THE  LAST  JOURNALS  OF 

HORACE  WALPOLE 

DURING  THE  REIGN  OF 
GEORGE  III   FROM  1771-1783 

WITH    NOTES    BY    DR.    DORAN  ffi 

EDITED  WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION 
BY    A.    FRANCIS    STEUART  ffl        « 

AND  CONTAINING  NUMEROUS 
PORTRAITS  REPRODUCED  FROM 
CONTEMPORARY    PICTURES  ffi 

ENGRAVINGS,  ETC.  fig  fiS  ffi 
IN    TWO    VOLUMES        VOLUME    I 


LONDON        JOHN    LANE        THE    BODLEY    HEAD 
NEW    YORK       JOHN    LANE    COMPANY       MCMX 


v,/ 


PLYMOUTH        WILLIAM    BRENDON    AND   SON,    LIMITED,    PRINTBBS 


EDITOR'S    INTRODUCTION 

THE  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  DUKE  AND 
DUCHESS  OF  GLOUCESTER 

THE  Last  Journal  of  the  Reign  of  George  HI 
now  before  us,  consists,  with  a  certain  amount 
of  invaluable  comments  on  Parliamentary 
debates,  foreign  news,  and  Court  gossip,  in  a 
great  measure  of  a  narrative  by  Horace  Walpole  con- 
cerning a  point  in  the  history  of  his  own  time  both  near 
and  dear  to  him,  namely,  the  account  of  the  declaration  of 
the  marriage  of  his  niece  Maria  Walpole,  Countess 
Dowager  Waldegrave,  to^  H.R.H.  the  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
the  second  brother  of  King  George  HI. 

Though  the  story  has  often  been  told,  it  is  advisable 
to  tell  again  here  how  this  marriage  (a  startling  one  from 
every  point  of  view)  came  to  be  brought  about,  and  this 
cannot  be  done  in  a  more  suitable  manner  than  in  the 
first  introduction  to  these  two  volumes.  In  this  way  leaving 
the  second  introduction  by  Dr.  Doran,  which  follows,  to 
explain  the  inception,  scope,  and  contents  of  the  work. 

A  short  genealogical  explanation  must  be  our  first 
excursus,  as  the  birth  of  the  future  Duchess  of  Gloucester 
and  her  place  in  the  Walpole  family  were  both  irregular, 
and  her  union  with  a  Prince  of  Great  Britain  particularly 
annoying  to  the  King,  who  under  the  influence  of  his 
German  Queen  had  always  the  idea  of  equal  birth  {eben- 
biirtigkeit)  before  him  when  treating  of  the  marriages  of 
princes  and  princesses  of  the  blood  Royal. 


vi  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

The  Walpoles  of  Houghton,  an  old  Norfolk  family, 
for  many  centuries  well  known  in  the  history  of  their 
county,  rose  suddenly  to  supreme  influence  in  Great 
Britain  in  the  person  of  the  great  statesman  Sir  Robert 
Walpole.  This  "manager  of  the  House  of  Commons" 
during  the  reigns  of  George  I  and  George  II,  was  Prime 
Minister  to  both  these  kings,  and  was  elevated  by  the 
latter  on  9  February,  1742,  to  the  dignity  of  Earl 
of  Orford,  though  he  was  better  known  by  his  previous 
title  of  Sir  Robert  until  his  death  on  18  March,  1745. 
Sir  Robert,  a  bon  vivant  and  a  wit,  was  in  no  sense  a  strict 
moralist.  By  his  first  wife,  Catherine  Shorter,  the  grand- 
daughter of  a  Lord  Mayor  of  London,  he  had,  with 
a  daughter  Mary,  Countess  of  Cholmondeley,  three  sons  : 
Robert,  second  Earl  of  Oxford,  Sir  Edward  Walpole, 
whose  life  and  romance  we  shall  deal  with  later  on,  and 
Horace  Walpole,  the  antiquary  and  the  writer  not  only  of 
this  work  but  of  the  admirable  letters  we  all  know  so  well, 
which  give  the  key  to  so  much  Georgian  history.  By  his 
second  wife,  Maria  Skerrett,  the  "Phryne"  of  Pope,  Sir 
Robert  had  one  daughter.  Lady  Mary  Churchill,  born 
before  marriage,  but  dowered  by  her  father's  influence  at 
Court  with  the  rank  of  an  earl's  daughter. 

Robert,  second  Earl  of  Oxford,  son  of  Sir  Robert,  was 
married  unhappily  to  a  great  heiress,  Margaret  Rolle,  Lady 
Clinton,  and  (dying  in  175 1)  by  her  had  but  one  son, 
George,  third  Earl.  He,  however,  died  unmarried  in  1791, 
and  his  only  surviving  uncle,  Horace  Walpole,  the  author 
of  this  work,  succeeded  as  fourth  Earl,  and  bore  the  title 
unwillingly  until  he  also  died  unmarried  2  March,  1797, 
when  the  earldom  became  extinct,  until  revived  in  the 
junior  branch  of  the  Walpole  family  in  1806. 

We  now,  having  done  with  dry  genealogy  for  the 
present,  are  able  to  come  to  the  life  story  and  romance 
of  Sir  Edward  Walpole,  the  second  son   of  the   Prime 


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  vii 

Minister,  and  the  astonishing  career  of  his  beautiful 
daughters. 

Sir  Edward  Walpole,  K.B.,  the  second  son  of  Sir  Robert, 
had  the  fortune  to  be  early  placed  by  his  all-powerful 
father,  according  to  the  custom  of  these  days,  in  several 
rich  places  of  a  sinecure  nature.  He  had  an  office  in  the 
Customs,  and  was  Clerk  to  the  Pells,  besides  being  M.P. 
for  Lostwithiel  in  1730  and  for  Great  Yarmouth  from 
1734-68.  He  was  made  a  Knight  of  the  Bath,  and, 
after  a  life  of  literary  ease,  died  12  January,  1784,  before 
he  had  a  chance  of  succeeding  to  the  title.  It  was  in 
1730  that  the  romance  of  his  life  began.  He  had  for  a 
short  time  lodged  in  Pall  Mall  in  a  house,  the  lower  part  of 
which  was  occupied  by  one  Rennie,  a  dealer  in  children's 
clothes.  One  of  the  apprentices  in  this  establishment  was 
a  beautiful  young  girl,  Mary  Clement,^  of  humble  birth, 
though  one  of  her  kinsfolk  at  least  was  "  of  a  good 
gentleman's  family,"  ^  whose  relatives  belonged  to  the 
distant  county  of  Durham.  Sir  Edward's  evident  admira- 
tion of  the  pretty  seamstress  soon  attracted  the  notice  of 
her  employers,  and  she,  rated  by  them  and  by  her  own 
family,  fled  one  day  to  Sir  Edward  Walpole,  who  had 
removed  to  another  house,  a  house  of  his  own,  in  Pall 
Mall,  imploring  him  to  protect  her.  Sir  Edward,  who  was 
already  deeply  in  love  with  her,  responded  to  this  appeal 
by  ordering  his  servant  to  place  a  chair  for  her  at  the  foot 
of  his  table,  and  she  presided  over  his  house  thenceforward 
for  the  remainder  of  her  short  life. 

Sir  Edward  did  not  dare  to  marry  Mary  Clement  on 
account  of  the  opposition  of  his  father,  but  he  treated  her 
(and  her  sister  subsequently)  with  all  the  respect  he  could, 
and  after  her  death  (on  the  birth  of  her  fourth  child),  he 

^  Horace  Walpole  calls  her  Dorothy  in  his  footnote,  p.  93.  A  correspondent 
in  the  Gentleman^ s  Magazine  (vol.  78,  p.  295)  says  that  the  two  Misses  Clement 
were  milliners  at  Bath.  ^  Vol.  I,  145  of  this  work. 


viu  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

became  to  her  children  by  him  the  most  indulgent  of  fathers. 
Far  from  shelving  these  illegitimate  children,  he  brought 
them  up  openly  as  his  own,  made  them  bear  the  honour- 
able name  of  Walpole,  and  forced  his  indulgent  family 
(his  brother  Horace  especially)  to  acknowledge,  to  recog- 
nise, and  finally  to  love  them.  Only  once  did  Sir 
Edward's  thoughts  stray  from  his  beloved  Mary  Clement 
to  lawful  matrimony,  and  then  her  children  were  by  no 
means  forgotten.  Horace  Walpole  wrote  on  23  Novem- 
ber, 1741^ : — 

A  brother  of  mine,  Edward  by  name,  has  lately  had  a  call  to 
matrimony ;  the  virgin's  name  was  Howe.  ^  He  had  agreed  to 
take  her  with  no  fortune,  she  him  with  his  four  children.  The 
father  of  him  to  get  rid  of  his  importunities  at  last  acquiesced. 
The  very  moment  he  had  obtained  this  consent  he  repented,  and, 
instead  of  flying  on  the  wings  of  love  to  notify  it,  he  went 
to  his  fair  one,  owned  his  father  had  mollified,  but  hoped  she 
would  be  so  good  as  to  excuse  him.  .  .  . 

Sir  Edward  never  again  attempted  to  ally  himself  with 
any  lady,  being  content  to  live  a  life  of  letters  and  music 
(he  played  "  extremely  well  on  the  bass  viol ")  in  London 
and  at  his  "very  pretty  place"  at  Englefield  Green. 
There,  as  his  kindly  brother  Horace  wrote  in  1745,  being 
"  very  agreeable  and  good  humoured,"  he,  with  interesting 
and  musical  society  round  him,  brought  up  his  family  of 
"  some  very  pretty  children."  These  children  were  four  in 
number — three  girls  and  one  boy. 

The  son,  Edward  Walpole,  except  for  his  illegitimacy, 
would  have  stood  near  the  succession  to  the  earldom  of 
Oxford,  but,  debarred  from  that  hope  by  his  birth,  entered 

1  Letters  of  Horace  Walpole,  I,  128  edited  by  Mrs.  Paget  Toynbee,  to 
whom  and  to  the  delegates  of  the  Clarendon  Press  I  have  to  offer  my 
acknowledgment  for  their  permission  to  reproduce  these  quotations. 

"^  Walpole  notes  to  this:  "Eldest  sister  of  the  Lord  Viscount  Howe. 
She  was  soon  after  this  married  to  a  relation  of  her  own  name. " — Ibid. 


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  ix 

the  army.  He  distinguished  himself  at  St.  Malo  in  1758, 
and  in  Portugal  in  1762,  but  died  of  consumption,  a 
colonel,  in  1771,  aged  thirty-three.  The  three  daughters 
— the  Three  Graces,  as  they  were  called  ;  Laura,  who 
was  the  eldest ;  Maria,  born  18  July,  1736 ;  and 
Charlotte,  born  9  December,  1738 — gained  encomiums  for 
their  beauty  and  conduct  from  most  of  their  contem- 
poraries, and  had,  considering  the  defect  of  their  birth, 
extraordinarily  successful  careers.  Well  educated,  and 
received  among  their  tolerant  Walpole  kinsfolk,  who  even 
admired  their  beauty  as  "  true  Walpoles,"  they  early  were 
known  to  a  section  of  the  high  society  of  the  Court  of 
George  III,  but  at  that  Court  itself  their  bastardy 
debarred  them  from  presentation.  The  first  matrimonial 
success  was  achieved  by  Sir  Edward's  eldest  daughter, 
Laura.  Horace  Walpole  announced  it  to  Sir  Horace 
Mann  in  one  of  his  oft  quoted  letters.^ 

9  September^  1758. 
I  have  forgot  to  tell  yoii  of  a  wedding  in  our  family.  My 
brother's  eldest  daughter  is  to  be  married  to-morrow  to  Lord 
Albemarle's  third  brother,  a  canon  of  Windsor.  We  are  very 
happy  with  the  match ;  the  bride  is  very  agreeable  and  sensible, 
and  good,  not  so  handsome  as  her  sisters,  but  farther  from 
ugliness  than  beauty.  The  second,  Maria,  is  beauty  itself.  Her 
face,  bloom,  eyes,  hair,  teeth,  and  person  are  all  perfect.  You 
may  imagine  how  charming  she  is,  when  her  only  fault,  if  one 
must  find  one,  is  that  her  face  is  rather  too  round.  She  has  a 
great  deal  of  wit  and  vivacity,  with  perfect  modesty. 

The  husband  of  Laura  Walpole  was  the  Hon.  Frederick 
Keppel,  fourth  son  of  William,  second  Earl  of  Albemarle, 
by  Lady  Anne  Lennox,  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond, who  became  subsequently  (in  1762)  Bishop  of 
Exeter.  Not  only  did  the  marriage  ally  the  bride  nearly 
with   a   great   family   of  Dutch   origin    elevated   to   the 

1  Letters,  IV,  186-7. 


X  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

English  peerage  by  William  III,  but  it  also  carried  with  it 

the  coveted  right  of  presentation  to  the  King  and  Queen. 

The  next  sister,  Maria  Walpole,  was  also  soon  sought 

in  marriage,  and  by  even  a  more  distinguished  man,  who 

was  none  other  than  James,  second  Earl  Waldegrave.     A 

descendant  of  King  James  II,  from  whose  brother,  Charles 

II,  his  family  had  received  their  first  peerage,  he  was  an 

unexceptionable  parti,  though  forty-five  years  of  age — 

some  twenty  years  older  than  his  bride.     Her  uncle  burst 

into  a  paean  of  delight  at  the  wedding  in  the  following 

terms  to  Sir  Horace  Mann  ^ : — 

II  Aprils  1759. 

I  have  married,  that  is  I  am  marrying,  my  niece  Maria,  my 
brother's  second  daughter,  to  Lord  Waldegrave.  What  say  you  ? 
A  month  ago  I  was  told  he  liked  her — does  he?  I  jumbled  them 
together  and  he  has  already  proposed.  For  character  and  credit, 
he  is  the  first  match  in  England — for  beauty,  I  think  she  is.  She 
has  not  a  fault  in  her  face  and  person,  and  the  detail  is  charming. 
A  warm  complexion  tending  to  brown,  fine  eyes,  brown  hair,  fine 
teeth,  and  infinite  wit  and  vivacity.  Two  things  are  odd  in  this 
match :  he  seems  to  have  been  doomed  to  a  Maria  Walpole — if 
his  father  had  lived,  he  had  married  my  sister  [Lady  Mary 
Walpole,  afterwards  wife  of  Charles  Churchill,  Esq.];  and  this 
is  the  second  of  my  brother's  daughters  that  has  married  into  the 
house  of  Stuart.  Mr.  Keppel  comes  from  Charles — Lord  Walde- 
grave from  James  II.  My  brother  has  luckily  been  tractable, 
and  left  the  whole  management  to  me. 

He  wrote  later  to  his  friend  George  Montagu,^  May  16, 
1759:— 

Well !  Maria  was  married  yesterday.  Don't  we  manage  well  ? 
The  original  day  was  not  once  put  off;  lawyers  and  milliners 
were  all  ready  canonically.  It  was  as  sensible  a  wedding  as  ever 
was.  There  was  neither  form  nor  indecency,  both  of  which 
generally  meet  on  such  occasions.  They  were  married  at  my 
brother's  in  Pall  Mall,  just  before  dinner,  by  Mr.  Keppel ;  the 
1  Utters,  IV,  p.  254.  2  i^etters,  IV,  p.  265. 


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  xi 

company,  my  brother  and  his  son,  Mrs.  Keppel  and  Charlotte 
[Walpole],  Lady  Elizabeth  Keppel,  Lady  Betty  Waldegrave,  and 
I.  We  dined  there ;  the  Earl  and  new  Countess  got  into  their 
postchaise  at  eight  o'clock  and  went  to  Navestock  alone,  where 
they  stay  till  Saturday  night.  On  Sunday  she  is  to  be  presented 
— and  to  make  my  Lady  Coventry  distracted.  .  .  . 

Maria  was  in  a  white  and  silver  nightgown,  with  a  hat  very 
much  pulled  over  her  face ;  what  one  could  see  of  it  was  hand- 
somer than  ever;  a  cold  maiden  blush  gave  her  the  sweetest 
delicacy  in  the  world. 

The  bride  seems  to  have  been  worthy  of  all  this  praise, 
and  her  choice  was  exceptionally  happy.  She  was  well 
received  at  Court,  and,  as  her  uncle  wrote,  was  soon  "  Lady 
Waldegrave  in  all  the  forms."  The  great  beauty  and  the 
exceptional  good  fortune  of  the  sisters  raised  them  high 
in  the  social  world,  and  their  crests  were  not  lowered  by 
the  marriage  in  1760  of  their  younger  sister  Charlotte  to 
Lord  Huntingtower,  under  circumstances  which  we  would 
now  call  odd,  and  which  her  uncle  Horace  thus  described 

to  Sir  Horace  Mann  ^ : — 

October  5,  1760. 
As  all  great  ladies  are  mortal  this  year,  my  family  is  forced  to 
recruit  the  peerage.  My  brother's  last  daughter  is  married,  and, 
as  Biddy  Tipkin  says,  though  their  story  is  too  short  for  a 
romance,  it  will  make  a  very  pretty  novel — nay,  it  is  almost  brief 
enough  for  a  play,  and  very  near  comes  within  one  of  the 
unities,  the  space  of  four-and-twenty  hours.  There  is  in  the 
world,  particularly  in  my  world,  for  he  lives  directly  over  against 
me  across  the  water,  a  strange  brute  called  Earl  of  Dysart. 
Don't  be  frightened,  it  is  not  he.  His  son,  Lord  Huntingtower, 
to  whom  he  gives  but  four  hundred  pounds  a  year,  is  a  comely 
young  gentleman  of  twenty- six,  who  has  often  had  thoughts  of 
trying  whether  his  father  would  not  like  grandchildren  better  than 
his  own  children,  as  sometimes  people  have  more  grand  tender- 
ness than  paternal.  All  the  answer  he  could  ever  get  was,  that 
the  Earl  could  not  afford,  as  he  has  five  younger  children,  to 
^  Letters,  IV,  433-4- 


xii  EDITOR'S    INTRODUCTION 

make  any  settlement ;  but  he  offered,  as  a  proof  of  his  inability 
and  kindness,  to  lend  his  son  a  large  sum  of  money  at  low 
interest.  This  indigent  usurer  has  thirteen  thousand  pounds  a 
year,  and  sixty  thousand  pounds  in  the  funds.  The  money  and 
ten  of  the  thirteen  thousand  in  land  are  entailed  on  Lord  Hunting- 
tower.  The  young  lord,  it  seems,  has  been  in  love  with  Charlotte 
for  some  months,  but  thought  so  Uttle  of  inflaming  her  that 
yesterday  fortnight  she  did  not  know  him  by  sight.  On  that  day 
he  came  and  proposed  himself  to  my  brother,  who  with  much 
surprise  heard  his  story,  but  excused  himself  from  giving  an 
answer.  He  said  he  would  never  force  the  inclinations  of  his 
children;  he  did  not  believe  his  daughter  had  any  engagement 
or  attachment,  but  she  might  have :  he  would  send  for  her  and 
know  her  mind.  She  was  at  her  sister  Waldegrave's,  to  whom, 
on  receiving  the  notification,  she  said,  very  sensibly,  "  If  I  was 
but  nineteen,  I  would  refuse  point-blank;  I  do  not  like  to  be 
married  in  a  week  to  a  man  I  never  saw.  But  I  am  two-and- 
twenty;  some  people  say  I  am  handsome,  some  say  I  am  not; 
I  believe  the  truth  is,  I  am  likely  to  be  large  and  to  go  off  soon — 
it  is  dangerous  to  refuse  so  great  a  match."  Take  notice  of  the 
married  in  a  week ;  the  love  that  was  so  many  months  in  ripen- 
ing could  not  stay  above  a  week.  She  came  and  saw  this  impetuous 
lover,  and,  I  believe,  was  glad  she  had  not  refused  point-blank — 
for  they  were  married  last  Thursday.  I  tremble  a  little  for  the 
poor  girl ;  not  to  mention  the  oddness  of  the  father,  and  twenty 
disagreeable  things  that  may  be  in  the  young  man,  who  has  been 
kept  and  lived  entirely  out  of  the  world;  he  takes  her  fortune, 
ten  thousand  pounds,  and  cannot  settle  another  shilling  upon  her 
till  his  father  dies,  and  then  promises  only  a  thousand  a  year. 
Would  one  venture  one's  happiness  and  one's  whole  fortune  for 
the  chance  of  being  Lady  Dysart  ?  If  Lord  Huntingtower  dies 
before  his  father,  she  will  not  have  sixpence.  Sure  my  brother 
has  risked  too  much. 

In  spite  of  the  uncle's  forebodings.  Lady  Huntingtower's 
marriage  proved  a  happy  one,  and  she  became  Countess 
of  Dysart  in  due  course.  The  Walpole  sisters  remained 
very  much  attached  to  each  other,  and  always  clung  to- 
gether and  supported  each  other  in  a  way  which  families 


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  xiii 

more  heraldically  legitimate  could  not  help  noticing,  com- 
menting on,  and  envying. 

Maria  Countess  of  Waldegrave  had  not  many  years  of 
the  perfect  happiness  which  her  marriage  brought  her. 
After  sharing  her  husband's  splendours  and  giving  birth 
to  three  daughters,  she  suffered  the  great  misfortune  of 
becoming  a  widow  within  four  years  of  her  wedding. 
Her  uncle  Horace  again  took  up  his  pen  to  send  the  sad 
news  to  Sir  Horace  Mann,  and  at  the  same  time  he  gave 
practical  proof  of  his  affection  and  support  by  taking  a 
house,  "  Ragman's  Castle,"  at  Twickenham,  not  too  far 
from  himself  at  Strawberry  Hill,  for  his  widowed  niece 
and  her  family. 

He  wrote  on  April  lo,  1763  ^ : — 

Lord  Waldegrave  is  just  dead  of  the  small  pox,  and  I  have 
brought  my  poor  unhappy  niece  hither  till  he  is  buried.  .  .  . 
We  scarce  feel  this  heavy  loss  more  than  it  is  felt  universally. 
He  was  one  of  those  few  men  whose  good  nature  silenced  even 
ill-nature.  .  .  .  My  niece  has  .nothing  left  but  a  moderate  join- 
ture of  a  thousand  pounds  a  year,  three  little  girls,  a  pregnancy, 
her  beauty,  and  the  testimonial  of  the  best  of  men,  who  ex- 
pressed no  concern  but  for  her,  and  who  has  given  her  as  much 
as  he  could,  and  ratified  her  character  by  making  her  sole 
executrix.  Her  tenderness,  which  could  not  be  founded  on  any 
charms  in  his  person,  shows  itself  in  floods  of  tears,  in  veneration 
for  his  memory,  and  by  acting  with  just  such  reason  and  pro- 
priety as  he  would  wish  her  to  exert ;  yet  it  is  a  terrible  scene  ! 
She  loses  in  him  a  father,  who  formed  her  mind,  and  a  lover 
whose  profusion  knew  no  bounds.  From  his  places  his  fortune 
was  very  great — that  is  gone  !  From  his  rank  and  consideration 
with  all  parties,  she  was  at  the  summit  of  worldly  glory — that  is 
gone  too  !  Four  short  years  were  all  their  happiness.  Since  the 
death  of  Lady  Coventry,  she  is  allowed  the  handsomest  woman 
in  England ;  as  she  is  so  young,  she  may  find  as  great  a  match 
and  a  younger  lover — but  she  never  can  find  another  Lord 
Waldegrave. 

^  Letters^  V,  302-3. 


xiv  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

Cast  down  and  dejected  as  Lady  Waldegrave  un- 
doubtedly was  at  first,  she  had  her  three  daughters, 
Ladies  Laura,  Maria,  and  Horatia  Waldegrave,  as  con- 
solation. They  had  portions  of  ;^8o(X)  each,  so  were  not 
quite  penniless  in  that  age,  although  she  herself  had  but 
a  scanty  jointure.  After  the  severe  period  of  mourning 
was  over  she  once  more  began  to  go  into  society,  and  was 
again  excessively  admired.  The  rich  Duke  of  Portland, 
among  many  other  aspirants,  soon  offered  her  his  hand, 
but  was  refused,  and  this  refusal  surprised  the  onlookers, 
who  in  this  case  at  least  did  not  see  the  best  of  the  game, 
although  they  did  know  that  the  young  widow  in  the 
autumn  of  1764  had  completely  fascinated  a  Prince  of  the 
Blood,  a  brother  of  King  George  III.  This  Prince  was 
Prince  William  Henry,  Duke  of  Gloucester  and  Edin- 
burgh in  Great  Britain,  and  Earl  of  Connaught  in 
Ireland,  K.G.,  the  third  son  of  Frederick  Prince  of  Wales, 
and  grandson  of  King  George  II.  Younger  than  Lady 
Waldegrave  (he  had  been  born  at  Leicester  House, 
14  November,  1743),  he  soon  became  her  slave  and 
followed  her  about  everywhere,  and  his  admiration  was 
patent  to  the  whole  of  the  curious  courtiers.  At  the  time 
when,  in  1761,  his  brother  King  George  III  had  been 
flirting  with  Lady  Sarah  Lennox,  the  beautiful  daughter 
of  the  second  Duke  of  Richmond,  he  had  paid  some 
addresses  to  her  friend  and  confidante  Lady  Susan  Fox- 
Strangeways,  who  had  afterwards  made  a  runaway  match 
with  the  handsome  Irish  actor,  William  O'Brien.  His 
later  attentions  to  Lady  Waldegrave  were  therefore  a  sub- 
ject of  gossip  between  Lady  Sarah  and  Lady  Susan,  and 
the  former — then  the  wife  of  Sir  Charles  Bunbury — wrote 
in  December,  1764: — 

The  D.  of  Gloucester  is  desperately  in  love  with  17  D^^  Walde- 
grave. It's  a  falling-off,  I  think,  from  your  little  cunning  face  to 
her  insensibility;  it  does  not  show  his  sense,  but  what's  more 


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  xv 

extraordinary  is  that  she  appears  to  be  in  love  with  him,  and  he 
is  not  of  consequence  or  rich  enough  to  make  it  worth  her  while 
to  feign  it,  I  should  think. 

The  intimacy  and  the  Duke's  attentions  continued, 
however,  and  two  years  later,  on  8  March,  1766,  Lady 
Sarah  wrote  again  to  her  friend  : — 

The  report  of  this  week  is  that  the  King  has  forbid  the 
D.  of  G.  to  speak  to  his  pretty  widow ;  the  truth  is  that  she  has 
gone  out  of  town,  but  more  difficult  to  know.  He  has  given 
her  fine  pearl  bracelets  that  cost  ;^5oo — that's  not  for  nothing, 
surely.^ 

The  eager  courtiers  seized  every  scrap  of  news  of  the 
interesting  couple,  and  their  possible  or  probable  marriage 
was  frequently  discussed.  Lady  Mary  Coke,  nee  Lady 
Mary  Campbell,  a  rigid  aristocrat  opposed  in  every  way 
to  their  union,  who  had  believed  the  Duke's  elder 
brother  Edward  Duke  of  York  to  be  in  love  with  herself, 
entered  in  her  carefully  kept  Journal,^  August,  1766  : — 

\J  Tweedale  told  me  the  Dowager  Waldegrave's  complaint 
had  brought  her  into  a  terrible  condition,  and  that  she  was  so 
greatly  altered  she  had  hardly  the  remains  of  beauty;  yet,  she 
added,  she  heard  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  attachment  con- 
tinued .  .  .  then  she  turned  to  me  [continues  this  spiteful 
narrator]  and  asked  me  if  her  mother  was  not  a  washerwoman. 
I  said  I  really  wou'd  not  determine  her  profession. 

Even  the  Walpole  family  were  uncertain  of  Lady 
Waldegrave's  status,  and  as  late  as  18  September,  1768, 
her  indulgent  uncle,  Horace  Walpole,  wrote  to  Thomas 
Gray : — 

George  Selwyn  says  I  may,  if  I  please,  write  Historic  Doubts 
on  the  present  Duke  of  G.  too.  Indeed,  they  would  indeed  be 
doubts,  for  I  know  nothing  certainly. 

^  Letters  of  Lady  Sarah  Lennox,  I,  p.  189.  ^  Vol.  I,  p.  35. 

l.-b 


xvi  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

As  a  matter  of  fact — as  we  shall  see  in  the  first  of  the 
volumes  before  us — the  Duke  of  Gloucester  and  Lady 
Waldegrave  were  privately  married  by  her  chaplain,  the 
Rev.  Dr.  Morton,  at  her  own  house  in  Pall  Mall,  on 
6  September,  1766,  but  as  it  was  clandestine  and  there 
were  no  witnesses,  the  marriage  remained  unknown  and 
was  not  acknowledged  by  the  parties  themselves.  As, 
however,  their  intimacy  still  continued,  reports  of  a  secret 
union  got  about,  and  these  were  almost  confirmed  in  the 
public  estimation  when  in  February,  1770,  they  attended 
a  masquerade  in  Soho,  the  Duke  as  King  Edward  IV, 
and  Lady  Waldegrave,  in  the  significant  dress  of  his  bride 
Elizabeth  Woodville,  as  a  widow ;  for  it  was  in  her  widow- 
hood also  that  Edward  IV  had  wooed  his  future  queen. 
Until  the  truth  was  finally  disclosed,  however,  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  many  people  doubted  the  marriage,  and 
wondered  at  Lady  Waldegrave's  indiscretion,  and  the  busy- 
bodies  about  the  Court  were  on  the  qui  vive  for  reports  of 
their  behaviour. 

Lady  Mary  Coke  has  recorded  many  instances  of  the 
spying  to  which  the  couple  were  subjected.  In  her 
Journal  of  January,  1767,^  she  entered  : — 

Found  Mrs.  Egerton  in  my  house.  I  ask'd  her  if  was  true 
that  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  was  as  much  with  the  Dowager 
Waldegrave  as  was  reported  (her  lodgings  being  close  to  hers). 
She  said  whenever  he  was  in  the  country,  she  believed  they  mett 
every  day. 

Later  she  gleefully  wrote :  "  The  Dowager  Waldegrave 
was  in  a  box  looking  very  dismal ;  the  Duke  of  Gloucester 
never  went  near  her,  tho'  he  was  at  the  Opera  the  whole 
night."  In  May,  1767,  Lady  Mary  became  even  more 
sanguine  that  the  Royal  mesalliance  had  not  taken  place. 

The  Dowager  Waldegrave  was  there.  I  observed  her  looking 
after   the   Duke  of  Gloucester,  but   he   seem'd   to   avoid   her. 

1  I,  p.  125. 


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  xvii 

H.R.H.  was  not  civiler  to  me  than  usual,  yet  I  think  the  aifair 
between  him  and  L^  Waldegrave  does  seem  at  an  end. 

Her  satisfaction,  however,  did  not  endure  long.  In 
June,  1767,  she  was  forced  to  write:  "I  find  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  and  Lady  Waldegrave  live  as  much  together  as 
usual.  I  must  repeat  what  I  already  said  to  you,  that 
I  think  she  is  lucky  that  anyone  else  keeps  her  company." 
She  entered  on  June  24 :  "  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  was 
with  L^  Waldegrave  before  nine  o'clock."  And  next  day : 
"  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  was  with  L^  Waldegrave  a  little 
after  nine.  I  went  to  the  ten  o'clock  prayers.  As  I 
returned  his  chaise  was  waiting  at  the  door.  He  stay'd 
till  twelve,  and  then  went  to  London."  In  March  of  next 
year  she  chronicled  that  Lady  Waldegrave  had  received 
from  the  Duke  "  a  watch  set  with  diamonds  and  several 
fine  rings,"  and  had  taken  a  house  in  Portman  Square 
"rather  out  of  proportion  to  a  fortune  of  a  thousand 
pounds  a  year,  as  most  probably  the  rent  of  such  a  house 
must  be  five  or  six  hundred  pounds." 

The  secrecy  was  nearing  its  conclusion,  however.  Lady 
Mary  tells  us  of  a  difficulty  in  March,  1769 : — 

Lady  Gower  has  got  the  lodgings  at  Hampton  Court  that 
L^  Hertford  had  given  to  the  Dowager  Waldegrave.  Various 
reasons  are  assigned  for  her  now  declining  them.  She  wanted 
her  coach  to  be  admitted  into  the  iner  Court,  saying  she  did 
not  chuse  to  walk,  but  was  refused  and  told  Nobody  but  the 
Royal  Family  or  their  coaches  cou'd  be  admitted;  complain'd, 
as  'tis  supposed,  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  and  desired  he 
wou'd  give  her  leave.  Went  down  to  Hampton  Court ;  was 
again  refused;  asked  if  there  was  no  order  come  with  per- 
mission :  was  answered  there  was  a  fresh  order  to  refuse  her.^ 

Vindictive  in  this  case  to  the  last.  Lady  Mary  Coke 
refused  to  believe  in  a  legal  marriage.  She  wrote,  Decem- 
ber, 1 77 1  : — 

*  Journal  III,  pp.  45-46. 


xviii  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

When  the  marriage  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  was  first 
known,  Ly  Betty  [Mackenzie]  wrote  me  word  that  it  was  fear'd 
L^  Waldegrave  wou'd  no  longer  conceal  her  marriage ;  in  my 
answer  I  ask'd  her  whether  L^  Waldegrave  had  any  marriage  to 
declare  or  conceal  ? 

Three  circumstances  really  forced  on  the  public  declara- 
tion of  the  marriage.  The  first  was  the  pregnancy  of 
Lady  Waldegrave;  the  second  the  declaratioji  of  the 
marriage  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester's  younger  brother,  to  Mrs.  Horton  ;  and  thirdly, 
the  event  which  it  caused,  the  passing  of  the  Royal 
Marriage  Act. 

Prince  Henry  Frederick,  Duke  of  Cumberland,  third 
brother  to  King  George  III,  of  whom  Lady  Louisa  Stuart 
wrote  as  "an  idiot  prince";  married  on  2  October,  1771, 
"  by  means,  it  was  said,  of  some  stern  hints  from  a  resolute 
brother,"  Anne  Luttrell,  widow  of  Christopher  Horton  of 
Catton  Hall,  in  Derbyshire,  and  daughter  of  the  dis- 
reputable Simon  Luttrell,  afterwards  first  Earl  of  Car- 
hampton.  The  marriage  was  particularly  galling  to  the 
Royal  Family  on  account  of  the  reputation  of  the 
Luttrells,  but  there  was  no  doubt  of  its  regularity,  for 
the  widow  Horton  "  took  especial  care  to  be  married  in 
the  face  of  day,  and  have  register,  certificate,  and  witnesses 
all  forthcoming."  The  King  forbade  his  brother  the 
Court,  and  pressed  the  passing  of  a  bill  in  Parliament 
(the  progress  of  which  is  recounted  by  Walpole  in  the 
book  now  before  us)  which  gave  the  King  and  the  Parlia- 
ment a  veto  on  princely  marriages  up  to  a  certain  age, 
and  limited  the  freedom  of  marriages  in  the  Royal  Family 
to  a  very  considerable  extent.  This  Royal  Marriage  Act, 
which  is  still  in  force,  and  unmade  the  marriage  of  H.R.H. 
the  Duke  of  Sussex  and  Lady  Augusta  Murray  in  1794, 
became  law  in  March,  1772.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
fearing  his  secret  marriage  was  in  danger  of  being  de- 


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  xix 

dared  null,  announced  it  September,  1772,  though  his  wife's 
relatives  had  been  apprised  of  it  beforehand,  to  the  King, 
and  was  met  with  his  severe  displeasure.  What  followed 
may  be  traced  step  by  step  in  Walpole's  narrative,  but  we 
may  as  well  give  Lady  Louisa  Stuart's  shorter  account : — 

The  Duke  of  Gloucester,  who  at  first  intended  to  keep  his 
marriage  a  profound  secret,  found  himself  hampered  by  the 
precautions  he  had  used  for  that  purpose,  and  in  consequence 
could  not  produce  his  proofs  [as  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  had 
done]  so  readily.  But  the  King,  though  angry,  ever  upright  and 
honourable,  as  he  had  no  manner  of  doubt  in  his  own  mind, 
would  not  suifer  any  to  be  started  in  Council,  and  I  believe  none 
was  entertained  by  the  world  at  large. 

Lady  Louisa  further  compares  the  two  newly-made 
Duchesses,  and  with  such  cunning  sagacity  that  two  more 
long  extracts  from  her  writings  may  be  excused.^ 

Lady  Waldegrave  was  a  most  lovely  woman;  not   of  much 

sense,    but  blameless  in  character   and  conduct.     She  had  the 

manners  of  the  high  society  in  which  she  had  always  moved  ; 

she  was  the  widow  of  a  distinguished  man  of  quality ;  but — there 

was  no  disguising  it — the  illegitimate  daughter  of  Sir  Edward 

Walpole,  by  a  mistress,  whom,  if  report  spoke  truth,  the  keeper 

of  some  infamous  house,  descrying  her  uncommon  beauty,  had 

fairly  beckoned  in  from  the  top  of  a  cinder  cart.     The  widow 

Horton  had  no  such  stain  of  birth,  but  in  every  other  respect 

was  far  less  fit  to  be  a  Princess.     Her  father,  Simon  Luttrell, 

might  be  pronounced  the  greatest  reprobate  in  England.     He 

once  challenged  his  eldest  son,  the  late  Lord  Carhampton,  who 

in  return  sent  his  word  that  if  he  (the  father)  could  prevail  on 

any  gentleman  to  be  his  second,  he  would  fight  him  with  all  his 

heart.     Such  was  the  style  of  the  family.     The  daughters  had 

habits  suited  to  it,  noisy,  vulgar,  indelicate,  and  intrepid :  utter 

strangers  to  good  company,  they  never  were  to  be  seen  in  any 

woman   of    fashions'   house,   though   often   leaders   of    riotous 

parties   at   Vauxhall  or  Ranelagh.     Yet  Mrs.  Horton  was  not 

accused  of  gallantry. ^  .  .  . 

^  Memoir^  by  Lady  Louisa  Stuart.  Prefaced  to  Lady  Mary  Coke's 
Journal  /,  xcv.  "^  Introduction  I,  xcv. 


XX  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

The  indignant  King  forbade  both  brothers  the  Court, 
and  put  both  their  houses  under  the  ban  of  his  displeasure, 
but  his  prohibition  was  not  strictly  attended  to. 

It  overawed  people  [continues  the  astute  Lady  Louisa  Stuart] 
for  the  first  month  :  in  the  second  they  stole  a  visit  to  Gloucester 
or  Cumberland  House,  went  to  Court  early  in  the  third,  and 
being  spoken  to  as  usual,  troubled  their  heads  no  more  about  the 
matter :  It  soon  grew  to  be  a  dead  letter,  which  nobody  pre- 
tended to  mind  but  the  household,  the  ministers,  and  their 
wives.  Meanwhile,  as  it  pointed  out  to  the  Opposition  a  cheap 
and  safe  way  of  showing  disrespect  to  the  Crown,  their  zeal 
instantly  flamed  high  for  the  princes  in  disgrace ;  and  never 
were  Princesses  so  reverenced  and  Royal  Highnessed  by  patriots, 
as  the  ladies  whose  consequence  Aunt  Emily  [Princess  Amelia, 
daughter  of  George  II]  overturned  with  one  careless  word : 
"  Well !  to  talk  no  more  of  my  nephews  and  their  women  ! " 

Neither  of  the  proscribed  houses  then  was  at  all  deserted ; 
but  they  differed  materially  from  each  other  in  point  of  society, 
for  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  maintained  a  degree  of  state, 
approved  of  by  the  Duke,  that  gave  some  stiffness  to  her  parties 
w^hich  were  commonly  rather  select.  Unbounded  freedom 
reigned  at  Cumberland  House,  as  its  mistress,  laughing  forms 
and  etiquettes  to  scorn,  was  better  pleased  that  tag,  rag,  and 
bobtail  (pardon  the  vulgar  phrase)  should  flock  in,  than  that 
numbers  should  ever  be  wanting.  This  did  not  spring  from 
humility — Query,  does  it  in  any  case? — She  was  not  honestly 
indifferent  to  the  honours  she  affected  to  undervalue ;  but  she 
had  sense  enough  to  know  that  nothing  could  ever  place  her 
upon  the  same  level  with  the  persons  born  in  purple ;  therefore  she 
bore  them  an  inveterate  hatred,  and  made  whatever  appertained 
to  rank,  birth,  or  dignity,  the  object  of  her  contemptuous 
sarcasms.  Her  sister,  Miss  Betsy  (or  Lady  Elizabeth)  Luttrell, 
who  had  a  great  deal  of  real  though  coarse  wit,  and  was  more 
precisely  what  the  Regent  Orleans  entitled  a  Roue  than  one 
would  have  thought  it  practicable  that  anyone  in  petticoats 
could  be,  governed  the  family  with  a  high  hand,  marshalling  the 
gaming-table,  gathered  round  her  the  men,  and  led  the  way  in 
ridiculing  the  King  and  Queen.     Buckingham  house  served  as  a 


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  xxi 

byword — a  signal  for  the  onset  of  Ho  !  Ho !  Ho  ! — and  a  mighty 
scope  for  satire  was  afforded  by  the  Queen's  wide  mouth  and 
occasionally  imperfect  English,  as  well  as  by  the  King's  trick  of 
saying  What  ?  What  ?  his  ill-made  coats,  and  general  antipathy 
to  the  fashion.  But  the  marks  preferably  aimed  at  were  his 
virtues ;  his  freedom  from  vice  as  a  man ;  his  discouragement  of 
it  as  a  sovereign ;  the  exclusion  of  divorced  women  from  his 
Court;  beyond  all  his  religious  prejudices — that  is  to  say,  his 
sincere  piety  and  humble  reliance  upon  God.  Nothing  of  this 
scoffing  kind  past  at  Gloucester  house :  the  Duke  respected  his 
brother  and  himself  too  much  to  permit  it,  and  the  Duchess, 
however,  sore  on  her  own  account,  saw  nothing  ridiculous  in 
conjugal  fidelity,  nor  yet  in  going  to  Church  and  saying  ones 
prayers — superstitious  practices  to  which  the  unenlightened 
woman  was  greatly  addicted  herself.^ 

One  cannot  help  thinking  that  this  good  taste  on  the 
part  of  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  had  its  real  effect  upon 
the  angry  but  well-meaning  King,  and  though  Horace 
Walpolc  saw  little  good  in  his  treatment  of  his  brother 
and  his  wife,  the  King  yet  allowed  Parliament  to  make 
provision  for  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester's 
children  in  April,  1778  [v.  vol.  II.,  pp.  160,  et  seq.] :  the 
behaviour  of  the  two  errant  Dukes  and  their  spouses  was 
thus  compared  by  Lady  Sarah  Lennox  in  a  letter  dated 
June,  1780,  to  Lady  Susan  O'Brien : 

You  have  heard,  I  suppose,  of  the  conduct  of  the  2  D^^'  about 
their  husbands  reconciliation  with  the  King.  The  D^^*  of 
Cumberland  sent  her  husband  to  Court  and  said  she  would  be 
no  hindrance  to  his  going,  "  that  her  house  was  her  palace,  and 
her  husband  her  guard,  and  she  wanted  no  others,"  voyez  un  peu 
comme  elk  s^y  prend  bien  pour  arriver  d  sa  fin.  The  Duke  of 
Gloucester  only  goes  in  private,  but  the  King  is  so  fond  of  him 
he  seems  to  approve  of  everything  he  does,  so  that  it's  hard  to 
tell  who  is  in  the  right,  but  I  would  bet  my  money  on  the  head 
of  a  Luttrell  being  in  the  right  road  to  preferment,  and  it's  no 
bad  sign  of  it  when  a  Luttrell  adopts  les  beaux  sentiments  and  is 
^  Memoir,  xcvi-xcvn. 


I 


xxii  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

scrupulous  of  family  duties  among  relatives,  for  it  is  not  in  that 
line  they  have  hitherto  shone. 

It  does  not  appear  that  either  of  the  Duchesses  ever 
went  to  Court.  The  Duchess  of  Cumberland  caused  the 
greatest  pain  to  her  royal  brother-in-law,  George  III,  by 
encouraging  the  dissipation  of  the  heir  apparent,  his  son, 
the  Prince  of  Wales,  afterwards  George  IV.  She  had  no 
children  of  her  own,  however.  The  Duchess  of  Gloucester, 
whose  conduct  was  always  decorous,  on  the  other  hand 
had  two  surviving  "  royal "  children,  and  they  were,  in  spite 
of  their  mother's  position,  brought  up  in  real  intimacy 
with  their  cousins,  the  younger  children  of  the  King  and 
Queen.  It  was  on  these  children  that  the  late  interests  of 
the  Duchess  mainly  centred,  for  her  husband  in  his  latter 
years  fell  under  the  influence  of  her  beautiful  and  intrigu- 
ing lady-in-waiting,  Lady  Almeria  Carpenter.^  As  far 
back  as  1768,  George  Selwyn  had  written  of  her  at 
Almacks  as ''  the  beauty  of  the  former  night,"  and  in  later 
days  she  was  known  as  "  one  of  the  most  beautiful  women 
of  her  time,  but  to  whom  nature  had  been  sparing  of 
intellectual  attractions."  In  spite  of  this  defect  we  are 
told  by  Sir  Nathaniel  Wraxall  [Posthumous  Memoirs,  V, 
201]  that  she  "reigned  at  Gloucester  House,"  the  Duchess 
remaining  "indeed  its  nominal  mistress,  but  Lady  Al- 
meria constituted  its  ornament  and  its  pride,"  a  galling 
position  enough  for  the  supplanted  ex-beauty.  The  Duke 
and  Duchess's  children  who  survived  were  a  daughter  and 
a  son.  The  first,  Princess  Sophia,  was  born  29  May,  1773, 
and  is  known  to  us  from  memoir  writers  of  the  Regency  as 
a  jolly  frank  princess,  full  of  good  feeling  and  good  sense. 
She  did  not  marry,  and  died,  Ranger  of  Greenwich  Park, 
29  November,  1844.     Her  brother  was  William  Frederick, 

^  Daughter  of  George,  first  Earl  of  Tyrconnel,  born  20  March,  1752,  died 
OctoMr,  1809. 


EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION  xxiii 

second  Duke  of  Gloucester,  a  kindly,  good-natured  Prince 
sometimes  called  by  his  friends  "  Silly  Billy,"  born  at 
Rome,  15  January,  1776.  He,  like  his  father  and  grand- 
father, had  also  his  romance,  as  he  was,  for  "  reasons  of 
State,"  kept  unmarried  until  his  young  cousin,  Princess 
Charlotte  of  Wales,  had  chosen  a  consort,  lest  it  might 
be  thought  necessary  that  she  should  marry  a  British 
Prince  of  the  Blood.  When,  however,  she  gave  her  hand, 
on  2  May,  18 16,  to  Prince  Leopold  of  Saxe-Coburg,  he 
then  found  himself  free  at  the  age  of  forty.  He  married 
immediately,  22  July,  1 8 16,  his  old  love.  Princess 
Mary,  Princess  Charlotte's  aunt,  the  fourth  daughter 
of  his  uncle,  King  George  III.  A  life  of  happiness 
followed  this  union  until  he  died  issueless,  30  November, 
1834.  His  widow  survived  him  until  1857.  The  Duchess 
of  Gloucester  had,  as  we  have  seen,  by  Lord  Waldegrave, 
three  daughters.  They  all  married  satisfactorily  in  the 
end,  but  their  settlement  in  life,  as  readers  of  Walpole's 
letters  know  well,  caused  their  mother  some  anxiety. 
They  all  missed  the  best  matches  of  their  time.  The 
eldest.  Lady  Elizabeth  Laura,  was  betrothed  to  Lord 
Carmarthen,  the  son  and  heir  of  the  Duke  of  Leeds,  but 
the  engagement  was  broken  off  owing  to  money  difficulties. 
She  then  married,  in  1782,  her  cousin,  George,  fourth  Earl 
Waldegrave,  and  she  succeeded  eventually  to  Horace  Wal- 
pole's adored  Strawberry  Hill.  The  second.  Lady  Charlotte 
Maria,  was  in  1 780  engaged  to  the  rich  George  Wyndham, 
third  Earl  of  Egremont,  but  he — either  through  fear  of  all 
the  "  forms  of  royalty  "  in  his  bride's  family  as  Lady  Sarah 
Lennox  hints,  or  through  the  influence  of  his  dearest 
friend,  Lady  Melbourne,  as  rumour  had  it — broke  off  the 
match  just  before  its  completion,  and  Lady  Maria  later,  in 
1784,  married  George,  Duke  of  Grafton,  the  son  of  her 
mother's  rival  in  beauty,  Anne  Liddell.  The  youngest 
daughter.  Lady  Anne  Horatia  Waldegrave,  whose  first 


xxiv  EDITOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

jfianc^  the  Duke  of  Ancaster  died,  married,  in  1786,  one  of 
her  Walpole  cousins.  Admiral  Lord  Hugh  Seymour.  All 
these  marriages  were  accomplished  before  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  died  at  Gloucester  House,  Grosvenor  Street,  on 
25  August,  1805.  The  Duchess  herself  died  at  Brompton, 
22  August,  1807,^  after  a  blameless  life  and  extraordinary 
career,  beginning  (as  she  herself  touchingly  said)  as 
a  girl  born  with  the  right  to  no  name  but  'Maria,'  and 
ending,  as  we  have  seen,  as  a  Princess  of  the  Royal  House 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  recognised  as  such  by  both 
Houses  of  Parliament. 

A.  Francis  Steuart. 

^*^  A  few  words  in  regard  to  the  editing  of  this  edition 
must  be  added.  The  text  is  printed,  except  for  the  removal  of  a 
few  obvious  misprints,  exactly  as  it  stood  in  Dr.  Doran's  edition 
of  1858.  That  edition,  as  his  "introduction"  shows,  bore  only 
two  sets  of  notes,  Walpole's  original  comments  and  Dr.  Doran's 
subsequent  emendations.  Dr.  Doran  was  a  popular  editor  and  a 
clever  writer,  and  in  the  present  edition  his  notes  have  always 
been  retained  where  possible;  but  as  he  wrote  hurriedly  and 
without  much  subsequent  revision  and  for  his  own  time  only,  it 
has  been  thought  best  to  remove  the  more  obvious  inaccuracies 
which  crept  into  his  notes.  The  present  editor  has  added  a  few 
more  notes  commenting  on  Walpole's  text,  and  each  footnote 
has  the  initials  of  the  commentators  affixed  to  it.  The  editor  has 
to  thank  Mr.  Thomas  H.  B.  Vade  Walpole  and  Mr.  Horace 
Bleackley  for  their  help,  and  Mr.  H.  H.  Raphael,  m.p.,  for  his 
permission  to  reproduce  two  portraits  from  his  splendid  collec- 
tion of  "  Walpoliana." 

A.  Francis  Steuart. 

^  A  pleasant  account  of  her  is  found  in  the  Memoirs  of  Hannah  More^  by 
William  Roberts  [vol.  II,  pp.  434-5].  Hannah  More  visited  her  in  1795, 
and  had  "two  hours  of  solid,  rational,  religious  conversation."  The 
Duchess  behaved  to  her  "with  the  affectionate  familiarity  of  an  equal,"  and 
though  the  guest  had  said  * '  stranger  things  of  a  religious  kind  "  than  her 
hostess  was  used  to,  the  Duchess  '*  bore  it  better  than  any  great  person  I  ever 
conversed  with." 


AUTHOR'S    INTRODUCTION 

THE  Journals^  or,  as  the  writer  himself  called 
them,  the  Last  Journals  of  Horace  Walpole, 
now  published  for  the  first  time,  form  a  con- 
tinuation of  his  Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  King 
George  III,  which  work  terminates  with  the  year  1771. 
After  that  year  the  author  continued  his  manuscript 
collections  under  this  title  oi  Journals.  To  describe  these 
it  is  only  necessary  to  quote  Walpole's  own  words.  In 
the  concluding  paragraph  of  March,  1772,  he  says  :  "  This 
Journal  is  rather  calculated  for  my  own  amusement  than 
for  posterity.  I  like  to  keep  up  the  thread  of  my 
observations  :  if  they  prove  useful  to  anybody  else  I  shall 
be  glad  ;  but  I  am  not  to  answer  for  their  imperfections, 
as  I  intend  this  Journal  for  no  regular  work."  From 
numerous  passages  in  these  volumes,  it  will  be  apparent 
that  the  Journalist  wrote,  in  more  or  less  full  detail,  after 
he  had  collected  a  series  of  brief  notes  ;  and  frequently  he 
added,  under  entries  of  an  earlier  date,  details  of  circum- 
stances in  connection  with  those  entries,  but  the  occurrence 
of  which  belonged  to  a  later  period. 

With  regard  to  his  own  qualities  and  defects  as  an 
historical  writer,  there  is  a  phrase  in  this  Journal  (p.  278, 
vol.  i.)  distinguished  by  more  candour  than  even  some 
of  Walpole's  admirers  have  been  disposed  to  consider  as 
forming  a  portion  of  his  character.  "  Authentic  papers," 
he  remarks,  "  will,  I  flatter  myself,  corroborate  the  authen- 
ticity of  these  Memoirs^  though  in  some  things  I  may 
have   been   misinformed,   and    in   others,   from   my   own 


xxvi  AUTHOR'S   INTRODUCTION 

passions,  I  may  have  exaggerated  faults."  With  this 
hope  and  this  acknowledgment,  his  Journal  will  be  read 
with  additional  interest. 

Finally,  Walpole  came  to  regard  his  Diary  as  possessing 
uses  for  others  rather  than  providing  only  amusement  for 
himself.  Towards  the  close  of  his  remarks,  dated  February 
27th,  1782,  he  says  that  he  has  "continued  it  so  long 
merely  to  preserve  certain  passages  less  known  and  to  aid 
future  historians,  not  intending  the  journalist  part  for  any 
other  use."  After  speaking  modestly  of  himself,  his 
powers,  his  opportunities,  and  the  employment  he  had 
made  of  them,  he  concludes  by  intimating,  with  reference 
to  further  entries,  that  "  they  will  be  chiefly  such  as  I  can 
warrant  the  truth  of,  and  are  not  likely  to  be  found  in 
narratives  of  men  much  less  conversant  with  some  of  the 
principal  actors." 

In  such  words  does  Walpole  describe  the  chief  object  of 
a  Journal,  the  publication  of  which  he  made  over  to  a 
succeeding  century.  The  title  and  the  epigraphs  on  the 
title-page  are  his  own,  exactly  as  he  left  them,  ready  for 
the  press.  The  latter  serve  as  texts  for  a  history,  ten 
years  of  which  included  a  period  of  the  greatest  peril 
which  ever  threatened  our  country.  Walpole  has  detailed 
the  daily  intrigues,  the  defeats  and  triumphs,  the  alternate 
exultation  and  depression,  the  glory  and  the  shame,  of 
that  critical  and  eventful  epoch.  This  varied  narrative 
he  has  illustrated  by  various  annotations ;  and  it  only 
remains  to  be  added,  that  the  notes  bearing  the  initial  D. 
are  those  for  which  Walpole  is  not  responsible,  but  which 
have  been  contributed  by  the  Editor. 

J.  DORAN. 

London,  December,  1858. 


CONTENTS 
OF   THE   FIRST    VOLUME 

1772 

JANUARY 
Lord  Rochford — His  handsome  conduct — Death  of  the  Earl  of  North- 
ington — The  Comte  de  Guines — Sir  Charles  Hotham — Sir  William 
Hamilton — Wilkes's  Answer  to  Stephens — Promises  to  conform  his 
conduct  to  Magna  Charta — Thurlow — ^Junius's  Letter  to  Lord 
Mansfield — Parliament  meets — No  opposition  to  the  Address — Death 
of  the  Princess  Mary — The  Navy  Augmentation  Bill — Imprisonment 
of  the  Queen  of  Denmark  in  the  Castle  of  Cronenburg — Her  seizure 
at  a  masquerade— The  Princess  of  Wales — Early  life  of  the  Queen  of 
Denmark — Thoughtless  conduct  of  the  King — Misfortunes  of  the 
Royal  family Pages     1-4 

FEBRUARY 
Mr.  Keith's  Report  on  the  arrest  of  the  Queen  of  Denmark — Witty 
retort  of  Mr.  Dayrolles — Charles  James  Fox — The  Marriage  Bill — 
Gambling  at  Almack's — George  Selwyn-s^oatroversy  on  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles— Lowth,  Bishop  of  Oxford — Lord  North— Sir  William 
Meredith— Sir  R?J^  Newdigate— Sir  WiUiam  Petty — Burke's  speech 
on  the  Liturgy  question — Sir  George  Saville— Gambling  of  Stephen 
and  Charles  Fox — Dunning — Wedderburn— Dr.  Hay — Death  of  the 
Princess-Dowager  of  Wales — The  Duke  of  Cumberland  not  per- 
mitted by  the  King  to  see  his  mother — Lord  Bute — Conduct  of  the 
Court  of  Denmark— Sir  William  Hamilton— Affairs  in  Ireland — 
Lord  Townshend's  satirical  ballad — Burial  of  the  Princess  of  Wales 
— The  Princess  of  Brunswick — Jealousy  of  the  Queen,  and  cruel 
conduct  to  the  Princess  of  Brunswick — Charity  of  the  Princess- 
Dowager — Lord  Bute's  sudden  wealth-^^Mr.  Seymour  on  "Dormant 
Claims  of  the  Church" — Resignation  of  Charles  Fox — Marriage  of 
Lady  Susan  Strangways — Royal  Marriage  Bill — Dr.  Nowel's 
Sermon  on  Charles  the  First — Rigby's  vote — Lord  Camden's  speech 
on  the  Marriage  Bill — Opinion  of  the  Judges — Lord  Mansfield's 
chagrin — Lady  Waldegrave— Governor  Pownall — Dictatorial  con- 
duct of  the  King 5-37 


xxviii  CONTENTS 

MARCH 
Lord  Lyttelton — Protest  against  the  Marriage  Bill  drawn  by  the  Duke 
of  Richmond  and  Burke-^Motion  to  discontinue  the  observance  of 
the  30th  of  January — Triennial  Parliaments — Situation  of  the  Queen 
of  Denmark — The  Order  of  the  Bath  sent  to  Mr.  Keith — Dowdes- 
well,  Seymour,  T.  Pitt,  Wedderburn,  Dunning,  Charles  Fox,  Lord 
North,  Burke,  General  Conway,  Colonel  Barre,  and  others  on  the 
Marriage  Bill — The  King's  complaint  of  General  Conway — Conway 
seeks  Walpole's  advice — Great  opposition  to  the  Marriage  Bill — 
Lord  John  Cavendish's  amendment  rejected — Spirited  conduct  of 
Mr.  Herbert — Adjournment  of  the  House — Rose  Fuller  moves  to 
confine  the  duration  of  the  Bill  to  the  King's  life — Narrow  division 
on  this  clause — Vehement  speeches  of  T.  Townshend  and  Colonel 
Barre — Dinner  at  Mr.  Crawford's — Wedderburn's  admission — Merits 
of  the  speakers  on  the  Marriage  Bill  discussed — Letter  from  Keith 
— Disturbances  in  the  North  of  Ireland — Oppression  in  India — 
Charges  against  Lord  Clive — Lord  Clive's  defence      .         .  Pages    38-73 

Supplement  to  March. 
Papers  relating  to  the  affairs  in  Denmark 73-76 

APRIL 

Inquiry  into  the  conduct  of  the  House  of  Lords^^Protestant  Dissenters 
— State  of  Denmark — Marriage  of  the  Pretender — Proclaims  his 
consort  Queen — The  Pope  refuses  to  acknowledge  the  title — Wilkes 
and  Bull's  Letter — Walpole  goes  to  hear  Charles  Fox  speak — 
Colonel  Burgoyne — Lord  North — Description  of  Burke's  speech  on 
the  Old  Marriage  Bill — Fox's  reply  to  Burke — Fox  and  Burke  com- 
pared, and  Fox  with  Charles  Townshend — Defeat  of  Lord  North — 
Character  of  Lord  North — Grant  of  an  island  to  Lord  Rochford — 
Penn  claims  it,  and  substantiates  his  claim — Abuses  in  India — In- 
surrections in  Essex  in  consequence  of  the  high  price  of  food — Food 
riots  in  London — Masquerades  i^see  note) — Attacks  on  Madame 
Schwellenburg— Impertinent  conduct  of  the  Danish  Minister  at  the 
levee — Fitting  out  the  fleet — The  Queen  of  Denmark's  confession — 
Committee  for  Indian  Affairs      .......       77-^7 

MAY 

Bradshaw's  appointment  as  Lord  of  the  Admiralty— Expedition  to  con- 
duct the  Queen  of  Denmark  to  Zell — Prussians  march  into  Polish 
Prussia — Presentation  of  Madame  Dieden,  the  Danish  Minister's 
lady — Execution  of  Struensee — Bradshaw  unseated — Petitions  to  be 
reseated — Fox's  Marriage  Bill  thrown  out — Return  of  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  from  Italy— The  laws  against  Dissenters  proposed  to  be 
repealed — Warburton's  conduct  on  the  occasion  during  the  debate 
in  the  Lords — Lords  Chatham,  Lyttelton,  and  Barrington  on  the 


\ 


CONTENTS  xxix 

Bill — Lady  Waldegrave — Letter  of  Sir  Edward  Walpole — Letter 
from  Lady  Waldegrave  to  her  father  on  the  subject  of  her  marriage 
with  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — Walpole's  approval  of  this  letter,  and 
comments  on  it — Character  of  Lady  Waldegrave — The  Duke  of 
Gloucestor's  proposed  levee,  and  Walpole's  reasons  for  not  appearing 
at  it — Character  of  Sir  Edward  Walpole — Anecdote  of  him  and  of 
Frederick  Prince  of  Wales — Anecdote  of  George  the  Third  when 
young — Levee  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — Conduct  of  the  Duchess 
of  Cumberland — Smuggling  by  Ambassadors  {see  also  notes) — 
Luttrell's  motion  on  Smuggling Pages  88-108 

Supplement  to  May 
Arthur  Tell-Truth's  Letter  to  the  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty  in 

^^t  Public  Advertiser 109-110 

Extract  from  a  letter  from  Copenhagen  on  the  subject  of  Struensee's 
execution 110-112 

JUNE 

Middlesex  election — Bradshaw's  Petition — Close  of  the  session — Alder- 
man Townsend — The  Land  tax— Lord  Mansfield — Case  of  a  black 
slave  claiming  the  freedom  of  England — Visit  of  Ladies  Waldegrave 
and  Dysart — Account  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's  announcement  of 
his  marriage  to  the  King — Conduct  of  the  King — Installation  of  the 
Knights  of  the  Bath,  and  of  Prince  Frederick — Account  of  the 
Danish  trial  of  Struensee  and  Brandt — Details  of  Danish  Court 
life — Lord  North  made  a  Knight  of  the  Garter — Fordyce's 
bankruptcy — Disastrous  consequences  of  it — Great  failures — Run 
upon  the  Bank  of  Edinburgh — Partition  of  Poland — Conduct  of  the 
Empress  of  Austria — Want  of  spirit  in  the  French  policy     .         11 3-1 19 

Supplement  to  June 
Alderman  Townsend's  case 120-122 

JULY 

Scrutiny  for  new  Sheriffs — Alderman  Oliver  and  Lewes  the  popular 
candidates — Account  of  Hugh  Kelly,  the  playwright  {see  note) — 
Continuation  of  disasters  in  the  City — Failure  of  four  bankers         123-124 

AUGUST 

Plan  for  purchasing  lands  on  the  Ohio — Thomas  Bradshaw — Lady 
Holderness — Lady  Charlotte  Finch — Ungovernable  character  of 
the  Prince  of  Wales — Mr.  Smeet— Mr.  Sfnnp— Rishnp  of  Chester- 
Lord  North — Lord  Hillsborough — Fears  of  Lord  North — Earl 
Gower — Lord  North  takes  advice  from  Rigby— Lord  Weymouth — 
Resignation  of  Lord  Hillsborough— Allen  Lord  Bathurst  made  an 
Earl — Lord  Dartmouth  takes  office— Illness  of  the  Marquis  of 
Rockingham 125-128 


I 


XXX  CONTENTS 

SEPTEMBER 
Revolution  in  Sweden — Fordyce  gives  himself  up — Is  almost  lauded  as 
a  martyr — The  Duke  of  Gloucester's  marriage  made  public — The 
King  places  the  Duke  under  the  same  proscription  as  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland — Walpole's  letter  to  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester — He 
visits  her — Kind  reception — Mr.  Legrand's  conversation  with  the 
King  on  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  marriage — Walpole's  advice  to 
the  Duchess  of  Gloucester — Entrance  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester— 
Kindly  treatment  of  Walpole — Walpole  writes  to  Lord  Hertford  a 
letter  for  Lord  Hertford  to  show  to  the  King  touching  the  Duke  ot 
Gloucester's  marriage — The  King's  reply — Lord  Hertford's  advice — 
Walpole's  spirited  reply — Meeting  of  the  Duchesses  of  Cumberland 
and  Gloucester — The  Duke  of  Gloucester's  temper      .  Pages  129-138 

OCTOBER 
The  Duchess  of  Gloucester  applies  for  apartments  for  her  children  in 
Windsor  Castle — The  request  is  granted — Lord  Hertford — Earl  of 
Lichfield— Lady  Charlotte  Finch — The  Duchess  of  Gloucester — Sir 
Edward  Walpole — General  Conway's  reforms  in  the  Ordnance — 
The  King's  anger  at  Conway's  conduct  on  the  Marriage  Bill — Dis- 
grace of  Conway — Lord  Townshend — His  courage  called  in  question 
— Captain  Montgomery — Captain  Osborn — Lord  Bute — Ingratitude 
of  Lord  Townshend  to  Lord  Bute — Arbitrary  rule  of  Lord  Townshend 
in  Ireland  approved  by  the  King — Lord  Townshend  as  a  speaker — 
Lord  Townshend  removed  from  Ireland — Affront  to  General  Conway 
— Conway's  love  for  his  official  duties — Walpole  interferes  in  his 
behalf— Seeks  Lord  Hertford — Lord  Hertford's  intercession — Lord 
North — Negotiations  in  favour  of  Conway — Conway  yields  so  far  as 
to  accept  the  Governorship  of  Jersey — Conway  does  not  appear  at 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  levee — The  King's  pleasure  at  this — Con- 
way made  Governor  of  Jersey — The  Duchess  of  Gloucester's  letter 
to  Walpole  respecting  Conway's  and  Lord  Hertford's  absence  at  the 
levee — Walpole's  reply  . 1 39-153 

NOVEMBER 
Walpole's  letter  to  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  on  her  position  with 
respect  to  the  King  and  the  Royal  family — Walpole  advises  that  the 
Duke  should  go  to  the  King  and  ask  pardon — The  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  is  enceinte — Death  of  the  Earl  of  Lichfield— ^rd  North 
made  Chancellor  of  Oxford — Defeat  of  the  Earl  of  Radnor  as  a 
candidate  for  the  Chancellorship — Wilkes  offers  himself  for  Lord 
Mayor  of  London — The  Court  party  set  up  Aldermen  Halifax  and 
Shakespeare — Election  for  Lord  Mayor — Deceitful  conduct  of 
Alderman  Oliver — Strong  feeling  in  favour  of  Wilkes — Townsend  is 
returned  by  finesse — Anger  of  W^ilkes — Suspicion  falls  on  Lord 
Shelburne — Riots  at  the  Guildhall  ball — Parson  Home  mobbed — 


CONTENTS  xxxi 

The  Russian  and  Turkish  war — The  Crimea — Count  Orloff — The 
Empress  Catherine — Duties  exacted  from  us  at  Dantzig — Abuses  in 
the  East  India  Company — Probability  of  India  being  lost  to  us — 
Affairs  of  the  Company  brought  before  Parliament — Richard  Fitz- 
patrick  moves  the  Address — Lord  North — General  Burgoyne — Fox 
at  Newmarket  [see  note)     ......         Pages    154-161 

DECEMBER 
The  East  India  Company  resolve  to  send  out  Supervisors — Government 
objects — Burke's  speech  on  the  occasion — Majority  for  Government — 
The  Company  heard  by  Counsel — Lord  George  Germaine — Duke  of 
Richmond — The  question  comes  before  the  Lords — Lord  Bathurst's 
Sunday  visitors — Mr.  Sykes's  fortune  made  in  India — Exposed  by 
•  Mr.  Wilkes— New  disposition  of  places  in  the  Ministry  .         162-164 


1773 

JANUARY 

Meeting  of  Parliament — Birth  of  another  Prince — Mr.  Andrew  Stuart's 

letters  on  the  Douglas  cause    ........     165 

FEBRUARY 
Sale  of  the  jewels  of  the  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales — Lord  Townshend's 
quarrel  with  Lord  Bellamont — Duel — Lord  Bellamont  wounded — 
Petition  of  Navy  Captains — Lord  Howe — Lord  Sandwich — Sir  Gil- 
bert Elliot — The  expedition  against  the  Caribbees — Sir  William 
Young — Lord  Hillsborough — T.  Townshend — Examination  of  wit- 
nesses before  the  House — Loyal  conduct  of  the  French  Governor  of 
Martinique — Lord  North  threatens  to  resign — The  King  frightened 
— The  King  takes  upon  himself  to  bestow  a  large  number  of  military 
preferments — Affairs  of  the  East  India  Company— Governor  Johnston 
— Duke  of  Richmond — Townshend's  speech  on  the  Caribbean  question 
— Ironical  speech  of  Lord  George  Germaine — Lord  North — Colonel 
Barre — Colonel  Burgoyne — General  Howard — General  Harvey — Sir 
Gilbert  Elliot — Defeat  of  the  motion — The  Duke  and  Duchess  of 
Gloucester— The  Duchess  comes  to  town  for  her  lying-in — The 
Opposition  pay  their  court  to  the  Duke  and  Duchess — The  King 
first  approves,  and  afterwards  speaks  with  anger  of  the  conduct  of 
those  who  attend  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  levees — Reception  of  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester  at  the  theatre — The  Duchess  of  Cumberland's 
reception — Townsend  the  Lord  Mayor  proposes  to  the  Aldermen  to 
urge  short  Parliaments — Wilkes  opposes  Townsend-^Sif  William 
Meredith  moves  to  reconsider  the  Thirty-Nine  Articles—Lord  North 
throws  out  the  motion — Sir  Roger  Newdigate— Charles  Fox — Charles 
Jenkinson — Sir  John  Dalrymple's  History — The  India  Directors — 
Impey — Sickness  among  the  troops  .,,,.,  166-178 
\.—c 


xxxii  CONTENTS 

MARCH 

Death  of  the  King  of  Sardinia — Mason's  Epistle  to  Sir  William  Cham- 
bers— The  King  buys  the  book  to  tease  Chambers — Finds  an  attack 
upon  himself — Lord  Bristol  refuses  to  read  it — Sir  John  Dalrymple's 
History — Acrimony  against  the  Scotch — Lord  Mansfield  disavows 
having  aided  Dalrymple — Lord  Nuneham — Papers  accusing  Algernon 
Sidney  transcribed  for  the  King — Designs  against  Lord  North — I^ord 
Mountstewart — Lord  North  moves  a  grant  for  the  East  India  Com- 
pany— Sir  Basil  Keith  made  Governor  of  Jamaica — The  City  Re- 
monstrance— Drawn  up  by  Wilkes — Death  of  the  Earl  of  Chesterfield 
— His  will — Presentation  of  the  City  Remonstrance — The  King 
treats  it  as  a  joke Pages  179-182 

Supplement  to  March 

The  City  Remonstrance 182-183 

Wilkes's  letter 184 

The  King's  reply  to  the  City  Remonstrance  .         .         .         .         .         .185 

APRIL 

The  Prussian  Minister  threatens  to  depart — Affairs  of  the  East  India 
Company — Lord  North — Lord  Clive  offended  at  the  Secret  Com- 
mittee— News  from  the  Caribs — Cession  of  part  of  their  territory — 
Call  of  the  House  of  Commons — The  Sheriffs  of  Middlesex  summon 
Wilkes — Contempt  of  the  City  for  the  Court — Sir  Thomas  Robinson 
of  Rokeby — The  House  of  Commons  afraid  of  Wilkes — News  from 
Boston — Rumours  of  a  war  with  France — Fall  in  the  funds— Sir 
Charles  Saunders  named  to  the  command  of  the  fleet — Wilkes  de- 
mands his  writ — Motion  to  hear  Wilkes  at  the  Bar — Motion  rejected 
— Fears  of  war  unfounded — Meeting  of  the  freeholders  of  Middlesex 
— Resolutions  to  adhere  to  Wilkes's  election— Meeting  of  the  Pro- 
prietors of  East  India  Stock    .......       186-192 

Supplement  to  April 
Sir  Fletcher  Norton's  letter  to  the  Sheriff  of  Middlesex         .         .         .192 

The  Sheriff's  reply 193 

Wilkes's  letter  to  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons       .         .       193-196 

MAY 
Petition  of  the  Court  of  Proprietors  of  the  East  India  Company — Lord 
Clive's  speech — Defence  of  his  Administration — Present  of  diamonds 
to  the  King — Burgoyne's  attack  on  Clive — Debates  on  Clive's  pro- 
ceedings— Thurlow  revives  the  feeling  against  Lord  Clive — Bur- 
goyne's resolutions  carried — Fall  of  India  stock — Recriminations  of 
Wedderburn  and  Burgoyne — Junius — Burgoyne's  election  at  Preston 
—The  Court  of  East  India  Proprietors  vote  not  to  agree  with  the 


CONTENTS  xxxiii 

Government  plan — The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester — Their 
levees  deserted  by  a  servile  nobility — The  Due  de  Choiseul  and  the 
French  nobility  contrasted  with  the  English  nobility  and  the  Duke 
of  Gloucester — Paltry  excuses  for  their  absence — Lord  and  Lady 
Waldegrave — The  Countess  of  Powis — Pregnancy  of  the  Duchess  of 
Gloucester — Illness  of  the  Duke — Dr.  Jebbe — The  Duke  writes  to 
the  King — The  King's  delay  in  answering — The  Duke  writes  again 
— Unfeeling  message  of  the  King — Cruel  conduct  of  the  King — Firm 
attitude  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — The  Duke  of  Richmond,  Lord 
George  Germaine,  Sir  William  Meredith,  and  Lord  Rockingham  on 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  marriage — Circumstances  of  the  maniage 
— Walpole's  interview  with  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — The  King 
yields — Walpole's  advice  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — The  Duke  of 
Gloucester's  indignation  at  the  threatened  Committee  of  Inquiry — 
Charles  II's  conduct  in  compelling  the  Duke  of  York  to  acknow- 
ledge his  marriage  favourably  contrasted  with  the  King's  in  ignoring 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  marriage — Lord  North  and  the  Duchess 
of  Argyle  well  disposed  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  ^Sensible  conduct 
of  the  Duke — Imbecility  of  the  Lords  Commissioners,  Archbishop 
Cornwallis,  Lord  Bathurst,  and  Dr.  Terrick,  Bishop  of  London — 
Inquiry  into  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  marriage — Examination  of  the 
Duke  and  Duchess— rPeposition  of  the  Bishop  of  Exeter — Inquiry 
into  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's  marriage — Visit  from  Lord  Hertford 
— Lord  Hertford  frightened  at  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  boldness — 
Sir  Edward  Walpole's  congratulatory  letter — Lady  Gower — Council 
on  the  Duke's  marriage — Lord  Camden — Mean  conduct  of  the  King 
and  Lord  Mansfield — Persecution  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — The 
King  proposes  the  marriage  over  again — The  Duke  of  Gloucester's 
reply — The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury — Triumph  of  the  Duke — 
Disingenuousness  of  the  King — The  Duchess  of  Gloucester  gives 
birth  to  a  Princess — East  Indian  Affairs — Duke  of  Richmond — Lord 
North — Accusation  of  Lord  Clive — Lord  Clive's  able  and  interesting 
defence — General  Burgoyne  moves  that  Lord  Clive  abused  his 
powers — Sir  WiUiam  Meredith,  Thurlow,  Fox,  and  Colonel  Barre 
support  General  Burgoyne's  motion — Wedderburn,  Conway,  Saun- 
ders, Burke,  and  Lord  George  Germaine  support  Lord  Clive — Defeat 
of  Lord  North— Bill  of  Regulations  ....  Pages  197-235 

JUNE 
Generals  Monckton  and  Clavering — Wilkes  proposes  to  congratulate  the 
King  on  the  birth  of  a  child  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — Fresh  attacks 
on  Lord  Clive — Andrew  Stuart — Lord  Mansfield's  memory  of  in- 
juries— Debate  on  the  India  Bill  in  the  Lords — Admirable  speech  of 
the  Duke  of  Richmond — The  King's  journey  to  Portsmouth — Lord 
Sandwich— The  King's  statue — Highway  robbery  in  St.  James's 
Square — Lord  North's  Budget — The  East  India  Bill  passed  in  the 


xxxiv  CONTENTS 

Lords — Lord  Shelburne's  conversion — News  from  America— The 
Bostonians  disclaim  the  authority  of  Parliament — The  House  of 
Lords  **  smiles" — The  King's  visit  to  Portsmouth — His  enthusiastic 
reception — Christening  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  daughter — The 
King  invited  to  be  godfather,  refuses — The  King  to  mortify  the 
Duke  refuses  to  review  his  regiment Pages  236-240 

JULY 

Prorogation  of  Parliament — Miller  fined  p^20oo  for  an  accusation  of 
Lord  Sandwich — The  India  Company  vote  not  to  employ  General 
Clavering— Lord  North  installed  Chancellor  of  Oxford— General 
Moyston  cast  in  damages  of  ;^3000  for  arbitrarily  imprisoning  Mr. 
Fabregas — The  Duke  of  Cumberland  applies  for  permission  to  go  to 
Italy — Influence  of  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland — Cornwall  quits 
the  Opposition — Fresh  uneasiness  at  Boston — Governor  Hutchinson 
recommends  coercion  ........  241-243 

AUGUST 
The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumberland  dine  with  the  Duke  and  Duchess 
of  Gloucester — Coldness  of  the   Duke  of  Cumberland — Death  of 
George  Lord  Lyttelton — His  character  and  writings — Character  of 
his  son 244-245 

SEPTEMBER 
The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumberland  set  out  for  Italy— Directions 
given  to  the  English  Ministers  abroad  not  to  visit  them — Death  of 
Evelyn,  Duke  of  Kingston — Miss  Chudleigh — Her  beauty — Account 
of  her  early  life — Her  lavish  expenditure — Takes  measures  to  annul 
her  marriage  with  Augustus  Hervey — Marries  the  Duke  of  Kingston 
— His  will — Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu — The  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land at  Calais — Goes  to  the  play — Present  to  the  players — Conduct 
of  the  players — East  Indian  affairs 246-249 

OCTOBER 

Contest  for  Lord  Mayor — Wilkes  and  Bull  versus  Sawbridge  and  Oliver 
— Townsend  maltreated  by  the  mob — Sawbridge  accuses  Wilkes  of 
slander — Discoveries  amongst  the  papers  of  the  Jesuits — Annoyance 
of  the  Pope — The  King  of  Prussia  protects  the  Jesuits — Affairs  of 
Ireland — Simon  Lord  Harcourt — Discussion  in  the  Irish  House 
respecting  Lord  Townshend — Proposed  tax  on  absentees — Conduct 
of  the  absentees — Lord  Rockingham — Lord  Shelburne — Conversa- 
tion between  Lords  Besborough  and  Shelburne — Edmund  Burke — 
The  letter  of  the  five  Lords  to  Lord  North — Lord  North's  reply — 
Character  of  the  five  Lords — Lord  and  Lady  Gower — Rigby — The 
King's  attention  to  him — Lord  North  and  Mr.  Rigby  .         .  250-256 


CONTENTS  XXXV 

NOVEMBER 

The  remonstrance  against  the  Absentee  tax  —  Mr.  Fortescue — Lord 
Clermont  —  Measures  of  the  Court  —  Lord  Hertford  —  Colonel 
Blaqui^re — Impolitic  disclosures — ^Jealousy  of  Prussia  and  Spain — 
Sir  Robert  Ladbrooke — Bull  a  candidate  for  the  City — Roberts 
opposes  him  in  the  Court  interest  —  Wilkes  and  Townshend — 
General  Moyston — King's  favour  to  him — Rejection  of  the  tax  on 
absentees — Recantation  of  Fludd     .....  Pages  257-261 

DECEMBER 

Bull  declared  duly  elected  for  London — The  Duke  of  Richmond — 
General  Johnson — The  tax  on  tea  in  America — Death  of  Andrew 
Stone,  Treasurer  to  the  Queen — Character  of  Andrew  Stone — Earl 
of  Guilford,  Treasurer  to  the  Queen — General  Graeme — Sir  George 
Macartney — George  Selwyn — The  Duke  of  Grafton — Lord  North's 
conduct  to  Selwyn — Panegyric  on  Lord  Chatham — Satire  on  the 
King  —  Dr.  Robertson — Flood,  the  Irish  orator — Baratariana — 
Flood's  change  of  politics — Lord  Clive — Secret  service  money — Royal 
Marriage  Act — Abandonment  of  the  Falkland  Islands — Dr.  John- 
son's pamphlet  on  the  occasion — Sir  William  Young's  debt  to 
Government — His  bankruptcy — Impoverishment  of  the  Crown — 
Temple's  duel  in  America  with  Mr.  Whately  the  banker — Rage  for 
duelling — The  "Sensible  Woman" — Her  conduct  to  the  Quaker — 
Represents  herself  as  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Grieve — Charles  Fox  becomes 
her  dupe — Sir  John  Dalrymple's  History  of  Charles  II — Foote's 
Cozeners — Description  of  Dalrymple's  History — Fletcher  of  Sal- 
toun — Barillon — Algernon  Sidney — Death  of  Thomas  HoUis,  the 
antiquary  and  collector — An  account  of  him — His  love  of  liberty — 
His  editions  of  works  supporting  the  cause  of  freedom — Another 
account  of  Plollis  {see  note)  .......  262-275 

Suppieme7tt  to  Deceinber 

Letter  from  Mr.  Temple  to  the  Public  Advertiser  on  the  subject  of  his 

duel  between  Whately  and  Temple     ......  276-280 


1774 

JANUARY 

The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  go  to  Covent  Garden  in  state — 
Received  with  applause — The  King  meets  their  child,  the  Princess 
Sophia — Parliament  meets — Mr.  Prescott  the  banker — The  Duke 
of  Richmond — General  Graeme  resigns  his  post  of  Secretary  to  the 
Queen — Mr.  Harris,  the  author  of  Hermes — Riots  at  Boston — 
Dr.    Law,    Bishop    of    Carlisle,    writes    against    the    Thirty-nine 


xxxvi  CONTENTS 

Articles  —  Whitehead's  ode  —  The  City  petition  in  favour  of 
Roberts — Lord  North  opposed  to  it — Fox's  unpatriotic  conduct — 
Rigby  courts  Fox — Dr.  Franklin  heard  by  counsel  before  the  Privy 
Council — Wedderburn  abuses  him — Franklin  makes  no  reply — 
The  Council  advise  a  rejection  of  the  Memorial— Franklin  turned 
out  of  his  place— ^Dr.  Dodd.  the  popular  preacher — His  intrigues 
for  advancement — Struck  off  the  list  of  chaplains     .         .  Pages  281-285 

FEBRUARY 

The  disturbances  at  Boston — The  Earl  of  Stair's  maiden  speech — 
Lord  Buckingham's  motion — General  Clavering  appointed  to  the 
command  in  India— The  City  Petition— Mr.  Grenville's  Act  for 
Select  Committees  —  Conviction  of  Mr.  Rous  of  bribery  —  Sir 
Edward  Astley  promises  to  move  for  the  perpetuity  of  Grenville's 
Bill — Lord  Rockingham — Lord  North — An  Heroic  Postscript  to 
the  Heroic  Epistle — Liberty  of  the  Press — Daring  attack  on  the 
Speaker,  Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  in  the  Public  Advertiser — William 
Tooke,  of  Purley — The  Speaker  accused  of  partiality — Mr.  Herbert 
moves  to  have  the  publisher  of  the  Public  Advertiser  punished — 
Lord  North's  ironical  speech  —  Dowdesv/ell — Wilkes  —  Woodfall 
the  printer  ordered  to  attend — Appears  at  the  bar  of  the  House — 
His  excuse — Charles  Fox  counsels  harsh  measures— Herbert  and 
Sir  William  Meredith  for  moderation — Lord  North  proposes  to 
send  Mr.  Woodfall  to  the  Gatehouse — Dowdeswell  shows  a  prece- 
dent for  milder  measures — Lord  North,  willing  to  yield,  appeals  to 
Charles  Fox — Fox  indecently  adheres  to  his  original  harsh  proposi- 
tion, but  is  defeated — Letter  of  "A  South  Briton"— Tlig  Rev.  John 
Home  committed  to  the  custody  of  the  Sergeant  at  Arms — Invective 
on  the  Revolution — Violence  of  the  Press — Virulent  satire  on  Lord 
Lyttelton — Charles  Fox  complains  of  the  Press — T.  Townshend 
throws  in  Lord  North's  teeth  the  pensions  paid  to  Drs.  Johnson 
and  Shebbeare  and  Sir  John  Dalrymple — Lord  North  denies  the 
latter — Lord  Bute — Defeat  of  the  Administration— j^^ornp.  surrenders 
— Sawbridge— JifiScription  of  Mr.  Home — His  skilful  defence — 
Wedderburn — Woodhall— Defence  by  Dunning — Lord  Shelburne — 
Colonel  Barre — Examination  of  Woodfall — Address  of  Home — 
Examination  of  Woodfall's  men — Home's  defence  —  Herbert  and 
Phipps  vote  his  discharge — Fox,  disappointed,  blames  Lord  North 
— Colonel  Barre's  speech — Home  ordered  to  be  at  liberty — The 
Ordinary  of  the  Navy — Copyright  decision — Dismissal  of  Charles 
Fox — The  Queen  delivered  of  another  Prince — Fox  and  Burke — 
Petition  from  Woodfall  dismissed — Sir  Edward  Astley 's  motion  for 
making  Grenville's  Select  Committee  Bill  perpetual — Lord  North's 
indecision  —  Debate  on  the  Select  Committee  Bill  —  Sir  John 
Molesworth,  Lord  North,  James  Grenville,  Stephen  Fox,  T. 
Townshend,    Sir    George    Younge,    Jenkinson,    Penton,    Colonel 


CONTENTS  xxxvii 

Barre,  and  General  Burgoyne,  on  the  Bill — George  Selwyn  and 
Charles  Fox — The  King's  dislike  to  Fox  —  Fox  in  difficulties — 
Anecdotes  of  Fox — Mr.  Drake,  Phipps,  Sir  George  Germaine,  Sir 
Gilbert  Elliot,  and  others,  on  Mr.  Grenville's  Bill — Mr.  Rigby's 
coarse  defence  of  Government — Defeat  of  the  Government  Pages  286-309 

MARCH 

Woodfall's  petition  agreed  to — Popularity  of  Mr.  Grenville's  Bill — 
The  Bill  carried  to  the  Lords — City  address  to  the  King  on  the 
birth  of  the  Duke  of  Cambridge — New  promotions — The  American 
question — Lord  North,  Mr.  Rice,  Wedderburn,  Burke,  etc.,  on 
American  affairs — Want  of  any  plan  in  American  affairs — Strong 
feeling  against  the  Bostonians — Grenville's  Bill  debated  in  the 
House  of  Lords  and  carried — East  Indian  affairs — Lord  North 
moves  to  remove  the  Custom-house  from  Boston  —  Colonel  Barre 
declares  the  Americans  ought  to  be  punished  for  their  ingratitude — 
Calvert  proposes  to  take  away  charters — The  Bill  read  a  first  time 
to  remove  the  Custom-house  from  Boston — Speeches  of  Mr.  Herbert, 
Lord  North,  Bamber  Gascoyne,  Mr.  Montagu,  and  others — 
Character  of  Mr.  Montagu  —  Colonel  Barre's  defence  of  the 
Bostonians — Petition  from  Massachussets  Bay  rejected — Edmund 
Burke's  oration— The  Bill  read  in  the  Lords — Attacked  by  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lord  Camden — Lords  Gower,  Temple, 
Mansfield,  and  Lyttelton,  support  the  Bill — News  arrives  of  the 
taking  of  Tanjour — General  Smith — The  Massachussets  Bay  Bill — 
Lord  George  Germaine's  speech  on  the  Bill — Career  of  Lord 
George  Germaine— His  defection— Efforts  of  the  King — State  of 
parties — Lord  George  Germaine  offered  the  reversion  of  the 
Wardenship  of  the  Cinque  Ports— Refuses  it,  and  demands  the 
Master-Generalship  of  the  Ordnance  —  Walpole  agitates  against 
him — Conversation  with  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — The  Czarina's 
disclosure  to  General  Loyd 3i^~329 

APRIL 

The  Middlesex  election — Colonel  Luttrell's  complaint  of  the  Sheriffs — 
Lord  Beauchamp  moves  the  Orders  of  the  day  — Charles  Fox 
seconds  Colonel  Luttrell— Fox  attacks  Lord  North— Lord  North's 
witty  reply— Sir  Charles  Whitworth's  Bill  for  the  better  regulation 
of  the  Government  of  Massachussets  read  a  first  time — The  King's 
Message  taken  into  consideration — General  Conway  reproaches  the 
Government  for  their  despotic  measures  in  America— Rose  Fuller 
moves  the  repeal  of  the  Tea  Bill— Burke's  speech  received  with 
applause — Glover  makes  a  good  speech  on  a  matter  of  trade — 
Ballot  for  Directors  of  the  East  India  Company —  "  Civil 
Jurisdiction  Bill"  (America)— Rose  Fuller  and  Sir  George  Saville 
denounce    Government    for    condemning    the    Americans   without 


xxxviii  CONTENTS 

being  heard — Conway's  defence  of  the  Americans — Lord  North's 
reply — Sir  George  Younge  and  General  Johnston  blame  the  injustice 
of  Administration — Governor  Pownall  intimates  that  the  Americans 
are  in  rebellion — Rigby's  speech — Fox's  defence  of  the  Americans — 
Anecdote  told  by  Sir  Richard  Sutton  to  show  the  levelling  system 
in  America Pages  330-337 

MAY 
Petition  from  Americans  resident  in  London  against  sending  troops 
against  them — The  petition  only  suffered  to  lie  on  the  table — 
Insolence  of  the  Court  party — Third  reading  of  the  Massachussets 
Bill — Lord  Chatham  disapproves  the  rigour  used  towards  Boston — 
Rumours  respecting  Lord  Chatham — Dunning  strongly  opposes  the 
third  reading  of  the  Massachussets  Bill — Lord  Caermarthen  defends 
Government — Rigby's  impudent  speech — General  Conway's  predic- 
tion— Lord  George  Germaine  comes  round  to  the  Government — Fox 
assails  Lord  George  Germaine's  position — Burke's  statement — Re- 
butted by  Lord  North — Sir  George  Saville  again  protests  against 
the  wrong  of  condemning  the  Americans  unheard— Sir  William 
Meredith  renews  his  motion  for  reviewing  the  Thirty-nine  Articles 
— ^Sil-J^oger  Newdigate  offers  his  usual  opposition — liuxke's  defence 
of  the  Articles — Government  of  Canada — Louis  the  Fifteenth  seized 
with  the  small-pox — The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumberland  arrive 
in  England — Magnificently  treated  by  the  Pope — The  Bostonian 
Bill  in  the  Lords — The  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lord  Camden 
support  the  Bostonians — Pulteney,  Mansfield,  and  Sandwich  support 
Government — Death  of  Louis  the  Fifteenth — Accounts  from  Boston 
— The  Quebec  Bill — The  Duke  of  Richmond,  Lords  Rockingham, 
Gower,  Sandwich,  Dartmouth,  Hillsborough,  on  the  Bill — Con- 
siderations on  the  Fresetit  Measures — Reported  saying  of  the  King 
— -romplaiganrp  of  the  Bishops — The  Budget — Lord  North's  speech 
— Retiring  pensions  {see  also  note) — Lord  Chatham's  conduct — 
Third  reading  of  the  Bill  for  providing  Quarters  for  the  Ofhcers  and 
Troops  in  North  America — Lord  Temple  speaks  with  animosity — 
Lord  Chatham's  entry  in  black  velvet  boots  and  leaning  on  a  black 
stick — Compliments  Lord  Sandwich — The  oration  ineffective — Lord 
Chatham's  pride  and  madness — Picture  of  him  by  V\  alpole — The 
Bostonians,  hearing  of  severe  measures,  intend  to  stand  on  their 
defence 33^~3Si 

JUNE 
Bill  to  relieve  booksellers — Sir  John  Dalrymple  opposes  it,  and  arraigns 
newspapers — He  is  stated  to  have  received  from  these  same  book- 
sellers ;i^2000  for  his  book — The  City  of  London  present  a  petition 
against  the  Quebec  Bill — Dr.  Marriot — General  Murray — Lord 
North  —  Townshend  —  Charles    Fox  —  Burke    makes    an    angry 


CONTENTS  xxxix 

speech  on  the  Quebec  Bill  —  Lord  North — News  arrives  that 
New  York  takes  part  with  Boston — Wedderburn  and  Governor 
Hutchinson  burnt  in  effigy — Choiseul's  justification  for  the  sur- 
render of  Canada  {see  note) — Strong  opposition  to  the  Quebec 
Bill  —  Lord  Chatham  bitterly  arraigns  the  Bill — Lord  Stanley's 
entertainment  {see  note)  —  Debate  in  the  Lords  —  Conduct  of 
the  Bishops — The  Duke  of  Gloucester  votes  against  the  Court — 
Unpopularity  of  the  Bill — The  Clergy — Presbyterians— Bishoprics 
in  America — Comparison  between  George  III  and  Charles  I — Re- 
flections of  Walpole  on  the  aspect  of  the  times — The  City  of  London 
vote  a  strong  petition  to  the  King  not  to  pass  the  Bill — The  King 
goes  to  the  House  of  Lords  and  passes  the  Bill — Prorogation  of 
Parliament — Alarm  of  the  Court — General  Moyston— Lord  Mansfield 
— The  King  threatened  on  his  way  to  the  House — The  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  delivered  of  a  second  Princess — Election  of  Sheriffs — 
The  Court  candidates  elected — Accounts  from  America — Death  of 
Zachary  Pearce,  Bishop  of  Rochester        ....  Pages  352-361 

JULY 
Death  of  Lord  Holland — His  great  wealth — Solemn  fast  in  Virginia  in 
behalf  of  Boston — Association  in  Maryland  against  trade  with 
England — Treasonable  papers  affixed  at  St.  James's  and  other  public 
places — The  Duchess  of  Kingston  returns  to  England — Christening 
of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  daughter — Death  of  Lady  Holland     362-363 

AUGUST 

Unpromising  news  from  America — Solemn  league  and  covenant  not  to 
trade  with  Great  Britain — General  Gage  declares  the  league  illegal 
— North,  Wedderburn,  and  Hutchinson  burnt  in  effigy — Five  hun- 
dred soldiers  desert — Affairs  of  the  Duke' of  Gloucester — Proposed 
application  to  Parliament — Letter  of  Walpole  to  the  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  on  the  affairs  of  the  Duke — Provision  for  the  Duchess 
and  her  children — Application  to  the  King — Cold  reply  of  the  King 
— Threat  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — Brutal  answer  of  the  King — 
Sir  William  Meredith  enrolled  in  the  Court — Meredith  and  Onslow 
excuse  themselves  from  waiting  on  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — 
Howard  and  Blaquiere  made  Knights  of  the  Bath — Unfavourable 
accounts  from  America— General  Gage  advises  Ministers  to  persist 
— Peace  between  the  Russians  and  the  Turks — Rumoured  death  of 
Lord  Lyttelton — Lord  Mansfield  goes  to  Paris — Relations  with 
France       3^4-373 

SEPTEMBER 

Gloomy  aspect  of  affairs — Intended  dissolution — Dr.  Franklin  {see 
note) — Lord  North — The  King's  debts — Probability  of  war — Rea- 
sons  for  the  dissolution— Bad  news  from  America — Effect  of  Mr. 


xl  CONTENTS 

Grenville's  Bill — Unfavourable  time  for  the  elections — General 
Conway — Intrigues  against  him — The  Duke  of  Grafton — His  weak- 
ness— His  conduct  to  General  Conway — Walpole  bestirs  himself  for 
General  Conway — Rigby  at  the  Duchess  of  Grafton's — Gives  the 
Duke  notice  of  the  dissolution — Colonel  Keene — Electioneering 
topics — Embarrassment  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton — Conversation 
with  Lady  Hertford — Character  of  Lady  Hertford-^Character  of 
Lady  Ailesbury — The  Duke  of  Richmond— Mrs.  Darner— Anec- 
dote of  Mrs.  Damer — Her  decision  and  character— General  Sir 
Robert  Rich — His  character — Anecdote  of  him — Quarrels  with 
Conway — Conway  abroad — The  King  dismisses  Sir  Robert  Rich 
from  his  service .  Pages  374-387 


OCTOBER 

Dissolution  of  Parliament — Lord  Barrington  sent  by  the  King  to  Lady 
Ailesbury — Penetration  of  Mrs.  Damer — Duplicity  of  the  King — 
Colonel  Keene's  message  from  Lord  North — Lord  North's  hand- 
some conduct — Conway's  independence — Arrival  of  Lord  Hertford 
— His  chicanery — Remarkable  scene  at  Lord  Hertford's — Walpole's 
strong  letter  to  Lord  Hertford — Letter  from  Lady  Hertford — Lord 
Hertford  promises  to  come  to  Walpole — Walpole  declines  his 
acquaintance — Lady  Hertford — Her  amiable  character  and  spirited 
conduct — The  Earl  of  Hertford  visits  Walpole — The  quarrel  at  an 
end — Lord  Hertford  sends  for  Walpole — The  Duke  of  Grafton 
throws  Conway  over — Treachery  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton — The 
borough  of  Thetford — Bad  news  from  America — General  Gage 
implores  more  men  and  ships — Letter  to  Conway — Conway  likely  to 
be  offered  the  command  in  America — The  elections — Election  for 
Mayor — Wilkes  elected — The  duration  of  his  influence — Candidates 
for  Middlesex — Sir  John  Hawkins — His  History  of  Music — 
Account  of  him  {see  Jiote) — Majority  for  Wilkes's  nominees — A  poll 
demanded — Conduct  of  Alderman  Townsend — The  city  of  West- 
minster— Lord  Percy — The  Earl  of  Lincoln — Earl  Stanhope — 
Anecdote  of  Lord  Percy's  penuriousness  {see  note) — Lord  Mahon 
stands  for  Westminster  on  liberal  principles — Humphrey  Cotes — 
Lord  Mountmorris  associated  with  Lord  Mahon  for  Westminster — 
Alarm  of  the  Duke  of  Northumberland— Lord  Thomas  Clinton 
nominated  on  the  Court  side — Death  of  Pope  Ganganelli — His 
contest  with  the  Jesuits — Their  persecution  of  him — His  death  and 
suspicious  circumstances  attending  it — Supposed  to  have  been 
poisoned  by  the  Jesuits  in  the  Sacrament — Letter  from  Sir  Horace 
Mann,  describing  his  death — Election  for  the  City — Wilkes  and 
Glynn  elected  for  Middlesex— Losses  of  the  Court  party — Proclama- 
tion against  the  export  of  gunpowder — Colonel  Lee — Lords  Percy 
and  Clinton  returned  for  Middlesex 388-405 


CONTENTS  xli 

NOVEMBER 

Wilkes  abused  by  the  Court  and  Scotch  faction — Answer  in  the 
Public  Advertiser^  signed  "Toby" — Chancellor  Apsley  and  Mr. 
Wilkes — Advices  from  America — Spread  of  the  discontent — Burke 
elected  for  Bristol— Death  of  Thomas  Bradshaw— The  King's 
liberality  to  his  widow  and  children — The  Duke  of  Athol  drowned 
— Dr.  Johnson  publishes  The  Patriot — Dr.  Shebbeare's  Answer  to 
Queries — Death  of  Lord  Clive — Dr^  Fpthergill — Lord  Clive  dies  by 
his  own  hand — The  printers  of  the  South  Briton  tried  and  sen- 
tenced for  a  libel  on  Charles  Fox — Results  of  the  elections — Inacti- 
vity of  the  Rockingham  party  and  the  Dissenters — Wilkes's 
treatment  of  Burke  in  the  Westminster  election — A  sermon  at 
Bristol  before  Burke — Death  by  dropsy  of  Lord  Holland — Meeting 
of  the  new  Parliament — Sir  Fletcher  Norton — Accident  to,  and 
death  of,  Dr.  Johnson,  Bishop  of  Worcester — Dr.  North  named  his 
successor — Debate  on  the  King's  Speech  in  the  Lords — Speeches  of 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  Lords  Hillsborough,  Shelburne,  Camden, 
Dartmouth,  Talbot,  and  Lyttelton    .         .         .         .         .  Pages  406-41 1 

DECEMBER 

Debate  on  the  King's  Speech  in  the  Commons — Lord  Beauchamp  and 
Mr.  De  Grey  move  the  Address — Strong  feeling  against  the  Ameri- 
cans— Success  of  the  Court  party — Panic  caused  by  the  state  of 
American  affiiirs — George  Grenyille — Lord  Lyttelton  moves  to  open 
the  door  of  the  Lords — Lord  Weymouth  seconds  him — Rigby  and 
the  Court  disappointed — Debates  on  the  Army  and  Navy — Admis- 
sion of  Lord  Beauchamp — Burke  makes  a  fine  speech  on  American 
affairs — Alarming  news  from  America — Dismay  of  the  Administra- 
tion— Influence  of  Lord  Mansfield  and  Jenkinson— Vacillating 
conduct  of  Ministers — Increase  of  the  National  Debt  .         .         .  412-416 


1775 

JANUARY 

remarkable  .advertisement — Who  is  to  succeed  Mr.  Bradshaw? — 
The  American  merchants  petition  Parliament  against  the  late 
measures  of  Administration — Burke's  famous  speech  on  the  repeal 
of  the  tea  duty — Description  of  that  speech  and  of  Burke's  oratory 
in  general — Burke  a  stockjobber — The  American  merchants — Dis- 
sensions in  the  Cabinet — Lord  North  for  moderate  measures — 
Mansfield  and  Jenkinson  for  carrying  out  a  high  policy — The 
Bedfords  vacillate — Glasgow  dissatisfied — The  West  Indian  mer- 
chants' petition — Desertions  amongst  the  soldiery  at  Boston — 
Distress  of  the  King — More  regiments  ordered  to  Boston — Meeting 
of  Parliament — American  papers  laid  before   the   House  of  Com- 


xlii  CONTENTS 

mons — Lord  Chatham  moves  in  the  House  of  Lords  to  recall  troops 
from  Boston — Debate  in  the  Lords — Lords  Shelburne,  Camden,  and 
the  Duke  of  Richmond  for  the  motion — Lords  Suffolk,  Lyttelton, 
Townshend,  Gower,  Weymouth,  and  Rochford  vote  for  the  Court — 
Petition  of  the  merchants  of  London  on  American  affairs — Another 
from  Bristol — Debate  against  observing  the  30th  of  January — 
Wilkes  considers  it  rather  a  festival  than  a  fast — Alderman  Hay- 
ley's  petition — Lord  George  Germaine— Charles  Fox  attacks  Lord 
North — Sir  George  Saville — Colonel  Barre — A  petition  from  the 
agents  of  the  colonies  rejected  .         .....  Fages  /\i 7-424. 

FEBRUARY 

Lord  Chatham's  Bill  for  conciliating  America — Ministers  reject  it — The 
French  Court — Lord  Gower  complains  of  the  conduct  of  Lord 
Chatham — The  Duke  of  Grafton  announces  a  Bill  of  his  own — 
Lord  Mansfield  absents  himself — Sawbridge  proposes  triennial 
Parliaments — Wilkes  and  Mr.  Moysey  support  it — Lord  North's 
irresolution — His  plan  for  carrying  on  the  war — His  speech — Rein- 
forcement of  General  Gage — Dunning's  reply  to  Lord  North — 
Speech  of  the  Attorney-General — Five  thousand  men  in  arms  against 
Government  in  New  Hampshire — Colonel  Grant — Fox  makes  a  fine 
speech  against  Government— Grenville's  defence — The  House  votes 
in  favour  of  carrying  on  the  war — Want  of  policy  in  the  Opposition 
— Burke  makes  a  long  and  pathetic  speech — Barre  speaks  with 
more  fire — The  Opposition  flag — Maiden  speech  of  Sir  Robert 
Smith — The  Address  communicated  to  the  Lords — Attacks  on  Lord 
Mansfield — He  is  threatened  with  impeachment — His  defence — The 
Duke  of  Grafton  attacks  Lord  Mansfield — State  of  the  fleet  dis- 
cussed— Publication  of  the  debates  in  the  Lords  complained  of  by 
Lord  Lyttelton— Sir  Francis  Molesworth,  Serjeant-at-Arms,  sent 
to  take  up  the  printer — The  printer  not  '*at  home" — The  printer 
writes  to  Sir  Francis  to  tell  him  at  what  time  he  would  be  at  home 
— The  Lords  hesitate — The  Court  eagerly  push  forward  the  war — 
Sir  Jeffery  Amherst  offered  the  command,  which  he  declines — 
Howe,  Burgoyne,  and  Clinton  made  Majors-General  under  Gage 
— Their  characters — Lord  North  moves  to  put  the  trade  of  America 
under  temporary  restrictions — Evidence  of  the  rebellion  contested — 
Dilatoriness  of  Lord  North — 2000  seamen  asked — Temple  Luttrell 
opposes  the  demand — Lord  North  offers  terms  of  pacification — The 
Ministry  frightened — Broken  into  factions — Lord  North's  plan 
very  similar  to  Lord  Chatham's — Astonishment  of  Parliament  and 
the  people — Fluctuating  conduct  of  Ministers  exposed — The  Ministry 
in  danger — The  Secret  Junto  come  forward  to  rescue  it — Wedder- 
burn  shows  that  conciliation  means  no  conciliation — Insincerity  of 
the  Ministry — The  motion  carried — Surprise  without  the  House — 
The  stocks  rise — Wilkes's  motion  for  rescinding  the  Acts  of  the  last 


CONTENTS  xliii 

Parliament  respecting  the  Middlesex  election — Lord  North  threatens 
to  resign  if  the  motion  is  carried — Debate  on  the  motion — Wilkes 
draws  a  portrait  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton — Vann  accuses  Wilkes  of 
blasphemy — Bill  against  Massachussets — Lord  Effingham — Moves 
to  have  a  pamphlet  called  Present  Crisis  with  respect  to  America 
considered  burnt  by  the  common  hangman — The  Bill  offering  self- 
taxation  to  the  Americans  debated — General  Burgoyne's  speech  in 
favour  of  the  motion Pages  425-439 


MARCH 

The  merchants  heard  against  the  Massachussets  Bill — Aspect  of  affairs 
in  America — The  Crisis — Rigby  ridicules  the  House  of  Lords — 
Warm  discussion  in  that  House — Lord  Sandwich  accuses  the  Duke 
of  Richmond  of  encouraging  libels  against  the  King — The  Duke  of 
Richmond  makes  him  ask  pardon — A  State  Tinker — Lord  Pigot — 
Dowdeswell's  death  at  Nice — Cardinal  Braschi  chosen  Pope,  and 
takes  the  name  of  Pius  the  Sixth — Petitions  for  and  against  the 
Americans — Cooper  moves  the  engrossment  of  the  Bill  against 
Massachussets — First  occasion  on  which  the  word  starvation  was 
used — Fox's  speech — Jenkinson  upholds  the  exercise  of  power — Our 
force  in  America — Dundas's  heartless  speech — Lord  George  Caven- 
dish ridicules  him — Burke  breaks  out  into  bitter  invective — Styles 
the  supporters  of  the  Bill  *'  the  blackest  traitors" — The  Lord  Advo- 
cate charges  the  Opposition  with  the  war — Lord  North  moves  a 
similar  Bill  for  other  states  in  America — State  of  Ireland — The 
Whiteboys  commit  great  ravages — Dr.  Johnson's  Taxation  no 
Tyranny — Walpole's  character  of  Dr.  Johnson — Macpherson — 
Ossian's  poems — The  Scotch  Jacobites — Death  of  the  Princess 
Caroline,  youngest  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — The  King 
affronts  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  and  refuses  burial  for  his  child  in 
the  Royal  vault  at  Westminster — The  Duke  has  a  vault  made  at 
Windsor — Lord  Hertford  frightens  the  King  by  intimating  that  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester  might  make  the  affair  public — Insignificance  of 
German  Princes — George  Grenville  and  Lord  Bulkeley  move  to 
bring  in  a  bill  for  allowing  Members  of  Parliament  to  vacate  their 
seats — The  Chiltern  Hundreds — Lord  North's  imprudence — The 
New  England  Fishery  Bill— Death  of  Lord  Bristol  at  Bath- 
Results  of  it — Conway's  election  prospects — The  young  Princess 
Caroline  lies  in  state  at  Gloucester  House — Carried  to  Windsor — 
Burke's  plan  for  pacifying  America — Large  majority  against  Burke 
— Wilkes  gives  notice  of  a  Reform  Bill  next  session — Lord  Wey- 
mouth made  Groom  of  the  Stole — Protest  against  the  Massa- 
chussets Bill — Grenville's  Election  Bill — Bill  for  disfranchising 
Hindon — Lord  Hertford  tries  to  quash  the  Bill — Charles  Fox 
attacks  Rigby    ..........  440-452 


xliv  CONTENTS 


APRIL 

New  bill  against  the  refractory  Colonies — The  Opposition,  disgusted, 
absent  themselves — General  Conway  laments  the  measures  of  Govern- 
ment— Rigby  attacks  Conway — High  talking  with  respect  to  America 
—Lord  John  Cavendish  reproves  Rigby's  indecent  levity — Maiden 
speech  of  the  Marquis  of  Granby — Follows  the  policy  of  Lord 
Chatham — T.  Townshend  ridicules  Rigby — Conway  votes  against 
the  Court — The  Livery  of  London  vote  a  strong  remonstrance  to  the 
American  Bills,  and  Wilkes  presents  it — His  respectful  conduct  to 
the  King — The  King  declines  to  receive  future  remonstrances  from 
the  City  except  in  their  corporate  capacity — The  Duke  of  Gloucester 
enters  the  proofs  of  his  marriage  in  the  journals  of  the  House  of  Lords 
— The  Irish  fisheries — State  of  Ireland — Motion  to  sell  Somerset 
House  to  pay  the  King's  debts — Adjournment  of  the  Houses — The 
Generals  sail  for  Boston — Parliament  meets  again    .         .  Pages  453-458 


MAY 

Accounts  from  America^Position  of  General  Gage — Apprehension  of 
the  Spaniards — Lord  Grantham — The  Budget — Wilkes's  reply  to  the 
Lord  Chamberlain — Ramsay,  the  King's  painter — Account  of  the 
Ramsays  {see  note) — Remonstrance  from  New  York — Burke  intends 
to  present  it — The  Court  throw  out  the  petition  by  a  large  majority 
— The  bishops — Death  of  Caroline  Matilda,  Queen  of  Denmark — 
Strange,  the  engraver — Lord  Bute — The  Royal  Academy — Lord 
Camden  moves  for  a  repeal  of  the  Quebec  Bill — Lord  Mansfield 
opposes  the  motion — Lord  Shelburne — Lord  Lyttelton  attacks  Lord 
Camden — Lord  Bristol — The  Spanish  armaments — The  Quebec  Bill 
— Sir  George  Saville  moves  its  repeal  in  the  Commons  supported  by 
Fox — Burke's  plan  for  the  pacification  of  America  printed — The 
Duchess  of  Kingston  surrenders  herself  to  answer  a  charge  of 
bigamy — Parliament  rises — The  King's  Speech — Prince  of  Masse- 
rano — First  victory  obtained  by  the  Americans  ....   459-464 

JUNE 

Captain  Darby  sent  for  by  Lord  Dartmouth — Refuses  to  go  to  him 
— Parson  Home  opens  a  subscription  for  our  brethren  in  America — 
The  whole  continent  of  America  thrown  into  a  flame  by  the  news  of 
the  victory — Boston  invested — The  King's  friends  driven  out  of  New 
York — Lord  Dunmore  has  to  leave  Virginia — The  Administration 
thunderstruck — Gaieties  of  the  metropolis — Regatta  on  the  Thames — 
The  Americans  send  over  an  address  to  Wilkes — Election  for  Sheriffs 
—Strong  proceedings  in  the  City— The  Earl  of  Effingham— Bad 
news  pour  in  from  America — Lord  Chatham  and  the  Duke  of 
Richmond — Violent  resolutions  in  the  City  ....  465-468 


CONTENTS  xlv 

JULY 

General  Gage — Remonstrance  to  the  King  presented  by  the  City — The 
dockyards — Half-pay  officers  not  paid — Mrs.  Bradshaw — Lady 
Margaret  Fordyce — Nuttal — Charles  Fox — ^Jenkinson — News  from 
America — Lord  Dunmore  forced  to  take  refuge  in  the  ships — Procla- 
mation of  General  Gage — The  Lultrells — The  Duke  and  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  set  out  for  Italy — Attentions  of  the  French  Court  to  them 
— M.  de  Castries — General  opinion  abroad  that  we  should  lose 
America — Accounts  received  from  Boston — Repulse  of  our  troops — 
Recall  of  General  Gage — Command  given  to  General  Howe — Con- 
gress at  Philadelphia — Washington  named  General-in-Chief — Attack 
by  the  Spaniards  on  Algiers  repulsed — Foote  and  the  Duchess  of 
Kingston — Foote  introduces  her  into  a  play — Lord  Hertford  stops 
the  play — Correspondence  between  the  parties  .         .         .  Pages  469-472 

AUGUST 

The  King  issues  a  proclamation  declaring  the  Americans  rebels — The 
Ministers  order  the  prosecution  of  the  printers  of  Home's  advertise- 
ment— The  London  Association  subscribe  for  supporting  the  printers 
— The  Cabinet  send  for  20,000  Russians — The  merchants  of  Dublin 
thank  Wilkes,  Lord  Effingham,  and  the  English  Peers,  who  opposed 
the  American  war   ..........     473 

SEPTEMBER 

The  shipwrights — Major  Rogers  neglected,  goes  over  to  the  Americans 
— Admiral  Greaves  beaten  at  Boston — Recalled — Riot  amongst  the 
sailors  at  Liverpool — Addresses — Death  of  Lord  Bathurst — Meeting 
of  the  freeholders  of  Middlesex — Wilkes  receives  a  letter  from  the 
Provincial  Congress — Sawbridge  Lord  Mayor — The  merchants  of 
London  present  a  strong  address  against  the  war — Wesley's  calm 
address  to  the  Colonies 474-476 

OCTOBER 

Irish  Parliament  meets — Blunders  of  the  Ministry — Admirable  conduct 
of  the  Americans — State  of  the  funds — Resources  of  trade — The 
Scotch  party — Lord  North— Approach  of  the  session — Fears  of  the 
Ministry — Rigby — Thurlow — The  Duke  of  Grafton  writes  to  Lord 
North  on  the  errors  of  the  war — Newmarket — Charles  Fox — The 
Duke  of  Grafton  in  Opposition — The  Bedfords  alarmed — The  Duke 
of  Grafton  vacillates — Fox  again  meets  the  Duke  at  Newmarket — 
The  Provincials  seize  Nova  Scotia — The  Court  attempt  to  intimidate 
Wilkes — Absurd  charge  against  Sayer — Warrants  issued  for  appre- 
hending two  dissenting  divines — Incendiary  papers  distributed  invit- 
ing the  people  to  rise   and  prevent  the   meeting  of  Parliament — 


xlvi  CONTENTS 

Extraordinary  speech  of  the  King— The  addresses — Debate  on  the 
speech — The  Duke  of  Grafton  condemns  the  speech — The^ishop 
of  Peterborough — Lord  Lyttelton — Lord  Ferrers — Lord  Gower — 
Lord  Rochford — The  Court  carry  the  day — Debate  in  the  Commons 
on  the  Address — General  Conway's  speech — Fox  makes  a  brilliant 
speech — Sawbridge  announces  his  intention  of  impeaching  Ministers 
— Report  on  the  Address — Gibraltar — Colonel  Barre — Lord  North's 
reply  to  Adam — Rigby — Governor  Johnston — Sayer  carried  before 
Lord  Mansfield — Colonel  Keene — Walpole's  place  in  the  Custom- 
house— Conversation  with  Colonel  Keene  respecting  it — Temptation 
held  out  to  Walpole— Folly  of  it Pages  477-489 


NOVEMBER 

Several  Lords  protest  against  the  Address — 28,000  seamen  proposed  in 
the  Commons — Lord  North  no  longer  pacific — General  Conway  up- 
braids him — The  seamen  carried  without  a  division — The  Duke  of 
Manchester  in  the  Lords,  and  Sir  James  Lowther  in  the  Commons, 
move  a  censure  on  employing  the  Hanoverians  without  consent  of 
Parliament — Dunning  reproaches  Lord  North  with  the  mode  in 
which  addresses  had  been  obtained — The  Duchess  of  Kingston 
petitions  the  House  of  Lords  for  her  trial — Mr.  Pownall  arrives 
from  Quebec — Temple  Luttrell  made  a  motion  for  pacification  with 
America — Its  ill-success— Debate  on  the  Army — A  violent  speech  of 
Wilkes  on  giving  up  the  mayoralty  to  Sawbridge — The  privy  seal 
taken  from  the  Duke  of  Grafton — Ministerial  changes — Lord  George 
Sackville  Germaine  becomes  a  Minister — The  Earl  of  Suffolk — The 
Earl  of  Dartmouth  becomes  Lord  Privy  Seal  —  Lord  Rochford 
dismissed  with  a  pension — Lord  Weymouth  takes  his  place — Other 
ministerial  changes— Infamous  conduct  of  Lord  Lyttelton — Insin- 
cerity of  the  King — The  Duke  of  Richmond  —  Governor  Penn 
examined  before  the  House — Recriminations  between  Lords 
Sandwich  and  Shelburne — General  Gage  arrives  from  Boston — The 
Duke  of  Grafton  —  The  Militia  —  Burke  makes  his  conciliatory 
motion — Offends  Dunning  and  Barre — Lord  Camden,  Lord  Ossory, 
and  Richard  Fitzpatrick  go  into  Opposition— Charles  Fox — 
Wedderburn — Lord  George  Germaine — Rejection  of  the  conciliatory 
plan — Lord  North  moves  to  repeal  the  Boston  and  Massachussets 
Bill — T.  Townshend  and  Conway  censure  the  severity  of  the  new  bill 
— The  King's  power  over  the  MiHtia  limited  to  seven  years — Fox — 
Ackland  attacks  Fox  with  gross  personaUty — Fox's  reply — Death  of 
Sir  John  Hill  —  Account  of  him  [see  note)  —  Alderman  Oliver  moves 
to  know  who  advised  the  war — Ireland — The  Nova  Scotia  Bill — 
The  Indemnity  Bill — Addresses  and  petitions — Earl  Cornwallis  asks 
to  go  out  at  the  head  of  his  regiment — Triumph  of  Ministers — 
Disgust  of  the  Opposition — Dissensions  among  them— Dissolute  life 
of  Fox ,         ,         .  490-499 


CONTENTS  xlvii 

DECEMBER 

Bill  for  capturing  American  ships — Dunning  opposes  the  bill — Town- 
shend  attacks  the  Ministers  on  their  late  measures  to  Ireland — 
Sawbridge  abuses  Lord  George  Germaine — Sir  George  Saville's 
panegyric  on  Admiral  Sir  Charles  Saunders — Disposition  of  the 
troops — Bill  for  destroying  American  shipping  passed — Lord  George 
Germaine — Sir  Charles  Saunders — Palliser — Lord  North's  perplex- 
ities— Lord  Howe  threatens  to  resign — Major  Stuart —  Lord  George 
Germaine  seizes  letters  going  to  America — The  Whiteboys — American 
Shipping  Bill — Lord  Mansfield  delivers  a  speech  in  favour  of  the  war 
— The  Duke  of  Richmond  defends  the  Americans — Lord  Denbigh — 
Lord  Townshend — Lord  Dunmore — His  success — Canada — Defeat 
of  General  Carleton — Lord  North's  apathy — Lord  George  Germaine — 
Montreal  taken  by  the  provincials — General  Howe — Admiral  Greaves 
— General  Burgoyne  arrives  from  Boston — Brings  thirty  prisoners — 
The  Provincials  capture  a  store  ship — Sermon  at  Emanuel  Collage, 
in  which  the  restoration  of  convocation  is  spoken  of  as  probable — 
Illness  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — The  ill-treatment  of  him  by  the 
King — Dr.  Jebbe — The  King  goes  to  the  play  in  spite  of  the  Duke's 
illness  and  danger — The  Duke  of  Gloucester's  fondness  for  his  child 
— His  anxiety  about  his  affairs — Writes  to  the  King — Anecdote  of 
the  King — Dilatoriness  of  Lord  North — Anecdote  of  Lord  North — 
Mr.  Foley — Lord  Harrington — Anecdote  of  Lord  North's  picture — 
Sir  Edward  Walpole  and  Lord  IsTorth       ....  Pages  500-509 

1776 

JANUARY 
Preparations  for  the  war  in  America — Lord  George  Sackville  Ger- 
maine— Efforts  made  to  raise  soldiers  and  sailors — Lord  Mansfield — 
Wedderburn — Lord  North — His  levity — Lord  George  Germaine's 
unpopularity — The  King's  review  of  the  Guards  at  Wimbledon — 
The  Duke  of  Grafton  goes  over  to  the  Opposition — Lord  Rocking- 
ham— Lord  Camden — Lord  Shelburne — The  Duke  of  Richmond 
— Charles  Fox — His  dissipated  habits — Conversation  of  Horace 
Walpole  with  the  Duke  of  Richmond — The  Duke's  dislike  of 
violent  measures — Walpole's  opinion  of  leading  public  men — 
Steadiness  of  the  funds — Lord  George  Germaine  shut  up  in  his  own 
house  by  the  snow 510-516 

FEBRUARY 
Recall   of    Comte  de   Guines,    Ambassador    from    France — Monsieur 
de   Turgot,    Comptroller-General — Views   of    France   towards   our 
Indian    possessions — Turgot  reprimands  De   Guines — De  Guines' 
\.—d 


xlviii  CONTENTS 

haughty  answer — De  Guines  accused  by  his  secretary,  Tort,  of 
stockjobbing — Prevalence  of  stockjobbing  amongst  foreign  Ministers 
— Support  of  Tort  by  EngUsh  bankers — The  Due  d'Aiguillon — 
Mildness  of  Tort's  sentence — The  Queen's  support  of  De  Guines — 
The  Due  de  Choiseul — De  Guines'  great  popularity — His  inactivity 
in  procuring  intelligence  with  respect  to  the  posture  of  America — 
Frances,  Du  Chatelet's  confidential  secretary — His  residence  in 
England — Lord  Mansfield — Lord  Howe  appointed  chief  admiral  in 
America — Admiral  Keppel— His  interview  with  the  King — Lord 
Sandwich — Lord  North's  shortness  of  memory — General  Burgoyne 
leaves  Boston — His  rank  and  pay  raised — Captain  Stanhope,  Lady 
Harrington's  son — Admiral  Greaves — His  recall  from  Boston — 
General  Gage — Macpherson  the  Ossianite's  pension — Concealment 
of  advices  from  America  by  the  Government — The  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  gives  birth  to  a  son — The  Duke  of  Gloucester — His  ill- 
health — His  persecution  by  the  Court — Lord  Rochford — Distin- 
guished reception  of  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  in  France 
— Lord  Dunmore — Destruction  of  his  army  by  the  Virginians — 
Motion  of  Thomas  Townshend,  junior — Sir  John  Blaquiere — Lord 
Harcourt — Advices  from  Boston — The  Provincials  reported  to  be 
beaten  off  Quebec — Reported  death  of  General  Montgomery — The 
Hessians — General  Clinton — Lord  Barrington — Major  Carleton  at 
the  King's  levee — Wilkes — Fox's  motion  on  the  causes  of  the  ill- 
success  of  the  King's  arms  in  America — Barre — Lord  Ossory — 
Richard  Fitzpatrick — Lord  Mulgrave — Lord  Clare — Rejection  of 
Fox's  motion — Dr.  Price's  **  Essay  on  Civil  Liberty  " — The  Earl 
of  Stair Pages  517-S30 

MARCH 
The  Duke  of  Richmond's  motion  to  countermand  troops  going  to 
America — Its  rejection  by  a  large  majority — Lord  Shelburne — The 
Duke  of  Cumberland's  speech  against  the  war — Lord  Temple's 
reflections  on  the  Ministers — Lord  Chatham  and  Temple  declare 
themselves  unfavourable  to  the  war — George  Grenville — General 
Conway  reproaches  Lord  North — Colonel  Dalrymple — Fox's  pane- 
gyric on  General  Montgomery — Speeches  of  Lord  North  and  Barre 
upon  him — Burke  and  Lord  North  upon  the  Hessian  question — 
Mr.  Elliott — Wilkes's  bon  mot  on  Lord  George  Germaine — Insolence 
of  Lord  G.  Germaine — Defective  nature  of  the  arrangements  made 
for  the  American  war — Dr.  Keppel's  sermon  before  the  King — Lord 
Denbigh — The  Duke  of  Grafton's  motion  for  pacification  with 
America— Lord  Camden — Lord  Weymouth — Colonel  St.  Paul    .  531-535 

APRIL 
Discovery  of  friendly  intercourse  between  the  French  and  Provincials 
— Trial  of  the  Duchess  of  Kingston— Her  conviction — Fears  of  the 


CONTENTS  xlix 

Ministers  for  our  Eastern  possessions — Execution  of  Nuncomar — 
The  Budget — ^Sir  James  Lowther — Wilkes's  annual  motion — De- 
ficiency of  transports — Delay  in  sending  them — General  Harvey — 
Alteration  of  the  destination  of  the  Guards  from  Virginia  to  Boston 
— General  Clinton — Notification  by  the  Ministers  of  the  raising  of 
the  siege  of  Quebec     ........  536-538 

MAY 

Position  of  Affairs  at  Boston — Preparations  of  Washington  to  storm 
the  town — General  Howe — His  departure  for  Halifax— Lord  North 
— The  Bedford  party — Vote  of  credit — Colonel  Barre  moves  for 
accounts  from  Boston — Warm  speech  of  Burke — General  Conway — 
Licences  to  trade — Lord  Sandwich — Lord  North's  letter  to  the 
Admiralty — The  Provincials  take  the  Isle  of  Providence— General 
Howe's  expedition  to  Georgia — Its  failure — Dr.  Franklin — His 
pamphlet,  "Common  Sense" — Temple  Luttrell's  abuse  of  Lord 
George  Germaine — New  peerages — Sir  Edward  Hawke — Lord 
Caermarthen — The  Duchess  of  Argyll — Lady  Coventry — The  Duke 
and  Duchess  of  Queensberry — Lord  Mountstewart — Lord  Polwarth 
— George  Onslow — Sir  Brownlow  Cust — Bill  for  erecting  galleys  on 
the  Thames — Lord  John  Cavendish — The  Bill  meets  with  no  opposi- 
tion— General  Smith  committed  for  bribery — Foote— Whites  and 
Almack's  —  Prevailing  dissipation  —  Comparison  of  the  times  of 
Charles  II.  and  George  III. — ^  Louis  XVI. — Count  de  Maurepas' 
administration — The  Duke  de  Choiseul — His  recall  from  banish- 
ment— Madame  de  Pompadour — Turgot — Malesherbes — Abolition 
of  grievances  by  Turgot  —  The  Prince  of  Conti  —  Queen  Marie 
Antoinette — Her  fondness  of  dress  and  pleasure — Her  character — 
Louis  XVI. 's  want  of  firmness — Resignation  of  Malesherbes — Dis- 
missal of  Turgot— Comte  de  Noailles  made  Ambassador  to  England 
— Effects  on  the  Court  on  the  changes  taking  place  in  the  French 
Ministry — Lord  Howe — Great  Powers  intrusted  to  him  for  making 
peace — Lord  Bute's  friends  join  the  opposition — Lord  North's  defeat 
—  Rejection  of  peace  by  the  Ministers  —  Doubtful  language  of 
Ministers — General  Conway's  motion — Lord  Hertford — General 
Conway  moves  for  an  address  to  the  King — Vollaire  and  the  King 
of  Prussia — Their  opinions  of  our  blindness  with  regard  to  the 
Americans  —  Lord  George  Germaine  denies  that  he  insisted  on 
implicit  submission  from  the  Americans — Lord  John  Cavendish 
seconds  General  Conway's  motion  —  Burke,  Fox,  Townshend, 
Colonel  Barre,  Governor  Johnston,  and  Hartley  support  the  motion 
— Lord  North  desires  the  Plouse  to  see  Lord  Howe's  instructions — 
The  Bedfords — Rigby — Rejection  of  the  motion — Sir  George  Saville 
and  Hartley — They  move  an  address  to  the  King  to  adjourn  Parlia- 
ment— Prorogation   of    Parliament — Stanley  and  Jenkinson — Dis-_ 


1  CONTENTS 

missal  of  Dr.  Markham,  Bishop  of  Chester,  from  being  preceptor  to 
fKeTnnce  of  Wales — Lord  Holderness  resigns  being  governor  of  the 
Prince  of  Wales — Lord  Bruce  named  governor— Dr.  Hurd  is  ap- 
pointed the  Prince's  preceptor — Bruce  Brudenel — Lord  Ashburnham 
— The  Prince  of  Wales  and  Prince  Frederick — Their  conduct  to 
Lord  Holderness — The  King's  ill  health — Ungovernable  temper  of 
the  Prince — Lord  Bruce's  sudden  retirement — The  Duke  of  Montagu 
appointed  governor  to  the  Princes Pages  539-558 

JUNE 

Reported  good  nevi^s  from  America — Repulse  of  Generals  Worcester  and 
Arnold  from  Quebec — The  Attorney-General — Promotion  of  Lords 
Hyde  and  Trevor  to  the  peerage — Lord  John  Cavendish — The 
King's  review  of  the  Guards — Colonel  Hotham  —  The  Earl  of 
Harcourt — Lord  Rochford — The  Duke  of  Marlborough — Confirma- 
tion of  the  raising  of  the  siege  of  Quebec — General  Carleton's 
ostentatious  letter — Exultation  of  the  King  and  Court — Opinions 
of  Washington's  strategy — Sentence  of  General  Smith  and  Mr, 
Brand  Holhs — The  cause  of  Mr.  Sayer  and  Lord  Rochford — Irish 
elections — Unpopularity  of  the  American  war  in  Ireland — The 
Speaker  Perry  elected  by  a  large  majority  —  English  pamphlets 
against  liberty — The  Earl  of  Winchelsea— The  King's  increasing 
illness 559-5^2 

JULY 

Wilkes  stands  again  as  Chamberlain  of  the  City — His  defeat — Creation 
of  new  Irish  peers — General  Carleton  rewarded  with  the  red  riband 
for  his  defence  of  Quebec — Lord  George  Germaine's  opposition  to  it 
— General  Conway  attacked  by  a  slight  paralytic  stroke — Capture  of 
Jamaica  men  by  American  privateers — The  Americans  driven  out 
of  St.  John's,  Chamblee,  and  Montreal,  by  General  Carleton — The 
King  becomes  master  of  all  Canada — Enmity  between  General 
Carleton  and  Lord  George  Germaine — Lord  George  Germaine's 
letter  of  severe  orders  intercepted — General  Lee  orders  Governor 
Eden  to  be  seized — His  escape — Don  Lewis,  brother  of  the  King  of 
Spain  ..........         563-566 

AUGUST 

Accounts  from  General  Howe — His  safe  landing  on  Staten  Island — 
Governor  Tryon — Defences  of  New  York — The  Congress  declares 
the  Provinces  independent — Seizure  of  Franklin,  Governor  of  Jersey 
— The  Mayor  of  New  York — His  correspondence  with  Tryon — His 
condemnation — Suppression  by  the  Government  of  unfavourable 
news — Express  from  General  Clinton — Failure  of  the  attempt  on 


CONTENTS  li 

Charles  Town — General  Clinton  and  Lord  Cornwallis  land  on  Long 
Island — Sir  Peter  Parker's  attack  of  a  fort — They  are  repulsed  by 
the  Provincials — Admiral  Parker  wounded — Chevalier  Deon — His 
complaint  of  Morande — Comte  de  Guerchy — M.  de  Vergennes — 
Guerchy  threatens  Deon's  life — Deon  employed  by  Louis  XV. — The 
Duke  of  Portland  and  Sir  James  Lowther — Dismay  of  Ministers 
— The  Duke  of  Newcastle — His  visit  to  Lord  North — His  grief  at 
the  affair  of  Charles  Town — Lord  North's  indifference — Attacks 
upon  Lord  Sandwich — Lord  George  Germaine's  complaint  of  him — 
The  Commodore  at  Boston — He  quits  Boston  for  Halifax — His 
meeting  with  Lord  Howe 567-570 

SEPTEMBER 

Arrival  of  Governor  Eden  from  America — His  expulsion  from  Maryland 
by  the  Provincials — He  joins  Lord  Dunmore  at  Gwynn's  Island — 
The  Provincials  attack  it — They  cannonade  the  Royalist  ships — 
Departure  of  Lord  Dunmore  from  Gwynn's  Island — New  American 
frigates — Admiral  Hopkins — Letters  from  Carleton — His  refusal  to 
admit  Indians  into  his  force — Reports  of  the  demolition  of  Crown 
Point  by  the  Provincials — Menaced  burning  of  New  York — General  ,. 
Lee's  answer — Governor  Eden  knighted — The  Duke  of  Grafton — 
Rigby— Rigby's  interview  with  the  Duke  of  Grafton — Dr.  Plunter — 
Sir  Gilbert  Elliott — Jeremy  Dyson— Sir  Alexander  Gilmour — The 
American  agent  at  Versailles — Lord  Howe  and  his  brother — Acci- 
dent to  Lord  North — Lord  Howe's  letter  to  Washington — Letters 
from  Quebec— Letters  from  New  York — Expectation  of  peace — 
Major  Reade — The  treaty  at  an  end — Destruction  of  the  King's 
statue — Woolridge — His  speech  to  the  Livery  of  London — Lord 
Dunmore      ..........         571-573 

OCTOBER 

The  Ministers  in  despair — The  King's  great  anxiety — The  King  and 
Queen  visit  Lord  North — They  complain  to  him  of  General  Carleton 
— Reports  from  France — Lord  Howe's  aide-de-camp  arrives  with 
good  news — Extravagant  joy  of  the  Court — Attack  of  Long  Island 
by  Lord  Howe — Lands  without  opposition — Precipitate  retreat  of 
the  Provincials — Long  Island  taken — Great  loss  of  the  Provincials — 
Cruelty  of  the  Hessians — Lord  Stirling  taken  prisoner — Paoli — His 
base  conduct — Dissensions  between  the  New  Englanders  and  the 
New  Yorkists — Probability  of  the  submission  of  the  New  Yorkists — 
Symptoms  of  submission  to  the  Crown  appear — The  inhabitants  of 
Long  Island — Want  of  provisions  in  the  Royalist  army — The  paper 
money  of  the  Congress — Lord  Harcourt's  express  from  Ireland — 
The    "Gazette" — Hopes  of   the   moderate   Anti- Americans — The 


Hi  CONTENTS 

Bedfords — Their  desire  to  destroy  American  towns — The  Provincials 
send  an  army  against  Halifax — Presentation  of  the  red  riband  to 
General  Howe — Lord  Onslow's  death— Lord  Lothian — Lord  Cath- 
cart — The  Mayor  and  Corporation  of  York — Their  address  to  the 
King  on  his  victory  at  Long  Island — Lord  Rockingham's  incapacity 
— Lord  Mansfield  created  an  Earl — Differences  between  the  Courts 
of  Lisbon  and  Madrid — Accounts  received  of  the  sailing  of  a 
Spanish  fleet— Raising  of  men  by  the  Portuguese— Strong  part 
taken  by  the  Portuguese  against  the  Americans — The  pretences  of 
France — France  arms  by  sea  and  land — Views  of  Spain  and  France 
with  respect  to  England— Bill  posted  up  in  Lloyd's  Coffee-house- 
Reported  arrival  of  the  Bristol  with  Admiral  Shuldham  and 
abandonment  of  New  York  by  the  Americans— Robinson  Secretary 
of  the  Treasury — The  stocks  continue  falling — Warrants  for  pressing 
seamen — Fears  of  England  from  France — Meeting  of  Parliament — 
The  King's  Speech — Mr.  Neville  Aldworth  and  Mr.  Hatton  Finch 
— Lord  John  Cavendish's  speech — Lord  Granby — Mr.  Whitmore — 
Governor  Johnston's  appeal  to  the  House — Wombwell — Wilkes — The 
pressgangs — Wilkes  charges  the  Administration  with  obstinacy — He 
wishes  to  restore  their  charters  to  the  Americans — Silence  of  Minis- 
ters—Townshend  attacks  Ministers  for  their  silence — Lord  North's 
answer — His  belief  in  the  friendliness  of  foreign  powers — Freedom 
of  speech  in  England  and  America — Colonel  Barre  —  Admiral 
Keppel — Lord  George  Germaine— Fox's  brilliant  answer  to  Lord 
George  Germaine — Gibbon — His  opinion  of  Fox's  speech— Thurlow 
and  Wedderburn — Rejection  of  the  amendment  to  the  Address — 
Majority  for  the  Address  from  the  Crown— The  Address  in  the 
Lords— Lords  Carlisle  and  Radnor — The  Marquis  of  Rockingham's 
counter  address — The  Duke  of  Manchester— Lord  Mountstewart's 
defence  of  the  Administration  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond  —  His 
recommendation  of  peace  with  America — Lord  Sandwich — The 
Duke  of  Grafton  and  Lord  Shelburne  on  our  defenceless  situation — 
Lord  Shelburne's  visit  to  the  seaports  of  France— Great  prepara- 
tions of  the  French— Lords  Weymouth  and  Bristol — Majority  in  the 
Lords  for  the  Court  Address Pages  574-586 


NOVEMBER 

General  Howe  in  possession  of  New  York — General  Washington — 
Retirement  of  Washington  to  King's  Bridge — Manoeuvres  of  Plowe 
— Repulse  of  the  Provincials — Burning  of  a  part  of  Massachussets — 
Execution  of  two  of  the  ringleaders — Consequences  of  the  attempt 
to  burn  Massachussets — The  King  receives  unwelcome  letters — 
Dr.  Franklin  and  two  leaders  of  Congress  visit  the  Howes  with  a 
view  to  treat — Lord  Howe's  answer  to  them — The  Pacific  Proclama- 
tion— Sawbridge  the  Lord  Mayor — Pressgangs  not  allowed  by  him 


CONTENTS  liii 

to  enter  the  City— Sir  Thomas  Halifax — His  invitation  to  Ministers 
— Wilkes — Vote  of  Seamen  by  the  House  of  Commons — Temple 
Luttrell's  violent  abuse  of  Lord  Sandwich — Lord  North,  the 
Attorney-General — Lords  Mulgrave,  Wombwell,  &c.,  defend  Lord 
Sandvk^ich — The  Presbyterians  and  Dissenters — Their  passiveness  in 
England— Their  conduct  in  Ireland — "The  Morning  Post"— Bates 
the  clergyman  prosecutes  it — Dunning — Lord  Mansfield — His  dislike 
to  the  persecution  of  Popery — The  Kingsends  for  Admiral  Keppel — 
He  obtains  the  command  of  the  fleet  of  observation — Lord  Mul- 
grave—  Lord  Harcourt  solicits  his  recall  from  Ireland — Lord 
Rochford — Lord  Hillsborough — Lord  Buckingham  appointed  Lord 
Lieutenant  in  Ireland,  in  Lord  Harcourt's  stead — Inducement  to 
the  nomination  of  Lord  Buckingham — Lord  Gower — Lords  Suffolk 
and  Germaine — Destruction  of  the  Provincial  fleet  on  Lake  Champ- 
lain — Arnold's  plan  to  destroy  the  Royal  fleet — His  ill-success — His 
bravery  and  retirement  to  Ticonderoga — His  destruction  of  Crown 
Point — Supposed  disagreements  between  Generals  Burgoyne  and 
Carleton — Disgrace  of  Grimaldi  and  Panucci — The  Family  Compact 
— Grimaldi's  hostile  letter — Virtual  recognition  of  the  independence 
of  our  colonies  by  Spain Pages  587-591 

DECEMBER 

Adjournment  of  Parliament — Efforts  of  Grimaldi  to  preserve  peace — 
The  Prince  of  Asturias — Intrigues  of  the  Queen  of  Naples— Sup- 
posed destination  of  the  Spanish  fleet — General  Burgoyne— His 
grief  for  his  wife's  death — He  asks  the  King  for  an  audience — He 
brings  news  of  the  abandonment  of  Crown  Point  by  Carleton — 
Major  Gates — Frightful  failure  of  the  two  greatest  Jamaica  mer- 
chants in  London — Government  lends  money  to  them — Reasons  for 
the  loan— i2l^  Drummond's  death — The  nomination  of  the  living 
of  the  Archbishop  of  York  given  to  Wedderburn— Accounts  of  the 
embarkation  of  Dr.  Franklin  in  an  American  frigate,  and  of  his 
landing  in  France — The  objects  of  his  visit  to  France — Promotion 
of  Dr.  Markham — Lord  Holderness — Dr.  Porteus'  pamphlet — 
Dr.  Butler — Mr,  Legge — Walpole  obtains  the  King's  chaplaincy 
for  J3r.  Biitler^-Dr,  Butler's  disappointment  at  losing  the  Bishopric 
of  Chester — The  Fast  Sermon — Zeal  of  the  clergy — Infatuation 
against  America — Lord  Mansfield's  doctrines  of  obedience  and  non- 
resistance — Dr.  Lvnde— Sejmon  preached  by  Dr.  Cooper  at  Oxford, 
against  the  principles  of  the  Revolution — The  press  attack  Dr. 
Cooper's  sermon — Lord  Huntingdon  and  Dr.  Barnard — Surrender 
of  Fort  Washington  to  Howe — Retirement  of  Washington — Great 
loss  of  the  Hessians — Lords  Percy  and  Howe — Reception  of  the 
Proclamation  in  America — Determination  of  the  Administration  to 
make  a  vigorous  campaign — Conduct  of  the  Opposition    .         .     592-596 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Maria,  Countess  Waldegrave     .  .  .  .  Frontispiece 

By  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.    {Photogravure.) 

FACING   PAGE 

Augusta,  Princess  of  Wales        .  .  .  .        .       i6 

From  a  print  after  a  painting  by  Vanloo. 

Maria,  Countess  Waldegrave  and  her  Daughter     .    .   96 

From  a  mezzotint  by  Watson  after  Reynolds  in  the  collection  of  H.  H. 
Raphael,  Esq.,  m.p. 

Anne  Luttrell,  Mrs.  Horton,  afterwards  Duchess  of  Cum- 
berland      .  .  .  .  ...     136 

From  a  piint  by  Cook  after  Reynolds. 

King  George  III  and  Queen  Charlotte  .  .  .        .     164 

From  miniatures  in  the  collection  of  A.  Francis  Steuart,  Esq. 

Augusta,  Duchess  of  Brunswick,  as  a  Child        .  .        .     222 

From  a  mezzotint  by  Faber  after  Philips  in  the  collection  of  A.  Francis 
Steuart,  Esq. 

Sir  Edward  Walpole,  k.b.  .  .  .  .        .     240 

From  a  print  in  the  collection  of  H.  H.  Raphael,  Esq.,  m.p. 

Caroline  Campbell,  Countess  of  Aylesbury  .  .        .     380 

From  a  print  by  Greatbatch  after  Eckardt. 

Hon.  Mrs.  Damer  .  .  .  ...     388 

From  an  engraving  by  Hopwood  after  G.  C. 

Caroline  Matilda,  Queen  of  Denmark  .  ...     460 

From  a  mezzotint  by  Brookshaw  after  Coles. 

Thi-:  Duchess  of  Kingston  .  .  .  .        .     536 

By  F.  Bartolozzi,  from  the  collection  of  A.  M.  Broadley,  Esq. 


THE   LAST   JOURNALS   OF 

HORACE   WALPOLE 


THE  LAST  JOURNALS  OF 

HORACE  WALPOLE 


1772 

JANUARY 

A  GENTLEMAN  whom  Lord  Rochfordi  had 
made  Consul  at  Messina  died,  and  gave  his 
whole  fortune,  between  3000/.  and  4000/.,  to 
L  his  patron.  Nobody  wanted  money  more 
than  the  Earl ;  yet  he  immediately  gave  the  whole  legacy 
to  the  testator's  family. 

i^th,  Robert  Henley,  Earl  of  Northington,^  formerly 
Lord  Chancellor,  died.  The  Comte  de  Guines,  Embassa- 
dor from  France,  arrived  here  again. 

^  William  Henry  Nassau  Zulestein,  Earl  of  Rochford,  Secretary  of  State. 

^  Lord  Northington  was  one  of  the  ''swearing  Chancellors,"  but  a  man  of 
good  sense  also.  In  his  last  illness  he  was  recommended  to  avail  himself 
of  the  services  of  a  certain  prelate.  "He  will  never  do,"  said  the  Chan- 
cellor ;  "  I  should  have  to  acknowledge  that  one  of  my  heaviest  sins  was  in 
having  made  him  a  bishop."  Lord  Northington's  coarse  wit  was  inherited 
by  his  daughter,  Lady  Bridget  Fox  Lane,  whose  jokes  and  smart  sayings 
delighted  the  King  and  Queen,  and  made  of  Lady  Bridget  a  sort  of  court 
jester.  Her  mother,  who  was  an  ignorant  woman,  once  told  George  HI. 
that  their  country  house,  the  Grange,  was  built  by  Indigo  Jones.  To  this  the 
King  replied  that  he  "  thought  so  by  the  style."  When  her  Ladyship  related 
this  conversation  to  Lord  Northington,  the  latter  remarked,  to  her  surprise, 
that  he  could  not  well  tell  which  was  the  greater  fool,  she  or  his  Majesty. 
A  reference  to  Northington's  death  will  be  found  in  Walpole's  letter  to  Mann, 
Jan.  21,  1772,  and  a  sneer  at  Lady  Bridget's  wit  in  a  letter  to  Lady  Ossory, 
March  27,  1773.— D. 

I.— B 


2  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Jan. 

15//^.  Sir  Charles  Hotham,  Groom  of  the  Bedchamber 
to  the  King,  and  Mr.  WilHam  Hamilton,^  Minister  at 
Naples,  were  made  Knights  of  the  Bath. 

20th.  Wilkes  published  an  answer  to  one  Stephens 
(a  prisoner  who  had  distinguished  himself  by  acting  and 
writing  in  behalf  of  debtors)  and  others,  who  had  attacked 
him  for  not  showing  more  favour  to  debtors  in  his  capacity 
of  Sheriff;  and  he  promised  to  conform  his  conduct 
exactly  to  Magna  Charta.  He  had  a  short  time  before,  in 
conversation  with  Thurlow,  the  Attorney-General,  told 
the  latter  he  should  print  this  defence  the  day  before  the 
meeting  of  the  Parliament ;  and  that  a  Junius  would 
appear  on  the  morning  of  the  meeting  :  both  which  hap- 
pened ;  for  on 

2ist  was  published  a  long  and  able  letter  from  Junius  to 
Lord  Mansfield,  on  his  bailing  Eyre,  taken  in  the  fact  of 
stealing  paper  the  last  year.^ 

The  Parliament  met.  The  Duke  of  Beaufort^  and 
the  Earl  of  Pembroke*  moved  the  Address  in  the  Lords  ; 
Lord  Hinchinbrook^  and  Mr.  Frederic  Vane  in  the 
Commons.  There  was  not  a  word  of  opposition  in  either 
House — a  most  extraordinary  event !  It  was  well  said  that 
the  Parliament  was  not  unanimous,  but  un-animous. 

2^th.  An  account  came  of  the  death  of  Princess  Mary,^ 
Landgravine  of  Hesse,  fourth  daughter  of  King  George  H.^ 

^  A  younger  son  of  Lord  and  Lady  Archibald  Hamilton  [and  subsequently 
husband  of  Nelson's  Emma  Hamilton. — D.]. 

^  Junius  denounces  Mansfield  for  violating  the  law,  inasmuch  as  that  "a 
felon  under  the  circumstances  of  being  taken  in  the  fact,  with  the  stolen 
goods  upon  him,  and  making  no  defence,  is  not  bailable  by  the  laws  of 
England."— D. 

^  Henry  Somerset,  Duke  of  Beaufort. 

*  Henry  Herbert,  Earl  of  Pembroke. 

^  John  Montagu,  Lord  Hinchinbrook,  eldest  son  of  John,  Earl  of  Sand- 
wich. 

**  Horace  Walpole  wrote  to  Lady  Mary  Coke,  then  in  Vienna,  on  29  Jan., 
1772.  "  I  condole  with  you,  Madame,  on  the  death  of  the  Princess  of  Hesse. 
Princess  Amelia,  though  expecting  it,  was  much  shocked." — A.  F.  S. 

'^  On  the  27th  of  January  the  Pantheon  in  Oxford  Street  was  first  opened 
to  a  vast  assembly  of  gay  and  disreputable  people  of  all  ranks,  from  May 
Fair  to  Drury  Lane.     The  death  of  the  Princess  had  a  curious  effect  on  the 


1772]  IMPRISONMENT  OF  QUEEN  OF  DENMARK        3 

2<^th.  The  ministers  in  the  House  of  Commons  proposed 
to  augment  the  Navy  to  25,000  men,  it  being  necessary  to 
keep  a  considerable  force  constantly  in  the  East  Indies. 
The  Admirals  Saunders  ^  and  Keppel  ^  said,  that  in  their 
naval  capacity  they  should  approve  the  measure,  but  could 
not  as  members  of  Parliament !  Colonel  Barre  found 
some  faults,  and  said  he  had  not  changed  his  opinion  of 
the  Administration,  but  would  support  the  Government  in 
everything  that  was  right.  The  spirit  of  opposition  was 
at  an  end,  and  the  augmentation  was  voted  without  a 
division. 

The  same  morning  a  courier  from  Denmark  brought 
advice  to  the  King  that  his  sister,  the  Queen  of  Denmark,^ 
had  been  suddenly  sent  prisoner  (with  her  youngest  child,* 
whom  the  King  of  Denmark  disavowed)  to  the  Castle  of 
Cronenburg.  She  had  been  seized  at  a  masquerade  with 
the  physician,  who  was  her  lover  and  Prime  Minister. 
Three  or  four  noblemen  were  arrested  at  the  same  time, 
and  accused  of  having  partaken  of  her  favours,  of  which 
she  was  said  to  be  very  liberal.  The  King,  on  being  told 
she  was  secured,  said,  **  Then,  I  am  a  free  man  ;  "  ^  but  the 
persons  who  had  driven  him  to  give  the  order  told  him  he 
must  call  to  court  the  Queen  Dowager,^  his  mother-in-law, 

opening.  "It  is  thought  the  company  would  have  been  still  more  numerous 
but  for  the  sudden  notice  of  the  death  of  the  Landgravine  of  Hesse  Cassel, 
which  prevented  many  from  going,  on  account,"  says  Mr.  Urban,  **of  not 
having  been  prepared  with  mourning  I " — D. 

^  Sir  Charles  Saunders,  Knight  of  the  Bath. 

'  Augustus  Keppel,  brother  of  George,  Earl  of  Albemarle. 

^  Caroline  Matilda,  youngest  daughter  of  Frederic,  Prince  of  Wales. 

^  It  was  a  daughter.  ^  This  was  not  true. 

•  Juliana,  or  Julia  Maria,  second  wife  of  Frederick  V.,  and  sister  of  the 
Duke  of  Brunswick  and  of  Prince  Ferdinand,  Knight  of  the  Garter,  and  General 
of  the  English  forces  in  the  last  war.  The  first  wife  of  Christiern  VI.  was 
Louisa,  youngest  daughter  of  George  II.  Charles  hereditary  Prince  of  Bruns- 
wick, nephew  of  Queen  Juliana,  married  Augusta,  eldest  daughter  of  Frederic, 
Prince  of  Wales,  and  sister  of  Carolina  Matilda,  Queen  of  Denmark.  A 
niece  of  Queen  Juliana  was  wife  of  the  Prince  Royal  of  Prussia,  from  whom 
she  was  divorced  for  adultery.  A  sister  of  Christiern  VII.  by  Queen  Louisa 
was  married  to  her  first  cousin  the  Prince  of  Hesse,  son  of  the  Princess  Mary 
of  England,  whose  death  happened  this  month,  as  is  mentioned  in  the 
preceding  page. 


4  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Jan. 

and  her  son.  This  young  prince,  named  Frederick,  aged 
about  eighteen,  and  the  Queen  Dowager,  were  supposed  to 
be  at  the  bottom  of  this  revolution.  Queen  Caroline  had 
been  kept  by  her  mother,  the  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales, 
in  the  closest  retirement,  having  scarce  appeared  even  in 
the  drawing-room,  till  she  was  married  at  sixteen  to  the 
King  of  Denmark.  She  was  not  yet  twenty-one.  King 
George,  her  brother,  was  advised,  considering  the  deplor- 
able state  of  her  health,  to  conceal  this  new  misfortune 
from  the  Princess  of  Wales,  but  he  answered  incautiously, 
"  My  mother  will  know  everything,  and  therefore  it  is 
better  that  I  should  break  it  to  her  by  degrees."  He 
therefore  went  to  her  directly,  suddenly  forbidding  his 
levee,  but  half-an-hour  before  it  was  to  begin,  and  thus 
was  the  first  to  publish  the  disgrace  of  his  sister.  Such  an 
accumulated  succession  of  mortifications  has  seldom  fallen 
on  a  royal  family  in  so  short  a  space.  They  seemed  to 
have  inherited  the  unpropitious  stars  of  the  Stuarts,  from 
whom  they  are  descended,  as  well  as  their  crown.  The 
marriage  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  with  Colonel  Lut- 
trell's  sister,  the  dangerous  illness  of  the  Princess  of  Wales 
and  Duke  of  Gloucester,  and  this  dishonour  of  the  Queen 
of  Denmark,  all  happening  within  three  months ! 


FEBRUARY 

2nd. 

THE  following  account  of  the  Danish  history,  as 
it  was  sent  hither  to  the  King  by  Mr.  Keith, 
our  Minister  at  Copenhagen,  was  told  me  by 
a  person  who  had  it  from  his  Majesty's  own 
mouth.  There  was  a  ball  at  court,  which  went  on  as 
usual  till  three  in  the  morning,  when,  the  Queen  being 
retired,  an  obscure  officer  tapped  Istruinski}  the  physician 
and  favourite,  on  the  shoulder,  and  told  him  he  was  his 
prisoner.  Istruinski  in  a  rage  asked  him  how  he  dared 
to  speak  in  that  manner  to  him,  who  was  Prime  Minister, 
and  had  the  whole  power  of  the  kingdom  in  his  hands  ? 
The  officer,  and  another,  his  companion,  said  it  was  in 
vain  to  resist ;  and  seizing  him,  carried  him  off,  and 
loaded  him  with  irons.  Count  Rantzau  then  went  into 
the  Queen's  room,  who  was  in  bed,  and  rudely  bade  her 
rise.  She  did,  but  insisted  on  going  to  the  King,  which 
he  said  she  must  not,  but  she  got  the  better,  and  went  to 
the  King's  chamber,  but  at  the  door  of  it  stood  a  soldier 
with  a  drawn  sword,  which  he  presented,  and  told  her  his 
orders  were  to  prevent  her  entering,  even  at  the  expense 
of  her  life.  Still  she  attempted  to  push  forward  ;  but 
finding  the  fellow  determined,  and  that  she  should  lose 
her  life,  she  desisted,  surrendered  herself,  and  was  sent  to 
the  Castle,  attended  by  only  one  lady.  Mr.  Keith  repre- 
sented against  this  usage,  saying  that,  though  he  could 
have  no  orders  from  his  court,  he  yet  thought  it  his  duty 
to  complain   of  such   disrespect    shown    to   his   master's 

^  Struensee. 
5 


6  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

sister  ;  on  which  all  her  ladies  were  sent  to  her,  and, 
though  confined,  she  was  treated  with  the  former  respect. 
Her  infant  daughter  was  shut  up  with  her.  The  King, 
her  husband,  was  threatened,  that,  if  he  did  not  acquiesce 
in  all  that  was  done,  he  should  lose  his  crown ;  and  that 
he  must  send  for  his  mother-in-law ;  to  all  which  he  sub- 
mitted.— The  King  added  to  this  account,  that  both  the 
Queen  Dowager  and  her  son  Prince  Frederick  were  persons 
of  no  capacity  or  understanding,  nor  likely  to  have  been 
authors  of  the  plot.  His  Majesty  said  he  did  not  suspect 
the  Czarina  neither,  as  the  politics  of  the  Danish  Court  had 
lately  relapsed  to  the  Russian  interest ;  but  he  seemed  to 
doubt  whether  the  King  of  Prussia  was  not  at  the  bottom 
of  the  conspiracy.  With  Struensee  were  seized  six  noble- 
men of  his  faction,  amongst  whom  was  one  Brandt,  who 
had  been  the  King's  favourite  before  the  disgraced  Count 
Holke,  and  who  had  now  recovered  the  King's  good 
graces.  Struensee  had  obtained  from  the  King  a  patent 
that  gave  him  the  full  power  of  Viceroy ;  and  on  a  late 
mutiny  of  the  Guards  he  had  signed  a  paper  to  them  with 
the  King's  signature,  Christian  VIL 

About  a  week  after  the  account  came,  Count  Maltzan, 
the  Prussian  Envoy,  asked  Mr.  Dayrolles,  with  a  sneer, 
*'  Qu'est  devenue  votre  Reine  de  Danemarc  ?  "  Dayrolles 
replied  with  spirit,  **  Apparemment  qu'ellc  est  a  Spandau 
avec  votre  Princesse  Roiale  de  Prusse." — She  had  been 
divorced  for  adultery.^ 

6th.  Charles  Fox,  whose  ambition  was  checked  by  the 
inactivity  in  Parliament,  gave  notice  in  the  House  of 
Commons  that  he  intended  on  that  day  fortnight  to  make 
a  motion  for  the  repeal  of  the  Marriage  Act,  in  order  to 

^  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Charles  I.,  Duke  of  Brunswick- Wolfenbuttel, 
born  1746,  died  1840.  Lord  Holland  says  that  later,  in  179 1,  she  was  "  much 
belied,  if  on  the  marriage  of  her  daughter  with  the  Duke  of  York,  she  did 
not  observe  to  the  Chamberlain,  who  announced  it,  that  it  was  a  good  match 
enough  for  the  daughter  of  MuUer,  the  Musician"  (** Foreign  Reminis- 
cences," p.  64). — A.  F.  S. 


1772]  RAGE   FOR   GAMING  7 

bring  in  a  new  bill.  His  father,  Lord  Holland,  had  dis- 
tinguished himself  in  the  late  reign  by  his  animated 
opposition  to  that  bill. 

When  Fox  moved  this  repeal  he  had  not  read  the 
Marriage  Bill,  nor  did  till  some  days  after.  A  few  even- 
ings before,  he  had  been  at  Brompton  on  two  errands  : 
one,  to  consult  Justice  Fielding  on  the  penal  laws ;  the 
other,  to  borrow  ten  thousand  pounds,  which  he  brought 
to  town  at  the  hazard  of  being  robbed.  As  the  gaming 
and  extravagance  of  the  young  men  of  quality  was 
arrived  now  at  a  pitch  never  heard  of,  it  is  worth  while 
to  give  some  account  of  it.  They  had  a  club  at  one 
Almack's  in  Pall  Mall,  where  they  played  only  for 
rouleaus  of  50/.  each  rouleau  ;  and  generally  there  was 
10,000/.  in  specie  on  the  table.  Lord  Holland  had  paid 
above  20,000/.  for  his  two  sons.  Nor  were  the  manners 
of  the  gamesters,  or  even  their  dresses  for  play,  un- 
deserving notice.  They  began  by  pulling  off  their  em- 
broidered clothes,  and  put  on  frieze  great-coats,  or  turned 
their  coats  inside  outwards  for  luck.  They  put  on  pieces 
of  leather  (such  as  worn  by  footmen  when  they  clean  the 
knives)  to  save  their  lace  ruffles  ;  and  to  guard  their  eyes 
from  the  light,  and  to  prevent  tumbling  their  hair,  wore 
high-crowned  straw  hats  with  broad  brims,  and  adorned 
with  flowers  and  ribbons ;  masks  to  conceal  their  emotions 
when  they  played  at  Quinze.  Each  gamester  had  a  small 
neat  stand  by  him  with  a  large  rim,  to  hold  their  tea, 
or  a  wooden  bowl  with  an  edge  of  ormolu,  to  hold  their 
rouleaus.  They  borrowed  great  sums  of  Jews  at  ex- 
orbitant premiums.  Charles  Fox  called  his  outward 
room,  where  those  Jews  waited  till  he  rose,  the  Jerusalem 
Chamber.  His  brother  Stephen  was  enormously  fat ; 
George  Selwyn  said  he  was  in  the  right  to  deal  with 
Shylocks,  as  he  could  give  them  pounds  of  flesh. 

For  a  few  years  past  a  controversy  had  been  carried 
on    in    pamphlets   on   the   signature   of  the   Thirty- nine 


8  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Fkr. 

Articles.  Of  late  some  conscientious  clergymen  had  pro- 
ceeded further,  and  formed  themselves  into  a  society  for 
attempting  relief.  The  younger  men  in  the  University 
of  Cambridge  had  gone  heartily  into  the  scheme,  but 
had  been  rudely  and  tyrannically  handled  by  the  Vice- 
Chancellor  and  Heads  of  Houses.  One,  Dr.  Halifax, 
preached  three  sermons  at  St.  Mary's,  Cambridge,  against 
the  conscientious.  The  other  University,  ever  devoted 
to  the  Church,  was  zealous  in  asserting  their  antiquated 
tenets.  Even  the  Methodists  espoused  the  same  cause, 
pretending  themselves  to  be  the  purest  sons  of  the  Church 
of  England  ;  and  Madan,^  once  a  buffoon  and  mimic,  and 
who  since  his  reformation  had  endeavoured  to  cheat  a 
poor  old  clergyman  out  of  a  living,  wrote  in  defence  of 
the  Articles,  and  was  much  countenanced  at  Court,  where 
pious  or  profligate  rogues  were  equally  welcome.  Queen 
Caroline  had  much  wished  to  make  Dr.  Samuel  Clarke 
a  bishop,  but  he  would  not  subscribe  the  Articles  again, 
I  have  often  heard  my  father,  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  relate 
that  he  sat  up  one  night  at  Kensington  Palace  with  the 
Doctor,  till  the  pages  of  the  backstairs  asked  if  they 
would  have  fresh  candles,  my  father  endeavouring  to  per- 
suade him  to  subscribe  again,  as  he  had  for  the  living 
of  St.  James's.  Clarke  pretended  he  had  then  believed 
them.  "  Well,"  said  Sir  Robert,  "  but  if  you  do  not  now. 
you  ought  to  resign  your  living  to  some  man  who  would 
subscribe  conscientiously."  The  Doctor  would  neither 
resign  his  living  nor  accept  the  bishopric. 

The  dissatisfied  Clergy  appointed  a  committee  at  the 
Feathers  Tavern  to  manage  their  cause.  The  son  of 
Dr.  Law,  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  and  another  of  his  relations, 
attended  their  meeting,  which  demonstrated  the  Bishop's 
opinion,  though  he  had  not  resolution  enough  to  declare 

^  "Go  turn  to  Madan,  and  in  Gospel  truth, 
And  Thelypthoric  lore,  instruct  our  youth." 

♦'Pursuits  of  Literature."— D. 


1772]  SUBSCRIPTION  TO  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES     9 

himself  openly.  Lowth,  Bishop  of  Oxford,  an  abler  man, 
and  more  capable  of  figuring  in  a  debate,  had  encouraged 
the  new  party  to  expect  his  countenance,  but  abandoned 
them.  They  applied  to  Lord  John  Cavendish,  and  then 
to  Sir  George  Saville,  to  present  to  the  House  of  Com- 
mons their  petition  for  dispensing  with  subscription,  but 
both,  though  they  supported  it  when  it  came  thither, 
excused  themselves  from  presenting  it.  Lord  North  was 
very  uneasy  at  the  progress  of  this  controversy,  and  not 
being  able  to  prevent  it,  though  resolved  not  to  favour 
the  demand,  recommended  to  his  party  great  decency 
and  moderation  in  treating  it ;  but  the  High  Church  and 
old  Tories,  secure  of  the  King's  favour,  paid  little  regard 
to  a  Minister  who,  they  knew,  was  but  the  servant  of 
a  junto  that  really  governed  ;  and  though  all  other  men 
allowed  the  absurdity  of  the  Articles,  and  agreed  that  the 
Bishops  themselves  could  not  believe  them,  but  that  yet 
a  door  was  not  to  be  opened  to  farther  innovation  and 
religious  disputes  which  are  the  most  dangerous  of  factions, 
the  Tories  still  combated  for  their  old  Diana  as  stiffly  as 
they  could  have  done  in  the  monkish  ages.     On  the  ^ 

Jth.  Sir  William  Meredith,  seconded  by  Mr.  Thomas 
Pitt,  informed  the  House  that  he  had  in  his  hand  a  peti- 
tion, signed  by  many  respectable  clergymen,  complaining 
of  the  subscription  to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  :  ^  that  the 
grievances  which  affected  the  minds  of  those  gentlemen  were 
greater  than  any  that  could  regard  their  properties  :  and 
that  the  whole  clergy  were  obliged  to  sign  those  Articles, 
which  not  three  of  them  had  ever  defended.  The  peti- 
tioners set  forth  that  they  desired  to  subscribe  to  no  Arti- 
cles, but  to  the   Holy  Scriptures  themselves ;  with  many 

^  See  a  good  and  fuller  account  of  this  debate  in  the  **  London  Chronicle" 
of  February  nth. 

'^  Dr.  Porteus  was  a  member  at  this  time  of  a  clerical  society  established 
for  procuring  a  revisal  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  and  the  form  of  subscrip- 
tion. The  society  is  said  to  have  been  dissolved  on  an  intimation  from  the 
bishops  '*  that  it  would  be  neither  safe  nor  prudent  to  do  anything  in  the 
matter." — D. 


lo         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

other  heads,  on  which  Sir  William  commented  very  ably. 
Sir  Roger  Newdigate  a  hot-headed  bigot,  and  formerly  as 
warm  a  Jacobite,^  desired  to  know  how  many  of  the  clergy 
had  signed  the  petition.  Sir  W.  Meredith  answered,  250, 
most  of  them  beneficed  clergymen.  Sir  Roger  ridiculed 
them  and  said,  tender-conscienced  as  they  were,  they  had 
however  signed  the  Articles.  Everything  had  been  over- 
turned in  the  last  age  by  tender  consciences  !  The  walls 
of  religion  must  not  be  broken  down  ;  Church  and  State 
were  inseparable.  But  his  great  argument  was,  that  it 
was  a  breach  of  the  Union  with  Scotland  to  alter  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles,  and  that  the  petition  was  therefore 
inadmissible  ;  and  he  and  Jenkinson  moved  to  have  the 
Articles  of  the  Union  read.  Stanley,  with  more  decency, 
and  declaring  himself  a  warm  friend  to  toleration,  advised 
a  lenient  negative.  To  make  any  alteration  would  be  going 
through  anarchy  and  confusion  to  persecution.  The  peace 
of  mankind  was  the  fortieth  article  of  his  creed.  Mr.  Burn 
said,  if  the  Convocation  had  erected  itself  into  an  Inquisi- 
tion, he  should  be  for  the  petition.  Mr.  Fitzmaurice,^ 
Lord  Shelburne's  brother,  spoke  against  the  petition,  and 
said  it  was  modesty  in  comparison  of  what  would  be  asked 
if  this  was  complied  with.  It  had  grown,  he  was  informed, 
out  of  a  libel  ^  against  the  State.  Sir  W.  Petty  had  com- 
puted the  clergy  of  England  at  20,000 ;  how  small  a  por- 
tion were  250!  If  the  petition  was  received,  mobs  would 
come  to  force  the  House  to  do  what  they  pleased — re- 
ligious mobs — worse  than  patriotic  mobs !  Lord  George 
Germayne  defended  the  petition,  and  said  most  of  the 
clergy  in  his  neighbourhood  had  signed  it,  not  wishing  the 

^  When  I  was  at  Rome  he  openly  hunted  in  the  villas  there  with  the 
Pretender's  two  sons. 

2  Colonel  Barre  was  not  present.  His  absence,  and  Mr.  Fitzmaurice's 
conduct,  showed  Lord  Shelburne  was  willing  to  make  his  peace  at  Court. 
Mr.  Fitzmaurice  was  desirous,  too,  of  being  member  for  the  University  of 
Oxford. 

'  "  The  Confessional,"  a  celebrated  book,  which  had  begun  this  con- 
troversy. 


1772]  SUBSCRIPTION  TO  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES   ii 

Liturgy  or  Episcopacy  altered.  He  wondered  the  House 
did  not  take  some  steps  on  this  subject  with  regard  to  the 
Universities,  where  boys  were  made  to  subscribe  the 
Articles  without  reading  them — a  scandalous  abuse.  His 
son  might  be  obliged  to  subscribe  to  what  he  himself  should 
not  be  able  to  explain  to  him.  He  should  be  sorry  if  the 
petition  open  the  door  to  faction.  T.  Pitt  lamented  the 
levity  with  which  the  subject  had  been  treated,  but  used 
wit  himself  in  ridiculing  the  Articles,  which  he  wished  to 
have  expunged  and  obliterated  for  the  sake  of  common 
sense.  Lord  North  said  he  had  hoped  he  should  see  no- 
thing in  the  petition  to  prevent  his  being  for  bringing  it  up, 
having  intended  to  enter  his  protest  against  doing  anything 
more  than  put  off  the  consideration  for  six  months ;  but  he 
must  now  object  to  the  receiving  it,  as  clashing  with  the 
Act  of  Union.  To  alter  the  Articles  would  be  opening 
the  door  to  thousands  of  wicked  men.^  The  decay  of  reli- 
gious controversy  was  the  increase  of  religion.  If  once  the 
nation  got  into  a  religious  dispute,  not  all  the  poppy,  and 
mandragora,  and  sweet  syrups  of  the  East,  could  restore 
that  sweet  sleep  it  had  before  possessed.  Th.  Townshend 
(whose  father  was  member  for  the  University  of  Cam- 
bridge) declared  he  was  simply  for  receiving  the  petition, 
lest  the  rejection  should  occasion  a  flame.  Edmund  Burke 
made  a  fine  laboured  speech  against  the  petition,  urging 
that  the  civil  war  began  by  forcing  Episcopacy  on  Scot- 
land against  the  bent  of  the  nation :  but  his  chief  argument 
was,  the  necessity  of  a  precise  rule  of  faith.^  The  petitioners 
declared  they  would  be  bound  by  the  Scriptures  ;  but  what 
are  the  Scriptures  ?  are  they  a  book  bound  in  red  morocco 
with  clasps,  and  printed  by  Baskett  ?  What  was  the  Bible 
but  a  miscellaneous  body  of  writings  ?    Was  he  to  find  the 

^  A  most  absurd  argument.  Are  wicked  men  kept  out  of  the  Church  by 
scruples? 

^  On  the  law  of  England.  The  necessity  of  a  rule  of  faith  is  a  Popish 
tenet  and  familiar  to  Mr.  Burke,  who  was  of  a  Catholic  family,  and  whose 
wife  is  a  Papist. 


12         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [t'RB. 

Scriptures  in  the  Mosaic  Law,  in  the  Psalms,  or  in  the 
New  Testament  ?  If  we  were  to  be  bound  by  the  Bible, 
we  must  take  the  book  of  Deuteronomy,  and  lay  aside 
Dr.  Blakiston.  For  himself,  he  wished  to  open  the  Act  of 
Toleration  and  widen  it.  Sir  George  Saville  said  he  pre- 
ferred the  Church  of  God  to  the  established  church  of  the 
land,  and  that  he  adhered  to  St.  Paul,  who  was  the  first 
Protestant,  and  withstood  Peter  to  the  face.  Charles  Fox 
declared  for  rejecting  the  petition,  but  for  doing  something 
with  regard  to  the  Universities.  Religion,  he  said,  was 
best  understood  when  least  talked  of  He  did  not  shine 
in  this  debate,  nor  could  it  be  wondered  at.  He  had  sat  up 
playing  hazard  at  Almack's,  from  Tuesday  evening  4th,  till 
five  in  the  afternoon  of  Wednesday  5th.  An  hour  before 
he  had  recovered  12,000/.  that  he  had  lost,  and  by  dinner, 
which  was  at  five  o'clock,  he  had  ended  losing  11,000/. 
On  the  Thursday  he  spoke  in  this  debate ;  went  to  dinner 
at  past  eleven  at  night ;  from  thence  to  White's,  where  he 
drank  till  seven  the  next  morning;  thence  to  Almack's, 
where  he  won  6000/. ;  and  between  three  and  four  in  the 
afternoon  he  set  out  for  Newmarket.  His  brother  Stephen 
lost  11,000/.  two  nights  after,  and  Charles  10,000/.  more 
on  the  13th ;  so  that  in  three  nights  the  two  brothers,  the 
eldest  not  twenty-five,  lost  32,000/.  Charles  Fox  com- 
plained of  the  quiet  of  the  session,  and  said  the  House  of 
Commons  was  always  up  before  he  was.  There  being  a  re- 
port that  he  was  going  to  be  married,  it  was  told  to  his  father. 
Lord  Holland,  who  replied,  "  I  am  glad  of  it,  for  then  he 
will  go  to  bed  at  least  one  night."  Sawbridge,  in  the  above 
debate,  read  the  most  absurd  Articles.  Dunning  spoke 
with  much  wit  for  the  petition.  He  was  desired,  he  said,  to 
give  a  lenient  negative,  which  was  voting  against  what  was 
thought  right,  only  because  it  was  of  too  much  consequence 
to  be  entered  into  ;  and  he  laughed  at  Lord  North's  doubt- 
ing the  efficacy  of  his  poppy  and   mandragora^  on  the 

1  The  gold  of  the  Treasury. 


I 


1772]  SUBSCRIPTION  TO  THIRTY-NINE  ARTICLES   13 

present  occasion,  when  it  had  served  him  so  well  the  pre- 
sent session.  Wedderburn  approved  the  acceptance  of 
the  petition,  but  would  go  no  farther,  as  the  Church  was 
but  a  rope  of  sand,  without  tests.  Dr.  Hay  said  the  House 
was  not  an  assembly  of  divines,  and  that  the  petition  was 
more  proper  for  the  consideration  of  the  Convocation.  The 
Articles  had  been  the  law  for  200  years  ;  why  alter  them 
now  ?  Sir  W.  Meredith  said,  he  repented  of  the  candour 
with  which  he  had  opened  the  petition,  since  it  had  been 
so  ill  treated.  The  petitioners  would  find  relief  if  any 
religious  liberty  remained  in  this  country.  Archbishop 
Cranmer  compiled  the  Articles,  which  were  accommodated 
for  his  acceptance  of  the  Archbishopric.  The  House 
divided  at  eleven  at  night,  and  the  petition  was  rejected 
by  217  to  71.  Burke  and  Dowdswell,  the  latter  an  old 
Tory,  separated  from  their  friends  the  Cavendishes,  and 
divided  with  the  majority ;  as  did  Lord  Sefton  and  Dillon, 
two  converts  from  popery ;  Lord  Palmerston  and  Wed- 
derburn, two  placemen,  with  the  minority.  It  will  be 
observed  from  the  language  of  Fitzmaurice  and  Lord  G. 
Germayne,  as  well  as  from  Burke's  and  Dowdswell's  votes, 
how  much  disposition  was  spreading  towards  all  anni- 
hilation of  patriotism. 

Wilkes,  abandoned  by  all  his  lukewarm  or  interested 
fellow  labourers,  saw  nothing  but  persecution  could  revive 
his  importance.  He  accordingly  caused  the  debates,  even 
with  the  speakers'  names  to  them,  to  be  copied  in  the  public 
papers — the  great  offence,  which  the  last  year  had  drawn 
on  the  imprisonment  of  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Alderman 
Oliver.  The  ministers  seemed  still  to  dread  Wilkes,  and 
the  printers  went  on  with  impunity.^ 

Zth.    Died    Augusta,  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales,  the 


^  The  journals  could  not  print  "divisions"  anymore  than  debates,  as  they 
do  now  ;  but  the  supporters  of  the  bill  of  the  petitioning  clergy  were  named 
in  the  principal  papers  as  a  "list  of  gentlemen  toasted  by  all  friends  to  the 
cause.  — D, 


14         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

King's  mother,  aged  fifty-two,  of  an  abscess  in  her  throat. 
Some  called  it  an  abscess,  some  a  cancer,  but  the  surgeons 
a  cancerous  humour  or  skimes.  The  reason  of  these  uncer- 
tainties was,  that  the  Princess  would  suffer  nobody  but  her 
German  page  or  surgeon  to  look  into  her  throat,  and  once 
Sir  John  Pringle,  whom  she  permitted  to  make  the  report 
to  Hawkins  ;  but  the  latter  never  saw  her  throat.  The 
only  medicine  she  was  known  to  try  was  hemlock.  She 
had  long  struggled  secretly  with  a  humour  in  her  blood, 
which  she  had  fatally  brought  into  the  family,  and  for  the 
last  three  months  her  sufferings  had  been  dreadful,  and 
menacing  her  life,  yet  her  fortitude  was  invincible,  and  she 
kept  up  to  the  last  moment  that  disguise  and  reserve 
which  predominated  so  strongly  in  her  character.  She  not 
only  would  not  acknowledge  her  danger  to  her  children, 
servants,  and  physicians,  but  went  out  in  her  coach.  One 
day  (it  was  on  the  Monday  before  she  died),  reading  in  the 
newspapers  an  account  of  her  own  danger,  she  instantly 
ordered  her  coach,  and  went  through  the  streets  to  Kew, 
though  swooning  away  in  it,  and  showing  herself  occa- 
sionally to  various  persons  after  her  speech  was  almost 
unintelligible.  She  had  a  long  fit  on  the  arrival  of  her 
daughter  the  Princess  of  Brunswick,^  who  thought  her 
expiring;  but  the  next  morning  rose  by  nine  o'clock, 
dressed,  and  went  to  her  daughter,  to  convince  her,  she 
said,  how  well  she  was,  and  that  her  disorder  was  only 
nervous.  Though  she  had  sent  for  the  Princess  of  Bruns- 
wick, yet  she  never  intimated  to  her  that  she  thought 
herself  dying.  One  day  the  Princess  of  Brunswick, 
coming  suddenly  into  the  room,  found  her  reading,  but 
she  hid  the  book  under  the  couch.  Happening  to  go  out 
of  the  room,  the  Princess  of  Brunswick  looked  at  the  book, 
and  found  it  A  Preparation  for  Death.  She  never  dropped 
a  syllable  that  intimated  her  expecting  death ;    though, 

^  Augusta,  Princess  Royal  (i  737-1813),  married  (1764)  Charles  William 
Ferdinand,  Duke  of  Brunswick-Wolfenbiittel. — A.  F.  S. 


1772]  DEATH    OF   PRINCESS   OF   WALES  15 

after  receiving  the  news  from  Denmark/  she  scarce  took 
any  nourishment  but  cordials.  On  Thursday,  the  6th, 
her  approaching  end  was  evident ;  and  on  Friday  the  King 
forbade  his  levee  on  that  account.  It  was  his  custom  to 
visit  the  Princess,  with  the  Queen,  every  Saturday  evening 
from  six  to  eight ;  they  now  went  at  that  hour  on  the 
Friday.  Hearing  they  were  come,  the  Princess  rose, 
dressed  herself,  and  attempted  to  walk  to  meet  them,  but 
was  so  weak  and  unable,  that  the  Princess  of  Brunswick 
ran  out  and  called  in  the  King  and  Queen.  At  eight 
o'clock  they  rose  to  leave  her,  but  though  she  could  only 
hear,  not  converse  with  them,  she  pressed  them  to  stay  till 
ten  ;  and  when  that  hour  came,  made  a  sign  to  them  to 
retire,  as  usual.  They  stayed,  however,  in  her  palace,  and 
she  went  to  bed — still  taking  no  notice  of  the  extremity  of 
her  case.  Some  of  her  women,  and  a  page  who  attended 
her  as  a  surgeon,  sat  up  in  her  room.  At  half  an  hour 
after  six  in  the  morning,  perceiving  he  did  not  hear  her 
breathe,  the  page  softly  drew  the  curtain,  and  touched  her 
hand,  which  he  found  cold,  and  that  she  had  been  dead 
some  time,  and  without  a  groan.  The  King  and  Queen 
remained  at  Carlton  House  till  eight,  probably  to  look 
for  her  will,  and  to  seal  up  her  papers. 

The  Princess  sent  for  her  son  the  Duke  of  Cumberland 
two  days  before  she  died,  and  then  sent  to  the  King  to  ask 
his  consent  to  her  seeing  the  Duke.  The  King  said  he 
would  not  oppose  it,  if  it  would  give  her  satisfaction.  The 
Duke  stayed  three  hours  in  her  house  without  her  admitting 
him.  At  last  she  wrote  again  to  the  King  to  beg  that,  if 
there  was  to  be  any  reconciliation,  she  might  have  the 
happiness  of  making  it.  The  King  replied,  that  it  was  a 
matter  that  required  too  much  deliberation  to  be  deter- 
mined so  abruptly.  On  this  she  waived  it,  and  did  die 
without  seeing  the  Duke. 

^  She  answered  the  King  of  Denmark's  letter  on  that  occasion  with  her 
own  hand,  but  two  days  before  her  death. 


i6         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Feb. 

N.B.  I  do  not  warrant  the  circumstances,*  though  from 
good  authority ;  but  it  is  certain  that  the  Duke  was  at 
Carlton  House,  and  yet  did  not  see  his  mother. 

Lord  Bute  was  two  hours  with  the  Princess  on  Thursday 
evening ;  he  returned  on  the  Friday  while  the  King  and 
Queen  were  with  her,  and  sent  to  let  her  know  he  was 
there,  but  she  declined  seeing  him,  and  the  next  morning 
she  died. 

The  evening  after  she  died  another  courier  arrived  from 
Denmark,  who  brought  advice  that  the  governing  party 
would  palliate  the  Queen's  adultery  as  much  as  possible, 
but  would  prosecute  severely  the  pursuit  against  Struensee, 
who  had  intended  to  give  the  King  drugs  to  disorder  his 
understanding,  and  make  him  declare  Struensee  regent. 
One  of  the  chief  plotters  against  the  Queen  and  her 
favourite  was  Count  Ostein,  lately  returned  from  the 
embassy  at  Naples.  Sir  William  Hamilton,  our  envoy  at 
that  court,  and  newly  come  to  England  on  his  private 
affairs,  told  me  three  months  ago  that  Ostein  was  one  of 
the  most  intriguing  men  in  the  world,  and  would  certainly 
be  very  busy  at  home.  When  the  account  of  the  revolu- 
tion arrived,  Sir  William  said  to  me,  "  I  am  persuaded 
Ostein  is  engaged  in  the  conspiracy ;"  and  so  it  proved. 

In  Ireland  the  scene  was  grown  very  stormy ;  Lord 
North  had  been  averse  to  the  erection  of  the  new  Board  ;2 
Lord  Townshend  had  assured  him  the  Irish  would  like  it, 
as  it  would  furnish  more  employments.  They  here,  who 
knew  Ireland  best,  advised  against  it,  yet  the  Administra- 
tion allowed  Lord  Townshend  to  proceed  in  his  plan,  and 
he  immediately  declared  his  new  Board.  The  Parliament 
met  on  the  6th,  and  the  House  of  Commons  opened  in  a 
flame,  and  threatened  the  greatest  violence.^    The  popular 

^  The  fact  is  certain,  as  I  have  learned  since. 

'^  It  was  properly  a  separation  of  two  boards,  and  had  been  established  by 
an  Act  of  Charles  II. 

^  See  an  account  of  those  debates  in  the  "  London  Chronicle"  for  Feb.  i8, 
1772. 


k 


AUGUSTA,    PRINCESS    OF   WALES 
After  a  painting  by  Vanloo 


1772]  MEETING   OF    PARLIAMENT  17 

leaders  were  the  more  enraged,  as  Lord  Townshend  had 
personally  provoked  them  by  writing  a  satirical  ballad, 
called  the  Cotillon,  in  which  he  introduced  their  several 
characters.     This  account  arrived  on  the  nth. 

13^//.  The  Princess  of  Wales  was  buried.  The  mob 
huzzaed  for  joy,  and  treated  her  memory  with  much  dis- 
respect.^ 

iZth.  The  Princess  of  Brunswick  returned  to  Germany. 
The  King  and  Queen  had  taken  great  pains  to  disgust  her; 
and  the  Queen  never  suffered  her  to  see  the  King  alone. 
Though  her  mother  had  sent  for  her,  she  was  not  lodged  at 
Carlton  House,  nor  even  at  St.  James's,  which  was  empty; 
and  yet  the  Prince  of  Mecklenburg  had  apartments 
there ;  but  a  miserable  little  house  in  Pall  Mall  was  taken 
for  the  Princess  of  Brunswick.  A  stronger  instance  of  the 
Queen's  jealousy  of  her,  and  even  of  her  Majesty's  haugh- 
tiness, broke  out.  On  her  own  birthday ^  Lady  Gower,* 
having  formerly  been  Lady  of  the  Bedchamber  to  the 
Princess,  and  now  civilly  waiting  on  her,  followed  her 
into  the  ball-room,  and  by  sufferance  of  the  Duchess  of 
Argyle,*  her  great  friend,  sat  next  to  her,  who  was  in 

^  It  was  not  the  mob  alone  by  whom  the  Princess  was  disrespectfully 
treated.  Little  more  than  a  week  before  her  death  the  following  paragraph 
appeared  in  the  papers  : — '  *  Fifty  guineas  were  yesterday  offered  and  refused 
to  insure  100/.  on  the  life  of  a  certain  great  lady  in  Pall  Mall  for  two  months 
only ;  and  five  offered  at  the  same  time,  and  refused,  to  underwrite  her  for 
three  days."  It  seems  to  have  been  the  fashion  of  the  mob  to  act  indecently 
at  public  funerals,  especially  if  they  had  anything  to  gain  by  it.  Thus  we 
read  in  the  "General  Evening  Post"  for  Saturday,  24th  January,  1772,  that 
*'  the  remains  of  the  late  Lord  Baltimore,  who  died  abroad,  were  carried  from 
Exeter  Change,  in  the  Strand,  where  they  had  lain  in  state,  in  order  to  be 
interred  in  the  family  vault  at  Epsom.  His  Lordship  had  injured  his 
character  in  his  life  by  seduction  ;  so  that  the  populace  paid  no  regard  to  his 
memory  when  dead,  but  plundered  the  room  where  his  body  lay,  the  moment 
it  was  removed."  Again,  at  the  funeral  of  the  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales, 
the  mob  stripped  the  black  cloth  from  the  platform  to  the  Abbey,  before  half 
the  procession  had  passed  across  ;  and  the  soldiers  on  guard,  fearful  of  losing 
their  share,  began  to  help  themselves. — D. 

^  The  Queen's. 

^  Lady  Susan  Stewart,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Galloway,  and  third  wife 
of  Granville  Leveson,  Earl  Gower. 

*  Elizabeth  Gunning,  Duchess  Dowager  of  Hamilton,  and  wife  of  John 
Campbell,  Duke  of  Argyle. 

I.— C 


1 8         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

waiting  on  the  Queen.  Her  Majesty  was  exceedingly 
angry,  and  in  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  all  her  ladies  being 
present,  said  aloud  to  the  Duchess,  "Duchess,  I  must 
reprmiatid  you  for  letting  Lady  Gower  take  place  of  you, 
as  Lady  to  the  Princess  of  Brunswick.  I  had  a  mind  to 
speak  to  you  on  the  spot,  but  would  not,  for  fear  of  saying 
anything  I  should  repent  of,  though  I  should  have  thought 
it}  The  Princess  of  Brunswick  has  nothing  to  do  here, 
and  I  insist  on  your  recovering  the  precedence  you  gave  up. 
One  day  or  other  my  son  will  be  married,  and  then  I 
shall  have  his  wife's  ladies  pretending  to  take  place  in 
my  palace  which  they  shall  not  do."  To  mortify  the 
Princess  still  farther,  the  King  refused  to  let  her  be  chief 
mourner  at  her  mother's  funeral,  which  she  asked  :  he  pre- 
tended it  would  afflict  her  too  much,  as  she  was  not  well. 
On  this  she  would  have  set  out  the  day  after  her  mother 
expired,  but  Princess  Amelia  advised  her  against  it  as  in- 
decent, and  she  stayed  till  after  the  burial.  Her  fate  was 
on  all  sides  unhappy ;  the  Prince  her  husband  did  not  care 
for  her,  and  had  many  mistresses,  and  was  extravagant. 
Her  allowance  was  scanty,  nor,  though  she  had  put  her  to 
the  expense  of  this  journey,  did  her  mother  leave  her  any- 
thing.2  Ij^  fact,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  mankind,  the 
Princess  of  Wales  left  no  will ;  and  to  their  greater  sur- 
prise, she  left  no  money  !  ^  She  enjoyed  for  twenty  years 
a  revenue  of  64,000/.  a-year  ;  her  life  was  the  most  private, 
her  expenses^  extremely  reduced,  and  her  parsimony  very 
great,  though  she  was  sometimes  generous,  and  always 
very  charitable.      Her   friends,   in   print,   computed   her 

^  Another  instance  that  gave  offence :  the  two  first  drawing-rooms  after  the 
Princess's  death  were  exceedingly  full :  at  the  second  the  Queen  said,  **  I  do 
not  call  this  a  circle,  but  a  crowd." 

'^  This  neglect,  and  the  King's  ill-treatment  of  her,  making  noise,  the  King 
paid  both  her  journeys,  and  gave  her  looo/.  besides. 

^  Only  27,000/.,  which  were  found  in  her  cabinet  after  her  death. 

^  The  King  continued  not  only  their  salaries  to  her  servants,  but  their 
board  wages,  amounting  in  all  to  between  i6,000''.  and  20,000/.  a  year, 
Her  whole  income  fell  to  him, 


1772]  THE   LATE   PRINCESS   OF   WALES  19 

charities  at  6000/.  a-year,  and  some  said  8000/.  At  Kew 
she  had  laid  out  between  30,000/.  and  40,000/.,  and  the 
keeping  of  it  was  expensive.  Still  the  most  moderate  cal- 
culation had  reckoned  her  worth  300,000/.  Many  persons 
supposed  that  her  journey  to  Germany  had  been  made 
with  an  intent  of  carrying  her  money  thither,  and  depositing 
it  with,  or  bestowing  it  on,  her  own  family  at  Saxe  Gotha, 
or  on  the  Princess  of  Brunswick.  The  latter  indubitably 
did  not  prove  true  ;  and  as  even  the  former  was  never  pre- 
tended by  her  friends,^  it  is  no  wonder  that  it  became  the 
universal  belief  that  she  had  wasted  all  on  Lord  Bute. 
This  became  still  more  probable,  as  he  had  made  the  pur- 
chase of  the  estate  at  Luton  in  Bedfordshire,  at  the  price 
of  114,000/.,  before  he  was  visibly  worth  20,000/ ;2  had 
built  a  palace  there,  another  in  town,  and  had  furnished 
the  former  in  the  most  expensive  manner,  bought  pictures 
and  books,  made  a  vast  park  and  lake,  and,  in  short,  had 
given  but  too  much  handle  to  ill-natured  conjecture. 

ijth.  Mr.  PI.  Seymour  moved  the  House  of  Commons 
to  give  leave  to  bring  in  a  bill  for  "  quieting  the  subjects 
against  dormant  claims  of  the  Church."  Acquiescent  as 
the  Opposition  was,  and  servile  as  the  majority,  the  spirit 
that  appeared  in  favour  of  this  motion  showed  that  this 
Parliament  was  not  totally  abandoned.  The  ministers  set 
themselves  against  the  bill ;  yet  was  there  but  one  strong 
reason  to  weigh  against  the  many  for  it,  and  that  was  the 
probability  that  country  gentlemen  would  delay  their  tithes 
and  inventobstructions  till  prescription  should  weigh  against 
the  clergymen  who  had  a  right  to  them.     This,  however, 

^  Till  after  her  death,  when  it  was  said  she  had  made  them  great  presents, 
and  even  to  the  Princess  of  Brunswick,  and  it  was  believed  that  during  the 
war  she  sent  large  sums  to  her  brother  the  Duke  of  Saxe  Gotha. 

'  His  wife's  father,  Wortley  Montagu,  had  left  her  a  vast  estate,  but  so 
tied  up  that  she  could  raise  no  money  on  it.  Her  mother,  Lady  Mary 
Wortley,  who  was  believed  very  rich,  had  left  her  sole  heiress ;  but  as  Lord 
Bute  himself  had  no  estate  at  all,  it  was  impossible  to  account  for  his  vast 
expense  but  from  the  Princess's  poverty.  His  house  in  Berkeley  Square  he 
sold  to  Lord  Shelburne  for  24,000/.,  but  even  half  that  sum  was  not  paid  in 
some  years. 


20         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Feb- 

might  be  remedied  by  abolishing  tithes  and  fixing  stipends. 
Mr,  Seymour  said  that  the  nullum  tenipus  of  the  King 
and  Church  were  twins  ;  that  the  first  was  buried,  and  the 
other  he  hoped  would  share  the  same  fate.  He  took  up  the 
cause,  he  said,  on  impartial  ground  :  it  was  levelled  at  no 
individual.  The  Church  at  present  was,  as  Wolsey  said, 
Ego  et  Rex  meus.  He  quoted  an  instance  of  an  estate 
recovered  by  the  Church  from  Sir  Thomas  Clavering  after 
it  had  been  in  his  family  an  hundred  years ;  and  he  men- 
tioned the  title  deeds  of  his  own  father,  which  the  butler 
had  taken  away,  and,  turning  woollen-draper,  had  cut  into 
shreds ;  but,  not  having  used,  they  were  found  in  a  sack. 
Had  they  been  destroyed,  what  might  have  been  the 
consequence,  as  the  whole  estate  was  Church  land !  He 
said  he  had  carried  the  plan  of  his  bill  to  the  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury.^  He  desired  a  copy :  it  was  sent.  He 
would  not  accuse  his  Grace  of  having  shown  it,  but  a 
printed  paper  ^  had  been  delivered  at  the  door,  of  which  he 
hoped  the  House  would  take  notice.  He  had  gone  after- 
wards to  the  Archbishop  of  York,^  who,  being  a  lively  and 
ingenious  man,  had  humorously  said  that  he  was  only 
lieutenant-colonel,  and  could  do  nothing  in  it.  For  himself, 
he  was  determined,  if  unsuccessful  now,  to  renew  his  motion 
every  year.  The  younger  T.  Townshend,  whose  father  was 
member  for  the  University  of  Cambridge,  opposed  the 
motion  ;  and  said  he  did  not  see  how  the  bill  would  prevent 
the  deeds  of  careless  people  from  being  sent  to  a  woollen- 
draper's  and  cut  to  pieces.  Mr.  Cornwall  declared  his 
willingness  to  assist  the  inferior  clergy,  and  to  attack  deans 
and  chapters.  It  could  never  be  the  intention  that  one 
man  should  hold  two  great  livings  ;  and  he  quoted  a  saying 
of  Warburton  on  two  clergymen,  that  the  one  *  made  reli- 
gion  a    trade,  and   the  other  ^  made  trades  by  religion. 

^  Dr.  Cornwallis.  ^  Written  by  Dr.  Tucker,  Dean  of  Gloucester. 

^  Dr.  Hay  Drummond.        ^  Dr.  Squire,  late  Bishop  of  St.  David's, 
^  Tucker,  Dean  of  Gloucester,  who  wrote  much  on  Trade, 


1772]      DEBATE  ON  ECCLESIASTICAL  AFFAIRS  21 

The  Lord  Advocate  of  Scotland  declared  himself  against 
the  motion,  but  advised  obliging  the  Church  to  register 
their  title  deeds.  Dowdswell  and  Burke  supported  the 
motion.  Lord  North  opposed  it  warmly,  said  no  grievance 
called  for  it,  and  affirmed  arbitrarily,  and  contrary  to  all 
usage,  that  Mr.  Seymour  ought  to  have  brought  in  his  plan 
thoroughly  digested,  and  should  have  offered  the  clauses. 
He  was  glad,  too,  he  said,  that  the  gentlemen  had  felt  the 
printed  papers  :  he  hoped  the  dignity  of  the  House  would 
be  restored  by  not  suffering  their  debates  to  be  published. 
Charles  Fox,  oppressed  with  debts,  and  impatient  to  dis- 
tinguish himself,  seized  the  occasion  presented  by  Lord 
North,  and  fell  violently  on  the  new  doctrine  of  beginning 
by  stating  the  clauses  of  a  bill  when  first  moved  for.  He 
called  it  most  unparliamentary  and  arbitrary  ;  espoused  the 
motion  the  rather,  he  affirmed,  because  no  particular  griev- 
ance pressed,  and  because  no  one  parliamentary  reason 
had  been  alleged  why  the  bill  should  not  be  brought  in  ; 
yet  Mr.  Seymour,  he  believed,  would  have  great  difficulties 
to  remove  before  the  bill  could  be  made  perfect.  Seymour, 
too,  provoked  by  Lord  North's  behaviour,  accused  him  of 
deceit.  He  had  acquainted  that  lord,  he  said,  with  his  in- 
tention at  the  beginning  of  the  session,  who  had  seemed 
to  assent  to  it,  and  had  been  very  civil,  but  asked  if  he  did 
not  think  it  would  meet  with  opposition  in  the  House  of 
Lords  ?  From  thence  he  passed  to  a  censure  on  the  Bishop 
of  Lichfield  and  Coventry,  Lord  North's  brother,  who, 
not  satisfied  with  that  bishopric,  which  had  contented 
Dr.  Hough,  one  of  the  most  ingenious  men  that  ever  lived, 
had  obtained  two  livings  in  commendam.  Lord  North 
replied  that  he  would  not  accuse  the  gentleman  of  betray- 
ing private  conversation,  as  he  supposed  Mr.  Seymour  did 
not  look  on  it  as  such ;  but,  because  he  had  asked  if  the 
honourable  gentleman  expected  no  opposition  from  the 
Lords,  had  he  expected  of  course  that  there  would  be  none 
in  the  Commons  ?     For  himself,  he  might  have  bowed  and 


22         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

been  civil ;  but  that  his  bows  and  civility  might  not  be 
misunderstood  for  the  future,  he  would  tell  the  honourable 
gentleman,  and  everybody  else,  that  if  he  was  solicited  for 
a  place  and  bowed  and  was  civil,  it  meant  No.  If  he  in- 
tended to  serve  the  person,  he  would  tell  him  so  at  once. 
For  the  two  livings  held  by  his  relation,  they  were  neither 
small  nor  great,  nor  was  his  income  more  than  that  of 
other  Bishops.  Nor  did  he  know  that  he  was  himself 
rapacious.  The  bill  was  rejected  by  only  141  to  117,  a 
very  small  majority  in  such  a  session.  Charles  Fox,  his 
brother,  and  several  other  ministerial  men  were  in  the 
minority.^ 

2Qth.  Charles  Fox  resigned  his  place  in  the  Admiralty ; 
probably  by  direction  of  his  father,  who  was  dissatisfied  at 
not  obtaining  his  Earldom,  and  was  particularly  angry 
with  Lord  North  for  refusing  a  place  to  O'Brien,  formerly 
an  actor,  who  had  married  Lord  Holland's  niece.^  Lord 
North  and  the  Bedfords  were  ridiculously  alarmed  at  this 
resignation,^  which  was  indeed  timed  very  disagreeably,  for 

^  It  was  popularly  said  by  the  wits  at  the  Smyrna  coffee-house,  that  the 
"dormant  claims  of  the  clergy"  were  preferred  against  the  habit  of  sleeping 
in  church. — D. 

^  Lady  Susan  Fox  Strangways,  daughter  of  Stephen  Earl  of  Ilchester, 
elder  brother  of  Lord  Holland.  Lady  Ilchester  wrote  to  Lord  North,  who 
returned  no  answer,  an  ill-breeding  to  which  he  was  accustomed,  and  by 
which  he  made  many  real  enemies.  He  had  much  distinguished  Charles 
Fox  the  last  year,  and  had  as  much  neglected  him  this ;  yet  as  soon  as  Fox 
had  spoken  against  him,  he  weakly  and  timidly  called  him  aside,  and  asked 
him  if  he  had  seen  Maclean,  who  had  got  the  place  which  had  been  asked 
for  O'Brien,  and  who  would  make  O'Brien  his  deputy ;  but  this  Fox  received 
with  contempt.  One  of  the  opposition  triumphing  on  the  acquisition  of  Fox 
from  the  Court,  George  Selwyn  said,  **  You  have  no  reason  to  triumph :  you 
will  be  forced  to  pay  his  debts,  as  you  did  Wilkes's,  or  you  will  lose  him 
again." 

'  There  were  some  curious  details  connected  with  the  marriage  of  O'Brien, 
the  actor,  with  Lady  Susan.  The  young  couple  appear  to  have  been  pro- 
vided for  after  a  singular  fashion.  Fox,  writing  to  Macartney,  Dec.  25, 
1764,  says,  **  We  have  heard  from  Lady  Susan  since  her  arrival  at  New 
York.  I  do  not  think  they  will  make  much  of  their  lands  ;  and  I  fear  it  will 
be  impossible  to  get  O'Brien  a  place."  The  actor  was,  nevertheless,  not 
overlooked  ;  and  in  1772  the  London  papers  attributed  Fox's  resignation  to 
Lord  North's  refusal  to  appoint  O'Brien  to  this  post,  "a  kind  of  sinecure," 
ultimately  given  to  Maclean,  and  which  was  worth  1000/.  a  year.  Fox  is,  by 
the  same  authority,  reported  to  have  asked  for  this  place  for  the  ex-actor, 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  23 

on  that  very  day  was  delivered  to  the  Houses  by  Lord 
Rochford  and  Lord  North  the  following  message  from  the 
King  :— 

"G.  R.  His  Majesty,  being  desirous,  from  paternal  affection 
to  his  own  family  and  anxious  concern  for  the  future  welfare  of 
his  people,  and  the  honour  and  dignity  of  his  Crown,  that  the 
right  of  approving  all  marriages  in  the  Royal  Family  (which  ever 
has  belonged  to  the  Kings  of  this  realm  as  a  matter  of  public 
concern)  may  be  made  effectual,  recommends  to  both  Houses  of 
Parliament  to  take  into  their  serious  consideration  whether  it 
may  not  be  wise  and  expedient  to  supply  the  defect  of  the  laws 
now  in  being,  and  by  some  new  provision  more  effectually  to 
guard  the  descendants  of  his  late  Majesty  King  George  IL 
(other  than  the  issue  of  princesses  who  have  married  or  may 
hereafter  marry  into  foreign  families)  from  marrying  without  the 
approbation  of  His  Majesty,  his  heirs  and  successors,  first  had 
and  obtained." 

This  hard  and  despotic  power  claimed  by  the  Crown, 
and  excited  by  the  late  marriage  of  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land, was  insisted  upon  by  the  King  and  Queen,  and  the 
bill  drawn  by  Lord  Mansfield,  though  much  and  undis- 
guisedly  disapproved  by  most  of  the  Ministers/  and  even 
by  some  of  the  King's  own  creatures.  When  the  message 
was  delivered,  it  was  received  with  the  utmost  coldness 
and  disgust  by  both  Houses.  It  not  only  set  out  with 
a  falsehood  (the  assertion  of  the  King's  power  over  such 

"  in  exchange  for  two  lucrative  places  which  Mr.  O.  now  enjoys  abroad,  of 
about  800/.  per  annum,  and  which  require  his  attendance  in  that  country." 
Fox  writes  to  Ossory,  21  Feb.,  1772,  "It  is  impossible  to  tell  you  the  real 
reason  of  my  resigning,  it  is  very  complicated.  I  should  not  have  resigned 
at  this  moment,  merely  on  account  of  my  complaints  against  Lord  North,  if  I 
had  not  determined  to  vote  against  this  Royal  Family  Bill,  which  in  place  I 
should  be  ashamed  of  doing."  See  Lord  J.  Russell's  **  Memorials  and  Cor- 
respondence of  Fox,"  under  the  above  dates.— D.  [Lady  Susan  O'Brien's 
correspondence  with  Lady  Sarah  Lennox  was  published  by  Lord  Ilchester  in 
1901.— A.  F.  S.] 

^  At  a  previous  meeting  at  Lord  North's  General  Conway  made  many 
objections,  which  were  allowed  to  have  weight,  but  nobody  else  would  then 
openly  venture  to  speak  his  sentiments. 


24         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

marriages),  but  contradicted  itself  by  devising  a  remedy  for 
the  very  deficiency  of  that  power.  The  Bill  teemed  with 
seeds  of  future  civil  wars,  by  bastardizing  children  of  the 
Royal  Family  born  in  wedlock  which  had  not  the  King's 
consent.  Princes  marrying  Englishwomen,  though  with- 
out that  consent,  and  having  issue,  such  issue,  in  spite  of 
the  Act,  would  undoubtedly  be  preferred  by  the  nation  to 
foreign  and  unknown  descendants  of  George  IL  A  king 
preferring  his  second  son  might  prevent  his  eldest  from 
marrying  ;  and  could  a  Christian  nation  and  Christian 
Bishops  say  that  the  younger  sons  of  the  Crown  should 
pass  all  their  lives  in  fornication  or  adultery,  unless  the 
King  pleased  to  find  them  wives?  The  House  of  Com- 
mons had  just  maintained  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  one  of 
which  afifirms  that  all  Christians  have  a  right  to  marry. 
These  and  numerous  other  objections  were  in  every  man's 
mouth  ;  so  that  the  very  day  after  the  delivery  of  the 
message  the  general  disapprobation  and  the  defection  of 
Charles  Fox^  terrified  the  Ministers  so  much,  that  they 
obtained  a  mitigation  of  the  Act,  and  brought  it  in  the 
next  day  with  an  alteration,  which,  though  it  satisfied 
some  who  wished  to  be  satisfied,  was  either  annulling  the 
bill  in  great  measure,  if  intended  to  relieve,  or  a  chicane 
invented  (I  believe  by  Lord  Mansfield)  to  make  a  seeming 
softening  without  a  real  difference ;  for  the  bill  now  said 
that  the  Act  should  bind  the  princes  but  till  twenty-five  ; 
after  which  age  they  were  to  declare  their  intention  to  the 
Privy  Council,  before  whom  it  should  be  for  a  year  ;  and 
that  the  princes  might  then  marry,  if  Parliament  should 
make  no  objection. 

2ist.  Complaint  was  made  in  the  House  of  Commons  of 
Dr.  Nowel's  sermon  preached  before  them  on  the  30th  of 
January,  in  which  he  vindicated  Charles  L  and  drew  a 

^  Charles  Fox  had  asked  Lord  North  for  an  Irish  peerage  for  a  Mr.  Upton, 
a  friend  of  his  father,  Lord  Holland,  which  was  not  granted,  and  was  an 
additional  reason  for  its  being  believed  that  the  father  had  influenced  the  son's 
resignation,  though  the  father  denied  it. 


1772]  DR.   NOWEL'S   SERMON  25 

parallel  between  him  and  the  present  King.  T.  Townshend, 
jun,,  moved  to  have  it  burned  by  the  hands  of  the  common 
hangman  ;  but  as  the  House  had,  according  to  custom, 
thanked  the  parson  for  his  sermon  without  hearing  or 
reading  it,  they  could  not  censure  it  now,  without  exposing 
themselves  to  great  ridicule. 

In  Ireland  two  questions  were  carried  by  majorities  of 
tzve/ves.nd  ten  against  the  Castle,^  by  which  they  resolved  to 
make  no  provision  for  the  Commissioners  of  the  new  Board, 
nor  to  assist  in  the  execution  of  the  excise  under  the  new 
commission.  The  Duke  of  Leinster^  insisted  on  the  party 
proposing  a  violent  question  to  which  they  were  adverse, 
viz.  to  expel,  or  at  least  take  away  the  votes  of,  the  new 
commissioners ;  and  a  motion  was  actually  made  by 
Mr.  Barry  Maxwell  ;^  but  Ponsonby,  the  late  Speaker,  left 
the  House,  and  the  motion  was  given  up.  The  opposition 
was  little  less  at  variance  than  that  in  England. 

Alderman  Sawbridge  had  moved  for  a  call  of  the  House, 
intending  to  bring  in  a  bill  for  Triennial  Parliaments. 
Nash,  the  Court  Lord  Mayor,  had  been  desired  to  call  an 
extraordinary  Common  Hall,  that  the  Livery  might  instruct 
their  members  to  vote  for  it.  This  he  refused,  which 
raised  great  resentment  against  him,  and  Sawbridge 
attacked  him  in  a  very  warm  and  severe  speech,*  in  which 
he  taxed  him  with  lying,  and  hinted  at  his  imitating 
a  higher  magistrate,  whose  veracity  had  been  called  in 
question.     The  call  had  been  fixed  for  the 

2^th,  but  was  put  off  for  a  fortnight.  Mr.  Walsingham 
Boyle^  and  General  Irwin^  then  moved  to  expunge  from  the 


^  See  the  account  in  the  '*  Gazetteer  "  of  Feb,  27. 

^  James  Fitzgerald,  Duke  of  Leinster,  formerly  Earl  of  Kildare. 

'  Called  Mr.  Barry  Barry  :  he  was  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Farnham. 

*  Sawbridge  was  the  wealthy  democratic  sheriff,  who,  with  his  colleague, 
five  times  returned  Wilkes  to  Parliament  in  defiance  of  the  House  of 
Commons. — D. 

^  A  captain  in  the  navy,  son  of  the  Earl  of  Shannon. 

^  Major-General  John  Irwin,  colonel  of  a  regiment ;  both  he  and  Captain 
Walsingham  were  in  opposition. 


26         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

journals  the  thanks  of  the  House  which  had  been  ordered 
to  Dr.  Nowel,  Principal  of  Mary  Hall,  Oxford,  for  his 
sermon  on  the  30th  January,  This  was  opposed  by 
Sir  William  Dolben  and  Sir  Roger  Newdigate,  who  had 
proposed  both  the  preacher  and  the  thanks.  Sir  Roger 
was  particularly  hot,  and  spoke  with  all  the  flame  of 
stupid  bigotry,  declaring  he  would  maintain  that  all  the 
doctrines  in  the  sermon  were  constitutional.  T.  Towns- 
hend,  jun.,  showed  how  repugnant  they  were  to  the  con- 
stitution, and  it  was  carried  by  152  to  41  to  expunge 
the  thanks ;  General  KeppeV  Colonel  Fitzroy,^  Vice- 
Chamberlain  to  the  King,  and  Charles  Fox,^  all  descend- 
ants of  Charles  L,  voting  against  the  sermon,  as  did  even 
Dyson*  and  many  courtiers.  The  41  were  rank  Tories, 
all  but  Rigby,^  who  had  retired  behind  the  Chair,  but, 
being  made  to  vote,  voted  as  he  thought  the  King  would 
like,  to  whom  he  paid  the  greatest  court,  expecting  to 
be  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  if  Lord  Guildford  should 
die,  and  Lord  North  go  into  the  House  of  Lords.  This 
proper  severity  on  the  sermon  was  a  great  blow  to  the 
Court,  as  clergymen  would  fear  to  be  too  forward  with 
their  servility,  when  the  censure  of  Parliament  might 
make  it  unadvisable  for  the  King  to  prefer  them.^     This 

^  General  William  Keppel,  brother  of  George,  Earl  of  Albemarle,  descended 
from  Charles  II.  by  his  mother,  Anne,  daughter  of  the  first  Duke  of  Richmond, 
son  of  the  Duchess  of  Portsmouth. 

"^  Colonel  Charles  Fitzroy,  brother  of  Augustus  Henry,  Duke  of  Grafton, 
descended  from  the  Duchess  of  Cleveland. 

^  Charles  Fox,  son  of  Caroline,  Lady  Holland,  daughter  of  the  second 
Duke  of  Richmond. 

^  Jeremiah  Dyson,  formerly  Clerk  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and  had  ori- 
ginally been  a  republican,  though  grown  an  active  tool  of  the  Court.  His  old 
leaven  seemed  on  this  occasion  to  return  ;  he  said,  '*  If  King  Charles's  grand- 
sons vote  against  him,  sure  I  may."  ["Jerry  Dyson,"  in  1770?  had  been 
granted  an  Irish  pension  by  the  Court ;  the  amount  was  500/.  for  his  life  and 
that  of  his  three  sons.  The  Irish  House  of  Commons,  however,  struck  it  off 
the  list.  The  abuse  of  granting  pensions  out  of  Irish  revenue  was  enormous. 
Lady-lieutenants  even  put  their  **  dressers"  on  the  list  for  a  hundred  a  year. 
A  pension  to  that  amount  was  procured  this  very  year  for  Miss  Elizabeth 
Biddels,  dresser  to  Lady  Townshend,  wife  of  the  out-going  viceroy. — D.] 

^  Richard  Rigby,  Paymaster  of  the  Army,  formerly  a  vehement  Whig. 

^  Yet  Dr.  Nowel  was  afterwards  preferred. 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE    BILL  27 

was  another  instance,  too,  that   the  present  Parliament 
was  not  entirely  abandoned. 

26th.  The  bill  for  regulating  the  marriages  of  the  Royal 
Family,  or,  as  it  was  called,  The  King's  Bill,  was  read  a 
second  time  in  the  House  of  Lords.  Of  the  debates  in 
that  assembly  I  can  give  but  a  very  imperfect  account. 
The  Lords,  since  their  quarrel  with  the  other  House  the 
last  session,  finding  the  sweets  of  coldness  from  a  thin 
audience,  and  still  more  the  little  effect  which  the  best 
orations  against  them  could  make  on  such  determined 
voters  as  the  majority,  and  which  were  not  easily  trans- 
mitted to  the  public  when  there  were  no  spectators,  rigor- 
ously adhered  to  their  exclusion  of  all  intruders,  and  the 
Opposition  took  no  pains  to  disperse  their  own  arguments. 
What  I  could  gather  was  as  follows  :  Lord  Rockingham 
had  caused  the  Judges  to  be  summoned,  intending  to  ques- 
tion them  on  the  assumptions  in  the  King's  message,  and 
came  prepared  with  many  questions  for  that  purpose ;  but 
the  determined  chicanery  of  Lord  Mansfield,  supported 
by  the  Ministerial  party,  at  the  head  of  which,  now  there 
was  no  danger,  he  affectedly  seemed  to  place  himself, 
and  which  undoubtedly  he  possessed  in  the  King's  confi- 
dence, blasted  all  attempts  to  make  the  Judges  explicit, 
though  on  the  first  day's  debate  there  appeared  great  dis- 
cordance among  the  subordinate  Ministers.  Lord  Rock- 
ingham's first  question  was,  "  Is  the  King  intrusted  with 
the  care  and  approbation  of  the  marriages  of  the  descend- 
ants of  King  George  II.,  other  than  his  Majesty's  own 
children  during  their  minorities  ?  "  Baron  Smythe  ^  in  the 
name  of  his  brethren  gave  an  unanimous  negative  to 
this  question,  because  it  comprehended  even  the  issue  of 
our  princesses  married  abroad,  over  whom  his  Majesty 

^  Of  the  Exchequer.  He,  with  Aston  of  the  King's  Bench,  and  Bathurst 
of  the  Pleas,  had  held  the  Great  Seal  by  commission,  before  the  appointment 
of  Bathurst,  the  most  incompetent  of  three  incompetents.  Bathurst,  by 
supporting  the  bill,  acted  contrary  to  the  opinions  he  held  when  attorney- 
general  to  Frederic  Prince  of  Wales.— D. 


28         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

could  have  no  power.  Lord  Rockingham  then  amended 
his  question  by  omitting  the  foreign  descendants.  The 
Judges,  in  spite  of  Lord  Mansfield's  arts,  desired  time 
to  consider  on  their  answer.  This  occasioned  a  long 
debate ;  it  was  Wednesday ;  on  Saturday  the  Judges 
were  to  set  out  on  the  circuit,  and  it  would  waste  two 
months  ere  they  could  return  ;  yet  what  haste  demanded 
precipitation  ?  No  child  of  the  King  was  near  the  mar- 
riageable age ;  his  brother  Cumberland  was  married ; 
his  brother  Gloucester  was  believed  to  be  so.  A  bill 
that  so  nearly  affected  the  whole  succession,  so  big  with 
possibilities  of  occasioning  future  civil  wars,  so  new  a 
power  claimed  by  the  Crown,  such  new  difficulties  thrown 
on  matrimony,  and  the  indissolubleness  of  that  con- 
tracted in  a  Christian  light  so  attacked,  seemed  to  call 
for  mature  and  serious  deliberation.  The  precipitation 
which  strode  over  all  these  most  important  considerations 
spoke  not  only  pride,  passion,  and  the  obstinacy  of  impa- 
tient prerogative,  but  looked  as  if  some  secret  reason,  which 
even  a  short  time  might  defeat,  lurked  beneath.  And 
this  reason  was  supposed  to  be  the  possibility  of  the  Duke 
of  Gloucester's  return,  whose  health  was  much  mended. 
This  advantage  taken  of  a  favourite  and  dying  brother's 
absence  did  not  indicate  much  affection  or  justice.  People 
went  further,  and  suspected  that  the  Duke  was  only  con- 
tracted to  Lady  Waldegrave ;  in  which,  though  his  mar- 
riage, if  accomplished,  could  not  be  annulled,  yet,  the  act 
once  passed,  could  never  be  completed  without  the  King's 
consent;  and  how  relenting  his  Majesty  was  on  that  article 
the  bill  itself  explained.  Lord  Camden,  though  ill  of  the 
gout,  was  so  struck  with  the  whole  arbitrary  measure,  with 
the  dangers  it  threatened,  the  injustice  it  enacted,  no  coun- 
sel even  being  allowed  to  the  princes  to  defend  their 
cause,  and  with  the  hurry  with  which  it  was  driven  on, 
that,  however  unwilling  to  offend  the  Crown,  and  waive  all 
hopes  of  recovering  the  Great  Seal,  he  had  gone  to  the 


^m'l  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  29 

House,  and  with  great  energy ,1  yet  with  signal  incense  to 
the  King's  person,  descanted  on  all  the  objectionable  parts 
of  the  bill.  Even  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  vaunting  his  own 
unalterable  Whiggism,  declared  for  hearing  the  Judges  ; 
though  whispering  afterwards  with  Lord  Mansfield,  he 
explained  away  his  pretended  firmness.  Lord  Shel- 
burne  was  very  warm  against  the  bill.  Lord  Temple's 
conduct  was  more  particular.  He  had  abroad  talked 
strongly  against  the  bill ;  but  on  Charles  Fox's  resignation, 
and  the  panic  that  ensued,  his  tone  had  lowered  ;  and  even 
in  the  preceding  week,  surmising  that  the  bill  might  dis- 
joint the  administration,  he  had  been  three  times  at  Court, 
to  intimate  how  ready  he  should  be  to  repair  any  breach. 
Lord  Lyttelton  with  more  solemn  decency  had  likewise 
declared  himself  dissatisfied  with  the  measure.  In  that 
exigence  Lord  Mansfield,  called  upon  by  the  Ministers  at 
midnight,  had  devised  what  was  called  the  softening  altera- 
tion^ but  with  his  usual  mischievous  address,  for  when  he 
drew  out  the  dagger  he  inserted  a  slow  poison  in  its  room. 
Lord  Lyttelton,  the  devotee  (amidst  all  his  patriotism)  of 
that  high-priest  of  despotism,  readily  swallowed  the  potion, 
flew  with  the  cup  to  Lord  Temple,  and  for  four-and- 
twenty  hours  intoxicated  him  too.  But  whether  it  was 
that  Lord  Temple,  discovering  that  the  treacherous  remedy 
had  been  gulped  by  too  many  others,  and  that  the  totter- 
ing Ministers  would  recover  their  stability,  he  reverted  to 
his  first  opinion  ;  and  after  notifying  to  the  House  that 
the  alteration  had  been  made  in  compliment  to  his  import- 

^  He  asked  earnestly  for  an  answer  to  the  question,  "Who  are  the 
Royal  family  ?  "  proved  there  was  no  reason  for  confining  it  to  the  descendants 
of  George  II.,  since  all  the  descendants  of  Edward  III.,  of  which  there  are  a 
thousand,  were  likewise  so  ;  and  he  showed  that  the  numerous  branches  from 
even  George  II.  might  extend  so  that  half  England  might  become  wards  of 
the  Crown,  and  effectually  revive  the  grievous  and  abrogated  court  of  wards 
and  liveries.  I  think  it  was  Lord  Mansfield  who  answered  that,  should  the 
line  of  the  Princess  Sophia  fail,  the  nation  would  be  at  liberty  to  choose  a  new 
family — a  gross  mistake,  considering  how  many  lawful  Protestant  descendants 
there  are  of  George  Duke  of  Clarence,  Lady  Catherine  Grey,  etc.,  etc, 
[z-.  pp.  42,  54.] 


30         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

ance,  not  only  he,  but  Lord  Lyttelton  whom  he  dragged 
after  him,  spoke  their  dissatisfaction.  The  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond was  the  most  vigorous  of  the  opponents  and  not  to 
be  beaten  from  his  hold ;  but  the  most  interesting  object 
of  the  scene  was  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  himself,  who 
appeared  at  the  debate ;  yet  was  he,  or  those  great  Lords, 
sunk  so  low,  that,  except  the  Dukes  of  Bolton  and  Rich- 
mond, not  a  soul  spoke  to  him.  He  held  notes  in  his 
hand,  which  he  seemed  to  con  over,  as  intending  to  speak. 
The  Duke  of  Richmond  asked  him  if  his  Royal  Highness 
should  have  any  objection  to  being  named  in  the  debate  ? 
He  said,  No ;  and  added,  that  he  had  come  to  satisfy  him- 
self whether  there  was  any  intention  of  setting  aside  his 
marriage ;  if  there  were,  he  proposed  to  throw  himself  on 
the  justice  of  the  House.  Not  perceiving  there  was,  he 
asked  Richmond  if  he  had  not  better  retire,  which  the 
latter  approving,  he  went  away,  and  came  no  more  to  the 
discussion.  Lord  Rockingham  asked  if  marriages  made 
without  the  King's  consent  were  invalid.  Lord  Mansfield 
refused  to  answer ;  but  the  same  interrogatory  being  pro- 
posed the  ensuing  day  to  be  put  to  the  Judges,  the  Chief 
Justice,  though  without  assigning  any  reason,  said  it  was 
an  improper  question,  but  that  he  would  take  upon  himself 
to  declare  that  such  marriage  solemnized  before  this  bill 
should  take  place  could  not  be  abrogated.  Still  the  neces- 
sity of  the  Judges  absenting  themselves,  and  the  more 
important  necessity  of  their  having  time  to  weigh  well  so 
deep  and  extensive  a  question,  filled  the  House  with 
anxious  uncertainty — not  lessened  by  the  magisterial 
declaration  of  the  young  but  pompous  Earl  of  Suffolk, 
who,  though  so  recent  a  renegade,  took  upon  him  to  pro- 
nounce that  the  Judges  should  be  allowed  but  one,  one 
little,  day  to  form  their  opinion,  and  should  deliver  it  on 
the  Friday.  This  oracle,  of  which  that  hollow  youth  was 
but  the  inflated  spokesman,  was  maintained  by  the  rest  of 
the  Ministers  of  their  faction,  and  at  near  nine  at  night 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  31 

was  voted  by  78  Lords  to  35 — as  horrid  a  mockery  both 
of  forms  and  justice  as  ever  was  acted.  Yet  even  some 
little  rub  disquieted  the  Court ;  the  young  Lords,  less 
hackneyed  in  the  trammels  of  indiscriminate  voting,  were 
refractory.  The  Dukes  of  Buccleuch  and  Dorset  dis- 
sented, and  even  Lord  Carlisle,  son-in-law  of  Lord  Gower, 
whether  influenced  by  Charles  Fox  his  friend,  or  angry 
with  Lord  North  who  had  omitted  respect  to  him,  voted 
in  the  minority.  The  Dukes  of  Montagu^  and  Northum- 
berland,^  the  only  two  of  that  rank  of  the  present  King's 
creation,  absented  themselves,  though  the  first  a  creature, 
the  second  an  opponent  of  the  Court.  But  Northumber- 
land was  willing  to  pay  a  compliment ;  and  pleaded  the 
absence  of  Lord  Chatham,  to  whom  he  was  now  more  glad 
to  owe  an  excuse  than  an  obligation.  That  fallen  star, 
Lord  Chatham,  was  in  the  country,  ineptly  solacing  his 
disappointment,  which  he  miscalled  retirement,  by  writing 
silly  verses  to  Garrick  the  actor,  in  which  he  affected  to 
have  renounced  ambition-^-ambition  so  often  renounced 
and  so  often  resumed,  that  he  could  impose  on  nobody 
but  a  man  as  ambitious  of  fame  as  himself,  and  as  bad  a 
poet. 

I  ought  to  mention  that  even  Lord  Temple  and  the 
Rockingham  party  agreed  with  the  Court  that  some 
measure  was  requisite  to  prevent  improper  marriages  being 
formed  by  princes  too  juvenile  and  thoughtless.  But  if 
this  concession  authorised  the  King  and  his  Ministers  to 
seek  that  remedy,  impossible  perhaps  to  be  found  without 
entailing  greater  mischiefs  on  posterity,  surely  it  did  not 
justify  their  proceeding  without  deliberation,  without 
giving  the  Judges  time  to  deliberate,  though  they  had  asked 
their  opinions,  and  when  the  Ministers  themselves  could 
not  assign  a  reason  (at  least  such  as  they  could  avow) 
against  procrastination  ! 

^  This  title,  conferred  in  1766,  became  extinct  in  1790. — D. 
?  Sir  Hugh  Smithson,  grandfather  of  the  present  duke,— D, 


32         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

On  the  2jth  Sir  George  Saville  moved  for  leave  to 
bring  in  the  bill  that  he  had  moved,  and  that  had  been 
rejected  the  last  session,  for  enacting  that  expulsion  from 
the  House  of  Commons  should  not  constitute  incapacita- 
tion. This  was  to  keep  up  a  spirit  against  the  intrusion 
of  Colonel  Luttrell,  but  vi^as  quashed  with  contempt  by 
the  Administration,  and  by  a  majority  of  i8i  to  135. 

In  Ireland  the  Opposition  moved  a  resolution  that  who- 
ever had  advised  the  carrying  into  execution  the  increas- 
ing the  Commissioners  of  the  Revenue  beyond  seven,  after 
the  Resolution  of  the  House  against  it,  which  resolution 
was  subsequent  to  the  King's  letters  for  that  purpose, 
though  prior  to  the  execution,  advised  a  measure  contrary 
to  the  express  sense  of  the  House.  This  was  supported  by 
106  voices  and  opposed  by  an  equal  number,  but  was  given 
for  the  motion  by  the  Speaker's  ^  casting  vote.  This  was 
but  a  tame  measure,  after  violence  and  victory.  But  not 
only  was  the  Opposition  ill-connected,  but  afraid  of  Eng- 
land ;  or  merely  driven  to  resistance  by  Lord  Townshend's 
absurd  and  profligate  conduct.  The  moderation  of  the 
Opposition  showed  how  easily  that  country  might  be 
governed  by  prudence  and  temper — a  lesson  to  posterity, 
should  posterity  be  free,  that  not  moderation,  not  corrupt 
servility,  can  render  a  Court  temperate.  The  former  does 
not  disarm  them  ;  but  encourages  them,  as  much  as  the 
latter,  to  innovate  farther.  Hence  does  the  science  of 
Opposition,  I  mean  in  true  patriots,  in  knowing  when  to 
advance  or  recede,  require  as  great  skill  as  that  of  govern- 
ment itself  How  far  to  act  against  bad  men  is  to  good 
men  a  difficult  crisis  of  judgment  indeed ! 

It  was  now  apprehended  that  the  Judges,  for  want  of 
sufficient  time,  would  refuse  to  make  any  answer  to  the 
query  put  to  them.  The  Ministers  threatened  to  proceed 
without  their  answer  ;  and  might  in  truth,  in  point  of 
decency,  as  well  have  acted  without  their  opinion,  as  go 

1  Mr.  Perry, 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  33 

beyond  it.  But  though  those  sages  of  the  law  would  not 
go  so  far  as  Lord  Mansfield  required,  yet  he  did  prevail 
on  them  to  make  some  answer ;  and 

On  the  2%th  Baron  Smythe  declared  that  their  unani- 
mous opinion  was/  "  that  the  care  and  approbation  of  the 
marriages  of  the  King's  children  and  grandchildren,  and 
of  the  presumptive  heir  to  the  Crown  (other  than  the  issue 
of  Princesses  married  into  foreign  families),  do  belong  to 
the  Kings  of  this  realm  ;  but  to  what  other  branches  of  the 
Royal  family  such  care  and  approbation  do  extend,  we  do 
not  find  precisely  determined." 

This  response,  so  far  short  of  the  pretensions  in  the  Bill, 
gave  full  cause  to  Lord  Rockingham  and  his  friends  to  ask 
of  the  Judges,  "  To  what  other  degrees  of  kindred,  and  to 
what  ages  of  the  contracting  parties,  does  such  right  of 
approbation  extend  ?  "  But  this  question  Lord  Mansfield 
and  the  Ministers  would  not  suffer  to  be  put,  because  they 
were  aware  that  the  Judges  could  not  answer  it  in  a 
manner  to  justify  what  they  were  determined  to  enact. 
Throughout  the  whole  progress  of  the  Bill  they  would 
hear  no  reason,  they  would  lend  no  assistance  to  improve, 
explain,  or  soften  it,  they  would  admit  even  no  verbal 
alteration,  though  the  Duke  of  Richmond  the  last  day  of 
it,  to  demonstrate  their  unfairness,  reminded  them  that 
they  had  omitted  a  word  in  one  clause  which  they  had 
used  in  another,  exactly  to  the  same  tenor  and  in  the 
same  form,  and  which  Lord  Mansfield  still  would  not 
suffer  to  be  replaced :  however,  what  equity  refused,  ab- 
surdity granted.    The  Chancellor,^  in  the  most  nonsensical 

^  In  these  debates  much  reference  was  had  to  what  is  called  \hQ  grand 
opinion  of  the  Judges  in  1717,  as  complete  a  piece  of  legal  jargon  as  exists, 
and  worthy  to  be  read  for  its  extreme  absurdity  and  ridiculous  arguments. 
[On  the  occasion  here  referred  to  Baron  Price  and  Baron  Eyre  were  against 
giving  the  power  required  to  the  King,  George  I.  Lord  Chief  Justice  Parker 
was  supposed  by  his  Majesty  to  have  secured  the  majority  in  his  favour,  and 
Lord  Campbell  suggests  that  this  circumstance  may  account  for  the  elevation 
of  Parker  to  the  dignity  of  Lord  Chancellor,  and  the  title  of  Earl  of  Mac- 
clesfield.—D.] 

^  Bathurst,  Lord  Apsley. 

I.— D 


■ 


34         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

of  all  speeches,  blabbed  out,  that  one  of  the  reverend 
Judges  had  owned  to  him  that  he  believed  the  prerogative 
did  go  one  degree  farther  than  they  had  asserted  in  their 
unanimous  opinion  ;  nay,  and  that  another  Judge  had  told 
him  that  he  doubted  whether  it  did  not  go  two  or  three 
degrees  farther.  This  refutation  of  their  decision  out 
of  their  own  mouths,  and  delivered  by  the  ostensible  head 
of  the  law,  was  artfully  seized  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond, 
who  showed  the  House  how  indecent  it  was  not  to  give 
further  time  for  examination  to  the  Judges,  when  on  the 
evidence  of  the  Chancellor  they  were  still  very  much  in  the 
dark.^  Lord  Hillsborough,  a  tragic  scaramouch,  did  not 
yield  to  the  Chancellor  in  blunders,  while  Lord  Mansfield 
sat  with  every  mark  of  vexation  in  his  face  at  seeing  his 
cobwebs  brushed  away  by  the  awkwardness  of  his  own 
instruments.  Lord  Camden,  who  had  declared  he  would 
not  attend  the  Committee,  nor  meddle  with  the  botching 
of  so  bad  a  bill,  made  an  oration  that  was  allowed  to  be 
a  masterpiece  of  eloquence  and  argument,  even  by  his 
antagonists — except  in  their  votes.  Lord  Temple,  though 
less  fine,  was  not  less  strong,  and  concluded  with  saying 
that,  as  he  was  connected  with  no  man  or  men,  so  had  he 
no  enmity  even  to  the  Ministers,  for  whose  miserable 
politics  he  felt  a  good-natured  contempt.  Lowth,  Bishop 
of  Oxford,  confessed  he  could  not  reconcile  the  votes  of 
his  brethren  to  their  profession,  so  abhorrent  was  the  bill 
from  the  doctrines  of  Christianity.  His  tremor  from  dis- 
use of  speaking  made  him  deliver  what  he  said  with  a  bad 
grace.     His  old  enemy  Warburton,  as  ready  to  sacrifice 

1  It  is  very  remarkable  that,  should  the  descendants  of  the  present  King, 
of  his  brothers,  and  of  the  Princess  of  Brunswick  fail,  the  Crown  of  England 
would  descend  to  the  King  of  Denmark's  son,  before  him,  as  issue  of  the 
present  King's  sister.  It  would  then  go  to  his  (doubtful)  sister,  then  to  the 
House  of  Orange,  and  then  to  the  King  of  Denmark  himself ;  and  after  him 
and  his  issue  to  his  sister,  not  to  his  brother,  as  the  latter  is  not  born  of  the 
Princess  Louisa,  but  of  a  second  wife.  There  is  another  doubtful  princess  in 
our  Hne  of  succession,  though  farther  off;  i.e.  the  child  of  the  divorced 
Princess  of  Prussia. 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  35 

his  Christianity  to  his  interest,  as  he  had  embraced  it  for 
his  interest,  replied  to  him  in  a  style  even  ludicrous,  and 
with  so  much  indelicacy,  that  Lord  Pembroke  said  the 
Bishop  of  Gloucester  had  said  so  much  in  behalf  of  forni- 
cation, that  for  the  future  he  should  go  openly  to  a  brothel 
with  his  own  chariot  and  liveries.^  Keppel  of  Exeter 
voted  in  the  minority,  but  did  not  speak ;  he,  Lowth,  and 
Ewer  of  Bangor,  were  the  only  three  prelates  who  did  not 
abandon  all  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible  and  of  the  Church 
on  matrimony :  and  yet  Lowth  signed  no  protest ;  and 
though  Ewer  signed  one,  it  was  not  the  one  that  regarded 
the  religious  part.  Thus  v/ithin  three  weeks  were  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles  affirmed,  and  the  New  Testament 
deserted  ! 

There  was  another  incident  in  this  debate,  of  which, 
though  no  reply  was  made  to  it,  much  notice  was  taken. 
The  Duke  of  Richmond  said  that,  though  it  was  known 
that  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  was  actually  married,  and 
though  universally  believed  that  the  Duke  of  Gloucester 
was  so  too,  no  communication  of  either  match  had  been 
made  to  that  House — a  great  indecency,  considering  that, 
if  there  were  children  from  either  match,  they  might  be- 
come entitled  to  the  Crown. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond  had  asked  me  if  I  should  have 
any  objection  to  his  naming  my  niece  Lady  Waldegrave. 
I  thanked  him,  but  said  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  give 
his  Grace  any  answer,  for,  as  I  did  not  know  whether  she 
was  married  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  or  not,  I  could  not 
tell  whether  the  mention  of  her  would  serve  or  hurt  her. 
As  I  did  not  know  her  mind,  I  could  not  tell  whether  she 
would  like  to  be  mentioned  or  not :  were  she  not  married, 
and  the  mention  of  it  should  bring  that  secret  to  light,  I 
should  ruin  her  by  advising  it,  and  therefore  I  begged  to 
be  excused  from  giving  any  opinion  at  all. 

^  "  E'en  saintlike  Gadby  b ts  her  eyes,  and  swears 

Pembroke's  the  most  abandon'd  of  the  peers." — "Diaboliad." — D. 


I 


36         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

Governor  PownalP  had  come  to  me  on  the  same  occa- 
sion, and  I  had  given  him  the  same  answer.  Even  with 
General  Conway  I  would  not  talk  on  the  subject ;  I  told 
him  he  knew  how  little  fond  I  was  of  royal  families,  and 
how  little  desirous  of  being  related  to  them  ;  that  I  had 
done  all  I  could  to  break  off  my  niece's  connexion  with  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester,  and  that,  not  having  succeeded,  I  had 
determined  never  to  meddle  with  that  affair  more,  and  had 
strictly  kept  my  resolution  ;  that  I  knew,  if  he  dissented 
from  the  bill,  that  it  would  be  supposed  I  had  influenced 
him,  but,  as  I  should  declare  I  had  not,  I  would  have  it  to 
say  with  the  utmost  truth  that  I  would  not  suffer  even 
him  to  talk  to  me  on  the  subject ;  and  though,  according 
to  his  custom,  he  was  anxious  that  I  should  advise  him 
what  was  proper  for  him  to  do  with  regard  to  his  character,^ 
I  persisted  in  not  talking  to  him  on  the  subject.  All  I 
would  say,  and  which  was  not  at  all  in  character  for  me  to 
say,  was  that  I  thought  he  should  not  offend  the  King  if  he 
could  help  it.  When  I  would  not  go  into  the  Court  by 
the  straight  door,  I  was  resolved  nobody  should  even  sus- 
pect that  I  wished  to  creep  up  by  a  private  staircase. 

The  majority  was  much  increased  on  the  ^jth.  Lord 
Mansfield  had  told  the  King  that  his  Ministers  were 
divided  (in  truth  they  were  in  their  hearts  unanimous 
against  the  bill),  and  that  he  must  oblige  them  to  support 
it  heartily,  or  change  his  Administration.  The  advice  was 
taken  and  succeeded.  The  King  grew  dictatorial,  and  all 
his  creatures  kissed  the  earth.  It  was  given  out  that  he 
would  take  a  dissent  on  this  bill  as  a  personal  affront — 
adieu !    qualms,  fears,  and  care  of  posterity !     Zeal,  and 

^  He  had  married  Lady  Fawkner,  sister  of  my  brother-in-law  Mr. 
Churchill.  Lady  Fawkner  was  a  very  intriguing  woman,  and  intimate  both 
with  Lady  Waldegrave  and  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland.  [She  was  natural 
daughter  of  General  Charles  Churchill,  brother  of  "the  great"  Duke  of 
Marlborough,  married  first  Sir  Everard  Fawkener,  secondly  Governor 
Thomas  Pownall. — A.  F.  S.] 

"^  I  say  this  to  his  praise,  nor  did  I  ever  give  him  any  advice  that  was  not 
strictly  honourable  for  him. 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  37 

money,  and  influence  of  all  sorts  went  to  work,  and  the 
consequence  was  a  division  against  Lord  Rockingham's 
questions  of  90  to  32.  Lord  Carlisle  voted  against  the 
individual  question  that  he  had  voted  for  two  days  before. 
To  complete  his  folly,  the  next  time  he  did  not  vote  at  all. 
I  shall  say  nothing  of  the  bill  in  the  Committee,  as  I  have 
comprehended  part  of  what  was  said  that  day  in  the 
account  of  the  preceding  debate,  and  because,  though  many 
alterations  were  proposed,  not  one  was  admitted. 


[March 


MARCH 

ON  the  third  reading^  Lord  Lyttelton  put  home 
to  the  bishops  their  renegade  behaviour,  which 
was  defended  on  mere  poHtical  principles  by 
the  Archbishop  of  York^  ^nd  the  Bishops  of 
St.  Asaph^  and  Lincoln.*  I  approve  bishops  that  are 
good  citizens ;  but  if  the  duty  of  a  citizen  clashes  with 
that  of  a  pastor,  and  he  prefers  the  former,  I  know  what 
to  think  of  his  Christianity.  In  the  present  case  I  am 
certain  that  the  Bench  made  a  compliment  of  their  reli- 
gion to  their  King,  not  a  sacrifice  of  it  to  their  country, 
whose  future  peace  their  votes  may  dreadfully  have 
hazarded.  Those  fathers  of  the  Church  were  hampered 
by  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  who  quoted  a  case^  that  hap- 
pened in  the  reign  of  Henry  VI.,  when,  a  law  being 
passed  to  forbid  the  remarriage  of  a  Queen  Dowager,  the 
whole  Bench  of  Bishops  refused  to  join  in  it.  After  two 
more  divisions  the  bill  was  passed  at  night  and  sent  to 
the  Commons. 

A  protest  of  great  strength  and  weight,  admirably 
drawn  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Edmund  Burke, 
was  signed  by  fourteen  of  the  dissenting  Peers ;  another, 
more  confined  to  the  argument  of  religion,  was  signed  by 

^  March  3rd. 

^  Dr.  Hay  Drummond. 

^  Dr.  Barrington,  brother  of  Lord  Barrington,  Secretary  at  War. 

^  Dr.  Greene. 

^  This  case  was  discovered  in  Rymer's  Foedera,  by  the  Comte  de  Lauragais, 
son  of  the  Duke  de  Brancas.  Lauragais,  a  wild  dissokite  man,  of  a  head  not 
very  sound,  but  of  some  parts,  had  come  to  England  to  publish  a  book  against 
the  new  despotism  in  France,  for  which  his  estate  had  been  forfeited,  and 
whither  he  did  not  dare  to  return. 

38 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  39 

Lord  Temple,  Lord    Lyttelton,  and   four  more ;   and   a 
short  one  by  the  Lord  Radnor  alone.^^ 

On  the  same  3rd  of  March,  on  the  occasion  given  by 
Dr.  Nowel's  insolent  sermon,  Mr.  Frederick  Montague 
moved  the  House  of  Commons  for  leave  to  bring  in  a  bill 
for  laying  aside  the  observance  of  the  30th  of  January. 
He  protested  against  any  idea  of  his  designing  an  attack 
on  the  Church.  He  revered  the  Church,  he  said  ;  not, 
indeed,  that  high-flying  Church  under  Bancroft  and  Laud, 
but  the  mild  Church  under  Tillotson.  It  was  out  of  re- 
spect that  he  made  the  motion.  It  was  a  great  oppres- 
sion on  the  clergy  to  be  obliged  to  read  the  service  of  that 
day,  which  Bishop  Burnet  said  was  drawn  up  by  Bancroft ; 
and,  as  others  said,  had  been  enlarged  by  Father  Petre, 
and  was  full  of  impiety,  containing  throughout  a  parallel 
between  Jesus  Christ  and  Charles  I.  Should  that  service 
not  be  abrogated  now,  while  Dr.  Nowel's  sermon  was  ring- 
ing in  their  ears,  he  could  never  hope  to  see  it  repealed, 
nor  would  ever  repeat  his  motion.  The  nation  might 
as  well  be  concerned  for  Richard  II.  as  for  Charles  I. 
He  was  seconded  by  Mr.  Hipsley  Cox,  a  young  man 
of  very  quick  parts ;  and  answered  in  a  long,  absurd 
rhapsody,  stuffed  with  all  the  prejudices  of  clergy  and 
old  women,  by  Sir  Roger  Newdigate,  who  also,  in  Dr. 
Nowel's  name,  disclaimed  any  design  of  offence  in  his 
offensive  sermon.  T.  Townshend  said,  Henry  IV.  of 
France  was  not  made  a  saint,  and  yet  was  so  excel- 
lent a  prince  that  it  would  be  a  disgrace  to  compare 
Charles  I.  with  him.  Judge  Jefferies  deserved  as  much 
to  be  mourned  for.     Fox^  spoke  against  innovation,  and, 

^  The  silly  conduct  of  the  Rockingham  party  appeared  now  in  a  new 
instance.  Instead  of  consulting  Lord  Camden,  or  asking  him,  as  the  head  of 
the  law  on  their  side,  to  draw  their  protest,  they  only  sent  it  to  him  indecently, 
at  seven  o'clock  of  the  very  morning  on  which  it  was  to  be  signed.  As  they 
might  well  have  expected,  he  returned  it  unsigned. 

2  This  was  Stephen  Fox,  who  further  said  that  he  saw  no  harm  in  the 
observance  of  the  30th  of  January,  except  that  it  compelled  the  Speaker  to 
go  to  church  once  a  year.     Sir  Thomas  Cave  ended  a  few  observations  by 


40     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

being  of  enormous  fatness,  said,  with  humour,  that  nobody 
would  believe  he  had  ever  fasted  on  the  30th  of  January. 
He  and  all  the  other  spurious  descendants^  of  Charles, 
except  Admiral  Keppel,  now  supported  the  memory  of 
their  patriarch,  and  the  Court^  under  Lord  North  taking 
up  the  cause,  the  motion  was  rejected  by  125  to  97 ;  even 
General  Conway,  from  too  timid  candour  and  that  plau- 
sible argument  of  avoiding  disputes,  the  palladium  of  all 
established  nonsense,  voting  in  the  majority. 

On  the  4.th,  the  Marriage  Bill  being  delivered  to  the 
House  of  Commons,  Mr.  Seymour  and  Mr.  Cornwall 
moved  to  have  it  printed,  which  was  refused  by  a  majority 
of  193  to  109.  Lord  North,  however,  by  no  means  equally 
fond  of  the  bill  with  Lord  Mansfield,  nor  so  impetuous  to 
dispute  it,  agreed  to  a  Committee  for  searching  the 
Journals  of  the  Lords ;  and  consented  to  the  debate  being 
postponed  to  Monday  gth. 

The  same  day  Sawbridge's  motion  for  Triennial  Parlia- 
ments was  treated  with  great  slight,  and  rejected  by  251 
to  83. 

recounting  a  visit  of  Queen  Caroline  to  the  pictures  of  the  sovereigns  of  Eng- 
land, painted  by  Richardson.  Observing  the  portrait  of  a  plain-looking 
individual  between  Charles  I.  and  Charles  II.,  she  asked  the  painter  if  he 
called  that  personage  a  king.  "No,  madam,"  answered  Richardson,  "he 
is  no  king  ;  but  it  is  good  for  kings  to  have  him  among  them  as  a  memento." 
In  connexion  with  this  subject  I  may  add  that  in  1733,  from  the  23rd  to  the 
30th  of  January,  there  raged  in  the  metropolis  the  "London  headache  and 
fever,"  which  were  extensively  fatal,  more  than  1500  persons  dying  therefrom 
in  the  capital.  Some  chroniclers  of  the  fact,  remembering  that  in  1649  Charles 
denied  the  jurisdiction  of  his  judges  on  the  23rd  of  the  above  month,  and  that 
he  suffered  death  on  the  30th,  have  suggested,  not  without  a  little  hesitation 
indeed,  that  the  destructiveness  and  duration  of  the  malady  might  be  an  assur- 
ance to  royalists  that  London  had  not  then  expiated  the  murder  or  martyr- 
dom which  had  taken  place  at  Whitehall  more  than  fourscore  years  before. — D. 

"^  One  of  Lord  Bute's  sons,  and  another  Stuart,  probably  for  a  little  popu- 
larity with  the  Whigs,  voted  against  the  fast ;  but  it  was  well  said  by  a 
Whig,  that  they  did  so  because  the  Pretender  had  scratched  the  name  of 
Charles  I.  as  a  heretic  out  of  his  proclamation. 

^  It  is  remarkable  that  the  present  King  had  never  from  the  beginning  of 

his  reign  gone  to  church  on  the  30th  of  January,  whereas  George  II.  always 

,  did,  wore  mourning  on  that  day,  and  everybody  went  to  Court  in  mourning. 

His  sister,  the  Queen  of  Prussia,  as  is  more  natural  for  all  princes  who  do  not 

personally  profit  by  the  ruin  of  the  Stuarts,  was  a  declared  Jacobite. 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  41 

While  these  things  were  in  agitation,  the  situation  of 
the  Queen  of  Denmark  and  her  favourite  grew  worse. 
Rantzau,  and  two  other  noblemen,  heads  of  the  conspiracy, 
governed  the  King  despotically,  and  never  suffered  him  to 
be  out  of  their  sight,  Rantzau  even  lying  in  his  chamber. 
Of  his  son  no  notice  was  taken  or  mention  made.  The 
Court  of  England  knew,  or  at  least  said,  very  little  of 
what  was  passing  there,  except  that  the  Queen  was  to  be 
sent  to  Norway.  King  George,  however,  to  mark  his  re- 
sentment of  the  treatment  of  his  sister  and  brother-in-law, 
and  his  approbation  of  Mr.  Keith's  spirit  in  her  behalf, 
sent  him  the  Order  of  the  Bath,  with  a  positive  command 
to  put  it  on  immediately  himself,  since  there  was  no  sovereign 
in  Denmark  to  invest  him  with  it.  It  might  be  justified  to 
send  this  riband,  though  none  was  vacant ;  but  it  was  not 
very  wise  to  mark  anger  when  it  was  not  safe  to  do  more. 
When  there  was  so  little  spirit  in  our  councils,  the  Danes, 
who  had  trampled  on  their  own  King,  were  not  likely  to 
tremble  at  Mr.  Keith's  red  riband. 

<^th.  The  Royal  Marriage  Bill  was  to  be  read  the 
second  time  by  the  Commons,  but  Dowdswell,  to  prevent 
the  reading,  went  into  a  strong  confutation  of  the  asser- 
tion in  the  King's  message,  that  to  the  Crown  had  al- 
ways belonged  the  care  and  approbation  of  marriages  in 
the  Royal  Family,  which  he  proved  to  be  a  falsehood,  even 
by  the  recent  opinion  given  by  the  Judges  in  the  other 
House.  The  Crown  could  have  had  no  such  right,  because 
the  law  gave  no  remedy  ;  and  remedy  there  must  be  if 
there  is  law.  The  Star  Chamber  was  all  the  remedy  ! 
The  Crown  has  no  legal  prerogative  that  cannot  be  brought 
into  Westminster  Hall.  The  bill  would  tend  to  extermi- 
nate the  House  of  Hanover.  He  moved  a  Resolution  that 
the  assertion  was  unfounded  in  any  law,  and  unwarranted 
by  the  opinion  of  any  of  the  Judges  of  England.  Mr. 
Seymour  seconded  the  motion,  with  bitter  reflections  on 
the  bill,  which  he  said  he  heard  came  from  the  Lord  Chief 


42     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

Justice:^  he  read  several  cases,  in  particular  the  opinion 
of  thQ  Bishops  that  the  Duke  of  York's  was  a  valid  marriage. 
Mr.  Herbert  was  for  reading  the  bill,  though  he  declared 
strongly  against  the  doctrines  in  it,  which  he  said  only 
tended  to  oppress  such  great  families  as  should  happen  to 
marry  with  the  blood  royal.  T.  Pitt  spoke  well  against 
the  bill,  which  he  said  ought  to  be  intituled  an  Act  declar- 
atory of  obsolete  and  dangerous  laws.  Mr.  Cornwall  went 
farther,  and  wished  to  know  who  had  advised  the  bill. 
Wedderburn,  the  Solicitor-General,  spoke  with  infinite 
applause  in  favour  of  the  bill.  The  most  remarkable  part 
of  his  speech  was,  that  he  restricted  the  Royal  Family  to 
the  Settlement  by  King  William,^  and  would  not  allow 
that  any  descendant  of  Edward  HL  could  claim  the 
Crown  on  failure  of  that  Settlement — a  strange  proposition  ! 
Dunning  answered  him  in  a  speech  that  lasted  above  two 
hours,  but  was  tedious  and  disgusting.  Charles  Fox  (who 
it  was  believed  had  already  made  his  peace,  that  is,  his 
bargain)  was  not  only  very  temperate,  but  profuse  of 
incense  to  Lord  North  on  the  stand  he  had  made  against 
Opposition,  and  of  his  grief  for  differing  with  him.  One 
sage  observation  he  made  :  it  had  been  urged  and  cases 
had  been  quoted  of  persons  fined  for  being  concerned  in 
Royal  matches;  he  said,  there  ought  to  be  a  bill  of 
indemnity,  as  it  was  known  there  were  great  persons  in 
the  predicament.  Lord  North  was  not  ungrateful,  but 
returned  Fox's  flattery  with  interest,  and  not  without 
ridicule  for  its  being  so  exaggerated,  and  for  its  being  proof 
of  his  fear.  Burke  spoke  with  much  wit,  and  laughed  at 
the  grand  opinion  in  Fortescue's  Reports.  History  was  not 
law  ;  and  the  arguments  used  on  this  occasion  were  the 
same  that  had  been  employed  to  defend  ship-money  and 
the  dispensing  power.     General  Conway  disapproved  the 

^  Mansfield. 

^  Walpole  forgot  that  further  back  than  descendants  of  the  Stuarts  the  royal 
lines  of  England  and  Scotland  would  diverge.     See  note  p.  29, — A.  F.  S. 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  43 

motion,  yet  owned  he  thought  the  Crown  claimed  more 
than  it  was  entitled  to.  He  lamented  his  doubts,  feared 
he  must  express  them  in  the  Committee,  wished  to  combine 
his  affection  for  the  King  with  his  free  opinion,  was  a 
friend  to  the  principle  of  the  bill  and  to  the  minutest  wish 
of  the  Crown.  At  one  in  the  morning  the  House  divided 
on  the  orders  of  the  day,  when  it  was  carried  for  the 
second  reading  of  the  bill  by  268  to  140.  Lord  Irnham,^ 
his  son  the  Colonel,  and  another  Luttrell,  voted  with  the 
Opposition  ;  who  moved  to  adjourn,  but  it  was  carried  to 
proceed  to  the  reading.  After  the  last  division  Colonel 
Barre  said  the  Ministers  had  been  holding  a  bed  of  justice 
to  register  an  edict,  instead  of  meeting  an  English  parlia- 
ment ;  but  he  would  leave  the  House  when  prerogative 
stalked  at  that  dead  hour  of  the  night.  Lord  North  was 
questioned  and  forced  to  explain  away  a  daring  expression, 
that  the  King  would  approve  of  the  conduct  of  those  who 
did  not  use  an  improper  violence. 

On  the  wth,  when  the  House  should  have  gone  into 
the  Committee  on  the  bill,  the  affair  took  a  new  turn.  It 
appeared  that  there  were  three  distinct  bodies :  the  first 
were  totally  against  the  principle  of  the  bill ;  these  were 
Sir  William  Meredith,  the  leader  of  a  very  small  squadron, 
and  supposed,  by  the  Rockingham  party,  to  lean  to  the 
Court ;  to  them  were  joined  the  Shelburne  faction,  and, 
on  this  occasion,  the  Foxes.  The  second  division  were 
for  going  into  the  Committee  in  order  to  mend  the  bill, 
thinking  some  restraint  necessary,  yet  enemies  to  the  bill 
unless  corrected.  The  third  troop  was  the  Ministerial 
squadron,  who  desired  to  send  the  bill  to  the  Committee 
for  form,  but  void  of  any  intention  of  altering  it,  though 
they  disavowed  that  intention.      Stephen  Fox,  in  patriot 

^  Simon  Luttrell,  Lord  Irnham,  father  of  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland. 
[Of  his  birth  Lady  Mary  Coke  wrote  that  Lady  Bute  told  her  he  '*  was  a  natural 
son  of  a  Col.  Lutteral  assassinated  in  Ireland,  and  just  before  he  dyed,  he 
married  his  mother.  This  is  no  very  honourable  descent,  tho'  to  be  sure 
much  better  than  the  other,"  i.e.  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester. — A.  F.  S.] 


44     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

terms,  complained  of  the  enormity  of  recurring  to  history 
for  precedents ;  Stanley  fetched  precedents  from  Vienna, 
Berlin,  Turin,  and  every  arbitrary  court,  yet  he  lamented 
the  unlimited  flight  of  the  bill,  and  yet  approved  even  that, 
since  he  could  not  devise  a  better  method.  Captain  Phipps 
more  shrewdly  observed  that  the  Parliament  was  so  flat- 
tering to  the  Royal  Family,  that  it  was  giving  leave  to  the 
Princes  of  the  Blood  to  lie  with  our  wives^  and  forbidding 
them  to  marry  our  daughters}  The  very  draught  of  the 
bill  showed  the  hand  of  one  ^  wedded  to  tyranny,  and  the 
fruit  tasted  of  the  tree  of  prerogative.  When  the  bill 
should  be  passed  the  author  of  it  would  lay  himself  down 
with  the  pleasing  idea  of  the  tyranny  he  had  inflicted  on 
this  country.  Mr.  Herbert  said  the  bill  ought  to  be 
intituled  An  Act  to  encourage  Adultery  and  Fornication. 
Colonel  Barre  asked  directly  if  more  was  intended,  and 
whether  it  was  meant  to  attack  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's 
marriage?  And  let  not,  said  he,  that  other  marriage^ 
be  a  doubt.  Did  they  mean  to  bastardize  the  children  of 
those  two  princes?  It  had  taken  eighty  or  ninety  years 
to  quiet  the  parties  raised  by  the  Act  of  Settlement — was 
another  Act  of  Settlement  to  be  made  now?  He  said 
Lord  North  was  the  honestest  and  justest  man  in  the 
administration,  which  yet  was  no  compliment,  nor  did  he 
pretend  to  mean  one ;  for  the  majority,  it  would  be  exactly 
the  same  whoever  should  succeed  him.     When  the  King's 

^  There  could  not  be  greater  servility  in  a  free  nobility  and  gentry  *  than  to 
fetch  a  little  family  from  Germany,  and  indulge  them  in  the  scorn  they  had  for 
marrying  into  our  families.  The  House  of  Hanover  was  descended  from  a 
low  Frenchwoman,  one  Mile.  d'Olbreuse,  maid  of  honour  to  a  Duchess  of 
Zell,  and  then  left-handed  wife  to  a  Duke  of  Zell,  father  of  the  wife  of  King 
George  I.  The  Queen  was  daughter  of  a  younger  branch  of  the  insignificant 
House  of  Mecklenburg.  [Walpole  forgot  that  it  was  one  of  the  oldest  in 
Europe.— A.  F.  S.] 

^  Lord  Mansfield.  ^  The  Duke  of  Gloucester's. 

_  *  When  Louis  XIV.  broke  off  the  match  of  Mademoiselle  with  Lausun,  and  ordered  his 
Ministers  at  foreign  Courts  to  declare  he  scorned  such  an  alliance,  his  nobility,  slaves  as 
they  are,  represented  to  him  the  disgrace  he  inflicted  on  them,  whose  families  had  so  often 
had  the  honour  of  matching  with  the  House  of  Bourbon.  Plantagenets,  Tudors,  and 
Stuarts  matched  with  the  nobility.  The  House  of  Hanover,  though  at  best  descended  from 
the  little  family  of  Este  in  Italy,  scorned  it. 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  45 

children  should  be  grown  up,  what  were  they  to  do  ?  All 
women  would  avoid  them.  They  would  have  no  paddock 
of  their  own  ;  they  would,  indeed,  have  a  right  of  com- 
mon. Would  Lord  North  like  to  be  a  prince  of  the 
blood  ?  "  Or  you,  Sir,"  said  he  to  the  Speaker,  "  should  you 
have  a  handsome  wife,  should  she  grant  the  favour  to  a 
prince,  and  you  should  demand  damages  of  a  jury,  would  not 
they  laugh  in  your  face,  and  ask  why  you  had  tied  up  the 
princes  from  marrying?"  Charles  Fox  was  so  inoffensive 
that,as  Burke  said  afterwards,  the  dissent  of  some  gentlemen 
was  the  opposition  of  half  an  hour.  Lord  George  Germaine 
said,  things  wore  a  bad  aspect  when  it  was  necessary  to  revive 
prerogative :  it  was  drawing  in  Parliament  to  give  a  right 
that  had  never  existed.  It  was  right  to  send  the  bill  to 
the  Committee,  as  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  declare  that 
it  was  no  ex-post-facto  law.  Lord  Folkstone,^  mentioning  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland's  marriage,  added,  "  Report  says  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester  is  married  still  more  exceptionably 
in  point  of  birth.^  Had  the  Ministers  been  impartial, 
they  would  have  brought  in  the  bill  when  that  match  was 
made."  Lord  North  said  the  bill  would  prevent,  not 
punish,  improper  marriages.  Sir  W.  Meredith  said  Lord 
Hardwicke's  bill  had  given  rise  to  the  doctrine  of  marriage 
being  only  a  civil  contract.  It  had  lessened  the  sacred- 
ness  of  the  tie,  and  given  a  loose  to  divorces ;  there  were 
fifty  bills  of  divorce  then  actually  before  the  House.  For 
the  persons  who  were  against  the  principle  of  the  bill 
and  yet  for  carrying  it  to  the  Committee,  they  were  like 
a  man  who  takes  a  common  prostitute  to  his  arms  and 
then  marries  in  hopes  of  reclaiming  her.  Burke  took  up 
this  expression  very  warmly,  and  ridiculed  Sir  William 
with  much  wit.  The  gentleman,  he  said,  had  got  on  a 
high  prancing  horse,  but  it  was  not  well  in  him  to  be- 
spatter others  as  they  passed  by  on  foot ;  that  he  himself 

^  Son  of  the  Earl  of  Radnor. 

2  Lady  Waldegrave  was  a  natural  daughter. 


46     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

was  married  and  had  been  seven  years  in  Opposition, 
and  that,  as  he  thought  he  could  hold  it,  it  was  proper 
for  him  to  go  on ;  and  therefore,  if  he  did  not  go  as  fast 
as  was  wished  by  that  gentleman,  who  had  only  a  step  or 
two  to  go,  it  was  because  he  had  farther  to  go.  At  past 
one  in  the  morning  the  House  divided,  and,  by  the  jarring 
of  the  Opposition,  the  Ministers  carried  it  by  300  to  64 
to  go  into  the  Committee  on  the  13th ;  Dowdswell,  Burke, 
the  Cavendishes,  T.  Pitt,  T.  Townshend,  Lord  George 
Germaine,  and  most  of  the  Rockinghams  voting  with  the 
Ministry;  Sir  George  Saville  with  the  minority.  This 
new  disagreement  in  the  Opposition  was  the  first  fruit 
of  their  revival.  As  the  Court  paid  men  for  their  opinion, 
that  party  had  but  one  opinion ;  the  unpaid,  as  was 
natural,  had  twenty. 

On  the  13th,  the  House  being  resolved  into  a  Com- 
mittee on  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill,  the  Rockingham  party 
desired  to  begin  with  the  preamble,  which  it  is  generally 
the  custom  to  postpone  till  the  clauses  of  a  bill  are  settled. 
Lord  North  declared  it  was  indifferent  to  him  which 
method  was  preferred.  General  Conway  objected  to  the 
preamble  being  read,  and  said  the  clauses  ought  to  stand 
on  their  own  merit,  not  depend  on  the  introduction,  and 
that,  as  the  House  was  likely  to  hear  a  great  deal  in  the 
course  of  the  bill,  he  hoped  they  should  not  hear  it 
oftener  than  was  necessary.  For  this  part,  he  should 
neither  be  captivated  by  history  nor  poetry.  Charles  Fox 
observed  that  he  was  not  surprised  that  the  (Rocking- 
ham) gentlemen  were  for  going  into  the  preamble,  as  they 
did  not  know  how  to  attain  their  ends,  and  always 
defeated  their  own  purposes.  The  House  was  not  in- 
clined to  divide  about  the  preamble,  but  Rigby,  eager  to 
get  Conway,  whom  he  hated,  into  a  minority,  drove  on 
a  division,  and,  the  Rockinghams  voting  with  the  Court, 
there  were  but  68  for  postponing  the  preamble,  and  203 
for  reading  it  then.     This  prelude  was  of  no  consequence. 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  47 

and  only  gave  the  Court  false  hopes  that  the  rupture  in 
the  Opposition  would  continue  favourable  to  them  ;  but 
things  soon  wore  another  aspect.  The  arrogance  with 
which  the  Ministerial  party  set  up  prerogative,  the  total 
want  of  argument  to  support  those  pretensions,  the 
opinion  of  the  Judges,  which  fell  so  far  short  of  what  was 
claimed,  the  injustice  of  the  bill,  the  indefinite  extent  of 
it,  and  the  civil  wars  which  it  might  occasion,  had  made 
deep  impressions  on  several  members,  who  were  even 
zealous  courtiers.  And  though  the  nature  of  the  bill 
could  not  affect  the  people  but  collaterally  or  in  remote 
degrees,  and  though  the  inactivity  of  the  Opposition  had 
neglected  to  inform  the  nation  of  the  dangerous  tendency 
of  the  bill  in  various  lights,  still  was  this  House  of 
Commons,  as  I  have  observed  on  several  occasions, 
possessed  of  so  many  conscientious  men,  that  the  Crown 
found  reason  to  perceive  that  the  constitution  was  not 
totally  at  its  mercy,  nor  could  be  destroyed  without  a 
struggle. 

The  preamble  was  no  sooner  read^  than  Mr.  Dowdswell 
moved  to  leave  out  the  words  "  and  therefore  the  kings  of 
this  realm  have  been  intrusted  with  the  care  thereof''  This 
occasioned  a  very  serious  and  fine  debate  till  near  midnight, 
five-and-twenty  persons  speaking  either  on  the  one  side  or 
the  other,  with  great  disadvantage  on  the  side  of  the  Court 
— Sir  Fletcher  Norton  as  a  friend,  and  General  Conway  as 
an  enemy  to  the  bill,  contributing  most  to  the  detriment  of 
the  King's  cause.  Sir  Fletcher,  insidiously  towards  Lord 
Mansfield,  said,  if  the  prerogative  asserted  was  false,  the 
word  had  no  business  in  the  preamble ;  if  true,  the  words 
should  be  handed  down  to  posterity.  It  was  a  bold  asser- 
tion of  a  bold  prerogative  ;  it  was  a  commendable  warmth 
with  which  gentlemen  had  disputed  the  King's  right.  He 
would  not  militate  with  every  gentleman's  opinion  ;  he 

^  A  Mr.  Baker  first  proposed  an  immaterial  alteration,  which  was  rejected 
by  169  to  58. 


48     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

would  speak  his  own  frankly.  The  term  Royal  Family 
ought  to  be  first  settled.  If  he  saw  the  Royal  Family  so 
extensive  as  some  did,  he  should  be  against  the  bill ;  but 
there  was  nothing  to  fear  from  prerogative.  If  he  should 
be  asked  if  he  could  draw  the  line,  he  would  say  it  should 
not  be  drawn  :  he  would  go  farther — it  could  not  be 
drawn.  It  was  a  matter  that  behoved  the  State  to  regu- 
late, and  right  that  it  should  be  done.  The  opinion  of  the 
Judges  in  17 17  remained  upon  the  books  of  the  Privy 
Council.  Was  there  any  opinion  or  any  determination  of 
any  Judges  to  the  contrary  of  what  was  contended  for? 
He  believed,  if  the  nine  Judges  who  had  now  given  their 
opinions  had  had  more  time  allowed  to  them,  they  would 
have  carried  their  opinions  farther  than  the  Judges  did  in 
1 717,  for  these  have  gone  to  the  presumptive  heir.  He 
should  fix  his  opinion  on  that  of  the  Judges.  Whoever, 
that  was  not  bred  to  the  profession,  should  read  law  books, 
would  only  find  it  lumber  in  his  head.  Very  often  gentle- 
men of  the  law  have  not  time  to  read  on  the  subject  on 
which  they  were  to  debate.  He  would  tell  the  House 
what  constituted  the  presumptive  heir  to  the  Crown  :  the 
presumptive  heir  might  be  ten  degrees  off;  it  was  propin- 
quity, it  was  proximity  to  the  Crown,  that  induces  the 
necessity  of  the  case.  What  is  propinquity  ?  He  would 
not  tell  there  ;  he  could  tell  any  gentleman  at  his  chambers. 
He  begged  leave  to  mention  an  ingenious  book,  called  a 
"Treatise  on  Collateral  Consanguinity:"  he  would  not 
enter  into  the  policy  of  this  or  of  the  Marriage  Act ;  but 
in  the  Marriage  Act  princes  are  excepted  by  the  term 
Royal  Family.  He  dropped  an  obscure  hint,  as  if  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland's  marriage  had  not  been  properly 
solemnized.  The  Royal  Family,  he  said,  had  been  settled 
by  the  Act  of  Precedence  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne, — 
The  Attorney-General  and  Morton  disagreed  with  him  and 
with  each  other,  and  Norton's  absurd  speech  was  deservedly 
turned  into  great  ridicule.     Mr.  Cornwall  said  he  had  led 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  49 

them  in  a  circle  and  left  them  just  where  he  set  out.  Who 
could  tell  where  the  numerical  circle  ended,  and  where 
began  that  which  the  gentleman  had  drawn  ?^  For  him- 
self, he  would  say,  in  answer  to  the  pride  with  which  this 
bill  had  been  planned,  if  the  proudest  Duke's  daughter 
was  a  fit  alliance  for  the  Royal  Family,  so  was  the  daughter 
of  a  private  gentleman  :  he  knew  of  no  other  qualification 
than  a  good  character. 

Mr.  Sutton,  Under-Secretary  to  Lord  Rochford,  a  young 
man  of  parts,  who  had  been  bred  a  lawyer  and  was  a  great 
master  of  modern  languages,  and  of  a  very  singular  turn, 
often,  though  in  office,  speaking  against  the  Court,  and 
never  speaking  for  them  when  he  voted  for  them  (but  too 
necessary  to  be  dismissed),  fell  likewise  severely  on  the 
Speaker's  juggling  oration.  Such  doctrines  as  Sir  Fletcher's, 
he  said,  were  dangerous  to  the  subject,  that  a  prince  of  the 
blood,  not  being  within  the  line,  might  marry  his  servant- 
maid,  and  afterwards  by  deaths  might  come  within  the  line 
by  proximity  and  propinquity  to  the  Crown,  the  marriage 
might  be  annulled  and  the  children  bastardized.  He  assured 
the  House  that  it  was  Sir  Fletcher's  speech  that  had  deter- 
mined him  to  vote  against  the  preamble.  Edmund  Burke 
said  he  was  rejoiced  to  hear  the  law  as  it  had  been  stated 
by  the  Speaker :  hitherto  it  had  been  locked  up  in  the 
strong  box  of  the  Chair  of  that  House,  but  it  was  now  let 
loose  that  men  and  dogs  might  drink  at  the  fountain  till 
they  burst.  The  preamble  vitiated  both  the  present  Act 
and  the  Marriage  Bill ;  but  he  was  struck  with  horror 
because  there  might  be  a  doubt  on  the  past  marriage  (of 
the  Duke  of  Cumberland).  He  feared  there  was  a  little 
of  the  politician  mixed  with  the  lawyer  in  Sir  Fletcher's 
speech ;  "  but  consider,  Sir,"  said  he,  addressing  himself 
to   Norton,    "  this  bill  will   operate   when   you    shall   be 

^  Norton  rose  to  explain  himself  afterwards,  as  to  the  hint  at  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland's  match,  saying,  that  "if  it  was  good,  it  would  be  good  to  the 
end  of  the  world."  The  line  of  consanguinity,  he  still  insisted,  could  not  be 
drawn. 

h—E, 


50     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

enjoying  in  another  world  the  rewards  of  a  life  well  spent 
in  this " — a  bitter  sarcasm,  much  tasted  by  the  House. 
Thurlow,  Attorney-General,  asked  if  there  was  a  doubt 
whether  the  prerogative  existed  ?  If  the  Act  did  not  pass, 
the  Royal  Family  would  be  surprised  into  marriages  that 
would  be  a  stain  to  them  and  a  disgrace  to  the  country. 
The  word  prerogative  he  found  was  understood  as  if  it 
meant  fire  and  sword.  A  prerogative-man  was  as  necessary 
as  a  justice  of  peace  :  the  bill  could  not  affect  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland's  marriage  in  the  least.  Sir  W.  Meredith  said, 
that,  though  the  validity  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's 
match  seemed  to  be  allowed  at  present,  would  not  any 
Judge  hereafter  conclude  that  that  match  had  been  the 
object  of  this  bill  ?  He  censured  in  strong  terms  the  clause 
of  praemunire,  which  is  the  loss  of  all  a  man  has  in  the 
world,  and  perpetual  imprisonment.  Mr.  Graves  observed 
how  extraordinary  it  was  that  not  a  single  book  written  on 
prerogative  has  ever  mentioned  this  pretended  right  over 
Royal  Marriages.  Addresses  proved  nothing ;  ^  they  are 
always  consonant  to  the  temper  of  the  times.  He  did  not 
believe  his  Majesty  was  informed  of  the  extent  of  the  bill. 
John  Crauford,  an  amiable  young  Scot,  said  he  believed 
gentlemen  disliked  the  preamble  because  they  thought  it 
an  old  prerogative  converted  into  a  new  law.  He  thanked 
the  gentleman  for  explaining  marriage  ;  for  his  part,  he  had 
ever  thought  it  a  cruel  encroachment  on  the  rights  of 
mankind.  The  bill  he  believed  was  capable  of  being  made 
better ;  but  he  would  not  obstruct  it  because  he  could  not 
get  through  all  the  niceties.  Morton  (though  a  Court  Tory) 
said  he  totally  differed  with  Sir  Fletcher  Norton  that  a 
prosecution  had  ever  been  commenced  against  any  person 
of  the  Royal  Family  for  marrying  without  the  consent  of 
the  Crown  :  he  defied  him  to  show  that  it  was  punishable 

^  This  alluded  to  an  argument  used  by  the  Court,  that  the  House  of  Com- 
rnons  addressed  Charles  II.  to  hinder  the  Duke  of  York's  marriage  with 
the  Princess  of  Modena. 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  51 

by  the  laws  of  the  land.  It  was  called  the  law  of  the 
Crown,  not  prerogative.  Sir  Fletcher  said  he  had  been 
misrepresented — that  he  had  not  a  particle  of  doubt  existing 
on  the  validity  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's  marriage. 

Sawbridge  stated  a  case  that  made  much  impression  : 
had  this  bill  existed  in  King  Williams  tiine,  he  might  have 
prevented  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  from  marrying,  and  intro- 
duced his  own  family.  Lord  North  said  but  little ;  that 
the  right  had  been  proved  by  records  under  the  great  seal, 
and  that  the  bill  was  the  reverse  of  a  Prerogative  Bill ; 
the  preamble  was  built  in  the  prerogative  it  enjoys.  Charles 
Fox  made  a  greater  figure  than  ever,  chiefly  at  the  expense 
of  Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  whose  dreaded  abilities  he  held  in 
contempt ;  but  he  first  blamed  Lord  North  for  having  said 
indiscreetly  on  the  preceding  day  that  there  were  300 
members  to  64  who  had  declared  the  bill  to  be  agreeable 
to  law,  yet  many  of  the  300  had  entered  their  protest 
against  being  included  in  that  opinion.  He  himself  had 
ever  thought  the  bill  odious;  he  thought  it  ten  times  more 
so  since  he  had  heard  Sir  Fletcher's  doctrines.  It  was  the 
more  odious  from  the  uncertainty  under  which  he  had  left 
it — "  that  glorious  uncertainty,"  said  he,  "  which  always 
attends  the  law."^  Had  any  gentleman  explained  the  term 
descendants  of  the  Royal  Family  ?  He  would  answer  No  ! 
He  had  been  told  that  particular  care  had  been  taken  to 
find  out  the  person  who  solemnized  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land's marriage — for  what  purpose  he  knew  not.  This  and 
much  more  he  uttered  with  great  warmth,  energy,  and 
applause.  General  Conway,  with  serious  dignity  and  be- 
coming firmness,  did  not  make  less  impression.  He  owned 
he  was  a  friend  to  the  principle  of  the  bill,  but  thought 
there  would  be  a  degree  of  absurdity  in  voting  a  right 
what  was  only  a  compliment — a  compliment  that  ought 
not  to  be  paid  anywhere :  it  was  creating  a  power  that 

1  His  father,   Lord  Holland,   too,  had  always  taken  great  pleasure  in 
attacking  the  lawyers. 


52     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

could  never  be  taken  away  again.  He  begged  the  House 
to  consider  this,  and  told  them  they  would  not  do  their 
duty  if  they  did  not  resist  the  preamble.  At  half  an 
hour  after  eleven  at  night  the  House  divided,  and,  to  the 
great  mortification  of  the  Court,  their  majority,  which 
on  the  first  day  of  the  bill  had  amounted  to  128,  was 
now  sunk  to  36 — the  numbers  being  200  to  164:  a  clear 
proof  of  the  badness  of  the  bill,  for  conscience  must  be 
violently  attacked  when  so  triumphant  a  superiority  as  128 
shrinks  from  the  test.  Thus  had  the  Court,  by  new 
intemperance  and  folly,  raised  from  the  dead  a  departed 
Opposition — demonstration  that  it  was  not  a  desire  of 
tranquillity  and  legal  government  that  was  aimed  at,  but 
extension  of  prerogative. 

On  the  i/^th,  in  the  evening,  Mr.  Conway  came  to  me, 
and  showed  me  a  letter  he  had  received  from  his  brother, 
Lord  Hertford,  in  which  the  latter  said  the  King  had 
written  to  him  that  morning,  complaining  grievously  of 
Conway's  opposition  to  the  bill,  though  the  King  had,  as 
he  said,  shown  him  so  many  marks  of  kindness ;  and 
though  it  was  a  personal  question  to  himself.  Conway 
asked  me  what  he  should  do,  for  he  would  not  disgrace 
himself  by  retracting.  I  said  he  was  sensible  that  I  had 
refused  to  talk  to  him  on  the  bill  because  I  had  not 
meddled  in  my  niece's  connection  with  the  Duke  of  Glou- 
cester, whatever  it  were,  nor  would  with  the  bill ;  but 
that  now  he  (Conway)  had  taken  his  part,  and  asked  my 
advice  on  the  present  occasion,  I  would  give  it  him  fairly. 
The  question,  I  said,  was  indeed  personal  to  the  King — 
nay,  and  too  personal,  for  it  went  to  an  extension  of  his 
prerogative,  a  point  in  which  he  ought  not  to  ask  or  expect 
to  be  obliged.  That  the  duty  to  our  country  was  to 
supersede  private  gratitude.  Kings  might  enslave  a  nation 
if  their  favours  were  to  tie  men  up  from  obeying  their 
conscience.  That  I  approved  what  he  (Conway)  had 
done,  and  begged  him  not  to  recant  for  his  own  sake,     I 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  53 

said  it  ill  became  his  brother  to  interfere  in  what  con- 
cerned his  honour ;  and  I  added  that,  if  he  allowed  his 
brother  to  dissuade  him  from  acting  as  he  ought  to  do,  he 
himself  would  have  no  thanks :  Lord  Hertford  would 
have  all  the  merit,  and,  instead  of  Conway's  receiving 
favours,  Lord  Hertford  would  be  rewarded  for  governing 
him.  He  agreed  with  me  entirely,  censured  his  brother 
for  his  unbounded  servility,  and  owned  that  he  was  now 
convinced  that  what  I  had  so  often  told  him,  and  which 
he  never  believed  before,  was  true — that  Lord  Mansfield 
aimed  at  stretching  the  prerogative.  Lord  Hertford  wrote 
him  more  letters,  but  they  had  no  effect.  The  King  was 
so  indiscreet  as  to  write  to  that  silly  boy  Lord  Sefton, 
whom  he  had  lately  made  an  earl,^  and  who  voted  against 
the  bill ;  and  Sefton  kept  away  on  the  i6th.  Colonel 
Burgoyne,  who  had  kept  away  too,  was  made  to  vote  for 
the  bill. 

On  the  \6th^  the  Committee  sat  again  till  two  in  the 
morning,  the  Opposition  fighting  the  bill  so  strenuously 
that  they  could  not  get  through  a  whole  clause.  Dowds- 
well  moved  to  omit  in  the  first  clause  the  words  descendants 
of  George  II.,  and  insert  children  and  grandchildren,  or 
heir-apparent  to  the  Crown,  in  order  to  give  some  limita- 
tion to  the  bill.  The  Ministers  refused  to  come  into  the 
amendment.  After  some  debate.  Rose  Fuller,  a  ministerial 
man,  said  he  had  been  endeavouring  to  find  out  some  pro- 
per limitation,  but  could  possibly  discover  none,  for  which 
reason  he  thought  the  bill  ought  to  be  limited  in  time — 
that  is,  to  be  restrained  to  the  reign  of  his  present  Majesty 
and  one  year  after  his  demise ;  and  that,  should  he  con- 

^  Charles  William,  eighth  Viscount  Molyneux,  was  created  Earl  of  Sefton, 
in  1771.  He  died  in  1795.  His  mother,  Maria  Leverly,  by  a  third  mar- 
riage with  Mr.  Errington,  of  Northumberland,  became  the  mother  of  Maria, 
who,  marrying  with  Mr.  Walter  Smythe,  became  in  her  turn  the  mother  of 
the  cehbrated  "  Mrs.  Mary  Anne  (or  Maria,  as  her  tombstone  at  Brighton 
has  it)  Fitzherbert,"  who,  like  Maria  Leverly  (or,  as  the  name  is  sometimes 
written,  Levery),  was  the  wife  of  three  successive  husbands,  the  last  of  whom, 
it  is  hardly  necessary  to  add,  was  George  IV. — D. 


54     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

tinue  of  the  same  opinion  after  the  bill  was  gone  through, 
he  would  propose  this  restriction  as  an  amendment  to  the 
bill.  He  was  not  for  trusting  the  Crown  with  powers  that 
could  never  be  got  back.  Richard  Whitworth,  a  neces- 
sitous member  of  the  Opposition,  who  had  spoken  against 
the  bill,  had  now  been  bought  off  and  spoke  for  it. 
General  Conway,  who  always  spoke  admirably  when 
warmed,  attacked  the  bill  again  with  peculiar  energy.  He 
had  attended,  he  said,  to  every  argument  on  that  im- 
portant bill,  professed  himself  a  friend  to  the  principle  of 
it  though  not  to  the  form,  and  therefore  wished  such  a 
bill  might  be  sent  out  of  the  House  as  might  do  honour 
to  it.  His  objection  was  to  the  extent,  and  therefore  he 
should  like  the  limitation  in  point  of  time,  and  approved 
the  amendment  proposed.  The  extent  proposed  was 
enormous.  The  canons  of  the  Church  pointed  out  a  limit, 
as  well  as  the  act  of  Harry  VHI.  He  would  first  fix 
the  line,  and  then  add  heir  presumptive.  He  could  not 
agree  that  any  great  inconvenience  had  ever  attended  the 
marriages  of  the  Royal  Family  with  subjects  ;  the  mischief 
had  not  flowed  from  proximity  to  the  Crown,  but  from  the 
power  of  the  great  barons.  Fifty  improper  marriages 
were  preferable  to  making  the  Crown  elective,  as  Wedder- 
burn  had  falsely  declared  it  would  be  if  all  persons  within 
the  Act  of  Settlement  should  fail.^  The  Judges,  in  17 17, 
declared  the  right  of  the  Crown  was  more  over  the  educa- 
tion of  princes  than  over  their  marriage.  Should  this  bill 
pass  they  must  all  be  educated  too  by  the  Crown.  No 
regard  ought  to  be  paid  to  an  inconvenience  that  had  hap- 

^  What  possible  pretence  could  there  be  for  setting  aside  the  descendants 
of  Edward  III.  ?  Papists  are  rejected  because  of  their  religion  ;  but  what 
reason  can  there  be  for  depriving  Protestants  of  their  right?  I  can  see  no 
reason  but  that  the  Stuarts  might  be  eligible,  if  the  descendants  of 
George  II.  should  fail.  [Walpole  again  forgets  that  if  available  descendants 
of  the  Stuart  royal  line  which  had  for  an  ancestress  Margaret  Tudor  Queen 
of  Scotland  failed,  the  royal  famihes  would  again  separate.  That  of  England 
would  be  descended  from  Mary  Tudor,  Queen  of  France,  youngest  sister  of 
Henry  VIII. ;  that  of  Scotland  from  James  Hamilton  Earl  of  Arran,  de- 
scendant of  Mary  daughter  of  King  James  II.  of  Scotland. — A.  F.  S.] 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  55 

pened  ;  the  bill  ought  to  be  corrected.  It  was  a  law  not 
fit  to  go  out  as  it  was  drawn  ;  he  would  venture  to  say  the 
House  could  not  pass  it.  Were  he  capable  of  paying  a 
compliment  on  this  occasion^  he  should  think  his  tongue 
would  wither  in  his  mouth.  It  was  an  act  for  which  Par- 
liament could  not  have  any  complaisance.  They  were 
such  acts  that  had  disgraced  Parliament.  There  was  a 
duty  superior  to  everything  else.  He  would  have  such  a 
bill,  but  taken  up  hereafter  with  less  precipitation.  Lord 
North  shuddered  at  Conway's  words,  but  had  not  the 
courage  to  act  as  honest  a  part,  chicaned  on  forms  of 
making  the  amendment,  which  took  up  much  time  and 
brought  on  a  long  controversy  on  order,  which  provoked 
T.  Townshend  so  much  that  he  cried  out,  "  Let  us  have 
no  dirty  tricks  !"  Lord  North  was  exceedingly  hurt  with 
this  and  other  attacks,  particularly  at  Conway's  reflecting 
on  the  complaisance  of  the  majority,  which,  he  said,  the 
Llouse  would  not  bear.  He  himself  was  independent,  the 
Parliament  was  independent.  Gentlemen  had  a  flippant 
way  of  saying  things  against  Parliament.  Captain  Phipps 
turned  the  debate  towards  Lord  Mansfield  by  a  beautiful 
simile,  in  which  he  described  the  tree  of  prerogative  with 
the  wily  serpent  winding  up  it,  and  offering  the  fruit  to 
the  house  of  Brunswick.  De  Grey  saying  the  contest  was 
become  a  question  of  bodily  strength,  E.  Burke  in  a  fine 
rhapsody  cried  out,  he  hailed  the  omen !  He  had  never 
had  a  better  opportunity.  "Self-denying  Court!"  said 
he  ;  "  mild  aristocracy  !  When  the  message  came  first,  it 
was  a  round  little  dwarf;  the  preamble  was  a  herald  at 
arms,  with  all  his  trappings ;  and  then  came  the  Knight 
of  the  Sorrowful  Countenance."  He  then  quite  ranted 
with  eloquent  bombast,  and  then  with  admirable  pathetic, 
and  seeming  to  see  the  image  of  Lord  Mansfield,  he  cried 
out,  *'  He  has  no  child'^  who  ^rst  formed  this  bill .f^  He  was 
no  judge  of  the  crime  of  following  Nature!  But  if  it 
1  ''Macbeth." 


56     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

is  true  that  eloquence  fascinates  the  passions,  it  is  as  true 
that  gold  is  a  counterpoison.  Nor  Burke's  oratory,  nor 
Conway's  energy,  nor  Charles  Fox's  logic  could  unseal 
the  ears  into  which  the  golden  infusion  had  been  dropped. 
Wedderburn  said  the  act  was  calculated  to  make  royal 
marriages  solemn  and  notorious,  and  to  restrain  improper 
marriages.  It  had  been  said  that  if  the  Duke  of  York 
had  not  married  Lady  Anne  Hyde  the  revolution  would 
not  have  happened.  He  would  say  that  it  would  not  have 
happened  unless  he  had  married  the  Princess  of  Modena. 
It  was  said  marriage  would  prevent  the  licentiousness  of 
princes :  had  not  everybody  heard  of  their  amours  when 
married  ?  The  Duke  of  Berwick  had  sprung  from  such 
amours.  Sir  George  Saville  said  there  was  not  a  man  in 
the  House  but  could  propose  less  objectionable  words  than 
those  in  the  bill.  Charles  Fox  said  no  decent  reason  had 
been  given  why  the  words  should  not  be  descendants  of 
George  III.,  not  of  George  II.  He  was  not  clear  the 
bill  had  not  a  retrospective  view.  He  spoke  on  with 
great  force,  though  less  applauded  than  the  preceding  day, 
yet  still  severe  on  Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  who  rose  again, 
and  said  the  severe  chastisement  he  had  received  the 
other  day  had  had  no  effect  upon  him  ;  abuse  never  had. 
When  he  was  in  the  wrong  he  would  kiss  the  rod.  He 
desired  a  truce  with  arguments  drawn  from  his  great  wig 
and  being  locked  up  in  his  strong  box.  He  had  a  rough 
side  of  his  tongue  as  well  as  other  gentlemen,  though  he 
had  forborne  to  make  use  of  it.  He  was  as  ready  to  de- 
scend from  the  Chair  as  he  had  been  to  ascend  it :  it  was 
not  an  honour  he  had  sought.  He  would  explain  his 
sentiments,  which  had  been  grossly  misrepresented.  So 
far  from  throwing  a  doubt  on  the  present  marriage  (of  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland),  he  had  given  it  as  a  datum.  If 
fame  said  true,  the  solemnities  of  that  marriage  were  not 
complied  with,  and  in  that  case  the  saving  clause  in  the 
Marriage  Act  could  only  indemnify.     He  had  asked,  was 


'772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  57 

the  term  Royal  Faviily  known  or  not?  Give  him  the 
case,  he  would  give  the  rule.  He  thought  words  should 
be  moved  more  restrictive  than  those  already  moved. 
When  the  Royal  Family  was  branched  out,  could  he 
call  them  the  Royal  Family  ?  he  could  not ;  therefore  he 
thought  some  regulation  necessary.  Thus  did  his  explana- 
tion leave  his  opinion  more  obscure,  more  unintelligible 
than  ever ;  probably  he  could  not  explain  it  better. 
Charles  Fox  implored  him  to  assist  them  with  proper 
words,  since  he  and  the  other  lawyers  disagreed.  Burke 
and  Cornwall  lashed  him  again,  but  to  no  purpose.  Then 
the  House  divided,  and  by  the  unwearied  efforts  of  the 
Court,  who  had  sent  to  Scotland  for  votes  and  had  used 
every  other  means  of  procuring  them,  there  were  222  for 
the  original  words  and  164  for  the  amendment.  The 
Opposition  then  moved  to  adjourn :  the  Ministers,  on  a 
new  division,  determined  to  proceed ;  but  so  many  mem- 
bers went  away  that  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  the 
House  broke  up  without  having  advanced  a  step. 

The  Committee  sat  again  on  the  i8th,  when  Charles 
Fox  proposed  to  omit  the  words  other  than  the  issue  of 
princesses  married  into  foreign  families^  and  substitute  the 
words  being  a  subject  of  Great  Britain,  because,  as  he 
showed,  foreigners  could  not  be  bound  by  our  laws ;  and 
that  foreign  families  would  take  in  so  many  cases  that 
there  would  be  more  danger  of  foreign  wars  even  than  of 
domestic.  Sir  W.  Meredith  urged  that  even  the  Bishop 
of  Osnaburg,  the  King's  second  son,  was  a  foreign  sove- 
reign prince,  and  could  not  be  bound  by  the  bill.  Should 
he  marry,  as  he  would  have  a  right  to  do,  without  the  King's 
consent,  and  his  next  brother  with  it,  and  the  Prince  of 
Wales  die  without  children,  there  would  be  a  contested 
succession.  Queen  Elizabeth  succeeded  to  the  crown, 
though  bastardized.  Lord  North  could  only  say,  in  answer 
to  this  very  strong  case,  that  the  Bishop  of  Osnaburg  was 
not  an  hereditary  sovereign,  and  that  his  children  would  be 


58     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

only  princes  of  England.  Burke  said  that  the  Bishop,  as  a 
prince  of  the  empire,  could  not  be  restrained  from  marry- 
ing. The  lines  drawn  in  the  bill  were  loosely,  not  safely 
drawn.  This  was  a  laiv  to  create  doubts ;  till  now,  laws 
were  made  to  explain  doubts.  Wedderburn  said,  children 
born  abroad  of  English  parents  are  English  subjects — still 
he  could  not  evade  the  personal  case  of  the  Bishop.  One 
or  two  particulars  in  the  bill  he  owned  must  be  altered. 
Charles  Fox  persisted  in  asking  whether  persons  not 
subjects  of  England  came  within  the  Act?  Mr.  Jackson 
said  they  would.  Mr.  Sutton  and  Sir  W.  Meredith  showed 
the  great  hardship  on  younger  princes^  who,  having  no 
appanages ,  would  yet  be  debarred  from  marrying  heiresses. 
Wedderburn,  on  the  contrary,  owned  the  Act  did  not  mean 
to  bind  foreigners,  nor  could  it  bind  them.  Mr.  Hussey 
said,  if  the  Prince  of  Wales  should  marry  without  the 
King's  consent,  he  would  inherit  Hanover,  though  not  the 
Crown  of  England.  Charles  Fox  urged  that,  while  the 
lawyers  contradicted  one  another^  it  was  in  vain  to  say,  as 
Wedderburn  maintained,  that  the  line  was  ascertained. 
This  would  be  the  first  time  that  ever  a  penal  law  was 
passed  with  the  lawyers  differing.  Governor  Johnson  said 
there  was  nothing  but  confusion  and  ambiguity  in  every 
clause  of  the  bill.  Would  men  lay  their  hands  upon  their 
swords,  and  say,  This  is  a  good  cause  ?  General  Conway 
said  he  did  not  think  the  amendment  would  answer  the 
purpose,  and  should  not  be  for  it.  The  Attorney-General 
Thurlow  owned  the  bill  must  be  altered,  according  as 
exigencies  should  arise.  The  amendment,  though  so  very 
weakly  opposed,  was  notwithstanding  rejected  by  i88  to 
102,  so  little  were  men  deterred  by  a  cloud  of  dangers 
from  pursuing  their  instant  interest ! 

Mr.  Phipps  then  asked,  as  the  chairman  proceeded  with 
the  clause,  why  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  had  not  been 
punished  by  the  King's  prerogative,  if  the  King,  as  the 
preamble  asserted,  had  such  prerogative?      Was  the   bill 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  59 

preferred  as  a  safer  and  surer  mischief?  He  begged 
pardon  ;  the  prince  had  been  twice  punished  ;  his  horses 
had  been  turned  out  of  the  Royal  mews,  and  himself  for- 
bidden the  Court,  according  to  the  text,  the  cattle  and  the 
stranger  that  is  within  thy  gates}  The  prince  was  still  of 
the  Privy  Council,  and  high  in  the  sea  service — had  he 
been  turned  out,  the  question  would  have  been  asked  who 
advised  the  measure,  and  had  sown  dissension  in  the  Royal 
Family?  The  Chancellor,  he  said,  was  a  puppet,  while 
there  was  one  pouring  poison  into  the  King's  ear,  and, 
serpent-like,  slipping  his  skin  every  year,  as  it  best  suited 
his  purpose.  By  the  words  sign  manual  the  House  would 
never  be  able  to  get  at  the  person  who  should  advise  the 
refusal  of  any  intended  marriage.  It  was  then  proposed 
to  leave  out  sign  manual^  and  insert,  shall  not  lawfully 


^  The  democracy  adopted  their  own  method  of  commenting  on  the  conduct 
of  George  III.  towards  his  brother  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  for  whom  he  was 
supposed  to  have  small  affection — he  could  indeed  have  but  small  respect.  As 
the  King  was  going  about  this  time  in'^his  sedan  to  service  at  St.  James's  Chapel, 
one  of  the  crowd  through  which  he  passed  thrust  a  paper  into  the  royal  chair,  on 
which  was  written — "First  go  and  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then 
come  and  offer  thy  gift."  The  Duke  did  not  lose  much  by  being  forbidden 
the  Court  which  was  unusually  dull,  considering  that  two  young  sovereigns 
were  at  the  head  of  it.  One  paper  remarks  that  **  the  Duchess  of  Grafton  is 
now,  in  a  manner,  the  only  woman  of  her  rank  who  dances  on  public  occasions 
at  St.  James's."  Of  the  little  liveliness  of  other  duchesses  we  have  a  sample 
in  the  case  of  the  Duchess  of  Northumberland,  of  whom  the  London  journals 
report  the  following  quiet  trait,  a  few  weeks  prior  to  the  period  in  the  text. 
**  Her  Grace  the  Duchess  of  Northumberland's  somnolency  seems  to  increase  ; 
and  at  Court  on  Saturday  she  was  asleep  the  principal  part  of  the  time  she 
stayed  in  the  drawing-room."  The  Duchess  of  Grafton  above-named  was  the 
third  duke's  second  wife,  Elizabeth  Wrothesley.  They  were  married  in  1 769,  and 
she  died,  duchess-dowager,  in  1822.  The  somnolent  Duchess  of  Northumberland 
was  the  once  young  heiress  of  the  Seymours  and  Percys,  who  brought  a  ducal 
coronet  to  her  husband  Sir  Hugh  Smithson.  While  young  Grafton  danced  and 
the  more  mature  Northumberland  dozed  at  Court,  there  were  men  who  were 
not  forbidden  to  appear  there  like  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  but  who  mostly 
abstained  out  of  delicacy  and  their  own  free-will.  "It  is  remarkable,"  so 
runs  a  paragraph  in  the  papers  of  the  early  part  of  this  year,  "  that  the  Judges, 
if  we  except  the  Chancellor  only,  seldom  or  never  attend  a  levee  at  St.  James's, 
it  being  deemed  incompatible  with  the  proper  administration  of  the  law  for  the 
expositors  to  maintain  an  intimacy  with  the  Court."  For  a  further  account  of 
the  above  Duchess  of  Northumberland  the  reader  is  referred  to  Walpole's 
"  Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  King  George  III.,"  edited  by  Sir  Denis  Le  Marchant, 
Bart.,  vol.  i.  p.  419. — D. 


6o     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

contract  matrimony  without  the  Kings  consent  under  the 
great  seal.  Sir  Fletcher  Norton  said,  some  alteration  was 
certainly  necessary  ;  he  did  not  know  where  the  bill  had 
originated,  nor  did  he  care.  He  would  consider  it  with 
propriety  and  freedom.  He  hoped  to  throw  out  the 
annulling  clause.  The  notoriety  of  the  King's  consent 
was  the  great  object.  Objections  rose  against  every  part 
of  the  bill.  He  was  for  the  great  seal,  rather  than  the  sign 
manual.     Lord  North  consented  to  the  alteration. 

They  then  went  into  much  discussion  on  the  annulling 
of  marriages,  and  registering  them  ;  and  it  appeared  that 
Royal  marriages  are  not  registered.  Lord  Folkstone  said 
he  had  heard  that  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  had  applied 
to  have  his  marriage  registered,  but  was  told  it  could  not 
be  done  unless  a  herald  attended.  Burke  with  humour 
desired  he  might  have  the  office  of  Registrar,  and  said 
Lord  North  could  not  give  him  the  ministerial  answer, 
that  it  was  promised.  It  was  carried  without  a  division  to 
alter  the  words. 

Dowdswell  next  proposed  to  omit  the  conclusion  of 
the  clause,  and  insert  part  of  the  Act  of  Settlement,^ 
nothing  being  so  much  to  be  apprehended  as  a  match 
with  a  papist.  Burke  spoke  on  the  hardship  put  on 
princes  in  taking  away  their  right  of  choice ;  and  he  com- 
pared them  to  Gulliver's  Strulbrugs,  who  were  immortal, 
but  deprived  of  the  rights  of  mankind — hard  condition,  to 
be  told  you  shall  be  a  prince  on  such  terms  !  The  charter  of 
nature  is  greater  than  that  of  law.  God  forbid  the  House 
should  pay  greater  regard  to  the  dirty  books  on  the  table 
than  to  the  great  Creator !  T.  Townshend  said  this  was 
the  worst  part  of  the  worst  bill  that  had  ever  been  framed  ; 
and  Stephen  Fox,that  innocent  children  were  to  bepunished 
for  the  faults  of  their  parents.  Sir  W.  Meredith  said, 
if  Scotland  had  not  been  open,  marriage,  since  Lord  Hard- 
wicke's  bill,  could  not  have  gone  on.     This  bill  was  equally 

1  See  the  Votes. 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  6i 

obnoxious  by  its  certainties  and  uncertainties.  The  Royal 
Family  will  always  be  able  to  find  a  necessitous  clergyman 
to  marry  them,  if  they  pay  his  poverty  though  not  his  will} 
General  Conway  said  he  could  neither  approve  the  clause 
nor  the  amendment,  which  he  did  not  think  would  remove 
the  difficulty.  He  disliked  punishing  innocent  children. 
Should  a  prince  of  Wales  marry  without  his  father's 
consent,  and  have  children,  would  he  not  on  coming  to 
the  Crown  rehabilitate  them?  How  many  persons  in 
our  history  had  been  set  aside,  and  restored  by  Parlia- 
ment !  He  wished  to  see  natural  and  legal  parental 
authority  re-established,  but  must  dissent  from  both  pro- 
positions.2  Lord  John  Cavendish  said  he  had  a  different 
doubt;  might  not  a  prince,  married  under  this  restrictive 
act,  endeavour,  if  he  came  to  the  throne,  to  have  his 
marriage  annulled  ?  T.  Pitt  said  the  bill  was  pure  and 
absolute  tyranny.  The  words  heir-presumptive  had  been 
adopted,  because  the  heir-apparent  would  treat  this  act  as 
it  deserved.  Was  it  within  the  competency  of  legislation 
to  forbid  marriage  ?  A  prince  must  be  doomed  to  eternal 
chastity,  with  guards  attending  him  to  make  amends  for 
taking  away  his  rights.  In  Spain,  in  Portugal,  in  all 
countries  that  admit  the  Council  of  Trent,  no  prohibition 
of  marriage  is  known.  Yet  he  did  not  approve  the  amend- 
ment which  he  thought  too  severe,  nor  could  he  acquiesce  in 
the  clause.  Should  the  clause  be  carried,  he  would  attend 
the  bill  no  more.  He  begged  that  the  bill  might  only  be 
temporary ;  he  could  trust  the  King ;  let  future  remedies 
be  applied  to  future  evils.  Charles  Fox  said  the  occasion 
was  pitiful  and  disgraceful.     Did  the  dignity  of  the  Crown 

^  **  Romeo  and  Juliet." 

'^  There  was  a  well-invented  story  spread  about  to  ridicule  Conway's  irreso- 
lutions :  that  he  went  with  Charles  Fox  and  others  to  Breslau,  the  conjurer, 
who  told  persons  what  card  they  had  thought  of.  He  told  all  the  rest  directly  ; 
but  when  Conway  presented  himself,  Breslau  said,  "Oh  !  here  is  something 
very  odd  !  Sir,  you  have  not  fixed  upon  a  card  ;  you  first  thought  of  the  knave 
of  clubs,  then  of  the  ace  of  hearts,  and  then  of  the  nine  of  diamonds,  but  you 
have  not  determined  on  which." 


62     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

consist  in  the  marriages  of  the  Royal  Family  ?  Cornwall 
said  he  did  not  expect  to  hear  the  strong  part  of  the  bill 
so  weakly  defended.  The  man  who  planned  the  bill  would 
never  have  credit  in  this  country.  What  magic  could 
induce  the  House  to  be  for  that  clause  ?  Rose  Fuller  said, 
if  the  bill  was  temporary,  it  could  not  be  mischievous  ;  he 
was  for  limiting  its  duration.  Charles  Fox,  perceiving  the 
Ministers  would  not  argue,  yet  maintained  the  clause,  said 
artfully,  he  perceived  Lord  North's  friends  had  abandoned 
his  defence.  They,  however,  stuck  to  him  with  their  votes, 
for  the  amendment  was  rejected  at  midnight  by  197  to  140. 
Then  for  two  hours  and  a  half  followed  great  confusion ; 
the  Opposition  dividing  for  adjournment,  the  Ministers  for 
going  on,  by  which,  as  on  the  foregoing  day,  they  only  lost 
time,  as  they  sat  too  late  to  meet  the  next  day.  The 
Speaker  was  grown  a  strong  opponent,  and  carried  Fred. 
Vane  and  Dundas  with  him  into  the  minority.  He 
wanted  a  peerage  for  his  wife,  a  lieutenant-colonelcy  for  his 
son,  and  to  be  Chancellor  himself,  but  lost  the  Court,  was 
given  up  by  the  Opposition,  and  left  alone  the  next  day. 

The  bill  was  finished  in  the  Committee  on  the  20th, 
though  again  sitting  till  two  in  the  morning,  after  a  dull 
debate,  both  sides  having  exhausted  their  fire.  Burke 
wished  to  offer  an  amendment  to  the  last  clause  which  had 
been  passed  the  preceding  day,  for  which  he  had  laid  in 
his  claim  ;  but  Dyson  and  the  men  of  order  denied  that 
the  clause  could  be  resumed.  Rigby,  who  had  shrunk 
from  the  contest,  took  this  opportunity  of  showing  some 
zeal,  and,  though  with  many  compliments  to  Burke, 
contested  his  right  of  amending  a  clause  passed.  Herbert^ 
exclaimed  on  the  want  of  candour  and  justice  ;  and  Burke 
said  they  were  adding  to  the  bill  fraud,  violence,  and  folly. 
Surely  there  had  been  enough  of  the  lion's  skin  in  the  act, 
without  adding  the  fox's  tail,  and  piecing  it  out  with  the 


man 


^  First  cousin  of  the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  and  a  very  conscientious  young 

in 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  63 

ass's  ears.  Dowdswell  asked  if  they  meant  a  Prince  of  the 
Blood  should  ask  the  King's  consent  after  twenty-five? 
Would  not  the  King's  refusal  prejudice  the  Parliament 
against  the  Prince  ?  Rigby  said,  he  did  not  believe  a  King 
would  refuse  his  consent  if  asked.  Lord  North  suffered 
the  debate,  content  to  reject  the  proposition  by  vote,  which 
was  done  by  103  to  48. 

Dowdswell  proposed  that  the  Prince's  notification  of 
marrying  should  lie  before  the  Council  but  one  month,  not 
twelve ;  Thurlow  said  twelve  months  would  give  the 
Prince  time  to  deliberate ;  T.  Townshend,  that  it  would 
only  give  the  Crown  more  time  to  tamper  with  Parliament. 
The  amendment  was  however  rejected  by  127  to  60. 

Herbert  moved  between  the  words  aforesaid  and  con- 
tracted to  insert  lawfully^  to  which  Lord  North  objected, 
but  made  another  slight  alteration,  to  which  the  Com- 
mittee agreed. 

Lord  John  Cavendish  moved  to  leave  out  the  word  unless^ 
which  motion  Sir  Charles  Hotham  (a  courtier)  said  he 
liked,  lest  Parliament  might  be  drawn  in  to  shelter  King 
or  minister.  Lord  North  said  he  never  knew  a  great 
question  carried  by  surprise.  Burke  asked  him  if  the 
House  had  not  been  surprised  into  thanking  Dr.  Nowel 
but  the  other  day?  It  was  a  vain  hope,  a  Parliamentary 
cheat,  and  delusive  power  that  was  held  out  to  the  Prince 
who  was  to  ask  the  consent  of  the  House,  and  a  power 
that  belonged  to  neither  King  nor  Parliament.  If  the 
Crown  should  dissent,  would  Parliament  consent  ?  Should 
a  Prince  of  Wales  ask  their  consent,  and  they  refuse,  and 
he  still  marry,  what  a  hardship  to  members  to  disoblige 
the  reigning  or  the  future  King !  how  hard  too  on  any 
woman  a  Prince  might  wish  to  marry,  to  have  all  that 
relates  to  her  and  her  family  discussed  in  Parliament ! 
She  would  be  liable  to  the  most  absurd  examination  of 
her  morals,  person,  history,  health,  constitution,  &c. 
T.  Townshend  saying  this  would  clash  with  the  Regency 


64     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

Act,  Rigby  answered  (and  it  was  the  best  argument  given 
for  the  bill)  that  the  existence  of  the  Regency  Act  was 
a  strong  argument  for  the  present  bill,  for,  unless  this 
should  pass,  persons  of  the  Regency  might  get  a  match 
for  their  family  with  the  Royal  Family,  unless  Parliament 
could  intervene.  Lord  John's  amendment  was  rejected 
by  196  to  107. 

They  went  then  on  the  clause  of  Praemunire.  Mr. 
Herbert  said,  "  We  are  now  come  to  the  clause  of  Prae- 
munire, a  very  fit  clause  to  close  this  infamous  piece ; " 
and  moved  to  leave  out  the  whole  clause,  in  which  he 
was  seconded  by  Sir  George  Colebrook.  Sir  Fletcher 
Norton  strongly  attacked  the  clause,  and  called  on  the 
gentlemen  of  the  law,  who  he  concluded  had  been  con- 
sulted, to  attend  to  what  he  should  say.  If  the  Com- 
mittee thought  as  he  did,  they  would  see  the  absurdity, 
nay,  impossibility,  of  passing  the  clause  as  it  then  stood 
— if  he  had  got  a  true  copy  of  the  bill,  which  he  doubted, 
because  it  was  so  absurd.  It  set  forth  that  the  punish- 
ment was  to  be  according  to  the  statute  of  Richard  II. 
for  provision  of  praemunire.  Now  that  Act  expressly  sets 
forth  the  word  prcemunire  and  not  provision ;  so  that,  if 
the  word  "  provision  "  remained,  there  was  no  such  statute 
as  that  mentioned  in  the  present  bill.  Cornwall  said,  as 
they  were  passing  a  heavy  clause,  he  wished  to  know 
whether  the  parties  themselves  contracting  a  marriage 
were  included  in  the  praemunire  ?  Lord  North  ansv^ered 
positively,  they  are  not  included  in  it.  Mr.  Rigby  said 
the  words  were  the  same  as  in  the  Regency  Act.  Sir 
Fletcher  Norton  said  he  protested  against  any  imputation 
on  his  conduct ;  if  they  would  leave  the  words  so,  be  it 
so.  Charles  Fox  asked  Lord  North  with  what  face  he 
could  tell  him  that  a  prince  who  should  contract  a 
marriage  contrary  to  this  bill  would  not  be  guilty  of 
a  praemunire  ?  That  clause  was  a  tacit  confession  of  the 
weakness  of  the  nullity. 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  65 

I  was  told  privately  a  most  memorable  circumstance, 
and  from  very  good  authority.  The  Ministers  chose  to 
leave  the  clause  with  the  error  the  Speaker  had  pointed 
out,  in  order  that  nobody  might  be  punished — a  secret 
they  probably  did  not  tell  the  King.  They  said  the  same 
error  had  been  made  designedly  in  the  Regency  Bill,  which 
I  do  not  quite  believe.  It  was  more  like  Lord  Mansfield's 
chicanery  to  adopt  the  error,  which  is  like  what  is  done 
on  outlawries,  and  of  which  he  had  profited  to  annul 
Wilkes's  outlawry,  than  like  Lord  Hardwicke's  severity. 
The  clause  was  retained  by  a  majority  of  179  to  112. 
Rose  Fuller  would  then  have  moved  his  clause,  but  Lord 
John  Cavendish  persuaded  him  rather  to  do  it  on  the 
report,  as  it  was  then  so  late.  The  House  adjourned  to 
the  2ird. 

On  that  day  Fuller  renewed  his  motion  for  a  clause 
to  confine  the  duration  of  the  bill  to  the  King's  life.  He 
had  talked,  he  said,  with  men  of  all  sides,  and  all  thought 
that  the  Act  ought  to  be  but  temporary.  This  was 
opposed  by  Lord  North  and  Mr.  Rice,^  who  said  the 
marriages  of  the  Royal  Family  will  always  be  matter  of 
public  concern.  T.  Townshend  said  all  the  advocates  for 
the  bill  had  confessed  that  Parliament  must  interpose 
some  time  hence.  What  made  the  bill  necessary  at 
this  time?  Lawyers  would  have  time  to  consider  the 
bill  more  maturely.  Mr.  Curzon,  though  a  Tory, 
spoke  for  the  clause.  Sir  H.  Houghton  said  the 
King's  message  had  given  great  jealousy :  it  had 
given  him  great  uneasiness.  He  opposed  the  bill  from 
conviction :  the  bill  had  given  great  jealousy.  Lord 
North  said  the  clause  was  worse  than  any  part  of  the 
bill,  and  also  went  from  the  usual  practice  of  Parliament. 
It  was  not  right  to  trust  one  king  with  a  power  that  is  not 

^  George  Rice,  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  and  son-in-law  of  Lord  Talbot. 
[He  married  in  1756  Cecil  Talbot,  Baroness  Dinevor,  and  died  in  1779. — ' 
A.  F.  S.] 


66     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

fit  to  be  trusted  to  all  kings.     It  would  not  be  difficult  to 
recover   the  power   of  marriages  :    to  give  it  for  a  time 
would  be  invidious.     There  would  be  danger  in  having 
the  law  expire.     The  best  time  to  make  the  law  is  when 
the  princes  are  too  young  to  marry.     He  himself  had  been 
very  well  acquainted  with  the  drawing  of  this  law.     Any 
gentleman  might  move  to  alter  it  next  year.     The  law,  if 
not  a  good  law,  would  not  last  even  during  the  life  of  the 
present  King.     Colonel  Jennings  said  it  was  safer  to  grant 
away  a  lease  than  an  inheritance  of  power.     Mackworth 
said  this  was  the  first  time  he  ever  heard  of  a  bill  made 
with  a  view  to  its  being  repealed.     Colonel  Burgoyne  said 
he  could  give  a  conscientious  vote  for  the  bill ;  yet  he  had 
spoken  against  the  preamble,  had  then  stayed  away,  and 
had  then  been  ordered  to  go  and  vote  for  the  bill.     General 
Conway   applauded    Burgoyne's  manly  honesty  (with   a 
sneer)  :  there  was  no  rule  for  an  honest  man  but  to  act  as 
he  felt.     It  was  not  a  parliament  if  it  did  not  reject  the  bill. 
He  had  been  told    that  all  who  voted  for  the  bill  were 
against  it  in  their  private  sentiments.     It  had  been  said, 
even  to  him — Why  take  a  part  in  this  bill  in  the  situation 
you  are  in  ? — you  are  but  one,  why  not  do  as  others  do  ? 
You  cannot  turn  the  fate  of  the  bill ! — why  break  through 
your  connexions  ?      He   would    answer,  if  this  bill  were 
adopted,   the  Parliament   was   no    longer    a   parliament. 
After  Rome   fell   there   was  a   form    of  parliament,  but 
only  the  skeleton.     He  would  never,  in  any  great  constitu- 
tional question,  be  confounded  in  the  mass  of  courtiers.    He 
never  knew  any  bill  call  more  for  attention.     If  the  Minis- 
ters would  adopt  any  other  limitation,  he  would  be  for  it. 
At  present  they  were  making   bad    laws   to   have   them 
repealed.     The  opinion  of  the  Judges  was  against  the  bill. 
This  bill  established  the  old  prerogative,  and  all  its  appur- 
tenances would  come  back  with  it.     They  were  not  called 
upon  penal  laws ;  and  of  all  laws  he  ever  knew,  this  most 
called  for  limitation,     Thurlow  chicaned  in  answer,  and 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  67 

had  the  front  to  affirm  that  the  King  asked  nothing,  but 
that  the  House  pressed  him  to  accept  this  act  for  his 
life  :  there  lay  the  adulation,  he  said.  Did  Mr.  Conway 
think  that  his  taking  one  part,  and  other  gentlemen 
another,  destroyed  the  essence  of  Parliament?  It  was 
better  to  be  against  the  bill  than  endeavour  to  smother 
it  obligingly.  Conway  replied,  that  he  had  said  gentle- 
men had  differed  from  themselves,  not  from  him.  He 
had  also  said  that  he  had  been  told  that  he  was  not 
to  break  into  parties  nor  divide  from  his  friends ;  but 
he  detested  the  odious  principle  of  having  one  opinion 
in  public  and  another  in  private,  which  was  the  case 
of  all  the  Ministry  on  this  bill.  He  knew  opinions  were 
carried  where  they  ought  not  to  go,  and  where  they  were 
misrepresented. 

The  question  for  the  clause  was  put  at  a  little  past  nine 
at  night,  and  rejected  by  150  to  132,  a  majority  of  only 
18  !  Fourteen  persons  were  shut  out  who  had  not  thought 
the  division  would  happen  so  early,  and  twelve  of  them 
would  have  voted  for  the  clause — a  formidable  hint  to 
the  Court  that  the  free  spirit  of  the  nation  was  not  yet 
quite  broken,  and  that  tyranny  could  never  be  established 
by  a  majority  of  eight.  Thus  had  the  pride  and  folly  of 
the  Court,  and  the  despotic  knavery  of  Lord  Mansfield, 
shaken  a  Ministry  so  triumphant,  though  the  Opposition 
had  disbanded  itself  On  January  21st  there  had  not 
been  a  negative  to  the  address ;  on  the  23rd  of  March 
the  Ministry  were  reduced  to  a  majority  of  eight !  May 
arbitrary  power  have  still  worse  success  ! 

On  the  24//^  the  bill  was  reported  to  the  House,  and 
opposed  with  vehemence  by  T.  Townshend.  The  lady 
Arabella  Stuart,  he  said,  was  poisoned^  in  the  reign  of 
James  I.     He  wondered  why  the  precedent  of  poison  had 

^  Bishop  Goodman,  who  censures  some  portion  of  the  conduct  of  his 
master  James  I.  towards  this  unfortunate  lady,  and  justifies  other  portions, 
makes  no  alkision  either  to  the  alleged  poisoning  or  to  the  alleged  lunacy  of 
Lady  Arabella.     See  his  "Court  of  King  James  I." — D. 


68     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

not  been  put  into  the  preamble  :  it  would  have  made  as 
good  a  figure  there  as  prerogative.  The  House  was  pass- 
ing this  bill,  while  a  prince  of  the  blood ^  was  upon  a  sick 
bed  at  Naples,  and  could  not  come  and  protest  against  it. 
One  brother^  was  married,  the  other  absent,  the  children 
of  the  Crown,  infants ;  could  this  bill,  therefore,  pass  at 
present  with  any  propriety?  Let  the  man^  who  framed 
this  bill  apply  his  notions  to  the  family*  to  whom  they 
belonged.  He  hoped  the  doctrines  in  it  would  be  driven 
back  to  the  Star-Chamber,  and  the  author  buried  in  the 
ruins  with  them  !  If  the  Pretender,  with  Lord  Dunbar^ 
at  his  elbow,  had  been  here,  he  could  not  have  planned  a 
bill  more  dangerous  to  the  constitution  or  to  the  liberties 
of  the  people.  Colonel  Barr6  treated  as  severely  both  the 
bill  and  its  author  Mansfield.  Though  the  principle  of 
the  bill,  he  said,  was  styled  regulation,  it  was  in  fact  pre- 
rogative. The  highest  ranks  were  to  be  kept  in  order  for 
fear  of  being  guilty  of  an  impropriety  ;  decency  was  held 
out  to  the  middle  degree  of  people,  threats  and  terrors 
to  the  lower  sort.  As  the  old  Marriage  Act  would  prob- 
ably be  altered,  there  might  have  been  a  clause  inserted 
in  it  to  regulate  the  marriages  of  the  Royal  Family,  which 
would  have  answered  every  purpose.  The  bill  was  not  ill- 
shaped,  though  a  monster ;  it  had  stern  prerogative  for  its 
head  ;  for  its  tail,  bloody  praemunire.  It  had  not  an  Eng- 
lish face.  Charles  II.  said  King  William  had  an  honest 
face,  and  therefore  he  would  have  him  for  his  nephew. 
Lord  North  had  worked  double  sides ;  his  associates  had 
not  supported  him  ;  yet  nothing  was  so  contemptible  as 
the  other  Ministers  sitting  still,  disliking  and  abusing  the 
bill,  yet  giving  a  steady  aye  to  every  part  of  it.  He  wished 
to  alarm  everybody  on  the  bill :  the  man  who  framed  it 

^  The  Duke  of  Gloucester.  ^  The  Duke  of  Cumberland. 

'^  Lord  Mansfield.  ^  The  Stuarts. 

^  First  Minister  to  the  late  Pretender,  and  elder  brother  of  Lord  Mans- 
field. [James ;  he  held  the  title  of  Lord  Dunbar  from  the  Pretender,  and 
died  at  Avignon,  A.D.  1770,  aged  80. — D.] 


1772]  ROYAL   MARRIAGE   BILL  69 

had  his  budget  full  of  such  bills.^  Nothing  but  alarming 
the  minds  of  men  could  put  an  end  to  his  influence.  In 
the  course  of  the  bill  he  had  observed  some  sober  men 
quitting  the  line  of  their  politics,  and  joining  the  opposers 
of  it.  Mr.  Fitzmaurice^  said  the  Ministers  had  been 
ordered  to  defend  the  bill  without  an  argument.  Saw- 
bridge,  that  the  bill  had  been  brought  in  to  satisfy  the 
rancour  of  a  monster,^  and  the  resentment  of  a  man.* 
Lord  North  had  not  yet  acquired  the  gift  of  second  sight, 
though  in  time  he  might,  conversing  as  he  did  with  the 
framer  of  the  bill.  Lord  Mansfield,  for  he  might  name 
him,  had  said  that  juries  were  not  to  judge  of  fact :  should 
he  find  me,  said  Sawbridge,  guilty  of  a  praemunire,  I  should 
indeed  be  in  a  pitiable  case !  The  bill  was  founded  in 
iniquity,  and  would  end  in  a  civil  war. 

The  Ministers  declining  all  these  challenges  and  just 
reproaches,  and  not  a  breath  of  defence  being  even  whis- 
pered in  favour  of  Mansfield,  at  five  in  the  afternoon  the 
bill  was  passed  by  a  majority  of  168  to  115,  and  returned 
to  the  Lords,  who  passed  it  the  next  day  without  a  word 
and  without  a  blush  :  the  bishops  even  without  repentance. 

Yet  had  the  struggle  in  the  Lower  House  been  so  con- 
siderable, that  the  minds  of  true  Englishmen  were  much 
comforted.  They  saw  the  national  spirit  was  not  totally 
gone  ;  and  though  the  King,  amidst  all  his  disgraces,  loved 
to  show  his  Ministers  how  little  they  were  independent, 
and  how  little  they  could  depend  on  him,  still  it  was  not 
likely  that  either  he  or  Mansfield  would  have  spirit  enough 
to  return  soon  to  the  charge,  though  neither  would  aban- 
don his  views.  But  if  the  King  had  shown  Lord  North 
that  he  was  not  to  be  trusted,  he  had  on  his  side  ex- 
perienced that  he  could  not  trust  his  own  tools.  Even 
Dyson  and  Dr.  Hay  had  declined  all  defence  of  the  bill, 

^  This  proved  a  prophecy ;  Lord  Mansfield  had  then  drawn  the  Popish 
code  for  Canada,  which  in  very  few  years  after  he  promulgated. 
^  Brother  of  Lord  Shelburne. 
3  Lord  Mansfield.  "*  The  King. 


70     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

the  former  by  silence,  the  latter  by  not  saying  a  word  but 
on  a  point  of  order.  Even  fawning  Lord  Barrington  had 
in  private  company  been  so  bold  as  to  say  the  bill  would 
politically  unman  the  Royal  Family.  But  a  more  remarkable 
secret  came  out.  Very  few  days  before  the  conclusion  of 
the  bill,  young  Mr.  Crawford,  mentioned  above,  told  me 
this  story.  He  gave  a  dinner  to  his  countryman  Alexander 
Wedderburn  the  Solicitor-General,  to  Charles  Fox,  and 
others.  They  got  drunk ;  and  in  his  cups  Wedderburn 
blabbed  that  he  and  Thurlow  had  each  drawn  the  plan  of 
an  unexceptionable  bill,  but  that  Lord  Mansfield  had  said 
they  were  both  nonsense,  had  rejected  them,  and  then 
himself  drew  the  present  bill.  "And  damn  him!"  added 
Wedderburn  ;  "  when  he  called  my  bill  nonsense,  did  he 
think  I  would  defend  him  ?  "  In  the  course  of  the  debates 
I  have  given  very  inadequate  ideas  of  the  speeches  of 
Burke,  Charles  Fox,  and  Wedderburn,  three  excellent 
orators  in  different  ways.  I  could  only  relate  what  I  heard 
at  secondhand,  or  from  notes  communicated  to  me,  which 
must  be  imperfect  when  not  taken  in  short-hand.  Burke's 
wit,  allusions,  and  enthusiasm  were  striking,  but  not 
imposing.  Wedderburn  was  a  sharp  and  clear  arguer, 
though  unequal.  Charles  Fox,  much  younger  than  either, 
was  universally  allowed  to  have  seized  the  just  point  of 
argument  throughout,  with  most  amazing  rapidity  and 
clearness,  and  to  have  excelled  even  Charles  Townshend 
as  a  parliament  man,  though  inferior  in  wit  and  in  variety 
of  talents.  Lord  North  did  not  much  shine  but  by  the 
respect  paid  to  his  irreproachable  character.  Conway's 
integrity,  ever  at  war  with  his  fortune  or  his  judgment, 
gained  great  honour,  but  his  understanding  often  lost 
ground  by  his  refining  fickleness.  Phipps,^  though  not 
admired,  showed  much  wit.  The  Speaker  confirmed  the 
reputation  of  his  knavery,  and  lost  much  of  his  character 
for  abilities.     But  enough  of  that  bill  !      Never  was  an 

^  Eldest  son  of  Lord  Mulgrave. 


1772]  AFFAIRS   OF   IRELAND  71 

act  passed  against  which  so  much,  and /^r  which  so  little, 
was  said. 

All  this  time  the  public  obtained  no  light  into  what  was 
passing  in  Denmark.  All  that  came  out  was,  that  about 
the  13th  or  14th  the  King  received  a  letter  from  Keith 
that  he  hoped  by  the  next  post  to  be  able  to  tell  his 
Majesty  that  the  life  of  the  Queen,  his  sister,  was  safe — 
which  intimated  what  bloody  designs  had  been  conceived 
against  her.  Struensee  was  under  examination,  and,  it 
was  said,  would  discover  nothing. 

The  Irish  Opposition,  besides  being  divided  amongst 
themselves,  received  a  great  blow  by  the  defection  of  Lord 
Shannon,^  who  sold  himself  and  friends  to  the  Court.  At 
the  same  time  there  were  ugly  disturbances  in  the  north 
of  Ireland.  Lord  Donegal,^  a  very  weak  creature,  had 
married  a  daughter  of  a  Duke  of  Hamilton.  Her  aunt, 
Lady  Charlotte  Edwin,  an  avaricious  Scotchwoman,  re- 
commended to  them  a  knavish  attorney,  who  went  over, 
and  raised  the  rents  with  so  much  harshness  and  tyranny, 
that  the  lord  brought  back  100,000/.,  and  the  attorney 
18,000/.  The  poor  tenants  offered  to  increase  their  rents, 
but  the  extortioner  insisted  on  heavy  fines,  which  they 
could  not  pay,  and  were  driven  out  starving.  They  rose 
in  arms  to  the  number  of  4000  men,  all  Protestants,  and 
refusing  junction  with  Papists.  The  latter  still  existed,  in 
small  bodies,  under  the  title  of  Whiteboys.  Other  insur- 
gents, dissatisfied  with  enclosures,  called  themselves  Hearts 
of  Oak.  The  new  rioters  assumed  the  denomination  of 
Hearts  of  Steel.  With  melancholy  despair  they  com- 
mitted great  outrages ;  attacked  the  house  of  an  active 
justice  of  peace,  who  escaped  with  difficulty,  but,  as  they 
shot   into   the   house,   they  killed   a   clergyman.      Three 

^  Boyle,  Earl  of  Shannon,  son  of  the  late  Speaker,  who  had  also  sold 
himself. 

2  Arthur,  ist  Marquis  of  Donegal  (1739-1799),  married  first,  1761,  Anne 
daughter  of  the  5th  Duke  of  Hamilton.  She  died  in  1780,  having  been 
mother  of  his  heir. — A.  F.  S. 


72     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

detachments  of  infantry,  under  Colonel  Gisbourn,  were 
sent  against  them,  and  a  regiment  was  ordered  from 
Scotland. 

loth.  The  oppressions  of  India,  and  even  of  the  English 
settled  there,  under  the  rapine  and  cruelties  of  the  servants 
of  the  Company,  had  now  reached  England,  and  created 
great  clamour  here.  Some  books  had  been  published, 
particularly  by  one  Bolts  and  Mr.  Dow,  the  first  a  man 
of  bad  character,  the  latter  of  a  very  fair  one,  which 
carried  the  accusations  home  to  Lord  Clive ;  and  the 
former  represented  him  as  a  monster  in  assassination, 
usurpation,  and  extortion,  with  heavy  accusations  of  his 
monopolising  in  open  defiance  of  the  orders  of  the  Com- 
pany,— the  latter  charge  being  confirmed  by  letters  under 
his  own  hand.  To  such  monopolies  were  imputed  the  late 
famine  in  Bengal,  and  the  loss  of  three  millions  of  the 
inhabitants.  A  tithe  of  these  crimes  was  sufficient  to 
inspire  horror.  The  Company  now  applied  to  Parliament 
themselves,  desiring  some  regulation,  and  this  day  two 
of  the  Directors  moved  for  a  bill  to  reform  the  courts  of 
justice  in  India,  to  send  three  dictators  thither,  and  to 
settle  appeals  to  this  country.  Cornwall,  Barre,  and  others 
demanded  previously  a  Committee  to  inquire  into  the 
abuses  complained  of.  Mr.  Rumbold^  denied  the  greater 
part  of  the  charge,  allowed  Dow  was  an  honest  but  disap- 
pointed man,  said  much  against  Bolts,  and  denied  the 
depopulation  of  the  country.  Lord  Clive  then  rose,  and 
in  a  speech 2  of  two  hours  made  a  much-admired  defence 
of  himself,  though  he  could  not  wipe  off  the  accusation  of 
monopoly :  in  some  points  he  cleared  himself,  but  till  the 
examination  into  facts  his  bare  denial  or  act  could  not 

\  This  Rumbold  went  again  to  India,  returned  with  a  vast  fortune,  and 
was  prosecuted  by  the  House  of  Commons  in  1782.  [The  prosecution  was, 
however,  abandoned. — D.] 

'■^  One  of  Lord  Clive's  complaints  was  that  English  candidates  for  writer- 
ships  in  India  were  merely  asked  if  they  could  *' write  and  cipher,"  and  that 
an  affirmative  reply  was  deemed  a  suitable  qualification  for  rendering  them 
eligible  to  become  the  future  administrators  of  India. — D. 


1772]    CHARGE  AGAINST  QUEEN  OF  DENMARK       73 

disculpate  Him.  Lord  North  said  he  saw  no  reason  for 
deferring  the  bill,  but  he  should  not  be  against  a  Com- 
mittee of  Inquiry.  Burke  reproached  him  with  having 
prepared  no  plan  for  settling  that  country.  Leave  was 
given  for  bringing  in  the  bill. 

The  history  of  Indian  affairs  is  too  vast  to  enter  into 
the  compass  of  such  a  journal  as  this:  nor  shall  I  attempt 
it.  Our  concerns  are  become  so  extensive  and  so  various 
that  they  must  baffle  the  knowledge  and  attention  of  any 
single  man.  What  book  can  contain  them  ?  Into  what 
one  narrative  will  they  not  throw  confusion  ?  How  little 
resemblance  between  the  affairs  of  America  and  Bengal ! 
Who  is  master  of  both?  I  shall  only  touch  on  either 
as  they  arise  on  the  scene.  Even  my  Memoirs  did  not 
pretend  to  embrace  the  whole  of  our  system  ;  but  to  assist 
future  historians  with  such  lights  as  came  to  my  know- 
ledge. This  journal  is  rather  calculated  for  my  own 
amusement  than  for  posterity.  I  like  to  keep  up  the 
thread  of  my  observations ;  if  they  prove  useful  to  any- 
body else,  I  shall  be  glad ;  but  I  am  not  to  answer  for 
their  imperfections,  as  I  intend  this  journal  for  no  regular 
work. 

SUPPLEMENT 

A  rticles  from  the  Public  Papers^  the  truth  of  which 
I  do  not  warrant 

Hamburgh^  Feb.  26th. — It  is  said  that  the  Sieur  Struensee, 
Superintendent-General  of  the  Churches  in  the  Duchies  of 
Sleswick  and  Holstein,  was  seized  with  a  fit  of  apoplexy  upon 
receiving  the  news  of  his  son  Count  Struensee's  imprisonment,  and 
died  upon  the  spot.  He  often  expressed  great  concern  at  the 
rapid  advancement  of  his  son ;  and  when  he  heard  that  he  was 
made  Prime  Minister,  he  said  with  great  warmth,  that  he  had 
rather  have  received  advice  of  his  death. 


74     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

London^  Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Copenhagen^  dated  Feb.  22?td — 
Yesterday  morning  the  Commission  of  Inquiry  went  to  the 
Citadel,  and  opened  their  commission  in  the  Governor's  house 
for  the  examination  of  the  state  prisoners.  They  began  with 
Count  Struensee,  who  was  brought  in  the  Governor's  coach  about 
ten  o'clock  from  his  place  of  confinement,  guarded  by  two 
sergeants  and  four  grenadiers  with  their  bayonets  fixed.  He  had  on 
a  blue  suit  of  clothes,  and  as  he  had  not  been  shaved  for  five  weeks 
his  beard  was  very  long.  At  the  entrance  of  the  room  where  the 
Commissioners  sat  his  chains  were  taken  off,  and  he  was  permitted 
to  sit  down  during  his  examination,  which  lasted  till  two  o'clock, 
when  he  was  sent  back  to  prison ;  and  at  four  o'clock  he  was 
brought  again,  when  his  examination  continued  till  after  seven  in 
the  evening.  He  showed  a  great  deal  of  uneasiness  all  the  time 
of  his  going  and  coming  from  examination.  All  we  can  learn 
with  respect  to  his  examination  is,  that  he  denied  the  charge  that 
was  laid  against  him.  He  was  shown  the  instruments  of  the 
torture  he  was  to  undergo  if  he  would  not  confess ;  but  he  said 
they  would  get  Httle  out  of  him  by  such  means,  as  he  always 
acted  according  to  his  conscience.  One  of  the  Commissioners 
fell  into  a  passion  with  him,  to  whom  he  replied,  "  That  as  he 
was  cool,  he  hoped  they  would  be  so  too  ; "  but  at  last  he  burst 
into  tears,  confessed  his  guilt,  and  begged  for  mercy.  When  he 
was  ordered  back  to  prison,  he  desired  to  have  a  little  time 
allowed  him  to  compose  himself.  Major  Falckenschiold  is  taken 
into  custody,  and  guarded  in  his  own  house  by  two  Serjeants  and 
four  soldiers.  He  wrote  a  note  to  his  brother  the  colonel,  and 
gave  it  to  his  friseur,  who  put  it  under  his  neckcloth,  but  the  officer 
observing  it  took  it  and  delivered  it  to  the  Commissioners. 

The  King's  messenger,  who  was  sent  to  London  on  the  1 8th  of 
last  month  (Mr.  Brummer),  is  returned  with  despatches  of  conse- 
quence. Everybody  is  desirous  to  know  whether  the  letters  that 
are  brought  from  London  to  the  Queen  will  be  delivered  to  her 
at  the  Castle  of  Cronenburg.  The  Cabinet  Secretary,  Paning,  is 
since  his  examination  closer  confined  than  he  was  before;  he 
cannot  see  his  wife  nor  children. 

Three  Secretaries  are  appointed  to  the  Commission  for  the 
more  speedy  expedition  of  the  trials  of  the  state  prisoners.  More 
persons  are  taken  into  custody  every  day  for  conspiracy. 


1772]    CHARGE  AGAINST  QUEEN  OF  DENMARK       75 

Since  our  last  arrived  the  Mails  from  Holland  and  France. 

Copenhagen^  Feb.  11th, — The  Commission  appointed  to  try  the 
prisoners  of  state  has  published  an  order  that  all  persons  who 
have  received  presents  from  the  Counts  Struensee  and  De  Brandt 
in  the  name  of  the  King  and  Queen  are  to  return  them. 

The  expedition  against  Algiers  will  not  take  place;  in  con- 
sequence of  which  the  sailors  who  were  here  on  that  account 
have  received  passports  to  return  home. 

Altona^Feb.  id>th. — The  following  couplet  on  Count  Struensee 
is  handed  about  here  : — 

Sic  Regi  Mala  multa  Struens  se  perdidit  ipse, 
Jam  vinctus  Claustris,  qui  mode  Victor  erat. 

London. — The  following  letter  was  lately  written  by  the  King 
of  Denmark  to  his  Queen  : — 

"  Madam  :  I  pity  your  present  just  fate.  Let  this  prove  my 
last  adieu.     I  wish  you  a  sincere  and  Christian  repentance. 

"Christian  Rex." 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Copenhagen^  Feb.  i^th. — The 
examined  papers  of  the  state  prisoners  turn  clearly  against 
them,  notwithstanding  the  Court  shows  all  the  lenity  possible  to 
them.  Yesterday  noon  the  English  Minister,  Colonel  Keith, 
had  an  audience  of  his  Danish  Majesty,  in  the  presence  of  his 
Privy  Council,  on  account  of  despatches  he  received  from  his 
Court. 

Two  Cabinet  Secretaries,  two  ladies  belonging  to  the  Queen, 
the  waiting  woman  to  the  young  Prince,  the  two  young  Black- 
moors  that  attended  occasionally  upon  the  Queen  and  upon  the 
Royal  Family,  and  about  twenty  other  persons  were  this  week 
examined  before  the  Commissioners,  and  next  week  the  examina- 
tion of  the  state  prisoners  will  begin.  General  Schmidt  is 
appointed  ex  parte  to  the  Commission  of  the  Inquisition. 
Admiral  Hausen  is  so  far  free  that  he  has  no  guard  set  over  him, 
but  is  not  permitted  to  go  out  of  his  house ;  one  of  the  Queen's 
ladies  who  was  under  arrest  is  set  at  liberty.  On  Wednesday 
morning  arrived  Monsieur  Ernst,  Colonel  Keith's  Secretary,  from 


76     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [March 

England,  who  was  sent  from  hence  thither  the  i8th  of  last 
month.  In  the  Castle  are  three  rooms  fitted  up  for  Colonel 
Falckenschiold,  Lieut.-General  Hesselberg,  and  Counsellor  Sturk. 
This  is  done  for  the  convenience  of  the  Commissioners;  the 
examination  of  those  is  to  begin  on  Thursday  next,  on  account 
that  they  may  be  near  at  hand.  Counsellor  Sturtz  was  for  the 
first  time  under  examination  on  Friday  last  by  the  members  of 
the  Commission,  and  waspermitted  pen,  ink,  and  paper;  after 
he  had  written  about  two  sheets  they  were  taken  from  him  by  the 
major  of  the  guard. 

The  Danish  Ambassador  to  the  British  Court,  Baron  de 
Dieden,  who  had  leave  of  absence,  is  ordered  immediately  to 
repair  to  London. 

The  two  clergymen  belonging  to  the  garrison  of  Helsingor  and 
Cronenburg  have  received  orders  from  the  King  to  preach  by 
turns  before  the  Queen,  the  one  in  German,  the  other  in  the 
Danish  language. 

Letters  from  Copenhagen  mention  that  the  Queen  is  now  per- 
mitted to  walk  out  two  miles  distant  from  the  Castle  of  Cronen- 
burg.    Her  name  is  omitted  in  the  public  prayers. 


1772] 


APRIL 


ird. 


jL  MESSAGE  being  sent  from  the  Lords  to  the 
/^        House  of  Commons,  and  but  one  Master  in 

/ — ^  Chancery  being  in  waiting,  a  clerk  was  sent 
-A-  JiL^  down  with  him,  dressed  like  another  Master, 
which  it  was  said  was  not  unprecedented.  However,  Mr. 
W.  Burke^  and  Mr.  Dempster  took  this  up  with  great 
warmth,  and  complained  of  it  as  an  indignity,  at  the  same 
time  calling  to  the  memory  of  the  House  the  insulting 
manner  in  which  their  members  had  been  turned  out 
of  the  House  of  Lords  the  last  year ;  and  a  later  affront 
this  session,  when  the  Speaker  had  gone  up  to  hear  the 
King's  speech,  and  before  the  Speaker  could  retire  several 
Lords  had  cried  out  "  Clear  the  House ! "  The  House 
grew  very  angry  on  these  representations,  and  it  was 
moved,  after  refusing  to  hear  the  messengers,  to  appoint 
a  Committee  to  inquire  into  the  improper  behaviour  of  the 
Lords.  The  House  was  very  thin,  and  few  of  the  courtiers 
there.  Lord  North  and  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  seeing  the 
Opposition  endeavoured  to  make  a  breach  between  the 
two  Houses,  did  all  they  could  to  prevent  it.  They 
represented  against  the  word  improper  as  prejudging  the 
case,  and  urged  that  it  ought  to  be  seen  whether  the  Lords 
would  not  make  excuses.  It  was  carried  but  by  a 
majority  of  three  to  omit  improper ;  but  a  Committee  of 
Inquiry  was  voted. 

\th.  Sir  Henry  Houghton^  made  a  motion  in  the  House 

^  Cousin  of  Edmund.  See  Walpole's  "  Memoirs  of  George  III,,"  vol.  ii. 
p.  273.— D. 

^  Member  for  Preston.     He  died  in  1795. — ^' 

n 


78        LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  VVALPOLE    [April 

of  Commons  in  behalf  of  Protestant  Dissenters,  in  order 
to  take  off  the  obligation  on  them  of  subscribing  to  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles.  As  the  Bishops  would  not  consent 
to  this,  though  the  penalty  was  never  enforced,  Lord  North 
and  the  Ministers  in  the  Commons,  that  the  members 
might  not  disoblige  their  Dissenting  constituents  by  oppos- 
ing the  relief,  determined  to  take  no  part,  but  to  leave  it 
to  the  Lords  to  throw  out  the  Bill ;  on  which  leave  was 
given  to  bring  it  in. 

It  began  to  be  believed  that  the  governing  party  in 
Denmark  was  too  narrow,  and  consequently  not  popular. 
The  Queen  Dowager  sent  to  her  father  the  Duke  of 
Brunswick  to  consult  him  on  her  conduct.  He  replied,  as 
she  had  not  asked  his  advice  in  time,  he  desired  now  to  be 
excused  from  giving  any ;  nor  did  he  approve  of  what  she 
had  done.  It  was  said,  but  not  so  authentically,  that  she 
made  the  same  application  to  the  King  of  Prussia,  and 
received  a  like  answer.  Struensee  and  Brandt  had  under- 
gone several  examinations,  and  an  account  of  their  execu- 
tion was  expected  soon. 

The  insurgents  in  Ireland  dispersed  themselves  on  the 
approach  of  the  regular  forces  ;  but,  as  the  latter  were  not 
numerous,  it  was  feared  they  would  reassemble  on  the  first 
opportunity. 

An  account  came  of  the  Pretender  being  married  at 
Paris  by  proxy  to  a  Princess  of  Stolberg.  She  was  elder 
sister  of  the  wife  of  the  "  Marquis  de  la  Jama'i'que,"  ^  only 
son  of  the  Duke  of  Berwick.  Those  sisters  were  descended 
from  Thomas  Bruce,  Earl  of  Ailesbury,  who  died  an 
outlaw  for  King  James  at  Brussels,  and  one  of  whose 
daughters  married  the  Prince  of  Home.     Many  persons 

^  Charles  Richard,  Marquis  de  la  Jamaique,  son  of  the  3rd  Due  de  Berwick, 
married,  in  1771,  Caroline  Auguste,  second  daughter  of  Gustavus  Adolphus, 
Prince  of  Stolberg-Guedern.  She  re-married  Prince  Castelfranco.  Her 
mother,  the  "  old  Princess  of  Stolberg,"  was  daughter  and  co-heiress  of 
Maximilian  Emmanuel,  3rd  Prince  de  Homes,  by  his  wife  Lady  Marie  Therese 
Charlotte  Bruce,  Baronne  de  Melbroeck. — A.  F.  S. 


1772]  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  PRETENDER  79 

had  believed  that  the  Pretender,  had  turned  Protestant 
a  few  years  ago.  General  Redmond,  a  brave  old  Irish 
officer  in  the  French  service  and  a  Roman  Catholic, 
told  Lord  Holland  that  the  Pretender  had  abjured  the 
Roman  religion  at  Liege,  and  that  the  Irish  Catholics 
had  withdrawn  their  contributions  on  that  account.  This 
seemed  to  excuse  the  injustice  of  the  Court  of  Rome, 
which  had  refused  him  the  title  of  King,  though  his 
family  had  lost  a  kingdom  for  that  Church.  The  Pope 
had  withdrawn  the  pension  paid  to  the  father,  only 
allowing  the  Cardinal  of  York  to  give  up  his  pension 
to  his  brother,  who  was  now  said,  but  I  doubt  it,  to 
have  25,000/.  sterling  a-year.  His  marriage  in  a  family 
connected  with  the  bigoted  house  of  Fitzjames  did  not 
look  as  if  he  was  turned  Protestant.  When  the  bride 
approached  Rome,  the  Pretender  went  to  meet  her  at 
Loreto,  and  first  conducted  her  to  a  villa  of  Cardinal 
Marefoschi  at  Macerata,  and  thence  to  Rome,  where,  the 
moment  he  was  arrived,  he  notified  to  the  Cardinal  Secre- 
tary of  State  and  to  the  Maestro  di  Camera  his  return  colla 
Regina  sua  Consorte.  This  gave  great  offence,  and  his 
messenger  was  told  that  no  such  person  could  be  in  Rome. 
His  insisting  on  her  assuming  the  title  of  Queen,  contrary 
to  her  own  and  the  Cardinal  of  York,  his  brother's,  earnest 
entreaties,  was  a  cruel  circumstance  on  her,  as  it  condemned 
her  to  live  in  solitude  with  him,  who  was  drunk  half  the 
day  and  mad  the  other  ;  for  as  the  Pope  would  not  acknow- 
ledge him  or  her  for  King  or  Queen,  the  Roman  nobility, 
sufficiently  proud,  would  not  pay  her  the  honours  he  re- 
quired, and  consequently  could  not  visit  her. 

Jth.  Wilkes  and  Bull,  six  months  of  their  sheriffalty 
being  expired,  published  a  very  bold  letter  in  the  news- 
papers, in  which  they  not  only  vaunted  their  services  by 
attention  to  prisoners,  &c.,  but  boasted  that  they  had  got 
the  better  of  the  arbitrary  prosecutions  of  printers  by  the 
House  of  Lords,  who  no  longer  dared  to  punish  them  for 


8o        LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [April 

publishing  the  debates.     The  latter  spoke,  too,  of  the  Mar- 
riage Bill,  of  the  Lord  Mayor,  &c. 

yth.  Though  I  had  never  been  in  the  House  of  Commons 
since  I  had  quitted  Parliament,  the  fame  of  Charles  Fox 
raised  my  curiosity,  and  I  went  this  day  to  hear  him.  He 
made  his  motion  for  leave  to  bring  in  a  bill  to  correct  the 
old  Marriage  Bill,  and  he  introduced  it  with  ease,  grace, 
and  clearness,  and  without  the  prepared  or  elegant  formality 
of  a  young  speaker.  He  did  not  shine  particularly  ;  but 
his  sense  and  facility  showed  he  could  shine.  He  said,  the 
two  great  points  of  the  former  bill  were  to  fix  the  notoriety 
of  marriages,  and  to  prevent  improper  marriages  by  estab- 
lishing a  nullity.  He  approved  the  first ;  he  highly  con- 
demned the  second.  To  encourage  marriage  by  facilities 
was  the  business  of  a  republican  kind  of  government ;  but 
the  late  bill  had  been  the  work  of  a  proud  aristocracy,  and 
he  believed  had  hurt  propagation,  though  he  was  not  ready 
with  proofs  that  it  had.  Colonel  Burgoyne,  a  pompous 
man,  whose  speeches  were  studied  and  yet  not  striking, 
seconded  him.  Lord  North,  who  had  declared  he  would 
not  oppose  the  introduction  of  the  new  bill,  now  unhand- 
somely opposed  it,  to  please  the  Yorkes  and  the  Peers, 
and  spoke  well.  He  said,  formerly  the  bill  had  been  matter 
of  speculation  ;  it  was  no  longer  so :  twenty  years  had  shown 
its  utility;  it  ought  not  to  be  laid  aside  unless  proofs  could 
be  brought  that  it  had  done  hurt.  T.  Townshend  supported 
the  motion.  Ellis,  who  owned  he  had  been  strongly  against 
the  old  bill,  said  he  had  been  converted  to  it  in  many  points 
(by  Lord  North's  supporting  it),  but  should  not  oppose 
considering  how  to  amend  it.  Ongley  and  Cornwall  were, 
the  first  for  the  old,  the  second  for  the  new  bill.  Cornwall  ^ 
was  a  comely  sensible  man,  decent  in  his  manner  and 
matter,  but  of  no  vivacity.     Burke  made  a  long  and  fine 

^  He  was  afterwards  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons. 

The  "  Rolliad"  alludes  to  his  porter-drinking  propensities.  He  died  during 
the  session  of  1789;  and  was  succeeded  by  Mr.  (afterwards  Lord)  Grenville. 
— D. 


1772]  FOX,   TOWNSHEND,    BURKE  8i 

oration  against  the  motion  ;  for  Burke  was  certainly  in  his 
principles  no  moderate  man,  and,  when  his  party  did  not 
interfere,  generally  leaned  towards  the  more  arbitrary  side, 
as  had  appeared  on  the  late  debates  on  the  Church,  in  which 
he  had  declared  for  the  clergy.  He  laid  his  chief  stress  on 
the  impropriety  of  allowing  men  to  beget  children  till  they 
were  of  an  age  by  strength  and  prudence  to  maintain  them. 
He  spoke  with  a  choice  and  variety  of  language,  a  profusion 
of  metaphors,  and  yet  with  a  correctness  in  his  diction  that 
were  surprising.  His  fault  was  copiousness  above  measure, 
and  he  dealt  abundantly  too  much  in  establishing  general 
positions.  Two-thirds  of  this  oration  resembled  the  be- 
ginning of  a  book  on  speculative  doctrines,  and  yet  argu- 
ment was  not  the  forte  of  it.  Charles  Fox,  who  had  been 
running  about  the  House  talking  to  different  persons  and 
scarce  listening  to  Burke,  rose  with  amazing  spirit  and 
memory,  answered  both  Lord  North  and  Burke,  ridiculed^ 
the  arguments  of  the  former  and  confuted  those  of  the  latter 
with  a  shrewdness  that,  from  its  multiplicity  of  reasons,  as 
much  exceeded  his  father  in  embracing  all  the  arguments  of 
his  antagonists,  as  he  did  in  his  manner  and  delivery.  Lord 
Holland  was  always  confused  before  he  could  clear  up  the 
point,  fluttered  and  hesitated,  wanted  diction,  and  laboured 
only  one  forcible  conclusion.  Charles  Fox  had  great 
facility  of  delivery ;  his  words  flowed  rapidly,  but  he  had 
nothing  of  Burke's  variety  of  language  or  correctness,  nor 
his  method.  Yet  his  arguments  were  far  more  shrewd  ; 
he  was  many  years  younger.^  Burke  was  indefatigable, 
learned,  and  versed  in  every  branch  of  eloquence.  Fox 
was  dissolute,  dissipated,  idle  beyond  measure.     He  was 

^  He  said  ingeniously  that  the  clandestine  marriages  made  in  Scotland  had 
prevented  some  of  the  bad  effects  of  the  bill ;  and  yet  that  he  disliked  those 
marriages,  because,  by  preventing  those  mischiefs,  they  had  prevented  the 
repeal  of  the  bill.  He  maintained  what  Burke  had  denied,  that  it  was  an 
aristocratic  bill  ;  and  he  asked  if  it  was  the  mildness  of  the  aristocracy  that 
had  spved  the  bill,  when  a  repeal  of  it  had  twice  passed  the  House  of 
Commons? 

"^  Burke  was  born  in  1730;  Fox  in  1749. — D. 


82        LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [April 

that  very  morning  returned  from  Newmarket,  where  he 
had  lost  some  thousand  pounds  the  preceding  day.  He 
had  stopped  at  Hockerel,  where  he  found  company,  had 
sat  up  drinking  all  night,  and  had  not  been  in  bed  when 
he  came  to  move  his  bill,  which  he  had  not  even  drawn 
up.  This  was  genius — was  almost  inspiration.  Being  so 
extremely  young,  he  appeared  in  that  light  a  greater 
prodigy  than  the  famous  Charles  Townshend.  Towns- 
hend's  speeches  for  four  or  five  years  gave  little  indication 
of  his  amazing  parts.  They  were  studied,  pedantic,  and 
like  the  dissertations  of  Burke,  with  less  brilliancy.  When 
he  attained  his  maturity  he  exceeded  everybody.  Charles 
Fox  approached  to  Charles  Townshend  only  in  argument. 
Though  Townshend  grew  idle,  he  had  taken  pains.  Both 
could  illuminate  themselves  from  the  slightest  hints ;  but 
Townshend's  wit  exceeded  even  Burke's,  and  was  abrupt 
and  unprepared,  which  Burke's  was  not,  and  he  could 
shine  in  every  science,  in  every  profession,  with  a  quarter 
of  Burke's  application.  All  three  were  vain,  and  kept 
down  by  no  modesty.  Townshend  knew  his  superiority 
over  all  men,  and  talked  of  it ;  Fox  showed  that  he 
thought  as  well  of  himself;  Burke  endeavoured  to  make 
everybody  think  so  of  him.  Burke  had  most  ambition, 
and  little  judgment ;  Townshend  no  judgment,  and  most 
vanity ;  Fox  most  judgment  in  his  speeches,  and  none  of 
Townshend's  want  of  courage  and  truth.  If  Fox  once 
reflects  and  abandons  his  vices,  in  which  he  is  as  proud 
of  shining  as  by  his  parts,  he  will  excel  Burke ;  for  of  all 
the  politicians  of  talents  I  ever  knew,  Burke  has  the 
least  political  art.  None  of  the  three  was  well  calculated 
to  command  adherents.  No  man  could  trust  or  believe 
Townshend ;  and  though  he  would  flatter  grossly,  he 
would  the  next  moment  turn  the  same  men  into  ridicule. 
Fox  was  too  confident  and  overbearing;  Burke  had  no 
address  or  insinuation.  Men  of  less  talents  are  more 
capable  of  succeeding  by  art,  observation,  and  assiduity. 


1772]  GRANT   TO   LORD   ROCHFORD  83 

The  House  dividing,  Lord  North  was  beaten  by  62  to 
61 — a  disgraceful  event  for  a  Prime  Minister.  Since  he 
would  oppose  Fox's  motion,  contrary  to  his  declaration, 
he  ought  to  have  taken  care  to  have  his  members  about 
him  ;  but  he  daily  showed  that  he  was  only  a  subservient 
minister ;  the  Scotch  cabal  and  the  Tories  could  sway 
him  as  they  pleased,  and  his  negligence  demonstrated 
that  he  followed  their  dictates,  not  his  own  objects.  In 
fact,  he  disliked  his  post,  and  retained  it  only  from  hopes 
of  securing  some  considerable  emoluments  for  his  family. 
He  was  indolent,^  good-humoured,  void  of  affectation  of 
dignity,  void  of  art ;  and  his  parts  and  the  goodness  of 
his  character  would  have  raised  him  much  higher  in  the 
opinion  of  mankind,  if  he  had  cared  either  for  power  or 
applause. 

Two  strong  objections  against  the  old  bill  came  out, 
which  called  loudly  for  reconsideration.  Lord  Mansfield 
had  expressed  doubts  on  the  clandestine  marriages  in 
Scotland,  and  had  advised  some  persons  married  there  to 
be  married  again  legally.  The  other  was  still  more 
crying :  a  young  man  could  marry,  complying  with  the 
other  forms,  by  swearing  he  was  of  age.  Should  it  come 
out  twenty  years  afterwards  that  he  had  sworn  falsely, 
whether  by  design  or  by  ignorance,  the  marriage  would 
be  null,  and  his  children  irretrievably  bastards. 

Lord  Rochford  obtained  a  grant  of  an  island  near 
Pennsylvania,  which  he  immediately  sold  for  20,000/.     It 

^  Lord  North  sometimes  slept  in  the  House ;  sometimes  only  feigned  to 
sleep ;  and  at  others  wished  he  were  able  to  sleep.  Burke,  on  one  occasion, 
when  Lord  North  was  in  as  deep  a  slumber  during  a  debate  as  the  Duchess 
of  Northumberland  at  a  royal  drawing-room,  referred  to  him  under  the 
figure  of  Lazarus  sleeping.  It  was  on  one  of  his  sudden  awakings  from  a  fit 
of  somnolency  that,  in  starting  up,  he  unconsciously  carried  off  Welbore 
Ellis's  wig  (who  sat  before  him)  on  the  handle  of  his  dress-sword.  About 
this  time  he  was  elected  Knight  of  the  Garter  ;  and  he  practised  the  charity 
enjoined  by  the  rules  of  chivalry,  by  a  distribution  every  Sunday  morning,  at 
the  door  of  his  residence  in  Downing-street,  of  broken  victuals  and  five 
shillings  and  threepence  to  each  of  twenty  poor  persons  there  assembled 
by  order. — D, 


84        LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [April 

was  an  island  off  Pennsylvania,  and  came  out  to  be  the 
property  of  Mr.  Penn,  who  was  called  before  the  Council 
and  asked  what  he  had  to  say  in  behalf  of  his  pretensions? 
He  replied,  "  A  great  deal,  for  the  island  was  his."  He 
was  asked  in  what  time  he  could  make  out  his  right  ?  He 
said  he  would  endeavour  to  prove  it  in  six  weeks.  They 
allowed  him  six  days ;  but  they  soon  found  he  was  in  the 
right,  and  Lord  Rochford  lost  his  grant,  which  he  had  only 
sold  conditionally.  I  was  told  it  was  given  him  as  a  bribe 
to  take  the  Lieutenancy  of  Ireland  ;  but  I  am  not  sure  of 
the  fact.  Indeed,  nobody  cared  to  go  thither,  though  the 
insurrection  was  suppressed,  and  several  of  the  poor 
wretches  found  guilty,  whom  it  was  difficult  not  to  pity, 
though  they  had  committed  great  outrages  and  barbari- 
ties, from  their  oppressions. 

(^th.  The  Report  was  made  to  the  House  from  the  Com- 
mittee appointed  to  inquire  into  the  ill-treatment  of  the 
Speaker  and  Commons  by  the  Lords.  The  Speaker,  who 
was  in  exceedingly  bad  odour  for  veracity,  had  deposed 
much  less  before  the  Committee  than  he  asserted  in  the 
House,  which  gave  room  to  the  ministerial  party,  who 
feared  a  breach  with  the  Lords,  to  excuse  the  latter,  and 
to  resist  two  motions  made  by  the  Opposition — one  for 
sending  back  the  bills  unpassed,  the  other  for  a  confer- 
ence. Both  were  rejected  by  above  two  to  one,  and  a 
resolution  was  carried  to  represent  to  the  Lords  that  their 
behaviour,  having  been  unusual,  it  was  hoped  would  not  be 
drawn  into  precedent,  the  Commons  desiring  a  good  corre- 
spondence with  them.  The  Lords  answered  that  they  were 
equally  desirous  of  harmony,  and  should  give  no  occasion 
to  interrupt  it. 

\lth.  Colonel  Burgoyne  moved  for  a  Committee  to  in- 
quire into  the  abuses  in  India.  It  was  discussed,  rather 
than  opposed,  till  eleven  at  night.  Lord  North  said  he 
did  not  understand  those  affairs,  and  wished  to  have  them 
examined  for  his  own  information  :  Lord  Clive  defended 


1772J    IMMODERATE  DEARNESS  OF  PROVISIONS      85 

himself  by  affirmations.  A  Select  Committee  of  thirty- 
one  was  ordered  to  be  chosen  by  ballot ;  they  were  chosen, 
and  sat  during  the  holidays. 

Great  insurrections  at  Sudbury,  Colchester,  and  Chelms- 
ford, on  the  immoderate  dearness  of  provisions.^ 

^  These  food-riots  extended  to  London.  The  conduct  of  the  mob  at  nearly 
every  locality  where  a  riot  occurred  was  systematic.  It  was  their  custom  to 
seize  meat  and  other  provisions  brought  to  market :  sell  what  they  seized  at  a 
low  price  (beef,  for  instance,  at  3d.  per  pound,  when  the  market  tariff  quoted 
it  at  I  lid.),  and  give  over  the  produce  to  the  owners.  At  this  period  the 
condition  of  the  middle  and  lower  classes  was  one  of  extreme  distress.  They 
found  little  sympathy  on  the  part  of  the  "fashionable  classes,"  very  few 
of  whom  set  a  wholesome  moral  example  to  the  "  order  "  beneath  them.  In 
the  very  midst  of  the  distress  alluded  to  above  there  was  a  rage  for  masquer- 
ades. At  one  of  these  licentious  entertainments,  given  at  the  Pantheon, 
it  was  calculated  that  not  less  than  10,000  guineas  had  been  expended  by  the 
revellers  in  dress  and  other  luxuries.  The  trade  of  the  metropolis  would  have 
profited  by  this  to  a  certain  extent  had  payment  of  liabilities  been  a  recog- 
nised duty  of  the  time.  As  a  sample  of  the  sort  of  persons,  and  their  conduct 
at  these  orgies,  I  may  cite  from  the  various  reports  in  different  journals  the 
presence  of  groups  of  gentlemen  from  the  universities,  some  of  them  attired  as 
"Tom-fools,  with  cap  and  bells";  of  clergymen  who  gained  applause  for 
originality  by  trying  to  represent  "old  sober  hackney-coachmen";  and  of 
ladies,  the  Duchess  of  Ancaster  at  their  head,  in  male  attire.  "Dr.  Gold- 
smith" is  named  among  those  who  masqueraded  in  an  "old  English  dress"  ; 
and  after  lists  of  noble  ladies,  descriptions  of  their  attire,  and  praises  of  their 
wit  and  beauty,  we  find  a  sample  of  the  easy  virtue  of  the  times  in  the  pres- 
ence of  very  infamous  women  "  with  their  young  ladies,"  who  are  eulogised 
for  their  good  taste  in  appearing  as  "  a  lady  abbess  and  her  nuns."  The 
gentlemen  present  were  not  more  nice  of  speech  to  the  noble  ladies  from 
court  than  they  were  to  the  Delias  from  Drury-lane.  The  licence  of  speech, 
action,  and  allusion  was  something  astounding.  At  the  Pantheon  the  excited 
crew  generally  finished  by  breakfasting,  at  daylight,  on  the  remains  of  the 
supper,  and  then  going  home  "gloriously  drunk."  At  the  masquerades  at 
Soho  Square  at  break  of  day,  after  a  supper  marked  by  hard  drinking  and 
filthy  singing,  "which  no  lady  need  leave  save  those  who  are  too  immodest 
to  stay,"  as  the  formula  ran,  the  custom  was  to  fling  open  the  windows  and 
pelt  the  eager,  hungry,  thirsty,  and  howling  crowd  below  with  half-empty 
bottles^  and  the  remains  of  the  supper.  The  very  Queen  of  Beauty  at  these 
demoniacal  orgies  was  young  Gertrude  Conway,  niece  of  Walpole's  friend 
General  Conway,  daughter  of  Francis,  first  Marquis  of  Hertford,  and 
only  just  married  to  George  Villiers  (Earl  of  Grandison).  She  was 
the  Queen  of  Fashion  as  well  as  of  Beauty ;  and  she  excited  the 
greatest  admiration  by  giving  frocks  and  tambour  waistcoats,  as  un- 
dress livery,  to  her  servants,  and  by  the  splendour  of  her  chairmen,  who 
never  carried  her  abroad  without  feathers  in  their  hats.  This  "  fast "  young 
wife  died  in  1782,  in  only  the  thirty-second  year  of  her  age.  In  this  lady 
masquerades  lost  their  great  patroness.  This  species  of  entertainment  was 
never  encouraged  by  George  III.,  at  whose  request  Foote  abstained  from 
giving  one  at  the  little  theatre  in  the  Haymarket.  There  were  some  curious 
scruples  entertained  even  by  people  of  pleasure  at  this  time.     The  most 


86        LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [April 

Attacks  began  to  be  made  in  the  papers  on  Madame 
Schwellenburg,  the  first  of  the  Queen's  two  German  ladies, 
as  a  powerful  favourite. 

A  strong  fleet  was  now  fitted  out,  and  universally  sup- 
posed to  be  destined  for  the  Baltic,  to  protect  the  impri- 
soned Queen  of  Denmark,  whose  cause  now  wore  a  very- 
melancholy  aspect.  Struensee  was  said  to  have  confessed 
everything,  and  it  was  thought  she  would  be  divorced,  if 
not  brought  to  a  trial.  The  King  would  not  speak  to 
Baron  Dieden,  the  Danish  Minister,  at  his  levee.  Dieden 
behaved  impertinently,  standing  out  in  the  circle  and 
laughing  at  the  King  to  the  Prussian  Minister.  Dieden's 
wife  was  just  arrived,  but  did  not  go  to  Court,  nor  did  any 
of  the  Court  ladies  visit  her.  Hill,  the  most  prudent, 
thought,  or,  at  least,  hoped,  that  the  fleet  was  only  in- 
tended to  intimidate  the  Danes,  but  would  not  sail,  as  the 
King  of  Prussia  would  certainly  march  an  army  immedi- 
ately to  Hanover,  and  thence  a  new  war  be  lighted  up  in 
the  north.  On  the  22nd  counter-orders  for  suspending 
the  preparations  were  sent  to  Portsmouth. 

The  King,  as  Lord  Hertford  told  me,  had  certainly 
ordered  the  fleet  to  sail ;  and  a  near  relation  of  Lord  North 
told  me  that  the  latter  had  not  been  acquainted  with  that 
intention.  Lord  Mansfield,  therefore,  who  had  now  got  the 
King's  ear,  or  Lord  Sandwich,  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty, 
must  have  been  consulted.  The  latter,  though  1  should 
think  he  could  not  approve  it,  was  capable  of  flattering  the 
King's  wishes ;  Lord  Mansfield  assuredly  would.  The 
destination  was  changed  on  the  arrival  of  a  courier  from 
Denmark,  who  brought  word  that  the  Queen  was  repu- 
diated, and,  I  suppose,  a  promise  that  her  life  should  be 

fashionable  of  them  appeared  at  the  theatre  in  Lent  attired  in  mourning  ; 
and  at  the  same  season  masquerades  were  considered  as  out  of  place  ;  but 
these  scrupulous  persons  found  a  method  of  reconciling  their  sense  of  religion 
with  their  taste  for  dissipation.     *'  In  Lent,"  says  Bramston,  the  satirist, 

"In  Lent,  if  masquerades  displease  the  town, 
Call  'em  ridottos  and  they  still  go  down." — D. 


1772]         COMMITTEE   FOR   INDIAN   AFFAIRS  87 

saved ;  for  though  the  Danes  had  thirty  ships,  and  the  best 
seamen  next  to  ours  in  Europe,  and  though  we  were  send- 
ing but  ten  against  them,  the  governing  party  were  alarmed, 
probably  from  not  being  sure  their  nation  was  with  them. 
The  Queen  had  confessed  her  intrigue  with  Struensee,  and 
signed  that  confession.  When  the  counsellor  who  was  to 
defend  her,  went  to  receive  her  orders,  she  laughed  and  told 
him  the  story  was  true.  They  gave  her  the  title  of  Countess 
d'Aalbourg,  and  condemned  her  to  be  shut  up  in  the  castle 
of  that  name.  The  King  of  England  had  certainly  known 
her  story  two  years  before,  a  clerk  in  the  Secretary's  office 
having  opened  a  letter  that  came  with  the  account,  and  told 
that  he  had  seen  it  before  the  Secretaries  gave  it  to  the 
King.  It  was  now  believed  that  that  intelligence  had  occa- 
sioned the  Princess  of  Wales  to  make  her  extraordinary 
journey  to  Germany,  where  she  saw  her  daughter,  though 
to  no  purpose.  Princess  Amelia  told  Lord  Hertford  on 
the  26th,  that  when  the  King  of  Denmark  was  in  England, 
observing  how  coldly  he  spoke  of  his  wife,  she  asked  him 
why  he  did  not  like  her?^  He  answered,  ''Mais  elk  est  si 
blonde  I "  The  Princess  added  that  Queen  Matilda  had  a 
very  high  spirit — that  she  believed  the  Danes  would  con- 
sent to  let  her  go  to  Hanover ;  "  but  she  will  not  be  let  go 
thither,"  added  the  Princess — meaning  that  the  Queen's 
brother,  Prince  Charles  of  Mecklenburg,  commanded  there 
— "  or  to  Zell ;  but  she  will  not  go  thither — another  of 
the  Queen's  brothers  was  there ;  perhaps  she  may  go  to 
Lunenberg." 

The  Select  Committee  for  Indian  affairs  began  with 
great  warmth.  Governor  Johnson,  Lord  Clive's  great 
enemy,  called  witnesses  against  his  corruption.  Lord 
Clive  said  he  thought  this  inquiry  had  been  to  regulate 
those  affairs,  but  found  it  was  for  accusation.  Sir  Gilbert 
Elliot  replied,  they  could  not  regulate  without  going  to 
the  bottom  of  abuses. 


[May 


MAY 


1st 


THOMAS  BRADSHAW  kissed  hands  as  Lord 
of  the  Admiralty,  in  the  room  of  Charles  Fox 
— a  promotion  much  censured,  from  the  dirty 
character  of  the  man  ;  but  he  had  great  weight 
still  with  the  Duke  of  Grafton.^  The  same  day  Lord 
North  opened  the  budget  of  Ways  and  Means.^  Two 
frigates  were  now  ordered  to  sail  for  the  Queen  of  Den- 
mark and  carry  her  to  Stade  in  her  way  to  Zell,  where  the 
Danes  consented  she  should  reside.  The  King  ordered 
them  to  be  furnished  royally  from  the  Lord  Chamberlain's 
office.  Lord  Suffolk  had  been  a  chief  actor  to  flatter  the 
King  in  promoting  the  intended  expedition  to  Copen- 
hagen, and  Lord  North  was  supposed  not  to  have  pleased 
by  opposing  it. 

Account  of  a  Prussian  army  being  marched  into  Polish 
Prussia,  even  with  the  consent  of  the  Emperor^  and 
Czarina.  An  armistice  agreed  on  between  the  Russians 
and  Turks  to  treat  of  peace. 

3r</.  Madame  Dieden,  the  Danish  Minister's  wife,  was 
presented  to  the  King  and  Queen. 

yth.  The  account  arrived  of  the  execution  of  Struensee 
and  Brandt.     Each  had  his  hand  cut  off,  and  then  was  be- 

^  See  Sir  Denis  le  Marchant's  remarks  in  Walpole's  "  Memoirs  of  George 
III.,"  vol  iv.  p.  68.— D. 

2  Lord  North  declared  he  thought  it  likely  that  we  should  have  no  war  in 
ten  years,  and  that  by  that  time  we  should  pay  off  seventeen  millions.  Had 
the  fleet  sailed  to  Denmark  it  would  have  spoiled  the  pacific  prophecy. 

^  The  King  of  Prussia  had  reduced  the  Emperor  to  this  acquiescence, 
having  previously  bought  up  all  manner  of  forage,  and  half  starved  the 
Emperor's  army. 


1772]  DISSENTERS'   DISABILITIES  89 

headed.  After  Struensee  had  lost  his  hand  he  resisted, 
and  was  executed  by  force.  The  King  was  made  to  sign 
the  warrant  for  his  execution.  Query  if  true  that  he  re- 
sisted ?     No. 

Bradshaw,  when  he  stood  for  his  re-election,  was  opposed 
by  a  West  Indian,  who  bribed  the  corporation,  and  was 
returned.  Bradshaw  petitioned,  and,  though  the  Parlia- 
ment was  to  adjourn  immediately  after  the  King's  birth- 
day, the  Ministry  determined  to  keep  it  sitting  to  hear  the 
cause.  This  was  much  censured,  and  added  to  the  un- 
popularity of  such  a  fellow's  promotion. 

iZth.  Charles  Fox's  Marriage  Bill,  on  which  he  had 
given  himself  no  trouble,  having  taken  away  all  restraints 
but  the  single  one  of  a  register,  was  thrown  out  without 
a  debate  by  93  to  34.  He  arrived  from  Newmarket  just 
as  his  bill  was  rejected. 

The  same  night  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  arrived  from 
Italy,  quite  recovered. 

The  Dissenters,  though  the  penal  laws  were  never  exer- 
cised against  them,  were  with  reason  uneasy  at  their 
remaining  in  force,  and  had  now  petitioned  to  be  exempted 
from  them.  The  Bishops  as  obstinately  insisted  on  re- 
taining the  power  of  persecution,  though  they  declared 
against  exerting  it — why  then  should  they  keep  it  ?  The 
Ministers,  afraid  of  disobliging  the  Dissenters  before  the 
general  election,  suffered  the  bill  to  pass  the  House  of 
Commons,  hoping  the  loss  would  be  imputed  to  the  Lords 
only,  and  not  to  Members  of  Parliament.  Lord  Gower 
accordingly  gave  notice  that  he  would  oppose  it,  and  did 
on  the 

\gth.  The  Duke  of  Richmond,  in  a  speech  of  nearly  two 
hours,  warmly  attacked  the  Bishops  on  their  Jesuitic  spirit, 
want  of  candour,  and  scandalous  love  of  power  and  money  ;^ 


^  The  poets  had   long  before  attacked  the  prelates  in  the  same  spirit 
which  marked  the  speech  of  the  duke.      Paul  Whitehead   was,  perhaps, 


90         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

and  he  read  many  quotations  in  favour  of  toleration  from 
Bishop  Warburton's  "  Divine  Legation  and  Doctrine  of 
Grace."  Warburton,^  formerly  a  heretic,  had  now  driven  the 
Bishops  upon  this  opposition  to  toleration;  then  changed 
his  mind,  and  declared  he  would  not  attend  the  bill.  His 
friend  Dr.  Heberden,^  the  physician,  went  to  him,  and  told 
him,  if  he  had  changed  his  mind,  he  ought  to  declare  it 
like  a  man,  but  would  lose  all  character  if  he  absented 
himself.     He  went  to  the  House,  but  did  not  mend  the 

the  most  vigorous  of  these  satirists.     In  his  **  Manners"  he  thus  writes: — 

"  In  vain  behold  yon  rev'rend  turrets  rise 
And  Sarum's  sacred  spire  salute  the  skies  ! 
If  the  lawn'd  Levite's  earthly  vote  be  sold, 
And  God's  free  gift  retail'd  for  Mammon-gold, 
No  rev'rence  can  the  proud  cathedral  claim, 
But  Henley's  shop  and  Sherlock's  are  the  same." — D. 

*  Walpole's  estimate  of  Warburton  partakes  of  the  prejudices  of  his  con- 
temporaries. The  reader  may  consult  Kurd's  biography  for  a  more  correct, 
yet  not  entirely  laudatory,  judgment  on  the  same  subject.  At  the  period 
recorded  in  the  text  the  bishop  was  a  remarkably  venerable  and  dignified  old 
man,  but  as  arrogant  and  intolerant  as  ever  he  had  been.  His  infelicitous 
style  and  perplexed  arguments  exposed  him  to  charges  of  heterodoxy.  He 
possessed  more  learning  tljtan  wisdom,  and  could  not  well  apply  that  which  he 
possessed.  Bentley  remaifked  of  him  that  he  had  "a  monstrous  appetite,  but 
a  very  bad  digestion."     An  anonymous  epigrammatist  wrote  of  him  : — 

"  Great  is  your  wisdom,  Sir,  no  doubt ; 
Surpass'd  by  very  few  ; 
Who  strike  not  only  new  lights  out, 
But  all  the  old  ones  too." 

He  was  still  more  roughly  handled  by  Churchill.  Witness  the  famous  pas- 
sages in  the  "  Duellist,"  of  which  the  following  lines  are  a  part : — 

"  He  was  so  proud  that,  should  he  meet 
The  twelve  apostles  in  the  street, 
He'd  turn  his  nose  up  at  them  all, 
And  shove  his  Saviour  from  the  wall. 


He  wrote,  too,  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 

Of  whom  no  more  than  doth  a  post 

He  knew  ;  nor  should  an  angel  show  him. 

Would  he,  or  know,  or  choose  to  know  him." 

Warburton  died  in  1779,  at  the  age  of  fourscore  and  one. — D. 

2  Heberden  was  one  of  the  most  able  and  most  virtuous  men  of  his  day. 
His  great  work,  the  "Commentaries  on  the  History  and  Cure  of  Diseases," 
gained  for  him  a  posthumous,  but  a  world-wide,  fame.  It  was  he  who  outbid 
a  publisher  for  the  copyright  of  a  sceptical  work  by  Dr.  Conyers  Middleton, 
offered  for  sale  by  the  doctor's  widow.  On  receiving  the  manuscript  he  com- 
mitted it  to  the  flames.  Heberden  died  in  1801  ;  he  was  then  above  ninety- 
one  years  of  age. — D. 


1772]  DISSENTERS'   DISABILITIES  91 

matter,  for  he  made  no  reply  to  the  Duke,  but  said  he 
scorned  to  answer  or  to  stay  away.  Hay  Drummond, 
Archbishop  of  York,  Terrick  of  London,  Hinchcliffe^  of 
Peterborough,  Lowth  of  Oxford,^  and  Barrington^  of 
Landaffe,  opposed  the  bill.  Terrick  said  he  had  letters 
from  several  Dissenters  expressing  content  with  the  bill  as 
it  stood.  Lowth  took  up  the  affair  in  a  spirit  of  revenge, 
declaring  he  would  not  favour  the  Dissenters,  because  they 
would  not  receive  Bishops  in  America.  Lord  Shelburne  said 
that  he  was  Secretary  of  State  when  Archbishop  Seeker 
had  struggled  for  an  American  Bishop,  and  that  both  the 
Archbishops  Seeker  and  Drummond  had  been  with  him ; 
and  when  he  had  urged  how  unwelcome  a  Bishop  would 
be  to  the  Dissenters,  they  had  both  assured  him  that  the 
Dissenters  did  not  object  to  it.  This  Drummond  could 
not  deny.  Lord  Chatham,  who  had  not  appeared  this 
whole   session,  answered   the   Bishops  with  many  ironic 


^  Hinchclifife  was  the  son  of  a  livery-stable  keeper,  and  was  educated  at 
Westminster,  of  which  school  he  was  appointed  head-master  in  1764,  through 
the  patronage  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  He  married  the  sister  of  his  liberal 
friend  and  pupil,  Mr.  Crewe.  Hinchcliffe  had  been  employed  by  the  latter 
to  persuade  the  lady  not  to  entertain  the  suit  of  an  officer  in  the  Guards ;  and 
he  did  this  so  effectually  that  the  lady  graciously  listened  to  his  own,  and 
bestowed  on  him  a  hand  that  carried  a  large  fortune  with  it.  The  prelate 
was  strongly  opposed  to  the  American  war.  He  acquired  the  surname  of  the 
*' Bloody  Bishop"  in  1774,  being  the  only  member  of  the  episcopal  bench 
who  supported  severe  measures  against  the  Arminians.  Hinchcliffe  died  in 
1794,  aged  sixty-three. — D. 

^  The  great  episcopal  contributor  to  biblical  literature.  His  well-known 
work  on  Isaiah  has  been  pronounced  "the  best  book  in  the  world  after  the 
Bible."  In  his  controversies  with  Warburton  it  would  be  difficult  to  say 
which  of  the  disputants  exhibited  the  greater  amount  of  ill-temper.  Lowth 
was  something  of  a  courtier  ;  but  he  was  an  upright  prelate.  He  refused  to 
institute  a  clergyman  to  a  living  who  (he  knew)  had  signed  a  bond  of  resigna- 
tion. The  law-courts  condemned  the  bishop ;  but  the  House  of  Lords 
ultimately  declared  in  his  favour  by  a  majority  of  one.  He  died  in  1787,  aged 
seventy-seven. — D. 

^  The  brother  and  biographer  of  Viscount  Barrington.  He  was  promoted 
from  Llandaff  to  SaHsbury,  and  subsequently  to  Durham,  of  which  diocese 
he  died  bishop  in  1826.  Shute  Barrington  was  a  good  and  liberal  man,  who 
found  it  better  to  give  than  to  receive.  He  was  a  firm  anti-Romanist ;  always 
examined  candidates  for  holy  orders  himself;  and  on  one  occasion  settled 
500/.  a-year  on  a  relation,  expressly  to  keep  him  out  of  the  Church,  on  which 
the  bishop  thought  his  kinsman  would  reflect  little  credit. — D. 


92         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

compliments,  severity,  yet  temper,  and  with  more  know- 
lege  of  their  affairs  than  all  of  them  together  possessed. 
He  said  they  had  talked  much  of  the  system  of  the  Church 
of  England  ;  but  it  had  no  system.  He  would  in  three 
words  explain  the  whole  to  their  Lordships.  Their 
Thirty-nine  Articles  were  Calvinistical^  their  Creeds 
Papistical,  and  both  the  Church  and  Dissenters  were  every 
day  approaching  nearer  to  Arminianism.  Socinus  was  the 
reverse  of  our  Bishops.  He  had  set  out  wealthy,  and  died 
poor.  Lord  Lyttelton  spoke  on  the  same  side  with  more 
applause ;  the  Lords  Bruce  and  Radnor  with  the  Bishops. 
The  Bill  was  rejected  by  73  to  23,  and  with  proxies  by 
102  to  27.  Lord  Camden  did  not  speak  ;  Lord  Mansfield, 
for  I  know  not  what  timid  or  trimming  reason,  voted  in 
the  minority,  as  did  Lord  Talbot. 

This  subject  occasioned  Lord  Barrington  to  expose 
himself,  as  he  often  did,  especially  by  his  letters.  His 
father  had  been  reckoned  the  head  of  the  Dissenters, 
whom  he  sold  and  betrayed  to  the  Court.  Some  of  the 
present  Dissenters  waited  on  his  son,  desired  his  interest, 
and  intimated  their  wishes  that  his  brother  the  Bishop 
would  at  least  absent  himself.  Lord  Barrington,  with  all 
the  frankness  of  duplicity,  pleaded  his  own  and  brother's 
situations  as  ties  that  obliged  them  to  oppose  the  bill ;  but 
added,  that  the  Bishop  believed  the  Thirty -nine  Articles  no 
'tnore  than  he  did.  This  made  a  noise,  and  came  to  his 
brother's  ears,  who  was  angry  and  disavowed  the  imputa- 
tion. The  Dissenters  charged  Lord  Barrington  with  what 
he  had  said.  He  returned  a  written  answer,  in  which  he 
said  his  brother,  like  a  Pope,  whether  he  believed  or  not, 
must  defend  his  own  Church. 

I  must  now  enter  into  a  curious  detail  relative  to  the 
Royal  Family  and  my  own.  On  the  19th  of  May  I  re- 
ceived the  following  letter  from  my  brother  Sir  Edward 
Walpole : — 


1772]  LADY  WALDEGRAVE'S   MARRIAGE  93 

Dear  Brother,  ^''"  ''^'"'  '^"'^^^  ^^'"'°S.  May  .9,  .772. 

I  owe  it  to  you  in  friendship,  and  your  kindness  to  my 
children^  gives  you  a  kind  of  paternal  right  to  be  informed  of 
every  event  of  consequence  to  them.  I  have  this  moment  re- 
ceived an  express  from  Lady  Waldegrave,  with  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester's  permission  to  acquaint  me  with  their  marriage,  which 
was  in  1766.  The  clergyman  ^  who  I  always  thought  married 
them  called  here  this  morning,  but  would  not  come  up,  as  I  had 
a  good  deal  of  company,  but  pressed  to  see  Mrs.  Clement,^  who 
was  gone  to  Ham  to  Lord  Dysart.  He  said  he  would  come 
again  to-morrow.  I  had  not  then  received  the  express,  but 
figured  to  myself  that  his  visit  was  on  account  of  the  marriage, 
for  I  have  no  sort  of  acquaintance  with  him.  I  fancy  he  will  be 
here  to-morrow ;  and  I  suppose  we  are  to  settle  what  is  proper  to 
be  done  for  the  security  and  proof,  for  they  will  not  yet  awhile 
make  it  public,  or  she  take  the  title ;  which  probably  will  be  best 
till  they  have  taken  time  to  see  what  the  K.  will  do  in  it. 

I  think  it  incumbent  upon  me  to  communicate  it  to  you  as 
early  as  I  know  it  myself; 

And  am  very  affectionately  yours, 

Ed.  Walpole. 

P.S.  This  is  confusedly  wrote,  as  I  have  people  with  me, 
and  have  but  just  got  her  letter. 

1  was  a  good  deal  embarrassed  at  the  receipt  of  this 
letter.     I  had  opposed  the  match  till  I  had  found  it  was 

^  Sir  Edward  Walpole,  second  son  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  Prime  Minister 
and  Earl  of  Orford,  was  never  married,  but  by  Dorothy  Clement,  of  Durham, 
a  milHner's  apprentice,  had  four  natural  children :  Edward,  who  was  in  the 
army,  and  died  in  1 771  ;  Laura,  married  to  Dr.  Frederick  Keppel,  Bishop  of 
Exeter  and  Dean  of  Windsor,  fourth  son  of  William  Anne,  Earl  of  Albemarle  ; 
Maria,  first  married  to  James,  second  Earl  of  Waldegrave,  Knight  of  the 
Garter  and  Governor  of  King  George  III.,  and  secondly  to  his  Royal  High- 
ness William  Henry  Duke  of  Gloucester,  third  son  of  Frederick  Prince  of 
Wales  ;  and  Charlotte,  of  whom  her  mother  died  in  childbed,  and  who  was 
wife  of  Lionel  Talmache,  Lord  Huntingtower,  eldest  son  of  Lionel  Earl  of 
Dysart,  whom  he  succeeded  in  the  title  in  i77i' 

^  Mr.  Baddeley.  This  was  a  mistake  ;  they  were  married  by  a  Dr.  Morton, 
as  will  appear  afterwards. 

^  Aunt  of  Lady  Waldegrave, 


94         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

to  no  purpose ;  and  had  continued  steadfastly  to  avoid 
having  any  hand  in  it.  I  was  determined  still  not  to 
avail  myself  of  an  alliance  that  I  had  condemned,  nor  to 
pay  court  to  my  niece  when  she  had  carried  her  point, 
since  I  had  declined  doing  so  while  her  situation  was  un- 
certain. On  the  other  hand,  as  I  concluded  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  would  be  forbidden  the  Court,  like  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland,  I  had  no  sort  of  inclination  to  engage  in 
a  quarrel  with  the  King  and  Queen  in  support  of  a  cause 
that  I  had  disapproved,  especially  as  my  taking  part  for 
my  niece  would  seem  to  contradict  all  my  declarations. 
I  did  not  desire  to  be  abandoned  by  all  the  world  like  the 
Luttrells,  and  reduced  to  live  almost  in  solitude  with  the 
Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  who  would  not  love  me 
for  what  was  passed.  Nor  was  I  pleased  with  the  Duke 
of  Gloucester,  who  had  recently  mortified  my  particular 
friend  Sir  Horace  Mann,  Resident  at  Florence,  by  un- 
merited slights.  I  determined,  therefore,  to  act  as  neutral 
a  part  as  I  could,  and  at  once  decline  all  share  in  the 
honours  or  disgrace  of  my  niece.  This  was  a  conduct,  I 
own,  more  prudent  than  affectionate  or  heroic  ;  but  I  was 
cured  of  sacrificing  myself  for  others  :  I  had  done  with  the 
world,  and  wished  to  pass  in  tranquillity  the  remainder  of 
a  turbulent  life,  in  which  I  had  given  proofs  enough  of 
spirit  and  disinterestedness.  For  these  reasons  I  the  next 
morning  sent  my  brother  this  letter  ^  in  answer  to  his  : — 

Dear  Brother,  ^'""8'°"  ^"''''  ^^'' '°'  '"'■ 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  mark  you  have  given  me 
of  your  friendship  in  acquainting  me  with  Lady  Waldegrave's 
marriage :  and  I  give  you  many  thanks  for  the  justice  you  do  me 
in  believing  that  I  interest  myself  extremely  in  the  welfare  of  all 
your  children. 

Though  entirely  out  of  the  secret  of  the  match,  I  never  doubted 
it,  from  the  long  conviction  I  have  had  of  Lady  Waldegrave's 

^  Nev^r  before  printed. — D, 


1772]  LADY   WALDEGRAVE'S   MARRIAGE  95 

strict  virtue  and  many  excellent  qualities ;  since  it  is  accomplished, 
I  hope  in  God  it  will  prove  as  great  felicity  to  her  as  it  is  an 
honour  to  her  and  her  family.  When  I  have  said  this  with  the 
utmost  truth,  it  would  be  below  me  to  aifect  much  zeal  and  joy 
for  the  attainment  of  an  object  which,  at  the  beginning,  I  said 
all  I  could  to  dissuade  her  from  pursuing,  on  the  sincere  belief 
that  it  was  not  likely  to  tend  to  her  happiness.  When  I  found 
I  had  no  chance  of  prevailing,  I  desisted ;  and,  having  no  right 
to  question  her,  I  forbore  all  mention  of  the  subject.  For  her 
sake  I  did  not  approve  the  connection ;  for  my  own  I  could  take 
no  part  in  it,  without  being  sure  of  the  marriage.  As  both  friend- 
ship for  her  and  regard  for  my  own  honour  dictated  this  conduct, 
I  can  neither  repent  it  nor  deny  it.  Your  daughter,  I  think,  has 
too  nice  a  sense  of  honour  herself  to  blame  me ;  and  the  Duke 
of  Gloucester,  I  hope,  will  not  be  sorry  that  his  wife's  relations 
(for  it  is  justice  to  you  to  say  that  you  have  always  been  more 
anxious  about  her  character  than  her  fortune)  were  infinitely 
more  afraid  of  any  disgrace  that  might  happen  to  her,  than  they 
were  ambitious  of  an  honour  so  much  above  their  pretensions. 
It  is  not  to  make  my  court  that  I  say  this.  I  have  no  vanity  to 
gratify;  I  have  no  wishes -that  were  not  satisfied  before.  I 
receive  the  honour  done  to  the  family  with  great  respect  for  the 
royal  person  who  confers  it,  but  with  no  pride  for  myself,  having 
never  aspired  above  the  privacy  of  my  situation.  To  you  and 
to  your  daughter  I  sincerely  hope  the  event  will  prove  a  source 
of  great  happiness,  and  shall  always  be,  with  proper  deference 
for  her,  and  with  cordial  good  wishes  for  her  and  you. 

Dear  Brother,  yours  most  affectionately, 

Horace  Walpole. 

To  this  Sir  Edward  answered  as  follows : — 

Wednesday,  May  20,  1772. 
If  I  had  seen  you  to-day  I  should  have  shown  you  a  letter 
which  I  cannot  resist  sending  you  a  copy  of,  to  be  preserved 
among  your  valuable  collection  of  papers  ;  in  which,  or  any  other 
top  company,  I  think  it  highly  deserves  a  place,  for  it  strikes  me 
as  one  of  the  sweetest  samples  of  sense,  language,  and  goodness 
of  heart  that  I  ever  saw. 


96         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

At  the  same  time  it  will  be  a  necessary  information  to  you  of 
what  they  wish  to  be  our  conduct  on  the  occasion. 

The  substance  of  it,  though  not  put  together  so  well  as  it  is 
in  that  letter,  was  what  I  wrote  to  her  about  a  year  and  half 
ago,  intended  for  his  perusal.  And  it  was  my  way  of  thinking 
from  the  beginning ;  for,  as  you  very  kindly  observe  in  yours  of 
to-day,  my  solicitude  was  for  her  good,  not  her  great  name.  And, 
indeed,  if  she  were  Queen  of  England,  I  do  not  believe,  as  near 
as  St.  James's  is,  that  ever  I  should  go  thither. ^ 

Yours,  &c., 

E.  W. 

P.S.  Be  assured  she  has  the  highest  respect  for  you  imaginable. 

Lady  Waldegrave'  s  letter  to  her  father^  Sir  Edward  Walpole, 
on  occasion  of  her  marriage  with  the  Duke  of  Gloucester. 

St.  Leonards,  May  19,  1772. 

My  dear  and  ever  honoured  Sir, 

You  cannot  easily  imagine  how  much  every  past  affliction 
has  been  increased  to  me  by  my  not  being  at  liberty  to  make  you 
quite  easy.  The  duty  to  a  husband  being  superior  to  that  we 
owe  a  father  I  hope  will  plead  my  pardon,  and  that,  instead  of 
blaming  my  past  reserve,  you  will  think  it  commendable. 

When  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  married  me  (which  was  in 
September,  1766)  I  promised  him  upon  no  consideration  in  the 
world  to  own  it  even  to  you  without  his  permission ;  which  per- 
mission I  never  had  till  yesterday,  when  he  arrived  here  in  much 
better  health  and  looks  than  ever  I  saw  him ;  yet,  as  you  may 
suppose,  much  hurt  at  all  that  has  passed  in  his  absence :  ^  so 
much  so,  that  I  have  had  great  difficulty  to  prevail  upon  him  to 
let  things  as  much  as  possible  remain  as  they  are.  To  secure  my 
character,  without  injuring  his,  is  the  utmost  of  my  wishes ;  and 
I  dare  say  that  you  and  all  my  relations  will  agree  with  me  that  I 
shall  be  much  happier  to  be  called  Lady  Waldegrave  and  respected 

^  Sir  Edward  lived  so  very  retired  a  life  that  he  had  not  at  this  time  stirred 
out  of  his  house  since  the  13th  of  the  preceding  December,  when  he  had 
arrived  from  his  seat,  Luxborough,  in  Essex. 

2  The  King,  by  trying  to  hinder  the  declaration  of  the  Duke  of  Glou- 
cester's marriage,  or  to  prevent  it  by  the  Marriage  Bill,  was  the  cause  that 
the  Duke  now  owned  it. 


<      /////■/</  /f'f////^/, I  (/ /h//au/?< 


From  the  collection  by  Jl.  //.  Raphael.  F.sc)..  M .1\ 


1772]  LADY   WALDEGRAVE'S    MARRIAGE  97 

as  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  than  to  feel  myself  the  cause  of  his 
leading  such  a  life  as  his  brother^  does,  in  order  for  me  to  be 
called  your  Royal  Highness.  I  am  prepared  for  the  sort  of  abuse 
the  newspapers  will  be  full  of — very  few  people  will  believe  that 
a  woman  will  refuse  to  be  called  Princess  if  it  is  in  her  power. 

To  have  the  power  is  my  pride ;  and  not  using  it  in  some  measure 
pays  the  debt  I  owe  the  Duke  for  the  honour  he  has  done  me. 

All  I  wish  of  my  relations  is,  that  they  will  show  the  world  that 
they  are  satisfied  with  my  conduct,  yet  seem  to  disguise  their 
reasons. 

If  ever  I  am  unfortunate  enough  to  be  called  Duchess  of  Glou- 
cester, there  is  an  end  of  almost  all  the  comforts  which  I  now 
enjoy,  which,  if  things  can  go  on  as  they  are  now,  are  many. 

I  sent  my  brother  word  that  I  had  been  ready  to  kiss 
his  daughter's  hand,  but  was  now  ready  to  kiss  her  feet ; 
and  I  advised  his  showing  her  letter  confidentially  to  some 
few,  only  omitting  what  related  to  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land, whom  she  ought  not  to  offend. 

That  my  brother  said  not  too  much  of  this  inimitable 
letter,  every  one  who  reads  it  must  confess.  It  struck  me 
with  astonishment,  admiration,  and  tenderness — and,  I 
confess,  with  shame.  How  mean  did  my  prudence  appear 
compared  with  hers !  which  was  void  of  all  personal  con- 
siderations but  of  her  honour.  What  proper  spirit !  what 
amiable  concern  for  and  gratitude  to  her  husband  !  what 
scorn  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  of  rank,  of  malice,  and 
(at  least  implied)  of  the  King  and  his  power !  what  sense 
in  her  conduct !  Address  how  laudably  employed  !  This 
letter  proved  two  things.  I  have  always  thought  that 
feeling  bestows  the  most  sublime  eloquence,  and  that 
women  write  letters  better  than  men.  I,  a  writer  in  some 
esteem,  and  all  my  life  a  letter-writer,  never  penned  any- 
thing like  this  letter  of  my  niece.  It  is  great,  it  is  pathetic, 
it  is  severe,  and  it  is  more  than  all  these — it  is  the  lan- 
guage of  Virtue  in  the  mouth  of  Love.     She  wrote  a 

1  The  Duke  of  Cumberland. 


98         LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

letter  to  her  sister  Dysart  that  did  not  breathe  total  self- 
denial.  That  she  recounted  with  pleasure  the  magnificent 
presents  the  Duke  had  brought  her  was  natural,  was  not 
to  be  blamed.  Other  expressions  intimated  further  views. 
She  desired  her  sister  to  make  confidences  of  her  marriage 
to  persons  likely  not  to  keep  the  secret — nor  was  even 
this  faulty.  The  vindication  of  her  character  justified 
her  eagerness  to  have  the  secret,  so  long  and  painfully 
concealed,  known.  She  acquainted  Lady  Dysart  with  the 
Duke's  intention  of  having  a  levee,  which  he  had  never 
practised,  and  requested  her  sister  to  publish  that  inten- 
tion. Of  the  King,  she  said,  "he  seems  not  to  have 
courage  enough  to  be  angry  with  the  Duke,^  but  he  will 
wound  him  in  the  dark,  though  he  dare  do  no  more."  Her 
letter  concluded  with  desiring  Lady  Dysart  to  omit  the 
word  Dowager  in  the  subscription  of  her  letters,  which, 
said  Lady  Waldegrave,  I  cannot  bear !  These  symptoms 
convinced  me  that  the  natural  ambition  of  her  temper 
would  not  long  be  smothered.  Lady  Waldegrave,  with 
many  and  great  virtues,  was  impetuous,  and  from  her 
childhood  ambitious.  While  a  girl,  she  had  often  said 
she  would  be  a  lady.  Her  father,  to  correct  her,  asked 
her  ''  How  that  could  be,  for  she  was  a  beggar."  "  Then," 
said  she,  "  I  will  be  a  lady-beggar."  She  was  very  pious, 
charitable,  sincere,  frank,  and  friendly,  but  warm  and 
resentful ;  her  sense  strong,  her  wit  ready  and  very 
pointed ;  yet  from  the  time  of  her  marriage  with  the  Duke 
of  Gloucester  she  had  conducted  herself  with  singular 
humility  and  attention  to  all  sorts  of  persons,  and,  except 
by  the  ostentation  of  her  expense,  had  given  no  indica- 
tion  of  her   feeling   herself  a  princess — even   her   mag- 

^  Lord  Hertford  told  me  the  King  hoped  to  prevail  on  the  Duke  not 
to  declare  the  marriage  publicly,  and  confessed  he  thought  the  King  afraid  of 
quarrelling  with  the  Duke,  who  was  very  differently  respected  from  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland ;  the  Opposition,  too,  who  shunned  the  younger  brother  for 
marrying  Luttrell's  sister,  would  flock  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  if  forbidden 
the  Court.  Even  the  Queen  must  fear  disobliging  the  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
who,  if  the  King  died,  would,  under  her,  preside  in  the  Council  of  Regency. 


1772]  LADY  WALDEGRAVE'S   MARRIAGE  99 

nificence  was  the  less  striking,  as  she  never  had  had  any 
idea  of  economy.  To  her  daughters^  she  was  an  excel- 
lent mother,  blending  the  greatest  tenderness  with  the 
most  sensible  education. 

On  the  23rd  I  received  this  note  from  her : — 

My  dear  Sir, 

My  father  writes  me  word  that  he  showed  you  my  letter, 
and  that  you  approve  of  my  conduct,  which  is  an  addition  to 
my  present  happiness. 

The  same  day  my  brother  wrote  to  me,  with  an  account 
of  the  great  respect  and  court  which  Lady  Waldegrave 
told  him  had  been  paid  to  the  Duke  by  all  sorts  of  people, 
and  that  he  intended  to  have  a  levee,  to  which  he  had 
expressly  desired  Sir  Edward  would  not  go,  as  it  would 
distress  him,  the  Duke  (from  the  difficulty  of  receiving  or 
not  receiving  him  as  a  father).  Sir  Edward,  alluding  to 
his  own  retired  life,  answered  with  humour,  that,  if  he 
were  to  appear,  people  would  certainly  think  he  was  dead.^ 
Of  the  levee  my  brother  said  he  informed  me  for  my  own 
judgment,  who  knew  best  whether  I  would  or  should  go  to 
it.  Of  this  difficulty  I  was  already  well  aware.  Lady 
Waldegrave's  noble  conduct  had  captivated  me,  and  I  was 
determined  to  take  her  part  in  the  most  disinterested 
manner.  Still,  as  she  did  not  declare  her  marriage  openly, 
it  was  by  no  means  proper  or  consistent  that  her  family 
should  proclaim  it ;  and  as  I  had  never  waited  on  the 
Duke,  and  had  besides  always  declared  that  I  never 
would  go  to  him  till  I  was  certain  my  niece  was  his  wife, 
not  his  mistress,  my  appearance  would  be  the  most  clear 
avowal  of  the  marriage.  The  case  seemed  to  me  too 
delicate  to  risk  the  decision  myself  I  consulted  my 
brother  ;  he  was  clearly,  nay,  positively,  of  opinion  that  I 

^  By  Lord  Waldegrave  she  had  three  daughters,  the  Ladies  Laura,  Maria, 
and  Horatia. 

2  i.e.^  would  take  him  for  a  ghost,  as  he  had  not  been  seen  in  the  world 
so  long. 


loo       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

ought  not  to  go,  and  desired  I  would  send  his  daughter 
my  reasons.  I  said,  "  No  ;  I  did  not  care  to  take  so  much 
on  myself."  "  Then,"  said  he,  "  say  we  both  think  so." 
"  No,"  replied  I ;  "if  you  please,  I  will  say  you  think  so." 
He  said,  "  Pray  do."  I  went  home  and  wrote  to  my  niece, 
stating  the  case,  telling  her  her  father's  opinion  and  desire, 
and  yet  referring  it  to  the  Duke  and  her  to  order  what  I 
should  do,  whether  appear  at  his  levee  or  not. 

This  was  my  letter,  in  which  I  meant  to  show  all 
manner  of  respect  to  the  Duke,  and  even  to  my  niece, 
now  become  my  superior,  and  withal  a  proper  and  spirited 
sense  of  what  I  owed  to  myself : — 

My  dear  Madam,  Arlington  Street,  May  24,  1772. 

It  is  very  true  what  your  father  has  told  you,  that  I  never  was 
so  struck  with  admiration  of  anything  as  I  was  with  your  letter  to 
him.  It  shows  the  goodness  of  your  heart,  of  your  understanding, 
and  of  your  conduct ;  and  a  greatness  of  mind  that  makes  you 
worthy  of  your  fortune.  You  will  not  think  this  flattery,  for  you 
know  I  am  incapable  of  flattering  you — and  it  cannot  be  designed 
as  a  compliment  to  your  rank,  when  I  approve,  as  I  do  exceedingly, 
your  waiving  it.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  has  thence  a  satisfac- 
tion that  few  princes  taste — the  conviction  that  you  married  him 
from  inclination,  not  from  ambition.  I  do  not  ask  your  pardon 
for  having  opposed  that  inclination,  because  I  did  it  from  fearing 
it  would  not  tend  to  your  happiness.  Nor  can  I  repent  my  conduct 
and  silence  since ;  you  cannot  disesteem  me  for  it,  and  his  Royal 
Highness  cannot  be  sorry  to  have  found  that  his  wife's  relations  had 
too  much  honour  to  be  proud  even  of  his  favour  to  you  till  they 
were  satisfied  of  your  marriage.  The  Duke,  I  hear,  is  to  have 
a  levee  on  Thursday  ;  as  I  would  not  dare  to  take  any  liberty, 
and  certainly  would  as  little  omit  any  mark  of  veneration  and 
gratitude  to  his  Royal  Highness  after  the  honour  he  has  done  to 
the  family,  I  went  to  your  father  to  consult  him  on  what  would  be 
most  proper  for  me  to  do.  Having  never  had  the  honour  of  being 
presented  to  his  Royal  Highness  or  of  kissing  his  hand,  it  would 
be  presumption  in  me  to  approach  him  without  that  testimony 
of  duty ;  but  at  the  same  time,  as  the  motives  of  my  past  absence 


1772]  LADY   WALDEGRAVE'S   MARRIAGE  loi 

are  well  known,  my  going  through  that  ceremony  just  now  would 
be  a  positive  declaration  of  my  being  assured  of  your  marriage. 
Sir  Edward  is  clear  that  such  a  step  at  this  time  would  be  the 
most  improper  imaginable,  and  very  repugnant  to  that  amiable 
and  wise  moderation  you  have  adopted,  and  he  bid  me  tell  you 
how  wrong  he  thinks  it  would  be  for  me  to  go  to  the  Duke's 
levee.  Let  me  beg  you,  therefore,  dear  Madam,  to  acquaint  his 
Royal  Highness  with  the  reasons  why  I  am  not  one  of  the  first 
to  express  my  zeal  and  gratitude,  together  with  my  joy  for  his 
recovery  and  return.  I  have  the  utmost  respect  and  attachment 
to  his  person,  the  more  sincere  as  I  have  no  views,  no  ambition, 
no  pride  to  gratify.  My  wishes  are  completely  satisfied  in  your 
having  acted  as  became  the  names  you  bore.  The  accession 
of  dignity  without  your  excellent  qualities  would  never  have  made 
me,  so  much  as  I  am,  either  in  affection  or  respect, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

Horace  Walpole. 

To  this  letter  I  received  a  very  civil  letter  from  my 
niece,  approving  my  non-appearance  at  the  Duke's  levee, 
and  telling  me  she  had  communicated  to  him  v^hat  I  had 
said.  At  the  same  time  she  expressed  great  uneasiness  at 
having  heard  that  her  father  had  shov^n  her  letter ; 
which  he  had  done  v^ith  so  little  caution  that  the  very 
words  of  it  almost  were  quoted  about  the  town.  He  had, 
in  particular,  shown  it  to  one  Touchet,  a  broken  merchant 
of  a  very  bad  character,  but  much  in  his  esteem,  and 
much  more  connected  with  Lord  Holland,  to  whom  he 
immediately  reported  the  contents,  as  well  as  to  many 
others.  The  Duke  was  exceedingly  hurt  at  this  indiscre- 
tion, and  Lady  Waldegrave  complained  to  her  father 
of  that  imprudence.  Sir  Edward  owned  the  charges,  but, 
having  seen  me  so  pleased  with  his  daughter's  letter, 
concluded  I  had  been  as  little  guarded  as  himself,  and 
imputed  the  publicity  of  it  to  me  as  well  as  to  himself. 
I,  who,  as  the  reader  has  seen,  had  been  over-circumspect 
from  the  very  beginning  of  the  amour,  was  astonished  when 


102       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

my  brother  told  me  what  he  had  written  to  his  daughter ; 
but  on  my  giving  him  various  proofs  how  little  foundation 
there  was  for  his  involving  me  in  the  charge,  he  hand- 
somely promised  to  clear  me  to  Lady  Waldegrave,  and 
I  myself  sent  her  a  minute  account  of  the  caution  I  had 
observed. 

My  brother  Edward,  father  of  the  Duchess  of  Glou- 
cester, and  second  son  of  Sir  R.  Walpole,  Prime  Minister 
to  George  L  and  IL,  and  afterwards  Earl  of  Orford,  was  a 
man  of  excellent  parts  and  numerous  virtues  ;  the  first  he 
buried  in  obscurity  and  retirement,  the  latter  he  never 
failed  exerting.  He  had  great  natural  eloquence,  wit, 
humour  even  to  admirable  mimicry,  uncommon  sensibility, 
large  generosity  and  charity.  He  drew  well,  but  seldom, 
was  a  profound  musician,  and  even  invented  a  most  touch- 
ing instrument,  which,  from  the  number  of  its  strings,  he 
called  a  i)entachord.  All  these  engaging  qualities  and 
talents,  formed  for  splendour  and  society,  were  confined  to 
inferior  companions,  for  he  neither  loved  the  great  world, 
nor  was  his  temper  suited  to  accommodate  himself  to  it, 
for  he  was  exceedingly  passionate,  jealous,  and  impatient 
of  contradiction,  though  in  his  later  years  he  acquired 
more  mildness.  He  wrote  several  small  pieces  occasion- 
ally both  in  prose  and  verse,  a  very  few  of  which  were 
printed,  but  never  with  his  name,  for  no  man  had  less 
parade.  In  pathetic  melancholy  he  chiefly  shone,  espe- 
cially in  his  music,  and  yet,  though  his  ear  was  all  har- 
mony, his  verse  was  more  replete  with  meaning  than  it  was 
sonorous.  His  father  he  idolized  ;  to  his  children  he  was 
magnificently  liberal ;  to  his  friends,  dependants,  servants, 
profuse ;  and  so  far  from  arrogant  to  inferiors,  he  was 
over-ceremonious.  This  tribute  to  his  virtues  I  pay  with 
pleasure,  and  it  may  be  credited,  for  to  me  he  was  never 
affectionate,  though,  but  for  one  short  period,  we  always 
lived  on  fair  terms.^     After  the  commencement   of   the 

^  See  Cunningham's  "  Letters  of  Horace  Walpole,"  vol.  i.  p.  355-360. — D. 


1772]  SIR   EDWARD   WALPOLE  103 

American  war  he  took  a  turn  in  politics  very  afflicting  to 
almost  all  his  family,  and,  as  we  thought,  to  the  principles 
in  which  he  had  been  educated — those  of  the  Revolution. 
He  grew  a  warm  Royalist,  though  at  the  time  of  the 
General  Warrants  he  had  embarked  zealously  with  the 
Whigs  against  the  Court.  For  his  change  we  could  never 
clearly  account :  I  am  sure  it  was  from  no  abject  selfish 
motive ;  he  never  had  been  ambitious,  nor  was  interested, 
nor  ever  stained  with  the  slightest  taint  of  corruption  ;  but 
from  what  observations  I  could  make,  I  believe  the  follow- 
ing were  his  chief  inducements.  The  profligacy  of  Wilkes 
made  the  first  impression,  and,  recollecting  the  unprincipled 
opposition  to  his  beloved  father,  Sir  R.  Walpole,  Sir 
Edward  grew  to  see  all  opposition  in  the  same  light.  The 
death  of  his  great  friend  Mr.  Legge  broke  off  his  connec- 
tion with  the  Whigs,  and  the  apostacy  of  Dr.  Butler, 
whose  friendship  he  inherited  from  Mr.  Legge,  for  whom 
Butler  had  written  more  than  one  Whig  pamphlet  against 
the  Court,  contributed  in  my  opinion  to  the  alteration  in 
my  brother,  at  whose  request  I  recommended  Butler  to 
Lord  Hertford  for  a  King's  chaplain,  Butler  professing,  as 
he  had  a  good  fortune,  that  he  wished  but  for  a  feather, 
and  desired  neither  deanery  nor  bishopric,  only  the 
honour  of  preaching  before  the  King,  he  being  an  esteemed 
preacher.  Yet  no  sooner  had  this  unambitious  priest  en- 
tered on  his  new  office,  then  he  became  one  of  the  most 
servile  of  his  cloth,  and  by  a  zealous  Fast  Sermon  and 
other  courtly  acts  obtained  a  bishopric,  though  Dr.  Porteus 
outstripped  him  by  a  grosser  dose  of  flattery  at  the  same 
time  and  on  the  same  occasion,  and  got  the  first  nomina- 
tion— a  preference  which  Butler,  who  had  lately  borne 
being  cut  for  the  stone  like  a  hero,  bore  like  a  woman.^  I 
suspect  that  Butler  owed  his  mitre  a  little  too  to  poisoning 

^  Dr.  Porteus  was  appointed  to  the  bishopric  ot  Chester  in  1776,  at  the 
request  of  Queen  Charlotte,  to  whom,  during  an  illness,  he  had  officiated  as 
private  chaplain. — D. 


I04       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

my  brother's  principles ;  a  most  welcome  offering  to  the 
King  when  he  was  persecuting  my  brother's  own  daughter 
and  son-in-law,  the  Duchess  and  Duke  of  Gloucester. 
Her,  Sir  Edward  loved  above  his  other  children — and 
though  he  often  exclaimed  against  the  King's  ill-treatment 
of  her,  yet  nothing  could  shake  his  zeal  for  the  King  or  his 
inveteracy  to  the  Opposition.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester 
once  said  to  me, "  I  wonder  how  your  brother  and  you,  who 
are  of  such  different  parties,  can  agree."  I  replied,  "  Sir, 
I  beg  your  Royal  Highness  to  be  easy ;  I  give  you  my 
word  you  shall  never  hear  of  a  quarrel  between  my  brother 
and  me.  I  know  I  can  command  myself  with  him  ;  I 
never  do  contradict  him."  The  Duke's  prudence  kept 
him  more  easily  from  any  dispute  with  his  father-in-law, 
whom  indeed  he  rarely  saw,  for  Sir  Edward  even  to  him 
did  not  go  twice  in  a  year.  Nor  did  the  Duke  take  a 
declared  part  in  politics,  for,  though  ill-treated  by  his 
brother,  he  received  little  attention  from  the  Opposition,^ 
except  from  a  very  few.  The  noble  generosity,  too,  of  Sir 
Edward  to  the  Duchess  could  but  exact  gratitude  from 
the  Duke. 

A  story  I  will  relate  of  Sir  Edward  will  exemplify 
many  parts  of  the  character  I  have  given  of  him.  When 
Frederick  Prince  of  Wales  first  came  to  England,  Sir 
Edward  Walpole  was  one  of  his  favourites,  and  constantly 
a  performer  at  his  private  concerts.  When  His  Royal 
Highness  began  to  glance  towards  Opposition,  he  en- 
deavoured to  persuade  Sir  Edward  to  absent  himself  from 
the  House  of  Commons  on  the  question  of  the  army.  He 
refused.  The  Prince  pressed  to  know  why  he  would  not 
oblige  him.  "You  will  never  forgive  me,  Sir,"  said  Sir 
Edward,  "  if  I  give  you  my  reasons."  "  By  God,  I  will," 
said  the  Prince,  who  was  walking  about  the  room  with  his 
arm  round  my  brother's  shoulder.  Sir  Edward  replied, 
jestingly,  "  By  God,  Sir,  you  will  not — yet  I  will  tell  you, 

^  Introduction  No.  I,  p.  xx. — A.  F.  S. 


1772]  SIR   EDWARD   WALPOLE  105 

that  I  will  not  stay  away,  hecaiuse  four  {ather  and  mine  are 
for  the  question."  The  Prince  flung  from  him  in  anger  ; 
but  the  Princess  Royal,  who  was  at  the  harpsichord,  and 
heard  what  passed,  cried  out,  "  As  I  am  a  musician,  I  may 
say,  bravo,  Mr.  Walpole ! "  (he  was  not  then  Knight  of  the 
Bath)  "  bravo  ! "  The  Prince  stomached  the  refusal  and 
the  reason  more;  and  at  his  next  concert  asked  the  several 
hired  performers  whether  they  had  played  the  night  before 
at  one  Lancetti's  benefit,  and  then,  strutting  up  haughtily 
to  Sir  Edward,  put  the  same  question  to  him,  as  if  he  was 
a  fiddler  by  profession.  Sir  Edward  started  with  rage, 
and,  running  to  the  bell,  rung  it  violently,  and,  a  page 
entering,  bade  him  take  away  a  base  viol  and  call  his 
servants.  The  Prince  asked  what  he  meant,  and  whether 
he  was  going  away.  He  said,  "  Yes ;  he  would  be 
affronted  by  no  man  living."  "  You  are  mad,"  said  the 
Prince :  "  Come  back."  "  Never,  Sir,  never,"  replied  he  ; 
"  never,  as  long  as  I  breathe."  The  Duke  of  Rutland,  and 
other  persons  of  rank,  who  were  present,  endeavoured  to 
soothe  Sir  Edward,  but  away  he  went  with  proper  in- 
dignation. The  story  getting  wind,  the  Prince  sent 
Hedges,  his  treasurer,  to  ask  Sir  Edward  if  he  had  set 
it  about ;  but  he  proving  firmer  than  was  expected. 
Hedges,  instead  of  using  any  menaces,  made  many 
excuses  in  the  Prince's  name,  and  by  his  Royal  Highness's 
order  pressed  him  so  much  to  wait  on  the  Prince  again, 
that  Sir  Edward,  finding  the  satisfaction  as  honourable  as 
he  could  desire,  went  to  the  Prince's  next  birthday.  After 
the  death  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole  the  Prince  ordered  Sir 
William  Irby  to  write  to  Sir  Edward,  and  press  him,  now 
at  liberty,  to  join  his  Royal  Highness's  Opposition.  Sir 
Edward,  in  answer  to  Sir  William,  begged  him  to  ask  the 
Prince  how  his  Royal  Highness  would  have  him  behave 
when  he  should  be  King ;  and  zn  that  manner  would  he 
(Sir  Edward)  behave  under  King  George  then  living. 
The  Prince  had  candour  enough  to  cry  out,  "  He  is  an 


io6       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

honest  man,  and  1  will  keep  his  letter."  He  did  so ;  and 
Sir  Edward  having  made  him  a  present  of  a  valuable 
Cremonese  violoncello,  the  Princess  of  Wales  after  her 
husband's  death  ordered  it  to  be  carefully  locked  up,  and 
said  to  her  son,  the  present  King,  then  a  boy,  "  George, 
that  instrument  was  given  to  your  father  by  a  man  from 
whom  I  will  show  you  a  letter.  When  you  are  King  get 
him  about  you,  if  you  can  :  you  cannot  have  an  honester 
man."i 

Having  enlarged  this  account,  I  will  relate  a  story  which 
was  told  me  this  summer,  1772,  by  her  Royal  Highness 
Princess  Amelia.  She  told  me  that  having,  one  day  when 
his  Majesty  was  a  boy,  done  something  to  please  him,  the 
Princess  Dowager  said  to  her,  "  Madam,  you  are  very  good 
to  my  children  ;  but.  Madam,  if  you  was  to  lay  down  your 
life  for  George,  George  would  not  be  obliged  to  you." 

On  the  28th  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  had  his  levee,  which 
was  exceedingly  crowded.  It  was  called  an  attention  to 
the  nobility  and  foreign  ministers,  &c.,  who  had  been 
officious  in  their  inquiries  after  him  on  his  return.  Perhaps 
he  had  a  mind  to  feel  the  pulse  of  the  public.  On  his 
arrival  he  had  scarce  spoken  to  any  of  the  ministers ;  and 
though  the  King  affected  much  kindness  to  him,  the  least 
observing  courtiers  took  notice  how  coldly  and  sullenly  the 


^  By  way  of  further  illustration  of  this  royal-household  life  I  add  the 
following,  which  is  now  before  me  in  a  note  in  the  handwriting  of  Mrs. 
Piozzi.  "The  character  of  George  III.  was  uniformly  moral,  and  uniformly 
discreet.  He  was  what  we  call  a  'steady  boy'  in  early  youth.  A  con- 
fidential friend,  and  natural  son,  indeed,  of  one  of  my  uncles,  was  about  the 
court  when  Prince  Frederick  of  Wales  died.  He  told  my  mother  the  follow- 
ing story.  The  Princess  was  sitting,  one  day  of  her  early  widowhood,  pensive 
and  melancholy ;  her  two  eldest  sons  were  playing  about  the  room.  '  Brother,' 
said  the  second  boy  (Edward,  Duke  of  York),  'when  you  and  I  are  men 
grown,  you  shall  be  married,  and  /will  keep  a  mistress.'  '  Be  quiet,  Eddy  !' 
replied  the  present  King  (George  III. ), '  we  shall  have  anger  presently  for  your 
nonsense.  There  must  be  no  mistresses  at  all.'  'What  you  say?'  cries  old 
Augusta ;  '  you  more  need  learn  your  pronouns,  as  the  preceptor  bid  you  do. 
Can  you  tell  vat  is  a  pronoun  ? '  '  Yes  ;  very  well  ! '  replied  Prince  Edward  ; 
*  a  pronoun  is  to  a  noun  what  a  mistress  is  to  a  wife,  a  substitute  and  a  repre- 
sentative ! ' "— D. 


1772]  PETITION   AGAINST   SMUGGLING  107 

Duke  received  his  Majesty's  advances.  At  his  levee  he 
was  more  gracious,  though  to  Lord  Mansfield  he  spoke 
with  irony.  To  the  Opposition,  to  General  Conway,  and 
above  all  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  who  had  warmly 
opposed  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill,  he  was  remarkably 
courteous.  His  brother  Cumberland  he  visited — and,  in 
truth,  it  was  their  common  interest  to  support  each  other. 
Lady  Waldegrave,  who  felt  acutely  the  hurt  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland's  marriage  had  occasioned  to  her,  and  Mrs. 
Keppel,  her  sister,  still  more  warm,  had  expressed  much 
acrimony  against  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland,  who,  from 
the  first  declaration  of  her  wedding,  had  assumed  un- 
common state,  as  far  as  she  could  find  opportunities ;  but 
their  diminutive  court  was  so  shunned  that  she  was  forced 
to  bestow  her  hand  to  be  kissed  by  her  menial  servants. 
Her  brother,  Colonel  Luttrell,  burned  with  impatience  to 
see  her  and  himself  of  more  consequence.  If  that  could 
not  be  obtained,  his  next  wish  was  to  annoy  the  Court. 
An  occasion  presented  itself  The  exorbitant  impositions 
of  the  tradesmen  of  London  had  induced  many  of  the 
nobility  to  import  goods  from  France.  The  Ministers  of 
smaller  foreign  courts,  whose  pay  is  scanty,  taking  advan- 
tage of  their  sacred  character,  were  turned  notorious 
smugglers,^  and,  without  paying  duties,  kept  warehouses 
of  contraband  commodities.  Haslang,  the  Bavarian 
Minister,  who  maintained  himself  for  above  thirty  years 
by  gaming,   smuggling,  and    selling   protections    against 

^  The  Spanish  ambassador  was  almost  the  only  envoy  from  a  foreign  court 
who  disdained  to  turn  his  exalted  office  to  trading  purposes.  His  idea  of  an 
ambassador  was,  that  he  should  rather  watch  over  the  honour  of  his  own 
country  than  derive  profit  to  himself  by  dealing  in  furniture  or  pictures.  The 
strictures  on  the  alleged  speculations  of  the  half-brother  of  the  Emperor  of  the 
French,  the  Count  de  Morny,  in  Russia,  were  made  in  the  spirit  of  the  old 
Spanish  envoy.  Not  very  many  years  since,  a  package  directed  to  a  French 
ambassadress  in  this  country  was  accidently  opened  at  the  custom-house,  and 
found  to  contain  French  gloves,  at  that  time  liable  to  an  exceedingly  heavy 
duty.  The  authorities  did  not  proceed  against  the  ambassadress  for  smuggling, 
but  sent  the  package  through  the  post-office.  It  was  charged  by  weight,  as  a 
letter,  and  a  postage,  amounting  to  a  formidable  sum,  was  paid  without  obser- 
vation.— D. 


io8       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

arrests,^  and  the  envoys  from  Venice  and  Naples,  were  the 
principal  offenders.  The  cabinet-makers,  who  aspired  at 
monopolising  frauds,  were  outrageous  at  those  dignified 
interlopers,  and  drew  up  a  petition  to  Parliament  for  re- 
dress. Luttrell,  who  had  not  forgotten  the  arts  of  his 
antagonist  Wilkes,  presented  himself  to  the  complainants, 
offered  to  carry  their  petition  to  the  House  of  Commons, 
and  did,  at  the  head  of  a  multitude  of  clamorous  trades- 
men. Not  content  with  winning  their  hearts,  he  carried 
the  war  into  the  very  quarters  of  the  Court.  He  trembled, 
he  said,  for  the  safety  of  the  heir  of  the  Crown.  The 
House  was  amazed.  Yes,  continued  he,  the  Prince  of 
Wales  is  often  at  the  house  of  the  principal  smuggler ;  and 
as  the  mob  some  day  or  other,  provoked  past  bearing,  will 
indubitably  attack  and  demolish  that  palace  of  contraband 
commerce,  the  life  of  the  successor  himself  may  be  in 
danger !  No  man  guessed  the  meaning  of  the  rant.  Lord 
North  asked  at  whom  it  was  levelled.  Luttrell,  in  a  more 
than  half  whisper,  which,  from  the  silence  of  curiosity,  was 
heard  distinctly  by  the  whole  House,  named  Lord  Holder- 
ness,  the  governor  of  the  Prince,  who,  with  his  wife,^  was 
indeed  a  notorious  dealer  in  prohibited  merchandise.  As 
the  session  was  so  near  a  conclusion,  Lord  North  begged 
the  petitioners  to  respite  their  demand  of  redress  till  the 
next  winter,  when  he  promised  he  would  endeavour  to 
correct  the  abuses  complained  of,  with  which  assurance 
they  departed  satisfied. 

^  Count  Haslang  was  guilty  of  a  much  viler  proceeding.  He  had  for 
very  many  years  hired  a  house  for  which  the  landlord  could  get  no  rent  from 
him.  His  public  character  saved  him  from  being  arrested.  The  poor  man  at 
last  offered  to  relinquish  what  was  due  to  him,  provided  Haslang  would  quit 
and  give  up  the  house.  Haslang,  sanctified  by  the  inviolable  law  of  nations, 
refused  to  be  even  so  honest  a  rogue  as  to  compound  with  the  man  he  had 
oppressed. 

^  Lady  Holderness,  in  Mr.  Grenville's  administration,  had  occasioned  the 
putting  the  laws  against  contraband  goods  into  rigorous  execution,  having  at 
one  journey  from  Paris  imported  one  hundred  and  fourteen  gowns,  which 
were  seized.  Her  lord  becoming  afterwards  Governor  of  the  Cinque  Ports, 
she  carried  on  a  smuggling  intercourse  at  Walmer  Castle,  on  the  coast  of 
Kent,  for  importing  French  clothes  and  furniture  for  herself. 


1772]  AFFAIRS   OF   DENMARK  109 


SUPPLEMENT 


{For  the  Public  Advertiser,  May  8,  1772) 

To  THE  Right  Honourable  the  Lords  Commissioners 
OF  the  Admiralty 

My  Lords, 

Having  seen  in  last  Saturday's  paper  that  Mr.  Bradshaw 
was  appointed  to  be  a  member  of  your  Board,  give  me  leave  to 
congratulate  your  Lordships  on  the  event,  as  a  person  of  Mr. 
Bradshaw's  birth  and  talents  may  be  of  the  greatest  use  to  you  on 
many  occasions,  besides  adding  infinitely  more  weight  and  dignity 
to  the  Board ;  I  was  therefore  a  good  deal  surprised  at  the  simple 
manner  in  which  his  well-merited  promotion  was  announced  to 
the  public,  but  must  attribute  it  either  to  his  own  modesty  or  the 
printer's  ignorance ;  but  whatever  be  the  cause,  I  think  it  neces- 
sary to  acquaint  you,  his  brother  Lords,  with  a  little  of  his 
history. 

It  is  needless  to  trouble  your  Lordships  with  an  account  of  his 
birth  or  education,  as  the  first  might  be  a  very  difficult  task,  and 
the  latter  your  Lordships  may  see  has  not  been  neglected.  His 
first  appearance  in  the  great  world  was  as  one  of  Lord  Barrington's 
domestics,  from  whence  he  moved  to  Ireland,  set  up  a  shop,  and, 
under  the  influence  of  a  happy  planet,  returned  to  England, 
where,  by  means  of  his  uncommon  address  in  administering  to 
i}ci^  pleasures  of  the  great,  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  Secretaries 
to  the  Treasury,  which  office  he  held  during  the  Duke  of  Grafton's 
administration,  and  by  exerting  his  happy  talents  between  his 
Grace  and  the  celebrated  Nancy  Parsons,  he  so  far  ingratiated 
himself  with  the  Duke  that  he  became  his  chief  confidant,  and 
was  privy  to  the  whole  of  his  generous  treatment  of  that  young 
lady,  and  of  course  became  his  Grace's  bosom  friend ;  for  which 
service  he  first  received  a  pension  of  fifteen  hundred  pounds  a  year 
for  three  lives,  and,  that  not  being  sufficient,  is  now  made  one  of 
you.     I  cannot  avoid  again  congratulating  you  on  the  acquisition 


no       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

of  such  a  brother  member^  as  it  is  to  be  hoped  he  will  assist  any 
of  your  Lordships  with  his  good  offices  upon  all  occasions. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be, 
My  Lords, 

Your  Lordships'  most  humble 
and  obedient  servant. 
Pall  Mall.  Arthur  Tell-Truth. 

The  Duke  of  Grafton's  ambition  was  to  be  at  the  head  of  the 
Admiralty,  and  he  had  insisted  on  Bradshaw  being  placed  at  that 
Board  as  a  spy  on  Lord  Sandwich,  and  to  learn  the  business, 
that  he  might  be  his  Grace's  Secretary  there,  if  he  could  obtain 
the  command.  It  came  out  afterwards  that  he  belonged  more 
to  the  Court  than  to  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  though  the  Court  had 
no  objection  to  have  it  believed  that  he  owed  his  promotion  to 
that  Duke. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Copenhagen,  dated  April  30. 

"  In  my  last  I  gave  you  an  account  of  the  execution  of  Counts 
Struensee  and  Brandt,  but,  through  hurry,  omitted  to  mention 
the  crimes  they  were  charged  with,  which  are  as  follows : — 
Struensee  was  convicted  of  having  embezzled  from  the  King's 
coffers  almost  six  tons  (?)  of  gold,  amounting  to  125,000/. 
sterling ;  of  having  expedited  many  orders  from  the  Cabinet 
without  the  King's  knowledge ;  of  having  been  guilty  of  criminal 
conversation ;  of  having  kept  from  the  King  and  never  delivered 
to  him  several  letters  sent  to  his  Majesty,  &c.  Count  Brandt 
was  convicted  of  having  been  privy  to  Count  Struensee's  criminal 
conversation,  and  all  his  other  crimes,  without  divulging  them, 
and  of  having  laid  violent  hands  on  the  King's  Majesty,  &c. 
The  scaffold  on  which  the  above  criminals  were  executed  is 
ordered  to  remain  on  the  place  where  it  now  is  for  a  month 
longer,  from  which  circumstance  it  is  supposed  that  some  more 
ot  the  state  prisoners  will  suffer  death.  The  Colonels  Falcon- 
skiold  and  Hesselberg  are  brought  to  the  apartments  in  the 
citadel  wherein  Struensee  and  Brandt  had  been  confined." 

The  following  was  published  by  somebody  attached  to  the 
Court,  but  I  do  not  know  that  it  is  authentic: — May  26,  1772. 


1772]  AFFAIRS   OF   DENMARK  iii 

The  last  letters  from  Copenhagen  advise  that  the  sentences 
against  the  unfortunate  Struensee  and  Brandt  are  just  published, 
but,  instead  of  satisfying  the  public,  have  excited  a  general  com- 
passion for  them,  and  an  abhorrence  of  their  barbarous  execu- 
tion ;  and,  in  short,  they  are  now  looked  upon  as  victims  of 
state,  sacrificed  to  the  ambition  and  hatred  of  their  enemies. 
These  letters  add,  that  the  Queen  Carolina  Matilda  was  pre- 
paring to  set  out  for  Hanover  towards  the  end  of  the  present 
month. 

Letters  from  Hamburgh  by  yesterday's  mail  advise  that  the 
lower  order  of  people  at  Copenhagen,  who  had  been  irritated  to 
the  highest  pitch  by  the  discourses  of  Dr.  Munter  against  the 
Counts  Struensee  and  Brandt,  had  taken  another  turn,  in  con- 
sequence of  which  it  was  said  to  be  determined  by  the  Court 
that  there  should  be  no  more  executions.  These  letters  add, 
that  the  articles  exhibited  against  the  two  Counts  were  only 
general  charges  of  their  intentions  to  get  the  whole  power  of  the 
kingdom  into  their  hands,  but  that  it  seemed  very  improbable 
any  such  thing  was  intended. 

The  following  account  of  Count  Struensee  is  transmitted 
from  Hamburgh.  The  Count  was  born  at  Halle  on  Aug.  5, 
1737;  his  father  was  pastor  to  the  parish  of  Ulric.  He  began 
his  first  exercises  in  a  public  school  in  that  city,  after  which 
he  was  removed  to  the  University  there,  where  he  studied  physic 
and  received  his  doctor's  degree.  In  1757  he  went  with  his 
father  to  Altona,  where  the  latter  was  appointed  first  pastor, 
with  the  title  of  Ecclesiastical  Counsellor  to  the  King.  Soon 
after  the  son  was  appointed  physician  to  the  Signiory  of  Pinne- 
berg  and  of  the  county  of  Rantzau ;  here  he  practised  his  art 
with  great  success,  and  was  in  such  a  situation  as  to  have  lived 
happily,  contentedly,  and  esteemed ;  but  how  few  can  properly 
enjoy  the  precious  state  of  mediocrity!  In  1768  he  was 
appointed  physician  to  the  King,  and  chosen  to  accompany 
him  on  his  travels  to  England,  Holland,  Germany,  and  France ; 
this  unhappily  was  the  beginning  of  his  greatness.  He  accom- 
panied his  Majesty  throughout  and  gave  him  the  greatest  proofs 
of  his  zeal  and  attachment,  and  had  more  than  one  opportunity 
of  exercising  his  skill  in  the  medical  way  both  on  the  King  and 


112       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

Queen ;  his  assiduity  and  address  soon  gained  him  the  affections 
of  their  Majesties,  and  the  King  appointed  him  his  reader ;  on 
the  1 2th  of  May,  1769,  his  Majesty  invested  him  with  the  char- 
acter of  Counsellor  of  State,  two  days  after  with  that  of  Counsellor 
of  Conference,  and  in  December  following  appointed  him  Master 
of  Requests.  In  the  month  of  July,  1771,  he  was  declared 
Minister  of  the  Cabinet,  and  at  the  same  time  raised  to  the 
dignity  of  a  Count,  and  invested  with  the  order  of  Queen 
Caroline  Matilda;  so  that  he  enjoyed  his  height  of  greatness 
little  more  than  six  months.  It  is  false  that  he  was  accused 
of  diverting  to  his  own  use  fifteen  tons  of  gold  from  the 
Treasury,  it  being  only  six ;  but  when  his  accusers  were  at  work 
it  was  as  easy  to  write  the  one  sum  as  the  other. 

The  Queen,  Struensee,  and  Brandt  had  acted  like  mad  people ; 
they  certainly  gave  the  King  laudanum  frequently ;  and  yet,  if 
he  did  not  go  to  bed  so  soon  after  supper  as  they  chose,  Brandt 
used  to  kick  him  out  of  the  room.  Other  instances  appeared 
on  the  trial  of  similar  indignity.  Sir  Robert  Keith,  after  his 
return,  owned  to  a  person  from  whom  I  had  it,  that  the  junto 
certainly  had  meant  by  drugs  to  hurt  the  King's  understanding. 


1772] 


JUNE 

ON  the  '^rd  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  to  keep  up 
the  Opposition  disavowal  of  the  legality  of 
the  last  election  for  Middlesex,  moved  to 
reconsider  the  resolution  of  the  Lords  on  that 
question ;  and  the  motion,  as  usual,  was  rejected  with 
little  debate,  and  by  a  large  majority. 

^th.  A  Committee  for  hearing  the  merits  of  Bradshaw's 
petition  was  chosen.  The  whole  Opposition  made  a  point 
of  not  attending,  that  there  might  not  be  lOO  Members 
present,  the  necessary  complement ;  but  the  Ministers,  by 
private  application,  procured  112  to  meet;  and  four  days 
after  the  Committee  decided  the  election  in  favour  of 
Bradshaw.  This  man,  of  the  lowest  extraction,  coarse 
manners,  and  clumsy  figure,  had  the  confidence  to  take 
the  Duchess  of  Grafton  out  to  dance  at  a  ball  at  Lady 
Hillsborough's.  Somebody  asked  if  he  had  lately  learned 
to  dance  where  grown  gentlemen  were  taught  ?  Lady 
Bridget  Lane  asked  in  return,  where  he  had  learnt  to 
grow  a  gentleman  ? 

On  the  6th  the  King  put  an  end  to  the  session.  The 
Bill  for  regulating  the  affairs  of  India  had  been  dropped 
from  the  difficulties  of  forming  it,  and  the  Committee  of 
inquiry  into  the  mismanagements  and  abuses  in  that 
country  was  postponed  till  the  next  session. 

The  same  day,  the  gth,  was  heard,  in  the  King's  Bench, 
the  cause  of  Alderman  Townsend  against  the  collector  of 
the  land-tax,  which  Townsend  had  refused  to  pay.^     Ser- 

^  See  Supplement  at  the  end  of  June. 
I.— I  113 


114       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [June 

jeant  Glynn,  counsel  for  Townsend,  urged  the  nullity  of 
the  Parliament  by  the  irregularity  of  the  last  Middlesex 
election,  and  that  consequently  the  land-tax  was  not  a 
valid  Act.  Lord  Mansfield  adhered  to  the  Act,  declared 
Glynn's  argument  nothing  to  the  purpose,  and  ordered 
the  jury  to  find  for  the  collector,  which  they  did,  as  every- 
body expected  they  would. 

Lord  Mansfield  betrayed  the  greatest  symptoms  of  fear 
when  he  sat  in  the  Alderman's  cause,  and  soon  after  gave 
another  instance  of  his  timidity.  It  was  in  a  memorable 
cause  between  a  black  slave  and  his  master,^  the  former 
claiming  the  freedom  of  England  after  being  brought 
thither.  The  Chancellors  Talbot  and  Hardwicke  had 
given  an  opinion  formerly  against  slaves.  Lord  Mansfield 
now  for  a  little  popularity,  after  first  advising  the  affair  to 
be  made  up,  gave  judgment  in  favour  of  the  slave,  but 
advised  procuring  an  Act  of  Parliament.  Whether  this 
was  to  soothe  the  master,  or  to  get  slavery  confirmed  by 
Act  of  Parliament,  cannot  be  decided,  but  his  arbitrary 
disposition  countenanced  the  belief  of  the  latter. 

13M.  Lady  Waldegrave  came  to  me  with  her  sister 
Dysart,  from  Ham  House.^  She  told  me  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  had  not  been  able  to  find  a  moment  for  de- 
claring his  marriage  to  the  King,  who  would  not  be  alone 
with  him  a  minute.  I  did  not  like  this :  it  showed  either 
timidity  or  irresolution  in  the  Duke.  The  Duke  of  Cum- 
berland had  behaved  with  much  more  spirit  when  he 
married  Mrs.  Horton,  as  Lady  Waldegrave  now  told  me. 
The  Duke  of  Cumberland  went  to  the  King  with  a  letter 

1  This  was  the  celebrated  "case  of  James  Somersett,  a  negro."  Charles 
Steuart,  last  Receiver-General  of  Customs  in  British  North  America,  had 
brought  a  slave,  James  Somersett,  to  England  with  him.  The  slave  ran 
away  and  his  master  had  him  caught,  placed  in  irons,  and  taken  on  board  a 
ship  bound  for  Jamaica.  Before  the  ship  left  the  Thames,  however,  the 
slave's  friends  sued  out  his  habeas  corpus,  and  in  the  subsequent  trial  before 
the  Court  of  King's  Bench  Lord  Mansfield  held  that  the  cause  returned  was 
not  sufficient  for  remanding  the  slave  and  that  he  must  be  discharged.  This 
decision  had  an  important  effect  in  the  history  of  slavery. — A.  F.  S. 

2  Scat  of  the  Earl  of  Dysart,  near  Richmond. 


1772]  THE    KING'S    FALSEHOOD  115 

in  his  pocket  containing  notice  of  his  wedding.  After 
walking  some  time  in  the  garden  with  the  King,  the  Duke 
gave  him  the  letter.  The  King  put  it  into  his  pocket, 
saying,  "  I  suppose  I  need  not  read  it  now."  "  Yes,  Sir," 
said  the  Duke,  "  you  must  read  it  directly."  The  King 
had  no  sooner  read  it  than  he  broke  out  in  these  terms — 
"  You  fool !  you  blockhead !  you  villain  !  you  had  better 
have  debauched  all  the  unmarried  girls  in  England — you 
had  better  have  committed  adultery  with  all  the  married 
women — but  this  woman  can  be  nothing — she  never  shall 
be  anything."  The  Duke  asked  what  he  would  have  him 
do.  The  King  said,  "  Go  abroad  till  I  can  determine 
what  to  do."  Thus  that  foolish  journey  was  his  Majesty's 
own  thought,  not  that  of  his  supposed  more  foolish  brother  ; 
and  the  pious  apostrophe  above  showed  the  texture  of  the 
King's  vaunted  religion.  Lady  Waldegrave  told  me  too 
that  the  King  now  said  his  Ministers  had  made  him  pro- 
mise never  to  forgive  his  brother  Cumberland — another 
instance  of  his  piety,  and  yet  probably  a  falsehood  ;  what 
interest  had  the  Ministers  to  exact  that  promise,  and  make 
the  Duke  their  irreconcilable  enemy  ?  Lady  Waldegrave 
added  that  the  King  had  not  notified  the  Marriage  Bill 
to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  till  in  the  very  letter  in  which 
he  told  him  of  his  mother's  death — thus  heaping  indignity 
on  cruelty,  and  closing  all  with  another  falsehood,  by 
affirming  that  the  Marriage  Bill  was  enacted  to  please  the 
Princess;^  and  with  a  new  indignity  to  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester,  by  thanking  the  Parliament  at  the  close  of  the 
session,  just  as  the  Duke  arrived,  for  having  regulated, 
that  is  restrained,  the  marriages  of  the  Royal  Family. 

On  the  i^th  a  great  installation  of  Knights  ot  the  Bath. 
The  King  had  his  son  (Prince  Frederick)  installed  by 
proxy ,2  to  save  the  expense  of  the  entertainment,  which 

^  The  King's  implacability  against  those  who  opposed  the  Marriage  Bill 
proved  it  was  his  own  act,  as  will  appear  by  the  case  of  General  Conway, 
which  I  shall  mention  hereafter. 

"  Most  of  the  public  journals  of  the  time  state  that  the  Bishop  of  Osnaburgh 


ii6       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

the  King  must  have  borne  had  the  Prince  been  installed 
in  person. 

\6th.  Account  of  the  Queen  of  Denmark  being  landed 
at  Stade,  in  her  way  to  the  Gorde,  a  villa  of  the  King's 
near  Hanover.  On  embarking  aboard  the  frigate  the 
royal  standard  of  Denmark  was  hoisted.  It  was  impossible 
to  learn  exactly  the  truth  of  the  Danish  History.  In 
general  the  conduct  of  the  Queen,  Struensee,  and  Brandt 
appears  to  have  been  absurd  and  extravagant  even  to 
frenzy.  In  the  printed  trial,  which  is  very  ill  drawn  up, 
and  more  agreeable  to  the  vague,  unsatisfactory  manner  in 
which  despotic  countries  render  accounts  to  the  public, 
than  to  the  notions  of  a  nation  that  requires  positive 
breaches  of  known  laws  proved  by  facts  and  evidences, 
it  seems  that  Brandt,  by  Struensee's  consent,  went  into 
the  King's  closet  to  demand  satisfaction  of  him,  and  even 
ill-treated  his  master,  and  bit  his  finger.  In  Germany,  I 
know  from  good  authority,  that  it  is  believed  that  they 
frequently  gave  the  King  laudanum,  and  that  after  supper 
they  said.  We  must  make  him  go  to  bed ;  and  that,  as  he 
went  out  of  the  room,  Brandt  used  to  kick  him.  If  true, 
all  three  ought  to  have  been  shut  up  as  mad  people.  Nor 
do  these  accusations  agree  with  the  King's  endeavouring 
twice  or  thrice  to  get  to  the  Queen,  especially  the  day  of 
Struensee's  execution.  It  has  been  said  that,  when  the 
conspirators  forced  the  King  to  declare  to  the  people  from 
a  balcony  his  assent  to  what  had  been  done,  Rantzau  stood 
behind  him  with  a  dagger,  to  awe  him.  This  is  as  little 
probable  on  the  other  side.    Rantzau  and  two  more  of  the 

(Frederick)  was  installed  on  this  occasion,  with  Sir  Horace  Mann,  Sir  W. 
Draper,  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  and  eleven  others.  At  night,  as  was  then  the 
custom  on  these  occasions,  a  magnificent  ball  was  given  at  the  Opera-house, 
followed  by  as  magnificent  a  supper.  The  whole  was  at  the  expense  of  the 
new  knights  ;  and  every  person  of  distinction  in  town  was  present,  without 
exception.  When  Lord  North  was  invested  with  the  Garter,  a  few  days  later, 
he  celebrated  the  occasion  by  giving,  at  his  official  residence  in  Downing- 
street,  an  entertainment  of  such  splendour  that  London  talked  of  it  for  a 
fortnight. — D. 


1772]     GARTER  CONFERRED  ON  LORD  NORTH      117 

leaders  lie  by  turns  in  the  King's  bedchamber.  If  half 
that  is  said  of  the  Queen  is  true,  the  Queen  Dowager,  who 
saw  children  yearly  born  to  the  prejudice  of  her  own  son, 
and  who  could  not  well  believe  them  legitimate,  had  cause 
to  countenance  the  revolution  ;  and  yet  it  is  believed  she 
had  no  more  hand  in  it  than  lending  her  name. 

On  the  18M,  Frederick  Lord  North,  First  Lord  of  the 
Treasury,  and  eldest  son  of  Francis  Earl  of  Guilford,  was 
made  a  Knight  of  the  Garter,  alone.  It  had  long  been 
promised  to  him,  and  when  the  Duke  of  Saxe  Gotha  died 
in  the  preceding  winter  the  King  confirmed  the  promise ; 
but  Lord  Chesterfield's  death  being  expected,  his  Majesty 
wished  to  keep  his  uncle's  garter  for  one  of  his  own  sons, 
and  give  that  which  had  been  worn  by  a  subject  to  Lord 
North.  He  was  assisted  in  this  delay  by  the  Court  of 
Gotha,  who  deferred  sending  over  the  riband — some  said 
from  discontent,  because  the  pension  which  the  late 
Princess  of  Wales  had  paid  to  her  brother  was  not  con- 
tinued to  his  successor — others  from  a  dispute  between 
two  Gothan  lords,  each  of  whom  wished  to  bring  it. 
Hence  many  persons  concluding  the  King  unwilling  to 
give  the  Order  to  Lord  North,  his  Majesty,  to  silence 
those  rumours,  conferred  it  on  him.  It  was  a  singular 
honour  in  this  age.  It  was  not  usual  to  give  a  single 
garter,  but  to  wait  till  two  were  vacant ;  yet  this  King  had 
not  adhered  to  that  custom.  Sir  Robert  Walpole  was  the 
only  commoner  who  had  had  the  Garter  since  the  reign  of 
Queen  Elizabeth,  and  no  son  had  had  it  in  the  lifetime 
of  his  father  since  the  Earl  of  Ossory,  son  of  the  Duke  of 
Ormond,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,  nor  before  him  since 
the  time  of  Henry  VIII. 

At  this  time  happened  an  affair  of  great  consequence, 
and   that  threatened   national  mischief.     One  Fordyce,^ 

^  Alexander  Fordyce,  a  Scotsman,  who  married  in  1770  Lady  Margaret 
Lindsay,  daughter  of  the  5th  Earl  of  Balcarres.  His  deficit,  when  he  failed, 
was  es*:imated  at  100,000/.,  a  vast  sum  for  those  days.  In  December,  1772, 
his  creditors  were  paid  a  dividend  of  four  shillings  in  the  pound  (**  Gentleman's 
Magazine"). — A.  F.  S. 


ii8       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

formerly  clerk  to  a  banker,  had  become  a  banker,  and  was 
exceedingly  countenanced  by  his  countrymen.  He  plunged 
into  all  manner  of  expense  and  extravagance,  and  added 
that  dangerous  vice  of  gaming  in  the  stocks,  hazarding  the 
property  of  his  partners,  and  of  all  that  had  placed  money 
in  his  hands,  and  borrowing  from  all  quarters-.  He  lost  in 
the  Alley,  and  blew  up,  failing  for  two  or  three  hundred 
thousand  pounds.  Scarce  the  bubble  of  the  South  Sea 
occasioned  greater  consternation.  One  of  his  partners 
shot  himself;  another  man,  ruined  by  him,  drowned  him- 
self; a  third  flung  himself  out  of  window  and  broke  his 
limbs.  The  Aldermen  Glynn  and  Halifax  were  declared 
bankrupts  in  the  "  Gazette."  Drummond,  a  great  banker, 
was  near  failing.  The  Bank  lent  Sir  George  Colebrook 
190,000/.,  or  he  had  failed  too.  The  brothers  Adam, 
undertakers  of  the  Adelphi  buildings,  were  ruined.  The 
Dukes  of  Queensberry  and  Buccleuch  and  Archibald 
Douglas  offered  their  estates  to  the  Bank  of  England  for 
security  for  the  Bank  of  Edinburgh.  Indeed,  that  Bank 
had  waded  very  deeply  into  circulating  a  prodigious 
number  of  their  own  notes ;  and  all  this  revived  great 
clamour  against  the  Scots.  It  was  feared  there  would  be 
a  run  on  the  Bank  of  England  itself  as  soon  as  the  Dutch 
should  learn  the  news.  Thus  did  one  rascal  shake  the 
mighty  credit  of  such  a  nation  as  Great  Britain.  Nor  will 
twenty  years  perhaps  remove  the  prejudice  that  men  will 
contract  against  bankers.  Who  can  like  to  venture  their 
property  being  gamed  for  by  men  they  trust,  without 
knowing  it  is  gamed  for? 

A  most  extraordinary  scene  was  also  acting  at  this  mo- 
ment on  the  theatre  of  Europe  :  the  Emperor,  the  Czarina, 
and  the  King  of  Prussia  had  agreed  to  divide  Poland 
among  themselves,  except  a  small  part,  which,  to  indemnify 
the  King  of  Poland  for  all  the  rest  of  his  dominion,  they 
intended  to  bestow  on  him  as  an  hereditary  kingdom  ; 
and  to  satisfy  the  Czarina  with  less  of  Poland,  they  pro- 


1772]         PROPOSED   PARTITION   OF   POLAND  119 

posed  to  oblige  the  Grand  Signior  to  sacrifice  to  her  as 
much  of  the  conquest  she  had  made  on  him  as  would 
answer  that  end.  In  this  combination,  for  which  there 
was  no  title  but  the  law  of  force,  were  two  remarkable 
circumstances  —  one,  the  indifference  with  which  the 
Apostolic  Empress-Queen  of  Hungary  abandoned  the 
Popish  confederates,  against  whom  the  Czarina  had 
protected  the  Protestant  dissidents ;  so  that  the  murderous 
Russian  princess  was  true  to  her  religion,  and  the  pious 
Austrian  faithless  to  hers.  The  other  circumstance  was 
more  remarkable,  because  the  bad  are  often  zealous,  and 
the  devout  often  insincere.  But  great  empires  are  seldom 
treated  with  the  lowest  contempt ;  and  since  Cardinal 
Richelieu,  France  had  certainly  not  been  contemptible. 
The  humiliation  of  Louis  XIV.  was  but  the  reverse  of 
a  great  monarch's  fortune ;  and  if  he  had  been  insolent  in 
prosperity,  he  at  least  maintained  dignity  in  the  midst  of 
his  calamities.  Now  the  three  associated  powers  did  not 
even  deign  to  notify  their  association  and  plan  to  the 
Court  of  Versailles.  The  Empress-Queen,  who  had  entered 
into  the  Family  Compact,  seemed  to  forget  she  had  such 
an  ally  as  the  King  of  P'rance.  That  monarch's  new 
Ministry  had  indeed  at  the  end  of  last  year  sent  a  reinforce- 
ment to  the  confederates — so  ridiculous  a  reinforcement 
that  no  wonder  it  drew  contempt ;  it  consisted  solely  in 
twenty  officers.  Viomenil,  a  lieutenant-general,  who  led 
them,  was  taken  prisoner,  and  sent  home.  But  if  Louis 
and  his  Ministers  were  treated  with  ignominy,  his  late 
Minister,  Choiseul,  had  cause  to  triumph.  The  slight  put 
on  his  master  was  a  compliment  paid  to  him.  Kaunitz, 
Prime  Minister  to  the  Empress-Queen,  was  intimately 
connected  with  Choiseul,  and  had  incited  his  mistress  to 
protect  him.  Their  ill  success  was  returned  by  this  league 
with  two  princes  the  most  obnoxious  to  the  Court  of 
France,  the  Czarina  and  the  King  of  Prussia. 


I20      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Jwne 


SUPPLEMENT 

London,  June  loth,  1772. 

Yesterday  came  on  in  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  the  long- 
expected  cause  between  Mr.  Alderman  Townsend  and  the 
collector  of  the  land-tax.  Lord  Mansfield  had  appointed  the 
trial  for  nine  o'clock  precisely,  but  he  delayed  it  till  near  eleven, 
waiting  for  the  Attorney-General,  who  did  not  attend.  The 
cause  was  opened  by  Mr.  Davenport,  after  which  Mr.  Serjeant 
Glynn  addressed  the  jury,  and  informed  them  that  in  common 
cases  it  was  the  custom  to  content  themselves  with  proving 
the  trespass,  and  then  leave  the  justification  of  it  to  the  defendant ; 
but  he  said  the  present  case  required  a  further  discussion 
from  him;  that  it  was  an  important  constitutional  point  upon 
which  the  valuable  rights  of  the  whole  nation  depended.  He 
said  he  was  directed  by  his  client,  Mr.  Townsend,  to  conduct 
the  cause  as  its  importance  demanded;  that,  therefore,  he 
should  waive  all  the  informalities  in  the  collector's  proceedings. 
He  would  admit  him  likewise  to  be  collector,  and  that  he  was 
authorised  by  the  Commissioners  ;  that  the  single  ground  of  his 
pleading  would  be  that  the  Commissioners  themselves  were  not 
authorised ;  for  that  a  House  of  Commons  legally  chosen  by  the 
people  are  alone  empowered  to  levy  taxes  in  this  country ;  and  he 
said  he  insisted,  and  would  prove  by  evidence,  that  the  persons  who 
passed  the  Act  of  Parliament  (under  which  the  collector  had  seized 
Mr.Townsend's  hay)  were  improperly  called  a  House  of  Commons, 
because  they  were  illegally  and  defectively  constituted.  He  said 
that  to  the  making  of  all  laws,  and  the  levying  of  all  taxes,  it  was 
formerly  necessary  that  every  freeholder  should  assent  individually, 
and  especially  before  a  tax  was  to  be  levied  the  constituents  were 
formerly  first  referred  to,  because  they  were  to  consent  to  what 
they  were  to  pay.  Custom  and  usage,  he  said,  had  now  made  it 
common  for  the  representatives  in  Parliament  to  speak  for  the 
people,  and  this  was  considered  the  same  as  the  consent  of  the 
people,  because  they  were  freely  chosen  by  the  people  for  that 


1772]  ALDERMAN    TOWNSEND'S   CASE  12 

purpose  ;  and  after  every  election  a  formal  letter  of  attorney  (the 
indenture)  is  always  given  by  the  electors  to  the  person  they  have 
chosen.  He  said  that  this  implied  consent  of  the  people  by  their 
representatives  depended  entirely  on  their  having  the  free  choice 
of  their  representatives ;  for  that  if  their  freedom  of  choice  was 
invaded  the  reference  and  implication  was  destroyed,  and  the 
people  would  no  longer  have  any  the  least  consent  in  the  making 
of  laws  or  levying  of  taxes;  but  that  their  lives  and  their 
property  would  be  absolutely  at  the  mercy  of  any  set  of  men  who 
should  call  themselves  a  Parliament,  corrupted  by  the  revenue 
and  supported  by  the  troops  of  a  weak  or  a  wicked  tyrant.  He 
said  that  this,  as  far  at  least  as  it  related  to  representation,  was 
the  case  with  the  present  persons  who  call  themselves  a  House ; 
for  which,  he  said,  as  they  were  not  chosen,  so  neither  are  they 
acknowledged,  by  the  people.  The  county  of  Middlesex,  he 
said,  was  not  represented :  that  one  of  the  members  legally 
chosen  by  the  county  had  been  forcibly  and  illegally  excluded, 
and  another  person  as  illegally  and  forcibly  substituted  in  his 
room.  Mr.  Glynn  then  gave  a  very  striking  account  of  the 
absurdity   and    impudence   of   Mr.    LuttrelFs   pretensions,   and 

of  the  infamy  of  our  ,  and  his  abettors  and  accomplices. 

He  said,  the  present  pretended  House  of  Commons  had  super- 
seded the  election  of  the  county  by  an  unwarrantable  resolution 
of  their  own  ;  and  had  by  so  doing  seized  into  their  own  hands, 
and  for  their  own  use  and  emolument,  the  birthright  of  all  the 
people  of  England.  He  proved  in  the  clearest  manner  that  the 
pretence  of  Mr.  Wilkes's  incapacity  does  not  exist  in  the  law ;  and 
that  the  people's  right  of  representation  is  less  than  a  name,  if  the 
House  of  Commons  has  an  indefinite  power  of  expulsion.  Mr. 
Glynn  said  he  would  produce  unquestionable  evidence  to  the 
points  on  which  he  had  rested  the  merits  of  his  cause,  not- 
withstanding that  he  thought  it  unnecessary,  because  the  facts 
were  so  notorious  and  so  well  known  to  the  jury  themselves, 
that  they  could  of  their  own  knowledge,  agreeably  to  the  laws 
of  the  land,  give  a  verdict  for  the  plaintiff  even  without  any 
evidence. 

As  soon   as   Mr.   Glynn  had   finished  his   speech,   and   was 
directing  the  evidence  to  be  called,   Mr.  Wallace,  the  King's 


122       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

counsellor,  produced  a  printed  paper,  which  he  said  was  the  Act 
of  Parliament  by  which  the  collector  levied  the  tax.  As  for  the 
objection  that  had  been  made  by  Mr.  Glynn  relative  to  the  seat 
of  one  of  the  members,  or  of  the  legality  of  the  Parliament, 
he  said  the  courts  of  Westminster-Hall  had  no  power  to 
determine. 

Lord  Mansfield  then  rose  and  said  that  he  perceived  Mr. 
Glynn  wanted  that  court  to  retry  the  Judgment  of  the  House 
of  Commons  touching  the  case  of  the  Middlesex  election ;  "  that 
is,"  said  his  Lordship,  "  he  wants  to  prove  that  the  Legislature  is 
dissolved,  and  that  all  the  Acts  of  Parliament  made  since  the 
year  1769  are  void.  The  evidence  which  Mr.  Glynn  wants 
to  produce  is  not  by  law  admissible,  and  I  will  not  suffer  it  to 
be  given.  Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  you  will  find  for  the  defen- 
dant." The  clerk  then  hurried  over  the  form  and  said,  "  Gentle- 
men of  the  jury,  hearken  to  your  verdict,  &c. ;  you  find  for  the 
defendant,  and  so  you  say  all."  Whereupon  one  of  the  jury, 
Mr.  Long,  said  that  he  did  not  consent  to  that  verdict.  This  dissent 
caused  some  embarrassment  to  Lord  Mansfield,  which  he  soon 
got  over  by  saying,  "  Gentlemen,  you  are  sworn  to  give  a  verdict 
according  to  the  evidence ;  now  no  evidence  has  been  produced  to 
you  against  the  defendant,  therefore  you  must  find  for  him. 
You  cannot  try  facts  by  notoriety ^  that  is  not  law ;  you  must  go 
by  the  evidence,  and  you  have  heard  no  evidence ;  you  must  find 
for  the  defendant."  The  jury  acquiesced,  and  by  their  tameness 
proved  that  the  Scotch  Lord  Mansfield  treats  an  English  jury 
as  they  deserve. 


1772] 


JULY 

ON  the  1st  was  determined  the  scrutiny  for  new 
Sheriffs,  when  Alderman  Oliver  and  one  Lewes, 
the  popular  candidates,  appeared  to  have  a 
very  great  majority  against  Plumbe,  set  up  by 
the  Court  faction  in  the  City.  Captain  Allen,  the  now 
ringleader  of  the  Anti-Court  mob,  harangued  the  Livery 
two  or  three  times  on  this  occasion,  and,  about  the  same 
time,  he  beat  one  Kelly  in  Vauxhall  Garden  for  having 
given  him  the  lie  in  print.  This  Kelly  had  been  a  tailor, 
and  had  become  a  playwright,  and  scribbled  much  abuse 
against  the  City  patriots  in  newspapers.^ 

^  Walpole  speaks  sneeringly  of  Kelly,  probably  because  the  latter  had  spoken 
severely,  in  his  Thespis^  of  Walpole's  friend  Kitty  Clive  : — 

"  undamn'd  with  any  casual  part 
Of  Clive's  weak  head,  or  execrable  heart," 

Kelly  was  at  this  time  about  thirty  years  of  age.  He  had  not  been  a  tailor, 
but  a  staymaker,  to  which  honest  occupation  he  had  been  bound  in  Ireland  by 
his  father,  a  man  of  good  family,  but  small  means.  Hugh  Kelly  failed  in 
London  as  a  master  in  the  above  vocation.  The  poor  Irishman  might  have 
taken  to  the  road,  but  he  preferred  the  employment  he  found  in  an  attorney's 
office.  It  is  likely,  and  deplorable  enough,  that  his  necessities  being  stronger 
than  his  principles  made  of  him  a  venal  writer.  The  democrats  had  their  re- 
venge when  he  began  to  write  for  the  stage.  His  comedy  of  False  Delicacy ^ 
by  no  means  a  bad  comedy  of  the  sentimental  class,  fell  of  itself;  but  the 
Wilkes  party  swept  from  the  stage  his  Word  to  the  JVtse,  in  1770.  His 
School  for  Wives,  of  which  he  was  not  at  first  known  to  be  the  author,  was 
produced  in  1773,  and  was  acted,  with  an  admirable  cast,  as  late  as  1813. 
Kelly  wrote  other  dramatic  pieces,  and  some  poems,  all  included  in  the  4to. 
volume  of  his  works.  After  his  decease,  in  1777,  his  Wofd  to  the  Wise  was 
acted  for  the  benefit  of  his  family.  Dr.  Johnson  wrote  a  poor  prologue  for  it.  He 
had  not  long  before  been  writing  speechesand  sermons  for  the  unlucky  Dr.  Dodd. 
"  When  they  come  to  me,"  said  Johnson,  "  with  a  dying  parson  and  a  dead 
staymaker,  what  can  a  man  do  ?  "  In  the  best  days  of  his  London  life  Kelly 
resided  in  Gough-square,  Fleet-street.  He  was  then  in  comfortable  circum- 
stances, marked  by  a  little  eccentric  ostentation.  *'  He  was  so  fond,"  says 
Johnson  (Boswell's  "Life,"  v.  321),  "  of  displaying  on  his  sideboard  the  plate 

123 


124       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [July 

The  failures  among  the  bankers  continued  ;  four  more 
broke  on  the  ist,  and  two  persons,  ruined  by  the  crash, 
shot  themselves.  The  failures  were  computed  to  amount 
to  4,000,000/.  It  came  out  now  that  Fordyce  was  rather 
the  handle  than  the  cause  of  this  ruin.  The  Scotch  had 
for  several  years  been  drawing  vast  quantities  of  specie 
into  Scotland  by  remitting  bills  to  England ;  they  had 
carried  thence  15,000/.  a  week.  This  had  made  specie 
rare  here,  and  had  prodigiously  raised  their  manufactures, 
and  consequently  estates.  The  Bank  of  England  had 
long  beheld  this  practice  with  jealousy,  and  were  glad  to 
take  the  opportunity  of  Fordyce's  gaming,  villainy,  extra- 
vagance, and  destruction,  to  put  an  end  to  so  ruinous  a 
combination.^ 

which  he  possessed  that  he  added  to  it  his  spurs. "  To  return  to  Walpole  :  I 
may  notice  that  Chatterton  alluded  to  Kitty  Clive  in  a  gentler  spirit  than  Kelly, 
but  gained  no  more  respect  from  Kitty's  friend  on  that  account.  In  the  lines 
called  "Advice,"  addressed  to  a  Bristol  Maria,  the  young  poet  says  : — 

**  Yet  when  that  bloom  and  dancing  fire 
Insilver'd  rev'rence  shall  expire, 
Aged,  wrinkled,  and  defaced  ; 
To  keep  one  lover's  flame  alive 
Requires  the  genius  of  a  Clive, 
With  Walpole's  mental  taste."— D. 

^  The  general  distress  at  this  time  was  greater  than  the  national  charity. 
Charity  sermons  were  delivered  from  various  pulpits,  but  with  small  results. 
These  very  results  only  excited  the  jokers.  As  an  instance  I  may  cite  an 
epigram.  On  nine-and-twenty  shillings  being  collected  after  a  charity  sermon 
in  a  chapel  in  Bishopsgate  a  copy  was  found  pasted  on  the  wall : — 

"  So  little  given  at  chapel  door  ! 
This  people,  doubtless,  must  be  poor. 
So  much  at  gaming  thrown  away  ! 
No  nation,  sure,  so  rich  as  they. 
Britons  !  'twere  greatly  for  your  glory, 
Should  those  who  shall  transmit  your  story, 
Their  notions  of  your  grandeur  frame. 
Not  as  you  give,  but  as  you  game." 

That  among  the  preachers  of  the  period  some  were  either  grossly  incom- 
petent or  grossly  maligned  may  be  seen  in  the  columns  of  most  of  the  news- 
papers. In  one  of  the  latter  a  correspondent  declares  that  a  clergyman  to 
whose  sermon  he  had  listened  had,  some  years  before,  stood  in  the  pillory  for 
a  crime  which  he  does  not  hesitate  to  name.  He  was  probably  one  of  the 
class  of  mere  "fashionable"  preachers, — shams  in  the  Church,  and  curses 
among  Christians. — D. 


1772] 


AUGUST 

IN  the  beginning  of  this  month  was  determined  an 
affair  that  had  much  agitated  the  Ministry  for  some 
time.  A  plan  had  been  laid  before  them,  I  think  as 
early  as  in  the  Duke  of  Grafton's  administration,  for 
allowing  a  set  of  gentlemen  to  purchase  of  the  Crown  and 
settle  lands  on  the  Ohio.  Thomas  Walpole,  brother  of 
Horatio  Lord  Walpole,  was  at  their  head,  but  the  person 
who  had  most  credit  in  carrying  the  affair  through  was 
the  famous  Thomas  Bradshaw,  who  had  lately  occasioned 
much  conversation.  At  this  very  time  Bradshaw's  own 
sister  was  woman  to  Lady  Holderness.  Their  father  was 
an  outlawed  Irish  smuggler,  whose  wife  was  protected  by 
a  lace-woman,  whom  one  Michael  Hatton,  a  toadeater  of 
Lord  Holderness,  married  for  her  money,  and  he  recom- 
mended the  widow  Bradshaw  to  Lady  Holderness,  who 
made  her  her  housekeeper  at  Sion  Hill,  but,  the  woman 
growing  infirm,  the  daughter  was  taken  in  to  assist  her, 
and  thence  became  chambermaid.  It  was  probably  in- 
terest, not  want  of  liberality,  that  made  Bradshaw  leave 
his  sister  in  so  mean  a  situation.  Miss  Bradshaw  had 
great  credit  with  her  lady,  who  was  grown  a  particular 
favourite  of  the  Queen,  while  Lord  Holderness  was 
Governor  of  the  Princes.  Lady  Holderness  had  already 
tripped  up  Lady  Charlotte  Finch,^  Governess  of  the 
children,  a  woman  of  remarkable  sense  and  philosophy, 
who  was  not  disgraced,  indeed,  but  half  laid  aside.  In  the 
meantime  the  King  grew  much  alarmed  about  the  Prince 

^  Second  daughter  of  Th.  Fermor,  Earl  of  Pomfret,  widow  of  the  Vice- 
Chamberlain  William  Finch,  and  mother  of  the  Earl  of  Winchelsea, 

125 


126       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Aug. 

of  Wales,  who,  though  but  ten  years  old,  was  very  un- 
governable. He  was  not,  as  Mr.  Smeet  owned,  suffered 
to  see  a  newspaper,  and  the  Bishop  of  Chester  took  true 
pains  to  keep  up  the  authority  of  Mr.  Stone,  who,  though 
forgotten  by  the  world,  was,  with  Lord  Mansfield,  the 
chief  director.  Mr.  Smeet  owned,  in  his  innocent  sim- 
plicity, to  a  friend  that  the  Bishop  of  Chester  had  told 
him  Mr.  Stone  was  the  man  that  they  ought  all  to  look 
up  to. 

Lord  North  was  thought  to  be  no  friend  to  the  above 
land-scheme  in  his  heart,  though  he  would  not  oppose  it ; 
but  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough,  who  at  first  had  much  ap- 
proved it,  had  latterly  set  himself  to  impugn  it  violently, 
and  had  even  persuaded  the  Board  of  Trade  to  represent 
strongly  against  it.  On  this  the  plan  had  been  laid  before 
the  Council,  who  were  unanimously  for  it,  particularly 
Earl  Gower  (to  please  the  Duke  of  Grafton  and  Brad- 
shaw).  Lord  Hillsborough  was  taxed  with  having  origin- 
ally favoured  the  scheme,  and  was  so  weak  as  to  plead  in 
defence  that  he  had  seemed  to  approve  it  that  he  might 
deceive  the  patrons  of  it,  and  defeat  it  the  more  easily. 
This  frank  confession  of  double-dealing  did  not  heighten 
the  opinion  of  his  Lordship's  character  or  sense.  He  was, 
indeed,  a  man  of  more  pomp  than  solidity,  very  ambitious, 
changeable,  and  false  to  his  friends,  clear  in  none  of  his 
ideas  but  in  the  determination  of  pursuing  his  interest,  but 
always  losing  esteem  faster  than  he  raised  his  fortune. 
His  American  administration  had  raised  him  many  ene- 
mies, without  securing  favour  or  benefiting  either  country, 
nor  did  his  affectation  of  laborious  assiduity  produce 
any  order  or  despatch.  Earl  Gower  declared  himself  the 
champion  of  the  plan,  and  it  came  to  a  necessity  of  one 
of  the  two  Earls  quitting  his  office.  Lord  North  was 
exceedingly  alarmed,  and,  as  usual,  did  not  show  himself 
a  man  of  firmness.  He  feared  the  Bedford  faction  aimed 
at  overturning  him  and  the  administration  ;  and  though 


1772]  FEARS    OF   LORD   NORTH  127 

it  was  probable  that  their  view  was  to  make  Lord  Wey- 
mouth Secretary  for  America  instead  of  Lord  Hills- 
borough, and  though  Lord  North's  own  wish  was  to  place 
the  Earl  of  Dartmouth^  in  that  office,  yet,  after  trying 
every  method  of  accommodation  or  compromise  in  vain 
(for  Lord  Hillsborough,  for  private  reasons  that  shall  be 
mentioned,  would  not  yield,  though  Lord  Gower  consented 
to  give  much  longer  time  for  decision  2),  Lord  North,  in  a 
panic,  went  to  Rigby,  declaring  he  saw  the  administration 
would  dissolve,  and  proposed  to  give  the  Seals  to  Lord 
Weymouth — a  step  that  would  have  made  that  party  too 
formidable  to  Lord  North  in  the  Cabinet.  Rigby,  no 
firm  politician,  yet  he  saw  the  childishness  of  his  fears, 
showed  him  that  Lord  Hillsborough  could  not  influence 
any  one  man,  told  him  Lord  Weymouth  would  not  take 
the  Seals,  and  advised  him  to  stand  his  ground  like  a 
man.3  Still  Lord  North  made  the  offer  to  Weymouth, 
which  was  rejected  haughtily,  the  latter  saying  he  did  not 
look  on  a  third  Secretary  as  Secretary  of  State.  The  fact, 
as  his  friends  owned,  was  that  Lord  Weymouth  had  de- 
clared so  strongly  against  the  creation  of  a  third  Secretary 
that  he  could  not,  with  any  decency,  accept  it  himself; 
but  who  could  expect  that  decency  would  have  governed 
Lord  Weymouth  ?  At  last,  on  the  Jth^  Lord  Hillsborough 
resigned,  and  on  the  \2th  was  created  an  English  earl*  to 
indemnify  him.  As  he  had  a  large  estate  in  Ireland,  and 
was  extremely  desirous  of  being  Viceroy  of  that  country, 
it  was  believed  that  half  his  discontent  was  feigned  in 
order  to  obtain  an  earl's  coronet,  which  raised  him  to  a 

^  William  Legge,  Earl  of  Dartmouth.  His  mother,  widow  of  George 
Lord  Lewisham,  had  remained  with  Francis  Earl  of  Guilford,  Lord  North's 
father ;  and  Lord  Dartmouth  and  Lord  North  had  travelled  together,  and 
lived  as  brothers. 

"^  Lord  North  proposed  to  refer  the  scheme  to  Sir  W.  Johnson,  in  America, 
to  which  Lord  Gower  consented ;  but  Lord  Hillsborough  said  he  had  gone 
too  far  to  retract. 

^  For  he  had  even  talked  of  resigning. 

*  The  Earl  of  Hillsborough  was  raised  to  the  rank  of  Marquis  of  Down- 
shire  in  1789. — D. 


128       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Aug 

rank  proper  for  that  dignity.  With  him  was  created  an 
earl,  the  Chancellor's  father,  old  Allen  Lord  Bathurst,  now 
near  ninety.  He  had  been  one  of  Queen  Anne's  twelve 
peers,  and  had  been  fixed  on  by  Bolingbroke,  Swift,  and 
the  Tory  party,  at  the  beginning  of  George  IL's  reign, 
as  the  person  through  whom  Lady  Suffolk,  the  King's 
mistress,  was  to  try,  by  asking  an  earldom  for  him, 
whether  she  could  prevail  over,  or  at  least  balance,  the 
power  of  the  Queen  and  Sir  Robert  Walpole.  The  two 
latter  obtained  the  victory,  and  Swift,  in  a  rage,  set  out 
for  Ireland.  As  a  door  to  peerages  was  now  again  opened 
— though  only  by  increase  of  rank,  not  by  entirely  new 
creations,  which  the  King  was  hampered  by  too  many 
promises  and  solicitations  to  begin — many  renewed  their 
applications,  particularly  Lord  Holland,  who  was,  in  truth 
very  ill  used  by  neglect.  He  sent  his  son  Charles  to  Lord 
North,  to  repeat  his  request  of  an  earldom,  but  was  again 
refused. 

There  being  now  no  other  competitor,  Lord  North 
obtained  the  Seals  for  Lord  Dartmouth.  It  was  with 
much  more  difficulty  that  the  latter  was  prevailed  on  to 
accept  them.  He  was  extremely  conscientious  and  delicate 
of  his  honour ;  and  though  his  very  near  connection  with 
Lord  North  could  but  dispose  him  to  wish  well  to  the 
latter's  administration,  yet  he  had  been  so  leagued  with 
Lord  Rockingham  and  that  party  that  he  made  the  utmost 
difficulty  of  leaving  them,  though  they  had,  in  a  manner, 
given  up  opposition,  and  Lord  Rockingham  was  dying  :^ 
yet  would  not  Lord  Dartmouth  accept  the  Seals  till  he  had 
explained  himself  to  the  Marquis,  and,  it  was  said,  obtained 
his  consent. 

^  Lord  Rockingham  survived  till  the  year  1786  ;  but  the  coffee  houses  near 
the  Exchange  were  re  echoing  with  the  voices  of  speculators  betting  on  the 
chances  of  his  living  or  dying  before  the  present  year  expired. — D. 


1772] 


SEPTEMBER 

IN  the  beginning  of  this  month  came  the  first  accounts 
of  the  revolution  of  Sweden,^  where  the  King  had 
wrenched  the  power  from  the  Senate,  who  thought 
they  had  bound  him  in  firmer  bonds  than  ever. 
I  know  not  enough  of  the  facts  to  specify  them,  nor  of 
that  nation  to  foresee  whether  the  nobility  will  be  able  to 
struggle ;  as,  whichever  gets  the  better,  the  people  will 
still  remain  slaves,  I  am  pretty  indifferent  to  which  side 
the  power  of  tyranny  falls. 

Fordyce,  secure  from  justice  because  secure  from  law, 
came  over  and  surrendered  himself  The  Scots  cried  up 
his  behaviour  to  the  skies,  and  this  extravagant  villain,  for 
a  little  plausible  demeanour  and  address,  and  from  national 
partiality,  was  almost  celebrated  as  a  martyr. 

\6th.  At  night  I  found  on  my  table,  when  I  came  home, 
the  following  letter  : — 

My  dear  Sir,  Pavilions,^  September  i6th,  1772. 

I  am  just  now  too  much  flurried  to  do  more  than  write 
you  the  matter  of  fact.  The  Duke  has  sent  M.  Legrand^  to  the 
King  to  own  his  marriage,  and  the  King  is  now  gone  to  town  to 
inform  his  Ministers  that  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  is  under  the 
same  proscription  as  the  Duke  of  Cumberland.  You  will,  per- 
haps, wonder  why  we  have  changed  our  plan,  but  the  Duke  found 
it  too  inconvenient  to  go  on  as  we  were.* 

^  This  revolution  was  concerted  with  France,  which  obtained  from  the 
Court  of  Spain  a  very  large  sum  of  money  to  enable  the  King  of  Sweden  to 
corrupt  a  sufficient  number  of  adherents.  France  acted  in  this  odious  affair 
chiefly  from  hatred  of  the  Czarina. 

2  At  Hampton  Court,  where  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  sometimes  resided. 

^  He  had  been  Governor  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester. 

^  It  was  on  the  Duchess  finding  herself  enceinte, 

I.— K  129 


I30      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Sept. 

The  King  must  be  displeased,  but  his  behaviour  has  been 
such  upon  the  occasion  that  we  have  all  the  reason  in  the  world 
to  be  grateful  to  him.  I  must  do  Mr.  Legrand  the  justice  to 
say  that  his  behaviour  upon  the  occasion  was  manly  and  friendly. 
This  letter  is  scarcely  to  be  read,  but,  as  it  is  only  for  your 
perusal,  it  shall  go. 

I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Affectionately  yours, 

Maria  Gloucester. 

On  this  open  rupture  it  was  impossible  the  Duke  could 
avoid  seeing  my  brother,  and  so  far  I  was  glad  that  the 
marriage  had  not  only  been  concluded  without  my  know- 
ledge, but  was  even  publicly  owned  before  I  had  once 
seen  the  Duke  or  been  consulted.  I  was  now  to  deter- 
mine what  part  to  take,  and,  as  the  Duke  was  now 
disgraced  and  my  niece  oppressed,  I  chose  the  handsome 
part,  and  resolved  to  offer  to  incur  the  King's  prohibition 
and  pay  my  court  to  them.  Accordingly  the  very  next 
morning,  as  early  as  I  could,  I  sent  a  servant  to  the 
Duchess  with  this  letter  : — 

Having  long  known,  Madam,  that  your  understanding  is  as 
good  as  your  heart  is  excellent,  I  must  believe  that  you  have  not 
changed  a  plan  of  conduct  which  I  thought  so  right  without 
having  still  stronger  reasons  for  what  you  have  done.  I  am 
very  happy  to  hear  that,  though  forced  to  act  impartially,  his 
Majesty  has  softened  his  justice  with  kindness.  It  must  be  my 
prayer,  as  well  as  expectation,  that  your  virtues  will  reconcile 
the  King  to  you  and  ease  his  Royal  Highness's  mind  of  the  only 
pang  which,  I  flatter  myself,  you  will  ever  occasion  to  him. 

My  wish  is  to  pay  my  duty  to  you.  Madam,  immediately,  and 
to  the  Duke,  if  I  might  be  allowed  that  honour ;  but  as  I  think 
that  would  be  too  great  a  liberty  to  take  without  his  Royal 
Highness's  permission,  I  must  hope  that  the  kind  familiarity 
which  you  still  show  me,  Madam,  and  which  I  burn  to  return, 
but  restrain  from  a  proper  respect,  will  prescribe  the  conduct  to 
me  which  his  Royal  Highness  and  you  choose  I  should  observe, 


1772]       DUKE   OF   GLOUCESTER'S   MARRIAGE         131 

and  which  may  best  express  the  regard  with  which  I  am  his 
and  your 

Royal  Highness's 

Most  faithful  and  most 

obedient,  humble  servant, 

Horace  Walpole. 

The  Duchess  immediately  sent  mc  this  very  engaging 
answer : — 

My  dear  Sir — (N.B.  You  forgot  those  two  little  words  with 
lines  under  them  in  your  kind  note  to  me), — I  am  at  home  now, 
and  so  shall  remain  all  this  morning,  and  shall  be  very  happy  to 
see  you ;  the  Duke  bids  me  say  he  shall  be  glad  to  see  you. 

I  am  ever  truly  yours, 

M.  G. 

I  went  directly  and  found  her  alone ;  she  received  me 
with  the  greatest  kindness,  and  insisted  on  my  treating 
her  as  familiarly  as  ever.  The  first  time  I  saw  her,  in 
July,  she  had  refused  to  Jet  me  kiss  her  hand,  and  em- 
braced me.  She  told  me  now  the  Duke  thought  we 
should  like  better  to  talk  the  whole  over,  and  then  would 
come  to  me.  She  said  they  had  found  so  many  diffi- 
culties in  her  situation^  that  they  could  go  on  no  longer; 
that  the  Duke  had  tried  in  vain  to  bring  the  King  to 
talk  on  it;  that  he  owed  it  to  his  brother  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland  to  own  his  marriage ;  and  that  she  could 
sign  no  paper  legally,  not  even  for  receiving  her  jointure 
from  Lord  Waldegrave,  but  by  her  real  name  Gloucester  ; 
and  a  propos,  she  asked  me  if  I  did  not  approve 
her  signing  Maria  Gloucester,  instead  of  simply  Maria, 
in  the  royal  style ;  for,  said  she,  modestly,  "  there 
was  a  time  when  I  had  no  right  to  any  name  but 
Maria."  She  said  the  King  had  told  Mr.  Legrand 
that   he   had    not   thought   they   were   married ;  and  on 

^  A  principal  one  was,  that,  if  the  Duke's  health  should  again  oblige  him 
to  go  abroad,  she  must,  now  her  marriage  was  known,  accompany  him. 


132      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Sept. 

Legrand's  urging  the  publicity  of  her  letter  to  her  father, 
the  King  said  he  had  heard  it,  but  did  not  believe  what 
the  servants  said.  He  added,  that,  as  nobody  knew  of  this 
notification  but  he  and  Legrand,  it  might  still  remain 
undeclared,  and  Legrand  saying  that  was  impossible,  the 
King  begged  the  Duke  would  take  time.  Legrand  went 
away,  and,  returning  the  next  morning,  told  the  King  the 
Duke  had  taken  a  day  to  consider,  but  could  not  alter  his 
resolution.  The  King  cried^  and  protested  he  had  not 
slept  all  night,  and  had  not  told  the  Queen,  which  seemed 
to  be  true,  for  her  Majesty  coming  into  the  room  just  then 
he  called  Legrand  into  the  garden.  There  he  asked  him, 
if  he  should  forgive  his  brother,  what  he  should  say  to  his 
children  if  they  had  a  mind  to  marry  ill.  Legrand  put 
him  in  mind  that  the  Marriage  Bill  would  prevent  that. 
He  still  talked  of  not  seeing  the  Duke,  though  he  said  it 
should  not  be  for  ever :  he  should  be  miserable  never  to 
see  that  brother  again  whom  he  loved  ;  but  he  had  never 
loved  Harry.  Legrand  begged  him  not  to  push  the  Duke 
too  far  ;  he  did  not  know  what  might  be  the  consequence. 
The  Opposition  might  bring  the  affair  into  Parliament ; 
the  Duke  might  resign  his  regiment.  The  King  said,  God 
forbid  !  he  could  not  bear  that,  but  he  did  not  mind  what 
the  Opposition  could  do.  The  Duchess  said  the  Queen 
had  owned  that,  when  the  late  Princess  Dowager  heard 
of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's  marriage  and  the  Duke 
of  Gloucester's  danger,  she  had  said  to  the  King  that, 
if  William  died,  she  insisted  on  his  never  forgiving 
Harry,  though  she  did  afterwards  forgive  him  herself 
before  she  died. — The  Duke  of  Cumberland  had  just 
been  to  see  her,  which  she  said  the  Duke  of  Gloucester 
would  return  by  visiting  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland,  but 
she  did  not  talk  directly  of  her  seeing  the  latter.  As  I  was 
determined  to  be  very  cautious  till  I  knew  the  Duke 
better,  I  would  not  advise  it,  though  I  thought  it  wrong 
that  they  did  not  meet.     She  said  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 


1772]      VISIT  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER        133 

land  had  protested  he  had  suffered  very  much  for  the 
three  last  days,  though  he  had  never  cared  about  himself. 
I  said,  the  common  idea  was  that  the  King  would  forgive 
him  if  he  would  give  up  the  Duchess.  "  Pho  ! "  replied 
she,  "  he  is  eager  to  get  back  to  Court,  and  the  King  has 
a  letter  from  him  to  tell  him  so."  She  said  she  was  content 
to  live  in  the  country,  and  go  nowhere ;  she  should  only 
be  hated  if  she  appeared  at  Court.  She  thought  the  King 
now  would  take  no  notice  (which  I  doubt),  or,  at  most, 
forbid  the  foreign  Ministers  to  visit  them.  The  Duke, 
she  said,  would  not  deal  with  the  Opposition  unless  the 
Court  persecuted  him  and  her.  I  begged  her  to  dissuade 
him  from  that.  I  said  she  knew  I  had  long  been  inclined 
to  the  Opposition  (which,  I  believe,  was  one  great  cause 
of  the  Duke's  coldness  to  me),  but  that  I  never  would 
give  her  advice  that  I  thought  against  her  interest,  how- 
ever it  might  suit  my  inclinations ;  that  she  was  now  a 
Princess  of  the  blood,  and  that  their  interest  was  insepar- 
able from  the  Crown,  and  that  I  thought  they  ought,  by 
patience  and  submission,  to  endeavour  to  reconcile  the 
King  to  them.  I  asked  her  if  she  approved  my  asking 
leave  to  see  the  Duke  before  I  came.  She  said,  Yes  ; 
that  she  had  intended  to  bid  her  sister  Dysart  tell  me  to 
come,  but  the  Duke  had  said  it  was  best  to  wait  and  see 
if  I  would  offer  to  come.  This  showed  he  thought  I 
neglected  him.  I  said,  I  hoped  she  knew  me  too  well  to 
suspect  I  would  desert  her  in  her  distress ;  and  I  told  her, 
at  the  same  time,  I  should  desire  Lord  Hertford  to 
acquaint  the  King  that  I  forbore  to  pay  my  duty  to  his 
Majesty  out  of  respect,  as  I  could  not  suppose  the  sight  of 
our  family  would  be  agreeable  to  him  just  now  ;  that  I 
could  not  but  be  sensible  of  the  honour  the  Duke  had 
done  our  family,  and  concluded  his  Majesty  could  not 
expect  that  her  own  family  would  give  her  up.  She 
approved  my  conduct,  and  I  shall  add  presently  the  letter 
I  wrote.     She  said  the  only  thing  that  wounded  her  was 


134      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Sept. 

to  part  with  her  children  by  Lord  Waldegrave  ;  ^  that  she 
had  struggled  long,  but  the  Duke  had  said  he  could  not 
live  with  another  man's  children  ;  that  indeed  it  would 
scarce  be  parting  with  them  ;  that  she  should  take  a  house 
for  them  at  Windsor,  but  four  miles  from  St.  Leonard's 
Hill,  and  that  she  should  see  them  oftener  than  she  did 
now  ;  that  one  or  other  of  them  would  always  be  with  her, 
and  that  she  should  give  up  for  the  maintenance  of  them 
and  a  proper  governess  the  looo/.  a  year  she  received 
for  their  education  ;  and  that  to  her  great  comfort  Lady 
Laura,  the  eldest,  was  old  enough  and  reasonable  enough 
to  comprehend  the  necessity  of  what  she  was  doing.  She 
said  what  made  her  most  doubt  the  King's  forgiving  them 
easily  was  the  aversion  he  would  have  to  ask  of  Parliament 
proper  jointures  for  her  and  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland. 
The  Duke  of  Gloucester  then  came  in :  I  knelt  and 
kissed  his  hand ;  he  would  have  had  me  keep  my  seat 
on  the  sofa  by  the  Duchess,  which  I  declining,  he  drew 
an  arm-chair  for  me,  and  made  me  sit.  He  entered  on 
the  reasons  that  had  determined  him  to  notify  his  marriage 
to  the  King,  which  were  on  the  Duchess's  account  chiefly, 
and  in  justice  to  his  brother.  He  was  very  civil,  though 
a  little  awkward,  but  I  believe  would  have  been  more 
familiar  if  I  had  not  behaved  with  the  utmost  respect, 
saying  absolutely  nothing  after  I  had  told  him  how  ex- 
tremely sensible  I  was  of  the  honour  he  had  done  my 
niece  and  the  whole  family,  and  how  noble  I  thought  his 
justice  to  the  Duchess.  He  sought  several  topics  of  con- 
versation, and  asked  me  if  the  King  and  Queen  had  been 
to  see  my  house,  as  he  had  heard  they  intended.  I  con- 
fined myself  to  monosyllables,  that  he  might  not  think  I 

1  The  King  asked  Legrand  if  the  Duke  and  Duchess  had  any  children, 
and  expressed  great  joy  on  hearing  they  had  not.  It  is  very  memorable  that 
the  King  betrayed  his  own  want  of  truth  in  that  very  conversation  with 
Legrand,  as  the  Duchess  told  me  afterwards.  As  the  King  read  the  letter, 
he  said,  "  I  never  believed  they  were  married  ;  "  and  yet,  when  he  came  to 
the  words,  "  I  was  married  in  September,"  the  King  said,  "  That  is  not  true, 
for  he  was  married  in  July ; "  but  that  was  a  mistake. 


I 


1772]  QUESTION   OF  GOING  TO  COURT  135 

assumed  the  familiarity  of  a  near  relation,  and  made  a  sign 
to  the  Duchess  to  know  when  it  was  proper  for  me 
to  go  away,  which  she  would  not  let  me  do.  In  a  few 
minutes  more  the  Duke,  finding  I  would  not  be  free  with 
him,  got  up,  and  said  he  would  go  take  a  ride.  The 
Duchess  chid  me  for  my  respectfulness,  and  said  it  had 
distressed  the  Duke,  but  we  should  be  better  acquainted 
another  time.  I  said  I  would  conform  to  what  I  should 
find  agreeable  to  him,  but  would  take  no  liberties  of  my- 
self In  truth,  I  knew  he  thought  me  so  anti-monarchic 
that  any  freedom  at  first  would  have  prejudiced  him  more 
against  me,  as  supposing  I  made  too  light  of  princes ;  but 
though  I  would  never  flatter,  court,  or  ask  a  favour  of 
them,  I  always  piqued  myself,  when  with  them,  on  showing 
them  I  knew  the  distance  between  them  and  me.  It  were 
a  want  of  sense  and  good  breeding  to  behave  otherwise. 
All  I  desired  was  to  give  him  a  good  opinion  of  me,  and 
prevent  my  enemies  from  the  satisfaction  of  thinking  he 
behaved  ill  to  me.  I  asked  the  Duchess  if  she  had  seen 
her  father  ?  She  said,  No ;  but  she  had  writ  to  him.^  I 
knew  she  was  afraid  of  his  violence  and  of  his  giving 
advice,  and  she  did  not  enough  conceive  the  great  amend- 
ment in  his  temper.  Upon  the  whole  I  was  satisfied  with 
her  sense  and  conduct,  and  resolved  to  moderate  whenever 
I  had  an  opportunity,  in  order  to  reconcile  the  King  to 
her,  and  soften  as  much  as  I  could  her  fate,  which,  in 
truth,  seems  exposed  to  many  dangers  with  few  flattering 
appearances.  For  the  Duke,  I  was  sure,  over-respect  was 
the  fault  a  prince  would  the  most  easily  forgive ;  and  for 
advice,  if  he  should  ask  any,  I  was  determined  to  give 
him  none  but  the  most  justifiable.  I  owed  it  to  him  for 
his  goodness  to  my  niece,  and  I  was  resolved,  if  he  was 
reconciled  to  the  King,  he  should  not  have  it  to  say  that  I 

^  The  Duke,  as  soon  as  he  had  notified  his  marriage  to  the  King,  wrote  to 
invite  Sir  Edward  Walpole  to  St.  Leonard's  Lodge,  with  which  the  latter  was 
contented,  but  did  not  go. 


136      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Sept. 

had  ever  contributed  to  their  being  at  variance  :  it  being 
no  uncommon  thing  for  enemies  reconciled  to  make  peace 
at  the  expense  of  their  friends.  It  became  me  too  to 
maintain  the  part  I  had  acted,  and  to  evince  that  I  had 
had  no  hand  either  in  the  marriage  or  in  the  declaration. 
On  the  contrary,  having  once  broke  off  the  connection 
between  the  Duke  and  my  niece,  and  never  countenanced 
it,  I  deserved  the  King's  esteem  and  approbation.  I  did 
not  expect  much  justice  on  that  account — and  found  none.^ 
However,  I  determined  to  behave  agreeably  to  the  clear- 
ness of  my  conduct.  I  wrote  to  Lord  Hertford  a  letter, 
which  I  meant  he  should  show  to  the  King,  couched  in 
the  most  respectful  terms,  in  which  I  stated  my  own 
ignorance  of  the  marriage  till  owned,  but  said  that, 
concluding  the  new  Duchess's  family  could  not  be  very 
welcome  at  St.  James's,  I  should  not  presume  to  present 
myself  there  without  leave.  I  mentioned  having  waited  on 
the  Duke  as  a  duty,  due  for  the  honour  he  had  done  the 
family  and  to  the  tenderness  I  had  always  felt  for  my 
niece,  whom  were  I  to  abandon,  I  should  expect  his  Ma- 
jesty's own  paternal  affections  would  make  him  despise 
me.  This  letter  I  enclosed  in  a  cover,  in  which  I  told 
Lord  Hertford  plainly  that,  if  it  was  expected  I  should  not 
see  my  niece,  I  was  determined  rather  to  give  up  going  to 
St.  James's.  Lord  Hertford  was  too  good  a  courtier,^  I 
believe,  to  show  even  the  ostensible  letter ;  he  did,  in  my 
name,  ask  whether  I  might  go  to  Court  and  to  the  Duke 
and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  too.  The  King,  according  to 
regal  equity,  which  involves  the  innocent  with  the  guilty 
in  offences  of  a  family  against  Majesty,  replied  he  chose 
everybody  should  take   their  own  part.     Mine  was  soon 

^  I  mean,  by  his  including  me  in  the  prohibition.  I  never  found,  so  clear 
had  been  my  conduct,  that  I  was  ever  suspected  of  acting  wrong  in  the 
affair,  or  that  I  was  particularly  in  disgrace.  The  truth  is,  I  took  no  pains 
to  inform  myself:  in  general  I  heard  it  was  thought  that  I  was  in  no  favour 
with  the  Duke. 

2  "  But  cautious  Hertford  shrinks  when  risks  are  run"  ("Diaboliad"). — 
D. 


Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  finxt.  Cook,  sculpt. 

ANNE  LUTTRELL — MRS.  HORTON,  AFTERWARDS  DUCHESS  OF  CUMBERLAND 


1772]     VISIT  FROM  DUCHESS  OF  GLOUCESTER      137 

taken,  when  the  question  was  whether  I  should  act  with 
spirit  against  my  interest,  or  dirtily  to  pay  my  court ;  and 
I  went  no  more  to  St.  James's.  Lord  Hertford,  when  he 
brought  me  the  King's  answer,  said,  "Well,  you  will 
go  to  Court,  won't  you  ? "  I  replied,  "  Certainly  not." 
"  Why,"  said  he,  "  the  King  will  receive  you  very  civilly." 
"  I  do  not  doubt  it,"  replied  I  ;  ''  but  he  may  say  it  was 
impertinent  in  me  to  come  after  his  prohibition,  and  I  had 
much  rather  he  should  say  it  was  impertinent  in  me  not 
to  come." 

On  the  25///  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  came  to  me. 
She  and  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland  had  met,  but  in 
visits  most  formal  and  ceremonious.^  My  niece  asked  me 
to  meet  her  at  her  sister  Dysart's  at  Ham,  which  seemed 
to  mark  the  Duke  neither  intended  her  relations  should 
come  to  him  nor  go  to  them  ;  and  Lady  Dysart  afterwards 
told  me  he  declared  he  came  to  her,  not  to  her  Lord. 
Many  instances  of  his  high  spirit  broke  out  and  made  me 
tremble  for  his  wife.  While  she  was  with  me  I  showed 
her  a  painted  pane  of  glass,  with  her  and  Lord  Walde- 
grave's  arms.  I  asked  her  if  I  should  have  it  altered  and 
add  the  Duke's  arms  too.  She  cried  out,  "  Oh !  he  will 
not  bear  to  have  my  arms  placed  with  his."  I  replied, 
"  Why,  they  must  be  on  your  coach."  She  said,  No  ; 
the  Queen's  arms  were  never  joined  with  the  King's.  I 
desired  her  to  look  at  the  Queen's  coach,  where  she  would 
find  they  were.  These  symptoms  of  his  temper  did  not 
make  me  more  pleased  with  the  match.  However,  I  said 
nothing  to  her,  but  persuaded  her  to  take  all  manner  of 
ways  to  reconcile  herself  to  the  King,  that  she  might 
obtain  a  jointure,  I  dreading  the  prospect  for  her,  con- 

^  The  Duchess  of  Cumberland  proposed  to  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  to 
take  a  box  at  the  Opera  together,  which  the  latter  declined,  and  said  to  me 
upon  the  proposal,  with  wit,  "No,  I  could  not  go  and  smell  at  the  same 
nosegay  with  her  in  public ; "  alluding  to  King  Usher  and  King  Physician  in 
the  Rihearsal.  [Ultimately  these  high  personages  sat  far  apart ;  the  Cumber- 
lands  in  the  very  centre  of  the  grand  tier,  the  Gloucesters  in  a  side  box  on  the 
second  floor. — D.] 


138       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [Sept. 

sidering  the  precarious  state  of  the  Duke's  health,  and 
shocked  at  what  they  had  told  me,  that  one  reason  for 
their  owning  their  marriage  had  been  that,  as  he  was 
extremely  in  debt,  he  could  not  borrow  money  but  on  their 
joint  lives.  What  was  to  become  of  her  (should  he  die), 
with  no  jointure  from  him,  liable  to  his  debts,  and  having 
nothing  but  her  jointure  of  looo/.  a  year  from  Lord 
Waldegrave  ? 


1772] 


OCTOBER 

THE  Duchess  having  been  obliged  to  part  with 
her  children,  but  desirous  to  have  them  nearer, 
asked  Lord  Hertford  for  lodgings  for  them  in 
Windsor  Castle.^  It  seemed  extraordinary  to 
ask  for  them  in  one  of  the  King's  palaces,  when  the  King 
had  forbidden  the  Duke  and  Duchess  the  Court.  It  seemed 
more  extraordinary  that  they  should  be  granted ;  but  when 
Lord  Hertford  granted  them,  and  sent  his  own  messenger 
openly  to  the  Duchess  with  his  compliance,  I  was  very  sure 
so  cautious  a  courtier  had  the  King's  full  consent.  His 
Majesty  acted  still  the  utmost  regard  for  his  brother — we 
shall  see  whether  sincerely :  his  sincerity  has  not  been  his 
most  shining  quality.  Sometimes  I  have  thought,  from 
several  indirect  circumstances,  that  the  Queen  kept  him 
from  forgiving  his  brother.  Another  boon  granted  to  the 
Duke  in  the  next  month  was  coupled  with  a  previous  inci- 
dent, that  did  not  convince  me  the  King's  compliance  with 
his  brother's  wishes  flowed  entirely  from  kindness.  On  the 
death  of  the  Earl  of  Lichfield,  a  great  favourite,  who 
enjoyed  by  the  King's  gift  a  lodge  in  Hampton  Court 
Park,  near  the  Pavilions,  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  sent  to 
Lady  Lichfield  for  the  keys.  She  could  not  deliver  them, 
as  they  were  given  by  the  King,  without  his  Majesty's 
consent.  She  pleaded  not  having  removed  all  her  goods, 
and  in  the  meantime  wrote  to  Lady  Charlotte  Finch, 
governess  of  the  King's  children,  to  consult  her  what  she 
should  do.     The  King  happened  to  be  in  Lady  Charlotte's 

^  The  Lord  Chamberlain  disposes  of   all  lodgings,  but  asks  the  King's 
consent. 

139 


I40       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

room  when  Lady  Lichfield's  letter  arrived.  He  imme- 
diately ordered  her  to  deliver  the  keys  to  the  Duke  ;  but  he 
had,  on  the  news  of  Lord  Lichfield's  death,  offered  Lady 
Lichfield  to  continue  in  the  Lodge,  which  she  had  declined. 

The  next  transaction  in  which  the  Duke  and  Duchess 
of  Gloucester  appear  was  complicated  with  a  great  variety 
of  different  circumstances  that  must  be  opened,  and  with 
many  political  events,  the  sources  of  which  were  curious, 
though  the  incidents  not  of  great  moment ;  the  history, 
however,  I  think,  will  not  be  unentertaining. 

The  Duchess  of  Gloucester  had  a  relation  by  her 
mother's  side,^  who,  though  of  a  good  gentleman's  family, 
was  an  upper  officer  to  and  a  favourite  of  the  Duchess  of 
Northumberland.  Sir  Edward  Walpole  had  neglected  to 
serve  this  gentleman ;  and  as  he  and  I  shared  an  office  in 
the  Customs,  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  asked  me  to 
bestow  one  on  her  relation,  or  to  desire  Lord  Hertford  to 
provide  for  him,  or  General  Conway  to  appoint  him  a 
supernumerary  officer  in  the  Ordnance,  she  offering  to 
pension  him  till  he  should  come  into  a  salary.  I  desired 
I  might  serve  him  myself,  if  I  should  find  an  opportunity, 
but  I  did  not  care  to  apply  to  Lord  Hertford,  from  whom 
I  had  obtained  several  little  favours,  nor  did  I  think  it 
reasonable  the  Duchess  should  so  soon  expect  another 
from  him.  To  General  Conway  there  were  still  stronger 
reasons  against  my  addressing  myself  He  had  greatly 
distinguished  himself  by  a  large,  extensive,  and  economic 
reform  of  the  abuses — gross  abuses — in  the  office  of  Ord- 
nance ;  he  was  the  last  man  in  the  world  to  overcharge  an 
office ;  and  he  was  actually  at  this  moment  going  to  quit 
his  post  in  disgust — was  this  the  hour  in  which  he  would 
transgress  his  principles?  The  causes  of  that  disgust  must 
now  be  detailed. 

1  The  "Morning  Chronicle"  of  April  14th,  1773,  has  this  notice  :  "The 
cousin-german  of  the  Duchess  of  G r  is  one  of  the  Duchess  of  North- 
umberland's first  domestics.     Mrs.  D 's  footman  is  of  the  same  kin  to  the 

Duchess  of  G r." — A.  F.  S. 


1772]  GENERAL   CONWAY'S   REFORMS  141 

The  King  had  no  sooner  heard  of  the  part  Conway 
took  in  the  outset  of  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill  than  he 
wrote  a  warm  expostulatory  letter  to  Lord  Hertford,  com- 
plaining of  his  brother's  conduct,  and  reproaching  the 
latter  with  the  various  marks  of  favour  he  had  received, 
and  urging  Lord  Hertford  to  stop  Conway's  farther  oppo- 
sition to  the  Bill.  Lord  Hertford,  with  too  much  zeal, 
treated  his  brother  too  imperiously,  and  did  but  fix  him 
more  in  his  opinion,  which,  as  I  have  said,  he  expressed 
even  with  acrimony.  That  behaviour  incensed  the  King, 
and  made  him  yield  to  a  plan  that  had  long  been  pressed 
upon  him,  and  which  he  constantly  resisted.  Conway 
having,  from  excess  of  delicacy,  declined  the  Mastership 
of  the  Ordnance,  though  with  the  King's  consent  that 
he  should  govern  that  Board,  though  only  Lieutenant- 
General,  the  Mastership  really  remained  vacant.  Such 
great  posts  were  much  wanted,  and  both  the  Ministers 
that  were  not  his  enemies,  and  the  Bedford  faction  that 
were,  had  often  remonstrated  to  the  King  that  Conway 
would  neither  accept  the  post  himself,  nor  let  anybody 
else  enjoy  it — an  assertion  not  ill-founded.  The  King 
now  at  once  resisted  no  longer,  and  many  were  eager  to 
strike  at  so  favourable  a  moment  both  for  hurting  Conway 
and  serving  their  own  views,  Conway  having  often  declared 
that  he  would  serve  as  Lieutenant-General  of  the  Ord- 
nance under  no  man  but  an  older  officer,  and  one  that  had 
served :  for  Lord  Halifax  and  Lord  Sandwich  had  been 
talked  of,  who,  though  having  the  rank,  had  never  been 
military  men,  but  by  having  during  the  rebellion  offered  to 
raise  regiments  which  they  never  did  raise.  The  Bed- 
fords,  besides  their  hatred  of  Conway,  hoped  that,  if 
Conway  was  driven  from  the  Ordnance,  Lord  Hertford 
might  resent  it  and  resign  his  place  of  Lord  Chamberlain, 
the  great  object  of  Lord  Gower's  ambition,  who  never 
gave  up  hopes  that,  could  he  obtain  a  post  about  the 
King's  person,  he  should  still  become  the  favourite ;  and 


142       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

his  place  of  President  would  have  just  suited  their  other 
chief  Lord  Weymouth  ;  as  if  that  seat  of  equity  was  never 
to  be  filled  by  a  man  that  was  sober.^  Lord  Holland, 
who  never  lost  sight  of  injuring  Conway,  and  who  had 
received  a  recent  disobligation  from  him,  set  every  engine 
at  work  to  hurt  him,  and  met  with  an  able  associate.  Lord 
Mansfield.  I  must  mention  the  reasons  of  both.  O'Brien, 
a  young  actor,  had  privately  married  Lord  Ilchester's 
eldest  daughter,  niece  of  Lord  Holland ;  the  family,  to 
remove  the  disgrace  from  the  eyes  of  the  public,  had  pro- 
cured for  O'Brien  a  post  of  charge  under  the  Ordnance  in 
America.  The  young  couple,  weary  of  their  banishment, 
had  lately  returned  to  England,  nor  had  O'Brien  had  the 
precaution  to  ask  the  leave  of  the  Board  of  Ordnance. 
General  Conway  was  labouring  to  reform  that  department, 
and  had  ordered  all  the  officers  under  it  to  repair  to  their 
posts,  those  in  America  particularly  who  had  abandoned 
their  duty.  O'Brien  received  orders  among  the  rest  to 
return,  but  refused.  Conway  declared  he  would  dismiss 
him ;  Lord  and  Lady  Holland  interposed,  but  Conway, 
inflexible  when  both  his  duty  and  justice  to  others  whom 
he  would  not  excuse,  called  upon  him,  was  firm  and  turned 
out  O'Brien.^ 

It  happened  that  at  this  very  period  Lord  Mansfield 
wished  to  bring  his  nephew  Lord  Stormont,  the  Minister 
at  Vienna,  to  be  ambassador  at  Paris ;  but  a  place  was 
wanting  to  accommodate  Lord  Harcourt,  if  recalled  from 
France,  and  the  place  that  Lord  wanted  was  the  Vice- 

1  Earl  Granville,  the  Earl  of  Northington,  and  Earl  Gower,  were  notorious 
drunkards. 

^  The  ex-actor  occupied  his  enforced  leisure  by  writing  for  the  stage.  On 
the  same  night,  December  8,  1772,  he  produced  his  comedy  of  "  The  Duel  "  at 
Drury-lane,  and  his  co7?iedietia,  as  it  would  now  be  called,  of  "Cross  Purposes  " 
at  Covent-garden.  The  former  is  an  adaptation  of  the  *'  Philosophe  sans  le 
savoir,"  in  which  Baptiste,  atmf,  has  delighted  many  of  ourselves,  as  Barry  did, 
in  London,  many  of  our  fathers.  "  The  Duel"  failed  through  the  mawkish, 
sentimental  scenes  which  the  adapter  worked  in,  at  the  suggestion  of  some  of 
his  noble  relatives,  who  spoiled  his  play,  but  made  him  pecuniary  compensa- 
tion, it  is  said,  for  his  iU-fortune. — D. 


1772]  LORD   TOWNSHEND  143 

royalty  of  Ireland,  a  post  long  destined  for  him  had  the 
Ministers  known  how  to  satisfy  Lord  Townshend.  Con- 
way's conduct  on  the  Marriage  Bill  smoothed  all  these 
difficulties,  and  Lord  Mansfield,  who  loved  to  whisper 
arbitrary  counsels,  and  who  personally  resented  Conway's 
opposition  to  a  Bill  his  Lordship  had  drawn  from  the 
sources  of  the  Star  Chamber,  was  not  slow  to  gratify  his 
two  passions — despotism  and  the  Scottish  interest.  Con- 
way, it  is  true,  was  Lord  Stormont's  intimate  friend ;  but 
when  fear  did  not  check  Lord  Mansfield  no  other  principle 
could. 

It  might  be  asked  how  Lord  Townshend's  satisfaction 
happened  to  prevent  an  arrangement  sooner.  He  had 
disgusted  Ireland  and  drawn  on  himself  universal  con- 
tempt. Proud,  insolent,  sarcastic,  ill-tempered,  and  ill- 
natured,  stooping  to  the  lowest  buffooneries,  and  debasing 
the  dignity  of  Government ;  defying  Opposition,  which 
almost  all  his  life  he  had  practised,  and  avowing  that  he 
trusted  to  corruption  alone  for  success,  though  at  the  same 
time  he  exercised  the  most  hard  and  unjust  persecutions ; 
from  a  squanderer  become  penurious,  when  generosity,  at 
least  ostentation,  might  have  balanced  some  part  of  his 
unpopularity ;  having  incurred  suspicions  of  a  want  of 
bravery  which  had  been  but  surmised  before  by  those  who 
best  knew  him.  He  had  been  suspected  at  the  conquest  of 
Quebec,^  and  on  his  intended  duel  with  Lord  Albemarle 

^  See  the  index  to  Walpole's  '*  Memoirs  of  George  III."  for  references  to 
Townshend,  whom  Walpole  treats  unfairly.  Bancroft  ("Hist.  Amer. 
Revol.,"i.  384),  treating  dispassionately  of  the  affair  at  Quebec,  says,  after 
describing  the  fall  of  Wolfe  and  the  wounding  of  Monckton,  "The  next  in 
command,  Townshend,  brave,  but  deficient  in  sagacity  and  attractive  power, 
and  the  delicate  perception  of  right,  recalled  the  troops  from  the  pursuit,  and 
when  De  Bougainville  appeared  in  view  declined  a  contest  with  a  fresh 
enemy;  but  already  the  hope  of  New  France  was  gone."  Townshend  does 
not  throw  off  so  successfully  other  assertions  against  him.  Wolfe  sent  to  the 
Secretary  of  State  an  able  letter,  explanatory  of  his  intended  movements  at 
Quebec.  Charles  Townshend  maintained  that  this  was  the  production  of  his 
brother.  When  the  latter,  however,  transmitted  to  the  Secretary  a  blunder- 
ing narration  of  the  battle  itself,  Selwyn  asks:  "Charles,  if  your  brother 
wrote  Wolfe's  letter,  who  wrote  your  brother  George's  ?  " — D. 


144       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

in  1760.  In  Ireland  he  refused  a  challenge  from  Dr. 
Lucas,  to  wipe  out  which  imputation  he  waited  a  week  at 
Dublin  to  give  time,  now  he  was  a  private  man,  for  any 
one  to  call  him  to  account  that  wanted  satisfaction.  Mr. 
Rochford,  a  son  of  Lord  Belvedere,  did  actually  challenge 
him  for  having  complained  to  his  father  of  his  (Mr.  Roch- 
ford's)  absenting  himself  from  the  House  of  Commons 
on  an  important  question.  Lord  Townshend  denied  the 
charge,  but,  that  not  contenting  the  young  gentleman,  he 
obliged  Lord  Townshend  to  disavow  the  charge  under  his 
hand,  which  did  not  add  to  the  reputation  either  of  his 
wisdom  in  staying  to  be  challenged  or  of  his  courage.  A 
Captain  Montgomery,  whose  vote  he  had  obtained  by 
promising  him  his  support  in  relation  to  a  post  in  his 
borough,  finding  Lord  Townshend  had  engaged  the  Privy 
Council  to  represent  against  it  to  England,  challenged 
Lord  Townshend,  and  forced  him  to  make  him  amends. 
A  Captain  Osborn,  of  disordered  intellects,  challenged  him 
after  he  came  to  England  ;  Lord  Townshend  deferring 
immediate  satisfaction,  though  promising  it,  Osborn  sent 
him  word  he  would  horsewhip  him  wherever  he  met  him. 
There  seemed  to  be  but  little  cause  for  hesitating  to 
remove  Lord  Townshend,  and  there  was  a  private  reason 
which  made  many  men  admire  how  the  King  continued 
to  treat  him  with  any  indulgence.  He  had  owed  his 
favour  at  Court  to  Lord  Bute's  protection,  to  whom  he 
had  been  devoted  ;  but,  whether  from  caprice  or  jealousy, 
he  had  treated  his  Secretary,  Sir  George  Macartney,  the 
husband  of  Lord  Bute!s  favourite  daughter,  with  such 
venomous  tyranny  that  the  House  of  Bute  spoke  of  Lord 
Townshend  as  the  most  ungrateful  of  men,  and  the  last 
deserving  countenance  or  lenity.  Two  motives  congenial 
with  the  ruling  spirit  of  the  Cabinet — despotism  and  pusil- 
lanimity— concurred  with  Conway's  indiscretion  to  save 
this  worthless  man,  who  had  been  on  the  point  of  being 
dismissed  to  gratify  the  Butes,  with  nothing  but  the  com- 


1772]  AFFRONT   TO   GENERAL   CONWAY  145 

mand  of  a  regiment  of  foot.  The  arbitrary  manner  with 
which  he  had  governed  and  insulted  Ireland  had  softened 
the  King's  heart.  Joseph  gained  the  favour  of  Pharaoh  by 
buying  their  liberty  of  the  Egyptians  for  bread.  At  the 
same  time  it  was  apprehended  that  Lord  Townshend,  if 
disgusted,  would  be  troublesome  in  the  House  of  Lords — 
a  panic  very  ill  founded.  He  was  a  coarse  but  ungracious 
speaker;  in  difficult  times,  and  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
where  bitterness  does  the  work  of  eloquence,  and  where 
his  affectation  of  patriotism  had  lent  him  popularity,  he 
had  sometimes  carried  weight ;  the  decency  and  silence  of 
the  Lords  were  not  suited  to  recommend  his  ill-tempered 
attacks,  nor,  had  he  reverted  to  patriotism,  was  it  a  weapon 
their  Lordships  respected.  But  when  fear  had  gone  forth, 
the  Court  was  not  apt  to  weigh  whether  it  was  founded, 
and,  before  the  end  of  the  session,  it  got  wind  that  Conway 
was  to  be  punished,  that  Lord  Townshend  was  to  be 
Master  of  the  Ordnance,  Lord  Harcourt  to  succeed  him 
as  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  Lord  Stormont  to  be 
Ambassador  at  Paris,  and  Sir  Robert  Keith,  for  his 
Danish  services,  to  be  Minister  at  Vienna. 

Lord  Townshend  was  by  no  means  pleased  at  being 
dethroned,  and  tried  every  method  to  preserve  his  station ; 
but  finding  his  fate  decided,  accepted  the  Mastership 
of  the  Ordnance.  I  will  say  no  more  of  him,  but  that 
at  his  giving  up  his  government  he  affected  a  delay 
of  eight  days,  to  give  time,  when  become  a  private  man, 
to  those  who  resented  any  part  of  his  behaviour  to  call 
him  to  account ;  but  Dr.  Lucas,  who  had  challenged  him, 
was  dead. 

Conway  was  still  more  hurt  than  Lord  Townshend  ;  for 
though  the  affront  was  only  indirect,  and  that  the  King 
affected  to  suppose  he  might  remain  subordinate  in  the 
office,  as  he  might,  if  he  pleased,  there  having  been  several 
precedents  of  elder  officers  acting  under  great  lords,  yet 
Conway  knew  what  was  meant,  and  was  too  scrupulous  on 

I.— L 


146       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

the  point  of  honour  to  relinquish  the  declaration  he  had 
made,  of  not  acting  under  a  junior  soldier,  though  to  Lord 
Townshend  he  had  no  personal  objection,  the  latter  having 
quitted  the  post  to  Conway  in  a  very  obliging  manner 
when  he  was  named  to  the  Lord-Lieutenancy.  Nor  was 
the  meditated  blow  what  wounded  Conway  most  sensibly. 
He  had  conceived  a  passion  for  his  office,  had  already 
made  great  progress  in  improving  it,  and  had  flattered 
himself  with  acquiring  much  renown  from  the  foot  on 
which  he  meant  to  place  it.  It  was  even  his  plaything 
and  passion  ;  and  he  who  had  not  borne  with  patience  the 
details  of  the  Secretary's  office,  though  the  sphere  of  im- 
portant business,  was  indefatigable  in  all  the  minute  though 
necessary  drudgery  relating  to  the  service  of  the  artillery 
and  all  its  branches. 

I,  who  felt  the  damage  done  to  his  fortune,  the  greater 
danger  that  would  hang  over  it,  and  who  could  not  bear 
the  triumph  of  his  enemies,  though  I  was  sensible  how 
rashly  he  had  drawn  the  tempest  on  himself,  could  with 
difficulty  command  my  vexation :  determined,  however, 
to  repair  the  fruits  of  his  imprudence,  I  affected  to  appear 
indifferent  to  the  event,  and  to  speak  of  it  as  a  mark 
of  disgrace  that  Mr.  Conway  could  not  but  have  expected 
to  receive.  In  the  meantime  I  left  no  method  untried  to 
remedy  or  stop  the  evil ;  and  fortune,  as  usual,  befriended 
me  more  than  either  my  art  or  industry ;  while,  as  usual, 
Conway,  and  those  from  whom  I  expected  the  most 
facilities,  contributed  little  to  second  my  endeavours. 

I  began  by  representing  to  Lord  Hertford  that  it  would 
prove  he  had  little  credit  with  the  King  when  he  could  not 
save  his  brother  from  this  affront.  He  broke  out — told  me 
the  pains  he  had  taken  to  reclaim  his  brother  before  it  was 
too  late — talked  of  being  head  of  the  family,  and  that 
his  brother  ought  not  to  traverse  his  views — and  that  if 
Mr.  Conway  expected  favours  from  Court  he  must  conform 
to  the  King's  pleasure,  and  that  his  brother  must  take  the 


1772]  LORD    HERTFORD'S   INTERCESSION  147 

consequence  of  his  behaviour.  I  said  calmly,  but  firmly> 
that  Mr.  Conway  owed  nothing  to  his  Lordship,  but  that 
his  Lordship  had  owed  everything  to  Mr.  Conway,  who 
made  him  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  and  Lord-Chamber- 
lain :  the  first  he  could  not  deny,  but  said  Lord  Chatham 
made  him  Lord-Chamberlain.  I  replied,  Yes,  to  make 
room  for  Lord  Bristol ;  and  that  yet  Lord  Chatham  would 
not  have  made  him  the  one  unless  he  had  found  him  the 
other.  I  touched  gently  on  Mr.  Conway's  conscientious- 
ness and  scruples,  and  hinted  that  Lord  Hertford  carried 
his  acquiescence  with  the  King's  will  farther  than  perhaps 
was  justifiable ;  and  yet  I  owned  Mr.  Conway  was  in  the 
wrong  to  expect  favour  on  different  terms  from  what  every- 
body else  bought  it,  when  it  was  in  effect  what  was  stipu- 
lated by  the  Court.  It  was  from  that  consideration  that 
myself  would  accept  no  favour  from  the  Court,  as  I  under- 
stood the  conditions  that  would  be  implied,  and  with  which 
I  would  not  comply.  Conway,  in  a  virtuous  age,  would 
have  had  a  right  to  expect  the  honours  and  emoluments  of 
his  profession,  though  he  should  obey  the  dictates  of  his 
conscience — as  a  man  that  knew  the  world,  he  could  not 
expect  them  ;  but  his  case  was  harder  than  mine,  who  did 
not  want  the  smiles  of  the  Crown  ;  his  whole  fortune  de- 
pended upon  them.  I  bade  Lord  Hertford  apprehend  the 
Opposition,  who  would  foment  Mr.  Conway's  disgusts,  and 
might  provoke  him  to  resign  his  regiment,  or  forfeit  it  as 
he  had  done  before  by  farther  hostilities.  In  short,  I 
omitted  nothing  to  engage  Lord  Hertford  to  prevent  the 
blow,  or  procure  an  indemnification  for  his  brother  ;  and  it 
is  but  justice  to  the  elder  to  say,  that,  though  he  did  not 
love  to  ask  favours  for  others  which  might  interfere  with 
those  he  wished  for  himself  or  his  children ;  though  he 
shuddered  at  dropping  a  harsh  or  unpleasant  word  to  the 
King,  instead  of  using  a  firmness  that  alone  made  impres- 
sion on  him  ;  though  Lord  Hertford  had  violent  repug- 
nance to  solicit  Lord  North,  governing  himself  by  that 


148       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

ruling  humour  of  his  Majesty,  that  whoever  attached  him- 
self to  a7ty  First  Minister  was  not  his  Majesty's  man  {in  this 
reign  called^'  the  King's  friend''^,  still  had  Lord  Hertford, 
in  a  sugared  way,  tried  to  ward  off  the  blow ;  and  when 
fallen,  contrary  to  his  expectation,  did  earnestly  deprecate 
the  King's  wrath,  sue  for  reparation,  and  even  more  than 
once  negotiate  with  Lord  North  for  intercession.  On  the 
4th  of  June  Lord  Hertford  went  so  far  as  to  ask  the  King 
if  it  was  impossible  for  his  brother  to  be  restored  to  his 
favour — and  the  King,  with  great  good-humour  and  for- 
giveness, replied,  "  No,  not  if  you  advise  it."  Lord  North, 
who  had  never  had  any  cause  to  be  partial  to  Mr.  Conway, 
who  had  quitted  the  Cabinet  Council  (not  from  disliking 
him  but  the  Bedfords)  on  Lord  North's  becoming  Minister, 
and  who  at  first  had  taken  personally,  though  erroneously, 
to  himself  Conway's  warmth  on  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill, 
— Lord  North,  I  say,  had  still  a  high  opinion  of  Conway's 
virtue  and  abilities ;  and  though  he  thought  him  a  woeful 
politician, from  his  scruples,he  had  often, on  former  attempts, 
resisted  any  endeavours  to  remove  him  from  the  Ordnance. 
When  he  found  the  King  enraged  and  decided,  it  could 
not  be  expected  Lord  North  would,  unapplied  to  by  Con- 
way, stem  the  torrent  for  him,  and  thence  offend  the  King. 
Yet  his  Majesty,  before  the  end  of  June,  relaxing  so  much 
farther  still,  to  please  Lord  Hertford,  as  to  allow  him  to 
speak  to  Lord  North,  and  see  what  could  be  done  to  keep 
Mr.  Conway  in  the  Ordnance,  or  procure  him  an  equiva- 
lent, Lord  North  embraced  the  motion  with  joy ;  and 
though  he  frankly  owned  he  did  not  see  how  it  was  pos- 
sible to  set  aside  Lord  Townshend,  when  the  King  had 
voluntarily  offered  him  the  Ordnance,  and  he  had  accepted 
it,  yet  he  promised  to  search  for  or  promote  any  other 
method  of  contenting  Mr.  Conway.  The  great  diffi- 
culty of  all  was  to  content  Conway  himself  He  doted, 
as  I  have  said,  on  the  Ordnance ;  he  would  hear  of  no 
equivalent— said  he  had  declared  he  would  resign  it  if 


1772]    NEGOCIATIONS  IN  FAVOUR  OF  CONWAY      149 

superseded,  and  would  not  unsay  his  resolution — would 
not  bear  to  hear  of  intercessions  made  for  him — would 
not  accept  anything  else.  This  alarmed  me ;  for  all  his 
language  was  that  of  a  man  injured,  not  of  one  that 
endeavours  were  using  to  soothe.  I  tried  to  find  ex- 
pedients, and  proposed  that,  instead  of  the  Ordnance, 
a  marquisate  or  the  Garter,  two  objects  of  his  ambition, 
or  one  of  the  regiments  of  Guards,  on  the  approaching 
death  of  Lord  Tyrawley,  should  be  promised  to  Lord 
Townshend,  or  a  Garter  to  Lord  Harcourt,  instead  of 
Ireland  ;  but  though  I  prevailed  on  Lord  Hertford  to 
mention  these  compromises  to  Lord  North,  there  was  not 
disposition  enough  to  pacify  Mr.  Conway  at  such  high 
prices.  The  King  would  not  let  Lord  North  dispose 
of  principal  regiments,  or  know  how  he  himself  designed 
to  dispose  of  them.  Peerages,  despite  endless  promises, 
were  not  to  be  given  but  on  great  emergencies,  and  Lord 
Townshend  was  no  longer  in  that  or  in  the  predicament 
of  favour ;  and  for  Lord  Harcourt  an  early  Garter  was 
designed.  Thus,  though  pardoned  by  the  King  and  sup- 
ported by  the  Minister,  I  despaired  of  Conway's  obtaining 
an  indemnification,  or  indeed  of  his  accepting  it,  could 
it  be  found.  Silence  and  patience  on  my  part  waited  for 
a  more  favourable  moment,  and  chance,  before  the  middle 
of  October,  presented  two  at  once. 

By  little  and  little,  and  by  ranging  on  my  side  his  wife, 
who  did  not  admire  the  approaching  diminution  of  their 
income,  I  had  "softened  Conway's  mind  so  far  as  to  make 
him  bear  the  mention  of  an  equivalent.  In  the  interim 
Lord  Albemarle  was  known  to  be  in  a  hopeless  state  of 
health  :  he  was  Governor  of  Jersey ;  on  that  I  fixed  my 
eye,  and  Lord  Hertford,  and  other  friends  of  Conway, 
hinted  it  both  to  the  King  and  Lord  North.  The  latter 
asked  if  it  was  sure  Conway  would  accept  it.  I  sounded 
him  at  a  distance,  and,  though  he  spoke  very  dubiously 
I  ventured  to  take  upon  me  to  answer  he  would.     In  the 


150       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

meantime  happened  the  declaration  of  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester's  marriage  with  my  niece,  and  the  King's 
prohibition  of  their  being  visited.  With  Conway's  par- 
tiality for  the  Duchess/  I  feared  he  would  visit  her,  which 
would  have  blasted  his  fortune  for  ever.  His  brother, 
who  would  have  prevented  it  by  all  means  if  he  could, 
was  unluckily,  or  perhaps  luckily,  out  of  town,  for  Conway 
was  jealous  of  his  brother's  too  great  eagerness  to  make 
him  a  courtier  ;  he  knew  I  was  more  tender  of  his  honour  ; 
yet  I  own  on  this  occasion,  in  which  he  would  have  staked 
his  fortune  against  a  romantic  visit  of  ceremony,  I  did 
again  take  upon  me  to  tell  him  abruptly,  before  he  could 
reflect,  that  it  would  be  madness,  when  a  great  favour 
from  the  King  was  soliciting  for  him,  to  throw  it  from 
him  for  a  punctilio  of  form ;  and  I  engaged  and  promised 
to  take  the  blame  of  his  neglect  to  the  Duchess  of 
Gloucester,  and  reconcile  her  to  it.  Briefly,  he  followed 
my  advice ;  it  was,  I  think,  on  the  20th  of  September. 
Lord  Albemarle  died  on  the  1 2th  of  October.  The  King 
was  delighted  that  Conway,  who  had  opposed  the  Marriage 
Bill,  should  yet  not  attach  himself  to  the  Duke  of  Glou- 
cester f  and  Lord  North  proposing  it,  his  Majesty  imme- 
diately consented  to  give  Conway  the  Government 
of  Jersey.  Conway  came  directly  to  me  to  consult 
whether  he  should  accept  it.  I  would  not  let  him 
hesitate  a  moment.  I  told  him  the  agreeable  manner 
in  which  it  was  offered,  pressed  upon  him,  doubled  the 
favour ;  that,  though  inferior  in  profit,  it  was  more 
agreeable   than   the  Ordnance ;   governments  are  never, 

^  They  were  first  cousins,  once  removed :  her  grandmother,  Lady  Wal- 
pole,  and  his  mother,  Lady  Conway,  were  own  sisters. 

^  Conway  himself  assigned  a  very  substantial  reason  for  not  offending  the 
King  by  attending  the  Duke  of  Gloucester.  As  colonel  of  the  Blues  he  had 
personal  conferences  with  the  King.  If  the  King  forbad  those  who  waited 
on  the  Duke  to  appear  before  him,  could  Conway,  consistent  with  his  duty 
and  charge,  violate  the  order  or  abstain  from  St.  James's?  Nobody,  I 
suppose,  will  say  he  should  have  resigned  his  regiment  in  order  to  make 
a  gallant  compliment  where  he  had  no  obligations. 


1772]  CONWAY   GOVERNOR   OF  JERSEY  151 

can  hardly  be,  taken  away ;  the  Ordnance,  a  most  pre- 
carious tenure — he  had  even  given  it  up  when  many  prece- 
dents were  against  him;  that  he  could  expect  no  reparation 
if  he  declined  this ;  and  would  add  a  still  more  disagree- 
able situation  to  that  in  which  he  already  was — for  what 
could  he  do?  Could  he,  would  he,  be  pleased  to  be 
ousted  from  the  Ordnance ;  if  he  was  not,  would  he  act 
zealously  with  the  Court  ? — or  could  he  oppose  when  the 
King  had  offered  to  make  him  all  the  amends  in  his 
power?  He  yielded,  went  to  Court,  and  accepted  the 
Government,  which  the  King  gave  him  with  every  accom- 
paniment of  grace  that  he  could  mix  with  the  boon. 
The  Bedfords,  who  were  dispersed  in  the  country,  and  had 
not  got  the  least  intelligence  of  our  views,  nor  of  the 
circumstances  that  had  contributed  to  realise  them,  were 
far  from  concealing  either  their  surprise  or  anger  with 
equal  temper. 

The  Duchess  was  hurt  at  General  Conway's  not  waiting 
on  the  Duke  and  her,  and  suspected  that  Lord  Hertford 
had  been  officious  at  procuring  the  general  prohibition,  of 
which  he  was  very  innocent.  As  they  were  both  so  nearly 
related  to  her,  she  wrote  to  expostulate  with  me  on  their 
behaviour,  when  I  happened  to  be  seized  violently  with 
the  gout,  which  she  did  not  know.  I  justified  Lord 
Hertford,  and  took  the  whole  blame  of  General  Conway's 
absence  on  myself,  as  I  had  promised  him,  and  as  was  true. 
I  had  written  a  long  minute  account  of  this  affair,  but 
have  torn  it  out  of  this  book,  only  leaving  the  Duchess's 
reply,  to  show  that,  though  she  was  warm,  her  heart  was 
excellent,  tender,  and  most  easily  reconciled,  and  that  her 
style  was  charming  : — 

St.  Leonards,  Sunday  evening. 

My  dear  Sir, — For  I  will  call  you  so,  though  you  have 
Madamed  me  up  to  the  highest  heavens.  Your  letter  grieves  me 
because  I  think  you  have  taken  mine  wrong.  I  was  hurt  with 
Lord  Hertford's  conduct ;  and  when  a  thing  strikes  me,  I  am  too 


152       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

honest  to  conceal  it.  I  never  could  look  favourable  upon  Lord 
Hertford  whilst  I  believed  those  reports;  and  I  cannot  look 
grave  upon  any  one  without  giving  a  reason.  My  author  I  will 
not  tell,  but  my  author  is  a  good  one.  The  message  from  you  to 
the  King  could  not  cause  the  foreign  Ministers  to  be  forbid 
visiting  the  Duke,  after  having  had  no  message  for  six  weeks. 
This  I  only  mention  to  show  you  that  I  cannot  accuse  you,  how- 
ever willing  you  may  be  to  take  it.  I  am  at  dinner,  therefore  am 
not  very  explicit;  but  I  choose  to  send  an  immediate  answer, 
because  I  see  you  are  much  hurt,  and  I  should  be  very  sorry  to 
be  the  cause  of  an  unnecessary  moment's  pain  to  one  I  have 
such  a  real  regard  for.  I  had  rather  find  Lord  Hertford  innocent; 
but  although  I  may  have  wrote  when  I  was  too  warm,  your 
usual  candour,  however  partial  to  him,  will  make  you  grant  that 
I  have  reason  to  be  hurt,  though  he  may  only  have  been  officious. 
As  to  General  Conway,  perhaps  what  I  said  of  him  had  better 
have  been  omitted ;  but  you  know  I  am  blessed  with  Walpole 
hastiness;  and  it  did  appear  extraordinary  that  he  (just  at  the 
time  I  heard  of  his  brother's  conduct)  accepted  of  so  trifling 
a  compensation  for  what  to  the  world  appeared  great  injuries, 
and  of  which  he  complained  as  such. 

However,  I  am  sorry  I  have  given  you  any  pain,  but  hope  you 
will  not  be  a  real  sufferer  by  it ;  and  if  you  will  think  no  more 
about  it,  no  more  will  I.  I  am  not  vindictive;  I  have  vented 
myself  to  you,  and  had  rather  think  for  the  best  than  the  worst ; 
and  if  you  please,  here  it  shall  drop.  But  whether  you  will  or 
not,  I  will  still  subscribe  myself. 

Most  affectionately  yours, 

Maria  Gloucester,  &c. 

To  this  I  sent  the  following  ansv^er  : — 

Strawberry  Hill,  Oct.  27,  1772. 
I  thank  you  extremely,  my  dear  Madam,  for  your  answer 
to  my  letter,  and  for  the  permission  of  concealing  what  is  passed 
from  the  two  persons  in  question,  who,  I  am  sure,  would  suffer  as 
much  as  I  have  done ;  but  I  had  rather  bear  anything  from  my 
friends,  and  for  my  friends,  than  give  them  the  pain,  and  the 
world  the  pleasure,  of  knowing  it. 


1772]  THE   DUCHESS   OF   GLOUCESTER  153 

I  wish  I  had  strength  to  add  a  few  more  explanations,  Madam, 
that  would  be  for  your  satisfaction,  or  was  able  to  send  you  a  letter, 
which,  as  far  as  my  confused  head  can  recollect,  would  be  a  better 
justification  of  the  elder  than  all  I  have  said ;  but  I  am  not  capable 
yet  of  searching  for  it,  nor  can  employ  anybody  to  look  for  it.  I 
must,  therefore,  wait  till  I  am  better. 

Indeed  I  am  now  so  low  and  faint  to-day  that  I  must  stop  ;  and 
will  take  advantage,  my  dear  Madam,  of  your  late  reproof  for  my 
too  abundant  ceremony,  though  nothing  can  ever  make  me  forget 
the  respect  I  owe  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  wife — no,  not  even 
the  kindness  of  my  niece. 

-    I  am,  &c. 


[Nov. 


NOVEMBER 

Strawberry  Hill,  Nov.  15,  1772. 

THAT  you  have  many  enemies,  my  dear  Madam,  I  do 
not  doubt;  your  merit  and  fortune  will  raise  you 
numbers  of  such  in  those  who  have  not  the  former, 
and  are  given  up  to  the  pursuit  of  the  latter.  Lies 
will  be  the  consequence,  as  your  very  merit  will  prevent  them 
from  hurting  you,  were  they  to  speak  nothing  but  truth.  All  I 
take  the  liberty  to  beseech  of  you  is,  not  to  let  your  own  honest 
warmth  and  sincerity  add  to  the  number.  At  least  wait  till  you  can 
make  your  resentment  felt  as  well  as  known — or,  what  is  more 
like  you,  till  it  will  be  noble  to  forgive.  You  are  now  in  a 
position  in  which  your  every  word  will  be  weighed  and,  if  possible, 
misinterpreted.  In  this  country  nobody  escapes;  and  you  are 
capable  of  being  hurt  till  the  King  and  Duke  are  reconciled.  I 
know  how  ready  you  are  to  bear  anything  for  the  Duke's  sake, 
therefore  for  his  sake  bear  ill-nature ;  and  when  your  own  virtue 
is  so  great  as  to  be  willing  to  waive  the  honours  due  to  his  wife 
rather  than  obstruct  his  Royal  Highness's  return  to  Court,  carry 
the  sacrifice  so  much  farther  as  not  to  let  the  malicious  know  you 
know  them,  since  by  that  frankness  you  will  whet  their  claws  in 
this  only  moment  in  which  they  can  hurt  his  Royal  Highness  by 
keeping  him  from  the  King. 

You  will  say  it  is  very  fine  in  me  to  preach,  who  am  warm  and 
imprudent,  like  you  and  your  father ;  but  that  is  the  very  reason, 
my  dear  Madam,  why  I  do  preach.  I  have  felt  the  inconvenience 
of  incautious  anger,  and  wish  my  experience  may  all  turn  to  your 
service. 

That  lies  swarm  in  plenty  I  know  by  ancient  and  recent  per- 
sonal experience  too.  I  was  told  two  days  ago  that  a  lady  said 
I  had  been  the  cause  of  the  last  full  publication  of  your  marriage, 
and  that  the  King  believed  so.     I  did  not  vouchsafe  to  make  an 

154 


1772]  THE    DUCHESS   OF   GLOUCESTER  155 

answer.  You  know,  Madam,  better  than  anydody  does  or  can, 
how  true  that  assertion  is.  If  the  King  has  been  told  such  a  gross 
untruth,  I  shall  certainly  be  one  of  the  least  proper  persons  in  the 
world  to  convey  to  his  Majesty  what  you  wish  he  should  be  told 
of  your  self-denial ;  yet  it  does  you  so  much  honour,  it  is  such 
just  gratitude  to  his  Royal  Highness,  and  I  am  so  indifferent 
about  myself,  that  I  shall  certainly  take  care  your  declaration  shall 
be  made  known  to  his  Majesty — nor  have  I  any  doubt  but  Lord 
Hertford  will  be  happy  to  be  the  messenger.  He  knows  too  well 
the  King's  affection  for  the  Duke  not  to  be  sure  he  shall  execute 
a  welcome  office  by  doing  anything  that  may  tend  to  a  reconcilia- 
tion between  the  Royal  brothers ;  and  his  letter,  which  I  have 
already  mentioned  to  you,  Madam,  and  which  I  here  enclose,  will 
convince  you  Lord  Hertford  could  not  think  for  one  moment  that 
he  should  make  his  court  to  his  Majesty  by  inflaming  the  difference 
between  him  and  the  Duke  of  Gloucester.  The  letter,  I  give  you 
my  honour  and  oath  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  is  the  genuine 
identic  letter  that  I  received  at  the  time ;  nor  has  Lord  Hertford 
the  most  distant  idea  or  suspicion  of  what  he  was  accused,  or  of 
my  sending  you  his  letter.  I  do  both,  in  justice  to  him  and  my- 
self, to  prove  to  you,  my  dear  Madam,  that  I  would  not  put  your 
interests  into  his  hands  if  I  were  not  thoroughly  convinced  of  his 
zeal  to  obey  you.  He  is  now  in  Suffolk,  or  shooting  in  Norfolk 
with  my  excellent  nephew.  As  soon  as  I  am  able  to  see  him  in 
town  or  here,  which  I  have  not  yet  done,  I  will  not  lose  a  moment. 
I  will  only  beg  you  to  return  me  his  letter,  because,  though  so 
strong  a  vindication  of  him,  I  am  not  sure  he  would  like  my 
showing  it ;  but  the  goodness  of  my  intention  must  justify  me. 

P.S.  2ist.  I  wrote  the  above  some  days  ago,  but  was  in  too 
much  pain  then,  and  for  almost  all  the  week  since,  to  finish  it ; 
and  as  Lord  Hertford  was  not  in  town,  nor  I  able  to  go  thither, 
there  was  no  hurry.  In  my  tedious  and  sleepless  nights  I  have 
thought  this  matter  over  and  over ;  and  should  the  method  you 
prescribe  not  succeed,  I  think  there  might  be  still  more  direct 
and  more  efficacious  ways  taken ;  but  I  know  it  does  not  become 
me  to  give  advice,  and  therefore  I  can  only  show  my  zeal  by 
implicit  obedience,  which  you  may  always  depend  upon,  my  dear 
Madam,  in 

Your  Royal  Highness's  most  faithful,  humble  servant, 

H.  W. 


156       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

I  meant  by  the  last  paragraph  that  the  Duchess  should 
either  write  to  the  King  herself,  or,  which  I  thought  would 
be  the  only  method  likely  to  be  crowned  with  success, 
that  the  Duke  should  go  to  the  King  by  surprise,  fling 
himself  at  his  feet,  and  ask  his  pardon.  As  he  had  never 
done  the  last,  it  was  at  least  due  from  a  younger  brother 
to  an  elder  that  was  a  sovereign.  I  knew  the  King's 
pusillanimity,  which  could  not  say  no  to  a  man's  face  ;  and 
it  was  the  only  way  of  preventing  the  Queen  or  Lord 
Mansfield  from  preparing  the  King  to  resist ;  but  my 
opinion  was  never  asked ;  and  a  new  circumstance  had 
induced  the  Duke  and  Duchess  to  lay  aside  their  plan,  and 
build  upon  an  approaching  event,  which  I  am  inclined  to 
think  will  rather  delay  than  advance  the  reconciliation.^ 
All  that  was  yet  notified  to  me  was,  that  they  had  changed 
their  minds.     This  was  the  Duchess's  answer  : — 

Gloucester  Lodge,  Sunday,  Nov.  22,  1772. 

My  dear  Sir, — I  have  kept  your  servant  so  long  that  I  will  not 
write  a  long  letter.  I  am  very  sorry  that  you  are  still  so  ill.  As 
to  what  I  wrote  to  you  last,  it  may  rest  for  a  time,  as  the  King 
will  soon  be  informed  of  my  sentiments  in  another  manner.  My 
not  being  upon  any  intimate  footing  with  the  Duchess  of  Cum- 
berland, I  still  beg  you  will  take  all  opportunities  to  say  I  am,  and 
shall  always  be,  civil  to  her ;  it  is  not  possible  I  ever  can  be  more. 
But  I  am  running  into  a  letter,  when  I  only  meant  a  cover. 
I  am,  my  dear  Sir, 

Your  most  obliged  and  affectionate, 

Maria  Gloucester,  &c. 

P.S.  Observe,  we  have  changed  the  name  of  this  place  (to 
Gloster  Lodge). 

The  event  to  which  I  alluded  became  public  in  the 
beginning  of  December.  In  one  word,  the  Duke  of  Glou- 
cester sent  notice  to  the  King  that  the  Duchess  was  breed- 

^  See  Walpole's  letter  to  Mann,  Dec.  22,  1772.— D. 


1772]  ELECTION   OF   LORD   MAYOR  157 

ing ;  and  she  herself  wrote  to  her  father  to  inform  me  of 
it.  Here,  I  believe,  was  the  true  reason  of  the  Duke's 
formal  declaration  of  his  marriage ! — and  here,  for  the 
present,  I  shall  leave  this  long  detail — drawn  up  more  for 
the  satisfaction  of  my  own  family  than  for  the  public,  to 
the  events  of  which  I  shall  now  return. 

The  Earl  of  Lichfield  ^  dying  in  December,  the  Univer- 
sity of  Oxford  eagerly  chose  Lord  North  for  their 
Chancellor.  He  was  a  Tory,  he  was  their  neighbour,  and 
he  was  first  Minister.  The  Earl  of  Radnor  ^  presented 
himself  as  a  candidate  too,  but  was  slighted,  despised,  and 
ridiculed.  There  was  no  contending  against  the  fortune 
of  Lord  North ;  his  power  would  have  sufficed  to  carry 
the  election,  and  his  moderation  deserved  it. 

A  more  important  contest  had  a  more  singular  issue. 
On  the  ordinary  vacancy  of  the  chair,  Wilkes  offered 
himself  as  candidate  to  be  Lord  Mayor  of  London.  The 
Court  set  up  two  renegade  aldermen,  Halifax  and  Shake- 
speare. Mr.  Townshend  was  also  named,  but  disdained 
to  canvass,  or  even  to^  attend  the  election.  Wilkes's 
friends,  treacherous  as  Townshend  had  been,  gave  him 
their  second  votes,  lest  one  of  the  Court  candidates  should 
be  named  by  the  Court  of  Aldermen,  who,  on  two  objects 
being  presented  to  them,  may  make  their  option.  The 
tide  ran  violently  in  favour  of  Wilkes  and  Townshend, 
who  had  a  vast  majority ;  yet  Halifax  and  Shakespeare 
demanded  a  scrutiny  ;  and  then  as  ridiculously  abandoning 
it,  Wilkes  and  Townshend  were  returned  to  the  Court 
of  Aldermen.  The  King  trembled,  for  Wilkes  had  evi- 
dently the  voice  of  the  City ;  Townshend,  without  his 
assistance,  would  have  had  scarce  any  votes ;  and  the 
majority  of  aldermen  were  supposed  to  favour  Wilkes. 
It  was  even  said  that  Townshend,  if  chosen,  would  waive 

^  George  Henry  Lee,  Earl  of  Lichfield,  Chancellor  of  the  University 
of  Oxford,  and  Captain  of  the  band  of  Pensioners.  [The  title  became 
extinct  in  1776.— D.] 

^  William  Bouverie,  Earl  of  Radnor. 


1S8      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

his  pretensions  in  favour  of  Wilkes ;  and  his  disgusting 
behaviour  had  made  it  probable.  Wilkes's  triumph  was 
on  the  point  of  being  celebrated  with  every  mark  of 
exultation ;  but  Alderman  Oliver,  the  late  prisoner  in  the 
Tower,  who  had  quitted  Wilkes  for  Townshend,  by  a 
deceitful  finesse  procured  a  Court  of  Aldermen  before 
all  those  attached  to  Wilkes  were  assembled,  and  got 
Townshend  named  Lord  Mayor.  Townshend,  as  if  called 
by  the  City,  took  possession  of  the  chair  with  arrogance 
and  pride.  Wilkes  was  thunderstruck,  and,  for  once, 
angry  in  earnest.  His  rage  and  that  of  his  partisans 
broke  out  in  every  kind  of  outrage  against  Townshend  ; 
and  Lord  Shelburne,  whom  they  suspected  of  having  sold 
them  to  the  Court,  was  not  spared. 

Townshend's  brutality  and  haughtiness  were  the  subject 
of  ten  thousand  invectives ;  and  as  his  hot  temper  was 
well  known,  Wilkes  determined  to  put  it  to  the  test.  On 
the  Lord  Mayor's  day  Wilkes's  mob  attacked  Guildhall 
during  the  ball  at  night,  but  did  little  damage.  Towns- 
hend proposed  to  sally  out  with  drawn  swords  and  fall  on 
the  mob,  but  was  restrained.  This  answered  Wilkes's 
purpose  in  part ;  and  he  triumphed  more  by  Townshend's 
causing  a  few  rioters  to  be  seized  and  committed  to 
Newgate,  though  the  gaol-distemper  raged  there,  and  by 
vaunting  he  could  bring  the  riot  home  to  Wilkes,  in  the 
prosecution  of  which  he  was  disavowed  by  his  own 
witnesses.  Parson  Home  was  mobbed  and  insulted  as 
his  chief  instrument ;  but  the  real  advantage  that  flowed 
from  these  dissensions  accrued  to  the  Court,  who  enjoyed 
Wilkes's  disappointment  and  the  unpopularity  of  Towns- 
hend. The  real  damage  was  to  the  nation,  which  saw 
those  who  would  have  gone  farthest  to  stem  the  encroach- 
ments of  the  Crown  divided  and  warring  on  each  other. 

The  peace  between  the  Russians  and  the  Turks,  which 
had  been  on  the  point  of  conclusion,  was  suddenly  broken 
off  before  the  end  of  the  summer ;  it  was  said  from  the 


1772]  AFFAIRS   OF   THE   CONTINENT  159 

exorbitant  demands  of  the  former — more  likely  by  some 
secret  views  of  Count  Orlofif,  the  Empress's  negotiator, 
confidant  Minister  and  paramount  gallant.^  This  is  prob- 
able, as,  on  his  being  immediately  laid  aside,  though  with 
enormous  rewards  that  spoke  more  fear  than  love,  the 
treaty  was  as  suddenly  renewed.^ 

The  partition  of  Poland  between  that  patriot  legislatress 
(the  Czarina),  the  upright  legislator  the  King  of  Prussia, 
and  the  Emperor  (the  most  impudent  association  of 
robbers  that  ever  existed),  furnished  the  second  with 
claims  equally  just  on  Dantzig,  where  he  imposed  and 
exacted  new  duties  from  us  and  the  Dutch.  Our  Adminis- 
tration did  not  dare  to  resent  it,  and  we  had  no  Opposition 
to  dare,  at  least  not  strong  enough,  to  call  the  Ministers  to 
account.^ 

But  though  the  Opposition  was  so  tame,  and  the  Court 
not  ready,  or  too  much  intimidated,  to  be  actively  culpable, 
a  new  scene  of  almost  unparalleled  abuses  was  on  the  point 

1  The  fact  was,  that  the  Empress  had  ordered  OrlofF  to  give  all  possible 
facilities  to  the  negotiation,  and  to  accord  all  that  she  could  with  any  reason 
concede,  but  not  to  mention  their  surrender  of  the  Crimea  till  the  last  moment, 
in  hopes  that,  rather  than  lose  all  she  was  willing  to  give  up,  they  would  yield 
that  country.  In  the  meantime  she  had  fallen  in  love  with  a  lieutenant  of 
her  guards,  and  preferred  him  rapidly.  Orloff,  getting  intelligence  of  this  new 
favourite,  was  so  impatient  to  get  rid  of  him,  that  without  opening  on  the  other 
points  he  abruptly  made  the  demand  of  the  Crimea  ;  was  refused  ;  broke  off 
the  treaty,  and  getting  into  a  postchaise,  disguised  like  a  courier,  hurried  back 
to  Petersburg,  announced  the  rupture  of  the  negotiation,  was  disgraced,  and 
saw  his  rival  remain  in  possession.  Thus  the  Empress  and  her  lover-minister's 
impetuosity  prevented  the  conclusion  of  so  destructive  a  war,  and  was  a  new 
instance  of  what  little  passions  influence  the  fate  of  kingdoms. 

2  This  Orloff  was  the  individual  who  received  the  surname  of  Tschesmeski, 
for  the  victory  gained  for  him  at  Tchesme  by  three  English  officers  in  his  fleet, 
Elphinstone,  Greig,  and  Dugdale.  The  demands  of  the  Russians  alluded  to 
above  included  the  surrender  to  them  of  the  fortresses  of  Kertch  and  Yenikale. 
On  the  refusal  of  the  Porte  ensued  the  campaign  so  especially  glorious  to  the 
Ottomans  by  their  defeat  of  the  Russians  at  Silistria,  Varna,  and  Bazardchik. 
The  subsequent  victory,  however,  of  Suwarrow  at  Kozlidje  led  to  the  famous 
treaty  of  Kainardji,  whereby  Russia  gained  those  aids  to  the  future  destruction 
of  the  Ottoman  empire  which  were  stricken  from  her  hands  by  the  allied 
armies  in  the  Crimea. — D. 

^  When  Mr.  Harris  (Lord  Malmesbury),  our  Minister  at  Berlin,  announced 
the  partition  of  Poland  to  Lord  Suffolk,  our  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  the 
latter  complaisant  official  spoke  of  it  only  as  a  ^''curious  transaction,'''' — D. 


i6o       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

of  breaking  out.  It  had  not  been  intended  that  the  Parlia- 
ment should  meet  till  after  Christmas ;  but  the  East  India 
Company,  by  mismanagement,  or  from  worse  reasons,  and 
their  servants  in  India  by  the  grossest  crimes,  had  so  in- 
volved their  affairs,  that,  the  Company  having  applied  to 
the  Treasury  for  assistance  or  relief,  Lord  North  found  it 
necessary  to  bring  the  whole  state  of  the  Company  before 
Parliament,  which  was  summoned  to  meet  on  the  26th  of 
November. 

The  extent  and  intricacy  of  our  Indian  affairs  are  too 
ample  and  too  obscure  to  be  detailed  and  explained  in  a 
Journal,  nor  am  I  enough  versed  in  them  or  the  subject, 
were  I  so  disposed.  The  history  of  the  usurpation,  plunder, 
and  tyrannic  administration  of  an  empire  is  too  large  for 
an  episode  in  memoirs.  The  books,  controversial  papers, 
and  reports^  of  committees  written  on  that  matter  would 
compose  a  library.  In  all  probability  the  story  will  be  cut 
short ;  who  can  believe  we  shall  long  retain  possession  of 
the  Indies  ?  It  will  have  been  ours.  The  infamy  of  our 
usurpation,  and  the  inhuman  manner  in  which  we  have 
wielded  the  sceptre,  will  be  all  that  will  remain  to  us  ! 

On  the  26th  the  Parliament  met.  Whether  the 
Ministry  intended  to  wrest  the  Government  of  the  three 
Indian  provinces  from  the  Company,  and  throw  them  into 
the  hands  of  the  Crown,  was  not  known.  Whatever  was 
the  measure  in  embryo,  they  set  out  prudently  with  deter- 
mining to  lay  open  to  the  public  the  abuses  committed  by 
the  Company  or  their  servants.  Richard  Fitzpatrick, 
brother  of  the  Earl  of  Ossory,  and  nephew  of  Earl  Gower, 
an  agreeable  young  man  of  parts,  dear  friend  of  Charles 
Fox,  and  like  him  overwhelmed  with  gaming  debts,^  moved 

^  These  Reports  were  afterwards  published  in  two  large  volumes  in  folio. 

"  A  month  before  this,  Fox  was  publicly  spoken  of  as  having  been  more 
successful  at  Newmarket  than  had  been  the  lot  of  many  adventurers  there  for 
years.  The  newspapers  calculate  his  winnings  at  28,000/.  Fox  is  said  to  have 
been  in  partnership  with  Foley  ;  they  had  the  finest  stud  in  the  kingdom  ;  and, 
in  the  phrase  of  the  day,  the  best  horses  being  backed  by  the  same  parties, 


m 


1772]        AFFAIRS   OF   EAST   INDIA   COMPANY 


i6i 


the  Address,  and  dropped  strong  expressions  against  the 
dominion  of  the  Company,  which  were  not  well  taken  from 
a  young  man  of  so  light  a  character.  Lord  North  gave 
notice  that  he  intended  to  move  for  a  Committee  to  in- 
quire into  the  affairs  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  that 
he  meant  it  should  be  a  Committee  of  Secrecy  ;  and  said 
it  was  out  of  respect  to  the  Company,  as  there  were  secrets 
in  their  books  not  fit  to  be  made  public.  General  Bur- 
goyne,  chairman  of  the  Open  Committee,  who  affected 
importance,  was  hurt  at  the  idea  of  another  Committee, 
which  would  annihilate  or  render  his  insignificant,  and 
objected  to  the  new  proposal.  Lord  North  treated  his 
Opposition  with  contempt ;  said  he  did  not  mean  to  defeat 
the  former  Committee — that  he  did  not  intend  to  inquire 
into  petty  larceny,  but  looked  on  the  proposed  Secret 
Committee  as  the  commencement  of  a  great  inquiry  ;  and 
it  was  voted  without  a  division.  The  persons  chosen  were 
all  Ministerial  :  Lord  Frederick  Campbell ;  Lord  Pal- 
merston  ;  Alderman  Harley  ;  Richard  Rigby,  paymaster ; 
Thomas  Walpole ;  Nathaniel  Rider ;  Charles  Jenkinson, 
one  of  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury ;  Richard  Jackson ; 
William  Burrell ;  Richard  Fitzpatrick ;  John  Fames ; 
and  Thomas  Gilbert.  Alderman  Harley  was  elected 
chairman  ;  Lord  Frederick  Campbell  would  not  act. 

"the  knowing  ones  were  most  egregiously  taken  in."  Fox  refused  3000/.  for  his 
favourite  horse  Pantaloon.  Warton,  in  his  Satire  '  *  Newmarket,"  thus  addresses 
the  young  legislators  of  his  day,  who  combined  the  jockey  with  the  senator  : — 

' '  Go  on,  brave  youths,  till  in  some  future  age 
Whips  shall  become  the  senatorial  badge  ; 
Till  England  see  her  thronging  senators 
Meet  all  at  Westminster  in  boots  and  spurs ; 
See  the  whole  House  with  mutual  frenzy  mad, 
Her  patriots  all  in  leathern  breeches  clad  ; 
Of  bets,  not  taxes,  learnedly  debate, 
And  guide  with'equal  reins  a  steed  or  state." 

D. 


I.— M 


[Dec. 


DECEMBER 

THE  Company  had,  contrary  to  the  inclinations 
of  the  Ministry,  resolved  to  send  out  super- 
visors to  India.  To  stop  that  measure,  Alder- 
man Harley,  by  order  of  the  Secret  Committee, 
proposed  to  the  House,  on  the  9th  of  December,  to  bring 
in  a  bill  to  restrain  the  Company  for  a  limited  time  from 
sending  out  supervisors.  This  was  opposed  by  Dempster 
T.  Townshend,  Sullivan,  and  Lord  George  Germaine,  and 
particularly  by  Edmund  Burke  in  a  speech  of  exquisite 
wit  and  eloquence.  He  thanked  Lord  North  for  having 
assured  the  House  that  he  had  no  hostile  intentions 
against  the  Company,  but  wished  to  make  it  great  and 
glorious.  Three  monarchs,  said  he,  have  entered  Poland 
with  fire  and  sword,  in  order,  he  presumed,  to  make  that 
country  also  a  great  and  glorious  kingdom.  He  then  drew 
an  admirable  picture  of  the  two  Committees;  the  Ministry, 
he  supposed,  had  said  with  Pope — 

**  Try  what  the  open,  what  the  covert  yield  !  "^ 

and  he  compared  them  to  a  wife  and  a  mistress;  the  Open 
Committee  was  the  wife  publicly  avowed,  but,  finding  her 
barren,  they  had  taken  a  neat  little  snug  one,  which  they 
called  a  Committee,  and  the  motion  in  question  was 
her  first-born.  But  the  first-born  was  adopted  by  114 
against  45. 

On  the  \2th  the  Company  was  heard  by  counsel  against 
the  restraining  bill,  but  it  was  carried  by  153  to  28. 
Lord  George  Germaine  spoke  excellently  for  the  Court, 

^  "Essay  on  Man." 
162 


1772]        AFFAIRS    OF   EAST   INDIA   COMPANY  163 

convinced,  he  said,  by  the  bad  defence  the  Company  had 
made  against  it — more  probably  by  the  very  small 
minority  in  which  he  had  found  himself  three  days 
before.  The  Rockingham  party  had  proposed,  on  the 
paucity  of  their  numbers,  to  lie  still  this  winter,  and 
neither  Lord  Rockingham  nor  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
had  come  to  town.  Lord  George  Germaine  alone,  con- 
trary to  their  and  Burke's  opinion,  had  pressed  for  action, 
and  now  deserted  them.  On  this  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
came  post  to  town,  and  battled  the  bill  warmly  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  and,  though  in  vain,  made  a  strong  pro- 
test with  the  Dukes  of  Portland  and  Devonshire,  and  four 
more  Lords.  That  poor  creature  the  Chancellor,^  who 
was  wont  to  mistake  insolence  for  importance,  telling  the 
House  that  the  bill  ought  not  to  be  thrown  out  without 
hesitation,  but  28  having  opposed  it  in  the  other  House, 
was  well  reprimanded  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  who 
said,  last  year  the  same  noble  person  had  impetuously 
pressed  for  rejecting  a  bill  sent  up  unanimously  by  the 
House  of  Commons  (the"  Presbyterians'  Bill)  ;  now  his 
Lordship  thought  a  majority  of  28  was  sufficient  reason 
for  passing  a  bill.  The  Duke  made  another  hit  from  an 
expression  dropped  by  one  of  the  witnesses,  of  which 
more  will  be  said  hereafter.  But  it  was  a  witness  at  the 
bar  of  the  other  House  that  gave  a  clue  to  many  dark  and 
scandalous  transactions.  Sykes,  a  member,  and  one  of 
the  Company's  servants,  who  had  made  an  enormous  for- 
tune in  the  Indies,  brought  one  Wilkes,  an  infirm,  old, 
gouty  man,  as  a  witness  in  behalf  of  himself  and  his 
associates.  The  man  was  plain-spoken  and  honest.  He 
told  the  House  that  the  servants  had,  unwarranted  by  and 
unknown  to  the  Company,  levied    an   enormous  tax  in 

^  Lord  Bathurst.  [His  title  was  Lord  Apsley  till  the  death  of  his  father 
in  1775.  This  Chancellor's  Sunday  levees  rather  scandalised  the  serious 
people  of  his  time  ;  but  it  was  said  for  him  that  he  was  too  busy  on  other  days 
to  see  his  friends,  and  besides,  the  King's  example  was  cited  as  sufficient 
authority. — D,] 


i64       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE      [1772 

India,  which  they  shared  amongst  themselves  ;  and  that 
Mr.  Sykes  had  been  allowed  24,000/.  a  year  for  his  table. 
Sykes  was  thunderstruck,  and,  to  purge  his  character, 
challenged  the  old  man,  who  laughed  at  him. 

This  detection  of  abuses  had  flowed  from  an  un- 
paralleled instance,  I  believe,  of  revenge  triumphing  over 
avarice  in  the  breast  of  opulent  citizens,  who  are  used  to 
make  peace  rather  than  suffer  their  dearest  interests  to 
transpire  to  the  public.  The  animosities  and  jealousies 
of  the  Directors  amongst  themselves,  and  of  others,  who 
wished  to  direct,  against  them,  exposed  that  mass  of 
iniquity,  which  harmony  perhaps  might  have  buried  in 
tenfold  darkness. 

The  year,  and  this  first  part  of  the  session  of  Parlia- 
ment, ended  with  a  new  disposition  of  places,  arranged 
solely  to  make  room  for  Charles  Fox  at  the  Treasury.^ 
Lord  Edgcumbe,^  one  of  the  Vice-Treasurers  of  Ireland, 
was  made  to  give  up  that  opulent  post,  and  take  the 
vacant  place  of  Captain  of  the  Band  of  Pensioners,  with 
a  salary  to  make  up  his  loss.  Jenkinson,  Lord  Bute's 
creature  and  one  of  the  secret  junto,  succeeded  as  Vice- 
Treasurer  ;  and  Charles  Fox  replaced  Jenkinson  at  the 
Board  of  Treasury.  Lord  Holland  had  hoped  his  son 
would  have  been  able  to  lead  the  bargain  with  the  long- 
wished  Earldom  for  him ;  but  the  King  was  obdurate 
when  his  tools  were  past  service. 

1  The  contemporary  apologists  of  Fox  maintained  that  he  might  have  had 
an  important  and  lucrative  post  in  Ireland,  instead  of  a  seat  at  the  English 
Treasury  Board  with  a  poor  1600/.  a-year,  but  that  he  spiritedly  preferred  the 
acquisition  of  knowledge  to  the  emoluments  of  office.  His  adversaries 
accused  him  of  hoping  to  become  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  in  the  event 
of  Lord  North  going  to  the  House  of  Peers,  on  the  expected  death  of  his 
father,  the  Earl  of  Guilford.  "  If  nothing,  however,"  says  the  ''General 
Evening  Post,"  "but  Lord  Guilford's  death  is  likely  to  make  Mr.  Fox 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  the  odds  (to  use  a  language  he  is  not  wholly 
a  stranger  to)  are  much  against  him.  Lord  Guilford's  is  a  better  life  than  his 
own  ;  and  he  has  infinitely  less  to  dread  from  natural  decay  of  age  than 
ke  has  to  apprehend  from  headlong  vehemence  of  youthful  dissipation." — D. 

^  George,  third  Lord  Edgcumbe,  and  Admiral. 


KING   GEORGE    III    AND   QUEEN    CHARLOTTE 
From  viiniatures  in  the  collection  of  A .  Francis  Steuart,  Esq. 


1773 
JANUARY 

THE  Parliament  met  again  after  the  holidays. 
2jth,  The  Queen  was  delivered  of  another 
son.     It  was  christened  Augustus  Frederic. 
This  month  Mr.  Andrew  Stuart  printed  and 
dispersed  his  four  remarkable  Letters  to  Lord  Mansfield 
on  the  Douglas  cause.^ 

^  See  Walpole's  "Memoirs  of  George  III.,"  vol.  iii.  p.  304,  edited  by 
Sir  Denis  Le  Marchant. — D. 


165 


Feb. 


FEBRUARY 


1st. 


THE  jewels,  plate,  and  trinkets  of  the  late 
Princess  Dowager  of  Wales  were  sold  by  public 
auction  at  Christie's  in  Pall  Mall.  They  were 
inconsiderable,  and  it  seemed  very  mean  to 
expose  them  in  that  manner ;  especially  as  the  amount 
was  to  be  divided  amongst  her  own  children. 

2nd.  An  affair  that  made  most  noise  was  Lord  Towns- 
hend's  quarrel  with  the  Earl  of  Bellamont,  a  brave  young 
Irish  lord,  whom  he  had  offended  by  refusing  to  see  him  at 
Dublin.  Lord  Bellamont  waited  till  his  return  to  Eng- 
land, then  resigned  his  post  of  Quartermaster-General, 
and  sent  Lord  Charlemont  to  demand  satisfaction.  After 
many  evasions.  Lord  Bellamont  required  Lord  Townshend 
to  give,  under  his  hand,  a  formal  denial  of  having  intended 
to  affront  him.  Four  challenges  evaded  made  Lord  Towns- 
hend's  lingering  in  Ireland,  on  purpose  to  fight,  completely 
ridiculous.  He  refused  to  give  the  written  satisfaction, 
and  sent  Lord  Ligonier  to  Lord  Bellamont  to  declare  he 
would  not,  biit  making  an  apology,  and  declaring  sorrow 
for  what  had  happened,  with  which  Lord  Bellamont  con- 
tented himself  However,  the  story  being  reported  very 
differently  by  the  two  parties,  great  clamour  pursued  Lord 
Townshend ;  and  Lord  Bellamont  having  drawn  up  the 
state  of  the  quarrel  between  him  and  Lord  Townshend, 
and  got  it  signed  by  his  friends  Lords  Charlemont  and 
Ancram,  and  determining  to  publish  it,  Lord  Townshend 
found  it  disgraced  him  so  much,  that  he  at  last  sent  Lord 
Bellamont  a  challenge,  and  they  fought  between  four  and 
five  in  the  afternoon,  when  Lord  Townshend,  firing  first, 

i66 


r 


1773]  PETITION   OF   NAVY   CAPTAINS  167 

shot  Lord  Bellamont  in  the  belly,  who  then  fired,  shook 
hands  with  Lord  Townshend,^  and  was  carried  home  to 
have  his  wound  dressed. 

9^/2.  Lord  Howe  presented  to  the  House  of  Commons 
a  petition  from  the  captains  in  the  navy,  on  half-pay,  for  a 
small  addition.  Lord  Sandwich  had  been  against  it  for 
fear  of  the  precedent.  Lord  North  had  intended  to  take 
no  part,  and  though  he  did,  for  the  same  reasons  as  Lord 
Sandwich,  had  neglected  taking  any  precautions  for  having 
it  rejected.  Accordingly,  as  the  sum  required  was  incon- 
siderable, as  the  navy  had  made  interest  for  it,  and  the 
army,  liking  the  example,  would  not  oppose  it,  but  absented 
themselves,  Lord  North  was  beaten  by  154  to  45.  There 
were,  however,  circumstances  in  this  defeat  that  looked 
suspicious,  and  as  if  there  were  some  treachery  in  more 
places  than  one.     The  Duke  of  Grafton's  ^  friends  openly 

^  Lord  Townshend  gave  great  offence  by  writing  a  buffoon  account  of  his 
duel,  the  very  evening  after  it  happened,  to  Foote,  the  celebrated  buffoon,  vi'ho 
showed  it  in  coffee-houses.  [The  duel  took  place  in  that  part  of  Marylebone 
fields  which  was  in  the  rear  of  Bedford  House  (formerly  Southampton  House), 
a  mansion  which  as  late  as  the  year  1800  occupied  the  entire  north  side  of 
Bloomsbury  Square.  The  spot  had  long  been  sacred  to  duellists.  In  the 
epilogue  to  Mountfort's  "Greenwich  Park"  (1691),  Florella  (Mrs.  Mountfort) 
says : — 

"  Well,  sirs,  is  it  peace  or  war  that  you  declare? 

I'm  ready  arm'd  :  so  is  my  second  here. 

If  you're  displeased  with  what  you've  seen  to-night, 

Behind  Southampton  House  we'll  do  you  right. 

Who  is't  dares  draw  'gainst  me  and  Mrs.  Knight?  " 

A  long  time  elapsed  before  Townshend's  ball  was  extracted  from  his 
adversary's  groin.  Nevertheless  Lord  Bellamont,  during  his  suffering, 
attended  to  his  private  affairs,  and  negotiated  the  purchase  of  Luxborough 
House,  Epping  Forest,  which  belonged  to  Sir  Edward  Walpole.  The  cost 
was  20,000/.  The  epigrammatists  feebly  attacked  Lord  Townshend.  Here 
is  a  specimen  of  their  small  wit : — 

"  Says  Bell'mont  to  Townshend,  '  You  turn'd  on  your  heel, 
And  that  gave  your  honour  a  check.' 
'  'Tis  my  way,'  replied  Townshend  ;  '  to  the  world  I  appeal. 
If  I  didn't  the  same  at  Quebec.'" 

When  he  succeeded  to  the  command  at  Quebec,  after  Monckton  was  wounded, 
he  recalled  the  English  troops  from  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  and  subsequently 
declined  to  renew  the  contest  with  De  Bougainville.  "But,"  as  before 
quoted  from  Bancroft,  "  already  the  hope  of  New  France  was  gone." — D.] 

^  The  Duke  of  Grafton,  ever  since  his  fall  from  the  post  of  First  Minister, 
had  humbly  aspired  to  be  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty ;  and  now  that  Lord 
Sandwich  had  discouraged  the  petition  for  half-pay,  and  consequently  offended 


1 68       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

acted  against  Lord  North :  those  of  the  other  part  of  the 
Bedford  squadron  absented  themselves,  and  were  known 
to  be  envious  of  the  Minister's  power :  but  the  most 
remarkable  incident  was,  that  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  (believed 
to  be  more  trusted  by  the  King  than  any  man  except 
Lord  Mansfield,  and  yet  who  for  two  years  had  acted 
the  part  of  discontent)  was  the  warmest  supporter  of  the 
petition.  They  who  had  most  jealousy  of  the  King  and 
his  cabal  suspected  that  they  meant  to  insinuate  to  the 
navy  and  army^  that  his  Majesty  favoured  their  claim, 
and  that  the  Minister's  economy  alone  withstood  it.^ 

\Qth.  Now  at  last  came  on  an  affair  in  Parliament, 
the  discussion  of  which  had  long  been  expected.  The 
Caribbees,  who  had  been  suffered  for  a  great  number 
of  years  to  remain  in  the  Island  of  St.  Vincent  before 
it  was  ceded  to  us  by  the  late  peace,  and  had  considerably 
improved  their  lands,  were  recently  much  disturbed  by 
their  new  governor,  Sir  William  Young,  and  his  council, 
who,  coveting  the  improved  estates  of  the  Caribbees,  had 
formed  and  recommended  to  Government  a  plan  for 
dispossessing  them  of  their  lands.     The  Caribbees  resisted. 


part  of  the  navy,  it  is  but  extremely  probable  that  the  total  defection  of  his 
friends  on  that  question  was  enjoined  by  his  Grace.  However,  on  the  I2th 
he  positively  denied  having  desired  a  single  person  to  vote  for  the  petitioners 
— but  this  was  not  till  Lord  North,  shocked  at  finding  himself  betrayed, 
had  been  on  the  point  of  resigning  all  his  places  and  power  on  the  loth, 
which  had  so  alarmed  the  Bedfords,  who  hated  Lord  Mansfield  more  than 
Lord  North,  that  they  bestirred  themselves  with  all  their  activity  to  support 
Lord  North  on  the  affair  of  St.  Vincent's,  and  probably  brought  back  the 
Duke  of  Grafton.  For  the  Court's  part  of  the  treachery,  it  remained  as 
little  doubtful  as  his  Grace's.  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  would  not  make  any  apology 
to  Lord  North,  which  showed  he  was  sure  of  the  King  and  Lord  Mansfield ; 
and  as  last  year  he  had  openly  ridiculed  General  Conway's  conscientious 
scruples,  and  pronounced  it  impossible  for  Ministers  to  act  with  him,  it 
was  good  proof  that  his  own  embarrassing  the  Administration  did  not  proceed 
from  any  principle. 

^  That  this  surmise  was  well  grounded  may  be  gathered  from  the  following 
paragraph,  which  appeared  in  the  '*  Daily  Advertiser"  of  the  following  Fri- 
day, Feb.  1 2th  : — "The  petition  of  the  captains  of  the  navy  was  recommended 
by  his  Majesty." 

^  See  an  account  of  that  debate  in  the  *'  London  Chronicle"  of  Feb.  nth, 
1773,  and  sequent. 


1773]     EXPEDITION   AGAINST  THE   CARIBBEES      169 

The  governor  and  council  sent  over  bitter  complaints, 
representing  them  as  rebels  and  traitors,  who  were  treating 
with  the  French  at  Martinico  to  betray  the  island  to  the 
latter.  Lord  Hillsborough,  arbitrary,  ignorant,  and  incon- 
siderate, had  taken  upon  him  the  protection  of  the  governor 
and  council,  and,  believing  all  they  said,  had  drawn  in 
Lord  North  and  the  Cabinet  Council  to  act  as  arbitrarily 
as  inconsiderately,  and  send  troops  to  quell,  destroy,  or 
expel  the  wretched  Caribs.  To  the  cruelty  of  this  treatment 
of  the  real  savages,  our  polished  savages,  the  Ministers, 
added  another  towards  the  troops  despatched,  who,  despite 
the  representations  of  experienced  men,  were  sent  away  at 
the  most  improper  season,  and  when  it  was  apprehended 
that  nothing  but  distempers  or  destruction  could  overtake 
them.  The  atrociousness  of  these  proceedings,  the  disgusts 
of  the  officers  thus  exposed,  and  the  odium  that  followed 
Lord  Hillsborough,  though  now  out  of  place,  had,  in  spite 
of  the  servility  of  Parliament  and  the  supineness  of  Opposi- 
tion, forced  on  an  inquiry ;  and  though  many  causes  had 
staved  it  ofif,^  T.  Townshend,  jun.,  having  moved  for  papers 
to  ground  an  inquiry,  and  they  having  not  only  been 
granted,  but  even  so  far  fairly  given  that  they  awakened 
attention  and  augmented  clamour,  the  examination  was 
opened  on  this  day,  10/^,  and  many  witnesses  were 
examined,  among  whom   Lieutenant-General  Trappaud^ 

^  On  one  side  the  Ministers  wished  to  receive  farther  accounts  from  St. 
Vincent's ;  on  the  other,  Edmund  Burke,  the  soul  of  the  Opposition  in  the 
Commons  (as  the  Duke  of  Richmond  was  in  the  Lords),  had  meanly  retired 
to  France  on  the  pretence  of  placing  his  son  at  Blois,  but  in  reality,  it  was 
believed,  to  avoid  the  inquiry,  as  his  cousin,  another  Burke,  was  confidential 
secretary  to  Sir  William  Young,  and  was  supposed  to  be  deeply  concerned  in 
advising  the  malpractice  against  the  Caribs  in  that  island.  Some,  both  in 
place  and  in  opposition,  might  wish  to  have  Burke  return  before  the  inquiry ; 
but  he  was  not  likely  to  be  so  entrapped,  after  having  had  so  much  precaution. 

^  On  the  examination  relative  to  the  affair  at  St.  Vincent's,  before  a  great 
assembly,  on  Wednesday,  a  Lieut. -General*  of  the  70th  Regiment,  at  the 
Grenades,  read  part  of  a  letter,  dated  Nov.  14th,  which  mentioned  that  the 
mortality  among  the  men  is  very  great,  owing  to  the  heavy  and  continual  rains 
at  that  season  ;  that  the  Caribs  have  been  ill-used  ;  that  they  act  with  caution, 

*  General  Trappaud. 


I70       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

produced  a  letter  exemplifying  the  distresses  of  the  em- 
barkation :  and  then  the  inquiry  was  put  off  to  the  \2th. 

\2th.  The  day  was  passed  in  examining  witnesses.  It 
appeared  that  the  black  or  African  Caribs  had  almost 
driven  out  or  extirpated  the  yellow  or  red,  original  Caribs, 
and  possessed  more  land  than  they  could  occupy ;  that 
our  governor  and  council  were  very  desirous  of  restrain- 
ing the  blacks  to  narrower  quarters,^  and  had  offered  to 
purchase  their  uncultivated  lands ;  that  the  blacks,  jealous 
of  our  encroachments,  had  obstructed  our  surveys,  and  had 
even  sent  to  St.  Lucia  to  beg  assistance  against  us.  The 
French  governor  of  Martinique,  then  at  St.  Lucia,  had, 
handsomely  to  us,  refused  them  aid  ;  had  even  threatened 
them  with  supporting  the  English,  and  had  actually  given 
us  warning  of  the  designs  of  the  Caribs.  It  appeared,  too, 
that  for  this  fidelity  to  treaties  the  French  governor  had 
been  recalled.  The  French  were  represented  as  encour- 
aging the  obstinacy  of  the  Caribs,  whose  behaviour,  sturdy 
indeed  in  defence  of  their  freedom  and  property,  was  so 
exaggerated,  that  the  master  of  an  English  sloop  swore 
solemnly  that  four  canoes  of  Caribs  had  attempted  to 
board  him,  and  that  he  had  destroyed  them  all,  without  a 
syllable  of  foundation  for  his  deposition.  From  Fletcher, 
a  Scotch  officer  who  had  been  at  St.  Vincent's,  it  came 
out   that,  though   he  had   arrived  with   his  regiment  at 

and  the  woods  are  so  thick,  that  they  knock  down  the  soldiers  with  the  great- 
est security  to  themselves  ;  and  that  the  troops  have  only  been  able  to  penetrate 
four  miles  into  the  country.  The  above  officer  also  informed  the  House,  that 
an  officer  and  a  party  were  drowned  going  ashore  in  a  boat. 

^  The  planters  were  horridly  eager  to  cut  the  throats  of  the  savages  in  order 
to  seize  their  property.  The  English  Administration,  though  abetting  the 
usurpation,  had  enjoined  as  much  lenity  as  could  be  consistent  with  invasion, 
and  those  injunctions  had  prevented  force  from  being  used.  One  Harry 
Alexander,  President  of  St.  Vincent,  exclaims,  in  a  paper  laid  before  the 
House  of  Commons,  "I  withdrew  the  troops  to  their  quarters  without  the 
discharge  of  a  musket  on  either  side  ;  and  for  a  time,  /  hope  it  will  be  short,  I 
quitted  that  fine  cream  part  of  this  island  with  a  regret  /  cannot  express  to 
you  !  "  And  he  afterwards  speaks  of  himself  and  the  inhabitants,  as  rapacious 
as  himself,  as  men  of  good  hearts  and  hands,  but  tied  up  from  using  their 
arms. 


I 


1773]       INQUIRY   CONCERNING  THE   CARIBS         171 

Christmas,  and  had  had  seven  months  to  season  his  men, 
yet,  when  the  bad  season  and  rains  came,  250  out  of  400 
had  been  sent  to  the  hospital.  Being  asked  what  would 
be  the  consequence  of  the  new  troops  arriving  at  the 
beginning  of  the  bad  season,  he  replied,  Dreadful  indeed! 
Sharp,  a  shrewd  man,  who  had  also  been  President  of 
St.  Vincent,  and  was  willing  enough  to  palliate  what  had 
been  done,  confessed  he  had  been  ordered  by  the  Cabinet 
Council  to  draw  up  advice  for  their  proceedings,  had  been 
allowed  but  one  day,  and  had  been  so  pressed  by  them 
that  he  was  forced  to  deliver  in  the  rough  sketch  of  his 
rude,  indigested,  and  indeed  rash  thoughts,  and  that  the 
Council  here  had  intemperately  ordered  them  to  be  carried 
into  execution.  This  was  the  merciless  scheme  of  trans- 
porting the  black  Caribs  to  a  desert  island. 

These  lights  were  proclaimed  to  be  most  favourable  to 
the  ministry,  and  much  less  heinous  than  the  facts  had 
been  represented — not  that  they  were  so,  except  in  the 
softness  of  some  expressions,  as  appears  from  the  above 
state,  but  because  it  was  become  expedient  for  many  who 
had  been  disposed  to  censure,  to  alter  their  language.  In 
short,  the  late  amazing  overthrow  of,  at  least  affront  given 
to,  Lord  North,  had  occasioned  the  greatest  fermentation 
in  the  Cabinet.  Nor  could  there  be  a  more  surprising  cir- 
cumstance than  that  the  first  event  of  the  most  triumphant 
session  ever  known,  in  which  Opposition  itself  had  given 
up  the  game, — that  the  first  event,  I  say,  of  such  a  session, 
should  be  a  total  rout  of  the  First  Minister.  He  had 
neglected  the  question,  he  had  declared  he  would  not  take 
any  part  on  it;  yet,  unless  there  had  been  purposed 
treachery,  his  troops  would  have  rallied  when  once  they 
heard  his  voice.  Lord  North  was  not  the  dupe.  He 
declared  strongly  in  private  to  the  King,  and  publicly  to 
others,  that  he  would  be  supported ;  that  the  question  on 
St.  Vincent's  should  decide  his  fate  as  a  minister;  and  that 
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  should  make  reparation  by  supporting 


172       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

him,  or  that  he  or  Sir  Gilbert  must  quit  the  King's  service. 
Lord  North  had  reason  to  take  his  part  without  loss  of  a 
day :  it  was  known  that  General  Harvey/  the  King's  con- 
fidential tool  for  the  army,  had  threatened  to  condemn  in 
Parliament  the  embarkation  of  the  troops  at  so  improper 
a  moment ;  and  many  other  officers  would  have  taken  the 
same  part.  The  King  was  terrified ;  for  though  alert  to 
betray  his  own  servants,  he  was  not  always  ready  to 
supply  their  places ;  and  Lord  North  happened  to  be  the 
only  unexceptionable  man  in  England  who  could  at  this 
juncture  be  employed  to  public  satisfaction  in  the  manage- 
ment of  affairs.  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  was  ordered  to  make 
amends,  General  Harvey  to  be  moderate,  and  the  secret 
junto  (probably)  to  plan  Lord  North's  fall  or  disgrace  on 
firmer  grounds.  No  wonder  the  courtiers  in  the  mean- 
time, who  had  run  from  the  Minister  after  Sir  Gilbert, 
were  quick  in  discerning  that  the  cause  against  the  Caribs 
was  better  than  they  had  been  told.  To  exculpate  the 
King,  Lord  Bute,  and  the  cabal,  of  the  charge  of  betray- 
ing Lord  North,  it  was  proclaimed  that  Sir  Gilbert's 
treachery  was  only  revenge,  Lord  Barrington^  having  re- 
fused a  commission  in  the  army  to  one  of  his  sons.  Sir 
Gilbert  himself  would  have  been  ashamed  to  ascribe  his 
vote  in  behalf  of  poor  naval  officers,  to  principle. 

Treachery  was  not  all  Lord  North  complained  of :  the 
grounds  of  his  complaint  had  foundation  deep  enough  to 
deserve  to  alarm  the  constitution  itself.  Lord  North  re- 
monstrated against  the  large  numbers  of  military  prefer- 
ments which  the  King  himself  bestowed ;  a  practice,  he 
said,  that  loosened  parliamentary  discipline,  as  officers  did 
not  look  up  to  the  Minister,  nor  could  he  engage  the 
attachment  of  country  gentlemen  when  they  found  he  had 
not  credit  to  provide  for  their  sons  and  relations  in  the 

^  General  Edward  Harvey,  of  the  family  of  the  Harveys  of  Chigwell  in 
Essex.     He  had  a  pension  also  of  1500/.  a  year. 
2  Secretary  at  War. 


1773]        AFFAIRS   OF   EAST   INDIA   COMPANY  173 

army ;  and  this  personal  dependence  on  the  Crown  ex- 
plained collaterally  why,  on  the  half-pay,  the  land  and 
naval  officers  had  more  willingly  followed  Elliot  than 
Lord  North — a  secret  favourite  having  better  interest 
than  an  ostensible  minister.  But  what  was  not  to  be 
apprehended  from  the  King's  assiduity  in  attaching  the 
army  personally  to  himself? 

On  the  same  12th  of  February  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
gave  a  signal  defeat  to  the  measures  of  Government.  Lord 
North  had  come  to  an  agreement  with  the  Directors  of 
the  East  India  Company,  and  the  governing  chiefs  had 
settled  a  list  of  demands  and  offers  to  be  made  to  Parlia- 
ment. They  were  laid  before  the  General  Court  of 
Proprietors  ;  but  Governor  Johnson  proposing  that  the 
Company  should  rather  desire  to  know  Lord  North's 
terms,  and  some  altercations  arising,  the  Duke,  unaccus- 
tomed to  appear  there,  and  thence  drawing  observance, 
persuaded  the  generality  of  the  proprietors  of  stock  to 
embrace  Johnson's  motion ;  and  it  was  carried  by  three  to 
one  against  Sir  George  Colebrook,  Sullivan,  and  their 
adherents. 

i^th  was  finished  the  examination  of  witnesses  in  the 
affairs  of  St.  Vincent's.  T.  Townshend  then  entered  into 
a  discussion  and  condemnation  of  the  measures  taken. 
He  stated  the  injustice  and  cruelty  of  the  conduct  held 
towards  the  Caribs,  even  after  they  had  taken  the  oaths  of 
allegiance  to  the  King,  and  the  inhumanity  of  the  designs 
against  them,  merely  to  gratify  the  mercenary  views  of  that 
wretch  Alexander,  and  other  planters.  He  afterwards  cen- 
sured the  impropriety  of  sending  troops  at  a  season  so  de- 
structive; and  he  told  the  House  he  should  offer  two  motions 
of  crimination  on  both  measures.  Others  dwelt  on  the 
extravagance  of  despatching  2500  against  700  poor  savages. 
Lord  George  Germaine  summed  up  the  whole  barbarity, 
rashness,  and  folly  in  one  of  his  most  pointed  speeches,  full 
of  pith,  matter,  irony,  and  satire.      Stanley,  Sir  Richard 


174       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

Sutton,^  Stephen  Fox,  Lord  Barrington,  Sam.  Martin,  Rice, 
and  General  Conway  defended  the  conduct — the  latter 
rather  the  person — of  Lord  North,  to  whose  moderation  and 
equity  he  had  been  obliged,  though  owning  he  was  ready 
to  second  an  address  for  lenity  towards  the  Caribs. 
Lord  North  did  not  defend  himself  so  well,  and  was  roughly 
handled  by  Colonel  Barre.  With  regard  to  other  officers, 
Colonel  Burgoyne  was  pompously  pathetic  against  both 
parts  of  the  plan,  and  exposed  the  iniquity  to  the  Caribs 
after  they  had  gotten  forty  of  our  people  into  their  power 
and  let  them  go  off  unhurt.  General  Howard  voted 
against  the  expedition  ;  so  did  General  Harvey — by  order, 
temperate.  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  supported,  silently  minis- 
terial. Late  at  night  the  first  question  was  put,  That  the 
expedition  against  the  black  Caribs  in  the  island  of  St. 
Vincent  was  undertaken  without  sufficient  provocation  on 
the  part  of  those  unhappy  people,  and  by  the  advice  of 
persons  interested,  and  will  end  in  the  extirpation  of  those 
unhappy  people.  This  motion  was  rejected  by  206  voices 
to  88.  Townshend  then  proposed  his  second  motion.  That 
the  sending  troops  which  were  unprovided  with  camp  equi- 
page or  necessaries  in  the  unhealthy  season  of  the  year  is 
not  justified  by  any  necessity,  and  must  prove  destructive 
to  the  best  troops  in  his  Majesty's  service,  and  probably 
defeat  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  sent,  and  bring 
disgrace  upon  his  Majesty's  arms.  This  was  likewise  not 
accepted,  by  199  to  y^.  Townshend  told  the  House  that, 
had  his  two  first  questions  been  attended  with  success,  he 
had  designed  to  have  taken  their  sense  upon  the  following 
motion : — That  an  humble  address  be  presented  to  his 
Majesty,  that  he  would  be  graciously  pleased  to  acquaint 
the  House  by  whose  advice  the  measure  was  undertaken 
for  attacking  the  Caribs  in  the  island  of  St.  Vincent,  and 
sending  troops  for  that  purpose  in  the  most  unhealthy 
season  of  the  year ;  a  measure  equally  repugnant  to  the 

*  Lately  in  the  Secretary's  office  ;  since  become  a  baronet. 


1773]  DUKE  AND  DUCHESS  OF  GLOUCESTER  175 
known  humanity  of  his  Majesty's  temper,  disgraceful  to  his 
Majesty's  arms,  and  a  disgrace  to  the  character  of  the 
British  nation.  But  this  question,  become  improper  from 
the  contrary  sense  of  the  House,  was  not  enforced,  and  the 
Caribs  were  left  to  the  mercy  of  the  elements,  which  could 
alone  defend  them. 

The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  were  now  come 
to  settle  in  town  against  her  lying-in.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond,  his  brother  Lord  George  Lenox,  Lord  George 
Germaine,  with  their  wives,  and  several  of  the  Opposition, 
went  to  pay  their  court  to  them.  Some  few  of  the  Court 
went  likewise;  but  General  Harvey  going  to  the  Duke, 
and  being  told  by  General  Rainsford,  the  Duke's  Groom 
of  the  Bedchamber  in  waiting,  that  he  might  go  to  the 
Duchess  too,  Harvey  replied  he  had  come  to  the  Duke 
on  military  matters ;  but  as  the  Duchess  could  have 
no  military  business  with  him,  he  desired  to  be  excused. 
General  Amherst,  receiving  the  like  intimation,  answered, 
he  had  not  the  honour  of  knowing  the  Duchess,  and 
therefore  desired  to  be  excused.  The  King  was  very  civil 
to  those  who  went,  which  distressed  those  who  abstained. 
Lord  Denbigh,  the  lowest  and  most  officious  of  the  Court- 
tools,  endeavoured  to  incense  the  King,  whose  measure, 
not  whose  inclination,  it  was  to  affect  lenity.  Lord 
Rockingham  did  not  wait  on  the  Duke  and  Duchess, 
on  pretence  that  it  would  look  too  like  a  system  of 
opposition  !  This  refinement  served  to  announce  his  being 
head  of  the  Opposition,  and  his  fear  of  its  incensing  the 
King  and  preventing  his  becoming  some  time  or  other 
the  head  of  Administration  again.  The  Duke,  however, 
sent  to  desire  to  meet  him  at  the  House  of  Lords,  and 
did ;  and  the  next  day  Lord  Rockingham  waited  on  him, 
but  took  care  to  let  it  be  known  that  he  had  been  invited. 
The  King  soon  afterwards  spoke  with  much  anger  to 
Lord  Hertford  against  those  who  had  been  at  Gloucester 
House,  and  said  he  believed  he  must  forbid  them  more 


176       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     IFeu. 

positively ;  but,  according  to  his  usual  timidity,  a  few  days 
after  this  he  bade  Lord  Hertford  desire  his  brother, 
General  Conway,  to  whisper  General  Amherst  that  his 
Majesty  disliked  his  going  to  the  Duke.  Conway  begged 
to  be  excused,  saying  he  had  been  sorry  to  have  been 
hindered  going  himself.  The  Duke,  going  to  Foote's 
theatre,  was  received  with  three  claps.  The  Duchess  of 
Cumberland,  in  imitation  of  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester, 
saw  company  twice  a  week  ;  fifty  persons  went  the  first 
night,  but  not  one  man  or  woman  of  any  name.  The 
Duchess  of  Gloucester  received  her  visitors  with  great 
humility — advanced  and  saluted  every  Lady  to  prevent 
their  offering  to  kiss  her  hand,  and  gave  it  to  kiss  to  the 
untitled  and  to  the  men  ;  making  the  company  sit  (which 
was  not  according  to  Royal  etiquette),  and  asking  the 
ladies  to  stay  and  play  at  cards.  The  next  day,  the  i8th, 
General  Conway  pressed  his  brother,  Lord  Hertford,  to 
ask  the  King  if  officers,  as  was  reported,  were  allowed  to 
pay  their  duty  to  the  Duke  and  Duchess.  The  King 
answered  with  great  anger  that  his  orders  had  been 
positive ;  that  he  had  allowed  no  officer  but  those  of  the 
Duke's  own  regiment  to  wait  on  him,  and  General 
Harvey,  as  Quartermaster- General ;  and  added  he  did 
not  believe  any  other  officers  had  been  with  the  Duke 
— if  there  were,  he  desired  to  know  who  they  were, 
which  Lord  Hertford  requested  to  be  excused  telling 
him. 

Townshend,  Lord  Mayor,  at  this  time  recommended  to 
the  Court  of  Aldermen  to  promote  measures  for  obtaining 
short  parliaments.  All  the  Aldermen  approved  the  motion 
but  Wilkes,  who,  from  hatred  of  Townshend,  opposed  that 
popular  measure,  calling  it  a  worn-out  matter.  It  was 
declared  to  be  carried  unanimously.  Wilkes  denied  the 
unanimity,  yet,  on  putting  the  question,  did  not  hold  up 
his  hand  against  it,  and  it  passed  unanimously,  though 
not   without   his   charging   Townshend    with   his   having 


1773]  THE   THIRTY-NINE   ARTICLES  177 

delayed  his  advice  till  Sawbridge's  motion  for  short 
parliaments  had  been  rejected  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
and  could  not  be  renewed  till  another  session,  which 
showed  Townshend  was  only  making  a  fallacious  offering 
to  popularity. 

2ird.  Sir  W.  Meredith  moved  to  reconsider  the  sub- 
scription to  the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  The  Archbishop 
of  York  had  complained  that  Lord  North  had  been  too 
indifferent  to  them  last  year;  and  the  University  of 
Oxford  applying  to  him  to  defend  their  great  Diana,  he 
made  a  point  of  throwing  out  the  motion,  and  earnest 
request  of  attendance  was  sent  twice  to  the  Court  militia 
— yet  did  not  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  attend.  However,  Sir 
Roger  Newdigate,  the  spokesman  of  bigotry  and  every 
antiquated  doctrine  of  prerogative  and  superstition,  stiffly 
opposed  going  into  the  Committee  ;  and  with  an  hypocrisy 
which  churchmen,^  but  seldom  their  satellites,  use,  pro- 
fessed moderation.  Charles  Fox  supported  the  question, 
but  it  was  quashed  by  159.  to  6^. 

2\th,  Sir  John  Dalrymple  published  his  Appendix  to 
his  History,  of  both  which  more  will  be  said  at  the  end 
of  this  year,  not  to  interrupt  the  suite  of  events,  though 
both  were  far  from  being  foreign  to  the  plan  of  despotism 
the  Court  and  the  Scotch  were  pursuing. 

The  India  Directors,  having  rallied  their  troops,  re- 
covered their  ground,  and  carried  their  point  for  applying 
in  their  own  terms  to  Parliament.  One  Impey,  a  lawyer, 
said  he  was  surprised  at  the  Duke  of  Richmond  deigning 
to  come  among  them;  but  it  was  a  proof  how  low  Opposi- 

^  Charles  Jenkinson,  who  began  to  assume  the  airs  of  a  minister,  and  was 
thought  to  aspire  to  the  post  of  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  declared  that 
Archbishop  Laud,  with  all  his  faults,  was  a  very  very  great  tnan.  There 
wanted  nothing  to  prove  the  justice  of  this  panegyric,  but  to  quote  his 
ridiculous  and  pagan  consecration  of  St.  Catherine  Cree  Church,  his  Star- 
Chamber  sentences,  as  puerile  as  cruel,  his  letters  to  Lord  Strafford,  and  his 
"Diary,"  in  which  he  relates  his  dreams,  which  turned  on  his  jealousy  of 
Archbishop  Williams.  See  an  account  of  the  debate  in  the  "London 
Chronicle"  of  Feb.  27th,  1773. 

I. — N 


178       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE      [Feb. 

tion  had  fallen,  when  his  Grace  could  find  no  other  theatre 
in  which  to  promote  faction. 

Accounts  of  great  sickness  and  mortality  among  the 
troops  sent  to  St.  Vincent.  An  hundred  men  were  killed 
by  the  Caribs,  and  six  hundred  sent  to  the  hospital.  A 
regiment  that  was  on  the  point  of  returning  from  America 
was  countermanded. 


^ 


1773] 


MARCH 

jA  N  account  came  of  the  death  of  Charles  Emanuel, 
/^L         King  of  Sardinia,  aged  72.^ 
/ — ^  At  this  time  was  published  an  admirable 

-A^  -Ml-  poem,  equal  in  wit  and  poetry  to  the  Dunciad, 
though  short.  It  was  called  An  Heroic  Epistle  to  Sir 
William  Chambers  on  his  Book  of  Gardening;^  and 
though  ridiculing  him,  was  a  severe  satire  on  the  King  and 
his  chief  tools.  The  King,  expecting  only  an  attack  on 
Chambers,  bought  it  to  tease,  and  began  reading  it  to, 
him  ;  but,  finding  it  more  bitter  on  himself,  flung  it  down 
on  the  floor  in  a  passion  and  would  read  no  more.  Lord 
Bristol,  the  best  of  courtiers,  and  as  zealous  as  the  Roman 
who  swore  to  having  seen  the  Emperor's  soul  fly  to  heaven, 
could  not  be  persuaded  to  read  the  Heroic  Epistle ;  he 
said,  from  what  he  had  heard  of  it,  he  would  as  soon  read 
blasphemy — such  pious  servants  had  our  pious  King  !  In 
the  Public  Advertiser  of  March  5th  was  a  bitter  attack, 
signed  Justice,  on  his  Majesty's  patronage  of  Sir  John 
Dalrymple's  book.  This  invective,  I  imagine,  was  written 
by  William  Burke.  It  was  followed  soon  after  by  another 
and  better,  signed  Mollis :  and  all  the  acrimony  against 
the  Scotch  was  revived  by  that  indiscreet  publication,  to 
the  no  small  mortification  of  the  Court.  Lord  Mansfield, 
a  principal  promoter  and  patron  of  the  work,  grew 
frightened,  as  usual,  and  affirmed  having  refused  to  assist 
Dalrymple  with  his  interest  with  the  French  Ministers 
to  obtain  the  papers  accusing  Algernon  Sidney.     Lord 

^  He  had  reigned  forty-three  years. — D. 
'^  Now  known  to  be  by  Mason. — D. 

179 


i8o    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

Nuneham,  son  of  Lord  Harcourt,  Ambassador  at  Paris,  told 
me  his  father  obtained  them  by  the  King's  order,  and  that 
the  King  paid  for  transcribing  them.  Lord  Nuneham  saw 
them  in  his  father's  hands,  I  am  sure,  for  he  told  me  the 
contents  of  them  before  they  were  published. 

At  this  time  there  were  certainly  designs  going  on 
against  Lord  North ;  and  some  thoughts  of  putting  the 
Treasury  into  Lord  Gower's  hands.  Lord  North  was 
very  ungracious  and  indolent ;  Lord  Mansfield  blamed 
him  loudly.  He  had  much  offended  Lord  Mountstewart 
(Lord  Bute's  son)  by  refusing  him  the  Lieutenancy  of  a 
Welsh  county  (which  Lord  M.  obtained  however),  and  by 
the  rude  manner  of  the  refusal,  for  which  Lord  M.  said  he 
would  h^ve  knocked  him  down  if  it  had  not  been  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  for  which  he  and  all  his  family 
would  never  forgive  him.  This  was  some  key  to  Sir 
Gilbert  Elliot's  late  behaviour.  But  Lord  North's  capital 
crime,  or  rather  merit,  was  his  aversion  to  promoting  the 
King's  wish  of  obtaining  an  increase  to  his  revenue  of 
200,000/.  a  year. 

(^th.  Lord  North  moved  to  grant  1,400,000/.  to  the  East 
India  Company,  provided  necessary  precautions  were  taken 
to  prevent  like  exigencies  in  future,  which  was  agreed  to. 

Sir  Basil  Keith,  a  younger  brother  of  Sir  Robert  Keith, 
late  Ambassador  in  Denmark  and  since  at  Vienna,  was, 
though  only  a  junior  Captain  in  the  navy,  raised  to  the 
rich  government  of  Jamaica. 

\Qth.  The  City  agreed  on  a  new  Remonstrance  to  the 
King,  and  to  use  their  utmost  endeavours  to  obtain  shorter 
parliaments.  Wilkes  drew  up  the  Remonstrance  in  such 
strong  and  violent  terms,  that  he  boasted  that  his  enemy 
Townshend,  the  Lord  Mayor,  would  be  undone  at  St. 
James's  if  he  presented  it,  and  stoned  by  the  people  if  he 
did  not.  There  were  doubts  if  it  were  not  treasonable,  and 
Thurlow,  Attorney-General,  declared  he  thought  the  King 
ought  to  refuse  accepting  it.     Some  of  Wilkes's  friends 


1773]    DEATH  OF  THE  EARL  OF  CHESTERFIELD   i8i 

persuading  him  to  accompany  it,  he  excused  himself,  and 
published  his  answer  in  the  papers,  which  was  not  less 
insulting  than  the  Remonstrance,  and  said,  "  how  unhappy 
he  should  be  to  see  his  Sovereign  surrounded  almost 
entirely  by  the  enemies  of  our  country  and  his  family!^ 
The  Lord  Mayor  behaved  absurdly ;  asked  the  Attorney- 
General  if  the  Remonstrance  was  not  a  libel ;  who  said  it 
was  ;  and  sent  for  Serjeant  Glynn,  who  adhered  to  Wilkes, 
to  town,  to  know  his  opinion,  and  then  would  not  see  him, 
but  demanded  it  in  writing.^ 

2ird.  Lord  North,  previously  to  his  intended  measures, 
proposed  two  resolutions  for  restraining  the  East  India 
Company's  dividends  to  six  and  seven  per  cent,  till  their 
debt  to  the  public  should  be  reduced  to  a  certain  sum. 
Burke  almost  alone  opposed  those  motions,  with  little 
foundation,  and,  attacking  Conway,  was  answered  well  by 
him.  Barre  spoke  with  much  temper  and  applause,  ap- 
proving the  measure,  which  was  agreed  to. 

The  next  day  the  Secret  Committee  on  Indian  Affairs 
made  their  Report,  but  it  was  thought  more  partial  to  the 
supposed  criminals  than  had  been  expected. 

Philip,  Earl  of  Chesterfield,  died  after  a  slow  decay, 
aged  jZ.  He  left  a  will  that  did  him  no  credit ;  imposing 
impracticable  restraints  upon  his  heir,  and  sporting  ludi- 
crously on  the  Church,  by  giving  penalties,  which  his  heir 
was  made  liable  to,  to  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  West- 
minster, to  whose  want  of  lenity  he  said  he  would  trust. ^ 

^  See  Supplement  at  end  of  March. 

2  See  "  Life  and  Works  of  Lord  Chesterfield,"  by  Lord  Mahon  (Earl  Stan- 
hope). Shortly  after  Chesterfield's  death  the  following  lines  were  very 
generally  circulated.  They  were  said  to  have  been  written  by  that  nobleman, 
and  offered  to  CoUey  Cibber,  during  the  lifetime  of  Frederick  Prince  of  Wales, 
son  of  George  II.,  as  a  birthday  ode  to  that  King  : — 

"  I  Colley  Cibber,  right  or  wrong,  Heav'n  send  the  Prince  of  royal  race 

Must  celebrate  this  day,  A  little and  horse, 

And  tune  once  more  my  tuneless  song,  A  little  meaning  in  his  face, 

And  strum  the  venal  lay.  And  money  in  his  purse ! 

Heav'n  spread  through  all  the  family  And,  as  I  have  a  son  like  yours, 

That  broad,  illustrious  glare,  May  he  Parnassus  rule  ! — 

That  shines  so  flat  in  ev'ry  eye.  So  shall  the  crown  and  laurel  too, 

And  makes  them  all  so  stare.  Descend  from  fool  to  fool." 

Lady  Chesterfield,  the  daughter  of  the  Duchess  of  Kendal  (Melusina  von 


1 82    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

2(^th.  The  Lord  Mayor,  very  ill  attended,  presented  the 
City's  Remonstrance,  and  made  apologies  to  the  Lord 
Chamberlain  for  having  been  forced  to  bring  it.  The 
King  in  his  answer  treated  it  as  not  serious,  and  as  if  the 
remonstrants  could  not  expect  any  other  response. 


SUPPLEMENT 

The  following  is  an  exact  copy  of  the  City's  Remonstrance, 
agreed  upon  in  Common  Hall,  March  nth,  1773,  as  it  was  de- 
livered to  his  Majesty's  Secretary  of  State,  that  a  proper  answer 
might  be  prepared  against  the  day  when  the  Lord  Mayor,  Alder- 
men, &c.,  are  to  present  it  in  form  to  his  Majesty  : — 

"To  THE  King's  Most  Excellent  Majesty. 

"  The  humble  Address,  Petition,  and  Remonstrance  of  the  Lord 
Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Livery  of  the  City  of  London,  in 
Common  Hall  assembled. 

"Most  Gracious  Sovereign, 

"  We,  your  Majesty's  dutiful  and  loyal  subjects,  the  Lord 
Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Livery  of  the  City  of  London,  beg  leave 
to  approach  the  Throne  with  the  respect  becoming  a  free  people 
zealously  attached  to  the  laws  and  constitution  of  their  country, 
and  the  Parliamentary  right  of  your  Majesty  to  the  crown  of 
these  realms. 

"  We  desire,  with  all  humility  in  the  grief  and  anguish  of  our 
hearts,  to  submit  to  your  Majesty  that  the  many  grievances  and 
injuries  we  have  suffered  from  your  Ministers  still  remain  un- 
redressed; nor  has  the  public  justice  of  the  kingdom  received 
the  least  satisfaction  for  the  frequent  atrocious  violations  of  the 
laws  which  have  been  committed  in  your  reign  by  your  Ministers, 
with  a  daring  contempt  of  every  principle  human  and  divine. 

Schulenburg),  when  her  lord  was  dying,  sent  for  the  Rev.  Rowland  Hill. 
Lord  Chesterfield  refused  to  see  him  ;  and  immediately  after  his  death  Lady 
Chesterfield  appointed  him  her  chaplain,  and  opened  Chesterfield  House  for 
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel. — D. 


1773]  THE   CITY   REMONSTRANCE  183 

Your  people  have,  with  the  deepest  concern,  observed  that  their 
former  humble  Petitions  and  Remonstrances  were  received  with 
a  neglect  and  disregard  very  hardly  brooked  by  the  high  spirit  of 
a  great  and  powerful  nation;  but  the  hopes  of  redress  still  en- 
couraging us  to  persevere,  we  again  supplicate  your  Majesty  to 
listen  to  the  voice  of  your  aggrieved  subjects  in  vindication  of 
your  own  and  the  nation's  honour  against  your  despotic  and 
corrupt  ministers,  who  have  perverted  the  fountains  of  public 
justice,  and  undermined  the  foundations  of  our  excellent  con- 
stitution. Our  representatives,  who  were  chosen  to  be  the 
guardians  of  our  rights,  have  invaded  our  most  sacred  privileges. 
The  right  of  being  represented  in  Parliament  is  the  inherent 
inalienable  privilege,  as  well  as  peculiar  glory,  of  the  free-born 
inhabitants  of  this  country ;  and  a  person  qualified  according  to 
law,  a  magistrate  of  this  city,  was  duly  elected  a  knight  of  the 
shire  for  the  county  of  Middlesex  by  a  great  majority  of  legal 
votes,  yet  has  been  excluded  from  the  House  of  Commons  by  a 
resolution  of  that  House  ;  and  a  candidate,  who  had  only  a  few 
votes,  declared  the  representative  of  the  electors  of  the  said 
county  against  their  consent.  Through  the  like  corrupt  influence 
of  the  same  Ministers,  the  chief  magistrate  and  one  of  the 
aldermen  of  this  city  were  imprisoned  for  not  obeying  the  illegal 
mandates  of  an  arbitrary  House  of  Commons,  and  violating  the 
solemn  oaths  they  had  taken  for  the  preservation  of  the  liberties 
and  franchises  of  the  capital  of  your  Majesty's  dominions.  We 
recall  to  your  Majesty's  remembrance  with  horror  that  un- 
paralleled act  of  tyranny,  the  erasing  a  judicial  record  in  order  to 
stop  the  course  of  justice,  to  introduce  a  system  of  power  against 
right,  and  to  tear  up  by  the  roots  truth  and  law  from  the  earth. 

"We  therefore,  your  Remonstrants,  again  supplicate  your 
Majesty  to  employ  the  only  remedy  now  left  by  the  constitution, 
the  exercise  of  that  salutary  power  with  which  you  are  intrusted 
by  law,  the  dissolving  of  the  present  ParHament,  and  the  removal 
of  those  evil  counsellors  who  advised  the  measures  so  generally 
odious  to  the  nation ;  and  your  Majesty,  as  the  true  guardian  of 
our  rights,  shall  ever  reign  in  the  hearts  of  a  grateful  people." 

Several  of  Mr.  Alderman  Wilkes's  friends  waited  upon  him, 


1 84    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

and  pressed  very  much  his  going  to  St.  James's  with  the  other 
Aldermen  to  present  the  late  Address,  Petition,  and  Remon- 
strance to  the  King.  Mr.  Wilkes's  answer  was  nearly  in  these 
words : — 

"  Gentlemen, 

"You  well  know  the  support  I  gave  on  Thursday  to  the 
motions  in  Common  Hall  for  the  Remonstrance,  and  the  en- 
gagement for  shortening  the  duration  of  Parliaments.  I  now 
feel  a  real  pain  in  declining  to  comply  with  the  solicitation  of  so 
respectable  friends.  As  I  have  long  been  personally  obnoxious 
to  the  King,  I  have  not  for  many  years  been  at  St.  James's.  It 
would  now  be  rude  and  indecent  to  force  myself  into  the  Royal 
presence  on  an  occasion  not  the  most  pleasing,  I  believe,  to  his 
Majesty.  I  am  not  used  to  go  into  any  gentleman's  house  who 
does  not  wish  to  see  me.  The  last  year,  as  sheriff,  it  would  have 
been  the  particular  duty  of  my  office  to  have  attended  the  King 
with  any  petition  or  remonstrance,  and  I  should  have  obeyed 
the  commands  of  the  City.  I  am  now  to  be  considered  only  as 
an  Alderman.  The  attendance  of  the  whole  body  is  not  neces- 
sary. No  favourable  effect  could  possibly  arise  from  my  being 
with  you  at  St.  James's;  and  if  the  least  disturbance  should 
happen  without,  it  would  be  construed  to  be  a  premeditated  riot, 
the  Guards  immediately  be  ordered  to  fire  among  the  people, 
and  another  massacre  ensue. 

"I  am  not  fond  of  the  air  of  a  Court:  it  generally  blasts 
sooner  or  later,  and  often  nips,  even  in  the  bud,  our  modern 
patriotism.  I  should  be  particularly  unhappy  at  this  time  to  see 
my  sovereign  surrounded  almost  entirely  by  the  enemies  of  our 
country  and  his  family,  and  the  royal  smiles  beaming  on  those 
very  Ministers  against  whom  the  City  of  London  now  petition 
and  remonstrate  with  so  much  truth  and  justice,  while  my  fellow- 
citizens  were  received  with  coldness  and  disregard.  My  warmest 
wishes,  however,  gentlemen,  will  go  with  you,  and  may  you  meet 
with  a  gracious  reception  and  success." 

The  Lord  Mayor,  attended  by  Mr.  Serjeant  Glynn,  Recorder ; 
Alderman  Bull ;  Mr.  Sheriff  Lewes,  City  Remembrancer ;  Common 
Serjeant;  Town  Clerk;  eight  of  the  livery,  and  the  rest  of  the 


1773]  THE   CITY   REMONSTRANCE  185 

City  officers,  went  to  St.  James's,  where  the  Recorder  read  to  his 
Majesty  the  Address,  Petition,  and  Remonstrance  from  the  City 
of  London.     To  which  his  Majesty  gave  the  following  answer  : — 

"  I  have  the  satisfaction  to  think  that  my  people  don't  doubt 
of  my  readiness  to  attend  to  their  complaints,  or  of  my  ardent 
desire  to  promote  their  happiness,  which  I  cannot  more  effectu- 
ally do  than  by  resisting  every  attempt  to  sow  groundless 
jealousies  among  them. 

"  Your  petition  is  so  void  of  foundation,  and  is,  besides,  con- 
ceived in  such  disrespectful  terms,  that  I  am  convinced  you  do 
not  seriously  imagine  it  can  be  complied  with." 


[Al'RIL 


APRIL 

THE  Prussian  Minister,  Count  Malzahn,  sud- 
denly declared  he  was  going  away,  and  ordered 
in  the  bills  of  his  tradesmen.  This  was  sup- 
posed to  be  in  consequence  of  the  part  we  were 
believed  to  be  taking  with  France  against  the  invasion  and 
usurpation  of  Poland.  The  Ministers  denied  that  he  was 
going,  and  called  it  an  imposition  for  the  purpose  of  stock- 
jobbing. 

^th.  Lord  North  acquainted  the  House  of  Commons 
that  the  King,  in  answer  to  the  petition  of  the  East  India 
Company,  had  left  the  decision  of  that  affair  to  the  House. 
Lord  North  then  moved  to  leave  territorial  acquisitions  to 
the  Company  for  six  years  longer,  the  Company's  exclu- 
sive charter  expiring  in  1780;  but  he  hinted  that  exigen- 
cies might  require  the  Government's  taking  those  pos- 
sessions into  its  own  hands  sooner.  He  moved  too  that 
after  a  certain  time  the  Government  should  partake  of  the 
Company's  clear  profits ;  all  which  was  voted  with  scarce 
any  opposition.  Lord  Clive,  who  had  been  much  offended 
at  the  report  of  the  Secret  Committee,  and  had  threatened 
to  contravert  it,  forbore. 

Advice  was  received  that  the  Caribs  at  St.  Vincent  had 
entered  into  composition  with  us,  and  had  ceded  part  of 
the  contested  territory.  France  prevailed  on  the  Turks 
to  continue  the  war  ;  and  they  refusing  to  comply  with  the 
Czarina's  demands,  she  broke  off  the  conferences. 

Lord  North  having  moved  for  a  call  of  the  House  on 
the  26th,  when  he  was  to  lay  business  of  great  importance 
before  them,  the  Speaker  was  ordered  to  send  notice  to 

186 


1773]       CALL   OF  THE   HOUSE   OF   COMMONS         187 

the  sheriffs  of  counties  to  summon  all  their  members  to 
attend.  On  this  opportunity  Sir  Watkin  Lewes  and 
Alderman  Oliver,  Sheriffs  of  Middlesex,  sent  the  summons 
to  Wilkes,  instead  of  Luttrell,  and  acquainted  the  Speaker 
with  what  they  had  done :  Wilkes  himself  also  wrote  a 
very  bold  letter  to  the  Speaker,  asserting  his  right.  This 
contempt  of  the  House,  which  the  Court^  was  afraid  to 

^  The  contempt  of  the  City  for  the  Court,  and  the  characteristic  foibles  and 
offences  of  public  men,  were  satirized  in  the  following  anonymous  lines,  which 
were  in  circulation  at  this  time  : — 

"  You  I  love,  my  dearest  life,  More  than  Huntingdon  her  teachers, 

More  than  Georgey  loves  his  wife  ;  More  than  Carlisle  those  who  cheat  him, 

More  than  Ministers  to  rule.  More  than  Long  Tom  those  who  treat  him, 

More  than  North  to  play  the  fool,  More  than  Pomfret  a  lead-mine. 

More  than  Camden  to  grimace,        •  More  than  Weymouth  play  and  wine, 

More  than  Barrington  his  place,  More  than  fools  at  wits  to  nibble. 

More  than  Clive  his  black  jagueer,  More  than  Walpole  loves  to  scribble. 

More  than  Bute  the  Royal  ear ;  More  than  Lyttleton  to  write, 

More  than  patriots  love  their  price,  More  than  blackleg  March  to  bite. 

More  than  Fox  loves  cards  and  dice.  More  than  country  squires  their  dogs, 

More  than  cits  the  Court  to  spite.  More  than  Mawbey  loves  his  hogs. 

More  than  Townshend  not  to  fight.  More  than  demireps  a  spark. 

More  than  Colebrook  heaps  of  pelf.  More  than  Martin  a  sure  mark ; 

More  than  Elliot  loves  himself,  More  than  Grafton  loves  his  pimps, 

More  than  Alderman  his  gut,  More  than  Devil  loves  his  imps. 

More  than  Hillsborough  to  strut ;  More  than  Tories  love  the  Stuarts, 

More  than  cullies  love  a  jilt,  _  More  than  Whigs  love  all  true  hearts. 

More  than  Grosv'nor  horns  well  gilt ;  Thus,  my  fair,  I  love  you  more 
More  than  Dartmouth  loves  field  preachers.       Than  ever  man  loved  fair  before." 

Mason,  too,  in  his  then  recently  published  "  Heroic  Epistle,"  alluded  more  or 
less  openly  to  those  he  calls 

" the  plunderers  of  the  age 

(Too  numerous  far  for  this  contracted  page), 

The  Rigbys, s,  Mungos,  Bradshaws  there, 

In  straw-stuft  effigy  shall  kick  the  air." 

In  the  anonymous  lines  above  there  is  one  individual  not  mentioned  by  his 
surname, — "  Long  Tom."  This  was  long  Sir  Thomas  Robinson,  of  Rokeby, 
whose  length  served  to  distinguish  him  from  his  namesake.  Sir  Thomas 
Robinson,  created  Lord  Grantham  in  1761.  Chesterfield,  being  asked  by  the 
Baronet  to  write  some  verses  upon  him,  immediately  produced  the  epigram — 
"Unlike  my  subject  now  shall  be  my  song, 
It  shall  be  witty,  and  it  shan't  be  long." 

Long  Sir  Thomas  is  mentioned  more  than  once  with  ridicule  in  Walpole's 
letters.  At  an  early  period  of  his  life  he  filled  the  office  of  Commissioner  of 
Excise,  and  as  Governor  of  Barbadoes  he  acquired  a  reputation  for  liberality 
which  is  denied  him  by  the  anonymous  minstrel.  The  measure  of  his  ability, 
however,  may  be  arrived  at  by  remembering  the  fact  that,  when  our  King  had 
not  yet  dropped  the  folly  of  calling  himself  also  King  "of  France,"  and  it 
was  customary  at  the  coronation  of  an  English  sovereign  to  have  fictitious 
Dukes  of  Aquitaine  and  Normandy  to  represent  the  vassalage  of  France, 
Sir  Thomas  was  selected  to  fill  the  second  mock-dignity  at  the  coronation  of 
George  IIL — the  last  occasion  on  which  the  foolish  phantoms  appeared. 
Churchill  alludes  to  the  circumstance  in  his  "Ghost "  ;  but  he  assigns  a  wrong 
dukedom  to  Sir  Thomas  : — 


1 88       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [April 

resent,  lest  it  should  revive  the  troubles  about  Wilkes,  did 
however  set  the  authority  of  the  House  of  Commons  in  the 
most  contemptible  light.  At  the  same  time  arrived  a 
representation  of  the  Assembly  at  Boston  to  their  Gover- 
nor, in  which  they  peremptorily  denied  the  jurisdiction  of 
the  Parliament  of  England  ;  nor  of  this  did  the  Ministers 
dare  to  take  notice ;  so  low  was  the  Crown  sunk  in  the 
midst  of  all  its  pretensions,  and  of  all  its  corrupt  influence, 
having  no  credit  but  what  it  purchased  day  by  day ! 

When  the  House  met  after  the  Easter  recess,  the 
Speaker  acquainted  them  with  the  receipt  of  Wilkes's  letter, 
and  said,  if  any  man  desired  it,  he  would  read  it :  nobody 
desired  it. 

2ist.  At  a  time  when  many  believed  an  alliance  con- 
cluded with  France,  and  with  good  reason,  for  France,  not- 
withstanding the  want  of  money  there,  had  agreed  to  pay 
a  very  large  sum  to  our  East  India  Company,  which  had 
been  thought  desperate,  a  fleet  of  twelve  or  fifteen  ships  of 
the  line  was  suddenly  ordered  out,  and  Colonel  Boyd, 
Deputy-Governor  of  Gibraltar,  was  remanded  to  his  post. 
The  Ministers  gave  out  that  these  preparations  were  de- 
signed against,  at  least  to  watch,  France  and  Spain,  a  fleet 
being  fitting  out  at  Carthagena,  and  another  being  ready 
to  sail  from  Marseilles  for  the  Mediterranean,  where  it  was 
supposed  France  intended  to  intercept  the  Russian  navy, 
or  to  proceed  to  oppose  the  Russian  attack  of  Constanti- 
nople, the  French  having  prevailed  on  the  Turks  to  con- 
tinue the  war.  The  stocks  fell  greatly  ;  but  everybody 
was  not  credulous  ;  and  the  most  jealous  apprehended  that 
our  fleet  would  at  last  join,  at  least  not  impede  the  opera- 
tions of  the  French  squadron. 

22,rd.  Sir  Charles  Saunders,  a  brave  and  popular  Admi- 

"  Could  Satire  not  (though  doubtful  since 
Whether  he  plumber  is  or  prince) 
Tell  of  a  simple  knight's  advance 
To  be  a  doughty  peer  of  France  ? 
Tell  how  he  did  a  dukedom  gain, 
And  Robinson  was  Aquitain?" 

"  Long  Tom"  died  in  1777.— D. 


1773]    MOTION  TO  HEAR  WILKES  AT  THE  BAR      189 

ral  in  the  Opposition,  was  named  to  the  command  of  the 
fleet,  and  bounties  were  ordered  to  encourage  sailors  to 
enlist.  Still,  even  many  attached  to  the  Court  could  not 
believe  any  hostilities  would  follow. 

26th.  This  being  the  day  appointed  for  the  call  of  the 
House,  Wilkes  went  to  the  Crown  Office  and  demanded 
his  writ,  which  was  refused  to  him  by  the  deputy  clerk. 
Thence  he  went  attended  to  Westminster,  though  without 
any  riot :  yet  it  being  apprehended,  the  Guards  were  held 
in  readiness.  Serjeant  Glynn  acquainted  the  House  that 
he  had  a  paper  in  his  hand  wherein  Mr.  Wilkes  desired  to 
be  heard  at  the  bar  by  way  of  complaint  against  John 
Frewer,  Esq.,  Clerk  of  the  Crown.  The  resolution  of  the 
House,  said  Glynn,  had  been  illegal ;  the  people  would  not 
be  easy  till  their  rights  were  restored  ;  nor  need  he  tell 
them  in  what  derision  Parliament  was  held.  He  then 
moved  to  call  Wilkes  to  make  good  the  matter  of  his 
complaint  on  the  refusal  of  his  certificate.  Alderman 
Sawbridge  seconded  the  motion,  and  said  he  had  the  same 
abhorrence  of  their  proceedings  that  he  had  ever  had. 
Dyson  replied,  that  it  was  unusual  to  hear  a  complaint  that 
had  never  been  made,  but  could  have  no  objection  if  the 
Serjeant  chose  the  motion  should  go  with  all  its  imper- 
fections on  its  head.  Glynn  answered,  that  he  had  no 
intention  to  make  the  motion  ineffectual :  if  Dyson  would 
state  the  question,  he  would  second  it.  Dyson  replied  he 
had  not  said  the  motion  was  irregular.  It  was  then  re- 
jected on  a  division  of  227  to  124. 

Sir  George  Saville  then  moved  the  question  he  had 
formerly  proposed,  for  a  bill  for  more  effectually  securing 
the  right  of  electors  with  regard  to  the  eligibility  of  per- 
sons to  serve  in  Parliament.  Dowdswell  seconded  the 
motion  ;  he  said  the  notoriety  of  the  injustice  shown  on 
the  Middlesex  election  called  for  prevention  of  such  prac- 
tices any  more.  If  the  nation  was  at  the  eve  of  a  war, 
what  a  situation  would  the  country  be  in  with  the  minds 


I90       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [April 

of  the  people  alienated  in  the  manner  they  were !  As 
soon  as  the  sheriffs  had  summoned  Wilkes,  it  went  forth 
that  the  House  was  not  to  be  called  over.  As  soon  as  his 
letter  was  mentioned,  the  House  was  struck  with  a  panic, 
and  the  order  of  the  day  was  called  for  to  prevent  any 
discussion  on  Wilkes.  Had  the  order  for  apprehending 
the  printer  of  his  letter  been  put  into  execution  ?  Were 
not  speeches  printed  daily,  and  did  the  House  dare  to  take 
notice  of  them  ?  No ;  they  had  made  too  free  with  their 
constituents.  Lord  North  said  it  would  be  misspending 
the  time  of  the  House  to  enter  into  arguments  that  had 
been  so  often  talked  over ;  but  he  rose  to  inform  the 
honourable  gentleman  (Dowdswell)  tkat  the  armament  of 
the  French  was  laid  aside.  The  people  at  large  were 
not  to  be  judged  of  by  the  Livery  and  Common  Council 
of  London,  nor  by  the  company  that  had  attended  Wilkes 
down  to  the  House  that  morning,  nor  by  the  majority  of 
those  that  chose  the  minority  of  the  House.  Members 
went  down  to  be  re-elected  with  the  additional  crime  of 
having  taken  a  place,  and  yet  succeeded  in  their  elections. 
Newgate  would  be  a  reward  to  Wilkes.  The  liberties 
that  had  been  taken  with  Government  were  owing  to  the 
mild  and  cautious  behaviour  of  the  Administration.  T. 
Townshend  said  he  thanked  the  noble  Lord  for  his  good 
news,  though  he  still  thought  a  war  not  very  distant.  He 
believed  his  Lordship  had  had  a  mind  to  laugh  away  the 
question.  Burke  added  that  the  climate  of  the  House 
was  changed  as  soon  as  the  name  of  Wilkes  was  men- 
tioned ;  the  doors  were  barricaded,  and  strangers  were 
refused  admittance.  Sir  G.  Saville's  motion  was  rejected 
by  20I  to  151.  Lord  North  acquainted  the  House  that, 
in  a  few  days,  he  hoped  to  lay  before  them  regulations  of 
the  East  India  Company. 

The  war  with  France  thus  vanished  on  the  sixth  day 
of  its  appearance.  Could  any  sober  man  believe  it  had 
been  even  in  contemplation  ?     Orders  for  fitting  out  our 


1773]  FEAR   OF   WAR   UNFOUNDED  191 

fleet  had  been  given  on  the  19th,  or  i8th  at  soonest. 
They  were  published  on  the  21st.  The  command  had 
been  given  to  Sir  Charles  Saunders  on  the  23rd,  and  on 
the  26th  it  was  declared  that  France  had  already  promised 
to  lay  aside  her  armament.  Supposing  we  had  made  a 
serious  remonstrance  against  their  fleet  sailing,  it  must 
have  been  very  few  days,  if  any,  previous  to  the  orders 
for  equipping  our  own  fleet,  or  an  answer  would  have 
come  sooner.  Or  was  France  so  terrified  with  our  menaces 
(menaces  from  so  pacific  a  Court !)  that  she  did  not  take 
an  instant  to  deliberate,  but  obeyed  our  mandate  almost 
sooner  than  the  courier  could  return?  Was  our  Court 
grown  so  very  vigorous,  so  very  martial,  that  no  man 
could  come  up  to  their  spirit  but  the  most  determined 
anti-Frenchman  in  the  navy,  and  he  in  the  Opposition, 
and  favourite  of  Lord  Chatham  ?  Was  it  to  that  Lord 
that  they  wished  to  point  and  direct  the  eyes  of  the 
nation  ?  Had  France  offered  to  pay  a  great  sum  to  our 
East  India  Company  on  no  conditions  ?  Had  they  made 
us  no  overtures  of  alliance,  given  not  a  single  hint  from 
whence  we  could  conjecture,  before  last  week,  that  she  did 
not  look  tranquilly  on  the  renewal  of  the  war  between 
Russia  and  the  Turks  ?  Or  was  France  indeed  so  sunk, 
that,  having  rekindled  that  war,  she  was  glad  to  plead  to 
the  Turks,  whom  she  had  promised  to  support,  that  we 
intimidated  her?  What  had  given  them  such  terror  of 
our  King,  or  Administration  ?  Was  it  the  pusillanimity 
with  which  we  had  made  peace,  and  sacrificed  such  im- 
portant conquests  to  purchase  ?  Or  was  it  the  authority 
with  which  the  House  of  Commons  supported  itself  against 
the  sheriffs  and  Wilkes ;  or  the  phlegm  with  which  the 
Parliament  heard  its  jurisdiction  denied  and  contemned 
by  the  people  of  Boston  ?  When  Lord  Mansfield  pre- 
dominated in  the  Cabinet,  when  his  nephew  was  Am- 
bassador at  Paris,  and  Lord  Chatham  was  in  disgrace 
and  in  the  country,  he  must  be  credulous  indeed  who  can 


192       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [April 

believe  that  we  meant  war,  or  that  France  feared  we 
would  make  it ! 

loth.  At  a  meeting  of  the  freeholders  of  Middlesex, 
summoned  by  the  sheriffs  at  Mile  End,  strong  resolutions 
of  adhering  to  Wilkes's  election  were  voted,  and  thanks 
returned  to  him,  the  Sheriffs,  to  Serjeant  Glynn,  and  to 
Sir  George  Saville,  for  their  late  behaviour ;  but  great 
altercation  and  reproaches  broke  out  between  the  factions 
of  Wilkes  and  Horne,^  the  latter  of  whom  was  treated 
with  much  indignity  by  the  adherents  of  the  former. 
Vide  Home's  account  in  the  London  Chronicle  of  May  ist. 

The  same  day  at  a  General  Court  of  Proprietors  of 
East  India  stock,  the  Duke  of  Richmond  persuaded  them 
to  petition  Parliament  against  the  arbitrary  resolutions  of 
the  House  of  Commons  that  affected  their  territorial  rights, 
and  to  desire  that  those  rights  might  be  previously  settled. 

SUPPLEMENT 

London,  April  i^tk,  1773. 
The  speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons  having  sent  the  Sheriff 
of  Middlesex  the  following  letter  : — 

From  the  House  of  Commons^  "jth  April,  1773. 

oIRj 

I  am  commanded  by  the  House  of  Commons  to  acquaint 
you  that  you  are,  immediately  upon  the  receipt  of  this,  to  sum- 
mon the  representatives  of  your  county,  and  boroughs  within  the 
same,  to  attend  their  service  in  Parliament  on  Monday,  the  26th 
day  of  this  instant  April ;  the  House  of  Commons  intending  to 
proceed  with  the  utmost  severity  against  such  of  their  members 
as  shall  then  neglect  to  attend  the  service  of  the  House.  And 
you  are  to  give  me  an  account  of  the  receipt  of  this,  and  what 
you  have  done  therein^  upon  pain  of  incurring  the  displeasure 

of  the  said  House. 

I  am.  Sir, 

Your  humble  servant, 

Fletcher  Norton. 

*  **  Brentford,  the  bishopric  of  Parson  Home"  ("  Heroic  Epistle"). — D. 


1773]         THE   SPEAKER   AND   THE  SHERIFFS  193 

The  Sheriffs,  in  pursuance  thereto,  yesterday  summoned  the 
several  representatives  for  London,  Middlesex,  and  West- 
minster, and  sent  the  following  letter  to  the  Speaker  : — 

Sir, 

In  consequence  of  your  direction  to  us  in  the  name  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  we  have  given  the  proper  notice  to 

Sir  Robert  Ladbroke,  Knt.,  the  Right  Hon.  Thomas  Harley,  and 

Barlow  Trecothick,  Esq.,  representatives  of  London. 
John  Wilkes,  Esq.,  and  John  Glynn,  Esq.,  Knights  of  the  Shire 

for  the  County  of  Middlesex. 
And  to  Earl  Percy  and  Sir  Robert  Bernard,  Bart.,  representatives 
of  Westminster. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  most  obedient  humble  servants, 

Richard  Oliver,  Sheriff. 
Watkin  Lewes,  Sheriff. 

London,  April  21st,  1773. 
The  printer,  by  order  of  Mr.  Wilkes,  gives  the  following  letter  to 
the  public  from  an  attested  copy. 

To  the  Right  Honourable  Sir  Fletcher  Norton^  Knight^ 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons. 

(copy.) 

gjj^  Primers  Court,  April  20th,  1773. 

In  pursuance  of  your  orders  to  the  Sheriff  of  Middlesex 
on  the  7th  of  this  month  to  summon  the  representatives  of  this 
county,  I  have  received  a  letter  from  Richard  Oliver,  Esq.,  and 
Sir  Watkin  Lewes,  requiring  my  "attendance  in  the  House  of 
Commons  on  the  26th  day  of  this  instant  April,"  with  a  declara- 
tion "  that  the  House  of  Commons  intend  to  proceed  with  the 
utmost  severity  against  such  of  their  members  as  shall  then 
neglect  to  attend  the  service  of  the  House." 

The  two  gentlemen.  Sir,  as  well  as  every  man  of  sense  and 

principle  in  the  kingdom,  could  not  entertain  a  doubt  that  the 

legal  members  for  Middlesex  were  Mr.  Glynn  and  myself,  the 

persons  who  were  chosen  into  Parliament  by  a  majority  of  the 

I.— o 


194       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [April 

freeholders.  The  summonses  in  consequence  issued  to  us  by 
their  express  directions.  The  sentiments,  however,  of  the  House 
of  Commons  appear  to  me  very  different,  and  not  less  in  direct 
opposition  to  every  idea  of  justice  than  to  the  rights  of  the 
people.  It  is  too  evident  they  mean  a  continuation  of  their 
former  injuries  to  the  county  of  Middlesex  and  the  nation  at 
large,  by  their  still  suffering  Mr.  Luttrell  to  sit  in  Parliament,  the 
pretended  representative  of  freeholders  who  voted  against  him. 
In  this  spirit  of  injustice  they  intended  the  summons  should  issue 
to  a  gentleman  who  has  no  pretence  to  a  seat  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  but  finds  his  usurpation  supported  by  their  fraud  and 
violence. 

I  have  not  been  remiss.  Sir,  on  this  occasion  in  duty  to  my 
worthy  constituents  and  to  my  country.  I  neglected  no  oppor- 
tunity of  demanding  the  seat  to  which  I  was  so  honourably 
chosen,  nor  have  I  failed  to  protest  frequently,  both  to  the 
Parliament  and  nation,  against  this  injustice  done  to  the  free- 
holders of  the  county  of  Middlesex,  as  being  suffered  to  be 
represented  only  in  part  by  Mr.  Glynn,  although  with  the  highest 
reputation  to  himself,  and  the  most  essential  benefit  to  the  public. 
On  the  27th  of  January,  1769,  I  demanded,  in  person,  at  the  bar 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  to  be  admitted  and  sworn  in  as  one 
of  the  knights  of  the  shire  for  this  county.  In  a  letter  to  you, 
Sir,  as  Speaker,  on  the  20th  March,  1771,  I  declared:  "In  the 
name  of  the  freeholders  of  Middlesex,  I  again  demand  my  seat 
in  Parliament,  having  the  honour  of  being  freely  chosen,  by  a 
very  great  majority,  one  of  the  representatives  for  the  said 
county.  I  am  ready  to  take  the  oaths  prescribed  by  law,  and  to 
give  in  my  qualification  as  knight  of  the  shire."  I  now  to  you, 
Sir,  as  Speaker,  renew  the  same  claim  in  the  strongest  manner, 
for  the  injured  people  of  England,  and  my  constituents,  the 
freeholders  of  the  county  of  Middlesex.  I  will  never  cease  to 
support  with  spirit  the  clear  right  I  derive  from  them  by  all 
constitutional  modes  of  redress,  till  every  the  most  minute  trace 
of  the  late  flagitious  proceedings  be  utterly  done  away,  and  the 
guilt  fully  expiated. 

The  people,  Sir,  are  anxious  that  the  House  should  embrace 
the  opportunity,  which  now  naturally  offers,  of  reviewing  their 


1773]        WILKES'S  LETTER  TO  THE  SPEAKER  195 

conduct,  of  doing  a  necessary  piece  of  justice  by  rescinding  that 
arbitrary  resolution  of  May  8th,  1769,  which  virtually  repeals  the 
Great  Charter  and  the  Bill  of  Rights  in  the  important  point  of 
the  freedom  of  election,  "that  Henry  Lawes  Luttrell,  Esq.,  is 
duly  elected  a  knight  of  the  shire  for  the  county  of  Middlesex." 
While  this  resolution  remains  in  the  Journals  of  the  House,  I 
assert  that  the  House  of  Commons,  in  the  person  of  one  man 
illegally  deprived  of  his  seat  in  Parliament,  have  disfranchised  all 
the  people  of  England,  and,  in  the  person  of  another,  have 
assumed  to  themselves  the  right  of  nominating  to  any  county, 
city,  or  borough,  in  defiance  of  the  legal  electors.  The  right  of 
election  is  in  the  people,  which  they  hold  absolutely  independent 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  who  are  only  the  guardians  of  that 
and  every  other  less  sacred  right.  The  present  majority  have 
betrayed  their  trust,  and  given  up  those  invaluable  privileges 
which  they  were  chosen  to  defend  and  protect.  Our  ancestors 
held  the  freedom  of  election,  subject  only  to  the  law  of  the  land, 
to  be  of  the  essence,  as  well  as  the  nobler  part,  of  the  franchise. 
Their  posterity  have  been  robbed  of  this  first,  this  distinguishing 
and  favourite  honour  of  Englishmen,  by  a  venal  senate  hitherto 
with  impunity. 

It  is  scarcely  possible  to  imagine  a  precedent  more  fatal  to  the 
free  constitution  of  any  state,  or  more  alarming  to  the  members 
themselves,  who,  indulging  in  supine  ease  and  luxury  amid  the 
cries  of  the  starving  poor,  unfeeling  as  unrepenting,  now  glory  in 
the  rich  spoils  of  this  ignoble  victory  over  their  bleeding  country, 
and,  perhaps,  their  posterity.  I  wish  to  awaken  them  by  a  sense 
of  their  own  danger,  since  they  are  deaf  to  the  voice  of  truth  and 
liberty.  Should  the  resolution  I  have  mentioned  not  be  rescinded, 
the  precedent  is  at  hand  to  justify  the  further  violence  of  any 
minion  or  minister  against  themselves,  on  the  sHghtest  act  of 
disobedience  or  neglect.  It  is  not  necessary  to  call  in  a  jury  of 
our  countrymen  to  try  the  fact  on  oath.  A  complaisant  and 
corrupt  majority  may  be  induced,  after  a  mock  examination  of 
two  or  three  witnesses  not  sworn,  to  vote  any  man,  obnoxious  to 
a  despotic  court  or  ministry,  guilty  of  a  libel,  even  against  a 
profligate  peer,  to  expel  him  the  House,  and  adopt  in  his  room 
some  forward  slave  of  power,  who  will  court  and  kiss  the  base 


196       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [April 

chains  forged  by  a  tyrant,  without  any  appeal  having  been  made 
by  the  party  pretending  to  be  aggrieved  by  the  libel  either  to  the 
laws  of  the  land  or  of  honour.  Such  a  precedent  is  now  on 
record,  the  most  admired  page  in  the  thirty  folio  volumes  of  the 
Journals,  and  engraven  on  the  cankered  hearts  of  our  modern 
courtiers  and  ministers. 

The  reverence  I  have  for  Parliaments,  Sir,  has  induced  me  to 
state  the  mischiefs  with  which  we  are  threatened  should  the 
resolution  not  be  rescinded.  By  the  servile  and  iniquitous 
conduct  of  the  present  House  of  Commons,  the  regard  of  the 
people  to  that  part  of  our  constitution  is  visibly  weakened.  The 
majority  of  the  members  are  abhorred  as  the  instruments  of 
ministerial  tyranny,  not  revered  as  the  protectors  of  the  rights  of 
the  nation.  They  are  become  odious  as  well  as  criminal;  for, 
from  the  meanest  and  most  interested  motives,  they  have  totally 
subverted  the  constitution,  and  effected  an  absolute  dissolution 
of  that  fair  and  equal  system  of  power  by  which  we  have  hitherto 
been,  and  alone  can  be,  legally  governed.  They  have  fallen  into 
the  lowest  state  of  humiliation  and  contempt.  If,  however,  they 
persevere,  in  the  violation  of  our  fundamental  rights,  if  they 
continue  actuated  by  the  same  spirit  of  usurpation  and  lawless 
violence,  one  hope  still  remains,  the  wisdom  and  virtue  of 
a  future  independent  Parliament,  which  cannot  fail  soon  to  give 
vigour  and  success  to  the  honest  efforts  of  all  real  patriots  for 
the  restoration  of  the  constitution,  and  to  pour  just  vengeance 
on  their  guilty  predecessors. 

I  am.  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

John  Wilkes. 

Right  Honourable  Sir  Fletcher  Norton^ 

Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons, 


1773] 


MAY 


ird. 


PETITION  of  the  Court  of  Proprietors  presented 
to  the  House,  and  ordered  to  lie  on  the  table. 
Lord  North  moved  for  leave  to  bring  in  a  bill  to 
regulate  the  affairs  of  the  Company  at  home 
and  abroad,  and  he  stated  the  chief  correctives  he  had  in 
view.  Lord  Clive  then  spoke  for  two  hours  and  a  half  on 
his  own  case,  and  was  heard  with  the  utmost  attention, 
and,  though  he  did  not  convince,  astonished  and  gained 
the  admiration  of  all  his  audience.  It  was  not  a  piece 
of  regular  and  set  oratory,  but  the  artful  effusions  of 
a  man,  master  of  his  cause,  of  himself,  and  of  the 
passions  of  others,  which  he  raised,  interested,  or  amused, 
as  he  found  necessary.  He  was  bold  and  seemingly  frank, 
rather  than  apologising ;  and  as  secure  of  having  gained 
sufficient  support,  or  above  danger,  from  his  credit  or  the 
timidity  of  his  judges,  or  impotence  of  his  adversaries,  he 
dealt  his  censures  liberally,  nay,  seemingly  without  dis- 
crimination ;  and  though  he  appeared  to  have  gained 
wealth  enough  to  indemnify  him,  he  assumed  great  merit 
from  having  acquired  no  more,  attributing  to  moderation 
what  probably  had  been  the  effect  of  his  prudence.  His 
allusions  and  applications  were  happy,  and  when  he  was 
vulgar  he  was  rarely  trivial.  Scorn  of  his  enemies  and 
even  of  his  judges  escaped,  yet  did  but  make  him  more 
formidable ;  and  while  the  Ministers  and  the  Parliament 
sunk  before  him,  he  shone  eminently  as  a  real  great  man, 
who  had  done  great  things,  and  who  had  the  merit  of  not 
having  committed  more  (perhaps  not  worse)  villanies, 
when  it  appeared  that  he  had  known  how  to  be  more 

197 


198       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

guilty,  even  with  impunity.  Little  reply  was  made,  and 
some  even  flattered  him. 

It  was  notorious,  however,  that  he  owed  his  indemnity 
neither  to  innocence  nor  eloquence.  Lord  North  was  an 
upright  man,  but  of  no  decisive  rigour.  The  Opposition 
were  disposed  to  court  Lord  Clive  rather  than  arraign 
him.  It  was  suspected  that  he  had  had  recourse  to  private 
corruption  of  some  of  the  secret  junto  at  Court,  and  it 
came  out  before  the  Secret  Committee  that  in  1766  he  had 
obliged  the  Great  Mogul,  his  tool,  to  write  a  letter  to  the 
King,  telling  his  Majesty  that  he  had  sent  him  a  rich 
present  of  diamonds.  "  I  may  write  the  letter,"  said  the 
Mogul,  "  but  you  know  I  have  no  diamonds." — "  Do  you 
write  the  letter,"  said  Clive,  "  and  I  will  find  diamonds." 
He  did  :  he  plundered  a  Nabob.  One  of  the  diamonds 
was  alone  worth  12,000/.  Thurlow,  a  proper  bloodhound 
to  pursue  such  a  tiger,  offered  to  take  up  Lord  Clive, 
as  Attorney-General,  and  made  out  the  charge.  Wedder- 
burn,  the  Solicitor-General,  no  honester  than  the  accuser 
or  the  criminal,  was  a  warm  advocate  for  the  latter,  and 
had  better  interest  with  the  ruling  cabal.  Lord  North 
wavered  and  inclined  to  middle  measures.  Thurlow 
disdained  to  lend  himself  to  modified  proceedings.  Men 
of  more  virtue  were  afraid  of  retrospects  and  laws  ex  post 
facto,  and  saw  too  much  promiscuous  criminality  to  think 
it  just  to  select  a  single  though  capital  delinquent.  Lord 
Clive  had  urged  that  he  had  had  opportunities  of  making 
the  vastest  fortune  that  could  have  been  acquired  since  the 
fall  of  the  Roman  republic.  His  case  proved  the  simili- 
tude of  the  times.  With  the  frankness  of  Julius  Caesar  he 
promised  himself  an  escape  like  Verres.  The  innocent 
alone  do  not  escape  in  such  times.  The  public  are  the 
victims,  when  great  men  dare,  and  when  Government  is 
timid,  and  good  men  tender. 

On  the  loth  the  scene  began  to  open,  or  rather  the 
drama  to  proceed,  and  its  outset  was  indeed  extraordinary, 


1773]  BURGOYNE'S  ATTACK   ON   CLIVE  199 

both  from  a  revolution  in  opinions  unprecedentedly  pre- 
cipitate, from  the  magnitude  of  the  object  determined,  and 
from  the  inconsideration  with  which  it  was  decided.  Lord 
North  had  kept  himself  clear  from  acting  as  a  party ;  yet 
it  was  suspected  that  he  had  privately  encouraged  General 
Burgoyne  (become  an  enthusiast  against  Lord  Clive)  to 
proceed.  The  Bedford  party ^  at  least  showed  themselves 
his  enemies  without  reserve.  Lord  North,  however,  had 
taken  his  measures  so  loosely  that  he  checked  Thurlow 
from  bearing  a  part  in  the  debate  I  am  going  to  mention 
till  late  in  the  day,  changed  his  own  opinion,  at  least  his 
conduct,  in  the  course  of  the  debate,  had  consulted  no 
members  previously  at  a  meeting,  and  with  his  usual  indif- 
ference slept  during  some  of  the  most  interesting  parts  of 
the  discussion.  General  Burgoyne  began  his  attack  with 
bitter  invectives  on  Clive's  most  glaring  crimes,  particularly 
on  his  enormous  bribe  to  Omichund,  the  Nabob's  minister, 
to  procure  the  assassination  of  his  master.  He  recapitu- 
lated other  treacheries  and  perfidies  in  which  Clive  had 
almost  gloried,  at  least  only  palliated  as  necessary  strokes 
of  policy.  Burgoyne  then  read  three  resolutions  he  pro- 
posed to  move :  First,  that  all  acquisitions  made  under  the 
influence  of  a  military  force,  or  by  treaty  with  foreign  force, 
do  of  right  belong  to  the  State.  Second,  that  to  appro- 
priate acquisitions  acquired  under  the  influence  of  a 
military  force,  or  by  treaty,  &c.,  to  a  private  use,  is  illegal. 
Third,  that  great  sums  of  money  have  been  obtained  by 
such  means  from  the  Sovereign  princes  in  India.  These 
were  great  questions  indeed.  The  first  pronounced  on  the 
capital  point,  the  point  of  Sovereignty ;  a  question  eagerly 
contended  for  by  Lord  Chatham,  denied  by  the  East  India 
Company,  claimed  and  ambitioned  by  the  Crown,  staved 
off  by  Lord  North,  and  that  ought  certainly  to  be  settled 

^  Rigby  particularly  hated  Lord  Clive  ever  since  Mr.  Grenville's  Adminis- 
tration, when  they  had  saved  Governor  Walsh's  election,  Clive's  friend  ;  and 
the  moment  the  election  was  safe,  Lord  Clive  had  turned  against  them. 


200       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

on  the  most  mature  deliberation.  The  second  declared 
crimes  which,  from  the  novel  nature  of  the  war  in  India, 
could  scarce  come  under  any  known  law,  it  being  in  fact  a 
war  of  invasion  on  an  amicable  power,  though  metamor- 
phosed by  military  merchants  into  a  war  with  rebel  Nabobs, 
who  had  usurped  the  dominion  of  provinces  committed  to 
their  government,  and  which  those  our  martial  merchants 
had  converted  into  an  empire  for  themselves.  The  third 
question  condemned  unnamed  persons  of  peculation,  on  the 
mere  report  of  the  Select  Committee  headed  by  BCirgoyne, 
without  producing  any  evidence  but  the  narrative,  or  speci- 
fying the  accused,  or  hearing  them  in  their  defence,  though 
they  would  yet  be  entitled  to  trial.  Wedderburn,  with  all 
the  arts  of  his  profession,  and  all  the  resources  of  oratory, 
exposed  in  a  long  deduction  the  vague  and  dangerous  im- 
propriety of  the  motions,  especially  of  the  first,  and  made 
such  sensible  impression  on  the  House,  that  he  assumed 
triumph  on  the  victory  gained  for  his  client.  He  did  not, 
he  said,  advise  dereliction  of  the  prosecution,  but  demanded 
time,  suspense,  and  sober  correction  of  so  large  and  im- 
portant a  question,  for  which  reason  he  moved  for  the 
previous  question ;  casting  out  at  the  same  time  threats  of 
recrimination  on  Burgoyne,  who,  he  hinted,  ought  to  reform 
his  own  character  ere  he  commenced  reformer.  Lord 
North  alleged  the  question  was  too  ill  digested,  and  Dyson 
stated  the  informalities  of  it ;  and  though  Dunning,  Corn- 
wall, and  others,  bore  hard  on  Clive,  the  tone  of  the 
House  ran  irresistibly  for  delay  and  temper.  Lord  Clive 
said  little,  and  with  arrogant  haughtiness,  that  did  not 
conceal  strong  dismay,  referred  to  his  great  services,  to 
the  approbation  of  the  King  and  the  public,  and  to  the 
insolent  defences  he  had  already  made ;  as  if  services 
covered  all  crimes,  as  if  the  public  did  not  always  re-echo 
the  first  shouts  of  victory,  as  if  the  honours  bestowed  by 
the  Crown  had  not  been  at  least  as  much  a  retainer  for 
private  services  as  the  reward  of  merit,  and  as  if  avowing 


1773]        DEBATES   ON   CLIVE'S   PROCEEDINGS        201 

plunder  and  assassination  were  an  adequate  apology.  At 
last,  while  Dyson  was  labouring  to  find  milder  and  more 
technical  terms,  Thurlow  rose,  answered  Wedderburn's 
arguments,  and  in  a  moment  revived  and  heightened  the 
odium  against  Lord  Clive.  This  was  at  past  ten  at  night. 
Still  nobody  doubted  but  that  the  matter  was  to  be  post- 
poned ;  but  no  new  words  being  found,  and  the  Speaker 
being  appealed  to,  what  question  was  to  be  proposed,  it 
appeared  that  Wedderburn's  motion  for  the  previous  ques- 
tion, or  order  of  the  day,  I  forget  which,  had  not  been 
seconded  and  could  not  therefore  be  put,  and  there  re- 
mained none  but  Burgoyne's,  which  had  not  been 
mitigated  or  corrected.  Young  Mr.  Cavendish,  however, 
said  he  seconded  Wedderburn's  motion,  but  being  a  very 
absurd  man,  he  only  drew  ridicule  on  what  had  no  other 
support.  It  happened  too  that  the  House  was  exceedingly 
crowded.  It  would  have  been  unpopular  to  exclude  many 
who  might  be  proprietors  of  India  stock,  and  unpolite, 
as  many  ladies  were  present  too.  Yet  the  heat  was  in- 
tolerable, and  the  younger  men,  who  had  gone  away  to 
dinner  and  returned  flushed  with  wine,  growing  impatient 
as  the  interesting  part  of  the  debate  was  over,  they 
roared  impetuously  for  the  question.^  There  was  no 
question  ready  but  Burgoyne's,  for  Wedderburn's  was 
not  attended  to  ;  and  thus,  without  almost  a  negative, 
Burgoyne's  momentous  resolution,  that  had  been  aban- 
doned, was,  before  eleven  at  night,  voted  as  the  general 
sense  of  the  House  of  Commons.  In  so  tumultuous  a 
manner  was  the  Sovereignty  of  three  Imperial  vast 
provinces  transferred  from  the  East  India  Company  to 
the  Crown!  so  rashly  did  one  House  of  Parliament  decide! 
and  in  such  a  labyrinth  had  the  Ministry  involved  itself, 
a  clue  through  which  the  wisest  man  cannot  see.     And 

^  Walpole  in  a  letter  to  Mason,  May  15,  1773,  says  the  House  was  so 
very  hot,  "the  young  members  thought  it  would  melt  their  rouge  and  wither 
their  nosegays." — D. 


202       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

though  Lord  North  declared  the  resolution  should  not 
deprive  the  Company  of  the  possession  for  the  six  years 
which  had  been  promised  to  them,  still  the  right  was 
transferred,  and  a  limit  set  to  their  enjoyment  of  dominion. 
A  proof  of  the  change  appeared  in  two  days,  for  the  stock 
fell  three  per  cent.  Nor  could  Lord  North  foresee  the 
embarrassments  into  which  he  had  plunged.  The  second 
question  passed  like  the  first ;  and  though  the  third  was 
postponed  to  the  id^th^  here  were  criminals  denounced ; 
and  when  victims  are  pointed  out  to  a  turbulent  nation, 
a  Minister  runs  the  double  hazard  of  sacrificing  or  screen- 
ing them ;  and  a  line  of  prosecution  was  marked  out, 
without  precedent  to  follow,  or  any  system  of  proceeding 
digested.  Lord  Chatham  had  been  deemed,  and  was, 
absurd,  to  preclude  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  First  Lord  of 
the  Treasury,  and  Charles  Townshend,  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,  from  conducting  the  business  of  India  through 
the  House.  In  his  vapouring  way  he  had  consigned  it 
over  to  vapouring  Beckford,  crying,  "  Throw  it  into  the 
House  of  Commons  and  it  will  find  its  way."  Lord 
North  and  all  sober  men  had  condemned  so  unsystematic, 
so  unwise  a  method — the  method  adopted  now,  partially 
and  without  the  same  gigantic  though  rash  ideas.  It  will 
be  seen  whether  Lord  North  will  creep  with  more  success 
than  Lord  Chatham  flew ;  or  whether  he  can  fly  without 
wings  where  Lord  Chatham's  wings  melted. 

Nor  was  this  singular  day  without  an  interlude  almost 
as  singular.  Towards  night,  General  Burgoyne  took  up 
the  hint  of  recrimination  thrown  at  him  by  Wedderburn. 
The  latter  avowed  it,  and  said  he  had  seen,  in  a  paper 
called  Junius^  complaints  of  an  election  carried  by  military 
force.^     A   charge,  he  said,  might  be   brought   into   the 

^  It  was  Burgoyne's  at  Preston,  for  which  he  had  been  fined.  In  the  same 
paper  Burgoyne  was  treated  as  a  gamester  and  sharper.  [Burgoyne  was 
quartered  at  Preston  when  he  married  Lady  Charlotte  Stanley.  Her  father, 
the  Earl  of  Derby,  was  indignant  at  the  match,  for  the  penniless  young  officer 
was  the  natural  son  of  Lord  Bingley.  The  parties,  however,  were  soon 
reconciled. — D.l 


1773]  WEDDERBURN    AND   BURGOYNE  203 

House  on  such  foundation.  "  I  am  now  personally 
marked,"  said  Burgoyne,  "  and  rejoice  in  the  opportunity. 
I  have  long  groaned  in  secret  for  an  occasion  of  venting 
myself  against  those  scandalous  aspersions ;  and  if  that 
wretch  Junius  is  lurking  here  in  any  corner  of  this  House, 
I  now  tell  him  to  his  face  he  is  an  assassin,  a  liar,  and 
a  coward."  But  what  excuse  for  Wedderburn !  The 
Court,  Lord  Mansfield  in  courts  of  judicature,  every  man 
almost  had  pronounced  the  writings  of  Junius  libels.  The 
Attorney-General  first,  the  Solicitor- General  next,  are  the 
prosecutors  of  libels.  Here  was  the  Solicitor-General 
ranking  the  aspersions  of  that  writer  against  the  tender 
honour  of  an  officer,  an  officer  that  had  distinguished 
himself,  and  that  was  countenanced  by  the  Crown,  as 
matter  for  parliamentary  charge  against  a  member  of 
Parliament!  Would  Wedderburn  plead  against  the  author 
and  printer  ?  would  he  condemn  the  paper,  and  yet  make 
use  of  it  ?  would  he — rather,  what  would  he  not  do  ?  He 
had  been  against  Wilkes,  had  drawn  up  the  remonstrance 
of  the  county  of  York  in  behalf  of  Wilkes,  and  is 
Solicitor-General ! 

14//^.  The  Court  of  East  India  Proprietors  voted,  319 
to  149,  not  to  agree  with  the  Government's  plan.  They 
were  chiefly  led  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Governor 
Johnston,  though  these  two  did  not  agree,  the  latter  even 
telling  the  Duke  that  he  hoped  his  Grace  did  not  mean  to 
make  the  India  Company  an  engine  of  party.  Lord 
North,  though  so  routed  in  his  measures,  affected  to  talk 
in  a  high  strain,  and  threatened  to  force  the  Company  to 
pay  their  debt  to  the  Government,  since  they  would  not 
accept  the  latter's  terms. 

I  must  return  to  the  history  of  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of 
Gloucester,  which  became  very  important.  The  servility 
of  all  who  looked  up  to  the  Court,  and  the  timidity  of  the 
Opposition,  who,  though  with  little  hopes,  looked  up  thither 
too,  had,  after  the  first  demonstrations  of  respect  from  no 


204       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

considerable  number,  left  the  Duke  and  Duchess  pretty 
much  abandoned — a  foul  reflection  on  an  independent 
nation !  The  nobility  of  France  had  recently  testified 
attachment  to  a  fallen  minister/  and  continued  to  resort 
to  him,  even  to  braving  their  all-puissant  Monarch.  The 
nobility  of  England  shrunk  from  the  King's  own  brother. 
And  on  what  pretence  ? — for  having  matched  with  a  woman 
of  their  own  rank !  Some  had  gone  to  her,  repented,  and 
went  no  more.  Some  made  paltry  excuses.  The  Duke 
refused  to  receive  any  more  who  should  not  visit  the 
Duchess  as  well  as  him.  Lord  and  Lady  Waldegrave,^ 
her  first  husband's  brother,  and  sister-in-law,  whether  to 
insult  or  soften  her,  after  their  neglect,  would  have  visited 
her  daughters.  She  very  properly  refused  to  allow  of 
such  a  visit.  The  Countess  of  Powis,^  niece  to  the  Duchess 
and  to  Lord  Waldegrave,  and  who  had  been  the  warmest 
assertor  of  the  marriage,  sent  her  daughter  (her  lord  dying 
at  that  very  time)  with  unusual  ceremony  to  make  excuses 
for  not  paying  her  duty  till  she  quitted  her  weeds.  The 
Duchess,  in  acknowledgment  of  the  attention,  sent  her 
daughters  to  visit  the  young  lady  :  but  Lady  Powis,  by  an 
excess  of  absurdity  and  meanness,  though  in  the  most 
affluent  circumstances,  thought  better  on  it,  and  neither 
went  herself  to  the  Duchess,  nor  suffered  her  daughter  to 
return  the  visit  of  her  cousins,  though  they  were  children 
of  a  senior  Earl — I  am  sorry  such  trifles  are  characteristics 
of  the  debased  spirit  of  the  English  peerage.  They  are 
worthy  of  being  recorded  too,  as  the  King  and  Queen 
descended  to  court  such  sacrifices.     Their  vengeance  now 

'  The  Due  de  Choiseul. 

2  John,  Earl  Waldegrave,  and  Lady  Elizabeth  Waldegrave,  his  Countess. 
[She  was  a  daughter  of  John,  first  Earl  Gower.  Their  eldest  son  George,  fourth 
Earl  Waldegrave,  married  in  1782  his  cousin,  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester's 
eldest  daughter.— A.  F.  S.] 

^  Barbara  Herbert,  daughter  of  Lord  Edward  Herbert,  brother  of  the 
Marquis  of  Powis,  and  widow  of  Henry  Arthur  Herbert,  Earl  of  Powis  ;  her 
mother  was  Lady  Henrietta  Waldegrave,  who  afterwards  married  Mr.  Beard, 
the  singer. 


1773]     DUKE   AND   DUCHESS   OF   GLOUCESTER      205 

broke  out  in  more  glaring  colours  ;  and  passions  let  loose 
are  sure  to  appear  in  their  true  complexion,  and  almost  as 
sure  to  be  accompanied  by  folly,  as  folly  is  by  mortifica- 
tion. The  ensuing  scene  began  with  the  blackest  circum- 
stances, and  ended  with  pusillanimity  and  discomfiture. 

The  Duke  had,  so  early  as  December  7th  of  the  pre- 
ceding year,  acquainted  the  King  with  the  pregnancy  of 
the  Duchess.  No  notice  had  been  taken  of  it.  She 
reckoned  at  the  end  of  May,  or  beginning  of  June.  At 
the  beginning  of  May  a  great  cold  brought  on  the  Duke 
a  violent  attack  of  his  asthmatic  complaint,  and  reduced 
him  to  such  extreme  danger  that  Dr.  Jebbe  demanded 
another  physician.  In  that  weak  and  perilous  state,  and 
torn  with  apprehensions  for  his  wife,  and  a  child  ready  to 
be  born,  whose  state  and  provision  were  unprovided  for, 
his  Royal  Highness  sent  a  letter  by  Legrand  to  the  King, 
warning  him  of  the  Duchess's  approach  to  her  term,  and 
beseeching  his  Majesty  to  send  the  great  officers  of  the 
Council  to  the  delivery — a  demand  not  only  reasonable, 
but  prudential,  as  the  Duchess  of  Bedford  and  Lord  and 
Lady  Waldegrave  had  had  the  spiteful  insolence  to  publish 
that  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  was  not  with  child.  Lady 
Waldegrave  said,  that  it  would  prove  like  the  Duchess's 
false  pregnancy  after  her  husband's  death,  by  which  she 
had  kept  his  brother  nine  months  out  of  the  title  and 
estate.  The  fact  was  this  :  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  at 
her  first  husband  Lord  Waldegrave's  death,  had  a  disorder 
in  her  breast,  which  was  attended  by  other  circumstances 
which  made  her  believe  and  declare  herself  with  child. 
At  the  end  of  six  months,  finding  herself  not  pregnant, 
she  ordered  her  man-midwife.  Dr.  Hunter,  who  had  told  her 
she  was  not,  to  acquaint  Lord  and  Lady  Elizabeth  Walde- 
grave that  they  might  be  out  of  their  suspense,  and  assure 
themselves  they  would  enjoy  the  title  and  estate.  Dr. 
Hunter  advised  her  not  to  send  such  a  message,  as  he 
might  be  mistaken.     She  followed  his  advice — but  he  him- 


2o6       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

self  went  and  acquainted  Lady  Elizabeth  Waldegrave  with 
the  very  secret,  that  he  might  have  the  merit  of  betraying 
it,  instead  of  letting  his  patient  act  in  the  generous  and 
friendly  manner  she  had  intended.  She  underwent  a 
terrible  operation  of  several  minutes,  which  she  bore  with 
her  usual  constancy,  at  her  father's  house,  and  which 
entirely  removed  the  gathering  in  her  breast. 

The  King  put  the  letter,  addressed  to  him  by  the  Duke 
of  Gloucester,  into  his  pocket  without  vouchsafing  to  read 
it.  A  week  passed  without  an  answer.  The  Duke's 
anxiety  increased,  and  the  bad  effects  it  had  on  his  health 
alarmed  the  very  few  to  whom  he  imparted  his  distress. 
It  was  not  to  be  borne — on  the  \2th  he  wrote  again. 
Cold  silence  was  still  the  return.  The  Prince  then  sent 
Colonel  Rainsford  to  Lord  Rochford,  Secretary  of  State, 
to  press  for  an  answer.  The  King  said  to  the  Secretary 
of  State,  "  My  brother  presses  me  very  hard  !  "  "  Alas  ! " 
said  the  Duke,  when  he  was  told  of  that  complaint,  "  I 
wrote  first  in  December,  and  had  no  answer,  and  the  King 
complains  now  in  May  that  I  press  him  ! "  Lord  Roch- 
ford promised  to  bring  an  answer  the  next  day  ;  but  wrote 
to  say  the  King  wanted  time  for  more  mature  deliberation; 
but  would  send  an  answer  on  the  day  following. 

On  the  lyth  Lord  Rochford  waited  on  the  Duke  with 
the  following  message  in  writing,  which  he  delivered  to  his 
Royal  Highness :  "  Lord  Rochford  is  ordered  by  the  King 
to  acquaint  your  Royal  Highness  that  his  Majesty  has 
received  both  your  letters,  but  that  in  an  affair  of  this  con- 
sequence he  could  not  send  an  answer  until  his  Majesty 
had  given  them  mature  consideration ;  and  has  ordered 
me  to  acquaint  your  Royal  Highness,  that,  at  a  proper 
time  after  the  delivery  of  the  Duchess,  your  marriage,  as 
well  as  the  birth  of  the  child,  shall  be  properly  inquired 
into,  in  order  that  both  may  be  authenticated.  The  King 
has  ordered  me  to  say  farther  to  your  Royal  Highness, 
that  it  would  be  right  to  have  some  of  your  principal 


1773]    THE  KING  AND  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER      207 

servants  present  as  witnesses  to  testify  the  event ;  and  this 
is  the  only  part  his  Majesty  can  take  with  propriety,  for 
he  can  be  no  otherwise  concerned  than  as  to  the  legaHty 
of  the  proceeding,  as  he  cannot  but  disapprove  of  the  mar- 
riage.— May  17th,  1773." 

Let  me  stop  for  a  moment,  and  remark  this  memorable 
message,  accompanied  with  some  brutal  circumstances, 
which  I  will  mention  presently,  when  I  come  to  relate  the 
conversation  the  Duke  had  with  Lord  Rochford  after  he 
had  delivered  his  message,  which  conversation  his  Royal 
Highness  repeated  to  me  afterwards. 

The  cruelty  of  such  treatment,  when  three  lives  were 
at  stake,  the  Duke's,  the  Duchess's,  and  the  child's,  is  the 
first  glaring  feature  that  strikes  and  makes  one  shudder. 
Was  the  Duke's  crime  so  heinous  that  a  fond  brother  did 
not  hesitate  to  plunge  three  poignards  in  his  heart  ?  Was 
it  designed  to  expedite  all  three?  But,  without  diving 
into  hearts,  let  us  weigh  the  atrociousness  of  the  message ; 
and  let  the  dictator,  or  advisers,  answer  to  posterity  for 
the  legacy  of  a  civil  war,  the  possibility  of  which  at  least 
they  seemed  to  be  laying  a  foundation  for.  Was  this  the 
legacy  of  the  father  of  his  people  ?  What  were  the  friends 
that  suggested,  or  the  ministers  that  acquiesced  in,  such 
a  plan  ?  Are  the  words  too  strong  ? — compare  them  with 
the  message.  ''After  the  delivery  of  the  Duchess  the 
marriage  shall  be  properly  inquired  into."  What !  and  suffer 
a  dubious  heir  to  the  Crown  to  be  born,  after  the  pregnancy 
had  been  notified  six  months !  authenticate  the  marriage 
after  the  delivery  !  Three  lives  !  ten  thousand  lives  might 
have  been  involved  in  those  words.  What  a  thunder- 
stroke to  the  Duchess,  at  the  eve  of  childbirth,  to  tell  her 
her  marriage  would  be  questioned,  her  child's  legitimacy 
must  be  examined  !  Her  fortitude  bore  the  shock,  and 
her  anxiety  for  the  Duke's  sufferings  made  her  command 
her  temper,  and  act  with  cheerfulness — a  merit  far  superior 
to  phlegm, 


2o8       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

The  Duke,  as  haughty  as  the  proudest  of  his  race,  was 
roused  by  such  injurious  treatment.  It  awakened  all  the 
feelings  and  faculties  of  his  soul,  and  called  forth  a  fund 
of  sense  and  capacity  that  had  dozed  under  respect  for  a 
brother  he,  till  that  hour,  tenderly  loved.  With  a  mixture 
of  wisdom  and  dignity  he  sent  Lord  Rochford  the  next 
day  the  following  message  in  writing  : — 

"The  Duke  of  Gloucester  desires  Lord  Rochford  will 
present  his  humble  and  most  respectful  duty  to  the  King, 
and  acquaint  his  Majesty  that  he  has  considered  the  very 
important  message  which  he  received  yesterday  by  Lord 
Rochford,  as  maturely  as  the  shortness  of  the  time  would 
admit.  The  Duke  desires  that  Lord  Rochford  will  repre- 
sent that,  lest  the  want  of  an  authentication  of  his  marriage 
should  produce  a  disinclination  to  direct  the  attendance 
of  the  Privy  Council  at  the  Duchess's  delivery  (which  is 
his  very  earnest  and  humble  request),  it  is  the  first  object 
of  that  request  that  he  may  be  permitted  to  authenticate 
his  marriage  as  soon  as  may  be  in  any  manner  that  shall 
be  thought  requisite." 

The  King  had  not  expected  either  such  quickness  or 
firmness.  The  Duke's  extreme  decency  and  respect  had 
always  bordered  on  fear  of  his  brother  ;  and  perhaps  it  was 
so  when  in  the  King's  presence ;  but  that  awe  was  unfelt 
at  a  distance,  resentment  had  succeeded,  and  the  Duke 
was  too  shrewd  not. to  have  observed  that  magnanimity 
was  not  in  the  list  of  his  Majesty's  own  great  qualities. 
Of  this  remark  the  Duke  made  artful  use,  and  the  King 
bent  as  fast  as  the  Duke  pushed  him.  Lord  Rochford 
wrote  this  answer  to  Colonel  Rainsford  : — 

"  Lord  Rochford  presents  his  compliments  to  Colonel 
Rainsford,  and  desires  he  would  acquaint  his  Royal  High- 
ness the  Duke  of  Gloucester  that  Lord  Rochford  cannot 
have  the  honour  of  bringing  his  Royal  Highness  an 
answer  from  the  King  to  his  Royal  Highness's  message 
until  to-morrow  evening,  as  the  King  has  thought  fit  to 


1773]     THE  KING  AND  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER      209 

defer  giving  it  to  Lord  Rochford  until  to-morrow,  but 
that  at  any  hour  to-morrow  evening  that  shall  be  most 
convenient  to  his  Royal  Highness  Lord  Rochford  will 
have  the  honour  of  waiting  on  him. — May  19th,  1773." 

On  the  20th  Lord  Rochford  went  accordingly  to  the 
Duke,  and  acquainted  him  that  the  King  would  appoint 
the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,^  the  Lord  Chancellor,  and 
the  Bishop  of  London  to  inquire  into  the  marriage,  and 
to  report  their  opinions  to  him,  which  he  would  have 
entered  into  the  Council  books.  Of  the  rest  of  that  con- 
versation and  the  preceding,  I  shall  give  an  account 
presently  and  together,  not  knowing  them  precisely  sep- 
arate, as  the  Duke  blended  them  in  his  narrative  to  me, 
and  forgot  some  which  he  told  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
and  the  Bishop  of  Exeter,  with  whom  I  compared  the 
notes  I  had  taken,  till  I  had  them  acurately. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond  was  sent  for  by  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  on  that  evening  of  the  20th.  His  Royal 
Highness  told  the  Duke  the  whole,  and  acquainted  his 
Grace  with  what  till  then  had  been  secret,  that  he  had 
been  married  to  Lady  Waldegrave,  on  the  6th  of  Sep- 
tember, 1766,  by  her  own  Chaplain,  at  her  house  in  Pall 
Mall  ;  that  no  witnesses  had  been  present,  and  that  the 
Chaplain  was  dead.  He  added  that  his  brother  Cumber- 
land had  often  put  questions  to  him  on  his  marriage,  and 
that,  not  being  satisfied  by  him,  the  Duke  of  Cumberland 
had  guessed  that  all  the  common  forms  had  not  been 
observed ;  and  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  had  heard  that 
his  brother  Cumberland  had  boasted  of  his  own  marriage 
being  more  regular  in  the  ceremonial  than  his  brother 
Gloucester's,  This  the  Duke  suspected  had  reached  the 
King's  ears,  and  inspired  him  with  the  idea  of  inquiring 
into  the  marriage.     Thus  did  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester 

^  Dr.  Cornwallis  ;  the  routs  given  at  Lambeth  Palace  by  his  elegant  and 
fashionable  wife  called  forth  a  spirited  remonstrance  from  George  III.,  at  the 
instigation  of  Lady  Huntingdon. — D, 

I,— P 


2IO       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

taste  the  fruits  of  the  indiscreet  dislike  she  had  expressed 
for  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland.     The  Duke  had  already 
seen  Dunning,  who  assured  him  the  marriage  was  indis- 
solubly   valid   and   legal.      He   had    many   corroborative 
proofs,  as  will  appear,  and  had  made  several  wills  in  her 
favour,  avowing  her  his  wife.     The  Duke  had  also  com- 
municated the  transaction  with  the  King  to  Lord  George 
Germaine  and  Sir  William  Meredith.     The  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond begged  his  leave  to  inform  Lord  Rockingham  and 
me.     The  Duke  replied  that  he  meant  his  Grace  should 
tell  it  to  Lord  Rockingham  :  for  me,  he  would  consult  the 
Duchess.     He  went,  and  returning  said  the  Duchess  had 
answered  he  could  not  tell  me  unless  he  told  her  father 
too,  and  that  one  of  us  would   be  timid  ;   which   Rich- 
mond interpreting  of  me,  assured  the  Duke  he  did  not 
know    me   if   he   thought    I    was   timid  ;    and    from   his 
great  friendship  for  me  added  many  encomiums  I  did  not 
deserve.     It  would  not  have  surprised  me  if  an  ambitious 
woman,  whose  projects  of  aggrandizement  I  had  vehem- 
ently opposed,  ascribed  it  to  apprehensions.     Alas  !  I  had 
but  too  well  foreseen  the  distresses  into  which  she  would 
plunge  herself;  and  I  now  saw  with  what  intrepidity  she 
had  done  it.     I  started  when  the  Duke  of  Richmond  told 
me  she  had  had  no  witnesses  to  her  marriage.     It  is  so 
common  to  have  them  that  I  had  concluded  them  neces- 
sary, and    I   cried  out,  when  he  showed   me  the  words 
in  Lord  Rochford's  message  of  the  King's  disapproving  the 
marriage  (for  the  Duke  of  Richmond  told  me  the  whole  at 
midnight,  though  the  Duke  desired  him  to  defer  it  till 
next  day),  "  My  Lord,  those  words  are  dictated  by  Lord 
Mansfield  ;  I  know  him ;  he  inserted  in  the  preamble  of 
the  Royal  Marriage  Bill  last  year,  that  anciently  the  mar- 
riages of  the  Royal  Family  were  dependent  on  the  preroga- 
tive ;   and  he  will  now  urge  that  assertion  against  my 
niece."     The  Duke  of  Richmond  assured  me  that  Dun- 
ning said  he  would  maintain  the  legality  of  the  marriage 


1773]     LEGALITY   OF  THE   DUKE'S   MARRIAGE       211 

against  Lord  Mansfield  in  every  court  in  England ;  that 
the  common  law  required  no  witnesses ;  that  the  declara- 
tion of  the  parties  was  sufficient ;  and  that  the  Court  of 
Delegates  had  pronounced  in  favour  of  Mrs.  Hervey  but 
last  year,  though  she  could  not  remember  even  the  month 
in  which  she  was  married,  and  though  her  husband  denied 
the  marriage ;  but  having  often  acknowledged  her  as  his 
wife,  and  she  claiming  him,  the  notoriety  had  been  deemed 
sufficient.  The  Duke  too  had  been  excepted  by  the 
clause  in  Lord  Hardwicke's  Marriage  Act  which  ex- 
empted the  Royal  Family  from  the  new  law.  I  was 
satisfied.  I  saw  too  the  springs  of  the  Duchess's  conduct. 
She  had  determined  to  be  a  princess  and  to  preserve  her 
virtue.  She  satisfied  her  ambition  and  her  conscience, 
and  left  the  rest  to  chance  and  the  Duke's  honour — she 
ought  not  to  have  trusted  him.  He  owned  to  the  Bishop 
of  Exeter^  that  he  was  so  afraid  her  vanity  would  hurry 
her  to  disclose  the  marriage,  that  he  would  not  let  her 
have  witnesses,  that  she  might  not  be  able  to  prove  it. 
He  knew,  he  said,  that  he  could  and  should  do  her  justice; 
how  did  she  know  he  would  ?  Lord  Rockingham  observed 
that,  should  the  marriage  by  any  chicane  be  set  aside,  the 
King  would  be  free  not  to  make  any  royal  provision  for 
either  the  Duchess  or  the  child.  Richmond  proposed  to 
the  Marquis  that  they  should  go  to  the  Council  and  pro- 
test against  a  breach  of  the  marriage,  but  Lord  Rocking- 
was  not  so  eager. 

On  the  2\st  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  sent  the  Bishop  of 
Exeter  to  my  brother  Sir  Edward  Walpole  and  to  me, 
to  make  excuses  for  not  having  acquainted  us  sooner  with 
what  had  passed  between  the  King  and  his  Royal  High- 
ness^  but  the  Duke  said  he  had  determined  the  Court 
should  not  have  it  to  say  that  he  had  been  governed  by  the 

^  The  Bishop  was  the  Duke's  brother-in-law,  his  wife  Laura  being  the 
elder  sister  of  the  Duchess.  She  died  in  181 3,  having  survived  her  husband 
thirty-six  years. — D. 


212       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

Duchess's  relations  and  had  not  acted  from  himself.  In 
the  evening  I  went  to  his  Royal  Highness,  when,  taking  me 
into  another  chamber  alone,  he  gave  me  a  long  account 
of  his  two  conversations  with  Lord  Rochford,  in  which, 
though  the  latter  submitted  to  execute  a  most  indecent 
commission,  yet  he  professed  so  much  respect  for  the  Duke, 
that  he  even  talked  of  resigning  the  Seals  and  voting  for 
the  validity  of  his  Royal  Highness's  marriage.  The  Duke 
only  laughed  to  me  at  zeal  so  divided  to  both  sides  ; 
and  as  he  knew  the  weakness  and  prating  disposition 
of  Lord  Rochford,  he  had  encouraged  him  to  talk  away, 
checking  him  only  when  it  was  necessary  to  give  firm 
answers  to  the  King.  The  Earl  had  begun  by  telling 
him  in  so  many  words  from  the  King,  that  he  had 
asked  for  the  Privy  Councillors  only  out  of  pride — what 
accents  for  a  brother  to  send  !  and  for  a  minister  to  arti- 
culate !  "  Out  of  pride  ! "  said  the  Duke  ;  "  my  Lord, 
the  Privy  Council  can  do  me  no  honour ;  I  demand  their 
attendance,  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  King  and  the  nation. 
The  King  may,  if  he  pleases,  forbid  their  coming,  but  I 
will  summon  them,  and  they  shall  answer  it  at  their  peril 
to  the  nation  if  they  refuse.  But  the  King  advises  me  to 
summon  my  chief  servants  ;  that  is  not  his  Majesty's  busi- 
ness ;  they  are  my  servants,  and  every  one  of  them  shall 
attend.  On  my  part,  my  Lord,  let  me  tell  your  Lordship, 
and  the  rest  of  the  King's  Ministers,  that  none  of  you  shall 
dare  to  tell  the  King  that  I  am  hostile  to  his  Majesty.  I 
married  like  a  boy,  but  I  will  defend  my  marriage  like  a 
man.  Out  of  respect  to  the  King  I  concealed  it ;  to  satisfy 
him  and  the  nation  I  must  now  authenticate  it ;  and  if 
his  Majesty  does  not  forthwith  take  the  necessary  steps  for 
verifying  it,  I  myself  will  summon  the  House  of  Lords, 
will  go  thither  myself,  and  in  person  beseech  the  House 
to  press  the  King  for  despatch."  This  last  sentence  was 
uttered  in  the  first  conversation,  and  alarmed  so  much, 
that  in  the  second,  the  King  having  stooped,  as  he  was 


1773]  INTERVIEW  WITH  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER  213 

wont  to  do  after  bullying,  to  cajoling,  Lord  Rochford 
vaunted  the  King's  kind  intentions,  and  that  he  would  pre- 
fer him  in  the  army.  This  was  the  most  pitiful  piece  of 
all  regal  craft.^  He  was  determined  never  to  make  the 
Duke  Commander-in-Chief;  having  the  first  regiment  of 
Guards,  he  could  not  go  higher ;  the  whole  of  that  paltry 
offer  could  consist  but  in  a  government  that  could  not  be 
worth  a  Prince's  acceptance ;  so  far  from  it,  the  Duke 
rejected  the  tender  with  scorn,  and  bid  the  Earl  tell  the 
King  that  he  would  not  keep  his  regiment  unless  he 
found  more  justice.  I  told  the  Duke  that  Lord  Hertford 
had  been  with  me  that  morning,  and  I  suspected  by 
command ;  that  he  had  said  to  me,  if  anything  sinister 
happened  to  the  Duke,  he  dared  to  say  the  King  would 
take  care  of  the  Duchess  and  the  child,  but  would  go  no 
farther ;  that  is,  would  never  receive  her  at  Court.  The 
Duke  said,  he  believed  there  was  foundation  for  this  re- 
port, for  he  had  had  the  same  intelligence  another  way.  In 
truth  I  trusted  to  it  so  little,  or  to  any  Royal  promises,  that 
I  had  pressed  my  brother,  the  Bishop  of  Exeter,  and  others 
about  the  Duke,  to  persuade  him  to  make  submissions  to 
the  King,  and  get  to  Court,  even  without  the  Duchess, 
for,  the  Duke  once  pardoned,  the  King  could  not  avoid 
making  a  proper  settlement  on  the  Duchess  and  the  issue. 
My  brother  asked  me  if  I  would  have  the  Duke  make 
mean  submissions !  I  replied,  "The  King  is  his  King  as  well 
as  his  elder  brother.     If  you  had  quarrelled  with  me,  even 

^  A  similar  instance  happened  not  long  after.  Mr.  Adair  the  surgeon 
offered  his  Majesty  a  portrait  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester.  The  King  thanked 
him  extremely,  and  ordered  his  dear  brother's  picture  to  be  hung  in  his  own 
bedchamber.  This  was  taking  after  his  father.  When  Frederick  Prince  of 
Wales  had  taken  the  Princess  from  Hampton  Court,  though  in  labour,  and  in 
the  most  insulting  manner  to  the  King  a:i(i  Queen,  the  Queen  went  the  next 
morning  to  see  the  Princess  at  St.  James's.  The  Prince  led  her  downstairs 
without  speaking  to  her,  but  when  he  came  into  the  street,  and  before  the 
mob,  he  knelt  down  in  the  dirt  and  kissed  her  hand.  [Walpole  has  antedated 
the  above  incident.  It  was  not  on  the  "  next  morning,"  but  on  the  second  visit, 
nine  days  later.  Caroline  and  her  son,  whom  she  hated,  never  met  again  in 
this  world.— D.l 


214       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

without  a  cause,  I  would  ask  your  pardon  as  you  are  my 
elder  brother,  though  I  would  ask  pardon  of  no  other 
gentleman  in  England."  The  Bishop  told  me  it  would  be 
in  vain  to  try  to  persuade  the  Duke  to  humble  himself.  He 
would  at  first  have  consented  to  waive  the  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  Duchess  at  Court,  but  that  the  case  was 
altered  now ;  that  she  was  bringing  him  a  child,  whose 
mother  should  not  be  affronted,  and  that  he  vowed  he 
would  not  go  to  Court,  but  leading  the  Duchess  by  the  hand. 
Still  I  urged  this  to  him  myself  at  the  conversation  I  have 
been  mentioning;  and  though  no  man  could  more  abhor  the 
cruelty  and  duplicity  with  which  he  had  been  treated,  I  did 
not  think  it  right  to  exasperate  the  quarrel,  but  to  endeav- 
our to  allay  it.  He  showed  me  the  written  messages  :  I 
spoke  severely  on  the  inquiry  after  the  birth.  ''  Nobody," 
said  the  Duke,  "but  has  started  at  that  word  as  well  as  you  ; 
but,"  continued  he,  "  I  am  as  much  offended  at  the  word  dis- 
approvey  "  I  beg  your  Royal  Highness's  pardon,"  replied 
I,  "  but  I  cannot.  Sir,  agree  with  you.  There  is  no  man  but 
will  justify  the  King's  displeasure  at  your  marriage.  Your 
Royal  Highness  has  been  pleased  to  say  you  married  like 
a  boy,^  and  therefore.  Sir,  I  may  repeat  the  word  ;  you 
did  marry  like  a  boy,  and  I  do  not  wonder  the  King  was 
offended  ;  we  all  feel  the  same  in  the  same  case."  "  Oh  !  " 
said  the  Duke,  "  it  is  not  in  that  sense  that  I  dislike  the 
word  disapprove.  No,  it  is  because  I  think  it  is  meant  to 
imply  that  my  marriage  is  not  valid  without  the  King's  ap- 
probation." He  told  me  that  on  his  coming  over  he  had 
interceded  warmly  for  his  brother  Cumberland,  and  that  he 
had  meant  to  give  the  King  that  loophole  for  not  quarrel- 
ling with  him  himself.  I  commended  his  whole  conduct 
extremely,  as  indeed  it  deserved  ;  I  told  him  he  had  been 
in  the  right  to  consult  nobody  but  himself,  and  that,  having 
found  the  excellence  of  his  own  judgment,  I  hoped  he 

^  He  was  twenty-three  years  of  age  when  he  married  Lady  Waldegrave, 
in  1766.- D. 


1773]  INTERVIEW  WITH  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER  215 

would  not  trust  to  that  of  others.^  "  I  am  sure,  Sir,"  said  I, 
"  you  will  not  consult  younger  men."  "  No,"  said  the  Duke. 
"  Then,  Sir,"  said  I,  "  pray  do  not  consult  older,  whose 
hearts  you  will  find  worse  than  your  own."  He  smiled.  I 
commended  his  throwing  all  the  blame  on  the  Ministers, 
who  were  responsible  for  all  that  had  passed,  though 
Lord  Rochford  had  owned  to  him  that  the  King  had 
dictated  the  message  himself  in  Council,  and  corrected  the 
expressions  himself  Still  I  urged  him  to  charge  all  on  the 
Ministers,  which  would  give  him  room  to  distinguish,  and 
profess  the  more  deference  for  the  King.  I  said,  I  wished 
to  see  them  reconciled,  and  that  I  should  always  preach 
moderate  measures  :  that  I  thought,  when  he  should  have 
proved  his  marriage,  he  had  done  enough  for  the  Duchess 
and  our  family ;  that  he  ought  then  to  think  of  himself 
He  told  me,  he  knew  the  King  better  than  I  did,  and  that 
firmness  was  the  best  method  of  dealing  with  him  :  and  so 
it  proved.  He  spoke  with  indignation  of  the  Committee 
of  three  Lords  appointed  to  inquire  into  his  marriage. 
He  called  them  a  Court  of  Inquisition,  and  said,  some 
persons  had  advised  him  not  to  allow  of  their  commission 
(Dunning  and  Lee,  I  knew,  had  treated  their  authority 
with  much  contempt,  and  declared  it  not  worth  a  straw). 
He  told  me  that.  Lord  Rochford  having  mentioned  the 
marriage  of  the  Duke  of  York  with  Lord  Clarendon's 
daughter,  he  had  replied,  "  My  Lord,  I  wish  the  King  my 
brother  would  act  like  Charles  II. !"  the  Duke  of  York,  of 
whose  character  I  will  say  nothing  now,  wanted  to  disown 
his  marriage,  but  Charles  II.  forced  him  to  acknowledge 
her.  He  spoke  with  more  resentment  far  of  the  King 
than  the  Ministers,  except  where  I  thought  he  pointed  at 
Lord  Mansfield.  I  told  him,  I  would  promise  him  never 
to  tell  him  any  ill  to  hurt  anybody  with  him  ;  but  I  would 
tell  him  of  anybody  that  wished  him  well,  and  named  the 

^  There    was   not  one   of  his  servants  or  confidants  that  had  common 
sense. 


2i6       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

Duchess  of  Argyle,^  who  had  told  me  she  had  asked  Lord 
North  when  they  should  see  his  Royal  Highness  at  Court 
again  ;  Lord  North  replied,  "  Madam,  I  wish  it  as  much  as 
you  do ;  I  only  wait  for  the  King's  giving  me  an  opportu- 
nity of  pressing  it."  The  Duke  said  he  believed  Lord 
North  was  well  disposed  to  him  ;  he  had  heard  that  Lord 
North  had  even  spoken  in  his  favour,  but  had  been  told 
by  the  King  that  it  was  a  private  family  affair,  and  that  his 
Lordship  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  "  Then,  Sir,"  said  I, 
"  my  inference  is,  that  Lord  North  is  not  First  Minister." 
The  Duke  said  that  Lord  Rochford  had  told  him  all  the 
King  meant  was  to  prove  the  marriage  for  form's  sake,  and 
for  the  sake  of  the  child.  I  said,  I  wished  his  Royal  High- 
ness would  write  down  those  words,  and  take  memorandums 
of  the  whole  transaction.  He  answered,  that  he  had  a 
good  memory,  and  had  not  loaded  it,  but  he  ordered  me 
to  make  notes  of  all  he  had  told  me. 

If  the  Duke  had  acted  thus  far  with  resolution  and  dig- 
nity, in  the  ensuing  scene  he  displayed  an  equal  portion  of 
quickness  and  solidity,  assuming  a  tone  of  authority  that 
was  at  once  the  expression  of  his  innate  loftiness,  and 
proved  the  extent  of  his  understanding.  He  was  aware 
of  the  imbecility  of  the  Lords  Commissioners;  he  suspected 
the  mischievous  views  of  those  who  had  selected  them, 
and  he  knew  that  by  inspiring  them  with  awe  he  should 
convey  the  same  impressions  to  the  King  and  Lord  Mans- 
field, who  rarely  abandoned  mischief  but  from  cowardice. 
Dr.  Cornwallis,  the  Archbishop,  was  an  honest,  good  man — 
firm  when  convinced,  but  inclined  to  decency  and  modera- 
tion ;  and  yet  more  likely  to  fear  being  imposed  upon,  in 
a  delicate  case,  by  those  who  persecuted  than  by  those 
who  were  the  objects  of  persecution.  This  temper  was 
fortunate  to  the  Duke's  situation.     The  Chancellor ^  was  a 

^  Formerly  the  handsome  Miss  Gunning,  and  wife  of  the  Duke  of  Hamil- 
ton.—D. 

^  Lord  Bathurst ;  "raised  to  be  exposed"  {Sir  C.  H.  Williams), — D. 


1773]     INQUIRY  INTO  THE  DUKE'S  MARRIAGE      217 

wretched  animal,  disposed  to  be  insolent,  but  so  improperly, 
that  the  probability  lay  for  his  serving  those  he  meant  to 
hurt,  by  over-officiousness.  Indeed  he  hurt  himself  most 
by  the  meanness  of  his  conduct  and  intellects.  Dr.  Terrick, 
Bishop  of  London,  was  no  less  devoted  a  tool.  Plausibility 
was  his  highest  merit :  it  served  him  instead  of  virtues, 
learning,  and  instead  of  art  and  understanding.  As  he 
alone  could  rise  higher,  and  was  supposed  a  wiser  man 
than  his  associates,  I  concluded  the  Court's  secret  would 
be  intrusted  chiefly  to  him  ;  but  whether  they  had  reserved 
the  management  of  their  meditated  mischief  to  other 
hands,  or  whether  the  Bishop,  who  sighed  for  the  primacy, 
expected  that  the  Royal  brothers  would  be  reconciled,  and 
that  it  would  not  be  wise  to  raise  an  enemy  in  the  first 
Prince  of  the  Blood,  Terrick  behaved  with  his  wonted  civil 
suppleness,  and  by  decency  towards  the  Duke,  and  by 
deference  for  his  superiors  the  Archbishop  and  Chancellor, 
he  avoided  taking  any  further  part  than  expressions  of 
reverence  for  his  Royal  Highness.  Most  of  the  Court  did 
not  expect,  like  Terrick,  a  reconciliation.  The  little 
measure  they  kept,  in  speaking  of  the  Duke,  showed  the 
security  of  their  boldness. 

On  the  2ird  the  Archbishop  waited  on  the  Duke  to 
settle  the  method  of  proceeding,  and  said  he  and  the  two 
Lords  would  come  in  the  evening  and  take  his  Royal 
Highness's  declaration,  and  then  go  up  to  the  Duchess. 
"  Hold,  my  Lord  ! "  cried  the  Duke ;  "  this  is  my  house, 
and  I  will  direct  in  it.  The  Duchess  shall  be  present,  and 
all  my  servants."  The  Prelate  said  it  would  give  her  Royal 
Highness  too  much  trouble,  and  the  servants  would  be 
unnecessary.  "  No,  my  Lord,"  said  the  Duke ;  "  the  busi- 
ness is  too  important  to  consider  trouble :  she  shall  be 
present,  and  so  shall  my  family.  It  is  a  national  concern, 
and  cannot  be  too  public."  At  seven  in  the  evening  the 
three  Lords  arrived,  and  were  received  by  the  Duke  and 
Duchess,  attended  by  their  chief  officers,  the  Bishop  of 


2i8       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

Exeter,  and  by  Dunning,  late  Solicitor-General,  and  Lee, 
another  able  lawyer. 

The  Chancellor  opened  the  scene  by  presenting  to  the 
Duke  a  declaration  to  sign.  The  Prince,  with  an  indig- 
nant smile,  cried,  "  A  declaration,  my  Lord  !  What,  do 
you  bring  me  a  declaration  ready  drawn,  without  knowing 
what  I  shall  declare  ? "  The  Chancellor,  abashed,  pleaded 
that  it  was  done  to  save  time.  "  How  can  that  be  ?  "  said 
the  Duke.  '*  If  you  have  not  guessed  right  in  the  dark, 
the  declaration  must  be  written  over  again.  Come,  my 
Lords,  the  shortest  way  will  be  to  take  notes  of  what  I 
shall  depose."  He  then  told  them  he  had  been  married  on 
such  a  day  to  the  Dowager  Lady  Waldegrave,  at  her  own 
house  in  Pall  Mall,  by  her  own  chaplain  Dr.  Morton,  who 
was  now  dead  ;  "  and,  my  Lords,  we  had  no  witnesses." 
"Sir,"  said  the  Chancellor,  "was  your  Royal  Highness 
married  by  a  licence  ?  "  The  Duke,  smiling  again  from 
contempt,  replied,  "  My  Lord,  I  thought  your  Lordship 
had  known  that  it  was  a  clandestine  marriage."  The  Duke 
then  said  that  if  it  would  not  be  improper  he  should 
desire  to  take  a  solemn  oath  to  the  truth  of  what  he  had 
uttered.  The  Bishop  of  London  told  him  politely  that  the 
word  of  his  Royal  Highness  was  as  satisfactory  as  his  oath; 
but  the  Duke  insisted  on  being  sworn,  and  was  sworn  in 
the  most  solemn  manner.  He  then  said,  "  I  have  done, 
my  Lords :  I  will  now  leave  the  Duchess  in  your  hands, 
that  you  may  examine  her  at  liberty  and  ask  her  what 
questions  you  please,  she  and  you  not  being  under  any 
influence  from  my  presence."  His  Royal  Highness  retired. 
The  Duchess  made  her  declaration  and  swore  to  it,  and  then 
the  Duke  returning,  his  Royal  Highness  acquainted  the 
Lords  that  he  had  other  witnesses  to  corroborate  the  truth 
of  his  marriage.  "  Your  Lordships  remember,"  said  he, 
"  that  I  was  at  the  point  of  death  at  Florence.  Here  I 
was  even  believed  dead.  At  that  awful  moment  I  called 
for  Colonel  Rainsford.     I  told  him  I  was  married  to  the 


1773]     INQUIRY  INTO  THE  DUKE'S  MARRIAGE      219 

Dowager  Lady  Waldegrave,  and  I  told  him  the  circum- 
stances. I  then  enjoined  him,  on  his  duty  to  a  dying 
master,  as  soon  as  he  should  have  closed  my  eyes,  to 
hasten  to  England  and  to  repair  to  the  King,  falling  on  his 
knees  before  whom  I  charged  him  to  declare  my  marriage, 
and  to  say  that  my  last  request  was  that  his  Majesty 
would  allow  a  small  pittance  of  what  he  had  allowed  me 
to  the  widow  of  one  who,  among  so  many  brothers,  had 
always  been  reckoned  his  favourite  brother.  I  ordered 
Colonel  Rainsford,  my  Lords,  to  repair  next  to  the  Prin- 
cess my  mother,  and  beg  she  would  intercede  with  the 
King  my  brother  in  favour  of  my  widow.  My  Lords, 
Colonel  Rainsford  took  notes  of  what  I  said:  he  has 
them  in  his  pocket,  and  shall  read  them  to  your  Lord- 
ships. My  Lords,  I  have  another  witness  here.  I  called 
Colonel  Heywood  to  me,  but,  not  having  strength  to  repeat 
what  I  had  said  to  Rainsford,  I  referred  him  to  the 
latter  for  the  particulars.  Colonel  Heywood  was  to 
have  the  melancholy  office  of  attending  my  corpse  to 
England  ;  but  he  took  notes  of  what  passed,  and  will 
swear  to  them.  And  now,  my  Lords,"  said  the  Duke 
tenderly,  "your  Lordships  will  not  wonder  that  the  last 
thoughts  of  a  dying  man  turned  on  the  woman  he  loved." 
The  Colonels  Rainsford  and  Heywood  made  their  deposi- 
tions upon  oath.  "  I  have  yet  another  witness,"  said  the 
Duke,  "who  is  here  present.  I  will  beg  my  Lord  of 
Exeter  to  acquaint  your  Lordships  with  what  he  knows  of 
my  marriage  with  Lady  Waldegrave." 

The  Bishop  of  Exeter  advancing  said,  "  My  Lords, 
Lady  Waldegrave  never  trusted  the  secret  to  her  father, 
her  sisters,  or  any  of  the  family.  The  first  time  I  knew 
it  certainly  was  last  year.  There  was  a  remarkable  bill 
depending  in  Parliament,  which  your  Lordships  may  well 
remember ;  it  was  called  the  Royal  Marriage  Act.  I 
thought  it  a  bad  bill,  and  intended  to  come  and  vote 
against  it ;  but  reflecting  that  Lady  Waldegrave  might 


2  20       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

be  interested  in  it,  I  thought  it  right  to  question  her  first. 
She  was  then  with  my  wife  and  me  at  the  Deanery  at 
Windsor:  it  was  on  the  ist  of  March,  1772.  The  Duke 
of  Gloucester  was  then  absent  in  Italy.  I  went  into  the 
Lady  Waldegrave's  room,  and,  telling  her  my  reasons  for 
inquiring,  I  asked  whether  she  was  married  to  his  Royal 
Highness  or  not.  She  burst  into  a  flood  of  tears,  and 
cried,  '  I  am  !  I  am  married!' — and  then  falling  into  a 
greater  agony,  she  wrung  her  hands  and  exclaimed,  '  Good 
God !  what  have  I  done  ?  I  have  betrayed  the  Duke,  and 
broken  my  promise  to  him  of  never  owning  my  marriage 
without  his  leave.'"  Of  these  circumstances  the  Bishop 
made  a  deposition  on  oath ;  and  the  Duke  desired  the 
three  Lords  to  observe  that  accident  had  naturally  drawn 
from  him  and  the  Duchess,  when  they  were  parted  and 
there  could  be  no  concurrence  between  them,  the  same 
confession. 

Dunning,  stepping  up  to  the  Chancellor,  said,  "  My 
Lord,  did  you  ever  hear  anything  so  clear  ? "  "  Oh ! " 
replied  the  Chancellor,  "  as  clear  as  possible." 

The  Duke,  then  addressing  himself  to  the  three  Lords,^ 
recommended  to  them  to  press  the  King  to  send  the  Privy 
Council  to  the  birth  of  the  child  for  the  satisfaction  of  the 
nation — at  least,  if  not  Privy  Counsellors,  to  beseech  his 
Majesty  to  send  any  private  Lord  or  Commoner,  or  more 
if  he  pleased.  "  And,  my  Lords,"  added  the  Duke,  "  the 
time  presses :  look  at  the  condition  of  the  Duchess — your 
Lordships,  I  dare  to  say,  have  all  heard  the  ill-natured 
reports  of  her  not  being  with  child." 

Then  having  asked  each  separately  if  they  were  satisfied, 
and  each  declaring  himself  perfectly  satisfied,  the  Duke 
dismissed  them.  They  no  doubt  made  their  report  im- 
mediately to  the  King ;  but  his  Majesty,  notwithstanding 

^  The  Chancellor  often  interrupted  the  Archbishop  when  speaking ;  but 
the  Duke  as  constantly  reprimanded  him,  saying,  "Pray,  my  Lord,  let  the 
Archbishop  finish  what  he  was  saying." 


1773]     INQUIRY  INTO  THE  DUKE'S  MARRIAGE      221 

the  urgency  of  the  occasion,  would  not  summon  the 
Council  till  the  26th,  the  day  on  which,  being  the  next 
levee  day,  it  was  usual  to  hold  it. 

The  next  day,  to  colour  over  the  malice  that  had  been 
aimed  at  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  marriage,  the  same  three 
Lords  Commissioners  were  sent  to  inquire  into  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland's  marriage.  The  examination  took  up  little 
time.  Miss  Luttrell,  the  Duchess's  sister,  had  been  wit- 
ness, the  clergyman  who  had  married  them  was  living,  and 
the  Duchess  produced  the  certificate.  This  marriage  and 
the  evidence  was  likewise  entered  in  the  Council-books 
at  the  same  time  with  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's. 

On  the  2^th  Lord  Hertford  sent  for  me,  and  after  dis- 
course on  some  family  business,  which  he  made  the  pre- 
tence for  having  desired  to  see  me,  he  dropped,  as  if  inad- 
vertently, that  notice  had  been  left  at  his  house  that  the 
Council  appointed  for  the  next  day  was  put  off  for  a  week. 
It  alarmed  me  exceedingly.  I  concluded  that  they  were 
determined  to  shift  off  the  verification  of  the  marriage  till 
after  the  delivery,  or  were  machinating  some  plot  for  con- 
troverting the  marriage  itself.  I  suspected  too  that  Lord 
Hertford  had  acted  by  order,  and  wanted  to  sound  me  how 
the  delay  would  be  taken.  He  was  very  cool,  and  I  apt 
to  be  frank  and  unguarded ;  but  I  turned  the  tables  on 
him,  and  even  overacted  the  concern  I  really  felt.  I 
lamented  what  was  doing,  and,  intimating  how  much  the 
Duke  would  be  offeiaded,  I  spoke  pathetically  on  the  ex- 
tremities to  which  such  treatment  would  drive  him.  I 
magnified  the  sense  and  firmness  he  had  already  shown, 
and  said  I  knew  he  was  determined  at  any  rate  to  have  his 
marriage  authenticated  without  delay.  Lady  Hertford, 
who  was  present,  asked  with  terror  what  he  would  do.  I 
would  not  name  his  design  of  going  to  the  House  of  Lords, 
that  they  might  not  be  prepared  for  it,  but,  shaking  my 
head  mysteriously,  I  said  I  knew  he  had  very  rash  coun- 
sellors, and  was  desperate  enough  to  embrace  the  most 


222       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

determined.  Then,  to  rouse  Lord  Hertford's  political  fears, 
which  I  knew  were  as  great  as  his  wife's  personal  appre- 
hensions, I  hinted  that  the  Duke  would  find  wellwishers 
even  in  the  Court,  and  that  not  even  all  the  Ministers 
would  stick  by  the  King  in  such  violences :  and  then, 
affecting  confidence  for  his  own  sake,  I  acquainted  him 
that  even  Lord  Gower,  the  President  of  the  Council,  had, 
though  on  so  important  a  business,  withdrawn  into  the 
country,  rather  than  preside  at  a  Council  in  which  the 
Duke  might  be  insulted.  It  was  true,  and  the  Duchess 
had  told  me  so  herself;  but  she  had  laughed  at  it,  and 
said  she  was  persuaded  it  was  a  little  dirty  finesse  of  Lady 
Gower,  who  had  sent  her  husband  out  of  the  way,  to  make 
some  amends  for  her  own  impertinence.  Lord  Hertford 
was  struck,  I  saw,  and  I  left  him  ;  but  I  wrote  immediately 
to  the  Duke  to  acquaint  him  with  what  had  happened,  and 
he  took  my  intelligence  very  kindly.  At  night  I  went  to 
the  Duchess.  The  Duke  took  me  aside  immediately, 
thanked  me  for  my  letter,  but  told  me  Lord  Rochford  had 
just  sent  him  word  the  Council  would  be  held.  Perhaps 
what  Lord  Hertford  had  learnt  from  me  had  occasioned 
the  summons  being  again  issued — but  that  is  more  than  I 
know.^ 

^  Sir  Edward  Walpole,  who  seldom  went  out  of  his  own  house,  wrote  to 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  condoling  with  and  congratulating  him  on  what  was 
passing.     The  Duke  returned  this  very  sensible  and  pathetic  answer  : — 

"Dear  Sir, 

*'  I  agree  entirely  with  you  that  our  talking  over  together  the  subject 
of  this  last  week's  transaction  would  be  too  affecting  for  either  of  us  to  have 
chosen.  I  am,  therefore,  sincerely  obliged  to  you  for  having  taken  this 
method  of  easing  your  mind,  which  gives  me  so  good  an  opportunity  of  doing 
the  same.  Now  I  have  had  a  little  time  to  recover  myself  from  the  various 
feelings  I  have  been  agitated  by  for  a  long  time  past,  I  can  reflect  again  upon 
the  real  joy  you  must  feel  in  seeing  the  character  of  my  amiable  Duchess  has 
shone  through  the  cloud  I  myself  was  forced  from  duty  to  the  King  to  permit 
to  hang  over  my  own  wife  for  so  long  a  time.  And  yet  I  have  the  secret 
satisfaction  to  believe,  that,  when  his  Majesty  considers  the  variety  of  events 
that  had  happened  during  my  last  absence  from  England,  he  must  allow  that 
my  public  declaration  of  my  marriage  at  my  return  was  a  debt  due  to  my 
country,  my  Duchess,  myself,  and  to  posterity. 

"  Vour  compliments  to  me  upon  my  management  I  would  thank  you  for  jf 


1773]       COUNCIL  ON  THE  DUKE'S  MARRIAGE        223 

The  Lady  Gower  just  named  had  been  intimate  with 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester  and  had  affected  much  friendship 
for  the  Duchess,  but,  instead  of  visiting  them  on  the 
declaration  of  their  marriage,  she  had  contented  herself 
with  writing  a  most  familiar  note  to  the  Duchess,  which 
began.  My  dear  Madam,  and  ended  with  only  inquiring 
after  the  Duke's  health.  Lady  Gower  was  a  daughter  of 
Stuart,  Earl  of  Galloway,  a  man  indecently  Jacobite. 
She  had  been  Lady  of  the  Bedchamber  to  the  Princess 
Augusta,  and,  being  of  the  most  interested  and  intriguing 
turn,  she  had,  even  before  her  marriage,  obtained  three 
pensions  by  different  channels.  After  her  marriage^  her 
life  was  a  series  of  jobs  and  solicitations,  and  she  teazed 
every  Minister  for  every  little  office  that  fell  in  his  depart- 
ment. She  made  a  thousand  dependants  and  enemies, 
but  no  friend. 

The  Council  was  held  on  the  26th,  and  was  very  full ; 
the  King  present.  The  three  Lords  made  their  report, 
expressed  their  satisfaction,  and  the  King  ordered  all  the 
depositions  to  be  entered  in  the  Council-books,  not  the 
least  objection  being  made  to  the  validity  of  the  marriage; 
but  as  the  Duke  afterwards  told  me.  Lord  Camden  ac- 
quainted him  with  a  very  wicked  circumstance.  It  had 
been  intended  to  register  the  marriages  and  specify  that 
they  were  legal,  but  somebody  had  persuaded  the  King  to 
omit  that  word.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  Lord 
Mansfield  was  that  adviser,  and  the  person  Lord  Camden 
meant.     It  was  a  gratification  to  a  Jacobite  born^  to  leave 

I  felt  I  deserved  them  ;  but  your  approbation,  as  an  honest  man,  of  my  con- 
duct, I  feel  grateful  for. 

**  I  am,  dear  Sir, 
"Yours, 
'*  Gloucester  House,  "William  Henry. 

"  May  25,  1773." 

^  In  1768,  She  was  the  third  wife  of  the  second  Earl  Gower,  created  in 
1786  Marquis  of  Stafford.     She  died,  his  widow,  in  1805. — A.  F.  S. 

2  Junius,  in  a  special  note,  in  1772,  upon  the  Jacobitism  of  Lord  Mansfield 
(Murray),  says : — "  This  man  was  always  a  rank  Jacobite.  Lord  Ravensworth 
produced  the  most  satisfactory  evidence  of  his  having  frequently  drunk  the 


224       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

even  a  shadow  of  suspicion  on  the  legitimacy  of  a  Bruns- 
wicker,  but  even  that  squint  was  effaced  by  the  Duke's 
quickness  and  resolution,  which  drew  even  from  the  King 
himself  an  avowal  that  not  a  cavil  remained  against  the 
marriage.     It  happened  thus  : 

The  Duke  being  informed  the  next  day  that  some  per- 
sons had  misreported  the  transaction  in  Council,  as  if 
doubts  had  arisen  on  the  legality  of  his  marriage,  the 
Duke,  though  late  at  night,  hurried  to  the  Archbishop, 
and  finding  the  Bishop  of  London  with  him,  who  would 
have  retired,  the  Duke  stopped  him,  and  with  a  tone  of 
authority  told  him  he  should  not  leave  the  house  till  he 
had  received  his  orders.  His  Royal  Highness  then  told 
the  two  prelates  what  he  heard,  and  therefore  enjoined 
them  by  their  function,  by  their  duty  to  their  country,  and 
by  the  testimony  they  had  borne  to  the  validity  of  his 
marriage,  to  go  that  moment  to  the  King,  and  tell  him 
that,  though  he  himself  was  satisfied  with  the  proofs,  yet, 
if  his  Majesty  had  any  doubts  remaining,  the  Duke  was 
willing  to  do  anything  his  Majesty  should  require  to  have 


Pretender's  health  upon  his  knees."  On  the  occasion  alluded  to  by  Junius, 
Fawcett,  a  Newcastle  solicitor,  was  really  the  accuser  (in  1753)  of  Murray, 
the  Solicitor-General,  and  Stone,  sub-preceptor  to  Prince  George,  afterwards 
George  III.  The  accusation  was  disproved,  but  W^alpole,  moved  by  his 
antipathy  against  Murray,  frequently  repeated  it.  Lord  Chesterfield  (to 
Dayrolles,  March  13,  1753)  says: — "As  nobody  is  unprejudiced  on  either 
side,  but,  on  the  contrary,  warm  and  violent  on  each,  one  hears  no  undisguised 
truth  on  either."  The  charges  which  Junius  recorded,  which  Walpole  re- 
peated, and  which  Chesterfield  affected  neither  to  believe  nor  reject,  Churchill 
vehemently  asserted  in  poetry.  He  did  not  name  the  alleged  offender,  but  he 
took  care  that  he  might  be  easily  identified  : — 


" a  figure  came, 

Whom  Justice  would  but  dare  not  name. 
Hard  times  when  Justice,  without  fear. 
Dare  not  bring  forth  to  public  ear 
The  names  of  those  who  dare  offend 
'Gainst  Justice,  and  pervert  her  end  ! 
But  if  the  Muse  afford  me  grace, 
Description  shall  supply  the  place. 
In  foreign  garments  he  was  clad, 
Sage  ermine  o'er  the  glossy  plaid 
Cast  rev'rend  honour  ;  on  his  heart. 
Wrought  by  the  curious  hand  of  Art, 
In  silver  wrought,  and  brighter  far 


Than  heavenly  or  than  earthly  star, 
Shone  a  White  Rose,  the  emblem  dear 
Of  him  he  ever  must  revere. 


What  if  to  that  Pretender's  foes 
His  greatness,  nay,  his  life  he  owes ; 
Shall  common  obligations  bind. 
And  shake  his  constancy  of  mind  ? 
Scorning  such  weak  and  petty  chains 
Faithful  to  James  he  still  remains, 
Though  he  the  friend  of  George  appear : 
Dissimulation  's  virtue  here." 

D. 


1773]       VERIFICATION  OF  DUKE'S  MARRIAGE        225 

his  marriage  confirmed.  The  Archbishop  said  it  would 
be  impossible  to  see  the  King  at  that  late  hour. — "My 
Lords,"  cried  the  Duke  peremptorily,  "ye  shall  not  lay 
your  heads  on  your  pillows  till  ye  have  seen  him — I  will 
have  an  answer  to-night."  They  obeyed,  and  returned 
with  a  message  that  the  King,  though  satisfied  himself 
with  the  proofs  of  the  Duke's  marriage,  would  consent 
to  the  Duke's  being  married  again  if  he  chose  it.  The 
Duke  afterwards  told  Mr.  Keppel,  that,  if  the  King  sent 
the  Archbishop  to  marry  him  over  again,  he  would  lock 
the  door  and  admit  no  witnesses,  to  show  that  the  first 
marriage  was  as  good  as  the  last.  He  was  extremely 
averse  to  the  repetition  of  the  ceremony  which  he 
was  aware  would  weaken  rather  than  corroborate  his 
marriage,  and  he  had  the  prudence  to  go  to  Dunning 
and  made  him  draw  up  a  proper  answer,  which  he  sent, 
and  was  as  follows  : — 

The  Duke  of  Gloucester  desires  the  Lord  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury  and  the  Lord  Bishop  of  London  to  present  his 
humble  duty  to  the  King,  accompanied  with  the  sincerest 
acknowledgment  of  his  Majesty's  goodness  in  declaring  in  the 
terms  they  communicated  to  the  Duke  this  morning  his  Royal 
satisfaction  in  the  validity  of  the  Duke's  marriage,  after  which 
he  will  not  believe  that  any  other  will  presume  to  doubt  of  the 
veracity  or  sufficiency  of  the  evidence  that  has  been  produced 
upon  that  subject.  It  can,  therefore,  be  no  object  with  the 
Duke  to  go  a  second  time  through  the  ceremony;  but  that, 
or  any  other  mark  of  obedience  to  the  King,  the  Duke  will 
cheerfully  yield,  if  it  should  be  thought  that  it  can  be  of  any  use, 
and  the  King's  consent  with  the  other  necessary  preparatory 
steps ^  can  be  gone  through  before  the  Duchess's  delivery;  after 
which  such  a  ceremony  would  be  obviously  improper. 

On  the  2'jth  the  Duke  received  from  the  Archbishop 
this    full    and    satisfactory    answer,    which    removed    all 

^  The  preparing  a  sign  manual.  It  could  not  hq,ve  been  ready,  for  the 
Duchess  was  delivered  the  next  day. 

I.-Q 


2  26      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

ground  of  cavil,  assured  the  indissolubility  of  his  marriage 
and  the  rights  of  his  child,  and  took  away  all  pretence 
for  doubt,  even  from  those  who  wished  for  a  handle,  or 
might  still  pretend  they  doubted,  though  women  only, 
who  make  no  scruple  of  repeating  the  same  thing  twenty 
times  after  confutation,  had  the  confidence  to  surmise  that 
there  was  still  some  imperfection,  though  they  did  not 
know  how  or  where.     Here  is  the  Archbishop's  letter : — 

Sir, 

Upon  the  receipt  of  your  Royal  Highness's  letter,  the 
Bishop  of  London  and  I  immediately  waited  on  his  Majesty, 
and  acquainted  him  with  the  contents  of  it.  His  Majesty  was 
pleased  to  say,  that,  as  your  Royal  Highness  was  satisfied  with 
the  proofs  of  the  validity  of  your  marriage,  and  did  not  desire 
to  have  it  further  authenticated,  his  Majesty,  not  having  heard 
any  objection  to  the  validity  of  it,  does  not  think  it  necessary 
to  take  any  farther  steps  in  it. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be.  Sir, 
With  the  greatest  respect. 
Your  Royal  Highness's 

Most  obedient  humble  servant. 


Lambeth,  May  27th,  1773. 
II  o'clock. 


Fred.  Cant. 


The  next  day  the  Archbishop  waited  on  the  Duke, 
when  his  Royal  Highness  told  him  that  as  the  King  was 
satisfied  he  desired  he  might  hear  no  more  of  the  matter. 

At  night  the  Duchess  lent  me  the  Archbishop's  letter, 
which  I  returned  the  next  morning,  but  wrote  to  beg  she 
would  never  let  it  go  out  of  her  hands  again,  as  it  was  of 
the  highest  importance  to  her  and  the  child. 

Thus  ended  this  memorable  transaction,  with  the  com- 
pletest  triumph  to  the  Duke,  and  to  the  signal  credit  of  his 
sense  and  character.  The  King  through  the  whole  showed 
so  much  pride,  ill-nature,  duplicity,  and  pusillanimity,  that 
one  may  almost  conclude  the  whole  had  been  concerted 


1773]         DISINGENUOUSNESS   OF   THE   KING  227 

and  conducted  by  himself,  the  Queen,  her  women,  and 
a  man  as  silly  as  her  women — Lord  Rochford.  The 
pusillanimity  would  include  Lord  Mansfield,  but  the  con- 
duct was  unworthy  of  his  abilities.  Still,  satisfactory  as 
the  Archbishop's  letter  was  at  last,  I  soon  learnt  that  the 
avowal  had  been  wrung  most  reluctantly  from  a  mind 
that  had  harboured  disingenuity  to  the  last  moment,  as 
I  shall  mention  presently,  and  which,  as  deceit  pursued  to 
its  inmost  retreat  never  pardons,  his  Majesty  resolved  not 
to  forgive ;  the  Archbishop  himself  owning  to  Bishop 
Keppel  that  the  King  was  angry  with  the  three  Lords  for 
their  full  avowal  of  satisfaction,  and  had  told  him,  the 
Archbishop,  that,  whatever  he  might  have  thought  before 
of  being  reconciled  to  his  brother,  the  Duke  had  now  so 
pushed  him  to  the  wall  that  he  could  not  forgive  him. 

The  Duchess  had  scarce  surmounted  the  anxiety  of  this 
cruel  situation,  which  she  bore  with  an  heroic  cheerfulness 
that  seemed  to  improve  her  natural  beauty,  which  had 
never  glowed  with  more  lustre  than  at  this  moment,  but 
she  was  taken  with  labour-pains  at  three  in  the  morning 
of  May  29th,  and  at  eight  of  the  clock  in  the  evening  she 
was  delivered  of  a  Princess.  There  were  present  the 
Dukes  of  Richmond,^  Manchester,^  and  Dorset,^  the  Earls 
of  Thanet  and  Cholmondeley,  Lord  Nuneham,  eldest  son 
of  the  Earl  of  Harcourt,  Lord  Beaulieu,*  Sir  William 
Meredith,  Captain  Boyle  Walsingham,^  the  Countess 
Dowager  of  Albemarle,^  Mr.  T.  Townshend,  jun. ;  and  of 
the    Duke's   family,   the   Colonels    George   West,^  Coxe, 

^  Charles  Lenox,  third  Duke  of  Richmond. 

^  George  Montague,  fourth  Duke  of  Manchester. 

^  John  Sackville,  third  Duke  of  Dorset. 

*  Sir  Edward  Hussey  Montague,  Lord  Beauheu. 

'^  Brother  of  the  Earl  of  Shannon,  and  Member  of  Parliament,  a  sea- 
man. 

®  Lady  Anne  Lenox,  daughter  of  the  first  Duke  of  Richmond,  widow  of 
William  Anne,  Earl  of  Albemarle,  and  mother  of  Dr.  Keppel,  Bishop  of 
Exeter. 

■^  Brother  of  Earl  Delawar,  and  had  been  groom  of  the  bedchamber  to  the 
Duke. 


228       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

Rainsford,  Heywood,  Captain  Jennings,^  Mr.  Deval  his 
chaplain,  Legrand  his  old  governor,  Colonel  Folke, 
Colonel  Craggs,  groom  of  the  bedchamber  to  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland  ;  and  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester's 
own  bedchamber  women,  Mrs.  Heywood,  Mrs.  Cox,  and 
Mrs.  Swanton.  The  men,  by  the  man-midwife,  Mr.  Ford, 
giving  the  sign  too  soon,  entered  the  room  even  before  the 
child  was  quite  born.  The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumber- 
land had  been  sent  for,  but,  being  out  of  town,  did  not 
arrive  in  time.  The  Duchess's  father,  sisters,  nor  I  were 
present,  that  no  management  might  be  imputed  to  the 
family.  Lord  Cholmondeley,^  a  second  cousin,  was  the 
only  relation  there. 

As  soon  as  the  Duchess  was  delivered,  the  Duke  sent 
word  of  the  event  to  my  brother  and  me.  I  went  directly 
to  wish  him  joy.  He  called  me  into  his  closet,  appeared 
very  happy,  and  said  he  was  only  sorry  for  the  Duchess's 
disappointment  in  not  having  a  son.  He  told  me  he  had 
sent  Legrand  to  tell  the  King,  with  orders  not  to  stay  if  not 
.called  in  ;  but  he  would  send  in  more  form,  which  he  would 
not  do  if  he  lived  in  friendship  with  his  brother.  The 
etiquette  was  to  acquaint  the  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber ; 
but  this  delivery  was  so  serious  an  affair  that  he  would 
notify  it  to  the  Secretary  of  State.  He  added  that  the 
King  had  sent  to  him  to  desire  he  would  waive  insisting 
on  the  presence  of  the  Privy  Council ;  and  that  he  had 
given  it  up  by  a  message  carried  by  Colonel  Rainsford  to 
Lord  Rochford ;  that  the  Earl,  at  that  visit,  had  taken 
occasion  to  advise  Rainsford  to  persuade  the  Duke  to  be 
remarried,  but  not  to  say  it  was  his  advice  ;  that  for  him- 
self, he  was  going  out  of  town,  and  would  wash  his  hands 
of  it.  The  Duke  expressed  himself  with  the  greatest 
warmth  as  he  repeated  this  double  dealing,  and  said  he 

^  Of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's  family. 

^  George  Earl  of  Cholmondeley,  son  of  Lord  Malpas,  eldest  son  of  George 
Earl  of  Cholmondeley,  by  Mary  sister  of  Sir  Edward  Walpole, 


1773]  EAST   INDIAN   AFFAIRS  229 

did  not  know  whether  Lord  Rochford  had  acted  from  folly 
or  wickedness  ;  I  believe  from  neither,  but  from  directions. 
"  Good  God  ! "  said  the  Duke,  "  marry  again  !  I  desire 
everybody  may  know  I  never  had  such  a  thought." — And 
happy  it  was  he  had  not ;  the  Duchess  was  delivered  be- 
fore the  ceremony  could  have  been  performed,  which  is 
what  the  Court  had  sought — a  future  civil  war  was  indeed 
very  harmless  revenge !  The  blind  acrimony  with  which 
they  endeavoured  to  render  the  child's  legitimacy  doubtful 
proved  the  means  of  authenticating  both  its  birth  and 
the  marriage. — I  must  now  return  to  the  transactions  in 
Parliament. 

I  have  related  the  precipitation  with  which  the  House 
of  Commons  had  voted  away  the  sovereignty  of  three 
provinces  from  the  East  India  Company ;  and  the  breach 
of  their  agreement  with  the  Government,  which  the  Duke 
of  Richmond  had  chiefly  effected.  Lord  North,  though 
he  held  a  firm  language  out  of  the  House,  and  though  on 
the  17th  of  May  he  declaimed  in  a  menacing  speech 
against  them,  was  not  a  man  to  push  matters  to  extremity, 
nor  to  avail  himself,  as  worse  and  more  daring  ministers 
would  have  done,  of  the  rash  vote  by  which  one  House 
of  Parliament  had  in  a  manner  voted  three  provinces 
to  the  Crown.  Lord  North  probably  wished  to  procure 
some  pecuniary  advantages  to  the  King,  in  lieu  of  an 
additional  revenue  of  200,000/.  which  he  had  declined 
asking  of  Parliament  for  his  Majesty — a  refusal,  no  doubt, 
heavily  felt,  and  which  contributed  to  draw  on  the  defeat 
which  Lord  North  received  in  the  course  of  the  India 
business :  but  he  meant  so  well,  and  was  so  moderate, 
that  neither  the  rapacious  or  ambitious  views  of  the 
Court,  nor  the  intemperate  servility  of  members  of  Parlia- 
ment, tempted  him  beyond  reasonable  bounds.  This 
moderation,  perhaps,  contributed  to  carry  his  bill  of  regu- 
lations through,  though  much  pains  were  taken  to  inflame 
the  City  of  London  against  him  as  the  destroyer  of  all 


230       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

corporate  rights.  In  the  meantime  proceeded  the  attack 
on  Lord  Clive. 

On  May  \%th  much  altercation  happened,  and  many 
censures  were  passed  on  the  precipitation  of  the  former 
day,  several  persons  declaring  that  the  right  of  sovereignty 
over  the  three  provinces  could  not  be  intended  to  be  taken 
away  by  general  and  indefinite  resolutions.  This  debate 
put  off  General  Burgoyne's  charge  till  the  next  day,  the 

19///,  when  he  opened  his  accusation  of  Lord  Clive,  and 
went  through  the  catalogue  of  his  crimes,  as  his  fictitious 
treaties,  the  assassination  of  Surajah  Dowlah,  and  the 
immense  presents  he  had  obtained  by  military  influence, 
to  the  amount  of  234,000/.  besides  his  jaghire.  I  shall 
say  little  on  these  facts,  or  of  the  debate.  I  was  not  in 
Parliament  myself,  nor  much  conversant  in  Indian  affairs. 
The  details,  and  even  many  of  the  speeches,  are  to  be 
found  in  books,  pamphlets,  and  newspapers,  particularly  in 
the  London  Chronicle.  All  I  shall  touch  is  the  complexion 
of  the  debate  which  turned  towards  more  favour  for  the 
criminal.  His  friends  seemed  to  attempt  delay,  and  did 
obtain  leave  to  produce  witnesses  for  him.  This  arose 
from  Sir  Richard  Sutton,  one  of  the  Committee  of  Inquiry, 
complaining  that,  when  Lord  Clive  was  before  them,  he  had 
been  forced  to  answer  questions  that  tended  to  accuse  him- 
self. Such  compulsion  was  illegal,  and  to  bring  his  own 
confession  against  him  not  less  so.  The  forms  of  justice 
therefore  favoured  his  escape  ;  but  his  confession,  and  his 
voluntary  confessions  in  the  House,  proclaimed  the  crimes 
of  the  man.  Whether  his  merits  balanced  them  was 
another  consideration.  A  moralist  would  condemn,  a 
politician  (I  mean  a  politician  in  the  worst  sense  of  the 
word,  in  opposition  to  all  morality)  would  absolve  him. 
The  Bedfords,  as  I  have  said.  Colonel  Barre,  Charles  Fox, 
and,  above  all,  Burgoyne,  Sir  W.  Meredith,  and  Thurlow, 
were  hot  on  the  pursuit ;  Sawbridge,  Burke,  Stanley,  and 
the  junto  protected  him  ;  and  it  was  carried  at  last  by  119 


1773]  ATTACK   ON   LORD   CLIVE  231 

to  81  to  hear  his  witnesses.  The  hostile  part  pushed  for 
going  on  the  next  day,  but  the  Speaker  with  his  blunt  and 
unceremonious  frankness  told  them  it  was  too  much  fatigue 
for  him,  and  that  they  should  not  have  his  company  ;  on 
which  it  was  postponed  till  the  21st,  after  Lord  Clive,  in 
an  artful,  though  seemingly  desponding  speech,  had 
lamented,  himself,  that  after  enjoying  his  fortune  for 
sixteen  years  he  must  look  on  himself  as  a  bankrupt,  who 
had  nothing  left  but  a  family  estate  of  five  hundred  pounds 
a  year,  which  his  ancestors  had  possessed  for  several 
generations.  "  But,"  said  he,  "  it  is  easy  to  stoop  to  this  ; 
it  requires  more  resolution  to  bear  prosperity  than 
adversity."  For  what  he  had  gotten,  it  was  nothing  new  ; 
presents  had  been  coeval  with  the  Company ;  Eastern 
Princes  always  make  presents  ;  every  Governor  for  these 
hundred  years  had  returned  with  a  fortune  :  he  could  have 
wished  General  Burgoyne  had  sifted  with  as  much  accuracy 
the  hardships,  sufferings,  and  services  of  the  former  part  of 
his  life,  as  he  had  of  the  latter  part ; — and  then,  as  if 
inadvertently  wandering  into  the  subject,  he  drew  an 
interesting  picture  of  his  campaigns  and  conquests.  After 
winding  up  their  passions  to  admiration  and  applause,  as 
if  recollecting  himself,  he  returned  to  the  severe  lot  he 
expected ;  but  charged  them  with  dignity,  when  they 
should  decide  on  his  honour,  not  to  be  forgetful  of  their 
own. 

On  the  2\st  arrived  the  important  day  which  was  to 
determine  the  fate  of  this  every  way  great  criminal.  It 
began  with  peevish  altercation  on  forms  of  proceeding,  and 
then,  one  Beecher  being  examined,  and  Lord  Clive's  own 
evidence  at  the  Select  Committee,  which  he  admitted  as 
evidence  against  him,  being  read,  he  himself  rose,  and 
told  the  House  he  had  little  to  say  ;  if  the  approbation  he 
had  received  from  the  Company,  and  from  his  country, 
were  not  sufficient,  he  had  nothing  to  say.  He  had  been 
accused  as  the  cause  of  all  the  misfortunes  that  had  fallen 


232       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

on  the  Company — of  that  he  would  leave  the  House  to 
judge.  All  he  entreated  was,  that  they  would  leave  him 
his  honour,  and  take  away  his  fortune.  Having  said 
which,  he  walked  out  of  the  House. 

General  Burgoyne  then  made  the  following  motion  : — 
"  That  it  appears  to  this  House,  that  Robert  Lord  Clive, 
Baron  of  Plassey  in  the  kingdom  of  Ireland,  about  the 
time  of  the  deposition  of  Surajah  Dowlah,  Nabob  of 
Bengal,  and  the  establishment  of  Meer  Jaffier  on  the 
Musnud,^  did,  through  the  influence  of  the  powers  with 
which  he  was  intrusted  as  member  of  the  Select  Com- 
mittee^  and  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  British  forces, 
obtain  and  possess  80,000  roupees  as  member  of  the 
Select  Committee,  a  further  sum  of  two  lacs  as  Commander- 
in-Chief,  and  a  further  sum  of  16  lacs,  or  more,  under  the 
denomination  of  private  donation,  which  sums,  amounting 
together  to  20  lacs  and  80,000  roupees,  were  of  the  value 
in  English  money  of  234,000/.,^  and  that  in  so  doing  the 
said  Robert  Lord  Clive  abused  the  powers  with  which  he 
was  intrusted,  to  the  evil  example  of  the  servants  of  the 
public." 

Sir  William  Meredith,  the  Attorney-General  Thurlow, 
Charles  Fox,  and  Barre,  supported  the  question  with  great 
acrimony.  Fox  said,  Lord  Clive  was  the  origin  of  all 
plunder,  the  source  of  all  robbery.  Barre  drew  a  parallel 
between  him  and  Major  Monroe,  who  had  refused  a 
present  of  300,000/. ;  Lord  Clive's  lacs,  he  supposed,  had 
not  been  given  him  for  his  beauty.*  Were  he  acquitted, 
the  House  ought  to  punish  Monroe.  Whom  could  it 
punish,  if  the  principal  was  acquitted  ?  On  the  other 
hand,  the  services  of  the  criminal,  an  enjoyment  of  his 
wealth  for  sixteen  years,  the  applause,  the  honours,  the 
trust  conferred  on  him  by  the  Crown,  the  Company,  the 
Parliament,  and  the  nation,  pleaded  in  his  behalf     So  did 

'■  The  throne  or  power.  ^  In  India. 

'  This  was  independent  of  his  jaghire. 

*  Lord  Clive  was  a  remarkably  ill-looking  man. 


17731  ATTACK   ON   LORD   CLIVE  233 

Wedderburn,  the  Solicitor-General,  with  much  ability, 
Conway  with  candour,  Admiral  Saunders  with  rough  naval 
indignation  that  spoke  more  forcibly  than  eloquence,  and 
by  a  home  application  of  the  case  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh. 
Burke,  as  Thurlow  told  him,  showered  a  bright  con- 
fusion of  ideas  on  his  defence,  and  told  the  House  he 
hoped  that  what  Indian  gratitude  had  bestowed,  British 
ingratitude  would  not  take  away;  that  they  could  not 
compound  honour  and  disgrace ;  and  that  he  knew  not 
what  called  out  heaven-born  genius;  he  did  know  what 
suppressed  it — ingratitude.  But  the  person  whose  argu- 
ments were  most  serviceable  to  the  accused  was  Lord 
George  Germaine.  He  was  allowed  to  have  surpassed 
himself,  and  to  have  compressed  into  a  few  pithy  manly 
sentences  the  sum  of  all  that  could  possibly  be  said  in 
alleviation  or  excuse,  in  justice  or  policy.  One  image  was 
particularly  admired — it  was  a  picture  of  the  doubts  Lord 
Clive  must  have  fluctuated  between,  if  at  the  onset  of  the 
battle  of  Plassey  he  had  had  the  Attorney-General  on 
one  hand,  and  the  Solicifor-General  on  the  other,  prompt- 
ing him  to  conduct  directly  opposite.  Lord  George 
Germaine  certainly  made  great  impression  in  Lord  Clive's 
favour ;  but  more  than  his  nervous  compactness,  more 
than  Burke's  desultory  imagery  and  good-humoured  wit, 
more  than  Wedderburn's  legal  subterfuges,  and  more  than 
the  inveteracy  expressed  against  him,  which  too  operated 
in  his  favour, — more  than  all  this  was  done  for  him  by 
very  inferior  advocates,  and  by  the  irresolute  conduct 
of  one  who  ought  to  have  taken  the  lead :  in  short,  the 
appearance  on  Lord  Clive's  side  of  those  flimsy  and  con- 
temptible men  Lord  Barrington  and  Jenkinson  carried 
the  tide  of  Court  favour  along  with  them  ;  and  the  pusil- 
lanimous, uncertain,  contradictory  variations  and  inde- 
cision of  Lord  North,  who  wavered  from  censure  to 
encomium,^  who  aimed  at  punishment  and  held  out  re- 

^  He  said  Lord  Clive  had  virtues  enough  to  balance  his  faults. 


234       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

compense,  and  who  at  last,  almost  in  terms,  proposed  to 
take  away  his  fortune,  and  then  restore  it,  turned  the  scale. 
But  why  do  I  say  turned  the  scale  ?  Lord  North  only  con- 
trived to  make  his  own  defeat  appear  merited.  It  had 
been  determined  before  ;  Lord  Clive  had  bought  the  Court 
— it  was  past  a  doubt ;  and  the  Court  was  glad  too  to 
show  both  Lord  North  and  the  Bedfords  together,  that 
they  were  nothing  if  the  rays  of  the  Crown  did  not  shine 
on  them.  At  four  in  the  morning  the  House  divided,  and 
the  motion  was  rejected  by  153  to  95.  To  complete  Lord 
Clive's  triumph,  and  its  own  shame,  the  House  voted  next, 
at  the  instigation  of  the  Solicitor-General,  "  that  Robert 
Lord  Clive  had  rendered  great  and  meritorious  services 
to  this  country."  That  is,  after  having  stated  by  vote  that 
presents  acquired  by  military  influence  were  illegal,  they 
acquitted  and  thanked  the  man  who  had  confessed  and 
gloried  in  the  facts  of  which  he  was  accused.  Some  of 
his  friends  drove  to  Lord  Clive's  at  five  in  the  morning  to 
congratulate  him.  He  was  in  bed  ;  but  his  wife  and  family 
received  them  with  acclamations  from  the  windows  of  his 
house.  Twenty  other  plunderers  exulted  no  less,  but  more 
secretly.  Lord  North  went  home  with  very  different  sen- 
sations, and  wrote  immediately  to  the  King,  complaining 
how  he  had  been  abandoned  by  his  Majesty's  creatures. 
His  Majesty,  as  usual,  soothed  him  with  promises — and 
he  deserved  the  treatment,  by  once  again  submitting  to 
be  soothed. 

The  same  day  the  Proprietors  of  India  Stock  passed  a 
vote  for  petitioning  Parliament  to  be  heard  by  counsel 
against  Lord  North's  Bill  of  Regulations.  That  bill  took 
up  the  remainder  of  the  session,  and,  though  it  was  stiffly 
opposed,  was  carried  successfully  by  the  predominant  in- 
fluence of  the  Crown.  It  was  heavily  censured  for  its 
violation  of  the  charter,  and  for  reducing  the  just  rights  of 
the  proprietors  to  vote  for  500/.  stock,  which  was  now 
fixed  at  1000/.     Great  faults  were  found  in  the  bill  itself; 


1773]  BILL  OF  REGULATIONS  235 

but  was  it  not  easier  to  find  faults  than  to  draw  at  once  a 
bill  which  should  both  correct  and  give  law  to  a  country 
so  little  known  and  so  different  from  our  own  ?  The  most 
impartial  found  Lord  North's  bill  inadequate  to  any  great 
purpose ;  and,  perhaps,  that  was  to  his  praise.  Neither 
his  subservience  to  the  Crown,  his  contradictions  from  the 
Opposition,  nor  his  provocations  from  the  Company,  could 
drive  him  to  a  high  exercise  of  power.  His  regulations 
were  moderate,  and  the  limitations  confined  to  a  short 
season.  It  was  rather  an  essay  than  a  plan  of  govern- 
ment. He  endeavoured  to  awe  the  Company  into  submis- 
sion by  forcing  them  to  pay  their  debts,  which  they  were 
unable  to  do ;  but  the  Duke  of  Richmond  wrought  the 
Company  up  to  enthusiasm  of  resistance,  and  threw  every 
possible  difficulty  into  the  way  of  Government,  whose 
measures  created  many  real  enemies,  for  enemies,  wounded 
in  their  property,  are  in  earnest. 

On  the  2^th  the  Duke  persuaded  the  Company  and 
Proprietors  to  seek  union  with  the  great  corporations,  in 
which  they  were  met  eagerly  by  the  Common  Council ; 
but  the  flame  spread  no  farther.  The  bill  was  debated  for 
many  days  in  the  House  of  Commons,  which  often  sat  late 
on  it,  but  even  Lord  Clive  supported  the  Regulations. 


[June 


JUNE 

ON  the  Zth  happened  another  disagreeable  affair 
for  Lord  North,  and  it  did  not  come  single. 
General  Monckton,^  whose  services  in  the  late 
war  had  been  brilliant,  had  been  named  by  the 
East  India  Company  to  the  command  of  their  forces- 
Lord  North  made  a  different  choice,  or  had  it  imposed 
on  him.  He  recommended  General  Clavering,  a  man  that 
was  a  favourite  too  with  the  army.  To  this  preference 
Lord  North  had  added  slights.  He  was  apt  to  offend  by 
not  answering  letters,  for  he  had  no  grace,  even  if  he  con- 
ferred favours.  Monckton  first  complained  to  the  King, 
and  at  last  presented  a  memorial  to  the  House  of  Commons. 
Lord  North  was  abashed,  and  defended  himself  awkwardly, 
pleading  that  Monckton  had  been  offered  the  command  in 
America.  The  House,  however,  determined  as  the  Minister 
directed.  The  Company  adhered  to  Monckton ;  and  the 
feuds  increased. 

^th.  Wilkes,  to  affront  the  King,  moved  the  Common 
Council  to  congratulate  his  Majesty  on  the  increase  of  the 
Royal  Family  by  the  delivery  of  the  Duchess  of  Glou- 
cester.2     Some  urged  that  the  King  had  not  acknowledged 

^  See  Walpole's  '*  Memoirs  of  George  III.,"  vol.  i.  p.  143.  Monckton  was 
one  of  the  most  liberal  as  well  as  the  most  popular  generals  in  the  army.  He 
died  in  1782,  when  Governor  of  Portsmouth  and  Colonel  of  the  17th 
Regiment. — D. 

^  This  was  not  the  only  affront  dealt  at  Royalty  by  the  ultra-democratic 
party  in  London.  In  Wilkes's  *'  Letters  to  his  Daughter,"  vol.  i.  p.  121,  men- 
tion is  made  of  the  presentation  to  the  City  of  a  silver  cup  embossed  with  a 
representation  of  the  death  of  Caesar.  Some  persons  saw  an  insult  to  the 
Court  in  the  revival  of  Hamlet  a  few  months  before  the  period  treated  of  in 
the  text.  Walpole  (to  Mason,  Jan.  9,  1773)  expresses  his  surprise  that  so 
good  a  courtier  as  Garrick  should  have  committed  the  impropriety  of  bringing 
out  an  old  play,  with  "an  adulterous  Queen  of  Denmark"  for  a  heroine.— D. 

236 


1773]  HIGHWAY   ROBBERY  237 

her,  and  almost  all  objected  to  the  impropriety  of  the 
motion,  and  it  was  easily  quashed. 

nth.  On  the  India  Bill,  Sir  William  Meredith  and 
Charles  Fox,  though  then  unprovoked  and  unfounded  by 
the  debate,  made  such  philippics  against  Lord  Clive,  that 
he  quitted  the  House  with  anger  or  shame.  In  that 
debate!  many  friends  of  Andrew  Stuart  had  intended  to 
move  that  he  might  be  nominated  one  of  the  new  super- 
visors in  India,  and  Lord  North  had  promised  not  to 
oppose  it.  He  now  deprecated  the  motion  privately  with 
earnest  dismay,  saying  he  should  lose  his  bill  if  Andrew 
Stuart  was  named  :  Stuart  himself,  on  some  engagement, 
it  was  said,  that  he  should  be  indemnified,  wrote  a  letter 
to  beg  the  question  might  not  be  moved.  The  secret  was 
this  :  Lord  Mansfield,  from  hatred  of  Lord  Camden,  had 
opposed  a  like  bill  in  the  Duke  of  Grafton's  adminis- 
tration, and  did  now,  out  of  the  House,  inveigh  against 
this.  Hearing  of  the  intended  advancement  of  Stuart, 
whose  book  against  him  has  been  mentioned  in  the  month 
of  January,  Lord  Mansfield,  with  ungenerous  rancour, 
threatened  to  oppose  the  bill  if  Andrew  Stuart  was  to 
be  benefited  by  it.  The  injury  was  cruel,  and  had 
already  produced  the  book  ;  for  when  Stuart  had  can- 
vassed for  the  place,  many  urged  that  a  man  represented 
in  such  black  colours  as  he  had  been  on  the  Douglas 
cause  by  Lord  Mansfield,  could  not  be  a  proper  person 
for  so  important  a  trust.  He  wrote  his  book  to  vindicate 
and  avenge  himself,  but  experienced  the  fate  of  those  who 
dare  scribere  contra  Eum  qui  potest  proscribere. 

The  bill  went  to  the  Lords,  and  in  spite  of  all  the 
Duke  of  Richmond's  efforts  (and  he  was  allowed  even  by 
his  enemies  to  make  a  great  figure)  was  easily  carried 
through,  though  attended  with  a  warm   protest.^     Lord 

^  In  one  of  the  debates  on  this  bill  Dowdswell  spoke  for  two  hours  and 
forty  minutes. 

^  Signed  by  the  Dukes  of  Richmond,  Devonshire,  and  Portland,  the 
Marquis  of  Rockingham,  and  the  Lords  Fitzwilliam,  Milton,  and  Besborough. 


238       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

Mansfield  did  not  attend  it.  Lord  Gower,  affecting 
candour,  said  he  should  vote  for  all  the  evidence  which 
the  Duke  of  Richmond  demanded  from  the  Commons, 
because  he  had,  in  his  former  opposition,  voted  for  like 
lights ;  but  he  escaped  from  this  delicacy  by  hearing  the 
evidence  would  be  proposed  to  be  read — if  it  was  to  be 
of  any  use,  he  was  not  so  conscientious. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond  joked  on  the  King's  journey 
to  Portsmouth;  and  when  the  Ministers  pressed  the  bill 
forwards,  that  it  might  be  over  before  the  journey,  he  said 
he  supposed  they  were  afraid  of  trusting  Lord  Sandwich 
alone  with  the  King,  and  that  indeed  he  did  not  think 
him  a  man  fit  to  be  so  trusted. 

\2th  was  printed  in  the  Public  Advertiser  a  very 
bold  paragraph  on  the  King's  paying  for  his  own  statue 
in  Berkeley  Square,  telling  him  it  was  from  the  apprehen- 
sion that  posterity  would  erect  none  to  him,  and  advising 
him  to  build  his  own  mausoleum  for  the  same  reason.^ 

\/\.th.  Lord  North  opened  the  Budget,  and  in  the  con- 
clusion made  a  peroration  on  himself  and  his  own  situa- 
tion, in  which,  after  mentioning  the  reports  of  his  intending 
to  resign,  he  vaunted  his  own  firmness  in  the  cause  of 
the  public,  vaunted  his  merit  in  having  undertaken  the 
burthen  in  so  critical  a  situation,  when  tempted  neither 
by  avarice  nor  ambition  ;  and  he  vowed  with  tears  to 
persist  in  sustaining  his  part  till  he  should  have  perfected 
his  plans.    His  emotion  rather  bespoke  the  want  of  firmness 

^  With  equal  boldness  the  papers  of  the  day  maintained  that  the  wages  of 
the  servants  of  the  King's  household  were  greatly  in  arrear,  that  their  families 
were  in  exceeding  distress,  and  that  the  servants  themselves  were  clamorous  to 
be  paid.  Distress  was  not  confined  at  this  time  to  the  servants  of  the  palace,  in 
whose  vicinity  highwaymen  plied  their  vocation.  In  the  February  of  this 
year  the  two  daughters  of  Admiral  Holborn  were  stopped  by  a  robber  as  their 
carriage  was  conveying  them  across  St.  James's  Square  from  the  opera.  The 
highwayman  deliberately  robbed  them  of  their  watches,  jewels,  and  rings.  The 
prevailing  distress  was  aggravated  by  the  counterfeit  coin  in  circulation.  A 
few  months  later  than  the  period  in  the  text,  one  hundred  pounds'  worth  of 
silver  was  examined.  Only  ten  pounds'  worth  came  from  the  Mint ;  the  re- 
mainder was  "  Brummagem." — D. 


1773]    THE  KING'S  JOURNEY  TO  PORTSMOUTH      239 

to  resign  than  firmness  in  remaining.  As  his  measures 
were  successful,  it  could  only  be  the  uneasiness  of  his 
situation  in  the  Cabinet  that  called  forth  tears ;  and  this 
scene  he  had  repeated  too  often. 

i^th.  The  East  India  Bill  of  Regulations  was  read  in 
the  House  of  Lords  for  the  last  time,  and  was  passed  by 
a  large  majority.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  combated  it  to 
the  utmost,  speaking  near  twenty  times.  Lord  Shelburne, 
whether  having  brought  his  schemes  of  reconciliation  with 
the  Court  nearer  to  maturity,  or  whether  apprehending 
Lord  North's  fall  at  hand,  and  a  new  scramble  for  places 
approaching,  undertook  the  defence  of  the  bill,  and 
executed  it  with  applause  :  the  Duke  of  Richmond  com- 
plimented him  ironically  on  his  conversion.  The  next 
day  the  chiefs  of  the  minority  entered  a  new  protest,  couched 
in  the  most  respectful  terms,  on  the  servility,  adulation, 
corruption  of  the  peerage.  The  same  day  was  passed  by 
the  House  of  Commons  another  bill,  obliging  the  East 
India  Company  to  accept  the  loan  which  they  had  agreed 
with  Lord  North  to  take  from  Government,  and  which  they 
had  since  voted  they  would  not  receive. 

About  the  same  time  arrived  from  Boston,  resolutions 
voted  by  the  town  of  Gorham  on  their  grievances,  in 
which  in  the  most  open  terms  they  disclaim  the  authority 
of  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain  to  tax  them,  cry  out, 
as  all  men  did,  on  the  corruption  of  that  assembly,  and 
with  reason,  and  declare  their  option  of  risking  their  lives 
and  fortunes  in  defence  of  their  rights  civil  and  religious, 
rather  than  dying  by  piecemeal  in  slavery.  Corruption 
smiled,  and  was  not  afraid  of  swords  at  such  a  distance. 
The  town  of  Gorham  was  as  little  formidable  to  a  senate 
of  pensioners  as  a  protest  of  twelve  peers. 

On  the  22nd  the  King  set  out  for  Portsmouth,  and 
returned  on  the  2yth.  The  Ministers  attended  him  and 
dined  with  him  on  board  the  fleet  in  their  turns,  as  did 
several  other  lords  and  gentlemen,  Monsieur  de  Guisnes 


240       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

the  French  ambassador,  and  the  Duke  de  Lauzun.  The 
mob  were  unbounded  in  those  exultations  which  the  first 
sight  of  a  king  always  excites  in  a  distant  province. 
Mistaking  giddy  joy  for  affection,  he  said  :  "  I  do  not 
mind  abuse,  I  am  grown  accustomed  to  it ;  but  I  own 
these  sentiments  of  applause  touch  me."  It  was  a  pity  he 
did  not  reflect  that  the  silent  suffrages  of  approbation 
founded  on  merit  were  the  only  testimonies  of  affection 
that  are  lasting  and  worth  coveting. 

2jth.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester's  daughter  was  christened 
Sophia  Matilda.  Sir  Edward  Walpole  had  suggested  the 
name  of  Sophia,  the  foundress  of  the  Brunswick  line,  and 
which,  though  the  Queen  bore,  she  had  disclaimed,  prefer- 
ring her  other  name  of  Charlotte.  The  name  of  Sophia 
too  facilitated  the  use  of  the  appellation  the  Princess 
Sophia}  which  the  Duke  wished  should  be  given  to  his 
daughter,  rather  than  the  Lady  Sophia;  his  father  for 
popularity  had  affected  to  call  his  daughters  the  Lady 
Augusta,  the  Lady  Elizabeth,  &c. ;  but  the  late  King  had 
never  approved  or  admitted-  that  appellation,  and  it  had 
been  dropped  by  the  Princess  herself  after  her  husband's 
death.  The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumberland  were 
sponsors,  and  the  Queen  of  Denmark  by  proxy.  The 
Duke  had  written  to  ask  her  to  be  godmother,  but  no 
answer  had  come.  However  he  chose  to  suppose  her  con- 
sent rather  than  admit  a  gossip  of  rank  and  blood  not 
royal.  He  had  in  the  first  place  invited  the  King,  and 
intended  the  Queen,  but,  the  former  refusing,  the  latter 
was  not  asked.  Nor  was  any  occasion  of  mortifying  the 
Duke  omitted.  The  King  refused  to  review  his  regiment. 
The  Duke  sent  to  Lord  Rochford  to  press  the  verification 
of  his  child's  birth,  which  the  King  had  promised,  but  now 
declined.  They  saw,  however,  that  the  Duke  was  pre- 
pared and  determined  to  take  every  advantage  the  King's 
passionate  folly  should  present  to  him. 

^  Py  having  been  familiar. 


4 


\ 


J 

■ 

H 

,;in  M/^ 

'Ijit 

^"^^^'^^■■l 

- 

r.u)'^J\  11 

ar:iv:*.«saKl^fe<::^£:; 

] 

From  t/te  collection  of  H.  H.  Raphael,  Esq.,  M.P. 


^773] 


JULY 


IS^, 


THE  Parliament  was  prorogued.  The  Lords 
chose  to  swallow  the  stigma  of  servility  fixed 
on  them  by  the  protest  of  the  dissenting 
Lords  rather  than  spread  the  notoriety  by 
expunging  it. 

y^/i.  Miller,  printer  of  the  London  Evening  Post,  was 
tried,  by  a  special  jury,  before  Lord  Mansfield,  for  accusing 
Lord  Sandwich  of  selling  a  place,  was  found  guilty  and 
fined  2000/.  The  East  India  Company  voted  not  to 
employ  General  Clavering. 

St/i.  Lord  North  was  installed  Chancellor  of  Oxford. 

12/^.  General  Moyston,  a  brave  but  insolent  and  cor- 
rupt man,  Governor  of  Minorca,  was  cast  in  the  Common 
Pleas  in  damages  of  3000/.  to  Mr.  Fabregas,  a  native 
merchant  of  that  island,  whom  he  had  arbitrarily  im- 
prisoned and  then  transported  to  Spain  without  trial,  after 
many  instances  of  barbarity,  for  having  refused  to  sell 
his  wine,  the  product  of  his  own  estate,  at  the  price  the 
General  had  despotically  imposed.  Lord  George  Lenox 
had  been  exceedingly  ill-used  by  the  same  mercenary 
bacha  for  having  interposed  in  favour  of  the  common 
soldiers,  whom  Moyston  obliged  to  purchase  wine  dearer 
than  they  could  have  bought  it  themselves,  and  for  which 
grievance  Lord  George  could  obtain  no  redress  from  the 
Governor  or  the  War-Office. 

In  this  month  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  wrote  a  very 

respectful  letter  to  the  King,  asking  leave  to  go  to  Italy 

for  some  time,  which  was  readily  granted,  and  the  King, 

it  was  given  out,  was  pleased  with  his  behaviour.     The 

I.— R  241 


242       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [July 

Duchess  of  Cumberland  was  certainly  very  sensible  ;  and 
though  she  had  not  the  parts  and  wit  of  the  Duchess  of 
Gloucester,  no  more  than  the  lustre  of  beauty,  was  greatly 
more  mistress  of  her  passions  and  more  artful.  Since  she 
had  married  the  Duke  he  had  committed  no  folly  or  in- 
discretion, which,  as  before  he  committed  every  week, 
could  be  attributed  only  to  her  influence.  She  saw  her- 
self totally  neglected  by  all  sides,  while  the  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  was  courted  by  part  of  the  Opposition  and 
had  several  persons  of  consideration  attached  to  her.  She 
saw  too  that  the  spirit  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  and 
the  warmth  of  the  Duchess  had  and  would  offend  and 
frighten  the  King  and  keep  open  the  breach  as  well  as 
had  widened  it.  Hence  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  was 
tutored  to  act  contrition,  and  took  opportunities  of  ex- 
pressing to  such  of  the  Court  as  he  could  meet,  his  sorrow 
for  the  King's  anger  and  his  resolution  of  withdrawing 
and  never  giving  him  any  occasion  of  dislike.  The 
King,  whose  joy  and  talent  lay  in  fomenting  division  in 
all  connections,  was  charmed  with  these  overtures,  and 
affected  to  favour  his  contemptible  brother  whom  he 
had  always  hated  in  order  to  mortify  and  affront  his 
favourite  brother,  for  folly  and  demerit  never  wanted  his 
Majesty's  countenance  if  they  were  but  abject  enough. 
Sense  and  virtue  might  awe  him,  but  were  sure  of  his 
aversion. 

The  Court,  about  the  same  time,  made  another  conquest 
which  it  seemed  little  worth  their  while  to  buy  so  dear, 
unless  from  the  intrinsic  satisfaction  of  corrupting  a  fair 
character.  Cornwall  ^  quitted  the  Opposition  for  a  pension 
of  five  hundred  a  year  for  life.  He  was  a  reputable  and 
specious  man  and  a  decent  speaker,  but  not  being  acri- 
monious seemed  little  formidable,  for  how  could  a  shame- 
less Parliament  dread  moderation  when  they  braved  every 

^  He  was  brother-in-law  of  Jenkinson.  (See  Walpole's  *'  Memoirs  of  Reign 
pf  George  III.,"  vol.  iii.  p.  211.). — D. 


1773]  DISCONTENTS   IN   AMERICA  243 

insult  ?  but,  when  hypocrisy  was  the  religion  of  the  Court, 
prostitution  was  the  symbol  of  a  convert. 

This  month  came  an  account  of  new  uneasinesses  at 
Boston.  Some  letters  of  their  Governor  Hutchinson  had 
been  discovered  and  laid  before  the  Assembly,  by  which 
it  appeared  that  he  had  sent  over  inflammatory  informa- 
tions against  the  colonies,  in  one  even  using  this  expres- 
sion, so  foul  in  the  mouth  of  an  Englishman  :  "  There 
must  be  an  abridgment  of  what  is  called  English  liberty." 
General  Moyston  had  acted  what  Hutchinson  recom- 
mended.^ 

^  Perhaps  few  circumstances  gave  more  surprise  to  Franklin  when  he  was 
in  London  seeking  justice  for  the  oppressed  colonies  than  to  be  informed  that 
the  grievances  of  which  he  complained,  and  the  coercion  which  he  deprecated, 
formed  a  course  of  policy  recommended  not  only  by  certain  English  officials 
but  by  native  American  gentlemen  exercising  offices  of  great  dignity  and 
responsibility.  Franklin,  at  least,  professed  to  doubt  this,  and  a  ''Member 
of  Parliament,"  according  to  Bancroft  (Hist.  Americ.  Rev.,  vol.  iii. 
pp.  480-1),  who  had  learned  the  alleged  fact  from  John  Temple,  Lieuten- 
ant-Governor of  New  Hampshire,  undertook,  with  the  privity  of  Temple,  to 
procure  the  documents  which  would  prove  the  assertion.  These  documents 
consisted  of  letters  from  Hutchinson,  Oliver,  and  Paxton,  "written  to  pro- 
duce coercion,"  and  originally  "addressed  to  Whately"  (Secretary  to  the 
Treasury),  "who  had  communicated  them  to  Grenville,  his  patron,  and 
through  him  to  Lord  Temple."  Bancroft  finds  his  account  with  respect 
to  Grenville  receiving  from  Whately  details  of  his  correspondence  with 
Hutchinson  confirmed  by  the  Grenville  Papers,  iv.  480.  Franklin,  by  trans- 
mitting copies  of  the  letters  to  America,  made  himself  the  public  accuser  of 
men  whom  the  colonies  now  looked  upon  as  traitors.  The  excitement  in 
America  and  England  was  very  great ;  and  in  the  latter  country  a  duel  was 
fought  between  a  brother  of  the  deceased  Secretary  Whately  and  the  Lieu- 
tenant-Governor Temple.  Whately  was  dangerously  wounded.  After  the 
duel  Franklin  published  a  letter,  in  which  he  stated  that  he  alone  od^amed  the 
letters,  which  had  never  been  in  the  hands  of  the  last-named  Whately,  from 
whom  they  could  not  therefore  have  been  taken  by  Temple.  According  to 
Bancroft,  the  letters  were  procured  for  Franklin  by  **  a  Member  of  Parlia- 
ment." I  find  another  person  mentioned  as  having  rendered  this  service  to 
Franklin.  In  Dr.  Francis's  "Old  New  York,"  p.  97  (published  1858),  there 
are  some  details  of  a  remarkably  methodical  physician  of  New  York,  named 
Hugh  Williamson,  who  was  in  England  in  1773.  Dr.  Francis  says,  "  Ho- 
sack  affirmed,  on  the  testimony  of  Bishop  White,  John  Adams,  President  of 
the  United  States,  General  Reed,  and  John  Williamson,  that  Hugh  William- 
son was  the  individual  who,  by  an  ingenious  device,  obtained  the  famous 
Hutchinson  and  Oliver  letters  from  the  British  Foreign-Office  for  Franklin ; 
and  I  can  add  that  John  Williamson,  the  brother  of  the  Doctor,  communicated 
to  me  his  concurrence  in  the  same  testimony." — P. 


[Aug. 


AUGUST 

THE  beginning  of  this  month  the  Duke  and 
Duchess  of  Cumberland  went  to  Weymouth  on 
their  way  to  Italy.  Before  they  set  out  they 
went  to  dine  at  Gloucester  Lodge.  The 
Duke  of  Cumberland  behaved  there  in  the  most  cold, 
silent,  and  particular  manner,  and  went  away  abruptly 
without  taking  any  leave.  His  Duchess,  whether  the 
cause  of  it  or  not,  was  distressed  and  confounded,  and,  as 
she  followed  him,  turned,  and  in  a  low  voice  said  to  the 
Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  "  I  do  not  know  what 
is  the  meaning  of  all  this ;  he  did  not  apprise  me."  It 
was  said  that  he  often  treated  her  very  rudely  ;  still  she 
certainly  had  had  no  reason  to  be  pleased  with  the  little 
cordiality  shown  to  her  by  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester. 

22nd.  Died  at  Hagley,  of  an  inflammation  in  his 
bowels,  George  Lord  Lyttelton,  aged  sixty-four.  He  had 
entered  into  life  with  the  highest  reputation  for  parts, 
which,  however,  were  not  bright  nor  answered  expectation, 
though  he  had  sense  and  uncommon  learning  for  a  peer. 
His  ignorance  of  mankind,  want  of  judgment,  with  strange 
absence  and  awkwardness,  involved  him  in  mistakes  and 
ridicule,  and  drew  him  into  many  political  errors.^  When 
he  arrived  at  being  a  minister,  he  maintained  a  reputation 
of  parts  and  of  spirit  with  temper,  though  he  appeared 
totally  unequal  to  his  office.  His  slighter  works  were 
marked  with  neither  genius  nor  novelty,  but  his    Reign 

^  See  a  pretty  just  character  of  Lord  Lyttelton,  agreeing  with  this  and 
a  former  one  in  the  **  Memoirs  of  1751  "  (except  in  his  Lordship's  being  a  great 
man  and  a  good  poet,  which  he  was  not),  in  the  "London  Chronicle"  of 
Jan.   15th,  1774. 

244 


1773]  DEATH   OF   LORD   LYTTELTON  245 

of  Henry  II.,  so  long  laboured  and  expected  as  a  great 
and  profound  work,  disappointed  all  mankind  ;  and  though 
it  evinced  how  deeply  he  had  endeavoured  to  inform  him- 
self, it  neither  instructed  the  learned  nor  amused  the  idle, 
being  in  truth  a  tedious,  turgid,  empty,  uninteresting  per- 
formance. As  he  had  fluctuated  between  parties  rather 
than  betrayed  them,  as  he  really  had  a  good  heart  and 
with  inveterate  gravity  affected  sanctimonious  manners, 
the  world  esteemed  him  very  much  as  a  wise  and  upright 
man,  which  was  greatly  increased  by  compassion  and  com- 
parison with  the  detestable  character  of  his  only  son,  who, 
with  more  natural  parts,  was  devoid  of  every  principle  and 
sentiment  that  become  a  man,  and  whose  ingratitude, 
profligacy,  extravagance,  and  want  of  honour  and  decency, 
seemed  to  aim  at  nothing  but  afflicting  his  father,  shocking 
mankind,  and  disgracing  himself.^ 

Toward  the  end  of  the  month  the  Pope,  vanquished  by 
the  perseverance  of  the  King  of  Spain,  published  the  bull 
for  the  suppression  of  the  Jesuits. 

^  See  a  correct  appreciation  of  Lyttelton's  character  by  Sir  Denis  Le  Mar- 
chant,  in  Walpole's  "  Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  George  III.,"  vol.  ii. 
p.  27.— D. 


[Sept. 


SEPTEMBER 


i^th. 


THE  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumberland,  and 
the  Duchess's  sister  Miss  Luttrell,  went  to 
Calais  on  their  way  to  Italy.  Our  Ministers 
abroad  were  instructed  not  to  visit  them,  but 
to  be  as  useful  to  them  as  they  could  underhand,  whil^ 
every  method  was  used  at  home  to  discourage  attention  to 
the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester. 

2\th.  On  the  24th  died  at  Bath  of  the  palsy  Evelyn 
Pierpoint,  Duke  of  Kingston  and  Knight  of  the  Garter, 
in  whom  the  title  extinguished.  He  had  for  many  years 
publicly  kept,  at  a  vast  expense,  the  famous  Miss  Chud- 
leigh,  maid  of  honour  to  the  Princess  Dowager,  and  their 
affairs  had  become  singular  enough  to  enter  into  history. 
Miss  Chudleigh  had  a  most  beautiful  face,  her  person  was 
ill-made,  clumsy,  and  ungraceful.  She  aimed  at  infinite 
art,  but  her  beauty  aided  it  more  than  her  understanding, 
for  her  art  was  gross,  ill-judged,  and  more  supported  by 
assurance  than  address.  She  had  very  early  been  privately 
married  to  Augustus  Hervey,  brother  of  the  Earl  of 
Bristol,  and  had  two  children  by  him,  and  before  their 
marriage  was  known  the  Dukes  of  Hamilton  and  Ancas- 
ter  and  the  Earl  of  Hillsborough  offered  her  their  hands. 
As  the  wedded  pair  were  both  poor,  extravagant,  and 
gallant,  they  were  soon  weary  of  their  chain,  though,  on 
confessing  their  case  to  the  Princess  and  her  son  the  King, 
the  bride  was  retained  as  maid  of  honour,  though  her 
character  soon  became  as  inconsistent  with  her  office  as 
both  were  with  matrimony.  After  some  adventures  of 
noise  she  engaged  the  Duke  of  Kingston,  a  very  weak 

246 


1773]  THE   DUCHESS   OF   KINGSTON  247 

man,  of  the  greatest  beauty  and  finest  person  in  England. 
She  built  an  expensive  house  at  Knightsbridge,  plundered 
the  Duke,  lived  with  the  utmost  profusion,  while  connived 
at  by  a  pious  Court  as  an  object  of  charity,  and  was  so 
silly  as  to  wear  well-known  jewels  of  the  Kingston  family, 
and  pretend  to  have  found  them  in  a  chest  of  her  mother, 
who  lived  on  a  pension.  At  length,  the  children  by  her 
husband  and  the  witnesses  of  her  marriage  being  dead, 
and  hearing  the  clergyman  who  had  married  them  was 
dying,  she  went  down  to  him,  forced  the  register  from  him 
in  his  agony,  tore  it,  went  to  Doctors'  Commons  and  for- 
swore her  marriage,  and  publicly  married  the  Duke,  with 
all  the  affected  pretences  to  virgin  modesty,  but  she  had 
first  taken  care  to  silence  the  opposition  of  Hervey  by  a 
bribe  of  fourteen  thousand  pounds.  Triumphant  and  lost 
to  shame,  she  was  presented  at  Court  as  Duchess  of 
Kingston,  and,  as  if  she  had  bribed  the  King  and  Prin- 
cesses too,  they,  the  Queen,  and  whole  Court  wore  the 
favours  she  had  sent  to  them  on  her  marriage, — nay, 
even  Lord  Bristol  himself  did,^  though  he  went  about 
declaring  that  she  herself  had  long  before  acquainted  him 
that  she  was  his  brother's  wife ;  and  the  Bishop  of  Derry, 
his  brother  and  next  in  succession  to  Augustus,  protested 
against  the  second  marriage.  Augustus  himself,  as  if 
loosened,  offered  his  hand  to  a  physician's  daughter  at 
Bath,  with  whom  he  was  in  love,  but  the  physician  was 
too  conscientious  to  consent.  Still  the  Duchess  was 
baulked.  All  London,  who  had  resorted  to  her  balls  and 
entertainments  while  she  was  a  kept  mistress,  had  the 
decency  to  abandon  her  on  her  new  dignity,  and  she  was 
reduced  to  retire  with  the  Duke  into  the  country.  On  his 
death  the  scene  was  completed.     To  secure  her  plunder 

^  At  the  time  of  the  wedding  Lady  Mary  Coke  writes  that  she  said  to  his 
sister,  Lady  Mary  Fitzgerald,  "  '  I  see  a  great  many  favours ;  I  think  this 
late  event  outdoes  all  the  extraordinary  ones  that  this  year  has  produced.' 
She  agreed  with  me,  but  with  a  smile  she  said  she  thought  she  ought  to  have 
had  a  favour.  "—A.  F.  S. 


248       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [Sept. 

she  was  forced  to  act  moderation  ;  and  her  timidity  pre- 
vailing over  her  rapine,  as  her  interest  did  over  her  pride, 
it  appeared  by  the  Duke's  will  that  she  had  contented 
herself  with  his  own  personal  estate  for  ever,  and  with  his 
real  estate  (computed  at  17,000/.  a  year,  charged  with  a 
debt  of  70,000/.)  only  for  her  life,  while,  to  exclude 
Hervey's  claim,  it  was  given  in  trust  for  her ;  and  to 
identify  the  person  beyond  cavil  all  her  names  were  speci- 
fied, and  she  described  as  Duchess  of  Kingston,  alias 
Elizabeth  Chudleigh,  alias  Elizabeth  Hervey^ — the  first 
instance  of  a  Duchess  recorded  in  a  Duke's  will  as  a  street- 
walker is  indicted  at  the  Old  Bailey,  and  a  clear  confession 
that  she  was  guilty  of  bigamy.  The  estate,  by  disinherison 
of  the  eldest  son  Evelyn  Meadows,  with  whom  the  Duke 
had  quarrelled,  was  given,  after  the  Duchess,  to  the  second 
son  of  the  Duke's  only  sister  Lady  Frances  Meadows,  who 
had  long  been  mad,  to  his  heirs,  then  to  the  other  nephews 
and  their  heirs,  and  after  them  to  the  second  son  of  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle,  Lord  Thomas  Clinton.  The  well- 
known  Wortley  Montagu,  son  of  the  more  deservedly 
famous  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu,  the  Duke's  aunt, 
succeeded  to  1200/.  a  year,  settled  on  him  by  his  grand- 
father the  first  Duke  of  Kingston. 

The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumberland  had  landed  at 
Calais.  The  two  first  nights  they  went  to  the  play.  The 
next  morning  a  deputation  of  the  players  waited  on  them 
to  thank  them  for  the  honour  and  to  be  paid.  The  Duke 
sent  them  but  three  guineas.  Disappointed,  and  meaning 
to  affront,  they  had  the  insolence  to  despatch  a  dirty 
candle-snuffer  with  a  bouquet  for  the  Duchess  ;  the  fellow 
very  properly  was  caned.  Still  the  comedians  did  not 
desist :  they  sent  a  letter  after  the  Duke  to  St.  Omer,  to 

^  This  is  not  true ;  she  is  only  called  my  dear  wife  in  the  Duke's  will. 
There  are  other  errors  in  the  above  statement.  The  notorious  lady  did  not 
marry  the  Duke  before  an  Ecclesiastical  Court  had  disallowed  her  marriage 
with  Hervey.  It  was  the  reversal  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Court  decree  by  the 
House  of  Lords  that  subjected  her  to  the  charge  of  bigamy. — D. 


1773]       DUKE   OF   CUMBERLAND   AT   CALAIS         249 

ask  if  it  was  really  true  that  his  Royal  Highness  had  given 
but  three  guineas,  the  company  suspecting  their  comrades 
of  having  sunk  part  of  the  gratuity.  The  French  magis- 
trates now  interposed,  and,  to  punish  such  insults,  com- 
mitted the  last  messenger  to  prison  and  banished  the 
players  from  Calais. 

The  Ministry,  having  formed  a  plan  or  a  shift  for  East 
Indian  affairs,  determined  not  to  let  the  Parliament  meet 
till  after  Christmas,  a  delay  very  agreeable  to  Lord  North's 
indolence. 


[Oct. 


OCTOBER 

THERE  was  again  a  great  contest  for  the  elec- 
tion of  a  Lord  Mayor.  On  one  side  stood 
Wilkes  and  Bull,  on  the  other  Sawbridge  and 
Oliver ;  the  two  former  were  chosen  by  a 
majority  of  the  livery,  and  Wilkes  by  a  very  large  one, 
as  it  appeared  after  a  poll  demanded  by  Sawbridge. 
Townshend,  the  late  Lord  Mayor,  as  active  an  enemy 
of  Wilkes  as  the  Scotch,  was  very  ill-treated  by  the  mob 
at  each  meeting.  Sawbridge  accused  Wilkes  of  anony- 
mous slander,  who  made  a  very  bold  speech  of  defiance 
against  him,  and  published  it  in  the  papers.  There  was 
another  gross  correspondence  of  the  same  kind  between 
Wilkes  and  one  Lovel,  chairman  of  the  Committee.  On 
the  report  of  the  Court  of  Aldermen,  they  preferred  Bull 
for  Lord  Mayor  by  Townshend's  casting  vote.  This  pro- 
scription of  Wilkes,  though  for  two  years  together  he  was 
first  on  the  poll,  did  but  serve  to  revive  his  popularity 
from  the  injustice  done  him,  and  in  this  instance  did  not 
hurt  his  power.  Bull  being  entirely  his  creature,  and  the 
odium  on  Townshend,  Home,  Oliver,  and  Sawbridge  in- 
creasing. The  two  first  were  knaves,  and  the  latter  weak 
men.  Wilkes  was  the  only  man,  except  Ministers,  who 
preserved  credit  in  spite  of  character. 

Great  discoveries  were  made  from  the  papers  of  the 
Jesuits,^  which  exceedingly  enraged  the    Pope,  who   had 

^  In  their  Noviciate  was  found  by  the  examiners  the  plan  of  the  Gunpowder 
Plot.  The  Pope  made  it  be  published,  and  even  sent  an  account  of  it  to  be 
printed  in  the  Florence  Gazette ;  but  though  Sir  Horace  Mann,  our  Envoy  at 
Florence,  sent  home  an  authentic  account,  the  temper  of  the  Court  was  too 
favourable,  even  to  Jesuits,  to  let  it  be  made  public  here. 

250 


1773]  AFFAIRS   IN   IRELAND  251 

temporised  in  their  favour  as  long  as  possible.  Counter- 
briefs,  in  the  name  of  their  General,  were  found,  annulling 
all  that  the  Pope  had  enacted  against  their  order,  and 
denying  not  only  his  authority  but  even  the  legality  of  his 
election.  The  King  of  Prussia,  by  a  silly  affectation 
rather  than  from  policy,  protected  the  Society. 

I  must  now  turn  to  Ireland,  the  only  part  of .  our 
dominions  which  seemed  to  threaten  any  disturbance,  nor 
that  unless  it  should  happen  to  be  combined  with  circum- 
stances in  England.  Lord  Harcourt,i  an  empty  man, 
devoted  to  the  Court,  but  diffident  and  complaisant,  had 
determined  to  act  upon  a  sort  of  general  plan,  for  which  he 
was  not  much  qualified,  to  court  all  parties  and  to  employ 
no  managers.  Managers  implied  either  the  officers  of 
State  or  the  best  speakers  in  Parliament,  who  were  not 
yet  retained,  though  willing  to  be  so.  This  impartiality, 
still  more  than  hatred  of  his  predecessor  Lord  Towns- 
hend,2  drew  attention  and  civility  towards  him  from  all 
parties,  the  leaders  of  all  being  sensible  that  he  could  not 
govern  alone,  and  being  unwilling  to  be  neglected  by  dis- 
obliging him.  Even  the  Duke  of  Leinster,  who  was  dying, 
was  among  the  first  to  pay  his  court.  Ponsonby,  the  late 
Speaker,  was  far  from  hostile;  Perry,  then  actually  Speaker, 
was  favourable;  and  Hutchinson,  Prime  Serjeant,  wished 
to  be  solicited  to  be  so.  Among  the  inferior  speakers, 
who  by  having  less  parts  had  less  hopes,  several  were 
active  in  opposition,  and  at  the  opening  of  the  session 
hostile  motions  were  made  by  calling  for  numerous 
accounts,  partly  to  display  the  flagrancy  of  Lord  Towns- 
hend's  corruption  by  proofs,  and  partly  to  ground  the 
proposal  of  a  new  tax.  The  Marquis  of  Kildare,  eldest 
son  of  the  Duke  of  Leinster,  told  the  House  of  Commons 
he  hoped  they  would  declare  the  late  Viceroy  an  enemy 
to  that  country.     Some  few  who  had  been  gained  by  that 

^  Simon,  Earl  of  Harcourt,  Lord  Lieutenant  1 772-1 777. — D. 
2  Lord  Lieutenant  1 767-1 772.— D. 


252       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

Minister  provoked  more  philippics  by  injudicious  pane- 
gyrics on  their  patron.^  Still  the  new  Lord  Lieutenant 
appeared  predominant,  and  the  first  motion  for  papers  was 
defeated  by  the  number  of  88  against  52.  Lord  Harcourt 
had  even  ingratiated  himself  with  the  country  by  obtaining 
from  England  abolition  of  the  addition  and  unpopular 
Boards  of  Customs. 

But  the  great  object  of  expectation  was  the  tax  on 
absentees,  loudly  called  for  by  the  popular  party.  In 
short,  between  the  profusions  of  the  late  Viceroys  to  gain 
votes,  the  want  of  specie  which  was  spent  in  England  by 
the  great  proprietors  of  estates,  the  consequential  decrease 
of  trade  and  farms,  which  in  their  turn  produced  emigra- 
tions, the  revenue  was  almost  gone,  and  necessary  cash 
did  not  remain  either  to  carry  on  government,  commerce, 
or  common  traffic;  hence  the  patriots  had  determined 
to  propose  a  tax  of  two  shilling  in  the  pound  on  the 
estates  of  all  who  should  not  reside  in  Ireland.  Lord 
North,  sensible  of  the  necessity  and  of  the  abuses,  had 
promised  Lord  Harcourt  that  if  the  bill  should  be  sent 
from  Ireland  he  would  use  all  his  power  to  have  it  con- 
firmed by  the  King  and  Council  here.  It  happened  that 
some  very  great  Lords  ^  here  had  the  greater  part  of 
their  property  in  Ireland.  Even  some  of  the  chiefs  of  the 
English  Opposition  were  in  that  predicament,  especially 
the  Marquis  of  Rockingham,^  who,  forgetting  their  patriot- 
ism in  both  countries,  grew  very  clamorous  against  the 
project,  and  found  countenance  from  some  of  the  Court, 
who  had  various  reasons  for  joining  the  cry,  which  was 
grounded  on  plausible  as  well  as  interested  causes.  Several 
great  Irish  proprietors  and  peers  were  also  peers  of  Eng- 

^  The  Octennial  Bill  was  proved  to  have  been  only  passed  by  Lord  Towns- 
hend,  but  to  have  been  the  act  of  Lord  Chatham. 

'^  Particularly  the  Earl  of  Hertford,  Lord  Chamberlain,  who  was  warm 
against  the  tax. 

^  See  "Memoirs  of  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham,"  vol.  ii.  pp.  227-234. 


1773]  PROPOSED   TAX   ON   ABSENTEES  253 

land,  and  obliged  to  attend  Parliament  here,  which  clashed 
with  their  residence  in  Ireland.  Some  were  of  English 
families  to  whom  Irish  estates  had  fallen  without  any  other 
connection  in  that  country.  It  was  immediately  intimated 
in  the  English  papers  that  the  scheme  was  an  act  of 
revenge  against  Lord  Rockingham,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
a  leading  step  towards  a  land-tax  in  that  country.  The 
cry,  however,  made  no  sensation  here.  Could  the  people 
of  England  care  whether  Irish  lords  were  taxed  or  not? 
Lord  Rockingham  exerted  himself  in  vain.  At  last, 
having  summoned  a  meeting  of  those  concerned,  he  could 
assemble  but  four  besides  himself,  Lord  Shelburne  having 
been  invited  to  sign  their  remonstrance,  refusing,  and 
adding,  that  if  they  had  called  him  to  sign  an  impeach- 
ment of  a  minister  he  would  have  concurred — a  vaunt  of 
hostility  only  calculated  to  disguise  his  wish  of  being  pur- 
chased by  the  Court.  Lord  Shelburne  had  affirmed  that 
the  tax  on  absentees  would  be  a  robbery,  and  that  the 
Minister  who  should  advise  it  would  deserve  to  be  hanged. 
When  pressed  on  all  he  had  said,  he  pleaded  to  Lord 
Rockingham  and  Lord  Besborough  that  Lord  Chatham 
approved  the  tax,  and  he  had  long  determined  to  be 
governed  in  everything  by  Lord  Chatham.  "  Pray," 
said  the  two  Lords,  "what  reasons  has  Lord  Chatham 
given  your  Lordship  for  the  tax?"  "He  has  given  me 
none,"  said  Shelburne.  "  And  is  your  Lordship  con- 
vinced without  reasons!'  said  Lord  Besborough,  "  when 
you  would  have  hanged  the  Minister  who  should  propose 
it?"  Yet  the  very  next  day  Lord  Shelburne  went  to 
Edmund  Burke,  and  pressed  him  to  write  against  the  tax, 
saying  Burke  might  save  him  some  thousand  pounds  in 
his  pocket.  Burke  told  him  he  had  never  written  but 
two  political  pamphlets,  one  of  which  his  Lordship  had 
much  condemned,  and  that  he  would  write  no  more.  The 
Duke  of  Richmond  told  me  these  facts,  which  he  had 
from  Lord  Rockingham  himself, 


254       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Oct. 

The  five  Lords  signed  and  sent  a  letter,  supposed  to  be 
drawn  by  Edmund  Burke,  to  Lord  North,  requiring  to  know 
if  he  intended  to  confirm  the  tax  in  case  it  should  be  sent 
over.  He  answered,  if  it  came  in  the  shape  it  had  been 
proposed  to  him,  as  an  individual  he  would  in  council  vote 
for  it.  This  answer  was  more  commendable  for  its  frankness 
than  dignity,  nor  was  it  a  wise  precedent  to  answer  a  ques- 
tion on  a  measure  of  government  asked  by  five  private  indi- 
viduals of  whom  four  were  in  Opposition.  The  five  were 
the  Duke  of  Devonshire,^  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham, 
the  Earls  of  Besborough^  and  Ossory,^  and  Lord  Milton.* 
The  Duke  had  inherited  a  large  estate  from  his  maternal 
grandfather  the  Earl  of  Burlington,  and,  with  all  his  indif- 
ference to  money  and  party,  was  persuaded  by  his  family 
and  Lord  Rockingham,  glad  to  dip  him  in  any  opposition, 
to  concur  in  this  demand.  Lord  Besborough  was  an  Irish- 
man, and  his  fortune  lay  in  that  country.  He  was  a  peace- 
able man,  was  sorry  to  be  involved  against  the  Court,  but 
understood  and  loved  his  interest.  Lord  Milton,  heir  of 
Swift's  old  miser  and  usurer  Damer,  was  the  most  arro- 
gant and  proud  of  men,  with  no  foundation  but  great 
wealth  and  a  match  with  the  Duke  of  Dorset's  daughter ; 
his  birth  and  parts  were  equally  mean  and  contemptible. 
Lord  Ossory's  junction  was  more  surprising.  Of  the  most 
ancient  Irish  blood,  and  with  a  large  Irish  estate,  he  was 
firmly  attached  to  the  Court,  and,  though  a  young  man  of 
strict  honour  and  good  sense,  strongly  connected  with  his 
near  relations  the  Bedfords.  He  was  not  likely,  on  an  abrupt 
summons  from  Lord  Rockingham,  to  take  so  uncommon  a 
step.  Probably  he  knew  it  would  not  displease  his  con- 
nection, if  some  of  them  had  not  even  instigated  him. 

^  William  Cavendish,  fifth  Duke  of  Devonshire. 

^  William  Ponsonby,  Earl  of  Besborough,  elder  brother  of  the  late  Irish 
Speaker,  and,  by  his  wife,  uncle  to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire. 

^  John  Fitzpatrick,  Earl  of  Upper  Ossory,  nephew^  of  the  Duchess 
of  Bedford  and  Earl  Gower. 

*  Joseph  Damer,  Lord  Milton.  He  married  Caroline  Sackville,  only 
[third — D.  ]  daughter  of  Lionel  Duke  of  Dorset, 


1773]  PARTY   INTRIGUES  255 

In  fact,  the  Bedfords  were  at  least  not  contented.  Lord 
Gower  had  not  lost  sight  of  the  Treasury ;  Lady  Gower^ 
thirsted  for  that  source  of  jobs  and  preferments.  Lord 
Weymouth  was  undone,  as  well  as  out  of  place,  since  the 
blunder  he  had  made  in  resigning  the  Seals.  Even  Rigby, 
though  possessed  of  the  most  lucrative  post  in  England,  in 
which  he  was  rapidly  raising  a  fortune,^  had  the  vanity  of 
sometimes  wishing  to  be  First  Minister,  though,  being  a  very 
timid  politician,  however  insolent  when  his  circumstances 
were  desperate,  he  trembled  to  gaze  steadily  on  the  object 
he  coveted.  Two  trifles  that  touched  his  vainglory  and 
rapacity  happened  at  this  time  to  meet  and  tempt  him. 
The  King,  either  afraid  of  his  weight  with  the  Bedfords, 
or  apprehending  that  Lord  North  might  resign  in  some 
disgust  and  that  Rigby  might  chance  to  be  necessary  for 
the  conduct  of  the  House  of  Commons,  paid  great  court 
to  him,  and  made  him  think  himself  a  favourite.  On  the 
other  hand,  Lord  North,  desiring  to  remove  for  his  own 
ease  the  meeting  of  Parliament  till  after  Christmas,  and 
wanting  money  to  carry  on  the  necessary  services,  had 
obtained  from  the  Pay-Office  an  hundred  thousand  pounds 
as  a  loan.  Though  for  a  few  months  only,  Rigby  felt  the 
loss  of  the  interest  on  such  a  sum,  which  he  always  put 
out  for  his  own  use,  and  then,  to  his  mortification,  Lord 
North,  with  his  usual  ill-breeding  and  indifference,  seemed 
insensible  of  this  favour,  which  he  thought  an  insignificant, 
and  Rigby  a  considerable,  service.  This  induced  him  to 
blow  up  Lord  Rockingham's  heat,  and  to  hold  out  to  him 
and    Lord    Besborough   a  prospect  of  allies ;    and  Lord 

^  Lady  Susan  Stewart,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Galloway,  third  wife  of 
Granville  Leveson,  Earl  Gower,  Lord  President  of  the  Council. 

2  Rigby,  the  son  of  a  linendraper,  was  Secretary  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford 
when  the  latter  was  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  1757-1761.  Rigby's  post  was 
a  sinecure,  bringing  him  4000/.  a-year.  He  was  subsequently  Paymaster  of 
the  Forces.  He  died  in  1788.  Combe  in  the  *'  Diaboliad  "  has  smartly  hit 
both  Rigby  and  his  patron : — 

"  When  at  my  back  the  angry  lash  was  thrown, 
JJe  saved  me  and  received  it  on  his  own." 


256       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Oct. 

Gower,  who  never  acted  on  any  principle,  already  affected 
dislike  to  the  tax,  and  Rigby  easily  drew  Lord  Weymouth 
to  any  measure  that  favoured  a  prospect  of  changes,  though 
Rigby,  pretending  his  duty  to  the  King's  measures,  pro- 
cured to  be  dispensed  from  personal  opposition  to  Lord 
North.  But  before  he  returned  from  Longleat^  he  heard 
the  tax  was  not  so  likely  to  pass  even  in  Ireland.  The 
city  of  Dublin,  always  enemy  to  taxes  in  general,  had 
instructed  their  members  to  oppose  that  proposed ;  and 
Lord  North  protested,  if  it  came  over,  he,  though  alone, 
would  support  it  in  council.  Rigby,  alarmed,  went  to 
Lord  North  and  disclaimed  all  knowledge  of  Lord  Ossory's 
conduct,  and,  as  was  his  practice,  retired  to  his  own  house 
in  the  country  that  he  might  not  be  suspected. 

^  Seat  of  Lord  Weymouth,  in  Somersetshire. 


1773] 


NOVEMBER 

I  SAW  the  remonstrance  of  the  five  Lords  against 
the  tax  on  absentees :  it  was  strong  and  very  well 
drawn.  Lord  North  desired  at  first  to  be  excused 
answering  till  he  had  communicated  the  contents 
to  the  other  Ministers.  He  then  sent  an  answer  in  which 
he  owned  he  had  received  such  a  plan  from  Ireland  ;  but 
though  he  did  not  express  it,  he  implied  that  the  plan 
had  come  to  him  from  the  King's  servants  there,  and 
he  said,  if  passed  there  as  proposed,  he  for  himself  would 
support  it.^  Nothing  could  be  more  injudicious  than  this 
answer.  The  case  was  that  Mr.  Fortescue,  an  Irish 
patriot  fond  of  popularity,  though  brother  of  Lord  Cler- 
mont,^ a  most  devoted  courtier,  did  intend  to  propose 
such  a  tax.  It  was  as  true  that  the  Court  intended  to  avail 
themselves  of  the  idea  and  carry  it  into  execution,  but 
were  soon  forced  to  relinquish  it.  It  was  first  represented 
as  a  prologue  to  a  general  land-tax ;  which  apprehension, 
conjoined  with  the  private  interest  of  the  landed  men, 
both  Peers  and  others,  and  the  certainty  that  it  would 
lower  the  value  of  land  in  that  country,  soon  made  it 
denied  by  all  substantial  men.  The  partiality  of  it  was 
strong ;  the  circumstance  of  injustice  to  men  who  were 
Peers  in  both  kingdoms,  and  who  could  not  attend  their 
duty  in  both  countries  at  once,  self-evident;  and  the  great 
probability  that  our  colonies  would  follow  the  example 

^  Authentic  letters,  relative  to  the  intended  tax  upon  Irish  absentees, 
from  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  and  other  Lords,  to  Lord  North,  will  be  found 
in  Lord  Rockingham's  *' Memoirs." — D. 

'  The  creation  of  this  peerage  (Viscount  and  Baron)  only  dates  from 
1776.-D. 

I.— s  257 


258       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

was  alarming.  The  defection  among  the  Bedfords  could 
not  be  without  weight ;  nor  was  the  Administration  less 
distressed  on  finding  the  Act  would  be  very  unpopular  in 
England.  The  influx  of  money  from  Ireland  was  the 
more  important  to  England  the  more  prejudicial  it  was  to 
Ireland  ;  and  as  the  greater  part  is  spent  in  the  capital, 
the  City  of  London  soon  took  the  alarm,  and  intended  to 
call  a  Council  that  they  might  petition  against  it.  It  is 
scarcely  credible,  though  true,  that  the  first  idea  of  the 
Court  to  quiet  some  of  the  most  dissatisfied  was  to  exempt 
persons  employed  about  the  King  from  being  subject  to 
the  tax.  Nothing  could  have  been  done  more  unjust  and 
partial.  Were  men  to  be  exempted  from  the  penalty 
because  they  had  additional  incomes  ?  Were  placemen  to 
be  indemnified  when  Peers  were  not  ?  and  was  a  trifling 
ceremonious  attendance  on  the  King's  person  to  be  deemed 
more  important  than  attendance  on  the  business  of  the 
nation  in  Parliament  ?  Might  not  the  King  release  whom 
he  pleased,  as  he  does  from  the  office  of  Sheriff,  by  nomi- 
nating men  to  that  empty  charge  of  Gentlemen  of  the  Privy 
Chamber  ?  This  indulgence  was  especially  calculated  for 
the  benefit  of  the  Lord  Chamberlain,  the  Earl  of  Hertford, 
who  had  an  estate  of  ten  thousand  a-year  in  Ireland,  and 
who,  though  the  most  decent,  cautious,  discreet,  and  sub- 
missive of  courtiers,  was  on  this  occasion  one  of  the  most 
vociferous.  He  declared  he  would  do  anything  to  evade 
the  tax.  He  said  he  would  make  over  his  estate  in  Ireland 
to  his  son,  who  should  go  and  reside  there  for  a  year,  and 
then  restoring  it  to  him,  himself  would  go  and  reside  there 
another  year,  and  so  alternately  ;  but  he  took  a  better 
method,  without  absenting  himself  from  Court.  One  of 
his  nearest  dependants,  Colonel  Keene,  had  married  Miss 
Legge,  a  kind  of  sister  of  Lord  North,^  and  this  Colonel 

^  Elizabeth  Legge  was  the  daughter  of  George  Viscount  Lewisham  (eldest 
son  of  William  Earl  of  Dartmouth).  Her  mother,  after  the  death  of  Lord 
Lewisham,  became  the  wife  of  the  first  Earl  of  Guildford.  The  Earl,  by  a 
former  marriage  with  Lucy  Montague,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Halifax,  was 


1773]  PROPOSED   TAX   ON   ABSENTEES  259 

had  early  informed  Lord  Hertford,  as  he  said,  by  Lord 
North's  permission,  of  the  intended  tax.  Lord  Hertford, 
no  doubt,  did  not  understand  this  communication  as  a 
secret,  for  he  immediately  gave  intelligence  of  the  project 
to  Lord  Besborough,  who,  as  much  interested  as  shrewd, 
and  under  less  obligation  to  secresy,  immediately  blew  up 
Lord  Rockingham,  who,  both  as  affected  in  his  property 
and  as  head  of  a  party,  could  not  fail  to  profit  by  the  notice; 
yet  when  the  five  Lords  proposed  to  Lord  Hertford  to  sign 
their  remonstrance,  he  was  too  good  a  courtier  to  counte- 
nance such  opposition  to  the  King's  measures.  Could  he 
sign  what  Lord  Shelburne,an  opponent,  had  refused  to  sign? 
Nor  had  Lord  Shelburne  been  less  active  in  inciting  the 
five  to  make  the  stand.  It  is  no  wonder  that  on  the  13th 
of  November,  before  the  tax  could  even  be  known  to  have 
been  proposed  in  Ireland,  so  far  from  passed  (which  it  was 
now  thought  it  would  not  be),  it  was  declared  here  that  the 
Court  relinquished  the  plan,  and  would  not  confirm  it  even 
if  sent  over :  a  symptom  of  weakness  very  consolatory  to 
those  who  saw  what  strides  prerogative  had  taken,  and  a 
confirmation  of  Lord  North's  want  of  judgment  in  having 
avowed  for  a  plan  of  Government  what  might  have  passed 
for  a  measure  of  Opposition  if  the  King  rejected  the  tax 
when  sent  over. 

While  the  Ministers  here  were  wishing  to  avoid  the  tax, 
and  while  it  was  daily  growing  more  unpalatable  in 
Ireland,  Colonel  Blaquiere,  Lord  Harcourt's  Secretary  and 
Prime  Minister,  a  frank,  good-humoured,  but  weak  and 
conceited  man,  contrived  by  his  indiscretion  to  saddle 
them  with  it,  and  avow  it  as  a  project  of  Government. 
Being  called  upon  by  one  of  the  Opposition  to  proceed 
with  the  openness  he  professed  and  to  enumerate  the 
proposed  taxes,  he  detailed  them  immediately,  and  owned 

the  father  of  Lord  North.  In  this  way  was  Elizabeth  Legge  **a  kind  of 
sister"  of  that  noble  Lord.  Her  husband,  Whitshed  Keene,  represented 
Montgomery  in  thirteen  parliaments. — D. 


I 


26o       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

there  might  be  one  more  made  use  of,  which  was  a  tax  on 
absentees.  To  this  imprudence  he  added  two  more,  totally- 
foreign  to  the  purpose,  but  which,  having  come  to  his 
knowledge  during  his  being  Secretary  to  the  Embassy,  he 
could  not  contain  the  vanity  of  divulging :  these  were, 
that  His  Majesty's  late  great  expenses  had  had  in  view 
the  formidable  and  vast  armies  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  as 
the  review  at  Portsmouth  and  the  exercises  of  the  fleet  in 
the  Bay  of  Biscay  had  deeper  objects  than  many  people 
imagined.  This  jealousy  of  Prussia  and  this  hostile  eye 
towards  Spain  were  points  neither  his  Majesty  nor  his 
Ministers  could  wish  imparted  to  either  monarch.  The 
bravado  to  Spain  became  very  soon  afterwards  supremely 
ridiculous,  as  it  was  known  before  the  month  expired  that 
we  had  relinquished  the  Falkland  Islands  to  the  Spaniards, 
the  recovery  of  which  had  been  no  less  pompously  vaunted. 

About  this  time  died  Sir  Robert  Ladbroke,  father  of  the 
City,  and  one  of  its  Members.  Wilkes  immediately  set  up 
his  new  Lord  Mayor  Bull  as  candidate ;  and  at  first  the 
Court  could  prevail  on  no  citizen  to  oppose  him.  At  last 
they  got  one  Roberts  ;  and  the  Scotch,  and  Townshend, 
and  Lord  Shelburne's  faction,  and  the  Court  Aldermen 
under  Harley,  supported  the  latter  with  the  utmost  ani- 
mosity. The  heats  between  Wilkes  and  Townshend  went 
the  greatest  lengths,  and  the  Court  of  Aldermen  voted  an 
indirect  censure  on  the  former  for  publishing  anonymous 
and  libellous  paragraphs. 

General  Moyston  having  moved  the  Court  of  Common 
Pleas  for  a  new  trial  against  Fabriguas,  that  Court  refused 
to  grant  it.  The  King  took  very  kind  notice  of  that 
tyrannical  man.  An  arbitrary  officer  was  not  likely  to  be 
discountenanced,  when  the  army  was  the  favourite  object. 

30//^  An  express  arrived  from  Dublin  that  the  tax  on 
absentees  had  been  rejected  by  a  majority  of  14,^  though 

^  **  Nov.  30,  1773.  Yesterday  afternoon  an  account  came  from  Ireland 
that  the  Absentee  Bill  was  rejected^  after  a  debate  till  two  o'clock  in  the 


1773]  REJECTION   OF   ABSENTEE   TAX  261 

the  Castle,  all  triumphant,  and  which  had  just  had  a 
majority  of  50,  and  had  gained  over  Mr.  Fludd,  the  best 
orator  and  warmest  patriot  in  the  Opposition,  had  exerted 
all  its  strength  to  carry  it.  But  though  honour  and  care 
of  posterity  could  not  restrain  men  from  corruption, 
immediate  self-interest  could,  which  certainly  defeated 
Government  in  this  case ;  for  though  the  gentlemen  had 
lately  let  new  leases  of  their  lands,  on  condition  of  the 
tenants  paying  all  new  taxes,  yet  the  diminution  of  the 
value  of  their  estates  which  would  have  fallen  by  the  tax, 
and  the  danger  of  seeing  their  tenants  migrate,  as  was  now 
deplorably  the  practice  both  in  Scotland  and  Ireland, 
alarmed  the  gentry,  as  that  condition  of  paying  new  taxes 
had  made  the  bill  unpopular  even  among  the  lower  sort. 
Mr.  Fludd  was  said  to  be  bought  by  the  promise  of  being 
made  Provost  of  the  College  on  the  death  of  Mr.  Andrews, 
which  was  expected.  Fludd  made  a  very  impudent  speech 
in  recantation  of  patriotism,  and  instantly  took  his  seat  on 
the  Treasury  bench  next  to  the  Prime  Serjeant,  his  great- 
est enemy  and  antagonist.  The  sighs  of  expiring  liberty 
are  marked  by  some  daily  apostacy,  and  may  such  saints 
stand  red-lettered  in  the  Court's  Calendar  !  It  was  thought 
that  some  of  the  Opposition,  who  intended  to  wote  for  the 
tax,  opposed  it  in  resentment  to  Fludd,  to  show  the 
Government  that  he  could  not  have  so  much  influence  as 
they  had  expected. 

morning.  The  majority  were  twenty  to  one  hundred  and  six."  Lord 
Rockingham  to  Mr,  Dowdeswell. — ("Mem.  of  Marq.  of  Rockingham  and 
his  Contemporaries,"  vol.  ii.  p.  234.)  The  tax  proposed  by  Flood  was  two 
shillings  in  the  pound,  and  the  motion  was  lost,  neither  as  Walpole  nor 
Rockingham  describes  it,  but  by  122  to  102.  The  proposal  was  no  innova- 
tion, for  a  tax  of  four  shillings  in  the  pound  had  been  levied  on  the  profits, 
fees,  emoluments,  and  pensions  of  absentees  from  17 15  to  I753'  A  renewed 
attempt  to  revive  the  tax  abolished  in  the  latter  year  was  rejected  in  the  Irish 
Parliament  in  1783.     The  numbers  were  184  to  122. — D. 


[Dec. 


DECEMBER 

ON  the  ^th  ended  the  poll  for  the  election  of  a 
Member  for  the  City  of  London  in  the  room 
of  Sir  Robert  Ladbroke.  Bull,  Wilkes's  Lord 
Mayor,  was  for  some  time  the  sole  candidate, 
neither  the  Court  nor  the  Shelburne  faction  being  able  to 
prevail  on  any  creditable  man  to  stand.  At  last  they  set 
up  one  Roberts,  of  a  popish  family,  who  had  been  an  East 
India  Director,  and  had  been  dismissed  for  ill-manage- 
ment.^ The  Scotch,  Townshend,  and  Home  persecuted 
Wilkes  with  all  manner  of  abuse ;  and  Alderman  Harley 
promised  openly  to  countenance  Roberts,  but  did  not  dare 
to  appear  for  him  at  the  poll,  which  Roberts's  friends 
demanded,  and  which  began  on  the  27th  of  the  preceding 
month.  Wilkes  notwithstanding  triumphed,  and  Bull  at 
the  close  had  214  majority.  Thus  the  Court,  with  their 
usual  inveteracy  and  blindness,  contrived  once  more  to 
cement  the  waning  interest  of  Wilkes,  and  to  rivet  the 
attachment  of  his  party  to  him ;  and  while,  with  their 
usual  nostrum  of  breaking  all  parties,  they  fomented  the 
animosity  between  Wilkes  and  Townshend,  they  kept  up 
a  strong  interest  against  themselves  in  the  heart  of  the 
metropolis.  On  the  declaration  of  the  poll  in  favour  of 
Bull,  Roberts  demanded  a  scrutiny,  which  was  fixed  for 
the  23rd. 

yth.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  and  General  Johnson 
carried  the  whole  Court  of  Proprietors  of  India  Stock 
against  the  Ministry,  persuading  them  to  reject  the  plan 

1  This  assertion  Roberts  solemnly  denied.  His  dismission  from  the  direc- 
tion he  could  not  contradict. 

262 


1773]  OFFICE   OF   QUEEN'S   TREASURER  263 

of  orders  drawn  up  for  the  new  Council,  and  the  Court 
empowered  the  Duke  and  six  others  to  draw  up  new 
instructions.  Johnson  uttered  many  sarcasms,  though 
a  Scot,  on  the  King's  insincerity,  which  grew  into  a 
proverb. 

The  East  India  Company  having  determined  to  send 
their  superabundant  teas  to  America,  and  Parliament 
having  imposed  a  tax  on  teas  landed  there,  the  Americans 
resolved  to  buy  no  such  teas,  and  even  to  oppose  their 
being  landed. 

On  the  ijth  died  Andrew  Stone,  Treasurer  to  the  Queen 
— a  man  of  whom  I  have  said  much  in  the  Memoirs  of 
the  last  reign,  and  who,  though  from  his  privacy  long  for- 
gotten by  the  world,  continued,  by  his  access  to  the  Queen 
and  by  his  intimacy  with  Lord  Mansfield,  an  industrious 
promoter  of  the  arbitrary  measures  of  the  present  reign. 
By  principle  a  Jacobite,  by  nature  dark,  by  experience 
able,  he  always  suggested  such  counsels  as  he  would  have 
instilled  into  James  IL,  and  was  gratified  when  they  pro- 
moted despotism  in  the^  House  of  Hanover,  or  tended  to 
render  it  unpopular.^ 

The  2'i^rd  had  been  fixed  for  beginning  the  scrutiny  on 
the  election  for  the  City ;  but  Mr.  Roberts  demanding  to 
be  allowed  counsel,  the  Sheriffs  refused  it,  no  law  author- 
izing it.  On  this  Roberts  gave  up  the  scrutiny,  but 
threatened  to  appeal  to  the  House  of  Commons.  The 
Sheriffs,  however,  on  his  declining  the  scrutiny,  declared 
in  favour  of  the  Lord  Mayor  Bull,  who  was  accordingly 
pronounced  duly  elected. 

On  the  2%th  the  old  Earl  of  Guilford,  father  of  Lord 
North,  was  appointed  Treasurer  to  the  Queen  in  the  room 
of  Mr.  Stone — a  nomination  that  surprised  and  made 
everybody  laugh.  The  Earl  was  extremely  infirm  and 
very   rich,   but   very   covetous.     Yet  probably  he  would 

^  See  a  sensible  vindication  of  Stone,  by  Sir  Denis  Le  Marchant,  in  a  note, 
"Mem.  Reign  George  III.,"  vol.  i.  p.  71. — D. 


264       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Dec. 

not  have  been  chosen  either  for  asking  it  or  to  gratify  his 
son,  if  other  reasons  had  not  concurred.  General  Graeme 
was  supposed  to  have  obtained  the  promise  during  his 
former  favour ;  Sir  George  Macartney/  son-in-law  of  Lord 
Bute,  wished  for  the  place ;  but  the  latter  either  had  not 
sufficient  favour,  or  it  was  feared  would  be  thought  to 
have  still  too  much.  The  deep  mystery  of  the  King's 
and  Queen's  family  made  it  sure  that  no  one  but  a  very 
secure  person  would  be  trusted  in  so  near  a  post  at  the 
palace.  Lord  Guilford  was  most  harmless,  half  incapable 
and  half  superannuated.  This  mark  of  grace,  too,  to 
Lord  North,  would  silence  him  from  complaining  that 
he  had  no  power,  or  might  engage  his  serving  in  some 
new,  dirty,  or  despotic  job. 

That  man  of  famous  wit,  G.  A.  Selwyn,  was  ambitious 
of  succeeding  Stone  as  Treasurer  to  the  Queen — a  place 
his  father  had  held  under  Queen  Caroline.  He  had  applied 
for  the  promise  of  it  to  the  Duke  of  Grafton  when  Minister, 
who  told  him  he  had  mentioned  it  to  the  King,  who  had 
promised  he  should  have  it.  On  Stone's  death,  Selwyn 
told  me  of  that  transaction  :  I  said,  "  You  will  certainly 
not  have  it ;  your  wit  is  too  well  known  and  too  formid- 
able ;  you  will  never  be  admitted  into  the  silly,  mysterious, 
and  discreet  penetralia  of  the  Queen's  house."  However, 
he  stated  his  pretensions  to  Lord  North,  who  wrote  him 
word  that  he  had  mentioned  his  claim  to  the  King,  but  the 
King  had  protested  he  had  never  heard  of  it  before ;  and 
as  the  Duke  of  Grafton's  veracity  was  more  doubtful  than 
even  his  Majesty's,  the  improbability  of  the  King's  having 
given  such  a  promise  makes  it  fair  to  believe  what  he  said. 
The  Duke's  conduct  removed  all  doubt.  On  Selwyn's 
applying  to  his  Grace  to  confirm  the  propriety  of  his 
pretensions,  the  Duke  by  letter  acknowledged  Selwyn's 

^  Sir  George  Macartney  was  created  Baron  Macartney  in  1776,  and  Earl 
in  1794.  He  died  in  1806,  when  the  earldom  became  extinct.  His  widow, 
Lady  Jane  Stuart,  survived  him  till  the  year  1828,  dying  then  at  the  age  of 
86.— D. 


1773]  FLOOD'S   CHANGE   OF   POLITICS  265 

application  to  him,  and  his  own  having  spoken  to  the 
King ;  but  pretended  not  to  recollect  perfectly  his 
Majesty's  answer :  however  referred  him  to  Bradshaw, 
whom  he  had  ordered  to  keep  a  list  of  all  his  engage- 
ments. Bradshaw  denied  having  any  such  list,  or  having 
received  any  such  order.  On  farther  application  to  the 
Duke,  in  which  he  was  told  of  the  King's  disavowal,  his 
Grace,  forgetting  his  former  letter,  flatly  contradicted  him- 
self,^ recollected  that  he  possibly  had  never  spoken  to  the 
King,  and  insolently  enjoined  Selwyn  to  say  no  more 
on  that  affair.  Lord  North's  behaviour  was,  though  niore 
justifiable,  not  more  temperate.  He  was  angry  with 
Selwyn  for  disappointing  him  of  a  borough,  and  in  his 
letter,  which  was  thoroughly  brutal,  told  him  that,  though 
he  had  laid  his  suit  before  the  King,  he  had  not  supported 
it,  for  he  thought  it  most  unreasonable,  and  then  indis- 
creetly went  into  the  affair  of  the  borough,  which  he 
proved  to  have  been  the  source  of  his  enmity.  These 
letters,  with  a  very  sensible,  artful  letter  from  Selwyn  in 
reply  to  Lord  North,  are  preserved,  and  will  possibly  some 
day  or  other  confirm  this  account,  and  display  the  char- 
acters of  those  Ministers ;  as  other  authentic  papers  will, 
I  flatter  myself,  corroborate  the  authenticity  of  these 
Memoirs — though  in  some  things  I  may  have  been  mis- 
informed, and  in  others,  from  my  own  passions,  I  may 
have  exaggerated  faults. 

At  the  end  of  the  month  was  published  in  the  news- 
papers a  panegyrical  character  of  Lord  Chatham,  with 
some  satire  on  the  King,  and  ascribed  to  Dr.  Robertson, 
but  unjustly :  Dr.  Robertson  was  no  satirist,  nor  disposed 
to  censure  the  reigning  King,  the  patron  of  him  and  of  his 
countrymen.  The  character  had  been  written  by  Mr. 
Fludd,  or  Flood, ^  the  Irish  orator,  formerly  an  enthusiast 

He  pretended  to  have  found  notes  of  his  own. 
2  Others  say  by  Mr.  Grattan.     [The  latter  was  the  author  of  this  "Char- 
acter."   "  Baratariana  "  was  the  title  of  a  collection  of  satires  against  the  Irish 


266       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Dec. 

to  Lord  Chatham,  and  had  been  printed  a  year  ago  in 
"  Baratariana,  or  Political  Essays  in  Ireland."  It  was  now 
reprinted,  probably  to  hurt  Mr.  Flood  with  the  King, 
and  to  make  it  more  remarked  by  being  ascribed  to  Dr. 
Robertson.  Mr.  Flood  had  been  formerly  introduced  by  a 
friend  to  Lord  Chatham,  who  told  the  person,  Mr.  Flood 
would  never  do — a  false  judgment.  Mr.  Flood  was  quali- 
fied to  do,  for  he  had  eloquence  and  worldly  views ;  yet  he 
had  now  not  sold  himself  for  a  place  or  reversion  merely, 
as  was  supposed,  but  from  the  urgency  of  his  situation.  In 
a  contest  with  the  family  of  Agar  for  the  interest  of  an 
Irish  county,  he  had  killed  Agar  the  father  in  a  duel.^ 
The  son  Agar  continued  the  animosity,  and  obtained,  or 
thought  he  had  obtained,  evidence  of  corruption  and  per- 
jury in  Flood,  and  prosecuted  him.  Agar  had  likewise 
interest  with  the  Sheriff,  and  Flood  did  not  dare  to  stand 
his  trial.  He  now  sold  himself,  cheaply  for  the  Govern- 
ment, to  Lord  Harcourt,  on  condition  of  being  allowed  to 
name  a  Sheriff  who  would  be  favourable  to  him,  which  was 
granted.  2 

I  will  finish  the  journal  of  this  year  with  some  miscel- 
laneous anecdotes,  which  could  not  well  be  inserted  at  any 
precise  period,  and  with  some  embryos  of  politics,  which 
time  must  bring  to  maturity,  or  prove  not  to  have  been 
authentic. 

Lord  Clive,  for  real  or  pretended  ill-health,  went  to 
Italy.  Before  he  set  out  he  made  over  to  Lord  North  the 
disposition  of  the  Members  at  his  command — a  step  more 
dictated  by  prudence  than  by  inclination. 

It  came  out  that  300,000/.  had  been  privately  issued  at 
the  Treasury  for  secret  services  in  the  preceding  year  1772. 

administration  of  Lord  Townshend.  In  a  letter  to  Lady  Ossory,  Dec.  30, 
I773>  Walpole  seems  to  accept  the  reputed  authorship  of  Dr.  Robertson, 
whose  name  was  used  merely  as  a  mystification.  The  Journal  shows,  how- 
ever, that  he  was  aware  of  the  reports  which  spoke  of  Flood  and  of  Grattan 
as  having  written  the  paper  for  the  work  named  above. — D.] 

^  In  1769.     The  quarrel  was,  however,  of  long  standing. — D. 

^  He  was  better  paid  afterwards. 


1773]  GENERAL   MALADMINISTRATION  267 

A  large  part  of  this  large  sum  had  probably  been  employed 
for  the  safety  and  maintenance  of  the  Queen  of  Denmark;^ 
but  there  could  be  no  doubt  neither  but  a  large  portion  had 
been  expended  to  carry  the  Royal  Marriage  Act — a  bill  so 
unpopular  that  almost  all  the  Ministers  had  expressed  dis- 
like and  repugnance  to  it.  Lord  North  had  been  the  most 
averse  of  all ;  but  it  was  now  whispered  that  his  assent 
and  support  had  been  purchased  at  a  very  dear  rate  in- 
deed— that  is,  by  a  grant  of  the  Savoy,  or  part  of  it,  for  the 
sale  of  which  a  bill  had  passed  ;  corruption  so  scandalous, 
that  it  ought  not  to  be  believed  till  the  proof  shall  come 
out. 

A  transaction  as  ignominious  to  the  Crown,  and  ridi- 
culous after  our  boasted  spirit,  I  learnt  from  good  au- 
thority, and  believe  it  will  be  verified,  viz.  that  we  have 
abandoned  the  Falkland  Islands  to  the  Spaniards.^  Dr. 
Johnson's  pamphlet  on  that  affair  will  be  doubly  profligate. 

An  affair,  little  known  yet,  but  certain,  has  come  out. 
Sir  William  Young,  the  mercenary  oppressor  of  the  Caribs 
at  St.  Vincent's,  and  usurper  of  their  lands,  owed  the 
Government  near  300,000/.  Lord  North  had  with  great 
difficulty  and  culpable  secrecy  prevented  the  debt  appear- 
ing in  the  accounts  of  the  last  year,  yet  did  not  save  Sir 
William,  who  at  the  end  of  the  year  became  bankrupt 
for  that  sum.  This  engrossing  Governor  had  possessed 
himself  in  the  island,  of  lands  to  the  value  of  35,000/.  a- 
year ! 

With  such  waste  of  various  sorts  the  Crown  was  im- 

^  It  was  currently  reported  in  1772,  that,  while  Denmark  had  nominally 
assented  to  the  payment  of  an  annual  pension  to  the  unhappy  Queen  in  seclu- 
sion at  Zell,  the  money  was  undoubtedly  to  be  first  furnished  to  Denmark  by 
the  English  Treasury.  This,  and  the  history  of  the  Queen  generally,  were 
subjects  which  the  ballad-singers  of  London  made  use  of  in  their  scandalously 
rude  rhymes,  which  they  bawled  and  sold  to  ready  purchasers,  despite  com- 
mittals to  Bridewell  whenever  the  constables  succeeded  in  bringing  the 
minstrels  before  the  magistrates. — D. 

2  Lord  North,  in  the  ensuing  session,  avowed  the  dereliction  of  the  Falk- 
land Islands  ;  incidentally  in  a  speech  on  another  occasion,  he  said,  a  cross 
would  be  sufficient  to  ascertain  our  right ;  and  not  a  word  was  said  in  reply. 


268       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Dec. 

poverished.  A  scheme  was  set  on  foot  for  calling  on 
grantees  of  lands  in  America  to  pay  the  arrears  of  their 
quit-rents,  which,  if  satisfied,  would  have  brought  in  a 
large  sum,  and  steps  were  taken  to  obtain  the  payment ; 
but  the  Americans  were  not  in  a  temper  to  comply.  One 
of  the  obstacles  I  saw  thus  stated  in  a  letter  from  an 
officer  of  the  Revenue  in  one  of  the  colonies  to  my  own 
nephew,  Mr.  Cholmondeley,  Auditor  of  the  Plantations  : 
"  I  disapprove  national  reflections  ;  but  must  say  that  a 
Scot  here  may  do  anything  he  pleases,  and  will  be  sup- 
ported even  against  the  King."  In  fact,  governments  and 
embassies  were  showered  on  the  Scotch  as  less  ostensible 
and  invidious,  while  officers  and  private  men  of  that  nation 
crowded,  or  were  crowded  into,  the  army  and  navy. 

At  Boston  the  discoveries  which  I  have  mentioned  in 
the  month  of  July^  were  near  producing  very  serious 
consequences  here.  Mr.  Whateley,  a  banker  of  most  fair 
and  amiable  character,  and  brother  of  Mr.  Grenville's 
secretary,  to  whom  the  letters  in  question  had  been  written, 
suspected  that  one  Mr.  Temple,  a  zealous  American,  but 
who  had  been  preferred  by  his  brother,  and  whom  he  had 
permitted  to  read  over  his  brother's  letters,  had  betrayed 
his  trust,  and  stolen  and  sent  to  America  the  letters  that 
had  occasioned  the  flame.  A  controversy  in  the  news- 
papers ensued.  Mr.  Temple  challenged  Mr.  Whateley, 
the  banker,  who  instantly  obeyed  the  summons,  but  de- 
clared his  disapprobation  of  that  savage  manner  of 
decision,  to  which  his  profession  and  way  of  life  was 
repugnant.  He  carried  no  pistols  into  the  field ;  Temple 
made  him  accept  one  of  his,  fired  his  own,  and  missed. 
Whateley  fired  his  into  the  air ;  yet  Temple  insisted  on 
his  drawing  his  sword,  though  he  knew  not  how,  nor  was 
inclined,  to  use  it,  almost  suffering  himself  to  be  stabbed, 
and  actually  received  nine  wounds,  one  behind  on  the 
shoulder,  though  none  of  them  proved  mortal.  Great 
^  See  page  243. — D. 


1773]  THE   "SENSIBLE   WOMAN"  269 

clamour  fell,  and  with  much  justice,  on  Temple,  though  he 
appeared  to  be  innocent  of  the  treachery ;  for,  after  the 
combat.  Dr.  Franklin  owned  himself  in  print  to  be  the 
conveyer  of  the  letters  to  America.  Temple  published  a 
vindication  of  himself  in  the  duel ;  but  it  was  far  from 
satisfying  any  man. 

The  rage  of  duelling  had  of  late  much  revived,  especi- 
ally in  Ireland,  and  many  attempts  were  made  in  print 
and  on  the  stage  to  curb  so  horrid  and  absurd  a  practice.    . 

In  the  summer  of  this  year,  a  woman  who  had  been 
transported,  and  who,  a  few  years  before,  had  advertised 
herself  as  a  sensible  woman  who  gave  advice  on  all  emer- 
gencies for  half  a  guinea,  was  carried  before  Justice 
Fielding,  by  a  Quaker  whom  she  had  defrauded  of  money 
under  the  pretence  of  getting  him  a  place  by  her  interest 
with  Ministers,  to  whom  she  pretended  to  be  related.  She 
called  herself  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Grieve,  and  gave  herself  for 
cousin  to  Lord  North,  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  and  Mrs. 
Fitzroy.  She  had  bribed  Lord  North's  porter  to  let  her 
into  his  house,  and  as  her  dupes  waited  for  her  in  the 
street,  they  concluded  she  had  access  to  the  Minister. 
Before  Fielding  she  behaved  with  insolence,  abused  the 
Quaker,  and  told  him  she  had  disappointed  him  of  the 
place  because  he  was  an  immoral  man,  and  had  had  a 
child.  Her  art  and  address  had  been  so  great  that  she 
had  avoided  being  culpable  of  any  fraud  for  which  she 
could  be  committed  to  prison,  and  was  dismissed,  the 
Quaker  having  only  power  to  sue  her  at  common  law  for 
the  recovery  of  his  money,  and  for  which  suit  she  was  not 
weak  enough  to  wait  when  at  liberty.  But  the  Quaker's 
part  of  the  story  would  not  have  spread  Mrs.  Grieve's 
renown,  if  a  far  more  improbable  dupe  had  not  been 
caught  in  her  snares.  In  a  word,  the  famous  Charles  Fox 
had  been  the  bubble  of  this  woman,  who  undoubtedly  had 
uncommon  talents  and  a  knowledge  of  the  world.  She 
had  persuaded   Fox,  desperate  with  his  debts,  that  she 


2  70       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Dec. 

could  procure  for  him,  as  a  wife,  a  Miss  Phipps,  with  a 
fortune  of  80,000/.,  who  was  just  arrived  from  the  West 
Indies.  There  was  such  a  person  coming  over,  but  not 
with  half  the  fortune,  nor  known  to  Mrs.  Grieve.  With 
this  bait  she  amused  Charles  for  many  months,  appointed 
meetings,  and  once  persuaded  him  that,  as  Miss  Phipps 
liked  a  fair  man,  and  as  he  was  remarkably  black,  that  he 
must  powder  his  eyebrows.  Of  that  intended  interview 
he  was  disappointed  by  the  imaginary  lady's  falling  ill  of 
what  was  afterwards  pretended  to  be  the  smallpox.  After 
he  had  waited  some  time  Mrs.  Grieve  affected  to  go  to 
see  if  Miss  Phipps  was  a  little  better  and  able  to  receive 
her  swain ;  but  on  opening  the  door,  a  servant-maid,  who 
had  been  posted  to  wait  on  the  stairs,  as  coming  down  with 
the  remains  of  a  basin  of  broth,  told  Mrs.  Grieve  that 
Miss  Phipps  was  not  well  enough  to  receive  the  visit. 
Had  a  novice  been  the  prey  of  these  artifices,  it  would  not 
have  been  extraordinary,  but  Charles  Fox  had  been  in  the 
world  from  his  childhood,  and  been  treated  as  a  man  long 
before  the  season.  He  must  have  known  there  could  not 
have  been  an  Hon.  Mrs.  Grieve,  nor  such  a  being  as  she 
pretended  to  be.  Indeed,  in  one  stroke  she  had  singular 
finesse ;  instead  of  asking  him  for  money,  which  would 
have  detected  her  plot  at  once,  she  was  so  artful  as  to  lend 
him  300/.,  or  thereabouts,  and  she  paid  herself  by  his 
chariot  standing  frequently  at  her  door,  which  served  to 
impose  on  her  more  vulgar  dupes.^ 

^  Foote,  ever  on  the  look-out  for  incidents,  introduced  two,  which  had 
engaged  public  attention,  into  his  farce  of  "The  Cozeners,"  produced  at  the 
Haymarket,  August  3,  1774;  namely,  the  frauds  of  Mrs.  Grieve,  under  the 
character  of  "  Mrs.  Fleecem,"  and  the  simony  of  Dr.  Dodd,  transferred  to 
his  wife,  as  "Mrs.  Simony."  These  characters  were  originally  sustained  by 
Mrs.  Williams  and  Mrs.  Gardner.  The  farce,  or  comedy,  as  it  is  called, 
lived  almost  as  long  as  Fox  himself  did  ;  but  the  character  supposed  to  repre- 
sent Mrs.  Dodd  was  very  properly  omitted.  It  was  an  insult  to  that  poor 
woman,  and  a  cruelty  against  Dodd's  brother,  the  Rev.  Richard  Dodd, 
incumbent  of  Camberwell,  to  whom  all  reference  concerning  his  wretched 
kinsman  was  a  matter  of  much  pain.  With  this  exception,  the  piece  con- 
tinued to  be  acted  with  great  applause  ;  for  it  afforded  excellent  opportunities 
to  comic  actors,  as  may  be  supposed,  from  the  fact  that  Foote,  Munden,  Quick, 


1773]     DALRYMPLE'S  HISTORY  OF  CHARLES  H      271 

I  have  promised  to  give  an  account  of  Sir  John  Dal- 
rymple's  book,  published  in  the  preceding  February,  and 
will  here  perform  that  engagement. 

Sir  John  Dalrymple  had  some  time  before  written  a 
volume  on  the  History  of  Charles  II.  It  was  compiled 
from  original  papers  and  from  miscellaneous  information 
of  men  of  very  different  parties,  which  he  had  put  together 
with  so  little  judgment,  that  he  perpetually  contradicted 
himself  and  his  own  narratives,  and  alternately  exalted  and 
reviled  each  party,  according  as  his  materials  had  been 
collected  from  the  opposite.  Nor  was  this  the  only  glaring 
defect  in  his  book.  Sometimes  it  is  ridiculously  descrip- 
tive and  bombast.  His  friends  the  Highlanders  are  drawn 
as  pure  and  perfect  as  the  Troglodites,  while  the  chiefs  of 
his  own  country  are  represented  in  the  most  odious  colours. 
His  hero,  Fletcher  of  Saltoun,  whom  he  compares  to  Cato, 
appears  to  have  been  an  unprincipled  captain  of  banditti, 
and  assassin.  Sir  John's  own  character  appeared  to  little 
better  advantage,  when  he  had  thus  and  by  his  second 
volume  provoked  the  public  to  examine  it.  He  had  been 
a  hearty  Jacobite ;  pretended  to  be  converted  ;  then  paid 
his  court  when  he  found  his  old  principles  were  no  longer 
a  disrecommendation  at  Court ;  and  affected  to  admire 
King  William  ;  while  the  great  object  of  his  work  was  to 
depreciate  and  calumniate  all  the  friends  of  the  Revolution, 
which  he  laboured  to  do,  without  measure,  and  in  several 
instances  effected  with  justice — nothing  appearing  so 
strongly  as  the  corruption  of  the  Scottish  great  men  and 
the  coldness  of  the  English  at  the  Revolution,  whence  King 

Suett,  and  the  two  Bannisters,  Mrs.  Webb,  Mrs.  Martyr,  and  Mrs,  Sparks, 
have  at  various  periods  appeared  in  a  "piece  de  circonstance,"  the  ground- 
work for  which  is  noticed  by  Walpole.  It  should  be  added,  that  in  the 
•'Memorials  and  Correspondence  of  Fox,"  edited  by  Lord  John  Russell 
(vol.  i.  p.  94),  Lord  Holland  states,  "I  believe  the  loan  from  Mrs.  Grieve  to 
be  a  foolish  and  improbable  story."  His  Lordship  adds,  "  I  have  heard  him 
(Fox)  say  she  never  got  or  asked  any  money  from  him."  Walpole  does  not  say 
that  she  ever  did,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  she  lent  money  to  him,  which, 
certainly,  Fox  would  not  have  considered  q.  foolish  fact,  nor  his  contemporaries 
have  deemed  an  improbable  circumstance. — D. 


272       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Dec. 

William's  character  rose  with  redoubled  lustre  when  the 
difficulties  he  surmounted  came  to  light,  while  the  abomin- 
able knavery  and  meanness  of  Charles  IL  and  the  stupidity 
and  cool  cruelty  of  James  IL  became  ten  times  more  strik- 
ing than  ever  ;  evidence  still  involuntarily  wrung  from  Sir 
John,  who  is  ever  wishing  to  palliate  their  crimes,  or  excuse 
them,  by  throwing  the  blackest  calumnies  on  the  most 
virtuous  of  their  opposers,  particularly  on  Algernon  Sidney, 
Lord  Russell,  and  Lord  Hollis,  and  by  closing  his  book  with 
denying  James's  and  Louis's  privity  to  the  assassination- 
plot,  of  which  Sir  John  must  have  seen  evidence  in  Lord 
Hardwicke's  hands,  from  whom  he  obtained  many  lights. 
The  famous  second  volume  was  a  direct  charge  of  bribery 
from  France  on  the  venerable  hero  Algernon  Sidney,  pre- 
tended to  be  drawn  from  Barillon's  papers  at  Versailles ; 
a  source  shut  up  to  others,  and  actually  opened  to  Sir  John 
by  the  intercession  of  even  George  II L — a  charge  I  would 
not  make  but  on  the  best  authority.  Lord  Nuneham,  son 
of  Lord  Harcourt,  then  Ambassador  at  Paris,  told  me  his 
father  obtained  licence  for  Sir  John  to  search  those  archives 
—amazing  proof  of  all  I  have  said  on  the  designs  of  this 
reign  :  what  must  they  be  when  George  III.  encourages  a 
Jacobite  wretch  to  hunt  in  France^  for  materials  for  black- 

^  What  George  III.  really  did  was  to  open  William  III.'s  private  box  at 
Kensington  to  Sir  John  Dalrymple.  The  King  did  not  encourage  him  to 
make  researches  in  France  ;  but  did  not  Walpole  himself  do  so  ?  Sir  John,  in 
the  preface  to  his  book,  states  that  he  had  letters  of  introduction  to  Choiseul 
from  "Mr.  Stanley,  Lord  Harcourt,  and  Mr.  Walpole."  It  was  by  the 
special  advice  of  the  Chancellor,  Charles  Yorke,  that  Dalrymple  attempted 
to  write  the  history  of  a  certain  period,  grounded  on  state  papers  and 
other  original  documents  of  importance.  His  only  alleged  object  was 
truth,  but  the  Whigs  saw  in  his  "Memoirs  "  nothing  but  a  party  work  pub- 
lished for  their  annoyance.  The  book  is  not  altogether  ill-criticised  by  Wal- 
pole. Dalrymple  knew  so  little  how  to  use  his  materials,  that  when  he  had 
discovered  the  sentiments  of  an  individual  he  threw  the  whole  into  the  form  of 
a  speech,  which  the  individual  utters  "after  the  manner  of  the  ancients!" 
His  assiduity  was  indefatigable,  and  he  tried  hard,  but  in  vain,  to  obtain  a 
sight  of  manuscript  family  memoirs  in  London,  which  he  knew  to  be  of  great 
authority ;  but,  he  says,  ' '  it  required  a  train  of  solicitations  to  get  access  to 
them  to  which  no  man  of  common  pride  could  submit."  With  regard  to  the 
charge  brought  against  Sydney  of  having  accepted  money  from  the  French 
government  and  the  French  ambassador  in  London,  Barillon,  it  is  one  that 


i7n1     DALRYMPLE'S  HISTORY  OF  CHARLES  II      273 

ening  the  heroes  who  withstood  the  enemies  of  Protestanism 
and  liberty !  The  attempt  was  received  with  due  abhor- 
rence, and  to  the  great  mortification  of  the  Scotch,  whose 
unpopularity  was  doubled  by  so  infamous  an  aspersion. 
Men  saw  the  Court  could  have  no  meaning  but  to  sap  all 
virtuous  principles,  and  to  level  the  best  men  to  the  worst — 
a  plot  more  base  and  destructive  than  any  harboured  by 
the  Stuarts.  Nor  was  it  crowned  with  success.  Who 
could  trust  to  evidence  either  furnished  from  Versailles,  or 
coined  as  if  it  came  from  thence  ?  And  who  could  trust 
Sir  John,  who  was  accused,  I  know  not  how  truly,  of 
having  attempted  to  get  his  own  father  hanged,  and  who 
had  been  turned  out  of  a  place  by  Lord  Rockingham  for 
having  accepted  a  bribe — a  charge  he  endeavoured  to  deny, 
and  from  the  weight  of  which  Charles  Yorke  had  saved 
him,  but  which  Lord  Rockingham  would  never  disculpate 
him  from.  His  bullying  vindication  in  the  public  papers 
did  but  hurt  his  cause,  and  the  Court  grew  ashamed  of 
their  champion,  in  spite  of  his  flattery  to  the  Prince  on  the 
throne.  But  here  let  me  leave  him  :  a  refutation  of  his 
calumnies  will  appear  in  Mrs.  Macaulay's  next  volume. 

has  been  examined  by  the  editor  of  Lady  Russell's  Letters  (1773);  by  Dr. 
Towers,  who  published  his  '*  Examination  into  the  Nature  and  Evidence  of 
the  Charges,"  &c.,  in  the  same  year  ;  also  by  Mrs.  Macaulay,  and  by  Charles 
Fox,  as  well  as  others.  The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  is,  that  Sydney  un- 
doubtedly accepted  money,  but  for  no  selfish  purpose  of  his  own.  His  great 
desire  was  to  establish  a  republic  in  England,  and  Louis  XIV.  was  but  too 
happy  to  help  him,  not  out  of  love  for  commonwealths,  but  out  of  hatred  to 
this  country.  The  great  patriot  asked  for  larger  sums  than  he  ever  received, 
namely,  100,000  crowns.  Louis  offered  a  fifth  of  that  sum,  with  a  promise  of 
more  when  operations  had  been  seriously  commenced  against  the  English 
Government.  Nothing  came  of  it.  Nevertheless,  in  Barillon's  papers,  cited 
by  Dalrymple,  we  find  **  M.  de  Sidney,"  or  "Algernon  Sidney,"  set  down 
more  than  once  as  the  recipient  of  "  500  guineas  ; "  at  the  same  time  Barillon 
writes  of  him,  "The  Sieur  Algernon  Sidney  is  a  man  of  great  views,  and 
very  high  designs,  which  tend  to  the  establishment  of  a  republic."  In  another 
despatch  to  the  French  King  the  ambassador  states  that  M.  Sidney  '*  always 
appeared  to  him  to  have  the  same  sentiments,  and  not  to  have  changed  his 
maxims."  Lord  Macaulay  truly  says  that  "in  our  time  a  public  man  would 
be  thought  lost  to  all  sense  of  duty  and  of  shame  who  should  not  spurn  from 
him  a  temptation  which  conquered  the  virtue  and  the  pride  of  Algernon 
Sidney." — D. 

I.— T 


2  74       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Dec. 

At  the  end  of  this  year  died  a  singular  man,  Thomas 
Hollis.  He  was  a  gentleman  of  ample  fortune,  an  antiquary, 
collector,  of  most  virtuous  morals,  and  the  most  bigoted 
of  all  republicans,^  to  a  degree  of  being  unwilling  to  con- 
verse with  men  of  other  principles.  He  spent  much  money 
in  procuring  and  distributing  fine  prints  of  the  heroes  of 
his  party  and  friends  of  liberty,  at  the  head  of  which  were 
the  most  virtuous  of  men,  as  Milton,  Locke,  Algernon 
Sidney,  Andrew  Marvel,  &c.,  and  in  reprinting  pompous 
editions  of  such  works  as  support  the  cause  of  freedom. 
These  editions,  richly  bound  and  stamped  with  the  emblems 
of  liberty,  Mr.  Hollis  made  presents  of  to  those  who  loved 
the  cause.  He  sent  them  all  to  me  ;  yet  as  I  was  not  quite 
republican  enough  for  him,  he  would  neither  admit  me 
into  his  house  nor  enter  mine,  and  once  he  wrote  angrily 
against  me  for  having  in  the  "  Anecdotes  of  Painting " 
ridiculed  the  Presbyterians  on  their  demolition  of  arts ;  so 
that  my  impartiality  and  love  of  truth  offended  both  the 
friends  and  enemies  of  the  Stuarts.  Mr.  Hollis,  however, 
whose  virtue  was  far  superior  to  his  understanding,  retained 
regard  for  me,  and  once  sent  me  a  fine  drawing  by  Isaac 
Oliver,  which  I  knew  had  cost  him  ten  guineas.  I  sent  it 
back,  adding  that  I  had  accepted  his  books  and  prints,  as 
he  had  given  them  to  many  other  persons  ;  but  that  I  could 
not  receive  a  valuable  obligation  from  a  gentleman  who 
would  not  condescend  to  converse  with  me.  He  was 
offended  ;  but  his  humanity  soon  forgave  me,  and  he  sent 
me  more  of  his  publications.  Disgusted  with  the  servility 
of  the  times,  he  had  retired  to  Lyme,  in  Dorsetshire,  where 
Lord  Chatham  made  court  to  him,  and  it  was  supposed  ^ 

^  So  he  was  thought  during  his  life.  An  account  of  him  has  been  since 
written  and  printed  in  two  pompous  volumes  in  quarto,  and  thence  it  does  not 
appear  that  he  was  positively  a  republican.  It  does  appear  that  he  was  a 
very  weak  man,  and  thence  it  is  no  wonder  that  his  principles  were  not  very 
clear. 

2  It  was  confidently  asserted  that,  a  little  before  his  death,  which  happened 
very  suddenly  in  his  garden  (on  New-Year's  day,  1774),  Mr.  Hollis  had  sent 
to  Lord  Chatham  for  the  christian  names  of  all  his  children,  but,  dying  of  an 


1773]     DALRYMPLE'S  HISTORY  OF  CHARLES  H      275 

expected  his  estate ;  but  Lord  Chatham  could  not  be 
republican  enough  for  Mr.  Hollis,  who  died  suddenly  as 
he  was  walking  in  his  garden. 

Before  the  conclusion  of  the  year  Sandwich,  who  had 
resisted  all  manner  of  applications  from  Miller,  the  printer, 
to  be  forgiven  his  fine  of  2000/.,  and  who  had  vowed  never 
to  forgive  it,  but  to  bestow  it  on  some  charity,  privately 
compounded  it  for  500/.  and  his  own  costs.^ 

apoplexy,  his  estate,  by  a  will  made  long  before,  came  to  a  distant  relation, 
Thomas  Brand,  of  the  Antiquarian  Society. 

[Walpole  evidently  misunderstood  good  Thomas  Hollis,  whose  only 
bigotry  was  manifested  in  his  dread,  hatred,  and  intolerance  of  Popery.  The 
eccentricities  of  this  amiable  scholar  and  antiquary  were  many,  but  they  were 
partly  assumed,  in  order  that  idle  and  ignorant  visitors  might  not  intrude  on 
his  valuable  time.  He  was  a  highly  accomplished  and  a  wealthy  gentleman, 
skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  many  languages,  addicted  to  scientific  pursuits, 
and  enlightened  and  refined  by  the  exercise  of  acute  observation  in  his  various 
extended  travels.  His  great  ambition  was  to  become  a  representative  of  the 
people  in  Parliament,  but  he  turned  away  from  the  object  of  his  ambition 
when  he  found  it  was  to  be  secured  only  by  bribery,  and  at  the  cost  of  in- 
dependence of  thought  and  action.  He  was  a  great  collector  of  books  and 
medals,  and  profusely  generous  in  parting  with  any  of  them  to  individuals  and 
institutions  who  could  turn  them  to  good  purposes.  For  himself,  he  had 
method  and  purpose  in  all  his  transactions.  His  collection  of  medals  preserved 
the  effigies  of  men  who  had  withstood  tyranny,  and  thereby  kept  up  the 
memory  of  freedom  and  its  champions.  He  thus  at  once  illustrated  art  and 
patriotism.  Nor  was  he  a  mere  collector  either  of  books  or  medals  :  his 
methodical,  elaborate,  and  curious  diary  alone  might  serve  to  prove  his 
claim  to  be  considered  a  "literary  man."  He  edited  various  works  with  the 
care  of  a  scholar,  to  whom  the  labour  is  a  delight ;  and  the  medals  designed 
and  struck  by  himself  are  said  to  have  established  his  fame  as  an  artist. 
Throughout  life  he  acted  on  the  principle  that  to  give  was  better  than  to 
receive  ;  and  no  man  could  desire  better  epitaph  than  the  one  contained  in  the 
summingupofhischaracterby  a  writer  inthe  "  St.  James's  Chronicle, "wherein 
it  is  said  that  in  him  "  Liberty  lost  her  champion,  Humanity  her  treasurer, 
and  Charity  her  steward," — D.] 

^  Lord  Sandwich  repented  of,  or  was  persuaded  out  of,  this  lenity,  and 
sent  Miller  word  he  would  remit  no  part  of  the  fine. 


276       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Dec. 


SUPPLEMENT 

To  the  Printer  of  the  Public  Advertiser 

gjj^  Great  George  Street,  i8M  Dec,  1773. 

When  the  malice  of  my  enemies,  by  falsely  impeaching 
my  character,  had  put  me  to  the  hazard  of  my  life,  I  flattered 
myself  it  would  have  rested  silent  and  satisfied  ;  but  as  I  under- 
stand they  are  still  busy  with  my  reputation,  and  are  endeavouring 
by  a  thousand  misrepresentations  to  destroy  that  good  name 
which  to  me  is  inestimable,  I  am  compelled  to  trouble  the  public 
with  a  detail  of  those  circumstances  which  obliged  me  to  appeal 
to  the  sword.  I  hope  to  show  that  my  conduct  in  so  doing  was 
proper,  as  far  as  complying  with  a  custom,  the  tyranny  of  which, 
I  confess,  I  have  not  fortitude  to  resist,  can  be  justified. 

It  is  with  infinite  regret  I  find  myself  obliged  to  mention  Mr. 
Whately,  and  that  sometimes  in  terms  of  censure.  The  part  he 
took  in  the  question  made  me  feel  myself  aggrieved  by  him.  He 
answered  me  in  the  field  like  a  man  of  spirit  and  a  gentleman. 
It  is  with  pleasure  I  do  this  justice  to  his  character. 

When  Mr.  Whately  was  apprised  of  some  original  letters  from 
gentlemen  in  America  to  his  late  brother  having  been  sent  over 
and  made  public  at  Boston,  he  called  upon  me,  read  part  of  a 
letter  from  Mr.  Oliver  complaining  of  the  publication  of  his 
letters,  and  mentioned  that  he  had  given  me  access  to  some  of 
his  brother's  letters  from  his  correspondents  in  America.  He 
accompanied  this  with  a  declaration  that  he  had  not  the  least 
suspicion  of  me,  and  did  not  know  that  those  published  letters 
were  ever  in  his  possession ;  but  he  wished  I  would  authorise 
him  to  say  I  had  them  not  from  him.  I  gave  Mr.  Whately  every 
assurance  that  a  gentleman  could  give  that  I  had  not  taken  any 
one  letter,  nor  a  line  of  one,  from  among  those  he  showed  to 
me,  but  such  as  he  saw  and  gave  me  leave  to  take,  and  which 
were  all  written  by  my  brother  and  myself.  I  did  this  repeatedly, 
and  in  the  most  explicit  terms.  Mr.  Whately  appeared  perfectly 
satisfied,  and  I  own  I  did  not  expect  he  would  have  mentioned 


1773]    DUEL  BETWEEN  WHATELY  AND  TEMPLE     277 

that  transaction  again  in  any  manner  that  could  throw  a  possi- 
bility of  suspicion  on  my  character.  For  in  my  apprehension, 
when  a  gentleman  has  pledged  his  honour  to  another,  to  insinuate 
or  countenance  a  suspicion  of  him  afterwards  leads  inevitably  to 
the  consequences  which  have  attended  this  transaction.  Some 
time  after  this  explanation  between  Mr.  Whately  and  myself 
several  paragraphs  appeared  in  the  newspapers  highly  injurious 
and  dishonourable  to  me.  I  was  held  forth  as  a  monster  of  in- 
gratitude and  as  a  villain,  who,  under  the  cover  of  friendship, 
watched  for  an  opportunity  when  Mr.  Whately's  back  was  turned 
to  rob  him  of  papers  which  were  in  confidence  put  into  my 
hands.  Of  these  things  I  took  no  public  notice,  not  because 
they  gave  me  no  uneasiness,  but  because  I  knew  not  how  to 
redress  myself.  A  search  after  the  authors  of  them  I  conceived 
would  be  vain.  Such  malevolent  attacks  could  have  been  made 
by  none  but  cowards,  who  would  take  care  to  conceal  themselves. 
It  seemed  impossible  that  Mr.  Whately  could  have  had  any 
knowledge  of  the  authors,  or  could  have  given  any  countenance 
to  such  aspersions,  after  the  solemn  assurances  which  I  had 
given  him;  nor  should  I  have  troubled  him  on  the  subject  if 
his  name  had  not  been  used  as  an  authority  to  support  these 
false  and  malicious  assertions.  These  writers  artfully  suppressed 
three  very  material  circumstances  in  their  representations?  that 
Mr.  Whately  did  not  know  the  letters  sent  to  Boston  were  ever 
in  his  possession ;  that  of  those  which  he  put  into  my  hands 
none  appeared  to  be  missing,  which  could  not  have  been  the 
case  if  seventeen  letters,  and  some  of  them  very  long,  had  been 
taken  away ;  and  that  I  had  given  him  every  assurance  which  a 
gentleman  could  require  or  receive  that  no  such  letters  had  been 
taken  by  me.  Without  the  use  of  Mr.  Whately's  name  the 
charge  would  have  had  no  effect  upon  the  public.  That  gentle- 
man suffered  the  unfair  and  injurious  representations,  under  the 
sanction  of  his  name,  to  pass  unexplained.  I  did  expect,  when 
he  saw  the  purpose  to  which  the  men  who  gained  intelligence 
from  him  were  applying  it,  that  he  would  in  justice  to  truth,  and 
to  me,  have  stated  the  whole  as  above.  If  he  had  done  so,  I 
appeal  to  the  judgment  of  the  public  whether  any  suspicion 
would  have  rested  upon  me,  or  any  serious  consequences  followed. 


278       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Dec 

I  did  not  ask  this  of  him,  because  I  thought  he  ought  to  have 
done  it  unasked.  There  is  an  indelicacy  in  urging  a  gentleman 
to  do  that  which  is  his  duty,  and  owes  its  m^rit  to  its  being 
voluntary.  The  suspicion  against  me  upon  so  unfair  a  state  of 
facts,  aided,  I  suppose,  by  the  private  slanders  of  those  who 
raised  it,  secretly  gained  ground ;  and  on  the  8th  of  this  month 
a  writer,  under  the  signature  of  Ante?ior,  renewed  the  accusation 
of  me  by  name,  vouching  it  with  a  conversation  which  he  seems 
to  have  himself  held  upon  the  subject  with  Mr.  Whately. 

Under  so  direct  a  charge  I  thought  it  would  not  become  me 
to  be  any  longer  silent.  I  went  with  the  paper  to  Mr.  Whately, 
and  received  from  him,  as  I  imagined,  a  satisfactory  denial  of 
those  pretended  facts  which  materially  supported  the  suspicion. 
This  I  made  public ;  Mr.  Whately  then  came  forward  with  his 
name.  He  omitted  to  state  what  was  solely  essential,  that  he 
did  not  know  the  letters  in  question  were  among  those  he  put 
into  my  hands,  and  that  none  of  those  with  which  he  had 
intrusted  me  appeared  to  be  missing,  but  related  the  matter 
in  such  a  manner  as  strongly  to  corroborate  the  anonymous 
charge,  and  gave  me,  to  my  understanding,  the  lie  direct.  They 
who  have  any  feelings  of  honour  will  not  wonder  that  I  was 
impatient  under  such  an  imputation,  and  thought  every  moment 
miserable  till  I  had  called  upon  him,  from  whom  I  received  such 
an  affront,  for  honourable  amends.  The  public  is  acquainted 
with  the  sequel ;  but  the  circumstances  of  that  affair  have  been 
so  falsely  represented  to  my  dishonour,  that  I  am  obliged  to  beg 
a  moment's  indulgence  till  I  state  that  transaction  fairly. 

The  gentleman  who  waited  upon  Mr.  Whately  with  my  invita- 
tion told  him  he  would  attend  me  as  a  second  if  Mr.  Whately 
would  have  one  on  his  part.  Mr.  Whately  declined  having  any 
second,  and  therefore  I  brought  none.  He  appeared  at  the 
place  appointed  with  a  sword  only.  I  gave  him  one  of  my 
pistols.  We  discharged  them  mutually;  mine  being,  at  his 
request,  the  first,  without  effect.  If  his  was  not  directed  at  me 
it  escaped  my  observation.  I  then  drew  my  sword  and 
approached  him,  who  had  also  unsheathed  his,  with  a  persuasion, 
grounded  on  his  coming  with  a  sword  only,  when  the  choice 
of  weapons   was  in  him,  that  I  was  to  encounter  an  adversary 


1773]    DUEL  BETWEEN  WHATELY  AND  TEMPLE     279 

much  superior  to  myself  in  skill.  I  soon  found  my  mistake; 
and,  as  far  as  I  could  reason  in  such  a  situation,  determined, 
by  wounding  him  in  the  sword  arm,  to  end  the  business  without 
a  fatal  stroke.  But  my  skill  was  not  equal  to  my  intention  ;  it 
soon  became  a  struggle,  instead  of  a  regular  combat,  and  I  could 
only  avoid  making  a  full  lunge,  which  probably  would  have 
wounded  him  mortally.  The  contortions  of  my  antagonist's 
body,  during  the  struggle,  exposed  parts  which,  in  a  regular 
encounter,  could  never  have  been  touched.  When  he  turned 
himself  to  seize  the  blade  of  my  sword  with  his  left  hand,  I 
supposed  he  received  the  wounds  in  his  left  side,  and  in  some 
violent  effort  his  shoulder  must  have  been  exposed.  The 
extreme  smallness  of  the  wound  in  that  part,  being,  as  I  am  well 
informed,  a  mere  puncture,  proves  it  to  have  been  accidental. 
Had  my  purpose  been  unfair,  I  should  have  taken  the  life  that 
was  in  my  power;  had  it  been  mortal,  every  wound  would  not 
have  been  superficial,  and  one  only  dangerous,  not  from  its 
depth,  but  its  direction.  I  understand  it  has  been  said  he  was 
down.  In  such  circumstances  it  is  as  impossible  to  account  for 
everything  that  happens  as  to  remember  everything  that  passes. 
But  of  this  I  am  very  sure,  that,  though  he  slipped  once,  he 
never  fell. 

It  is  proper  to  apprise  the  reader  that  I  am  unfortunately  very 
deaf.  If  any  words  of  accommodation,  as  has  been  represented, 
were  really  used  by  Mr.  Whately,  I  did  not  hear  them.  They 
who  expect  coolness  in  the  midst  of  such  a  conflict,  and  delibera- 
tion in  the  moment  of  a  deadly  point  being  at  one's  breast, 
require  too  much.  It  is  well  that  the  passion  which  rises  fast 
on  such  an  occasion  did  not  alter  imperceptibly  my  general 
determination  not  to  push  so  forcibly  as  to  make  a  deep  wound. 
It  is  with  confidence  I  can  affirm  I  was  not  guilty  of  any  unfair 
action,  because  I  never  had  an  unfair  thought;  nor  of  a  cruel 
one,  because  my  purpose  was  the  reverse. 

I  have  received  no  bodily  wound ;  but  they  whose  minds  can 
feel  for  consequences  which  they  could  not  with  honour  avoid 
will  understand  me  when  I  say  that  I  have  felt  those  wounds 
which  far  surpass  in  anguish  every  bodily  pain. 

The  anonymous  assassins  who  have  been  really  the  cause  of 


28o       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [i773 

this  mischief  remain  unknown,  but  time,  I  trust,  will  drag  them 
forth  to  the  punishment  they  deserve. 

Of  those  to  whom  I  am  unknown,  the  candid  and  honourable 
are,  I  hope,  convinced  that  the  injurious  charges  which  have 
been  brought  against  me  are  totally  without  foundation.  With 
those  to  whom  I  am  known  I  flatter  myself  the  constant  tenor  of 
my  life  has  rendered  a  defence  of  my  conduct  unnecessary. 

I  have  but  a  few  words  more  to  say  upon  the  subject.  As 
Mr.  Whately's  narrative  tends  to  confirm  the  suspicion  of  my 
having  taken  from  him  the  letters  which  were  sent  to  Boston, 
I  do  again  most  solemnly  affirm  that  I  neither  took  from  him 
those,  nor  any  other  letters,  but  such  as  were  written  by  my 
brother  and  myself  to  the  late  Mr.  Whately,  and  that  with  his 
knowledge  and  consent;  nor  had  I  any  concern,  directly  or 
indirectly,  in  procuring  or  transmitting  the  letters  which  were 
sent  to  Boston.  j  temple. 

Mr.  Whately  afterwards  published  an  account  of  the  duel, 
which  proved  Mr.  Temple  still  more  in  the  wrong.  Dr.  Franklin 
having  presented  a  memorial  to  the  Privy  Council  against  Messrs. 
Hutchinson  and  Oliver,  founded  on  their  letters  to  the  late  Mr. 
Whately,  the  Council  asked  Dr.  Franklin  how  he  got  those  letters? 
to  which  he  refused  to  reply.  Whoever  wishes  to  know  more  of 
this  affair  may  consult  the  books  of  the  Privy  Council  for  the 
month  of  January,  1774.^ 

^  See  also  the  note  to  the  last  entry  for  July,  1772^ 


\oth. 


^11  \ 
JANUARY 


THE  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  went  to 
the  play  at  Covent  Garden  for  the  first  time  in 
ceremony.  They  were  received  with  excessive 
shouts  of  applause,  which  confounded  the 
Duchess  not  accustomed  to  it.  She  turned  pale,  and  then 
coloured ;  as  she  was  evidently  with  child,  the  spectators, 
for  fear  of  affecting  her,  suspended  their  acclamations ; 
but,  won  by  her  modesty,  confusion,  and  beauty,  redoubled 
their  claps  and  huzzas.^  A  few  days  before,  as  the  King 
was  riding,  he  met  their  child,  the  Princess  Sophia,  in  its 
nurse's  lap  in  the  coach.  Thinking  it  was  the  Duchess 
and  child,  he  pulled  off  his  hat.     He  met  it  again  in  two 

^  The  bills  of  the  day  simply  express  that  the  play  for  the  evening  was 
"by  particular  desire."  The  performances  consisted  oi  Jane  Shore  and 
Harlequin  Sylph.  The  tragedy  perhaps  was  selected  as  an  illustration  of 
the  evils  of  dishonourable  connections  between  princes  and  ladies  of  inferior 
state.  Bensley  played  Shore,  and  Smith  enacted  Hastings.  The  latter, 
a  short  time  after,  carried  off  the  Jane  Shore  of  the  evening— brilliant  Mrs. 
Hartley.  Two  nights  after  the  triumphant  reception  of  the  Duke  and 
Duchess  at  Covent  Garden,  the  King  and  Queen  went  in  state  to  Drury 
Lane,  where  the  School  for  Wives  was  given.  Both  pieces  contain  lines  that 
party  spirit  could  easily  apply,  according  to  its  bias.  It  will  be  observed  in 
the  text  that  Parliament  met  on  the  13th,  the  day  after  the  latter  visit  to  the 
theatre.  Five  days  previously,  Saturday,  January  8,  Charles  Fox  and  other 
public  men  of  less  note  closed  their  vacation  pleasures  by  the  performance 
of  a  tragedy  and  farce  at  Winterslow  House,  near  Salisbury,  the  seat  of  the 
Hon.  Stephen  Fox.  The  play  was  the  Fair  Penitent^  in  which  Charles  Fox 
acted  Horatio  to  the  Lothario  of  his  lively  friend  Fitzpatrick.  The  afterpiece 
was  High  Life  below  Stairs,  in  which  Fox  played,  with  great  spirit,  that 
capital  low  comedy  part,  Sir  Harry's  servant.  The  night's  entertainment  was 
followed  by  a  very  serious  drama,  for  before  Sunday  morning  dawned  Winter- 
slow  was  burned  to  the  ground.  With  the  session  now  opening,  Fox  may  be 
said  to  have  seriously  commenced  his  career  as  a  public  man. — D. 

281 


282       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Jan. 

days,  being  in  the  chaise  with  the  Queen,  but  then  took 
no  notice — which  proved  it  was  her  Majesty  that  prevented 
his  reconciliation  with  his  brother. 

i^th.  The  Parliament  met.  The  Earl  of  Northington^ 
and  Lord  Willoughby  de  Broke^  moved  the  Address  in 
the  Lords  ;  Lord  Guernsey^  and  Mr.  John  St.  John  *  in  the 
Commons.  There  was  not  a  breath  of  opposition  in  either 
House ;  only  Mr.  Prescott,  a  very  rich  banker,  com- 
plained, in  the  Commons,  of  the  late  regulation  of  the 
gold  coin,  by  which,  he  said,  there  was  not  a  banker  in 
England  that  had  not  lost  500/.  Lord  North  laughed, 
and  made  the  House  laugh,  at  him,  by  saying  he  was 
glad  the  loss  had  fallen  on  those  who  were  the  best  able 
to  bear  it. 

But  though  Parliament  was  so  tame,  one  man  alone 
kept  the  whole  power  of  Government  in  check  by  his 
spirit,  abilities,  and  industry.  This  was  the  Duke  of 
Richmond.  On  the  eve  of  the  Parliament  he  had  defeated 
all  the  efforts  of  the  Ministers  at  the  India  House,  and 
carried  a  material  question  against  them  by  68  voices  to 
26.  On  this  the  Court  party  endeavoured  to  throw  the 
whole  once  more  into  confusion,  that  it  might  be  necessary 
to  apply  again  to  Parliament,  where  they  could  carry  what- 
ever they  pleased. 

\Zth.  General  Graeme,  angry  at  not  succeeding  Andrew 
Stone  as  Treasurer  to  the  Queen,  resigned  his  posts  of 
Secretary  and  Comptroller  to  her ;  the  former  of  which 
was  immediately  conferred  on  Mr.  Harris  of  Salisbury, 
author  of  "  Hermes,"  and  other  tracts.^ 

^  Henley,  second  Earl  of  Northington. 

'■*  John  Peyto  Verney,  Baron  Willoughby  de  Broke,  a  Lord  of  the  Bed- 
chamber. 

^  Finch,  eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Aylesford. 

^  Youngest  brother  of  the  Lord  Viscount  Bolingbroke. 

°  Soon  after  the  period  when  Charlotte,  Princess  of  Mecklenburgh  Strelitz, 
became  Queen  Consort,  she  bestowed  on  Colonel  Graeme  the  "  prettiest  bit  of 
preferment"  in  the  possession  of  the  wife  of  a  King  of  England, — the  Master- 
ship of  St.  Catherine's  Hospital.  This  appointment  was  popularly  described 
as  the  Colonel's  reward  for  the  exercise  of  his  office  of  love's  emissary,  when 


1774]  MEETING   OF   PARLIAMENT  283 

This  week  came  accounts  of  very  riotous  proceedings 
at  Boston,  where  the  mob  broke  into  the  ships  that  had 
brought  teas,  and  threw  above  340  chests  into  the  sea.^ 

About  this  time  Dr.  Law,  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  had  the 
honesty  to  write  against  subscription  to  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles,  so  popishly  upheld  by  the  rest  of  his  brethren. 

On  the  25//^  came  on  the  great  day  of  expectation  at 
the  India  House  on  the  ballot  for  the  Instructions  of  the 
Board  of  Directors  and  those  of  the  Proprietors,  when  the 
former,  by  the  superior  influence  of  the  Administration, 

he  went  from  court  to  court  in  Germany  in  search  of  a  princess  qualified  to 
share  the  throne  of  Great  Britain  with  George  III.  The  gallant  soldier 
happened  to  meet,  at  the  salutary  springs  of  Pyrmont,  with  the  Princess 
Dowager  of  Strelitz  and  her  two  daughters.  His  report  of  the  younger  of 
the  latter  is  stated  to  have  been  so  favourable  that  it  led  to  the  offer  of 
marriage  subsequently  made  and  promptly  accepted.  When  Harris  succeeded 
the  Colonel  in  the  office  named  above  he  was  member  for  Christchurch.  He 
retained  his  seat  and  his  office  till  the  day  of  his  death,  in  1780.  Mr.  Harris 
was  the  father  of  the  first  Earl  of  Malmesbury  (the  diplomatist),  and  was, 
undoubtedly,  a  great  scholar,  but  not  so  "universal "  as  he  was  accounted 
during  the  best  period  of  his  honourable  and  useful  life. — D. 

^  The  Americans  signalised  the  early  occurrences  of  the  outbreak  by  using 
very  loyal  tunes,  to  which,  however,  they  adapted  words  which  were  accounted 
very  undutiful  here.  Thus,  to  the  air  of  "  Rule  Britannia  ! "  was  chorused  a 
hymn  of  liberty  of  many  verses,  from  which  I  take  one,  as  a  sample  of  the 
half-arguing,  half-defying,  colonial  minstrelsy  : — 

*'  Let  us,  your  sons,  by  freedom  warm'd, 
Your  own  example  keep  in  view, 
'Gainst  tyranny  be  ever  arm'd, 
Though  we  our  tyrant  find  in  you. 
Rule  Britannia  ;  Britannia  rule  the  waves ; 
But  never,  never  make  your  children  slaves  !  " 

Whitehead,  the  laureate,  whose  grand  nonsense  was  pronounced  "insupport- 
able "  by  Johnson,  took  occasion  of  a  temporary  '*  lull "  in  the  American 
excitement,  a  few  months  later  than  the  period  named  in  the  text,  to  proclaim 
in  a  Birthday  Ode  the  repentance  of  the  colonists  who  incited  to  rebellion  by 
putting  new  words  to  old  tunes.  Thus  sang  the  son  of  the  wealthy  Cambridge 
baker  : — 

"  The  prodigal  again  returns. 

And  on  his  parent's  neck  reclines, 
With  honest  shame  his  bosom  burns. 

And  in  his  eye  affection  shines ; 
Shines  through  tears,  at  once  that  prove 
Grief  and  joy  and  filial  love." 

Before  Whitehead  could  write  another  Birthday  Ode  to  the  King  the 
''prodigal"  had  struck  his  "parent"  that  blow  at  Lexington  which  seemed 
proof  of  anything  but  "grief  and  joy  and  filial  love."  And  then,  as  Bancroft 
remarks  of  the  opening  of  the  conflict, — "  Kings  sat  still  in  awe,  and  nations 
turned  to  watch  the  issue." — D. 


284       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE      [Jan. 

were  carried  by  a  majority  of  98,  and  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond at  last  defeated. 

26th.  The  City  petition  in  favour  of  Roberts  against  the 
Lord  Mayor  was  at  last  presented  to  the  House  of  Com- 
mons. Lord  North  was  not  inclined  to  it,  and  the  Speaker 
Norton  advised  its  not  being  carried  into  the  House  :  but 
Alderman  Harley  and  the  Scotch  party  prevailed,  and, 
after  being  referred  to  the  Attorney  and  Solicitor  Generals, 
it  was  presented  by  Alderman  Hopkins.  Sawbridge  said 
it  ought  not  to  be  heard  there.  Charles  Fox  supported  it, 
and,  by  Rigby's  instigation,  abused  George  Grenville's 
Select  Committee  for  hearing  Elections,  which  had  really 
restored  some  credit  to  Parliament,  and  which  the  Court 
disliked  as  impartial  and  destroying  the  weight  of  a 
majority  when  petitions  were  tried  there,  since  a  small 
number  would  not  expose  themselves  to  the  odium  of 
injustice  as  a  whole  party  would.  T.  Townshend,  observing 
that  Charles  Fox  sat  near  the  bar,  as  his  father  had  used  to 
do  when  he  managed  elections,  said,  the  young  gentleman 
seemed  to  think  he  had,  and  wished  to  recover,  an  heredi- 
tary right  of  managing  elections.  Rigby,  to  court  Fox, 
made  a  panegyric  on  Lord  Holland,  whom  he  had  used  so 
very  ill,  and  abused  Grenville's  bill.  Townshend,  with  his 
usual  quickness,  replied  that,  had  he  been  the  friend  of 
Lord  Holland  or  Grenville  (as  Rigby  had  been  and  deserted 
both  for  interest),  he  should  not  have  forfeited  their  friend- 
ship.    The  petition  was  referred  to  the  Committee. 

2(^th.  Dr.  Franklin  was  again  heard  by  counsel  before 
the  Privy  Council.^  Wedderburn,  Solicitor-General,  made 
a  most  bitter  and  abusive  speech  against  him,  which  was 
much  admired.  He  made  no  reply.  The  Council  advised 
a  rejection  of  the  memorial  he  had  presented  against 
Hutchinson  and  Oliver,  and  justified  those  persons  as  not 
being  to  blame  for  the  letters  complained  of.  The  Minis- 
ters determined  to  turn  Franklin  out  of  his  place  of  post- 

^  This  event,  a  capital  one  in  giving  date  to  the  American  war. 


1774]  DISGRACE   OF   DR.    DODD  285 

master  of  America,  which  could  but  incense  him  and  drive 
him  (a  man  of  vast  abilities)  on  farther  hostilities,  and 
recommend  him  as  a  martyr  to  the  Bostonians.  This 
place  was  all  he  had,  and  it  was  taken  away. 

At  the  end  of  the  month  happened  the  disgrace  of  Dr. 
Dodd,  a  precise,  affected,  and  popular  preacher,  an  enemy, 
but  mimic,  of  the  Methodists,  Director  of  the  Magdalens, 
and  chaplain  at  Court,  from  his  hypocrisy  and  popularity. 
He  had  been  tutor  to  the  young  Earl  of  Chesterfield,  and 
had  married  a  cast  mistress  of  Lord  Sandwich  ;  yet  so 
many  titles  not  advancing  his  fortune  in  proportion  to  his 
wishes,  on  a  prospect  of  the  rich  living  of  St.  George's 
falling  into  the  gift  of  the  Lord  Chancellor,  Dr.  Dodd 
contrived  to  have  a  letter  written  and  conveyed  to  Lady 
Apsley,  the  Chancellor's  wife,  in  which  she  was  offered 
3000/.,  and  500/.  a  year  out  of  the  living,  if  she  would 
procure  it  for  a  person  that  should  be  named  to  her.  The 
lady  carried  the  letter  to  her  husband,  who,  on  making  in- 
quiry, discovered  that  it  had  been  penned  by  a  clerk  in  an 
office,  but  dictated  by  Mrs.  Dodd.  The  Doctor  immediately 
denied  being  privy  to  the  negotiation,  and  laid  it  on  the 
officious  zeal  of  his  consort ;  he  then  owned  he  had 
offended,  begged  delay  that  he  might  retire  and  hide  him- 
self abroad.  The  Chancellor  was  obdurate,  and  made 
formal  complaint  to  the  King,  who  ordered  the  Lord 
Chamberlain  to  strike  the  Doctor  off  the  Hst  of  chaplains. 
He  again  solicited  for  delay,  but  persisted  in  ignorance  of 
the  transaction  ;  and  when  Lord  Hertford  told  him  no 
indulgence  would  be  granted,  complained  of  the  hardship 
of  the  usage. 

^  Dodd  was  at  this  time  forty-five  years  of  age.  His  wife,  a  Miss  Perkins, 
was  a  handsome  woman,  the  daughter  of  one  of  Sir  John  Dolben's  servants. 
When  he  made  his  equally  impudent  and  imprudent  offer  to  Lady  Apsley  he 
was  at  the  height  of  his  popularity  as  a  preacher.  The  right  to  appoint  to 
St.  George's  was  claimed  by  Lord  North,  the  Bishop  of  London,  and  the  Lord 
Chancellor  respectively  ;  but  that  of  the  latter  was  established,  and  he 
appointed  the  Rev.  Dr.  Smythe,  a  nephew  of  the  ex-Chancellor,  Lord  Cam- 
den.—D. 


[Feb. 


FEBRUARY 

1st. 

10RD  Buckingham^  moved  the  House  of  Lords  to 
address  for  copies  of  papers  relative  to  the  dis- 
turbances at  Boston,  on  the  teas.  The  Minis- 
-^  ters  pleaded  that  they  had  not  yet  obtained 
sufficient  information,  but  would  produce  it  as  soon  as 
they  could.  The  Earl  of  Stair,^  a  recent  peer  of  the  six- 
teen, who  had  never  opened  before,  surprised  the  House 
by  a  strange,  theatric,  and  angry  declamation,  in  which  he 
declared  he  was  attached  to  and  obliged  to  no  man.  He 
censured  a  long  series  of  measures,  both  in  the  past  and 
present  reigns,  complained  bitterly  of  the  oppression  his 
country  laboured  under  by  the  Union  (while  the  English 
repined  as  much  at  the  partialities  showered  upon  them), 
censured  the  debility  of  the  Government,  and  concluded 
with  prognosticating  all  kinds  of  evils  from  it.  Lord 
Buckingham  withdrew  his  motion. 

S^k.  The  day  for  ballotting  at  the  India  House  for 
General  Clavering  as  commander  in  India ;  the  Duke  of 
Richmond  endeavoured  to  avoid  it  by  putting  the  previous 
question,  but  was  beaten  by  a  great  appearance  of  courtiers 
as  proprietors,  after  a  long  debate,  and  the  ballot  was 
again  fixed  for  Tuesday,  the  8th  ;  but  on  the 

yt/i  the  Duke,  having  gained  a  majority  of  the  Board 
of  Directors,  carried  a  question  by  a  majority  of  one,  that, 

^  Sir  John  Hobart,  second  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  formerly  Ambassador 
to  Russia,  now  out  of  place.  His  motion  was  supposed  to  tend  to  the  vindica- 
tion of  Mr.  Grenville,  his  patron,  author  of  the  Stamp  Act. 

2  John  Dalrymple,  Earl  of  Stair.  He  had  been  elected  of  the  sixteen, 
when  the  Administration  could  not  carry  the  election  for  the  Earl  of  Dysart, 
and  the  Ministers  had  only  preferred  Lord  Stair  to  the  Earl  of  Breadalbane, 
who  had  been  set  up  by  the  opposing  Peers  of  Scotland. 

286 


1774]  CITY   PETITION  287 

as  tranquillity  prevailed  in  India,  it  was  not  necessary  to 
appoint  a  commander-in-chief.     Yet  on  the 

Zth  the  Court  Proprietors  carried  the  command  for 
General  Clavering,  as  on  the  wth  they  prevailed  to  send 
Colonel  Monson  with  him  as  an  eventual  successor ;  and 
there  ended  the  Duke  of  Richmond's  Indian  campaign,  in 
which  his  spirit,  address,  insinuation,  and  application  had 
greatly  distinguished  him,  and  acquired  a  large  number  of 
adherents,  by  whom  he  had  so  long  balanced  the  power  of 
Government,  at  a  moment  when  Opposition  had  in  a  man- 
ner given  up  the  contest  in  Parliament.^ 

The  City  petition,  indeed,  threatened  a  little  storm. 
Mr.  Roberts,  the  petitioner,  in  order  to  detect  illegal 
votes,  had  demanded  examination  of  the  books  of  the 
Glovers'  Company,  and  the  House  sent  a  warrant  for  that 
purpose.  The  Company,  in  the  interest  of  Wilkes,  had  a 
mind  to  refuse  them,  and  consulted  Serjeant  Glynn.  He 
told  them  that,  as  a  member  of  Parliament,  he  could  not 
advise  them  to  resist  the  orders  of  the  House,  and,  as  a 
friend,  counselled  them  to  obey ;  which  they  did  :  but  the 
City  petition  had  been  presented  with  a  deeper  view  in  the 
Court.  Mr.  Grenville's  Act  for  Select  Committees  to  try 
Elections,  enacted  as  an  essay  for  only  seven  years,  proved 
the  most  effectual  bar  to  corruption  that  had  ever  been 
devised,  and  was  a  tacit  confession  of  the  iniquity  of  de- 
cisions in  Committees  of  the  whole  House,  for  the  whole 
parties  and  majorities  would  brave  any  general  shame. 
Thirteen  specific  men,  chosen  by  ballot,  bound  by  a  solemn 
oath,  and  whose  names  were  divulged,  would  not  stand  the 
test  of  odium  of  flagrant  injustice  and  perjury.  Yet  it  was 
not  to  do  impartial  justice  that  the  Ministers  promoted 
the  City  petition.  No;  what  they  hoped  was,  that  the 
danger  of  offending  Wilkes  and  his  mob  would  deter  most 

^  The  Duke  gave  great  offence  to  the  Court  just  before  the  meeting  of 
Parliament,  by  stating  at  the  India  House  that  his  inclination  and  duty  would 
prompt  him  rather  to  attend  at  the  latter  place  than  at  the  former,  although 
the  King  was  there  to  address  the  assembly  on  the  opening  of  the  session. — D. 


288       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

men  from  appearing  in  the  House  when  the  Committee 
should  be  chosen.  Thirteen  names  were  to  be  ballotted 
for  out  of  an  hundred  ;  if  an  hundred  members  were  not 
present,  no  committee  could  be  appointed ;  and,  as  an 
election  committee  was  to  take  place  of  all  other  business, 
the  House  could  not  proceed  on  any  business  till  the 
Committee  should  be  chosen.  The  experiment  was  pre- 
viously made  on  the  contested  election  at  Worcester  prior 
to  that  for  the  City  of  London.  The  Administration  used 
as  much  solicitation  to  prevent  members  going  to  the 
House  as  they  commonly  used  to  fill  it,  and  it  was  past 
three  o'clock  before  there  were  an  hundred  members  on 
the  day  appointed  for  choosing  the  Committee.  The  event 
was  correspondent  to  the  object  of  the  bill.  Mr.  Rous,  the 
Court  member,  was  convicted  of  bribery,  and  the  election 
was  declared  void.  It  had  cost  him  12,000/.,  and  two 
more  to  support  himself  against  the  petition  of  his  an- 
tagonist, Sir  Watkin  Lewis,  one  of  Wilkes's  adherents. 
This  was  a  stunning  blow  to  corruption,  and  highly  satis- 
factory to  country  gentlemen  and  family  interests,  who 
daily  saw  themselves  attacked  by  adventurers,  strangers, 
commissaries,  and  nabobs.  Sir  Edward  Astley  had  often 
promised  the  House  to  move  for  the  perpetuity  of  Gren- 
ville's  bill,  and  on  the 

10//2,  by  persuasion  of  Lord  Rockingham,  acquainted 
the  House  that  he  should  propose  it.  Lord  North  said  he 
would  be  as  frank,  and  declared  that  he  should  be  against 
making  the  Act  perpetual — a  fair  warning  ;  but  he  thought 
he  knew  to  what  a  mercenary  crew  he  announced  his  in- 
tention of  making  them  vote  by  immediate  pay  against 
their  permanent  interests ! 

The  same  day  was  published  "  An  Heroic  Postscript 
to  the  Heroic  Epistle  " — a  severe  satire  on  the  King,  and 
a  declaration  of  asserting  the  liberty  of  the  press,^  which 

^  The  satire  against  the  King  is  confined  to  the  few  lines  referring  to  the 
naval  review  that  had   occurred   since   the  publication  of  the   "Epistle," 


1774]  THE   "HEROIC   POSTSCRIPT"  289 

the  very  next  day  grew  in  danger  from  the  rashness 
of  its  friends  and  the  designs  of  its  enemies ;  insinuations 
having  been  thrown  out  in  the  autumn  that  the  King 
would  in  this  session  send  a  message  to  both  Houses 
to  demand  some  correction  of  the  licentiousness  of  the 
press.     On  the 

wth  appeared  in  the  "Public  Advertiser"  a  most  daring 
attack  on  the  Speaker,  Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  for  notorious 
partiality  in  preventing  the  presentation  of  a  memorial 
in  behalf  of  one  William  Tooke,^  a  Norfolk  gentleman, 

when  George  III.  went  to  Spithead,  where,  as  Mason  remarks,  a  monarch 

might  see — 

"  as  other  folks  have  seen, 
That  ships  have  anchors,  and  that  seas  are  green, 
Should  own  the  tackling  trim,  the  streamers  fine, 
With  Sandwich  prattle,  and  with  Bradshaw  dine. 
And  then  sail  back,  amid  the  cannon's  roar. 
As  safe,  as  sage,  as  when  he  left  the  shore." 

In  a  subsequent  portion  of  the  brief  "  Heroic  Postscript"  the  author  does 
not  so  much  assert  the  liberty  of  the  press  as  threaten  to  employ  it : — 

"  If  real  danger  threat  fair  Freedom's  reign, 
If  hireling  peers,  in  prostitution  bold, 
Sell  her  as  cheaply  as  themselves  they  sold  ; 
Or  they  who,  honour'd  by  the  people's  choice. 
Against  that  people  lift  their  rebel  voice, 
And,  basely  crouching  for  their  paltry  pay. 
Vote  the  best  birthright  of  her  sons  away. 
Permit  a  nation's  inborn  wealth  to  fly 
In  mean,  unkingly  prodigality — 

If  this  they  dare,  the  thunder  of  his  song. 

Rolling  in  deep-toned  energy  along. 

Shall  strike  with  Truth's  dread  bolt  each  miscreant's  name. 

Who,  dead  to  duty,  senseless  e'en  to  shame, 

Betray'd  his  country,"  &c. 

All  satire  on  Bradshaw  was  acceptable  to  Walpole,  who  never  spares 
the  friend  or  follower  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  Just  a  year  previous  to  the 
appearance  of  the  "  Postscript  "  the  launch  of  the  Defiance  was  to  take 
place  at  Chatham,  in  presence  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  and  Captain  Boyle. 
The  moment  had  nearly  arrived  for  the  event,  when  a  message  from  the 
Admiralty  reached  the  builder  of  the  vessel,  with  Bradshaw's  compliments, 
and  a  request  that  the  launch  might  be  postponed  for  an  hour  or  two,  as 
he  (Bradshaw)  was  setting  out  with  two  ladies,  but  would  be  at  Chatham 
as  soon  as  possible.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  is  said  to  have  laughed  heartily 
at  the  idea  of  a  "  Sea  Lord  "  being  ignorant  that  time  and  tide  waited  for  no 
man.  This  ben  trovato  story  had  great  success  ;  but  in  despite  of  that  and 
similar  stories  circulated  by  men  who  took  Walpole's  view  of  Bradshaw,  the 
latter  possessed  many  good  qualities  which  would  have  been  looked  for  in  vain 
in  those  who  either  censured  or  laughed  at  him. — D. 

^  This  was  Mr.  Tooke,  of  Purley,  in  Surrey.  Tooke,  in  his  difficulty, 
consulted  "  Parson  Home,"  as  he  was  called,  though  he  had  just  resigned  the 

I.— U 


290      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

oppressed  by  Mr.  De  Grey,  brother  of  the  Chief  Justice, 
who  was  soliciting  a  bill  for  enclosing  a  common  in  which 
the  said  Tooke  had  property,  and  to  which  enclosure 
Tooke  would  not  give  his  consent.  Tooke  set  his  name 
to  the  publication,  but  it  was  said  to  be  written  by  Parson 
Home,!  and  contained  a  representation  of  the  Speaker's 
injustice,  which,  however,  appeared  by  the  testimony 
of  many  present  to  have  been  no  more  than  his  slovenly 
hurry  in  doing  business,  and  to  have  been  more  owing  to 
Sir  Edward  Astley's  ignorance  in  presenting  two  counter- 
petitions  at  the  same  time.  The  Speaker,  as  soon  as  the 
House  met,  made  his  complaint,  and  said  all  he  desired 
was  to  be  acquitted  of  partiality.  The  members  on  whom 
he  called  disculpated  him,  and  then  Lord  North,  Rigby, 
and  Charles  Fox  called  for  the  Orders  of  the  Day,  and  the 
matter  had  like  to  have  ended  there ;  but  Mr.  Herbert  ^ 
went  up  to  Lord  North,  and  asked  him  if  he  did  not  mean 
to  vindicate  the  dignity  of  the  Speaker  and  of  the  House. 
Lord  North,  with  his  usual  indolent  indecision,  replied  he 
had  not  determined,  he  must  have  time  to  think  of  it ; 
but  Herbert  did  not  give  him  time,  and  moved  for  ven- 
geance on  the  printer.  This  set  the  House  in  a  flame,  and 
many  cried  that  now  was  the  time  to  assert  the  honour 
of  the  House  against  the  insolence  of  the  press.  Lord 
North  himself  took  up  spirit,  and  spoke  well,  as  he  always 

incumbency  of  New  Brentford,  and  given  up  the  church  for  the  study 
of  the  law.  Home  advised  Tooke  to  pubUsh  a  libel  against  the  Speaker, 
of  which  he  offered  to  be  the  author,  as  a  sure  means  of  promoting  his  views. 
This  libel  brought  Home  before  the  House ;  but  it  also  led  to  such  a 
modification  of  the  bill  so  strenuously  objected  to  by  Tooke,  that  the  latter, 
out  of  pure  gratitude,  appointed  Home  heir  to  a  great  portion  of  his  estate. 
It  was  on  this  account  that  the  name  of  Tooke  was  subsequently  added  to 
that  of  Home. — D. 

^  Mr.  Tooke  was  a  very  wrongheaded  man,  and  had  long  had  a  quarrel 
with  Mr.  De  Grey :  he  once  proceeded  so  far  as  to  pull  down  a  large  quantity 
of  Mr.  De  Grey's  pales,  who  sent  him  a  challenge.  Tooke  hasted  to  London 
and  prosecuted  De  Grey  for  the  challenge  in  the  King's  Bench.  Lord 
Mansfield  gave  Tooke  but  two  shillings  damages,  and  indecently  made  a 
speech  in  defence  of  duelling. 

'  H.  Herbert,  first  cousin  of  the  Earl  of  Pembroke, 


1774]  LIBEL   ON   THE   SPEAKER  291 

did  when  he  took  his  part ;  and  he  drew  a  ridiculous  pic- 
ture of  a  former  transaction,  to  mortify  Sawbridge  and  the 
City  patriots.  He  said,  if  they  sent  for  the  printer,  the 
Lord  Mayor  would  refuse  to  obey  their  order :  the  magis- 
trate would  think  it  his  duty,  like  one  of  his  predecessors, 
to  be  sent  to  prison,  would  have  the  comfort  of  martyrdom, 
and  would  probably  meet  with  the  same  gratitude  from  his 
fellow-citizens  as  his  predecessor  had  done.  The  conclu- 
sion would  have  been  very  artful  in  the  mouth  of  Burke 
or  Dowdswell,  as  a  leader  of  Opposition,  as  tending  to 
excite  the  citizens  to  show  more  gratitude.  Dowdswell,  not 
quick  enough  to  catch  such  an  idea,  yet  put  Lord  North 
in  mind  that  Wilkes  might  avow  himself  the  author  of 
Tooke's  letter,  and  then  what  would  his  Lordship  do  ? 
He  remembered,  he  said,  how  often  the  Ministers  had 
shrunk  from  the  charge  when  it  had  been  necessary  to 
question  and  encounter  Wilkes.  Woodfall,  the  printer, 
was  ordered  to  attend.  Sawbridge  declared  that,  should 
the  business  come  before  him,  he  would  dismiss  the 
printer. 

14//^.  Woodfall  appeared  at  the  bar  of  the  House.  He 
declared  he  had  received  the  offensive  paper  from  Parson 
Home,  but  in  the  hurry  of  business  had  not  perused  it ; 
only,  seeing  two  petitions,  he  concluded  the  paper  related 
to  the  common  affairs  of  the  House ;  and  submitted  him- 
self, hoping  allowance  would  be  made  for  his  having  exer- 
cised his  profession  for  twenty  years  without  ever  having 
offended  the  House  before.  This  behaviour  greatly  softened 
the  House,  and  Mr.  Herbert  moved  for  his  being  only 
committed  to  the  Serjeant-at-Arms ;  but  Charles  Fox, 
prompt  to  be  violent  and  to  disgust,  and  assuming  the 
Minister,  moved  to  commit  Woodfall  to  Newgate,  in  de- 
fiance, he  declared,  of  the  City  and  the  Sheriffs,  and  was 
seconded  by  General  Burgoyne;  but  many  others  objected 
to  the  punishment  as  too  severe,  and  the  courtiers  them- 
selves were  against  extremities,  as  Herbert,  Sir  W.  Mere- 


292       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

dith,  and  others  were  for  not  violating  the  Hberty  of  the 
press.  Lord  North  at  last  said  the  offence  was  too  great 
to  be  slightly  passed  over ;  but,  wishing  to  avoid  a  quarrel 
with  the  City  magistrates,  preferred  the  Gatehouse,  which 
was  out  of  their  jurisdiction,  to  Newgate.  However,  if 
a  precedent  of  milder  punishment  could  be  found,  he 
would  yield  to  it ;  if  not,  he  must  tread  in  the  steps  of  our 
ancestors,  who  had  been  more  watchful  over  the  privileges 
of  the  House  than  the  present  generation  were  ;  and  he 
indiscreetly  owned  that  the  House  was  got  into  a  scrape, 
must  avoid  it  if  they  could,  at  least  ought  not  to  provoke 
it.  A  tedious  debate  then  ensued,  everybody  trying  to 
procure  unanimity  and  moderation.  At  last  Dowdswell 
pointed  out  a  case  in  the  Journals  exactly  parallel,  only 
stronger,  as  it  extended  to  abuse  on  both  Houses,  when 
Meres  the  printer  was  committed  to  the  Serjeant-at-Arms. 
This  brought  over  several  to  the  milder  side;  and  Lord 
North  confessed  that  the  case  was  in  point,  and  that  he 
must  submit  to  it,  if  Charles  Fox,  with  whom  he  had  con- 
curred for  imprisonment,  would  let  him  off,  though  he  had 
bound  him  to  the  stake :  but  Charles  Fox,  with  most  in- 
decent arrogance,  stuck  to  his  point,  and  declared  he 
would  take  the  sense  of  the  House,  and  Lord  North  was 
so  weak  as  to  vote  with  him ;  but  they  were  beaten  by 
152  to  68. 

lyth.  Yesterday  complaint  was  made  to  the  House  of 
a  letter  printed  in  the  "  Public  Advertiser "  of  yesterday, 
and  the  same  letter  printed  in  the  "  Morning  Chronicle," 
signed  "  A  South  Briton." 

"  Resolved,  that  the  said  letters  are  a  false,  scandalous, 
and  seditious  libel  upon  the  constitution  of  this  country, 
tending  to  alienate  the  affections  of  his  Majesty's  subjects 
from  his  Majesty  and  the  Royal  Family." 

"  Ordered,  that  his  Majesty's  Attorney-General  do  forth- 
with prosecute  the  publishers  of  the  said  libel." 

"  The  order  of  the  day  being  read  for  the  attendance  of 


1774]  VIOLENCE   OF   THE   PRESS  293 

the  Rev.  John  Home,  he  not  attending  according  to 
order." 

"  Ordered,  that  the  said  Rev.  John  Home,  having  been 
guilty  of  a  breach  of  privilege  of  this  House  in  not  obey- 
ing the  said  order,  in  contempt  of  the  authority  of  this 
House,  be  taken  into  the  custody  of  the  Serjeant-at- 
Arms." 

The  paper  complained  of  above  was  an  impudent  in- 
vective on  the  Revolution.  Indeed  the  printers  of  news- 
papers seemed  to  be  trying  whether  they  could  not  pro- 
voke the  Legislature  to  persecute  them.  The  "  Morning 
Post "  had  for  a  twelvemonth  been  the  grossest  vehicle  of 
all  manner  of  scandal.  In  the  same  paper  was  a  virulent 
satire  on  Lord  Lyttelton,  and  a  barbarous  story  of  a 
young  lady  of  quality,  of  unblemished  character.  The 
printer  made  an  apology  the  next  morning,  charging  the 
fault  on  his  servants — a  poor  alleviation  of  such  scandalous 
injuries  !  Such  enormous  licence  could  not  be  borne,  and 
the  friends  of  the  press  trembled  lest  they  should  lose  the 
benefit  of  it  by  the  excess  of  the  abuse. 

It  was  Charles  Fox  who  complained  of  the  Jacobite 
paper  on  the  I'jth ;  his  reason  was,  that,  if  he  should  com- 
plain on  his  own  case,  he  might  be  reproached  with  in- 
difference to  the  interests  of  the  Crown  and  Constitution. 
T.  Townshend  took  the  occasion  of  teazing  and  flinging 
in  Lord  North's  teeth  the  pensions  bestowed  by  the  King 
on  those  notorious  Jacobites  Dr.  Johnson  and  Dr.  Sheb- 
beare,!  the  latter  of  whom  had  even  been  sentenced  by 

^  At  the  age  of  forty-five,  Shebbeare,  the  not  bad-hearted  but  irascible 
son  of  a  Devonshire  attorney  and  cornfactor,  after  failing  as  a  medical  practi- 
tioner, commenced  life,  in  the  year  1754,  as  a  public  and  political  writer.  In 
novels,  pamphlets,  and  other  publications,  he  mercilessly  assailed  the  admin- 
istrational  system  under  George  II.  He  was  determined,  he  said,  to  write 
himself  into  a  post  or  on  to  the  pillory.  His  "  Letters  to  the  People  of  Eng- 
land "  procured  for  him  the  latter  distinction  at  Charing  Cross  ;  but  his  friend 
and  admirer,  Beardmere,  the  Under-Sheriff,  permitted  him  to  stand  on  the 
platform  in  front  of  the  pillory  itself,  where  he  remained  the  usual  time,  com- 
fortably beneath  an  umbrella  held  over  him  by  an  Irish  chairman  hired  for  the 
occasion.     Having  thus  far  succeeded  under  George  II.,  he  became  still  more 


294       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

the  King's  Bench  for  his  flagrant  writings.  He  also  re- 
proached Lord  North  with  the  patronage  given  by  the 
Court  to  that  scandalous  writer  Sir  John  Dalrymple. 
Lord  North  was  grievously  hurt,  and  denied  the  latter, 
though  the  King  had  paid  for  transcribing  the  French 
papers.  Townshend,  seeing  his  Lordship  did  not  defend 
the  pensions  to  Johnson  and  Shebbeare,  which  were  given 
before  his  time,  and  by  Lord  Bute,  took  care  to  renew  the 
charge,  which  he  did  with  wit  and  asperity  ;  and  few  could 
help  smiling  at  what  almost  all  supported,  so  weak  and 
disgraceful  a  Government ! 

On  the  iZth  the  Administration  were  ridiculously  dis- 
comfited. Lord  North,  who  had  concluded  that  Parson 
Home,  who  seemed  to  be  running  a  race  with  Wilkes  for 
popularity,  would  take  refuge  in  the  City,  and  that  the 
magistrates  there  would  protect  him  against  the  officers  of 
the  House,  was  not  at  all  prepared  to  act,  though  Home 
had  surrendered  himself,  and  was  now  to  appear  at  the 
bar  of  the  House.  As  he  was  brought  by  the  Mace,  it 
was  the  form  that  nobody  could  interrogate  him  but  the 
Speaker.  Sawbridge  pleaded  that  he  might  be  first  heard, 
as  he  was  charged  with  contempt.  The  Speaker  said  the 
House  had  already  determined  the  contempt,  on  which 
Sawbridge  cried  out  scornfully,  "  Go  on  and  prosper  ! " 
Home  was  then  called  in.  He  was  pale,  but  well  made, 
and  had  a  sensible  countenance — was  neatly  and  decently 
dressed  in  grey,  but  without  his  gown.  He  spoke  with 
affected  respect,  and  much  deliberation,  and  with  as  much 
firmness.     He  promised  to  pay  all  proper  respect  to  the 

fortunate  under  George  III.  Shebbeare  did  not  indeed  obtain  a  post,  but  he 
gained  the  next  best,  if  not  a  better,  thing  in  the  eyes  of  such  a  man,  namely 
a  pension,  in  return  for  which  he  defended  all  the  measures  of  government 
with  all  the  means  in  his  rough  power.  Like  the  Tory  Johnson,  he  published 
pamphlets  in  strong  support  of  the  course  taken  by  ministers  against  the 
American  colonies.  He  died  in  August,  1788,  and  would  have  been  entirely 
forgotten  now,  had  not  Smollett  depicted  him  as  Fo-ret  in  "Sir  Launcelot 
Greaves,"  and  Hogarth  given  him  immortality  by  fixing  him  for  ever,  one  of 
a  group  in  the  third  print  of  "  The  Election." — D. 


1774]    HORNE  AT  THE  BAR  OF  THE  COMMONS     295 

House — said  the  rights  of  the  people  had  always  been 
defended  by  such  enthusiasts  as  himself — desired  a  patient 
hearing — meant  nothing  disrespectful  or  offensive.  He 
declared  he  should  have  obeyed  the  first  summons  had  it 
not  been  so  worded  as  to  condemn  him  as  guilty  of  a  libel. 
The  crime  would  have  been  established — an  action  would 
have  been  brought  against  him  as  confessing  the  charge.  He 
professed  his  ignorance  of  the  forms  of  the  House  when 
they  were  acting  in  a  judicial  capacity.  He  then  requested 
to  be  discharged  out  of  custody,  that  he  might  make  his 
defence — in  which  demand  he  was  supported  by  his  friends 
Oliver,  the  late  Lord  Mayor  Townshend,  and  Sawbridge ; 
but  the  Solicitor-General  Wedderburn  opposed  it,  and  he 
was  ordered  to  answer  the  information  against  him.  He 
then,  well  instructed  to  baffle  so  idle  and  thoughtless  a 
Ministry,  asked  modestly  whether  the  minutes  that  had 
been  read  to  him  were  a  charge  or  the  evidence  ?  The 
Speaker  inconsiderately  replied,  a  charge.  Home  replied 
shrewdly,  then  there  was  either  a  charge  without  evidence, 
or  evidence  without  a  charge.  Wedderburn  soon  saw  the 
difficulty,  and  endeavoured,  but  in  vain,  to  prove  that 
Woodfall  was  a  competent  evidence,  which  was  strongly 
denied,  as  having  been  the  original  person  accused,  and  to 
clear  himself  had  accused  Home.  On  this  ground  he  was 
artfully  and  ably  defended  by  Dunning  who  seemed  to 
have  been  his  adviser ;  and  it  is  probable  that  Lord  Shel- 
burne  and  that  faction,  finding  their  treachery  to  Wilkes 
not  rewarded  by  the  Court,  had  laid  this  new  plan  for  con- 
fusion ;  and  though  Wilkes  tried  to  gain  Woodfall  by 
offering  him  the  protection  of  the  City  against  the  House, 
he  remained  firm  to  Home.  Colonel  Barre  taunted  the 
Ministry  with  the  case  of  Algernon  Sydney,  which  he  said 
would  be  revived  if  they  adjourned,  as  they  proposed,  to 
seek  for  fresh  evidence  against  Home,  and  which  Dunning 
pronounced  contrary  to  the  custom  of  all  courts  of  law, 
though  they  affected  to  copy  those  courts,  whereas,   on 


296       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

such  occasions,  the  House  had  formerly  been  accustomed 
to  sound  high  the  law  of  Parliament — but  Parliament  was 
grown  contemptible  ! — and  Home  himself  affected  to  laugh 
in  their  faces,  though,  as  if  unwilling  to  be  disrespectful, 
he  lifted  up  his  hat  to  his  face  when  the  laugh  had  escaped 
him.  Woodfall  was  then  called  and  confronted,  and 
alleged  receiving  the  MSS.  from  Home,  and  showing  him 
the  proof-sheet,  and  Home's  allowing  him  to  give  him  up 
as  the  author.  Still  there  was  no  witness  to  these  trans- 
actions, and  yet  some  were  essential.  Woodfall  was  asked 
if  any  of  his  servants  had  been  privy.  He  said  they  had 
printed  the  paper  by  his  orders,  but  none  of  them  had  been 
present  at  his  conversations  with  Home.  Mr.  Herbert 
moved  to  call  three  of  Woodfall's  servants,  whom  he  had 
named,  the  next  day  as  witnesses ;  and  Lord  North  said 
it  would  be  ridiculous  not  to  push  the  inquiry  as  far  as  it 
would  go  ;  but  such  an  inquisitorial  sentence  was  violently 
contested,  though  at  last  carried  by  132  to  44.  The  day 
did  great  credit  to  Home's  address  and  parts,  and  exposed 
the  House  and  the  Administration,  who  knew  so  little  how 
to  extract  advantage  from  so  gross  an  affront  and  violation 
of  their  Speaker  and  their  privileges ;  and  who,  while  half 
the  public  was  complaining  of  the  abuses  of  the  press,  and 
themselves  wishing  to  abridge  its  just  rights,  contrived  to 
flatter  the  most  scandalous  authors  and  printers  with  im- 
punity, and  could  not  save  themselves  from  a  defeat  by  a 
profligate  and  infamous  parson.  In  fact,  the  nation  was  so 
servile,  and  abilities  so  rare,  at  this  time,  that  an  able 
Minister  would  have  riveted  our  chains,  or  an  able  Oppo- 
sition have  demolished  so  weak  an  Administration. 

The  next  day,  the  \Zth,  was  still  less  prosperous.  Home 
being  again  brought  to  the  bar,  the  three  witnesses,  Wood- 
fall's  men,  were  examined  in  his  presence.^  They  all  denied 
any  acquaintance  with  him,  or  knowing  that  he  was  author 
of  the  libel  in  question.     Home  was  then  informed  by  the 

^  Vide  "  London  Chronicle"  of  Feb,  19,  1774. 


1774]    HORNE  AT  THE  BAR  OF  THE  COMMONS     297 

Speaker  that  that  was  the  proper  time  for  making  his 
defence.  He  replied,  "  My  only  defence  will  be  thanks 
to  this  House  for  great  personal  tenderness.  A  wise  man  ^ 
(whom  I  never  knew  mistaken)  had  said,  that  truth  had 
never  yet  so  many  friends  in  the  world  as  to  carry  it 
through  anywhere  by  vote.  I  rely  in  this  instance  on 
finding  my  old  friend  mistaken — and  so  I  leave  my  de- 
fence." Mr.  Herbert  then,  to  show  his  impartiality,  said 
that,  as  the  evidence  had  not  proved  Mr.  Home  guilty, 
he  moved  to  discharge  him.  Mr.  Phipps^  seconded  him, 
with  severe  reflections  on  the  injustice  of  the  proceedings, 
and  ridicule  on  Lord  North's  false  prophecy  that  Home 
would  not  appear,  and  the  consequential  blunders.  They 
expected  nothing  but  violence,  said  he — not  moderation, 
and  a  man  of  sense.  Charles  Fox,  struck  with  Lord 
North's  insufficient  behaviour,  and  impatient  to  aggrandise 
himself  at  his  expense,  cautioned  the  House,  the  next  time 
they  should  be  concerned  in  such  a  business,  not  to  ascribe 
any  particular  merit  to  a  printer  in  giving  up  his  author  ; 
and  he  rudely  blamed  Lord  North  for  his  imprudence  in 
promising  Woodfall  indemnity  for  betraying  Home.  He 
declared  too  that  he  thought  printers  more  culpable  than 
authors,  and  that  the  chief  punishment  ought  to  fall  on 
the  former.  Colonel  Barre  was  still  more  pointed,  and 
drew  a  picture,  with  much  wit,  of  Lord  North,  counselled 
on  one  hand  by  Wedderburn,  and  on  the  other  by  the 
prudence  of  the  youngest  man  in  the  House,  Charles  Fox, 
both  whom  he  painted  well,  and  extolled  ironically.  Mr. 
Home's  being  a  clever  fellow,  he  said,  had  not  been 
guarded  against.  What  the  honour  of  the  House  meant 
he  did  not  know.  Had  the  House  not  suffered  Mr. 
Wilkes's  answer  to  the  Sheriffs,  upon  their  summoning  him 
to  attend  his  duty  in  Parliament,  to  pass  unnoticed,  though 

^  Lord  Bacon. 

^  Constantine   Phipps,    eldest  son  of  Lord    Mulgrave.      He    was    lately 
returned  from  an  expedition  to  discover  the  North-west  Passage. 


298       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

signed  with  his  name,  and  would  they  now  go  about 
searching  for  libellers  ?  They  had  better  address  the  Crown 
to  pay  Mr.  Home's  fees  ;  and  for  himself,  as  he  had  been 
a  soldier,  and  used  to  disposing  troops,  he  would  advise 
the  noble  Lord  to  place  the  young  gentleman  on  the  right 
who  had  recommended  to  him  not  to  be  rash,  and  the  faith- 
ful Achates,  his  learned  friend,  on  the  left,  and  then  he 
would  find  common  sense  on  one  side,  and  law  on  the 
other.  Sawbridge  moved  that  Home  should  be  discharged 
without  paying  his  fees,  but  that  amendment  was  over- 
ruled, and  he  was  ordered  to  be  at  liberty  on  paying  his 
fees.  Herbert  said  he  should  move  to  have  Woodfall  prose- 
cuted. 

2\st.  A  debate  on  the  ordinary  of  the  Navy,  in  which 
an  increase  was  made,  and  ill  defended  by  the  Ministers. 
It  was  remarkable  that  Cornwall,  their  late  pensioned 
convert,  gave  up  their  bad  defence,  and  censured  it,  and 
that  Captain  Phipps,  generally  an  opponent,  made  a  high 
panegyric  on  Lord  Sandwich,  who,  it  was  thought,  had 
sent  him,  from  pique,  on  his  late  unprosperous  and  im- 
probable search  of  a  north-west  passage. 

The  next  day  the  House  of  Lords  gave  sentence  against 
the  permanent  right  of  authors  and  their  assigns  to  the 
property  of  their  works. 

2^th.  Charles  Fox  was  dismissed,  for  his  late  behaviour 
to  Lord  North,  from  being  a  Lord  of  the  Treasury.  Mr. 
Temple  was  also  turned  out  for  the  affair  of  Whateley's 
letters. 

At  night  the  Queen  was  delivered  of  another  Prince.^ 

It  was  not  entirely  presumption  and  ambition  that  had 
driven  Charles  Fox  on  hostilities  towards  Lord  North. 
Edmund  Burke  had  great  weight  with  him  ;  and  Burke, 
tired  of  a  hopeless  opposition,  of  desperate  fortune,  and  apt 
to  deal  in  moneyed  projects,  had,  in  concert  with  Garrick 
the  actor,  engaged  Fox  in  soliciting  Lord  North    for  a 

^  Adolphus  Frederick,  Duke  of  Cambridge. — D. 


1774]  DISMISSAL   OF   FOX  299 

grant  of  lands  in  America.  If  it  succeeded,  Burke  and 
Fox  would  have  sold  their  shares  ;  if  it  miscarried,  Fox 
would  be  a  great  acquisition  to  the  discontented.  Lord 
North  refused  the  grant — Fox  attacked  him,  and  was 
turned  out. 

The  same  day  Mr.  Phipps  presented  a  very  submissive 
petition  from  Woodfall,  begging  tD  be  discharged  on 
paying  his  fees  ;  but  it  was  rejected. 

25^/2.  Sir  Edward  Astley,  who  had  put  off  for  a  week 
his  motion  for  making  Grenville's  Select  Committee  Bill 
perpetual,  now  made  that  motion.^  Lord  North  had  ori- 
ginally opposed  it,  and  had  now,  by  persuasion  of  Rigby 
and  Fox,  declared  against  making  it  immediately  perpetual 
— a  part  lightly  embraced,  and  which  he  took  no  pains  to 
support  till  it  was  too  late,  not  having  even  taken  the 
pains  to  inform  himself  whether  it  would  be  palatable  or 
not.  Many  circumstances  concurred  to  recommend  the 
bill.  The  recent  examination  of  the  contested  election  at 
Worcester,  which  had  been  set  aside  for  bribery,  and  the 
news  that  arrived  the  morning  of  the  discussion,  that  Mr. 
Lechmere  had  been  chosen  there  on  his  natural  interest  as 
a  neighbour  and  country  gentleman,  opened  the  eyes  of  all 
who  had  natural  interest,  and  wished  not  to  see  themselves 
opposed  by  weight  of  money.  Many  who  usually  con- 
curred with  Government  were  attached  to  the  bill,  as 
having  been  friends  to  Grenville,  its  author ;  and  the 
Opposition  were  glad  to  take  that  side,  as  the  bill  was 
detrimental  to  the  Court.  Yet,  till  the  day  before.  Lord 
North  did  not  suspect  his  power  of  stopping  the  prolonga- 

^  It  will  be  remembered  that  this  bill,  passed  in  1770,  was  for  the  trial  of 
contested  elections.  It  is  one  of  the  two  bills  for  which  the  parliamentary 
history  of  this  eminent  minister  was  remarkable.  The  other  was  his  bill  of 
17575  for  the  more  regular  payment  of  the  navy.  Grenville  died  in  1770, 
and  the  predecessor  of  Lord  Rockingham  is  not  unworthy  of  the  lines  written 
on  him  by  gentle  James  Hammond  : — 

"  He,  form'd  alike  to  serve  us  and  to  please, 
Polite  with  honesty,  and  learn'd  with  ease ; 
With  heart  to  act,  with  genius  to  retire  ; 
Open,  yet  wise ;  though  gentle,  full  of  fire." 

— D. 


300     Last  journals  of  Horace  walpole    [Feb. 

tion  of  the  term.  With  his  usual  hurry  after  indolence, 
he  turned  out  Charles  Fox,  as  a  threat  to  those  who  might 
incline  to  desert,  but  without  effect.  The  King  warned 
him  that  he  would  be  defeated  ;  but  though  he  took  some 
pains  the  morning  of  the  debate  in  closeting  a  few  whom 
he  suspected,  it  was  too  late ;  and  he  even  prejudiced  his 
cause  in  the  debate  itself  by  affecting  to  approve  the  bill, 
though  he  pretended  it  was  too  early  to  decide  on  its  utility, 
at  least  without  amendments.  His  approbation  confirmed 
the  bill,  authorised  those  who  liked  it,  and  left  no  argu- 
ment to  its  opposers,  as  it  would  never  be  too  late  to 
correct  it  if  inconveniences  should  appear.  Indeed  no 
bill  was  ever  carried  by  so  much  argument  for,  and  with 
so  little  against.  Even  Lord  Mansfield,  in  private,  had 
expressed  his  good  opinion  of  the  Act. 

Sir  Edward  said  that  when  he  first  came  into  Parlia- 
ment he  had  fancied  himself  member  of  a  corporation,  so 
indecently  had  he  been  solicited  for  his  vote  on  contested 
elections  ;  that  it  could  be  no  act  of  private  friendship  that 
could  induce  gentlemen  to  be  for  making  the  bill  per- 
petual ;  that,  in  truth,  Rigby  and  Fox  had  opposed  it 
manfully ;  and  that  the  younger,  who  would  be  in  other 
Parliaments,  would  scarce  believe  in  how  infamous  a  man- 
ner elections  had  formerly  been  decided  ;^  that,  should  the 
Act  be  made  perpetual,  it  would  be  more  to  Mr.  Grenville's 
honour  than  sculptured  monuments,  or  the  poet  laureat 
writing  his  epitaph.  Sir  John  Molesworth  seconded  him, 
and  said  the  Act  had,  did,  and  would  for  ever  speak  for 
itself;  that  the  conduct  of  those  gentlemen  who  had  been 
of  the  new  Committees  had  done  them  immortal  honour ; 
that  it  was  the  most  constitutional  bill  that  had  passed  in 
the  last  century  :  it  had  amended  the  constitution,  and  had 

^  There  is  no  bad  illustration  of  election  matters  in  a  paragraph  which  was 
extracted  from  a  private  letter,  and  quoted  by  all  the  papers,  two  months 
previous  to  the  above  date.  The  locality  is  Newry,  and  the  writer  there  says, 
* '  Our  election  goes  on  with  the  greatest  spirit ;  .  .  .  last  night  a  poor  fellow 
was  killed ;  four  or  five  persons  are  in  confinement  for  the  murder." — D. 


1774]  SELECT   COMMITTEE    BILL  301 

put  an  end  to  the  baneful  influence  that  prevailed  before, 
when  the  House  was  filled  by  corruption.  Nobody,  he 
concluded,  could  be  an  enemy  to  the  bill  but  who  was  a 
friend  to  venality  and  corruption.  Lord  North  rose  to 
give  the  word.  He  said  he  had  never  come  thither  by 
corruption,  yet  was  against  making  the  Act  perpetual  at 
that  time,  though  he  was  a  friend  to  the  bill.  The  gentle- 
man who  had  framed  it  was  wise  and  just,  nor  did  he 
himself  want  veneration  for  his  memory.  He  revered  him 
living,  and  honoured  him  dead — was  joyful  that  such 
tribute  had  been  paid  to  his  memory  which  had  been 
denied  to  him  in  office.  Virtuous  conduct  would  always 
prevail  at  last ;  but  the  present  proposition  was  contrary 
to  Mr.  Grenville's  original  intentions.  He  had  treated  the 
bill  as  an  experiment^ — let  the  House  not  treat  it  contrary 
to  his  intentions !  After  what  had  been  said,  it  would 
stand  confessed  that  this  was  the  best  Parliament  that  ever 
was,  notwithstanding  all  the  remonstrances  that  had 
passed.  Laurels  had  been  strewed  on  Mr.  Grenville's 
tomb,  but  petitions  for  counties  had  not  yet  been  tried  by 
the  new  Committees.  There  had  as  yet  been  but  five 
determinations.  That  could  not  be  called  a  proof  of  the 
bill.  What  good  could  possibly  arise  from  making  the 
bill  perpetual?  It  will  not  prevent  a  possibility  of  its 
repeal.  The  best  respect  to  Mr.  Grenville's  memory  would 
be  to  subject  the  bill  to  a  trial.  He  might,  he  said,  have 
moved  the  previous  question ;  his  opposition  to  it  was 
only  of  the  same  nature. 

James  Grenville  the  younger,  an  amiable  and  ingenious 
man,  who  had  improved  parts,  and  a  most  pleasing  man- 
ner, said  he  would  not  pretend  to  contradict  the  noble 
Lord's  assertion  that  the  author  of  the  bill  never  intended 
it  should  be  perpetual ;  it  would  not  become  him  to  assert 
the  contrary,  as  he  had  not  had  the  good  fortune  to  con- 

^  It  is  true  that  Grenville  was  in  Opposition  when  he  moved  it,  which  it  is 
not  probable  he  would  have  done  if  in  place. 


302       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

verse  much  with  his  worthy  relation  ;^  but  he  saw  an 
honourable  gentleman  ^  who  had  had  that  advantage.  Mr. 
Grenville  probably  would  not  grasp  at  too  much  ;  he  knew 
he  could  not  at  first  make  the  bill  perpetual,  and  therefore 
took  it  on  the  terms  the  House  would  pass  it.  The  good 
it  had  done,  the  petitions  for  Shoreham  and  Worcester 
sufficiently  proved.  How  many  Acts  against  bribery,  how 
many  nostrums  and  anathemas  were  produced  by  the 
House,  and  how  fruitless  were  they  till  brought  into  force 
by  the  Act  in  question  !  He  hoped  a  negative  on  that 
day  would  not  be  a  prelude  to  the  repeal  of  the  bill, 
though  no  power  of  the  House  could  weaken  the  popu- 
larity of  it.  Yet  it  would  be  wise  not  to  trust  to  the  spirit 
of  the  times  to  come ;  the  next  generation  would  be  worse 
than  the  present.  Mock  trials  of  elections  disgraced  the 
annals  of  Parliament.  If  the  question  were  to  be  lost  then, 
a  future  Minister  might  flatter  himself  on  some  other  occa- 
sion of  obtaining  a  repeal. 

Stephen  Fox  called  himself  a  friend  to  the  bill,  yet  pro- 
fessed believing  that  it  had  been  intended  for  a  perpetual 
Act.  T.  Townshend  laughed  at  him,  and  at  the  tender 
years  of  his  brother  Charles ;  and  with  compliments  to 
Lord  North,  whose  wit  he  commended,  told  him  with  how 
much  more  propriety  he  would  have  used  argument.  The 
noble  Lord,  said  he,  cries,  '^ Die  !  and  then  we  will  adore 
you — then  the  bust  and  marble  rise  to  the  Right  Hon. 
Gentleman  who  planned  the  Bill ;  but  do  not  make  it  per- 
petual ;  let  us  have  it  from  seven  years  to  seven  years — 
yes,  and  then  every  seven  years  there  will  be  an  oppor- 
tunity of  crushing  it !  Mandates  even  now  had  been  sent 
out  from  the  Treasury  to  oppose  it.  Himself  had  sat 
twenty  years  in  Parliament,  and  remembered  the  duration 

^  He  was  nephew  of  George  Grenville,  who  had  been  at  variance  with 
his  brother  James,  the  father,  during  the  quarrel  between  George  and  Lord 
Chatham. 

^  Alex.  Wedderburn,  Solicitor-General,  had  assisted  Mr.  Grenville  in 
drawing  the  bill  and  carrying  it  through  the  House. 


1774]  SELECT   COMMITTEE   BILL  303 

of  the  petition  for  Oxfordshire.  It  could  not  have  lasted 
so  long  a  time  with  the  new  mode  of  trial.  Whoever 
should  support  that  mode  would  be  handed  down  to  pos- 
terity as  attempting  to  restore  the  only  mode  of  trying 
elections."  Sir  George  Younge,  in  behalf  of  the  bill,  told 
a  story  very  much  to  the  purpose.  That  as  he  came  to 
London  he  stopped  at  a  borough  town  (Andover),  and 
observed  some  cockades  in  hats.  Upon  talking  with  the 
landlord  of  the  inn,  the  latter  told  him  that  there  had  been 
canvassing  for  votes  against  the  next  election  for  some 
time ;  but  that  the  determination  of  the  Committee  on  the 
Worcester  petition  was  a  sad  business,  and  as  soon  as  it 
was  known  had  knocked  up  the  whole  canvass.^ 

Jenkinson  commended  the  bill,  but  affirmed  that  Gren- 
ville  himself  had  not  intended  it  to  be  perpetual ;  that  he 
was  not  only  a  wise  but  a  bold  Minister,^  and  would  not 
have  desisted  if  he  had  thought  it  right  to  make  it  per- 
petual ;  he  had  only  meant  it  as  an  experiment  to  be  tried 
at  the  general  election.  The  present  mode  must  be  altered 
whenever  it  should  be  necessary  to  try  an  election  for  a 
county.  This  was  farther  urged  by  Penton,  who  said  the 
mode  would  not  serve  for  a  concourse  of  elections,  as  the 
bill  allowed  but  one  Committee  at  a  time.)  This  indeed 
was  the  sole  argument  used  against  the  bill,  and  which 
could  easily  be  obviated  by  corrections.)  Penton  declared 
he  should  be  for  the  bill's  perpetuity  if  amended.  Colonel 
Barre  said,  if  the  objection  was  a  true  one,  different  Com- 

^  This  reminds  me  of  a  saying  of  George  Selwyn's,  elicited  by  a  report 
circulated  at  this  time,  to  the  effect  that  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  was  to  stand  for 
Plympton  on  the  next  occasion  of  an  election.  The  maccaronies,  club-men, 
and  "gentlemen"  generally  laughed  at  the  idea  of  an  artist,  or  of  a  literary 
man,  presuming,  or  having  a  chance,  to  get  into  the  House  of  Commons. 
"He  is  not  to  be  laughed  at,  however,"  said  Selwyn  :  "he  may  very  well 
succeed  in  being  elected,  for  Sir  Joshua  is  the  ablest  man  I  know,  on  a 
canvas  ! " — D. 

^  But  he  was  not  Minister  when  he  moved  the  Act.  [In  1754  he  was  First 
Lord  of  the  Treasury;  in  1763  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer;  in  1765  he  re- 
signed, and  was  succeeded  by  Lord  Rockingham.  The  Act  for  trying  con- 
tested elections  was  passed  in  1770. — D.j 


304       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

mittees  could  not  sit  at  the  same  time,  for  which  there 
seemed  to  be  no  reason.  The  opposers,  said  he,  speak 
handsomely  of  the  bill  ;  they  had  better  join  with  its 
supporters,  rivet  the  bill,  explain  and  amend  it  afterwards. 
Mr.  Grenville,  politically  speaking,  had  been  his  enemy — 
had  done  him  a  private  injury ,i  but  had  made  him  ample 
amends  by  giving  this  bill  to  his  country.  But  how  could 
any  gentlemen  oppose  it  ?— could  they  hesitate  ? — were 
they  tired  of  being  honest  ?  Hottentot-like,  would  they 
return  to  their  garbage  ?  The  noble  Lord  was  likely  to 
remain  in  office — let  him  make  office  honourable.  He 
needed  not  give  sanction  to  the  repeal  of  this  bill ;  would 
he  not  have  the  means  of  winning  the  affections  of  members 
after  they  were  chosen?  The  House,  he  hoped,  would 
expiate  their  sins,  in  voting  for  this  motion.  He  hoped 
there  were  no  crane-necked  consciences  (who  can  turn  in 
a  moment)  connected  with  Government.  The  Act  he 
looked  upon  as  the  palladium  of  liberty. 

General  Burgoyne,  a  classic  scholar,  who  had  more 
reading  than  parts,  made  a  set  and  florid  declamation  in 
favour  of  the  bill,  and  concluded  with  pronouncing  that, 
in  the  Roman  manner,  it  would  be  named  Grenville's  Bill 
to  latest  posterity.  De  Grey,  the  Chief  Justice's  son,  was 
one  of  the  few  that  dissented.  He  called  it  not  a  proper 
time,  and  questioned  the  practicability.  "  It  was  the 
introduction  of  an  innovation  into  the  constitution,  and 
humiliating  to  the  House  to  be  bound  by  oaths  when  honour 
would  not  do  !  " 

After  the  debate,  George  Selwyn  said  to  Charles  Fox, 
"  Charles,  for  the  future  I  will  fast  and  eat  salt  fish  on 
the  day  you  was  turned  out.  You  shall  be  my  Charles 
the  Martyr  now.  I  am  tired  of  the  old  one,  your  great- 
grandfather :  his  head  can  never  be  sewed  on  again  ;  but 
as  yours  can  be,  I  will  stick  to  you."  Fox  was  infinitely 
hurt  at  his  disgrace,  and  had  reasons  enough.     Besides 

^  Grenville,  when  Minister,  h^d  t^ken  away  Barre's  commission. 


1774]  CHARLES   FOX  305 

the  desperate  situation  of  his  affairs,  his  disappointment 
of  the  job  he  had  aimed  at,  and  the  mortification  of  not 
having  at  least  contrived  to  be  turned  out  on  some  point 
that  would  make  him  popular,  he  had  still  more  cause  of 
vexation.  When  Lord  North  complained  of  Charles's 
flippancies  to  the  King,  his  Majesty,  who  hated  him,  said, 
"  Why  don't  you  turn  him  out  ? — you  may,  if  you  will." 
He  had  even  been  the  dupe  of  Burke.  The  latter,  in 
pushing  him  on  asking  for  an  enormous  grant  in  St. 
Vincent's,^  had  a  two-edged  view ;  if  it  succeeded,  Burke 
would  have  gained  thirty  thousand  pounds  without  an 
obligation  to  Government,  and  would  have  been  still  free 
to  make  his  own  bargain,  as  the  favour  would  have  been 
granted  to  Fox.  If  refused  and  resented,  Fox  would  be  an 
acquisition  to  the  Opposition,  as  it  proved.  The  suit  indeed 
was  most  improbable  of  success.  The  purchase  of  lands  on 
the  Ohio,  though  the  most  beneficial  bargain  of  the  sort 
made  by  Government,  had  been  represented  against  by 
the  Board  of  Trade ;  and  though  overruled  by  the  Privy 
Council,  and  the  money  paid,  Lord  Dartmouth's  scruples 
were  so  great  that  it  was  a  year  before  he  could  be  pre- 
vailed on  to  pass  the  patent.  It  was  not  likely  he  would 
have  more  facility  on  a  flagrant  job.  Fox  knew  not  where 
to  turn,  yet  his  presumption  did  not  abandon  him.  At 
first  he  said  he  would  study  the  law.  His  character  was 
so  decried  that  the  mob  believed  he  was  turned  out  for 
robbing  the  Treasury.  The  Cavendishes  hated  both  his 
father  and  him,  and  his  uncle,  the  Duke  of  Richmond, 
had  the  worst  opinion  of  him.  He  had  played  his  game 
so  ill  in  every  light,  that,  if  he  did  not  make  the  greatest 
figure  possible,  he  was  sure  of  making  a  silly  one.     I  do 

^  It  would  have  been  worth  an  hundred  thousand  pounds.  The  exact 
case  was  this :  The  third  Burke,  who,  as  I  have  before  said,  was  at 
St.  Vincent's,  had  purchased  a  large  tract  of  ground  from  the  Caribs  for 
a  trifling  sum.  The  Government  did  not  allow  it  to  be  a  good  purchase. 
To  secure  it  by  his  interest,  the  Burkes  admitted  Charles  Fox  into  a  share  ; 
and  yet  he  could  not  persuade  Lord  North  to  favour  his  bargain, 

I, — X 


3o6       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

not  mean  that  he  must  shine  only  by  speeches  in  Parlia- 
ment :  he  could  scarce  outdo  what  he  had  done,  and  his 
extreme  youth  had  augmented  the  surprise.  To  make  a 
figure  essentially,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  retrieve 
his  character  by  reforming  it;  and  by  industry  and  applica- 
tion, by  courting,  instead  of  defying,  mankind,  should 
assemble  such  a  party  about  him  as  might  balance,  if  not 
overturn,  the  Administration — at  least  make  himself  so 
grievous  and  so  necessary,  as  to  force  himself  and  his 
connexion  into  a  much  higher  situation  in  Government 
than  he  had  fallen  from.  To  make  his  peace  soon,  for 
some  subordinate  and  common  place  would  rivet  his  in- 
significance. Some  rashness  was  more  to  be  expected  ; 
and  his  mind  was  so  drunk  with  vanity  and  profligacy, 
which  he  thought  superior  intelligence,  that  one  trait,  the 
quintessence  of  his  frenzy,  will  scarce  be  believed,  though 
on  the  authority  of  his  own  brother.  Charles  directed  his 
friend  Mr.  Hare  to  keep  a  list  of  the  annuities  he  had 
sold,  by  his  brother  Stephen's  advice,  as  the  latter  told  a 
friend,  and  for  this  reason  :  "  Charles,"  said  Stephen,  "  if 
you  do  not  keep  a  list,  you  will  have  somebody  come  and 
claim  an  annuity  that  you  have  not  sold."  "  Damn  them," 
replied  Charles ;  "  I  had  rather  pay  them  for  their  im- 
pudence than  those  I  have  really  sold  annuities  to."  Yet 
though  he  took  the  advice,  and  bade  Hare  keep  the 
register,  he  forgot  five  thousand  pounds  a-year  in  annuities 
when  he  gave  in  a  list  of  them  to  his  father !  I  return  to 
the  debate,  but  make  no  excuse  for  the  detail,  which  is 
infinitely  more  curious. 

Mr.  Drake,  junior,  spoke  eagerly  for  the  bill,  and  said, 
"  Esto  perpetua ! "  Phipps  agreed  with  him  :  said  former 
trials  had  been  committees  of  affections,  not  of  elections ; 
that  the  bill  was  a  just  surrender  of  their  privileges ;  and 
he  dropped  some  severe  reflections  on  Charles  Fox.  Sam- 
brooke.  Freeman,  and  Aubrey  spoke  on  the  same  side ;  so 
did  Dunning,  though,  he  said,  men  of  his  profession  had 


1774]  SELECT   COMMITTEE   BILL  307 

cause  to  complain  of  the  bill :  great  sums  of  money  had 
used  to  accrue  to  lawyers  before  a  general  election.  It  was 
not  to  be  conceived  what  a  quantity  of  quo  warrantos 
were  carried  formerly  into  Westminster  Hall — now  there 
was  not  a  single  information.  Ellis  talked  of  the  bill  not 
being  yet  brought  to  a  state  of  perfection,  though  he  owned 
the  principle  of  it  deserved  approbation.  Lord  George 
Germaine  painted  the  high  importance  of  the  bill,  and  the 
necessity  of  making  it  perpetual  then.  If  its  chief  enemy 
(Mr.  Rigby)  should  come  into  Lord  North's  place,  what 
chance  would  there  be  of  the  bill's  remaining  in  force? 
If  the  bill  had  any  faults,  why  were  they  not  stated  ? 
Lord  North  had  mentioned  remonstrances  ;  for  himself, 
he  would  never  remonstrate,  because  he  knew  it  would 
never  have  any  effect.  He  asked  if  gentlemen  did  not 
remember  the  old  method  of  soliciting  when  petitions  were 
depending ;  and  he  described  with  much  wit  petitioners 
standing  on  each  side  the  door  of  the  House,  and  their 
various  ways  of  applying  to  members  as  they  entered, 
according  as  the  latter  were  of  the  same  party  or  not.  Sir 
Gilbert  Elliot  spoke  the  best  against  the  bill,  and  ridiculed 
the  exaggerations  of  the  other  side.  He  had  originally 
disliked  the  bill  for  being  a  departure  from  the  constitu- 
tion (a  part  even  courtiers  could  take  when  to  prevent 
the  constitution  being  amended).  Burke  was  as  keen  on 
the  Ministers,  and  laughed  at  the  inaction  of  Lord  North's 
troops,  though  his  Lordship  had  come  forth  and  put 
himself  at  the  head  of  them.  He  sounded  the  praises  of 
the  bill  in  the  loftiest,  rather  in  bombast,  terms.  Solicita- 
tion, he  said,  ended  when  the  judges  were  not  known. 
Sooner  would  the  pillars  of  heaven  fail  than  that  bill.  It 
was  superior  to  the  power  of  abilities  and  resolution, 
though,  as  he  excellently  expressed  it,  there  were  gentle- 
men in  that  House  whose  whole  souls  were  a  previous 
question^  and  their  lives  a  question  of  adjournment.  John 
St.  John  and    Stanley  declared  against  the  bill ;  Sir  W. 


3o8       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

Meredith  and  Thomas  Pitt  for  it.  Wedderburn  also 
strongly  defended  it,  and  ably.  No  compromise,  he  said, 
would  be  accepted.  No  right  of  judicature  was  taken 
from  the  House,  unless  it  had  the  right  divine  of  doing 
wrong.  Should  a  petition  come  before  the  new  Committee 
against  a  young  member  chosen  under  the  age  of  twenty- 
one,  did  anybody  think  his  election  would  not  be  set  aside? 
— yet,  according  to  former  experience,  it  would  have  passed 
unnoticed.  (This  had  recently  been  the  case  of  Charles 
Fox.)  The  bill  had  been  no  experiment :  neither  did  the 
author  originally  intend  it  as  such.  If  made  perpetual 
it  would  annihilate  borough-jobbers.  Thurlow,  Attorney- 
General,  was  as  warm  against  the  bill ;  and  in  answer  to 
the  panegyrics  on  Grenville,  and  the  use  that  had  been 
made  of  his  name,  said,  it  was  not  his  own  method  to  con- 
strue Acts  of  Parliament  by  anecdotes.  That  it  was  im- 
possible to  suppose  that  the  bill  did  not  take  from  the 
power  of  the  House.  Suppose  a  clergyman  were  elected, 
not  the  House  at  large,  but  a  Select  Committee,  would 
have  it  in  their  discretion  whether  he  should  sit.  Yet  no 
jealousies  would  arise  when  the  House  at  large  would  be  to 
blame.  Yet  it  was  not  a  committee  that  was  elected,  but  a 
court  of  justice  :  and,  still,  where  was  a  difference  between 
a  manager  of  elections,  an  office  now  so  much  condemned, 
and  a  nominee  after  the  new  mode?  Lord  John  Cavendish 
disclaimed  such  privileges  as  those  contended  for,  and 
showed  theimprobability  of  justice  being  well  administered 
by  a  multitude;  and  then  Rigby  with  that  bold  defiance 
of  discretion,  and  of  deference  for  prejudices,  which  he 
affected,  launched  out  against  the  bill,  and  endeavoured 
to  possess  the  members  with  the  inconveniences  they 
would  experience  in  their  own  future  elections  if  bribery 
were  so  rigidly  prohibited.  He  asked  the  mover,  Sir 
Edward  Astley,  whether  he  expected  that  his  voters  would 
go  for  him  from  Lynn  to  Norwich  without  being  treated 
with  a  pot  of  beer?  and  yet  by  the  Act  of  King  William 


1774]  SELECT   COMMITTEE   BILL  309 

the  new  Committee  must  find  this  bribery  after  the  test 
of  the  writ.  He  sowed  seeds  too  for  making  the  bill  un- 
popular without  doors,  by  urging  that,  however  the  elected 
might  like  it,  the  electors  must  grumble  at  it.  He  ridiculed 
the  discordance  of  the  Committees  on  the  Shoreham  and 
Worcester  petitions.  The  voters  at  Worcester  had  been 
sent  back  to  vote ;  those  at  Shoreham  had  been  disfran- 
chised. He  attacked  Th.  Pitt  for  having  sold  his  seat  for 
Old  Sarum,  and  endeavoured  to  alarm  the  possessors  of 
burgage  tenures.  Some,  he  said,  had  talked  of  gentleman 
being  in  leading-strings ;  for  his  part,  he  had  never  found 
any  inconvenience  from  his,  and  hoped  at  least  they 
would  not  crack  that  night.  The  profligacy  of  his  speech 
was  far  from  hurting  the  bill — on  the  contrary,  gained  it 
some  friends,  who  had  been  disposed  to  vote  against  it, 
when  they  heard  the  cause  of  corruption  avowed  as  an 
argument  against  it.  Sir  George  Saville,  Dowdswell,  Sir 
Robert  Fletcher,  Serjeant  Glynn,  and  Governor  Johnston, 
all  took  up  the  cause  of  the  bill  against  so  coarse  an  attack; 
the  latter  particularly  showed  what  Rigby's  practice  would 
be  if  ever  Minister.  Rose  Fuller,  Charles  Turner,  Mr. 
Field,  and  Colonel  Jennings  all  followed  in  the  same  key, 
and  nobody  said  a  word  more  against  the  bill  but  Sir 
William  Dolben,  a  bigoted  Tory,  who,  however,  reflected 
on  Charles  Fox,  and  observed  that  he  talked  as  if  the  fate 
of  Caesar  and  of  Rome  depended  upon  his  conduct.  He 
was  tender  in  years,  he  said,  but  tough  in  politics,  and,  if 
he  did  not  mistake,  had  already  been  twice  in  and  twice 
out  of  place. 

At  twelve  at  night  the  question  was  put  for  bringing  in 
a  Bill  to  make  the  Act  perpetual,  which  was  carried  by 
250  voices  to  122,  even  all  the  Scotch  but  two  voting  for 
the  Bill. 

On  the  2Zth  Mr.  Roberts  desired  to  withdraw  his  petition 
against  the  election  for  the  City. 


[March 


MARCH 

1st. 

WOODFALL  again  petitioned  the  House  to 
be  discharged.  Rose  Fuller  moved  that  he 
should  be  reprimanded  on  his  knees,  which 
was  condemned  and  overruled.  Charles 
Fox  censured  Lord  North's  irresolute  conduct,  which  was 
defended  by  Lord  Clare.  Woodfall  was  ordered  to  be 
discharged  on  paying  his  fees. 

Lord  North's  defeat  on  Mr.  Grenville's  bill,  and  the 
popularity  of  it,  had  been  so  great  that  the  Court  thought 
it  vain  to  dispute  it  any  further,  unless  some  stand  could 
be  made  in  the  House  of  Lords.  It  was  brought  into  the 
House  of  Commons  and  passed  rapidly  in  five  days, 
nemine  contradicentey  Rigby  alone  giving  a  negative  on  the 
first  reading.     On  the 

/^th  it  was  carried  to  the  House  of  Lords,  attended  by  a 
vast  concourse  of  members.  To  raise  a  party  against  the 
bill,  it  was  suggested  that,  though  it  would  indisputably 
give  the  greatest  weight  to  the  landed  interest,  yet  it 
would  be  equally  pernicious  to  the  moneyed — an  argument 
of  no  force  to  the  lovers  of  the  constitution.  The  moneyed 
men  are  a  far  more  fluctuating  body  and  more  venal  than 
men  of  estates,  who  must  be  more  affectionate  to  a 
government  that  secures  the  lasting  welfare  of  their 
families.  Many  old  families  of  country-gentlemen  had 
been  rooted  out  and  their  estates  sold  by  the  weight  of 
taxes,  and  by  the  ruinous  expense  of  contesting  their 
elections  against  upstarts  who  had  risen  to  sudden  fortunes. 
The  Lord  Mayor  and  Sheriffs  went  with  an  Address  to 
the  King  on  the  birth  of  the  young  prince.     Neither  of 

310 


1774]  NEW  PROMOTIONS  3" 

the  sheriff's  would  kiss  the  King's  hand  :  one  excused  him- 
self civilly ;  the  other  said  he  never  kissed  any  hand  but 
a  woman's. 

gth.  The  following  persons  kissed  the  king's  hand  on 
their  new  promotions  : — Mr.  Dyson,  as  Cofferer,  in  the 
room  of  Mr.  Stanley,  and  privy  councillor  ;  Lord  Pelham, 
as  Chief  Justice  in  Eyre,  in  the  room  of  the  Duke  of 
Leeds,  to  whom  a  pension  was  given ;  Sir  William  Mere- 
dithji  that  fluctuating  patriot,  who  had  broken  with  all 
parties,  and  at  last  had  dropped  anchor  at  his  own  interest, 
as  Comptroller,  in  lieu  of  Lord  Pelham,  and  privy  coun- 
cillor ;  Lord  Beauchamp,^  and  the  late  patriot,  Mr.  Corn- 
wall (who  had  taken  a  pension  for  life  only  as  a  retaining 
fee)  as  Lords  of  the  Treasury,  in  the  room  of  Charles  Fox 
and  Dyson :  the  latter,  a  tailor's  son,  had  not  ambitioned 
the  office  of  Cofferer  so  much  from  interest  as  vanity,  the 
Cofferer's  place  giving  him  the  rank  of  privy  councillor. 
Stanley  was  neither  turned  out  from,  nor  resigned  without 
reward,  his  post  of  Cofferer.  His  government  of  the  Isle 
of  Wight  was  confirmed  to  him  for  life — and,  it  was  said, 
with  an  additional  pension.  That  of  the  Duke  of  Leeds, 
and  the  preferment  of  Lord  Pelham,  I  believe,  were  owing 
to  Lady  Holderness's  favouritism  with  the  Queen,  Lord 
Pelham  having  brought  about  the  match  between  Lord 
Holderness's  only  daughter  and  the  only  son  of  the  Duke 
of  Leeds,  after  Lord  Caermarthen,  the  bridegroom,  had 
broken  off  his  engagement.^ 

1  Sir  W.  Meredith  being  complimented  on  his  promotion,  and  told  that 
Lord  North  would  derive  great  strength  from  him  and  Cornwall,  replied, 
"Good  God  !  how  is  it  possible  for  a  man  to  derive  strength  even  from  the 
whole  world,  if  he  will  not  know  his  own  mind  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
together  ?  " 

"^  Francis  Seymour  Conway,  eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Hertford.  [Combe 
thus  hits  off  his  character : — 

"  Without  one  virtue  that  can  grace  a  name, 
Without  one  vice  that  e'er  exalts  to  fame." 

-D.] 

^  This  marriage  was,  after  all,  an  unhappy  one.  It  took  place  in  i773j  ^"^^ 
was  dissolved  by  Act  of  Parliament  in  1779.  Amelia  D'Arcy,  sole  daughter 
and  heiress  of  the  last  Earl  of  Holdernesse,  brought  with  her  into  the  family 


312     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [March 

Two  days  before  these  promotions,  namely,  on  the  Jth, 
Lord  North  delivered  a  message  to  the  House  of  Com- 
mons on  the  American  papers.^  In  answer  to  which, 
Mr.  Rice,  seconded  by  Lord  Clare,  moved  an  Address  of 
thanks.  Rice  said,  the  claims  and  pretensions  of  the  Ame- 
ricans had  gone  beyond  all  example,  and  that  the  question 
now  was  whether  the  colonies  were  any  longer  to  belong 
to  Great  Britain ;  that  the  best  blood  of  this  country  had 
been  sacrificed  in  their  defence,  and  yet  that  the  expected 
advantages  were  not  to  be  maintained  without  asserting 
our  sovereignty;^' Lord  Clare  added,  that  if  the  measures 
to  be  proposed  met  with  opposition,  whatever  should  be 
the  violences  of  North  America,  they  must  be  submitted 
to.  Dowdswell,  almost  alone,  objected  to  the  conduct  of 
the  Administration,  whose  wise  heads,  he  said,  had  brought 
to  a  crisis  the  trial  for  power  between  this  country  and 
America.  He  and  his  friends  at  least  had  acted  on  a 
system.  Edmund  Burke  desired  the  clerk  might  read  the 
answer  to  the  Address  in  1768,  and  the  Speeches  from  the 
Throne  in  1769  and  1770,  and  the  Journals  of  the  9th  of 
January,  1770.  The  clerk,  on  searching  the  Journals, 
reported  there  was  nothing  to  be  found  on  the  subject  in 
question.  "  What !  "  said  Burke,  "  are  our  Journals,  then, 
:  mutilated  ?  There  ought  to  be  a  hue  and  cry  after  your 
i  proceedings ;  but  no,  nothing  had  been  done,  though  the 
\  House  had  promised  to  exert  their  utmost  endeavours  to 
,  settle  America."  Wedderburn  said,  Burke's  epigram  had 
■not  been  short  ;  but  that  nobody  ought  to  consider  what 
part  he  had  hitherto  acted  upon  American  questions :  it 
would  be  base  to  say,  such  a  man  did  this,  and  such  that ; 
^  the  question  was  now,  whether  America  was  to  be  ours  or 
not.      The  declaratory  clause  for   binding  America  had 

of  the  Duke  of  Leeds  the  barony  of  Conyers.  This  lady  remarried  the  Hon. 
John  Byron,  father,  by  a  second  marriage,  of  the  Poet,  and  on  her  death,  in 
1784,  the  eldest  son  of  Lord  Caermarthen  succeeded  to  the  title  of  Lord 
Conyers— A.  F.  S. 

^  Vide  the  votes.     This  day  was  the  era  of  the  American  war. 


1774]  AFFAIRS   IN   AMERICA  313 

passed  almost  without  a  dissenting  voice.  The  right  of 
taxation  had  been  established  ;  but  their  joy  on  the  repeal 
of  the  Stamp  Act  had  been  too  riotous — too  ostentatious 
their  triumph.  The  question  was  now,  whether  you  would 
maintain  them  as  subjects,  or  retrench  your  expenses  in 
their  defence.  Burke  replied,  firmly,  that  he  meant  to 
revise  the  conduct  of  individuals,  nor  would  he  be  told  that 
it  was  base  to  do  so.  The  people  would  expect  success  from 
Administration  when  it  had  been  trusted  with  full  power 
so  long.  Colonel  Barre  said,  if  the  Bostonians  were  so 
guilty  as  they  had  been  represented,  we  ought  to  make 
war  on  them ;  there  could  be  no  middle  measures.  A 
plan,  it  was  said,  was  to  be  brought ;  let  America  appear 
at  the  bar  with  all  her  imperfections  on  her  head^  with  all 
her  sins,  and  all  her  merits  and  blessings  to  this  country. 
If  factious,  still  bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh. 
He  was  ready  to  follow  any  leader  in  that  business  that 
had  determination,  nor  meant  to  make  a  captious  opposi- 
tion ;  our  establishments  in  that  country  were  of  too  great 
consequence.  Lord  North  said,  the  proper  papers  would 
be  ready  on  the  following  Friday ;  on  which  the  Attorney- 
General  Thurlow  said,  so  loud  as  to  be  heard  by  Lord 
North,  "  I  never  heard  anything  so  impudent ;  he  has  no 
plan  yet  ready."  Lord  George  Germaine  said,  he  agreed 
there  is  no  use  in  entering  into  the  calamities  that  had 
been  brought  on  America, — it  had  been  owing  to  the  dif- 
ferent conduct  of  different  7ninisters  (the  consequence  of 
the  King's  changing  them  so  often).  The  wisdom  of  Par- 
liament was  now  requisite.  It  would  not  be  right  to  let 
America  steal  a  constitution  they  had  no  right  to.  The 
mischiefs  were  owing  to  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  and 
want  of  uniformity  in  the  proceedings  of  Parliament. ' 
Their  laws  must  be  revised,  their  charters  looked  into  ; 
they  did  not  mind  the  Declaratory  Act.  General  Con- 
way said,  the  Parliament  ought  to  assert  its  rights  ;  and  he 
saw  the  necessity  of  subordination  ;  our  salvation  depended 


314     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [March 

on  it.  He  had  lamented  that  there  was  no  plan,  and  that 
there  had  been  two  opinions  on  America  ;  yet  he  had 
thought  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  right,  and  thought 
so  still,  and  ever  should  ;  as  maintaining  it  would  have 
lost  America.  One  word  he  would  say  for  the  colonies, 
that,  short  of  taxation,  they  were  and  would  be  loyal  and 
dutiful  subjects.  The  Address  was  voted  without  a  division. 
Such  an  outset  prognosticated  ill  for  the  Bostonians, 
The  friends  of  the  Stamp  Act  encouraged  all  manner  of 
severity,  and  filled  the  papers  with  philippics  against  them, 
which  served  the  other  purpose  of  promoting  prerogative. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Rockingham  party  was  cold  ; 
Burke  was  suspected  of  fearing  to  make  his  interest  in  St. 
Vincent's  more  desperate ;  Meredith  had  deserted  ;  Barr6 
seemed  wavering  ;  and  Lord  Shelburne  was  supposed,  as 
well  as  he,  to  have  made  their  peace.  Conway  was  hurt 
that  the  violence  of  the  Bostonians  gave  the  friends  of  the 
Stamp  Act  room  to  triumph.  Lord  Gower  advised  to 
make  them  pay  the  East  India  Company  for  the  tea  ; 
Rigby,  the  cancelling  their  charter.  Lord  Temple  was 
bitter  against  Franklin,  and/6>r  whatever  could  revive  the 
Stamp  Act.  Thurlow  and  Wedderburn,  who  had  hitherto 
agreed  in  no  one  point,  concurred  in  drawing  a  bill,  with 
severity,  for  removing  the  custom-house  from  Boston,  which 
Lord  North  had  sent  to  them  awkwardly  drawn  by 
Cooper,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury ;  and,  lazy  as  his  Lord- 
ship was  himself,  he  readily  adopted  vigorous  measures 
when  he  found  even  the  Opposition  passive  ;  yet,  from  the 
same  dilatoriness,  he  used  no  activity  in  pushing  on  the 
/several  bills  of  punishment,  which  gave  time  to  the  Bos- 
I  tonians  to  take  their  precautions,  if  they  were  not  prepared 
L  to  submit. 

On  the  Zth  Grenville's  Election  Bill  was  read  for  the 
last  time  in  the  House  of  Lords.  The  Duke  of  Grafton, 
Lord  Weymouth,  and  Dr.  Hinchclifife,  Bishop  of  Peter- 
borough, spoke  against  it,  the  first  and  last  wishing  to 


^g    1774] 


SELECT   COMMITTEE   BILL  315 

have  it  further  tried  before  it  was  made  perpetual,  and 
Grafton  even  paying  compliments  to  Grenville,  parent  of 
the  bill.  Lord  Mansfield,  who  supported  the  bill,  was  as 
flattering  to  Lord  Weymouth ;  but  the  current  ran  in 
favour  of  the  bill.  Lord  Suffolk,  the  Duke  of  Richmond, 
Lord  Lyttelton — who  praised  the  other  House  for  having 
sent  it  to  their  Lordships,  Lord  Dartmouth,  and  even 
Lord  Gower  supported,  the  last  paying  so  much  homage 
to  Rigby  as  to  say  he  should,  if  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, have  opposed  it,  though  every  Lord  must  be  for  it ; 
and,  in  truth,  the  greatest  danger  apparent  from  the  bill 
is,  that  it  will  add  weight  to  the  engrossing  property  of 
the  Peers.  Lord  Temple  returned  the  Duke  of  Grafton's 
compliments  to  his  brother.  The  bill  was  then  passed — 
the  best  I  remember  to  have  seen  in  my  time,  and  a  most 
unexpected  mound  against  corruption,  though,  the  more 
utility  it  shall  have,  the  more  arts  will  be  employed  to 
undermine  it. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond,  Governor  Johnston,  Lord 
Pigot,  and  their  friends,  continued  to  endeavour  to  clog 
the  new  Instructions  of  the  East  India  Company;  but  the 
Treasury's  influence,  conducted  by  Robinson  the  Secretary, 
and  now  openly  by  Lord  Sandwich's  activity  and  presence, 
secured  a  complete  victory  to  Lord  North's  measures,  and 
by  great  majorities. 

14/)^.  Lord  North  moved  for  leave  to  bring  in  a  bill  for 
the  immediate  removal  of  the  custom-house  from  Boston, 
and  for  discontinuing  the  landing  or  lading  of  goods,  &c., 
at  that  port,  with  an  intended  clause  in  the  bill  to  prevent 
restitution  of  the  custom-house  there  till  an  adequate  com- 
pensation should  be  made  for  the  loss  of  the  teas.  The 
present  disorders  at  Boston  were  one  point,  he  said,  to  be 
attended  to ;  the  second  was,  to  secure  a  proper  depen- 
dence of  the  colonies — a  consideration  for  another  day. 
Even  this  bill  was  little  resisted.  Governor  Johnston 
asked  where  the  custom-house  was  to  be  placed  ?     Lord 


3i6     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [March 

North  answered,  according  to  the  language  of  the  time^  that 
was  to  be  left  to  the  Crown.  Dempster  cavilled  a  little , 
Sawbridge  spoke  out,  and  said  the  Americans  had  been 
treated  like  slaves ;  their  money  was  taken  from  them 
without  their  consent.  Phipps  spoke  well,  not  hostilely ; 
said  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  might  be  wrong :  but  it 
had  been  foolish  to  lay  those  trifling  taxes  afterwards,  not 
meant  to  bring  in  a  revenue,  and  only  serving  to  put  the 
Americans  out  of  humour ;  that  he  liked  Lord  North's 
motion  for  the  moderation ;  that  he  should  vote  for  it,  not 
pledging  himself  to  approve  the  subsequent  measures. 
Lord  John  Cavendish  doubted  the  efficacy  of  the  measure: 
he  and  Dowdswell  had  nothing  better  to  propose,  and  did 
not  deny  the  necessity  of  doing  something.  Colonel 
Barre,  in  very  different  language  from  what  he  had  been 
accustomed   to  use,  declared  the  Americans   ought  to   be 

/  punished  for  their  ingratitude.  He  would  co-operate  with 
Lord  North  in  this  measure.  Moderation  he  had  not 
expected ;  nor  could  expect  perfect  wisdom ;  but,  even 
short  of  that,  they  should  have  his  support.  He  went  as 
far  as  to  say,  he  had  not  lent  himself  to  Administration  : 
if  preferment  came  to  him  as  an  atonement  for  unmerited 
and  repeated  injuries,  it  might  not  be  unwelcome.  John 
Calvert,  instigated  by  Rigby,  called  for  taking  away 
charters.  Charles  Fox,  without  heat,  left  himself  at 
liberty  to  take  what  part  he  should  please.  The  bill  was 
ordered  in,  without  a  division.  The  next  day  it  was 
reported  (from  the  courtly  overtures  in  Barry's  speech) 
that  Lord  Shelburne  was  to  be  Lord  Lieutenant  of 
Ireland,  and  Barre  his  Secretary.  In  truth,  many  enemies 
of  the  Stamp  Act  seemed  to  be  canvassing  for  places  at 

^  the  expense  of  the  Americans.  Cornwall^  was  compared 
to  a  chimney-sweeper  who  had  been  let  down  the  chimney 
to  open  the  door  to  thieves. 

^  Afterwards  Speaker,  from  1780  to  1794.     See  Walpole's  "Memoirs  of 
the  Reign  of  George  III."  vol.  iii.  p.  211. — D. 


1774]  BOSTON   CUSTOM-HOUSE   BILL  317 

The  bill  was  still  dallied  with,  as  if  in  hopes  that  the 
Bostonians  would  offer  a  composition — at  least,  that  they 
might  prevent  by  submission  the  attack  on  their  charter, 
which  was  threatened.  The  bill,  however,  was  at  last  pre- 
sented on  the 

\%th,  and  read  for  the  first  time,  but  without  any  debate; 
and  on  the 

2ird  the  House  went  into  a  Committee  on  it,  filled  up 
the  blanks,  reported  it.  It  was  immediately  read  again, 
with  slight  opposition  for  about  three  hours,  and  with  no 
division,  all  sides  seeming  to  agree  that  the  conduct  of  the 
Bostonians  could  not  be  defended.  Rose  Fuller,  indeed, 
proposed  to  begin  with  a  fine  of  fifteen  or  twenty  thousand 
pounds,  and  that  the  bill  should  not  take  place  till  a 
specified  day,  that  the  refractory  town  might  have  time  to 
comply,  as  it  could  not  be  carried  into  execution  but  by  a 
military  force,  which  would  revolt  all  the  other  colonies. 
Mr.  Herbert  said  he  was  glad  attention  was  called  towards 
the  independent  views  of  the  Americans.  Lord  North 
said  he  was  known  to  be  no  enemy  to  lenient  measures ; 
but  this  was  not  the  first  offence  of  the  Bostonians ;  they 
had  been  guilty  for  three  years  past ;  censure  and  warning 
had  no  effect.  A  measure  of  this  sort  alone  could  make 
them  think  this  country  in  earnest.  The  general  sense  of 
the  nation  was  with  the  House.  He  proposed  to  remove 
the  port  to  Salem,  seventeen  miles  from  Boston.  It  would 
be  in  their  power  to  shorten  the  operation  of  the  bill.  The 
danger  of  fresh  affronts  was  not  to  be  risked.  The  incon- 
venience England  would  undergo  must  be  borne.  When 
the  Stamp  Act  was  repealed,  the  Americans  did  not  pay 
their  debts ;  but,  if  their  debts  were  to  be  an  argument 
against  our  taking  any  measures,  they  were  our  masters. 
Four  or  five  frigates  would  carry  this  measure  into  execution. 
He  was  free  to  confess  that  he  would  use  even  the  military, 
if  necessary.  The  militia  of  Boston  were  no  match  for 
the  force  of  this  country.     Lenient  measures  were  at  an 


3i8     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [March 

end.  Whether  they  were  in  rebellion  or  not  he  could  not 
say  ;  nor  was  he  answerable  for  the  consequences.  At  least 
it  would  be  clear  to  the  world  that  the  Bostonians  brought 
on  the  rebellion  themselves. 

Bamber  Gascoyne^  said  the  Bostonians  had  prepared 
twelve  pieces  of  cannon  ;  that  a  fine  would  only  give  them 
time  for  farther  preparations.  That  they  had  been  factious 
ever  since  1701,  when  Mr.  Prior  was  at  the  Board  of 
Trade. 

The  next  who  spoke  was  Mr.  Montagu,^  the  younger 
son  of  Lord  Sandwich,  recently  chosen  into  Parliament. 
He  had  wit,  more  vivacity,  and  consummate  confidence. 
The  youths  of  this  period,  who  had  any  parts,  came  out 
full  blown,  and  wanted  none  of  the  apologies  that  had 
formerly  been  made  for  the  graceful  disadvantages  of  diffi- 
dence and  modesty.  Montagu  had  been  such  a  reprobate 
boy,  that  at  school  he  had  acquired  the  appellation  of 
Devil  Montagu  ;  but  he  was  a  genuine  son  of  his  father, 
and  set  the  beauty  of  character  as  sturdily  at  defiance  as 
the  new  Lord  Lyttelton  had  done  or  Charles  Fox,  with 
still  greater  intrepidity  of  countenance.  He  dealt  his 
judgments  and  censures  liberally,  was  extravagant  in  his 
expressions,  and  made  them  more  ridiculous  by  his  con- 
fidence, though  he  set  out  by  calling  himself  a  virgin 
orator.  What,  he  said,  would  the  rising  generation  think 
of  the  presentj  if  America  were  given  up  }  This  country 
would  be  left  with  nothing  but  a  load  of  debts ;  though 
when  America  had  wanted  our  support  we  had  given  it 
cheerfully.  A  merica  must  be  part  of  this  constitution  ;  two 
souls  could  not  animate  the  same  body.  It  would  be  as 
absurd  to  expect  it  in  politics  as  in  religion.  Passing  the 
Declaratory  Law  was  acting  the  part  of  bullying  cowards. 
If  there  were   any  Members   who   from    factious   views 

^  See  Walpole's  "Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  George  III.,"  vol.  i.  p.  115. — D. 
^  William  Augustus.      He  died  unmarried,  at  Lisbon,  in  1778,  in  the 
twenty-fifth  year  of  his  age. — D. 


1774]  BOSTON   CUSTOM-HOUSE   BILL  319 

opposed  the  present  measures,  they  ought  to  be  looked 
upon  as  "  so  many  protuberances  feeding  on  the  excrement 
of  opposition  ! " 

George  Byng  as  warm  from  principle  as  Montagu  from 
want  of  it,  and  with  much  less  abilities,  protested  against 
the  bill,  which  he  said  was  to  prevent  the  importation  of 
English  goods  into  North  America.  Dempster  said,  if 
unanimity  was  desired,  why  not  imitate  the  repeal  of  the 
Stamp  Act?  Disorders  had  arisen  from  attempts  at 
taxation.  Jenkinson  broke  out  in  the  true  spirit  of  the 
Court,  and,  full  of  prerogative  and  vengeance,  called  on  all 
the  friends  of  the  Stamp  Act  to  join  in  humbling  America, 
and  in  vindicating  that  bill,  in  which  he  boasted  to  have 
taken  great  part}  and  for  which  he  called  for  as  loud 
applause  to  Grenville's  memory,  as  for  the  bill  for  trying 
elections.  He  turned  particularly  round,  and,  looking  at 
Conway,  showed  how  impatiently  the  Butists  had  borne 
the  triumph,  the  short  triumph,  of  the  Whigs  in  the  year 
1766.  Conway  rose  with  his  usual  coolness  and  temper, 
and  with  much  humour  and  contempt  ridiculed  Jenkinson's 
then  unprovoked  but  long-hoarded  passion,  and  Montagu's 
impertinent  bombast.  He  would  not  debate,  he  said,  for 
there  was  no  question  before  the  House ;  nor  could  he 
imagine  what  had  put  the  honourable  gentleman  into  such 
a  passion  ;  he  never  had  seen  warmth  so  little  called  for. 
The  whole  House  laughed  at  so  proper  a  rebuke  to 
Jenkinson's  flimsy  flippancy,  but  he  had  been  called  up 
by  a  very  young  man,  who  had  given  hard  names  to  the 
Declaratory  Law — and  who  was  hardly  born  at  that  time, 
at  least  did  not  exist  politically.  "  Alas  ! "  said  he,  "  it 
concerns  me  very  little  to  hear  that  they  who  supported 
that  bill  are  said  to  have  acted  the  part  of  bullying  cowards. 
I  am  sure  they  had  no  such  motives  for  their  conduct. 
For  my  part,  I  will  say,  punish  the  Americans  for  the  insult 
they  have  committed^  Charles  Fox  declared  he  thought 
^  Jenkinson  was  believed  to  have  devised  the  Stamp  Act, 


320     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [March 

the  power  of  restoring  the  port  ought  to  be  in  the  Parlia- 
ment, not  in  the  Crown,  which  Phipps  denied,  as  mercy- 
was  one  of  the  King's  prerogatives.^  Charles  Fox  pressed 
to  know  what  the  Ministers  meant  to  do  farther,  as  this 
would  be  but  a  feeble  exertion,  worse  than  none  at  all ; 
but  Lord  North,  without  satisfying  him,  promised  to  be 
consistent  without  obstinacy.  Fred.  Vane^  thought  build- 
ing forts  at  Salem  would  cost  large  sums,  yet  he  pronounced 
of  Boston  that  Carthago  Delenda.  This  expression,  and 
Lord  North's,  Colonel  Barre  took  up,  which  last  thought 
the  ground  had  been  ticklish  at  first,  but  the  measures 
now  were  vengeful.  He  would  give  his  support  to  this 
first  measure,  but  to  this  only.  America  he  found  was  no 
longer  to  be  the  bon  ton.  Lord  North  had  declared  an 
end  of  lenient  measures,  but  he  would  say,  God  forbid  ! 
better  repeal  the  odious  taxes  and  keep  your  hands  out  of 
their  pockets.  It  was  the  effectual  way  of  making  rebels, 
to  call  them  so.  A  foreign  enemy  might  take  us  in  the 
midst  of  our  operations.  The  next  American  measure,  he 
believed,  would  be  of  a  deeper  and  darker  hue. 

On  the  2^th  a  petition  was  presented  from  the  province 
of  Massachussets  Bay  in  behalf  of  the  said  colony ;  but 
that,  and  all  intercession  for  their  being  heard  in  their  own 
defence  before  they  were  condemned,  was  rejected,  and  the 
bill  was  read  for  the  third  time.  Dowdswell  called  it  a 
bill  of  pains  and  penalties ;  Ellis  said,  that  if  England 
could  not  impose  taxes,  it  could  give  no  laws  whatever  to 
the  colonies.  They  had  resisted  the  teas  because  inter- 
fering with  smuggled  teas.  Edmund  Burke  made  one  of 
his  painted  orations,  and  said  that,  though  he  had  not  yet 
opposed  the  bill,  he  would  mark  his  heartfelt  sorrow  for  it 

^  A  vulgar  error.  It  is  erroneously  supposed  that  the  Sovereign  can  save 
a  life  that  has  been  declared  forfeit  by  the  law  ;  but  the  Sovereign's  sign 
manual  to  a  pardon  is  of  no  effect  unless  it  be  countersigned  (that  is,  sanctioned) 
by  a  responsible  minister. — D. 

2  I  believe  this  speech  was  not  made  by  Mr.  Fred.  Vane,  but  by  Mr.  Van. 
Vide  * '  London  Chronicle "  of  March  29.  My  notes  were  blotted  at  this 
name. 


1774]  BOSTON   CUSTOM-HOUSE   BILL  321 

in  that  its  last  stage.  The  House  had  refused  to  hear  the 
agents  of  the  colonies :  the  Ministers  had  had  their  songs  of 
exultation,  not  even  before  victory^  but  before  battle.  A 
combination  of  all  the  colonies  would  ensue.  Acts  of  rigour 
were  at  first  always  received  with  joy :  they  flatter  the 
person  in  power.  But  would  the  House  proscribe  Phila- 
delphia ?  Were  there  ships  and  men  enough  to  carry  on 
universal  proscription  ?  The  Act  was  diabolical,  and  Ellis 
had  expressed  too  much  reverence  for  (the  King)  God's 
IMAGE,  to  call  him  so.  The  House  had  been  told  that 
Salem  was  but  seventeen  miles  from  Boston  ;  but  justice 
was  not  an  idea  of  geography.  Governor  Pownall  and 
T.  Townshend  were  much  softened  in  their  language ; 
approved  the  bill,  and  left  men  to  suspect  them  being 
in  the  treaty  with  the  Administration.  Lord  John  Caven- 
dish and  Sawbridge  were  more  firm  to  their  principles, 
and  the  latter  told  Lord  North  that  he  skulked  behind  the 
laws  and  came  to  Parliament,  when  he  might  have 
done  the  business  himself  by  giving  proper  directions. 
This  attack  Lord  North  answered  with  much  humour  and 
wit,  and  ridiculed  the  complaint  of  a  Minister  being  so 
arbitrary  as  to  complain  to  Parliament  rather  than  exert 
despotic  power.  Governor  Johnston  said  he  had  warned 
the  East  India  Company  before  they  sent  out  their  teas, 
and  had  foretold  what  had  happened  since.  The  Minister 
ought  to  have  opened  the  whole  of  his  plan  ;  it  should 
have  been  known  before  this  bill  was  assented  to.  The 
sum  of  indemnification  ought  to  have  been  specified,  that 
the  Bostonians  might  know  when  they  have  expiated  their 
crime.  The  House  was  sowing  seeds  of  rebellion  in  that 
country ;  the  dispute  between  Spain  and  the  Dutch  pro- 
vinces had  grown  in  the  same  way.  Rose  Fuller  declared 
he  would  vote  against  the  bill  unless  the  Administration 
would  promise  to  repeal  the  tea  duties.  The  bill,  however 
passed  without  one  division  on  it. 

On  the  2Wi  the  bill  was  read  in  the  Lords.     The  Duke, 
I.— y 


32  2    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

of  Richmond  and  Lord  Camden  attacked  it  with  much 
more  warmth  than  had  appeared  in  the  Commons,  the  latter 
condemning  the  tea  duties  as  a  mischievous  Act.  This 
Lord  Gower  took  up  shrewdly,  and  to  Lord  Camden's 
confusion,  reminding  him  that  he  had  been  Chancellor 
when  that  Act  passed.  If  he  had  foreseen  the  mischief, 
why  did  he  not  oppose  it  ?  if  he  had  been  absent,  he  had 
not  had  the  sagacity  to  discover  the  probable  inconveni- 
ences. Lord  Temple  was  as  vehement  for  the  bill,  and 
yet  against  the  ministers,  as  his  languid  fire  would  admit. 
Lord  Lyttelton  was  more  animated,  and  fine,  and  hostile 
to  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  who  begged  his  pardon  for 
thinking  the  bill  too  important  for  him  to  regard  personal 
attacks.  Lord  Dartmouth  palliated  a  little  the  case  of  the 
Bostonians,  would  not  believe  they  were  in  actual  rebellion, 
and  showed  that  he  was  the  real  cause  of  any  lenity,  any 
temporizing  being  admitted.  He  was  both  a  conscientious 
and  mild  man,  and  not  a  little  checked  by  consciousness  of 
his  apostacy  to  the  Court.  But  it  was  Lord  Mansfield 
who  discovered  himself  the  true  instigator  of  violence, 
which  he  first  endeavoured  to  colour  with  all  the  obscure 
chicanery  of  law,  and  at  last  avowed,  declaring  that  the 
bill  was  as  decisive  as  passing  the  Rubicon.  Rigour  was  his 
characteristic  when  personal  safety  was  out  of  the  question ; 
no  mob  at  Boston  could  reach  him.  The  House  did  not 
divide.^ 

On  the  2Zth  arrived  the  unexpected  account  of  what 
was  called  a  new  conquest  in  the  East.  Our  troops,  I 
know  not  on  what  foundation  or  pretence,  had  taken  and 
plundered  Tanjour.  A  second  General  Smith  had  seized 
for  his  own  share  150,000/.  The  escape  of  Lord  Clive 
the  last  year  and  the  approbation  of  his  conduct  by  the 
House  of  Commons  was  a  vote  of  sanction  to  any  sub- 

*  Lord  Shelburne  spoke  well  against  the  bill,  which,  as  well  as  Col.  Barre's 
last  speech,  seemed  to  imply  that  they  had  not  made  their  bargain  with  the 
Court. 


1774]  MASSACHUSSETS   BAY  BILL  323 

sequent  enormities.  The  Gaulish  ambassador's  saying 
that  the  Roman  Senate  appeared  to  him  an  Assembly  of 
Kings  might  with  more  truth  be  applied  to  the  English 
Parliament.  It  indeed  seemed  an  Assembly  of  Kings  by 
the  tyranny  and  injustice  it  countenanced. 

The  same  day  Lord  North  moved  for  leave  to  bring  in 
a  bill  for  regulating  the  Government  of  Massachussets  Bay. 
This  was  the  prelude  of  the  attack  intended  on  charters. 
His  Lordship  said,  there  must  be  something  radically  wrong 
in  the  constitution  of  the  Massachussets  Bay,  when  the 
civil  magistrates  could  not  act  on  any  occasion.  He 
wished  to  take  away  the  executive  fro^n  the  democratic  part, 
and  lodge  it  in  officers  appointed  by  the  Crown,  and  to 
have  justices  of  the  peace  ex  officio.  He  would  have  the 
Governor  name  the  Judges,  etc.,  belonging  to  the  courts  of 
justice,  and  all  to  be  removeable,  except  the  Chief  Justice 
and  Judges  of  superior  Courts,  and  then  not  without  a  sign 
manual :  and  no  town  meetings  to  be  held  without  leave  of 
the  Governor.  Charter  rights  would  be  sufficiently  entered 
into  in  the  course  of  the  bill.  George  Byng  disapproved 
of  the  motion,  as  heaping  provocation  on  provocation.  Sir 
Fletcher  Norton,  the  Speaker  (for  the  House  was  in  Com- 
mittee), desired  to  know  whether  it  was  the  intention  to 
leave  the  province  with  a  Council  and  Assembly  or  not  ? 
Lord  North  replied,  he  meant  nothing  that  would  affect 
the  Assembly  or  election  of  the  Council.  Stephen  Fox 
approved  vigorous  measures,  but  said  the  disorders  had 
arisen  neither  from  the  Stamp  Act  nor  its  repeal;  but  that 
all  colonies,  as  they  acquire  strength,  look  with  a  jealous 
eye  on  the  mother  country. 

Lord  George  Sackville  Germaine  made  a  much  admired 
speech  in  favour  of  the  motion — and  of  himself.  It  was 
impossible,  he  said,  to  understand  the  purport  of  the  bill  at 
the  first  opening.  He  would  ask  if  this  was  all  that  was 
to  be  done  this  session.  As  far  as  it  went,  he  had  no 
objection.     The  present  Council  in  the  Massachussets  was 


324    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

a  council  of  control,  not  of  advice.  He  would  put  that 
council  on  the  same  foot  as  in  other  royal  governments 
abroad.  It  was  absurd  to  let  the  people  choose  the  Council. 
The  intended  bill  ought  to  prevent  their  having  a  power  of 
calling  their  town  meetings,  which  were  now  only  political. 
Lord  North  had  expressed  doubts  as  to  the  alteration  of 
juries — perhaps  the  House  did  not  know  that  their  grand 
juries  were  appointed  with  a  salary  and  chosen  annually : 
the  petty  juries  were  elected  by  the  different  townships. 
The  sheriff's  was  also  a  lucrative  office.  What  a  situation 
were  the  army  and  navy  in,  triable  by  such  a  jury !  God 
forbid  those  juries  should  be  trusted,  when  Scotch  juries 
were  not  suffered  to  try  the  rebels,  nor  Sussex  juries  the 
smugglers !  But  it  would  be  said,  Will  you  bring  them 
hither  to  be  tried  ?  perhaps  not,  but  he  would  not  have 
them  tried  on  the  spot.  He  would  bring  the  constitution 
of  that  country  as  near  to  our  own  as  he  could.  It  was 
perpetually  asked  in  the  House,  Would  you  infringe  their 
charters  ?  He  would  answer,  he  would  not  only  assert  the 
power  of  this  country  in  words,  whilst  they  were  counter- 
acting us  with  deeds.  ^ 

Nothing  could  be  more  artfully  laid  than  this  scene. 
Lord  Mansfield  was  the  promoter  of  prerogative,  and  the 
soul  of  the  intended  exertion  against  the  colonies.  Lord 
North  had  drawn  the  first  bill  for  removing  the  port  from 
Boston  so  badly,  that  Wedderburn  and  Thurlow  had  been 
forced  to  draw  a  new  one,  though,  as  Thurlow  said,  they 

^  There  was  much  sense  and  foresight  in  this  speech.  It  was  idle  to  pro- 
voke the  colonies  by  those  Acts,  and  yet  take  no  precaution  against  their 
resistance.  Lord  North  certainly  lost  a  whole  year,  and  thence  the  most 
important  one,  by  bullying,  provoking,  and  temporising.  It  is  probable  that 
Lord  Mansfield  and  the  Junto  encouraged  his  dilatoriness ;  for  if  vigorous 
measures  had  checked  the  revolt  early  it  might  have  gone  no  farther ;  but 
by  these  hostile  acts,  accompanied  by  procrastination,  time  was  given  to  the 
other  colonies  to  join  in  the  revolt,  which  the  Junto  flattered  themselves  they 
should  be  able  to  master  by  force,  and  then  they  might  take  away  charters, 
give  military  codes,  as  Lord  Mansfield  was  prepared  to  do,  and  reduce  all 
North  America  to  slavery  and  the  power  of  the  Crown. 

Governor  Hutchinson  was  recalled,  and  General  Gage,  who  had  long  com- 
manded in  America,  was  appointed  Governor  of  Boston  in  his  room. 


1774]  LORD   GEORGE   GERMAINE  325 

two  had  never  agreed  before  in  a  single  point.  Lord 
Mansfield  and  Wedderburn  were  the  intimate  friends  of 
Lord  George  Germaine,  and  the  latter  had  secretly  nego- 
ciated  his  defection  from  Opposition  with  Lord  North,  and 
Cooper,  the  latter's  favourite  Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 
Lord  Mansfield  had  never  failed  attacking  juries,  the 
palladium  of  the  constitution.  Lord  North  might  not 
care  for  the  odium  of  beginning  to  undermine  them  in 
America.  To  have  the  proposal  come  from  the  mouth  of 
a  supposed  opponent  would  give  less  alarm,  and  his  Lordship 
would  seem  to  adopt  candidly  a  measure  recommended  by 
Opposition  itself  He^  accordingly  rose,  and  said  how 
much  this  country  was  obliged  to  the  Noble  Lord^ — that 
what  he  had  said  highly  deserved  attention.  His  opinions 
agreed  with  his  own,  particularly  in  relation  to  juries  and 
the  military ;  but  was  not  certain  there  would  be  any  pro- 
position. Yet  he  did  not  intend  to  close  the  Committee 
with  this  proposal.  Tke  charter  rights  were  certainly  not 
of  a  magnitude  to  withhold  Parliament.  Governor  Pownall 
owned  the  mob  governed  in  the  Massachussets,  but  that 
they  were  sober,  religious,  and  fond  of  government.  The 
bill  was  ordered  in  without  a  division.  However,  nothing 
farther  was  done  then,  except  ordering  a  Committee  to 
inquire  into  the  proceedings  of  the  colony ;  and  the 
Houses  adjourned  for  Easter  on  the  31^-/. 

Lord  Germaine's  apostacy  was  immediately  known.  He 
had  in  truth  been  driven  into  Opposition  by  Lord  Chatham, 
who  had  sacrificed  him  to  Prince  Ferdinand  ;  and  con- 
tinued in  it  partly  from  being  driven  out  again  with  Lord 
Rockingham,  and  partly  from  resentment  to  Lord  Bute, 
to  whom  he  had  been  attached,  and  who  had  given  him  to 
Lord  Chatham  on  his  second  expulsion.  From  that  anger 
he  had  voted  against  Sir  James  Lowther,  Bute's  son-in- 
law,  who  had  repaid  the  desertion  by  instigating  Johnston 
to  affront  him,  which  ended  in   a  duel  by  which   Lord 

^  Lord  North.  **  Lord  George  Germaine. 


326    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [March 

George  had  partly  wiped  off  the  imputation  of  cowardice. 
The  folly  and  weakness  of  Lord  Rockingham's  opposition 
must  have  made  Lord  George,  who  was  still  exceedingly 
aspiring,  and  who  had  persisted  to  act  in  public  till  the 
uncommon  excellence  of  his  abilities  had  surmounted  the 
load  of  contempt  under  which  he  had  lain,  wish  to  get  quit 
of  his  associates.  Whether  he  had  so  great  sagacity  as  to 
discover,  contrary  to  the  discernment  and  practice  too  of 
almost  all  England,  that  attachment  to  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  would  rather  advance  a  man's  fortune  than 
prejudice  it,  certain  it  is  that  he  and  his  wife  had  been 
most  assiduous  in  paying  their  homage  at  Gloucester 
House.  Lord  George  had  at  least  by  the  event  judged 
right.  The  King  hated  nobody  who  paid  court  to  his 
brother  1  so  much  as  he  hated  his  brother,  and  was  dis- 
sembler enough  to  reward  the  first  when  his  brother  would 
be  the  person  punished.  I  had  early  got  wind  of  Lord 
George's  approaching  defection,  and  before  the  Parliament 
met  this  winter  had  warned  the  Duke  not  to  trust  him  ; 
but  the  sudden  desertion  of  Sir  W.  Meredith,^  supposed  a 
man  of  more  principle,  had  now  taught  his  Royal  Highness 
what  to  expect.  The  greatness  of  the  reward  offered  to 
Lord  George  Germaine  bespoke  great  hatred  of  his  brother 
in  the  King  ;  or  the  zeal  for  making  converts  when  the  Court 
was  overstocked,  when  it  could  only  gain  converts  by 
making  removals  of  other  zealots  at  the  expense  of  pensions 
and  places  for  life,  as  in  the  cases  of  Cornwall,  Stanley, 
and  the  Duke  of  Leeds,  implied  that  the  King  had  very 
great  or  very  little  views  to  carry,  for  Opposition  was  re- 
duced so  low  that  the  Administration  could  want  neither 
votes  nor  speeches  in  their  favour.  If  Cornwall  was  not 
gained  on  some  great  view,  he  was  very  dearly  bought  by 
a  pension  for  life  and   a  Lordship  of  the  Treasury ;    if 

^  The  Opposition  members  used  to  meet  at  Gloucester  (now  Grosvenor) 
House  every  Sunday  evening. — D. 

*  See  Walpole's  "  Reign  of  George  III.,"  vol.  i.  p.  350.— D. 


1774]  LORD   GEORGE   GERMAINE  327 

Meredith  and  Germaine  were  gained  only  to  mortify  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester,  the  object  was  pitiful  indeed.  One 
must  hope  it  was,  that  no  great  blow  may  be  preparing — 
yet  why  should  not  royal  revenge  be  the  first  pursuit  ? 
What  a  bribe  had  been  heaped  on  Lord  North  to  win  his 
support  to  the  Royal  Marriage  Act !  Other  little  reasons 
may  have  concurred  to  the  treaty  with  Lord  George. 
Lord  North,  who  had  been  lazy  or  averse  to  business,  or 
had  acted  till  he  had  persuaded  the  King  that  he  would 
always  be  a  tractable  tool,  might  be  silently  gathering  a 
party  round  him  attached  to  himself  He,  or  the  King, 
might  be  plotting  to  get  rid  of  the  Bedfords,  and  therefore, 
the  more  Opposition  was  weakened,  the  less  considerable 
the  Bedford  faction  would  be,  if  driven  to  join  it.  Cooper 
and  Robinson,  the  Secretaries  of  the  Treasury,  were  known 
foes  :  the  latter  belonged  to  Lord  Bute ;  the  former  had 
connections  with  Wedderburn,  who  hated  Thurlow,  the 
creature  of  the  Bedfords.  All  these  causes  and  little 
passions  might  have  smoothed  the  way  for  Lord  George's 
advancement.  His  mind  was  no  sooner  known  than  he 
was  at  once  offered  the  reversion  of  the  Cinque  Ports,  of 
which  Lord  Holderness  was  Warden  for  life,  and  which 
Lord  George  had  long  wished,  as  being  useful  to  his  Kentish 
boroughs,  and  as  his  father  the  Duke  of  Dorset  had  held 
that  post.  In  this  instance  the  tenderness  of  the  King's 
heart  again  appeared.  Lord  Holderness  was  a  younger 
man  than  Lord  George  Germaine,  but  the  former  had 
been  dying,  and,  though  a  little  recovered,  was  not  likely 
to  live ;  yet  though  a  favourite,  as  his  wife  was  with  the 
Queen,  they  had  learnt  that  his  Majesty,  on  a  prospect  of 
the  Earl's  death,  had  announced  his  intention  of  appoint- 
ing Lord  Bristol  Governor  of  the  Prince  of  Wales ;  and 
now  repeated  the  blow  by  offering  the  Cinque  Ports  to 
Lord  George.  How  was  mankind  astonished  to  hear  that 
such  an  offer  did  not  satisfy !  how  much  more  were  they 
astonished  that  Lord  George  demanded  to  be  re-estab- 


328    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [March 

lished  in  the  army,  and  even  aspired  to  be  Master-General 
of  the  Ordnance,  a  post  that  had  been  pressed  on  the 
brave  General  Conway,  from  which  he  had  been  cruelly 
driven,  and  so  recently  bestowed  on  Lord  Townshend, 
whose  character  for  valour  was  not  indeed  much  higher 
than  Lord  George's !  Even  this  was  listened  to,  and  Lord 
Townshend  was  sounded  to  know  whether  he  might  not 
be  contented  with  a  compensation  ?  He  bounced  and 
refused. 

In  the  mean  time,  as  I  was  aware  how  much  Conway 
would  be  hurt  by  such  a  preference  of  an  unworthy  rival, 
and  who  he  suspected  had  always  been  his  enemy,  I  wished, 
if  I  could,  to  prevent  it,  though  I  admired  Lord  George's 
sound  abilities,  and  had  always  lived  on  civil  terms  with 
him.  But  I  neither  liked  to  see  him  decked  with  Mr. 
Conway's  spoils,  nor  was  pleased  with  his  sacrificing  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester,  nor  was  glad  to  see  so  masterly  an 
understanding  in  the  service  of  high  prerogative.  I  dis- 
covered the  transaction,  while  still  very  secret,  to  Lord 
Waldegrave,  with  whom  Lord  George  might  come  to  com- 
petition for  the  first  rank  in  the  army,  and  to  General 
Fitzroy,  who  had  been  aide-de-camp  to  Prince  Ferdinand, 
and  the  very  man  who  had  carried  the  fatal  orders  at 
Minden,  which  Lord  George  had  not  obeyed.^  Through 
these  channels  I  knew  the  Bedfords,  who  did  not  love 
Lord  George,  would  be  inflamed,  and  possibly  the  rest  of 
the  army.  I  also  acquainted  the  Duke  of  Gloucester. 
He  made  a  great  panegyric  on  Lord  George's  talents,  and 
was  so  true  a  soldier  as  to  approve  his  wishing  to  recover 

^  On  the  1st  August,  1759.  Prince  Ferdinand  (who  with  the  allied  in- 
fantry had  compelled  the  French  to  retreat)  sent  an  order  to  Lord  George 
Sackville  to  advance  with  the  English  and  German  cavalry,  of  which  he  was 
the  commander,  and  complete  the  rout.  The  order  was  not  obeyed  ;  perhaps 
it  was  misunderstood ;  and  the  French  thereby  recovered  an  advantageous 
post  previously  held  by  them.  Lord  George  was  punished  by  being  ejected 
from  all  his  offices,  military  and  civil ;  but  he  was  restored  to  them,  and  pro- 
moted to  higher  employments  and  dignities,  under  George  III.,  at  which  time 
he  had  assumed  the  name  of  an  aunt  whose  property  he  had  inherited.  He 
died  Viscount  Sackville  in  1785. — D. 


1774]         CONVERSATION   WITH   THE   DUKE  329 

rank  in  the  army.  I  hinted  my  real  fears  that,  if  Master 
of  the  Ordnance,  Lord  George  might  afterwards  become 
Commander-in-chief,  to  his  Royal  Highness's  prejudice. 
"  Oh ! "  said  the  Duke,  "  if  any  man  is  preferred  to  that 
service,  I  will  instantly  go  into  the  Imperial  or  Russian 
service."  The  Duchess  was  present,  and  said  not  a  word 
to  such  a  denunciation,  though  I  saw  how  it  struck  her — 
but  she  always  submitted  to  his  will.  In  the  same  con- 
versation the  Duke  told  me  that  the  King  hated  his 
brother-in-law  the  Hereditary  Prince  much  more  than 
Prince  Ferdinand  :  that  the  former  knew  it  so  well  that  he 
had  not  accompanied  his  wife  to  England  on  the  last  ill- 
ness of  the  Princess  of  Wales,  nor  ever  would  come  hither 
again,  unless  he  was  offered  the  command  of  the  army ; 
but  had  said,  "  The  King  might  have  me  much  cheaper 
than  my  uncle  Ferdinand,  for  he  likes  the  pay,  and  I  want 
only  the  honour."  The  Duke  told  me  too  that  Colonel 
Loyd,  who  had  been  in  the  Russian  service,  told  him  the 
Czarina  had  said  to  him,  "  I  do  not  talk  from  your  news- 
papers and  party  papers,  but  I  am  certain — mind,  I  say 
I  know — that  two  persons  of  your  country  took  money 
from  France  for  the  last  peace ; "  and  Loyd  added,  "  Sir, 
if  ever  I  see  your  Royal  Highness  out  of  England,  I  will 
tell  you  their  names ;  but  I  dare  not  name  them  here." 
As  Loyd  did  not  name  them,  I  suspect  that  one  of  them 
was  the  Princess  of  Wales. 


[April 


APRIL 

THE  Houses  reassembling  on  April  wth,  an 
attempt  was  made  on  the  \2th  in  the  House 
of  Commons  to  throw  the  Administration  back 
into  their  difficulties  on  the  election  for  Middle- 
sex ;  but  the  bomb  was  fired  by  too  unwelcome  a  hand. 
Colonel  Luttrell,  brother  of  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland, 
was  both  a  hotheaded  and  an  interested  man,  and  hitherto 
had  always  made  the  rashness  of  his  head  subservient  to 
the  lucre  that  reigned  in  his  heart.  He  had  but  the  very 
last  year  extorted  a  job  from  the  Court  on  threats  of 
vacating  his  seat  in  Parliament,  on  acknowledgment  that 
there  was  something  wrong  in  his  election.  He  now 
menaced,  accusing  Bradshaw,  the  favourite  agent  in  all 
dark  work,  of  having  seduced  him  to  stand  for  Middlesex  ; 
but  the  more  Luttrell  had  profited  by  his  own  venality, 
the  less  formidable  his  threats  became.  They  being  now 
despised,  he  made  a  formal  complaint  to  the  House  against 
itself  of  its  having  suffered  the  Sheriffs  to  summon  Wilkes, 
instead  of  him,  to  serve  the  duty  in  Parliament,  and  he 
moved  to  order  the  Sheriffs  to  answer  it  at  the  bar.^  The 
Ministers  could  not  comply  without  quarrelling  with  the 
City ;  by  rejecting  the  motion  they  seemed  tacitly  to 
approve  the  behaviour  of  the  Sheriffs  in  favour  of  Wilkes; 
yet  this  ignominy,  when  they  had  borne  so  many  insults, 
they  preferred — and  so  far  were  secure ;  for  as  the  Op- 

^  Luttrell,  although  Wilkes,  at  the  Middlesex  election,  had  polled  a  far 
greater  number  of  votes,  had  been  declared  by  the  House  to  be  the  properly 
elected  member  :  his  opponent  was  held  incapable  of  sitting,  as  he  was  under 
sentence  of  expulsion  for  having  written  various  seditious,  libellous,  and 
obscene  matters.  How  Wilkes  ultimately  triumphed  I  need  not  here  nar- 
rate.—D.  J 

330 


1774]      LUTTRELL'S  COMPLAINT  OF  SHERIFFS        331 

position  condemned  the  intrusion  of  Luttrell,  they  could 
not  become  his  partizans.  When  Luttrell  ceased,  a  long 
and  dead  silence  ensued.  At  last  Lord  Beauchamp  moved 
for  the  Orders  of  the  Day,  which,  nobody  seconding 
Luttrell,  would  have  been  called  for.  After  another  pause 
Charles  Fox  rose  and  said  Colonel  Luttrell  should  not 
want  a  second ;  and  then  poured  out  a  torrent  of  invective 
against  Lord  North  for  his  pusillanimity,  and  for  what  he 
called  his  impudent  and  shameless  silence.  Lord  North, 
with  great  quickness  and  humour,  replied,  that  he  had 
never  before  heard  of  impudent  silence ;  that  he  had, 
indeed,  seen  gentlemen  on  their  legs  whose  shameless 
impudence  had  shocked  all  mankind.  The  laugh  of  the 
whole  House  applied  the  likeness  to  the  original  it  was 
drawn  for.  Thomas  Townshend  said  he  should  be  for  the 
Orders  of  the  Day,  not  from  fear  of  a  quarrel  with  the 
Sheriffs  or  from  dread  of  giving  them  importance,  as 
Lord  North  had  urged,  but  because  his  opinion  was  totally 
different  from  that  of  Lord  North  on  the  Middlesex  elec- 
tion. Nobody  else  espousing  Luttrell,  the  Orders  of  the 
Day  were  read. 

Saturday^  i6th. — Yesterday,  after  some  private  business 
being  done,  and  the  House  being  pretty  full.  Sir  Charles 
Whitworth  presented  the  bill  for  the  better  regulating  the 
Government  of  the  Province  of  the  Massachussets  Bay, 
in  North  America,  and,  after  a  short  debate,  the  bill  was 
read  a  first  time,  and  ordered  to  be  read  a  second  time 
next  Friday.  Lord  North  then  presented  to  the  House 
several  more  papers  relative  to  the  present  state  of  some 
of  His  Majesty's  colonies  in  North  America,  which  was 
read  by  the  Clerks  of  the  House,  and  took  up  near  an 
hour  reading. 

The  Order  of  the  Day  was  then  read  to  take  into 
further  consideration  his  Majesty's  most  gracious  Message, 
together  with  the  papers  which  had  been  presented  to  the 
House  by  Lord  North  on  the  7th  and  nth  of  March  last 


332     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [April 

and  those  presented  yesterday,  when  the  House  resolved 
itself  into  a  Committee,  Sir  Charles  Whitworth  in  the 
Chair ;  when  Lord  North  proposed  another  bill  relative  to 
the  indemnification  of  persons  who  may  act  towards  the 
preservation  of  the  peace,  when,  after  a  long  debate,  the 
Committee  came  to  the  said  proposition  without  a  division, 
and  Sir  Charles  Whitworth  reported  the  same  to  the 
House,  and  the  bill  was  ordered  in  accordingly.  The 
speakers  were  Lord  North,  Solicitor-General,  General 
Conway,  Mr.  Dowdswell,  Governor  Pownall,  Captain 
Phipps,  and  Mr.  Burke. 

General  Conway  was  the  only  man  who  spoke  out  on 
these  bills,  which  he  did  with  firmness,  though  without 
bitterness.  He  said  the  Administration  had  boasted  of 
sending  a  sword  in  one  hand  and  the  olive  in  the  other : 
he  saw  the  sword  but  could  not  discover  the  olive-branch. 
They  were  going  to  take  away  juries  from  Boston,  though 
Colonel  Preston,  in  the  midst  of  a  town  exasperated  at 
the  deaths  of  eleven  persons,  had  had  a  fair  trial,  and  had 
been  acquitted.  There  was  one  peaceable  measure  sure 
of  success,  and  that  was  not  tried,  repealing  the  Tea  Bill : 
he  would  second  Mr.  Rose  Fuller  in  moving  for  such 
repeal. 

\gth.  Rose  Fuller  moved  for  the  repeal  of  the  tea  duty, 
and  was  seconded  by  Mr.  Pennant.  Conway  voted  for  it, 
and  Phipps,  the  two  Foxes^  Edmund  Burke,  T.  Townshend, 
Frederick  Montague,  Colonel  Barre,  and  Dowdswell,  spoke 
for  the  motion.  It  was  opposed  by  Lord  North,  Rice, 
Cornwall,  Wedderburn,  Lord  Beauchamp,  Lord  Clare,  and 
Buller,  and  was  rejected  at  eleven  at  night  by  182  to  49. 
Burke  spoke  for  two  hours  with  the  highest  applause,  gave 
a  detail  of  taxation  and  of  late  Ministers,  in  which  he 
drew  portraits  of  George  Grenville,  Lord  Chatham,  and 
others.  Of  Grenville  his  portrait  was,  at  least,  as  favour- 
able as  he  deserved  ;  but  blaming  his  obstinate  adherence 
to  forms,  and  with  the  littleness  of  a  lawyer  and  man  of 


1774]  AMERICAN   TEA    DUTIES  333 

business.  He  commended  Lord  Chatham's  great  talents, 
but  ridiculed  his  latter  administration  and  perseverance  in 
governing  when  the  gout  had  disordered  his  understanding, 
and  his  deputies  were  not  at  liberty  nor  had  abilities  to  do 
anything.^  Lord  North  himself  applauded  this  oration. 
Wedderburn  answered  it  in  defence  of  G.  Grenville,  and 
said  it  was  new  to  hear  a  Minister  condemned  for  being  a 
man  of  business.  "  To  be  sure,"  he  added,  "  an  ignorant 
young  man  (Lord  Rockingham),  governed  by  a  visionary 
(Burke  himself)  who  is  generally  in  the  third  heaven,  is 
fitter  to  be  at  the  head  of  affairs ! "  Burke's  speech  was 
excessively  admired.  It  was  a  year  of  fine  harangues : 
[  Wedderburn's  against  Dr.  Franklin,  Lord  George  Ger- 
Imaine's  on  the  colonies,  and  this  of  Burke,  besides  those 
Vf  the  lawyers  on  literary  property,  were  the  most  extolled. 
The  very  next  day  old  Glover,  author  of  "  Leonidas,"  a 
bombast  and  turgid  orator  when  in  Parliament,  was  not 
less  approved  on  a  matter  of  trade.^ 

About  this  time,  on  a  new  ballot  for  Directors  of  the 
East  India  Company,  there  were  three  parties — that  of  the 
House  or  old  Directors,  that  of  the  Administration,  and 
that  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond.  The  last  lost  two  of  their 
best  friends  ;  the  Ministers  were  little  more  successful,  the 
Directors  themselves  choosing  most  of  the  list.  Lord 
North's  agents  prepared  against  another  year,  and  it  was 
pressed  on  the  friends  of  the  Court  to  become  proprietors 
of  India  Stock  to  qualify  themselves  for  voting. 

^  He  spoke  highly  of  Conway,  who,  when  Secretary  of  State,  had  firmly 
resisted  the  influence  of  Lord  Bute  and  his  creatures,  but  in  other  parts  was 
severe  on  his  irresolution.  • 

2  This  was  in  a  Committee  to  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  Linen  Trade  in 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  Sir  Thomas  Clavering  in  the  chair.  Mr.  Glover 
is  said  to  have  spoken  in  "a  most  pathetic  and  extraordinary  manner," 
concluding  with  hoping  that  the  House  would  not  lay  any  more  duty  upon  the 
foreign  linens,  as  it  would  be  the  means  of  putting  a  stop  to  that  branch  of 
trade.  He  spoke  at  the  bar  of  the  House  for  near  two  hours  and  a  half. 
Several  of  the  members,  as  they  left  the  House,  told  Glover  that_  *'  they  often 
heard  him  when  he  sat  in  the  House,  but  they  never  heard  anything  to  exceed 
this  performance  before." — D. 


334     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [April 

22nd.  The  Committee  sat  on  the  second  reading  of  the 
Bill  for  regulating  the  Civil  Jurisdiction  in  America.  Rose 
Fuller  said  the  bill  was  a  new  proof  of  the  A  mericans  being 
condemned  without  being  heard.  Sir  George  Saville  said  he 
had  trembled  at  every  step  that  had  been  taken  on  the 
affair  of  Boston  :  he  had  argued  ill  from  the  time  the 
House  had  refused  to  hear  Mr.  BoUand,  agent  for  that 
colony,  and  till  now  had  withdrawn  himself  from  that 
whole  business.  Ellis  affirmed  that  the  King,  Lords,  and 
Commons  have  a  right  to  alter  charters  given  by  the 
Crown.  General  Conway  said,  that,  though  it  had  been 
alleged  that  the  Americans  had  no  right  to  be  heard  at  the 
bar  of  the  House,  yet  it  had  been  the  universal  practice, 
on  alteration  of  charters,  to  hear  the  party,  and  in  matters 
of  right  it  could  not  be  refused.  Delays  might  be  disagree- 
able, but  were  of  no  weight  in  matters  of  right.  The 
question  now  was,  whether  the  Americans  should  be  heard 
or  not,  before  the  charter  was  broken  into  for  our  convenience. 
He  would  not  attempt  to  stem  the  torrent — he  knew  it 
would  be  ineffectual ;  but  he  would  say  that  we  were  the 
aggressors  and  innovators  upon  them^  and  had  been  so  for  the 
last  ten  years.  They  had  held  one  line  of  duty  to  us,  whilst 
we  had  teazed  and  vexed  them  with  a  variety  of  contradictory 
laws :  first,  with  Admiralty  jurisdiction.  Stamp  Act  duties, 
now,  with  duty  of  taxation.  Putting  all  together,  we  were 
the  aggressors.  We  carried  our  ideas  of  pride  and  dignity 
too  far  upon  these  abstract  sophisticated  notions  We 
had  no  right  to  tax  even  Ireland.  These  measures,  he 
thought,  would  involve  those  who  had  the  conduct  of  them  in 
such  difficulties  as  they  would  not  get  the  better  of}  Lord 
North  replied,  that  it  was  fit  in  courts  of  law  to  hear  the 
parties ;  but  charters  were  the  regulations  of  the  Crown,  and 
under  the  control  of  Government.  Was  it  the  idea  that  we 
should  send  over  to  summon  them  to  attend  their  rights, 
which  did  not  exist,  whilst  they  go  on  plundering  your 
^  A  prophecy  verified. 


1774]      AMERICAN  CIVIL  JURISDICTION  BILL        335 

merchantmen,  and  tarring  and  feathering  1  your  subjects? 
Were  we,  in  that  state,  to  take  no  steps  to  restore  govern- 
ment ?  He  was  persuaded  they  would  send  word  they 
would  not  appear  at  the  bar.  This  measure  was  a  political 
necessity,  not  a  political  convenience :  this  measure  must  be 
pursued,  unless  any  gentleman  would  point  out  a  more 
proper  method.  Conway  had  said  we  were  the  aggressors 
— and  therefore  what  ?  Were  we  to  let  them  go  on,  be- 
cause the  provocation  was  on  their  side?  Had  they  not 
burnt  our  sloops  and  rescued  our  seizures?  Our  friends 
in  America  had  doubted  whether  we  should  support  them. 
If  we  were  not  ready  to  part  with  our  colonies,  some 
steps  must  be  taken.  Did  anybody  conceive  that  the  facts 
which  had  appeared  from  the  correspondence  laid  before 
the  House  were  not  true  ? 

Sir  George  Yonge  and  Governor  Johnston  blamed  the 
injustice  of  Administration.  The  latter  complained  that 
the  new  bill  would  make  the  Governor  of  the  Massachussets 
absolute,  and  the  Americans  become  the  slaves  of  Ministers. 
The  latter  had  better  speak  out  and  say  at  once  that  they 
meant  to  establish  despotism  all  over  the  empire.  Kingy  y 
LordSy  and  Commons  could  not  take  away  the  rights  of  the 
people^  who  would  be  authorised  to  resist  for  the  cause  of 
liberty.  What  proceedings  had  been  seen  here,  and  what 
had  been  done,  in  consequence  of  mobs  in  this  country ! 
Had  not  Majesty  itself  been  insulted,  and  the  Minister^ 
nearly  torn  in  pieces  ?  Had  he  not  fortunately  been  saved 
by  Sir  William  Meredith?  The  Americans  would  resist 
like  Englishmen — Jenkinson  and  Harris  supported  the 
bill.  Sir  Edward  Astley  and  Governor  Pownall  argued 
against  it :  the  latter  said  there  was  an  end  of  opinions — 
it  would  come  to  action  with  the  Americans.  They  would 
immediately  hold  a  Congress  of  the  different  provinces ; 

^  The  Bostonians  rolled  those  who  bought  teas,  naked,  in  tar  and  then  in 
feathers.  An  account  was  arrived  the  day  before  of  a  new  cargo  of  tea 
destroyed.  2  Lq^^j  North. 


336     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [April 

they  would  unite,  and  consider  how  they  should  proceed 
most  to  their  advantage.  They  no  longer  trusted  any 
letters  to  their  common  post ;  they  had  couriers  of  their 
own  in  every  province. 

Rigby  said  what  had  dropped  from  Pownall  was  very 
serious :  he  had  told  the  House  that  America  was  now  in 
rebellion,  for  as  yet  they  could  know  nothing  of  what  had 
been  done  here.  Thdy  had  then  a  private  post,  not  for 
serious  matters,  not  because  of  their  correspondence,  but 
to  regulate  their  future  transactions ;  but  America  was  in 
the  right  to  rebel,  for,  it  seemed,  we  were  the  aggressors ! 
yet,  if  he  did  not  mistake,  the  honourable  gentleman  (Con- 
way) had  this  year  been  for  taking  away  the  port  from 
Boston.  For  himself  he  had  never  varied  his  opinions ; 
but  was  astonished  to  hear  a  man,  who  had  brought  in  the 
Declaratory  Bill,  say  that  we  had  been  the  aggressors.  If 
he  himself  had  thought  so,  he  would  not  have  voted  for 
the  Boston  Port  Bill,  but  would  have  moved  for  the  repeal 
of  his  own  Declaratory  Law.  But  this  country  had  a  right 
to  tax  even  Ireland,  though  it  would  not  be  expedient  to 
do  it,  as  the  Irish  have  a  Parliament  of  their  own.  How 
were  we  to  make  requisitions  to  the  North  Americans? 
Was  this  House  to  send  over  cap  in  hand  ?  Himself  had 
not  the  least  varied.  Had  not  the  Administration  been 
changed  in  1765,  the  Stamp  Act  would  have  been  enforced 
as  easily  as  the  land-tax  is  here.  We  had  clearly  a  right 
to  tax  them,  though  perhaps  it  would  not  be  expedient. 
He  would  wait  till  the  flame  had  subsided. 

Charles  Fox  said  Rigby's  politics  were  very  distinct ; 
how  wise,  was  another  question.  He  would  tax  the  Ameri- 
cans when  they  are  quiet — would  tax  them,  as  a  boon  for 
their  submission.  But  we  were  now  fighting  for  taxation. 
We  might  speculatively  have  a  right  to  tax  Ireland.  In 
this  country  a  dispensing  power  had  once  been  contended 
for :  the  moment  it  came  to  be  exercised,  nobody  would 
bear  it.    It  was  contrary  to  fact  that  the  Stamp  Act  would 


1774]      AMERICAN  CIVIL  JURISDICTION  BILL         337 

have  passed  without  opposition.  We  were  irritating  the 
Americans  without  a  power  to  force  them  :  whoever  would 
govern  a  country  without  its  consent,  insured  resistance. 
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  endeavoured  to  palliate  the  grossness  of 
Rigby's  positions,  who,  he  affirmed,  had  not  said  he  would 
tax  them  by  way  of  reward,  but  when  their  situation  would 
admit  of  it ;  yet  he  allowed  we  could  tax  them  only  by 
force :  and  he  himself  had  never  varied  in  his  opinion  of 
taxing  that  country.  Sir  Richard  Sutton  said  a  levelling 
principle  prevailed  in  that  country :  he  would  give  the 
House  an  idea  of  it.  He  knew  a  gentlemen  who  went  to 
a  merchant's  house  at  Boston,  and  asked  the  servant  if  his  / 
master  was  at  home.  "  My  master  !  "  replied  the  servant ; 
"  I  have  no  master  but  Jesus  Christ :  John  Such-an-one 
(naming  his  master)  is  at  home,  if  you  want  him."  Sir 
Richard  concluded  with  declaring  he  approved  regulations, 
as  he  thought  them  necessary.  The  bill  was  then  read  a 
second  time  without  a  division,  and  ordered  to  be  com- 
mitted. In  the  Committee,  Dowdswell  declared  he  would 
reserve  his  opposition  for  the  last  reading.  The  regula- 
tions were  contested  in  different  debates  the  following 
week,^  but  with  no  divisions  nor  anything  memorable. 
The  attendance,  too,  was  very  small. 

^  See  the  ''London  Chronicle"  of  April  30th  on  a  new  petition  from 
Mr.  BoUand.  There  was  much  insolence  and  confidence  in  Lord  North's 
assertion  that  the  plan  was  only  to  reduce  Boston  to  a  footing  with  the  other 
colonies  ;  whereas  one  of  the  new  bills  enacted  that  criminals  might  be  brought 
over  to  England  to  be  tried,  which  had  not  been  the  case  in  the  other  colonies. 


[May 


MAY 

ON  the  2nd  Sir  George  Saville  presented  a 
petition  from  several  inhabitants  of  North 
America,  then  resident  in  London,  praying  to 
be  heard  against  sending  troops  against  them, 
and  against  the  proceedings  then  carrying  on  in  Parlia- 
ment. All  the  favour  shown  to  that  petition  was  to  suffer  it 
to  lie  on  the  table.  Insolence  was  now  the  language  of  the 
Court ;  and  some  of  its  emissaries  went  so  far  as  to  call  in 
the  newspapers  for  the  names  of  those  who  interfered  for  the 
Americans,  that  they  might  be  exposed  to  public  vengeance — 
so  easily  did  despotism  espouse  measures  of  which  they 
had  so  loudly  complained  in  their  opponents. 

The  same  day  was  read,  for  the  third  time,  the  Bill  for 
regulating  the  Massachussets,and  a  very  long  debate,  though 
not  a  very  new  or  lively  one,  ensued,  which  lasted  till  past 
two  in  the  morning,  when  the  bill  was  carried  by  239  to 
64.  Before  I  mention  any  of  the  speeches,  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  premise  some  circumstances  relative  to  it.  I  have 
spoken  of  Colonel  Barre's  change  of  tone  at  the  outset  of 
these  bills,  and  of  the  expectation  it  had  raised  that  both 
he  and  Lord  Shelburne  were  coming  into  place,  as  well  as 
Lord  George  Germaine.  The  latter  continued  to  support 
the  bills,  though  nothing  more  was  heard  of  his  (supposed) 
intended  preferment.  Colonel  Barre,  on  the  contrary,  had 
retracted  his  complaisance,  and  had  distinguished  himself 
against  the  new  regulations.  It  was  known  that  Lord 
Shelburne  had  received  a  letter  from  Lord  Chatham  dis- 
approving the  rigour  used  towards  Boston :  the  consequence 
was,  that  Lord  Shelburne,  Barre,  and  Dunning,  who  had 

338 


1774]  MASSACHUSSETS   BAY   BILL  339 

been  long  ill  and  whose  faculties  were  said  to  be  impaired, 
though  it  did  not  appear  on  this  occasion,  took  a  warm 
part  against  the  Court.  Lord  Chatham  himself,  so  long  for- 
gotten in  his  solitude  at  Pynsent,  had  now  passed  through 
London  and  fixed  at  Hayes,  and  it  was  thought  would 
appear  in  the  House  of  Lords.  It  was  then  given  out  that 
he  was  only  come  to  fix  marriages  for  his  son  and  daughter. 
It  was  then  said  he  had  the  gout,  and  the  Court  reported 
that  he  had  changed  his  opinion  on  America.  The  truth 
I  believe  was,  that  he  hoped  the  disorders  of  America 
would  prove  useful  to  him  ;  but  as  the  stream  ran  the  other 
way,  and  the  Rockingham  party  resolved  to  take  no  notice 
of  him,  he  found  the  times  not  yet  ripe.  He  and  Lord 
Temple  visited,  but  in  the  coolest  manner — Lord  Temple 
affecting  to  be  the  representative  of  George  Grenville*s 
inveteracy  to  America,  which  only  made  him  of  still  less 
consequence  than  Lord  Chatham,  for  the  Court  did  not 
want  tools,  much  less  a  chief  without  a  party.  Lord 
Camden,  Lord  Chatham  excused  himself  from  seeing,  yet 
received  the  Sheriffs,  who  were  creatures  of  Wilkes. 
These  hints  will  explain  parts  of  the  subsequent  debate. 

Dunning  opened  the  attack  and  spoke  above  two  hours. 
He  begged  indulgence,  as  he  found  his  organs  of  speech 
considerably  impaired.  He  wished  never  to  hear  the  bill 
read  again — wished  to  stem  the  torrent  of  prejudice  that 
had  taken  possession  of  the  House.  He  would  consider  all 
the  bills  together  as  forming  one  system,  which  put  the 
Crown  and  Minister  on  a  different  foot  from  what  they 
were  when  the  charter  was  given.  The  repeal  of  the  tea 
duty  would  have  quieted  the  Americans ;  he  thought  that 
repeal  had  been  kept  in  reserve.  The  fatal  secret  was 
now  out :  it  was  not  the  olive-branch,  but  war  and  resent- 
ment. The  language  was,  Resist  and  we  will  cut  your 
throats — acquiese  and  we  will  tax  you.  In  the  whole  busi- 
ness there  was  nothing  of  a  plan  ;  the  Minister  was  deter- 
mined to  do  something,  without  knowing  what,  only  it  was 


340       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

to  be  violent/  though  not  warranted  to  say  A  merica  was  in 
rebellion.  The  town  guard  at  Boston  was  meant  for  pro- 
tection ;  but  if  there  was  treason  there  must  have  been 
traitors.  He  would  not  suppose  Lord  North  was  Minister, 
therefore  did  not  blame  him  ;  neither  did  he  know  who  was 
Minister,  nor  even  of  what  sex  :  and  were  he  to  describe 
the  Minister  in  the  phrase  of  his  own  profession,  he  should 
say,  he^  she,  or  they.  The  Stamp  Act  had  passed  before  he 
was  in  Parliament.  He  would  give  his  opinion  on  the 
right  of  taxing  the  colonies,  though  there  were  shades  in 
his  opinion  that  made  him  differ  from  those  he  revered 
most  (Lord  Camden).  He  thought  Parliament  competent  to 
tax  Ireland  and  America,  in  cases  of  necessity  ;  but  first  they 
ought  to  make  requisitions.  In  every  country  there  must 
exist  a  supreme  law — here,  it  was  in  King,  Lords,  and  Com- 
mons. Sir  W.  Meredith,  the  new  apostate  Comptroller, 
condemned  General  Conway's  pronouncing  England  the 
aggressors,  which  he  affectedly  called  a  "flippancy  declared." 
He  said  the  statute  of  the  25th  of  Charles  II.  and  the  Act  of 
Navigation  had  laid  a  similar  tax  to  that  on  tea.  Who  com- 
pelled the  Americans  to  buy  the  tea  ? — Stanley  denied  the 
two  bills  being  the  same,  and  that  any  person  might  con- 
sistently vote  for  the  one  and  against  the  other.  While 
Europe  should  maintain  its  superiority,  it  was  impossible 
for  America  to  submit  without  depending  on  some  European 
power.  There  had  been  a  radical  error  in  the  formation 
of  the  American  constitution.  Was  it  extraordinary  that 
levellers,  who  settled  there  first,  should  choose  that  form 
that  was  most  like  no  government  at  all  ? — Colonel  Barre 
said  the  question  was,  whether  to  reconcile  the  colonies  by 
sober  means  or  drive  them  to  despair  ?  We  had  been  the 
aggressors,  and  oppressors  never  forgive  those  they  have 
injured.     Lord  North  had  declared  he  would  see  America 

^  This  observation  agrees  with  what  I  have  said  before  in  this  Journal, 
viz.  that  the  Ministers  waited  for  the  rest  of  the  colonies  to  rebel  before  they 
sent  any  forces  to  America. 


1774]  MASSACHUSSETS   BAY   BILL  341 

at  his  feet^  and  then  would  repeal  the  tax.  Two  other  gen- 
tlemen of  high  description  (Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  and  Rigby) 
had  said,  We  will  see  America  at  our  feet,  and  thejt  we  will 
tax  them  ;  and  those  two  men  he  believed  could,  if  they 
pleased,  not  leave  Lord  North  a  casting  vote  in  the  Cabinet. 
They  said  they  would  tax  :  it  was  now  to  the  Americans, 
"  Stand  and  deliver  ! "  The  great  Minister  who  had  go- 
verned this  country  so  long  and  so  much  to  his  credit  (Lord 
Chatham)  had  no  other  idea  than  of  going  cap  in  hand  to 
the  Americans  and  making  requisitions.  If  the  scabbard 
was  thrown  away,  we  must  point  the  whole  weight  of  the 
British  empire  against  the  American  colonies  :  for  his  part, 
the  blood  of  the  Americans  would  not  lie  at  his  door. 

The  young  Lord  Caermarthen,  whose  voice  and  person 
recommended  him,  as  well  as  his  rank  and  favour  at  Court 
by  his  late  marriage,  spoke  with  great  applause.  He  said, 
when  he  saw  a  systematic  opposition  established  in  America, 
he  should  never  think  a  particular  tax  the  cause.  He  had 
never  heard  that  Lord  Chatham  was  famous  for  going  cap 
in  hand  towards  the  execution  of  his  measures  ;  he  had 
heard,  but  time  would  show,  that,  were  his  Lordship  well 
enough  to  attend  his  duty  in  Parliament,  he  would  not  be 
for  adopting  the  cap-in-hand  measures  towards  the  Ameri- 
cans. George  Byng  spoke,  as  he  did  always,  warmly 
against  the  bill,  and,  calling  Rigby  by  his  place  the  Irish 
Master  of  the  Rolls,  took  notice  how  indecent  it  was  in  him 
of  all  men  to  declare  for  taxing  Ireland. — Rigby,  with  im- 
pudent frankness  and  parts,  avowed  the  satisfaction  he  had 
in  holding  that  place,  and  said  it  had  been  thought  that  he 
had  not  been  well  founded  in  his  assertion  ;  but  in  the 
statutes  of  George  I.  there  was  a  law  to  bind  Ireland  in  all 
cases  whatsoever.  The  Declaratory  Law  had  been  the  most 
nonsensical  that  ever  was.  Another  had  said,  it  was  now 
Stand  and  deliver :  it  was  very  true,  and  he  thought  it  as 
much  his  duty  to  say  so  as  to  enforce  the  land-tax,  when 
voted.     As  to  the  cap-in-hand  Minister,  he  certainly  made 


342       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

this  country  very  great,  and  too  great  at  last  to  hold  him- 
self: witness  his  retreat  to  Marlborough.  When  gentlemen 
had  a  mind  to  have  a  fling  at  him  (Rigby),  they  called 
him  a  Minister  ;  but  he  never  was  nor  ever  should  be  one. 
Had  he  any  power,  which  he  had  not,  he  assured  the 
House  it  should  be  at  Lord  North's  service,  and  used  for 
his  support.  If  he  was  upon  his  oath,  he  would  vote  for 
the  bill. 

General  Conway  said  he  had  been  accused  of  declaring 
we  had  no  right  to  tax  America  or  Ireland  ;  but  he  had 
never  gone  so  far.  The  statute  of  George  I.  was  in  pre- 
cise words  the  same  as  the  Declaratory  Law,  which  was 
dignified  with  the  epithet  of  ridiculous.  We  were  now 
running  into  difficulties  there  would  be  no  end  to  :  the 
flame  could  never  be  laid,  the  expense  could  not  be  main- 
tained. He  had  thought  there  was  to  be  something 
lenient ;  but  where  was  the  olive-branch  ?  Was  it  in  the 
breach  of  the  charters  ?  Soldier  as  he  was,  he  did  not 
wish  to  see  the  military  exempted  from  the  laws  of  their 
country.  There  had  been  a  variety  of  innovations.  He 
would  ask,  had  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  had  a  fair 
trial  ?  It  was  a  law  of  rule  and  justice  to  hear  the  parties. 
He  lamented  that  he  could  not  prevent  these  measures,  nor 
stem  the  torrent.  Violence  in  Parliament  was  like  zeal  in 
religion.  His  maxim  was,  Peace  with  our  colonies,  and 
war  with  all  the  rest  of  the  world.  If  once  engaged  in  a 
war  with  America,  we  should  see  no  end  to  it.  The 
Americans,  he  hoped,  would  have  temper  to  wait  for 
better  times. 

Lord  G.  Germaine  said,  these  bills  had  been  called 
wicked ;  he  thought  them  necessary.  The  military  were 
subject  to  law  by  the  bill,  but  not  to  partial  trials.  Was 
there  a  single  magistrate  that  dared  to  act  in  that  country.? 
Where  were  the  Judges  ?  The  courts  of  justice  were  shut 
up,  and  the  Chief  Justice  retired  into  the  fort.  Supremacy 
must  be  maintained  upon  the  ground  of  taxation.     This 


1774]  MASSACHUSSETS   BAY   BILL  343 

claim  of  the  Americans  was  no  new  one.  Depart  from 
your  tax,  there  was  an  end  of  you.  Conway  had  said, 
Peace  with  your  colonies,  &c.  What !  peace  with  your 
colonies,  by  submission  ?  Would  that  peace  be  long  ? — 
Charles  Fox  said,  Lord  George  thought  repealing  the  tea- 
duty  would  be  giving  up  the  Constitution — was  the  tea- 
duty  part  of  the  Constitution  ? — the  most  absurd  point  of 
honour  that  ever  was !  If  taxation  was  intended,  their 
charters  must  be  annihilated,  and  could  only  be  maintained 
by  military  force. — The  Attorney-General  said,  he  would 
tax  them  to  make  them  pay  their  own  Judges  to  execute 
the  laws  of  Great  Britain. 

Edmund  Burke,  who  was  ill  heard  from  the  lateness  of 
the  hour,  produced  a  letter^  from  Lord  Hillsborough,  when 
Secretary  of  State  for  the  Colonies,  in  which  the  King  and 
Ministers  had  declared  they  did  not  mean  to  tax  America 
for  the  purposes  of  raising  a  revenue.  From  this,  he  said, 
they  could  not  depart,  and  this  argument  he  would  make 
his  shield  and  buckler. — Lord  North  denied  that  Burke 
had  stated  facts  fairly,  yet  waived  the  plea,  saying,  that 
when  the  proper  time  for  taxing  America  should  come  he 
did  not  know,  but  was  sure  this  was  not  a  proper  time  for 
repealing  a  tax. — Sir  George  Saville  again  protested 
against  the  violence  of  condemning  the  Americans  with- 
out hearing  them. 

On  the  /\th  Sir  William  Meredith,  affecting  not  to  have 
changed  his  principles  by  selling  himself,  renewed  his 
former  motion  for  reviewing  the  Thirty-nine  Articles.  Sir 
Roger  Newdigate,  too  obstinate  a  simpleton  to  change 
foolish  principles,  supported  the  Articles  as  usual.  Burke, 
with  much  wit,  ridiculed  Sir  W.  Meredith  and  his  apostacy ; 
but  defending  the  Articles  with  as  much  bigotry  as  Newdi- 
gate, whether  to  mark  the  reality  of  his  apostacy  from 
Rome,  or  being  so  little  a  convert  that  he  still  was  pre- 
judiced to  popish  tenets.     No  division  was  attempted. 

^  This  was  a  capital  ingredient  in  the  American  war. 


344       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

On  the  ^th  there  was  another  debate  and  slender  divi- 
sion on  the  Bostonian  Bills.     On  the  discussion  of  these 
Acts  the  doors  of  both  Houses  were  carefully  locked — a 
symptom  of  the  spirit  with  which  they  were  dictated. 
/      About  the  same  time  the  King  at  last  gave  a  govern- 
(      ment  to  Canada,^  as  indulgent  to  the  Roman  Catholics  as 
to  Royalty ;  and  as  Parliament  was  now  the  instrument  of 
despotism,  the  King,  who  might  have  imposed  the  new 
\      code  by  prerogative,  permitted  it  to  take  its  rise  in  the 
House  of   Lords.     An  hundred  thousand  Catholics  ^   in 
Canada  were  a  good  resource  for  the  Crown  against  the 
\    independence  affected  by  the  Protestant  colonies. 
'^      In  the  midst  of  this  triumphant  career  the  Court  was 
thunderstruck  with  an   account  of  Louis  XV.,  King  of 
France,  being  seized  with  the  smallpox.     His  resolution 
of  going  no  more  to  war  had  authorised  our  Ministers  to 
make  an  essay  of  the  Crown's  power  by  persecuting  the 
Americans.     A  new  King  in  France  was  as  likely  to  go  to 
war   with  us, — perhaps   to   encourage,  if  not   assist,  our 
colonies. 

On  the  6th  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumberland 
landed  at  Dover.  The  Pope  had  treated  them  with  the 
highest  distinction,  and  supplied  them  with  galleys  richly 
furnished  on  purpose  to  convey  them  from  Civita  Vecchia 
to  France. 

On  the  wth  the  Bostonian  Bill  was  agitated  in  the 
Lords.  Bolland,  the  agent,  petitioned  to  be  heard,  and  was 
rejected,  as  by  the  Commons,  on  a  division  of  57  to  20. 
The  Duke  of  Richmond  spoke  warmly  for  Boston  ;  said 
y  they  would  be  in  the  right  to  resist^  as  punished  unheard, 
and,  if  they  did  resist,  he  should  wish  them  success. — Lord 
Camden  spoke  out  too,  though  more  moderately,  saying 
he  loved  this  country  so  well  that,  though  in  the  wrong, 

^  Another  remarkable  event  in  the  American  quarrel. 

^  General  Gage,  who  commanded  the  troops  against  Boston,  was  son  of 
Lord  Gage,  who  had  turned  Protestant,  but  died  a  Catholic  in  1754. 


1774]  BOSTONIAN   AND   QUEBEC   BILLS  345 

he  should  wish  it  success.  He  then  more  warmly  attacked 
Lord  Mansfield,  whom  he  treated  as  author  of  the  bills  and 
of  all  the  present  measures, — Lord  Mansfield,  in  a  speech 
of  an  hour  and  a  half,  very  artful  but  very  timid,  returned 
no  attack,  but  purged  himself  of  the  bill,  which  he  pro- 
tested he  had  never  seen  till  printed — a  falsehood  too  gross 
and  incredible  for  any  art  to  palliate. — Lord  Sandwich 
and  Lord  Lyttelton  defended  the  bills,  and  the  latter,  as 
usual,  attempted  to  provoke  the  Duke  of  Richmond.  The 
House  sat  till  eleven,  when  the  bill  was  voted  by  about 
the  same  number  as  had  rejected  Bolland,  but,  to  colour 
the  violence  with  more  names,  proxies  were  produced. 
The  next  day  eleven  lords  protested. 

That  night  arrived  an  express  that  the  King  of  France 
was  at  the  extremity  on  the  8th  at  eleven  at  night.  The 
dismay  of  the  Court  here  was  notorious. 

Louis  XV.  died  at  three  in  the  afternoon,  May  loth, 
aged  sixty-four  years. 

Accounts  that  the  people  of  Boston  had  made  warm 
speeches  at  Liberty-tree  and  were  laying  in  provisions  of 
gunpowder.  They  did  not  then  know  of  the  proceedings 
going  on  against  them.  The  Ministers  here  were  so  ill- 
informed  in  all  they  were  doing  that  they  passed  the 
Quebec  Bill  in  the  Commons  with  so  material  a  blunder 
that  they  were  forced  to  add  16  clauses  to  correct  it.  Captain 
Phipps,  who  had  been  in  America,  asked  such  necessary 
questions,  which  the  Ministers  could  not  answer,  that  they 
stopped  the  debate  while  they  sent  about  the  town  to  get 
proper  information. 

The  Bostonian  and  Quebec  Bills  were  disputed  to  the 
last  by  the  small  minority  under  the  Duke  of  Richmond, 
rather  than  Lord  Rockingham,  who,  however,  spoke  well 
on  one  of  those  debates.  Lord  Gower,  Lord  Sandwich, 
and  Lord  Dartmouth  defended  them,  and  Lord  Mansfield 
till  the  last  reading  of  the  Quebec  Bill,  when,  with  his 
usual  poltroon ry,  he  absented  himself  on  Lord  Camden's 


346       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

having  described  him  as  the  real  Prime  Minister.  The 
Duke  of  Richmond  reproached  Lord  Dartmouth  with 
supporting  these  bills  after  having  been  one  of  the  protestors 
against  the  Starnp  Act.  The  Duke,  being  reproached  by 
Lord  Gower  for  dissenting  from  the  majority  and  venting 
his  opinions,  answered,  with  just  severity,  that  in  the  last 
rebellion  no  man  had  been  questioned  for  speculative 
prejudices,  though  they  might  have  had  one  foot  in  the 
stirrup  to  join  the  Pretender — the  case  of  Lord  Gower's 
father.  Lord  Hillsborough,  all  courtier  as  he  was,  op- 
posed the  Quebec  Bill,  and,  glancing  at  Lord  Dartmouth, 
said  it  must  have  been  the  work  of  a  child  in  politics. 
The  latter  answered,  that  was  the  objection  of  an  old 
dotard.  The  dissenting  Lords  protested  again.  At  the 
same  time  appeared  a  very  sensible  pamphlet,  called 
"  Considerations  on  the  Present  Measures,"  said  to  be 
written  by  Lord  Camden.     I  doubt  it. 

Amidst    the    horror    of    these    impolitic    proscriptions 

nothing  was  more  shocking  than  the  King's  laughing  and 

saying  at  his  levee  "  that  he  had  as  lief  fight  the  Bostonians 

^    as  the  Frenchr^    It  was  only  to  be  paralleled  by  James  IL 

sporting  on  Jefferies's  campaign  in  the  west. 

The  next  thing  remarkable  was  the  complaisance  of 
the  Bishops,  who  lent  themselves  to  those  cruel  bills  and 
(  made  no  objections  to  the  indulgences  shown  to  the 
Roman  Catholics  in  Quebec ! 

On  the  1 8///  Lord  North  opened  the  Budget,  and  was, 
as  usual,  ministerially  admired  and  spoke  with  much  wit. 
He  went  into  and  denied  Colonel  Barre's  prosperous  state 
of  the  finance  of  France,  and  then  lamented  the  late 
pacific  King  and  commended  the  new  economic  King, 
adding  that  it  would  be  very  unwise  in  us  to  provoke  an 

^  Whitehead,  the  poet-laureate,  in  the  Birthday  Ode  this  year  gave  the 
King  credit  for  higher  principles,  representing  him  as  a  prince  whose  sole 
object  was — 

"  To  guard,  and  not  invade,  the  world's  repose." 

D. 


1774]  LORD   CHATHAM  347 

economic  king — a  timidity,  however  prudent,  very  un- 
becoming the  dignity  of  a  British  Parliament !  His 
lamentation  was  so  dolorous  that  Burke  told  him  he  had 
thought  his  Lordship  was  going  to  move  an  address  of  con- 
dolence.  T.  Townshend  and  Burke  were  severe  on  the 
apostacy  of  Cornwall  and  Meredith,  and  on  an  additional 
pension  to  the  Deputy  Paymaster  of  500/.  a  year,  when 
the  poor  clerks  in  the  office  could  not  obtain  a  small 
addition.! 

I  have  said  that  Lord  Chatham  had  instigated  Lord 
Shelburne  and  Barre  to  oppose  the  American  bills.  He 
himself,  on  the  prospect  of  the  troubles  arising  in  the 
colonies,  had  removed  from  Somersetshire  to  Hayes,  still 
flattering  himself  that  the  Court  or  Opposition  or  the 
Americans  would  apply  to  him,  but  keeping  a  great  re- 
serve towards  Lord  Shelburne  and  declining  a  visit  from 
Lord  Camden,  who,  though  he  combated  some  parts  of 
the  American  bills,  accused  Lord  Mansfield  of  being  the 
artificer  of  all,  and  instigated  Dunning  and  everybody  he 
could  to  oppose  them,  was  so  provoked  by  Lord  Chat- 
ham's coldness  and  so  willing  to  be  Chancellor  again,  that 
on  one  of  those  debates  he  professed  himself  connected 
with  nobody — a  declaration  commonly  understood  to  mean 
that  the  person  who  makes  it  is  to  be  bought  single,  and 
will  insist  on  nobody's  being  promoted  but  himself  It 
did  not  look  much  as  if  the  Court  were  desirous  of  Lord 
Chatham's  services,  or  asked  them  ;  ^  and  for  the  Rocking- 
ham party,  they  had  a  meeting  in  which  they  determined 
to  take  no  notice  of  Lord  Chatham's  approach  to  town. 

^  There  were  at  this  time  on  the  pension-list  a  number  of  ex-royal  wet- 
nurses,  whose  pensions  amounted  to  1600/.  per  annum.  These  officials,  after 
the  expiration  of  their  period  of  service,  received  100/.  a  year,  if  they  had 
nursed  the  younger  children  of  the  Royal  Family.  The  retiring  pension  of 
a  nurse  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  or  the  Princess  Royal  amounted  to  400/.  a 
year. — D. 

'^  Lord  Caermarthen  said  in  the  House  of  Commons  that  he  heard  Lord 
Chatham  approved  of  the  Bostonian  bills,  which  Lord  Holderness's  son-in- 
law  would  not  have  said  had  there  been  any  treaty. 


348       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

This  neglect  made  him  at  first  have  recourse  to  his  old 
mummery  of  acting  the  gout ;  ^  and  though  his  presence 
was  often  threatened,  he  still  delayed  appearing.  At  last 
the  death  of  the  King  of  France  roused  him — perhaps 
alarmed  the  Court  enough  to  make  some  advances  to- 
wards him — and  other  circumstances  concurred  to  put 
him  in  motion.  Lord  Temple,  acting  the  same  dignified 
retirement  from  the  same  dereliction  by  all  mankind,  had, 
though  in  town,  not  gone  to  the  House  of  Lords.  He 
breathed  nothing  but  his  late  brother  George's  vengeance 
against  America — very  ineffectually,  for  he  had  no  in- 
fluence but  over  his  nephews.  Lord  Chatham's  former 
patronage  of  the  Americans  made  them  incompatible ; 
mutual  insignificance  and  equal  ambition  now  brought 
them  together  once  more.  Lady  Chatham,  Lord  Temple's 
sister,  had  gained  great  weight  over  her  husband  during 
his  long  recess  in  the  country.  She  was  a  blameless 
woman,  strongly  attached  to  her  husband,  and  who  could 
but  wish  to  recommend  her  children  to  her  brother,  who 
was  rich  and  childless.  She  and  Thomas  Pitt,  Lord 
Chatham's  nephew,  who  hated  his  uncle  and  had  as  cor- 
dially hated  Lord  Temple,  and  was  too  flimsy  a  speaker 
to  rise  again  by  his  own  weight,  though  he  did  not  want 
parts,  brought  about  a  reunion  of  two  chiefs  without  troops. 
The  champion  of  America  and  Lord  Temple,  the  repre- 
sentative of  its  persecutor  Grenville,  met  on  a  kind  of 
compromise  that  was  a  mere  juggle  of  words,  or  rather  of 
deliberate  falsehoods,  that  could  deceive  nobody.  This 
private  treaty  was  no  sooner  sealed  than  Lord  Lyttelton, 
the  nephew  and  cousin  of  the  two  allies,  went,  by  Lord 
Chatham's  order,  to  Lord  Gower  in  the  House  of  Lords, 
and  said  Lord  Chatham  desired  some  day  might  be  fixed 
for  a  debate  on  one  of  the  American   bills  ;  that  Lord 

^  His  eldest  son,  Lord  Viscount  Pitt,  had  just  commenced  his  unlucky 
military  career,  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  by  proceeding  to  Quebec  as  ensign  in 
the  47th  Foot.— D. 


1774]  LORD  CHATHAM  349 

Chatham,  who  agreed  on  many  points  with  Lord  Temple 
(that  was  with  the  Ministry  on  those  bills),  might  come 
and  give  his  attendance.  The  day,  as  may  be  believed, 
was  graciously  settled  for  the 

26th,  on  the  third  reading  of  the  Bill  for  Providing 
Quarters  for  the  Officers  and  Troops  in  North  America. 
The   two   languid    chiefs,  worn    out   in   constitution  and 
fame,  accordingly  made  their  appearance.     Lord  Temple 
spoke  with  animosity,  but  threw   in   two   palliatives   in 
compliment   to    Lord    Chatham,  neither  of  which   were 
fully  true,  and  which   I  shall  mention   presently.     Lord 
Chatham,  who    was    a   comedian,  even   to  his  dress,  to 
excuse  his  late  absence  by  visible  tokens  of  the  gout, 
had  his  legs  wrapped  in  black  velvet  boots,  and  as  if  in 
mourning  for  the  King  of  France  he  leaned  on  a  crutch\ 
covered    with   black   likewise.     He    made   a   long    feeble  \ 
harangue,  in  which  on  one  side  he  blamed  the  violence  of    \ 
the  Bostonians,  and  on  the  other  every  step  that  had  pro-     j 
voked  them  or  been  taken  to  chastise  them.     He  talked      \ 
high  for  the  sovereignty  of  this  country,  but  condemned 
the  taxes  :  the  result  of  all  which  he  meant  to  insinuate 
was  that  he  alone  could  assert  the  authority  of  England, 
and  compose  the  differences  in  America.     With  the  same 
intention  he  wandered  into  a  vague  detail  on  the  state  of 
Europe,  was  struck  with  the  death  of  the  French  monarch, 
and,  while  he  intimated  it  would   produce  a  war,  hoped 
that  he  alone  would  be  thought  fit  to  conduct  one.    Every- 
thing he  saw  deplorable,  if  not  desperate,  till  he  turned  his 
eyes  to  a  noble  Lord  who  reminded  him  of  the  glorious       \ 
state  into  which  his  Lordship  had  put  the  fleet.     This  was       \ 
true,  but  nobody  credited  the  sincerity  of  the  compliment.       J 
Lord  Sandwich  (the  person  alluded  to)  was  apt  to  ridicule 
Lord  Chatham's  rhapsodies,  and  had  done  so  in  the  House 
of  Lords.     He  was  remarkably  well  too  with  the  King, 
and  it  was  an  intimation  that  their  Lordships  would  not 
be  incompatible  should  Lord  Chatham  return  to  power.     | 

f 


350       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

It  was  at  least  to  deprecate  Sandwich's  opposing  his 
return.  Never  did  an  oration  make  less  sensation.  The 
generality  looked  on  it  as  a  poor  attempt  at  a  little 
popularity — as  the  Americans  were  now  unpopular — or 
perhaps  at  a  little  more  pension.  As  the  scope  was  a 
recommendation  of  himself,  he  pleased  nobody.  It  con- 
demned the  Ministers,  and  neither  flattered  the  Opposition 
nor  the  Americans. 

Lord  Camden  was  not  present.  The  Chancellor  had 
by  mistake  sent  him  word  that  the  debate  was  appointed 
for  the  27th,  instead  of  the  26th  ;  but  though  Lord  Camden 
knew  to  the  contrary,  as  the  occasion  was  very  public,  he 
was  so  offended  at  Lord  Chatham's  coldness  and  shuffling 
that  he  affected  to  believe  he  did  not  discover  the  Chan- 
cellor's mistake  till  it  was  too  late. 

Lord  Chatham  himself  explained  the  collusion  between 
him  and  Lord  Temple  to  my  cousin  Thomas  Walpole, 
who  was  much  connected  with  Lord  Camden,  and  made 
Lord  Chatham  a  visit  two  days  afterwards.  He  found 
him  in  bed  with  affected  fatigue  or  gout,  and  described  to 
me  the  masquerade  in  which  he  found  him,  and  which 
spoke  that  pride  and  madness  which  had  reigned  so 
strongly  in  his  last  administration.  He  was  sitting  up  in 
bed,  with  a  satin  eider-down  quilt  on  his  feet.  He  wore  a 
duffil  cloak,  without  arms,  bordered  with  a  broad  purple 
lace.  On  his  head  he  had  a  nightcap,  and  over  that  a  hat 
with  a  broad  brim  flapped  all  round.  It  was  difficult  not 
to  smile  at  a  figure  whose  meagre  jaws  and  uncouth  habili- 
ments recalled  Don  Quixote  when  he  received  the  Duenna 
to  an  audience  after  he  had  been  beaten  and  bruised,  and 
was  wrapped  up  in  serecloths.  Pretending  to  Walpole 
to  adhere  to  his  favourable  sentiments  towards  the 
Americans,  he  said  he  had  been  comforted  to  hear  Lord 
Temple  declare  that  he  had  never  positively  given  his  appro- 
bation to  the  Stamp  Act,  and  that  Lord  Temple  had  said 
too  in  the  House  of  Lords  that  Mr.  George  Grenville  had 


1774]  LORD   CHATHAM  351 

first  proposed  to  make  a  requisition  to  the  Americans. 
Both  were  fallacies  on  both  sides.  Lord  Temple  had 
dropped  these  declarations  as  a  seeming  approach  to  Lord 
Chatham,  they  were  nothing  but  words  settled  between 
them — a  shallow  contrivance  that  Lord  Chatham,  if  re- 
stored, might  pretend  to  begin  with  a  requisition  of  taxes 
to  save  their  credit,  and  then  to  tax  them  whether  they 
yielded  or  refused.  But  Lord  Temple  had  never  formally 
approved  the  Stamp  Act ;  but  had  he  not  embraced  all 
the  violences  of  his  brother  on  that  subject  ?  had  he  not 
joined  him  on  the  repeal?  did  he  not  vote  against  the 
repeal?  had  he  not  acted  ever  since — was  he  not  acting 
now — on  the  same  plan?  What  wretched  evasions,  and 
what  liars  are  politicians  ! 

T.  Walpole  questioned  Lord  Chatham  on  the  other 
point,  and  that  proved  as  hollow.  Mr.  Grenville,  he  could 
only  say,  had  talked  to  the  agents  of  the  colonies,  and  had 
asked  them  if  the  provinces  would  on  requisition  tax  them- 
selves? The  agents  replied  they  must  consult  their 
principals ;  but  Mr.  Grenville  had  gone  no  farther,  and 
had  passed  the  Stamp  Act  without  making  any  requisition. 
When  age  and  debility  can  stoop  to  such  subterfuges, 
what  excesses  are  blameable  in  youth  ?  How  should  the 
parts  and  passions  of  a  Charles  Fox  not  precipitate  him 
into  loss  of  character  when  the  dregs  of  ambition  can 
dictate  such  meanness  ? 

But  though  Lord  Chatham  was  in  general  not  hostile 
to  Administration,  the  Duke  of  Richmond  took  advantage 
of  one  part  of  his  disapprobation,  and,  dividing  the  House, 
drew  him  into  the  minority,  which,  I  think,  was  too  great 
a  compliment  to  him. 

At  the  end  of  the  month  a  ship  arrived  from  Boston, 
and,  it  was  said,  reported  that  the  Bostonians,  having 
received  advice  of  the  intended  severities,  meant  to  stand 
on  their  defence. 


[June 


JUNE 
2nd. 

A  BILL,  which  had  passed  the  Commons,  to 
relieve  booksellers  who  had  bought  property  in 
copies,  was  thrown  out  by  the  Lords  by  21  to 
II.  The  impudent  Sir  John  Dalrymple  had 
impudently  pleaded  at  the  bar  of  the  other  House  against 
the  booksellers,  and,  like  a  Star  Chamber  tool,  arraigned 
newspapers.  The  counsel  on  the  other  side  urged  his  not 
only  having  sold  his  book  for  2000/.,  but  produced  a  letter 
under  his  own  hand  in  which  he  had  pleaded  strongly  the 
cause  of  the  booksellers.  This  was  the  wretch  who  had 
traduced  Virtue  and  Algernon  Sidney. 

'i^rd.  The  City  of  London  presented  a  strong  petition 
against  the  Quebec  Bill,  but  it  was  only  ordered  to  lie  on 
the  table.  The  Opposition,  however,  prevailed  to  have 
witnesses  examined,  which  the  Lords  had  not  done ;  but 
though  great  evidence  appeared  of  the  bad  consequences 
the  bill  would  have,  the  tight  majority  overruled  all  con- 
viction. Dr.  Harriot,  Advocate-General  for  Quebec, 
though  he  had  given  his  opinion  against  the  bill,  evaded 
shamefully  giving  the  House  satisfaction.^  It  was  proposed 
to  examine  General  Murray,  who  was  present,  and  Lord 
North  consented  ;  but  the  General  stepping  out  of  the 
House,  Lord  North  would  not  let  him  be  sent  for. 
T.  Townshend  reproached  him  so  warmly  with  his 
shuffling,  that  Lord  North  fell  into  the  most  ridiculous 
passion,  for  which  he  was  severely  handled  by  Townshend, 
and  with  much  humour  by   Charles    Fox;    yet   the  ob- 

^   Vide  the  debate  in  the  "  London  Chronicle  "  of  June  4th. 
352 


1774]  QUEBEC   BILL  353 

sequious  majority  of  90  to  36  supported  Lord  North  even 
in  this  paltry  refusal. 

The  House  continued  to  sit  day  after  day,  and  till  late 
at  night,  on  the  same  bill,  every  step  of  which  was  hotly 
contested  and  some  points  were  altered. 

On  the  ph,  Lord  North  persisting  at  past  eleven  at 
night  to  go  on  with  the  bill,  Burke  made  an  angry  speech 
and  complaint  of  the  heat  and  fatigue,  and  left  the  House, 
followed  by  others  of  the  Opposition.  This  alarmed 
Lord  North,  and  he  suffered  the  House  to  break  up.  It 
was  time  to  grow  alarmed,  for  accounts  had  been  just 
received  that  New  York  had  taken  almost  as  warm  a  part 
as  Boston,  and  had  seized  and  sent  away  a  cargo  of  tea. 
The  example  of  so  great  and  potent  a  province  was  likely 
to  have  great  influence  on  the  other  colonies.  At  the 
same  time  came  advice  that  at  Philadelphia  they  had 
burnt  the  effigies  of  Alexander  Wedderburn,  Solicitor- 
General,  for  his  aspersing  Dr.  Franklin ;  and  of  Governor 
Hutchinson  for  his  evil  intentions. 

On  the  %th  the  bill  was  again  warmly  fought  and  the 
dangers  of  it  exposed,  as  well  as  the  objections  to  it 
detailed,  particularly  the  extension  of  the  limits  of  the 
province  so  as  to  involve  many  Protestants  under  a  Roman 
Catholic  jurisdiction.  Indeed  it  was  evident  that  the 
Court  was  preparing  a  Catholic  army  to  keep  the  colonies 
in  as  great  subjection  as  they  had  been  when  Canada  had 
been  in  the  hands  of  the  French.^  Much  was  said  too  on 
the  production  of  the  bill  so  late  in  the  session,  when  some 
years  had  been  taken  to  concoct  it.  Nobody,  strong  as 
the  ministers  were,  would,  however,  venture  to  own  himself 
the  parent ;  and  Lord  Mansfield,  who  nobody  doubted  was 
the  author,  disavowed  it.  Still  the  Opposition  could  carry 
no  point,  though  scarce  anybody  spoke  in  its  behalf,  but 

^  Choiseul  justified  the  surrender  of  Canada  to  England  on  this  strange 
ground,  that  the  colony  would,  by  being  a  constant  drain  on  and  an  increas- 
ing trouble  to  this  country,  be  the  ruin  of  the  latter  in  less  than  a  century. — D. 

I. — 2    A 


/ 


354       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

left  the  whole  burthen  on  Lord  North,  who  proposing  to 
adjourn  the  last  reading  to  the  loth,  because  Lord  Stanley- 
was  to  give  a  great  entertainment  on  the  9th,^  T.  Towns- 
hend  and  others  ridiculed  him  severely,  and  told  him  the 
Pretender's  birthday,  the  loth  of  June,  was  a  proper  festi- 
val for  finishing  a  bill  of  so  Stuart  a  complexion. 

It  was  fini-shed  on  the  \oth  and  sent  to  the  Lords,  who 
on  the  17^/^  completed  it.  Lord  Chatham  who  had  prob- 
ably expected  that  he  should  be  sent  for  to  Court  on  the 
tender  he  had  made  of  his  services  in  hi^  last  speech,  and 
was  cjisappointed,-  came  in  a  very  different  mood,  and  bit- 
terly arraigned  the  bill  in  every  ,part,  especially  on  the 
taking  away  of  juries  and  the  protection  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  religion.  He  said  the  bill  was  a  breach  of  the  Re- 
formatioHy  of  the  Revolution^  and  of  the  King's  Coronation 
Oath ;  and  he  put  it  home  to  those  scandalous  tools,  the 
Bishops,  who  had  denied  security  to  the  Presbyterians  on  a 
law  which  the  Church  owned  itself  ashamed  to  execute,  how 
they  could  countenance  so  gross  a  violation  of  the  Protes- 
tant religion.  But  what  availed  it  to  apostrophize  men  so 
hardened  to  shame  and  infamy !  Do  they  not,  if  a  Peer 
is  tried  for  murder,  excuse  themselves  from  voting,  as  they 
dare  not  meddle  in  cases  of  blood  ?  and  had  they  not 
boldly  voted  in  the  recent  instance  of  sending  an  army  to 
cut  the  throats  of  the  Bostonians  ?  Yet  a  few  had  shame, 
though  no  conscience.  The  Bishop  of  London,  Terrick, 
who  had  in  private  condemned  the  present  bill,  and  one 
or  two  more  Bishops,  did  withdraw  on  Lord  Chatham's 

^  The  entertainment  waa^given  at  the  Oaks,  near  Epsom,  in  honour  of 
Lord  Stanley's  intended  bride,  the  Lady  Betty  Hamilton,  only  daughter  of 
the  late  Duk6  of  Hamilton;  whose  Widow  was  then  Duchess  of  Argyle.  This 
splendid  and- fantastic  affair  was  con'ducted  by  General  Burgoyne,  who,  further 
to  celebrate  the  occasion,  composed  expressly  his  once  popular  piece,  the 
"  Maid  of  the'  Oaks."  It  was  in  this  piece  that  Mrs;  Abington  set  the  town 
mad  with  delight  by  her  inimitable  performance  of  Lady  Bab  Lardoon  ; — a 
character  which  subsequently,  was  vainly  attempted  by  Mrs.  Bulkeley, 
Mrs.  Pope,  and  Miss  Wallis, — and  in  which  even  Mrs.  Jordan  was  inferior  to 
the  sparkling,  rattling,  and  unapproachable  original. — D. 


1774]  CONDUCT   OF   THE    BISHOPS  355 

remonstrance.  Bishop  Shipley  ^  alone  voted  against  the 
bill,  and  had  the  courage  to  preach  and  publish  a  sermon 
against  using  violence  with  the  Americans ;  but  Terrick, 
after  thus  compromising  the  matter  between  God  and  the 
King,  pretended  to  excuse  himself  for  retiring,  by  saying  he 
was  to  have  company  to  dinner — an  excellent  excuse  for  a 
Bishop  when  the  interests  of  Protestantism  were  at  stake ; 
and  a  falsehood  too,  for  Bishop  North  was  to  dine  with 
him,  who,  Terrick  was  sure,  would  stay  out  the  debate 
and  vote  for  Popery ;  and  Terrick  was  too  well-bred  a 
courtier  to  go  to  dinner  without  the  Minister's  brother. 

Terrick  and  the  others  who  withdrew  were  too  good 
courtiers  and  too  bad  Christians  to  vote  against  the  bill. 
Dr.  Cornwallis,  the  Archbishop,  too  inoffensive  a  man  to 
give  such  scandal,  walked  out  to  vote  at  the  head  of  the 
majority,  and  was  followed  by  Bishop  North,  the  Minister's 
brother,  who  was  also  waiting  for  the  Archbishopric  of 
York — for  Dr.  Drummond  was  dying, — and  for  Canter- 
bury too,  when  he  saw  the  Bishop  of  London  retire. 
Lord  Chatham,  at  the  close  of  his  speech,  went  so  far  as 
to  say  that  the  mask  was  now  thrown  off,  and  arbitrary 
power  openly  aimed  at.  Lord  Lyttelton  answered  him, 
and  Lord  Dartmouth,  for  the  Court  had  gained  both  the 
most  profligate  and  the  most  pious.  Lord  Temple  was  out 
of  town.     The  Court,  notwithstanding,  had  been  able  to 

■^  Shipley,  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  was  at  this  time  sixty  years  of  age.  His 
hostility  against  those  who  were  for  taking  extreme  measures  against  the 
Americans  is  supposed  to  have  prevented  his  attaining  any  further  prefer- 
ment. His  daughter  married  Sir  William  Jones,  whose  harmless  little 
pamphlet,  "Dialogue  between  a  Gentleman  and  a  Farmer,"  brought  the 
Bishop's  son,  the  famous  Dean  of  St.  Asaph,  into  great  tribulation  in  1784. 
For  publishing  this  useful  tract  within  the  diocese  of  St.  Asaph,  the  Dean 
was  indicted  for  publishing  a  libel.  It  was  at  this  memorable  trial  that 
Erskine  made  his  glorious  stand  against  the  tyrannical  principle  that  a  jury 
was  not  competent  to  say  whether  the  alleged  publication  was  libellous  or 
not ;  the  only  office  of  that  body  being  to  pronounce  on  the  fact  of  publica- 
tion of  what  was  already  declared  to  be  a  libel.  Erskine  never  was  so  great 
as  when  he  first  fought  for  a  principle  which  he  ultimately  established,  and 
which  honourably  connected  his  name  with  the  then  popular  one  of  Shipley. 
— D. 


y 


356       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

muster  but  twenty-five  Lords  to  countenance  so  flagrant 
an  act.  The  opponents  were  but  seven,  at  the  head  of 
whom  was  the  Duke  of  Gloucester.  His  Royal  High- 
ness had  till  now  had  the  decency  never  to  vote  in  a 
direct  question  against  the  King.  It  was  judicious  in 
him  in  so  religious  a  cause  to  let  it  be  seen  that  at  least 
one  Prince  of  the  House  of  Hanover  had  the  Protestant 
cause  at  heart.^ 

Without  doors  the  bill  gave  much  offence,  yet  did 
not  make  half  the  noise  that  a  thousand  points  of  infi- 
nitely less  importance  used  to  make.  Many  things  con- 
curred to  this  indifference.  The  eyes  of  mankind  were 
much  opened,  and  there  was  much  less  credulity  both  in 
Papists  and  Protestants  than  in  the  last  century,  conse- 
quently their  animosity  was  less,  and  zeal  always  increases  or 
decreases  in  proportion  to  opposition.  The  only  zealous 
were  the  Methodists, and  their  teachers  were  either  favourers 
or  copyists  of  Popery.  Even  the  Duke  of  Richmond  had 
been  less  warm  against  this  bill  than  usual.  His  principle 
was  toleration,  and  even  to  serve  the  cause  of  his  country 
he  would  not  contradict  his  opinion.  But  the  capital 
reason  why  the  establishment  of  Popery  in  so  large  a 
portion  of  the  empire  made  no  more  noise  was  certainly 
this : — The  Clergy  of  the  Established  Church,  whose  duty 
it  was  to  oppose  it,  are  not  only  too  apt  to  connive  at 
Popery  when  countenanced  by  the  Crown  (as  they  did 
notoriously  in  the  reigns  of  James  L  and  Charles  L),  but 
were  now  interested  both  by  temporal  and  bigoted  reasons, 
which  are  always  weighty  with  priests,  to  wink  at  the 
encroachments  and  evil  designs  of  the  Court.  The  Presby- 
terians and  a  few  of  the  moderate  Clergy  were  striving  to 
have  the  penal  laws  against  the  former  mitigated,  and  the 

^  This  severe  article  appeared  in  the  "Public  Advertiser"  on  this 
occasion  : — *"Tis  said  that  a  great  personage  has  taken  an  additional  disgust 
at  another  great  personage's  dividing  with  the  minority  on  Friday  last.  This 
is  the  second  heinous  offence  the  latter  has  been  guilty  of :  the  first  committing 
matrimony,  and  now  professing  himself  a  Protestant." 


1774]  THE   CLERGY  357 

nonsensical  Thirty-nine  Articles  not  made  essential  to 
taking  orders.  Though  justice  and  common  sense  de- 
manded these  conscientious  alleviations,  the  higher  Clergy- 
could  not  bear  to  hear  of  them,  and  therefore  took  care  not 
to  offend  a  Court  that  favoured  Popery  rather  than  the 
Presbyterians  and  the  conscientious.  In  the  reign  of 
James  II.  the  English  Clergy  were  honester  men  in  all 
these  respects,  and  softened  towards  the  Dissenters  rather 
than  towards  the  Papists.  Perhaps  the  Presbyterians  were 
a  little  like  our  Clergy,  and  would  not  clamour  against 
Popery,  hoping  the  King  would  imitate  James  II.  in  favour 
to  Dissenters  as  well  as  to  Roman  Catholics.  For  the 
present  Bench  of  Bishops,  they  had  neither  piety  enough 
to  care  about  their  religion,  sense  enough  to  see  the 
danger  of  the  constitution,  nor  virtue  enough,  if  they  saw 
the  danger  of  both,  to  care  about  either.  *—— 

There  was  yet  another  reason  that  weighed  with  the 
Bishops  to  fall  in  with  the  views  of  the  Court.  They  had 
long  sighed  to  erect  bishoprics  in  America,  and  they  could 
not  doubt  but,  when  a  Popish  Bishop  was  tolerated  in 
Canada,  the  Crown,  if  predominant  in  that  continent  by 
the  sword,  would  establish  the  hierarchy  there.  Thus  the 
war  in  the  eyes  of  the  Clergy  became  a  religious  war 
against  Dissenters.  Vide  Mr.  Hollis's  Memoirs,  in  which 
it  appears  that  the  Archbishop,  who  had  been  bred  a 
Presbyterian  and  died  a  freethinker,  had  been  earnest  in 
the  scheme  of  planting  Episcopacy  in  America. 

The  indifference  manifested  towards  the  bill,  mentioned 
above,  is  not  the  worst  omen  of  what  may  be  attempted. 
What  may  not  be  attempted  when  in  one  bill  Parliament 
abrogates  juries  and  establishes  Popery!  James  II.  lost 
his  Crown  for  such  enormities :  the  Prince  that  wears  it  to 
the  prejudice  of  that  family  is  authorised  by  a  free  Parlia- 
ment to  do  what  James  was  expelled  for  doing !  A  Prince 
cried  up  like  Charles  I.  for  his  piety  is  as  favourable  to 
Papists  as  Charles  was ;  and  has  a  Bench  of  Bishops  as 


358       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

unjust  to  the  Presbyterians,  as  propitious  to  Papists,  as 
Charles  had.  And  George  IIL  has  an  army,  which  Charles 
had  not,  and  has  no  able  and  honest  men  to  oppose  him 
as  Charles  had.  He  has  too  a  Scotch  Chief  Justice  abler 
than  Laud,  though  not  so  intrepid  as  Lord  Stafford. 
Laud  and  Stafford  lost  their  heads — Lord  Mansfield  would 
not  lose  his,  for  he  would  die  of  fear  if  he  were  in  danger, 
of  which,  unfortunately,  there  is  no  prospect !  This  nation 
has  had  many  escapes :  Heaven  can  work  them  for  us 
when  there  is  no  prospect.  O  Liberty,  thou  first  of  bles- 
sings, may  Heaven  preserve  thee  in  this  almost  only 
country  in  which  thou  dost  exist !  Shall  a  Prince  whose 
family  was  brought  hither  to  defend  thee — shall  servile 
Peers,  venal  Members  of  Parliament,  and  Bishops,  who  in 
this  country  are  allowed  to  have  the  comfort  of  posterity, 
sacrifice  thee  and  their  posterity  for  titles  and  pay  that 
are  equally  a  reproach  to  them?  A  Prince  may  be 
punished  by  obtaining  his  own  object — Despotism  ;  for 
no  man  is  exposed  to  so  much  danger  as  an  absolute 
monarch.  The  slaves  who  lift  the  yoke  on  their  necks 
deserve  no  pity ;  but  the  innocent  unborn,  the  happy 
merchant  and '  husbandman,  deserve  compassion.  The 
thought  is  so  shocking,  the  prospect  so  gloomy,  I  am 
almost  tempted  to  burn  my  pen  and  discontinue  my 
Journal. — I  will  continue  it  in  hopes  of  better  days. 

The  City  of  London,  by  the  influence  of  the  Lord 
Mayor  and  Sheriffs,  who  were  governed  by  Wilkes,  voted 
a  strong  petition  to  the  King  not  to  pass  the  bill,  in  which 
they  taxed  him  plainly  with  a  breach  of  his  coronation 
oath  if  he  passed  it,  and  told  him  he  had  no  right  to  the 
Crown  but  as  Protector  of  the  Protestant  religion.  When 
they  arrived  at  Court,  the  Lord  Chamberlain  told  them 
that,  as  they  brought  a  petition  against  a  bill  that  had 
passed  both  Houses,  he  could  give  them  no  answer — and 
did  not.  The  King  went  immediately  to  the  House  of 
Lords,  as  it  was  the  last  day  of  the  session,  passed  the 


I774J  PETITION   AGAINST   QUEBEC   BILL  359 

bill,  and  prorogued  the  Parliament,^  but  only  to  the  4th 
of  August,  to  be  ready  against  bad  news  from  America. 
Those  that  were  actually  received  were  not  entirely  satis- 
factory :  though  General  Gage  had  been  quietly  received 
at  Boston,  the  inhabitants  had  assembled  in  Council,  and 
voted  to  invite  the  other  colonies  to  unite  with  them  in 
stopping  all  trade  with  England. 

The  Court  was  certainly  alarmed,  and  Lord  Mansfield 
very  much  so.  It  was  published  in  the  papers  that  the 
King,  who  had  received  General  Moyston  very  graciously, 
and  even  had  the  indecency  to  joke  with  him  at  the  levee 
on  his  trial,  had  now  read  the  trial,  and  was  so  much 
offended  at  Moyston's  conduct,  that  he  had  forbidden  the 
Attorney-General  to  plead  for  him  on  his  appeal  for  a 
new  trial.  Lord  Mansfield  too,  who  had  abolished  juries 
in  Quebec,  now  made  a  canting  panegyric  in  favour  of 
English  justice,  on  behalf  of  some  Armenian  merchants 
who  had  come  from  India  to  complain  of  Governor  Varelst. 
So  little  spirit  and  address  was  there  wanting  to  terrify 
the  Court  out  of  their  worst  designs  !  The  whole  colour 
of  the  reign,  and  glaring  in  the  conduct  of  both  the  King 
and  Lord  Mansfield,  was  a  mixture  of  despotism,  cowardice, 
and  hypocrisy. 

The  Anti-Court  party  in  the  City  had  intended  a  pro- 
cession to  affront  and  go  before  the  King  to  the  House, 
and  had  prepared  to  carry  figures  of  the  Pope  and  the 
Devil ;  but  the  Government  getting  wind  of  the  design,  it 
was  laid  aside.  The  mob,  however  was  very  abusive,  and 
some  persons,  dressed  at  least  like  gentlemen,  held  out 
their  fists  at  the  King,  and  cried  out  "  Remember  Charles 
I.!  Remember  James  II.!"  The  mob  also  cried  out, 
"  Long  live  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  ! "  The  King  was  so 
hurt  and  alarmed,  that  when  he  came  to  the  Lords  he 

^  This  was  on  June  22nd :  the  mob  were  very  clamorous  in  his  passage. 
**  His  Majesty  was  much  insulted  in  his  way  to  the  House  of  Peers  yesterday  ; 
the  cry  of  '  No  Popery  '  was  re-echoed  from  every  quarter,  and  the  noisy 
expressions  of  displeasure  were  greater  than  his  Majesty  ever  yet  heard." 


36o       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

trembled,  he  faltered,  and  could  scarcely  pronounce  his 
Speech. 

On  the  2/^th  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  was  delivered 
of  a  second  princess.^ 

The  flame  against  the  Quebec  Bill,  though  it  offended 
all  serious  men,  did  not  spread  ;  and  though  the  insults  it 
drew  on  the  King  had  been  so  open,  they  appeared  rather 
to  have  been  raised  by  Wilkes  than  by  general  odium,  to 
carry  the  election  of  Sheriffs,  which  came  on  immediately 
after  the  recess  of  Parliament.  Wilkes  set  up  two  obscure 
men,  Williams  and  Greive ;  and  to  excite  disaffection 
they  published  this  extraordinary  advertisement : — 

"  To  the  Worthy  Independent  Protestant  Livery  of  London. 
Gentlemen,  June  28. 

The   favour   of  your  Interest  and   Poll  is  most  earnestly 
requested  for       j^^^^^  Williams,  Esq., 

Citizen  and  Needle-maker,  and 
George  Greive,  Esq., 

Citizen  and  Frame-work-Knitter, 
to  be  Sheriffs  of  this  City  and  County  of  Middlesex,  for  the  year 
ensuing ;  they  being  gentlemen  most  firmly  attached  to  the  prin- 
ciples of  our  glorious  and  invaluable  Constitution,  and  determined 
enemies  of  the  Romish  religion^  as  now  by  King  and  Parliament 
established. 

The  numbers  at  the  close  of  the  poll  yesterday  were  : 

For  John  Williams,  Esq 198 

George  Greive,  Esq.  .         .         .         .197 

William  Plomer,  Esq 579 

John  Hart,  Esq 580 

The  poll  will  begin  this  day  at  nine  o'clock,  and  close  at  three. 

1^  The  friends  of  Mr.  Williams  and  Mr.  Greive  are  desired 
to  meet  this  morning  at  ten  o'clock  (and  every  morning  during 
the  poll)  at  the  Paul's  Head  Tavern,  Cateaton  Street,  in  order  to 
proceed  from  thence  in  a  body  to  Guildhall  to  poll  for  these 
gentlemen." 

^  Caroline.     This  princess  died  March  14th,  1775. — ^' 


1774]  ELECTION   OF   SHERIFFS  361 

The  Court  candidates  were,  however,  declared  ;  but  the 
Wilkites  demanded  a  poll,  but  were  so  much  outnumbered 
that  in  a  very  few  days  Williams  and  Greive  declined 
the  poll,  and  Aldermen  Plomer  and  Hart  were  declared 
sheriffs.  This  was  a  great  blow  to  Wilkes,^  and  showed 
how  much  he  was  fallen  ;  new  evidence  of  the  folly  of  the 
Opposition,  and  partly  the  consequence  of  Lord  Shel- 
burne's  treachery,  of  which  at  this  moment  he  probably 
repented,  though  his  friend  Alderman  Townshend  had 
embarked  so  deeply  against  Wilkes  that  he  joined  in 
supporting  the  Court  sheriffs.  Wilkes  had  set  up  these 
candidates,  that  Reynolds,  his  favourite  agent,  might  be 
undersheriff,  and  he  be  more  sure  of  the  returning  officer 
against  the  general  election. 

Accounts  from  Virginia  that  they  had  refused  to  join 
with  Boston  in  cutting  off  trade  with  us,  urging  that 
Boston  had  broken  the  former  agreement.  This  was  fore- 
seen here,  as  the  islands  could  not  subsist  without  trade. 
Governor  Gage  in  his  speech  at  Boston  hinted  that  the 
port  might  soon  be  restored  to  them. 

2(^th.  Died  Dr.  Pearce,  Bishop  of  Rochester.^ 

^  Crosby  and  Sir  Watkin  Lewes,  his  warm  friends,  betrayed  him  on  this 
occasion.     See  the  "  Public  Advertiser  "  of  July  14,  1774. 

^  Zachary  Pearce  was  the  son  of  a  distiller  in  Holborn,  where  he  was  born 
in  1690.  He  passed  with  credit  through  Westminster  School  and  Trinity 
College,  Cambridge,  and  had  the  good  luck  to  find  a  patron  in  Lord  Chan- 
cellor Macclesfield.  So  great  was  the  influence  of  the  latter  that  he  procured 
the  appointment  of  Pearce  to  the  rectory  of  St.  Bartholomew's,  London, 
after  Dr.  Claget  had  kissed  the  hand  of  George  L  on  the  same  appointment. 
In  1748  he  was,  to  his  great  regret,  created  Bishop  of  Bangor,  and  six  years 
later  was  raised,  against  his  will,  to  the  see  of  Rochester.  A  subsequent  offer 
to  elevate  him  to  the  see  of  London,  was  at  once  and  for  ever  declined  by  him. 
In  his  old  age,  this  commentator  on  Longinus,  Cicero,  and  Milton,  the 
opponent  of  Woolston,  and  the  upholder  of  Waterland,  in  vain  sought  for 
permission  to  withdraw  from  the  episcopate,  "lest"  (he  said)  "I  might 
chance  to  outlive  my  faculties,  and  the  church  suffer  by  my  infirmities."  He 
acquired  a  large  fortune  by  marrying  the  daughter  of  another  Holborn  dis- 
tiller ;  and  when  a  widower  and  childless,  he  bequeathed  munificently  to 
public  charity.  It  was  not  in  allusion  to  his  matter  but  to  his  manner  that 
Churchill  (who  managed,  when  flinging  mud  at  another  man,  to  kick  the 
Bishop  also)  said  : — 

"  In  lawn  he  whisper 'd  to  a  sleeping  crowd, 
As  dull  as  Rochester,  and  half  as  proud." 

The  Bishop  had  a  proper  sense  of  professional  and  also  of  self-dignity, — hence 
the  sarcasm  of  Churchill.  — D. 


[July 


JULY 


1st. 


DIED  Henry  Fox,  Lord  Holland.  He  expired 
easily,  quite  worn  out  in  mind  and  body. 
(Lord  Holland  left  everything  to  his  wife,  and 
400,000/.  of  public  money.  She  paid  all  the 
debts  of  her  two  eldest  sons  :  so  Stephen  remained 
possessed  of  10,000/.  a  year ;  Charles  with  a  place  of  600/. 
a  year,  an  estate  of  200/  and  10,000/.  in  money;  Henry, 
the  youngest,  had  20,000/.  and  900/.  a  year.  It  was  certain 
that  Lord  Holland  died  still  much  richer  than  he  had 
pretended,  but  how  much  was  not  known.  I  have  since 
doubted  of  Lord  Holland's  riches ;  at  least,  when  his  son 
Stephen  died,  it  was  but  a  moderate  estate  that  came  to 
the  grandson.) 

New  accounts  that  they  had  proclaimed  a  solemn  Fast 
in  Virginia  in  behalf  of  Boston  :  and  that  at  a  meeting 
in  Maryland  they  had  determined  an  association  against 
trading  with  England,  or  paying  their  debts  to  us.  Vide 
"Public  Advertiser"  of  July  5. 

Very  treasonable  papers,  abusing  the  King,  his  father's 
mother,  and  threatening  him  with  assassination  for  the 
Quebec  Bill,  were  affixed  at  St.  James's,  the  Mews,  and 
other  public  places,  and  on  all  or  most  of  the  churches  in 
London.^ 

^  This  epigram  was  printed  in  the  "  Public  Advertiser,"  July  29.  "One 
of  our  monarchs  (probably  «<?/  King  George  II.)  is  said  to  have  been  ex- 
ceedingly offended  on  finding  the  following  lines,  written  with  a  pencil,  in  one 
of  the  pavilions  of  Richmond  garden.  They  seem  intended  for  a  parody  of 
the  famous  epitaph  upon  King  Charles,  by  Wilmot,  Earl  of  Rochester  : — 
God  bless  our  bishop-making  King  ! 

But  send  us  soon  a  new  one, 
To  do  perchance  a  grievous  thing, 
And  sometimes  speak  a  true  one. 

— Merlin. 

362 


1774]  DEATH   OF   LADY   HOLLAND  363 

At  the  beginning  of  the  month  the  Duchess  of  King- 
ston returned  to  England,  on  advice  that  the  Meadowses, 
nephews  of  the  Duke,  had  got  proofs  of  her  former  mar- 
riage with  Captain  Hervey.  Her  lawyer,  however,  had 
written  to  warn  her  not  to  come,  as  he  found  they  thought 
of  prosecuting  her  for  bigamy.  She  arrived  at  ten  at 
night,  but  he  waited  for  her,  and  persuaded  her  to  de- 
camp, which  she  did  at  three  in  the  morning,  and  at  nine 
the  officers  of  justice,  as  it  was  said,  went  to  her  house  to 
seize  her. 

22nd.  Duke  of  Gloucester's  second  daughter  christened 
Caroline  Augusta  Maria;  the  Duchess  herself,  and  the 
Prince  and  Princess  of  Brunswick,  were  sponsors. 

2d^th.  Lady  Holland  died  of  an  internal  cancer  after 
many  months  of  dreadful  sufferings.  For  some  weeks  she 
had  taken  500  and  600  drops  of  laudanum  every  day.^ 

^  When  Lady  Georgina  Caroline  Lenox,  eldest  daughter  of  the  Duke  of 
Richmond,  married,  in  1744,  Henry  Fox  (afterwards  first  Lord  Holland),  a 
man  of  rather  humble  descent.  Lady  Georgina  was  great-granddaughter  of  a 
natural  son  of  Charles  H.,  by  Louise  de  Keroualle,  Duchess  of  Ports- 
mouth. Her  family  saw  with  ill-will  her  liking  for  Henry  Fox,  and  announced 
to  her  the  coming  of  another  wooer  ;  but  she  rendered  an  introduction  to  him 
impossible  by  previously  cutting  off  her  eyebrows.  Ere  they  had  grown  again 
she  had  married  Henry  Fox.  She  was  the  elder  sister  of  Lady  Sarah  Lenox, 
with  whom  George  HI.  was  in  love ;  and  who  subsequently  married 
Sir  Thomas  Bunbury,  and  afterwards  Colonel  Napier.  The  first  Lord  Holland 
died  in  his  70th  year.  His  widow  was  only  fifty-one  years  of  age.  They  had 
made  Holland  House  a  great  resort  of  Society,  and  it  became  the  Whig 
centre  in  the  time  of  their  grandson.  — A.  F.  S. 


[Aug. 


AUGUST 

THE  month  opened  with  very  unpromising  news 
from  America.  The  assembly  at  Boston  was 
very  firm,  and,  declaring  against  making  com- 
position for  the  teas,  was  dissolved  by  General 
Gage.  So  was  that  of  New  Hampshire  by  Governor 
Wentworth.  Several  towns  entered  into  a  solemn  league 
and  covenant  not  to  trade  with  Great  Britain,  unless  the 
majority  of  the  colonies  should  think  it  necessary.  General 
Gage  issued  a  proclamation  against  this  covenant,  declar- 
ing it  illegal  and  hostile.  At  New  York  they  burnt  the 
effigies  of  Lord  North,  Wedderburn,  and  Governor  Hut- 
chinson ;  but  what  was  more  to  their  purpose,  they  per- 
suaded 500  of  the  new  landed  soldiers  to  desert,  an  event 
that  had  been  foretold  here.  On  this  it  was  resolved  to 
send  over  more  regiments. 

I  must  interrupt  the  events  of  the  year  to  return  to  the 
affairs  of  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester.  They 
were  exceedingly  embarrassed  in  their  affairs  and  greatly  in 
debt.  On  the  27th  of  January  the  Duchess  sent  for  me, 
and  told  me  the  Duke  had  ordered  her  to  speak  to  me  on 
their  situation ;  that  he  intended  to  apply  to  Parliament ; 
but  she  expressed  herself  so  mysteriously  that  I  did  not 
clearly  understand  whether  his  Royal  Highness  proposed 
to  ask  for  a  settlement  on  her  or  for  an  additional  income 
for  himself — I  thought  the  latter,  and  spoke  only  on  that. 
She  added,  that  the  Duke  wished  I  would  prevail  on  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  to  move  it.  I  was  much  struck  with 
the  extreme  impropriety  of  so  ill-advised  a  measure,  that 
was  totally  hopeless  of  success,  and  that  only  could  tend  to 

364 


1774]       AFFAIRS   OF   DUKE   OF   GLOUCESTER         365 

widen  the  breach,  and  draw  a  parliamentary  approbation 
of  the  King's  rigour.  I  saw  it  would  draw  ruin  on  the 
Duchess  herself;  and  I  loved  the  Duke  of  Richmond  too 
well  to  embark  him  in  a  step  that  would  not  only  be  a 
personal  affront  to  the  King,  but  would  be  universally  con- 
demned, and  thence  become  universally  ridiculed.  I  told 
the  Duchess  I  would  certainly  obey  the  Duke  and  acquaint 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  but  that  I  must  beg  leave  to 
express  my  total  disapprobation  of  a  measure  that  I  saw 
would  prove  so  fatal  to  both  their  Royal  Highnesses.  I 
said,  I  had  always  and  would  always  dissuade  any  hostile 
steps  in  the  Duke  towards  his  Majesty  ;  and  that  in  the 
present  case  I  must  remonstrate  how  highly  improper  it 
would  be  to  apply  for  increase  of  income  to  Parliament, 
before  the  application  had  been  made  to  the  King;  and 
that,  in  one  word,  I  thought  the  Duke  ought,  previous  to 
all  other  conduct,  to  ask  his  Majesty's  pardon.  "The 
King,"  continued  I,  "is  not  only.  Madam,  his  Royal  High- 
ness's  King,  but  elder  brother,  and  I  advise  nothing  but 
what  I  would  practise.  I  would  not  submit  to  ask  pardon 
of  any  other  man  living,  but  of  my  brother  ;  and  j^ou  know. 
Madam,  that  I  have  asked  pardon  of  your  father,  when  he 
has  been  the  person  in  the  wrong,  only  because  he  is  my 
elder  brother.^  I  would  have  the  Duke  ask  the  King's 
pardon,  and  then  entreat  the  Bench  of  Bishops  to  be  media- 
tors, and  urge  to  his  Majesty's  piety  the  duties  of  forgive- 
ness and  reconciliation.  You  know.  Madam,  that  what  I 
say  is  not  from  affection  or  to  pay  my  court ;  but  when 
the  Duke  does  me  the  honour  to  consult  me,  I  must  and 
will  give  him  my  opinion  freely  and  honestly."  The 
Duchess  took  what  I  said  in  good  part,  but  did  not  seem 
to  think  the  Duke  would  take  my  advice.  At  night, 
having  well  considered  the  affair,  I  wrote  her  the  following 

1  Probably  after  a  dispute  between  the  brothers  in  1745,  as  to  the  repre- 
sentation of  the  Parhamentary  Borough  of  Castle  Rising  {v.  Horace  Walpole's 
Letters,  Toynbee  Edition,  II,  pp.  91-96).— A.  F.  S. 


366  ■    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Aug. 

letter,  in  hopes  that  it  would  open  the  Duke's  eyes  on  the 
imprudence  of  his  plan,  when  he  saw  how  very  strong  the 
arguments  were  against  it : — 

Madam, 

The  most  proper  mark  of  respect  that  I  can  show  to  the 
Duke  or  to  your  Royal  Highness  on  a  subject  of  such  momentous 
importance,  is  to  use  as  few  words  as  possible.  I  am  not  wise 
enough  to  advise,  much  less  to  decide  upon  it,  nor  do  I  know  a 
man  in  England  who  I  think  could  advise  the  Duke  upon  it  with 
good  effect.  All  I  can  do  is  to  suggest  what  comes  into  my  mind 
on  the  most  intent  thought  and  coolest  reflection ;  submitting  my 
sentiments  with  the  utmost  deference  to  his  Royal  Highness's 
judgment. 

No  man  living  has  a  higher  opinion  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond's 
unequalled  honour  and  integrity  than  I  have.  I  respect  his  spirit 
and  abilities,  and  am  as  sure  as  I  can  be  of  anything  that  he  is 
incapable  of  an  unworthy  action.  Still  I  should  not  recommend 
him  for  the  mover,  if  the  question  is  resolved  upon.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond^  is  particularly  unwelcome  to  his  Majesty ;  and  the 
measure  will  be  thought  the  more  hostile  if  proposed  by  his 
Grace. 

The  question  itself  seems  to  me  most  unlikely  of  success.  The 
Ministers  will  plead  that  when  the  King,  however  necessitous,  does 
not  ask  for  an  increase  of  income,  from  the  present  distressed 
situation  of  the  country,  it  cannot  be  reasonable  to  augment  the 
revenue  of  his  brothers.  An  increase  of  the  King's  own  revenue 
might  be  supposed  to  include  the  charge  of  his  own  children  ;  but 
an  addition  to  that  of  his  brothers  would  not  lessen  the  burthen 
of  his  own  issue.  And  it  would  infallibly  be  urged  that  so 
numerous  a  progeny  as  his  Majesty's  makes  it  imprudent  to 
establish  a  precedent  of  such  large  revenues  for  each  Prince  of 
the  Royal  Family. 

^  In  all  the  previously  printed  copies  of  this  letter,  instead  of  "the  Duke 

of  Richmond,"  we  have  "  the  Duke  of  K ,"  evidently  a  mistake  of  the 

printer,  for  R.  All  Walpole's  editors  have  overlooked  the  error,  although  the 
writer  of  the  letter  was  concluding  his  paragraph  with  reference  to  the  same 
man  and  the  same  matter  with  which  it  was  commenced. — D.  [It  is  printed 
"the  D.  of  R.  ''  in  Mrs.  Paget  Toynbee's  edition  of  Walpole's  Letters  (viii, 
p.  410)  issued  in  1904. — A.F.S.] 


1774]       AFFAIRS   OF   DUKE   OF   GLOUCESTER         367 

In  any  case,  so  great  is  the  power  of  the  Crown,  and  so  infamous 
the  servility  of  Parliament,  that  there  cannot  be  the  shadow  of  hope 
that  an  increase  could  be  obtained  for  the  two  Royal  Dukes 
against  the  King's  inclination. 

But  a  question  moved  and  lost,  as  undoubtedly  this  would  be, 
could  only  make  his  Royal  Highness's  case  worse,  if  possible,  than 
it  is  at  present.  His  Royal  Highness's  father,  though  Heir-apparent 
to  an  old  King,  could  not  obtain  an  increase  of  income,  when 
parties  ran  high,  and  were  almost  equally  divided.  His  Royal 
Highness  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  can  hold  out  neither  hopes 
nor  rewards ;  and  in  the  very  low  ebb  of  Opposition,  would 
obtain  scarce  any  support.  When  so  few  pay  common  respect 
by  waiting  on  him,  though  not  discountenanced  for  it,  would 
they  vote  for  him?    no,  not  all  that  now  pay  their  duty  to  him. 

The  question  moved  and  lost  would  change  the  state  of  the  case 
to  his  Royal  Highness's  disadvantage.  His  treatment  may  now  be 
thought  hard.  When  he  should  have  had  recourse  to  Opposition, 
which  a  parliamentary  application  would  be  called,  the  courtiers 
would  term  it  a  hostile  measure,  and  thus  claim  a  sanction  for 
their  servility,  by  affecting  to  support  offended  Majesty. 

The  King  himself  would  then  too  plead  that  he  only  acted  by 
the  opinion  of  ParHament,  who  did  not  think  it  reasonable  to 
increase  the  income  of  the  two  Princes.  And  the  most  moderate 
Ministers,  if  any  such  there  are,  who  may  have  wished  a  reconcilia- 
tion between  the  King  and  his  brothers,  will  then  oppose  it,  as 
concluding  that,  by  voting  against  them,  they  have  made  the  two 
Royal  Dukes  their  personal  enemies. 

Thus  every  door  to  a  reconciliation  in  the  Royal  Family  would 
be  shut,  and  no  advantage  gained.  On  the  contrary,  his  Royal 
Highness  would  only  let  the  world  know  how  few  friends  stand  by 
him.  When  so  few  even  of  the  Opposition  wait  on  him,  I  doubt 
whether  they  would  be  heartier  friends  to  his  interest. 

These  seem  to  me  insurmountable  difficulties.  It  is  still 
more  arduous  for  me  to  chalk  out  an  alternative. 

I  presumed  to  tell  your  Royal  Highness,  Madam,  when  you  first 
mentioned  this  great  point  to  me,  that  I  thought  the  first  step  in 
wisdom  to  be  taken  was  to  engage  the  favour  of  mankind  to  the 
Duke's  cause  by  showing  he  had  done  everything  rather  than  act 


368       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Aug. 

in  what  might  be  called  a  hostile  manner.  His  Royal  Highness 
will,  I  flatter  myself,  forgive  me,  if  I  use  even  an  improper  term. 
Will  it  be  too  free-spoken  in  so  important  a  moment  to  say,  that, 
previous  to  an  application  to  Parliament,  which  should  in  prudence 
be  the  last  resort,  it  would  recommend  even  that  application  if  the 
Duke  could  show  he  had  tried  every  method  of  softening  his 
Majesty's  displeasure?  Nobody  knows  so  well  as  his  Royal 
Highness  how  to  mix  dignity  with  propriety.  Could  not  his  Royal 
Highness,  Madam,  blend  those  two  in  a  representation  of  his 
youthful  error,  of  his  concern  for  having  afflicted  an  affectionate 
brother  and  King,  of  tenderness  for  a  wife  and  a  sweet  little 
innocent  Princess,  calling  on  his  Majesty's  piety  for  forgiveness, 
and  by  touching  his  heart  on  his  own  conjugal  and  parental  affec- 
tions; and  above  all  by  stating  his  own  anxious  cares  on  the 
incertitude  of  the  fate  of  persons  so  dear  to  him  as  your  Royal 
Highness  and  the  infant  Princess  his  daughter  !  These,  Madam, 
are  noble  motives,  and  would  justify  a  tender  and  fraternal  appli- 
cation to  his  Majesty's  heart,  and  would  distress  it  far  differently 
from  a  question  in  Parliament.  They  would  engage  the  com- 
passion of  the  disinterested  world ;  and  in  the  last  resort  would 
corroborate  in  the  strongest  manner  all  arguments  in  Parliament, 
where  it  would  certainly  be  asked  if  his  Royal  Highness  had  used 
any  intercession  with  the  King  his  brother.  When  the  Duke  had 
tried  all  other  methods  in  vain,  such  application  would  not  be 
condemned  :  and  the  preference  of  all  softer  methods  first  would 
redound  to  his  Royal  Highness's  honour. 

Having  said  this  much.  Madam,  I  think  my  conscience  and  duty 
oblige  me  to  add,  that  I  think  it  indispensably  incumbent  on 
those  who  have  the  honour  to  be  related  to  your  Royal  Highness 
to  give  you  no  advice  but  such  as  may  tend  to  repair  the  breaches 
which  the  Duke's  tenderness  for  you  has  occasioned  in  the  Royal 
Family.  The  good  of  his  Royal  Highness  calls  on  you  and  on 
us  to  consult  his  welfare  in  the  first  instance.  You  have  always 
told  me  how  desirous  you  are  of  sacrificing  yourself  for  him.  I 
know  the  uprightness  of  your  heart,  Madam,  and  I  know  you 
spoke  truth.  Advise  him  to  whatever  is  most  for  his  benefit  and 
credit.  Do  your  duty  by  him,  and  trust  to  a  just  God  for 
reward.     In  the  presence  of  that  God  I  have  given  you  the  best 


1774]       AFFAIRS   OF   DUKE   OF   GLOUCESTER         369 

advice  in  my  power.  I  am  sure  I  have  not  displeased  you  by  my 
freedom :  I  hope  I  have  not  offended  his  Royal  Highness ;  but 
I  declare  on  my  conscience  and  honour  that  I  know  not  what 
better  advice  to  give,  and  I  sign  it  with  my  name,  as  the  firm 
opinion  of  Madam, 

Your  Royal  Highness's  most  faithful 
and  devoted  humble  servant 

January  27th,  1774.  HORACE  WaLPOLE. 

To  this  letter  I  received  no  answ^er.  The  next  time  I 
saw  the  Duchess  she  told  me  she  had  given  the  Duke  the 
letter,  who  said  I  had  mistaken  the  affair,  and  he  would 
explain  it  to  me.  This  intimated  that  he  meant  to  ask  a 
provision  for  her  and  the  child,  rather  than  for  himself — 
yet  my  arguments  were  equally  good  against  both ;  and 
though  the  Duke  never  said  a  word  to  me  on  the  business 
more,  it  was  plain  he  thought  so  too,  for  he  laid  aside  his 
design.  I  believe,  however,  that  he  did  not  like  my  free- 
dom, though  for  some  time  he  treated  me  with  more  regard. 
I  showed  the  letter  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  who  entirely 
agreed  with  my  sentiments,  and  had  no  mind  to  be  made 
the  instrument,  for  he  knew  even  his  own  friends.  Lord 
Rockingham  and  the  Cavendishes,  would  not  have  sup- 
ported him  in  the  motion,  which  would  have  left  him  single 
in  a  wrongheaded  measure,  though  he  said  he  would  obey 
if  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  insisted  on  it.  But  the  latter 
did  not  attempt  it  farther,  knowing  he  was  not  likely  to 
persuade  the  Duke  of  Richmond  against  my  opinion.  I 
had  wished  his  Royal  Highness  would  write  such  a  letter 
to  the  King  as  I  had  suggested ;  but  he  was  too  haughty  to 
stoop.  Still  he  did  not  drop  the  plan  of  a  provision  for  the 
Duchess  and  her  children,  and  in  the  beginning  of  May, 
desiring  Lord  Rochford  to  notify  to  the  King  that  the 
Duchess  expected  to  be  brought  to  bed  in  less  than  two 
months,  he  added  his  request  that  a  provision  might  be 
made  for  her  and  his  children  ;  adding,  that  he  did  not 
desire  an  immediate  answer.  Accordingly  he  received 
I.— 2  B 


370       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Aug. 

none  in  a  week,  and  then  a  very  cold  and  evasive  message. 
"  Then,"  said  the  Duke  angrily,  "  I  must  take  care  of  my- 
self." Lord  Rochford  replied,  "  Your  Royal  Highness  did 
not  go  so  far  as  this  last  year."  *'  No,"  said  the  Duke, 
"  I  had  a  mind  to  save  the  King's  credit,  but,  seeing  he 
does  not,  I  must."  Lord  Rochford,  in  a  fright,  said  he 
hoped  his  Royal  Highness  would  not  apply  to  Parliament. 
"  No,"  said  the  Duke,  "  I  am  not  going  directly  to  Parlia^ 
ment,  but  I  will  see  what  friends  I  have."  Even  this 
threat  terrified,  and  the  next  time  they  met  in  the  House  of 
Lords  Lord  Rochford  told  the  Duke  he  had  been  in  such 
distress  the  last  time  he  spoke  to  his  Royal  Highness,  that 
he  had  forgot  half  his  message,  and  that  the  King  had 
ordered  him  to  say  he  had  not  yet  thought  of  his  own 
children.  On  this  opening,  the  Duke  sent  for  Lord  Roch- 
ford to  his  own  palace,  and  said,  he  did  not  put  his  children 
on  a  foot  with  the  King's,  they  would  certainly  be  taken 
care  of.  "So  will  your  Royal  Highness's,"  interrupted 
Lord  Rochford.  "  Yes,"  said  the  Duke,  "  very  shabbily  ; 
but  tell  the  King  I  ask  it."  Lord  Rochford  returned  with 
answer,  that  the  King  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  thei?t. 
The  Duke,  justly  provoked  at  so  brutal  an  answer,  replied 
with  spirit,  "  This  is  manly — but  I  will  try  what  I  can  do, 
though  I  know  it  will  not  succeed."  Lord  Rochford,  who 
again  executed  but  half  his  message,  had  been  commis- 
sioned, after  bullying,  to  pacify  with  hopes,  possibly  to  de- 
ceive with  hopes  not  meant  to  be  realized.  He  added  then, 
that  he  had  spoken  to  Lord  North  of  himself;  and  that  the 
latter  had  told  him  the  King  could  go  on  no  longer  himself 
without  money,  and  whenever  he  asked  it  for  himself  he 
could  not  avoid  mentioning  his  brothers ;  and  that  he  (Lord 
North)  looked  on  the  Duke's  children  as  children  of  the 
Crown,  and  that  they  must  be  provided  for.  This  was 
exactly  the  spirit  of  the  Court,  to  do  injustice  and  endeavour 
to  soften  it  with  declarations  and  promises. 

At  this  very  time  the  Duke  tasted  of  the  King's  deter- 


1774]       AFFAIRS    OF   DUKE   OF   GLOUCESTER         371 

mination  to  persecute  him  when  he  dared.  Sir  W.  Meredith, 
one  of  the  Duke's  particular  friends,  probably  to  debauch 
him  from  the  Duke  as  well  as  from  patriotism,  had  been 
enrolled  in  the  Court  with  a  white  stick.  He  was  to  have 
been  a  Commissioner  of  the  Treasury ;  but  as  George 
Onslow,  one  of  that  board,  had  been  suffered  to  go  to 
Gloucester  House,  they  could  not  prohibit  Sir  W.  Mere- 
dith, if  in  the  same  station,  and  therefore  they  made  him 
Comptroller,  and  then  forbade  him,  as  a  domestic  servant 
of  the  King,  to  go  to  the  Duke.  Some  said  Sir  William 
officiously  asked  whether  he  might  go  thither,  and  was 
told  not.  He  himself  said  he  received  orders  from  Lord 
Rochford  ;  however,  he  still  professed  strong  attachment 
to  the  Duke,  and  took  all  opportunities  of  speaking  to  the 
Duke  in  public ;  but  if  he  had  had  that  attachment,  he 
would  not  have  deserted  him  at  all.  Poor  George  Onslow 
made  a  still  worse  figure.  On  hearing  of  Sir  William's 
prohibition,  he,  though  connived  at,  took  panic,  and  sent 
the  Duke  an  excuse  for  waiting  on  him  no  more.  When 
interest  and  servility  were  so  gross,  was  I  in  the  wrong  to 
counsel  the  Duke  not  to  hope  anything  from  Parliament, 
where  dirt  was  most  glaring  ? 

General  George  Howard  and  John  Blaquiere,  Secretary 
of  the  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  were  created  Knights 
of  the  Bath.  Neither  were  men  of  any  parts.  The  latter 
had  exercised  a  successful  ministry,  being  the  acting  agent 
for  dispensing  the  sums  which  were  requisite  to  regain  the 
willing  proselytes  whom  Lord  Townshend's  absurdities 
had  unwillingly  driven  into  Opposition.  Ireland  was  once 
more  tranquillized,  but  grew  a  heavy  burthen  on  the 
Government,  for  it  is  impossible  to  corrupt  men  and  keep 
them  moderate.  When  all  men  took  money  it  was  not 
easy  to  find  money  enough.  If  that  fails,  recourse  must 
be  had  to  the  army,  and  the  King,  Lord  Mansfield,  and 
the  Scotch,  seem  to  be  preparing  against  that  necessity. 
The  experiment  is  begun  in  America. 


372       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Aug. 

The  accounts  from  America  continued  unfavourable. 
The  Bostonians,  on  being  threatened,  grew  more  zealous 
to  take  the  solemn  League  and  Covenant;  and  the  spirit 
of  breaking  off  commerce  with  England  seemed  to  spread 
in  the  other  colonies.  General  Gage  in  his  private  letters 
encouraged  the  Ministers  to  be  firm,  and  that,  if  they 
would  be  so,  they  would  prevail. 

\^th.  Advice  came  of  peace  being  concluded  between 
the  Russians  and  Turks.  It  was  said  to  be  occasioned 
by  the  whole  Turkish  army,  consisting  of  140,000  men, 
refusing  to  fight.^ 

2^th.  Died  Thomas,  the  new  Lord  Lyttelton,  who  had 
surprised  the  world  with  the  badness  of  his  heart,  and 
with  the  dazzling  facility  of  his  eloquence ;  and  who  had 
not  had  time  to  show  whether  his  parts  were  sound  and 
deep,  nor  whether  the  reformation  he  had  but  partially 
affected  since  his  father's  death  was  sincere,  or  only  the 
momentary  effort  of  very  marked  ambition.  Nothing  had 
given  it  the  colours  of  shame.  The  Bishops,  whose  pros- 
titution he  had  defended,  would  no  doubt  have  given  him 
absolution.^ 

^  This  was  not  the  case.  Suwarrow  defeated  the  Turks,  25,000  strong,  in 
fair  fight  at  Kozlidje,  and  the  Russians  then  advanced  upon  Shumla,  where 
the  8000  men  under  the  Grand  Vizier  were  in  a  state  of  disorganization.  The 
peace  which  followed,  as  eagerly  desired  by  the  Russians  as  the  Turks,  gave 
renown  to  the  famous  treaty  of  Kainardji.  The  Turks  had  commenced  the 
war  in  order  to  assist  Poland  ;  but  in  the  treaty  the  Poles  were  not  once  men- 
tioned. By  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  Russia  acquired  great  extent  of  territory, 
and  ample  opportunity,  whenever  it  suited  her,  to  embroil  Turkey  by  ques- 
tioning the  interpretation  of  clauses  left  purposely  obscure.  This  character- 
istic shuffling  did  not  altogether  succeed.  It  led  to  those  future  felonious 
acts  on  the  part  of  the  Czar  which  were  chastised  by  the  Turkish  triumph 
over  the  Muscovites  at  Oltenitza,  by  the  disgraceful  repulse  suffered  at  Silis- 
tria,  by  the  humiliation  at  Eupatoria,  by  the  destruction  of  Sebastopol,  and 
by  the  premature  death  of  Nicholas,  whose  heart  broke,  before  all  the  disas- 
ters enumerated  had  descended  on  his  head. — D. 

^  There  was  no  truth  in  the  report  of  Lord  Lyttelton  being  dead ;  nor  was 
it  a  mere  accidental  rumour,  but  a  falsehood  propagated  by  himself.  He  had 
made  his  own  steward  send  the  news,  in  the  name  of  his  sister  Lady  Valentia, 
to  his  first  cousin  and  intimate  friend,  Captain  Ayscough,  with  an  account  of 
his  will  and  of  a  large  legacy  to  that  cousin.  This  he  afterwards  pretended 
to  have  done  to  try  his  cousin's  affection.     [He  died  in  1779. — D.] 


1774]  RELATIONS   WITH   FRANCE  373 

Great  variance  between  the  Emperor  and  the  King 
as  Elector  of  Hanover,  on  the  latter  siding  with  the  King 
of  Prussia,  and  traversing  him,  as  the  Emperor  said,  in 
Germany. 

Lord  Mansfield  went  to  Paris  on  a  visit,  as  he  pre- 
tended, to  his  nephew  Lord  Stormont,  our  ambassador 
there,  probably  to  endeavour  a  nearer  alliance  with  France 
in  our  present  situation,  the  difficulties  in  the  colonies  in- 
creasing, and  the  power  of  the  Emperor  with  his  sister 
the  Queen  of  France  threatening  us.  Such  kings  and 
such  ministers  as  ours  were  apt  to  court  France  when 
they  meditated  subversion  of  the  Constitution  at  home. 
Lord  Mansfield  might  wish  to  fathom  the  new  views  of 
the  French  Court,  having  lost  there  a  congenial  subverter 
of  the  government  of  a  country.  Lord  Mansfield  cer- 
tainly set  out  very  privately,  and  tried  both  at  Dover  and 
Calais  to  pass  by  the  name  of  Dr.  Murray,  but  so  many 
persons  knew  him  that  he  found  it  impossible.  I  mention 
it  only  as  a  conjecture ;  but  who  can  doubt  but  Lord 
Mansfield  went  to  endeavour  to  persuade  the  French 
Court  not  to  interfere  in  our  differences  with  America? 
to  procure  which  he  might  promise  all  submission  on  our 
part  to  other  views  of  France.  It  was  the  very  conduct 
which  Charles  II.  and  James  II.  had  held.  That  very 
embassy  of  Lord  Mansfield  might  confirm  France  in  her 
design  of  supporting  the  Americans,  as  the  more  we  feared 
it  the  more  we  should  hear  of  it. 

It  is  now  time  to  say  a  few  words  of  the  new  French 
monarch  Louis  XVI. ;  but  this  must  be  deferred  to  the 
end  of  the  year,  for  at  the  latter  end  of  September  an 
extraordinary  step  was  taken,  which  will  very  properly 
serve  as  an  introduction  to  a  new  period.  The  share  I 
took  in  the  consequences,  and  the  characters  of  some  of 
the  actors,  will  not  only  not  be  foreign  to  the  matter,  but 
illustrate  it. 


[Sept. 


SEPTEMBER 

I  WAS  at  Strawberry  Hill,  almost  desponding  of  the 
liberty  of  this  country,  from  the  abandoned  pro- 
fligacy and  indifference  of  every  higher  order  of  men, 
and  from  the  great  stride  which  the  Court,  grown 
presumptuous  on  such  passive  obedience,  had  lately  taken. 
-^  I  saw  no  chance  of  a  free  spirit  arising,  unless  in  America, 
and  the  accounts  thence  did  not  make  me  sanguine.  The 
colonies  had  appointed  a  general  meeting  on  the  3rd  of 
this  month,  to  consider  of  measures  that  might  oblige  this 
country  to  revoke  its  arbitrary  and  penal  laws  against 
Boston ;  but  there  seemed  more  caution,  diffidence,  and 
irresolution  in  their  councils  than  warm  patriotism  ;  and 
it  was  much  to  be  apprehended  that  Scotch  governors, 
interested  merchants,  and  local  necessities  would  defeat 
unanimity.  They  professed  great  loyalty,  which  might 
be  equivocal,  and  copied  from  the  Parliament  of  1641,  for 
indeed  many  of  the  colonists  were  Puritans  and  re- 
publicans ;  but  the  Government  here  affected  to  publish 
assurances  that  they  would  submit,  denied  the  desertion 
of  the  troops,^  did  send  no  reinforcements,  and  asserted 
that  the  American  merchants  were  providing  themselves 
with  such  quantities  of  English  commodities,  to  supply 
themselves  during  the  contingent  non-importation,  that 
this   country  would    be   little   affected   by   it   from    such 

^  Soldiers  are  always  tempted  to  desert,  but  do  seldom  in  England, 
because  it  is  an  island,  and  they  cannot  easily  escape  to  any  other  protection. 
The  wide  continent  of  America  was  more,  nay  quite,  secure  for  deserters  ; 
and  as  the  colonies  would  naturally  tempt  them  with  the  offer  of  settlements, 
it  could  scarce  be  doubted  but  they  would  prefer  such  emoluments  to  fighting 
against  their  countrymen. 

374 


^P^J 


1774]  INTENDED   DISSOLUTION  375 

anticipation.  They  also  hardily  maintained  that  all  the 
unfavourable  accounts  in  the  public  papers  were  coined 
here  by  Dr.  Franklin ^  or  Wilkes.  With  so  little  hopes, 
and  amidst  such  carelessness  in  the  public,  I  determined 
to  remain  quiet  in  the  country,  awaiting  the  issue  of  this 
contest,  but  ready  to  give  any  assistance  in  my  power  if 
a  dawn  of  spirit  should  appear.  I  should  mention  that, 
when  I  broke  off  almost  all  my  political  connections, 
I  had  still  had  the  precaution  to  keep  up  a  very  sure  and 
excellent  channel  of  intelligence.  It  was  from  that  source 
that,  in  the  midst  of  this  political  slumber,  I  received 
certain  information,  on  the 

27//^,  that  the  Parliament  was  to  be  suddenly  dissolved 
in  four  days,  viz.  on  October  1st,  and  the  new  writs 
immediately  issued — a  step  indeed  hardly  premature,  for 
interest  was  openly  making  in  all  parts,  even  in  Scotland, 
though  from  interested  not  party  motives  there.  My 
father.  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  had  been  advised  by  Bishop 
Sherlock,  after  his  triumphant  defeat  of  the  motion  for 
removing  him  in  1740,  to  take  advantage  of  his  popularity 
and  choose  a  new  Parliament  a  year  before  the  term ;  but 
he,  too  brave,  and  too  secure,  and  averse  to  measures  of 
authority,  slighted  the  advice,  and  fell  by  not  taking  it. 
Mr.  Pelham,  much  more  timid,  but  really  more  secure  by 
the  quietness  of  the  times,  imitated  the  advice  afterwards 
to  disappoint  Frederick  Prince  of  Wales,  and  succeeded. 
The  Marquis  of  Rockingham  was  likewise  advised  in  1766 
to  take  the  same  step,  in  order  to  remove  Lord  Bute's 
creatures,  and  secure  a  strong  party  in  a  new  Parliament, 
even  in  case  he  himself  should  soon  be  removed.  But 
Lord  Rockingham,  and  that  Administration,  would  do 
nothing  that  had  even  the  air  of  being  irregular,  and  lost 

^  Dr.  Franklin  after  his  disgrace  remained  in  England,  giving  out  that  it 
was  to  prove  that  he  did  not  go  to  America  to  inflame  the  contention,  and  he 
even  talked  of  going  to  Italy,  but  did  stay  here  ;  the  Ministry  asserted  it  was 
to  spread  the  flame  here,  depending  on  the  colonies  and  his  friends  there  foy 
keeping  up  the  spirit. 


376      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Sept. 

the  moment  of  securing  a  set  of  men  in  Parliament  who 
would  be  true  to  the  constitution.  Unhappy  delicacy  !  I 
knew  that  Lord  Mansfield  this  very  spring  had  repeated 
the  same  advice  to  the  King;  but  Lord  North,  really  I 
believe  from  having  no  bad  intentions,  and  from  his  indo- 
lence, which  prompted  him  to  keep  off  so  much  trouble, 
resisted,  and  prevented  the  dissolution  then.  I  knew  too 
that  Lord  Gower  had  lately  renewed  the  advice  to  dissolve 
to  Lord  Suffolk,!  and  he  to  the  King ;  and  since  that,  I 
had  made  observation  that  at  the  last  prorogation  of  the 
Parliament  no  mention  had  been  made  as  usual,  when 
adjourned  to  November,  that  it  was  then  to  sit  for  busi- 
ness. I  did  not  doubt  my  intelligence,  and  these  I  guessed 
were  the  reasons: — ist.  Very  arbitrary  measures  to  be 
taken  against  America.  2nd.  The  pressing  cry  of  the 
King's  debts,  and  his  eagerness  for  an  addition  to  his 
revenue,  which  could  not  with  a  shadow  of  decency  be 
proposed  in  the  last  and  shortest  session  of  a  Parliament, 
and  when  most  of  the  members  must  be  absent  in  securing 
their  re-elections.  3rd.  A  probability  of  a  war  with  France, 
Spain,  or  the  Emperor,  during  which  it  was  never  safe  to 
have  the  nation  distracted  with  the  disturbances,  drunken- 
ness, and  thoughtlessness  of  a  general  election.  The  King 
of  Spain,  from  the  time  we  had  bullied  him  when  King  of 
Naples,^   and   from   his   ill-success  in  the  late  war,  had 


^  Lord  North,  who  was  averse  to  the  demand  of  an  additional  royal 
revenue,  and  only  retained  his  post  till  some  of  the  great  Exchequer  places 
should  fall,  and  he  could  secure  them  for  his  children,  might  wish  to  protract 
the  approach  of  a  new  Parliament,  when  he  must  make  the  demand  ;  and  if 
he  should  be  so  fortunate  to  secure  one  of  those  places,  he  might  quit  the 
Administration  without  the  odium  of  having  increased  the  revenue.  I  knew, 
too,  that  Lord  Gower  was  ambitious  of  being  First  Minister  himself,  and  the 
rest  of  the  Bedfords  were  jealous  of  Lord  North.  By  giving  this  advice  Lord 
Gower  pleased  the  King  and  Lord  Mansfield,  the  real  Prime  Minister ;  and 
should  it  miscarry,  Lord  North  would  be  the  victim. 

'^  Of  the  two  sons  of  Philip  of  Anjou  who,  after  the  War  of  Succession, 
was  acknowledged  in  171 3,  by  all  the  powers  of  Europe,  as  King  of  Spain, 
the  elder,  Ferdinand  VL,  succeeded  him  in  that  title  at  Philip's  death.  In 
the  last-named  year,  that  of  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht,  Spain  surrendered  Sicily 
to  Victor  Amadeus,  Duke  of  Savoy,     Seven  years  later  the  Duke  gave  up 


1774]  REASONS   FOR   THE   DISSOLUTION  377 

retained  an  invincible  aversion  to  England.  He  was  now 
meditating  an  invasion  of  Portugal,  and  probably  of  us, 
if  we  should  support  Portugal.  He  had  lately  called  on 
the  new  King  of  France  for  support,  agreeably  to  the 
Family  Compact.  France  had  answered  coolly,  though  not 
refusing.  As  for  the  Emperor,  he  was  very  angry  at  this 
time  with  the  King  as  Elector  of  Hanover.  4th.  I 
apprehended  that  Lord  Mansfield  might  be  gone  to  Paris 
to  negotiate  some  treaty  pernicious  to  this  country,  which 
his  timid  foresight  would  know  it  was  more  prudent  to 
have  ratified  by  a  new  Parliament  than  by  an  expiring  one. 
I  no  sooner  got  to  London  than  I  discovered  that,  if  all 
these  were  ingredients  in  the  dissolution,  at  least  there 
had  been  two  others  that  had  prompted  adoption  of  the 
measure  with  so  much  rashness,  that,  between  Lord  North's 
indolence  and  the  shortness  of  the  time,  the  Administra- 
tion had  not  taken  full  precautions  to  secure  several  re- 
elections.  They  had  no  candidates  ready  to  set  up  for 
either  Westminster  or  Middlesex,  though,  after  all  the 
King  had  suffered  from  the  latter,  it  was  amazing  that 
county  had  not  been  the  first  provided  for.  The  two  rea- 
sons I  hinted  at  were  these  : — The  advices  from  America, 
though  industriously  concealed,  were  so  bad  that  great 
clamour  was  foreseen  from  the  American  merchants  and 
trading  towns  in  particular.  The  Ministers  did  not  doubt 
but  that  clamour  would  be  adopted  by  the  Opposition  and 
by  Wilkes  as  the  cry  to  influence  the  future  elections  ; 
and  they  knew,  from  experience  of  past  times,  that  in  the 
last  session  of  a  Parliament  the  Court  loses  many  votes 
even  of  its  friends,  who  then  are  forced  to  please  their 


Sicily  for  the  island  of  Sardinia,  which  had  long  been  a  Spanish  possession. 
The  second  son  of  Philip  of  Anjou  (Charles)  subsequently  became  King 
of  the  Two  Sicilies  ;  and,  on  the  death  of  his  brother  Ferdinand,  obtained 
the  crown  of  Spain  as  Charles  III.  He  made  over  the  Crown  of  the  Two 
Sicilies,  or  Naples,  to  his  third  son,  Ferdinand,  who  thus  founded  the 
younger  reigning  branch  of  Bourbon.— D.  [This  branch  was  ousted  from  the 
throne  of  Naples  by  the  deposition  of  King  Francis  II.  in  i860. — A.  F.  S.] 


378      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Sept. 

constituents  by  voting  against  any  unpopular  measures. 
The  other  reason  was,  that  a  meeting  had  ah'eady  been 
held  of  Wilkes's  friends,  for  the  renomination  of  him  and 
Sergeant  Glynn  to  serve  the  county ;  and  both  the  candi- 
dates had  subscribed  and  sworn  to  a  set  of  articles  which 
they  were  to  endeavour  to  obtain  by  Act  of  Parliament, 
the  most  striking  of  which  was  the  repeal  of  the  late 
Boston  and  Quebec  Bills.  The  Court  apprehended  that 
this  list  would  be  adopted  in  most  other  places  of  election, 
and  hurried  to  dissolve  the  Parliament  to  prevent  it,  which 
could  scarce  be  executed  before  a  new  and  capital  obstacle 
arose  before  their  eyes.  Mr.  Grenville's  bill,  of  which  I 
have  said  so  much  in  the  beginning  of  this  volume,  now 
hung  out  all  its  terrors.  They  who  had  not  been  pre- 
pared did  not  dare  to  hurry  down  to  their  boroughs  laden 
with  money.  The  least  barefaced  bribery  would  vacate 
their  seats — and  a  new  method  of  corruption  had  not  yet 
been  invented,  from  the  want  of  foresight  of  its  being  so 
soon  necessary.  If  money  was  no  longer  to  decide  the 
choice,  courtiers  and  placemen  had  the  worst  chance  of 
being  popular.  Either  the  country  gentlemen  who  live 
nearer,  and  more  with  their  electors,  were  most  likely  to 
succeed,  or  noisy  factious  candidates.  England  had  not 
much  the  better  prospect  from  this  change  of  scene. 
Country  gentlemen  were  either  Tories,  or  lulled  asleep  by 
threats  of  the  Court,  by  the  little  care  taken  by  the  Whig 
Opposition  to  open  their  eyes,  or  liable  to  be  seduced  by 
the  clergy,  in  general  favourers  of  the  Court.  Factious 
candidates  would  probably  be  poor,  and  thence  easily  to 
be  corrupted.  In  fact,  the  Court  flattered  itself  that,  how- 
ever ill  several  elections  might  go,  they  should  still  be 
able  to  buy  the  members  themselves,  though  they  were 
restrained  from  buying  the  electors.  The  dissolution 
happened  very  unluckily  just  now  from  the  peculiar  bad- 
ness of  the  season.  September,  commonly  the  dryest 
month  of  the  year,  had  been  incessantly  raining.     The 


1774]  GENERAL   CONWAY  379 

floods  were  out,  and,  though  most  of  the  wheat  was  in, 
the  barley  and  oats  were  rotting  on  the  ground  ;  and  as 
there  was  not  a  fair  day  till  October,  when  the  weather 
mended,  all  attention  would  be  diverted  from  the  harvest 
to  elections. 

For  my  own  particular,  I  was  soon  struck  with  the 
interests  of  my  friend  General  Conway.  He  had  been 
chosen  for  Thetford  by  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  not  only 
from  Lady  Hertford's  being  the  Duke's  aunt,^  but  by  their 
political  connection  when  Ministers.  I  have  formerly 
given  an  account  of  the  prejudices  sown  in  the  Duke's 
mind  against  him  by  his  mistress  at  the  instigation  of 
Rigby.  They  were  augmented  by  his  new  Duchess's 
family,  when  he  had  married  a  niece  of  the  Duchess  of 
Bedford.  The  poverty  of  the  Duke's  parts  and  virtues 
was  ill-suited  to  the  abilities  and  integrity  of  Conway  ;  and 
when  the  Duke  had  stooped  to  be  an  insignificant  part  of 
an  Administration  of  which  he  had  been  the  most  insuffi- 
cient head,  and  had  even  abandoned  that  signal  act  of  his 
joint  Administration,  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act,  his 
and  Conway's  politics  differed  as  much  as  their  morality. 
Indeed,  it  is  just  to  the  Duke  to  say  that  he  was  partly 
excusable  and  partly  had  cause  of  dissatisfaction.  Though 
he  had  joined  with  Lord  Rockingham  in  repealing  the 
Stamp  Act,  the  tea  duty,  which  provoked  the  outrages 
of  the  Bostonians,  had  been  laid  during  his  own  Adminis- 
tration ;  yet  he  had  not  the  sense  to  make  this  excuse 
which  I  make  for  him,  but  sunk  into  the  common  tacit 
acquiescence  of  those  who  had  for  places  deserted  their 
American  principles.  Conway  had  boldly  adhered  to  them, 
and  necessarily  had  voted  differently  from  the  Duke,  who 
had  brought  him  into  Parliament,  and  even  on  the  Royal 
Marriage  Bill,  on  which  Conway  could  plead  no  former 
agreement  with  the  Duke.     His  Grace  seemed,  however, 

^  Isabella,  youngest  daughter  of  Charles  Fitzroy,  second  Duke  of  Grafton, 
and  sister  of  Lord  Augustus  Fitzroy,  father  of  Duke  Augustus  Henry. 


38o       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Sept. 

to  excuse  this  defection  with  much  generosity — which 
generosity  proved  to  have  been  only  an  inability  of 
revenge  at  the  time.  I,  who  knew  the  Duke  and  the 
Bedford's  better,  did  not  doubt  but  I  should  now  see  the 
winding  up  of  his  Grace's  forgiveness.  Yet  some  circum- 
stances might  stagger  me  a  little.  His  Grace,  though  the 
dissolution  had  been  talked  of,  had  not  dropped  a  hint  of 
intending  to  elect  Mr.  Conway  no  more.  He  had  even  in 
the  spring,  on  the  death  of  the  other  member,  Mr.  Drum- 
mond,  chosen  his  first  cousin.  Lord  Petersham,^  for  Thet- 
ford,  with  a  declaration  that  he  would  not  be  bound  for  the 
ensuing  Parliament ;  and  this  salvo  Lord  Hertford  had 
interpreted  so  favourably  to  Mr.  Conway,  that  he  had 
ordered  Lady  Hertford  to  thank  her  nephew  for  it.  But 
if  this  omen  was  good,  an  augur  so  quick-sighted  for  a 
friend  as  I,  saw  one  at  least  as  unpropitious,  and  more  to 
be  depended  upon,  as  adapted  to  the  entrails  of  the  beast  I 
inspected.  Mr.  Conway  was  at  this  time  absent  in  Ger- 
many ;  and  the  Duke  of  Grafton  was  not  such  a  hero  but 
I  concluded  he  would  like  better  to  do  a  hurt  to  an  absent 
man  than  to  his  face.  Generosity  would  have  bidden  him 
re-elect  Conway,  from  the  very  circumstance  of  his  absence 
and  ignorance  of  the  conjecture,  when  he  could  not  seek  a 
new  seat  for  himself.  The  Duke  might  plead  intention  of 
notifying  to  Conway,  before  the  general  election,  that  he 
must  provide  himself  with  another  borough ;  and  as  the 
Duke  was  not  privy  to  the  dissolution,  it  could  not  strictly 
oblige  him  to  re-elect  Conway,  when  he  had  intended  the 
contrary.  Another  promise  too  dispensed  with  him,  and 
the  danger  of  losing  another  borough.^  Yet  when  he  made 
that  promise  was  the  just  season  for  acquainting  Conway ; 
and  though  the  Duke  might  have  had  all  these  excuses, 

1  Eldest  son  of  W.  Stanhope,  second  Earl  of  Harrington,  by  Lady 
Caroline  Fitzroy,  eldest  daughter  of  Charles  Duke  of  Grafton,  and  sister  of 
Lord  Augustus,  father  of  Duke  Henry. 

2  Bury. 


Eckhardt  ^,,  Greatbatch 

CAROLINE   CAMPBELL,    COUNTESS   OF   AYLESBURY 


1774]  THE   DUKE   OF   GRAFTON  381 

he  contrived  to  prove  that  he  or  his  instigators  had 
meant  that  his  revenge  could  not  be  bounded  by  casting 
off  Conway  himself,  but  went  to  shutting  him  entirely  out 
of  Parliament.  A  proceeding  so  unlike  a  gentleman,  that 
one  would  think  his  Grace  imagined  Mr.  Conway  would 
never  return  to  resent  it. 

The  total  exclusion  was  what,  I  concluded  immediately, 
was  intended.  It  certainly  was,  I  had  reason  to  think  so ; 
and  yet  the  confidence  in  my  own  sagacity  made  me  turn 
every  circumstance  so  entirely  to  that  point,  that  it  equally 
misled  my  judgment  and  my  passions,  and  hurried  the 
latter  into  very  extraordinary  lengths,  hurting  Mr.  Conway, 
as  I  often  did,  by  giving  my  enemies  opportunities  of 
wounding  him,  that  they  might  wound  me :  a  reflection 
that  constantly  made  me  as  eager  to  indemnify  him,  and 
punish  them,  in  both  which  I  had  hitherto  succeeded,  and 
soon  saw  a  prospect  of  succeeding  again. 

I  immediately  wrote  to  Lord  Hertford,  earnestly  pressing 
him  to  sound  the  Duke  of  Grafton  on  his  brother's  situation 
immediately,  and  telling  him,  if  the  Duke  was  adverse, 
that  I  depended  on  his  finding  a  borough  for  his  brother : 
but  thinking  him  in  Suffolk,  as  he  was,  I  ordered  the 
servant  to  deliver  the  letter  to  Lady  Hertford,  who  was 
warmer  in  zeal,  and  had  more  weight  with  her  nephew 
than  her  husband  had.  I  also  wrote  to  Lady  Ailesbury 
to  insist  on  Lady  Hertford's  despatching  a  messenger 
immediately,  which  she  did.  On  Thursday,  the  29th,  I 
went  to  town  myself,  and  the  first  thing  I  saw  was  Rigby 
at  the  Duchess  of  Grafton's,  who  lay  in ;  and  the  next  I 
heard  that  he  had  sent  the  Duke  notice  of  the  dissolution 
on  the  27th.  This  told  me  I  had  guessed  right.  At 
night  at  Lady  Hertford's  the  surprise  was  great  that  I 
had  learnt  the  dissolution  a  day  sooner  than  many  of 
the  Ministers  or  than  all  London,  for  Lady  Ailesbury, 
whom  I  had  not  warned  to  keep  the  secret,  had  divulged 
it,  and   I  alone  was  quoted  for  making  it  public.     Lady 


382       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Sept. 

Hertford  had  been  intrusted  with  it  but  an  hour  before 
my  messenger  arrived,  by  Colonel  Kcene,^  by  Lord  North's 
permission.  Colonel  Keene  took  me  aside,  and  with  much 
importance  questioned  me  about  it,  As  I  knew  and  was 
prepared  for  his  curiosity,  instead  of  being  angry  at  his 
taking  so  much  liberty,  I  laughed  it  off,  and  said  I  had 
heard  the  news  at  Twitnam.  He  asked  me  if  it  was 
George  Onslow,  who  was  a  notorious  blab,  had  told  me } 
"Oh!  no,"  said  I,  "for  then  I  should  not  have  believed 
it,  he  tells  so  much  false  news."  Charles  Fitzroy  was 
there ;  I  asked  him  if  his  brother  would  re-choose  Mr. 
Conway  ?  He  answered  very  doubtfully ;  "  for,"  said  he, 
"  my  brother  will  have  an  opposition  to  me  at  Bury ,2  and 
must  keep  Thetford  open."  I  said  very  indiscreetly,  I 
feared  the  Bedfords  had  been  doing  Mr.  Conway  hurt. 
Lady  Hertford  chid  me  for  talking  to  her  nephew,  and 
said  he  was  the  worst  person  in  the  world  to  talk  to  about 
it,  for  he  was  jealous  about  his  own  election.  I  owned  I 
had  been  in  the  wrong;  but  though  Fitzroy  was  very 
rattling,  I  thought  him  zealously  attached  to  Mr.  Conway, 
forgetting  that  he  had  since  lived  eight  or  nine  years  at 
Court.  What  affected  me  much  more  was  to  find  that 
Lord  Hertford,  who  was  to  have  been  in  town  that  night, 
had  put  off  his  journey  for  two  days.  I  began  to  fear  he 
was  privy  to  some  plan  with  the  King  to  get  the  Duke  to 
leave  his  brother  out  of  Parliament.  This  sunk  deep. 
30//^.  Lady   Hertford    came  to  me ;    I   said,  "  Madam, 

^  Colonel  James  Whitshed  Keene  was  an  Irish  officer  of  no  fortune,  and 
had  served  in  Portugal.  He  then  went  to  Paris,  and  attached  himself  to 
Stephen  Fox,  but  soon  became  acquainted  with  Lord  Plertford,  then  am- 
bassador, became  his  master  of  the  horse,  by  degrees  his  intimate  dependent, 
and  was  made  by  him  secretary  to  the  Lord  Chamberlain.  He  married  a 
homely  maiden-sister  of  Lord  Dartmouth,  and,  by  the  marriage  of  their 
father  and  mother,  a  kind  of  sister  of  Lord  North.  He  had  very  little  sense, 
but  was  a  great  politician,  and,  by  no  bashfulness  in  asking  questions, 
screwed  himself  into  being  much  trusted  by  Lord  North,  which  hurt  them 
both  in  the  estimation  of  mankind,  though  Colonel  Keene's  faults  were  owing 
to  his  head,  not  his  heart.     He  was  made  one  of  the  Board  of  Trade. 

*  The  Duke  of  Grafton  did  actually  lose  Bury  this  time. 


ELECTIONEERING   TOPICS  383 

I  see  all  is  over."  She  said  "  No,  not  quite,"  and  showed 
me  the  Duke's  answer,  which  began  with  a  falsehood,  for 
it  said  her  letter  had  brought  him  the  first  notice  of  the 
dissolution,  and  Rigby  had  told  Fitzroy  that  he  had 
acquainted  him  twenty  hours  before.  The  latter  said  he 
was  in  great  embarrassment,  had  no  plan  laid  beyond 
choosing  the  two  Fitzroys,  his  brother  and  uncle,^  and  had 
a  great  esteem  for  Mr.  Conway's  character.  This,  Lady 
Hertford  thought  looked  well,  and  I  ill.  Fitzroy  came 
in,  just  setting  out  for  Bury.  He  said  Mr.  Conway  should, 
before  he  went  abroad,  have  asked  the  Duke  to  bring  him 
in  again,  and  that  the  Duke  had  mentioned  his  silence 
with  surprise.  Lady  Hertford  said  it  was  delicacy  in 
Mr.  Conway.  She  told  Fitzroy  he  must  tell  his  brother 
to  send  a  positive  answer  directly ;  it  would  be  unhand- 
some behaviour  to  keep  it  in  suspense ;  yet  the  answer 
never  came  till  Monday  the  3rd,  when  Fitzroy  was  gone. 
Lady  Hertford  and  I  talked  on  what  could  be  done  for 
Mr.  Conway,  if  the  Duke  should  not  choose  him.  She 
said  her  Lord  had  no  seat  but  Oxford  and  Coventry  for 
his  own  three  sons,  and  could  not  prefer  his  brother  to 
them.  To  this  I  said  not  a  word  ;  it  was  not  decent  for 
me  to  propose  it,  and  yet  I  thought  Mr.  Conway  of  much 
more  consequence  than  the  two  younger  sons,  who  never 
spoke  in  Parliament.  She  said  her  Lord  could  ask  Lord 
North  to  bring  in  General  Conway,  though  she  fancied 
all  boroughs  were  full.  To  this  likewise  I  made  no 
answer,  knowing  Mr.  Conway  would  not  like  to  be  brought 
in  by  the  Minister.  She  was  displeased  I  would  not 
speak  ;  at  last  I  said  it  was  too  delicate  to  say  anything 


^  Charles  Fitzroy  the  elder  was  natural  son  of  the  late  Duke  of  Grafton, 
and  was  Member  for  Heytesbury,  which  borough  the  Duke  of  Marlborough 
having  got,  it  is  probable  that  the  Bedfords,  under  colour  of  preventing  a 
quarrel  between  the  Dukes  of  Grafton  and  Marlborough,  now  cousins  by  the 
Duchess  of  Grafton,  had  suggested  to  old  Mr.  Fitzroy  to  apply  to  his  nephew 
for  a  seat,  and  the  Duke  had  promised  it.  It  was  then  thought  in  honour  to 
have  declared  off  with  Mr.  Conway. 


384       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [Sept. 

between  two  brothers.  She  started,  and  cried  it  was  not 
between  two  brothers,  they  were  one ;  that  we  all  thought 
alike ;  and  pressed  me  to  speak,  but  I  would  say  nothing 
else,  for  I  was  persuaded  Lord  Hertford  would  drop  his 
brother,  who  would  take  it  ill,  and  then  it  would  certainly 
be  an  affair  between  two  brothers.  We  parted  both  dis- 
satisfied. 

Lady  Hertford^  was  an  extraordinary  person.  She  had 
been  very  beautiful,  but  never  gallant ;  of  strong  passions, 
but  they  centered  in  her  own  family ;  proud  of  her  birth 
and  rank,  yet  void  of  all  pride  in  her  behaviour,  which 
was  simple  and  natural.  Her  temper  was  uneasy,  though 
infinitely  good-natured  and  forgiving ;  her  mind  uncul- 
tivated, but  full  of  strong  sense,  particularly  on  emer- 
gencies, when  her  reasoning  was  exquisitely  close  and 
just,  even  when  most  disturbed  with  anger.  Though 
naturally  timid  and  nervous,  she  had  an  heroic  fortitude 
when  the  lives  or  persons,  the  interests  or  characters,  of 
her  family  were  at  stake ;  on  those  occasions  she  always 
presented  herself  to  ward  danger  from  them.  Yet  she 
was  without  pretensions,  and  in  common  occurences  no 
woman  was  more  a  woman.  Her  own  interest  or  applause 
to  herself  seemed  to  her  contemptible.  She  was  a  heroine 
without  knowing  it,  and  scorned  to  be  a  philosopher. 

From  her  I   went  to  Lady  Ailesbury,^  of  a  very   dif- 

^  Lady  Isabella  Fitzroy,  youngest  daughter  of  Charles,  the  second  Duke  of 
Grafton,  by  a  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Beaufort.  She  was  married  very 
young  to  Francis  Seymour  Conway,  second  Lord  Conway,  afterwards  Earl  of 
Hertford,  by  whom  she  had  eleven  children — Francis  Lord  Beauchamp,  her 
favourite ;  Henry  Robert,  an  officer ;  Edward,  high  in  the  sea  service ; 
William ;  and  George ;  Anne,  married  to  the  Earl  of  Drogheda ;  Sarah,  to 
Mr.  Stuart,  in  Ireland  ;  Gertrude,  to  Lord  Villiers,  only  son  of  the  Countess 
of  Grandison  ;  Frances  ;  Elizabeth  ;  and  Isabella.  All  the  eleven  were  fine 
figures  or  handsome ;  Lady  Francis  and  Lady  Elizabeth  very  handsome. 
Henry  had  very  uncommon  parts. 

^  Lady  Caroline  Campbell,  only  daughter  of  John  Duke  of  Argyle,  then 
Colonel  Campbell,  had  been  married  young  against  her  will  to  old  Thomas 
Lord  Bruce,  Earl  of  Ailesbury,  to  whom  she  was  third  wife,  and  by  whom  she 
had  no  children  but  Mary  Duchess  of  Richmond  ;  as  by  her  second  husband. 
General  H.  Seymour  Conway,  she  had  only  one  daughter,  Anne,  married  to 
John  Damer,  eldest  son  of  Joseph  Lord  Milton. 


1774]       LADY   HERTFORD— LADY   AILESBURY         385 

ferent  character.  She  too  had  been  extremely  handsome, 
and  preserved  her  beauty  much  longer.  She  was  mild, 
gentle,  and  of  a  temper  unsusceptible  of  strong,  at  least  of 
lasting  impressions.  She  had  read  much,  was  fond  of 
music,  and  had  a  wonderful  genius  for  needlework.  She 
seldom  thought  on  politics,  and  understood  them  less ; 
nor,  though  she  lived  in  the  happiest  union  with  her 
husband,  did  she  make  any  right  judgment  on  the  frequent 
difficulties  of  his  situation.  Dress  and  female  amusements 
occupied  her  most,  and  except  being  a  pleasing  woman 
she  was  not  superior  to  many  of  her  sex.  I  found  her 
quite  unalarmed  at  her  husband's  position,  and  had 
difficulty  to  make  her  conceive  why  the  King  or  Lord 
Hertford  could  wish  Mr.  Conway  out  of  Parliament ;  yet 
when  I  mentioned  the  excessive  delicacy  of  her  son-in-law 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  who,  though  he  would  have  been 
happy  to  see  Mr.  Conway  in  Opposition,  had  had  the 
generosity  to  advise  him  to  quit  Parliament  lest  he  should 
hurt  his  fortune  there,  she  cried  out,  •'  Oh !  the  Duke  of 
Richmond  is  so  violent ! "  I  said,  "  Madam,  if  he  was  so 
violent,  he  would  have  given  just  the  contrary  advice." 
Her  daughter  Mrs.  Damer  came  in,  who,  though  very 
young,  pretty,  and  much  in  fashion,  and  who  had  never 
thought  on  politics  before,  yet  understood  at  once  what 
I  said  to  her,  for  she  was  passionately  fond  of  her 
father,  had  as  good  sense  as  he,  and  as  much  decision  in 
her  way  of  thinking  as  he  had  little,  and  expressed  it  at 
once  in  the  fewest  and  most  expressive  words.  An  in- 
stance of  which  she  gave  the  next  day  on  the  following 
occasion  : — 

There  was  a  man  whom  no  words  can  paint  truly  with- 
out seeming  superlatively  exaggerated,  so  wrongheaded, 
so  brutal  he  was,  so  ill-natured,  ill-tempered,  and  untame- 
abled  a  savage  :  this  was  General  Sir  Robert  Rich,  who, 
with  a  pleasing  person,  interesting  address,  and  good 
breeding,  had  a  vindictive  obstinacy  in  his  temper,  on 
I.— 2  c 


386       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Sept. 

which  decency,  the  customs  of  the  world,  or  principle 
could  make  no  impression.  He  had  been  half  cut  to  pieces 
in  the  Rebellion,  had  lost  both  hands,  for  his  bravery  was 
equal  to  his  fury,  and  yet  his  insolence  to  superiors  and 
inferiors  was  so  great,  that  his  sufferings  did  but  just  save 
him  from  being  cast  out  of  the  army  for  his  insupportable 
pride  and  arrogance.  He  had  long  been  at  variance, 
after  a  friendship,  with  General  Conway,  who  had  suc- 
ceeded to  Sir  Robert's  father's  regiment,  the  arrears  due 
to  which  for  clothing,  &c..  Sir  Robert  had  stopped,  for 
his  avarice  was  in  proportion  to  his  other  bad  qualities. 
Conway,  as  cool  and  temperate  as  the  other  was  im- 
perious, had,  from  regard  to  him  and  his  sisters,^  whom, 
however.  Sir  Robert  treated  still  worse,  tried  all  methods 
of  compromise ;  and  when  reduced  to  bring  the  matter 
before  a  court  martial,  found  authority  had  as  little  weight 
with  the  savage  as  reason  and  patience.  Sir  Robert  had 
been  condemned,  and  had  had  recourse  to  every  delay 
that  forms  or  passions  could  suggest;  and  even  when  at 
last  the  King  ordered  him,  after  amazing  and  unjust 
indulgences,  to  pay  the  money,  he  refused.  The  matter 
had  been  in  agitation  at  least  four  years.  Conway  was 
now  abroad,  aud  had  been  distinguished  by  the  Emperor 
and  King  of  Prussia  with  the  most  uncommon  marks  of 
notice  and  esteem.^  Lord  Hertford  had  shown  all  Con- 
way's letters  to  the  King ;  and  whether  his  Majesty  was 
jealous  of  the  King  of  Prussia's  attentions  to  Conway, 
whether  ashamed  of  having  twice  ill-used  so  brave,  so 
virtuous,  so  able  an  officer,  whom  he  saw  all  military 
princes  admired ;  or  whether,  as  I  suspected,  his  Majesty 


^  Elizabeth  Rich,  Lady  Lyttelton,  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Lady  Ailes- 
bury.     Mary  Rich  died  unmarried. 

2  When  he  first  went  to  Berlin,  the  King  told  him,  as  he  was  come  to  see 
armies,  he  gave  him  leave  to  follow  him  to  his  reviews  ;  and  when  there,  at  his 
only  three  levees,  talked  only  and  a  great  deal  to  him.  The  Prince  Royal 
invited  him  to  drink  tea,  and  to  sup  with  him  tete-a-teti,  and  repeated  the 
King  his  uncle's  high  opinion  of  him. 


1774]  GENERAL   CONWAY  387 

was  desirous  of  soothing  him  while  he  wished  to  exclude 
him  from  Parliament,  at  this  very  moment  Sir  Robert 
Rich  was  dismissed  from  the  King's  service  for  disobedi- 
ence, his  government  was  taken  away,  and  the  profits 
sequestered  till  General  Conway's  demands  should  be 
satisfied. 


[Oct. 


OCTOBER 
1st. 

THE  Parliament  was  dissolved  by  proclamation, 
and  writs  issued  for  a  new  one  to  meet  the 
29th  November. 
It  was  on  this  very  day  that  the  King  sent 
Lord  Barrington  to  Lady  Ailesbury,  to  acquaint  her  with 
the  justice  he  had  (at  last)  done  to  her  husband.  She  was 
charmed — but  Mrs.  Darner,  who  had  more  penetration, 
said,  "  Pho !  this  is  only  a  sugarplum."  I  saw  it  in  the 
same  light ;  and  as  Lord  Barrington,  who  was  one  of  those 
men  who  betray  the  truth  by  colouring  it  over  with  false- 
hood, told  Lady  Ailesbury  he  concluded  General  Conway 
was  to  be  rechosen  for  Thetford,  my  suspicious  temper 
persuaded  me  that  he  was  privy  to  the  treachery  of  the 
message.  And  here  let  me  stop  to  make  a  reflection, 
which  all  Kings  ought  to  make.  What  can  be  so  miserable 
as  a  King  whose  duplicity  has  made  such  impression  on 
his  people,  that,  even  when  he  does  justice  or  kindness  to 
one  of  his  subjects,  it  is  received  as  a  token  of  an  injury  ! 
Knowledge  of  the  world  and  experience  might  make  me 
distrustful  of  Court  favours  ;  but  a  young  inexperienced 
woman,  who  saw  favour  to  her  own  father  but  in  the  light 
of  treachery,  proves  that  the  insincerity  of  the  King  was 
known  to  the  most  unthinking.  On  talking  again  on  this 
subject,  Mrs.  Damer  compared  the  King's  word  to  the  bad 
guineas  just  decried,  and  said,  "  The  King's  impress  and 
name  ought  to  pass  as  sterling." 

The  same  day  Colonel  Keene  came  to  me,  and  said 
that,  seeing  Lord  Hertford's  difficulties,  he  himself  had 
proposed  to  Lord  North  to  bring  Mr.  Conway  into  Parlia- 

388 


THE    iK».\J.,.iv.    Mk.^.    DAMER 
Front  an  engraving  by  Hop7vood  a/ter  a  painting  by  G.  C. 


1774]  ELECTIONEERING   TOPICS  389 

ment,  and  had  found  him  very  well  disposed  whenever 
there  should  be  a  vacancy.  This,  I  learnt  afterwards  from 
Lord  Hertford,  who  pleaded  it  as  a  proof  of  his  zeal  for 
his  brother,  had  been  suggested  by  him  from  the  country. 
I  said,  "  Mr.  Keene,  even  to  serve  Mr.  Conway,  I  will  not 
deceive  Lord  North  or  you.  I  cannot  answer  that  Mr. 
Conway  will  always  vote  as  Lord  North  may  expect,  and 
therefore  I  make  no  answer  to  you ;  take  notice,  I  tell  you 
I  wash  my  hands  of  it."  Mr.  Keene  said,  Lord  North  was 
apprized  of  Mr.  Conway's  determination  to  be  indepen- 
dent ;  that  he  loved  him,  and  would  not  mind  his  scruples. 
I  said  it  was  handsome,  and  that  leaving  him  to  himself 
would  be  the  most  likely  way  of  binding  him.  I  stated 
to  Mr.  Keene  all  Lord  Hertford's  obligations  to  his  brother, 
and  showed  him  that,  if  his  brother  had  not  saved  him 
and  made  him  a  Minister,  he  would  never  have  gotten  the 
borough  of  Oxford.     Keene  was  struck  as  I  expected,  and 

said,  "  Upon  my  word  I  think "     I  stopped  him,  and 

for  fear  he  should  not  say  all  I  wished,  and  what  I  could 
not  say  myself  to  Lord  Hertford,  I  determined  to  put  my 
own  words  into  his  mouth.  I  said,  "  Sir,  I  know  what  you 
are  going  to  say,  but  I  will  not  let  you.  When  you  are 
kind  to  me,  I  will  not  be  so  unjust  as  to  let  you  say  what 
is  not  proper  for  you  to  say.  You  are  Lord  Hertford's 
friend,  not  Mr.  Conway's.  I  know  you  was  going  to  say 
Lord  Hertford  ought  to  bring  his  brother  into  Parliament 
out  of  gratitude,  rather  than  one  of  his  own  sons  :  I  don't 
wonder  you  think  so,  but  you  must  not  say  so  to  me." 
He  owned  he  had  had  some  such  thought,  and  I  did  not 
doubt  but  he  would  repeat  it  to  Lord  or  Lady  Hertford, 
as  he  certainly  did,  and  told  them  he  believed  that  was 
what  I  had  meant,  but  that  I  never  would  say  so.  He 
then  returned  to  my  early  knowledge  of  the  dissolution, 
and  wanted  to  get  out  the  secret ;  but  I  would  not  tell  him. 
I  said  it  might  hurt  somebody  or  other.  My  informant 
might  have  learnt  it  at  one  of  the  offices.    "  Oh  !  "  said  he, 


390       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

"  that  was  my  reason  for  wishing  to  know  ;  if  Lord  North 
has  any  indiscreet  or  unfaithful  servant  he  ought  to  know 
it,  or  be  on  his  guard  against  him."  Colonel  Keene  had 
little  sense  to  think  I  would  preclude  myself  from  know- 
ing ;  and  I  must  have  had  as  little  sense  to  have  told  him. 
At  eight  that  night  Lord  Hertford  arrived,  and  an  hour 
after  I  went  to  him,  but  was  struck  by  his  porter  telling 
me  his  Lord  was  busy  and  could  not  possibly  see  me,  but 
carried  me  up  to  Lady  Hertford.  Lady  Ailesbury  and 
another  lady  were  playing  at  cribbage  in  her  room.  She 
said  her  Lord  was  writing  to  Coventry,  which  he  should 
lose,  and  had  Lady  Powis's  agent  with  him.  I  thought  his 
brother's  impending  danger  as  important  as  a  borough  lost, 
or  as  Lady  Powis's  boroughs.  My  suspicions  redoubled. 
After  some  time  Lady  Hertford  said  she  would  go  and 
ask  my  Lord  if  he  would  see  me.  She  returned,  and  said 
not  a  word.  I  carried  her  into  another  room,  and  said, 
"  Good  God,  Madam  !  what  is  my  Lord  afraid  of  that  he 
will  not  see  me  ?  I  have  told  your  Ladyship  I  would  say 
nothing  that  can  be  disagreeable  to  him  till  the  answer 
comes  from  Euston."  She  protested  he  was  so  busy  writ- 
ing, that  on  looking  into  his  room  he  had  scolded  her,  and 
that  he  would  soon  come  upstairs.  A  little  after.  Colonel 
Keene  came  up,  and  she  asked  him  if  her  Lord  was  still 
writing  ?  he  said  Yes.  This  offended  me  still  more,  that 
Colonel  Keene  was  admitted  when  I  was  not,  though 
wanting  to  speak  on  his  brother.  Soon  after  their  son 
Henry  came  and  asked  for  more  pens ;  his  father  had 
used  all  below.  This  seemed  a  shallow  art  to  impose  upon 
and  delay  me.  I  grew  very  much  out  of  humour,  and 
showed  it  on  purpose,  that  I  might  force  my  way  to  my 
Lord.  Twelve  o'clock  came,  and  my  Lord  sent  word  he 
had  not  time  to  sup.  This  struck  even  Lady  Ailesbury, 
and  by  signs  I  made  her  understand  my  anger.  After 
supper,  at  which  I  had  not  spoken  a  word,  Lady  Ailesbury 
called  for  her  chair,  and  I  asked  for  one.     Lady  Hertford 


1774]  POLITICAL   COMEDY  391 

saw  my  uneasiness  and  sent  her  son  to  ask  my  Lord  if  he 
would  see  me :  I  said  drily,  "  Madam,  I  will  not  trouble 
my  Lord  ;  I  have  nothing  to  say ; "  and  walked  out  of  the 
room  with  Lady  Ailesbury.  On  the  stairs  I  trembled  so 
with  passion  that  I  had  like  to  have  fallen  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom,  and  I  said  to  Lady  Ailesbury,  "  I  will  never 
set  my  foot  in  this  house  again,"  This  frightened  her,  and 
she  said,  "  Pray  don't  say  so."  Mr.  Conway  (the  second 
son)  met  us  on  the  stairs,  and  said  his  father  would  see  me  ; 
but  I  thought  without  showing  great  resentment  I  should 
not  force  him  to  bring  in  his  brother,  and  therefore  would 
not  go  to  him,  but  repeated  "  I  will  not  trouble  him  ;  I 
have  nothing  to  say."  When  we  were  in  our  chairs  and  a 
little  way  from  the  door,  I  stopped  Lady  Ailesbury  and 
told  her  my  sentiments.  The  porter  came  out  and  said 
his  Lord  desired  to  see  me,  but  I  persisted,  only  repeating 
the  same  words.  I  carried  Lady  Ailesbury  to  my  own 
house ;  she  was  in  tears  and  as  angry  then  as  I,  and  said 
it  was  shocking  in  Lord  Hertford  not  to  see  her,  when  she 
was  going  to  Paris  in  two  days.  I  said,  "  Madam,  he 
wants  you  gone,  and  me  out  of  town,  till  it  is  too  late  to 
find  a  borough  for  your  husband,  and  then  he  will  plead  the 
lapse  of  time  as  an  excuse :  "  and  I  added  a  great  deal  of 
very  intemperate  invective  on  him.  I  told  her,  however, 
what  was  true,  that,  angry  as  I  was,  it  was  a  right  measure 
to  be  so,  and  necessary  to  make  it  impossible  for  Lord 
Hertford  to  desert  his  brother. 

I  slept  very  ill,  and  early  in  the  morning  wrote  a  very 
passionate  letter  to  Lord  Hertford,  telling  him  of  the  in- 
dignity he  had  shown  to  his  brother,  his  brother's  wife,  and 
me,  and  breaking  off  all  intercourse  with  him  ;  which,  how- 
ever, I  did  not  intend  to  execute,  but  to  make  a  seat  for 
his  brother  the  terms  of  reconciliation.  I  had  the  patience, 
however,  to  wait  and  see,  before  I  sent  my  letter,  whether 
my  Lord  or  Lady  would  not  come  or  write  to  me.  As  I 
expected.  Lady  Hertford  wrote,  said  Lord  Hertford  had 


392       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE      Oct. 

been  angry  at  her  not  telling  him  I  wanted  to  speak  with 
him,  and  that,  seeing  his  distress,  and  that  there  was  no 
hurry,  as  the  answer  was  not  come  from  Euston,  she  had 
deferred  telling  him,  thinking  his  business  would  be  over  ; 
but  that  it  had  lasted  till  half-an-hour  past  two.  She 
added, "  As  soon  as  he  comes  from  churchy  he  goes  to  Kew^ 
and  will  call  on  you  when  he  comes  back."  I  did  not 
believe  the  excuses,  though  with  regard  to  Lady  Hertford 
they  were  pretty  true.  But  that,  in  such  business,  he  had 
time  to  go  to  church,  seemed  not  very  probable,  or  made 
me  not  believe  in  the  business.  His  going  to  Kew  before 
he  saw  me  appeared  indubitable  evidence  of  a  plot,  and  that 
he  did  not  dare  to  see  mc  till  he  had  seen  the  King,  and 
knew  what  answer  to  give  me.  I  sent  a  very  civil  note  to 
Lady  Hertford  for  all  her  goodness  to  me,  but  telling  her 
that,  after  the  indignity  with  which  her  Lord  had  treated 
both  his  brother  and  me,  I  could  never  enter  his  house 
again  or  have  any  friendship  with  him.  I  now  thought  the 
quarrel  would  be  very  serious.  *****  \  ^^^s 
satisfied  it  would  be  honourable  to  undo  myself  for  my 
friend,  and  thought  myself  too  old  to  disgrace  a  life  of  dis- 
interestedness by  giving  up  him  to  save  my  own  fortune. 
In  this  unalterable  resolution  I  went  to  Lady  Ailesbury, 
but  had  scarce  been  there  a  minute  before  Lady  Hertford, 
who  had  been  at  my  house,  followed  me  thither,  and  sent 
for  me  down  stairs  alone.  I  found  her  very  angry;  she 
entirely  acquitted  her  Lord,  taxed  me  with  pride,  ingrati- 
tude, and  injustice ;  and  swore  how  much  her  Lord  loved 
both  his  brother  and  me;  and  said  if  I  quarrelled  with  him 
she  desired  no  compliments  from  me,  nor  ever  would  speak 
to  me  again.  I  was  charmed  with  her  behaviour,  and 
treated  her  with  the  utmost  respect.  I  stated  to  her  all 
the  strong  circumstances  that  had  raised  and  confirmed  my 
suspicions,  and  told  her,  that  to  show  her  it  was  not  pride 
on  my  own  account,  but  on  Mr.  Conway's,  I  was  ready  to 
ask  my  Lord's  pardon  for  myself,  or  would  black  his  shoes, 


1774]  POLITICAL   COMEDY  393 

but  that  I  would  not  desert  his  brother,  nor  see  him  injured 
in  his  absence.  She  asked  me  what  she  should  say  to  her 
Lord.  I  said,  whatever  she  pleased,  except  that  I  would 
give  up  his  brother :  I  could  not  be  his  friend  if  he 
deserted  his  brother.  Her  I  entirely  acquitted.  She  said 
she  would  not  be  excepted,  and  that  my  suspicions  were 
unjust ;  that  I  was  always  suspicious  of  the  Bedfords. 
I  said,  "  Madam,  I  name  nobody."  She  replied,  that  was 
worse ;  I  left  my  suspicions  at  random  to  be  fixed  on 
anybody.  I  said,  "  Madam,  I  will  name  nobody  without 
proofs — but  my  suspicions  went  high."  "  What,"  said  she, 
"do  you  suspect  Lord  North?"  "No,  Madam,"  said  I, 
"  but  I  will  name  no  more."  She  would  fain  have  recon- 
ciled me,  but  I  did  not  think  it  ripe  yet.  I  persuaded  her 
to  go  up  to  Lord  Ailesbury,  who  seemed  very  angry,  and 
complained  of  Lord  Hertford's  treatment  of  her.  We  had 
both  a  passionate  and  tender  scene,  during  which  Lady 
Hertford's  character  appeared  in  the  most  amiable  light. 
She  told  us  Lord  Hertford  would  give  up  his  third  son, 
Robert,  to  bring  in  his  brother,  but  said,  "  Robert  is  the 
proudest  of  his  children,  and  probably  will  quarrel  with 
his  father  on  it."  I  said,  "  Madam,  Lady  Ailesbury  and 
I  cannot  hear  of  that,  nor  would  Mr.  Conway  bear  to  be 
the  cause  of  a  family  quarrel  between  a  father  and  his 
son."  Indeed  this  circumstance  showed  me  it  was  in  vain 
to  push  that  any  farther,  nor  would  I,  from  friendship  to 
Mr.  Conway,  do  so  abominable  a  thing  as  make  that 
quarrel.  I  insisted  that  it  should  not  be,  and  afterwards, 
when  Lord  Hertford  proposed  it  to  me  again,  I  made  him 
give  it  up.  He  then  told  me  what  was  greatly  to  the 
honour  of  his  second  son  Henry,  who,  on  his  father's 
mentioning  it,  said,  "  My  Lord,  you  had  better  give  me  up; 
I  am  cooler  and  more  reasonable  than  my  brother  Robert." 
Lady  Hertford  pressed  me  again  to  tell  her  whom  I  sus- 
pected. I  said,  "  The  King."  She,  who  was  all  honesty, 
instead  of  denying  it,  smiled,  and  said,  "  Indeed,  people 


394       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

do  think  the  King  very  double."  I  reconciled  her  and 
Lady  Ailesbury,  and  the  former  pressed  me  to  see  my 
Lord.  I  said  frankly,  "  Madam,  you  are  sensible  with 
what  respect  and  patience  I  have  born  all  your  Ladyship's 
reproaches,  even  almost  without  a  word  of  defence  :  if  you 
will  give  me  leave  to  say  what  I  please  to  my  Lord,  I  will 
see  him  at  six  o'clock."  These  terms  produced  a  new 
embarras^  though  all  I  meant  was  to  press  on  him  his 
obligations  to  his  brother.  She  said  he  could  not  come  to 
me  so  soon  as  six,  it  was  church  time.  I  smiled  inwardly 
at  this  extreme  devotion  in  so  busy  a  politician,  and  we 
parted  the  best  friends  in  the  world. 

After  evening  prayer,  the  Earl  came  to  me,  but  to  my 
surprise  brought  his  son  Henry  with  him,  Lady  Hertford 
having  reported  my  words  so  faithfully  that  he  had  con- 
cluded I  should  speak  too  plainly,  and  had  therefore  for 
precaution  brought  his  son.  He  entered  smiling,  shook 
me  by  the  hand,  and  tried  to  treat  my  anger  as  too  excep- 
tious  and  to  laugh  it  off,  pretending  he  had  not  suspected 
my  having  been  earnest  to  see  him.  I  was  very  cold  and 
would  scarce  utter  a  syllable.  When  he  pressed  me  to 
speak,  I  said  it  should  be  with  great  circumspection  ;  that 
I  looked  on  myself  as  on  my  trial,  and  had  no  witness, 
whereas  he  had  brought  one  ;  that  I  was  persuaded  his  son 
would  misrepresent  nothing,  and  yet  could  but  be  partial 
to  his  own  father.  Mr.  Conway  said  I  spoke  as  if  they 
were  come  to  bully  me.  I  said.  No,  but  I  was  certainly 
afraid  of  him ;  that  I  knew  he  was  a  young  man  of  great 
parts  ;  that  he  was  very  cool,  and  that  I  was  provoked, 
and  therefore  should  be  put  upon  my  guard  what  I  said. 
Young  men,  I  said,  were  apt  to  laugh  at  those  much  older  ; 
that  I  had  been  thinking  what  I  should  do,  and  had  deter- 
mined to  tell  them  honestly  that  I  could  not  speak  so 
freely  before  him,  with  whom  I  was  little  acquainted,  as 
to  his  father  alone,  with  whom  I  had  been  brought  up 
from  a  boy.     Upon  this  the  son  got  up  and  went  to  the 


1774]  POLITICAL   COMEDY  395 

door.  I  said  I  begged  his  pardon  ;  that  I  was  sensible  I 
was  doing  a  very  rude  thing  in  turning  him  out  of  my 
own  house  ;  and  yet  that  we  should  sooner  understand  one 
another  if  he  retired,  which  he  did  with  great  good 
humour.  I  then  talked  over  the  whole  affair  with  Lord 
Hertford  with  cordiality  and  better  temper.  He  pro- 
tested his  innocence ;  excused  the  King,  though  not  to 
my  satisfaction  ;  and  offered  absolutely  to  give  up  his 
third  son.  This  I  would  not  hear  of.  At  last  he  promised 
to  lay  down  any  sum  to  bring  his  brother  into  Parliament : 
and  we  parted  very  good  friends. 

'^rd.  Lord  Hertford  sent  for  me.  I  guessed  the  cause, 
and  guessed  right,  that  the  Duke  of  Grafton  had  de- 
clared, without  any  softening,  that  he  should  not  bring 
General  Conway  into  Parliament.  As  this  would  bring 
the  burthen  on  him.  Lord  Hertford  was  very  much  hurt ; 
owned  he  now  believed  all  the  mischief  of  which  I  had 
accused  the  Bedfords ;  and  in  his  vexation  discovered  to 
me  a  most  black  treachery  of  the  Duke  some  time  before, 
and  which,  leading  to  his  present  behaviour,  showed  he 
had  long  meditated  getting  rid  of  Mr.  Conway.  The 
borough  of  Thetford  is  entirely  governed  by  three  persons, 
the  Mayor,  the  Recorder,  and  one  other ;  Lord  Hertford 
was  Recorder ;  the  Duke  of  Grafton  engaged  General 
Conway  himself  to  ask  Lord  Hertford  to  resign  that  office, 
who  had  done  so  unwillingly :  it  is  not  necessary  to  add 
any  stroke  to  this  feature  of  the  Duke's  character.  Lady 
Hertford  was  still  more  hurt  and  provoked  at  her  nephew's 
behaviour,  which  showed  how  little  influence  she  had  over 
him  and  diminished  the  number  of  her  husband's  votes. 
But  I  had  better  materials  to  work  with  than  this  anger.  I 
had  that  morning  learnt  that  very  bad  news  had  arrived 
from  America  ;  1500  men  were  in  arms,  and  General  Gage 
had  sent  to  implore  more  men  and  ships.  I  made  full  use 
of  this  to  imprint  on  Lord  Hertford's  mind  his  brother's  im- 
portance ;  and  to  do  him  justice,  he  was  quick  enough  in 


396       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

seeing  it  himself.  I  painted  to  him  the  necessity  there 
would  be  of  the  King's  calling  Mr.  Conway  to  council,  and 
I  gave  Lord  Hertford  a  hint  that  a  change  might  very 
probably  happen,  and  his  brother  be  again  in  a  situation 
to  save  him.  He  felt  this,  and  almost  told  me  in  plain 
words  that  the  King  had  thoughts  of  taking  Mr.  Conway 
into  the  Ministry;  he  said,  some  temperate  man  must  be 
called  in.  I  wanted  no  more  than  this  hint  to  assure  me 
Lord  Hertford  would  soon  find  some  way,  if  possible,  to 
bring  his  brother  into  Parliament.  On  my  side,  as  I 
meant  to  keep  them  well  together,  I  wrote  by  Lady  Ailes- 
bury,  who  went  next  day  to  Paris,  a  very  moderate  letter 
to  Mr.  Conway,  did  justice  to  Lady  Hertford,  excused 
Lord  Hertford,  said  nothing  hard  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton, 
and  took  all  the  blame  I  could  on  myself.  I  had  put 
everything  on  the  best  foot  I  could,  considering  the 
circumstances,  for  Mr.  Conway,  and  was  very  willing  to 
appear  to  all  the  family  to  be  the  person  in  fault,  for  I 
really  wished  them  well ;  they  were  my  near  relations  and 
friends ;  and  if  I  had  gone  too  far,  it  was  for  a  right  end, 
and,  so  far  from  being  for  my  own  sake,  I  had  risked 
doing  infinitely  more  hurt  to  myself  than  to  any  other 
person  living.  In  this  conversation  I  told  Lord  Hertford 
what  I  foresaw ;  viz.  that  Rigby  would  get  it  suggested  to 
the  King  to  send  Conway  to  command  in  America,  to 
ruin  him.  Lord  Hertford  was  struck  with  the  probability, 
and  said  it  must  be  prevented,  for  Conway  had  declared 
so  explicitly  for  the  Americans  that  he  would  refuse  to  go. 
"  Then,"  said  I,  "  he  will  be  ruined  as  an  officer,  and  that 
very  alternative  will  make  Rigby  press  it."  "  What  is  to 
be  done?"  said  Lord  Hertford.  I  said,  "1  protest  I  do 
not  foresee  at  once,  but  I  will  suggest  the  first  thing  that 
comes  into  my  mind  :  tell  the  King  that,  if  your  brother 
refuses  to  serve  against  the  Americans,  the  example  will 
spread  and  be  followed."  "  No,"  said  he,  "  the  King  will 
never   bear   that !     I    should   tell    him   my   brother    has 


1774]  POLITICAL   COMEDY  397 

scruples  ;  and  irresolution  will  hurt  the  service."  I  allowed 
this  was  a  better  thought  than  mine.  Lord  Hertford  said, 
the  King  had  the  highest  opinion  of  Mr.  Conway,  and 
had  really  never  taken  anything  seriously  ill  of  him  but 
his  voting  against  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill. 

I  have  said  that  the  Court  was  not  prepared  with  candi- 
dates for  London,  Westminster,  or  Middlesex.  Previous 
to  those  elections,  came  on  that  of  a  Lord  Mayor. 
Wilkes  entirely  governed  Bull,  the  actual  Mayor,  and 
made  him  decline  the  chair  a  second  time.  The  Court 
on  one  side,  and  Alderman  Townshend  on  the  other, 
meant  to  gain  or  give  the  preference  to  any  man  over 
Wilkes.  They  set  up  two  insignificant  Aldermen,  Eisdale 
and  Kennet,  as  competitors,  not  having  been  able  to 
prevail  on  Sawbridge  to  stand  for  it  again.  Wilkes  had 
regained  him  by  promising  to  bring  him  into  Parliament 
for  the  City.  Wilkes  and  Bull  had  the  majority  of  hands, 
and,  after  a  poll  which  was  demanded  for  Eisdale  and 
Kennet,  Wilkes  and  Bull  were  returned  to  the  Court  of 
Aldermen,^  who  at  last  did  declare  Wilkes  Lord  Mayor. 
Thus,  after  so  much  persecution  of  the  Court,  after  so 
many  attempts  on  his  life,  after  a  long  imprisonment  in  a 
gaol,  after  all  his  own  crimes  and  indiscretions,  did  this 
extraordinary  man,  of  more  extraordinary  fortune,  attain 
the  highest  office  in  so  grave  and  important  a  city  as  the 
capital  of  England,  always  reviving  the  more  opposed 
and  oppressed,  and  unable  to  shock  Fortune,  or  make  her 
laugh  at  him^  who  laughed  at  everybody  and  everything.^ 
The  duration  of  his  influence  was  the  most  wonderful 
part  of  his  history.  Massaniello,  a  fisher-boy,  attained  the 
supreme  power  of  Naples,  but  perished  in  three  days. 
Rienzi  governed  Rome,  but  lost  it  by  his  folly.  Sacheverel 
balanced  the  glory  of  Marlborough  in  the  height  of  his 

1  Eleven  aldermen  scratched  for  Wilkes  ;  Townshend  and  Oliver  for  Bull. 
;  2  In  the  triumph  of  his  heart  Wilkes  said,  *'  If  the  King  had  sent  me  a 

I       pardon  and  a  thousand  pounds  to  Paris,  I  should  have  accepted  them,  but  I 
am  obliged  to  him  for  not  having  ruined  me." 


398       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

victories,  but  never  was  heard  of  more.  Wilkes  was  seen 
through,  detected,  yet  gained  ground  :  and  all  the  power 
of  the  Crown,  all  the  malice  of  the  Scots,  all  the  abilities 
of  Lord  Mansfield,  all  the  violence  of  Alderman  Town- 
shend,  all  the  want  of  policy  and  parts  in  the  Opposition, 
all  the  treachery  of  his  own  friends,  could  not  demolish 
him.  He  equally  baffled  the  King  and  Parson  Home, 
though  both  neglected  no  latitude  to  compass  his  ruin. 
It  is  in  this  tenth  year  of  his  war  on  the  Court  that  he 
gained  so  signal  a  victory ! 

The  moment  the  poll  was  over,  the  Livery  proceeded 
to  the  nomination  of  members  for  the  county.  Wilkes 
had  set  up  his  backsliding  friend  Crosby,  his  late  enemy 
Sawbridge,  his  trusty  friend  Bull,  and  one  Hayley,  his 
brother-in-law.  A  company  of  Middlesex  Justices,  at- 
tached to  the  Court,  entered,  and  one  of  them.  Sir  John 
Hawkins,  seized  the  chair,  while  the  livery  cried  out  to 
Sawbridge  to  take  it.  Sir  John  was  originally  bred  a 
lawyer,^  in  which  profession  he  did  not  succeed.  Having 
married  a  gentlewoman  who,  by  her  brother's  death, 
proved  a  considerable  fortune,  he  bought  a  house  at 
Twickenham,  intending  to  give  himself  up  to  his  studies 
and  music,  of  which  he  was  very  fond,  and  had  already 
published  the  life  of  a  German  musician.  He  now  com- 
menced a  justice  of  peace ;  and  being  a  very  honest 
moral  man,  but  of  no  brightness,  and  very  obstinate  and 
contentious,  he  grew  hated  by  the  lower  class,  and  very 
troublesome  to  the  gentry,  with  whom  he  went  to  law  both 
on  public  and  private  causes ;  at  the  same  time  collecting 

1  He  was  the  son  of  a  builder,  and  born  in  17 19.  When  a  young  man  he 
wrote  for  the  periodical  press ;  he  was  the  friend  and  executor  of  Johnson,  of 
whom  he  wrote  a  memoir  which  brought  upon  him  the  castigation  of  Peter 
Pindar  and  a  host  of  critics.  At  the  time  Walpole  here  speaks  of  him  he  h  td 
been  chairman  of  the  quarter  sesssions  ten  years ;  he  had  been  knighted  in 
the  year  1772.  He  contributed  notes  to  Johnson  and  Steevens's  "  Shak- 
speare,"  edited  Walton's  "Angler,"  wrote  a  pamphlet  on  the  Highways,  and 
secured  a  respectable  name  in  literature  by  his  *'  History  of  the  Science  and 
Practice  of  Music."     He  died  in  1789. 


1774]  WESTMINSTER   ELECTION  399 

materials  indefatigably  for  a  History  of  Music.  His  wife 
disliking  so  retired  a  life,  he,  uneasy  from  the  uneasiness 
he  gave  his  neighbours,  sold  his  house,  quitted  Twicken- 
ham, and  settled  in  London,  pursuing  his  duty,  in  which 
he  was  very  useful,  and  his  History,  when  his  want  of 
judgment,  and  his  zeal  and  obstinacy,  drew  him  into  the 
imprudent  step  I  have  mentioned.  Such  confusion 
followed  the  seizing  of  the  chair  by  Sir  John,  that  the 
meeting  broke  up  in  disorder ;  but  on  the  next  day  but 
one. 

loth^  the  majority  of  hands  were  held  up  for  Wilkes's 
nominees.  A  poll  was  demanded  and  entered  upon, 
after  much  riot  occasioned  by  the  extravagant  insolence 
and  pride  of  Alderman  Townshend,  who,  being  hissed 
and  hooted  by  the  citizens,  clapped  on  his  hat,  and  turned 
his  back  on  them  in  contempt.  He  set  up  his  convert 
Oliver.  Baker,  son  of  the  late  Alderman,  and  Alderman 
himself  and  in  Opposition  too,  stood  likewise,  but  refused 
to  sign  the  self-denying  oath  which  Wilkes's  four  candi- 
dates had  taken,  and  gave,  in  print  good  reasons  against 
it.  Oliver  refused  too  to  sign  that  one  article  which 
promised  to  obey  implicitly  the  directions  from  the  con- 
stitutents.  Roberts,  the  last  year's  Court  candidate  for 
the  mayoralty  against  Wilkes,  now  stood  likewise  for 
the  City. 

The  city  of  Westminster  was  in  equal  danger  of  being 
lost  to  the  Court.  Lord  Percy,  son  of  the  Duke  of  North- 
umberland, was  only  more  welcome  to  them  than  a 
nominee  of  Wilkes ;  but  he  was  in  America,  a  penurious 
undignified  young  man,^  and  his   father  connected  with 

^  "When  Lord  Percy  was  in  Ireland  with  his  regiment,  the  5th  Infantry, 
he  consented,  after  much  consideration,  to  give  a  dinner  to  the  officers  in 
garrison  at  Limerick.  The  gallant  but  cautious  Earl  ordered  the  repast  at  a 
tavern,  specifying  that  it  should  be  for  fifty  persons,  at  eighteen  pence  per 
head.  The  officers  heard  of  the  arrangement,  and  they  ordered  the  landlord 
to  provide  a  banquet  at  a  guinea  per  head,  promising  to  pay  the  difference,  in 
the  event  of  their  entertainer  declining  to  do  so.  When  the  banquet  was 
served  there  was  but  one  astonished  and  uncomfortable  individual  at  the 


400       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

Lord  Chatham.  The  Earl  of  Lincoln  (now  Duke  of 
Newcastle),^  as  penurious  as  Lord  Percy,  had  promised 
to  set  up  his  second  son,  but  repented  and  refused.  Earl 
Stanhope,  a  determined  republican,  was  just  returned 
from  Geneva,  where  he  had  long  resided.^  He  made  his 
son  (Lord  Mahon)  offer  himself  to  the  citizens  of  West- 
minster by  an  advertisement  in  which  the  young  Lord 
engaged  to  promote  all  popular  causes,  and  to  vote  against 
all  the  late  American  Acts  ;  and  he  declared  for  all  Wilkes's 
self-denying  articles  in  their  largest  latitude.     Humphrey 

board,  and  that  was  the  Earl  himself,  who  beheld  a  feast  for  the  gods,  and 
heard  himself  gratefully  complimented  upon  the  excellence  of  both  viands  and 
wines.  The  astonished  Earl  experienced  an  easily  understood  difficulty  in  re- 
turning thanks  when  his  health  was  drunk  with  an  enthusiasm  that  bewildered 
him ;  and  on  retiring  early  he  sought  out  the  landlord,  in  order  to  have  the 
solution  of  an  enigma  that  sorely  puzzled  him.  Boniface  told  the  unadorned 
and  the  unwelcome  truth ;  and  the  inexperienced  young  Earl  acknowledged 
his  mistake,  and  discharged  the  bill  with  a  sigh  on  himself,  and  a  cheque  on 
his  banker." — "  Table  Traits^  and  something  on  them.''^ — D. 

^  Henry,  ninth  Earl  of  Lincoln,  succeeded  to  the  dukedom  of  Newcastle- 
under-Line  in  1768.     He  died  in  1794- — D. 

^  Philip,  the  second  Earl ;  he  died  in  1786,  aged  seventy-two.  His  eldest 
son,  Charles  (the  third  earl),  married  Lord  Chatham's  eldest  daughter,  Hester 
Pitt,  of  which  marriage  was  born  the  eccentric  Lady  Hester  Stanhope.  Both 
the  above  Earls  were  exceedingly  liberal  in  their  political  opinions,  and  both 
were  excellent  mathematicians :  the  first  was  so  in  spite  of  his  guardian,  the 
celebrated  Earl  of  Chesterfield,  who  prohibited  him  when  a  boy  from  the 
pursuit  of  his  favourite  study.  He  was  also  an  accomplished  linguist,  a 
sound  classical  scholar,  with  so  retentive  a  memory  that  he  could  repeat  the 
whole  of  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey  by  rote.  Earl  Philip  was  a  munificent  patron 
of  learning  and  of  learned  men.  As  a  statesman,  he  was  one  of  the  most 
independent  of  his  day ; — that  day  was  one  of  splendid  extravagance,  but 
Earl  Philip  did  not  follow  the  mode.  On  one  of  his  occasional  visits  to  the 
House  of  Lords  (from  Geneva),  a  new  doorkeeper,  seeing  him  about  to  pass 
into  the  House  in  a  dress  of  extreme  simplicity,  impeded  his  entrance 
with  the  remark,  ' '  Now  then,  honest  man,  go  back  !  You  can  have  no 
business  in  such  a  place  as  this,  honest  man  !"  His  son  Charles,  at  the 
period  of  the  election  above  referred  to,  was  twenty-one  years  of  age.  He 
was  a  more  advanced  republican  than  his  father,  and  when  the  French 
Revolution  burst  forth  he  laid  aside  all  the  external  ornaments  of  the 
peerage.  But  he  is  remembered  for  better  things  than  this.  When  a  young 
man  he  gained  a  prize,  from  the  Society  of  Stockholm,  for  a  Memoir  on  the 
Pendulum.  He  was,  perhaps,  too  universal  a  genius  to  be  very  useful  to 
mankind ;  and  among  his  projects,  rather  than  his  achievements,  may  be 
mentioned,  his  arithmetical  machine,  his  plan  for  securing  buildings  from  fire, 
his,  new  printing-press,  his  monochord  for  tuning  musical  instruments,  and  his 
designs  for  a  vessel  to  sail  against  wind  and  tide.  Earl  Charles  died  in 
1816.— D. 


1774]  DEATH   OF   CLEMENT   XIV  401 

Cotes,  the  associate  of  Wilkes,  presented  himself  likewise, 
but  met  with  no  encouragement.  He  was  a  broken  wine- 
merchant,  and  of  no  repute.  Sir  Robert  Bernard,  one 
of  their  late  members,  and  a  patriot  too,  was  another 
candidate ;  but  the  popular  cry  was  for  Lord  Mahon,  and 
another  Lord  till  then  unknown  to  the  English  public. 
This  was  Lord  Mountmorris,^  a  young  Irish  patriot,  of  a 
very  slender  estate,  and  wrongheaded,  who  had  been 
a  very  active  opponent  in  the  Irish  Parliament.  He 
greedily  embraced  all  the  political  tenets  of  Wilkes ;  and 
being  well  received  by  the  populace,  at  their  desire  was 
joined  with  Lord  Mahon,  and  both  were  enrolled  of  all 
Wilkes's  City  clubs.  Such  success  alarmed  the  Duke  of 
Northumberland,  who  instantly  quitted  the  North,  where 
he  was  deeply  engaged  in  contested  elections,  and  posting 
to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  prevailed  on  him  to  set  up  his 
son  Lord  Thomas  Clinton  ;  while  his  own  son.  Lord  Percy, 
as  if  Irish  Lords  had  the  chief  influence  in  Westminster, 
was  recommended  by  the  Earl  of  Kerry,  a  simple  young 
Irish  peer,2  who  had  married  an  elderly  Irishwoman  that 
had  been  divorced  on  his  account,  and  had  wasted  a  vast 
estate  in  the  idlest  ostentation. 

On  the  \2th  came  news  of  the  death  of  the  Pope 
Ganganelli,  called  Clement  XIV.,  an  artful  sensible  man, 
but  too  old  and  timid  to  support  the  tottering  tiara  under 
its  depressure  and  the  intrigues  of  the  Jesuits.  He  had 
bound  himself,  as  the  condition  of  his  exaltation,  to  sacri- 
fice that  order  to  the  obstinacy  of  the  King  of  Spain 
delayed  it  as  long  as  he  possibly  could,  yielded  at  last  to 
the  necessity,  and  perished  by  his  complaisance.  They 
not  only  spread  doubts  on  the  validity  of  his  election  and 

^  Hervey  Redmond,  second  Viscount  Mountmorris,  died  unmarried  1797. 

^  Francis  Thomas,  Earl  of  Kerry,  was  at  this  time  in  his  thirty-fifth  year, 
and  had  been  married  about  seven  years  to  Anastasia  Daley  (daughter  of 
Peter  Daly  of  Queensbury,  co.  Galway),  sister  of  the  Countess  of  Louth. 
The  Earl  died  childless  in  1818,  when  the  title  fell  to  his  cousin  the  Marquis 
of  Lansdowne. — A.  F.  S. 

I. — 2    D 


402       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Oct. 

published  books  against  it,  but  threatened  his  life,  so  that 
he  did  not  dare  to  stir  abroad  unless  doubly  guarded. 
When  they  had  intimidated  and  broken  his  spirit,  they 
employed  an  old  woman  to  foretell  the  nearness  of  his 
death,  and  even  set  a  celebrated  Madonna  at  work  to 
menace  him  with  it.  This  fraud  he  detected,  and  ordered 
the  Inquisition  to  prosecute  ;  but  it  was  too  late:  the  panic 
had  sunk  deep,  and  carried  him  off. 

The  public,  however,  soon  learnt  that  the  Jesuits  had  not 
trusted  to  the  panic  alone.  Clement  thought  himself  poi- 
soned, and  declared  so.  The  symptoms  appeared  clearly 
before  his  death.  His  belly  swelled  extremely,  and  was  of 
a  very  bad  colour ;  and  the  suspicions  were  so  strong,  that 
the  Ministers  of  the  House  of  Bourbon  insisted  that  the 
body  should  not  be  opened  without  the  assistance  of 
surgeons  and  others  whom  they  should  appoint  for  that 
purpose.  But,  though  the  dissection  was  made  the  very 
day  he  died,  the  putrefaction  was  so  rapid  that  the 
surgeons  had  great  difficulty  to  perform  the  operation. 
As  soon  as  they  touched  the  head,  the  hair  fell  off,  and 
all  the  teeth  fell  out :  the  bones  of  the  body  crumbled 
away ;  and  the  flesh  upon  the  least  touch  of  the  knife  did 
not  divide,  but  came  away  in  pieces.  They  were  forced  to 
embalm  the  body  twice,  in  order  to  transport  it  to  the 
Vatican  ;  but  the  face  was  so  disfigured,  that  it  was  neces- 
sary to  cover  it  with  a  mask  of  wax.  The  bowels  at  the 
dissection  were  put  into  a  strong  earthen  pan ;  but  the 
fermentation  was  so  great  that  it  broke  it.  The  body  was 
deposited  the  first  night  in  a  private  chapel,  in  order  to  be 
consigned  in  form  the  next  morning  to  the  Great  Chapter 
of  St.  Peter's;  but  in  the  removal  of  it  for  that  purpose 
the  head  detached  itself  from  the  body.  It  was  supposed 
that  a  slow  poison  had  been  given  to  him  in  the  last  Holy 
Week.  His  confectioner  was  taken  ill  at  the  same  time 
with  the  same  symptoms,  and,  when  the  letters  came  from 
Rome,  was  at  the  point  of  death.     For  some  months  past 


1774]  THE   ELECTIONS  403 

great  numbers  of  ex-Jesuits  had  resorted  to  Rome ;  and 
letters  had  been  received  there  from  Germany  and  France, 
inquiring  if  the  Pope  was  poisoned.  These  particulars 
I  received  in  the  following  letter  from  Sir  Horace  Mann, 
Envoy  to  Florence,  dated  from  Naples,  Sept.  29th,  1774  : — 

You  will  have  heard  of  the  death  of  the  Pope,  but  do  not 

know,  perhaps,  that  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  it  was 
hastened  by  the  Jesuits,  who  poisoned  him  in  the  Sacrament. 
He  himself  declared  his  suspicions  before  he  died,  and  the  belief 
of  it  is  so  general,  even  in  these  Catholic  countries,  that  the 
Ministers  of  France  and  Spain  insisted  on  being  present  at  the 
opening  of  his  body,  his  belly  having  swelled  extraordinarily,  and 
being  strangely  discoloured,  even  before  he  expired.  The  corpse 
putrified  so  suddenly,  that  the  surgeons  could  hardly  go  through 
the  operation ;  and,  as  soon  as  they  touched  the  head,  the  teeth 
fell  out,  and  all  the  bones  of  his  body  crumbled  away,  and  the 
flesh  came  away  in  pieces.  They  were  forced  to  embalm  the 
body  twice  before  they  could  carry  it  to  St.  Peter's ;  and  instead 
of  exposing  his  face  as  is  usual,  they  covered  it  with  wax,  and  in 
the  transport  the  head  separated  from  the  body.  His  con- 
fectioner is  dead  in  a  manner  little  less  horrid,  and  with  the 
same  symptoms  his  Holiness  had. 

The  late  Jesuits,  not  content  with  their  diabolical  practices, 
had  the  impudence  and  folly  to  foretell  his  death,  and  crowded 
to  Rome,  asking  all  the  way  if  the  Pope  was  not  yet  dead. 

The  Ministers  of  the  two  Crowns,  and  the  College  of  Car- 
dinals, sit  day  and  night  in  taking  informations.  Several  of  the 
Ignatian  Society  are  seized  and  clapped  up ;  but,  as  the  gates  of 
Rome  are  shut  and  strictly  guarded  since  this  detestable  scene  has 
come  to  light,  I  can  tell  you  no  more  particulars  at  present, 
but  you  shall  hear  farther  in  a  post  or  two.  It  is  thought  here 
that  this  shocking  assassination  will  precipitate  the  fall  of  the 
other  monkish  Orders,  who  are  but  too  like  the  Jesuits,  in  stop- 
ping at  no  crimes  for  the  interest  of  their  Church. 

Wilkes's  triumph  in  the  City  was  not  complete ;  of  his 
four  nominees,  Bull,  Halsey,  Sawbridge,  and  Brass  Crosby, 


404       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Oct. 

he  carried  but  the  three  first.  Alderman  Oliver,  now 
the  creature  of  Alderman  Townshend,  was  the  fourth 
elected  ;  but  Alderman  Harley  was  not  only  driven  out 
there,  but,  standing  for  Herefordshire,  the  native  county 
of  his  family,  he  was  not  only  rejected,  but  insulted,  so 
that  he  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life.  At  Dover,  Wilkes 
carried  one  member  ; — and  on  the 

20th  he  himself  and  Sergeant  Glynn  were  elected  for 
Middlesex  without  an  opponent,  though  Alderman  Towns- 
hend had  threatened  to  stand,  and  the  Court  and  the 
justices  of  the  county  had  used  every  endeavour  to  get 
candidates,  but  no  man  would  venture.  Had  he  been 
permitted  to  sit  quietly  in  the  House  of  Commons  five 
years  sooner,  he  had  sunk  to  nothing,  having  no  oratorical 
talents.  Now  he  forced  his  way  triumphantly,  and  came 
vested  with  the  insignia  of  the  first  magistracy  in  England, 
and  supported  by  half  a  dozen  members  of  his  own 
nomination.  Alderman  Harley,  brother  of  Lord  Oxford, 
and  who  made  the  firmest  stand  against  him,  now  took 
fright,  abandoned  the  City,  and  stood  for  Herefordshire, 
but  lost  it,  and  was  both  exceedingly  ill-treated  by  the 
populace,  and  frowned  on  by  the  Court,  as  Wilkes  himself 
owned  that  Harley,  had  he  stood  for  London,  would  have 
been  the  first  on  the  poll.  Sir  Joseph  Mawbey,  Wilkes's 
candidate  for  Surrey,  was  as  unsucccessful  there.  How- 
ever, the  Court  lost  several  members  in  different  places 
before  a  month  of  the  electing  time  was  over. 

On  the  22nd  the  Court  issued  a  proclamation  against 
exporting  gunpowder.  This  was  levelled  at  the  North 
Americans,  and  was  a  proof  that  the  Government  expected 
they  would  take  up  arms.  General  Gage  had  seized  the 
powder  at  Boston,  which  had  actually  occasioned  an  in- 
surrection. Colonel  Lee,  a  brave  but  very  wild  man,  who 
had  been  disobliged,  was  actually  gone  to  America  to  offer 
his  services  to  the  discontented.  The  King  had  broken  a 
promise  to  him,  but  afterwards,  having  an  audience  on 


1774]  THE    ELECTIONS  405 

bringing  a  letter  from  the  King  of  Poland,  the  King  began 
to  excuse  his  former  behaviour ;  but  Lee  stopped  him 
short  by  saying,  "  Sir,  I  will  never  give  your  Majesty  an 
opportunity  of  breaking  your  promise  to  me  again."  The 
Government  had  about  10,000  men  in  Boston. 

On  the  26th  the  poll  for  Westminster  ended,  and  Lord 
Percy  and  Lord  T.  Clinton  were  returned  ;  the  first  had 
4994  votes,  and  the  second  4744.  Lord  Mountmorris  had 
but  2531,  Lord  Mahon  2342,  and  Humphrey  Cotes  130. 
Wilkes  went  one  day  to  support  the  losing  candidates,  and 
could  amass  but  15  voters.  The  Duchess  of  Northumber- 
land sat  daily  at  a  window  in  Covent  Garden  making 
interest  for  her  son. 


[Nov. 


NOVEMBER 


1st. 


THE  Court  and  Scotch  faction,  enraged  at 
Wilkes's  success,  abused  him  in  the  grossest 
and  most  outrageous  manner.  This  occa- 
sioned the  appearance  of  the  following  ex- 
cellent satire  in  the  "  Public  Advertiser "  to-day,  the 
author  of  which  I  know  not : — 

An  Answer  to  all  past,  present,  and  future  Abuse  of  Mr.  Wilkes, 
on  the  score  of  Morals. 

I  have  hitherto  given  my  best  support  to  the  Lord  Mayor 
elect,  from  an  opinion  that  the  man  had  some  virtues  blended 
with  his  vices  and  follies ;  nay,  to  own  a  weakness,  I  confess  I 
regardod  him  as  a  very  exalted  character,  whose  public  services 
and  inflexible  attachment  to  the  laws  and  the  people  had  for  a 
course  of  years  drawn  upon  his  head  the  whole  weight  of  a 
tyrant's  oppression,  and  rendered  him  obnoxious  to  all  the 
slaves,  sycophants,  and  ministerial  prostitutes  in  the  kingdom, 
I  begin  now  to  be  much  staggered  in  my  opinion  of  his  character. 
For  how  can  he  be  otherwise  than  the  collected  mass  of  all 
moral  turpitude  who  is  reviled  without  ceasing  for  his  treachery 
by  Mr.  Home  ?  for  his  cruelty  by  Alderman  Townshend  1  for  his 
callous  conscience  by  Sylva  the  Jew,  for  his  impudence  and  dis- 
loyalty by  Dr.  Shebbeare?  for  his  abuse  of  the  Scotch  by  Dr. 
Johnson?  for  his  impiety  by  Lord  Sandwich,  and  his  infidelity 
by  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester!  for  his  prodigality  by  Charles  Fox? 
his  mercenary,  time-serving  principles  by  Lord  Mansfield  and 
Wedderburn  ?  for  his  luxury  by  the  ministerial  Aldermen  ?  his 
profligacy  by  Rigby  and  Townshend?  his  hypocrisy,  selfishness, 
and  ingratitude  by  the  whole  Scotch  nation  ?  and,  finally,  for  his 

black  revenge  and  dark  designs  upon  his  country  by ,  the 

best  of  Pr s  ?  Toby. 

406 


I774J  DEATH   OF   THOMAS    BRADSHAW  407 

Wilkes  being  told  that,  on  his  presentation,  the  Lord 
Chancellor  Apsley  intended  to  signify  to  him  that  the 
King  thought  the  City  had  made  a  very  improper  choice, 
Wilkes  said,  "  If  he  does,  I  shall  inform  him  that  I 
am  at  least  as  fit  to  be  Lord  Mayor  as  he  is  to  be  Lord 
Chancellor." 

By  accounts  from  America  it  appeared  that  the  spirit 
of  the  colonies  rose  and  spread.  At  Boston  they  made 
strong  representations  against  fortifying  the  town,  and  the 
Presbyterian  ministers  were  at  the  head  of  all  mutinies. 
The  General  sending  to  New  York  for  800  blankets 
for  the  soldiers,  and  for  transports  to  bring  more  troops 
from  Quebec,  not  a  merchant  of  New  York  would  sell  him 
a  blanket,  nor  would  the  town  lend  him  their  transport 
vessels. 

Edmund  Burke  was  elected  for  Bristol,  with  one  Cruger, 
both  preferably  to  the  two  old  Court  Members. 

On  the  Jth  died  suddenly  Thomas  Bradshaw,  that  low 
but  useful  tool  of  Administration.  His  vanity  had  carried 
him  to  great  excesses  of  profusion,  and,  being  overwhelmed 
with  debts,  he  shot  himself.  The  King  gave  his  widow  so 
great  a  pension  as  500/.  a  year,  and  300/.  a  year  for  the 
education  of  the  children.  The  Duke  of  Athol  was 
drowned  in  his  own  pond  about  the  same  time.^ 

\2th.  Very  bad  accounts  from  J\merica;  many:  letters 
stopped.  The  Court  affirmed  that  the  General  Assembly 
would  have  restrained  themselves  to  a  simple  petition  to 
the  King  for  redress  against  the  Boston  bills,  but  that 
Dr.  Franklin  had  privately  despatched  a  sloop  to  invite 
more. violent  measures. 

On  the  dissolution  of  the  Parliament  Dr.  Johnson,  one 
of  the  venal  champions  of  the  Court,  published  a  short 
piece  called  "  The  Patriot,"  tending,  according  to  the  prac- 
tice of  renegades,  who  are  always  most  virulent  against 

^  On  the  4th.  This  was  the  Duke  who,  in  1765,  sold  his  sovereignty  of 
the  Isle  of  Man  to  Government  for  70,000/. — B, 


4o8       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

those   who   have   deserted,   to   show   that   all   patriotism 
is  instigated  by  interest. 

Dr.  Shebbeare,  another  pensioned  writer,  and  who  had 
been  pilloried  for  libels,  published  another,  one  of  the  most 
profligate  and  outrageous  ever  penned.  It  was  called  "An 
Answer  to  Queries,"  and  contained  the  grossest  abuse  on 
King  William  and  Queen  Mary,  on  the  Reformation,  the 
Revolution,  the  Whigs,  and  all  lovers  of  liberty  and  the 
Constitution.  It  defended  the  Papists,  and  called  for 
persecution  of  all  Dissenters,  and  for  proscription  of  the 
Americans ;  and  was  more  extravagant  than  the  writings 
of  Garasse  and  the  Jesuits  at  the  time  of  the  League.  He 
avowed  himself  the  King's  pensioner ;  and  the  rank  invec- 
tive on  King  William  was  a  worthy  monument  of  the 
gratitude  of  the  fourth  Prince  of  the  House  of  Hanover  to 
the  great,  wise,  and  heroic  Monarch  who  called  that  line 
to  the  Crown  ! 

The  Scotch  Peers,  on  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Athol, 
made  a  stand  against  the  mandate  of  the  Court — not  a 
majority  of  them. 

22nd,  died  that  extraordinary  man,  Robert  Lord  Clive, 
aged  fifty.  His  fatigues  of  body  and  mind  had  greatly 
impaired  and  broken  his  constitution.  He  was  grown  sub- 
ject to  violent  disorders  in  his  bowels  on  any  emotion,  and 
they  often  were  attended  by  convulsion.  He  was  at  Bath, 
but  being  suddenly  sent  for  to  town  by  Varelst,  one  of  his 
Indian  accomplices,  on  what  emergency  was  not  known,  he 
was  seized  with  violent  pains.  Dr.  Fothergill,  his  physi- 
cian, gave  him,  as  he  had  been  wont  to  do,  a  dose  of  lau- 
danum in  the  evening.  It  did  not  remove  his  anguish,  and 
he  demanded  more  laudanum.  Some  said  Fothergill  told 
him  if  he  took  more  he  would  be  dead  in  an  hour ;  others, 
that  more  was  administered.  It  is  certain  that  he  took 
more  without  or  with  the  privity  of  the  physician,  and 
did  die  within  the  time  mentioned  :  but  he  certainly  cut 
his   throat.      So   many  recent   suicides   gave    the    more 


1774]  LIBEL   ON    CHARLES   FOX  409 

weight  to  the  belief  of  this.  He  was  in  his  forty-ninth 
year. 

The  printers  of  the  "  South  Briton  "  and  of  the  Hbel  on 
Charles  Fox  were  tried  and  sentenced.^  See  this  Journal 
in  the  preceding  month  of  February,  and  in  the  "  London 
Chronicle." 

The  new  elections  were  now  all  over,  and  certainly  to 
appearance  less  favourable  to  the  Court  than  they  had 
expected  from  the  surprise.  Lord  North  said  he  was  sure 
of  327,  and  that  30  were  quite  doubtful.  If  200  were 
surely  in  Opposition,  it  would,  without  the  30,  be  formid- 
able ;  but  there  was  no  union  amongst  them.  Lord  Rock- 
ingham's was  the  greater  party  ;  the  rest  were  small, 
detached  squadrons  of  Lord  Chatham's,  Lord  Shelburne's, 
and  Wilkes's — all  disunited.  The  Rockinghams  were  so 
low  and  inactive  that  they  saw  they  had  no  chance  till 
affairs,  especially  in  America,  should  grow  much  worse; 
and  accordingly  they  came  not  to  town  till  the  very 
instant  of  the  Parliament  opening,  and  even  then  found 
the  merchants  asleep  and  not  disposed  to  stir  on  the  griev- 
ances of  America.  The  Dissenters,  still  more  threatened, 
were  as  supine.  Wilkes  was  squabbling  in  the  Court  of 
Aldermen  with  Harley  and  Townshend,  and  attended  to 
nothing  else.  He  had  recently  played  Burke  a  very  offen- 
sive trick.  Having  offered  to  set  up  the  latter  for  West- 
minster, Burke  said  he  would  subscribe  no  engagement  to 
his  constituents.  Wilkes  promised  it  should  not  be  asked 
of  him  ;  and  then,  on  Lord  Mountmorris  starting,  sent  him 
word  he  must  subscribe — on  which  he  did  not  stand.  This 
was  the  meaning  of  his  obscure  speeches  at  Bristol.  Lord 
Shelburne  had  gone  abroad  for  two  years,  but  returned 
suddenly  on  the  dissolution.  The  Ministry  were  extremely 
alarmed  on  America,  and  it  was  suspected  that  Cornwall, 
who  was  a  thorough  rogue,  and  brother-in-law  of  Jenkin- 
son.  was  in  connivance  with  the  Court  junto,  meditating  a 

1  They  were  fined  and  imprisoned. 


4IO       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

removal  of  Lord  North  and  introduction  of  Lord  Shel- 
burne,  and,  by  his  means,  of  Lord  Chatham,  in  hopes  of 
the  latter  being  more  agreeable  to  the  Americans.  In  the 
mean  time  the  Court  agents  were  going  all  lengths  in 
inflaming  the  nation  against  the  Americans  and  reviving 
all  the  old  exploded  doctrines  of  the  Stuarts.  Mr.  Burke 
told  me  he  heard  a  sermon  at  Bristol  in  which  the  parson 
said  the  King  owed  the  Crown  neither  to  King  William 
nor  to  the  people,  but  enjoyed  it  by  indefeasible  hereditary 
right. 

2yth.  Died  of  a  dropsy,  Stephen,  Lord  Holland.  Charles 
Fox,  his  brother,  succeeded  him  as  Clerk  of  the  Pells  in 
Ireland,  by  virtue  of  a  patent  for  three  lives  given  to  their 
father  in  the  late  reign,  and  which  Princess  Amelia  told  me 
she  heard  the  late  King  give  him  on  condition  of  his  never 
asking  a  peerage.  I  do  not  think  that  promise  could  bind 
him  beyond  the  late  King's  life,  who  had  no  right  to  tie  up 
a  man  after  his  own  life. 

2(^th.  The  new  Parliament  met.  Lord  Beauchamp  ^  and 
Lord  Guernsey^  moved  for  Sir  Fletcher  Norton  to  be  re- 
chosen.  When  Lord  North  proposed  to  him  to  be  Speaker 
again,  he  said,  "  And  is  that  all  ? "  intimating  he  expected 
a  bribe  for  taking  so  great  an  office. 

Dr.  Johnson,  Bishop  of  Worcester,  had  a  fall  from  his 
horse  in  the  streets  of  Bath  on  the  24th  or  25th,  and  it  was 
thought  had  fractured  his  skull.  The  King  immediately 
named  Dr.  North,  Bishop  of  Lichfield  and  Coventry,  his 
successor ;  but  on  the  26th  news  came  that  Johnson  was 
still  alive,  which  made  the  precipitation  ridiculous ;  how- 
ever, he  died  of  the  hurt. 

10th.  The  Lords  went  on  the  King's  speech.  Lord 
Hillsborough  moved  the  Address  in  a  very  long  and  severe 
speech  on  the  colonies.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  answered 
him  and  read  a  letter  of  Lord  Hillsborough  to  Governor 

^  Eldest  sons  of  the  Earls  of  Hertford  and  Aylesford.  N.B.  This  was  a 
mistake,  Lord  Beauchamp  moved  the  Address  to  the  King. 


1774]  DEBATE   ON   THE   ADDRESS  411 

,  in  which  he  assured  the  colonies  that  the  whole  Cabinet 

Council  disapproved  of  taxing  them,  and  that  the  King  was 
of  the  same  opinion.  Lord  Shelburne  spoke  warmly  and 
well,  and  tried,  in  vain,  to  provoke  Lord  Mansfield  to  rise. 
Lord  Camden  spoke  finely  on  the  same  side.  He  said  he 
knew  no  sovereignty  but  that  of  God ;  and  drew  a  pathetic 
picture  of  the  colonies,  who  were  fighting  for  everything 
that  was  dear  to  them,  while  we  were  only  contending  for 
the  empty  name  of  sovereignty.  But  what  were  we  to  get 
by  it  ?  The  Legislature  might  proclaim  war  on  them,  but 
the  executive  power,  the  Crown,  must  wage  it,  and  would 
alone  be  advantaged  by  it.  But  so  it  had  been  in  every- 
thing. The  Legislature  had  conquered  Canada,  and  then  it 
had  been  given  to  the  Crown.  The  charters  had  been  con- 
demned as  too  loose  and  ill-drawn ;  they  had  been  corrected 
and  subjected  to  the  Crown.  The  arms  of  the  Legislature 
had  acquired  three  provinces  in  India,  but,  the  Company 
not  being  able  to  manage  them,  they  had  been  thrown  into 
the  Crown.  Lord  Dartmouth  was  the  only  Minister  who 
vouchsafed,  or,  from  not  knowing  what  part  they  should 
take,  who  ventured  to  reply,  and  he  chiefly  confined  himself 
to  wishing  the  colonies  would  submit.  Lord  Talbot  was 
more  moderate  than  ordinary.  Lord  Lyttelton  made  an 
admired  declamation.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  had  moved 
to  correct  the  Address,  that  the  House  might  be  involved 
by  no  declaration  without  lights,  but  it  was  overruled  by 
63  to  13.  The  next  day  nine  Lords  protested;  Lord 
Camden  for  the  first  time.  Lord  Chatham  was  expected, 
but  was  confined  with  the  gout.  Lord  Lyttelton,  vain  of 
his  own  oratory,  said  he  would  move  on  the  following 
Tuesday  to  open  the  doors  to  strangers. 


[Dec. 


DECEMBER 

THE  Members  being  now  all  sworn,  the  House 
of  Commons  went  on  the  King's  Speech,  and 
Lord  Beauchamp  and  Mr.  De  Grey,  son  of 
the  Chief  Justice,  moved  the  Address.  The 
first  was  pretty  warm  for  pursuing  measures  of  authority 
against  the  Bostonians,  and  presumed  that  dissention 
among  the  colonies  would  facilitate  the  business,  North 
Carolina  and  Georgia  having  sent  no  Deputies  to  the  Con- 
gress. Lord  John  Cavendish,  and  Frederic  Montagu  pro- 
posed corrections,  as  had  been  done  in  the  other  House, 
till  better  information  should  arrive ;  but  the  current  ran 
strongly  against  the  Americans,  and  the  New  Parliament, 
on  which  it  had  been  supposed  the  Court  had  rather  lost, 
seemed  more  submissive  even  than  the  last.  Charles  Fox, 
Mr.  Hartley,^  Colonel  Barre,  the  Burkes,  and  T.  Towns- 
hend,  were  very  warm  on  the  views  and  late  measures  of 
the  Court,  and  Colonel  Barre  said  the  Ministers  were 
going  to  blooden  the  new  members  with  blood  of  the 
Americans.  Lord  North  disclaimed  having  ever  given 
out,  as  he  was  taxed,  that  the  Quebec  Bill  was  destined 
to  let  loose  Papists  on  the  Colonies ;  Wedderburn  made 
a  figure  on  the  same  side ;  but  even  some  who  used  to  be 
opponents,  as  Sir  W.  Mayne  and  Sir  Philip  Jennings, 
appeared  converts ;  and  at  ten  at  night,  on  a  division, 
there  appeared  but  73  in  Opposition  and  264  Courtiers. 
A  majority  of  191  had  been  little  expected  by  either  side ; 
but  the  inactivity  of  the  Opposition,  the  vigilance  of  the 

^  Mr.  Hartley,  much  versed  in  finances,  and  friend  of  Lord  Rockingham, 
had  written  several  political  tracts,  and  was  now  in  Parliament  for  the  first 
time. 

412 


1774]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  413 

Court,  and  the  prejudice  taken  against  the  Americans, 
made  nothing  surprising.  Lord  North  had  said  the  Court 
would  have  327,  30  were  doubtful,  so  the  Opposition 
ought  to  have  consisted  of  200.  Such  a  disparity  might 
lead  the  Court  to  embark  more  rashly ;  but  the  firmness 
of  the  Americans  had  struck  a  panic,  and  Lord  Beau- 
champ  told  me  the  next  day,  with  concern,  that  he  saw 
the  disposition  was  to  give  way.  Certainly  it  was  not  the 
disposition  of  the  King  and  junto — it  might  be  Lord 
North's,  who  had  been  driven  to  extremes  against  his 
inclination  ;  and  it  might  be  that  of  the  Bedfords,  who 
were  always  the  first  to  prompt  violence,  and  the  first  to 
be  alarmed.  Sir  W.  Mayne  said  he  had  been  told  by  a 
person  in  the  lobby  that  a  ship  was  come  which  had 
brought  advice  that  the  Congress  had  not  only  voted 
the  non-importation,  but  the  non-exportation  also.  For 
Charles  Fox,  Rigby  had  been  negotiating  his  peace  with 
Lord  North,  but  Charles's  demands  had  been  rejected  as 
too  extravagant,  which  had  fixed  him  in  Opposition,  and 
Burke  had  even  carried  him  to  Lord  Rockingham's  meet- 
ings. But  the  most  extraordinary  event  of  that  day  was, 
that  young  George  Grenville  voted  against  the  Court — in 
effect,  against  his  own  father's  famous  Stamp  Act.  He 
was  just  returned  from  his  travels,  and  newly  chosen  into 
Parliament,  but  had  not  even  been  at  Court.  His  being 
greatly  in  the  power  of  his  uncle.  Lord  Temple,  explained 
the  phenomenon.  Since  the  Court  had  not  called  Lord 
Temple  to  superintend  the  enforcement  of  the  Stamp 
Act,  he  had  found  or  made  evasions  for  opposing  it ;  and 
though  he  pretended  to  abandon  politics  himself,  he  hoped 
to  re-enter  or  revenge  himself  by  his  nephew,  who  had 
sense,  political  warmth,  and  nothing  of  the  dissolute 
character  of  his  contemporaries. 

6th.  Lord  Lyttelton  moved  to  open  the  doors  of  the 
House  of  Lords.  Lord  Weymouth,  a  little  impatient  at 
waiting  so  long  ere  he  was  called  into  the  Administration, 


414       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Dec. 

supported  him,  and  they  made  such  a  breach,  that  the 
Court  maintained  the  seclusion  but  by  36  to  28.  The 
motion  being  again  renewed  soon  after,  the  Lords  yielded 
to  admit  the  Commons,  and  that  each  Lord  might  intro- 
duce a  private  person.  On  this  the  Commons  re-admitted 
the  Lords. 

In  a  more  momentous  point  the  Court  was  disappointed. 
Rigby  and  his  connection,  hurt  at  the  impartiality  of 
Grenville's  Select  Committees  for  trying  Elections,  had 
comforted  themselves  that  they  could  prefer  the  hearing 
of  those  they  favoured,  and  postpone  those  to  which  they 
were  adverse ;  but  Rose  Fuller  proposing  unexpectedly 
that  the  petitions  should  be  drawn  out  by  ballot,  the 
whole  House  adopted  the  method,  and  it  was  ordered  to 
be  made  a  rule. 

On  the  days  of  voting  the  army  and  navy  there  were 
lively  debates,  for  the  navy  being  lessened,  and  no  new 
supplies  being  asked,  though  appearances  were  so  hostile 
on  both  sides  in  America,  the  Opposition  presumed  that 
some  large  after-demands  would  be  made :  and  Lord 
John  Cavendish  hinting  that  he  wished  the  Ministers 
would  a  little  open  their  plan  to  the  House,  Lord  Beau- 
champ  imprudently  (for  Lord  North  was  absent  by  a  fall) 
said  he  had  passed  two  hours  the  preceding  evening  with 
the  noble  Lord  (Lord  North),  and  could  assure  the  House 
his  Lordship  had  no  plan.  This  was  exceedingly  ridiculed, 
and  deservedly,  as  it  was  very  true.  Burke  made  a  great 
figure  those  two  days,  ridiculing  with  the  highest  wit  and 
humour  the  inconsistency  of  the  Ministers,  their  violent 
attack  on  America,  followed  by  the  contemptible  inactivity 
of  Gage,  cooped  up  and  besieged  in  Boston  which  he  was 
sent  to  punish ;  and  he  exposed  Sir  W.  Meredith  egregi- 
ously,  who  attempted  to  defend  those  measures.  Burke 
was  not  less  severe  on  the  violence  used  against  Wilkes 
in  the  last  Parliament,  and  the  placid  admission  of  him 
into  this.' 


1774]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  415 

New  edge  was  given  to  these  attacks  by  the' arrival  of 
the  long-intended  sloop  with  the  result  of  the  American 
Congress,  which  far  outwent  the  utmost  the  Ministers  had' 
feared.  They  had  flattered  themselves,  at  least  given  out, 
that  the  colonies  would  submit :  then  that  the  Bostonians 
would  offer  compensation.  At  last  they  had  hoped  the 
colonies,  at  least  the  deputies,  would  disagree,  and  that  at 
most  a  non -importation  would  be  voted  and  not  observed. 
Now  the  contrary  of  all  this  appeared.  They  had  been 
unanimous,  had  voted  non-importation,  non-exportation 
too,  and  non-consumption  ;  had  voted  to  sell  cargoes  of 
ships  bringing  goods  from  England  ;  had  determined  to 
support  by  arms  such  of  their  brethren  as  should  be 
attacked ;  insisted  on  repeal  of  all  late  Acts  against 
America,  and  not  to  submit  till  that  was  obtained.  They 
sent  over  a  petition  to  the  King,  a  fine  recapitulation  of 
their  grievances ;  an  address  to  the  people  of  England 
(intended  against  the  general  election,  not  knowing  it  was 
over) ;  and  they  had  invited  the  people  of  Canada  to  join 
with  them  against  the  Quebec  Bill. 

This  intelligence  threw  the  Administration  into  the 
utmost  dismay  and  consternation,  as  well  it  might.  TbJs 
panic  of  the  Administration  may  seem  to,  but  does  not  at 
all,  contradict  my  former  hypothesis,  of  there  having  been 
an  intention  qf^driving  all  or  many  of  the  colonies  into 
rel^elHon.  That  plan  I  impute  to  Lord  Mansfield  and 
Jenkinson,  and  their  secret  junto,  who,  though  really  the 
confidential  Ministers,  were  very  distinct  from  the  Admin- 
istration. Lord  North's  indolence  might  well  be  alarmed 
at  seeing  the  storm  he  would  have  to  combat ;  but  even 
the  junto  might  act  panic,  to  disguise  their  own  plan,  and 
to  excite  the  nation  against  the  Americans.  But  could  it 
be  extraordinary  that  even  the  junto  should  be  alarmed  ? 
Lord  Mansfield  was  very  capable  of  giving  pestilent 
advice,  and  of  then  trembling  at  the  consequences.  Nor 
was  inconsistence  at  all  out  of  character  for  the  whole 


4i6       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE      [i774 

mass  of  junto  and  Ministers.  What  could  be  more  con- 
tradictory than  their  whole  conduct  during  the  war  ?  how 
often  did  they  bully,  provoke,  seek  to  conciliate,  sue  for 
peace !  They  went  to  war  with  America,  France,  Spain, 
and  Holland,  rejecting  all  offers  for  maintaining  the  peace, 
and  negotiating  for  it  the  moment  war  was  proclaimed. 
The  Commissioners,  Lord  Carlisle,  Johnston,  and  Eden, 
sent  to  New  York  to  offer  peace ;  the  despatch  of 
Cumberland  to  Spain ;  the  negotiations  kept  up  with 
Holland  through  Count  Welderen  and  Sir  Joseph  Yorke 
from  the  moment  the  rupture  was  made  ;  and  the  constant 
various  channels  opened  and  kept  open  in  France,  was  one 
tissue  of  insolence,  timidity,  obstinacy,  and  indecision. 
The  rashness  of  the  Administration  had  lighted  up  a  civil 
war  In  America,  in  which  it  might  be  equally  fatal  to 
advance  or  recede.  In  order  to  extend  the  prerogative, 
they  had  taught  the  nation  to  be  warm  for  the  sovereignty 
over  America,  and  now  many  of  them  were  ready  to  give 
up  America  rather  than  push  the  contention  any  farther. 
The  Butists  were  for  driving  on.  Lord  North  for  com- 
promising, the  Bedfords  for  either,  to  save  their  plans. 
Some  of  the  underlings  advised  to  withdraw  our  pensions 
from  the  Indians,  that  they  might  fall  on  the  colonies — a 
horrible  idea,  and  not  a  new  one,  as  will  appear  hereafter. 
yFh   this    distraction    the    Parliament   adjourned   for   the 

/holidays,  and  the  year  ended,  though  not  till  the  American 
merchants  had  advertised  for  a  meeting ;  and  even  those 
of  Glasgow  were  mutinous,  though  Lord  Frederic  Camp- 
bell had  been  commissioned  to  reside  there,  to  keep  them 

I  quiet.  Before  the  end  of  the  year  ii,ooo/.  a  year  was 
saddled  on  Ireland  in  additional  pensions  to  Members 
of  Parliament,   except    3000/.    a   year   to  the   Queen    of 

\  Denmark.^ 

'  ^  The  national  debt  at  this  time  amounted  to  128,524,332/.  7^.  \d.,  the 
interest  to  4,543,212/.  4J.  30^.  The  debt  was  less  than  it  had  been  in  1767  by 
nine  and  a  half  millions. — D. 


1775 
JANUARY 

A  REMARKABLE  Advertisement— '' For  the 
'Public  Advertiser.' — Intelligence  Extraordi- 
nary.— We  hear  that  the  candidates  to  succeed 
the  late  Mr.  Bradshaw  as  K 's  friend  are 

Messrs.  Pinchbeck  and  Macreth,  Sir  William  Meredith, 
Mr.  Cornwall,  Dr.  Hunter,  man-midwife  and  tittle-tattler 
to  her  M y,  and  Mademoiselle  Kromm,  the  nursery- 
maid. It  is  thought  Mr.  Pinchbeck  has  the  least  chance, 
having  long  had  a  promise." 

^th.  The  American  mer<;hants,  instigated  chiefly  by 
Hayley,  Wilkes's  brother-in-law,  one  of  their  number,  met, 
and  determined  to  petition  Parliament  against  the  late  mea- 
sures of  Administration,  which  had  brought  their  trade  into 
such  danger.  They  chose  three  merchants  for  each  colony 
to  be  a  committee. 

loth.  Was  published  Mr.  Burke's  famous  speech  on  the 
proposed  repeal  of  the  tea-duty,  in  the  last  Parliament. 
This  speech  will  illustrate  and  prove  the  character  I  have 
given  of  his  eloquence  in  former  pages.  It  also  remark- 
ably confirms  the  characters  and  account  I  have  given,  in 
my  Memoirs,  of  George  Grenville  and  Charles  Townshend, 
and  of  Lord  Chatham's  last  Administration.  With  the 
quickest  conception  and  amazing  facility  of  elocution,  with 
great  strength  of  argumentation,  and  with  all  the  powers 
of  imagination  and  memory,  the  speech  I  refer  to  has 
great  defects.  The  redundancy  of  images,  the  pursuit  of 
I.— 2  E  417 


4i8       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Jan. 

wit,  even  to  puerility,  the  want  of  judgment  and  sobriety, 
and  the  still  greater  want  of  art  to  touch  the  passions,  rank 
this  great  composition  (which  was  the  greater,  as  it  was 
spoken  unpremeditated)  but  with  the  species  of  imperfect 
eloquence.  The  occasion  was  too  serious  for  so  much  levity, 
and  an  orator  who,  when  hs  should  persuade  or  deprecate, 
makes  his  audience  only  wonder  or  smile,  shows  he  had 
rather  shine  than  gain  his  cause,  and  cannot  touch  his 
hearers  when  he  discovers  that  he  himself  is  unaffected  by 
his  subject.  The  part  the  ministers  were  taking  could  but 
be  of  the  last  importance  to  Britain.  It  aimed  at  sub- 
jecting the  colonies,  and  it  risked  the  ruin  both  of  them 
and  of  the  empire  itself.  Was  that  a  moment  for  Cicero 
to  be  as  profuse  of  playful  metaphors  and  fancy  as  Ovid  ? 
Yet  Burke  did  not  want  views  in  this  oration.  His  con- 
cealed objects  were  to  represent  Lord  Chatham  as  debili- 
tated by  age,  to  misrepresent  Conway  as  corrupted  and 
swerved  from  his  patronage  of  the  Americans,  and  thence, 
if  the  Ministry  should  be  overturned,  to  hold  out  Lord 
Rockingham  as  the  sole  tutelary  saint  of  America.  Thence 
the  principal  part  that  Conway  had  held  in  the  Stamp 
Act  was  but  stated  as  official,  while  all  the  firmness  of  the 
measure  was  ascribed  to  Lord  Rockingham  ;  and  that  in- 
capable nervous  puppet  was  held  up  as  the  only  Saviour, 
that  Burke,  his  prompter  and  tutor,  might  govern  in  his 
name.  Yet,  while  all  the  measures,  and  violences,  and 
timidity,  and  inconsistency  of  Administration  were  su- 
premely ridiculed,  the  last  pages  of  the  oration  stated  such 
high  and  despotic  principles,  that  Burke  both  left  himself 
a  subterfuge  for  acceding  even  to  the  views  of  the  Court,  or 
showed  that,  whatever  attacks  he  made  on  Ministers  from 
disappointed  or  eager  ambition,  he  did  not  essentially  differ 
in  his  maxims  from  the  most  arbitrary  system.  His  false 
imputation  on  Conway's  most  disinterested  and  indomitable 
virtue  was  still  more  profligate  in  a  man  who  had  been  so 
deeply  immersed  in  stockjobbing  at  the  very  moment  that. 


1775]  AMERICAN    AFFAIRS  419 

as  a  senator,  he  ought  to  have  anathematized  the  practice  ; 
and  who  but  last  year  had  shrunk  from  the  poor  oppressed 
Caribs,  because,  as  guilty  as  their  oppressors,  he  had 
coveted,  and  bought  from  their  ignorance,  for  a  trifle,  a 
vast  tract  of  their  land,  and  had  admitted  Charles  Fox, 
then  a  minister,  to  a  participation  of  the  intended  profits, 
in  hopes  of  obtaining  by  his  interest  a  confirmation  of  his 
purchase.  Conway  was  generally  irresolute  from  excess 
of  conscientious  scruples ;  when  Burke  deserted  his  party 
it  was  from  high  tenets,  as  on  the  subscription  to  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles,  or  to  secure  a  good  bargain  in  a 
fraudulent  acquisition  ;  but  both  in  his  stockjobbing  and 
his  purchase  his  judgment  proved  as  erroneous  as  in  his 
oratory  and  in  his  politics. 

The  American  merchants  were  very  temperate.  Some 
thought  that  Lord  North  himself  had  promoted  the  meet- 
ing, hoping  the  merchants  would  be  mediators  between  the 
Parliament  and  the  colonies.  It  is  certain  that  all  the 
Administration  was  in  the  greatest  consternation,  and  Lord 
North  was  much  inclined  to  recede.  Some  of  his  friends 
wished  him  to  give  up  the  obnoxious  bills  ;  and  some  went 
so  far  as  to  propose  to  give  up  the  colonies  themselves,  and 
make  a  perpetual  treaty  of  alliance  and  commerce  with 
them.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Lord  Mansfield  and  the 
junto,  of  whom  Jenkinson  and  Cornwall  had  most  weight, 
suggested  violent  measures,  and  it  was  proposed  to  refrain 
the  presents  to  the  Indian  nations,  that  they  might  fall  on 
the  colonies.  Lord  Mansfield,  underhand,  gave  hot  advice 
as  long  as  he  could  secretly,  and  as  not  responsible ;  and 
the  probability  was  that  Lord  Mansfield  would  advise 
rashness  and  prevail  to  have  it  employed,  and  that  Lord 
North  would  dissuade  it,  submit,  and  execute  it  ill  or  poorly. 
The  Bedfords  were  not  less  alarmed,  and  wavered  between 
both  opinions.  Lord  North,  naturally  indolent,  would  go 
out  cf  town  at  Christmas,  instead  of  attending  Councils 
and   determining   on   measures.     In   the  mean  time  bad 


420       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Jan. 

news  poured  in.  Glasgow  itself,  where  Lord  Frederic 
Campbell  was  kept  to  prevent  violent  resolutions  in  the 
merchants,  could  hardly  be  restrained  from  protesting 
against  the  condnct  of  the  Government.  The  West  Indian 
merchants  voted  a  petition,  with  only  nine  dissenting 
voices,  who  were  all  Scotch.  Accounts  came  of  vast  de- 
sertions of  the  soldiers  at  Boston,  and  that  three  officers  of 
Lord  Percy's  regiment  there  were  amongst  the  mutinous. 
The  King  wept  to  General  Howe  on  these  notices,  and 
said  he  had  never  been  so  much  distressed  before ;  yet  his 
favourites  kept  up  his  spirits,  and  he  and  they  prevailed 
over  salutary  councils.  Lord  Bute  himself  was  not  of  the 
number.  Lord  Beauchamp,^  who  had  married  the  sister 
of  Lord  Mountstewart's  wife,  and  who  was  for  pacific  mea- 
sures, complained  to  me  that  Lord  Mansfield  would  sur- 
mount Lord  North's  temperate  wishes ;  "  for,"  said  Lord 
Beauchamp,  "  if  there  is  any  secret  influence,  it  is  Lord 
Mansfield's."  At  the  very  eve  of  the  meeting  of  the  Parlia- 
ment the  warlike  part  of  the  Cabinet  prevailed,  and  four 
more  regiments  were  ordered  for  Boston. 

\^th.  The  Parliament  met.  Lord  North  laid  extracts 
from  a  great  quantity  of  American  papers  before  the  House, 
and  moved  to  have  them  considered  on  that  day  sevennight. 
Burke  observed  there  were  none  from  Maryland,  to  which 
no  satisfactory  answer  was  given. 

20th.  Lord  Chatham,  after  notifying  in  the  public  papers 
that  he  would  make  a  motion  on  that  day,  appeared  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  and  kept  his  word  ;  but,  being  above 
communicating  with  or  consulting  those  whom  he  yet  ex- 
pected to  support  him,  and  not  being  at  all  fortunate  on 
such  occasions  in  choosing  his  measure  with  judgment,  he 
crudely  and  absurdly  proposed  an  Address  to  the  King  to 
recall  the  troops  from  Boston,  giving  no  tolerable  reason 

^  Francis  Lord  Beauchamp,  son  of  Lord  Hertford,  and  Lord  Mount- 
stewart,  son  of  the  Earl  of  Bute,  had  married  the  daughters  and  co  heiresses 
of  the  Lord  Viscount  Windsor. 


1775]  LORD   CHATHAM'S    MOTION  421 

for  so  precipitate  and  premature  a  step,  but  that  it  would 
be  an  earnest  of  pacific  intentions.  It  would,  indeed,  have 
been  a  good  deal  more — total  submission  to  America 
without  any  stipulations.  The  rest  of  his  speech  was  very- 
hostile,  not  only  to  the  Ministry,  but  to  the  Secret  Junto, 
whom  he  treated,  as  well  as  the  Ministers,  with  proper 
contempt.  He  said  Whig  measures  must  always  pre- 
vail in  this  country ;  that  there  were  three  millions  of 
Whigs  in  America,  and  all  Ireland  was  Whig ;  and  many 
in  England,  though  some  of  our  great  Lords  temporised  for 
places :  but  if  there  were  any  remains  of  such  Tories  in 
the  Cabinet  as  had  cost  the  Stuarts  the  Crown,  they 
would  be  pulled  out  when  they  had  made  the  Crown  sit 
uneasy  on  the  King's  head.  The  Ministers,  he  said? 
had  shown  their  incapacity,  were  checkmated,  and  had  not 
a  move  to  make.  But  he  would  knock  at  the  door  of 
Administration  till  they  heard  him.  He  arraigned,  too, 
the  late  dissolution.  Lord  Suffolk,  who  spoke  better 
than  ordinary,  defended  the  dissolution,  and  said  he  had 
advised  it ;  that  the  Ministers  had  determined  on  coercive 
measures,  and  would  lay  their  plan  before  the  Houses  on 
Thursday.  Lord  Shelburne  supported  the  motion,  and 
talked  of  the  bodies  of  people  that  would  appear  against 
the  present  measures.  Lord  Lyttelton  declaimed  against 
Lord  Chatham,  and,  not  much  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
Court,  against  General  Gage.  Lord  Camden  spoke  with 
great  energy  on  Lord  Chatham's  side,  against  involuntary 
taxation  and  the  Declaratory  Law,  which,  he  said,  he  would 
maintain  against  any  lawyer  in  England  ;  but  the  lawyer 
both  he  and  Lord  Chatham  aimed  at  was  pitifully  absent, 
pretending  it  was  usual  to  summon  the  Lords  on  any 
unusual  motion.  It  was  positively  said  just  now  that  he 
had  declared  he  would  give  no  farther  advice,  he  knew 
not  what  to  advise.  Lord  Townshend  was  warm  and 
empty  for  the  Court.  Lord  Gower  urged  the  propriety 
of  the  troops  remaining  at  Boston  to  encourage  and  protect 


422       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Jan. 

the  friends  of  Government ;  and,  indeed,  the  Court  could 
so  justly  show  the  unseasonableness  of  the  motion,  that  all 
who  wished  to  pay  court  had  a  better  excuse  for  it  than 
they  generally  cared  whether  they  had  or  not ;  the  waver- 
ing went  after  them,  and  even  the  Opposition  could  scarce 
bring  themselves  to  swallow  either  Lord  Chatham's 
haughtiness  or  absurdity.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  told 
me  that  for  two  hours  he  could  scarce  resolve  to  vote  for 
the  motion  ;  and  when  he  did,  after  some  few  feeble  sen- 
tences from  Lord  Rockingham,  the  Duke,  leaving  the 
question,  attacked  the  Ministers  on  the  base  and  timid 
conduct  of  the  Court  on  the  affair  of  Falkland's  Island,  it 
having  just  appeared  in  the  Defence  of  M.  de  Guines 
that  we  had  offered  to  disarm  fii'st}  Lord  Rochford  intre- 
pidly denied  it,  said  both  Courts  had  agreed  to  disarm  on 
the  same  day,  and  France  and  Spain  had  begun  to  disarm 
first.  But  it  was  probable  that  M.  de  Guines  had  without 
any  reason  published  a  false  fact,  or  that  Lord  Rochford, 
pressed  and  attacked,  affirmed  a  direct  falsehood  ?  The 
Duke  asked  if  we  had  made  no  promise  of  restoring  the 
island  ?  Lord  Rochford  denied  that  too  :  yet  we  had  re- 
linquished the  island  !  Lord  Weymouth  said  a  few  words 
against  the  motion,  but  with  it  so  many  compliments  to 
Lord  Chatham,  that  he  seemed  to  think  the  latter  would 
still  be  Minister  once  more. 

At  eight  at  night  the  motion  was  thrown  out  by  6Z 
votes  and  9  proxies  to  18.  The  Duke  of  Cumberland 
voted  in  the  minority;  Lord  Coventry  and  I^ord  Gros- 
venor,  usually  followers  of  Lord  Chatham,  in  the  majority. 
A  few  others  of  the  Opposition  retired  without  voting.  Lord 
Temple,  who  had  again  veered  to  the  Stamp  Act,  was  absent. 

^  Though  Lord  Rochford  had  the  confidence  to  deny  this,  solemnly,  it  was 
proved  in  the  month  of  April  following,  by  the  pubUcation  of  the  correspond- 
ence between  the  Due  d'Aiguillon  and  M.  de  Guines,  on  the  latter's  cause.  It 
appeared  there  that  Lord  Stormont  had  desired  to  have  some  expressions  in 
those  letters  altered ;  and  from  two  of  the  letters  that  we  had  absolutely  offered 
to  disarm  first. 


1775]  PETITIONS  FROM  AMERICAN  MERCHANTS  423 

2ird.  Hayley  presented  to  the  House  of  Commons  the 
petition  of  the  merchants  of  London  trading  to  America, 
and  moved  to  have  it  referred  to  the  same  Committee  as 
the  American  papers,  but  the  Ministerial  party  moved  to 
refer  it  to  a  Committee  only;  which,  after  debating  till 
six,  was  carried  by  197  to  81.  Then  Burke  presented  a 
like  petition  from  Bristol,  which  had  the  same  fate ;  as 
another  from  Bristol  had,  presented  by  Cruger.  The 
chief  speakers  for  the  petition  were  Burke,  Charles  Fox, 
T.  Townshend,  Lord  John  Cavendish,  and  Captain  Luttrell ; 
against,  Lord  North,  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  and  Lord  Clare. 

The  merchants,  angry  at  the  cold  reception  of  their 
petition,  met  again,  and  voted  to  recall  it,  which  they  did, 
by  pleading  it  would  hurt  them  to  have  their  affairs  so 
publicly  exposed,  and  desiring  to  withdraw  their  petition.  1 

26th.  There  was  a  debate  in  the  Commons  against 
observing  the  30th  of  January,  but  it  was  maintained  by 
1 38  to  50.  Wilkes  said  he  should  certainly  vote  against 
keeping  that  day  as  a  fast,  having  always  observed  it  as  a 
festival.  Mr.  Eden,  a  young  hopeful  lawyer,^  just  brought 
into  Parliament  by  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  and  who 
had  written  a  sensible  book  on  the  law,  opened  first  in  this 
debate,  but  with  no  success. 

The  same  day  Alderman  Hayley  presented  a  petition 
from  another  body  of  merchants,  praying  it  might  be  read 
with  the  American  papers ;  this  occasioned  a  long  debate, 
and  the  request  was  rejected  by  250  to  89.  Lord  George 
Germaine  (who,  by  his  friendship  with  Lord  Mansfield  and 
Wedderburn,  was  now  much  consulted  by  the  Cabinet  as 

^  These  merchants  had  also  other  grounds  of  dissatisfaction,  as  may  be 
gathered  from  the  following  paragraph  in  the  "  Middlesex  Journal"  for  Janu- 
ary 5  :— "  No  less  than  five  ships  arrived  in  the  river  last  week  from  America  ; 
but  the  mouths  of  every  soul  on  board  are  locked  up,  and  Lord  North  has  got 
the  key  of  them.  This  has  alarmed  the  merchants  concerned  in  the  American 
trade  very  much." — D. 

2  Mr.  Eden  (the  first  Lord  Auckland,  1789),  third  son  of  Sir  Robert  Eden, 
Bart.,  was  at  this  time  Member  for  Woodstock,  and  was  thirty-three  years  of 
age.  He  became  a  correct,  fluent,  and  augumentative  speaker,  an  able  writer, 
and  a  skilful  diplomatist.     He  died  in  18 14. — D. 


424       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Jan. 

he  was  warm  against  the  Americans  y  distinguished  him- 
self much  on  this  occasion.  He  defended  all  the  Acts  of 
the  last  session,  except  the  Quebec  Bill,  which,  he  said,  he 
had  not  attended,  and  with  parts  of  which  he  found  fault. 
He  said,  too,  that  if  the  Americans  had  petitioned,  he 
would  willingly  have  presented  their  petition  ;  but  if  they 
resisted  for  what  they  called  their  rights,  he  would  treat 
them  with  a  Roman  severity.  Charles  Fox  attacked  Lord 
North  violently,  who  replied  that,  though  the  gentleman 
had  blamed  all  his  administration,  yet  he  had  defended 
and  supported  much  of  it ;  nor  did  he  know  how  he  had 
deserved  his  reproaches.  Fox  started  up,  and  said  he 
would  tell  the  noble  Lord  how — by  every  species  of  false- 
hood and  treachery.  Fox  was  called  to  order  ;  he  rejoined 
that  he  saw  the  House  would  hear  all  invectives  only  from 
one  side.  Sir  G.  Saville  told  the  Ministers  he  saw  they 
were  determined  to  make  war  on  the  Americans,  but 
assured  them  they  would  be  beaten.  Barre  spoke  well, 
and  with  much  ridicule  on  the  last  Parliament,  which,  he 
said,  Aad  died  in  the  Catholic  faith^  and  left  us  a  rebellion 
for  a  legacy.  On  this  debate,  the  Marquis  of  Caermarthen, 
only  son  of  the  Duke  of  Leeds,  and  son-in-law  of  those 
favourites  Lord  and  Lady  Holderness,  and  himself  much 
caressed  by  the  Court,  was  the  first  to  start  up  and  go  out 
on  the  division  with  the  minority.  It  was  said  he  had  been 
refused  some  favour  he  had  asked.  Lord  George  Gordon, 
brother  of  the  Duke,  also  voted  on  that  side.  Sir  James 
Lowther,  son-in-law  of  Lord  Bute,  dissatisfied  also,  had 
reconciled  himself  to  his  great  enemy  the  Duke  of  Port- 
land, and  was  gone  over  to  the  Rockingham  party,  with 
seven  or  eight  members  he  commanded. 

A  petition  from  Mr.  Lee,  Dr.  Franklin,  and  Mr.  BoUand, 
agents  from  the  colonies,  desiring  to  be  heard  on  the  peti- 
tion from  the  Congress  to  the  King,  was  presented,  but 
rejected  by  218  to  68. 

^  He  was  severely  treated  in  the  public  papers  on  this  account. 


1775] 


FEBRUARY 

IS/. 

LORD  CHATHAM,  pursuing  his  own  ideas, 
and  still  flattering  himself  that  he  could 
prevail,  as  in  the  height  of  his  popularity,  pre- 
^  sented  a  bill  (which  he  boasted  of  having 
communicated  to  nobody)  to  the  House  of  Lords,  calling 
it  a  Bill  for  Conciliating  America.  Its  tendency  was  to 
abrogate  the  Declaratory  Act,  but  declaring  a  supremacy 
over  the  colonies  in  all  cases  but  for  taxation  ;  allowing 
a  Congress  to  meet  at  Philadelphia  in  May  next,  in  which 
they  should  acknowledge  the  restricted  supremacy,  and 
grant  a  benevolence  to  the  King  under  the  disposition 
of  Parliament.  He  spoke  better  than  he  had  done  of  late. 
Lord  Dartmouth  owned  himself  willing  to  admit  the  bill 
for  some  future  consideration  ;  declared  his  own  wishes 
for  peace,  though  still  ready  to  maintain  the  supremacy. 
Lord  Sandwich  declared  warmly  for  rejecting  the  bill, 
which  the  Ministers  agreed  to  reject.  As  a  reason  for 
hmnediately  reducing  the  colonies  to  obedience,  he  urged 
that  they  would  soon  be  plentifully  supplied,  as  ships 
were  loading  for  them  in  the  Dutch  and  French  seaports. 
It  is  remarkable  that,  not  a  month  before  this,  the  Court 
had  published  in  the  public  papers  an  order  from  the 
Court  of  France  to  their  merchants  not  to  supply  our 
colonies,  an  order,  as  our  Ministers  pretended,  obtained  at 
their  intercession ;  the  French  Court  adding  that  we 
should  seize  such  cargoes.  This  was  ridiculed  in  the 
newspapers  some  days  after.  Lord  Gower  quoting  some 
words  used  long  ago  in  the  House  of  Commons  by  Lord 
Chatham,  the  latter  complained  of  such  unfair  proceeding, 

42s 


426       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

and  flatly  denied  the  words,  as  he  had  been  used  to  do 
in  the  House  of  Commons.  Lord  Gower  apologised  for 
his  unfairness,  but  maintained  the  truth  of  his  quotation. 
Lord  Lyttelton,  though  against  the  new  bill,  would  have 
received  it  from  respect  for  the  author.  Lord  Temple 
professed  the  same  respect,  but  lamented  the  mischief 
the  introduction  of  the  bill  would  do ;  said  the  Minis- 
ters had  been  right  in  all  former  measures  against 
America,  and  had  not  sinned  till  last  year  by  their  intem- 
perate bills  and  manner  of  passing  them.^  The  Duke  of 
Grafton  said  he  differed  from  all  sides,  had  a  plan  of  his 
own,  and  would  propose  it ;  complained  of  Lord  Chatham's 
manner  of  hurrying  on  his  bill;  to  which  the  latter  replied, 
his  old  friend  th.Q  Duke  seemed  as  eager  to  hurry  it  out. 
Lord  Camden,  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  and  Lord  Shel- 
burne,  the  last  with  strong  invectives  on  the  weakness  of 
the  Ministers,  supported  the  bill ;  but  it  was  rejected  at 
ten  at  night  by  6^  to  32.  Lord  Weymouth  was  absent 
out  of  compliment  to  Lord  Chatham,  and  Lord  Mansfield 
from  poltroonery,  on  which,  when  the  King  was  told  at 
night,  he  joked  openly  befose  all  his  servants.^ 

The  same  day  Sawbridge  renewed  his  motion  for  trien- 
nial parliaments,  to  which  the  Ministers  did  not  vouch- 
safe an  answer.  Wilkes  supported  the  motion,  and  a 
young  Mr.  Moysey,  son  of  a  physician  at  Bath,  for  the 
first  time,  and  very  well.  The  motion  was  rejected  by 
195  to  104. 

2nd.  Lord  North,  who  had  in  vain  hurried  on  the 
supplies  before  Christmas  to  prevent  reinforcements  being 
sent  to  America,  now  being  overborne  by  the  Secret  Junto, 

^  The  last  Congress,  he  said,  had  been  plainly  rebellious. 

2  "For  the  'Public  Advertiser.*— Epigram  on  Lord  Mansfield's  de- 
claring in  the  House  of  Lords  that  the  Rubicon  was  passed,  and  then  appear- 
ing there  no  more  : — 

"  '  The  Rubicon  is  pass'd,'  great  Julius  cried  ; 
Mansfield,  '  The  Rubicon  is  pass'd,'  replied  : 
Caesar  press'd  on,  came,  saw,  and  won  the  day ; 
— But  what's  become  of  Mansfield  ? — Run  away  !  " 


1775]  AMERICAN    AFFAIRS  427 

and  not  having  resolution  or  honesty  enough  to  adhere  to 
his  own  opinion,  produced  part  of  his  plan  for  carrying  on 
the  war.  The  most  memorable  topics  of  his  speech, 
which  was  larded  with  violence  and  moderation,  as  his 
own  humour  or  the  plan  that  had  been  given  him  took 
their  turn,  were  these :  that  jurisdiction  must  be  kept  up 
with  legislation;  that  it  was  essential  ^^ /r^j-^;^^  not  to 
repeal  the  Acts  of  the  last  session,  as  it  was  necessary  to 
maintain  authority,  which  was  well  worth  all  the  exertion 
of  every  force  in  this  country.  The  non-importation  and 
non-exportation  agreement,  he  maintained,  was  not  likely 
to  be  observed.  That  the  nation  must  contribute  to  relieve 
the  distresses  of  its  traders,  should  there  be  any.  When, 
he  asked,  was  the  time  when  foreign  powers  would  not 
take  advantage  of  our  difficulties?  We  had  tried  our 
strength  elsewhere  in  the  last  war,  though  not  against  the 
Americans.  Should  we  be  defeated,  we  should  but  be 
where  we  were  now.  But  would  they  come  to  accommoda- 
tion ?  sheathe  the  sword — but  was  anybody  authorised  to 
say  they  would  ?  If  they  would  grant  supplies  by  requisi- 
tion, he  would  not  go  to  war.  He  would  move  an  Address 
to  the  King  to  take  all  proper  means  of  reducing  America, 
but  would  acquaint  the  House  that  he  had  other  measures 
to  propose  on  a  future  day.  It  was  determined  to  reinforce 
General  Gage ;  four  regiments  were  to  go,  and  his  army 
to  be  increased  to  10,000  men.  There  would  also  be 
regulations  with  regard  to  their  trade.  If  they  would  not 
trade  with  us,  it  was  just  they  should  not  trade  with  others. 
The  object  was  great,  the  attempt  honest ;  no  better  means 
had  been  proposed.  He  meant  to  prevent  the  refractory 
colonies  from  fishing  in  our  seas. 

Dunning  answered  him,  and  complained  of  the  manner 
in  which  the  papers  had  been  garbled  in  order  to  make 
bad  appear  worse,  the  effect  of  bad  measures.  He  asked 
if  the  wealth  of  this  country  was  to  be  employed  on 
bankrupt  merchants?  and  were  the  lives  to  be  lost  to  be 


428       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

counted  for  nothing?  He  believed  the  noble  Lord  was 
overborne  by  the  violence  of  others  in  the  Cabinet,  whom 
he  would  pledge  himself  to  impeach.  He  would  take 
upon  himself  to  say  there  had  been  no  illegality  in  the 
meeting  of  the  Congress.  He  hoped  the  authors  of  these 
evils  would  be  known.^ 

The  Attorney-General  replied,  that,  while  Government 
existed,  Acts  of  Parliament  must  be  obeyed.  Five  thou- 
sand men  were  in  arms  at  the  town  of  Worcester  in  New 
Hampshire,  which  he  had  given  his  opinion  was  an  act  of 
high  treason.  Colonel  Grant,  a  Scot,  who  had  served  in 
America,  said  it  was  his  opinion  the  Americans  would 
recede  if  we  showed  spirit ;  that  their  army,  if  they  had 
one,  must  perish  in  the  field.  He  said  he  had  served 
there  all  the  last  war  ;  that  in  their  conversation  they  said, 
those  heathens  of  regular  troops,  yet  they  w — d  and  drank 
as  much  themselves.  Yet  his  opinion  was  that  there 
should  be  a  person  appointed  to  treat  with  the  North 
Americans. 

Charles  Fox  entered  into  the  whole  history  and 
argument  of  the  dispute  with  great  force  and  temper, 
and  made  the  greatest  figure  he  had  done  yet,  in  a  speech 
of  an  hour  arid  twenty  minutes.  He  said  the  greatest 
folly  of  his  life  was  in  having  supported  Lord  North,  with 
which  his  Lordship  was  always  upbraiding  him.  He 
threw  some  reflections  on  George  Grenville  as  author  of 
the  Stamp  Act,  which  drew  up  the  latter's  son,  who  had 
not  yet  opened.  He  defended  his  father  both  with  spirit 
and  decency,  and  gained  great  favour  with  the  House  by 
his  pleasing  manner.  Yet  he  would  not,  he  said,  blame 
those  who  had  repealed  the  Stamp  Act,  and  owned  the 
Charter  Bill  had  united  all  America  against  us.  He 
would  not  let  go  the  rein  since  we  could  not  hold  it  tight 

^  Mr.  Dunning  bade  the  country  gentlemen  take  notice  that  Lord  North 
would  saddle  them  with  the  bankrupt  merchants  and  ruined  manufacturers ;  and 
he  bade  them  observe  too  that  by  consenting  to  this  war  they  agreed  to  that 
proposition. 


1775]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  429 

enough.  If  he  gave  his  vote  for  the  Address,  it  would  be 
that  the  Americans  might  not  think  they  were  encouraged. 
Yet  he  did  not  vote,  which,  with  his  vote  on  the  first  day, 
showed  that,  though  Lord  Temple's  factious  discrepancy 
held  him  back,  his  heart  was  against  the  Court ;  and  it 
was  said  he  bitterly  resented  the  King's  treatment  of  his 
father.  Lord  Stanley  spoke  for  the  Address,  and  Lord 
Lumley,  son  of  the  Earl  of  Scarborough,  for  the  first 
time,  against  it ;  both  without  any  weight.  Mr.  Powis 
stated  the  difficulties  on  both  sides  in  a  sensible  manner, 
and  did  not  divide  with  either.  Some  other  young  men 
spoke,  and  Burke  a  few  words ;  but  the  time  spent  by  the 
young  men,  and  the  heat  of  the  House,  and  the  ignorance 
of  the  leaders  in  Opposition  of  the  measures  to  be  pro- 
posed, put  an  end  to  the  debate  much  sooner  than  was 
expected,  so  that  before  twelve  a  division  arrived  on  an 
amendment  proposed  by  Charles  Fox,  which  tended  to 
leave  out  all  the  substance  of  the  Address,  which  was 
carried,  and  it  was  a  vote  for  a  civil  war,  by  304  to  105  ; 
so  that  this  Parliament  appeared  to  be  even  more  corrupt 
and  servile  than  the  two  last.^ 

The  want  of  policy  in  the  Opposition  was  not  less 
notorious.  This  was  the  day  on  which  they  should  have 
made  their  principal  stand  and  protest  against  the  tyranny 
of  the  Court,  but  they  had  neither  information,  nor  policy, 
nor  union.  Lord  North,  by  his  lazy  dilatoriness,  had  given 
time,  after  venting  his  hostile  intentions,  to  apprise  the 
Americans  of  those  intentions  a  fortnight  before  Ad- 
ministration took  a  single  step.  The  agents  and  friends 
of  the  colonists  probably  despatched  intelligence,  but 
Opposition  did  nothing :  it  did  not  even  unite.  Lord 
Chatham  was  vain  and  empty ;  Lord  Rockingham  empty, 
and  as  dilatory  as  Lord  North.  Wilkes  was  broken  and 
tired  of  the  struggle.  Yet  Lord  North,  with  all  his  faults, 
was  capable  of  one  still  greater — though  wishing  and 
1  Commencement  of  the  war. 


430       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

professing  moderation,  he  was  capable  of  lending  himself 
to  all  the  injustice  of  the  Court  if  his  own  professions 
should  dupe  the  Americans  into  submission. 

When  the  Address  was  put,  the  numbers  were  296  for 
it,  106  against  it. 

6th.  The  Address  was  reported  and  fought  till  three  in 
the  morning,  but  with  no  more  spirit  than  the  preceding 
day.  Burke  made  a  long  pathetic  speech,  and  drew  a 
picture  of  the  Smithfield  preparing  for  the  American 
martyrs.  Barre  spoke  with  more  fire,  and  lamented  the 
fate  of  the  brave  officers  who  were  to  be  sent  against  their 
own  countrymen,  and  he  taunted  the  Court  with  neglect 
and  ill-usage  of  the  Admirals  Saunders  and  Keppel, 
whom,  however,  they  called  out  if  any  real  service  was  to 
be  done.  He  seemed  to  intimate  that  he  despaired  of 
doing  any  good,  and  would  try  no  longer.  Many  of  the 
Opposition  were  disposed  to  secede — a  very  silly  measure 
— but  the  Duke  of  Richmond  withheld  them.  Lord  North 
affected  still  great  disposition  to  peace.  Wedderburn 
went  farther,  and  said  an  amnesty  would  be  published  if 
the  Americans  submitted,  with  few  exceptions.  This  was 
severely  taken  up  the  next  day  in  the  House  of  Lords  by 
the  Duke  of  Richmond.  The  Address  was  carried  by  288 
to  105. 

In  this  debate  first  appeared  another  admired  young 
speaker,  Sir  Robert  Smith,  who  fully  possessed  himself, 
like  his  contemporaries,  and  showed  his  confidence  not 
only  by  beginning  with  a  reply  to  Burke,  but  by  laughing 
at  his  metaphors  ;  yet  falling  into  the  same  fault  himself, 
and  perceiving  that  the  House  observed  it,  he  came  off 
adroitly  by  saying  the  example  had  spoiled  him,  for  evil 
communications  corrupted  good  manners. 

yth.  The  Address  was  communicated  to  the  Lords,  but 
a  dispute  arrived  whether  Lord  Dartmouth,  who  was  to 
open  it,  should  begin,  or  Lord  Rockingham,  who  offered 
a  petition  from  the  merchants,  who  being  rejected  by  the 


1775]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  431 

House  of  Commons  had  applied  to  them ;  but  this  was 
postponed,  on  which  several  Lords  protested,  and  the 
merchants  resolved  to  petition  the  King. 

The  Address  was  much  more  warmly  fought  there, 
though  Lord  Chatham  was  not  present,  being  or  pretend- 
ing to  be  ill ;  but  Lord  Mansfield  was,  and  the  whole  fire 
fell  on  him,  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lord  Shelburne, 
in  the  most  personal  manner,  accusing  him  of  being  the 
sole  author  of  the  war  and  the  confidential  Minister,  and 
threatening  him  with  impeachment.  He  was  exceedingly- 
agitated,  and  tried  to  disculpate  himself;  but,  after  con- 
fessing he  had  been  in  all  secrets  in  the  last  reign,  and  had 
often  been  called  to  council  in  this,  he  pleaded  having 
begged  to  be  dispensed  with,  denied  any  share  in  the 
Duke  of  Grafton's  administration  on  the  tea-duty,  on 
which  he  laid  the  whole  cause  of  the  present  war,  and 
affirmed  that  he  had  seen  none  of  the  late  bills  nor  read 
the  despatches  till  before  the  House.  It  was  much  more 
remarkable  that  he  made  no  answer  to  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond, who  reproached  him  with  his  late  journey  to  France 
under  the  name  of  Dr.  Murray,  nor  to  Lord  Shelburne's 
accusing  him  of  his  being  the  confidential  Minister,  though 
the  latter  again  pressed  it  upon  him,  after  calling  out 
aloud  to  one  part  of  his  denial  "  That  is  a  falsehood*"  He 
was  still  more  hurt  by  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  who,  being 
offended  at  the  attack  of  the  tea-duty,  said  he  supposed 
Lord  Mansfield  laid  the  whole  blame  on  that  to  excuse 
himself  from  everything  else  he  had  advised.  The  Duke 
of  Richmond  urged  the  insufficience  of  the  fleet,  and  urged 
their  bad  manoeuvres  at  the  royal  review  at  Portsmouth, 
where  he  allowed  Captain  Barrington  had  shone.  Lord 
Sandwich  gave  a  very  satisfactory  account  of  the  fleet ; 
and  though  he  confessed  Barrington's  merit,  said,  in  the 
word  of  "  Chevy  Chase,"  he  hoped  he  had  forty  as  good  as 
he.  Lord  Camden  spoke  with  great  weight,  and  was 
attacked  by  Lord  Lyttelton  as  encourager  of  the  American 


432       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

rebellion,  but,  attempting  to  reason,  the  last  succeeded 
poorly.  The  debate  lasted  till  two  in  the  morning — a 
most  unusual  sitting  for  that  House — when  the  Address 
was  carried  by  104  to  29.  The  8///,  eighteen  Lords  signed 
a  protest  drawn  up  by  Lord  Camden^  and  Edmund  Burke. 

The  House  of  Lords  had  gotten  into  a  new  scrape 
which  loaded  them  with  signal  disgrace  and  showed  the 
Court's  timidity  in  a  new  instance.  Lord  Lyttelton  had 
promised,  when  they  opened  their  doors  to  strangers,  that 
he  would  complain  if  their  debates  were  published.  They 
were  published,  and  he  did  complain.  Their  Lordships 
sent  their  serjeant,  Sir  Francis  Molesworth,  to  take  up  the 
printer.  He  went,  but  the  man  was  not  at  home.  Next 
day,  by  Wilkes's  instigation,  the  printer  wrote  to  Sir 
Francis  to  tell  him  at  what  time  he  would  be  at  home, 
and  would  expect  him,  but  the  Lords  did  not  dare  to  send 
their  messenger  again,  as  Wilkes — Lord  Mayor — would 
have  committed  their  serjeant  to  prison,  the  printer  living 
within  the  liberties  of  the  City,  and  then  the  Lords  must 
have  committed  Wilkes  himself  to  the  Tower,  which  they 
did  not  dare  to  venture. 

The  whole  object,  indeed,  of  the  Court  seemed  to  be 
to  subdue  America  first :  for  this — though  sure  of  so  very 
servile.»a  Parliament — the  King,  though  overwhelmed  with 
debts,  yielded,  to  waive  application  for  payment  of  them 
and  for  increase  of  his  civil  list,  though  sure  to  obtain 
both  if  the  expense  of  the  war  had  not  intervened.  But 
when  he  waived  so  much,  and  the  House  of  Lords  bore  so 
much,  it  was  plain  what  despotism  they  flattered  them- 
selves would  follow  from  the  conquest  of  America.  That 
war,  averse  as  Lord  North  was — though  more  criminal  by 
supporting  it  against  his  opinion — was  eagerly  pushed. 
They  had  offered  a  peerage  and  everything  else  he  could 

^  Not  only  Lord  Camden  now  conversed  with  the  Rockingham  party,  but 
Lord  Chatham  himself  went  to  visit  Lord  Rockingham,  stayed  with  him  two 
hours,  and  promised  to  make  no  more  motions  without  consulting  them. 


1775]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  433 

ask  to  Sir  Jeffery  Amherst  to  take  the  command,  and 
for  a  week  they  thought  he  had  consented,  but  his  wife 
dissuaded  him,  and  he  gave  for  answer  that  he  could  not 
bring  himself  to  command  against  the  Americans,  to  whom 
he  had  been  so  much  obliged.  General  Howe  was  not  so 
grateful.  On  Amherst's  refusal  the  Court  resolved  to 
continue  Gage^  in  the  command,  though  they  had  blamed 
him,  and,  by  the  application  to  Amherst,  affronted  him  ; 
but  they  sent  three  major-generals  to  serve  under  him — 
Howe,  Burgoyne,  and  Clinton.  The  Duke  of  Richmond 
artfully  in  the  Lords  complained  of  the  cruelty  of  sending 
Howe  to  command  against  Boston,  when  the  first  object 
he  would  behold  there  would  be  the  monument  they  had 
erected  there  to  his  brother  slain  in  the  last  war.  Howe 
was  one  of  those  brave  and  silent  brothers,  and  was 
reckoned  sensible,  though  so  silent  that  nobody  knew 
whether  he  was  or  not.  Burgoyne  had  offered  himself  to 
this  service ;  he  was  a  vain,  very  ambitious  man,  with  a 
half  understanding  that  was  worse  than  none  ;  Clinton  had 
not  that  fault,  for  he  had  no  sense  at  all.  When  this 
resolution  was  taken  it  was  said  that  they  also  sent  orders 
to  Gage  to  seize  and  send  over  the  chief  leaders  of  the 
Americans. 

loth.  Lord  North  moved  for  leave  to  bring  in  a  bill  for 
putting  the  trade  of  America  with  England,  Ireland,  and 
the  West  Indies  under  temporary  restrictions,  and  for  re- 
straining the  refractory  provinces  from  fishing  on  the  banks 
of  Newfoundland.  As  this  bill  was  founded  on  the  sup- 
posed rebellion  of  the  Massachussets,  the  evidence  of  such 
rebellion  was  much  contested  by  Dunning,  Burke,  Glynn, 
T.  Townshend,  Lord  J.  Cavendish,  and  Sir  George  Saville, 
and  maintained  by  the  Attorney  and  Solicitor-General, 
and  Sir  Fletcher  Norton  the  Speaker.  The  rest  of  Lord 
North's  arguments,  and  the  foolish  conduct  of  the  Ad- 

^  General  Gage  was  not  only  very  insufficient,  but  his  wife  was  an  American, 
and,  it  was  supposed,  betrayed  all  his  orders  to  her  countrymen. 

J.— 3  F 


434       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

ministration,  were  well  exposed,  and  are  as  well  and  more 
shortly  summed  up  in  an  account  of  that  debate  in  the 
"London  Chronicle"  of  Feb.  nth.  Leave  was  granted  to 
bring  in  the  bill  at  twelve  at  night  by  261  against  85. 
Lord  North's  temporising  or  dilatoriness  appeared  in  the 
manner  of  conducting  this  bill.  It  was  moved  for  but  on 
February  loth,  was  sure  of  occasioning  many  contests  in 
both  Houses,  so  it  could  not  at  soonest  arrive  in  America 
before  the  end  of  March,  by  which  time  the  fishing  season 
would  be  over,  and  the  bill,  which,  if  it  took  place,  would 
starve  the  Massachussets,  could  have  no  effect  till  a  full 
year  should  be  expired. 

I  ^th.  The  Ministry  asked  the  2000  seamen  of  the  House 
of  Commons  which  they  had  refused  before  Christmas. 
The  proposal  was  rather  debated  than  opposed,  without 
a  division,  for  about  three  hours.  Temple  Luttrell,  brother 
of  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland,  a  wit  and  a  poet,  spoke 
against  the  motion  in  a  style  both  turgid  and  flat.  He 
printed  his  speech  in  the  newspapers,  which  was 
much  abused,  as  was  Lord  Chatham's  very  ill-worded 
return  to  the  thanks  of  the  Common  Council  for  his 
conduct. 

But  in  the  midst  of  the  highflown  measures  of  Adminis- 
tration against  the  colonies. 

On  the  igtk,thQ  town  was  astonished  to  hear  that  Lord 
North  intended  the  very  next  day  to  offer  terms  of  pacifi- 
cation to  America.  Had  this  been  done  before  he  had 
seduced  the  Parliament  into  the  utmost  violence,  it  might 
have  worn  some  show  of  moderation.  Now  it  appeared 
a  sudden  panic,  and  probably  was  so,  though,  to  palliate 
it,  it  was  given  out  that  very  favourable  accounts  were 
arrived  from  General  Gage  of  the  more  moderate  persons 
endeavouring  to  stem  the  rage  of  their  countrymen,  and 
attempting  associations  to  oppose  the  resolutions  of  the 
Congress.  Many  suspected  that  alarming  intelligence  of 
the   Spaniards   arming   was   come.     That    Lord    North, 


1775]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  435 

biassed  by  Lord  Dartmouth,  should  seize  any  moment  of 
insinuating  more  temper  was  not  surprising.  He  had, 
contrary  to  his  opinion  and  indolence,  been  hurried  by 
the  Scotch  part  of  the  Cabinet,  and  by  Lord  Gower  and 
Lord  Suffolk,  into  extremities.  It  was  still  more  probable 
that  Lord  Mansfield  was  frightened,  and  that  Lord  Gower, 
alarmed  by  the  offensive  conduct  of  his  brother-in-law  the 
Earl  of  Dunmore,  Governor  of  Virginia,  and  lately  of 
New  York  (of  which  more  will  be  said  hereafter  when 
that  scene  of  iniquity  shall  come  forth),  had  also  inclined 
to  some  show  of  moderation.  There  were  reasons  for 
thinking  so,  for  Rigby,  a  blustering  but  very  timid  poli- 
tician, who  took  no  open  part  this  winter,  and  affectedly 
kept  out  of  town  some  days  in  every  week,  happening  to 
go  on  the  preceding  Thursday,  Lord  Gower  had  promised 
Lord  North  to  communicate  the  intended  motion  (which 
had  been  very  privately  settled  by  a  very  few)  to  Rigby, 
and  yet  neglected  it,  Rigby  learning  it  only  on  the  very 
day  of  the  motion  on  his  return  to  town  by  a  letter  from 
Eden,^  the  new  confidential  agent  of  Lord  North  in  the 
House  of  Commons  ;  and  when  Rigby  blamed  the  motion. 
Lord  Gower  could  find  no  better  excuse  to  plead  for  it 
than  that  it  would  please  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  who  had 
been  originally  on  the  side  of  America.  It  did  appear 
that  the  Cabinet  was  broken  into  factions,  and  that  the 
crisis  had  suggested  to  their  fears  to  shift  for  themselves. 
Rigby  and  Lord  Weymouth  (the  latter  not  in  place)  leant 
towards  Lord  Chatham  ;  Lord  Gower,  by  his  wife's  means, 
was  courting  Lord  Rockingham.  All  of  them  hated  or 
were  jealous  of  Lord  North.  Lord  Mansfield  was  con- 
nected with  Lord  Gower,  Lord  Suffolk,  Lord  George 
Germaine,  and   Wedderburn.    -The  latter  was  enemy  of 

^  Eden  was  the  creature  of  Wedderburn,  and  had  been  recommended  by 
Lord  Suffolk  to  Lord  North  to  replace  Robinson,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury, 
who  managed  all  the  business  of  elections,  and  the  corruption  of  Members. 
Robmson  had  been  disabled  by  a  stroke  of  the  palsy  ;  and  though  he  retained 
his  place,  could  not  carry  on  the  secret  business. 


436       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

Thurlow,  the  creature  of  Lord  Weymouth.^  Whatever, 
or  whichever  of  these  Httle  factions,  directed  the  motion, — 
On  the  2Qth  it  was  opened  by  Lord  North,  and  held 
out  offers  to  the  Americans,  hollow  ones  indeed,  of  letting 
them  tax  themselves,  though  that  tax  subject  to  revision 
here,  and  promising  faintly,  if  any  single  colony  would 
accept  the  overture,  not  to  tax  it.  This  proposition  was 
the  more  absurd  now,  as  it  was  almost  the  same  as  the 
plan  offered  by  Lord  Chatham,  except  that  his  was  ad- 
dressed to  the  Congress,  and  this  to  each  single  colony, 
which  all  must  see  could  only  mean  to  divide  them.  The 
House  of  Lords  had  even  disdained  to  hear  Lord  Chatham's 
bill  read,  and  now  the  Minister  himself  aped  him  in  the 
House  of  Commons.  The  motion  was  received  with 
astonishment  and  indignation,  for  the  Court  had  worked 
up  both  the  Parliament  and  people  to  such  a  frenzy  for  the 
supremacy  over  America,  that  a  proposal  of  terms  to  them 
seemed  a  debasement  of  this  country's  dignity.  Poor 
Ellis,  in  no  secrets,  was  the  first  to  express  his  disdain,  and 
even  to  the  last  voted  against  it.  Lord  North  now  trembled 
again,  and  the  House  seemed  violently  inclined  to  reject 
the  motion.  Charles  Fox  exposed  the  fluctuation  of 
the  Minister  in  able  terms,  and  Dunning  too,  and  Barre. 
Burke  called  on  Rigby  and  Thurlow,  but  they  were  silent. 
At  last  the  Junto,  finding  their  puppet  North  was  disre- 
garded, were  forced  to  assist  him,  and  recall  the  mutineers, 
who  obeyed  the  summons,  when  sure  they  obeyed  those  in 
the  secret.  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  ^  gave  the  tone,  and  then 
Wedderburn,  but  the  latter  broke  forth  from  all  candour, 
and  crammed  the  motion  down,  by  protesting  no  lenity, 
no  relaxation  of  severity  was  in  reality  intended — a  con- 
duct, however,  prudent  by  immediately  securing  the  votes 
of  the  day,  so  demonstrative  of  the  juggle,  and    so  ill 

^  It  was  believed  that  threats  from  the  Opposition  of  impeaching  Lord 
North  had  a  hand  in  this  trimming.  The  King  was  displeased  with  Lord 
North  for  yielding  to  it. 

?  Father  of  the  first  L,ord  Minto.     He  died  in  1777.— D, 


1775]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  437 

calculated  to  have  any  effect  on  the  colonies,  that,  unless 
they  could  be  excluded  from  all  knowledge  of  transactions 
in  Parliament,  which  is  impossible,  they  could  conceive 
nothing  but  contempt  and  distrust  of  measures  in  which 
appeared  as  little  sincerity  as  stability.  Charles  Fox 
moved  for  the  Chairman's  leaving  the  chair,  and  at  half 
an  hour  after  ten  at  night,  the  question  being  put,  it  was 
resolved  in  the  negative  by  271  to  88,^  and  the  Address 
passed  in  the  Committee,  but,  being  interpreted  a  money- 
bill,  the  Lords  were  saved  from  the  disgrace  of  adopting 
a  measure  they  had  so  lately  scorned  from  Lord  Chatham, 

Without  the  House  people  were  amazed,  and  this  alter- 
nate vicissitude  of  peace  and  war  much  ridiculed  ;  yet  the 
stocks  rose,  probably  because  the  Minister  of  the  Finances 
seemed  rather  pacific. 

On  the  22nd  arrived  a  day  which  had  long  given  the 
Court  a  greater  panic  ;  but  the  Court  allowed  too  little 
to  its  own  influence.  This  was  the  motion  Wilkes  had 
threatened  of  rescinding  every  step  of  the  last  Parliament 
on  the  Middlesex  election.  Lord  North  had  even  declared 
he  would  resign  if  he  could  not  throw  out  the  motion  ;  but 
they  who  knew  him  knew  he  hung  between  aversion  to  his 
situation  and  the  advantages  he  expected  from  it,  and  that 
the  latter  would  still  preponderate.  The  moment  he  made 
the  declaration,  too,  was  that  of  his  learning  the  adverse 
success  of  the  American  Congress — when  his  terrors  sug- 
gested to  him  to  catch  at  the  first  miscarriage  of  any  other 
sort,  in  order  to  escape  from  that  knotty  and  dangerous 
task.  The  fears  of  the  Court  arose  from  the  obligation 
members  for  counties  and  popular  boroughs  were  under  of 
humouring  their  constituents  by  voting  for  Wilkes,  the 
idol  of  the  people,  and  by  so  many  members  of  the  late 
Opposition,  who,  though  now  renegades,  had  laid  them- 
selves under  a  sort  of  decent  necessity  of  consistence,  by 

^  Some  few  of  the  courtiers  voted  with  Ellis  against  the  motion  as  pacific  ; 
some  of  the  Opposition  for  it,  because  it  was  pacific. 


438       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

voting  as  they  had  so  often  done  on  the  same  question 
formerly.  But  again  the  Court  imputed  too  much  to  their 
tools  by  suspecting  them  of  decorum.  Cornwall  and  Sir 
W.  Meredith,  who,  having  most  affected  conscience,  had 
violated  it  most,  did,  as  is  usual  to  hypocrites,  content 
themselves  with  this  useless  tribute  to  it,  and  voted  with 
Wilkes ;  so  did  Wedderburn  too ;  but  as  if  a  vote  were 
not  even  the  token  of  an  opinion,  he  gave  his  vote  for  the 
question,  but  spoke  against  it. 

Wilkes  opened  the  question  with  temper,  and  adhered 
to  it.  In  truth,  he  was  sick  of  his  part ;  and  though  he 
called  the  resolutions  of  the  last  Parliament  a  violation  of 
Magna  Charta,  he  said,  in  a  whisper  to  Lord  North,  he 
was  forced  to  say  so  to  please  the  fellows  who  followed 
him.  This  was  his  constant  style  ;  and  though  certainly 
conveyed  to  the  mob,  they  still  followed  him — probably 
because  they  saw  no  man  of  whom  they  had  a  better 
opinion.  Wilkes  mentioning  Lord  North  as  the  manager 
against  him  formerly,  Charles  Fitzroy,  by  a  blunder, 
thought  it  was  meant  of  his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Grafton, 
and  took  up  his  defence  ;  but  by  another  blunder  avowed 
his  brother's  part  in  it.  Wilkes  observed  that  that  con- 
fession did  the  Duke  no  good,  as  it  was  a  breach  of 
privilege  for  a  peer  to  meddle  in  elections.  It  drew  from 
him  a  very  contemptuous  picture  of  the  Duke.  Vann,  a 
strange  man,  urged  the  imputation  of  blasphemy  against 
Wilkes,  having  in  a  bravado  the  last  winter  vowed  to  do 
so.  Wilkes  called  for  the  words  of  the  resolution,  in  which 
impiety,  not  blasphemy,  was  expressed.  "  A  puppy ! " 
cried  Wilkes  to  those  near  him ;  "  does  he  think  I  don't 
know  what  is  blasphemy  better  than  he  ?  "  At  past  twelve 
the  Court  appeared  triumphant  beyond  their  expectation. 
Robinson  had  calculated  their  majority  at  50,  Lord  North 
but  at  30  ;  it  was  of  68,  that  is  239  to  171.^ 

^  Captain  Luttrell  acknowledged  and  lamented  severely  his  elder  brother  the 
Colonel  having  lent  himself  to  the  purposes  of  theCourt  in  the  Middlesex  election. 


1775]  MASSACHUSSETS    BILL  439 

On  the  25///  the  hostile  bill  against  the  Massachussets 
was  read,  and  the  same  day  in  the  Lords  the  Earl  of 
Effingham,  a  rough  soldier,  of  no  sound  sense,  and  in  the 
Opposition,  complained  of  a  pamphlet  called  the  "  Present 
Crisis  with  respect  to  America  considered."  It  ascribed 
to  the  King  the  right  of  imposing  taxes,  if  refused  or  of 
absolute  necessity.  He  moved  it  should  be  burnt  by  the 
common  hangman  ;  which  was  ordered.  It  was  right  to 
take  this  step,  but,  as  the  tract  was  obscure  and  ill-written, 
it  had  been  of  much  more  importance  to  have  stigmatized 
Shebbeare's  in  that  infamous  manner. 

27///.  The  bill  offering  self-taxation  to  the  Americans 
was  again  debated,  but  with  no  division.  General  Bur- 
goyne  made  a  set  oration  for  it  that  was  admired.  He 
professed  his  love  of  peace,  but  resolution  of  supporting 
the  supremacy  of  this  country. 


[March 


MARCH 


isf. 


THE  merchants  were  heard  against  the  Massa- 
chussets  Bill,  and  proved  strongly  the  hurt 
and  injustice  that  bill  would  do  both  to  that 
province  and  this  country. — See  the  particulars 
in  the  "London  Chronicle"  of  March  2nd.  N.B.  This 
bill  extended  the  powers  of  the  Admiralty  Courts.  The 
Administration  published  accounts  of  the  part  the  As- 
sembly at  New  York  had  taken  against  the  Congress,  as 
had  one  little  town  who  depended  on  trade.  Lord  Dun- 
more,  too,  had  encouraged  them  to  hope  the  non-import 
and  export  resolutions  would  not  be  adhered  to. 

The  same  day  Lord  Radnor  in  the  Lords,  and  Lord 
Chewton  and  Rigby  in  the  Commons,  complained  of  an 
anti-Court  paper  called  the  "  Crisis  "  too,  and  ordered  it  to 
be  burnt.  Rigby  ridiculed  the  other  House  for  their  late 
pusillanimity,  and  said  one  man,  Wilkes,  would  frighten 
them  out  of  all  their  resolutions. — N.B.  The  Court  ordered 
the  printer  to  be  prosecuted,  which  had  not  been  done 
on  the  other  side. — N.B.  This  happened  on  the  last  of 
February,  not  on  the  first  of  March.  In  that  debate  there 
were  very  warm  words  between  the  Dukes  of  Richmond 
and  Manchester  on  the  one  side,  and  Lord  Sandwich  and 
Lord  Pomfret  on  the  other,  the  former  maintaining  it  was 
not  treasonable  (which  the  Court  was  forced  to  abandon) ; 
Lord  Sandwich  adding,  that  the  Duke  of  Richmond  always 
countenanced  libels  against  the  King.  This  the  Duke 
made  him  ask  pardon  for,  and  deny  to  be  meant  to  him. 
Lord  Sandwich  was  not  stout.  At  this  instant,  he,  who 
had  always  dealt  grossly  in  libels,  countenanced  that  low 

440 


1775]  MASSACHUSSETS   BILL  441 

rascal  Scott,  the  parson,  to  abuse  the  Opposition  daily  by- 
name, particularly  Lord  Chatham,  in  letters  signed  A 
State   Tinker. 

Lord  Pigot  carried  the  Government  of  Fort  St.  George 
at  the  India  House  against  Rumbold,  who  was  espoused 
by  the  Government. 

About  this  time  died  at  Nice,  whither  he  had  gone  for 
the  recovery  of  his  health,  William  Dowdswell,  Chancellor 
of  the  Exchequer  in  1766.  He  had  a  most  numerous 
family,  yet  had  most  inflexibly  and  honourably  refused  all 
emoluments  contrary  to  his  engagements  with  his  party — 
a  very  uncommon  instance. 

^th.  Accounts  that  Cardinal  Braschi  was  chosen  Pope, 
and  had  taken  the  name  of  Pius  VL 

A  counter-petition  was  presented  from  Nottingham 
against  the  Americans ;  and  one  from  Waterford,  for 
repeal  of  the  obnoxious  bills. 

6th.  Cooper  moved  that  the  bill  against  the  Massachus- 
sets  should  be  engrossed.  It  was  warmly  though  very 
ineffectually  opposed,  the  courtiers,  particularly  Jenkinson 
and  the  Scotch  Lord  Advocate  Dundas,  avowing  that 
they  wished  the  bill  might  starve  the  inhabitants  of  that 
province.^  Lord  Howe  declared  for  the  engrossment,  and 
against  the  late  pretended  Conciliatory  Bill,  as  he  thought 
it  wrong  to  treat  with  America  in  rebellion.  Lord  North 
and  Lord  Dartmouth,  he  said,  would  be  answerable  for 
the  events  of  it.  Charles  Fox  opposed  the  engrossment, 
imputed  all  the  present  disturbances  to  the  persisting  in 
taxation,  and  said  the  Americans  had  now  discovered  that 
taxation  was  used  as  punishment ;  and  that  it  was  bad 
policy  to  use  power  to  punish  with,  nor  was  it  prudent  to 
risk  more  in  the  contest  than  was  necessary.  Was  there  a 
man  would  say  the  Americans  had  better  starve  than 
rebel?     If  the  Act  should  not  produce  universal  acquies- 

^  I  believe  it  was  on  this  occasion  that  Dundas  coined  the  word  starvation^ 
which  became  a  nickname  for  him. 


442    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

cence,  he  would  defy  anybody  to  defend  the  policy  of  it. 
Yet  America  would  not  submit ;  New  York  only  differed 
in  the  mode.  He  believed  the  Ministers  did  not  like  their 
state  of  suspense :  they  wished  to  drive  the  colonies  into 
rebellion,  and  then  their  way  would  be  plain.  Jenkinson 
replied,  the  Ministers  had  a  right  to  use  their  authority, 
for  the  colonies  did  resist.  The  question  was  whether  we 
should  have  any  authority  at  all.  They  must  be  reduced 
to  obey  or  starve  ;  it  was  the  very  intent  of  the  bill.  They 
would  be  taught  by  their  wants  to  know  they  could  not  do 
without  this  country.  There  would  be  nineteen  battalions 
in  America  to  protect  the  friends  of  Government.  T. 
Townshend  lamented  the  condition  of  the  land  and  sea 
officers,  who  would  have  nothing  to  do  but  burn,  sink,  and 
destroy.  Dundas  owned  he  had  long  wished  for  such  a 
bill  as  this  :  he  should  have  been  sorry  no  other  way  had 
been  left  to  reduce  the  Americans  but  by  the  sword.  He 
wished  he  could  give  credit  to  the  fact  of  starving  them. 
He  doubted  it,  he  was  afraid  it  was  not  true.  They  were 
carrying  on  Newfoundland  fishery  with  English  capital. 
That  fishery  could  be  carried  on  to  any  extent  by  English 
merchants.  He  wished  an  indulgence  could  be  shown  to 
the  friends  of  Government  there,  it  would  remove  the  idea 
of  injustice.  Lord  John  Cavendish  ridiculed  Dundas's 
affected  moderation,  which,  zvhile  shocked  at  sanguinary 
measures,  could  talk  with  wonderful  complacency  of  staining. 
Whilst  penal  laws  were  multiplied,  the  name  of  the  mother 
country  would  become  odious.  Invention  was  ransacked 
for  punishment :  but  the  man  was  not  worthy  of  liberty 
who  would  not  let  the  people  enjoy  it.  Rice  owned  he 
was  sorry  for  concurring  with  the  bill,  and  felt  he  was 
executing  the  most  odious  part  of  his  duty ;  but  the 
supremacy  of  this  country  determined  him.  Burke  broke 
out  into  a  bitter  invective  against  such  savage  proceedings. 
He  called  it  inflicting  a  famine  on  four  provinces  ;  and  yet 
the  Ministers  lamented  that  they  could  not  even  dry  up 


1775]  STATE   OF   IRELAND  443 

the  brooks  in  America.  Our  Acts  of  Parliament  would 
be  the  fluttering  of  harpies'  wings.  This  Parliament  was 
treading  in  the  steps  of  the  last :  this  was  the  Boston  Port 
Bill  upon  a  larger  scale.  It  put  him  in  mind  of  Lady 
Macbeth,  who  exhorted  her  husband  to  go  on  in  blood. 
The  bill  was  unjust  and  tyrannic,  and  would  generate  such 
another  for  Virginia,  Carolina,  and  Maryland.  Open  the 
Statute  Book,  from  1772  nothing  could  be  found  in  it  but 
penallaws.  Yet  better  to  employ  the  whole  force  at  once ; 
this  way  was  weakening  us  more :  40,000  men  might  be 
maintained  at  less  expense  than  this  bill,  so  destructive 
it  would  be  to  trade.  Because  they  stopped  our  trade, 
must  we  stop  it  too  ?  If,  on  every  disturbance  in  America, 
trade  was  to  be  stopped,  there  was  an  end  of  this  country ! 
If  the  innocent  should  petition  the  Governor  for  leave  to 
fish,  he  could  not  relieve  them.  What  act  was  to  restore 
the  food  when  taken  away  by  this  damnable  Act?  If  you 
pass  this  Act,  you  would  be  the  blackest  traitors  God  ever 
suffered.  Here  he  was  called  to  order,  but  persisted  in  re- 
peating his  words,  and  said  he  had  a  right,  as  the  bill  was 
not  yet  passed.  "  I  call,"  said  he,  "  upon  your  bowels. 
Grief,  zeal,  and  indignation  may  make  me  exceed  common 
bounds ;  but  do  not  think,  because  we  are  few  in  numbers, 
that  we  have  lost  all  reason."  It  was  the  language  of 
tyranny,  it  was  the  case  of  Pharaoh.  The  trade  of  the 
colonies  at  the  beginning  of  this  century  produced  74,000/.; 
for  several  years  past  it  had  brought  in  near  500,000/. ;  yet 
was  to  be  thrown  away  ! 

The  Lord  Advocate,  provoked,  replied,  that  had  there 
been  unanimity  on  this  side  the  water,  America  would  have 
been  quiet.  The  blood  that  would  be  spilt  would  lie  at 
the  door  of  the  Opposition.  At  eight  the  House  divided, 
and  the  order  for  engrossing  was  carried  by  215  to  61, 
some  of  the  Opposition  being  shut  out. 

gth.  Lord  North  moved  for  leave  to  bring  in  a  similar 
bill  against  New  Jersey,  Pensylvania,  Maryland,  Virginia, 


444    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

and  South  Carolina— North  Carolina,  New  York,  and 
Georgia  were  excepted.  As  the  tobacco  trade  from  Vir- 
ginia to  France,  of  which  we  were  the  carriers,  produced 
a  million  to  France,  it  was  expected  that  France  would 
insist  on  that  being  excepted,  or  rather  that  the  Ministers 
would  not  dare  not  to  except  it. 

The  sloop  that  carried  the  news  of  the  first  violent 
measure  had  been  forced  back  to  Portsmouth,  so  the 
Ministers  hoped  the  account  of  the  Conciliatory  Bill  would 
arrive  in  America  as  soon. 

Ireland  all  this  time  was  in  a  miserable  state.  The 
White  Boys  committed  great  ravages,  were  supposed  to  be 
supplied  with  money  from  Spain,  and  even  to  be  winked 
at  by  the  Government  in  order  to  keep  the  country  quiet 
by  being  alarmed.  The  revenue  was  so  doled  away  in 
pensions  that  it  was  running  125,000/.  a  year  in  arrear, 
and  no  coin  could  be  got  in  the  country  even  for  remit- 
tances hither.^ 

Dr.  Johnson  published  his  answer  to  the  Congress  in  a 
pamphlet  called  "  Taxation  no  Tyranny."  This  man,  of 
the  narrowest  notions  and  most  illiberal  mind,  had  no  ideas 
of  trade,  and  preferred  despotism  to  the  most  flourishing 
condition  by  liberty.  He  was  at  the  same  time  at  open 
war  with  Macpherson,  the  forger  of  Ossian's  poems,  in 
which  he  had  detected  him.  This  fellow,  as  much  a  bully 
as  Johnson  was  a  brute,  challenged  the  old  decrepit  hire- 

^  As  an  illustration  of  the  attention  paid  to  the  small  traditions  of  Court 
customs  at  a  time  of  such  anxiety  and  distress,  may  be  noticed  the  fact  that, 
when  the  King  went  to  Parliament  this  month,  to  give  the  royal  assent  to 
certain  bills,  he  was,  on  going  down  to  the  House,  dressed  in  blue  ;  and,  on 
returning  from  it,  in  crimson.  The  subject  of  dress,  indeed,  was  generally 
esteemed  of  vast  importance.  The  papers  of  the  day  especially  commemorate 
with  admiration  the  appearance  of  a  splendidly  dressed  Duchess  at  the 
Queen's  birthday  drawing-room.  "  The  most  elegant  figure  which  appeared 
yesterday  in  the  drawing-room  was  her  Grace  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire. 
Her  dress  was  a  blossom-coloured  full  suit  of  cloaths,  with  rich  spangles  and 
white  ermine." — "  Monday,  some  of  the  silk  and  lace  weavers  of  Spitalfields 
went  on  the  search  among  the  mantua-makers  and  lace-dealers  of  St.  James's 
parish,  when  they  picked  up  a  very  rich  booty  of  French  manufacture,  which 
was  designed  to  be  worn  on  the  Queen's  birthday." — D. 


1775]        AFFRONT  TO  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER         445 

ling,  who  sent  him  a  stout  and  contemptuous  answer. 
Macpherson  now  pubHshed  King  James's  papers  from  the 
Scotch  College  at  Paris,  with  a  commentary  of  his  own, 
tending  to  defame  the  Duke  of  Marlborough  and  the 
friends  of  the  Revolution.  The  Scotch  Jacobites  now 
countenanced  at  Court,  had  and  took  the  opportunity  of 
venting  all  their  malice  against  those  who  had  demolished 
their  cause ;  and  the  way  they  took  was  to  coin  or  pervert 
what  they  pretended  original  papers — an  easy  way  of 
defaming  the  most  spotless  characters  ;  but  the  industry 
with  which  they  pursued  this  method,  the  revenge  they 
exhibited,  the  interest  they  had  in  the  defamation,  the 
impossibility  of  detection  when  verification  of  the  papers 
was  shut  up  from  the  families  they  defamed,  and  the 
infamous  characters  of  Dalrymple  and  Macpherson,  the 
two  chief  aspersers,  destroyed  all  credibility  either  in 
the  papers  or  publishers.  Who  could  be  innocent,  if  it 
was  sufficient  to  allege  from  papers  of  James  II.,  or  at 
Versailles,  that  the  enemies  of  James  and  Louis  were 
secretly  their  best  friends  ?  The  folly  of  the  assertion  was 
still  more  glaring ;  the  Jacobites  assert  that  all  the  chief 
friends  of  King  William  betrayed  him  to  King  James — 
how  then  came  William  to  die  on  the  throne,  and  James 
in  exile  ?  or  how  able  a  man  must  William  have  been,  and 
what  a  driveller  James,  when  the  latter  could  not  defeat  his 
rival,  though  betrayed  by  all  he  trusted  !  and  how  wise  a 
man  is  George  III.,  who  drives  from  him  all  the  friends  of 
his  family,  and  adopts  the  measures  and  counsels  of  those 
who  ruined  his  antagonists,  and  could  never  restore  them 
to  the  throne  ! 

14^^  Died  the  Princess  Caroline  Augusta  Maria, 
youngest  daughter  of  their  Royal  Highnesses  the  Duke 
and  Duchess  of  Gloucester.  The  Duke,  who  was  pre- 
paring to  go  abroad  for  his  health,  and  to  carry  the 
Duchess  and  his  children  along  with  him,  had  deter- 
mined   the    two    Princesses   should    first   be   inoculated, 


446    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

though  the  youngest  was  but  nine  months  old,  and  was 
asthmatic  and  unhealthy  like  her  father.  They  were 
accordingly  inoculated,  and  the  small-pox  was  come  out 
favourably  on  both,  but  on  the  tenth  day  the  youngest 
Princess  had  a  fit,  and  died  on  the  eleventh.  The  Duke 
sent  his  treasurer,  Legrand,  to  the  Lord  Chamberlain, 
Hertford,  to  notify  it  to  the  King,  and  desire  his  Majesty's 
orders.  The  King  replied  he  had  none  to  give — which 
implied  that  he  would  not  order  the  child  to  be  buried 
in  the  Royal  vault  at  Westminster.  The  Duke  was 
exceedingly  offended  at  this  slight,  which  even  intimated 
a  disavowal,  and  the  Duke  was  once  minded  to  go  himself 
to  the  King,  demand  an  audience,  and  complain  of  the 
injustice.  He  then  determined  to  have  a  vault  made 
in  St.  George's  Chapel  at  Windsor  for  his  family ;  for, 
seeing  the  King  did  not  intend  the  Duchess  and  his 
children  should  lie  in  the  Royal  vault,  he  would  not  lie 
there  himself  He  fixed  on  Windsor,  not  only  as  near 
his  own  residence  in  the  forest,  Gloucester  Lodge,  but 
because  some  Kings  and  Queen  Anne's  children  were 
buried  there.  He  spoke  to  the  Dean  of  Windsor,  Dr. 
Keppel,  Bishop  of  Exeter,  his  brother-in-law,  to  have  a 
vault  prepared.  The  Bishop,  not  at  all  disposed  to  offend 
the  King,  desired  me  to  ask  Lord  Hertford  if  this  would 
give  offence,  provided  he  did  not  bury  the  child  in  the 
Royal  vault.  Mrs.  Keppel,  the  Duchess's  sister,  being 
present,  begged  he  would  not  send  the  message,  lest  the 
King  should  refuse  that  too.  They  disputed  on  it :  the 
Bishop  said  he  would  not  sacrifice  her  smd  her  children  for 
the  Duchess's  sake.  Mrs.  Keppel  persisted  and  begged 
I  would  not  carry  the  message.  I  said  I  could  not  refuse, 
if  the  Bishop  desired,  and  must  not  take  on  me  to  decide 
between  two  nieces  ;  however,  I  said  I  would  alarm  Lord 
Hertford,  and  take  care  to  obtain  the  permission.  I  did 
so ;  I  told  him  that  if  the  Duke  was  farther  provoked  he 
would   bury  the  child    publicly  in   London,  publish  the 


1775]      INSIGNIFICANCE  OF  GERMAN  PRINCES       447 

King's  brutality,  and  make  the  greatest  clamour.  Lord 
Hertford  said  he  would  privately  consult  the  King,  for  he 
could  give  no  answer  of  himself.  He  did  so ;  said  the 
King  had  no  objection,  provided  it  was  not  in  the  Royal 
vault ;  and  had  been  shocked  when  Lord  Hertford  told 
him,  as  I  desired  he  would,  that  Legrand  had  proposed 
burying  the  Princess  in  a  church — the  King  had  said, 
Nobody  could  think  of  such  a  thing.  Lord  Hertford 
owned  he  had  frightened  the  King  with  a  public  burial 
in  London.  It  was  very  mortifying  to  the  Duke  to  be 
denied  his  daughter's  interment  in  the  Royal  vault,  when 
the  Queen  was  to  lie  there,  who  was  daughter  of  the 
younger  branch  of  one  of  the  most  insignificant  princes  in 
Germany,  the  Duke  of  Mecklenberg,  and  very  inferior  to  a 
Countess  of  England,  as  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  had 
been.  When  Prince  Charles,  the  Queen's  brother,  had 
before  her  marriage  been  in  our  army  in  Germany,  he 
had  the  nickname  of  Mecky,  and  had  been  treated  with 
sovereign  contempt  by  the  lowest  officers  in  our  troops. 
Mile.  d'Olbreuse,  the  left-handed  wife  of  the  Duke  of 
Zell,  father  of  George  I.'s  Queen,  had  been  waiting- 
woman  to  the  first  Duchess  of  Zell,^  and  was  of  a  very 
mean  French  gentleman's  family — such  a  mis-alliance 
that  the  King  himself  could  not  be  a  Knight  of  Malta  ;  so 
that,  though  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  as  illegitimate, 
was  a  mis-alliance  too,  her  father's  family  was  that  of  a 
very  ancient  English  gentleman  ;  and  Lady  Walpole,  first 
wife  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  was  descended  from  four  sons 
of  Edward  HI.  and  from  George  Duke  of  Clarence,  and 
from  the  Earls  of  Huntingdon  and  Chesterfield — much 
more  considerable  persons  than  the  Duke  of  Mecklenberg- 

^  This  is  a  mistake.  She  was  Lady-in-waiting  to  the  Princesse  de  Tarente 
(n^e  Princess  of  Hesse-Cassel).  Far  from  not  knowing  her  husband's  descent 
from  Elsonore  d'Olbreuse,  Queen  Charlotte,  it  is  said,  used  to  put  her  hand 
on  her  heart  and  twit  her  husband  with  "II  n'y  a  pas  d'Olbreuse  icy," 
which  meant  "The  Mecklenberg  quarters  are  all  right."  Horace  Walpole 
was  in  this  case  wrong  and  silly,  for  his  "niece,"  though  beautiful,  was  not 
legitimate.— A.  F.  S. 


448    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

Strelitz ;  and  the  Duchess,  as  widow  of  Earl  Waldegrave, 
was  of  not  less  eminent  rank.  A  Peer  of  England,  who  is 
a  member  of  the  Legislature  in  so  free  and  great  a  country, 
is  something  different  from  so  abject  and  dependant  a 
creature  as  a  little  Prince  in  Germany.  Had  the  Duchess 
taken  my  advice  she  would  have  contented  herself  with 
the  dignity  of  Countess  Dowager  of  Waldegrave,  inde- 
pendent of  all  the  world,  and  respected  as  granddaughter 
of  Sir  Robert  Walpole  and  widow  of  Lord  Waldegrave 
— admired  for  her  commanding  beauty,  and  adored  for 
her  unspotted  virtue,  her  sense,  and  distinguished  piety. 
Ambition,  which  her  virtue  surmounted,  had  made  her 
yield  to  be  the  unhappy  wife  of  a  Prince  of  the  Blood.  I 
mean  unhappy  from  the  affronts  her  marriage  occasioned 
to  the  Duke.  He  was  fond  of  her,  and  always  treated  her 
both  with  kindness  and  friendship. 

\^th.  Mr.  George  Grenville  and  Lord  Bulkeley  moved 
for  leave  to  bring  in  a  bill  for  allowing  Members  of  Parlia- 
ment to  vacate  their  seats.  The  meaning  and  cause  of  this 
motion  was  that  any  Member  on  application  might  be 
appointed  Steward  of  the  Chiltern  Hundreds,  which  nomi- 
nal office  was  in  the  power  of  the  Minister  for  the  time 
being.  The  Earl  of  Abingdon,  in  Opposition,  had  applied 
to  Lord  North  for  this  vacating  office  for  his  friend 
Mr.  Bailie.  Lord  North  had  refused  it,  and  had  had 
the  imprudence  to  say  in  his  answer  that  he  had  deter- 
mined never  to  grant  the  office  but  to  a  friend.  He  had 
some  time  before  declared  in  the  House  that  he  would, 
as  impartiality  required,  give  it  to  anybody  that  applied. 
On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Bailie  now  read  Lord  North's 
letter  to  the  House.  Lord  North  said  he  was  not  prepared 
to  defend  himself,  as  he  could  not  expect  so  ungentleman- 
like  an  attack  ;  yet  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  point  of  honour 
was  violated  in  publishing  an  ungentlemanlike  and  partial 
refusal,  and  a  breach  of  a  public  promise.  The  motion  was 
rejected  by  173  to  136. 


1775]  DEATH   OF   LORD    BRISTOL  449 

The  same  day  the  petition  of  the  City  against  the  New 
England  Fishery  Bill  was  carried  to  the  House  of  Lords 
by  the  Sheriffs  and  presented  by  Lord  Rockingham,  who 
produced  witnesses  to  prove  the  mischiefs  it  would  do.  On 
the  other  hand,  Lord  Sandwich  had  prepared  and  called 
witnesses  to  prove  the  trade  could  be  carried  on  here  and 
be  beneficial  to  England.  Very  warm  words  passed  be- 
tween the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lord  Sandwich,  in 
which  the  former  showed  most  spirit,  and  the  latter  most 
art. 

\6th.  The  bill  was  debated.  Lord  Carlisle  spoke  for  it 
with  applause,  Lord  Camden  with  much  ability  against  it ; 
but  the  Court  had  as  usually  a  great  majority.  See  "  Lon- 
don Chronicle." 

\Zth.  Died  at  Bath,  of  a  palsy  from  a  repelled  gout,  in 
the  53rd  year  of  his  age,  George  William  Hervey,  Earl  of 
Bristol,  Groom  of  the  Stole  to  his  Majesty.  He  was  suc- 
ceeded in  the  title  by  his  next  brother.  Captain  Augustus 
John  Hervey,  Groom  of  the  Bedchamber  to  the  King, 
Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  and  Colonel  of  the  Marines.  By 
this  accession  the  famous  Miss  Chudleigh,  pretended 
Duchess  of  Kingston,  became  in  reality  Countess  of 
Bristol.  He  resigned  all  his  posts  on  the  great  accession 
of  wealth  to  him  by  his  brother's  death.  He  set  up  his 
brother.  Colonel  William  Hervey,  as  candidate  for  Bury, 
in  his  room  ;  but  General  Conway,  by  the  interest  of  the 
Duke  of  Grafton,  was  chosen  there.  Mr.  Conway  had  no 
inclination  to  come  into  Parliament  now,  and  I  was  un- 
willing he  should  be  elected  by  the  Duke  of  Grafton  after 
his  late  behaviour ;  but  he  and  I  thought  he  could  not 
decline  it  without  disobliging  Lady  Hertford,  who  had 
made  a  point  of  his  being  brought  in  by  her  nephew. 
Lord  Hertford,  too,  was  very  eager  for  it,  as  it  would  save 
him  the  expense  of  bringing  his  brother  into  Parliament. 
The  Bedfords  were  much  hurt  at  it,  both  as  it  showed  they 
did  not  govern  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  and  as  Mr.  Conway 
I.— 2  G 


450    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

was  against  violence  towards  America.  The  King  did  not 
like  it  much  better,  nor  the  Opposition ;  for  Conway 
was  not  a  man  to  be  governed  by  a  faction,  nor  go  the 
lengths  they  wished  ;  nor  had  he  been  on  good  terms  with 
Lord  Rockingham  since  they  divided  on  Lord  Chatham's 
last  Administration. 

22nd,  The  young  Princess,  second  daughter  of  the  Duke 
and  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  lay  in  state  at  Gloucester 
House,  and  was  carried  to  Windsor  the  next  day  to  be 
buried  in  a  vault  the  Duke  had  ordered  to  be  made  there 
for  himself,  his  Duchess,  and  children,  being  determined 
not  to  be  buried  in  the  Royal  vault  at  Westminster  him- 
self, since  his  family  were  not  suffered  to  lie  there.  He 
ordered  the  lying  in  state,  to  ascertain  the  rank  of  his 
child,  and  make  the  refusal  more  noticed. 

2ird.  Mr.  Edmund  Burke,  in  a  speech  that  lasted  three 
hours,  opened  to  the  House  of  Commons  a  plan  he  had 
drawn  for  pacifying  America.  I  shall  not  specify  his 
propositions  or  questions,  nor  enlarge  on  other  debates  on 
American  affairs,  as  they  are  now  particularly  detailed 
with  the  most  material  speeches  in  Almon's  Parliamentary 
Register.  Lord  John  Cavendish  seconded  the  motion  ; 
Jenkinson  moved  for  the  Orders  of  the  Day.  The  Attorney- 
General  Thurlow  answered  Burke  in  a  very  able  speech. 
The  other  speakers  were  :  for  the  motion — Tuffnell,  Lord 
Irnham,  father  of  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland,  Sawbridge, 
Charles  Fox,  Beaumont,  Hotham,  and  Field  ;  against  it 
— Lord  Clare,  Powis,  Cornwall,  Poulett,  Lister,  Adam 
Drummond,  Lord  G.  Germaine,  Lord  Frederic  Campbell. 
The  plan  was  rejected  at  half  an  hour  after  eleven  at 
night,  by  270  to  78. 

The  same  day  Wilkes  the  Lord  Mayor  gave  notice  that 
in  the  next  session  he  should  move  a  question  for  the 
more  equal  representation  of  the  people ;  but  to  show  he 
was  not  connected  with  the  Rockingham  party,  he  did 
not  stay  to  vote  for  Burke's  plan. 


i 


1775]    BILL   FOR   DISENFRANCHISING   HINDON     451 

Lord  Weymouth,  immediately  on  Lord  Bristol's  death, 
received  an  offer  of  the  post  of  Groom  of  the  Stole,  which 
after  two  or  three  days  he  accepted. 

The  chief  Lords  in  the  Opposition  protested^  against 
the  Massachussets  Bill ;  and  then  agreed  amongst  them- 
selves to  vote  against  other  American  bills,  but  not  to 
debate  them,  seeing  the  majority  was  so  determined  on 
violence,  and  that  it  was  in  vain  to  try  to  prevent  it.  At 
the  same  time  many  in  Administration  owned  privately 
that  they  foresaw  some  change  in  the  Ministry  must  be 
made,  if  in  the  course  of  the  summer  the  Americans  did 
not  consent  to  take  our  goods.  Yet  it  was  the  spirit  that 
they  had  propagated  against  the  Americans  that  en- 
couraged them  to  proceed  in  the  violences  that  were  so 
likely  to  undo  them. 

2gth.  Mr.  Grenville's  Bill  for  Elections  had  proved  of 
great  utility.  The  Committees  had  despatched  an  amazing 
quantity  of  contested  elections,  without  interfering  with 
the  business  of  the  House ;  and  in  general  the  justice  and 
impartiality  of  their  decisions  had  given  great  satisfaction. 
The  corruption  in  the  borough  of  Hindon  had  been  the 
most  notorious,  and  the  Committee  had  presented  a  bill 
for  disfranchising  the  borough.  Great  opposition  was 
made  to  this  from  various  reasons  ;  some  were  reasonable, 
as  all  the  voters  were  not  guilty.  Lord  Hertford,  a  great 
borough  jobber,  and  who  had  hopes  of  getting  this,  used 
all  his  interest  to  quash  the  bill.  The  Attorney-General 
and  Rigby,  from  hatred  of  the  bill,  and  the  Court  itself, 

^  This  was  one  of  the  best  protests  ever  registered,  and  was  drawn,  I  sup- 
pose, by  Mr.  Burke.  It  contained  a  just  and  severe  criticism  on  Lord  Sand- 
wich's assertion  that  the  Americans  were  cowards  : — 

' '  For  the  *  Public  Advertiser. ' 

EPIGRAM. 

On  Reading  the  late  Protest. 

The  Americans  are  cowards,  and  will  yield 
Sooner  than  face  our  forces  in  the  field ; 
And  then  in  brave  commanders  how  much  richer 
We  who  have  Mansfield,  Sackville,  Jemmy  Twitcher. 

Bath,  March  27." 


452    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [March 

I  believe,  wished  ill  to  it,  and  Lord  North  opposed  it, 
though  no  great  industry  was  used  ;  and  the  favour  to  the 
bill  was  so  great  that  it  was  carried  against  Lord  North  for 
committing  the  bill  by  120  to  107.  Just  reflections  were 
thrown  on  the  Court  for  preferring  Bamber  Gascoyne  after 
he  had  been  convicted  of  bribery  on  a  former  election  at 
Maiden.  Charles  Fox,  not  very  gratefully,  attacked  Rigby, 
who  had  lent  him  12,000/.  to  save  him  from  selling  his 
place,  on  a  letter  to  a  borough,  in  which  Rigby  had  used 
the  King's  name. 


[7753 


APRIL 

ON  the  ^th  was  read  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
for  the  last  time,  the  new  bill  against  the  refrac- 
tory colonies.  The  Opposition  had  determined 
to  leave  the  Ministers  to  pursue  their  own  mea- 
sures, and  wait  the  event.  Burke  and  Charles  Fox  were 
absent,  and  Colonel  Barre  had  gone  away.  The  debate  was 
going  off,  after  some  slight  objections  from  Hartley,  Sir 
W.  Mayne,  and  the  Aldermen  Sawbridge  and  Bull,  when 
General  Conway,  without  designing  to  revive  it,  took  that 
only  opportunity  he  thought  he  should  have  in  the  session 
of  speaking  his  sentiments,  to  speak  his  disapprobation  of 
the  present  violent  measures,  though  rather  lamenting 
them  than  arraigning.  He  applauded  the  pacifying  bill, 
and  wished  both  countries  might  have  the  wisdom  to  adopt 
it,  though  he  feared  the  terms  would  not  be  accepted.  The 
measures,  he  said,  had  neither  been  taxing  nor  not  taxing, 
and  we  were  waiting  till  America  should  say  we  have  a  right 
to  tax  them.  But  things  would  not  go  well  till  brought 
back  to  the  spirit  of  the  time  when  the  Stamp  Act  was 
repealed.  There  was  a  disposition  in  America  not  to  deal 
in  treaty  or  in  abstract  reasoning. — Rigby,  who  had  not 
spoken  once  in  the  session  from  apprehension  that  the 
Ministers  would  be  undone,  could  not  resist  an  opportunity 
of  attacking  Conway,  and,  to  charge  him,  bragged  of  his 
own  consistency,  and  of  having  never  differed  with  Ad- 
ministration in  supporting  the  supremacy  of  England.  He 
had  voted  for  the  tea  duty,  though  then  in  Opposition.^ 
He  had  voted  for  the  Boston  Bill,  for  which  Conway  had 

^  The  tea  duty  was  agreeable  to  the  Stamp  Act,  which  he  had  supported. 

453 


454     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [April 

voted  too.  If  the  Stamp  Act  had  been  enforced,  the 
present  disorders  would  not  have  happened.  He  was 
surprised  Mr.  Conway  thought  he  had  done  wrong  in 
voting  for  the  tea  duty.  It  was  laid  by  Ch.  Townshend, 
but  all  the  other  Ministers  must  have  been  for  it  in 
Council.  He  should  disdain  to  treat  with  America.  It 
was  romantic  to  think  they  would  fight :  it  was  an  idea 
thrown  out  to  frighten  women  and  children.  There  was 
more  military  prowess  in  a  militia  drummer.  Much  had 
been  said  on  starving  the  Americans — one  would  think 
they  were  otters,  and  eat  nothing  but  fish.  Gentlemen 
forgot  it  was  an  article  of  commerce  with  which  they 
meant  to  buy  gunpowder.  They  were  not  only  rebels,  but 
the  worst  kind  of  rebels,  who  meant  to  sow  rebellion  in  the 
heart  of  this  country.  For  himself,  he  would  not  submit 
till  they  had  beaten  us  into  it.  There  was  not  one  mem- 
ber who  had  been  in  the  last  Parliament  who  had  not 
been  at  some  time  or  other  on  his  side  of  the  question. 
Were  we  to  give  way,  the  seat  of  Empire  would  be  at 
Philadelphia.  Thither,  if  we  repealed  the  late  Acts,  he 
would  advise  ambitious  gentlemen  to  go,  and  have  the 
honour  of  meeting  Dr.  Franklin.^ — Conway,  more  hurt  at 
having  been  for  the  tea  duty  than  at  reproach  and  insult, 
and,  yet,  too  upright  to  deny  what  he  had  done,  replied 
with  mildness  that  he  must  plead  guilty,  and  scorn  to 
justify  his  consistency.  He  had  acted  for  the  best  at  the 
time  he  had  done  it,  and  had  followed  the  ablest  men  in 
this  country  who  were  then  in  Administration.  The 
Americans  he  still  thought  ought  not  to  be  taxed,  and 
Lord  Hillsborough's  letter  had  since  owned  that  there  was 
then  no  such  intention.  It  was  madness  to  go  to  war  for 
taxes  when  the  idea  was  not  to  tax,  and  when  it  might 
bring  ruin  on  both  countries.  Our  troops  could  never  be 
sufficient  to  make  such  extensive  dominions  submit.    Lord 

'  Dr.  Franklin  was  just  gone  to  America ;  the  Ministry  had  deUberated 
whether  they  should  not  stop  him. 


1775]  CONCILIATORY   BILL   PASSED  455 

North  had  merit  in  proposing  something  that  might  put 
an  end  to  the  dispute. — Lord  John  Cavendish  reproved 
Rigby's  indecent  levity  on  so  serious  an  occasion,  and  said, 
that  if  a  despotic  monarch  makes  laws  that  are  disagree- 
able to  his  subjects,  he  cannot  make  laws  fast  enough  to 
enforce  them. 

The  young  Marquis  of  Granby,i  just  come  into  Parlia- 
ment, rose  with  much  decency,  and,  though  unprepared, 
spoke  with  much  sense  and  energy  against  the  measures 
of  Administration.  He  said  the  bill  was  bad  in  every 
respect,  vindictive  and  oppressive.  It  was  saying,  Re- 
nounce everything  that  is  dear  to  you,  or  we  will  put  you 
and  your  family  to  the  sword.  He  would  support  the 
supremacy  of  this  country  when  founded  in  justice  and 
in  general  principles  of  liberty  like  his  own.  He  con- 
cluded with  avowing  that  he  followed  the  line  of  Lord 
Chatham.  This  speech  and  declaration  were  a  great 
disappointment  to  the  Court.  Lord  Mansfield,  whose 
wife  was  sister  of  the  Duchess  of  Somerset,  Lord 
Granby's  grandmother,  who  had  educated  him,  had 
flattered  himself  he  should  govern  Lord  Granby,  and  had 
even  answered  for  him  to  the  Court.  Lord  Chatham  was 
artful  enough  to  write  him  a  long  letter  of  thanks  on  this 
declaration. 

Lord  North  said  his  sincerity  had  been  doubted  in  the 
Conciliatory  Bill ;  that  he  did  wish  peace,  yet  would  not 
give  up  everything  to  obtain  it.  The  bill  was  not  a 
proposition  to  starve  the  colonies,  but  to  force  them  to 
open  their  trade,  and  not  starve  our  West-India  Islands, 
and  to  obtain  adequate  supplies.  He  had  been  accused 
of  popery,  persecution,  and  resentment  on  their  rejecting 
the  teas.  No  measures  had  been  taken  last  year^  till  the 
smugglers  gave  offence.  The  nation  could  not  have  main- 
tained its  rank  if  no  notice  had  been  taken  of  that  offence. 

^  Grandson  of  the  Duke  of  Rutland,  and  son  of  John  Marquis  of  Granby, 
the  late  idol  of  the  people  and  soldiers. 


456     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [April 

As  yet  they  had  not  offered  submission.  Instead  of  it 
they  had  held  a  Congress.  Our  violence  arose  from 
theirs ;  the  cause  was  too  great  to  be  given  up.  The 
question  was  no  longer  of  taxation,  but  sovereignty. — T. 
Townshend  reflected  severely  on  Rigby  (who,  from 
timidity  of  the  event,  had  taken  no  part  all  the  winter  on 
any  American  question),  and  ridiculed  his  consistence, 
putting  him  in  mind  of  his  abandoning  Grenville  to  get 
his  present  place.^  The  gentleman  might  blush,  he  said, 
but  he  had  lost  Grenville's  friendship. — The  bill  passed  by 
192  to  46,  Conway  voting  in  the  minority.  Lord  Hertford 
was  much  hurt  at  it,  though,  when  the  Court  had  been  so 
terribly  alarmed  at  the  unprosperous  accounts  of  the  Con- 
gress, he  himself  had  said  to  me,  "  My  son  Beauchamp 
said  to  me  this  morning,  It  is  very  lucky  my  uncle  has 
taken  part  for  America,  it  will  save  our  family."  The  one 
brother  voted  as  his  conscience  directed  him,  the  other 
considered  only  how  his  brother's  vote  would  affect  the 
interest  of  the  family ! 

\oth.  The  Livery  of  London  had  voted  a  very  strong 
remonstrance  to  the  King  against  the  new  American  bills  ; 
and  this  day  Wilkes  presented  it.  This  completed  the 
triumph  of  the  latter  over  the  Court,  and  mortified  the 
King  was  to  be  forced  to  submit.  He  affected  to  be  in 
high  spirits,  and  read  his  answer  with  firmness,  which  was 
a  reproof  to  their  justifying  the  Bostonians.  He  might 
well  be  firm  :  he  had  summoned  a  great  appearance  of  his 
devotees  ;  the  Americans  were  not  popular;  and  Wilkes  not 
only  aimed  at  no  affront,  but  behaved  with  so  much  re- 
spect, that  the  King  himself  owned  he  had  never  seen  so 
well-bred  a  Lord  Mayor.  Many  thought  even  that  Wilkes 
was  bought  off;  at  least,  his  whole  conduct  aimed  at  no 
hostilities,  nor  at  more  than  maintaining  some  ascendant 
over  the  mob. 

^  Townshend  might  well  recollect  that,  for  the  place  had  been  taken  from 
him  for  Rigby. 


1775]        MOTION  TO  SELL  SOMERSET  HOUSE         457 

A  few  days  after,  the  Lord  Chamberlain  wrote  to  ac- 
quaint Wilkes  that  his  Majesty  would  receive  no  more 
remonstrances  from  the  City,  on  the  Throne,  but  in  their 
corporate  capacity.  This  was  a  mean  act  of  haughtiness, 
levelled  at  the  Livery  as  distinct  from  the  Court  of  Alder- 
men. He  had  not  dared  to  reject  Wilkes,  and  by  receiving 
him  had  established  a  precedent  for  what  he  now  pro- 
scribed. Even  of  this  handle  for  incensing  the  Livery, 
Wilkes  made  no  use. 

wth.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester,  alarmed  by  the  King's 
ill-usage  (of  which  more  will  be  said  hereafter),  entered  the 
proofs  of  his  marriage,  his  own  and  the  Duchess's  arms,^ 
and  the  births  of  his  children,  in  the  Journals  of  the  House 
of  Lords,  that  the  record  of  his  marriage  in  the  Council 
Books  might  not  be  destroyed  ;  and  thus  authenticated  the 
validity  of  his  marriage  in  the  most  solemn  and  irrefragable 
manner. 

\2th.  The  Lords  in  Opposition,  in  scorn  of  the  viol- 
ence of  the  Court,  and  convinced  of  the  inutility  of  re- 
sisting, gave  a  silent  vote  against  the  latest  American 
bill,  and  entered  a  protest  against  it  without  giving  their 
reasons. 

Lord  North,  to  hook  a  little  popularity  out  of  these 
bills,  moved  for  an  examination  into  the  Irish  Fisheries,  as 
if  intending  to  favour  them  on  the  ruin  of  the  American 
Fisheries.  This  produced  a  most  melancholy  representa- 
tion of  the  ruinous  state  of  Ireland  from  Mr.  Burke  and 
Mr.  Conolly,  and  to  which  Lord  North  could  only  reply, 
that  all  he  meant  now  was  to  consider  the  fisheries.  Ire- 
land was  in  a  worse  state  than  America,  by  the  neglect  of 
the  Administration,  and  by  the  country  being  plundered 
by  pensions. 

Lord  North  also  moved  to  sell  Somerset  House,  and  to 
settle  Buckingham  House  on  the  Queen  in  lieu  of  it,  which 
easily  passed.     He  added,  that  he  should  next  year  move 

1  Cf.  page  137.— A.  F.  S. 


45 8     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [April 

for  paying  the  King's  debts,^  and  even  for  an  additional 
revenue ;  and  that  he  should  not  be  ashamed  to  avow  that 
part  of  the  King's  debts  had  been  contracted  by  his  advice 
to  advance  several  sums.  This  delay  seemed  to  imply 
that  he  might  be  out  by  next  session  and  avoid  the 
odium,  and  at  the  same  time  he  laid  in  for  favour  by  the 
declaration. 

I'^th.  The  Houses  adjourned  for  Easter. 

20th.  The  Generals  Howe,  Burgoyne,  and  Clinton  sailed 
for  Boston. 

2^th.  The  Parliament  met  again. 

^  The  salaries  of  the  King's  household  were  one  year  in  arrear  ;  but  those 
of  the  Queen's  were  paid  up.  The  project  of  applying  for  an  addition  to  the 
King's  revenue  was  very  distasteful  to  a  people  who  found  themselves  uneasy 
under  eight  millions  of  taxes,  which  was  said  to  be  forty  times  more  than  was 
paid  in  Elizabeth's  time, — but  it  was  only  sixteen  times  as  much,  for  the 
revenue  then  collected  by  taxation  was  not  more  than  half  a  million. — D. 


1775] 


MAY 

A  LL  the  accounts  from  America  grew  more  and 
/^L        more    unfavourable.      The   ministerial   party 

/ — ^  had  been  totally  defeated  at  New  York,  where 
JL  .^^  they  had  flattered  themselves  with  most  suc- 
cess, and  it  had  been  carried  highly  to  send  deputies  to  the 
approaching  Congress.  At  Philadelphia,  Galloway, ^  a 
chief  patriot,  angry  that  his  plan  had  not  been  adopted, 
had  written  a  book  that  gave  great  offence,  and  had  moved 
for  an  Address  to  the  King ;  but  it  was  rejected,  and  the 
Quakers  were  unanimous  for  supporting  the  general  cause 
of  freedom,  as  were  their  brethren  here.  It  was  said  that 
on  General  Gage  receiving  orders  to  seize  and  send  over 
hither  the  chief  patriots,  he  had  returned  for  answer,  that 
should  he  attempt  to  do  any  such  thing,  that  would  be  the 
last  letter  they  would  ever  receive  from  him,  for  he  should 
be  knocked  on  the  head. 

Apprehensions  were  felt  that  the  Spaniards,  who  had  a 
large  fleet  ready  to  sail,  were  meditating  some  blow.  Lord 
Grantham,  our  ambassador  there,^  was  under  a  cloud.  A 
person  unknown  had  gone  on  a  holiday  to  the  East  India 
House  and  Secretary's  Office,  and,  being  admitted,  had  ex- 
amined all  the  papers,  retired  and  could  not  be  discovered. 
Lord  Grantham  was  suspected,  and  none  of  the  grandees 
would  converse  with  him. 

'  Galloway,  I  think,  had  married  the  daughter  of  Delancey,  the  chief  man 
at  New  York,  which  was  divided  into  two  parties.  Delancey,  I  have  heard, 
was  inclined  to  the  American  cause  ;  but  the  head  of  the  opposite  faction  tak- 
ing that  part,  Delancey  was  forced  into  the  Royalist  scale,  and  became  a 
dreadful  sufferer  by  it.  Galloway  came  over,  and  turned  a  virulent  writer  in 
the  newspapers  against  General  Howe  and  the  Opposition. 

^  Thomas,  the  second  Lord.     He  died  in  1786. — D. 

459 


46o       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

'^rd.  Lord  North  opened  the  Budget  very  heavily 
See  the  particulars  in  the  "  London  Chronicle." 

5///,  Wilkes  published  a  strong  answer  to  the  Lord 
Chamberlain's  letter  to  him. 

The  Hindon  affair  was  put  off  till  next  Session,  but  it 
was  ordered  that  no  writ  should  be  issued  till  then.  George 
Grenville  moved  that  the  Attorney-General  should  prose- 
cute some  of  the  persons  concerned  in  the  corruption, 
which  was  voted. 

Ramsay,  the  King's  painter,  who  had  been  a  Jacobite 
and  had  set  out  to  join  the  rebels,  though  he  arrived  too 
late,  had  left  off  painting,  and  was  a  constant  scribbler  for 
the  Court  in  the  newspapers.  He  had  last  year  published 
a  letter  to  and  against  Lord  Chatham,  which  not  selling, 
he  had  written  another  to  Lord  Lyttelton  in  the  papers, 
ascribing  it  to  him,  which  gave  it  some  sale.  He  now 
published  another,  and  likewise  attributed  that  to  Lord 
Caermarthen,  for  which  he  was  severely  handled  in  print.^ 

^  Allan  Ramsay,  of  whom  Walpole  here  speaks  so  much  evil,  was  the  son 
of  the  poet.  In  the  spirit  in  which  Walpole  censures  the  former,  Churchill 
sneered  at  both  father  and  son.  Showering  his  satire  on  Scotland,  he  says  in 
his  *'  Prophecy  of  Famine"  : — 

"  Thence  came  the  Ramsays,  names  of  worthy  note, 
Of  whom  one  paints  as  well  as  t'other  wrote." 

But  poet  and  painter  were  above  the  censure  of  Walpole  and  the  satire  of 
Churchill.  When  the  younger  Allan  went  to  Rome  in  1736,  then  twenty- 
three  years  of  age,  it  was  to  study  an  art  which  his  father  said  he  had  been 
following,  like  Raphael,  from  the  time  he  was  twelve  years  old:  "He  sets  out 
for  the  seat  of  the  Beast  beyond  the  Alps,  to  be  away  two  years." — "  I'm 
sweer  (loth)  to  part  with  him,  but  canna  stem  the  current  which  flows  from  the 
advice  of  his  patrons  and  his  own  inclination."  It  was  sufticient  that  Ramsay 
was  a  Scot,  more  than  sufhcient  that  he  was  patronized  by  Bute,  that  Walpole 
should  strike  at  him.  That  Ramsay  was  appointed  portrait-painter  to  the 
Court,  was  reported  to  be  such  a  favourite  with  George  III.  that  he  painted 
pictures  in  the  King's  drawing-room,  sat  down  to  finish  the  mutton  and  turnips 
left  by  his  Majesty,  and  was  intrusted  with  the  Crown  jewels  and  regalia  at 
his  own  house,  where  he  was  finishing  the  portrait  of  Queen  Charlotte,  with 
a  guard  round  the  dwelling,  more  for  security  than  honour — this  was  enough 
to  excite  the  scorn  of  Walpole.  •  As  an  artist  Ramsay  painted  with  such  skill 
as  to  stimulate  the  fears  and  exertions  of  Reynolds  ;  he  painted  with  such 
success,  as  to  reputation  and  wealth,  that  Hogarth  hated  him  ; — but  Johnson 
praised  him  for  the  grace  and  instructiveness  of  his  conversation  :  Sir  Joshua 
even  ranked  him  among  the  most  skilful  artists  of  his  day.  Walpole  has, 
elsewhere,  borne  testimony  that  if  Ramsay  was  not  "first-rate,"  it  was  not 


C AROLTXA  .    Jf ATILDA 


y//////  /  J  / 


//////a/A'. 


CAROLINE    MATILDA,    QUEEN    OF    DENMARK 
From  a  inezzoiint  by  BrookshwM  after  Coles 


1775]  THE    DECLARATORY   ACT  461 

A  remonstrance  had  been  sent  from  New  York,  couched 
in  very  decent  terms,  but  arguing  against  the  Declaratory 
Act.  Burke  was  to  present  it  to  the  House  ;  on  which 
Lord  North  called  a  private  meeting  of  the  chief  members, 
and  they  resolved  not  to  receive  it  :  Lord  Beauchamp 
argued  much  for  accepting  it,  yet  in  the  House  voted 
against  it.  Lord  Barrington  too  was  for  receiving  it,  and 
stayed  away  from  the  House  ;  which  was  noticed,  as  his 
Lordship  was  not  subject  to  conscientious  scruples,  and 
therefore  it  was  suspected  that  the  King  was  meditating 
some  change.  The  petition  was  presented  on  the  15th, 
but  the  Court  threw  it  out  by  an  amendment  that  was 
carried  by  186  to  6j.  General  Conway  voted  for  the 
reception,  but  did  not  speak,  as  it  attacked  the  Declaratory 
Act.  Cruger,  Charles  Fox,  T.  Townshend,  T.  Walpole, 
Governor  Johnston,  and  Serjeant  Adair,  supported  the 
remonstrance ;  Lord  North,  Cornwall,  Jenkinson,  and 
others  spoke  against  it. 

The  Bishops,  who  had  voted  for  so  many  bloody  Acts, 
protested  against  a  playhouse  at  Manchester,  for  which 
Lord  Radnor  protested  against  them. 

On  the  \Zth  came  advice  of  the  death  of  Caroline 
Matilda,  Queen  of  Denmark,  the  King's  youngest  sister,^ 

for  want  of  genius  but  of  subjects.  Northcote  gave  him  on  one  occasion  a 
crown  that  he  refused  to  Vandyke ;  and  Fuseli  has  alluded  admiringly  to  his 
love  of  classic  lore,  his  genius,  and  his  learning.  His  visits  to  Italy  were 
made  for  the  sake  of  improvement  in  the  art ;  but  even  there  he  boldly  asserted 
the  merits  of  the  English  school  of  painters.  In  his  leisure  hours  he  was  a 
general  writer, — history,  politics,  criticism,  and  the  exposure  of  individual 
imposition,  occupying  his  time.  He  was  so  fond  of  learning  that,  like  Cato, 
he  mastered  Greek  in  his  old  age.  His  humaneness  of  spirit  was  not  a  theory, 
but  was  carried  into  action  ;  and  he  was  a  thoroughly  sober  man — a  "tee- 
totaller "  in  fact,  when  to  be  sober  as  a  rule  exposed  a  man  to  ridicule  and 
reproach.  He  was  in  every  sense  of  the  word  "a  noble  fellow,"  who  out  of 
the  fruits  of  his  labour  paid  his  father's  debts,  and  provided  for  his  family 
and  kinsfolk.  He  was  not  one  of  those  great  geniuses  who  spend  all  they 
earn  on  themselves,  and  leave  their  wives  and  ifamilies  to  the  eleemosynary 
mercies  of  the  public.  He  was  an  honest  man,  and  died  as  an  honest  father 
deserved  to  do,  in  the  arms  of  a  gallant  son,  Major-General  Ramsay,  in  the 
year  1784. — D. 

^  She  was  the  posthumous  child  of  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  and  at  her 
death  was  only  twenty-four  years  of  age. — D, 


462       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

at  Zell,  where  she  and  some  of  her  attendants  died  in  a 
very  few  days  of  a  putrid  fever. 

About  the  same  time  came  out  a  pamphlet,  by  Strange 
the  engraver,  complaining  of  bitter  persecution  from  Lord 
Bute,  and  of  ill-treatment  by  the  Royal  Academy.  Strange 
was  a  vehement  Jacobite,  and  having  early  in  this  reign 
been  applied  to  by  Ramsay  the  painter  to  engrave  two 
pictures  which  the  latter  had  done  of  the  King  and  Lord 
Bute,  the  latter  of  which  the  Earl  or  the  painter  had  had 
the  folly  to  desire  should  be  done  first,  Strange,  from 
Jacobitism,  as  Ramsay  said,  refused  ;  and  Lord  Bute,  with 
still  greater  folly,  had  declared  that  we  {he  and  the  King) 
would  never  forgive  him.^ 

On  the  \<^th  Lord  Camden  moved  for  a  repeal  of  the 
Quebec  Bill,  and  made  a  great  figure,  as  Lord  Mansfield, 
who  defended  it,  made  an  artful  one,  pleading  that  it  was 
better  to  have  that  bill  than  no  constitution  at  all  there. 
Lord  Shelburne  spoke  finely  too,  and  Lord  Lyttelton 
with  applause,  and  (for  that  reason  with  much  applause) 
with  most  indecent  abuse  of  Lord  Camden,  whom  he 
taxed  with  Republicanism  and  Jacobitism  ;  but  printing 
his  speech  immediately  afterwards,  as  was  grown  a  custom, 
it  was  so  wordy  and  void  of  argument,  that  he  fell  greatly 
in  the  public  opinion.  He  had  the  assurance  too  to  taunt 
Lord  Camden  with  Lord  Chatham's  absence  and  dis- 
countenance, though  he  himself  was  apt  to  attack  Lord 
Chatham  too.  The  chief  part  of  the  debate  turned,  how- 
ever, on  the  great  military  preparations  and  fleets  assem- 
bling in  Spain,  which  Lord  Lyttelton  called  on  the  Ministers 

^  The  Jacobitism  of  Strange  was  notorious  enough,  for  he  had  borne  arms 
for  the  Pretender,  suffered  exile  with  him,  and  obtained  Isabella  Lumisden 
for  a  wife,  only  because  of  his  Jacobitism  ;  but  his  refusal  to  engrave  the 
portrait  of  the  King,  it  is  said,  was  founded  on  the  assertion  of  the  artist  that 
it  was  an  unworthy  picture— as  a  work  of  art.  Strange,  despite  his  Jacobite 
tendencies,  submitted  to  be  knighted  by  George  III.  in  1787.  He  died  in 
1792  ;  and  the  letters  of  his  widow  show  that  her  stout  Jacobite  heart  never 
thoroughly  digested  the  honour  conferred  on  her  husband  by  "the  Elector 
of  Hanover." — D. 


1775]        VICTORY  OBTAINED  BY  AMERICANS  463 

to  declare  the  intent  of,  as  did  the  Duke  of  Richmond  ; 
and  even  Augustus  Hervey,  the  new  Earl  of  Bristol,  who, 
though  he  had  been  a  creature  of  Lord  Sandwich,  now 
aimed  at  the  Admiralty.  Lord  Rochford  said,  no  Lord 
had  a  right  to  call  on  him,  yet  declared  the  Court  of  Spain 
had  given  assurances  of  having  no  hostile  designs  against 
us  ; — but  Lord  Sandwich  succeeded  worse,  for  it  came  out 
that  we  had  but  17  ships  at  home,  and  they  wanted  4000 
men. 

The  Quebec  Bill  was  upheld  by  88  to  28. 

The  next  day  Sir  George  Saville  moved  the  same  repeal 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  supported  admirably  by  Charles 
Fox,  but  with  no  better  success. 

Mr.  Burke  printed  his  speech  and  plan  for  the  pacifica- 
tion of  America.  It  was  much  more  sober,  judicious,  and 
chaste  from  flights  than  the  former. 

2A^th.  The  Duchess  of  Kingston,  who  was  returned  from 
Italy  to  answer  the  charge  of  bigamy,  appeared  unex- 
pectedly in  the  King's  Bench,  and  surrendered  herself. 
Lord  Mansfield  treated  her  with  great  respect.  She  gave 
bond  in  5000/.  for  her  appearance  to  her  trial,  and  was 
bailed  in  1000/.  each  by  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  whom  she 
had  got  named  in  the  Duke  of  Kingston's  will,  Lord 
Mountstewart,  son  of  Lady  Bute,  first  cousin  of  that  Duke, 
Sir  Thomas  Clarges,  and  M.  La  Roche.  The  charge  was 
then  read,  which  she  heard  with  amazing  intrepidity  of 
countenance,  and  then  was  dismissed  on  her  bail. 

26th,  The  Parliament  rose :  the  King's  speech  was  very 
temperate. 

The  same  day  the  Prince  of  Masserano  returned  to  his 
Embassy,  which  served  the  Ministers  to  confirm  their 
assertions  of  Spain  having  no  hostile  intentions. 

2Zth.  Arrived  a  light  sloop  sent  by  the  Americans  from 
Salem,  with  an  account  of  their  having  defeated  the  King's 
troops.  General  Gage  had  sent  a  party  to  seize  a  magazine 
belonging  to  the  provincials  at  Concord,  which  was  guarded 


464       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

by  militia  of  the  province  in  arms.  The  regulars,  about 
1000,  attacked  the  provincials,  not  half  so  many,  who 
repulsed  them,  and  the  latter  retired  to  Lexington.  Gage 
sent  another  party  under  Lord  Percy  to  support  the 
former ;  he,  finding  himself  likely  to  be  attacked,  sent  for 
fresh  orders,  which  were  to  retreat  to  Boston.  The  country 
came  in  to  support  the  provincials,  who  lost  about  50  men, 
and  the  regulars  1 50.  The  advice  was  immediately  dis- 
persed, while  the  Government  remained  without  any  intel- 
ligence. Stocks  immediately  fell.  The  provincials  had 
behaved  with  the  greatest  conduct,  coolness,  and  resolution. 
One  circumstance  spoke  a  thorough  determination  of  resist- 
ance :  the  provincials  had  sent  over  affidavits  of  all  that 
had  passed,  and  a  colonel  of  the  militia  had  sworn  in  an 
affidavit  that  he  had  given  his  men  order  to  fire  on  the 
King's  troops,  if  the  latter  attacked  them.  It  was  firm- 
ness, indeed,  to  swear  to  having  been  the  first  to  begin 
what  the  Parliament  had  named  rebellion.  Thus  was  the 
civil  war  begun,  and  a  victory  the  first  fruits  of  it  on  the 
side  of  the  Americans,  whom  Lord  Sandwich  had  had  the 
folly  and  rashness  to  proclaim  cowards. 


1775] 


JUNE 

IT  was  said  that  Gage  had  but  two  days  before  the 
engagement  received  any  hostile  orders ;  but  that 
I  doubt.  The  Sukey,  the  sloop  he  sent,  did  not 
arrive  till  a  week  after  the  account  by  Captain 
Darby,  who  being  sent  for  by  Lord  Dartmouth  refused 
to  go  to  him.  Gage  commended  much  Lord  Percy's 
behaviour.  Parson  Home  by  advertisement  opened  a 
subscription  for  our  brethren  in  America. 

The  action  at  Concord  flew  like  wildfire,  and  threw  the 
whole  Continent  into  a  flame.  The  mob  rose  at  New 
York,  seized,  unloaded,  and  destroyed  the  cargoes  of  two 
ships  lying  there  with  provisions  for  Gage;  and  then 
seized  a  fort  garrisoned  by  an  hundred  invalids.  Troops 
from  every  quarter  marched  towards  Boston,  and  18,000 
men  invested  the  town.  Ten  thousand  more  were  said 
to  be  on  the  march  from  Rhode  Island.  The  King's 
friends  were  driven  out  of  New  York,  and  Lord  Dunmore^ 
was  told  he  should  be  treated  civilly,  but  was  desired  to 
leave  Virginia 

The  Administration  was  thunderstruck :  spirit  began 
to  appear,  and  bitter  invectives  were  published  every  day 
against  the  governing  party,  while  they  endeavoured  to 
recriminate  and  to  lay  all  the  blame  on  the  repealers  of 
the  Stamp  Act. 

1  The  father  of  Lady  Augusta  Murray,  the  first  wife  [or  rather  pseudo- 
wife,  as  her  marriage  was  contrary  to  the  provisions  of  the  Royal  Marriage 
Act]  of  the  late  Duke  of  Sussex.  Lord  Dunmore  died  in  1809.  Another  of 
his  daughters,  Lady  Virginia  Murray,  was  so  named  at  the  request  of  the 
people  of  the  colony  in  which  she  was  born,  and  of  whiqh  Lord  DunmorQ 
was  Governor." — D. 

I.— 2  H  465 


466       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

But  while  the  prospect  was  so  gloomy,  equal  dissipation 
continued  :  on  the 

2ird  the  clubs  at  the  S^avoir  Vivre,  Almack's,  White's, 
and  Guthrie's,  gave  a  new  diversion  invented  by  Lord 
Lyttelton,  or  rather  borrowed  from  the  Venetians,  a  race 
of  boats  called  a  Regatta.  Lord  Lyttelton  and  Temple 
Luttrell,  one  of  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland's  brothers, 
were  the  chief  managers.  It  began  from  Westminster 
Bridge  at  half-an-hour  after  seven  in  the  evening,  but  it 
was  ill-conducted,  the  evening  rainy  and  unfavourable, 
and,  though  all  London  was  on  the  river  or  shores,  few 
saw  the  race  :  thence  the  company  proceeded  to  Ranelagh, 
where  was  a  supper  and  ball,  as  ill-managed  too. 

The  Americans  sent  over  an  address  to  Wilkes,  who 
now  openly  espoused  their  cause.  At  the  election  of 
Sheriffs  he  set  up  his  brother-in-law  Hayley,  and  one 
Newenham  :  the  Court  was  for  Rawlinson  and  Thomas, 
two  elder  Aldermen,  but  the  show  was  exceedingly  in 
favour  of  the  former ;  and  though  a  scrutiny  was  de- 
manded, the  Court  Aldermen  were  forced  to  give  it  up, 
pleading  that  order  did  not  yet  prevail. 

At  the  same  meeting  a  strong  Remonstrance  to  the  King 
in  favour  of  America  was  voted  with  scarce  a  negative, 
and  voted  that  it  should  not  be  delivered  unless  to  the 
King  on  his  throne  ;  complaint  being  there  made  of  Lord 
Hertford's  letter,  and  a  vote  passed  that  whoever  advised 
that  letter  was  an  enemy  to  his  country.  The  meeting 
also  voted  thanks  to  the  Earl  of  Effingham,^  who  had 
quitted  the  army  rather  than  go  and  fight  against  the 
Americans.  The  Earl  was  a  wild  sort  of  head,  yet  had 
made  a  very  sensible  speech  in  the  House  of  Lords  on 
that  subject.  The  Sheriffs  went  to  know  when  the  King 
would  receive  the  Address,  and  not  finding  him  at  St. 

^  Thomas,  Earl  of  Effingham.  He  died  in  1791,  at  Jamaica,  a  few  weeks 
after  the  death  of  his  Countess  at  New  York.  The  title  became  extinct  in 
1816.— D. 


1775]       VIOLENT  RESOLUTIONS  IN  THE  CITY        467 

James's,  followed  him  to  Kew.  He  sent  them  word  he 
was  not  ready  with  his  answer,  but  would  give  it  at 
St.  James's. 

Bad  news  poured  in  from  America.  The  New  Eng- 
enders would  not  supply  Newfoundland  with  provisions, 
and  the  Ministers,  afraid  of  their  being  starved,  had 
thoughts  of  diverting  part  of  the  supplies  designed  for 
Gage.  The  Quakers  in  Philadelphia  had  determined  to 
take  up  arms,  and  were  training  all  their  young  men  to 
exercise.  The  American  forces  had  also  taken  Ticonde- 
roga  and  Crown  Point. 

The  Ministers  were  aground :  they  first  thought  of 
sending  Hessians,^  Hanoverians,  and  even  a  large  body 
of  Russians — but  found  it  would  be  too  expensive  or  too 
unpopular.  They  were  offered  3000  Highlanders,  but  did 
not  dare  to  accept  them.  At  last  they  thought  of  recal- 
ling Gage  and  the  troops,  and  it  was  said  to  be  carried  in 
council  but  by  one  voice  that  they  should  not.  At  last, 
after  several  consultations,  the  Ministers  determined  to 
prosecute  the  war,  and  sent  to  General  Carleton  at  Quebec 
to  march  with  6000  Canadians  to  the  back  of  the  Colonies. 
Still  they  had  little  hopes  of  making  any  impression  this 
campaign,  but  waited  anxiously  for  the  result  of  the 
General  Congress,  in  hopes  it  would  propose  some  terms 
of  accommodation. 

In  the  meantime  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  thinking  the 
Ministers  could  not  stand  it,  had  gone  to  Lord  Chatham, 
and  told  him  that,  as  it  was  likely  they  should  be  sent  for, 
it  would  be  necessary  to  settle  some  plan  of  Administration. 
Lord  Chatham  allowed  it,  and  said  his  Grace  and  Lord 
Shelburne  must  be  Secretaries  of  State,  and  greatly  com- 
mended the  Duke's  zeal  and  activity.      "Ay,  my  Lord," 


^  The  Hessians  were  ultimately  purchased.  There  was  nothing  unusual 
in  the  process.  HoUis  states  in  his  Memoirs,  that  the  Elector  of  Saxony 
sold  a  regiment  of  dragoons  to  the  King  of  Prussia  for  forty  large  blue  and 
white  metal  jars. — D. 


468       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

said  the  Duke,  "  but  who  is  to  be  at  the  head  of  the 
Treasury?"  Lord  Chatham  would  not  name  anybody, 
but  described  the  Duke  of  Northumberland — on  this  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  left  him  abruptly,  as  he  had  not  agreed 
to  Lord  Rockingham  having  the  Treasury.  This  disagree- 
ment encouraged  the  Ministers,  whose  sole  safety  indeed 
depended  on  not  resigning.  Yet  all  America  went  in ; 
they  declared  that  all  that  were  not  with  them  were 
against  them,  and  were  starving  Newfoundland,  which 
was  a  new  and  heavy  difficulty  on  the  Ministry.  Lord 
Dunmore  had  acted  with  spirit  and  seized  some  provincial 
powder,  and  they  submitted  to  be  paid  for  it — but  the 
violence  was  so  great  and  universal  that  Dr.  Franklin  was 
said  to  have  left  the  Congress :  it  was  thought  Lord 
Dunmore  had  settled  a  plan  of  accommodation  with  Dr. 
Franklin.  The  Scotch  party  here  continued  to  preach  up 
rigour,  and  to  throw  all  blame  on  the  repealers  of  the 
Stamp  Act,  and  were  in  general  more  popular  than  the 
Americans — but  Wilkes  and  his  faction  now  threw  off  all 
moderation.  The  Sheriffs  insisted  on  the  King's  receiving 
their  Remonstrance  on  the  throne — he  told  them  he  was 
judge  where  he  would  receive  it ;  on  which  they  voted  to 
publish  but  not  to  present  it,  with  several  other  violent 
resolutions,  which  they  entered  on  their  books,  with  orders 
to  the  Members  for  the  City  to  impeach  the  Ministers  the 
next  Session,  and  which  Resolutions  without  the  Remon- 
strance the  Sheriffs  presented  to  the  King  on  the  5th  of 
July. 


17751 


JULY 


^th. 


THE  same  day  came  an  account  of  another  skir- 
mish between  Gage's  men  and  the  Provincials 
at  Hogg  Island,  whence  the  latter  had  gone 
to  drive  away  the  cattle  which  supplied  Gage. 
They  were  attacked  by  a  party  from  Boston,  supported 
by  a  schooner  and  a  sloop ;  the  former  of  which  was  burnt 
by  the  Provincials,  and  the  party  beaten  back. 

i/^th.  The  Mayor  and  City  in  their  corporate  capacity 
presented  a  Remonstrance  to  the  King,  which  he  did  re- 
ceive on  the  throne,  as  it  was  in  their  corporate  capacity, 
and  gave  a  moderate  though  firm  answer.  This  seemed 
rather  a  submission  in  them,  but  they  could  not  help  doing 
it,  to  satisfy  the  Americans  on  their  address  to  them. 

At  this  time  the  shipwrights  in  all  the  dockyards  refused 
to  work  unless  their  wages  were  increased.  They  grew  so 
mutinous  at  last  that  horse  and  foot  guards  were  sent  to 
restrain  them. 

The  officers  in  half-pay  were  not  paid,  which  has  never 
happened  even  in  time  of  war — but  all  the  money  went  in 
corruption,  or  to  the  American  war.  Of  the  former  were 
these  instances :  Mrs.  Bradshaw  had  a  pension  of  800/.  a 
year ;  Lady  Margaret  Fordyce,^  wife  of  that  infamous 
banker  who  had  ruined  so  many,  and  driven  two  or  three 
persons  to  make  away  with  their  own  lives,  had  a  pension  ; 
just  now  the  widow  of  Nuttal,  Solicitor  of  the  Treasury, 
who  had  embezzled  19,000/.,  had  a  pension  of  300/.  a  year 

^  Younger  daughter  of  James  Lindsay,  5th  Earl  of  Balcarres.  Married 
first,  1770,  Alexander  Fordyce,  of  London,  Esq.,  banker;  second,  i8i2,  Sir 
James  Bland  Burgess  Lamb,  Bart. — A.  F.  S. 

469 


470       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [July 

to  induce  her  to  give  up  her  husband's  papers,  who  had 
been  engaged  in  many  election  matters  ;  and  at  last  the 
Court  purchased  of  Charles  Fox  his  place  of  Clerk  of  the 
Pells  in  Ireland  *  *  *  *  ^j^^|.  j|-  jnjg^t 
be  given  to  Jenkinson  for  life,  who  already  had  the  rever- 
sion of  Clerk  of  the  Pells  in  England.  This  was  given 
him  for  his  secret  services,  and  that  he  might  give  up  his 
place  of  Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland,  the  purchase  of  Flood, 
the  Irish  orator. 

ijth.  News  from  America.  Lord  Dunmore  had  been 
forced  to  take  refuge  on  board  the  ships.  General  Gage 
had  issued  a  Proclamation,  offering  pardon  to  all  who 
should  immediately  lay  down  their  arms,  excepting  only 
Samuel  Adams  and  John  Hancock ;  and  ordering  martial 
law  to  be  exercised  throughout  the  province.  The  effect  of 
this  Proclamation  was  only  to  enrage  the  colonies  still  more. 
In  the  meantime  the  Scotch  aspersed  Gage  as  inactive. 

2\st.  A  motion  was  made  in  the  Common  Council  for 
sending  an  answer  to  the  Committee  at  New  York,  with  a 
copy  of  the  Remonstrance  and  the  King's  answer,  but  the 
motion  was  rejected  by  64  to  50. 

The  Luttrells  had  last  year  negotiated  with  Lord  North, 
and  the  father,  Lord  Irnham,  was  to  have  an  Irish  Earl- 
dom, and  Temple  Luttrell  had  a  pension  of  700/.  a  year ; 
but  the  family  all  quarrelling  among  themselves — the 
Duchess  of  Cumberland  and  the  two  younger  brothers 
and  sister  with  the  father,  and  all  with  the  Colonel — the 
Earldom  was  stopped,  and  Temple  Luttrell  continuing  in 
warm  Opposition,  his  pension  was  taken  away. 

2\th.  The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  and  their 
daughter  the  Princess  Sophia,  set  out  for  Italy — the 
Duchess  three  months  gone  with  child.  The  story  of  this 
Prince  during  the  last  winter  will  be  inserted  hereafter. 
The  Duke  and  Duchess  were  received  with  proper  respect 
at  Calais  by  order  of  the  French  Court,  and  escorted  to 
Lisle.    The  King  of  France  invited  them  to  Versailles,  but 


1775]  DISTRESS   IN   BOSTON  471 

they  excused  themselves,  which  was  ill-judged,  as  it  would 
have  been  of  great  use  to  the  Duchess  to  be  owned  there. 
The  greatest  honours  were  paid  to  them  all  through  France. 
The  officers  reviewed  their  regiments  before  the  Duke ;  and 
at  Nancy  the  Princess  Christina,  daughter  of  the  King  of 
Poland,  and  sister  of  the  late  Dauphiness,  after  hesitating, 
made  the  Duchess  the  first  visit.  M.  de  Castries  asking 
the  Duchess  who  were  the  Knights  of  the  Garter,  and  she 
naming  Lord  North  as  one,  M.  de  Castries  said,  with  sur- 
prise, "  Is  he  one  ? — for  what  ? — for  having  lost  America  ?  " 
In  France,  whither  I  went  now,  I  did  not  find  a  single  per- 
son who  did  not  condemn  our  conduct  towards  America, 
our  folly  and  cruelty.  The  Bishop  of  Mirepoix  said  to  me, 
"  Fous  etes  devenus  fous,  vous  y  perdrez!' 

An  account  of  a  considerable  action  near  Boston  had 
been  brought  by  the  "  Cerberus,"  and  had  arrived  on  the 
19th,  but  was  concealed  by  the  Administration  ;  but  on 
the  25th,  an  account  unfavourable  to  their  side  being  pub- 
lished, they  owned  partly  to  the  advices  they  had  received, 
and  called  it  a  victory.  The  Regulars,  under  Howe,  had 
attempted  to  drive  the  Provincials  from  a  neck  of  land, 
and  a  settlement  at  Charles  Town,  but  were  repulsed  and 
sent  for  a  reinforcement  under  Clinton.  They  did  burn 
Charles  Town,  but  had  1700  killed  and  wounded,  out  of 
which  was  a  vast  proportion  of  officers,  amongst  whom  were 
Colonels  Pitcairn  and  Abercrombie.  The  Provincials  lost 
not  a  quarter  of  the  number.  Many  of  the  wounded  died, 
having  nothing  but  salt  provisions  and  scarce  any  hospital 
preparations,  and  the  distress  in  Boston  was  inconceivable. 
Dr.  Warren,  a  minister,  was  killed  in  the  Provincial  army. 
The  Regular  troops  were  such  novices  that  half  of  the  King's 
troops  that  were  killed  were  shot  by  their  own  friends. 

The  Ministers  now  saw  America  was  lost,  or  not  to  be 
recovered  but  by  long  time  and  vast  expense  ;  yet,  not 
daring  to  own  their  miscarriage,  pushed  on  ;  ordered  more 
ships,  sent  five  regiments  and  clothing  for  6000  Canadians. 


472       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    Quly 

Hanoverians  were  ordered  to  replace  the  garrisons  of 
Minorca  and  Gibraltar.  Gage  was  recalled,  on  whom  they 
laid  all  manner  of  blame,  and  the  command  given  to  Howe. 
Burgoyne,  disgusted,  or  not  liking  the  service,  had  desired 
to  be  recalled. 

The  Congress  at  Philadelphia  took  the  most  resolute 
measures.  They  named  Washington,  a  very  able  officer, 
General-in-Chief  They  voted  him  2000/.  a-year  and  5/. 
a-day  for  his  table :  he  would  accept  only  the  latter. 
Colonel  Ward  was  second,  Colonel  Lee  third,  and  Major 
Horace  Gates  Adjutant-General. 

The  great  Spanish  armament,  on  which  attention  had 
hung  so  long,  had  at  last  attacked  Algiers  and  was 
repulsed  with  great  loss  ; — it  retired. 

Foote  had  written  a  play  in  which  he  had  introduced 
the  Duchess  of  Kingston.  She  heard  of  it,  and  complained 
to  Lord  Hertford,  who  stopped  it.  Foote  was  enraged,  and 
published  a  severe  letter  to  Lord  Hertford  in  the  papers, 
and  went  to  the  Duchess,  who  offered  him  money  to  sup- 
press his  play,  but  he  would  not.  She  then  wrote  the  most 
vulgar,  coarse,  stupid,  and  blackguard  letter  to  him  that 
was  possible,  and  printed  it  with  her  name  in  the  papers. 
He  answered  it  with  as  much  delicacy  as  humour  and 
severity. 

The  Provincial  Congress,  determined  on  defence,  formed 
an  Union  of  the  Twelve  Provinces,  chose  Hancock  their 
president,  made  Dr.  Franklin  postmaster,  and  sent  over 
a  firm  but  decent  petition  to  the  King,  to  which  no  answer 
was  given. 


1775] 


AUGUST 

I  WENT  to  Paris  August  i6th,  and  returned  October 
17th.  Short  notes  of  events  during  my  absence. 
2ird.  The  King  issued  a  proclamation  declaring 
the  Americans  rebels,  and  forbidding  to  assist  them. 
The  Opposition  made  no  noise  on  this  stretch  of  power. 
Wilkes  let  nobody  but  the  common  crier  attend  the  Pro- 
clamation, and  would  not  lend  any  horses  to  the  heralds. 

The  Ministers  ordered  prosecutions  of  printers  who  had 
printed  Home's  advertisement,  but  did  not  dare  to  attack 
him.  The  London  Association  determined  to  subscribe 
for  supporting  the  printers,  and  censured  Sir  J.  Dalrymple 
and  Macpherson,  though  not  by  name. 

Five  memorials  from  the  Congress. 

3 1  J/.  The  Cabinet  sent  to  Russia  to  borrow  20,000 
Russians.  This  was  soon  known  in  France,  where  it  was 
said  we  were  to  give  Georgia  to  Russia,  and  make  it  a 
maritime  power.  The  Government  declined  offers  made 
to  them  of  raising  Highland  regiments,  but  attempted  to 
raise  a  regiment  of  Irish  Catholics,  but  these  would  not 
list,  nor  could  they  in  the  whole  summer  get  above  400 
recruits  in  England.  In  the  meantime  ships  and  stores 
were  sent  without  end  to  Boston,  but  with  so  much  negli- 
gence and  ignorance  that  at  the  end  of  October  many  of 
the  transports  were  not  sailed. 

Letters  between  General  Burgoyne  and  General  Lee. 
See  "  Chronicle,"  August  29th. 

The  Guild  of  Merchants  at  Dublin  thank  Wilkes,  Lord 
Effingham,  and  the  English  Peers  who  opposed  the  Ameri- 
can war. 

473 


[Sept. 


SEPTEMBER 

THE  quarrel  with  the  shipwrights  was  composed, 
and  they  were  taken  again. 
Major  Rogers,  who  had  come  from  America 
to  be  preferred,  being  neglected,  returned, 
took  on  with  the  Americans,  and  did  great  mischief  to  the 
King's  cause. 

Account  of  Admiral  Greaves  at  Boston  being  beaten 
with  his  own  sword  by  an  officer  of  the  Revenue.  On 
this.  Greaves  was  recalled. 

Insurrection  of  sailors  at  Liverpool,  who  had  been 
discharged  by  the  merchants,  suppressed  by  the  military, 
but  several  lives  lost. 

A  remonstrance  to  the  King  against  the  war,  from  the 
Common  Council  of  Dublin,  stopped  there  by  the  Mayor 
and  Aldermen. 

The  London  Association  send  letters  to  Worcester  and 
other  places,  inviting  a  league  against  the  war,  but  without 
success. 

6th.  The  Court  procure  by  money  an  Address  to  the 
King  from  the  Jacobites  of  Manchester,^  advising  him  to 
prosecute  the  war.     This  was  immediately  followed   by 

1  "  For  the  '  Public  Advertiser: 

EXTEMPORE. 

On  Reading  the  List  of  the  Manchester  Subscriptions. 
I.  11, 

"  When  Manchester  people  subscribe  "  How  strangely,  in  thirty  good  years, 

The  Government  plans  to  support,  May  politic  changes  arise  ! 

We  may  venture  to  swear  that  a  bribe  Those  who  felt  for  their  heads,  or  their  ears. 

Is  never  unwelcome  at  Court.  Begin  now  to  open  their  eyes. 

Mason." 

474 


1775]  ADDRESSES  475 

Liverpool,  and  Lancaster,  and  Leicester ;  which  being 
trading  towns,  the  Addresses  must  have  been  dearly 
bought.  They  were  followed  by  Poole,  Coventry,  War- 
wick, Exeter,  Beverley,  Gloucester,  Sufifolk,  Taunton, 
Dover,  and  Devonshire,  and  with  a  very  ill-attended  one 
from  Yarmouth.  Lynn  was  said  to  have  addressed,  but 
Crisp  Molineux,  one  of  their  members,  published  a  letter 
denying  it,  saying  he  and  his  colleague  T.  Walpole  had 
presented  none,  had  both  always  opposed  the  war,  and  it 
was  against  the  sense  of  the  town.i  Leith  and  Montrose, 
in  Scotland,  addressed,  but  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow 
refused,  nor  could  all  the  interest  of  their  member  Lord 
Frederick  Campbell  obtain  one  there.  The  Mayor  and 
Aldermen  of  Bristol  addressed,  but  near  a  thousand  of 
the  merchants  there  soon  presented  a  counter-Address, 
but  so  cool  an  one,  that  Burke,  who  drew  it,  displeased 
them,  and  it  was  plain  he  was,  as  usual,  unwilling  to 
displease  the  Court.  The  Opposition  were  so  weak  as  to 
try  at  getting  no  counter-petitions,  though  Lord  Rocking- 
ham might  have  got  one  from  the  whole  county  of  York. 
Still  the  Administration  did  themselves  as  much  hurt  as 
good  by  the  Addresses,  as  they  inflamed  the  spirit  of 
contest  and  party  in  every  place  whence  the  Addresses 
came,  and  had  as  bad  effect  by  exciting  counter- Addresses 
in  London  and  Middlesex. 

\6th.  Died  Allen  Lord  Bathurst,  aged  91,  father  of  the 
Lord  Chancellor  Apsley. 

2^th.  The  freeholders  of  Middlesex  assembled  at  Mile 
End,  and  voted  instructions  to  their  members,  which  were 
couched  in  the  strongest  terms ;  also  thanks  to  Lord 
Effingham. 

The  Middlesex  Justices  presented  a  counter- Address. 

Wilkes  the  Lord  Mayor  receives  a  letter  to  him  and  the 
livery  from  Hancock  and  the  Provincial  Congress,  which 

^  For  the  real  names  and  substance  of  the  addresses  consult  the  "  Gazette," 
as  this  list  may  not  be  exact. 


476       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE   [Sept. 

he  read  to  the  Common  Council,  which  they  ordered  to  be 
entered  in  their  books,  and  published.  They  also  ordered 
a  letter  to  the  electors  of  Great  Britian,  inviting  them  to 
discourage  the  war  ;  and  published  it. 

2<^th.  The  Livery  return  Wilkes  and  Sawbridge  for 
Lord  Mayor ;  the  Court  of  Aldermen  choose  the  latter. 

The  merchants  of  London  present  a  decent  but  very 
strong  Address  against  the  war. 

Wesley,  the  artful  patriarch  of  the  Methodists,  to  court 
his  patron  Lord  Dartmouth,  published  a  calm  Address  to 
the  colonies,  where  he  knew  it  had  no  chance  of  being 
seen.     He  probably  hoped  for  a  deanery  or  bishopric. 


775] 


OCTOBER 
loth. 

IRISH  Parliament  meet:  Address  opposed,  but 
carried  by  92  to  52. 
At  my  return  I  found  everything  in  great  con- 
fusion. The  Ministers  had  made  many  blunders, 
and  the  Americans  had  not  made  one ;  but  conducting 
themselves  with  equal  address  and  vigour,  spoke  the 
language  of  respect,  decency,  and  conciliation,  while  they 
had  prepared  every  resource,  parried  every  art,  and  em- 
ployed every  one  to  encourage  and  confirm  the  people. 
The  Scotch  Royal  party  at  home  had  attended  to  nothing 
but  perpetuating  the  blindness  of  the  nation,  and  keeping 
up  the  stocks.  The  keeping  up  of  the  stocks  was  the  in- 
explicable phenomenon  of  the  year,  and  which,  it  is  just 
to  say,  the  Government  managed  with  great  address.  In 
the  first  place,  they  applied  the  large  sums  of  trust  money 
in  Chancery  to  buy  into  stock,  which  they  sold  out  again, 
and  repeated  this  manoeuvre.  In  the  next  the  stagnation 
of  the  American  trade  induced  people  that  had  money  to 
buy  into  the  stocks  rather  than  let  it  lie  dead.  The  non- 
exportation  from  America  had  not  yet  taken  place,  and 
the  Americans,  not  to  make  things  quite  desperate,  had 
paid  several  of  their  debts.  Some  prudent  men  in  America, 
averse  to  the  troubles,  had  remitted  their  fortunes  hither, 
and  large  sums  had  been  expended  by  the  Russian  fleet  on 
their  return  from  Constantinople.  The  Ministers  averred 
that  the  trade  with  Russia,  Germany,  and  Poland,  since 
the  pacification  of  the  first  and  last,  yielded  as  much  as  the 
American  trade ;  but  this  was  fictitious  or  temporary,  as 
Poland  had  been  so  distracted  that  for  three  years  it  had 

477 


478       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

made  no  demand.  The  Americans,  foreseeing  the  storm, 
had  laid  in  treble  quantities  of  goods;  and  many  mer- 
chants, concluding  the  war  would  not  last,  had  kept  their 
manufacturers  at  work  against  a  new  and  vast  demand  on 
a  peace.  But  all  these  resources  would  fail  in  a  year  or 
two  if  the  war  should  last ;  and  it  had  already  cost  three 
millions,  as  much  as  had  been  pretended,  and  but  pre- 
tended, to  be  paid  of  the  national  debt  after  twelve  years 
of  peace  ;  for  Lord  North  had  only  borrowed  with  one 
hand  to  pay  with  the  other,  and  in  reality  we  had  paid  off 
but  a  year  and  a  half.  How  the  Government  kept  all  the 
American  merchants  from  being  more  clamorous  is  still 
more  inconceivable. 

The  Scotch  party  at  Court  were  also  busy  in  keeping  up 
animosity  against  the  Americans,  leaving  the  management 
of  the  war  to  the  Ministers,  who  had  applied  little  to  it. 
Lord  North,  of  astonishingly  gay  indolence,  had  taken  his 
pleasure  in  the  country;  and  the  other  Ministers,  who 
began  to  foresee  a  storm,  had  dispersed  themselve  with  less 
carelessness,  to  avoid  the  imputation  of  having  meddled 
much.  Lord  North  had  neither  devised  the  war  nor  liked 
it,  but  liked  his  place,  whatever  he  pretended.  Lord 
Mansfield  trembled  and  worked  more  in  the  dark  than  in 
daylight ;  and  he  and  the  Scotch  were  still  more  busied 
in  keeping  up  the  spirits  of  the  King,  as  they  knew,  if  he 
flinched,  the  nation  would  soon  turn  and  pursue  them. 
On  the  bad  success  at  Boston  they  had  all  recurred  to  a 
great  effort  in  spring,  which  made  them  neglect  proper 
supplies  and  vigilance,  and  the  Americans  availed  them- 
selves of  their  negligence.  As  the  Parliament  grew  near, 
the  inferior  Ministers  began  to  apprehend  that  so  much 
money  and  lives  wasted,  so  much  money  to  be  asked,  so 
little  done,  and  such  total  miscarriage  of  all  their  schemes, 
must  begin  to  open  the  eyes  of  men.  This  put  them  on 
procuring  Addresses,  to  authorise  their  demands  to  Parlia- 
ment, and  to  secure  the  Parliament;  for  they  justly  flattered 


1775]  THE    DUKE   OF   GRAFTON  479 

themselves  that,  while  they  were  secure  of  the  Parlia- 
ment, even  the  loss  of  America  and  repeated  disgraces 
would  not  shake  them  at  home,  so  weak  was  the  Oppo- 
sition, and  so  corrupt  the  nation.  Still,  however,  in  their 
vexation,  almost  every  one  endeavoured  to  throw  the  blame 
off  himself,  and  all  to  throw  it  on  Lord  North.  Lord 
Gower  was  sometimes  desponding,  sometimes  violent  from 
rage.  Rigby  kept  out  of  sight  as  usual.  The  Attorney- 
General,  Thurlow,  declared  that  it  required  the  utmost 
effort  of  charity  to  suppose  the  Ministers  had  any  under- 
standing. But  he  had  more  reasons  than  conviction  for 
holding  this  language  :  Lord  Weymouth,  his  patron,  was 
still  looking  to  better  himself  by  a  change,  and  Thurlow 
himself  got  a  deanery  for  a  near  relation,  to  silence  his 
criticisms. 

But  there  was  another  Thurlow-like  man  who  gave 
them  a  greater  alarm.  Whether  the  fears  of  the  Bedfords 
had  alarmed  the  Duke  of  Grafton  seriously,  and  he  had 
a  mind  to  veer  about  towards  his  old  friends  the  Rocking- 
hams,  who  must  come  in  on  a  change,  whether  his  pride 
was  hurt  by  an  incident  I  am  going  to  mention,  or  that  he 
had  a  mind  to  have  his  murmurs  hushed  by  some  bribe, 
in  autumn  he  wrote  to  Lord  North,  finding  much  fault 
with  what  was  doing  or  not  doing.  Lord  North,  who  was 
a  man  of  neither  ceremony  nor  civility,  made  him  no 
answer.  The  Duke,  forgetting  or  remembering  how  many 
hours  he  had  made  Lord  North  wait  when  under  him  in 
the  Treasury,  could  not  brook  this  contempt,  but  having 
been  a  patriot,  or  intending  to  be  so  again,  he  veiled  re- 
sentment under  public  good,  and  at  his  own  table  at 
Newmarket  broke  out  openly,  and  before  Charles  Fox,  on 
the  mismanagement  and  errors  of  the  war.  Charles  posted 
to  town  and  proclaimed  the  conversation.  The  town  rung 
with  the  news  that  the  Duke  would  begin  the  session  in 
Opposition.  Rigby  in  a  panic  asked  Fox  if  he  might  tell 
the  Duke  what  he  had  heard.     Yes,  said  Fox  jollily,  he 


48o       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

did  not  say  it  to  me  in  confidence,  but  publicly.  The 
Bedfords  immediately  lectured  the  Duke,  who,  being 
frightened,  and,  as  cowards  always  do,  beginning  with 
bullying,  wrote  to  Fox  that  he  was  sure  the  latter  had 
not  misrepresented  his  words,  but  concluded  that  others 
had  misrepresented  Fox's.  Charles,  who  was  very  stout, 
made  no  answer,  but  went  to  the  Duke  at  Newmarket, 
and,  before  his  Grace  could  hammer  out  a  palliative,  said, 
"  My  Lord,  I  will  save  your  Grace  trouble,  and  will  repeat 
what  I  have  said."  The  Duke  did  not  like  so  much 
greater  firmness  than  his  own,  but  did  not  dare  to  con- 
tradict it,  yet  still  had  recourse  to  evasion.  He  said, "  Sir, 
you  have  repeated  my  words  more  exactly  than  I  could 
do  myself;  still  I  desire  not  to  be  thought  out  of  humour  : 
Lord  North  (this  was  false)  and  the  Ministers  have  been 
very  civil  to  me  ;  I  only  disapprove  of  all  their  measures." 
The  public  was  impatient  to  see  how  he  would  flounder 
through  these  tricks  and  contradictions. 

Just  as  the  Parliament  was  ready  to  open,  new  difficul- 
ties fell  on  the  Ministers.  They  learnt  that  two  separate 
bodies  of  Provincials  were  marched  to  attack  Quebec, 
where  General  Carleton,  who  was  to  have  retaken  Crown 
Point  and  Ticonderoga,  and  to  invade  New  York  with  the 
favourite  Roman  Catholics,  could  raise  none,  had  but  600 
men,  and  was  obliged  to  send  home  his  wife  for  safety,  who 
landed  a  few  days  before  the  Parliament  met ;  and  on  the 

22nd,  intelligence  came  that  the  Provincials  had  seized 
Nova  Scotia  and  Halifax,  and  made  themselves  masters 
of  7000  stand  of  arms,  a  train  of  artillery,  stores,  and 
provisions,  all  which  by  marvellous  negligence  had 
been  guarded  but  by  50  men.  The  Ministers  denied 
having  any  information  of  it,  but  Lord  Hertford  owned 
to  me  that  the  Ministers  knew  the  Provincials  were  gone 
thither,  and  must  take  it  as  totally  unguarded ;  and 
added,  "The  Americans  will  soon  be  masters  of  all  the 
strong  posts  in  America."     These  were    the    Provincials 


1775]  PANIC   OF   MINISTERS  481 

that  Lord  Sandwich  and  Colonel  Grant  had  so  wisely  pro- 
claimed cowards  to  a  man.  The  loss  of  Halifax  was  the 
greater  blow,  as  it  was  one  of  the  places  that  the  Admin- 
istration had  destined  for  the  retreat  of  the  troops  from 
Boston.  At  this  minute  transports  for  Boston  with  cattle 
were  lying  wind-bound  in  the  river,  and  the  cattle  was 
dying  daily. 

This  was  a  very  different  situation  from  that  time 
twelvemonth,  when  I  had  almost  despaired  of  liberty.  At 
least  now  it  did  not  seem  in  great  danger  in  America. 

I  have  mentioned  the  bravado  of  the  Proclamation,  and 
the  prosecution  of  printers.  On  the  2'^rd  the  Minister, 
to  wear  an  air  of  vigour  in  consequence  of  those  threats, 
or  to  throw  out  a  tub  that  might  make  men  forget  the 
hopeless  situation  of  their  affairs  in  America,  or  to  intimi- 
date Wilkes  and  Sawbridge  from  provoking  imprisonment 
from  Parliament  by  denying  the  Americans  were  in  re- 
bellion, took  a  step  that  was  much  more  likely  to  inflame 
than  terrify  them ;  and  conducted  the  matter  as  sillily  as 
it  was  contrived.  On  the  oath  of  one  Richardson,  an 
American  and  an  officer,  who  swore  that  Sayer,  a  late 
patriot  and  banker  of  bad  credit,  had  come  to  him  in  the 
Tower,  and,  taking  him  into  a  private  room,  had  offered 
him  1 500/.  to  assist  him  in  seizing  the  Tower,  and  the 
King  as  he  went  to  the  House  of  Lords,  and  then  force 
him  to  call  a  new  Parliament,  they  held  a  council  and  sent 
for  Lord  Mansfield  and  the  Attorney-General ;  the  first 
was  afraid  to  appear,  and  the  latter  would  not,  laughing  at 
the  folly  of  the  charge,  as  everybody  did  the  moment  they 
heard  it.  They  could  get  nobody  but  blind  Justice  Field- 
ing and  his  clerk.  However,  on  so  absurd  an  allegation, 
supported  but  by  one  witness,  Lord  Rochford  sent  mes- 
sengers the  next  morning  to  Sayer's  house,  who,  for  fear 
he  should  escape,  told  a  lie,  and  said  they  had  got  a  forged 
note  of  hand  to  talk  to  him  about.  He  came  to  them,  and 
they  seized  him  and  carried  him  before  Lord  Rochford, 
I. — 2  I 


482       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

where  he  behaved  very  civilly,  but  first  sent  for  Reynolds, 
Wilkes's  lawyer,  for  his  counsel.  As  he  had  been  Sheriff, 
they  pretended  that  in  compliment  to  the  City  they  com- 
mitted him  to  the  Tower,  allowing  nobody  but  his  wife  to 
have  access  to  him.  Richardson  the  evidence  proved  to 
have  a  very  bad  character.  The  Ministers,  it  was  sup- 
posed to  justify  their  proceedings,  had  intercepted  treason- 
able letters  of  Sayer  to  America.  That  this  man  and  one 
Labelic,  a  poor  mad  enthusiast  to  liberty,  whom  they 
likewise  took  up,  had  talked  indiscreetly,  was  probable, 
for  one  Nugent,  another  officer,  said  he  had  heard  con- 
versation about  seizing  the  Tower,  in  a  coffee-house  two 
days  before  Sayer  was  committed.  On  this  Nugent  was 
taken  up  too,  but,  refusing  to  name  the  person  whom  he 
had  heard  talk  of  it,  was  after  two  days  released.  The 
Ministers  likewise  issued  warrants  for  apprehending  one 
or  two  dissenting  Divines. 

The  same  day  thousands  of  incendiary  papers  were 
dispersed,  inviting  the  people  to  rise  and  prevent  the 
meeting  of  the  Parliament.  On  this  the  guard  was  trebled, 
and  their  muskets  loaded,  and  thirty-six  rounds  of  powder 
delivered  to  them.  At  the  same  time  papers  telling  the 
people  how  well  the  Court  was  prepared,  signed  by  Sir 
John  Hawkins,  Chairman  of  the  Bench  of  Westminster 
Justices,  were  spread  abroad.  These  rumours  gathered 
an  immense  multitude  of  people  together  on  the 

26th  ;  but  everything  passed  very  quietly,  and  the  King 
opened  the  session  with  a  very  extraordinary  speech,  in 
which  were  three  or  four  gross  falsehoods :  the  first,  that 
the  Americans  designed  to  establish  an  independent 
empire  ;  this  was  strongly  contradicted  by  Lord  Shelburne  ; 
— and  second,  that  Foreign  Powers  had  offered  us  assist- 
ance ;  if  this  meant  Russia,  it  was  false,  for  they  had  been 
begged,  not  offered  ;  ^  and  if  it  alluded  to  little  Princes  in 

^  It  was  said  that  we  had  asked  for  20,000,  that  the  Empress  said  she 
could  not  lend  so  many,  but  spoke  very  fair.     The  meeting  of  Parliament 


1775]  MEETING   OF   PARLIAMENT  483 

Germany,  they  could  not  with  propriety  be  called  Foreign 
Powers  ; — the  third  was,  pleading  the  conciliatory  plan  of 
last  winter  as  indication  of  disposition  to  peace,  whereas  it 
was  true  that  that  plan  had  been  only  carried  by  Wcdder- 
burn's  declaring  that  nothing  serious  was  intended  by  it. 
But  the  most  striking  part  was  the  King's  notification  of 
a  design  of  sending  Commissaries  to  treat  with  any 
provinces  that  should  wish  to  return  to  their  duty.  Who- 
ever knew  anything  of  America  could  but  laugh  at  this 
scheme,  as  there  was  not  the  least  probability  that  the 
Americans  would  treat  with  the  present  Administration. 
To  others  it  seemed  to  imply  that  the  Ministers  began  to 
be  alarmed,  and  wished  to  treat.  Many  of  them  for  fear 
of  their  places  looked  that  way ;  but  there  was  a  secret 
motive  to  this  known  a  few  days  afterwards,  that  set  the 
whole  in  the  most  ridiculous,  mean,  and  contemptible  light 
possible. 

The  Addresses,  moved  in  the  one  House  by  Lord 
Townshend  (very  ill),  and  by  Mr.  Ackland  ^  and  Governor 
Lyttelton^  in  the  other,  were  warmly  attacked  in  both, 
after  Lord  Camden  had  presented  a  petition  from  the  City 
for  peace,  to  which  the  Chancellor  opposed  one,  con- 
temptible from  the  insignificance  of  the  petitioners  as 
under  command,  from  Nova  Scotia.  A  like  was  presented 
to  the  House  of  Commons. 

The  Duke  of  Grafton,  who  two  days  before  had  ac- 
quainted the  King  with  his  dissent  from  the  measures  of 
Government,  after  Lord  Gower  on  Rigby's  authority  had 
assured  his  Majesty  that  the  Duke  would   not  disagree, 

was  deferred  to  the  26th,  as  it  was  said  the  final  answer  might  come  on  the 
22nd,  but  nothing  now  was  said  on  it ;  only  some  affirmed  that  the  French 
Ambassador  at  St.  Petersburgh  had  protested  against  lending  us  those  troops. 
It  is  certain  the  demand  had  been  spread  in  France  by  the  beginning  of 
September. 

^  Eldest  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Ackland,  and  married  to  a  daughter  of  Lord 
Ilchester. 

^  William  Lyttelton,  brother  of  George  Lord  Lyttelton,  and  late  Minister 
at  Lisbon. 


484       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

openly  condemned  both  the  Speech  and  measures.  It 
was  known  that  Lord  Camden,  voluntarily  or  invited,  had 
entered  into  counsels  with  him  in  the  summer ;  and  as 
Hinchclifife,  Bishop  of  Peterborough,  now  took  the  same 
part,  and  influenced  his  former  pupil,  Mr.  Crewe,  to  take  the 
same  part  in  the  Commons,  much  of  his  Grace's  disgusts 
was  imputed  to  the  Bishop,  who  was  a  sensible  fine 
gentleman,  and  a  Whig,  though  he  had  the  last  year,  when 
the  prospect  was  more  promising  for  the  Court,  gone  much 
with  the  stream  of  favour.  Lord  Shelburne  was  not  less 
hostile;  Lord  Rockingham  took  part,  and  the  Duke  of 
Richmond  as  ably  and  with  more  applause  than  usual : 
even  Lord  Lyttelton,  now  gone  into  Opposition,  because 
Lord  North  had  offered  him  a  lucrative  place,  and  not  one 
of  power  or  show,  attacked  the  Ministers  warmly,  and 
told  Lord  Sandwich,  who  he  thought  had  hinted  censure 
at  Lord  Chatham,  that  he  had  not  dared  to  attack  that 
great  Lord  if  present.  Lord  Chatham  was  indeed  con- 
fined, and  had  long  been  in  a  despondent  situation.  The 
young  Lord  Ferrers,^  eldest  son  of  Lord  Townshend,  a 
most  excellent  young  man,  declared  he  should  oppose  all 
the  measures  of  the  Court,  though  out  of  respect  to  his 
father  he  would  not  begin  that  day.  The  Ministers  made 
a  most  disgraceful  figure.  Lord  Gower  alone  defending 
them  tolerably.  Lord  Rochford  did  as  well  as  his  capacity 
would  allow  him — that  was,  wretchedly.  He  said  he 
would  take  on  him  to  affirm  that  there  was  a  design  to 
raise  a  rebellion  here  and  overturn  the  Government ;  an 
assertion  not  only  ridiculous  from  what  had  been  dis- 
covered, but  very  inconsistent  with  the  boasts  of  the 
Ministers  that  the  whole  nation  was  with  them.     Lord 

^  George,  afterwards  second  Marquis  of  Townshend,  was  at  this  time 
twenty-one  years  of  age.  His  mother,  Charlotte,  daughter  of  James 
Compton,  fifth  Earl  of  Northampton,  was  in  her  own  right  Baroness  Comp- 
ton  and  Ferrars  of  Chartley.  On  her  death  in  1770  her  eldest  son  George 
succeeded  to  the  title,  and  by  it  was  subsequently  summoned  to  the  House  of 
Peers  in  his  father's  Hfetime.     He  died  in  181 1. — D. 


1775]  DEBATE   ON   THE   ADDRESS  485 

Sandwich,  whose  parts  his  own  friends  thought  impaired, 
behaved  so  indecently,  arrogantly,  and  contemptuously, 
that  he  was  often  called  to  order,  and  did  own  he  had 
been  deceived  in  the  number  of  ships  wanted  in  America, 
and  yet  that,  if  more  had  been  asked,  many  Lords  would 
have  opposed  their  being  granted.  Lord  Weymouth  did 
not  speak,  nor  the  Law  Lords  Camden  and  Mansfield, 
who  seemed  to  wait  to  reply  to  each  other.  The  House 
sat  till  eleven,  after  two  divisions :  the  first  on  a  proposed 
amendment  in  which  the  Duke  did  not  vote,  and  which 
was  rejected  by  69  to  29 ;  the  second  against  the  whole 
Address,  which  was  carried  by  69  to  33.  The  Earl  of 
Jersey,  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber,  but  attached  to  the  Duke 
of  Grafton,  voted  with  him  in  the  minority. 

In  the  Commons  Lord  John  Cavendish  and  Sir  James 
Lowther  moved  to  correct  the  Address,  and  were  briskly 
seconded  by  the  Lord  Mayor  Wilkes,  Hopkins,  a  clerk 
of  the  Green  Cloth  and  friend  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton, 
Temple  Luttrell  and  the  Colonel  his  brother,  Governor 
Johnston,  Sir  Edward  Astley,  General  Conway,  Colonel 
Barre,  Burke,  Charles  Fox,  Dunning,  T.  Townshend,  and 
Turner.  For  the  Court  spoke  Rice,  Sir  Richard  Sutton, 
Lord  Stanley,  Sir  William  Meredith,  Jolliffe,  Sir  Adam 
Ferguson,  Freeman,  Lord  George  Germaine,  Lord  Bar- 
rington.  Lord  North,  and  the  Attorney  and  Solicitor- 
Generals.  General  Conway  spoke  with  the  highest  spirit 
and  universal  applause,  even  from  the  Courtiers  and  his 
rival  Lord  George.  He  said, — they  talked  of  the  King's 
dominions  in  America;  where  had  he  any  left  there?  was 
Montreal  any  longer  his?  was  Quebec?  was  Halifax? — 
who  would  answer  him  ?  He  professed  great  respect  for 
his  Majesty,  but  said,  looking  full  at  Rigby,  he  never 
would  be  bound  down  to  act  with  one  set  of  men  and 
say  black  was  white,  and  what  was  called  upon  system. — 
The  Solicitor-General  having  said  he  augured  well  from 
our  ill  success,  as  the  late  war  had  begun  ill,  and  ended  so 


486       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

gloriously,  Burke  took  this  up  to  ridicule,  but  lost  himself 
in  a  torrent  of  images  and  copiousness,  as  he  often  did. — 
Charles  Fox  took  it  up  better,  and  said  the  late  war  had 
not  turned  to  success  till  the  Ministry  had  been  changed 
— forgetting  Lord  Chatham  had  come  in,  and  his  own 
father  had  been  of  the  former  Administration ;  but  with 
his  usual  quickness  he  soon  recovered  that  slip  and  said. 
Lord  Hard  wick  had  been  a  great  lawyer  but  a  wretched 
politician  ;  and  when  he  gave  place  to  Lord  Chatham,  all 
had  prospered ;  "  but,"  continued  he,  rising  in  energy, 
"  not  Lord  Chatham,  not  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  no, 
not  Alexander  nor  Caesar,  had  ever  conquered  so  much 
territory  as  Lord  North  had  lost  in  one  campaign."^ 
Lord  North  made  a  poor  defence ;  and  Sawbridge  declar- 
ing that  he  had  received  the  orders  of  his  constituents  to 
impeach  the  Ministers,  and  certainly  would,  Lord  North's 
voice  was  observed  to  falter.  The  House  sat  till  past 
four  in  the  morning,  when  the  Address  was  carried  by  278 
to  108. 

The  next  day  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  having  drawn  a 
strong  protest  for  the  dissenting  Lords,  found  the  Minis- 
ters had  adjourned  the  House  before  the  usual  hour,  to 
disappoint  it — a  poor  refuge,  as  they  could  protest  on  that 
step  and  enter  their  former  reasons,  and  could  always 
print  them. 

The  Commons  sat  again  till  twelve  at  night  on  the 
Report  of  the  Address,  the  debate  turning  on  the  garrison- 

^  ^^ For  the  ^Public  Advertiser.^ 

On  the  Loss  of  North  America  in  one  Campaign. 

"  Of  two  Colutnbuses  let  Europe  boast ; 
America  one /ound, — and  t'other  lost. 


"  On  the  Same. 

"  O'er  East  and  West  Pitt  spread  the  British  reign, 
Curb'd  envious  France,  and  humbled  faithless  Spain. 
North,  with  rash  ignorance  and  wasteful  cost, 
In  one  campaign  a  continent  has  lost. 
What  stigmas,  ribands,  stars — how  foul  a  blot. 
When  North  a  garter  /las,  and  Chatham  not '.  " 


1775]  DEBATE   ON    THE   ADDRESS  487 

ing  Gibraltar  and  Port  Mahon  with  Hanoverian  troops, 
which  the  Opposition  cried  out  against  as  a  glaring  breach 
of  the  Act  of  Settlement.  Lord  North  said  he  did  not 
believe  that  measure  not  having  the  consent  of  Parliament 
was  illegal,  but,  if  it  was,  there  might  be  an  Act  of  In- 
demnity ;  on  which  Colonel  Barre  advised  him  to  insert 
all  the  crimes  and  blunders  of  the  Ministers.  Adam, 
nephew  of  the  Scotch  architect,  and  a  rising  speaker,  said, 
that,  though  wishing  so  well  as  he  did  to  the  measures 
of  Administration,  he  was  sorry  the  noble  Lord's  inherent 
indolence,  which  he  had  so  often  confessed  in  that  House, 
should  so  far  unfit  him  for  being  First  Minister,  but  hoped 
his  Lordship  would  not  suffer  it  to  be  said  in  history  that 
in  the  year  1775  he  had  lost  America.  Lord  North  said, 
he  confessed  his  indolence,  and  still  more  his  inability  ; 
that  he  had  been  forced  into  his  present  situation,  and 
kept  in  it,  and,  while  there  was  a  storm,  would  stand  firm. 
He  owned  he  had  not  apprehended  so  general  a  revolt, 
and  said  he  should  propose  a  bill  for  empowering  the  King 
to  call  out  the  militia  if  there  should  be  any  rebellion  ; 
and  he  added  this  savage  sentence, — "  If  we  suffer  from  the 
war^  we  shall  at  least  have  the  satisfaction  of  making  the 
Americans  suffer  more!'  —  Barre  ridiculed  Lord  North 
admirably  on  his  deference  to  Adam,  a  Scot,  and  said 
that  accent  had  always  weight,  and  even  its  reproofs  were 
called  candid ;  but  his  Irish  brogue  did  not  meet  with  the 
same  favour,  and  was  always  construed  into  invective. — 
Rigby  rejoiced  at  Lord  North's  resolution,  but  owned  the 
last  campaign  had  not  answered  his  hopes,  and  did  think 
the  fault  must  lie  somewhere,  whether  in  the  sea  or  land 
department  he  could  not  say. — Hartley,  G.  Byng,  Sir  G. 
Yonge,  and  Dempster  were  strong  for  the  illegality;  Corn- 
wall, the  Lord  Advocate,  with  violence,  for  it ;  Sir  Gilbert 
Elliot  for  trying  both  war  and  peace.  The  Report  was 
carried  by  176  to  ^2.  Sir  Matthew  Ridley,  a  country 
gentleman,  always  with  Administration,  owned  he  began 


488       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct 

to  fear  the  expense  of  the  war.  Governor  Johnston  said 
he  should  hereafter  lay  open  the  true  secret  reason  for 
sending  the  Commissaries ;  and  he  told  some  people  that 
very  day,  that  it  was  Lord  Mansfield  who  had  insisted  on 
that  measure,  that  his  darling  bastard  Sir  Thomas  Mills 
might  be  one  of  them  ;  a  man  notoriously  too  inconsider- 
able for  the  office,  and  a  strange  instance  of  interested 
selfishness  or  cowardice  in  the  author  of  the  war. 

2^th.  Sayer  was  carried  by  Habeas  Corpus  before  Lord 
Mansfield,  whose  dastardly  spirit  again  displayed  itself  by 
his  profuse  civility  to  Sayer,  whom  he  allowed  to  be  bailed. 

3 1  J-/.  Colonel  Keene,  Lord  North's  brother-in-law,  told 
me  that  he  had  heard  me  say  I  wished  my  place  in  the 
Custom-house  were  for  my  own  life,  not  for  my  brother's, 
and  that  Lord  North  would  be  very  glad  to  give  it  me  for 
my  own.  I  replied,  "  Sir,  to  be  sure  a  place  for  one's  own 
life  is  more  agreeable  than  for  another  person's  ;  but  I  beg 
to  explain  myself  to  you :  though  I  do  think  so,  and  have 
very  likely  said  so,  still  it  was  with  no  intention  of  asking 
to  have  it  so  ;  and  I  must  tell  you  that  I  might  have  had 
it  so.  Lord  Holland,  when  I  lived  with  him  in  great 
intimacy,  offered  to  make  my  place  for  my  own  life,  but 
I  would  not  accept  it."  "  No  ? "  said  Colonel  Keene,  "  I 
am  amazed  at  that!  why  not?"  "Because,  Sir,"  said  I, 
"it  is  a  greater  favour  than  I  will  ever  accept  from  any 
man."  "  To  be  sure,"  added  he, "  it  would  be  more  difficult 
to  give  it  you  now,  as  even  the  reversion  is  granted." 
"Yes,  Sir,"  said  I,  "and  I  will  explain  that  to  you  too. 
Lord  Bute,  after  Lord  Holland's  life,  would  have  been  over- 
joyed to  have  given  me  my  place  for  my  life ;  but  I  would 
not  accept  it ;  and  so  the  reversion  was  given  to  Jenkin- 
son."  I  was  much  pleased  with  this  offer,  as  I  knew  it 
was  made  in  hopes  of  my  persuading  Mr.  Conway  to  vote 
with  the  Ministry  against  America,  and  gave  me  the 
opportunity  of  showing  him  how  disinterested  my  senti- 
ments were,  and  as  it  proved  to  me  how  much  they  were 


1775]  DEBATE   ON   THE   ADDRESS  489 

hurt  by  his  opposition.  It  was  silly  too,  as  everybody 
knew  it  was  impossible  to  corrupt  me;  and  having  refused 
to  accept  the  place  twenty  years  before  from  Lord  Holland 
when  he  wanted  to  buy  me  to  approve  his  measures,  and 
rejected  all  overtures  from  Lord  Bute,  and  withstood 
Grenville  at  the  hazard  of  my  fortune,  and  advised  Mr. 
Conway  to  resist  all  overtures,  and  offers,  and  threats,  it 
was  not  probable  that  at  fifty-eight  I  would  disgrace  my 
whole  life,  character,  and  principles,  for  a  lucrative  offer 
that  I  could  flatter  myself  with  few  years'  enjoyment  of; 
and  what  a  mean  creature  must  Lord  North  be,  if  he  could 
hope  I  was  mean  enough  to  accept  a  favour  from  him 
after  his  brutal  behaviour  to  my  nephew  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  but  the  last  winter ! 


[Nov. 


NOVEMBER 

SEVERAL  Lords  protested  against  the  Address. 
1st.  28,000  seamen  proposed  in  the  House  of 
Commons.  Lord  North  had  changed  his  pacific 
language,  and  was  now  for  vigorous  measures. 
Burke,  Charles  Fox,  and  General  Conway,  all  spoke  ably 
against  the  measures ;  though  the  latter  approved  the 
number  of  seamen,  that  the  country  might  not  be  left 
defenceless.  He  upbraided  Lord  North  for  his  obstinate 
silence  on  the  Conciliatory  Commission,  or  Commissioners, 
who,  he  said,  could  not  be  sent  without  consent  of  Parlia- 
ment ;  but  all  their  measures  were  wrapped  up  in  dark- 
ness, nor,  indeed,  would  the  Ministers  give  any  lights 
of  any  sort.  This  was  a  parliamentary  war,  and  yet  even 
Parliament  was  trusted  with  nothing !  If  concessions 
were  to  be  made,  they  would  come  best  from  Parliament. 
Everybody  had  given  up  taxation,  and  yet  the  war  con- 
tinued.    The  seamen  were  carried  without  a  division. 

In  the  Lords  the  Duke  of  Manchester  moved  for  a  cen- 
sure on  employing  the  Hanoverians  without  consent  of 
Parliament,  and  the  Duke  of  Grafton  supported  the 
motion,  but  it  was  rejected  by  53  to  32. 

2nd.  The  same  motion  was  made  in  the  House  of 
Commons  by  Sir  James  Lowther,  but  after  a  very  long 
debate  it  was  rejected  by  a  previous  question. 

2,rd.  The  bill  for  indemnifying  the  Ministers  on  employ- 
ing the  Hanoverians  was  read  and  occasioned  another  late 
debate.  Dunning  was  very  severe  on  the  indirect  measures 
by  which  the  Court  had  procured  Addresses.  He  repre- 
sented the  indecency  and  danger  of  a  battalion  of  the 

490 


1775]  MINISTERIAL   CHANGES  491 

Devonshire  militia  addressing  the  King  for  war,  and 
taxed  Lord  North  with  correcting  that  Address,  and  with 
procuring  one  from  the  University  of  Oxford,  in  whom,  as 
tutors  of  youth,  it  was  shocking  to  promote  bloodshed. 
This  was  carried  by  203  to  81. 

The  same  day  the  Duchess  of  Kingston  petitioned  the 
House  of  Lords  for  her  trial. 

/\th.  Pitt  and  Mr.  Pownall  arrived  from  Quebec,  sent 
by  General  Carleton  (for  their  personal  safety  as  it  was 
thought)  to  give  an  account  of  200  Provincials  having 
made  an  attempt  on  Quebec  and  being  repulsed.  They 
had  certainly  made  the  attack  with  too  few  men  and  too 
little  artillery.  It  began  to  be  said  that  the  attempt  on 
Halifax  had  failed  likewise,  being  guarded  by  a  man-of- 
war. 

"jth.  Temple  Luttrell  made  a  motion  for  pacification 
with  America,  but  little  notice  was  taken  of  it,  nor  followed 
any  division. 

Wi.  The  army  moved  for  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
Lord  Barrington  said  it  was  not  designed  against  all  the 
provinces,  as  some  few  were  for  peace.  This  was  a  stale 
trick  to  sow  divisions  in  the  colonies.  Sir  Robert  Smith 
and  Mr.  Powis,  who  both  generally  voted  with  the  Court, 
declared  they  could  not  vote  for  the  army  unless  the 
Ministers  would  open  more  of  their  plan.  General 
Conway  supported  them,  and  said  it  was  the  opinion  of 
many  officers  that  the  war  would  be  better  carried  on  by 
sea  alone.  The  House  sat  till  near  eleven,  when  the  army 
was  carried  by  so  great  a  majority  as  227  to  73. 

^th.  A  very  violent  speech  was  published  of  Wilkes,  on 
his  giving  up  the  mayoralty  to  Sawbridge.  It  was  full  of 
invectives  and  insult  on  both  Houses,  particularly  the 
House  of  Lords. 

The  same  day  the  Privy  Seal  was  taken  from  the  Duke 
of  Grafton,  which  he  intended  to  resign.  This  dismission 
produced  several  other  changes,  and,  indeed,  gave  a  new 


492       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

complexion  to  the  Cabinet.  The  memorable  Lord  George 
Sackville  Germaine  became  a  Minister,  a  proof  at  least  of 
his  political  courage.  The  Scotch  faction  was  outrageous 
at  Lord  North's  indolence,  and  were  for  pushing  on  the 
war  with  the  utmost  violence.  The  Earl  of  Suffolk,^  as 
ambitious  as  if  he  had  parts,  was,  though  an  absolute 
cripple,  eager  to  act  a  more  considerable  part,  and  was 
governed  by  Wedderburn  and  Lord  George,  the  latter  of 
whom  was  as  active  and  determined  as  Lord  North  was 
the  reverse.  The  Earl  of  Dartmouth  had  conquered  his 
own  conscience,  but  not  his  scruples  :  he  had  lent  himself 
to  all  the  worst  acts  of  the  eager,  but  had  not  grown  eager 
himself.  He  now  was  persuaded  to  show  that  he  had 
acted  against  his  principles  for  pay,  not  for  power,  and 
gave  up  the  provinces  to  Lord  George  and  took  the  Privy 
Seal.  Poor  Lord  Rochford,  who  had  made  so  silly  a 
figure  in  Sayer's  affair,  and  as  silly  in  Parliament,  was 
dismissed  with  a  pension.^  Lord  Weymouth  succeeded 
him.  Lord  Ashburnham,  a  Court  cipher,  was  made  Groom 
of  the  Stole ;  Lord  Pelham,  another  of  the  same  class, 
succeeded  him  in  the  great  Wardrobe ;  and  the  infamous 
Lord  Lyttelton,  who  had  terrified  this  martial  Ministry  by 
one  speech,  was  made  Justice  in  Eyre,  in  the  room  of  Lord 
Pelham,  and  that  very  day  made  a  more  violent  oration 
against  the  Americans  than  that  he  had  made  for  them  a 
fortnight  before  on  his  bargain  being  refused.  When 
these  new  Ministers  were  taking  the  oaths  in  Council, 
the  King  called  Rigby  aside,  and  expressed  his  obliga- 
tions to  Lord  Weymouth  for  taking  the  Seals,  and  added, 
"  Thurlow  (the  friend  of  Weymouth  and  Rigby)  is  my 
lawyer!'     This  was  notable  insincerity,  for  Wedderburn, 

^  Henry,  Earl  of  Suffolk  and  Berkshire.  He  died  in  March  1779,  child- 
less, but  leaving  his  widow  enceinte.  The  presumptive  heir  was  Henry 
Bowes,  the  late  Earl's  uncle,  who  waited  in  suspense  till  August  1779,  when 
the  widowed  Countess  gave  birth  to  a  son,  but  the  little  Earl  lived  but  two 
days,  when  his  great-uncle  succeeded  to  the  title  and  estates. — D. 

^  It  amounted  to  3320/.  a  year. — D. 


1775]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  493 

Thurlow's  particular  rival,  was  really  the  King's  lawyer, 
and  had  the  greatest  share  in  this  change.  In  the  Com- 
mons, Jenkinson,  on  the  army,  as  the  mouth  of  the  Court, 
declared  for  more  vigorous  measures. 

\oth.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  engaged  the  House  of 
Lords  to  examine  Governor  Penn,  who  had  brought  over 
the  proposal  from  the  colonies.  Penn  told  them  the 
colonies  had  neither  lost  their  loyalty  to  the  King  nor 
affection  to  this  country,  but  would  if  we  did  not  make 
peace  soon.  Being  asked  if  Lord  Dartmouth  had  asked 
him  any  questions,  he  said,  '^  None  at  all"  (see  the 
"London  Chronicle"  of  November  11).  The  Duke  then 
complained  of  the  Ministers  doing  nothing,  and  yet 
vaunting  that  70,000  men  were  to  be  sent  to  America, 
of  which  30,000  were  to  be  Russians,  the  carrying  of 
whom  to  America  would  cost  500,000/. ;  and  he  moved 
that  the  petition  of  the  Congress  afforded  matter  for  con- 
ciliation. Lord  Dartmouth  and  Lord  Sandwich  opposed 
the  motion,  and  the  latter  went  into  a  vain  rant  on  his 
own  merit  in  the  peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle.  This  was 
well  ridiculed  by  Lord  Shelburne,  who  put  him  in  mind 
that  he  was  the  only  man  who  had  ever  stipulated  for  the 
disgrace  of  sending  hostages  to  France ;  and  he  chal- 
lenged the  Ministers  to  answer  whether  they  did  not 
know  that  they  could  not  have  Russians,  and  that  France 
had  insisted  we  should  not  have  them.  No  answer  was 
made  to  this,  but  the  motion  was  rejected  by  %6  to  33. 

\/\th.  General  Gage  arrived  from  Boston.  Whatever 
accounts  he  brought  were  sedulously  concealed.  All  that 
was  learnt  was  that  the  troops  could  not  get  out  of 
Boston,  were  to  winter  there,  and  were  fortifying  them- 
selves as  strongly  as  they  could,  and  had  few  fresh 
provisions. 

\^th.  The  Duke  of  Grafton,  having  summoned  the 
House  of  Lords,  moved  for  a  state  of  the  forces  in 
America,  in  order  to  ground  advice  to  the  King.     This 


494       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

was  objected  to  as  likely  to  convey  intelligence  to  the 
Provincials.  Lord  Camden  and  Lord  Mansfield  spoke 
long  on  their  different  sides.  Lord  Denbigh  blabbed  that 
the  Court  reckoned  that  the  manufacturers  would  enlist 
when  out  of  employment.  The  motion  was  rejected  with- 
out a  division. 

The  same  day,  in  the  Committee  for  empowering  the 
King  to  call  out  the  militia  in  case  of  rebellion,  Lord 
John  Cavendish  (in  the  House  of  Commons)  moved  that 
the  said  power  should  not  extend  beyond  the  continuance 
of  the  present  rebellion.  This  also  was  rejected  by  140 
to  55.  Another  striking  evidence  that  the  Court  was  driving 
at  arbitrary  power  by  a  standing  army. 

i6th.  Mr.  Burke  made  his  conciliatory  motion,  and 
spoke  for  three  hours  and  a  half — in  general  ill.  It  was 
remarkable  that  in  his  proposed  repeal  he  did  not  mention 
the  Quebec  Bill — another  symptom  of  his  old  Popery. 
Lord  Camden  and  Lord  Shelburne  were  so  offended  at 
this  omission  that  neither  Dunning  nor  Barr6  attended. 
(Lord  Shelburne  was  as  jealous  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton 
as  Lord  Rockingham,  and  both  feared  that  on  a  change 
Grafton  would  be  preferred  to  them,  for  preferment  was 
uppermost  in  all  their  thoughts.  I  had  written  a  strong 
letter  in  the  summer  to  Lord  Camden,  begging  him,  if 
sent  for,  not  to  accept  till  the  King  was  so  reduced,  and 
the  nation  so  provoked,  that  the  authors  of  the  late 
measures  might  be  punished,  and  a  total  end  put  to  the 
plan  of  despotism.  I  sent  the  letter  by  a  messenger,  but 
Lord  Camden  pretended  to  be  afraid  of  answering  it  even 
that  way.  But  as  he  even  did  not  come  to  me  on  my 
return  from  France,  I  saw  he  was  displeased  at  my  ad- 
vising him  to  hesitate  a  moment  about  accepting  the 
Seals.)  Lord  Ossory  and  Richard  Fitzpatrick,  nephews 
of  Lord  Gower,  but  won  over  by  Charles  Fox,  now 
declared  themselves  in  Opposition.  The  elder  brother 
spoke  sensibly  and  well,  the  younger  very  well.     Charles 


1775]  MILITIA   AND    INDEMNITY    BILLS  495 

Fox  outshone  himself,  made  a  very  pathetic  eulogium  on 
the  two  brothers,  and  a  very  humorous  description  of  the 
Treasury  Bench.  Wedderburn  shone  too.  Lord  George 
Germaine^  now  opened  as  Minister,  and  was  at  first  much 
flustered.  The  House  sat  till  four  in  the  morning,  when 
the  conciliatory  plan  was  rejected  by  210  to  105,  Just 
before  the  division,  Lord  North,  half  asleep,  owned  that 
New  York  might  have  been  saved  if  a  few  regiments  had 
been  sent  in  time.^ 

20th.  Lord  North  had  given  notice  that  he  should  soon 
make  some  motion  of  great  consequence.  He  made  it 
now;  it  was  for  a  bill  to  repeal  the  Boston  and  Massachus- 
sets  Acts,  as  not  extending  to  all  the  provinces,  and  to 
empower  the  King's  subjects  to  seize  and  destroy  all 
American  vessels ;  and  the  language  now  was  to  maintain 
the  right  of  taxation.  T.  Townshend  censured  the  severity 
of  this  new  bill,  and  commended  Lord  Effingham ;  so  did 
General  Conway  warmly,  and  said,  though  against  a 
foreign  enemy  an  officer  must  obey  all  orders,  yet  in  a 
civil  war,  where  he  thought  the  Constitution  concerned, 
conscience  was  ever  above  honour,  as  the  Comte  de  Fende 
thought  at  the  massacre  of  Paris.  This  was  severely 
arraigned  by  Thurlow,  but  Conway  explained  himself  still 
more  fully.  Sawbridge,  the  Lord  Mayor,  went  farther 
and  drew  a  bitter  parallel  between  Lord  Effingham  and 
Lord  George  Germaine,  who,  he  said,  had  turned  pale  at 
the  head  of  squadrons.  The  bill  was  ordered  in  by  192 
against  62. 

The  rest  of  that  week  were  several  very  late  debates  in 
the  House  of  Commons  on  various  bills — as  the  Militia 
and  Indemnity  Bills,  &c.  The  Court  did  at  last  submit 
to  confine  the  King's  power  over  the  militia  to  seven 
years.     In  one  of  the  debates  on  the  militia,  Charles  Fox 

^  Governor  Johnston,  who  had  formerly  fought  him,  now  very  brutally 
and  unhandsomely  again  reflected  on  Lord  George's  courage. 

2  Some  excellent  papers  signed  "Valence,"  I  don't  know  by  whom,  were 
published  about  this  time  in  the  **  London  Evening  Post." 


496       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

saying  it  was  not  fit  to  be  trusted  in  hands  who  could 
petition  the  King  for  pushing  the  war  against  America, 
Mr.  Ackland,^  his  cousin,  a  hot  Tory,  warmly  resented  it, 
and  said  it  was  in  fitter  hands  than  in  those  of  men  who 
had  ruined  themselves  by  the  most  scandalous  vices. 
This  personality,  unprovoked  by  any,  gave  offence.  Fox 
replied :  he  confessed  his  errors,  and  wished  he  could 
atone  for  them. 

This  week  died  that  voluminous  writer  and  compiler, 
Sir  John  Hill.^ 

2'jth.  Alderman  Oliver,  by  former  directions  of  the 
City,  moved  to  address  his  Majesty  to  know  who  had 
advised  the  war.  This  motion,  as  the  times  were  not  ripe 
for  it,  was  very  injudicious,  and  was  supported  only  by 
Wilkes  and  Sawbridge.  Charles  Fox  endeavoured  to 
prevent  a  division,  but  the  Ministers,  knowing  their 
strength,  forced  it  on  to  assure  a  negative,  after  Lord 

^  Son  of  Sir  Thomas  Ackland,  a  very  rich  western  knight.  The  son  was 
married  to  a  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Ilchester,  Fox's  uncle. 

^  Sir  John  Hill  was  a  vain  man,  but  he  was  very  far  from  being  the  fool 
that  his  enemies  said  he  was.  He  was  one  of  the  most  industrious  beings 
that  ever  lived,  and  had  essayed  many  callings  in  order  to  obtain  a  living ; 
depending  only  on  himself,  for  his  father,  an  old  clergyman,  could  give  him 
no  aid.  Hill  kept  an  apothecary's  shop,  managed  a  botanical  garden, 
appeared  as  an  actor,  went  back  to  his  shop  in  St.  Martin's  Lane,  and  in  the 
back  parlour  there  edited  "  Theophrastus  on  Gems,"  and  gained  thereby  some 
money  and  reputation.  He  aspired,  on  the  strength  of  his  successful  editor- 
ship, to  enter  the  Royal  Society,  but,  being  rejected,  he  took  revenge  in 
foolishly  satirizing  that  learned  body.  He  pursued  authorship  with  great 
zeal,  and  did  what  many  more  able  men  were  unable  to  do, — namely,  made 
1500/.  in  one  year  by  his  own  compositions.  On  setting  up  as  physician, 
with  the  diploma  of  M.D.,  he  declined  to  follow  in  the  old  paths  of  pro- 
fessional routine,  and  was  consequently  denounced  as  a  quack.  His  self- 
estimation  erred  in  an  opposite  direction  ;  and  his  impertinence  in  public, 
where  he  was  for  ever  figuring,  once  brought  upon  him  a  horse-whipping 
at  Ranelagh.  He  founded  the  "  British  Magazine"  and  "  Inspector,"  wrote 
many  volumes  and  papers  on  Natural  History  and  Philosophy,  and  was 
knighted  by  the  King  of  Sweden,  in  acknowledgment  of  a  presentation  of 
Hill's  seven  folio  volumes  on  *' Vegetable  History" — a  work  of  very  con- 
siderable merit,  which  gained  no  English  honours  for  the  author.  An 
epigram  ascribed  to  Garrick,  who  would  not  accept  a  farce  by  the  medical 
chevalier,  is  as  good  as  it  is  severe  : — 

"  For  physic  and  farces  his  equal  there  scarce  is  : 
His  farces  are  physic  ;  his  physic  a  farce  is. " 

D. 


1775]  ADDRESSES   AND   PETITIONS  497 

North  had  avowed  that  he  and  various  Ministers  had  given 
the  advice.     Not  above  ten  were  for  the  motion. 

Accounts  from  Ireland  that  Sir  John  Blaquiere  had 
acquainted  the  House  of  Commons  that  the  King  desired 
they  would  admit  of  his  sending  4000  men  of  that  estab- 
lishment to  America,  and  that,  if  they  desired  it,  he  would 
replace  them  with  4000  Hessians  and  Brunswickers,  as 
soon  as  that  House  would  enable  him  to  do  so. 

2(^th.  Some  feeble  opposition  was  given  to  the  Nova 
Scotia  Bill,  but  it  was  carried  by  91  to  12. 

30//^.  On  the  last  reading  of  the  Indemnity  Bill,  Lord 
Rockingham,  alone,  moved  to  have  it  thrown  out :  Lord 
Weymouth  seconded  that,  and  it  was  rejected.  This  bill, 
which  had  taken  up  three  long  days  in  the  other  House, 
had  been  brought  in  to  please  Sir  W.  Bagot  and  the 
Tories,  who,  from  their  old  hatred  of  Hanoverian  troops, 
had  desired  to  have  that  bill,  that  spoke  their  not 
being  constitutional.  Lord  Rockingham  triumphed  in  his 
success,  though  it  was  plain  that  the  Ministers,  more 
arbitrary  than  the  Tories  themselves,  were  proud  of 
having  the  deed  stand  on  the  King's  authority,  and  were 
not  afraid  of  being  called  to  account  hereafter  from  want 
of  indemnity  for  that  Act. 

All  this  time  Addresses  and  a  few  Petitions  continued  to 
be  presented.  One  was  remarkable.  The  Earl  of  Hard- 
wicke  (formerly  a  friend  to  the  repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act, 
now  an  eager  anti-American)  joined  with  Lord  Sandwich, 
formerly  his  competitor  for  the  High  Stewardship  of  Cam- 
bridge, to  procure  an  Address,  which  they  carried  by  sur- 
prise, before  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  the  Chancellor,  and  the 
Bishop  of  Peterborough,  Master  of  Trinity  College,  could 
assemble  their  friends.  Still,  however,  the  Bishop,  and  Dr. 
Law,  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  opposed  it  so  much,  that  it  was 
carried  by  a  small  majority,  and  was  so  whittled  down, 
that  the  Kings  could  not  be  pleased. 

About  the  same  time  Earl  Cornwallis,  a  good  sort  of 

I. — 2  K 


498       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

man,  who  had  a  wife  and  children  that  he  loved,  and  who 
at  the  time  of  the  Stamp  Act  had  been  one  of  five  who 
voted  for  the  repeal  in  the  House  of  Lords,  was  now  be- 
come so  good  a  courtier,  that,  as  troops  were  going  to  the 
southern  colonies,  in  hopes  of  countenancing  some  resist- 
ance on  the  part  of  the  King's  friends,  he  asked  to  go 
thither  with  his  own  regiment,  and  it  was  granted. 

The  month  ended  triumphantly  in  Parliament  for  the 
Ministers,^  not  only  from  the  corruption  of  that  assembly, 
from  the  predominance  of  Toryism,  and  from  the  frenzy 
of  the  nation  against  America,  but  from  the  want  of  abili- 
ties and  from  the  factions  in  the  Opposition.  The  Duke 
of  Richmond,  whose  health  was  bad,  disgusted  with  ill 
success,  had  been  gone  a  fortnight  into  the  country  ;  so  was 
the  Duke  of  Grafton,  and  many  other  young  men,  for  their 
hunting  and  sports  attached  them  more  than  their  prin- 
ciples ;  and  as  Lord  Camden  said  well,  it  was  impossible 
to  command  an  army  of  volunteers.  Formerly  the  obstinacy 
of  the  Jacobites  and  Tories  had  kept  them  together 
better  than  the  troops  of  the  Court ;  now,  the  activity  of 
the  Scotch,  and  the  incapacity  of  Lord  Rockingham,  the 
Cavendishes,  and  Burke,  and  the  factions  in  Opposition, 
reduced  them  to  nothing.  Lord  Shelburne,  Barre,  and 
Dunning  were  so  dissatisfied  with  the  Rockinghams,  that 
they  declared  it  should  be  long  before  they  voted  with  them 
again.  Wilkes  obstinately  pursued  his  own  ideas,  and  was 
therefore  shunned  by  all  those  lordly  leaders.  Charles  Fox, 
the  only  active  man  in  Opposition,  would  not  give  up  his 
dissolute  life,  sat  up  all  night,  and  was  seldom  out  of  bed 
before  two  in  the  afternoon.  The  sense  and  spirit  of  the 
Americans  was  all  that  threatened  the  Court,  for  Spain 
was  certainly  afraid  of  the  example  of  the  revolt,  and 
France,  if  she  supported  the  Americans,  did  it  in  a  small 
degree  and  very  secretly.     If  this  nation  is  saved,  Provi- 

^  It  was  the  witty  remark  of  Selwyn  that  Ministers  grew  less  by  elevation, 
like  little  statues  placed  on  lofty  pedestals. — D. 


1775]  CHARLES   FOX  499 

dence  or  chance  must  save  it ;  I  see  nothing  at  home 
in  its  favour,  for  the  indolence  of  the  Administration  was 
now  likely  to  be  quickened  by  the  activity  of  Lord  George 
Germaine. 


[Dec. 


DECEMBER 


1st. 


THE  bill  for  making  captures  of  American  ships 
debated  till  eleven  at  night.  It  having  been 
reported,  on  their  secession,  that  Lord  Shel- 
burne,  Dunning,  and  Barre  (the  latter  of  whom 
was  ill  at  Bath  with  the  gout  in  his  stomach)  were  gone 
over  to  the  Court,  Dunning  appeared  in  the  House  and 
spoke  warmly  against  the  bill,  alleging  as  the  cause  of  his 
late  absence  that  he  had  been  ill.  T.  Townshend  attacked 
the  Ministers  violently  on  the  late  message  to  Ireland,  as 
most  disrespectful  to  the  Parliament  of  England,  as,  though 
so  civil  to  that  of  Ireland,  the  King  engaged  that  the 
Parliament  of  England  should  pay  the  foreign  troops. 
Jenkinson,  to  excuse  his  ancient  patron  Lord  Harcourt, 
pleaded  that  the  speeches  and  messages  of  the  Lords- 
Lieutenants  were  always  drawn  by  the  Lord  Chancellor 
there  ;  but  Lord  North,  seeing  that  was  no  excuse,  said 
the  English  Ministers  had  not  authorized  that  message, 
and  that,  as  Townshend  spoke  only  from  newspaper 
information,  it  might  not  be  true,  and  the  House  must 
wait  for  better  authority.  Townshend  pledged  himself 
to  take  it  up  if  true.  The  bill  was  voted  by  107  to  55, 
and  was  much  debated  in  the  Committee.  On  the  yth, 
the  last  day  of  the  Committee,  Sawbridge  again  abused 
Lord  George  Germaine  in  very  gross  terms.  Sir  George 
Saville  the  same  day  made  a  fine  pathetic  panegyric  on  the 
Admiral  Sir  Charles  Saunders,  who  died  that  morning. 

Sir  John  Blaquiere,  Lord  Harcourt's  Secretary,  who 
governed  his  principal  with  no  more  abilities  than  the 
principal  himself  possessed,  had    proposed    to   the   Irish 

500 


1775]        DEATH  OF  SIR  CHARLES  SAUNDERS  501 

House  of  Commons  to  allow  the  King  to  send  to  America 
4000  of  the  12,000  men  which  his  Majesty  had  given  his 
royal  word  to  maintain  there.  The  venal  majority  allowed 
the  monarch  to  break  his  word  when  he  desired  it.  Sir 
John  then  offered  them  4000  Hessians  and  Brunswickers 
and  the  House,  as  if  a  breach  of  promise  were  security, 
rejected  the  offer  by  a  great  majority.  This  seemed  an 
Irishism  ;  but  the  truth  was,  the  Secretary  had  privately 
engaged  his  friends  to  oppose  the  offer,  though  he  did  not 
vote  against  it  himself  What  was  the  true  meaning  of 
this  finesse  I  do  not  know.  It  might  be  to  make  the 
leaving  the  country  so  naked  the  option  of  the  country 
itself;  it  might  be  that  the  King  could  not  get  the  foreign 
troops  in  question,  or  that  he  did  not  care  to  be  at  the 
expense  of  them.  The  manoeuvre  was  paltry,  though  it 
spoke  the  dependence  of  the  Ministers  on  the  promises 
of  France  and  Spain  that  they  would  not  attack  us. 

wth.  The  bill  for  destroying  the  American  shipping  was 
passed  in  the  House  of  Commons  by  112  to  16.  The 
Opposition  had  so  deserted  (gone  to  the  country)  that 
this  was  all  the  force  they  could  muster.  I  and  others  had 
advised  their  not  coming  to  Parliament,  but  protest 
against  the  measures.  There  had  been  some  dignity  in 
this,  but  they  could  neither  assemble  nor  retire  with 
propriety,  and  this  neglect  could  but  dishearten  the 
Americans.  On  the  other  hand,  Lord  George  Germaine, 
as  was  foreseen,  set  out  with  spirit,  seizing  two  chests  of 
letters  that  were  going  by  a  common  ship  to  Virginia. 

On  the  death  of  Sir  Charles  Saunders  1  Lord  Sandwich, 

^  Saunders  had  passed  through  a  glorious  career,  as  may  be  seen  by 
reference  to  the  "Lives  of  the  Admirals."  His  glory  and  usefulness  com- 
menced when  he  became  lieutenant  to  Anson  in  the  famous  expedition  to 
the  South  Seas.  As  one  of  Hawke's  captains,  he  was  remarkable  for 
"pluck";  and  as  commander  of  the  naval  part  of  the  enterprise  against 
Quebec,  he  exhibited  a  zeal,  foresight,  and  bravery  which  rendered  his  name 
highly  popular,  and  obtained  for  him  the  lieutenant-generalcy  of  the  Marines. 
He  closed  his  long  and  brilliant  career,  a  contented  though  a  childless  man  ; 
his  marriage  with  the  only  daughter  of  a  banker  (Miss  Back)  being  without 
issue. — D. 


502       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Dec. 

before  he  was  buried,  got  Palliser,  his  favourite,  made 
Lieutenant-General  of  the  Marines,  though  Lord  North 
had  promised  it  to  Lord  Howe,  who  came  to  town  and 
claimed  Lord  North's  promise.  The  latter  chose  to  plead 
forgetfulness,  rather  than  confess  that  Lord  Sandwich  had 
clapped  in  Palliser  by  surprise.  Lord  Howe  said  he 
would  go  directly  to  the  King  and  resign  all  his  employ- 
ments, and  that  his  brother,  the  General  at  Boston,  he  was 
sure,  would  resign  too.  Lord  North  beseeched  him  to 
have  patience,  and,  to  quiet  him,  offered  a  pension  of 
3000/.  a  year  to  Admiral  Forbes  to  resign  the  post  of 
General  of  Marines  to  Lord  Howe.  This  was  not  settled 
at  the  end  of  the  year. 

Major  Stuart,  a  younger  son  of  Lord  Bute,  was  preferred 
over  the  heads  of  some  officers  who  had  served  at  Bunker's 
Hill. 

A  ship  going  to  America,  Lord  George  Germaine  sent 
and  seized  two  parcels  of  letters  going  thither,  though  not 
contrary  to  law. 

The  White  Boys  continued  to  commit  great  ravages  in 
Ireland,  on  so  few  troops  being  left  there. 

i^th.  The  American  Shipping  Bill  carried  in  the  Lords 
by  78  to  19.     See  "  London  Chronicle  "  of  i6th. 

On  the  last  reading  of  that  bill  Lord  Mansfield,  en- 
couraged by  the  accession  of  Lord  George  Germaine  to 
the  Ministry  and  by  the  absence  of  Lord  Camden,  who 
was  at  Bath,  broke  out  violently  in  support  of  the  war, 
and  said,  no  matter  who  was  the  author  of  it,  it  must  now 
be  pursued.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  defending  the 
Americans,  Lord  Denbigh  said  we  had  traitors  among  us. 
The  Duke,  alluding  to  Lord  Denbigh's  former  Jacobitism, 
said  he  thought  there  were  no  longer  any  traitors  in  Eng- 
land. Lord  Townshend,  as  if  the  King's  army  had  been 
successful,  said  he  wished  Hancock  and  Adams  would  fly 
to  Switzerland,  that  we  might  not  be  obliged  to  punish 
them. 


1775]        MONTREAL  TAKEN  BY  PROVINCIALS         503 

These  exultations  ^  seemed  to  be  occasioned  by  boasted 
feats  of  Lord  Dunmore,  who,  the  Scotch  said,  though 
retreated  on  board  his  own  ship,  had  landed  with  80  men 
and  put  to  flight  300  Provincials,  and  taken  or  spiked 
several  cannon.  The  Court,  to  justify  their  naming  him 
one  of  the  sixteen,  published,  in  the  Gazette  of  the 

2ird,  a  lying  account  of  his  having  taken  all  the  artillery 
of  the  province  (though  only  a  few  privateer  guns  that  had 
been  left  on  the  shore  as  useless),  and  made  prisoner  Rob- 
inson, a  Deputy  of  the  Provincial  Congress.  To  this,  in 
the  same  Gazette,  was  added  assurances  that  Canada  was 
perfectly  safe. 

The  very  next  day  all  these  triumphs  were  contra- 
dicted. It  was  proved  that  there  was  no  such  person  as 
Robinson,  and  accounts  arrived  that  the  Provincials  under 
General  Montgomery,  an  Irishman,  had  defeated  General 
Carleton,  who  was  fled  to  Montreal,  and  had  summoned 
the  fortress  of  St.  John,  which  had  capitulated.  The 
safety  of  Canada  had  been  pretended,  because  the  Minis- 
ters on  the  last  bill  had  been  reproached  with  the  danger 
of  our  West  India  Islands,  and  had  pleaded  that  Canada 
would  supply  them. 

This  news  threw  the  Ministers  into  the  greatest  con- 
sternation, except  Lord  North,  who  would  have  gone  to 
his  villa  at  Bushy,  but  Lord  George  Germaine  would  not 
let  him.  Lord  George  went  to  the  Admiralty,  where  he 
found  only  Palliser  (for  Lord  Sandwich  and  the  other 
Lords  were  gone  into  the  country  for  Christmas),  and  said 
he  must  have  four  ships  to  send  to  Quebec.  Palliser  said 
they  could  not  get  into  the  river,  which  was  frozen,  and  it 
was  given  up. 

On  the  2Zth,  accounts  came  that  Carleton  had  deserted 
Montreal,  which  the  Provincials  took,  and  had  shut  him- 
self up  in  Quebec,  having  but  700  men,  all  they  had  kept 

^  It  was  said  at  this  time  that  England  offered  a  mutual  guarantee  of  their 
American  dominions  to  France  and  Spain,  which  those  Courts  rejected. 


504       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Dec. 

for  the  guard  of  that  whole  province^  and  the  Canadians, 
whom  he  could  not  trust,  for  the  Canadians,  in  spite  of 
the  restoration  of  their  religion,  leaned  towards  the  Pro- 
vincials. General  Howe  had  wished  to  send  looo  men 
from  Boston,  but  Admiral  Greaves,  who  still  commanded 
there,  though  he  had  had  his  sword  broken  over  his  head, 
called  a  council  of  war,  who  agreed  with  him  that  he  must 
not  dare  to  risk  the  King's  ships. 

The  same  day  arrived  General  Burgoyne  from  Boston, 
on  his  private  affairs,  as  he  said.  Thirty  prisoners  of  the 
Provincials,  sent  over,  were  lodged  in  Pendennis  Castle ; 
the  Ministers  were  very  sorry  they  were  sent  :  they  did 
not  dare  to  try  them,  as  the  Provincials  had  far  more 
prisoners  of  ours. 

Accounts  came  of  attempts  by  our  ships  to  burn^  the 
towns  on  the  coasts ;  all  were  said  to  be  condemned,  but 
the  first  attempts  had  miscarried.  In  the  meantime  the 
Provincials  had  taken  a  rich  storeship  of  ours  with  five 
hundredweight  of  powder. 

The  loss  of  Canada  was  a  particular  blow  to  Lord 
George  Gcrmaine,  whose  plan,  it  was  thought,  was  to 
make  war  thence  on  the  back  settlements. 

A  Fellow  of  Emanuel  College,  preaching  at  St.  Mary's, 
Cambridge,  declared  he  hoped,  from  the  piety  of  the 
King,  that  the  Convocation  would  be  allowed  to  sit  and 
the  clergy  recover  the  tithes  they  had  lost  and  the  power 
of  correcting  vice. 

I  promised  to  give  an  account  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's 
illness  and  motives  for  retiring  out  of  England.  The  slights 
he  received  from  all  the  higher  ranks  of  people,  the  perse- 
cutions of  his  elder  brother,  the  narrowness  of  his  income 
and  weight  of  his  debts,  but,  above  all,  his  anxious  uncer- 
tainty on  the  fate  of  the  Duchess  and  his  child,  had  preyed 
so  much  on  his  mind,  that  no  wonder  it  augmented  the 

^  This  was  agreeable  to  Rigby's  idea,  who  said,  to  prevent  the  colonic^ 
from  growing  indepeiident,  t^ey  must  be  put  b?^ck  fifty  yeaifs.     "  '  '" 


1775]    THE   DUKE   OF  GLOUCESTER'S   ILLNESS     505 

infected  state  of  his  blood  and  brought  him  to  the  point  of 
death.  As  the  humour  his  mother  had  brought  into  the 
family  had  in  his  youth  found  a  vent  in  his  face,  the 
Princess,  it  was  said,  wounded  by  so  plain  an  indication  of 
the  contagion  she  had  spread  through  her  children,  had 
obliged  him  to  use  a  remedy  for  the  eruption,  as  the  King 
was  supposed  to  have  done  for  the  same  reason,  and  it  had 
turned  in  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  to  an  asthma.  In  the 
winter  of  this  year  he  was  given  over  by  his  physician,  Dr. 
Jebbe ;  yet  on  the  evening  that  he  was  at  the  worst  the 
King  and  Queen  had  most  indecently  gone  to  the  play, 
though  Dr.  Warren,  the  other  physician,  daily  warned  the 
King  of  his  Royal  Highness's  danger.  In  this  extremity 
nothing  afflicted  the  dying  Duke  so  much  as  the  situation 
of  his  then  only  child,  the  young  Princess  Sophia,^  of  whom 
he  was  dotingly  fond,  of  which  he  gave  a  moving  proof 
He  was  sitting  on  his  bed,  with  nobody  in  the  room  but  the 
Duchess  and  the  little  Princess.  He  thought  the  latter, 
who  could  but  just  walk,  was  going  to  fall,  and  attempted 
to  rise  to  save  her.  His  extreme  weakness  would  not  allow 
it ;  he  sunk  back  and  said,  "  Oh !  Sophia,  you  are  my 
death  !  "  In  this  agony  of  grief  and  illness  he  had  resolved 
in  his  mind  every  measure  he  could  think  on  to  obtain  some 
provision  for  his  family,  and,  from  despair  of  touching  the 
King's  heart,  he  had  fixed  on  ordering  his  few  friends  to 
attempt  a  Parliamentary  provision.  I,  with  infinite  pains, 
had  diverted  him  from  this  rash  and  fatal  step,  on  which, 
as  a  negative  would  infallibly  pass,  I  apprehended  it  would 
preclude  any  good-natured  motion  in  favour  of  his  widow 
and  child,  in  case  he  should  die.  I  once  had  intended,  if 
the  Duke  could  not  be  dissuaded  from  his  purpose,  to  try 
to  prevail  on  him  to  write  to  the  House  of  Lords,  stating 
his  danger,  and  entreating  them,  if  he  should  fail,  to  inter- 
cede with  the  King  for  his  family;  but  his  Royal  High- 
ness, abandoning  his  purpose,  sent  for  me  and  told  me  he 

1  This  Princess,  Sophia  Matilda,  died  November  29,  1844.— D. 


5o6      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Dec. 

had  changed  his  mind,  and  would  write  to  the  King  himself. 
He  had  ordered  another  person  to  draw  a  sketch  of  a  letter, 
but  it  was  far  from  being  a  conciliatory  one,  and  the  Duke's 
own  good  sense  had  rejected  it ;  and,  weak  as  he  was,  he 
had  drawn  another  himself,  which  he  showed  me.  Nothing 
could  be  more  sensible,  decent,  or  proper,  though  not  per- 
fectly correct,  which  I  would  not,  however,  remark,  that 
the  King,  who  knew  his  genuine  style,  might  perceive  it 
was  not  fashioned  for  him.  One  thing  alone  I  found 
wanting,  to  ask  pardon  of  the  King  for  his  marriage,  which, 
even  if  fruitless,  would  have  doubled  the  feeling  of  the 
public  in  his  favour.  I  laboured  to  obtain  this  addition 
with  all  the  arguments  and  persuasion  I  could  use — not 
that  I  believe  even  that  condescension  would  have  softened 
the  King's  obduracy.  The  Duke  said  to  me,  "  Sir,  I  know 
the  King  better  than  you ; "  and  he  has  told  me  at  other 
times  that  nothing  could  operate  on  his  brother  except  fear. 
But  an  instance  of  his  Majesty's  nature^  the  Duchess  gave 
me  in  the  Duke's  presence  during  the  illness  I  am  speaking 
of.  A  few  years  before,  when  the  King  styled  the  Duke 
his  favourite  brother^  the  humour  in  their  blood  had  fallen 
on  the  Duke's  arm,  and  the  physicians  had  thought  it 
necessary  for  it  to  be  cut  off;  but  the  humour  dispersing 
itself  suddenly,  and  the  Duke  recovering,  the  first  moment 
he  was  able  to  visit  the  King,  his  Majesty  only  stared  on 
this  favourite  brother,  and  said  coolly,  "  I  thought  you  had 
lost  your  arm." 

The  Duke  sat  up  most  part  of  the  night,  ill  as  he  was, 
to  digest  and  send  his  letter ;  and  the  next  day,  sending 
for  Lord  North  as  a  witness  to  his  desperate  condition,  de- 
livered his  letter  to  him,  and  commanded  it  to  be  delivered 
immediately  to  the  King.  Shall  I  venture  to  relate  the 
sequel ;  will  it  be  believed  if  I  do  ?  The  letter  was  con- 
signed to  Lord  North  on  the  Thursday — the  answer  might 

^  Sir  John  Pringle,  the  King's  physician,  though  a  Scot,  had  no  reserve  in 
talking  of  the  Kin^j's  unfeeling  disposition. 


1775]  STORY   TOLD   OF   LORD   NORTH  507 

have  imparted  life  or  death  to  the  writer,  the  Duke.  His 
impatience  and  anxiety  were  as  great  as  such  a  moment 
could  demand.  On  Friday  night  his  Royal  Highness 
received  a  letter  from  Lord  North — a  feeling  reader  will 
shudder  as  he  figures  the  Duke  reading  his  fate — (again  I 
must  implore  faith  in  my  solemn  veracity) — Lord  North's 
answer  cannot  enter  into  the  compass  of  conjecture.  With 
the  coolest  indifference  he  told  the  Duke  that  he  had 
received  his  Majesty's  answer,  but — this  was  on  the  Friday 
night — supposed  it  would  be  the  same  to  his  Royal  High- 
ness if  he  deferred  bringing  the  answer  till  the  following 
Monday ;  for  this  first  Prince  of  the  Blood,  this  dying 
Prince,  was  to  suppose  his  Lordship  chose  to  go  and  divert 
himself  at  Bushy,  according  to  custom,  for  the  intervening 
Saturday  and  Sunday!  Such  insolent  impertinence,  such 
inhuman  carelessness,  were  never  equalled.  The  brutality 
of  such  a  message,  even  if  laziness  or  ignorance  of  decency 
were  the  motives, was  not  the  less  brutal  for  such  palliatives; 
but  the  gross  insensibility  of  the  servant  announced  the 
savage  response  of  the  master,  and  spoke  the  mimic  inso- 
lence of  the  lowest  rank  of  servants,  who  copy  every  pre- 
sumptuous sally  of  the  superiors  they  belong  to.  The  King, 
in  answer  to  the  Duke's  supplication  for  a  provision  for 
his  wife  and  daughter,  verbally  bade  Lord  North  tell  his 
favourite  dying  brother  that  he  would  have  nothing  to  do 
with  them  ;  nor,  when  Lord  North  at  last  brought  that 
answer,  did  he  spare  an  accent  of  the  contents.  The  con- 
sequence to  the  Duke  was  a  relapse  ;  but  resentment  or 
nature  surmounted  his  illness,  and  he  quitted  the  country, 
as  I  have  said  before. 

It  will  be  no  improper  supplement  to  this  picture  of 
Lord  North  to  relate  the  following  story,  which  happened 
at  the  end  of  this  year : — 

Mr.  Foley,  member  for  Herefordshire,  an  opulent  Tory, 
had  long  had  a  promise  of  a  Peerage,  and,  as  a  creation  of 
Peers  was  approaching,  a  seat  for  that  county  would  be 


5o8       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Dec. 

vacant.  Alderman  Harley,  a  favourite  tool  of  the  Ad- 
ministration, had  missed  a  seat  in  Parliament  at  the  last 
general  election  by  the  success  of  Wilkes  in  the  City,  and 
by  pusillanimity  of  his  own,  which  the  Ministers  had  inter- 
preted treachery,  though  he  had  again  reingratiated  himself 
in  their  favour.  Young  Foley,  eldest  son  of  the  future 
Peer,  was  ambitious  of  representing  his  native  county  ;  but 
being  already  a  member,  applied  to  Lord  North  for  the 
Chiltern  Hundreds  to  vacate  his  seat.  Lord  North  refused 
that  usual  boon,  to  prevent  so  formidable  a  competitor  to 
Harley.  Foley  would  not  give  up  his  point ;  but,  being  on 
the  eve  of  marriage  with  Lady  Henrietta  Stanhope,  thought 
it  would  be  no  disgrace  to  act  in  any  capacity  under  his 
future  father-in-law,  and  desired  Lord  Harrington,  who 
had  a  troop  of  horse,  to  make  him  his  agent — an  employ- 
ment that  vacates  a  seat  in  Parliament,  and, having  obtained 
it,  acquainted  Lord  North.  The  latter,  as  insolent  as  if 
sole  Minister  and  not  the  official  tool  of  the  cabal,  replied, 
without  management,  "  If  Lord  Harrington  makes  you  his 
agent,  his  troop  shall  be  taken  from  him  ! "  Foley,  in  love 
with  the  lady,  could  not  sacrifice  her  father  to  such  an 
object,  and  desisted.  He  did  set  up  another  candidate,  but 
was  defeated.  A  menace  in  such  Royal  terms,  and  against 
an  old  general  officer  of  such  rank  as  the  Earl,  was  unheard 
of.  I  must  mention  here  that  Mr.  Foley,  the  father,  would 
not  consent  to  his  son's  marriage  unless  he  could  obtain  a 
barony,  which  had  long  been  promised.  Lord  North,  either 
to  make  amends  for  his  brutality,  or  to  secure  the  son's 
interest,  as  the  father  was  dying,  did  obtain  the  peerage 
for  him,  and  the  young  people  were  married  ;  but  the  son 
never  gave  a  vote  for  Lord  North,  of  which  the  latter's 
friends  complained  loudly ;  nor  was  Foley  to  be  excused.^ 

^  The  Foleys  were  descendants  of  Paul  Foley,  the  opponent  of  William  III.'s 
Ministry.  Paul  was  the  son  of  an  eminent  iron-master,  became  Speaker  of 
the  House  of  Commons  in  1695,  and  gave  his  name  to  Foley  Place.  The 
older  barony  of  Foley,  created  in  171 1,  expired  in  January,  1766.  In  May, 
1776,  the  new  barony  was  created  in  favour  of  the  Mr.  Foley  mentioned 


1775]    ANECDOTE  OF  LORD  NORTH'S  PICTURE      509 

A  nature  so  capable  of  outrage  as  Lord  North's  was, 
under  the  veil  of  uncommon  good  humour  and  idleness, 
recalled  to  mind  a  picture  drawn  of  him  early  by  one  who 
knew  him  well  : — 

Mr.  Henry  Legge,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  was 
uncle  of  Lord  Dartmouth,  who  was  son-in-law  of  the  Earl 
of  Guilford,  Lord  North's  father,^  and  the  young  Lords 
had  travelled  together.  Very  few  days  before  Mr.  Legge 
died.  Sir  Edward  Walpole,  his  friend,  visiting  him,  a 
picture  of  Lord  North  by  Pompeis  hung  over  the  chimney, 
Sir  Edward  said,  "  Pompeis  must  be  an  able  painter  to 
make  so  good  a  picture  of  a  man  so  ugly  as  Lord  North." 
Legge  replied,  "To  have  made  it  like,  he  should  have 
drawn  his  inside  as  hideous  as  his  outside ;  I  have  not 
breath  now,  or  I  would  tell  you  circumstances  to  confirm 
what  I  say."  Sir  Edward  Walpole  often  repeated  this 
story.  In  the  winter  of  1776,  Sir  Edward  declaring  him- 
self openly  an  enemy  to  the  Americans,  Lord  North  sent 
a  person  to  him  to  say  how  glad  he  was  to  hear  they 
agreed  in  sentiments  about  America  ;  and,  after  civil  pro- 
fessions, the  person  was  charged  to  ask  Sir  Edward  if  he 
had  ever  related  the  above-mentioned  story,  as  Lord  North 
had  heard  he  had.  Sir  Edward,  very  warm,  and  offended 
at  Lord  North's  late  indecent  treatment  of  his  son-in-law, 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  though  it  did  not  effect  his 
political  opinions,  fairly  owned  the  story,  and  bade  the 
person  tell  Lord  North  he  was  ready  to  repeat  it  to  his 
Lordship's  face.  Lord  North  did  not  desire  that  con- 
frontation. 

above,  who  was  a  cousin  of  the  second  and  last  Lord  of  the  elder  creation. 
The  marriage  of  young  Foley,  however,  with  Lady  Henrietta  Stanhope, 
took  place  before  Lord  North  raised  "  Mr.  Foley,  the  father,"  to  the 
peerage,  namely,  in  March,  1776.     The  elder  Foley  died  in  1777  J  his  son  in 

1793. -D. 

^  Miss  Kaye  was  first  married  to  Lord  Lewisham,  eldest  son  of  the  first 
Earl  of  Dartmouth,  and  secondly  to  the  Earl  of  Guilford,  to  whom  she  was 
second  wife.  His  first  wife,  Lord  North's  mother,  was  half  sister  to  the  last 
Earl  of  Halifax. 


1776 
JANUARY 

THE  year  began  with  mighty  preparations  for 
carrying  on  the  war  in  America  with  vigour. 
Lord  George  Sackville  Germaine,  who  had 
been  brought  into  power  for  that  end,  was 
indefatigable  in  laying  plans  for  raising  and  hiring  troops, 
in  sending  supplies  and  recruits,  and  more  naval  force. 
Sixteen  thousand  Hessians  were  obtained,  some  Bruns- 
wickers,  and  a  few  other  German  troops,  and  a  demand 
was  made  from  the  Dutch,  of  the  Scotch  in  their  service, 
which  met  with  opposition  in  that  country,  but  was  granted 
at  last.  Every  effort  was  used  in  these  islands  to  raise 
soldiers  and  sailors,  with  but  indifferent  success,  and  not 
at  all  in  proportion  to  the  extraordinary  premiums  given 
to  particular  favourites  who  offered  or  were  invited  to  raise 
them,  as  will  be  mentioned.  Some  of  the  Guards  offered 
to  go,  and  one  thousand  were  selected  from  the  three 
regiments,  but  so  little  to  the  satisfaction  of  several,  that 
fifteen  officers  threw  up  or  desired  leave  to  sell  their  com- 
missions. Lord  Mansfield,  Wedderburn,  and  the  Scotch 
sounded  high  Lord  George's  spirit ;  and  nothing  was 
talked  of  but  conquering  America  in  one  campaign  ;  whilst 
indeed  the  more  sober  part  of  the  Ministers,  who  saw  the 
wildness  and  profusion  of  the  expense,  were  apprehensive 
that,  if  the  business  could  not  be  effected  in  that  time,  the 
Administration  would  be  blown  up,  finding  themselves  at 
a  dead  stand.     Lord  G.  Germaine,  who  had  always  treated 

510 


1776]  LORD   MANSFIELD  511 

Lord  Chatham's  magnificent  plans  as  visions  of  a  mad- 
man, who  dictated  impracticable  measures  and  left  the 
Treasury  to  find  the  means,  now  seemed  to  have  taken 
that  daring  and  inconsiderate  Minister  for  his  own 
pattern,  chalking  out,  dictating  the  measures,  and  leaving 
the  whole  burthen  of  supplies  on  the  shoulders  of  Lord 
North,  whom  at  the  same  time,  without  reserve  in  his  most 
public  conversations,  he  spoke  of  as  a  trifling  and  supine 
Minister.  Lord  North  had  all  the  air  of  subscribing  to 
that  character,  and  augmented  his  natural  and  jocose  levity, 
as  if  his  coadjutor  had  rendered  the  office  of  Prime 
Minister  a  sinecure.  Still  the  difference  of  their  characters 
kept  up  a  sort  of  division  or  ambiguity  in  the  conduct  of 
Government ;  Lord  North  still  retaining  an  affected  pro- 
pensity to  peace,  Lord  George  pronouncing  authoritatively 
for  decision  and  exaction  of  full  submission  from  the 
colonies :  an  inconsistent  language  which  broke  out  from 
both  in  every  parliamentary  debate,  though,  however  dic- 
tatorial Lord  George  was  in  the  Cabinet,  he  had  recovered 
so  little  spirit,  was  so  afraid  of  inviting  personal  reflec- 
tions, or  was  so  cowed  by  his  conscious  unpopularity,  that 
he  nowhere  appeared  the  Minister  so  little  as  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  never  shone  there  with  so  little 
lustre. 

Lord  Mansfield,  more  Minister  than  either  of  those 
Lords,  to  shroud  his  own  poltroonery,  and  the  Scotch  and 
the  Bedfords  to  prevent  being  sacrificed  by  the  King's 
irresolution,  had  buoyed  up  his  Majesty  with  such  visions 
of  empire  and  despotism,  that  he  breathed  nothing  but 
war,  and  was  equally  childish  and  indiscreet  in  professing 
his  sentiments,  and  in  flattering  all  who  concurred  with  his 
sentiments.  When  he  reviewed  the  Guards  in  March  on 
Wimbledom  Common,  previous  to  their  embarking  for 
America,  he  condescended  to  do  what  he  had  not  even 
done  at  the  great  naval  review  at  Portsmouth, — he  pulled 
off  his  hat  when  he  took  leave  of  the  Guards,  not  doubt- 


512       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Jan. 

ing  but  they  would  cheerfully  lay  down  their  lives  for  so 
gracious  a  Monarch,  who  had  uncovered  his  sacred  head 
to  salute  them  ! 

The  Opposition  seemed  to  have  lost  all  spirit  as  unac- 
countably as  the  Administration  had  acquired  some  by  the 
accession  of  Lord  George  Germaine  ;  and  on  their  side  had 
gained  none  by  the  Duke  of  Grafton's  desertion  to  them. 
Indeed  it  brought  them  nor  sense,  nor  activity,  nor  har- 
mony, nor  six  votes.  Lord  Rockingham  and  the  Duke 
were  no  sooner  allies  again  than  rivals.  Lord  Camden, 
who  had  seduced  the  Duke,  intended  him  for  First  Min- 
ister, which,  though  Lord  Rockingham  was  content  to  be 
at  the  head  of  his  own  faction  though  out  of  place,  he  was 
not  ready  to  cede  even  in  that  powerless  situation.  At  an 
early  meeting  of  the  Opposition  this  session.  Lord  Rock- 
ingham summoned  the  Bishop  of  Peterborough  as  a  new 
dependant,  which  offended  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  The 
Marquis  excused  himself  on  the  indecency  of  inviting  the 
Duke  before  he  was  out  of  place.  Lord  Shelburne,  who 
had  his  own  personal  views  on  the  first  place,  was  more 
tractable,  and  concerted  with  either ;  more  readily  with 
the  Duke,  as  a  former  limb  of  Lord  Chatham's  Adminis- 
tration, to  whom  Lord  Shelburne  still  avowed  implicit 
allegiance,  though  equally  unfitted,  by  his  depression, 
for  power  or  Opposition.  What  little  life  there  was  ex- 
isted in  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Charles  Fox.  The 
latter  bustled,  tried  to  animate  both  the  Duke  and  Mar- 
quis, conferred  with  Lord  Shelburne,  but  abandoned 
neither  his  gaming  nor  rakish  life.  He  was  seldom  in  bed 
before  five  in  the  morning,  nor  out  of  it  before  two  at 
noon.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  I  tried  early  in  the  winter 
to  fire  with  industry.  I  painted  to  him  all  the  miscar- 
riages of  the  campaign,  and  the  inability  of  the  Ministers ; 
and  gave  him  a  long  list  of  hostile  motions  which  I  wished 
him  to  make  of  complaints  and  grievances  ;  but  his  health 
was  bad,  and  his  spirits ;  he  distrusted  his  own  abilities. 


1776]  THE    MINISTERS  513 

though  his  eloquence  improved  daily  ;  he  loved  his  country 
pleasures,  and  he  was  disheartened  by  repeated  defeats. 
Nay,  though  nobody  more  severe  when  he  did  take  a  part, 
his  candour  disliked  great  hostilities.  I  said,  "  My  Lord, 
when  the  Ministers  stick  at  nothing,  is  it  right  to  your  coun- 
try to  let  them  manage  everything  ?  "  But  his  delicacy  could 
not  brook  any  violent  measures ;  and  while  the  Court 
thought  and  represented  him  as  the  soul  of  faction,  he  was 
incapable  of  transgressing  the  most  minute  article  of  strict 
honour.  In  truth  all  the  motions  I  gave  him  were  provoked 
and  crying  ;  but  he  frankly  confessed  he  would  not  attack 
Ministers  on  any  measures,  such  as  grants  and  pensions,  with 
which  he  had  not  found  fault  when  he  had  formerly  acted 
with  the  Court.  I  own  this,  and  owe  to  his  character  to  do 
it  justice,  though  perhaps  to  my  own  dispraise.  But  I  who 
had  seen  every  injustice  heaped  on  my  father  by  Jacobit- 
ism  and  faction,  and  who  now  saw  the  ruin  of  the  country 
pursued  by  Jacobite  principles,  did  wish  to  turn  every  art 
of  party  that  was  allowable,  on  such  guilty  men.  I  had 
less  delicacy  than  the  Duke,  and  thought  it  meritorious  to 
expose  to  clamour  and  public  hatred  such  Machiavels  as 
Lord  Mansfield,  "  qui  sobrius  ad  evertendam  Rempublicam 
accessit."  Lord  North  was  a  pliant  tool,  without  system  or 
principle  ;  Lord  George  Germaine  of  desperate  ambition 
and  character ;  Wedderburn  a  thorough  knave ;  Lord 
Sandwich  a  more  profligate  knave ;  Lord  Gower  a  villain 
capable  of  any  crime  ;  Elliot,  Jenkinson,  Cornwall,  mutes 
that  would  have  fixed  the  bowstring  round  the  throat  of 
the  Constitution.  The  subordinate  crew  to  name  is  to 
stigmatize  ;  they  were  Dr.  Johnson,  the  pilloried  Shebbeare, 
Sir  John  Dalrymple,  and  Macpherson  !  The  pious  though 
unconscientious  Lord  Dartmouth  had  been  laid  aside,  after 
bequeathing  to  Administration  his  hypocritic  secretaries 
Wesley  and  Madan ;  Lord  Barrington  remained  to  lie 
officially  ;  Lord  Weymouth  had  acceded  with  all  his  insen- 
sibility to  honour,  and  by  acceding  had  given  new  edge  to 

I.— 2  L 


514       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Jan. 

Thurlow,  who  was  fit  to  execute  whatever  was  to  be  done. 
Ahnost  every  Scot  was  ready  to  put  his  sickle  to  the  har- 
vest, and  every  Jacobite  country  gentleman  exulted  in  the 
prospect  of  reversing  on  the  Whigs  and  Dissenters  all  their 
disappointments  since  the  Revolution  ;  and  they  saw  a 
prince  of  the  House  of  Brunswick  ready  to  atone  for  all 
the  negative  hurt  his  family  had  done  to  their  ancestors, 
and  for  all  the  good  his  ancestors  and  the  benefactor  of  his 
family,  King  William,  had  done  to  Great  Britain.  There 
was  still  another  body  ready  to  profit  by  the  restoration 
of  Stuart  views — the  bishops  and  clergy.  How  deeply  and 
joyfully  they  waded  into  a  civil  war  on  the  Constitution  and 
on  Dissenters,  let  their  votes,  addresses,  and  zeal  for  the 
war  declare  !  This  is  a  heavy  picture  ;  but  if  any  of  the 
individuals  mentioned  above,  or  any  of  the  denominations 
of  men,  come  out  whiter  in  the  eyes  of  impartial  posterity, 
let  this  page  be  registered  as  a  page  of  the  blackest 
calumny  ! 

Thus  however  were  all  the  blunders,  violent  and  absurd 
measures  of  the  two  last  years,  and  the  disgraces  and  inac- 
tivity of  the  last  campaign,  suffered  almost  to  pass  without 
a  note  from  Opposition.  The  latter  had  foretold  and  had 
expected  that  a  sudden  decrease  of  American  trade  would 
long  ere  this  have  driven  the  merchants  and  manufac- 
turers to  despair.  No  such  thing  had  happened.  The 
merchants,  by  what  art  or  manoeuvre  I  know  not,  or  by 
what  hopes  of  peace,  had  been  kept  quiet ;  the  stocks, 
by  the  wealth  of  the  nation,  by  no  diminution  of  trade,^  by 
the  difficulty  of  employing  money  elsewhere,  and  by  great 
address,  and  by  connivance  with  the  Bank,  had  been 
astonishingly  kept  up.  The  cessation  of  the  Turkish  war 
and  the  pacification  of  Poland  had  revived  trade  ;  and  the 
discreet  and  ostentatious  payment  of  their  debts  by  the 
Americans,  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  the  trading  part 

^  It  was  thought  that  France  aad  Holland  took  off  many  of  our  manu- 
factures to  sell  them  to  our  colonies, 


1776]  AMERICAN   WAR  515 

of  the  nation,  together  with  remittances  of  the  fortunes 
of  those  who  fled  from  America  on  the  commencement  of 
the  troubles,  had  concurred,  with  the  general  spirit  of  dis- 
sipation and  thoughtlessness,  to  make  the  American  war 
not  yet  felt  or  even  perceived  at  home.  The  superior 
activity  of  Administration  in  calumniating  patriots  as  self- 
interested  incendiaries  of  the  war,  had  disheartened  and 
alarmed  the  decent  and  conscientious  friends  of  Lord 
Rockingham ;  and  indeed  the  sword  was  now  so  thoroughly 
drawn,  the  Parliament  was  so  totally  corrupt  and  lost  to 
shame,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  nation  so  blinded, 
that  perhaps  the  Opposition  could  hardly  do  better  than 
lie  quiet  till  some  calamity  opened  the  eyes  of  the  public. 
For  my  own  part,  I  can  scarce  lament  the  war.  Had  the 
King  and  Lord  Mansfield,  who  dreaded  tumults  and  insur- 
rections at  home,  and  who  knew  they  were  in  no  danger 
from  mobs  across  the  Atlantic,  had  courage  to  invade 
liberty  at  home,  they  might  have  done  their  business  al- 
most at  one  stroke.  By  driving  all  America  to  resistance, 
they  have  made  it  very  doubtful  whether  they  will  carry  one 
point.  If  America  gets  the  better,  it  will  be  independent, 
or  will  not  return  to  us  without  effectuating  by  stipulation, 
or  by  the  consequences  of  our  ill  success,  a  total  change  of 
Administration,  and  a  blow  to  despotism.  If  Britain  pre- 
vails, it  cannot  be  but  by  ruining  the  towns  and  trade  of 
America,  and  by  wasting  the  King's  fleet,  armies,  and 
treasure,  his  best  means  of  despotism.  If  a  middle  way, 
an  ignominious  treaty,  ensues,  what  disgrace  to  the  Crown, 
and  what  a  damp  to  its  farther  innovations !  No  case  can 
happen  in  which,  if  the  King  prevails,  he  will  not  be  a  far 
less  potent  monarch  than  before  the  war.  These  kingdoms 
are  more  likely  to  grow  shocked  at  so  ignominious  a  reign 
(compared  with  its  glorious  commencement) ;  and  few 
princes  that  grow  despised  augment  their  power.  How 
too  shall  we  have  wasted  our  treasure  and  armies,  instead 
of  diminishing  our  debt!     France  and  Spain,  says   the 


5i6       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Jan. 

Court,  give  solemn  assurances  of  neutrality,  and  dislike 
the  precedent  of  rebellious  colonies — perhaps  both  is  true. 
The  more  they  promise,  the  more  they  are  to  be  suspected. 
Will  they  spare  promises  which  will  encourage  us  to  be 
undone?  If  a  civil  war  will  not  dispel  our  delusion,  a 
French  or  Spanish  war,  or  both,^  will  tear  the  bandage  from 
the  eyes  that  wink  most  obstinately.  Then  will  our  abso- 
lute Monarch  know  the  difference  between  the  constitutional 
glory  of  such  a  King  as  his  grandfather,  and  that  of  a 
despotic  Sovereign,  who  has  revolted  and  laid  waste  his 
colonies,  and  impoverished  and  exhausted  his  subjects  at 
home. 

The  year  began  with  a  remarkable  snow  and  frost  that 
lasted  a  month.  Lord  George  Germaine,  who  had  com- 
plained to  the  King  of  the  Ministers  so  frequently  quitting 
the  town  to  amuse  themselves  at  their  country  houses,  going 
to  his  own  house  at  Stonelands,  was  shut  up  there  by  the 
snow. 

The  two  Houses  of  Parliament  met  after  the  recess  of 
the  holidays,  the  Lords  on  January  the  23rd,  and  the 
Commons  on  the  25th,  but  nothing  was  done  or  moved  by 
Ministers  but  the  ordinary  business,  and  by  Opposition 
nothing  at  all. 

^  Both  a  French  and  a  Spanish  war  did  happen,  but  did  not  open  all 
eyes  ! 


1776] 


FEBRUARY 

MONSIEUR  le  Comte  de  Guines,  Ambassador 
from  France,  was  suddenly  recalled.  It  was 
said  that  Monsieur  Turgot,  the  Comptroller- 
General,  having  sent  a  confidential  person 
hither  to  inquire  into  the  nature  of  our  raising  money,  and 
into  the  affairs  of  our  East  India  Company  (which  our 
embarrassments  in  America  could  not  but  make  France  see 
a  prospect  of  undermining,  if  not  of  invading  our  vast 
possessions  in  the  East),  and  that  person  having  been  too 
coldly  received  by  De  Guines,  had,  on  his  return,  com- 
plained to  Turgot,  who  had  sent  the  Count  a  severe 
reprimand,  to  which  he  had  replied  haughtily,  urging  that 
his  quality  of  Ambassador  ought  to  exempt  him  from  so 
humiliating  a  rebuke,  and  that  Turgot,  having  laid  the 
letter  before  his  master,  the  King  had  instantly  sent  for 
him  away  in  anger.  This  was  probably  true,  for  when 
at  last  M.  de  Guines  obtained  an  audience,  after  long 
soliciting  it,  and  asked  if  he  had  offended  his  Majesty,  and 
what  was  the  reason  of  his  sudden  recall,  he  could  obtain 
no  answer  from  the  King,  but  "  lAmbassade  etoit  finie." 
The  King,  too,  coloured  when  he  first  saw  him,  as  if  the 
act  were  his  own  ;  and  when  De  Guines  asked  Monsieur 
de  Vergennes  the  cause,  he  replied,  "  C'est  le  secret  du 
Roi." 

Whatever  precipitated  this  fall  of  De  Guines,  he  had 
not  even  been  encouraged  to  expect  his  embassy  would  be 
protracted ;  his  three  years  were  expired,  and  he  had 
extorted  his  last  return  hither  as  a  vindication  of  his 
honour.     He  was  involved  in  a  most  afflicting  suit  against 

S17 


5i8       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

his  own  secretary,  one  Tort,  who,  having  suddenly- 
decamped  on  ill-success  in  stockjobbing,  had  accused  his 
master  of  having  employed  him  in  that  unseemly  practice 
on  that  account.  Most  of  the  foreign  Ministers  here, 
except  the  Prince  of  Masserano,  the  Spanish  Ambassador, 
followed  that  dirty  trade.  The  cause  of  M.  de  Guines 
suffered  extremely  by  his  pretending  to  have  burnt  Tort's 
first  letter  from  Paris.  Count  Welderen,  the  Dutch 
Minister,  told  me  that  the  letter  was  not  burnt,  but  that 
M.  de  Guines,  out  of  most  good-natured  delicacy  and 
honour,  would  not  produce  it  even  for  his  own  justification, 
and  to  his  great  prejudice,  because  in  it  Tort  had  men- 
tioned another  of  the  foreign  Ministers  as  concerned  in 
that  trafific,  which  would  have  ruined  him  at  his  own 
Court. 

The  Ambassador  had  as  warmly  prosecuted  Tort,  who 
was  openly  supported  by  English  bankers  whom  he  had 
drawn  into  his  misfortunes,  assuring  them  he  was  warranted 
by  his  master,  who  would  communicate  the  secrets  of  his 
embassy  to  them  ;  and  it  did  seem  an  exculpation  of  the 
Count  that  he  had  lost  by  the  transaction,  which  was  not 
credible,  being  master  of  the  secret  of  pacification  on  Falk- 
land's Island.  Tort  had  still  a  more  formidable  though 
clandestine  protector  in  the  Due  d'Aiguillon,  who  to  ruin 
De  Guines,  the  creature  of  the  Due  de  Choiseul,  had 
been  guilty  of  scandalous  injustice  to  the  Ambassador.^ 
The  cause  had  been  heard  the  last  winter  ;  and  by  as 
strange  a  judgment  as  that  against  Admiral  Byng,  the 
sentence,  though  in  favour  of  M.  de  Guines,  was  by  no 
means  severe  against  Tort,  who  was  either  a  complete 
rascal  (as  he  certainly  in  his   memorials   had   been   un- 

^  M.  de  Guines  forcing  the  Due  d'Aiguillon  to  print  their  correspondence, 
it  appeared  by  two  letters  that  on  the  affair  of  Falkland's  Island  the  English 
Court  had  offered  to  disarm  first.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  had  before  this 
publication  taxed  our  Ministers  in  the  House  of  Lords  with  this  national 
indignity,  and  Lord  Rochford  had  denied  it  upon  his  honour.  Here  it  now 
appeared  irrefragably. 


1776]  THE   COMTE   DE   GUINES  519 

precedentedly  insolent  and  provoking  to  the  Ambassador), 
or  De  Guines  was  the  most  unjust  and  blackest  of  men. 
The  latter  had  indeed  carried  his  cause  but  by  one  voice, 
which  the  Queen  had  obtained  for  him  at  eleven  o'clock 
at  night.  That  Princess,  instructed  by  her  mother,  the 
Empress  Queen,  was  eager  to  restore  the  Due  de  Choiseul 
to  the  management  of  affairs,  in  gratitude  for  and  to  en- 
force the  Family  Compact  which  he  had  made,  as  well  as 
her  daughter's  marriage  with  Louis  XVI.,  and  the  Queen 
of  France  took  all  occasions  of  showing  favour  to  Choiseul 
and  his  adherents — a  little  indiscreetly,  for  she  obtained 
permission  for  the  Duke  to  appear  at  Versailles  and  Paris ; 
and  boasting  of  it  to  show  her  power,  old  Maurepas,  who 
had  the  chief  credit,  and  who  knew  the  King's  jealousy 
of  being  governed,  revealed  the  Queen's  triumph ;  and  to 
exclude  Choiseul  for  ever,  insinuated  to  his  Majesty  that 
the  Due  de  Choiseul  had  poisoned  the  Dauphin  his  father. 
The  Comte  de  Maurepas  had  learned  this  calumniating 
art  by  his  own  experience ;  when  he  was  banished  for 
affronting  Madame  de  Pompadour,  to  assure  his  never 
returning  to  the  Court,  she  persuaded  Louis  Quinze  that 
M.  de  Maurepas  had  poisoned  one  of  the  King's  former 
mistresses,  the  Duchess  de  Chateauroux. 

Tort  had  appealed  to  the  Parliament,  and  the  cause  was 
to  be  reheard  ;  but  though  so  essential  to  De  Guines  to 
watch  the  suit  and  his  enemies,  the  excessive  partiality  he 
had  experienced  both  from  the  Court  and  the  nobility 
here  had  tempted  him  to  press  his  return  hither.  He  had 
wasted  immense  sums  here  in  treats  and  balls,  was  gallant, 
acceptable  to  the  women.  He  was  so  popular  with  the 
fine  ladies,  that  they  formed  several  extravagant  plans  for 
showing  their  concern  for  his  recall.  One  was  to  write  to 
the  Queen  of  France  to  intercede  in  his  favour ;  another, 
to  wear  black  ribands  for  him,  and  to  make  a  procession 
from  the  Ladies'  Club  to  take  leave  of  him.  It  ended  in 
many  going  with  their  husbands  to  leave  at  his  door  their 


520       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

names  on  printed  cards,^  expressing  their  sorrow  for  his 
recall.  It  was  suspected  that  they  went  farther,  for  the 
day  he  took  leave  at  St.  James's  a  posse  of  Irish  chairmen 
assembled  round  his  coach,  would  have  taken  off  the  horses, 
and  insisted  on  drawing  him  home,  as  the  City  mobs  had 
done  for  Wilkes ;  but  the  Ambassador  had  the  prudence 
not  to  consent.  De  Guines  was  also  liked  by  the  King, 
who  had  hated  the  arrogance  of  his  predecessor  Du 
Chatelet,  and  the  contemptuous  coldness  of  his  wife.  The 
Due  d'Aiguillon,  it  is  true,  was  fallen  and  disgraced  ;  but 
Maurepas  and  Turgot  were  not  less  jealous  of  Choiseul, 
and  could  not  be  partial  to  so  devoted  an  adherent  of 
his  as  De  Guines  was.  Public  reasons  augmented  their 
private  animosity.  De  Guines,  a  civil,  complaisant,  and 
showy  man,  was  no  genius.  In  our  posture  with  America 
he  was  neither  active  enough  to  procure  the  best  intelli- 
gence, nor  enough  ill-disposed  to  England  to  represent 
our  difficulties  in  the  strongest  light.  Should  France  be 
inclined,  while  she  lulled  us  asleep  by  taking  no  open  part 
for  the  Colonies,  to  take  advantage  of  our  difficulties  by 
extorting  concessions  from  our  weakness,  De  Guines,  so 
espoused  and  adopted  here,  was  more  likely  to  soften  any 
harsh  message  than  deliver  it  in  its  crude  terms.  It  was 
said  that  he  had  received  many  hints  from  his  Court  that 
they  wished  to  recall  him,  but,  as  if  persisting  in  staying 
had  been  sufficient  to  keep  him  here,  he  had  shut  his  eyes 
to  his  situation,  and  received  the  blow  with  as  much 
despair  as  if  he  had  had  no  reason  to  expect  it.  Our 
Court  chose  to  be  as  wilfully  blind,  though  no  notice  had 
been  taken  to  Lord  Stormont,  our  Ambassador  at  Paris, 
of  the  recall  of  De  Guines  ;  nor  would  they  apprehend  any 

^  The  custom  of  visiting  by  cards  had  been  recently  adopted  in  France  by 
persons  of  fashion.  It  was  at  first  laughed  at  by  the  more  punctilious  people 
as  at  once  a  lazy  and  an  impudent  habit, — but  the  mode  prevailed.  I 
think  it  is  the  Baroness  d'Oberkirch  who  records  in  her  Memoirs,  that,  when 
a  person  left  a  card  at  a  friend's  house,  such  a  visit  was  called  a  "  visite  en 
blanc."— D. 


1776]  RELATIONS   WITH   FRANCE  S^i 

sinister  designs  from  that  quarter,  though  no  successor 
was  named,  and  though  Gamier,  the  Charge  d'Afifaires,  a 
known  enemy  of  De  Guines,  and  much  more  able,  was 
ordered  to  hire  a  house,  which  did  not  imply  the  sudden 
arrival  of  any  Ambassador.  The  Court  of  France  had 
even  invited  Monsieur  Frances  to  return  hither ;  but  he, 
attached  to  Monsieur  du  Chatelet,  and  formerly  to  Choiseul, 
was  suspected  of  being  so  little  favourable  to  M.  de  Guines 
in  his  suit  with  Tort,  having  been  still  here  at  the  time 
of  the  latter's  transactions,  that  he  excused  himself  from 
accepting  the  employment.  Frances,  a  man  of  middling 
birth,  was  exceedingly  shrewd,  and  perhaps  better  ac- 
quainted with  this  country  than  any  Frenchman  living. 
Before  his  appearance  as  Du  Chatelet's  confidential  secre- 
tary, he  had  privately,  obscurely,  and  unknown,  resided 
here  three  years  in  the  City,  and  by  that  time  had  made 
himself  perfectly  master  of  our  language  and  affairs.  Still 
did  not  these  unpromising  appearances  startle  Lord  Mans- 
field ?  No.  He  was  determined  the  house  of  Brunswick 
should  throw  itself  like  the  house  of  Stuart  on  the  gener- 
osity of  the  Bourbons,  and  purchase  countenance  to  the 
schemes  of  enslaving  England  by  the  sacrifice  of  England's 
honour  and  interests.  France  was  so  gracious  as  not  to 
thwart  his  views,  when  they  held  out  to  her  the  ruin  of  our 
trade,  credit,  and  marine. 

ird.  Lord  Howe  was  appointed  Chief  Admiral  in 
America,  and  had  been  designed  for  sole  Commissioner 
for  Peace  ;  but  the  Court  had  now  no  thoughts  of  treating 
with  the  Americans,  whom  it  was  determined  to  subdue 
by  force.  It  had  been  for  some  time  uncertain  whether 
Lord  Howe  would  accept  either  command — nay,  whether 
he  would  not  resign  all  his  employments. 

Admiral  Keppel,  the  friend  and  legatee  of  Admiral 
Saunders,  carried  the  latter's  red  riband  to  the  King.  His 
Majesty,  as  great  a  flatterer  as  any  of  his  own  flatterers, 
kept  Keppel,  though  in  Opposition,  long  in  the  closet,  yet 


522     Last  journals  of  Horace  walpole  [Feb. 

said  not  a  word  of  so  meritorious  a  hero  as  Saunders,  who 
had  died  in  Opposition.  Keppel,  provoked,  said  at  last, 
"  Your  Majesty  has  lost  a  most  brave  and  loyal  subject." 
The  King,  with  great  quickness,  answered,  "  I  do  not  miss 
him  while  I  have  a  Keppel."  Keppel  himself,  offended  at 
the  promotion  of  PalHser,  one  of  the  youngest  Admirals, 
reproached  Lord  Sandwich,  by  letters,  with  the  preference 
in  very  unmeasured  terms ;  but  Sandwich  was  not  a  man 
to  encounter  a  rough  seaman.  It  will  be  seen  here  after- 
wards how  Sandwich  and  Palliser  returned  Keppel's  ob- 
jections. 

On  the  death  of  Sir  Charles  Saunders,  at  the  end  of  the 
preceding  year.  Lord  Sandwich  slightly  asked  Lord  North 
whether  he  had  any  objection  to  Admiral  Palliser  succeed- 
ing Sir  Charles  as  Lieutenant-General  of  the  Marines. 
Lord  North,  forgetting  that  he  had  promised  Lord  Howe 
should  succeed  Saunders,  replied,  "  No."  Lord  Sandwich, 
who  loved  expedition,  and  cunning  more,  carried  Palliser 
immediately  to  kiss  the  King's  hand.  Lord  Howe,  dis- 
appointed and  affronted,  came  to  town,  and,  meeting  Lord 
North  in  the  House  of  Commons,  told  him  he  should  wait 
on  the  King  the  next  day.  "  On  what  account "  ?  asked 
Lord  North.  "  To  resign  all  my  employments,  on  your 
Lordship's  breaking  your  promise  to  me  of  the  Marines," 
said  Lord  Howe ;  "  and  I  flatter  myself  my  brother  the 
General  (at  Boston)  will  resign  too,  when  he  hears  how  I 
have  been  used."  Lord  North,  in  a  great  fright,  pleaded 
that  his  mind  was  so  occupied  by  America  that  he  had 
forgotten  his  promise,  and  besought  the  angry  Lord  to 
defer  his  purpose.  Lord  George  Germaine  joined  them, 
and  they  did  prevail :  that  is,  Lord  Howe  suspended 
his  resentment  for  six  weeks,  waiting  to  be  pacified  by 
some  more  lucrative  offer.  Lord  North  tempted  Admiral 
Forbes,  General  of  the  Marines,  to  resign  that  post  to 
Lord  Howe,  in  consideration  of  a  pension  of  2000/.  a-year; 
but  Forbes  was  stout,  and  at  last  the  naval  command  in 


1776]  APPOINTMENT   OF   LORD   HOWE  523 

America  was  given  as  a  compensation  to  Lord  Howe,  at 
the  expense  of  Admiral  Shuldham,  another  friend  and 
favourite  of  Lord  Sandwich,  who  was  thus  punished  for  his 
dexterous  industry.  Lord  Howe,  like  all  the  Howes,  was 
intrepidity  itself  His  parts  were  below  moderate;  his 
interestedness  notorious  by  this  and  his  ingratitude  to 
Lord  Chatham. 

If  the  King  in  the  prosecution  of  the  civil  war  met  with 
brave  and  zealous  servants,  they  took  care  to  be  well  paid 
for  their  loyalty.  General  Burgoyne  had  left  Boston, 
not  much  to  his  credit  nor  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Court, 
when,  by  the  departure  of  General  Clinton  with  a  detach- 
ment for  the  southern  colonies,  Boston  was  left  so  ill- 
officered  by  men  of  experience,  that  had  General  Howe 
died  or  been  killed,  the  command  must  have  devolved  on 
the  raw  Lord  Percy.^  Burgoyne,  on  his  arrival,  had  been 
very  communicative  of  complaints,  even  to  Charles  Fox 
and  the  Opposition,  for  Burgoyne  knew  the  Ministers,  and 
probably  the  Opposition  too ;  for  had  the  latter  had  any 
activity  they  would  have  questioned  him  in  Parliament 
before  the  Court  had  had  time  to  buy  off  his  affected 
dissatisfaction.  But  before  there  was  a  single  question 
started  in  the  House  of  Commons,  Burgoyne's  rank  and 
pay  were  raised,  fifteen  men  added  to  each  company  of 
his  regiment  (all  to  his  profit),  and  four  cornetcies  given 
to  him  to  sell ;  besides  an  extraordinary  promotion  for  his 
wife's  nephew,  Mr.  Stanley,^  which  was  stopped  by  the 
Secretary  of  War's^  partiality  to  Captain  Stanhope,  Lady 
Harrington's  son,  over  whose  head  Stanley  would  have 
stepped.  After  these  favours,  nobody  more  reserved 
than  General  Burgoyne  on  any  mention  of  America  in 
Parliament.     In  April  he  sailed  for  Quebec. 

There  arrived  from  Boston  another  commander,  whom 

^  Eldest  son  of  the  Duke  of  Northumberland. 

"  And  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Derby,  nephew  of  Lady  Charlotte  Burgoyne. 

^  Lord  Barrington,  attached  to  Lady  Harrington. 


524       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

the  Administration  had  loudly  threatened  to  treat  in  a 
very  different  manner  ;  to  whom,  if  not  equally  bounteous, 
they  behaved  at  least  as  mildly,  and  about  whom  the 
soporific  Opposition  were  as  silent  as  the  Ministers  could 
wish.  This  was  Admiral  Greaves ;  he  had  borne  insults 
ill-suiting  the  spirit  of  a  military  man.  He  had  been 
recalled  with  ignominy,  and  the  Ministers  had  menaced 
to  make  a  second  Admiral  Byng  of  him,  that  is,  a  sacrifice 
to  palliate  their  own  inactivity.  But  finding  how  little 
either  the  nation  or  the  Opposition  clamoured  on  so 
disgraceful  a  campaign,  they  did  not  choose  to  open  any 
sores,  and  not  a  word  of  complaint  was  uttered  to  or  of 
Greaves.  He  to  his  friends  lamented  his  situation  and 
disgrace,  declared  he  had  asked  what  were  his  crimes, 
and  affirmed  that  he  had  not  only  orders  in  writing  to 
justify  all  he  had  done,  but  had  previously  on  his  own 
judgment  executed  many  actions  for  which  he  had  after- 
wards received  orders.  However,  as  he  was  not  clamorous 
on  his  disgrace,  nor  asked  for  a  trial,  he  was  either  con- 
scious of  something  blameworthy,  or  hoped  to  be  indemni- 
fied like  Howe  and  Burgoyne.  General  Gage  was  here 
in  the  same  equivocal  situation.  Posterity  will  scarce 
believe  such  lethargy;  but  the  facts  I  have  related  may 
be  ascertained  both  by  what  was  done  and  what  was  not 
done.  London  was  sunk  in  pleasure  and  dissipation, 
and  governed  by  Scotch  emissaries.  Macpherson,  the 
Ossianite,  had  a  pension  of  600/.  a-year  from  the  Court, 
to  supervise  the  newspapers,  and  prevent  the  publication 
of  truth  or  satire.  The  Opposition  was  incapable,  inac- 
tive, and  borne  down  by  the  torrent.  The  manufacturers 
had  not  yet  suffered  by  loss  of  trade  as  the  friends  of 
America  had  foretold  and  expected.  The  country  was 
governed  by  Tory  country  gentlemen,  and  they  by  the 
clergy ;  and  the  Government  concealed  news,  and  suffered 
no  advices  from  America  to  transpire,  so  that  as  yet  the 
war  was  neither  felt  nor  thought  of. 


1776]  STATE   OF   GOVERNMENT  525 

On  the  ^th  came  an  account  of  the  Duchess  of  Glou- 
cester being  delivered  at  Rome  of  a  prince  who  was 
christened  by  the  name  of  William-Frederick,  the  Duke 
and  Duchess  of  Saxe  Gotha,  and  the  Margrave  of  Ans- 
pach,  all  then  at  Rome,  being  sponsors.^  The  appearance 
of  these  princes  was  fortunate  and  creditable  ;  their  pre- 
sence silenced  the  malice  of  the  Court ;  and  the  King, 
who  probably  disliked  his  mother's  nephew  lending  him- 
self as  godfather,  had  drawn  this  mortification  on  himself 
by  having  on  the  death  of  the  Princess  of  Wales  with- 
drawn the  pension  she  paid  to  the  Court  of  Saxe  Gotha. 
I  have  mentioned  in  the  former  year  that  the  Duke  and 
Duchess  of  Gloucester  had  left  England  the  last  autumn, 
for  the  Duke's  health,  from  the  distress  of  his  finances, 
and  worn  out  by  the  persecutions  of  the  Court,  which  had 
been  carried  so  far,  that  officers  from  other  regiments  were 
continually  preferred  to  those  in  the  Duke's  own.  When 
Lord  Rochford,  before  they  set  out,  asked  the  Duke 
whither  he  was  going,  he  replied  with  equal  sense,  spirit, 
and  severity,  "  To  Rome,  my  Lord,  the  only  place^ 
where  the  Pretender  and  I  can  live."  In  France  they  were 
received  with  the  most  distinguished  honours  by  order  of 
that  Court ;  the  King  himself  invited  them  to  Versailles, 
which  the  Duke,  out  of  decency  to  his  brother,  declined. 
At  Metz,  where  the  troops  were  reviewed  for  them,  M.  de 
Castries,   the    commanding    officer,   asking   the    Duchess 

1  This  prince,  who  was  born  at  Rome,  January  15,  1776,  was  christened 
by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Salter.  He  succeeded  his  father  in  1805.  He  was  a  good, 
amiable,  and  honest  man,  but  it  was  too  much  the  fashion  to  ridicule  him 
because  his  intellect  was  not  as  strong  as  his  virtues.  He  served  creditably 
in  Flanders.  Parliament  made  him  a  settlement  of  14,000/.  a  year,  and  he 
lived  under  his  income.  His  marriage  in  18 16  with  the  Princess  Mary, 
fourth  daughter  of  George  III.,  who  died  in  1857,  was  the  result  of  a  long 
and  mutual  attachment.  He  was  charitable  with,  as  well  as  careful  of,  his 
money,  and  he  left  his  widow,  on  his  death  at  Bagshot  in  1834,  90,000/.  as 
provision.  He  was  buried  in  his  military  uniform,  and  wearing  on  his  finger  a 
ring  which  had  been  an  early  love-gift  to  him  from  the  Princess  whom  he 
married. — D.     See  introduction  No.  i — A.  F.  S. 

2  The  Duke  could  not  go  to  any  other  capital,  as  the  King's  Ambassadors 
were  not  allowed  to  pay  their  duty  to  him. 


526       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

who  were  Knights  of  the  Garter,  and  she  naming  Lord 
North,  he  said,  "  Pourquoi  I'a-t-il,  lui  ?  est-ce  pour  avoir 
perdu  TAmerique?"  The  Duke  of  Wirtemberg  and  the 
senate  of  Venice  paid  them  no  less  respect.  The  Pope 
was  as  full  of  attentions,  and  borrowed  a  palace  for  them  ; 
but  before  they  arrived  at  Rome  the  Duke  was  at  the 
point  of  death  at  Padua  with  his  old  complaint ;  and  the 
Duchess,  with  child,  exhausted  by  the  fatigue  of  travelling 
and  by  sitting  up  to  watch  him,  was  near  accompanying 
him,  but,  thank  God  !  both  recovered.  The  young  prince, 
as  the  Duchess  wrote  to  me,  was  not  so  promising  a  child 
as  the  Princess  Sophia ;  "  but,  considering  what  I  suffered 
for  four  months,"  said  the  Duchess,  "  I  wonder  he  is  any 
child  at  all." 

About  this  time  accounts  came  from  New  York  that 
overturned  the  triumphs  which  the  Ministers  and  the 
Scotch  had  so  ridiculously  coined  for  Lord  Dunmore. 
The  Virginians  had  entirely  demolished  his  diminutive 
army,  and  obliged  him  to  take  refuge  on  board  a  man-of- 
war  off  the  town  of  Norfolk.  It  was  the  more  disgraceful 
to  the  Earl,  as  he  had  sacrificed  the  men  of  a  very  brave 
regiment  (General  Keppel's)  in  an  unequal  engagement 
with  a  much  superior  force,  and  had  not  risked  his  own 
person. 

On  the  Zth  the  stocks  fell  on  the  report  of  a  French 
fleet  assembled  at  Toulon  ;  but  it  was  without  foundation. 

i^th.  The  Opposition  opened  the  Parliamentary  cam- 
paign with  a  motion  from  Thomas  Townshend  jun.,  which 
he  had  promised  before  Christmas.  It  was  for  a  com- 
mittee to  inquire  into  the  insult  offered  to  the  English 
House  of  Commons,  by  the  message  to  that  of  Ireland,  in 
which,  without  any  authority  from  the  former,  the  Govern- 
ment engaged  England  should  pay  for  whatever  troops 
Ireland  should  demand  in  lieu  of  those  to  be  drawn  thence 
for  the  American  service.  Lord  North  denied  that  any 
such   message   had  been  sent  hence ;   but  Lord  George 


1776]  VICTORY   OF   THE   VIRGINIANS  527 

Germaine,  who  despised  Sir  John  Blaquiere,  and  did  not 
love  Lord  Harcourt,^  and  was  not  unwilling  to  censure 
whatever  had  been  done  before  he  came  into  power,  did 
not  spare  the  Irish  Ministers ;  at  the  same  time  marking 
his  ardour  of  pursuing  the  war  at  any  rate,  for  he  declared 
that  it  was  worth  while  to  pay  for  8000  men,  rather  than 
not  get  4000.     The  motion  was  rejected  by  224  to  106. 

At  this  moment,  when  the  Court  feared,  and  everybody 
expected  to  hear,  that  Quebec  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of 
the  Provincials,  advice  was  received  from  Boston,  carried 
thither  by  two  deserters,  that  the  town  having  been 
stormed,  and  on  the  point  of  being  taken.  General  Mont- 
gomery had  been  killed,  and  the  Provincial  army  beaten 
off.  Colonel  Arnold  was  said  to  be  taken  prisoner ;  but 
the  river  St.  Lawrence  being  frozen,  no  certain  account 
could  be  obtained  for  many  weeks ;  though,  by  all  that 
could  be  collected  from  other  quarters,  the  death  of 
Montgomery  was  generally  believed.  The  safety  of  Que- 
bec raised  the  spirits  of  the  Court  greatly.  The  plan  of 
Lord  George  Germaine  had  uniformly  been  to  pour  an 
army  from  Quebec  on  the  back  of  the  colonies ;  and  he 
had  resumed  that  purpose  with  all  his  activity,  the  Hes- 
sians being  immediately  destined  to  that  service ;  and  an 
attempt  meditated  against  the  southern  colonies,  under 
General  Clinton,  was  now  diverted  to  the  succour  of 
Quebec,  and  General  Burgoyne,  instead  of  returning  to 
Boston,  was  ordered  to  take  the  command  of  that  force  and 
endeavour  to  lead  it  to  Quebec.  Still,  so  little  was  the 
Court  assured  of  the  miscarriage  before,  and  so  ridiculous 
had  they  been  made  by  the  falsities  they  had  published 
in  favour  of  Lord  Dun  more,  that  they  did  not  venture 
to  mention  the  defeat  and  death  of  Montgomery  at 
Quebec.  They  did  not  even  do  justice  to  the  defence 
made  by  General  Carleton  ;  and  Lord  George  Germaine, 

^  Lord  Harcourt  had  refused  to  let  three  reginients  go  from  Ireland,  and 
had  threatened  to  resign  if  they  were  taken  thence. 


528       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

who  hated  him  as  one  who,  by  his  friendship  with  the 
Duke  of  Richmond,  and  by  his  own  firmness,  he  concluded 
or  knew,  was  not  favourable  to  his  Lordship  on  the  affair 
of  Minden,  took  this  very  moment  to  put  a  signal  affront  on 
the  Commander  at  Quebec.  Carleton,  in  his  last  letters 
thence,  had  begged  that,  if  his  Majesty  approved  of  his 
services  there,  he  would  appoint  his  brother  Major  Carle- 
ton  his  Quartermaster- General.  The  latter  had  cited 
his  brother's  recommendation  to  Lord  Barrington,  the 
Secretary  at  War,  who  had  obtained  the  King's  consent, 
and  had  acquainted  Carleton  with  his  promotion.  Yet 
Lord  George  Germaine  ravished  this  honour  from  him, 
and  insisted  on  its  being  conferred  on  one  Christie,  an 
obscure  Scot,  offering  Major  Carleton  the  post  of  Ad- 
jutant-General. This  the  Major  sturdily  rejected — yet  set 
off  to  join  his  brother ;  but  at  the  King's  levee,  when  he 
kissed  hands  on  his  departure,  and  the  King  asked  him 
when  he  should  set  out,  he  replied  audibly,  "  To-morrow, 
Sir ;  and  I  go  the  most  injured  of  your  Majesty's  sub- 
jects." 

20th.  Sir  Stephen  Theodore  Jansen  having  resigned  the 
office  of  Chamberlain  of  the  City  of  London,  Wilkes,  who 
had  long  eyed  that  post  with  ambition,  presented  himself 
as  candidate  for  it.  His  enemies,  both  at  Court  and  in 
the  City,  supported  one  Hopkins  against  him  ;  and  Wilkes, 
too  confident  of  his  popularity — now  grown  a  little 
obsolete — neglecting  to  push  his  solicitations  with  vigour, 
lost  it,  both  on  the  poll  and  on  a  scrutiny  that  he  demanded  ; 
yet,  as  it  is  an  annual  office,  though  the  incumbent 
seldom  laid  aside,  he  declared  he  would  stand  for  it  again 
at  Midsummer. 

On  the  20th  Charles  Fox  made  a  motion  in  the  House 
of  Commons  for  inquiring  into  the  ill-success  of  the  King's 
arms  in  America,  and  laid  open  all  the  boasts,  blunders, 
and  disgraces  of  the  Administration  ;  as  Barre  did,  still 
more  severely,  with  much  irony  on  Lord  George  Germaine, 


1776]  PAMPHLETS   IN   AMERICA  529 

whom  he  called  the  Pitt  of  the  day.  Lord  Ossory  ^  and 
Richard  Fitzpatrick,  nephews  of  Earl  Gower,  but 
intimately  connected  with  Charles  Fox,^  both  spoke 
well  in  Opposition  for  the  first  time  ;  Lord  Mulgrave  ^ 
as  warmly  for  all  the  measures  he  had  used  to  condemn. 
Lord  Clare  moved  the  previous  question,  and,  after  a 
debate^  that  lasted  till  three  in  the  morning,  the  motion 
was  rejected  by  240  to  104.  Adam,  a  Scot,  spoke  and 
voted  with  the  minority. 

At  the  end  of  the  month  was  published  a  pamphlet  that 
made  a  great  sensation.  It  was  called  '  An  Essay  on 
Civil  Liberty,'  and  was  written  by  Dr.  Price,^  a  Dissenter, 
strongly  connected  with  Lord  Shelburne.  It  was  a  defence 
of  the  Americans,  and  maintained  the  improbability  of 
subduing  them.  But  the  part  that  hurt  Administration 
was  the  alarm  it  gave  to  the  proprietors  of  the  funds  by 
laying  open  the  danger  to  which  they  were  exposed  by 
ruinous  measures  of  the  Court.  I  think  this  was  the  first 
publication  on  that  side  that  made  any  impression.     All 

^  John  Fitzpatrick,  second  Earl  of  Upper  Ossory. 

"^  Stephen  Fox,  Lord  Holland,  elder  brother  of  Charles,  had  married  Lady 
Mary,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Upper  Ossory. 

^  Phipps,  second  Lord  Mulgrave. 

*  See  a  good  account  of  this  debate  in  the  **  London  Chronicle"  of  Feb.  24, 
1776. 

^  If  there  be  any  readers  of  the  present  day  who  are  acquainted  with 
Mrs.  Chapour,  they  will  remember  in  her  Miscellanies  a  certain  "  Simplicius," 
— the  original  of  which  was  Dr.  Price.  This  eminent  Dissenter  began  life  by 
dividing  the  small  fortune  which  he  inherited  from  his  father,  a  Welsh  minister, 
between  his  sisters,  and  raised  a  fortune  to  himself  by  his  abihty  and  industry. 
He  was  perhaps  the  author  of  more  pamphlets  than  any  writer  yet  known. 
They  were  on  overy  subject,  moral,  social,  political,  religious,  philosophical ; 
and  there  was  scarcely  one  that  did  not  exhibit  high  qualities  rarely  found  in 
such  productions.  The  pamphlet  mentioned  in  the  text  was  the  one  by  which 
he  acquired  the  greatest  reputation,  and  very  various  honours.  In  two  years 
it  went  through  eight  editions,  and  gave  rise  to  very  virulent  controversy. 
Pitt's  plan  for  reducing  the  national  debt  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  three 
submitted  to  him  by  Dr.  Price.  The  extreme  satisfaction  with  which  the 
latter  greeted  the  French  revolution  brought  down  upon  him  the  mingled 
contempt,  sarcasm,  and  wrath  of  Burke,  who  almost  called  him  assassin,  and 
who  clearly  accounted  him  a  fool.  The  Doctor  really  hated  nothing  but  cards, 
and  yet,  to  gratify  his  wife,  who  suffered  acutely  from  ill  health,  and  found  no 
solace  but  in  a  rubber,  he  sat  down  cheerfully  to  whist  every  night.  Dr.  Price 
died  in  1791,  in  the  69th  year  of  his  age. — D. 

I.— 2  M 


530       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Feb. 

the  hireling  writers  were  employed  to  answer.  The  author 
was  complimented  with  the  freedom  of  the  City,  and  it 
was  thought  some  complaint  would  be  made  from  that 
quarter  of  the  manoeuvres  of  the  Bank.  Indeed  the 
Directors  of  the  Bank  grew  more  reserved  in  furthering 
the  jobs  of  Administration.  The  Earl  of  Stair,^  an 
honest  Scot,  enthusiastic  in  the  cause  of  America,  pub- 
lished soon  afterwards  another  tract  on  the  impossibility 
of  supporting  the  expense  of  the  war,  which  for  the 
present  year  was  calculated  at  five  millions. 

^  John,  5th  Earl.  His  story  belongs  to  the  romance  of  the  Peerage.  John, 
the  2nd  Earl,  the  Field-Marshal  and  Commander-in-Chief,  surrendered  his 
titles  to  the  Crown  in  1707.  A  new  charter,  then  obtained,  authorised  him, 
in  default  of  heirs  male,  to  nominate  to  the  succession  of  his  titles  and  estates 
any  direct  descendent  of  the  first  Viscount  Stair,  who  died  in  1695,  and  who 
was  this  John's  grandfather.  Now  this  Earl  John,  finding  himself  childless, 
and  having  had  two  brothers,  William  and  George,  nominated  in  1747  his  name- 
sake John,  son  of  the  younger  brother,  as  his  successor.  The  charter  had  stated 
that,  if  he  failed  to  nominate,  the  titles  and  estates  should  pass  to  the  second 
son  of  the  elder  brother  William.  This  second  son,  named  James,  claimed 
and  obtained  the  title,  as  if  there  had  been  no  nomination  under  the  charter. 
He  died  without  issue  in  1760,  and  was  then  succeeded  by  his  own  elder  brother 
William,  who  also  dying  without  issue  in  1768,  the  title  and  estates  then  fell 
to  his  cousin — that  very  [ohn  whom  the  second  Earl  (in  1747)  had  declared 
should  be  his  heir,  and  who  continued  to  enjoy  both  till  his  death  in  1789. — D. 


1776] 


MARCH 

ADVICE  came  that  Lord  Dunmore,  after  his 
/%        defeat,  had    burnt  the    town   of   Norfolk    in 

/ — %  Virginia.  Other  accounts  said  that  the  Pro- 
-^       -■^   vincials  had  set  fire  to  it  themselves. 

On  the  5/"/^  the  Duke  of  Richmond  moved  the  House  of 
Lords  to  address  the  King  to  countermand  the  foreign 
troops  going  to  America,  to  stop  the  farther  effusion  of 
blood,  and  put  an  end  to  hostilities.  This  motion,  after 
a  long  debate,  was  rejected  by  lOO  to  32.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond,  amongst  other  severities,  said  (alluding  to  the 
King)  that  the  spirit  which  governed  the  Cabinet  was 
weak,  ignorant,  and  obstinate.  Lord  Shelburne  made  a 
great  figure  in  that  debate ;  and  even  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland  spoke  against  the  war  and  the  foreign  troops, 
lamenting,  with  much  emotion,  that  the  troops  of  Bruns- 
wick, which  had  always  fought  for  liberty,  should  be 
employed  on  the  other  side.  "  But,  my  Lords,"  said  the 
Prince,  "  I  grow  warm,  and  will  say  no  more."  Lord 
Temple  made  so  obscure  a  speech,  though  with  strong 
imputations  on  the  inefficiencies  and  inability  of  the 
Ministers,  that,  though  he  did  not  vote,  it  was  under- 
stood as  declaring  for  the  prosecution  of  the  war :  it  was 
so  reported  to  Lord  Chatham,  and  even  as  if  Lord 
Temple  had  declared  that  Lord  was  of  the  same  opinion. 
The  newspapers  declared  it  was  with  Lord  Chatham's 
concurrence,  which  obliged  both  those  Lords  to  contradict 
the  report  of  either  favouring  the  war.  Lord  Chatham 
went  farther,  and  ordered  his  wife  to  write  a  letter  disavow- 
ing those  sentiments  in  his  name.     Lord  Temple  himself, 

531 


532    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

who  very  few  days  before  had  told  me  he  would  not 
attend  the  House  of  Lords,  came  to  me  to  explain  his 
motives,  and  said  he  had  been  forced  to  go  thither  to  dis- 
avow his  nephew,  George  Grenville,  who  had  been  drawn 
in  (by  Lord  George  Germaine)  to  declare  too  roundly 
against  America.  Lord  Sandwich,  in  the  same  debate, 
amidst  many  false  assertions,  particularly  in  excusing  the 
burning  of  Norfolk,  said  he  would  tell  the  House  how  it 
happened,  if  Norfolk  really  had  been  burnt — it  was  being 
prompt  at  excuses,  to  say  he  knew  how  an  affair  had 
happened,  which  he  did  not  know  whether  it  happened  or 
not. 

It  was  in  the  debate  on  the  foreign  troops  that  George 
Grenville  had  spoken  and  voted  against  the  Americans; 
but  as  I  was  very  ill  the  beginning  of  this  year,  my  notes 
on  the  three  first  months  are  very  imperfect.  They  may 
be  well  supplied  from  the  "  London  Chronicle."  On  the 
debate  for  the  foreign  troops.  General  Conway  dis- 
tinguished his  abilities  and  spirit  in  the  highest  manner, 
and  sorely  wounded  Lord  North  by  reproaching  him  with 
the  treachery  to  the  Americans  after  the  promises  made 
to  them  by  Lord  Hillsborough's  letter.  In  one  of  those 
debates  it  came  out  that  Colonel  Dalrymple,  nephew  of 
the  infamous  historian  Sir  John,  had  been  raising  Roman 
Catholics  in  Ireland  for  the  King's  service,  and  had  been 
assisted  by  the  Popish  Archbishop  of  Tuam.  This,  if 
there  had  been  no  other  key  to  Sir  John  Dalrymple's 
principles,  explained  why  he  had  traduced  the  great 
Algernon  Sydney! 

There  were  other  good  debates  in  the  Commons  on  the 
gth  and  \ith.  In  the  latter,  Charles  Fox  made  a  pane- 
gyric on  General  Montgomery  (who  had  borne  a  most 
excellent  character),  and  reproached  the  Administration 
with  having  lost,  by  ill-treatment,  so  amiable  a  man — a 
man  distinguished  by  the  friendship  and  esteem  of 
General  Wolfe.     Lord  North  confessed  the  bravery  and 


1776]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  533 

virtues  of  Montgomery,  but  said  still  he  had  fallen  in 
rebellion.  Barre  took  this  up  with  warmth,  and  said  that 
while  Fox  had  been  speaking  he  had  heard  a  sort  of 
sneering  laugh :  he  wished  he  knew  from  whom  it  came, 
he  would  never  keep  company  with  the  wretches  that 
were  capable  of  it.  Lord  North  on  this  occasion  behaved 
with  decency.  Commonly  he  treated  most  subjects  with 
ridicule,  and  this  winter  was  more  than  ever  cried  up  for 
his  wit.  It  was  on  the  Hessian  question,  mentioned 
above,  that  Lord  North  spoke  with  so  much  wit.  Burke 
answered  him  extempore  with  scarce  inferior  wit.  Mr. 
Elliot,  of  Port  Elliot,  a  Lord  of  Trade,  voted  with  the 
minority,  and  soon  after  resigned  his  employment.  How- 
ever the  nation  in  general  was  prejudiced  against  the 
Americans,  it  appeared  that  there  were  enthusiasts  also 
on  the  other  side.  Mr.  Elliot  was  descended  from  Sir 
John  Elliot,  imprisoned  in  the  Tower  by  Charles  I.  A 
country  gentleman,  dining  with  Mr.  Elliot  at  his  house  in 
Cornwall,  where  hung  a  picture  of  his  ancestor  in  the 
Tower,  said,  "  I  hope  soon  to  see  you  in  the  same  situa- 
tion ! "  A  civil  war,  in  which  Lord  North  had  been  so 
deep  an  actor,  and,  to  his  disgrace,  an  instrument,  and  an 
unsuccessful  one,  was  no  very  decent  season  for  buffoonery. 
Burke  compared  him  with  George  Selwyn,  and  said  they 
were  the  capital  wits  of  the  age — the  one  in  public,  the 
other  in  private  company.  Burke  himself  always  aimed 
at  wit,  but  was  not  equally  happy  in  public  and  private. 
In  the  former  nothing  was  so  luminous,  so  striking,  so 
abundant ;  in  private  it  was  forced,  unnatural,  and  bom- 
bast. Lord  North  had  more  humour  than  wit,  though 
rarely  deficient  in  the  latter.  But  the  best  bon  mot  of  the 
winter  fell  from  Wilkes,  in  an  ironic  speech  on  Lord 
George  Germaine :  he  said  the  noble  Lord  might  conquer 
America,  but  he  believed  it  would  not  be  in  Germany.  That 
rhodomontade  of  Lord  Chatham  had  been  so  often  applied 
that  it  seemed  difficult  to  allude  to  it  with  novelty  any 


534    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [March 

more.  Lord  George,  whose  insolence  bore  him  up  above 
all  his  disgraces,  repeated  this  sarcasm  on  himself  in 
Council,  and  commended  it.  He  carried  this  overbearing 
humour  yet  higher.  Complaining  to  the  King  of  the 
neglects  and  dilatoriness  of  the  Admiralty  and  Ministry, 
and  of  the  badness  of  the  transports,  he  said,  "  But  I  must 
say,  Sir,  that  the  two  heaviest  and  worst  sailers  are  the 
King  George  and  the  Lord  North  ; "  and  he  bragged  of 
having  said  this.  If  ever  he  falls  into  disgrace,  the  King 
will  remember  it. 

It  was  fact :  the  transports  were  not  only  bad  and  ill- 
manned,  but  so  little  care  and  thought  had  been  had  for 
providing  them,  that  even  at  the  end  of  April  not  half  the 
number  were  provided.  The  Brunswick  troops,  the  first 
of  the  foreign  mercenaries,  did  not  sail  before  the  4th  of 
April,  and  the  first  division  of  Hessians  did  not  arrive  at 
Portsmouth  before  the  24th.  The  Administration  had 
reckoned  on  having  an  army  of  50,000  men  in  America 
by  the  opening  of  the  campaign  ;  and  had  loudly  talked  of 
completing  the  conquest  in  one  summer.  It  was  now  plain 
that  they  would  not  be  able  to  take  the  field  before  the  end 
of  June  at  soonest,  when  the  heats  would  make  it  difficult 
to  act ;  but  these  boasts  had  been  no  less  given  out  to  im- 
pose on  the  Parliament  and  the  nation.  Now  the  lan- 
guage was  altered  ;  and  as  the  preparations  for  this  year 
were  made,  they  began  to  talk  of  doing  little  this  year — 
that  is,  disappointments  were  to  be  guarded  against,  and  a 
foundation  of  another  year's  profusion  prepared. 

lOth.  Dr.  Keppel,  Bishop  of  Exeter,  preached  before  the 
King.     He  (the  Bishop),  Shipley,  Law,  and  Hinchcliffe,^ 

^  Of  Shipley  and  Hinchcliffe  I  have  before  spoken.  Of  Law,  who  is  so 
much  better  known,  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  he  held  the  bishopric  of  Carlisle 
nineteen  years,  from  1768  to  1787,  when  he  died.  He  was  the  father  of  the 
Chief  Justice,  Lord  Ellenborough.  As  a  writer,  he  indulged  more  frequently 
in  parenthetical  observations  than  Lord  Clarendon  himself.  When  one  of 
his  works  was  passing  slowly  through  the  press  at  Carlisle,  the  Bishop  com- 
plained of  the  delay.  The  printer  excused  himself  on  the  ground  that  he  had 
been  compelled  to  stop  the  press  till  he  had  received  from  a  type-foundry  at 
Glasgow  a /^««^  of  parentheses. — D. 


1776]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  535 

were  the  only  prelates  professedly  in  Opposition.  The 
Bishop  of  Exeter  preached  against  the  dissipation  of  the 
age,  and  announced  the  judgments  that  would  follow  it. 
"  Have  they  not  already  fallen  on  us  ?  "  said  he.  "  Are 
we  not  engaged  in  a  fatal  civil  war  ?  And  give  me  leave 
to  add,"  continued  he,  "that,  if  the  sword  is  not  timely 
sheathed,  ruin  will  ensue  to  both  countries."  Lord  Den- 
bigh clamoured  against  that  sermon  even  to  the  Bishop  of 
London ;  yet  that  courtly  priest  was  so  true  to  his  own 
order,  that  he  defended  the  sermon,  as  becoming  a  bishop, 
even  against  the  sycophant,  who  replied,  "  But,  my  Lord, 
would  you  have  preached  it  ?  "  "I  cannot  say  I  would," 
said  Terrick. 

I4^y^.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  made  a  new  motion  for 
pacification  with  America,  and  stated  the  pacific  language  of 
Lord  Dartmouth,  and  the  warlike  tone  of  Lord  George  Ger- 
maine.  He  informed  the  House  too  that  two  French  agents 
were  actually  at  the  Congress  negotiating  with  the  Ameri- 
cans. This  was  enforced  by  Lord  Camden,  and  vaguely 
denied  only  by  Lord  Weymouth.  Lord  Sandwich  as  usual 
denied  and  asserted  whatever  came  into  his  head;  the  Duke 
of  Richmond  lashed  the  Bishops  for  their  unchristian  com- 
pliance with  bloody  measures ;  Lord  Shelburne  made  a 
great  figure ;  but  at  past  ten  at  night  the  motion  was  re- 
jected by  91  to  31. —  Vide  "  London  Chronicle." 

lyth.  Colonel  St.  Paul,  Charg6  d' Affaires  at  Paris, 
was  made  Minister  Plenipotentiary  there.  As  no  Am- 
bassador thence  was  named  in  the  room  of  Monsieur  De 
Guines,  it  looked  as  if  Lord  Stormont  was  not  to  remain 
at  Paris. 

22nd.  The  King  received  a  remonstrance  from  the  City 
against  the  war. 


[April 


APRIL 


\oth. 


A  PROVINCIAL  ship  that  had  been  going  to  a 
French  port  for  ammunition  was  betrayed  and 
brought  into  Bristol  by  the  mate,  who  not 
only  confirmed  this  friendly  intercourse  of  the 
Provincials  with  France  (before  Ministers  could  know  or 
stop  his  blabbing,  so  contrary  to  all  their  assertions),  but 
he  declared  (conformably  to  what  the  Duke  of  Grafton  and 
Lord  Camden  had  asserted)  that  two  French  noblemen  were 
then  at  the  Congress  negociating  with  the  Americans,  and 
that  the  two  negotiators  were  to  have  gone  back  to  France 
in  that  very  ship,  if  it  had  not  been  overloaded. 

\^th.  Began  the  trial  of  the  Duchess  of  Kingston.  It 
raised  great  clamour  against  the  Ecclesiastical  Court. 
22nd,  she  was  convicted,  but  dismissed  without  punish- 
ment, as  Lord  Mansfield  had  foretold.  Two  days  after 
she  retired  to  Calais,  to  prevent  receiving  a  writ  ne  exeat 
regnOy  which  was  issued  the  night  she  went.^ 

^  The  Duchess  declared  that  a  decree  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Court  had  not 
before  been  reversed  for  1425  years  !  When  the  Court  had  before  them 
the  question  of  her  early  marriage  with  the  Hon.  Augustus  Hervey,  it 
pronounced  that  '*the  parties,  as  far  as  appeared  to  them,  were  not 
legally  married,  and  that  Miss  Chudleigh  was  and  is  a  spinster,  free  to 
marry,  especially  as  regards  the  Hon.  Augustus  Hervey."  Contemporary 
statements  assert  that  the  witness  who  proved  the  marriage  before  the 
House  of  Lords  had,  at  the  time  of  the  inquiry  before  the  Ecclesiastical 
Court  (the  result  of  which  enabled  the  lady,  as  she  thought,  to  marry  the 
Duke  of  Kingston),  been  sent  down  to  Lincolnshire,  with  the  promise  of  a 
pension  of  20/.  a  year.  At  the  bar  of  the  House  of  Lords  the  Duchess,  on 
conviction,  pleaded  her  privilege  as  a  peeress,  which  was  allowed  ;  but  she  was 
told  that  her  privilege  would  not  screen  her  if  she  again  offended,  and  the 
crime  would  then  be  capital.  Her  privilege  also  to  be  tried  by  her  peers 
rested  on  the  ground  that  if  she  was  not  the  Duchess  of  Kingston  she  was 
Countess  of  Bristol,  her  first  husband  having  succeeded  the  title  in  1775- 
The  Duchess  died  in  1788.— D. 

536 


F.  Bartolozzi,  sailpt. 

THE    DUCHESS    OF    KINGSTON 

Frojii  the  collection  of  A .  M.  Broadlcy,  Esq. 


1776]  AMERICAN   AFFAIRS  537 

An  account  that  Jamaica,  alarmed  at  a  great  French 
force  in  those  seas,  had  arrayed  their  militia.  Ministers 
had  still  more  reason  to  tremble  for  the  East,  and  betrayed 
their  fears.  They  had  determined  to  leave  out  some  ob- 
noxious Directors  of  the  Company,  and  elect  others  more 
confidential,  with  a  view,  is  was  supposed,  of  engaging 
the  Company  at  the  price  of  two  or  three  millions  to  Go- 
vernment to  renew  their  Charter,  which  was  within  two 
years  of  expiration.  They  had  settled  this  new  list,  and 
used  all  their  art  and  industry  to  secure  success  :  but  on  the 
eve  of  the  election,  dropped  the  design,  and  left  in  the  old 
obnoxious  members,  who  must  have  known  whatever  bad 
news  had  come,  and  would  have  published  it  in  revenge,  if 
turned  out  of  the  Direction. 

Account  of  the  execution  of  Nuncomar  in  India. 

2Afth,  Lord  North  opened  the  Budget,  and  proposed 
additional  taxes  on  coaches,  dice  and  cards,  and  news- 
papers, and  a  tax  on  stage  coaches,  exempted  before. 
All  these  were  light,  and  were  approved,  yet  that  on  news- 
papers was  liable  to  suspicion.  Lord  North  denied  any 
danger  to  Jamaica,  vaunted  the  prosperous  state  of  the 
kingdom,  and  as  usual,  whatever  was  the  subject,  except  on 
danger  to  his  own  person,  he  treated  the  whole  with  mirth 
and  ridicule. 

2^th.  The  Lords  having  thrown  out  the  bill  that  in- 
demnified the  Ministers  who  had  advised  filling  Gibraltar 
and  Port  Mahon  with  foreign  troops,^  Sir  James  Lowther 
again  moved  for  a  resolution  against  that  measure,  but 
without  success. 

The  same  morning  the  Queen  was  brought  to  bed  of  an 
eleventh  child,  a  daughter.^ 

^  The  Ministers  had  never  desired  the  bill,  and  at  the  third  reading, 
Lord  Rockingham,  moving  to  have  it  thrown  out,  had  been  surprised  to 
find  himself  seconded  by  Lord  Weymouth  ;  and  nobody  saying  a  word  for 
the  bill,  it  was  lost. 

2  Mary,  who  married  the  son  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  born  this  same 
year,  in  i8i6,  and  died  in  1857. — D. 


538     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [April 

loth.  Wilkes  made  his  annual  motion  for  rescinding  the 
Middlesex  election.     It  was  rejected  by  i86  to  92. 

The  Ministers  had  been  infinitely  disappointed  of  a 
sufficient  number  of  transports.  For  the  Hessians  they 
had  procured  but  half  the  necessary  quantity ;  and  then 
the  Hessian  General  would  not  suffer  the  half  to  sail 
without  the  whole.  This  occasioned  so  long  delay,  that 
the  first  half  arrived  at  Portsmouth  but  in  the  last  week 
of  April ;  and  then  the  same  impediment  was  thrown  in 
the  way  by  the  Hessian  commander.  The  King  was 
forced  to  send  General  Harvey  to  Portsmouth,  and  it  was 
with  great  difficulty  Harvey  prevailed  for  their  sailing, 
the  King  taking  it  on  himself  to  justify  it  to  the  Land- 
grave. It  appeared  that  the  Ministers  must  have  had 
advice  of  the  very  bad  posture  of  their  affairs  in  America, 
though  they  pretended  to  have  received  the  contrary,  for 
now  all  was  changed,  and  the  Guards,  who  had  been 
detained  and  who  were  to  have  gone  to  Virginia  with  the 
Hessians,  were  now  ordered,  both  the  one  and  the  other, 
to  Boston.  The  Ministers  published  so  late  as  the  27th 
that  the  siege  of  Quebec  was  raised,  and  that  the  Congress 
had  reprimanded  Washington  for  not  attacking  Boston, 
and  said  he  had  excused  himself  on  having  but  1 5,000  men, 
and  those  ill-disciplined,  and  from  want  of  artillery.  Ge- 
neral Clinton  with  his  little  division  had  touched  at  New 
York,  but  had  not  stayed  there,  and  was  sailed  for  Virginia  ; 
and  since  that  it  was  known  that  General  Lee,  with  some 
thousand  men  and  expecting  more,  was  drawing  strong  lines 
round  that  place.  Whether  the  Ministers  believed  Quebec 
safe,  and  the  Provincial  army  at  Boston  weak,  or  whether 
they  despaired  of  the  first  and  feared  for  the  second, 
where  at  least  the  Royal  army  had  nothing  but  salt  provi- 
sions left,  the  Guards  and  the  Hessians  were  to  have  sailed 
for  Boston  on  the  2nd  of  May. 


1776] 


MAY 

2nd. 

THE  wind  turned  contrary,  and  that  very  morn- 
ing came  news  that  entirely  put  a  stop  to  the 
new  plan,  for  letters  arrived  that  General  Howe 
had  been  forced  to  abandon  Boston.  Five 
days  before,  the  Ministers  believed,  or  said  they  believed, 
that  the  Congress  had  reprimanded  General  Washington 
for  having  done  nothing ;  that  he  answered  he  had  but 
1 5,000  men,  ill-disciplined,  and  no  artillery ;  and  that  the 
Congress  had  admitted  his  excuse.  Now  the  Court 
affirmed  he  had  25,000  men.  They  at  Boston  were 
starving,  had  nothing  but  salt  provisions,  and  had  not  even 
received  any  news  from  England  since  October.  Washing- 
ton, either  knowing  their  situation,  or  that  the  Provincials 
were  more  exasperated  than  ever  on  hearing  of  the  intention 
of  sending  Russians  against  them,  and  of  the  Restraining 
Bill,  had  prepared  to  storm  the  town,  and  had  opened  a 
cannonade.  General  Howe  in  despair  resolved  to  attack 
their  army ;  but  a  violent  storm,  that  lasted  two  days, 
prevented  him,  and  the  ruin  of  his  forces.  He  then  quitted 
the  town,  destroyed  what  works  he  could,  and  embarked 
his  men,  what  artillery  he  could  carry  off,  and  as  many  of 
the  inhabitants  and  their  wives  as  were  attached  to  England, 
with  their  effects.  The  Provincials  gave  him  no  in- 
terruption, lest  in  revenge  he  should  burn  the  town.  In 
this  extremity  he  sailed  for  Halifax,  where  distress  had 
been  already  felt. 

This  blow  the  Ministers  endeavoured  to  represent  as 
fortunate,  publishing  a  ridiculous  account  in  the  Gazette, 
crying  up  Howe's  retreat  as  a  master-stroke,  and  giving 

539 


540       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

out  that  they  had  ordered  him  to  quit  Boston  ;  but  nobody 
was  deceived,  though  Lord  North  said,  with  indifference, 
it  was  only  having  five  thousand  men  more  in  circulation — 
but  then  the  Provincials  had  five-and-twenty  thousand 
more  !  The  not  having  been  able  to  victual  Boston,  after 
the  immense  expense,  nor  even  to  get  a  letter  to  it,  proved 
the  madness  of  all  they  were  doing.  The  friends  of 
America  revived  on  this  news.  Great  abuse  fell  on  Lord 
George  Germaine,  though  he  certainly  had  been  as  active 
as  possible.  The  Bedford  party  began  to  talk  for  peace, 
and  probably  the  Court  began  to  think  of  it.  A  com- 
mission passed  the  seals  to  Lord  Howe  and  his  brother 
the  General,  to  empower  them  to  treat ;  and  on  the 

Afth  the  Hessians  and  Guards  sailed,  now  to  Halifax, 
and  Lord  Howe  on  the  Zth. 

6th.  The  King  asked  a  vote  of  credit,  and  a  million  was 
voted. 

The  same  day  Colonel  Barr^  moved  for  the  accounts 
from  Boston ;  the  Ministers  used  the  old  stale  argument 
of  the  impropriety  of  the  time.  Barre  produced  forty 
precedents  of  Lord  Chatham  communicating  intelligence 
in  the  last  war  to  Parliament ;  and  this  had  affectedly  been 
called  a  Parliamentary  war,  and  yet  votes  of  credit  were 
asked  without  any  information  given.  Burke  made  a  most 
warm  speech,  showed  the  falsehood  of  the  Gazette,  and  all 
the  other  blunders  and  lies.  Conway  made  a  most  admired 
speech  to  the  same  purport.  Lord  George  Germaine 
answered  him  in  a  poor,  abject  manner,  confessing  the 
misfortune  at  Boston.  Charles  Fox  was  absent  at  New- 
market, Governor  Johnston  and  T.  Townshend  in  other 
places, — so  the  question  was  refused  to  a  very  small 
minority.     The  next  day, 

^th,  the  House  sat  till  five  in  the  morning  on  a  discussion 
of  the  licences  to  trade  given  to  his  creatures  by  Lord 
Sandwich,  which  the  Restraining  Bill  denied  to  the 
merchants.     Lord  North  had  written  a  letter  of  reprimand 


1776]  NEW   PEERAGES  541 

to  the  Admiralty  on  this  abuse ;  the  Opposition  took  the 
very  words  of  his  letter  for  their  motion — yet  it  was 
rejected.  Lord  North,  whose  jocularity  was  overset  by  the 
bad  news  from  America,  lost  his  temper  most  indecently. 
The  Provincials  had  taken  the  isle  of  Providence.  An 
expedition  sent  by  General  Howe  to  Georgia  had  mis- 
carried, and  intelligence  was  come  that  the  American 
Admiral  with  a  squadron  were  waiting  off  Jamaica  to 
intercept,  and  were  likely  to  take  the  West  Indiamen. 
The  Restraining  Bill  had  wrought  their  rage  to  the  highest 
pitch,  and  had  brought  back  to  the  Congress  Dickinson, 
one  of  the  chiefs,  who  had  left  them  and  put  on  the  King's 
colours.  A  pamphlet  called  "  Common  Sense,"  supposed 
to  be  written  by  Dr.  Franklin,  was  come  over,  in  which 
they  disclaimed  Royalty  and  all  connection  with  this 
country. 

\Qth.  Temple  Luttrell  abused  Lord  George  Germaine 
in  the  grossest  terms,  and  for  a  long  time,  in  the  House 
of  Commons.  He  said,  flight  was  the  only  safety  that 
remained  for  the  royal  army^  and  he  saw  one  who  had 
set  the  example  in  Germany^  and  was  fit  to  lead  them,  on 
such  an  occasion.     Lord  George  said  not  a  word  in  reply. 

\2th.  Twelve  new  peerages  were  declared.^  The  King 
had  involved  himself  in  so  many  promises,  and  so  many 
coronets  had  been  asked,  that  for  some  years  no  peers 
had  been  created.  Twelve  peers  were  as  many  as  had 
created  clamour  at  the  end  of  Queen  Anne's  reign.  The 
new  creations  were :  Lord  Caermarthen,  called  up  to  the 
House  of  Lords ;  the  Duchess  of  Argyll  a  Baroness,  that 
her  son,  Duke  Hamilton,  might  be  an  English  peer ;  Lord 
Polwarth,  son  of  the  Earl  of  Marchmont ;  Lord  Mount- 

^  When  these  twelve  peerages  were  gazetted,  parallels  were  made  between 
them  and  the  famous  creation  of  twelve  in  Queen  Anne's  time,  and  the  old 
jocular  question  was  asked,  whether  the  twelve  would  be  bound  to  speak 
through  their  foreman.  Thirty-four  new  peers  had  now  been  added  to  the 
House  since  the  accession  of  George  III.  ;  and  the  Lords  now  amounted 
to  237.— D, 


542       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

Stewart,  of  Lord  Bute ;  Sir  Edward  Hawke  ;  Sir  Jeffery 
Amherst ;  George  Onslow  ;  George  Pitt ;  Mr.  Rider ;  Mr. 
Foley ;  and  Sir  Brownlow  Cust ;  with  Mr.  Southwell,  to 
whom  the  Barony  of  Clifford,  then  in  abeyance,  had  been 
allotted.  Some  of  these  were  well  entitled  to  the  rank ; 
some  were  attended  with  extraordinary  circumstances. 
Sir  Edward  Hawke  was  one  of  the  principal  heroes  of  the 
last  war,  in  which  Sir  Jeffery  Amherst  had  distinguished 
himself  too.  Lord  Caermarthen's  was  a  favour,  and  no 
new  peerage.  Singular  was  the  fortune  of  the  Duchess 
of  Argyll.  She  and  her  sister,  the  celebrated  Lady 
Coventry,  were  Irish  girls  (Gunning)  of  no  fortune,  and 
scarce  gentlewomen  but  by  their  mother.^  They  had 
been  designed  for  the  stage.  The  wonderful  beauty  of 
their  faces  and  persons  had  captivated  the  Earl  of 
Coventry  and  Duke  Hamilton.  The  younger  had  pre- 
served the  fairest  reputation ;  and  on  Duke  Hamilton's 
death  she  was  sought  in  marriage  by  the  Duke  of  Bridge- 
water,  but  preferred  the  Duke  of  Argyll,  and  became 
mother  of  both  those  formerly  great  and  contending 
houses :  and  now  by  the  favour  of  the  Queen,  to  whom 
she  was  lady  of  the  bedchamber,  and  with  whom  she  had 
been  so  ill  two  years  before  as  to  have  thought  of  quitting 
her  place,  became  from  an  Irish  girl  the  source  of  new 
honour  to  the  proud  House  of  Hamilton.  That  Duke 
and  the  Duke  of  Queensberry  had  English  Dukedoms, 
but  had  been  excluded  from  seats  in  Parliament,  though 
the  latter  had  enjoyed  his.  This  Barony  seemed  to  allow 
that  rejection,  though  neither  had  ever  condescended  to 
be  of  the  sixteen,  and  was  hard  on  Queensberry,  though 
of  little  consequence,  as  he  was  past  seventy  and  had  no 
children.  Yet  there  was  something  childishly  contra- 
dictory in  this  new  Barony  to  that  of  Lord  Mountstewart, 
conferred  at  the  same  moment.     His  mother.  Lady  Bute, 

^  The  Hon.  Bridget  Bourke,  third  daughter  of  Theobald,  sixth  Viscount 
Bourkc  of  Mayo.— A.  F.  S. 


1776]  NEW   PEERAGES  543 

had  been  created  a  Baroness  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign, 
that  it  might  descend  to  him  ;  yet  some  lawyers  having 
started  a  doubt,  whether,  if  his  father  should  die  before 
his  mother,  Lord  Mountstewart,  then  a  Scotch  peer,  could 
inherit,  an  English  peerage  was  prepared  for  Duke 
Hamilton,  who  was  already  a  Scotch  peer — so  little  con- 
sistence was  there  in  the  acts  of  the  Court. 

Lord  Polwarth's  Barony  seemed  almost  as  unnecessary 
as  Lord  Caermarthen's.  He  was  an  only  child,  had 
married  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Marchioness  of  Grey 
(Baroness  Lucas),  so  that,  had  he  had  children,  they 
would  inherit  an  English  peerage,  and  he  had  none. 
George  Onslow's  was  still  more  absurd.  Lord  Onslow, 
to  whom  he  was  heir,  was  past  sixty,  childless,  and  dying ; 
but  he  had  been  disappointed  of  a  seat  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  and,  being  a  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  thought 
it  below  his  dignity  not  to  be  in  either  House  of  Parlia- 
ment. George  Pitt  had  sued  for  the  Barony  of  Morley, 
in  abeyance  between  him  and  Lord  Portmore.  He  now 
took  the  title  of  Rivers,  from  which  family  he  was  de- 
scended by  a  female.  Mr.  Rider's  was  a  case  of  great 
hardship ;  his  father.  Sir  Dudley  Rider,  Attorney-General, 
had  actually  been  made  a  peer  in  the  last  reign,  but  died 
before  the  patent  had  passed  the  seal,  and  it  was  stopped. 
He  had  now  married  the  Bishop  of  London's  daughter, 
was  a  worthy  man,  rich,  and  a  speaker  in  Parliament,  and 
obtained  justice.  Sir  Brownlow  Cust  was  son  of  the  last 
Speaker,  and  heir  of  the  last  Brownlow,  Viscount  Tir- 
connel.  Mr.  Foley  was  exceedingly  rich,  a  Tory,  and 
heir  of  the  Lord  Foley,  one  of  Queen  Anne's  twelve,  all 
recommendations  in  this  reign. 

Mr.  Southwell  had  experienced  three  uncommon  hard- 
ships, and  well  merited  this  favour.  His  grandfather's 
mother  had  walked  at  Queen  Mary's  funeral  as  Baroness 
of  Cromwell  in  her  own  right,  but  her  son  could  never 
obtain  his  writ.     Mr.  Southwell's  mother  was  only  daugh- 


544      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

ter  of  Lady  Sondes,  second  daughter  of  the  Earl  of 
Thanet,  who  had  inherited  the  Barony  of  Clifford  from  the 
Earls  of  Cumberland.  That  Barony,  by  Lord  Thanet's 
death,  had  fallen  in  abeyance  between  his  five  daughters. 
The  two  eldest  being  married  to  the  Earl  of  Salisbury  and 
Lord  Sondes,  heir  of  the  Earl  of  Rockingham,  and  each 
having  sons  who  would  be  Earls,  George  IL  had  given  the 
Barony  to  the  third  sister,  wife  of  Lord  Lovel,  afterwards 
Earl  of  Leicester.  He  and  she  losing  their  only  son.  Lord 
Coke,  and  Lady  Clifford  dying  without  issue  the  last  year, 
the  Barony  became  in  abeyance  again  amongst  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  four  other  sisters.  Lady  Sondes  had  had 
three  sons,  two  of  whom  had  become  Earls  of  Rocking- 
ham, and  both  dying  without  issue,  Thomas,  the  younger 
of  the  brothers,  had  left  his  estate  from  his  only  sister's 
son,  Mr.  Southwell,  to  his  aunt's^  second  son,  Mr.  Monson, 
since  created  Lord  Sondes,  on  condition  of  his  taking  the 
name  of  Watson — probably  to  revive  that  family,  as  Mr. 
Southwell  had  a  good  estate.  He  now  recovered  one  of 
the  advantages  he  had  missed,  and  to  which  he  was  so 
well  entitled. 

At  this  time  was  brought  into  Parliament  a  bill  (for  one 
year)  for  erecting  galleys  on  the  Thames ^  for  employing 
criminals, — as  convicts,  by  the  American  war,  could  not  be 
transported,  as  usual,  to  the  plantations.  They  were  first 
intended  to  be  sent  to  Africa,  but  our  Governors  there  had 
remonstrated  against  receiving  them.  In  time  of  warm 
Opposition  galley-slaves  would  have  occasioned  the  loudest 
clamour :  now  it  raised  none.     Even  Lord  John  Caven- 

^  Married  to  Lord  Monson. 

^  In  the  volume  of  Egerton  Papers,  edited  for  the  Camden  Society  by  Mr. 
Payne  Collier,  there  is  reference  made  to  the  introduction  into  England,  by 
Queen  Elizabeth,  of  the  continental  system  of  galleys  and  forced  labour. 
The  Queen,  it  appears,  had  built  a  single  galley,  and  had  others  in  prepara- 
tion. To  man  the  former  she  selected  a  crew  from  the  prisons, — a  change  for 
the  crew,  considering  what  prisons  then  were,  that  must  have  been  very 
satisfactory  to  the  labouring  captives.  The  system,  however,  did  not  succeed. 
Transportation  to  our  North  American  colonies  was  the  first  kind  of  banish^ 
ment,  united  with  hard  labour,  which  was  extensively  adopted  by  us. — D. 


1776]  GENERAL   SMITH  545 

dish,  a  hearty  Whig  patriot,  supported  it  on  the  humane 
principle  of  wishing  to  estaWrsh  the  punishment  in  lieu  of 
death  for  robberies,  which,  in  spite  of  all  the  laws,  and  of 
the  vagabonds  lately  enrolled  for  America,  were  never  so 
frequent,  from  the  enormous  dissipation  of  all  orders  of 
men,  and  from  the  outrageous  spirit  of  gaming  which  had 
spread  from  the  fashionable  young  men  of  quality  to  the 
ladies  and  to  the  lowest  ranks  of  the  people. 

\jth.  General  Smith  was  committed  to  the  King's 
Bench  prison,  on  conviction  of  bribery  at  Hindon,  on  Mr. 
Grenville's  bill.  Young  George  Grenville,  Sir  George 
Young,  George  Byng,  and  some  others,  had  for  two  years 
been  labouring  to  disfranchise  Hindon  and  Shaftsbury  for 
the  notorious  corruption  of  those  two  boroughs ;  but  just 
now,  at  the  end  of  the  session,  the  adversaries  to  Grenville's 
bill  had  thrown  out  that  bill  of  disfranchisement,  and,  on 
issuing  the  new  writ.  General  Smith  had  again  presented 
himself,  and  been  returned  for  Hindon;  the  return  had  even 
arrived  on  the  i6th ;  but  not  having  been  certified  to  the 
Clerk  of  the  Crown,  Lord  Mansfield  committed  the 
General.  This  man  had  from  a  cheesemonger's  son  risen 
to  an  insolence  of  wealth  by  plunder  in  the  Indies.  His 
wife  was  covered  with  chains  of  pearls  and  diamonds,  and 
he  himself,  who  had  been  drawn  by  Foote,  in  the  "Nabob," 
under  the  character  of  Matthew  Mite,^  was  the  deepest  of 
all  deep  gamesters  in  London.  Being  excluded  from  the 
fashionable  club  of  young  men  of  quality  at  Almack's,  and 
wishing  to  plunder  them  like  the  Indies,  he  and  a  set  of 
sharpers  had  formed  a  plan  for  a  new  club,  which,  by  the 

^  The  "Nabob  "  was  first  produced  at  the  Haymarket  on  the  29th  June, 
1772  ;  Foote  playing  Sir  Matthew  Mite,  in  which  character  he  was  only  ap- 
proached by  Palmer.  In  this  piece  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  comes  in  for  a 
good  share  of  satire,  and  the  club-morals  of  the  time  are  illustrated  in  the  cir- 
cumstance of  Sir  Matthew  being  requested  not  to  allude  to  "hanging,"  as  a 
member's  brother  had  so  finished  his   career.     Sir    Matthew   subsequently 

d ing  a  member,  Touchit  replies,  "  That's  right !  stick  to  that  !  for  though 

the  Christian  club  may  have  some  fears  of  the  gallows,  they  don't  value 
damnation  a  farthing." — D. 

I.— 2    N 


546       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

excess  of  play,  should  draw  all  the  young  extravagants 
thither.  They  built  a  magnificent  house  in  St.  James's 
street,  furnished  it  gorgeously,  and  enrolled  both  the  clubs 
at  White's  and  that  of  Almack's.  The  titular  master  of 
the  house  the  first  night  acquainted  the  richest  and  most 
wasteful  of  the  members  that  they  might  be  furnished  in 
the  house  with  loans  of  ready  money,  even  as  far  as  forty 
thousand  pounds.  This  pernicious  seminary,  erected,  in 
defiance  of  so  many  laws,  at  the  very  gate  of  the  King's 
palace,  and  menacing  ruin  to  their  heirs  to  the  most 
opulent  of  the  Legislature,  was  tolerated  by  a  Court  that 
delighted  in  seeing  the  great  Lords  and  Commoners  re- 
duced to  a  state  of  beggary  and  dependence,  and  which, 
affecting  piety,  winked  at  such  giant  vice,  while  many 
members  of  the  legislature  partook  of  the  flagrant  dissipa- 
tion, and  none  stirred  a  finger  to  check  it.  The  cries  of  a 
civil  war  were  drowned  in  such  a  torrent  of  dissolute 
manners,  and  the  clergy  employed  all  their  labours  in  pro- 
moting the  tyrannic  views  of  the  Court.  Charles  II. 
corrupted  the  morals  of  his  age,  yet  virtue  and  patriotism 
shot  up  amidst  the  tares  he  sowed.  The  uncommunicative 
selfishness  and  pride  of  George  IIL  confined  him  to 
domestic  virtues.  His  people  were  welcome  to  be  as 
abandoned  as  they  pleased ;  and  when  their  vices  made 
them  necessitous,  the  rewards  destined  to  virtue  were 
showered  on  the  profligate,  not  to  correct  their  want  of 
principles,  but  to  ensure  it. 

lylk.  Came  accounts  of  a  change  in  the  French  Minis- 
try. Louis  XVL,  a  very  weak  prince  with  some  rays 
of  good  qualities,  had  trusted  the  chief  power  with  the 
old  Count  de  Maurepas,  who  gained  no  credit  by  his  ad- 
ministration, nor  showed  any  genius  or  firmness  ;  at  most 
the  arts  of  an  aged  courtier.  The  young  Queen  had  been 
tutored  by  the  Empress  Queen,  her  mother,  to  endeavour 
the  recall  of  the  Duke  of  Choiseul,  and  had  early  suc- 
ceeded so  far  as  to  obtain  the  revocation  of  his  banishment. 


1776]  FRENCH   POLITICS  547 

Proud  of  her  credit,  she  boasted  of  it.  Old  Maurepas 
reported  the  vaunt  to  the  King  ;  and  as  weak  men,  who  are 
most  easily  governed,  are  afraid  of  it,  his  Majesty,  who 
humoured  the  Queen  in  most  things,  constantly  denied  to 
grant  her  any  farther  favours  for  Choiseul.  Indeed,  Mau- 
repas, to  secure  the  exclusion  of  so  formidable  a  rival, 
whispered  to  the  King  that  Choiseul  had  poisoned  the 
Dauphin  his  father — the  very  art  employed  by  Madame 
de  Pompadour  against  Maurepas  himself,  whom  she 
accused  of  poisoning  her  predecessor,  the  Duchess  of 
Chateauroux.  Maurepas  had  introduced  two  men  who 
had  imbibed  all  the  humane  doctrines  of  modern  philo- 
sophy. These  were  Monsieur  Turgot,  set  at  the  head  of 
the  finances,  and  the  virtuous  President  de  Malesherbes, 
who,  extremely  against  his  inclination,  was  made  Secretary 
of  State  for  Paris,  in  which  department  he  showered  down 
blessings,  and  in  vain  attempted  to  extend  his  benevolence 
by  reforming  all  crying  abuses,  in  concurrence  with  Turgot, 
who  resolved  to  brave  every  danger  and  difficulty  in  cor- 
recting an  oppressive  constitution.  When  Intendant  of 
a  province,  Turgot  had  raised  the  Corv^es  within  his 
jurisdiction,  and  now  set  about  abolishing  them,  and  other 
crying  grievances,  obtaining  the  King's  consent  and  sup- 
port. The  clergy  and  gentry,  whose  estates  would  have 
suffered  by  this  relief  of  the  woes  of  the  poor,  united 
against  the  salutary  reform  :  and  the  restored  Parliament 
in  the  same  cause,  and  for  the  same  interests,  remon- 
strated against  the  King's  arrets,  thus  justifying  the 
despotic  Chancellor  Maurepas,  who  had  substituted  a  new 
Parliament  in  their  places ;  for  they  now  showed  how 
little  true  patriotism  was  in  their  hearts,  though  they  had 
so  boldly  withstood  the  late  King.  They  were  incited  to 
this  resistance  by  their  old  Tribune,  the  Prince  of  Conti, 
a  lover  of  faction  from  no  virtue,  but  from  pride.  Their 
opposition  was  so  stout  that  most  of  the  Council  advised 
the  King  to  recede.     Maurepas,  timid,  irresolute,  and  now 


548       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

jealous  of  Turgot's  credit,  would  take  no  part.  The 
intrepid  Turgot  persisted,  carried  the  King  to  a  Lit  de 
Justice,  and  forced  obedience  to  all  the  godlike  acts. 

In  the  meantime  neither  the  Queen  nor  Maurepas  was 
idle.  The  Queen,  young,  beautiful,  of  a  commanding  air, 
had  many  of  the  faults  of  her  age  and  sex.  She  adored 
her  own  beauty,  and  liked  its  being  homaged ;  was 
extravagantly  fond  of  dress  and  pleasure ;  was  capricious, 
fickle,  and  indiscreet,  with  an  ardent  desire  of  command. 
The  King,  though  incapable  of  tasting  her  beauty,  was 
fond  of  her,  and  at  least  indulgent ;  and  as  no  other  woman 
could  be  her  rival,  the  number  of  hours  that  he  passed 
alone  with  her  could  but  augment  her  influence  over  a 
husband  who  had  no  real  firmness.  She  had  openly  and 
zealously  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Comte  de  Guines. 
Messieurs  de  Turgot  and  Malesherbes,  who  had  no  opinion 
of  the  Count's  innocence,  and  the  former  of  whom  had 
procured  his  recall,  had  procured  his  being  so  coolly 
received  by  the  King,  that,  after  long  being  denied  an 
audience,  when  he  at  last  obtained  it,  and  begged  to  know 
the  cause  of  his  sudden  recall,  he  could  extract  no  other 
answer  from  the  King  than  "I'Ambassade  etoit  finie"; 
and  after  his  audience,  when  the  King  talked  to  the  Comte 
du  Chatelet,  De  Guines's  predecessor  in  the  embassy,  the 
King  said  nothing  to  De  Guines,  who  stood  next,  but 
talked  to  Chatelet  on  England.  Maurepas  and  Vergennes, 
to  increase  the  Queen's  animosity  to  Turgot  and  Males- 
herbes, by  profiting  of  their  indisposition  to  De  Guines, 
persuaded  M.  de  Malesherbes,  who  knew  nothing  of  a 
Court,  to  represent  to  her  Majesty  that  she  ought  not  to 
support  so  guilty  a  man  as  De  Guines.  Malesherbes  fell 
into  the  snare,  was  laughed  at  by  the  Queen,  and  by  all 
Paris,  which  loves  to  laugh,  and  was  encouraged  by  his 
various  enemies,  particularly  by  the  clergy,  nobility,  and 
army,  who  did  not  taste  the  elevation  of  two  civil  men 
of  no  illustrious  birth,  and   much  less  their  plans  of  re- 


1776]  FRENCH   POLITICS  549 

formation.  The  clergy  hated  them  as  favourers  of  the 
Protestants  and  the  philosophers.  Malesherbes,  hurt  at 
the  "  pas  de  clerc "  he  had  made,  asked  leave  to  resign 
and  return  to  a  virtuous  repose  which  he  had  unwillingly 
sacrificed  in  vain  to  serve  the  public.  The  King  resisted 
for  a  short  time ;  but  the  Queen  taking  advantage  of  the 
moment,  not  only  the  resignation  of  Malesherbes  was 
accepted,  but,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  France,  Tiirgot 
himself  was  suddenly  dismissed,  though  the  King  himself, 
but  a  week  before,  had  said,  "  I  believe  there  is  nobody 
but  Turgot  and  I  who  have  any  idea  of  justice."  But  this 
levity  was  not  new.  Just  before  his  grandfather's  death 
he  had  told  the  Chancellor  to  go  on  in  his  despotic  plans, 
and  promised  to  support  him  when  King.  The  Chancellor 
was  the  first  he  banished.  The  Presidency  of  all  the 
Councils  was  given  to  Maurepas ;  but  he  himself  was  the 
first  to  point  out  to  the  public  the  author  of  the  change, 
and  with  whom  power  lay,  for  he  stooped  to  beg  of  the 
Queen  the  recall  of  his  nephew  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon, 
pleading  the  share  he  himself  had  had  in  the  favour  shown 
to  the  Comte  de  Guines,  who  was  now  made  a  Duke,  and 
thanked  by  the  King  in  a  letter  under  his  hand  for  his 
services.  The  Queen  took  care  to  confirm  the  ostentation 
of  her  power,  for  she  treated  Maurepas  very  ill,  and 
refused  to  grant  his  suit  for  his  nephew ;  and  a  Monsieur 
de  Cluni  was  brought  in,  who  had  been  employed  in  the 
marine  under  the  Duke  de  Praslin  during  Choiseul's 
Ministry. 

The  Comte  de  Noailles  was  named  Ambassador  to 
England,  a  poor  security  to  us,  when  two  such  pacific  men 
as  Turgot  and  Malesherbes  were  removed.  The  power  of 
the  Queen,  and  the  probability  of  Choiseul  being  replaced, 
were  a  thunder-clap  to  our  Court,  now  in  the  utmost 
despair  on  the  affairs  of  America.  The  stocks  immediately 
fell;  and  the  arrogance  of  the  Ministers  was  so  sunk,  that 
Lord  North  said  to  a  person  from  whom  I  had  it,  "  I  wish 


550       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

the  time  was  come  for  my  being  abused  for  having  made 
a  disgraceful  peace  with  America  !  " 

Peace,  even  before  the  news  from  France,  had  become 
the  measure.  They  had  hurried  away  Lord  Howe  out  of 
town  to  Portsmouth  the  day  before  his  brother's  retreat 
from  Boston  was  sure  of  being  mentioned  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  lest  Lord  Howe's  want  of  sense  should  draw 
him  into  betraying  any  secrets  in  defence  of  his  brother — 
yet  to  that  want  of  sense  they  trusted  so  momentous  a 
negotiation  !  They  hurried  him  of  with  vast  powers,  it 
was  said,  and  with  few  instructions,  hoping  he  would 
hazard  a  disadvantageous  peace,  and  be  liable  to  bear  the 
blame.  I  have  heard  too,  but  do  not  know  if  true,  that 
he  obtained  a  full  pardon  for  whatever  he  should  do, 
under  the  King's  sign  manual.  If  he  did,  some  friend 
more  shrewd  than  himself  must  have  suggested  that  salvo. 

Whether  the  desperate  situation  of  affairs  before,  or  the 
news  from  France,  alarmed  the  Junto,  and  made  them 
wish  to  detach  themselves  from  Lord  North,  I  cannot  tell, 
but  at  the  India  House  Lord  Bute's  friends,  under  Sir 
Gilbert  Elliot,  joined  the  Opposition,  and  defeated  Lord 
North  in  his  attempt  to  reverse  a  question  that  had  been 
carried  there  for  recalling  Hastings  and  Barwell.  The 
Butists  pretended  that  two  younger  sons  of  Lord  Bute 
and  Elliot,  just  returned  from  India,  had  contracted  friend- 
ships there  which  their  fathers  favoured,  but  neither  father 
would  have  deserted  the  Minister  without  a  serious  purpose 
of  betraying  him. 

General  Conway,  who,  with  so  much  spirit  and  so  much 
indifference  to  his  interest,  had  persevered  in  condemning 
and  opposing  the  American  war,  was  shocked  to  see 
the  session  expire  without  the  smallest  communication 
to  Parliament.  The  Ministers  had  haughtily  rejected 
every  overture  towards  peace  from  the  Opposition  ; 
more  imperiously  had  withheld  every  communication  of 
measures  and  events  ;   had,  especially  in    the    House  of 


1776]  GENERAL   CONWAY  551 

Lords  by  the  mouth  of  Lord  Sandwich,  denied,  exag- 
gerated, falsified,  not  only  all  intelligence,  but  every 
circumstance ;  had  drawn  all  decision  on  a  war,  that  they 
had  affected  to  call  parliamentary,  to  the  King ;  and  had, 
by  the  contradictory  language  of  Lord  North  and  Lord 
George  Germaine,  left  the  Parliament  wholly  in  doubt 
whether  they  meant  peace  or  war,  and,  if  peace,  whether 
they  would  grant  America  a  moderate  peace,  or  whether 
they  would  expect  implicit  submission.  The  venal  Par- 
liament— I  mean  the  great  majority — had  servilely  ac- 
quiesced under  this  treatment ;  the  public  had  been  as 
patient,  and  bore  being  shut  out  from  all  debates. 
Conway  determined  to  press  the  Court  to  speak  out,  and 
to  call  for  an  explanation  of  their  meaning,  whether  Par- 
liament was  to  have  anything  to  do  in  the  negotiation  or 
not.  A  few  days  before  the  conclusion,  he,  in  a  very 
serious  and  pathetic  manner,  put  several  questions  to  the 
Ministers  in  the  House  of  Commons.  They  deigning  to 
make  no  answer,  he  gave  them  notice  he  would,  on  the 
eve  of  the  prorogation,  state  his  questions  in  a  motion. 
I,  who  well,  I  thought,  knew  the  Ministers  and  the  subter- 
fuges of  Lord  Mansfield,  expected  that  the  previous  notice 
would  furnish  the  latter  with  some  art  of  chicanery  to 
evade  the  motion  ;  but  disaster  and  dismay  seemed  to  have 
blunted  their  wits,  and  they  quietly  expected  and  stood 
a  scene  of  confusion  and  disgrace,  even  without  arguments, 
and  took  up  with  the  cold  satisfaction  of  a  majority  against 
the  motion.  Lord  Hertford,  indeed,  tried  all  his  Court 
rhetoric  to  dissuade  his  brother  from  his  intention,  even 
after  he  had  notified  it  publicly.  But  Conway  was  im- 
moveable; and  I  do  not  doubt  but  the  credit  he  gained 
comforted  Lord  Hertford,  as  the  despair  of  the  Ministry 
made  him  see  how  useful  his  brother  would  be  to  him 
if  a  change  should  happen. 

On   the  22nd  Conway  moved   for  an  Address  to  the 
King,  that  he  would  be  pleased  to  communicate  to  the 


552       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [May 

House  so  much  of  his  instructions  to  Lord  and  General 
Howe  as  related  to  the  conditions  on  which  it  was  pro- 
posed to  make  peace.  He  spoke  an  hour  and  a  quarter 
with  most  pathetic  eloquence  and  weight,  opened  the 
whole  scene  of  mismanagement,  dwelt  on  Lord  Hills- 
borough's treacherous  letter,  showed  the  improbability 
of  the  Americans  treating  with  us,  the  impossibility  of 
concluding  without  recourse  to  Parliament,  urged  on  the 
country  gentlemen  their  fatal  delusion,  spoke  of  his  own 
disinterestedness  and  moderation,  avowed  his  disposition 
to  support  the  Administration,  with  whom  he  dissented 
but  on  America,  commended  Lord  North,  whom  he 
allowed  to  be  the  best-humoured  of  Ministers,  pointed  out 
the  hopelessness  of  the  approaching  campaign,  and  dis- 
played the  impending  danger  of  a  war  with  France,  and 
the  nakedness  of  our  situation.  He  quoted  a  letter  from 
Voltaire  to  the  King  of  Prussia,  in  which  both  those 
men  of  genius^  condemned  our  blindness ;  and  in  short, 
by  the  most  consummate  abilities,  graces,  seriousness,  and 
eloquence,  charmed  almost  all  his  audience,  though  he 
failed  of  gaining  any  votes  from  the  majority,  which 
accompanied  with  their  own  disgrace  the  wretched 
defence  made  by  the  Ministers — in  truth  by  only  two  of 
them,  Lord  North  and  Lord  George  Germaine,  the 
latter  of  whom  was  dragged  up  to  speak,  and  never  made 
a  poorer  figure.  They  pleaded  the  old  stale  pretence  of 
not  discovering  measures.  Lord  George  was  so  dis- 
mayed that  he  had  the  desperate  courage  to  tell  a  gross 
untruth, — he  denied  ever  having  said  that  he  should  insist 
on  implicit  obedience  from  the  colonies,  which  all  the 
House  had  heard  from  him,  and  pretended  to  explain  it 
away  by  other  words,  though  to  the  same  effect,  protesting 

^  "  Both  those  men  of  genius  "  had  been  recently  reviling  each  other,  and 
Voltaire  had  only  very  lately  written  thus  of  his  quondam  friend  and  patron : — 
"  Hai  du  dieu  de  I'amour,  cher  au  dieu  des  comV.ats, 
II  baigna  dans  le  sang  Europe  et  sa  patrie  ; 
Cent  mille  hommes  par  lui  reijurent  le  tr^pas, 
Et  pas  un  n'en  regut  la  vie." — D. 


1776]       CONWAY'S  MOTION  FOR  AN  ADDRESS         553 

he  had  only  said  he  would  not  make  peace  while  the 
colonies  were  in  arms — what  would  that  be  but  implicit 
submission  ?  The  Junto  kept  silence,  as  usual  in  difficult 
moments,  hoping  to  keep  their  hold,  though  the  Ministers 
should  be  changed.  Lord  John  Cavendish  seconded 
Conway  ;  and  Burke,  Charles  Fox,  T.  Townshend,  Colonel 
Barre,  Governor  Johnston,  and  Hartley,  supported  the 
motion.  Burke  paid  the  most  profuse  compliments  to 
Conway's  abilities  and  virtues,  avowing  how  proud  he 
should  be  to  serve  under  him  ;  yet  with  his  usual  jealousy 
condemning  Conway's  partial  opposition  to  bad  Ministers, 
and  vaunting  his  own  unaltered  virtue.  Barr6  laid  all 
their  faults  heavily  and  wittily  on  the  Ministers ;  and 
when  Lord  North  pleaded  wishing  that  the  House  saw 
Lord  Howe's  instructions,  Johnston  said  anybody  might 
see  the  commission  for  two  shillings  where  it  was  regis- 
tered— it  was  the  real  instructions  they  ought  to  see. 
Young  Adam,  the  Scot,  as  usual,  condemned  the  Ministers, 
wishing  for  anybody  that  would  correct  their  faults — no 
doubt  with  a  salvo  for  the  Junto.  The  Bedfords,  and 
even  Rigby,  were  mute,  though  nobody  hated  Conway  so 
much  as  the  latter,  and  he  owned  afterwards  how  sorely 
he  bore  Conway's  triumph.  The  House  sat  till  half  an 
hour  past  ten.     The  motion  rejected  by  171  to  85. 

That  very  night  Lord  Hertford  owned  to  me  the  dis- 
may of  the  Ministers,  and  the  impossibility  of  their  main- 
taining their  hold  a  year.  The  best,  he  said,  he  thought 
Lord  George  Germaine  could  do,  would  be  to  run  away 
in  six  months.  Till  now,  he  said,  he  had  thought  we 
should  subdue  America — I  believe  he  did,  or  he  would 
not  have  been  so  zealous.  On  the  30th  of  April,  when 
Wilkes's  motion  had  been  defeated  by  a  great  majority, 
he  twice  repeated  in  my  presence,  to  taunt  me,  "  This  is 
the  way  Government  carries  questions  in  this  reign."  I 
now  contented  myself  with  blowing  up  his  personal  alarm, 
painted  the  probability  of  a  French  war,  and  said,  "  My 


554       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Mxy 

Lord,  you  have  more  reason  to  tremble  than  most  men, 
for  undoubtedly  the  first  place  they  will  land  in  will  be 
Ireland,  which  is  left  so  exposed."  There  Lord  Hertford's 
great  estate  lay. 

On  the  2ird  Sir  George  Saville  and  Hartley  moved  to 
address  the  King,  not  to  prorogue,  but  only  to  adjourn  the 
Parliament,  stating  most  artfully  the  tremendous  posture 
of  our  affairs. — See  their  arguments  well  stated  in  the 
London  Chronicle  of  May  25. 

2\th.  The  Parliament  was  prorogued.  The  stocks  fell 
every  day.  About  this  time  Stanley  and  Jenkinson  went 
to  France ;  probably  to  sift  into  the  revolution  there,  and 
probably  to  deprecate  a  war.  During  the  winter,  seeing 
the  weakness  of  Opposition,  I  had  tried  to  persuade  them 
to  offer  a  protest  against  the  measures  to  the  House  of 
Commons,  which,  though  it  was  sure  of  being  rejected  as 
unprecedented,  yet  they  might  print  it  for  their  own 
vindication,  in  answer  to  the  slanders  thrown  on  them  as 
promoters  of  the  rebellion.  This  many  approved,  but 
nothing  was  done.  After  the  session  I  recommended  to 
them  to  publish  an  apology  for  their  conduct,  proving 
that  they  had  foretold  all  the  ill  success  that  had  already 
attended  the  King's  counsels  and  arms,  which  would  have 
raised  their  credit  in  the  nation ;  but  there  was  no  sense, 
no  activity  amongst  them,  and  I  was  not  minded. 

2'^th.  It  was  suddenly  declared  that  the  King  had  dis- 
missed Dr.  Markham  (Bishop  of  Chester)  and  Mr.  Jack- 
son^ from  being  Preceptor  and  Sub-Preceptor  to  the  Prince 
of  Wales ;  and  that  Lord  Holderness  and  Mr.  Smelt,  his 

^  Cyril  Jackson,  who  in  1783  became  Dean  of  Christ  Church — a  post 
which  he  retained  for  26  years.  He  was  made  sub-preceptor  to  the  princes 
in  1771,  and  died  in  possession  of  no  preferment  in  1019.  Parr,  Porteus,  and 
all  the  scholars  of  his  day,  looked  to  him  as  to  an  authority  that  was  not  to 
be  disputed.  He  enjoyed  the  distinction  of  twice  declining  to  be  elevated  to 
the  episcopal  bench, — but  it  was  when  his  habits  of  life  were  formed,  his 
fortune  large,  his  duty  light,  and  his  disincHnation  to  assume  enlarged  re- 
sponsibility not  to  be  surmounted.  He  was  75  when  he  died.  His  statue  in 
the  Chapel  at  Christ  Church  was  executed  by  Chantrey,  after  the  excellent 
portrait  in  the  Hall,  by  Owen. — D. 


1776]         THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES'S  OFFICERS  555 

Royal  Highness's  Governor  and  Sub-Governor,  had  re- 
signed those  posts.  No  reason  was  assigned  for  so  great 
a  revolution.  All  that  got  out  at  first  was,  that  Lord 
Holderness  had  been  quarrelling  with  Jackson  for  three 
months,  and  had  said  he  could  not  serve  with  him.  So 
inadequate  a  cause  could  not  at  all  account  for  so  general 
a  change,  nor  satisfy  the  extreme  curiosity  of  mankind  on 
so  large  an  event,  which,  as  Lord  Hertford  said  to  me 
that  night,  must  have  had  weighty  causes  to  surmount  the 
King's  disposition  to  conceal  everything  as  much  as  he 
possibly  could.  The  next  day  Lord  Bruce  was  named 
Governor,  and  Dr.  Hurd  (Bishop  of  Lichfield  and 
Coventry)  Preceptor,  both  being  told  that  they  were  not 
to  choose  their  own  substitutes ;  the  former  was  at  the 
same  time  created  Earl  of  Ailesbury.  Bruce  Brudenel, 
youngest  brother  of  Lord  Brudenel  Montagu,  Duke  of 
Montagu,  had  been  adopted  by  his  uncle,  Thomas  Bruce 
Earl  of  Ailesbury,  and  inherited  his  estate.  This  new 
Earl  was  a  formal,  dull  man,  totally  ignorant  of  and 
unversed  in  the  world,  and  a  Tory ;  very  unexceptionable 
in  his  character,  suited  to  the  mystery  affected  by  the 
King,  but  totally  unfit  to  educate  the  Prince  of  Wales. 
Bishop  Hurd  had  acquired  a  great  name  by  several  works 
of  slender  merit,  was  a  gentle,  plausible  man,  affecting  a 
singular  decorum  that  endeared  him  highly  to  devout 
old  ladies.^  Lord  Ashburnham  had  been  designated  for 
Governor,  as  well  as  the  last  Earl  of  Bristol,  if  Lord 
Holderness  had  died  ;  but  the  second  had  died,  and  the 
first  had  not  made  his  court  by  cavilling  at  the  lesser 
profit  of  Groom  of  the  Stole  compared  with  that  of 
Master  of  the  Great  Wardrobe ;  and  when  the  King  had 

^  Hurd,  the  son  of  a  Staffordshire  farmer,  died  Bishop  of  Worcester  in 
1808.  He  was  a  good  deal  to  Warburton  what  Boswell  was  to  Johnson.  He 
had  the  bad  taste  to  allow  his  own  name  to  be  attached  to  the  "  Observations 
on  Hume's  Natural  History  of  Religion,"  written  by  Warburton ;  but  he  also 
had  the  good  sense  to  decline  the  primacy  when  it  was  offered  to  him  in  1783. 
*'  I  am  glad  he  did  not  go  to  Lambeth,"  said  Dr.  Johnson,  *'  for  after  all  I  fear 
he  is  a  Whig  in  his  heart." — D. 


556      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     IMay 

once  taken  an  objection  to  him,  he  could  but  perceive  how 
close,  artful,  and  dangerous  a  man  Lord  Ashburnham 
was;  and  when  once  seen  in  that  light,  his  signal  in- 
gratitude to  his  old  patron  the  late  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
whom  he  had  shamefully,  though  his  first  favourite,  aban- 
doned, could  but  be  recollected.  Kings  expect  gratitude, 
whatever  they  feel.  Lord  Ailesbury  protested  he  had  not 
known  anything  of  his  designation  till  the  27th  ;  and  it 
was  true  the  resolution  had  not  been  taken  on  the  whole 
measure  till  the  26th  at  night,  nor  was  Lord  North  or  any 
of  the  Ministers  acquainted  with  the  general  resolution  till 
the  27th,  which  equally  surprised  the  Court  and  the  town. 
On  the  3 1  J-/  Lord  and  Lady  Holderness  were  with  Lord 
and  Lady  Hertford  in  the  evening,  and  the  two  latter 
gave  me  this  account  after  supper,  adding,  they  were  per- 
suaded the  affair  had  gone  much  farther  than  they  were 
acquainted  with,  and  I  found  they  knew  even  more  than 
they  told.  Lord  Holderness,  who  had  had  a  violent 
humour  in  his  face,  which  struck  in  and  had  fallen  on 
his  hearing  and  his  breast,  had  been  to  seek  relief  in  the 
South  of  France,  whence  he  had  returned  in  the  last 
autumn,  a  little  mended  in  his  health,  but  still  very  deaf. 
On  his  return  he  found  great  prejudices  had  been  instilled 
into  the  mind  of  his  pupils  the  Prince  of  Wales  and 
Prince  Frederick,  Bishop  of  Osnaburgh,  against  him  ;  and 
it  had  grown  so  bad  that  from  last  November  they 
had  treated  his  authority  with  contempt,  and  often  ridi- 
culed him  to  his  face.  This  he  imputed  to  Jackson.  I 
asked  if  Prince  Frederick,  who  was  thought  a  great  favour- 
ite, had  behaved  as  ill  as  the  Prince,  who  it  was  known 
had  a  high  spirit,  as  I  had  guessed  two  or  three  years 
before  from  Lord  Holderness  affecting  to  say  how  tractable 
he  was.  Lord  Hertford  said,  "  Oh  !  Prince  Frederick  has 
gone  the  farthest,  and  has  been  the  instrument  to  inflame 
his  brother."  This  was  artful,  as  more  indirect.  I  said  I 
heard  everybody  had  observed  the  day  before   that   the 


I776J    PRINCE  OF  WALES— PRINCE  FREDERICK     557 

King  was  much  fallen  away,  and  looked  very  ill.  Both 
Lord  and  Lady  Hertford  cried  out,  "Nobody  can  tell 
what  he  has  suffered  for  six  weeks  ; "  and  Lord  Hertford 
added,  "  Think  what  he  must  feel  at  finding  already  that 
his  son  is  so  headstrong  that  he  has  not  the  least  authority 
over  him ! "  I  said  I  heard  the  Prince  was  extremely 
in  awe  of  the  Queen.  He  replied,  "  Faith !  I  believe  he 
is  in  awe  of  neither."  He  told  me  the  Bishop  of  Chester 
was  sorely  suspected  of  being  at  the  bottom  of  this  plot, 
and  was  a  very  ambitious  man;  and  that  the  King  had 
nothing  left  but  to  get  rid  of  him  and  Jackson.  The 
Bishop  of  Chester  had  ambitioned  the  Bishopric  of  Win- 
chester on  the  next  vacancy,  and  had  been  more  than  once 
told  that  he  was  not  to  expect  it.  Jackson  had  been  taken 
from  Oxford  with  a  marvellous  character  for  parts  and 
learning ;  but  I  believe  his  monarchic  principles  had  been 
a  greater  recommendation.  Lord  Holderness,  though  so 
good  a  courtier,  had  recommended  Smelt,  a  thorough 
Revolution  Whig;  and  had  placed  two  other  persons  of  the 
same  principles  about  the  Prince — one  Bude,  a  Swiss  Pro- 
testant, and  Saigas,  mentioned  lower  in  the  text.  Jackson's 
pension  was  continued  to  him,  and  it  was  said  the  Bishop 
was  promised  a  better  bishopric  ;  however  he  was  very 
open  in  his  conversation  against  Lord  Holderness,  and 
represented  him  as  most  trifling  and  unfit  for  his  late  charge. 
Both  Markham  and  Jackson  had  been  the  choice  of  Lord 
Mansfield,  and  I  did  not  think  it  very  prudent  to  choose 
Dr.  Hurd,  another  professed  creature  of  Mansfield  ;  but  it 
was  the  maxim  of  the  King  to  cajole  all  he  parted  with  or 
disliked,  and,  between  hypocrisy  and  timidity,  he  generally 
attempted  to  soothe  those  he  discarded.  I  said  I  still  did 
not  understand  why  Lord  Holderness  had  resigned  when 
his  enemies  were  removed  !  Lord  Hertford  said  the  King 
had  used  all  manner  of  entreaties  with  him  to  remain  ;  but 
Lord  Holderness  answered  that  the  only  service  he  could 
do  his  Majesty  farther  was  to  retire.    This  spoke  the  aver- 


558       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [May 

sion  of  the  Prince,  and  how  far  he  had  carried  his  dis- 
obedience. To  mark  approbation  of  the  Earl,  the  King 
immediately  made  his  son-in-law,  the  Marquis  of  Caermar- 
then,^  Lord  of  his  Bedchamber,  in  the  room  of  Lord  Bruce. 
He  offered  a  pension  too  to  Smelt,  who,  with  his  usual 
incorruptible  virtue,  declined  it.  "  Why,"  said  the  King  ; 
"  you  have  but  a  small  fortune  ?  "  "  Enough,  Sir,"  said  he, 
"  to  keep  me  independent ; "  and  he  absolutely  refused  any 
premium — following  his  patron  the  Earl,  who,  it  is  justice 
to  say,  acted  wisely  and  handsomely  to  the  King  in  his 
retreat.  Lord  Hertford  told  me  besides,  that  Saigas,  son 
of  a  French  refugee,  and  one  of  the  Prince's  tutors, 
insisted  on  retiring,  too,  from  the  ungovernable  temper  of 
the  Prince.  All  his  servants,  even  to  valets-de-chambre, 
were  changed. 

Yet  even  these  wounds  could  not  be  closed  before  another 
ridiculous  incident  happened.  Lord  Bruce  had  barely 
taken  possession  of  his  post,  and  dined  once  with  the 
Prince,  when  he  suddenly  retired  into  the  country  and,  it 
was  said,  even  without  giving  notice  or  taking  leave.  The 
Bishop  of  Lichfield  was  left  to  inform  the  King  that  the 
Governor  did  not  mean  to  return.  It  was  given  out  that 
his  wife,^  who  was  at  the  Bath,  and  mad,  had  written 
to  him  to  say  it  would  kill  her  if  he  accepted  an  employ- 
ment that  would  deprive  her  of  so  much  of  his  company. 
In  fact  Lord  Bruce  did  quit  as  suddenly  as  I  have  said,  and 
then  the  King  pitched  upon  his  eldest  brother,  the  Duke 
of  Montagu,  one  of  the  weakest  and  most  ignorant  men 
living,  for  Governor  to  the  Princes.  The  late  Duchess,^  his 
wife,  had  often  lamented,  with  tears,  in  his  presence,  that 
he  was  not  fit  for  any  of  the  great  offices  of  State. 

^  Only  son  of  the  Duke  of  Leeds.  He  married  Lady  Amelia  Darcy,  the 
Earl's  only  child.  On  the  King's  birthday  the  Queen  gave  Lady  Holderness 
a  bracelet  of  her  hair  set  with  diamonds. 

*  Daughter  of  Mr.  Hoare,  of  Stourhead,  and  widow  of  Lord  Dungarvon, 
eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Cork  and  Orrery. 

'  Lady  Mary  Montagu,  younger  daughter  of  John  Duke  of  Montagu,  and 
wife  of  George  Brudenel  Earl  of  Cardigan,  created  Duke  of  Montagu. 


1776] 


JUNE 


ird. 


THE  wind,  which  had  long  been  easterly,  turn- 
ing to  the  west,  much  intelligence  came  in  from 
America  that  raised  the  desponding  spirits  of 
the  Court.  They  had  received,  or  said  they 
had  received,  accounts  that  General  Worster  and  Colonel 
Arnold  had  determined  to  make  another  attack  on  Quebec 
before  any  succours  should  arrive  there,  and  had  accord- 
ingly attempted  to  storm  it,  but  had  been  repulsed  with 
the  loss  of  1 300  men.  A  New  York  Gazette  was  reported 
as  having  been  sent  over,  which  said  General  Lee  had  been 
taken  prisoner  by  General  Clinton  in  Carolina,  and  accused 
him  of  having  given  himself  up  by  treachery ;  but  the 
story  was  a  very  blind  one.  Other  letters  said  General 
Howe  was  safely  arrived  at  Halifax  with  his  army ; 
General  Washington  was  reported  to  be  in  disgrace  with 
the  Congress ;  and  their  Admiral  Hopkins  was  said  to  be 
beaten  and  disgraced  with  two  or  three  frigates  by  a  single 
ship.  The  courtiers  exulted  extremely  on  this  cargo  of 
good  news,  and  the  King  behaved  with  great  levity.  Still 
the  intelligence  was  so  vague  or  dubious,  that  not  one  of 
the  above  articles  was  mentioned  in  the  Gazette,  and  Lord 
North  had  the  prudence,  on  being  asked  about  the  good 
news  at  his  public  dinner  on  the  King's  birthday,  to  reply, 
"  We  have  heard  all  this,  but  have  no  certain  intelligence;" 
and  the  Attorney-General  asking  him  if  he  had  a  plan 
ready  on  the  submission  of  America,  he  answered,  "  I 
believe  we  shall  have  time  enough  to  form  one  before  that 
time  comes." 

559 


56o       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [June 

Lord  Hyde^  was  created  Earl  of  Clarendon,  and  Lord 
Trevor^  Viscount  Hampden.  These  peers  had  been  con- 
nected with  George  Grenville,  and  were  supposed  to  owe 
their  promotions  to  Lord  Suffolk,  the  patron  of  that  con- 
nection. Lord  Hyde  was  so  dull  a  man  that  Lord  John 
Cavendish  said  with  a  sneer,  "  The  Ministers  have  made  a 
rebellion,  and  now  they  have  made  a  Lord  Clarendon  to 
write  the  history  of  it." 

The  King,  reviewing  the  Blues,  to  pique  General  Con- 
way their  colonel,  found  great  fault  with  the  officers  very 
unjustly,  and  said,  "  I  wish  I  could  see  the  Blues  behave 
as  well  as  they  used  to  do."  Mr.  Conway  replied  he  was 
sorry  his  officers  were  blamed  only  to  mortify  him. 

All  the  servants  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  down  to  the 
valets-de-chambre  were  changed.  Colonel  George  Hotham, 
nephew  of  the  Earl  of  Buckingham,  was  appointed  Sub- 
Governor,  and  Mr.  Arnold,  of  St.  John's  College,  Cam- 
bridge, a  celebrated  tutor,  and  chaplain  to  Bishop  Hurd, 
was  made  Sub-Preceptor. 

The  Earl  of  Harcourt's  three  years  in  Ireland  being 
expired,  the  Lord-Lieutenancy  was  offered  to  Lord  Roch- 
ford,  but  he  declined  it,  not  liking  to  reside  there  three 
years.  It  was  also  offered  to  and  refused  by  the  Duke  of 
Marlborough.  The  Earls  of  Hillsborough  and  Bucking- 
ham were  candidates  for  it,  but,  for  what  reason  I  know 
not.  Lord  Harcourt  was  desired  to  stay  there  another  year. 
The  new  Parliament  there  was  chosen. 

The  frigate  that  had  fought  with  Admiral  Hopkins  and 
his  squadron  came  into  Portsmouth,  and  it  appeared  that 
Hopkins's  men  had  not  manoeuvred  so  ably  as  those  of  the 
frigate,  and  that  the  latter  had  outsailed  and  got  away 
from  them. 

^  Thomas  Villiers,  younger  brother  of  the  last  Earl  of  Jersey,  had  married 
Lady  Charlotte  Capel,  eldest  daughter  of  William  Anne  Earl  of  Essex,  by  the 
eldest  daughter  of  the  last  Earl  of  Clarendon  and  Rochester. 

^  Robert  Trevor  Hampden,  formerly  Minister  at  the  Hague,  and  father-in- 
law  of  the  Earl  of  Suffolk. 


1776]  SIEGE   OF   QUEBEC  561 

About  the  same  time  came  a  confirmation^  of  the  rais- 
ing the  siege  of  Quebec,  with  a  very  unintelligible  ostenta- 
tious letter  from  General  Carleton,  in  which  it  appeared 
that,  having  received  200  recruits  by  the  Isis,  he  had 
sallied  out,  and  found  the  Provincials  preparing  to  raise 
the  siege  on  the  sight  of  the  Isis  and  other  ships  with 
General  Burgoyne  and  the  Brunswickers.  Carleton  said 
the  Provincials  had  immediately  fled  and  left  all  their 
cannon  and  stores,  but  with  no  account  of  any  slaughter 
he  had  made,  as  the  first  letters  had  said.  However,  this 
seemed  to  speak  the  Provincials  a  rabble  without  military 
discipline,  and  much  alarmed  the  friends  of  liberty.  It  as 
greatly  raised  the  spirits  of  the  King  and  Court,  who  now 
talked  of  nothing  but  reducing  the  Americans  to  a  state 
of  never  rebelling  again.  The  wind  too  had  been  so  long 
in  the  east,  that  it  was  probable  the  Hessians  would  arrive 
in  America  by  the  end  of  June ;  and  it  was  much  doubted 
whether  the  Americans  would  be  able  to  make  any  stand 
against  regular  forces.  Washington  was  thought  to  have 
been  in  the  wrong  to  have  preferred  the  safety  of  Boston 
to  attacking  Howe's  army.  The  American  islands  were 
certainly  in  great  want  of  provisions  ;  but  if  the  Americans 
took  many  prizes,  they  lost  full  as  many  ships  of  their 
own.  It  was  believed  even  by  Americans  here  that  the 
King's  troops  might  subsist  during  the  winter  in  Virginia ; 
and  these  their  friends  trusted  not  much  to  any  effectual 
stand  but  in  New  England.  The  best  chance  of  the 
Americans  was  by  protracting  the  war,  and  drawing  the 
King's  armies  up  into  the  country.  It  was  hoped  too  that 
the  Hessians  would  be  seduced  by  their  German  brethren ; 
but  upon  the  whole,  the  superior  artillery  and  fleet  of  the 
Royalists,  and  the  inexperience  of  the  Americans,  filled 
the  friends  of  liberty  with  gloomy  apprehensions. 

^  The  Americans  were  said  to  have  defeated  the  Regulars  in  Carolina,  who 
had  been  very  troublesome  to  them,  and  to  have  taken  1500  stand  of  arms 
sent  by  Government  to  Governor  Martin  ;  but  all  advantages  of  the  Ameri- 
cans were  carefully  concealed. 

I.— 2  O 


562       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [June 

%th.  General  Smith  and  Mr.  Brand  Hollis  were  carried 
to  the  King's  Bench,  and  sentenced  to  six  months'  imprison- 
ment and  a  fine  of  looo  marks. 

At  the  end  of  the  month  came  on  the  cause  between 
Mr.  Sayer  and  Lord  Rochford,  when  the  jury  gave  damages 
of  lOOO/.  to  the  former. 

The  Irish  Parliament  having  expired,  there  were  great 
contests  at  the  new  elections,  and  the  American  war  was 
so  unpopular  in  that  country,  that  the  Court  met  with 
sturdy  opposition.  However,  it  carried  the  speaker  Perry 
by  a  large  majority ;  yet  two  Court  bills  were  rejected, 
and  then  the  Parliament,  having  only  met  for  form,  was 
prorogued. 

A  very  different  spirit  reigned  here.  One  Hays,  and 
other  young  lawyers,  wrote  pamphlets  against  liberty,  and 
the  young  Earl  of  Winchelsea,  going  to  Portsmouth  to 
take  leave  of  Captain  Fielding,his  brother-in-law,  embarked 
with  him  as  a  volunteer  for  America.  In  the  meantime 
Lord  North's  friends  grew  very  sick  of  Lord  G.  Germaine's 
assuming  ascendant.  The  King,  whether  from  the  humour 
in  his  blood,  or  vexation  from  the  Prince,  visibly  wasted 
and  looked  very  ill.  The  Prince  was  evidently  very  quick, 
and  had  actually,  by  pumping  a  groom  who  rode  out  with 
the  King,  found  out  who  was  to  be  his  Governor. 


1776] 


JULY 

WILKES  had  stood  again  for  Chamberlain  of 
the  City  ;  but  whether  the  money  of  the 
Court  prevailed,  or  that  the  citizens  were 
offended  at  his  attempting  such  an  innovation, 
though  the  place  was  only  voted  from  year  to  year,  he  lost 
it  on  the  first  of  the  month,  after  a  poll  of  several  days,  by 
a  majority  against  him  of  1196. 

2nd.  The  Gazette  declared  the  promotion  to  higher 
titles  of  twelve  Irish  peers,  and  the  creation  of  eighteen 
new.  Thirty  creations  at  once  was  more  than  had  ever 
been  made,  even  at  the  beginning  of  a  reign.  It  was  a 
mob  of  nobility.  The  King  in  private  laughed  much  at 
the  eagerness  for  such  insignificant  honours. 

The  promotions  and  creations  were  as  follows : — Vis- 
count Lisburne,  Viscount  Ligonier,  and  Lord  Clanwilliam, 
were  raised  to  Earls  of  the  same  name ;  Viscount  Clare 
was  made  Earl  Nugent,  and  Viscount  Crosbie  Earl  of 
Glandore. 

The  dignity  of  Viscount  of  the  kingdom  of  Ireland  was 
conferred  on  Thomas  Southwell,  by  title  of  Viscount 
Southwell,  of  Castle  Mattress,  in  the  county  of  Limerick ; 
the  Right  Honourable  Thomas  Baron  Knapton,  by  the 
title  of  Viscount  de  Vesci,  of  Abbeyleix,  in  the  Queen's 
County ;  the  Right  Honourable  William  Willoughby, 
Baron  Mount  Florence,  by  the  title  of  Viscount  Enniskillen, 
in  the  county  of  Fermanagh  ;  the  Right  Honourable 
Francis  Baron  Orwell,  by  the  title  of  Viscount  Orwell ; 
the  PJght  Honourable  John  Baron  Baltinglass,  by  the  title 
of  Viscount    Aldborough,   of  the    Palatinate    of    Upper 

563 


564       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [July 

Ormond  ;  the  Right  Honourable  William  Henry  Baron 
Clermont,  by  the  title  of  Viscount  Clermont,  of  Clermont, 
in  the  county  of  Louth,  with  remainder  of  Viscount  and 
Baron  unto  the  Right  Honourable  James  Fortescue,  of 
Ravensdale  Park,  in  the  county  of  Louth,  brother  to  the 
said  Lord  Clermont ;  the  Right  Honourable  William 
Henry  Baron  Dawson,  by  the  title  of  Viscount  Carlow,  in 
the  county  of  Carlow. 

The  dignity  of  Baron  of  the  kingdom  of  Ireland  to 
them  and  their  heirs  male  unto — 

The  Right  Honourable  Thomas  Maude,  Baronet,  by 
the  title  of  Baron  de  Montalt  of  Hawarden,  in  the  county 
of  Tipperary  ;  the  Right  Honourable  Sir  George  Macart- 
ney, by  the  title  of  Baron  Macartney  of  Lissanoure,  in  the 
county  of  Antrim  ;  the  Right  Honourable  Sir  Archibald 
Acheson,  Baronet,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Gosford  of 
Market  Hill,  in  the  county  of  Armagh. 

The  Right  Honourable  Ralph  Howard,  by  the  title  of 
Baron  Clonmore,  of  Clonmore  Castle,  in  the  county  of 
Carlow;  Sir  Richard  Philipps,  Baronet,  by  the  title  of  Baron 
Milford ;  Sir  Thomas  Wynn,  Baronet,  by  the  title  of  Baron 
Newborough  of  Newborough  ;  Sir  Charles  Bingham,  by 
the  title  of  Baron  Lucan,  of  Castlebar,  in  the  county  of 
Mayo ;  Sir  Alexander  Macdonald,  by  the  name  of  Baron 
Macdonald,  of  Slate,  in  the  county  of  Antrim ;  Sir  William 
Mayne,  Baronet,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Newhaven,  of 
Carrick  Mayne,  in  the  county  of  Dublin ;  James  Agar,  Esq., 
by  the  title  of  Baron  of  Clisden,  in  the  county  of  Kilkenny; 
William  Edwardes,  Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Kensing- 
ton ;  William  Henry  Lyttelton,  Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron 
Westcote,  of  Balamare,  in  the  county  of  Longford ;  Robert 
Henry  Ongley,  Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Ongley,  of  Old 
Warden,  in  Ireland. 

Molyneux  Shuldham,  Esq.,  Vice-Admiral  of  the  Blue 
Squadron  of  his  Majesty's  Fleet,  by  the  title  of  Baron 
Shuldham. 


1776]  AMERICAN   NEWS  565 

John  Bourke,  Esq.,  of  Palmerstown,  in  the  county  of 
Kildare,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Naas,  of  Naas,  in  the  said 
county. 

Sentleger  Sentleger,  Esq., by  the  title  of  Baron  Doneraile, 
of  Doneraile,  in  the  county  of  Cork  ;  Clotworthy  Upton, 
Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Templetown,  in  the  county 
of  Antrim ;  Hugh  Massey,  Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron 
Massey,  of  Duntrylergue,  in  the  county  of  Limerick. 

The  Red  Riband  was  given  to  General  Carleton  for  his 
defence  of  Quebec,  which  he  had  maintained  against  the 
opinion  of  his  officers.  Lord  George  Germaine  strongly 
opposed  this  reward. 

i^th.  General  Conway  had  a  slight  paralytic  stroke  in 
his  face,  occasioned  by  catching  cold. 

The  month  passed  with  no  other  news  than  General 
Howe  with  his  forces  having  sailed  from  Halifax  on  the 
loth  of  June,  till  the  three  or  four  last  days,  when  the 
Court  heard  that  nine  Jamaicamen,  richly  loaded,  had 
been  taken  by  two  or  three  American  privateers.^  At  the 
same  time  came  a  letter  from  General  Carleton  with  an 
account  of  having  driven  the  Americans  out  of  St.  John's, 
Chamblee,  and  Montreal,  after  a  bold  attack  on  their  part, 
but  from  which  they  fled  with  great  precipitation  on 
finding  him  so  well  prepared.  By  this  means  the  King 
became  again  master  of  all  Canada.  Carleton's  letter  was 
very  obscure  and  ill  written  ;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that 
Lord  George  Germaine,  out  of  hatred,  had  suffered  it  to 
appear  in  that  rude  manner.  Carleton  had  been  so  offended 
at  the  preference  of  Christie  to  his  own  brother,  that, 
trusting  to  his  great  services,  he  had  taken  so  bold  a  step 
as  to  overlook  the  King's  nomination  of  Christie,  and  send 
him  up  into  the  country,  and  appoint  his  own  brother 
Quartermaster-General.     At  the  same  time  he  would  not 

^  A  very  rich  ship  laden  with  ammunition  and  provisions  had  been 
delivered  up  to  the  Americans  by  the  Captain,  who  was  an  American,  and  for 
trusting  whom  Lord  Sandwich  was  much  blamed.  The  ship  was  very  valuable 
and  of  great  importance  to  the  losers  and  gainers. 


566       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [July 

deign  to  inform  Lord  George  of  his  farther  designs,  which 
were  to  prepare  to  pass  the  Lakes.  This  the  Ministers 
learnt  from  Sir  William  Douglas.^ 

2(^th.  Advice  that  General  Howe  was  off  Halifax,  but 
had  not  been  joined  by  his  brother. 

A  letter  of  Lord  George  Germaine,  with  severe  orders, 
having  been  intercepted,  General  Lee  ordered  Governor 
Eden  to  be  seized,  but  he  escaped.  The  Congress  was 
angry  at  Lee. 

In  this  month  Don  Lewis,  youngest  brother  of  the  King 
of  Spain,  and  formerly  Cardinal,  being  in  love  with  a 
Dutch  2  lady,  and  insisting  on  marrying  her  in  spite  of  the 
King,  his  Majesty  at  last  yielded  upon  condition  of  not 
allowing  her  to  rank  as  Princess  of  the  Blood. 

^  General  Carleton  issued  a  most  humane  order,  inviting  the  wounded 
Provincials  to  come  and  be  taken  care  of,  and  promising  to  send  them  to  their 
homes  when  recovered. 

2  She  was  not  Dutch,  but  Spanish,  being  Dona  Maria  Theresa  Villabriga 
y  Bosas,  Countess  of  Torres  Seccas,  "  a  lady  of  one  of  the  finest  families  in 
Arragon."  She  was  grand-daughter  of  Don  Joseph  de  Bosas,  the  Jacobite 
"  Duke  of  St.  Andrew's,"  and  great-grand-daughter  of  John  Drummond,  ist 
*'  Duke  of  Melfort,"  of  James  II.  creation.  They  were  married  in  January. 
A  contemporary  account  says  *'  This  young  lady  and  her  sister  had  been  for 
some  time  with  their  aunt  the  Marchioness  [of  St.  Leonards] ;  she  is  very 
beautiful,  about  seventeen  years  of  age,  and  endowed  with  excellent  qualities. 
Don  Louis  saw  her  and  desired  to  have  her  for  his  wife.  He  has  obtained 
the  King's  formal  leave  to  marry  her,  but  with  these  conditions,  that  she 
retain  her  former  name  and  arms,  and  that  the  children,  if  there  shall  be  any, 
take  only  their  mother's  name."  Her  children  did  take  the  name  of  Bourbon, 
however,  and  she  was  allowed  the  title  of  Duchess  of  Chinchon.  They  had 
three  children.  Louis,  who  died  a  Cardinal,  19  March,  1823  ;  Caroline, 
married  1797,  Manuel  de  Godoy,  Prince  of  the  Peace,  and  died  in  1828  ;  and 
Marie  Louise,  Duchess  of  San  Fernando,  who  died  in  1846. — A.  F.  S. 


1776] 


AUGUST 


\oth. 


CAME  letters  from  General  Howe  with  accounts 
of  his  having  landed  his  troops,  after  a  passage 
of  three  weeks,  on  Staten  Island  without 
molestation  ;  but  that  he  had  learned  from 
Governor  Tryon  that  a  battery  of  lOO  pieces  was  erected 
to  defend  New  York  towards  the  sea,  and  that  a  very 
numerous  army  of  Provincials,  strongly  intrenched,  were 
posted  near.  On  this  report  the  General  had  thought  it 
prudent  to  wait  for  the  junction  of  his  brother  General 
Clinton,  but  that  he  was  preparing  to  send  a  naval  force  up 
the  river.  He  informed  the  Government  that  the  Con- 
gress had  declared  all  the  provinces  independent ;  had 
seized  Franklin,  Governor  of  Jersey  ;  and  condemned  the 
Mayor  of  New  York  to  be  hanged  for  corresponding  with 
Tryon,  but  had  not  executed  him.  Howe  boasted  of 
having  been  joined  by  60  men.  Provincials,  and  of  expect- 
ing 500  more.  I  was  told  by  good  authority  that  the 
Government  had  suppressed  several  disagreeable  circum- 
stances, and  indeed  the  above  were  far  from  favourable  to 
them. 

2\st.  An  express  from  General  Clinton  brought  advice 
of  the  total  failure  of  the  attempt  on  Charles  Town.  The 
Ministers  had  boasted  that  a  fifty- gun  ship  had  been  got 
over  the  bar  there,  which  had  always  been  thought  impos- 
sible. The  forces  under  General  Clinton  and  Lord  Corn- 
wallis  had  landed  on  Long  Island,  where  they  had  been 
told  the  pass  was  fordable.  They  found  it  very  deep  and 
could  not  act.  The  fleet  under  Sir  Peter  Parker  attacked 
a   fort   between   them   and   the   town.     The   Provincials 

%^1 


568       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Aug. 

received  and  repulsed  them  with  great  bravery — burnt 
a  man-of-war,  on  board  of  which  the  Admiral  was,  who 
himself  was  wounded  in  six  places;  the  Captain,  the 
Lieutenant,  and  200  men  were  killed  ;  and  the  Royalists 
were  forced  to  burn  a  store-ship  lest  it  should  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy. 

The  same  day  the  famous  Chevalier  Deon  appeared 
before  Lord  Mansfield,  on  a  complaint  of  having  sent  a 
challenge  to  one  Morande,  an  infamous  wretch  who  had 
fled  from  France  for  having  written  a  most  scandalous 
libel,  the  "  Gazettier  cuirasse."  Deon  avowed  being  a 
woman.  The  best  account  I  could  collect  of  the  Chevalier 
was  as  follows  :^ — The  Due  de  Choiseul,  I  know,  believed 

^  There  is  no  longer  any  mystery  connected  with  the  story  of  d'Eon.  He  was 
of  a  good  French  family,  and  was  born  in  1728.  He  was  an  excellent  scholar, 
soldier,  and  political  intriguer.  It  was  in  the  service  of  Louis  XV.  that  he 
went  to  Russia  in  female  attire,  obtained  employment  as  "lectrice,"  or 
female  reader  to  the  Czarina  Elizabeth,  and  under  that  disguise  carried  on 
political  and  semi-political  negotiations  with  wonderful  audacity  and  success. 
At  a  subsequent  period  he  returned  to  Russia  in  male  costume,  describing  him- 
self as  the  brother  of  the  Czarina's  lectrice.  He  wrote  well,  plotted  well,  and 
fought  well.  In  1762  he  appeared  in  England  as  Secretary  of  Embassy  to 
the  Duke  de  Nivernois.  It  was  during  his  residence  here  that  he  accused  De 
Guerchy,  during  the  embassy  of  the  latter,  who  had  attempted  to  place  him 
in  a  subordinate  post  after  he  had  temporarily  exercised  the  office  of  Minister 
Plenipotentiary,  of  a  design  to  poison  him.  The  accusation  was  deemed 
well  founded,  but  a  nolle  prosequi  saved  De  Guerchy  from  all  earthly  penalty, 
save  contempt.  D'Eon  continued  to  reside  here,  the  active  diplomatic  agent 
of  the  French  Court,  and  protected  by  his  Sovereign,  even  when  the  latter 
appeared  to  yield  to  his  enemies.  Louis  XVI.  granted  him  a  pension  ;  and 
when  he  went  over  to  Versailles  to  return  thanks  for  the  favour,  Marie 
Antoinette  insisted  on  his  assuming  women's  attire.  To  gratify  this  foolish 
whim  d'Eon  one  day  swept  into  the  royal  presence  decked  like  a  duchess,  and 
supported  the  character  to  the  great  delight  of  the  royal  and  noble  spectators. 
After  thus  masquerading  for  some  time  he  returned  to  England  in  1784  ;  and 
being  here  in  1789,  after  the  Revolution  was  accomplished,  the  Convention 
deprived  him  of  his  pension,  and  placed  his  name  in  the  fatal  list  of  imigris. 
From  the  EngUsh  Government  he  received  a  pension  of  200/.  a  year,  but 
his  extravagant  style  of  living  involved  him  in  debt  and  distress.  In  his  old 
days  he  turned  his  fencing  capabilities  to  account,  appearing  in  matches  with 
the  famous  Chevalier  de  St.  George,  and  permanently  reassuming  female 
attire.  This  strange  personage  died  in  1810  ;  when  an  inspection  of  the  body 
by  several  medical  men,  in  presence  of  the  Pere  Elisee,  who  attended  for 
Louis  XVIII.,  was  followed  by  a  public  certificate  that  the  chevalier  was  an 
old  man.     He  died  at  the  age  of  eighty-two. — D. 

The  bon  tnot  of  Lord  Mount  Edgcumbe's  must  be  mentioned,  '  That  d'Eon 
was  his  own  widow. ' — A.  F.  S. 


PROGRESS   OF   THE   WAR  569 

it  was  a  woman.  After  the  death  of  Louis  XV.  Deon  had 
leave  to  go  to  France,  on  which  the  young  Comte  de 
Guerchy  went  to  M.  de  Vergennes,  Secretary  of  State, 
and  gave  him  notice  that  the  moment  Deon  landed  at 
Calais,  he,  Guerchy,  would  cut  his  throat,  or  Deon  should 
cut  his ;  on  which  Vergennes  told  the  Count  that  Deon 
was  certainly  a  woman.  Louis  XV.,  though  so  indolent, 
had  long  secretly  employed  the  Comte  de  Broglie,  brother 
of  the  Marshal,  to  get  him  intelligence  from  all  parts  of 
Europe,  for  which  the  Count  had  a  pension,  and  the  King 
corresponded  with  the  Count  unknown  to  his  Ministers^ 
and  but  seldom  spoke  to  him.  Even  when  the  Count  was 
exiled  on  his  quarrel  with  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon,  the 
King  still  wrote  to  him.  His  Majesty  went  much  farther  ; 
for  when  the  Due  de  Choiseul  had  sent  a  vessel,  which 
lay  six  months  in  the  Thames,  to  trepan  and  bring  off 
Deon,  the  King  wrote  a  letter  with  his  own  hand  to  give 
him  warning  of  the  vessel. 

The  Duke  of  Portland  carried  his  suit  finally  against 
Sir  James  Lowther. 

The  Ministers  were  exceedingly  dismayed  at  the  failure 
at  Charles  Town,  which  was  much  worse  than  they  had 
owned,  and  thoroughly  disgraceful.  The  Duke  of  New- 
castle went  to  Lord  North  at  Bushy  Park,  to  lament  the 
miscarriage  at  Charles  Town,  and  to  inquire  into  his 
cousin  Clinton's  behaviour  ;  but  finding  Lord  North  treat 
the  affair  with  his  usual  indifference  and  jollity,  took  notice 
of  it  to  him.  "  Faith,  my  Lord,"  said  Lord  North,  "  if 
fretting  would  make  me  thin,  I  would  be  as  sorry  as  your 
Grace ;  but  since  it  will  not  have  that  effect,  I  bear  it  as 
well  as  I  can."  Clinton  and  Parker  were  much  blamed ; 
but  it  was  seen  now  that  there  was  little  prospect  of 
finishing  the  war  this  year,  and  the  expense  was  so  enor- 
mous that  it  could  not  be  borne  for  another.  It  was  now 
in  their  own  mouths  that,  unless  Howe  succeeded  at  New 
York,  the  Ministry  must  be  changed.     Great  mismanage- 


570       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Aug. 

ment  and  profusion  was  attributed  to  Lord  Sandwich,  and 
Lord  George  Germaine  complained  to  the  King  of  his 
disposition  of  the  fleet.  The  Commodore  at  Boston  had 
quitted  the  place  and  gone  to  Halifax  :  it  was  said  in  his 
behalf  that  he  was  obliged  to  go  thither  for  water ;  yet, 
Lord  Howe  meeting  him  at  sea,  and  asking  him  why  he 
had  abandoned  Boston,  he  replied  he  had  been  annoyed 
by  batteries.  Lord  Howe  answered,  "In  the  last  war  he 
sought  batteries,  not  avoided  them." 


SEPTEMBER 

GOVERNOR  EDEN  arrived  in  town  from 
America.  On  being  forced  by  the  Provincials 
to  leave  his  government  of  Maryland,  he  had 
taken  refuge  with  Lord  Dunmore  at  Gwynn's 
Island,  where  the  Virginians  attacked  the  latter,  and  drove 
them  to  their  ships,  which  the  Provincials  then  cannonaded, 
and  obliged  three  men-of-war  to  bear  away,  after  burning 
some  schooners,  for  fear  they  should  fall  into  the  hands  of 
the  Provincials.  Lord  Dunmore  went  to  another  island, 
where  he  met  with  the  same  treatment.  Eden  added  that 
the  Americans  had  thirteen  new  frigates  of  twenty-six 
guns  each  ready  to  launch,  and  that  Admiral  Hopkins 
was  gone  in  search  of  the  West-India  homeward-bound 
fleet. 

At  the  same  time  came  letters  from  Carleton,  that  he 
was  delayed  from  crossing  the  lakes  by  being  obliged  to 
build  batteaux.  He  had  refused  to  admit  five  hundred 
Indians  who  had  come  and  offered  themselves,  and  sent 
them  back.  This  was  said  to  be  from  a  principle  of 
humanity,  and  that  his  refusal  would  make  them  join  the 
Provincials. 

It  was  said  that  the  latter  had  demolished  Crown  Point, 
but  meant  to  defend  Ticonderoga.  I  was  told  that  our 
fleet  had  threatened  to  burn  New  York  if  attempted  to 
be  fortified  ;  but  General  Lee  had  sent  the  Commander 
word  that  he  would  take  all  the  King's  friends  in  New 
York,  and  set  them  in  the  front  line  if  the  ships  attempted 
to  disturb  them,  on  which  they  desisted,  and  he  fortified 
the  place.     Eden  was  knighted. 

571 


572       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE  [Sept. 

The  Court  was  greatly  dismayed.  It  was  said  in  private 
letters  that  the  Provincials  had  attacked  Clinton  in 
his  retreat,  and  cut  off  numbers  of  his  men.  Clinton  had 
endeavoured  to  dissuade  Parker  from  the  attempt,  and 
had  sent  over  a  defence  of  himself,  but  it  was  not  pub- 
lished, and  Lord  George  Germaine  was  much  abused  for 
suppressing  it.  The  Court,  at  least  some,  had  thoughts 
of  a  change,  and  wished  for  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  Rigby 
went  to  him,  but  was  coldly  received.  Lady  Hertford 
owned  to  me  she  wished  to  see  the  Duke  and  General 
Conway  ministers.  I  had  the  satisfaction  of  having 
Dr.  Hunter,  Queen's  man  midwife  and  favourite,  say  to 
me,  "  How  the  poor  Scotch  will  be  abused !  I  think 
General  Conway  must  go  to  America  and  make  peace." 
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  talked  of  retiring,  at  least  of  not  attend- 
ing Parliament,  on  pretence  of  ill  health. 

i6th.  Died  Jeremy  Dyson,  on  whom  this  epitaph  was 

made, — 

"  To  the  grave  see  Republican  Jerry  descend, 
A  prerogative  tool  and  his  Majesty's  friend  ; 
Yet  it  ought  not  our  wonder,  but  laughter  to  move, 
That  the  son  of  a  taylor  a  turncoat  should  prove." 

Stanley  was  appointed  Cofferer  in  Dyson's  room,  and 
Sir  Alexander  Gilmour^  brought  into  Parliament;  he  was 
a  Scot.  Lord  Carlisle  had  just  chosen  one  of  Sir  G. 
Elliot's  sons  for  Morpeth. 

The  Ministers  had  certain  intelligence  that  one  Deane, 
agent  from  the  American  Congress,  was  at  Versailles. 

2Qth.  A  ship  arrived  at  Clyde  brought  an  account  that 
Lord  Howe  had  joined  his  brother,  and  that  they  intended 
to  attack  New  York  immediately. 

23;^^.  Lord  North  broke  his  arm  by  a  fall  from  his  horse. 

Account  of  seven  ships  from  the  Straits  taken  by  the 
Provincials. 

^  This  was  designed,  for  Lord  North  wrote  in  his  favour  to  Lord  Irwin,  to 
whom  belonged  the  borough  of  Horsham,  but  he  would  not  consent. 


1776]       ALARMING   ACCOUNTS   OF  THE   WAR         573 

2^th.  Advice  that  Lord  Howe  had,  in  the  middle  of 
July,  sent  a  letter  to  Washington  for  treaty,  which  the 
latter  refused  to  receive  because  his  titles  were  omitted  : 
the  Congress  thanked  Washington. 

2jth.  Letters  from  Quebec  ;  contents  kept  secret.  Some 
said  Carleton  had  sent  word  his  boats  would  be  ready  in 
ten  days,  others  that  he  must  lay  aside  his  plan  till  next 
year.  The  Hessians  had  not  joined  him  till  the  15th 
of  August.^  General  Carleton  would  not  correspond  with 
Lord  George  Germaine. 

Letters  from  officers  at  New  York  said  they  were 
negotiating,  and  that  peace  was  expected ;  but  on  the 

2Zth,  a  Major  Reade,  who  had  sold  out,  arrived  with 
letters  from  General  Howe,  that  all  treaty  was  at  an  end, 
that  he  had  got  Clinton  and  all  his  reinforcements;  and 
Reade  said  he  thought  news  of  a  battle  might  have  got 
here  before  him.  Provincials  had  melted  the  statue  of  the 
King  for  bullets,  and  called  him  the  late  King. 

Letters  from  the  Howes.  Lord  Howe,  after  refusing 
the  title  of  General  to  Washington,  submitted  to  give  it 
to  him  on  pretence  of  treating  for  the  exchange  of 
prisoners.  These  letters,  however,  said  that  all  negotiation 
was  at  an  end,  and  that  two  50-gun  ships  that  had  passed 
above  New  York  had  been  beaten  back,  and  narrowly 
escaped  being  burnt  by  the  fireships  of  the  Provincials. 
It  was  given  out  that  the  attempt  on  New  York  would 
still  be  made,  but  it  was  doubted. 

Woolridge,  who  had  been  set  up  for  sheriff,  declined 
it,  pleading  in  his  public  speech  to  the  Livery  of  London 
that  he  was  a  bankrupt  by  the  American  war,  and  he  taxed 
Lord  Dunmore  of  having  seized  a  ship  of  his,  which  the 
Admiralty  Court  had  declared  not  legal  capture. 

^  It  was  kept  as  a  great  secret,  but  it  was  certain,  that  General  Carleton's 
letters  that  arrived  on  the  25th,  had  said  that  he  was  obliged  to  abandon  his 
enterprise  for  this  year. 


[Oct. 


OCTOBER 

THE  Ministers  were  quite  in  despair  at  the 
unprosperous  state  of  their  affairs.  The 
King  could  not  disguise  his  concern,  which 
increased  his  indisposition ;  and  at  the  re- 
views everybody  remarked  his  uneasiness,  and  how  much 
he  was  fallen  away.  It  was  thought  that  Lord  North  had 
a  mind  to  resign  ;  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  month  the 
King  and  Queen  went  to  him  at  Bushy,  and  staid  with 
him  three  hours,  as  it  was  supposed,  to  prevail  on  him  not 
to  quit.  They  complained  exceedingly  of  General  Carle- 
ton  for  dilatoriness,  and  for  persisting  not  to  write  a  syl- 
lable to  Lord  George  Germaine.  They  were  astonished 
at  not  hearing  from  General  Howe,  who,  it  was  said,  had 
sent  them  word  he  would  make  his  attack  on  the  26th 
of  August.  A  ship  arrived  at  Nantes  in  France  had 
spread  a  report  that  the  attack  had  been  made,  and  that 
Howe  had  beaten  the  Provincials,  and  killed  6000, 
but  that  Washington  had  rallied  his  troops,  and  driven 
back  the  royal  army,  of  which  he  had  killed  5000; 
but,  as  these  actions  were  said  to  have  happened  on  the 
15th  of  August,  the  report  soon  lost  ground.  All  these 
alarms  were  at  last  dispelled  ;  for  on  the 

\oth,  by  three  in  the  morning,  General  Howe's  first 
aide-de-camp  arrived  at  Lord  George  Germaine's  with  an 
account  that  much  changed  the  state  of  affairs,  and  filled 
the  Court  with  an  extravagance  of  joy,  which  they  dis- 
played with  the  utmost  ostentation.  The  whole  army  being 
assembled,  which  it  was  thought  amounted  to  about  28,000 
men  (though  said  to  be  more  by  the  Royalists),  and  the 

574 


1776]  REVERSES  OF  THE  PROVINCIALS  575 

fleet,  General  Howe  attacked  Long  Island  on  the  22nd 
of  August,  and  landed  without  opposition.  And  it  was  said 
(though  not  mentioned  in  the  "Gazette")  that  he  had  caused 
the  fleet  to  make  a  movement  which  had  deceived  the 
Provincials ;  and  it  was  added,  that  on  the  26th  he  had 
ordered  his  first  parties  to  retreat,  which  encouraging  the 
Provincials  to  pursue  in  the  park,  they  found  themselves 
in  the  morning  of  the  27th,  when  the  general  attack  was 
made,  entirely  enveloped,  and  fled.  Certain  it  was  that 
the  Provincials,  who  were  to  the  amount  of  10,000  on  the 
island,  which  was  strongly  fortified,  made  no  resistance,  but 
fled  in  precipitation.  The  island  was  entirely  taken, 
with  the  loss  of  only  60  killed  and  250  wounded.  Of 
the  Provincials  3000  were  taken,  killed,  wounded,  or 
drowned  in  the  morass;  and  though  the  Court  endeavoured 
to  stifle  it,  it  was  soon  known  that  the  Hessians  had  com- 
mitted great  butchery,  and  refused  to  give  any  quarter. 
Lord  Stirling^  and  two  other  general  officers  of  the  Pro- 
vincials were  taken  prisoners  with  their  artillery  and  stores, 
but  they  had  burnt  the  corn  on  the  island.  In  the  King's 
troops  there  was  a  Paoli ;  if  a  nephew  of  the  Corsican 
general,  it  showed  what  an  infamous  wretch  he  was,  who 
had  accepted  a  pension  from  the  English  Crown,  which 
had  abandoned  his  countrymen,  and  who  now  sent  a  rela- 
tion to  invade  the  x^mericans,  who  were  fighting  for  their 
liberty  as  his  countrymen  had  done. 

The  letters  said  that  they  learnt  from  the  prisoners 
that  there  were  4000  sick  in  New  York,  and  that  there 
were  great  dissensions  among  the  New  Englanders  and 
New  Yorkists — the  former  insisting  on  the  town  being 
given  up  to  them,  which  the  latter  concluding  was  with 
the  intention  to  burn  it,  had  refused  ;  and  general  Howe 
could  discover  from  Long  Island  great  numbers  leaving 

^  A  claimant  rather  to  the  title,  which  had  been  extinct  since  1739. — D. 
(Major-General  Alexander  of  the  United  States  service,  styled  Lord  Stirling. 
He  died  in  1793. — A.  F.  S.). 


576       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Oct. 

the  town,  which  he  imagined  were  the  New  Englanders. 
His  letters  said,  too,  that  the  Provincials  intended  to  make 
their  stand  at  King's  Bridge,  14J  miles  from  New  York 
through  a  country  of  passes. 

This  made  a  very  great  alteration,  particularly  from  the 
bad  behaviour  of  the  Provincials,  and  sounded  very  ill 
after  so  haughty  a  rejection  of  peace,  and  all  the  extremi- 
ties they  had  gone  to.  It  was  most  probable  that  the  New 
Yorkists,  who  would  not  let  their  houses  be  burnt,  would 
submit  to  recover  them  ;  and  it  seemed  a  fatal  measure, 
that  they  had  not  burnt  the  town  previously,  and  endea- 
voured to  draw  the  Royalists  up  into  the  country.  Now 
it  might  be  expected  that  the  Royalists  in  every  province 
would  exert  themselves,  and,  profiting  by  the  panic,  preach 
up  submission,  of  their  being  ready  for  which  symptoms 
enough  already  appeared.  All  the  inhabitants  of  Long 
Island  immediately  offered  to  take  the  oaths  to  the  King  ; 
and  the  next  morning  after  the  victory  they  brought  in 
8000  head  of  cattle  to  the  army,  which  was  in  the  utmost 
want  of  fresh  provisions.  The  people,  weary  of  the  paper- 
money  of  the  Congress,  were  glad  to  take  General  Howe's 
dollars.i  Thus  was  a  capital  blow  given  to  the  war  ;  and 
news  even  came  by  a  ship  to  Ireland,  that  sailed  on  Sep- 
tember the  4th,  two  days  after  Howe's  letter,  the  captain 
of  which  said  he  had  heard  a  cannonading  for  twelve 
hours,  which  then  ceased,  and  he  concluded  Howe  was  in 
possession  of  New  York.  Lord  Harcourt  sent  this  account 
express  from  Ireland.  The  "  Gazette  "  came  out  the  next 
day  with  great  ostentation.  The  more  moderate  of  the 
Anti-Americans  hoped  this  blow  would  produce  peace,  but 
the  extravagant  joy  of  the  Court  gave  no  such  prospect. 

^  By  what  was  called  the  Tender  Law,  Congress  had  declared  that  the 
paper  dollars  formed  a  legal  tender  for  payment,  or  in  satisfaction  of  a  debt 
offered  by  a  debtor  to  a  creditor.  The  difference  between  the  value  of  this 
paper  representative  and  the  actual  coin  was  at  last  so  great,  that  looo  paper 
dollars  were  only  accounted  equal  to  a  single  silver  dollar.  The  Congress 
ultimately  abolished  this  ruinous  law. — D. 


1776]  ADDRESS   VOTED   TO   THE   KING  577 

Some  already  declared  against  restitution  of  the  charters. 
It  was  not  likely  America,  even  if  terrified  into  submission, 
could  be  maintained  without  an  army,  and  for  that,  there 
was  no  doubt,  they  would  make  the  Americans  pay, — two 
circumstances  that  would  for  ever  keep  America  from 
being  flourishing  and  commercial  as  it  had  been.  Its 
independence  had  been  the  source  of  invitation  and  riches. 
The  country  gentlemen  would  expect  indemnification  for 
the  increase  of  the  land-tax,  and  yet  the  vast  sums  still 
necessary  to  be  raised,  will  sooner  increase  their  burthens 
— and  if  a  new  debt  of  ten  or  twelve  millions  is  to  be  in- 
curred, the  Court  may  be  triumphant,  but  the  nation  is  but 
more  undone — and  the  army  and  fleet,  that  must  at  least 
winter  another  season  in  America,  will  but  make  us  still 
more  unprepared  for  a  foreign  war. 

The  savage  behaviour  of  the  Hessians  was  the  reverse 
of  what  had  been  expected.  It  was  foretold  that  being 
German  Protestants,  they  would  join  their  brethren  in 
America,  and  be  tempted  by  offers  of  settlements. 

Some  of  the  junto  expressed  joy  at  the  probability  of 
New  York  being  saved.  The  Bedfords,  on  the  contrary, 
had  long  ago  vapoured  that  it  would  be  right  to  destroy 
their  towns,  and  that  America  was  so  powerful  it  ought 
to  be  put  back  fifty  years.^ 

Howe's  letters  notified  that  the  Provincials  had  sent  an 
army  against  Halifax. 

The  King  immediately  determined  to  send  a  red  riband 
to  General  Howe.  An  extraordinary  one  was  to  be  sent 
to  him ;  but  Lord  Onslow  dying  on  the  9th,  his  was 
given  :  at  the  same  time  Lord  Lothian  had  Lord  Cath- 
cart's  vacant  green  riband. 

The  Mayor  and  Corporation  of  York  voted  an  address 
to  the  King  on  the  victory  at  Long  Island.  This  showed 
the  incapacity  of  Lord  Rockingham  to  be  at  the  head  of 
an   Opposition.     He  had  last  year  neglected  to  get  an 

^  This  has  been  previously  set  down  as  the  maxim  of  Rigby. — D, 
I.— 2  P 


578      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Oct. 

address  against  the  war  from  the  county  of  York,  where 
he  had  the  greatest  influence. 

igth.  Lord  Mansfield  was  created  an  Earl,  with  rever- 
sion to  Lord  Stormont.  This  reversion  seemed  contrary 
to  the  acceptation  of  the  Union,  but  the  Scots  were 
enough  in  favour  now  to  leap  over  any  bounds  that 
opposed  them  ;  and  this  earldom  being  taken  now  showed 
the  victory  at  Long  Island  had  surmounted  all  Lord 
Mansfield's  panics,  and  implied  that  he  chose  to  be 
thought  now  the  chief  author  of  the  American  war,  as 
I  believe  he  was. 

22nd.  The  differences  between  the  Courts  of  Madrid 
and  Lisbon,  occasioned  by  hostilities  committed  in 
America  by  a  Portuguese  Governor,  and  which  were 
thought  to  be  compromised,  appeared,  after  long  nego- 
tiation, not  to  be  settled.  An  account  came  this  day  that 
a  Spanish  fleet  was  sailed,  and  that  the  Portuguese  were 
raising  men  as  fast  as  possible.  The  Stocks  immediately 
fell.  The  Portuguese,  to  engage  our  protection  against 
Spain,  had  taken  strong  part  with  us  against  our  colonies ; 
and  that  perhaps  tempted  the  Spaniards  the  more  to 
break  with  them.  France  had,  or  pretended  to  have, 
recommended  peace ;  but  France  continued  to  arm,  in 
the  warmest  manner,  both  by  sea  and  land.  Neither 
Spain  nor  France  quite  liked  the  precedent  of  our  colonies 
setting  up  for  themselves ;  but  that  was  a  distant  danger, 
and  we  seemed  to  offer  them  too  many  advantages  to  be 
resisted  :  the  perishing  of  our  fleet  in  America,  our  being 
stripped  of  men,  the  debts  we  were  contracting,  the  naked- 
ness of  Ireland,  Spain's  prospect  of  recovering  Jamaica, 
France's  hopes  of  ravishing  the  East  Indies  from  us  and 
our  American  trade,  with  the  loss  France  suffered  by  our 
war  in  their  tobacco,  which  they  might  engross  by  pro- 
tecting our  colonies,  and  the  as  fair  chance  of  recovering 
Canada, — all  these  views  must  surmount  the  distant  appre- 
hension of  their  colonies  rebelling.     France,  indeed,  had 


1776]  WARRANTS  ISSUED  FOR  PRESSING  SEAMEN  579 

a  most  easy  game  to  play.  Our  Ministers  desired  nothing 
but  to  be  deceived  ;  that  is,  assurances  of  not  counten- 
ancing the  colonies,  which  they  gave,  while  they  gave  all 
manner  of  countenance  to  them ;  and  now,  at  the  very 
moment  that  the  Spanish  fleet  sailed,  M.  de  Noailles 
arrived  here  their  new  Ambassador. 

2ird.  It  was  spread  that  a  ship  arrived  at  Bristol  had 
brought  an  account  that  the  Americans  had  abandoned 
New  York,  and  had  retired  to  King's  Bridge  to  make 
their  stand.  In  the  evening  a  person  pasted  up  in  Lloyd's 
Coffee  House  notice  that  the  "  Bristol "  was  arrived  in  the 
River  with  Admiral  Shuldham,  who  brought  the  same 
account,  and  that  Howe  was  within  cannon-shot  of  the 
Americans.  Robinson,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  wrote 
this  account  to  a  rich  Jew  merchant,  and  added  the 
Provincials  were  70,000  strong.  Bells  were  rung  and 
guns  fired  to  confirm  this,  but  not  a  word  was  true  ; 
and  it  appeared  to  have  been  an  artifice  to  keep  up  the 
Stocks,  which,  however,  did  not  succeed,  for  they  continued 
falling. 

26th.  An  embargo  laid  on  Ireland  and  proclamation  for 
seamen. 

2Zth.  Warrants  issued  for  pressing  seamen.^  The 
Government  was  certainly  afraid  of  a  war  with  France, 
and  hoped  to  stop  it  by  these  preparations.  The  differ- 
ences  between   Spain   and    Portugal  were   certainly   not 


^  Pressgangs  were  now  actively  engaged  in  "a  hot  press."  In  London 
alone,  in  less  than  a  month,  800  men  were  "pressed."  The  streets  were 
swept  of  all  who  could  not  give  a  good  account  of  themselves  ;  the  ships  in 
the  river  were  stripped  of  all  except  master's  mate  and  the  boys.  Lives  were 
lost,  "as  usual,"  add  the  papers  of  the  day,  from  which  I  gather  these  facts. 
I  read  of  a  lieutenant  of  the  Navy  "  shot  dead,"  which  was  not  so  usual  on 
the  side  of  the  pressers.  The  latter  even  laid  hands  on  John  Tubbs,  the 
"  City  Waterman,"  who  claimed  exemption  by  right  of  his  office.  The  case 
was  solemnly  argued  in  the  King's  Bench,  and  being  decided  against  him, 
Tubbs  was  forced  to  go  to  sea.  The  general  distress  too  was  severely  felt  at 
this  time  ;  a  time  ill-chosen  by  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  to  go  before  the 
same  tribunal  as  John  Tubbs,  and  claim  exemption  of  Lambeth  Palace  from 
being  rated  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  !     Thi$  claim  was  allowed. — P, 


58o       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Oct. 

adjusted,  and,  the  French  said,  from  the  obstinacy  of  the 
latter. 

31J/.  The  Parliament  met.  The  King's  Speech  was 
evasive  and  far  from  firm.  With  regard  to  America,  it 
charged  all  on  the  ambition  of  their  leaders,  and  said, 
artfully,  their  having  declared  independence  must  unite 
everybody  at  home.  It  mentioned  the  success  at  Canada 
and  New  York,  and  said  the  latter  gave  the  strongest 
hopes  of  the  most  decisive  good  consequences,  though  at 
all  events  another  campaign  would  be  necessary.  As  to 
foreign  affairs,  the  King  said  he  continued  to  receive 
assurances  of  amity  from  the  several  Courts  of  Europe 
(this  was  cold  indeed !),  and  was  using  his  utmost  en- 
deavours to  conciliate  the  differences  between  Spain  and 
Portugal,  yet  thought  it  expedient  to  be  in  a  respectable 
state  of  defence  at  home.  An  address,  applauding  all  the 
late  measures,  was  moved  by  Mr.  Neville  Aldworth,  jun., 
and  Mr.  Hallow  Finch,  two  young  men.  The  first  said, 
the  independence  of  the  Americans  was  in  the  hands  and 
the  abhorrence  of  everybody,  but  they  would  be  taught  the 
value  of  government  from  the  want  of  it.  This  was  a 
war  not  of  ambition  but  necessity,  and  we  were  fighting 
for  the  value  of  all  our  former  triumphs.  The  Opposition 
had  prepared  a  counter-address,  as  their  own  protest,  con- 
demning all  the  late  measures.  Lord  Granby  was  to  have 
moved  it,  but  his  youthful  diffidence  got  the  better,  and  he 
gave  it  to  Lord  John  Cavendish,  who  moved  it,  and  said 
he  never  knew  a  crisis  so  interesting :  we  were  now  in  a 
more  melancholy  situation  than  at  the  meeting  of  Parlia- 
ment last  year.  The  whole  strength  of  this  country  had 
been  tried,  and  had  only  produced  a  declaration  of  inde- 
pendence. He  owned  it  surpassed  his  wisdom  to  know 
what  was  to  be  done.  He  would  propose  recapitulating 
past  errors.  We  ought  not  coolly  to  take  advantage  of  a 
moment  of  victory  to  increase  our  demands.  The  idea  of 
marching  through  the  Continent  of  America  was  absurd. 


1776]         SPEECH   OF   GOVERNOR  JOHNSTON  581 

The  expense  of  love  of  money  were  the  paltry  considera- 
tion and  the  cause  of  these  unhappy  differences.  Distant 
provinces,  with  their  minds  alienated,  would  be  a  burthen 
and  not  a  benefit.  Were  not  the  army  and  fleet  now  in 
America  at  the  mercy  of  the  French?  The  prejudices 
as  well  as  the  rights  of  a  people  ought  to  have  been 
attended  to.  Lord  Granby  seconded  him.  Mr.  Whit- 
more,  usually  a  courtier,  spoke  for  the  Opposition  ;  asked 
if  the  Houses  had  any  terms  to  propose  to  the  Americans  ? 
— if  they  had,  what  terms?  Were  the  present  measures 
Lord  North's,  or  were  they  forced  upon  him  ?  Governor 
Johnston  made  a  very  warm  speech,  and  appealed  to  the 
House  whether  he  ought  to  alter  his  principles  when  all 
he  had  foretold  was  come  to  pass  ?  The  declaration  of 
independence  had  been  a  case  of  necessity.  Would  not 
they  also  call  in  foreign  assistance?  He  urged  the 
Ministers  (and  so  did  others  in  both  Houses,  though 
without  a  reply)  with  the  open  residence  at  Paris  of  Silas 
Deane,  the  agent  for  the  Colonies.  Washington's  business 
was  to  gain  time.  The  Marquis  de  Pombal,  Minister  of 
Portugal,  exceeded  Machiavel  in  art ;  the  whole  quarrel 
was  a  blind.  Why  should  Spain  attack  their  settlements, 
when  she  could  immediately  march  into  their  country? 
The  Speech  from  the  Throne  was  full  of  hypocrisy. 
General  Gage  had  published  a  proclamation  against 
hypocrisy;  he  wished  he  would  execute  it  on  his  Majesty's 
Ministers.  What  gorged  contractor,  what  fawning  courtier, 
or  new-made  peer  would  assert  that  the  Americans  stood 
upon  equal  liberty  with  us?  The  press  for  seamen  was 
carried  on  with  the  greatest  barbarity — several  lives  had 
been  lost.  This,  Wombwell,  a  merchant,  attached  to  Lord 
Sandwich,  denied — said  only  one  life  had  been  lost,  and 
that  the  preparations  for  war  were  popular  in  the  City. 
Wilkes  said  the  pressgangs  did  not  dare  to  enter  the  City, 
from  the  well-known  love  of  liberty  in  the  present  Chief 
Magistrate,  Sawbridge.     The  Americans  had  been  driven 


582       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Oct. 

into  independence  by  the  obstinacy  of  the  Administration. 
The  Ministers  had  foretold  it,  but  had  no  more  reasons  to 
plume  themselves  on  the  completion  than  the  Jesuits,  who 
prophesied  Henry  IV.  would  die  within  the  year,  and 
hired  Ravaillac  to  murder  him.  There  was  no  way  of 
bringing  back  the  Americans  to  temper  but  by  restoring 
their  charters,  repealing  all  the  acts  since  1762,  and  re- 
calling the  army.  The  Ministers  sat  silent,  very  indecently 
at  such  a  moment,  unless  that  they  knew  not  what  to  say. 
T.  Townshend,  provoked  at  this  behaviour,  and  seeing 
Lord  North  go  down  the  House,  started  up  and  said  he 
thought  the  noble  Lord  was  going  away,  and  had  left  the 
debate  to  secretaries  and  clerks  to  finish,  and  send  him  a 
list  of  the  numbers  when  it  was  over.  It  was  the  first 
instance,  he  believed,  of  Ministers  sitting  silent  till  that 
time  of  night  on  a  day  of  so  much  consequence  !  How- 
ever, he  hoped  for  some  information,  if  they  did  not  think 
themselves  too  great  to  be  responsible.  We  had  lost  as 
many  merchantmen  as  in  a  French  and  Spanish  war. 
The  "  Gazette,"  on  the  affair  of  Charles  Town,  had  been  a 
libel  on  General  Clinton.  Men-of-war  could  not  hinder 
an  invasion ;  we  wanted  frigates  at  home  and  had  none. 

Lord  North  then  rose  with  some  apology.^  He  said 
Lord  John  had  said  we  must  carry  America  by  the  sword, 
or  abandon  it.  No,  the  first  measure  would  be  for  some  of 
the  colonies  to  break  off  from  the  general  confederacy.  He 
hoped  to  put  an  end  to  the  troubles  by  vigour  on  one 
hand  and  moderation  on  the  other.  But  Lord  John's  words 
would  give  the  Americans  fresh  courage.  He  had  been 
asked  what  was  the  state  of  foreign  powers.  The  French 
had  six  sail-of-the-line,  and  four  frigates  ready  to  put 
to  sea.  But  when  he  heard  of  their  sending  for  their 
registered  seamen  all  over  their  kingdom,  he  had  thought 
it  necessary  to  arm  too.  We  had  twenty-three  guardships 
fitted  out,  and  partly  manned.     He  did  not  believe  any 

^  This  speech  alone  was  a  full  condemnation  of  the  Ministry. 


^H^']  LORD   NORTH'S   REPLY  583 

hostile  intention  on  the  part  of  any  foreign  power;  that  was 
to  say,  now   immediately.      He   hoped    and    trusted    our 
armament  was  merely  for  precaution.     His  Majesty  had 
no  ambitious  views,  only  to  take  from  the  Americans  the 
hopes  of  foreign  supply.     But  there  was  another  charge, 
the  hypocrisy  in  the  speech — consisting  in  what?     In  his 
Majesty's  wishes  to  restore  America  to  the  full  enjoyment 
of  law  and  liberty.     The  Acts  restraining  that  country 
were  made  in  consequence  of  the  insults  received.     Happy 
was  it  for  the  gentlemen  in  Opposition  that  they  were 
here  where  liberty  exists  ;  if  in  America,  half  as  much  said 
against  the  Congress  would  be  punished.     Colonel  Barre 
said  Lord  North  had  not  answered  what  terms  had  been 
offered  to  the  Americans.     Lord  North  replied  the  trans- 
action had  been  published  in  the  "Gazette"  from  Lord 
Howe's  letters.     Barre  then  complained  that  his  letters 
from  America  were  stopped,  and  he  asked  Lord  North 
whether  any  preparation  of  a  particular  sort  was  making, 
and  whether  Administration  had  any  intelligence  of  it. 
(This  looked  as  if  he  meant  invasion.)     Lord  North  had 
formerly  said,  "  Let  France  and  Spain  both  interfere,  this 
country  was  ready  to  face  them."     Should  Washington  be 
beaten,  he  should  not  alter  his  opinion  ;  liberty  takes  a 
great  deal  of  killing.     Twenty-three  guardships  and  twelve 
others !  they  would  not  find  men  to  man  them ;  nor  could 
a  majority  of  both  Houses  beat  the  French.     It  was  said 
we  had  made  a  treaty  for  20,000  Russians,  but  the  French 
would  be  within  sound  of  that  House,  when  some  of  those 
who  voted  for  the  measures  of  Government  would  be  ready 
to  die  of  the  fright.     Admiral  Keppel  said  if  he  had  been 
attended  to  last  year  we  should  not  be  in  the  situation  he 
feared  we  were  in  now.     Why  were  there  not  frigates  on 
the  coasts  of  France  and  Spain  to  secure  our  trade  ?     It 
was  not  line-of-battle  ships  alone  that  could  prevent  an 
invasion.     Here,  added  he,  I  stand  a  Vice- Admiral,  that 
has  been   forty  years   at  sea — the   only  reward    I    have. 


584      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Oct. 

Lord  George  Germaine  said  no  man  wished  more  than  he 
did  to  see  that  brave  Admiral  employed.  A  cartel  could 
not  be  had  ;  rebels  offered  to  exchange  man  for  man.  It 
was  known  the  Legislative  Power  would  be  asembled  at 
New  York,  and  put  at  the  peace  of  the  King.  He  con- 
fessed crossing  the  lakes  had  taken  up  more  time  than  he 
expected.  Carleton's  army  consisted  of  11,000  men; 
Howe's  of  25,000.  He  knew  of  no  preparations  on  the 
coast  of  France.  The  motion  was  rather  a  censure  on 
Ministers  and  measures  than  a  cure  for  them.  The  nearer 
the  country  was  to  unanimity  the  better.  Must  we  ask 
leave  of  France  and  Spain  to  control  our  own  colonies  ? 
Not  that  he  meant  France  intended  to  attack  us.  What 
would  become  of  their  islands  if  America  got  the  better  of 
us  }  what  of  the  Spanish  continent  ?  They  might  laugh 
perhaps  at  our  present  situation,  but  would  not  at  the 
independence  of  the  Americans.  Charles  Fox  answered 
Lord  George  in  one  of  his  finest  and  most  animated 
orations,  and  with  severity  to  the  answered  person.  He 
made  Lord  North's  conciliatory  proposition  be  read,  which, 
he  said,  his  Lordship  seemed  to  have  forgotten,  and  he 
declared  he  thought  it  better  to  abandon  America  than 
attempt  to  conquer  it. 

Mr.  Gibbon,  author  of  the  "  Roman  History,"  a  very 
good  judge,  and,  being  on  the  Court  side,  an  impartial  one, 
told  me  he  never  heard  a  more  masterly  speech  than 
Fox's  in  his  life ;  and  he  said  he  observed  Thurlow  and 
Wedderburne,  the  Attorney  and  Solicitor  Generals,  com- 
plimenting which  should  answer  it,  and,  at  last,  both 
declining  it. 

General  Conway  concluded  the  debate  with  very  few 
words.  He  said  he  rose  simply  to  say  it  was  so  unusual 
to  him  to  dissent  to  the  address,  that  he  wished  to  explain 
his  reasons  why  he  should  be  against  it  now.  He  could 
not  be  for  it  without  a  manifest  contradiction  of  all  those 
principles  he  had  hitherto  professed ;  at  the  same  time 


1776]      THE  ADDRESS  MOVED  IN  THE  LORDS        585 

that  he  should  vote  for  the  counter- address  or  amendment, 
he  owned  there  were  parts  of  it  he  did  not  Hke.  The 
House  divided  at  eleven  at  night  on  the  amendment, 
which  was  rejected  by  242  to  87.  The  Opposition  then 
divided  again  on  the  Court-address,  which  was  carried  by 
232  to  83,  and  at  twelve  they  broke  up. 

The  address  in  the  Lords  was  moved  by  Lord  Carlisle 
and  Lord  Radnor.^  The  Marquis  of  Rockingham  offered 
the  same  counter-address  that  had  been  proposed  in  the 
other  House  by  Lord  John  Cavendish,  and  was  seconded 
by  the  Duke  of  Manchester.  Lord  Mountstewart,  in  a 
manly,  becoming  manner,  defended  Administration,  and 
persisted  in  recommending  reduction  of  the  Colonies.  The 
Duke  of  Richmond  declaimed  against  corruption,  said  he 
would  keep  within  Parliamentary  grounds  as  far  as  he 
could,  but  the  nation  was  so  sold  to  the  Crown,  that 
nothing  but  the  King's  goodness  prevented  our  being 
absolute  slaves.  He  insisted  that  if,  as  the  speech  said,  we 
still  received  amicable  professions  from  France  and  Spain, 
we  had  as  much  reason  to  believe  them  this  year  as  last ; 
but  pressing  sailors  and  our  other  preparations  showed  we 
did  not  believe  those  professions  any  longer.  He  recom- 
mended peace  with  America,  if  it  could  be  gotten,  and 
called  on  Lord  Sandwich  for  the  state  of  our  navy.  Lord 
Sandwich  said  he  saw  no  likelihood  of  foreign  war,  but 
we  did  not  trust  assurances  any  longer,  because  France 
and  Spain  were  arming  :  he  vaunted  much  of  our  fleet  and 
of  his  care  of  it.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  spoke  warmly 
on  our  defenceless  situation,  and  Lord  Shelburne  with  still 
more  weight.  He  said  he  had  been  lately  in  France,  and 
had  seen  their  preparations ;  but,  as  they  had  admitted 
him  into  their  seaports,  he  thought  it  would  be  acting  like 
a  spy,  not  like  a  gentleman,  to  mention  what  he  had  seen  ! 
He  had  even  quitted  one  port  abruptly  where  they  had 

^  I  am  not  sure  whether  it  was  Lord  Radnor  or  Lord  Falconberg  ;  I  was 
told  the  former,  the  newspapers  said  the  latter. 

I. — 2   P  2 


586       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [Oct. 

been  too  ready  to  give  him  full  inspection  !  But  of  what 
was  notorious  to  everybody  he  might  speak  ;  and  then, 
after  mentioning  their  great  preparations,  he  enlarged  on 
the  great  countenance  shown  to  Silas  Deane,  and  the  open 
trade  with  the  colonies.  Lord  Weymouth  and  Lord 
Bristol  defended  the  Court  and  Admiralty.  Lord  Camden 
said  not  a  word.  The  Court-address  was  carried  by  82 
to  26. 


1776] 


NOVEMBER 


2nd, 


yA  T  night  General  Howe's  second  aide-de-camp  ar- 
/^        rived  with  an  account  of  his  being  in  posses- 

h — ^  sion  of  New  York  from  the  1 5th  of  September. 
-A-  .m.  General  Washington  had  removed  the  sick, 
and  had  retired  within  his  lines  at  King's  Bridge.  Howe 
had  again  deceived  the  Provincials  by  a  feint  manoeuvre, 
and  the  Provincials  certainly  did  not  seem  to  have  able 
generals.  3000  of  them  were  repulsed  with  no  consider- 
able loss.  On  the  20th,  some  of  the  people  of  the  Massa- 
chussets  set  fire  to  the  town,  and  above  a  quarter  of  it  was 
burnt  before  the  flames  could  be  extinguished.  Two  were 
taken  and  hanged,  and  died  glorying  in  their  exploit.  It 
was  said  that  this  act  had  made  very  ill  blood  between  the 
New  Yorkists  and  the  colony  of  Massachussets.  The 
Court  was  mortified  that  nothing  more  was  yet  done ; 
and  I  was  told  by  very  good  authority  that  Howe  had 
written  that  the  lines  were  so  strong  he  should  attempt 
nothing  farther  till  joined  by  the  rest  of  the  Hessians. 

It  is  certain  that  Governor  Tryon's  letters  were  very  un- 
promising ;  and  one  of  the  King's  personal  domestics  said 
the  King  had  received  very  unwelcome  letters.  Dr. 
Franklin,  and  two  other  leaders  of  the  Congress,  went  to 
the  Howes  to  treat.  He  asked  them  from  whom  they 
came?  they  said  from  the  Independent  States  of  America. 
"  Then,"  said  Lord  Howe,  "  I  cannot  receive  you."  Yet  it 
was  said  he  did  desire  them  to  stay.  Some  thought  they 
had  come  in  hopes  of  being  rejected,  which  might  fix  the 
people  more  firmly  to  them. 

It  is  not  improbable  but  the  more  pacific  Proclamation 

587 


S88       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

noticed  above  might  have  been  issued  in  consequence  of 
sudden  orders  despatched  from  hence,  in  consequence  of 
the  letters  received  from  General  Howe  on  the  lOth  of 
August,  in  which  he  represented  the  strong  position  of  the 
Americans,  and  of  the  account  received  on  the  2ist  of 
the  same  month  of  the  miscarriage  at  Charles  Town,  at 
which  time  the  Court  thought  very  ill  of  the  affairs  in 
America.  The  Proclamation  was  not  issued  till  the  19th 
of  September,  and  being  so  different  from  Lord  Howe's 
first  Proclamation,  looked  very  much  like  new  orders.  A 
light  frigate  might  in  twenty-seven  days,  I  believe,  arrive 
at  New  York. 

Sawbridge,  the  Lord  Mayor,  now  quitted  at  the  end  of 
his  year ;  having  done  nothing  in  his  mayorality  remark- 
able, but  not  permitting  the  pressgangs  at  this  time  to 
enter  the  City.  Sir  Thomas  Halifax  succeeded  him,  and 
invited  the  Ministers  to  his  feast,  to  which  they  had  not 
been  asked  for  seven  years.  Thus  Wilkes  by  his  impru- 
dence, and  by  the  folly  of  the  Opposition,  lost  the  City. 

^th.  The  House  of  Commons  voted  45,000  seamen, 
though  they  gave  out  that  they  did  not  believe  there  would 
be  a  war  with  France.  Temple  Luttrell  abused  Lord 
Sandwich  outrageously,  and  pledged  himself  to  the  House 
to  move  an  address  to  the  King  to  remove  him.  He  was 
defended  by  Lord  North,  the  Attorney-General,  the  two 
members  for  Huntingdon,  Lord  Mulgrave  and  Wombwell. 

In  all  this  contest  with  America,  the  Presbyterians  and 
other  Dissenters,  who  could  not  but  see  the  designs  of  the 
Court,  and  its  notorious  partiality  to  Roman  Catholics, 
were  entirely  passive  in  England,  being  bribed  or  sold  by 
their  leaders.  In  Ireland  they  were  not  quite  so  quiet, 
and  I  heard  a  person  in  very  high  office,  and  a  great  pre- 
tender to  religion,  say,  that  the  Presbyterians  were  the 
worst  subjects  the  King  had,  and  that  the  Roman  Catho- 
lics were  better  subjects. 

13/^  A  new  and  most  infamous  paper  was  set  up,  and 


1776]  THE   NEW   "MORNING   POST"  589 

sold  as  the  "  Morning  Post."  Bates  the  clergyman,  and 
author  of  the  old  one,  prosecuted  the  printer,  and  got  an 
injunction  against  him.  Yet  Bates,  not  content,  took  a 
most  extraordinary  step.  He  sent  about  the  town  a  pro- 
cession of  thirty  or  forty  persons,  dressed  expensively,  like 
Hussars,  in  yellow  habits,  with  blue  waistcoats  and  breeches, 
and  high  caps,  streamers  and  colours  flying,  and  martial 
music,  the  musicians  in  mask,  and  labels  with  *  The  Morn- 
ing Post'  on  their  caps,  and  they  distributed  handbills  in 
behalf  of  the  old  paper.  A  masquerade  exhibited  by  a 
clergyman  in  behalf  of  a  most  scandalous  paper,  particu- 
larly abusive  on  women  of  the  first  rank,  in  the  midst  of 
a  civil  war !  what  words  can  come  up  to  the  profligacy, 
insensibility,  and  degeneracy  of  the  times  ? 

Dunning  moved  for  information  against  two  justices 
of  the  peace,  who  refused  to  tender  the  oaths  to  Roman 
Catholics ;  Lord  Mansfield  said  he  did  not  like  reviving 
that  sort  of  persecution,  and  refused  the  information.  This 
was  consonant  to  the  restoration  of  Popery  in  Canada,  and 
opposition  to  all  favour  to  Dissenters. 

18///.  The  King  sent  for  Admiral  Keppel,  and  gave 
him  the  command  of  the  Fleet  of  Observation — yet  the 
Ministers  professed  not  expecting  a  French  war! — yet  some 
owned  that  nothing  but  a  strong  fleet  could  prevent  it. 
And  they  bragged  of  having  twenty-five  ships  of  the  Line 
ready ;  yet  Lord  Mulgrave  owned  to  the  King  at  his 
levee  that  his  ship  wanted  two  hundred  men  of  its  comple- 
ment. They  had  now  thoughts  of  enforcing  pressing  in  the 
City,  though  the  Court  of  Aldermen  had  just  thanked 
Sawbridge  for  having  resisted  it  in  his  Mayorality. 

2\st.  Lord  Harcourt's  term  in  Ireland  had  long  been 
expired,  and  he  had  long  been  soliciting  his  recall.  The 
Court  had  endeavoured  by  all  means  to  persuade  Lord 
Rochford  to  accept  that  government,  but  he  could  not  be 
persuaded  to  reside  there  the  whole  term.  Lord  Hills- 
borough was  most  desirous  of  that  post,  but  being  an  Irish- 


590       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Nov. 

man,  could  not  obtain  it.  It  was  now  at  last,  by  the 
interest  of  Lord  Suffolk,  bestowed  on  Lord  Buckingham, 
who  had  pined  himself  into  illness  for  it,  and  who  was, 
perhaps,  of  all  the  nobility  the  least  fit — nay,  the  most 
unfit,  for  it.  He  was  weak,  proud,  avaricious,  peevish, 
fretful,  and  femininely  observant  of  the  punctilio  of  visits  ; 
and  he  had  every  one  of  those  defects  in  the  extreme, 
with  their  natural  concomitant,  obstinacy.  His  wife  had 
more  sense  with  as  much  pride.  The  condition  and  per- 
haps chief  inducement  to  the  nomination  of  Lord  Bucking- 
ham, was  that  he  was  to  have  no  disposal  of  military  pre- 
ferments. He  had  previously  been  Ambassador  in  Russia. 
His  first  wife  was  the  daughter  of  Sir  Thomas  Dury,  by 
whom  he  had  only  four  daughters^  which  had  fretted  him 
so  much,  that  her  apprehension  of  his  ill-humour  on  the 
birth  of  the  last  was  thought  to  have  contributed  to  her 
death.  He  then  married  a  sister  of  Mr.  Conolly  of  Ireland, 
and  had  two  sons  by  her,  who  both  died  within  a  short 
time  of  each  other,  before  the  eldest  was  three  years  old. 
Lord  Gower  had  endeavoured  to  make  his  son-in-law,  the 
young  Earl  of  Carlisle,  Lord  Lieutenant ;  but  Lord  George 
Germaine  and  Lord  Suffolk  carried  it  for  Lord  Bucking- 
ham. 

22nd.  Arrived  letters  from  General  Carleton,  with  an 
account  of  the  destruction  of  the  Provincial  Fleet  on  Lake 
Champlain,  on  the  nth  and  13th  of  October,  twelve  of 
their  vessels  being  taken  or  destroyed  out  of  fifteen.  The 
Royalists  had,  with  almost  incredible  expedition,  built  or 
rebuilt  thirty  vessels ;  and  the  Americans,  having  no  notion 
of  their  being  able  to  be  ready  so  soon,  and  indeed  seeming 
to  have  totally  wanted  all  intelligence,  were  surprised  and 
defeated.  Arnold,  however,  had  formed  a  plan  to  sur- 
round and  destroy  the  Royal  Fleet ;  and  it  was  thought 
would  have  succeeded,  if  he  had  not  been  disappointed  by 
the  cowardice  or  treachery  of  some  of  his  people.  He, 
however,  fought  with  great  bravery  himself,  and  retired  to 


1776]      DESTRUCTION   OF  PROVINCIAL   FLEET      591 

Ticonderoga,  after  entirely  destroying  Crown  Point.  Carle- 
ton  expressed  much  doubt  from  the  lateness  of  the  season  of 
being  able  to  proceed  any  farther  this  campaign,  so  that  if 
forced  to  return  to  Quebec,  he  had  not  gained  an  inch  of 
ground  by  this  victory.  Men  were  surprised  to  hear  Gene- 
ral Burgoyne  was  immediately  coming  home  on  pretence 
of  his  own  affairs,  but  it  was  supposed  on  disagreement 
with  Carleton. 

26th,  Account  of  Grimaldi  and  Panucci,  Prime  Ministers 
of  Spain  and  Naples,  being  disgraced.  The  Court  gave 
out  that  this  was  a  favourable  omen  for  peace,  as  the  Due 
de  Choiseul  and  Grimaldi  had  been  authors  of  the  Family 
Compact.  There  had  more  recently  appeared  in  the 
papers  a  letter  signed  by  Grimaldi  of  very  hostile  aspect. 
An  American  privateer  had  carried  three  prizes  into 
Bilboa ;  the  Governor  had  detained  them  and  sent  to 
Court  for  orders.  He  was  ordered  by  Grimaldi's  letter  to 
restore  them,  the  King  of  Spain  professing  an  exact 
neutrality,  which  was  in  effect  owning  our  Colonies  for  an 
independent  state.  We  were  said  to  have  threatened 
Portugal,  that  if  she  did  not  satisfy  Spain  we  would  not 
protect  her. 


[Dec. 


DECEMBER 


Zrd. 


THE  Parliament  adjourned  for  the  holidays. 
It  was  now  known  that  Grimaldi  had  en- 
deavoured to  preserve  peace.  As  he  was 
extremely  obnoxious  to  the  Prince  of  Asturias. 
who  had  often  affronted  him,  and  as  Panucci,  Prime 
Minister  of  Naples,  was  disgraced  by  the  intrigues  of  the 
Queen,  it  seemed  to  have  been  a  concert  between  the 
younger  part  of  the  Spanish  Royal  Family.  A  Spanish 
fleet  of  six  ships-of-the-line  sailed  immediately  after 
Grimaldi's  disgrace ;  its  supposed  destination  for  the 
Brazils. 

gth.  General  Burgoyne  again  arrived  from  Quebec  as 
he  had  done  the  last  year.  He  now  pretended  grief  for 
his  wife's  death,  which  was  laughed  at.  The  King  scarce 
spoke  to  him,  and  he  was  forced  to  ask  for  an  audience. 
Some  thought  he  had  quarrelled  with  Carleton  ;  but  he 
was  exceedingly  disappointed  at  finding  the  Opposition 
had  quitted  Parliament,  having  probably  hoped,  as  he  had 
done  last  year,  to  be  bribed  from  making  complaints.  He 
brought  news  that  Carleton  had  caused  his  army  to  recross 
the  lakes,  had  abandoned  Crown  Point,  and  not  attempted 
Ticonderoga,  where  Major  Gates  was  with  12,000  men. 

A  little  before  this  time,  Sericole  and  Jackson,  partners, 
and  two  of  the  greatest  Jamaica  merchants  in  London, 
broke,  by  the  failure  of  that  trade,  for  the  amazing  sum  of 
975,000/.  Their  failure  was  so  void  of  fraud  that  their 
creditors  agreed  to  allow  them  1000/.  a  year  a-piece  till 
their  affairs  could  be  made  up,  and  Lord  North  agreed  to 
lend  them  400,000/.  of  Government  money.     This  loan,  at 

592 


1776]     DR.    FRANKLIN   PROCEEDS   TO   FRANCE      593 

a  time  that  Government  was  so  distressed  for  money,  and 
was  going  to  raise  new  taxes  was  done  to  stop  the  bad 
effects  of  this  bankruptcy  among  other  merchants,  and 
was  demonstrative  of  the  obstinacy  of  the  Court  in  the 
American  war,  which  had  already  brought,  and  must  bring, 
on  so  much  destruction  to  commerce. 

\oth.  Died  Dr.  Drummond,^  Archbishop  of  York  ;  a 
sensible,  worldly  man,  but  much  addicted  to  his  bottle.  A 
living  had  lapsed  to  the  Crown  by  his  not  being  able 
before  his  death  to  sign  a  presentation  to  it.  The  King 
gave  the  nomination  to  Wedderburn,  because  the  latter's 
wife  had  landed  interest  where  the  living  lay — the  very 
reason  that  made  him  the  most  improper  person  to  have 
the  nomination  to  it  for  the  interest  of  the  Church  of 
York. 

\6th.  An  account  came  that  Dr.  Franklin,  at  the  age 
of  72  or  74,  and  at  the  risk  of  his  head,  had  bravely 
embarked  on  board  an  American  frigate,  and,  with  two 
prizes  taken  in  their  way,  had  landed  at  Nantes  in  France, 
and  was  to  be  at  Paris  on  the  14th,  where  the  highest 
admiration  and  expectation  of  him  were  raised.  There 
could  be  no  doubt  but  he  came  with  the  fullest  powers 
from  the  Congress  to  announce  the  fullest  independence  of 
the  Colonies,  and  to  offer  the  most  advantageous  terms  of 
alliance  and  commerce  to  France — perhaps  to  declare  they 
must  make  peace  with  England  if  not  vigorously  supported, 
though  the  Houses  had  done  nothing,  and  there  was  no 
longer  danger  from  Canada.  Perhaps,  too,  this  bold  step 
was  necessary  to  confirm  the  spirit  of  the  several  provinces. 
It  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  France  can  resist  such  tempt- 
ing offers  of  ruining  us  for  ever,  or  that  M.  de  Maurepas 
can  stem  the  universal  inclination  of  his  countrymen  for 
the  Americans,  and  the  desire  of  war  in  the  military, 
added  to  the  same  inclinations  in  Spain. 

^  Hon.  Robert  Hay,  who  in  1739  assumed  the  name  and  arms  of 
Drummond.     He  was  a  son  of  the  8th  Earl  of  Kinnoull. — A.F.S. 


594       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE    [Dec. 

Dr.  Markham,  the  late  Preceptor  and  Bishop  of  Chester, 
was  promoted  to  the  See  of  York,  after  it  had  been  offered 
to  Dr.  Terrick,  of  London,  who  declined  it  on  his  bad 
health,  and  probably  in  hopes  of  Canterbury.  Markham 
had  been  promised  promotion,  and  no  doubt  fears  of  what 
he  could  divulge  had  still  greater  weight  than  the  promise. 
His  being  preferred,  who  had  offended,  and  Lord  Holder- 
ness,  who  had  pleased,  not  getting  the  Garter,  showed  fear 
was  a  better  solicitor  than  affection.  Dr.  Porteus  succeeded 
to  Chester  on  the  merit  of  preaching  a  loyal  pamphlet  on 
the  Fast,^  and  carried  the  mitre  from  Dr.  Butler,  an  abler 
man,  who  had  expected  it,  but  who,  not  expecting  so  much 
from  the  boasted  success  in  America,  had  made  a  more 
trimming  sermon  on  the  same  occasion.  Butler  was  a 
very  sensible  man,  and  had  written  some  able  pamphlets 
under  the  countenance  of  Mr.  Legge  in  1765  and  1766; 
but  losing  his  patron,  and  seeing  the  tide  turned,  had 
turned  a  zealous  courtier.  He  had  desired  my  brother, 
Sir  Edward  Walpole,  to  desire  I  would  get  Lord  Hertford 
to  make  him  the  King's  Chaplain,  saying  he  had  a  good 
estate,  and  said  he  only  wanted  2l  feather,  not  a  deanery  or 
bishopric.  I  obtained  it.  He  was  afflicted  with  the  stone, 
and  bore  being  cut  for  it  with  the  greatest  fortitude — but 
could  not  bear  the  disappointment  of  the  mitre  with  equal 
heroism,  but  with  much  weakness. 

The  Fast  Sermon  let  loose  all  the  zeal  of  the  clergy, 
and  contributed  to  raise  the  infatuation  of  England  against 
America.  Indeed  it  was  no  wonder,  for  the  Court  had 
now  at  their  devotion  the  three  great  bodies  of  the  clergy, 
army,  and  law.  Lord  Mansfield  encouraged  writings  full 
of  all  the  old  exploded  nonsense  of  passive  obedience  and 
non-resistance.  He  employed  particularly  a  Dr.  Lynde, 
who  had  written  those  able  letters,  on  very  different 
principles,  on  the  partition  of  Poland.     On  the  Fast,  too, 

^  On  the  Fast  on  the  13th  nobody  was  admitted  to  Court  but  in  mourning, 
and  the  Courtiers  went  everywhere  to  church  in  mourning. 


1776]      SURRENDER   OF   FORT   WASHINGTON 


595 


a  sermon  against  all  the  principles  of  the  Revolution  was 
preached  and  licensed  at  Oxford  by  Dr.  Miles  Cooper,  late 
President  of  the  College  at  New  York.  This  was  severely 
attacked  in  the  public  papers  in  a  letter  to  the  Bishop  of 
London,  who  was  called  on  to  know  if  Cooper  had  received 
any  share  of  the  subscription  for  the  suffering  American 
clergy,  for  whom  above  5000/.  had  been  collected,  and  of 
which  no  account  had  been  yet  given.  An  answer  appeared 
that  Cooper  had  received  nothing  thence.  The  conversation 
of  many  courtiers  was  openly  in  favour  of  arbitrary  power. 
Lord  Huntingdon  and  Dr.  Barnard,  Dean  of  Derry,  who 
was  promised  an  Irish  Bishopric,  held  such  discourse 
publicly. 

2(^th.  Came  accounts  of  the  surrender  to  Howe  of  Fort 
Washington  with  2700  prisoners,  Washington  retiring, 
according  to  the  plan  of  protracting  the  war,  and  not 
fighting.  However,  the  Americans  had  so  far  behaved 
well,  that  Howe  had  been  in  danger  of  a  defeat,  and  the 
Hessians  had  suffered  considerably.^     Lord  Percy's  horse 


^  Among  the  writers  who  this  year  discussed  the  Anglo-American  question 
in  pamphlets  was  Dr.  Tucker,  who  in  1758  was  rewarded  with  the  Deanery  of 
Gloucester,  for  having  secured  the  return  of  Mr.  Nugent,  afterwards  Lord 
Clare,  for  Bristol,  where  Tucker  was  rector  of  St.  Stephens.  Tucker  held 
liberal  views,  and  in  a  series  of  pamphlets  he  advocated  the  expediency  of  the 
mother  country  allowing  the  colonies  to  separate  from  her  government,  and 
even  to  defend  them  from  foreign  aggression,  if  they  sought  for  it.  These 
pamphlets  awoke  the  satiric  muse  of  Soame  Jeuyns,  a  multifarious  writer,  of 
the  Board  of  Trade,  who  had  published,  among  other  works,  a  poem  "On 
the  Art  of  Dancing,"  and  a  "View  of  the  Internal  Evidences  of  the  Christian 
Religion."  From  the  satire  on  Dean  Tucker  (the  reader  will  be  reminded  of 
Mason's  satire  "  Of  the  Dean  and  the  Squire"),  I  take  the  following 
stanzas  : — 


"Crown'd  be  the  man  with  lasting  praise, 
Who  first  contrived  the  pin, 
To  loose  mad  horses  from  the  chain. 
And  save  the  works  within. 


Each  claiming  now  his  natural  right 
Scorns  to  obey  his  brother  ; 

So  they  proceed  to  kick  and  bite. 
And  worry  one  another. 

Hungry  at  last,  and  blind  and  lame, 
pleeding  at  nose  and  eyes, 


By  suflTrings  grown  extremely  tame. 

And  by  experience  wise ; 
With  bellies  full  of  liberty. 

But  void  of  oats  and  hay. 
They  both  sneak  back,  their  folly  see. 

And  run  no  more  away. 
Let  all  who  view  th'  instructive  scene, 

And  patronize  the  plan, 
Give  thanks  to  Gloster's  honest  Dean, 

For  Tucker  thou'rt  the  man." 

SoAMp  Jenyns. 

D. 


596       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE     [1776 

had  been  killed  under  him  as  Lord  Howe  stood  close  by 
him.  The  proclamation,  which  had  been  so  disliked  here, 
had  had  no  effect.  Not  an  American,  but  Scotch  and 
Irish  had  come  in.  The  Americans  were  all  sullen  and 
determined ;  and  the  prisoners  made  at  Fort  Washington 
had  sent  to  their  General  to  beg  he  would  not  treat  for 
their  exchange,  as  an  exchange  would  be  more  beneficial 
to  the  King  than  to  him.  The  Howes  had  lost  many  men 
and  pressed  for  recruits.  General  Carleton  had  written 
for  4000  more.  The  Administration  determined  to  make 
a  vigorous  campaign,  and  treated  for  10,000  Wirtember- 
gers  and  other  Germans. 

The  Opposition  came  no  more  to  Parliament  after  the 
first  day.  I  had  endeavoured  last  winter  to  persuade  them 
to  secede,  with  a  public  protest  against  the  present  mea- 
sures. They  had  approved  the  measure  but  did  nothing. 
I  told  them  they  must  foretell  calamities — it  would  be  too 
late  after  they  happened  or  after  success.  They  thoi.  ;ht 
of  it  again  in  autumn,  and  did  no  more,  and  now  kr  ot 
from  Parliament  without  giving  any  reasons  there  or  to 
the  public ;  and  in  the  meantime  had  seen  all  England 
turn  against  them,  the  Court  being  as  industrious  as  they 
were  irresolute  and  inactive. 




--- VOLUME II ---


>:IOS-ANGEIFJ> 


^•IIBRARY^ 


FREDERICK    LORD    NORTH. 


London  Published  "by  H.ichaxci 


KING  GEORGE  THE  THIRD, 


FROM  THE  YEAR  1771  TO  1783. 


BY    HORACE    WALPOLE, 


NOW  FIRST  PUBLISHED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  MSS. 


F"i  'tis  a  chronicle  of  day  by  Jay."  —  SHAK8PEAUK,  Tempest. 

••  (  >n  jiiv'voioit  ijue  la  jmtrk-  allait  ctre  sacritic'e  i  la  dignite  de  la  fainillc 
myali',  <lnnt  la  veritable  gloire  cst  de  se  sacrifier  toujours  au  bonhcur  de  la 
l>:itn>."  —  YIF.  I>K  MAIXTENON,  torn,  v.,  page  18. 


EDITED,  WITH  NOTES,  BY  DE.  DOEAN, 

AUTHOR  OF  '  HISTORY  OF  THE  QUEENS  OF  ENGLAND  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  HANOVER,'  ETC. 

IN  TWO  VOLUMES.— VOL.  II. 


v  •.' ; 


LONDON: 

RICHARD    BENTLEY, 

publisher  tit  <0rbiiury  to  $n  glajtstp. 
M.TXXX^.UX. -^ 

Tkei-iyht  nf  Tranilatvm  if  rttenxd. 

6»-»    ^     »»      . 
0104 


LONDON  :  PRINTED  BT  WILLIAM  CLOWBS  AND  SONS,  8TAHFOKD  STREET 
AND  CHARINO  CROSS 


12  A  5  o  fc» 


CONTENTS 


OF 


THE    SECOND    VOLUME. 


1776. 

JANUARY. 

PREPARATIONS  for  the  war  in  America  —  Lord  George  Sackville  Germaine  — 
Efforts  made  to  raise  soldiers  and  sailors  —  Lord  Mansfield  —  Wedderburn  — 
Lord  North  —  His  levity — Lord  George  Germaine's  unpopularity  —  The 
King's  review  of  the  Guards  at  Wimhledon  —  The  Duke  of  Grafton  goes  over 
to  the  Opposition  —  Lord  Rockingham  —  Lord  Camden  —  Lord  Shelhurne 

—  The  Duke  of  Richmond  —  Charles  Fox  —  His  dissipated  habits  —  Con- 
versation of  Horace  Walpole  with  the  Duke  of  Richmond  —  The  Duke's 
dislike  of  violent  measures  —  Walpole's  opinion  of  leading  public  men  — 
Steadiness  of  the  funds  —  Lord   George   Germaine   shut  up  in  his  own 
house  by  the  snow.        ..          ..          ..          ..          ..          ..         Pages  1-8 

FEBRUARY. 

Recall  of  Comte  de  Guines,  Ambassador  from  France  —  Monsieur  de  Turgot, 
Comptroller-General  —  Views  of  France  towards  our  Indian  possessions 

—  Turgot  reprimands  De  Guines  —  De   Guines'  haughty  answer  —  De 
Guines  accused  by  his  secretary,  Tort,  of  stockjobbing — Prevalence  of 
stockjobbing  amongst  foreign  Ministers  —  Support  of  Tort   by   English 
bankers  —  The   Due  d'Aiguillon  —  Mildness   of  Tort's   sentence  —  The 
Queen's  support  of  De  Guines  —  The  Due  de  Choiseul  —  De  Guines'  great 
popularity  —  His  inactivity  in  procuring  intelligence  with  respect  to  the 
posture  of  America —  Frances,  Du  Chatelet's  confidential  secretary  —  His 
residence  in  England — Lord  Mansfield — Lord  Howe  appointed  chief  admiral 
in  America  —  Admiral  Keppel  —  His  interview  with  the  King  —  Lord 
Sandwich —  Lord  North's  shortness  of  memory  —  General  Burgoyne  leaves 
Boston  —  His  rank  and  pay  raised  —  Captain  Stanhope,  Lady  Harrington's 
son  —  Admiral  Greaves  —  His  recall  from  Boston  —  General  Gage  —  Mac- 
pherson  the  Ossianite's  pension  —  Concealment  of  advices  from  America 

a  2 


IV  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

by  the  Government — The  Duchess  of  Gloucester  gives  birth  to  a  son  — 

—  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  —  His  ill-health  —  His  persecution  by  the  Court 

—  Lord  Rochford  — Distinguished  reception  of  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  in  France  —  Lord  Dunmore  —  Destruction  of  his  army  by  the 
Virginians  —  Motion  of  Thomas  Townshend,  junior —  Sir  John  Blaquiere  — 
Lord  Harcourt — Advices  from  Boston  —  The  Provincials  reported  to  be 
beaten  off  Quebec  —  Reported  death  of  General  Montgomery  —  The  Hessians 

—  General  Clinton  —  Lord  Barrington  —  Major   Carleton   at  the  King's 
leve'e  —  Wilkes  —  Fox's  motion  on  the  causes  of  the  ill-success  of  the  King's 
arms  in  America  —  Barre  —  Lord  Ossory  —  Richard  Fitzpatrick  —  Lord 
Mulgrave  —  Lord  Clare  —  Rejection  of  Fox's  motion  —  Dr.  Price's  '  Essay 
on  Civil  Liberty' —  The  Earl  of  Stair Pages  9-23 

MARCH. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond's  motion  to  countermand  troops  going  to  America  — 
Its  rejection  by  a  large  majority  —  Lord  Shelburne  —  The  Duke  of  Cum- 
berland's speech  against  the  war  —  Lord  Temple's  reflections  on  the  Ministers 

—  Lords  Chatham  and  Temple  declare  themselves  unfavourable  to  the  war 

—  George  Grenville  —  General  Conway  reproaches  Lord  North  —  Colonel 
Dalrymple  —  Fox's  panegyric  on  General  Montgomery  —  Speeches  of  Lord 
North  and  Barre"  upon  him  —  Burke  and  Lord  North  upon  the  Hessian 
question  —  Mr.  Elliott  —  Wilkes's  bon  mot  on  Lord  George  Germaine  — 
Insolence  of  Lord  G.  Germaine  —  Defective  nature  of  the  arrangements 
made  for  the  American  war  —  Dr.  Keppel's  sermon  before  the  King —  Lord 
Denbigh  —  The  Duke  of  Grafton's  motion  for  pacification  with  America  — 
Lord  Camden  —  Lord  Weymouth  —  Colonel  St.  Paul          ..          ..   24-28 

APRIL. 

Discovery  of  friendly  intercourse  between  the  French  and  Provincials  —  Trial 
of  the  Duchess  of  Kingston  —  Her  conviction  —  Fears  of  the  Ministers  for 
o\(r  Eastern  possessions  —  Execution  of  Nuncomar  —  The  Budget  —  Sir 
Jam5s"~Eowther  -^Wflkes's  annual  motion  —  Deficiency  of  transports  — 
Delay  in  sending  them  —  General  Harvey  —  Alteration  of  the  destination 
of  the  Guards  from  Virginia  to  Boston  —  General  Clinton  —  Notification  by 
the  Ministers  of  the  raising  of  the  siege  of  Quebec  ..  ..  ..  29-32 

MAY. 

Position  of  affairs  at  Boston  —  Preparations  of  Washington  to  storm  the  town 

—  General  Howe  —  His  departure  for  Halifax  —  Lord  North  —  The  Bedford 
party  —  Vote  of  credit  —  Colonel  Barre'  moves  for  accounts  from  Boston  — 
Warm  speech  of  Burke  —  General  Conway  —  Licences  to  trade  —  Lord  Sand- 
wich —  Lord  North's  letter  to  the  Admiralty  —  The  Provincials  take  the  Isle 
of  Providence  —  General  Howe's  expedition  to  Georgia  —  Its  failure  —  Dr. 
Franklin  —  His  pamphlet,  '  Common  Sense ' — Temple  Luttrell's  abuse  of 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  V 

Lord  George  Germaine  —  New  peerages  —  Sir  Edward  Hawke  —  Lord  Caer- 
marthen  —  The  Duchess  of  Argyll  —  Lady  Coventry  —  The  Duke  and 
Duchess  of  Queensberry  —  Lord  Mountstewart  —  Lord  Polwarth  —  George 
Onslow  —  SirBrownlow  Cust-^Bill  for  erecting  galleys  on  the  Thames  — 
Lord  John  Cavendish  —  The  Bill  meets  with  no  opposition  —  General  Smith 
committed  for  bribery  —  Foote  — White's  and  Almack's  —  Prevailing  dissipa- 
tion —  Comparison  of  the  times  of  Charles  II.  and  George  III.  — Louis  XVI. 
—  Count  de  Maurepas'  administration  —  The  Duke  de  Choiseul  —  His  recall 
from  banishment  —  Madame  de  Pompadour  —  Turgot  —  Malesherbes  — 
Abolition  of  grievances  by  Turgot  —  The  Prince  of  Conti  —  Queen  Marie  An- 
toinette — Her  fondness  of  dress  and  pleasure —  Her  character  —  Louis  XVI.'s 
want  of  firmness  —  Resignation  of  Malesherbes  —  Dismissal  of  Turgot  — 
Comte  de  Noailles  made  Ambassador  to  England  —  Effects  on  the  Court  on 
the  changes  taking  place  in  the  French  Ministry  —  Lord  Howe  —  Great 
powers  intrusted  to  him  for  making  peace  —  Lord  Bute's  friends  join  the 
Opposition  —  Lord  North's  defeat  —  Rejection  of  peace  by  the  Ministers  — 
Doubtful  language  of  Ministers  —  General  Con  way's  motion  —  Lord  Hert- 
ford —  General  Conway  moves  for  an  address  to  the  King  —  Voltaire  and 
the  King  of  Prussia — Their  opinions  of  our  blindness  with  regard  ot  the 
Americans  —  Lord  George  Germaine  denies  that  he  insisted  on  implicit 
submission  from  the  Americans  —  Lord  John  Cavendish  seconds  General 
Conway's  motion  —  Burke,  Fox,  Townshend,  Colonel  Barre',  Governor 
Johnston,  and  Hartley  support  the  motion  —  Lord  North  desires  the 
House  to  see  Lord  Howe's  instructions  —  The  Bedfords  —  Rigby  —  Re- 
jection of  the  motion  —  Sir  George  Saville  and  Hartley  —  They  move 
an  Address  to  the  King  to  adjourn  Parliament  —  Prorogation  of  Par- 
liament —  Stanley  and  Jenkinson  —  Dismissal  of  Dr.  Markham,  Bishop 
of  Chester,  from  being  preceptor  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  —  Lord  Holderness 
resigns  being  governor  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  — Lord  Bruce  named  governor 

—  Dr.  Hurd  is  appointed  the  Prince's  preceptor  —  Bruce  Brudenel  — Lord 
Ashburnham  —  The  Prince  of  Wales  and  Prince  Frederick  —  Their  con- 
duct to  Lord  Holderness  —  The  King's  ill  health  —  Ungovernable  temper 
of  the  Prince  —  Lord  Bruce's  sudden  retirement  —  The  Duke  of  Montagu 
appointed  governor  to  the  Princes       ..          ..          ..          ..      Pages  32-53 

JUNE. 

Reported  good  news  from  America  —  Repulse  of  Generals  Worcester  and  Arnold 
from  Quebec  —  The  Attorney- General  —  Promotion  of  Lords  Hyde  and 
Trevor  to  the  peerage  —  Lord  John  Cavendish  —  The  King's  review  of  the 
Guards  —  Colonel  Hotham  —  The  Earl  of  Harcourt  —  Lord  Rochford  —  The 
Duke  of  Marlborough  —  Confirmation  of  the  raising  of  the  siege  of  Quebec 

—  General  Carleton's  ostentatious   letter  —  Exultation  of  the  King  and 
Court  —  Opinions  of  Washington's  strategy  —  Sentence  of  General  Smith 
and  Mr.  Brand  Hollis  —  The  cause  of  Mr.  Sayer  and  Lord  Rochford  — 
Irish  elections  —  Unpopularity  of  the  American  war  in  Ireland  —  The 
Speaker  Perry  elected  by  a  large  majority  —  English  pamphlets  against 
liberty  —  The  Earl  of  Wiuchelsea  —  The  King's  increasing  illness  ..   54-57 


vi  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

JULY. 

Wilkes  stands  again  as  Chamberlain  of  the  City  —  His  defeat  —  Creation  ol 
new  Irish  peers  —  General  Carleton  rewarded  with  the  red  riband  for  his 
defence  of  Quebec  —  Lord  George  Germaine's  opposition  to  it  —  General 
Conway  attacked  by  a  slight  paralytic  stroke  —  Capture  of  Jamaica  men  by 
American  privateers  —  The  Americans  driven  out  of  St.  John's,  Chamblee, 
and  Montreal,  by  General  Carleton  —  The  King  becomes  master  of  all 
Canada  —  Enmity  between  General  Carleton  and  Lord  George  Germaine  — 
Lord  George  Germaine's  letter  of  severe  orders  intercepted  —  General  Lee 
orders  Governor  Eden  to  be  seized  —  His  escape  —  Don  Lewis,  brother  of 
the  King  of  Spain  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  Pages  58-61 

AUGUST. 

Accounts  from  General  Howe — His  safe  landing  on  Staten  Island  —  Governor 
Tryon  —  Defences  of  New  York  —  The  Congress  declares  the  Provinces 
independent — Seizure  of  Franklin,  Governor  of  Jersey  —  The  Mayor  of 
New  York  —  His  correspondence  with  Tryon  —  His  condemnation  —  Sup- 
pression by  the  Government  of  unfavourable  news  —  Express  from  General 
Clinton  —  Failure  of  the  attempt  on  Charles  Town — General  Clinton  and 
Lord  Cornwallis  land  on  Long  Island  —  Sir  Peter  Parker's  attack  of  a  fort 

—  They  are  repulsed  by  the  Provincials  —  Admiral  Parker  wounded  — 
Chevalier  Deon  —  His  complaint  of  Morande  —  Comte  de  Guerchy  —  M.  de 
Vergennes  —  Guerchy  threatens  Deon's  life  —  Deon  employed  by  Louis  XV. 

—  The  Duke  of  Portland  and  Sir  James  Lowther  —  Dismay  of  Ministers  — 
The  Duke  of  Newcastle  —  His  visit  to  Lord  North  —  His  grief  at  the  affair 
of  Charles  Town  —  Lord  North's  indifference  —  Attacks  tipon  Lord  Sand- 
wich —  Lord  George  Germaine's  complaint  of  him  —  The  Commodore  at 
Boston  —  He  quits  Boston  for  Halifax  —  His  meeting  with  Lord  Howe  62-65 

SEPTEMBER. 

Arrival  of  Governor  Eden  from  America — His  expulsion  from  Maryland  by 
the  Provincials  —  He  joins  Lord  Dunmore  at  Gwynn's  Island  —  The  Pro- 
vincials attack  it  —  They  cannonade  the  Royalist  ships  —  Departure  of 
Lord  Dunmore  from  Gwynn's  Island  —  New  American  frigates  —  Admiral 
Hopkins  —  Letters  from  Carleton  —  His  refusal  to  admit  Indians  into  his 
force  —  Reports  of  the  demolition  of  Crown  Point  by  the  Provincials  — 
Menaced  burning  of  New  York  —  General  Lee's  answer — Governor  Eden 
knighted  —  The  Duke  of  Grafton  —  Rigby  —  Rigby's  interview  with  the 
Duke  of  Grafton  —  Dr.  Hunter  —  Sir  Gilbert  Elliott  —  Jeremy  Dyson  — 
Sir  Alexander  Gilmour  —  The  American  agent  at  Versailles  —  Lord  Howe 
and  his  brother  —  Accident  to  Lord  North  —  Lord  Howe's  letter  to 
Washington  —  Letters  from  Quebec  —  Letters  from  New  York  —  Expecta- 
tion of  peace  —  Major  Reade  —  The  treaty  at  an  end  —  Destruction  of  the 
King's  statue  —  Woolrulge —  His  speech  to  the  Livery  of  London  —  Lord 
Dunmore  ..  ..  ..  .  66-69 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  vii 


OCTOBER. 

The  Ministers  in  despair  —  The  King's  groat  anxiety  —  The  King  and  Queen 
visit  Lord  North  —  They  complain  to  him  of  General  Carleton  —  Reports 
from  France  — Lord  Howe's  aide-de-camp  arrives  with  good  news  —  Extra- 
vagant joy  of  the  Court  —  Attack  of  Long  Island  by  Lord  Howe  —  Lands 
without  opposition  —  Precipitate  retreat  of  the  Provincials  —  Long  Island 
taken  —  Great  loss  of  the  Provincials  —  Cruelty  of  the  Hessians  —  Lord 
Stirling  taken  prisoner  —  Paoli  —  His  base  conduct  —  Dissensions  between 
the  New  Englanders  and  the  New  Yorkists —  Probability  of  the  submission 
of  the  New  Yorkists  —  Symptoms  of  submission  to  the  Crown  appear  — 
The  inhabitants  of  Long  Island  —  Want  of  provisions  in  the  Royalist  army 

—  The  paper  money   of  the  Congress  —  Lord  Harcourt's  express  from 
Ireland  —  The  'Gazette'  —  Hopes  of  the  moderate  Anti-Americans  —  The 
Bedfords  —  Their  desire  to  destroy   American   towns  —  The  Provincials 
send    an    army    against    Halifax  —  Presentation   of    the   red    riband    to 
General   Howe  —  Lord  Onslow's  death  —  Lord  Lothian  —  Lord   Cathcart 

—  The  Mayor  and  Corporation  of  York  —  Their  address  to  the  King  on  his 
victory  at  Long  Island  —  Lord  Rockingham's  incapacity  —  Lord  Mansfield 
created  an  Earl  —  Differences  between  the  Courts  of  Lisbon  and  Madrid  — 
Accounts  received  of  the  sailing  of  a  Spanish  fleet  —  Raising  of  men  by  the 
Portuguese —  Strong  part  taken  by  the  Portuguese  against  the  Americans 

—  The  pretences  of  France  —  France  arms  by  sea  and  land  —  Views  of 
Spain  and  France  with  respect  to  England  —  Bill  posted  up  in  Lloyd's 
Coffee-house  —  Reported  arrival  of  the  Bristol  with  Admiral  Shuldham  and 
abandonment  of  New  York  by  the  Americans  —  Robinson  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  —  The  stocks  continue  falling  —  Warrants  for  pressing  seamen  — 
Fears  of  England  from  France  —  Meeting  of  Parliament  —  The  King's 
Speech  —  Mr.  Neville  Aldworth  and  Mr.  Hatton  Finch  —  Lord  John 
Cavendish's  speech  —  Lord  Granby  —  Mr.  Whitmore  —  Governor  John- 
ston's appeal  to  the  House  —  Wombwell  — Wilkes  —  The  pressgangs  — 
Wilkes  charges  the  Administration  with  obstinacy  —  He  wishes  to  re- 
store their  charters  to  the  Americans  —  Silence  of  Ministers  —  Towns- 
hend  attacks  Ministers  for  their  silence  —  Lord  North's  answer  — 
His  belief  in  the  friendliness  of  foreign  power.s  —  Freedom  of  speech  in 
England  and  America  —  Colonel  Barre'  —  Admiral  Keppel  —  Lord  George 
Germaine  —  Fox's  brilliant  answer  to  Lord  George  Gennaine — Gibbon  — 
His  opinion  of  Fox's  speech  —  Thurlow  and  Wedderburn  —  Rejection  of 
the  amendment  to  the  Address  —  Majority  for  the  Address  from  the  Crown 

—  The  Address  in  the  Lords  —  Lords  Carlisle  ond  Radnor  —  The  Marquis 
of    Rockingham's   counter  address  —  The  Duke  of    Manchester  —  Lord 
Mountstewart's  defence  of  the  Administration  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond  — 
His  recommendation  of  peace  with  America  —  Lord  Sandwich  —  The  Duke 
of  Grafton  and  Lord  Shelburne  on  our  defenceless  situation  —  Lord  Shel- 
burne's  visit  to  the  seaports  of  France  —  Great  preparations  of  the  French 

—  Lords  Weymouth  and  Bristol  — Majority  in  the  Lords  for  the  Court 
Address    .  ,    Pases  60-82 


viii  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 


NOVEMBER. 

General  Howe  in  possession  of  New  York  —  General  Washington  —  Retirement 
of  Washington  to  King's  Bridge  —  Manoeuvres  of  Howe  —  Repulse  of  the  Pro- 
vincials —  Burning  of  a  part  of  Massachussets  —  Execution  of  two  of  the  ring- 
leaders— Consequences  of  the  attempt  to  burn  Massachussets  — The  King  re- 
ceives unwelcome  letters  —  Dr.  Franklin  and  two  leaders  of  Congress  visit 
the  Howes  with  a  view  to  treat  —  Lord  Howe's  answer  to  them  —  The 
pacific  Proclamation  —  Sawbridge  the  Lord  Maydr  —  Pressgangs  not  allowed 
by  him  to  enter  the  City  —  Sir  Thomas  Halifax  —  His  invitation  to  Minis- 
ters—  Wilkes  —  Vote  of  Seamen  by  the  House  of  Commons  —  Temple 
Luttrell's  violent  abuse  of  Lord  Sandwich  —  Lord  North,  the  Attorney- 
General,  Lords  Mulgrave,  Wombwell,  &c.,  defend  Lord  Sandwich  —  The 
Presbyterians  and  Dissenters  —  Their  passiveness  in  England  —  Their  con- 
duct in  Ireland  — '  The  Morning  Post '  —  Bates  the  clergyman  prosecutes 
it  —  Dunning  —  Lord  Mansfield  —  His  dislike  to  the  persecution  of  Popery 

—  The  King  sends  for  Admiral  Keppel  —  He  obtains  the  command  of  the 
fleet    of    observation  —  Lord    Mulgrave  —  Lord  Harcourt    solicits    his 
recall  from  Ireland  —  Lord  Rochford  — •  Lord  Hillsborough  —  Lord  Bucking- 
ham appointed  Lord  Lieutenant  in  Ireland,  in  Lord  Harcourt's  stead  — 
Inducement  to  the  nomination  of  Lord  Buckingham  —  Lord  Gower  —  Lords 
Suffolk  and  Germaine  —Destruction  of  the  Provincial  fleet  on  Lake  Champ- 
lain  —  Arnold's  plan  to  destroy  the    Royal  fleet  —  His   ill-success  —  His 
bravery  and  retirement  to  Ticonderoga  —  His  destruction  of  Crown  Point  — 
Supposed  disagreements  between  Generals  Burgoyne  and  Carleton — Disgrace 
of  Grimaldi  and  Panucci  —  The  Family  Compact  —  Grimaldi's  hostile  letter 

—  Virtual  recognition  of  the  independence  of  our  colonies  by  Spain. 

Pages  83-87 

DECEMBER. 

Adjournment  of  Parliament — Efforts  of  Grimaldi  to  preserve  peace  —  The 
Prince  of  Asturias  —  Intrigues  of  the  Queen  of  Naples  —  Supposed  desti- 
nation of  the  Spanish  fleet  —  General  Burgoyne  —  His  grief  for  his  wife's 
death  —  He  asks  the  King  for  an  audience  —  He  brings  news  of  the  abandon- 
ment of  Crown  Point  by  Carleton  — Major  Gates — Frightful  failure  of  the  two 
greatest  Jamaica  merchants  in  London  —  Government  lends  money  to  them 

—  Reasons  for  the  loan —  Dr.  Drummond's  death  —  The  nomination  of  the 
living  of  the  Archbishop  of  York  given  to  Wedderburn  —  Accounts  of  the 
embarkation  of  Dr.  Franklin  in  an  American  frigate,  and  of  his  landing  in 
France  —  The  objects  of  his  visit  to  France  —  Promotion  of  Dr.  Markham 

—  Lord  Holderncss  —  Dr.   Porteus'  pamphlet  —  Dr.  Butler  *—  Mr.  Legge 

—  Walpole  obtains  the  King's  chaplaincy  for  Dr.   Butler  —  Dr.  Butler's 
disappointment  at  losing   the  Bishopric  of  Chester  —  The  Fast  Sermon  — 
Zeal  of   the  clergy  —  Infatuation  against   America  —  Lord  Mansfield's 
doctrines  of  obedience  and  non-resistance  —  Dr.  Lynde  — Sermon  preached 
by  Dr.  Cooper  at  Oxford,  against  the  principles  of  the  Revolution  —  The 
press  attack  Dr.  Cooper's  sermon  —  Lord  Huntingdon  and  Dr.  Barnard  — 


CONTENTS  OP  VOL.  II.  ix 

Surrender  of  Fort  Washington  to  Howe  —  Retirement  of  Washington  — 
Great  loss  of  the  Hessians — Lords  Percy  and  Howe  —  Reception  of  the  Pro- 
clamation in  America — Determination  of  the  Administration  to  make  a 
vigorous  campaign  —  conduct  of  the  Opposition Pages  88-92 


1777. 
JANUARY. 

Burning  of  houses  in  Bristol  —  The  Court  attempts  to  represent  the  fire  as  an 
American  plot  —  Lord  Rockingham  and  his  friends  —  Burke's  petition  to 
the  King  —  Surrender  of  Rhode  Island  to  the  Howes  —  Sir  Gilbert  Elliott's 
death  —  The  Duke  of  Buccleugh  —  The  Lord  Advocate  succeeds  Sir  G. 
Elliott  as  Keeper  of  the  Signet  93-94 

FEBRUARY. 

Bill  for  suspending  Habeas  Corpus  with  regard  to  the  Americans  —  Walpole's 
conversation  with  the  Duke  of  Richmond  —  Fox,  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  and 
Lord  Camden  —  Lord  Shelburne,  Governor  Johnston's  brother,  and  Dunning 
against  the  Suspension  Bill  —  Differences  between  Fox  and  Lord  Rocking- 
ham, the  Cavendishes  and  Burke  —  Sir  George  Saville —  Second  reading  of 
the  Suspension  of  the  Habeas  Corpus  Bill  —  Dunning,  Townshend,  Johnston, 
and  Fox  oppose  it — Second  reading  carried  —  Petition  of  the  Common 
Council  against  the  bill  —  Dunning's  explanatory  clause  —  Cornwall's 
amendment  —  Rigby's  violent  speech  —  Adam  censures  Lord  North  —  Wed- 
derburn  —  Conway  urges  peace  —  He  speaks  of  supplies  sent  by  the  French 
to  the  Americans  —  Lord  North  accepts  the  clause  —  Charles  Fox  — 
Wilkes  —  He  taunts  Lord  Germaine  —  Wedderbura  draws  a  parallel 
between  Fox  and  Wilkes  —  Passing  of  the  bill  in  the  Lords  —  Bad  accounts 
from  General  Howe  —  Imitation  of  the  cruelties  of  the  English  by  the  Hes- 
sians—  The  Landgrave  —  Defeat  of  two  English  regiments  —  The  Congress 
retire  from  Philadelphia  —  Inability  of  Howe  to  cross  the  Delaware  river  — 
Impossibility  of  obtaining  new  German  troops  —  Arrival  of  General  Clinton 

—  His  reason  for  leaving  America  —  An  English  ship  taken  by  the  Spaniards 

—  Remonstrance  of  the  Ministry      ..          ..          ..          ..          ..       94-99 

MARCH. 

John  the  Painter's  execution  —  Lord  Rochford  —  Lord  Sandwich  —  Lord 
George  Germaine  —  Dr.  Franklin  —  Lord  Temple  the  cause  of  the  convic- 
tion of  John  the  Painter  —  Lords  Sandwich,  Palmerston,  and  Stanley  at  the 
trial  —  The  church  of  Buckingham  —  Lord  Verney  —  Burke  and  Fox  — 
Lord  North's  illness  —  Distressing  situation  of  the  Royalist  armies  in 
America — Temple  Luttrell's  plan  for  raising  seamen  without  pressing  — 


X  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  11. 

David  Hume's  Life  —  News  of  the  attack  of  the  Spanish  settlements  in 
America  by  the  Portuguese  —  General  Yorke's  memorial  to  the  Dutch  — 
The  Dutch  talk  of  uniting  with  France  against  England — M.  de  Noailles  — 
Sir  Joseph  Yorke's  threat  —  Report  of  an  attempt  to  assassinate  the  King  — 
Accounts  from  India  —  Lord  Pigot  —  Howe  obliged  to  send  for  troops  from 
Rhode  Island  —  Augmentation  of  Washington's  army  —  Washington  de- 
clared Dictator — Abuse  of  General  Howe  by  the  Scotch  —  The  King's 
inveteracy  against  America  —  The  King  and  Queen  at  the  Duke  and  Duchess 
of  Argyll's  —  The  Duchess  of  Gloucester's  picture  —  The  Bishop  of  London 
on  Good  Friday  —  Dr.  Price's  additions  to  his  pamphlet  on  Civil  Liberty  — 
Abuse  of  Dr.  Price  in  the  papers  —  Wedderburn's  bill  against  annuities  — 
The  Court  of  Directors  vote  the  restitution' of  Lord  Pigot  —  Death  of  the 
Bishop  of  London Pages  100-106 

APRIL. 

Dr.  Lowth  made  Bishop  of  London  and  Dr.  Butler  Bishop  of  Oxford  —  Mes- 
sage from  the  King  on  the  subject  of  his  debts  —  Determination  to  increase 
the  King's  revenue  —  Apprehensions  of  the  loss  of  America  —  Treatment  of 
the  Prince  by  the  King  —  The  payment  of  the  King's  debts  unopposed  — 
Temple  Luttrell  —  General  Clinton  —  M.  de  Lafayette  —  His  presentation 
to  the  King  —  His  departure  to  America — Count  Welderen  —  The  East 
India  Directors  and  Lord  Pigot  —  The  Ministers  state  that  Congress  has 
insisted  on  France  and  Spain  declaring  war  with  England  —  Speeches  of 
Lord  Cavendish,  Lord  North,  Wilkes,  and  Burke,  on  the  King's  debts  and 
augmentation  —  Lord  North's  answer  to  Fox  —  Sawbridge  called  to  order 
by  General  Fitzroy  —  Sir  James  Lowther  —  Rigby —  Sir  W.  Bagot  —  Ac- 
counts from  Ireland  —  Tisdale  and  Ely  Hutchinson  —  Ministerial  hopes  of  a 
pacific  arrangement  with  France  —  France  and  Spain  agree  to  disarm  eight 
men-of-war  —  Lord  Stormont  —  France  refuses  to  disarm,  on  the  ground  of 
the  refusal  of  Spain  —  Capture  of  one  of  the  English  packet-boats  by  an 
American  privateer — Disagreement  between  General  Howe  and  Lord  Percy 
—  The  Speaker  presents  the  Civil  List  Bill  to  the  Lords  ..  ..  107-114 

MAY. 

Destruction  of  an  American  magazine  —  Sir  James  Lowther's  motion  for  an 
increase  of  income  to  the  King's  brothers  —  Speeches  of  Sir  Edward  Astley, 
Governor  Johnston,  Rigby,  Fox,  and  Burke  —  Complaint  of  Rigby's  attack 
by  the  Speaker  —  Lord  North's  alarm  —  The  Common  Council  of  London 
vote  the  freedom  of  the  City  to  the  Speaker  —  Lard  North  opens  the  Budget 
— Colonel  Barre"  —  Fox  —  Lord  George  Germaine's  remarks  on  America  and 
the  weakness  of  Washington's  army  —  Burke's  letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bris- 
tol—  His  advocacy  of  the  Rockingham  faction  —  General  Johnston's  reso- 
lutions on  Indian  affairs  —  The  Nabob  of  Arcott  and  his  agent  —  Sir  Herbert 
Macworth  —  General  Conway's  approval  of  the  motion  —  Arthur  Lee  — 
His  invitation  by  the  King  of  Prussia  —  Lord  Chatham  comes  down  to  the 
House  —  His  appearance — His  speech  against  the  continuation  of  the 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  xi 

American  war  —  He  moves  an  Address  to  the  King  for  the  removal  of  accu- 
mulated grievances  imposed  on  the  Americans  —  Lord  Gower  opposes  the 
motion  —  His  remarks  on  Dr.  Markham's  sermon  —  Lord  Lyttelton,  the 
Duke  of  Manchester,  Lord  Abingdon,  and  Lord  Camden  —  Lord  Weymouth's 
answer  to  those  who  reproached  Ministers — Lord  Shelburne's  severity  on 
the  Archbishop  of  York  —  The  Archbishop's  indignation  —  The  Bishop  of 
Peterborough  —  Lords  Mansfield  and  Chatham  —  Rejection  of  Lord  Chat- 
ham's motion  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  Pages  114-120 

JUNE. 

Lord  Percy  arrives  from  America  —  The  King  puts  an  end  to  the  Session  — 
Change  in  the  tone  of  his  Speech  —  Lord  Coruwallis  defeats  a  party  of  the 
Provincials  —  Governor  Tryon  —  Welbore  Ellis  appointed  Treasurer  of  the 
Navy —  Charles  Townshend  succeeds  to  the  Vice-Treasurership  of  Ireland  — 
Colonel  Keene  —  De  Grey  —  Lord  Pembroke's  cousin  —  Sir  John  Shelley 
made  Treasurer  of  the  Household  —  Mrs.  Howe  —  The  Spaniards  take  the 
Isle  of  St.  Catherine  from  the  Portuguese  —  Execution  of  Dr.  Dodd  —  His 
character  —  His  marriage  with  Lord  Sandwich's  mistress  —  The  Earl  of 
Chesterfield's  partiality  for  Dr.  Dodd  —  Dr.  Dodd's  promotion  of  charitable 
institutions  —  His  fopperies  and  extravagance  —  His  act  of  forgery  and 
detection  —  His  behaviour  at  his  trial  —  The  Advocate  Linguet  —  Lord 
Mansfield's  recommendation  of  Linguet  — •  Dr.  Newton,  Bishop  of  Bristol  — 
Efforts  made  to  save  Dr.  Dodd's  life  —  The  Methodists  —  Toplady  —  Lord 
Mansfield's  relentless  character  —  Earl  Percy  presents  a  new  petition  for 
mercy  towards  Dr.  Dodd — 'Execrations  on  the  King  for  not  sparing  him 
—  Execution  of  Harris  —  Hopkins  again  returned  Chamberlain  of  the  City 
of  London  —  Support  of  Hopkins  by  the  Administration  —  Sir  John  St. 
Aubyn  120-126 

JULY. 

Trial  before  Lord  Mansfield  between  Morande  and  Chevalier  Deon  —  Cha- 
racter of  Morande  —  Express  from  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  —  Illness  of 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester  at  Verona  —  Effects  of  the  King's  ill-usage  on  the 
Duke  —  The  King's  pretended  regret  at  the  Duke's  illness  —  General  Howe 
prepares  to  take  the  field  —  Ireland  and  Scotland  alarmed  by  American 
privateers  —  Daily  expectation  of  war  with  France  —  Jenkinson  despatched 
to  Paris  —  Fear  of  Ministers  —  General  Howe  finds  Washington  strongly 
entrenched  —  He  marches  back  to  New  York  —  Effect  of  this  news  on  the 
Court  —  Representations  made  by  the  Court  of  Lord  Stormont's  remon- 
strances —  Great  monetary  distresses  —  Difficulty  felt  by  the  Ministers  of 
obtaining  assistance  from  the  Bank  —  The  debts  of  the  Crown  —  M.  de 
Vergennes  —  Arrival  of  Madame  de  Noailles  ..  ..  ..  127-129 

AUGUST. 

Letters  from  General  Burgoyne  —  His  manifesto  to  the  colonies  —  General 
Howe  attacked  on  embarking  —  Lord  Aylesford's  brother  —  Unwillingness 


xu  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

of  our  troops  to  embark  —  Want  of  discipline  —  The  Americans  surprise 
General  Prescot  —  Sir  George  Collier  —  Burgoyne  becomes  master  of  Ticon- 
deroga  —  Ecstatic  joy  of  the  King ..  ..  ..  ..  Pages  130,  131 

SEPTEMBER. 

Lord  Abingdon's  answer  to  Burke's  letter  —  His  character  —  His  notions  of 
liberty  • —  His  opposition  to  the  American  war  —  Voltaire's  '  Guerre  de 
Geneve  '  — •  The  Earl  of  Harcourt  drowned  —  Difficulties  of  Burgoyne  — 
The  Provincials  abandon  Fort  Edward  —  Ministerial  directions  to  Bur- 
goyne not  to  advance — -Coolness  of  the  French  towards  the  Provincials 

—  Spain  and  Portugal  make  peace  —  Disgrace  of  Count  Virri      ..    131-133 

OCTOBER. 

Application  of  merchants  for  intelligence  from  America  —  Despair  felt  with 
regard  to  the  issue  of  tlie  American  war  —  Lords  Mansfield  and  Weymouth 

—  Dissatisfaction  of  the  nation  —  Eaising  of  levies  in  Germany  —  The 
Czarina  of  Eussia  —  Her  offer  to  garrison  Hanover  —  The  Czarina  and  the 
Emperor  of  China  —  Captain  Blackbourne  — •  Clinton  repulses  the  attacks 
made  on  him  —  Clinton's  dissatisfaction  with  General  Howe — General  Halo- 
binon  —  Lord  George  Germaine's  fear  of  Carleton  — Return  of  the  Duke 
and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  to  England  —  Change  in  Sir  Edward  Walpole 
towards  Lord  Germaine  —  Intercession  of  Sir  E.  Walpole  in  behalf  of  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester  —  Lord  George  Germaine's  answer  —  Roberts  —  Cor- 
diality of  Lord  Germaine  —  His  language  in  the  King's  hearing  with  respect 
to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester — Lords  North  and  Dartmouth  —  Lord  George 
Germaine's   enmity   to   General   Conway  —  Horace   Walpole's  support  of 
Lord  George  Germaine  —  Desertion  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  by  General 
Onslow  and  Sir  William  Meredith  —  Horace  Walpole's  interview  with  Sir 
Edward  Walpole — The  Duke  of  Gloucester's  anxiety  and  illness  —  The 
King's  cruelty  to  him  —  The  Emperor  of  Austria  —  His  friendship  for  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester  —  The  Duke's  dangerous  illness  —  The   King's  pre- 
tended anxiety  — The  Duchess  of  Gloucester's  unremitting  kindness  — Dr. 
Jebbe  —  The    little  Trentine  girl  —  Colonel  Jennings  —  Neglect  of  the 
King  —  Servility  of  the  Court  —  Lord  Weymouth's  brutality  —  The  King's 
kind  and  cordial  letter  to  the  Duke — The  manner  in  which  the  King  was 
induced    to  write   the    letter  —  Duval,  Canon  of  Windsor —  The   Duke 
of  Cumberland  —  Dissimulation  of  the  King  —  The  Duchess  of  Gloucester's 
story  of  the  King's  baseness  —  Lord   George   Germaine  —  The   Duke   of 
Gloucester  much  recovered  —  The  Duke's  letter  to  Lord  George   Germaine 

—  Lord    Germaiue's    answer  —  Lord    George   Germaine's  interview  with 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester — Walpole's  conversation  with  the  Duke  of  Gloucester 

—  Lady  Sarah  Lennox  —  Pope  Ganganelli  —  Lord  Mansfield  —  Lord  North 
—  Lady  Bute  — General  Sir  George  Howard  — Meeting  of  the  King  and 

the  Duke  of  Gloucester  —  Landing  of  General  Howe  in  Chesapeake  Bay  — 
Defeat  of  Colonel  St.  Leger  —  Defeat  of  General  Burgoyne  and  distress  of  his 
army  ..  f 133-160 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  xiii 


NOVEMBER. 

False  reports  of  victories  over  Washington  —  The  English  banker  Panchaud 

—  Defeat  of  Howe  —  Opening  of  the   Session  —  Weak  Speech  from  the 
Throne  —  Sir  W.  Meredith  —  Earl    Percy  moves    the    Address  —  Earl 
Chatham's  motion   to  recall   the  army   from  America  —  His  severity  of 
speech  on  the  German  princes  —  Lord  Shelburne's  accusation  of  the  King's 
servants  —  Lord  Suffolk's  reply  —  The  Duke  of  Grafton  and  Lord  Chatham 

—  The  new  Earl  of  Harcourt  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond's  and  the  Earl  of 
Effingham's  protest  against  the  Address  —  Lord  Hyde's  movement  of  the 
Address  in  the  House  of  Commons —  Fox's  attack  of  Lord  George  Germaine 

—  Lord  North's  defence  of  Lord  George  Germaine  —  Gibbon's  defence  of 
the  war  —  General  Con  way's  speech  against  the  war  —  Thurlow's  and  Wed- 
derburn's  answer  —  Wedderburn's  philippic  on  Dr.  Franklin  —  Proposals 
made  to  Lord  Stormout  by  Franklin  and  Deane  for  an  exchange  of  prisoners 

—  Dr.  Franklin's  address  to  foreign  powers  —  Imprisonment  of  Parson  Home 

—  Temple  LuttrelFs  attack  on  the  Admiralty  —  Lord  Mulgrave's  reply 

Pages  160-167 

DECEMBER. 

Great  slaughter  of  Scots  and  Hessians  by  Washington's  army — Howe  takes 
possession  of  Philadelphia  —  The  fort  of  Mud  Island  —  Motion  of  the 
Opposition  to  consider  the  state  of  the  nation  —  Speeches  of  Lord  Chatham, 
Duke  of  Richmond,  and  Lord  Lyttelton  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond's  remarks 
on  the  bayonet  and  scalping-knife  —  Altercation  between  Earl  Chatham  and 
Lord  Sandwich  —  Lord  North's  opposition  to  the  production  of  papers  — 
Affected  merriment  of  the  King  —  Sir  W.  Meredith's  resignation  —  Ques- 
tions put  by  Fox  and  Burke  to  Lord  Germaine  as  to  the  truth  of  the  capture  of 
Burgoyne's  army  —  Burke's  irony  on  Wedderburn  —  Renewal  of  the  debate 
on  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act  —  Fox  and  Thurlow  —  Lord  Chatham  moves 
for  the  instructions  to  Burgoyne  —  Lord  Galloway's  forgetfulness  of  his 
speech  —  Lord  Mountstewart's  complaints  of  France  —  Lord  Chatham's  con- 
demnation of  the  Ministry  for  taking  Indians  —  Lord  Gower  —  Lord  Den- 
bigh —  Lord  North  sent  by  the  King  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  —  Dr. 
Johnson's  pamphlet,  '  Taxation  no  Tyranny '  —  Wilkes's  motion  for  the 
repeal  of  the  American  Acts  —  Lord  North's  plan  for  treating  with  the 
Americans  —  Abuse  of  Lord  North  by  Burke  and  Fox  —  Lord  Suffolk's 
indecent  attack  on  Lord  Chatham  —  Changes  in  the  Royal  household  — 
Raising  of  men  for  the  war  in  Liverpool  and  Manchester  —  The  King  of 
Prussia  and  the  Emperor  of  Austria  —  Confirmation  of  the  surrender  of 
Burgoyne  and  his  army  —  Terms  of  their  surrender,  and  treatment  by  the 
Americans  —  Subscriptions  for  American  prisoners  in  England  —  Death  of 
Dr.  Keppel,  Bishop  of  Exeter  —  Account  of  Dr.  Markham's  conduct  towards 
Lord  Holderness  ..  168-177 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 


1778. 
JANUARY. 

Apprehensions  of  war  with  France  —  Keception  of  French  officers  by  the 
Congress  of  America  —  Obstinacy  of  the  King  —  Zeal  of  the  Scots  for  the 
war  —  Efforts  made  by  the  King  to  raise  regiments  for  the  American  war  — 
Conquest  of  Mud  Island  and  Eedbank  —  Threatened  pursuit  of  Washington 
by  General  Howe  —  Death  of  the  Elector  of  Bavaria — Death  of  Lord 
Germaine's  wife  —  Lord  Cornwallis's  arrival  from  America  —  His  represen- 
tations to  the  King  on  the  war  —  Lord  Petersham  —  Lord  Germaine's  justi- 
fication of  himself  for  writing  against  Burgoyne  —  Promotions  in  the 
Church — Insulting  remarks  made  in  the  House  on  French  officers  —  Be- 
ported  challenge  of  a  duel  from  Comte  de  Turpin  to  Lord  Suffolk  — 
Lord  Chatham  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond  —  Lord  Eockingham's  invitation 
to  Lord  Chatham  to  be  present  at  the  House  of  Lords  —  Lord  Abingdon's 
motion  on  the  illegality  of  raising  regiments  without  consent  of  Parliament 

—  Sir  Philip  Jennings  Clarke  —  Fox's  attack  on  the  reign  of  the  King  — 
Colonel  LuttrelFs  anger  —  Lord  North  —  Burke  — •  Motion  for  despatches 
from  the  Generals  in  America  —  Lord  North  on  our  quarters  at  Philadelphia 

—  The   Duke  of  Eichmond's  motion  for  lists  of  the  navy  —  Colonel  Lut- 
trell's  complaint  of  '  The  Morning  Post '  —  His  motion  to  exclude  strangers 
from  the  House  —  Speech  of  General  Conway  against  the  motion  —  '  The 
Daily  Advertiser's'  characters  of  the  speakers  in  Parliament  —  Death  of 
Lord  Pigot  in  India Pages  178-187 

FEBRUARY. 

Inquiry  into  the  state  of  the  nation  —  Eejection  of  the  motion  of  the  Duke  of 
Bichmond  —  Charles  Fox's  recapitulation  of  the  events  of  the  war  in  the 
House  of  Commons  —  Young  George  Grenville  —  Committees  of  Inquiry  in 
both  Houses —  Great  public  curiosity  to  hear  the  debates  —  Lord  Abingdon's 
hit  at  Lord  Mansfield  —  Lord  Suffolk's  amendment  to  Lord  Abingdon's 
motion  —  Lord  Mansfield's  parallel  between  the  rebellions  of  Scotland  and 
America — Anecdote  of  Lord  Denbigh  —  Abandonment  by  Ministers  of 
the  design  of  transporting  new  levies  to  America  —  Gibbon  and  Conway  — 
Dundas,  the  Lord  Advocate  —  Burke's  great  speech  on  our  cruelties  in 
America  —  Lord  W.  Gordon  —  Sir  Alexander  Leith's  attack  of  Lord  Ger- 
maine,  and  his  answer  —  Eeported  attack  of  our  fortified  camp  by  Wash- 
ington —  Bon-mot  of  Wilmot,  Vice-Provost  of  King's  College,  Cambridge 

—  Lord  Mansfield's  motion  —  Lord  Mansfield  and  Lord  Carnden  —  A  treaty 
with  America  signed  by  France  —  Lord  Mansfield   supposed   to  be   the 
author  of  late  measures  —  Story  of  Lord  Mansfield  and  the  subscription  for 
raising  forces  —  Fox's  motion  for  the  regular  and  general  state  of  the  army 

—  George  Grenville's  speech  —  Eejection  of  Fox's  motion  —  Lord  Effing- 
ham  —  Eesumption   of  the   Committee    of  Inquiry  —  Lord   Sandwich  — 
Lords  Hillsborough   and  Lyttelton  —  Button   sent  by  the  King  to  Dr. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  xv 

Franklin  —  French  officers  ordered  to  Bretagne  —  General  Gates  —  Lord 
North's  conciliatory  plan  —  Great  desertions  from  the  Court  —  Dread  of 
inquiries  by  Lords  Sandwich  and  Suffolk  —  Reasons  of  the  Court  for  being 
in  favour  of  the  conciliatory  plan  —  Lord  North's  political  character  —  The 
King's  love  of  assuming  the  donation  of  places — The  King's  views  of  the 
extension  of  his  prerogative  —  Interview  between  Hutton  and  Dr.  Franklin 

—  Cost  of  the  war  —  Thurlow's  disgust  for  Lord  North's  plan  —  Burke  and 
Fox  —  Fox's  inquiry  of  Lord  North  about  the  treaty  between  France  and 
America  —  Sir  William  Gordon,  late  President  at  Naples  —  George  Gren- 
ville  —  Burke's  question  to  Lord  North  with  regard  to  the  treaty —  Remon- 
strance against  the  war  by  the  county  of  Norfolk  —  The  meeting  at  the 
King's  Arms  Tavern  —  The  pacific  bills  —  Non-repeal  of  the  offensive  Acts 

—  Dundas's  apology  for  Lord  North  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond  —  The  Earl 
of  Bristol's  attack  on  the  Admiralty  —  The  Duke  of  Bolton  —  The  right  of 
naming  Commissioners  granted  to  the  King — The  Earl  of  Carlisle  named 
one  of  the  Commissioners  —  Lord  Chancellor  Bathurst  —  The  Fast 

Pages  188-214 

MARCH. 

The  conciliatory  bills  passed — Lord  Germaine  declares  himself  responsible  for 
them  —  Bad  condition  of  the  fleet  — •  Address  of  the  Common  Council  to 
the  King  against  the  Ministers  —  Sailing  of  a  French  fleet  to  America  — 
Speeches  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  Lord  Weymouth,  Lord  Suffolk,  Lord 
Temple,  Lord  Shelburne,  on  the  conciliatory  bills  —  Absence  of  eminent 
men  from  the  debates  —  Lord  North's  wish  to  resign  after  the  defeat  of 
Burgoyne  —  Opening  of  the  Budget  by  Lord  North  —  His  proposition  of  the 
loan  —  Burke's  attack  on  the  financial  measures  of  the  Government  — 
Fox's  severe  attack  of  Lord  North  —  Appointment  of  Eden  and  Jackson  as 
Commissioners  —  Lord  John  Cavendish  • — •  General  Carleton  —  Mr.  Gilbert's 
proposition  to  tax  places  and  pensions  —  Rising  in  Norfolk — Lord  Cam - 
den's  attack  on  the  criminality  of  Ministers  —  Lord  Stair  excluded  for 
opposing  the  American  war  —  Luttrell's  proposal  for  the  removal  of  any 
Ministers  obnoxious  to  the  Americans  —  M.  de  Noailles  delivers  to  the 
King  the  declaration  of  the  treaty  between  France  and  America — Recep- 
tion of  Dr.  Franklin  as  Ambassador  at  Versailles  —  Orders  sent  to  Lord 
Stormont  to  leave  France  —  Motion  of  Mr.  George  Grenville  for  papers 
relating  to  the  treaty  between  France  and  America  —  Censure  of  Lord 
North  by  Burke,  Dunning,  and  Fox  —  The  extravagances  of  Lord  Foley's 
sons  —  Bill  for  the  setting  aside  Lord  Foley's  will  —  The  Earl  of  Coventry 

—  The  Duke  of  Manchester  moves  for  the  removal  of  Ministers  —  Dr. 
Butler's  speech  in  favour  of  the  war  —  Lord  Coventry,  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond, and  Lord  Shelburne  —  Confusion  of  Lord  Mansfield  —  Speeches  in 
the  House  of  Commons  relative  to  the  removal   of  Ministers  —  General 
Amherst's  appointment —  Admiral  Keppel  made  commander  of  the  fleet  — 
War  between  Prussia  and  Austria  —  Attitude  of  France  —  Walpole's  con- 
versation with  the  Duke  of  Richmond  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond's  tolerant 
views  on  the  subject  of  religion  —  Walpole's  opinions  on  Romanism  in  Ire- 
land —  Fox's  charge  on  Lord  Germaine  of  the  miscarriage  of  the  Burgoyne 


XVI  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

expedition  —  Thurlow's  defence  of  Lord  Weymouth  from  Fox's  accusation 
• —  Wedderburn's  advocacy  of  Lord  Germaine  —  Dundas  taunts  Fox  for  his 
moderation  —  Fox's  intemperate  answer  —  The  King's  commendation  of 
Fox  —  Lord  Chatham's  pension  —  The  Queen  and  Duchess  of  Northumber- 
land—  Governor  Pownall's  letter  —  Scandalous  abuse  of  the  Howes  and 
libels  on  the  Americans  —  Walpole's  desire  for  the  maintenance  of  liberty 
—  Abhorrence  of  the  name  of  Whigs  by  the  army  —  Misrepresentations  of 
the  Ministers  of  the  inutility  of  our  trade  with  America  • —  Departure  of 
the  French  ambassador  and  his  wife  —  Treaty  with  the  Emperor  of  Austria 
and  France  —  Lord  Weymouth  acquaints  the  House  of  the  King's  intention 
to  call  out  the  militia  —  The  Duke  of  Eichmond's  dissuasion  from  war  with 
France  —  Attacks  on  the  Ministers  made  by  Lord  Rockingham  and  the  Duke 
of  Grafton  —  Lord  Lyttelton's  panegyric  on  Lord  Chatham  • — The  Duke  of 
Gloucester's  letter  to  the  King  on  the  subject  of  the  office  of  Commander-in- 
chief —  The  King's  answer,  and  meeting  with  the  Duke  —  The  militia 
ordered  out — •  Peaceful  declarations  of  France  —  Story  of  Dundas's  intem- 
perance —  General  Conway  labours  to  unite  the  Duke  of  Grafton  and  Lord 
Shelburne  —  Dr.  Franklin  asserts  he  has  still  power  to  treat  —  Colonel 
Barre's  motion  for  a  Select  Committee  —  Lord  Effingham's  motions  relative 
to  the  navy  — *  The  Duke  of  Richmond  —  Lord  Sandwich  and  the  Chan- 
cellor  Pages  215-248 

APRIL, 

Provision  for  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  children  —  The  Duke  and  Duchess  of 
Cumberland  —  Intended  motion  for  an  addition  to  the  new  loan  —  Gover- 
nor Johnston  made  Commissioner  in  place  of  Mr.  Jackson  —  Dr.  Robertson, 
the  historian,  and  Dr.  Franklin,  in  Scotland  —  Rejoicings  in  France  on  the 
return  of  De  la  Mothe  with  his  squadron  —  Admiral  Keppel  questioned  by 
the  King  with  respect  to  the  condition  of  the  fleet  —  Two  of  Lord  Bute's 
sons  join  the  militia  —  Sir  W.  Meredith's  motion  for  the  repeal  of  the  inimi- 
cal Acts  against  the  Americans  —  Speeches  of  Burke  and  Fox  in  favour  of 
greater  indulgence  towards  the  Roman  Catholics  —  General  Conway  on  the 
want  of  discipline  in  the  army  • —  Lord  Chatham's  views  against  the  inde- 
pendence of  America  —  Dr.  Addingtou,  Lord  Chatham's  physician  — 
Seizure  of  Lord  Chatham  with  a  fit  of  apoplexy  in  the  House  • —  Lord 
Weymouth  delivers  to  the  House  the  King's  message  for  settlements  on  his 
own  and  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  children  — Wilkes  and  Townsend  — 
Lord  Shelburne's  speech  on  English  patriotism  in  the  House  of  Lords  —  The 
Chancellor's  plan  for  giving  satisfaction  to  the  Foleys  —  Lord  Derby  —  The 
Duke  of  Richmond  —  Lord  Sandwich  —  Lord  Cornwallis  suddenly  ordered 
back  to  America  —  Wilkes's  motion  on  the  legality  of  the  marriages  of  the 
Dukes  of  Gloucester  and  Cumberland  —  Lord  Irnham's  malevolent  speech 
—  Thomas  Townshend  and  Thomas  Walpole  —  Withdrawal  of  Wilkes's 
motion  —  Passing  of  the  Bill  of  Settlement  on  the  Royal  children  —  Enmi- 
ties of  the  Luttrells  to  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  —  Coolness  of 
the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  towards  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland  —  The 
Duke  of  Gloucester  as  husband  and  parent,  and  his  general  character — 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  xvn 

His  attachment  for  Townshend — Horace  "Walpole's  unassuming  conduct 

—  Mr.  Powys'  motion  to  enlarge  the  powers  of  the  Commissioners  —  Dun- 
das's  warm   speech  against   the  attempt  to  conquer  America  —  Violent 
attack  on  Lord  North  —  Lord  George  Gordon's  unparliamentary  language 

—  Departure  of  the  three  Commissioners  from  Portsmouth  —  Apprehen- 
sion of  a  French  invasion  in  Ireland  —  Account  of  a  French  fleet  sail- 
ing from   Toulon  —  The  King's   supreme  control   over  the   army  —  Va- 
cancy in  the  government  of  Charlemont  —  The  King's  visit  to  the  fleet 
of  observation   at  Portsmouth  —  Lord  Thurlow  and   the  Chancellorship 

—  Paul  Jones,  the  privateer  ..          ..          ..          ..     Pages  249-264 

MAY. 

New  publications  —  Lord  Derby's  motion  rejected  —  The  Contractors'  Bill 
deferred  —  Thomas  Townshend  on  the  fleet  at  Portsmouth  —  Lord 
North's  motion  in  answer  to  the  King's  message  —  Lord  George  Ger- 
maine  —  Promises  of  Lord  North  to  favour  Ireland  in  commercial  bills 
—  Alarm  of  the  trading  community  on  the  western  coast  of  England  — 
Burke  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond's  motion  on  the  destination  of  the 
Toulon  squadron  —  Death  of  Lord  Chatham  —  Colonel  Barrels  motion 
on  the  funeral  of  the  Earl  of  Chatham  —  Hearing  of  Home's  appeal  by 
the  House  of  Lords  —  Lord  Shelburne's  motion  for  attending  the  Earl  of 
Chatham's  funeral  —  Dr.  Cornwallis,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  —  Arrival 
of  General  Burgoyne  —  Passing  of  Sir  George  Saville's  motion  to  take 
off  restraints  from  the  Roman  Catholics  —  Appointment  of  Marshal 
Broglie  as  generalissimo  —  Death  of  the  Earl  of  Holderness  —  The  King 
and  Lord  North  —  Motion  of  settlement  of  an  annuity  on  the  Earl  of 
Chatham  —  Distresses  in  Ireland  —  General  Burgoyne  appears  in  the 
House  of  Commons  —  The  Common  Council  resolve  to  bury  the  Earl 
of  Chatham  in  St.  Paul's  —  Return  of  the  Toulon  fleet  to  Toulon  — 
Intended  motion  of  Sir  James  Lowther  for  jointures  for  the  two  Royal 
Duchesses  —  The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  act  on  Walpole's 
advice  —  Offers  to  Lord  Chatham  by  Lord  Bute  to  make  him  Prime 
Minister  and  create  him  a  Duke  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond's  attack 
on  Lord  Sandwich  —  Vyner  moves  for  a  Committee  to  inquire  into 
Burgoyne's  conduct  —  Violent  scene  in  the  House  —  Lord  North  —  Mr. 
Buller  —  Hartley's  motion  for  an  address  to  the  King  to  adjourn  Parlia- 
ment —  Speeches  of  Rigby  and  Wedderburn  upon  Burgoyne  —  Alarm 
of  the  French  having  landed  —  Account  of  a  mutiny  in  the  county  of 
Sussex  264-277 

JUNE. 

Passing  of  the  Bill  for  settling  an  annuity  on  the  Earl  of  Chatham  —  Dr. 
Markham's  revenge  —  Lord  Derby's  motion  for  all  papers  relating  to  the 
Convention  of  Saratoga  —  Sir  James  Lowther  —  Dissatisfaction  in  the  Royal 
army  at  the  conciliatory  plan  —  Complaints  of  Lord  Ossory  at  the  treatment 
of  our  generals  in  America  by  the  Administration  —  Thurlow  created  a 
VOL.  II.  b 


xvni  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II 

Baron  — Anecdote  of  the  King's  conscience —  Bon  mot  at  the  Lord  Chan- 
cellor's —  The  King's  Speech  at  the  close  of  the  session  —  Audience  of  the 
City  with  the  King  —  Admiral  Byron  despatched  after  the  Toulon  squadron 

—  Encounter  between  an  English  and  French  frigate  —  Negociation  for  a 
Northern  alliance  between  Russia  and  Prussia  —  Admiral  Keppel's  account 
of  the  engagement  of  the  English  and  French  frigate  —  Consternation  of 
the  Court  —  The  Bill  in  favour  of  the  Roman  Catholics  —  Alarm  of  the 
City   on   the  return  of  Keppel  —  Great    preparations    in   the    ports  of 
France  Pages  277-282 

JULY. 

"Wilkes  again  rejected  from  being  the  Chamberlain  of  the  City  —  Favourable 
reception  of  Sir  William  Howe  by  the  King  —  Apprehensions  of  Ministers 
for  the  East  and  West  India  fleets  —  Reports  in  England  of  the  opinions  of 
French  Ministers  with  regard  to  war  with  England.  Pacific  assurances  of 
Spain — View  taken  by  the  Grand  Duke  of  the  protection  of  the  Americans 
by  France  —  Falling  of  stocks  in  consequence  of  disheartening  rumours  — 
Arrival  of  the  Commissioners  in  America  • —  American  expedition  against 
Florida  —  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  seeks  to  be  employed  by  the  King  — 
The  King's  answer  to  the  Duke's  letter 282-287 

AUGUST. 

Admiral  Keppel's  encounter  with  the  centre  and  rear  of  the  French  fleet  — 
Lord  Richard  Cavendish  —  Affected  disappointment  of  the  Court  at  the 
result  of  Keppel's  action — Safe  arrival  of  all  the  fleets  at  Portsmouth  — 
Negociations  of  the  Commissioners  with  the  Congress  —  Quarrel  between 
Keppel  and  Sir  Hugh  Palliser  —  Lady  Chatham  and  Lord  Bute  —  Sir  Henry 
Clinton  fights  his  way  to  New  York  —  Trial  of  General  Lee  by  General 
Washington  by  court  martial  —  Lord  Howe  blockaded  by  Monsieur  D'Estaing 

—  Sir  Edward  Newnham's  letter   to  the  Dissenters  against  the   Roman 
Catholic  Bill  —  The  Earl  of  Ely  —  Dismissal  of  Captain  Brereton  from 
the  navy  for  cowardice  —  Reported  duel  between  Keppel  and  Palliser 

288-291 

SEPTEMBER. 

The  King  of  Prussia's  letter  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  —  Arrival  of  Sir  Guy 
Carleton  —  Pursuit  of  D'Estaing  by  Lord  Howe  —  Sir  P.  Parker — Alderman 
Oliver's  fear  for  his  possessions  in  the  West  Indies  —  Mutiny  in  Edinburgh 

—  The  King  and  Queen  visit  the  camp  at  Winchester  ..          ..     292 

OCTOBER. 

D'Estaing's  attempt  upon  Rhode  Island,  and  its  succour  by  Sir  H.  Clinton  — 
Governor  Johnston  stigmatized  by  Congress  —  Publication  of  Lord  Bute's 
negociation  with  the  Earl  of  Chatham  —  Distress  in  French  trade — The 
King's  visit  to  Lord  Petre  —  Walpole's  illness  ..  ..  ..  293 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  xix 


NOVEMBER. 

Lord  Mountstewart's  letter  denying  Lord  Bute's  desire  for  place  —  Mr.  W. 
Pitt  —  Cautious  reserve  of  the  Earl  of  Chatham's  family  —  The  King's  dis- 
like of  Lord  Bute  —  Unfeeling  conduct  of  the  King  towards  his  mother  — 
The  Queen's  jealousy  of  the  Duchess  of  Argyll  —  Account  of  the  French 
taking  Dominica — Trial  in  the  King's  Bench  — Lord  Sandwich  —  Lords 
Erskine  and  Mansfield  —Parallel  drawn  by  a  Greenwich  clergyman  —  Con- 
test between  Lady  Bute  and  Lord  Sandwich  —  Apprehensions  of  Ministers 
of  defection  in  their  troops  —  The  Grosvenors  — Sir  Laurence  Dundas  — 
Letters  of  Lord  North  to  press  a  large  attendance  in  the  House  —  The 
pamphlet  '  Anticipation'  —  Tickell's  attack  on  Lord  Granby  —  Welbore 
Ellis  —  Speeches  of  Lord  Derby,  Lord  Suffolk,  and  Lord  Shelburue  on  the 
Address  —  Speech  of  the  nephew  of  the  Earl  of  Gower  in  the  House  of 
Commons  —  Governor  Johnston's  insinuation  of  blame  on  Keppel  —  Violent 
attack  on  Lord  North  by  Fox  — Emotion  of  Lord  North  —  Lord  North's 
wealth  —  The  King's  desire  to  retain  Lord  North  in  the  Administra- 
tion   Pages  294-305 

DECEMBER. 

The  Duke  of  Northumberland  appointed  Master  of  the  Horse  —  The  Duke  of 
Bridgewater  threatens  to  go  into  Opposition  —  Encroachments  on  land  made 
in  Wales  —  Assemblies  of  Welsh  proprietors  in  London  against  the  encroach- 
ments—  Temple  Luttrell's  attack  on  the  Admiralty  for  embezzlement  — 
LuttrelFs  statement  to  the  House  of  Captain  Berkeley's  story  —  Speeches  of 
Keppel  and  Sir  Hugh  Palliser  —  Lord  Kockingham's  complaint  of  Sir  Henry 
Clinton's  proclamation  —  The  Chancellor  at  the  King's  leve'e  —  Thurlow's 
arrogance — Comparison  of  the  minds  of  Thurlow,  Mansfield,  and  Wedderburn 
—  Charles  Fox  —  Thurlow  made  Chancellor  —  Plots  of  Rigby,  Lord  Wey- 
mouth,  and  Thurlow,  to  sacrifice  the  other  Ministers  —  Insolence  of  Thurlow 
towards  Andrew  Stuart — The  manner  in  which  Lord  Thurlow  obtained  the 
Reals — 'Mr.  Coke's  seat  at  Holkham< — Speeches  of  Mr.  Conolly,  Colonel 
Stanley,  and  Mr.  Powis  on  the  defenceless  condition  of  the  coast  —  Lord 
George  Germaine's  answer  to  Sir  W.  Howe  —  The  King  his  own  Minister  — 
The  Bishop  of  Peterborough  on  Sir  H.  Clinton's  manifesto — Speeches  of 
Lord  Derby,  Lord  Abingdon,  and  the  Dukes  of  Richmond  and  Grafton 
against  the  proclamation  —  Voting  of  two  Archbishops  in  favour  of  the  pro- 
clamation—  Resignation  of  General  Keppel — Lord  Amherst  —  Intrigues  of 
Lord  Sandwich  —  Admiral  Keppel  informed  of  the  charges  made  against 
him  by  Sir  Hugh  Palliser  —  Great  astonishment  at  Sir  Hugh  Palliser's 
conduct  —  Admiral  Campbell  —  Anxiety  of  Keppel's  friends  —  Temple 
Lut troll's  motion  for  a  court-martial  on  Sir  Hugh  Palliser  —  Commenda- 
tions of  General  Conway  and  Lord  Nugent  of  Keppel  —  Admiral  Keppel's 
desire  that  the  trial  should  proceed  —  Admiral  Pigot  —  Lord  Mulgrave  — 
General  Keppel  —  Charles  Fox's  motion  for  the  order  of  the  day  —  Speech 
of  Wedderburn,  and  it*  confutation  by  Dunning  —  The  Secretaryship  at  War 

b  2 


xx  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

given  to  Jenkinson  —  Disgust  of  the  navy  at  the  persecution  of  Keppel  — 
The  Earl  of  Bristol  and  the  Duke  of  Bolton  —  Remonstrance  of  the  Ad- 
mirals and  Commanders  of  the  fleet  against  the  court-martial  on  Keppel  — 
Lord  Hawke  —  Lord  Vere  —  The  Duke  of  Marlborough  —  The  Earl  of 
Pembroke  —  Dispersion  of  Byron's  fleet  by  a  storm  —  Resignation  of  his 
command  in  America  by  Lord  Cornwallis  —  Lafayette's  challenge  to  Lord 
Carlisle  —  The  King's  treatment  of  the  remonstrance  of  the  West  India 
merchants  —  Sir  William  Meredith's  pamphlet  in  answer  to  the  book  of  a 
Scotch  clergyman — Hartley's  pamphlet  in  defence  of  the  colonies. 

Pages  306-328 


1779. 
JANUARY. 

Great  storm  —  Destruction  of  a  part  of  Greenwich  Hospital  —  Zeal  of  the 
Scotch  naval  officers  in  favour  of  Keppel  —  Admiral  Montagu  —  His  treat- 
ment of  Palliser  and  Lord  Mulgrave  —  Lord  Sandwich  —  The  King's  par- 
tiality for  Sir  Hugh  Palliser  —  Fox's  remark  on  the  zeal  displayed  by  the 
Rockingham  faction  at  the  trial  of  Keppel —  Resentment  of  the  King  at  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland's  presence  at  the  trial  —  Death  of  Garrick,  the  actor  — 
Burke's  attendance  at  his  funeral  —  Sir  John  Dalrymple's  scurrilous  pam- 
phlet —  Lord  Barrington's  challenge  to  Sir  J.  Dalrymple  —  Anecdotes  of  Sir 
J.  Dalrymple  —  Captain  Hood  —  Captain  Windsor  —  Behaviour  of  Pal- 
liser and  Keppel  at  the  trial  —  Opposition  of  the  Scottish  Presbyterians  to 
the  toleration  of  Popery 329-337 

FEBRUARY. 

Anger  of  the  Scotch  against  Dr.  Robertson  —  Lord  Weymouth's  letter  to  the 
Scottish  clergy  —  Lord  Beauchamp  —  Charles  Fox  —  Position  and  prospect 
of  the  King  and  his  Administration  —  Absolute  power  of  the  King  —  Lord 
Sandwich's  power  over  the  East  India  Company  —  Lords  North  and  Ger- 
maine  —  KeppePs  acquittal  —  Illuminations  in  London  and  Westminster, 
and  other  demonstrations  of  joy  at  the  event —  Sir  Hugh  Palliser's  empty 
house  —  The  windows  of  Lord  Mulgrave's,  Captain  Hood's,  and  Lord  Ger- 
maine's  houses  broken  —  Escape  of  Lord  Sandwich  and  Miss  Ray  from  the 
Admiralty  —  The  rioters  at  Lord  North's  house  —  The  Marquis  of  Rock- 
ingham's  observation  on  Lord  Mansfield  —  Lord  Mulgrave's  motion  to  alter 
the  law  relating  to  courts-martial  —  Colonel  Barre'  —  Sir  Philip  Jennings 
Clarke  —  Admiral  Keppel  presented  with  the  freedom  of  the  City  —  Uni- 
versal illuminations  —  Terror  of  Lord  Sandwich  and  Lord  Weymouth  — 
Palliser  appointed  Steward  of  the  Chiltern  Hundreds  —  Temple  Luttrell  — 
Lord  Radnor  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond  —  Lord  Rockingham's  motion  for 
papers  relating  to  Keppel's  trial  —  Lord  North's  irresolution  —  Pleading  of 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  xxi 

Fox  for  the  three  rioters  —  Admiral  Keppel  receives  the  thanks  of  the 
House  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond's  motion  for  a  list  of  the  Royal  Navy  — 
Speeches  on  Sir  Hugh  Palliser  by  Fox  and  Lord  North  —  Lord  Howe  —  Lord 
Nugent  —  General  Convvay  —  Riots  and  destruction  of  windows  by  the  mob 

—  Capture  of  Saint  Lucia  by  General  Grant  —  General  Campbell's  success  in 
Georgia  —  Inactivity  of  the  French  —  Fox's  attack  on  Lord  North  as  a 
financier  —  Governor  Johnston        ..          ..          ..          ..     Pages  338-352 

MARCH. 

Account  of  peace  between  the  Emperor  of  Austria  and  the  King  of  Prussia  — 
Fox's  motion  against  Lord  Sandwich  —  Death  of  Lord  Suffolk  —  Debate  on 
Dissenters  —  Account  of  the  taking  of  Pondicherry  ..  ..  352,  353 

NOVEMBER. 

Temple  Luttrell  and  freedom  of  debate  —  Seizure  of  the  goods  of  a  Dublin 
merchant  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  353 

DECEMBER. 

Lord  Shelburne's  motion  for  censure  and  neglect  of  Ireland  —  Meeting  in  the 
City  to  swear  Wilkes  Chamberlain  —  Lord  North  and  Mr.  Hartley  — 
Speeches  of  Burke,  Fox,  &c.,  on  Lord  Shelburne's  bill  on  neglect  of  Ireland 

—  Lord  North's  propositions  for  Ireland  unanimously  voted  —  Lord  Shel- 
burne's speech  on  the  extravagance  of  the  Administration  —  Taking  of  the 
fort  of  Omoa  from  the  Spaniards  —  Repulse  of  D'Estaing  at  the  Savannah  — 
Conspirators  against  Lord  Pigott  found  guilty  —  Satisfaction   in  Ireland 
with  the  Act  for  their  free  trade  —  Accounts  of  the  rising  of  settlers  in  Caro- 
lina   ,  353-357 


1780. 
JANUARY. 

Captain  Fielding  attacks  the  Dutch  store  ships  —  Petitions  in  Middlesex  and 
Hampshire  against  new  taxes  till  the  grievances  are  redressed  —  Lord 
George  Gordon  chairman  of  the  Protestant  Committee — Unsettled  condition 
of  the  country  —  Hans  Stanley's  death  —  Taking  of  a  Spanish  man-of-war 
by  Sir  George  Rodney  —  Lord  George  Gordon's  interview  with  the  King  — 
Resignation  of  the  Marquis  of  Caermarthen  —  Lord  Spencer  ..  358-363 

FEBRUARY. 

Meeting  for  a  petition  in  Westminster  Hall  —  Proposition  that  Fox  be  future 
candidate  for  Westminster — Lord  Cavendish — Wilkes — Rigby  —  Lord 
Temple  —  General  Burgoyne  —  The  Duke  of  Chaudos'  interference  in  the 
Hampshire  election  —  John  Wesley's  letter  in  the  '  London  Chronicle'  — 
Mr.  Smelt  and  the  Prince  of  Wales  —  Rejection  of  Lord  Shelburne's  motion 


xxn  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

for  inquiring  into  expenditure  of  public  money  —  Sir  George  Saville's  pre- 
sentation of  the  Yorkshire  petition  —  Lord  North — Fox — Resignation  of 
Lord  Pembroke  —  Fine  of  Stratton  and  others  for  the  arrest  and  imprison- 
ment of  Lord  Pigott  —  The  Duke  of  Portland  —  Burke's  great  speech  on  the 
alteration  of  the  Crown's  revenue  and  influence  —  Rodney's  capture  of 
Spanish  men-of-war  —  S peeches  upon  the  petitions  by  Sir  George  Saville, 
Colonel  Barre',  Lord  North,  Fox,  and  Lord  Mulgrave  —  Motion  to  peti- 
tion the  King  to  pardon  Parker,  the  printer  —  Sir  George  Saville  —  Lord 
North  —  Lord  Pembroke  —  The  Lieutenancy  of  Sussex  —  Conduct  of 
the  King  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond  —  Lord  Carysfort's  motion  for  a 
Mutiny  Bill —  Reports  of  a  rising  against  the  Roman  Catholics  in  Ireland  — 
Lord  Shelburne  —  Barrd  —  The  protests  of  the  Corporation  —  Sir  George 
Saville's  motion  for  lists  of  pensions  —  Speeches  on  the  motion  by  Lord 
North,  Wedderburn,  and  Barre'  —  The  Contractors'  Bill  in  the  House  of 
Commons  —  Lord  Hertford  —  Meeting  of  Burke,  Lee,  &c.  —  Lord  Frederick 
Cavendish  and  the  Westminster  election  —  The  King's  intention  of  resisting 
the  petitions  —  Adam  —  Lord  Caermarthen  —  Lord  Shelburne  —  Sir  George 
Eodney's  account  of  his  victory —  Lord  North's  opposition  to  the  expenses 
of  the  army  being  printed  —  Lord  Temple  —  Lord  Hertford's  alarm  at  what 
passed  in  conversation  between  him  and  Walpole  and  his  brother  —  Fox 
andMr.Wyvil  Pages  364-373 

MARCH. 

Mr.  Burke's  Bill  — ^Unfavourable  accounts  from  Ireland  —  Lord  Buckingham 

—  Proposition  of  a  petition  at  Maidstone  by  Lord  Mahon  —  The  Duke  of 
Dorset's  opposition  —  The  St.  Alban's  Tavern  —  Capture  of  a  French  ship 
by  Admiral  Digby  —  Lord  Shelburne's  motion  —  Lord  North  opens  the 
Budget  —  Lord  George  Gordon  —  Committee  on  Burke's  Bill  —  Permission 
granted  to  Ireland  to  trade  with  the  colonies  —  The  Duke  of  Leinster  — 
Defeat  of  the  Court  on  Burke's  Bill  —  Sir  Edward  Dering  —  The  Speaker's 
attack  on  Lord  North  —  Charles  Fox  —  Charges  made  against  Lord  North 
voted  groundless  —  Alarm  caused  by  committees  of  association  —  Horace 

"Walpole's  views  of  affairs  —  Necessity  for  economy  —  Duty  of  the  nation 
to  restore  the  Constitution  to  the  state  in  which  it  was  at  the  Revolution 

—  Annual  Parliaments  —  Impropriety  of  attempting  experiments  —  Chan- 
cellor —  Charles  Fox   calls   Fullerton   to    order  —  Colonel   Barrd  —  Lord 
Shelburne  —  Passing    of  the  Contractors'   Bill  —  The   Speaker's  apology 
for  his  behaviour  —  Lord  Nugent  speaks  against  Mr.  Burke  and  his  bill — 
Lord  George  Gordon  —  General  Conway's  objection  to  the  removal  of  the 
Board  of  Ordnance  —  The  Attorney-General  —  Mr.  Fullerton's  insulting 
letter  to  Lord  Shelburne  —  Duel  between  Lord  Shelburne  and  Mr.  Fullerton 

—  Lord  Frederick  Cavendish  —  Lord  Balcarras  —  Burke's  notice  of  the  duel 
in  the  House  —  Sir  James  Lowther  —  Fox  —  Recommendation  of  a  depu- 
tation from  the  St.  Alban's  Tavern  to  insist  on   Annual  Parliaments  — 
Lord  Oasory  —  Dr.  Watson's  sermons  —  Agreement  of  the  York  Committee 
to  Triennial  Parliaments  —  Sir  George  Saville  —  Lord  John  Cavendish  and 
Lord  George  Gordon  —  Lord  Shelburue's  letter  to  the  Wiltshire  Committee 

374-390 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  xxiu 


APRIL. 

Leicestershire  and  Northampton  reject  the  Association  —  Petition  from  Cumber- 
land—  Complaints  in  the  House  on  new- raised  regiments  —  Fox  harangues 
petitioners  of  Westminster — Dunning's  motion  for  the  diminution  of  the  influ- 
ence of  the  Crown  —  Walpole's  proposed  alteration  of  the  motion  —  Dunning's 
motion  carried — Lord  North's  loss  of  temper  —  Thomas  Pitt — -Bigby  — 
Silence  of  the  Opposition  on  the  disagreements  at  York  —  Mr.  G.  Pitt  — 
Complaint  of  the  usage  of  T.  Grenyille  —  Censure  on  Lord  Amherst — Mr. 
Wyvil's  behaviour  to  Lord  John  Cavendish  —  Bill  for  disqualifying  officers 
of  Revenue  from  voting  at  elections  —  Declaration  of  Russia  and  other 
Powers  against  suffering  their  ships  to  be  visited  —  Lord  Hillsborough  — 
Illness  of  the  Speaker  —  Protest  of  Lords  against  the  rejection  of  the  Con- 
tractors' Bill —  Proclamation  in  the  '  Gazette'  to  dissolve  the  alliance  with 
the  Dutch  —  Sir  Roger  Newdegete  —  The  Westminster  Association  — 
The  Duke  of  Richmond's  motion  for  an  inquiry  into  the  late  state  of  Ply- 
mouth—  Speeches  of  Lord  Shelburne  and  Lord  Stormont  —  Landing  of 
Sir  H.  Clinton  near  Charles  Town  —  Rejection  of  the  clauses  for  the  abo- 
lition of  the  Wardrobe  and  Board  of  Works  ..  ..  Pages  391-400 

MAY. 

General  Con  way's  motion  for  a  bill  for  pacifying  America  —  Charles  Fox's 
support  of  Conway  —  Lord  George  Germaine  —  Lord  North  —  Thomas  Pitt 
—  Severity  of  Conway  and  Fox  on  the  Bishops  —  The  English  Mutiny  Bill 
in  Ireland  —  Dismissal  of  Tandy  for  mutinous  conduct — Motions  in  Par- 
liament —  Dissension  on  the  questions  between  Lord  Shelburne  and  Burke 

—  Death  of  Sir  Charles  Hardy  —  Admiral  Gray  appointed  to  the  command 
of  the  fleet  —  Engagement  between   Rodney  and   M.  de  Guishen  —  The 
King's   opposition   to   Keppel's  election — Rigby's  attack   on   Fox  —  The 
Mutiny  Bill  carried  in  Ireland  —  Illness  of  the  Chancellor  ..   400-403 

JUNE. 

Lord  George  Gordon  goes  down  to  the  House  with  a  great  mob  to  present  a 
petition  from  the  Protestant  Association  —  Attack  upon  the  Lords  by  the 
mob  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Burke  —  Lord  George  Gordon's  denuncia- 
tion of  Members  to  the  mob  —  Resolution  of  Lord  North  and  the  Speaker  — 
The  Duke  of  Gloucester  —  Occupation  of  both  Houses  by  the  mob  —  Terror 
of  Lord  Mansfield  —  Dispersion  of  the  tumult  by  the  Horse  Guards  — 
Attack  upon  the  houses  of  the  Sardinian  and  Bavarian  Ministers  —  Mon- 
sieur Rantran  —  Proposal  to  General  Conway  —  Horace  Walpole's  opinion 
of  the  proposal  —  Sir  George  Saville's  house  attacked  by  the  mob  —  Rescue 
of  Lord  Sandwich  by  the  Guards  —  Lord  George  Gordon  drawn  in  triumph 
by  the  mob  —  Destruction  of  Lord  Mansfield's  house  and  his  narrow  escape 

—  Colonel  Woodford  —  Attempt  upon   the  Bank  — "Release   of  prisoners 
from  Newgate  —  Mr.  Langdale,  the  Catholic  distiller  —  The  Duke  of  Glou- 
cester stopped  in  his  Hackney  coach  —  Encampment  of  troops  in  Hyde 


xxiv  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IT, 

Park  —  Burke's  proposition  for  military  law  —  Summons  of  all  the  Privy 
Councillors  —  Lord  Rockingham's  remonstrance  to  the  King  —  The  mili- 
tary empowered  to  act  at  discretion  —  Destruction  of  rioters  in  Fleet  Street 
—  Lord  George  Gordon's  threats  to  the  House  — •  Burke  —  Lord  North  — 
Lord  Rockingham  —  Terror  of  the  Catholics  —  Seizure  of  Lord  George 
Gordon  in  his  own  house  —  His  committal  to  the  Tower  —  Apprehensions 
of  a  rising  in  Scotland  —  Fisher,  Secretary  of  the  Protestant  Association  — 
Lady  Hertford — Wedderburn  —  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  oifers  his  services  to 
the  King  —  His  interview  with  the  King  —  The  King's  complaint  of  Lord 
Rockingham  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond  —  The  Duke  of  Cumberland's  inter- 
view with  the  King  —  Meeting  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  with  the  Prince  of 
Wales  and  Prince  Frederick  —  The  King  takes  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  to  see 
the  Princes  —  Colonel  Hotham  —  The  Duke  of  Cumberland  at  Court  —  Lord 
North  —  Lord  Germaine  —  Lord  Hertford  and  the  King  —  Walpole's  visit 
to  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  —  Special  reasons  for  the  Duke  of  Gloucester 
insisting  on  the  Duchess's  reception  at  Court  —  The  King's  rebuke  to 
General  Carpenter  —  The  Duke  of  Cumberland's  intended  levee  —  Horace 
Walpole  and  Count  Welderen  at  the  Dutch  Envoy's  —  Account  of  the  cap- 
ture of  Charles  Town  —  The  King's  Speech  in  the  House  of  Lords  — 
Burke's  pamphlet  —  Lord  Rockingham  alarmed  at  the  riots  —  Speeches 
upon  the  Popish  riots,  in  the  House,  by  Lord  Mansfield,  Lord  Camden, 
Lord  George  Saville,  Burke,  Fox,  &c.  —  Penal  Laws  against  Popery  — 
The  Duke  of  Richmond  —  Lord  Loughborough  —  Lord  Stormont  — 
Burke's  bill  rejected  —  Wilkes  re-elected  Chamberlain  —  Parson  Bate's 
libel  —  Hartley's  motion  for  accommodation  with~  America  —  Trials  of  the 
rioters  ..  ..  Pages  403-420 

JULY. 

The  Popish  bill  in  the  Lords  —  The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  —  The 
Chancellor  —  Execution  of  rioters  —  Sir  Hugh  Palliser  —  Overtures  of  the 
Court  to  Lord  Rockingham  —  Lord  Rockingham's  demands  —  Lord  Rock- 
ingham's conduct  to  his  friends  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  421-424 

AUGUST. 

Execution  of  female  rioters  —  Russian  men-of-war  in  the  Downs  —  The  Irish 
Mutiny  Bill 424,425 

SEPTEMBER. 

Dissolution  of  Parliament  —  Bad  reports  from  America — Disgust  and  resig- 
nation of  his  command  by  Admiral  Geary  —  The  King's  duplicity  towards 
Admiral  Keppel  —  Sawbridge  —  Creation  of  new  Barons.  Bate,  the  author 
of  '  The  Morning  Post '  —  Lascelles  the  Court  Member  —  Charles  Fox  carried 
in  triumph  to  St.  James's  Gate  —  Capture  of  a  portion  of  the  English  fleet — 
Keppel's  election  for  Surrey  —  The  Prince  of  Wales  congratulates  Miss 
Keppel  on  the  event  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  425-427 


CONTENTS  OP  VOL.  II.  xxv 


OCTOBER. 

Capture  of  Lawrence,  late  President  of  Congress  —  Success  of  Lord  Cornwallis 
in  America  —  Resolution  of  the  Court  to  go  on  with  the  American  War  — 
Lord  Carlisle  appointed  Lord  Lieutenant  in  Ireland  —  Dr.  Hunter's  pane- 
gyric on  the  King  —  Choice  of  Speaker  —  Fox's  attack  on  Lord  Germaine 
and  Rigby — The  King's  speech  on  the  Meeting  of  Parliament  Pages  428-429 

NOVEMBER. 

Lord  Pomfret  insults  the  Duke  of  Grafton  —  Movement  of  the  King's  address 
in  the  House  of  Commons  —  Grenville  —  Fox  —  Lord  Gerraaine  —  Erskine 
—  Finding  of  a  bill  for  high  treason  against  Lord  George  Gordon  —  Admiral 
Arbuthnot  blamed  by  Admiral  Rodney  —  Arnold's  offer  to  Sir  H.  Clinton 
to  betray  Washington's  advanced  guard  —  Capture  of  Major  General  St. 
Andre1  —  Execution  of  St.  Andre'  by  Washington  —  Lord  Pomfret  —  Adam's 
complaint  of  the  Westminster  Association  —  His  speech  upon  Fox  — Fitz- 
patrick  —  Fox's  threat  of  a  motion  for  dismissing  Lord  Sandwich  for  mis- 
management of  the  Navy  —  Rigby  • — Mr.  Courtney  —  Lord  Pomfret's  peti- 
tion for  his  liberty  and  his  release —  Resolutions  of  the  Protestant  Associa- 
tion in  behalf  of  Lord  George  Gordon  —  Sheridan's  first  speech  —  Motion 
of  thanks  to  the  late  Speaker  —  The  address  of  the  Convocation  — Appre- 
hensions of  war  with  Holland — Count  Welderen's  demand  that  a  Dutch  agent 
should  reside  in  Ireland  —  The  King's  reply  —  Mr.  Tumbull  taken  as  a 
spy  —  Arrival  of  Captain  Keith  Stewart  —  Mr.  Coke's  vote  of  thanks  to 
Lord  Cornwallis — 'Wilkes — Lord  Lewisham  ..  ..  ..  430-434 

DECEMBER. 

Sir  Hugh  Palliser's  defence  —  Keppel  —  Lord  North — Effects  of  the  excessive 
demands  of  the  Associations  —  Publication  of  Turnbull's  letters  —  Death  of 
the  Empress  Queen  —  Lord  Carlisle  —  Lord  Macartney  —  The  King's  mani- 
festo against  the  Dutch  —  Hurricane  in  the  West  Indies  —  Retirement  of 
the  wife  of  the  Pretender  into  a  convent  —  Establishment  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales  —  Recall  of  Count  Welderen  —  Success  of  the  Chesapeak  —  Defeat  of 
Colonel  Ferguson  —  Embarrassed  situation  of  Clinton  —  State  of  the  country 
at  the  close  of  the  year  —  Popularity  of  a  Dutch  war  —  Change  in  the 
French  Government  .,  ,.  435-439 


1781. 
JANUARY. 

Destruction  of  a  great  part  of  Jamaica  —  Destruction  of  fifteen  hundred  meu 
by  the  climate  in  Jamaica  —  Landing  of  the  French  in  Jersey  and  surprise 


xxvi  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

of  the  Lieutenant-Governor  —  General  Conway  —  The  French  driven  out 
of  Jersey  —  Mr.  Wy vil  and  the  Yorkshire  Association  —  Memorial  delivered 
by  the  Russian  Minister  on  our  war  with  Holland  —  Lord  George  Gordon 
before  the  King's  Bench  —  Majority  for  the  King  oh  the  war  with  Holland 

Pages  440-442 

FEBEUAEY. 

Sir  Charles  Fox's  motion  on  Sir  Hugh  Palliser's  nomination  —  Attempt  of 
Rodney  on  the  island  of  St.  Vincent  —  Acquittal  of  Lord  George  Gordon  — 
Erskine  —  Renewal  of  Mr.  Burke's  Bill  for  reducing  the  places  on  tlje  Civil 
List  —  The  Duke  of  Bolton  —  Debate  on  Admiral  Darby's  flight  —  Lord 
Sandwich  —  Lord  Rockingham  — •  The  Duke  of  Cumberland's  leve'e  —  The 
Duke  of  Cumberland  pays  court  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  —  The  Queen's  ball 
to  the  Prince  of  Wales  —  The  French  actress  Vestris  —  Desertion  of  Peun- 
sylvanians  from  Washington  —  Lord  George  Gordon  congratulated  by  the 
Protestant  Association  —  Loss  of  the  ship  Barker,  Indiaman  —  Second 
reading  of  Mr.  Burke's  bill  on  the  Civil  List  —  William  Pitt's  first  speech 
—  Sheridan  —  The  Prince  of  Wales  and  his  brother  Frederick  —  Bishop 
Hurd  —  The  Duchess  of  Cumberland  —  Lady  Melbourne  —  The  Duchess  of 
Devonshire  —  Levees  at  Cumberland  House  —  The  King's  conversation  with 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester  on  the  conduct  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  — 
Dissipation  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  —  Lord  Chesterfield  —  Walpole's  con- 
versation with  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  ..  ..  ..  ..  443-452 

MARCH. 

Rumours  of  the  mediation  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria  and  the  Czarina  for  a 
general  peace  —  Sheridan's  motion  to  alter  the  police  of  Westminster  — 
Lord  North's  Budget  —  Rodney  takes  St.  Eustatia  from  the  Dutch  — 
Sailing  of  our  grand  fleet  to  relieve  Gibraltar  —  Anecdote  told  by  M.  de 
Genlis  —  Dean  Tucker's  answer  to  Locke  on  Government  —  Dr.  Bagot  — 
Bishop  Hoadley  —  Bishop  Porteus  —  Sir  George  Saville's  motion  for  an 
inquiry  into  Lord  North's  behaviour  on  the  Loan  —  Speeches  of  Mr.  Byng  — 
Fox  and  the  Lord  Advocate  —  Private  property  at  St.  Eustatia  given  to  the 
captors  —  Alarming  accounts  from  the  East  Indies  —  Hyder  AH  452-456 

APEIL. 

Debates  in  the  Lords  about  tithes  —  Attack  of  the  Chancellor  on  Lords  Sand- 
wich and  Bathurst  —  Lord  North's  motion  to  inquire  into  the  late  misfor- 
tunes in  the  East  Indies —  Fox 456,457 

MAY. 

Relief  of  Gibraltar  by  Admiral  Darby  —  Conduct  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  — 
Dissipation  at  Lord  Chesterfield's — The  King's  illness  in  consequence  of  the 
Prince's  misconduct  —  Sir  George  Saville  —  Defeat  of  General  Greene  by 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  xxvii 

Lord  Cornwallis  —  Burke's  motion  for  an  inquiry  into  the  conduct  of 
Rodney,  &c.,  at  St.  Eustatia  rejected  —  Fox's  speech  and  picture  of  the 
Chancellor  —  Capture  of  transports  ladon  with  the  plunder  of  St.  Eustatia 
by  the  French  —  Lord  North's  brother  made  Bishop  of  Winchester 

Pages  457-460 

JUNE. 

Lord  Rawdon's  success  over  General  Greene  —  Deplorable  condition  of  Lord 
Cornwallis's  army  —  William  Pitt  in  Opposition  —  The  East  India  Com- 
pany and  Lord  North  — Erskine  —  Repulse  of  French  men-of-war  at  St. 
lago  by  Commodore  Johnston  —  Fox's  speech  against  Lord  North  —  Fox's 
motion  for  a  Committee  to  consider  the  American  war  —  Bill  for  preventing 
the  abuse  of  Sunday  —  Lord  Abingdon's  invective  on  the  Bishops  —  Lord 
George  Gordon  heads  the  Methodists  — •  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  visits  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  at  Brussels  —  Sale  of  Mr.  Charles  Fox's  library  —  Bate's 
sentence  for  libel  —  Altercations  in  the  House  on  severities  to  American 
prisoners — .The  Lord  Advocate — Wedderburn  —  The  Lord  Chancellor 

461-465 

JULY. 

Trial  of  Monsieur  La  Mothe  —  Lord  Mulgrave  —  Execution  of  La  Mothe  — 
Suspected  intrigue  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  with  Madame  Hardenburg 

466,  467 

AUGUST. 

Loss  of  Tobago  —  Engagement  of  Admiral  Parker  against  the  Dutch  — 
Great  ball  at  Windsor  on  the  birthday  of  the  Prince  —  The  Duke  of 
Cumberland  —  The  King  and  Prince  go  to  see  Admiral  Parker  and  his  fleet 
at  the  Nore  467 


SEPTEMBER. 

Resignation  of  his  command  by  Admiral  Parker  —  The  combined  fleets  of 
France  and  Spain  off  Scilly  —  Lord  George  Gordon  presents  himself  as  can- 
didate for  the  City  of  London  —  Alarm  felt  by  the  Jamaica  merchants  — 
Return  of  the  combined  fleets  to  Brest  and  Cadiz  —  Admiral  Torbay  — 
Arrival  of  Sir  George  Rodney  in  England  —  Private  negociatious  of  the 
King  with  Holland  for  a  separate  peace  ..  ..  ..  ..  468-471 

OCTOBER. 

Admiral  Greaves  and  Sir  Samuel  Hood  —  Apprehensions  felt  by  Lord  Corn- 
wallis—  Commodore  Johnston's  capture  of  a  rich  Dutchman  —  The  Irish 
Parliament  —  The  King  declares  to  Lord  Hertford  his  desire  for  peace  — 
The  Ministers  humour  the  King's  obstinacy  against  American  inde- 
pendence ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  471,  472 


xxviu  CONTENTS  OP  VOL.  IT. 


NOVEMBER. 

Desperate  state  of  our  affairs  in  America  —  Imminent  danger  of  Lord  Corn- 
wallis  —  Capture  of  Lord  Rawdon  by  the  French  in  America — 111  feeling 
between  Sir  H.  Clinton  and  Lord  Cornwallis  —  Capture  of  Lord  Cornwallis 
and  his  whole  army  by  General  Washington  —  Confusion  and  distress  of 
the  Court  and  Administration  —  The  King's  speech  on  the  opening  of  Par- 
liament • —  Lord  Shelburne's  severe  attack  on  Ministers  —  Lord  South- 
ampton Groom  of  the  Stole  • — The  Duke  of  Richmond's  motion  of  the 
Tenth  Article  of  the  capitulation  —  Severe  speeches  of  Burke  and  William 
Pitt  on  Lord  Cornwallis's  sacrifice  of  the  Americans  in  his  army  —  Speeches 
of  the  Duke  of  Grafton  and  Lord  Camden  on  the  Address  —  Attacks  on  Lord 
George  Germaine  and  Lord  Sandwich  —  Enmity  between  Lord  George 
Germaine  and  Lord  Sandwich  —  William  Pitt's  admirable  speech  — •  The 
Lord  Advocate's  enigmatic  speech  • —  The  King's  maxim  of  discon- 
necting parties  —  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  —  Lord  George  Germaiue's 
apology  to  Lord  Sandwich  in  the  House  • —  Disrespect  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales  towards  the  King  • —  Cause  of  the  firmness  of  the  stocks  —  Burke's 
motion  for  an  inquiry  into  the  conduct  of  Sir  George  Rodney  and  Vaughan 
at  St.  Eustatia  — T.  Pitt's  motion  —  Burke  —  Lord  Stormont  Pp.  473-482 

DECEMBER. 

General  Murray  —  Disgust  at  the  conduct  of  the  King  and  Lord  North  — • 
Colonel  Vaughan  —  Remonstrance  of  the  Livery  of  London  against  the 
American  war —  Profligacy  of  the  press  —  The  King  refuses  to  receive  the 
address  of  the  Livery  on  the  throne  —  Great  meeting  in  Westminster  Hall  • — 
Sir  James  Lowther's  motion  on  the  inutility  of  any  further  attempts  on 
America  —  Lord  North  — •  Dunning  —  Charles  Fox  —  Lord  George  Ger- 
maine —  Sir  George  Saville  —  General  Conway  —  William  Pitt  — Rigby  — 
Sir  Eyre  Coote's  victory  over  Hyder  All  —  French  West  India  fleet  — 
Alarm  for  the  West  Indies  —  Negligence  of  Lord  Sandwich  —  Lord  Rock- 
ingham  —  Threatened  motions  against  Lord  Sandwich — George  Byng's 
alarm  at  the  adjournment  of  the  House  —  Expected  reduction  of  places  — 
George  Dalling,  Governor  of  Jamaica — Parson  Home's  treasonable  speech 
—  Commodore  Stuart's  inactivity  —  Lord  Barrington  appointed  Post- 
master—  Lord  Sandwich  — Lord  North  —  Success  of  Lord  Carlisle  in 
Ireland  —  England  accepts  the  mediation  of  the  Czarina  with  Holland 

482-491 


1782. 

JANUARY. 

Great  perplexity  of  the  Court  —  Dismissal  of  Lord  George  Germaine  —  Ar- 
rival of  Lord  Cornwallis  and  Arnold  ..  .   492-494 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  xxix 


FEBRUARY. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond's  motion  for  inquiry  into  the  execution  of  the  Ame- 
rican officer,  Colonel  Hayes,  by  Lord  Rawdon  —  Lord  Abingdon's  abuse  of 
the  King  for  his  reception  of  Arnold  —  Lord  Rawdon's  challenge  to  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  —  General  Con  way  and  Lord  Ligonier  —  The  Duke  of 
Richmond  makes  a  declaration  that  he  meant  nothing  personal  to  Lord 
Rawdon — Opinion  of  Horace  Walpole  as  to  the  best  course  for  the 
Duke  to  have  adopted  —  Instigation  to  duelling  by  the  instruments  of  the 
Court  —  The  Duke  of  Chandos  —  Lord  Caermarthen's  motion  against  Lord 
Germaine  being  created  a  Peer —  Fox  abuses  Lord  Sandwich  —  The  King's 
anger  at  Lord  Caermarthen's  motion  —  Lord  Germaine  created  a  Viscount 

—  Lord  Caermarthen  renews  his  motion  —  Apology  of  Viscount  Germaine 

—  Lord  Southampton  —  Speeches  of  Lord  Stormont,  Lord  Walsingham, 
Lord   Shelburne,   the   Duke   of  Richmond,   and  the   Chancellor  on   Lord 
Caermarthen's   motion  —  Recall   of  Sir  Henry   Clinton  —  General   Gage 

—  Sir  William  Howe  —  General  Burgoyne  —  Lord  Cornwallis  —  Sir  Guy 
Carleton    takes    the    command    in    America  —  Welbore   Ellis  —  Protest 
of  Lords  against   Lord  Sackville's  peerage  —  Reflections  of  Burke,  Fox, 
and  Conway  upon  Arnold  —  Fox's  motion  for  inquiry  into  the  mismanage- 
ment of  the  navy  by  Lord  Sandwich  —  Dislike  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to 
Lord  Sandwich  —  Prince  Frederick  and  Lord  Sackville  —  Influence  of  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland  over  the  Prince  of  Wales  —  Want  of  respect  shown  by 
the  Duke  of  Cumberland  to  the  King  —  The  Duke  of  Cumberland's  vulga- 
rity —  Mr.  Legge  —  The  Prince's  coarse  behaviour  —  The  Prince  wearies  of 
the  society  of  the  Cumberlands  —  Intention  of  the  Prince  to  visit  the  Duke 
and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  —  Secret  negociations  with  France  —  The  French 
demand  the  cession  of  the  Isle  of  Wight  —  General  Conway  strives  for 
peace  —  Speeches  of  Ellis,  Burke,  Jenkinson,  Fox,  and  Dundas  on  peace 

—  Rejection  of  Conway's  motion  —  Colonel  Barre'  attacks  Lord  North  — 
Rage  of  Lord  North,  and  uproar  in  the  House  —  Lord  North  apologises  to 
Barre'  —  The  Lord  Advocate's  demands  —  Lord  North  opens  the  Budget  — 
General  Conway's  motion  to  declare  the  impossibility  of  subduing  the  Ame- 
cans  carried — Precautions  against  riots     ..          ..          ..      Pages  494-510 


MARCH. 

Ill-temper  of  the  King  —General  Arnold  —  The  King  sends  for  the  Chancellor 
—  Lord  North  —  Fox  —  General  Conway  —  William  Pitt  —  Surrender  of 
Minorca  to  the  French  and  capture  of  St.  Christopher's  —  Lord  John  Caven- 
dish's four  resolutions  to  the  House  —  Motion  for  change  of  Ministers  — 
Lord  Maitland  —  Sir  Fletcher  Norton  —  Rigby  —  Sheridan  —  William  Pitt's 
ambitious  speech  —  Victory  of  Admiral  Hood  over  the  French  at  St. 
Christopher's  —  Lord  North  resigns  —  The  Lord  Advocate's  desire  for  a 
Coalition  of  parties  —  Chancellor  Thurlow  commissioned  by  the  King  to 
sound  Lord  Rockin<:ham  —  Jenkinson's  insertion  of  the  word  "  Ireland"  into 


xxx  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 

the  Mutiny  Bill  —  Lord  Beauchamp  —  Lord  North  accedes  to  the  omission 
of  the  word  "  Ireland"  —  Majority  for  Lord  North —  The  Marquis  of  Bock- 
ingham  refuses  to  accept  the  Administration  —  The  King's  obstinacy  and 
peevishness — Embassy  of  Digges  to  the  Hague  to  negociate  peace  with 
America  —  Dr.  Franklin's  remark  on  Digges  —  Lord  North  formally  takes 
leave  of  the  King  —  Eudeness  of  the  King  to  Lord  North —  The  King  sends 
for  Lord  Shelburne  —  The  Duke  of  Grafton  —  Lord  Camden,  Mr.  Dunning, 
and  Colonel  Barre"  —  Enemies  of  Lord  Shelburne  —  Lord  Gower  —  Difficulty 
of  forming  a  new  Ministry  —  Lord  Shelburne  attacks  Lords  North  and  Stor- 
mout  —  Lord  Eockingham  accepts  the  Administration  —  Composition  of  the 
new  Cabinet  —  The  Duke  of  Eichmond  —  Thurlow  —  The  new  Treasury  — 
Acquisition  of  power  by  Lord  Shelburne  —  The  Duke  of  Devonshire's  reply 
to  his  flatterers  —  Lord  Dartmouth  —  Lord  Ashburnham  —  Lord  Hertford 
Effects  of  the  King's  conduct  towards  Lord  Hertford  and  his  son  —  Admiral 
Keppel  and  Lord  Howe  raised  to  the  Peerage  —  Mr.  Burke's  reforming 
bills  —  Services  rendered  by  the  new  Ministers  —  Walpole  urges  the  Duke 
of  Eichmond  to  proceed  to  the  motion  for  stigmatizing,  censuring,  and  fining 
the  late  Ministers — General  Conway  appointed  Commander-in-Chief — 
Lord  Eockingham's  reasons  for  the  appointment  of  General  Conway  —  Lord 
Bateman's  answer  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  —  The  Duke  of  Gloucester 
acquainted  with  Conway's  honourable  answer  to  the  Duke  of  Eichmond 

—  Grateful  conduct  of  Fox  towards  Lord  Carlisle  —  The  Duke  of  Portland 
made  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland  —  Grattan's  famous  speech  for  the  inde- 
pendence of  Ireland  —  Lord  Weymouth  made  Groom  of  the  Stole  —  The 
Lord  Advocate  —  William  Pitt's  refusal  of  all  preferment  —  Lord  North  and 
Eobinson  rewarded  with  pensions  —  Defeat  of  a  large  French  armament  by 
Admiral  Barrington  —  Prosecution  against  Sir  Thomas  Eumbold 

Pages  51 1-537 

APEIL. 

Adjournment  of  the  meeting  of  the  Associations  at  York  —  Eden's  refusal  to 
communicate  the  state  of  Ireland  to  Lord  Shelburne  —  Colonel  Luttrell  de- 
mands of  the  Ministers  their  measures  for  pacifying  Ireland  —  Eden  calls 
for  the  repeal  of  the  Act  of  George  I.  —  Speeches  of  Fox  and  Conway  against 
Eden — Lord  Carlisle  made  Lord  Steward — Eden  obtains  the  Vice-Treasurer- 
ship  —  The  King's  recommendation  of  economy  to  the  House  of  Commons 

—  Panegyrics  of  Burke  and  Lord  Shelburne  on  the  King  —  Eejection  of 
overtures  of  peace  by  the  Dutch  —  Difficulties  of  Lord  Eockingham's  Ad- 
ministration— Lord  Shelburne  —  Lord  Cholmondeley  —  Lord  Shelburne  and 
the  Lord  Chancellor         537-541 

MAY. 

Tin-  Contractors'  Bill  carried  in  the  House  of  Lords  —  Parson  Bate  pardoned 
through  the  intercession  of  the  Duke  of  Eichmond  —  Fox — William  Pitt's 
motion  for  a  more  equal  Eepresentation  rejected  —  General  Conway's  plan 
for  arming  the  people  adopted  —  Masterly  abilities  of  Charles  Fox  —  Fox's 
acquaintance  with  foreign  affairs  —  Lord  Shelburne's  treacheries  —  Lord 
Kockingham's  ill-health  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  541-544 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL    II.  xxxi 

JULY. 

Death  of  Lord  Rockingham  —  The  King's  unkind  conduct  to  Lord  Rocking- 
ham  —  How  Lord  Rockingham  became  head  of  the  Opposition  —  Lord 
Chatham  —  Lord  John  Cavendish  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Charles 
Fox  —  Disqualifications  of  Fox  for  the  office  of  Premier  —  The  King's 
aversion  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond  —  The  Rockingham  faction  set  up  the 
Duke  of  Portland  —  His  pecuniary  assistance  to  his  younger  brother  and 
his  distresses  —  Lord  Shelburne  acquaints  the  King  with  the  Whig  recom- 
mendation of  the  Duke  of  Portland  —  Lord  Shelburne  Prime  Minister  — 
Resignation  of  Fox  and  Lord  John  Cavendish  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond  — 
Walpole's  mediation  between  Fox  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond — General  Con- 
way's  view  of  the  resignation  of  Fox  —  Fox  and  Burke  resent  Conway's 
neutrality  —  Conway's  patriotic  views  —  Walpole  and  Fitzpatrick  at  the 
play  —  Burke's  attachment  to  his  party  —  Lord  Rockingham  heaps  lucrative 
offices  on  Burke  and  his  family  —  Burke's  noble  sacrifices  —  Walpole  sent 
for  by  Burke  —  Burke's  proposal  —  Pensions  to  Barre  and  Dunning  — 
Lord  Shelburne  strikes  off  small  offices  and  pensions  —  Lord  Shelburne's 
support  of  the  reforming  plans  of  Lord  Rockingham's  friends  —  Split  in  the 
Rockingham  party  —  William  Pitt  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  —  Com- 
jiarison  between  Fox  and  Pitt  —  New  method  of  writing  history  —  Charac- 
ter of  Lord  Shelburne  —  His  contempt  for  Lord  North  —  He  offends  Burke, 
Fox,  and  the.  Cavendishes  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  Pages  544-569 

JULY  TO  END  OF  NOVEMBER. 

JULY  AND  AUGUST  : — Lord  Rockingham's  death  —  Lord  Shelburne  goes  to 
Windsor  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond  at  Mr.  Cornwallis's  —  The  advice  of 
Walpole  and  Mr.  Cornwall's  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond  to  let  Lord  Shelburne 
be  Premier  —  The  Duchess  of  Richmond  is  opposed  to  submission  to  Lord 
Shelburne — Lord  Weymouth — Professed  good  disposition  of  Lord  Shelburne 
— Fox  and  others  suspect  him  —  The  King  and  his  Council  in  favour  of  the" 
independence  of  America  —  News  of  the  Quebec  fleet  being  taken  —  Charles 
Fox  in  love  with  Mrs.  Robir.son  —  Georgia  given  up  —  Hood  made  Lord 
Lieutenant  —  News  of  the  loss  of  Kempenfelt  in  the  Royal  George  —  Lord 
North  received  in  triumph  at  Manchester.  SEPTEMBER  : — Sir  James 
Lowther  —  Lord  Howe  sails  to  the  relief  of  Gibraltar  —  Some  colonies  dis- 
obedient to  the  Congress —  Lord  Howe  and  Keppel  —  The  combined  fleets  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Channel  —  Lord  Howe  sends  part  of  our  fleet  after  the 
Dutch  —  Vast  preparations  against  Gibraltar  —  Rodney  lets  the  beaten 
French  escape  —  Mr.  Fitzherbert  —  Account  of  the  attack  on  Gibraltar. 
OCTOBER  : — Resolutions  of  Congress  against  offers  of  independence  —  Lord 
George  Gordon's  letter  to  Lord  Shelburne  on  that  subject.  NOVEMBER  : — 
Attack  on  Lord  Howe  by  the  combined  fleets  —  Pamphlet  against  Lord 
Shelburne  —  The  Marriage  Act,  a  new  ballad  ..  ..  ..  569-576 


xxxii  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 


1783. 
JANUARY. 

Meeting  of  Parliament  and  silence  of  Opposition  —  Bill  brought  in  for  ceding 
control  of  England  over  Ireland — Preliminaries  signed  by  France,  Spain, 
and  America  —  Lord  Oxford  and  the  King  —  The  Duke  of  Eichmond  — 
Lord  Keppel  resigns  the  Admiralty  —  Lord  Howe  made  First  Lord  of  the 
Admiralty  —  Trial  of  General  Murray  —  Draper  makes  an  apology  to 
General  Murray  —  General  Murray  placed  under  arrest  —  Mutiny  of  the 
77th  at  Portsmouth  —  Lord  Maitland  Pages  577-579 

FEBRUARY. 

Mutiny  of  the  66th  regiment  composed —  Eemonstrances  of  Canada  merchants 
to  Lord  Shelburne  —  Lord  Carlisle  resigns  the  place  of  Lord  Steward  —  Lord 
Shelburne's  insolence  and  folly  —  Ratification  of  Preliminaries  with 
France  and  Spain  —  Unpopularity  of  the  peace  —  Lord  Shelburne  and  the 
Duke  of  Grafton  —  Lord  Shelburne  makes  the  Duke  of  Rutland  Lord 
Steward  and  Member  of  the  Cabinet  Council  —  Motion  for  increase  of 
General  Elliott's  pension  —  Sheridan  —  Fox  —  Pitt  —  Discussion  of  the 
Preliminaries  in  both  Houses  —  General  Conway  —  Fox  rejects  Lord 
Shelburne's  offers  —  League  between  Lord  North  and  Fox  on  the  Pre- 
liminaries —  Discussions  on  the  Preliminaries  —  The  Duke  of  Grafton 
defends  Lord  Shelburne  —  Speeches  on  Lord  John  Cavendish's  amendment 
—  The  Lord  Advocate's  abuse  of  Lord  North  —  He  is  rebuked  by  Fox  and 
Sheridan  —  William  Pitt's  attack  on  Sheridan's  theatric  management  — 
Sheridan's  reply  —  T.  Pitt  —  Lee's  brutal  attack  on  Lord  North  —  Rigby's 
warm  speech  in  defence  of  Lord  Shelburne  —  Jenkinson  —  Resignation  of 
the  Privy  Seal  by  the  Duke  of  Grafton  —  The  cause  of  the  Duke  of  Graf- 
ton's  dissatisfaction  —  Lord  Shelburne's  indifference  — Production  of  new 
motions  by  Lord  John  Cavendish  —  Lord  North  —  Fox  —  Lord  John 
Cavendish's  insolence  —  Anguish  of  Lord  North  at  the  taunts  of  T.  Pitt  — 
William  Pitt  laughed  at  by  the  House  —  Resignation  of  Lord  Shelburne  — 
The  Duke  of  Portland  entreats  the  Duke  of  Richmond  to  unite  with  his 
old  friends  —  Mr.  Duncombe  presents  petition  from  Yorkshire  for  a  new 
mode  of  representation  —  Burke  —  Lord  George  Cavendish  —  Lord  Shel- 
burne disgusts  the  Whigs  —  Unwillingness  of  the  King  to  part  with  Lord 
Shelburne  —  Lord  Chancellor  Thurlow  and  the  Lord  Advocate  —  Overtures 
of  Lord  Weymouth,  Lord  Gower,  and  Rigby  to  the  King  —  William  Pitt 
refuses  to  be  Prime  Minister  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  580-592 

MARCH. 

Lord  Rawdoii  and  Thomas  Townshend  created  English  barons  —  Pensions 
given  by  Lord  Shelburne  to  his  associates  —  The  Chancellor —  Lord  Grant- 
ham  —  Sir  Joseph  Yorke  —  The  Duke  of  Manchester's  new  patent  — 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.  xxxin 

William  Pitt's  Bill  for  abrogating  all  places  in  the  Custom-house  —  Mr. 
Powys's  motion  on  pensions  —  Reflections  on  Lord  Shelburne  for  his  pre- 
tence of  Reform  —  Reduction  or  cashiering  of  slender  pensions  of  old 
servants  by  Lord  Shelburne  —  Lord  Shelburne'  a  parsimony  and  extrava- 
gance —  The  King's  aversion  to  the  Duke  of  Portland  and  Fox  as  Ministers 

—  The  King  prevented  from  going  to  Hanover  by  the  Queen  —  Lord  North 
refuses  to  break  with  Fox —  The  King's  indignation  —  Ingratitude  of  Lord 
North   towards   the  King  —  The  King  a  bad  politician  —  The  Prince  of 
Wales  attaches  himself  to  Fox  —  Fox's  levees  at  Brooks's — Bets  on  the 
duration  of  the  King's  life  —  Report  of  a  consultation  of  the  King  with  the 
Chancellor  and  Lord  Ashburton  on  the  subject  of  the  Prince  —  Rumoured 
reply  of  the  Chancellor  —  Proscription  of  the  Chancellor  by  Fox  and  his 
associates  —  Mutinous  conduct  of  our  sailors  and  of  some  militia  regiments 

—  Prolongation  of  the  Mutiny  Bill  —  Addresses  to  the  King  thanking  him 
for  peace  —  Lord  North  —  Fox  —  The  King  sends  for  Lord  North  —  The 
King  and   the  Duke  of  Portland  —  The   King  peremptory  against  dis- 
missing the  Chancellor  —  Lord  Stormont  —  Threat  of  Coke,  of  Norfolk 

—  Great  meeting  of  the  Rockingham  party  presided  over  by  the  Duke 
of  Portland  —  Cabinet  meeting  on  the  tumults  at  Portsmouth  —  Lord 
North   Secretary  of   State  —  The  Chancellor  resigns  —  Lord   Stormont 
persuaded  by   Lord   North   to   be   President  —  The    King  receives    the 
Duke  of  Portland  coldly  —  The  King   informs   the  Duke   of  Portland 
and  Lord  North  that  negotiation  with  them  is  at  an  end  —  The  King 
sends  for  William  Pitt  —  Mr.  Coke's  motion  —  Pitt  —  Fox  —  Jenkinson  — 
Lord  North  — Mistakes  made  by  the  King  —  Jenkinson's  error  in  owning 
his  secret  correspondence  with  the  King  —  Pitt's  irresolution  —  Death  of 
Dr.  Corn wallis,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  —  Dr.  Hurd —  Lowth,  Bishop  of 
London  —  The  King  and  Prince  of  Wales  go  to  Windsor  —  Seditious  hand- 
bills distributed  —  The  Lord  Mayor  sends  for  guards  from  General  Con  way 

—  Lord  George  Gordon's  mischievous  conduct  —  The  King   speaks  to 
General  Conway  on  the  present  strange   situation  —  Burke's  change  of 
behaviour  towards  General  Conway  —  Lord  North  —  His  refusal  to  be  Mi- 
nister —  Illness  of  the  King  —  Resignation  of  William  Pitt   Pages  593-611 

APRIL. 

The  King  and  Lord  North  —  The  Duke  of  Portland  made  First  Lord  of  the 
Treasury  —  The  new  Ministry  —  Lord  Carlisle  —  Lord  North  —  The  Duke 
of  Portland  goes  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  General  Conway  —  Fox 
vindicates  his  conduct  to  the  King  —  Ingratitude  of  Keppel  to  Captain 
Leveson  Gower  —  Dissolute  character  of  Fox's  partizans  —  Lord  North's 
double  dealing  —  Lord  Hertford  takes  the  Chamberlain's  staff  —  Burke 
made  Paymaster  —  Re-election  of  Fox  for  Westminster  —  Bill  for  ceding 
jurisdiction  to  Ireland  —  The  Duke  of  Richmond  —  Lord  Thurlow  —  The 
Duke  of  Portland  —  Lord  John  Cavendish  opens  the  loan  —  Fox  attacks  Pitt 

—  Lord  Northington  made  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland  —  Mr.  Windham  — 
Burke's  intemperate  speeches  against  Warren  Hastings  —  Burke  restores 
Powell  and  Bembridge,  who  were  under  prosecution  —  Fox  and  Sheridan 

612-618 
VOL.  II.  c 


xxxiv  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 


MAY. 

Lord  Shelburne  and  Thurlow  attack  Lord  John  Cavendish's  loan — Demand  of 
the  Coldstream  Guards  for  their  discharge  —  Lord  George  Gordon  prin  ts  a 
private  conversation  between  him  and  Lord  Petre  —  William  Pitt  moves 
for  an  alteration  in  the  mode  of  representation  —  Speeches  of  Lord  North, 
the  Lord  Advocate,  and  Thomas  Pitt  — •  Eejection  of  William  Pitt's  motion 

—  The  new  Ministry  —  Character  of  Lord  Shelburne  —  Advantages  of  the 
struggle  of  parties  to  the  nation  —  Suicide  of  Mr.  Powell  —  Lord  John 
Cavendish  opens  the  taxes  —  Lord  North  ridicules  Lord  Mahon  —  Pitt  and 
Fox Pages  619-627 

JUNE. 

Clamour  of  the  Opposition  against  the  new  tax  on  receipts  —  Mr.  Pitt  — 
Sheridan  —  Provision  for  the  Prince  of  Wales  on  his  coming  of  age  —  Inju- 
dicious conduct  of  the  Duke  of  Portland  —  The  King  offers  the  Administra- 
tion to  Lord  Temple  —  Surprise  of  Ministers  at  the  King's  conduct  —  Rage 
of  the  Prince  of  Wales  —  Interview  of  the  Duke  of  Portland  with  the  King 

—  Fox  rescues  the  Ministry  from  their  embarrassing  situation  —  Reasons 
for  the  King's  sudden  change  of  mind  —  Andrew  Stuart  —  Lord  Mount- 
stewart  —  Lady  Betty  McKenzie  —  Lord  Bute  —  Lord  Thurlow  —  Secret 
endeavours  for  a  change  made  by  Thurlow,  Dundas,  and  Lord  Weymouth 
with  the  King  —  The  King's  insincerity  —  Lord  Shelburne  —  Mr.  W.  Pitt's 
Reform  Bill  thrown  out  by  the  Lords         628,632 

JULY. 

Bill  for  reform  of  Exchequer  places  —  Courtney's  abuse  of  Lord  Temple  — 
Rigby's  clause  attacked  by  Fox  and  Sheridan,  and  rejected  by  the  House  — 
Unhappiness  of  the  King  —  Lords  Stormont  and  Mansfield  —  The  King's 
remark  to  Lord  North  —  Dismissal  of  Thurlow  and  Dundas  — Death  of 
HyderAli — The  Irish  Parliament  dissolved  '633,634 

AUGUST. 

Fox  expostulates  with  General  Conway  —  Fox  desires  Prince  Frederick  to  be 
at  the  head  of  the  army  —  Washington's  resignation  —  The  King's  remark 
upon  the  American  treaty  . .  . .  . .  . .  .  t  _  634,  635 

SEPTEMBER. 

Definite  treaties  between  England,  France,  Spain,  and  America  arrive  signed 

635 


JOURNAL  OF  THE  REIGN 


OF 


GEORGE    THE    THIRD. 


1776. 
JANUARY. 

THE  year  began  with  mighty  preparations  for  carrying  on 
the  war  in  America  with  vigour.  Lord  George  Sackville 
Germaine,  who  had  been  brought  into  power  for  that  end, 
was  indefatigable  in  laying  plans  for  raising  and  hiring 
troops,  in  sending  supplies  and  recruits,  and  more  naval 
force.  Sixteen  thousand  Hessians  were  obtained,  some 
Brunswickers,  and  a  few  other  German  troops,  and  a  de- 
mand was  made  from  the  Dutch,  of  the  Scotch  in  their 
service,  which  met  with  opposition  in  that  country,  but  was 
granted  at  last.  Every  effort  was  used  in  these  islands  to 
raise  soldiers  and  sailors,  with  but  indifferent  success,  and 
not  at  all  in  proportion  to  the  extraordinary  premiums 
given  to  particular  favourites  who  offered  or  were  invited 
to  raise  them,  as  will  be  mentioned.  Some  of  the  Guards 
offered  to  go,  and  one  thousand  were  selected  from  the 
three  regiments,  but  so  little  to  the  satisfaction  of  several, 
that  fifteen  officers  threw  up  or  desired  leave  to  sell  their 
commissions.  Lord  Mansfield,  Wedderburn,  and  the 

VOL.  II.  B 


2  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  JAN. 

Scotch  sounded  high  Lord  George's  spirit ;  and  nothing 
was  talked  of  but  conquering  America  in  one  campaign; 
whilst  indeed  the  more  sober  part  of  the  Ministers,  who 
saw  the  wildness  and  profusion  of  the  expense,  were  appre- 
hensive that,  if  the  business  could  not  be  effected  in  that 
time,  the  Administration  would  be  blown  up,  finding  them- 
selves at  a  dead  stand. / Lord  G.  Germaine,  who  had 
always  treated  Lord  Chatham's  magnificent  plans  as  vi- 
sions of  a  madman,  who  dictated  impracticable  measures 
and  left  the  Treasury  to  find  the  means,  now  seemed  to 
have  taken  that  daring  and  inconsiderate  Minister  for  his 
own  pattern,  chalking  out,  dictating  the  measures,  and 
leaving  the  whole  burthen  of  supplies  on  the  shoulders  of 
Lord  North,  whom  at  the  same  time,  without  reserve  in 
his  most  public  conversations,  he  spoke  of  as  a  trifling 
and  supine  Minister.  Lord  North  had  all  the  air  of  sub- 
scribing to  that  character,  and  augmented  his  natural  and 
jocose  levity,  as  if  his  coadjutor  had  rendered  the  office 
of  Prime  Minister  a  sinecure.  Still  the  difference  of  their 
characters  kept  up  a  sort  of  division  or  ambiguity  in  the 
conduct  of  Government;  Lord  North  still  retaining  an 
affected  propensity  to  peace,  Lord  George  pronouncing 
authoritatively  for  decision  and  exaction  of  full  submission 
from  the  colonies :  an  inconsistent  language  which  broke 
out  from  both  in  every  parliamentary  debate,  though,  how- 
ever dictatorial  Lord  George  was  in  the  Cabinet,  he  had 
recovered  so  little  spirit,  was  so  afraid  of  inviting  personal 
reflections,  or  was  so  cowed  by  his  conscious  unpopularity, 
that  he  nowhere  appeared  the  Minister  so  little  as  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  never  shone  there  with  so  little 
lustre. 

Lord   Mansfield,    more    Minister  than  either  of  those 
Lords,  to  shroud  his  own  poltroonery,  and  the  Scotch  and 


177fi.  THE  OPPOSITION.  3 

the  Bedfords  to  prevent  being  sacrificed  by  the  King's 
irresolution,  had  buoyed  up  his  Majesty  with  such  visions 
of  empire  and  despotism,  that  he  breathed  nothing  but  war, 
and  was  equally  childish  and  indiscreet  in  professing  his 
sentiments,  and  in  flattering  all  who  concurred  with  his 
sentiments.  When  he  reviewed  the  Guards  in  March  on 
Wimbledon  Common,  previous  to  their  embarking  for 
America,  he  condescended  to  do  what  he  had  not  even 
done  at  the  great  naval  review  at  Portsmouth, — he  pulled 
off  his  hat  when  he  took  leave  of  the  Guards,  not  doubt- 
ing but  they  would  cheerfully  lay  down  their  lives  for  so 
gracious  a  Monarch,  who  had  uncovered  his  sacred  head 
to  salute  them  !  \ 

The  Opposition  seemed  to  have  lost  all  spirit  as  unac- 
countably as  the  Administration  had  acquired  some  by  the 
accession  of  Lord  George  Germaine  ;  and  on  their  side  had 
gained  none  by  the  Duke  of  Grafton's  desertion  to  them. 
Indeed  it  brought  them  nor  sense,  nor  activity,  nor  har- 
mony, nor  six  votes.  Lord  Rockingham  and  the  Duke 
were  no  sooner  allies  again  than  rivals.  Lord  Camden, 
who  had  seduced  the  Duke,  intended  him  for  First  Mi- 
nister, which,  though  Lord  Rockingham  was  content  to  be 
at  the  head  of  his  own  faction  though  out  of  place,  he  was 
not  ready  to  cede  even  in  that  powerless  situation.  At  an 
early  meeting  of  the  Opposition  this  session,  Lord  Rock- 
ingham summoned  the  Bishop  of  Peterborough  as  a  new 
dependant,  which  offended  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  The 
Marquis  excused  himself  on  the  indecency  of  inviting  the 
Duke  before  he  was  out  of  place.  Lord  Shelburne,  who 
had  his  own  personal  views  on  the  first  place,  was  more 
tractable,  and  concerted  with  either;  more  readily  with 
the  Duke,  as  a  former  limb  of  Lord  Chatham's  Adminis- 
tration, to  whom  Lord  Shelburne  still  avowed  implicit 

B  2 


4  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JAN. 

allegiance,  though  equally  unfitted,  by  his  depression, 
for  power  or  Opposition.  What  little  life  there  was  ex- 
isted in  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Charles  Fox.  The 
latter  bustled,  tried  to  animate  both  the  Duke  and  Mar- 
quis, conferred  with  Lord  Shelburne,  but  abandoned 
neither  his  gaming  nor  rakish  life.  He  was  seldom  in  bed 
before  five  in  the  morning,  nor  out  of  it  before  two  at 
noon.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  I  tried  early  in  the  winter 
to  fire  with  industry.  I  painted  to  him  all  the  miscar- 
riages of  the  campaign,  and  the  inability  of  the  Ministers  ; 
and  gave  him  a  long  list  of  hostile  motions  which  I  wished 
him  to  make  of  complaints  and  grievances;  but  his  health 
was  bad,  and  his  spirits ;  he  distrusted  his  own  abilities, 
though  his  eloquence  improved  daily ;  he  loved  his  country 
pleasures,  and  he  was  disheartened  by  repeated  defeats. 
Nay,  though  nobody  more  severe  when  he  did  take  a  part, 
his  candour  disliked  great  hostilities.  I  said,  "  My  Lord, 
when  the  Ministers  stick  at  nothing,  is  it  right  to  your  coun- 
try to  let  them  manage  everything  ?  "  But  his  delicacy  could 
not  brook  any  violent  measures ;  and  while  the  Court 
thought  and  represented  him  as  the  soul  of  faction,  he  was 
incapable  of  transgressing  the  most  minute  article  of  strict 
honour.  In  truth  all  the  motions  I  gave  him  were  provoked 
and  crying ;  but  he  frankly  confessed  he  would  not  attack 
Ministers  on  any  measures,  such  as  grants  and  pensions,  with 
which  he  had  not  found  fault  when  he  had  formerly  acted 
with  the  Court.  I  own  this,  and  owe  to  his  character  to  do 
it  justice,  though  perhaps  to  my  own  dispraise.,  But  I  who 
had  seen  every  injustice  heaped  on  my  father  by  Jacobit- 
ism  and  faction,  and  who  now  saw  the  ruin  of  the  country 
pursued  by  Jacobite  principles,  did  wish  to  turn  every  art 
of  party  that  was  allowable,  on  such  guilty  men. /I  had 
less  delicacy  than  the  Duke,  and  thought  it  meritorious  to 


177C.  THE  MINISTERS.  5 

expose  to  clamour  and  public  hatred  such  Machiavels  as 
Lord  Mansfield,  "qui  sobrius  ad  evertendam  Rempublicam 
accessit."  Lord  North  was  a  pliant  tool,  without  system  or 
principle ;  Lord  George  Germaine  of  desperate  ambition 
and  character ;  Wedderburn  a  thorough  knave ;  Lord 
Sandwich  a  more  profligate  knave ;  Lord  Gower  a  villain 
capable  of  any  crime  ;  Elliot,  Jenkinson,  Cornwall,  mutes 
that  would  have  fixed  the  bowstring  round  the  throat  of 
the  Constitution^  The  subordinate  crew  to  name  is  to 
stigmatize ;  they  were  Dr.  Johnson,  the  pilloried  Shebbeare, 
Sir  John  Dalrymple,  and  Macpherson  !  The  pious  though 
unconscientious  Lord  Dartmouth  had  been  laid  aside,  after 
bequeathing  to  Administration  his  hypocritic  secretaries 
Wesley  and  Madan ;  Lord  Barrington  remained  to  lie 
officially ;  Lord  Weymouth  had  acceded  with  all  his  insen- 
sibility to  honour,  and  by  acceding  had  given  new  edge  to 
Thurlow,  who  was  fit  to  execute  whatever  was  to  be  done. 
Almost  every  Scot  was  ready  to  put  his  sickle  to  the  har- 
vest, and  every  Jacobite  country  gentleman  exulted  in  the 
prospect  of  reversing  on  the  Whigs  and  Dissenters  all  their 
.disappointments  since  the  Revolution ;  and  they  saw  a 
prince  of  the  House  of  Brunswick  ready  to  atone  for  all 
the  negative  hurt  his  family  had  done  to  their  ancestors, 
and  for  all  the  good  his  ancestors  and  the  benefactor  of  his 
family,  King  William,  had  done  to  Great  Britain.  There 
was  still  another  body  ready  to  profit  by  the  restora- 
tion of  Stuart  views — the  bishops  and  clergy.  How  deeply 
and  joyfully  they  waded  into  a  civil  war  on  the  Constitu- 
tion and  on  Dissenters,  let  their  votes,  addresses,  and  zeal 
for  the  war  declare  !  This  is  a  heavy  picture ;  but  if  any 
of  the  individuals  mentioned  above,  or  any  of  the  denomi- 
nations of  men,  come  out  whiter  in  the  eyes  of  impartial 
posterity,  let  this  page  be  registered  as  a  page  of  the 
blackest  calumny! 


6  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  IIOEACE  WALPOLE.  JAK. 

Thus  however  were  all  the  blunders,  violent  and  absurd 
measures  of  the  two  last  years,  and  the  disgraces  and  inac- 
tivity of  the  last  campaign,  suffered  almost  to  pass  without 
a  note  from  Opposition.  The  latter  had  foretold  and  had 
expected  that  a  sudden  decrease  of  American  trade  would 
long  ere  this  have  driven  the  merchants  and  manufac- 
turers to  despair.  No  such  thing  had  happened.  The 
merchants,  by  what  art  or  mano3uvre  I  know  not,  or  by 
what  hopes  of  peace,  had  been  kept  quiet;  the  stocks, 
by  the  wealth  of  the  nation,  by  no  diminution  of  trade,1  by 
the  difficulty  of  employing  money  elsewhere,  and  by  great 
address,  and  •  by  connivance  with  the  Bank,  had  been 
astonishingly  kept  up.  The  cessation  of  the  Turkish  war 
and  the  pacification  of  Poland  had  revived  trade ;  and  the 
discreet  and  ostentatious  payment  of  their  debts  by  the 
Americans,  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  the  trading  part 
of  the  nation,  together  with  remittances  of  the  fortunes 
of  those  who  fled  from  America  on  the  commencement  of 
the  troubles,  had  concurred,  with  the  general  spirit  of  dis- 
sipation and  thoughtlessness,  to  make  the  American  war 
not  yet  felt  or  even  perceived  at  home.  The  superior 
activity  of  Administration  in  calumniating  patriots  as  self- 
interested  incendiaries  of  the  war,  had  disheartened  and 
alarmed  the  decent  and  conscientious  friends  of  Lord 
Rockingham  ;  and  indeed  the  sword  was  now  so  thoroughly 
drawn,  the  Parliament  was  so  totally  corrupt  and  lost  to 
shame,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  nation  so  blinded, 
that  perhaps  the  Opposition  could  hardly  do  better  than 
lie  quiet  till  some  calamity  opened  the  eyes  o  f  the  public. 
For  my  own  part,  I  can  scarce  lament  the  war.  Had  the 
King  and  Lord  Mansfield,  who  dreaded  tumults  and  insur- 


1  It  was  thought  Hint  Franco  and  Holland  took  off  many  of  our  manufactures 
to  sell  them  to  our  colonies. 


177fi.  AMERICAN  WAR.  7 

rections  at  home,  and  who  knew  they  were  in  no  danger 
from  mobs  across  the  Atlantic,  had  courage  to  invade 
liberty  at  home,  they  might  have  done  their  business  al- 
most at  one  stroke.  By  driving  all  America  to  resistance, 
they  have  made  it  very  doubtful  whether  they  will  carry  one 
point.  If  America  gets  the  better,  it  will  be  independent, 
or  will  not  return  to  us  without  effectuating  by  stipulation, 
or  by  the  consequences  of  our  ill  success,  a  total  change  of 
Administration,  and  a  blow  to  despotism.  If  Britain  pre- 
vails, it  cannot  be  but  by  ruining  the  towns  and  trade  of 
America,  and  by  wasting  the  King's  fleet,  armies,  and 
treasure,  his  best  means  of  despotism.  If  a  middle  way, 
an  ignominious  treaty,  ensues,  what  disgrace  to  the  Crown, 
and  what  a  damp  to  its  farther  innovations  !  No  case  can 
happen  in  which,  if  the  King  prevails,  he  will  not  be  a  far 
less  potent  monarch  than  before  the  war.y  These  kingdoms 
are  more  likely  to  grow  shocked  at  so  ignominious  a  reign 
(compared  with  its  glorious  commencement)  ;  and  few 
princes  that  grow  despised  augment  their  power.  How 
too  shall  we  have  wasted  our  treasure  and  armies,  instead 
of  diminishing  our  debt !  France  and  Spain,  says  the 
Court,  give  solemn  assurances  of  neutrality,  and  dislike 
the  precedent  of  rebellious  colonies — perhaps  both  is  true. 
The  more  they  promise,  the  more  they  are  to  be  suspected. 
Will  they  spare  promises  which  will  encourage  us  to  be 
undone  ?  If  a  civil  war  will  not  dispel  our  delusion,  a 
French  or  Spanish  war,  or  both,2  will  tear  the  bandage  from 
the  eyes  that  wink  most  obstinately.  Then  will  our  abso- 
lute Monarch  know  the  difference  between  the  constitutional 
glory  of  such  a  King  as  his  grandfather,  and  that  of  a 
despotic  Sovereign,  who  has  revolted  and  laid  waste  his 


:  Both  a  French  and  a  Spanish  war  did  happen,  but  did  not  open  all  eyes  f 


8        LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALFOLE.      JAN. 

colonies,  and  impoverished  and  exhausted  his  subjects  at 
home. 

The  year  began  with  a  remarkable  snow  and  frost  that 
lasted  a  month.  Lord  George  Germaine,  who  had  com- 
plained to  the  King  of  the  Ministers  so  frequently  quitting 
the  town  to  amuse  themselves  at  their  country  houses,,  going 
to  his  own  house  at  Stonelands,  was  shut  up  there  by  the 
snow. 

The  two  Houses  of  Parliament  met  after  the  recess  of 
the  holidays,  the  Lords  on  January  the  23rd,  and  the 
Commons  on  the  25th,  but  nothing  was  done  or  moved  by 
Ministers  but  the  ordinary  business,  and  by  Opposition 
nothing  at  all. 


177G.  RECALL  OF  FRENCH  AMBASSADOR. 


FEBRUARY. 


MONSIEUR  le  Comte  de  Guines,  Ambassador  from  France, 
was  suddenly  recalled.  It  was  said  that  Monsieur  Turgot, 
the  Comptroller-General,  having  sent  a  confidential  person 
hither  to  inquire  into  the  nature  of  our  raising  money,  and 
into  the  affairs  of  our  East  India  Company  (which  our 
embarrassments  in  America  could  not  but  make  France  see 
a  prospect  of  undermining,  if  not  of  invading  our  vast 
possessions  in  the  East),  and  that  person  having  been  too 
coldly  received  by  De  Guines,  had,  on  his  return,  com- 
plained to  Turgot,  who  had  sent  the  Count  a  severe 
reprimand,  to  which  he  had  replied  haughtily,  urging  that 
his  quality  of  Ambassador  ought  to  exempt  him  from  so 
humiliating  a  rebuke,  and  that  Turgot,  having  laid  the 
letter  before  his  master,  the  King  had  instantly  sent  for 
him  away  in  anger.  This  was  probably  true,  for  when 
at  last  M.  de  Guines  obtained  an  audience,  after  long 
soliciting  it,  and  asked  if  he  had  offended  his  Majesty,  and 
what  was  the  reason  of  his  sudden  recall,  he  could  obtain 
no  answer  from  the  King,  but  "  1'Ambassade  e'toit  finie." 
The  King,  too,  coloured  when  he  first  saw  him,  as  if  the 
act  were  his  own  ;  and  when  De  Guines  asked  Monsieur 
de  Vergennes  the  cause,  he  replied,  "  C'est  le  secret  du 
Koi." 

Whatever  precipitated  this  fall  of  De  Guines,  he  had 
not  even  been  encouraged  to  expect  his  embassy  would  be 
protracted ;  his  three  years  were  expired,  and  he  had 
extorted  his  last  return  hither  as  a  vindication  of  his 


10 


LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FKB. 


honour.  He  was  involved  in  a  most  afflicting  suit  against 
his  own  secretary,  one  Tort,  who,  having  suddenly 
decamped  on  ill-success  in  stockjobbing,  had  accused  his 
master  of  having  employed  him  in  that  unseemly  practice 
on  that  account.  Most  of  the  foreign  Ministers  here, 
except  the  Prince  of  Masserano,  the  Spanish  Ambassador, 
followed  that  dirty  trade.  The  cause  of  M.  de  Guines 
suffered  extremely  by  his  pretending  to  have  burnt  Tort's 
first  letter  from  Paris.  Count  Welderen,  the  Dutch 
Minister,  told  me  that  the  letter  was  not  burnt,  but  that 
M.  de  Guines,  out  of  most  good-natured  delicacy  and 
honour,  would  not  produce  it  even  for  his  own  justification, 
and  to  his  great  prejudice,  because  in  it  Tort  had  men- 
tioned another  of  the  foreign  Ministers  as  concerned  in 
that  traffic,  which  would  have  ruined  him  at  his  own 
Court. 

The  Ambassador  had  as  warmly  prosecuted  Tort,  who 
was  openly  supported  by  English  bankers  whom  he  had 
drawn  into  his  misfortunes,  assuring  them  he  was  warranted 
by  his  master,  who  would  communicate  the  secrets  of  his 
embassy  to  them ;  and  it  did  seem  an  exculpation  of  the 
Count  that  he  had  lost  by  the  transaction,  which  was  not 
credible,  being  master  of  the  secret  of  pacification  on  Falk- 
land's Island.  Tort  had  still  a  more  formidable  though 
clandestine  protector  in  the  Due  d'Aiguillon,  who  to  ruin 
De  Guines,  the  creature  of  the  Due  de  Choiseul,  had 
been  guilty  of  scandalous  injustice  to  the  Ambassador.1 
The  cause  had  been  heard  the  last  winter;  and  by  as 
strange  a  judgment  as  that  against  Admiral  Byng,  the 


1  M.  de  Guinea  forcing  the  Due  <T 
Aiguillbn  to  print  their  correspondence, 
it  ;i|.]>eared  by  two  letters  that  on  the 
iiilair  of  Falkland  8  Island  the  English 
( '.,nrl  hii'l  i.ll'rrrd  to  disarm  first.  The 
of  Richmond  had  before  this 


publication  taxed  pur  Ministers  in  the 
House  of  Lords  with  this  national  in- 
dignity, and  Lord  Rochford  had  denied 
it  upon  his  honour.  Here  it  now  ap- 
peared irrefragably. 


1776.  Till-:  COMTE  DE  GUINES.  11 

sentence,  though  in  favour  of  M.  de  Guines,  was  by  no 
means  severe  against  Tort,  who  was  either  a  complete 
rascal  (as  he  certainly  in  his  memorials  had  been  unpre- 
cedentedly  insolent  and  provoking  to  the  Ambassador),  or 
De  Guines  was  the  most  unjust  and  blackest  of  men. 
The  latter  had  indeed  carried  his  cause  but  by  one  voice, 
which  the  Queen  had  obtained  for  him  at  eleven  o'clock 
at  night.  That  Princess,  instructed  by  her  mother,  the 
Empress  Queen,  was  eager  to  restore  the  Due  de  Choiseul 
to  the  management  of  affairs,  in  gratitude  for  and  to 
enforce  the  Family  Compact  which  he  had  made,  as  well  as 
her  daughter's  marriage  with  Louis  XVI.,  and  the  Queen 
of  France  took  all  occasions  of  showing  favour  to  Choiseul 
and  his  adherents — a  little  indiscreetly,  for  she  obtained 
permission  for  the  Duke  to  appear  at  Versailles  and  Paris ; 
and  boasting  of  it  to  show  her  power,  old  Maurepas,  who  had 
the  chief  credit,  and  who  knew  the  King's  jealousy  of  being 
governed,  revealed  the  Queen's  triumph ;  and  to  exclude 
Choiseul  for  ever,  insinuated  to  his  Majesty  that  the  Due 
de  Choiseul  had  poisoned  the  Dauphin  his  father.  The 
Comte  de  Maurepas  had  learned  this  caluminating  art  by 
his  own  experience ;  when  he  was  banished  for  affronting 
Madame  de  Pompadour,  to  assure  his  never  returning  to 
Court,  she  persuaded  Louis  Quinze  that  M.  de  Maurepas 
had  poisoned  one  of  the  King's  former  mistresses,  the 
Duchess  de  Chateauroux. 

Tort  had  appealed  to  the  Parliament,  and  the  cause  was 
to  be  reheard  ;  but  though  so  essential  to  De  Guines  to 
watch  the  suit  and  his  enemies,  the  excessive  partiality  he 
had  experienced  both  from  the  Court  and  the  nobility  here 
had  tempted  him  to  press  his  return  hither.  He  had 
wasted  immense  sums  here  in  treats  and  balls,  was  gallant, 
acceptable  to  the  women.  He  was  so  popular  with  the 


12 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


fine  ladies,  that  they  formed  several  extravagant  plans  for 
showing  their  concern  for  his  recall.  One  was  to  write  to 
the  Queen  of  France  to  intercede  in  his  favour;  another, 
to  wear  black  ribands  for  him,  and  to  make  a  procession 
from  the  Ladies'  Club  to  take  leave  of  him.  It  ended  in 
many  going  with  their  husbands  to  leave  at  his  door  their 
names  on  printed  cards,2  expressing  their  sorrow  for  his 
recall.  It  was  suspected  that  they  went  farther,  for  the 
day  he  took  leave  at  St.  James's  a  posse  of  Irish  chairmen 
assembled  round  his  coach,  would  have  taken  off  the  horses, 
and  insisted  on  drawing  him  home,  as  the  City  mobs  had 
done  for  Wilkes;  but  the  Ambassador  had  the  prudence 
not  to  consent.  De  Guines  was  also  liked  by  the  King, 
who  had  hated  the  arrogance  of  his  predeccessor  Du 
Chatelet,  and  the  contemptuous  coldness  of  his  wife.  The 
Due  d'Aiguillon,  it  is  true,  was  fallen  and  disgraced ;  but 
Maurepas  and  Turgot  were  not  less  jealous  of  Choiseul, 
and  could  not  be  partial  to  so  devoted  an  adherent  of 
his  as  De  Guines  was.  Public  reasons  augmented  their 
private  animosity.  De  Guines,  a  civil,  complaisant,  and 
showy  man,  was  no  genius.  In  our  posture  with  America 
he  was  neither  active  enough  to  procure  the  best  intelli- 
gence, nor  enough  ill-disposed  to  England  to  represent 
our  difficulties  in  the  strongest  light.  Should  France  be 
inclined,  while  she  lulled  us  asleep  by  taking  no  open  part 
for  the  Colonies,  to  take  advantage  of  our  difficulties  by 
extorting  concessions  from  our  weakness,  De  Guines,  so 
espoused  and  adopted  here,  was  more  likely  to  soften  any 
harsh  message  than  deliver  it  in  its  crude  terms.  It  Was 


3  The  custom  of  visiting  by  cards 
had  been  recently  adopted  in  France 
by  persons  of  fashion.  It  wus  at  first 
luughcd  at  by  the  more  punctilious 
people  as  at  once  a  lazy  and  an  impu- 
dent habit, — but  the  mode  prevailed. 


I  think  it  is  the  Baroness  d'Oberkirch 
who  records  in  her  Memoirs,  that,  when 
a  person  left  a  card  at  a  friend's  house, 
such  a  visit  was  called  a  "  visite  en 
blanc." — D. 


1771'.  RELATIONS  WITH  FRANCE.  13 

said  that  he  had  received  many  hints  from  his  Court  that 
they  wished  to  recall  him,  but,  as  if  persisting  in  staying 
had  been  sufficient  to  keep  him  here,  he  had  shut  his  eyes 
to  his  situation,  and  received  the  blow  with  as  much 
despair  as  if  he  had  had  no  reason  to  expect  it.  Our 
Court  chose  to  be  as  wilfully  blind,  though  no  notice  had 
been  taken  to  Lord  Stormont,  our  Ambassador  at  Paris, 
of  the  recall  of  De  Guines  ;  nor  would  they  apprehend  any 
sinister  designs  from  that  quarter,  though  no  successor  was 
named,  and  though  Gamier,  the  Charge  d' Affaires,  a 
known  enemy  of  De  Guines,  and  much  more  able,  was 
ordered  to  hire  a  house,  which  did  not  imply  the  sudden 
arrival  of  any  Ambassador.  The  Court  of  France  had 
even  invited  Monsieur  Frances  to  return  hither ;  but  he, 
attached  to  Monsieur  du  Chatelet,  and  formerly  to  Choiseul, 
was  suspected  of  being  so  little  favourable  to  M.  de  Guines 
in  his  suit  with  Tort,  having  been  still  here  at  the  time 
of  the  latter 's  transactions,  that  he  excused  himself  from 
accepting  the  employment.  Frances,  a  man  of  middling 
birth,  was  exceedingly  shrewd,  and  perhaps  better  ac- 
quainted with  this  country  than  any  Frenchman  living. 
Before  his  appearance  as  Du  Chatelet's  confidential  secre- 
tary, he  had  privately,  obscurely,  and  unknown,  resided 
here  three  years  in  the  City,  and  by  that  time  had  made 
himself  perfectly  master  of  our  language  and  affairs.  Still 
did  not  these  unpromising  appearances  startle  Lord  Mans- 
field ?  No.  He  was  determined  the  house  of  Brunswick 
should  throw  itself  like  the  house  of  Stuart  on  the 
generosity  of  the  Bourbons,  and  purchase  countenance 
to  the  schemes  of  enslaving  England  by  the  sacrifice  of 
England's  honour  and  interests.  France  was  so  gracious 
as  not  to  thwart  his  views,  when  they  held  out  to  her  the 
ruin  of  our  trade,  credit,  and  marine. 


14  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

3rd.  Lord  Howe  was  appointed  Chief  Admiral  in 
America,  and  had  been  designed  for  sole  Commissioner 
for  Peace ;  but  the  Court  had  now  no  thoughts  of  treating 
with  the  Americans,  whom  it  was  determined  to  subdue 
by  force.  It  had  been  for  some  time  uncertain  whether 
Lord  Howe  would  accept  either  command — nay,  whether 
he  would  riot  resign  all  his  employments. 

Admiral  Keppel,  the  friend  and  legatee  of  Admiral 
Saunders,  carried  the  latter's  red  riband  to  the  King.  His 
Majesty,  as  great  a  flatterer  as  any  of  his  own  flatterers, 
kept  Keppel,  though  in  Opposition,  long  in  the  closet, 
yet  said  not  a  word  of  so  meritorious  a  hero  as  Saunders, 
who  had  died  in  Opposition.  Keppel,  provoked,  said  at 
last,  "Your  Majesty  has  lost  a  most  brave  and  loyal  sub- 
ject.'' The  King,  with  great  quickness,  answered,  "  I  do 
not  miss  him  while  I  have  a  Keppel."  Keppel  himself, 
offended  at  the  promotion  of  Palliser,  one  of  the  youngest 
Admirals,  reproached  Lord  Sandwich,  by  letters,  with  the 
preference,  in  very  unmeasured  terms ;  but  Sandwich  was 
not  a  man  to  encounter  a  rough  seaman.  It  will  be  seen 
here  afterwards  how  Sandwich  and  Palliser  returned  Kep- 
pel's  objections. 

On  the  death  of  Sir  Charles  Saunders,  at  the  end  of  the 
preceding  year,  Lord  Sandwich  slightly  asked  Lord  North 
whether  he  had  any  objection  to  Admiral  Palliser  succeed- 
ing Sir  Charles  as  Lieutenant-General  of  the  Marines.  Lord 
North,  forgetting  that  he  had  promised  Lord  Howe  should 
succeed  Saunders,  replied,  "No."  Lord  Sandwich,  who 
loved  expedition,  and  cunning  more,  carried  Palliser 
immediately  to  kiss  the  King's  hand.  Lord  Howe,  dis- 
appointed and  affronted,  came  to  town,  and,  meeting  Lord 
North  in  the  House  of  Commons,  told  him  he  should  wait 
on  the  King  the  next  day.  "  On  what  account  ?"  asked 


1776.  APPOINTMENT  OF  LORD  HOWE.  15 

Lord  North.  "  To  resign  all  my  employments,  on  your 
Lordship's  breaking  your  promise  to  me  of  the  Marines," 
said  Lord  Howe ;  "  and  I  flatter  myself  my  brother  the 
General  (at  Boston)  will  resign  too,  when  he  hears  how 
I  have  been  used."  Lord  North,  in  a  great  fright,  pleaded 
that  his  mind  was  so  occupied  by  America  that  he  had 
forgotten  his  promise,  and  besought  the  angry  Lord  to 
defer  his  purpose.  Lord  George  Germaine  joined  them, 
and  they  did  prevail  :  that  is,  Lord  Howe  suspended 
his  resentment  for  six  weeks,  waiting  to  be  pacified  by 
some  more  lucrative  offer.  Lord  North  tempted  Admiral 
Forbes,  General  of  the  Marines,  to  resign  that  post  to 
Lord  Howe,  in  consideration  of  a  pension  of  2000/.  a-year; 
but  Forbes  was  stout,  and  at  last  the  naval  command 
in  America  was  given  as  a  compensation  to  Lord  Howe? 
at  the  expense  of  Admiral  Shuldham,  another  friend  and 
favourite  of  Lord  Sandwich,  who  was  thus  punished  for 
his  dexterous  industry.  Lord  Howe,  like  all  the  Howes, 
was  intrepidity  itself.  His  parts  were  below  moderate  ; 
his  interestedness  notorious  by  this  and  his  ingratitude  to 
Lord  Chatham. 

If  the  King  in  the  prosecution  of  the  civil  war  met  with 
brave  and  zealous  servants,  they  took  care  to  be  well  paid 
for  their  loyalty.  General  Burgoyne  had  left  Boston, 
not  much  to  his  credit  nor  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Court, 
when,  by  the  departure  of  General  Clinton  with  a  detach- 
ment for  the  southern  colonies,  Boston  was  left  so  ill- 
officered  by  men  of  experience,  that,  had  General  Howe 
died  or  been  killed,  the  command  must  have  devolved  on 
the  raw  Lord  Percy.3  Burgoyne,  on  his  arrival,  had  been 
very  communicative  of  complaints,  even  to  Charles  Fox 


3  Eldest  son  of  the  Duke  of  Northumberland. 


16 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


and  the  Opposition,  for  Burgoyne  knew  the  Ministers,  and 
probably  the  Opposition  too ;  for  had  the  latter  had  any 
activity,  they  would  have  questioned  him  in  Parliament 
before  the  Court  had  had  time  to  buy  off  his  affecwa 
dissatisfaction.  But  before  there  was  a  single  question 
started  in  the  House  of  Commons,  Burgoyne's  rank  and 
pay  were  raised,  fifteen  men  added  to  each  company  of 
his  regiment  (all  to  his  profit),  and  four  cornetcies  given 
to  him  to  sell ;  besides  an  extraordinary  promotion  for  his 
wife's  nephew,  Mr.  Stanley,4  which  was  stopped  by  the 
Secretary  at  War's 5  partiality  to  Captain  Stanhope,  Lady 
Harrington's  son,  over  whose  head  Stanley  would  have 
stepped.  After  these  favours,  nobody  more  reserved 
than  General  Burgoyne  on  any  mention  of  America  in 
Parliament.  In  April  he  sailed  for  Quebec. 

There  arrived  from  Boston  another  commander,  whom 
the  Administration  had  loudly  threatened  to  treat  in  a 
very  different  manner;  to  whom,  if  not  equally  bounteous, 
they  behaved  at  least  as  mildly,  and  about  whom  the 
soporific  Opposition  were  as  silent  as  the  Ministers  could 
wish.  This  was  Admiral  Greaves  :  he  had  borne  insults 
ill-suiting  the  spirit  of  a  military  man.  He  had  been 
recalled  with  ignominy,  and  the  Ministers  had  menaced 
to  make  a  second  Admiral  Byng  of  him,  that  is,  a  sacrifice 
to  palliate  their  own  inactivity.  But  finding  how  little 
either  the  nation  or  the  Opposition  clamoured  on  so 
disgraceful  a  campaign,  they  did  not  choose  to  open  any 
sores,  and  not  a  word  of  complaint  was  uttered  to  or  of 
Greaves.  He  to  his  friends  lamented  his  situation  and 
disgrace,  declared  he  had  asked  what  were  his  crimes, 
and  affirmed  that  he  had  not  only  orders  in  writing  to 


*  And  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Derby, 
nephew  of  Lady  Charlotte  Burgoyne. 


8  Lord  Harrington,  attached  to  Lady 
Harrington. 


177''..  STATE  OF  GOVERNMENT.  17 

justify  all  he  had  done,  but  had  previously  on   his   own 
judgment  executed  many  actions  for  which  he  had  after- 
wards received  orders.    However,  as  he  was  not  clamorous 
(h.  iiis  disgrace,  nor  asked  for  a  trial,  he  was  either  con- 
scious of  something  blameworthy,  or  hoped  to  be  indemni- 
fied like  Howe  and  Burgoyne      General  Gage  was  here 
in   the   same   equivocal   situation.     Posterity  will    scarce 
believe  such  a  lethargy ;  but  the  facts  I  have  related  may 
be  ascertained  both   by  what  was  done  and  what  was  not 
done.      London  was   sunk   in    pleasure    and   dissipation, 
and  governed   by  Scotch   emissaries.      Macpherson,    the 
Ossianite,  had  a  pension  of  600/.  a-year  from  the  Court, 
to  supervise  the  newspapers,  and  prevent  the  publication 
of  truth  or  satire.     The  Opposition  was  incapable,  inac- 
tive, and  borne  down  by  the  torrent.     The  manufacturers 
had   not   yet  suffered    by  loss  of  trade  as  the  friends  of 
America  had   foretold  and  expected.     The  country  was 
governed  by  Tory  country  gentlemen,   and  they  by  the 
clergy;  and  the  Government  concealed  news,  and  suffered 
no  advices  from  America  to  transpire,  so  that  as  yet  the 
war  was  neither  felt  nor  thought  of. 

On  the  5th  came  an  account  of  the  Duchess  of  Glou- 
cester being  delivered  at  Rome  of  a  prince  who  was 
christened  by  the  name  of  William-Frederick,  the  Duke 
and  Duchess  of  Saxe  Gotha,  and  the  Margrave  of  Ans- 
pach,  all  then  at  Rome,  being  sponsors.6  The  appearance 


8  This  prince,  who  was  born  at  Borne, 
January  15, 1776,  was  cliristened  by  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Salter.  He  succeeded  his 
t'utluT  in  1805.  He  was  a  good,  amiable, 
and  honest  man,  but  it  was  too  much 
tin-  fashion  to  ridicule  him  because  his 
intellect  was  not  as  strong  as  his  virtues. 
He  served  creditably  in  Flanders. 
Parliament  made  him  a  settlement  of 
1-1,000?.  a  year,  and  he  lived  under  his 
income.  His  marriage  in  1816  with  the 

VOL.  II. 


Princess  Mary,  youngest  daughter  of 
George  III.,  who  died  in  1857,  was  the 
result  of  along  and  mutual  attachment. 
It  procured  for  him  the  title  of"  Royal  " 
instead  of  "  Serene  "  Highness  ;  but  he 
stipulated  that  neither  the  marriago 
nor  the  title  should  influence  his  poli- 
tics. He  was  charitable  with,  as  well 
as  careful  of,  his  money,  and  he  left  his 
widow,  on  his  death  at  Bagshot  in  1834, 
a  dowry  of  90,000?.  He  was  buried  in 


18  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.    '  FEB. 

of  these  princes  was  fortunate  and  creditable ;  their  pre- 
sence silenced  the  malice  of  the  Court;  and  the  King, 
who  probably  disliked  his  mother's  nephew  lending  him- 
self as  godfather,  had  drawn  this  mortification  on  himself 
by  having  on  the  death  of  the  Princess  of  Wales  with- 
drawn the  pension  she  paid  to  the  Court  of  Saxe  Gotha. 
I  have  mentioned  in  the  former  year  that  the  Duke  and 
Duchess  of  Gloucester  had  left  England  the  last  autumn, 
for  the  Duke's  health,  from  the  distress  of  his  finances, 
and  worn  out  by  the  persecutions  of  the  Court,  which  had 
been  carried  so  far,  that  officers  from  other  regiments  were 
continually  preferred  to  those  in  the  Duke's  own.  When 
Lord  Rochford,  before  they  set  out,  asked  the  Duke 
whither  he  was  going,  he  replied  with  equal  sense,  spirit, 
and  severity,  "To  Rome,  my  Lord,  the  only  place7 
where  the  Pretender  and  I  can  live."  In  France  they  were 
received  with  the  most  distinguished  honours  by  order  of 
that  Court ;  the  King  himself  invited  them  to  Versailles, 
which  the  Duke,  out  of  decency  to  his  brother,  declined. 
At  Metz,  where  the  troops  were  reviewed  for  them,  M.  de 
Castries,  the  commanding  officer,  asking  the  Duchess 
who  were  Knights  of  the  Garter,  and  she  naming  Lord 
North,  he  said,  "  Pourquoi  l'a-t-il,  lui  ?  est-ce  pour  avoir 
perdu  1'Amerique?"  The  Duke  of  Wirtemberg  and  the 
I  senate  of  Venice  paid  them  no  less  respect.  The  Pope 
was  as  full  of  attentions,  and  borrowed  a  palace  for  them  ; 
but  before  they  arrived  at  Rome  the  Duke  was  at  the 
point  of  death  at  Padua  with  his  old  complaint ;  and  the 
Duchess,  with  child,  exhausted  by  the  fatigue  of  travelling 
and  by  sitting  up  to  watch  him,  was  near  accompanying 

his  military  uniform,  and  wearing  on  I  7  The  Duke  could  not  go  to  any  other 

his  finger  a  ring  which  had  beeii  au  !  capital,    as  the   King's    Ambassadors 

curly  love-gift  to  him  from  the  Princess  were  not  allowed  to  pay  their  duty  to 

whom  he  married. — D.                              I  him. 


1776.  VICTORY  OF  THE  VIRGINIANS.  19 

him,  but,  thank  God!  both  recovered.  The  young  prince, 
as  the  Duchess  wrote  to  me,  was  not  so  promising  a  child 
as  the  Princess  Sophia  ;  "  but,  considering  what  I  suffered 
for  four  months,"  said  the  Duchess,  "  I  wonder  he  is  any 
child  at  all." 

About  this  time  accounts  came  from  New  York  that 
overturned  the  triumphs  which  the  Ministers  and  the 
Scotch  had  so  ridiculously  coined  for  Lord  Dunmore. 
The  Virginians  had  entirely  demolished  his  diminutive 
army,  and  obliged  him  to  take  refuge  on  board  a  man-of- 
war  off  the  town  of  Norfolk.  It  was  the  more  disgraceful 
to  the  Earl,  as  he  had  sacrificed  the  men  of  a  very  brave 
regiment  (General  Keppel's)  in  an  unequal  engagement 
with  a  much  superior  force,  and  had  not  risked  his  own 
person. 

On  the  8th  the  stocks  fell  on  the  report  of  a  French 
fleet  assembled  at  Toulon ;  but  it  was  without  foundation. 

15th.  The  Opposition  opened  the  Parliamentary  cam- 
paign with  a  motion  from  Thomas  Townshend  jun.,  which 
he  had  promised  before  Christmas.  It  was  for  a  com- 
mittee to  inquire  into  the  insult  offered  to  the  English 
House  of  Commons,  by  the  message  to  that  of  Ireland,  in 
which,  without  any  authority  from  the  former,  the  Govern- 
ment engaged  England  should  pay  for  whatever  troops 
Ireland  should  demand  in  lieu  of  those  to  be  drawn  thence 
for  the  American  service.  Lord  North  denied  that  any 
such  message  had  been  sent  hence ;  but  Lord  George 
Germaine,  who  despised  Sir  John  Blaquiere,  and  did  not 
love  Lord  Harcourt,8  and  was  not  unwilling  to  censure 
whatever  had  been  done  before  he  came  into  power,  did 


s  Lord  Harcourt  bad  refused  to  let  I  had  threatened  to  resign  if  -they  were 
thrre  regiments  go  from  Ireland,  and  |  taken  thence. 

c  2 


20  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

not  spare  the  Irish  Ministers ;  at  the  same  time  marking 
his  ardour  of  pursuing  the  war  at  any  rate,  for  he  declared 
that  it  was  worth  while  to  pay  for  8000  men,  rather  than 
not  get  4000.  The  motion  was  rejected  by  224  to  106. 

At  this  moment,  when  the  Court  feared,  and  everybody 
expected  to  hear,  that  Quebec  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of 
the  Provincials,  advice  was  received  from  Boston,  carried 
thither  by  two  deserters,  that  the  town  having  been 
stormed,  and  on  the  point  of  being  taken,  General  Mont- 
gomery had  been  killed,  and  the  Provincial  army  beaten 
off.  Colonel  Arnold  was  said  to  be  taken  prisoner;  but 
the  river  St.  Lawrence  being  frozen,  no  certain  account 
could  be  obtained  for  many  weeks ;  though,  by  all  that 
could  be  collected  from  other  quarters,  the  death  of 
Montgomery  was  generally  believed.  The  safety  of  Que- 
bec raised  the  spirits  of  the  Court  greatly.  The  plan  of 
Lord  George  Germain e  had  uniformly  been  to  pour  an 
army  from  Quebec  on  the  back  of  the  colonies;  and  he 
had  resumed  that  purpose  with  all  his  activity,  the  Hes- 
sians being  immediately  destined  to  that  service ;  and  an 
attempt  meditated  against  the  southern  colonies,  under 
General  Clinton,  was  now  diverted  to  the  succour  of 
Quebec,  and  General  Burgoyne,  instead  of  returning  to 
Boston,  was  ordered  to  take  the  command  of  that  force  and 
endeavour  to  lead  it  to  Quebec.  Still,  so  little  was  the 
Court  assured  of  the  miscarriage  before,  and  so  ridiculous 
had  they  been  made  by  the  falsities  they  had  published 
in  favour  of  Lord  Dunmore,  that  they  did  not  venture 
to  mention  the  defeat  and  death  of  Montgomery  at 
Quebec.  They  did  not  even  do  justice  to  the  defence 
made  by  General  Carleton ;  and  Lord  George  Germaine, 
who  hated  him  as  one  who,  by  his  friendship  with  the 
Duke  of  Richmond,  and  by  his  own  firmness,  he  concluded 


1776.  ELECTION  OF  CITY  CHAMBERLAIN.  21 

or  knew,  was  not  favourable  to  his  Lordship  on  the  affair  of 
Minden,  took  this  very  moment  to  put  a  signal  affront  on 
the  Commander  at  Quebec.  Carleton,  in  his  last  letters 
thence,  had  begged  that,  if  his  Majesty  approved  of  his 
services  there,  he  would  appoint  his  brother  Major  Carle- 
ton  his  Quartermaster-General.  The  latter  had  cited 
his  brother's  recommendation  to  Lord  Barrington,  the 
Secretary  at  War,  who  had  obtained  the  King's  consent, 
and  had  acquainted  Carleton  with  his  promotion.  Yet 
Lord  George  Germaine  ravished  this  honour  from  him, 
and  insisted  on  its  being  conferred  on  one  Christie,  an 
obscure  Scot,  offering  Major  Carleton  the  post  of  Adjutant- 
General.  This  the  Major  sturdily  rejected — yet  set  off  to 
join  his  brother;  but  at  the  King's  levee,  when  he  kissed 
hands  on  his  departure,  and  the  King  asked  him  when  he 
should  set  out,  he  replied  audibly,  "  To-morrow,  Sir ;  and 
I  go  the  most  injured  of  your  Majesty's  subjects." 

20th.  Sir  Stephen  Theodore  Jansen  having  resigned  the 
office  of  Chamberlain  of  the  City  of  London,  Wilkes,  who 
had  long  eyed  that  post  with  ambition,  presented  himself 
as  candidate  for  it.  His  enemies,  both  at  Court  and  in 
the  City,  supported  one  Hopkins  against  him  ;  and  Wilkes, 
too  confident  of  his  popularity — now  grown  a  little  obso- 
lete— neglecting  to  ^>ush  his  solicitations  with  vigour,  lost 
it,  both  on  the  poll  and  on  a  scrutiny  that  he  demanded ; 
yet,  as  it  is  an  annual  office,  though  the  incumbent  sel- 
dom laid  aside,  he  declared  he  would  stand  for  it  again  at 
Midsummer. 

•  On  the  20th  Charles  Fox  made  a  motion  in  the  House 
of  Commons  for  inquiring  into  the  ill-success  of  the  King's 
arms  in  America,  and  laid  open  all  the  boasts,  blun- 
ders, and  disgraces  of  the  Administration ;  as  Barre  did, 
still  more  severely,  with  much  irony  on  Lord  George 


22 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


Germaine,  whom  he  called  the  Pitt  of  the  day.  Lord 
Ossory 9  and  Richard  Fitzpatrick,  nephews  of  Earl  Gower, 
but  intimately  connected  with  Charles  Fox,1  both  spoke 
well  in  Opposition  for  the  first  time  ;  Lord  Mulgrave2  as 
warmly  for  all  the  measures  he  had  used  to  condemn. 
Lord  Clare  moved  the  previous  question,  and,  after  a 
debate 3  that  lasted  till  three  in  the  morning,  the  motion 
was  rejected  by  240  to  104.  Adam,  a  Scot,  spoke  and 
voted  with  the  minority. 

At  the  end  of  the  month  was  published  a  pamphlet  that 
made  a  great  sensation.  It  was  called  *  An  Essay  on 
Civil  Liberty,'  and  was  written  by  Dr.  Price,4  a  Dissenter, 
strongly  connected  with  Lord  Shelburne.  It  was  a  defence 
of  the  Americans,  and  maintained  the  improbability  of 
subduing  them.  But  the  part  that  hurt  Administra- 
tion was  the  alarm  it  gave  to  the  proprietors  of  the 
funds  by  laying  open  the  danger  to  which  they  were 
exposed  by  the  ruinous  measures  of  the  Court.  I  think 
this  was  the  first  publication  on  that  side  that  made  any 


9  John  Fitzpatrick,  second  Earl  of 
Upper  Ossory. 

1  Stephen  Fox,  Lord  Holland,  elder 
brother  of  Charles,  had  married  Lady 
Mary,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Upper 
Ossory. 

4  Phipps,  second  Lord  Mulgrave.  - 

3  See  a  good  account  of  this  debate 
in  the  London  Chronicle  of  Feb.  24, 
1776. 

4  If  there  be  any  readers  of  the  pre- 
n-iit  'lay  who  arc  acquainted  with  Mrs. 
Chapour,  they  will  remember  in  her 

\l'"-illanies  a  certain  "  Simplicius," — 
the  original  of  which  was  Dr.  Price. 
This  eminent  Dissenter  began  life  by 
dividing  the  small  fortune  which  he 
inherited  from  his  father,  a  Welsh 
minister,  between  his  sisters,  and 
raised  a  fortune  to  himself  by  his  abi- 
lity and  industry.  He  was  perhaps  the 
author  of  more  pamphlets  than  any 
writer  yet  known.  They  were  on  every 
subject,  moral,  social,  political,  reli- 


gious, philosophical;  and  there  was 
scarcely  one  that  did  not  exhibit  high 
qualities  rarely  found  in  such  produc- 
tions. The  pamphlet  mentioned  in  the 
text  was  the  one  by  which  lie  acquired 
the  greatest  reputation,  and  very  va- 
rious honojirs.  In  two  years  it  went 
through  eight  editions,  and  gave  rise  to 
very  virulent  controversy.  Pitt's  plan 
for  reducing  the  national  debt  is  said  to 
have  been  one  of  three  submitted  to  him 
by  Dr.  Price.  The  extreme  satisfac- 
tion with  which  the  latter  greeted  the 
French  revolution  brought  down  upon 
him  the  mingled  contempt,  sarcasm,  and 
wrath  of  Burke,  who  almost  called  lyin 
assassin,  and  who  clearly  accounted 
him  a  fool.  The  Doctor  really  hated 
nothing  but  cards,  and  yet,  to  gratify 
his  wife,  who  suffered  acutely  from  ill 
health,  and  found  no  solace  but  in  a 
rubber,  he  sat  down  cheerfully  to  whist 
every  night.  Dr.  Price  died  in  1791, 
in  the  69th  year  of  his  age. — D. 


177H. 


PAMPHLETS  ON  AMERICA. 


23 


impression.  All  the  hireling  writers  were  employed  to 
answer.  The  author  was  complimented  with  the  freedom 
of  the  City,  and  it  was  thought  some  complaint  would 
be  made  from  that  quarter  of  the  manoeuvres  of  the  Bank. 
Indeed  the  Directors  of  the  Bank  grew  more  reserved  in  J 
furthering  the  jobs  of  Administration.  The  Earl  of  Stair,5 
an  honest  Scot,  enthusiastic  in  the  cause  of  America,  pub- 
lished soon  afterwards  another  tract  on  the  impossibility 
of  supporting  the  expense  of  the  war,  which  for  the  present 
year  was  calculated  at  five  millions. 


5  John,  5th  Earl.  His  story  be- 
longs to  the  romance  of  the  Peerage. 
John,  the  2nd  Earl,  the  Field- Marshal 
and  Commander-in-Chief,  surrendered 
his  titles  to  the  Crown  in  1707.  A  new 
charter,  then  obtained,  authorised  him, 
in  di  fault  of  heirs  male,  to  nominate  to 
the  succession  of  his  titles  and  estates 
any  direct  descendant  of  the  first  Vis- 
count Stair,  who  died  in  1G95,  and  who 
was  this  John's  grandfather.  Now  this 
Earl  John,  finding  himself  childless, 
and  having  two  brothers,  William  and 
Ui-urire,  nominated  in  1747  his  name- 
sake John,  son  of  the  younger  brother,  as 
his  successor.  The  charter  had  stated 


that,  if  he  failed  to  nominate,  the  titles 
and  estates  should  pass  to  the  second 
son  of  the  elder  brother  William.  Tins 
second  son,  named  James,  claimed  and 
obtained  the  title,  as  if  there  had  been 
no  nomination  under  the  charter.  He 
died  without  issue  in  1760,  and  was 
then  succeeded  by  his  own  elder  bro- 
ther William,  who  also  dying  without 
issue  in  17G8,  the  title  and  estates 
then  fell  to  his  cousin — that  very  John 
whom  the  second  Earl  (in  1747)  had 
declared  should  be  his  heir,  and  who 
continued  to  enjoy  both  till  his  death 
in  1789.— D. 


24  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.         MARCH, 


MARCH. 


ADVICE  came  that  Lord  Dunmore,  after  his  defeat,  had 
burnt  the  town  of  Norfolk  in  Virginia.  Other  accounts 
said  that  the  Provincials,  had  set  fire  to  it  themselves. 

On  the  5th  the  Duke  of  Richmond  moved  the  House  of 
Lords  to  address  the  King  to  countermand  the  foreign 
troops  going  to  America,  to  stop  the  farther  effusion  of 
blood,  and  put  an  end  to  hostilities.  This  motion,  after  a 
long  debate,  was  rejected  by  100  to  32.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond,  amongst  other  severities,  said  (alluding  to  the 
King)  that  the  spirit  which  governed  the  Cabinet  was 
weak,  ignorant,  and  obstinate.  Lord  Shelburne  made 
a  great  figure  in  that  debate;  and  even  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland  spoke  against  the  war  and  the  foreign  troops, 
lamenting  with  much  emotion  that  the  troops  of  Brunswick, 
which  had  always  fought  for  liberty,  should  be  employed 
on  the  other  side.  "  But,  my  Lords,"  said  the  Prince, 
"  I  grow  warm,  and  will  say  no  more."  Lord  Temple 
made  so  obscure  a  speech,  though  with  strong  imputations 
on  the  nefficiencies  and  inability  of  the  Ministers,  that, 
though  he  did  not  vote,  it  was  understood  as  declaring 
for  the  prosecution  of  the  war :  it  was  so  reported  to 
Lord  Chatham,  and  even  as  if  Lord  Temple  had  de- 
clared that  Lord  was  of  the  same  opinion.  The  news- 
papers declared  it  was  with  Lord  Chatham's  concurrence, 
which  obliged  both  those  Lords  to  contradict  the  report 
of  either  favouring  the  war.  Lord  Chatham  went  far- 
ther, and  ordered  his  wife  to  write  a  letter  disavowing 
those  sentiments  in  his  name.  Lord  Temple  himself,  who 
very  few  days  before  had  told  me  he  would  not  attend 


177ii.  AMERICAN  AFFA1KS.  25 

the  House  of  Lords,  came  to  me  to  explain  his  motives, 
and  said  he  had  been  forced  to  go  thither  to  disavow  his 
nephew,  George  Grenville,  who  had  been  drawn  in  (by 
Lord  George  Germaine)  to  declare  too  roundly  against 
America.  Lord  Sandwich,  in  the  same  debate,  amidst 
many  false  assertions,  particularly  in  excusing  the  burning 
of  Norfolk,  said  he  would  tell  the  House  how  it  happened, 
if  Norfolk  really  had  been  burnt — it  was  being  prompt  at 
excuses,  to  say  he  knew  how  an  affair  had  happened,  which 
he  did  not  know  whether  it  had  happened  or  not. 

It  was  in  the  debate  on  the  foreign  troops  that  George 
Grenville  had  spoken  and  voted  against  the  Americans ; 
but  as  I  was  very  ill  the  beginning  of  this  year,  my  notes 
on  the  three  first  months  are  very  imperfect.  They  may 
be  well  supplied  from  the  '  London  Chronicle.'  On  the 
debate  for  the  foreign  troops,  General  Conway  distinguished 
his  abilities  and  'spirit  in  the  highest  manner,  and  sorely 
wounded  Lord  North  by  reproaching  him  with  the  trea- 
chery to  the  Americans  after  the  promises  made  to  them 
by  Lord  Hillsborough's  letter.  In  one  of  those  debates  it 
came  out  that  Colonel  Dalrymple,  nephew  of  the  infamous 
historian  Sir  John,  had  been  raising  Roman  Catholics  in 
Ireland  for  the  King's  service,  and  had  been  assisted  by 
the  Popish  Archbishop  of  Tuam.  This,  if  there  had  been 
no  other  key  to  Sir  John  Dalrymple's  principles,  explained 
why  he  had  traduced  the  great  Algernon  Sydney ! 

There  were  other  good  debates  in  the  Commons  on  the 
9#A  and  \\th.  In  the  latter  Charles  Fox  made  a  panegyric 
on  General  Montgomery  (who  had  borne  a  most  excellent 
character),  and  reproached  the  Administration  with  having 
lost,  by  ill  treatment,  so  amiable  a  man — a  man  distin- 
guished by  the  friendship  and  esteem  of  General  Wolfe. 
Lord  North  confessed  the  bravery  and  virtues  of  Montgo- 
mery, but  said  still  he  had  fallen  in  rebellion.  Barre  took 


26  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

this  up  with  warmth,  and  said  that  while  Fox  had  been 
speaking    he    had    heard    a    sort    of  sneering   laugh :    he 
wished  he   knew  from    whom  it    came,    he  would  never 
keep  company  with  the  wretches  that  were  capable  of  it. 
Lord  North  on  this  occasion  behaved  with  decency.    Com- 
monly he  treated  most  subjects  with   ridicule,  and  this 
winter  was   more   than   ever  cried  up  for   his  wit.      It 
was   on    the    Hessian    question,     mentioned    above,    that 
Lord  North  spoke  with  so  much  wit.     Burke  answered 
him  extempore  with  scarce  inferior  wit.     Mr.  Elliot,    of 
Port  Elliot,  a  Lord  of  Trade,  voted  with  the  minority,  and 
soon  after  resigned  his  employment.     However  the  nation 
in  general   was  prejudiced  against  the  Americans,    it  ap- 
peared that  there  were  enthusiasts  also  on  the  other  side. 
Mr.  Elliot   was   descended    from    Sir   John    Elliot,    im- 
prisoned in  the  Tower  by  Charles  I.      A  country  gentle- 
man,  dining  with  Mr.  Elliot  at  his   house  in   Cornwall, 
where    hung    a    picture    of  his    ancestor    in   the    Tower, 
said,  "  I  hope  soon  to  see  you  in  the  same  situation  !  " 
A  civil  war,  in  which  Lord  North   had  been  so  deep  an 
actor,  and,  to  his  disgrace,  an  instrument,  and  an  unsuc- 
;  cessful  one,   was   no  very  decent  season   for  buffoonery. 
Burke  compared  him  with  George  Selwyn,  and  said  they 
were  the  capital  wits  of  the  age — the  one  in  public,  the 
other  in  private  company.   Burke  himself  always  aimed -at 
wit,  but  was  not  equally  happy  in  public  and  private.     In 
the  former  nothing  was  so  luminous,  so  striking,  so  abun- 
dant ;  in  private  it.  was  forced,   unnatural,    and   bombast. 
Lord  North  had  more  humour  than  wit,  though  rarely  de- 
ficient in  the  latter.     But  the  best  bon  mot  of  the  winter 
fell  from  Wilkes,  in   an  ironic  speech  on  Lord  George 
I  Germaine :  he  said  the  noble  Lord  might  conquer  America, 
but  he  believed  it  would  not  be  in  Germany.     That  rhodo- 
montade  of  Lord  Chatham  had  been  so  often  applied,  that 


1770.  A  MICHIGAN  AFFAIUS.  27 

it  seemed  difficult  to  allude  to  it  with  novelty  any  more. 
Lord  George,  whose  insolence  bore  him  up  above  all  his 
disgraces,  repeated  this  sarcasm  on  himself  in  Council,  and 
commended  it.  He  carried  this  overbearing  humour  yet 
higher.  Complaining  to  the  King  of  the  neglects  and 
dilatoriness  of  the  Admiralty  and  Ministry,  and  of  the  bad- 
ness of  the  transports,  he  said,  "  But  I  must  say,  Sir,  that 
the  two  heaviest  and  worst  sailers  are  the  King  George 
and  the  Lord  North ;"  and  he  bragged  of  having  said  this. 
If  ever  he  falls  into  disgrace,  the  King  will  remember  it. 

It  was  fact :  the  transports  were  not  only  bad  and  ill- 
manned,  but  so  little  care  and  thought  had  been  had  for 
providing  them,  that  even  at  the  end  of  April  not  half  the 
number  were  provided.  The  Brunswick  troops,  the  first 
of  the  foreign  mercenaries,  did  not  sail  before  the  4th  of 
April,  and  the  first  division  of  Hessians  did  not  arrive  at 
Portsmouth  before  the  24th.  The  Administration  had 
reckoned  on  having  an  army  of  50,000  men  in  America 
by  the  opening  of  the  campaign  ;  and  had  loudly  talked  of 
completing  the  conquest  in  one  summer.  It  was  now  plain  / 
that  they  would  not  be  able  to  take  the  field  before  the  end 
of  June  at  soonest,  when  the  heats  would  make  it  difficult 
to  act ;  but  these  boasts  had  been  no  less  given  out  to  im- 
pose on  the  Parliament  and  the  nation.  Now  the  lan- 
guage was  altered  ;  and  as  the  preparations  for  this  year 
were  made,  they  began  to  talk  of  doing  little  this  year— 
that  is,  disappointments  were  to  be  guarded  against,  and  a 
foundation  of  another  year's  profusion  prepared. 

\Qth.  Dr.  Keppel,  Bishop  of  Exeter,  preached  before  the 
King.     He  (the  Bishop),  Shipley,   Law,   and  HinchclifFe,1 


Of  Shipley  and  Hinchcliffe  I  have 
fore  spoken.    Of  Law,  who  is  so  much 


Justice,   Lord    Ellenborough.      As    a 
wriU-r,  lie  indulged  more  frequently  in 


Ix-ttcr  known,  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  parenthetical   observations   than  Lord 

lit'  held  the  liishopric  of  Carlisle  nine-  !  Clarendon  himself.     When  one  of  his 

tern  years,  fn.ni  17(>8  to  1787,  when  he  works  was  passing  slowly  through  tl,.- 

•li.-'l.     He  \v:is  the  father  of  the  Chief  pP-^atC.irlisle,  the  Bishop  complained 


28 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  IIOEACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 


were  the  only  prelates  professedly  in  Opposition.  The 
Bishop  of  Exeter  preached  against  the  dissipation  of  the 
age,  and  announced  the  judgments  that  would  follow  it. 
"  Have  they  not  already  fallen  on  us?"  said  he.  "Are 
we  not  engaged  in  a  fatal  civil  war?  And  give  me  leave 
to  add,"  continued  he,  "  that,  if  the  sword  is  not  timely 
sheathed,  ruin  will  ensue  to  both  countries."  Lord  Den- 
bigh clamoured  against  that  sermon  even  to  the  Bishop  of 
London ;  yet  that  courtly  priest  was  so  true  to  his  own 
order,  that  he  defended  the  sermon,  as  becoming  a  bishop, 
even  against  the  sycophant,  who  replied,  "  But,  my  Lord, 
would  you  have  preached  it  ?  "  "I  cannot  say  I  would," 
said  Terrick. 

14th.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  made  a  new  motion  for 
pacification  with  America,  and  stated  the  pacific  language  of 
Lord  Dartmouth,  and  the  warlike  tone  of  Lord  George  Ger- 
maine.  He  informed  the  House  too  that  two  French  agents 
were  actually  at  the  Congress  negotiating  with  the  Ameri- 
cans. This  was  enforced  by  Lord  Camden,  and  vaguely 
denied  only  by  Lord  Weymouth.  Lord  Sandwich  as  usual 
denied  and  asserted  whatever  came  into  his  head  ;  the  Duke 
of  Richmond  lashed  the  Bishops  for  their  unchristian  com- 
pliance with  bloody  measures  ;  Lord  Shelburne  made  a 
great  figure ;  but  at  past  ten  at  night  the  motion  was  re- 
jected by  91  to  31. —  Vide  l  London  Chronicle.' 

17th.  Colonel  St.  Paul,  Charge  d'Affaires  at  Paris, 
was  made  Minister  Plenipotentiary  there.  As  no  Am- 
bassador thence  was  named  in  the  room  of  Monsieur  De 
Guines,  it  looked  as  if  Lord  Stormont  was  not  to  remain 
at  Paris. 

22ra£  The  King  received  a  remonstrance  from  the  City 
against  the  war. 


of  the  delay.  The  printer  excused  him- 
self on  the  ground  that  lie  had  been 
compelled  to  stop  the  press  till  he  had 


received  from  a  typo-foundry  at  Glas-    / 
gow  a  pound  of  parentheses. — D. 


1776.  DUCHESS  OF  KINGSTON'S  TRIAL.  29 


APRIL 


10th.  A  PROVINCIAL  ship  that  had  been  going  to  a  French 
port  for  am  munition  was  betrayed  and  brought  into  Bristol 
by  the  mate,  who  not  only  confirmed  this  friendly  inter- 
course of  the  Provincials  with  France  (before  the  Ministers 
could  know  or  stop  his  blabbing,  so  contrary  to  all  their 
assertions),  but  he  declared  (conformably  to  what  the  Duke 
of  Grafton  and  Lord  Camden  had  asserted)  that  two 
French  noblemen  were  then  at  the  Congress  negotiating 
with  the  Americans,  and  that  the  two  negotiators  were  to 
have  gone  back  to  France  in  that  very  ship,  if  it  had  not 
been  overloaded. 

15th.  Began  the  trial  of  the  Duchess  of  Kingston.  It 
raised  great  clamour  against  the  Ecclesiastical  Court. 
22?zd,  she  was  convicted,  but  dismissed  without  punish- 
ment, as  Lord  Mansfield  had  foretold.  Two  days  after 
she  retired  to  Calais,  to  prevent  receiving  a  writ  ne  exeat 
regno,  which  was  issued  the  night  she  went.1 


1  The  Duchess  declared  that  a  decree 
of  the  Ecclesiastical  Court  had  not 
before  been  reversed  for  1425  years! 
When  that  Court  had  before  them  the 
question  of  her  early  marriage  with  the 
Hon.  Augustus  Hervey,  it  pronounced 
that  "  the  parties,  as  far  as  appeared  to 


lady,  as  she  thought,  to  marry  the  Duke 
of  Kingston),been  sent  down  to  Lincoln- 
shire, with  the  promise  of  a  pension  of 
201.  a.  year.  At  the  bar  of  the  House 
of  Lords  the  Duchess,  on  conviction, 
pleaded  her  privilege  as  a  peeress,  which 
was  allowed  ;  but  she  was  told  that  her 


them,  were  not  legally  married,  and  j  privilege  would  not  screen  her  if  she 


that  Miss  Chudleigh  was  and  is  a  spin- 
ster, free  to  marry,  especially  as  regards 
the  Hon.  Augustus  Hervey."  Con- 
temporary statements  assert  that  the 
witness  who  proved  the  marriage  before 
the  House  of  Lords  had,  at  the  time  of 
the  inquiry  before  the  Ecclesiastical 
Court  (the  result  of  which  enabled  the 


again  offended,  and  the  crime  would 
then  be  capital.  Her  privilege  also  to  be 
tried  by  her  peers  rested  on  the  ground 
that  if  she  was  not  Duchess  of  Kingston 
she  was  Countess  of  Bristol,  her  first 
husband  having  succeeded  to  the  title 
in  1775^  The  Duchess  died  A.D.  1788. 
— D. 


30  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

An  account  that  Jamaica,  alarmed  at  a  great  French 
force  in  those  seas,  had  arrayed  their  militia.  Ministers 
had  still  more  reason  to  tremble  for  the  East,  and  betrayed 
their  fears.  They  had  determined  to  leave  out  some  ob- 
noxious Directors  of  the  Company,  and  elect  others  more 
confidential,  with  a  view,  it  was  supposed,  of  engaging 
the  Company  at  the  price  of  two  or  three  millions  to  Go- 
vernment to  renew  their  Charter,  which  was  within  two 
years  of  expiration.  They  had  settled  this  new  list,  and 
used  all  their  art  and  industry  to  secure  success ;  but,  on  the 
eve  of  the  election,  dropped  the  design,  and  left  in  the  old 
obnoxious  members,  who  must  have  known  whatever  bad 
news  had  come,  and  would  have  published  it  in  revenge, 
if  turned  out  of  the  Direction. 

Account  of  the  execution  of  Nuncomar  in  India. 

24th.  Lord  North  opened  the  Budget,  and  proposed 
additional  taxes  on  coaches,  dice  and  cards,  and  newsr 
papers,  and  a  tax  on  stage  coaches,  exempted  before. 
All  these  were  light,  and  were  approved,  yet  that  on  news- 
papers was  liable  to  suspicion.  Lord  North  denied  any 
danger  to  Jamaica,  vaunted  the  prosperous  state  of  the 
kingdom,  and  as  usual,  whatever  was  the  subject,  except  on 
danger  to  his  own  person,  he  treated  the  whole  with  mirth 
and  ridicule. 

25th.  The  Lords  having  thrown  out  the  bill  that  in- 
demnified the  Ministers  who  had  advised  filling  Gibraltar 
and  Port  Mahon  with  foreign  troops,2  Sir  James  Lowther 
again  moved  for  a  resolution  against  that  measure,  but 
without  success. 


"  The  Ministers  had   never  desired  '  seconded  by  Lord  Weymouth ;  and  no- 

the  bill,  and  at  the  third  reading,  Lord  I  body  saying  a  word  for  the  bill,  it  was 

Buckingham,  moving  to  have  it  thrown  loat. 
out,  had  been  surprised  to  find  himself  ' 


1776.  AMERICAN  AFFAIRS.  31 

The  same  morning  the  Queen  was  brought  to  bed  of  an 
eleventh  child,  a  daughter.3 

30th.  Wilkes  made  his  annual  motion  for  rescinding  the 
Middlesex  election.  It  was  rejected  by  186  to  92. 

The  Ministers  had  been  infinitely  disappointed  of  a 
sufficient  number  of  transports.  For  the  Hessians  they 
had  procured  but  half  the  necessary  quantity ;  and  then 
the  Hessian  General  would  not  suffer  the  half  to  sail 
without  the  whole.  This  occasioned  so  long  delay,  that 
the  first  half  arrived  at  Portsmouth  but  in  the  last  week 
of  April ;  and  then  the  same  impediment  was  thrown  in 
the  way  by  the  Hessian  commander.  The  King  was 
forced  to  send  General  Harvey  to  Portsmouth,  and  it  was 
with  great  difficulty  Harvey  prevailed  for  their  sailing, 
the  King  taking  it  on  himself  to  justify  it  to  the  Land- 
grave. It  appeared  that  the  Ministers  must  have  had 
advice  of  the  very  bad  posture  of  their  affairs  in  America, 
though  they  pretended  to  have  received  the  contrary,  for 
now  all  was  changed,  and  the  Guards,  who  had  been 
detained  and  who  were  to  have  gone  to  Virginia  with  the 
Hessians,  were  now  ordered,  both  the  one  and  the  other, 
to  Boston.  The  Ministers  published  so  late  as  the  27th 
that  the  siege  of  Quebec  was  raised,  and  that  the  Congress 
had  reprimanded  Washington  for  not  attacking  Boston, 
and  said  he  had  excused  himself  on  having  but  15,000  men, 
and  those  ill-disciplined,  and  from  want  of  artillery.  Ge- 
neral Clinton  with  his  little  division  had  touched  at  New 
York,  but  had  not  stayed  there,  and  was  sailed  for  Virginia ; 
and  since  that  it  was  known  that  General  Lee,  with  some 
thousand  men  and  expecting  more,  was  drawing  strong  lines 
round  that  place.  Whether  the  Ministers  believed  Quebec 


3  Mary,  who  married  the  sou  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  born  this  same  year, 
in  1816,  "and  died  in  1857.— D. 


32  "LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOKACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

safe,  and  the  Provincial  army  at  Boston  weak,  or  whether 
they  despaired  of  the  first  and  feared  for  the  second, 
where  at  least  the  Royal  army  had  nothing  but  salt  provi- 
sions left,  the  Guards  and  the  Hessians  were  to  have  sailed 
for  Boston  on  the  2nd  of  May. 


MAY. 


2nd.  THE  wind  turned  contrary,  and  that  very  morn- 
ing came  news  that  entirely  put  a  stop  to  the  new 
plan,  for  letters  arrived  that  General  Howe  had  been 
forced  to  abandon  Boston.  Five  days  before,  the  Minis- 
ters believed,  or  said  they  believed,  that  the  Congress  had 
reprimanded  General  Washington  for  having  done  nothing; 
that  he  had  answered  that  he  had  but  15,000  men,  ill- 
disciplined,  and  no  artillery ;  and  that  the  Congress  had 
admitted  his  excuse.  Now  the  Court  affirmed  that  he  had 
25,000  men.  They  at  Boston  were  starving,  had  nothing 
but  salt  provisions,  and  had  not  even  received  any  news 
from  .England  since  October.  Washington,  either  knowing 
their  situation,  or  that  the  Provincials  were  more  exas- 
perated than  ever  on  hearing  of  the  intention  of  sending 
Russians  against  them,  and  of  the  Restraining  Bill,  had 
prepared  to  storm 'the  town,  and  had  opened  a  cannonade. 
General  Howe  in  despair  resolved  to  attack  their  army ; 
but  a  violent  storm,  that  lasted  two  days,  prevented  him, 
and  the  ruin  of  his  forces.  He  then  quitted  the  town, 
destroyed  what  works  he  could,  and  embarked  his  men, 
what  artillery  he  could  carry  off,  and  as  many  of  the 
inhabitants  and  their  wives  as  were  attached  to  England, 


1776.  AMERICAN  AFFAIRS.  33 

with  their  effects.  The  Provincials  gave  him  no  in- 
terruption, lest  in  revenge  he  should  burn  the  town.  In 
this  extremity  he  sailed  for  Halifax,  where  distress  had 
been  already  felt. 

This  blow  the  Ministers  endeavoured  to  represent  as 
fortunate,  publishing  a  ridiculous  account  in  the  Gazette, 
crying  up  Howe's  retreat  as  a  master  stroke,  and  giving  out 
that  they  had  ordered  him  to  quit  Boston ;  but  nobody  was 
deceived,  though  Lord  North  said,  with  indifference,  it  was 
only  /laving  Jive  thousand  men  more  in  circulation — but  then 
the  Provincials  had  five-and-twenty  thousand  more !  The 
not  having  been  able  to  victual  Boston,  after  the  immense 
expense,  nor  even  to  get  a  letter  to  it,  proved  the  madness 
of  all  they  were  doing.  The  friends  of  America  revived 
on  this  news.  Great  abuse  fell  on  Lord  George  Germaine, 
though  he  certainly  had  been  as  active  as  possible.  The 
Bedford  party  began  to  talk  for  peace,  and  probably  the 
Court  began  to  think  of  it.  A  commission  passed  the 
seals  to  Lord  Howe  and  his  brother  the  General,  to 
empower  them  to  treat ;  and  on  the 

4th  the  Hessians  and  Guards  sailed,  now  to  Halifax, 
and  Lord  Howe  on  the  Sth. 

6th.  The  King  asked  a  vote  of  credit,  and  a  million  was 
voted. 

The  same  day  Colonel  Barre  moved  for  the  accounts 
from  Boston ;  the  Ministers  used  the  old  stale  argument  of 
the  impropriety  of  the  time.  Barre'  produced  forty  prece- 
dents of  Lord  Chatham  communicating  intelligence  in  the 
last  war  to  Parliament ;  and  this  had  affectedly  been 
called  a  Parliamentary  war,  and  yet  votes  of  credit  were 
asked  without  any  information  given.  Burke  made  a 
most  warm  speech,  showed  the  falsehood  of  the  Gazette, 
and  all  the  other  blunders  and  lies.  Con  way  made  a 

VOL.  II.  D 


34  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

most  admired  speech  to  the  same  purport.  Lord  George 
Gerrnaine  answered  him  in  a  poor,  abject  manner,  con- 
fessing the  misfortune  at  Boston.  Charles  Fox  was  absent 
at  Newmarket,  Governor  Johnston  and  T.  Townshend  in 
other  places, — so  the  question  was  refused  to  a  very  small 
minority.  The  next  day, 

7th,  the  House  sat  till  five  in  the  morning  on  a  discus- 
sion of  the  licences  to  trade  given  to  his  creatures  by 
Lord  Sandwich,  which  the  Restraining  Bill  denied  to  the 
merchants.  Lord  North  had  written  a  letter  of  reprimand 
to  the  Admiralty  on  this  abuse ;  the  Opposition  took  the 
very  words  of  his  letter  for  their  motion — yet  it  was 
rejected.  Lord  North,  whose  jocularity  was  overset  by 
the  bad  news  from  America,  lost  his  temper  most  in- 
decently. The  Provincials  had  taken  the  isle  of  Pro- 
vidence. An  expedition  sent  by  General  Howe  to  Georgia 
had  miscarried,  and  intelligence  was  come  that  the  Ameri- 
can Admiral  with  a  squadron  were  waiting  off  Jamaica  to 
intercept,  and  were  likely  to  take  the  West  Indiamen. 
The  Restraining  Bill  had  wrought  their  rage  to  the  highest 
pitch,  and  had  brought  back  to  the  Congress  Dickinson, 
one  of  the  chiefs,  who  had  left  them  and  put  on  the  King's 
colours.  A  pamphlet  called  *  Commom  Sense,'  supposed 
to  be  written  by  Dr.  Franklin,  was  come  over,  in  which 
they  disclaimed  Royalty  and  all  connection  with  this 
country. 

lOtk.  Temple  Luttrell  abused  Lord  George  Germaine 
in  the  grossest  terms,  and  for  a  long  time,  in  the  House 
of  Commons.  He  said,  flight  was  the  only  safety  that 
remained  for  the  royal  army,  and  he  saw  one  who  had 
set  the  example  in  Germany,  and  was  Jit  to  lead  them 
on  such  an  occasion.  Lord  George  said  not  a  word  in 
reply. 


1776.  NEW  PEERAGES.  35 

12th.  Twelve  new  peerages  were  declared.1  The  King 
had  involved  himself  in  so  many  promises,  and  so  many 
coronets  had  been  asked,  that  for  some  years  no  peers 
had  been  created.  Twelve  peers  were  as  many  as  had 
created  clamour  at  the  end  of  Queen  Anne's  reign.  The 
new  creations  were :  Lord  Caermarthen,  called  up  to  the 
House  of  Lords ;  the  Duchess  of  Argyll  a  Baroness,  that 
her  son,  Duke  Hamilton,  might  be  an  English  peer ;  Lord 
Polwarth,  son  of  the  Earl  of  Marchmont ;  Lord  Mount- 
stewart,  of  Lord  Bute ;  Sir  Edward  Hawke ;  Sir  Jeffery 
Amherst;  George  Onslow;  George  Pitt;  Mr.  Eider;  Mr.  Fo- 
ley;  and  Sir  Brownlow  Cust;  with  Mr.  Southwell,  to  whom 
the  Barony  of  Clifford,  then  in  abeyance,  had  been  allotted. 
Some  of  these  were  well  entitled  to  the  rank  ;  some  were 
attended  with  extraordinary  circumstances.  Sir  Edward 
Ilawke  was  one  of  the  principal  heroes  of  the  last  war, 
in  which  Sir  Jeffery  Amherst  had  distinguished  himself 
too.  Lord  Caermarthen's  was  a  favour,  and  no  new  peerage. 
Singular  was  the  fortune  of  the  Duchess  of  Argyll.  She 
and  her  sister,  the  celebrated  Lady  Coventry,  were  Irish 
girls  (Gunning)  of  no  fortune,  and  scarce  gentlewomen  but 
by  their  mother.2  They  had  been  designed  for  the  stage. 
The  wonderful  beauty  of  their  faces  and  persons  had 
captivated  the  Earl  of  Coventry  and  Duke  Hamilton.  The 
younger  had  preserved  the  fairest  reputation ;  and  on 
Duke  Hamilton's  death  she  was  sought  in  marriage  by 
the  Duke  of  Bridgewater,  but  preferred  the  Duke  of 
Argyll,  and  became  mother  of  both  those  formerly  great 


1  When  these  twelve  peerages  were  the  accession  of  George  III. ;  and  the 

gazetted,  parallels  were  made  between  Lords  now  amounted  to  237.— D. 
them  and  the  famous  creation  of  twelve         2  The   lion.  Bridget  Bourke,    third 

in  Queen  Anne's  time,  and  the  old  jocu-  daughter  of  Theobald,  sixth  Viscount 

lur  question  was  asked,   whether  the  Mayo.     The  Bourkes  had  Plantageuet 

twelve  would  be  bound  to  speak  through  blood  in  them, — quite  enough  thereof 

their  foreman.    Thirty-four  new  peers  to  compensate  for  the  inferior  "  tap  "  of 

had  now  been  added  to  the  House  Bince  the  humble  but  honest  Gunnings. — D. 

D    2 


36  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

and  contending  houses:  and  now  by  the  favour  of  the 
Queen,  to  whom  she  was  lady  of  the  bedchamber,  and 
with  whom  she  had  been  so  ill  two  years  before  as  to  have 
thought  of  quitting  her  place,  became  from  an  Irish  girl 
the  source  of  new  honour  to  the  proud  House  of  Hamilton. 
That  Duke  and  the  Duke  of  Queensberry  had  English 
Dukedoms,  but  had  been  excluded  from  seats  in  parlia- 
ment, though  the  latter  had  enjoyed  his.  This  Barony 
seemed  to  allow  that  rejection,  though  neither  had  ever 
condescended  to  be  of  the  sixteen,  and  was  hard  on 
Queensberry,  though  of  little  consequence,  as  he  was  past 
seventy  and  had  no  children.  Yet  there  was  something 
childishly  contradictory  in  this  new  Barony  to  that  of  Lord 
Mounstewart,  conferred  at  the  same  moment.  His  mother, 
Lady  Bute,  had  been  created  a  Baroness  at  the  beginning 
of  the  reign,  that  it  might  descend  to  him  ;  yet  some 
lawyers  having  started  a  doubt  whether,  if  his  father 
should  die  before  his  mother,  Lord  Mountstewart,  then 
a  Scotch  peer,  could  inherit,  an  English  peerage  was 
prepared  for  Duke  Hamilton,  who  was  already  a  Scotch 
peer — so  little  consistence  was  there  in  the  acts  of  the 
Court. 

Lord  Polwarth's  Barony  seemed  almost  as  unnecessary 
as  Lord  Caermarthen's.  He  was  an  only  child,  had  mar- 
ried the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Marchioness  of  Grey 
(Baroness  Lucas),  so  that,  had  he  had  children,  they  would 
inherit  an  English  peerage,  and  he  had  none.  George 
Onslow's  was  still  more  absurd.  Lord  Onslow,  to  whom 
he  was  heir,  was  past  sixty,  childless,  and  dying ;  but  he 
had  been  disappointed  of  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
and,  being  a  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  thought  it  below  his 
dignity  not  to  be  in  either  House  of  Parliament.  George 
Pitt  had  sued  for  the  Barony  of  Morley,  in  abeyance 


1776.  NEW  PEERAGES.  37 

between  him  and  Lord  Portmore.  He  now  took  the  title 
of  Rivers,  from  which  family  he  was  descended  by  a  female. 
Mr.  Rider's  was  a  case  of  great  hardship  ;  his  father,  Sir 
Dudley  Rider,  Attorney-General,  had  actually  been  made 
a  peer  in  the  last  reign,  but  died  before -the  patent  had 
passed  the  seal,  and  it  was  stopped.  He  had  now  married 
the  Bishop  of  London's  daughter,  was  a  worthy  man,  rich, 
and  a  speaker  in  Parliament,  and  obtained  justice.  Sir 
Brownlow  Gust  was  son  of  the  last  Speaker,  and  heir  of 
the  last  Brownlow,  Viscount  Tirconnel.  Mr.  Foley  was 
exceedingly  rich,  a  Tory,  and  heir  of  the  Lord  Foley,  one 
of  Queen  Anne's  twelve,  all  recommendations  in  this 
rc'ign. 

Mr.  Southwell  had  experienced  three  uncommon  hard- 
ships, and  well  merited  this  favour.  His  grandfather's 
mother  had  walked  at  Queen  Mary's  funeral  as  Baroness 
of  Cromwell  in  her  own  right,  but  her  son  could  never 
obtain  his  writ.  Mr.  Southwell's  mother  was  only  daughter 
of  Lady  Sondes,  second  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Thanet, 
who  had  inherited  the  Barony  of  Clifford  from  the  Earls  of 
Cumberland.  That  Barony,  by  Lord  Thanet's  death,  had 
fallen  in  abeyance  between  his  five  daughters.  The  two 
eldest  being  married  to  the  Earl  of  Salisbury  and  Lord 
Sondes,  heir  of  the  Earl  of  Rockingham,  and  each  having 
sons  who  would  be  Earls,  George  II.  had  given  the  Barony 
to  the  third  sister,  wife  of  Lord  Lovel,  afterwards  Earl  of 
Leicester.  He  and  she  losing  their  only  son,  Lord  Coke, 
and  Lady  Clifford  dying  without  issue  the  last  year,  the 
Barony  became  in  abeyance  again  amongst  the  represen- 
tatives of  the  four  other  sisters.  Lady  Sondes  had  had 
three  sons,  two  of  whom  had  become  Earls  of  Rocking- 
ham, and  both  dying  without  issue,  Thomas,  the  younger 
of  the  brothers,  had  left  his  estate  from  his  only  sister's 

G*J  -I  ** 
01,  >- 


38 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLB. 


MAY, 


son,  Mr.  Southwell,  to  his  aunt's3  second  son,  Mr.  Monson, 
since  created  Lord  Sondes,  on  condition  of  his  taking  the 
name  of  Watson — probably  to  survive  that  family,  as 
Mr.  Southwell  had  a  good  estate.  He  now  recovered  one 
of  the  advantages  he  had  missed,  and  to  which  he  was  so 
well  entitled. 

At  this  time  was  brought  into  Parliament  a  bill  (for  one 
year)  for  erecting  galleys  on  the  Thames 4  for  employing 
,  criminals, — as  convicts,  by  the  American  war,  could  not  be 
!  transported,  as  usual,  to  the  plantations.  They  were  first 
intended  to  be  sent  to  Africa,  but  our  Governors  there  had 
remonstrated  against  receiving  them.  In  time  of  warm 
Opposition  galley-slaves  would  have  occasioned  the  loudest 
clamour :  now  it  raised  none.  Even  Lord  John  Caven- 
dish, a  hearty  Whig  patriot,  supported  it  on  the  humane 
principle  of  wishing  to  establish  the  punishment  in  lieu  of 
death  for  robberies,  which,  in  spite  of  all  the  laws,  and  of 
the  /vagabonds  lately  enrolled  for  America,  were  never  so 
frequent,  from  the  enormous  dissipation  of  all  orders  of 
men,  and  from  the  outrageous  spirit  of  gaming  which  had 
\  spread  from  the  fashionable  young  men  of  quality  to  the 
ladies  and  to  the  lowest  ranks  of  the  people. 

\7th.  General  Smith  was  committed  to  the  King's 
Bench  prison,  on  conviction  of  bribery  at  Hindon,  on 
Mr.  Grenville's  bill.  Young  George  Grenville,  Sir  George 
Young,  George  Byng,  and  some  others,  had  for  two  years 
been  labouring  to  disfranchise  Hindon  and  Shaftsbury  for 


3  Married  to  Lord  Monson. 

4  In  the  volume  of  Egerton  Papers, 
edited  for  the  Camden  Society  by  Mr. 
Payne  Collier,  there  is  reference  made 
to  the  introduction  into   England,  by 
Queen  Elizabeth,   of   the    continental 
system   of  galleys  and  forced  labour. 
The  Queen,  it  appears,   had   built   a 
single  galley,  and  had  others  in  prepa- 
ration.   To  man  the  former  she  selected 


a  crew  from  the  prisons, — a  change  for 
the  crew,  considering  what  prisons 
then  were,  that  must  have  been  very 
satisfactory  to  the  labouring  captives. 
The  system,  however,  did  not  succeed. 
Transportation  to  our  North  American 
colonies  was  the  first  kind  of  banish- 
ment, united  with  hard  labour,  which 
was  extensively  adopted  by  us. — D. 


1770. 


GENERAL  SMITH. 


39 


the  notorious  corruption  of  those  two  boroughs ;  but  just 
now,  at  the  end  of  the  session,  the  adversaries  to  Grenvillc's 
bill  had  thrown  out  that  bill  of  disfranchisement,  and,  on 
issuing  the  new  writ,  General  Smith  had  again  presented 
himself,  and  been  returned  for  Hindon  ;  the  return  had  even 
arrived  on  the  1 6th ;  but  not  having  been  certified  to  the 
Clerk  of  the  Crown,  Lord  Mansfield  committed  the 
General.  This  man  had  from  a  cheesemonger's  son  risen 
to  an  insolence  of  wealth  by  plunder  in  the  Indies.  His 
wife  was  covered  with  chains  of  pearls  and  diamonds,  and 
he  himself,  who  had  been  drawn  by  Foote,  in  the  *  Nabob,' 
under  the  character  of  Matthew  Mite,5  was  the  deepest  of 
all  deep  gamesters  in  London.  Being  excluded  from  the 
fashionable  club  of  young  men  of  quality  at  Almack's,  and 
wishing  to  plunder  them  like  the  Indies,  he  and  a  set  of 
sharpers  had  formed  a  plan  for  a  new  club,  which,  by  the 
excess  of  play,  should  draw  all  the  young  extravagants 
thither.  They  built  a  magnificent  house  in  St.  James's 
street,  furnished  it  gorgeously,  and  enrolled  both  the  clubs 
at  White's  and  that  of  Almack's.  The  titular  master  of 
the  house  the  first  night  acquainted  the  richest  and  most 
wasteful  of  the  members  that  they  might  be  furnished  in 
the  house  with  loans  of  ready  money,  even  as  far  as  forty 
thousand  pounds.  This  pernicious  seminary,  erected,  in 
defiance  of  so  many  laws,  at  the  very  gate  of  the  King's 
palace,  and  menacing  ruin  to  their  heirs  to  the  most 
opulent  of  the  Legislature,  was  tolerated  by  a  Court  that 
delighted  in  seeing  the  great  Lords  and  Commoners  reduced 


s  The  '  Nabob  '  was  first  produced  at 
tin-  Hayinarket  on  the  29th  June,  1772  ; 
Foote  playing  Sir  Matthew  Mite,  in 
which  character  he  was  only  approached 
l'\  I'.ilim T.  In  tliia  piece  the  Society 
of  Antiquaries  conies  in  for  a  good  share 
of  satire,  and  the  club-morals  of  the 
time  arc  illustrated  in  the  circumstance 
of  Sir  Matthew  being  requested  not  to 


allude  to  "hanging,"  as  a  member's 
brother  hod  so  finished  his  career.  Sir 
Matthew  subsequently  d ing  a  mem- 
ber, Touchit  replies,  "  That's  right ! 
stick  to  that  I  for  though  the  Christian 
club  may  have  some  fears  of  the  gal- 
lows, they  don't  value  damnation  a 
farthingr."— D. 


40  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAT, 

to  a  state  of  beggary  and  dependence,  and  which,  affecting 
piety,  winked  at  such  giant  vice,  while  many  members  of 
the  legislature  partook  of  the  flagrant  dissipation,  and  none 
stirred  a  finger  to  check  it.  The  cries  of  a  civil  war  were 
drowned  in  such  a  torrent  of  dissolute  manners,  and  the 
clergy  employed  all  their  labours  in  promoting  the  tyran- 
nic views  of  the  Court.  Charles  II.  corrupted  the  morals 
of  his  age,  yet  virtue  and  patriotism  shot  up  amidst  the 
tares  he  sowed.  The  uncommunicative  selfishness  and  pride 
of  George  III.  confined  him  to  domestic  virtues.  His 
people  were  welcome  to  be  as  abandoned  as  they  pleased  ; 
and  when  their  vices  made  them  necessitous,  the  rewards 
destined  to  virtue  were  showered  on  the  profligate,  not 
to  correct  their  want  of  principles,  but  to  ensure  it. 

17/A.  Came  accounts  of  a  change  in  the  French 
Ministry.  Louis  XVI.,  a  very  weak  prince  with  some 
rays  of  good  qualities,  had  trusted  the  chief  power  with 
the  old  Count  de  Maurepas,  who  gained  no  credit  by  his 
administration,  nor  showed  any  genius  or  firmness ;  at  most 
the  arts  of  an  aged  courtier.  The  young  Queen  had  been 
tutored  by  the  Empress  Queen,  her  mother,  to  endeavour 
the  recall  of  the  Duke  of  Choiseul,  and  had  early  suc- 
ceeded so  far  as  to  obtain  the  revocation  of  his  banishment. 
Proud  of  her  credit,  she  boasted  of  it.  Old  Maurepas 
reported  the  vaunt  to  the  King ;  and  as  weak  men,  who  are 
most  easily  governed,  are  afraid  of  it,  his  Majesty,  who 
humoured  the  Queen  in  most  things,  constantly  denied  to 
grant  her  any  farther  favours  for  Choiseul.  Indeed,  Mau- 
repas, to  secure  the  exclusion  of  so  formidable  a  rival, 
whispered  to  the  King  that  Choiseul  had  poisoned  the 
Dauphin  his  father — the  very  art  employed  by  Madame 
de  Pompadour  against  Maurepas  himself,  whom  she 
accused  of  poisoning  her  predecessor,  the  Duchess  of 


1776.  FRENCH  POLITICS.  41 

Chateauroux.  Maurepas  had  introduced  two  men  who 
had  imbibed  all  the  humane  doctrines  of  modern  philo- 
sophy. These  were  Monsieur  Turgot,  set  at  the  head  of 
the  finances,  and  the  virtuous  President  de  Malesherbes, 
who,  extremely  against  his  inclination,  was  made  Secretary 
of  State  for  Paris,  in  which  department  he  showered  down 
blessings,  and  in  vain  attempted  to  extend  his  benevolence 
by  reforming  all  crying  abuses,  in  concurrence  with  Turgotj 
who  resolved  to  brave  every  danger  and  difficulty  in  cor- 
recting an  oppressive  constitution.  When  Intendant  of 
a  province,  Turgot  had  raised  the  Corvees  within  his 
jurisdiction,  and  now  set  about  abolishing  them,  and  other 
crying  grievances,  obtaining  the  King's  consent  and  sup- 
port. The  clergy  and  gentry,  whose  estates  would  have 
suffered  by  this  relief  of  the  woes  of  the  poor,  united  against 
the  salutary  reform :  and  the  restored  Parliament  in  the 
same  cause,  and  for  the  same  interests,  remonstrated 
against  the  King's  arrets,  thus  justifying  the  despotic 
Chancellor  Maurepas,  who  had  substituted  a  new  Parlia- 
ment in  their  places ;  for  they  now  showed  how  little  true 
patriotism  was  in  their  hearts,  though  they  had  so  boldly 
withstood  the  late  King.  They  were  incited  to  this 
resistance  by  their  old  Tribune,  the  Prince  of  Conti,  a 
lover  of  faction  from  no  virtue,  but  from  pride.  Their 
opposition  was  so  stout  that  most  of  the  Council  advised 
the  King  to  recede.  Maurepas,  timid,  irresolute,  and  now 
jealous  of  Turgot's  credit,  would  take  no  part.  The 
intrepid  Turgot  persisted,  carried  the  King  to  a  Lit  de 
Justice,  and  forced  obedience  to  all  the  godlike  acts. 

In  the  mean  time  neither  the  Queen  nor  Maurepas 
was  idle.  The  Queen,  young,  beautiful,  of  a  commanding 
air,  had  many  of  the  faults  of  her  age  and  sex.  She 
adored  her  own  beauty,  and  liked  its  being  homaged  ;  was 


42  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

extravagantly  fond  of  dress  and  pleasure ;  was  capricious, 
fickle,  and  indiscreet,  with  an  ardent  desire  of  command. 
The  King,  though  incapable  of  tasting  her  beauty,  was 
fond  of  her,  and  at  least  indulgent ;  and  as  no  other  woman 
could  be  her  rival,  the  number  of  hours  that  he  passed 
alone  with  her  could  but  augment  her  influence  over  a 
x^  husband  who  had  no  real  firmness.  She  had  openly  and 
zealously  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Comte  de  G nines. 
Messieurs  de  Turgot  and  Malesherbes,  who  had  no  opir^on 
of  the  Count's  innocence,  and  the  former  of  whoir  had 
procured  his .  recall,  had  procured  his  being  so  coolly 
received  by  the  King,  that,  after  long  being  denied  an 
audience,  when  he  at  last  obtained  it,  and  begged  to  know 
the  cause  of  his  sudden  recall,  he  could  extract  nc  .ther 
,  answer  from  the  King  than  "1'Ambassacle  etoit 

and  after  his  audience,  when  the  King  talked  to  the  (J.ioiti- 
du  Chatelet,  De  Guines's  predecessor  in  the  embassy,  the 
King  said  nothing  to  De  Guines,  who  stood  next,  but 
talked  to  Chatelet  on  England.  Maurepas  and  Vergcunes, 
to  increase  the  Queen's  animosity  to  Turgot  and  Males- 
herbes, by  profiting  of  their  indisposition  to  De  G  .lines 
persuaded  M.  de  Malesherbes,  who  knew  nothing 
Court,  to  represent  to  her  Majesty  that  she  ought  ;  ;.f  to 
support  so  guilty  a  man  as  De  Guines.  Malesherb< 
into  the  snare,  was  laughed  at  by  the  Queen,  and  i  \>  all 
'  Paris,  which  loves  to  laugh,  and  was  encouraged  =v  bis 
various  enemies,  particularly  by  the  clergy,  nobility  and 
army,  who  did  not  taste  the  elevation  of  two  civi  roen 
of  no  illustrious  birth,  and  much  less  their  plans  f  re- 
formation. The  clergy  hated  them  as  favourers  <>»  uie 
Protestants  and  the  philosophers.  Malesherbes,  hurt  at 
the  "  pas  de  clerc "  he  had  made,  asked  leave  to  resign 
and  return  to  a  virtuous  repose  which  he  had  unwillingly 


l"7fi.  FRENCH  POLITICS.  43 

sacrificed  in  vain  to  serve  the  public.  The  King  resisted 
for  a  short  time ;  but  the  Queen  taking  advantage  of  the 
moment,  not  only  the  resignation  of  Malesherbes  was 
accepted,  but,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  France,  Turgot 
himself  was  suddenly  dismissed,  though  the  King  himself, 
but  a  week  before,  had  said,  "  I  believe  there  is  nobody  1  / 
but  Turgot  and  I  who  have  any  idea  of  justice."  But  this 
levity  was  not  new.  Just  before  his  grandfather's  death 
he  had  told  the  Chancellor  to  go  on  in  his  despotic  plans, 
and  promised  to  support  him  when  King.  The  Chancellor 
was  the  first  he  banished.  The  Presidency  of  all  the  Councils 
was  given  to  Maurepas ;  but  he  himself  was  the  first  to 
point  out  to  the  public  the  author  of  the  change,  and  with 
whom  power  lay,  for  he  stooped  to  beg  of  the  Queen  the 
recall  of  his  nephew  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon,  pleading  the 
share  he  himself  had  had  in  the  favour  shown  to  the  Comte 
de  Guines,  who  was  now  made  a  Duke,  and  thanked  by 
the  King  in  a  letter  under  his  hand  for  his  services.  The 
Queen  took  care  to  confirm  the  ostentation  of  her  power, 
for  she  treated  Maurepas  very  ill,  and  refused  to  grant 
his  suit  for  his  nephew ;  and  a  Monsieur  de  Cluni  was 
brought  in,  who  had  been  employed  in  the  marine  under 
the  Duke  de  Praslin  during  Choiseul's  Ministry. 

The  Comte  de  Noailles  was  named  Ambassador  to 
England,  a  poor  security  to  us,  when  two  such  pacific  men 
as  Turgot  and  Malesherbes  were  removed.  The  power 
of  the  Queen,  and  the  probability  of  Choiseul  being 
replaced,  were  a  thunder-clap  to  our  Court,  now  in  the 
utmost  despair  on  the  affairs  of  America.  The  stocks 
immediately  fell,  and  the  arrogance  of  the  Ministers  was 
so  sunk,  that  Lord  North  said  to  a  person  from  whom  I 
had  it,  "  I  wish  the  time  was  come  for  my  being  abused 
for  having  made  a  disgraceful  peace  with  America  !' 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

Peace,  even  before  the  news  from  France,  had  become 
the  measure.  They  had  hurried  away  Lord  Howe  out  of 
town  to  Portsmouth  the  day  before  his  brother's  retreat 
from  Boston  was  sure  of  being  mentioned  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  lest  Lord  Howe's  want  of  sense  should  draw 
him  into  betraying  any  secrets  in  defence  of  his  brother — 
yet  to  that  want  of  sense  they  trusted  so  momentous  a 
negotiation  I  They  hurried  him  off  with  vast  powers,  it 
was  said,  and  with  few  instructions,  hoping  he  would 
hazard  a  disavantageous  peace,  and  be  liable  to  bear  the 
blame.  I  have  heard  too,  but  do  not  know  if  true,  that 
he  obtained  a  full  pardon  for  whatever  he  should  do,  under 
the  King's  sign  manual.  If  he  did,  some  friend  more 
shrewd  than  himself  must  have  suggested  that  salvo. 

Whether  the  desperate  situation  of  affairs  before,  or  the 
news  from  France,  alarmed  the  Junto,  and  made  them 
wish  to  detach  themselves  from  Lord  North,  I  cannot 
tell,  but  at  the  India  House  Lord  Bute's  friends,  under 
Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  joined  the  Opposition,  and  defeated 
Lord  North  in  his  attempt  to  reverse  a  question  that  had 
been  carried  there  for  recalling  Hastings  and  Barwell. 
The  Butists  pretended  that  two  younger  sons  of  Lord 
Bute  and  Elliot,  just  returned  from  India,  had  contracted 
friendships  there  which  their  fathers  favoured,  but  neither 
father  would  have  deserted  the  Minister  without  a  serious 
purpose  of  betraying  him. 

General  Conway,  who,  with  so  much  spirit  and  so 
much  indifference  to  his  interest,  had  persevered  in  con- 
demning and  opposing  the  American  war,  was  shocked 
to  see  the  session  expire  without  the  smallest  communi- 
cation to  Parliament.  The  Ministers  had  haughtily 
rejected  every  overture  towards  peace  from  the  Opposi- 
tion ;  more  imperiously  had  withheld  every  communication 


177G.  GENERAL  CONWAY.  45 

of  measures  and  events ;  had,  especially  in  the  House  of 
Lords  by  the  mouth  of  Lord  Sandwich,  denied,  exag- 
gerated, falsified,  not  only  all  intelligence,  but  every 
circumstance ;  had  drawn  all  decision  on  a  war,  that  they 
had  affected  to  call  parliamentary,  to  the  King ;  and  had, 
by  the  contradictory  language  of  Lord  North  and  Lord 
George  Germaine,  left  the  Parliament  wholly*  in  doubt 
whether  they  meant  peace  or  war,  and,  if  peace,  whether 
they  would  grant  America  a  moderate  peace,  or  whether 
they  would  expect  implicit  submission.  The  venal  Par- 
liament— I  mean  the  great  majority — had  servilely  ac- 
quiesced under  this  treatment ;  the  public  had  been  as 
patient,  and  bore  being  shut  out  from  all  debates. 
Conway  determined  to  press  the  Court  to  speak  out,  and 
to  call  for  an  explanation  of  their  meaning,  whether  Par- 
liament was  to  have  anything  to  do  in  the  negotiation  or 
not.  A  few  days  before  the  conclusion,  he,  in  a  very 
serious  and  pathetic  manner,  put  several  questions  to  the 
Ministers  in  the  House  of  Commons.  They  deigning  to 
make  no  answer,  he  gave  them  notice  he  would,  on  the 
eve  of  the  prorogation,  state  his  questions  in  a  motion. 
I,  who  well,  I  thought,  knew  the  Ministers  and  the  subter- 
fuges of  Lord  Mansfield,  expected  that  the  previous  notice 
would  furnish  the  latter  with  s'ome  art  of  chicanery  to 
evade  the  motion ;  but  disaster  and  dismay  seemed  to  have 
blunted  their  wits,  and  they  quietly  expected  and  stood 
a  scene  of  confusion  and  disgrace,  even  without  arguments, 
and  took  up  with  the  cold  satisfaction  of  a  majority  against 
the  motion.  Lord  Hertford,  indeed,  tried  all  his  Court 
rhetoric  to  dissuade  his  brother  from  his  intention,  even 
after  he  had  notified  it  publicly.  But  Conway  was  im- 
moveable ;  and  I  do  not  doubt  but  the  credit  he  gained 
comforted  Lord  Hertford,  as  the  despair  of  the  Ministry 


46 


LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


MAY, 


made  him  see  how  useful  his  brother  would  be  to  him 
if  a  change  should  happen. 

On  the  22nd  Con  way  moved  for  an  Address  to  the 
King,  that  he  would  be  pleased  to  communicate  to  the 
House  so  much  of  his  instructions  to  Lord  and  General 
Howe  as  related  to  the  conditions  on  which  it  was  pro- 
posed to  make  peace.  He  spoke  an  hour  and  a  quarter 
with  most  pathetic  eloquence  and  weight,  opened  the 
whole  scene  of  mismanagement,  dwelt  on  Lord  Hills- 
borough's  treacherous  letter,  showed  the  improbability 
of  the  Americans  treating  with  us,  the  impossibility  of 
concluding  without  recourse  to  Parliament,  urged  on  the 
country  gentlemen  their  fatal  delusion,  spoke  of  his  own 
disinterestedness  and  moderation,  avowed  his  disposition 
to  support  the  Administration,  with  whom  he  dissented 
but  on  America,  commended  Lord  North,  whom  he 
allowed  to  be  the  best-humoured  of  Ministers,  pointed  out 
the  hopelessness  of  the  approaching  campaign,  and  dis- 
played the  impending  danger  of  a  war  with  France,  and 
the  nakedness  of  our  situation.  He  quoted  a  letter  from 
Voltaire  to  the  King  of  Prussia,  in  which  both  those 
men  of  genius 6  condemned  our  blindness;  and*  in  short, 
by  the  most  consummate  abilities,  graces,  seriousness,  and 
eloquence,  charmed  almost  all  his  audience,  though  he 
failed  of  gaining  any  votes  from  the  majority,  which 
accompanied  with  their  own  disgrace  the  wretched 
defence  made  by  the  Ministers — in  truth  by  only  two  of 
them,  Lord  North  and  Lord  George  Germaine,  the 
latter  of  whom  was  dragged  up  to  speak,  and  never  made 


6  "  Both  those  men  of  genius"  had 
been  recently  reviling  each  other,  and 
Voltaire  had  only  very  lately  written 
thus  of  his  quondam  friend  and  pa- 
tron : — 


"  Hal  du  dlcu  de  1'amour,  chcr  an  dieu  des  com- 
bats, 

II  baigna  dans  le  sang  Europe  et  sa  patrin ; 
Cent  millo  homines  par  lui  reyurent  le  tr<5pas, 
Et  pas  un  n'en  rcyut  la  vie." 

— D. 


1776.  CON  WAY'S  MOTION  FOR  AN  ADDRESS.  47 

a  poorer  figure.  They  pleaded  the  old  stale  pretence  of 
not  discovering  measures.  Lord  George  was  so  dis- 
mayed that  he  had  the  desperate  courage  to  tell  a  gross 
untruth, — he  denied  ever  having  said  that  he  should  insist 
on  implicit  obedience  from  the  colonies,  which  all  the 
House  had  heard  from  him,  and  pretended  to  explain  it 
away  by  other  words,  though  to  the  same  effect,  protesting 
he  had  only  said  he  would  not  make  peace  while  the 
colonies  were  in  arms — what  would  that  be  but  implicit 
submission  ?  The  Junto  kept  silence,  as  usual  in  difficult 
moments,  hoping  to  keep  their  hold,  though  the  Ministers 
should  be  changed.  Lord  John  Cavendish  seconded 
Con  way;  and  Burke,  Charles  Fox,  T.  Townshend,  Colonel 
Barre',  Governor  Johnston,  and  Hartley,  supported  the 
motion.  Burke  paid  the  most  profuse  compliments  to 
Con  way's  abilities  and  virtues,  avowing  how  proud  he 
should  be  to  serve  under  him ;  yet  with  his  usual  jealousy 
condemning  Conway's  partial  opposition  to  bad  Ministers, 
and  vaunting  his  own  unaltered  virtue.  Barre'  laid  all 
their  faults  heavily  and  wittily  on  the  Ministers  ;  and 
when  Lord  North  pleaded  wishing  that  the  House  saw 
Lord  HoWe's  instructions,  Johnston  said  anybody  might 
see  the  commission  for  two  shillings  where  it  was  regis- 
tered— it  was  the  real  instructions  they  ought  to  see. 
Young  Adam,  the  Scot,  as  usual,  condemned  the  Ministers, 
wishing  for  anybody  that  would  correct  their  faults — no 
doubt  with  a  salvo  for  the  Junto.  The  Bedfords,  and 
even  Rigby,  were  mute,  though  nobody  hated  Con  way  so 
much  as  the  latter,  and  he  owned  afterwards  how  sorely 
he  bore  Conway's  triumph.  The  House  sat  till  half  an 
hour  past  ten.  The  motion  rejected  by  171  to  85. 

That  very  night  Lord  Hertford  owned  to  me  the  dis- 
may of  the  Ministers,  and  the  impossibility  of  their  mainr 


48  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

taining  their  hold  a  year.  The  best,  he  said,  he  thought 
Lord  George  Germaine  could  do,  would  be  to  run  away 
in  six  months.  Till  now,  he  said,  he  had  thought  we 
should  subdue  America — I  believe  he  did,  or  he  would 
not  have  been  so  zealous.  On  the  30th  of  April,  when 
Wilkes's  motion  had  been  defeated  by  a  great  majority, 
he  twice  repeated  in  my  presence,  to  taunt  me,  "  This  is 
the  way  Government  carries  questions  in  this  reign."  I 
now  contented  myself  with  blowing  up  his  personal  alarm, 
painted  the  probability  of  a  French  war,  and  said,  "  My 
Lord,  you  have  more  reason  to  tremble  than  most  men, 
for  undoubtedly  the  first  place  they  will  land  in  will  be 
Ireland,  which  is  left  so  exposed."  There  Lord  Hertford's 
great  estate  lay. 

On  the  23rd  Sir  George  Saville  and  Hartley  moved  to 
address  the  King,  not  to  prorogue,  but  only  to  adjourn  the 
Parliament,  stating  most  artfully  the  tremendous  posture 
of  our  affairs. — See  their  arguments  well  stated  in  the 
London  Chronicle  of  May  25. 

24th.  The  Parliament  was  prorogued.  The  stocks  fell 
/  every  day.  About  this  time  Stanley  and  Jenkinson  went 
to  France ;  probably  to  sift  into  the  revolution  there,  and 
probably  to  deprecate  a  war.  During  the  winter,  seeing 
the  weakness  of  Opposition,  I  had  tried  to  persuade  them 
to  offer  a  protest  against  the  measures  to  the  House  of 
Commons,  which,  though  it  was  sure  of  being  rejected  as 
unprecedented,  yet  they  might  print  it  for  their  own 
vindication,  in  answer  to  the  slanders  thrown  on  them  as 
'promoters  of  the  rebellion.  This  many  approved,  but 
nothing  was  done.  After  the  session  I  recommended  to 
them  to  publish  an  apology  for  their  conduct,  proving 
that  they  had  foretold  all  the  ill  success  that  had  already 
attended  the  King's  counsels  and  arms,  which  would  have 


1776. 


THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES'S  OFFICERS. 


49 


raised  their  credit  in  the  nation ;  but  there  was  no  sense, 
no  activity  amongst  them,  and  I  was  not  minded. 

28th.  It  was  suddenly  declared  that  the  King  had  dis- 
missed Dr.  Markham  (Bishop  of  Chester)  and  Mr.  Jack- 
son 7  from  being  Preceptor  and  Sub- Preceptor  to  the  Prince 
of  Wales  ;  and  that  Lord  Holderness  and  Mr.  Smelt,  his 
Royal  Highness's  Governor  and  Sub-Governor,  had  re- 
signed those  posts.  No  reason  was  assigned  for  so  great  a 
revolution.  All  that  got  out  at  first  was,  that  Lord  Hol- 
derness had  been  quarrelling  with  Jackson  for  three  months, 
and  had  said  he  could  not  serve  with  him.  So  inadequate 
a  cause  could  not  at  all  account  for  so  general  a  change, 
nor  satisfy  the  extreme  curiosity  of  mankind  on  so  large  an 
event,  which,  as  Lord  Hertford  said  to  me  that  night, 
must  have  had  weighty  causes  to  surmount  the  King's  dis- 
position to  conceal  everything  as  much  as  he  possibly 
could.  The  next  day  Lord  Bruce  was  named  Governor, 
and  Dr.  Hurd  (Bishop  of  Lichfield  and  Coventry)  Pre- 
ceptor, both  being  told  that  they  were  not  to  choose  their 
own  substitutes  ;  the  former  was  at  the  same  time  created 
Earl  of  Ailesbury.  Bruce  Brudenel,  youngest  brother  of 
Lord  Brudenel  Montagu,  Duke  of  Montagu,  had  been 
adopted  by  his  uncle,  Thomas  Bruce  Earl  of  Ailesbury, 
and  inherited  his  estate.  This  new  Earl  was  a  formal, 
dull  man,  totally  ignorant  of  and  unversed  in  the  world, 
and  a  Tory ;  very  unexceptionable  in  his  character,  suited 


7  Cyril  Jackson,  who  in  1783  became 
Dean  of  Christ  Church, — a  post  which 
he  retained  for  26  years.  He  was  made 
sub-preceptor  to  the  princes  in  1771, 
and  died  in  possession  of  no  preferment 
in  1819.  Parr,  Porteus,  and  all  the 
scholars  of  his  day,  looked  to  him  as  to 
an  authority  that  was  not  to  be  dis- 
puted. He  enjoyed  the  distinction  of 
twice  declining  to  be  elevated  to  the 

VOL.  II. 


episcopal  bench, — but  it  was  when  liis 
habits  of  life  were  formed,  his  fortune 
large,  liis  duty  light,  and  his  disinclina- 
tion to  assume  enlarged  responsibility 
not  to  be  surmounted.  He  was  75  when 
he  died.  His  statue  in  the  Chapel  at 
Christ  Church  was  executed  by  Chan- 
trey,  after  the  excellent  portrait  in  the 
Hall,  by  Owen.— D. 


50 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


MAY, 


to  the  mystery  affected  by  the  King,  but  totally  unfit  to 
educate  the  Prince  of  Wales.  Bishop  Ilurd  had  acquired 
a  great  name  by  several  works  of  slender  merit,  was  a 
gentle,  plausible  man,  affecting  a  singular  decorum  that 
endeared  hjm  highly  to  devout  old  ladies.8  Lord  Ashburn- 
ham  had  been  designated  for  Governor,  as  well  as  the  last 
Earl  of  Bristol,  if  Lord  Holderness  had  died;  but  the 
second  had  died,  and  the  first  had  not  made  his  court  by 
cavilling  at  the  lesser  profit  of  Groom  of  the  Stole  compared 
with  that  of  Master  of  the  Great  Wardrobe ;  and  when  the 
King  had  once  taken  an  objection  to  him,  he  could  but  per- 
ceive how  close,  artful,  and  dangerous  a  man  Lord  Ash- 
burnham  was  ;  and  when  once  seen  in  that  light,  his  signal 
ingratitude  to  his  old  patron  the  late  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
whom  he  had  shamefully,  though  his  first  favourite,  aban- 
doned, could  but  be  recollected.  Kings  expect  gratitude, 
whatever  they  feel.  Lord  Ailesbury  protested  he  had  not 
known  anything  of  his  designation  till  the  27th  •,  and  it  was 
true  the  resolution  had  not  been  taken  on  the  whole  mea- 
sure till  the  26th  at  night,  nor  was  Lord  North  or  any 
of  the  Ministers  acquainted  with  the  general  resolution 
till  the  27th,  which  equally  surprised  the  Court  and  the 
town. 

On  the  31s/  Lord  and  Lady  Holderness  were  with  Lord 
and  Lady  Hertford  in  the  evening,  and  the  two  latter 
gave  me  this  account  after  supper,  adding,  they  were  per- 
suaded the  affair  had  gone  much  farther  than  they  were 
acquainted  with,  and  I  found  they  knew  even  more  than 


8  Hurd,  the  son  of  a  Staffordshire 
farmer,  died  Bishop  of  Worcester  in 
1808.  He  was  a  good  deal  to  Warbnr- 
ton  what  Boswell  was  to  Johnson.  Ho 
had  the  bad  taate  to  allow  his  own  name 
to  be  attached  to  the  'Observations  on 
Hume's  Natural  History  of  Religion,' 


written  by  Warburton  ;  but  lie  also  had 
the  good  sense  to  decline  the  primacy 
when  it  was  offered  to  him  in  1783.  "  I 
am  glad  he  did  not  go  to  Lambeth," 
said  Dr.  Johnson,  "  for  after  all  I  fear 
he  is  a  Whig  in  his  heart." — D. 


1770.          PRINCE  OF  WALES  AND  PRINCE  FREDERICK.  51 

they   told.     Lord   Holderness,    who   had    had   a    violent 
humour  in   his  face,   which  struck  in  and  had  fallen  on 
his  hearing  and  his  breast,  had  been  to  seek  relief  in  the 
South   of  France,  whence   he  had  returned  in  the  last 
autumn,  a  little  mended  in  his  health,  but  still  very  deaf. 
On  his  return  he  found  great  prejudices  had  been  instilled 
into  the   mind    of  his  pupils  the   Prince  of  Wales  and 
Prince  Frederick,  Bishop  of  Osnaburgh,  against  him  ;  and 
it   had   grown    so   bad    that   from   last   November   they 
had  treated  his  authority  with  contempt,  and  often  ridi- 
culed him  to  his  face.     This  he  imputed  to  Jackson.     I 
asked  if  Prince  Frederick,  who  was  thought  a  great  favour- 
ite, had  behaved  as  ill  as  the  Prince,  who  it  was  known 
had  a  high  spirit,  as  I  had  guessed  two  or  three  years 
before  from  Lord  Holderness  affecting  to  say  how  tractable 
he  was.     Lord  Hertford  said,  "  Oh !  Prince  Frederick  has 
gone  the  farthest,  and  has  been  the  instrument  to  inflame 
his  brother."     This  was  artful,  as  more  indirect.     I  said  I 
heard  everybody  had  observed  the   day  before   that   the 
King  was  much  fallen  away,  and  looked  very  ill.     Both 
Lord  and  Lady  Hertford   cried  out,    "  Nobody  can  tell 
what  he  has  suffered  for  six  weeks ;"  and  Lord  Hertford 
added,  "  Think  what  he  must  feel  at  finding  already  that 
his  son  is  so  headstrong  that  he  has  not  the  least  authority 
over  him ! "     I  said  I  heard  the   Prince  was  extremely 
in  awe  of  the  Queen.     He  replied,  "Faith!  I  believe  he 
is  in  awe  of  neither."     He  told  me  the  Bishop  of  Chester 
was  sorely  suspected  of  being  at  the  bottom  of  this  plot, 
and  was  a  very  ambitious  man ;  and  that  the  King  had 
nothing   left  but  to  get  rid  of  him   and  Jackson.     The 
Bishop  of  Chester  had  ambitioned  the  Bishopric  of  Win- 
chester on  the  next  vacancy,  and  had  been  more  than  once 
told  that  he  was  not  to  expect  it.     Jackson  had  been  taken 

E  2 


52 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


MAY, 


from  Oxford  with  a  marvellous  character  for  parts  and 
learning ;  but  I  believe  his  monarchic  principles  had  been 
a  greater  recommendation.  Lord  Holderness,  though  so 
good  a  courtier,  had  recommended  Smelt,  a  thorough 
Revolution  Whig ;  and  had  placed  two  other  persons  of  the 
same  principles  about  the  Prince — one  Bude,  a  Swiss  Pro- 
testant, and  Saigas,  mentioned  lower  in  the  text.  Jackson's 
pension  was  continued  to  him,  and  it  was  said  the  Bishop 
was  promised  a  better  bishopric ;  however  he  was  very 
open  in  his  conversation  against  Lord  Holderness,  and 
represented  him  as  most  trifling  and  unfit  for  his  late  charge. 
Both  Markham  and  Jackson  had  been  the  choice  of  Lord 
Mansfield,  and  I  did  not  think  it  very  prudent  to  choose 
Dr.  Hurd,  another  professed  creature  of  Mansfield ;  but  it 
was  the  maxim  of  the  King  to  cajole  all  he  parted  with  or 
disliked,  and,  between  hypocrisy  and  timidity,  he  generally 
attempted  to  soothe  those  he  discarded.  I  said  I  still  did 
not  understand  why  Lord  Holderness  had  resigned  when 
his  enemies  were  removed  !  Lord  Hertford  said  the  King 
had  used  all  manner  of  entreaties  with  him  to  remain  ;  but 
Lord  Holderness  answered  that  the  only  service  he  could 
do  his  Majesty  farther  was  to  retire.  This  spoke  the  aver- 
sion of  the  Prince,  and  how  far  he  had  carried  his  disobe- 
dience. To  mark  approbation  of  the  Earl,  the  King 
immediately  made  his  son-in-law,  the  Marquis  of  Caermar- 
then,9  Lord  of  his  Bedchamber,  in  the  room  of  Lord  Bruce. 
He  offered  a  pension  too  to  Smelt,  who,  with  his  usual 
incorruptible  virtue,  declined  it.  "Why,"  said  the  King; 
"  you  have  but  a  small  fortune  ?  "  "  Enough,  Sir,"  said  he, 
"to  keep  me  independent;"  and  he  absolutely  refused  any 


9  Only  son  of  the  Duke  of  Leeds.  He 
married  Lady  Amelia  Darcy,  the  Earl's 
only  cliild.  On  the  King's  birthday  the 


Queen  gave  Lady  Holderness  a  brace- 
let of  her  hair  set  with  diamonds. 


1776. 


RETIREMENT  OF  LORD  BRUCE. 


53 


premium — following  his  patron  the  Earl,  who,  it  is  justice 
to  say,  acted  wisely  and  handsomely  to  the  King  in  his 
retreat.  Lord  Hertford  told  me  besides,  that  Saigas,  son 
of  a  French  refugee,  and  one  of  the  Prince's  tutors, 
insisted  on  retiring,  too,  from  the  ungovernable  temper  of 
the  Prince.  All  his  servants,  even  to  valets-de-chambre, 
were  changed. 

Yet  even  these  wounds  could  not  be  closed  before  ano- 
ther ridiculous  incident  happened.  Lord  Bruce  had  barely 
taken  possession  of  his  post,  and  dined  once  with  the  Prince, 
when  he  suddenly  retired  into  the  country,  and,  it  was 
said,  even  without  giving  notice  or  taking  leave.  The 
Bishop  of  Lichfield  was  left  to  inform  the  King  that  the 
Governor  did  not  mean  to  return.  It  was  given  out  that 
his  wife,1  who  was  at  the  Bath,  and  mad,  had  written 
to  him  to  say  it  would  kill  her  if  he  accepted  an  employ- 
ment that  would  deprive  her  of  so  much  of  his  company. 
In  fact  Lord  Bruce  did  quit  as  suddenly  as  I  have  said,  and 
then  the  King  pitched  upon  his  eldest  brother,  the  Duke 
of  Montagu,  one  of  the  weakest  and  most  ignorant  men 
living,  for  Governor  to  the  Princes.  The  late  Duchess,2  his 
wife,  had  often  lamented,  with  tears,  in  his  presence,  that  he 
was  not  fit  for  any  of  the  great  offices  of  State. 


1  Daughter  of  Mr.  Hoare  of  Stour- 
head,  and  widow  of  Lord  Dungarvon, 
eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Cork  and 
Orrery. 


3  Lady  Mary  Montagu,  younger 
daughter  of  John  Duke  of  Montagu, 
and  wife  of  George  Brudenel  Earl  of 
Cardigan,  created  Duke  of  Montagu. 


54  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 


JUNE. 


3rd.  THE  wind,  which  had  long  been  easterly,  turning 
to  the  west,  much  intelligence  came  in  from  America  that 
raised  the  desponding  spirits  of  the  Court.  They  had 
received,  or  said  they  had  received,  accounts  that  General 
Worster  and  Colonel  Arnold  had  determined  to  make 
another  attack  on  Quebec  before  any  succours  should 
arrive  there,  and  had  accordingly  attempted  to  storm  it, 
but  had  been  repulsed  with  the  loss  of  1300  men.  A 
New  York  Gazette  was  reported  as  having  been  sent  over, 
which  said  General  Lee  had  been  taken  prisoner  by 
General  Clinton  in  Carolina,  and  accused  him  of  having 
given  himself  up  by  treachery ;  but  the  story  was  a  very 
blind  one.  Other  letters  said  General  Howe  was  safely 
arrived  at  Halifax  with  his  army;  General  Washington 
was  reported  to  be  in  disgrace  with  the  Congress;  and 
v  their  Admiral  Hopkins  was  said  to  be  beaten  and  dis- 
graced with  two  or  three  frigates  by  a  single  ship.  The 
courtiers  exulted  extremely  on  this  cargo  of  good  news, 
and  the  King  behaved  with  great  levity.  Still  the  intel- 
ligence was  so  vague  or  dubious,  that  not  one  of  the  above 
articles  was  mentioned  in  the  Gazette,  and  Lord  North 
had  the  prudence,  on  being  asked  about  the  good  news 
at  his  public  dinner  on  the  King's  birthday,  to  reply,  "We 
have  heard  all  this,  but  have  no  certain  intelligence  ; " 
and  the  Attorney-General  asking  him  if  he  had  a  plan 
ready  on  the  submission  of  America,  he  answered,  "I 


1770.  LORD-LIEUTENANCY  OF  IRELAND.  65 

believe  we  shall  have  time  enough  to  form  one  before  that 
time  comes." 

Lord  Hyde  l  was  created  Earl  of  Clarendon,  and  Lord 
Trevor2  Viscount  Hampden.  These  peers  had  been  con- 
nected with  George  Grenville,  and  were  supposed  to  owe 
their  promotions  to  Lord  Suffolk,  the  patron  of  that 
connection.  Lord  Hyde  was  so  dull  a  man  that  Lord 
John  Cavendish  said  with  a  sneer,  "  The  Ministers  have 
made  a  rebellion,  and  now  they  have  made  a  Lord 
Clarendon  to  write  the  history  of  it." 

The  King,  reviewing  the  Blues,  to  pique  General  Con- 
way  their  colonel,  found  great  fault  with  the  officers  very 
unjustly,  and  said,  "  I  wish  I  could  see  the  Blues  behave 
as  well  as  they  used  to  do."  Mr.  Conway  replied  he  was 
sorry  his  officers  were  blamed  only  to  mortify  him. 

All  the  servants  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  down  to  the 
valets-de-chambre  were  changed.  Colonel  George  Hotham, 
nephew  of  the  Earl  of  Buckingham,  was  appointed  Sub- 
Governor,  and  Mr.  Arnold,  of  St.  John's  College,  Cam- 
bridge, a  celebrated  tutor,  and  chaplain  to  Bishop  Kurd, 
was  made  Sub-Preceptor. 

The  Earl  of  Harcourt's  three  years  in  Ireland  being 
expired,  the  Lord- Lieutenancy  was  offered  to  Lord  Roch- 
ford,  but  he  declined  it,  not  liking  to  reside  there  three 
years.  It  was  also  offered  to  and  refused  by  the  Duke 
of  Marlborough.  The  Earls  of  Hillsborough  and  Bucking- 
ham were  candidates  for  it,  but,  for  what  reason  I  know 
not,  Lord  Harcourt  was  desired  to  stay  there  another  year. 
The  new  Parliament  there  was  chosen. 


Thomas  Villiers,  younger  brother  of     Clarendon  and  Rochester. 


\  the  last  Earl  of  Jersey,   had  married  j       2  Robert  Trevor  Hampden,  formerly 
I  .ml y  Charlotte  Cupel,  eldest  daughter     Minister  at  the  Hague,  and  father-in- 
of  William  Anne  Earl  of  Essex,  by  the     law  of  the  Earl  of  Suffolk, 
eldest  daughter  of  the   last  Earl    of  I 


56  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

The  frigate  that  had  fought  with  Admiral  Hopkins  and 
his  squadron  came  into  Portsmouth,  and  it  appeared  that 
Hopkins's  men  had  not  manoeuvred  so  ably  as  those  of 
the  frigate,  and  that  the  latter  had  outsailed  and  got  away 
from  them. 

About  the  same  time  came  a  confirmation 3  of  the 
raising  the  siege  of  Quebec,  with  a  very  unintelligible 

.  ostentatious  letter  from  General  Carleton,  in  which  it 
appeared  that,  having  received  200  recruits  by  the  Isis, 
he  had  sallied  out,  and  found  the  Provincials  preparing 
to  raise  the  siege  on  the  sight  of  the  Isis  and  other  ships 
with  General  Burgoyne  and  the  Brunswickers.  Carleton 
said  the  Provincials  had  immediately  fled  and  left  all  their 
cannon  and  stores,  but  with  no  account  of  any  slaughter 
he  had  made,  as  the  first  letters  had  said.  However  this 
seemed  to  speak  the  Provincials  a  rabble  without  military 
discipline,  and  much  alarmed  the  friends  of  liberty.  It  as 
greatly  raised  the  spirits  of  the  King  and  Court,  who  now 
talked  of  nothing  but  reducing  the  Americans  to  a  state 
of  never  rebelling  again.  The  wind  too  had  been  so  long 
in  the  east,  that  it  was  probable  the  Hessians  would  arrive 
in  America  by  the  end  of  June  ;  and  it  was  much  doubted 
whether  the  Americans  would  be  able  to  make  any  stand 
against  regular  forces.  Washington  was  thought  to  have 
been  in  the  wrong  to  have  preferred  the  safety  of  Boston 

i  to  attacking  Howe's  army.  The  American  islands  were 
certainly  in  great  want  of  provisions  ;  but  if  the  Americans 
took  many  prizes,  they  lost  full  as  many  ships  of  their 
own.  It  was  believed  even  by  Americans  here  that  the 
King's  troops  might  subsist  during  the  winter  in  Virginia ; 


3  The  Americans  were  said  to  have 
defeated  the  Regulars  in  Carolina, 
who  had  been  very  troublesome  to 
them,  and  to  have  taken  1500  stand  of 


arms  sent  by  Government  to  Governor 
Martin  ;  but  all  advantages  of  the  Ame- 
ricans  were  carefully  concealed. 


1776.  IRISH  PARLIAMENT.  57 

and  these  their  friends  trusted  not  much  to  any  effectual 
stand  but  in  New  England.  The  best  chance  of  the 
Americans  was  by  protracting  the  war,  and  drawing  the 
King's  armies  up  into  the  country.  It  was  hoped  too  that 
the  Hessians  would  be  seduced  by  their  German  brethren ; 
but  upon  the  whole,  the  superior  artillery  and  fleet  of  the' 
Royalists,  and  the  inexperience  of  the  Americans,  filled  the 
friends  of  liberty  with  gloomy  apprehensions. 

Sth.  General  Smith  and  Mr.  Brand  Hollis  were  carried 
to  the  King's  Bench,  and  sentenced  to  six  months'  impri- 
sonment and  a  fine  of  1000  marks. 

At  the  end  of  the  month  came  on  the  cause  between  Mr. 
Sayer  and  Lord  Rochford,  when  the  jury  gave  damages  of 
1000J.  to  the  former. 

The  Irish  Parliament  having  expired,  there  were  great 
contests  at  the  new  elections,  and  the  American  war  was 
so  unpopular  in  that  country,  that  the  Court  met  with 
sturdy  opposition.  However,  it  carried  the  speaker  Perry 
by  a  large  majority ;  yet  two  Court  bills  were  rejected, 
and  then  the  Parliament,  having  only  met  for  form,  was 
prorogued. 

A  very  different  spirit  reigned  here.  One  Hays,  and 
other  young  lawyers,  wrote  pamphlets  against  liberty, 
and  the  young  Earl  of  Winchelsea,  going  to  Ports- 
mouth to  take  leave  of  Captain  Fielding,  his  brother- 
in-law,  embarked  with  him  as  a  volunteer  for  America. 
In  the  mean  time  Lord  North's  friends  grew  very  sick 
of  Lord  G.  Germaine's  assuming  ascendant.  The  King, 
whether  from  the  humour  in  his  blood,  or  vexation  from 
the  Prince,  visibly  wasted  and  looked  very  ill.  The 
Prince  was  evidently  very  quick,  and  had  actually,  by 
pumping  a  groom  who  rode  out  with  the  King,  found  out 
who  was  to  be  his  Governor. 


58  LAST  JOURNALS  OP -HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 


JULY. 


WILKES  had  stood  again  for  Chamberlain  of  the  City ;  but 
whether  the  money  of  the  Court  prevailed,  or  that  the 
citizens  were  offended  at  his  attempting  such  an  innova- 
tion, though  the  place  was  only  voted  from  year  to  year, 
he  lost  it  on  the  first  of  the  month,  after  a  poll  of  several 
days,  by  a  majority  against  him  of  1196. 

2nd.  The  Gazette  declared  the  promotion  to  higher 
titles  of  twelve  Irish  peers,  and  the  creation  of  eighteen 
new.  Thirty  creations  at  once  was  more  than  had  ever 
been  made,  even  at  the  beginning  of  a  reign.  It  was  a 
mob  of  nobility.  The  King  in  private  laughed  much  at 
the  eagerness  for  such  insignificant  honours. 

The  promotions  and  creations  were  as  follows : — Vis- 
count Lisburne,  Viscount  Ligonier,  and  Lord  Clanwilliam, 
were  raised  to  Earls  of  the  same  name ;  Viscount  Clare 
was  made  Earl  Nugent,  and  Viscount  Crosbie  Earl  of 
Glandore. 

The  dignity  of  Viscount  of  the  kingdom  of  Ireland 
was  conferred  on  Thomas  Southwell,  by  title  of  Viscount 
Southwell,  of  Castle  Mattress,  in  the  county  of  Limerick  • 
the  llight  Honourable  Thomas  Baron  Knapton,  by  the  title 
of  Viscount  de  Vesci,  of  Abbeyleix,  in  the  Queen's  County  ; 
the  Right  Honourable  William  Willoughby,  Baron  Mount 
Florence,  by  the  title  of  Viscount  Enniskillen,  in  the 
county  of  Fermanagh;  the  Eight  Honourable  Francis 
Baron  Orwell,  by  the  title  of  Viscount  Orwell ;  the  llight 
Honourable  John  Baron  Baltinglass,  by  the  title  of  Vis- 


1776.  CREATION  OP  HUSH  PEERS.  59 

count  Aldborough,  of  the  Palatinate  of  Upper  Ormond  ; 
the  Right  Honourable  William  Henry  Baron  Clermont, 
by  the  title  of  Viscount  Clermont,  of  Clermont,  in  the 
county  of  Louth,  with  remainder  of  Viscount  and  Baron 
unto  the  Right  Honourable  James  Fortescue,  of  Ravens- 
dale  Park,  in  the  county  of  Louth,  brother  to  the  said 
Lord  Clermont ;  the  Right  Honourable  William  Henry 
Baron  Dawson,  by  the  title  of  Viscount  Carlow,  in  the 
county  of  Carlow. 

The  dignity  of  Baron  of  the  kingdom  of  Ireland  to  them 
and  their  heirs  male  unto — 

The  Right  Honourable  Thomas  Maude,  Baronet,  by 
the  title  of  Baron  de  Montalt  of  Hawarden,  in  the  county 
of  Tipperary ;  the  Right  Honourable  Sir  George  Macart- 
ney, by  the  title  of  Baron  Macartney  of  Lissanoure,  in  the 
county  of  Antrim  ;  the  Right  Honourable  Sir  Archibald 
Acheson,  Baronet,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Gosford  of  Mar- 
ket Hill,  in  the  county  of  Armagh. 

The  Right  Honourable  Ralph  Howard,  by  the  title  of 
Baron  Clonmore,  of  Clonmore  Castle,  in  the  county  of 
Carlow ;  Sir  Richard  Philipps,  Baronet,  by  the  title  of 
Baron  Milford  ;  Sir  Thomas  Wynn,  Baronet,  by  the  title 
of  Baron  Newborough  of  Newborough ;  Sir  Charles  Bing- 
ham,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Lucan,  of  Castlebar,  in  the 
county  of  Mayo ;  Sir  Alexander  Macdonald,  by  the  name 
of  Baron  Macdonald,  of  Slate;  in  the  county  of  Antrim  ;  Sir 
William  Mayne,  Baronet,  by  the  title  of  Barori  Newhaven, 
of  Carrick  Mayne,  in  the  county  of  Dublin  ;  James  A  gar, 
Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron  of  Clisden,  in  the  county  of 
Kilkenny ;  William  Edwardes,  Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron 
Kensington  ;  William  Henry  Lyttelton,  Esq.,  by  the  title 
of  Baron  Westcote,  of  Balamare,  in  the  county  of  Long- 
ford ;  Robert  Henry  Ongley,  Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron 
Ongley,  of  Old  Warden,  in  Ireland. 


60  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

Molyneux  Shuldham,  Esq.,  Yice- Admiral  of  the  Blue 
Squadron  of  his  Majesty's  Fleet,  by  the  title  of  Baron 
Shuldham. 

John  Bourke,  Esq.,  of  Palmerstown,  in  the  county  of 
Kildare,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Naas,  of  Naas,  in  the  said 
county. 

Sentleger  Sentleger,  Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Doneraile, 
of  Doneraile,  in  the  county  of  Cork;  Clotworthy  Upton, 
Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Templetown,  in  the  county 
of  Antrim  ;  Hugh  Massey,  Esq.,  by  the  title  of  Baron 
Massey,  of  Duntrylergue,  in  the  county  of  Limerick. 

The  Red  Riband  was  given  to  General  Carleton  for  his 
defence  of  Quebec,  which  he  had  maintained  against  the 
'  opinion  of  his  officers.  Lord  George  Germaine  strongly 
opposed  this  reward. 

13th.  General  Conway  had  a  slight  paralytic  stroke  in 
his  face,  occasioned  by  catching  cold. 

The  month  passed  with  no  other  news  than  General 
Howe  with  his  forces  having  sailed  from  Halifax  on  the 
10th  of  June,  till  the  three  or  four  last  days,  when 
the  Court  heard  that  nine  Jamaicamen,  richly  loaded,  had 
been  taken  by  two  or  three  American  privateers.1  At  the 
same  time  came  a  letter  from  General  Carleton  with  an 
account  of  having  driven  the  Americans  out  of  St.  John's, 
Chamblee,  and  Montreal,  after  a  bold  attack  on  their 
part,  but  from  which  they  fled  with  great  precipitation  on 
finding  him  so  well  prepared.  By  this  means  the  King 
became  again  master  of  all  Canada.  Carleton's  letter  was 
very  obscure  and  ill  written ;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that 
Lord  George  Germaine,  out  of  hatred,  had  suffered  it  to 


1  A  very  rich  ship  laden  with  am-  ,  trusting   whom    Lord    Sandwich   was  , 

munition  and  provisions  had  been  de-  i  much  blamed.    The  ship  was  very  va- 

livered  up  to   the   Americans  by  the  j  luable  and  of  great  importance  to  the 

Captain,  who  was  an  American,  and  for  losers  and  gamers. 


1776. 


AMERICAN  NEWS. 


61 


appear  in  that  rude  manner.  Carleton  had  been  so  offended 
at  the  preference  of  Christie  to  his  own  brother,  that, 
trusting  to  his  great  services,  he  had  taken  so  bold  a  step 
as  to  overlook  the  King's  nomination  of  Christie,  and  send 
him  up  into  the  country,  and  appoint  his  own  brother 
Quartermaster-General.  At  the  same  time  he  would  not 
deign  to  inform  Lord  George  of  his  farther  designs,  which 
were  to  prepare  to  pass  the  Lakes.  This  the  Ministers 
learnt  from  Sir  William  Douglas.2 

29th.  Advice  that  General  Howe  was  off  Halifax,  but 
had  not  been  joined  by  his  brother. 

A  letter  of  Lord  George  Germaine,  with  severe  orders, 
having  been  intercepted,  General  Lee  ordered  Governor  / 
Eden  to  be  seized,  but  he  escaped.     The  Congress  was' 
angry  at  Lee. 

In  this  month  Don  Lewis,  youngest  brother  of  the  King 
of  Spain,  and  formerly  Cardinal,  being  in  love  with  a  Dutch 
lady,  and  insisting  on  marrying  her  in  spite  of  the  King, 
his  Majesty  at  last  yielded  upon  condition  of  not  allowing 
her  to  rank  as  Princess  of  the  Blood. 


*  General  Carleton  issued  a  most  hu- 
mane order,  inviting  the  wounded  Pro- 
vincials to  come  and  be  taken  care  of, 


and  promising  to  send  them  to  their 
homes  when  recovered. 


62  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  AUG 


AUGUST. 


10th.  CAME  letters  from  General  Howe  with  accounts  of 
his  having  landed  his  troops,  after  a  passage  of  three  weeks, 
on  Staten  Island  without  molestation  ;  but  that  he  had 
learned  from  Governor  Tryon  that  a  battery  of  1 00  pieces 
was  erected  to  defend  New  York  towards  the  sea,  and  that 
a  very  numerous  army  of  Provincials,  strongly  intrenched, 
were  posted  near.  On  this  report  the  General  had  thought 
it  prudent  to  wait  for  the  junction  of  his  brother  General 
Clinton,  but  that  he  was  preparing  to  send  a  naval  force  up 

;  the  river.  He  informed  the  Government  that  the  Con- 
gress had  declared  all  the  provinces  independent ;  had 
vseized  Franklin,  Governor  of  Jersey  ;  and  condemned  the 
Mayor  of  New  York  to  be  hanged  for  corresponding  with 
Tryon,  but  had  not  executed  him.  Howe  boasted  of 
having  been  joined  by  60  men,  Provincials,  and  of  expect- 
ing 500  more.  I  was  told  by  good  authority  that  the 
Government  had  suppressed  several  disagreeable  circum- 
stances, and  indeed  the  above  were  far  from  favourable  to 
them. 

21s#.  An  express  from  General  Clinton  brought  advice 
of  the  total  failure  of  the  attempt  on  Charles  Town.  The 
Ministers  had  boasted  that  a  fifty-gun  ship  had  been  got 
over  the  bar  there,  which  had  always  been  thought  impos- 
sible. The  forces  under  General  Clinton  and  Lord  Corn- 

[  wallis  had  landed  on  Long  Island,  where  they  had  been 
told  the  pass  was  fordable.  They  found  it  very  deep  and 
could  not  act.  The  fleet  under  Sir  Peter  Parker  attacked 


1776. 


THE  CHEVALIER  D'EON. 


63 


a  fort  between  them  and  the  town.  The  Provincials 
received  and  repulsed  them  with  great  bravery — burnt 
a  man-of-war,  on  board  of  which  the  Admiral  was,  who 
himself  was  wounded  in  six  places  ;  the  Captain,  the  Lieu- 
tenant, and  200  men  were  killed ;  and  the  Royalists  were 
forced  to  burn  a  store-ship  lest  it  should  fall  into  the  hands 
of  the  enemy. 

The  same  day  the  famous  Chevalier  Deon  appeared 
before  Lord  Mansfield,  on  a  complaint  of  having  sent  a 
challenge  to  one  Morande,  an  infamous  wretch  who  had 
fled  from  France  for  having  written  a  most  scandalous 
libel,  the  "Gazettier  cuirasse."  Deon  avowed  being  a 
woman.  The  best  account  I  could  collect  of  the  Chevalier 
was  as  follows : l — The  Due  de  Choiseul,  I  know,  believed 


1  There  is  no  longer  any  mystery  con- 
nected with  the  story  of  d'Eon.  He  was 
of  a  good  French  family,  and  was  born 
in  1728.  He  was  an  excellent  scholar, 
soldier,  and  political  intriguer.  It  was 
in  tlio  service  of  Louis  XV.  that  he 
went  to  Russia  in  female  attire,  ob- 
tained employment  as  "  lectrice  "  or 
female  reader  to  the  Czarina  Elizabeth, 
and  under  that  disguise  carried  on  po- 
litical and  semi-political  negotiations 
witli  wonderful  audacity  and  success. 
At  a  subsequent  period  he  returned  to 
Russia  in  male  costume,  describing  liim- 
self  as  the  brother  of  the  Czarina  8  lec- 
trice. He  wrote  well,  plotted  well,  and 
fought  well.  In  1762  he  appeared  in 
England  as  Secretary  of  Embassy  to 
the  Duke  de  Nivernois.  It  was  during 
his  residence  here  that  he  accused  De 
Guerchy,  during  the  embassy  of  the 
latter,  who  had  attempted  to  place  him 
in  a  subordinate  post  after  he  had  tem- 
porarily exercised  the  office  of  Minister 
Plenipotentiary,  of  a  design  to  poison 
him.  The  accusation  was  deemed 
well  founded,  but  a  nolle  prosequi  saved 
De  Guerchy  from  all  earthly  penalty, 
save  contempt.  D'Eon  continued  to 
reside  here,  the  active  diplomatic  agent 
of  the  French  Court,  and  protected  by 
his  Sovereign,  even  when  the  latter 


appeared  to  yield  to  his  enemies.  Louis 
XVI.  granted  him  a  pension  ;  and  when 
he  went  over  to  Versailles  to  return 
thanks  for  the  favour,  Marie  Antoinette 
insisted  on  his  assuming  woman's  attire. 
To  gratify  this  foolish  whim  d'Eon  one 
day  swept  into  the  royal  presence 
decked  like  a  duchess,  and  supported  I 
the  character  to  the  great  delight  of. 
the  royal  and  noble  spectators.  After 
thus  masquerading  for  some  time  he 
returned  to  England  in  1784  ;  and  being 
here  in  1789,  after  the  Revolution 
was  accomplished,  the  Convention  de- 
prived him  of  his  pension,  and  placed 
his  name  in  the  fatal  list  ufVj/m/r(V. 
From  the  English  Government  he  re- 
ceived a  pension  of  2001.  a  year,  but 
his  extravagant  style  of  living  involved 
him  in  debt  and  distress.  In  his  old 
days  he  turned  his  fencing  capabilities 
to  account,  appearing  in  matches  with 
the  famous  Chevalier  de  St.  George, 
and  permanently  reassuming  female 
attire.  This  strange  personage  died  in 
1810 ;  when  an  inspection  of  the  body 
by  several  medical  men,  in  presence  of 
the  Pere  Elisee,  who  attended  for  Louis 
XVIII.,  was  followed  by  a  public  cer- 
tificate that  the  chevalier  was  an  old 
man.  He  died  at  the  age  of  eighty- 
two.— D. 


64  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  AUG. 

it  was  a  woman.  After  the  death  of  Louis  XV.  Deon  had 
leave  to  go  to  France,  on  which  the  young  Cointe  de 
Guerchy  went  to  M.  de  Vergennes,  Secretary  of  State, 
and  gave  him  notice  that  the  moment  Deon  landed  at 
Calais,  he,  Guerchy,  would  cut  his  throat,  or  Deon  should 
cut  his ;  on  which  Yergennes  told  the  Count  that  Deon 
was  certainly  a  woman.  Louis  XV.,  though  so  indolent, 
had  long  secretly  employed  the  Comte  de  Broglie,  brother 
of  the  Marshal,  to  get  him  intelligence  from  all  parts  of 
Europe,  for  which  the  Count  had  a  pension,  and  the  King 
corresponded  with  the  Count  unknown  to  his  Ministers, 
and  but  seldom  spoke  to  him.  Even  when  the  Count  was 
exiled  on  his  quarrel  with  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon,  the 
King  still  wrote  to  him.  His  Majesty  went  much  farther ; 
for  when  the  Due  de  Choiseul  had  sent  a  vessel,  which 
lay  six  months  in  the  Thames,  to  trepan  and  bring  off 
Deon,  the  King  wrote  a  letter  with  his  own  hand  to  give 
him  warning  of  the  vessel. 

The  Duke  of  Portland  carried  his  suit  finally  against 
Sir  James  Lowther. 

The  Ministers  were  exceedingly  dismayed  at  the  failure 
at  Charles  Town,  which  was  much  worse  than  they  had 
owned,  and  thoroughly  disgraceful.  The  Duke  of  New- 
castle went  to  Lord  North  at  Bushy  Park,  to  lament  the 
miscarriage  at  Charles  Town,  and  to  inquire  into  his 
cousin  Clinton's  behaviour ;  but  finding  Lord  North  treat 
the  affair  with  his  usual  indifference  and  jollity,  took  notice 
of  it  to  him.  "  Faith,  my  Lord,"  said  Lord  North,  "  if 
fretting  would  make  me  thin,  I  would  be  as  sorry  as  your 
,  Grace ;  but  since  it  will  not  have  that  effect,  I  bear  it  as 
well  as  I  can."  Clinton  and  Parker  were  much  blamed ; 
but  it  was  seen  now  that  there  was  little  prospect  of 
finishing  the  war  this  year,  and  the  expense  was  so  enor- 


1776.  PROGRESS  OF  THE  WAR.  65 

mous  that  it  could  not  be  borne  for  another.  It  was  now 
in  their  own  mouths  that,  unless  Howe  succeeded  at  New 
York,  the  Ministry  must  be  changed.  Great  mismanage- 
ment and  profusion  was  attributed  to  Lord  Sandwich,  and 
Lord  George  Germaine  complained  to  the  King  of  his 
disposition  of  the  fleet.  The  Commodore  at  Boston  had 
quitted  the  place  and  gone  to  Halifax :  it  was  said  in  his 
behalf  that  he  was  obliged  to  go  thither  for  water ;  yet, 
Lord  Howe  meeting  him  at  sea,  and  asking  him  why  he 
had  abandoned  Boston,  he  replied  he  had  been  annoyed 
by  batteries.  Lord  Howe  answered,  "  In  the  last  war  he 
sought  batteries,  not  avoided  them." 


VOL.  II. 


66  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  SEPT. 


SEPTEMBER. 


4th.  GOVERNOR  EDEN  arrived  in  town  from  America.  On 
being  forced  by  the  Provincials  to  leave  his  government  of 
Maryland,  he  had  taken  refuge  with  Lord  Dunmore  at 
Gwynn's  Island,  where  the  Virginians  attacked  the  latter, 
and  drove  them  to  their  ships,  which  the  Provincials  then 
cannonaded,  and  obliged  three  men-of-war  to  bear  away, 
after  burning  some  schooners,  for  fear  they  should  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  Provincials.  Lord  Dunmore  went  to 
another  island,  where  he  met  with  the  same  treatment. 
Eden  added  that  the  Americans  had  thirteen  new  frigates 
of  twenty-six  guns  each  ready  to  launch,  and  that  Admiral 
Hopkins  was  gone  in  search  of  the  West-India  homeward- 
bound  fleet. 

At  the  same  time  came  letters  from  Carleton,  that  he 
was  delayed  from  crossing  the  lakes  by  being  obliged  to 
build  batteaux.  He  had  refused  to  admit  five  hundred 
Indians  who  had  come  and  offered  themselves,  and  sent 
them  back.  This  was  said  to  be  from  a  principle  of 
humanity,  and  that  his  refusal  would  make  them  join  the 
Provincials. 

It  was  said  that  the  latter  had  demolished  Crown  Point, 
but  meant  to  defend  Ticonderoga.  I  was  told  that  our 
fleet  had  threatened  to  burn  New  York  if  attempted  to 
be  fortified  ;  but  General  Lee  had  sent  the  Commander 
word  that  he  would  take  all  the  King's  friends  in  New 
York,  and  set  them  in  the  front  line  if  the  ships  attempted 
to  disturb  them,  on  which  they  desisted,  and  he  fortified 
the  place.  Eden  was  knighted. 


1776.  ALARMING  ACCOUNTS  OF  THE  WAR.  67 

The  Court  was  greatly  dismayed.  It  was  said  in  pri- 
vate letters  that  the  Provincials  had  attacked  Clinton  in 
his  retreat,  and  cut  off  numbers  of  his  men.  Clinton  had 
endeavoured  to  dissuade  Parker  from  the  attempt,  and 
had  sent  over  a  defence  of  himself,  but  it  was  not  pub- 
lished, and  Lord  George  Germaine  was  much  abused  for 
suppressing  it  The  Court,  at  least  some,  had  thoughts 
of  a  change,  and  wished  for  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  Rigby 
went  to  him,  but  was  coldly  received.  Lady  Hertford 
owned  to  me  she  wished  to  see  the  Duke  and  General 
Conway  ministers.  I  had  the  satisfaction  of  having  Dr. 
Hunter,  Queen's  man  midwife  and  favourite,  say  to  me,  I 
"  How  the  poor  Scotch  will  be  abused !  I  think  General 
Conway  must  go  to  America  and  make  peace."  Sir 
Gilbert  Elliot  talked  of  retiring,  at  least  of  not  attending 
Parliament,  on  pretence  of  ill  health. 

I6t/i.  Died  Jeremy  Dyson,  on  whom  this  epitaph  was 
made, — 

"  To  the  grave  see  Kepublican  Jerry  descend, 
A  prerogative  tool  and  his  Majesty's  friend ; 
Yet  it  ought  not  our  wonder,  but  laughter  to  move, 
That  the  son  of  a  taylor  a  turncoat  should  prove." 

Stanley  was  appointed  Cofferer  in  Dyson's  room,  and 
Sir  Alexander  Gilmour l  brought  into  Parliament;  he  was 
a  Scot.  Lord  Carlisle  had  just  chosen  one  of  Sir  G. 
Elliot's  sons  for  Morpeth. 

The  Ministers  had  certain  intelligence  that  one  Deane, 
agent  from  the  American  Congress,  was  at  Versailles. 

"20th.  A  ship  arrived  at  Clyde  brought  an  account  that 
Lord  Howe  had  joined  his  brother,  and  that  they  intended 
to  attack  New  York  immediately. 


1  This  was  designed,  for  Lord  North  I  whom  belonged  the  borough  of  Hore- 
wrote  in  his  favour  to  Lord  Irwin,  to  |  ham,  but  he  would  not  consent 

F    2 


C8 


LAST  JOUBNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


SEPT. 


23rd.  Lord  North  broke  his  arm  by  a  fall  from  his 
horse. 

Account  of  seven  ships  from  the  Straits  taken  by  the 
Provincials. 

25th.  Advice  that  Lord  Howe  had,  in  the  middle  of 
July,  sent  a  letter  to  Washington  for  treaty,  which  the 
<  latter  refused  to  receive  because  his  titles  were  omitted  : 
the  Congress  thanked  Washington. 

27th.  Letters  from  Quebec  ;  contents  kept  secret.  Some 
said  Carleton  had  sent  word  his  boats  would  be  ready  in 
ten  days,  others  that  he  must  lay  aside  his  plan  till  next 
year.  The  Hessians  had  not  joined  him  till  the  15th 
of  August.2  General  Carleton  would  not  correspond  with 
Lord  George  Germaine. 

Letters  from  officers  at  New  York  said  they  were 
negotiating,  and  that  peace  was  expected ;  but  on  the 

28th,  a  Major  Reade,  who  had  sold  out,  arrived  with 
letters  from  General  Howe,  that  all  treaty  was  at  an  end, 
that  he  had  got  Clinton  and  all  his  reinforcements ;  and 
Reade  said  he  thought  news  of  a  battle  might  have  got 
:  here  before  him.  Provincials  had  melted  the  statue  of  the 
King  for  bullets,  and  called  him  the  late  King. 

Letters  from  the  Howes.  Lord  Howe,  after  refusing 
the  title  of  General  to  Washington,  submitted  to  give  it 
to  him  on  pretence  of  treating  for  the  exchange  of  pri- 
soners. These  letters,  however,  said  that  all  negotiation 
was  at  an  end,  and  that  two  50-gun  ships  that  had  passed 
above  New  York  had  been  beaten  back,  and  narrowly 
escaped  being  burnt  by  the  fireships  of  the  Provincials. 


2  It  was  kept  as  a  great  secret,  but 
it  was  certain  that  General  Carleton's 
letters,  that  arrived  on  the  25th,  had 


said  that  he  was  obliged  to  abandon  his 
enterprize  for  this  year. 


1776.         THE  KING  AND  QUEEN  VISIT  LORD  NORTH.  69 

It  was  given  out  that  the  attempt  on  New  York  would 
still  be  made,  but  it  was  doubted. 

Woolridge,  who  had  been  set  up  for  sheriff,  declined 
it,  pleading  in  his  public  speech  to  the  Livery  of  London 
that  he  was  a  bankrupt  by  the  American  war,  and  he  taxed 
Lord  Dunmore  of  having  seized  a  ship  of  his,  which  the 
Admiralty  Court  had  declared  not  legal  capture. 


OCTOBER. 


THE  Ministers  were  quite  in  despair  at  the  unprosperous 
state  of  their  affairs.  The  King  could  not  disguise  his 
concern,  which  increased  his  indisposition ;  and  at  the 
reviews  every  body  remarked  his  uneasiness,  and  how  much 
he  was  fallen  away.  It  was  thought  that  Lord  North  had 
a  mind  to  resign ;  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  month  the 
King  and  Queen  went  to  him  at  Bushy,  and  staid  with 
him  three  hours,  as  it  was  supposed,  to  prevail  on  him  not 
to  quit.  They  complained  exceedingly  of  General  Carle- 
ton  for  dilatoriness,  and  for  persisting  not  to  write  a  syl- 
lable to  Lord  George  Germaine.  They  were  astonished 
at  not  hearing  from  General  Howe,  who,  it  was  said,  had 
sent  them  word  he  would  make  his  attack  on  the  26th 
of  August.  A  ship  arrived  at  Nantes  in  France  had 
spread  a  report  that  the  attack  had  been  made,  and  that 
Howe  had  beaten  the  Provincials,  and  killed  6000, 
but  that  Washington  had  rallied  his  troops,  and  driven 
back  the  royal  army,  of  which  he  had  killed  5000; 


70       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.      OCT. 

but,  as  these  actions  were  said  to  have  happened  on  the 
15th  of  August,  the  report  soon  lost  ground.  All  these 
alarms  were  at  last  dispelled ;  for  on  the 

IQth,  by  three  in  the  morning,  General  Howe's  first 
aide-de-camp  arrived  at  Lord  George  Germaine's  with  an 
account  that  much  changed  the  state  of  affairs,  and  filled 
the  Court  with  an  extravagance  of  joy,  which  they  dis- 
played with  the  utmost  ostentation.  The  whole  army  being 
assembled,  which  it  was  thought  amounted  to  about  28,000 
men  (though  said  to  be  more  by  the  Royalists),  and  the 
fleet,  General  Howe  attacked  Long  Island  on  the  22nd 
of  August,  and  landed  without  opposition.  And  it  was  said 
(though  not  mentioned  in  the  '  Gazette')  that  he  had  caused 
the  fleet  to  make  a  movement  which  had  deceived  the 
Provincials ;  and  it  was  added,  that  on  the  26th  he  had 
ordered  his  first  parties  to  retreat,  which  encouraging  the 
Provincials  to  pursue  in  the  dark,  they  found  themselves 
in  the  morning  of  the  27th,  when  the  general  attack  was 
made,  entirely  enveloped,  and  fled.  Certain  it  was  that 
the  Provincials,  who  were  to  the  amount  of  10,000  on  the 
island,  which  was  strongly  fortified,  made  no  resistance,  but 
fled  in  precipitation.  The  island  was  entirely  taken, 
with  the  loss  of  only  60  killed  and  250  wounded.  Of 
the  Provincials  3000  were  taken,  killed,  wounded,  or 
drowned  in  the  morass ;  and  though  the  Court  endeavoured 
to  stifle  it,  it  was  soon  known  that  the  Hessians  had  com- 
mitted  great  butchery,  and  refused  to  give  any  quarter. 
Lord  Stirling l  and  two  other  general  officers  of  the  Pro- 
vincials were  taken  prisoners  with  their  artillery  and  stores, 
but  they  had  burnt  the  corn  on  the  island.  In  the  King's 
troops  there  was  a  Paoli ;  if  a  nephew  of  the  Corsican 


1  A  claimant  rather  to  the  title,  which  had  been  extinct  since  1739. — D. 


REVERSES  OF  THE  PROVINCIALS.  71 

general,  it  showed  what  an  infamous  wretch  he  was,  who 
had  accepted  a  pension  from  the  English  Crown,  which 
had  abandoned  his  countrymen,  and  who  now  sent  a  rela- 
tion to  invade  the  Americans,  who  were  fighting  for  their 
liberty  as  his  countrymen  had  done,\ 

The  letters  said  that  they  learnt  from  the  prisoners 
that  there  were  4000  sick  in  New  York,  and  that  there 
were  great  dissensions  among  the  New  Englanders  and 
•  Yorkists — the  former  insisting  on  the  town  being 
given  up  to  them,  which  the  latter  concluding  was  with 
the  intention  to  burn  it,  had  refused  ;  and  General  Howe 
could  discover  from  Long  Island  great  numbers  leaving 
the  town,  which  he  imagined  were  the  New  Englanders. 
His  letters  said,  too,  that  the  Provincials  intended  to  make 
their  stand  at  King's  Bridge,  14£  miles  from  New  York 
through  a  country  of  passes. 

This  made  a  very  great  alteration,  particularly  from  the 
bad  behaviour  of  the  Provincials,  and  sounded  very  ill 
after  so  haughty  a  rejection  of  peace,  and  all  the  extremi- 
ties they  had  gone  to.  It  was  most  probable  that  the  New 
Yorkists,  who  would  not  let  their  houses  be  burnt,  would 
submit  to  recover  them ;  and  it  seemed  a  fatal  measure, 
that  they  had  not  burnt  the  town  previously,  and  endea- 
voured to  draw  the  Royalists  up  into  the  country.  Now  it 
might  be  expected  that  the  Royalists  in  every  province 
would  exert  themselves,  and,  profiting  by  the  panic,  preach 
up  submission,  of  their  being  ready  for  which  symptoms 
enough  already  appeared.  All  the  inhabitants  of  Long 
Island  immediately  offered  to  take  the  oaths  to  the  King ; 
and  the  next  morning  after  the  victory  they  brought  in 
8000  head  of  cattle  to  the  army,  which  was  in  the  utmost 
want  of  fresh  provisions.  The  people,  weary  of  the  paper- 
money  of  the  Congress,  were  glad  to  take  General  Howe's 


72 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


OCT. 


dollars.2  Thus  was  a  capital  blow  given  to  the  war ;  and 
news  even  came  by  a  ship  to  Ireland,  that  sailed  on  Sep- 
tember the  4th,  two  days  after  Howe's  letter,  the  captain 
of  which  said  he  had  heard  a  cannonading  for  twelve 
hours,  which  then  ceased,  and  he  concluded  Howe  was  in 
possession  of  New  York.  Lord  Harcourt  sent  this  account 
express  from  Ireland.  The  '-  Gazette'  came  out  the  next  day 
with  great  ostentation.  The  more  moderate  of  the  Anti- 
Americans  hoped  this  blow  would  produce  peace,  but  the 
extravagant  joy  of  the  Court  gave  no  such  prospect.  Some 
already  declared  against  restitution  of  the  charters.  It  was 
not  likely  America,  even  if  terrified  into  submission,  could 
be  maintained  without  an  army,  and  for  that,  there  was  no 
doubt,  they  would  make  the  Americans  pay, — two  cir- 
cumstances that  would  for  ever  keep  America  from  being 
flourishing  and  commercial  as  it  had  been.  Its  independ- 
ence had  been  the  source  of  invitation  and  riches.  The 
country  gentlemen  would  expect  indemnification  for  the  in- 
crease of  the  land-tax,  and  yet  the  vast  sums  still  necessary 
to  be  raised,  will  sooner  increase  their  burthens — and  if  a 
new  debt  of  ten  or  twelve  millions  is  to  be  incurred,  the 
Court  may  be  triumphant,  but  the  nation  is  but  more  un- 
done— and  the  army  and  fleet,  that  must  at  least  winter 
another  season  in  America,  will  but  make  us  still  more 
unprepared  for  a  foreign  war. 

The  savage  behaviour  of  the  Hessians  was  the  reverse 
of  what  had  been  expected.  It  was  foretold  that  being 
German  Protestants,  they  would  join  their  brethren  in 
America,  and  be  tempted  by  offers  of  settlements. 


J  By  what  was  called  the  Tender 
Law,  Congress  had  declared  that  the 
paper  dollars  formed  a  legal  tender  for 
payment,  or  in  satisfaction  of  a  debt 
offered  by  a  debtor  to  a  creditor.  The 
difference  between  tho  value  of  this 


paper  representative  and  the  actual 
coin  was  at  last  so  great,  that  1000 
paper  dollars  were  only  accounted 
equal  to  a  single  silver  dollar.  The 
Congress  ultimately  abolished  this  ruin- 
ous law. — D. 


177'5.  ADDRESS  VOTED  TO  THE  KING.  73 

Some  of  the  junto  expressed  joy  at  the  probability  of 
New  York  being  saved.  The  Bedfords,  on  the  contrary, 
had  long  ago  vapoured  that  it  would  be  right  to  destroy 
their  towns,  and  that  America  was  so  powerful  it  ought  to 
be  put  back  fifty  years.3 

Howe's  letters  notified  that  the  Provincials  had  sent  an 
army  against  Halifax. 

The  King  immediately  determined  to  send  a  red  riband 
to  General  Howe.  An  extraordinary  one  was  to  be  sent 
to  him ;  but  Lord  Onslow  dying  on  the  9th,  his  was  given : 
at  the  same  time  Lord  Lothian  had  Lord  Cathcart's  vacant 
green  riband. 

The  Mayor  and  Corporation  of  York  voted  an  address 
to  the  King  on  the  victory  at  Long  Island.  This  showed 
the  incapacity  of  Lord  Rockingham  to  be  at  the  head  of 
an  Opposition.  He  had  last  year  neglected  to  get  an 
address  against  the  war  from  the  county  of  York,  where 
he  had  the  greatest  influence. 

19th.  Lord  Mansfield  was  created  an  Earl,  with  rever- 
sion to  Lord  Stormont.  This  reversion  seemed  contrary 
to  the  acceptation  of  the  Union,  but  the  Scots  were  enough 
in  favour  now  to  leap  over  any  bounds  that  opposed  them  ; 
and  this  earldom  being  taken  now  showed  the  victory  at 
Long  Island  had  surmounted  all  Lord  Mansfield's  panics, 
and  implied  that  he  chose  to  be  thought  now  the  chief 
author  of  the  American  war,  as  I  believe  he  was. 

22nd.  The  differences  between  the  Courts  of  Madrid 
and  Lisbon,  occasioned  by  hostilities  committed  in  America 
by  a  Portuguese  Governor,  and  which  were  thought  to  be 
compromised,  appeared,  after  long  negotiation,  not  to  be 
settled.  An  account  came  this  day  that  a  Spanish  fleet 


3  This  has  been  previously  set  dowa  as  the  maxim  of  Bigby.— D. 


74  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

was  sailed,  and  that  the  Portuguese  were  raising  men  as 
fast  as  possible.  The  Stocks  immediately  fell.  The  Por- 
tuguese, to  engage  our  protection  against  Spain,  had  taken 
strong  part  with  us  against  our  colonies ;  and  that  perhaps 
tempted  the  Spaniards  the  more  to  break  with  them. 
France  had,  or  pretended  to  have,  recommended  peace ; 
but  France  continued  to  arm,  in  the  warmest  manner,  both 
by  sea  and  land.  Neither  Spain  nor  France  quite  liked 
the  precedent  of  our  colonies  setting  up  for  themselves ; 
but  that  was  a  distant  danger,  and  we  seemed  to  offer 
them  too  many  advantages  to  be  resisted :  the  perishing 
of  our  fleet  in  America,  our  being  stripped  of  men,  the 
debts  we  were  contracting,  the  nakedness  of  Ireland, 
Spain's  prospect  of  recovering  Jamaica,  France's  hopes 
of  ravishing  the  East  Indies  from  us  and  our  American 
trade,  with  the  loss  France  suffered  by  our  war  in  their 
tobacco,  which  they  might  engross  by  protecting  our  colo- 
nies, and  the  as  fair  chance  of  recovering  Canada, — all 
these  views  must  surmount  the  distant  apprehension  of 
their  colonies  rebelling.  France,  indeed,  had  a  most 
easy  game  to  play.  Our  Ministers  desired  nothing  but 
to  be  deceived ;  that  is,  assurances  of  not  countenancing 
the  colonies,  which  they  gave,  while  they  gave  all  manner 
of  countenance  to  them;  and  now,  at  the  very  moment 
that  the  Spanish  fleet  sailed,  M.  de  Noailles  arrived  here 
their  new  Ambassador. 

23rd.  It  was  spread  that  a  ship  arrived  at  Bristol  had 

brought  an  account  that  the  Americans  had  abandoned 

,  New  York,  and  had  retired  to  King's  Bridge  to  make 

|  their  stand.     In  the  evening  a  person  pasted  up  in  Lloyd's 

Coffee  House  notice  that  the  "  Bristol "  was  arrived  in  the 

River  with   Admiral  Shuldham,   who   brought  the  same 

account,  and  that  Howe  was  within  connon-shot  of  the 


1776. 


WARRANTS  ISSUED  FOR  PRESSING  SEAMEN. 


Americans.  Robinson,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  wrote 
this  account  to  a  rich  Jew  merchant,  and  added  the 
Provincials  were  70,000  strong.  Bells  were  rung  and 
guns  fired  to  confirm  this,  but  not  a  word  was  true; 
and  it  appeared  to  have  been  an  artifice  to  keep  up  the 
Stocks,  which,  however,  did  not  succeed,  for  they  continued 
falling. 

26th.  An  embargo  laid  on  Ireland  and  proclamation  for 
seamen. 

2Sth.  Warrants  issued  for  pressing  seamen.4  The  Go- 
vernment was  certainly  afraid  of  a  war  with  France, 
and  hoped  to  stop  it  by  these  preparations.  The  differ- 
ences between  Spain  and  Portugal  were  certainly  not 
adjusted,  and,  the  French  said,  from  the  obstinacy  of 
the  latter. 

31.sf.  The  Parliament  met.  The  King's  Speech  was 
evasive  and  far  from  firm.  With  regard  to  America, 
it  charged  all  on  the  ambition  of  their  leaders,  and  said, 
artfully,  their  having  declared  independence  must  unite 
everybody  at  home.  It  mentioned  the  success  at  Canada 
and  New  York,  and  said  the  latter  gave  the  strongest 
hopes  of  the  most  decisive  good  consequences,  though 
at  all  events  another  campaign  would  be  necessary.  As  to 
foreign  affairs,  the  King  said  he  continued  to  receive 


4  Pressgangs  were  now  actively  en- 
gaged in  "a  hot  press."  In  London 
alone,  in  less  than  a  month,  800  men 
were  "pressed."  The  streets  were 
.-'•AI  |>t  of  all  who  could  not  give  a  good 
account  of  themselves ;  the  ships  in  the 
river  were  stripped  of  all  except  mas- 
ter's mate  and  the  boys.  Lives  were 
li»t,  •*  us  usual,"  add  the  papers  of  the 
day,  from  which  I  gather  these  facts. 
I  read  of  a  lieutenant  of  the  Navy  "  shot 
dead,"  wliich  was  not  so  usual  on  the 
side  of  the  presscrs.  The  latter  even 


laid  hands  on  John  Tubbs,  the  "  City 
Waterman,"  who  claimed  exemption  by 
right  of  his  office.  The  case  was  so- 
lemnly  argued  in  the  Kings  Bench, 
and  being  decided  against  him,  Tubbs 
was  forced  to  go  to  sea.  The  general 
distress  too  was  severely  felt  at  this 
time ;  a  time  ill-chosen  by  the  Arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury  to  go  before  the 
same  tribunal  as  John  Tubbs,  and  claim 
exemption  of  Lambeth  Palace  from 
being  rated  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  ! 
This  claim  was  allowed.—  D. 


76  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

assurances  of  amity  from  the  several  Courts  of  Europe 
(this  was  cold  indeed !),  and  was  using  his  utmost  endea- 
vours to  conciliate  the  differences  between  Spain  and  Portu- 
gal, yet  thought  it  expedient  to  be  in  a  respectable  state  of 
defence  at  home.  An  address,  applauding  all  the  late 
measures,  was  moved  by  Mr.  Neville  Aldworth,  jun.,  and 
Mr.  Hallow  Finch,  two  young  men.  The  first  said,  the 
independence  of  the  Americans  was  in  the  hands  and  the 
abhorrence  of  everybody,  but  they  would  be  taught  the 
value  of  government  from  the  want  of  it.  This  was  a 
war  not  of  ambition  but  necessity,  and  we  were  fighting 
for  the  value  of  all  our  former  triumphs.  The  Opposition 
had  prepared  a  counter- address,  as  their  own  protest,  con- 
demning all  the  late  measures.  Lord  Granby  was  to  have 
moved  it,  but  his  youthful  diffidence  got  the  better,  and  he 
gave  it  to  Lord  John  Cavendish,  who  moved  it,  and  said 
he  never  knew  a  crisis  so  interesting :  we  were  now  in  a 
more  melancholy  situation  than  at  the  meeting  of  Par- 
liament last  year.  The  whole  strength  of  this  country  had 
been  tried,  and  had  only  produced  a  declaration  of  inde- 
pendence. He  owned  it  surpassed  his  wisdom  to  know 
what  was  to  be  done.  He  would  propose  recapitulating 
past  errors.  We  ought  not  coolly  to  take  advantage  of 
}  a  moment  of  victory  to  increase  our  demands.  The  idea 
of  marching  through  the  Continent  of  America  was  absurd. 
The  expense  and  love  of  money  were  the  paltry  considera- 
tion and  the  cause  of  these  unhappy  differences.  Distant 
provinces,  with  their  minds  alienated,  would  be  a  burthen 
and  not  a  benefit.  Were  not  the  army  and  fleet  now 
in  America  at  the  mercy  of  the  French?  The  prejudices 
as  well  as  the  rights  of  a  people  ought  to  have  been 
attended  to.  Lord  Granby  seconded  him.  Mr.  Whitmore, 
usually  a  courtier,  spoke  for  the  Opposition ;  asked  if  the 


1776.  SPEECH  OF  GOVERNOR  JOHNSTON.  77 

Houses  had  any  terms  to  propose  to  the  Americans  ? — if 
they  had,  what  terms  ?  Were  the  present  measures  Lord 
North's,  or  were  they  forced  upon  him  ?  Governor 
Johnston  made  a  very  warm  speech,  and  appealed  to 
the  House  whether  he  ought  to  alter  his  principles  when 
all  he  had  foretold  was  come  to  pass  ?  The  declaration  of 
independence  had  been  a  case  of  necessity.  Would  not 
they  also  call  in  foreign  assistance?  He  urged  the  Mi- 
ninisters  (and  so  did  others  in  both  Houses,  though  without 
a  reply)  with  the  open  residence  at  Paris  of  Silas  Deane, 
the  agent  for  the  Colonies.  Washington's  business  was 
to  gain  time.  The  Marquis  de  Pombal,  Minister  of  Por- 
tugal, exceeded  Machiavel  in  art ;  the  whole  quarrel  was  a 
blind.  Why  should  Spain  attack  their  settlements,  when 
she  could  immediately  march  into  their  country?  The 
Speech  from  the  Throne  was  full  of  hypocrisy.  General 
Gage  had  published  a  proclamation  against  hypocrisy  ;  he 
wished  he  would  execute  it  on  his  Majesty's  Ministers. 
What  gorged  contractor,  what  fawning  courtier,  or  new- 
made  peer  would  assert  that  the  Americans  stood  upon 
equal  liberty  with  us  ?  The  press  for  seamen  was  carried 
on  with  the  greatest  barbarity — several  lives  had  been  lost. 
This,  Wombwell,  a  merchant  attached  to  Lord  Sandwich, 
denied — said  only  one  life  had  been  lost,  and  that  the  pre- 
parations for  war  were  popular  in  the  City.  Wilkes  said 
the  pressgangs  did  not  dare  to  enter  the  City,  from  the 
well-known  love  of  liberty  in  the  present  Chief  Magistrate, 
Sawbridge.  The  Americans  had  been  driven  into  inde- 
pendence by  the  obstinacy  of  the  Administration.  The 
Ministers  had  foretold  it,  but  had  no  more  reasons  to  plume 
themselves  on  the  completion  than  the  Jesuits,  who  pro- 
phesied Henry  IV.  would  die  within  the  year,  and  hired 
Ravaillac  to  murder  him.  There  was  no  way  of  bringing 


78  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

back  the  Americans  to  temper  but  by  restoring  their 
charters,  repealing  all  the  acts  since  1762,  and  recalling  the 
army.  The  Ministers  sat  silent,  very  indecently  at  such 
a  moment,  unless  that  they  knew  not  what  to  say.  T. 
Townshend,  provoked  at  this  behaviour,  and  seeing  Lord 
North  go  down  the  House,  started  up  and  said  he  thought 
the  noble  Lord  was  going  away,  and  had  left  the  debate  to 
secretaries  and  clerks  to  finish,  and  send  him  a  list  of  the 
numbers  when  it  was  over.  It  was  the  first  instance, 
he  believed,  of  Ministers  sitting  silent  till  that  time  of 
night  on  a  day  of  so  much  consequence !  However,  he 
hoped  for  some  information,  if  they  did  not  think  them- 
selves too  great  to  be  responsible.  We  had  lost  as  many 
merchantmen  as  in  a  French  and  Spanish  war.  The 
1  Gazette,'  on  the  affair  of  Charles  Town,  had  been  a  libel 
on  General  Clinton.  Men-of-war  could  not  hinder  an  inva- 
sion ;  we  wanted  frigates  at  home  and  had  none. 

Lord  North  then  rose  with  some  apology.5  He  said 
Lord  John  had  said  we  must  carry  America  by  the 
sword,  or  abandon  it.  No,  the  first  measure  would  be  for 
some  of  the  colonies  to  break  off"  from  the  general  confederacy. 
He  hoped  to  put  an  end  to  the  troubles  by  vigour  on  one 
hand  and  moderation  on  the  other.  But  Lord  John's  words 
would  give  the  Americans  fresh  courage.  He  had  been 
asked  what  was  the  state  of  foreign  powers.  The  French 
had  six  sail-of-the-line,  and  four  frigates  ready  to  put 
to  sea.  But  when  he  heard  of  their  sending  for  their 
registered  seamen  all  over  their  kingdom,  he  had  thought 
it  necessary  to  arm  too.  We  had  twenty-three  guardships 
fitted  out,  and  partly  manned.  He  did  not  believe  any 
hostile  intention  on  the  part  of  any  foreign  power ;  that  was 


5  This  speech  alone  was  a  full  condemnation  of  the  Ministry. 


1770.  LORD  NORTH'S  REPLY.  79 

to  say,  now  immediately.  He  hoped  and  trusted  our 
armament  was  merely  for  precaution.  His  Majesty  had 
no  ambitious  views,  only  to  take  from  the  Americans  the 
hopes  of  foreign  supply.  But  there  was  another  charge, 
the  hypocrisy  in  the  speech — consisting  in  what  ?  In  his 
Majesty's  wishes  to  restore  America  to  the  full  enjoyment 
of  law  and  liberty.  The  Acts  restraining  that  country 
were  made  in  consequence  of  the  insults  received.  Happy 
was  it  for  the  gentlemen  in  Opposition  that  they  were 
here  where  liberty  exists  ;  if  in  America,  half  as  much  said 
against  the  Congress  would  be  punished.  Colonel  Barre 
said  Lord  North  had  not  answered  what  terms  had  been 
offered  to  the  Americans.  Lord  North  replied  the  trans- 
action had  been  published  in  the  *  Gazette '  from  Lord 
Howe's  letters.  Barre  then  complained  that  his  letters 
from  America  were  stopped,  and  he  asked  Lord  North 
whether  any  preparation  of  a  particular  sort  was  making, 
and  whether  Administration  had  any  intelligence  of  it? 
(This  looked  as  if  he  meant  invasion.)  Lord  North  had 
formerly  said,  "  Let  France  and  Spain  both  interfere,  this 
country  was  ready  to  face  them."  Should  Washington  be 
beaten,  he  should  not  alter  his  opinion ;  liberty  takes  a 
great  deal  of  killing.  Twenty-three  guardships  and  twelve 
others !  they  would  not  find  men  to  man  them ;  nor  could 
a  majority  of  both  Houses  beat  the  French.  It  was  said 
we  had  made  a  treaty  for  20,000  Russians,  but  the  French 
would  be  within  sound  of  that  House,  when  some  of  those 
who  voted  for  the  measures  of  Government  would  be  ready 

• 

to  die  of  the  fright.  Admiral  Keppel  said  if  he  had  been 
attended  to  last  year  we  should  not  be  in  the  situation  he 
feared  we  were  in  now.  Why  were  there  not  frigates  on 
the  coasts  of  France  and  Spain  to  secure  our  trade  ?  It 
was  not  line-of-battle  ships  alone  that  could  prevent  an 


80  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

invasion.  Here,  added  he,  I  stand  a  Vice-Admiral,  that 
has  been  forty  years  at  sea — the  only  reward  I  have. 
Lord  George  Germaine  said  no  man  wished  more  than  he 
did  to  see  that  brave  Admiral  employed.  A  cartel  could 
I  not  be  had  ;  rebels  offered  to  exchange  man  for  man.  It 
'  was  known  the  Legislative  Power  would  be  assembled  at 
New  York,  and  put  at  the  peace  of  the  King.  He  con- 
fessed crossing  the  lakes  had  taken  up  more  time  than  he 
expected.  Carleton's  army  consisted  of  11,000  men; 
Howe's  of  25,000.  He  knew  of  no  preparations  on  the 
coast  of  France.  The  motion  was  rather  a  censure  on 
Ministers  and  measures  than  a  cure  for  them.  The  nearer 
the  country  was  to  unanimity  the  better.  Must  we  ask 
leave  of  France  and  Spain  to  control  our  own  colo- 
nies ?  Not  that  he  meant  France  intended  to  attack  us. 
What  would  become  of  their  islands  if  America  got  the 
better  of  us  ?  what  of  the  Spanish  continent  ?  They  might 
laugh  perhaps  at  our  present  situation,  but  would  not  at 
the  independence  of  the  Americans.  Charles  Fox  answered 
Lord  George  in  one  of  his  finest  and  most  animated  ora- 
tions, and  with  severity  to  the  answered  person.  He  made 
Lord  North's  conciliatory  proposition  be  read,  which,  he 
said,  his  Lordship  seemed  to  have  forgotten,  and  he  de- 
clared he  thought  it  better  to  abandon  America  than 
attempt  to  conquer  it. 

Mr.  Gibbon,  author  of  the  ( Roman  History,'  a  very 
v  good  judge,  and,  being  on  the  Court  side,  an  impartial  one, 
told  me  he  never  heard  a  more  masterly  speech  than 
Fox's  in  his  life ;  and  he  said  he  observed  Thurlow  and 
Wedderburne,  the  Attorney  and  Solicitor  Generals,  com- 
plimenting which  should  answer  it,  and,  at  last,  both  de- 
clining it. 

General  Conway  concluded  the  debate  with  very  few 


1776.  THE  ADDRESS  MOVED  IN  THE  LORDS.  81 

words.  He  said  he  rose  simply  to  say  it  was  so  unusual 
to  him  to  dissent  to  the  address,  that  he  wished  to  explain 
his  reasons  why  he  should  be  against  it  now.  He  could 
not  be  for  it  without  a  manifest  contradiction  of  all  those 
principles  he  had  hitherto  professed ;  at  the  same  time 
that  he  should  vote  for  the  counter-address  or  amendment, 
he  owned  there  were  parts  of  it  he  did  not  like.  The 
House  divided  at  eleven  at  night  on  the  amendment, 
which  was  rejected  by  242  to  87-  The  Opposition  then 
divided  again  on  the  Gourt-address,  which  was  carried  by 
232  to  83,  and  at  twelve  they  broke  up. 

The  address  in  the  Lords  was  moved  by  Lord  Carlisle 
and  Lord  Radnor.6  The  Marquis  of  Buckingham  offered 
the  same  counter-address  that  had  been  proposed  in  the 
other  House  by  Lord  John  Cavendish,  and  was  seconded 
by  the  Duke  of  Manchester.  Lord  Mountstewart,  in  a 
manly,  becoming  manner,  defended  Administration,  and 
persisted  in  recommending  reduction  of  the  Colonies.  The 
Duke  of  Richmond  declaimed  against  corruption,  said  he 
would  keep  within  Parliamentary  grounds  as  far  as  he 
could,  but  the  nation  was  so  sold  to  the  Crown,  that 
nothing  but  the  King's  goodness  prevented  our  being  abso- 
lute slaves.  He  insisted  that  if,  as  the  speech  said,  we 
still  received  amicable  professions  from  France  and  Spain, 
we  had  as  much  reason  to  believe  them  this  year  as  last ; 
but  pressing  sailors  and  our  other  preparations  showed  we 
did  not  believe  those  professions  any  longer.  He  recom- 
mended peace  with  America,  if  it  could  be  gotten,  and 
called  on  Lord  Sandwich  for  the  state  of  our  navy.  Lord 
Sandwich  said  he  saw  no  likelihood  of  foreign  war,  but 
we  did  not  trust  assurances  any  longer,  because  France 

s  I  am  not  sure  whether  it  was  Lord  I  told  the  former,   the   newspapers  said 
Radnor  or    Lord  Falconberg ;    I  was  |  the  latter. 

VOL.    II.  O 


82  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

and  Spain  were  arming :  he  vaunted  much  of  our  fleet  and 
of  his  care  of  it.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  spoke  warmly 
on  our  defenceless  situation,  and  Lord  Shelburne  with  still 
more  weight.  He  said  he  had  been  lately  in  France,  and 
had  seen  their  preparations ;  but,  as  they  had  admitted 
him  into  their  seaports,  he  thought  it  would  be  acting  like 
a  spy,  not  like  a  gentleman,  to  mention  what  he  had  seen ! 
He  had  even  quitted  one  port  abruptly  where  they  had 
been  too  ready  to  give  him  full  inspection  !  But  of  what 
was  notorious  to  everybody  he  might  speak ;  and  then,  after 
mentioning  their  great  preparations,  he  enlarged  on  the 
great  countenance  shown  to  Silas  Deane,  and  the  open 
trade  with  the  colonies.  Lord  Weyrnouth  and  Lord 
Bristol  defended  the  Court  and  Admiralty.  Lord  Camden 
said  not  a  word.  The  Court-address  was  carried  by  82 
to  26. 


177G.  MASSACHUSSETS  SET  ON  FIEE.  83 


NOVEMBER. 


2nd.  AT  night  General  Howe's  second  aide-de-camp  ar- 
rived with  an  account  of  his  being  in  possession  of  New 
York  from  the  15th  of  September.  General  Washington 
had  removed  the  sick,  and  had  retired  within  his  lines  at 
King's  Bridge.  Howe  had  again  deceived  the  Provincials 
by  a  feint  manoeuvre,  and  the  Provincials  certainly  did 
not  seem  to  have  able  generals.  3000  of  them  were 
repulsed  with  no  considerable  loss.  On  the  20th,  some  of 
the  people  of  the  Massachussets  set  fire  to  the  town,  and 
above  a  quarter  of  it  was  burnt  before  the  flames  could  be 
extinguished.  Two  were  taken  and  hanged,  and  died 
glorying  in  their  exploit.  It  was  said  that  this  act  had 
made  very  ill  blood  between  the  New  Yorkists  and  the 
colony  of  Massachussets.  The  Court  was  mortified  that 
nothing  more  was  yet  done ;  and  I  was  told  by  very  good 
authority  that  Howe  had  written  that  the  lines  were  so 
strong  he  should  attempt  nothing  farther  till  joined  by  the 
rest  of  the  Hessians. 

It  is  certain  that  Governor  Tryon's  letters  were  very 
unpromising ;  and  one  of  the  King's  personal  domestics 
said  the  King  had  received  very  unwelcome  letters.  Dr. 
Franklin,  and  two  other  leaders  of  the  Congress,  went  to 
the  Howes  to  treat.  He  asked  them  from  whom  they 
came?  they  said  from  the  Independent  States  of  America. 
"  Then,"  said  Lord  Howe,  "  I  cannot  receive  you."  Yet  it 
was  said  he  did  desire  them  to  stay.  Some  thought  they 
had  come  in  hopes  of  being  rejected,  which  might  fix  the 
people  more  firmly  to  them. 

o  2 


84  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 

It  is  not  improbable  but  the  more  pacific  Proclamation 
noticed  above  might  have  been  issued  in  consequence  of 
sudden  orders  despatched  from  hence,  in  consequence  of 
the  letters  received  from  General  Howe  on  the  10th  of 
August,  in  which  he  represented  the  strong  position  of  the 
Americans,  and  of  the  account  received  on  the  21st  of 
the  same  month  of  the  miscarriage  at  Charles  Town,  at 
which  time  the  Court  thought  very  ill  of  the  affairs  in  Ame- 
rica. The  Proclamation  was  not  issued  till  the  19th  of 
September,  and  being  so  different  from  Lord  Howe's  first 
Proclamation  looked  very  much  like  new  orders.  A 
light  frigate  might  in  twenty-seven  days,  I  believe,  arrive 
at  New  York. 

Sawbridge,  the  Lord  Mayor,  now  quitted  at  the  end  of 
his  year ;  having  done  nothing  in  his  mayoralty  remark- 
able, but  not  permitting  the  pressgangs  at  this  time  to 
enter  the  City.  Sir  Thomas  Halifax  succeeded  him,  and 
invited  the  Ministers  to  his  feast,  to  which  they  had  not 
been  asked  for  seven  years.  Thus  Wilkes  by  his  impru- 
dence, and  by  the  folly  of  the  Opposition,  lost  the  City. 

9th.  The  House  of  Commons  voted  45,000  seamen, 
though  they  gave  out  that  they  did  not  believe  there  would 
be  a  war  with  France.  Temple  Luttrell  abused  Lord 
Sandwich  outrageously,  and  pledged  himself  to  the  House 
to  move  an  address  to  the  King  to  remove  him.  He 
was  defended  by  Lord  North,  the  Attorney-General, 
the  two  members  for  Huntingdon,  Lord  Mulgrave  and 
Wombwell. 

In  all  this  contest  with  America,  the  Presbyterians  and 

other  Dissenters,  who  could  not  but  see  the  designs  of  the 

Court,    and  its  notorious  partiality  to  Roman    Catholics, 

i  were  entirely  passive  in  England,  being  bribed  or  sold  by 

their  leaders.     In  Ireland  they  were  not  quite  so  quiet, 


177t>.  TOE  NEW  'MORNING  POST.'  85 

and  I  heard  a  person  in  very  high  office,  and  a  great  pre- 
tender to  religion,  say,  that  the  Presbyterians  were  the 
worst  subjects  the  King  had,  and  that  the  Roman  Catho- 
lics were  better  subjects. 

13th.  A  new  and  most  infamous  paper  was  set  up,  and 
sold  as  the  '  Morning  Post.'  Bates  the  clergyman,  and 
author  of  the  old  one,  prosecuted  the  printer,  and  got  an 
injunction  against  him.  Yet  Bates,  not  content,  took  a 
most  extraordinary  step.  He  sent  about  the  town  a  pro- 
cession of  thirty  or  forty  persons,  dressed  expensively,  like 
Hussars,  in  yellow  habits,  with  blue  waistcoats  and  breeches, 
and  high  caps,  streamers  and  colours  flying,  and  martial 
music,  the  musicians  in  mask,  and  labels  with  *  The  Morn- 
ing Post'  on  their  caps,  and  they  distributed  handbills  in 
behalf  of  the  old  paper.  A  masquerade  exhibited  by  a 
clergyman  in  behalf  of  a  most  scandalous  paper,  particu- 
larly abusive  on  women  of  the  first  rank,  in  the  midst  of 
a  civil  war !  what  words  can  come  up  to  the  profligacy, 
insensibility,  and  degeneracy  of  the  times  ? 

Dunning  moved  for  information  against  two  justices 
of  the  peace,  who  refused  to  tender  the  oaths  to  Roman 
Catholics ;  Lord  Mansfield  said  he  did  not  like  reviving 
that  sort  of  persecution,  and  refused  the  information.  This 
was  consonant  to  the  restoration  of  Popery  in  Canada,  and 
opposition  to  all  favour  to  Dissenters. 

Iftth.  The  King  sent  for  Admiral  Keppel,  and  gave 
him  the  command  of  the  Fleet  of  Observation — yet  the 
Ministers  professed  not  expecting  a  French  war! — yet  some 
owned  that  nothing  but  a  strong  fleet  could  prevent  it. 
And  they  bragged  of  having  twenty-five  ships  of  the  Line 
ready ;  yet  Lord  Mulgrave  owned  to  the  King  at  his 
levee  that  his  ship  wanted  two  hundred  men  of  its  comple- 
ment. They  had  now  thoughts  of  enforcing  pressing  in  the 


86  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 

City,  though  the  Court  of  Aldermen  had  just  thanked 
Sawbridge  for  having  resisted  it  in  his  Mayoralty. 

2\st.  Lord  Harcourt's  term  in  Ireland  had  long  been 
expired,  and  he  had  long  been  soliciting  his  recall.  The 
Court  had  endeavoured  by  all  means  to  persuade  Lord 
Rochford  to  accept  that  government,  but  he  could  not  be 
persuaded  to  reside  there  the  whole  term.  Lord  Hills- 
borough  was  most  desirous  of  that  post,  but  being  an  Irish- 
man, could  not  obtain  it.  It  was  now  at  last,  by  the  in- 
terest of  Lord  Suffolk,  bestowed  on  Lord  Buckingham, 
who  had  pined  himself  into  illness  for  it,  and  who  was, 
perhaps,  of  all  the  nobility  the  least  fit — nay,  the  most 
unfit,  for  it.  He  was  weak,  proud,  avaricious,  peevish, 
fretful,  and  femininely  observant  of  the  punctilio  of  visits ; 
and  he  had  every  one  of  those  defects  in  the  extreme, 
with  their  natural  concomitant,  obstinacy.  His  wife  had 
more  sense  with  as  much  pride.  The  condition  and  per- 
haps chief  inducement  to  the  nomination  of  Lord  Bucking- 
ham, was  that  he  was  to  have  no  disposal  of  military  pre- 
ferments. He  had  previously  been  Ambassador  in  Russia. 
His  first  wife  was  the  daughter  of  Sir  Thomas  Drury, 
by  whom  he  had  only  four  daughters,  which  had  fretted 
him  so  much,  that  her  apprehension  of  his  ill-humour 
on  the  birth  of  the  last  was  thought  to  have  contri- 
buted to  her  death.  He  then  married  a  sister  of  Mr. 
Conolly  of  Ireland,  and  had  two  sons  by  her,  who  both 
died  within  a  short  time  of  each  other,  before  the  eldest 
was  three  years  old.  Lord  Gower  had  endeavoured  to 
make  his  son-in-law,  the  young  Earl  of  Carlisle,  Lord 
Lieutenant ;  but  Lord  George  Germaine  and  Lord  Suffolk 
carried  it  for  Lord  Buckingham. 

22nd.  Arrived  letters  from  General  Carleton,  with  an 
account  of  the  destruction  of  the  Provincial  Fleet  on  Lake 


1776.  DESTRUCTION  OF  PROVINCIAL  FLEET.  87 

Champlain,  on  the  llth  and  13th  of  October,  twelve  of 
their  vessels  being  taken  or  destroyed  out  of  fifteen.  The 
Royalists  had,  with  almost  incredible  expedition,  built  or 
rebuilt  thirty  vessels;  and  the  Americans,  having  no  notion 
of  their  being  able  to  be  ready  so  soon,  and  indeed  seeming 
to  have  totally  wanted  all  intelligence,  were  surprised  and 
defeated.  Arnold,  however,  had  formed  a  plan  to  sur- 
round and  destroy  the  Royal  Fleet ;  and  it  was  thought 
would  have  succeeded,  if  he  had  not  been  disappointed  by 
the  cowardice  or  treachery  of  some  of  his  people.  He, 
however,  fought  with  great  bravery  himself,  and  retired  to 
Ticonderoga,  after  entirely  destroying  Crown  Point.  Carle- 
ton  expressed  much  doubt  from  the  lateness  of  the  season  of 
being  able  to  proceed  any  farther  this  campaign,  so  that  if 
forced  to  return  to  Quebec,  he  had  not  gained  an  inch  of 
ground  by  this  victory.  Men  were  surprised  to  hear  Gene- 
ral Burgoyne  was  immediately  coming  home  on  pretence 
of  his  own  affairs,  but  it  was  supposed  on  disagreement 
with  Carleton. 

2Qth.  Account  of  Grimaldi  and  Panucci,  Prime  Minis- 
ters of  Spain  and  Naples,  being  disgraced.  The  Court  gave 
out  that  this  was  a  favourable  omen  for  peace,  as  the  Due 
de  Choiseul  and  Grimaldi  had  been  authors  of  the  Family 
Compact  There  had  more  recently  appeared  in  the  papers 
a  letter  signed  by  Grimaldi  of  very  hostile  aspect.  An 
American  privateer  had  carried  three  prizes  into  Bilboa ; 
the  Governor  had  detained  them  and  sent  to  Court  for 
orders.  He  was  ordered  by  Grimaldi's  letter  to  restore 
them,  the  King  of  Spain  professing  an  exact  neutrality, 
which  was  in  effect  owning  our  Colonies  for  an  inde- 
pendent state.  We  were  said  to  have  threatened  Portugal, 
that  if  she  did  not  satisfy  Spain  we  would  not  protect 
her. 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 


DECEMBER. 


3rd.  THE  Parliament  adjourned  for  the  holidays. 

It  was  now  known  that  Grimaldi  had  endeavoured  to 
preserve  peace.  As  he  was  extremely  obnoxious  to  the 
Prince  of  Asturias,  who  had  often  affronted  him,  and  as 
Panucci,  Prime  Minister  of  Naples,  was  disgraced  by  the 
intrigues  of  the  Queen,  it  seemed  to  have  been  a  concert 
between  the  younger  part  of  the  Spanish  Royal  Family. 
A  Spanish  fleet  of  six  ships-of-the-line  sailed  immediately 
after  Grimaldi's  disgrace  ;  its  supposed  destination  for  the 
Brazils. 

9th.  General  Burgoyne  again  arrived  from  Quebec  as 
he  had  done  the  last  year.  He  now  pretended  grief  for 
his  wife's  death,  which  was  laughed  at.  The  King  scarce 
spoke  to  him,  and  he  was  forced  to  ask  for  an  audience. 
Some  thought  he  had  quarrelled  with  Carleton ;  but  he  was 
exceedingly  disappointed  at  finding  the  Opposition  had 
quitted  Parliament,  having  probably  hoped,  as  he  had  done 
last  year,  to  be  bribed  from  making  complaints.  He 
brought  news  that  Carleton  had  caused  his  army  to  recross 
the  lakes,  had  abandoned  Crown  Point,  and  not  at- 
tempted Ticonderoga,  where  Major  Gates  was  with 
12,000  men. 

/A  little  before  this  time,  Sericole  and  Jackson,  part- 
ners, and  two  of  the  greatest  Jamaica  merchants  in  London, 
broke,  by  the  failure  of  that  trade,  for  the  amazing  sum  of 
975,000^.  Their  failure  was  so  void  of  fraud  that  their 
creditors  agreed  to  allow  them  1000/.  a  year  a-piece 


177G.  DR.  FRANKLIN  PROCEEDS  TO  FRANCE.  89 

till  their  affairs  could  be  made  up,  and  Lord  North  agreed 
to  lend  them  400,000/.  of  Government  money.  This  loan, 
at  a  time  that  Government  was  so  distressed  for  money,  and 
was  going  to  raise  new  taxes,  was  done  to  stop  the  bad 
effects  of  this  bankruptcy  among  other  merchants,  and  was 
demonstrative  of  the  obstinacy  of  the  Court  in  the  Ameri- 
can war,  which  had  already  brought,  and  must  bring,  on  so 
much  destruction  to  commerce.  \ 

[Oth.  Died  Dr.  Drummond,  Archbishop  of  York;  a 
sensible,  worldly  man,  but  much  addicted  to  his  bottle.  A 
living  had  lapsed  to  the  Crown  by  his  not  being  able  before 
his  death  to  sign  a  presentation  to  it.  The  King  gave  the 
nomination  to  Wedderburne,  because  the  latter 's  wife  had 
landed  interest  where  the  living  lay — the  very  reason  that 
made  him  the  most  improper  person  to  have  the  nomina- 
tion to  it  for  the  interest  of  the  Church  of  York. 
/16th.  An  account  came  that  Dr.  Franklin,  at  the  age 
of  72  or  74,  and  at  the  risk  of  his  head,  had  bravely 
embarked  on  board  an  American  frigate,  and,  with  two 
prizes  taken  in  their  way,  had  landed  at  Nantes  in  France, 
and  was  to  be  at  Paris  on  the  14th,  where  the  highest  ad- 
miration and  expectation  of  him  were  raised.  \  There  could 
be  no  doubt  but  he  came  with  the  fullest  powers  from  the 
Congress  to  announce  the  fullest  independence  of  the  Colo- 
nies, and  to  offer  the  most  advantageous  terms  of  alliance 
and  commerce  to  France — perhaps  to  declare  they  must 
make  peace  with  England  if  not  vigorously  supported, 
though  the  Houses  had  done  nothing,  and  there  was  no 
longer  danger  from  Canada.  Perhaps,  too,  this  bold  step 
was  necessary  to  confirm  the  spirit  of  the  several  pro- 
vinces. It  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  France  can  resist 
such  tempting  offers  of  ruining  us  for  ever,  or  that  M.  de 
Maurepas  can  stem  the  universal  inclination  of  his  country- 


90  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

men  for  the  Americans,   and  the  desire  of  war   in    the 
military,  added  to  the  same  inclinations  in  Spain. 

Dr.  Markham,  the  late  Preceptor  and  Bishop  of  Chester, 
was  promoted  to  the  See  of  York,  after  it  had  been  offered 
to  Dr.  Terrick,  of  London,  who  declined  it  on  his  bad 
health,  and  probably  in  hopes  of  Canterbury.  Markham 
had  been  promised  promotion,  and  no  doubt  fears  of  what 
he  could  divulge  had  still  greater  weight  than  the  promise. 
His  being  preferred,  who  had  offended,  and  Lord  Holder- 
ness,  who  had  pleased,  not  getting  the  Garter,  showed  fear  was 
a  better  solicitor  than  affection.  Dr.  Porteus  succeeded 
to  Chester  on  the  merit  of  preaching  a  loyal  pamphlet  on 
the  Fast,1  and  carried  the  mitre  from  Dr.  Butler,  an  abler 
man,  who  had  expected  it,  but  who,  not  expecting  so  much 
from  the  boasted  success  in  America,  had  made  a  more 
trimming  sermon  on  the  same  occasion.  Butler  was  a 
very  sensible  man,  and  had  written  some  able  pamphlets 
under  the  countenance  of  Mr.  Leggein  1765  and  1766;  but 
losing  his  patron,  and  seeing  the  tide  turned,  had  turned  a 
zealous  courtier.  He  had  desired  my  brother,  Sir  Edward 
Walpole,  to  desire  I  would  get  Lord  Hertford  to  make  him 
the  King's  Chaplain,  saying  he  had  a  good  estate,  and  said 
he  only  wanted  a  feather,  not  a  deanery  or  bishopric.  I 
obtained  it.  He  was  afflicted  with  the  stone,  and  bore 
being  cut  for  it  with  the  greatest  fortitude — but  could  not 
bear  the  disappointment  of  the  mitre  with  equal  heroism, 
but  with  much  weakness. 

/The  Fast  Sermon  let  loose  all  the  zeal  of  the  clergy,  and 
contributed  to  raise  the  infatuation  of  England  against 
America.  Indeed  it  was  no  wonder,  for  the  Court  had 
now  at  their  devotion  the  three  great  bodies  of  the  clergy, 

1  On  the  Fasten  the  13th  nobody  was  I  and  the  Courtiers  went  everywhere   to 
admitted   to  Court  but  in   mourning,  |  church  in  mourning. 


1770. 


SURRENDER  OF  FORT  WASHINGTON. 


91 


army,  and  law.  Lord  Mansfield  encouraged  writings 
full  of  all  the  old  exploded  nonsense  of  passive  obedience 
and  non-resistance.  \  He  employed  particularly  a  Dr. 
Lynde,  who  had  written  those  able  letters,  on  very  dif- 
ferent principles,  on  the  partition  of  Poland.  On  the  Fast, 
too,  a  sermon  against  all  the  principles  of  the  Revolution 
was  preached  and  licensed  at  Oxford  by  Dr.  Miles  Cooper, 
late  President  of  the  College  at  New  York.  This  was 
severely  attacked  in  the  public  papers  in  a  letter  to 
the  Bishop  of  London,  who  was  called  on  to  know  if 
Cooper  had  received  any  share  of  the  subscription  for  the 
suffering  American  clergy,  for  whom  above  5000/.  had 
been  collected,  and  of  which  no  account  had  been  yet 
given.  An  answer  appeared  that  Cooper  had  received 
nothing  thence.  The  conversation  of  many  courtiers  was 
openly  in  favour  of  arbitrary  power.  Lord  Huntingdon 
and  Dr.  Barnard,  Dean  of  Derry,  who  was  promised  an 
Irish  Bishopric,  held  such  discourse  publicly. 

29M.  Came  accounts  of  the  surrender  to  Howe  of  Fort 
Washington  with  2700  prisoners,  Washington  retiring, 
according  to  the  plan  of  protracting  the  war,  and  not  fight- 
ing. However,  the  Americans  had  so  far  behaved  well, 
that  Howe  had  been  in  danger  of  a  defeat,  and  the 
Hessians  had  suffered  considerably.2  Lord  Percy's  horse 


*  Among  the  writers  who  this  year 
discussed  the  Anglo-American  question 
in  pamphlets  was  Dr.  Tucker,  who  in 
1758  was  rewarded  with  the  Deanery  of 
Gloucester,  for  having  secured  the  re- 
turn of  Mr.  Nugent,  afterwards  Lord 
Clare,  for  Bristol,  where  Tucker  was 
rector  of  St.  Stephens.  Tucker  held 
liberal  views,  and  in  a  series  of  pam- 
phlets he  advocated  the  expediency  of 
the  mother  country  allowing  the  colo- 
nies to  separate  from  her  government, 
and  even  to  defend  them  from  foreign 
aggression,  if  they  sought  for  it.  These 
pamphlets  awoke  the  satiric  muse  of 


Soame  Jenyns,  a  multifarious  writer, 
of  the  Board  of  Trade,  who  had  pub- 
lished, among  other  works,  a  poem  '  On 
the  Art  of  Dancing,'  and  a  'View  of  the 
Internal  Evidences  of  the  Christian 
Religion.'  From  the  satire  on  Dean 
Tucker  (the  reader  will  be  reminded 
of  Mason's  satire  'Of  the  Dean  and 
the  Squire'),  I  take  the  following 
stanzas : — 

'Crown'd  be  the  man  with  lasting  praise, 

Who  first  contrived  the  pin. 
To  louse  mad  horses  from  the  chain. 
And  save  the  works  within. 


Each 


92  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.       DEC.  1770. 

had  been  killed  under  him  as  Lord  Howe  stood  close  by 
him.  The  proclamation,  which  had  been  so  disliked  here, 
had  had  no  effect.  Not  an  American,  but  Scotch  and 
Irish  had  come  in.  The  Americans  were  all  sullen  and 
determined ;  and  the  prisoners  made  at  Fort  Washington 
had  sent  to  their  General  to  beg  he  would  not  treat 
for  their  exchange,  as  an  exchange  would  be  more  be- 
neficial to  the  King  than  to  him.  The  Howes  had  lost 
many  men  and  pressed  for  recruits.  General  Carleton  had 
written  for  4000  more.  The  Administration  determined  to 
make  a  vigorous  campaign,  and  treated  for  10,000  Wirtem- 
bergers  and  other  Germans. 

The  Opposition  came  no  more  to  Parliament  after  the 
first  day.  I  had  endeavoured  last  winter  to  persuade  them 
to  secede,  with  a  public  protest  against  the  present  mea- 
sures. They  had  approved  the  measure  but  did  nothing. 
I  told  them  they  must  foretell  calamities — it  would  be  too 
late  after  they  happened  or  after  success.  They  thought  of 
it  again  in  autumn,  and  did  no  more,  and  now  kept  from 
Parliament  without  giving  any  reasons  there  or  to  the 
public ;  and  in  the  meantime  had  seen  all  England  turn 
against  them,  the  Court  being  as  industrious  as  they  were 
irresolute  and  inactive. 


Each  claiming  now  his  natural  right 

Scorns  to  obey  his  brother ; 
So  they  proceed  to  kick  and  bite, 

And  worry  one  another. 
Hungry  at  last,  and  blind  and  lame, 

Bleeding  at  nose  and  eyes, 
By  sufTrings  grown  extremely  tame, 

And  by  experience  wise ; 


With  bellies  full  of  liberty, 

But  void  of  oats  and  hay, 
They  both  sneak  back,  their  folly  see, 

And  run  no  more  away. 
Let  all  who  view  th'  instructive  scene, 

And  patronize  the  plan, 
Give  thanks  to  tiloster's  honest  Dean, 

For  TUCKEE  thou'rt  the  man.' 

SOAMK  JKNYNS. 

— D. 


1777. 
JANUARY. 


.  AN  express  arrived  that  Bristol  was  in  flames ;  at 
least  so  the  Administration  gave  out.  The  fact  was,  that 
some  houses  had  been  set  on  fire,  and  about  six  burnt ;  the 
highest  amount  of  the  loss  being  8000/.  The  cause  was 
very  uncertain.  The  Court  party  there  had  with  great 
difficulty  procured  an  address  against  the  Americans,  and 
some  thought  the  opposite  party,  which  was  very  nume- 
rous, had  done  this  in  revenge.  The  Court  endeavoured  . 
to  make  it  thought  an  American  plot  (just  as  they  had 
laboured  to  instil  the  belief  of  Sayer's  plot,  exactly,  too, 
before  the  meeting  of  Parliament).  They  combined  the 
fire  at  Bristol  with  a  late  attempt  of  the  same  kind  at 
Portsmouth,  and  did  spread  a  great  panic,  though  for 
very  few  days. 

22nd.  The  Parliament,  but  none  of  the  Opposition 
attended.  Several  meetings  of  his  friends  were  held  at 
Lord  Buckingham's,  and  Burke  drew  up  a  strong  petition 
to  the  King — a  most  absurd  way  of  dispensing  with  their 
own  attendance  in  Parliament ;  but,  though  they  invited 
not  Lord  Chatham,  Lord  Camden,  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  to 
those  meetings,  they  could  agree  on  nothing  amongst 
themselves. 

23rd.  Accounts  came  of  Rhode  Island  having  sur- 
rendered to  the  Howes. 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  died  in  the  South  of  France,  where 
he  was  for  the  recovery  of  his  health.  Lord  Frederick 
Campbell  was  competitor  for  his  place,  but  the  Duke  of 
Buccleugh  strongly  supporting  the  Lord  Advocate,  he 
succeeded  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  as  Keeper  of  the  Signet, 
paying  a  pension  to  the  famous  Andrew  Stuart,  and  Lord 
F.  Campbell  had  a  grant  of  his  own  pension  for  life.  The 
Treasurership  of  the  Navy  was  reserved  for  Lord  Howe, 
who  had  held  it  before. 


FEBRUARY. 


8th.  THE  Ministers  brought  in  a  bill  for  suspending  the 
Habeas  Corpus  with  regard  to  the  Americans.  I  had  re- 
ceived intelligence  of  this  bill  three  weeks  before,  and,  being 
ill,  sent  for  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  acquainted  him  with 
that  intention,  which,  indeed,  I  had  .concluded  would  be 
a  general  suspension.  I  said  to  him,  "My  Lord,  this 
bill  you  must  oppose,  or  you  and  your  friends  will  lose  all 
credit.  I  think  I  have  an  idea  that  by  anticipation  will 
throw  cold  water  on  the  intended  bill,  or  at  least  will 
furnish  the  Opposition  with  a  most  justifiable  and  popular 
cause  of  secession.  I  would  take  advantage  of  Dr.  Miles 
Cooper's  sermon  l  as  a  handle  of  complaint ;  not  for  cen- 
sure, for  I  would  seem  to  despise  it,  but  I  would  complain 
of  the  prerogative  sermons  and  pamphlets  lately  printed 
and  published  under  the  countenance  of  the  Court ;  and  I 
would  urge  that  many  persons  were  alarmed  at  the  en- 


1  Many  of  the  fast  sermons  wore  in 
the  same  strains ;  even  Bishop  Kurd's 


sermon,  though  more  guarded,  breathed 
the  same  prerogative  spirit. 


1777.         H.  WALPOLE'S  ADVICE  TO  D.  OF  RICHMOND.  95 

courageinent  given  to  such  arbitrary  doctrines,  and  at  the 
suspected  views  of  the  Court ;  and  I  would  press  the 
Administration  to  make  a  declaration  of  their  not  having 
any  such  views.  I  would  tell  them,  my  Lord,  that  I  and 
my  friends  would  be  satisfied  if  they  would  concur  in  the 
following  resolution,  as  an  earnest  of  their  sincerity,  and 
then  I  would  move : — '  Resolved,  That  Magna  Charta,  the 
Bill  of  Right,  the  Habeas  Corpus,  the  Liberty  of  the 
Press,  and  Trial  by  Juries,  are  the  unalterable  bulwarks 
of  the  Constitution  ;  and  whoever  shall  endeavour  to  alter, 
weaken,  or  abrogate  those  sacred  foundations,  by  preach- 
ing, writing,  speaking,  or  voting,  is  an  enemy  to  his 
country  and  to  the  house  of  Hanover,  which  was  brought 
over  to  guard  and  maintain  those  invaluable  blessings.'  I 
added,  *  My  Lord,  I  will  give  your  Grace  this  motion  in 
writing,  but  I  beg  you  will  transcribe  it,  for  it  will  be 
sufficient  reason  to  your  friends  (I  meant  Lord  John 
Cavendish  and  Mr.  Burke)  not  to  come  into  it,  that  it 
comes  from  me.  The  motion  will  throw  previous  disgrace 
on  the  intended  suspension  of  the  Habeas  Corpus,  and 
alarm  men  against  it.'"  The  Duke  replied,  "The  Minis- 
ters will  say  these  things  are  better  confirmed  by  being  the 
laws  of  the  land."  "  I  know  it,  my  Lord,"  said  I ;  "  but 
being  so,  with  what  grace  can  they  refuse  you  this  satisfac- 
tion ?  Yet  I  dare  to  say  they  will,  by  moving  for  the  pre- 
vious question  ;  then  you  will  have  the  best  foundation  in 
the  world  for  seceding,  and  giving  your  reasons  in  print." 
I  communicated  my  intelligence  to  Charles  Fox,  the 
Duke  of  Grafton,  and  Lord  Camden,  too,  but  neither 
they  nor  the  Rockinghams  would  believe  there  could  be 
such  a  design,  till  the  bill  itself  came  into  Parliament. 

The  object  certainly  was  to  keep  the  American  captives 
in  prison,   and  not  be  obliged  to  bring  them  to  trial   till 


96  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

the  end  of  the  war,  or  till  it  should  be  convenient  to 
the  Court,  either  by  exchange  of  prisoners  or  by  any 
other  means.  Yet  I  do  not  doubt  but  the  Court,  and 
Lord  Mansfield  in  particular,  were  willing  to  accustom  the 
nation  to  suspensions  of  the  Habeas  Corpus ;  Lord  Mans- 
field never  omitting  any  opportunity  of  undermining  the 
bulwarks  and  blessings  of  liberty. 

None  of  Lord  Rockingham's  friends  appeared  in  the 
House  against  the  bill ;  but.  Lord  Shelburne  was  not  so 
foolishly  inactive.  Governor  Johnston's  brother  opposed 
it,  and  Dunning  moved  for  the  printing ;  and  even  this 
faint  opposition  so  alarmed  the  Ministers,  that  they  ex- 
plained away  the  spirit  of  the  bill,  and  admitted  such 
alterations,  clauses,  and  softenings,  as  took  off  much  of  its 
obnoxiousness,  and  showed  that  if  the  whole  opposition 
had  acted  with  vigour,  they  would  have  kept  a  most 
wicked,  designing,  but  cowardly  Ministry  in  great  awe ; 
and  as  Charles  Fox  told  them  in  the  course  of  the  bill, 
they  had  thought  to  steal  this  dangerous  bill  on  the  nation 
by  the  secession  of  the  Opposition,  and  by  altering  it, 
showed  how  bad  it  had  been  in  its  original  concoction. 
But  did  not  this  tell  Lord  Rockingham,  too,  how  mis- 
chievous their  secession  was  ? 

Lord  Rockingham  held  a  meeting  to  consider  whether 
they  should  return  and  oppose,  and  they  had  great  divi- 
sions. Lord  Rockingham,  the  Cavendishes,  and  Burke 
adhered  to  their  stupid  retreat,  but  Charles  Fox  would  not ; 
and  even  Sir  George  Saville,  though  more  attached  to 
Lord  Rockingham,  was  so  honest  as  to  attend  the  House 
on  the  third  reading,  and  spoke  against  the  bill.  The 
proud  obstinacy  of  the  others  only  betrayed  to  the  world 
the  divisions  in  the  party.  Lord  Shelburne  and  the  Duke 
of  Grafton,  and  perhaps  Lord  Camden  (I  am  not  sure), 


1777.      SECOND  READING  OF  THE  HABEAS  CORPUS  BILL.       97 

intended  to  oppose  the  bill  warmly  in  the  Lords,  but 
Dunning's  clause  being  accepted,  they  did  not. 

1  \th.  The  bill  was  read  a  second  time,  and  opposed  by 
Dunning,  Johnston,  T.  Townshend,  and  Charles  Fox. 
Lord  North  ridiculed  the  last,  and  said  he  should  not  have 
known  the  Opposition  was  so  insignificant  if  the  gentle- 
man had  not  owned  it.  It  was  voted  by  195  to  43. 

l'2th.  The  Common  Council  voted  a  petition  against 
the  bill,  and  it  was  presented  by  the  sheriffs. 

\3(h.  Dunning  proposed  an  explanatory  clause,  which 
Cornwall  amending,  it  was  understood  that  the  Adminis- 
tration accepted  it,  when  Rigby  rose,  and  in  a  most 
vociferous  manner  declared  he  thought  the  bill,  so  far  from 
dangerous  or  too  extensive,  did  not  go  far  enough ;  nay, 
he  wished  for  a  total  suspension,  as  he  had  formerly  seen 
(though  that  was  in  this  country  when  the  Rebellion 
raged).  This  slavish  flattery  came  with  still  worse  grace 
from  Rigby,  as  all  his  inflammatory  speeches  for  the  war 
had  done,  as  his  place  of  paymaster  was  considerably 
swollen  by  the  raging  of  the  war.  The  House,  no  less 
venal  and  ductile,  applauded  Rigby 's  fury ;  and  Lord 
North,  who  it  appeared  had  not  even  read  the  bill,  made 
Cornwall  rise  again  and  disclaim  any  agreement  in  the 
clause.  Adam,  as  usual,  censured  Lord  North  for  want 
of  violence,  and  Wedderburne  made  a  very  poor  speech 
for  the  bill.  Con  way  again  recommended  peace,  said  he 
was  no  seceder,  would  support  anybody  that  could  com- 
pose our  troubles,  and  urged  the  probability  of  war  with 
France,  where  Franklin  and  Deane  were  openly  counte- 
nanced,2 and  whence  ships  with  ammunition  and  supplies 
v,vre  constantly  sent  to  the  Americans;  that  this  country 


1  In  the  sight  of  our  Ambassador. 
VOL.    II.  H 


98  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

could  never  bring  America  to  unconditional  submission, 
nor  ought  to  insist  on  it ;  yet,  said  he,  the  moment  France 
and  America  are  joined,  he  should  be  an  enemy  to  America. 
Lord  North  at  last  rose,  and  to  the  surprise  of  everybody, 
and  to  the  indignation  of  Rigby  and  all  the  violent,  accepted 
the  clause  and  suffered  it  to  be  inserted  in  the  bill. 
Charles  Fox,  in  an  admirable  speech,  complimented  Lord 
North  on  his  candour  and  universal  benevolence,  said  he 
should  consider  him  as  the  head  of  the  seceders,  and  their 
guardian  against  the  violence  of  his  coadjutors ;  but  Lord 
North's  conduct  that  day  had  been  so  desultory  and 
uncertain  that  the  courtiers  interpreted  the  panegyric  as  a 
sarcasm.  The  debate  was  going  to  end,  when  Wilkes  made 
a  long  speech,  in  which,  with  great  rudeness  but  great  wit, 
he  said  Lord  North,  like  a  true  dictator,  had  chosen  for 
his  Master  of  the  Horse  the  noble  lord  near  him  (Lord 
George  Germaine),  who,  to  his  immortal  honour,  with 
great  and  invincible  courage  advanced  and  charged  the 
enemies  of  our  country  at  the  head  of  the  British  Horse. 
This  speech  gave  time  to  Wedderburne,  whom  Charles  Fox 
treated  severely,  to  recover  himself,  and  he  made  one  of  his 
best  speeches,  that  hurt  Fox  much,  drawing  a  parallel  between 
him  and  Wilkes,  and  ridiculing  universal  benevolence  (to 
which  he  unfairly  added  the  word  equal),  and  said  all  great 
writers  had  given  up  the  idea  of  equal  universal  benevolence. 
He  invidiously  attacked  Conway,  too,  whose  virtue  and  in- 
tegrity were  too  pure  not  to  be  an  eyesore  to  so  profligate  a 
tool,  who  was  the  avowed  advocate  of  so  soiled  a  character 
as  Lord  George  Germaine's.  There  was  no  division,  and 
the  bill  passed  the  Lords,  too,  with  only  a  softening  explana- 
tion drawn  from  the  Chancellor  by  the  Earl  of  Coventry. 

When   the  accounts  of  the  war  were  laid  before  the 
House  of  Commons,  one  article  was  of  750,000^.  sent  in 


1777.       SUPINENESS  AND  DESERTION  OF  THE  HESSIANS.       99 

specie  to  America — a  lesson  to  the  country  gentlemen 
who  lived  in  expectation  of  seeing  part  of  their  taxes 
borne  by  the  Americans. 

2,4th.  Letters  from  General  Howe  with  many  bad 
accounts,  and  confirmation  of  a  large  body  of  Hessians 
made  prisoners.  The  Court  owned  to  the  number  of  700, 
but  it  was  thought  to  be  double.  They  had  not  been  sur- 
prised, yet  laid  down  their  arms ;  and  now  began  to  appear 
what  had  been  foreseen,  that  the  German  mercenaries, 
whose  pay  was  wretched  and  service  hard  and  hopeless, 
would  be  seduced  by  their  countrymen  settled  in  America,  i 
The  Hessians,  encouraged  by  plunder,  had  at  first  behaved 
with  great  cruelty  to  the  Americans ;  but,  the  English 
imitating  them,  General  Howe  had  been  forced  to  restrain 
marauding  ;  and  fifteen  Hessian  prisoners,  being  carried  to 
Philadelphia  and  released,  had  learnt  to  embrace  a  happier 
lot,  and  instilled  desertion  into  their  companions.  Their 
prince,  the  Landgrave,  enriched  by  our  subsidy,  was  now  v 
at  Rome,  abjuring  Protestantism  in  the  hands  of  the  Pope. 
Two  English  regiments  had  been  beaten,  and  General 
Howe  reduced  to  contract  his  quarters.  The  Congress 
had  retired  from  Philadelphia  to  Baltimore,  but  the  pro- 
vincials having  burnt  all  the  boats,  Howe  could  not  cross 
the  Delaware  river.  The  Court,  at  the  same  time,  could 
get  no  new  German  troops. 

28M.  General  Clinton  arrived.  He  had  quitted  his 
duty  to  come  and  pursue  his  anger  against  Lord  George 
Germaine  for  having  misrepresented  his  conduct  at  Charles 
Town,  in  the  Gazette. 

Towards   the    end  of  the    month  Governor  Johnston 
complained  to  the  House  of  Commons  of  an  English  ship 
taken  by  the  Spaniards ;  the  Ministry  had  remonstrated,  . 
but  could  get  no  answer  from  Spain :  yet  the  House  would 
not  receive  the  petition. 

H  2 


100  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MARCH, 


MARCH. 


THIS  month  was  tried  and  executed  John  the  Painter  J  the 
incendiary,  who  had  attempted  to  set  fire  to  Portsmouth, 
and  actually  had  set  fire  to  and  burnt  two  or  three  houses 
at  Bristol,  with  so  little  address,  that  though  he  acted  from 
American  enthusiasm,  the  chief  mischief  he  had  done  was 
to  an  American  merchant.  The  Ministers  were  even  at 
first  less  alarmed  at  the  attempt  and  crime  than  ready  to 
turn  it  into  matter  of  clamour  against  the  Americans,  as  a 
conspiracy  amongst  whom  they  represented  the  act,  giving 
out  that  the  whole  city  of  Bristol  was  in  flames.  As  it 
was  some  time  before  the  perpetrator  was  discovered,  they 
endeavoured  to  spread  an  universal  panic  and  suspicion, 
and  were  indignant  when  told  that  they  had  set  the 
example  of  such  savage  and  unfair  war  by  burning  Nor- 
folk, and  meditating  a  conflagration  at  New  York  before  it 
fell  into  their  hands.  Lord  Rochford,  their  old  tool,  when 
it  was  objected  to  him  that  the  Ministers  had  been  the 
aggressors,  called  it  talking  treason.  It  was  much  to  their 
confusion,  that  the  perpetrator  being  taken,  was  discovered  by 
a  burglary  which  he  had  committed,  and  that  he  proved  to  be 
a  single  incendiary  without  accomplices,  a  notorious  house- 
breaker, a  mad  enthusiast,  and  a  Scotchman.  Lord  Sand- 
wich, whose  supreme  talents  were  the  artifices  of  a  spy, 
busied  himself  capitally  in  the  detection  of  a  plot,  which 
proved  no  plot  at  all ;  and  some  printed  books  being  found 
in  the  culprit's  lodgings,  Lord  George  Germaine 2  gave 


1  Serjeant  Davy  on  the  trial  made  an  I       2  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  Envoy  to  Naples, 
invective  against  the  patriots.  |  then  in  England,  came  to  me  from  Lord 


1777. 


THE  « OLD,  DECREPID  LORD  TEMPLE." 


out  that  they  were  an  account  of  the  massacre  at  Paris  and 
Dr.  Price's  pamphlet.  Dr.  Franklin,  too,  was  involved 
in  the  charge  ;  the  Ministers,  to  decry  him,  pretending 
to  believe  that  he  had  invented  a  new  and  most  destructive 
machine  for  burning  towns.  Two  hundred  years  sooner  . 
the  same  persons  would  have  accused  him  of  magic ! 

But  by  far  the  most  surprising  part  of  the  story  was 
that  the  conviction  of  John  the  Painter  was  effected  by  a 
very  unexpected  actor,  who,  descending  from  a  greater 
height  than  Lord  Sandwich  had  done  in  the  treachery 
to  Wilkes,  stooped  to  become  the  spy  of  a  Ministry  whom 
he  had  long  affected  to  treat  with  the  utmost  contempt. 
This  was  the  old,  decrepid  Lord  Temple,3  whose  crippled 
body  was  still  agitated  by  the  smothered  flames  of  ambi- 
tion, and  who,  exploded  by  all  parties  and  factions,  chose 
to  purchase  contemptuous  smiles  from  the  Court,  and  to 
indulge  his  late  brother  George's  rancour  to  America,  by  ; 
turning  informer  and  prompter  to  a  treacherous  spy.  In 
short,  he  had  sent  down  a  dependent  of  his,  a  painter,  to 
Winchester  jail,  to  insinuate  himself  into  the  prisoner's 
confidence ;  and  they  succeeded,  as  far  as  hanging  the 


George's,  where  he  had  dined,  and  as- 
sured me  Lord  George  had  named  the 
two  pieces  to  him. 

3  Richard,  first  Earl  Temple.  His 
father,  Richard  Grenville,  of  Wootton, 
a  country  gentleman  who  traced  his 
descent  from  Rollo,  Duke  of  Normandy, 
married  in  1710  the  daughter  of  Sir 
Richard  Temple,  of  Stow,  who,  in  1749, 
was  advanced  to  the  dignity  of  Countess 
Temple.  As  Earl  Temple,  Richard  suc- 
ceeded his  mother  in  1752,  and,  dying 
childless  in  1779,  was  himself  succeeded 
by  his  nephew,  the  son  of  his  next 
brut  her,  George  Grenville,  the  mini- 
ster. This  nephew,  also  named  George, 
married  in  1775  an  heiress,  Mary,  the 
only  daughter  of  Earl  Nugent,  and  was 
created  Marquis  of  Buckingham  in 


1784.  Their  son  Richard  married  in 
1796  Anne,  the  only  child  of  the  third 
and  last  Duke  of  Chandos,  aud  descend- 
ant of  Henry  Grey,  Duke  of  Suffolk, 
whose  wife  Frances  was  the  eldest 
daughter  of  Charles  Brandon  and  Mary, 
widow  of  Louis  XII.,  and  daughter  of 
Henry  VH.  Thus,  if  Grenville  of 
Wootton  brought  with  him  the  blood  of 
Rollo,  the  heiress  of  Chandos  brought 
with  her,  blood  that  could  be  traced 
through  the  wife  of  Henry  VII.  to  a 
Plantagenet.  Accordingly,  the  hus- 
band of  this  heiress  was  created  Duko 
of  Buckingham  and  Chandos  in  1822. 
Walpole's  "  old,  decrepid  Lord  Temple  " 
died  in  1779,  before  he  had  attained 
the  ago  of  threescore  years  and  ten. 
— D. 


102  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MARCH, 

man  ;  but,  though  Lord  Sandwich,  Lord  Palmerston,  and 
Stanley,  three  of  the  Admiralty,  went  down  to  the  trial, 
and  though  no  pains  were  omitted  to  involve  Silas  Deane 
in  the  accusation,  the  criminal,  who  at  first  pretended  to 
have  received  3001.  from  him,  at  last  only  pleaded  having 
been  promised  so  much,  and  was  soon  despatched  that  he 
might  not  recant  even  that.  The  zeal  of  the  Scots,  as  zeal 
is  the  blindest  of  all  agents,  endeavoured  to  alarm  France, 
as  if  Silas  Deane  had  such  a  passion  for  burning  maga- 
zines, that  Brest  would  not  be  safe  if  he  was  suffered  to 
remain  in  France ;  it  was  so  likely  that  he  would  pay  his 
court  at  Versailles  by  so  capital  an  injury  !  But  though 
this  mean  treachery  in  a  man  who  had  once  stood  so  high, 
under  the  wings  of  Lord  Chatham,  and  was  now  uncon- 
nected with  the  Court,  might  be  actuated  by  hopes  of 
being  again  received  into  it,  yet  Lord  Temple's  mind  was 
as  capable  of  doing  a  base  thing  for  a  little  end  as  for  a 
great  one ;  and  he  had  at  this  time  a  little  object  too. 
The  church  of  Buckingham  was  rebuilding,  and  he  had 
offered  to  contribute  2001.  or  3001.  to  the  fabric,  provided 
it  was  rebuilt  on  another  spot,  whence  it  would  be  an 
ornament  to  the  prospect  from  Stowe.  The  Corporation 
agreed,  but  Lord  Verney,  proprietor  of  the  spot,  would 
not.  Lord  Temple,  instead  of  soliciting  a  favour,  inso- 
lently attempted  to  force  the  ground  from  the  other  Earl 
by  act  of  Parliament,  and  the  Ministers  ordered  their 
creatures  to  attend  the  committee  and  support  Lord 
Temple's  usurpation ;  but  Burke,  the  friend  of  Lord 
Verney,  and  Charles  Fox  opposed  so  unjust  an  act ;  and 
Burke  lashed  Lord  Temple  so  severely,  that  he  retracted 
his  bill,  and  asked  pardon  for  having  attempted  it. 

Finding,  however,  that  his  services  against  the  incen- 
diary were  accepted,  and  Lord  North  having  a  dangerous 


1777.  LORD  TEMPLE'S  AMBITION.  103 

illness  at  the  same  time,  yet  not  losing  his  good  humour 
(for  Dr.  Warren,  his  physician,  asking  his  Lordship  what  he 
felt  ?  he,  who  was  very  gross,  replied,  "  What  I  have  not 
felt  a  great  while,  my  own  ribs"),  Lord  Temple  could  not 
conceal  his  ambition,  but  gave  out  that  Lord  North  pro- 
tracted his  illness  to  prevent  being  forced  to  demand  the 
payment  of  the  King's  debts,  and  would  be  removed,  and 
that  he,  Lord  Temple,  was  to  be  first  Lord  of  the  Trea- 
sury, with  Jenldnson  for  his  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
—  an  union  that  would  have  been  as  ignominious  to  him 
as  his  treacherous  plot  on  John  the  Painter,  Lord  Temple 
having  been  the  principal  incendiary  that  instigated  Wilkes 
in  all  his  attacks  on  Lord  Bute  and  the  Cabal. 

The  Ministers  had  laid  the  greater  stress  on  this  plot  to 
divert  the  thoughts  of  the  nation  from  the  distressful 
situation  of  their  armies  in  America,  which  were  perishing 
by  every  wrant  and  calamity,  where  they  had  been  forced 
to  abandon  Rhode  Island,  and  for  which,  with  pressing  at 
home  and  hiring  abroad,  they  could  not  amass  7000 
recruits  :  they  had  contracted  for  forces  with  the  Duke  of 
Wirtemberg,  but  his  dominions  being  sequestered  for  his 
debts,  the  administrators  would  not  let  him  squander  his 
subjects  as  he  had  done  his  revenues. 

llth.  Temple  Luttrell  offered  a  plan  for  raising  seamen 
without  pressing,  but  it  was  rejected  by  the  House  of 
Commons. 

The  same  day  was  published  'David  Hume's  Life,' 
written  by  himself,  in  which  he  boasts  of  being  the  first  to 
laugh  at  the  folly  of  Whiggism. 

16th.  The  captain  of  the  Royal  Oak,  out  on  a  cruise, 
returned  suddenly  with  an  account  of  eight  French  men-of- 
war  sailing  westward.  It  turned  out  to  be  eight  ships 
from  Toulon  going  to  Brest. 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


MARCH, 


News  that  the  Portuguese  had  again  attacked  the 
Spanish  settlements  in  America,  and  that  the  Congress 
had  declared  Washington  Lord  Protector. 

General  Yorke  had  drawn  and  sent  over  a  strong 
memorial  to  the  Dutch,  complaining  of  the  Governor  of 
St.  Eustatia  saluting  the  American'  ships.  It  was  ap- 
proved here  and  returned  to  him  to  be  presented.  It  was 
extremely  ill  taken  in  Holland,  and  they  talked  of  uniting 
with  France  against  our  engrossing  all  trade.  Mons.  de 
Noailles,  the  Trench  Ambasador  here,  said,  his  Court 
would  not  have  sent  so  haughty  a  memorial  to  any  inferior 
state.  It  was  said  that  Sir  Joseph  Yorke,  threatening  to 
leave  the  Hague  on  not  receiving  an  answer  to  his  memo- 
rial, was  coldly  told  that  there  were  no  gates  to  the 
Hague. 

One  Digriam,  a  spy,  gave  information  of  a  plot  of 
twenty-five  persons  (at  the  head  of  which  were  Lord 
Shelburne  and  Sawbridge)  to  assassinate  the  King.  For 
a  few  days  it  was  believed,  and  the  chief  accused  were 
watched,  and  the  King  was  afraid  to  ride  out ;  but  the 
man  being  taken  up  for  forging  the  sale  of  a  place,  the 
plot  was  found  to  be  his  forgery  too. 

Accounts  from  India  of  Lord  Pigot  being  put  under 
arrest  by  a  Scotch  faction  in  the  Council.4  He  had  been 


4  The  gallant  and  unfortunate  Pigot 
was  the  able  defender  of  Madras  against 
Lally,  1759.  He  was  also  a  zealous 
servant  of  the  Company,  in  protecting 
its  interests  against  the  encroachments 
of  the  Crown.  Governor  Pigot  was 
raised  to  the  Irish  peerage  previous  to 
his  going  out  to  India  a  second  time  as 
Governor  of  Madras.  The  arrest  of 
Lord  Pigot  was  at  once  a  curious  and 
serious  circumstance.  The  Nabob  of 
the  Carnatic  had  illegally  deposed  the 
Rajah  of  Tanjore,  who  was  restored  by 
Lord  Pigot.  The  notorious  Paul  Bon- 


field  claimed  a  large  portion  of  the 
Rajah's  revenue,  which  he  alleged  had 
been  assigned  to  him  by  the  Nabob,  in 
satisfaction  of  a  debt.  There  was  no 
truth  in  the  assertion,  nor  justice  in 
assuming  that  the  Rajah's  revenue  was 
to  pay  the  Nabob's  debts.  The  Madras 
Council,  however,  after  various  contra- 
dictory decisions,  allowed  the  validity 
of  Benfield's  claim  ;  and  as  Lord  Pigot 
continued  his  opposition,  a  majority  of 
the  Council  arrested  him,  through  a 
Colonel  Stuart,  who  had  previously 
breakfasted,  dined,  and  spent  the  day 


1777.        OBSTINACY  AXD  NEGLIGENCE  OF  THE  KING. 


105 


betrayed  and  seized  by  Colonel  Stewart,  brother  of  Archi- 
bald Stewart. 

19th.  General  Robertson  arrived  from  General  Howe 
with  accounts  of  slight  skirmishes.  Howe  had  been  forced 
to  send  for  troops  from  Rhode  Island,  and  Washington's 
army  had  been  greatly  augmented  from  the  South  ;  but 
a  very  different  account  was  published  in  the  '  Gazette ' 
from  what  Robertson  gave  in  private.  At  New  York 
they  had  nothing  but  salt  provisions.  Washington  not  , 
declared  Protector,  but  Dictator  for  six  months.  The 
Scotch  began  to  abuse  General  Howe  in  all  the  coffee 
houses.  Robertson,  in  fact,  had  brought  word  that  so 
many  Provincials  had  arrived  from  the  Southern  provinces 
to  join  Washington,  that  his  army  amounted  to  30,000 
men.  Notwithstanding  this  and  the  accounts  he  gave  in 
private,  so  very  different  to  the  intelligence  published  in 
the  '  Gazette,'  Robertson  himself  was  quoted  for  the  nar- 
rative. It  is  very  certain  that  he  complained  that  he  had 
had  two  or  three  material  points  to  acquaint  the  King 
with ;  but  though  he  had  an  audience,  he  could  not  bring 
his  Majesty  to  listen  to  him  at  his  audience,  and  was 
so  shocked  at  it  that  he  was  taken  ill  the  moment  he 
came  out  of  the  closet.  The  fact  was  that  the  Junto  and 
Scotch  had  blown  up  the  King  to  such  inveteracy  to 
America,  that  he  would  hear  nothing  that  contradicted  his  | 
desires  of  conquering  them  ;  and  his  indolence  concurring 
with  his  animosity,  he  could  seldom  be  prevailed  upon  [ 
even  to  read  the  letters  that  came  from  America.  This 
obstinate  negligence  was  confirmed  to  me  by  very  good 
and  very  different  channels.X 


with  his  Lordship.  Pigot  died  in  the 
eighth  month  of  his  captivity,  of  a 
broken  heart.  His  persecutors  only 
Buffered  by  a  nominal  fine  of  lOOOi. ! 


but  Benfield's  claims  were  never  re- 
alized. Lord  Pigot's  title  became  ex- 
tinct in  1783.— D. 


100 


LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


MARCH, 


The  same  evening  the  King  and  Queen,  for  the  first 
time  in  the  reign,  went  to  a  concert  and  cards  at  the  Duke 
and  Duchess  of  Argyll's :  nobody  but  their  servants 
there,  except  Lord  and  Lady  Derby  and  Lady  Gower. 
They  took  down  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester's  picture,  who 
had  been  a  great  friend  of  the  Duchess  of  Argyll.  Which 
were  meanest,  they  who  paid  such  court,  or  they  who 
expected  it? 

The  Bishop  of  London  writes  a  letter  in  the  papers,  as 
Bishop  Porteus  had  written  a  book,  to  enforce  the  observance 
of  Good  Friday.  About  this  time  was  published  Dr.  Price's 
additions  to  his  pamphlet  on  Civil  Liberty,  in  which  he 
argued  that  the  Congress  had  agreed  to  offer  England  to 
pay  so  much  for  100  years  as  should  discharge  the  national 
debt,  but  were  provoked  not  to  make  the  offer  by  our 
sending  foreigners  against  them.  This  very  memorable. 
Shebbeare,  the  pilloried  champion  of  the  Court,  abused 
Dr.  Price  daily  in  the  papers. 

Wedderburne's  bill  against  annuities  stiffly  opposed  by 
Lord  Camden  in  the  house  of  Lords,  for  giving  power 
without  appeal  to  inferior  courts,  but  carried  by  above 
40  to  14.  See  'London  Chronicle.' 

3lst.  The  proprietors  of  India  stock  voted  by  a  great 
majority  to  recommend  to  the  Court  of  Directors  to 
restore  Lord  Pigot ;  and,  the  next  day,  the  Directors  by 
a  majority  of  two  voted  his  restitution.  (Qu.  the  latter 
part  ? 6) 

Died,  Dr.  Terrick,  Bishop  of  London,  of  a  disorder  in 
his  bowels. 


*  Walpole's  query  may  bo  thug 
answered.  The  Directors  sanctioned 
tin;  resolution  of  the  shareholders  only 
by  the  casting  vote  of  their  Chairman  ; 
in ii I  ministerial  influence  being  in- 
stantly exerted  against  such  sanction, 


it  was  ultimately  determined  to  recall 
both  parties  for  the  sake  of  investiga- 
tion. Little  or  nothing  came  of  it,  of 
course.  See  a  subsequent  entry,  under 
date  April  14,  and  May  9,  of  this 
year. — D. 


1777.        MESSAGE  PROM  THE  KING  TO  BOTH  HOUSES.  107 


APRIL 


DR.  LOWTH,  Bishop  of  Oxford,  was  translated  to  the  See 
of  London,  and  Dr.  Butler  succeeded  him  in  Oxford. 
^  9th.  A  message  from  the  King  was  delivered  to  both 
Houses,  desiring  the  payment  of  his  debts.  At  the  same 
time  it  was  determined  to  increase  his  revenue  100,000/. 
a  year.  This  measure  had  been  in  contemplation  for  two 
or  three  years,  with  double  that  addition  to  the  revenue. 
That  the  King  had  declined  such  a  proposition,  when  sure 
of  so  servile  a  Parliament,  was  speaking  evidence  of  the 
despotism  aimed  at  in  the  conquest  of  America,  when  a 
victorious  army  returning  would  have  made  the  King  as 
absolute  as  he  desired  to  be  ;  but  the  scene  was  changed, 
and  the  unprosperous  state  of  America  made  the  King  and 
Court  apprehend  that  the  loss  of  America,  and  the  heavy 
charge  of  a  war,  might  prevent  any  increase  of  the  revenue, 
if  not  seized  before  the  nation's  eyes  were  open,  and  before 
the  people  were  soured  by  increase  of  taxes,  and  the 
enormous  increase  of  the  public  debt.\  Lord  North  had 
certainly  wished  to  avoid  being  the  mover,  and  had  made 
the  most  of  his  late  illness,  pleading  the  badness  of  his 
nerves.  Still  the  weight  of  the  debts  on  the  civil  list,  and 
the  danger  of  not  obtaining  an  addition  if  delayed,  were  so 
obvious,  that  there  had  even  been  thoughts  of  making 
Cornwall  make  the  motion  if  Lord  North  was  unwilling  or 
unable  ;  but  the  latter  saw  that  if  he  waived  the  office,  he 
should  forfeit  all  the  merit  of  his  past  complaisance,  and 
even  risk  his  place,  if  he  let  any  body  else  execute  the 


108 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


APRIL, 


most  material  service.  He  had  secured  none  of  the  sine- 
cures in  the  Treasury  for  his  family ;  and  he  had  dipped 
too  far  not  to  complete  the  attainment  of  his  wages.  It  was 
given  out  that  the  second  hundred  thousand  pounds  a  year 
would  not  be  asked  till  the  Prince  of  Wales's  family 
should  be  established.  In  fact,  there  was  no  doubt  but  the 
King  dreaded  that  moment  more  than  he  wished  even  for 
increase  of  revenue,  and  feared  that  so  large  an  addition 
would  excite  the  avarice  or  ambition  of  those  who  hoped 
to  be  placed  about  the  Prince,  Nothing  could  equal  the 
King's  attention  to  seclude  his  son  and  protract  his  non- 
age. It  went  so  absurdly  far,  that  he  was  made  to  wear  a 
shirt  with  a  frilled  collar  like  that  of  babies.  He  one  day 
took  hold  of  his  collar,  and  said  to  a  domestic,  "  See  how 
I  am  treated  !  "1 

No  opposition  was  given  to  the  payment  of  the  debts 
the  first  day  in  either  House  ;  only  in  the  Commons,  on  the 
Ministers  proposing  to  defer  the  consideration  for  a  week, 
Geo.  Johnston,  T.  Townshend,  and  a  few  desired  to  go 
into  it  immediately,  but  on  a  division  were  few — about 
thirty  to  above  an  hundred. 

The  same  day  Temple  Luttrell  made  a  motion  to  admit 
strangers  into  the  Gallery,  and  abused  the  Parliament  in 
the  grossest  terms.  It  was  borne,  but  the  proposal  rejected. 

General  Clinton  was  pacified  by  a  supernumerary  red 
riband — a  paltry  way  of  retrieving  his  honour,  which  he 
had  come  so  far  to  vindicate. 

Mons.   De  la  Fayette,  a  young  French   officer,   much 


1  It  was  currently  said  that  the 
Prince,  even  when  he  was  ten  years  of 
age,  knew  less  of  the  world  than  any 
youth  in  Britain.  His  brother  William 
(Clarence)  had  better  means  of  escap- 
ing from  the  childish  treatment.  Thus, 
in  1780,  after  the  termination  of  his 


cruise  with  Admiral  Hardy,  the  sailor 
Prince  wrote  to  the  King,  praying 
to  be  excused  from  going  to  London,  i 
"  He  doesn't  fancy  the  nursery,"  was/ 
the  popular  comment  on  this  letter. 
— D. 


1777.  M.  DE  LA  FAYETTE.  109 

esteemed,  who  had  married  a  granddaughter  of  Marshal 
de  Noailles,  niece  to  the  French  ambassador,  had  come 
over  to  see  his  uncle,  was  actually  presented  by  him  to  the 
King,  but  suddenly  disappeared,  and  returning  to  Paris, 
set  out  privately,  with  eight  or  ten  young  officers,  his 
friends,  and  went  to  Bordeaux,  where  they  embarked  on 
board  a  vessel  he  had  bought  and  equipped,  and  sailed  for 
America.  He  was  intimate  with  Franklin  and  Silas 
Deane,  and  being  enthusiastic  for  the  Americans,  had 
obtained  from  them  the  rank  of  Major-General.  /  His 
family  sent  after  him,  but  too  late ;  and  the  Court  of 
France  afterwards  pretended  to  send  a  vessel  to  recall  him, 
though  it  is  not  credible  that  ten  young  Frenchmen  could 
have  dared  to  take  such  a  step  without  knowing  it  would 
be  approved ;  nor  was  it  likely  they  could  all  have  kept 
such  a  secret.  Count  Welderen,  the  Dutch  Minister, 
speaking  of  it,  and  of  the  quarrel  with  his  country,  said  to 
me,  "  Sir,  if  any  one  of  your  Ministers  would  take  the 
trouble  of  setting  his  foot  on  the  Continent,  he  would  find 
not  one  man  in  Europe  but  who  wishes  well  to  the  Ame- 
ricans : "  and  it  was  true  ;  our  barbarities  and  folly  had 
shocked  everybody  but  the  English  and  ScotchA 

The  East  India  Directors,  considering  the  restoration 
of  Lord  Pigot  as  recommended  to  them  by  the  Court  of 
Proprietors,  and  being  divided  in  sentiments,  eleven  to 
eleven,  consulted  their  charter,  which  directed  them  on 
an  equality  to  draw  lots,  which  they  did,  and  chance 
decided  in  favour  of  Lord  Pigot.  This  produced  much 
ridicule. 

\5th.  The  Ministers  learnt,  or  said  they  had,  that  the 
Congress  had  sent  to  France  and  Spain,  insisting  they 
should,  according  to  promise,  declare  war  with  England 
by  a  certain  day,  or  they  threatened  they  would  lay  down 


110  LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

their  arms.     It  was  said  too  that  M.  De  la  Fayette  had 
been  stopped,  and  was  sent  for  back. 

16th.  Both  Houses  sat  on  the  King's  debts  and  augmen- 
tation. In  the  House  of  Commons,  Lord  John  Cavendish, 
after  apologising  on  the  secession  of  himself  and  his  friends 
on  the  plea  of  despair  of  doing  any  good,  moved  for  a  com- 
mittee of  inquiry  into  the  accounts,  though  he  said  he 
believed  nothing  but  calamity  would  bring  the  nation  to  its 
senses  again.  Lord  North,  as  usual,  endeavoured  to  laugh 
away  reasoning,  and  said  the  King  could  not  do  with  less 
than  900,000/.  a  year,  though  he  heartily  wished  there  was 
no  application  for  places.  Wilkes  made  a  very  offensive 
speech,  and  complained  that  for  fifteen  years  he  had  re- 
ceived a  succession  of  injuries.  He  mentioned  the  Duke 
of  Gloucester,  and  said  he  was  not  abroad  by  choice ;  nor 
had  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  an  amiable  young  prince,  an 
income  to  live  like  a  prince ; — and  then  he  extolled  the  King 
of  France  for  his  affection  for  his  two  brothers,  who  find 
in  him  an  affectionate  brother,  not  a  gloomy  tyrant  like 
Louis  XI.  He  said  it  was  a  disgrace  for  the  names  of 
Dr.  Johnstone  and  Shebbeare  to  appear  on  the  pension 
list ;  and  he  mentioned  David  Hume's  being  rewarded  for 
writing  against  Christianity,  and  Dr.  Beattie's  for  writing 
against  Hume.  Burke  made  a  warm  and  witty  speech 
against  so  extravagant  a  Civil  List,  and  said  it  was  the 
enormous  Civil  List  of  France  that  occasioned  our  having 
all  the  victories  of  the  last  war;  and  ridiculing  the  King's 
expenses,  he  said  Louis  XIV.  had  raised  sumptuous  palaces 
in  the  midst  of  all  his  wars,  and  Burke  compared  them 
with  the  wretched  condition  of  the  palaces  in  England. 
Charles  Fox  made  a  speech  that  even  the  courtiers  allowed 
to  be  one  of  his  finest  orations ;  but  then  they  commended 
it  because  .it  was  remarkably  decent  and  respectful  to  the 


1777.  DEBATE  ON  KING'S  REVENUE.  Ill 

King.  At  ten  the  motion  for  a  Committee  was  rejected 
by  281  to  114.  Young  Adam  on  this  occasion  made  a 
foolish  speech  of  impudent  paradoxes,  which  the  House 
received  with  every  mark  of  ridicule  and  contempt. 

I8tk.  On  the  Report  Lord  North  made  a  good  speech, 
in  which  he  attempted  to  answer  Fox's  of  the  preceding 
day — a  proof  of  the  excellence  of  the  latter,  as  Lord  North 
had  taken  two  days  to  answer  it ;  and  as  Charles  Fox  had 
defended  the  Duke  of  Graftoii's  conduct,  Lord  North  was 
very  severe  on  it.  Sawbridge,  in  so  many  words,  said  the 
Members  of  both  Houses  were  corrupted.  He  was  called 
to  order  by  General  Fitzroy.  Sir  James  Lowther  made 
apologies  for  not  having  been  able  to  attend  the  preceding 
day,  and  informed  the  House  that  he  intended  to  propose 
an  amendment  in  their  Resolutions,  and  to  insert  an  increase 
of  income  for  the  King's  two  brothers.  He  was  overruled 
by  the  House  and  told  this  was  irregular,  and  that  there 
was  no  way  but  by  re-committing  them.  His  friends  rose 
and  advised  him  to  postpone  his  motion,  and  bring  it  in  by 
way  of  Address  to  his  Majesty,  and  to  have  a  day  appointed 
on  purpose  for  the  consideration  of  that  business.  Charles 
Fox  asked  if  Lord  North  thought  the  addition  of  100,000/. 
would  be  sufficient  without  coming  for  more  ?  Lord  North 
said  he  thought  it  would  till  the  Prince  of  Wales  should  be 
grown  up.  Charles  asked  if  he  would  pledge  himself? 
Rigby  said  Lord  North  was  not  bound  to  answer  questions 
of  individuals  ;  whenever  it  had  been  done  an  ill  use  had 
been  made  of  it.  Perhaps  Lord  North  might  not  be  in 
power  when  the  Prince  shall  be  married,  how  then  can  he 
pledge  himself?  On  the  King's  accession  the  idea  of  his 
Ministers  was  that  he  should  be  a  popular  and  a  patriot 
King,  but  it  would  be  difficult  to  make  a  popular  king  of  a 
poor  one ;  that  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  been  called  the 


112 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


APRIL, 


Father  of  Corruption,  not  that  he  was  so,  but  that  Opposi- 
tion liked  to  call  names.  On  the  division  the  numbers  of 
the  Court  were  diminished,  being  but  137  to  109,  some  of 
the  country  gentlemen  not  liking  the  augmentation — even 
the  Tory,  Sir  W.  Bagot,  Lord  North's  particular  friend, 
kept  away, — I  should  rather  think  from  popularity  than 
principle,  for  at  this  time  Lord  Dartmouth  complained 
that  the  Tories  would  not  be  content  but  with  absolute  power 
for  the  Crown. 

Accounts  from  Ireland  of  a  violent  quarrel  there  between 
Tisdale,  the  Attorney-General,  and  Hely  Hutchinson, 
Provost  of  Dublin,  who  were  bitter  enemies,  both  bad  men, 
and  the  latter  so  violent,  that  he  and  his  three  sons  had  at 
one  and  the  same  time  been  engaged  in  duels.  Hutchinson 
going  through  the  hall  to  the  Court  of  Chancery,  had  been, 
he  thought,  or  said  he  was,  jostled  by  a  young  counsellor 
attached  to  Tisdale.  Hutchinson  called  the  young  man 
names,  who  replying  in  the  same  style,  the  former  rushed 
into  the  Court,  and  finding  Tisdale  there,  abused  him  in 
the  grossest  terms,  and  collared  him.  The  Chancellor 
adjourned  the  Court,  and  next  day  Hutchinson  sent  Tisdale 
a  challenge.  Tisdale  refused  to  fight  him,  urged  that 
himself  was  73,  and  saying.  "If  I  should  kill  him,  I  should 
get  nothing  but  the  pleasure  of  killing  him ;  whereas  if  he 
kills  me,  he  will  get  my  place  of  Secretary  of  State,  of 
which  he  has  the  reversion."  Lord  Buckingham,2  whom 
Tisdale  governed,  took  this  insult  up  strongly,  and  it  was 
talked  of  passing  an  Act  of  Parliament  to  take  away 
Hutchinson's  Provostship,  though  it  was  for  life.3 


*  John,  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire, 
Lord  Lieutenant  from  1777  to  1780. 
He  died  in  1793.— D. 

3  Hely  Hutchinson's  rapacity  for 
office  may  be  illustrated  by  two  circum- 


stances. He  was  in  possession  of  many 
posts,  some  sinecures,  and  all  lucrative, 
when  he  applied  to  the  Lord-Lieu- 
tenant Townshend  for  more.  Towns- 
hend  laughed,  and  said  he  had  no- 


1777.  NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  FRANCE.  113 

The  Ministers  had  great  hopes  of  a  pacific  arrangement 
with  France,  and  the  Budget  was  put  off  in  hopes  of  an- 
nouncing it  and  putting  people  in  good  humour  for  the 
taxes.  They  said,  France  had  offered  to  disarm  eight 
men-of-war,  and  that  Spain  should  too,  if  we  would  disarm 
as  many.  As  they  had  laid  an  embargo  on  their  New- 
foundland ships  to  man  their  Navy,  we  in  a  fright  had 
agreed,  though  the  offer  seemed  fallacious,  and  it  was 
thought  France  would  still  remain  the  stronger  at  sea. 
Part  of  a  memorial,  said  to  be  delivered  to  the  French 
Ministers  by  Lord  Stormont,  was  published,  and  not  denied 
nor  the  printer  prosecuted,  though  most  humiliating  to  us, 
as  it  pleaded  that  the  Colonies  were  almost  become  a  great 
and  independent  Empire.  However,  France  excused  her- 
self, urging  that  Spain  would  not  consent  to  disarm. 

Immediately  after  this  refusal  an  American  privateer 
took,  and  carried  into  Dunkirk,  one  of  our  packet  boats 
with  the  King's  messenger  and  mail,  but  set  the  messenger 
on  shore.  The  crew  were  imprisoned  by  order  of  the 
Court  of  France  as  pirates. 

Letters  of  a  disagreement  between  General  Howe  and 
Lord  Percy ;  the  latter  was  coming  home,  and  it  was  said 
that  even  the  former  had  desired  his  recall. 

When  the  Speaker  presented  the  Civil  List  Bill  to  the 
King  in  the  House  of  Lords,  he  told  him,  his  faithful 
Commons  had,  in  a  time  of  public  distress,  full  of  difficulty 
and  danger,  and  labouring  under  burthens  almost  too  heavy 
to  be  borne,  granted  him  a  supply  and  great  additional 


thing  but  a  majorship  of  dragoons, 
which  Hely  is  reported  to  have  ac- 
cT]itcd,  employing  a  deputy  to  fulfil 
the  duty  for  u  small  emolument.  When 
Ilutrhinson  first  appeared  at  the  Eng- 
lish Court,  George  III.  asked  Lord 
North  who  he  was ;  a  query  to  which 

VOL.  II. 


his  Lordship  gave  a  well-known  reply  : 
"  He  is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Ire- 
land ;  a  man  on  whom  if  your  Majesty 
was  pleased  to  bestow  the  United  King- 
dom, he  would  ask  for  the  Isle  of  Man  as 
a  potato-garden."  Hutchiuaon  died  in 
1794.— D. 


114  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

revenue,  great  beyond  example,  great  beyond  his  Majesty's 
highest  expense  (he  really  used  the  word  wants,  but  in 
his  printed  speech  changed  it  to  expense),  but  hoping  that 
what  they  had  contributed  so  liberally  would  be  employed 
wisely.  This  gave  the  King  much  offence,  and  was  extra- 
ordinary in  such  a  tool,  who  had  voted  for  the  money 
himself.  It  was  supposed  that  the  Speaker  acted  from 
resentment,  having  been  refused  a  peerage. 


MAY. 


8th.  AFTER  long  expectation,  letters  came  from  General 
Howe,  which  only  brought  account  of  his  having  destroyed 
an  American  magazine,  all  the  particulars  of  which  were 
specified  with  as  much  parade  as  if  it  had  been  a  victory. 

9th.  The  proprietors  of  India  Stock,  by  the  manage- 
ment and  votes  of  the  courtiers,  voted  a  recall  both  of  Lord 
Pigot  and  his  adversaries.  The  Nabob  was  said  to  have 
sent  over  a  great  sum  and  distributed  it  by  his  agent 
Macleane. 

The  same  day  Sir  James  Lowther  made  his  intended 
motion  for  an  Address  to  the  King  for  an  increase  of  income 
to  his  brothers.  Sir  Edward  Astley  seconded  him.  He 
had  been  put  upon  it  by  Governor  Johnston,  but  the 
friends  of  the  Royal  Dukes  took  no  part  in  it.  Sir  John 
Griffin  moved  for  the  previous  question  (by  direction  of 
the  Court),  saying  the  movers  could  not  entertain  hopes  of 
carrying  the  question,  which  could  not  be  discussed  without 
risking  disrespect  to  the  two  Royal  Dukes,  and  therefore 


1777.        DEBATE  ON  INCOMES  OF  THE  ROYAL  DUKES.  115 

he  wished  to  prevent  any  debate.  Sir  George  Howard 
seconded  him,  urging  that  the  question  was  too  delicate. 
Governor  Johnston  said  he  had  not  the  same  delicacy ; » 
that  if  the  two  Princes  should  get  into  debt  and  leave  their 
country,  his  Majesty  would  be  glad  to  pay  their  debts, 
and  therefore  this  application  might  prevent  his  Majesty's 
wishes.  Rigby  disclaimed  disrespect  to  the  two  Dukes. 
The  motion  implied  that  the  House  would  grant  the  money. 
How  could  they  who  voted  against  paying  the  King's  debts 
vote  for  this  ?  The  late  Duke  of  Cumberland  had  only 
15,000/.  a  year  before  the  battle  of  Culloden  ;  till  then  no 
thought  of  increasing  his  income.  The  King,  if  he  thought 
proper,  might  reduce  his  brothers  to  8000/.  a  year.  Are 
20,000/.  a  year  not  sufficient?  Sir  James  had  a  princely 
fortune  :  all  Princes  need  not  be  so  rich.  "  If  I  had 
spoken,"  added  he,  "of  the  sense  of  this  House  in  another 
place,  I  should  have  said  a  large  majority  approved  it.  I 
should  not  have  said  my  constituents  were  labouring  under 
burthens  too  heavy  to  be  borne.  If  I  had  thought  so  I 
would  not  have  voted  the  money,  nor  would  have  said  the 
money  granted  was  beyond  his  Majesty's  highest  wants." 
Charles  Fox  said  less  than  20,000/.  a  year  had  some  years 
been  thought  sufficient  for  the  Dukes;  so  had  800,000/. 
been  thought  sufficient  for  his  Majesty  :  by  parity  of  reason 
both  ought  to  be  increased.  The  present  flourishing  state 
of  the  kingdom  had  been  chosen  for  increasing  the  revenue. 
To  be  sure  his  Majesty  was  full  of  goodness,  but  if  full  of 
hatred,  ought  not  Parliament  to  interfere  ?  If  one  of  the 
Princes  was  abroad  on  account  of  his  finances,  it  was  a 
scandal  to  this  country.  If  such  conduct  arose  from  any 
quarrel,  to  take  a  part  in  that  quarrel  was  the  worst 
servility.  It  was  the  worst  libel  on  the  King  to  suppose 
such  behaviour  could  be  agreeable  to  him.  Wilkes  laughed 

I  2 


116 


LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


MAY, 


at  the  two  Generals,  Griffin  and  Howard,  who  were  Knights 
of  the  Bath,  and  called  them  gentlemen  in  blushing  ri- 
bands. Burke  declared  for  the  motion,  and  then  the 
previous  question  was  carried  by  152  to  45.  After  the 
Debate  the  Speaker  complained  of  Rigby's  attack?  and 
Charles  Fox  proposed  words  in  justification  of  the  Speaker, 
which  were  agreed  to  without  a  division.  Lord  North 
was  exceedingly  alarmed  during  the  Debate,  and  wrote 
several  notes  to  Rigby  across  the  House  to  beg  him  to 
submit,  which,  though  he  did  and  asked  pardon,  the 
Speaker  was  stout,  and  declared  he  would  resign  the  chair 
next  day  unless  the  House  itself  gave  him  satisfaction. 

The  Common  Council  of  London  voted  the  freedom  of 
the  City  to  the  Speaker  for  his  speech  to  the  King. 

I4:th.  Lord  North  opened  the  budget,  languidly,  and 
appearing  ill,  and  desired  to  be  excused  entering  into  the 
state  of  the  nation,  which  Lord  George  Germaine  was  much 
called  on  to  do,  and  said  he  would  the  next  day.  Colonel 
Barre  detected  a  bargain  of  the  Treasury,  in  which  the 
contractors  for  rum  had  gained  forty  per  cent.  Charles 
Fox  displayed  astonishing  parts  on  the  revenue,  which  he 
had  only  gathered  from  Jenkinson's  seconding  Lord  North. 

15th.  Lord  George  Germaine  entered  on  the  American 
war,  declared  he  had  great  hopes  from  the  campaign ;  said 
Washington's  army  was  very  weak,  and  had  the  front  to 
assert  that  the  returns  from  the  army  there  were  greater  in 
March  last  than  in  the  preceding  September.2 

Burke  published  a  letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol, 
apologising  for  the  secession  of  himself  and  his  friends,  on 
their  inability  of  doing  any  good,  and  on  his  fear  of  their 


1  Which  the  Speaker,  Norton,  re- 
membered, and  returned  in  1782. 

*  He  said,  too,  that  Governor  Tryon 
had  collected  a  Iwdy  of  8000  Provin- 


cials, who  would  reinforce  General 
Howe,  and  that  the  troops  from  Canada 
would  got  to  the  back  of  New  England. 


1777.       GEN.  JOHNSTON'S  MOTION  ON  INDIAN  AFFAIRS.      117 

invenoming  the  spirit  of  acrimony  in  the  Ministers.  He 
entered  most  ably  and  severely  on  the  war,  and  concluded 
with  arrogantly  ascribing  all  virtue  to  the  little  Rocking- 
ham-faction,  recommending  to  everybody  to  join  and  follow 
them. 

22ra?.  General  Johnston,  in  a  most  able  speech  of  two 
hours,  moved  several  resolutions  on  Indian  affairs,  especially 
on  the  illegality  of  Lord  Pigot's  dispossession,  and  owned 
they  were  to  lead  to  a  bill  for  regulating  those  affairs.  He 
touched  on  the  bribery  practised  here  by  the  Nabob  of 
Arcott  and  his  agent  Macleane,  which  was  even  supposed 
to  have  gone  as  high  as  possible.  He  was  seconded  by 
Mr.  Rous.  Sir  Herbert  Mackworth  moved  for  the  previous 
question,  and  the  Courtiers,  after  sneering  at  Johnston  for 
bringing  affairs  before  Parliament  which  he  had  always 
declaimed  against  having  treated  there,  opposed  the  ques- 
tion on  the  ground  of  want  of  information.  General 
Conway  approved  the  motion  on  the  absurdity  of  the  Com- 
pany, who  had  voted  the  restoration  of  Lord  Pigot  and  his 
recall  too.  The  House  sat  till  12,  and  the  motion  was 
rejected  by  90  to  67.  The  Attorney-General  was  ill ; 
the  Solicitor-General  and  Lord  George  Germaine  stayed 
away  for  private  reasons. 

The  following  day  a  job  of  the  Ministers  in  the  African 
Company  was  severely  treated  by  Charles  Fox.  It  was 
now  known  that  Arthur  Lee,  one  of  the  Deputies  of  the  / 
Congress,  was  gone  to  Berlin  by  invitation  of  the  King  of 
Prussia.  This  man  had  been  in  London,  and  was  supposed 
to  have  been  aimed  at  in  the  suspension  of  the  Habeas 
Corpus. 

The  Ministers  were  forced  to  abandon  the  African  job, 
which  had  been  countenanced  by  the  Board  of  Trade. 

30/A.    The    Lords   having   been   acquainted    by    Lord 


118  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

Cam  den  that  he  had  been  desired  by  Lord  Chatham  to 
summon  the  House  for  a  motion  he  intended  to  make,  he 
appeared  this  day,  it  having  been  lately  given  out  by  his 
friends  that  he  was  perfectly  recovered.  He  looked  pale, 
and  grown  much  older,  and  had  one  crutch.  His  voice 
was  so  low  that  it  could  not  be  heard  to  the  end  of  the 
House,  and  little  remained  of  his  former  fire,  though  his 
second  speech  was  more  spirited.  He  spake  an  hour,  con- 
demned all  late  measures,  said  he  had  expected  war  with 
France,  but  now  thought  the  French  would  be  wise,  and 
,  leave  us  to  ruin  ourselves  by  wasting  8,000,000^.  a  year 
against  our  own  Colonies.  That  if  we  could  not  conquer 
the  Americans  in  1775,  should  we  be  able  to  do  it  in  1777, 
when  3,000,000  of  people  had  been  disciplined?  That 
our  army  must  be  destroyed  the  moment  it  got  to  any 
distance  from  the  ships.  At  present  we  had  not  a  single 
province  in  America ;  we  had  only  a  military  station. 
He  did  not  indeed  approve  of  the  Colonies  declaring  then-i- 
vy selves  independent ;  yet  it  was  not  too  late,  by  repealing 
the  repeated  grievances  they  complained  of,  to  reconcile 
their  affections  to  this  country.  He  then  moved  to  address 
the  King  to  prevent  impending  ruin  from  the  continuation 
of  an  unnatural  war,  and  to  advise  him  to  take  the  most 
speedy  and  effectual  measures  for  that  purpose  by  putting 
a  stop  to  such  fatal  hostilities,  and  by  the  removal  of  accu- 
mulated grievances,  promising  that  the  House  would  enter 
upon  that  great  and  necessary  work  with  cheerfulness  and 
despatch,  in  order  to  open  to  his  Majesty  the  only  means 
of  regaining  the  affections  of  the  British  Colonies,  and  of 
securing  to  Great  Britain  the  commercial  advantages  of 
those  invaluable  possessions,  &c.  Lord  Gower  opposed  the 
motion,  and  owned  himself  a  principal  adviser  of  the  late 
measures.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  supported  the  motion, 


1777.   INTEMPERATE  CONDUCT  OF  ARCHBP.  OF  YORK.         119 

and  took  notice  of  the  despotic  spirit  preached  up  by  the 
clergy,  particularly  of  a  late  sermon  of  the  Archbishop  of  V 
York  (Markham)  before  the  Society  for  the  Propagation 
of  the  Gospel.  That  sermon  had  been  printed,  but  not 
publicly  sold  ;  it  was  a  base  instance  of  servility,  hoping  to 
recover  favour  in  the  closet,  and  a  libel  on  the  Opposition. 
The  Archbishop  declared  himself  ready  to  defend  every 
position  in  his  sermon.  Lord  Lyttelton  spoke  for  the 
Court,  the  Duke  of  Manchester,  Lord  Abingdon,  and  Lord 
Camden  against  it.  Lord  Wey mouth,  in  answer  to  those 
who  had  reproached  the  Ministers  with  insisting  on  uncon- 
ditional submission  from  the  Colonies,  remarkably  denied 
that  the  Court  held  any  such  doctrine  (though  Lord 
George  Germaine  had  positively  asserted  it  in  the  other 
House).  Lord  Shelburne  was  still  more  severe  on  the 
Archbishop  of  York,  who  rose  with  most  intemperate  pride 
and  fury,  and  said,  that  though,  as  a  Christian  and  bishop, 
he  onght  to  bear  wrongs,  there  were  injuries  that  would 
provoke  any  patience,  and  that  he,  if  insulted,  should  know 
how  to  chastise  any  petulance.  The  Bishop  of  Peter- 
borough (Hinchcliffe),  though  in  Opposition,  endeavoured  to 
stop  him,  but  not  one  of  the  Court  supported  or  defended 
him,  not  even  his  friend  Lord  Mansfield,  who  only  turned 
the  debate  to  the  question.  Lord  Mansfield  owned  all  the 
ill  success  of  the  war,  but  pleaded  that  Lord  Chatham's 
motion  would  not  procure  peace,  and  asked  if  his  Lordship 
wished  to  have  all  the  acts  repealed?  Lord  Chatham 
cried  out,  "  Yes,  all ;  and  even  next  Monday  morning,  I 
will  come  out  of  my  bed  to  vote  for  that  repeal."  The 
day  was  a  very  unpropitious  one  to  the  Administration, 
who  had  nothing  to  say  in  defence  of  their  measures.  Lord 
Shelburne  ridiculed  the  exaggerated  accounts  and  lies  of 
the  war ;  said  they  had  asserted  the  Colonies  gave  30/.  a 


120  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

man  for  recruits,  but  it  was  30  rixdollars ;  but  he  did  not 
wonder  that  the  ignorant  head  of  the  Treasury  (Lord 
North),  who  had  not  known  sterling  from  currency  in  the 
contract  for  rum,  did  not  know  pounds  from  rixdollars. 
He  laughed  too  at  Lord  Sandwich's  pompous  accounts  of 
American  privateers  of  6  guns  being  taken  by  men-of-war 
of  74.  Lord  Shelburne  replied  also  to  the  prelate,  that 
since  his  Lordship  was  so  ready  at  means  of  resentment,  it 
was  a  blessing  for  this  nation  that  his  Majesty,  in  his  great 
wisdom,  had  removed  him  from  the  preceptorship  to  the 
heir  to  the  Crown.  The  motion  was  rejected  by  76  to  26, 
and  by  23  proxies  to  2.  The  sermon  was  publicly  sold 
after  this  debate,  and  atoned,  by  no  display  of  abilities,  for 
the  infamy  of  its  doctrines,  and  for  the  slavish  conduct  on 
one  hand,  and  arrogance  on  the  other,  of  its  author. 


JUNE. 


4th.  LORD  PERCY  arrived  from  America,  being  dissatisfied 
with  General  Howe. 

6th.  The  King  put  an  end  to  the  session.  The  Speech 
was  exceedingly  humbled  in  tone,  and  talked  of  maintaining 
the  rights  of  the  Legislature,  and  of  re-establishing  consti- 
tutional, not  unconditional,  obedience,  which  all  subjects  of 
a  free  state  owe  to  the  authority  of  law. 

Accounts  of  Lord  Cornwallis  having  defeated  a  party 
of  Provincials  and  killed  800  men,  and  of  Governor  Tryon 
having  destroyed  a  large  magazine  in  Connecticut,  which 
would  greatly  distress  the  Northern  army;  but  he  had 


1777.        PRESENTATIONS  TO  GOVERNMENT  PLACES. 


121 


been  attacked  in  his  retreat,  and  narrowly  brought  off  his 


men. 


8th.  The  place  of  Treasurer  of  the  Navy,  which  had 
been  kept  vacant  since  the  death  of  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  and 
was  supposed  to  be  reserved  for  Lord  Howe,  and  was  said 
by  his  family  to  have  been  promised  him  by  Lord  North, 
was  given  to  Wellbore  Ellis,  who  was  succeeded  as  Vice- 
Treasurer  of  Ireland  by  Charles  Townshend,  Lord  North's 
friend,  and  he  at  the  Treasury  by  Lord  Westcote,  uncle 
of  Lord  Lyttelton.1  Colonel  Keene,  Lord  North's  brother- 
in-law,  was  made  Surveyor  of  the  Board  of  Works  in  the 
room  of  Worseley,  who  was  dying,  and  said  to  be  dead, 
but  was  not.  De  Grey,  son  of  the  Chief  Justice,  was  made 
a  Lord  of  Trade  ;  and  in  his  room,  as  Groom  of  the  Bed- 
chamber, Charles  Herbert,  cousin  of  Lord  Pembroke. 
The  post  of  Treasurer  of  the  Household,  in  the  room  of 
Sir  John  Shelley,  who  had  not  lately  attended  Parliament, 
was  offered  to  the  Earl  of  Carlisle ;  but  not  content  with 
that,  he  insisted  on  a  Crown  living,  then  vacant,  of  1 100£. 
a  year  being  given  to  his  tutor,  Mr.  Ekin,  which  was 
granted.  Mrs.  Howe,  Lord  Howe's  sister,  was  outrageously 
angry  at  her  brother's"  disappointment,  and  told  Colonel 
Keene  the  quarrel  with  Lord  North  was  irreconcilable. 
The  Howes  were  at  this  time  not  only  Commanders-in- 
Chief,  but  had  the  pay  of  ambassadors  too. 

IQth.  Account  of  the  Spaniards  having  taken  the  Isle  of 
St.  Catherine  from  the  Portuguese. 

27th.  Dr.  Dodd  was  executed,  notwithstanding  most 
extraordinary  exertions  had  been  made  in  his  favour, 
though  part  only  accelerated  his  fate.  He  was  undoubtedly  a 


1  When  this  Lord  Lyttelton  died  sud- 
denly in  1779,  hid  unclo  was  the  only 
representative  of  the  oucieut  family, 


and  in  his  person  the  ancient  barony 
was  revived  m  17SH. — D. 


122 


LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


JUNE, 


bad  man,  who  employed  religion  to  promote  his  ambition, — 
humanity  to  establish  a  character  and,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  to 
indulge  his  good-natured  sensations, — and  any  means  to 
gratify  his  passions  or  vanity,  and  to  extricate  himself  out 
of  their  distressing  consequences.  He  was  early  a  fashion- 
able preacher,  and  though,  I  think,  not  a  professed  Metho- 
dist, leaning  towards  or  connected  with  that  sect ;  but  his 
vices,  pleasures,  fondness  for  dress  and  luxury  being  less 
under  command  than  the  hypocritic  self-denial  of  those 
more  artful  impostors,  and  his  thirst  for  preferment  being 
more  impetuous  than  their  patient  appetite  for  solid  power, 
he  made  use  of  their  credit  as  a  party,  rather  than  addicted 
himself  to  their  party.  Having  all  the  qualities  of  an 
ambitious  man  but  judgment,  he  gladly  stooped  to  rise,  and 
1  married  a  kept  mistress  of  Lord  Sandwich,  who,  having 
•  another  vice  incidental  to  her  profession,  he  encouraged 
her  love  of  drinking,  that  he  might  be  at  liberty  in  the 
evenings  to  indulge  himself  in  other  amours.  With  such 
a  sultana2  and  such  a  seraglio,  he  set  up  for  the  Apostle  of 
the  Magdalens.  The  late  Earl  of  Chesterfield,  ignorant 
\  of  or  indifferent  to  his  character,  committed  his  heir  to  his 
charge,  and  grew  exceedingly  partial  to  him ;  nor  was  his 
pupil's  attachment  alienated  by  the  Doctor's  attempt  to 
make  a  simoniacal  purchase  of  a  Crown  living  from  the 
Lord  Chancellor.3  Even  his  miscarriage  in  that  overture 


a  She  is  the  Mrs.  Simony  in  Foote's 
farce  of  the  '  Cozeners.' 

3  Dodd,  whose  character  is  not  un- 
fairly depicted  by  Walpole,  who,  how- 
ever, hardly  renders  justice  to  his  great 
talents,  had,  in  1774,  written  an  anony- 
mous letter  to  the  wife  of  the  Chan- 
cellor Bathurst,  offering  2000Z.  for  the 
nomination  to  the  rectory  of  St.  George's, 
Hanover  Square.  On  the  writer  being 
discovered,  George  HI.  struck  him  off 
the  list  of  Koyal  Chaplains.  In  the 


'Life  of  Foote,'  by  Cooke,  the  writer 
affirms  that  Dodd  completed  in  New- 
gate a  play  which  he  had  commenced 
several  years  previously.  For  this  as- 
sertion I  can  find  no  good  grounds. 
In  connection  with  the  close  of  lu's  life, 
it  may  bo  worthy  of  remark  that,  in  1772, 
he  wrote  a  pamphlet,  entitled,  'The 
Frequency  of  Capital  Punishments  in- 
consistent with  Justice,  sound  Policy, 
and  Religion  ;'  and  tliat,  two  days  before 
lie  forged  the  bond  for  4200/.  on  Lord 


3777. 


DK.  DODD. 


123 


he  had  in  great  measure  surmounted  by  varied  activity  and 
by  ostensible  virtues  in  promoting  all  charitable  institu- 
tions, in  particular  that  excellent  one  for  discharging  pri- 
soners for  debt,  of  which  he  is  said  to  have  been  the  founder. 
Still  were  his  pleasures  indecently  blended  with  his 
affected  devotion ;  and  in  the  intervals  of  his  mission,  he 
indulged  in  the  fopperies  and  extravagance  of  a  young  Maca- 
roni, both  at  Paris  and  the  fashionable  watering-places  in  his 
own  country.  The  contributions  of  pious  matrons  did  not, 
could  not,  keep  pace  with  the  expense  of  his  gallantries  :  the 
urgency  of  his  debts  drove  him  on  forgery.  He  forged  a 
draft  on  his  own  pupil,  Lord  Chesterfield,  and  was  instantly 
detected  and  seized,  not  having  had  the  discretion  to 
secure  himself  by  flight :  nor  did  the  Earl  discover  that , 
tender  sensibility  so  natural  to  and  so  becoming  in  a  young 
mind. 

From  that  moment  the  Doctor's  fate  was  a  scene  of  pro- 
tracted horrors,  and  could  but  excite  commiseration  in  every 
feeling  breast.  Yet  he  seemed  to  deserve  it,  as  he  at  once 
abandoned  himself  to  his  confusion,  shame,  and  terror,  and 
had  at  least  the  merit  of  acting  no  parade  of  fortitude.  He 
swooned  at  his  trial,  avowed  his  guilt,  confessed  his  fond- 
ness for  life,  and  deprecated  his  fate  with  agonies  of  grief, 
Heroism  under  such  a  character  had  been  impudence.  As 
the  Earl  was  not  injured,  the  case  happened  to  be  miti- 
gated. An  informality  in  the  trial  raised  the  prisoner's 
hopes ;  and  as  the  case  was  thought  of  weight  enough  to 
be  laid  before  the  judges,  those  hopes  were  increased ;  but 
his  sufferings  were  only  protracted,  for  the  judges  gave  after 


Chesterfield,  he  preached  for  the  last 
tiuir,  and  his  text  was  :  "  Among  these 
nations  shalt  thou  find  no  ease,  neither 
shall  the  sole  of  thy  foot  have  rest ;  but 
the  Lord  shall  give  them  a  trembling 


heart  and  failing  of  eyes,  and  sorrow  of 
mind ;  and  thy  life  shall  hang  in  doubt  I 
before  thee,  and  thou  shalt  fear  day  and 
night,  and  shalt  have  no  assurance  of 
thy  life."— D. 


124  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HOKACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

some  time  an  opinion  against  him — thus  he  endured  a 
second  condemnation.  The  famous  advocate,  Linguet,  the 
outcast  of  France,  and  abhorred  by  all  men  of  principle 
for  his  arbitrary  doctrines,  was  now  here,  and  published  a 
magazine,  in  one  number  of  which  he  censured  the  prolonga- 
tion of  the  sufferings  of  condemned  criminals.  I  was  talking 
of  this  man  at  this  very  time  to  Lord  Shelburne,  and  said, 
I  did  not  doubt  but  Lord  Mansfield  would  patronize  him. 
Lord  Shelburne  replied,  "You  do  not  know  how  much 
you  are  in  the  right;  I  will  tell  you.  It  was  but  the 
other  day  that  Lord  Granby  told  me  he  wanted  to  improve 
himself  in  French,  and  that  Lord  Mansfield  had  recom- 
mended to  him  one  Linguet  as  a  very  able  master."  Lord 
Mansfield  had  long  been  labouring  to  draw  Lord  Granby 
from  Opposition,  and  now  hoped  this  man  would  instil  his 
detestable  principles  into  him  ! 

The  malevolence  of  men  and  their  good  nature  dis- 
played themselves  in  their  different  characters  against 
Dodd.  His  character  appeared  so  bad  to  Dr.  Newton, 
Bishop  of  Bristol,  that  he  said,  "  I  am  sorry  for  Dr.  Dodd." 
Being  asked  why  ?  he  replied,  "  Because  he  is  to  be 
hanged  for  the  least  crime  he  ever  committed."  Every 
unfavourable  anecdote  of  his  life  was  published,  and  one 
in  particular  that  made  deep  impression.  The  young  lord, 
his  pupil,  had  seduced  a  girl,  and  when  tired  of  her,  had 
not  forgotten  the  sacrifice  she  had  made.  He  sent  by  Dr. 
Dodd  her  dismission  and  1000/.  The  messenger  had 
retained  900/.  for  his  trouble.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
fallen  Apostle  did  not  lose  the  hearts  of  his  devotees.  All 
his  good  deeds  were  set  forth  in  the  fairest  light,  and  his 
labours  in  behalf  of  prisoners  were  justly  stated  in  balance 
against  a  fraud  that  had  proved  innoxious.  Warm  and 
earnest  supplications  for  mercy  were  addressed  to  the  throne 


1777.  DK.  DODD.  325 

in  every  daily  paper,  and  even  some  very  able  pleas  were 
printed  in  his  favour.     The  Methodists  took  up  his  cause 
with  earnest  zeal :  Toplady,  a  leader  of  the  sect,  went  so 
far  as  to  pray  for  him.  Such  application  raised  the  criminal 
to  the  dignity  of  a  confessor  in  the  eyes  of  the  people — but 
an  inexorable  judge  had   already  pronounced  his   doom. 
Lord  Mansfield,  who  never  felt  pity,  and  never  relented 
unless  terrified,  had  indecently  declared  for  execution  of 
the  sentence  even  before  the  judges  had  given  their  opinion. 
An  incident,  that  seemed  favourable,  weighed  down  the 
vigorous  scale.      The   Common  Council  of  London  had 
presented  a  petition  for  mercy,  to  the  King.     Lord  Mans- 
field, who  hated  the  popular  party  as  much  as  he  loved 
severity,  was  not  likely  to  be  moved  by  such  intercessors. 
At  Court  it  grew  the  language  that  the  King  must  dis- 
countenance such  interposition ;  and,  accordingly,  on  the 
report  of  the  sentence,  no  regard  was  paid  to  the  applica- 
tion.    Lord  Mansfield  urged  rigour,  and  even  the  Chan- 
cellor seconded  it,  though,  as  Dr.  Dodd  had  offended  him, 
it  would  have  been  more  decent  to  take  no  part,  if  not  a 
lenient  one.     The  case  of  the  Perreaus  was  cited,  and  in 
one  newspaper  it  was  barbarously  said,  that  to  pardon  Dr. 
Dodd  would  be  pronouncing  that  the  Perreaus  had  been 
murdered.     The  necessity  of  establishing  that  forgery  was 
an  irremissible  crime  was  the  predominant  opinion,  and 
execution  was   ordered.       Still  the   Methodists   did   not 
despair  nor  were  remiss.     They  prevailed  on  Earl  Percy, 
the  popular  member  for  Westminster,  and  now  gracious  to 
the  people  for  his  behaviour  in  America,  to  present  a  new 
petition  for  mercy,  which,  it  was  said,  no  fewer  than  23,000 
persons  had  subscribed:    and   such  enthusiasm  had  been 
propagated  in  behalf  of  the  wretched  Divine,  that  on  the 
eve  of  his  death,  a  female  Methodist  stopped  the  King  in 


126  LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

his  chair,  and  poured  out  volleys  of  execrations  on  his  inex- 
orability. Such  a  symptom  might  have  produced  serious 
effects,  and  a  bigoted  party  treated  with  contempt  was  not 
quite  to  be  despised;  at  least,  an  attempt  to  rescue  the 
criminal  might  be  apprehended ;  nor  was  domestic  valour 
the  character  either  of  the  Court  or  the  Chief  Justice. 
Two  thousand  men  were  ordered  to  be  reviewed  in  Hyde 
Park  during  the  execution,  which,  however,  though  attended 
by  an  unequalled  concourse  of  people,  passed  with  the 
utmost  tranquillity.  The  signal  criminal  suffered  decently ; 
but  the  expected  commiseration  was  much  drawn  aside  by 
the  spectacle  of  an  aged  father,  who  accompanied  his  son, 
one  Harris,  who  was  executed  for  a  robbery  at  the  same 
time.  The  streaming  tears,  grey  hairs,  agony,  and  at  last 
the  appearance  of  a  deadly  swoon  in  the  poor  old  man, 
who  supported  his  son  in  his  lap,  deepened  the  tragedy, 
but  rendered  Dr.  Dodd's  share  in  it  less  affecting. 

On  the  last  day  of  the  month,  a  scrutiny  that  had  been 
demanded  in  favour  of  Wilkes  against  Hopkins,  who  was 
again  returned  for  Chamberlain  of  London,  was  decided  in 
favour  of  the  latter  by  a  majority  of  some  hundreds.  This 
was  a  striking  contrast  to  the  Court's  severity  to  Dr.  Dodd. 
Hopkins  was  supported  by  all  the  influence  of  the  Ad- 
ministration, though  notoriously  guilty  of  a  worse  act  than 
Dodd.  He  had  made  so  usurious  a  bargain  for  a  loan  of 
money  with  Sir  John  St.  Aubyn,  a  baronet  in  his  minority, 
that  the  Legislature  had  thought  fit  to  interpose  by  a  law 
against  such  contracts. 


1777 


ILLNESS  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER. 


127 


JULY. 


.  IT  was  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  jury,  on  a 
trial  before  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  Mansfield,  between 
Morande  and  the  famous  Chevalier  Deon,  that  the  latter 
was  of  the  female  sex.1  Morande  was  an  infamous  fellow, 
who  had  been  forced  to  leave  France  on  publishing  a 
scandalous  libel  called  the  *  Gazettier  Cuirasse,'  and  had 
been  intimate  with,  and  then  quarrelled  with  Deon. 

5th.  An  express  arrived  from  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester 
for  Dr.  Jebbe  and  Mr.  Adair,  the  Duke  of  Gloucester 
being  dangerously  ill  at  Verona.  The  King's  ill  usage 
and  the  little  hope  he  had  of  seeing  provision  made 
for  his  family,  had  sunk  deep  into  his  mind,  and  the 
heats  and  unwholesomeness  of  Verona  had  thrown  him 
into  great  weakness  and  wasting.  At  Padua  he  was  seized 
with  a  dysentery,  but  it  stopped ;  yet  at  Verona  he  grew 
so  weak  and  unable  to  bear  the  heat,  that  Bryant,  his 
surgeon,  advised  his  returning  to  England ;  and  his  danger 
increased  so  fast,  that  he  was  taken  out  of  his  bed  and  put 
into  his  post  chaise.  He  got  to  Trent,  seemed  to  mend 


1  The  case  was  between  Hayes,  a 
surgeon,  and  Jaques,  an  underwriter; 
and  it  was  tried  to  settle  a  wager, 
Jaques  having  bound  himself  (on  re- 
ceiving a  premium)  to  pay  Hayes  a 
certain  sum  whenever  the  fact  was  esta- 
blished that  d'Eon  was  a  woman.  Mo- 
rande was  a  witness,  and  gave  such 
testimony  that  no  human  being  could 
doubt  the  fact  of  d'Eon  belonging  to  the 


female  sex ;  only  that  Horande  was 
altogether  unworthy  of  credit.  But  two 
French  medical  men  gave  equally  con- 
clusive evidence  (if  they  could  be  be- 
lieved), and  the  jury  (before  whom 
d'Eon  himself  did  not  appear)  returned 
a  verdict  for  the  plaint  in",  with  seven 
hundred  and  two  pounds  damages  I 
Very  large  bets  were  depending  on  the 
result  of  this  absurd  trial. — D. 


128  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

by  the  journey  and  by  the  coolness  of  the  air  from  the 
mountains ;  but  his  flux  returned,  and  he  was  again  con- 
fined to  his  bed  for  some  days.  When  Adair  carried  the 
Duchess's  letter  to  Court,  the  King  for  some  time  would 
not  admit  him,  and  when  he  did,  asked  no  questions,  and 
looked  out  of  humour.  The  next  day,  on  reflection  or  on 
advice,  he  acted  great  concern,  said  he  was  glad  his  dear 
brother  was  coming  home,  gave  orders  for  relays  of  horses 
for  the  physicians,  and  shed  tears  to  Stiel,  the  Duke's 
head  domestic. 

About  the  10th,  accounts  from  General  Howe  that  he 
had  not  received  camp  equipage  for  the  army  till  the  24th 
of  May,  and  was  then  preparing  to  take  the  field.  Thus 
the  whole  camp  equipage  had  been  forced  again  to  be  sent 
hence. 

American  privateers  swarmed  on  all  our  coasts,  kept 
Ireland  and  Scotland  under  alarms,  and  interrupted  all 
their  trade.  Several  pieces  of  cannon  were  mounted 
on  the  harbour  of  Dublin.  The  provocations  from  France 
grew  as  crying,  and  memorials  passed  reciprocally  on  cap- 
tures and  grievances,  and  war  was  daily  expected ;  but 
Jenkinson  was  again  despatched  to  Paris  to  sue  and  miti- 
gate. Most  of  the  Ministers  grew  frightened,  and  almost 
all  were  casting  the  blame  on  each  other.  Mackensie  and 
his  wife  were  going  to  Italy,  which  looked  as  if  he  foresaw 
a  storm. 

25th.  Accounts  that  General  Howe  had  marched,  but 
found  General  Washington  so  strongly  intrenched  that  he 
did  not  dare  to  attack  him,  and  had  marched  back  to  New 
York.  This  showed  strange  want  of  intelligence  of 
Washington's  position,  and  proved  that  the  Provincials 
were  no  friends  to  Government,  as  the  latter  pretended, 
when  they  had  no  spies  amongst  them.  This  news  was  a 


1777.  GREAT  SCARCITY  OF  MONEY  AND  SPECIE.  129 

deep  blow  to  the  Court,  and  the  Scotch  declaimed  with 
the  greatest  violence  against  the  Howes.  At  the  same 
time  was  confirmed  the  account  of  the  taking  of  the  Fox 
man-of-war  by  the  Provincials. 

The  Court,  to  palliate  these  disgraces,  gave  out  that 
Lord  Stormont's  remonstrances  had  had  great  weight,  and 
that,  though  the  French  Court  declared  they  would  trade 
with  the  Provincials,  they  had  forbidden  their  privateers 
to  stay  above  twenty-four  hours  in  their  ports.  However, 
news  immediately  came  that  Cunningham,  the  privateer 
who  had  taken  and  carried  the  packet  boat  to  Dun- 
kirk, had  been  ordered  out,  and  not  to  take  any  English 
ship  till  out  in  full  sea,  had  immediately  taken  nine 
prizes. 

Besides  these  distresses,  there  was  the  greatest  want  of 
money  and  even  of  specie,  men  growing  frightened  and 
hoarding  their  coin  ;  bankers  would  not  discount  notes, 
and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  the  Ministers  prevailed 
on  the  Bank  to  assist  them.  Though  the  debts  of 
the  Crown  had  been  voted,  none  were  paid  till  the  last 
week  in  July ;  the  money  being  supposed  to  be  employed 
for  the  American  services,  or  to  corrupt  the  French 
Ministers,  Mons.  de  Vergennes  in  particular  being  sup- 
posed a  pensioner  of  Lord  Stormont. 

28^.  The  French  Ambassadress,  Madame  de  Noailles, 
arrived,  to  blind  us,  if  we  would  be  blinded. 


VOL.  ii. 


130  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  AUG. 


AUGUST. 


AT  the  beginning  of  the  month  letters  arrived  from  Gene- 
ral Burgoyne,  which  said  he  was  marched  with  the  Cana- 
dian army,  and  was  within  six  miles  of  Ticonderoga. 
With  his  letters  he  sent  over  two  papers  that  were 
V  standards  of  ridiculous  bombast.  One  was  his  talk  with 
the  Indian  nations,  the  other  his  manifesto  to  the  revolted 
Colonies,  penned  with  such  threats  of  his  arms,  as  would 
expose  him  to  derision  if  he  failed,  and  would  diminish  the 
lustre  of  his  success  if  he  obtained  any.  Burgoyne  was 
fond  of  writing,  and  did  not  want  eloquence,  but  judgment 
extremely.  The  Ministers  affected  great  spirits  on  the 
victories  he  promised,  though  they  laughed  at  his  pomp. 

An  account  of  General  Howe  being  attacked  on  his 
embarking.  Mr.  Finch,  Lord  Aylesford's  brother,  was 
killed,  but  the  Americans  lost  three  pieces  of  cannon. 
The  troops,  who  were  weary  of  being  shut  up  in  New 
York,  and  had  expected  to  be  led  against  Washington, 
whom  they  flattered  themselves  with  defeating,  and  then 
that  they  should  plunder  and  share  the  conquered  lands 
amongst  them,  were  veiy  unwilling  to  embark  and  be 
carried  they  knew  not  whither.  Howe,  too,  had  kept  up 
no  discipline,  but  suffered  great  drunkenness  and  gaming 
in  their  quarters. 

General  Prescot  surprised  out  of  his  quarters  by  the 
Americans,  as  General  Lee  had  been  by  the  Royalists. 

The  Fox  man-of-war,  and  the  Hancock,  that  had  taken 
it,  retaken  by  Sir  George  Collier. 


1777.  LORD  ABINGDON.  131 

/227M?.  An  account  of  General  Burgoyne  being  master 
of  Ticonderoga.  The  red  riband  was  offered  to  Lord 
Derby  for  Burgoyne,  but  the  latter,  who  had  expected  it 
before  he  had  done  anything  to  deserve  it,  had  left  direc- 
tions with  Lord  Derby  to  refuse  it.  The  King,  on 
receiving  the  account  of  taking  Ticonderoga,  ran  into  the 
Queen's  room,  crying,  "  I  have  beat  them !  beat  all  the 
Americans!'*  \ 


SEPTEMBER. 


LORD  Abingdon l  published  his  answer  to  Mr.  Burke's 
letter  to  the  sheriffs  of  Bristol.  He  was  a  singular  young 
man,  not  quite  void  of  parts,  but  rough,  wrongheaded, 
extremely  underbred,  but  warmly  honest  He  had  been 
bred  at  Geneva,  and  had  thoroughly  imbibed  principles  of 
liberty.  He  was  a  sportsman,  and  is  ridiculed  by  Voltaire 
in  one  of  the  cantos  of  the  *  Guerre  de  Geneve.'  Zealous  in 
opposition  to  the  American  war,  and  eager  in  every  pur- 
suit without  any  knowledge  of  the  world,  he  was  at  this 
time  ruined  by  horse-racing.  His  pamphlet  was  bold, 
spirited,  and  severe,  and  much  above  what  was  expected 
from  him,  the  arguments  being  shrewd  and  clear,  and 
destructive  of  Burke's  sophistry,  which  was  always  tinged 
with  monarchic  and  high  ecclesiastic  principles,  and  always 
reserved  loopholes  for  displaying  his  real  principles,  if  ever 
he  should  become  a  minister  of  the  Crown.  Lord  Abing- 


1  Willoughby,  the  fourth  Earl.    He  died  in  1799,  in  his  sixtieth  year.— D. 

K    2 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


SEPT. 


don  was  destitute  of  art  and  did  not  aim  at  eloquence,  but 
his  plain  dealing  and  severe  truths  were  far  more  detri- 
mental to  the  Court  than  the  laboured  subterfuges  and 
inconsistent  Jesuitism  of  Burke. 

16th.  Simon,  Earl  of  Harcourt,2  was  found  drowned  in 
an  old  well  in  a  wood  at  his  own  park  at  Nuneham,  aged 
sixty-four.  It  appeared  that  his  dog  had  fallen  in,  and 
that  the  Earl,  endeavouring  to  recover  him,  had  lost  his 
poise  and  fallen  in  himself.  The  dog  was  on  the  body, 
but  could  not  get  out. 

Accounts  from  Burgoyne  of  the  great  difficulties  he  had 
found  in  passing  the  woods,  where  the  Provincials  had 
felled  trees  to  embarrass  them.  He  found  the  whole 
country  wasted,  and  met  with  none  but  women  on  his 
march,  who  could  give  him  no  intelligence.  The  Provin- 
cials abandoned  Fort  Edward  to  him,  which  he  took  pos- 
session of;  but  the  Ministers  were  so  confounded  by 
Howe's  expedition,  when  they  wished  he  should  have  gone 
to  the  North  and  endeavour  to  get  Washington  between 
him  and  Burgoyne,  that  they  sent  orders  to  Burgoyne  not 
to  advance  beyond  Albany  till  he  could  hear  from  and 
concert  with  Howe. 

The  French  at  this  time  seemed  cooler  towards  the 
Provincials,  either  from  thinking  the  latter  sufficiently 
secure  of  maintaining  themselves,  or  from  wishing  to  force 
the  Colonies  into  stricter  conjunction  with  them  than  the 
latter  chose. 

At  the  same  time,  France,  in  concert  with  Spain,  who 
had  made  peace  with  Portugal,  insisted  on  Portugal's 
accession  to  the  Family  Compact.  Count  Virri,  the  Sar- 


9  The  first  Earl  and  second  Viscount, 
and  son  of  the  Lord  Chancellor  Har- 
court. He  had  filled  the  offices  of  Am- 
bassador to  France,  and  Lord  Lieu- 


tenant of  Ireland.  As  Ambassador 
Extraordinary,  he  escorted  Queen  Char- 
lotte to  England. — D. 


1777.  DEPRESSION  OF  THE  MINISTRY.  133 

dinian  Ambassador,  was  recalled  from  Paris,  and  totally 
disgraced,  on  its  being  discovered,  as  was  believed,  that 
his  wife  (Mrs.  Harriet  Spred,  an  Englishwoman)  had  been  , 
bribed   by   Lord   Stormont,   and   betrayed    to   him   like 
negotiations  at  the  court  of  Turin. 


THE  whole  month  of  September  had  passed  without  any 
intelligence  of  or  from  the  Howes.  They  had  promised  to 
write  on  making  good  their  landing,  but  had  not  com- 
municated to  Administration  a  syllable  of  their  plan. 
Lord  George  Germaine,  on  the  application  of  merchants 
to  him  for  intelligence  so  late  as  the  end  of  October, 
declared  he  knew  nothing  of  their  intentions ;  and  more 
privately,  even  when  he  did  hear  of  them,  declared  how  they 
had  frustrated  all  his  views,  and  that  he  now  despaired  of 
success  from  the  American  war.  Lord  Mansfield  had 
owned  he  should  despair  too  if  this  campaign  was  not 
very  prosperous.  Scarce  any  of  the  other  Ministers  were 
more  sanguine.  Lord  Weymouth  was  for  peace  at  any 
rate ;  yet,  on  Rigby's  desponding,  said,  they  had  nothing 
for  it  (i.  e.  for  safety  of  their  heads)  but  going  on. 
General  Harvey,  the  King's  military  favourite,  con- 
demned the  war.  The  nation,  from  impatience  for  news, 
grew  much  dissatisfied,  and  the  Howes  were  infinitely 
abused,  and  accused  of  thinking  of  nothing  but  their  vast 
profits.  The  King  alone  had  been  so  wound  up  by  the 
Scotch  and  the  Junto,  that  he  would  hear  of  nothing  but 


134  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

another  campaign.  New  subsidiary  levies  were  attempted 
in  Germany,  though  it  was  impossible  to  raise  troops 
enough  there  to  recruit  even  the  unavoidable  losses  of  the 
present  campaign ;  and  the  Government  was  forced  to 
purchase  old  East  India  ships  to  transport  provisions  to 
Quebec,  to  be  carried  round  by  the  circuit  Burgoyne  had 
made  (though  with  applause)  to  maintain  his  army. 
Russia  had  peremptorily  refused  to  let  a  Russian  go  to 
/  America ;  but  the  Czarina,  who  burnt  with  resentment  for 
the  obstructions  France  had  given  her  in  the  Turkish  war, 
as  well  as  for  having  blown  up  and  endeavoured  to  re- 
kindle it,  offered,  if  we  had  war  with  France,  to  garrison 
Hanover,  to  lend  us  eighteen  ships-of-the-line,  and  as 
many  frigates,  and  to  land  60,000  men  on  the  coast  of 
France,  as  she  had  long  been  desirous  of  doing.  About 
this  time  the  Czarina  having  proposed  to  the  Emperor  of 
China  to  lay  waste  a  large  district  that  separated  their 
dominions,  and  for  which  they  had  been  near  going  to 
war,  that  it  might  occasion  no  breach  of  their  peace,  he 
gave  her  no  answer,  but  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Russians, 
telling  them  that  a  woman,  who  called  herself  Empress  of 
Russia,  had  proposed  to  him  to  lay  waste  a  country  that 
belonged  to  him,  and  with  which  he  knew  better  what  to 
do;  but  he  wondered  that  the  Russians  continued  to  let 
themselves  be  governed  by  a  woman  that  had  murdered 
her  own  husband. 

6th.  A  Captain ,  Blackbourne  in  a  frigate  arrived  at 
Margate  from  New  York,  and  deposed  that  Burgoyne  was 
;  got  to  Albany,  that  three  attempts  had  been  made  on 
/New  York  and  Long  Island  since  Howe's  absence,  and 
had  all  been  repulsed  by  Clinton,  with  the  loss  to  the  Pro- 
vincials of  400  killed  and  300  taken,  and  that  the  Howes 
had  landed  at  Elk  in  the  bay  of  Chesapeake,  and  had  burnt 


1777.  GENERAL  HALDIMAN.  135 

a  vast  magazine.  The  arrival  of  Burgoyne  at  Albany  was 
not  confirmed ;  the  destruction  of  the  magazine  was  false,  f 
Clinton  wrote  a  confirmation  of  the  three  attacks  on  him, 
and  their  repulses,  to  General  Harvey  ;  but  he  had 
neither  cannons  sufficient  nor  500  men  to  spare  to  march 
towards  Burgoyne.  Clinton  was  much  dissatisfied  with 
General  Howe,  and  said  it  was  only  from  a  point  of 
honour  that  he  did  not  ask  to  be  recalled.  Three 
more  weeks  elapsed  before  any  more  was  heard  of  the 
Howes. 

General  Haldiman,  a  Swiss,  had  been,  not  very  legally, 
named  to  succeed  Carleton  as  Governor  of  Quebec,  and 
not  very  wisely,  as  he  was  fitter  for  a  partizan  than  for  the 
civil  and  military  government.  But  he  had  been  a  wit- 
ness for  Lord  George  Gennaine  on  his  trial  after  the 
battle  of  Minden,  as  Carleton  had  been  a  witness  against 
him.  Haldiman  went  to  Plymouth  to  embark,  but  was 
recalled ;  and  it  was  suspected  that  Lord  George  was 
afraid  of  the  return  of  Carleton,  who  was  coming  back 
inveterate  to  him,  wounded  by  the  affront  offered  to  his 
brother,  and  by  the  preference  given  to  Burgoyne.  He 
had  sternly  rejected  all  honours  and  emoluments  that  had 
been  offered  to  pacify  him. 

22nd.  The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester  and  their 
children  and  suite  landed  at  Dover,  and  on  the 

24^/i,  arrived  at  Gloucester  House.  The  motives  of 
their  return  sooner  than  they  had  intended,  and  many 
singular  circumstances  relating  to  them,  I  reserved  to  this 
place,  that  their  history  might  not  be  interrupted,  but  be 
better  understood. 

Some  time  previous  to  the  motion  in  Parliament  for  the 
payment  of  the  King's  debts,  Sir  Edward  Walpole,  the 
Duchess's  father,  who  had  in  the  early  part  of  his  life 


136  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

been  much  acquainted  with  Lord  George  Germaine,  and 
had  heartily  hated  him,  had,  from  being  violent  against 
the  Americans,  taken  a  contrary  turn,  and  grown  very 
partial  to  Lord  George.  Hearing  of  the  intended  motion 
for  the  King's  debts,  Sir  Edward,  without  consulting  the 
Duke  or  Duchess,  and  without  acquainting  me,  had  written  a 
most  nattering  letter  to  Lord  George,  commending  his  great 
abilities,  which  indeed  he  had,  and  begging  Lord  George 
to  get  payment  of  the  Duke's  debts,  and  a  farther  provision 
for  his  Royal  Highness,  added  to  the  intended  bill.  Lord 
George,  after  a  day  or  two,  returned  a  mere  official  answer, 
saying  he  could  propose  no  such  thing  without  the  King's 
consent,  nor,  without  it,  could  support  it ;  that  the  only  way 
of  obtaining  what  he  wished  was  for  the  Duke  himself  to 
make  his  peace ;  and  that  no  time  was  to  be  lost.  In 
truth,  had  not  the  motion  been  deferred  much  longer  than 
was  intended,  it  would  have  been  next  to  impossible  for 
Sir  Edward  to  have  acquainted  the  Duke,  who  was  at 
Rome,  with  Lord  George's  advice,  and  for  the  Duke  to  have 
returned  an  answer,  even  had  there  been  no  difficulty  in 
effecting  the  reconciliation. 

Sir  Edward,  not  discouraged,  sent  one  Roberts,  an 
apothecary's  son,  in  whom  Sir  Edward  had  great  confi- 
dence, to  Lord  George,  with  great  commendations  of  the 
young  man's  sense  and  fidelity  (which  indeed  he  proved), 
pressing  Lord  George  to  be  more  explicit.  Roberts  exe- 
cuted his  trust  so  well,  that  Lord  George  opened  himself, 
and  spoke  with  so  much  cordiality,  that,  after  a  letter  or 
two,  Lord  George  went  to  Sir  Edward,  repeated  what  he 
had  said  to  Roberts,  and  added  much  more,  of  both  which 
conversations  this  was  the  sum : — 

Lord  George  said,  that  from  the  moment  he  had  entered 
into  the  King's  service,  he  had  declared  himself  an  indepen- 


1777.  MEASURES  RELATIVE  TO  D.  OF  GLOUCESTER'S  FAMILY.  137 

dent  man,  and  had  told  Lord  North  he  would  be  so,  and 
should  be  ready  to  resign  his  post  at  any  time.  That  he 
had  constantly  avowed  his  attachment  to  the  Duke  of  Glou- 
cester ;  and  that,  though  Lord  North  and  other  ministers 
had  told  him  he  would  do  himself  no  good  by  that  zeal, 
he  had  always  continued,  and  had  told  the  Ministers,  the 
Duke's  children  must  be  provided  for  as  of  the  Royal 
family.  That  he  had  even  held  that  language  to  the 
King  himself;  and  once  in  his  Majesty's  hearing  had  said 
to  the  Ministers,  "  It  is  evident  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's 
children  are  of  the  blood  royal,  for  they  cannot,  by  the 
Royal  Marriage  Act,  marry  without  the  consent  of  the 
Crown.1"  This  was  certain,  and  by  far  the  most  irre- 
fragable argument  that  had  ever  been  used. 

Sir  Edward  asked  Lord  George's  advice,  whether  the 
Duke  and  Duchess  should  immediately  come  over.  He 
answered,  not  yet ;  but  advised  the  Duke  should  come  over 
alone  next  winter,  and  ask  leave  to  see  the  King ;  that  the 
King  could  not  refuse  to  see  him,  and  that  the  reception 
of  the  Duchess  and  the  children,  and  an  establishment  for 
all,  would  afterwards  come  of  course  in  some  time. 

Sir  Edward,  transported  with  so  fair  a  commencement 
of  his  negotiation,  wrote  an  account  to  the  Duke,  and 
before  he  sent  away  his  letter  showed  it  to  me,  and 
acquainted  me  with  what  had  passed.  I  was  very  far 
from  admiring  what  he  had  done,  or  from  having  the  same 
opinion  of  Lord  George,  for  many  reasons,  which  I  will 
truly  relate,  as  no  doubt  I  was  prejudiced  against  him. 
In  the  first  place,  for  the  very  cause  my  brother  liked  him, 
his  activity  against  the  Americans.  Till  Lord  George 
came  into  place,  there  had  been  no  spirit  or  sense  in  the 
conduct  of  the  war.  The  Scotch  had  been  incredibly 
industrious  in  poisoning  the  minds  of  the  King  and  the 


138  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

nation  against  them,  and  in  promoting  the  most  cruel  and 
unjust  acts ;  but  the  laziness  of  Lord  North,  the  scruples 
of  Lord  Dartmouth,  who  voted  for  the  worst  measures,  but 
was  supine  or  unwilling  to  execute  them,  the  inability  of 
the  commanders,  and  the  jobbing  partiality  of  Lord  Sand- 
wich (though  active  enough)  in  the  choice  of  admirals, 
commodores,  and  captains,  had  given  the  Americans  full 
time  to  put  themselves  on  their  guard.     Added  to  this, 
Lord  George,  from  jealousy,  never  from  cause,  had  been  a 
constant  enemy  of  my  dear  friend,  General  Conway  ;  and 
yet,  during  Lord  George's  disgrace,  I  had  persevered  in 
hot  abandoning  him,  having  long  been  acquainted  with  him, 
his  father,  mother,  and  sister ;  and  I,  Sir  John  Irwine,  and 
Mr.  Brand  had  been  the  only  three  men  in  England  who 
had  dared  to  speak  to  or  sit  by  Lord  George  in  public 
places.     Yet,  when  I  visited  him  on  his  being  Secretary 
of  State,  he  did  not  return  my  visit,  which  Ministers  do 
not ;  but  I  thought  I  had  done  too  much  to  excuse  his 
pleading  such  a  ceremonial.     Indeed  his  preferment  I  had 
not  doubted  was  owing  to  his  having  been  one  of  those 
who  had  attached  themselves  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester. 
George  Onslow  and  Sir  W.  Meredith  had  been  promoted 
for  that  sole  reason,  and  showed  they  had,  by  deserting 
the  Duke.     I  had  early  suspected  the  same  thing  was 
meditated  by,  and  would  happen  to,  Lord  George,  and 
had  warned  the  Duchess  not  to  trust  him.     When  he  went 
into  place,  he  vowed  to  the  Duke  he  was  glad  of  it,  as  it 
would  give  him  opportunities  of  showing  himself  his  Royal 
Highness's  friend;  and  he  has  kept  his  word  nobly  and 
boldly  since ! 

It  was  too  late  to  blame  what  my  brother  had  done ; 
and  he  was  a  father,  I  but  uncle.  Yet  I  could  not 
conceal  from  him  that  1  feared  the  Duke  would  by  no 


1777.       CONVERSATION  WITH  SIR  EDWARD  WALPOLE.        139 

means  be  pleased  with  the  step  he  had  taken ;  and  80  it 
proved,  for  though  his  Royal  Highness  sent  Sir  Edward  a 
dispassionate  and  sensible  answer,  he  was  exceedingly  hurt 
at  the  transaction.  I  took  the  liberty,  too,  to  hint  to  Sir 
Edward  what  I  really  very  much  apprehended,  that  Lord 
George  might  be  acting  a  very  treacherous  part  to  pay  his 
court  to  the  King  ;  that  by  drawing  the  Duke  over  alone 
he  might  be  absolutely  sacrificing  the  Duchess  without 
obtaining  any  establishment  for  her  and  her  children.  I 
did  not  doubt,  I  said,  but  the  King  would  receive  the 
Duke  alone ;  but  should  he  afterwards  refuse  to  receive 
the  Duchess,  could  the  Duke  quarrel  with  him  for  the 
refusal,  when  he  had  thrown  himself  alone  into  the  King's 
arms  ?  or  how  could  he  insist  on  a  settlement  when  he  had 
made  no  terms?  I  said,  I  did  not  mean  to  injure  Lord 
George,  but  that  I  thought  it  right  and  necessary,  when 
the  whole  interest  of  the  Duke  and  his  family  was  at  stake, 
that  his  Royal  Highness  should  at  least  hear  counsel  on 
both  sides  before  he  determined  what  he  would  do. 

Sir  Edward  heard  me  with  great  patience  and  temper, 
and  said  there  was  a  great  deal  in  my  objections ;  and 
though  he  was  persuaded  of  Lord  George's  sincerity,  he 
allowed  it  was  right  to  give  the  Duke  every  caution.  Our 
nephew,  Lord  Cholmondeley,  he  added,  intends  going  to 
see  the  Duke,  and  each  of  us  will  state  and  send  by  him  to 
the  Duke  our  arguments  in  writing.  I  did  not  contradict 
him,  but  I  did  not  intend  to  give  what  I  had  said  in 
writing,  that  hereafter  might  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
King  or  Lord  George  ;  and  new  events  soon  made  this 
step  unnecessary. 

The  Duke  and  Duchess  had  left  Rome  and  gone  to 
Venice  for  the  Ascension,  intending  to  pass  the  hot  months, 
that  were  very  unfavourable  to  him,  in  the  mountains  of 


140  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

Switzerland,  return  to  Rome  for  the  winter,  and  come 
home  in  the  spring  for  the  summer  months,  as  the  Duchess 
was  impatient  to  see  her  three  daughters  by  Lord  Walde- 
grave,  of  whom  she  was  extremely  fond.  The  heats  of  the 
season  and  of  the  theatres,  and  the  sudden  chill  on  going 
into  gondolas,  were  too  much  for  the  Duke's  diseased  con- 
stitution, nor  was  he  ever  above  two  years  without  some 
grievous  crisis.  To  natural  infirmity  and  accidental  colds 
was  added  the  anxiety  of  his  mind,  from  mortifications, 
from  his  debts,  and  from  the  uncertitude  of  the  future 
destiny  of  his  family,  should  he  drop.  The  King's  obdu- 
rate cruelty,  and  the  coldness  with  which  the  House  of 
Commons  had  rejected  Sir  James  Lowther's  motion  in 
favour  of  the  two  Royal  Dukes,  were  new  stabs  to  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester,  and  threw  him  into  the  most  violent 
and  desperate  diarrhoea  at  Padua.  He  got  to  Verona, 
whence,  the  heat  proving  insupportable,  he  was  lifted  into 
a  post-chaise,  and  with  great  difficulty  transported  to 
Trent.  The  Emperor  of  Germany  had  a  great  friendship 
for  the  Duke,  and  passing  through  Inspruck  while  the 
Duke  was  ill  at  Trent,  publicly  expressed  great  concern  at 
not  having  time  to  go  to  him !  This  was  written  to 
England,  and,  with  the  comment  of  the  Duchess's  words  I 
have  quoted,  and  which  were  in  one  of  her  letters  by  the 
post,  which  probably  were  always  opened,  might  contribute 
to  the  King's  letter  what  I  shall  mention  presently,  as  Sir 
Edward  was  told  by  good  authority  that  .the  King  had 
been  alarmed  with  the  Emperor's  intending,  if  his  Majesty 
was  not  reconciled  to  the  Duke,  to  offer  his  Royal  Highness 
any  establishment  at  Vienna  consistent  with  the  Duke's 
inclination  and  religion.  It  might  have  been  written  to 
the  King  from  Germany,  as  the  Emperor  did  not  love  the 
King,  and  was  very  capable  of  having  declared  such  an 


1777.  THE  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER'S  ILLNESS.  141 

intention.  The  Duke,  after  his  return,  told  me  himself 
that  the  Emperor  had  formerly  asked  him  if  he  was 
married  ?  The  Duke  said  it  was  hard  to  ask  him  what  he 
had  not  told  to  his  own  brother  the  King.  "  Well,"  said 
the  Emperor,  "  I  will  not  press  it ;  but,  if  you  are  not 
married,  and  like  the  woman,  I  advise  you  to  marry  her. 
Formerly  there  were  foolish  prejudices  about  me'salliances, 
but  Europe  has  got  over  them.  I  can  tell  you,  if  you 
ever  hear  I  am  married,  it  will  be  to  some  woman  I 
like."  At  Trent  the  Duke  declared  himself  dying  of  a 
broken  heart.  The  Duchess,  distracted  with  grief,  wrote 
to  beseech  Dr.  Jebbe  and  Mr.  Adair  to  come  to  the  Duke, 
though  she  had  no  prospect  of  their  arriving  in  time  to 
find  him  alive.  To  overwhelm  her  completely,  the  young 
Prince  her  son,  a  remarkably  strong  child,  fell  ill  and 
wasted,  and,  as  she  apprehended,  of  the  disorder  trans- 
mitted with  his  blood.  Her  own  pathetic  expressions  can 
best  paint  her  agonies  : — "  I  cannot  bear  to  lose  him,"  said 
she,  "  though  I  have  no  better  prospect  for  him  than  a 
commission  in  the  Austrian  service." 

Bryant,  a  surgeon,  page  to  the  Duke,  gave  such  an 
account  of  the  Duke's  danger,  that  Dr.  Jebbe  and  Mr. 
Adair  determined  to  set  out  that  night.  Adair  went 
directly  to  Court  to  show  the  King  the  letter.  The  King, 
though  apprised  of  the  contents  of  the  letter,  made  him 
wait  above  an  hour ;  and  when  Lord  Jersey,  the  Lord  in 
Waiting,  said  Adair  had  no  time  to  lose,  the  King  looked 
out  of  humour,  called  in  Adair,  read  the  letter,  but  said 
not  a  word.  Some  hours  after,  when  both  went  to  receive 
his  Majesty's  commands,  upon  recollection  or  advice,  he 
expressed  great  anxiety  about  his  dear  brother,  said  he  had 
always  thought  his  leaving  England  wrong,  gave  orders  for 


142  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

post-horses  and  messengers,  but  did  not  send  a  word  of 
message  by  them  to  his  dear  brother. 

The  Duke  continued  growing  worse  and  worse,  and 
weaker  and  weaker.  Sometimes  some  symptoms  were 
more  favourable ;  but  on  the  25th  of  August  he  was  seized 
in  the  most  dangerous  and  violent  manner,  with  excruciating 
pain  in  his  thigh  and  leg ;  and  though  the  weather  was 
sultry,  and  he  had  suffered  infinitely  by  it,  he  grew  so  cold 
*  that  he  could  not  be  kept  warm  with  three  bottles  of 
boiling  water  in  the  bed :  cold  sweats  came  on,  his  speech 
grew  inarticulate,  and  the  rattle  in  his  throat  began. 
Bryant  wrote  that  he  would  probably  be  dead  in  four 
hours ;  and  as  the  disorder  in  his  bowels  stopped,  the 
physicians  thought  the  mortification  begun.  The  Duchess 
had  been  six  weeks  constantly  in  his  chamber,  and  lay  by 
his  bed ;  nor  quitted  it  but  unavoidably.  She  wrote  to 
her  daughter,  Lady  Laura,  "  When  I  am  from  him  I  see 
no  soul ;  I  only  weep  and  pray."  After  sitting  twelve 
hours  by  him  at  his  extremity,  expecting  to  see  him 
expire,  the  physicians  forced  her  out  of  the  room.  "I 
hope,"  said  the  Duke,  u  I  shall  die  now  while  she  is  gone!" 
As  soon  as  she  had  left  him,  she  asked  Dr.  Jebbe  if  he  had 
never  known  anybody  recover  that  was  so  bad  ?  He  burst 
into  tears  and  said,  "  Madam,  you  know  the  Duke  has 
been  three  months  ill ;  I  cannot  flatter  you  ! " 

Words  could  not,  nor  is  it  necessary  to  paint  the 
Duchess's  situation  if  he  had  died.  The  Duke  had 
exacted  a  promise  from  her  not  to  send  his  body  by  sea, 
but  to  attend  it  herself  by  land.  To  travel  with  the  dead 
body,  and  with  her  two  infants,  through  Germany  and 
France,  to  be  gazed  at  by  curious  crowds  of  strangers  at 
inns,  to  be  totally  uncertain  whether  she  or  her  children 


1777.  THE  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER'S  ILLNESS.  143 

would  have  a  maintenance,  or  even  whether  wickedness  and 
revenge  would  not  try  to  dispute  the  validity  of  her  mar- 
riage and  their  birth,  hopeless  of  ever  having  it  in  her 
power  to  reward  the  few  friends  that  had  stuck  faithful 
to  the  Duke  and  her,  and  to  return  an  object  of  triumph- 
ant insult  to  a  Queen  and  a  sex  that  envied  the  success 
of  her  beauty,  it  is  no  wonder,  as  she  said  herself,  that 
she  expected  madness  would  be  the  term  of  her  miseries ! 

That  a  great  Prince,  exiled  and  dying,  should  excite 
every  sentiment  of  pity  in  a  people  secured  by  mountains 
from  being  tainted  and  hardened  by  a  Court,  is  not  ex- 
traordinary ;  it  is  natural.  The  patience  of  the  Duke, 
his  and  the  Duchess's  virtues,  and  her  familiarity  and  con- 
descension, won  so  rapidly  on  the  good  people  of  Trent, 
that,  though  he  was  a  Protestant,  the  Ursuline  nuns  said 
masses  for  his  recovery,  and  the  people  imagined  they 
had  a  prophecy  that  the  brother  of  a  great  King  would 
recover  of  a  dangerous  illness  in  their  city. 

A  poor  Trentine  little  girl  that  attended  the  Royal 
children  was  the  first  that  seemed  to  administer  any  relief 
to  the  Duke's  dreadful  sufferings.  He  imagined  he  could 
eat  potatoes :  not  one  was  to  be  found  in  twenty  miles. 
The  little  maid,  hearing  great  inquiries  after  potatoes, 
asked  what  they  were,  and  desired  to  have  them  described 
to  her.  She  thought  she  recollected  having  seen  such 
roots  in  a  convent  out  of  the  town.  She  ran  thither,  and 
returned  with  four,  which  the  Duke  ate,  and  wished  for 
more  ;  but  the  convent  was  shut,  and  the  poor  child  could 
procure  no  more  till  the  next  morning.  But  Nature  no 
doubt  had  effected  the  miracle  already.  The  crisis  of  the 
humour  had  turned  itself  to  the  leg  (which  swelled  immo- 
derately), and  cleared  the  bowels. 

Four  days  after  the  crisis,  a  new  and  most  unexpected 


144  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

event  secured  the  Duke's  recovery,  by  relieving  his  mind 
as  much  as  the  tumour  had  tranquillized  his  bowels. 
Though  Colonel  Jennings,  who  was  come  to  visit  him, 
had  extorted  a  decent  message  from  the  King  after  one 
repulse,  the  total  indifference,  the  marked  neglect  of  the 
\Court,  in  servile  complaisance  with  their  master,  was  so 
indecent,  that  Lord  Weymouth,  so  far  from  expressing 
even  the  civility  of  concern,  did  not  so  much  as  answer 
one  of  the  constant  accounts  which  Dr.  Jebbe  sent  of  the 
Duke's  situation.  Provoked  at  such  brutal  rudeness,  the 
doctor  at  last  addressed  his  letters  to  Lord  George 
Germaine,  who  answered  them  as  punctually. 

Thus  abandoned  to  neglect  and  despair,  how  was  the 
Duke  surprised  at  receiving  a  most  kind  and  cordial  letter 
from  the  King,  in  which  his  Majesty  protested  "  that  his 
affection  for  his  dear  brother  had  never  been  altered,  and 
never  should  cease ;  and  that,  lest  anxiety  should  augment 
his  danger,  his  Majesty,  in  case  of  a  fatal  termination,  gave 
his  dear  brother  his  Royal  word  that  he  would  take  care  of 
his  Family" 

The  poor  Duke  received  this  astonishing  reprieve  with 
calmness  and  faint  satisfaction,  and  with  a  trembling  hand 
acknowledged  gratefully  the  fraternal  medicine  to  his 
anguish.  He  had  even  command  enough  of  himself  to 
manage  the  King's  shame,  and  thank  him  for  his  intended 
goodness  to  his  family,  without  mentioning  the  name  of 
his  Duchess. 

But  before  I  proceed,  I  must  relate  by  how  extra- 
ordinary an  engine  this  letter  was  wrung  from  his  Majesty's 
insensibility — or  rather  suggested  to  his  hypocrisy.  The 
account  will  be  a  clue  to  a  labyrinth  of  as  unkingly  senti- 
ments as  ever  entered  into  a  Royal  composition. 

I  have  said  that  Colonel  Jennings  had  taken  post  to 


1777.          JENNINGS'S  LETTER  TO  COLONEL  RAINSFORD.      145 

visit  the  Duke.  Jennings  was  a  young  officer  of  parts, 
but  wild,  bold,  and  free.  He  was  a  servant  of  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland,  but  much  more  devoted  to  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester.  Arriving  at  Trent,  and  finding  the  Duke  at 
the  extremity,  ill  lodged,  and  lying  in  a  hammock  (as  it 
had  been  found  necessary  to  preserve  the  circulation  of 
his  blood  by  swinging  him),  incapable  of  articulating,  the 
physicians  in  despair,  the  Duchess  half  distracted,  and  the 
whole  family  plunged  in  misery  and  distress,  Jennings  sat 
down  and  wrote  a  letter  to  Colonel  Rainsford,  one  of  the 
Duke's  Grooms  of  the  Bedchamber,  in  which  he  let  loose  a 
torrent  of  abuse  and  treason  on  the  King,  painted  his  own 
horror  on  finding  the  Duke  in  so  deplorable  a  condition, 
which  he  pathetically  described,  and  declared  that  nothing 
but  a  kind  letter  from  the  King  could  give  a  chance  of 
saving  his  Royal  Highness's  life,  and  that  his  Majesty  had 
not  a  moment  to  lose  if  he  had  a  wish  of  preserving  his 
brother.  Jennings  protested,  his  conscience  and  duty 
compelled  him  to  give  the  King  this  solemn  notice, 
declared  he  neither  feared  nor  hoped  for  himself,  and 
insisted,  as  Rainsford  would  answer  it  to  the  King,  the 
Duke,  and  the  public,  that  he  would,  without  a  moment's 
delay,  carry  this  very  letter  himself  to  his  Majesty. 
Rainsford  was  thunderstruck  at  so  outrageous  a  remon- 
strance, and  carried  it  to  Dr.  Duval,  Canon  of  Windsor, 
and  formerly  the  Duke's  preceptor.  Duval  was  no  less 
terrified,  and  agitated  between  the  insult  of  the  language 
and  affection  to  the  Duke,  he  knew  not  what  to  determine, 
but  carried  the  letter  to  the  deanery  to  the  Bishop  of 
Exeter,  the  Duchess's  brother-in-law.  The  Bishop,  poor, 
and  loaded  with  four  unprovided  children,  could  not  be 
expected  to  stake  his  fortune  with  the  same  honest  rash- 
ness as  Jennings.  At  last,  they  copied  out  the  letter, 
VOL.  ii.  L 


146  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

omitting  the  harshest  and  treasonable  expressions,  but  pre- 
serving the  description  of  the  Duke's  situation,  and  the 
strong  adjurations  to  the  King;  and  Duval  carried  the 
letter  to  his  Majesty's  favourite  page. 

When  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  heard  the  King  had 

seen  Jennings's  letter,  he  said,  "  Jennings  has  undone  us  !" 

but  Jennings's  spirit  was  fittest  to  deal  with  so  ignoble  a 

j  nature.     The  King  was  alarmed,  and  said  it  was  a  very 

•   strong  letter  indeed ;  and  either  through  fear  or  shame  he 

immediately  wrote  the  memorable  letter  I  have  quoted. 

Tenderness  or  remorse  might  more  justly  be  supposed 
to  have  dictated  the  contents,  if,  in  the  very  moment  of 
penning  it,  the  King  himself  had  not  betrayed  the  base 
and  unworthy  motives  of  his  own  conduct.  They  who 
knew  him  best  did  suspect  it  was  but  a  tribute  paid  to 
ostentation,  and  that  he  flattered  himself  the  Duke  would 
be  breathless  before  the  letter  could  reach  him.  Still,  as  it 
must  fall  into  the  Duchess's  hand,  the  purport  must  be 
known ;  and  though  the  measure  of  provision  remained  in 
the  King's  breast,  and  would  probably  be  mean  enough, 
and  that  amidst  the  apparent  gush  of  feelings  his  Majesty 
had  reserved  coolness  enough  to  omit  the  Duchess's  name, 
and  that  he  was  artfully  equivocal  enough  to  be  capable 
of  interpreting  his  own  words  as  confined  to  the  children : 
still  no  man  living  was  black  enough  or  hostile  enough  to 
the  King  to  fathom  all  the  depths  of  his  deliberate  dissi- 
mulation and  treachery.  It  must  be  told,  as  a  lesson  to 
v  Princes  never  to  stoop  to  all  the  tricks  their  hearts  may 
suggest,  for  Kings  must  have  instruments,  and  what  they 
venture  to  command  those  instruments  may  venture  to 
divulge.  Nay,  their  own  folly  may  counteract  their  own 
artifice — as  it  happened  now,  for  the  letter  found  the  Duke 
alive  and  was  delivered  to  him.  The  King  had  no  doubt 


1777.  DISSIMULATION  OF  THE  KING.  147 

intended  to  boast  of  how  fraternal  a  letter  he  had  written, 
but  was  insidious  enough  to  design  to  suppress  the  promise. 
I  speak  by  authority.  The  Duchess,  on  her  return,  pro- 
voked at  a  reception  so  abhorrent  from  the  unalterable 
affection  the  King  had  vowed  to  his  dear  brother,  disclosed 
the  whole  of  the  Royal  scandalous  machination.  The 
King  had  given  his  letter  to  Legrand,  the  Duke's  former 
governor  and  now  his  treasurer,  a  plain,  honest,  dull  man, 
incapable  of  deviating  from  a  Royal  command,  with  orders 
to  transmit  it  to  Colonel  Heywood,  one  of  the  Duke's 
gentlemen  with  him  at  Trent,  to  be  delivered  to  the  Duke 
if  alive ;  if  not,  Heywood  was  commanded — can  it  be 
believed  ? — to  return  the  letter  to  the  King,  with  strict 
injunctions  not  to  mention  it.  The  King  must  have  feared 
that  Heywood  would  pry  into  or  divine  the  contents  of  the 
promise;  but  Heywood  was  so  honest,  so  incapable  of 
suspecting  such  blackness,  or  so  shocked  at  it,  that  he 
revealed  it  to  the  Duchess,  whose  indignation  was  so  great, 
that,  without  foreseeing  the  consequences,  she  ran  into  the 
Duke's  chamber,  and  acquainted  him  with  what  Heywood 
had  just  told  her.  The  Duke,  who  had  supported  the 
revival  of  his  hopes  with  decent  fortitude,  could  not  stand 
so  treacherous  a  stab ;  he  broke  out  into  a  most  passionate 
exclamation,  and  was  again  hurried  to  the  brink  of  the 
grave  by  the  agitation  he  was  thrown  into  in  so  emaciated 
and  exhausted  a  state.  What  had  been  the  consequence 
to  the  King  ?  Was  it  possible  that  any  terror  or  interest 
could  have  gagged  the  lips  of  so  warm  and  affectionate 
a  woman,  had  her  husband  expired  on  discovering  the 
treachery  couched  under  a  letter  that  affected  to  be  the 
panacea  of  all  his  sorrows  and  sufferings  ?  She  must  have 
vented  the  fatal  secret  in  the  first  transports  of  her  grief — 
and  Charles  I.  would  no  longer  have  been  deemed  the 

L  2 


148  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT 

falsest  of  mankind,  for  confiding  to  his  Queen  that  he  did 
not  intend  to  keep  his  promises  to  his  enemies :  but  those 
enemies  were  not  his  own  expiring  brothers. 

I  declare  in  the  most  solemn  manner  that  the  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  herself  told  me  this  story — HORACE  WALPOLE. 

The  Duchess  sent  an  account  of  the  King's  letter  to  her 
family,  but  enjoining  silence  on  the  promise.  Too  many 
persons,  however,  both  at  Trent  and  in  England,  were 
made  privy  to  the  whole  for  it  to  remain  concealed.  I 
obeyed  the  injunction ;  but  being  at  liberty  about  the  rest, 
I  took  care  to  spread  the  account  of  the  King's  protesta- 
tions, both  as  they  would  bind  him,  if  he  had  any  feeling 
of  honour,  and  as  I  knew  more  surely  that  the  whole 
court  would  be  alarmed,  and  cautious  of  fomenting  the 
quarrel,  when  they  should  think  they  saw  that  the  King's 
affection  for  his  brother  might  be  capable  of  returning ; 
though  some  no  doubt,  who  had  behaved  ill  both  to  the 
Duke  and  Duchess,  would  endeavour  to  prevent  the 
reconciliation. 

I  was  not  a  little  surprised,  as  I  was  answering  the 
Duchess's  letter,  on  receiving  a  visit  from  Lord  George 
Germaine.  I  immediately  said,  "  My  Lord,  I  have  been 
doubting  whether  I  should  not  come  and  thank  your  Lord- 
ship, as  the  author  of  the  Duke's  receiving  a  letter  from 
the  King,  of  which  I  have  just  received  an  account,  but 
did  not,  because  I  thought  it  more  respectful  to  interpret 
it  as  flowing  singly  from  the  King's  own  goodness."  Lord 
George  approved  my  behaviour,  but  said  unguardedly, 
"Pray  show  me  the  Duchess's  account,  for  I  ought  to 
know  the  contents,  that  I  may  be  prepared  to  speak  on 
them."  This  proved  to  me  that  he  had  known  nothing 
of  the  matter,  and  made  me  still  more  cautious  of  trusting 
to  him. 


1777.  CONVERSATION  WITH  THE  DUCHESS  OF  GLOUCESTER.  1-19 

On  the  24^,  as  I  have  said,  the  Duke  and  Duchess 
arrived.  He  was  much  recovered,  and  had  only  a  swelled 
leg  and  lameness  remaining.  She  was  emaciated,  and 
looked  older,  and  showed  how  much  she  had  suffered. 

I  was  hurt  at  the  Duke's  suffering  Sir  Edward  Walpole 
to  kneel  and  kiss  his  hand.  It  was  too  Royal  a  reception 
of  a  father;  but  the  King  himself  had  not  more  of  the 
Prince  than  the  Duke  had.  The  Duchess  often  told  me 
that  the  Duke,  offended  at  the  ill  breeding  of  the  Luttrells, 
had  more  than  once  said  to  her  there  was  a  comfort  in 
conversing  with  Sir  Edward  and  me,  for  we  were  gentle- 
men, and  ever  treated  her  with  as  much  respect  as  him. 
I  said,  *'  Madam,  you  shall  never  be  reproached  on  my 
account  with  ill  behaviour  of  your  family.  I  carry  this  so 
far,  that  often  when  the  Duke  bids  me  sit  down,  I  decline 
it,  and  not  so  much  out  of  respect  to  him  as  to  his  atten- 
dants. I  have  no  notion  of  sitting  when  Colonel  Rains- 
ford  and  Colonel  Heywood  stand,  who  are  as  good 
gentlemen  as  myself.  I  go  and  sit  in  the  outward  room 
when  I  can  stand  no  longer,  unless  the  Duke  bids  me  sit 
down  by  him  to  talk  to  me.  They  would  hate  me,  and 
even  you,  Madam,  if  I  assumed  any  airs  as  your  uncle." 
In  truth  I  determined,  if  ever  the  Duke  and  Duchess 
went  to  Court  and  were  treated  according  to  their  rank,  to 
relax  a  little  of  my  great  respect  to  him,  for  though  he  was 
really  a  good  man  and  a  respectable  Prince,  he  was  too 
proud  of  his  Royal  blood  ;  and  though  it  was  excusable  to 
support  his  dignity,  when  almost  all  the  world  slighted 
him,  he  was  not  likely  to  relax  when  he  should  receive 
greater  consideration.  His  common  understanding  had 
nothing  shining,  yet  he  never  said  a  weak  thing — and  when 
his  own  interests  were  attacked  and  injured,  it  was  impos- 


150  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

sible  to  have  more  quickness,  or  to  argue,  judge,  and  reply 
with  more  presence  of  mind  and  propriety. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25^  the  Duke  wrote  to  Lord 
George  Germaine,  to  desire  he  would  ask  the  King  when 
his  Royal  Highness  might  have  leave  to  pay  his  duty  to 
the  King,  and  thank  his  Majesty  for  his  letter. 

In  the  evening,  Lord  George  answered  by  letter,  that 
he  had  laid  his  Royal  Highness's  letter  before  the  King, 
who  was  very  glad  to  hear  of  his  brother's  arrival.  As 
to  the  demand  of  an  audience,  his  Majesty  would  take 
time  to  consider  on  his  answer;  "and  by  what  I  can 
collect"  added  Lord  George,  "his  Majesty  will  not  send 
an  answer  very  soon." 

Thus  was  the  unalterable  affection  already  evaporated  ! 
v  Here  was  a  confirmation  of  his  Majesty's  insincerity,  and 
a  confirmation  of  the  message  to  Colonel  Heywood.  The 
Duke  said  to  me,  "  Lord  George  delivered  the  letter 
at  St.  James's ;  by  taking  time,  the  King  meant,  for 
consulting  the  Queen."  I  said,  "Sir,  I  beg  your  Royal 
Highness's  pardon,  but  I  believe  it  means,  time  to  draw  up 
conditions  that  you  shall  come  without  the  Duchess."  It 
proved,  that  taking  time  meant  nothing  but  that  the  King 
did  not  mean  to  see  the  Duke  at  all. 

The  Duke  of  Cumberland  some  time  before  had  written 
by  Lord  George  Germaine  to  the  King,  offering  his 
service  on  board  the  fleet.  Lord  George  told  Lord  North 
that  he  was  going  with  that  letter  to  the  King,  and  added, 
"  My  Lord,  I  do  not  ask  your  approbation,  I  am  not 
dependent  on  you  ;  but  I  do  not  think  it  handsome  to 
take  such  a  step  without  acquainting  my  brother  Mini- 
sters." Lord  North  replied,  "  Your  Lordship  treads  on 
slippery  ground."  "  My  Lord,"  answered  Lord  George,  "  I 


1777. 


THE  KING'S  VACILLATION. 


151 


know  how  to  make  my  footing  good."  And  Lord  George 
Gerrnaine  now  acquainted  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  that  he 
would  pay  his  duty  to  his  Royal  Highness  on  the  following 
Monday,  and  did.  He  told  the  Duke  that  he  had  ac- 
quainted Lord  North  that  he  was  going  in  to  the  King 
with  the  Duke's  letter,  told  him  the  purport,  and  asked 
him  what  he  thought  would  come  of  it  ?  "  Nothing,"  said 
Lord  North.  "  But  does  not  your  Lordship  hope  some- 
thing will  come  of  it  ?  "  said  Lord  George.  Lord  North 
was  out  of  countenance,  and  muttered  something  indis- 
tinctly. Lord  George  pressed,  and  asked  him  if  it  was 
the  interest  of  Ministers  to  have  the  Royal  family  divided  ? 
but  could  get  no  explicit  answer.  He  had  put  the  same 
questions  to  Lord  Wey mouth,  who  had  the  decency  to  say 
he  hoped  the  application  would  be  successful.  Lord 
George  farther  told  the  Duke,  that  finding  the  King  silent 
as  to  the  request  of  an  audience,  he  had  pressed  him  for 
an  answer,  and  told  him  he  himself  must  send  one  to  the 
Duke.  The  King  evaded,  but  on  Lord  George's  persisting, 
the  King  had  ordered  him  to  say  that  by  what  he  could 
collect,  the  answer  would  not  come  soon.  Lord  George 
had  scratched  under  the  word,  for  that  reason.  Lord 
George  added  (certainly  by  direction),  that  if  his  Royal 
Highness  would  go  to  Court  without  the  Duchess,  he 
would  be  received  whenever  he  pleased ;  and  owned  that 
he  did  not  doubt  but  the  Queen  was  the  obstacle  to  the 
Duchess's  reception.  The  Duke  replied,  "  My  Lord,  the 
Duchess  and  her  whole,  family  have  pressed  me  to  go 
without  her ;  but  without  talking  of  my  love  for  her,  I 
cannot  for  my  own  honour.  The  Duchess1  has  been  received 


1  The  Arch-Duchess,  wife  of  the 
Duke  of  Saxe-Teischen,  being  at  Rome 
at  the  same  time  with  the  Duchess  of 


Gloucester,  had  yielded  precedence  to 
her,  as  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  took 
place  of  a  Priucc  of  Saxony. 


152 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


OCT. 


as  my  wife  at  every  Court  where  I  have  been ;  the  House 
of  Austria  have  been  so  kind  to  us,  that  had  I  been  able, 
I  should  have  carried  her  to  Vienna.  Can  I,  my  Lord, 
by  waiving  my  wife's  rank  and  appearing  in  the  Drawing 
Room  without  her,  affront  all  those  Courts,  and  say  I  have 
;  presented  to  them  as  my  wife  a  woman  whom  I  could  not 
carry  to  my  brother's  circle  ?  I  shall  go  abroad  again,  my 
Lord ;  must  I  leave  her  behind  me,  because  I  could  not 
present  her  again  as  my  Duchess  ?"  Lord  George  owned 
himself  convinced ;  but  showing  that  he  had  powers  to 
negotiate,  he  said,  that  if  the  Duke  would  be  content  to 
go  to  St.  James's  alone,  the  King  would  send  the  whole 
Court  to  pay  their  duty  to  the  Duchess.  The  Duke  said, 
"  My  Lord,  the  Duchess  is  certainly  mistress  in  her  own 
house,  as  every  other  woman  is,  without  their  attendance — 
but  come,  my  Lord,"  said  he,  *c  the  King  loves  a  mezzoter- 
mine.  Tell  him,  I  will  come  to  him  in  private,  but  I 
never  will  appear  in  the  Drawing  Room  without  the 
Duchess.  I  am  ill  and  lame ;  the  King,  if  he  pleases, 
may  tell  his  Ministers  that  is  the  reason  I  do  not  appear 
publicly."  Lord  George  seemed  to  think  the  compromise 
would  be  accepted.  He  spoke  strongly  of  a  settlement  on 
the  Duke  and  his  family,  and  said  it  must  be  this  very 
winter,  he  would  not  cease  pressing  on  the  King  the 
necessity  of  it.2 

I  pressed  both  the  Duke  and  Duchess  to  submit  to  any 
possible  terms,  provided  they  could  obtain  a  settlement  on 
the  Duchess  and  her  children,  and  urging  that  such  an  act 
would  be  the  strongest  confirmation  of  the  validity  of  the 
marriage;  suspecting,  I  own,  from  the  King's  duplicity, 


4  The  King  asked  Lord  George  how 
the  Duchess  looked  ?  He  replied,  "  So 
handsome,  Sir,  that  I  thought  the 
Duke  excusable  for  marrying  her." 


Soon  after  the  Duke  arrived,  the  Prince 
of  Wales,  as  much  watched  as  he  was, 
sent  him  privately  a  very  kind  message. 


1777.        CONVERSATION  WITH  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER.       153 

that  if  the  Duke  should  die,  he  would  be  capable  of  trying 
to  set  aside  the  marriage  ;  and  the  Parliament  had  shown 
itself  slavish  enough  not  to  stick  at  anything,  however 
heinously  black  soever,  that  should  be  demanded  of  them. 
The  Duke  said,  "  Make  yourself  easy,  Sir,  the  Duchess's 
title  is  already  acknowledged  and  confirmed  by  Act  of 
Parliament.  She  is  expressly  named  in  one !  "  I  stared. 
"  Yes,"  continued  the  Duke,  "  when  we  wanted  to  sell 
Gloucester  Lodge,  it  was  necessary  the  King  should  give 
me  the  freehold  of  it  by  Act  of  Parliament.  Such  an  act 
did  pass  ;  we  are  both  expressly  named  in  it,  and  even  part 
of  the  ground  by  the  term  of  the  Waldegrave  Inclosure. 
The  King  would  not  go  to  pass  it,  to  avoid  hearing  the 
Duchess's  name  :  but  it  was  passed  by  commission,  and  is 
as  valid,  you  know,  as  every  other  Act  of  Parliament." 
"I  am  satisfied,  Sir,"  said  I;  "since  the  whole  Legislature 
has  acknowledged  the  Duchess,  the  validity  of  your 
marriage  is  incontestable." 

On  the  30th,  in  the  evening,  Lord  George  sent  a  letter 
by  his  wife ;  the  Duchess  bade  me  carry  it  to  the  Duke. 
It  was  written  in  so  bad  a  hand  that  the  Duke  could  scarce 
make  it  out ;  and  he  read  it  aloud  to  me,  having  sent  his 
gentleman  out  of  the  room.  Lord  George  told  the  Duke 
that  he  had  proposed  the  Duke's  mezzotermine  to  the 
King,  and  had  added,  that  the  Duke  had  promised,  if 
admitted  to  the  King,  that  he  would  mention  nothing  of 
their  quarrel  or  the  cause.  The  King  had  replied  that  he 
could  not  accept  the  terms ;  but,  added  Lord  George,  as  I 
repeated  to  his  Majesty  that  your  Royal  Highness  would 
say  nothing  that  could  be  disagreeable,  the  King  said  he 
would  send  for  the  Duke  in  private.  The  Duke  smiled. 
I  said,  "  Sir,  the  letter  is  dictated  by  the  King,  and  a 
studied  one  ;  it  has  nothing  of  Lord  George's  frank  manner. 


154  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

The  King  would  not  seem  to  consent  at  first,  because  he 
was  ashamed  to  close  with  your  Eoyal  Highness's  offer  of 
mentioning  nothing  of  the  past,  but  I  was  sure  from  the 
beginning  of  the  letter  that  the  consent  would  follow." 
"Well,"  said  the  Duke,  "  we  shall  meet,  and  mean  nothing 
on  either  side."  "  I  beg  your  pardon,  Sir,"  replied  I ;  " you 
will  feel  very  differently  when  you  meet  from  what  you  do 
now.  I  have  had  differences  with  my  brother,  and  I  was 
always  overjoyed  when  we  were  reconciled."  "  You  had 
not  received  such  usage  as  I  have,"  said  the  Duke. 
" However,  Sir,"  said  I,  "I  hope  your  Eoyal  Highness 
will  forget  all.  The  King  is  talkative,  and  loves  talking, 
and  when  the  first  awkwardness  is  over,  he  will  grow  as 
easy  with  you  as  ever ;  and  pray,  Sir,  encourage  him  to  do 
so.  He  cannot  help  in  time  asking  after  your  children — 
you  may  thence  get  him  to  see  them ;  and  when  once  he 
is  used  to  them,  he  may  come  to  think  that  your  daughter 
is  the  fittest  match  for  the  Prince  of  Wales,  or  at  least  for 
one  of  his  other  sons."  I  knew  that  was  the  best  argu- 
ment with  the  Duke,  for  he  was  dotingly  fond  of  his 
daughter.  I  said,  "Sir,  as  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  sets 
out  for  Brussels  to  join  the  Duchess  to-night,  as  soon  as  he 
is  gone,  and  the  Queen  brought  to  bed,  your  Royal  High- 
ness will  be  sent  for."  He  thought  so.  We  had  a  great 
deal  more  conversation.  Accidentally  the  Princess  Dow- 
ager was  named.  The  Duke  said,  "  Perhaps  you  think 
the  King  loved  my  mother ;  I  assure  you  he  did  not,  and 
I  will  give  you  a  proof.  The  very  day  the  Queen  arrived, 
three  hours  afterwards  when  she  was  gone  to  be  dressed 
for  the  wedding,  I  was  left  alone  with  the  King,  and  he 
told  me  he  had  already  given  her  a  caution  never  to  be 
alone  with  my  mother,  for  she  was  an  artful  woman  and 
would  try  to  govern  her.  Think  of  saying  this  to  a  girl  of 


1777. 


CONVERSATION  ABOUT  THE  KING. 


155 


fifteen/'  said  the  Duke,  "  the  very  moment  he  first  saw 
her."  The  Duke  told  me  he  had  thought  the  King  would 
marry  Lady  Sarah  Lennox,  and  had  talked  as  if  he  would, 
even  after  the  contract  was  signed  with  the  Princess  of 
Mecklenberg.3  "He  liked  Lady  Sarah,"  continued  the 
Duke,  "  as  much  as  he  could  like  any  woman  ;  and  yet  as 
soon  as  the  Queen  came,  whom  he  told  me  he  did  not  find 
handsome,  he  appointed  how  the  bridesmaids  should  hold 


1  Lady  Sarah  was  the  sister  of  the 
Lady  Caroline  Lennox  mentioned  pre- 
viously, who  cut  off  her  eyebrows  to  dis- 
gust an  unwelcome  lover  presented  to 
her  by  her  parents  ;  and  who,  marrying, 
was  subsequently  the  mother  of  Charles 
Fox.  Another  sister,  Lady  Emily,  was 
the  mother  of  the  unfortunate  Lord 
Edward  Fitzgerald.  The  love-passages 
in  the  life  of  the  father  of  these  re- 
markable ladies  are  worthy  of  passing 
notice.  He  was  the  second  Duke  of 
Richmond,  and  grandson  of  Cliarles  II. 
iiinl  his  mistress,  Louise  de  Querouaille. 
When  a  boy  (bearing  the  title  of  Lord 
March)  he  was  married  to  Lady  Sarah 
Cadogan,  to  cancel  a  gambling  debt 
between  the  fathers  of  the  "  happy 
pair."  The  boy  remonstrated  against 
I  being  married  to  "  such  a  dowdy  ;'"  but 
the  ceremony  was  performed,  and  he 
was  immediately  despatched  to  the 
Continent.  Returning  to  London,  after 
an  absence  of  three  or  four  years,  he 
at  once  proceeded  to  the  theatre,  and 
suddenly  fell  in  love  with  a  splendid 
beauty  whom  he  saw  there,  and  whom 
e  found  to  be  his  own  wife  I  He 
claimed  her,  took  her  home  ;  and  years 
after,  the  sentiment  of  that  home  was 
indicated  by  an  expression  in  one  of 
Walpole's  letters,  who,  describing  a 
Kill,  says:  "The  beauties  were  the 
Duke  of  Richmond's  two  daughters, 
and  their  mother,  still  handsomer  than 
they.  The  Duke  sat  by  his  wife  all 
night,  kissing  her  hand."  The  younger 
daughter  (the  fourth  child  of  this  mar- 
riage) was  the  Lady  Sarah  of  the  text. 
She  was  born  in  1745,  and,  it  is  said 
tlxat,  when  sixteen,  she  refused  an  offer 
of  marriage  made  her  by  George  III., 
but  that  she  ultimately  accepted  him. 


Kensington  traditions  describe  Lady 
Sarah  as  making  hay  in  the  fields  then 
bordering  the  road,  and  exchanging  a 
word  or  two  with  the  young  Prince  as 
he  rode  by.  The  lady,  however,  might 
have  sung  of  him  as  was  sung  of  the 
knight  in  the  song :  "  He  loves  and 
he  rides  away."  The  royal  lover 
deceived  her;  and  she,  instead  of 
being  bride  at  liis  wedding,  was  only 
bridesmaid.  Lady  Sarah  was  speedily 
consoled,  it  may  be  supposed ;  for  the 
year  after  the  union  of  George  and 
Charlotte  she  married,  at  the  age  of 
eighteen,  the  well-known  Baronet,  Sir 
Thomas  Charles  Bunbury,  whom  Wai- 
pole  will  notice  in  a  subsequent  en  try, 
4th  December,  1777.  Subsequently,  a 
widow  of  the  mature  age  of  thirty-six, 
Lady  Sarah  married,  in  1781,  the  Hon. 
George  Napier,  son  of  Francis,  fifth 
Lord  Napier.  The  first  child  of  which 
she  was  mother  was  the  "  Sir  Charles 
Napier,"  the  hero  of  Scinde,  whose 
"  very  existence "  is  ludicrously  de- 
scribed by  his  biographer  and  brother. 
Sir  William,  as  "an  offence  to  royal 
pride!"  The  slowness  of  Sir  Charles 
Napier's  promotion  is  amusingly  laid 
to  this  union.  When  Lady  Sarah  was 
seventy,  this  eldest  son  of  a  brave, 
honourable,  but  singularly  arrogant, 
family  wrote  to  Lady  Sarah  :  "  It  is  the 
greatest  satisfaction  to  me  that  the 
Regent  is  fifty,  and  that  I  am  only 
thirty-four;"  and  at  an  earlier  period 
by  fifteen  years,  he  expresses  his  dis- 
gudt  against  the  Prince  of  Wales  for 
"  taking  the  liberty  of  calling  me 
Cliarles !  '  Marry,  come  up,  my  dirty 
cousin  !*  "  Lady  Sarah  Lennox  died  in 
1 826,  being  then  in  her  eighty-first  year. 
—  D. 


156 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


OCT. 


her  train,  and  named  Lady  Sarah  with  as  much  indifference 
as  if  it  was  the  first  time  of  his  seeing  her  too." 

Among  other  passages  the  Duke  told  me  that  when  he 
was  at  Rome,  in  Pope  Ganganelli's  time,  the  Princess 
of  Santa  Croce  assured  him  that  the  King,  his  brother,  had 
written  several  letters  to  that  Pope,4  and  she  had  seen  them. 
"  I  pressed  her  to  get  me  a  sight  of  one,"  said  the  Duke, 
"  but  she  never  could,  for  I  wanted  to  see  what  my  brother 
called  the  Pope.  After  his  death,  the  Pope's  papers  were 
sealed  up  and  delivered  to  Monini,  the  Spanish  Ambas- 
sador, and  are  in  all  probability  now  in  Spain."  I  said, 
"  Sir,  I  believe  that  when  Lord  Mansfield  found  he 
could  not  restore  the  House  of  Stuart,  he  determined  at 
least  to  do  all  the  hurt  he  could  to  your  Royal  Highness's 
family,  and  therefore  turned  to  the  history  of  Charles  I., 
and  advised  your  brother  to  take  every  step  that  was 
reproached  to  that  Prince."  The  Duke  asked  my  mean- 
ing ?  I  said,  "  Sir,  don't  you  know  that  Charles  I.,  when 
Prince,  wrote  two  letters  to  the  Pope,  which  were  after- 
wards printed?" 

Nothing  was  so  incomprehensible  to  me  in  all  this  trans- 
action as  the  part  Lord  George  Germaine  had  taken.  It 
was  past  a  doubt  that  he  had  interested  himself  warmly  in 
the  Duke's  favour,  and  apparently  knowing  how  disagree- 
able such  an  office  would  be  both  to  the  King  and  Queen, 
as  was  evident  by  the  behaviour  of  all  their  other  servants  and 
dependents.  When  the  Duke  was  dying,  I  had  met  Lord 
North  at  a  dinner,  and  he  had  not  had  the  civility  of 
asking  me  after  him.  When  returned,  Lady  Bute  was 
twice  present  when  others  inquired  of  me  how  he  was,  and, 


4  I  asked  the  Duko  if  he  did  not 
think  Pope  Ganganelli  was  poisoned  ? 
He  said  he  hod  not  the  smallest  doubt ; 


that  Monini,  the  Ambassador,  with 
whom  the  Duke  was  very  intimate,  had 
had  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  it. 


1777.  LORD  GEORGE  GERMAINE.  157 

though  close  to  me,  she  said  not  a  word.  As  Lord  George 
had  ventured  to  accuse  the  Queen  to  the  Duke  as  his 
enemy,  and  was  so  explicit  as  to  throw  on  the  King  him- 
self the  word  collect  in  his  first  letter,  I  could  not  believe 
such  marks  of  confidence  at  his  own  risk  were  taken  with 
the  King's  connivance.  By  his  behaviour  to  the  other 
Ministers  on  the  Duke's  account,  and  the  bold  language  he 
affirmed  he  had  held  to  them,  and  which  he  had  repeated 
to  Sir  Edward,  and  which  might  likely  come  to  their 
knowledge  in  the  future  discussion  of  such  important  points, 
he  could  not  be  supposed  to  have  gone  beyond  truth,  nor 
was  it  his  method  or  style.  It  is  more  likely,  as  he  said 
himself  to  Sir  Edward,  that  he  was  grown  old  and  peevish ; 
and  he  certainly  was  much  chagrined  and  soured  at  the  ill- 
success  of  the  war,  on  success  in  which  he  had  flattered 
himself  with  re-establishing  his  reputation  and  acquiring 
much.  If  it  failed,  nobody  was  so  sure  of  falling.  All  the 
Ministers  had  kept  aloof  from  him,  and  did,  even  at  St. 
James's.  The  Bedfords  had  ever  hated  him ;  with  Lord 
Sandwich  he  had  been  at  great  variance  from  the  moment 
he  received  the  seals ;  he  had  bullied  all  the  Admiralty, 
and  had  accused  Sandwich  of  neglect  in  the  supplies  sent 
to  Howe.  He  now  owned  to  Lord  Hertford  on  the  30th 
that  Howe  had  disappointed  all  his  plans.  He  must  have 
perceived  the  King's  insincerity,  nor  was  his  misconduct 
before  unknown  to  Lord  George.  Two  years  before  he 
came  into  place,  talking  of  the  King,  he  had  prophesied  to 
me  that  the  King's  reign,  from  his  insincerity,  would  end 
unhappily.  Lord  George  had  been  adopted  to  repair 
Lord  North's  indolence  and  inactivity,  and  consequently 
he  could  not  be  agreeable  to  the  latter.  The  Scotch,  dis- 
satisfied with  Lord  North's  neglect  of  the  war,  had  cried 
up  Lord  George  in  opposition  to  him.  Lord  George  might 


158  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

pique  himself  on  not  abandoning  the  Duke  as  Lord  Onslow 
and  Sir  W.  Meredith  had  done,  and  might  wish  to  have 
some  friends  if  he  fell  at  Court.  But  upon  the  whole,  I 
thought  that  either  he  was  trying  to  restore  the  Duke  and 
have  a  support,  or  that  he  was  meditating  a  breach  with 
the  Ministers  that  might  serve  as  a  cover  to  his  resignation, 
since  he  found  the  war  turned  out  so  very  unprosperously. 
As  the  Duke  was  informed  that  the  Scotch  affirmed  that 
he  was  to  be  declared  Captain-General,  Lord  George 
might  have  such  a  view,  both  to  ensure  to  himself,  through 
the  Duke,  great  influence  over  the  army,  if  the  war  con- 
tinued, or  to  prevent  General  Conway  being  made  Com- 
mander-in-chief, if  the  King  was  reduced  by  the  miscarriage 
of  the  war  to  take  a  new  Ministry  from  the  Opposition. 
Time  must  explain  Lord  George's  views. 

The  night  after  the  Duke's  arrival,  the  Pope,  who  had 
been  very  civil  to  him  and  the  Duchess,  sent  by  a  letter 
from  Prince  Aldobrandini  to  congratulate  the  Duke's 
recovery,  to  express  his  fears  that  he  should  not  soon  see 
his  Royal  Highness  at  Rome ;  but  if  he  did  return  thither, 
that  his  Holiness  would  be  rejoiced  to  see  him. 

General  Sir  George  Howard,  who  at  first  had  gone  to 
Gloucester  House,  then  abstained,  and  lately  had  opposed 
the  increase  of  the  allowance  to  the  Royal  Dukes,  thinking 
the  reconciliation  made,  went  the  very  next  morning  after 
the  Duke's  arrival  to  pay  his  duty  to  him.  The  Duke  sent 
him  word  he  saw  nobody,  though  other  coaches  were  in 
the  Court.  The  Duchess,  on  my  advising  her,  if  people 
were  allowed  to  visit  her,  to  forget  all  that  was  passed, 
said,  she  would  all  but  those  who  had  professed  themselves 
friends,  and  then  deserted  the  Duke  and  her. 

Nothing  followed  from  these  negotiations.  The  Duke 
of  Cumberland  went  abroad,  and  the  Queen  was  brought 


1777. 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  WAR, 


15& 


to  bed,5  when  both  Lord  George  and  I  thought  the  King 
would  take  that  moment  of  seeing  the  Duke.  Lord 
George  said  to  the  Duke,  "  Sir,  if  the  King  does  not  send 
for  your  Royal  Highness  in  three  days  after  the  Queen's 
delivery,  I  own  I  shall  despair."  A  few  days  after  that 
event,  the  Duke  was  airing  with  the  Duchess  in  his  coach, 
and  met  the  King  riding.  They  stopped  their  coach,  but 
the  King  did  not  even  pull  off  his  hat.  The  transaction 
about  the  letter  was  black ;  the  rest  of  the  behaviour  was 
only  foolish  and  brutal.  I  return  to  the  transactions  of 
the  year. 

2&th.  At  last  letters  arrived  from  General  Howe  with 
an  account  of  his  landing,  after  a  tedious  passage  of  above 
forty  days,  in  Chesapeake  Bay,  August  28.  He  said  General 
Washington  was  posted  between  him  and  Philadelphia,  at 
Wilmington,  with  about  15,000  militia. 

Accounts  came  from  France  that  Sir  John  Johnson  was 
defeated  and  killed  by  the  Provincials ;  and  that  Colonel  St. 
Leger,  who  had  been  detached  by  General  Burgoyne  to 
take  Fort  Stanwix,  was  beaten  and  taken  prisoner. 

More  accounts  of  Burgoyne  being  defeated  by  Arnold 
and  of  having  lost  2500  men.  These  accounts  were  after- 
wards confirmed,  and  represented  Burgoyne  and  his  army 
in  the  utmost  distress  of  every  kind,  and  likely  to  be 
starved  into  a  surrender.  Arnold  parodied  his  mani- 
festoes.6 General  Carleton  marched  with  2000  men  to 
favour  his  retreat.  The  Indians  he  had  brought  with  him 
had  plundered  his  camp.  A  body  of  New  Englanders  had 
pretended  to  join  him  and  then  fallen  on  him.  It  was 


*  The  Princess  Sophia  was  born  3rd 
Nov.  1777.— D. 

6  Epigram  from  the  '  Public  Adver- 
tiser '  of  December  5, 1777 : — 


"  A  CABINET  REPARTEE. 
1  To  North  the  Lean  said  George  the  Wite, 

Here  'a  with  one  Arnold  much  ado ; 
The  drowsy  Premier,  starting,  cries, 
•  'T  is  well,  my  liege,  there  are  not  two.' ' 


160  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

apprehended  that  they  would  fall  on  him  in  greater  num- 
bers, and  perhaps  on  Quebec.  Lord  George  Germaine 
owned  to  Lord  Hertford  that  General  Howe  had  defeated 
all  his  views  by  going  to  Maryland  instead  of  waiting  to 
join  Burgoyne.  Clinton  had  not  force  sufficient  at  New 
York  to  send  him  any  relief.7 

30th.  A  person  was  said  to  have  arrived  in  the  City  in 
^fifty-two  hours  from  Paris,  and  opened  policies  and  bets 
that  Howe  had  totally  defeated  Washington. 


NOVEMBER. 


2nd.  AT  daybreak  an  express  arrived  from  Bamber  Gas- 
coyne,  at  Liverpool,  with  a  New  York  'Gazette,'  that  was  said 
to  have  come  to  Glasgow  by  a  ship  from  New  York.  This 
*  Gazette'  said  that  a  person  from  Howe's  army  had  arrived 
there  and  brought  an  account  of  three  actions  between 
Howe  and  Washington,  on  the  1 1th,  12th,  and  13th  of  Sep- 
tember, in  which  Washington  had  been  totally  defeated, 
and  his  army  entirely  dispersed.  Another  ship  had  met 
the  Isis  at  sea,  and  was  told  it  was  bringing  glorious 
news.  The  Ministers  and  Courtiers  received  this  news 
with  transports  of  joy,  that  did  great  honour  to  Washington. 
A  letter  from  him  to  the  Congress  was  published,  in  which 


7  From  the  London  '  Evening  Post : 

"  OUR  COMMANDERS. 
••  Gage  nothing  did,  and  went  to  pot ; 


Howe  lost  one  town,  another  got ; 


Guy  *  nothing  lost,  and  nothing  won ; 
Punmore  was  homewards  forced  to  run ; 
Clinton  wag  beat,  and  got  a  garter, 
And  bouncing  Burgoyne  catch'd  a  Tartar : 
Thus  all  we  gain  for  millions  spent 
la  to  be  laugh'd  at,  and  repent." 


SirG.Carleton. 


1777.  RUMOURED  VICTORY  OF  HOWE.  161 

he  owned  his  disadvantage  in  the  first  day's  action;  but 
instead  of  mentioning  any  of  their  friends  killed,  he  only 
said  Monsieur  de  la  Fayette  was  wounded  in  the  leg.  It 
did  not  sound  very  probable  that  a  general,  the  night  of 
his  defeat,  should  mention  a  young  stranger's  wound, 
though  it  is  true  the  Provincials  had  given  him  two  regi- 
ments. Nor  did  it  appear  how  a  letter  to  the  Congress 
should  reach  General  Clinton,  nor  did  he  send  it.  As  the 
4  Isis '  did  not  come,  nor  was  coming,  suspicions  increased. 
It  was  indeed  said  in  France  that  Washington  was  defeated ;  i 
but  in  a  fortnight  Franklin  laughed  at  the  report,  and  wrote 
that  General  Howe  would  winter  in  New  York. 

The  pretended  victory  lost  ground  every  day.  Some 
said  it  had  been  invented  by  Panchaud,  an  English  banker 
at  Paris ;  then  that  the  rascally  bankrupt  Fordyce  had 
coined  it,  and  had  gotten  30,000/.  by  stockjobbing  on  it. 
Then  came  a  like  account  from  Halifax.  Then  a  pre- 
tended letter  from  Lord  Howe  to  Sir  P.  Parker,  confirming 
it,  and  that  Howe  had  passed  through  Philadelphia  and 
was  pursuing  Washington;  but  there  was  no  such  letter. 
In  the  last  week  of  November  came  a  Boston  Gazette, 
which  described  three  actions,  but  said  Howe  had  had  much 
the  worse  of  it.  In  the  same  Gazette  was  a  still  more  ridi- 
culous letter  from  Burgoyne  to  Gates,  repelling  an  accusa- 
tion of  his  having  encouraged  his  Indians  to  murder  a 
young  woman,  which  he  said,  in  his  bombast  style,  he  \ 
would  not  be  guilty  of  for  the  Empire  of  America;  no, 
not  if  mines  were  in  its  bowels  and  Paradise  on  the  surface  ! 

In  this  uncertainty  and  perplexity  the  Ministers  knew 
not  what  to  do.  Parliament  was  to  meet  on  the  20th. 
Some  totally  desponded,  some  were  for  putting  it  off;  but 
as  the  rumours  were  yet  favourable,  the  majority  prevailed 
to  open  the  session  ;  but  it  was  with  the  most  pusillanimous 

VOL.  II.  M 


162 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOKACE  WALPOLE. 


Nov. 


speech  they  had  ever  produced.  So  far  from  announcing 
the  complete  conquest  of  America,  as  had  been  promised 
this  campaign,  it  only  talked  of  hoping  for  important 
success,  but  confessed  the  obstinacy  of  the  rebels,  and  hinted 
at  another  campaign  by  increase  of  forces.  It  talked  of 
pacific  assurances  from  foreign  powers,  but  confessed  that 
France  and  Spain  were  arming  so  powerfully  that,  his 
Majesty  could  not  trust  their  promises,  and  had  been  forced 
to  provide  for  the  security  of  his  own  dominions.1  At  the 
end  it  stooped  tp  hope  that  the  Americans  would  return 
to  their  duty  and  sue  for  peace,  which  to  re-establish  would 
be  the  greatest  happiness  and  glory  of  his  reigu. 

This  timid,  feeble,  and  disheartening  speech,  so  dissonant 
from  all  the  late,  did  not,  as  might  have  been  expected, 
throw  down  the  stocks  many  per  cent.  The  fall  was  in- 
considerable in  proportion  to  the  change  of  circumstances 
and  language.  When  the  nation  was  so  intoxicated  and 
blind,  no  wonder  the  Parliament  did  not  take  the  panic 
first.  It  had  been  reported  that  the  country  gentlemen 
had  begun  to  open  their  eyes,  but  no  such  symptom  ap- 
peared, nor  did  the  Court  lose  a  man  ;  but  the  absurd  and 
wavering  Sir  W.  Meredith,  who  would  not  vote,  com- 
plained that  Lord  North  would  not  take  away  his  white 
stick,  and  went  again  to  Gloucester  House,  after  an  absence 
of  three  years.  The  Duchess,  instead  of  coldness  or  anger, 
received  him  with  much  humour,  and  only  joked  with  and 
teazed  him. 

Earl  Percy,  who  had  left  the  army,  disgusted  with  Sir  W. 


1  Epigram  on   the    King's   Speech, 
from  the  newspapers  : — 
"  I'ninc-e  swears  her  sentiments  are  quite  pacific ; 
In  Europe  mine,  you  know,  are  soporific ; 
But  as  both  France  and  Spain  are  stoutly  arming, 
I  must  confess  the  crisis  is  alarming; 
And  though  1  do  believe  'em,  and  I  don't, 
1  must  not  be  invaded,  and  I  won't." 


Paragraph  from  ditto. — "We  were  told 
that  the  Americans  were  cowards ;  and 
now  we  are  told  that  they  are  so  obsti- 
nate that  they  will  not  be  conquered. 
Cowardice  and  obstinacy  are  reckoned 
incompatible  ;  but  a  late  Speech  proves 
they  can  exist  together." 


1777. 


MEETING  OF  PARLIAMENT. 


163 


Howe,  moved  the  Address ;  but  whether  ashamed  of  being 
there,  not  at  his  duty,  or  that  his  father  the  Duke,  who  pro- 
fessed attachment  to  Lord  Chatham,  but  did  not  expect  his 
presence,  had  received  notice  of  his  intention,  and  recom- 
mended caution,  the  Earl  spoke  so  very  low  that  those  nearest 
to  him  could  not  distinguish  one  word  he  said.  The  young 
Earl  of  Chesterfield2  seconded  him  in  a  very  puerile  way. 

Lord  Chatham,  finding  the  moment  more  propitious, 
again  appeared.  He  had  even  sent  his  intended  motion 
to  Lord  Rockingham,  and  that  party  determined  to  support 
it.  X^he  Earl's  motion  was  to  recall  the  army,  rescind  the 
late  Acts,  and  endeavour  to  re-unite  with  America ;  but 
he  absurdly  protested  he  would  never  give  his  consent  to  ,/ 
their  being  independent ;  as  if  men  whom  you  could  not 
conquer  were  not  and  would  not  be  independent !  V^e  was 
very  severe  on  the  German  Princes  who  sold  us  their  subjects,  j 
and  said  we  had  in  reality  but  one  ally,  the  King  of  the  Gip- 
sies. Lord  Shelburne  went  further,  and  accused  the  King's 
servants  in  India  of  fomenting  a  rebellion  there  too.  Much 
was  said  against  the  exciting  the  Indians  to  massacre  the  Pro- 
vincials. Lord  Suffolk  defended,  and  said,  in  a  rebellion  it 


2  The  fourth,  the  great,  or  celebrated 
Earl  of  Chesterfield  died  in  1773,  child- 
less. His  three  brothers  had  previ- 
ously died  (two  unmarried),  leaving  no 
male  issue.  The  title  passed  to  a  dis- 
tant relative,  who  was  a  lineal  descend- 
ant of  the  second  son  of  the  first  Earl. 
This  lucky  heir  of  a  great  inheritance 
was  Mr.  Pliilip  Stanhope,  of  Mansfield. 
He  was  the  fourth  Earl's  godson  ;  was 
born  in  1755,  and  died  in  1815.  The 
1  >n -si 'lit  Eurl  is  his  son.  The  following 
extract  from  a  letter  written  by  Lord 
Chesterfield  to  Philip's  father  baa  re- 
ference to  the  greater  or  less  proba- 
bility of  the  godson  succeeding  to  the 
title  and  estate.  It  is  dated  1759  : — 
"  About  ten  days  ago  my  brother  (Wil- 
liam) communicated  to  me  his  resolu- 
tion to  marry  Miss  Delaval.  The  mar- 


rying or  not  marrying  was  his  business, 
which  I  neither  advised  nor  objected 
to ;  and  as  for  the  lady,  she  has  been 
soberly  and  modestly  educated  in  the 
country,  and  is  of  a  very  good  gentle- 
man's family So  that  probably 

there  will  be  children ;  but  in  all  events 
I  assure  you  that  I  shall  have  the  same 
concern  and  attention  for  STURDY 
(Chesterfield's  familiar  name  for  his 
godson)  that  I  have  hitherto  had  . .  . ; 
and  while  I  live  will  grudge  no  trouble 
nor  expense  for  his  education.  If  you 
persist  in  your  resolution  of  sending  him 
to  Paris  for  a  year  or  two  "  (the  child 
was  only  four  years  old),  "  in  which  I 
think  you  would  do  right,  it  shall  be 
at  my  charge,  as  also  when  it  may  be 
proper  to  send  him  to  a  good  Latin 
school." — D. 

M    2 


164 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


Nov. 


was  lawful  to  use  all  the  means  that  God  and  Nature  put 
'  in  our  hands.  This  expression  gave  great  offence,  and  was 
severely  taken  up  by  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  and  by  Lord 
Chatham  with  his  ancient  fire.  Lord  Amherst  prompted 
Lord  Gower  that  in  the  last  war  Lord  Chatham  had  made 
use  of  Indians.  The  latter  positively  denied  it.  Lord 
Amherst  affirmed  there  had  even  been  a  treaty  with  them. 
At  last  Lord  Chatham  said,  laughing,  "  Perhaps  there  were 
a  few  to  scour  the  woods."  Lord  Sandwich  asserted  the 
flourishing  state  of  our  affairs.  The  House  sat  till  past 
ten,  and  carried  the  Address  by  above  fourscore  to  26. 
Lord  Mansfield  did  not  speak.3  The  new  Earl  of  Har- 
court  voted  in  the  minority.  Though  his  father  had  been 
the  King's  Governor,  Ambassador,  and  Lord  Lieutenant  of 
Ireland,  and  had  come  to  so  dismal  a  death,  the  Queen 
had  not  sent  the  usual  compliment  to  Lady  Harcourt. 
The  new  Earl  was  a  most  honest  man,  and,  being  by  prin- 
ciple averse  to  the  measures  of  the  Court,  had  quitted  the 
House  of  Commons,  because  he  would  not  support  the 
measures  and  would  not  differ  with  his  father. 

The  next  day  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  the  Earl  of 
Effingham  entered  a  very  short  but  severe  protest  against 
the  fulsome  flattery  of  the  Address. 

In  the  House  of  Commons,  Lord  Hyde,  eldest  son  of 
the  Earl  of  Clarendon,  moved  the  Address  very  poorly, 
seconded  by  the  young  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  in  a  better  manner, 
but  he  was  out,  and  indecently  called  the  Opposition  a 


3  Epigram  written  in  the  House  of 
Lords ;  from  the '  General  Advertiser :' — 

"  When  tragic  scenes  mechanic  terrors  want 
To  aid  an  unaffectlng  author's  rant , 
The  canvas  empyreans  bid  to  growl 
With  the  deep  thunders  of  the  mustard-bowl. 
So  when  the  sophistries  of  Murray*  fail, 
Or  Twitcherf  vainly  coins  some  frontless  talc, 

*  Lord  Mansfleld.        f  I-»rd  Sandwich. 


The  mustard-bowl  of  State  is  roll'd  along, 
And  bellows  pompous  sounds  from  Suffolk's 

tongue. 

The  mob  at  either  audience  feel  dismay. 
And  clap  the  thunder,  (bough  they  hiss  the 

play." 


1777.  DEBATE  ON  THE  ADDRESS.  16f> 

faction.  The  Marquis  of  Granby  made  the  same  motion 
as  Lord  Chatham.  Burke  spoke  above  two  hours,  but  the 
only  brilliant  part  of  the  debate  was  a  bitter  philippic  on 
Lord  George  Germaine  by  Charles  Fox,  in  his  highest 
manner,  who  called  him  an  ill-omened  and  inauspicious 
character,  and,  besides  blaming  the  choice  of  a  man  pro- 
nounced unfit  to  serve  the  Crown,  dwelt  on  his  ignorance 
and  incapacity  for  conducting  a  war.  The  attack  was  by 
moderate  men  thought  too  personal  and  too  severe.  It 
was  felt  in  the  deepest  manner  by  Lord  George,  who  rose 
in  the  utmost  consternation,  and  made  the  poorest  figure. 
Lord  George  said  the  man  in  the  world  who  he  chose 
should  abuse  him  had  done  so.  (General  Conway  said 
the  next  day,  he  was  exactly  of  a  contrary  opinion.)  Lord 
George  pleaded  having  been  invited  into  the  service  by 
Lord  North,  and  declared  himself  ready  to  quit  it. 
Having  been  censured  for  Burgoyne's  march,  his  confusion 
led  him  to  a  wretched  defence,  for  he  urged  that  the  same 
march  had  been  meditated  by  the  enemy  in  the  last  war, 
but  they  had  not  been  able  to  execute  it.  Lord  North 
handsomely  defended  Lord  George,  and  owned  he  had 
invited  him  into  the  Administration  ;  and  said  he  was  glad 
Fox  had  abandoned  him,  an  old  hulk,  to  attack  a  man-of- 
war  ;  but  afterwards  he  perhaps  hurt  Lord  George  as  much 
as  Fox  had  done,  for  the  latter  coming  afterwards  to  the 
Treasury  bench,  Lord  North,  who  was  thought  not  to  love 
Lord  George  (and  their  various  partizans  had  lately 
attacked  each  alternately  in  the  papers),  Lord  North  said 
in  Lord  George's  hearing,  "Charles,  I  am  glad  you  did 
not  fall  on  me  to-day,  for  you  was  in  full  feather." 

It  had  been  given  out  the  day  before  the  Parliament  met, 
that  Lord  Bute's  son,  Lord  Mountstewart,  would  move  for 
the  recall  of  the  troops,  but  he  did  not.  It  was  explained 


166  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 

thus: — Lord  M.  had  asked  Lord  North  for  a  Scotch  place 
for  a  friend,  which  had  been  refused.  Lord  M.  wrote  to 
Lord  North  that,  if  he  did  not  grant  it,  he  would  move  for 
that  recall.  The  King  himself  composed  the  quarrel ;  and 
Lord  Mountstewart  obtained  his  desire  the  day  before  the 
Parliament  met. 

The  House  sat  till  past  eleven,  when  the  Address  was 
carried  by  243  to  86.  Mr.  Gibbon  told  me  soon  after- 
wards that  he  was  convinced  that,  if  it  had  not  been  for 
shame,  there  were  not  twenty  men  in  the  House  but  were 
v  ready  to  vote  for  peace.  I  did  not  think  it  very  decent  in 
so  sensible  a  man  to  support  the  war,  and  make  such  a 
confession. 

The  next  day,  on  the  report,  General  Conway  made 
one  of  his  finest,  most  pathetic,  and  most  animated 
speeches  against  the  war ;  and  he  told  the  Ministers  how 
much  they  had  borne  and  would  have  to  bear  from 
France.  Thurlow  and  Wedderburn  both  answered  him, 
but  very  poorly :  the  latter  blamed  Fox's  preceding 
philippic,  and  pretended  to  lay  down  rules  for  invectives, 
which  was  well  retorted  by  Burke,  who  quoted  a  most 
abusive  speech  uttered  formerly  against  Lord  North  by 
Wedderburn,  then  in  Opposition. 

This  epigram  was  published  on  Wedderburn's  con- 
demnation of  invective,  after  his  famous  philippic  on  Dr. 
Franklin  before  the  Privy  Council : — 

"  Sarcastic  Sawney,  swoll'n  with  spite  and  prate, 

On  silent  Franklin  pour'd  his  venal  hate. 
The  calm  philosopher,  without  reply, 

Withdrew,  and  gave  his  country  liberty." 

A  little  before  this,  Dr.  Franklin  and  Deane  had,  in  a 
very  decent  manner,  proposed  to  Lord  Stormont  an  ex- 
change of  prisoners,  intimating  that,  if  not  accepted,  the 


1777.  SENTENCE  ON  HORNE.  167 

English  prisoners  must  be  sent  to  America.  Lord  Stor- 
mont  returned  a  haughty  answer,  and  inhuman  too,  as  he 
did  not  accept  the  terms.  \\ 

Dr.  Franklin  likewise  published  a  very  able  address  to 
foreign  powers,  inviting  them  to  lend  money  to  the  Ameri- 
cans, whose  good  faith  could  be  depended  upon,  since  they 
had  even  paid  their  debts  to  England,  though  the  war  had 
been  declared.  It  contained,  too,  a  sharp  satire  on  the 
corruption,  profligacy,  and  decay  of  England ;  and  it  was 
printed  here  in  the  '  Westminster  Journal.' 

Parson  Home  had  been  carried  to  the  King's  Bench  to 
receive  sentence  for  publishing  his  advertisement  for  sub- 
scription for  the  Americans.  Lord  Mansfield  ordered  him 
to  prison;  he  cried  out,  "What,  before  sentence?"  Lord 
Mansfield  was  intimidated,  and  dismissed  him.  Some 
days  after  he  was  again  brought  into  court,  and  the  Attor- 
ney-General pleaded  for  his  being  set  in  the  pillory,  and 
even  had  the  audacity  to  quote  the  Star  Chamber,  which 
he  said  had  been  laid  aside  for  its  rankness,  which  implied 
it  was  not  totally  without  merit.  Lord  Mansfield  was 
afraid,  and  would  not  venture  the  pillory,  but  sentenced 
Home  to  a  fine  and  a  year's  imprisonment.  This  was  on 
the  24th. 

26th.  The  Navy  was  voted.  Temple  Luttrell  attacked 
the  Admiralty.  Lord  Mulgrave  defended  it  well.  The 
Opposition  abused  the  Courtiers  on  writing  against  the 
Generals,  and  for  setting  aside  Carleton.  Lord  North  said 
he  himself  was  as  much  abused  as  anybody.  Wedder- 
burn  said  he  wished  there  were  no  such  thing  as  news- 
papers. Colonel  Barre  said  the  Ministers  had  disgraced 
General  Carleton,  because  he  would  not  accept  Indians, 
and  had  been  humane  to  the  American  prisoners. 


168 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


DEC. 


DECEMBER. 


1st.  THE  long  expected  account  came  from  General  Howe, 
and  was  at  first  called  a  victory,  but  soon  appeared  not  to 
have  been  so.  There  had  been  two  engagements  between 
him  and  Washington,  in  the  second  of  which  Washington  had 
very  boldly  attacked  Howe  in  his  post,  and,  though  repelled, 
had  committed  great  slaughter,  particularly  on  the  Scots 
and  Hessians.  Washington  was  retired  in  full  force  to 
German  Town  at  the  head  of  13,000  men.  Howe  had 
taken  possession  of  Philadelphia,  but  without  any  benefit, 
as  the  Delaware  was  not  cleared ;  and  Lord  Howe  was 
besieging  a  fort  strongly  fortified  on  Mud  Island,  and  had 
lost  a  sixty-four  gun  ship  and  a  frigate.  Clinton,  after 
burning  Esopus  (?),*  was  returned  to  New  York,  and  on 
Howe's  demand  had  sent  4000  men. 

On  the  2nd  the  Opposition  moved  in  both  Houses  for 
each  resolving  itself  into  a  Committee  to  consider  the  state 
of  the  nation. 

In  the  Lords  the  motion  was  made  by  the  Duke  of 
Richmond,  and  he  moved  for  several  papers,  most  of 
which  were  granted  by  the  Ministers  with  much  com- 
placency. Lord  Chatham  spoke  long,  and  was  severe  on 
the  foreign  garrisons  in  Gibraltar  and  Port  Mahon,  and 
quoted  a  letter  of  the  first  Earl  Stanhope  on  the  danger  of 


1  Washington  thus  writes  to  Landon 
Carter  (Upham's  '  Life  of  Washington,' 
vol.  i.  277)  : — "  Burgoyne's  surrender 
lias  caused  Sir  Henry  Clinton's  expedi- 
tion from  New  York,  in  aid  of  Burgoyne, 


to  end  in  (something  more  than  smoke 
indeed)  the  burning  of  mills,  gentle- 
men's seats,  and  the  villages  near  the 
water." — D. 


1777.     MOTION  TO  CONSIDER  THE  STATE  OF  THE  NATION.     169 

such  measures.  Lord  Chatham,  speaking  with  contempt 
of  the  Ministers,  said,  "  Poor  creatures !  let  them  go ; 
nobody  will  hurt  a  hair  of  their  heads."  This  was  sup- 
posed to  intimate  that,  if  the  King  would  send  for  him, 
he  would  be  very  merciful.  In  the  same  speech  he  said 
he  had  been  inclined  to  prosecute  the  Archbishop  of  York 
for  a  libel,  and  did  not  know  whether  he  should  not  yet. 
Lord  Lyttelton,  defending  the  use  of  Indians,  and  saying 
he  saw  no  difference  between  a  bayonet  and  a  scalping 
knife,  the  Duke  of  Richmond  made  this  beautiful  answer : 
"  The  bayonet  was  an  honest,  generous  weapon,  levelled  at 
the  breast ;  the  scalping  knife  the  base  tool  of  cowardice 
and  revenge." 

An  altercation  happened  between  the  Earls  Chatham 
and  Sandwich,  the  latter  of  whom  said  he  would  not  be 
browbeaten ;  but  adding  that  he  spoke  as  an  honest  man, 
the  whole  House  burst  out  laughing.  The  meeting  of  the 
Committee  was  fixed  for  the  2nd  February  following. 

Charles  Fox  made  the  motion  in  the  other  House,  and 
shone  eminently,  again  attacking  severely  Lord  G.  Ger- 
maine,  whom  he  compared  to  Dr.  Sangrado,  who  would 
persist  in  drawing  blood  because  he  had  written  a  book  on 
bleeding.  Lord  George  Germaine,  to  the  astonishment  of 
everybody,  confessed  that,  if  America  was  to  be  conquered 
by  force,  it  would  be  of  no  utility ;  on  which  Conway  said, 
Magna  est  veritas,  prevalebit.  Lord  North  opposed  giving 
the  papers  demanded ;  but,  while  he  was  speaking,  word 
was  brought  that  the  Lords  had  granted  most  of  them ; 
yet  Lord  North  persisted  in  his  refusal,  said  that  House 
was  not  to  be  governed  by  the  Lords ;  and  though  the 
papers  could  no  longer  be  a  secret,  the  House  was  so 
absurdly  servile  as  to  vote  the  refusal  by  178  to  89. 
*  At  night  came  an  express  from  General  Carleton,  in- 
forming that  he  had  learnt  by  deserters,  and  believed,  that 


170  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

the  Provincials  had  taken  Burgoyne  and  his  whole  army 
prisoners.  The  King  fell  into  agonies  on  hearing  this 
account,  but  the  next  morning,  at  his  levee,  to  disguise 
his  concern,  affected  to  laugh  and  to  be  so  indecently 
merry,  that  Lord  North  endeavoured  to  stop  him.  The 
consternation  at  first  was  great,  and  it  was  generally 
thought  the  Administration  would  be  changed,  but  the 
nation  seemed  so  insensible,  the  Ministers  were  so  afraid 
of  losing  their  places  first,  and  then  their  heads,  and  the 
Parliament  was  so  thoroughly  corrupted  and  stanch,  that 
the  Court  took  heart,  and  in  two  or  three  days  their  run- 
ners began  to  give  out  that  the  news  was  not  true. \  Sir  W. 
Meredith  resigned  his  place  on  the  2nd,  in  the  morning. 
The  next  day,  meeting  Lord  Camden  in  the  street,  with 
whom  he  was  not  acquainted,  he  stopped  him  and  told 
him,  but  assured  him  he  had  resigned  before  the  news  of 
Burgoyne's  disgrace  came;  yet  he  was  treated  by  both 
sides  with  equal  contempt. 

3rd.  On  the  army,  Charles  Fox  and  Burke  pressed 
Lord  George  to  know  if  the  capture  of  Burgoyne  and  his 
army  was  true.  He  was  forced  to  own  he  believed  it, 
though  he  did  not  know  it  officially.  The  Opposition, 
instead  of  receiving  such  a  national  indignity  with  serious 
lamentation,  insulted  the  Ministers  so  much  that  the 
majority  appeared  more  *  *  perated  and  less  dejected  than 
on  the  former  days  of  the  session.  Burke,  too,  treating 
Wedderburn  with  great  irony,  as  Lord  George's  counsel, 
Wedderburn  rose  in  great  heat,  told  Burke  he  did  not 
know  how  to  behave  with  good  manners,  but  would  be 
respected  by  him  both  in  public  and  private.  Burke  on 
this  went  out  of  the  house  and  made  a  sign  to  Wedder- 
burn to  follow  him ;  but  their  friends  interposed,  and 
Wedderburn  protesting  he  had  meant  no  affront,  the  duel 
was  prevented.  Charles  Fox  went  farther,  and  told  Lord 


1777.       MOTION  FOR  ACCOUNTS  OF  COURTS  MARTIAL.        171 

George  he  hoped  to  see  him  brought  to  a  second  trial,  and 
abused  the  Ministers  on  their  stupidity  and  ignorance. 
But  Lord  George  saying  he  hoped  Burgoyne  would  not  be 
condemned  unheard,  Fox  flamed  still  more,  and  charged 
Lord  George  with  the  whole  blame  of  the  badness  of  the  plan. 
Lord  North  defended  Lord  George,  and  claimed  his  share  of 
the  blame.  Rigby  and  the  Attorney-General  in  their  turns 
tried  to  provoke  Conway,  but  with  no  success  or  applause. 
4th.  There  was  a  short  but  warm  debate  on  the  renewal 
of  the  Habeas  Corpus ;  and  Fox  charging  Thurlow  with  it 
as  a  black  act,  Thurlow  answered  him  warmly,  and  asked 
if,  supposing  his  character  a  black  one,  Fox's  was  a  white 
one.  Sir  Charles  Bunbury  declared  off  from  the  Court. 

5th.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  moved  for  accounts  of 
courts  martial,  and  Lord  Chatham  was  warm  on  the  plan 
of  Burgoyne's  march,  imputing  it  to  Lord  George,  and 
moved  for  the  instructions  to  Burgoyne.  This  produced 
a  warm  debate.  Lord  Galloway  declared  his  zeal,  and 
that  he  would  give  half  his  fortune  to  the  carrying  on  the 
war ;  but  being  out,  after  speaking  of  his  figure  and  nation, 
he  was  forced  to  pull  out  his  speech  and  read  it.  Lord 
Mountstewart  made  a  most  extraordinary  speech,  almost 
the  whole  of  which  was  a  condemnation  of  the  war,  and 
complaints  of  the  insults  received  from  France ;  yet 
he  concluded  with  declaring  we  must  go  on  with  the 
war.  Various  comments  were  made  on  this  speech. 
Some  thought  he  had  been  unwilling  to  lose  what  he  had 
written,  and  intended  to  speak  for  recalling  the  troops,  if 
he  had  not  got  a  place;  and  this  was  probably  true. 
Others  thought  he  meant  to  impute  the  continuation  of 
the  war  to  the  King's  obstinacy  for  it,  in  compliment  to 
which  he  would  vote  for  it  against  his  opinion.  This  too 
might  be  partly  true ;  but  the  best  solution  was,  that  the 
Court,  fearing  any  should  leave  them  on  a  prospect  of  a 


172  LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

change  in  the  Ministry,  had  ordered  Lord  Mountstewart 
to  speak  for  going  on,  as  a  signal  that  there  would  be  no 
alteration  of  men  or  measures.1  Lord  Chatham  fell  again 
into  his  condemnation  of  taking  Indians ;  and  Lord  Gower 
taxing  him  and  forcing  Lord  Amherst  again  to  confute 
him,  Lord  Chatham  reproached  Lord  Gower  with  the 
dissolute  part  of  his  former  life,  to  which  Lord  Gower 
answered  as  absurdly,  by  comparing  his  own  understanding 
to  Lord  Chatham's.  Lord  Denbigh,  on  the  confutation, 
said  the  oracle  (Lord  Chatham)  had  lost  its  memory. 

During  that  week  Lord  North  was  sent  by  the  King  to 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester  to  acquaint  his  Royal  Highness 
that  his  Majesty  intended  to  ask  for  a  Parliamentary  pro- 
vision for  his  own  children,  and  then  would  make  a  hand- 
some settlement  on  his  Royal  Highness's.  When  Lord 
North  had  delivered  his  message,  he  drily  added  that  he 
had  nothing  more  in  command,  which  probably  meant 
that  the  King  would  not  see  the  Duke.  I  thought  it 
meant  there  would  be  no  provision  for  the  Duchess,  but 
she  told  me  Lord  George  Germaine  had  assured  the  Duke 
that  she  would  have  a  handsome  jointure.  What  pro- 
duced this  kindness  I  do  not  know,  nor  did  Lord  George 
claim  any  farther  share  in  it.  Probably  the  King  thought 
the  public  would  be  satisfied  with  this,  without  his  seeing 
the  Duke  or  Duchess.  For  my  own  part,  I  was  fully 
content  that  the  Duchess  and  her  children  would  have 
some  provision.  Had  they  returned  to  Court,  I  con- 
cluded it  would  be  expected  both  by  the  King  and  by 
them  that  I  should  also  return  to  Court,  which  I  heartily 
wished  never  to  do  again. 

One  Straub,  a  young  man  of  Oxford,  connected  with 
the  Burkes,  had  written  an  answer  to  Dr.  Miles  Cooper's 

1  Yet  Lord  Northington,  Lord  Mountstewart's  friend,  voted  in  the  minority 
that  day. 


1777.  PROPOSAL  TO  TREAT  WITH  AMERICA.  173 

Sermons.  The  Proproctor,  to  punish  him,  ordered  Straub 
to  turn  into  Latin,  Doctor  Johnson's  pamphlet  called 
*  Taxation  no  Tyranny.' 

10th.  Wilkes  moved  for  a  repeal  of  all  the  American 
Acts,  but,  as  he  never  consulted  them,  the  Opposition 
would  not  support  him.  /A  new  scene  opened ;  Lord 
North,  who  at  the  beginning  of  the  session  had  declared 
that  conquest  was  the  moment  for  treating,  now  acquainted 
the  House  that  after  the  holidays  he  should  lay  before 
them  a  plan  for  treating  with  the  Americans.  Lord 
North's  expression  marked  his  timidity ;  his  words  were, 
"  I  trust  we  have  still  force  enough  to  bring  forwards  an 
accommodation."  Whether  this  was  a  private  panic  was 
not  known. \Part  of  the  Ministers  were  certainly  not  of 
his  opinion,  probably  to  flatter  the  King,  who  was  obstinate 
to  continue  the  war.  Burke  and  Fox  abused  Lord  North, 
and  told  him  the  Ministers  thought  of  nothing  but  keeping 
their  places ;  and  they  argued  strongly  against  adjourning 
for  more  than  the  Christmas  days  in  times  of  such  immi- 
nent danger. 

llth.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lord  Chatham 
argued  the  same  plea,  but  the  Ministers  persisted  in 
adjourning  for  six  weeks,  and  Lord  Suffolk  had  the  inde- 
cency to  tell  Lord  Chatham  that  he  only  wanted  the 
House  to  sit,  because  he  was  sure  he  would  be  allowed  to 
give  his  advice  nowhere  else.  This  brutality  from  so  stupid 
a  creature  to  an  old  man  who  had  made  so  great  a  figure 
was  severely  treated  in  the  public  papers. 

The  next  day,  to  support  an  air  of  firmness,  the  King 
dismissed  the  Earl  of  Jersey  from  his  bedchamber,  and 
Mr.  Hopkins  from  the  Board  of  Green  Cloth.2  There  did 


*  They  were  frienda  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton. 


174 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


DEC. 


not  seem  any  particular  reason  for  marking  two  friends  of 
the  Duke  of  Grafton,  except  that  there  were  few  other 
opponents  in  place,  and  that  the  Court  wanted  to  provide 
for  some  favourites.  Accordingly,  the  Marquis  of  Caer- 
marthen  was  promoted  to  be  Chamberlain  to  the  Queen, 
in  the  room  of  the  late  Lord  Delaware ;  and  in  Lord 
Caermarthen's  and  Lord  Jersey's  room,  the  young  Earls  of 
Winchelsea  and  Aylesford3  were  named  to  the  Bedchamber. 
Lord  Onslow  was  made  Comptroller  of  the  Household  in  the 
room  of  Sir  W.  Meredith,  and  was  succeeded  at  the  Treasury 
by  Lord  Palmerston,  both  to  make  room  for  Lord  Mul- 
grave,  a  favourite  of  Lord  Sandwich,  at  the  Admiralty. 
Sir  Richard  Worseley,  a  very  rich  man,  succeeded  Hopkins 
at  the  Green  Cloth. 

The  town  of  Manchester  agreed  to  raise  a  thousand  men 
for  the  King,  and  Liverpool  attempted  to  do  so.  Four 
Highland  chiefs  were  to  raise  regiments,  and  the  Court 
talked  of  sending  26,000  men  to  America  in  April ;  but 
that  was  impossible.  They  had  been  wanting  recruits  for 
three  years,  and  from  Germany  they  could  not  get  a  man. 
The  King  of  Prussia  had  denied  passage  to  the  troops  of 
Anspach,  and  he  and  the  Emperor  had  determined  to 
suffer  no  more  men  to  go  to  America  from  Germany.4 
/15fA.  Arrived  Captain  Craig  from  Burgoyne,  with  the 
confirmation  of  the  surrender  of  Burgoyne  and  the  army, 
after  great  slaughter  and  desertion  of  the  Germans.  During 
the  treaty,  Burgoyne  heard  Clinton  was  advanced  nigher 
than  was  true,  and  tried  to  gain  time  by  taxing  Gates  with 


3  These  Earls  were  both  of  the  house 
of  Finch.    Lord  Winchelsea  was  son  of 
Lady  Charlotte  Finch,  governess  of  the 
King's  children.     Lord  Aylesford  was 
first  cousin  and  brother-in-law  of  Lord 
Suffolk. 

4  From  the  '  General  Advertiser  ; ' — 


"  THE  KING'S  FRIENDS. 

"  Loud  in  the  list  of  George  the  Second's  foes, 
France,  Spain,  Scots,  Tories,  Jacobites  arose  ; 
Yet  victory  over  all,  Britannia  ne'er 
Beheld  a  King  so  great,  a  reign  so  fair. 
Revers'd  the  scene,  disgrace  our  arms  attends — 
The  grandsire's  foes  are  now  the  grandson's 
friendt." 


1777.  SURRENDER  OF  BURGOYNE.  175 

detaching  part  of  his  army  to  Washington,  which  Gates 
denied.  Burgoyne's  account  was  in  his  usual  bombast  and 
absurd  style ;  he  talked  of  having  dictated  the  terms  of  his 
surrender ;  and  lest  it  should  not  be  published  at  length  in 
the  Gazette,  he  sent  one  copy  to  Lord  Derby  and  another 
to  Charles  Fox.  The  terms  were  singularly  gentle,  and 
the  Provincials,  while  the  prisoners  deposited  their  arms, 
kept  out  of  sight  not  to  insult  their  disgrace.  Gates  drew 
out  12,000  to  show  Burgoyne  his  army,  and  they  were 
completely  armed,  and  stood  five  hours  without  moving 
out  of  their  line.  When  this  was  over,  Gates  marched 
with  16,000  men  to  the  assistance  of  Washington.\ 

19M.  Came  an  account  of  the  capture  of  Mud  Island, 
and  that  Washington  was  with  his  army  at  German  Town. 

The  ill  treatment  of  the  American  prisoners  in  England 
occasioned  such  murmurs  that  a  subscription  was  set  on 
foot  for  them,  and  near  3000/.  were  immediately  sub- 
scribed, and  more  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  year. 

At  the  end  of  the  year  died  Dr.  Frederick  Keppel, 
Bishop  of  Exeter  and  Dean  of  Windsor.  On  his  death- 
bed he  thanked  God  that  he  had  not  given  one  vote  for 
shedding  American  bleed. 

End  of  the  year  1777. 


[The  following  paper  in  Walpole's  hand  I  found  at  the  end  of  the 
Diary  for  1777.  It  appears  to  have  been  a  contribution  to  a  news- 
paper.— D.] 

AMONGST  the  many  heavy  charges  laid  in  promiscuous 
companies  to  a  late  noble  Governor  (Lord  Holderness),  by 
his  reverend  rival  (Markham,  Bishop  of  Chester),  the 
chief  were,  that  he  was  a  mere  dancing-master,  fit  for 
nothing  but  to  form  a  petit  maitre,  and  that  he  discouraged 


176  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

his  Royal  pupil  from  reading  the  Greek  Testament. 
These  delinquencies  appeared  no  doubt  sufficiently  weighty 
to  the  more  apostolic  tutor  to  justify  him  in  secret  machi- 
nations against  his  coadjutor,  in  poisoning  the  minds  of  his 
disciples,  and  in  filling  them  with  contempt  for  the  prin- 
cipal person  to  whom  their  education  was  intrusted,  to  the 
great  grief  and  alarm  of  their — parent. 

It  is  of  little  consequence  in  what  language  children  are 
instructed  in  the  duties  of  our  holy  religion.  A  pedant 
will  prefer  Greek ;  a  peer,  French.  But  might  not  the 
Noble  Governor  ask  the  Priest,  "  Why  didst  thou  re- 
proach me  with  a  mote  in  mine  eye,  and  dost  not  perceive 
the  beam  in  thine  own?"  The  patience  and  silence  with 
which  the  Peer  bore  the  treachery  used  against  him,  com- 
pared with  a  very  recent  instance  of  intemperate  rage  in  the 
Churchman,  looks  as  if  the  dancing  instructor  had  studied 
the  Gospel  with  more  application  and  more  benefit  than  the 
arch-doctor.  Threats  and  menaces  of  doing  himself  justice, 
an  almost  challenge  at  single  rapier,  are  strange  sounds  in 
the  mouth  of  a  Christian  pastor,  in  an  apostle  of  peace,  in  a 
sermonizer  of  the  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the  Gospel, 
yet  much  of  a  piece  with  the  spirit  breathed  in  a  late 
famous  harangue  to  that  Society,  where  (page  17)  we  read 
with  horror  and  astonishment,  in  this  country  of  toleration, 
that  some  of  our  Prelates  advise  laying  as  severe  restraints 
on  our  Dissenting  brethren  as  on  Papists ;  and  in  the 
same  discourse  in  which  the  favour  shown  to  Roman 
Catholics  is  mentioned  with  approbation  (p.  24).  I  hope 
we  have  not  two  prelates  endued  with  that  persecuting  and 
detestable  spirit;  yet  it  is  worth  the  while  of  the  Dis- 
senters to  ponder  on  that  memorable  passage. 

Some  readers  have  thought  that  so  highflown  a  sermon 
was  less  dictated  by  a  High  Church  spirit  than  by  a  peni- 


1777.  MARKHAM,  BISHOP  OF  CHESTEE.  177 

tent  ambition  of  recovering  favour  in  the  Closet.  I  hope 
they  do  not  mean  this  as  an  apology,  nor  as  a  compliment 
to  a  Prince  who  with  reason  removed  so  meddling  and 
turbulent  a  Pontiff.  The  Churchman  has  disclosed  his 
cloven  foot,  and  shown  how  ill  suited  he  is  to  govern 
either  boys  or  men.  He  never  can  efface  the  memory  of 
his  late  indecent  arrogance,  when  the  gentleman  was  lost 
in  the  pedagogue,  and  the  Christian  in  the  high  priest. 
Where  was  that  meek  sufferance  enjoined  in  the  Gos- 
pel, "To  him  who  smites  thee  on  one  cheek,  turn  the 
other  ?"  The  rash  schoolmaster  thought  he  still  held  the 
rod,  and  that  a  senate  was  to  be  disciplined  like  the 
trembling  urchins  at  Westminster ;  but,  like  harlequin, 
he  brandished  only  a  wooden  sword,  and  diverted  the 
audience. 

Some  compassion  would  have  been  due  to  a  man  fallen 
from  a  dream  of  empire,  who  had  figured  himself  at  the 
head  of  a  future  administration,  like  Cardinal  Fleury, 
during  the  reign  of  his  pupil :  but  slavish  doctrines,  a 
scurrilous  sermon  when  the  propagation  of  the  Gospel 
was  in  question,  and  abusive  and  insolent  language  and 
loss  of  temper  when  censured  for  his  time-serving,  admit 
of  no  emotion  of  pity.  The  most  we  can  bestow  is  regret 
that  so  boisterous  a  spirit  should  be  so  misplaced.  Though 
improper  to  conduct  a  Royal  education,  or  to  preside 
over  a  Protestant  Church,  such  martial  courage  would 
blaze  in  a  communion  in  which  Cardinals  have  conducted 
armies ;  or,  if  bred  in  the  military  line,  would  probably 
have  inspired  our  legions  with  his  own  fierce  ardour.  We 
may  even  lament  that  the  divine  was  not  entrusted  to  lead 
up  the  Blues  at  Minden,  and  that  a  certain  noble  com- 
mander was  not  destined  to  lawn  sleeves  in  his  room. 

Mark  him ! 

VOL.  II.  N 


(     178     )  JAN. 


1778. 


JANUARY. 


THE  Stocks  continued  to  fall  on  apprehensions  of  a  war  with 
France,  yet  there  did  not  seem  to  be  much  cause  for  those 
fears.  The  French,  it  is  true,  continued  arming,  and  it 
was  believed  had  concluded  a  treaty  with  the  Americans ; 
but  the  probability  was  that  it  was  solely  a  transaction 
of  trade ;  and  neither  were  the  Colonies  so  content  with 
France  as  to  plunge  themselves  into  her  arms  blindly, 
nor  so  afraid  of  not  being  able  to  maintain  their  independ- 
ence as  to  court  her  servility.  The  first  accounts  that 
came  from  Philadelphia  mentioned  the  slights  shown  by 
the  Congress  to  the  French  officers,  who  were  only 
detained  by  the  intreaties  of  M.  de  la  Fayette,  and  soon 
afterwards  above  forty  were  said  to  have  set  out  for 
Boston  on  their  return  to  France.  The  French  King  was 
not  inclined  to  war,  and  M.  de  Maurepas  too  old  and 
indolent  to  seek  it.  It  was  not  quite  so  sure  that  some  of 
the  English  Ministers  did  not  look  to  a  war  with  France 
as  an  excuse  for  abandoning  America ;  at  least,  if  they 
meant  to  drain  the  country  of  more  troops,  it  was  holding 
out  such  an  invitation  to  France  as  she  could  not  well 
resist. 

/Though  Lord  North  had  promised  to  draw  up  some 
plan  of  accommodation,  and  every  body  saw  the  improbabi- 
lity of  recovering  America,  still  so  great  was  the  King's 


1778.        GENERAL  DISLIKE  TO  RAISING  NEW  TROOPS.         17!) 

obstinacy,  and  the  eagerness  of  the  Scots,  that  no  sooner 
was  the  Parliament  adjourned  than  nothing  was  heard  of 
but  raising  of  regiments.  Manchester  and  Liverpool  took 
the  lead,  and  the  Scots  engaged  to  furnish  9000  men ;  but 
so  little  were  the  views  of  the  Court  disguised,  that  most  of 
the  zealous  clans  were  precisely  the  same  as  had  risen 
for  the  Pretender  in  1745  ;  and  the  Lord  Macleod  and 
other  outlaws  were  recalled  and  named  officers  of  the 
intended  regiments.  Such  folly  or  such  wicked  designs 
made  many  apprehend  that  there  was  less  thought  of 
sending  those  regiments  to  America  than  to  raise  them  for 
the  views  of  the  Court ;  but  happily,  though  the  Parliament 
had  risen,  contrary  to  reason  and  representation,  as  if  to  set 
a  precedent  of  raising  troops  without  its  consent,  by  pre- 
rogative, it  went  on  very  lamely\  General  Harvey,  the 
King's  Military  Minister,  and  Lord  Barrington,  Secretary- 
at-War,  did  not  taste  the  measure,  as  prejudicial  to  recruit- 
ing ;  the  officers  disliked  it  as  it  gave  them  many  new 
upstart  rivals  and  competitors ;  and,  as  no  money  had  been 
spared  for  three  years  to  procure  recruits,  they  did  not 
start  up  only  because  more  regiments  were  wanted.  The 
manufacturing  towns  and  the  farmers  could  not  like  the 
scheme;  and  though  Serjeants  of  the  Guards  were  sent 
down  to  Manchester  to  form  the  levies,  they  came  in  very 
slowly.  Scotland,  for  some  years  before  the  war,  had 
complained  of  migrations  to  America,  and  having  lately 
gone  deep  into  manufactures  and  improvement  of  estates, 
must  dislike  further  depopulation.  The  King  himself  con- 
trived to  relax  the  zeal  he  cultivated :  he  refused  the 
command  of  the  Gordon  and  Liverpool  regiments  to  the 
brothers  of  the  Duke  of  Gordon  and  Lord  Derby ;  Lord 
Warwick  was  discouraged  by  the  jealousy  of  Lord  Hert- 
ford, and  Lord  Townshend  was  discomfited  in  attempts  in 

N  2 


180 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


JAN. 


Norfolk.  Alderman  Harley  and  the  Court  faction  tried 
to  draw  the  Common  Council  into  the  measure,  but  were 
baffled ;  and  then,  in  opposition  to  the  subscription  for  the 
American  prisoners,  opened  one  for  raising  men,  as  was 
done  at  Bristol. 

Sth.  Came  an  account  of  the  conquest  of  Mud  Island  by 
General  Howe,  and  of  Redbank  by  Lord  Cornwallis ;  both 
of  which  the  Provincials  had  abandoned  with  little  loss  on 
either  side,  and  with  some  capture  of  stores.  Howe  threat- 
ened immediately  to  march  in  pursuit  of  Washington.  The 
Delaware  was  now  open. 

Account  of  the  death  of  the  Elector  of  Bavaria,  which, 
as  he  left  no  children,  it  was  thought  would  produce  a  war 
in  Europe. 

Lord  George  Germaine  lost  his  wife,1  who  died  of  the 
measles.  As  she  was  a  good  wife  and  mother  and  a  sen- 
sible woman,  her  death  was  a  great  blow  to  him  at  this 
moment. 

16th.  An  account  that  Howe  had  marched  to  attack 
Washington,  but  found  him  so  strongly  entrenched  behind 
a  bridge  at  Whitemarsh,  that  he  had  again  not  ventured  to 
attack  him,  and  had  put  his  army  into  winter  quarters  in 
Philadelphia. 

\7th.  Earl  Cornwallis,  Lord  Chewton,  the  Marquis  of 
Lindsey,  Sir  George  Osborne,  and  Captain  Brodericke 
arrived  on  leave.  Lord  Cornwallis  was  five  hours  in  pri- 
vate with  the  King,  and  it  was  supposed  was  charged 
to  lay  open  the  hopelessness  of  success.  The  army  suf- 
fered everything — had  nothing  but  salted  provisions,  and 
those  very  dear  ;  and  the  people  of  Philadelphia  were 


1  Diana,  daughter  of  Mr.  John  Sam- 
brooke.  Their  eldest  son  Charles  suc- 
ceeded to  the  dukedom  of  Dorset,  on 


the  death  of  his  second-cousin,  Duke 
George  John,  in  1815. — D. 


1778. 


MEETING  OF  PARLIAMENT. 


181 


absolutely  starving.  Sir  Thomas  Wilson  had  come  before, 
and  declared  the  army,  by  the  loss  of  Burgoyne,  by  deaths 
and  desertions,  was  diminished  above  20,000.  The  King 
did  not  ask  a  question  of  Lord  Petersham,  because  he  was 
recommended  by  Burgoyne,  but  he  was  suffered  to  buy  a 
higher  commission.  Lord  George  Germaine  justified  him- 
self in  writing  against  Burgoyne,  and  suffered  his  defence  to 
lie  in  his  office  and  be  perused.2 

Dr.  Ross,  Chaplain  to  Lord  Weymouth,  was  made 
Bishop  of  Exeter,  and  Bishop  Barrington  Dean  of 
Windsor. 

Reports  of  Lord  Pigot  being  dead  in  India,  but 
doubted.3 

20th.  Both  Houses  met,  but  little  was  done,  in  the 
absence  of  Lord  George  Germaine,  who  was  not  expected 
in  town  till  the  26th. 

An  event  that  had  happened  at  the  end  of  the  preceding 
year  occasioned  much  talk.  The  Ministers  having  been 
attacked  in  the  House  of  Lords  with  the  hire  of  foreign 
mercenaries,  and  threatened  with  a  French  war,  had  indis- 
creetly mentioned  the  French  officers  with  little  respect. 
Some  French  officers  happened  to  be  present  at  the  debate, 
and  were  much  offended ;  and  the  matter  being  much  ex- 
aggerated in  a  paper  published  abroad,  called  '  Le  Courier 
de  FEurope,'  the  King  of  France  himself  was  displeased, 
and  it  was  affirmed  that  a  Comte  de  Turpin  had  come 
to  Calais  and  sent  a  challenge  to  Lord  Suffolk.  Both  the 
Earl  and  Lord  North  positively  disclaimed  the  charge  to 
the  French  Ambassador ;  but  many  wagers  were  laid  on 
the  fact  at  Paris,  and  even  referred  to  the  decision  of  Lord 


1  "  For  '  The  General  Advertiser,' 
Jan.  15,  1778. 

'  On  the  new  Manchester  Regiment,  to 
be  called  the  '  Button-makers'  Regi- 


ment : ' — 

'  No  wonder  Manchester  for  George  declares. 
The  King  of  Button-makers  must  be  theirs." 

3  See  post,  31st  January. — D. 


182  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JAN. 

Chatham,  Lord  Shelburne,  or  the  Duke  of  Richmond. 
An  event  of  more  importance  was  for  some  time  a  secret. 
Lord  Chatham,  after  the  highest  compliments  on  the  Duke 
of  Richmond's  integrity  and  abilities,  had  told  Admiral 
Keppel  that  the  Duke  had  cut  the  grass  under  his  feet  by 
declaring  for  the  independence  of  America.  The  fact 
stood  thus : — Lord  Chatham  had,  before  Christmas,  de- 
clared he  would  never  consent  to  the  independence  of 
America,  probably  to  clear  his  way  to  Court,  and  perhaps 
a  little  to  popularity.  Lord  Sandwich  had  artfully  de- 
manded whether  the  rest  of  the  Opposition  subscribed  to 
that  doctrine  ?  The  Duke  of  Richmond,  more  honestly  than 
prudently,  declared  he  did  not,  said  he  would  treat  with 
them  as  independent  rather  than  not  make  peace,  and 
would  try  afterwards  to  persuade  them  to  re-acknowledge 
the  sovereignty  of  this  country,  as  less  likely  to  endanger 
their  freedom  then  than  the  ambition  of  their  own  leaders. 
Lord  Camden  had  leaned  to  the  same  side,  but  less  expli- 
citly ;  but  Lord  Shelburne  had  wisely  advised  them  to  avoid 
decision,  and  treat  the  question  as  was  done  with  the  pre- 
amble of  bills,  which  are  always  postponed  till  the  body  of 
the  bills  is  formed  and  agreed  on. 

Lord  Chatham,  however,  whether  really  offended  or  whe- 
ther he  had  had  any  overtures,  as  was  said,  during  the 
holidays,  by  the  intervention  of  Lord  Amherst,  or  whether 
he  wished  to  receive  some,  affected  to  stomach  this  schism, 
or  to  make  it  one.  He  complained  of  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond to  Lord  Camden,  but  intimated  that  he  still  more 
blamed  his  Lordship's  neutrality.  Lord  Camden  defended 
it,  with  reason,  as  wiser  than  either  extreme. 

22nd.  Lord  Rockingham,  previous  to  intended  motions, 
wrote  to  invite  Lord  Chatham  to  be  at  the  House  of  Lords 
the  next  day ;  but  he  returned  a  very  cold  answer,  inti- 


1778.     MOTION  TO  TAKE  THE  OPINION  OF  THE  JUDGES.      183 

mating  that  he  did  not  know  whether  he  should  attend  any 
more.  This  conduct  would  have  been  very  mischievous, 
but  luckily  the  Duke  of  Grafton  declaring  he  would 
pay  no  regard  to  it,  and  would  not  absent  himself,  Lord 
Camden,  who  at  first  doubted,  took  the  same  part ;  and 
so  Lord  Shelburne,  after  a  day's  consideration,  resolved  to 
do  so  too.* 

In  the  meantime  the  illegality  of  raising  regiments 
without  the  previous  consent  of  Parliament,  began  to 
make  a  noise.  Lord  Abingdon  moved  to  ask  the  opinion 
of  the  Judges  ;  and  on  the 

22m/,  Sir  Philip  Jennings  Clarke  moved  to  address  the 
Crown  for  a  list  of  the  number  of  the  new  corps,  and  for 
the  dates  of  the  former  commissions  of  officers  destined  to 
serve  in  those  regiments.  Charles  Fox  moved  again  for 
the  instructions  to  Howe  and  Burgoyne,  and  falling  foul 
on  the  so  many  obnoxious  measures,  compared  the  present 
reign  to  that  of  James  II.  Colonel  Luttrell  flew  into  a 
rage,  but  could  not  express  what  he  meant,  but  muttered 
something  of  Fox's  having  declared  he  would  talk  treason. 
Lord  North,  to  avoid  the  charge,  owned  it  had  been  almost 
treason.  Burke  spoke  well,  and  severely  too. 

27th.  Lord  George  Germaine,  though  come  to  town, 
was  not  at  the  House,  as  Lord  North  promised.  Great 
complaints  of  the  defects  in  the  papers  given  in.  Charles 
Fox,  in  an  admirable  speech,  attacked  Lord  North  on 
having  called  himself  an  unfortunate  Minister,  and  proved 
that  all  the  disgraces  had  happened  by  ignorance,  blunders, 
and  misconduct,  not  by  misfortune.  Lord  North  answered 
with  some  humour ;  and  as  Fox  had  accused  him  of  idle- 


4  Lord  Rockingham  sent  an  answer  plied  that  ho  was  much  concerned^  but 

expressing  his  surprise  at  Lord  Chat-  could  not  agree  with  them  on  the  qaes- 

ham's  deserting  the  party  in  so  great  tion  of  independence, 
national  concerns.    Lord  Chatham  re- 


184  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JAN. 

ness  and  listening  to  flatterers,  he  said  he  passed  a  great 
deal  of  time  in  that  House,  where  he  could  not  be  idle, 
and  it  was  plain  was  not  flattered.  Colonel  Luttrell  made 
a  frantic  speech  against  the  Opposition,  which  gave  general 
offence.  Some  despatches  that  were  moved  for  from  the 
Generals  in  America  were  refused  on  a  division  of  163  to 
101 ;  but  Adam,  George  Grenville,  Sir  Alexander  Leithe, 
and  Mr.  Gibbon,  the  historian,  voted  in  the  minority.  Lord 
North  being  asked,  the  day  before  the  Parliament  met  after 
the  holidays,  if  the  army  had  good  quarters  at  Philadelphia, 
replied,  "  so  good  that  I  wish  I  was  to  pass  the  next  three 
months  there" — meaning,  rather  than  in  the  House  of 
Commons. 

On  the  27th,  Lord  Abingdon  moved  again  to  consult 
the  Judges  on  the  new  levies.  The  Court  endeavoured  to 
show  it  must  be  the  House,  not  a  single  Lord  that  could 
consult  them.  It  was  deferred  till  the  next  day  seven- 
night. 

29th.  The  Duke  of  Kichmond  moved  to  have  lists  of 
the  navy  laid  before  the  House  on  the  Monday  following ; 
it  was  then  Thursday.  Lord  Sandwich  said  there  would 
not  be  time,  Sunday  intervening,  and  the  next  day  being 
the  thirtieth  of  January.  The  Duke  said  he  had  not 
forgotten  that  day,  but  he  should  not  observe  it,  nor  con- 
dole with  Government  on  what  had  happened  on  that  day, 
— and  though  it  had  happened  to  his  own  ancestor,  it  was 
right,  and  he  was  glad  of  it. 

The  same  day  Colonel  Luttrell  complained  of  the 
*  Morning  Post '  for  misrepresenting  his  behaviour  the 
preceding  day — but  in  fact  it  could  not  be  made  worse ; 
he  had  been  so  absurd  and  so  furious,  that  many  thought 
he  had  been  set  on  by  the  Ministers  to  provoke  Charles 


1778. 


ADMISSION  OF  STRANGERS  TO  DEBATES. 


185 


Fox  to  a  duel.5  He  said  he  would  move  to  exclude 
strangers  from  the  House.  Rigby  supported  him,  yet 
owned  it  was  an  invidious  task ;  and  others  objected,  par- 
ticularly as  a  public  inquiry  was  coming  on,  and  Rigby 
(probably  to  charge  the  Generals)  called  it  a  public  trial. 
General  Conway  ridiculed  the  idea  of  shutting  up  the 
House  because  some  men  were  abused  in  the  newspapers. 
He  said  nobody  was  abused  there  more  than  he,  or  minded 
it  less.  He  had  two  or  three  days  before  seen  a  "character" 
of  himself.  (These  were  characters  of  the  speakers  in 
Parliament,  published  in  the  '  Daily  Advertiser,'  and 
supposed  to  be  written  by  one  Combes,6  a  most  infamous 
rascal,  who  had  married  a  cast  mistress  of  Lord  Beauchamp, 
and  wrote  many  satiric  poems  not  quite  despicable  for  the 
poetry,  but  brutally  virulent  against  that  Lord,  and  others, 
particularly  Lord  Irnham.)  Conway  avowed  that,  though 
his  valour  in  the  field  was  allowed,  it  was  said  he  was  so 
irresolute  that  he  trembled  if  answered  by  Lord  George 


*  The  'Morning  Post,'  a  paper  no- 
toriously paid  by  the  Court,  abused 
Fox  on  this  occasion  in  the  most  out- 
rageous terms,  and  accused  him  of 
cowardice  for  not  challenging  Luttrell, 
which  it  evidently  tried  to  make  him 
do.  Even  Luttrell  was  ashamed  of 
such  assassinating  endeavours,  made 
excuses  to  Fox,  and  hoped  he  did  not 
suspect  him  of  being  accessory  to  so 
black  a  design. 

6  William  Combe,  after  a  creditable 
career  at  Eton  and  Oxford,  burst  on  the 
world  as  a  wonderfully  well-dressed 
beau,  and  was  received  with  eclat  for 
the  sake  of  his  wealth,  talents,  grace, 
and  personal  beauty.  He  was  popularly 
called  "Count  Combe,'1  till  his  extrava- 
gance had  dissipated  a  noble  fortune  ; 
and  then,  addressing  himself  to  litera- 
ture, the  Count  was  forgotten  in  the 
author.  In  the '  Gentleman's  Magazine ' 
for  May,  1852,  there  is  a  list  of  his  works, 
originally  furnished  by  his  own  hand. 
Not  one  was  published  with  his  name, 
and  they  amount  in  number  to  68. 


Among  them  are  'Dr.  Syntax'  and 
4  Lord  Lyttelton's  Letters ' — for  Combe 
was  the  author  of  many  other  people's 
works.  He  was  a  "teetotaller"  in  the 
days  when  drunkenness  was  in  fashion, 
and  was  remarkable  for  disinterested- 
ness and  industry.  He  was  the  friend  of 
Hannah  More,  whom  he  loved  to  make 
weep  by  improvised  romances,  in  which 
he  could  "  pile  the  agony "  with  won- 
derful effect.  He  worked  on  steadily 
till  he  had  passed  his  eightieth  year, 
and  ultimately  died  in  Lambeth  Road 
(which  I  am  afraid  was  "within  the 
Rules")  in  1823.  At  no  period  of  his 
life  did  he  merit  such  strong  censure  as 
Walpole  has  flung  at  him;  but  Wai- 
pole,  however  fond  of  satire,  hated  sa- 
tirists, particularly  when  they  were 
fearless  and  outspoken,  like  Combe. 
Religious  faith  and  hope  enabled  Wil- 
liam Combe  to  triumph  over  the  suf- 
ferings of  his  latter  years.  His  second 
wife,  the  sister  of  the  gentle  and  gifted 
Mrs.  Cosway,  survived  him. — D. 


186  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JAN. 

Germaine  or  Wedderburn  (two  men  that  could  inspire  no 
man  with  fear)  ;  but  if  the  author  could  get  sixpence  by  the 
abuse,  he  did  not  grudge  it  him.  Luttrell  owned  he  should 
not  like  to  take  on  himself  the  odium  of  shutting  the  doors, 
and  dropped  his  complaint.  Luttrell  had  quarrelled  with  his 
father,  Lord  Irnham,  and  was  returned  to  the  Court.  The 
father  and  brothers  continued  in  Opposition  with  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland ;  and  no  man  published  more  abuse  in  the 
papers  than  one  of  the  brothers,  Temple  Luttrell. 

3lst.  Confirmation  came  of  the  death  of  Lord  Pigot  in 
confinement  in  India. 


"THE  HALCYON  DAYS  OF  OLD  ENGLAND; 

OR, 

WISDOM  OF  ADMINISTRATION  DEMONSTRATED. 

A  BALLAD. 
To  the  tune  of  '  Ye  Medley  of  Mortals. 

Give  ear  to  my  song,  I'll  now  tell  you  a  story, 
This  is  the  bright  era  of  Old  England's  glory ; 
And  though  some  may  think  us  in  pitiful  plight, 
I'll  swear  they're  mistaken,  for  matters  go  right ! 

Sing  tantarara,  wise  all,  wise  all, 
Sing  tantarara,  wise  all. 

Let  us  laugh  at  the  cavils  of  weak  silly  elves  ! 
Our  statesmen  are  wise  men  ! — they  say  so  themselves ! 
And  though  little  mortals  may  hear  it  with  wonder, 
Tis  consummate  wisdom  that  causes  each  blunder ! 

Sing  tantarara,  wise  all,  &c. 

They  now  are  conducting  a  glorious  war ! 
(It  began  about  tea,  about  feathers,  and  tar  !) 
With  spirit  they  pushed  what  they  planned  with  sense ! 
Forty  millions  they've  spent  for  a  tax  of  threepence  ! 
Sing  tantarara,  wise  all,  &c. 


1778.          "  THE  HALCYON  DAYS  OF  OLD  ENGLAND."  187 

The  debts  of  the  nation  do  grieve  them  so  sore, 
To  lighten  our  burden — they  load  us  the  more ! 
They  aim  at  th'  American's  cash,  my  dear  honey ! 
Yet  beggar  this  kingdom  and  send  them  the  money. 
Sing  tantarara,  wise  all,  &c. 

What  honours  we're  gaining  by  taking  their  forts, 
Destroying  batteaux  and  blocking  up  ports  ; 
Burgoyne  would  have  worked  them — but  for  a  mishap, 
By  Gates  and  one  Arnold  he's  caught  in  a  trap  ! 

Sing  tantarara,  wise  all,  &c. 

But  Howe  was  more  cautious  and  prudent  by  far, 
He  sailed  with  his  fleet  up  the  great  Delaware ; 
All  summer  he  struggled  and  strove  to  undo  them, 
But  the  plague  of  it  was  that  he  could  not  get  to  them. 
Sing  tantarara,  wise  all,  &c. 

Oh  think  us  not  cruel  because  our  allies 
Are  savagely  scalping  men,  women,  and  boys ! 
Maternal  affection  to  this  step  doth  move  us — 
The  more  they  are  scalped,  the  more  they  will  love  us  ! 
Sing  tantarara,  wise  all,  &c. 

Some  folks  are  uneasy  and  make  a  great  pother, 
For  the  loss  of  one  army  and  half  of  another : 
But,  sirs,  next  campaign  by  ten  thousands  we'll  slay  them, 
If  we  can  but  find  soldiers  and  money  to  pay  them ! 
Sing  tantarara,  wise  all,  &c. 

I've  sung  you  my  song,  now  I'll  give  you  a  pray'r : 
May  peace  soon  succeed  to  this  horrible  war  ! 
Again  may  we  live  with  our  brethren  in  concord  ! 
And  the  authors  of  mischief  all  hang  in  a  strong  cord  ! 
Sing  tantarara,  wise  all,"  Ac. 


188  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 


FEBRUARY. 


.  BOTH  Houses  went  upon  the  inquiry  into  the  state 
of  the  nation.  In  the  Lords  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
entered  largely  into  the  defects  of  the  papers  laid  before 
them,  after  a  division  in  which  the  Court  carried  it  for 
Lord  Scarsdale  to  be  Chairman  of  the  Committee,  instead 
of  the  Duke  of  Portland,  proposed  by  the  Opposition.  The 
Duke  offered  a  motion  to  address  the  King,  that  in  con- 
sideration of  the  great  armaments  provided  by  France  and 
Spain,  as  intimated  in  his  Majesty's  Speech,  and  of  the 
present  great  weakness  of  the  Kingdom,  no  more  of  the 
old  corps  should  be  sent  to  any  distant  parts  whatever. 
This  motion  after  a  debate  was  rejected  at  past  eight  by 
9 1  to  34,  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle  and  Lord  Say  and  Seale 
voting  with  the  minority. 

The  same  motion  was  made  by  Charles  Fox  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  after  a  speech  of  two  hours  and  forty 
minutes,  in  which  he  recapitulated  the  events,  history,  and 
misconduct  of  the  war  with  astonishing  memory  and  me- 
thod. The  Ministers  did  not  make  one  word  of  answer, 
but  most  indecently  called  for  the  question,  when  it  was 
rejected  by  259  to  165 — a  surprising  minority  that  much 
alarmed  the  Administration  ;  many  even  of  the  Tories 
voting  against  the  Court,  and  some  Members,  offended  at 
the  insolence  of  making  no  reply  on  so  very  important  a 
subject.  Young  George  Grenville  was  one  who  was  come 
to  town  entirely  in  Opposition,  and  had  even  waited  on 
Lord  Rockingham,  telling  him  that,  though  he  could  never 
depart  from  the  principle  of  England's  right  of  taxation,  yet 


1778.  RESOLUTION  BY  THE  DUKE  OF  RICHMOND.  189 

he  totally  disagreed  with  the  Ministers  on  every  other 
part  of  the  war.  The  Court  had  very  maliciously  delivered, 
amongst  the  papers,  one  sent  over  by  General  Burgoyne, 
and  called  his  "Thoughts  on  the  Canadian  War  " — a  clear 
symptom  of  their  intending  to  inculpate  him. 

2nd.  The  Committees  of  Inquiry  were  opened  in  both 
Houses.  In  the  Lords  the  Opposition  proposed  the  Duke 
of  Portland  for  Chairman  instead  of  the  usual  one,  Lord 
Scarsdale,1  but  the  latter  was  chosen  by  the  majority  of 
58  to  33.  Lord  Talbot  voted  with  the  minority  ;  and  Lord 
Weymouth,  having  married  the  Duke's  sister,  in  decency 
did  not  vote.  The  Duke  of  Richmond,  after  complaining 
of  many  defects  in  the  papers  delivered  in,  and  stating 
that  the  army  in  Great  Britain  was  near  6000  men 
less  than  established  by  Act  of  Parliament,  besides  the 
deficiencies  in  Ireland,  proposed  a  Resolution,  that,  con- 
sidering the  danger  of  war  from,  and  the  preparations  in, 
France  and  Spain,  stated  in  his  Majesty's  Speech,  the 
Crown  should  be  addressed  to  send  no  more  of  the 
old  corps  out  of  the  kingdom.  This  was  levelled  at  the 
new  regiments  raising,  which,  not  being  likely  to  be  raised, 
could  not  defend  the  kingdom.  This  occasioned  a  long 
debate,  after  which  the  motion  was  rejected  by  91  to  34. 
Lord  Suffolk  threw  out  hints  that  the  inquiry  would  betray 
the  weakness  of  the  kingdom  to  foreign  Courts  (as  if  they 
could  be  ignorant  of  it,  when  the  Government  found  such 
difficulty  of  getting  recruits,  and  500,000/.  of  last  year's 
subscription  lay  unpurchased  in  the  Bank !).  However, 
those  hints  made  it  apprehended  that  the  Ministers  would 
put  a  violent  stop  to  the  inquiries ;  yet  some  of  them  were 
certainly  for  their  going  on — Rigby  again,  in  the  course  of 
the  week,  declaring  there  must  be  some  atonement.  His 


1  Sir  Nathaniel  Curzon,  the  first  Lord. — D. 


190 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


view,  no  doubt,  was  to  sacrifice  some  of  the  Generals  as 
scapegoats  for  the  Ministers,  as  the  Duke  of  Newcastle 
and  Lord  Hardwicke  had  sacrificed  Admiral  Byng,  in  the 
late  war,  to  save  themselves  and  Lord  Anson.1 

So  great  was  the  curiosity  of  the  public  to  hear  the  De- 
bates on  this  occasion  in  the  other  House,  that  the  crowd 
burst  in,  and  were  with  difficulty  turned  out.  As  there 
were  also  three-score  ladies  in  the  gallery,  amongst  whom 
the  Speaker's  lady,  Governor  Johnston  moved  to  have 
them  sent  away  also,  as  was  done. 

4th.  Was  destined  to  consider  Lord  Abingdon's  motion 
for  consulting  the  Judges  on  the  legality  of  the  new  sub- 
scriptions for  raising  regiments ;  but  his  Lordship  (probably 
foreseeing  that  affirmation  would  be  given  by  the  Judges, 
which  would  be  a  dangerous  authority)  forbore  to  press 
that  motion,  which,  he  said,  though  it  was  not  his  opinion, 
could  not  be  demanded  by  a  single  Lord ;  and  then 
hoping,  with  much  wit,  that  there  was  not  a  Judas  Iscariot 
(meaning  Lord  Mansfield)  among  the  twelve  Judges,  as 
there  had  been  amongst  the  Disciples,  he  offered  a  Resolu- 
tion, that  the  subscribing  of  money  by  way  of  aids  or  bene- 
volences towards  raising  troops,  without  the  consent  of 
Parliament,  was  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution 
and  the  express  letter  of  the  law.  Lord  Mountstewart  de- 
fended or  excused  the  Scotch,  whom  Lord  Abingdon  had 
attacked.  Lord  Suffolk,  in  the  most  impudent  and  un- 


1  The  ministry,  itwill  be  remembered, 
gent  Byng  with  a  miserably  insufficient 
force  to  prevent  Minorca  (gloriously 
defended  by  Blakeney)  from  falling 
into  the  hands  of  the  French.  Byng 
exposed  himself  by  warmly  censuring 
the  Admiralty,  who  had  despatched 
him  on  his  commission  without  proper 
means  of  accomplishing  it.  In  his 
fruitless  engagement  with  the  French 
fleet  he  certainly  manifested  more  cau- 
tion than  "  pluck  ;"  but  he  could  hardly 
have  expected  to  be  blamed  on  that 


account,  for,  not  long  before,  Matthews 
had  been  dismissed  for  fighting,  while 
Lestock  had  been  promoted  for  evinc- 
ing much  less  resolution  than  Byng,  who 
was  executed,  as  Voltaire  remarks, 
"pour  encourager  les  autres."  In  the 
very  month  in  which  Walpole  writes  the 
above,  the  Royal  George  was  offered  to 
Lord  Bristol,  in  case  of  war.  "  God 
forbid  that  I  should  set  foot  in  her,"  said 
the  gallant  peer  in  the  House  of  Lords, 
"  a  vessel  so  ill  formed  and  so  wretch- 
edly manned !" — D. 


1778.  DEBATE  ON  THE  NEW  LEVIES.  191 

precedented  manner,  proposed  to  amend  the  question  by 
making  it  affirm  the  direct  contrary.2     This  was  griev-  ' 
ously   resented   and   complained  of,    particularly  by  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lord  Camden,  the  latter  of  whom 
affirmed  that  all  his  experience  did  not  suggest  so  flagrant  v/ 
a  piece  of  unfair   insolence.     Lord   Denbigh,    the    most 
unprincipled  of  men,  and  more  hackneyed  in  impudence 
than  Lord  Suffolk,  defended  the  innovation ;  but  at  last 
Lord  Mansfield  himself,  ashamed  of  the  outrage,  advised 
the  Courtiers  not  to  persevere  in  it :  but  he  defended  the 
legality    of  the   evidence,  particularly   on  the   authority 
of  Lord   Chancellor   Hardwicke,    who,    on   passing   sen- 
tence on  the  rebel  Lords,  had  taken  occasion  to  go  out 
of  his  way,  and  justify  the  subscriptions  of  that  time; 
though    the    cases   were   widely   different,    for    could    a 
rebellion  within  the  island,    and  one  on    the   other   side 
of  the  Atlantic,  be  called  parallel  exigences  ?    Lord  Hard- 
wicke had  certainly  had  in  his  eye  the  action  of  Sir  John 
Philipps,  a  notorious  Jacobite,  who  had  presented  those 
subscriptions  in  Westminster  Hall  as  illegal.    So  dangerous 
is  it  to  risk  unconstitutional  precedents,  even  in  defence 
of  the  Constitution ;   for  thus  an  opinion  given  obiter  to 
justify  the  friends  of  liberty  was  pleaded  as  an  excuse  for  a 
measure   employed   to  destroy  the  liberties  of  America. 
Lord  Camden  flatly  denied  the  legality  of  the  measure ; 
but  though  Lord  Suffolk  withdrew  his  indecent  amend- 
ment, Lord  Abingdon's  motion  was  rejected  by  90  to  30 ; 
and  so  the  majority  in  effect  decided,  as  their  opinion,  that 
the  measure  was  not  illegal.3 


8   EPIGRAM. 

"  In  every  soil  can  wild  Ambition  grow ; 
Smoke  In  the  dull,  or  in  the  lively  glow. 
In  this  the  warmth  of  Genius  aids  the  growth; 


8  Lord  Chatham,  who  had  not  suc- 
ceeded in  being  sent  for  to  Court, 
threatened  to  appear  on  the  debate  for 
the  new  levies  and  thunder  against 


Tfl2:        U.  nreg.       !  them  ;  but  he  did  not :  it  was  sad  he 

And  blundering  Suffolk  like  bright  Fox  aj-pires."       was  laid  up  with  the  gout. 


192  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

The  same  question  was  virtually  agitated  the  same  day 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  but  with  a  material  difference 
— that  the  supply  for  the  new  levies  was  brought  in  in 
form  by  the  Secretary-at-War.  Dunning  attacked  them 
on  the  legality,  and  was  answered  by  the  Attorney4  and 
Solicitor-Generals,  and  the  contest  was  reckoned  a  most 
superior  discussion  of  law.  The  great  premiums,  too,  pre- 
vented common  recruiting;  and  that  reason  prevailed  so 
far,  that  the  Earl  of  Warwick  was  desired  by  the  King,  in- 
stead of  raising  a  regiment,  to  get  recruits  for  other  deficient 
regiments.  The  subscriptions  themselves  were  much  ridi- 
culed :  in  the  first  place,  few  or  no  men  were  to  be  gotten  ; 
on  the  other  hand,  when  the  lists  were  printed,  a  great  num- 
ber of  the  names  appeared  to  be  Jews,  contractors,  and 
persons  in  the  pay  of  Government.  A  former  anecdote 
was  recollected  of  Lord  Denbigh,  who,  having  proposed  a 
subscription  in  Leicestershire,  and,  being  called  on  for  his 
quota,  replied,  "  Why,  I  was  your  decoy-duck  ;  you  should 
not  call  on  me  !  "  Was  I  in  the  wrong  to  impute  profli- 
gacy and  impudence  to  such  a  wretch  ?  In  fact,  not  a 
quarter  of  the  sums  subscribed  were  likely  to  be  called  for. 
General  Conway  voted  for  the  measure,  and  often  rose  to 
give  his  reasons,  but,  others  rising  at  the  same  time,  he  was 
not  pointed  to  by  the  Speaker.  He  had  material  reasons :  as 
an  officer  he  did  not  care  to  discourage  necessary  recruiting 
(though  in  fact  the  measure  was  very  unpopular  in  the 


4  The  Attorney-General  Thurlow  re- 
peated what  Rigby  said  twice,  that  there 
must  he  some  atonement.  On  the  other 
hand,  Lord  Suffolk,  and  even  Lord 
Sandwich  and  Lord  Gower,  disliked 


mouth  were  one,  the  Bedfords  were 
divided  into  two,  and  Lord  Mansfield, 
Jenkinson,  Wedderburn,  Lord  Suffolk, 
and  Lord  George  Germaine  were  an- 
other, and  most  trusted  by  the  King ; 


the  inquiries.    Thus  it  appeared  that  j  and  yet  Lord  George  could  not  be  well 
Kigby  and  Thurlow  (and  Lord  Wey-      with  the  King,  and  was  less  so  with 


mouth  agreed  in  sentiment)  differed 
from  the  rest  of  the  Bedford  faction, 
and  that  there  were  several  factions  in 


the  Ministry :   Lord  North  and  Dart-  i  fidence. 


Lord  Bute — but  Lord  Bute  himself,  I 
believe,  had  but  moderately  a  share  in 
the  King's  favour,  and  less  in  his  con- 


1778.  VOTING  FOR  THE  LEVIES.  193 

nriny,  as  many  new  Colonels  had  rank  assigned  them  over 
old  officers,  particularly  the  Lord  Macleod,  son  of  the  con- 
demned and  attainted  Lord  Cromartie,  and  recalled  from 
Sweden  for  this  purpose)  ;  but  Conway's  more  important 
reasons  were,  that  the  new  levies  were  now  proposed  legally 
and  constitutionally  to  the  consideration  of  Parliament ; 
and,  in  the  second  place,  he  apprehended  a  war  with 
France,  and  knew  the  defenceless  state  of  the  kingdom, 
which  made  him  wish  to  reinforce  the  army.  By  this  time 
the  Ministers  themselves  had  given  over  the  thoughts  of 
transporting  the  new  levies  to  America,  both  from  their 
paucity  and  the  impossibility  of  reconquering  that  country. 
Gibbon  voted,  like  Conway,  with  the  majority ;  but  Wilmot,  ; 
son  of  the  retired  Chief  Justice,  was  converted,  and  gone 
over  to  the  Opposition,  on  which  his  father  would  not  see 
him.  Dundas,  the  Lord  Advocate,  made  a  very  confident 
apology  for  the  adopted  Scotch  outlaws ;  and  the  levies 
were  voted  by  223  to  130,  but  were  debated  again  the  next 
day  on  the  Report,  though  without  a  division. 

The  6th  was  memorable  for  the  chef-d'oeuvre  of  Burke's 
orations.  He  called  Burgoyne's  Talk  with  the  Indians, 
the  "  sublimity  of  bombast  absurdity,"  in  which  he  ! 
demanded  the  assistance  of  seventeen  Indian  nations,  by 
considerations  of  our  Holy  Religion,  by  regard  for  our  con- 
stitution ;  and  though  he  enjoined  them  not  to  scalp  men, 
women,  or  children  alive,  he  promised  to  pay  them  for 
any  scalps  of  the  dead,  and  required  them  to  repair  to  the 
King's  standard,  which—  —where  was  it  ?  said  Burke, — 
on  board  Lord  Dunmore's  ships,  whose  practices  with  the 
Indians  he  severely  stigmatized.  Seventeen  interpreters 
from  the  several  nations,  said  he,  could  not  have  given 
them  any  idea  of  his  reasons — but,  added  Burke,  the  invi- 
tation was  just  as  if,  at  a  riot  on  Tower  Hill,  the  keeper  of 

VOL.  II.  O 


194  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

the  wild  beasts  had  turned  them  loose,  but  adding,  "my 
gentle  lions,  my  sentimental  wolves,  my  tender-hearted 
hyenas,  go  forth,  but  take  care  not  to  hurt  men,  women, 
or  children."  He  then  grew  serious ;  and  as  the  former 
part  had  excited  the  warmest  and  most  continued  bursts  of 
laughter  even  from  Lord  North,  Rigby,  and  the  Ministers 
themselves,  so  he  drew  such  a  pathetic  picture  of  the 
cruelties  of  the  King's  army,  particularly  in  the  alleged 
case  of  a  young  woman  on  whose  ransom,  not  beauty,  they 
quarrelled,  and  murdered  her, — that  he  drew  iron  tears 
down  Barre's  cheek,  who  implored  him  to  print  his  speech, 
and  said,  with  many  invectives  against  the  Bishops,  that  it 
ought  to  be  pasted  up  on  every  church  under  their  pro- 
clamation for  the  Fast,  and  that  he  himself  would  paste  it 
upon  some.  Governor  Johnston  said  he  was  now  glad 
that  strangers  were  excluded,  as,  if  they  had  been  admitted, 
Burke's  speech  would  have  excited  them  to  tear  the  Mi- 
nisters to  pieces  as  they  went  out  of  the  House.  Rigby 
replied,  that  if  such  ideas  were  instilled,  he  would  be 
against  re-admitting  any  stranger.  The  Opposition  de- 
manded to  know  the  authors  of  employing  the  Indians, 
but  the  motion  was  rejected  by  223  to  137. 

The  same  day  Mr.  Doyley,  Secretary  to  Lord  George 
Germaine,  resigned,  professing  he  had  accepted  his  em- 
ployment from  friendship  to  the  Howes,  and  quitted  it 
because  he  could  no  longer  be  of  any  use  to  them.  This 
more  than  implied,  it  spoke,  that  Lord  George  Germaine 
was  their  enemy.  Adam,  the  nephew  of  the  Scottish  ar- 
chitect, succeeded.6  He  had  often  opposed  and  spoke 
against  Lord  North,  which  was  ascribed  to  some  Scotch 
politics.  It  now  seemed  to  be  owing  to  Lord  George's 


4  This  did  not  prove  true  ;  Mr.  De  Grey  succeeded  Mr.  Doyley. 


1778.  BOTH  HOUSES  IN  THE  COMMITTEES.  195 

instigation,  or  the  Ministers  understood  better  than  the 
generality  that  he  had  wanted  to  bully  them  into  employ- 
ing him. 

Lord  W.  Gordon  was  made  Deputy  Ranger  of  the 
Parks,  by  a  bargain  with  Captain  Shirley,  so  very  advan- 
tageous to  the  latter  that  it  was  supposed  the  Government 
really  paid  the  charge,  to  soothe  Lord  William  and  the 
Duke  his  brother  for  the  refusal  of  the  command  of  their 
new  regiment  to  the  younger. 

9th.  Both  Houses  sat  again  in  the  Committees.  On 
that  day  and  the  6th  preceding  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
produced  witnesses  to  testify  the  vast  losses  we  had  suf- 
fered, and  the  vast  decrease  of  various  articles,  which 
formerly  came  from  America.  In  the  Commons  a  Sir 
Alexander  Leith,  a  Scot,  who  had  gone  into  virulent 
Opposition  on  being  refused  to  be  sent  to  Madras,  and 
had  a  very  bad  character,  abused  Lord  George  Germaine 
in  the  grossest  terms,  and  told  him  he  was  not  fit  to  serve 
the  King.  Lord  George  answered  him  with  great  spirit 
(though  he  had  better  have  exerted  it  against  Fox),  and 
said,  that  any  man  had  a  right  to  accuse  him  in  form,  but 
no  man  should  say  such  things  to  his  face  without  a  formal 
charge  and  proofs. 

1  Ith.  An  officer  arrived  with  an  account  from  General 
Howe,  that  he  had  marched  with  10,000  men  out  of  Phi- 
ladelphia to  forage,  had  proceeded  with  7000,  and  left 
3000  in  a  fortified  camp,  and  that  as  soon  as  Howe  was 
gone,  Washington  had  attacked  the  camp ;  as  no  more  was 
owned,  and  this  not  published,  it  was  concluded  that  the 
rest  of  the  affair  was  bad. 

On  one  of  the  late  Debates,  Lord  Mansfield  went  and 
sat  by  Lord  Camden,  and  told  him  he  thought  we  were 
undone,  and  that  he  could  not  sleep  for  uneasiness.  Lord 

o  2 


196  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

Camden  replied  that  he  was  not  to  blame,  having  long 
foretold  and  done  all  he  could  to  prevent  the  mischief. 
This  puts  me  in  mind  of  a  bon  mot  that  happened  when 
I  was  a  lad  at  King's  College,  Cambridge.  One  Sunday 
morning  when  not  above  two  of  the  Fellows  had  been  at 
Chapel  with  the  Provost,  Dr.  Snape,  the  latter,  at  evening 
service,  said  to  Dr.  Wilmot,  the  Vice-Provost,  a  man  of  wit, 
who  wrote  on  the  English  particles,  "Upon  my  word,  Mr- 
Vice-Provost,  there  was  a  scandalous  appearance  at  Chapel 
this  morning  !  "  "  Why  do  you  apply  to  me  ?  "  said 
Wilmot;  "  I  did  not  contribute  to  make  it."  Lord  Mans- 
field at  this  time  went  to  visit  Lord  Temple,  and  wept 
on  the  present  calamities.  Lord  Chatham  said  he  had 
heard  of  five  places  where  Lord  Mansfield  had  been 
crying. 

Lord  Mansfield  told  Lord  Camden  he  thought  it  a  time 
for  all  men  to  join  for  the  common  cause.  Lord  Camden 
did  not  think  he  ought  to  join  with  the  author  of  all  the 
mischief,  made  little  or  no  answer,  and  quitted  him. 
The  chief  cause  of  Lord  Mansfield's  terror  was,  that  the 
Ministers  probably  knew  that  France  had  signed,  as  she 
actually  had,  a  treaty  with  the  Americans,  which  France 
intended  to  declare  to  all  Europe  by  a  Manifesto,  and 
Spain  was  to  accede  as  soon  as  their  ships  were  arrived. 
A  strong  presumptive  proof  that  Lord  Mansfield  was 
author  of  the  late  measures  was  this.  The  Boston  Port 
Bill  had  met  with  such  feeble  opposition  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  that  Lord  Camden  had  designed  only  to  try 
to  correct  some  of  the  most  exceptionable  clauses  in  the 
Committee.  But  on  the  first  or  second  reading  of  the 
Bill,  I  forget  which,  Lord  Mansfield  told  the  Lords  that 
it  was  only  one  of  several  measures  that  were  to  follow; 
and  that  no  Lord  must  consider  it  as  a  single  Act,  but  as 


1778.  DECEIT  OF  LORD  MANSFIELD.  197 

part  of  a  system.  This  declaration  struck  Lord  Camden  so 
much  that  he  rose  and  took  notice  of  it.  Lord  Mansfield, 
alarmed,  said  he  was  not  privy  to  the  plan,  but  spoke  at 
random  what  he  imagined.  This  was  a  direct  contradiction 
of  what  he  had  just  said,  nor  could  be  believed.  In  the 
late  conversation  I  have  mentioned  with  Lord  Camden, 
Lord  Mansfield  disclaimed  being  adviser  of  the  late  mea- 
sures— equally  credible  !  His  famous  speech  of  the  Ru- 
bicon proved  he  had  advised  in  public,  as  his  Boston 
Port  Speech  did  that  he  advised  in  the  Cabinet.  His 
never  placing  his  money  in  the  funds,  asserting  they  were  j 
not  secure,  being  coupled  with  the  ruin  he  has  occasioned, 
may  make  him  even  suspected  of  designing  to  blow  them 
up.  An  old  story  was  revived  at  this  time,  which  was 
very  true.  In  the  Rebellion,  Dr.  Gaily,  minister  of 
his  parish,  went  to  him,  on  his  rounds,  with  the  book  of 
subscriptions  for  raising  forces.  Lord  Mansfield  refused  to 
subscribe ;  but  as  soon  as  the  rebels  retreated  from  Derby, 
Lord  Mansfield  sent  for  the  book ;  and  the  parish  officer 
not  being  at  home,  Lord  Mansfield  had  his  bureau  broken 
open  and  his  subscription  entered  into  it. 

On  the  10/A  the  Ministers  apprehending  a  strong 
motion  the  next  day  from  Charles  Fox,  and  alarmed  at 
the  late  increase  of  the  minority,  issued  summonses  from 
the  Treasury  uncommonly  urgent  to  press  all  their  friends 
to  attend,  and  forced  down  everybody  they  could,  even 
the  sick,  to  attend.  Charles  Fox  did  carry  a  string  of 
twelve  motions.  The  first,  which  was  debated  till  night, 
was  for  a  regular  and  general  state  of  the  army,  seconded 
by  George  Grenville. 

G.  Grenville  spoke  well,  yet  mixed  absurdities.  He 
declared  he  renounced  most  of  his  (father's)  opinions 


198  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

about  America,  and  asked  why  the  man  (describing  Lord 
Chatham)  who  had  made  England  so  victorious,  great,  and 
flourishing,  was  not  recalled ;  yet  Grenville's  father  had 
been  at  personal  enmity  with  Lord  Chatham,  and  they  had 
never  been  sincerely  reconciled.  Lord  Temple,  Grenville's 
uncle,  and  with  whom  he  lived  in  the  same  house,  had 
never  given  up  the  American  system  of  Grenville,  senior, 
and  had  last  year  basely  entrapped  and  sacrificed  John 
the  Painter.  The  younger  George  Grenville  had  just 
attached  himself  to  Lord  Rockingham,  who  had  just 
quarrelled  with  Lord  Chatham,  and  yet  he  was  the  last 
that  Grenville  recommended  for  Minister.  Old  Lord 
Nugent,  Grenville's  father-in-law,  answered  his  son-in-law, 
to  justify  himself  to  the  Court  from  being  privy  to  the 
latter's  politics,  which  would  have  been  suspicious  in 
anybody  less  interested  :  Lord  Nugent  was  capable  of  such 
duplicity,  but  could  have  no  interest  in  joining  with  his 
son-in-law. 

The  Debate  was  a  heavy  one,  and  the  motion  was  re- 
jected by  263  to  149.  The  same  day  Lord  North  notified 
his  intention  of  producing  his  conciliatory  plan,  that  he 
had  promised  before  the  holidays,  on  the  following  Tues- 
day, the  17th. 

The  same  day  Lord  Effingham  moved  the  Lords  for 
a  paper  relative  to  General  Burgoyne's  expedition,  and 
for  copies  of  letters  passed  between  the  Generals  Carleton, 
Burgoyne,  and  Philips  on  the  same  affair.  These  the 
Ministers  refused  (see  the  'London  Chronicle'  of  February 
12),  but  Lord  Gower  hinting  that  the  necessary  parts 
might  be  given,  the  motion  was  withdrawn.  The  Com- 
mittee was  then  resumed  ;  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond  an- 
nounced having  ten  resolutions  to  move,  drawn  from  the 


1778.  THE  COMMITTEE  RESUMED.  199 

evidence  given  at  their  bar,  and  he  opened  the  first.    Lord 
Sandwich  owned  he  had  all  along  dreaded  this  inquiry,  as 
it  would  lay  open  the  difficulties  and  embarrassments  under 
which   he   owned    the   country   lay   (and   probably  Lord 
North's  conciliatory  plan  was  to  be  brought  partly  to  get 
rid  of  the  inquiry,  as  unnecessary  or  improper  during  a 
treaty ;  another  reason,  to  get  back  the  votes  they  had 
lost,  as  the  most  conscientious  would  be  glad  of  peace  :  but 
this  would  be  a  palty  shift  and   delay,  if  the  Americans 
would  not  treat.    But  then  the  Ministers  hoped  the  country 
would  be  more  ready  to  support  the  war,  when  they  should 
plead  the  Colonies  were  irrecoverable  :  nor  would  this  help 
the  re-conquest,  as  the  Americans  would  not  refuse  to  treat 
but  on   finding    it  impossible   for   us  to    conquer   them. 
However,  the  Ministers  cared  more  for  keeping  their  places 
than  for  recovering  America,  and  their  whole  dependence 
now  was  on   keeping  up  and  increasing  the  popularity 
of  the  war).     The  Ministers  combated  the  motion,  though 
self-evident,  and  speaking  only  affirmatively  of  facts  that 
had  been   proved   as   laying   open   our  weakness,  which 
could  not  be  concealed,  as  the  facts  appeared  in  the  com- 
mon   newspapers,  and  consequently   must   be   known   in 
France.      Lord  Hilsborough  and  Lord  Lyttelton  argued 
against  the  motion  likewise ;    and  at  last  the  Court  party 
called  for  the  Chairman's  leaving  the  Chair,  which  being 
carried  by  80  to  32,  the  House  was  resumed ;  and  then  the 
previous  question  was  put  separately  on  all  the   Duke's 
questions — viz.,  that  this  question  be  now  put,  to  which  a 
negative  was   given  on  every  one ;    and  then  the  House 
was  adjourned  to  the   13th,   but  not   an  end  put  to  the 
Committee. 

I  was  told  by  good  authority  that  the  King  himself  had 
sent  one  Hutton  privately  to  Paris  (without  acquainting 


200 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


his  Ministers)  to  negotiate  with  Dr.  Franklin ;  but  the 
latter  replied  it  was  too  late.6 

The  French  officers,  both  of  sea  and  land,  were  ordered 
to  Bretagne.  The  French  Court  gave  out  that  we  meant 
to  send  a  fleet  to  burn  Brest  or  some  other  port. 

1 6th,  General  Gates's  letter  to  Lord  Thanet  laid  before 
the  House  of  Lords. 

Gates  was  the  son  of  a  housekeeper  of  the  second  Duke 
of  Leeds,  who,  marrying  a  young  husband  when  very  old, 
had  this  son  by  him.  That  Duke  of  Leeds  had  been  saved, 
when  guilty  of  a  Jacobite  plot,  by  my  father,  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  and  the  Duke  was  very  grateful,  and  took  great 
notice  of  me  when  I  was  quite  a  boy.  My  mother's 
woman  was  intimate  with  that  housekeeper,  and  thence 
I  was  godfather  to  her  son,  though  I  believe  not  then  ten 
years  old  myself.  This  godson,  Horatio  Gates,  was  pro- 
tected by  General  Cornwallis  when  Governor  of  Halifax ; 
but,  being  afterwards  disappointed  of  preferment  in  the 
V  army,  he  joined  the  Americans. 

1 7th.  (A  day  for  ever  memorable  as  one  of  the  most  igno- 
minious in  the  English  annals.)  Lord  North  opened  his 
conciliatory  plan.  Many  reasons,  some  perhaps  unknown 
to  the  public,  had  concurred  to  determine  the  Administra- 
tion to  take  this  step,  and  with  more  sincere  intentions  than 
they  had  hitherto  shown  or  felt.  The  ill  success  of  the  cam- 
paign was  the  most  glaring.  The  difficulty  of  raising  more 
money  was  no  doubt  another,  and  both  concurred  to  present 
the  third  reason,  which  probably  was  the  most  prevalent  of 
all,  the  King's  apprehensions  of  being  obliged  to  change 
his  Administration — I  do  not.  mean  his  Ministers,  but  his 


6  Franklin  had  been  previously  sus- 
pected of  indecision.  "  He  is  certainly 
a  man  of  knowledge,"  says  Hollis  of 
him  in  his  '  Memoir,'  "  he  wishes  well 


to  do  what  is  right,  loves  his  country, 
North  America,  even  to  partiality ;  and 
yet,  according  to  old  observings,  to  me 
he  ii  a  trimmer" — D. 


1778.  ENTERTAINMENT  OF  PACIFIC  MEASURES.  201 

system  of  Administration — and  the  Ministers'  fears  of 
losing  their  places.  The  Opposition,  weakly  as  it  was  con- 
ducted, had  gained  ground,  not  by  their  own  conduct,  but 
by  the  ill  success  of  the  Court  in  all  their  plans ;  and 
though  those  miscarriages  had  opened  few  eyes  in  pro- 
portion, yet  they  had  alarmed  the  most  clear-sighted — I 
mean  interested  men,  who,  concluding  that  the  inability 
and  disappointments  of  the  Ministers  would  produce  a 
change,  had  begun  to  withdraw  and  conjecture  into  what 
hands  power  would  fall.  The  inquiries  in  both  Houses, 
which  some  at  least  of  the  Ministers  had  encouraged,  in 
hopes  of  turning  the  storm  from  themselves  to  the  Gene- 
rals, had  laid  open  such  errors,  profusion,  misconduct,  and 
misfortunes,  chiefly  detected  by  the  indefatigable  industry, 
spirit,  integrity,  and  perseverance  of  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond, who,  from  a  fund  of  knowledge  and  practice  of 
speaking,  was  become  a  most  clear  and  ready  orator,  that 
the  Court  had  found  great  desertion  was  spreading  amongst 
its  standing  army  of  mercenaries  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons. Lord  Sandwich  and  Lord  Suffolk — the  first  quick- 
sighted,  the  other  proud  and  accustomed  to  an  obedient 
majority — had  betrayed  great  dislike  of  the  inquiries. 
Overtures  of  peace  might  stifle  those  inquiries,  and  would 
secure  the  most  candid,  who  conscientiously  wished  for  a 
pacification.  The  Opposition  could  not  with  decency  or 
character  oppose  pacific  measures,  and  the  Court  hoped 
that  a  rejection  of  the  offered  terms  would  incense  even  the 
most  peaceable,  when  the  Americans  should  be  reckoned 
unreasonable  and  intractable ;  and  it  further  hoped  that 
supplies  of  men  and  money  would  be  liberally  accorded, 
when  neither  the  obstinacy  of  the  King  or  his  Ministers 
could  be  objected.  All  these  reasons  probably  concurred 
to  bring  forwards  a  plan  of  peace ;  and  the  difficulty 


202  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

of  raising  money  (500,000£.  of  the  last  year's  subscription 
lying  still  unpurchased  in  the  Bank)  easily  reconciled 
Lord  North  to  a  plan  that  he  hoped,  by  holding  out  peace, 
would  raise  the  Stocks,  though  it  did  not  succeed  in  that 
light ;  for  the  discovery  of  a  treaty  between  France  and 
the  Americans,  the  great  probability  of  a  French  war 
springing  out  of  that  alliance,  and  the  movements  of  French 
troops  towards  the  coast,  spread  an  alarm  that  overba- 
lanced all  the  comfortable  prospect  of  peace.  In  fact,  so 
many  substantial  reasons  were  not  necessary  to  decide 
Lord  North.  The  abject  pliancy  of  his  complaisance,  and 
his  shameless  tergiversation,  embraced  any  measure  that  was 
dictated  to  him  from  Court.  His  indolent  and  frank  insen- 
sibility reconciled  him  to  anything.  He  never  disguised 
his  sentiments  when  they  did  not  coincide  with  the  opera- 
tions committed  to  his  execution,  nor  felt  shame  at  con- 
tradicting those  sentiments.  His  impudence  was  his  only 
'  honesty,  and  the  want  of  hypocrisy  his  only  innocence. 
Yet  he  was  not  sincere ;  for  when  the  professions  of 
the  Court  concealed  more  than  they  avowed,  Lord  North 
could  assume  the  colour  of  the  moment,  and,  by  a  blunt 
avowal  of  his  own  contradiction  of  himself,  he  seemed  to  be 
in  earnest  in  the  incoherent  part  he  adopted.  This  ap- 
peared in  his  conduct  on  this  occasion.  Not  blushing 
at  condemning  all  he  had  been  doing  for  four  years,  as  he 
seemed  to  do  by  offering  the  largest  terms  to  America, 
it  was  impossible  not  to  believe  that  he  found  peace  abso- 
lutely essential ;  and  yet  the  bills  when  brought  in  were  so 
delusive  that  there  was  great  reason  to  doubt  whether  the 
Court  was  sincere  or  not  in  their  hopes  of  pacification. 
As  I  write  before  those  views  can  be  penetrated,  I  must 
speak  with  doubt  and  uncertainty.  The  true  secret  was 
certainly  in  few  hands,  as  the  detail  I  shall  give  will 
prove. 


1778.         THE  KING'S  DESI11E  TO  DISPOSE  OF  PLACES.          203 

Instances  of  the  King's  loving  to  assume  the  donation 
of  all  places  though  not  in  his  gift,  and  of  his  resent- 
ment to  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  Old  Knapton,  Surveyor  of 
the  King's  Pictures,  was  dying  this  winter.  Lord  Hert- 
ford, Lord  Chamberlain,  had  promised  the  reversion  to 
Paul  Sandby,  at  the  Duke  of  Grafton's  request,  when  First 
Lord  of  the  Treasury.  Lord  Hertford  was  now  reminded 
of  that  promise,  but  said  he  must  speak  to  the  King,  who 
wished  that  Dalton,  his  favourite  artist,  should  have  it; 
and  he  said  to  Lord  Hertford,  "  If  the  Duke  of  Grafton 
promised  it  to  Sandby,  he  shall  not  have  it ;  /  command 
you  to  give  it  to  Dalton." 

Lord  Orford  being  mad,  Mr.  Shirley,  Deputy  Ranger  of 
the  Parks,  made  an  agreement  with  Lord  W  illiam  Gordon 
to  cede  it  to  him,  and  the  latter  proposed  it  to  Lord  North, 
who  spoke  to  the  King,  though  the  King  had  nothing  to  do 
with  it,  for  the  Ranger  not  only  appoints  his  Deputy, 
but  pays  him  his  salary.  The  King  ordered  Lord  William 
should  have  it. 

'The  great  source  of  mystery  and  insincerity  lay  in  the 
King's  own  breast.  Either  the  private  Junto  had  wrought  ' 
him  up  to  a  high  pitch  of  animosity  against  the  Ameri- 
cans, or,  to  excuse  themselves,  had  ascribed  it  to  him. 
Yet  obstinacy,  as  far  as  it  implies  firmness,  was  by  no 
means  his  character.  He  had  no  courage,  but  he  had  infi- 
nite hypocrisy.  He  could  and  did  adhere  unalterably  to  ( 
his  views,  but  he  could  waive  them  with  the  utmost  faci- 
lity for  a  time.  Those  views  were  to  extend  his  preroga- 
tive as  far  as  possible  on  all  occasions,  great  or  small ;  and, 
being  a  little  genius,  he  conceived,  and  consequently  was 
most  earnest  about,  the  smaller,  and  to  draw  all  attach- 
ment to  his  own  person.  He  was  as  much  or  more 
pleased  at  gaining  any  advantage  over  his  Ministers  and 


204 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


servants  as  over  his  opponents  and  enemies.  Thus  he 
never  was  so  content  with  any  Ministers  as  with  the  Duke 
of  Grafton  and  Lord  North,  whose  indolence  and  aversion 
to  business  left  him  sole  arbiter  of  all  favours ;  nor  could 
'  he  ever  pardon  the  desertion  of  the  former,  though  it 
supplied  him  with  the  latter.\ 

/That  the  King's  fears  surmounted  his  obstinacy  on  the 
present  offers  of  peace  was  evident  for  six  weeks  before  the 
famous  17th  of  February.  He  had  himself  privately 
despatched  to  Paris  one  Hutton,  an  adventurer,7  formerly 
a  bookseller  and  then  a  Moravian,  to  negotiate  with  Dr. 
Franklin  himself.8  Hutton,  with  tears,  flung  himself  on 
Franklin's  neck,  and  beseeched  him  to  give  both  countries 


7  This  is  seemingly  confirmed  in 
Benham's  recently  published  '  Life  of 
Hutton '  (pp.  511-529).  It  there  appears 
that  Hutton,  besides  laudably  providing 
for  the  welfare  of  his  Moravian  brethren 
in  America,  or  on  the  seas,  was  in  com- 
munication with  Franklin,  on  the  sub- 
ject of  a  reconciliation  between  Eng- 
land and  her  Transatlantic  colony,  on  a 
footing  of  something  just  "  short  of  ab- 
solute independency."  He  intimated  that 
the  English  nation  could  not  be  brought 
to  assent  to  complete  emancipation. 
"  Direct  to  me,"  he  writes  to  Franklin 
(Jan.  1778),  "  Queen's  Koad,  Pimlico, 
Westminster,  under  cover  to  M.  Court 
de  Gebelin,  Kue  Pompee,  Paris,  who 
will  put  a  cover  over  it,  and  my  friend 
Mr.  Fullerton  will,  without  examina- 
tion, forward  it  safe  to  me  in  the 
packet  of  Lord  Mansfield."  Of  the 
pious  old  bookseller's  interview  with 
the  King,  Benham  gives  at  least  one 
curious  illustration.  "  It  is  said  of 
Hutton  that  at  the  end  of  this  year 
(1779)  he  closed  his  visits  to  the  palace, 
in  consequence  of  the  command  of  the 
fleet  having  been  given  by  the  King  to 
the  circumnavigator  Rodney,  whoso 
name  Hutton  had  mentioned  to  his 
Majesty  shortly  before,  as  an  officer 
every  way  suitable  for  such  a  dis- 
tinguished post  during  the  present 
emergency  of  the  country.  Hutton,  on 


hearing  the  effect  of  his  recommenda- 
tion, felt  that  he  had  made  a  mistake 
in  presuming  to  advise  the  sovereign, 
and  therefore  at  once  and  for  ever 
withdrew  himself  from  the  possibility 
of  committing  a  like  indiscretion." 
Franklin  in  a  letter  to  Davis  Hartley 
(1778),  alluding  to  Button's  communi- 
cation with  him  at  Passy,  says,  "  He  is 
often  at  the  Queen's  palace  (Kew),  and 
is  sometimes  spoken  to  by  the  King. 
He  pretended  to  no  commission,  but 
urged  me  much  to  propose  some  terms 
of  peace,  which  I  avoided."  Let  me 
add  that  Hutton  was  no  adventurer,  as 
his  biographer  has  shown ;  at  Court  he 
was  no  flatterer,  and  the  worst  thing  - 
that  George  Stevens  could  say  of  him 
was  that  he  conversed  on  religious  sub- 
jects witli  his  customers,  and  refused  to  -. 
sell  Tom  Browne's  works,  or  Clarke's 
'  Essay  on  the  Trinity.' — D. 

8  Lord  Mansfield  had  another  agent 
in  France,  one  Forth,  an  Irishman, 
who  frequently  passed  by  Brighthelms- 
stone.  It  is  probable,  that  besides  the 
love  of  secret  intrigues,  he  wished  to 
negotiate  without  the  privity  of  his 
nephew,  Lord  Stormont,  that  if  the 
Administration  should  bo  changed, 
nothing  beyond  the  common  course  of 
business  might  be  brought  home  to  his 
nephew. 


1778.     SHAMELESS  CONDUCT  OF  THE  ADMINISTRATION.      205 

peace.  The  politic  philosopher  replied  coolly,  yet  cer- 
tainly not  without  feeling  the  triumphant  dignity  of  having 
humbled  a  haughty  Monarch,  "It  was  too  late."  It  was. 
The  treaty  between  France  and  America  was  signed ;  but 
it  had  not  been  so  when,  before  Christmas,  the  Opposition 
had  implored  the  Ministers  to  let  the  Parliament  continue 
sitting — a  crime  for  ever  to  be  remembered;  nay,  on  the 
very  day  of  that  adjournment — on  the  very  day  on  which 
Lord  North  had  promised  he  would  bring  a  conciliatory 
plan,  Lord  Jersey  and  Mr.  Hopkins  had  been  turned  out 
for  having  constantly  voted  against  the  war  and  for  peace. 
But  this  was  trifling  compared  with  their  perseverance  in  a 
war  that  was  proved,  by  the  inquiries  and  by  the  Duke  of 
Richmond's  motion,  to  have  cost  this  country  about  twenty 
thousand  lives  (and  probably  as  many  to  America)  and 
above  thirty-two  millions !  \ 

Disappointed,  defeated,  disgraced,  alarmed,  but  still 
depending  on  a  majority  in  both  Houses,  and  on  the 
blindness  and  indifference  of  the  nation,  the  Administration 
ventured  on  taking  the  very  opposite  part  to  all  they  had 
been  doing ;  and  as  if  there  was  no  shame  but  in  losing  their 
places,  presumed  to  tell  the  three  Kingdoms  that  they 
must  abandon  all  the  high  views  with  which  they  had  been 
lulled,  and  must  stoop  to  beg  peace  of  America  at  any  rate. 
This  was  the  substance  of  Lord  North's  opening  his  plan, 
which  the  very  night  before  had  not  been  fixed,  or  not 
fully  opened  to  a  meeting  of  the  principal  Members  at  Lord 
North's — yet  even  then  it  had  given  disgust.  The 
Attorney-General  Thurlow  had  protested  he  would  take 
no  part  in  it — and  did  at  last  take  but  a  very  cold  one. 
Lord  North,  who  seldom9  shone  when  he  could  not  jest, 


9  I  found  this  very  applicable  motto  I  he  often  slept  in  the  House  of  Com- 
for  him,  "  Aut  dormitabo,  aut  ridebo :''  |  mons. 


206  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

made  a  sorry  figure  except  in  assurance.  He  declared  he 
would  treat  with  the  Congress,  with  anybody — would  even 
allow  the  independence  of  the  Colonies — not  verbally,  yet 
virtually.  He  owned  all  his  disappointments — yet  recurred 
to  his  usual  defence,  that  every  act  had  been  the  Act  of 
the  Parliament.  All  the  comfort  he  gave  the  country 
gentlemen  was  some  hopes  that  America  might  be  per- 
suaded to  contribute  some  pecuniary  assistance.  He 
allowed  till  the  following  June  twelvemonth  for  the 
duration  of  the  negotiation.  The  other  parts  of  his  speech, 
of  which  this  was  the  pith,  will  be  detailed  enough  in  other 
publications.1 

The  astonishment  of  great  part  of  the  House  at  such 
extensive  offers  precluded  all  expression.  The  Opposition 
felt  honestly  that  they  could  not  decently  disapprove  a 
pacification  they  had  so  much  recommended ;  and  during 
the  course  of  the  bill  the  Ministers  had  the  satisfaction  of 
finding  this  integrity  operate  on  some  of  the  most  upright 
but  least  clear-sighted,  as  Lord  George  Cavendish  and 
Frederick  Montague  pressed  the  Ministers  not  to  lose  a 
moment  in  passing  the  bills — an  instance  of  more  virtue 
than  judgment ;  for  the  duplicity  of  the  Court  ought  to 
have  made  them  suspect  fraud,  and  to  weigh  every  tittle 
of  bills  which  were  likely  to  be  insidious,  and  the  more 
concise  the  more  capable  of  sinister  interpretations.  The 
Tories,  who  could  not  like  concessions  so  inadequate  to 
their  hopes,  and  so  repugnant  to  their  high-flown  attachment 
to  the  Prerogative,  seeing  the  intemperate  zeal  of  the  Oppo- 
sition, were  ashamed  to  mark  themselves  as  an  obstinate 
and  weak  party,  which  they  would  be  if  they  separated 
from  the  Court  when  approved  by  the  Opposition.  Burke 


J  Seo  the  •  London  Chronicle  '  of  Feb.  21,  1778. 


1778.  LORD  NORTH  DISCONCERTED.  207 

and  Charles  Fox  yielded  to  and  seconded  the  torrent ;  but 
the  latter  threw  a  bomb,  that  much  disconcerted  though 
it  did  not  disappoint  the  Minister.  My  cousin  Thomas 
Walpole  had  acquainted  me  that  the  treaty  with  France 
was  signed.  We  agreed  to  inform  Charles  Fox ;  but  as 
we  both  distrusted  Burke,  and  feared  the  childish  fluc- 
tuations of  Lord  Rockingham,  we  determined  that  Fox 
should  know  nothing  of  the  secret  till  an  hour  or  two 
before  the  House  met.  Accordingly,  T.  Walpole  communi- 
cated the  notice  of  the  treaty  to  the  Duke  of  Grafton  on 
the  16th,  and  engaged  him  to  acquaint  Charles  Fox,  but 
just  before  the  House  should  meet  the  next  day.  This 
was  done  most  exactly,  and  Burke  knew  nothing  of  the 
matter  till  he  came  into  the  House. 

As  soon  as  Lord  North  had  opened  his  two  bills,  Charles 
Fox  rose,  and  after  pluming  himself  on  having  sat  there 
till  he  had  brought  the  noble  Lord  to  concur  in  sentiments 
with  him  and  his  friends,  he  astonished  his  Lordship  with 
asking  him  whether  a  commercial  treaty  with  France  had 
not  been  signed  by  the  American  agents  at  Paris  within 
the  last  ten  days !  If  so,  said  he,  the  Administration  is 
beaten  by  ten  days — a  situation  so  threatening,  that  in 
such  a  time  of  danger  the  whole  House  must  concur  with 
the  propositions,  though  probably  now  they  would  have  no 
effect.  Lord  North  was  thunderstruck,  and  would  not 
rise.  Thomas  Pitt  declared  he  had  absented  himself  of 
late,  as  not  knowing  what  part  to  take,  but  now  gladly 
embraced  that  of  peace.  Adam  as  usual  disapproved  them. 
Governor  Johnston  approved  them,  but  called  on  Sir 
William  Gordon,  the  late  Resident  at  Brussels,  who  had 
been  in  America,  to  testify  that  the  Americans  had  not 
formerly  thought  of  making  themselves  independent.  Sir 
William,  a  man  of  a  very  blundering  head,  thus  unexpect- 


208  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

edly  called  on,  had  one  of  those  momentary  inspirations 
which  sometimes  light  on  idiots,  and  without  answering 
satisfactorily  for  Johnston,  ridiculed  him  with  much 
humour,  wondering  that  the  Governor,  who  so  boldly  at- 
tacked the  highest  personages,  should  descend  to  him — 
but,  said  he,  he  is  like  a  sportsman,  who  returning  from 
killing  pheasants,  discharges  his  gun,  as  he  comes  home, 
at  the  sparrows  on  the  side  of  a  penthouse. 

George  Grenville,  with  more  sagacity  than  the  rest, 
showed  he  felt  the  ignominious  posture  of  his  country  in 
such  humiliating  concessions.  He  spoke  with  energy  and 
weight,  said  he  had  been  deceived  by  Administration, 
and  the  country  had  been  so  too.  He  would  worship  any 
man  as  the  saviour  of  his  country  who  could  make  peace ; 
but  he  did  not  think  these  propositions  would  have  that 
effect.  He  had  seen  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  Dr. 
Franklin,  which  asserted  the  treaty  as  a  fact: — what 
then  would  be  our  situation  with  France?  were  these 
our  triumphs  ? — this  the  dignity  of  Parliament  ?  He  felt 
the  humiliating  blush  that  must  spread  the  cheek  of  his 
Sovereign,  when  he  should  be  called  to  give  his  assent  to 
these  bills.  He  thought  the  Parliament  had  not  been  to 
bend,  but  to  assert. — Gilbert,  an  agent  of  Lord  Gower,  pro- 
posed rather  to  tax  placemen  to  carry  on  the  war.  Burke 
maintained  that  Lord  North  had  taken  precisely  the  plan 
that  he  (Burke)  had  offered  two  years  before ;  and  he 
called  on  his  Lordship  to  answer  to  the  fact  of  the  treaty. 
Still  the  Minister  was  silent;  till  Sir  George  Saville  rose 
and  told  him  it  would  be  criminal  to  withhold  a  reply,  and 
a  matter  of  impeachment,  and  ended  with  crying,  an 
answer  !  an  answer !  an  answer !  Lord  North,  thus  forced 
up,  owned  he  had  heard  the  report  of  a  treaty,  but  desired 
to  give  no  answer  to  the  House  at  that  moment.  He  had 


1778.          DEBASEMENT  OF  THE  KING  AND  MINISTRY.          209 

no  official  intelligence  on  that  subject.  The  report  might  be 
vague.  Some  time  ago  the  Ministers  of  France  had  denied 
it; — such  evasive  answers  rather  convinced  everybody  of 
the  truth.  (Three  days  after  this,  Lord  Mansfield,  at 
Lady  Gower's,  said  openly,  that  the  Ministers  did  not 
speak  truth  if  they  denied  the  treaty,  for  it  was  cer- 
tainly signed !)  Leave  was  then  given,  nemine  contradi- 
cente,  for  the  two  Bills  to  be  brought  in. 

Such  an  avowal,  in  effect,  of  criminality,  ignorance,  and 
incapacity  in  the  Ministers  had  never  been  equalled — nor, 
since  King  John  surrendered  his  Crown  at  the  Nuncio's 
feet,  could  a  more  ignominious  instance  of  the  debasement 
of  a  great  monarch  be  quoted.  The  Ministers  had  stig- 
matized the  whole  body  of  colonists  as  cowards,  and 
boasted  they  could  traverse  the  whole  continent  of  America 
with  5000  men ;  and  in  four  years  stooped  to  offer  terms 
infinitely  beyond  what  would  have  glutted  the  most  san- 
guine or  presumptuous  wishes  of  the  insurgents  but  two  years 
ago  !  No  matter  whether  sincere  their  offers  or  not :  if  in- 
sincere, it  was  but  another  infamy.  But  how  could  England 
but  fall  into  disgrace  and  contempt,  when  Ministers,  by 
turns  so  audacious,  so  criminal,  and  so  mean,  remained  yet 
undisturbed  in  their  posts  ?  Their  cruelty,  injustice,  de- 
feats, had  revolted  few.  Few  showed  either  joy  or  indig- 
nation at  their  recantation.2  The  Scots  at  first  inveighed 
against  the  pacific  spirit ;  but  soon  grew  so  silent,  that  no 
doubt  they  were  let  into  the  secret  of  the  insincerity  of  the 
Court — and  both  the  King  and  the  Scots  enjoyed  any 
ignominy  that  fell  on  the  Parliament.X 

The  same  day  a  remonstrance  from  the  county  of  Nor- 
folk against  the  war,  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Windham  ofFelbry? 


*  Lord  Townshend  was  so  offended 
at  the  plan  of  peace,  that  he  said  he 

VOL.  II. 


concluded  it  would  be  thrown  out  by 
the  House  of  Lords. 


210 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


and  signed  by  about  5000  persons,  was  presented  to  the 
House  of  Commons. 

A  glaring  evidence  of  the  insincerity  of  the  Court  broke 
out  three  days  after  the  conciliatory  plan  was  proposed  by 
Lord  North,  and  seemed  to  indicate  that  the  principal 
view  had  been  to  dip  the  nation  in  an  engagement  of  sup- 
porting the  war,  if  the  Americans  should  prove  deaf  to  re- 
;  conciliation.3  A  meeting  was  summoned  by  some  unknown 
persons,  at  the  King's  Arms  Tavern,  and  one  Bourne/  a 
low  tool,  proposed  to  establish  a  Committee  of  Peace,  who 
were  to  agree  to  many  soothing  propositions,  and  most 
extraordinary  measures  for  that  purpose,  with  a  test  the 
assembly  was  to  subscribe,  which  concluded  with  the  real 
meaning,  that  if  peace  did  not  take  place,  the  subscribers 
promised  to  pay  certain  sums  to  the  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer^ or  Receiver  of  the  Land-Tax  of  the  County,  for 
carrying  on  the  War.  This  idea  could  not  have  originated 
out  of  Lord  North's  proposal,  for  thousands  of  books  had 
been  printed  to  disperse  all  over  England,  with  a  fine 
allegoric  print,  and  this  motto,  lBlessed  are  the  Peace- 
makers I '  But  this  hopeful  project  was  blown  up  by  Mr. 
Baker,  the  Member  of  Parliament,  and  Alderman  Saw- 
bridge  ;  they  exposed  the  insidious  plan,  the  assembly  was 
dispersed,  and  another  called,  at  which  Sawbridge  took 
the  chair,  and  they  voted  resolutions  very  far  from  agree- 
afyle  to  the  Administration. 

/  When  the  pacific  Bills  were  brought  in,  nothing  could 
be  more  abject  than  the  style,  nothing  more  delusive  than 
the  spirit.  Instead  of  an  honest  confession  of  errors,  the 


8  One  of  the  clauses  specified  that 
there  should  be  no  retrospect :  a  saving 
clause  for  the  Ministers.  Lord  Mans- 
field was  suspected  of  being  concerned 
in  this  project.  Bourne  was  proved 


to  have  been  with  Robinson,  one  of  the 
Secretaries  of  the  Treasury,  the  day  be- 
fore the  proposed  meeting. 

4  This  Bourne  had  a  handsome  wife, 
who  was  Mistress  to  Lord  Onslow. 


1778.  READING  OF  THE  TWO  BILLS.  211 

language  of  the  Bills  seemed  to  speak  as  if  the  Americans 
were  only  a  dissatisfied  people,  a  little  misguided,  but 
whom  His  Majesty  was  willing  to  humour  by  indulgence 
and  condescension.  Rebellion  was  out  of  the  question ; 
but  all  was  to  be  left  to  the  commissioned  negotiators. 
The  offensive  Acts  were  not  to  be  repealed,  but  might  < 
be,  if  necessary  to  peace.  Not  a  word  was  said  of  the 
Quebec  Bill,  which  no  doubt  the  King  and  Lord  Mans- 
field hoped  to  preserve,  as  it  restored  Popery,  abolished 
Juries,  and  established  Military  Law :  yet,  were  the 
Americans  inclined  to  treat,  they  could  demand  nothing 
more  earnestly  than  the  abolition  of  that  Bill.  As  they 
were  sectaries,  Popery  was  more  obnoxious  than  the 
Church  of  England — and  as  the  removal  of  the  French 
from  Canada  had  left  them  free  to  assert  their  liberties, 
they  could  never  admit  of  a  Popish  arbitrary  army  in  their 
neighbourhood  ready  to  be  poured  upon  them  as  soon  as 
the  King  should  be  disposed,  or  strong  enough  to  reassert 
his  empire  over  America. 

The  two  Bills — one  to  enable  the  King  to  appoint  com- 
missioners to  treat  of  peace,  the  other  to  declare  the  in- 
tention of  Parliament  not  to  exercise  the  right  of  taxing 
the  Americans — were  read  twice  on  the  19th.\  The  Lord 
Advocate  of  Scotland,  Dundas,  made  a  strong  and  sen- 
sible speech  against  them,  declaring  he  had  always  been 
for  upholding  the  supremacy  over  America.  He  pre- 
tended to  excuse  Lord  North,  but  his  apology  was  a 
bitter  satire,  for  he  said  no  man  of  the  rank,  fortune,  and 
independence  of  Lord  North  could  stoop  to  contradict  all 
his  words  and  actions  from  any  motive — but  conviction. 
There  were  many  other  speeches,  but  no  formal  opposi- 
tion or  division.  Wedderburn  took  most  part,  Lord 
George  Germaine  none  at  all. 

p  2 


212  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

The  House  of  Lords,  in  the  meantime,  were  not  idle, 
the  Duke  of  Richmond  pushing  on  the  inquiries  with  great 
vigour ;  and  though  his  motions  were  all  rejected  by  the 
majority,  they  were  printed  in  the  newspapers,  and  laid 
open  an  astonishing  scene  of  extravagance  and  losses.  In 
these  debates  Augustus,  Earl  of  Bristol,  who  had  been  dis- 
gusted by  his  friend  Lord  Sandwich,  took  a  strong  part 
against  the  conduct  of  the  Admiralty,  but  was  far  from 
having  abilities  to  do  them  any  hurt.  When  the  Duke  of 
Richmond  had  gone  through  the  civil  and  military  part  of 
the  inquiries,  he  ceded  the  naval  part  to  the  Duke  of 
Bolton,  who  had  been  a  seaman  like  Lord  Bristol,  and  was 
by  no  means  a  more  clear-headed  one.  In  the  House  of 
Commons,  Conolly,  on  the  subject  of  the  inquiries,  called 
on  Lord  George  Germaine  to  know  what  reasons  General 
Howe  had  assigned  for  desiring  his  recall.  The  question 
was  certainly  premature  at  least,  and  Lord  George  refused 
to  answer  it.  Conolly  was  an  honest,  though  absurd, 
Irishman,  of  great  property  and  weight  in  that  country, 
where  he  often  supported  the  Government,  but  rarely 
in  this.  Sir  William  Howe  had  married  one  of  his 
sisters. 

The  House  of  Commons  sat  late  several  times  on  the 
Conciliatory  Bills,  but  without  any  material  debates  or 
events. 

On  the  23rd  the  Opposition  contended  for  the  Commis- 
sioners being  named,  urging  the  hardship  it  would  be 
on  them,  if  any  of  them  were  appointed.  And  the  Minis- 
ters were  shrewdly  asked  whether,  if  the  Americans  should 
demand  the  heads  of  some  of  the  Ministers,  the  Commis- 
sioners would  be  empowered  to  promise  them  !  Mr.  Powis, 
one  of  the  minority,  moved  for  a  repeal  of  the  Tea  Act, 
which  was  granted,  and  the  dereliction  of  taxes  was  ex- 


1778.  FREDERICK  EARL  OF  CARLISLE.  213 

tended  to  the  West  India  Islands.  There  was  but  one 
division  before  the  report  of  181  to  108 — many  of  the 
Court  and  many  of  the  Opposition  absented  themselves, 
equally  disliking  the  measure.  Lord  Bulkeley,  Burrel, 
and  a  few  others  quitted  the  majority.  The  Opposition 
demanded,  as  it  was  a  Parliamentary  War,  and  the  supre- 
macy of  Parliament  in  question,  that  Parliament  should 
name  the  Commissioners ;  but  the  House  of  Commons,  as 
usual,  ceded  that  right  to  the  King. 

In  the  mean  time  His  Majesty  named  Frederick  Earl 
of  Carlisle5  as  one  of  the  Commissioners,  a  choice  univer- 
sally ridiculed,  particularly  by  Burke  and  Governor  John- 
ston in  the  House.  Lord  Carlisle  was  a  young  man  of 
pleasure  and  fashion,  fond  of  dress  and  gaming,  by  which 
he  had  greatly  hurt  his  fortune,  was  totally  unacquainted 
with  business,  and  though  not  void  of  ambition,  had  but 
moderate  parts,  and  less  application. 

During  the  course  of  these  Bills,  the  Lord  Chancellor 
Bathurst  wrote  to  the  Ministers  of  the  Cabinet,  desiring 
not  to  be  summoned  to  their  councils ;  his  motive  was, 
that  of  late  he  had  been  little  consulted  or  entrusted  with 
the  measures  in  agitation  ;  yet  so  timid  was  the  Court  or 
so  unwilling  the  King  to  give  the  Seals  to  Thurlow,  pre- 
ferably to  Wedderburn,  whom  the  unprosperous  state  of 
affairs  made  it  imprudent  to  exalt,  that  Lord  Suffolk  was 
sent  to  soothe  and  reconcile  the  poor  creature  of  Chan- 
cellor; who  was  (in  the  right  to  be)  pacified. 

About  the  same  time  came  accounts  that  almost  the 
whole  of  Burgoyne's  army  had  deserted,  and  been  received 
by  the  Americans;  but  the  foreigners  they  rejected,  at 
whose  barbarities  they  were  probably  disgustedA  The 

*  Frederick,  the  fifth  earl.  He  was  I  William  fourth  Lord  Byron.  He  died 
grandson  (by  his  mother  Isabella)  of  j  in  1825,  aged  77. — D. 


214  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

Congress  had  refused  to  confirm  Gates's  terms  granted  to 
Burgoyne,  who  himself  was  said  to  be  very  ill. 

27^.  The  Fast  was  observed — a  ridiculous  solemnity, 
as  the  nation  was  to  beg  a  blessing  on  their  arms,  when 
the  war  was  at  an  end — or  at  least  suspended  for  sixteen 
months,  if  the  Americans  pleased.  One  passage  in  the 
appointed  service  was  much  remarked,  as  the  whole  nation 
seemed  at  once  converted  to  pacific  sentiments  by  Lord 
North's  proposal.  The  words  were  these,  "  Then  shall 
all  the  people  say  after  the  Minister,  '  Turn  us,  O  Lord, 
and  so  shall  we  be  turned  ! ' ' 

The  following  are  poetical  comments  on  the  Fast : — 


A  EEFLECTION  ON  THE  FAST, 

COMPOSED  WHILE  MEDITATING  ON  THE  FOLLOWING  WORDS  OF 
KING  DAVID. 

"  I  will  wash  my  hands  in  innocency ;  so  will  I  approach  thine  altar."- 
PSALM  xxvi.  v.  6. 

"  With  cruel  hearts  and  bloody  hands, 

The  Ministry  were  stain'd, 
A  Fast  was  publish'd  thro'  these  lands 

That  they  might  all  be  clean'd. 
But,  oh !  what  blunders  time  affords  ! 

Thro'  want  of  grace  and  sense, 
They  wash'd  them  in — a  form  of  words, 

Instead  of — Innocence  I  " 


ON    THE    SEVEEAL    GENERALS    TO    WHOSE    CONDUCT 
THE  AMERICAN  WARFARE  HAS  BEEN  INTRUSTED. 

"  First  General  Gage  commenc'd  the  war  in  vain ; 
Next  General  Howe  continued  the  campaign; 
Then  General  Burgoyne  took  the  field ;  and  last, 
Our  forlorn  hope  depends  on  General  Fast" 


1778. 


INEFFICIENCY  OF  THE  FLEET. 


215 


MARCH. 


2nd.  THE  Conciliatory  Bills  were  passed  by  the  House 
of  Commons.  Towards  the  end  of  the  debate  (when 
Charles  Fox  was  gone  out  of  the  House)  Lord  George 
Germaine  rose  and  said  a  few  words,  and  declared  he 
looked  upon  himself  as  responsible  for  these  pacific 
measures. 

The  same  day  the  Duke  of  Bolton  continued  the  in- 
quiries in  the  Lords,  and  brought  Lord  Sandwich  to  great 
shame,  proving  how  far  the  fleet  ready  for  sea  fell  short  of 
what  the  Earl  had  boasted.  It  appeared  that  many  of  the 
ships  were  not  manned  or  very  inadequately.  (See  the 
printed  accounts.)  Lord  Bristol,1  who  had  been  allotted 
a  ship,  said  it  was  not  safe  to  put  it  to  sea ;  and  that 
though,  on  his  complaints,  the  Admiralty  had  given  him 
260  additional  men,  he  read  a  letter  from  a  sea  captain, 
whom  he  had  ordered  to  visit  them,  that  they  were  boys, 
old  cripples,  and  the  scum  of  the  earth.  Not  one  of  the 
Ministers  supported  Sandwich,  but  Lord  Gower  moved  for 
the  Chairman  leaving  the  chair,  and  the  Duke  of  Bolton's 
motions  were  rejected  by  the  majority. 

4th.  It  was  proposed  in  the  Common  Council  to  address 
the  King  to  make  peace  with  America,  and  a  Committee 
being  chosen  to  draw  it  up,  consisting  of  Wilkes,  Crosby, 


1  This  Earl  died  in  1779,  eight 
years  before  the  death  of  his  wife,  the 
"Duchess  of  Kingston."  He  was  suc- 
ceeded by  hia  brother,  the  eccentric 


Bishop  of  Deny,  whose  son,  now  Mar- 
quis of  Bristol,  is  in  his  ninetieth  year. 
— D. 


216  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

Bull,  Sawbridge,  Oliver  and  Hayley,  and  twelve  others, 
they  produced  an  address  that  contained  a  strong  charge 
against  the  Ministers,  and  a  petition  to  have  them  removed. 
Some  even  of  the  Committee  remonstrated  against  the 
violence  of  the  language,  though  they  did  not  all  condemn 
the  measure ;  but  it  was  voted,  and  the  sheriffs  were 
directed  to  ask  the  King  when  he  would  receive  it. 

It  was  known  that  a  French  fleet,  I  think  of  seven 
ships,  commanded  by  Monsieur  De  la  Mothe  Picquet,  was 
sailed  to  America,  and  that  Commodore  Digby,  with  five 
ships  (of  which  one  returned  disabled),  had  been  sent  after 
them.  This  looked  much  like  war. 

5th.  The  Conciliatory  Bills  were  read  in  the  House  of 
Lords.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  made  a  very  strong  speech 
that  amounted  almost  to  impeachment  of  the  Ministers, 
and  urged  them  with  the  convention  between  France  and 
America,  which  Lord  Weymouth  still  denied  their  knowing. 
Lord  Radnor  condemned  the  Administration,  and  declared 
his  dissent  to  the  Bills.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  was  not 
less  severe,  particularly  on  Lord  Hilsborough,  who  rose 
with  heat  and  demanded  to  have  his  circular  letter  read ; 
but  the  Duke  persisted,  and  threatening  to  call  the  Earl's 
conduct  to  account  on  some  future  day,  Lord  Hilsborough 
had  no  more  to  say.  Lord  Suffolk,  as  usual,  said  nothing 
material.  Then  rose  Lord  Temple,  who  had  not  appeared 
for  a  long  time ;  he  spoke  strongly  against  the  Bills,  and 
ridiculed  the  poltroonery  of  the  Ministers  ;  and  he  told 
the  House  that  if  there  was  a  division,  he  should  vote 
against  the  Bills,  and  had  in  his  pocket  Lord  Milton's 
proxy,  which  too  he  should  give  against  them.  (Lord 
Milton  was  in  a  kind  of  mad  state,  and  had  appeared  no- 
where since  his  wife's  death,  near  two  years  before.  He 
had  been  in  Opposition  and  attached  to  Lord  Rockingham 


1778.  DEBATES  ON  THE  BILLS.  217 

till  the  breaking  out  of  the  American  war,  when  he  had 
taken  up  violent  animosity  to  the  Americans,  probably  in- 
stigated by  his  brother-in-law,  Lord  George  Germaine. 
That  violence  and  his  immoderate  pride,  and  Lord 
Temple's  suggestions,  now  made  him  indignant  at  the 
meanness  of  the  Ministers,  and  revert  to  Opposition  with 
that  weathercock  Lord  Temple.)  The  Bishop  of  Peter- 
borough showed  how  inadequate  the  Bills  were  to  the 
object.  Lord  Carmarthen,  another  very  unsettled  head, 
spoke  for  the  Bills,  though  with  doubts  of  their  success.  The 
Duke  of  Buccleugh,  like  almost  all  the  Scots,  vehement 
against  the  Americans,  and  not  so  pliant  as  most  of  them, 
declared  against  the  Bills.  Lord  Shelburne  spoke  strongly 
against  giving  up  the  independence  of  America,  which 
was  agreeing  with  Lord  Chatham,  and  taking  the  popular 
ground.  He  recommended  the  defence  of  Canada,  the 
navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  the  Floridas,  Nova  Scotia, 
and  Newfoundland.  /In  fact,  the  Ministers,  by  half- 
measures,  or  double  measures,  now  stood  on  the  worst 
ground  they  could.  If,  like  honest  men,  they  had  declared 
they  could  do  no  more,  but  would  not  hinder  any  other 
Ministry  attempting  to  save  the  country,  they  had  been 
less  inexcusable  ;  or  had  they  determined  to  defend  Phila- 
delphia, New  York,  and  the  other  countries  mentioned  by 
Lord  Shelburne,  and  without  pursuing  vain  endeavours  of 
conquest,  distressed  the  trade  of  America,  they  would  have 
acted  a  part  of  more  dignity  and  firmness,  and  perhaps 
wearied  the  Americans  into  offering  peace.  By  having 
recourse  at  once  to  such  mean  and  debasing  submissions, 
they  contradicted  and  exposed  themselves  to  the  contempt 
of  America,  Europe,  and  England,  justified  the  Opposition, 
and  opened  a  door  to  any  future  Administration  to  submit 
to  any  terms,  and  precluded  themselves  from  blaming  such 


218  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOKACE  WALPOLE.          MAKCH, 

submission.  The  Opposition,  if  they  should  come  into 
place,  would  not  have  dared  to  offer  such  degrading  terms 
which  now  they  might,  without  imputation  of  sacrificing 
the  rights  of  the  Crown  of  England,  when  the  Crown  had 
made  those  overtures  itself.  But  the  King  preferred  his 
power  at  home  to  his  general  dignity,  and  the  Ministers 
were  glad  to  keep  their  places  at  the  price  of  any 
ignominy — and  their  heads  too,  as  they  feared,  if  they 
resigned,  the  conquering  Administration  would  call  them 
to  account :  but  in  my  opinion  they  are  in  much  greater 
danger  by  thus  temporising,  for  they  have  disgusted  the 
majority  of  the  nation,  who  would  have  defended  them  if 
they  had  maintained  the  Crown's  and  Country's  dignity, 
and  had  not  added  poltroonery  and  meanness  to  ill  success./ 

Lord  Shelburne  shone  against  the  Ministers,  but  there 
was  no  division — what  was  more  remarkable  than  any  of 
these  dissents,  was  the  absence  of  Lord  Bute's  son,  Lord 
Mountstuart,  of  Lord  Denbigh,  and  Lord  Talbot,  which 
added  to  the  suspicious  conduct  of  the  Court.  Lord  Bute's 
friends  had  early  in  the  Bills  intimated  his  dissatisfaction. 
It  might  be  sincere,  it  might  be  to  please  the  Scots,  it 
might  be  a  trimming  policy,  or  might  imply  that  the  Bills 
were  rather  the  measure  of  Lord  North  than  of  the  King. 
Lord  Camden  thought  the  Court  determined  on  peace 
with  America  at  any  rate — I  own  I  doubted  it.  I  had 
heard  that  on  Burgoyne's  defeat,  Lord  North  had  told  the 
King  he  must  take  other  Ministers ;  and  that  the  King 
had  replied,  he  would  neither  stoop  to  America  nor  to  the 
Opposition ;  and  that  if  Lord  North  would  not  stay,  he 
would  take  the  next  Minister  on  the  line.  This  is  very 
credible,  and  Lord  North's  yielding  against  his  opinion 
as  credible.  •  There  was  certainly  great  obscurity  in  the 
conduct  of  the  Court — yet  am  I  persuaded,  that  if 


17T8.  SECOND  READING  OF  THE  BILLS.  219 

America  should  treat,  which  would  imply  not  being  bound 
to  France,  which  would  make  a  French  war  unlikely, 
the  Court  would  be  perfidious  enough  not  to  ratify  the 
treaty.  V  Treat,  America  may  if  but  to  gain  time — but 
will  they  not  ask  security  ?  And  what  security  can  be 
given?  Perhaps  they  would  demand  the  guarantee  of 
France ;  and  still  more  likely,  that  France  should  be 
mediatress. 

Jenkinson  asking  a  person  well  acquainted  with  America, 
if  he  thought  the  Americans  would  treat,  the  person  re- 
plied, yes,  if  not  too  strictly  connected  with  France.  No, 
said  Jenkinson,  they  will  not,  the  enemy  will  hinder  them. 
What !  said  the  person — France  !  No,  answered  Jenkin- 
son,— but  he  would  explain  no  farther.  By  the  enemy  he 
meant  the  antiprerogative  party  in  America. 

The  6th,  the  Bills  were  read  again  and  much  con- 
demned by  Lord  Bristol,  and  less  strongly  by  Lord 
Townshend,  who  yet  said  he  should  vote  for  them — he 
had  only  declared  he  thought  it  impossible  the  Lords 
should  pass  them.  It  was  one  criterion  of  the  degeneracy 
of  the  present  age,  that  men  were  so  shameless  and  sense- 
less as  frequently  to  declare  their  real  sentiments,  and  then 
contradict  them  by  their  votes. 

The  same  day  Lord  North  opened  the  Budget,  having 
been  forced  once  or  twice  to  put  it  off.  He  had  hoped  the 
Dutch  would  furnish  the  loan,  but  they  had  grown  alarmed 
at  our  situation,  and  had  refused.  The  Bank  had  been 
tried,  but  would  venture  no  farther.  The  City  was  grown 
frightened  too,  or  dissatisfied,  and  had  set  their  faces 
against  it.  The  monied  friends  of  the  Court  were  soli- 
cited to  subscribe,  but  none  liked  it,  and  some  refused. 
So  great  was  the  distress  that  Lord  North,  without  prece- 
dent, divided  the  Budget  into  two  days,  proposed  the 


220  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

loan,  but  deferred  the  taxes  to  the  9th.  He  declared  the 
total  sum  wanted  was  13,230,000/. !  The  loan  was  to  be 
of  6,000,000/.,  which  he  owned  he  had  not  obtained  on  as 
easy  terms  as  he  could  have  wished.  He  stated  the  terms, 
and  reckoned  them  at  a  clear  profit  to  the  subscribers  of 
five  per  cent.  He  dwelt  much  on  the  arts  that  had  been 
used  to  keep  down  the  funds,  effected  chiefly  by  spreading 
rumours  of  war,  of  which  the  monied  men  had  taken  ad- 
vantage, determining  not  to  be  losers.  Burke,  in  reply, 
affirmed  that  the  loan  would  be  six  per  cent. ;  and  he 
reprobated  the  measures  that  had  brought  the  nation  into 
so  miserable  a  situation.  Lord  North,  in  answer,  con- 
fessed that  if  the  Americans  meant  Independence,  they 
would  not  consent  to  treat.  Charles  Fox  then  poured  out 
the  bitterest  and  one  of  the  finest  of  all  his  philippics 
against  Lord  North,  taxing  him  with  breach  of  honour, 
on  having  declared  that  he  would  resign  if  his  first  conci- 
liatory proposition  had  not  the  desired  effect ;  that  he  had 
broken  his  word ;  that  he  had  this  year  brought  measures 
of  the  same  kind,  at  which  he  confessed  he  felt  humbled, 
though  not  ashamed — if  such  measures  did  not  make  him 
blush,  what  would  ? — and  in  this  style  he  spoke  for  above 
half  an  hour — to  which  Lord  North  made  no  reply.  After 
the  motion  had  passed,  Lord  George  Germaine  was  called 
on  for  answers  to  two  or  three  questions  relative  to  the 
Canada  expedition. 

It  was  now  known  that  Jackson,  a  very  able  man, 
Council  to  the  Board  of  Trade,  and  Eden,  Secretary  to 
Lord  Suffolk,  were  to  be  Commissioners  with  Lord  Carlisle. 
The  Court  had  been  greatly  distressed  to  find  anybody 
that  would  undertake  the  Commission.  Sir  George 
Hay  had  positively  refused.  Lord  John  Cavendish  told 
me  he  had  been  indirectly  sounded,  and  been  told  any 


1778. 


VOTING  OF  NEW  TAXES. 


221 


proper  person  of  the  Opposition  might  have  what  terms 
they  pleased. 

'A  Government  was  given  to  General  Carleton — and 
though  the  Ministers  had  endeavoured  to  stir  up  perse- 
cution against  Burgoyne  and  the  Howes,  I  have  no  doubt 
but  as  fast  as  they  came  over,  the  Court,  from  its  natural 
cowardice,  will  endeavour  to  bribe  and  pacify  them.  * 

9th.  Lord  North  opened  his  taxes,  which  were  to  be 
on   houses   and  wine.      Objections  were    made   to  them, 
but  they  were  voted  without  a  division.     Then  Mr.  Gil- 
bert, an  agent  of  Lord  Gower,   proposed  to  lay  a  tax  of 
25  per  cent,  on  all  places  and  pensions  during  the  war. 
Lord  Gower  and  the  Duke  of  Bridgwater 2  had  taken  great 
pains  to  dissuade  him,  but  he  said  he  could  not  be  easy  in 
mind  without  proposing  it.     It  was,  however,  suspected 
that  it  was  aimed   in  revenge  at  Rigby,  the  Paymaster. 
Gilbert  had  married  the  sister  of  one  Cranford,  a  Scot,  in 
the  Pay  Office,  who  had  been  disobliged  by  Eigby's  not 
giving  him  a  vacant  place  at  Chelsea  College.     The  plan 
took  with  the  House,  though  even  Burke  spoke  against  it, 
and  it  was  voted  against  Lord  North,  in  the  Committee, 
by  a  majority  of  eighteen.     This  would  have  been  a  signal 
blow  on  the  Court,  as  well  as  on  Lord  North,  who  sent 
out  an  earnest  summons  for  attendance  the  next  day  on  the 
Report,  which  yet  he  threw  out  but  by  a  majority  of  six, 
147  to  141,  and  three  of  those,  Sir  George  Saville,  Burke, 
and  Fox,  were  of  the  minority,  as  well  as  General  Con  way, 
who  often  was,  and  who  showed  the  absurdity  of  the  pro- 
prosed  tax,  as,  instead  of  saving  money,  it  would  oblige 


*  Francis,  the  third  and  last  Duke. 
His  success  in  projecting  and  establish- 
ing inland  canal  navigation  is  happily 
alluded  to  in  the  single  line  on  his 


tomb  in  the  church  at  Little  Gaddes- 
den :  "  Impulit  ille  rates  ubi  •  lux i  t  ara- 
tra  colonus."  His  Grace  died  in  1803. 
— D. 


222  LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

the  King  to  increase  salaries.  A  tax  on  pensions,  as 
far  as  they  were  charities,  would  be  crying  and  unheard  of. 
The  same  day,  on  a  report  that  the  Court  was  going  to 
send  8000  of  the  new  troops  to  America,  General  Conway 
begged  to  know  the  state  of  the  force  in  the  nation,  and 
represented  its  defenceless  condition — but  no  answer  was 
made  to  him. 

Accounts  came  of  a  rising  in  Norfolk  on  the  dearness 
of  meal,  and  on  the  new  levies.  They  were  said  to  have 
destroyed  the  house  of  the  Mayor  of  Norwich,  and  a 
mill  belonging  to  Lord  Townshend.  There  were  disturb- 
ances, too,  among  the  tinners  in  Cornwall. 

The  Stocks  fell  greatly,  and  the  new  loan  was  already 
1  i  under  par. 

The  Conciliatory  Bills  were  read  the  third  time  in  the 
Lords.  Lord  Abingdon  spoke  and  protested  against  them . 
The  Duke  of  Eichmond  ridiculed  the  trifling  character  of 
Lord  Carlisle  and  the  insignificant  one  of  Eden.  Moore, 
Bishop  of  Bangor,  who  had  married  Eden's  sister,  spoke 
in  defence  of  the  latter  ;  Porteus,  Bishop  of  Chester,  for 
the  Bills.  Lord  Camden  made  a  most  admirable  oration 
on  the  criminality  and  inability  of  the  Ministers,  and  on 
the  dismal  situation  to  which  they  had  reduced  this 
country,  but  said  he  would  neither  vote  for  nor  against 
the  Bills — and  they  passed.  The  Attorney-General  being 
asked  what  he  thought  of  that  speech,  replied,  if  words 
could  turn  us  out,  better  could  not  be  found  for  the 
purpose. 

The  Duke  of  Gordon  said  he  did  not  quite  like  the 
Bills,  but  would  vote  for  them  as  no  better  were  offered — 
but  he  was  influenced  by  no  Minister  nor  would  be.  The 
Duke  of  Richmond  took  up  this,  and  what  had  been 
dropped  by  the  Duke  of  Buccleugh  on  a  former  day,  on 


1778.  PETITION  FOR  PEACE  TO  THE  KING.  223 

the  interference  of  the  Court  in  the  elections  of  Scots 
Peers,  on  which  the  Duke  of  Buccleugh  had  formerly 
opposed  the  Court.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  complained 
of  Lord  Stair  having  been  excluded  from  the  Sixteen  for 
opposing  the  American  War;  and  his  Grace  said  he 
would  move  to  have  the  Scots  Peers  elected  for  their  lives. 

In  the  House  of  Commons  the  inquiry  was  carried  into 
the  state  of  the  Navy,  as  it  had  been  in  the  other  House ; 
and  Charles  Fox  exerted  himself  in  exposing  the  ill  con- 
duct of  the  Admiralty,  and  of  Lord  North,  whom  he 
treated  with  the  utmost  contempt  and  indignity — but  the 
inquiries  began  to  languish  in  both  Houses,  and  were  re- 
duced to  one  day  in  a  week. 

12th.  James  Luttrell  proposed  that  the  Commissioners 
for  Peace  should  be  authorised  to  promise  the  removal 
of  any  Ministers  to  whom  the  Americans  should  object 
Itx  occasioned  a  long  debate,  but  was  rejected. 

On  the  1 3th,  the  Lord  Mayor  presented  to  the  King  a 
very  strong  and  very  sensible  petition  for  peace  from  the 
Common  Council,  to  which  the  King  made  a  cold  though 
temporising  answer. 

On  the  13th,  Monsieur  de  Noailles,  the  Ambassador  of 
France,  delivered  to  Lord  Weymouth  a  declaration  from 
the  King  his  master,  acquainting  his  Majesty  that  the 
King  of  France  had  concluded  a  Treaty  of  Commerce 
and  Amity  with  the  Independent  States  of  America,  but 
had  had  the  attention  for  his  Majesty  of  not  making  it 
exclusive  of  their  trading  with  us  ;  but  should  any  inter- 
ruption be  given  to  the  commerce  between  France  and 
America,  the  former  would  support  the  dignity  of  their 
flag.--  Dr.  Franklin  was  received  at  Versailles  in  form  on  } 
the  17th,  as  Ambassador  for  the  United  States  of  America. 
This  triumph  had  never  been  exceeded  but  by  the  capture 


224  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

of  Francis  I.  by  the  Constable,  of  Bourbon,  which,  per- 
haps, was  inferior  to  Franklin's,  as  the  latter  was  a  private 
v  man,  and  triumphed  by  his  own  abilities  over  the  King  of 
Great  Britain!" 

The  French  message  was  deemed  so  ironic  and  insulting, 

that  at  night  orders  were  sent  to  Lord  Stormont  to  leave 

France  directly  without  taking  leave — and  Monsieur  de 

Noailles  was  acquainted  with  that  step,  that  he  might  retire 

I  too.     The  Stocks  immediately  fell  considerably. 

1 6th.  Lord  Weymouth  and  Lord  North  acquainted  the 
two  Houses  that  they  should  the  next  day  deliver  a 
message  of  great  consequence  from  his  Majesty.  The 
Duke  of  Manchester  immediately  told  the  Lords,  that  he 
should  move  an  Address  to  the  King  to  turn  out  his  Mini- 
sters for  not  having  known  of  the  treaty  with  France,  or 
for  having  concealed  it. 

In  the  Commons,  Mr.  George  Grenville  moved  to  ad- 
dress the  King  to  lay  before  the  House  all  papers  from 
Lord  Stormont  or  communications  from  the  French  Am- 
bassador relating  to  the  treaty  between  France  and 
America.  Lord  North  objected  to  the  motion,  and  moved 
for  the  previous  question.  Mr.  Burke,  Mr.  Dunning,  and 
Mr.  Fox,  particularly  the  latter,  censured  Lord  North 
most  severely  for  ignorance  and  for  the  situation  into 
which  he  and  the  Ministers  had  brought  the  nation,  and 
with  great  contempt  for  proposing  unanimity.  Wedder- 
burn,  Rigby  and  others  defended  the  Ministers,  and  the 
motion  was  rejected  by  231  to  146.  One  beautiful  pas- 
sage in  Mr.  Burke's  speech  was  an  application  of  Lord 
Bedford's  reply  to  James  II. 

The  Lords  were  busied  the  same  day  on  a  bill  of  a 
private  but  most  extraordinary  nature,  which  was  the 
strongest  picture  that  could  be  drawn  of  the  dissoluteness  of 


1778.  LORD  FOLEY  AND  HIS  BROTHER. 

the  times.  Lord  Foley,  who  was  born  heir  to  an  estate  of 
20,000/.  a  year,  had,  with  his  next  brother,  gone  into  such 
an  outrageous  excess  in  gaming  and  racing,  and  conse- 
quential borrowing  of  money  at  enormous  usury,  that 
their  father,  the  late  Lord,  in  whose  power  the  estate  was, 
after  repeated  attempts  in  vain  to  correct  them,  had  deter- 
mined, on  many  breaches  of  their  promises  of  amend- 
ment, and  after  many  threats  and  warnings,  to  disinherit 
both  and  give  the  estate  to  his  third  son.  But  the  eldest 
having  without  his  approbation,  though  at  last  with  his 
consent,  married,  for  love,  Lady  Henrietta  Stanhope,  the 
fourth  daughter  of  Lord  and  Lady  Harrington,  the  latter 
of  whom  was  verv  obnoxious  to  the  father,  Lord  Folev,  from 

rf  »   7 

her  very  bad  character,  the  late  Lord  had  given  hopes  of 
his  forgiveness,  provided  his  son  reformed,  a  promise  the 
son  immediately  violated  by  frequenting  Newmarket  and 
contracting  a  new  debt  of  20,000/.  On  this  the  father, 
Lady  Henrietta  being  delivered  of  a  son,  made  his  will, 
settled  the  estate  on  that  child,  yet  left  6000/.  a  year  to  his 
eldest,  and  1500/.  a  year  to  his  second  son.  As  the  sons 
were  exceedingly  good-humoured  young  men  and  popular 
amongst  those  of  their  own  age,  they  were  pitied,  as  left  in 
necessity,  and  unable  even  to  pay  their  debts,  though  the 
provision  was  much  larger  than  they  deserved.  After 
some  months,  their  father  having  given  some  marks  of  re- 
lenting, and  having  talked  of  selling  part  of  his  estate  to 
pay  their  debts,  and  even  of  making  a  new  will,  which, 
dying  suddenly,  he  could  not  execute  if  he  intended,  the 
relations,  the  other  brother  and  sisters,  and  the  trustees, 
were  prevailed  on  to  consent  that  the  two  elder  Foleys 
should  apply  to  Parliament  for  a  much  larger  portion  of 
the  estate,  and  for  immediate  sale  of  enough  to  pay  the 
principal  of  the  debts,  in  which  application  many  misre- 
VOL.  n.  Q 


226  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MAECH, 

presentations  and  exaggerations  were  employed.  Still 
they  were  so  popular:  and  Charles  Fox,  whose  example 
and  society  had  contributed  to  their  ruin,  and  for  whom 
they  were  bound  too  for  above  40,000/.,  and  the  rest  of  the 
young  nobility  at  Almack's,  and  the  fashionable  young  wo- 
men of  quality,  who  were  Lady  Henrietta's  friends,  pushed 
the  affair  with  so  much  vehemence,  that  even  Lord  Mans- 
field and  Lord  Camden,  though  condemning  the  cause  and 
still  more  the  fatal  precedent  of  setting  aside  wills,  deter- 
mined to  absent  themselves  and  let  the  bill  pass.  But  the 
Duke  of  Richmond,  though  pitying  Lady  Henrietta,  uncle 
of  and  connected  in  party  with  Charles  Fox,  and  inclined  to 
.  favour  the  Foleys,  was  too  upright  and  honest  to  bear  this 
time-serving  of  the  two  great  lawyers,  and  when  the  bill 
was  presented,  insisted  on  their  attending  it,  that  he  might 
from  them  learn  what  he  ought  to  do.  They  both  endea- 
voured to  avoid  it,  Lord  Mansfield  saying  he  could  not 
attend,  and  Lord  Camden  that  he  had  a  private  reason  for 
not  attending  causes.  (This  was  partly  a  good-natured 
motive,  as  he  thought  Lord  Mansfield  often  frustrated  just 
causes  if  he  supported  them,  and  was  sure  of  carrying  the 
majority  with  him.)  The  honest  Duke  would  not  accept 
their  excuses,  but  insisted  on  their  naming  a  day  when  they 
could  attend,  which  they  were  forced  to  do.  For  this,  as 
usual,  he  was  grievously  abused ;  and  the  beautiful  Coun- 
tesses of  Sefton  and  Barrymore,  Lady  Foley's  sisters,  said 
everything  that  rage  could  suggest  of  him. 

In  truth,  the  four  first  lines  of  the  printed  case  were  an 
insult  on  all  gravity,  decency,  and  sense :  the  least  sense  of 
sharne  would  have  stopped  their  presenting  such  a  petition  ; 
and  after-ages  will  scarce  credit  that  men  could  have  the 
front  to  offer,  or  a  Legislature  so  little  decorum  as  to  re- 
ceive, a  representation  of  a  case  as  compassionate  that  was 


1778.  LORD  FOLEY  AND  HIS  BROTHER.  227 

the  highest  excess  of  prodigality,  extravagance,  and  usury. 
In  short,  they  stated  that  the  two  Foleys  had,  during  their 
father's  life,  taken  up  money  on  such  enormous  usury 
that  they  had  bound  themselves  to  pay  annuities  for  the 
interest  that  amounted  to  17,540?.  a  year;  and  this  their 
unfortunate  situation,  they  said,  they  had  disclosed  to 
their  late  father.  This  was  the  foundation  of  their  claim 
to  pity !  Such  were  the  meritorious  orphans  that  deserved 
that  a  Legislature  should  violate  the  solemnity  of  wills ! 
And  what  could  the  other  Peers  be,  who  could  listen  to 
such  a  plea,  and  not  tremble  at  the  example  for  their  own 
sons,  and  for  their  own  testamentary  disposition  of  their 
estates  ?  It  was  almost  as  singular  a  contradiction  that 
the  petition  was  presented  and  supported  by  the  Earl  of 
Coventry,  who  had  disinherited  by  will  his  own  son,  for 
extravagance  and  worthlessness  !3 

The  two  Lords,  Mansfield  and  Camden,  being  thus 
forced  to  give  their  opinion,  as  did  the  Chancellor,  who  to 
his  honour  had  been  firmly  against  it,  the  Lords  were  dis- 
posed to  throw  out  the  bill  on  the  first  reading ;  but  the 
Duke  of  Richmond,  whose  good  nature  was  equal  to  his 
integrity  (and  both  were  as  great  as  could  be  in  man),  pre- 
vailed to  have  it  allowed  to  be  referred  to  a  committee. 

nth.  Lord  Wey mouth  and  Lord  North  acquainted 
both  Houses  with  the  declaration  of  the  French  Ambas- 
sador, and,  after  arraigning  the  perfidy  of  France,  moved 
to  address  the  King,  with  vows  of  support  in  maintaining 
the  honour  and  dignity  of  the  crown  and  nation.  In  the 
Lords,  the  Duke  of  Manchester  immediately  moved  an 
amendment  or  addition,  beseeching  his  Majesty,  that  in 


»  The  sixth  Earl.  He  survived  till 
1809,  and  was,  at  his  death,  in  his 
eighty-seventh  year.  The  son  whom 


he  is  said  to  have  disinherited  suc- 
ceeded his  father  when  nearly  sixty 
years  of  age. — D. 

Q  2 


228  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

consideration  of  the  want  of  success  of  his  Ministers,  in 
almost  every  civil  and  military  plan,  he  would  be  pleased 
to  remove  them.  Proofs  of  what  he  said,  and  of  their 
neglects  and  ignorance,  were  repeated  by  both  the  Duke 
and  Lord  Rockingham.  Lord  Dudley  defended  the 
Ministers  with  warmth,  and  was  answered  by  Lord  Abing- 
don  (who  plainly  described  Lord  Mansfield),  and  by  Lord 
Effingham,  Lord  Ravensworth,  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond  ; 
the  latter  adding,  that  the  only  way  to  recover  the  friend- 
ship of  America  would  be  to  acknowledge  its  independence, 
for  which  he  said  he  had  a  fortnight  ago  drawn  up  a  bill 
for  that  purpose,  the  heads  of  which  he  read  to  the  House. 
Dr.  Butler,  Bishop  of  Oxford,  rose  for  the  first  time,  but 
it  was  principally  to  defend  the  Bench,  who,  he  said,  had 
been  branded,  in  the  other  House,  with  dying  their  lawn  in 
blood,  and  yet  he  declared  he  was  ready  to  support  the  war 
with  his  advice  or  by  the  arm  of  flesh.  Lord  Coventry 
told  him  he  should  first  have  considered  our  resources ;  to 
which  the  Prelate  said,  that  a  tax  on  half  our  pomps  and 
vanities  would  support  the  expenses  of  the  war.  The 
Duke  of  Richmond  replied,  that  he  knew  none  fitter  objects 
than  fat,  high-fed  Churchmen  and  rich  Prebendaries.  Lord 
.'Shelburne  made  a  very  strong  speech,  pointed  at  Lord 
Mansfield ;  said  he  had  heard  a  French  Bishop  recommend 
the  clergy  taking  part  in  politics,  which,  if  they  miscarried, 
could  not  be  laid  to  them,  who  might  retire  to  their  wealthy 
bishopricks.  He  said  he  was  sorry  we  had  legal  adven- 
turers, who  could  be  meddling,  and  he  could  see  their 
hand  in  the  Canada  Bill.  Lord  Mansfield  sat  trembling 
and  groaning,  under  every  mark  of  confusion.  He  was  so 
frightened  and  dismayed,  that  about  this  time,  a  person 
mentioning  somebody's  death  to  him,  he  said,  "  I  don't 
know  why,  but  Death  knocks  at  every  door  but  mine !" 


1778.  GENERAL  CONWAY'S  SPEECH.  229 

In  the  House  he  made  no  reply,  though  Lord  Shelburne 
looked  directly  at  him  the  whole  time  he  was  speaking. 
At  half  an  hour  after  nine  the  Amendment  was  rejected 
by  84  to  34.  It  is  remarkable  that  Lord  Shelburne  did 
not  divide.  He  gave  for  reason  that  he  did  not  wish  for 
war,  and  yet  thought  peace  improper.  In  the  same  speech 
he  attacked  the  pluralities  of  the  Church. 

In  the  other  House,  Mr.  Baker  and  Sir  George  Younge 
proposed  the  same  Amendment  for  removal  of  the  Ministers, 
and  were  supported  by  Conolly,  George  Grenville,  and 
Thomas  Pitt.  Jenkinson  declared  the  war  must  now  be 
looked  upon  as  certain ;  it  was  war  itself.  Lord  Lumley 
said  the  people  had  a  right  to  choose  Ministers.  General 
Conway  rose,  and,  as  was  allowed  by  all  sides,  made  one 
of  the  finest  orations  ever  pronounced  there.  He  said  he 
should  not  excuse  the  Ministers,  but  thought  the  purport  of 
the  message  was  of  much  higher  importance  than  a  ques- 
tion of  who  should  be  Ministers ;  that,  if  guilty,  they 
ought  to  be  accused.  That  early  in  his  life  he  had  disap- 
proved of  such  a  general  charge  against  a  great  minister, 
his  own  relation  (Sir  Robert  Walpole) ;  that  he  hoped  it 
was  not  necessary  to  declare  war,  though  he  was  ready  to 
offer  his  services ;  and  though  he  had  some  time  ago  given 
offence  by  declaring  his  opinion  that  an  officer  who  disap- 
proved the  American  war  ought  not  to  serve  in  it,  the 
case  was  different  with  regard  to  France,  and  he  should  be 
proud  to  end  his  life  as  he  had  begun  it,  in  the  service  of 
his  country.  He  said  the  Declaration  of  France  did  not 
call  on  us  to  declare  war,  and  he  quoted  a  very  remark- 
able and  apposite  instance  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  who,  having 
made  an  alliance  with  the  Dutch  and  supplied  them  with 
6000  men,  notified  that  treaty  to  Philip  II.  in  1583,  and 
he  did  not  declare  war  against  her  till  three  years  after. 


230 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 


He  quoted  a  letter  from  Dr.  Franklin  (which  Governor 
Pownall  had  shown  him),  in  which  Franklin  said  it  was 
not  yet  too  late  to  make  a  treaty  with  the  Americans,  if 
we  would  but  acknowledge  their  independence,  which 
Con  way  pressed  the  House  to  do,  and  urged  that  the  words 
of  the  French  Declaration,  that  the  treaty  was  not  exclusive, 
implied  the  same ;  (and,  indeed,  by  the  accounts  from 
France  it  appeared  that  they  did  not  expect  war,  no  doubt 
depending  on  the  timidity  of  the  Court,  though,  by  the  pre- 
cipitate recall  of  Lord  Stormont,  and  Jenkinson's  words 
above,  I  am  persuaded  the  King  and  the  Scots  preferred 
war  with  France  to  giving  up  hopes  of  absolute  power  in 
America  ;  and  this,  if  true,  would  prove  they  had  not  been 
sincere  in  Lord  North's  conciliatory  plan).  Charles  Fox 
paid  the  highest  compliments  to  Conway's  integrity  and 
abilities,  and  said  he  should  differ  from  him  in  nothing  but 
in  demanding  the  immediate  dismission  of  the  Ministers ; 
would  declare  the  Independence  of  America,  and  turn  the 
Commissioners  into  Ambassadors.  He  said,  Lord  North 
had  talked  much  of  the  confusion  his  resigning  would  occa- 
sion ;  he  did  not  see  how ;  he  did  see  what  confusion  his 
staying  would  make.  Lord  North  said  little,  but  seemed 
to  intimate  that  it  would  be  war ;  that  he  did  not  believe  all 
America  wished  for  Independence  (another  symptom  of 
the  Court's  hopes  of  continuing  the  war)  ;  he  himself  had 
wished,  for  ten  years,  to  resign.  \  He  acquainted  the  House 
that  the  first  payment  of  the  loan  had  been  made  that 
morning.4  The  Lord  Advocate  broke  out  into  a  violent 


*  Lord  North  had  not  got  the  money 
that  morning  at  noon  ;  but  as  the  exe- 
cutors of  the  last  Lord  Holland  had  just 
paid  in  two  hundred  thousand  pounds 
of  the  money  belonging  to  the  Pay 


Office,  the  Ministers  probably  advanced 
part  of  the  money  to  make  up  the  de- 
ficiency till  they  could  supply  it  other- 
wise. 


1778.     GENERAL  CONWAY'S  INTERVIEW  WITH  THE  KING.    231 

invective  against  the  Opposition,  and  said  they  wanted  to 
take  the  Cabinet  by  storm.  Thomas  Townshend  called 
him  to  order,  and  said  it  was  false,  and  warm  words  arose 
between  them ;  but  Conway  and  Rigby  interposed,  and 
they  were  calmed.  Lord  Bulkeley  spoke  for  supporting 
Government,  and  between  one  and  two  in  the  morning  the 
Amendment  was  rejected  and  the  Address  voted  by  263 
to  113.  /  I  forgot  that  Barre*  spoke  with  great  commenda- 
tion of  Conway,  but  wondered  he  would  serve  under 
Ministers  who  betrayed  and  ill-treated  all  officers,  and  laid 
their  own  faults  on  them.\ 

General  Amherst  was  made  of  the  Cabinet  Council, 
and  was  designed  to  direct  the  war,  but  was  not  to  be  Cap- 
tain-General. This  showed  that  Lord  George  Germaine, 
whose  particular  friend  he  was,  had  no  thoughts  of  retiring, 
but,  not  to  shock  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  had  withheld  the 
title;  at  the  same  time  it  was  preferring  Amherst  to 
Conway.  The  latter  went  in  to  the  King,  and  told  him  he 
was  come  to  say  in  private  what  he  had  said  in  public,  and 
to  offer  his  services  as  he  had  done  at  the  time  of  the  affair 
of  Falkland's  Island.  The  King  thanked  him,  and  said 
it  was  a  great  and  general  question.  Conway  said  yes,  he 
had  not  thought  that  a  day  for  attacking  the  Ministers. — 
Admiral  Keppel  was  appointed  Commander  of  the  Fleet. 

Beginning  of  a  war  between  Prussia  and  the  Emperor, 
which  probably  encouraged  France  to  make  her  Declaration 
so  soon,  though,  had  she  waited,  we  should  probably  have 
sent  more  troops  abroad.  It  was  a  tempting  moment  to 
France,  the  influence  and  credit  of  which  kingdom  in 
Europe  had  greatly  declined  since  1758,  by  our  great  suc- 
cesses, by  the  waste  of  the  last  King's  reign,  and  by  his  con- 
tests with  his  Parliaments  and  suppression  of  them,  and  by 
the  new  powers  of  Russia  and  Prussia,  and  the  revival  of  the 


232  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

House  of  Austria.  France  had  been  forced  to  behold  without 
stirring,  the  partition  of  Poland  and  the  invasion  of  Dantzic. 
Her  policy  and  our  folly  had  brought  back  a  favourable 
moment.  She  had  brought  about  another  war  between 
Russia  and  the  Turks,  which  deprived  us  of  assistance  from 
the  former,  and  prevented  both  from  trading  with  us  so 
prodigally  as  Russia  especially  did  in  times  of  peace.  The 
still  more  recent  war  that  was  broken  out  between  the 
Emperor  and  Prussia  on  the  seizure  of  Bavaria  (on  which  it 
was  said  Prussia  had  demanded  a  categoric  answer  from 
'  France  what  part  she  would  take,  and  in  which  she  pro- 
bably had  answered  wisely  that  she  would  take  none)  gave 
France  the  prospect  of  seeing  these  two  great  Princes  waste 
their  vast  armies,  and  left  her  at  liberty  to  humble  us, 
and  ravish  our  trade  with  America,  and  humble  our  Marine. 
This  was  too  strong  a  temptation  to  be  resisted,  and  their 
insulting  manner  of  avowing  their  conduct  ought  to  have 
told  the  King  how  much  his  credit  was  sunk. 

On  Thursday,  the  1 8th,  I  had  a  great  deal  of  conversa- 
tion with  the  Duke  of  Richmond.  I  had  observed  that  the 
approaching  war  with  France  had  rather  done  the  Ministers 
good  than  harm,  though  it  ought  to  have  done  the  latter, 
as  they  had  brought  it  on.  The  alarm  made  men  rather 
think  of  the  whole  than  of  parties,  and  I  found  that  the 
instances  of  mismanagement  which  the  Opposition  had 
published  from  the  inquiries,  had  been  artfully  turned 
against  them  by  the  Court,  who  represented  it  as  laying 
open  our  weakness — as  if  France  could  not  have  known 
that  without,  especially  from  Dr.  Franklin.  I  told  the 
Duke  my  observations ;  I  wished  him  to  move  to  address 
the  King  not  to  prorogue  the  Parliament  in  the  present 
calamitous  situation :  the  Ministers,  to  get  rid  of  the  in- 
quiries and  Opposition,  had  designed  the  Parliament  should 


1778.      CONVERSATION  WITH  THE  DUKE  OF  RICHMOND.      233 

rise  in  April,  but  now  in  May.  I  said,  to  move  against 
prorogation  would  recall  the  memory  of  the  fatal  proroga- 
tion at  Christmas,  and  would  establish  them  for  prophetic 
judges,  if  the  King  should  be  forced  to  call  the  Parliament 
suddenly  in  summer ;  but  the  Duke  did  not  mind  my  advice. 
I  then  told  him  that  the  Opposition  were  very  unpopular, 
because  they  never  took  the  least  pains  to  raise  a  spirit  but 
in  Parliament,  the  last  place  where  it  could  be  raised,  as  the 
Members  were  more  evidently  corrupted  than  any  men. 
I  pressed  him  to  have  a  protest  drawn  up  against  the  con- 
clusion of  the  session,  and  get  it  signed  by  as  many  Mem- 
bers of  both  Houses  as  would  sign  it.  I  said  it  ought  to  be 
drawn  in  the  plainest  and  simplest  words,  not  in  figure 
and  metaphor  (I  meant  not  by  Burke),  which  few  would 
understand,  and  fewer  be  struck  by ;  that  as  we  were  now 
at  a  new  crisis,  America  gone,  and  a  war  at  hand  with 
France,  I  thought  the  Opposition  should  give  an  account  to 
the  nation  (for  speeches  were  only  read  day  by  day  in  the 
common  newspapers,  and  too  shortly,  and  said  to  have  been 
answered  and  forgotten);  that  they  should  detail  their  attempts 
to  prevent  the  war  in  America  and  to  have  the  Americans 
heard ;  their  prophecies  of  all  that  had  happened,  the  con- 
ciliatory plans  that  they  had  offered,  and  which  the  Ministers 
had  been  forced  to  adopt,  yet  with  more  indignity  to  the 
nation  than  the  Opposition  would  have  dared  to  propose ; 
and  should  state  all  the  errors,  blunders,  waste  of  men, 
money,  and  ships  of  which  the  Ministry  had  been  guilty ; 
and  should  print  and  disperse  thousands  of  this  manifesto 
all  over  England.  The  Duke  said  they  did  intend  some- 
thing of  that  sort,  as  far  as  would  consist  in  what  they  had 
discovered  by  the  inquiries,  and  had  prepared  a  paper,  but 
it  was  not  finished.  I  concluded  it  was  drawn  by  Burke, 
and  would  not  half  answer  the  purpose.  I  spoke  pretty 


234:  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MARCH, 

roundly  on  the  negligence  of  the  Opposition,  and  blamed 
particularly  their  having  neglected  to  make  more  noise  on 
the  countenance  shown  to  Roman  Catholics.  The  Duke 
answered  eagerly,  that  he  had  no  notion  of  persecution  for 
religion,  and  had  long  wished  to  have  the  Catholics  of 
Ireland  well  treated,  which  would  have  brought  many  of 
them  over.  His  excellent  heart  could  not  fail  to  love 
toleration,  and  Burke  had  no  doubt  taken  advantage  of 
that  mild  disposition  to  imprint  tenderness  for  Catholics, 
for  if  Burke  was  not  still  a  Catholic,  he  yet  retained  many 
of  its  principles.  I  replied,  that  I  did  not  dislike  Catholics 
for  their  religious,  but  civil,  tenets,  which  were  destructive 
of  all  liberty ;  and  that  of  all  Catholics  I  most  dreaded  Irish 
Roman  Catholics  for  this  reason,  which  1  thought  unanswer- 
\  able.  "  Consider,  my  Lord,"  said  I,  "  that  there  is  not  a 
Protestant  in  Ireland  who  is  possessed  of  a  foot  of  land  that 
was  not  wrenched  from  an  Irish  family.  The  Irish  are 
proud  of  their  families,  which  are  as  ancient  and  noble  as 
any  in  Europe,  and  some  of  them  Royal.  The  Irish 
Catholics  therefore  must  be  obstinate  to  their  religion  (with- 
out considering  their  education,  prejudices,  and  ignorance), 
as  the  Catholic  religion  alone  can  recover  their  estates.  If 
they  turned  Protestants,  and  were  ever  so  loyal,  no  Pro- 
testant Government  could  wrest  lands  from  old  established 
Protestants,  to  restore  to  new  converts  ;  and  the  Protestants 
being  intruders  from  England,  which  domineers  Ireland, 
the  genuine  Irish  hate  our  religion  for  that  reason,  as  it 
was  the  cause  of  their  depression.  But,"  said  I,  "my 
Lord,  depend  upon  it,  even  the  English  Catholics,  who  can 
complain  of  no  persecution,  have  great  indulgence,  and  are 
not  obliged  to  pay  double  taxes,  though  loyal,  will  never 
be  sincere  friends  to  a  Protestant  King,  though,  I  own,  the 
present  has  almost  made  his  religion  doubtful. " 


1778.         CHARLES  FOX  CHARGES  LORD  G.  GERMAINE.         235 

It  is  a  fact  that  Spain  has  always  kept  up  intimate  con- 
nection with  the  Irish  Catholics,  and  when  one  of  them 
settles  in  Spain  he  is  allowed  the  same  rank  and  pre- 
cedence as  he  has  in  his  own  country.  Mr.  Conolly,  speak- 
ing of  the  present  state  of  Ireland,  was  very  clear  in  his 
opinion :  he  said,  if  the  French  land  in  the  South,  every 
man  there  will  join  them  ;  and  if  the  Americans  land  in 
the  North,  they  will  be  as  gladly  received  there  by  the 
Presbyterians. 

The  19th  was  a  very  remarkable  day  in  the  House  of 
Commons.  The  inquiry  was  to  be  summed  up  on  the  ex- 
pedition of  Burgoyne;  and  Charles  Fox  undertook  to 
charge  Lord  George  Germaine  as  the  author  of  that  mis- 
carriage, by  not  having  given  orders  sufficiently  explicit  to 
General  Howe  to  endeavour  to  meet  and  assist  Burgoyne. 
Fox  made  the  charge,  but  with  extraordinary  temper  and 
judgment,  and  without  any  acrimony.  He  said  he  saw  that 
too  many  of  the  King's  servants  were  involved  in  criminality, 
to  make  personal  bitterness  to  any  single  man  excusable. 
He  condemned,  he  said,  the  Canada  expedition,  but  the 
ignorance  of  the  Ministers  of  the  treaty  between  France 
and  the  Americans  had  effaced  that ;  and  next  year  he 
supposed  it  would  be  so  much  exceeded  by  new  blunders 
that  he  should  forget  it.  He  was  sorry  in  this  ignorance 
to  be  forced  to  include  his  own  friend  Lord  Weymouth. 
Fox  often  passed  the  end  of  the  night,  or  rather  daybreak, 
in  drinking  with  Lord  Weymouth. 

These  parts  of  his  speech  gave  the  chief  colour  of  the 
day.  Thurlow,  Lord  Weymouth's  creature  and  intimate, 
was  very  angry,  and  with  bitter  irony  said  he  hoped  Mr. 
Fox  would  never  be  his  friend.  Fox  rose  to  excuse  him- 
self, but  launched  out  still  more  severely  against  Lord 
Weymouth.  Wedderburn  was  the  chief  advocate  for 


236  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MARCH, 

Lord  George  Gerrnaine,  who  said  nothing  all  day  but  in 
answer  to  interrogatories,  and  the  day  languished  very 
dully,  though  with  one  division  of  164  to  44.  All  the 
principal  officers  retired,  as  they  might  be  called  to  courts 
martial  on  the  Generals  Howe  and  Burgoyne,  and  Conway 
particularly  for  that  reason,  and  because  he  would  show  no 
partiality  against  Lord  George,  who,  contrary  to  all  pre- 
cedent, voted  in  his  own  case  for  himself.  He  had  the  day 
before  said  to  a  friend  that  he  was  ready  to  resign  (and 
indeed  his  office  of  Secretary  of  State  for  America  was 
likely  to  become  an  useless  place),  but  he  would  be  ac- 
quitted first  by  the  House  of  Commons.  That  implied 
fear  both  of  being  immediately  sacrificed  by  his  brother 
Ministers,  and  impeached  hereafter  by  the  Opposition ;  but 
in  truth  the  nomination  of  Lord  Amherst  persuaded  me 
that  Lord  George  would  retain  his  place,  at  least  the  King's 
confidence. 

Towards  three  in  the  morning  the  Debate  took  a  new 
and  very  warm  turn.  The  Lord  Advocate  Dundas,  who 
seemed  to  be  set  up  by  the  Court  against  Charles  Fox,  rose 
and  taunted  him  with  his  moderation,  and  called  on  him  to 
employ  his  usual  invectives.  He  had  at  the  beginning  of 
the  Session,  said  the  Advocate,  overflowed  with  bitterness ; 
now  he  had  sifted  the  conduct  of  the  Ministers,  he  found 
nothing  to  say  against  them.  This  speech,  and  the  small 
minority  and  support  of  his  friends,  several  of  whom  had 
gone  away,  from  lassitude  and  the  insipidity  of  the  day, 
provoked  Fox  to  the  utmost  rage.  He  burst  out  into  a 
torrent  of  abuse,  and  lost  all  temper  and  conduct.  Rigby 
answered  him,  and  in  return  abused  the  Opposition,  whom 
he  called  an  insignificant  minority.  This  equally  provoked 
Governor  Johnston,  who  told  Kigby  he  was  not  surprised 
to  hear  him,  who  always  declared  he  would  belong  to 


1778.  ACQUITTAL  OF  LORD  G.  GERMAINE.  237 

majorities,  condemn  the  minority  ;  and  he  did  it  very  much 
at  his  ease,  as  he  enjoyed  twenty  or  thirty  thousand  pounds 
a  year  from  the  distresses  of  his  country.  Lord  George 
Germaine  at  last  defended  himself  in  a  good  speech,  though 
many  thought  he  did  not  clear  himself.  He  had,  however, 
had  the  precaution  to  tell  General  Howe,  in  a  letter,  that 
he  hoped  to  be  in  time  to  assist  Burgoyne. — Charles  Fox 
should  then  have  made  a  motion  he  had  prepared,  of  cen- 
sure on  Lord  George,  but  in  his  passion  he  tore  the  paper  and 
went  away  ;  on  which  Wedderburn  moved  an  acquittal  of  his 
friend,  which  was  voted  with  a  small  minority  under  forty. 
Charles  Fox  said  to  many  he  would  attend  the  House  no 
more,  of  which  probably  the  King  heard,  for  next  day  Lord 
Bolingbroke,  Fox's  friend,  being  in  waiting,  the  King,  who 
used  to  abhor  Fox's  name,  launched  out  into  commendations 
of  him.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  told  me  too  that  the 
King  had  been  making  overtures  to  different  persons  in 
Opposition,  but  with  the  annexed  condition  that  Lord  North 
should  remain  at  the  Treasury.  I  replied,  "  My  Lord,  that 
is  out  of  no  kindness  to  Lord  North,  but  to  shield  Jen- 
kinson  and  the  Junto:  whoever  would  consent  to  Lord 
North's  staying  could  not  object  to  the  others ;  but  I  think 
nobody  will  go  to  the  Court  on  those  terms,  unless  Lord 
Chatham  and  Lord  Shelburne."  The  latter's  attack  on  Lord 
Mansfield  shows  Lord  Chatham  would  object  to  HIM  ;  but 
I  am  sure  Lord  Temple  will  go  in  on  no  terms  but  the 
Treasury ;  and  though  I  did  not  say  so  to  the  Duke  of 
Richmond,  I  was  as  clear  Lord  Rockingham  would  not, 
and  him  perhaps  it  was  meant  to  exclude,  for  early  in  the 
winter  the  King  had  had  the  folly  and  indecency  to  say 
to  Lord  George  Germaine,  "  I  may  be  got  the  better  of  by 
the  American  rebels,  but  I  will  not  by  the  English  rebels." 
I  had  long  laboured  with  all  those  of  the  Opposition  I  was 


238 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


MARCH, 


connected  with  not  to  join  the  Court  till  the  nation  should  call 
for  them,  as  I  was  sure  the  King  would  betray  them  as  soon 
as  he  could,  if  they  put  themselves  in  his  power,  instead  of 
waiting  to  see  him  in  theirs ;  and  it  is  plain  Thurlow,  the 
Attorney-General,  was  of  my  opinion,  for  being  asked  soon 
after  Burgoyne's  defeat,  whether  he  did  not  think  he  should 
soon  lose  his  place,  he  replied,  "  Perhaps  I  may ;  but  I 
will  tell  you  what — if  I  do  I  shall  have  it  again  in  six 
months."  The  Duchess  of  Northumberland  was  in  the 
chaise  with  the  Queen  the  day  Lord  Chatham  accepted  his 
pension,  and  told  her  of  it.  The  Duchess  said  nothing. 
Said  the  Queen,  "  You  don't  speak,  are  not  you  glad  ?"  "  I 
don't  know,  Madam,"  replied  the  Duchess,  "whether  I 
ought  to  be  glad  or  not."  "Why,"  said  the  Queen,  "don't 
you  see  that  the  King  can  now  do  wliat  he  will ! "  This  was 
told  to  me  at  this  time  by  Mr.  Cowslade,  an  intimate  friend 
of  the  Duchess  and  Gentleman  Usher  to  the  Queen. 

I  mentioned  a  letter  which  Governor  Pownall  had  shown 
to  General  Conway  from  Franklin,  in  which  the  latter  said 
the  Americans  would  still  treat  with  us  if  we  would  declare 
them  Independent.  Hartley  had  shown  him  a  copy  of  the 
same  letter,  and  he  grew  very  eager  to  bring  it  about. 
Thomas  Walpole  did  not  believe  it,  and  he  knew  more  of 
Franklin's  sentiments  than  most  men  ;  but  he  did  not  even 
think  it  would  do  us  any  good.  On  the  21st  Conway  came 
to  me  and  said  he  had  been  labouring  the  point,  and  had 
persuaded  several  and  found  more  of  that  opinion.  He 
had  convinced  his  brother,  Lord  Hertford,  who  * 

*  *  *  said,5  Stanley 


*  Mr.  Conway  said,  that  though 
Stanley  was  for  the  Independence  his 
brother-in-law  Ellis  was  not,  and  laughed 
at  his  insignificance.  I  said  I  had  as 


much  contempt  for  Ellis's  abilities  as 
he  could  have.  Yet  Ellis's  dissent  was 
another  proof  of  the  King's  sentiments ; 
for  I  knew  Ellis  was  much  consulted ; 


1778. 


CONVERSATION  WITH  GENERAL  CONWAY. 


239 


and  Lord  Nugent  were  of  the  same  opinion,  and  thought 
Lord  North  and  Lord  George  Germaine  were  too ;  and  as  a 
proof  of  the  latter's  being  so,  told  me  that  De  Grey,  Lord 
George's  Secretary,  had  been  with  him  and  asked  him  for 
hints,  of  which  he  had  given  him  a  paper  with  twelve.  I 
interrupted  Mr.  Conway,  and  said,  "  That  is  a  trick  of 
Lord  George  to  hurt  you ;  he  knows  the  King  will  never 
consent  to  acknowledge  the  Independents,  and  that  he  will 
be  angry  with  you  for  trying  to  bring  it  about."  He  replied, 
he  did  not  care,  he  would  do  what  he  thought  right ;  though 
he  owned  he  did  not  believe  he  should  succeed,  for  Lord 
North  and  Lord  George  would  not  have  the  honesty  and 
courage  to  support  the  vote  of  Independence  against  the 
King's  will,  who,  he  believed,  was  determined  against  it, 
and  was,  he  was  now  persuaded,  more  the  governor  of  his 
Ministers  than  governed  by  them,  and  would  do  every- 
thing himself.  I  said  I  thought  so  too,  but  yet  had  opinions 
instilled  into  him  by  Lord  Mansfield,  Jenkinson,  and  the 
Scots.  That  I  had  early  thought  Lord  North's  concilia- 
tory plan  a  farce,  accorded  by  the  King  to  quiet  him,  and 
to  set  the  nation  still  more  against  the  Americans  for  re- 
fusing to  treat,  when  both  King  and  Ministers  knew  it  was 
too  late,  as  their  treaty  with  France  was  signed.  I  had 
disputed  with  Lord  Camden,  who  granted  everything  that 
could  be  asked :  I  said  I  had  made  several  observations 
lately  that  confirmed  my  opinion,  and  was  persuaded  the 
King  and  Scots  would  prefer  a  war  with  France  to  ac- 


and,  being  a  plausible  and  subservient 
tool,  and  of  no  weight  (which  was  what 
the  King  liked),  I  believe  he  was  de- 
signed for  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
if  Lord  North  should  resign,  or  by  liis 
father's  death  be  removed  into  the 
House  of  Ix>rds ;  for  though  Jenkinson 
was  the  person  really  intended,  the 


times  were  not  propitious  enough  ;  and 
as  he  had  had  so  principal  a  hand 
in  the  late  measures,  it  would  not  be 
thought  prudent  to  put  him  into  a  re- 
sponsible place,  which  would  expose 
him  to  be  called  to  account,  if  the  Op- 
position should  get  the  better,  which 
the  crisis  might  bring  to  pass. 


210  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

knowledging  the  Independence  of  America,  which,  if  once 
allowed,  could  never  be  recalled,  but  where  the  King  would 
not  part  with  hopes  of  absolute  power,  or  the  Scots  of 
plunder  and  confiscation  of  lands.  v  I  said,  Jenkinson's 
late  speech,  "  It  is  war''  was  one  of  my  reasons ;  another,  a 
scandalous  letter,  just  printed  and  given  about  at  the  doors 
of  both  Houses,  abusing  the  Howes  in  the  grossest  manner, 
imputing  to  them  the  fault  of  not  conquering  America,  and 
representing  the  expedience  of  sending  more  forces,  as  it 
was  stated  that  Washington's  army  was  a  slender  troop  of 
cowardly  ragamuffins,  and  that  the  greater  part  of  America 
desired  to  return  to  the  King's  obedience.  This,  I  added, 
the  Scots  still  asserted,  and  had  made  the  King  and 
Ministers  believe  that  Sir  Grey  Cooper  had  sent  me  a 
printed  copy  of  his  speech  on  the  Conciliatory  Bills,  in 
which  this  delusion  was  maintained ;  and  the  aversion  of 
the  Scots  to  those  Bills,  and  the  late  violences  of  the  Lord 
Advocate,  proved  they  had  still  such  hopes.  I  said  I  did 
not  mean  to  discourage  his  zeal,  but  feared  it  would  have 
no  effect ;  nor  indeed  did  he,  though  he  left  me  to  pursue 
his  aim  with  unabated  zeal. 

I  was  not  at  all  less  sincere  than  Conway  for  my 
country,  but  our  zeal  was  of  different  kinds.  His  was  to 
preserve  it  as  great  as  he  could ;  mine  was  to  see  the  con- 
stitution restored,  and  the  arbitrary  spirit  of  the  King  and 
Junto  punished.  To  me  it  would  be  preferable  to  have 
the  nation  humbled,  provided  it  remained  free,  than  to  see 
it  victorious  and  enslaved.  From  the  Stamp  Act,  and 
from  the  military  laws  devised  by  Lord  Mansfield  for  the 
Colonies,  from  his  abolition  of  Juries  and  restoration  of 
,  Popery  in  Canada,  from  the  beginning  of  the  war,  and 
from  the  bloody  acts  contrived  not  only  to  punish,  but  to 
drive  all  the  Colonies  into  rebellion,  that  all  might  be 


1778.  INHERENT  DPJSPOTISM  OF  THE  KING.  241 

punished  and  enslaved,  I  had  seen  the  evident  tendency 
of  the  King's  measures.  I  had  as  little  doubt,  but  if  the 
conquest  of  America  should  be  achieved,  the  moment  of 
the  victorious  army's  return  would  be  that  of  the  destruc- 
tion of  our  liberty.  That  army  had  been  sent  to  fight  for 
prerogative,  was  disciplined  by  Jacobite  Scots,  and  was  to 
combat  men  that  fought  for  freedom.  They  would  be  at 
the  beck  of  a  Prince  that  thirsted  for  despotism,  who  had 
not  only  a  Tory  Administration,  but  of  men  who  had  been 
Jacobites,  as  Lord  Mansfield  and  Lord  Gower,6  and  was 
supported  by  a  zealous  Clergy,  particularly  of  those  bred  at 
Oxford ;  and  the  greatest  efforts  of  the  Scots  had  been  to 
represent  the  Opposition  as  inciters  of  the  rebellion  which 
the  army  had  been  sent  to  crush.  Would  that  army,  had 
it  returned  victorious,  have  hesitated  to  make  the  King  as 
absolute  as  they  had  made  him  in  America  ?  Would 
they  not  have  been  let  loose  against  the  friends  of  liberty 
as  more  rebels  ?  I  had  a  strong  proof,  on  the  20th,  of  my 
suspicions  being  just.  Lord  Ossory  showed  me  a  letter 
from  his  brother,  Kichard  Fitzpatrick,  at  Philadelphia, 
brought  over  privately  by  Colonel  Harcourt,  who  was  just 
arrived  thence.  Fitzpatrick  had  distinguished  himself  by 
his  gallant  behaviour,  and  had  been  mentioned  with  praise 
by  General  Howe  to  the  King ;  but,  though  he  had  done 
his  duty  as  an  officer  with  spirit,  yet,  from  his  connection 
with  his  brother  and  Charles  Fox,  he  disliked  the  cause. 
In  this  letter,  which  was  admirably  well  written,  he  ex- 
pressed his  impatience  to  return,  saying  he  was  far  more 
rooted  in  his  principles  from  admiration  of  the  noble 
behaviour  of  the  Americans,  and  their  love  of  freedom; 


•  At  this  very  moment  Lord  Gower 
IV-  ((iinitly  harangued  on  the  dangers 
of  rcpnblWnkm  ;  and  nil  the  partizans 


of  the  American  war  spoke  of  the  Op- 
1  m-it  ion  as  republicans.  I  have  men- 
tioned the  King's  calling  them  rebels. 


VOL.  II.  R 


242 


LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


MARCH, 


and  was  disgusted  with  the  army,  who  were  grown  to  abhor 
the  name  of  Whigs,  and  had  lost  all  attachment  to  liberty. 
An  invasion  from  France  could  not  be  so  fatal  as  the 
return  of  such  an  army,  unless  calamity  and  the  incapacity 
of  the  Ministers,  and  the  obstinacy  of  the  Sovereign, 
rouse  the  nation,  drive  out  the  Administration,  punish 
them,  and  restore  the  constitution.  If  the  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  independence  of  the  Americans  should  recon- 
cile them,  and  thence  produce  peace  with  France,  I  am 
persuaded  the  King  will  still  think  of  satiating  his  ven- 
geance on  what  he  calls  the  English  Rebels.  But  I  think 
his  blindness  and  folly  will  not  let  him  advert  to  that 
advantage,  still  hoping  that  something  may  turn  out  to 
enable  him  to  crush  both  England  and  America ;  and  I 
think  too  that  France  will  not  lose  such  a  moment  to  give 
us  a  dreadful  blow  :  but  from  that  we  may  in  time  recover, 
we  never  can  from  the  subversion  of  the  constitution. 
How  blindly  the  Court  was  infatuated  by  the  vision  of 
despotism  appeared  by  another  circumstance.  Though 
all  our  greatness  had  been  founded  on  trade,  the  Ministers, 
and  Lord  North  as  much  as  any  one  (for  there  was  no 
part  he  was  not  base  enough  to  act),  for  fear  the  loss  of 
American  trade  should  alarm  the  nation,  had  propagated 
a  doctrine  that  we  could  do  without  the  American  trade ; 
that  Russia,  Poland,  and  Germany  took  off  as  great  a 
quantity  of  our  manufactures  as  our  hands  could  furnish, 
and  that  we  could  not  be  enriched  by  more  trade  than  we 
could  supply. 7  False  position  ! — for  the  glut  with  Russia 


7  There  was  this  other  falsehood  in 
that  position :  we  could  not  furnish 
more  commodities  for  the  demands  of 
trade,  because  so  many  hands  were 
taken  from  manufactures  to  supply  the 
army  and  navy.  Lord  Barrington,  too, 
early  in  the  war,  had  bragged  that  the 


decay  of  trade  would  force  manufac- 
turers to  enlist.  Thus,  by  a  rotation 
of  the  most  wicked  policy,  the  Mini- 
sters crippled  trade  to  get  soldiers,  and 
then  pleaded  that  we  had  more  trade 
than  we  could  supply. 


1778.         DEPARTURE  OF  THE  FRENCH  AMBASSADOR.  243 

and  Poland  arose  from  the  years  in  which  their  wars  had 
prevented  their  dealing  with  us,  and  other  nations  might 
run  away  with  those  markets,  which  they  could  not  with  our 
own  in  America,  where  we  were  masters  to  affix  the  price. 
That  commerce,  too,  was  the  nursery  of  our  seamen.  But 
it  is  frivolous  to  show  the  chicanery  of  such  an  argument. 
However,  the  only  success  the  Ministers  had  in  the  Ame- 
rican war  was  in  sowing  delusion  and  seeing  it  grow  up. 

The  French  Ambassador  and  his  wife  set  out  on  their 
return  on  the  20#A,  at  six  in  the  morning — Madame  de 
Noailles  being  afraid  of  insults 8  from  the  people.  When 
Lord  Weymouth  acquainted  him,  as  from  himself,  with 
Lord  Stormont's  recall,  and  advised  his  not  appearing  at 
Court,  he  answered  he  could  not  go  away  without  orders 
from  his  Court :  he  received  them  on  the  19th.  He  was 
a  grave,  decent,  and  very  well-bred  man,  and  had  never 
given  the  smallest  offence,  being  remarkably  discreet. 
However,  he  spread  his  memorial  with  great  activity,  and 
the  gentlemen  of  his  suite  with  much  impertinence.  One, 
his  relation,  being  told  by  a  person  that  he  was  sorry  for 
their  going,  replied,  "  Oh,  we  shall  soon  be  back  here ;" 
meaning  an  invasion.  Lord  Stormont  arrived  the  20th, 
in  the  evening.9 

The  Court  received  advice  of  a  treaty  between  the 
Emperor  and  France,  by  which  the  latter  was  to  garrison 
his  towns  in  Flanders,  that  he  might  employ  his  troops 
against  the  King  of  Prussia. 

A  strong  report  that  the  King  had  made  new  overtures 
to  Lord  Chatham.  Some  said  the  latter  demanded  nomi- 


8  They  acttmlly  were  pelted  ae  they 
wrnt  out  of  C.inti  rlniry. 

9  This  was  a  false  report.    He  said 


him.  Perhaps  Lord  Mansfield  ordered 
him,  by  a  private  letter,  to  stay,  in  hopes 
the  war  might  be  avoided. 


his  wife  hud  a  swelled  face;  that  k«  j>t 

R    2 


244  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

nation  to  all  the  departments ;  others,  that  he  insisted  on 
the  dismission  of  Lord  North  and  Lord  George  Germaine, 
but  said  he  should  not  meddle  with  the  dirty  people  of  the 
Court;  that,  if  the  King  liked  dirty  company,  he  was 
welcome  to  keep  it. 

24th.  Lord  Weymouth  acquainted  the  Lords  that,  in 
consequence  of  the  treaty  between  France  and  America, 
and  of  the  increasing  armaments  of  the  former,  his  Majesty, 
according  to  the  power  given  to  him  by  Parliament,  intended 
to  call  out  the  militia,  which  the  Dukes  of  Richmond  and 
Manchester  declared  they  approved  The  House  then 
proceeded  on  the  inquiries,  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
recommended  attention  to  Ireland  and  the  West  Indies, 
and  to  endeavour  peace  with  America  by  acknowledging 
its  independence ;  and  he  dissuaded  declaring  war  with 
France,  believing  both  the  King  of  France  and  M.  de  Mau- 
repas  still  inclined  to  peace.  Lord  Sandwich  still  boasted 
the  strength  of  the  fleet,  but  moved  for  adjourning  the 
Committee.  Lord  Rockingham  and  the  Duke  of  Grafton 
attacked  the  Ministers  on  the  consequences  of  their  mea- 
sures and  the  weakness  of  the  nation  ;  and  the  latter  spoke 
with  great  indignation  and  bitterness  on  the  report  that 
Lord  George  Germaine  was  to  be  called  up  to  that  House 
— he  that  had  been  employed  though  degraded,  and  who 
had  done  nothing  to  deserve  reward,  but  the  contrary. 
Lord  Lyttelton  took  a  new  turn  and  derided  Lord  Sand- 
wich severely  on  the  weakness  of  the  fleet,  after  all  his 
boasts,  and  then  declared  the  necessity  of  calling  for  Lord 
Chatham,  to  whom  and  Lord  Shelburne  he  paid  great 
compliments.  Some  thought  he  was  set  on  by  the  Court 
to  feel  the  pulse  of  the  House,  but  it  is  very  probable  that 
he  believed  the  report  that  Lord  Chatham  was  to  come 
into  place,  and  wanted  to  make  his  own  peace.  Had  he 


177S.        RETURN  OF  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER  TO  TOWN.        245 

been  prompted  he  would  not  have  attacked  Lord  Sand- 
wich. It  is  certain  that  Lord  Denbigh  and  Lord  Talbot 
gave  loud  applauses  to  his  panegyric  on  Lord  Chatham : 
they  probably  thought  themselves  included  in  the  number 
of  the  dirty  that  he  meant  to  spare.  The  adjournment  was 
voted  by  56  to  28. 

The  Duke  of  Gloucester,  who  had  been  ill  again  with 
his  asthma  and  a  cough,  and  was  gone  to  the  New  Forest 
for  the  air,  was  returned  to  town,  on  the  probability  of 
war,  and  on  the  promotion  of  Lord  Amherst.  I  was 
afraid  he  would  be  offended  at  it  and  resign  his  regiment, 
which  would  widen  the  breach  between  him  and  the  King ; 
nor  could  he  afford  to  lose  the  income.  I  therefore  imme- 
diately told  him  that  Lord  Amherst  was  to  have  no  title  as 
commander.  The  Duke  replied,  "  That  I  will  know  in 
twenty-four  hours."  He  wrote  to  the  King,  that  hearing  of 
the  insult  his  Majesty  had  received  from  France,  he  had 
immediately  come  to  town  to  offer  his  service  ;  and  as  the 
King  had  wished  him  to  retain  his  regiment,  he  hoped  to  be 
employed.  He  sent  for  Lord  George  Gerinaine  and  gave 
him  the  letter.  Lord  George  told  him  that  Lord  North, 
the  day  before,  viz.  21st,  had  told  the  Ministers  there 
must  be  a  Coramander-in-Chief,  and  that  he  should  pro- 
pose Lord  Amherst  to  the  King.  I  doubt  the  truth  of 
this  ;  Lord  George  himself  was  much  more  likely  to  have 
named  Amherst.  Lord  George  added  that  he  had  asked 
Lord  North  how  the  Duke  would  like  this  ?  and  that 
Lord  North  had  answered  with  confusion  and  ill  humour, 
"  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  is  very  ill."  Lord  George  had 
said,  his  Royal  Highness  was  out  of  order,  but  not  so  bad 
but  he  would  offer  his  service.  The  Duke  told  Lord 
George  he  should  be  very  glad  to  have  Amherst  for 
assistant,  and  Amherst  had  said  in  return,  he  should  be 


246  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MARCH, 

proud  to  serve  under  his  Royal  Highness,  and  should 
rejoice  to  have  his  sanction.  Lord  George  carried  the 
Duke's  letter  to  the  King,  but  begged  his  Majesty  would 
do  nothing  rashly,  but  take  some  days  before  he  should 
give  his  answer.  When  the  Duke  told  me  of  this,  I  said, 
"Sir,  if  there  is  no  Commander  named,  I  hope  your 
Royal  Highness  will  not  be  angry  if  you  are  not  appointed." 
He  replied,  "  People  that  are  of  no  profession  never  feel 
as  they  do  who  are  of  one ;  but  I  promise  you  I  will  weigh 
it:  I  will  do  nothing  rashly."  I  said,  "Sir,  I  hope  you 
will  not.  I  think  the  King  will  not  name  you  Com- 
mander-in-chief; he  will  say  he  will  be  so  himself;  and,  if 
the  French  land,  he  will  be  frightened,  and  probably  give 
your  Royal  Highness  some  separate  command."  He  said 
that  would  content  him.  All  the  answer  Lord  George 
said  he  could  obtain,  after  some  days,  was,  that  the  King 
said  he  thought  the  Duke  had  no  reason  to  complain,  as 
nobody  was  named  Commander-in-Chief.  The  difficulties 
of  the  times,  however,  seemed  to  soften  the  King  a  little ; 
for,  meeting  the  Duke  riding,  his  Majesty  pulled  off  his 
hat  to  him,  which  he  had  not  done  before.  And  on  the 
27th,  on  calling  out  the  militia,  which  Lord  Orford's 
insanity  would  not  permit  his  commanding,  Lord  Wey- 
mouth  wrote  to  Lord  Hertford,  by  the  King's  order,  to 
say  he  had  a  mind  to  appoint  three  Deputy-Lieutenants, 
whom  he  named,  but  would  not  fix  till  he  knew  they 
would  be  agreeable  to  the  Walpole  family,  which  Lord 
Hertford  was  desired  to  inquire.  I  wrote  a  very  respect- 
ful answer.  But  this  civility  might  have  been  occasioned, 
too,  by  a  sort  of  civil  remonstrance  I  had  made  on  Lord 
William  Gordon  being  appointed  Deputy-Ranger  of  the 
Parks,  without  consulting  us.  My  great  point  was  to  pre- 
vent any  greater  breach  between  the  King  and  Duke.  I 


1778.  THE  MILITIA  ORDERED  OUT.  247 

now  took  an  opportunity  of  excusing  General  Conway  to 
the  Duke  on  the  latter  mentioning  him  with  regard.  I 
told  him  it  had  been  solely  my  doing  that  General  Conway 
had  not  waited  on  his  Royal  Highness,  and  had  a  hundred 
times  reproached  me  with  it,  as  I  had  often  told  the 
Duchess.  The  Duke  said  the  Duchess  had  often  told 
him  I  had  taken  that  on  myself.  "  Indeed,  Sir,"  said  I, 
"  it  is  very  true  ;  I  beg  your  Royal  Highness's  pardon, 
but  I  had  rather  you  should  be  angry  with  me,  who  am 
the  person  in  fault,  than  with  him,  whom  I  over-persuaded 
against  his  inclination." 

The  militia  was  now  ordered  out,  and  four  days  after  the 
French  had  laid  an  embargo,  we  laid  one  on  their  ships 
when  many  were  gone  away.  Little  was  done  in  either 
House,  everybody  waiting  to  see  whether  war  would  be 
declared,  or  if  there  would  not  be  a  change  of  Administra- 
tion, which  all  men  expected. 

On  the  27t/t,  Lord  Stormont  arrived,  declaring  France 
had  been  much  surprised  at  his  recall,  and  that  they  did 
not  expect  or  desire  war. 

I  was  told  of  a  very  remarkable  incident.  Dundas,  the 
Scotch  Lord  Advocate,  dined  at  Mr.  Rigby's  on  the  27th, 
with  seven  or  eight  other  persons.  They  sat  drinking  till 
one  in  the  morning,  when  the  Lord  Advocate,  being  very  | 
drunk,  broke  out  into  an  invective  against  the  English. 
He  said  he  would  move  for  a  repeal  of  the  Union ;  that 
any  ten  Scots  could  beat  any  ten  English ;  and  if  there 
were  any  competition,  he  was,  and  would  avow  himself,  a  ' 
Scot.  Mr.  Douglas,  a  friend  of  Lord  Weymouth,  was 
present,  and  so  angry  at  this  declaration,  that  he  had  a 
mind  to  have  struck  the  Lord  Advocate.  I  was  told  this 
by  one  to  whom  Mr.  Rigby  himself  repeated  the  story. 

30th.  General  Conway  was  with  Lord  Shelburne  and 
the  Duke  of  Grafton,  and  laboured  to  unite  them,  and 


248  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MARCH, 

persuade  the  whole  Opposition  to  union ;  but  Lord  Shel- 
burne  declared  Lord  Chatham  would  hear  of  nothing  but 
the  dependence  of  America. 

31  st/  General  Con  way  saw  Dr.  Franklin's  letters,  in 
which  he  positively  asserted  that  he  had  power  from  the 
Americans  still  to  treat  with  us ;  yet,  both  the  Court  and 
Lord  Chatham  were  so  mad,  Conway  could  not  bring 
about  any  endeavours  of  reunion  with  America.  Lord 
Chatham  was  to  have  come  to  the  House  of  Lords  this 
day,  but  did  not,  in  all  probability  the  Court  was  nego- 
tiating with  him  and  had  not  yet  come  up  to  his  terms. 
One  of  the  letters  was  to  Hutton,  the  King's  secret  agent. 
Franklin  said  the  Americans  would  not  treat  with  the 
present  cruel  Administration,  nor  but  on  the  foot  of  inde- 
pendence ;  these  two  reasons,  especially  the  former,  pre- 
vented all  treaty  at  present.  \ 

30M.  Colonel  Barre,  in  a  long  and  able  speech,  moved 
for  a  select  Committee  to  examine  the  extraordinaries  (?) 
of  the  army.  Lord  North  was  determined  not  to  grant  it, 
and  opposed  it  with  great  heat ;  but,  being  little  supported, 
and  the  temper  of  the  House  seeming  to  approve  the 
motion,  he  yielded  to  it  with  ill  grace,  still  no  doubt 
hoping  the  Committee,  though  chosen  by  ballot,  would 
consist  of  persons  of  the  majority. 

3lst.  Many  more  motions  relative  to  the  navy  were 
proposed  by  Lord  Effingharn,  and  produced  a  very  hot 
debate,  with  many  personal  and  general  reflections,  between 
his  Lordship,  Lord  Sandwich,  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  and 
the  Chancellor.  Lord  Effingham  called  the  majority  a 
servile  one ;  the  Duke  expressed  fears  of  the  people  rising 
against  the  Ministers,  and  reflected  on  Miss  Ray,  Lord 
Sandwich's  mistress,  who  was  supposed  to  sell  favours  in  the 
Admiralty  for  money.  The  motions  were  rejected. 


1778.  LORD  NORTH'S  INTERVIEW  WITH  D.  OF  GLOUCESTER.  249 


APRIL. 


2nd.  LORD  North  waited  on  the  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
and  told  him  that  the  King  now  intended  to  perform  his 
promise  of  providing  for  his  Royal  Highness's  children ; 
that  the  next  day,  or  as  soon  after  as  could  be,  his  Majesty 
would  send  a  message  to  Parliament  to  ask  provision  for 
his  own  children  and  for  the  Duke's.  For  his  own  sons 
he  should  ask  10,000/.  a  year  each,  and  for  his  daughters 
60001 ;  for  the  Duke's  son,  Prince  William,  8000/.,  and 
Princess  Sophia,  4000/.  This  was  certainly  a  handsome 
provision  for  the  Duke's  issue,  in  proportion  to  the  King's, 
and  considering  the  great  number  of  the  latter,  the 
burthens  of  the  country,  and  the  present  moment.  The 
provisions  for  the  King's  children  were  to  be  paid  out  of 
the  Civil  List,  a  lesser  part  for  the  Duke's  to  be  paid 
by  Ireland,  which  would  occasion  a  diminution  of  about 
300/.  or  400/.  a  year.  The  Duke  was  much  pleased  and 
grateful,  but  wished  the  whole  for  his  children  could  be 
paid  in  the  same  manner  as  the  rest ;  and  he  was  so  afraid 
of  encumbering  the  favour  with  any  difficulties  that  he 
would  not  name  the  Duchess,  who  was  not  mentioned ; 
but  Lord  George  Germaine  told  the  Duke  there  was  no 
precedent  for  naming  her,  nor  was  the  Queen  named  with 
her  children.  This  was  certainly  no  reason,  for  the 
Queen's  jointure  was  settled  by  Parliament  before  she  had 
a  child ;  but  Lord  George  added,  that  there  could  be  no 
doubt  now  of  the  Duchess  having  a  handsome  jointure,  if 
his  Royal  Highness  should  die  before  her — nor  indeed 


250  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

could  there  be  a  doubt.  Her  marriage  was  acknowledged 
and  confirmed  by  her  children  being  established  as  Princes 
of  the  blood.  Of  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumberland, 
as  they  had  no  issue,  no  mention  was  to  be  made ;  but  the 
Duchess  was  entitled  to  whatever  the  Duchess  of  Glou- 
cester was.  Her  family  had  behaved  with  much  less 
caution  and  decency  than  we  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester's 
relations  ;  but  the  latter  Princess  had  not  been  so  discreet. 
The  Duke  told  me  that  Lord  North  behaved  as  hoggishly 
as  if  he  had  brought  an  angry  message. 

The  same  day  Lord  North  acquainted  the  House  of 
Commons  that  he  intended  to  move  for  an  additional  five 
shillings  to  the  subscribers  to  the  new  loan,  as  they  had 
been  losers  by  it.  This  was  a  strong  proof  of  the  want  of 
credit,  and  his  own  friends  objected  to  it  so  much  that  he 
dropped  it. 

4th.  To  the  astonishment  of  mankind  it  was  declared 
that  Mr.  Jackson  was  not  to  be  one  of  the  three  Commis- 
sioners to  America,  but  that  Governor  Johnston  was; 
and  he,  Lord  Carlisle,  and  Eden  kissed  hands.  This  con- 
firmed the  very  bad  opinion  the  world  had  of  Johnston,  and 
of  his  being  a  true  Scot.  To  this  moment  he  had  long  been 
in  violent  Opposition,  had  ridiculed  Lord  Carlisle  egre- 
giously  (indeed  both  were  equally  mean  in  consenting  to  go 
together),  and  had  even  very  lately  declared  strongly  against 
the  Independence  of  America,  which  could  not  make  him 
a  welcome  negotiator  there ;  but  the  great  salary  drowned 
all  reasons.  His  brother,  Mr.  Pulteney,1  had  wished  to  be 


Sir  William   Johnston,  a  descend-      was   heiress.     Johnston,  on  his  mar- 


ant  of  the  Burons  Johnston  of  Annan- 
dale,  married  Frances,  sole  child  of 
Lieutenant-General  Pulteney,  brother 
of  the  Earl  of  Bath,  who  died  childless, 
in  1704,  and  to  whoso  estates  Frances 


riago,  took  the  name  of  Pulteney.  The 
issue  of  this  marriage,  Henrietta  Laura 
Pulteney,  was  created  Baroness  of  Bath, 
1794,  and  subsequently  a  Countess ;  but 
the  title  became  extinct  in  1808.  Wil- 


1778. 


COMMITTEE  OF  ACCOUNTS  CHOSEX. 


251 


one  of  the  Commissioners,  and  had  lately  been  at  Paris 
to  talk  with  Dr.  Franklin — the  latter  might  have  en- 
couraged them,  either  seeing  that  Johnston's  principles 
could  veer  to  any  point  of  interest,  or  to  prevent  success  to 
the  negotiation  by  so  unwelcome  a  mediator.  Franklin 
might  have  these  covert  views  even  in  his  reply  to  Button. 
It  was  not  likely  he  would  take  any  step  that  would  lessen 
the  honour  he  had  gained  of  being  the  principal  destroyer 
of  the  Empire  of  Great  Britain.  Dr.  Robertson,  the  His- 
torian, told  me  on  the  5th  that  he  knew  Franklin  well, 
who  had  been  thrice  in  Scotland  several  years  ago.  Being 
once  at  Scone  and  told  it  was  there  the  old  Scottish  Kings 
had  used  to  be  crowned,  Franklin  said,  "  Who  knows  but 
St.  James's  may  some  time  or  other  lie  in  ruins  as  Scone, 
does  now," — a  commonplace  reflection,  if  what  has  since 
happened  did  not  make  it  memorable,  and  indicate  how 
long  he  had  harboured  his  plan. 

The  Committee  of  Accounts  was  chosen ;  the  first 
five  were  in  Opposition,  the  other  sixteen  hearty  Courtiers. 

The  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Cumberland  arrived  in  Eng- 
land on  the  prospect  of  the  war  with  France,  which,  how- 
ever, now  grew  more  dubious :  it  was  said  we  were  trying 
to  negotiate  a  peace ;  and  it  was  thought  so  likely  to  take 
place,  that  the  Stocks  rose  a  little.  All  the  English  that 
arrived  from  Paris  reported  that  the  French  wished  it, 
though  so  lately  eager  for  war;  and  that  great  rejoicings 
had  been  in  France  on  the  return  of  M.  De  la  Mothe  with  his 
squadron,  as  if  they  had  thought  hiin  in  danger  from  ours ; 
but  it  was  said  that  he  had  conveyed  the  ships  destined  for 


liain  Johnston  Pulteney  was  elder 
brothi-r  of  Governor  Johnston;  the 
latter  was  a  brave,  brutal,  rash,  ovor- 
,  litigious,  and  rather  clever 


personage,  whose  name,  constantly  be- 
fore the  public  of  the  latter  part  of  the 
last  century,  is  now  almost  forgotten. 
— D. 


252  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

America  with  stores,  to  a  certain  latitude,  and  then  con- 
signed them  to  a  Spanish  fleet,  which,  not  having  yet  quar- 
relled with  Spain,  we  could  not  attack.  If  France  is  not 
determined  on  war,  it  must  be  that  she  is  not  ready,  and 
had  trusted  to  our  wanting  spirit  to  resent  the  memorial 
of  M.  de  Noailles.  Admiral  Keppel  returned  too  from 
Portsmouth,  and  the  King  was  so  indiscreet  as  to  ask 
him  aloud  in  the  Drawing  Room  in  what  condition  he  had 
found  the  fleet  ?  he,  having  found  it  in  a  very  bad  one, 
had  the  prudence  to  reply,  "  I  hope,  Sir,  your  Majesty 
will  give  me  a  private  audience  after  the  Drawing  Room." 
In  Ireland  the  alarm  was  exceedingly  great,  and  the  Pro- 
testant gentlemen,  before  any  requisition  could  be  made  by 
the  Lord  Lieutenant,  began  raising  troops. 

It  was  very  remarkable  that  on  the  militia  being  ordered 
out,  two  of  Lord  Bute's  younger  sons  offered,  as  Bedford- 
shire gentlemen,  to  take  any  rank  in  the  militia  in  that 
county.  I  warned  Lord  Ossory,  the  Lord  Lieutenant, 
against  so  dangerous  a  precedent  as  admitting  Scots  in  the 
militia — and  indeed,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Lords  Lieutenants 
on  the  5th,  the  Court  having  offered  them  half-pay  officers, 
it  was  unanimously  rejected.  'A.  militia  can  only  be  safe 
by  being  officered  by  men  of  property  in  each  county.  If 
indigent  officers,  attached  only  to  the  Crown,  were  intro- 
duced, it  would  make  it  the  worst  kind  of  standing  army.\ 

6th.  Sir  W.  Meredith,  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
moved  for  a  repeal  of  all  the  inimical  Acts  against  the 
Americans.  In  the  course  of  the  debate  Charles  Fox  and 
Burke  spoke  for  greater  indulgence  to  Roman  Catholics. 
At  the  end  of  the  debate  General  Conway  complained  of 
the  want  of  discipline  in  the  army,  and  of  the  officers  not 
studying  the  art  of  war.  He  said  he  hoped  it  would  be 
better  now  Lord  Amherst  was  set  at  the  head  of  the  mili- 


1778.  DEBILITY  OF  LOUD  CHATHAM.  253 

tary.     For  himself,  he  looked  on  himself  as  laid  aside,  and 
could  only  give  his  advice  in  that  House. 

7th.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  opened  and  read  a  very 
long  and  severe  recapitulation  of  all  that  had  been  col- 
lected during  the  inquiries.  Lord  Chatham  appeared  in 
the  House;  he  had  told  his  particular  friends  that  he 
laboured  under  great  anxieties,  yet  must  adhere  to  main- 
taining the  sovereignty  over  America.  He  complained 
that  the  Court  had  been  tampering  with  his  physicians  and 
everybody  about  him,  but  had  made  no  direct  offers  to 
himself  (which  probably  was  the  cause  of  his  anger)  ;  he 
declared  he  would  protest  against  ever  compounding  with 
the  Ministers  that  had  ruined  this  country,  yet  would  not 
consent  to  the  Independence  of  America,  and  would  say 
that,  before  that  could  be  done,  the  Prince  of  Wales  ought 
to  be  brought  to  the  House  and  give  his  consent  to  it — he 
did  afterwards  hint  at  that — and  it  looked  a  little  as  if  his 
anger  made  him  wish  to  spirit  up  the  Prince.  Dr.  Ad- 
dington,  his  physician,  had  laboured  that  very  morning 
to  dissuade  him  from  going  to  the  House,  but  he  persisted, 
and  endeavoured  to  answer  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  after 
Lord  Weymouth  had  replied  to  the  letter ;  but  it  soon  ap- 
peared that  Lord  Chatham  was  exceedingly  weak,  and  his 
head  not  clear.  He  repeated  his  own  words  several  times, 
and  could  not  recollect  the  name  of  the  Princess  Sophia. 
He  asserted  the  sovereignty,  and  bade  the  Lords  not  fear  a 
French  invasion  ;  we  had  resisted  Danish  invasions,  Norman 
usurpations,  and  Scottish  inroads  (the  two  first  instances 
were  directly  contrary  to  his  purpose)  ;  he  said  he  wished 
for  no  place,  nor  was  any  man's  enemy  ; — but  he  knew  so 
little  what  he  said,  and  was  so  weak,  that  he  sat  down. 
The  Duke  of  Richmond  answered  Lord  Weymouth  and 
Lord  Chatham,  but  with  great  tenderness  and  respect  to 


254  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

the  latter,  who  was  going  to  reply,  hut  fell  down  in  a  second 
|  fit  of  apoplexy,  and  lay  some  time  as  one  dead.  He  was 
carried  into  the  Jerusalem  Chamber,  and  in  about  twenty 
minutes  recovered  his  speech.  The  first  thing  he  said 
was,  "  I  was  going  to  recommend  Prince  Ferdinand  for 
General."  That  was  very  likely,  both  from  his  regard  for 
that  Prince,  and  from  his  aversion  to  Lord  George  Ger- 
maine.  He  was  carried  to  a  messenger's  house  adjoining, 
and  next  day  was  better.  The  House  of  Lords  paid  Lord 
Chatham  the  respect  of  adjourning  immediately. 

8th.  Lord  Wey mouth  and  Lord  North  delivered  to  the 
two  Houses  the  King's  message,  desiring  establishments  for 
his  own  and  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  children,  which  was 
received  in  both  Houses  with  the  utmost  respect  and  una- 
nimity. Wilkes  took  notice  that  now  for  the  first  time 
the  Duke's  marriage  was  communicated  to  the  House ;  he 
wished  a  jointure  for  the  Duchess  had  been  asked  too. 
T.  Townshend  made  a  panegyric  both  on  the  Duke  and 
Duchess,  and  expressed  their  content,  to  prevent  any  cavils 
that  might  offend  the  King,  and  he  commended  the  Duke's 
virtues  till  he  wept,  himself. 

The  Lords  then  went  on  the  Duke  of  Richmond's  re- 
monstrance of  the  preceding  day,  when  it  was  rejected  by 
50  to  33.  Lord  Shelburne  made  a  most  bombast  and 
ridiculous  speech  for  the  sovereignty  over  America,  and 
said  we  could  not  want  men  for  a  French  war :  their 
Lordships  would  fight  for  their  country ;  we  abounded  in 
people,  every  stage-coach  was  overloaded — even  the  ladies 
would  cast  away  their  feathers,  and  show  how  they  de- 
spised Frenchmen.  Lord  Shelburne  not  only  adopted  his 
patron  Lord  Chatham's  sentiments,  but  was  as  impatient 
to  be  in  place,  and  no  doubt  intended  to  be  so  if  Lord 
Chatham  should  die. 


1778.        INDECENT  CONDUCT  OF  THE  FOLEY  TARTY.  255 

9tk.  The  Chancellor  had  drawn  a  plan  for  giving  some 
satisfaction  to  Lord  Foley  and  his  brother,  on  which  the 
Lords  seemed  willing  to  pass  it :  yet  the  friends  of  the 
Foleys  had  not  stuck  entirely  to  the  Chancellor's  plan ;  the 
two  other  law  Lords  not  being  present,  the  Foley  squad- 
ron, who  had  a  majority  of  one  present,  would  not  consent 
to  adjourn  as  the  Chancellor  desired, — he  pleading  fatigue 
They  behaved  most  indecently,  especially  Lord  Derby, 
and  even  the  Duke  of  Richmond  was  too  earnest  for  pro- 
ceeding that  very  day.  The  Chancellor  complained  griev- 
ously of  the  usage,  and  many  that  wished  well  to  Lady 
Foley  were  yet  shocked  ;  at  last  Lord  Sandwich,  who  de- 
clared he  had  been  rather  disposed  to  grant  the  bill,  broke 
out  against  the  indecency  of  his  friends,  and  moved  to 
have  the  bill  sent  back  to  the  Judges,  to  which  the  House 
agreed. 

Lord  Cornwallis,  who  was  returned,  and  had  spoken  too 
freely  on  American  affairs,  was  suddenly  ordered  back 
thither,  and  with  so  little  civility,  that  De  Grey,  Lord  G. 
Germaine's  Secretary,  told  him  of  it  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  and  that  he  must  go  in  the  ship  with  the  Commis- 
sioners, and  that  there  was  only  room  for  his  Lordship  and 
one  servant. 

10M.  Wilkes  moved  to  address  the  King  to  lay  before 
the  House  the  proofs  entered  into  the  Council  books  of  the 
marriages  of  the  Dukes  of  Gloucester  and  Cumberland. 
This  motion  was  received  by  the  whole  House  with  the 
utmost  disgust  and  indignation.  Even  Rigby,  who  the 
last  year  had  opposed  Sir  James  Lowther's  proposal  for  an 
augmentation  of  the  appanages  of  the  two  Royal  Dukes, 
now  rose  and  asked  if  any  man  living  doubted  of  the 
legality  of  those  marriages  ?  that  he  had  sat  in  Council 
the  day  of  their  being  registered,  and  did  not  wish  to  see  a 


256  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

motion  that  implied  the  least  doubt :  out  of  respect  to  his 
Royal  Highness  of  Gloucester,  he  thought  the  bill  should 
be  read  a  second  time  immediately.  This  appeared  to  be 
the  universal  sense,  except  of  that  profligate  old  reprobate, 
Lord  Irnham,  who  pretended  that,  in  justice  to  the  Prin- 
cess of  Brunswick,2  the  legality  of  the  marriages  of  her 
brothers  ought  to  be  ascertained.  He  added  all  the  mali- 
cious reports  that  had  been  spread  on  the  marriage  of  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester,  and  urged  the  King's  refusal  of  suf- 
fering the  Duke's  daughter,  the  Princess  Matilda,  to  be 
buried  in  the  Royal  vault,  as  a  mark  of  the  King's  doubt- 
ing the  marriage.  But  all  this  venom  only  poisoned  itself, 
and  turned  into  attestations  of  the  virtue  of  the  Duchess 
of  Gloucester.  Not  a  single  person  supported  the  malevo- 
lence of  Irnham.  Thomas  Townshend  and  Thomas  Wai- 
pole  bore  the  highest  testimony  to  the  characters  of  the 
Duke  and  Duchess  ;  the  former  hinted  a  wish  of  reconcili- 
ation between  the  King  and  his  brothers,  and  the  latter 
recommended  to  Lord  Irnham,  from  his  connection  with 
the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  to  advise  Wilkes  to  withdraw  his 
motion.  Sir  James  Lowther  recommended  a  settlement  of 
jointures  on  the  two  Duchesses,  which  Wilkes  immediately 
adopted,  and  withdrew  his  motion,  to  the  utter  confusion 
of  the  Luttrells ;  and  the  bill  for  the  Royal  children  was 
carried  through  both  Houses  with  the  utmost  rapidity,  and 
received  the  Royal  assent  with  general  satisfaction. 

Wilkes  must  be  acquitted  of  any  sinister  intention  in 
this  absurd  motion.     On  the  first  delivery  of  the  King's 


2  Immediately  after  the  King's  mes-  ;  children  would  be  an  injury  to  the  issue 

sage  the  Luttrells  had  inserted  in  the  of  the  Princess   of  Brunswick.     The 

public   papers  two  or  three  malicious  i  authors  were  immediately  guessed,  and 

and  extravagant  passages,  reflecting  on  the  father's  speech  on  Wilkes's  motion 

the  Duchess  of  Gloucester's  marriage,  proved  the  public  had   not  been  mis- 

and  asserting  that  acknowledging  her  taken. 


1778.      THE  BILL  FOR  THE  ROYAL  CHILDREN  CARRIED.       257 

message,  he  had  proposed  a  jointure  for  the  Duchess  of 
Gloucester— somebody  near  him  said,  "  Why  do  not  you 
mention  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland,  too  ?"  he  replied, 
';  Well,  and  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland,  with  all  my 
heart."  This  proved  he  had  no  zeal  for  the  House  of 
Luttrell,  his  old  antagonists;  but  that  old  fiend,3  Lord 
Irnham,  had  now  duped  him,  and  persuaded  him  that 
both  the  Dukes  wished  to  have  their  marriages  confirmed 
by  Parliament.  It  was  indeed  duping  him,  for  the  pro- 
vision for  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  children  as  of  the 
blood  Royal  was  the  most  authentic  confirmation — unless 
the  indignation  of  the  House  at  the  surmisal  of  a  doubt 
was  not  a  still  stronger  approbation.  The  Duke  and 
Duchess  of  Cumberland  and  the  Luttrells  were  certainly 
dissatisfied  at  no  mention  being  made  of  that  Prince  and 
Princess — but  they  had  no  children;  and  as  the  Duchess 
of  Gloucester  was  not  named,  the  other  Duchess  had  no 
reason  to  complain ; — and  as  the  Duchess  of  Glou- 
cester's children  were  acknowledged  and  provided  for, 
she  herself  must  have  a  suitable  jointure  as  their  mother ; 
and  if  she  had  a  jointure,  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland 
must  have  one  too.  Had  the  King  had  no  children,  or 
not  near  so  many,  and  if  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  had 
had  even  one,  or  even  if  he  had  not,  the  ambition  of  the 
Luttrells  might  have  tempted  them  to  endeavour  to  throw 
a  slur  on  the  legitimacy  of  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  chil- 
dren—but nothing  but  the  basest  rancour  could  dictate 
such  an  injury,  when  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  and  his  issue 
were  at  such  a  vast  distance  from  the  Crown.  The  Duke 
of  Cumberland  had  not  said  a  word,  when  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  told  him  of  the  intended  provision  for  his  chil- 


*  This  expression  alludes  to  Lord  Irnham's  being  the  hero  of  the  '  Diaboliad.' 
VOL.  II.  S 


258  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

dren.  He  had  promised  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  to  re- 
ceive no  favour  for  himself,  unless  the  same  was  indulged 
to  his  brother ;  but  having  children,  and  his  brother  none, 
he  could  not  refuse  for  his  children  what  it  was  impossible 
to  grant  equally  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  whose  chil- 
dren, should  he  have  any,  would  indubitably  be  intitled  to 
a  like  provision.  The  morning  Lord  Irnham  was  to  ma- 
chinate the  intended  motion,  Colonel  Coxe,  one  of  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester's  gentlemen,  going  to  wait  on  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland,  on  returning  from  America,  he  walked  about 
the  room  in  great  disorder,  said  he  was  in  the  utmost 
agony,  and  was  going  to  send  for  Coxe,  yet  did  not  tell 
him  the  subject  of  his  uneasiness.  However,  he  afterwards 
sent  his  brother  Gloucester  word,  how  wretched  he  had 
been  at  not  being  able  to  prevent  Lord  Irnham  from  pro- 
curing the  motion.  It  is  true  that  the  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  had  originally  and  imprudently,  against  my 
persuasion,  behaved  coolly  to  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland. 
But  the  honest  warmth  and  integrity  of  the  former  was 
not  formed  to  assimilate  with  the  artful  character  of  the 
latter.  The  folly  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  so  opposite 
to  the  cool  good  sense  and  stately  dignity  of  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester,  and  the  odious  enmities  in  the  family  of 
Luttrell,  could  but  disgust  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  who 
had  quick  parts,  and  as  quick  resentments,  undisguised 
frankness,  with  conscious  virtue,  and  no  idea  of  art  and 
artifice.  She*  had  every  merit  as  a  wife,  a  mother,  a 
daughter,  and  a  friend ;  and  though  she  resented  strongly 
the  slights  of  such  of  her  friends  as  abandoned  her  to  pay 
their  court,  and  the  time-serving  timidity  of  the  Opposition, 
who  shunned  the  Duke  almost  as  much  as  the  Courtiers, 
she  never  assumed  the  slightest  symptom  of  princely  pride 
towards  those  that  remained  attached  to  her,  nor  disguised 


1778,         CHARACTER  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER.          259 

the  easy,  cheerful  familiarity  of  her  nature,  even  in  presence 
of  the  Duke,  who  did  not  love  to  relax  the  severe  formulary 
of  Royalty.  He  had  more  good  nature  than  good  humour, 
and  more  good  sense  than  commonly  appeared ;  for  though 
he  never  said  a  silly  thing,  he  had  none  of  the  graces  of 
conversation,  nor  an  ingratiating  manner,  but  he  had  a 
just  sense  of  honour  and  strict  veracity,  and  no  insincerity. 
He  despised  the  King,  but  found  it  difficult  to  withdraw 
his  love  for  him.  He  truly  esteemed  the  Duchess,  espe- 
cially since  he  had  so  strongly  experienced  her  tenderness, 
assiduity,  and  care  during  his  great  illness  at  Trent.  He 
was  a  very  fond  and  indulgent  father,  especially  to  his 
daughter,  on  whom  he  doted.  What  would  have  been  his 
choice  of  friends  I  cannot  judge.  His  hard  fortune  had 
left  him  .  none  but  fools,  or  such  absurd  men  as  Lord 
Beaulieu  and  Captain  Walsingham  ;  yet  he  allowed  them 
such  liberties  and  familiarity  as  looked  as  if  he  could 
waive  his  dignity  towards  his  favourites :  and  of  the  few 
that  attached  themselves  to  him,  he  justly  distinguished 
Mr.  Thomas  Townshend,  who  was  far  the  most  sensible 
man  connected  with  him.  After  his  last  return  I  seemed 
to  be  much  more  welcome  to  him  than  formerly ;  but  I 
attributed  it  more  to  the  constant  respect  I  paid  to  him, 
and  to  his  desire  of  political  information,  than  to  any  per- 
sonal regard  for  me.  I  never,  or  very  seldom,  went  to 
him  but  in  an  evening  when  he  was  with  the  Duchess,  nor 
took  the  least  pains  to  be  a  favourite,  though  he  spoke 
with  great  confidence  to  me  whenever  a  natural  occasion 
offered.  But  now  the  provision  for  his  family  was  made, 
I  intended  to  be  less  assiduous  in  my  visits.  It  had  never 
been  my  purpose  to  be  a  courtier ;  I  constrained  myself 
more  than  I  liked,  because  they  were  in  disgrace,  and  lest 
he  should  be  dissatisfied  with  the  Duchess  if  her  relations 
trespassed  on  his  dignity  :  but  I  was  fully  determined 

s  2 


260  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

never  to  try  to  be  his  favourite,  which  is  only  being  the 
first  slave.  I  had  much  more  pride  than  ambition  or  love 
of  interest ;  and  when  my  father  had  been  Prime  Minister 
of  England,  I  could  not  aspire  to  be  First  Minister  to  a 
younger  branch  of  the  Royal  Family,  and  to  a  little  Court 
of  no  consequence.  It  was  plain  I  did  not,  and  that  none 
of  the  Duke's  family  had  the  least  jealousy,  for  I  treated 
them  every  one  with  so  much  civility  and  deference,  and 
was  so  cautious  of  not  suffering  them  to  think  that  I  as- 
sumed any  pretensions  from  my  relation  to  the  Duchess, 
that  I  never  went  into  the  palace  but  every  one  was  glad 
to  see  me ;  and  thus  I  made  what  attendance  I  paid  on  a 
Court  as  easy  to  me  as  such  a  life  could  be,  and  entirely 
avoided  all  shadow  of  the  jealousies  and  little  intrigues 
that  naturally  attend  it,  and  not  less  a  small  than  a  great 
one.  But  having  no  views  but  that  of  wishing  not  to 
offend,  it  was  not  hard  to  attain  what  nobody  envied. 
Perhaps  the  same  attention  would  have  served  me  had  I 
applied  it  where  it  could  have  been  of  advantage — for  all 
this  time  I  was  constantly  once  a  week  of  Princess  Amelia's 
parties ;  and  though  she  had  broken  with  her  nephew  on 
his  marrying  my  niece,  and  was  of  a  temper  still  more 
ungovernable  than  the  Duchess's,  I  contrived  to  give  her 
no  offence,  and  even  to  prevent  her  giving  me  any.  Thus 
did  chance  and  accidents  make  a  courtier  of  a  man  almost 
a  Republican,  and  decide  without  and  against  my  choice 
that  the  beginning  and  end  of  my  life  should  be  attached  to 
Princes  and  Princesses  ;  and  that  I  should  be  perhaps  a 
singular  instance  of  being  at  once  an  unwilling  courtier, 
and  yet  not  a  disappointed  one. 

\0th.  In  the  House  of  Commons  Mr.  Powys  moved  to 
enlarge  the  powers  of  the  Commissioners  going  to  America, 
meaning,  he  owned,  that  they  might  have  power  to  allow 
the  Independence  of  that  Country.  That  proposal  was  far 


1778. 


VIOLENT  ATTACK  ON  LORD  NORTH. 


2G1 


from  being  received  with  unanimity  even  by  the  Opposi- 
tion, the  two  factions  of  Lord  Chatham  and  Lord  Rocking- 
ham  differing  as  much  as  Lord  Shelburne  and  the  Duke  of 
Richmond  had  in  the  House  of  Lords.  Not  only  Governor 
Johnston,  one  of  the  new  Commissioners,  and  his  brother 
Pulteney,  opposed  the  motion,  but  so  did  Thomas  Walpole, 
Thomas  Townshend,  jun.,  and  Dunning.  The  Scotch 
Lord  Advocate  again  spoke  most  intemperately  for  pur- 
suing the  attempt  of  conquering  America,  and  was  well 
answered  by  Fox  and  Burke.  Lord  Mulgrave  and  Lord 
North  opposed  the  motion,  Sir  George  Saville  supported 
it,  but  it  was  rejected  by  the  previous  question. 

13th.  A  violent  attack  was  made  on  Lord  North.  His 
contract  for  rum  with  Adamson  and  Muir  had  been  so 
shameful,  that  Sir  Philip  Jennings  Clarke  now  moved  for 
a  bill  to  prohibit  contractors  from  sitting  in  Parliament. 
Lord  North  begged  the  House  to  suspend  their  opinion  of 
him  till  the  Select  Committee  should  make  their  report 
on  the  rum  contract.  Lord  George  Gordon,  a  younger 
brother  of  the  Duke,  started  up,  and  said  Lord  North  was 
the  contractor  for  all  contractors,  and  he  could  prove  had 
attempted  to  make  a  villainous  contract — had  offered  his 
brother  the  Duke  1000/.  a  year  if  he  would  get  him,  Lord 
George,  out  of  Parliament,  but  the  Duke  had  rejected  the 
villainous  offer.  Such  unparliamentary  language  created 
great  hubbub.  Many  tried  to  convince  the  young  Lord  of 
the  unparliamentary  indecency  of  the  term  villainous — 
Lord  North  was  exceedingly  confounded,  but  did  not  deny 
the  charge,  he  only  pleaded  that  there  was  nothing  villainous 
in  the  offer.4  Lord  George  was  at  last  persuaded  to  re- 


4  Lord  George  Gordon  had  been  con- 
.stintly  in  Opposition;  and  Lord  North 
hud  wished  to  bring  his  brother,  Lord 


William  Gordon,  into  Parliament  in  his 
room. 


2G2  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  AP*IL, 

tract  the  term,  but  he  said  the  fact  was  true,  and  the  House 
might  call  it  by  what  name  they  pleased.  Another  blow 
to  Lord  North  concluded  the  day ;  for,  leave  for  bringing 
in  the  bill  against  contractors  was  carried  against  him 
by  71  to  50. 

14th.  Sir  George  Saville  moved  to  repeal  the  Quebec 
Bill,  but  the  motion  was  rejected  by  96  to  51. 

IQth.  Account  of  Mr.  Adams,  from  the  Congress, 
being  landed  in  France,  and  of  his  having  taken  a  rich 
prize. 

22nc?.  The  three  Commissioners  sailed  from  Portsmouth. 

Great  alarm  in  Ireland  on  apprehensions  of  a  French 
war  and  invasion,  and  great  zeal  thence.  Associations  and 
subscriptions.  Parliament  voted  300,  OOO/.  Roman  Ca- 
tholics professed  much,  and  so  they  did  in  England; 
and  Lord  and  Lady  Petre  went  to  Court  for  the  first 
time. 

26th.  Accounts  of  the  French  Fleet  being  sailed  from 
Toulon  under  Monsieur  D'Estaing  and  Bougaineville,  with 
provisions  for  nine  months  and  quantities  of  stores.  Deane 
was  on  board,  and  a  new  French  Minister  to  the  Con- 
gress. These  circumstances  made  it  supposed  destined  for 
America  ;  some  thought  against  Gibraltar. 

In  the  midst  of  this  the  nation  was  insensible,  except 
in  drawing  out  the  militia.  The  King's  behaviour  was 
childish  and  absurd.  He  ordered  the  camp  equipage,  and 
said  he  would  command  the  army  himself.  He  ordered  a 
camp  near  Billericay,  a  marshy,  unhealthy  spot,  where  the 
men  were  likely  to  get  agues,  &c.,  and  would  not  be  per- 
suaded off  it.  Since  General  Harvey's  death,  he  directed 
everything  in  the  army  himself,  and  allowed  General 
Amherst  no  power.  He  told  all  the  Ministers  he  would 
be  his  own  Minister,  and  they  must  keep  to  their  depart- 


1778.  THE  KING  VISITS  CHATHAM,  ETC.  203 

ments.  On  General  Gisburne's  death,  he  ordered  Lord 
Wey mouth  to  make  out  a  warrant  for  Sir  Guy  Carletou  \r 
to  succeed  to  the  Government  of  Charlemont ;  and  when 
Lord  George  Germaine  went  to  tell  him  of  the  vacancy, 
he  found  it  filled  up  by  Carleton,  the  man  he  disliked 
the  most. 

In  the  midst  of  this  he  went  with  Lord  Sandwich  to 
visit  the  lines  at  Chatham,  and  then  by  the  same  per- 
suasion said  he  would  visit  the  Fleet  of  Observation  at 
Portsmouth,  which  he  not  only  did  with  the  Queen,  May 
2nd,  at  great  expense,  but  had  the  fleet  detained  for  him 
several  days.  This  occasioned  great  clamour  and  ridicule, 
though  not  so  much  as  it  ought  to  have  done :  and  he  did 
not  even  make  use  of  the  pretence  of  carrying  the  Prince 
of  Wales  to  see  that  puppet  show,  to  whose  youth  it 
would  have  been  a  sight,  but  left  him  at  home  out  of 
jealousy. 

At  this  time  there  was  another  great  difficulty :  Thurlow 
had  been  promised  to  be  Chancellor,  but  hearing  that  De 
Grey  was  to  be  a  Peer  too,  that  Wedderburn  might  be 
Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  and  a  Peer  also, 
Thurlow  said  he  would  not  take  the  seals  if  Wedderburn 
was  a  Peer.  The  Speaker  and  Sir  Laurence  Dundas,  who 
had  promises  of  peerages,  remonstrated  against  Wedder- 
burn too :  the  Scotch  Lord  Advocate  supported  him,  but 
Lord  North  said  it  would  give  so  much  offence,  that  he 
must  resign ;  so  the  arrangement  was  impeded. 

An  alarm  that  one  Paul  Jones,  a  Scot,  had  sailed  from 
Dieppe  to  Whitehaven,  had  landed  with  the  men  of  his 
privateer  in  the  night,  had  set  fire  to  one  of  the  ships  in 
the  harbour,  and  had  very  near  burnt  all  the  ships  in  the 
harbour — but  an  alarm  being  given,  he  had  re-embarked 
and  sailed  to  Scotland  ;  and,  being  born  within  fifteen  miles 


264  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

of  Lord  Selkirk's,  had  landed  there  and  taken  the  plate 
and  plundered  the  seat.  The  Countess  was  in  the  House, 
but  he  treated  her  with  civility. 

General  Oonway  had  applied  to  Lord  Sandwich  for  a 
frigate  to  guard  Jersey  and  Guernsey,  of  the  first  of  which 
he  was  Governor.  Lord  Sandwich,  though  he  had  as- 
sured the  House  of  Lords  that  there  were  nineteen  fri- 
gates at  home,  owned  to  Conway  there  were  but  two  and 
never  a  sloop,  all  being  in  America,  and  that  he  had  bor- 
rowed of  Keppel  one  of  the  two  frigates  to  send  against 
Paul  Jones. 

The  Parliament  met  again  on  the  28th,  after  the  Easter 
holidays. 


MAY. 


2nd.  THE  King  and  Queen  went  to  Portsmouth. 

[New  Publications.' — It  is  reported,  that  in  a  few  days 
will  be  published,  in  two  volumes,  folio,  an  accurate  ac- 
count of  his  *  Majesty's  Journeys  to  Chatham  and  Ports- 
mouth, together  with  a  minute  Description  of  his  numerous 
Fatigues,  Dangers,  and  hair-breadth  Escapes ;  to  which 
will  be  added  the  Royal  Bon-mots.'  And  the  following 
week  will  be  published,  an  'History  of  all  the  Campaigns 
of  the  King  of  Prussia/  in  one  volume,  duodecimo.] 

4th.  Lord  Derby  moved  the  Lords  to  rescind  their  order 
which  referred  Lord  Foley's  bill  to  the  Judges :  but  it 
was  rejected  by  40  to  32.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  would 
not  vote. 

In  the  other  House,  after  most  pressing  solicitations  from 


1778.  ATTACK  ON  THE  MINISTERS.  L'i;."i 

the  Treasury  for  attendance,  the  Contractor's  Bill  was  put 
off  for  two  months  (in  effect  thrown  out),  by  113  to  109. 

5th.  Lord  North  asked  from  the  King  a  vote  of  credit 
(for  a  million).  Thomas  Townshend  and  others  made 
severe  remarks  on  the  puppet  show  at  Portsmouth,  and  the 
detaining  of  the  fleet  on  that  account,  though  the  Toulon 
Fleet  was  sailed.  Even  Mr.  Pulteney  expressed  great  in- 
dignation on  that  subject. 

7th.  The  King's  message  being  read,  Lord  North  moved 
to  grant  1,000,000^.  T.  Townshend,  Charles  Fox,  and 
Mr.  Burke  attacked  the  Ministers  with  great  warmth  on 
their  receiving  an  account  of  the  sailing  of  the  Toulon 
Fleet  on  the  Monday,  and  not  calling  a  Council  even  to 
give  orders  on  that  occasion  till  the  Wednesday.  Nor  did 
it  appear  that  they  had  given  positive  orders  for  sailing  of 
any  part  of  our  fleet  till  the  wind  was  turned  to  the  west, 
as  was  usual  at  this  time  of  the  year — in  fact,  they  had 
only  been  sending  about  for  Sir  Hugh  Palliser;  nor  was 
the  fleet  ready  to  sail,  nor  sufficient  stores  on  board.  Mr. 
Fox  even  hinted  having  heard  that  Lord  George  Germaine 
was  so  dissatisfied  with  the  other  Ministers,  that  he  had 
threatened  to  resign.  Lord  George  no  doubt  was  looking 
about  for  specious  reasons  of  retreat.  So  were  Lord 
North  and  Lord  Gower :  the  King's  conduct  and  the 
desperate  state  of  affairs  could  not  but  disgust  and  alarm 
them. 

Lord  George  did  not  positively  deny  his  dissatisfaction, 
and  though  in  a  soft  way  he  pleaded  that  the  Ministers 
had  been  out  of  town,  his  gestures,  while  Fox  was  speak- 
ing, seemed  to  agree  to  all  he  said;  and  when  he  did 
answer,  it  was  in  a  manner  that  by  no  means  disculpated 
his  associates.  He  even  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  affairs 
were  in  so  bad  and  dangerous  a  way,  that  he  acquitted  the 


266  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

Opposition  of  wishing  to  come  into  place.     No  negative 
was  given  to  the  vote  of  credit. 

There  was  another  affair  in  agitation  that  grievously 
perplexed  the  Ministers,  and  was  big  with  alarming  conse- 
quences on  both  sides.  The  rebellion  in  America  had 
suggested  ideas  of  more  indulgence  to  Ireland,  with  which 
the  Irish  had  great  connections.  This  propensity  had 
been  seized  by  the  Irish  in  the  English  House  of  Com- 
mons, particularly  by  Lord  Nugent  and  Burke  ;  and  Lord 
North,  with  his  usual  inconsideration,  had  positively  pro- 
mised to  favour  Ireland  in  many  commercial  bills.  In 
the  mean  time  the  trading  towns  on  the  Western  Coast 
had  taken  the  alarm,  and  sent  up  petitions  against  any 
alteration.  The  Scots  took  up  the  point  as  strongly, 
and  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater,  whose  navigation,  and  Lord 
Derby,  whose  estate  was  likely  to  be  affected,  joined  in 
the  cry.  Lord  North,  as  usual,  grew  heedless  of  his 
promise,  and  wished  not  to  perform  it ;  but  neither  side 
was  to  be  mollified.  The  Irish  talked  of  rebellion  if 
disappointed ;  and  Conolly  even  in  the  House  threatened 
that  the  Irish  would  associate  not  to  take  any  goods  from 
us  if  the  promise  were  not  kept. 

On  the  7th  the  Debate  came  on,  and  lasted  till  past  one 
in  the  morning.  Burke,  though  he  knew  he  should  forfeit 
all  interest  with  his  constituents  at  Bristol,  combatted  with 
all  his  abilities  for  his  country,  and  the  first  Bill  was  voted 
in  favour  of  Ireland  by  126  to  77-  {Vide  the  'London 
Chronicle '  of  May  9th.] 

The  same  day  the  Duke  of  Richmond  moved  for  all  letters 
received  relating  to  the  destination  of  the  Toulon  Squadron. 
Lord  Weymouth  at  first  opposed  it,  and  called  for  the  pre- 
vious question,  but  on  a  sudden  acceded  to  the  motion,  and 
it  was  voted,  as  it  was  the  next  day  by  the  Commons. 


1778.  DEATH  OF  LORD  CHATHAM.  267 

9th.  The  King  and  Queen  returned  from  Portsmouth. 

llth.  Died,  Lord  Chatham.  At  ten  at  night,  as  the  v 
House  of  Commons  was  going  to  rise,  Colonel  Barre 
moved  (and  was  seconded  by  T.  Townshend,  who  wept) 
to  address  the  King  to  give  orders  to  the  proper  officers 
that  the  funeral  of  the  Earl  of  Chatham  should  be  at  the 
public  expense.  Rigby  submitted  to  the  House  whether 
a  monument  would  not  be  more  proper  than  a  public 
burial,  which  would  only  be  the  show  of  a  day.  He 
assured  the  House  that  what  he  said  was  with  no  intention 
of  dissenting ;  that  nobody  admired  more  than  he  did  the 
character  of  the  noble  Earl,  though  at  times  they  had 
differed  in  sentiments :  nor  had  Colonel  Barre  always 
agreed  with  the  Earl  (Barre  had  first  been  known  by  his 
outrageous  attack  on  Lord  Chatham).  He  owned  he 
thought  the  noble  Earl  a  public  loss  in  the  present  dis- 
tracted state  of  affairs,  and  that  the  last  words  he  had 
uttered  in  public  ought  to  be  graved  on  his  monument 
(those  were,  for  reducing  America  to  dependence).  Dun- 
ning seconded  Rigby.  Lord  North,  who  was  gone,  being 
sent  for,  returned,  and  said  he  gave  his  hearty  consent,  and 
would  have  troubled  the  House  longer,  had  he  had  more 
preparation,  and  was  not  so  out  of  breath.  The  question 
was  voted,  nern.  con.  Pulteney  proposed  the  Members 
should  be  ordered  to  attend  the  funeral;  but  Barre  said 
he  was  sure  the  attendance  would  be  voluntary,  and  there- 
fore have  a  better  grace. 

The  same  day  died  Sir  George  Hay. 

The  Lords  heard  Home's   appeal,  but   confirmed   his 
sentence  by  20  to  4. 

12/A.  Mr.  Burke  published  his  two  letters  to  Bristol  on 
the  Irish  Bills. 

13th.    Lord  Shelburne   moved  that  the   Lords  should 


268  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

attend  Lord  Chatham's  funeral,  and  there  was,  on  a  divi- 
sion, a  majority  of  one  vote  for  it ;  but  proxies  being  called 
for,  the  numbers  were  equal,  which,  in  the  Lords,  is 
reckoned  a  negative.  It  is  remarkable  that  two  of  the 
dissenting  voices  were  Dr.  .Cornwallis,  Archbishop  of  Can- 
terbury, who  owed  the  primacy  entirely  to  Lord  Chatham, 
and  Lord  Onslow,  who  formerly  had  been  one  of  his  most 
servile  creatures. 

The  same  day  Lord  John  Cavendish  moved  to  address 
the  King  to  settle  a  permanent  fortune  on  the  Earldom  of 
Chatham,  which  was  agreed  to. 

General  Burgoyne  arrived.  He  was  immediately  for- 
bidden to  appear  at  Court,  and  a  board  of  general  officers 
appointed  to  examine  his  conduct. 

The  same  day,  Sir  George  Saville  moved  to  take  off 
several  restraints  on  the  Roman  Catholics,  which  was 
voted,  nemine  contradicente. 

Sir  George  Saville  was  probably  influenced  by  Burke. 
Lord  Petre  had  consulted  Lord  Camden,  who  told  him  he 
could  give  no  opinion  till  he  saw  the  intended  bill,  and  till 
he  knew  what  the  Dissenters  would  think.  Surely,  when 
the  Court  were  so  disposed  to  the  Catholics,  there  was  no 
occasion  for  the  Opposition  to  favour  them.  The  Court, 
by  their  precipitation  to  gain  the  Catholics  and  the  Irish, 
told  France  how  weak  and  afraid  they  were.  These  were 
great  experiments  to  try  without  consideration ;  and  when 
weighed  with  the  refusal  of  all  indulgence  to  Dissenters, 
showed  what  a  spirit  prevailed.  The  Bishop  of  Peter- 
borough alone  made  some  slight  objections  in  the  Lords. 
He  told  me  he  did  it  from  foreseeing  it  would  be  an  intro- 
duction of  Roman  Catholics  into  the  army.  The  Minis- 
ters had  told  Sir  George  that  if  he  would  remove  it  they 
would  support  it. 


1778.  DEATH  OF  THE  EARL  OF  HOLDERNESS.  209 

The  same  day  came  an  account  that  Marshal  Broglio 
was  appointed  Generalissimo  on  the  coasts  of  the  ocean. 
This  portended  invasion,  or  was  intended  to  alarm  us  and 
make  us  keep  our  fleet  at  home. 

iQth.  Died,  Robert  Darey,  Earl  of  Holderness,  aged 
sixty.  This  was  the  second  person  to  whom  the  King 
had  long  promised  a  Garter,  who  died  without  receiving  it. 
Lord  Harcourt  was  the  other.  The  King  some  time 
before  had  told  Lord  North  (knowing  the  dangerous  state 
of  Lord  Holderness's  health)  that  he  would  not  have  him 
(Lord  North)  recommend  anybody  for  Warden  of  the 
Cinque  Ports,  his  Majesty  having  a  person  in  his  eye  for 
it.  On  Lord  Holderness's  death  the  King  told  Lord 
North  he  had  given  the  place  to  Lord  North.  It  was 
now  given  to  him  with  its  usual  salary,  about  500/.  a  year ; 
but,  if  Lord  North  quitted  the  Treasuiy,  it  was  to  be  as 
Lord  Holderness  had  had  it,  4000/.  a  year  for  life.  Some 
thought  the  King  threw  this  opportunity  in  Lord  North's 
way  of  resigning,  as  he  had  often  asked  leave  to  do ;  others, 
to  bind  him  by  that  obligation  not  to  quit  him.  The 
Duke  of  Dorset  had  solicited  Lord  North  for  the  Warden- 
ship,  and  Lord  North  had  promised  him  by  letter  not  to 
ask  for  it  himself.  The  Duke  now  carried  the  letter  to 
the  King  as  a  promise ;  the  King  said,  "  He  has  not  broke 
his  promise ;  he  did  not  ask  for  it."  However,  the  dis- 
tinction was  nice ! 

20#/i.  Lord  North  acquainted  the  House  of  Commons, 
from  the  King,  that,  in  pursuance  of  their  request,  he  had 
settled  an  annuity  of  4000/.  a  year  on  the  Earl  of  Chat- 
ham, which  they  must  make  perpetual.1 

.  The  Irish  bill  was  passed  by  79  to  23,  and  was 


The  Commons  also  voted  20.000/.  for  paying  Lord  Chatham's  debts.      y 


270  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

carried  through.  It  was  very  necessary,  for  the  distress  in 
Ireland  was  so  great  that  the  weavers  rose  and  committed 
great  riots ;  and,  had  the  bill  been  rejected,  it  was  appre- 
hended the  Irish  would  have  rebelled. 

General  Burgoyne  appeared  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
but  said  nothing-,  nor  was  anything  said  to  him ;  but  two 
days  afterwards  appearing  there,  Mr.  Vyner  declared  he 
should  desire  leave  to  ask  him  some  questions.  Burgoyne 
replied  he  should  be  very  ready  to  answer  any,  and  should 
even  declare  some  things  that  would  astonish  everybody. 
He  had  intended  to  have  Charles  Fox  question  him  in 
order  to  bring  out  what  he  wished — a  step  that  showed 
he  thought  himself,  as  it  made  him,  desperate  with  the 
Ministers.  They  were  now  sorry  they  had  not  thought 
of  ordering  him  back  directly,  as  he  was  come  without 
leave. 

The  Common  Council  having  resolved  to  desire  to  bury 
Lord  Chatham  at  St.  Paul's,  the  Sheriffs  acquainted  the 
House  with  that  desire  on  the  21st:  Dunning,  T.  Towns- 
hend,  Barre,  and  Burke  recommended  compliance.  Rigby 
made  a  most  indiscreet  speech  against  the  Common  Coun- 
cil, expressing  the  utmost  contempt  for  them,  which  was 
answered  severely  by  Barre,  who  told  Rigby  he  ought  to 
prefer  St.  Paul's,  as  there  would  be  room  enough  for  his 
person  (which  was  very  corpulent).  The  motion  was 
ordered  to  lie  on  the  table.  The  King  told  Lord  Hertford 
he  would  not  meddle  with  it — they  might  do  what  they 
would  with  the  corpse,  but  he  would  not  let  the  Guards  go 
into  the  City. 

22nd.  An  account  came  of  the  Toulon  Fleet  being 
driven  back  and  returned  to  Toulon.  Count  D'Estaing 
certainly  went  to  Paris  to  complain  of  the  bad  condition 
of  the  fleet. 


1778. 


SIR  JAMES  LOWTHER'S  INTENDED  MOTION. 


271 


It  was  known  that  Sir  James  Lowther  intended,  as  he 
had  declared  he  would,  to  move  for  jointures  for  the  two 
Royal  Duchesses.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  spoke  to  me 
on  it  with  great  uneasiness,  and  said  he  did  not  know  how 
to  act ;  for,  if  he  meddled  against  it,  his  brother,  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland,  would  resent  it,  as  if,  when  his  own  family 
was  taken  care  of,  he  opposed  a  settlement  for  the  Duchess 
of  Cumberland.  I  said  I  thought  there  was  an  easy  way 
of  avoiding  that  difficulty,  which  would  be  by  the  Duchess 
of  Gloucester  sending  to  Sir  James  Lowther  to  desire  he 
would  not  mention  her,  as  she  was  so  much  obliged  to 
the  King  for  the  provision  for  her  children,  and  that  she  did 
not  desire  anything  for  herself;  and  that  behaviour  would 
be  the  most  likely  method  of  pleasing  the  King,  and 
inducing  him  to  give  her  a  jointure.  The  Duke  was 
struck  with  the  idea  and  put  it  in  execution  with  full  suc- 
cess. The  Duchess  of  Gloucester  desired  the  Duchess  of 
Bolton,  Sir  James  Lowther's  favourite  sister,  to  tell  him,  in 
her  name,  that  she  was  greatly  obliged  to  him  for  his  inten- 
tion, but  begged  him  not  to  name  her ;  that  she  was  in- 
finitely obliged  to  the  King,  and  fully  satisfied  with  what  he 
had  done  for  her  children ;  that  she  being  older  than  the 
Duke,  and  his  health  being  now  quite  re-established,  she 
had  no  reason  to  expect  to  outlive  him ;  and,  even  if  she 
should,  she  trusted  the  King  would  be  too  good  to  leave 
her  without  a  provision.2  That  she  did  not  pretend  to 


11  The  Duchess  did  outlive  the  Duke. 
The  latter  died  in  August,  1805,  in  his 
sixty-second  year ;  the  Duchess,  in  Au- 
gust, 1807,  in  her  sixty-ninth  year.  The 
journals  of  the  period  made  the  general 
remark  that  her  death  left  only  one 
lineal  descendant  of  Sir  Robert  Wai- 
pole  living, — the  Marquis  of  Cholmon- 
deley,  whose  grandfather  (the  third 
Earl  Cholmondelty)  married,  in  1723, 


Mary,  the  only  daughter  of  Sir  Robert. 
This  marriage  conveyed  Houghton 
Hall,  Norfolk,  to  the  Cholmondeley 
family.  The  writers  in  the  journals 
above  noticed,  who  admitted  the  de- 
scent, though  illegitimate,  of  the 
Duchess  from  Sir  Robert,  forgot  that 
there  was  issue  of  her  sister,  Mrs. 
Keppel  (whose  descent  was  of  the  same 
character),  then  existing.—  D. 


272  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

meddle  with  what  related  to  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland, 
and  spoke  only  for  herself;  and  that  the  Duchess  of  Cum- 
berland, having  no  children,  had  not  been  named  in  the 
late  Act,  and  therefore  it  might  be  more  necessary  to 
think  of  some  provision  for  her.  Sir  James  Lowther  was 
much  pleased  with  the  message,  and  said  he  had  no  mind 
to  make  the  motion,  but  he  had  promised  it  to  the  Lut- 
trells,  and  they  were  very  pressing  with  him  to  make  it ; 
but  he  would  endeavour  to  get  off.  He  did  talk  to  Temple 
Luttrell  for  an  hour,  and  could  get  no  answer  from  him  ; 
but  the  next  morning  he  released  Sir  James  Lowther  from 
his  promise.  The  argument  that  probably  prevailed  was  that 
the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  had  told  the  Duchess  of  Bolton 
that  all  the  Duke  of  Gloucester's  friends  would  retire  on 
the  motion,  which  would  show  it  came  only  from  the 
Luttrells,  who  had  no  friends  in  the  House.  Sir  James 
Lowther,  by  his  great  estates  and  interest  in  Cumberland 
and  Westmoreland,  was  continually  engaged  in  procuring 
turnpike  bills,  and  the  Luttrells  paid  the  utmost  court  to  him 
in  attending  them,  which  gave  them  great  weight  with  him. 
A  great  secret  now  came  out,  which  Lord  Temple  dili- 
gently published.  But  a  little  before  Lord  Chatham's 
death,  Lord  Bute  had  sent  Eden  (Lord  Suffolk's  deputy, 
and  one  of  the  three  Commissioners  to  America)  to  him  with 
offers  of  making  him  Prime  Minister,  and  of  a  Dukedom, 
and  that  Lord  Bute  would  come  in  with  him  as  Secretary  of 
State.  Lord  Chatham  treated  the  message  and  the  mes- 
senger  with  the  utmost  contempt,  and  said,  "  Tell  the 
fellow,  that  if  he  dares  to  come  out  I  will  impeach  him." 
He  had  even  intended  on  the  day  he  had  his  fit  to  have 
divulged  the  message  to  the  House  of  Lords.  He 
spoke  of  it  at  his  own  table  with  ridicule,  laughed  at 
a  Dukedom  without  an  estate,  said  he  should  be  Duke 


1778.    PROPOSED  MOTION  OF  CENSURE  ON  LD.  SANDWICH.    273 

and  no  Duke,  and  ironically  called  Lady  Chatham,  Your 
Grace. 

25M.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  attacked  Lord  Sandwich 
on  all  the  falsities  he  had  uttered  in  Parliament  on  the 
state  of  the  Navy,  and  showed  from  the  papers  delivered 
in  by  the  Ministers  that  they  had  had  early  intelligence 
enough  to  have  sent  a  fleet  to  prevent  the  Toulon  squadron 
passing  the  Straits ;  and  he  proposed  a  motion  of  censure 
on  that  subject.  Lord  Bristol  joined  in  the  attack  on  his 
quondam  friend  Sandwich  ;  and  the  Duke,  finding  that  not 
one  of  the  Ministers  had  a  word  to  say  in  behalf  of  Sand- 
wich, condoled  with  him  ironically  on  that  head.  Sand- 
wich made  a  wretched  defence,  and  betrayed  the  utmost 
agony  and  perturbation,  and  the  motion  was  rejected  but 
by  a  majority  of  15.3 

26th.  General  Burgoyne  appeared  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  which  was  so  exceedingly  crowded  that  they 
were  forced  to  turn  out  the  strangers,  though  Burgoyne 
begged  they  might  stay  and  hear  his  defence.  Yyner, 
after  asking  him  some  questions  on  the  affair  of  Sara- 
toga, moved  for  a  Committee  to  inquire  into  his  conduct. 
Burgoyne  seconded  him,  gave  an  account  of  his  conduct, 
said  nothing  hard  on  General  Howe,  did  great  justice  to 
the  Americans,  and  complained  much  of  his  being  for- 
bidden the  King's  presence.  Lord  George  Germaine  con- 
tested the  possibility  of  Burgoyne's  being  examined  by  a 
Committee,  being  a  prisoner.  This  Burgoyne  denied,  but 
said  the  Congress  had  permitted  him  to  come  to  England 
to  clear  his  character.  He  made  great  encomiums  on 
General  Schuyler  and  the  Americans.  Though  he  had 
destroyed  an  estate  of  Schuyler 's,  the  latter  told  him  he 


*  There  was  a  debate  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  same  occasion. 
VOL.  II.  T 


274  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

should  have  done  the  same  in  the  same  circumstances ; 
and  even  lodged  Burgoyne,  and  took  care  that  nobody  in  his 
family  should  ever  name  the  affair  of  Saratoga  before  him. 
Lord  George  observed  that  the  word  permitted  proved 
his  being  a  prisoner.  Charles  Fox  wondered  there  could 
be  any  doubt  of  trying  the  General  when  the  Minister, 
Lord  George,  had  been  tried ;  and  his  conduct  had  ap- 
peared so  unsatisfactory  that  the  Committee  had  made  110 
report  to  the  House ;  and  he  moved  to  extend  the  inquiry 
to  the  whole  measure  of  the  expedition.  Temple  Luttrell 
compared  the  conduct  of  Burgoyne  with  that  of  Lord 
George  Germaine,  who,  he  said,  had  been  promoted  for  dis- 
obedience and  timidity.  Lord  George  started  up  in  the 
most  violent  rage,  and  clapping  his  hand  on  his  sword,  said, 
though  he  was  an  old  man,  he  would  not  hear  such  an 
insult  from  a  young  man,  who  was  an  assassin  and  of  the 
most  wretched  character.  This  produced  the  highest 
warmth  and  clamour.  Luttrell  went  out  of  the  House 
that  they  might  not  be  prevented  fighting ;  but  they  forced 
him  back  by  order  of  the  House,  when  he  would  not  retract 
a  syllable,  said  he  had  said  nothing  but  what  was  on 
record,  and  declared  he  would  be  sent  to  prison  rather  than 
retract.  Lord  North  said  a  few  faint  words  for  Lord 
George,  though  he  owned  he  had  been  disorderly.  Mr. 
Buller  was  for  committing  Luttrell,  but  most  condemning 
Lord  George;  the  latter  made  apologies,  and  called 
Luttrell  his  noble  friend,  which  the  latter  rejected  with  great 
indignation.  The  confusion  lasted  above  two  hours,  when 
Luttrell  was  forced  to  disclaim  any  farther  resentment. 
The  motion  for  a  Committee  was  rejected  by  144  to  96. 
The  Board  of  Officers  dropped :  Burgoyne  would  not  sub- 
mit to  it,  and  it  was  allowed  to  have  been  improperly  ap- 
pointed. 


1778.  "  ETIQUETTE."  275 


"  ETIQUETTE. 

"  What  though  America  doth  pour 
Her  millions  to  Britannia's  store, 
(Quoth  Grenville)  that  won't  do ;  for  yet, 
Though  it  risk  all,  and  nothing  get, 
Taxation  is  the  etiquette. 

"  The  tea  destroyed  ;  the  offer  made 
That  all  the  loss  should  be  repaid  : 
North  asks  not  justice,  nor  the  debt, 
But  he  must  have  the  etiquette. 

"  He'd  stop  their  port,  annul  their  laws. 
'  Hear  us,'  cried  Franklin,  '  for  our  cause  ! ' 
To  hear  th'  accus'd  the  senate  met, 
Decreed  'twas  not  the  etiquette. 

"  At  Bunker's  Hill  the  cause  was  tried ; 
The  earth  with  British  blood  was  dy'd  : 
Our  army,  though  'twas  soundly  beat 
(We  hear),  bore  off  the  etiquette. 

"  The  bond  dissolv'd,  the  people  rose ; 
Their  rulers  from  themselves  they  chose  : 
Their  Congress  then  at  nought  was  set ; 
Its  name  was  not  the  etiquette. 

"  Though  'twere  to  stop  the  tide  of  blood, 
Their  titles  must  not  be  allow'd — 
(Not  to  the  chiefs  of  armies  met) 
One  Arnold  was  the  etiquette. 

"  The  Yankees  at  Long  Island  found 
That  they  were  nearly  run  aground ; 
Howe  let  them  'scape  when  so  beset — 
He  will  explain  that  etiquette. 

"  His  aides-de-camp  to  Britain  boast 
Of  battles  Yankee  never  lost ; 
But  they  are  won  in  the  Gazette — 
That  saves  the  nation's  etiquette. 

T    2 


276  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAT, 

"  Clinton  his  injured  honour  saw  ; 
Swore  he'd  be  tried  by  martial  law, 
And  kick  Germaine  whene'er  they  met : 
A  riband  saved  that  etiquette. 

"  Though  records  speak  Germaine's  disgrace, 
To  quote  them  to  him  to  his  face 
(The  Commons  now  are  si  honnete), 
They  voted,  not  the  etiquette. 

"  Of  Saratoga's  dreadful  plain — 
An  army  ruin'd — why  complain  ? 
To  pile  their  arms  as  they  were  let, 
Sure  they  came  off  with  etiquette  ! 

"  Cries  Burgoyne,  '  They  may  be  reliev'd ; 
That  army  still  may  be  retriev'd, 
To  see  the  King,  if  I  be  let.' 
'  No,  Sir  !    'Tis  not  the  etiquette.' 

"  God  save  the  King  !  and  should  he  choose 
His  people's  confidence  to  lose, 
What  matters  it  ?     They'll  not  forget 
To  serve  him  still,  through  etiquette." 


Lord  Barrington  declared  his  intention  of  retiring,  and 
quitting  his  seat  in  Parliament ;  but  he  still  kept  his  office 
till  the  King  should  be  ready  to  appoint  a  successor. 

28th.  Hartley  moved  to  address  the  King  not  to  pro- 
rogue but  only  adjourn  the  Parliament  in  the  present  dan- 
gerous crisis, — wishing  to  give  opportunity  to  Burgoyne 
of  clearing  himself.  Rigby  spoke  with  great  animosity 
against  Burgoyne,  and  promised  that  he  himself  would 
move  that  he  should  have  a  trial ;  and  he  said  that  Howe 
was  at  least  less  blamable  than  Burgoyne.  Wedderburn 
objected  to  Burgoyne's  sitting  in  Parliament  while  a  pri- 
soner, but  gave  most  absurd  arguments.  Fox  made  a  very* 

4  It  was  one  of  the  best  speeches  he  I  See  an  abstract  of  it  in  the  '  General 
ever  made,  and  full  of  sense  and  matter.  |  Advertiser.' 


1778. 


AN  EXPRESS  FROM  SUSSEX. 


277 


masterly  and  severe  speech  against  Lord  North,  but  the 
motion  was  rejected  by  105  to  53.  Burgoyne  took  great 
part  in  the  Debate,  which  was  a  very  long  one. 

30th.  An  express  came  from  Sussex  and  went  in  boots 
to  Lord  North  at  the  Opera,5  which  gave  great  alarm — a 
report  of  the  French  being  landed ;  but  it  was,  that  part 
of  the  Brest  squadron  had  passed  the  coast  of  Sussex,  and 
that  the  squadron  had  orders  to  attack  Byron's  fleet.  The 
express  brought  an  account  of  a  mutiny  in  the  county,  the 
inhabitants  refusing  to  be  balloted  for  into  the  Militia, 
which  was  soon  composed  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond. 


JUNE. 


1st.  ON  the  second  reading  of  the  Bill  for  settling  an 
annuity  on  the  title  of  Chatham,  in  the  Lords,  the  Duke 
of  Chandos  opposed  it  on  the  present  distresses  of  the  nation, 
and  the  Chancellor  agreed  with  him ;  but  as  the  House  was 
so  thin,  and  no  Debate  was  expected,  desired  to  have  it 
deferred  till  the  next  day,  to  which  the  Duke  agreed.  It 
was  debated  the  next  day,  and  voted  by  42  to  11.  The 
Chancellor,  Markham,  Archbishop  of  York,  the  Duke  of 
Chandos,  and  Lord  Paget  protested  against  the  Act.  This 
was  mean  revenge  in  Markham  for  Lord  Chatham  having 
censured  his  sermon,  which  the  Archbishop  had  not  had 


*  Sir  John  Vanbrugh's  edifice,  built 
in  1705,  and  burnt  down  in  1789.  At 
this  period  it  retained  its  name  of  the 
"  New  Opera  House."  They  who  love 
to  trace  Walpole  and  his  companion- 
ship may  be  interested  in  knowing 
that  (as  I  learn  from  the  box-plan  now 


before  me)  the  box  No.  3,  on  the 
ground  tier,  called  "  Lady  Aylesbury's," 
was  held,  in  partnership  with  her,  by 
Lady  Mary  Coke,  Lady  Stratford,  Lord 
Hertford,  General  Conway,  and  Horace 
Walpole.— D. 


278  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

the  spirit  to  take  notice  of  in  the  House  while  Lord 
Chatham  lived. 

2nd.  Lord  Derby,  whose  aunt,  General  Burgoyne  had 
married,  and  who  resented  his  disgrace  so  much  that  he 
would  not  go  to  Court,  moved  the  Lords  to  address  for 
all  the  papers  relating  to  the  convention  of  Saratoga,  but 
it  was  rejected  without  a  division. 

The  Duke  of  Bolton  moved  that  the  Parliament  should 
not  be  prorogued,  but  adjourned,  which'  was  also  rejected 
by  42  to  20. 

Sir  James  Lowther  acquainted  the  House  of  Commons 
that  he  should  defer  till  the  next  year  his  promised  motion 
for  jointures  for  the  two  Koyal  Duchesses,  hoping  his 
Majesty  would  in  the  mean  time  provide  for  them.  He 
also  said  that,  as  since  the  proposed  motion  for  only  ad- 
journment had  been  rejected,  an  account  had  been  received 
of  the  arrival  in  America  of  the  Andromeda,  which  had 
carried  the  propositions  of  conciliation,  it  would  be  proper 
to  renew  the  motion,  to  give  Parliament  time  to  hear  the 
effect  of  those  proposals,  which  he  therefore  did  renew. 
This  was  objected  to  by  the  Court,  when  Richard  Fitz- 
patrick,  brother  of  Lord  Ossory  and  great  friend  of  Charles 
Fox,  having  arrived  the  day  before  from  America,  rose 
and  gave  a  strong  account  of  the  extreme  dissatisfaction  the 
conciliatory  plan  had  occasioned  in  the  Eoyal  Army,  and 
contempt  in  the  Americans.  He  complained  that  the 
Army  had  been  promised  20,000  recruits  and  had  been 
deceived,  commended  General  Howe,  and  complained  bit- 
terly how  ill  that  General,  and  Burgoyne  and  Carleton, 
had  been  treated  by  the  Administration,  Lord  George 
Germaine  denied  that  he  had  given  such  promises,  and  said 
his  letters  mentioned  nothing  of  such  dissatisfaction.  The 
motion  was  rejected  by  94  to  54. 


1778.  THURLOW  MADE  CHANCELLOR.  279 

3rd.  The  Chancellor  resigned  the  Seal,  which  was  given 
to  Thurlow,  who  was  made  a  Baron.  Wedderburn,  not 
having  been  able  to  obtain  his  peerage,  which  had  been 
strongly  opposed,  was  forced  to  content  himself  with  suc- 
ceeding as  Attorney- General,  and  Wallace  as  Solicitor- 
General.  Lord  North  kissed  hands  for  the  Cinque  Ports. 

Anecdote  of  the  present  Keeper  of  the  K — 's  Conscience. 
His  Lordship  qualified  a  few  years  since  for  a  place,  which 
was  the  last  step  he  took  to  his  present  cushioned  seat,  and 
the  clerk  of  the  parish  having  waited  on  him  for  his  fees 
of  office,  he  gave  him  a  guinea.  Amen  not  testifying  any 
great  satisfaction  or  gratitude  in  his  countenance,  the  noble 
Lord  is  said  to  have  exclaimed  with  some  degree  of  vehe- 
mence, "Friend,  what  would  you  have?  Do  not  you 
think  a  guinea  to  be  the  full  value  of  a  bit  of  bread  and  a 
glass  of  wine  ?  " 

Bon  Mot. — A  number  of  noblemen  and  gentlemen  of 
the  law  dining  with  the  Lord  Chancellor  on  Thursday  last, 
to  congratulate  him  on  his  recovery,  one  of  them  jocularly 
observed,  "  That  he  was  very  near  losing  the  Seals."  "  Very 
true,  Sir,"  says  the  other;  "and  that  would  be  rather  hard 
too  before  I  had  made  an  impression." 

The  three  vacant  Garters  were  given  to  the  Earls  of 
Suffolk  and  Rochfbrd  and  Lord  Weymouth. 

The  King  put  an  end  to  the  session  by  a  speech,  in 
which  he  declared  he  had  done  everything  in  his  power  to 
maintain  peace ;  and  if  unjustly  attacked,  appealed  to  the 
world  for  not  being  the  aggressor,  and  should  trust  to  the 
bravery  and  resources  of  his  subjects. 

THUS   ENDED   THAT   DISGRACEFUL   SESSION  ! 

5th.  The  City  had  an  audience  of  the  King  to  desire 
Lord  Chatham  might  be  buried  at  St.  Paul's.  He  an- 


280  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

swered  in  the  most  dry  and  ungracious  manner  (though 
their  address  was  remarkably  decent  and  respectful  both 
to  his  Majesty  and  the  House  of  Commons),  that  he  had 
complied  with  all  the  requests  of  the  Commons,  and  that 
everything  was  prepared  in  consequence — he  meant  at 
Westminster. 

The  same  day  an  account  arrived  of  the  Toulon  squa- 
dron having  passed  the  Straits  and  taken  a  course,  as  the 
captain  of  a  sloop  that  had  followed  them  thought,  for  the 
West  Indies.  Admiral  Byron  was  despatched  after  them. 

9th.  Lord  Chatham  was  buried  at  Westminster.  Not 
one  of  the  Court  attended  the  funeral  but  Lord  Townsherid 
and  Lord  Amherst.  Thus  the  Court  made  its  behaviour 
completely  ridiculous,  by  showing,  after  showering  such 
honours  and  rewards  on  him  and  his  family,  how  much  it 
had  acted  against  its  inclination. 

Wth.  Account  from  Philadelphia  of  a  detachment 
having  destroyed  forty-four  American  vessels  in  the  Dela- 
ware. 

16th.  General  Burgoyne  published  his  two  speeches 
made  in  the  House  of  Commons  in  his  own  defence. 

25^.  An  account  arrived  that  Admiral  Keppel  lying 
near  Brest,  three  French  frigates  entered  amongst  his  fleet, 
on  which  he  ordered  them  to  retire;  one  of  them,  the 
Belle  Poule,  fired  at  a  frigate  of  his,  and  they  fought  long, 
when  both  suffered :  the  Belle  Poule  had  forty  killed  and 
fifty  wounded  and  then  retired.  The  Licorne,  a  small  one, 
being  so  near  Lord  Longford,  he  summoned  her  to  yield ; 
but  she  fired,  killed  four  of  his  men  and  then  struck,  and 
was  sent  into  Portsmouth.  This  seemed  a  direct  intention 
of  beginning  the  war,  and  as  if  they  had  intended  to  pro- 
voke Keppel  to  begin  it.  The  Ministers  grew  much 
alarmed,  and  were  said  to  have  intelligence  that  D'Estaing's 


1778.  GREAT  SCARCITY  OF  MONEY.  281 

fleet  was  coming  back,  and  a  list  of  officers  named  for  a 
descent,  among  whom  were  Du  Chatelet  and  De  Guines, 
two  late  ambassadors  here,  as  best  acquainted  with  the 
country.  The  want  of  money  was  universally  felt  and 
complained  of.  In  Ireland  the  Government  had  given 
7  per  cent,  for  money.  Yet  the  Dutch  had  just  placed 
three  millions  into  our  funds  ;  and  it  was  said  Spain  was 
disarming  her  fleet,  at  least  had  dismissed  her  pilots.  A 
negotiation  for  a  Northern  alliance  was  going  on  with 
Russia  and  Prussia,  and  the  latter  had  recommended  our 
courting  Denmark. 

When  Mr.  Berkeley,  Lord  Berkeley's  brother,  arrived 
from  Admiral  Keppel  with  an  account  of  the  engagement, 
he  found  neither  Lord  Sandwich,  nor  Stephens,  the  Secretary 
of  the  Admiralty,  in  town !  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  told 
me  the  next  thing  I  should  hear  would  be  that  Keppel  was 
returned  to  Portsmouth,  as  he  had  orders  to  do,  after  look- 
ing into  Brest.  Lord  Hertford  dropped  to  me  the  next 
day  that  Keppel  had  not  been  backward.  I  thence  concluded 
that  the  Court  meant  to  blame  him ;  and  two  days  after, 
Lord  Dudley,  Lord  Sandwich's  friend,  asked  me  if  I  had 
seen  the  *  Gazette.'  I  said,  "  No."  He  said,  with  a  sneer, 
"  he  says  he  hopes  he  has  not  acted  wrong."  The  next  thing 
I  heard  was  that  Keppel  was  to  be  recalled,  that  the  King 
had  been  two  days  before  he  saw  Mr.  Berkeley,  that  there 
was  great  consternation,  that  Lord  Sandwich  was  gone 
post  to  Portsmouth,  and  that  the  Court  said  Keppel  was 
returned  because  he  was  too  weak ;  though,  from  what  the 
Duke  told  me,  I  saw  it  was  according  to  his  orders,  for  he 
was  actually  come  back.  This  showed  they  had  given 
him  obscure  orders,  and  were  now  afraid  of  the  war,  and 
would  sacrifice  him. 


282  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

The  Bill  in  favour  of  the  Roman  Catholics  was  thrown 
out  in  Ireland  by  three  voices.1 

There  was  an  universal  alarm  in  the  City  on  the  return 
of  Keppel.  Nobody  would  ensure  at  any  price. 

The  Court  received  intelligence  that  great  preparations 
of  transports  were  making  in  the  Ports  of  France,  and  that 
40,000  men  more  were  marched  to  their  coasts.  They 
were  also  sending  great  supplies  to  America,  whither  they 
had  heard  their  fleet  was  got  safe.  It  was  also  said  that 
our  Commissioners  would  be  received  there  with  the  greatest 
contempt. 


JULY. 


1st.  WILKES,  having  again  stood  against  Hopkins  for  the 
Chamberlain's  place,  had  but  a  small  number  of  hands, 
yet  demanded  a  poll,  which  finished  this  day,  when  Hop- 
kins had  1216  votes,  and  Wilkes  but  289. 

2nd.  Sir  William  Howe  arrived.  It  was  very  uncer- 
tain how  he  would  be  received,  but  he  had  an  audience  of 
the  King  on  the  3rd,  and  was  received  favourably.  He 
brought  an  account  of  the  army  under  Clinton  having 
abandoned  Philadelphia  for  want  of  provisions,  and  being 
suffered  to  march  to  New  York  through  the  Jerseys  with- 
out molestation,  on  a  compromise  of  his  not  destroying 
Philadelphia. 

The  Ministers  were  under  the  greatest  apprehensions  for 


1  It  afterwards  did  pass ;    but  the  I  to  take  off  the  test  in  favour  of  the  Dis- 
party  against  it  coupled  with  it  a  clause  |  seniors,  and  thus  the  bill  came  over. 


1778.  RE-SAILING  OF  ADMIRAL  KEPPEL.  283 

the  West  and  East  India  fleets,  now  expected  home,  and 
reckoned  worth  four  millions.  They  knew  the  French 
frigates  were  out  since  Keppel's  retreat  to  intercept  them ; 
and,  on  the  3rd,  the  West  India  Merchants  waited  on 
Lord  North  to  press  the  re-sailing  of  Keppel  to  save  their 
fleet. 

6th.  The  West  India  and  Jamaica  fleets  arrived.  It 
was  very  astonishing  that  France  had  not  endeavoured  to 
intercept  them  ;  not  only  for  the  great  blow  it  would  have 
been  to  our  trade,  but  as  out  of  them  the  Government  got 
1300  sailors  to  man  more  men-of-war. 

l()th.  Admiral  Keppel  sailed  again  with  twenty-six  or 
twenty-seven  men-of-the-line.  The  Ministers  thought  the 
Brest  squadron  was  sailed ;  but  it  was  not  certain.  The 
Ministers  learnt  that  one  reason  for  that  fleet  not  having 
come  out  when  Keppel,  with  only  twenty  men-of-war,  was 
before  Brest,  and  they  were  so  superior,  was,  that  they  did 
not  know  Byron  was  sailed  after  D'Estaing  to  America,  but 
thought  he  might  be  after  Keppel. 

It  was  confidently  said  here  that  Sartine  was  almost  the 
only  French  Minister  for  war,  and  that  the  Queen  sup- 
ported him  in  hopes  of  bringing  out  the  Duke  de  Choiseul : 
that  M.  de  Maurepas  was  jealous  of  Sartine  and  against 
war,  and  talked  of  retiring  if  it  was  declared;  and  that 
Necker  said  he  could  not  furnish  supplies  for  it  for  above 
six  months.  Spain  certainly  gave  the  most  pacific  assur- 
ances. 

The  Great  Duchess  told  Mrs.  Ann  Pitt,  at  Florence, 
that  her  father  had  written  to  her  that  he  condemned  the 
protection  France  gave  to  the  Americans,  and  that  he 
would  not  join  in  it.  In  fact,  on  the 

13th,  Almadovar,  his  new  Ambassador,  arrived  in 
London. 


284  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

It  was  said  that  General  Burgoyne,  being  ordered  by 
the  King  to  return  to  America,  as  soon  as  he  had  been  at 
Bath,  replied  he  would  consider  of  it. 

\7th.  A  merchant  in  the  City  received  an  express  from 
France  that  the  Brest  fleet  was  sailed,  twenty-eight  men- 
of-the-line,  with  orders  to  burn,  sink,  and  destroy. 

The  same  day  it  was  said  that  Admiral  Keppel  was  put 
into  Plymouth,  and  had  sent  to  demand  three  more  ships- 
of-the-line,  to  enable  him  to  meet  the  French. 

These  two  notices  were  immediately  stuck  up  at  Lloyd's 
Coffee  House,  and  stocks  fell  3i  per  cent. 

IQth.  The  Ministers  received  intelligence  of  war  having 
been  declared  by  France  ;  but  it  was  a  mistake,  occasioned 
by  the  ordonnance  for  privateers  being  read  in  some  seaport 
towns. 

22nd.  Letters  from  Philadelphia.  The  Commissioners 
had  arrived  there  three  days  after  the  army  was  gone,  and 
were  preparing  to  follow  it.  They  had  notified  their 
arrival,  and  offers  of  our  funding  the  American  debts,  to 
the  Congress ;  but  the  Congress  had  not  deigned  to  send 
them  any  answer.  Lord  Howe  had  refused  to  act  as  Com- 
missioner ;  and  Lord  Carlisle  and  Governor  Johnston 
had  quarrelled.  At  the  same  time  came  an  account  of 
the  Americans  fitting  out  an  expedition  against  Florida. 
Johnston  wrote  that  he  would  impeach  the  Ministers. 

26th.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  told  me,  that  having 
been  very  uneasy  at  not  being  employed,  he  had  as  long 
ago  as  April  tried  every  method  with  the  King ;  that  at 
first  he  had  been  told  there  would  be  no  war  with  France, 
then  not  in  Germany.  That  at  last  he  had  pushed  to 
know  if  he  was  never  to  be  employed,  and  had  proposed  a 
plan  to  the  King  which  would  interfere  with  nothing ;  but 
that  the  King  had  answered  he  had  no  occasion  for  his 


1778.     THE  D.  OF  GLOUCESTER'S  REQUEST  TO  THE  KING.      285 

service.     Hurt  at  this  cruelty,  impatient  of  doing  nothing 
at  so  important  a  moment,  he  had,  on  the  25th,  sent  Lord 
George  Germaine  to  the  King  to  ask  leave  to  go  as  a 
volunteer  to  the  King  of  Prussia.     The  King  sent  him 
this  answer,  that  he  was  very  glad  his  brother's  health  was 
so  established,  and  had  no  objection,  if  his  Royal  High- 
ness  could  obtain  the  King  of  Prussia's  consent.     The 
Duke  owned  to  me  that  he  was  much  disappointed,  having 
expected  to  be  refused ;  but  he  had  taken  his  part  like  a 
man  and  was  determined  to  go.     He  immediately  sent  for 
Count  Malzahn  and  gave  him  a  letter  to  the  King  of 
Prussia,  which  he  read  to  me,  and  very  sensible  it  was. 
He  said  that  being  desirous  to  serve  his  country,  he  knew 
he  could  learn  the  science  of  war  nowhere  so  well  as  in 
his  Majesty's  army ;  and  that  as  his  brother  had  no  objec- 
tion, he  asked  leave  to  attend  his  Majesty  as  a  volunteer. 
I  said,  "  Sir,  it  is  a  very  handsome  compliment ;  but  I 
admire  what  your  Royal  Highness  has  not  said  as  much  as 
what  you  have  :  your  silence  on  your  reasons  for  not  serving 
your  own  country  speak  those  reasons  sufficiently.  But,  Sir," 
added  I,  "  you  will  not  go.     It  is  impossible,  if  the  Minis- 
ters have  a  grain  of  sense,  but  they  must  see  the  indecency 
of  forcing  the  first  Prince  of  the  blood  to  seek  service  abroad 
when  his  own  country  is  in  danger  of  being  invaded ;  but, 
should  they  not  have   the    honesty  to  remonstrate,  still 
your  Royal  Highness  will  not  go.     The  King  will  desire 
the  King  of  Prussia  to  decline  your  offer ;  and,  as  they 
say  an  alliance  is  in  agitation  between  England,  Russia, 
and  Prussia,  the  latter  will  be  too  complaisant  to  accept 
your  Royal  Highness  if  your  brother  dislikes  it"     Tli£ 
Duke  said,  if  he  did  go,  he  would  return  immediately  if 
this  country  was  invaded.     The  Duchess  said  Lord  Percy 
had  asked  to  be  employed,  and  on  being  refused  had  asked 


286  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

the  King's  leave  to  go  either  into  the  Emperor's  or  the 
King  of  Prussia's  army ;  on  which  a  separate  command 
had  been  found  for  him  at  home.  I  saw  it  was  this  pre- 
cedent to  which  the  Duke  had  trusted. 

At  the  end  of  the  month  letters  came  that  the  Emperor 
had  offered  peace  to  the  King  of  Prussia. 


Quotation  from  Fletcher,  in  the  '  General  Advertiser' 

THE  D — KE  OF  GL R. 

"  If  you  condemn  your  brother 
Only  because  he  's  bounteous,  great,  and  brave, 
Know  you  condemn  those  virtues — own  you  want  them. 
Had  you  a  thousand  brothers  such  as  he, 
You  ought  to  show  you  are  above  them  all ; 
As  daring  to  reward  and  cherish  them 
As  bucklers  of  your  crown  in  time  of  war, 
And  in  soft  peace  the  jewels  that  adorn  it." 


For  the  '  G-eneral  Advertiser'  £c. 

ON  THE  LATE  DAVID  HUME'S  PENSION  BEING  GRANTED  TO  THE  WRITER 

OF  THE  '  MORNING  POST.' 
EPIGRAM. 

"  When  Dryden's  laurel  to  MacFlecno  came, 
Minerva  hung  her  head  with  conscious  shame ; 
But  soon  the  rising  glories  of  that  reign, 
And  Marlbro's  arms,  fir'd  all  her  tuneful  train. 

See  David's  meed  to  paltry  B descend  ! 

Fame  sounds  her  trumpet  at  the  nether  end. 
The  meed  of  wit  and  learning,  taste  and  sense, 
Ee wards  low  ribbald  lies  and  impudence  ! 
Pallas  herself,  turn'd  satyr,  laughs  outright : 
*  Battles  like  thine  great  George  Germaine  may  fight ; 
Triumphs  like  thine  dull  Parson  B may  write  /'  " 


1778.  "  THE  OLD  WOMAN  OF  SYRACUSE."  287 

For  the  *  Public  Advertiser? 

THE  '  OLD  WOMAN  OF  SYRACUSE,'  A  SCRAP  OF  ANCIENT  HISTORY. 

"  By  all  but  courtiers  vile  abhorr'd, 

On  Syracusa's  throne 
The  younger  Dionysius  sat, 
And  rul'd  by  fear  alone. 

"  Yet,  by  his  death,  though  all  men  wish'd 

Heaven  would  them  freedom  give ; 
Still  one  old  dame,  for  all  they  said, 
Still  pray'd  that  he  might  live ! 

"  Strange  was  the  prayer,  and  (as  strange  news 

Is  swift  in  its  career) 
It  was  not  long  before  the  tale 
Had  reach'd  the  tyrant's  ear. 

"  Surpris'd  to  find  he  had  a  friend 

(Conscious  to  none  he  'd  claim), 

He  for  the  old  woman  sent  to  Court, 

And  thus  bespoke  the  dame  : — 

"  '  How  comes  it  thou,  and  only  thou, 

Should'st  wish  my  life  to  last ; 
When  all  pray  thunders  on  my  head, 
All  hope  to  see  the  blast  ?  ' 

"  *  With  tyrants  long '  (the  matron  said) 

*  This  isle  has  been  opprest ; 
And  oft  I've  wish'd  them  tumbled  down, 
To  give  my  country  rest. 

"  4  Thus  oft  I've  pray'd,  as  oft  the  Fates 

Have  out  of  pity  will'd  it ; 
But  when  I'd  pray'd  one  from  the  throne, 
A  tyrant  worse  still  fill'd  it. 

"  '  Now  fervently  for  thee  I  pray, 
Through  fear  of  greater  evil ; 
For  if  a  worse  than  thou  should  come, 
He  sure  must  be  the  Devil.' " — M(ASO)N. 


288  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  AUG. 


A  U  G  U  ST. 


1st.  ADMIRAL  KEPPEL'S  Captain,  Captain  Falkener, 
arrived  at  the  Admiralty  with  an  account  of  the  Admiral 
having  come  up,  on  the  27th  July,  with  the  centre  and 
rear  of  the  French  fleet,  on  which  the  French  fired,  and  a 
fight  began  with  such  ships  as  could  come  up.  The 
French  endeavoured  to  destroy  the  masts  and  rigging  of 
the  English,  and  did  prevent  many  of  the  ships  following 
the  Admiral,  and  he  ceased  to  fire  in  hopes  of  their  form- 
ing and  give  him  fair  battle ;  but  in  the  night,  the  whole 
French  fleet  went  off,  and  got  into  Brest ;  and,  it  was  said, 
had  deceived  Keppel  by  leaving  the  lights  of  the  Admiral's 
ship  on  board  a  frigate.  One  French  ship  was  seen  to  be 
towed  away.  No  English  officer  was  killed,  and  only  133 
private  men,  and  373  wounded.  Lord  Richard  Caven- 
dish, brother  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  had  gone  a 
volunteer  with  his  friend  Captain  Walsingham,  and  was 
on  deck  of  Keppel's  ship  the  whole  time.  Keppel  had 
suffered  so  much  in  masts,  rigging,  &c.,  that  he  brought 
the  fleet  back  to  Plymouth. 

The  Court  affected  to  be  greatly  disappointed  at  not 
having  gained  a  complete  victory,  in  order  to  blame  Kep- 
pel. It  was  evident  the  French  had  orders  not  to  risk  a 
battle. 

Accounts  of  Admiral  Byron's  fleet  being  dispersed  by  a 
storm. 

It  was  also  said  that  the  Canadians  had  sent  a  Deputa- 
tion to  the  Congress  to  propose  union. 


1778.  OFFERS  MADE  BY  THE  COMMISSIONERS.  289 

7th.  Account  of  the  arrival  at  Portsmouth  of  eleven 
East  Indiamen,  for  which  there  had  been  great  apprehen- 
sions. Keppel  had  sent  five  ships  to  meet  them,  on  hearing 
the  French  had  despatched  six  to  intercept  them.  Thus 
had  all  the  fleets  come  in,  reckoned  worth  four  millions. 

The  French  affected  to  call  the  engagement  a  victory 
for  them,  and  asserted  Keppel  had  retired,  though  they 
owned  having  lost  above  1200  men. 

llth.  Were  published  in" our  papers,  from  those  of  the 
Americans,  the  negotiations  of  the  Commissioners  with 
the  Congress.  The  most  remarkable  points  were,  the 
unwarrantable  offers  of  admitting  them  to  Parliament,  and  . 
offering  to  pay  their  debts — both  without  the  authority  of 
Parliament.  On  their  side,  their  offering  us  the  alterna- 
tive of  acknowledging  their  independence  or  of  with- 
drawing our  troops.  The  language  of  Governor  John- 
ston to  the  President  Laurens,  in  which  he  talks  of 
Britain  in  the  hour  of  her  insolence,  was  the  most  indecent  r 
phrase  to  be  used  towards  enemies  of  his  own  country, 
which  he  represented  as  its  negotiator,  that  ever  was 
heard  of. 

For  the  ''Public  Advertiser,'  August,  1778. 

EXTEMPORE,  ON  THE  FRENCH  BUYING  UP  ENGLISH  HORSES. 

"  We  are  told  that  the  Monsieurs  our  horses  import, 

And  regardless  we  are  of  what  passes  ; 
But,  Lord !  what  a  racket  'twould  make  in  our  Court, 
If  they  kindly  would  purchase  our  asses  !  " 

The  Roman  Catholic  Bill,  without  the  clause  in  favour 
of  the  Dissenters,  was  carried  by  the  Court  in  the  Irish 
Parliament  by  a  majority  of  thirty — by  the  lateness  of  the 
season  and  the  absence  of  many  members. 

The  Brest  fleet  was  said  to  be  again  sailed. 

VOL.  II.  U 


290 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


AUG. 


The  Duke  of  Ancaster  died.1  The  King  offered  his 
place  of  Master-of-the-Horse  to  the  Earl  of  Exeter. 

It  was  whispered  that  Sir  Hugh  Palliser,  who  behaved 
very  bravely  at  first  in  the  late  sea-fight,  had  afterwards 
not  obeyed  Admiral  Keppel's  signal  for  advancing.  As 
Palliser  was  Lord  Sandwich's  creature,  he  was  suspected 
of  having  acted  by  the  Earl's  order,  who  hated  Keppel  for 
having  complained  to  the  King  of  the  bad  condition  of  the 
fleet.  It  was  said  that  Keppel  and  Palliser  quarrelled  on 
this  at  Plymouth,  which  might  happen,  as  Keppel  was  much 
insulted  by  the  mob  there,  as  supposed  at  the  instigation 
of  the  creatures  of  the  Court,  which  might  provoke  him  to 
tell  what  he  had  at  first  suppressed. 

Mr.  Thomas  Walpole  told  me  that  Lady  Chatham 
hearing  that  Samuel  Martin  went  about  showing  a  pre- 
tended letter  from  her  late  Lord  to  Lord  Bute,  proposing 
union  with  him,  was  very  angry,  and  wrote  to  Lord  Bute 
to  insist  on  his  disavowing  any  such  letter,  or  she  would 
publish  all  the  papers  in  her  hands  to  prove  that  just  the 
reverse  was  true,  and  that  Lord  Bute  had  been  the  proposer. 
She  sent  the  draught  of  her  letter  to  Lord  Camden, 
desiring  him  to  correct  it,  which  he  did.  Lord  Bute  sent 
but  an  evasive  answer. 

23rd.  Colonel  Patterson  arrived  from  New  York  with 
an  account  that  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  in  his  march  from  the 
Jerseys  to  New  York,  had  been  attacked  by  Washington 
and  twice  beaten  back,  but  at  last  had  forced  his  way,  and 
was  got  thither.  They  owned  having  lost  but  380  men, 
though  many  had  dropped  down  dead  in  the  field  from 
the  excessive  heat.  Washington  had  suffered  from  the 


1  Peregrine,  the  third  Duke,  whose 
second  wife  is  described  in  Walpole's 
letter  to  Mann,  July  9,  1779,  as 


"  natural  daughter  of  Panton,  a  disre- 
putable horse -jockey  of  Newmarket." 
— D. 


1778.  LORD  HOWE  BLOCKADED  BY  M.  D'ESTAING.         291 

same  cause,  and  probably  had  not  been  well  seconded,  for 
he  tried  General  Lee  by  a  court-martial ;  who,  however,  * 
was  acquitted.     Clinton  probably  lost  many  more,  as  he 
had  been  in  the  greatest  want  of  water,  had  no  hospitals, 
and  had  a  Ions:  march  to  New  York  after  the  action. 

When  they  arrived  there  they  found  Lord  Howe  blocked 
up  in  the  port  by  Mons.  D'Estaing,  and  provisions  in  the 
town  for  only  nine  weeks,  so  that,  unless  they  could  be 
relieved,  both  the  army  and  the  fleet  were  likely  to  be 
starved  into  a  surrender. 

14th.  News  came  that  Admiral  Byron,  with  three  of 
his  ships,  had  been  met  within  150  leagues  of  New 
York.  The  Court  immediately  gave  out  that  he  had  ten 
ships  with  him. 

Sir  Edward  Newnham,  in  Ireland,  wrote  a  strong  letter 
to  the  Dissenters  against  the  Roman  Catholic  Bill,  and  it 
was  printed ;  as  was  a  short  speech  of  the  Earl  of  Ely, 
who  said  he  would  vote  against  the  Bill,  though  he  ex- 
pected to  be  murdered  as  he  went  home. 

Captain  Brereton,  who  with  two  other  Captains  had 
been  reproached  for  having  been  backward  in  the  late  sea- 
fight,  demanded  a  court-martial,  was  found  guilty,  and  was 
broken.  He  had  once  before  been  suspected  of  cowardice. 
The  duel  between  Keppel  and  Palliser  was  not  true,  but 
the  latter  was  strongly  suspected  of  having  betrayed  the 
Admiral.  It  was  now  certainly  known  that  Keppel's  true 
reason  for  not  renewing  the  fight  was  the  great  damage  the 
fleet  had  received  in  the  rigging.  Both  fleets  were  now 
again  at  sea. 


u  2 


292  •    LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  SEPT. 


SEPTEMBER. 


2nd.  THE  Duke  of  Gloucester  received  a  very  civil  answer 
from  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  excused  himself  from 
receiving  the  Duke,  on  the  lateness  of  the  season  and  the 
danger  of  it  to  the  Duke's  health,  but  hoping  to  see  his 
Royal  Highness  some  other  time. 

13th.  The  Lisbon  and  Jamaica  fleets  arrived;  thus  all 
the  trade  was  come  home  safe,  having  almost  miraculously 
escaped  so  many  enemies.  Sir  Guy  Carleton  arrived  too. 

Letters  from  Lord  Howe  that  D'Estaing,  either  from 
want  of  water  or  from  not  being  able  to  enter  the  harbour 
of  New  York,  was  sailed  to  the  South,  it  was  supposed  to 
attack  Rhode  Island.  Lord  Howe,  having  been  joined  by 
one  of  Byron's  squadron,  was  gone  with  that  and  seven 
others  after  D'Estaing,  but  it  was  thought  with  too  small  a 
force.  It  was  said  that  Sir  P.  Parker,  with  six  of  Byron's, 
was  seen  very  near  New  York. 

Alderman  Oliver,  having  been  thought  of  for  next  Lord 
Mayor,  published  a  letter  declaring  he  should  decline  it, 
as  he  was  going  to  the  West  Indies,  where  his  property 
lay,  and  which  he  thought  in  great  danger,  and  should  quit 
Parliament  too. 

A  great  mutiny  at  Edinburgh  on  one  of  the  new  regi- 
ments thinking  they  were  to  be  sent  to  India. 

28th.  The  King  and  Queen  went  to  the  camp  at  Win- 
chester, but  did  not  carry  the  Prince  of  Wales.  Sir  Wil- 
liam Howe  attended  the  King,  though  he  had  so  little 
cause  to  display  himself  on  such  an  occasion. 


1778.       THE  CONGRESS  STIGMATIZES  GOV.  JOHNSTON.        293 


OCTOBER. 


ACCOUNT  of  the  Brest  fleet  having  returned  thither. 

Account  of  D'Estaing's  attempting  Rhode  Island  and 
Sir  H.  Clinton  succouring  it,  and  of  Lord  Howe's  coming 
up,  and  a  great  storm  separating  the  two  fleets  as  going  to 
engage.  Also  that  the  Congress  had  stigmatized  Governor 
Johnston  on  his  attempting  to  bribe  one  of  the  Members, 
and  of  his  throwing  up  his  commission  on  that  occasion. 

I6tk.  Lady  Chatham  published  Lord  Bute's  negotia- 
tion with  her  Lord  by  the  intervention  of  Sir  James 
"Wright  and  Dr.  Addington,  on  Lord  Bute's  having  em- 
ployed Samuel  Martin  to  show  a  letter  which  imputed 
overtures  to  Lord  Chatham. 

The  French  trade  greatly  distressed  by  our  numerous 
captures. 

19M.  The  King  visited  the  camp  at  Warley  Common, 
and  lodged  at  Lord  Petre's.1 

I  was  very  ill  to  the  end  of  the  year,  and  therefore  the 
notes  may  be  very  imperfectly  and  incorrectly  taken,  as 
they  were  written  afterwards  from  memory. 


1  Thou  art  Peter ;  and  on  this  rock  I  will  found  my  Church." 


294  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 


NOVEMBER. 


LORD  Mountstewart  published  a  letter  in  the  papers, 
asserting  upon  his  honour  that  his  father,  Lord  Bute,  had 
assured  him  he  had  had  no  thoughts  of  coming  into  place 
again,  and  declaring  that  he  himself  would  answer  no 
questions.  It  was  remarkable  that  Lord  Bute,  in  Dr. 
Addington's  narrative,  had  said  he  had  approved  all  of 
Lord  Chatham's  speech  the  first  day  of  the  last  session  but 
his  motion  for  recalling  the  troops  from  America,  and  yet 
it  was  the  very  day  in  which  his  son  had  threatened  to 
move  for  the  same  recall  of  the  troops  ! 

Mr.  W.  Pitt,  Lord  Chatham's  second  son,  answered 
Lord  Mountstewart's  letter  in  the  papers  too,  but  very 
civilly.  Lord  Chatham's  family  went  no  farther,  and  did 
not  even  state  the  provocation  given  by  Martin's  letter,  nor 
the  subsequent  offers  from  Lord  North  by  Eden ;  nor  did 
they  reply  to  a  sophistic  reply  published  in  the  name  of 
Sir  James  Wright,  and  written  by  Dr.  Luid,  who  let  out 
his  pen  to  men  of  any  party  or  principles.  This  cautious 
reserve  in  the  family  of  Pitt  made  many  persons  think 
Lord  Bute  had  the  better  in  the  dispute,  though  he  had  so 
much  exposed  himself,  especially  by  having  said,  in  his 
intercourse  with  Dr.  Addington,  that  the  two  men  the 
King  hated  the  most  were  him  (Lord  Bute)  and  Lord 
Chatham.  I  believe  so,  for  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  has 
told  me  that  the  King  hated  Lord  Bute  even  before  his 
accession,  though  he  gave  him  so  much  power  at  first  by 
the  influence  of  the  Princess,  his  mother.  Queen  Anne 


1778.  THE  KING'S  DISLIKE  TO  LORD  BUTE.  295 

acted  the  same  part  with  the  Duchess  of  Marlborough,  who 
had  lost  her  heart  many  years  before  it  appeared ;  the 
Duchess  knew  it,  but  concealed  it  from  her  husband  and 
Lord  Godolphin.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  told  me,  too, 
that  he  and  his  brothers  and  his  sisters  had  observed  the 
same,  and  had  heard  the  King  express  dislike  of  Lord 
Bute  early,  when  they  were  so  young  that  the  King  was 
unguarded  before  them.  The  Duke  told  me  that,  not  long 
before  his  own  rupture  with  his  brother,  the  King  had  said 
to  him  of  Lord  Bute,  "  The  fellow  has  twice  gone  abroad 
and  returned  without  kissing  my  hand ;"  and  the  Duke  did 
not  believe  that  Lord  Bute  ever  saw  the  King  in  private. 
Lord  Bute's  negotiation  with  Lord  Chatham  was  probably 
from  impatience  of  power,  and  he  was  probably  fool  enough 
to  think  that  he  and  Lord  Chatham  could  awe  the  King 
into  making  them  Ministers.  It  was  pity  the  Chatham 
family  did  not  publish  the  account  of  the  message  by 
Eden,  which  did  look  as  if  the  King  countenanced  Lord 
Bute ;  and  his  Majesty  was  so  false,  that  he  might  express 
dislike  of  Lord  Bute,  and  yet  keep  up  connections  with 
him. 

The  Duke  of  Gloucester  gave  me  an  instance  how  little 
the  King  loved  even  the  Princess  his  mother.  When 
Doctor  Musgrave  charged  her  in  the  House  of  Commons 
with  having  taken  money  from  France  for  the  peace  of 
Paris,  she  begged  the  King  to  save  her  from  that  disgrace, 
and  he  did  not  mind  her.  She  then  with  tears  sent  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester  to  the  King,  to  beseech  him  to  inter- 
pose and  prevent  that  insult.  The  Duke  went ;  the  King 
with  the  utmost  indifference  said,  "  /  bear  such  things,  and 
she  must  bear  them  !  " 

About  this  time  became  known  a  quarrel  at  Court, 
which  had  happened  the  last  month,  and  which  had  nothing 


29G  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 

to  do  with  politics.  The  Duchess  of  Argyll,  and  widow  of 
Duke  Hamilton,  had  long  aimed  at  being  the  King's  mis- 
tress ;  but  I  believe  never  was  so,  though  she  had  got 
great  weight  with  him,  and  obtained  an  English  barony 
for  herself,  and  another  for  her  son,  Duke  Hamilton.  The 
Queen  had  early  been  jealous  of  her,  and  had  used  her  so 
ill  that  she  had  thought  of  resigning ;  but  the  Duke  loved 
money  better  than  her,  and  was  not  jealous.  Whether  as  the 
Duchess  grew  old  and  lost  her  beauty,  or  whether,  to  dis- 
guise her  own  jealousy,  the  Queen  had  made  her  a  sort  of 
favourite ;  but  the  Duchess  was  grown  so  insolent,  and 
behaved  so  familiarly  with  the  King,  even  at  chapel, 
and  behind  the  Queen's  chair,  that  the  latter  was  deter- 
mined to  affront  her ;  and  when  she  was  to  go  to  Warley 
Camp  with  the  King,  and  it  was  the  Duchess's  turn  to 
wait,  the  Queen  said  she  would  have  Lady  Egremont  go. 
The  Duchess  was  so  angry,  that  she  went  home  and  told 
the  Duke  she  would  write  and  resign.  The  Duke,  the 
most  cautious  and  interested  of  men,  said  she  might  resign, 
but  he  would  dictate  the  letter.  He  did,  but  the  Duchess 
added  in  a  postscript,  "  Though  /write  the  letter,  the  Duke 
dictated  it."  The  Queen  in  return  bade  her  consider  on 
it;  she  did,  and  kept  her  place.  The  fortune  of  this 
woman  was  so  extraordinary  that  I  have  often  thought  it 
worth  mentioning.  Another  instance  of  her  insolence  will 
appear  in  the  next  month. 

This  month  came  an  account  of  the  French  having  taken 
the  island  of  Dominica. 

Governor  Johnston  arrived  from  America. 

A  singular  trial  in  the  King's  Bench.  Lord  Sandwich, 
as  first  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  had  placed  several  Hunt- 
ingdonshire voters,  instead  of  decayed  seamen,  in  Green- 
wich Hospital,  and  appointed  another  of  those  voters 


1778.     TRIAL  WITH  REGARD  TO  GREENWICH  HOSPITAL.    297 

contractor  for  the  seamen's  allowance,  which  man  gave 
them  exceedingly  bad  bread,  &c.,  which  they  could  not  eat. 
Baillie,  the  Deputy-Governor,  complained  heavily,  and 
Lord  Sandwich  could  not  stop  his  mouth.  The  Earl 
spoke  to  Lord  Bute,  who  had  appointed  Baillie  Deputy- 
Governor  ;  and  Lord  Bute  did,  or  pretended  to,  reprove 
Baillie,  who  said  he  knew  he  should  lose  his  place,  but  he 
would  not  see  the  poor  men  starved.  Baillie,  finding  no 
redress,  printed  a  pamphlet  on  the  case,  and  sent  it  only 
to  the  Trustees,  but  did  not  publish  it.  Lord  Sandwich 
on  this  superseded  Baillie,  and  instigated  some  accused 
in  that  publication  to  prosecute  him  for  a  libel ;  Lord 
Sandwich  having  previously  retained  all  the  great  Counsel 
in  England  but  Dunning,  whom  Baillie  retained,  and 
another  Counsel,  and  one  Erskine,  a  young  Scot,1  who  had 
been  recommended  to  Lord  Sandwich  and  rejected  by  him 
as  never  having  pleaded  at  the  bar.  He  was  brother  of 
the  Earl  of  Buchan,  had  been  a  soldier,  and  was  a  Whig — 
was  very  poor,  and,  having  a  wife  and  children,  had  taken 
to  the  law.  The  other  Counsel,  I  forget  his  name,  opened 
the  case  severely  on  Lord  Sandwich;  and  then  Erskine 
spoke  with  still  more  bitterness,  and  with  more  abilities 
and  success  than  had  ever  been  known  on  a  first  pleading. 
Lord  Mansfield  interrupted  him,  and  told  him  Lord  Sand- 
wich was  not  implicated  in  the  cause.  Erskine  replied, 
but  he  intended  to  make  him  concerned  in  it,  and  went  on 
with  greater  asperity,  and  so  ably  that  Dunning  had 
nothing  left  to  say,  and  Baillie  carried  his  cause.  There 
were  two  remarkable  depositions — one  of  Lord  Sandwich 
having  used  most  unwarrantable  threats  to  one  whom  he 
suspected  of  favouring  Baillie ;  the  other,  of  a  clergyman, 


1  Afterwards  Lord  Chancellor.  Dun-  I   Bearcroft,  Peckham,  Murphy,  and  Har- 
ning  was  retained  on  the  other  side  ;   |  grave  were  with  Erakine.— D. 


298  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 

attached  to  Lord  Sandwich,  who,  preaching  at  Greenwich, 
had  drawn  a  parallel  between  Jesus  Christ  and  Lord  Sand- 
wich, and  given  the  preference  to  the  latter !  Lord  Bute 
pretended  to  discard  Baillie,  but  I  rather  suspect  he  had 
encouraged  him.  My  reasons  are  these  : — After  the  trial, 
Lord  Mountstewart  said  to  the  Duke  of  Bolton,  a  known 
enemy  of  Lord  Sandwich,  "  My  Lord,  I  hope  we  shall  be 
able  to  do  something  for  poor  Baillie."  Besides,  the 
Butes  hated  Lord  Sandwich :  he  had  paid  assiduous  court 
for  many  years  to  old  Wortley  Montagu,  Lady  Bute's 
father,  as  his  nearest  male  relation — Montagu  being  at 
variance  with  his  son — in  hopes  of  getting  his  estate,  or 
part  of  it.  The  cunning  old  miser  accepted  his  court,  but 
left  him  nothing  but  their  ancestor  Admiral  Sandwich's 
MSS.  Just  at  this  time,  too,  there  was  another  contest  be- 
tween Lady  Bute  and  Lord  Sandwich.  Her  brother  had 
left  a  natural  son,  who,  being  cast  away,  this  summer 
returning  from  India,  had  left  ten  thousand  pounds  to  a 
friend,  who  happened  to  be  dead  before  him,  and  so  the 
legacy,  as  a  bastard's,  fell  to  the  King.  In  those  cases  the 
Crown  generally  gives  the  lapsed  fortune  to  some  near 
relation  of  the  person,  and  Lord  Sandwich  immediately 
begged  it,  but  Lady  Bute  had  now  just  put  in  her  claim. 

Before  the  Parliament  met,  the  Ministers  were  alarmed 
with  apprehensions  of  defection  in  their  troops  ;2  and  no 
doubt,  if  miscarriages  in  all  their  measures  could  occasion 
discontent,  there  was  full  room.  Some  of  the  country 
gentlemen  had  threatened  to  leave  them,  particularly  the 
Grosvenors  and  Sir  Laurence  Dundas ;  but  Lord  Grosvenor 
was  a  dirty  wretch,  and  Sir  Laurence's  motive  was  not 
better — the  hopes  of  a  peerage  with  which  he  had  long  been 


•  In  Parliament. 


1778.          PRIVATE  MEETING  OF  LEADING  MEMBERS.  299 

flattered,  or  flattered  himself.  He  contented  himself  with 
absence,  and  the  Grosvenors  did  not  go  off.  However, 
Lord  North  called  a  private  meeting  of  leading  Members 
to  consult  on  procuring  attendance.  He  himself  was  there 
severely  handled  by  Lord  George  Germaine,  Wedderburn, 
and  Rigby,  who  charged  his  negligence  and  laziness  with 
the  chief  blame ;  however,  all  agreed  to  summon  and 
watch  their  friends :  and,  not  content  with  the  common 
Treasury  letters,  Lord  North  issued  a  second  batch  signed 
by  himself,  earnestly  pressing  attendance.  It  is  probable 
that  he  had  better  intelligence,  and  apprehended  some 
defection  of  the  Scotch,  who,  whether  thinking  the  Admi- 
nistration could  not  stand  so  many  shocks  and  disgraces, 
or  whether  instigated  by  Wedderburn  to  resent  his  late 
miscarriage  of  the  Seals  and  Peerage, — certain  it  is,  that 
of  the  forty-four  Scottish  Members  but  eleven  appeared 
the  first  day,  though  different  reasons  were  given  for  their 
absence.  The  Lord  Advocate  Dundas  was  said  to  be 
detained  by  the  misfortune  of  having  caught  his  wife  in 
adultery,  and  Lord  Frederic  Campbell  was  pretended  to 
be  busy  with  his  militia ;  but  Wedderburn's  own  behaviour 
was  still  more  suspicious.  The  first  day  of  the  Session  he 
declared  himself  independent  and  unconnected  with  any  of 
the  Ministers  ;  but  as  the  majority  stood  firm,  the  treachery 
went  no  farther. 

The  day  before  the  Parliament,  was  published  a  pamph- 
let that  made  much  noise  and  was  greatly  tasted.  It  was 
called  *  Anticipation,'  and  pretended  to  be  the  summary  of 
what  would  be  said  by  the  chief  speakers  in  the  House  of 
Commons  on  the  next  day — most  of  whose  styles  it  had 
caught  very  happily,  at  least,  their  defects.  It  pretended  to 
great  impartiality ;  but,  though  some  of  the  Court  were 
not  spared,  and  Charles  Fox  exceedingly  commended,  it 


300 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


Xov. 


was  clearly  meant  to  expose  the  Opposition ;  and  Lord 
North  was  the  hero — his  capital  defect,3  buffoonery,  being: 
totally  omitted.  Indeed,  the  work  had  been  composed  in 
the  house  of,  and  was  instigated  by,  his  secretary,  Brom- 
hill,  with  whom  Tickell,  the  author,  lived.  Tickell  was 
grandson  of  the  friend  of  Addison,  and  had  been  intimate 
at  school  with  Lord  Granby,  who,  having  abandoned  him, 
was  a  principal  object  of  his  satire.  Colonel  Barre,  who 
had  not  seen  the  pamphlet,  fell  into  the  very  error  it  ridi- 
culed, his  citing  considerable  foreigners  with  whom  he  was 
acquainted.  Welbore  Ellis,  another  justly  and  humour- 
ously drawn,  proved  how  justly.  He  said,  "It  is  well 
written,  but  I  perceive  the  author  takes  me  for  a  dull 
man." 

26th.  The  Parliament  met.  The  King's  Speech  was  a 
very  tame  one.  The  Address  in  the  Lords  was  moved  by 
the  Duke  of  Chandos  and  Lord  Plymouth,  and  warmly 
opposed  by  Lord  Coventry,  Lord  Bristol,  and  Lord  Derby. 
The  second  mentioned  the  necessity  of  inquiry  into  the 
late  naval  engagement  with  the  French  off  Ushant,  as  he 
said  Admiral  Keppel  had  declared  he  would  never  serve 
again  with  Sir  Hugh  Palliser.  Lord  Derby  was  allowed 
to  have  spoken  very  well,  though  he  was  a  very  raw,  light 
young  man,  given  up  to  his  pleasures.  He  had  been  a 
warm  Courtier,  but  was  now  as  warm  in  Opposition, 
resenting  the  treatment  of  General  Burgoyne,  who  had 
married  his  aunt  and  governed  him.  He  owned  he  had 
been  for  the  American  war,  but  now  saw  the  impracticabi- 
lity of  carrying  it  on./  Lord  Suffolk,  who  seldom  opened 


3  The  drollery  of  the  pamphlet  was 
congenial  with  the  patron  :  a  very  un- 
prosperous  and  disgraceful  civil  war, 
just  heightened  by  a  bloody  proclama- 


tion of  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  and  accom- 
panied by  a  war  with  France,  was  not 
a  very  decent  moment  for  joking  I 


1778.  EXPRESSION  OF  LORD  SUFFOLK.  301 

his  mouth  in  public  without  blundering  out  something  that 
hurt  his  own  side,  said  he  hoped  the  American  war  would 
be  more  successful  now,  as  there  would  be  a  new  mode 
of  carrying  it  on.  This  expression  was  hotly  taken 
up,  and  he  was  pressed  to  explain  the  new  mode,  and  , 
whether  he  did  not  allude  to  General  Sir  H.  Clinton's 
rash  and  inhuman  proclamation,  threatening  the  Ame- 
ricans with  fire  and  sword  if  they  did  not  submit :  rash  it 
was,  as  the  Royalists  were  so  inferior  ;  and  inhuman,  as  he 
was  told,  as  it  would  certainly  be  retaliated,  not  only  by 
the  Americans,  but  would  probably  occasion  the  French, 
if  they  should  land  in  this  island  or  Ireland,  laying  waste 
and  burning  houses  on  our  long  line  of  defenceless  coasts. 
The  Americans  did  actually,  in  a  fine  manifesto,  declare 
they  would  take  similar  steps.  Lord  Suffolk  would  neither 
explain  what  he  meant  nor  disavow  his  approbation  of  the 
merciless  manifesto ;  v  which  Lord  North  was  forced  after- 
wards to  disclaim  in  the  House  of  Commons  as  a  Ministe- 
rial measure,  and  as  not  intended  in  the  sense  put  upon  it 
— though  his  denial  was  to  no  purpose,  as  the  words  of  the 
manifesto  speak  themselves :  they  were,  which  was  suffi- 
cient, understood  in  the  worst  sense  by  the  Americans, 
and  were  soon  afterwards  upheld  by  the  Ministers  them- 
selves and  their  Parliamentary  majority.  Lord  Shelburne 
made  so  severe  and  fine  a  speech  against  the  Administra- 
tion that  many  strangers  in  the  House  were  hurried  into 
the  emotion  of  applauding  it  by  exclamations  and  beating 
with  their  canes  on  the  floor.  This  offended  the  Courtiers, 
and  they  were  ordered  to  be  turned  out.  Lord  Shelburne 
was  particularly  bitter  on  Lord  North's  late  grant  of  the 
Cinque  Ports,  and  said  that  honour  and  emoluments,  which 
were  formerly  rewards  for  services,  were  now  the  pallia- 
tives of  disgrace.  If  a  Minister  loses  an  island,  he  gets  a 


302  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 

blue  riband — if  one  town  is  evacuated,  a  sinecure — if  ano- 
ther, a  better ;  and  he  concluded  lamenting  that  the  King, 
who  had  so  numerous  an  issue,  and  could  formerly  have 
given  them  such  rich  appanages,  had  now  lost  as  many 
provinces  as  he  had  children.  The  Address  was  voted  by 
76  to  31. 

In  the  Commons  T.  Townshend  moved  an  amendment 
to  the  Address,  and  Charles  Fox  condemned  it  in  one  of  his 
very  best  orations ;  he  said  it  was  false,  for  it  called 
the  powers  of  the  Commissioners  the  Act  of  Parliament, 
though  the  Parliament  had  never  seen  their  Commission. 
Sir  John  Wrottesley,  nephew  of  Earl  Gower,  and  just  re- 
turned from  America,  where  he  had  been  a  zealous  officer, 
now  declared  the  impracticability  of  reconquering  that 
country.  This  was  very  unpleasant  to  the  Court,  though, 
as  he  was  a  vain,  empty  young  man,  he  could  only  wound 
them  by  that  declaration.  On  being  ordered  to  his  post 
soon  afterwards,  he  complained  of  it  on  a  following  day, 
and  said  it  was  done  as  a  punishment  for  his  opposition, 
which  the  Ministers  denied. 

It  had  been  generally  expected  that  much  confusion 
would  happen  on  the  very  first  day  of  the  Session,  by  dis- 
putes between  the  Generals,  Admirals,  Ministers,  and 
Commissioners.  It  was  doubted  whether  Burgoyne  would 
not  complain  of  General  Howe  for  not  assisting  him ; 
whether  the  Howes  would  not  attack  Lord  George  Ger- 
maine,  to  whom  they  avowed  inveteracy ;  whether  Governor 
Johnston  would  not  attack  the  Howes,  as  he  had  raised 
a  ferment  against  them  in  the  City  ;  and  whether  Keppel 
nnd  Palliser  would  not  accuse  each  other:  but  little  or 
nothing  of  this  happened  the  first  day.  Governor  John- 
ston made  a  strange,  unintelligible  speech  (it  was  impossible 
for  him  to  make  a  clear  one  without  condemning  himself)  ; 


1778.  OPPOSITION  TO  THE  ADDRESS.  303 

he  endeavoured  to  wipe  off  his  attempt  to  bribe  some  of  v' 
the  Congress,  yet  owned  as  much  as  he  denied,  condemned 
and  approved  the  march  to  Philadelphia,  and  rather  in- 
sinuated blame  on  Keppel  than  on  anybody  else.  He  was 
soon  after  called  upon  in  several  newspapers  to  say,  whether  , 
he  did  not  still  retain  his  pay  of  Commissioner,  though  he 
had  so  long  quitted  the  office.  He  made  no  answer —  conse- 
quently was  by  that  sinecure  retained  by  the  Court.  Lord 
North  answered  Charles  Fox,  but  very  poorly,  and  in  every 
debate  before  Christmas  was  allowed  to  have  shown  no 
abilities — whether  his  indolence  or  his  dissatisfaction  in- 
creased. The  House  sat  till  past  two,  when  the  Address 
was  carried  by  226  to  107- 

On  the  report  of  the  Address,  the  opposition  to  it  was 
renewed.  Adam,  the  Scot  (who  often  attacked  the  Court, 
though,  as  was  suspected,  either  by  direction  to  get  into 
the  councils  of  the  opponents,  or  instigated  to  vent  par- 
ticular discontents  of  Lord  Bute,  Lord  Mansfield,  or  some 
of  his  countrymen  against  Lord  North,  and  now  probably 
in  concert  with  his  countrymen,  who,  as  I  have  said,  acted 
a  very  suspicious  part  at  the  beginning  of  this  Session), 
declared  against  the  possibility  of  carrying  on  two  wars 
and  defending  ourselves,  of  which  he  had  been  convinced 
this  summer  by  seeing  400  banditti  keep  50,000  people  in 
awe  and  alarm  (this  alluded  to  a  tumult  at  Edinburgh). 
Charles  Fox,  a  warm  friend  of  General  Burgoyne,  had 
intended  to  fall  heavily  on  Lord  George  Germaine,  who 
happening  not  to  be  come  into  the  House,  Fox  turned  his 
artillery  against  Lord  North,  and  uttered  one  of  the  most 
severe  philippics  ever  pronounced,  on  his  accumulation  of 
places,  heaped  on  him  in  proportion  to  his  miscarriages.4 

Tlic    attack    on    Lord    North   by      very  grateful.    About  a  year  or  more 


Charles  Fox  on  tin1  <>tlirr  M»le  was  not 


before,  Fox,  from  the  extreme  distress 


304 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


Lord  North  was  so  affected  by  that  attack  that  he  shed 
tears  (as  he  had  twice  done  at  the  outset  of  his  Ministry, 
though  till  this  winter  he  had  more  successfully  exchanged 
the  pathetic  for  buffoonery)  ;  he  now  made  a  most  pitiful 
lamentation,  and  pleaded  that  every  place  had  been  the 
voluntary  offer  of  his  Gracious  Royal  Master,  and  in  con- 
sideration of  his  numerous  family. 

Lord  North  was  very  ill-founded  in  pleading  poverty  : 
he  had  married  a  very  great  fortune — he  was  heir  not  only 
to  his  father,  Lord  Guildford's  estate,  which,  though  not 
large,  was  a  moderate  one,  but  to  the  Furnese  estate, 
which  Lord  Guildford  enjoyed  from  the  gift  of  his  third 
wife.  Lord  Guildford  had  first  married  the  only  daughter 
of  the  second  Montagu  Earl  of  Halifax,  by  his  first  wife, 
who  was  a  good  fortune  from  her  mother,  and  by  her 
had  Lord  North.  His  second  wife  was  widow  of  Lord 
Lewisham,  mother  of  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  and  by  her 
he  had  Bishop  North  and  Lady  Willoughby  de  Broke.  For 
his  third  he  married  the  second  daughter  of  Sir  Robert 
Furnese,  and  widow  of  Lewis  Watson,  Earl  of  Rocking- 
ham.  This  lady  enjoyed  Sir  Robert's  estate  of  50001. 
or  6000/.  a  year,  as  heiress  to  her  brother  Sir  Henry,  she 
being  of  the  whole  blood  and  by  the  same  mother,  whereas 
Sir  Robert's  eldest  and  youngest  daughters  were  by  his 
first  and  third  wives,  and  Sir  Henry  and  Lady  Rocking- 
ham  by  the  second.  The  eldest  daughter,  thus  cut  out 
by  law,  had  been  married  to  Viscount  St.  John,  by  whom 
she  left  the  present  Lord  Bolingbroke,  the  real  representa- 
tive of  Sir  Robert  Furnese,  and  Henry  and  John  St. 


of  his  circumstances,  had  had  a  mind 
to  go  to  India  as  Chief  of  the  Council, 
and  had  sent  to  Lord  North  to  ask  if  he 
would  oppose  it,  but  fairly  declaring  ho 
should  continue  in  Opposition  if  he  did 
not  go.  Lord  North  replied  that  the 


first  place  was  engaged,  but  should  it 
lapse,  Mr.  Fox  should  have  his  interest, 
and  he  added,  by  a  very  handsome 
compliment,  that  he  should  be  glad 
Mr.  Fox  went  to  India,  whether  he  con- 
sidered him  as  a  friend  or  an  enemy. 


1778.  LORD  NORTH'S  REVENUE.  305 

Johns.  Lady  Rockingham  for  some  time  after  her  first 
husband's  death  had  continued  unmarried,  and  had  more 
than  once  refused  Lord  Guilford,  and  had  bred  up  her 
youngest  nephew,  John  St.  John,  as  her  heir ;  but  at  last 
she  married  Lord  Guilford,  and  left  her  whole  estate  to 
him,  and  nothing  to  her  nephews,  the  St.  Johns,  nor  to  a 
son  and  daughter  of  her  younger  sister,  the  first  wife  of 
Sir  Edward  Deering ;  nor,  as  Lord  North  was  heir  to  both 
estates,  was  his  own  family  large,  he  having  but  five  chil- 
dren. His  emoluments  from  the  Crown  would  not  have 
been  thought  so  exorbitant,  nor  even, — if  they  had  not  been 
showered  on  him  after  repeated  mismanagement,  losses, 
and  ill -successes, — beyond  what  had  happened  to  any  other 
Minister.  They  seemed  extorted  too,  as,  besides  his  inac- 
tivity, he  was  always  affecting  to  desire  to  retire.  And  the 
King  bribed  him  to  stay  for  two  reasons :  the  first,  because 
he  submitted  to  be  only  a  cipher,  and  would  carry  through 
any  measures  the  King  or  Junto  suggested ;  the  second, 
because  the  King  had  nobody  to  put  in  his  place ;  for 
Jenkinson,  the  Minister  designatus,  could  not  be  risked 
in  so  unprosperous  a  crisis,  and  the  King  feared  that  Lord 
North's  resignation  would  blow  up  the  whole  Administra- 
tion, which  was  but  ill-cemented — hung  together  by  their 
common  fears,  and  of  which  North  was  by  much  the  least 
unpopular  and  least  obnoxious,  not  only  to  the  nation,  but 
to  the  King  himself,  who  did  not  love  Lord  George  Ger- 
maine  or  the  Bedfords,  and  feared  the  intriguing  spirit  of 
the  latter.  The  Chancellor,  Lord  Weymouth,  and  Rigby, 
who  were  a  detachment  of  the  Bedfords,  and  closely  con- 
nected together,  could  not  be  agreeable,  as  the  Chancellor 
had  been  forced  upon  him  in  preference  to  Wedderburn. 
Lord  Sandwich  was  more  welcome,  but  too  decried,  and 
Lord  Suffolk,  whom  the  King  preferred  to  any  of  them,  as 
a  more  tractable  tool,  was  too  incapable. 

VOL.  II.  X 


306 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


DEC. 


DECEMBER. 


1st.  HUGH,  Duke  of  Northumberland,  was  appointed 
Master  of  the  Horse ;  a  ridiculous  promotion :  he  was 
afflicted  with  the  stone,  and  very  lame  with  the  gout, 
and  at  least  sixty-five.  In  politics  he  had  acted  a  very 
shuffling  part;  had,  during  Lord  Bute's  credit,  married 
his  eldest  son  to  one  of  the  Earl's  daughters,  but  on  its 
declension  had  encouraged  their  separation,  and  they 
were  now  suing  her  for  adultery.1  The  Duke  had  then 
attached  himself  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham,  and  even  since 
his  death  to  within  few  weeks  of  his  promotion  had 
openly  talked  opposition  in  all  companies ;  but  had  now 
asked  and  obtained  the  Mastership  of  the  Horse,  soli- 
cited by  the  Duke  of  Dorset  and  the  Earl  of  Pem- 
broke: the  first  got  a  pension  of  2000Z.  a  year,  as  was 
said,  in  lieu  of  it ;  and  the  Earl  at  Christmas  declared  to 
the  King,  that  he  must  vote  in  all  questions  that  were 
coming  on,  against  Lord  Sandwich.  The  Duke  of  North- 
umberland, in  imitation  of  his  wife's  grandfather,  Charles, 
the  proud  Duke  of  Somerset,  intended  not  to  use  the 
King's  liveries  but  when  waiting  on  His  Majesty ;  but  the 
King  insisted  on  his  always  using  them. 

About  this  time  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater,  warmly  con- 
nected with  the  Court  by  his  relation  to  the  Bedfords  and 


1  The  marriage  was  dissolved  by  Act 
of  Parliament  in  1779.  Walpolo  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  altogether  "  up  " 
in  this  family  history.  The  fifteen  years' 
union  had  been  childless ;  but  the  Earl 


(afterwards  Duke)  married  one  of  lucky 
Peter  Burrell's  daughters,  of  which 
marriage  the  present  Duke  of  Northum- 
berland is  the  ninth  and  youngest  child. 


1778.  THREATENED  RESIGNATION  OF  D.  OF  BRIDGEWATER.  307 

Lord  Gower,  though  he  would  accept  of  no  employment, 
was  nearly  breaking  and  going  into  Opposition,  as  the 
India  Company,  to  please  the  King  and  the  Scots,  were 
going  to  send  Lord  M'Leod,  son  of  the  attainted  Earl  of 
Cromartie,  and  who  had  quitted  the  Swedish  service,2  as 
Commander-in-Chief  to  India,  over  Egerton,  a  near  rela- 
tion of  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater :  but  the  Duke,  who  hated 
the  Scots,  and  was  exceedingly  obstinate,  threatened  to 
resign,  and  that  himself,  the  Bishop  of  Durham,  his  cousin 
and  expectant  heir,  and  the  rich  Mr.  Egerton  of  the  House 
of  Commons,  would  go  into  Opposition.  Rigby  was  much 
alarmed,  and  negotiated  with  Lord  Sandwich,  who  go- 
verned the  East  India  Company,  and,  after  some  weeks, 
satisfaction  was  promised  to  the  Duke. 

A  much  more  serious  affair  broke  out  at  this  season. 
The  Treasury,  to  please  Earl  Powis,  had  appointed  one 
Probert  Surveyor  of  the  Crown  lands  in  Wales,  and,  to 
improve  the  revenue,  intended  he  should  look  into  the 
encroachments  on  the  lands  of  the  Royal  domain.  It  was 
known  that  much  greater  encroachments  had  been  made  in 
that  sequestered  part  of  the  island  than  in  any  other ; 
consequently,  the  recovery  would  be  the  more  sensibly  felt. 
The  first  that  took  the  alarm  was  the  young  Lord  Viscount 
Bulkeley.  He  immediately  published  a  very  warm  ad- 
vertisement against  what  he  called  the  tyrannic  intentions 
of  the  Administration,  with  which  hitherto  he  had  most 
commonly  acted.  He  went  farther,  and  infused  the  same 
spirit  into  his  countrymen,  especially  young  Sir  Watkin 
Williams,*  a  very  opulent  Baronet,  and  no  less  weak, 


2  The  King  of  Sweden  sent  his  order     Wynn  to  his  own,  on  succeeding  to  the 
to  Lord  M'Leod,  and  the  King  himself     estates  of  his  great-great-grandfather 
invested  him  with  it.  j  (on  the  female  side)  Sir  John  Wynn. — 

3  Whose  father  added   the  name  of  i  D. 

x  2 


308 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


DEC. 


whose  father  had  been  the  head  of  the  Jacobites,  and  was 
called  by  them  the  Prince  of  Wales.  The  son4  had  married, 
first,  the  sister  of  the  Duke  of  Beaufort,  and  then  the 
eldest  daughter  of  the  late  George  Grenville,  and  had  till 
now,  like  the  other  Jacobites,  been  devoted  to  the  Court. 
He  now  flew  off  at  once,  and  the  Welsh  proprietors  held 
assemblies  in  London,  and  were  determined  to  oppose  the 
invasion  of  their  property,  however  legal.  In  fact,  it 
would  scarce  be  possible  for  the  Crown  to  carry  their  rights 
into  execution  in  that  country,  where  there  was  no  police, 
and  where  the  great  families,  though  they  did  not  exercise 
it  as  arbitrarily,  had  as  much  weight  with  their  dependants 
as  the  chieftains  in  Scotland.  The  extravagance  of  the  Court 
in  corruptions,  and  the  enormous  expense  of  the  American 
war,  had  driven  Lord  North  on  this  imprudent  measure  to 
recruit  the  Exchequer,  to  which  he  had  probably  been  drawn, 
with  his  usual  negligence  and  inconsideration,  by  his 
brother-in-law,  Colonel  James  Whitshed  Keene,5  a  most 
absurd  Irishman,  who  had  great  interest  with  him,  and  who 
had  been  brought  into  Parliament  by  Lord  Powis's  mother. 
3rd.  Broke  out  an  affair  which  had  still  worse  conse- 
quences for  the  Administration.  Their  turbulent  opponent, 
Temple  Luttrell,  brother  of  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland, 
attacked  the  Admiralty  on  a  supposed  embezzlement  of 
300,000?.,  a  charge  he  afterwards  published  with  his 
name  in  the  papers,  and  in  more  abusive  terms  again, 
but  without  his  name,  and  for  which,  in  the  following 
February,  as  will  be  mentioned  in  its  place,  he  endeavoured 
to  draw  on  himself  the  censure  of  the  House  of  Lords.  In 


4  The  fourth  baronet.  His  first  wife, 
Henrietta,  died  in  little  more  than  three 
months  after  their  marriage.  The 
second  wife,  Charlotte,  daughter  of 
George  Grenville,  was  also  sister  of  the 
first  Marquis  of  Buckingham. — D. 


B  Mrs.  Keene  was  not  properly  sister 
of  Lord  North,  but  of  the  Earl  of  Dart- 
mouth, her  mother,  Lady  Lewisham, 
having,  secondly,  married  Lord  North's 
father,  by  whom  she  was  mother  of 
Bishop  North. 


1778.     TEMPLE  LUTTRELL  ATTACKS  THE  ADMIRALTY.        309 

the  conclusion  of  his  speech  this  day  he  drew  the  attention 
of  the  House  to  the  Admiralty,  who,  he  said,  had  pretended 
to  have  expected  greater  success  from  Admiral  Keppel's 
engagement  with  the  French  off  Ushant,  July  27th,  and 
which,  in  justice  to  that  great  commander,  ought  to  be 
inquired  into. 

What  he  alluded  to  was  this: — Captain  Berkeley, 
brother  of  the  Earl  of  that  name,  when  he  brought  the 
news  of  that  sea-fight,  had  whispered  that  Sir  Hugh 
Palliser,  Vice- Admiral  of  the  Blue,  had  disobeyed  the 
Admiral's  orders  of  coming  up  to  the  French  after  the 
combat,  and  renewing  it,  which  had  prevented  their  total 
defeat :  the  Captains  Brereton  and  Hood,  and  I  think  one 
other,  had  been  abused  in  the  papers  for  neglect  of  duty 
too.  Brereton  had  certainly  been  guilty  of  drunkenness 
and  had  been  broken.  Palliser,  on  these  rumours,  had 
published  a  vindication  of  himself  in  the  papers,  not 
pleasing  to  Keppel,  on  which  Keppel  had  said  he  would 
never  serve  with  him  again.  Palliser,  too,  had  drawn  up 
a  paper  in  his  own  justification,  which  he  asked  Keppel  to 
sign,  which  he  refused,  saying  it  was  not  a  true  account. 
Keppel  had  openly  declared  that  he  would  not  serve  with 
him  any  more. 

Luttrell's  speech  called  up  Keppel,  who  said  he  had 
accused  no  one,  but  had  had  reason  to  be  dissatisfied  with 
Palliser 's  publication.  Yet  he  had  rather  palliated  faults 
than  condemned  them.  He  did  justice  to  Palliser's 
bravery,  but  did  not  commend  his  subsequent  conduct. 
Sir  Hugh  Palliser  was  much  provoked,  and  complained 
of  Keppel's  insinuations.  The  latter  denied  he  had  made 
any,  and  was  still  tender  of  accusing  the  other,  but  main- 
tained that  Palliser  had  not  obeyed  his  signals.  The 
Admiralty  agreed  to  give  the  papers  demanded  by 


310  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

Luttrell,  but  the  next  day  refused  them,  when  very 
abusive  language  passed  between  Luttrell  and  Lord 
Mulgrave;  but  the  House  rescinded  the  preceding  day's 
vote  by  107  to  15. 

4th.  Lord  Buckingham  complained  to  the  Lords  of  Sir 
Henry  Clinton's  proclamation  for  laying  waste  America 
with  fire  and  sword.  He  had  issued  it  in  anger, — the 
Congress  having  very  meanly  broken  the  capitulation  with 
Burgoyne  and  refused  to  release  his  army.  But  that  was 
by  no  means  a  just  excuse  for  so  savage  a  declaration,  and 
even  so  imprudent  an  one,  as  the  King's  army  and  friends 
were  dwindled  to  so  small  a  number;  and  which  might 
incite  the  French  to  reprisals  on  our  coasts,  that  are 
defenceless  round  both  islands.  Sir  Henry  Clinton  was  a 
brave,  but  hot  and  weak  man.  The  Government  affected 
to  expect  great  things  from  him  (to  depreciate  Howe  and 
Burgoyne)  ;  but  so  far  from  answering  their  expectations,  he 
grew  angry  at  the  detachments  drawn  from  him  for  Carolina 
and  for  the  West  Indies,  and  threatened  to  come  away  if 
15,000  recruits  were  not  sent  to  him,  which  the  Govern- 
ment had  not  to  send.  To  palliate  their  inactivity,  they 
boasted  that  Carolina  and  Georgia  would  revolt  from  the 
other  colonies,  and  that  there  were  great  dissentients  in 
the  Congress. 

The  Chancellor  endeavoured  roughly  to  defeat  Lord 
Bockingham's  motion,  by  insisting  that  the  proclamation 
could  only  come  before  them  by  Address  to  the  King ;  but 
the  Duke  of  Bichmond  brought  precedents  to  the  con- 
trary, and  it  was  ordered  to  be  considered  on  the  following- 
Monday. 

The  Chancellor  at  the  King's  next  levee  said  aloud, 
that  the  House  of  Lords  did  not  know  how  to  debate  pro- 
perly, but  he  would  bring  them  into  better  order.  After 


1778,  CHARACTER  OF  LORD  THURLOW.  311 

Christmas  he  did  attempt  to  dictate,  but  was  foiled,  and 
proved  by  Lord  Camden  and  others  to  be  very  ignorant  of 
order  himself. 

This  is  not  said  to  depreciate  Thurlow's  abilities,  but  to 
display  his  arrogance  and  character.  Naturally  he  was 
indolent,  unambitious,  and  without  conception  of  his  own 
great  powers.  Early  in  life  he  was  on  the  point  of  being 
steward  to  the  Duke  of  Queensberry,  on  a  salary  of  300£. 
a  year;  and  even  when  his  reputation  had  pierced  so  far 
that  it  was  thought  necessary  to  prefer  him  to  Wedder- 
burn  for  Attorney-General,  the  Court  intended  it  should 
not  be  for  any  length  of  time  ;  and  in  less  than  a  year  had 
prevailed  on  him  to  accept  the  Chief  Justiceship  of 
Chester,  in  the  room  of  Morton,  who  consented  to  retire 
on  a  pension :  but  Morton's  wife  governed  him,  and  he 
owned  would  not  let  him  resign  his  insignificant  dignity. 

Thurlow  had  a  solid  and  deep  understanding  that 
penetrated  to  the  marrow  of  an  argument,  and  he  did  not 
think  of  escaping  by  its  labyrinths,  like  Lord  Mansfield. 
He  did  not  dazzle,  like  Wedderburn,  by  an  entertaining 
though  pert  brilliancy,  nor  fascinated  his  audience  with  the 
pathetic  solemnity  of  Lord  Camden.  But  such  was  Thur- 
low's sterling  and  nervous  sense,  that  he  shone  most  (as  on  the 
Duchess  of  Kingston's  trial)  when  other  orators  seemed  to 
have  exhausted  the  subject,  by  divesting  it  of  all  foreign 
ornaments,  and  extracting  the  quintessence  of  truth,  and 
placing  it  on  its  own  bottom.  The  luminous  and  argumenta- 
tive intuition  of  Charles  Fox  into  every  question  could  alone 
embarrass  the  dissecting  ratiocination  of  Thurlow.  The 
latter's  was  a  manly  soul  that  owed  all  its  merit  to 
vigorous  nature,  who  had  composed  him  of  stern  materials, 
that  would  neither  bend  before  refinement,  nor  assimilate 
with  the  soft  feelings  of  humanity.  He  was  coarse  in  his 


312  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

manners,  indelicate  in  his  pleasures  even  to  a  contempt  of 
decorum,  though  at  the  head  of  the  law — rough,  proud, 
sullen,  and  perhaps  intrepid.  This  quality  was,  however, 
doubtful.  When  challenged  by  Andrew  Stuart  on  the 
Douglas  cause,  Lynch,  his  friend,  had  had  difficulty  of 
getting  him  into  Hyde  Park.  After  he  was  Chancellor  he 
was  so  conscious  of  his  want  of  deep  knowledge  in  the  law, 
and  so  afraid  of  seeing  his  decrees  reversed,  that  it  was 
difficult  to  make  him  finish  a  cause,  to  the  great  prejudice 
of  suitors,  and  to  the  great  confusion  of  his  Court.  He  made 
a  wretched  figure  as  Chancellor,  while  the  greatest  in  the 
House  of  Lords.  Virtue  and  principles  he  had  none, — he 
seemed  to  regard  them  as  a  weakness.  Dark  and  daring, 
he  was  fitted  to  serve  a  bold  and  arbitrary  Court,  rather 
than  to  please  a  designing  but  irresolute  one ;  and  as 
ready  to  betray  it,  when  it  tottered  from  its  own  mis- 
conduct. In  his  early  life  he  had  seduced  a  young  gentle- 
'  woman  on  promise  of  marriage,  which  he  had  been 
reluctant  to  perform  ;  but  the  intrigue  being  blown  by  her 
falling  in  labour,  with  symptoms  of  the  utmost  danger,  he 
declared  himself  ready  to  marry  her :  but  though  the 
legitimacy  of  her  child  was  urged  to  her,  she  died  protest- 
ing she  would  not  marry  so  black  a  villain.  He  had 
strictly  leagued  himself  with  Lord  Weymouth  and  Rigby, 
who  yet  had  often  difficulty  to  restrain  his  ferocious  mind, 
whenever  the  King's  pusillanimity  or  Lord  North's  irreso- 
lution faltered,  or  being  opposed  or  unsuccessful.  As  both, 
Rigby  especially,  had  far  more  knowledge  of  the  world,  as 
both  wanted  Thurlow's  courage  (for  Lord  Weymouth  was 
an  arrant  dastard,  and  Rigby  had  no  political  firmness),  and 
as  both  had  still  less  political  honour,  they  easily  embarked 
Thurlow  in  a  plot  to  sacrifice  the  other  Ministers  to  the 
Opposition,  to  save  their  own  places ;  but  yet  the  treachery 


1778.  CHARACTER  OF  LORD  THURLOW. 

did  not  take  effect.  Thurlow,  though  the  Scottish  Junto 
dispensed  favours  and  honours,  was  yet  too  conscious  oi 
the  abilities  he  had  at  last  discovered  in  himself,  and  too 
haughty,  to  earn  power  by  petty  adulation :  he  had  never 
stooped  to  the  predominant  notion.  On  the  Douglas  cause 
he  had  treated  the  shrewd  Andrew  Stuart  with  such  in- 
solence and  obloquy  that  it  occasioned  a  duel  between 
them.  He  had  marked  aversion  for  Lord  Mansfield,  and 
was  too  brave  not  to  be  disgusted  at  his  cowardice ;  and  he 
despised  and  hated  Wedderburn  so  thoroughly,  that  he 
would  not  accept  the  Seals  and  a  peerage  if  the  latter  was 
bestowed  on  Wedderburn  too.  Thus  he  trampled  on  the 
King's  partiality,  and  forced  himself  on  his  necessity — :an 
arrogance  his  Majesty  will  remember  if  ever  Thurlow  is 
in  a  situation  to  want  his  favour  more  than  he  is  wanted. 
It  was  said  that  he  obtained  the  Seals  at  last  by  the  diffi- 
culties the  Court  was  in  by  General  Burgoyne's  arrival. 
In  their  distress  they  had  recourse  to  Thurlow.  He,  in 
one  night,  went  through  all  the  papers  that  had  passed  be- 
tween that  officer  and  the  Ministers ;  and  then  asked  them 
where  lay  their  strength  and  where  their  greatest  weakness  ? 
and  on  their  pointing  out  each,  he  made  a  speech  against 
Burgoyne,  which,  after  Wedderburn  had  attacked  the 
General  ridiculously,  was  thought  a  chef-d'oeuvre  of  rea- 
soning abilities. 

The  same  day,  the  4th,  Mr.  Coke,  Member  for  Norfolk, 
complained  to  the  House  of  Commons  of  Sir  H.  Clinton's 
proclamation,  and  moved  them  to  disavow  it.  He  said  he 
had  reason  to  be  alarmed  at  it,  as  his  fine  seat  at  Holkham 
was  situated  on  an  open,  defenceless  coast.  He  was  seconded 
by  Mr.  Conolly,  who  made  the  same  complaints  for  Ireland, 
and  by  Lord  Derby's  brother,  Colonel  Stanley  (they  both 
having  joined  the  Opposition  since  Burgoyne's  affair),  and 


314  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

by  Mr.  Powis,  who  said  he  did  not  believe  the  Royal 
army  in  America  would  execute  such  bloodthirsty 
measures.  This  drew  up  Sir  W.  Howe,  who  said  he  did 
not  believe  anything  would  induce  the  British  army  to 
mutiny :  at  the  same  time  he  owned  such  a  proclamation 
would  be  very  disagreeable  to  them.  He  then  entered  on 
his  own  case,  and  imputed  his  own  desire  of  being  recalled 
to  Lord  George  Germaine,  who  had  not  co-operated  with 
him,  nor  treated  him  with  confidence,  nor  taken  his  recom- 
mendation of  officers  for  preferment.  Lord  George  Ger- 
maine answered  him  very  ably,  and,  being  as  clear-headed 
as  Howe  was  confused,  turned  the  applause  of  the  House 
against  him,  particularly  on  recommendations,  of  which  he 
had  received  but  three,  two  of  which  he  had  complied  with, 
and  the  third  was  in  favour  of  an  officer  notoriously  un- 
worthy. He  justified  the  proclamation  by  examples,  as  did 
the  Attorney-General.  Burgoyne  thrust  himself  into  this 
altercation  with  his  usual  self-sufficiency  and  ill-success, 
condemned  the  proclamation,  and  endeavoured  to  prove 
that,  in  his  own  employment  of  Indians,  he  had  taken  great 
pains  to  prevent  barbarity,  though  the  measure  could  be 
calculated  for  nothing  else.  Burke  made  a  fine  speech, 
proving  the  proclamation  means  all  it  seemed  to  mean, 
and  painting  it  in  its  true  colours.  After  some  other 
speeches  the  motion  was  rejected  by  209  to  122.  I  think 
it  was  in  this  debate  that  Lord  George  Germaine  asserted 
that  the  king  "  was  his  own  Minister"  which  Charles  Fox 
took  up  admirably,  lamenting  that  His  Majesty  "  was  his 
own  unadvised  minister." 

7th.  Lord  Rockingham  made  his  intended  motion  for 
addressing  the  King  to  express  the  House's  disapprobation 
of  Sir  H.  Clinton's  proclamation,  and  he  particularly 
called  on  the  Bench  of  Bishops  to  condemn  so  un-Chris- 


1778.  LORD  ROCKINGHAM'S  MOTION.  315 

tian  a  declaration.  Dr.  Hinchcliffe,  Bishop  of  Peterborough, 
expressed  his  horror  at  so  inhuman  a  manifesto,  which  Lord 
Suffolk  defended  and  owned  he  approved.  Lord  Derby, 
Lord  Abingdon,  and  the  Dukes  of  Richmond  and  Grafton 
spoke  earnestly  against  the  proclamation,  and  the  latter 
arraigned  the  Ministers  particularly  for  not  having  had 
notice  of  the  treaty  between  France  and  America.  Lord 
Stormont  rose  and  justified  himself  well  for  having  sent 
word  of  it  in  time — a  charge  that  fell  heavy  on  Lord 
Weymouth,  who  endeavoured  but  did  not  clear  himself. 
Lord  Gower,  Lord  Lyttelton,  and  the  Chancellor  defended 
the  Ministers,  and  were  answered  by  Lord  Effingham, 
Lord  Shelburne,  and  Lord  Camden ;  but  the  motion  was 
thrown  out  by  55  to  34.  The  most  scandalous  part  was, 
that  the  two  Archbishops,  and  the  Bishops  Hurd,  Moore,  '• 
and  Ross,  voted  to  uphold  the  proclamation.  The  Bishops 
Shipley  and  Hinchcliffe  voted  against  it ;  Dr.  Lowth,  Bishop 
of  London,  and  Bishop  Thomas  of  Rochester,  and  Bishop 
Yorke  retired  without  voting — the  rest  were  not  present 
The  Congress  published  a  sensible  and  manly  answer  to 
Clinton,  in  which  they  declared  they  would  use  reprisals. 
Thirty-one  Lords  entered  a  very  strong  protest  on  the 
motion  against  the  proclamation  being  rejected. 

But  shocking  as  the  conduct  of  the  Court  was  on  that 
occasion,  and  infamous  as  the  behaviour  of  the  Archbishops 
and  some  of  the  Bishops,  the  attention  of  the  public  was 
drawn  off  from  both,  and  engrossed  entirely  by  the  con- 
sequences of  the  quarrel  between  the  Admirals  Keppel 
and  Palliser.  General  Keppel,  the  brother  of  the  former, 
who  had  commanded  in  one  of  the  summer  camps,  had  on 
the  7th  resigned  his  employment  on  the  staff,  disgusted 
with  the  King's  neglect,  and  total  preference  of  Lord 
Amherst.  Lord  Amherst,  lately  set  at  the  head  of  the 


316  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

army,  was  now  found  out,  and  allowed  to  be,  a  man  totally 
void  of  parts.     His  success  in  the  last  war  in  America, 
and  the  partiality  of  Lord  Chatham,  had  formerly  raised 
his  character  very  high ;  but  his  immoderate  self-interest 
and   obstinacy  (the  latter  of  which   proceeded  from  his 
extreme  slowness  of  conception,  and  fear  of  changing  his 
opinion  on  what  he  at  last  understood  for  another  which 
he  was  conscious  he  should  be  as  long  in  comprehending) 
had  much  sunk  his  reputation.    He  had  gained  the  King's 
favour  by  the  most  servile  deference,  and,  between  flattery 
and  dulness,  he  pleased  nobody  else.     General  Keppel 
was  proud  and  passionate,  and  very  free-spoken.     He  had 
particularly  offended  the  King  at  dinner   in   the   camp. 
His  Majesty  complained  of  the  difficulty  of  recruiting. 
Keppel  replied  aloud,  "  It  is  owing  to  the  Scots,  who  raise 
their  clans  in  and  about  London."     This  was  very  true : 
the  Master  of  Lovat  had  received  a  Royal  gift  of  6000/. 
to  raise  a  regiment  of  his  clan,  and  had  literally  picked  up 
boys  of  fifteen  in  London  and  Westminster.     The  Gene- 
ral's resignation  had  soured  the  King,  and  the  Admiral's 
retort  of  the  charge  on  Palliser  had  not  less  offended  Lord 
Sandwich.     Neither  the  Monarch  nor  the  Marine  Minister 
disliked  a  trick;  and  Lord  Sandwich  was  never  in  his 
element  so  much  as  when  he  could  surprise  mankind  by 
an  artifice  that,  carrying  business  along  with  it,  implied 
that   few  other    men  would  have   thought   of,    and   few 
adopted,   so  unworthy  a  contrivance.     Cunning  he   pre- 
ferred to  prudence;  and  though  he  had  drawn  so  much 
infamy  on  his  name  by  his  treachery  to  Wilkes,  he  could 
not  resist  the  impulse  of  attacking  Keppel  with  the  same 
arms.     Resentment  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond  probably 
concurred.     The  Admiral   was  cousin -germ  an   and   dear 
friend  of  the  Duke,  who  had  just  threatened  to  lay  the 


1778.        QUARREL  BETWEEN  KEPPEL  AND  PALLISER.  317 

Earl's  transactions  at  Greenwich  Hospital  before  the  Peers. 
It  was   in  vain  that  Sandwich  and  his  friends,  and  the 
Ministers    and    their   runners,  protested   that   the    scene 
that  ensued  had  originated   with,   and  been  carried  into 
execution    solely    by,    Sir   Hugh    Palliser   himself — the 
machinery  spoke  the  nature  of  Sandwich.    In  the  summer 
Jenkinson   made  a  progress  into  the  North  of  England. 
At   the  Archbishop's  public  dinner  at  York,   in  a  pro- 
miscuous company,  he  condemned  and  declaimed  against 
Keppel's  behaviour  at  the  engagement  off  Ushant.     The 
whispers  of  the  Court  to  Keppel's  prejudice,  the  precipi- 
tation of  the  Admiralty,  the  indiscreet  preferment  of  all 
Palliser's  officers  even  in  the  height  of  the  ferment,  the  vile 
plot  on  the  log-books,  which  will  be  mentioned,  and,  above 
all,  the  art,  address,  and  deliberation  with  which  Palliser's 
charge  was  drawn  up,  demonstrate  beyond  contradiction  that 
Sir  Hugh  was  nothing  but  the  tool  and  instrument  of  Lord 
Sandwich ;  and  very  striking  circumstances  came  out  that 
led   mankind  to  suspect  that  this  had  not  been  the  first 
occasion  on  which  he  had  basely  lent  himself  to  sacrifice 
his  friend  to  the  treachery  of  his  protector  :    in  a  word,  as 
Sir  Hugh  Palliser's  bravery  was  incontestable,   his  aban- 
doning the  Admiral  in  the  fight  off  Ushant  looked  like 
a  preconcerted  design  of  ruining  him.     Keppel  was  in  the 
Opposition,  and  unwelcome  both  to  the  King  and  the  First 
Lord  of  the  Admiralty.     He  had  even  complained  to  the 
King  of  the  bad  condition  of  the  fleet,  and  several  of  his 
friends  had  blamed  his  acceptance  of  the  command  under 
such  circumstances.     He  was  first  sent  out  with  a  very 
inferior  force  against  the  French  fleet.     Had  he  beaten  it 
more  effectually,  he  would  have  been  dear  to  all  parties, 
and  might  be  thought  fitter  to  preside  at  the  Admiralty 
than  a  mere  landsman.     Palliser's  desertion  was  paralleled 


318  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

with  Lord  George  Germaine's  at  the  battle  of  Minden, 
when  the  shrewdest  observers  thought  his  non-compliance 
with  orders  flowed  from  malice  to  Prince  Ferdinand,  not 
from  cowardice.  But  I  am  anticipating.  It  was  in  the 
evening  of  the 

Ilth,  that  Admiral  Keppel  received  notice  from  the 
Admiralty  that  Sir  Hugh  Palliser  had  but  that  very 
morning  exhibited  five  capital  articles  of  charge  against 
him,  and  that  the  Board  had  in  consequence  ordered  a 
court-martial  on  him. 

The  astonishment  of  mankind,  who  had  heard  enough 
to  think  that  Sir  Hugh  Palliser  ought,  in  vindication  of 
his  honour,  to  demand  a  court-martial  on  himself,  or  at 
least  that  the  Government  should  order  one  on  him, 
cannot  be  described,  when  they  were  told  that  Sir  Hugh 
had  impeached  his  friend,  his  patron,  his  saviour  (Sir 
Charles  Saunders  had  bequeathed  5000/.  to  Sir  Hugh, 
leaving  the  rest  of  his  fortune  to  Keppel,  who  had  selected 
Palliser  as  one  on  whom  he  most  depended  in  his  present 
command).  Honest  old  Admiral  Campbell,  hearing 
the  news  that  night  at  the  Admiralty,  cried  out,  "  The 
rascal !  he  knows  Keppel  has  his  head  in  his  pocket ! " 
It  did  appear  on  the  subsequent  trial  that  Keppel's  letter 
to  the  Admiralty  with  the  news  of  the  engagement,  which 
had  been  reckoned  obscure  and  weak,  had  been  dictated  by 
his  extreme  tenderness  and  desire  of  saving  Palliser. 

Keppel's  friends  were  not  without  anxiety.  The  pro- 
digious influence  of  the  Court,  the  unpopularity  of  the 
Opposition,  the  national  discontent  at  the  escape  of  the 
French  fleet,  and  the  confidence  with  which  the  Courtiers 
gave  out  that  the  lawyers  were  convinced  that  the  Admiral 
would  be  found  guilty,  were  reasonable  causes  of  alarm. 
Keppel,  however  able  an  officer,  was  no  genius,  and  he 


1778.         QUARREL  BETWEEN  KEPPEL  AND  PALLISER.          319 

had  had  a  stroke  of  a  palsy.  A  slur  might  sully  his 
honour,  though  he  should  not  be  capitally  condemned, 
and  the  ruinous  state  of  his  health  might  not  be  able 
to  sustain  the  fatigue  of  the  trial  and  the  inquietude  of  his 
mind.  His  enemies  might  have  made  the  same  reflections ; 
but  the  abominable  practices  on  the  log-books  intimated  that 
they  did  not  mean  to  be  content  with  disgracing  him,  but 
aimed  at  destroying  him  by  the  assistance  of  his  bad  health. 
The  intended  court-martial  was  notified  the  next  day  to 
the  House  of  Commons  by  Temple  Luttrell,  who  prefaced 
it  by  moving  for  one  on  Sir  Hugh  Palliser,  for  disobedience 
of  signals,  and  reflecting  on  the  partiality  of  the  Admiralty 
in  not  ordering  one  on  Sir  Hugh.  The  latter  endeavoured 
to  disculpate  himself  for  bringing  his  accusation  so  late  as 
near  five  months  after  the  action,  by  pretending  he  had 
been  unwilling  to  detain  so  many  fleets  as  had  been  on  the 
point  of  sailing,  by  retaining  officers  as  witnesses ;  but 
could  refrain  no  longer,  after  Keppel  had  declared  he 
would  serve  with  him  no  more.  He  urged  too  that  Kep- 
pel's  previous  kindness  absolved  him  from  guilt,  as  the 
Admiral  would  not  have  treated  him  with  regard  had  he 
thought  him  criminal.  Lord  Nugent  deprecated  the  mo- 
tion, and  implored  the  House  to  interpose  and  heal  the 
breach  between  the  two  Admirals  ;  and  he  did  not  applaud 
the  Admiralty  for  ordering  the  court-martial  so  incon- 
siderately. Admiral  Lord  Shuldham,6  though  attached  to, 
and  promoted  by,  Lord  Sandwich,  was  warm  in  Keppel's 
praises,  who,  he  said,  was  adored  by  all  the  officers  and 
seamen  in  the  fleet,  and  whose  glory  he  was  sure  would 
come  out  more  bright  from  the  trial.  General  Con  way 
was  no  less  zealous  in  commendation  of  Keppel,  and  be- 
sought the  House  to  address  His  Majesty  to  interpose  and 

•  The  first  and  last  Lord  of  this  title.    He  died  1796.— D. 


320  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

reconcile  the  two  Admirals,  and  not  suffer  the  court-mar- 
tial to  sit,  which  might  be  productive  of  so  many  inconve- 
niences and  detriment.  The  Admiral  himself  then  rose, 
and,  with  a  mixture  of  pathetic  modesty  and  sublime  dig- 
nity, told  the  House,  that,  however  sensible  of  the  honour 
many  gentlemen  had  done  him,  he  could  never  consent, 
consistently  with  his  reputation,  that  the  trial  should  not 
proceed.  The  charge  attacked  both  his  life  and  his  fame, 
and  he  must  call  for  it  to  clear  both,  though  he  lamented 
the  mischiefs  it  might  occasion.  "  The  Vice- Admiral  en- 
trenched himself  within  the  kindness  I  have  shown  him — 
good  God,  sir!"  said  he,  "intrusted  as  I  was  with  the 
salvation  of  England  against  invasion,  was  that  a  moment 
to  enter  into  his  distrust  of  my  sentiments  ?  No,  sir,  no ; 
I  had  no  intention  of  throwing  any  blame  on  him  ;  but 
when  I  saw  his  name  to  a  letter  in  the  '  Morning  Post,' 
that  tended  to  excite  mutiny  in  the  fleet,  then  I  did  think 
him  to  blame — then  I  did  think  he  had  accused  himself — 
but  I  forbear  and  retire."  These  few  sentences  were 
uttered  with  so  much  majesty  and  grace,  that  the  House 
melted  into  tears ;  even  his  friends,  who  expected  no  such 
powers,  looked  on  him  as  inspired;  and  the  least  partial 
were  ravished  with  the  dignity  of  his  action,  and  thought 
his  low  and  but  homely  figure  was  shot  up  into  heroic 
stature.  Admiral  Pigot,  ill-disposed  to  the  Court  by  the 
ill-treatment  of  his  late  brother,  Lord  Pigot,  was  still 
more  lavish  in  encomiums  on  Keppel,  and  severely  blamed 
the  precipitation  of  the  Admiralty.  Lord  Mulgrave  de- 
fended that  Board,  and  took  the  chief  blame  on  himself. 
He  insisted  that  the  Admiralty  had  no  power  of  suspend- 
ing or  denying  a  court-martial.  .  General  Collier  and 
General  Keppel  urged  that  the  method  was  very  different 
in  the  Land  Service;  and  the  former  said,  if  it  was  so  in 


1778.    WEDDERBURN.  DEFENDS  CONDUCT  OF  ADMIRALTY.    321 

the  Sea  Service,  it  ought  to  be  altered.  Charles  Fox,  a  rela- 
tion and  friend  of  Keppel,  said  the  Admiral  would  scorn 
recrimination  ;  and  therefore,  lest  it  should  have  that  look, 
he  would  move  for  the  order  of  the  day  to  supersede  it. 
Sir  Joseph  Mawbey  demanded  of  Sir  Hugh  if  he  had  not 
been  urged  to  his  accusation  by  the  First  Lord  of  the  Admi- 
ralty. He  protested  "  By  no  means."  The  Attorney-Gene- 
ral Wedderburn  defended  the  conduct  of  the  Admiralty, 
and  maintained  it  was  agreeable  to  the  spirit  of  the  law. 
Dunning  sat  out  of  his  sight  at  a  distance ;  but  Wedder- 
burn, suddenly  eyeing  him,  started,  and,  though  he  had  used 
the  strongest  affirmations,  corrected  himself,  and  said  he 
only  spoke  his  private  opinion,  and  uninformed.  Dunning, 
notwithstanding,  rose,  and  confuted  him  in  the  most  able 
speech  he  had  ever  made  in  that  assembly.  Sir  W.  Me- 
redith produced  a  case  of  a  Captain  Clements,  that  he  said 
refuted  the  plea  of  the  Admiralty  ;  but  he  was  found  to 
have  totally  misquoted  or  misrepresented  the  case,  and 
was  that  day,  and  on  two  subsequent  occasions  when  he 
revived  it,  brought  to  shame  by  Lord  Mulgrave.  The 
order  of  the  day  was  called  for,  and  the  motion  was 
dropped. 

The  Secretaryship-at-War  was  vacant:  Lord  Beau- 
champ,  son  of  Lord  Hertford,  had  been  very  desirous  of 
the  place,  but,  devoted  as  he  and  his  father  were  to  the 
Court,  the  King  chose  to  keep  the  army  entirely  to  him- 
self, and  trust  nobody  but  one  of  the  Junto  under  him. 
Cornwall,  Jenkinson's  brother-in-law,  was  the  man  sup- 
posed to  be  designed,  but,  being  a  younger  Lord  of  the 
Treasury  than  Lord  Beauchamp,  could  not  decently  be 
preferred  to  him.  In  that  difficulty  Jenkinson  was  se- 
lected. He  was  certainly  intended  for  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,  could  the  King  have  got  the  better  of  Ame- 

VOL.  II.  Y 


322  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

rica,  and  consequently  of  England.  I  believe  Jenkinson 
was  not  only  the  most  trusted  of  any  man  in  England 
by  the  King,  but,  in  concert  with  Lord  Mansfield,  the  sug- 
gesterof  all  arbitrary  measures;  for,  however  disposed,  the 
King  would  not  plan,  much  less  digest  and  prepare,  the 
steps  and  bills  of  all  those  measures. 

On  the  14th,  then,  Charles  Jenkinson,  lately  appointed 
Secretary-at-War  in  the  room  of  Lord  Barrington,  who 
retired  on  a  pension  of  2000/.  a  year,  opened  the  state  of 
the  army,  and  specified  an  additional  want  of  14,000  men. 
In  the  course  of  his  speech  he  stated  the  forces  in  our  pay 
at  three  hundred  thousand  men,  the  greatest  military  esta- 
blishment ever  kept  up  in  Europe,  except  by  Louis  XIV. 
at  the  period  of  his  greatest  power.  It  was  not  much  to 
the  honour  of  this  country,  with  such  an  army,  to  have 
received  nothing  but  disgraces ;  and  it  was  ridiculous  to 
hear  more  demanded  of  Parliament,  as  if  300,000  could 
not  achieve  all  that  314,000  could  !  • 

These  were  all  the  material  debates  before  Christmas, 
except  on  a  bill,  rapidly  passed,  to  dispense  with  the  law  for 
confining  the  persons  concerned  in  the  court-martial  on 
board  ship  during  the  whole  trial.  This  suspension  was 
demanded  in  consideration  of  Admiral  Keppel's  shattered 
health.  It  passed  easily  through  the  Commons ;  but  in  the 
Lords  the  new  Chancellor  uncandidly,  though  he  did  not 
venture  openly,  threw  objections  in  the  way- — but  it  was 
passed  there  too ;  and  then  both  Houses  adjourned  till  after 
the  holidays. 

But  before  the  year  ended,  the  Court  was  stunned  by 
a  very  unexpected  blow,  that  gave  them'  an  antepast  of  the 
odium  they  were  to  incur  by  the  persecution  of  Keppel.  In 
fact,  both  the  King  and  Lord  Sandwich  had  been  guided  by 
passion  only,  and  had  by  no  means  weighed  or  foreseen 


1778.  THE  PERSECUTION  OF  ADMIRAL  KEPPEL.  323 

the  consequences  of  their  rashness.  Probably  Sandwich 
had  suggested  and  the  King  embraced  the  measure  without 
consulting  Lord  Mansfield  or  Lord  North ;  the  timidity, 
nay,  good  sense,  of  the  former,  and  the  indolence  of  the 
latter,  with  his  aversion  to  violent  measures,  though  to  his 
shame  he  would  support  them  when  fixed  on  by  the  King, 
would  have  represented  against  so  indiscreet  a  step.  Fool- 
ish it  was  in  the  King 'to  the  highest  degree.  His  first  view 
had  permanently  been  to  rivet  to  himself  the  affections  of 
the  army  and  navy,  as  the  instruments  by  which  he  must  at 
last  maintain  the  despotism  which  he  was  to  obtain  by  the 
servility  of  Parliaments.  By  this  rash  act  he  shook  the 
affections  of  the  navy,  and  awakened  in  them  a  spirit 
which  His  Majesty  had  little  reason  before  to  suspect  yet 
lurked  in  any  of  the  great  professions.  The  senators 
were  impudently  corrupt,  and  prompt  to  accord  whatever 
could  be  asked  of  them  in  return  for  their  wages.  The 
Church  was  prostituted  to  the  most  shameless  pitch.  The 
Bishops  had  voted  for  Popery  and  massacres,  and  the  rest 
of  the  clergy  panted  for  arbitrary  power  in  the  Crown,  as 
a  step  towards  re-establishment  of  their  own  tyranny. 
The  country  gentlemen  were  led  by  the  clergy,  and  fools 
enough 'to  expect  to  tyrannize  over  the  inferior  orders  if 
the  Crown  was  aggrandized,  not  having  sense  or  knowledge 
enough  to  be  sure  of  a  most  indubitable  truth — viz.,  ttiat 
there  is  nowhere  upon  earth,  in  any  arbitrary  Government, 
such  an  order  of  beings  as  Independent  Country  Gentlemen. 
The  law,  at  least  all  of  the  profession  that  hoped  prefer- 
ment from  the  Court,  were  devoted  to  it,  and  knew  that 
Lord  Mansfield  held  the  feuille  de  benefices  in  that  line. 
The  Dissenters,  by  the  inflexibility  of  the  Court  and 
Bishops  in  not  relaxing  the  penal  statutes  against  them, 
and  who,  ever  since  the  commencement  of  the  American 

Y  2 


324  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

war,  had  been  stigmatised  by  the  Tories  as  Republicans, 
could  but  know  that  they  had  nothing  to  expect  but  per- 
secution if  the  King  became  arbitrary,  were  yet  kept 
quiet  by  pensions  to  their  chiefs,  or  desponded  from  the 
neglect  of  the  Opposition  ;  Sir  George  Saville  himself 
having  moved  for  toleration  of  the  Papists,  and  Burke, 
a  chief  leader,  having  opposed  indulgence  to  the  Dis- 
senters. The  army's  principles  naturally  led  them  to 
devotion  to  the  Court,  and  the  navy  had  hitherto  not 
betrayed  different  sentiments :  but  as  seamen,  by  the  ele- 
ment they  live  on,  are  less  exposed  to  the  corruptions  of 
the  world,  those  simple  men,  on  the  persecution  of  Keppel, 
discovered  a  manly  integrity  that  startled  the  Court,  and 
revived  some  hopes  in  the  friends  of  the  constitution,  that 
the  genuine  guardians  of  our  country  and  liberty  were  not 
lost  to  all  English  sentiments.  Nine  Scottish  Admirals 
and  Captains  took  the  honest  side. 

Yet,  according  to  a  maxim  that  from  reading,  experience, 
and  reflection,  I  have  long  laid  down  to  myself  as  a  certain 
truth — viz.,  that  no  great  country  was  ever  saved  by  honest 
men  from  arbitrary  power,  because  men  of  virtue  will  not 
go  all  the  lengths  that  may  be  requisite  to  inspirit  a  party, 
— the  first  man  that  roused  the  navy  on  the  attack  on 
Keppel  was  by  no  means  a  patriot  on  principle.  That 
.  man  was  Augustus  John  Hervey,  Earl  of  Bristol,  an  Ad- 
miral of  the  fleet,  in  which  service  he  had  performed 
actions  of  extreme  bravery,  and  on  other  occasions  had 
had  his  courage  called  in  question.  He  had  no  parts,  and 
but  a  very  confused  understanding.  During  the  life  of  his 
elder  brother  he  had  been  Groom  of  the  Bedchamber  to 
the  King,  and  a  most  servile  and  forward  Courtier.  He 
had  also  been  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  and  a  prime 
favourite  of  Lord  Sandwich ;  but  on  some  disobligation,  I 


1778. 


THE  PERSECUTION  OF  ADMIRAL  KEPPEL. 


325 


know  not  what,  received  from  the  latter,  Lord  Bristol  was 
become  his  most  personal  enemy,  and  in  the  last  session 
had  furnished  the  Opposition  with  many  lights  into  the 
defects  of  the  navy,  and  into  the  faults  of  Sandwich's 
administration  of  it. 

Lord  Bristol  seized  with  alacrity,  and  in  this  instance 
with  shrewdness,  the  opportunity  that  Sandwich  had  thrown 
in  his  way ;  and,  with  the  co-operation  of  another  Admiral, 
then  in  Opposition6  too  (Henry  Powlet,  Duke  of  Bolton,  a 
silly,  brutal,  proud  man,  yet  whose  valour  was  much  more 
problematic  than  the  Earl's),  they  prevailed  on  ten  other 
Admirals  and  Commanders  of  the  fleet  to  sign  and  pre- 
sent to  the  King  a  strong  remonstrance  against  the  conduct 
of  the  Admiralty  in  ordering  the  court-martial  on  Keppel. 
At  the  head  of  those  marine  heroes  appeared  the  venerable 
name  of  Lord  Hawke,  the  dear  friend  of  Keppel,  who  had 
partaken  in  his  immortal  victories.  With  equal  industry 
was  propagated  the  reply  of  the  good  and  infirm  old  man, 
to  whom  it  being  proposed  to  preside  at  the  court-martial, 
he  replied,  that,  were  he  able,  he  would  sooner  cut  off  his 
hand  than  be  accessory  to  such  a  trial ! 

Lord  Bristol  took  another  step,  of  far  less  consequence, 
yet  artful  and  disagreeable  to  the  Court.  He  alarmed  old 
Lord  Vere,  another  Admiral  and  his  friend,  for  his  son-in- 
law,  Lord  Charles  Spenser,  brother  of  the  Duke  of  Marl- 
borough.  Lord  Bristol  painted  the  odium  incurred  by  the 
Admiralty,  and  told  him  that,  as  Lord  Charles  had  for- 


7  The  last  of  the  six  Dukes  of  Bolton, 
and  imt  so  black  as  Wolpole  has  de- 
scribed him.  He  died  in  1794.  Just 
105  years  previously,  the  eldest  son  of 
Puulet,  Marquis  of  Winchester,  who 
had  married  the  daughter  and  heiress 
of  Scrope  of  Bolton,  was  created  Duke 
of  the  latter  place.  At  the  death  of 


the  childless  Duke  Henry,  a  large  share 
of  the  Bolton  property  fell  to  the 
natural  daughter  of  the  fifth  duke.  A 
younger  son  of  the  northern  family  of 
Orde  married  this  lady,  took  her  name 
and  estates,  and  for  this  or  some  other 
remarkable  feat  was  raised  to  the  rank 
of  Baron  Bolton.— D. 


326  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

tunately  happened  not  to  be  at  the  Board  when  the  court- 
martial  was  ordered,  he  would  do  well  to  abstain  from  their 
subsequent  proceedings.  By  these  manoBuvres,  the  Duke 
of  Marlborough,  who  had  often  felt  qualms  on  the  measures 
of  the  Court,  was  induced  to  forbid  Lord  Charles  to  attend 
Parliament  during  the  trial.  The  Earl  of  Pembroke  too, 
instigated  I  believe  by  Lord  Bristol,  and  soured  by  the 
refusal  of  the  Mastership  of  the  Horse  (for  conscience  Lord 
Pembroke  did  not  pretend  to),  asked  an  audience  of  the 
King,  and  told  him,  that,  though  his  Majesty's  servant  (he 
was  a  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber),  he  must  beg  leave  to 
inform  him  that,  on  all  the  questions  relative  to  Lord 
Sandwich  that  were  likely  to  come  on,  he  must  take  leave 
to  vote  against  the  Administration.  These  were  but  over- 
tures to  the  mortifying  scene  that  ensued. 

I  shall  mention  a  few  other  events  that  happened  towards 
the  close  of  the  year,  and  which  I  omitted  in  their  proper 
places. 

On  the  19^  arrived  an  account  of  the  dispersion  of 
Byron's  fleet  by  a  great  storm. 

Besides  the  Commissioners,  Lord  Carlisle,  Governor 
Johnston,  and  Edeii,  who  were  returned  from  America,  Lord 
Cornwallis  was  also  arrived.  He  too,  who  had  been  re- 
markably zealous  and  active,  resigned  his  command  in 
America.  The  reason  was  not  alleged — it  might  be 
attachment  to  General  Howe,  of  whom  he  had  been  a 
principal  favourite. 

Lord  Carlisle,  before  he  left  that  quarter  of  the  world, 
had  received  a  challenge  from  the  Marquis  de  la  Fayette, 
a  young  Frenchman  of  quality,  married  into  the  powerful 
family  of  Noailles,  and  who  from  enthusiasm  for  liberty  had 
resorted  to  America,  seemingly  without  the  approbation  of 
his  Court,  though  certainly  with  its  connivance,  as  at  his 


1778.  CHALLENGE  SENT  TO  LORD  CARLISLE.  327 

return  he  received  only  a  short  exile  ten  miles  from  Paris, 
and  had  been  very  active  in  the  service  of  the  Congress. 
This  young  adventurer  had  taken  offence  at  expressions 
reproachful  to  his  country  in  the  proclamation  of  the 
Commissioners,  and  very  absurdly  had  addressed  himself 
to  Lord  Carlisle  for  satisfaction.  The  latter,  in  a  very 
sensible  letter,  told  him  that  he  did  not  at  all  think  it  be- 
came him  to  answer  for  his  conduct  as  a  public  minister 
to  a  private  man  ;  and  that  he  thought  the  national  quarrel 
would  be  best  decided  by  Admiral  Byron  and  Comte 
D'Estaing. 

The  West  India  merchants  had  long  been  under  the 
utmost  apprehensions  for  our  islands.  They  had  repeatedly 
applied  to  the  Ministers  for  protection,  which  the  Ministers 
had  not  been  able  to  give  them.  The  merchants  had  been 
often  prompted  to  take  warmer  steps,  but  had  been  as  often 
afraid  of  incensing  the  Ministers  (a  fear  that  did  the  latter 
no  honour) :  many  meetings  had  been  held,  and  strong 
language  recommended.  As  their  desperation  increased, 
a  very  warm  remonstrance  to  the  King  had  been  drawn 
up,  which,  after,  however,  being  a  little  softened,  they  did 
carry  to  St.  James's.  Yet,  though  so  respectable  a  body 
of  men,  and  so  justly  entitled  to  be  treated  at  least  with 
humanity  and  decency,  the  King  received  their  Memorial 
only  in  the  Guard  Chamber  as  he  returned  from  chapel, 
and  gave  it  to  the  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber  in  waiting 
without  reading  it,  and  with  no  more  distinction  than  he 
gives  to  the  petition  of  a  begging  gentlewoman  that  sues 
for  a-  pension.  Thus  insulted,  the  Remonstrance  was 
printed  in  the  newspapers. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  were  printed  two  re«- 
markable  pamphlets,  written  by  two  Members  of  the 
House  of  Commons.  The  first,  by  Sir  William  Meredith, 


328  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.     DEC.  1778. 

and  of  which  only  a  few  copies  were  printed  and  given  by 
him  to  his  friends,  was  an  answer  to  a  book  written  by  a 
Scotch  clergyman,  at  the  instigation  of  Lord  Mansfield, 
to  show  that  the  free  states  of  antiquity  had  taxed  their 
own  colonies.  Sir  William  denied  this,  and,  quoting  the 
ancient  historians,  had  the  better  of  the  argument,  though 
he  had  made  mistakes,  and  seemed  too  fond  of  showing 
learning  that  was  new  to  himself.  The  best  part  was 
an  indirect  satire  of  Lord  North  under  the  character  of 
Hanno,  a  Carthaginian  leader. 

The  other,  by  David  Hartley,  was  a  recapitulation  of  all 
the  efforts  and  deprecations  of  the  Americans  to  avert  the 
war,  and  of  the  unheard-of  and  unparalleled  treatment  of 
their  petitions,  offers,  and  remonstrances  by  the  Ministerial 
majority  in  Parliament.  The  most  striking  part  of  all 
was  the  detection  of  the  usage  of  signs-manual  issued  in 
the  King's  name  for  the  government  of  the  colonies,  in 
which  the  author  shows  very  ably  the  views  of  the  Court, 
and  that  all  tended  to  subject  America,  not  to  the  pre- 
tended sovereignty  of  Parliament,  but  solely  and  abso- 
lutely to  the  Royal  Prerogative.  The  last  chapter  is  very 
weak,  and  proposes  that  the  Americans,  on  proper  conces- 
sions from  Great  Britain,  should  force  France  to  absolve 
them  from  the  contracted  alliance  between  France  and 
America.  But  the  rest  of  the  book  must  be,  to  every 
impartial  man,  a  justification  of  the  colonies ;  it  shows 
that  they  were  forced  into  rebellion  by  the  most  cruel 
treatment,  and  that  nothing  but  passive  submission  to 
despotism  would  content  the  Crown.  As  the  book  is  fairly 
drawn  from  public  Acts  and  witnessed  by  the  Journals  of 
Parliament,  it  will  be  a  faithful  guide  to  future  historians, 
for  it  is  history  already.  Notwithstanding  these  passionate 
attempts,  neither  the  Ministers  nor  the  House  chose  to 
meddle  with  Mr.  Hartley  or  his  pamphlet. 


(    329    ) 


1779. 


JANUARY. 


THE  new  year  was  ushered  in  by  a  violent  tempest  of 
wind,  which  began  in  the  night  precisely  as  the  old  year 
ended.  Ancient  historians  would  have  regarded  it,  and 
the  destruction  of  a  considerable  part  of  the  Royal  Hospi- 
tal at  Greenwich  by  fire  the  same  day,  as  omens  of  political 
storms.  The  folly  of  the  Court,  and  the  wretched  condition 
to  which  it  had  brought  this  country,  were  better-founded 
prognostics.  The  trial  of  Admiral  Keppel,  which  began 

On  the  7^,  at  Portsmouth,  was  the  first  considerable 
event  in  this  island  that  showed  the  King  and  his  Minis- 
ters that  their  power  was  not  so  irresistible  as  they 
imagined. 

Admiral  Pye,  an  old  dotard,  was  at  the  head  of 
the  court-martial,  and  took  little  part ;  but  there  were 
two  other  Admirals  that  took  the  lead — Montagu  and 
Arbuthnot.  The  latter  was  a  Scot,  and  yet  very  favour- 
able to  the  accused.  It  is  justice  to  the  Scots  to  say,  that, 
from  the  first  moment  of  the  attack  on  Keppel,  the 
sea  officers  of  that  nation  acted  with  a  zeal  and  warmth  on 
his  behalf  that  did  them  honour.  Admiral  Campbell,  the 
intrepid  Lockhart  Ross,  and  Sir  John  Lindsay,  though  the 
nephew  of  Lord  Mansfield,  stood  forth  as  the  champions 
of  Keppel  in  the  most  undisguised  manner.  But  it  was 
Admiral  Montagu,  one  of  the  Judges,  who  acted  more  as 


330  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JAN. 

counsel  for  the  prisoner  than  as  one  who  was  to  hear  and 
pronounce  on  the  cause.  He  was  a  distant  relation  of 
Lord  Sandwich,  and  at  variance  with  him ;  and,  indeed, 
acted  with  such  unreserved  partiality,  that,  could  a  speck 
have  been  found  in  Keppel's  character,  Admiral  Mon- 
tagu's behaviour  would  have  authorized  prejudice  itself. 
That  rough  seaman  browbeat  the  few  witnesses  that  were 
supposed  partial,  treated  Palliser  himself  with  passion  and 
Lord  Mulgrave  with  arrogance,  and  declared  frankly  that 
he  should  not  attend  to  forms  of  law,  but  to  justice.  It 
required  the  almost  unanimous  voice  of  the  witnesses  in 
favour  of  Keppel's  conduct,  and  the  vile  arts  practised 
against  him,  to  convince  all  mankind  how  falsely  and 
basely  he  had  been  accused.  His  merit  burst  forth  in  the 
most  pathetic  eulogies  from  the  artless  testimony  of  the 
honest  seamen ;  and  one  expression  of  Admiral  Campbell 
forced  tears  from  the  audience,  and  became  proverbial. 
Being  asked  if  Keppel  had  done  anything  to  tarnisli 
the  honour  of  the  flag,  the  good  old  man,  with  the  simpli- 
city of  heart-felt  eloquence,  cried  out,  "  Oh,  fie !  no  !  " 

Palliser  acted  with  no  address,  and  showed  so  little 
judgment  in  the  conduct  of  the  trial,  that  nobody  could 
suppose  he  had  drawn  up  the  charge  himself.  Admiral 
Montagu's  partiality  was  so  glaring,  that  as  soon  as  Palliser 
perceived  how  little  he  could  hurt  Keppel,  and  how  much 
glory  would  accrue  to  the  latter  from  the  concurrent 
testimony  of  the  navy,  the  best  thing  Sir  Hugh  could 
have  done  would  have  been  to  complain  of  the  court-mar- 
tial being  biassed  by  prejudice,  and  to  have  refused  to 
proceed  in  his  crimination  before  such  partial  Judges. 
Lord  Sandwich's  finesse  seemed  to  have  deserted  him,  too, 
on  that  ocasion,  in  not  suggesting  that  subterfuge ;  but  he 
was  busied  in  tampering  with  the  witnesses  and  the  log- 


1779.  TRIAL  OF  ADMIRAL  KEPPEL.  331 

books,  and  in  all  those  little  tricks  that  were  the  flowers  of 
his  genius,  and  which  doubled  his  confusion.  He  does  seem 
to  have  aimed  at  some  Mat  by  sending  Lord  Mulgrave  to 
browbeat  the  court-martial ;.  but  the  Lord  was  over- 
matched by  the  impetuosity  of  Montagu,  and  was  forced 
to  swallow  a  reprimand  from  the  Court. 

The  Commission  was  scarce  opened  before  Sandwich 
felt  the  grievous  blunder  he  had  made.  Every  day's 
trial  heaped  new  glory  on  the  prisoner.  The  Earl  set 
himself  early  to  disclaim  any  concert  with  Palliser,  but  all 
his  actions  betrayed  it.  The  five  articles  of  the  charge  de- 
monstrated that  they  had  not  been  the  result  of  rashness, 
passion,  and  precipitation.  The  fourth  article,  in  particu- 
lar, seemed  to  comprehend  every  species  of  crime  that 
could  strike  the  feelings  of  seamen  unused  to  reason,  and 
had,  no  doubt,  been  drawn  by  some  able  lawyer,  and  well 
pondered.  It  is  not  unfair  to  surmise,  if  Palliser  presented 
them  in  a  tit  of  rage,  that  he  had  been  pressed  to  offer  them 
for  some  time  before  he  yielded.  The  little  regard  paid  to 
Keppel,  both  previously  and  after  his  acquittal,  by  the 
King — the  tenderness  exerted  in  behalf  of  Sir  Hugh,  and 
the  promotion  of  his  officers  and  advocates,  even  during 
and  in  the  face  of  the  trial,  were  speaking  symptoms  that 
the  King  was  by  no  means  on  the  side  of  the  innocent. 

The  Rockinghaui  faction  took  up  the  trial  with  very 
different  spirit  from  what  they  had  ever  exerted.  Charles 
Fox,  being  told  by  one  of  the  Cavendishes,  who  had  been 
at  Portsmouth,  that  their  friends  there  were  finely  warm, 
replied,  "  Then  I  will  go  thither ;  I  want  to  see  what  their 
warmth  is — I  have  never  seen  any  in  them."  The  Mar- 
quis of  Rockingham,  and  even  the  Marchioness,  established 
themselves  at  Portsmouth  during  the  whole  progress  of  the 
trial;  so  did  Burke,  and  often  the  Duke  of  Richmond, 


332 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOKACE  WALPOLE. 


JAN. 


' 


and  others  of  their  friends.  The  Duke  of  Cumberland, 
too,  as  a  seaman,  interested  himself  as  much,  and,  with  his 
Duchess,  lodged  at  Portsmouth  the  whole  time- 
It  was  probably  in  resentment  for  this  behaviour  of  his 
brother  that  the  King  at  that  very  time  determined  to 
send  his  third  son,  a  boy  of  nine  or  ten  years  of  age,1  to 
sea  in  one  of  the  fleets  that  were  to  sail,  as  a  hint  to  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland  that  he  was  never  to  be  Lord  High 
Admiral,  which  he  would  not  have  been  otherwise.  So 
engrossed  was  the  universal  attention  by  the  court-mar- 
tial, and  so  deserted  the  Parliament  by  the  Opposition, 
that,  though  the  adjournment  ended  on  the  14th,  and 
the  trial  not  till  February  llth,  no  business  of  moment 
was  done  in  either  House.  In  truth,  the  Rockingham 
squadron  treated  the  trial  of  Keppel  as  an  affair  of  party 
rather  than  as  a  national  one — at  least,  as  if  it  were  the  tirst 
interest  of  the  nation  to  vindicate  Keppel :  yet  one  inci- 
dent made  this  conduct  ridiculous. 

Garrick,  the  celebrated  actor,  died  on  the  IQth,  and,  a 
most  extravagant  pomp  being  exhibited  for  his  funeral  in 
Westminster  Abbey,  Edmund  Burke,  who  would  not  leave 
the  trial  to  attend  his  duty  in  Parliament,  came  post  to 
town  to  attend  the  player's  burial,  and  returned  to  Ports- 


1  When  Prince  William  Henry  was 
sent  to  sea,  he  had,  at  least,  to  make 
and  fight  his  way  among  his  young 
shipmates.  I  am  tol*  on  reliable  au- 
thority, that  in  the  first  week  of  his 
cruise,  for  some  impertinence  at  mess, 
lie  received  a  "  drubbing "  from  one  of 
the  mates.  The  prince  threatened  to 
tell  his  father.  "  Ah  ! "  replied  the 
mate,  "  I  would  serve  your  father  in  the 
same  way  if  he  were  in  your  place  and 
behaved  as  unlike  a  gentleman."  The 
mate  was  living  at  Deal  when  the  Duke 
of  Clarence  became  Lord  High  Admiral, 
and  summoned  his  old  shipmate  up  to 
town.  At  the  interview  the  Duke  be- 


gan by  asking,  "  Are  you  the  man  who 
gave  me  my  first  '  hiding '  at  sea  ? " 
"  Oh !  your  Eoyal  Highness,"  said  the 
veteran,  "  I,  I  am  sorry  for  it."  "  Well, 
I  am  not,"  replied  the  Duke,  "for  it 
helped  to  make  a  man  of  me ;  and  now 
I  want  to  do  something  for  you."  The 
mate  returned  to  Deal  with  a  step  or 
two  in  rank.  In  these  later  days  the 
navy  has  seen,  with  surprise,  a  young 
prince  sent  to  sea  witli  a  protector ;  and 
it  has  created  something  more  than 
surprise  that  this  guardian,  or  "  govern- 
or," is  not  an  officer  in  the  navy,  but  a 
lieutenant  of  engineers ! — D. 


1779.  SIR  JOHN  DALRYMPLE.  333 

mouth  that  very  night.  Yet  even  in  that  zeal  he  acted 
injudiciously,  for  the  Court  was  delighted  to  see  a  more 
noble  and  splendid  appearance  at  the  interment  of  a  corn- 
median  than  had  waited  on  the  remains  of  the  great  Earl  of 
Chatham,  though  his  funeral  was  appointed  by  the  orders 
of  the  House  of  Commons. 

At  a  time  less  occupied  by  one  great  affair,  there  hap- 
pened an  interlude  that  well  deserved  attention,  and  is 
worthy  of  being  transmitted  to  posterity,  as  it  regarded  a 
character  that  has  made  himself  historic  by  his  base  at- 
tempts to  decry  two  of  the  most  virtuous  and  favourite 
characters  in  our  history — those  martys  to  liberty,  Algernon 
Sydney  and  Lord  Russell.  The  detestable  libeller  I  mean 
is  Sir  John  Dalrymple,  who,  after  daring  to  asperse 
heroes,  proved  a  scurrilous  libeller  in  the  more  common 
sense  of  the  word,  and  a  notorious  coward  in  consequence 
of  his  libel.  In  the  beginning  of  this  year  he  published  a 
bulky  pamphlet,  neither  the  matter  nor  contents  of  which 
at  all  deserved  the  attention  of  the  public.  It  was  a  viru- 
lent and  gross  abuse  of  Lord  Barrington,  the  late  Secretary- 
at-War,  for  not  obliging  Sir  John  in  a  job  or  two  that 
he  had  solicited ;  and  the  author  gave  the  Viscount  the  lie 
direct  in  more  than  one  passage.  Lord  Barrington,  though 
sixty-two,  sent  the  Baronet  a  challenge,  the  more  spirited 
as  the  Scots,  on  Sir  John's  publication  of  his  History,  had 
sounded  him  high  as  a  most  passionate  and  courageous 
man,  who  would  call  any  one  to  account  that  should  attack 
his  History.  But  this  redoubted  hero,  some  years  younger 
than  his  antagonist,  replied  to  Lord  Barrington's  defiance, 
that,  being  now  one  of  His  Majesty's  Judges,  it  would  not 
become  him  to  fight  a  duel.  To  this  pitiful  evasion  Lord 
Barrington  returned,  that  he  himself  had  a  brother  (Daines 
Barrington)  who  was  a  Judge  too ;  but  should  that  bro- 


334       LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.       JAN. 

ther  injure  any  man  grossly,  and  refuse  to  give  him  satis- 
faction, he  should  look  on  his  brother  as  a  scoundrel ;  and 
so  he  should  think  of  Sir  John,  and  treat  him  accord- 
ingly whenever  he  met  him.  To  this  the  reverend  Judge 
replied,  that,  if  that  was  to  be  the  case,  he  should  take  care 
to  keep  out  of  his  Lordship's  wayr  lest  passion  should  pro- 
voke him  to  act  in  a  manner  unseemly  to  his  station.  But 
this  contemptible  Drawcansir,  long  before  his  cowardice 
was  shrouded  in  furs,  had  given  clear  proofs  of  his  want 
of  spirit.  The  following  anecdotes  of  him  were  told  me  by 
Thomas  Townshend,  junr.,  a  man  of  as  prompt  courage  as 
Sir  John  was  deficient  in  it.  Not  long  after  Dalrymple's 
publication  of  his  second  volume,  this  Mr.  Townshend  and 
Mr.  John  Byng  expressed  in  the  House  of  Commons  their 
indignation  at  his  attack  on  Lord  Russell  and  Algernon 
Sydney.  After  the  debate,  Colonel  Masterton,  a  Scot, 
said  to  Mr.  Townshend,  "  You  don't  know  what  you  have 
done :  you  had  better  take  care  of  yourself;  Sir  J.  Dal- 
rymple  is  a  very  hot-headed  fellow.  I  assure  you  I  once 
saw  him  knock  down  a  gentleman  in  a  coffee-house,  and 
it  was  as  much  as  I  and  two  more  could  do  in  prevent- 
ing Sir  John  from  stabbing  him  while  he  was  down."  Mr. 
Townshend  smiled  at  the  instance,  and  said,  "  Sir,  when- 
ever I  meet  Sir  John  Dalrymple,  I  shall  take  care  to  keep 
on  my  legs." 

Soon  after  this  conversation,  Mr.  Townshend  and  Mr. 
William  Burke,  being  shut  out  of  the  House  of  Commons 
while  there  was  a  division,  went  into  the  Gentleman 
Usher's  room,  where  they  found  Sir  John  Dalrymple,  to 
whom  Townshend  purposely  gave  a  surly  look  of  defiance, 
of  which  Sir  John  chose  to  take  no  notice.  The  next  day 
W.  Burke  called  on  Townshend  and  said,  "  You  have  drawn 
me  into  a  fine  scrape.  You  choose  to  affront  Dalrymple, 


1779.  SIR  JOHN  DALRYMPLE.  335 

and  he  revenges  himself  on  me.  Here  is  a  letter  I  have 
just  received  from  him,  in  which  he  tells  me  he  hears  I  am 
going  to  answer  his  book.  That  if  I  attacked  him  only  as 
an  author  he  should  bear  it;  but  if  there  was  anything 
illiberal  in  my  answer,  and  personal  to  him,  he  should 
resent  it.  I  have  answered  him,"  added  Burke,  "  that  I 
was  surprised  where  he  could  hear  such  a  story ;  that  so 
far  from  thinking  of  answering  his  book,  I  had  never  read 
it ;  but  if  I  did,  and  found  any  inclination  to  answer  it,  I 
should  be  very  indifferent  how  he  took  it."  Soon  after, 
Townshend  and  Burke,  walking  through  Park  Street,  met 
Sir  John  with  a  woman  leaning  on  his  arm.  The  recollec- 
tion of  what  had  passed  made  them  both  smile.  When 
passed,  Sir  John  stopped  and  called  Burke,  who  soon 
returned  laughing.  "What  do  you  think  the  fellow  has 
said  to  me?"  cried  Burke;  "he  said,  'Mr.  Burke,  you  are 
a  very  warm  man,  and  sent  me  a  very  extraordinary  answer 
to  my  letter.  I  considered  for  some  days  whether  I  should 
not  resent  it,  but  I  thought  better  on  it.'  I  did  mean," 
replied  Burke,  "  that  you  should  think  it  extraordinary, 
and  was  in  hopes  you  would."  Sir  John  said  not  a  word 
more,  nor  is  worth  a  word  more.2 

The  court-martial  had  proceeded  but  few  days  before 
a  capital  alteration  was  discovered  to  have  been  made  on 
one  of  the  log-books.  It  proved  to  have  been  made  by 
Captain  Hood,  an  officer  of  good  renown — nor  could  he 
deny  it.  He  pleaded,  that,  not  knowing  but  he  might  be 


1  He  published  an  Appendix,  in 
which  he  mentioned  the  challenge  he 
had  received  and  his  declension  of  it ; 
and  declared  his  intention  of  keeping 
out  of  England  to  avoid  Lord  Barring- 
ton  :  but  said  be  should  go  abroad 
every  year  as  usual,  and,  if  Lord  Bar- 


rington  sought  his  blood,  should  think  !  the  original. 


himself  justified  in  defending  his  life  in 
a  foreign  country — as  if  a  judge  was  not 
justifiable  in  defending  his  life  in  his  own 
country  1  but  such  wretched  behaviour 
and  pitiful  evasions  are  best  seen  in  his 
own  words.  Any  paraphrase  would 
seem  exaggerated  till  collated  with 


336  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JAN. 

brought  to  trial  himself,  he  had  thought  it  necessary  to  have 
his  log-book  very  correct.     In  some  respects  he  equivo- 
cated disgracefully,  and  sunk  at  once  so  entirely  in  the  eyes 
of  his  profession   that   at  Portsmouth   he   was   excluded 
from  their  society,  and  stigmatized  as  a  tool  of  Lord  Sand- 
wich and  Palliser,  especially  as,  in  the  course  of  the  trial, 
Keppel  urged  that  the  alteration  would  have  affected  his 
life.      Hood  was  naturally  a  reserved  and  shrewd  man, 
but  a  very  proud  one.     After  the  action  of  July  27th,  he 
had  been  abused  as  not  having  done  his  duty,   no  more 
than  Brereton,  who  had  been  tried  and  broken  for  being 
drunk  during  the  engagement.     Hood  had  married  Miss 
West,  first  cousin  of  Lady  Chatham,  and  had  been  an 
intimate  favourite  of  her  Lord.    Whether  Hood,  from  rage 
at  the   unjust  aspersion  of  his  character,   had   combined 
his   resentments    with  Palliser's,    or  whether,    despairing 
of  preferment  from  the  Opposition  on  the  death  of  Lord 
Chatham,  he  had  attached  himself  to  Lord  Sandwich,  was 
not  known.    Captain  Bazeley,  Palliser's  own  Captain,  lost 
himself  too  by  his  glaring  partiality  to  the  latter ;  and  a 
second  practice  on  the  log-book  being  afterwards  discovered, 
the  tide  ran  so  strongly  in  Keppel's  favour  that  almost  all 
the  witnesses  vied  with  each  other  in  crying  him   up  to 
the  skies.     Captain  Digby,  and  one  or  two  who,  it  was 
thought,  would  be  most  hostile,  said  nothing  to  his  pre- 
judice, though  more  reserved  of  their  encomiums.    But  the 
fatal   blow  to   Palliser  was   given   by  Captain  Windsor, 
brother  of  Lord  Plymouth,   who  had  been  sent   by  the 
Admiral  to  Palliser  to  order  him  to  come  up,  and  deposed 
to  the  delivery  of  the  message.     It  was  made  clear,  too, 
that  Palliser  had  seen  the  Admiral's  signals,  and  that,  as 
the  French  fled,  a  victory  would  probably  have  been  gained 
had  he  advanced. 


1779.  TRIAL  OF  ADMIRAL  KEPPEL.  337 

Palliser's  own  behaviour  during  the  trial  was  poor  and 
passionate ;  Keppel's,  cool  and  temperate,  and  modest. 
In  truth,  they  were  in  very  different  situations:  Keppel 
stood  to  hear  his  own  praises  sounded  higher  even  than  he 
had  grounds  to  expect ;  Palliser  saw  himself  the  oppro- 
brium and  outcast  of  his  profession.  Disgrace  would  cost 
him  his  employments,  and  the  evidence  he  had  summoned 
to  overwhelm  his  enemy  turned  to  threaten  his  own  life. 
In  the  heat  of  the  altercation  he  was  so  intemperate  as  to 
throw  out  a  challenge  to  Keppel.  The  latter,  whose 
courage  was  the  burthen  of  every  conversation,  as  his  con- 
duct was  too,  waived  the  defiance  with  a  contemptuous 
smile,  and  assured  him  he  should  never  take  any  farther 
notice  of  it. 

Every  account  from  Portsmouth  was  as  unpalatable  as 
possible  to  the  Court.  Nor  did  they  receive  consolatory 
news  from  any  other  quarter.  Even  a  new  and  very  un- 
expected storm  had  arisen  from  a  quarter  in  which  they 
thought  themselves  most  secure.  The  Scottish  Presby- 
terians could  not  or  would  not  digest  the  toleration  of 
Popery,  which  it  was  intended  to  extend  to  that  country  also. 
From  private  and  quiet  meetings  in  separate  parishes  they 
had  worked  their  opposition  up  to  a  general  flame ;  and 
after  the  Kirk  had,  at  the  end  of  January,  voted  a  remon- 
strance against  the  meditated  Bill,  the  populace  had  caught 
or  had  been  instigated  by  their  pastors  to  feel  enthusiasms 
against  Popery.  It  burnt  forth  in  the  beginning  of 


VOL.  n. 


338  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 


FEBRUARY, 


WHEN  the  mob  rose  and  demolished  two  mass-houses,  and 
threatened  the  lives  of  two  Catholic  lords,  Lord  Traquair 
and  his  son  Lord  Linton.  They  were  not  less  enraged 
against  the  historian  Dr.  Robertson,  principal  of  the 
University,  whom  they  supposed  a  principal  advocate  for 
the  Bill.  They  attacked  the  College,  and  he  was  with 
difficulty  saved  from  their  fury.  The  insurrection  was  not 
appeased  till  the  provost  and  magistrates  engaged  that  the 
Bill  should  be  dropped ;  and  so  humbled  was  the  Court  at 
that  moment  by  so  many  tempests  of  resistance  (for  there 
were  great  riots  at  Glasgow  too),  that  Lord  Weymouth, 
one  of  the  Secretaries  of  State,  was  ordered  to  write  a 
humiliating  letter  to  assure  the  Scottish  clergy  that  the 
Administration  had  no  intention  of  relaxing  the  laws 
against  Popery  in  that  kingdom.  This  was  a  glaring 
falsity.  Lord  Beauchamp,  one  of  the  Lords  of  the  Trea- 
sury, had  told  me  that  he  had  thoughts  of  moving  to  take 
off  double  taxes  from  Roman  Catholics.  In  that  respect 
the  Opposition  were  as  forward  as  the  Court.  Charles 
Fox,  on  the  report  of  the  land-tax  before  Christmas,  had 
moved  for  that  repeal ;  but  was  told  that  he  was  too  late, 
as  the  bill  for  the  land-tax  was  too  far  advanced ;  and  that 
he  must  wait  till  another  year.  It  was  a  bitter  pill  for  the 
King  and  Lord  Mansfield  to  swallow — resistance  to  Popery 
from  Scotland. 

/  The  navy  disgusted,   insurrections  in  Scotland,  Wales 
mutinous,  a  rebellion  ready  to  break  out  in  Ireland,  where 


177H.  THE  KING  INSENSIBLE  TO  HIS  DANGER.  339 

15,000  Protestants  were  in  arms,  without  authority,  for 
their  own  defence,  many  of  them  well-wishers  to  the 
Americans,  and  all  so  ruined  that  they  insisted  on  relief 
from  Parliament,  or  were  ready  to  throw  off  subjec- 
tion ;  Holland  pressed  by  France  to  refuse  us  assistance, 
and  demanding  whether  we  would  or  not  protect  them ; 
uncertainty  of  the  fate  of  the  West  Indian  islands ;  and 
dread  at  least  that  Spain  might  take  part  with  France  ; 
Lord  North  at  the  same  time  perplexed  to  raise  money  on 
the  loan  but  at  eight  per  cent.,  which  was  demanded — such 
a  position  and  such  a  prospect  might  have  shaken  the 
stoutest  king  and  the  ablest  administration.  Yet  the  King 
was  insensible  to  his  danger.  He  had  attained  what  pleased 
him  most — his  own  will  at  home.  His  Ministers  were 
nothing  but  his  tools — everybody  called  them  so,  and  they 
proclaimed  it  themselves.  He  could  not  make  an  entire 
change  without  granting  mortifying  terms,  without  parting 
with  his  tractable  creatures,  without  admitting  masters, 
and  probably  not  without  being  forced  to  part  with  his 
darling  idea — absolute  power  over  America.\  I  question 
whether  his  Majesty  himself  had  the  smallest  intention  of 
making  any  change,  yet  most  of  his  Ministers  thought  it  in- 
evitable. The  whole  nation  proclaimed  it  impossible  for  him 
to  preserve  Sandwich  at  the  head  of  the  Admiralty.  It 
was  thought  that  most  of  the  commanders  of  the  fleet  would 
refuse  to  serve  under  him,  yet  Sandwich  had  the  firmest 
hold  on  the  King's  protection.  That  artful  and  intriguing 
politician  had  wormed  himself  into  the  entire  government 
of  the  East  India  Company,  and  by  that  management  had 
got  into  his  own  hands  the  intercourse  of  diamonds  with 
which  the  Indian  Nabobs  in  our  interest  fed  the  passion  of 
the  King  and  Queen  for  jewels.  An  East  India  ship  had 
been  lost  before  Christmas  in  which  was  known  to  be  a 

z  2 


340  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

brilliant  of  extraordinary  dimensions,  and  it  was  said  in  all 
130,000^.  worth  of  diamonds.  As  of  all  the  Opposition 
the  Duke  of  Eichmond  had  meddled  most  in  Indian  affairs, 
he  was  likely  on  a  change  to  interfere  again  in  their  affairs  : 
so  clear-sighted  and  so  virtuous  a  man  would  be  an  un- 
welcome exchange  for  Sandwich ! 

Lord  North  probably  turned  his  mind  to  any  alteration 
as  little  as  his  master.  His  place  must  be  the  first  vacated, 
and  no  change  could  save  him.  Lord  George  Germaine 
was  as  desperate.  He  had  not  a  friend  but  Lord  Suffolk, 
either  at  Court  or  in  the  Opposition.  He  was  fallen  as 
low  as  he  could  be,  except  by  dismission.  None  of  his 
plans  had  succeeded,  and  his  parts  were  sunk  in  esteem  as 
low  as  his  character.  Yet  at  that  very  moment  a  few 
changes  were  designed  even  by  the  Court,  though  the  King 
probably  intended  to  fill  the  vacancies  with  other  present 
Courtiers.  The  Ministers  were  angry  at  Lord  Buckingham 
for  having  encouraged  the  Irish  Protestants  to  arm.  It 
was  declared  that  he  had  desired  to  be  recalled — but  it 
may  be  presumed  he  had  been  ordered  to  desire  it.  It 
was  given  out  too  that  Lord  Suffolk  found  his  infirmities 
too  great,  and  would  retire  also.  Some  believed  that  he 
and  Wedderburn  had  been  trafficking  with  the  Rocking- 
ham  faction  for  a  junction.  If  they  did,  and  with  the 
King's  privity,  I  should  suppose  that  the  Secretary  and 
Attorney  hoped  to  be  spared  in  the  general  proscription  in 
favour  of  their  being  the  negotiators.  The  sole  view  of 
his  Majesty,  and  the  great  instrument  of  whatever  success 
he  had  had  in  his  reign,  was  to  divide  the  Opposition,  and 
at  the  same  time  relax  their  spirit  while  the  treaty  was 
pending.  If  he  could  separate  the  Rockinghams  from 
Grafton,  Camden,  and  Shelburne,  half  his  point  was 
gained ;  and  whichever  set  was  admitted  alone,  he  would 


1771).  SECRET  PROCEEDINGS  OF  RIGBY,  ETC.  341 

be  master  to  retain  part  of  his  Administration.  Jenkinson 
and  Cornwall  had  long  been  trying  to  gain  Lord  Shel- 
burne,  and  told  him  that,  if  he  would  not  be  offensive,  he 
must  be  Minister;  but  it  was  Grafton  that  the  King 
himself  would  have  preferred  to  all,  from  former  experience 
of  his  submission. 

But  there  was  one  cohort  of  the  Administration  that, 
from  seeing  their  common  danger,  had  long  been  attempting 
a  negociation  in  earnest,  but  with  triple  teachery,  for  they 
meant  to  betray  their  associates,  and  dealt  separately  with 
the  two  squadrons  of  Rockingham  and  Grafton.  These 
were  Rigby,  Lord  Weymouth,  and  the  Chancellor.  The 
first  was  no  doubt  the  instigator  of  the  others.  His  place 
of  Paymaster  was  his  summum  bonum ;  he  had  sacrificed 
every  friend  and  every  connection  to  obtain  and  to  keep  it, 
and  he  would  not  lose  it  if  the  same  artifices  could  avail 
him.  Rank  fear  was  Weymouth's  predominating  charac- 
teristic ;  he  was  proud  too,  but  not  of  any  principle  ;  and 
besides  he  was  indigent.  He  and  Rigby  easily  drew  the 
Chancellor  into  their  plot.  He  neither  knew  the  Court  or 
mankind ;  he  was  intrepid  in  the  right  place  or  the  wrong, 
and  indifferent  to  either ;  and  being  sensible  that  he  owed 
his  eminence  to  no  favour  of  the  King  or  the  Ministers,  for 
nobody  but  his  two  friends  had  wished  him  there,  he  was 
willing  to  owe  his  retaining  it  to  their  intrigues  only. 
Their  negociation  was  easily  tapped.  Weymouth  passed 
the  night  in  drinking  with  Charles  Fox,  and  so  commenced 
it.  Rigby  could  not  decently,  for  in  reality  there  was  no 
post  that  could  suit  Charles  Fox's  necessities  but  the  Pay- 
master's— yet  Rigby 's  being  of  the  complot  barred  Fox's 
demand  of  being  his  successor.  They  had  opened  the 
treaty  in  the  summer,  and  various  proposals  had  passed. 
At  one  time  Lord  Rockingham  had  broken  off,  on  being 


342  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

told  that  the  King  would  dispose  of  the  vacant  Garters ; 
at  others,  the  feigned  Ambassadors  pretended  that  they 
had  no  power  of  offering  the  Treasury.  They  certainly  had 
not,  nor  authority  from  the  King  to  offer  anything ;  but 
could  they  have  sealed  a  firm  union  with  the  Rockingbams, 
I  am  persuaded  they  would  have  bullied  the  King,  and 
told  him  they  would  resign  unless  he  gave  up  such  Ministers 
as  they  were  willing  to  sacrifice. 

The  sudden  turn  made  by  the  court-martial  alarmed 
the  three  plotters ;  they  renewed  the  negociation  both  with 
Rockingham  and  Grafton.  The  latter,  for  the  first  time, 
was  steady,  and  would  not  accede ;  the  other  was  less 
obdurate — but  I  shall  say  more  of  that  negociation  pre- 
sently. 

Insensible  as  Lord  North  was,  he  perceived  the  error  of 
Sandwich,  and  into  what  difficulties  he  had  plunged  them. 
The  Minister  told  a  capital  citizen  that  he  believed  the 
Parliament  must  soon  be  prorogued,  such  heats  were  likely 
to  arise  there  from  the  court-martial.  It  was  on  the 

1 1th,  in  the  evening,  that  a  courier  to  Lord  Bristol 
brought  the  news  of  Keppel's  acquittal,  couched  in  the 
most  honourable  terms  for  him,  and  most  ignominious  to 
his  antagonist.  Palliser  himself  had  escaped  out  of  Ports- 
mouth at  five  in  the  morning  in  a  hired  postchaise,  to 
avoid  insults  and  outrage  from  the  mob,  and  sheltered  him- 
self in  the  Admiralty.  The  news  spread  rapidly  through 
the  town,  and  by  eleven  at  night  most  houses  were  illu- 
minated both  in  London  and  Westminster.  Guns  were 
discharged  by  the  servants  of  some  of  the  great  Lords  in 
the  Opposition,  and  squibs  and  crackers  thrown  plentifully 
by  the  populace.  The  Ministers  and  some  of  the  Scots 
were  sullen  and  would  not  exhibit  lights ;  yet  the  mob 
was  far  more  temperate  than  usual,  the  Opposition  having 


1779.        REJOICINGS  ON  THE  ACQUITTAL  OF  KEPPEL.          343 

taken  no  pains  to  inflame  them,  nor  even  furnished  them 
with  any  cri  de  guerre.  Late  at  night,  as  the  people 
grew  drunk,  an  empty  house  in  Pall  Mall,  lately  inha- 
bited by  Sir  Hugh  Palliser,  and  still  supposed  to  belong 
to  him,  was  attacked,  the  windows  were  broken,  and  at 
last,  though  some  guards  had  been  sent  for,  the  mob 
forced  their  way  into  it,  and  demolished  whatever  re- 
mained. The  windows  of  Lord  Mulgrave  and  Captain 
Hood  were  likewise  broken,  and  some  few  others  acci- 
dentally that  were  not  illuminated.  It  happened  at  three 
in  the  morning  that  Charles  Fox,  Lord  Derby  and  his 
brother  Major  Stanley,  and  two  or  three  more  young  men 
of  quality,  having  been  drinking  at  Almack's  till  that  late 
hour,  suddenly  thought  of  making  the  tour  of  the  streets, 
and  were  joined  by  the  Duke  of  Ancaster,1  who  was  very 
drunk,  and  which  showed  it  was  no  premeditated  scheme — 
the  latter  was  a  courtier,  and  had  actually  been  breaking 
windows.  Finding  the  mob  before  Palliser's  house,  some 
of  the  young  Lords  said,  "  Why  don't  you  break  Lord 
George  Germaine's  windows?"  The  populace  had  been  so 
little  tutored  that  they  asked  who  he  was,  and,  being  en- 
couraged, broke  his  windows.  The  mischief  pleasing  the 
juvenile  leaders,  they  marched  to  the  Admiralty,  forced  the 
gates,  and  demolished  Palliser's  and  Lord  Lilburne's  win- 
dows. Lord  Sandwich,  exceedingly  terrified,  escaped 
through  the  garden  with  his  mistress,  Miss  Reay,2  to  the 
Horse  Guards,  and  there  betrayed  a  most  manifest  panic. 
Lord  Hertford  told  me  that,  having  engaged  Lord 


1  Robert,  the  fourth  of  the  five  Dukes  who  had  a  lucky  escape  of  a  man  ad- 

of  Ancaster,  which  title  became  extinct  dieted  to  drinking  and  rioting.     For  a 

in   1804.    He  succeeded  his  father  in  description  of  the  tippling  Duchesses  of 

August,  1778,  and  died  of  scarlet  fever  Ancaster,  see  Walpole  to  Mann,  9  July, 

in   the   July  of  this  year,  1779,  aged  1779. — D. 

•-'.'.     He   was  to  have   married   Lady  *  Shot  by  Hackman,  in  April,  1779. 

Horatia  Waldegrave  (daughter  of  Wai-  —  D. 
pole's  niece,  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester), 


344  LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

Sandwich  to  dine  with  him  on  the  1 2th  with  the  Spanish 
Ambassador,  the  Earl  at  dinner-time  sent  him  word  that 
he  could  come  safely  to  dine  with  him  by  daylight,  but  as 
he  might  be  insulted  or  ill-used  in  the  evening  he  desired 
to  be  excused. 

The  rioters  then  proceeded  to  Lord  North's,  who  got 
out  on  the  top  of  his  house  ;  but  the  alarm  being  now  given, 
the  Guards  arrived  and  prevented  any  farther  mischief. 
Three  of  the  lower  rioters  were  taken  up  the  next  day. 

Soon  after  the  trial,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Roc-kin  ghanis, 
some  reflection  being  thrown  on  Lord  Mansfield,  the 
Marquis  said,  "  You  mistake  ;  Lord  Mansfield  has  always 
been  for  Keppel."  "  Perhaps  so,"  replied  Lord  Abingdon  ; 
"  but  Lord  Mansfield  has  always  been  against  the  Con- 
stitution." 

"  For  the  '  Public  Advertiser.' 

"  EPIGRAM. 

"  Too  long  had  Neptune  seen  with  deep  disdain 
Twitcher  usurp  his  empire  of  the  main  ; 
But  when  one  prong  was  from  the  trident  lost, 
Thro'  his  vile  tricks,  oif  Ushant's  trembling  coast, 
'  Now  (cried  the  god)  this  sceptre  suits  him  well : 
4  He  has  stol'n  our  brother  Pluto's,  King  of  Hell.' 

W.  MASON." 

12th.  Lord  Mulgrave,  much  abashed,  moved  to  alter 
the  law  relating  to  court-martials,  and  with  great  confusion 
declared  that  his  Majesty  had  been  .pleased  to  accept  of 
Sir  Hugh  Palliser's  resignation  as  Commissioner  of  the 
Admiralty.  Colonel  Barre  moved  the  House  to  thank 
Admiral  Keppel  for  his  services,  which  passed  with  the 
single  negative  of  Strut,  Member  for  Maiden,  for  which 
he  was  much  reviled. 

Sir  Philip  Jennings  Clarke  moved  for  the  bill  to  exclude 
contractors  from  seats  in  Parliament.  Alderman  Harley, 


1770.        FREEDOM  OF  THE  CITY  VOTED  TO  KEPPEL.  345 

one  of  them,  opposed  it  warmly  ;  but  the  motion  was  carried 
by  a  majority  of  15,  but  the  bill  was  afterwards  thrown 
out. 

The  City  of  London  voted  to  give  their  freedom  to 
Admiral  Keppel,  and  ordered  it  to  be  presented  to  him  in 
a  box  of  heart  of  oak. 

At  night  the  illuminations  were  repeated,  and  were 
universal ;  but  not  the  least  tumult  happened.  Lord 
Weymouth  and  Lord  Sandwich  had  indeed  been  so 
grievously  terrified  that  they  had  ordered  out  a  party  of 
four  hundred  of  the  Guards,  and  drove  to  the  Queen's 
house,  and  endeavoured  to  persuade  the  King  there  would 
be  an  insurrection,  and  advised  him  to  remove  to  Kew ; 
but  his  Majesty  laughed  at  their  fright,  and  countermanded 
the  Guards.  The  same  rejoicings  were  made  in  various 
parts  of  England,  and  in  some  the  effigy  of  Palliser  was 
burnt.  Still  was  the  Court  so  favourable  to  him,  that  he 
was  now  appointed  Steward  of  the  Chiltern  Hundreds  to 
vacate  his  seat  in  Parliament,  lest  a  motion  should  be  made 
and  carried  for  expelling  him  from  the  House  of  Commons. 
Thus  by  protecting,  or  at  least  by  not  daring  to  punish  so 
black  a  man,  Lord  Sandwich  warranted  suspicions  that  he 
had  suggested  Palliser's  treachery  off  Ushant,  which  saved 
the  navy  of  France,  and  was  privy  to  his  accusation  of  the 
Admiral.  As  Sir  Hugh's  accomplices  were  sheltered  too, 
nay,  and  Sandwich  himself,  whatever  guilt  fell  on  both, 
involved  the  Crown  too  that  supported  them. 

1 5th.  A  new  difficulty  was  thrown  in  the  way  of  the 
Court.  Temple  Luttrell  had  charged  the  Admiralty  in 
the  House  of  Commons  with  vast  embezzlement  of  money  ; 
but  as  little  regard  was  paid  to  him  by  either  Court  or 
Opposition,  he  printed  the  charge  in  the  public  papers,  and 
named  Lord  Sandwich  as  the  criminal.  This  too  passing 


346      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.       FER. 

unnoticed,  he  instigated  Lord  Radnor  to  complain  to  the 
Lords  of  the  printer  as  guilty  of  a  breach  of  privilege, 
Luttrell  having  promised  to  avow  the  paper  as  his  own, 
hoping  to  commit  the  two  Houses  in  a  quarrel.  In  vain 
Sandwich  declared  he  complained  of  no  insult,  in  vain  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  advised  the  House  not  to  meddle  with 
printers,  who  had  more  than  once  defied  their  dignity, — 
Lord  Radnor  persisted,  and  the  printer  was  ordered  to 
attend ;  though  Wilkes  declared  he  would  commit  their 
messenger,  if  he  attempted  to  seize  the  printer,  who  lived 
in  the  City.  The  printer  wrote  to  the  Chancellor  that 
Mr.  Temple  Luttrell  was  the  author ;  but  the  Ministers 
chose  to  swallow  the  affront  and  the  indignity,  and  took 
no  notice  of  Luttrell. 

Lord  Rockingham  moved  for  papers  relative  to  Keppel's 
trial.  The  Chancellor  said  it  was  customary  to  address 
the  King  for  such  papers.  Lord  Rockingham  replied  he 
was  very  unwilling  to  name  the  King  in  so  ignominious  a 
business.  "What!"  cried  Lord  Ravensworth,  "shall  we 
apply  to  the  King  for  the  papers  that  are  in  the  hands  of 
every  man  ?"  They  were  ordered.  It  is  remarkable  that 
on  four  or  five  subsequent  debates  the  Chancellor  had  the 
disgrace  of  being  foiled  by  raising  most  partial  and  as 
unprecedented  objections.  He  had  very  indiscreetly,  im- 
mediately after  receiving  the  Seals,  told  the  King  aloud 
at  the  levee,  that  the  House  of  Lords  did  not  understand 
debating,  but  he  would  teach  them  how.  Devoted  to 
violence,  and  totally  ignorant  of  the  forms  of  the  House, 
he  threw  off  all  decency,  combated  the  most  simple  and 
usual  rules,  and  though  his  quickness  supplied  him  with 
new  arguments,  he  was  as  constantly  foiled,  and  forced  to 
recede.  He  disgraced  his  judgment,  temper,  dignity  ;  but 
recommended  himself  to  the  King  and  his  party  in  propor- 
tion as  he  shocked  the  rest  of  mankind. 


1779.  MOTIONS  IN  THE  HOUSE  OP  COMMONS.  347 

The  Duke  of  Richmond  the  same  day  announced  his 
intention  of  inquiring  into  the  abuses  at  Greenwich,  of 
which  Lord  Sandwich  professed  himself  glad. 

Lord  Newhaven  in  the  Commons  moved  for  papers 
relating  to  Ireland.  General  Conway  wished  to  have  a 
day  appointed  for  taking  the  state  of  that  country  into 
consideration.  Lord  North  avoided  it  by  promising  some 
favour  to  Ireland.  Irresolute  as  usual,  he  changed  his 
mind  again ;  then  granted  some  indulgence  on  cambrics, 
for  which  he  was  burnt  in  effigy  at  Glasgow ;  then  was 
angry  at  Lord  Beauchamp  for  moving  that  England  should 
pay  3000  of  the  Irish  troops ;  then  adopted  that  measure 
himself — would  not  permit  Lord  Beauchamp  to  move  it, 
but  moved  it  himself. 

The  negociation  with  Lord  Rockingham  had  still  gone 
on  by  intervals,  and  sometimes  with  the  Duke  of  Grafton, 
and,  they  both  believed,  by  warrant  from  the  King ;  but  as 
the  Treasury  was  still  to  be  withheld,  the  treaty  broke  off, 
and  only  served  to  make  a  firmer  union  between  the  several 
factions  in  Opposition. 

16th.  Lord  Rockingham  moved  the  Lords  to  thank 
Admiral  Keppel  as  the  Commons  had  done. 

The  same  night  Admiral  Keppel  arrived  in  town  as 
privately  as  he  could,  and  towards  evening,  to  avoid  being 
received  in  triumph.  However,  the  town  was  again  illu- 
minated in  the  most  splendid  manner,  but  without  any 
rioting  or  disturbance,  though  with  great  indignation  of  the 
Courtiers. 

"AN  EPIGRAM 

"  ON  THE  LATE  REJOICINGS. 

"  Ye  courtly  heroes,  who  so  boldly  vote 
To  cut  America's  collective  throat, 
And  hope  to  tear  her  limb  from  limb  asunder, 
"With  J — hns — 's,  Ed— n's,  and  L — d  C — rl— e's  thunder; 


348  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

"  Your  threats  are  vain,  your  very  looks  are  fibs  ; 
Cowards,  ye  quake  at  crackers  and  at  squibs  ; 
Trembling,  lest  every  stone  the  rabble  darts 
Should  break  the  casement  of  your  guilty  hearts. 

SQUIBLERUS.     W.  M(ASO)N." 

ISth.  Wedderburn,  the  Attorney-General,  having  un- 
dertaken to  prosecute  the  three  rioters,  notice  was  taken  of 
it  in  the  House  of  Commons ;  and  Charles  Fox,  handsomely 
and  generously,  though  liable  to  be  reproached  with  having 
been  one  of  their  instigators,  pleaded  for  them ;  and  the 
Ministers  were  reproached  with  their  partial  cruelty,  when 
the  King  had  pardoned  the  two  Chairmen  though  actually 
convicted  of  having  committed  murder.  The  Court  was 
ashamed,  and  dropped  the  prosecution.  Admiral  Keppel 
appeared  in  the  House,  and  received  its  thanks  from  the 
Speaker  with  great  modesty.  Wilkes  then  made  his 
annual  motion  against  the  Middlesex  election,  and,  as 
usual,  without  any  effect.  After  the  debate  Lord  North 
asked  him  what  he  would  have  done  if  he  had  carried  the 
question? — he  replied,  he  had  more  motions  to  make.  Lord 
North  answered  with  an  indecent  sneer,  "Should  you  have 
expected  to  be  thanked  by  the  House  ?" 

IQth.  Admiral  Keppel  went  to  the  King's  levee,  who 
received  him  civilly,  but  took  not  the  least  notice  of  what 
had  passed  relative  to  him,  nor  showed  him  any  particular 
distinction. 

The  Duke  of  Eichmond,  in  the  absence  of  Lord  Bristol, 
who  had  intended  to  move  it,  and  who  was  confined  by  the 
gout,  moved  for  a  list  of  the  Royal  Navy  as  it  stood  in 
January  1771.  Lord  Sandwich  said  he  should  object  to 
no  motions  personal  to  himself,  nor  saw  any  harm  in  the 
question  proposed  ;  but  as  it  would  probably  be  followed 
by  others,  which  might  give  too  much  information  to  the 
enemy,  as  such  questions  had  done  the  last  year,  he  should 


1779.  THE  DUKE  OF  RICHMOND'S  MOTIONS.  349 

object  to  it.  The  Chancellor  demanded  sight  of  the  Duke's 
other  motions,  that  the  House  might  judge  of  the  propriety 
of  the  whole.  This  was  warmly  reprobated  by  Lord 
Cam  den,  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  and  others,  and  supported 
by  the  Ministers.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  asserted  his 
right  of  making  a  single  motion  separately,  as  he  had 
indubitably  a  right  to  do,  but  condescended  to  read  his 
other  intended  motions ;  and  told  the  Ministers,  that,  if 
they  put  negatives  on  them,  it  would  be  defeating  an 
inquiry  which  the  nation  now  demanded.  He  also  asked 
Lord  Sandwich  if  the  House  was  to  understand  that  Sir 
Hugh  Palliser  was  to  be  tried  by  a  court-martial,  for 
Lord  Sandwich  had  dropped  that  he  thought  none  of  the 
officers  to  blame  in  the  action  of  July  27th,  and  for  his 
part,  the  Duke  said,  he  knew  Admiral  Keppel  had  forgiven 
Palliser  and  had  no  thoughts  of  accusing  him.  Sandwich 
replied  that  the  Admiralty,  having  found  in  the  minutes  of 
the  court-martial  matter  to  criminate  Sir  Hugh,  had  given 
him  orders  to  prepare  for  his  trial.  This  being  a  direct 
contradiction  to  his  assertion  that  he  thought  none  of 
the  officers  to  blame,  he  was  severely  handled,  and  so 
abashed  that  he  suffered  the  Duke's  motions  to  pass 
without  a  negative,  at  which  the  Chancellor  was  very 
indignant. 

Charles  Fox  told  the  Commons  that  he  had  intended 
to  move  an  Address  to  the  King  to  remove  Sir  H. 
Palliser  from  all  his  employments,  but  had  that  morning 
heard  a  report  that  precluded  his  motion,  for  he  had  been 
told  that  Sir  Hugh  had  been  dismissed  or  removed  from 
all  his  employments,  and  desired  to  know  if  either  was 
true.  Lord  North  said  it  was  true  that  he  had  resigned 
his  seat  at  the  Admiralty,  his  government  of  Scarborough 
Castle,  and  his  Lieutenantship  of  the  Marines.  Fox 


350  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

broke  out  on  the  scandalous  tenderness  for  a  man  so 
criminal,  compared  with  the  ill-treatment  of  the  meri- 
torius  Keppel,  to  whom  the  Ministers  had  only  written 
coldly  to  hoist  his  flag  again.  He  said  he  did  not  want 
to  persecute  the  unhappy  man,  nor  saw  what  good  a  court- 
martial  could  do  him,  for  it  could  not  clear  him  from 
having  brought  a  malicious  and  unjust  charge  against 
Keppel,  which  disqualified  him  from  ever  serving  again 
as  Vice- Admiral,  and  therefore  he  had  a  mind  to  move  for 
taking  that  rank  from  him.  He  might  still  have  a  court- 
martial,  as  Lord  George  Germaine  had  had.  Morton 
said  the  sentence  calling  the  charge  malicious  was  extra- 
judicial.  Burke  warmly  vindicated  the  court-martial. 
Lord  Howe  and  Lord  Nugent  were  against  the  motion  on 
the  flag,  as  prejudging;  Conway  agreed  with  them,  though 
he  declared  he  thought  Palliser  unfit  to  remain  in  the 
fleet ;  Charles  Fox,  in  compliment  to  Conway,  abstained 
from  his  motion. 

20th.  The  City  went  in  solemn  procession  to  carry 
Admiral  Keppel  his  freedom,  and  carried  him  back  to 
dine  with  them  at  the  London  Tavern.  At  night  the 
City  was  again  illuminated,  which  spread  to  Westminster 
after  midnight,  when  the  mob  was  much  more  riotous  than 
the  preceding  nights,  and  far  more  windows  broken  ;  but 
it  was  believed  to  be  at  the  instigation  of  the  Court  to 
make  the  Opposition  sick  of  those  rejoicings,  for  many 
windows  of  the  Opposition  were  broken,  particularly 
Charles  Fox's.  In  these  tumults  Admiral  Keppel  excused 
himself  from  dining  with  the  West-India  merchants  (as 
he  had  been  invited  to  do),  that  he  might  give  no  occasion 
to  more  disturbances. 

22nd.  The  Court  received  news  of  the  capture  of  Saint 
Lucia  by  General  Grant,  with  the  late  embarkation  from 


1779.  NEWS  OF  THE  CAPTURE  OF  SAINT  LUCIA.  351 

New  York,  and  of  D'Estaing's  landing  to  attempt  to  recover 
it,  and  of  his  being  beaten  off.  At  the  same  time  came 
an  account  of  General  Campbell's  success  in  Georgia, 
where  he  had  met  with  little  or  no  resistance.  The  Court 
talked  in  the  highest  strain  on  these  advantages,  and 
affected  to  believe  that  Campbell  with  his  1500  men 
would  overrun  the  Carolinas,  where  they  said  they  had 
a  strong  party,  if  not  recover  all  America.  The  other 
blow  was  more  important,  and  took  off  much  uneasiness 
for  the  West  Indies.  A  prodigious  number  of  captures 
were  made  of  French  merchantmen,  but  by  privateers. 
D'Estaing  seemed  to  have  conducted  his  whole  expedition 
very  ill :  it  was  still  more  surprising  how  few  strokes, 
almost  none,  France  had  struck,  though  we  so  exposed 
in  all  quarters.  They  did  now  take  Senegal,  where  they 
found  but  four  of  our  people  left. 

24M.  Lord  North  opened  the  Budget,  and  gave  an 
account  of  the  difficulties  he  had  met  in  raising  the  money, 
the  contractors  having  insisted  on  great  premiums  for  their 
losses  last  year  by  his  not  letting  them  know  of  the  treaty 
between  France  and  America.  He  confessed  that  a  mil- 
lion more  was  still  wanting  than  he  could  obtain.  Charles 
Fox,  who  had  never  applied  to  finance,  nor  was  supposed 
to  understand  it  at  all,  entered  into  that  subject,  and  made 
as  great  a  figure  as  he  did  on  all  others,  and  exposed  Lord 
North  in  that  light  as  much  as  he  had  in  others.  Governor 
Johnston,  who  tried  to  act  a  trimming  part,  censured  the 
Ministers,  but  said  he  should  prefer  them  to  any  set  of 
men  who  would  relinquish  America ;  but  the  Ministers 
had  retained  him  by  agreeing  to  allow  him  his  appoint- 
ment as  Commissioner  to  the  following  June,  though  he 
had  done  nothing  there  but  hurt  to  them  and  his  own 
character,  and  had  been  at  home  ever  since  October. 


352  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

Such  incapable  and  unsuccessful  Ministers  could  not  have 
kept  their  places  had  they  not  found  numbers  of  such 
sordid  and  profligate  natures  as  Johnston's. 


LOOSE  PAPERS. 


Mar.  1st.  LORD  N.'s  taxes.     See  '  Public  Advertiser.' 

Account  of  peace  between  Emperor  and  Prussia. 

3rd.  Ch.  Fox's  motion  against  Lord  Sandwich.  Sat 
till  1.  207  to  170. 

Lord  Sandwich,  so  frightened,  begged  people  to  attend, 
as  his  life  and  reputation  in  danger.  Lord  North  took 
defence  of  Sandwich — said  they  were  one. 

6th.  Duke  of  Bolton  said,  everything  at  sea  but  our 
fleet. 

Lord  Camd.  on  Chanc. ;  seems  determined  to  go  to 
extremes — all,  nothing. 

Lord  Suffolk  died,  aged  39. 

8th.  Charles  Fox's  second  motion.  Adm.  Keppel  and 
Howe  declared  could  not  serve  with  this  Adm.  Sir  J. 
Lowther  spoke  against  the  motion  and  went  away.  Mi- 
nistry rallied,  were  246  to  174 ;  sat  till  past  12.  Sir  H. 

Mann  against,  said  as at  Vienna,  "  Where  your  vast 

fleet?" 

10^.  Debate  on  Dissenters. 

\\th.  Ditto  on  Contractors,  &c. 

12th.  Greenw.  and  Ireland. 

.  Account  of  taking  of  Pondicherry. 


1779.  LOOSE  PAPERS.  353  ' 

\7th.  Dissenters'  Bill. 

23rd.  Motion  of  Ch.  Fox.  Lord  G.  Germaine,  pre- 
suming on  better  prospects,  talked  almost  of  unconditional 
submission,  &c.  &c.  &c. 

Nov.  29th.  Tern.  Luttrell  said  in  the  House,  though  he 
approv.  freedom  of  debate,  should  in  future  be  guarded,  as 
heard  bravoes  and  murderers  about. 

30th.  Acct.  from  Dublin  that  a  merchant  had  entered 
wooln.  goods  for  exportn.  Custom-house  had  seized  them, 
and  he  sued  the  Custm.-hse. 

Dec.  1st.  Lord  Shelburne's  motion  for  censure  on 
neglect  of  Ireland.  Ld.  Gower  declared  against  Lord 
North. 

Debates  on  ditto  in  House  of  Commons. 

Meeting  in  City  to  swear  Wilkes  Chamberlain.  Mr. 
Chs.  Fox's  health  toasted,  with  reflections  on  Adam  and 
Martin. 

Nov.  29th.  Sir  C.  Hardy  in  the  House  said  he  had 
offered  the  French  battle  twice. 

Dec.  2nd.  Conversation  in  the  Commons  on  the  navy. 
Lord  Mulgrave  said  he  did  not  know  whether  we  should 
be  weaker  or  stronger  next  year.  Acct.  from  Ireland 
tbat  the  Castle  had  lost  a  question  for  new  taxes  by  123. 

3rd.  Land-tax.  Mr.  Hartley  said,  as  America  had  not 
mentioned  in  Speech,  hoped  money  given  would  be  applied 
to  it. 

Lord  North  said,  money  was  given  agt.  combination 
against  England,  which  included  France,  Spain,  and  Ame- 
rica. Hartley  replied,  the  resolution  in  Gibbon's  memo- 
rial of  never  owning  independence  proved  Lord  N.  had 
been  insincere  in  spring,,  when  he  had  encouraged  him 
co  negotiate  with  Dr.  Franklin  by  tacitly  allowing  the 
:ndependence;  and  he  pressed  Ld.  N.  with  having  about 

VOL.  n.  2   A 


351  LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

same  time  made  meanest  offers  to  France  to  separate 
them  from  America.  Ld.  N.  did  not  deny  the  first,  but 
said  he  had  not  looked  on  it  as  very  serious,  Mr.  Hartley 
having  no  commission  to  do  it  (yet  Dr.  Franklin  had  had 
power  from  Congress  to  offer  truce  for  ten  years  on  the 
uti  possidetis) .  Ld.  N.  positively  denied  the  second,  of 
mean  offers  to  France,  yet  should  have  thought  almost 
anything  right  to  separate  France  from  America.  Mr. 
Hartley  said  he  would  conclude  with  what  he  did  not 
desire  anybody  should  understand  but  Ld.  N.,  that  the 
latter  person  would  be  in  great  danger.  . 

5th.  Letters  from  Dubl.  that  Mr.  Gratton  had  persuaded 
the  merchant  Horand  to  drop  his  suit  agt.  the  Cust.-ho. 
officers  till  they  should  see  what  the  Eng.  Gov.  should  do 
for  them. 

6th.  Lord  Ossory  supported  motion  of  Lord  Shelburne 
on  criminal  neglect  of  Ireland.  Sir  J.  Wrotesley  to  change 
criminal  for  blamable.  Burke,  fine  speech.  Ld.  Advo- 
cte.  warm  against  Opposition.  Charles  Fox  very  fine; 
accuses  Ld.  Advocte.  of  inflaming  Amern.  war  by  warmth, 
says  Ld.  North  forced  to  bring  all  his  defenders  400 
miles,  glances  at  Rigby  for  trimming,  ridicules  Ld. 
Beauchamp  for  not  knowing  how  to  reconcile  his  Eng- 
lish and  Irish  characters.  McDonald  grossly  abuses  Ld. 
North,  and  calls  him  whimpering  and  whining,  shuffling 
and  cutting.  Ld.  North,  firm  answer.  Attorn.-Gen. 
very  hostile  to  Opposition.  Ch.  Fox  told  him  he  was 
in  the  right,  for  Opposition  would  certainly  not  receive 
him.  Questn.  rejected  by  192  to  100. 

7th.  Duke  of  Kichd's.  motion  for  advising  King  to 
retrench  Civil  List,  rejected.  Lord  Shelburne  said  Minis- 
ters should  not  complain  of  our  despondency,  for  it  was 
despondency  alone  that  kept  the  King  on  the  throne. 


I  7 7'. I.  LOOSE  PAPERS.  355 

Sth.  Array  in  House  of  Commons.  McDonald  recanted 
his  abuse  on  Ld.  North,  said  he  had  been  drunk.  Gen. 
Conway  said  he  disliked  party,  but  all  so  ill-conducted, 
everybody  ought  to  join  against  the  Ministry. 

9th.  Acct.  from  Ireland,  Prime  Serjeant  Hussey  Burgh 
resigned.  Lord  Shannon,  who  command,  two  bodies  of 
independents  of  500  and  700,  dispossessed  by  them  for 
voting  in  the  Court,  and  very  low  leaders  chosen  in  his 
room. 

Lord  North's  propositions  for  Ireland.  He  desired 
House  would  take  till  following  Monday  to  consider  them. 

lO^A.  Remonstrance  from  Middlesex  presented  to  the 
House  of  Commons.  Complaint  made  of  a  letter  of  the 
Duke  of  Chandos  on  Hampsh.  election. 

13th.  Lord  North's  propositions  for  Ireland  read  first 
time  and  voted,  nem.  con.  Mr.  Fox  said  he  would  not 
oppose,  lest,  if  rejected  in  Ireland,  it  should  be  said  it 
was  owing  to  the  Opposition  here. 

15th.  Motions  in  both  Houses:  vide  'London  Courant ' 
and  '  Public  Advertiser.'  Ld.  Shelb.,  fine  speech  on 
extravagance  of  Admn.  Governors  formerly  for  extras 
had  drawn  but  for  800/.  a  year,  now  for  96,000^.  Famous 
rum  contract  for  double  what  it  cost  Mr.  Atkinson. 
5000/.  given  as  present  to  Sir  Ths.  Mills  out  of  extras 
of  Gov.  of  Quebec.  A  new  place  created,  called  Taster 
of  Rum.  Duke  of  Richmd.  said,  one  govr.,  the  Govr.  of 
Jersey,  had  drawn  a  bill  for  extras  but  of  231. 

\7th.  City  votes  thanks  to  minority  Lords  for  re- 
commending economy.  Debates  in  both  Houses :  vide 
( Pub.  Ad.'  and  *  Lond.  Courant.'  Gen.  Conway  gave 
an  account  of  his  own  reforms  in  Ordnance ;  that  he 
might  have  been  General  of  it,  and  quitted  because  he 
could  not  serve  under  a  junior.  Had  written  many  press- 

2  A  2 


356  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

ing  letters  for  artillerymen ;  had  at  last  received  seven, 
but  had  himself  formed  there  a  regiment  of  600,  and  had 
kept  them  as  constantly  exercised  as  if  the  island  had  been 
actually  attacked. 

18^.  Account  of  Col.  Dalrymple  and  Capt.  Luttrell 
taking  the  fort  of  Omoa  from  the  Spaniards,  and  two 
register  ships  :  vide  '  Gazette.' 

20th.  Extra  'Gazette'  on  the  repulse  of  D'Estaing  at 
the  Savannah  in  Georgia.  Same  day,  conspirators  against 
Lord  Pigott  found  guilty  in  King's  Bench.  Irish  Bill 
passed  by  King,  and  Parliament  adjourned  for  holidays. 

24th.  Court  lost  Hampsh.  election ;  Sir  R.  Worseley 
giving  up  before  end  of  the  poll. 

Nine  East  India  ships  arrived. 

27th.  Arrived  two  votes  of  the  House  of  Comms.  of 
Ireland  expressing,  nem.  con.,  satisfaction  with  the  Act 
passed  here  for  their  free  trade,  and  gratitude  for  the 
friendly  disposition  of  England. 

The  principal  Irish  gentlemen,  even  those  in  Opposition, 
as  Mr.  Gratton,  certainly  took  so  warm  a  part  as  they 
did  for  England,  on  the  reception  of  the  Bill,  from  their 
having  been  in  danger  of  seeing  their  influence  and  popu- 
larity wrenched  out  of  their  hands  by  the  mob.  An 
attempt  had  even  been  made  at  Cork  to  divest  Lord 
Shannon  of  the  command  of  his  volunteer  regiment,  for 
having  voted  for  new  taxes.  There  was  much  abuse  in 
Irish  House  of  Commons,  on  Lord  Shelburne  for  having 
said  the  associations  were  illegal,  and  on  Ch.  Fox  for  say- 
ing he  would  take  no  part. 

It  was  now  fortunate  this  had  happened.  England  gave 
what  she  ought  to  have  given  sooner.  Ireland  did  not  ex- 
ult in  having  forced  it.  And  there  were  40,000  Protestants 
armed  against  France  or  arbitrary  power.  Ireland,  how- 


1779. 


LOOSE  PAPERS. 


357 


ever,  had  asked  what  could  not  relieve  her  immediate  dis- 
tresses, for  they  must  first  set  up  manufactures,  and  adv. 
capitals,  and  trade  could  not  flow  in  in  a  moment. 

Accounts  that  3000  back  settlers  in  Carolina  had  risen 
on  Prevost's  victory,1  seized  a  town,  and  declared  for  the 
King. 

30^.  Mutiny  at  York  of  independent  gentlemen 
(chiefly  stirred  up  by  Mr.  Mason)  for  petitioning  House 
of  Commons  to  give  no  more  taxes  till  reductions  of  ex- 
penses and  sinecure  places,  &c.,  which  gave  too  much  influ- 
ence to  the  Crown.  Lord  Buckingham  and  other  Lords  had 
no  hand  in  this,  but  would  go  down  to  it,  though  pains 
taken  to  stop  them :  however,  they  were  thanked  by  the 
meeting ;  and  a  Committee  was  appointed  to  correspond 
with  other  places,  and  then  adjourn  to  Easter,  but  Com- 
mittee was  to  continue  sitting. 


1  At  Briar's  Creek,  where  Prevost 
totally  defeated  the  American  General, 
Ashe,  in  March.  A  second  action, 


with  similar  result,  was  fought  at  the 
same  place  in  May,  1779. — D. 


(     358     )  JAN. 


1780. 


JANUARY. 


2nd.  ACCOUNT  from  Plymouth  that  Captain  Fielding  had 
brought  into  that  port  some  Dutch  merchantmen,  with  their 
convoy,  the  Dutch  Admiral,  and  two  more  men-of-war. 
The  town  of  Amsterdam,  devoted  to  France,  had  agreed 
to  supply  the  Brest  fleet  with  naval  stores,  particularly 
masts  and  timber,  without  which  it  was  said  that  fleet 
could  not  again  put  to  sea.  The  English  party  in  Holland 
represented  against  this  aid,  as  breach  of  treaty  with  us. 
The  Amsterdammers  persisted,  and  threatened  not  to  pay 
their  taxes  if  their  trade  was  restricted.  The  States  ac- 
quiesced, but  said  they  would  not  protect  that  illicit  trade 
if  they  took  advantage  of  a  convoy  that  was  going  out, 
which  the  Amsterdammers  resolved  to  do.  Sir  Joseph 
Yorke  advised  the  Administration  here  to  seize  the  store 
ships,  persuaded  that  the  Dutch  would  not  make  war  with 
us  if  we  did.  The  Ministers,  thinking  that  so  good  an 
opportunity  of  crippling  the  French  navy  made  it  worth 
while  to  risk  even  another  war,  ordered  Captain  Fielding, 
with  five  men-of-war  of  the  line  and  three  frigates,  to  exe- 
cute that  determination,  and  stationed  a  line  of  cutters 
from  the  Texel  to  Spithead  to  watch  the  motions  of  the 
Dutch.  The  first  cutter  ran  aground,  and  the  Dutch 
sailed  with  the  advance  of  four  hours ;  but  Fielding,  receiv- 
ing notice  from  the  second,  followed,  and  came  up  with 


1780.  CAPT.  FIELDING  ATTACKS  THE  DUTCH  STORE  SHIPS.    359 

them.  He  acquainted  the  Dutch  Admiral  that  he  must 
visit  the  merchantmen;  the  other  replied  he  could  not 
permit  it.  Fielding  sent  a  boat  to  board  and  examine ;  the 
Dutch  Admiral  fired,  but  over  the  boat,  designedly.  Fielding 
returned  the  hostility  and  civility  by  firing  over  the  Ad- 
miral's own  ship.  The  Admiral  gave  a  broadside  still  in 
the  air ;  Fielding  replied  in  the  same  style^  and  then  the 
Admiral  struck,  and  sent  a  message  hoping  he  had  done 
no  damage.  Fielding  said  none,  and  desired  he  would 
again  hoist  his  flag ;  but  he  refused,  and  insisted  on  sharing 
the  fate  of  the  ships  under  his  convoy,  only  desiring  that 
two  ships  necessarily  going  to  St.  Eustatia  might  proceed, 
which  was  allowed.  To  the  great  disappointment  of  the 
captors  and  Ministers,  no  stores  were  found  but  hemp  and 
iron.  There  was,  perhaps,  a  little  of  Lord  Sandwich's 
usual  love  of  cunning  and  surprise  in  this  affair. 

3rd.  A  petition  from  Hampshire  on  the  plan  of  that 
from  Yorkshire  was  voted  at  a  meeting  at  Winchester. 

7th.  A  like  vote  from  Middlesex,  requesting  that  no 
new  taxes  be  granted  till  the  grievances  complained  of  be 
redressed  and  Committee  appointed  to  correspond  with  that 
of  York. 

Lord  George  Gordon,  Chairman  of  the  Protestant  Com- 
mittee, presses  Lord  North  to  present  their  petition  for 
repeal  of  the  toleration  of  Popery.  Lord  North  refuses. 

The  Yorkshire  Committee  talked  of  redressing  them- 
selves if  their  grievances  were  not  redressed,  and  the 
appointment  of  a  Standing  Committee  was  establishing  a 
tribunal  over  the  Parliament. 

The  corruption  of  Parliament,1   the  arrogance  of  the 


1  It  was  a  sensible  question  of  a  Scot 
in  a  conversation  on  that  subject,  Which 


is  more  grievous,  the  corruption  of  Pur- 
lin incut  or  privilege  of  Parliament?    As 


360 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


JAN, 


Ministers,  who  had  frequently  rejected  motions  without 
deigning  an  answer,  with  the  fall  of  the  value  of  lands,  and 
the  disgraces  of  the  summer,  had  provoked  that  assumed 
authority  which  the  Archbishop  of  York,  in  a  pretty  tem- 
perate letter  which  he  wrote  to  his  Dean,  questioned  if 
legal.  Some  Tories  and  some  wealthy  clergymen  had 
joined  the  meeting.  But  the  country  gentlemen  had 
been  as  much  to  blame,  though  now  clamorous,  as  the 
Court.  They  had  remained  pleased  spectators,  and  con- 
nived at  least,  and  most  of  them  promoted,  all  the  violence 
against  America,  and  all  that  waste  of  blood  and  treasure, 
hoping  for  a  revenue  from  America  to  raise  the  land-tax. 
Thus,  selfish  interest  had  kept  them  silent  till  now,  and 
now  selfish  interest  dictated  their  complaints. 

The  Ministers,  on  the  other  hand,  found  how  vainly 
they  had  preached  up  unanimity.  The  King  began  to 
find  how  ill  he  had  been  advised  in  attempting  to  extend 
his  prerogative,  and  the  Lords  at  the  head  of  the  Opposi- 
tion, I  think,  will  find  that  by  half  measures,  and  by 
waiting  in  hopes  of  favour  with  the  King,  that  their  in- 
fluence will  be  wrenched  out  of  their  hands  by  lower  and 


an  instance  of  the  horrid  lengths  to 
wliich  party  will  carry  men,  this  in- 
decent and  shocking  ballad  was  printed 
in  the  newspapers,  on  so  melancholy  a 
subject  as  self-murder  : — 

"  For  the  '  London   Courant,'  March  25, 
1780. 

" A  MERRY  SONG  ABOUT  MURDER. 
"  There  was  once  a  very  great  fool, 

Who  fancied  all  subjects  were  slaves ; 
Who  endeavour'd  at  absolute  rule, 

By  the  help  of  a  parcel  of  knaves. 
Now  cutting  of  throats  was  his  Joy, 

And  making  red  rivers  of  Wood  ; 
A  fine  button  his  favourite  toy, 

Though  his  habits  were  not  very  good. 
Toroddle,  toroddle,  toroll. 

"  Swords,  hatchets,  and  knives  he  prepar'd 

To  slaughter  his  people  like  sheep : 
Man,  woman,  or  child  he  ne'er  spar'd, 
Which  made  even  savages  weep; 


Then  like  a  great  lubberly  calf, 
On  his  marrow-bones  down  he  did  fall : 

'  /  have  kill'd  of  my  people  but  half; 
Lord,  help  me  to  murder  them  all !' 

Toroddle,  Jcc. 

So  then  the  fool  fasted  and  pray'd, 

And  baa'd  like  an  innocent  lamb, 
Pursuing  the  while  his  old  trade, 

For  his  piety  was  but  a  sham  ; 
But  his  measures  so  bloody  were  grown, 

That  some  of  his  time-serving  elves, 
For  their  share  in  his  crimes  to  atone, 

Did  cut  their  own  throats  of  themselves. 
Toroddle,  &c. 

'  The  first  was  a  lawyer  from  Forfc, 
Cajol'd  by  his  coaxing  and  art ; 
But  who,  rather  than  do  dirty  work, 

Chose  out  of  the  world  to  depart. 
Next  C — e,  and  eke  Bradshaw  the  bold, 

Last  Stanley,  with  cynical  grin, 
Show'd  the  folly  of  treasuring  gold, 
When  the  heart  has  no  treasure  within. 
Toroddle,  etc." 


17s«).        RESULT  OF  THE  KING'S  BREACH  OF  PROMISE.        361 

more  popular  demagogues,  who  will  govern  the  Committees 
in  the  counties,  and  who  will  be  disappointed  if  their  Par- 
liamentary leaders  attain  the  Administration,  and  do  not 
satisfy  them,  which  will  be  impossible. 

The  King  has  found  that  his  breach  of  promise  to  Ire- 
land, in  not  keeping  up  a  stated  number  of  troops  there, 
but  sending  most  of  them  to  America,  has  produced  the 
raising  the  voluntary  independent  army  of  above  40,000 
men ;  but  ambition  will  never  learn  that  "  Honesty  is  the 
best  policy." 

Sir  Robert  Walpole's  maxim  was,  "  Quieta  non  movere" 
How  wise,  when  applied  to  the  Stamp  Act  and  to  all  the 
unconstitutional  attempts  in  the  present  reign  ! 

The  obstinate  and  contemptuous  manner  in  which  the 
King  had  sent  the  Duke  of  Richmond  with  his  regiment 
to  Exeter,  the  last  summer,  had  probably  contributed  to 
the  Duke's  personality  to  the  King  this  winter. 

Sussex,  Hertfordshire,  Cheshire,  Devonshire,  and  even 
Lord  Sandwich's  favoured  Huntingdonshire,  voted  to  hold 
meetings  in  the  manner  of  Yorkshire.  Devonshire  even 
voted  a  fund  for  buying  arms.  General  Hall,  in  Yorkshire, 
wrote  to  Mr.  Mason,  advising  a  like  preparation  of  arms. 
Mason  happened  to  be  Chairman  that  day,  and  wisely  took 
on  him  to  suppress  the  letter,  and  wrote  to  the  General  to 
remonstrate  against  such  steps.  Then  Essex,  Bedfordshire, 
Dorsetshire,  Somersetshire,  and  Brecknockshire  summoned 
like  meetings.  In  some  the  Sheriff  refused.  In  Cheshire, 
William  Talmache  made  such  a  violent  speech  that  it  had 
near  lost  the  petition,  in  which  only  Tories  joined  and  no 
Whigs.  In  Hertfordshire  Lord  Cranbourne  spoke  against 
and  was  hissed,  which  the  opposite  side  lamented  and  apo- 
logised for.  Lord  Sandwich  himself  made  an  opposition 
at  Huntingdon  to  the  petitions,  but  it  was  carried  by  him. 


362 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


JAN. 


1 9th.  Four  new  raised  regiments  sent  abroad,  supposed 
to  the  West  Indies,  and  more  ordered. 

13th.  Hans  Stanley  killed  himself  at  Althorpe.  He 
was  Cofferer,  and  had  been  unprecedentedly  made  Governor 
of  the  Isle  of  Wight  for  life  ;  but  he  was  deep  in  the  secrets 
of  the  peace  of  Paris. 

22nd.  Account  of  Sir  George  Rodney  having  taken 
a  69-gun  Spanish  man-of-war,  and  eighteen  transports, 
with  cordage,  &c.2  Admiral  Parker  had  lately  taken 
eleven  French  transports  in  America. 

29th.  House  of  Commons  met.  Lord  North  presented 
another  bill  for  Ireland.  Lord  George  Gordon  declared 
the  Irish  not  satisfied,  and  would  not  be  unless  he  declared 
the  Tory  Act  was  rescinded  ;  Lord  Denham,  that  they  were : 
vide  'Public  Advertiser'  of  25th. 

Protest  of  Lord  Cranbourne,  Duke  of  Marlborough,  &c., 
against  Hertfordshire  meeting  printed  in  papers. 

This  Lord  George  Gordon  was  a  madman,  as  many  of 
his  family  had  been,  and  an  enthusiast.  He  had  set  him- 
self at  the  head  of  the  Scottish  bigoted  Presbyterians, 
against  the  repeal  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Bills,  and  they 
had  set  up  another  association  in  London.  He  now  inter- 
fered in  the  affairs  of  Ireland,  and  made  this  most  dangerous 
motion,  which  all  men  in  their  senses — at  least,  all  honest 
men — wished  at  this  time  not  to  have  brought  in  question, 
as  was  plain,  for  no  other  man  ventured  to  second  or  to 
oppose  it.  On  the  27th  he  had  an  audience  of  the  King, 
and  immediately  began  reading  his  Irish  pamphlet,  which 
he  had  persisted  in  reading  to  the  House  of  Commons. 


2  On  the  8th  of  January,  off  Finis- 
terre,  Rodney  effected  hix  grand  cap- 
ture of  the  fleet  of  Spanish  merchant- 
men, bound  from  St.  Sebastian  to  Cadiz  ; 
and  on  the  16th  of  the  panic  month  he 


encountered,  defeated,  and  captured  or 
destroyed  the  fleet  of  men-of-war  under 
UK-  ^allaiif,  Don  Juan  do  Longnni,  oti 
Cape  St.  Vincent.—  D. 


1780.  LORD  G.  GORDON  AND  THE  KING.  303 

The  King  heard  it  for  an  hour,  till  it  was  dusk,  and  then 
said  he  would  read  the  rest.  Lord  George  said  he  would 
leave  it  if  his  Majesty  would  promise  upon  his  honour  to 
finish  it;  he  said  he  would.  "Yes,  Sir,"  said  he,  "but 
you  must  give  me  your  honour,"  which  the  King  did. 

27th.  The  Marquis  of  Caermarthen  then  resigned  his 
key  of  Chamberlain  to  the  Queen.  He  had  written  to  the 
Committee  at  York  that  he  approved  of  their  meeting. 
He  was  a  light,  variable  young  man,  of  very  moderate  parts, 
and  less  principle. 

Lord  Spencer  had  procured  a  meeting  in  Northampton- 
shire, where  it  was  thought  he  had  the  greatest  influence ; 
but  one  Kerr,  a  Scotch  surgeon,  who,  though  used  by  him, 
had  always  opposed  his  interest  at  Northampton,  spoke 
violently  against  the  petition,  and  carried  the  assembly 
with  him,  who  only  agreed  to  give  instructions  to  their 
Members. 

Lord  Beauchamp  made  Cofferer,  and  Sir  R.  Worseley 
Governor  of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  in  the  room  of  Hans 
Stanley. 


364 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


FEBRUARY. 

2nd.  MEETING  for  a  petition  in  Westminster  Hall.  The 
Court  party  dispersed  handbills  to  represent  the  dearness 
of  coals,  and  then  incited  the  people  against  the  Duke  of 
Richmond  as  enriched  by  the  coal-tax.  About  3000 
persons  met,  headed  by  the  Duke  of  Portland,  the  Caven- 
dishes, Charles  Fox,  R.  Fitzpatrick,  Wilkes,  Sawbridge, 
Lord  Temple,  and  the  Grenvilles,  &c. ;  General  Burgoyne, 
Burke,  Townshends,  &c.  Charles  Fox  was  placed  in  the 
chair ;  Sawbridge  moved  for  the  petition,  and  was  seconded 
by  Wilkes,  and  a  petition  similar  to  that  of  York  voted,  and 
a  Committee  of  103  Lords  and  others  chosen.  Charles 
Fox  then  made  a  fine  warm  speech,  and  was  particularly 
severe  on  Lord  North  and  the  Duke  of  Northumberland. 
Dr.  Jebb  proposed  Mr.  Fox  for  future  candidate  for  West- 
minster, which  was  received  with  universal  applause.  Lord 
John  Cavendish  and  Charles  Turner  likewise  spoke. 

It  was  curious  to  see  Charles  Fox,  lately  so  unpopular 
a  character,  become  the  idol  of  the  people.  His  family 
were  still  in  possession  of  200,000?.  of  public  money,  his 
father's  accounts  not  being  yet  passed.1  *  * 
It  was  not  less  curious  to  see  Lord  Cavendish  acting  so 
cordially  with  Wilkes,  whom  formerly  he  had  been  too 
nice  to  support.  He  was  also  in  correspondence  with 
Rigby,  who  had  always  ridiculed  him ;  but  Lord  John's 
pride  and  resentments  had  at  last  got  the  better  of  all  his 
delicacy.  Lord  Temple,  who  petitioned  for  the  abolition 


1  Lord  Holland,  in  a  note  to  Lord 
John  Russell's  Memorials,  &e.,  of  Fox 
(vol.  i.  p.  241),  says  that  delay  in  pass- 
ing public  accounts  was  not  the  fault 


of  the  Accountant  or  his  representatives, 
but  of  the  system  in  use,  or  of  the 
public  offices  and  Treasury. — D. 


1780.    DISGRACEFUL  CONDUCT  OF  GENERAL  BURGOYNE.    365 

of  places,  was  at  this  moment  one  of  the  tellers ;  but  he 
was  enraged  at  his  brother  having  been  just  refused  a 
commission  in  the  Guards. /General  Burgoyne,  who  had 
been  so  desirous  of  becoming  the  Court's  instrument  in 
enslaving  America,  was  now  a  clamourer  against  grievances. 
Such  patriots  disgraced  the  cause  of  liberty,  and  were  little 
preferable  to  the  Ministers.  Lord  Gower,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  gone  to  Bath,  uncertain  what  part  to  take.  He 
had  left  his  proxy  with  the  Chancellor,  but  his  son  attended 
the  meeting  in  Westminster  Hall. 

The  same  day  the  Committee  of  privileges  reported  that 
the  Duke  of  Chandos  had  been  proved  guilty  of  a  breach 
of  privilege  in  interfering  in  the  Hampshire  election ;  but 
Lord  Nugent  moved  for  postponing  the  consideration  of 
the  report  for  four  months,  which,  after  a  debate,  was  car- 
ried by  87  to  30.  The  Opposition  had  rejected  a  motion 
against  the  Duke  of  Bolton  on  the  same  grounds. 

Byng  moved,  and  it  was  ordered,  that  no  Member  should 
presume  to  go  out  of  town  without  leave. 

At  a  meeting  at  Carlisle  a  much  more  moderate  petition 
than  the  rest  was  voted. 

7.th.  The  Duke  of  Chandos,  disappointed  of  the  Govern- 
ment of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  which,  on  Stanley's  death,  was 
given  to.  Sir  Richard  Worseley,  resigned  his  command  of 
the  Hampshire  militia  and  his  Lord-Lieutenancy  of  the 
county.2 

Stk.  John  Wesley,  the  Methodist,  prints  a  letter  in  the  , 
*  London  Chronicle'  against  the  toleration  of  Popery. 

Mr.  Smelt  used  to  dine  three  times  a  week  with  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  but  the  Prince,  being  told  of  his  speech 
at  York,  by  Colonel  Hotham,  did  not  speak  to  him,  nor 
let  him  dine  with  him  any  more. 

7  It  waa  said  that  the  King  solicited  the  Duke  of  Chandoa  to  resume  his  Liuu- 
t*-ii:mry,  uii'l  that  he  consented. 


306  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

Sth.  Lord  Shelburne's  motion  announced  before  Christ- 
mas for  a  Committee  of  both  Houses,  consisting  of  either 
placemen  or  pensioners,  for  inquiring  into  expenditure  of 
public  money.  The  House  sat  till  just  one,  but  not  a  fine 
debate.  Lord  Caermarthen  spoke  with  applause,  and  with 
indignity  of  being  turned  out  of  the  Lieutenancy  of  the 
Riding  of  Yorkshire  that  morning.  Many  Lords  were 
offended  at  the  affront  of  omitting  placemen.  The  Oppo- 
sition had  not  yet  been  so  strong  there,  for  they  amounted 
to  55 ;  but  the  motion  was  rejected  by  181. 

The  same  day  Sir  George  Saville  presented  the  York- 
shire petition  with  great  warmth,  advised  Lord  North  to 
use  no  tricks,  and  threw  out  many  threats  of  the  resent- 
ment of  the  petitioners.  Lord  North  turned  the  argument 
artfully,  and  said  he  found  the  Parliament  was  to  be  threat- 
ened, and  not  allowed  even  to  inquire  whether  there  were 
abuses  or  not. 

Charles  Fox  finely  and  wisely  explained  away  Sir 
George  Saville's  violence,  and  used  an  allusion  much  ad- 
mired to  the  wisdom  of  Solomon.  The  ruin  of  the 
nation  had  been  laid  to  the  Opposition,  but  now  would  be 
seen  who  was  the  real  mother  of  the  child.  The  petition 
ordered  to  lie  on  the  table. 

9th..  Lord  Pembroke  resigned  his  place  in  the  King's 
Bedchamber. 

"  For  the  'Public  Advertiser,'  February  10^,  1780. 
"  Ox  ST.  STEPHEN'S  CHAPEL. 

"  To  Stephen  sacred  was  this  House  of  yore, 
'And  still  its  inmates  the  same  Saint  adore ; 
By  throwing  dirt  his  festival  they  keep, 
And  pelted  North,  like  Stephen,  falls  asleep." 

10th.  The  King's  Bench  fined  Stratton  and  three  more, 
who  had  been  convicted  of  arresting  and  imprisoning  Lord 


1780.  BURKE'S  GREAT  SPEECH.  307 

Pigott,  only  1000^.  apiece,  and  to  be  imprisoned  till  they 
should  pay  it,  which  they  did  in  Court. 

The  provocation  was  much  aggravated  by  the  Duke  of 
Portland  and  two  or  three  other  Lords  giving  the  informa- 
tion against  a  Member  of  their  own  House  to  a  Committee 
at  a  tavern. 

The  Ministers  were  so  far  from  daring  to  take  notice  of 
this  outrage  in  the  House  of  Lords,  that,  on  the  Opposition 
complaining  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  14th  of 
Lord  Hillsborough's  speech,  Lord  Fairford,  his  son,  rose  and 
denied  the  words  imputed  to  his  father. 

13th.  Mr.  Edmund  Burke  made  his  great  speech,  in 
which  he  opened  his  plan  for  the  alteration  of  the  Crown's 
revenue  and  influence.  It  lasted  three  hours  and  eighteen 
minutes,  and  was  temperate,  moderate,  sprinkled  with  wit 
and  humour,  and  had  such  an  universal  effect  on  the  whole 
House,  that  it  was  thought  he  could  that  day  have  carried 
any  point  he  had  proposed.  Lord  North  himself  com- 
mended him  highly,  and  agreed  to  letting  the  Bill  be  brought 
in.  The  mad  Lord  George  Gordon  singly  opposed  it,  and 
singly  divided  against  the  whole  House. 

\'2th.  Accounts  from  different  quarters  of  Admiral 
Ilodney  having  taken  five  Spanish  men-of-war,  two  of 
which  had  suffered  so  much  that  Rodney's  own  sailors  had 
been  forced  to  navigate  them  into  Cadiz.  The  Spanish 
Admiral  was  said  to  have  blown  up. 

14th.  More  petitions  presented.  Sir  George  Saville 
declared  he  should  go  further  than  Mr.  Burke,  and  move 
for  leave  to  bring  in  a  bill  to  take  away  several  sinecure 
places  and  pensions ;  Colonel  Barre,  that  he  should  move 
for  a  Committee  of  Accounts,  to  facilitate  the  method  of 
accounting  for  the  expenditure  of  public  money.  Lord 
North  said  he  would  assist  in  it,  but  impossible  during  war 


368  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

to  refuse  issuing  money  or  to  bring  it  to  account  imme- 
diately. He  still  insisted  that  the  petitions  no  more  than 
the  protests  spoke  the  sense  of  counties,  only  of  individuals. 
Charles  Fox  congratulated  Lord  North,  ironically,  on  his 
being  grown  so  moderate,  and  was  very  severe  on  Lord 
Hillsborough.  Lord  Mulgrave  very  warm  against  the 
petitions,  and  threatened  the  Opposition  if  they  should 
go  beyond  the  law.  J.  Townshend  bitter  against  Lord 

Hillsborough.    Colonel as  violent  against  the  Duke  of 

Richmond,  particularly  for  surveying  the  ground  in  Sussex 
and  for  what  the  Due  de  Aiguillon  had  said  to  him. 
The  Duke,  was  defended  by  General  Conway  and  Charles 
Fox,  who  laughed  at  Onslow's  being  alarmed  at  one  of  the 
King's  Generals  surveying  the  coast.  Burke  then  moved 
for  leave  to  bring  in  his  bills,  excepting  the  Duchy  of 
Cornwall,  to  which  the  Prince  of  Wales,  being  a  minor, 
could  not  give  his  consent. 

\5th.  Lord  Effingham  moved  to  petition  the  King  to 
pardon  Parker,  the  printer.  Lord  Abingdon  very  severe 
on  Lord  Mansfield,  comparing  the  severity  to  Parker  with 
the  gentle  fine  on  Stratton,  &c. ;  but  Lord  Mansfield  per- 
suaded the  House  to  reject  the  petition. 

Sir  George  Saville  moved  for  a  list  of  patent  places 
granted  by  the  Crown,  and  pensions.  Cornwall  objected 
to  the  latter,  as  many  were  granted  to  women,  but  he 
was  overruled.  Lord  North  gave  the  King's  consent  to 
their  meddling  with  his  domain.  Dunning  said  it  was 
unparliamentary,  but  the  House  might  do  it  with  his 
consent.  Speaker  taken  ill. 

Lord  Pembroke  was  removed  from  the  Lieutenancy  of 
Wiltshire,  which  was  given  to  Lord  Ailesbury. 

That  of  Sussex,  held  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  was 
offered  to  the  Earl  of  Ashburnham,  Lord  Pelham,  and 


1780.       LORD  NORTH  DEFEATED  AT  THE  INDIA  HOUSE.      369 

Lord  Montacute,  who  all  declined  it ;  and  as  no  Lord  in 
the  county  would  accept  it,  the  King  was  forced  to  leave 
it  to  the  Duke.  There  was  exceeding  weakness  in  this 
conduct.  Some  Lords  Lieutenants  had  been  removed 
early  in  the  reign,  others,  though  in  Opposition,  as  the 
Duke  had  still  been,  permitted  to  keep  them.  Not  two 
months  before  this  the  King  had  said  he  could  forgive  even 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  and  now  provoked  him  anew, 
ineffectually,  and  dishonoured  himself  by  not  succeeding. 
It  was  very  unwise  too  to  attempt  this  in  a  place  without 
profit.  The  three  Lords  would  not  incur  unpopularity  for 
a  place  that  brought  in  no  emoluments. 

\7th.  Lord  North  was  beaten  at  the  India  House. 
The  proprietors,  by  a  majority  of  33,  rejected  the  bargain 
that  the  Directors  had  agreed  to  make  with  the  Treasury. 

The  King  promised  to  send  the  list  of  patent  places,  but 
determined  not  to  give  that  of  pensions.  This  showed  that 
the  true  commission  was  effected  by  pensions.  Patent 
places  make  men  independent,  not  dependent,  consequently 
the  King  did  not  care  if  they  were  taken  away ;  besides, 
if  abolished,  the  salaries  would  fall  to  the  King  and  aug- 
ment his  powers  of  corruption. 

Accounts  from  Ireland  that  they  were  determined  to  go 
further.  Lord  Carysfort  had  moved  for  a  Mutiny  Bill 
that  would  take  the  army  out  of  the  King's  hands,  and 
they  talked  of  not  giving  supplies  unless  certain  laws  were 
repealed.  It  was  said,  I  don't  know  how  truly,  that  some 
Presbyterians  had  risen  on  Lord  Hertford's  estate  against 
the  Catholics.  It  is  certain  that  in  the  northern  parts 
many  of  the  Cromwellian  stamp  remained  among  the  Dis- 
senters, who  had  all  along  favoured  the  Americans.  Lord 
Shelburne,  I  believe,  much  fomented  the  heats  in  Ireland, 
and  was  much  dissatisfied  with  Burke's  plan ;  and  Barr£ 

VOL.  II.  2    B 


370  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

openly  agreed  with  Sir  George  Saville,  who  went  much  farther 
than  Burke.  Lord  Buckingham  certainly  disliked  the 
Associations,  which  he  had  not  been  able  to  form.  He 
had  sent  down  another  petition  which  they  had  rejected. 
Mr.  Wyenill,  an  opulent  clergyman,  and  Mr.  Mason,  the 
poet,  had  been  the  chief  promoters  of  the  petition,  and  were 
not  at  all  disposed  to  be  governed  by  Lord  Buckingham. 
In  the  mean  time  the  Court  meditated  a  dissolution  of  Par- 
liament; and  one  reason  was,  the  Tories  were  afraid  of 
losing  their  popularity  and  elections  if  they  rejected  the 
popular  questions.  This  appeared  on 

The  21st.  Memorable  day.  It  began  in  the  House  of 
Commons  by  the  Member  for  Nottingham  offering  the 
protests  of  the  six  junior  members  of  the  corporation.  It 
could  not  be  received  as  containing  no  prayer.  The  Op- 
position were  warm  against  it  and  called  it  libellous,  which 
Lord  North  answered  justly,  for  surely  some  were  as  free 
to  dissent  from  as  others  to  assent  to  the  petitions.  Wed- 
derburn,  who  defended  the  protesters,  was  severely  handled 
for  having  formerly  dipped  in  remonstrances.  Then  came 
on  Sir  George  Saville's  motion  for  list  of  pensions,  which 
Lord  North  proposed  to  restrain  to  those  paid  at  the 
Exchequer,  and  by  the  paymaster  of  the  pensions.  The 
debate  grew  very  warm,  and  Lord  North  was  defended 
alone  by  the  Lord-Advocate  and  \Vedderburn,  the  latter 
of  whom  made  an  extraordinarily  shining  speech.  Colonel 
Barre  was  very  personal  to  the  Scots,  as  Lord  North's  only 
supporters.  The  Lord  Advocate  asked  him  if  it  was  not 
as  honourable  to  be  the  King's  pensioner  as  Lord  Shelburne's, 
as  Barre  notoriously  was  f  Wedderburn  told  him  he 
could  do  nothing  but  abuse  the  Scots.  Barre  replied  it 
was  false,  it  was  false.  The  Speaker  interposed,  but  had 
much  difficulty  to  pacify  Wedderburn,  who  was  at  last 


1780.  THE  CONTRACTORS'  BILL  UNOPPOSED.  371 

satisfied  by  Barre's  declaring  he  meant  nothing  personal. 
At  one  in  the  morning,  many  Tories  having  absented 
themselves,  Lord  North's  amendments  were  carried  by  a 
majority  of  only  two  votes,  188  to  186,  which  was  equal 
to  a  defeat. 

24th.  The  Contractors'  Bill  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
As  it  had  been  thrown  out  with  great  difficulty  the  last 
year,  it  was  likely  to  pass  now;  therefore  Lord  North 
declared  he  would  not  oppose  it  in  that  stage.  This  was 
avowing  weakness.  The  Court  were  hoping  the  Tories 
would  return  on  any  attack  on  the  Crown.  The  Opposi- 
tion thence  saw  it  was  best  to  attempt  only  popular  ques- 
tions, and  not  too  offensive. 

Lord  Hertford  came  to  me  twice  and  consulted  me  and 
his  brother  what  the  King  could  do.  We  both  advised 
that  there  should  be  a  total  change  directly,  which  alone 
might  prevent  civil  war.  He  said  the  King  must  ask  them 
first  if  they  meant  to  reduce  prerogative.  I  said,  "  I  should, 
my  Lord ;  he  must  enter  into  no  definitions ;  if  asked,  they 
must  say  yes  to  what  in  their  hearts  they  would  say  no. 
Let  him  talk  of  economy,  which  is  an  unlimited  term. 
The  error  of  this  reign  has  been  to  haul  into  dispute  unde- 
fined questions.  Everybody  knew  it,  right  government 
should  possess  a  power  of  general  warrants  ;  but  when 
brought  into  question  was  found  to  condemn  them,  for 
then  the  power  ceased  to  be  undefined."  (?)  He  wished  we 
could  find  some  middle  way ;  we  told  him  there  was  no 
third  party.  He  must  try  to  defend  his  Administration 
by  force  or  take  the  Opposition,  and  that  his  Ministers 
would  not  dare  to  be  defended.  He  would  expose  to  public 
resentment  any  one  he  tried  to  save. 

24th.  Mr.  Wyvil  had  got  chosen  of  the  Essex  Com- 
mittee; he  at  first  intended  to  tack  a  test  for  candi- 

2  B  2 


372  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

dates  to  the  petitions.  He  now  got  a  resolution  to  summon 
a  congress  of  each  chairman  and  two  members  of  each 
committee.  Lord  Roch,  Lord  John,  and  Burke  and  Lee 
meet  again.  This  and  the  last  said  it  was  illegal.  The 
Cavendishes  had  kept  a  petition  out  of  Derbyshire.  Lord 
Frederick  Cavendish  had  not  signed  the  Westminster 
petition,  as  too  strong  for  an  officer,  which  shows  the  army 
too  much  attached  to  the  Crown. 

The  Middlesex  Committee  at  first  thanked  only  Sir 
George  Saville,  but  afterwards  Burke  too. 

The  Courtiers  thought  the  King  determined  to  resist ;  he 
had  more  resources  than  Charles  I.,  had  an  army,  and  reli- 
gion was  not  in  question.  He  gave  striking  proof  of  his 
intentions  now  by  giving  a  regiment  to  Adam,  who  fought 
Charles  Fox.  His  dismissing  some  Lords  Lieutenants  was 
thought  to  be  with  the  same  view ;  but  at  last  little  Court 
quarrels  concurred.  Lord  Caermarthen  had  been  paying 
court  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  arid  Lord  Pembroke  had  been 
forgiven  before. 

Lord  Shelburne,  who  was  frequently  tampered  with  by 
the  Chancellor,  told  him  before  Christmas,  that  if  the 
King  meant  to  take  the  Opposition  he  must  do  it  then,  for 
if  the  Committee  got  head  it  would  then  be  too  late.  This 
was  good  advice.  What  makes  our  Constitution  preferable 
to  any  other  is  its  being  constituted  of  three  powers,  King, 
Lords,  and  Commons.  The  wisest  way  would  be,  if  the 
two  others  would  always  join  against  the  third,  that  should 
be  most  predominant,  to  keep  the  balance  even.  In  the 
last  reign  the  aristocracy  preponderated;  in  this  till  now, 
the  Crown  ;  now  the  people. 

The  Crown  had  designedly  disgraced  Parliament  to 
render  it  its  own  instrument,  but  it  had  taught  the  people 
to  lose  reverence  for  Parliament ;  and  now  the  Committees 


1780.  ACCOUNT  OF  SIR  G.  RODNEY'S  VICTORY.  '  373 

created  themselves  into  tribunals  over  Parliament,  to 
whom  the  people  might  appeal  against  Parliament  itself. 

28th.  Sir  George  Rodney's  account  of  his  victory  arrived . 
It  appeared  that  he  had  taken  five  Spanish  ships  of  the 
Admiral,  and  destroyed  three,  and  relieved  Gibraltar.  The 
guns  were  fired. 

29th.  Lord  North  moved  to  thank  Sir  George.  Motion 
for  the  expenses  of  the  army  to  be  printed.  Lord  North 
opposed,  but  was  forced  to  give  it  up  disgracefully.  Burke 
asked  if  he  meant  to  try  to  put  off  the  second  reading  of 
his  Bill  on  the  2nd,  as  had  been  given  out.  Lord  North 
said  no,  but  it  would  demand  discussion  and  inquiry. 
Rigby  affected  to  talk  as  independent. 

Meeting  for  a  petition  summoned  in  Northumberland, 
as  one  had  been  carried  almost  universally  in  Buckingham- 
shire. Lord  Temple  declared  himself  ready  to  give  up  his 
Teller's  place  if  there  were  a  general  reform  ;  yet  he  had 
not  wished  the  meeting,  and  had  professed  not  promoting 
it,  but  the  word  economy  had  now  captivated  almost  the 
whole  nation. 

Lord  Hertford,  alarmed  at  what  his  brother  and  I  had 
said  to  him,  told  me  he  had  declared  to  the  King  that  he 
must  send  for  the  Opposition,  not  a  moment  was  to  be  lost ; 
and  for  himself,  he  could  not  have  anything  more  to  do 
with  the  present  measures.  I  applauded  and  told  him 
nothing  but  the  King's  giving  up  his  Ministers  would  pre- 
vent the  greatest  mischief. 

Mr.  Charles  Fox  and  Mr.  Wyvil  almost  quarrelled  on 
the  latter  insisting  that  no  Members  of  Parliament  should 
be  on  the  deputation  of  the  Committees  of  petitions.  At 
last  it  was  compromised  that  it  should  not  be  specified  as  a 
condition,  but  that  none  should  be  sent. 


374  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 


MARCH. 


.  MR.  BURKE'S  Bill — second  reading.  Lord  North  pro- 
posed a  Commission  of  Accounts,  of  which  no  Members 
of  either  House  should  be.  This  was  not  handsome  to 
Colonel  Barre,  who  had  moved  it.  The  Ministers  had 
wished  to  defer  committing  the  Bill  for  three  weeks,  but 
did  not  dare  to  venture  it.  However,  on  Burke's  moving 
for  committing  the  Bill  for  next  day,  they  proposed  to  defer 
it  for  a  week,  and  carried  it  by  230  to  195. 

Very  unfavourable  accounts  from  Ireland.  The  Par- 
liament had  adjourned  to  consult  the  country  at  the  ses- 
sions ;  the  army  violent  for  abolishing  Poyning's  Law  and 
Declar.  Act  of  Geo.  I. ;  Lord  Buckingham  indolent  or 
paying  court  to  Ireland ;  Sir  Richard  Heron  the  seer  very 
insufficient. 

4th.  A  meeting  having  been  summoned  at  Maidstone, 
in  Kent,  and  a  petition  proposed  by  Lord  Mahon,  the 
Duke  of  Dorset  made  a  strong  opposition.  Mr.  Milles, 
Member  for  Canterbury,  always  against  the  Court,  de- 
clared that  he  saw  such  danger  in  the  associations  that  he 
could  be  only  for  a  petition.  The  Duke  then  produced  a 
moderate  one,  but,  great  confusion  arising,  each  was  signed 
by  the  different  parties. 

It  was  true  advertisements  had  been  issued  from  the 
Westminster  meeting  for  deputations  of  three  persons  from 
each  Committee  to  meet  at  the  St.  Alban's  Tavern,  and 
their  great  capital  points  were  to  be  economy,  an  equal  re- 
presentation, and  short  Parliaments.  These  two  last  were 


1780. 


LORD  NORTH  OPENS  THE  BUDGET. 


373 


not  corrections  of  the  Constitution,  but  trying  experiments 
in  the  midst  of  three  wars. 

5th.  Account  of  Admiral  Digby  being  arrived  at  Ply- 
mouth, and  having  met  a  French  convoy  going  to  Mauritius 
with  three  East  Indiamen,  and  two  69-gun  ships  with 
12,000  louis.  He  had  taken  one  of  the  69-guns  with  half 
the  specie,  two  Indiamen,  and  three  frigates.1 

6th.  Lord  Shelburae  moved  for  inquiring  into  the  dis- 
mission of  Lord  Caermarthen  and  Lord  Pembroke  against 
Lords  Lieutenants.  It  was  rejected  by  a  majority  of  56 
to  31 ;  a  protest  followed,  and  the  Duke  of  Devonshire 
spoke  for  the  first  time.  The  same  day  Lord  North 
opened  the  Budget,  and  declared,  as  taxes  on  brewing  had 
proved  deficient,  he  would  propose  very  general  though 
unpopular  taxes.  Early  in  the  day  he  had  been  accused 
by  Temple  Luttrell  of  having  been  guilty  of  corruption 
at  Milbourn  Port,  which  he  said  he  desired  to  have  proved. 

8^/4.  Lord  George  Gordon  moved  to  abolish  Auditor  and 
Tellers,  which  Lord  North  said  ought  to  be  lessened ;  but 
the  motion  was  withdrawn.  Then  sat  the  Committee  on 
Burke's  Bill j  but  Rigby  previously  surprised  everybody  by 
stating  a  question  which  he  said  he  had  communicated  to 
nobody,  and  did  not  know  if,  consistent  with  the  orders 
of  the  House,  could  then  be  moved.  It  was  whether  the 
House  could  meddle  with  the  Civil  List,  which  had  been 
given  to  the  King  for  life,  and  which  he  had  purchased 
by  cession  of  certain  rights.  This  embarrassed  North 


1  The  poet  laureate  this  year  pro- 
fessed to  hold  at  small  value  the  hostile 
power  of  France.  In  the  '  New  YearV 
day  Ode '  the  versificator  says, — 

"  She  "  (France)  ••  bears  the  ensigns  of  the  God, 
But  not  his  delegated  power," — 

which   may  remind   the  reader   of    a 


similar  but  grander  image  in  Dryden 
(in  the  '  Annus  Mirabilis ')  : — 

"  Till  now  alone  the  mighty  nations  strove — 

The  rest  at  gaze  without  the  lists  did  stand ; 
And  threat  'ning  f  ranee,  placed  like  a  painted 

Jove, 
Kept  idle  thunder  in  hit  lifted  kand." 

— D. 


376  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.         MARCH, 

and  the  Ministers ;  the  Attorney-General  and  Mansfield 
moved  that  it  could  not  be  defended  absolutely,  but  endea- 
voured to  avoid  it  by  calling  for  the  question.  Fox,  Burke, 
Conway,  and  others  would  not  allow  that  the  right  of  the 
House  could  be  doubted,  and  declared,  if  denied,  they 
would  appeal  to  the  people.  Rigby  said  he  would  not  be 
coaxed  nor  intimidated;  he  ridiculed  the  petitioners,  and 
said  he  should  be  glad  if  the  method  of  passing  his  accounts 
were  facilitated.  The  Ministers  carried  the  points  of  not 
having  Rigby 's  question  put  by  only  205  to  199.  Rigby 
voted  in  the  minority,  his  friends  with  the  Court;  the 
Dundases  and  some  few  Tories  in  the  minority.  Then 
the  House  sat  till  past  two  on  the  third  Secretary  of  State, 
and  saved  him  by  only  208  to  201.  They  had  appre- 
hended being  beaten  on  that  question  as  the  strongest 
against  them,  from  the  evident  inutility  of  a  Secretary  for 
America  when  it  was  lost,  and  from  the  unpopularity  of 
Lord  George  Germaine ;  Norton,  the  Speaker's  son,  one 
of  Lord  Bute's  sons,  and  Yiner,  who  also  spoke,  and  who 
three  years  ago  had  offered  15s.  in  the  pound,  voted  in 
the  minority. 

Accounts  from  Ireland  that  they  were  still  more  pleased 
with  the  permission  of  trading  with  the  colonies  than  with 
the  first  bill  for  Free  Trade.  The  Duke  of  Leinster  and 
Conolly  spoke  and  recommended  strongly  gratitude  to 
England,  yet  the  spirit  kept  up  for  altering  Poyning's 
Law,  and  for  a  counter  Declaratory  Act  of  their  own 
independence. 

13th.  Another  memorable  day,  the  Court  losing  its  ma- 
jority on  Burke's  Bill  on  the  question  of  the  Board  of 
Trade,  which  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  was  voted 
useless  by  207  against  199.  There  was  an  episode  that 
day  scarce  less  remarkable.  Sir  Edward  Deering,  a  foolish 


1780.  SIR  FLETCHER  NORTON.  '  H77 

Kentish  Knight  in  opposition,  having  attacked  Mr.  Rigby 
on  his  late  doctrine  of  the  Crown's  unalienable revenue,  and 
the  latter  having  defended  himself,  Charles  Fox  protested 
against  such  an  unparliamentary  declaration,  and  said  he 
would  appeal  to  the  highest  authority,  the  Speaker.  This 
was  probably  incorrect,  or  at  least  Sir  Fletcher  declaimed 
against  that  doctrine  of  Rigby  to  Fox ;  for  on  this  appeal 
the  Speaker  came  down  from  the  gallery,  and  made  a 
warm  and  good  speech  against  the  increased  influence  of 
the  Crown,  and  in  favour  of  the  petitions,  though  he  con- 
demned the  associations.  But  then  he  broke  out  into  the 
most  extravagant  and  profligate  rhapsody  that  perhaps  was 
ever  heard  in  that  place,  accusing  Lord  North  of  duplicity,  : 
and  professing  himself  his  personal  enemy  on  the  grounds 
of  a  story  that  he  had  the  impudence  and  absurdity  to 
tell,  with  as  little  modesty  in  the  high  estimation  at  which 
he  rated  himself.  He  acquainted  the  House  that  the 
Duke  of  Grafton,  when  Minister,  had  offered  him  the  posts 
of  Chief  Justice  in  Eyre  and  the  Speakership,  with  a  pro- 
mise of  the  best  place  in  the  law  that  should  become  vacant,  ( 
without  which,  as  he  thought  himself  at  the  head  of  his  pro- 
fession, he  would  not  quit  his  business.  He  asserted  that 
Lord  North  had  been  privy  to  this  bargain,  and  yet  had 
broken  it,  by  offering  a  large  pecuniary  bribe  to  Lord 
Chief  Justice  de  Grey  to  quit  that  post  in  favour  of  Wed- 
derburn.  So  far  was  true,  that  Lord  North  had  made  the 
offer:  the  Chief  Justice  demanded  10,000^.;  Wedderburn 
would  not  pay  the  money,  and  expected  the  Treasury 
should,  and  expected  a  peerage  besides.  Norton  had 
learnt  the  bargain  before  concluded,  and  had  threatened  to 
impeach  Lord  North  if  he  gave  the  public  money  for  that 
purpose — but  how  gross  in  him,  when  talking  for  economy 
on  the  ground  of  the  petitions,  to  complain  of  the  breach 


378  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.         MARCH, 

of  a  job  in  which  he  himself  was  originally  the  person  to 
be  corrupted  !  Lord  North  denied  being  tied  by  his  pre- 
decessor's bargain — went  farther,  and  denied  his  knowledge 
of  it,  in  which  few  believed  him,  and  still  less  did  they 
believe  Wedderburn,  who  denied  knowing  anything  of  the 
money-part  of  the  corruption.  The  dialogue  degenerated 
into  Billingsgate  between  Lord  North  and  Sir  Fletcher 
Norton.  Many  of  the  Tories  left  the  Court  on  the 
question  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  which  Eden,  one  of  the 
Commissioners,  defended,  and  was  well  ridiculed  by  Burke, 
who  called  them  a  nest  of  crows  with  one  nightingale 
in  it. 

Charles  Fox  was  severe  on  Gibson,  who  was  brought 
down  in  a  fit  of  the  gout  to  vote,  as  all  the  Board  did, 
though  in  their  own  cause,  except  Soame  Jenyns,  who 
retired. 

15th.  Lord  North  opened  his  taxes,  which  were  an 
additional  duty  on  malt,  and  ditto  on  wine,  spirits,  brandy, 
and  rum ;  on  exported  coals,  on  salt,  on  new  stamps  and 
licences  to  tea-dealers.  They  were  voted. 

16th  and  1.7th  were  wasted  on  a  charge  brought  by 
Temple  Luttrell  against  Lord  North  for  buying  the  next 
elections  at  Milbourne  Port  from  Mr.  Medlicott,  the  pro- 
prietor of  the  estate.  This  was  a  dirty  accusation,  as 
Luttrell  only  complained  because  he  thought  he  had 
agreed  with  Medlicott  for  the  next  election  for  himself. 
He  could  bring  no  proofs  home  to  Lord  North,  and  the 
charge  was  voted  groundless. 

The  Committees  of  Association  began  to  give  great  alarm. 
They  voted  themselves  a  right  of  considering  and  deciding 
on  questions  pending  in  Parliament,  and  of  censuring  or 
approving  the  part  taken  by  particular  Members.  Bat 
they  were  going  much  farther  still,  and  were  for  engrafting 


1780.      ALARM  CAUSED  BY  COMMITTEES  OP  ASSOCIATION.    379 

on  petitions  two  resolutions  of  the  highest  moment — one, 
that  there  ought  to  be  a  more  equal,  consequently  a 
new,  mode  of  representation  ;  the  other,  that  there  should 
be  frequent  Parliaments — at  first,  triennial  Parliaments. 
Lord  Shelburne  was  against  that,  and  Charles  Fox  spoke 
against  it  at  the  Westminster  Committee ;  but  it  is  likely 
that  the  Committees  will  be  even  for  annual  Parliaments. 
In  the  first  place  it  will  be  very  unfair  to  engraft  new 
matter  on  the  petitions.  They  who  voted  for  a  petition 
for  economy,  may  not  approve  of  a  new  mode  of  represen- 
tation, nor  of  more  frequent  Parliaments.  Some  no  doubt 
signed  the  petitions  from  a  desire  of  popularity.  Both  de- 
scriptions, if  they  will  not  subscribe  to  the  additional 
articles,  will  lose  their  popularity,  and  become  unpopular. 

In  the  next  place,  it  is  unwise  to  add  new  matter.  It 
was  the  necessity  of  economy,  which  every  man  felt,  that 
produced  so  great  a  change  against  the  Court,  and  so 
much  unanimity.  The  two  others  are  very  problematic 
questions,  and  will  sow  difference  of  opinion  and  dissen- 
sion, instead  of  compacting  unanimity,  and  drawing  in  the 
rest  of  the  nation.  The  present  torrent  would  bear  down, 
has  borne  down,  the  influence  of  the  Court ;  but  if  a  torrent 
is  divided  into  three  channels,  not  one  of  the  three  will 
carry  a  great  mass  of  tide  along  with  it  Perhaps  it  was 
not  wise  at  first  to  announce  publicly  a  design  of  reducing 
the  influence  of  the  Crown,  which  was  likely  to  shock  the 
principles  of  the  Tories,  at  least ;  though  they  have  shown 
that  interest  is  their  only  principle,  for  they  have  abandoned 
the  cause  of  the  Crown  the  moment  they  felt  the  diminu- 
tion of  their  own  estates. 

The  question  of  shortening  Parliaments  must  offend 
many ;  and  though  they  may  be  hurried  away  by  the  first 


380  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

sound,  the  people  will  not  like  it,  for  their  votes  will  be 
worth  nothing. 

The  alteration  of  the  mode  of  election  would  give 
deeper  offence.  All  men  who  have  interest  by  landed 
estates,  and  much  more  they  who  have  burgage  tenures, 
must  be  strongly  against  such  a  change.  It  has  been 
talked  that  they  should  be  indemnified  ;  it  would  be  an 
excellent  way  of  complying  with  the  petitions  for  eco- 
nomy to  raise  so  vast  a  fund  as  would  indemnify  those 
proprietors ! 

But  though  an  equal  representation  is  a  free  and  just 
proposition  in  theory,  it  is  by  no  means  advisable  to  have 
recourse  to  it,  especially  at  the  risk  of  great  disagreement 
of  opinion. 

Five  hundred  and  sixty-five  Members  are  an  arbitrary 
number  ;  but  in  the  best  times  they  answered  the  purposes 
of  good  government.  The  end  of  good  government,  in 
the  most  extensive  view,  is  to  make  a  nation  happy,  rich, 
and  glorious.  In  happiness  I  include  liberty.  The  House 
of  Commons,  constituted  and  chosen  as  it  is  at  present,  con- 
curred with  the  King  and  House  of  Lords  in  answering  all 
these  ends  in  the  last  reign  ;  and  if  the  happiest  and  best 
period  is  selected,  that  was  it,  and  consequently  the  best 
form  to  be  preserved.  If  that  form  has  been  altered,  re- 
store it,  instead  of  trying  to  make  it  better.  The  nation 
and  every  man  in  it  thinks  himself  represented  by  the  565, 
when  they  are  chosen ;  nor  have  the  people  complained  of 
not  having  more  equal  share  in  the  choice  of  their  repre- 
sentatives. Were  the  nation  equally  divided  into  565 
districts,  and  every  man  in  each  district  was  to  have  a 
vote  for  the  representative  of  that  district,  would  not  all 
think  themselves  represented  ? — but  do  not  they  think 


1780.  II.  WALPOLE'S  VIEWS  OF  AFFAIRS.  381 

so  at  present  when  the  565  are  chosen  by  the  present, 
however  unequal,  methods.  Has  not  every  individual 
some  Member  for  a  county  or  borough  to  whom  he  can 

/'ve  remonstrance,  petition,  or  instruction? 
I  allow  that,  by  several  wars  and  by  the  taxes  conse- 
quential of  those  wars,  the  Crown  has  acquired  too  great 
influence  ;  but  the  corruption  of  the  whole  nation,  the 
servility  of  the  nobility  and  gentry,  the  consequences  of 
their  extravagance,  have  aided  the  Crown  in  extending  its 
influence.  Alterations  of  the  Constitution  have  been  made 
in  the  present  reign,  and  greater,  I  firmly  believe,  were  ./• 
intended,  had  the  American  war  succeeded  to  the  wish  of 
the  Court.  But  the  enormous  expense  incurred  by  that 
war,  and  the  unnecessary  profusion  that  accompanied  it, 
producing  no  success — on  the  contrary,  producing  disap- 
pointments, disgraces,  losses,  and  distresses — and  the  majo- 
rity in  Parliament  upholding  the  insolence  of  the  Court  and 
Ministers,  opened  at  last  the  eyes  of  the  nation,  and  com- 
bined the  present  body  of  Opposition  without  doors.  What 
then  ought  to  be  done  ?  Economy  ought  to  be  enforced. 
It  can  only  be  enforced  effectually  by  getting  out  of  the 
American  war.  But  the  present  spirit  of  the  people  ought 
to  be  employed  to  other  purposes  too,  though  it  has 
already  certainly  had  one  good  eifect — it  has  checked 
the  career  of  the  Ministerial  profusion,  who  would  have 
gone  on  with  their  waste  if  the  country  had  not  put  in 
its  caveat.  \ 

Still  I  am  convinced  the  nation  is  not  yet  unanimous 
against  the  Court.  Twelve  English  counties  have  sent  us 
petitions ;  not  one  Scotch  county,  and  only  two  of  the  Welsh. 
The  counties  of  Northumberland  and  Cumberland  rejected 
petitions ;  those  of  Norfolk,  Surrey,  Sussex,  Kent,  Hun- 
tingdon, and  Hertfordshire  have  signed  protests  against 


382  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.         MARCH, 

the  petitions,  or  sent  to  others  more  moderate,  or  rejected 
Associations.  The  conduct  then,  I  think,  to  have  been 
pursued  was,  to  urge  economy  and  any  popular  object  that 
was  not  a  theme  of  speculation  and  dissension.  Nor  ought 
threats  to  have  been  used  towards  the  House  of  Commons, 
because  the  only  constitutional  remedies  can  come  from 
Parliament.  Whatever  is  obtained  by  menace  or  violence 
will  not  be  permanent.  The  prerogative  party  are  stunned, 
not  converted,  and  every  violence  they  complain  of  will 
preserve  their  friends,  or  reclaim  those  that  have  deserted. 
By  pursuing  economy  and  other  established  constitutional 
points  with  temper  and  moderation,  all  the  dissenting 
counties  might  be  drawn  into  the  general  sense  against  the 
Court.  Were  the  great  mass  of  the  nation  unanimous, 
they  would  have  opportunity,  in  a  year's  time,  of  choosing 
a  very  different  House  of  Commons  ;  and  that  House  of 
Commons  would  force  the  King  to  change  his  Adminis- 
tration ;  and  a  new  Administration,  not  agreeable  to  the 
Court,  obliged  to  the  people  and  depending  on  them  for 
support,  would  correct  abuses ;  and  then  whatever  was 
obtained  would  be  obtained  Parliamentarily  and  would  be 
durable. 

The  great  object  of  the  nation,  and  of  the  present  Oppo- 
sition, ought  to  be  to  restore  the  Constitution  to  what  it 
was  as  established  at  the  Revolution.  Abuses  enough  have 
crept  in,  and  the  influence  of  the  Crown  has  increased 
enough  to  find  full  and  long  employment  for  those  who  are 
its  friends,  if  they  can  obtain  the  power  of  amending  the 
grievances  that  have  arisen. 

f  But  surely,  surely  it  would  be  wise  to  restore  the  Con- 
stitution before  we  try  experiments  on  it.  For  instance, 
the  destruction  of  American  charters,  and  the  enacting 
military  governments  there,  to  the  abolition  of  juries,  is  a 


1780.  H.  WALPOLE'S  VIEWS  OF  AFFAIRS.  383 

flagrant  and  more  crying  deviation  from  the  Constitution 
than  any  faults  of  the  old  Constitution.  Cornish  boroughs 
are  not,  cannot  be  more  venal  than  they  were  in  our  hap- 
piest days — the  last  reign.  I  defend  not  Cornish  boroughs, 
or  many  burgage  tenures  where  scarce  a  house  exists,  as 
at  Old  Sarum  and  Castle  .Rising ;  but  I  would  deprecate 
attempts  that  will  disunite  the  nation  when  union  is  essen- 
tial. Annual  Parliaments  and  alteration  of  the  modes  of 
election  will  shock  numbers,  I  should  think  almost  all 
lawyers ;  and  as  for  annual  Parliaments,  I  should  think 
they  would  destroy  all  possibility  of  government.  If  it 
remained  an  object  to  get  into  Parliament,  the  frequency 
of  election  would  keep  the  nation  in  a  state  of  tumult,  fac- 
tion, and  drunkenness.  If  it  did  not,  the  House  of  Com- 
mons would  sink  into  disesteem,  and  only  meet  to  grant 
money,  while  the  King  and  House  of  Lords,  or  the  King 
and  Privy  Council,  would  be  the  efficient  Governments. 
What  evils  a  new  mode  of  representation  would  produce 
nobody  can  foresee,  for  nobody  can  tell  what  mode  will  be 
fixed  upon. 

In  fine,  I  am  for  restoring  the  Constitution  to  what  it  I 
was  when  it  made  us  the  happiest,  wisest,  and  most 
glorious  people  that  we  ever  were,  and  not  from  admiring 
the  identical  form  (which  has  grown  by  accident,  and  not 
from  any  preconceived  system),  but  for  the  effects  it  pro- 
duced. The  nation  might  be  led  to  co-operate  in  restoring 
it,  and  all  men  would  be  pleased  with  it  when  so  restored, 
except  the  Crown  and  a  few  of  its  partisans,  or  a  few 
ambitious,  who  would  blame  in  order  to  raise  themselves 
by  affecting  patriotism.  On  the  contrary,  subvert  the  es- 
tablished forms,  and  great  clamour  would  arise,  and  every 
evil  produced  by  the  change  (and  I  suppose  nobody  is  vain  ,/ 
enough  to  hope  to  invent  a  system  liable  to  no  objections) 


384  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

would  appear  aggravated  by  comparison.  The  very  spirit 
that  has  arisen  proves,  that,  however  weakened  the  Constitu- 
tion, it  still  retains  energy  enough  to  assert  itself,  and  I 
hope  to  produce  reformation.  If  it  does,  that  Constitution 
is  good  enough  that  when  at  its  perfection  made  us  so 
happy,  rich,  and  great ;  and  when  impaired,  could  by  its 
own  vigour  redress  itself.  I  have  said  nothing  of  the 
signal  impropriety  of  attempting  experiments  at  a  moment 
when  we  are  at  war  with  America,  France,  and  Spain,  and 
when  we  are  in  danger  of  seeing  Ireland  separate  itself 
from  this  country.  Alas !  it  is  unhappy  that  by  the  enor- 
mities of  the  Court,  and  the  incapacity  of  our  present 
Governors,  the  nation  should  be  forced  to  enter  into  discus- 
sions, the  very  attention  to  which  doubles  our  danger ; 
for  when  the  Opposition  think  of  nothing  but  vanquishing 
the  Court,  the  Court  can  think  of  nothing  but  defending 
itself  at  home.  No  plans  can  be  formed  for  abroad,  nor 
does  either  side  think  of  attaching  or  defending  the  country 
from  France.  Everybody  felt  the  danger  we  were  in  last 
summer  from  the  incapacity  of  the  Commander-in-Chief  and 
of  the  chief  Admiral.  Great  information  was  collected 
from  Lord  Amherst's  neglect  of  Plymouth,  and  a  charge 
against  him  was  threatened  in  Parliament — yet  all  is  as 
much  forgotten  as  if  events  of  the  last  war. 

Apropos  to  all  I  have  said,  I  will  set  down  some  advice 
I  gave  several  years  ago  (in  a  situation  a  little  parallel)  to  a 
celebrated  French  lawyer,  M.  Elie  de  Beaumont,  a  warm 
advocate  for  liberty.  He  showed  me  the  speech  of  the 
Advocate- General  of  the  Parliament  of  Aix,  and  asked  me 
if  I  did  not  approve  of  it.  I  replied,  "  Sir,  this  speech  is 
stronger  against  the  King  and  Church  than  would  have 
been  hazarded  in  the  first  year  of  the  Civil  War  against 
our  Charles  I.  You  attack  the  Crown  and  Church,  who 


1780.        H.  WALPOLE'S  ADVICE  TO  A  FRENCH  LAWYER.      385 

are  supported  by  the  nobility  and  an  army  of  200,000  men ; 
and  you  have  no  strength  but  an  imaginary  Parliament 
that  is  not  popular,  and  the  sect  of  authors  at  Paris  who 
call  themselves  philosophers.  You  trust  to  the  indolence 
of  your  King,  who  loves  his  ease,  and  will  bear  a  good  deal 
rather  than  engage  in  what  would  give  him  any  trouble. 
But  by  announcing  your  design  of  lowering  the  Crown  and 
crushing  the  clergy,  you  provoke  the  latter  to  engage  the 
King  to  crush  you,  which  he  can  do  in  a  moment  by  the 
army.  Be  more  moderate ;  obtain  whatever  little  you  * 
can  from  the  King's  disposition,  and  it  will  be  a  perma- 
nent service  to  your  country.  In  time  you  may  open  the 
eyes  of  the  nation  more  by  your  writings ;  and  if  you  can 
make  an  impression  on  the  nobility,  and  through  them  on 
the  army,  you  may  in  time  obtain  more  benefits  for  your 
country ;  but  by  aiming  at  too  much,  you  will  lose  all." 

So  it  happened:  the  Chancellor  Maupeou,  supported  by 
the  King's  mistress,  prevailed  on  him  to  crush  the  Parlia- 
ment and  become  despotic;  and  so  the  Kings  of  France 
would  have  remained,  if  that  King  had  not  died,  and  his 
successor  had  not  happened  to  take  new  Ministers,  who 
happened  to  choose  to  restore  the  old  Constitution. 

21st.  Mr.  Jenkinson  proposing  to  lay  some  army  esti- 
mates before  the  House,  Mr.  Fullerton,  a  young  Scot, 
who  had  been  secretary  to  Lord  Stormont  at  Paris,  and 
had  lately  been  made  colonel  of  a  new  raised  regiment, 
rose  and  broke  out  on  what  had  been  lately  said  on  that 
occasion  in  the  House  of  Lords  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
and  Lord  Shelburne,  who,  he  said,  had  called  him  commis 
and  clerk,  though  the  former  might  recollect  that  his  own 
brother,  Lord  George  Lennox,  had  been  his  secretary  at 
Paris.  But  he  was  much  more  warm  and  abusive  on  Lord 
Shelburne,  who  had  said  that  the  new  regiments  were 

VOL.  II.  2    C 


386  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.          MABCH, 

to  be  employed  in  buccaneering,  and  might  be  used  so 
against  the  Constitution.  Fullerton  added  that  the  Earl 
must  have  known  the  falsehood  of  his  accusations,  and  the 
person  he  meant  was  the  Earl  of  Shelburne. 

Here  he  was  called  to  order  by  Charles  Fox  for  naming 
persons  and  for  referring  to  debates  of  another  House. 
Mr.  Rigby  said  he  was  surprised  to  hear  Mr.  Fox  make 
those  objections,  who  was  so  apt  to  do  the  same,  and  had 
v  named  Lord  Hillsborough  for  what  he  had  said  in  the  other 
House.  Colonel  Barre  defended  his  friend  Lord  Shel- 
burne, and  hinted  that  Mr.  Fullerton  had  better  seek 
satisfaction  out  of  the  House.  Others  took  part  on  one 
side  or  the  other.  Fullerton  rose  again,  and  talked  of 
Lord  Shelburne's  aristocratic  insolence ;  but  he  was  again 
interrupted,  and  the  order  of  the  day  called  for. 

The  Contractors'  Bill  was  then  read  the  third  time, 
and  the  Ministry  suffered  it  to  pass  without  a  division. 

The  Speaker  then  made  an  apology  for  his  late  indecent 
behaviour,  but  maintained  the  truth  of  what  he  had  as- 
serted. He  said  he  knew  how  much  he  had  been  abused 
in  newspapers  for  what  he  had  said,  but  that  he  despised 
them,  and  only  desired  to  excuse  himself  to  the  House. 

The  Committee  then  sat  on  Burke's  Bill  and  on  that 
part  relating  to  the  household ;  but  he  gave  up  the  idea  of 
furnishing  it  by  contract.  Lord  Nugent  spoke  against 
the  Bill,  and  said  he  despised  discretion.  Lord  George 
Gordon  replied  that  generally  men  adopt  discretion  when 
they  have  lost  their  vigour  and  memory  as  his  Lordship 
seemed  to  have  ;  and  Lord  Nugent  having  expressed  his 
fears  that  Mr.  Burke  would,  like  Jack  in  the  '  Tale  of  the 
Tub,'  tear  the  cloth  as  well  as  the  lace,  Lord  George  said 
Mr.  Burke  (who  had  been  a  Catholic  and  zealous  for  their 
toleration)  was  not  likely  to  tear  that  coat.  General 


1780.  THE  COMMITTEE  SIT  ON  BURKE'S  BILL.  387 

Con  way  objected  to  parts  of  Burke's  plan,  particularly  that 
part  that  was  to  take  away  the  Board  of  Ordnance.  At 
past  one  in  the  morning  the  clauses  affecting  the  house- 
hold were  thrown  out  by  211  to  158,  the  Court  thus  re- 
covering its  majority.  The  Attorney-General  saying  the 
House  was  to  sit  only  to  register  Mr.  Burke's  edicts,  Mr. 
Dempster  said  so  it  had  sat  only  to  register  Ministerial 
edicts — the  edict  for  the  American  war,  then  an  edict  for 
peace  with  America,  and  then  another  edict  for  renewing 
the  war.  He  said  they  were  reproached  with  wanting  to 
take  away  the  revenue  they  had  given  to  the  King,  but 
all  was  a  bargain,  and  either  side  might  complain  if  the 
bargain  was  too  hard.  The  King  had  complained  and 
twice  asked  payment  of  his  debts,  and  the  nation  had 
paid  them.  Now  the  nation  was  grown  poor,  and  com- 
plained that  the  bargain  was  grown  too  hard  on  them. 
This  was  a  negotiation,  and  the  King  would  be  at  liberty 
to  ratify  or  reject  it. 

22nd.  Mr.  Fullerton  sent  a  letter  unsealed  from  the 
House  of  Commons  to  Lord  Shelburne,  and  a  duplicate  of 
it  by  a  servant,  the  latter  of  which  was  delivered  to  him 
just  as  Lady  Shelburne  had  left  the  room,  and  his  own 
servant  said,  "  My  Lord,  here  is  a  letter  from  Mr.  Fullerton 
that  requires  an  immediate  answer."  It  contained  the 
account  Mr.  F.  had  had  printed  that  morning  in  the 
'  Public  Advertiser,'  and  added  what  he  had  intended  to 
have  said  if  not  interrupted.  This  was  couched  in  the 
grossest  terms,  and  called  Lord  Shelburne's  conduct  inso- 
lence, cowardice,  and  falsehood,  and,  with  as  much  indis- 
cretion as  brutality,  he  asked  if  such  conduct  became  a 
leader  of  the  Opposition,  who,  as  he  had  heard  at  Paris, 
was  in  correspondence  with  the  enemies  of  his  country. ' 
This  was  supposed  to  mean  Dr.  Franklin,  but  was  very 

2  c  2 


388  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

imprudent  on  Lord  Stormont's  account,  who,  if  informed  of 
treasonable  correspondence  (which,  however,  with  Franklin 
was  not  so),  ought  to  have  accused  Lord  Shelburne.  His 
Lordship  replied,  no  other  answer  was  proper  than  to 
desire  Mr.  F.  to  meet  him  next  morning  in  Hyde  Park  at 
five  o'clock. 

23rd.  They  met  there,  as  appointed ;  Lord  Shelburne's 
second  was  Lord  Frederick  Cavendish,  with  whom  he  had 
served  at  St.  Malo's  and  St.  Cas  in  the  last  war — Mr.  F.'s 
was  Lord  Balcarras.  Fullerton  fired  first,  then  the  Earl, 
both  without  effect.  Fullerton  again,  and  wounded  Lord 
Shelburne  in  the  groin,  but  slightly,  as  he  fired  his  pistol  in 
the  air.  Lord  Frederick  asking  if  Mr.  F.  was  satisfied, 
Lord  Balcarras  said,  "  If  his  Lordship  would  say  he  had 
meant  no  affront."  Lord  Shelburne  said  it  was  too  late  for 
that,  and  that  he  was  able  to  renew  the  engagement,  but 
both  seconds  said  it  was  sufficient,  and  it  was  agreed  the 
affair  should  end  there. 

It  was  remarkable  that  Lord  Shelburne  had  not  used 
the  words  clerk  and  commis,  and  had  only  said  that  he 
would  not  use  the  term  commis,  with  which  he  had  offended 
Mr.  Eden. 

24th.  Mr.  Burke  took  notice  of  the  duel  in  the  House  ; 
and  Sir  J.  Lowther  talked  of  making  a  motion  against  duels 
on  speeches,  as  hindering  the  freedom  of  debate.  Mr. 
Adam  lamented  his  duel  with  Mr.  Fox.  Mr.  Rigby  said 
it  was  impossible  to  prevent  them  where  men  thought 
their  honour  affected,  but  it  was  always  wrong  to  mention 
names.  Fox  declared  warmly  that  he  would  not  be  pre- 
cluded from  the  freedom  of  debate,  and  that,  when  the  Ex- 
traordinaries  of  the  army  should  come  on,  he  would  name 
Mr.  Fullerton  if  he  found  it  necessary.  Sir  J.  Lowther 
said  he  would  not  insist  on  his  motion  then,  but  desired 


1780.  BYXG'S  MOTION  EEJECTED.  389 

Mr.  Fullerton's  friends  to  acquaint  him,  that  he  intended 
to  make  a  passing  inquiry  into  that  affair — probably  the 
case  of  the  regiment,  and  not  of  the  duel. 

Byng  and  others  would  have  put  off  the  report  of  the 
taxes  till  the  petitions  had  been  considered,  and  Byng 
threw  out  threats  of  taking  up  arms  if  the  petitions  were 
not  granted.  General  Conway  took  notice  of  the  indecency 
of  such  threats,  and  made  such  impression,  that  Byng 
dividing  the  House  for  putting  off  the  taxes,  the  motion 
was  rejected  by  145  to  37,  and  the  taxes  passed. 

The  House  then  adjourned  to  the  4th  of  April,  for  the 
Easter  holidays.  Fullerton  being  a  Scot,  as  well  as 
Adam,  renewed  much  national  animosity.  For  the  first 
time  such  a  thing  ever  happened,  the  Committee  of  the 
Common  Council  of  London  sent  to  inquire  how  Lord 
Shelburne  did.  But  a  more  serious  business  came  on.  The 
Congress,  as  the  Court  called  it,  on  the  deputation  of  the 
Committees,  issued  from  the  St.  Alban's  Tavern  a  memorial 
signed  by  Mr.  Wyvil  recommending  the  associations  to 
insist  on  annual  Parliaments,  and  a  new  mode  of  repre- 
sentation, with  the  addition  of  not  less  than  one  hundred 
Members,  and  engagements  from  candidates  to  promote 
these  terms,  though,  at  the  end,  they  rather  waived  annual 
Parliaments  till  the  other  points  should  be  obtained.  Lord 
Mahon,  an  abstracted  young  man,  had  chiefly  carried  this. 
The  memorial  was  drawn  by  Mr.  A.  Bromley,  was  obscure, 
bombast,  and  futile  ;  was  ill  written  as  possible.  Another 
similar  but  much  shorter  letter  was  issued  from  the 
Westminster  Committee,  but  ridiculous  too,  for  it  was 
signed  by  Sheridan,  junior,  a  most  dissipated  young  man, 
overwhelmed  with  debts,  manager  of  the  theatre  in  Drury 
Lane,  but  then  Under-Chairman  of  that  Committee. 

In  Mr.  Wyvil's  memorial  thirteen  counties  were  named 


390  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MABCH, 

as  agreeing  to  their  deputies;  but  Cheshire,  one  named, 
had  sent  no  deputies.  Lord  Ossory,  though  an  intimate 
friend  of  Charles  Fox  and  brother-in-law  of  Lord  Shel- 
burne,  could  not  be  prevailed  on  to  send  any  from  Bed- 
fordshire. 

Previous  to  the  meeting  at  Cambridge  for  a  petition, 
for  which  Dr.  Watson,  who  had  lately  printed  a  very 
sensible  Whig  sermon  on  the  Fast,  had  eminently  dis- 
tinguished himself,  the  Court  party  in  the  University  re- 
printed a  sermon  which  he  had  preached  when  the  Duke 
of  Graffcon  was  Minister,  in  which  were  very  opposite  senti- 
ments, and,  dispersing  it  as  he  appeared  at  the  meeting,  he 
was  much  confounded. 

28th,  The  report  was  made  to  the  Committee  at  York, 
when  they  agreed  to  the  plan  of  St.  Alban's  Tavern,  ex- 
cept in  triennial  Parliaments  instead  of  annual.  They 
agreed  to  demand  one  hundred  additional  Knights,  to  re- 
form the  mode  of  election,  and  to  pursue  bribery  at  elec- 
tions, and  now,  for  the  first  time,  agreed  to  demand  cessation 
of  the  American  war.  This  plan  they  printed  and  dis- 
tributed, but  coloured  with  great  professions  of  moderation 
and  legality,  and  mixed  no  threats.  Sir  George  Saville 
said  his  mind  was  not  made  up  to  shorten  Parliaments  and 
an  addition  of  one  hundred  Members,  but  would  come  into 
them  if  his  constituents  pleased.  Lord  John  Cavendish 
spoke  strongly  against  those  two  articles,  and  neither  he  nor 
Lord  George  signed  the  association. 

Lord  Shelburne  published  a  long  letter  to  the  Wiltshire 
Committee,  with  a  list  of  the  grievances  and  refusals  of  the 
winter ;  but  it  had  so  little  effect  that  the  Committee  broke 
up  without  adopting  the  association. 

Reports  of  Sir  Henry  Clinton  being  lost — false. 


1780.     FOX  HARANGUES  PETITIONERS  OF  WESTMINSTER.     391 


APRIL. 


LEICESTERSHIRE  rejected  the  association,  and  so  did  the 
Committee  of  Northampton. 

4th.  The  House  of  Commons  met  again  after  the  recess. 
Sir  James  Lowther  presented  a  petition  with  3000  names 
from  Cumberland,  and  used  many  threats,  as  of  refusing 
taxes,  if  their  demand  was  not  granted.  The  House  then 
went  on  the  new  raised  regiments,  one  of  which  was  Fuller- 
ton's.  Great  complaints  were  made  on  them  and  the  re- 
fusals to  Lord  Derby  and  other  English  who  had  offered  to 
raise  regiments,  and  on  the  partiality  to  the  Scots,  in  which 
Charles  Fox  joined  warmly.  The  Lord  Advocate  answered 
him  severely,  and  reproached  him  with  his  change  of 
principles.  The  regiments  were  carried  by  102  votes  to 
66.  Very  warm  altercation  between  Mr.  Fox  and  Colonel 
Holroyd. 

5th.  Another  very  memorable  day.  In  the  morning 
Charles  Fox  harangued  the  petitioners  of  Westminster  in 
the  Hall,  and  was  exceedingly  severe  on  the  King  and 
present  reign,  and  declared  loudly  for  annual  Parliaments 
and  the  additional  100  Knights,  which  were  eagerly 
adopted  by  the  assembly — (see  particulars  in  the  public 
prints).  The  Court  had  expected  that  Fox  would  be  at- 
tended to  the  House  by  a  great  mob,  and  the  Guards  were 
ordered  to  be  in  readiness,  but  he  went  privately  as  usual, 
and  there  was  not  the  least  tumult. 

The  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  thence  com- 
menced on  the  petitions — nearly  forty  from  counties  and 


392 


LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


APRIL, 


towns  were  piled  on  the  table  signed  by  thousands  of 
names.  Mr.  Dunning  opened  the  debate  by  a  motion  that 
threw  the  Courtiers  into  the  highest  astonishment;  the 
words  were,  "  That  the  influence  of  the  Crown  has  increased, 
is  increasing,  and  ought  to  be  diminished"1  The  Ministers 
were  greatly  embarrassed,  and  had  no  subterfuge  but  their 
old  hackneyed  evasion,  which  could  only  serve  in  times 
when  they  were  paramount,  of  trying  the  previous  question, 
which  not  being  admitted  in  a  Committee  (for  no  earthly 
good  reason),  they  recurred  to  its  tantamount  of  the  Chair- 
man's leaving  the  chair,  too  notoriously  implying  they  did 
not  mean  to  comply  with  the  petitions — but  this  was  not  a 
moment  to  endure  such  poor  shifts.  They  had  had  not 
only  a  fortnight's  notice  of  the  importance  of  the  day,  but 
a  fortnight's  recess  to  prepare  some  very  plausible 
manoeuvre  against  it.  It  is  true  they  knew  not  what  the 
motions  would  be,  and  could  not  well  expect  as  yet  so 
home  an  attack  on  the  prerogative.  Perhaps  their  wisest 
preparative  would  have  been  to  declare  a  general  intention 
of  complying  as  far  as  possible  with  the  requests  of  the 
petitioners.  This  could  not  be  an  answer  to  make  to  the 
motion .  produced,  but  to  that  I  should  think  the  most 
prudent  method  would  have  been  to  have  proposed  an 
amendment  of  the  question  by  the  sole  and  simple  addition 


1  The  influence  of  the  Crown  was 
especially  increased  through  the  crea- 
tion of  new  peerages ;  and  this  par- 
ticular influence  was  as  unpopular,  as 
the  reckless  creation  of  peers  was 
esteemed  at  once  ridiculous  and  uncon- 
stitutional. It  had  other  results,  not 
then  foreseen.  Prince  Dolgorouki,  in 
his  '  Handbook  of  the  Principal  Fa- 
milies in  Russia,'  laments  the  facility 
with  which  the  sons  of  rich  merchants 
were  ennobled,  for  military  or  civil 
services.  These  sons,  he  says,  disgraced 
their  honest  fathers,  and  despised  their 


honourable  commercial  vocations.  A 
writer  in  the  Athenaeum  (Oct.  16,  1858), 
referring  to  this  passage,  adds,  "  The 
English  saw  something  like  this  during 
the  last  generation.  The  great  rush  of 
new  peerages  in  George  the  Third's 
time  brought  forth  among  other  fruits 
that  increased  exclusiveness,  that  idi- 
otic contempt  for  '  Bloomsbury,'  that 
apotheosis  of  the  '  genteel '  and '  fashion- 
able' worlds,  which  has  left  its  mark 
on  Hook's  novels  and  the  whole  light 
literature  of  the  age." — D. 


1780.  DUNNING'S  MOTION  CARRIED.  393 

of  the  word  if — if  the  influence  has  increased,  it  ought  to  be 
diminished.      That  sole    amendment    might  have  gained 
some  candid  men,  or  some  who  wished  to  vote  with  them, 
which  were  many,  though  fear  of  their  elections  swayed 
them — yet  the  plea  would  have  been  plausible ;  and  could 
the  Court  have  gained  it,  it  would  have  procured  time  to 
examine  into  and  prove  the  affirmative,  or,  if  lost,  it  was 
being  beaten  on  decent  and  moderate  ground.    But  the 
Ministry,  like  the  Jesuits,  seemed  to  have  lost  their  under- 
standings when  they  had  most  occasion  for  them ;  and  Lord 
North,    supported    only    by    his  two  Scotch  champions, 
Wedderburn  and  the  Lord  Advocate,  was  not  able  to  com- 
bat such  numerous  and  violent  attacks.      The  Lord  Advo- 
cate at  last  produced  a  paltry  palliative  by  adding  to  the 
question,  It  is  necessary  to  declare  that  the  influence,  to  which 
he  said  he  meant  to   give  his  negative  ;  but  instead  of 
dividing  on  whether  those  words  should  stand  part  of  the 
question,  as  Dundas  expected  would  be  the  case,  Charles 
Fox  said  he  had  no  objection  to  the  words,  and,  they  being 
admitted,  Dunning's  motion,  after  a  very  hot  debate,  was 
carried  at  midnight  by  233  to  215.    Lord  North  conducted 
himself  the  whole  day  with  little  ability,  and  lost  his  temper 
entirely  on  a  severe  attack  of  Thomas  Pitt,  who  had  never 
spoken   nearly  so  well;   and  being  lately  returned  from 
Italy,  whither  he  had  gone  for  his  health,  described  how 
different  his  feelings  had  been  from  his  former  journey, 
when  he  had  gloried  in  his  country's  glory,  but  now  had 
only  blushed  for  its  disgraces.     Accusing  Lord  North  as 
author  of  the  loss  of  America,  the  latter  took  it  up  warmly ; 
on  which  Pitt  replied,  that  he  had  not  attacked  him  on  his 
conduct  in  Parliament,  where  he  knew  it  was  able,  nor  in 
private  life,  where  he  knew  it  was  amiable,  but  as  a  Minister 
who  had  lost  our  colonies  and  commerce,  as  a  financier 


394  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

who  produced  taxes  that  produced  nothing,  and  as  a  legis- 
lator who  had  not  preserved  one  ally.  Lord  North  then 
lost  all  temper  and  patience,  said  he  had  the  confidence  of 
the  nation  (though  it  seemed  to  have  greatly  deserted  him), 
and  fell  outrageously  on  the  Opposition,  saying  they  meant 
to  ruin  the  Constitution.  These  words  occasioned  a  very 
great  tumult,  and  the  Opposition  called  for  having  the  words 
taken  down,  and  it  was  some  time  before  the  uproar  was 
quieted.  Dunning  then  moved  that  it  was  competent  to 
that  House  to  examine  into  and  correct  abuses  in  the 
expenditure  of  the  Civil  List  revenues,  &c.  This  was  an 
assertion  against  Rigby,  who  affected  to  make  a  jocose 
speech,  but  not  friendly  to  Lord  North,  and  said  it  was  a 
new  curiosity  to  see  a  Minister  in  a  minority.  Burke  re- 
plied it  was  a  curiosity  for  the  Museum,  and  went  on  with 
a  suite  of  ideas  in  that  strain  with  much  wit,  but  observed 
that  Rigby  seemed  to  be  in  better  humour  of  late,  though 
beaten,  than  he  had  been  for  the  last  two  years.  This 
was  pointed  at  his  enmity  to  Lord  North.  The  question 
was  voted,  and  another  moved  by  G.  Pitt,  that  it  was  the 
duty  of  the  House  to  produce  immediate  redress  to  the 
grievances  mentioned  in  the  petitions.  Charles  Fox  then, 
so  late,  and  though  very  unusual,  moved  to  report  the 
motions  directly  to  the  House.  Lord  North  exclaimed 
loudly  against  such  proceedings,  as  violent,  arbitrary,  and 
unusual.  General  Conway  replied,  that  reports  were 
generally  deferred  because  Committees  were  often  thin,  but 
there  never  was  likely  to  be  a  fuller  House  than  at  the 
present  moment.  Lord  North  said  he  had  expected,  when 
Conway  rose,  that  his  candour  would  have  interposed; 
but  he  saw  candour  was  not  to  be  depended  upon.  In  the 
course  of  the  debate,  the  Opposition  were  told  of  the  late 
disagreements  at  York,  but  they  chose  to  be  silent.  The 


1780.  MOTIONS  IN  PARLIAMENT.  395 

abandoned  Speaker  spoke  again  in  Opposition :  but  such 
renegades  are  a  scandal  to  any  cause ;  nor  do  I  admire 
Mr.  G.  Pitt's  patriotism.  He  had  been  the  tool  of  Mr. 
Grenville,  the  author  of  the  Stamp  Act,  and  most  bitter 
against  his  uncle,  Lord  Chatham,  of  whom  he  now  boasted, 
and  he  affected  to  give  up  his  borough  of  Old  Sarum, 
though  he  was  a  very  interested  man.2  It  should  be  said, 
too,  that  he  had  done  some  very  noble  and  generous  things 
by  his  family,  but  he  had  coupled  much  dirt  with  his 
liberality.  Lord  North  had  certainly  deserted  Mr.  Gren- 
ville, but  had  made  it  up  with  him  ;  but  having  neglected 
Mr.  G.  Pitt  when  he  served  others  of  Mr.  Grenville's 
friends,  no  wonder  the  original  author  of  our  breach  with 
America  was  passed  over  in  silence,  and  Lord  North  sub- 
stituted in  his  place. 

The  event  of  this  memorable  day  was  a  complete  answer 
to  the  new  propositions  of  annual  Parliaments,  of  100 
additional  Knights,  and  of  altering  the  modes  of  election. 
It  was  very  plain  that,  if  the  people  would  act  with  spirit, 
their  representatives  would  be  forced  to  comply  with  them. 

The  obstinacy  of  maintaining  the  Administration  seems 
to  be  explained  by  an  indiscretion  of  the  Lord  Advocate ; 
and  Ministers  saying  to  him  that  the  Opposition  would  re- 
tract, Dundas  replied,  We  must  not  let  them  retract  This 
looked 3  exceedingly  like  the  conduct  held  to  America  at 
the  beginning  of  the  war,  and  as  if  the  Court  hoped  for  a 
civil  war ;  though  I  do  not  think  their  success  in  America 
ought  to  have  encouraged  them  to  resort  to  force. 


*  Two  years  after  published  a  pam-  had  projected  a  change ;  and  Dundas 

jilili-i  against  altering  the  mode  of  re-  j  gave  the  alarm  at  the  end  of  the  year, 

presentation.  \  When  a   change  happened  in  conse- 

J  Duudus  might  have  another  mean-  quence  Dundas  took  on  with  the  new 

ing ;  and  from  his  subsequent  conduct  ,  Ministers, 
it  ia  probable  he  bad.     He  and  Bigby  I 


396  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  APEIL, 

IQth.  The  Committee  on  petitions  against  Dunning 
moved  that  the  first  day  of  every  session  exact  accounts 
should  be  laid  before  Parliament  of  all  moneys  paid  out 
of  the  Civil  List  to  Members  of  Parliament.  Lord  North 
suffered  this  motion  to  pass  without  a  division.  Dunning  then 
moved  to  exclude  the  Cofferer,  Treasurer  of  Household  and 
Chambers,  and  ten  other  officers  from  sitting  in  the  House. 
This  was  opposed,  but  carried  on  a  division  by  only  two, 
215  to  213:  Mr.  North,  Sir  Grey  Cooper,  and  Burrell, 
were  shut  out  on  the  Court  side,  and  Meynel  of  the  Opposi- 
tion. 

llth.  More  debate  on  Fullerton's,  &c.,  regiments;  much 
complaint  of  the  ill-usage  of  T.  Grenville,  Lord  Temple's 
brother,  who  had  been  driven  out  of  the  army,  and  much 
censure  on  Lord  Amherst. 

Buckinghamshire  and  Cambridgeshire  rejected  Mr. 
Wyvil's  Articles.  He  had  behaved  infamously  to  Lord 
John  Cavendish,  having  written  to  him,  and  promised  not 
to  attempt  those  Articles  till  real  grievances  were  redressed  ; 
yet  when  Lord  John  went  to  York,  Wyvil  kept  him 
and  Sir  George  Saville  shut  up  in  a  room  by  themselves, 
while  the  Articles  were  settled  by  the  Committee  there. 
This  pragmatic  parson,  who  now  wanted  to  impose  sub- 
scriptions and  engagements  on  candidates,  had  been  the 
instigator  of  the  attempt  to  take  off  subscription  to  the 
Thirty-nine  Articles. 

1 2th.  The  new  bill  for  disqualifying  officers  of  Reve- 
nue from  voting  at  elections  was  opposed  on  the  second 
reading  by  the  Administration,  who  rejected  the  commit- 
ment by  226  to  195.  This  was  recovering  a  considerable 
majority  for  that  time.  The  Tories  certainly  began  to 
repent  having  gone  so  far  with  the  Opposition,  though  only 
for  fear  of  their  elections ;  and  some  of  the  Opposition, 


1780.  THE  SPEAKER  TAKEN  ILL.  397 

the  Whigs,  voted  against  the  bill,   as  many  of  their  voters 
were  officers  of  Revenue. 

At  this  time  the  Empress  of  Russia  declared,  in  concert 
with  other  Powers,  against  suffering  their  ships  to  be  visited. 

13th.  The  House  of  Lords  threw  out  the  Contractors' 
Bill,  which  had  passed  the  Commons,  by  57  to  41.  This 
was  a  bold  step  of  the  Court,  but  was  probably  encouraged 
by  the  late  majority  in  the  Commons.  Lord  Hillsborough, 
as  usual,  was  so  indiscreet  as  to  say  the  present  spirit  was 
virtue  run  mad. 

The  same  day  Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  Speaker  of  the  Com- 
mons, was  so  ill  that  he  declared  from  the  Chair  he  could 
not  go  on.  Lord  North  pretended  to  be  concerned,  and 
pressed  the  House  to  give  him  time  to  recover ;  and  he 
seemed  to  be  a  little  softened,  though  his  friends  said  he 
had  resolved  never  to  come  into  the  House  more.  How- 
ever, the  House  immediately  adjourned  from  that  day, 
Friday,  to  the  Monday  se'nnight. 

It  was  suspected  that  there  was  some  treachery  in  this, 
as  Dunning  opened  the  matter  by  asking  the  Speaker  if  he 
was  not  ill.  His  late  behaviour  and  the  frequent  treache- 
ries he  had  been  guilty  of  made  it  very  probable ;  yet  it  is 
doubtful  whether  his  indisposition  was  most  timely  to  the 
Court  or  the  Opposition.  The  Court  wanted  time  and 
delay,  and  the  rejection  of  the  Contractors'  Bill  would  have 
raised  an  immediate  flame,  which  ten  days  might  at  least 
abate.  On  the  other  hand,  the  next  was  a  Newmarket 
week,  whither  several  of  the  young  patriots  would  have 
gone,  not  being  under  authority  like  the  Court  pensioners  ; 
and  others  of  them  wanted  to  be  present  at  the  Committees 
of  their  counties,  which  were  then  to  meet. 

14th.  Twenty-nine  Lords  protested  on  the  rejection  of 
the  Contractors'  Bill.    The  county  of  Cheshire  put  an  end 


398  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

to  its  Committee,  instead  of  adopting  an  association  or  the 
new  articles. 

18th.  Proclamation  in  the  'Gazette'  to  dissolve  the 
alliance  with  the  Dutch  on  their  making  no  reply  to  Sir 
Joseph  York's  peremptory  and  definite  memorial. 

24th.  The  Speaker  returned  to  the  House  and  said  he 
would  continue  to  do  his  duty  as  long  as  he  could,  though 
against  the  advice  of  his  physicians.  Dunning  then  made 
his  intended  motion  to  address  against  dissolution  or  pro- 
rogation of  Parliament  till  the  grievances  in  the  petitions 
were  redressed.  The  motion  was  rejected  towards  mid- 
night by  254  to  203 ;  most  of  the  Tories  who  had  deserted 
to  the  Opposition  returning  to  vote  with  the  Court,  par- 
ticularly Sir  Roger  Newdigate,  who  had  owned  he  hated 
the  Opposition,  but  preferred  knaves  to  fools.  Charles 
Fox  abused  them  after  the  division,  and  said  the  House 
had  broken  its  promise  to  the  petitioners,  and  it  would  be 
better  to  secede  ;  but  his  friend  Dunning  would  try  one 
question  more.  Dunning  moved  to  adjourn  the  Committee 
for  a  week,  that  he  might  consider  coolly  what  he  should 
do,  but  was  not  sure  he  should  try  anything  further  then. 

Advice  from  Ireland  that  the  repeal  of  Poyning's  Law 
had  been  rejected  by  a  majority  of  thirty  in  that  House  of 
Commons. 

25th.  The  Westminster  Association  voted  any  Minister 
who  should  advise  prorogation  or  dissolution  of  Parliament 
before  the  House  of  Commons  fulfilled  their  promise  of 
diminishing  influence  and  correcting  other  abuses,  is  an 
enemy  to  his  country.  Resolved  also,  that  if  any  addi- 
tional burthens  are  laid  before  such  redress,  there  will  be 
reason  to  apprehend  that  the  promise  will  be  evaded. 

The  same  day  the  Duke  of  Richmond  moved  for  an 
inquiry  into  the  late  state  of  Plymouth,  and  urged  that 


1780.  MOTION  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  RICHMOND.  399 

Sir  David  Lindsay  had  resigned  his  command  there  be- 
cause Lord  Amherst  would  give  no  answer  or  attention  to 
his  representations  on  the  weakness  of  the  place.  Lord 
Stormont  complained  that  such  an  inquiry  would  expose 
too  much  to  the  enemy ;  and  dropping  that  there  was 
too  much  intercourse  with  the  enemy,  Lord  Shelburne 
and  the  Duke  of  Richmond  took  it  up  warmly,  and 
pressed  the  Viscount  to  declare  on  his  honour  if  he  knew 
of  any  traitorous  correspondence  with  the  enemy,  as  the 
Court  had  sedulously  given  out  they  had.  Lord  Stormont 
would  make  no  answer  ;  but  they  would  not  let  him  off  for 
a  silence  that  would  have  confirmed  the  suspicion :  they 
pressed  him,  dared  and  defied  him ;  and  the  Duke  taxed 
the  Ministers  for  paying  for  such  slanders ;  and  he  par- 
ticularly named  the  author  (Bates)  of  the  '  Morning  Post,' 
a  miscreant,  he  said,  whom  he  despised  and  whose  calum- 
nies he  laughed  at,  till  he  had  accused  him  of  treason. 
Now  he  had  prosecuted  him  for  a  libel  on  equal  ground, 
not  taking  advantage  as  a  peer.  Lord  Stormont  was  at 
last  forced  to  say,  pitifully,  that  he  had  meant  no  accu- 
sation. The  inquiry  was  rejected  with  proxies  by  92 
to  51. 

26M.  Account  of  Sir  H.  Clinton  being  landed  near 
Charles  Town ;  but  finding  a  garrison  there  of  9000  men, 
had  sent  to  New  York  for  2900  men  more. 

2Sth.  Mr.  Burke's  Bill  again.  Clause  for  abolishing  the 
Wardrobe  rejected  by  210  to  162;  and  then,  that  for 
abolishing  Board  of  Works  by  203  to  188.  On  one  of 
these  debates,  Lord  George  Gordon  took  notice  that  the 
rejection  of  the  Contractors'  Bill  had  made  no  impression — 
it  was  very  true — not  the  least;  nor  had  the  Opposition 
had  the  art  and  industry  to  raise  a  flame.  Charles  Fox 
had  been  at  Newmarket  instead  of  applying  to  it ;  and  the 


400 


LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


MAT, 


country  took  no  notice  of  it.  The  petitions  had  been  art- 
fully set  on  foot  by  Messrs.  Wyvil  and  Mason,  at  York ; 
had  been  promoted  in  some  other  counties  by  some  of  the 
leaders ;  but  did  not  seem  at  all  to  proceed  from  a  general 
spirit  of  dissatisfaction  or  party. 


MAY. 


1st.  THE  House  of  Commons  sat  till  past  three  in  the 
morning  on  Lord  North's  Commissioners  of  Accounts, 
when  he  gave  up  one  of  them,  and  carried  Sir  Guy 
Carleton  by  195  to  172. 

6th.  General  Conway  moved  for  a  bill  for  pacifying 
America.  He  had  long  meditated  his  plan,  and  had  com- 
municated it  both  to  the  Administration  and  Opposition. 
The  former  would  not  explain  their  intentions  to  him  ; 
the  others  were  but  part  for  it.  Hartley  intended  to  move 
for  the  recall  of  the  troops,  and  Sir  George  Saville  wished 
to  have  that  plan  preferred.  Charles  Fox  supported 
Conway  warmly,  but  Lord  George  Germain e  and  Lord 
North  opposed  it,  and  even  T.  Pitt.  Eden1  moved  for 
the  previous  question,  and  it  was  carried  by  123  to  81. 
Conway  was  very  severe  on  the  bench  of  Bishops  for 
dipping  so  deep  in  blood,  and  Charles  Fox  much  more  so. 

As  the  Irish  magistrates  would  not  obey  the  English 
Mutiny  Bill,  the  Irish  patriots  proposed  one  of  their  own, 
which  greatly  distressed  Government ;  for,  on  one  hand, 


1  Lord  North  was  much  inclined  to 
adopt  Conway's  measure  ;  and  Sir  Grey 
Ccoper  pressed  him  to  it,  but  he  gave 


way  to  Eden.  Kigby  was  for  it,  too, 
and  went  away  because  he  would  not 
vote  against  it. 


1780.  MOTIONS  IN  PARLIAMENT.  401 

they  had  in  effect  no  Mutiny  Bill ;   on  the  other,  it  was 
throwing  off  the  English  one. 

The  Irish  had  also  laid  a  new  duty  on  port  wine ;  the 
Portuguese  determined  to  prohibit  Irish  linens.  The 
English  Ministers  complained  to  Pinto,  the  Portuguese 
Minister;  he  said  the  Irish  were  independent,  and  his 
master  was  in  no  alliance  with  them. 

One  Tandy,  of  the  Duke  of  Leinster's  regiment,  had 
been  mutinous  on  the  deferring  the  repeal  of  Poyning's 
Law.  The  Duke  threatened  to  break  him ;  the  corps  peti- 
tioned for  him ;  the  Duke  persisted  and  dismissed  the 
man.  Forty  of  his  comrades  resigned. 

Sth.  Motion  in  the  Commons  for  inquiry  into  the  order 
given  on  the  6th  of  April  to  the  Guards  to  be  in  readiness : 
rejected,  after  a  debate,  by  133  to  91. 

Same  day,  Sawbridge  moved  for  triennial  Parliaments. 
Burke  declared  strongly  against  it,  and  said  he  desired  his 
constituents  should  know  his  opinion.  Fox  for  it.  Re- 
jected by  182  to  91. 

Great  dissensions  at  this  time  on  that  question  between 
Lord  Shelburne  and  Burke. 

11^/i.  Hartley's  motion  for  peace  with  America  put  off 
on  account  of  the  thinness  of  the  House. 

\Tth.  Sir  Charles  Hardy  died  suddenly  at  Portsmouth. 

18th.  House  of  Commons:  Burke's  bill;  two  clauses 
rejected;  he  said  he  would  divide  no  more.  Admiral 
Barrington,  though  pressed  in  the  strongest  manner,  and 
with  the  largest  offers,  refused  to  take  the  command  of  the 
fleet.  It  was  given  to  Admiral  Gray,  an  old  officer,  who 
had  not  been  at  sea  for  twenty  years. 

24#A.  Account  from  Admiral  Rodney  of  his  late  en- 
gagement with  the  French  fleet;  both  sides  suffered  a 
good  deal.  The  French  retired,  and  Rodney,  by  the 

VOL.  li.  2  D 


402  LAST  JOURNALS  OP1  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

bad  behaviour  of  some  of  bis  captains,  did  not  get  a  vic- 
tory. The  French  Admiral  was  twice  on  fire,  and  so  was 
Rodney's  ship,  and  he  was  towed  out  of  the  line,  but 
returned  to  it.  He  got  between  the  French  and  Martinico, 
where  only  they  could  refit.  The  Court  published  an 
'  Extraordinary  Gazette,'  and  called  it  a  complete  victory. 

The  King  himself  commenced  an  opposition  to  Admiral 
Keppel  at  Windsor  for  the  next  general  election,  and  set 
up  one  Powney  against  him. 

26th.  Mr.  Dunning  moved  for  a  Report  from  the  Com- 
mittee of  April  6th,  which  had  never  been  made.  Rigby 
attacked  Charles  Fox ;  said,  when  the  petitioners  had  been 
reported  at  the  several  assizes,  he  supposed  the  country 
gentlemen  had  told  their  constituents  they  must  choose 
between  Lord  North  and  Charles  Fox,  and  they  had  pre- 
ferred the  former  ;  and  that  the  next  Parliament  would  be 
still  more  for  the  Court  than  the  present.  However,  he 
was  not  tender  to  Lord  North,  particularly  on  the  Ameri- 
can war,  which  he  said  he  knew,  from  being  Paymaster, 
we  could  not  carry  on.  He  commended  General  Con- 
way's  bill,  and  said  he  should  have  been  for  it  if  it  had  not 
been  for  a  few  things  he  disliked  in  it.  He  blamed  the 
Duke  of  Grafton  for  the  beginning  of  the  war,  though  he 
had  lately  been  making  court  to  him,  but  had  been 
rejected ;  and  he  was  thought  to  have  glanced  at  his 
friend  Lord  Gower's  resolution.  Charles  Fox  told  him 
that  if  he  was  in  Lord  North's  place  he  should  not  be 
much  obliged  to  him  for  such  support.  In  fact,  Lord 
North,  after  the  debate,  sent  the  Lord  Advocate  to  Rigby 
complaining  of  his  hostility,  and  wishing  to  live  on  better 
terms  with  him,  which  Rigby  received  coldly.  The  motion 
was  rejected  by  177  to  134. 

The  Mutiny  Bill  carried  with  a  high  hand  in  Ireland. 


1780.  GORDON  RIOTS.  403 

The  Chancellor  firm  against  submitting  to  it.  Wedder- 
burn,  probably  in  opposition  to  the  Chancellor,  for  sub- 
mitting to  it.  The  Irish  softened  the  preamble  even 
beyond  what  they  owned  they  meant,  to  keep  some 
decency.  The  Chancellor  very  ill,  and  thought  in  a 
dangerous  way. 


JUNE. 


1st.  DEBATE  in  the  Lords  on  Lord  Shelburne's  motion 
about  Holland,  &c. 

2nd.  Lord  George  Gordon,  after  giving  notice  of  his 
intention  in  the  House  of  Commons,  and  by  public  sum- 
mons in  advertisements,  went  to  the  House  at  the  head  of 
a  vast  multitude  calling  themselves  the  Protestant  Asso- 
ciation, and  presented  a  petition  with  an  immense  volume 
of  names.  A  prodigious  riot  began,  and  fell  especially  on 
the  Peers,  many  of  whom  were  insulted  and  torn  out  of 
their  chariots ;  against  the  Lord  President  Bathurst,  who 
behaved  with  great  firmness,  Lord  Stormont,  Lord  Hills- 
borough,  Lord  Townshend,  Lord  Willoughby  de  Broke, 
and  Lord  Boston,  who  was  nearly  trampled  to  death.  All 
these  Lords  came  into  the  House  dishevelled.  Lord  Mans- 
field was  in  danger,  but  was  saved  by  the  Archbishop  of 
York,  who,  being  in  a  Committee  and  hearing  of  his  danger, 
flew  to  his  rescue,  burst  through  the  crowd,  and  led  him  off. 
Mr.  Ellis  was  carried  prisoner  to  the  new  Westminster 
Guildhall,  but  escaped  by  a  back  door.  The  Bishop  of 
Lincoln  was  in  great  danger,  and  escaped  over  the  leads  of 
the  House.  Lord  Sandwich  turned  back  on  seeing  the 
crowd.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Edmund  Burke  were 

2  D  2 


404  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

particularly  threatened  by  the  mob.  Lord  George  Gordon, 
from  the  doors  and  windows  of  the  House,  denounced  to 
the  populace  the  Members  who  spoke  against  them.  Gene- 
ral Conway  reprimanded  him  soundly  in  public  and  private. 
Colonel  Murray  told  him  he  was  a  disgrace  to  his  family, 
and  that  if  anybody  was  killed  he  should  not  escape. 
Another  Member  followed  him  to  every  place  he  stirred, 
and  vowed  the  same.  The  Speaker,  Lord  North,  and  the 
Members,  behaved  with  more  resolution  than  the  other 
House,  and  sent  for  the  Guards.  The  Duke  of  Glou- 
cester had  spoken  there  for  the  first  time,  and  advised  only 
the  civil  power.  In  the  mean  time  all  the  avenues  to  and 
between  both  Houses  were  besieged  and  occupied  by  the 
rioters  ;  the  House  of  Lords,  where  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
had  intended  to  move  a  bill  for  annual  Parliaments, 
adjourned  to  the  next  day  on  account  of  the  tumult.  Lord 
Mansfield  was  exceedingly  terrified,  and  said  to  the  Duke 
of  Gloucester  this  country  was  undone,  that  a  change  of 
Administration  might  be  good,  if  any  coalition  be  made. 
Lord  Mahon  harangued  the  mob,  and  persuaded  many  to 
retire  ;  but  the  other  House  was  in  great  danger  from 
their  fury  for  four  hours,  and  Colonel  Luttrell  proposed 
to  open  the  doors,  which  were  locked,  and  cut  their  way 
sword  in  hand.  At  nine  at  night  the  Horse  Guards 
arrived  and  dispersed  the  tumult,  after  Lord  George  Gor- 
don had  moved  to  take  the  petition  into  immediate  con- 
sideration, and  had  but  one  vote  with  him. 

At  ten  the  riot  began  again,  and  the  chapels  of  the 
Bavarian  and  Sardinian  Ministers  were  attacked,  gutted, 
and  plundered,  and  the  furniture  and  seats  burnt.  Mon- 
sieur Rantran,  a  Russian,  was  seized  in  the  tumult  and  sent 
to  prison  ;  but  was  reclaimed  by  Monsieur  Simonin,  the 
Russian  Envoy,  and  tamely  released. 


1780.  PROPOSAL  TO  GENERAL  CON  WAY.  405 

3rd.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  moved  his  bill  for  annual 
Parliaments,  but  it  being  rejected  and  little  supported  even 
by  his  own  party,  he  was  disgusted,  and  declared  he  would 
go  into  the  country,  as  he  did  the  next  day. 

The  same  day  happened  a  very  extraordinary  negotia- 
tion. General  Conway  received  a  letter  from  an  inferior 
person,  who  said  he  was  authorized  to  acquaint  him  that 
the  King  had  a  mind  to  make  a  change  in  the  Administra- 
tion, and  would  leave  it  entirely  to  General  Conway  to 
form  a  new  one,  his  Majesty  excepting  but  three  persons 
whom  he  would  not  remove — the  Chancellor,  Lord  Sand- 
wich, and  Lord  George  Germaine,  the  latter  of  whom  the 
letter  declared  had  the  King's  confidence^  which  Lord 
North  had  forfeited  by  his  indolence  and  inactivity. 
General  Conway,  his  Majesty  insisted,  should  be  Com- 
mander-in-Chief ;  the  Duke  of  Richmond  might,  if  he 
pleased,  go  Ambassador  to  Paris  on  a  peace;  and,  after 
this  campaign,  Lord  Camden  and  Mr.  Burke  might  go  to 
America  to  treat  of  a  reconciliation.  Many  assurances 
were  added  of  his  Majesty's  good  intentions  and  disposi- 
tions towards  this  country,  and  it  was  proposed  to  Mr. 
Conway  to  meet  Lord  George  Germaine  at  night,  as  by 
accident,  at  the  letter-writer's  house,  who  had  a  door  into 
the  Park. 

Mr.  Conway  immediately  sent  for  me,  showed  me  the 
letter,  and  asked  my  opinion.  I  said  at  once  that  it  was 
the  silliest  plan  I  had  ever  seen  of  the  sort,  and  that  I 
thought  he  could  not  give  in  to  it ;  that  the  proposed 
change  was  no  real  one,  would  render  things  worse,  not 
better,  for  Lord  George  Germaine  was  much  more  un- 
popular than  Lord  North,  whom  the  King  was  betraying ; 
and  that  Mr.  Conway 's  friends  would  certainly  not  accede, 
for  the  King  had  been  so  weak  as  to  reserve  the  chance  of 


406  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

another  campaign  in  America  before  he  would  treat ;  and 
as  sillily  discovered  that  he  meant  to  send  the  Duke  of 
Richmond,  Mr.  Conway's  friend  and  son-in-law,  and  Lord 
Camden  and  Burke  out  of  the  way,  and  keep  the  Chan- 
cellor, Lord  Sandwich,  and  Lord  George  Germaine  as  his 
confidential  Ministers ;  and  that  I  was  surprised  Lord 
George  Germaine  had  had  so  little  sense  as  to  expect  any 
success  to  so  foolish  and  glaring  a  project ;  that  I  saw 
nothing  desirable  in  it  but  Mr.  Conway's  commanding  the 
army  instead  of  so  wretched  and  incapable  a  creature  as 
Lord  Amherst ;  and  as  for  the  King's  promises,  they  were 
the  effects  of  fear,  and  not  to  be  depended  on  a  moment ; 
and  that  for  all  these  reasons  I  was  against  his  entering 
into  the  negotiation.  He  said  he  had  abstained  from 
speaking  till  he  had  heard  my  opinion ;  and  that  he 
agreed  with  me  in  every  point ;  that  he  did  not  like 
treating  with  Lord  George  Germaine,  nor  could  approve 
of  him;  and  then,  dashing  down  the  letter  with  warmth 
very  unusual  to  him,  he  said,  "  And  to  think  I  would  act 
a  moment  with  Lord  Sandwich  ! " 

He  sat  down  immediately  and  wrote  an  answer  to  the 
person,  with  every  expression  of  gratitude  for  the  King's 
goodness  to  him,  with  high  commendations  of  his  Majesty's 
good  intentions,  but  declining  the  negociation,  which  he 
said  was  what  he  was  neither  desirous  of  nor  fit  for.  He 
had  a  mind  to  make  a  little  repugnance  to  Lord  George, 
and  total  to  Lord  Sandwich ;  but  I  persuaded  him  to  omit 
both.  I  said  the  negociation  might  get  wind,  and  his 
excepting  to  persons  would  look  as  if  that  was  the  occasion 
of  his  hanging  back;  whereas  it  was  better  to  show  no 
inclination  at  all  to  coming  into  power.  If  he  named 
Lord  Sandwich,  I  told  him,  Lord  Sandwich  would  act  as 
he  had  done  when  the  first  negociation  was  broken  off  with 


1780.  GORDON  RIOTS.  407 

Lord  Chatham  (I  think,  in  1764),  when  Lord  Sandwich 
told  every  man  whom  he  wished  to  detach  from  Lord 
Chatham  that  Lord  Chatham  had  particularly  excepted 
them. 

What  Lord  Mansfield  had  said  the  day  before  to  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester  looked  as  if  his  Lordship  knew  some- 
thing of  this  attempt  at  negociation. 

At  night  the  mob  attacked  Sir  George  Saville's  house, 
who  had  moved  the  toleration,  and  did  some  mischief 
there,  as  they  did  in  other  places  on  the  Sunday  and 
Monday,  4th  and  5th.  Lord  Sandwich  was  torn  out  of 
his  chariot  that  morning,  and  had  his  face  cut,  and  was 
saved  only  by  the  Horse  Guards,  who  carried  him  home, 
whence  he  wrote  to  the  House  of  Lords  the  reason  of  his 
absence.  The  houses  of  the  Justices  Fielding  and  Hyde 
were  demolished  and  their  goods  burnt.  Lord  George 
Gordon  was  drawn  in  triumph  by  the  mob  from  the  House 
of  Commons. 

6th.  The  mob  grew  very  outrageous  and  entirely  de- 
stroyed and  burnt  everything  in  Lord  Mansfield's  house,  he 
himself  narrowly  escaping.  They  had  grown  particularly 
enraged  by  Colonel  Woodford's  ordering  the  Guards  to 
fire,  who  killed  eight  persons.  Lord  Mansfield  and  his 
wife  were  sheltered  at  St.  James's,  and  Colonel  Woodford 
was  forced  to  abscond. 

Wednesday  the  1th  was  the  fatal  day.  By  eight  at 
night  the  Bank  was  attempted  and  narrowly  escaped. 
Newgate  and  the  King's  Bench  were  forced,  all  the  pri- 
soners released,  and  the  buildings  gutted,  burnt,  and 
destroyed  as  far  as  possible.  Mr.  Langdale,  a  wealthy 
Catholic  distiller,  who  the  day  before  had  tried  to  appease 
them  by  money  and  liquor,  had  his  house  and  stock  bunit 
to  a  vast  amount,  as  had  a  Catholic  innkeeper  in  Holborn. 


408  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUKE, 

Barnard's  Inn  and  the  Fleet  Prison  were  also  fired,  and 
seven  distinct  conflagrations  were  to  be  seen  at  once.  The 
Inns  of  Court  were  also  threatened,  and  variety  of  persons, 
but  not  a  large  number,  were  killed,  except  by  the  spirits 
at  Mr.  Langdale's,  by  drinking  which  many  perished. 
The  mob  extorted  money  from  several  persons  and 
houses,  on  threats  of  burning  them  as  Catholics  ;  and  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester,  who  went  disguised  in  a  hackney 
coach  to  the  Fleet  Market,  was  stopped  and  plundered. 
The  Justices  were  afraid  to  act,  and  the  Lord  Mayor 
Kennet  and  Sheriff  Pughe  behaved  shamefully.  Troops 
were  sent  for  from  all  quarters,  and  some  arrived  and  were 
encamped  in  Hyde  Park.  The  mob  was  marching  to  burn 
Lord  Mansfield's  villa  at  Caen  Wood,  but  were  met  and 
turned  back  by  a  regiment  of  militia.  That  evening  a 
grand  Privy  Council  and  the  Judges  were  summoned  at 
the  Queen's  house,  and  the  Attorney-General  and  Soli- 
citor-General. The  two  Chief  Justices,  I  think,  were  not 
there.  De  Grey  was  not,  nor  Lord  Mansfield,  but  Wed- 
derburn  was  there ;  and  it  is  very  memorable  that  Burke, 
though  in  Opposition,  proposed  to  have  military  law  pro- 
claimed ;  and  that  Wedderburn,  though  a  Scot  and  tool 
of  the  Court,  dissuaded  it,  urging  that  all  causes  on 
private  property  must  stand  still.  Burke,  born  a  Catholic, 
was  so  enraged  at  the  riots  against  toleration  of  Popery, 
that  he  forgot  the  Whiggism  he  had  adopted  ;  as  law,  his 
profession,  weighed  with  Wedderburn  against  his  politics. 

All  Privy  Councillors,  though  in  Opposition,  were  sum- 
moned. Lord  Rockingham  and  the  Duke  of  Portland 
went ;  General  Conway  would  not  go  ;  the  Duke  of  Grafton 
wrote  to  thank  the  King,  but  said  there  were  some  of  the 
Ministers  with  whom  he  would  not  sit  in  council.  Lord 
Rockingham  took  that  opportunity  of  asking  an  audience, 


1780.  GORDON  RIOTS.  409 

and  made  a  bold  and  severe  remonstrance  to  the  King, 
laying  all  to  the  fault  of  the  Ministers.  The  Judges  being 
asked  if  the  riots  would  authorize  shutting  up  the  courts 
of  justice  and  declaring  military  law,  Judge  Gould  alone 
said  there  was  not  enough  to  authorize  either.  The  Lord 
President  Bathurst,  though  then  fuddled,  persuaded  the 
King  not  to  make  Gould  too  popular  by  contradicting 
him  ;  on  which  it  was  determined  not  to  shut  up  the 
Courts  nor  proclaim  martial  law,  but  to  empower  the 
military  to  act  at  their  discretion,  on  which  Lord  Rocking- 
ham  and  the  Duke  of  Portland  left  the  Council.  The 
next  day, 

8^,  more  regiments  arrived,  and  near  thirty  persons 
were  killed  rioting  in  Fleet-street,  on  which  all  tumults 
ceased,  except  that  a  popish  chapel  was  burnt  at  Bath  and 
another  at  Hull.  Lord  George  Gordon  had  threatened  in 
the  House  that  numbers  were  on  the  road  from  Birming- 
ham and  other  places,  and  bodies  were  expected  from 
Kent  and  Essex,  but  not  a  man  appeared.  Eleven  thou- 
sand men  of  the  army  were  assembled  in  and  near  London, 
and  camps  held  in  St.  James's  and  Hyde  Parks,  with 
which  the  King  was  delighted.  Burke  was  almost  frantic 
with  passion,  and  was  constantly  with  Lord  North,  which 
occasioned  reports  that  he  and  Lord  Buckingham  were 
coming  into  place.  The  Catholics  were  terrified,  with 
reason.  Lord  Petre's  house  was  saved  by  the  Guards,  and 
Lord  Rockingham  had  a  garrison  in  his  house,  but  few 
Catholics  suffered.  The  Earl  of  Surrey  at  that  moment 
turned  Protestant,  as  he  had  of  late  designed  to  do.  The 
House  of  Lords  had  adjourned  for  a  week  on  account  of 
the  riots,  but  on  the  8th  the  House  of  Commons  met, 
when  General  Conway,  who,  on  the  first  mob,  had  pro- 
posed to  take  the  popish  laws  into  consideration  when  the 


410  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

riots  should  be  over,  which  had  been  agreed  to,  intended 
to  move  to  repeal  them ;  but  to  his  great  surprise,  found 
the  House  had  adjourned  two  hours  before  the  usual  time, 
when  not  50  members  were  arrived.  This  was  imputed 
to  the  Speaker's  advice.  Conway,  displeased,  went  out  of 
town. 

9th.  Lord  George  Gordon  was  seized  by  messengers  in 
his  own  house,  and  carried  to  the  Horse-Guards.  The 
populace  in  Wimpole-street,  where  he  lived,  were  now 
turned  against  and  insulted  him.  He  was  examined  by 
the  Council,  and  thence  committed  prisoner  to  the  Tower, 
where  not  even  his  brother  Lord  William  was  admitted 
to  see  him  for  the  first  ten  days.  He  asked  frequently 
if  more  persons  were  not  sent  prisoners  there,  and  was 
shocked  when  told  that  not  a  single  person  had  inquired 
for  him.  It  was  much  apprehended  that  there  would  be  a 
rising  in  Scotland,  and  Duke  Hamilton,  Lord  Selkirk,  the 
Marquis  of  Graham,  and  others,  were  sent  down  privately 
to  prevent  it.  Fisher,  a  very  shrewd  man,  secretary  to 
the  Protestant  Association,  was  taken  up,  examined,  and 
discharged,  but  this,  I  believe,  was  in  concert  with  himself. 
I  know  he  had  been  privately  at  Twickenham  with  Wei- 
bore  Ellis  on  the  8th,  and  it  was  said  he  had  given  up  all 
the  correspondence  of  the  Society.  Lady  Hertford,  lady 
of  the  bedchamber  to  the  Queen,  told  me  Lord  George 
Gordon,  besides  his  well-known  audience  in  which  he  read 
a  pamphlet  to  the  King,  had  had  one  or  two  more  audi- 
ences, the  last  of  which  was  in  May,  when  he  told  the 
King  this  should  be  the  last  time,  and  that  he  had  given 
him  warning. 

The  same  day  Wedderburn  kissed  hands  as  Chief 
Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  and  in  a  few  days  as  Baron 
Loughborough. 


1780.  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER  WITH  THE  KING.  411 

10th.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  wrote  to  the  King  to  say 
that  his  Majesty  knew  how  ready  he  had  been  on  all  occa- 
sions to  offer  his  service  in  any  difficulties ;  that  he  had 
only  forborne  now  because  they  were  so  great  that  he 
thought  he  should  only  embarrass  his  Majesty ;  but  that 
he  saw  the  capital  in  so  much  danger  and  so  many  neglects 
that  he  thought  it  his  duty  to  acquaint  him  with  them, 
and  therefore  did  beg  an  audience.  The  next  day  the 
King,  by  General  Craggs,  sent  an  answer  full  of  most 
cordial  expressions,  told  the  Duke  he  should  be  glad  to 
see  him  and  his  children,  but  there  must  be  no  mention  of 
the  Duchess.  The  Duke,  shocked  at  that  restriction,  after 
reading  the  letter  twice,  thrust  the  letter  into  the  fire,  and 
said  to  Craggs,  "  It  is  not  fit  that  this  letter  should  ever 
be  seen."  His  Royal  Highness  went  to  the  King,  who 
wept  over  him,  and  told  him  he  had  ever  loved  him  the 
best  of  his  family,  and  hoped  to  see  him  often.  The  Duke 
said  all  he  intended,  and  told  me  the  King  had  heard  with 
great  patience  very  strong  things  that  the  Duke  said  to 
him,  who  said,  "  Sir,  there  ought  to  be  one  person  in- 
trusted with  the  care  of  the  capital."  "  Oh,"  said  the 
King,  "I  will  take  care  of  that  myself."  The  King  told 
him  he  should  see  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  asked  if  he 
would  not  go  to  the  Queen  ?  The  Duke  hesitated  to 
express  that  he  suspected  her  of  preventing  the  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  Duchess,  and  then  replied,  "Sir,  if  you 
desire  it,"  and  went  to  her.  The  King  acted  with  great 
confidence,  complained  of  Lord  Rockingham,  who,  he  said, 
had  asked  an  audience,  as  his  Majesty  expected  to  thank 
him  for  granting  him  a  guard  during  the  riots,  but  had 
taken  that  opportunity  to  lecture  him.  His  Majesty  also 
spoke  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond's  warmth ;  the  Duke 
replied,  "  Sir,  the  Duke  of  Richmond  is  fifteen  years  older 
than  when  you  knew  him,  and  is  grown  much  more  tern- 


412  .  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUKE, 

perate  ;"  on  which  the  King  said  no  more,  but  asked  him 
if  he  should  not  see  him  again  ?  The  Duke  replied,  he 
had  a  difficulty.  "  Oh  !  "  cried  the  King,  suspecting  he 
meant  on  the  Duchess's  account,  "if  you  have  any  diffi- 
culties." "  They  are,"  replied  the  Duke,  "  the  fear  of 
being  troublesome." 

The  next  day  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  hearing  his 
brothers  were  reconciled,  asked  leave  to  go  to  the  King 
too.  The  King  sent  him  word  he  had  been  three  years 
in  Opposition,  but  supposed  he  now  meant  to  quit  it. 
However,  as  he  had  seen  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  he 
would  see  him  too,  and  did,  and  afterwards  said  to  the 
Duke  of  Gloucester,  "  I  found  Harry  as  much  a  boy  as 
ever."  This  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  told  me  ;  I  re- 
plied, "  Pray,  Madam,  does  not  the  Duke  of  Cumberland 
say  the  same  of  the  King  ?  " 

The  Duke  of  Cumberland  asked  to  see  the  Queen  and 
the  children.  He  was  carried  to  the  Queen,  but  the  King 
said  his  children  were  out  of  town.  However,  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland  contrived  to  meet  the  Prince  of  Wales 
and  Prince  Frederick  as  they  were  riding  in  Hyde  Park, 
got  out  of  his  coach,  and  embraced  them.  On  this  the 
King  told  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  that,  though  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland  had  taken  that  advantage,  he  (Gloucester) 
should  see  the  Prince  first  at  home,  and  carried  the  Duke 
to  the  Princes  in  the  Queen's  apartment.  She,  as  if  not 
disturbing  the  Duke,  retired.  They  were  charmed  to  see 
their  uncle,  and  the  King  carried  the  farce  of  confidence 
so  far  that  he  gave  the  Duke  leave  to  visit  the  Prince  of 
\\  ales  at  Kew  on  the  Friday  following,  the  16th,  though 
he  himself  should  be  in  town.  Colonel  Hotham,  who 
probably  had  been  ordered  by  the  Queen  to  stay  in  the 
room  at  that  interview,  was  so  weak  as  to  tell  the  Prince 
he  should  be  in  the  room.  The  Prince  replied,  "  Indeed 


1780.  DUKE  OF  CUMBERLAND  AT  COURT.  413 

you  shall  not ;  for  I  will  write  to  the  King  to  desire  you 
may  not," — and  did ;  and  the  King  wrote  to  Hotham  to 
leave  them  together. 

The  Duke  of  Cumberland,  transported  at  the  reconcilia- 
tion, said  he  would  go  to  Court  the  next  Thursday.  The 
Duke  of  Gloucester  said  nothing.  Lord  North  was  eager 
to  have  him  go  to  Court  too,  and  pressed  Sir  John 
Dick,  a  favourite  of  the  Duke,  to  press  him  to  go,  and 
said,  all  the  rest  (meaning  the  Duchess)  would  follow  ; 
though,  if  Lord  North  knew  anything,  he  knew  it  would 
not — nay,  that  if  the  Duke  sacrificed  her,  she  never  would 
be  received.  Lord  North  asked  Sir  John  who  influenced 
the  Duke — did  the  Duchess  ?  Had  the  Duke  seen  Lord 
George  Germaine  ?  This  showed  that  Lord  North  had 
discovered  that  Lord  George  Germaine  was  grown  a 
favourite  of  the  King,  and  was  jealous  of  him  ;  but  Lord 
George  Germaine,  unwilling  to  risk  his  new  favour,  now 
kept  away  from  the  Duke,  though  he  had  till  now  kept  up 
appearances.  I  will  mention  presently  a  trifling  circum- 
stance that  belongs  to  this  part. 

The  Duke  of  Cumberland  sent  for  his  guards  as  for- 
merly when  the  Princes  went  to  Court,  and  went  thither, 
and  said  not  a  word  of  his  Duchess,  who,  it  was  given  out, 
was  satisfied  that  her  husband  was  reconciled  to  the  King. 
She  was  much  applauded,  and  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester 
as  much  condemned,  as  it  was  imputed  to  her  pride  that 
she  would  not  let  her  husband  go  to  Court  without  her. 
But  the  public  knew  little  of  the  matter,  as  will  appear  by 
what  I  am  going  to  relate.  The  Duchess  of  Gloucester 
wrote  to  me  on  the  14th,  to  desire  me  to  come  to  town  on 
the  16th,  when  the  Duke  would  be  at  Kew,  and  she  should 
be  alone,  and  should  have  time  to  tell  me  all  that  had 
passed.  I  concluded  the  Duke  would  offer  his  service  on 


414  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOE  ACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

the  tumults, "and  wondered  he  did  not;  but  I  made  it  a 
rule  never  to  offer  advice  unless  when  he  began  a  subject 
that  would  do  and  seemed  to  ask  it.  I  knew  he  was 
afraid,  and  it  was  sensible  to  be  so,  of  being  thought  to  be 
guided  by  the  Duchess's  family ;  and  it  was  not  at  all 
in  my  disposition  to  be  at  the  trouble  of  governing  any- 
body, which  is  in  reality  being  their  slave,  for  nobody  is 
governed  by  any  one  but  who  humours  them,  and  who  is 
forced  to  give  way  nine  times  in  order  to  succeed  the  tenth 
in  some  favourite  object.  I  had  always  avoided  Courts, 
had  still  more  resolutely  kept  myself  clear  of  my  niece's 
match  with  the  Duke;  and  could  I  have  governed  the 
Duke,  or  had  I  wished  it,  I  knew  it  would  be  to  no  pur- 
pose, for  I  knew  enough  of  the  King  to  be  sure  that,  if  the 
Duke  had  even  never  offended  him,  he  never  would  have 
communicated  to  the  Duke  a  ray  of  power.  Thus  I  had 
absolutely  not  known  a  tittle  of  the  Duke's  message  to  the 
King,  nor  knew  it  then  but  by  accident  at  Hampton 
Court  by  persons  come  from  town  on  the  very  day  after 
they  met.  As  I  heard  nothing  from  the  Duchess,  nor  a 
syllable  that  she  was  not  included,  I  concluded  she  was ; 
and  being  determined,  if  they  were  well  at  Court,  to  relax 
in  my  attendance,  knowing  that,  though  the  cordiality  be- 
tween King  and  Duke  would  be  only  outward,  they  would 
have  Court  enough,  and  not  intending  to  return  to  Court 
myself  unless  the  Duke  desired  it,  which  I  did  not  think 
him  likely  to  do  earnestly,  as  he  would  not  be  fond  of 
being  attended  by  his  wife's  relations,  I  remained  in  the 
country  till  I  was  sent  for. 

Before  I  saw  the  Duchess  I  went  to  Lord  Hertford  to 
learn  a  little  of  the  state  of  the  reconciliation.  Lord 
Hertford  told  me  that  he  himself  had  asked  the  King  if 
he  might  not  wait  on  the  Duke  and  Duchess  ?  The 


1780.  VISIT  TO  DUCHESS  OF  GLOUCESTER.  415 

King  replied,  "  Certainly  on  the  Duke ;  on  the  Duchess,  . 
certainly  not."  He  himself  could  not  receive  the  Duchess 
without  affronting  all  the  sovereigns  of  Europe  by  coun- 
tenancing a  mesalliance.  Lord  Hertford  added  that  the 
King  had  ordered  Lord  Stormont,  and  not  him,  to  acquaint 
the  Foreign  Ministers  that  he  and  his  brothers  were 
reconciled.  They  (the  Ministers)  might  pay  their  court 
to  them,  but  not  to  the  Duchess. 

I  then  went  to  the  Duchess,  who  showed  me  the  King's 
and  Duke's  letters,  and  told  me  all  that  had  passed.  I 
found  that  she  had  not  heard  of  the  order  to  Lord  Stor- 
mont, and  acquainted  her  with  it.  She  was  much  hurt  at 
the  King's  insidious  behaviour,  acting  so  much  fondness 
for  the  Duke  and  wounding  him  behind  his  back.  I  said 
I  had  hoped  she  would  have  seen  the  King  and  Queen  in 
private ;  that  I  had  never  wished  her  to  go  to  the  drawing- 
room,  where  she  would  have  stood  like  one  of  the  maids 
of  honour,  and  would  have  been  neglected  by  the  courtiers, 
not  to  give  jealousy  to  the  King  and  Queen.  She  said 
she  entirely  agreed  with  me,  and  added  Princess  Amelia 
left  off  the  drawing-rooms  because  the  King  and  Queen 
never  spoke  to  her  till  they  had  spoken  to  many  others,  and 
had  left  her  undistinguished  in  the  crowd. 

The  next  day  the  Duke  kept  his  bed  with  a  bad  fit  of 
the  asthma.  The  day  after  he  sent  for  me  to  his  bedside, 
and  repeated  all  that  had  passed  and  what  the  Duchess 
had  told  me.  He  said  he  had  never  intended  anything 
but  to  disburthen  his  mind  of  what  he  thought  the  King 
should  know ;  that  he  had  not  thought  of  going  again,  but 
that  his  line  was  simple — he  would  go  when  sent  for.  He 
had  told  the  King  he  wanted  nothing,  and  would  take 
nothing — so  the  Duchess  had  told  me ;  and  it  is  justice  to 
him  to  say  that,  before  the  reconciliation,  he  had  twice 


416  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

said  to  me  of  late  that  he  thought  General  Conway  the 
only  man  fit  to  be  at  the  head  of  the  army.     This  was  the 
nobler,  as  General  Conway  did  not  go  to  the  Duke's  Court. 
He  said  he  would  not  carry  his  children  to  Court  without 
their  mother.     "Sophia,"  said  he,  "is  old  enough  to  ask 
why  her  mother  does  not  go."     He  repeated  now  what  he 
had  said  more  than  once  to  me  before :  that  before  his  going 
to  Italy  he  would  not  have  insisted  on  the  Duchess  being 
received  at  Court;    but   since  the  King  of  France  had 
invited  her  by  name  to  Versailles  (which  was  only  pre- 
vented by  their  not  going  through  Paris),  the  Great  Duke 
and  Great  Duchess  had  received  her,  and  the  Emperor 
would  have  done  so,    he  should  affront  more   princes  if 
he  afterwards  gave  up  his  wife,  and  this  was  a  full  contra- 
diction to  the  King's  plea  to  Lord  Hertford.     The  Duke 
and  the  Duchess  had  been  much  hurt  at  the  message  to 
Lord  Stormont,  but  he  had  calmed  her.     I  said  I  could 
not  know  such  a  circumstance,  and  let  his  Royal  Highness 
remain  in  ignorance  of  it.    He  said  I  had  done  very  right. 
He  told  me  that  the  Prince  of  Wales  had  told  him  that 
General  Carpenter,  a  particular  favourite  of  the  King,  had, 
in  his  Majesty's  presence,  commended  the  Duke  of  Cum- 
berland for  going  to  Court,  and  had  been  very  impertinent 
about  his  (the  Duke  of  Gloucester)  •  not  going,  and  that 
the  King  had  said,   "General  Carpenter,  I  did  not  ask 
your  advice.     I  like  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's  coming, 
but  I  entirely  approve  of  the   conduct  of  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester,"  which  was  likening  two  contrarieties.     I  said 
to  the  Duke,  "  Sir,  may  I  repeat  that  the  King  entirely 
approves  of  your  Royal  High  ness's  conduct  ?  "    He  replied, 
"  You   may  tell  it   everywhere."      Two   days  after,  the 
Duke  told  me  the  Prince  of  Wales  had  said  to  him,- "  I 
cannot  come  to  see  you  now  without  the  King's  leave,  but 


1780.        DUKE  OF  CUMBERLAND'S  INTENDED  LEVEE.          417 

in  three  years  I  shall  be  of  age,  and  then  I  may  act  for 
myself.  I  will  declare  I  will  visit  you."  I  said  to  the 
Duke,  "Let  me  therefore  beg  your  Royal  Highness  to 
bear  any  mortification  from  the  King,  as  if  you  break  with 
him  again  you  will  not  see  the  Prince,  and  he  may  be  set 
against  you.  If  you  keep  well  with  him,  it  will  be  of  the 
utmost  consequeuce  to  your  children." 

The  Duke  of  Cumberland  declaring  he  would  have  a 
levee  on  the  19th  and  see  the  Foreign  Ministers  on  the 
20th,  they  sent  Mr.  Cotterell,  Master  of  the  Ceremonies, 
to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  to  know  when  his  Royal  High- 
ness would  please  to  receive  them.  He  replied  he  did 
not  intend  to  have  levees  or  drawing-rooms,  and  that  he 
should  think  it  impertinent  to  receive  the  Foreign  Ministers 
before  he  had  paid  his  duty  to  the  King  in  public;  and  he 
sent  Sir  J.  Dick  to  them  to  explain  why  he  did  not  see 
them — which  was  that  he  would  receive  nobody,  but  officers 
on  military  business,  who  did  not  wait  on  the  Duchess  too, 
They  replied  that  they  had  not  expected  to  be  received, 
car  la  conduite  de  son  Altesse  avait  toujours  et£  la  plus 
sage. 

The  night  before  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland  was  to 
receive  the  Foreign  Ministers,  I  found  Lord  George 
Germaine  at  the  house  of  the  Dutch  envoy.  Lord 
George  and  I  had  always  been  on  very  civil  terms,  but  he 
was  then  remarkably  cool.  I  imputed  it  to  his  guessing 
that  I  knew  of  General  Con  way's  rejection  of  the  negotia- 
tion with  him,  and  might  suspect  that  I  had  contributed 
to  it ;  but  late  in  the  evening,  when  Lord  George's  party 
was  broken  up,  he  came  to  the  table  where  I  was  playing 
with  Count  Welderen,  and  asked  him  when  he  was  to  go 
to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's,  which  he  would  not  probably 
have  done  before  me,  connected  as  I  was  with  the  Duke  of 

VOL.  n.  2  E 


418  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

Gloucester,  if  he  had  not  done  it  on  purpose,  and  had  not 
meant  it  as  a  sort  of  reproach  to  me  that  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  would  have  no  levee  ;  but  it  was  perfectly 
indifferent  to  me  whether  I  was  well  or  ill  with  Lord 
George,  and  whether  he  was  displeased  on  the  Duke's  or 
Conway's  account.  I  have  thrown  all  this  together  as  a 
transaction  by  itself. 

15^.  Arrived  the  Earl  of  Lincoln,  with  account  of  the 
capture  of  Charlestown  by  Sir  Henry  Clinton  and  Ad- 
miral Arbuthnot,  with  little  loss,  the  Provincials  being 
forced  to  surrender  for  want  of  provisions.  The  Court 
was  much  elated  by  this  news,  and  gave  out  that  they 
should  be  soon  masters  of  the  southern  colonies.  They 
reported  that  a  Colonel  Scott,  a  prisoner,  had  told  Lord 
Lincoln  that  the  Americans  were  sick  of  the  war,  and  had 
only  been  buoyed  up  by  Spanish  gold  and  by  French  pro- 
mises that  London  would  be  burnt,  but  this  was  never 
ascertained. 

19th.  The  Parliament  met;  much  loyalty  in  both 
Houses.  The  King  went  to  the  Lords,  and  made  a  speech 
apologising  for  the  use  of  the  military,  and  with  many 
assurances  of  his  regard  for  the  Constitution.  Burke  and 
Wilkes,  who  had  showed  great  spirit  and  zeal  during  the 
riots,  attacked  the  City  and  the  Lord  Mayor,  and  were 
very  severe  on  Alderman  Bull  on  petition  from  the  City 
for  repeal  of  toleration. 

Burke  at  the  same  time  published  a  pamphlet  against 
the  repeal,  in  which  he  much  misrepresented  the  number 
of  Papists,  who,  he  said,  were  few  and  inconsiderable,  and 
injudiciously  abused  the  Methodists,  as  greatly  concerned 
in  the  tumults. 

Lord  Buckingham  had  been  much  alarmed  during  the 
riots,  and  believed  his  house  would  be  attacked,  and  for- 


1780.  PENAL  LAWS  AGAINST  PAPISTS.  419 

tified  it,  and  had  guards  every  night  both  before  and  behind 
it.  He  and  Burke,  at  the  General  Council  at  the  Queen's 
house,  were  outrageous  for  the  King's  proclaiming  military 
law ;  and  while  those  patriots  pressed  it,  Wedderburn, 
the  Court  tool,  was  the  man  to  resist  it,  and  to  tell  them 
not  only  that  he  knew  of  no  power  in  the  King  to  pro- 
claim it,  but  that  it  would  ruin  all  the  persons  who  had 
lawsuits  pending,  as  the  courts  of  law  must  then  be 
shut  up.  I  mention  these  facts  to  do  justice  and  to  be 
impartial. 

2Qtk.  Lord  Mansfield  declared  in  the  Lords  that  every 
man  ought  to  resist  riots,  and  Lord  Camden  allowed  that 
doctrine.  In  the  Commons,  resolutions  that  all  the  penal 
laws  of  the  Papists  not  repealed  were  in  full  force.  Lord 
George  Saville  promised  a  bill  against  their  educating 
Protestants  in  their  schools,  and  did  bring  it  in.  -Burke 
spoke  well,  but  too  passionately,  against  repeal ;  attacked 
the  Dissenters,  but  said  the  worthiest  Presbyterians  had 
not  signed  the  petition  ;  declared  he  himself  had  been 
brought  up  by  an  Anabaptist  teacher.  Charles  Fox  made 
one  of  his  finest  speeches  against  a  repeal.  Only  Sir  J. 
Mawbey  gave  a  negative  to  the  new  resolutions,  as  they 
were  meant  in  lieu  of  a  repeal. 

2lst.  Duke  of  Grafton  and  Bishop  of  Peterborough 
declared  strongly  against  toleration  of  popery.  Bishop  of 
Llandaff  answered  them.  Duke  of  Richmond  moved  for  a 
censure  of  Lord  Amherst's  letter,  which  was  rejected  with- 
out a  division.  He  complimented  the  Chancellor,  and 
said  he  was  the  only  man  who  could  save  his  country. 
That  day  and  the  next,  the 

22m/,  Duke  of  Richmond  very  severe  on  the  Ministers 
for  timidly  releasing  Count  Manbeau,  who  had  been  taken 
prisoner  demolishing  the  Sardinian  chapel,  which  the 

2  E  2 


420 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


JUNE, 


Chancellor,  Lord  Loughborough,  and  Lord  Stormont 
denied,  but  did  not  dare  to  let  the  Duke  produce  witnesses 
to  prove  it. 

Burke's  bill  thrown  out  by  the  House  of  Commons  ; 
thus  nothing  done  for  the  petitions.  The  associations  were 
all  silenced  by  the  late  tumults.  Lord  Beauchamp  had 
declared,  on  the  first  day  of  the  Parliament  remeeting, 
that  he  thought  a  bill  of  indemnity  would  be  necessary, 
but  the  Court,  finding  their  strength,  laid  aside  that 
intention.1 

24th.  Wilkes2  much  missed  at  the  Common  Council, 
but  re-elected  Chamberlain.  Parson  Bate  convicted  of  a 
libel  in  the  '  Morning  Post '  on  the  Duke  of  Richmond. 
He  published  an  insolent  letter  to  the  Duke  in  that  paper, 
with  a  sort  of  challenge,  on  that  conviction. 

27th.  Mr.  Hartley  moved  a  new  bill  for  accommodation 
with  America,  but  it  was  rejected  by  93  to  28,  the 
Ministers  urging  that  they  expected  America  would  offer 
v  peace.  Sir  Gr.  Saville  moved  a  resolution  that  the  war 
with  America  was  unconstitutional  and  ruinous,  but  that 
was  rejected  by  105  to  34. 

28th  and  29th.  The  trials  of  the  rioters  began ;  eight  or 
ten  were  convicted,  but  nothing  came  out  of  any  plot  or 
plan  having  been  formed. 


1  They  did  bring  in  a  bill  to  indemnify 
the  military. 

3  The  influence  and  popularity  of 
Wilkes  among  his  special  followers  is 
illustrated  by  a  remark  of  Hollis,  in  the 


'  Memoirs '  of  the  latter  :  "  I  am  sorry 
for  the  irregularities  of  Wilkes  ;  they 
are,  however,  but  as  spots  in  the  sun." 
— D. 


1780.  EXECUTION  OF  RIOTERS.  421 


JULY. 


3rd.  THE  Popish  Bill  in  the  Lords.  The  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury  declared  himself  for  toleration.  The  Bishops 
of  Bath  and  Wells  and  Ely  declared  the  number  of  Papists 
were  decreased  in  their  dioceses.  The  Chancellor  de- 
clared he  had  always  disapproved  of  wliat  had. been  done  in 
favour  of  Papists,  but  thought  they  had  a  right  to  educate 
their  own  children  as  they  pleased.  Many  alterations 
were  made  in  the  bill,  but  at  last  it  was  thrown  out. 

8th.  The  Parliamentwas  prorogued,  and  thus  nothing  at 
all  was  done  to  satisfy  the  petitions  from  the  counties,  who 
now  seemed  to  be  satisfied,  though  nothing  was  done.  The 
riots  had  put  an  end  to  all  open  clamour,  and,  though 
military  power  triumphed,  all  opposition  was  at  an  end.1 

In  the  late  debates  the  Chancellor  had  made  the 
greatest  figure  in  point  of  abilities,  but  had  given  almost  as 
much  disgust  as  he  had  inspired  admiration.  His  be- 
haviour was  ill-tempered,  rude,  and  contemptuous  to 
almost  everybody,  and  he  affected  to  declare  himself  con- 
nected with  none  of  the  Ministers. 

llth,  \2tkj  and  13th.  Eight  or  nine  of  the  rioters 
hanged  in  different  parts  of  London.  The  Special  Com- 
mission for  trying  the  riots  in  Southwark  opened  by  Lord 
Loughborough. 

The  trial  of  Lord  George  Gordon  put  off"  till  November. 


1  Lord  Buckingham  had  couiributed,  too,  to  quash  lusociatious  wherever  he 
could.      . 


422  LAST  JOUBNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

Sir  Hugh  Palliser  made  Governor  of  Greenwich  in  the 
room  of  Sir  Charles  Harvey. 

Soon  after  the  negotiation  with  General  Conway  had 
been  attempted  and  failed,  another  (which  displayed  the 
King's  duplicity  and  indifference  to  his  Ministers)  was 
begun  with  Lord  Rockingham.  In  the  other  Lord  North 
was  to  have  been  the  sacrifice,  in  this  he  was  the  nego- 
tiator and  was  to  be  preserved.  He  engaged  Frederick 
Montague,  his  old  friend,  but  once  in  opposition  to  him,  to 
sound  the  Marquis  on  what  terms  he  and  his  friends  would 
unite  with  the  Court.  Lord  North  said  he  was  not  abso- 
lutely authorized  by  the  King,  but  would  answer  for  his 
Majesty's  acquiescence,  though  his  Majesty  would  wish 
that  he,  Lord  North,  should  remain  at  the  head  of  the 
Treasury.  This  seemed  to  preclude  all  success,  as  Lord 
Rockingham's  point  had  ever  been  the  Treasury;  but 
Lord  North  seemed  to  have  learnt  from  Burke  that  that 
would  no  longer  be  an  obstacle,  and,  in  fact,  it  looked  as 
if  Lord  Rockingham  in  this  treaty  was  solely  led  by 
Burke,  and  consulted  no  others  of  his  friends. 

Accordingly,  Lord  Rockingham's  answer  was  that  he 
himself  desired  no  place  nor  anything  but  a  seat  in  the 
Cabinet.  The  terms  he  demanded  (for  show)  were  that 
something  should  be  done  to  give  some  satisfaction  on  the 
Middlesex  election,  something  likewise  on  the  Contractors' 
Bill,  that  some  part  of  Burke's  reforming  bill  should  be 
adopted,  and  some  of  the  Crown's  influence  diminished 
by  taking  away  the  votes  of  excisemen,  &c.  His  Lord- 
ship demanded  that  the  King  should  not  declare  that  he 
would  never  consent  to  the  independence  of  America, 
though  his  Lordship,  on  his  side,  wished  that  his  Majesty 
should  grant  independence  to  America.  As  to  places, 
Lord  Rockingham  desired  that  the  Duke  of  Richmond 


1780.  LORD  ROCKINGHAM'S  DEMANDS.  423 

and  Fox  should  be  Secretaries  of  State,  T.  Townshend 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  and  that  Burke  should  have 
a  good  place,  and  some  others ;  and  that  Admiral  Keppel 
should  be  at  the  head  of  the  Admiralty. 

Nothing  could  be  more  futile  and  pitiful  than  these 
demands.  They  were  most  inadequate  to  the  language 
held  by  the  Opposition  and  to  Lord  Rockingham's  late 
remonstrance.  They  were  far  below  the  demands  not 
only  of  the  associations  but  of  the  'committees,  which  last 
Lord  Buckingham  had  subscribed ;  they  discovered  no 
general  views,  aimed  at  reforming  no  capital  grievances, 
and  still  less  specified  complaints  against  anybody.  They 
were  not  more  honourable  to  his  party  than  beneficial  to 
the  nation,  and  were  by  their  silence  singularly  disrespect- 
ful to  Lord  Camden,  Lord  Shelburne,  and  the  Duke  of 
Grafton,  even  the  last  of  whom  was  as  able  a  man  as  his 
Lordship,  and  yet  the  Duke  was  very  far  from  a  great 
man.  The  demands  were  so  timid,  so  insignificant,  so 
unmanly,  that  they  had  the  appearance  of  being  managed 
only  to  facilitate  Burke's  throwing  himself  into  all  the 
measures  of  the  Court,  and  did  not  even  preserve  the 
dignity  of  a  man  courted  to  be  an  apostate.  The  Court 
treated  the  Marquis  with  the  contempt  he  had  so  justly 
incurred.  The  answer  was  that  something  might  be  done 
on  the  Middlesex  election  and  the  Contractors'  Bill,  and 
on  Burke's  reform,  but  it  would  be  unjust  to  deprive 
excisemen  of  their  votes  ;  that  as  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
did  not  go  to  Court,  nothing  could  be  done  for  him  till  he 
did  ;  that  Charles  Fox  was  too  young  yet  for  Secretary  of 
State,  though  he  might  be  so  hereafter ;  Admiral  Keppel 
might  command  the  fleet,  but  he  could  not  be  at  the  head 
of  the  Admiralty ;  but  a  more  specific  rejection  of  Lord 
Rockingham  and  his  terms  was  the  immediately  bestowing 
(livemvich  Hospital  on  Sir  Hugh  Palliser. 


424  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  AUG. 

Lord  Buckingham  then  first  notified  the  transaction  to 
the  Duke  of  Grafton,  who  very  properly  disdained  to 
make  an  answer. 

It  was  still  more  indecent  that  Lord  Buckingham  had 
not  consulted  with,  nor,  till  past,  communicated  the  treaty 
to  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  who  was  not  only  his  intimate 
friend,  but  who,  in  compliment  to  him,  had  always  waived 
• — as  far  as  his  very  superior  abilities  would  permit  it 
— figuring  as  head  of  the  Opposition.  The  Duke,  who 
told  all  these  particulars  to  General  Conway,  said  he  only 
asked  Lord  Rockingham  how  they  could  ever  impeach 
Lord  North  if  they  had  united  with  him  ?  and  he  assured 
Conway  he  would  not  have  come  in  on  those  terms  had 
they  been  accepted. 


AUGUST. 


9th.  THE  executions  of  the  rioters  ended,  when 
amongst  others  were  two  young  women.  The  camps  in 
town  brought  up.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  of  the  several 
persons,  male  and  female,  executed  on  account  of  the  late 
riots,  seventeen  of  them  have  been  under  1 8  years  of  age, 
and  three  not  quite  15. 

One  more  in  St.  George's  Fields,  August  25th. 

The  following  is  a  general  view  of  the  trials  of  the 
rioters : — 

In  London  and  Middlesex.  Tn  SoUthwark. 

Found  guilty      34  Found  guilty       24 

Respited      15  Respited        18 

Executed 19  Executed      ..      G 

Acquitted 50  Acquitted 26 


1780.  IRISH  MUTINY  BILL.  425 

1 1th.  Five  Russian  men-of-war  appeared  in  the  Downs, 
and  retired  before  the  end  of  the  month.  The  Parliament 
was  to  have  been  dissolved  on  the  9th,  but  the  Ministers 
were  afraid  of  bad  news  from  the  West  Indies  that  might 
affect  the  elections. 

The  Irish  Mutiny  Bill,  being  granted  here,  was  received 
in  Ireland  and  passed. 

2lst.  It  was  resolved  not  to  dissolve  the  Parliament,  as 
too  many  of  the  Ministers  were  voters,  and  must  be  absent 
from  the  camps. 

22nd.  An  account  of  the  Spanish  fleet  having  come 
out  of  Cadiz  and  taken  the  whole  outward-bound  East 
India  and  West  India  fleets ;  25  with  the  latter,  with  7 
companies  of  General  Rainsford's  new  raised  regiment  for 
Jamaica;  and  5  of  former,  with  2  companies  of  Lord 
Mellish's,  and  2  ordnance  ships.  Their  convoy  got  off. 

The  Volunteers  of  Dublin  having  passed  strong  reso- 
lutions against  their  House  of  Commons  for  passing  the 
Mutiny  Bill  that  had  been  granted  here,  but  turned  into  a 
perpetual  one,  Conolly  complained  of  them,  and  the  House 
voted  them  illegal. 


SEPTEMBER. 

THE  English  Parliament  was  suddenly  dissolved.  It  was 
said  that  the  Ministers  consulted  Lord  Loughborough, 
who  was  on  the  Northern  Circuit,  and  he  advised  it,  as 
he  said  he  found  the  Court  was  losing  ground  again  every 
day. 

Reports    that  General   Clinton  was  returned  to  New 
York,  not  having  been  able  to  bring  Washington  to  a  battle 


426  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  SEPT. 

and  finding  him  too  strongly  entrenched.  Thus  the  re- 
covery of  America,  which  had  been  promised,  again 
vanished. 

Admiral  Geary  resigned  the  command  of  the  fleet.  It 
was  said  he  was  disgusted  at  not  having  had  frigates  enough 
to  watch  the  Brest  fleet,  and  that  the  Admiralty  had  not 
answered  his  demands  of  many  articles.  The  command 
was  offered  to  Admiral  Barrington ;  he  said  he  would  take 
it,  if  with  full  powers — that  is,  he  would  not  be  dependent 
on  Lord  Sandwich ;  or  he  would  serve  under  any  other 
Admiral;  neither  being  granted,  he  struck  his  flag  and 
retired. 

The  King  was  making  the  strongest  interest  at  Windsor 
against  Admiral  Keppel,  yet,  meeting  him  on  the  Terrace 
there,  told  him  he  hoped  he  would  carry  his  election. 
Keppel  lost  it,  but  the  counties  of  Surrey  and  Suffolk  im- 
mediately offered  to  elect  him,  and  he  accepted  the  former. 
(Prince  of  Wales  took  great  part  for  Keppel,  and  would 
not  speak  to  Colonel  Egerton,  who  voted  against  him.) 

Sawbridge  thrown  out  in  the  City  of  London,  for  having 
been  for  toleration  of  popery. 

14th.  Seven  new  Barons  created :  Earl  Talbot,  with 
reversion  to  his  grandchildren  by  his  daughter  Lady  Cecil 
Rice,  it  having  been  promised  to  her  late  husband  Mr. 
Rice ;  Lord  Gage  made  an  English  Baron,  with  reversion 
to  his  brother  the  General ;  General  Fitzroy  made  Lord 
Southampton ;  Sir  W.  De  Grey,  late  Chief  Justice,  Lord 
Walsingham  ;  Sir  W.  Bagot,  James  Brudenel  (middle 
brother  of  the  Duke  of  Montague  and  Lord  Ailesbury),  and 
Mr.  Herbert,  all  Barons.  The  late  Speaker,  Sir  Fletcher 
Norton,  and  Lord  George  Germaine,  were  not  made  Peers 
as  expected  ;  nor  Sir  Lawrence  Dundas  and  Lord  George 
Button,  and  I  think,  some  others  who  had  long  had  promises. 


1780.  THE  ELECTIONS.  427 

Bate,  the  vile  author  of  the  *  Morning  Post/  fought 
another  duel  with  one  of  the  proprietors  of  that  paper,  and 
set  up  a  new  one  called  the  '  Morning  Spy.' 

A  subscription  of  17,000^.  was  entered  into  at  York, 
against  Lascelles,  the  late  Court  Member  for  the  county, 
and  he  was  forced  to  decline  standing.  Mr.  Wyvil  and 
Mr.  Mason  the  chief  actors  against  him. 

22nd.  The  poll  for  Westminster  was  closed,  when 
Admiral  Rodney  and  Charles  Fox  were  returned,  and  Lord 
Lincoln  defeated.  The  next  day  Charles  Fox  was  chaired 
and  carried  in  triumph  to  St.  James's  Gate  to  insult  the 
Court.  He  often  harangued  the  people  from  the  hustings. 

The  people  of  Windsor  wore  crape  favours  with  KeppeFs 
name,  in  the  King's  face,  on  the  Terrace. 

25th.  General  Dalrymple  arrived  from  Sir  H.  Clinton 
with  an  account  of  the  capture  of  the  greatest  part  of  the 
fleet  going  to  Quebec  with  supplies,  of  the  great  distress  at 
New  York,  and  the  superiority  of  the  Americans. 

28th.  Admiral  Keppel  chosen  for  Surrey  by  a  majority 
of  700,  on  which  Onslow  declined,  and  Keppel  and  Sir 
Joseph  Mawbey  were  returned. 

Lord  Ongley  thrown  out  of  Bedfordshire  in  like  manner. 

The  Prince  of  Wales  wished  Miss  Keppel  joy  of  the 
Admiral's  success,  and  said  it  was  the  happiest  event  he 
had  ever  known. 


428  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOKACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

OCTOBER. 

LAWRENCE,  late  President  of  the  Congress,  and  going  to 
v  negotiate  in  Holland,   was  taken  at  sea  and  brought  to 
England  with  all  his  papers. 

7th.  He  was  committed  close  prisoner  to  the  Tower. 

9th.  An  express  from  Lord  Cornwallis  in  Carolina,  that 
with  only  2000  men  he  had  attacked  General  Grates  at  the 
head  of  7000,  and  totally  defeated  him,  with  little  loss  of 
Royalists,  and  had  killed  900  and  taken  1500  prisoners ; 
another  officer  had  had  like  success  with  a  less  party.  On 
the  news  from  Clinton  in  the  preceding  week  everybody 
had  declared  the  American  war  must  be  given  up.  This 
new  success  was  likely  to  revive  the  King's  obstinacy — as 
all  advantages  had  done  to  the  involving  us  deeper  in  ruin. 

9th.  Lord  Lincoln  gave  up  the  scrutiny  for  Westminster. 
Charles  Fox  returned. 

The  Court  resolved  to  go  on  with  the  American  war. 

13th.  Lord  Carlisle  appointed  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ire- 
land in  room  of  Lord  Buckingham.  Lord  Grantham 
succeeded  Lord  Carlisle  at  the  Board  of  Trade.  Eden 
appointed  his  Secretary. 

Dr.  Hunter,  the  Scotch  man-midwife,  at  one  of  his 
anatomic  lectures,  made  an  extravagant  panegyric  on  the 
King,  and  said,  all  our  disgraces  and  distresses  were 
owing  to  the  Opposition. 

3lst.  The  new  Parliament.  It  had  been  determined  that 
as  soon  as  the  Members  were  sworn  in  it  should  be  adjourned 
for  a  fortnight ;  but  Lord  Cornwallis's  victory  had  given 
the  Ministry,  and  they  hoped  the  nation,  spirits ;  and  as 
they  could  not  hope  any  further  success,  they  opened  the 
session. 

The  first  day  in  the  Commons 'was  appointed  for  choosing 


1780. 


MEETING  OF  PARLIAMENT. 


429 


a  Speaker  :  Lord  George  Germaine  and  Ellis  proposed  Mr. 
Cornwall ;  Sir  Fletcher  Norton  rose,  and  complained  that 
Lord  North  had  not  even  intimated  to  him  that  he  was  to 
be  laid  aside.  Charles  Fox  rose,  and  attacked  violently 
Lord  George  Germaine,  who  had  paid  great  compliments 
to  Sir  Fletcher.  Fox  said,  that  was  stabbing  him  in  the 
dark,  but  it  was  like  Lord  George's  well-known  cowardice. 
He  accused  Rigby  too,  who  defended  himself,  of  being  an 
enemy  of  Sir  Fletcher,  with  whom  he  had  formerly  had  a 
quarrel.  Cornwall  was  preferred  by  203  to  176. 

Not  a  word  was  heard  of  associations.  The  panic  on 
the  riots  had  quashed  them,  but,  being  entirely  over,  would 
not  have  hindered  their  reviving  had  the  nation  been  so 
disposed ;  but  I  am  persuaded  that  the  greater  number  of 
those  who  had  joined  in  the  associations  had  only  concurred 
for  fear  of  their  elections,  of  which  they  were  now  secure. 

The  King's  Speech  very  vague,  and  like  former  ones ;  , 
but  it  declared  for  another  year  of  war.  Lord  Westmore- 
land, a  young  Lord  just  of  age,  moved  the  Address  with 
applause ;  but  urged  as  a  good  omen,  that  Monsieur  De 
Sartines  (a  known  enemy  of  this  country)  was  removed  in 
France  :  it  was  a  little  of  a  blunder  too,  for  Sartines  was 
removed  for  waste  and  incapacity,  and  M.  De  Castries, 
another  man,  succeeded  him.1 

The  Address  was  voted  by  above  60  to  23.  Lord  Shel- 
burne  and  Lord  Camden  were  not  present,  and  did  not  in- 
tend to  attend.  They  were  entirely  broken  with  the  Rock- 
inghams.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  was  there,  but  resolved 
to  take  little  part  and  to  wait  till  the  nation  should  come 
to  its  senses.  The  debate  in  the  other  House  was  post- 
poned till  the  7th  for  the  Members  to  be  sworn. 


1  Lord  Westmoreland  (then  just  como 
of  age,  and  master  of  a  large  indc- 
]» n.lfnt  fortune)  was  so  servile  as  to 
add  that  the  King  desrrved  thanku  for 


not  having  made  himself  absolute,  like 
the  King  of  Sweden,  when  he  had  Uio 
army  in  town  on  the  late  riots. 


430  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLB.  Nov. 


NOVEMBER. 


6th.  LORD  Pomfret,  half  a  madman,  was  committed  to 
the  Tower  by  the  House  of  Lords,  for  challenging  and 
grossly  insulting  the  Duke  of  Grafton  without  any  provo- 
cation. 

The  same  day  in  the  Commons  Mr.  De  Grey  and  Sir 
Richard  Sutton  moved  the  Address  on  the  King's  Speech. 
It  was  opposed  by  Mr.  Thomas  Grenville  and  Colonel 
Richard  Fitzpatrick.  Charles  Fox  was  again  very  personal 
to  Lord  George  Germaine,  and  said  he  was  unfit  to  serve 
the  King,  as  he  had  been  declared  so  at  the  head  of  every 
regiment,  in  the  late  reign.  Lord  George  said  he  despised 
personalities,  and  those  who  employed  them.  The  Address 
was  voted  at  eleven  at  night  by  212  to  130.  Mr.  Erskine 
moved  the  King's  Bench  in  the  name  of  Lord  George 
Gordon  that  he  might  be  brought  to  trial ;  which  was 
received. 

I0th.  The  grand  jury  found  the  bill  of  high  treason 
against  Lord  George  Gordon. 

13^.  An  express  from  Admiral  Rodney  blaming  Ad- 
miral Arbuthnot  much,  and  saying  he  had  found  Rhode 
Island  so  strongly  fortified  that  he  could  not  attack  it,  and 
was  returned  to  the  West  Indies. 

At  the  same  time  an  account  of  General  Arnold,  the 
butcher's  son,  who  had  behaved  so  bravely  and  been  danger- 
ously wounded,  and  who  now  commanded  the  advanced 
guard  of  Washington's  army,  having  offered  Sir  H.  Clinton 
to  betray  the  whole  corps  to  him  if  he  would  advance. 


1780.  ARNOLD  AND  ANDRtf.  431 

Clinton  had  sent  his  Lieutenant,  Major-General  St.  Andre, 
son  of  St.  Andre  the  surgeon,  to  settle  the  terms.  St. 
Andre  was  taken  by  three  Americans,  who  carried  him  to 
Washington,  on  which  Arnold  had  made  his  escape  by  the 
North  River  to  Clinton.  Washington  offered  Clinton  to 
release  St.  Andre  on  Arnold  being  given  up,  and  on  re- 
fusal hanged  St.  Andre,  who  only  begged  to  be  shot.  This 
was  probably  provoked  by  Lord  Cornwallis's  having  hanged 
120  Carolinians.1 

The  King  gave  the  red  riband  to  Admiral  Rodney, 
General  Pensin,  and  J.  Wroughton,  Minister  in  Sweden. 

Lord  Pomfret  petitioned  the  House  of  Lords  for  his 
liberty  ;  ordered  to  be  considered  on  the  15th. 

T.  Towiishend  had  intended  to  move  for  the  thanks  of 
the  Commons  to  Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  and  had  acquainted 
Lord  North  with  his  design,  which  he  said  he  should  do 
without  giving  offence  ;  but  he  deferred  it,  Lord  North 
being  ill  of  a  quartan  ague.  Jenkinson  and  Rigby  now 
took  great  part,  as  if  both  aimed  at  being  Minister. 

Adam,  the  Scotch  duellist,  complained  of  a  severe 
advertisement  from  the  Westminster  Association,  who  said 
they  would  guard  Charles  Fox's  invaluable  life,  as  those 
who  attacked  him  and  other  patriots  (meaning  also  Ful- 
lerton,  who  fought  Lord  Shelburne)  were  sure  of  being 
rewarded.  He  was  severe  on  Fox's  private  life,  and  pane- 
gyrized his  own  virtues,  and  said  they  who  adopted  such 
advertisements  were  infamous.  Fox  made  a  temperate 
answer,  denied  having  known  of  the  vote  of  the  Committee, 
and  imputed  it  to  their  zeal  for  him.  Fitzpatrick  said  the 
same  of  his  absence,  but  that  he  approved  the  vote.  "  Then," 
said  Adam,  **  he  conies  under  my  description."  Fitzpatrick 


Twenty  thousand  pounds  was  the  price  of  Arnold'a  trairhcry. 


432  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 

replied  cleverly,  that  he  had  not  applied  the  words  to 
Adam,  and  if  he  applied  these  words  to  himself  he  could 
not  help  it.  As  they  stood,  he  did  approve  them. 

The  navy  then  being  moved,  Charles  Fox  fell  severely 
on  Lord  Sandwich  for  having  at  that  moment  set  up  Sir 
Hugh  Palliser  for  Huntingdon.  After  Christmas  he 
should  move  for  the  dismission  of  Lord  Sandwich,  and  then 
for  bringing  him  to  condign  punishment  for  his  mismanage- 
ment of  the  navy.  Rigby  said  that  was  nothing  to  the 
question  before  them ;  he  did  not  mean  to  defend  Lord 
Sandwich  or  Palliser,  but  did  not  doubt  that  they  would 
be  able  to  defend  themselves.  Mr.  Courtney,  of  the 
Ordnance,  a  new  member,  spoke  with  great  applause,  and 
said,  for  the  abuse  of  Administration,  it  put  him  in  mind 
of  Charles  II.,  who,  on  the  Duke  of  York's  warning  him 
to  guard  against  assassination,  replied,  "  Brother,  they  will 
not  murder  me,  as  they  know  who  is  to  succeed  me." 

1 3th.  Lord  Pomfret  made  his  submission  and  petitioned 
the  House  of  Lords  for  his  liberty.  They  appointed  a  Com- 
mittee to  draw  up  the  terms  of  his  reprimand,  submission, 
and  assurance  of  pursuing  his  resentment  no  further  against 
the  Duke  of  Grafton  or  anybody  else;  all  which  he  exe- 
cuted on  the  17th  and  was  released. 

It  was  determined  not  to  try  Lord  George  Gordon  till 
the  next  term.  The  Protestant  Association  came  to  reso- 
lutions in  his  behalf  which  were  published  in  the  news- 
papers. 

20th.  On  a  complaint  of  a  riot  at  Coventry,  which  had 
prevented  any  election  being  made  there,  Sheridan,  the 
comic  author,  son  of  the  Irish  actor,  and  manager  of  Drury 
Lane,  who  had  recently  been  chosen  for  Stafford,  and  was 
very  much  attached  to  Charles  Fox,  spoke  for  the  first 
time,  but  did  not  make  the  figure  expected.  T.  Towns- 


1780.        MOTION  OF  THANKS  TO  THE  LATE  SPEAKER.          433 

hend  then  moved  to  give  the  thanks  of  the  House  to  Sir 
Fletcher  Norton,  the  late  Speaker ;  he  had  previously  ac- 
quainted Lord  North  with  his  intention,  and  that  he  did 
not  intend  to  say  anything  offensive.  Lord  North  had 
promised  to  vote  for  it ;  Rigby  opposed  it,  and  others,  com- 
plaining of  his  having  without  any  authority  from  the  House 
taken  too  great  liberties  with  the  King  in  recommending 
economy,  so  servile  now  was  the  House  of  Commons  grown. 
Even  Sir  George  Saville  opposed  the  motion,  probably 
from  indignation  at  the  profligate  character  of  Norton, 
whom  Courtney  ridiculed  with  much  wit — yet  the  motion 
was  carried  by  136  to  94. 

The  Address  of  the  Convocation  was  uncommonly  servile 
and  ridiculous ;  they  told  the  King  they  hoped  he  would 
find  Popery  decreased  (which  was  most  improbable  after 
so  much  encouragement),  and  that  God  had  for  our  sins 
permitted  us  to  be  involved  in  a  just  and  necessary  war ! 

Great  apprehensions  of  war  with  Holland,  it  having  been 
discoursed  from  Lawrence's  papers  that  the  city  of  Amster- 
dam had  entered  into  a  treaty  with  the  Americans.  Sir 
J.  Yorke  was  ordered  to  present  a  new  imperious  and  per- 
emptory memorial,  though  we  had  been  so  put  to  shame  on 
that  sent  by  Lord  Suffolk.  This  was  scarce  delivered,  be- 
fore the  Dutch  envoy  demanded  that  a  Dutch  agent  should 
reside  in  Ireland,  which  was  saying  that  Holland  looked  on 
Ireland  as  become  independent.  The  King  replied  that 
he  had  consulted  his  Lord  Lieutenant,  who  advised  against 
it.  This  was  a  new  ridicule,  for  Lord  Carlisle  had  not 
been  Lord  Lieutenant  six  weeks,  and  had  not  yet  been  in 
Ireland,  and  could  understand  nothing  of  the  matter. 

Mr.  Turnbull,  son  of  the  American  Governor  of  Connec- 
ticut, was  taken  up  as  a  spy.  His  letters  were  immediately 
published,  because,  in  one  to  his  father,  he  said  Mr.  Temple 

VOL.  IT.  2    F 


434 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


Nov. 


was  intimate  with  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  and  Mr.  David 
Hartley,  and  Dr.  Price,  who  thence  were  represented  as 
traitors.3  In  reality  the  Ministry  hoped  to  discover  that 
American  agents  had  been  at  the  bottom  of  the  late  riots. 

Accounts  of  French  and  Spanish  fleets  having  joined. 

25th.  Captain  Keith  Stewart,  brother  of  Lady  Glover, 
arrived  very  ill,  and  with  his  ship  in  a  very  bad  condition. 
He  had  been  with  Admiral  Rodney's  fleet,  which  had 
suffered  greatly  by  bad  weather.  Three  others  had  been 
dismasted  and  four  were  missing. 

27th.  Mr.  Coke,  a  country  Member,  distressed  the  Minis- 
ters by  moving  to  thank  Lord  Cornwallis.  They  were 
forced  to  add  Sir  Henry  Clinton  and  Admiral  Arbuthnot, 
and  all  three  had  thanks  voted  after  warm  debates.  Wilkes 
strongly  objected  to  Lord  Cornwallis,  who  had  been  one  of 
five  who  had  protested4  against  the  Stamp  Act,  and  conse- 
quently did  not  act  now  from  principle.  Lord  Lewisham, 
son  of  Lord  Dartmouth,  made  a  ridiculous  speech  on  the 
necessity  of  destroying  the  French  marine — as  if  we  could ! 


8  November  25th,  conversing  with 
a  relation  of  the  late  Mr.  George  Gren- 
ville, and  saying  I  had  heard  from 
various  persons  that  Lord  Bute  had 
given  the  plan  of  the  Stamp  Act,  drawn 
up  by  Jenkinson,  to  Mr.  Grenville,  that 
person  agreed  with  me,  and  said  he  had 
often  heard  Mr.  Greuville  say  that  the 
King's  impatience  to  have  the  Stamp 
Act  proposed  was  incredible,  and  that 
lie  was  always  urging  Mr.  Grenville  to 
it,  and  telling  him  that  their  tune  would 
be  lost.  I  said  I  had  been  convinced 


that  Mr.  Grenville's  giving  up  the 
Stamp  Act,  as  he  did  towards  its  end, 
was,  though  partly  owing  to  the  repeal, 
and  partly  to  his  disgrace  and  opposi- 
tion, chiefly  from  its  having  not  been 
his  own  plan  ;  and  that  he  was  so  ob- 
stinate and  bigotted  to  his.  own  opi- 
nions that  he  would  never  have  aban- 
doned it  if  his  own  child. 

4  In  this,  too,  that  person  fully  agreed 
with  tne.  He  had  not  protested,  but 
divided  with  only  four  more. 


1780.  SIR  HUGH  PALLISER  READS  HIS  DEFENCE.  435 


DECEMBER. 


4th.  SIR  Hugh  Palliser  took  his  seat  in  the  House ;  read 
his  defence — dull.  Keppel's  spirited  answer,  disdaining 
compromise,  and  declaring  he  would  call  him  nothing  but 
Governor  of  Greenwich.  Lord  North's  warm  defence  of 
Palliser,  and  owning  his  recommendation  of  him,  though 
probably  not  true. 

6th.  House  of  Commons  adjourned  for  the  holidays. 
The  new  Parliament  evidently  Ministerial ;  half  the  Op- 
position had  not  appeared — Duke  of  Richmond  but  once, 
Lord  Shelburne  not  at  all.  Barre  scarce  took  a  part,  nor 
anybody  but  Fox  and  J.  Townshend. 

It  now  appeared  that  the  Associations  had  gone  too  far, 
and  by  Wyvil's  absurdities,  in  stating  various  new  proposi- 
tions, had  hurt  the  cause.  His  insolence,  too,  and  ill- 
treatment  of  Lord  Rockingham,  and  more  particularly  of 
Lord  John  Cavendish,  had  cooled  them,  and  had  induced 
the  Court  to  treat  with  Lord  Rockingham,  who,  disgusted 
at  that  usage,  had  been  more  ready  to  treat.  Lord  George 
Gordon  and  the  riots  had  alarmed  men ;  but  had  the 
country  really  been  for  the  Associations,  the  spirit  would 
have  revived  ;  but  a  great  many  had  joined  the  Associations 
for  fear  of  their  elections,  which  now  being  over,  they  were 
not  afraid.  I  had  laboured  last  year  to  persuade  temper 
for  the  Associations,  and  told  some  of  the  principal  leaders 
that  their  business  was  to  stick  to  the  plan  of  economy  as 

2  F  2 


436  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

popular,  and  to  wait  till  they  had  chosen  a  new  Parliament, 
and  then  they  might  carry  what  they  pleased ;  but  a  few 
men  who  had  carried  their  counties  into  Associations  were 
intoxicated  with  their  success,  and  fancied  they  could  govern 
the  world.  My  advice  was  not  listened  to,  and  now  they 
found  their  total  mistake. 

The  Court  in  the  mean  time  was  insolent,  and  seemed 
determined  to  stick  at  nothing.  The  Scotch  writers  openly 
recommended  duels,  i.  e.  assassinations — fine  doctrine  in  a 
pious  reign !  and  when  Lord  Pomfret  had  been  sent  to  the 
Tower  for  a  challenge  in  a  private  quarrel,  Adam,  like  a 
bravo  and  unlike  a  man  of  honour,  constantly  attacked 
Charles  Fox ;  and  his  warmth  against  the  Westminster 
Association  silenced  them,  as  his  countrymen  bragged. 

Turnbull's  letters  were  published,  and  the  cry  was  that 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  Hartley,  and  Dr.  Price,  who  were 
mentioned  in  them,  were  traitors ;  yet  the  publication  of 
them  proved  the  Court  could  prove  nothing  on  them. 
Other  intercepted  letters  from  America  (or  forged)  were 
sent  over  here  and  published,  to  make  the  nation  believe 
America  was  ready  to  submit. 

9th,  Account  of  the  death  of  the  Empress  Queen. 

16th.  Lord  Carlisle  went  as  Lord  Lieutenant  to  Ireland 
in  the  room  of  Lord  Buckingham. 

20th.  Lord  Macartney  appointed  Governor  of  Madras 
by  the  Indian  Company. 

2lst.  The  King's  manifesto  against  the  Dutch  published 
in  an  extraordinary  '  Gazette,'  letters  of  marque  granted, 
and  an  embargo  laid  on  all  Dutch  vessels  in  our  ports. 

A  great  number  of  new  Irish  Peers  made  and  pro- 
moted. 

25th.    Terrible  accounts   of  a  hurricane  in  the  West 


1780.        ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES.  437 

Indies,  in  which  both  English  and  French  suffered  greatly 
and  lost  many  vessels. 

The  Pretender's  wife  left  him  on  his  beastly  ill-usage, 
and  retired  into  a  convent  under  the  protection  of  the 
Grand  Duke.  Vide  Sir  Horace  Mann's  letters. 

28th.  The  £rince  of  Wales  had  a  sort  of  establishment 
appointed.  Lord  Southampton  was  made  his  Groom  of 
the  Stole ;  Lord  Courtown,  Lord  Parker,  and  Lord  J.  Clin- 
ton, his  Lords,  and  three  Grooms.  His  brother  Prince 
Frederick  was  to,  and  did,  go  to  Osnaburgh.  The  brothers 
were  separated  because  they  were  great  friends,  and  that 
Prince  Frederick  had  most  spirit,  and,  as  the  Queen 
dropped,  put  his  brother  on  acting  with  spirit ;  but  it  did 
not  go  far.  Colonel  Lake  and  Colonel  Robert  Conway 
were  ordered  to  America,  it  being  their  turns.  The  former 
was  suffered  to  go  because  he  was  the  chief  favourite  of  the 
Prince  of  Wales.  Conway  was  excused  because  he  had 
taken  a  warm  part  against  Admiral  Keppel  at  Windsor, 
but  was  afterwards  forced  to  go. 

28M.  The  Dutch  envoy  received  his  letters  of  recall. 
Sir  Joseph  Yorke  had  been  ordered  to  stop  at  Antwerp  to 
see  if  the  Dutch  would  relent,  for  our  Court  now  hoped 
they  would. 

30^/t.  The  Court  published,  or  rather  gave  out,  accounts 
of  Colonel  Leslie's  success  on  the  Chesapeak,  and  of  his 
taking  possession  of  and  fortifying  two  or  three  open  towns, 
among  which  waS  Norfolk,  which  the  English  had  burnt ; 
but  they  did  not  own  that  by  the  same  mail  they  had  learnt 
the  defeat  of  Colonel  Ferguson,  and  that  Sir  H.  Clinton 
had  recalled  Leslie  (who  had  actually  re-embarked)  to 
reinforce  Lord  Cornwallis,  who  had  been  very  ill,  and  was 
marched  150  miles  into  the  country  with  only  1300  men, 


438  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

and  was  then  in  great  danger  of  being  cut  off,  Washington 
having  detached  3000  men  to  reinforce  Gates.  I  saw  a 
letter  that  came  by  that  very  mail  from  Colonel  O'Hara  to 
General  Conway,  describing  the  embarrassed  situation  of 
Clinton,  the  aversion  of  the  Carolinians,  who  were  described 
here  as  returning  to  their  allegiance,  declaring  he  trembled 
for  Lord  Cornwallis,  who,  he  said  well,  was  surrounded  by 
inveterate  friends^  and  professing  his  firm  belief  of  the 
impossibility  of  our  recovering  America. 

3lst.  The  Dutch  envoy  went  away  without  taking  leave. 

Thus  the  year  finished  with  the  outset  of  a  new  war ; 
yet  the  Scotch  had  so  infatuated  and  poisoned  the  nation, 
that  the  Dutch  war  was  popular,  at  least  in  the  City,  where 
the  spirit  of  gaining  had  seized  all  ranks,  and  nothing  was 
thought  of  but  privateering.  The  people  were  told  and 
believed  that  the  Opposition  encouraged  America,  and  that 
several  rich  persons  had  been  ruined  by  sending  money 
thither.  The  Opposition  were  all  split  and  inactive :  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  on  one  side,  Lord  Shelburne  and  Lord 
Camden  on  the  other,  would  not  come  to  Parliament ;  and 
the  Government  that  had  precipitated  us  into  all  these 
calamities  and  had  achieved  nothing,  was  more  popular. 
At  this  moment  a  change  happened  in  France.  The 
Queen's  influence  prevailed :  she  obtained  the  dismission 
of  the  Prince  de  Montbarrey,  and  got  the  Due  du  Chatelet, 
one  of  our  bitterest  enemies,  to  succeed  him.  And  it  was 
thought  M.  De  Vergennes  would  fall,  too,  the  only  one 
who  had  supported  the  Americans,  for  all  the  other  Mi- 
nisters did  not  like  them,  though  they  wished  to  hurt  us, 


1  This  certainly  meant  the  Scotch  ;  I  Cornwallis  had  given  orders  to  his  re- 
for  it  afterwards  camo  out  that  Lord  |  cruiting-otficers  not  to  enlist  any  Scotch. 


1780.  CHANGE  IN  THE  FRENCH  GOVERNMENT.  439 

and  had  much  neglected  them  ;  and  Dr.  Franklin  was  grown 
old  and  indolent,  and  had  lost  all  credit  at  Versailles.  Yet 
they  had  a  mind  to  support  the  Americans  enough  just  to 
ruin  us  by  another  year's  war.  If  the  Due  du  Chatelet 
has  any  power,  and,  which  seems  not  improbable,  the  Due 
de  Choiseul  should  regain  power,  I  think  the  war  will 
be  carried  on  with  more  vigour,  but  more  in  the  West 
Indies  and  in  Europe  than  in  America. 


(     440     ) 


1781. 
JANUARY. 


2nd.  ACCOUNT  of  the  hurricane  having  destroyed  great 
part  of  Jamaica,  many  merchant  ships  and  some  men-of- 
war. 

About  the  same  time  an  account  of  the  expedition  sent 
by  Governor  Dalling  from  Jamaica,  of  1500  men,  against 
the  Spanish  settlements  having  been  destroyed  to  a  man, 
with  25  officers,  by  the  climate.  On  this  the  Government 
said  not  a  word,  nor  of  the  defeat  of  Colonel  Ferguson ; 
but  on  some  trifling  advantage  of  Colonel  Castleton  from 
Quebec,  they  published  a  '  Gazette '  on  the  6th,  and  then 
owned  he  had  recovered  what  had  been  taken  from  Fer- 
guson. 

8th.  An  account  that  near  2000  French  had  landed  from 
open  boats  on  Jersey  on  the  6th,  and  had  surprised  the 
Lieutenant-Governor  Corbett  in  his  bed.  The  Council 
sent  orders  to  Sir  James  Wallace,  at  Portsmouth,  to  go  to 
Jersey  with  what  force  he  could,  and  to  General  Conway 
to  repair  thither.  The  express  went  to  him  at  Park -place 
at  eleven ;  he  was  in  town  by  three,  though  with  a  broken 
arm  not  quite  recovered,  and  set  out  in  two  hours  for 
Portsmouth. 

Qth.  At  noon  an  express  from  Guernsey  that  the  troops 
in  Jersey  had  rallied,  attacked  the  French,  gained  a  com- 
plete victory,  taken  500  prisoners,  and  driven  400  into  the 


1781.  THE  FRENCH  DRIVEN  OUT  OF  JERSEY.  441 

sea.  The  Commander  was  killed  after  having  exposed 
Lieutenant- Governor  Corbett  to  the  fire  of  the  Jersey 
troops,  in  hopes  they  would  not  fire  on  him.  In  the  Com- 
mander's pocket  was  found  a  letter  from  the  Chevalier  de 
Luxembourg,  expressing  the  eagerness  of  the  French  King 
for  the  expedition.  It  was  to  have  consisted  of  5000  men 
from  four  different  ports,  and  was  to  have  landed  on  Christ- 
mas Eve,  generally  kept  as  a  great  holiday  at  Jersey,  when 
they  expected  to  find  the  garrison  drunk ;  but  all  had  been 
delayed  by  various  accidents,  and  only  one  corps  had  em- 
barked, which  was  then  defeated. 

On  the  3rd  of  January  a  committee  of  59  gentlemen  of 
the  Yorkshire  Association  had  met  at  York,  and  had  sent 
Mr.  Wyvil  and  two  other  deputies  to  London  with  very 
sober  instructions,  and  restraining  them  to  the  pursuit  of 
economy  of  public  money,  and  of  lessening  the  influence  of 
the  Crown  to  the  obtaining  200  additional  county  Members, 
but  waiving  to  a  more  proper  time  their  former  visions  of 
short  Parliaments,  &c. ;  at  the  same  time  professing  only  the 
most  legal  steps,  and  forbidding  the  delegates  to  enter  with 
any  other  delegates  of  counties  and  towns  into  any  other 
measures  than  those  prescribed,  without  consulting  the 
committee.  They  also  published  an  address  to  counties 
and  towns,  which  prescribed  what  they  had  almost  given 
up  in  their  directions  to  their  delegates,  and  was  more 
hostile  to  the  Opposition  than  to  the  Court,  and  was  conse- 
quently more  agreeable  to  the  Court  than  disagreeable.  It 
was  at  once  weak  and  proved  passionate  and  timid,  and  not 
likely  to  have  more  effect  on  the  nation  than  on  the  Parlia- 
ment ;  and  Mr.  Wyvil,  the  chief  director,  had  neither  sense, 
nor  policy,  nor  knowledge  of  mankind,  and  evidently  aimed 
more  at  governing  than  at  doing  any  service.  Such  is 
commonly  the  case  of  directors  of  small  assemblies — inflated 


442  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JAN. 

with  their  own  importance,  they  expect  everybody  to  submit 
because  their  own  little  knot  does.  They  grow  angry  at 
whoever  differs  with  them,  friends  or  foes,  and  hate  those 
most  with  whom  they  quarrel  last.  They  take  their  own 
obstinacy  for  integrity,  pass  for  martyrs  in  their  own  esti- 
mation if  they  are  contradicted,  and  imagine  that  all  liberty 
is  lost  if  they  are  not  suffered  to  be  tyrants. 

llth.  General  Conway,  in  the  Emerald  frigate,  was  two 
days  and  nights  in  a  tempest,  could  not  get  to  Jersey,  and 
was  forced  to  re-land  at  Plymouth.  He  set  out  with  a 
broken  arm,  and  hurt  it  as  he  was  lifted  into  the  vessel. 

19th.  The  Russian  Minister  delivered  a  memorial  on  our 
war  with  Holland,  which  occasioned  the  King  to  put  off 
his  levee  and  call  a  Council,  in  which  he  sat  from  eleven 
till  three. 

23rd.  The  House  of  Commons  met  after  the  recess. 
Breach  of  Mr.  Grenville's  bill. 

2$th.  Lord  George  Gordon  carried  before  King's  Bench. 
He  made  a  very  long  speech ;  against  the  opinion  of  his 
council,  Kenyon  and  Erskine,  pleaded  not  guilty  ;  ordered 
for  trial  on  the  Monday  sen'night. 

Alderman  Townshend  advertised  for  a  meeting  of  the 
Westminster  Association  to  meet  delegates  of  other  counties. 
This  was  probably  at  instigation  of  Lord  Shelburne,  because 
the  York  Associations  were  hostile  to  Lord  Buckingham. 

25th.  King's  message  to  both  Houses  on  war  with  Hol- 
land. Great  majorities  for  the  Court  in  both  Houses. 
Lord  George  Germaine  denied  any  hostile  intentions  in 
Russia.  Dunning  pressed  the  Ministry  to  say  what  right 
the  King  had  to  punish  the  Amsterdammers :  no  Minister 
could  answer. 


1781.  ACQUITTAL  OF  LORD  GEORGE  GORDON.  443 


FEBRUARY. 


4th.  CHARLES  Fox's  motion  to  censure  nomination  of  Sir 
Hugh  Palliser  to  be  Governor  of  Greenwich  Hospital. 
His  panegyric  on  General  Conway.  Governor  Johnston's 
artful  but  severe  speech  against  Keppel  and  the  illumina- 
tions. The  House  sat  till  three  in  the  morning.  Motion 
rejected  by  214  to  149. 

Account  of  Admiral  Rodney  attempting  St.  Vincent, 
and  being  forced  to  give  it  over. 

5th.  Lord  George  Gordon  tried  for  high  treason,  and 
acquitted  at  five  the  next  morning.  He  had  been  above 
seven  months  in  the  Tower. 

Had  the  Administration  tried  him  only  for  misdemean- 
ours, they  would  certainly  have  convicted  him,  and  got  him 
imprisoned  or  severely  fined.  They  were  persuaded  that 
their  evidence  was  sufficient  to  convict  him  of  high  treason, 
and  even  Erskine,  his  own  most  zealous  council,  expected 
it.  He  told  a  person  I  know  that  this  was  the  cause  of  his 
own  fainting.  He  did  not  doubt  but  the  jury  would  bring 
Lord  George  in  guilty  ;  but  when  they  returned  into  Court 
one  of  the  jurymen  made  a  favourable  sign  to  Erskine,  the 
surprise  of  which  made  such  a  revulsion  in  him  that  he 
fainted.  The  case  was,  most  of  the  jury  were  Dissenters. 
Lord  George,  when  arraigned,  accused  the  Ministers  of 
designing  to  pack  a  jury.  They  were  so  alarmed  at  the 
imputation  that  they  would  not  interfere,  and  hence  a  jury 
partial  to  him  was  returned. 

Reports  of  2200  men  deserting  from  Washington  to  Sir 


444  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

H.  Clinton.  This  was  said  (as  three  years  ago  of  Wash- 
ington's defeat)  to  come  to  Liverpool  in  a  New  York 
•  *  Gazette,'  and  was  so  confidently  asserted  by  the  Court  that 
the  stocks  rose  on  it.  However,  no  confirmation  came  in 
a  week  afterwards,  and  at  most  it  was  a  small  body  who 
had  mutinied  for  pay  and  retired.  Strong  affirmations  were 
also  made  in  all  the  Ministerial  papers,  which  were  almost 
all  the  papers,  of  a  defensive  treaty  made  with  the  Em- 
peror, which  proved  another  lie. 

14:th.  Mr.  Burke  moved  to  renew  his  bill  for  reducing 
the  places  on  the  Civil  List.  Lord  North  had  declared  he 
would  throw  out  the  motion  with  letting  the  bill  be  read  ; 
but  found  that  even  many  of  his  friends  would  dislike  such 
imprudent  proceeding,  and  he  was  forced  to  consent  to  let 
the  bill  be  brought  in. 

lotfA.  Duke  of  Bolton  had  moved  for  papers  to  inquire 
into  the  capture  of  the  great  convoy  in  August  last,  but 
turned  the  debate  to  the  late  flight  of  Admiral  Darby  before 
the  combined  fleets.  Lord  Sandwich  pleaded  that  Darby 
had  had  but  17  to  32,  and  he  had  had  no  more ;  they  had 
been  parted  by  a  storm.  Lord  Rockingham  fell  heavily  on 
Sandwich,  who  had  formerly  said  he  would  deserve  to  lose 
his  head  if  he  had  not  a  fleet  superior  to  France  and  Spain. 

8th.  The  Duke  of  Cumberland  having  had  a  general 
levee,  the  Duchess  saw  company  once  a  week  in  an  evening, 
and  many  persons,  both  of  the  Court  and  Opposition,  went 
to  her ;  but  the  Queen  forbade  her  ladies  going,  and  neither 
the  Lord  Chamberlain  nor  the  other  Ministers  went.  The 
Duke  of  Cumberland  was  making  great  court  to  the  Prince 
of  Wales,  and  intended  to  give  him  a  ball ;  but  the  King 
would  not  let  him  go  to  that  Duke  and  Duchess.  The 
Duke  of  Cumberland  then  made  a  great  dinner  for  the 
Prince's  servants ;  but  on  the  very  morning  the  King  forbad 


1781.        THE  QUEEN'S  BALL  TO  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES.     445 

their  going.  The  Duke  complained  to  the  Prince,  and  the 
Prince  entreated  the  King  to  let  them  go,  but  he  would 
not. 

16th.  The  Queen  gave  a  ball  at  her  house  to  the  Prince, 
to  which  one  hundred  persons  of  the  Court,  or  in  favour, 
and  their  children,  were  invited  ;  but  the  Duke  of  Cum- 
berland was  not  asked,  nor  Lady  Bute  and  her  daughter. 

19th.  Mr.  Burke's  bill  for  retrenching  places  on  the 
Civil  List  was  read  the  first  time ;  the  second  reading 
deferred  till  that  day  fortnight,  because  the  21st  was  to  be 
the  Fast  Day  and  the  22nd  the  benefit  of  Vestris,  a 
favourite  French  dancer  of  the  opera.  This  last  was  on 
Lord  Nugent's  motion,  and  the  House,  in  the  heat  of  a 
French  war,  came  into  it !  Then  followed  a  conversation 
of  severity  on  Admiral  Darby's  having  declined  the  French 
fleet.  Mr.  Fox  added  that  he  had  heard  that  Governor 
Johnston  had  sent  from  Portsmouth,  whither  he  was  gone 
to  sail  with  the  grand  fleet  for  the  relief  of  Gibraltar,  a 
complaint  to  Lord  Hillsborough  that  the  fleet  was  in  a  rotten 
condition  and  not  fit  to  sail.  Not  one  of  the  Ministers 
denied  it ;  but  next  day  it  was  given  out  that  Johnston 
had  only  complained  of  one  ship  not  being  ready  at  the  time 
it  had  been  promised. 

20/A.  Letters  from  New  York  that  1300  Pennsylvanians  / 
had  quitted  Washington  for  want  of  pay,  and  had  encamped 
at  Trenton.  Clinton  had  sent  two  messengers  to  invite 
them  to  join  him ;  but  they  had  refused,  and  sent  his  mes- 
sengers prisoners  to  the  Congress,  but  declared  they  would 
not  disband  till  paid.  This,  in  the  Court's  usual  manner, 
was  so  magnified,  that  it  was  called  the  greatest  and  most 
favourable  event  that  had  happened  in  America^  but  they 
did  not  venture  to  print  more  than  the  above  in  the  '  Gazette.' 

The  Protestant  Association  sent  a  very  strong  address 


446  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

of  congratulation  to  Lord  George  Gordon,  in  which  they 
absurdly  imputed  the  late  riots  to  the  papists,  and  exhorted 
his  Lordship  pretty  plainly  never  to  take  a  place.  To  that 
part  he  made  no  answer.  Rejoicings  in  many  towns  in 
Scotland  on  his  Handbills  for  keeping 

the  Fast,  with  strong  expressions  *  *  Vide 

the  '  London  Chronicle  '  for  February  22. 

22nd.  Account  of  the  Barker,  Indiaman,  exceedingly 
rich,  being  wrecked  in  the  late  storm  on  the  coast  of  Hol- 
land. Part  of  the  vast  wealth  of  Sir  Thomas  Rumbold 
was  on  board.  He  was  supposed  to  be  returned  worth  a 
million. 

26th.  Mr.  Burke's  renewed  bill  for  the  reduction  of  the 
Civil  List  was  read  a  second  time,  and  thrown  out  by  233 
to  190.  Lord  Shelburne's  friends  did  not  attend  it.  The 
young  men  in  Opposition  made  a  considerable  figure,  par- 
ticularly John  Townshend  (second  son  to  the  Viscount) 
and  Sheridan  (the  manager  of  the  theatre),  the  two  last 
intimate  friends  of  Charles  Fox,  and  William  Pitt  (younger 
son  of  the  great  Lord  Chatham),  who,  Lord  North  declared, 
made  the  best  first  speech  he  ever  heard.  Sheridan  de- 
molished Courtney,  the  wit,  or  rather  buffoon,  of  the  Court, 
whom  he  told  that  he  was  most  ludicrous  when  he  attempted 
to  be  serious.  The  Lord  Advocate  and  the  Courtiers  main- 
tained that  the  King  had  as  much  right  to  dispose  of  the 
Civil  List  as  he  pleased  as  any  private  man  of  his  estate. 
Rigby  moved  and  it  was  voted  to  put  off  the  bill  for  six 
months. 

A  new  scene  now  began  to  open,  which  drew  most  of 
the  attention  of  the  public,  at  least  of  the  town.  Since  the 
family  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  had  been  established,  and 
that  he  was  now  past  eighteen,  it  was  impossible  to  confine 
him  entirely.  As  soon  as  the  King  went  to  bed,  the  Prince 


1781.  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES  AND  HIS  BROTHER.          447 

and  his  brother  Prince  Frederick  went  to  their  mistresses 

or  to .      Prince  Frederick,   who  promised  to  have 

most  parts  and  had  an  ascendant  over  his  brother,  was  sent 
abroad  on  that  account,  and  thereby  had  an  opportunity  of 
seeing  the  world,  which  would  only  make  him  more  fit  to 
govern  his  brother  (contrary  to  the  views  of  both  King  and 
Queen)  or  the  nation,  if  his  brother  should  fail,  and  which 
was  not  improbable.  The  Prince  of  Wales  was  deeply 
affected  with  the  scrofulous  humour  which  the  Princess  of 
Wales  had  brought  into  the  blood,  and  which  the  King 
kept  down  in  himself  by  the  most  rigorous  and  systematical 
abstinence.  The  Prince,  on  the  contrary,  locked  up  in  the 
Palace  and  restrained  from  the  society  of  women,  had  con- 
tracted a  habit  of  private  drinking,  and  this  winter  the 
humour  showed  itself  in  blotches  all  over  his  face.  His 
governor,  the  Duke  of  Montague,  was  utterly  incapable  of 
giving  him  any  kind  of  instruction,  and  his  preceptor, 
Bishop  Hurd,  though  a  scholar,  was  only  a  servile  pedant, 
ignorant  of  mankind.  The  Prince  was  good-natured,  but 
so  uninformed  that  he  often  said,  "  I  wish  anybody  would 
tell  me  what  I  ought  to  do ;  nobody  gives  me  any  instruc- 
tion for  my  conduct."  He  was  prejudiced  against  all  his 
new  servants,  as  spies  set  on  him  by  the  King,  and  showed 
it  by  never  speaking  to  them  in  public.  His  first  favourite 
had  been  Lord  Maiden,  son  of  the  Earl  of  Essex,  who  had 
brought  about  his  acquaintance  with  Mrs.  Robinson  ;  but 
by  an  intrigue,  which  I  am  going  to  mention,  both  were 
disgraced  on  pretence  of  Lord  Maiden's  intriguing  with  her 
himself,  which  was  well  founded  * 

I  have  mentioned  that  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  paid 
great  court  to  the  Prince.  I  have  said,  too,  that  the 
Duchess  of  Cumberland  had  opened  drawing-rooms  on 
Thursday  evenings  :  the  resort  to  them  was  excessive. 


448 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


Before  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland  opened  her  drawing- 
room,  she  forced  herself  upon  several  great  ladies,  who  she 
knew  could  not  refuse  going  to  return  her  visits.  She  had 
desired  to  see  some  new  furniture  at  Devonshire  House, 
had  visited  Lady  Shelburne  on  the  Earl's  illness,  and  had 
invited  herself  to  Lord  Salisbury's  at  Hatfield,  and  at  Bath 
had  visited  the  Duchess  of  Marlborough. 

She  affected  humility,  and,  to  contradict  and  oppose  the 
Duchess  of  Gloucester,  would  not  suffer  her  hand  to  be 
kissed,  returned  visits  of  Duchesses  and  Countesses,  went 
to  general  assemblies,  as  tjie  Duke  of  Cumberland  did  still 
more,  and  admitted  everybody ;  whereas  the  Duchess  of 
Gloucester  had  imprudently  objected  to  some  persons 
whom  she  did  not  like  being  admitted.  But  the  chief  con- 
course was  drawn  thither  by  the  arts  of  Lady  Melbourne,1 
who,  being  the  mistress  of  Lord  Egremont,  had  occasioned 
his  breaking  off  his  match  with  Lady  Maria,  the  Duchess's 
daughter,  the  last  year.  Lady  Melbourne  was  a  very  sen-» 
sible  woman,  and  having  a  magnificent  house  and  making 
great  entertainments,  was  one  at  the  head  of  the  fashion, 
or  ton  as  they  were  called.  Her  friend  was  the  reigning 
beauty,  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire,2  who  had  assisted  in 
breaking  off  the  above-named  match,  and  had  particularly 
thereby  offended  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester.  These  women 
setting  the  example,  almost  all  the  nobility,  but  the  servants 


1  Daughter  of  Sir  Ealpli  Millbank. 

a  The  celebrated  Georgina,  eldest 
daughter  of  Earl  Spencer.  The  rhym- 
ing wits  assailed  this  style  of  dress  of 
the  famous  beauty.  Here  is  a  specimen 
by  an  anonymous  poet,  who  was  not 
invited  to  her  parties  : — 

Dss.  DEVON.  IN  1777. 


"  Hillicr,  various  g'.ddcss,  haste, 
Boundless,  inimitable  Taste,  [reign, 

And  save  those  charms  from  Fashion's  tawdry 
Which  Nature  gave  to  Devon,  nnd  gave  in  vain. 


From  her  cumbrous  forehead  tear 

The  architecture  of  her  hair; 

But  leave  one  snow-white  plume,  to  show 

It  faintly  mocks  the  neck  below. 

Snatch  from  her  lips  th'  immodest  guile 

Of  affectation's  constant  smile, 

And  on  her  check  replace  the  rose, 

Which,  pale  and  wan,  no  longer  glows 

With  all  that  beauty,  youth,  and  love 

Could  copy  from  some  saint  above. 

Would  she  promise  real  bliss, 

Bid  her  seem  but  what  she  is  ; 

Or  if  lovelier  still  she'd  be, 

From  Granby  learn  to  worship  thee." 

— D. 


1781.  LEVEES  AT  CUMBERLAND  HOUSE.  449 

of  the  King  and  Queen,  flocked  to  Cumberland  House — 
even  the  Opposition,  who  always  were  more  absurd  than 
the  Court.  They  had  none  of  them  gone  thither  till  now, 
to  mark  their  dislike  to  the  Luttrells,  and  many,  from  duty- 
court  to  the  King,  had  not  gone  to  Gloucester  House 
neither.  It  was  the  height  of  absurdity  to  go  to  Cumber- 
land House  now,  for  though  the  King  suffered  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland  to  have  levees,  he  forbad  his  servants  going 
to  the  Duchess — so  they  did  not  pay  court  to  the  King  by 
going ;  and  as  the  Duke  and  the  Luttrells  had  now  desisted 
from  Opposition,  they  had  in  reality  offended  the  Opposition, 
who,  however,  chose  that  very  moment  to  pay  their  court 
to  the  Cumberlands.  But  an  event  soon  happened  that 
changed  that  aspect,  and  made  Cumberland  House  natu- 
rally the  head-quarters  of,  at  least,  part  of  the  Opposition. 
The  Duchess  of  Cumberland  and  the  Luttrells  openly 
countenanced  the  amour  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  Mrs. 
Armstead  *  joined  that  faction,  and  set 

themselves  in  open  defiance  of  the  King. 

The  first  project  was  to  make  a  ball  for  the  Prince  at 
Cumberland  House ;  but  the  King  forbad  his  servants 
going  thither.  The  Duke  then  made  a  great  dinner  for  the 
Prince's  servants,  to  which,  as  I  have  said,  the  King  would 
not  permit  them  to  go.  The  Duke  was  so  enraged  that 
he  wrote  a  most  insolent  letter  to  the  King,  in  which  he 
told  him  he  would  go  abroad,  for  this  country  was  not  fit 
for  a  gentleman  to  live  in.  The  Duke,  however,  went  to 
the  Drawing-room  again  and  continued  to  go,  the  Duchess 
having  certainly  told  him  that  if  he  absented  himself  he 
would  lose  his  influence  over  the  Prince  of  Wales. 

To  the  Queen's  ball,  as  I  have  said,  the  Duke  was  not 
invited,  yet  went  to  Court  the  next  day.  At  that  ball 
the  Prince  got  drunk,  which  threw  him  into  a  dangerous 

VOL.  II.  2    G 


450  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

fever,  but  such  a  general  irruption  over  his  whole  face  and 
body  of  the  humours  in  his  blood  came  out  that  it  pro- 
bably saved  his  life. 

At  this  moment  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester 
came  to  town  from  Weymouth.  The  King  as  usual 
vented  his  complaints  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester.  The 
King  told  the  Duke  that  though,  on  the  reconciliation,  he 
had  told  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  that  all  his  doors  would 
be  opened  to  him,  "yet,"  said  the  King,  "he  comes  to  the 
Queen's  house  fourteen  times  a  week  to  my  son,  the  Prince, 
and  passes  by  my  door,  but  never  conies  in  to  me ;  and  if 
he  meets  me  there  or  when  we  are  hunting,  he  only  pulls 
off  his  hat  and  walks  or  rides  away.  I  am  ashamed," 
continued  he,  "  to  see  my  brother  paying  court  to  my 
son."  The  King  resented  it,  and  though  he  invited  the 
principal  persons  who  hunted  to  dinner,  he  never  invited 
the  Duke  of  Cumberland.  The  Prince  of  Wales  *  *  * 
*  *  *  seemed  to  be  very  weak  and  feeble.  He  drunk 

hard,  swore,  and  passed  every  night  in  ;  such  were 

the  fruits  of  his  being  locked  up  in  the  palace  of  piety  •' 
He  had  in  November  protested  against  receiving  Lord 
Chesterfield  for  a  Lord  of  his  Bedchamber  on  his  odious 
character  in  having  hanged  his  own  tutor,  Dr.  Dodd,  for 
forgery,  with  every  aggravating  circumstance  of  insensi- 
bility, and  for  having  chosen  Lord  Sandwich  for  his 
patron ;  yet,  in  the  month  of  March  following,  Lord 
'  Chesterfield  grew  a  favourite  with  the  Prince,  who  often 
drove  him  openly  to  Hyde  Park  in  his  chaise. 

The  King  further  informed  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  of 
his  brother  Cumberland's  outrageous  letter,  and  said,  "He 
has  forced  himself  every  day  into  my  son's  company, 
even  when  he  was  at  the  worst."  The  Duke  said  he 
wondered  his  Majesty  had  suffered  it.  "I  don't  know," 


1781.        CONVERSATION  WITH  DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER.          451 

replied  the  King,  "1  do  not  care  to  part  relations" — a 
curious  speech  to  a  brother  whom  he  himself  had  forbidden 
the  Court !  The  Duke  repeated  this  conversation  to  me, 
and  entered  much  on  the  conduct  of  the  Duke  and  Duchess 
of  Cumberland.  The  Luttrells,  he  said,  were  such  in- 
famous people  that  he  never  could  bear  to  be  connected 
with  them.  I  said,  "  Sir,  I  beg  your  Royal  Highness  to 
have  patience  ;  your  brother  and  his  Duchess  are  playing 
the  game  into  your  hands.  They  will  set  the  King  and 
Prince  at  variance,  and  the  sober  part  of  the  nation  will 
condemn  them.  Your  Royal  Highness's  prudence  and 
virtue  will  appear.  You  meddle  in  no  intrigues  nor  parties : 
nobody  attached  to  you  has  ambition  or  views  of  fortunes. 
You  will  be  the  umpire  or  mediator  between  the  King 
and  Prince  of  Wales.  I  have  already,  Sir,  begged  the 
Duchess  to  laugh  at  the  resort  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's 
house,  and  told  her  she  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  act  with 
sense  and  prudence,  and  that  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland 
will  do  the  reverse  out  of  opposition  to  her.  You,  Sir, 
will  see  the  moment  come  of  serving  your  country  and 
your  family,  and  the  King  will  at  last  be  forced  to  do 
justice  to  your  and  the  Duchess's  virtues.  The  Prince  of 
Wales  loves  you ;  keep  well  with  him,  give  him  good 
advice  when  you  can  ;  but,  as  your  brother  Cumberland 
will  flatter  his  views,  which  would  not  become  you  to  do, 
nor  is  it  in  your  nature  to  do,  do  not  prejudice  him  against 
you  by  giving  advice  but  when  he  asks  it,  then  it  will  make 
impression."  "  Oh ! "  cried  the  Duke,  "  he  says  he  loves 
me,  but  that  I  preach  too  much  ;  yet,  I  say  very  little." 
His  Royal  Highness  then  said  these  memorable  words  to 
me,  which  showed  that  his  good  heart  and  good  sense  had, 
like  his  uncle  Cumberland's,  profited  by  adversity:  "/ 
thank  God  that  I  have  such  bad  health.  I  was  very  am- 

2  G  2 


452  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

bilious,  but  I  have  had  time  to  reflect,  and  now  I  have  no 
view  of  doing  what  is  not  right"  I  did  not  lose  that  oppor- 
tunity, but  repeated  what  I  had  said,  that  by  patience  and 
prudence  he  would  have  opportunity  of  serving  his  country 
and  the  Royal  Family  of  which  he  was  a  member. 


MARCH. 


2nd.  IT  was  given  out  by  the  rumours  of  the  Court  that 
the  Emperor  and  the  Czarina  had  offered  to  mediate  a 
general  peace,  and  that  we,  France,  and  Spain  had 
accepted  the  mediation,  though  the  treaty  was  to  be  nego- 
tiated at  Vienna ;  and  that  Sir  Joseph  Yorke,  who  was  just 
arrived  from  Holland,  was  to  be  joined  with  Keith,  our 
Minister  at  Vienna,  and  was  to  set  out  without  delay. 
Lord  North,  too,  who  was  to  have  opened  the  Budget,  put 
it  off  for  two  days  on  pretence  of  impartiality.  The  stocks 
rose  six  per  cent,  in  two  days  on  this  intelligence,  but  soon 
fell  again,  as  it  appeared  to  be  at  least  a  very  exaggerated 
account  given  out  to  raise  them.  The  two  Imperial 
Powers,  it  was  said,  had  indeed  made  a  defensive  alliance, 
as  if  to  enforce  peace,  and  had  offered  us  their  mediation, 
but  it  did  not  appear  that  either  France  or  Spain  had 
accepted  it ;  and  if  we  had,  yet  the  conviction  of  the 
Court  discovered  how  little  foundation  there  was  for 
hoping  peace  would  be  made,  as  the  Courtiers  declared 
there  must  be  no  mention  made  of  the  independence  of 
America,  and  Sir  Joseph  Yorke's  journey  was  at  least 
delayed. 

5th.  Sheridan  moved  to  alter  the  Police  of  Westmin- 


1781.  LORD  NORTH  OPENS  THE  BUDGET.  4f>3 

ster,  it  having  been  so  defective  on  the  late  riots  that  it 
had  been  necessary  to  call  out  the  military.  The  Court 
maintained  the  propriety  of  the  latter  and  rejected  the 
motion. 

7th.  Lord  North  opened  the  Budget  and  declared  he 
should  fund  twenty-one  millions  to  borrow  twelve.  It  was 
severely  handled  on  the  partiality  he  had  showed  in  dis- 
posing of  the  loan  to  Members  of  Parliament  and  favou- 
rites. 

13th.  An  express  that  Sir  George  Rodney  had  taken 
St.  Eustatia  from  the  Dutch,  with  three  millions  of  pro- 
perty, and  with  no  loss.  The  Dutch  Admiral  was  killed. 

14th.  Lord  North  opened  the  taxes  on  most  excisable 
commodities. 

1 5th.  The  Court  partly  rescinded  a  note  that  had 
passed  in  the  Common  Council  for  lending  Guildhall  to 
the  deputies  of  the  Associated  Counties,  and  even  broke 
off  correspondence  with  them,  declaring  they  had  meant 
to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  City  again.  The  borough  of 
Cupar,  in  Scotland,  went  farther,  and  having  received 
Mr.  Hartley's  pamphlet,  stigmatized  it  as  intending  to 
promote  rebellion,  and  published  that  opinion  in  all  the 
papers. 

The  grand  fleet  which  had  been  so  long  preparing 
sailed  this  week  to  relieve  Gibraltar,  twenty-eight  ships-of- 
the-line,  &c.  This  was  a  most  desperate  stroke  ;  as  large  a 
French  fleet  was  at  Brest,  and  another  Spanish  as  large 
at  Cadiz.  If  they  joined  or  enclosed  ours,  the  odds  were 
great;  if  they  did  hot,  the  Channel  was  open  to  the 
French :  we  had  no  ships  at  home,  nor  a  camp  formed ;  and 
Portsmouth,  Plymouth  again,  Newcastle,  and  many  other 
parts  of  the  island,  were  exposed  to  invasion.  Hitherto 
France  and  Spain  had  not  profited  by  any  of  the  advantages 


454  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MARCH, 

we  threw  in  their  way.  It  looked  sometimes  as  if  our 
Court  had  bribed  some  of  the  French  Ministers  to  ob- 
struct their  measures.  In  March,  1781,  the  following 
anecdote  was  told  by  Monsieur  de  Genlis,  who  came  over 
on  some  private  business  of  his  own.  He  was  attached  to 
the  Due  de  Chartres,  and  his  wife  had  been  that  Prince's 
mistress,  and  was  now  governess  of  his  daughters,  for 
whose  use  she  wrote  'Le  Theatre  des  Enfans.'  He  said 
that  in  1779,  when  the  French  fleet  under  D'Orvilliers 
was  to  attack  Plymouth  and  invade  us  with  land  forces, 
the  Due  de  Chartres  was  to  accompany  them.  He  left 
Mons.  de  Genlis  at  Brest  with  orders  to  send  him  a  courier 
when  D'Orvilliers  was  ready  to  sail,  and  the  troops  to  be 
ready  to  embark  on  his  being  at  Plymouth.  The  Due 
broke  a  piece  of  money,  kept  one  half,  gave  the  other  to 
Grenlis,  who  was  to  send  it  at  the  proper  moment,  and  on 
receipt  of  it  the  Due  would  set  out.  D'Orvilliers  was 
ready  to  sail,  and  ordered  the  troops  to  be  ready  to 
embark  on  the  transports  on  his  notice.  Genlis  sent  the 
broken  piece ;  on  receiving  it  the  Due  did  not  embark, 
but  sent  the  other  tally  piece  as  a  mark  that  he  knew  the 
troops  would  not  go.  They  did  not.  We  afterwards 
thought  here  that  D'Orvilliers 's  retreat  without  landing, 
when  he  could,  was  owing  to  his  having  12,000  or  15,000 
of  his  seamen  sick.  I  do  not  answer  for  the  truth  of 
Genlis's  story,  but  he  certainly  told  it. 

Dean  Tucker  published  his  answer  to  Locke  on  Govern- 
ment. Dr.  Bagot,  Dean  of  Christchurch,  published  a 
most  silly  pamphlet  against  Dr.  Bell,  a  Canon  of  West- 
minster, who  had  written  on  the  Sacrament. 
.  Bagot  seemed  to  have  written  only  to  call  Bishop  Hoadley 
Sociriian.  Bishop  Porteus,  of  Chester,  on  a  complaint  of 
Earl  Ferrers,  in  the  Lords,  of  the  increase  of  Popery  in 


1781.  SIR  GEORGE  SAVILLE'S  MOTION.  455 

Cheshire,  maintained  that  the  number  of  Papists  in  gene- 
ral had  decreased. 

Lord  Buckingham  complained  in  the  House  of  Lords  of 
Lord  North's  extravagance  and  corruption  on  the  Loan, 
and  six  or  seven  Lords  protested. 

22nd.  Mr.  Minchin,  in  the  Commons,  complained  of 
great  abuses  in  the  Navy.  The  Courtiers  replied  by 
abusing  the  Association. 

26th.  Sir  George  Saville  moved  for  an  inquiry  into 
Lord  North's  behaviour  on  the  Loan.  Mr.  Byng  pro- 
duced numberless  instances  of  his  partiality  in  that  affair. 
Drummond,  the  banker,  had  84,000/.  in  his  own  name,  and 
treble  in  those  of  his  clerks.  Charles  Fox  most  severe  on 
Lord  North ;  the  Lord  Advocate  alone  defended  him,  but 
owned  afterwards  his  conduct  had  been  scandalous.  The 
minority  were  about  160  to  203.  The  Dutch  manifesto 
appeared,  and  proved  contrary  to  our  assertions,  but  they 
had  been  proceeding  to  give  us  satisfaction  against  Van 
Berchel  and  Amsterdam. 

Lord  Sandwich,  to  captivate  the  Navy,  persuaded  the 
King  to  give  the  private  property  at  St.  Eustatia  to  the 
captors.  France  had  acted  directly  contrary  when  D'Estaing 
took  the  Grenadines.  The  West  India  merchants  were 
alarmed  at  this  savage  and  dangerous  precedent,  and 
remonstrated  to  Lord  George  Germaine.  He  told  them 
the  King  had  ordered  it ;  but,  though  they  pressed  for  a 
written  answer,  he  was  ashamed  or  did  not  dare  to  give  it. 

24:th.  Accounts  of  a  new  defeat  of  Carleton  by  the 
Americans,  which  stopped  Lord  Cornwallis,  and  Arnold 
was  said  to  be  blocked  up  by  them. 

The  same  day,  a  much  more  alarming  account  came  by 
a  French  ship  that  was  taken  coming  from  the  East  In- 
dies, and  was  bringing  an  account  of  Hyder  Ally  and  the 


456  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

Mharattas  having  cut  to  pieces  Sir  Hector  Monro's  little 
army,  and  probably  being  masters  of  Pondicherry.  East 
India  stock  fell  eight  per  cent. 

31st.  Account  of  some  advantages  recovered  by  Lord 
Cornwallis's  parties,  who  had  prevented  the  junction  of  the 
American  Generals  Morgan  and  Green.  \Vide  'Gazette' 
of  that  night] 


APRIL. 


AT  this  time  debates  in  the  Lords  about  compounding 
tythes,  which  the  Chancellor  opposed,  and  fell  very 
roughly  on  Lord  Sandwich  and  the  Lord  President, 
Bathurst.  They  defeated  him  in  a  division,  yet,  in  a 
second  debate,  he  got  the  matter  postponed.  He  was 
believed  to  be  at  variance  with  the  Ministers,  whom  he 
despised,  and  on  all  occasions  treated  with  contempt 
and  haughtiness.  Everybody  admired  and  allowed  his 
abilities,  but  feared  and  disliked  him.  As  Chancellor  he 
gave  great  discontent ;  he  was  idle  and,  consequently, 
ill-informed,  which  made  him  delay  decision  of  causes  lest 
he  should  determine  wrong,  for  he  was  timid  at  times, 
though  often  stout  and  oftener  brutal. 

At  the  end  of  the  month,  Lord  North  moved  for  a 
secret  Committee  to  inquire  into  the  neglects  and  mis- 
management that  had  occasioned  the  late  misfortunes  in 
the  East  Indies.  It  was  supposed  to  be  chiefly  aimed  at  Sir 
G.  Rutnbold.  Burke,  Charles  Fox,  and  others  contended 
for  its  being  only  a  select  Committee.  Fox,  in  one  of  his 
capital  speeches,  was  most  justly  severe  on  Lord  North 


1781.  CONDUCT  OF  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES.  457 

for  inviting  inquiries  into  the  conduct  of  others,  and  pre- 
venting all  scrutiny  into  his  own,  which  had  brought  too 
many  disgraces  and  losses  on  us.  He  arraigned,  too,  the 
pusillanimity  of  a  late  proclamation,  in  which  we  submitted 
to  a  neutrality  in  the  Baltic,  if  the  French  did  attack  us 
there.  The  secret  Committee  was  preferred  on  a  division 
of  134  to  80. 


MAY. 


4th.  ACCOUNTS  of  Admiral  Darby  having  relieved  Gibral- 
tar ;  the  Spanish  fleet  having  kept  close  in  Cadiz,  though 
with  thirty-two  ships  to  Darby's  twenty-eight,  and  though 
he  was  so  embarrassed  with  transports  and  store  ships. 

The  Spanish  fleet  were  said  to  be  very  sickly. 

The  conduct  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  began  already  to 
make  the  greatest  noise,  and  proved  how  very  bad  his 
education  had  been,  or  rather  that  he  had  had  little  or  none, 
but  had  only  been  locked  up  and  suffered  to  keep  company 
with  the  lowest  domestics ;  while  the  Duke  of  Montague, 
and  Kurd,  Bishop  of  Lichfield,  had  thought  of  nothing 
but  paying  court  to  the  King  and  Queen,  and  her  German 
women.  The  Prince  drank  more  publicly  in  the  Drawing- 
room,  and  talked  there  irreligiously  and  indecently  in  the 
openest  manner  (both  which  were  the  style  of  the  Duchess 
of  Cumberland).  He  passed  the  nights  in  the  lowest 
debaucheries,  at  the  same  time  bragging  of  intrigues  with 
women  of  quality,  whom  he  named  publicly.  Both  the 
Prince  and  the  Duke  talked  of  the  King  in  the  grossest 
terms  even  in  his  hearing,  as  he  told  the  Duke  of  Glou- 
cester, who  asked  him  why  he  did  not  forbid  his  son 


458  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

seeing  his  brother.  The  King  replied  that  he  feared  the 
Prince  would  not  obey  him.  The  Duke  of  Cumberland 
dropped  that  he  meant  by  this  outrageous  behaviour  to 
force  the  King  to  yield  to  terms  in  favour  of  his  Duchess, 
having  gotten  entire  command  over  the  Prince.  The 
latter,  however,  had  something  of  the  duplicity  of  his 
grandfather,  Prince  Frederick,  and,  after  drawing  in  per- 
sons to  abuse  the  King,  would  betray  them  to  the  King. 
Nor  in  other  respects  did  his  heart  turn  to  good.  In  his 
letters  to  Mrs.  Robinson,  his  mistress,  he  called  his  sister, 
the  Princess  Royal,  a  poor  child,  "  that  bandy-legged  b — h, 
my  sister ;"  and,  while  he  was  talking  of  Lord  Chesterfield 
in  the  most  opprobrious  terms,  he  was  sending  courier 
after  courier  to  fetch  him  to  town.  That  Lord's  return 
produced  a  scene  that  divulged  all  that  till  now  had  been 
only  whispered.  One  night,  as  soon  as  the  King  was 
gone  to  bed,  the  Prince,  with  St.  Leger  and  Charles 
Windham,  his  chief  favourites,  and  some  of  his  younger 
servants,  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  and  George  Pitt,  son 
of  Lord  Rivers,  went  to  Blackheath  to  sup  with  Lord 
Chesterfield,  who,  being  married,  would  not  consent  to 
send  for  the  company  the  Prince  required.  They  all  got 
immediately  drunk,  and  the  Prince  was  forced  to  lie  down 
on  a  bed  for  some  time.  On  his  return,  one  of  the  com- 
pany proposed  as  a  toast,  "  A  short  reign  to  the  King." 
The  Prince,  probably  a  little  come  to  himself,  was  offended, 
rose  and  drank  a  bumper  to  "  Long  live  the  King."  The 
next  exploit  was  to  let  loose  a  large  fierce  house-dog,  and 
George  Pitt,  of  remarkable  strength,  attempted  to  tear 
out  his  tongue.  The  dog  broke  from  him,  wounded  Wind- 
ham's  arm,  and  tore  a  servant's  leg.  At  six  in  the  morn- 
ing, when  the  Prince  was  to  return,  Lord  Chesterfield 
took  up  a  candle  to  light  him,  but  was  so  drunk  that  he 


1781.  DEBAUCH  AT  LORD  CHESTERFIELD'S.  459 

fell  down  the  steps  into  the  area,  and,  it  was  thought,  had 
fractured  his  skull.  That  accident  spread  the  whole  his- 
tory of  the  debauch,  and  the  King  was  so  shocked  that  he 
fell  ill  on  it,  and  told  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  that  he  had 
not  slept  for  ten  nights,  and  that  whenever  he  fretted  the 
bile  fell  on  his  breast.  As  he  was  not  ill  on  any  of  the 
disgraces  of  the  war,  he  showed  how  little  he  had  taken 
them  to  heart.  Soon  after  this  adventure,  the  King  being 
to  review  a  regiment  on  Blackheath,  Lord  Chesterfield 
offered  him  a  breakfast,  but  the  late  affair  had  made  such 
a  noise  that  he  did  not  think  it  decent  to  accept  it. 

Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  used  to  drink  to  Dr.  Lee's 
being  soon  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  (a  health  of  the 
same  import),  and  without  being  drunk. 

For  the  'Public  Advertiser,'  1782. 
MODERN  WIT — (Blackheath). 

"  Drink  like  a  Lord,  and  with  him,  if  you  will. 
Deep  be  the  bumper  :  let  no  liquor  spill ; 
No  daylight  in  the  glass,  though  through  the  night 
You  soak  your  senses  till  the  morning  light ; 
Then  stupid  rise,  and  with  the  rising  sun 
Drive  the  high  car,  a  second  Phaeton. 
Let  these  exploits  your  fertile  wit  evince  : 
Drunk  as  a  Lord,  and  happy  as  a  Prince  !  "  ' 

8th.  Sir  George  Saville  moved  to  hear  the  petition  of 
the  delegates  of  counties.  It  was  rejected  on  pretence 
that  delegates  were  not  authorized  persons,  by  215  to 
135.  So  large  a  minority  on  a  topic  no  longer  popular, 
showed  what  they  might  have  done  had  not  the  Opposi- 
tion been  disunited. 

Wth.  Accounts  of  Lord  Cornwallis  having  been  attacked 
by  General  Greene,  whom  he  had  defeated,  though  much 


1  See  subsequent  entry  for  15th  August.— D. 


460  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

superior,  and  killed  2000  men,  but  with  heavy  slaughter 
of  the  Guards.  The  regular  messenger,  Captain  Brode- 
rick,  was  not  arrived. 

14th.  Burke  moved  for  an  inquiry  into  the  conduct  of 
Sir  George  Rodney  and  General  Vaughan,  at  St.  Eustatia, 
and  of  their  forfeitures  and  expulsions  there  :  rejected  by 
160  to  56.  In  the  former  debate,  Charles  Fox  shone 
transcendently,  and  drew  a  picture  of  the  Chancellor,  like 
an  enraged  bull,  tossing,  wounding,  trampling  on  the  rest 
of  the  Ministers  whom  he  despised. 

15th.  Account  of  La  Mothe  Piquet,  with  ten  ships, 
having  waited  at  the  mouth  of  the  Channel  for  Com- 
modore Hotham,  who,  with  four  men-of-war,  was  con- 
voying home  thirty  transports  laden  with  the  plunder  of 
St.  Eustatia.  La  Mothe  had  taken  about  twenty-one; 
nine  more  and  the  men-of-war  escaped  into  a  port  in 
Ireland.  Great  clamours  rose  amongst  the  merchants 
and  insurers,  who  had  demanded  a  large  convoy  to  meet 
them  from  Lord  Sandwich.  It  was  now  pleaded  in  his 
defence  that  we  had  but  twelve  ships  at  home,  and  those 
not  half  manned;  yet,  to  that  protection  were  we  left, 
while  Darby  was  gone  to  Gibraltar ;  and  yet,  France  and 
Holland  had  not  taken  that  opportunity,  nor  had  Spain 
stirred  to  prevent  us  in  our  designs.  If  anything  was 
more  contemptible  than  our  conduct,  it  was  that  of  three 
such  great  Powers  in  league  against  us,  without  giving 
us  a  wound  but  this  and  the  former  capture  of  our  mer- 
chantmen. 

Dr.  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  being  dead,  that 
rich  see  was  bestowed  on  Bishop  North,  the  Minister's 
brother,  who  was  succeeded  in  the  mitre  of  Worcester  by 
Hurd,  of  Lichfield,  and  he  by  Cornwallis,  Dean  of  Can- 
terbury, the  Archbishop's  nephew,  and  brother  of  Lord 
Cornwallis. 


1781.          VICTORY  OBTAINED  BY  LORD  CORNWALLIS. 


461 


JUNE. 


3rd.  CAPTAIN  BRODERICK  arrived  with  the  confirmation 
of  Lord  Cornwallis's  victory  over  General  Greene  with 
1600  men  against  9000,  and  with  another  success  since  of 
Lord  Rawdon  over  the  same  General  Greene. 

But  though  the  Court  had  sounded  the  former  as  a  de- 
cisive action,  Broderick's  account  was  most  melancholy, 
and  showed  that  it  had  been  so  far  from  a  final  defeat, 
that  Greene  had  been  already  in  force  again  and  ready  to 
attack  Lord  Rawdon.  Besides  this,  the  Carolinas  were  so  , 
hostile,  though  represented  as  ready  to  come  over,  that 
Cornwallis  had  not  been  able  to  get  intelligence  from  a 
single  person,  nor  could  ever  learn  where  the  enemy  was 
till  he  met  them.  He  was  equally  in  want  of  provisions 
and  cloaks,  and  his  army,  which  at  his  parting  from  Clinton 
had  consisted  of  17,000  men,  was  now  reduced,  excepting 
his  detachments,  to  1600. 

About  this  time  Mr.  William  Pitt,  second  son  of  the 
great  Lord  Chatham,  made  a  most  shining  figure  in 
Opposition.1 

The  East  India  Company  resisted  Lord  North's  demand 
of  600,000^.,  and  were  heard  by  Council  at  the  bar  of  the 
House  of  Commons.  Erskine  shone  in  their  defence,  but 
without  effect. 


1  "Mr.  William  Pitt,"  Member  for 
Sir  James  Lowther's  close  borough  of 
Appleby,  delivered  his  maiden  speech 
in  February  of  this  year,  in  support  of 
Burke's  motion  for  Reforming  the  Civil 
List.  His  speech,  early  in  June,  on  the 


American  war,  elicited  praise  even  from 
his  opponents.  "  He  promises  to  be  the 
first  speaker  ever  heard  in  the  House,"  / 
said  a  Member  to  Fox.  "  He  is  that 
already  "  was  the  chivalrous,  or  rather 
the  manly,  reply  of  Charles  Fox. — D. 


462  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

Charles  Fox,  seconded  by  Lord  Nugent,  obtained  leave 
to  bring  in  a  bill  to  repeal  the  Marriage  Act. 

Qth.  Account  from  Commodore  Johnston  of  his  having 
encountered  and  repelled  an  attack  of  five  French  men-of- 
war  of  the  line  at  St.  lago.  He  had  put  Captain  Sutton, 
of  the  Iris,  under  arrest  for  preventing  his  taking  some  of 
the  enemy's  ships. 

1  Ith.  Debate  on  the  bill  for  obliging  the  public  account- 
ants to  pay  the  balance  in  their  hands  into  the  Treasury. 
T.  Townshend  and  Charles  Fox  very  severe  on  Lord 
North's  indolence  and  eagerness  to  get  hold  of  public 
money.  The  latter  (Fox)  vindicated  his  father  as  Pay- 
master, and  attacked  Rigby  on  his  last  year's  inclination 
to  quarrel  with  Lord  North,  and  his  time-serving  since,  for 
fear  of  being  persecuted  as  Paymaster. 

12th.  Mr.  Fox's  motion  for  a  Committee  to  consider 
the  American  war.  He  showed  the  impossibility  of  sub- 
duing America  from  Lord  Cornwallis's  last  despatches  in 
the  '  Gazette.'  Sir  Thomas  Clarges,  who  had  constantly 
voted  with  the  Administration,  declared  he  had  been  de- 
ceived by  them,  and  would  support  them  no  longer. 
Rigby,  in  answer  to  Charles  Fox  on  the  preceding  day, 
affirmed  that  every  man  of  consequence  had,  at  one  time 
or  another,  voted  for  the  American  war,  and  that  to  de- 
clare for  peace  now  would  be  to  encourage  France.  The 
motion  was  rejected  by  1 72  to  99. 

The  Duke  of  Gloucester  set  out  to  see  the  Emperor  who 
was  come  to  Brussels.  It  was  supposed  that  he  went  on 
some  negotiation  from  the  King. 

14th.  On  the  bill  for  preventing  abuse  of  Sunday,  Lord 
Abingdon  made  a  bitter  and  well-deserved  invective  on  the 
bishops  for  their  hypocrisy,  and  for  their  bloody  votes  on 
the  American  war.  The  same  day  the  Chancellor  was 


1781.     LORD  GEORGE  GORDON  HEADS  THE  METHODISTS.    463 

beaten,  with  three  more,  by  27,  he  endeavouring  to  prevent 
the  bill  for  commutation  of  tithes. 

15M.  Charles  Fox  carried  the  commitment  of  his  bill  for 
repealing  the  Marriage  Act  by  90  to  27.  Mr.  Courtney 
made  a  much  admired  speech  for  the  repeal. 

A  little  before  this,  Lord  George  Gordon  had  set  him- 
self at  the  head  of  the  Methodists,  and  was  received  with 
the  highest  respect  by  them  at  a  meeting  of  the  Governors 
of  the  Lock  Hospital,  near  Hyde  Park,  that  sect  getting 
into  their  own  hands  the  management  of  that  charity.  The 
Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lord  Rockingham  resigned  their 
seats,  and  Lord  Hillsborough,  Secretary  of  State,  was  dis- 
posed to  do  so  too ;  but  the  Court  thought  it  advisable  for 
him  to  remain  there  as  some  check  on  them. 

The  Duke  of  Gloucester  made  a  short  trip  to  visit  the 
Emperor,  who  was  come  to  Brussels.  This  was  supposed 
to  be  a  political  visit,  but  was  not  so.  The  Emperor  told 
his  Royal  Highness  he  had  a  great  inclination  to  come  to 
England,  but  it  would  give  too  much  jealousy  to  the  other 
European  Powers ;  and  he  added,  "  If  one  wished  to  serve 
you  (meaning  England)  it  would  be  to  no  purpose,  you  are 
too  obstinate."  That  was  most  true  ;  the  King,  Lord  Hills- 
borough,  and  a  few  more  would  still  listen  to  no  terms  with 
America,  though  all  the  other  Ministers  saw  it  desperate,  and 
though  all  who  came  thence  assured  them  so.  Dalrymple 
pressed  Lord  North  on  that  head,  told  him  how  few  troops  re- 
mained, begged  him  to  talk  with  Governor  Martin — "Why," 
said  North,  "  Martin  advised  the  last  expedition."  "  He  did 
so,"  said  Dalrymple,  "but  now  sees  that  he  was  mistaken 
on  every  point,  and  will  tell  you  so ; "  but  Lord  North  de- 
clined it,  and  probably  did  not  want  to  be  confirmed  in 
that  opinion,  but  had  not  honesty  enough  to  combat  the 
King's  obstinacy.  The  Emperor  told  the  Duke  that  we 


461  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUKE, 

had  offered  Gibraltar  to  Spain  for  a  separate  peace,  but  it 
had  been  rejected. 

Lord  North  compounded  with  the  East  India  Company 
for  400,OOOZ. 

28th.  Last  week  was  sold  by  auction  the  very  valuable 
•>  library  of  an  honourable  representative2  of  Westminster, 
I  and  which  had  been  taken,  with  all  his  effects,  in  exe- 
cution. Amongst  the  books  there  was  Mr.  Gibbon's  first 
volume  of  the  *  Roman  History,'  and  which  appeared  by 
the  title  page  to  have  been  given  by  the  author  to  his 
honourable  friend,  who  thought  proper  to  subscribe  the 
following  anecdote:  —  "The  author  at  Brookes'  said, 
there  was  no  salvation  for  this  country  until  six  heads 
of  the  principal  persons  in  Administration  were  laid  on 
the  table."  Eleven  days  after  this  same  gentleman  ac- 
cepted a  place  of  Lord  of  Trade  under  those  very  Mini- 
sters, and  has  acted  with  them  ever  since.  Such  was  the 
avidity  of  bidders  for  the  smallest  production  of  so  won- 
derful a  genius,  that  by  the  addition  of  this  little  record 
the  book  sold  for  three  guineas. 

Bate,  the  author  of  the  'Morning  Post,'  sentenced  to  a 
year's  imprisonment  for  an  atrocious  libel  on  the  Duke  of 
Richmond,  whose  virtues  were  celebrated  even  by  the 
King's  Judges. 

Nothing  could  be  more  disgraceful  to  the  Court  than 
this  conviction  of  Bate.  He  was  the  worst  of  all  the  scan- 
dalous libellers  that  had  appeared  both  on  private  persons 
as  well  as  public.  His  life  was  dissolute,  he  had  fought 
more  than  one  duel,  and  had  avowed  persecution  of  the 
Duke  of  Richmond,  whom  he  hated  for  naming  him  in  the 
House  of  Lords.  Even  after  conviction,  and  before  sen- 


•  Mr.  Charles  Fox. 


1781.  CONVICTION  OF  BATE  FOR  LIBEL.  465 

tence,  he  had  insulted  and  challenged  the  Duke  ;  yet  Lord 
Sandwich  had  procured  for  him  a  good  Crown  living, 
and  he  was  believed  to  be  pensioned  by  the  Court,  as  well 
as  Shebbeare. 

Great  altercations  in  both  Houses  on  the  peculiar  seve- 
rities to  American  prisoners,  on  complaints  by  Charles 
Fox  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond.  The  Lord- Advocate 
was  grossly  abusive  on  the  Opposition  for  supporting 
rebels,  and  against  Charles  Fox,  who  had  been  as  bitter  on 
the  Scotch  for  having  formerly  committed  so  many  rebel- 
lions. Wedderburn,  Lord  Loughborough,  was  as  angry 
at  the  Duke  for  reflecting  on  the  poverty  of  Scotland. 
Both  motions  were  rejected.  The  Chancellor,  who  took 
every  opportunity  of  differing  with  the  Ministers,  particu- 
larly Lord  Bathurst  and  Lord  Sandwich,  and  indeed 
almost  with  everybody,  took  no  part  against  the  Duke 
of  Richmond  ;  and  when  the  alterations  in  the  Marriage 
Bill  came  from  the  other  House,  he  paid  the  highest  com- 
pliments to  Charles  Fox,  the  author,  though  he  opposed 
its  been  decided  so  very  late  in  the  session,  and  it  was 
rejected. 


VOL.  II.  2    II 


466  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 


JULY. 

12th.  ACCOUNT  of  the  junction  of  Lord  Cornwallis  and 
Arnold. 

14th.  Trial  of  Monsieur  La  Mothe,  a  spy,  after  four 
months  of  close  imprisonment,  convicted  on  the  evidence 
of  his  accomplice,  a  Hessian,  and  most  infamous  wretch. 

Lord  Mulgrave  returned ;  he  had  been  on  an  expedi- 
tion against  Flushing,  but  his  pilots  proved  ignorant  of 
the  road. 

Keene,  Bishop  of  Ely,  died  this  month ;  succeeded  by 
Dr.  Yorke,  Bishop  of  Gloucester. 

18th.  The  Parliament  rose. 

27th.  Monsieur  De  la  Mothe  executed  at  Tyburn,  for 
being  a  spy. 

At  the  end  of  this  month,  Monsieur  Hardenberg,  a 
Hanoverian  nobleman,  who  had  lately  come  over  with  his 
wife,  a  very  pretty  woman,  and  taken  house  at  Old 
Windsor,  suddenly  took  her  away  at  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  and  carried  her  out  of  England,  saying  he  should 
return  and  fetch  his  children.  The  report  was  that  he 
had  found  the  Prince  of  Wales  with  her.  That  would  not 
have  been  extraordinary ;  but  the  remarkable  part  of  the 
story  was,  that  the  Queen  had  for  some  time  been  taxed 
in  the  public  papers  as  endeavouring  to  give  her  son  a 
German  mistress,  as  it  had  been  suspected  that  he  had 
brought  over  Madame  de  Busch,  another  pretty  Hano- 
verian lady,  at  the  beginning  of  the  winter,  with  the  same 
view.  It  was  certain  that  her  attendants  did  give  out  that 


1781.  ASPERSION  OF  THE  QUEEN.  467 

it  would  be  less  dangerous  for  the  Prince  to  have  a  Ger- 
man than  an  English  mistress  ;  and  yet,  though  the  Queen 
had  been  aspersed  for  this,  the  Hardenbergs  were  not  sent 
away,  as  the  King  could  certainly  have  done  in  a  moment 
if  he  had  pleased.  It  was  not  consonant  to  the  affected 
piety  of  either  to  countenance  their  son  in  adultery. 


AUGUST. 

4th.  CONFIRMATION  of  the  loss  of  Tobago,  published  in  the 
*  Gazette.'  Pensecola  also  taken. 

9th.  Gazette  extraordinary  on  the  engagement  of  Admi- 
ral Parker  with  seven  ships  against  eight  Dutch. 

15/A.  A  great  ball  at  Windsor  on  the  birthday  of  the 
Prince  of  Wales.  The  Duke  of  Cumberland  was  there, 
though  he  had  been  at  neither  at  the  Queen's  house ;  but 
it  was  supposed  he  was  now  invited  to  please  the  Prince, 
over  whom  he  had  great  influence.  The  Prince  told  the 
Marquis  of  Graham  that  he  never  recollected  the  night  he 
had  passed  at  Lord  Chesterfield's,  at  Greenwich,  without 
regret,  and  that  he  was  determined  never  to  be  drunk 
again. 

The  King  and  Prince  went  to  see  Admiral  Parker 
and  the  fleet  at  the  Nore.  Parker  declined  receiving 
knighthood,  and  it  was  said  complained  of  not  having  been 
sufficiently  strengthened.1 

25th.  Account  of  Cornwallis's  defeating  La  Fayette 
and  a  body  of  2000,  by  seeming  to  retire  and  affecting 
weakness. 


1  There  were  several  men-of-war  in 
the  Nore,  in  the  Downs,  and  off  Har- 


whose  aid  Parker  could  have  destroyed 
the  whole  Dutch  fleet.— D. 


wich,  which  were  lying  idle,  but  with 

2  H  2 


468  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HOE  ACE  WALPOLE.  SEPT. 


SEPTEMBER. 


ADMIRAL  Parker,  notwithstanding  the  King's  flattery  to 
him,  resigned  his  command. 

Admiral  Darby  had  returned  suddenly  to  Torbay, 
having  been  informed  by  a  Portuguese  ship  that  the  com- 
bined fleets  were  approaching.  This  was  confidently  con- 
tradicted, and  it  was  said  that  he  had  mistaken  a  home- 
ward-bound fleet  of  French  merchantmen  for  the  French 
and  Spanish  fleets,  and  instead  of  taking  it  had  run  away 
from  it ;  but  on  the 

3rd  it  was  known  that  the  combined  fleets,  to  the  amount 
of  forty-seven  ships  of  the  line,  were  off  Scilly.  The 
French  had  joined  them  for  some  time,  and  the  King  of 
Spain  had  forced  even  convicts  to  man  the  fleet.  Great 
secrecy  was  observed  on  the  destination  of  this  great  arma- 
ment. Our  Ministers  had  no  intelligence,  and  thought  it 
designed  both  against  Gibraltar  and  Minorca.  They  now 
learned  that  on  the  22nd  of  July  nineteen  French  and 
thirty  Spanish  ships  of  the  line  had  sailed  from  Cadiz,  but 
steered  to  Cape  St.  Vincent,  and  the  next  day  an  enor- 
mous convoy  of  sixty-eight  embarkations,  with  8,500  men, 
and  everything  necessary  for  besieging  Minorca,  had  been 
seen  off  Carthagena :  the  28th  the  rest  were  come  into 
the  Channel.  Darby,  with  only  twenty-two  ships,  did  not 
dare  to  stir  out  of  Torbay.  Orders  were  sent  to  Keith 
Stewart,  who  had  succeeded  Parker,  to  join  Darby. 

In  the  midst  of  this  alarm,  Alderman  Hayley,  one  of 
the  Members  of  the  City  of  London,  was  dead,  and. 


1781.  LORD  GEORGE  GORDON.  4G9 

amongst  others,  Lord  George  Gordon  presented  himself  as 
a  candidate  to  succeed  him. 

The  Court  had  been  trying  for  peace,  but  with  this  ab- 
surdity, that,  as  if  dictating  not  suing  for  peace,  the  King 
would  not  admit  any  mention  of  America,  wildly  supposing 
that  France,  Spain,  and  Holland  would  leave  him  at  liberty 
to  pursue  the  war  in  America,  to  defeat  him  in  which  they 
had  gone  to  war  with  him/\ 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  Lord  George  Gordon,  in  his 
letter  to  Lord  North,  threatened  the  Court  with  having  a 
strong  party  in  the  army.  The  business  of  the  King  and 
Lord  Mansfield  had  been,  from  the  death  of  the  late  King, 
to  crowd  the  army  and  navy  with  Scotch  officers  and 
Scotch  soldiers  ;  and  now  these  were  held  out  as  the  least 
disposed  to  favour  the  arbitrary  views  of  the  Court ;  and 
it  is  very  true  that  in  the  riots  against  popery  in  the  pre- 
ceding year  the  private  men  in  the  Coldstream  regiment 
of  Guards  had  avowedly  declared  their  favour  towards 
Lord  George  Gordon,  and  would  take  no  part  against  him, 
though  their  officers  took  pains  to  indispose  them  to  him. 
Still  his  menaces  were  more  vapour  than  reality,  as  they 
had  been  before.  He  had  bragged  the  last  year  that  thou- 
sands from  different  counties  would  march  to  support 
him — not  a  man  had  moved  to  his  assistance  but  the 
lowest  of  the  mob  in  London.  He  had  worse  success  now, 
though  he  had  taken  a  wiser  step,  and  courted  the  Method- 
ists, and  had  gained  such  an  ascendant  at  the  Lock  Hos- 
pital, where  they  ruled,  that  they  received  him,  whenever 
he  came  to  chapel  there,  with  the  respect  shown  to  an 
Apostle,  and  always  made  a  lane  for  him  to  pass.  The 
Duke  of  Richmond,  in  disgust,  had  resigned  his  seat  there 
as  one  of  the  Governors,  and  Lord  Hillsborough  would 
have  done  so  too,  but  the  Court  insisted  on  his  remaining 


470  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  SEPT. 

as  a  check.  Still  the  horrors  which  Lord  George  Gordon 
had  occasioned  the  last  year  had  left  such  an  impression, 
the  dread  of  seeing  those  scenes  renewed  and  their  houses 
burnt,  the  total  want  of  any  new  provocation  in  favour  of 
popery,  the  alarm  occasioned  by  the  superiority  of  the 
combined  fleets  in  the  Channel  at  that  moment,  and  the 
apprehensions  of  the  merchants  for  the  Jamaica  fleet  worth 
4,000,OOOZ.,  which  was  daily  expected,  and  which  it  was 
supposed  the  French  and  Spanish  fleets  lay  off  Scilly  to 
intercept, — these  circumstances,  with  the  activity  of  the 
other  candidates,  the  disinclination  towards  a  Scotch  re- 
presentative, and  one  so  vile  an  incendiary  of  their  city, 
with  pains  taken  by  the  Court  to  decry  him,  all  threw  so 
total  a  damp  on  his  cause,  and  the  Association  for  pre- 
serving the  peace  of  the  City  was  so  determined  to  quash 
his  measures,  that  Lord  George  gave  up  the  pursuit  before 
the  election  came  on,  pretending  it  was  to  prevent  those 
combustions  of  which  he  had  been  the  principal  author, 
and  perhaps  hoped  again  to  be  so ;  though,  with  all  these 
pretences  to  religion,  he  was  as  profligate  as  Wilkes,  who 
at  least  was  no  hypocrite,  and  in  imitation  of  Wilkes  he 
would  often  laugh  at  his  followers,  and  vaunt  that  they 
would  not  believe  any  ill  of  him.  Such  villanous  conduct 
took  off"  from  the  credit  and  credibility  of  his  insanity. 

The  combined  fleets,  suffering  by  or  dreading  the  equi- 
noctial winds,  returned  to  Brest  and  Cadiz.  Admiral 
Darby,  with  only  twenty-six  sail,  sailed  from  Torbay,  but 
the  enemy  was  gone  some  time  before  he  appeared  off 
Scilly. 

Sir  George  Rodney  arrived  in  England,  and  the  Lee- 
ward Island  fleet  at  Cork. 

30th.  Sir  Watkyn  Lewes,  Lord  Mayor,  was,  on  a  scru- 
tiny, declared  Member  for  London  by  a  majority  of  above 


1781.  IRISH  PARLIAMENT.  471 

200   against    Clarke,    the    candidate    supported   by   the 
Court. 

Sir  Joseph  Yorke  was  at  this  time  privately  employed 
by  the  King  to  negotiate  with  some  of  the  leading  men  in 
Holland  for  a  separate  peace.  This  was  the  constant  con- 
temptible conduct  of  the  Court,  to  bully  itself  into  war,  and 
then  meanly  solicit  a  peace  underhand. 


OCTOBER. 


I5tk.  ACCOUNT  of  Admiral  Graves  and  Sir  Samuel  Hood, 
with  thirty-nine  sail,  having  attacked  the  French  fleet  of 
twenty-four,  under  Monsieur  De  Grasse,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Chesapeak,  and  being  defeated,  and  having  lost  about  300 
men,  and  been  forced  to  blow  up  a  74-gun  ship.1  Great 
apprehensions  at  the  same  time  for  Lord  Cornwallis,  who 
was  endeavouring  to  return  to  New  York,  and  was  sup- 
posed to  be  between  the  fire  of  the  Americans  and  French. 

16*/i.  Nineteen  Indiamen  arrived  immensely  rich. 

The  Irish  Parliament  met  on  the  9th.  Extraordinary 
compliments  paid  to  Lord  Carlisle  and  Mr.  Eden ;  but 
the  Opposition  obtained  leave  to  have  the  Volunteers 
thanked,  arid  that  term  specified  (which  the  Speech  had 
sunk),  for  their  late  loyal  offers  on  the  combined  fleets 
being  in  the  Channel.  The  Court  wanted  to  draw  them 
into  accepting  the  King's  commission,  and  Lord  Lough- 
borough  had  been  over  to  Dublin  with  that  view.  The 
Castle  soon  carried  a  question  by  above  100  to  forty  odd. 


1  This  account  was  a  gross  exaggeration,  as  a  reference  to  any  naval  history 
will  show. — D. 


472  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  OCT. 

The  King,  talking  to  Lord  Hertford,  said,  "  I  know  my 
enemies  are  superior  everywhere.  I  am  as  desirous  oi 
peace  as  any  man ;  but  how  can  I  make  it,  when  France 
and  Spain  are  so  unreasonable  ?"  He  dropped  that  they 
demanded  Gibraltar  and  Port  Mahon,  but  he  himself  had 
offered  the  more  important,  the  former.  It  is  much  more 
probable  that  what  was  said  at  Paris  was  true,  that  the 
Emperor  had  offered  to  make  peace  for  us,  and  that  the 
King  had  answered,  "  I  want  nobody  to  make  peace  for  me ; 
when  France  and  Spain,  who  make  unjust  war  on  me,  will 
make  me  amends,  I  shall  be  ready  to  make  peace." 

Lord  H.  told  me  that  the  Americans  had  very  recently 
offered  to  make  peace  with  us  on  worse  terms  than  we  had 
offered,  and  that  Lord  North  was  for  agreeing  with  them, 
yet  that  none  of  his  friends  could  prevail  on  him  to 
declare  for  that  side ;  that  Lord  Sandwich  and  Lord 
George  Germaine,  though  mortal  enemies,  humoured  the 
King  in  his  resolution  of  not  allowing  the  Americans 
independence,  as  the  only  means  of  keeping  in  place 
themselves. 


1781.  SITUATION  OF  LORD  CORNWALLIS.  473 


NOVEMBER. 


3rd.  COLONEL  Robert  Conway,  aide-de-camp  to  Sir  H. 
Clinton,  arrived  express  from  him  to  represent  the  des- 
perate posture  of  affairs.  Lord  Cornwallis  was  in  most 
imminent  danger  of  being  enveloped  and  starved  by  the 
Americans  and  French,  the  latter  having  landed  4000 
men,  and  Lord  Cornwallis  having  provisions  but  for  a 
month  or  six  weeks.  The  French  had  taken  Lord  Raw- 
don,  and  the  Congress  demanded  him  of  them,  to  hang  in 
revenge  for  one  of  theirs  he  had  hanged ;  but  it  was  not 
supposed  the  French  would  give  him  up.  Sir  H.  Clinton 
was  going  on  an  expedition  to  try  to  relieve  Lord  Corn- 
wallis ;  but  they  were  so  ill  together,  that  Sir  Henry  had 
owned  to  Conway  that  he  was  determined  to  challenge  Lord 
Cornwallis  after  the  campaign.  Eight  ships  of  the  line 
had  joined  the  French  in  the  Chesapeak,  and  they  were 
now  thirty-seven  to  twenty-three,  of  which  latter  many 
had  suffered  much  in  the  late  engagement  under  Graves. 
Admiral  Digby  now  commanded,  and  was  determined,  it 
was  said  by  positive  orders,  to  attack  the  French.  Con- 
way  told  his  father,  Lord  Hertford,  that  every  Captain  in 
the  navy  disapproved,  yet  from  bravery  would  not  oppose 
it.  The  French  had  taken  three  of  our  frigates.  Arnold 
had  burnt  New  London  and  taken  great  quantity  of  the 
rebel  stores,  but  lost  two  regiments  in  the  attack,  who  were 
cut  to  pieces.  This  victory  was  all  that  was  mentioned  in 
the  '  Gazette '  of  all  Conway  brought.  He  told  his  father 
we  had  not  a  friend  left  in  America. 


474  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 

The  York  Association  printed  a  new  declaration,  in 
which  they  apologized  for  and  softened  many  of  their 
pretensions ;  but  it  made  not  the  least  noise  out  of  the 
county. 

25th.  A  packet-boat  that  had  carried  the  Comte  de 
Jarnac  from  Dover  to  Calais  brought  back  a  French 
1  Gazette,'  with  an  account  of  Lord  Cornwallis  and  his 
whole  army  having  been  made  prisoners  at  York  Town  by 
General  Washington,  at  the  head  of  the  French  and  Ame- 
ricans. This  was  soon  confirmed  by  an  express  from  Sir 
Henry  Clinton,  who,  on  hearing  the  news,  had  retired 
with  his  troops  and  the  fleet  to  New  York,  and  had  luckily 
not  attacked  the  French  fleet,  very  superior  and  drawn  up 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Chesapeak,  fortified  on  both  sides  by 
strong  redoubts.  He  had  certainly  been  deceived  origin- 
ally by  Washington's  feint  of  attacking  New  York. 

This  news  threw  the  Court  and  Administration  into 
great  confusion  and  distress.  It  carne  on  the  Sunday,  and 
the  Parliament  was  to  open  on  Tuesday,  27th.  They  had 
little  time  to  prepare  or  alter  the  Speech,  and  so  it  ap- 
peared ;  for  though  it  affected  great  firmness  and  resolution 
.  of  carrying  on  the  war,  it  ridiculously  passed,  after  one 
short  paragraph  on  the  new  disgrace,  to  the  East  Indies, 
whence  there  was  no  new  account,  but  where  it  pretended 
we  had  great  success.  It  reminded  men  of  the  famous 
Speech  at  the  time  of  the  remonstrances,  which  talked  only 
of  the  disease  amongst  the  horned  cattle.  Lord  Fielding, 
son  of  Lord  Denbigh,  who  was  to  have  moved  the  Address 
in  the  Commons,  and  had  prepared  his  speech,  avoided 
being  as  ridiculous  as  the  Royal  Speech,  by  excusing  him- 
self. All  the  chiefs  of  the  Opposition  were  come  to  town, 
though  not  much  more  agreed  than  they  had  been ;  and 
Lord  Shelburne,  in  a  very  long  and  severe  speech,  ar- 


1781.  LORD  COBNWALLIS'S  CAPITULATION.  475 

raigned  the  whole  conduct  of  the  Ministers,  and  proposed 
an  amendment  to  the  Address,  which  had  been  moved  by 
Lord  Southampton. 

Lord  Southampton  was  Groom  of  the  Stole  to  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  and  had  probably  been  selected  for 
moving  the  Address  to  insinuate  that  the  Prince  approved 
his  father's  measures.  Yet  the  Prince  had  not  been  ac- 
quainted with  this  designation  till  the  moment  before, 
when,  asking  who  was  to  move,  the  King  told  him.  The 
Prince  complained  of  this  to  his  uncle  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  the  next  day  ;  and  his  other  uncle,  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland,  complained  of  it  loudly  the  next  day. 
Lord  Southampton  got  into  another  scrape,  for,  thinking 
his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  had  alluded  to  something 
he  had  said,  but  in  which  he  mistook  the  Duke,  instead  of 
calling  him  his  noble  relation,  according  to  form,  he  only 
said  he  had  great  respect  for  the  Duke's  high  rank. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond  followed  Lord  Shelburne,  and 
dwelt  with  reason  on  the  horrid  Tenth  Article  of  the 
capitulation  signed  by  Lord  Cornwallis,  in  which  he 
demanded  that  the  loyal  Americans  should  not  be  pu- 
nished, and,  though  that  was  refused,  he  had  signed  the 
capitulation. 

fi  must  stop  to  mark  that  shocking  proceeding.  The 
newspapers  on  the  Court  side  had  been  crammed  with 
paragraphs  for  a  fortnight,  saying  that  Lord  Cornwallis 
had  declared  he  would  never  pile  up  his  arms  like  Bur- 
goyne  ;  that  is,  he  would  rather  die  sword  in  hand.  He 
probably  had  made  no  such  declaration,  or,  if  he  had,  it 
was  not  known  here.  However,  it  cast  a  deeper  shade  on 
his  surrender.  He  certainly  ought,  on  the  refusal  of  the 
Tenth  Article,  to  have  declared  he  would  die  rather  than 
sacrifice  the  poor  Americans  who  had  followed  him  from 


476 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


Nov. 


loyalty  against  their  countrymen  :  he  should  have  tried 
whether  that  would  not  have  softened  the  enemy.  At  last, 
even  if  his  army  had  surrendered  themselves,  he  might  have 
refused  to  sign  the  articles — there  have  been  such  instances; 
on  the  contrary,  he  stipulated  for  his  own  leave  to  return 
home,  and  abandoned  those  deluded  troops.  It  has  been 
justly  said,  that,  having  capitulated  for  his  garrison,  the 
American  troops  were  included,  and  to  put  them  to  death 
would  have  been  a  breach  of  the  articles.  To  this  it  was 
answered,  that  perhaps  the  Americans,  doubting  their 
countrymen,  had  desired  to  be  specified.  I  should  scarce 
think  they  desired  him  to  make  use  of  the  word  punished ; 
still,  when  he  had  been  refused,  he  ought  to  have  struggled 
for  them  to  the  last  moment.  He  or  Lord  Rawdon  had  set 
an  example  of  such  cruel  warfare — had  just  hanged  an  Ame- 
rican officer  that  had  deserted  them ;  and  the  American 
General  Green  had  recently  published  a  proclamation  in 
which  he  declared  he  would  retaliate,  not  on  American 
but  on  English  officers — but  the  latter  Lord  Cornwallis 
secured.  This  sacrifice  was  severely  handled,  too,  by  Mr. 
Burke  and  Mr.  William  Pitt  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
It  was  a  virtual  end  to  the  war :  could  one  American,  un- 
less those  shut  up  in  New  York  and  Charles  Town,  even 
out  of  prudence  and  self-preservation,  declare  for  England, 
by  whose  General  they  were  so  unfeelingly  abandoned  ? 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond's  speech 
he  reverted  to  the  corruption  of  the  Constitution,  and 
pleaded  for  annual  parliaments  and  more  equal  repre- 
sentation ;  and  he  said,  as  he  saw  these  not  likely  to  be 
obtained,  he  believed  he  should  come  little  more  to  Par- 
liament.1 This  was  one  of  the  great  evils  produced  by 


1  He  did  go  out  of  town  soon  after. 
It  was  suspected  that  Lord  Shelburne, 


out  of  jealousy,  had  put  the  Duke  on 
that  declaration. 


1781.  DEBATES  ON  THE  ADDRESS.  477 

the  absurdity  of  the  Yorkshire  Associators.  They  de- 
prived the  country  of  the  honestest  and  most  useful  man 
in  the  House  of  Lords  at  such  a  moment !  When  every 
mouth  should  have  been  opened  to  pull  down  a  set  of  Mi- 
nisters who  had  brought  such  ruin  and  disgrace  on  their 
country,  was  that  a  time  to  distract  the  best  men  with 
speculative  opinions,  and  on  which  by  their  being  specu- 
lative no  hundred  men  in  England  would  agree  ? 

The  Duke  of  Grafton,  Lord  Camden,  and  a  few  more 
kept  up  the  attack,  which  was  feebly  repelled,  directly  by 
Lord  Denbigh,  and  by  no  Minister  but  Lord  Stormont. 
Lord  Sandwich  said  not  a  word,  nor  Lord  Mansfield,  who 
always  \vas  dumb  when  the  Court  was  unprosperous, 
hoping  it  would  be  forgotten  how  principal  an  adviser  he 
had  been  of  the  war.  The  Chancellor  made  merely  an 
official  speech — he  was  not  inclined  to  favour  the  Ministers, 
whom  he  despised  and  hated.  But  if  the  nation  was 
alarmed,  and  the  Ministers  thunderstruck,  the  venal  Peers 
and  Bishops  were  not  dismayed — at  least  not  ashamed,  for 
the  amendment  was  rejected  by  75  to  31 . 

The  House  of  Commons  was  as  tenacious  of  pensions 
and  places ;  and  after  a  debate  that  lasted  till  two  in  the 
morning,  the  same  amendment  failed  by  the  votes  of  218 
to  129.     The  attack  was  made  chiefly  on  Lord  George  ' 
Germaine  and  Lord  Sandwich,  and  indeed  even  by  the 
former  on  the  latter,  insomuch  that  Mr.  Fox  said  he  in- 
tended to  impeach  the  Earl,  and  should  depend  on  Lord 
George  as  his  principal  evi  dence.     The  rest  of  the  debate 
will  be  found  in  the  publications  of  the  time. 

The  King  himself,  on  the  30th,  told  the  Duke  of  Glou- 
cester that  Lord  Sandwich  had  been  with  him  and  with 
Lord  North,  and  had  insisted  that  Lord  George  should 
publicly,  in  the  House  of  Commons,  recant  what  he  had 


478  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 

said  ;  but  Lord  George  preferred  disavowal,  and  protested 
he  had  not  meant  what  was  imputed  to  him.  He  and 
Lord  Sandwich  had  long  been  at  open  enmity,  and  their 
partizans  in  the  newspapers  had  written  abusively  against 
each  respectively. 

28th.  On  the  report  of  the  Address  there  was  a  more 
remarkable,  though  a  much  shorter  debate.  Mr.  W.  Pitt 
again  made  a  most  brilliant  figure  to  the  admiration  of  all 
men  of  all  sides  ;  but  it  was  the  Lord  Advocate  who  oc- 
casioned more  surprise.  Affecting  great  frankness,  he 
seemed  to  adopt  the  language  of  Opposition,  who  both 
then  and  the  day  before  had  called  on  the  Ministers  to  de- 
clare whether,  as  the  Speech  seemed  to  announce,  they 
meant  to  persist  in  the  war  in  America.  He  seemed  to 
accuse  Ministers  of  disunion,  and  to  blame  some  who  did 
not  in  Council  deliver  their  sincere  opinions  ;  but  the  day 
was  at  hand,  he  said,  that  would  force  them  to  speak  out. 
?  With  all  this  air  of  frankness  few  knew  what  he  meant, 
nor  whom  he  meant  to  blame,  and  the  more  he  was  pressed 
the  more  obscure  and  shuffling  he  grew.  Charles  Fox  did 
urge  him  home  to  declare  whom  he  blamed,  and  what  the 
day  was  on  which  he  was  to  extort  truth.  He  immediately 
said  it  was  kind  to  except  Lord  North,  for  everybody's 
eyes  had  been  turned  on  him  ;  but  the  Advocate  evaded  all 
further  reply,  and  would  only  say  that  the  decision  would 
be  made  when  the  vote  for  the  army  should  come  into 
question. 

The  solution  of  this  enigmatic  speech  was,  I  believe, 
very  much  this.  The  Lord  Advocate  was  more  connected 
with  his  countryman  Lord  Loughborough,  Chief  Justice 
of  the  Common  Pleas,  than  with  any  man,  and  little  with 
the  other  Chief  Justice,  Lord  Mansfield.  But  as  the  Scotch 
always  affect  attachment  to  some  considerable  English 


1781.  THE  LORD  ADVOCATE.  479 

Minister,  the  Advocate  acted  devotion  to  Lord  North,  but 
was  more  connected  with  Rigby,  a  great  patron  of  the 
Scots.  Rigby  did  not  love  Lord  North,  but  the  Commis- 
sion of  accounts  that  had  grown  out  of  the  Associations, 
and  had  been  yielded  to  by  Lord  North  to  prevent  further 
concessions,  had  gone  so  far  into  abuses  and  waste,  that  they 
had  drawn  up  a  heavy  charge  against  the  Pay  Office,  which 
was  ready  to  be  laid  before  Parliament,  and  in  which  they 
stated  the  necessity  of  the  Paymaster's  paying  in  the  money 
in  his  hands,  four  or  five  hundred  thousand  pounds.  This 
had  so  alarmed  Rigby  that  he  softened  towards  Lord  North, 
and  wished  to  get  more  and  heartier  friends  into  the  Ad- 
ministration. He  had  even  gone  so  far  at  the  beginning  of 
the  summer  as  to  endeavour  to  have  Lord  George  Ger- 
maine  removed,  and  the  Lord  Advocate  made  Secretary 
of  State — a  choice  outrageously  absurd  and  that  must  have 
disgusted  everybody — if  anybody  would  be  disgusted. 

The  Advocate  was  very  able,  but  had  not  the  least  ex- 
perience in  State  affairs,  was  the  rankest  of  all  Scotchmen, 
and  odious  for  that  bloody  speech  that  had  fixed  on  him 
the  nick-name  of  Starvation.  That  attempt  was  now  to  be 
renewed,  and  it  was  supposed  in  concert  with  Rigby,  the 
Chancellor,  Lord  Wey mouth,  and  Lord  Gower ;  but  the 
King  was  totally  averse  to  their  plan,  and  had  no  mind  to 
have  in  Administration  so  many  men  united  together,  and 
consequently  less  dependent  on  himself.  One  of  the 
great  maxims  of  his  reign  had  been  to  break  all  parties 
and  connections.  He  forgave  any  offence  to  any  man 
who  would  leave  his  friends  and  be  attached  only  to 
him. 

I  have  guessed  right,  for  on  December  1st,  being  with 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  who  was  just  come  from  the  King, 
and  he  mentioning  the  Lord  Advocate's  speech,  I  said  that, 


480  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Nov. 

frank  as  it  had  pretended  to  be,  people  were  not  clear  what 
he  had  meant.  "  Oh !"  said  the  Duke,  "  I  will  tell  you  what 
he  meant;  he  thought  he  should  frighten  Lord  George 
Germaine  to  give  up  the  seals,  and  that  he  should  have 
them  that  evening."  I  said,  "  Sir,  it  is  supposed  that  both 
Lord  George  and  Lord  Sandwich  are  to  go  out."  He  replied, 
"I  assure  you  the  King  will  part  with  neither.  Lord 
Sandwich  was  exceedingly  angry  at  what  Lord  George  said 
against  him  on  the  first  day  of  the  session,  and  has  been 
both  with  Lord  North  and  the  King  to  complain,  and  in- 
sisted on  Lord  George's  making  a  public  recantation.  He 
was  to  have  made  it  yesterday,  and  I  went  to  the  House  on 
purpose  to  hear  it,"  said  the  Duke ;  "  but  Lord  George 
chose  to  eat  his  words,  and  protested  he  had  not  meant 
Lord  Sandwich."  However,  on  December  4th  Lord  George 
did  make  a  sort  of  apology  to  Lord  Sandwich  in  the 
House. 

The  Duke  of  Gloucester  had  come  to  town,  as  usual,  on 
the  opening  of  Parliament,  and  stayed  five  days,  in  which  he 
was  three  times  with  the  King,  who,  as  if  he  had  not  used 
the  Duke  ill,  opened  his  mind  to  him  on  his  son  the  Prince 
of  Wales,  and  his  own  brother  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  the 
latter  of  whom  he  said  was  governed  by  Charles  Fox  and 
Fitzpatrick,  and  governed  the  Prince  of  Wales,  whom  they 
wanted  to  drive  into  Opposition.  "  When  we  hunt  together," 
said  the  King,  "  neither  my  son  nor  my  brother  speak  to 
me ;  and  lately,  when  the  chace  ended  at  a  little  village 
where  there  was  but  a  single  post-chaise  to  be  hired,  my 
son  and  brother  got  into  it  and  drove  to  London,  leaving 
me  to  go  home  in  a  cart  if  I  could  find  one."  He  added 
that  when  at  Windsor,  where  he  always  dined  at  three,  and 
in  town  at  four,  if  he  asked  the  Prince  to  dine  with  him, 
he  always  came  at  four  at  Windsor  and  in  town  at  five,  and 


17>1.  CONDUCT  OF  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES.  481 

all  the  servants  saw  the  father  waiting  an  hour  for  the  son. 
That  since  the  Court  was  come  to  town  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland  carried  the  Prince  to  the  lowest  places  of 
debauchery,  where  they  got  dead  drunk,  and  were  often 
carried  home  in  that  condition.  "  I  wonder,"  said  the 
Duke,  "  that  your  Majesty  bears  all  this."  "  What  would 
you  have  me  do,"  said  the  King,  "in  my  present  distress? 
If  I  did  not  bear  it,  it  would  only  drive  my  son  into  Oppo- 
sition, which  would  increase  my  distresses."  The  Duke 
said  to  me,  "  I  know  the  King's  faults  ;  I  do  not  forget  his 
treatment  of  me  ;  but  I  must  pity  him  for  being  so  ill-used 
by  a  son."  In  those  conversations  the  King  boasted  that, 
notwithstanding  all  the  bad  news,  the  stocks  did  not  fall. 
"  I  know,"  said  the  Duke,  "  that  the  true  reason  was  that 
people  concluded  that  there  must  now  be  peace."  Another 
reason  was  that  the  Empress  of  Russia  had  been  trying  to 
make  a  separate  peace  between  England  and  Holland,  and 
many  Dutch  thought  it  would  have  taken  place  if  the  news 
of  Lord  Cornwallis's  misfortune  had  not  arrived  just  then. 
That  prospect  of  peace  had  raised  English  stock  in  Hol- 
land, which  rebounded  hither. 

'29th.  Mr.  Burke  moved  for  an  inquiry  into  the  conduct 
of  Sir  George  Rodney  and  General  Vaughan  at  St. 
Eustatia.  They  had  plundered  notoriously,  and  many 
suits  were  actually  commenced  against  them  in  the  courts 
of  law.  The  Ministers  made  a  wretched  fight  for  them, 
yet  threw  out  the  motion.  However,  many  who  voted 
in  the  majority  declared  they  had  given  a  very  flagrant 
vote  indeed.  This  was  one  of  the  symptoms  of  the  profli- 
gacy of  the  times;  men  did  not  scruple  to  avow  their  cor- 
ruption. 

3Qth.  T.  Pitt  moved  to  stop  the  supplies  till  there  was 
redress  of  grievances,  and  pledged  himself  as  answerable 

VOL.  II.  2  i 


482  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

for  that  motion ;  but  it  was  rejected  as  usual.  Burke  said 
Lord  Sandwich  had  so  lost  all  credit  that  no  man  would 
take  his  evidence  even  against  himself.  Lord  Stormont 
went  further.  Lord  Hertford  told  me  he  heard  him  in 
conversation,  in  the  House  of  Lords,  say  that  we  had  no 
intelligence;  that  he  had  done  his  utmost  repeatedly  to 
have  cutters  lay  off  the  French  seaports  to  get  information, 
but  could  not  prevail  on  Lord  Sandwich  to  grant  them. 


DECEMBER. 


AN  express  from  Sir  Horace  Mann,  at  Florence,  brought 
an  account  of  General  Murray  having  rejected  a  bribe  of  a 
million  of  dollars  from  the  Due  de  Crillon  to  betray  St. 
Philip's  to  him,  and  assuring  him  he  would  contrive  to  save 
his  honour.  This  was  not  mentioned  in  the  *  Gazette.'  In 
short,  both  the  King  and  Lord  North  almost  studiously 
disgusted  all  the  soldiers  and  seamen  they  employed — 
Lord  North  from  laziness,  the  King  from  pride.  They 
seldom  examined  even  the  officers  who  came  with  expresses. 
The  King  never  mentioned  to  Colonel  Harcourt  his  taking 
General  Lee  prisoner.  General  Vaughan,  perfectly  their 
creature,  and  now  returned  from  the  capture  of  St.  Eustatia, 
was  taken  no  notice  of  by  the  King,  and  declared  that  he 
had  been  so  ill-used,  he  would  resign  if  his  honour  would 
let  him. 

4th.  The  long  account  against  the  Pay-Office  was  deli- 
vered to  the  House  of  Commons  and  printed. 

The  Livery  of  London  voted  an  admirable  and  most 
severe  remonstrance  to  the  King  against  the  continuation 


1781.  REMONSTRANCE  OF  THE  LIVERY.  483 

of  the  American  war,  which  they  said  the  Speech  threatened. 
They  besought  the  King  to  remove  both  his  public  and 
private  counsellors,  and  used  these  stunning  and  memorable 
words :  "  Your  armies  are  captured ;  the  wonted  superiority 
of  your  navies  is  annihilated,  your  dominions  are  lost" 
Words  that  could  be  used  to  no  other  King :  no  King  had 
ever  lost  so  much,  without  losing  all.  If  James  II.  lost 
his  Crown,  yet  the  Crown  lost  no  dominions. 

At  that  meeting  of  the  Livery  a  Mr.  Hersford  declared 
that  he  had  written  a  vindicatory  paragraph  in  behalf  of 
Admiral  Graves  against  abuse  on  him;  and  though  he 
had  carried  it  to  the  press  himself,  and  offered  to  avow  it, 
and  gave  his  name,  he  could  get  it  inserted  but  in  one 
single  paper.  This  was  one  of  the  great  grievances  of  the 
time.  Macpherson,  the  editor  of  'Ossian,'  had  a  pension 
of  800/.  a  year  from  Court  for  inspecting  newspapers,  and 
inserted  what  lies  he  pleased,  and  prevented  whatever  he 
disapproved  of  being  printed.  He  and  Galloway,  an 
American  renegade,  and  the  still  more  infamous  Bate, 
were  the  editors  of  the  most  profligate  abuse ;  sometimes 
they  attacked  the  Ministers,  partly  to  make  their  scandals 
against  the  Opposition  more  credited.  Galloway  took  a 
more  artful  way,  which  was  to  impute  all  the  miscarriages 
of  the  war  to  the  Admirals  and  Generals — as  if  the 
Ministers  had  taken  any  wise  measures! 

The  King  sent  by  the  Lord  Chamberlain  to  the  Lord 
Mayor,  that  he  would  not  receive  their  address  on  the 
Throne,  to  which  they  had  no  pretensions  by  custom,  but 
in  their  corporate  capacity,  therefore  they  must  bring  it  to 
the  levee.  The  same  answer  had  been  given  to  them  six 
years  before.  The  Livery  met  again  on  that  answer ;  but  as 
the  Court  had  now  a  stronger^party  in  the  Common  Council, 
they  could  not  prevail  to  carry  their  address,  and  therefore 

2  i  2 


484  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

would  not  deliver  it  at  the  levee,  with  which  the  Lord 
Mayor  acquainted  the  Lord  Chamberlain.  I  think  they 
did  submit  to  deliver  it  at  the  levee. 

The  day  before  the  Sheriffs  went  to  know  when  the 
King  would  receive  the  address,  he  said  to  a  young  man 
who  was  hunting  with  him,  "  I  must  go  to  town  to-morrow 
to  receive  those  fellows  in  furs ;  they  will  riot  be  very  glad 
to  see  me,  nor  I  them." 

5th.  Debate  on  the  navy.  Parliamentary  debates  were 
now  so  common  in  various  publications  that  I  shall  not 
detail  them  here.  That  debate,  however,  was  remarkable 
from  the  many  assertions  of  Lord  Mulgrave  in  favour  of 
Lord  Sandwich's  attention  to  building  ships,  which  were 
refuted  and  disproved  by  different  Members. 

10th.  A  great  meeting  of  the  Westminster  voters  in 
Westminster  Hall  to  consider  of  a  petition  similar  to  the 
City's.  It  was  moved  by  Charles  Fox  and  approved,  but 
with  the  utmost  tranquillity,  for  the  people,  though  in  vast 
numbers,  seemed  to  be  perfectly  indifferent,  and  to  have 
assembled  only  from  curiosity.  Yet  the  Court,  fearing  or 
hoping  a  tumult,  had  a  large  body  of  Guards  in  readiness. 

1 1  th  was  the  day  appointed  for  voting  the  army,  when 
the  Lord  Advocate  had  declared  the  Ministers  would  be 
forced  to  speak  out.  A  few  days  before  Charles  Fox 
asked  him  whether  the  Ministers  would  speak  out  then  ? 
That  honest  man  said,  "  I  believe  not,  but  do  press  them." 

Before  the  question  could  come  on,  Sir  James  Lowther 
made  a  motion  to  vote  any  further  attempts  in  America 
ineffectual  and  censurable.  This  was  rather  injudicious, 
as  it  gave  the  Ministers  an  opportunity  of  opposing  that 
affirmative  without  declaring  their  intention.  Lord  North 
did  so,  and  asked  whether  th^y  would  give  up  the  posts 
we  possessed,  and  that  it  would  be  declaring  where  we  were 


1781.  DEBATES  ON  AMERICAN  AFFAIRS.  485 

strong,  where  weak.  Dunning  in  an  excellent  speech  re- 
plied, "  Everybody  knew  \\here  we  were  weak,  and  nobody 
where  we  were  strong."  The  Lord  Advocate  pretended  to 
understand  Lord  North  declaring  against  a  land  war. 
Charles  Fox  pressed  Lord  North  over  and  over  to  say  if 
that  was  his  meaning,  but  he  would  not  say  a  word  more. 
Lord  George  Germaine  talked  of  the  great  unanimity 
amongst  the  Ministers,  in  which  no  mortal  believed  him. 
Burke  made  a  very  wild,  passionate  speech ;  he  was  now 
grown  so  heated,  and  uttered  such  rhapsodies,  that  he  was 
generally  very  ill  heard.  The  Ministers  had  been  appre- 
hensive that  such  repeated  ill  success  would  weaken  their 
numbers;  and  though  they  had  taken  infinite  pains,  and  the 
Opposition  none,  to  collect  their  respective  friends,  the 
motion  was  rejected  but  by  a  majority  of  41. 

14th  was  another  remarkable  day;  the  army  was  to  be 
voted.  Jenkinson,  Secretary  at  -War,  pleaded  that  the 
moderation  of  the  estimate  was  a  proof  that  it  was  not 
meant  to  pursue  an  offensive  war  in  America.  Lord 
George  Germaine  affirmed  that  he  had  opposed  the  motion 
of  the  other  day,  as  it  seemed  to  tend  to  a  declaration  of 
abandoning  the  posts  we  still  possessed.  For  his  part,  he 
did  not  know1  what  was  the  opinion  of  the  other  Ministers ; 
but  for  his  own,  he  had  always  said,  and  still  thought,  that 
the  moment  the  independence  of  America  should  be  owned 
this  country  was  no  more,  and  that  therefore  he  would 
certainly  never  consent  to  sign  that  independence.  Sir 
George  Saville  made  a  speech  of  much  wit  in  ridicule  of 
addresses,  re-echoing  the  King's  Speech,  and  (alluding  to 
the  partiality  towards  Scotland)  said  he  was  persuaded 
that,  if  the  speech  was  to  begin  with  the  old  song,  *  WJiat 


1  A  proof  of  the  union  amongst  them! 


486  LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

beauties  does  Flora  disclose,  the  address  would  immediately 
reply,  '  How  sweet  are  her  smiles  upon  Tweed?  Lord 
North  affected  to  speak  out,  and  to  declare  that  he  did  not 
mean  to  continue  a  war  for  reducing  America  to  obedience ; 
but  it  was  with  so  many  exceptions  and  evasions,  that 
scarce  anything  could  be  collected  from  it 

General  Conway  made  a  very  fine  speech,  with  great 
spirit  and  severity  against  the  conduct  of  Administration, 
which  had  reduced  us  to  the  total  necessity  of  allowing  the 
independence  of  America,  which  he  confessed  he  now 
thought  must  be  granted ;  and  he  bitterly  condemned  the 
10th  Article  of  Lord  Cornwallis's  capitulation,  which  aban- 
doned the  Americans,  and  which  he  said  was  so  deep  a 
disgrace  that  he  was  persuaded  Lord  Cornwallis  must  have 
been  forced  by  his  own  troops  to  have  signed,  or  that  he 
would  have  died  rather  than  sign  it.  After  him,  young 
William  Pitt  took  to  pieces  Lord  North's  pretended  de- 
clarations, which  he  had  minuted  down,  and  exposed  them 
with  the  most  amazing  logical  abilities,  exceeding  all  the 
abilities  he  had  already  shown,  and  making  men  doubt 
whether  he  would  not  prove  superior  even  to  Charles  Fox. 
Rigby,  who  was  looking  out  for  new  support,  seized  that 
occasion  to  natter  the  young  genius  in  the  highest  terms, 
and  said  he  should  be  more  afraid  of  answering  him  than  even 
his  great  father  Lord  Chatham :  but  he  had  no  reason  to 
fear,  for  his  whole  speech  rather  went  to  support  Pitt's 
attack  on  the  war,  which  Rigby  declared  he  was  now  con- 
vinced he  had  been  wrong  in  supporting.  He  openly  con- 
demned Lord  George  Germaine's  adherence  to  it,  and  even 
blamed  his  old  ally  Sandwich's  conduct  of  the  navy,  for 
he  never  spared  any  old  friend  or  was  true  to  him  when  he 
thought  it  his  interest  to  seek  for  new.  Before  he  spoke 
he  nad  been  in  a  whisper  with  Lord  North,  who  was  sup- 


1781.  FRENCH  WEST  INDIA  FLEET.  487 

posed  to  concur  with  him  in  that  breach ;  and  E-igby  had 
private  meetings  with  Robinson,  the  active  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury,  and  had  sent  for  Lord  Wey mouth  from  Long- 
leat  to  meet  him  privately  at  Drummond's  to  communi- 
cate their  measures.  Mr.  Fox  called  on  the  Lord  Advo- 
cate to  speak  out  as  he  had  promised  the  other  day,  and 
said  it  would  become  his  manly  character.  The  Lord 
Advocate  (perhaps  having  been  softened  by  his  Scotch 
friends,  or  having  found  that  he  had  displeased  the  King) 
replied  angrily  that  he  would  maintain  his  own  character, 
and  if  others  looked  to  theirs  they  would  have  enough  to 
do.  He  said  he  had  engaged  himself  to  nothing,  and  that 
the  estimates  of  the  army  showed  that  the  Ministers  did 
not  mean  to  carry  on  the  American  war  in  the  former 
manner.  Lord  Nugent  declared  loudly  against  con- 
tinuance of  that  war,  and  at  eleven  at  night  the  estimate 
was  voted  by  166  to  84. 

17 'tli.  Came  an  account  of  Sir  Eyre  Coote  having  gained 
a  great  victory  over  Hyder  Ally. 

The  same  day — advice  that  Admiral  Kempenfelt,  with 
twenty-four  ships,  had  fallen  in  with  the  French  embarka- 
tion for  the  West  Indies,  from  Brest,  which  had  but  fourteen 
ships,  but  a  vast  number  of  transports,  twenty  of  which  had 
struck  to  him,  and  that  Commodore  Elliot  was  engaged 
with  Vaudreuil  the  Admiral,  and  had  dismasted  his  ship. 

This  account  transported  the  Court  and  town,  who  ex- 
pected every  minute  to  hear  of  a  great  victory  :  but  on  the 
18/^,  in  the.  afternoon,  Admiral  Kempenfelt  sent  word  he 
had  found  five  more  men-of-war  than  he  expected,  of  110 
guns  and  112  ;  and  that,  not  venturing  to  attack  so  superior 
a  force,  he  had  retired,  and  the  French  were  proceeding  on 
their  voyage — nor  did  above  seven  or  eight  transports  taken 
.arrive. 


488  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

This  disappointment  occasioned  the  utmost  alarm  for 
the  West  Indies  (Sir  George  Rodney  being  still  wind- 
bound  at  Brest),  and  as  great  indignation  against  Lord 
Sandwich,  who  had  either  not  had  proper  intelligence,  or 
had  sent  Kempenfelt  with  so  inferior  a  force,  though  we 
had  six  more  ships  lying  idle  in  the  Downs.  Lord  Rock- 
ingham,  Admiral  Keppel,  and  Charles  Fox  had  said  pub- 
licly on  the  17th  that  Lord  Sandwich  was  mistaken,  and 
that  Kempenfelt  would  have  found  nineteen  or  twenty 
men-of-war  at  Brest. 

This  proved  fully  what  Lord  Stormont  had  said  the  first 
day  of  the  session,  that  Lord  Sandwich  would  employ 
no  means  to  obtain  intelligence.  His  negligence  on  this 
occasion  was  inconceivable,  as  a  victory,  and  disappoint- 
ment of  the  French  embarkation,  would  have  procured 
personal  glory  to  him  and  established  him  firmly. 

I9th.  Lord  Rockingham,  in  the  House  of  Lords,  attacked 
Lord  Sandwich  on  this  fatal  step ;  he  defended  himself 
poorly,  and  no  one  Minister  took  his  part  but  Lord  Stor- 
mont, and  he  faintly. 

20th.  Most  pressing  letters  were  issued  from  the  Trea- 
sury to  summon  Members,  on  pretence  that  Lord  Sandwich 
was  to  be  violently  attacked  in  the  House  of  Commons ; 
but  I  believe  this  was  an  artifice  of  Rigby  and  that  faction 
to  stir  up  that  attack.  I  believe  so  for  these  reasons :  it 
was  the  last  day  before  the  Parliament  was  to  rise ;  most  of 
the  leaders  of  the  Opposition  were  out  of  town,  and  the 
rest  had  no  such  intention  then  ;  yet  the  Chancellor  told 
the  King  there  were  to  be  twelve  motions  against  Lord 
Sandwich ;  and  Lord  Graham,  probably  from  the  Lord 
Advocate,  told  me  he  expected  Sandwich  would  be  im- 
peached ;  so  far  from  it,  the  only  opposition  arose  from 
George  Byng,  who,  hearing  Sir  Grey  Cooper  propose  to 


1781.  EXPECTED  REDUCTION  OF  PLACES.  489 

adjourn,  cried,  "  Good  God !  adjourn  now,  when  we  ought 
to  sit  even  in  the  holidays  to  inquire  into  this  late  mis- 
carriage ?"  T.  Townshend  and  Charles  Fox  recalled  to 
mind  how  during  such  an  adjournment  the  French  war 
had  broken  out.  Lord  Mulgrave,  as  Sandwich  himself 
had  done  the  day  before,  assumed  honour  for  him  on  what 
had  been  done ;  yet  the  fault  was  so  flagrant  that  they  were 
forced  to  agree  that  there  should  be  a  formal  inquiry  after 
the  holidays,  Lord  North  pretending  that  Sandwich  him- 
self desired  it. 

21st.  The  Parliament  adjourned.     Some  other  incidents 
before  or  after  this  must  be  mentioned. 

On  one  of  General  Conway's  speeches,  in  which  he 
blamed  Lord  Sandwich,  Colonel  Keene,  Lord  North's 
brother-in-law  and  intimate  friend,  whispered  some  parti- 
cular fact  against  Lord  Sandwich  to  him,  u  which,"  said 
Keene,  "  you  might  have  added."  Lord  Camden  suspected 
that  Lord  North  was  willing  to  suffer  a  suppression  of  the 
places  of  the  Tellers,  one  of  which  was  held  by  Lord 
Camden's  son,  and  another  by  Lord  Temple,  both  in  Op- 
position, and  perhaps  of  others,  as  the  vastness  of  those 
places  had  made  them  so  obnoxious,  that  though  it  was 
probable  the  present  possessors  would  be  suffered  to  enjoy 
their  rights,  yet  it  was  imagined  that  a  stop  would  be  put 
to  any  successors.  The  Auditor's  place,  the  greatest  of  all 
the  present  places,  was  not  likely  to  be  continued.  It  had 
indubitably  been  the  great  object  of  Lord  North :  if  sup- 
pressed after  the  Duke  of  Newcastle's  death,  North  could 
not  get  it,  and  might  therefore  be  willing  to  punish  others. 
The  King  could  not  lament  the  suppression,  for  they  who 
hold  patent  places  are  independent,  and  all  those  incomes 
would  come  into  his  own  pockets.  There  seemed,  too,  to 
be  some  private  check  upon  the  Commissioners,  for  the 


490  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  DEC. 

report  on  the  Auditors  of  Impost  (two  of  the  largest  sine- 
cures) was  kept  back,  and  one  of  them  was  actually  pos- 
sessed by  Lord  Bute's  son,  Lord  Mountstewart. 

Lord  North  had  certainly  not  discouraged  Rigby  and 
the  Lord  Advocate's  plan  to  remove  Lord  Sandwich  and 
Lord  George  Germaine,  but  they  could  not  prevail  with 
him  to  propose  it  to  the  King.  Rigby  had  designed 
to  go  to  Drummond's  near  Southampton,  and  had  sent  to 
Lord  Weymouth  and  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater  to  meet 
him  there  privately  to  concert  farther  measures ;  but  he 
was  forced  to  lay  aside  his  journey,  for  neither  of  them 
would  meet  him  there ;  and  it  was  weak  to  expect  or  desire 
Lord  Weymouth  to  come  in  at  so  dangerous  a  crisis,  who 
had  twice  before  thrown  up  the  seals  in  a  panic. 

George  Dalling  had  been  twice  recalled  from  the 
Governorship  of  Jamaica,  but  would  not  obey. 

At  the  meeting  for  a  remonstrance  from  Middlesex, 
Parson  Home  made  a  treasonable  speech  against  the  King, 
who,  he  said,  had  betrayed  this  country. 

Great  clamour  against  Commodore  Stuart,  Lady  Gower's 
brother,  who  lay  in  the  Downs,  and  had,  let  a  Dutch  fleet 
pass  unmolested. 

Lord  Barrington,  fearing  his  pension  would  be  taken 
away  by  the  Commission  of  Accounts,  desired  to  give  it  up 
for  the  Postmaster's  place,  which  he  obtained.  Lord 
Sandwich  had  solicited  it  strongly  for  Lord  Dudley,  and 
Lord  North  for  his  relation  Lord  Willoughby  de  Broke. 
He  was  out  of  humour,  too,  on  not  being  able  to  obtain 
the  vacant  provostship  of  Eton  for  his  son's  tutor  Dr. 
Dampier. 

Lord  Carlisle,  in  Ireland,  had  carried  everything  in 
Parliament  by  great  majorities,  and  had  Mr.  Flood  turned 
out  for  opposing.  But  they  had  still  reason  to  apprehend 


1781.  OFFERED  MEDIATION  WITH  HOLLAND.  491 

danger  from  the  Irish  volunteers.  Those  of  Ulster  sent 
letters  to  the  rich  Peers  here  who  had  estates  in  Ireland, 
demanding  contributions  in  a  tone  not  to  be  refused. 

Great  hopes,  from  prevalent  strong  west  winds,  that  the 
French  embarkation  for  the  West  Indies  was  dispersed  or 
blown  back. 

The  Czarina  and  King  of  Sweden  offered  us  their  media- 
tion with  Holland.  The  first  was  declined,  the  last  refused,  , 
but  the  former  was  afterwards  accepted.    Mr.  Lawrence  was 
admitted  to  bail. 


492     )  JAN. 


1782. 
JANUARY. 


THE  Court  began  the  year  in  great  perplexity.  The 
defeat  of  Lord  Cornwallis  and  the  capture  of  his  army 
had  rendered  the  American  war  hopeless ;  yet  the  King 
was  not  in  the  least  more  inclined  to  give  it  up.  The 
French  were  evidently  pushing  for  so  great  a  superiority 
of  naval  force  in  the  West  Indies,  that  the  utmost  appre- 
hensions were  entertained  for  Jamaica  and  other  islands. 
The  Lord  George  Gordon's  frantic  and  wicked  proceed- 
ings had  given  a  great  blow  to  the  country  Associations, 
yet  the  latter  had  sown  seeds  that  disturbed  the  Courtiers,  if 
not  the  King — as  the  Commission  of  Accounts,  which  pro- 
ceeded strictly  and  with  spirit,  and  the  disposition  in  many, 
particularly  in  London,  Westminster,  and  Yorkshire,  to 
alter  the  mode  of  representation.  The  Ministers,  who  had 
never  cordially  agreed  and  had  held  together  only  from 
common  interest  and  common  danger,  were  now  as 
severally,  from  the  increase  of  the  danger,  seeking  to  save 
themselves  by  sacrificing  the  rest.  In  general  they  hoped 
to  remain  by  giving  up  Lord  Sandwich  and  Lord  George ; 
but  those  two,  as  most  dependent  on  himself  by  having  no 
other  support,  the  King  was  most  disposed  to  preserve. 
Yet  the  point  that  had  done  most  prejudice  to  the  Court 
was  the  treacherous  declaration  of  the  Lord  Advocate  on 
the  first  day  of  the  session  that  there  was  division  in  the 


1782.  DISMISSAL  OF  LORD  G.  GERMAINE.  493 

Council,  and  his  subsequent,  and  then  Rigby's  pretended 
conscientious  conviction,  that  they  had  been  in  the  wrong 
in  promoting  (I  believe  they  only  confessed  supporting) 
the  American  war.  Confessions  of  weakness  and  division 
opened  many  eyes — that  is,  of  those  who  looked  to  their 
own  interest.  Misfortunes  and  disgraces  there  had  hap- 
pened enough  to  undeceive  the  most  blinded,  and  yet  had 
had  little  effect ;  but  if  Ministers  themselves  recanted,  the 
venal  would  naturally  look  out  to  what  was  to  follow ;  and 
that  this  was  the  principal  cause  of  what  ensued  may  be 
fairly  gathered  from  the  little  part  the  nation  took  in  the 
subsequent  events,  and  from  the  indifference  with  which 
it  acquiesced  in  the  contradictions  that  grew  out  of  the 
crisis. 

During  the  holidays  the  Lord  Advocate  wrote  to  Lord 
North  that  he  could  not  serve  any  longer  with  Lord 
George  Germaine.  The  Minister  with  pleasure,  and  as 
was  his  duty,  acquainted  the  King,  who  was  much  offended 
with  the  Advocate,  and  would  not  speak  to  him  at  the 
next  levee.  Yet,  lest  a  rupture  should  produce  a  wider 
breach,  it  was  settled  that  Lord  George  should  retire,  and 
he  himself  declared  he  had  resigned  sooner  than  he  did  in 
form.  To  Lord  North,  who  notified  that  necessity  to  him, 
he  said  with  spirit  and  good  sense,  "  You  say  I  must  go, 
my  Lord ! — very  well — but  pray,  why  is  your  Lordship  to 
stay  ?" 

20th.  Lord  Cornwallis  and  the  noted  renegade  General 
Arnold  arrived.  The  former  offered  to  go  to  Court ; 
but  such  personal  severity  had  been  used  towards  General 
Burgoyne  in  the  same  circumstances,  that,  favourite  as 
Lord  Cornwallis  had  been,  at  least  till  he  was  become 
useless,  it  was  not  held  proper  to  be  partial  to  him  at  so 
untoward  a  moment.  But  to  Arnold,  a  character  of  far 


494 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


blacker  dye,  no  countenance  was  denied  by  the  King  or 
Ministers.     The  public,  more  equitable,  despised  him. 

2lst.  The  Parliament  met  after  the  recess. 

I  was  ill  and  took  no  notes  till  February  4th. 


FEBRUARY. 


4th.  COLONEL  Hayes,  an  American  officer,  had  been  taken 
and  executed  without  trial  by  Lord  Rawdon,  son  of  the 
Irish  Earl  of  Moira,  and  nephew  of  Lord  Huntingdon.1 
The  Dukes  of  Grafton  and  Richmond  had  pleaded  that 
they  had  no  authentic  account  of  it,  and  thought  it  hard  to 
reflect  on  brave  officers  in  their  absence.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond  now  made  a  motion  for  inquiry  into  that  aifair, 
though  with  great  tenderness  to  Lord  Rawdon,  declaring 
he  knew  nothing  of  the  truth,  but  thought  it  became  the 
House  to  examine,  in  order  to  prevent  savage  war.  Lord 
Abingdon  went  much  farther,  and  broke  out  on  the  inde- 
cency of  the  King's  reception  of  that  double  traitor  General 
Arnold,  which  he  censured  in  the  most  unguarded  terms. 
The  motion  was  rejected  by  73  to  25. 

A  few  months  after,  on  the  arrival  of  Lord  Rawdon,  he 
took  up  that  affair  with  great  heat,  challenged  the  Duke 
of  Richmond  in  injurious  terms.  The  Duke  declared  he 
had  neither  meant  nor  said  anything  personal  to  Lord 


1  When  Lord  Rawdon  arrived  at 
Cliarlrstown  (after  defeating  (in-c-n 
ip-icr  lldl>kirk)  lie  found  Hayes  already 
condemned  to  death,  and  vainly  endea- 
voured to  wave  him.  Hayes  had  volun- 


tarily sworn  allegiance  to  the  British 
government,  and  was  then  guilty  of 
tempting  an  English  corps  to  desert 
to  the  enemy. — I). 


1782.  DUKE  OF  IUCHMOND  CHALLENGED.  495 

Rawdon,  but  the  young  man,  as  stiff  in  punctilio  as  a 
Spaniard  (as  General  Conway  told  him),  would  hear  of 
nothing  but  a  formal  recantation  in  the  words  he  should 
dicjtate.  To  that  the  Duke  would  not  submit.  General 
Conway  and  Lord  Ligonier  were  empowered  to  adjust  the 
difference,  and  with  much  difficulty  it  was  settled  that  the 
Duke  should  make  a  public  declaration  in  the  House 
of  Lords  of  his  having  meant  nothing  personal  to  Lord 
Rawdon.  In  fact,  I  think  the  Duke  prejudiced  himself  by 
this  middle  way.  He  should  either  have  accepted  the 
challenge  or  taken  a  much  more  courageous  method — that 
of  complaining  to  the  House  of  Lords  of  the  challenge, 
which,  if  refused,  was  a  most  outrageous  infringement  of 
the  liberty  of  debate,  and  might  in  this  case  impede 
inquiries  into  such  cruelties.  As  the  Duke  was  extremely 
obnoxious  to  the  Court  by  the  warmth  of  his  opposition  and 
great  abilities,  I  have  no  doubt  but  Lord  Rawdon  was 
secretly  instigated  to  that  brutality.  The  recent  instances 
of  Charles  Fox  and  Lord  Shelburne  challenged  by  Scots, 
who  were  notoriously  set  on  by  other  Scots,  proved  that 
indirect  assassination  was  a  favourite  manoeuvre  of  the 
instruments  of  the  Court. 

8th.  The  Duke  of  Chandos  moved  the  Lords  to  inquire 
into  Lord  Cornwallis's  surrender,  which,  after  some  debate, 
was  allowed ;  but  as  Lord  Cornwallis  was  not  then  arrived, 
it  was  not  gone  into  then,  nor  resumed  afterwards. 

The  same  day  Lord  Caermarthen  made  a  very  extraordi- 
nary motion.  It  was  to  come  to  a  resolution,  that  it  was 
derogatory  to  the  honour  of  the  House  that  any  person 
labouring  under  a  heavy  censure  of  a  court-martial  should 
be  recommended  to  the  Crown  to  be  raised  to  the  dignity 
of  the  peerage.  This  was  directly  levelled  at  Lord  George 
JSackville  Germaine,  whom,  on  quitting  the  Seals,  the  King 


496 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


had  consented  to  create  a  Peer ;  indeed,  if  there  could 
have  been  any  doubt  of  the  application,  Lord  Caermarthen 
cleared  it  away  by  reading  the  identical  words  of  the  sen- 
tence that  had  been  passed  on  Lord  George  after  the 
battle  of  Minden,  twenty-two  years  before  :  the  distance  of 
the  time  sufficed  to  point  out  the  ill-nature  of  the  motion, 
which  was  generally  condemned  and  justly  rejected  by  the 
majority  of  the  Lords,  many  of  whom  had,  to  that  mi- 
nute, served  with  him  in  Administration,  and  had  never 
even  remonstrated  against  his  readmission.2  The  motion 
was  in  every  light  odious,  and  tended  to  destroy  the  best 
prerogative  of  the  Crown,  that  of  pardon. 

The  samet  day,  in  the  other  House,  Mr.  Fox,  in  a 
motion  on  the  abuses  of  the  navy,  was  not  less  personal  to 
Lord  Sandwich,  whom,  of  late,  he  had  pursued  with  much 
violence.  I  told  him  of  it,  and  of  his  wasting  his  fire  on  a 
secondary  character,  whom  all  the  rest  were  willing  to 
sacrifice.  I  advised  him  to  make  his  push  at  Lord  North, 
as,  if  the  keystone  could  be  removed,  the  whole  edifice 
would  fall.  He  owned  I  was  in  the  right,  and  he  took  my 
advice.  The  motion  against  the  Admiralty  was  rejected 
by  288  to  183. 

The  King  was  so  angry  at  Lord  Caermarthen's  motion, 
that  he  immediately  ordered  Lord  George  Germaine's  pa- 
tent to  be  notified  in  the  next  '  Gazette,'  which  it  was  on  the 
1 1th  ;  and,  as  if  his  Lordship  had  deserved  higher  honour 
than  usual,  he  was  created  a  Viscount  at  once.  It  was 
intended  that,  as  usual,  he  should  be  only  a  Baron,  but  he 
insisted  on  the  higher  step,  as  he  said  he  would  not  take 
place  after  his  aide-de-camp,  his  secretary,  and  hi  advocate, 


2  Lord  Caermarthen  had  not  been  a 
Minister,  but,  Laving  been  Chamberlain 


to  the  Queen,  had  certainly  served  in 
Court  with  Lord  George. 


1782.  PEERAGE  OP  LORD  G.  GERMAINE.  497 

who  all  now  were  Barons ;  those  were  Lord  Amherst, 
Lord  Walsingham,  and  Lord  Loughborough — the  last,  his 
counsel  on  h',-  court-  tial.  Yet  though  thus  supported 
by  the  fav  of  K<-yal  perseverance,  the  new  Lord 
Sackville  h;.«  :et  a  most  bitter  draught  to  swallow  be- 
fore he  was  dismissed  to  tranquillity  after  so  tempestuous  a 
life;  for, 

18th,  Lord  Caermarthen,  like  a  bloodhound,  renewed  his 
motion  to  the  new  Viscount's  face,  who  was  forced  to  hear 
his  sentence  read  and  to  apologise  for  himself,  and  to 
plead  his  competence  to  receive  the  honour.  He  defended 
himself  by  sound  arguments,  hinted  at  the  persecution  he 
had  undergone,  and  at  the  desire  there  had  been  to  take 
away  his  life  (which  was  true) ;  alluding  to  the  court- 
martial,  he  seemed  to  hint  at  injustice  in  it,  and  was  too 
civil  to  Lord  Caermarthen  for  so  rude  an  attack.  Lord 
Southampton  defended  the  court-martial,  at  which  he  had 
been  a  witness  against  Lord  George,  but  did  not  shine  in 
that  defence ;  nor  got  well  off  when  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond called  on  him,  if  he  approved  the  sentence  of  the 
court-martial,  to  vote  for  the  motion. 

The  Duke  observed,  too,  how  the  Ministers  skulked 
behind  the  question,  and  shunned  defending  it,  which  was 
also  true.  Lord  Stormont,  with  his  usual  empty  pomp 
and  insolence,  took  the  charge  up,  but  showed  that  he  was 
more  sore  on  his  own  account  than  Lord  Sackville's.  Lord 
Walsingham  defended  his  friend  and  late  master  much 
better ;  while  Lord  Shelburne  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
preferred  the  uniformity  of  Lord  Sackville  to  the  shuffling 
conduct  of  Lord  North.  The  Chancellor,  in  an  able  speech, 
put  an  end  to  the  debate,  and  the  motion  was  rejected  by 
81  to  27. 

One  remark  I  must  make.    It  is  surprising  that  neither 

VOL.    II.  2    K 


498  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEE 

Lord  Sackville  nor  any  of  his  friends  recollected  a  circum- 
stance which  they  might  have  thrown  in  the  teeth  of  the 
Whigs  with  great  propriety  on  this  occasion.  We  Whigs 
have  always  loudly  condemned  the  cruelty  and  injustice  of 
James  I.  in  executing  Sir  Walter  E-aleigh  after  he  had 
been  employed  in  a  Royal  commission,  which  we  deem 
equivalent  to  pardon.  If  a  commission  from  the  Crown 
was  a  pardon,  surely  the  dignity  of  Privy  Councillor 
and  Secretary  of  State,  as  higher  trusts,  are  stronger 
pardons. 

Let  me  add,  that  in  Lord  Rockingham's  administration, 
Lord  Sackville  had  been  made  Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland 
— with  what  grace  could  they  recur  to  the  sentence  of 
the  court-martial?  But  enough  on  Lord  Sackville,  of 
whom  probably  we  shall  hear  no  more.  The  passage  was 
bitter,  but  he  was  fortunate  to  retreat  so  easily  from  a 
scene  in  which  he  had  had  a  deep  hand,  with  no  kind  of 
success  or  credit  to  his  councils ! 

Lord  Sackville  could  not  forbear,  even  in  so  disgraceful 
a  conjuncture,  giving  a  new  proof  of  his  pride  and  want 
of  judgment.  I  have  mentioned  that  he  had  affected  a 
great  zeal  for  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  though  it  had  not 
appeared  since  the  seeming  reconciliation  of  the  King  and 
Duke ;  nor  had  Lord  Sackville  been  so  frequent  in  paying 
court  to  his  Royal  Highness.  On  the  day  of  Lord  Caer- 
marthen's  motion,  the  Duke,  who  had  never  given  a  vote 
but  once  (on  the  repeal  of  the  Popish  laws)  since  his  dis- 
agreement with  the  King,  retired  as  usual.  Lord  Sackville 
resented  that  his  Royal  Highness  had  not  voted  for  him, 
and  not  only  forbore  going  to  Gloucester  House,  but  for- 
bade his  daughters  going  thither — thus  excluding  himself 
from  the  most  creditable  and  honourable  of  the  few  houses 
where  he  was  received,  the  number  of  which  was  not  likely 
to  increase  now  he  had  lost  all  power. 


1782.  RECALL  OF  SIR  HENRY  CLINTON.  499 

On  the  retreat  of  Lord  Sackville,  Sir  Guy  Carleton  was 
sent  to  take  the  command  in  America  in  the  room  of  Sir 
Henry  Clinton,  who  had  long  solicited  to  be  recalled,  and 
who  had  not  made  a  better  figure,  or  been  more  successful 
than  his  predecessors,  and  who  Lord  Cornwallis,  and  many 
others,  thought  had  contributed  to  the  disgrace  of  the  latter 
by  not  supporting  him  properly ;  and  the  animosity  had 
gone  so  far,  that  Sir  Henry  vowed  he  would  at  a  proper 
time  challenge  Lord  Cornwallis.  But  that  quarrel,  like 
many  preceding  events,  was  forgotten  by  the  vast  variety 
of  new  matter  that  ensued,  and  will  for  ever  remain  obscure 
like  them,3  as  the  nation  had  not  time  to  enter  into  the 
discussion  of  such  a  multiplicity  of  problematic  questions, 
anxiously  concealed  by  the  Ministers,  and  transacted  at  so 
great  a  distance,  and  requiring  so  many  absent  witnesses, 
and  which,  in  a  flagrant  season  of  party,  were  affirmed  and 
denied  with  equal  heat,  while  the  dissipation  and  real 
indifference  of  the  nation,  that  took  most  of  them  up  at 
first  with  warmth,  forgot  them  with  equal  levity.  Sir 
Henry  Clinton  was  a  very  weak  man  ;  nor,  in  the  whole 
conduct  of  the  war,  had  one  of  the  Commanders  been  a 
man  of  real  abilities. 

General  Gage  was  not  only  totally  insufficient,  but  his 
wife  was  American,  and  supposed  to  betray  all  his  orders 
and  councils  to  her  countrymen.  Sir  William  Howe  had 
not  a  glimmering  of  parts,  and  even  undertook  the  com- 
mand against  his  principles,  if  he  had  any  or  knew  what 
they  were.  He  gave  himself  up  to  his  pleasures  and 
negligence ;  and  yet,  as  he  was  of  great  personal  bravery, 
and  not  without  vanity,  he  returned  expecting  applause  for 


3  Lord  Cornwallis  and  Sir  H.  Clinton     for  a  history  of  the  war  ;  but  the  public 


did  some  months  afterwards  publish 
four  or  five  pamphlets  against  each 
other,  which  may  be  of  use  hereafter 


took  no  part  in  the  contest,  which,  as 
well  as  the  combatants,  were  soon  fur- 
gotten. 

2  K  2 


500 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


having  done  nothing  but  lose  his  time ;  as  if  he  thought 
that,  because  he  had  courage  enough  to  have  done  any- 
thing, it  was  having  done  something.  He  bore  part  of  the 
blame  of  not  having  supported  Burgoyne,  as  Sir  Henry 
Clinton  that  of  neglecting  to  attempt  to  rescue  Lord 
Cornwallis.  General  Burgoyne  was  the  most  verbose  and 
bombast  boaster  that  ever  bore  a  truncheon.  He  did  not 
want  spirit  nor  knowledge,  nor  any  zeal  for  serving  his 
masters,  who  seem  to  have  sacrificed  him  because  he  did 
not  execute  a  bad  or  impossible  plan  drawn  by  them. 
Lord  Cornwallis  was  dull  and  brave,  and  more  in  earnest 
in  serving  the  cause  than  was  consistent  with  his  principles, 
which  had  utterly  opposed  and  condemned  it.  He  had 
not  genius  to  retrieve  the  King's  affairs,  if  they  were 
retrievable ;  and  though  his  first  successes  had  disposed  the 
Court  to  intend  him  for  their  hero,  they  let  him  sink  into 
obscurity  on  his  return  after  his  total  defeat,4  and  he  was 
too  silent  and  modest  not  to  acquiesce  in  their  neglect.  Sir 
Guy  Carleton  was  a  grave  man,  and  good  officer,  and 
reckoned  sensible — he  was  too  reserved  to  betray  himself 
if  he  was  not  what  he  was  reckoned.  He  had  served  well, 
had  been  affronted  by  Lord  George  Germaine,  under 
whom  he  would  not  serve,  and  had  recently  been  one  of 
the  Commissioners  of  Public  Accounts,  which  having 


4  What  probably  contributed  to  the 
neglect  of  Lord  Cornwallis,  was  a  letter 
of  his  that  was  published,  and  had  been 
written  in  America,  in  which  he  forbad 
enlisting  Scotchmen.  On  the  6th  of  the 
ensuing  March  of  1782,  there  was  an 
attempt  made  by  the  Opposition  to 
inquire  into  the  causes  of  Lord  Corn- 
wallis's  defeat  and  capture,  with  a  view 
to  ascribe  them  to  a  want  of  a  fleet  to 
cooperate  with  him.  In  that  debate 
Lord  Sandwich  defended  himself  and 
the  Ministers  against  the  charge  of 


want  of  a  naval  force ;  the  Earl  of  Derby 
flew  into  such  an  intemperate  passion 
that  he  termed  Lord  Sandwich's  defence 
impudence  and  assurance,  words  so  in- 
decent that  he  was  immediately  inter- 
rupted. The  Ministers  defeated  the 
motion  by  pleading  the  absence  of 
Lord  Cornwallis,  yet  prejudged  it  by 
voting  that  there  had  not  been  want  of 
a  naval  force  :  thus,  while  they  affected 
tenderness  for  Lord  Cornwallis,  they 
took  away  his  best  defence. 


1782.        WELBORE  ELLIS  MADE  SECRETAEY  OF  STATE.       501 

introduced  him  to  the  theory  of  reformation  and  economy, 
he  set  himself,  on  his  arrival  at  New  York,  to  correct  the 
enormous  abuses  that  had  grown  up  under  Lord  North's 
negligence,  and  by  the  plunder  of  all  whom  he  had 
employed,  or  had  not  opposed  when  recommended  by  the 
Junto  and  the  Scots. 

Welbore  Ellis  was  appointed  Secretary  of  State  in  the 
room  of  Lord  George  Germaine,  and  it  was  intended  that 
the  Lord  Advocate,  Dundas,  should  succeed  Ellis  as 
Treasurer  of  the  Navy. 

Lord  Caermarthen,  the  Dukes  of  Rutland  and  Devon- 
shire, the  Earls  of  Pembroke,  Derby,  Abingdon,  Egre- 
mont,  and  Chatham,  and  Lord  Craven,  protested  against 
Lord  Sackville's  peerage. 

19th.  In  a  debate  on  the  Mutiny  Bill,  Burke,  Fox,  and 
General  Conway  reflected  severely  on  the  traitor  Arnold ; 
and  Conway  made  a  capital  speech  against  the  pitiful 
solicitude  with  which  the  Courtiers,  both  in  the  House 
and  in  the  public  papers,  recommended  unanimity,6  which 
Conway  said  was  only  meant  to  beg  that  all  men  would 
support  the  present  nefarious  and  incapable  Adminis- 
tration. 

20th.  Charles  Fox  moved  an  inquiry  into  Lord  Sand- 
wich's mismanagement  of  the  Navy  during  1781.  He 
had  intended,  and  threatened,  an  inquiry  into  his  whole 
administration,  which  would  have  furnished  much  more 
matter  of  censure,  at  least,  of  discussion.  I  forget  why  it 
was  thought  more  proper  to  narrow  the  question  to  one 
year.  The  motion  was  rejected  by  a  majority  of  19 — a 
small  one,  but  prognosticating  the  downfall  of  the  Ministry. 
The  Prince  of  Wales  openly  avowed  his  dislike  of  Lord 


This  was  not  mode  ou  tin-  I'.'tli,  but  the  next  da}. 


502  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

Sandwich,  nor  even  spoke  to  him  at  Court.  His  brother, 
Prince  Frederick,  before  he  went  to  Germany,  had 
expressed  himself  still  more  injuriously  against  Lord 
Sackville. 

The  hostilities  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  were  supposed 
to  be  suggested  by  his  uncle  the  Duke  of  Cumberland, 
who  had  now  got  entire  influence  over  him.  The  Prince, 
though  at  first  he  did  not  go  openly  to  her,  frequently 
supped  with  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland,  and  in  a  little 
time  they  openly  kept  a  faro  bank  for  him — not  to  their 
credit ;  and  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  even  carried  bankers 
and  very  bad  company  to  the  Prince's  apartments  in  the 
Queen's  house.  This  behaviour  was  very  grating  to  the 
King,  and  the  offences  increased.  The  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land twice  a  day  passed  by  the  King's  apartment  to  his 
nephew's,  without  making  his  bow  to  his  Majesty  ;  and  the 
brothers  at  last  ceased  to  speak.  On  hunting  days  the 
Duke  was  not  asked  to  dine  with  the  King.  He  returned 
this  by  instilling  neglect  into  his  nephew.  One  day  that 
the  King  and  his  family  were  thrown  out  in  the  chace  in  a 
little  village,  the  Prince  and  Duke  took  the  only  chaise 
that  was  to  be  hired,  and  left  the  King  to  get  home  as  he 
could.  When  the  Prince  dined  with  his  Majesty,  the  son 
constantly  made  the  father  wait  a  full  hour.  The  King 
complained  of  this  treatment  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
who  asked  why  he  bore  it.  "  What  can  I  do  ?  "  said  the 
King  ;  "  if  I  resent  it  they  will  make  my  son  leave  me, 
and  break  out,  which  is  what  they  wish."  But  it  was  not 
long  before  the  folly  and  vulgarity  of  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land disgusted  the  Prince.  His  style  was  so  low  that, 
alluding  to  the  Principality  of  Wales,  the  Duke  called  his 
nephew  Taffy.  The  Prince  was  offended  at  such  indecent 
familiarity,  and  begged  it  might  not  be  repeated — but  in 


1782.       PRINCE  OF  WALES'S  CONDUCT  TO  THE  KING.          503 

vain.  Soon  after,  Mr.  Legge,  one  of  the  Prince's  gentle- 
men and  second  son  of  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  growing  a 
favourite,  inflamed  the  Prince's  disgusts ;  and  the  coolness 
increasing,  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  endeavoured  to 
counteract  the  prejudice,  by  calling  Legge  to  the  Prince 
"  Your  Governor  " — but  as  the  Governor  had  sense,  and 
the  Uncle  none,  Legge's  arrows  took  place,  the  others  did 
not.  Yet  though  the  Prince  had  too  much  pride  to  be 
treated  vulgarly,  he  had  not  enough  to  disuse  the  same 
style.  Nothing  was  coarser  than  his  conversation  and 
phrases ;  and  it  made  men  smile  to  find  that  in  the  palace 
of  piety  and  pride  his  Royal  Highness  had  learnt  nothing 
but  the  dialect  of  footmen  and  grooms.  Still,  if  he  tor- 
mented his  father,  the  latter  had  the  comfort  of  finding 
that,  with  so  depraved  and  licentious  a  life,  his  son  was  not 
likely  to  acquire  popularity.  Nor  did  he  give  symptoms 
of  parts,  or  spirit,  or  steadiness.  A  tender  parent  would 
have  been  afflicted — a  jealous  and  hypocritic  father  might 
be  vexed,  but  was  consoled  too. 

The  Duke  of  Gloucester's  conduct  toward  his  nephew 
was  very  different,  and  both  to  father  and  sou  very  meri- 
torious. What  little  he  said  to  the  latter  was  in  giving  him 
good  advice ;  not  finding  that  acceptable,  he  saw  the  Prince 
but  rarely.  At  first  he  bad  professed  to  the  Duke  much 
good-will  towards  the  Duchess,  but  whether  prejudiced 
against  her  by  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland,  or  offended 
by  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester's  resenting  that  he  took  no 
notice  of  her,  while  he  passed  so  much  of  his  time  with  the 
other,  he  dropped  all  mention  to  the  Duke  of  the  Duchess 
of  Gloucester — but  growing  weary  of  the  Cumberlands, 
he  on  a  sudden  told  his  elder  uncle  that  on  the  ensuing 
Sunday  he  would  come  to  him  and  the  Duchess  in  form. 

The  Duke  begged  him  to  acquaint  the  King  previously 


504  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

with  his  intention,  and  he  himself  would  await  his  Majesty's 
answer.  "No,"  said  the  Prince,  "I  dare  not ;  but  I  will 
come  to  you :  you  will  receive  me,  wont  you  ?  "  "  Cer- 
tainly," said  the  Duke,  with  utmost  form  and  respect ;  "  but 
I  will  go  the  next  morning  and  acquaint  the  King."  "  Sure 
you  wont  ?"  said  the  Prince,  but  desisted.  The  Duke  was 
above  receiving  a  visit  by  stealth  or  connivance. 

At  this  time,  and  indeed  I  believe  generally,  secret 
negotiations  were  going  on  with  France,  probably  with 
little  intention  on  their  side  of  concluding  them.  Now  was 
that  Court  so  elated  by  the  capture  of  Lord  Cornwallis's 
army,  and  the  total  desperation  of  the  Royal  cause  in 
America,  that  France  was  so  insolent  as  to  demand  cession 
of  the  Isle  of  Wight !  I  do  not  know  that  our  Court  had 
made  them  presume  such  a  cession  possible  !  .it  certainly 
was  not  artful,  if  they  meant  to  keep  the  negotiation 
open. 

22nd.  General  Conway,  void  of  factious  principles  and 
connected  with  neither  the  Rockingham  nor  Shelburne 
squadrons,  became  nevertheless  the  principal  instrument  of 
their  success.  He  was  indefatigable  in  whatever  he  thought 
his  duty  :  he  had  invariably  lamented  the  American  war ; 
and  now  learning  from  the  defeat  of  Lord  Cornwallis,  from 
the  despondency  of  the  Court,  and  from  their  divisions, 
that  the  independence  of  the  Colonies,  to  which  he  had 
long  been  utterly  averse,  was  established,  and  ought  to  be 
allowed  by  the  mother  country,  he  had  set  himself  to  devise 
all  or  any  means  of  pacification.  The  candour  and  fair- 
ness of  his  character  had  drawn  much  respect  to  him  from 
all  thinking  and  honest  men.  Their  confidence  in  him  had 
brought  to  his  knowledge  that  Lawrence,  formerly  Presi- 
dent of  the  Congress,  and  of  late  prisoner  here,  had  as  well 
as  another  person  in  Holland,  authority  from  the  Congress 


1782.  GENERAL  CONWAY  STRIVES  FOR  PEACE.       .      505 

to  conclude  peace  with  us.  On  this  foundation,  and  with 
his  usual  zeal,  he  had  drawn  up  a  motion  for  that  purpose ; 
and  so  great  was  his  command  over  himself  that  he  had 
made  himself  master  of  the  business,  and  formed  his  motion, 
at  the  very  instant  that  his  mind  and  pains  were  labouring 
and  tortured  to  pacify  the  quarrel  between  his  son-in-law, 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  and  the  hot-headed  Lord  Rawdon. 
Accordingly,  on  this  day,  February  22nd,  he  moved  the 
House  of  Commons  to  address  the  King  to  give  directions 
to  his  Ministers  to  use  every  means  in  their  power  to  re- 
store peace,  and  to  give  up  all  thoughts  of  subduing  Ame- 
rica with  force.  He  urged  the  peculiar  propriety  of  the 
moment  now  that  there  was  a  newly  appointed  American 
Secretary  in  the  room  of  Lord  George  Germaine,  and  there- 
fore he  wished  to  learn  whether  the  new  Minister  brought 
different  sentiments,  or  was  merely  a  phoenix  sprung  from 
the  ashes  of  the  departed  Minister.  He  had  another  in- 
ducement, which  was  to  second  the  Sovereign  himself,  who 
had  lately  declared  to  Parliament  that  the  wish  of  his  heart 
was  to  bring  about  a  safe  and  honourable  peace.  He  pro- 
fessed having  two  other  concurrent  motives — the  one,  that 
he  knew  America  wished  for  peace ;  and  the  other,  that  he 
also  knew  that  there  were  persons  at  no  great  distance 
empowered  to -treat — he  therefore  wished  to  hear  whether 
our  Ministers  were  taking  advantage  of  that  disposition  and 
those  circumstances.  He  warned  them  of  not  losing  such 
advantages,  which,  like  the  leaves  of  the  Sibyl,  would  rise 
in  price  in  proportion  as  they  delayed  the  purchase.  He 
mentioned  our  army  in  America,  which  standing  on  paper 
is  73,000  men,  and  cost  an  hundred  pounds  per  man,  though 
the  whole  efficient  force,  both  under  Lord  Cornwallis 
(which  part  was  now  gone)  and  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  had 
amounted  last  year  but  to  13,800  men. 


506  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

The  effect  of  this  speech  was  incredible,  considering 
how  steeled  had  been  the  majority  of  hearts  in  that  House 
— but  not  wonderful,  as  that  very  hardness  of  their  hearts 
had  been  occasioned  by  what  softened  them  now,  their 
interest.  It  is  easy  to  persuade  men  to  repent  when  it  is 
for  their  present  advantage  ;  and,  without  detaching  from 
the  power  of  Conway's  truth,  arguments,  and  eloquence, 
he  had  frequently  spoken  as  well,  and  disclosed  as  many 
truths  without  shaking  a  voter ;  but  the  fall  of  Lord 
George  Germaine  had  made  the  fabric  totter,  and  the  rats 
ran  away. 

Poor  Ellis  was  very  unequal  to  the  part  he  had  to  act. 
He  did  not  dare  at  such  a  moment  to  declare  his  masters' 
or  his  own  disposition,  if  ordered,  to  continue  the  war ;  nor, 
while  there  was  such  a  disposition,  as  little  dared  he  to  ven- 
ture to  embrace,  at  least  pronounce  for,  pacific  sentiments. 
There  was  a  third  path  to  steer,  to  which  he  was  excel- 
lently suited,  and  which  he  had  often  practised  with  much 
less  occasion,  and  that  was  to  say  little  or  nothing  to  the 
purpose.  With  much  pomp,  therefore,  he  uttered  a  parcel 
of  formal  hackneyed  phrases,  which,  to  give  him  his  due, 
he  thought  meant  something,  and  after  declaring  that  he 
had  found  nothing  in  his  office  that  apprised  him  of  there 
being  any  such  negotiators  as  had  been  mentioned,  all 
the  rest  he  said  was  a  little  for  contracting  the  war,  and 
a  little  for  carrying  it  on  ;  and  when  he  had  rung  the 
changes  on  those  contradictions,  and  flattered  himself  that 
he  had  not  been  too  explicit,  though  he  had  said  enough 
to  show  he  only  wanted  to  conceal  what  he  thereby  dis- 
covered, his  inclination  for  continuing  the  war,  he  sat 
down  perfectly  satisfied  with  himself,  as  everyone  else  was 
that  he  was  sitten  down.  Burke  did  not  let  Ellis's  real 
sentiments  pass  without  a  comment,  but  showed  that  the 


1782.  DEBATES  ON  PEACE.  507 

person  only  was  changed,  not  the  system.  Jenkinson  was 
less  oracular,  and  Charles  Fox  accordingly  applied  a  much 
harsher  comment  on  him,,  as  one  who  might  be  deemed 
to  be  mouth  of  the  oracle,  of  which  Ellis  was  only  the 
statue — but  as  if  Fox  had  embraced  all  the  notions  that 
have  been  held  about  oracles  (to  which  indeed  he  did 
even  allude),  he  mentioned  the  infernal  spirit  that  really 
ruled  and  had  so  nearly  ruined  this  country.  He  then 
turned  to  another  of  the  band,  and  said  that  should  the 
Lord  Advocate  not  vote  for  the  motion,  what  he  had  said 
before  the  holidays  would  bear  the  construction  of  having 
arisen  from  personal  animosity,  otherwise  how  was  his 
speaking  against  one  Minister,  and  supporting  another  for 
pursuing  the  same  measures,  to  be  accounted  for !  Fox 
might  ask  the  question,  but  Dundas  wanted  no  long 
commentator.  In  six  months  he  fully  explained  his  own 
comment,  and  that  he  had  not  acted  from  personal  animo- 
sity, but  from  personal  interest. 

At  two  the  House  divided  and  rejected  Conway's  mo- 
tion, but  by  a  majority  of  one  voice  only !  the  number 
being  194  to  193 — ample  intelligence  to  all  to  see  which 
way  the  scale  would  incline.  Mr.  Fox,  too  alert  not  to 
profit  by  a  doubtful  field,  immediately  gave  due  notice  that 
the  same  question  in  another  shape  would  be  renewed  in 
a  few  days ;  and  the  more  necessary  as  Lord  North  had 
given  notice  that  he  should  open  the  Budget  on  an  early 
day.  Colonel  Barre  reproached  Lord  North  bitterly  for 
that  notice,  when  he  ought  to  have  brought  on  other  busi- 
ness which  he  had  utterly  neglected,  especially  the  reports 
of  the  Commissioners,  whom  he  had  kept  employed  for 
two  years,  and  yet  had  let  their  papers  lie  on  the  table  like 
lumber.  He  called  him  the  scourge  of  this  country,  with 
many  harsh  additions  and  accusations.  Lord  North,  who 


508  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

was  a  laughing  philosopher  only  when  backed  by  numbers, 
finding  himself  so  hard  run  by  the  division,  wanted  nothing 
but  this  new  provocation  to  overset  his  temper.  He  fell 
into  a  furious  rage,  and  said  he  had  been  used  from 
that  quarter  to  language  so  uncivil,  so  brutal,  and  so 
insolent.  At  the  sound  of  those  words  there  was  an 
immediate  uproar  in  the  House ;  the  Speaker  and  the 
almost  triumphant  Opposition  called  him  to  order,  and  T. 
Townshend,  in  no  less  severe  terms,  complained  of  such 
language  from  a  Minister  as  totally  annihilating  all  free- 
dom of  debate.  Lord  North  said  he  was  ready  to  own 
he  had  gone  too  far,  but  desired  the  House  to  recollect 
the  provocation,  and  that  he  would  ask  pardon  of  the 
House,  but  not  of  Barre.  After  a  tumult  of  three  hours, 
Lord  North  was  forced  to  make  an  apology  even  to 
Barre :  heavy  mortifications  in  one  day.  Yet  when  it 
shall  be  seen  that  those  corrections  and  the  loss  of  his 
power  were  all  the  punishments  inflicted  on  so  criminal  a 
Minister,  and  that  even  those  were  wiped  out  by  a  large 
pension,  his  fate  will  not  be  deemed  very  severe  by  poste- 
rity, who  will  feel  the  losses  he  contributed  so  largely  to 
bring  on  this  country — a  proof  is  that  he  began  to  joke 
again  in  a  very  short  time  after  his  fall — for,  whatever 
moved  him,  shame  did  not. 

The  Lord  Advocate  Dundas,  whose  unsatisfied  ambition 
had  brought  the  Administration  to  the  brink  of  the  preci- 
pice, thought  the  emergency  favourable  for  extorting  the 
most  exorbitant  demands,  concluding  that  they  would  pay 
any  price  for  support  to  their  tottering  power.  He  de- 
manded the  treasure  ships  of  the  Navy,  and  to  have  the 
Treasury  of  the  Chambers  for  life,  a  place  of  2900/. 
a  year,  as  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  had  had,  pleading  that  he 
must  give  up  his  lucrative  profession,  though,  as  it  soon 


1782.  LORD  NORTH  OPENS  THE  BUDGET.  509 

appeared,  he  did  not  mean  to  relinquish  the  post  of  Lord 
Advocate.  Such  rapacity  in  not  many  months  occasioned 
a  full  display  of  his  venality  and  total  want  of  principles. 

25th.  The  Budget  opened.  Lord  North  had  contracted 
with  four  persons  (of  whom  one  was  the  notorious  Atkin- 
son, stigmatised  by  the  contract  for  ruin)  ;  the  bankers 
complained  of  being  neglected. 

On  February  27th  the  decisive  blow  was  given  to  an 
Administration  which  had  given  the  most  fatal  stab  to  the 
glory  and  interests  of  England,  by  (I  believe)  planning 
(certainly  by  taking  no  step  to  prevent),  pushing  on,  and 
persisting  in  the  American  war,  and  who  had,  by  the 
countenance  of  the  Crown,  and  by  the  arts  of  the  Scotch, 
and  the  intoxication  of  the  nation,  maintained  themselves 
under  the  greatest  disgraces  and  losses  that  ever  this 
country  had  sustained — disgraces  in  a  great  measure  the 
consequences  of  impolicy,  early  neglect,  and  rash  perse- 
verance in  a  hopeless  project;  and  though  they  struggled 
for  a  fortnight  longer,  not  without  a  slight  gleam  of  hope, 
they  could  not  recover  their  defeat.  General  Conway, 
who  had  been  the  principal  instrument  of  the  repeal  of  the 
Stamp  Act,  a  service  that  would  have  preserved  tran- 
quillity in  America,  had  not  the  same  pernicious  arts  that 
had  embroiled  it,  rekindled  the  flames,  had  the  honour  of 
commanding  this  day,  and  of  making  the  motion  that  gave 
victory  to  the  Opposition  by  its  consequences,  liberty  to 
America,  peace  to  England.  He  moved  to  declare  the 
purpose  of  subduing  the  revolted  Colonies  by  force  imprac- 
ticable— as  both  sides  were  sensible  it  was,  though  above 
200  Members  could  not  be  induced  to  make  the  confes- 
sion. Yet  between  one  and  two  in  the  morning  the  ques- 
tion was  carried  by  234  votes  to  215.  The  debate  may  be 
found  at  large  in  various  publications  of  the  time.  The 


510  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

debates  in  general  have  been  so  accurately  taken  and 
published  of  late  years,  that  I  willingly  omit  them  in  this 
journal,  because  far  too  voluminous,  and  which  I  have 
continued  so  long  merely  to  preserve  certain  passages  less 
known,  and  to  aid  future  historians,  not  intending  the 
journalist  part  for  any  other  use,  which  from  my  retire- 
ment from  the  public  scene,  from  my  total  disconnection 
with  Ministers,  from  satiety  of  politics,  and  from  disgust 
with  so  fatal  a  war,  and  so  impotent  and  shameful  an 
Administration,  I  have  furnished  very  imperfectly ;  and 
though  I  have,  again,  been  master  of  many  lights  by  the 
accession  of  some  few  of  my  friends  to  power,  yet  age  and 
indolence  have  unfitted  me  for  taking  pains  to  inform 
myself;  and  the  slight  notes  I  have  preserved  and  do  set 
down  of  the  changes  that  happened  in  1782  and  1783 
will  be  chiefly  such  as  I  can  warrant  the  truth  of,  and  are 
not  likely  to  be  found  in  narratives  of  men  much  less 
conversant  with  some  of  the  principal  actors. 

The  very  next  day,  whether  panic  or  the  paltry  act  of 
hoping  to  prejudice  the  public  against;  the  victorious  Oppo- 
sition dictated  the  measure,  Lord  Stormont  was  ordered  to 
write  to  the  Lord  Mayor  that  tumults  were  apprehended, 
and  he  was  directed  to  take  precautions  against  them. 

But  if  panic  had  seized  the  Ministers,  anger  and  obsti- 
nacy alone  seemed  to  possess  their  Master. 

Being  addressed  by  the  House  of  Commons  on 


1782.  ILL-TEMPER  OF  THE  KING.  511 


4th,  IN  consequence  of  their  late  resolution  of  suspending 
the  American  war,  his  Majesty  sternly  and  ungraciously 
told  them,  that  he  should,  in  pursuance  of  their  advice, 
take  such  measures  as  should  appear  to  him  (to  me  said  he 
emphatically)  to  be  most  conducive  to  the  restoration  of 
harmony  between  Great  Britain  and  the  revolted  Colonies. 
Authority  so  ill-timed  and  impolitically  assumed  in  the 
moment  of  defeat,  spoke  very  intelligibly  what  sort  a  spirit 
would  have  displayed  itself,  had  the  Colonies,  as  his  flat- 
terers had  promised  him,  been  reduced  to  unconditional 
submission,  and  what  measure  would  have  been  dealt  out 
to  the  Opposition  had  the  Royal  army  returned  trium- 
phant !  Prerogative  that  spoke  in  so  high  a  tone  to  a 
House  of  Commons  that  had  bound  its  hands,  would  soon 
have  issued  lettres  de  cachet  de  part  le  roi.  In  the  moment 
in  question,  for  a  King  of  parliamentary  election  who  had 
lost  so  vast  a  portion  of  an  empire  that  his  family  had 
been  called  to  preside  over,  to  conceit  all  negotiation  in  his 
own  wisdom,  was  bloated  folly,  but  shows  how  naturally 
that  factitious  puppet  believes  its  own  rights,  divine,  and 
inalienable  and  uncommunicable ! 

A  slight  incident  contributed  to  increase  the  scandal 
given.  General  Arnold,  the  American  renegade,  stood 
close  by  the  throne  as  a  champion  of  offended  Majesty, 
but  soon  sunk  into  obscurity  with  the  Royal  cause  to 
which  he  had  revolted,  and  was  no  more  heard  of. 

That  vexation,  not  firmness,  had  dictated  the  King's 


512  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

response  was  evident,  for  the  same  day  he  sent  for  the 
Chancellor  and  told  him  Lord  North  must  give  up  his 
post.  As  there  was  no  cordiality  between  the  Prime 
Minister  and  the  Chancellor,  the  latter  was  not  secret  on 
the  communication  made  to  him ;  and,  by  divulging,  per- 
haps expedited  Lord  North's  fall.  Thurlow  did  not  foresee 
that  in  less  than  a  year  and  a  half  himself  would  be  the 
disgraced  Minister,  and  have  his  dismission  notified  to  him 
by  Lord  North !  The  latter  asked  whether,  if  he  was  to 
retire,  he  must  yet  propose  the  taxes  ?  Yes !  he  was  told 
he  had  borrowed  the  money. 

Charles  Fox  proposed  to  the  House  of  Commons  to 
complain  of  the  King's  answer ;  but  General  Conway,  who 
had  moved  an  Address  of  thanks  for  that  answer,  William 
Pitt,  and  Sir  Gilbert,  and  others,  overruled  Fox  and  de- 
clared against  violence.  Rigby  attacked  the  new  majority 
warmly,  but  was  corrected  by  young  William  Pitt,  who 
told  him  the  nation  was  weary  of  paying  him.  The  Address 
was  voted. 

The  Commons  went  farther  and  declared  such  enemies 
who  should  advise  or  attempt  a  further  prosecution  of  the 
American  war. 

At  this  time  came  an  account  of  the  surrender  of  Mi- 
norca to  the  French,  and  likewise  of  their  capture  of  St. 
Christopher's. 

6th.  Lord  North  not  being  ready  with  his  taxes,  but 
obliged  to  postpone  them,  was  severely  handled  by  Charles 
Fox  and  Burke. 

8th.  Lord  John  Cavendish  proposed  four  resolutions  to 
the  House  of  Commons — the  first,  that  the  war  had  cost  an 
hundred  millions ;  the  second,  to  state  our  losses ;  the 
third,  that,  besides  with  America,  we  were  at  war  with 
France,  Spain,  and  Holland;  and  the  fourth,  which,  as 


1782.  MOTION  FOR  CHANGE  OF  MINISTERS.  513 

the  three  preceding  were  self-evident  propositions,  nobody 
who  confessed  them  could  deny — namely,  that  all  were 
owing  to  the  want  of  foresight,  and  want  of  ability  in  the 
King's  Ministers,  whom  he  should  move  to  have  changed. 
There  seemed  to  be  a  little  precipitation  in  those  motions, 
though  it  is  rarely  wise  not  to  pursue  a  victory ;  yet,  as 
Lord  North  was  in  three  days  to  open  his  taxes,  it  was 
most  probable  that  they  would  excite  more  enemies  to 
him,  and  therefore,  as  he  had  often  recovered  from  many 
slippery  situations,  it  might  have  been  to  secure  all  ad- 
vantages against  him.  This  reasoning  appeared  to  be  just, 
for  Lord  John's  motions  were  rejected  by  a  majority  of  ten. 
Lord  Maitland  reproached  Ministers  with  having  often  de- 
fied and  called  for  charges,  and  now  endeavouring  to  avoid 
them  by  the  most  pitiful  shifts.  Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  who 
had  long  borne  enmity  to  Rigby  for  a  former  offence, 
dragged  him  into  the  debate,  and  complained  of  the  vast 
sum  of  money  in  the  Paymaster's  hands,  and  said,  if  in- 
terest was  made  of  that  money,  it  ought  to  belong  to  the 
public,  and  declared  that  if  the  Crown  lawyers  did  not 
take  up  the  matter,  he  would.  Rigby  defended  himself, 
and  at  the  same  time  not  only  retorted  severely  on  Sir 
Fletcher,  whose  character  furnished  ample  matter,  but  a 
little  indiscreetly  on  Fox,  with  the  highest  encomiums  on 
his  friend  the  Lord  Advocate,  whose  speech  of  that  day 
he  pronounced  the  finest  he  had  ever  heard ;  a  proof  of 
which,  he  said,  was,  that  it  was  the  speech  that  had  the 
most  galled  the  Opposition.  Sheridan  replied  wittily,  that 
if  those  speeches  were  the  best  which  gave  most  offence, 
Rigby  himself  was  the  Demosthenes  of  the  House — it  was 
very  true ;  nobody  was  so  apt  to  provoke  by  indiscreet 
insolence.  But  the  most  memorable  incident  of  the  day 
was  a  far  greater  indiscretion  of  one  who  soon  afterwards 

VOL.    II.  2    L 


514  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAU. 

became  a  capital  personage  :  this  was  young  William  Pitt, 
second  son  of  the  renowned  Lord  Chatham,  who  had 
already  much  distinguished  himself  by  his  premature  elo- 
quence. The  debate  had  turned  much  on  a  new  arrangement 
of  Ministers.  Pitt  said  he  knew  not  who  they  would  be,  but 
he  felt  himself  obliged  to  declare  (even  that  was  not  very 
modest)  that  he  himself  could  not  expect  to  take  any  share 
in  a  new  Administration;  and  were  his  doing  so  more 
within  his  reach,  he  never  would  accept  a  subordinate 
situation.  So  arrogant  a  declaration  from  a  boy  who  had 
gained  no  experience  from,  nor  ever  enjoyed  even  the 
lowest  post  in  any  office,  and  who  for  half  a  dozen  orations, 
extraordinary  indeed,  but  no  evidence  of  capacity  for  busi- 
ness, presumed  himself  fit  for  command,  proved  that  he 
was  a  boy,  and  a  very  ambitious  and  a  very  vain  one.  The 
moment  he  sat  down  he  was  aware  of  his  folly,  and  said 
he  could  bite  his  tongue  out  for  what  it  had  uttered ;  but 
though  he  lamented  his  imprudence,  it  was  of  his  frankness 
he  repented.  In  very  few  months  he  showed  that  he  had 
neither  corrected  his  vanity  or  ambition. 

Lord  North's  recovery  of  majority  was  collaterally 
propped  on  the  same  day  by  a  report  that  Admiral  Hood 
had  attacked  and  defeated  the  French  fleet  off  St.  Chris- 
topher's, and  obliged  the  6000  men  they  had  landed  on 
the  island  to  surrender.  But  whether  the  Administra- 
tion was  really  too  much  shaken,  or  whether  Lord  North's 
firmness  deserted  him ;  whether  he  apprehended  that  to 
struggle  would  but  render  his  fall  more  severe ;  whether 
the  resolution  taken  by  the  Commons  of  abandoning  the 
American  war,  made  him  feel  the  disagreeableness  of 
his  situation  in  being  obliged  to  negotiate  peace,  which  he 
probably  knew  the  Americans  would  not  trust  him  to 
make ;  or  whether  the  temper  of  the  times,  which,  being 


1782.         INTENDED  RESIGNATION  OP  LORD  NORTH.  515 

turned  to  reformation,  cut  off  all  his  hopes  of  the  Auditor's 
place  being  suffered  to  exist  beyond  the  life  of  the  present 
incumbent,  it  is  certain  that,  having,  on  the 

llth,  proposed  his  taxes,  which  were  deemed  inefficient, 
and  some  of  which  were  so  unpalatable  that  they  were 
soon  afterwards  repealed,  he  intended  it  for  the  last  act 
of  his  administration,  and  had  the  day  before,  the 

IQth,  declared  to  the  King  that  he  was  determined  to 
resign  his  post.  The  Lord  Advocate,  who  had  opened  the 
breach,  which  he  had  intended  should  soon  be  closed  by 
his  own  stopping  all  the  gap  he  had  projected,  in  the  dis- 
mission of  Lord  George  Germaine,  perceiving  now  that 
much  more  of  the  fabric  would  tumble  than  he  had  moved, 
had,  since  the  defeat  of  the  2 7th,  talked  much  of  a  coalition 
of  parties,  and  even  proposed  to  search  for  some  unexcep- 
tionable man  under  whom  all  parties  might  unite.  But  he 
was  disregarded  as  he  deserved ;  nor  was  long  in  find- 
ing his  account  in  the  mischief  he  had  made.  He  did 
find  it,  just  long  enough  to  give  him  occasion  to  display 
farther  his  profligate  versatility. 

It  was  another  hand  to  whom  the  King  entrusted 
the  office  of  making  a  new  arrangement:  to  a  man  of 
abilities  equal  to  Dundas,  to  a  man  no  better  a  politician, 
not  so  rapacious  of  gain,  though,  as  it  afterwards1  ap- 
peared, not  so  disinterested  as  he  pretended,  and  whose 
surly  inoroseness  and  disgusting  manner  were  not  adapted 
to  conciliation,  and  to  the  suppleness  and  art  requisite  to 
negotiation.  It  was  the  Chancellor  Thurlow  whom  the 
King  commissioned  to  sound  Lord  Rockingham  with 
overtures  of  appointing  him  First  Minister.  Before  I 
mention  that  treaty  I  will  premise  that  I  imagine  the 

1  In  July,  1783. 


516 


LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HOE  ACE  WALPOLE. 


MAR. 


Chancellor,  from  that  and  other  occasional  confidences,  en- 
tertained some  views  occasionally  of  becoming  First  Minister 
himself.  It  is  sure,  at  least,  that  he  acted  cordially  with  no 
other  Premier ;  but  his  indolence,  his  want  of  policy,  and 
brutality  of  temper,  might  occasion  his  inharmonious  be- 
haviour, as  the  last2  had  evidently  more  part  in  his  fall  in 
the  succeeding  year  than  intrigue  and  ambition. 

When  the  Chancellor  opened  his  business  to  Lord 
Buckingham,  the  latter  asked  if  he  came  by  authority. 
"No,"  said  Thurlow;  "but  your  Lordship  may  trust  to 
me."  The  Marquis  replied  he  could  not  listen  to  him 
unless  he  came  by  authority.  The  Chancellor  said  he 
would  come  with  it  the  next  day. 

In  the  mean  time  an  incident  happened  that  was  preg- 
nant with  deep  mischief,  and  which,  in  the  course  of  it, 
brought  to  light  the  secret  influence  of  Jenkinson,  which 
had  long  been  suspected  by  a  few,  and  which  his  own  in- 
discreet vanity  made  very  evident  the  next  year.  A  Mu- 
tiny Bill  for  the  Navy  had  arrived  at  the  last  stage  un- 
noticed, though  Jenkinson  had  slipped  into  it  the  word 
Ireland,  to  extend  it  to  that  country  too.  Had  the  bill 
passed,  Ireland  would  have  been  in  a  flame.  The  Court 
had  had  secret  intelligence  that  the  volunteers  were  already 
negotiating  with  France.  To  America  they  were  so 
propense  that  they  had  made  illuminations  on  the  success 
of  General  Conway's  motion  to  address  the  King  for  peace. 
Lord  Beauchamp,  observing  the  insertion  of  Ireland,  repre- 
sented the  danger  to  his  father  and  uncle,  both  of  whom 
remonstrated  to  Lord  Hillsborough.  The  latter  said  be 
was  sorry,  but  all  the  Cabinet  had  agreed  to  the  insertion. 


2  It  provoked  Mr.  Fox  to  insist  on 
his  dismission  in  1783,  as  a  subsequent 
attack  on  Fox  was  the  cause  of  the 


latter  defeating  Lord  Thurlow's  attempt 
to  get  a  Teller's  place  on  the  old  footing. 


1782.  MUTINY  BILL  FOR  THE  NAVY.  517 

Lord  Beauchamp  applied  to  Jenkinson,  who  flew  into  a 
passion,  and  said,  all  was  lost  if  everything  was  yielded. 
This  showed  not  only  what  a  prerogative  spirit  predomi- 
nated   in   the    Court,    but   how   absurdly.     Was   that  a 
moment  for  hazarding  dangerous  innovations,   when  the 
Crown  could  so  ill  maintain  what  it  yet  possessed?     Few 
Kings  and  their  tools  have  discovered  tliat  it  belongs  only  to 
a  superior  genius  to  stretch  power  to  despotism — nor  will 
discover  it  till  they  discover  too  that  themselves  Jiave  no 
genius.     Charles  I.,  James  II.,  and  George  III.  will  be 
for  ever  memorable  for  blundering  away  their  power  in  v 
the  pursuit  of  enlarging  it.     The  two  first  met  with  the 
common    fate  of  such  attempts  conducted  without  skill. 
The  case  of  the  latter  is  more  singular,  and  though  less 
fatal  to  his  person  and  interest,  far  more  detrimental  to 
his  kingdom.      He   has   lost  more  dominions  than   ever 
monarch    lost  who  did  not  lose  his   crown.     But  when 
Charles  lost  his  head  and  James  his  kingdom,  the  nation 
lost  nothing  but  two  tyrants ;  the  extent  of  our  dominions 
remained  the  same,  and  the  constitution  was  much  amended 
in  both  instances,  as  it  ought  to  be  when  kings  are  not 
content  with  so  many  advantages  above  the  rest  of  man- 
kind, till  they  contend  for  more  than  their  subjects  have 
already  allowed.     The  composition  which  the  Germanic 
body  makes  with  every  new  Emperor  ought  to  be  observed 
on  all  accessions  of  Princes.     As  almost  all  Kings  inno- 
vate, or  flattery  offers  or  winks  at  their  encroachments, 
till,  too  bold  or  palpable,  a  concordate  ought  to  be  made 
with  every  new  sovereign,  by  which  he  should  relinquish 
some  branches  of  prerogative.     But  as  new  Princes  are 
commonly  welcome  from  what  the  people  have  suffered 
under  their  predecessors,  that  is  not  the  moment  that  will 
often  be  seized;  it  is  the  more  requisite,  therefore,  that 


518  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

when  they  have  encroached  and  miscarried,  the  injured 
country  should  take  measures  against  future  attempts  by 
curtailing  their  power. 

Lord  Hertford,  Lord  Beauchamp,  and  General  Conway 
having  so  ill  success  with  the  fabricator  of  the  mischievous 
plan,  addressed  themselves  to  Lord  North,  and  prevailing 
on  him,  who,  though  rarely  the  inventor  of  noxious  mea- 
sures generally,  consented  to  be  the  instrument,  the  word 
Ireland  was  omitted  in  the  bill. 

13M.  It  was  publicly  given  out  that  Lord  North  had 
resigned,  or  intended  it ;  yet  the  next  day  he  determined  to 
encounter  a  repetition  of  Lord  John  Cavendish's  last 
motions,  which  he  knew  were  to  be  made  on  the  15th. 
Such  a  resolution  seemed  most  injudicious,  as  it  was  rea- 
sonable to  expect  that  a  falling  Minister*  would  find  his 
supporters  crumble  away  the  more  occasion  he  should  have 
for  them. 

On  the  15th,  accordingly,  the  same  attack  was  renewed, 
and  by  a  hand  that  gave  it  more  weight,  being  that  of  Sir 
John  Routh  (?),  till  this  time  much  devoted  to  Lord  North, 
and  a  Tory  by  principle  as  he  avowed  himself,  and  who 
said  he  had  loved  the  amiableness  of  Lord  North's  private 
character.  He  then  renewed  Lord  John's  four  questions, 
prefacing  them  by  a  declaration  that  the  facts  contained  in 
those  motions  were  the  reasons  why  he  could  no  longer 
place  any  confidence  in  the  King's  Ministers.  Yet  not  this 
defection  of  a  creditable  friend,  nor  the  probability  of  a 
change,  nor  the  solicitation  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who 
made  interest  against  Lord  North,  though  he  influenced  but 
one  vote,  and  a  very  despicable  one — that  is,  Lord  Mel- 
bourne's, the  son  of  Sir  Matthew  Lamb,  a  low  lawyer  who 
had  raised  an  immense  fortune  out  of  various  great  estates 
to  which  he  had  been  steward  (of  the  Irish  peer,  his  son, 


1782. 


MAJORITY  FOR  LORD  NORTH. 


519 


history  will  probably  know  more — at  least,  of  his  wife3), 
were  as  yet  efficacious  to  overturn  the  Minister.  The 
motions  after  a  long  debate  were  rejected,  and  Lord  North 
had  a  majority  of  nine  for  him.  Whether  the  majority 
had  any  compunction  of  shame,  and  would  not  vote  for 
questions  which  they  had  voted  against  but  seven  days 
before,  condemning  the  lavish  expenditure  of  money  and 
blood,  for  which  expenditure  they  had  voted  for  seven 
years  together ;  or  whether  the  extreme  repugnance  of 
his  Majesty  to  submit  to  the  Opposition  had  made  his 
creatures  exert  themselves  to  prevent  the  humiliation,  I 
know  not — I  should  rather  think  the  latter;  certain  it 
is  that  nothing  could  exceed  the  aversion  of  the  King — 
not  for  parting  with  his  Minister,  but  for  accepting 
one  by  force.  All  his  arts,  little  ones  indeed,  were  em- 
ployed to  avoid  that  humiliation ;  and  though  he  succeeded 
in  the  only  artifice  in  which  he  had  ever  succeeded,  sowing 
division,  yet  he  not  only  avoided  no  mortification,  but  laid 
a  foundation  for  receiving  much  greater,  as  he  felt  in  a 
twelvemonth  after. 

1 8th.  The  Chancellor  went  again  to  Lord  Eockingham, 
on  how  silly  a  message  appeared  by  its  no  effect,  though  a 
man  of  so  great  talents  was  the  messenger,  and  a  man  of 
so  slender  parts  the  receiver.  The  Chancellor's  mission 
was  to  persuade  the  Marquis  to  accept  the  administration, 
and  to  settle  the  terras  afterwards.  The  Marquis  gave  a 
direct  negative. 

In  one  of  those  conversations  Lord  Buckingham  men- 
tioned the  measures  he  should  expect  to  have  adopted,  if 


s  The  wife  of  Peniston  Lamb,  first 
Viscount  Melbourne,  was  Elizabeth, 
only  daughter  of  Sir  Ralph  Milbanke. 
She  died  in  1811  ;  hor  husband  (the 


father  of  the  future  Prime  Minister, 
then  two  years  old;  survived  her  seven- 
teen years. — D. 


520  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

he  came  into  place — as  peace  with  America,  general  peace, 
disqualifying  of  contractors  from  sitting  in  Parliament,  and 
revenue  officers  from  voting  at  elections,  and  plans  of  eco- 
nomy :  but  the  Chancellor  avoided  the  discussion,  saying 
it  would  be,  more  proper  after  the  new  Administration 
should  be  settled  than  before;  and  that  for  his  part  the 
object  of  his  mission  was  to  enable  the  King  to  quiet 
internal  commotions — though  at  that  time  none  subsisted 
but  the  general  distaste  to  the  war. 

Had  the  Marquis  been  so  very  weak  as  to  yield,  perhaps 
his  Majesty  might  have  comforted  himself  with  duping, 
exposing,  and  ruining  him  with  his  party,  and  in  the  eyes 
of  the  public,  and  not  continued  to  meditate  a  project  that 
spoke  nothing  but  unconquerable  obstinacy  and  childish 
desperation.  He  not  only  talked  of  retiring  to  Hanover, 
but  it  is  most  certain  that  for  a  fortnight  together  the  Royal 
yacht  was  expeditiously  preparing  for  transporting  him — 
what  farther  steps  he  meant  to  take  I  do  not  pretend  to 
know,  nor  whether  he  had  digested  any  plan ;  whether 
his  secession  was  to  be  permanent  or  temporary,  whether 
he  meant  to  leave  the  Queen  Regent,  or  to  carry  her  and 
his  younger  children  with  him — such  moody  peevishness 
probably  had  not  looked  for  nor  fixed  on  any  system,  when 
it  was  not  possible  that  any  one  should  satisfy  him.  The 
thought,  however,  was  not  novel ;  I  have  heard  from  the 
best  authority  that  in  the  heat  of  Wilkes's  war  on  him,  he 
had  meditated  a  parallel  retreat. 

Another  art,  founded  in  a  little  wisdom,  was  employed 
at  this  time.  This  was  to  patch  up  a  peace  with  America, 
without  the  intervention  of  the  future  Ministers.  One 
Digges  was  despatched  to  the  Hague  to  negotiate  with  the 
American  agent  there.  That  the  Americans  would  treat 
with  the  Ministers  who  had  made  the  war,  and  conducted 


1782.  EMBASSY  OF  DIGGES.  521 

it  with  so  much  bitterness  and  negotiated  with  them  with 
such  notorious  insincerity,  was  of  all  events  the  most  im- 
probable. If  so  foolish  a  measure  could  be  degraded,  it 
would  have  been  by  the  character  of  the  envoy.  Digges 
was  so  infamous  a  fellow,  that  Dr.  Franklin  said  of  him, 
that  if  Digges  was  not  damned  the  devil  would  be  useless. 
Of  Digges  and  his  embassy  no  more  was  heard. 

I  almost  blush  to  particularize  follies  that  would  scarce 
be  credited ;  but  the  public  confusion  that  grew  out  of 
such  measures,  the  collateral  events  that  are  of  public 
notoriety,  and  the  discussions  that  followed  in  debates  and 
in  print  will  corroborate  my  assertions. 

20th.  Though  no  steps  had  been  taken  that  promised  a 
new  settlement,  Lord  North  declared  the  Administration 
was  dissolved.  He  wrote  a  letter,  that  was  commended,  to 
the  King  to  take  his  leave.  When  he  went  to  take  it 
formally,  the  King  parted  with  him  rudely  without  thank- 
ing him,  adding,  "Remember,  my  Lord,  that  it  is  you 
who  desert  me,  not  I  you." 

The  King,  though  thus  reduced  to  the  necessity  of 
taking  new  Ministers,  was  not  at  all  disposed  to  add  grace 
to  it,  nor  to  smooth  his  condition  by  persuading  them,  who- 
ever they  should  be,  that  they  were  not  utterly  unwelcome 
to  him.  On  the  contrary,  though  it  was  evident  that  Lord 
Rockingham  was  the  sole  person  who,  by  his  extensive 
connections  and  the  fairness  of  his  character,  could  form 
an  Administration  of  any  consistency,  that  very  reason 
made  the  King  seem  determined  not  to  let  the  choice  fall 
on  him.  He  would  not  see  the  Marquis,  but  on  the  21st 
sent  for  Lord  Shelburne  and  offered  to  place  him  at  the 
head  of  the  Treasury,  and,  on  Shelburne's  not  venturing  to 
accept,  he  made  the  same  offer  to  Lord  Gower,  with  the 
same  su<  < •>  B, 


522  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

Lord  Shelburne,  ambitious  and  impatient  as  he  was  to 
attain  that  eminence,  stood  on  too  narrow  a  bottom  to  ven- 
ture to  close  with  his  wishes.  Followers  of  property  he  had 
none,  or  those  so  inconsiderable  that  they  could  give  him 
no  weight.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  was  the  only  peer  of 
consequence  with  whom  he  was  connected — yet  a  man 
who  had  been  Prime  Minister  was  not  likely  to  prove  a 
zealous  second ;  nor  was  Grafton's  temper  pliable  or  to  be 
relied  on.  Lord  Camden's  great  eloquence,  character, 
and  integrity  made  him  by  far  the  most  considerable  of 
Lord  Shelburne's  friends.  Mr.  Dunning  was  a  most  able 
lawyer,  and  Colonel  Barre  as  able  a  tool.  But  all  these 
could  not  form  an  Administration,  nor  be  called  a  party. 

I  should  have  added  that  Shelburne  had  made  most  con- 
siderable enemies,  which  Lord  Buckingham  had  not.  He 
had  never  omitted  an  occasion  of  insulting  Lord  Mansfield, 
who  by  marriage  had  always  kept  on  the  fairest  terms  with 
Lord  Bockingham ;  and  to  Lord  North,  Shelburne's  con- 
tempt had  been  so  marked  that  it  exasperated  him  more 
than  the  invectives  of  Charles  Fox. 

Lord  Gower,  not  without  a  wish  of  being  Premier,  was 
too  indolent  and  too  timid  to  accept  the  post ;  and  though 
he  was  in  a  manner,  from  the  nonage  of  the  Duke  of  Bed- 
ford, the  head  of  that  large  connection,  it  had  been  so  much 
weakened  and  split  since  the  death  of  the  late  Duke,  that 
Lord  Gower  was  far  from  sure  of  commanding  it. 

When  Lord  North  was  removed,  who  alone  could,  from 
the  pleasantry  of  his  humour,  the  attachment  of  the  Tories, 
and  the  fairness  of  his  private  character  have  kept  the 
Administration  so  long  together,  Lord  Bockingham  was 
the  next  who  could  bring  the  largest  accession  of  landed 
property,  nobility,  and  popularity  of  character  to  the  sup- 
port of  Government.  Indeed,  in  point  of  character  there 


1782.       DIFFICULTY  OF  FORMING  A  NEW  MINISTRY.  523 

were  very  few  politicians  in  England  who  possessed  any 
character  of  integrity  and  disinterestedness  at  all  but  the 
chiefs  of  that  connection,  as  the  Cavendishes,  Sir  George 
Saville,  Frederick  Montagu,  and  others.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond,  though  so  eminently  virtuous,  was  in  truth  not 
popular ;  and  General  Conway,  immaculate  as  the  whitest 
of  them,  would  never  enlist  in  any  faction,  nor  allow  any 
to  call  him  theirs. 

This  summary  is  so  true  that  Lord  Shelburne  himself 
was  aware  of  it,  and  reporting  the  King's  offer  to  him  to 
Lord  Rockingham,  said,  "  My  Lord,  you  can  stand  without 
me;  but  I  could  not  without  you."  This  was  perhaps  the 
justest  reflection  Shelburne  made  in  his  life — and  had  he 
not  forgotten  it  with  too  childish  alacrity  from  his  pro- 
pensity to  duplicity,  he  might  have  mollified  the  indis- 
position of  Lord  Rockingham's  friends  towards  him,  and 
by  one  moment  of  steadiness  and  sincerity  ransomed  his 
notorious  perfidy,  and  succeeded  to  Lord  Rockingham's 
power,  had  h°!  not  undermined  it  prematurely  and  wan- 
tonly— I  mean  succeeded  with  stability.  By  forgetting 
his  own  reversion  he  converted  his  allies  into  bitter 
enemies. 

The  King,  defeated  as  he  was,  could  not  bear  to  submit, 
nor  did  the  rest  of  his  creatures  yield  with  the  facility  of 
Lord  North.  It  was  given  out,  to  encourage  steadiness  in 
others,  that  the  Duke  of  Montagu  had  offered  to  resign  his 
place  of  Master  of  the  Horse,4  if  it  would  accommodate 
his  Majesty  in  acquiring  a  friend.  It  was  thought  that 
the  King  saw  Lord  Bute  on  that  occasion :  for  others 
he  certainly  sent ;  and  Wedderburn  as  certainly  had  very 
private  interviews  with  the  Chancellor,  though  great 


4  Jonkiiisou  also  gave  out,  that  if  ho  was  any  obstacle,  he  was  willing  to  n  tin . 


624  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

hostilities  had  passed  between  the  latter  and  Wedderburu 
— when  they  could  meet,  it  was  evident  how  very  distasteful 
it  would  be  to  the  Court  to  admit  a  Whig  Adminis- 
tration. 

When  the  King  could  form  no  corps  strong  enough  to 
exclude  the  Opposition,  he  had  recourse  to  his  old  nostrum 
of  division.  He  again  sent  for  Lord  Shelbume,  and  gained 
him.  Shelburne  sent  word  to  Lord  Rockingham  that  he 
had  been  with  the  King,  but  would  not  disclose  what  had 
passed,  as  it  would  only  exasperate  Lord  Rockingham 
more — as  if  that  reticence  softened  it. 

Shelburne,  in  the  mean  time,  made  a  most  bitter  invective 
in  the  House  of  Lords  against  the  Lords  North  and  Stor- 
mont — an  absurd  impolicy  to  exasperate  more  a  part  of  the 
Court  into  which  he  was  going  to  fling  himself,  and  at  the 
very  moment  that  he  was  also  on  the  point  of  betraying 
and  provoking  the  greater  part  of  his  own  allies.  Is  it 
credible  that  a  man,  who  had  studied  nothing  but  artifice 
all  his  life,  should  have  learnt  his  lesson  so  very  ill  ? 

In  short,  not  to  dwell  on  days  and  hours,  the  King  con- 
sented to  take  Lord  Rockingham,  and  his  Lordship's 
arrangement ;  but — is  that  credible  ? — would  not  see  him. 
All  was  transacted  by  the  medium  of  Lord  Shelburne. 
He  carried  the  messages  backwards  and  forwards.  Lord 
Rockingham  was  indignant,  but  his  friends  persuaded  him 
to  bear  it,  and  when  all  the  changes  were  settled,  27th, 
Lord  Rockingham  was  admitted  to  an  audience  of  the 
King,  and  accepted  the  Administration. 

The  new  Cabinet  consisted  of  the  Marquis,  as  First 
Lord  of  the  Treasury ;  Lord  John  Cavendish,  Chancellor 
of  the  Exchequer  (most  reluctantly,  as  he  professed)  ;  Lord 
Shelburne  and  Charles  Fox,  Secretaries  of  State  ;  Lord 
Camden,  President  of  the  Council ;  the  Duke  of  Grafton, 


1782.  THE  NEW  CABINET.  525 

Privy  Seal;  General  Conway,  Commander-in-Chief ;  Ad- 
miral Keppel,  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty ;  the  Duke  of 
Richmond,  Master  of  the  Ordnance ;  and  Dunning,  who 
was  made  a  Peer,  Chancellor  of  the  Duchy. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond  refused  to  accept,  unless  the 
King  would  say  he  had  no  objection  to  him,  to  which  the 
King  had  assented,  though  the  Duke  and  Charles  Fox 
were  the  two  he  had  most  wished  to  exclude.  As  the 
Duke's  friend,  I  earnestly  wished  him  to  support  and  act 
vigorously  with  the  new  Administration,  but  to  take  nothing. 
It  would  have  placed  him  in  a  high  light,  and  silenced  much 
clamour!  Nor  do  I  think  that  I  could  have  condescended 
to  accept  a  post  under  a  Prince  whom  I  had  taxed  with 
breaking  his  word  with  me.  I  am  persuaded  he  did  not 
accept  the  Ordnance  for  the  sake  of  the  emoluments,  but 
from  his  activity  and  love  of  business,  and  from  thinking 
he  could  correct  gross  abuses  in  the  office,  which  he  soon 
did  with  indefatigable  industry.  I  was  as  little  pleased 
with  his  taking  the  Garter.  It  is  so  easy  for  a  Duke  of 
Richmond  to  have  it,  that  I  thought  he  would  be  more 
distinguished  by  neglecting  it. 

With  this  entirely  new  Cabinet  was  joined  the  old 
Chancellor,  Thurlow,  whose  abilities  the  new  Ministers 
thought  too  considerable  to  drive  into  Opposition. 

The  new  Treasury  was  composed  of  the  Marquis,  Lord 
John  Cavendish,  Lord  Althorp,  Frederick  Montagu,  and 
James  Grenville,  junior.  The  Board  of  Admiralty  was 
entirely  new ;  Edmund  Burke  was  made  Paymaster,  his 
brother  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  his  son  deputy  to  him- 
self, and  his  cousin,  William,  sent  to  India  in  a  most 
lucrative  post. 

But  if  Lord  Shelburne  had  waived  the  first  post,  he  proved 
that  he  at  least  shared  the  power.  Besides  obtaining  two 


526      LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.      MAR. 

great  posts  for  Lord  Camden  and  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  he 
got  baronies  for  Dunning  and  Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  who 
were  created  Barons  of  Ashburton  and  Grantley,  with  the 
Duchy  of  Lancaster,  and  a  pension  of  4000/.  a  year  for 
life  for  the  first.  Colonel  Barre  was  made  Treasurer  of 
the  Navy,  a  post  destined  to  the  Lord  Advocate  Dundas; 
nor  was  that  all  he  did  for  Colonel  Barre,  as  will  soon 
appear.  Nor  was  his  share  of  the  Cabinet  inconsiderable 
by  his  own  vote,  and  those  of  Lord  Camden,  the  Duke  of 
Grafton,  and  Lord  Ashburton ;  not  to  mention  that  having 
more  of  the  King's  favour  than  Lord  Rockingham,  the 
Chancellor  it  was  likely  would  incline  the  same  way. 

Nor  was  power  Shelburne's  sole  aim.  Ostensible  feathers 
must  crown  his  vanity.  Three  Garters  had  long  been  vacant, 
and  the  King  had  solemnly  promised  them  to  Lord  Dart- 
mouth under  his  hand ;  to  Lord  Ashburnha  m,  if  not  in 
the  same  manner,  as  positively ;  and,  it  was  said,  to  Lord 
Sandwich — but  as  his  Majesty  loved  better  to  keep  several 
men  in  hopes  than  oblige  even  those  he  preferred,  he  had 
kept  back  those  ribands  —  and  even  when  he  saw  his 
power  totter,  had  not  seized  the  opportunity  of  disposing 
of  them,  but  kept  them  to  be  torn  from  him  by  those  he 
most  disliked.  One,  Shelburne  obtained,  and  one  the 
Duke  of  Richmond;  the  third  was  to  be  given  to  the 
Duke  of  Devonshire,  who,  soon  after  he  came  of  age,  being 
told  by  his  flatterers  that  he  might  certainly  have  the 
Garter  if  he  would  ask  for  it,  replied  sensibly,  "  I  would  no 
more  ask  the  King  for  a  blue  riband,  without  having  done 
something  to  deserve  it,  than  I  would  ask  him  for  a  blue 
great  coat."  I  do  not  see  that  its  being  asked  for  him  was 
any  meritorious  act  in  him.  As  the  Duke  was  supposed 
indifferent,  the  third  Garter  was  then  reserved  for  the  Duke 
of  Portland ;  but  Devonshire,  who  affected  a  stoic  insensi- 


1782.  DEVONSHIRE'S  DESIRE  FOR  A  GARTER.  527 

bility  to  everything,  showed  his  philosophy  did  not  now 
reach  even  to  the  contempt  of  a  piece  of  riband.  He, 
therefore,  was  preferred.  Lord  Dartmouth,  whose  piety 
was  more  solid  than  Devonshire's  philosophy,  but  liked 
trappings  as  well,  had  the  discretion,  however,  not  to  com- 
plain— but  the  other  candidate,  who  had  more  reason  to 
be  silent,  was  far  less  temperate.  Lord  Ashburnham,  stung 
at  the  disappointment,  threw  up  his  post  of  Groom  of  the 
Stole,  though  the  King  had  in  the  midst  of  his  distress 
distinguished  him  by  a  singular  preference,  on  purpose,  it 
was  supposed,  to  soften  the  breach  of  his  promise.  The 
new  Ministers  had  offered  his  Majesty  to  save  any  two  of 
his  chief  officers  he  would  name.  He  had  not  only  accepted 
so  humiliating  a  boon,  but  had  marked  two  of  the  most 
insignificant  of  his  servants  as  the  victims  to  be  spared,  the 
Duke  of  Montagu  and  Lord  Ashburnham.  For  the  first, 
there  was  a  seeming  pretence  of  decency  as  Governor  of 
his  son ;  the  real  reason  was  that  he  was  not  only  the  spy 
on  that  son,  but  the  only  man  alive  in  whom  the  King  had 
any  confidence,  or  with  whom  he  talked  freely  about  his 
son,  though  he  was  totally  unfit  to  be  either  Governor  to 
the  sou  or  Counsellor  to  the  father.  To  recommend  Lord 
Ashburnham  there  was  no  plea  at  all.  He  was  a  most 
decent,  reserved,  and  servile  Courtier — but  so  were  fifty 
others.  He  did  not  want  sense,  but  it  all  centered  in  self- 
interest.  He  had  by  the  same  tacit  suppleness  made  him- 
self favourite  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  and  had  abandoned 
him  on  his  fall.  Nor  was  he  remarkable  for  anything  but 
those  noiseless  stains  that  in  spite  of  their  discretion  and 
address  may  be  found  in  the  secret  history  of  most 
Courtiers,  were  it  worth  while  to  scrutinize  them.  But 
there  was  another  man  who  had  much  more  claim  on  the 
King's  protection,  to  whom  he  did  not  extend  it.  This 


528  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

was  Lord  Hertford — by  no  means  a  worse  Courtier  than 
Lord  Ashburnham,  and  who,  as  being  of  more  weight, 
thought  himself  far  better  entitled  to  be  saved.  As 
Lord  Beauchamp  was  displaced  as  well  as  his  father, 
Lord  Hertford,  and  as  their  complaints  were  not  dis- 
guised, the  King's  conduct  on  that  occasion,  though  he 
had  endeavoured  to  palliate  it  on  Lord  Ashburnham's 
case  more  than  he  had  ever  condescended  to  do  before 
when  compelled  to  sacrifice  his  friends,  did  him  more 
real  hurt  than  almost  any  act  of  his  reign ;  I  mean  that 
it  thence  became  the  language  that  there  was  no  depending 
on  him — but  what  he  lost,  the  country  gained.  He  had 
endeavoured  to  attach  all  men  separately  to  himself, 
and  they  had  been  base  enough  to  embrace,  and  even 
excuse  every  hostility  towards  their  country,  on  the  plea  of 
personal  friendship  for  the  King  —  when  they  perceived 
that  that  Royal  amity  was  no  insurance  of  their  place,  they 
were  as  ready  to  disclaim  against  his  Majesty's  dereliction 
of  his  friends,  and  consequently  returned  to  the  old  style  of 
connecting  themselves  with  Ministers,  which  was  not  more 
commendable,  but  less  dangerous,  as  Ministers  can  be 
changed  more  easily  than  the  Sovereign,  and  are  not 
guarded  by  so  many  sacred  entrenchments. 

Two  other  peerages  were  bestowed,  for  one  of  which 
there  was  as  little  reason  as  the  other  was  a  just  recom- 
pence  for  the  persecutions  he  had  suffered.  Admiral 
Keppel  was  made  an  English  Viscount  ;  and  so  Lord 
Howe,  who  before  was  an  Irish  one.  His  brother,  Sir 
William,  was  also  made  a  Lieutenant-General  of  the 
Ordnance.  Why  these  two  brothers,  who  had  accepted 
the  charge  of  the  American  war  against  their  principles, 
and  against  all  their  inclinations  but  the  one  of  interest, 


1782.  THE  NEW  MINISTRY.  529 

who  had  conducted  it,  treacherously  as  many  thought, 
impotently  as  everybody  knew,  who  had  returned  hostile 
to  Ministers,  yet,  so  far  from  joining  the  Opposition,  had 
distressed  it  by  counteracting  it  ;  why  honours  and  profit 
were  showered  on  two  such  men,  who  with  the  most  con- 
stitutional intrepidity  had  no  other  merit  of  head  or  heart, 
is  utterly  inconceivable.  No  party  owed  gratitude  to  them. 
Many  to  whom  distinctions  were  due  Lord  Rockingham 
had  not  power  of  serving.  Mr.  Burke's  reforming  bills, 
which  had  saved  but  a  trifle  to  the  public,  distressed  his 
party  by  cutting  off  many  small  places  ;  thus  the  new 
Administration  was  very  narrow,  though  in  general  more 
popular  than  could  be  expected,  considering  how  much  the 
nation  had  been  set  against  them  on  the  false  accusation  of 
their  supporting  Americans ;  though  the  truth  was  that  the 
Americans,  so  far  from  thinking  themselves  supported  by 
them,  looked  on  themselves  as  abandoned. 

Nor  did  the  nation  perceive  that  the  new  Ministers  had 
stipulated  for  many  constitutional  points,  much  less  were 
inclined  to  favour  the  pretensions  of  the  associated  counties. 
Lord  Rockingham  had  evidently  laboured  to  discredit 
them,  and  had  succeeded  to  a  considerable  degree. 

The  two  great  services  rendered  by  the  new  Ministers 
was  carrying  the  bill  for  disabling  contractors  to  sit  in 
Parliament,  and  the  still  more  essential  point  of  taking 
away  votes  from  excisemen  and  Custom-house  officers,  a 
very  material  wound  to  the  influence  of  the  Crown,  and 
then  setting  on  foot  negotiations  of  peace  with  both  America 
and  France — though  those  Ministers  affected  neither  of  the 
two  last.  Their  last  stipulation  with  the  Crown  was  that  the 
famous  vote  on  the  Middlesex  election  should  be  rescinded. 

But  there  was  a  great  act  of  justice  which  they  did  not 
attempt  to  perform  —  that  was  punishment  of  the  late 

VOL.   II.  2  M 


530  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

Ministers.  It  was  a  point  which  I  had  long  laboured  to 
inculcate  into  Lord  Camden  and  the  Duke  of  Eichmond. 
No  man  living  was  more  averse  to  capital  punishments 
than  I,  but  I  had  earnestly  pressed  the  Duke  to  proceed 
to  stigmatizing  censures  and  fines — the  latter  would  deter 
men  in  future  from  exerting  too  much  alacrity  in  enlarging 
the  prerogative,  and  the  former  would  make  it  much  more 
difficult  for  the  Crown  to  recall  its  disgraced  tools. 

The  Duke,  though  good-natured,  was  inclined  to  follow 
my  advice,  and  Charles  Fox,  though  as  void  of  rancour, 
was  eager  for  it ;  but  they  were  totally  checked  by  Lord 
Shelburne,  who  had  devoted  himself  to  the  King,  and  by 
the  Chancellor,  whom  they  had  pardoned  and  adopted,  and 
who  could  taste  punishment  of  Ministers  with  whom  he 
had  acted  in  every  measure. 

Lord  Camden,  devoted  to  Lord  Shelburne  then,  would 
not  differ  with  him,  nor  do  I  know  that  he  was  inclined  to 
follow  my  advice.  For  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  he  had 
cause  in  less  than  a  year  to  find  how  thoroughly  I  had 
been  in  the  right  in  counselling  a  measure  which  would 
have  prevented  a  restoration  of  some  of  the  most  obnoxious 
late  Ministers. 

As  I  continued  to  press  that  measure  on  him  when  he 
found  it  could  not  be  pursued,  I  think  he  was  not  pleased 
with  me. 

When  I  found  that  not  even  censure  was  to  be  passed 
on  the  late  Ministers,  I  urged  the  Duke  of  Richmond  at 
least  to  draw  up  a  state  and  representation  of  the  condition 
in  which  the  affairs  of  the  nation  stood  when  delivered  into 
their  hands,  in  order  thereafter  to  refer  to  that  statement, 
whatever  misfortunes  might  happen,  to  show  that  such 
misfortunes  were  the  natural  consequences  of  the  ruined 
position  of  our  affairs  by  the  faults  of  the  late  Ministers. 


1782.  CONWAY  COMMANDEIWN-CIIIEF.  fi.Tl 

Even  this  step,  so  requisite  to  their  own  defence,  was   not 
taken. 

I  had  much  better  fortune  in  obtaining  an  object  which 
I  had  still  more  at  heart,  though  it  was  expected  not  only 
by  no  policy  of  mine,  but  much  beyond  my  expectation. 
This  was  the  appointment  of  General  Conway  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  army.  He  had  never  paid  any  court  either 
to  Lord  Rockingham  or  Lord  Shelburne,  or  their  factions, 
and  had  on  the  contrary  always  declared  he  was  of  no 
party  ;  yet  one  of  Lord  Rockingham's  demands  on  which 
he  most  insisted  was  that  command  for  Conway,  in  the 
room  of  the  dolt  Lord  Amherst.  The  steady  devotion  of 
the  latter  to  the  King  and  his  total  incapacity  for  so  great 
a  trust  were  glaring  reasons  for  his  removal ;  but  why 
Lord  Rockingham  pitched  on  General  Conway,  except 
from  the  general  voice  of  all  mankind  that  he  was  the  only 
fit  person,  was  not  so  clear.  The  reason  I  guess  was  that, 
Lord  Rockingham  having  first  neglected,  then  been  re- 
pulsed by,  and  then  having  insulted  and  persecuted  the 
Duke  and  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  was  afraid  that  the  King 
should  name  his  brother  commander  of  the  army,  and 
then  Lord  R.  knew  he  should  have  no  power  of  disposing 
of  regiments  and  commissions  ;  Conway  being  neither 
ambitious  nor  desirous  of  power,  Lord  Rockingham  flat- 
tered himself  he  should  do  what  he  would.  He  accord- 
ingly named  Conway,  and  it  was  granted  as  easily  as  his 
other  terms. 

This  was  the  centre  of  my  wishes.  I  had  long  dreaded 
lest  success  or  despair  should  infuse  resolution  enough  into 
the  King  to  endeavour  to  establish  absolute  power  by  the 
army.  Had  the  conquest  of  America  been  achieved,  I 
have  not  the  smallest  doubt  but  a.  triumphant  army,  re- 
turned from  subduing  the  King's  enemies,  and  stigmatized 

2  M  2 


532  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

by  the  Americans  as  Tories,  would  have  been  unbounded, 
being  ready  to  make  war  on  all  called  Whigs,  and  all  the 
King  should  call  his  enemies  :  when  that  dread  was  banished 
by  the  success  of  the  Americans,  and  by  little  or  no  army 
being  left  to  return  from  that  continent,  the  fear  succeeded 
that  either  the  county  associations  would  break  into  rebel- 
lion, which  Yorkshire  at  least  was  ready  to  do,  or  that 
they  would  provoke  the  King  to  resist  their  demands  by 
arms.  What  could  be  so  important  then  as  to  have  the 
bravest,  coolest,  most  constitutional  General  at  the  head  of 
the  army  ?  Conway  was  the  only  man  alive  who  would 
have  supported  the  King's  legal  rights,  would  have  con- 
curred in  no  unconstitutional  views,  knew  his  trade  far 
more  profoundly  than  any  man  in  the  army,  and  was 
equally  well  versed  in  the  laws  and  just  rights  of  the 
nation ;  had  intrepidity  enough  to  face  either  the  enemies 
of  the  Crown  or  of  the  country,  and  had  too  much  coolness 
to  be  heated  against  either  illegally.  By  commanding  the 
army  he  stood  as  an  isthmus  between  despotism  and 
faction. 

Yet  though  the  choice  of  Conway  satisfied  all  those 
views,  there  was  one  light  in  which  it  alarmed  me.  I  had 
lately  brought  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  and  Conway  to- 
gether, after  having,  for  the  sake  of  the  latter,  kept  them 
asunder.  I  suspected  that  the  Duke  silently  wished  to  be 
at  the  head  of  the  army.  It  was  a  post  proper  for  him, 
and  the  only  one  that  was  so ;  and  though  I  had  long 
known  the  King's  resolution  not  to  trust  the  army  to  any 
of  the  Royal  family,  yet,  exasperated  as  he  was  at  that 
moment  at  the  new  Ministers,  who  had  forced  themselves 
on  him,  and  torn  his  old  servants  from  him,  and  as  I  was 
sure  the  King  knew  that  the  Duke  was  angry  both  at 
Lord  Rockingham  and  Lord  Shelburne,  I  feared,  according 


1782.      DUKE  OF  CUMBERLAND  AND  LOUD  BATEMAN.        533 

to  an  old  maxim  of  mine,  that  men  are  always  most  angry 
at  those  with  whom  they  have  quarrelled  last,  and  that,  as 
nothing  unites  men  more  than  hatred  in  common  to  a  third, 
I  feared,  I  say,  that  the  King  might  prefer  his  brother  to 
Conway,  in  order  to  disappoint  Rockingham  :  if  he  should, 
and  the  Duke  should  accept  it,  I  was  far  from  flattering 
myself  that  a  prince  of  the  blood,  newly  reconciled  to  a 
King  his  brother,  would  be  equally  with  Conway  a  ram- 
part against  prerogative.  If  the  King  should  insist  on  his 
brother,  and  Lord  Rockingham  on  Conway,  and  the  latter 
should  carry  it,  I  should  have  been  distressed  as  I  had 
constantly  been ;  my  situation  at  Gloucester  House  would 
have  been  very  uncomfortable.  I  was  soon  delivered 
from  that  dilemma  by  the  following  piece  of  address. 

On  the  dissolution  of  the  Ministry  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond had  told  General  Conway  that  he  was  to  be  Com- 
mander-in-Chief.  He  had  replied  he  did  not  desire  it, 
and  thought  it  should  be  the  Duke  of  Gloucester,  whom 
he  wished  me  to  acquaint  with  his  answer ;  but  I  did  not 
think  it  proper  yet.  The  next  day  it  was  reported  that 
the  King  would  name  his  brother.  I  soon  after  heard  that 
the  Duke  of  Cumberland  had  gone  up  to  Lord  Bateman  in 
the  Drawing-room,  and  told  him,  insultingly,  that  he  was 
to  lose  his  place,  and  that  Lord  Bateman,  who  was  not 
famous  for  repartee,  had  replied,  "  Sir,  I  hear  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester  is  to  be  Commander-in-Chief " — an  answer  that 
struck  the  silly  Prince  dumb,  for  he  had  hated  his  brother 
Gloucester,  and  had  no  chance  of  being  anything  himself. 
I  hastened  to  Gloucester  House,  and  told  the  Duchess 
Lord  Bateman's  excellent  answer,  concluding  it  would 
draw  something  from  her  by  which  I  might  judge  whether 
the  Duke  had  any  hopes  of  the  command,  before  I  ac- 
quainted them  that  Lord  Rockingham  intended  it  for 


534  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

Conway.  What  I  had  foreseen  happened.  She  said  she 
was  glad  of  the  rebuff  given  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland, 
though  the  report  was  not  true,  for  that  the  Duke  of  Glou- 
cester, having  been  told  of  it,  had  said,  "  The  consent  of 
four  persons  is  wanting  to  that  arrangement — the  King's, 
my  own,  Lord  Buckingham's,  and  Lord  Shelburne's." 
On  this,  so  favourable  an  opening,  I  acquainted  her  with 
Conway 's  answer  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  with  which 
she  was  pleased,  and  said  she  would  relate  it  to  the  Duke. 
His  Royal  Highness  showed  no  disappointment  at  Conway 's 
preferment,  and  was  civil  to  him  on  it.  I  am  persuaded  he 
would  have  liked  it  himself,  as  was  natural ;  but  that  he 
would  not  have  accepted,  unless  the  King  would  have 
received  the  Duchess. 

There  was  one  of  the  former  Administration  who  might 
have  been  saved  if  he  pleased — Lord  Carlisle.  Charles 
Fox  and  he  had  been  intimate  from  school ;  and  in  the 
height  of  Fox's  extravagance  and  distress  from  gaming 
debts,  Lord  Carlisle  had  been  bound  for  him  in  so  large  a 
sum,  that,  with  his  own  dissipation,  his  affairs  were  much 
embarrassed  and  put  to  nurse.  Fox,  mindful  of  his  obliga- 
tions, had  obtained  to  have  Lord  Carlisle  left  Lord  Lieu- 
tenant of  Ireland ;  but  the  latter,  warm  and  haughty  as 
any  Howard  could  be,  and  prompted  by  his  self-sufficient 
secretary,  Eden,  who  had  devoted  himself  to  Lord  North, 
no  sooner  heard  of  the  revolution  than  he  sent  over  his 
resignation  and  demanded  to  be  recalled.  This  vacancy 
accommodated  Lord  Rockingham,  who  immediately  de- 
spatched the  Duke  of  Portland  to  take  the  government  of 
Ireland. 

The  Duke  of  Portland  pleased  in  Ireland,  and  Eden's 
industry  made  him  popular  ;  yet  neither  Lord  Charlemont, 
the  General  of  the  Volunteers,  nor  his  popular  orator 


1782.  GRATTAN— LORD  WEYMOUTH.  535 

Grattan,  would  treat  with  the  Duke  of  Portland.  It  was 
at  this  period  that  Grattan  made  his  famous  speech  for  the 
independence  of  Ireland,  for  which  their  Parliament,  in  the 
drunkenness  of  gratitude,  voted  him  50,000/.  He  de- 
served better  for  a  subsequent  action.  Marrying  a  young 
woman  with  whom  he  was  in  love,  he  settled  on  her  only  a 
jointure  out  of  his  own  small  original  fortune ;  his  parlia- 
mentary grant  he  entailed  on  his  heirs  male,  should  he 
have  any,  but  if  he  should  not  have,  said,  the  noble  boon 
should  return  to  the  public  who  had  bestowed  it.  I  have 
latterly  said  little  of  the  affairs  of  Ireland,  which,  having 
shaken  the  English  yoke,  is  become  in  a  manner  a  separate 
history,  and,  like  America,  will  probably  have  one  :  at  least 
I  have  not  been  conversant  enough  in  their  affairs  to  be 
able  to  give  anything  better  than  very  general  information  ; 
nor  even  of  our  own  transactions  do  I  mean  here  to  set 
down  more  than  hints  of  public  events,  and  some  particulars 
less  known  that  fell  within  my  knowledge. 

The  post  of  Groom  of  the  Stole,  which  Lord  Ashburnham 
had  quitted  as  angrily,  might  have  been  bestowed  properly 
on  another  of  the  late  Opposition,  but  it  was  strangely  con- 
ferred on  one  who  neither  deserved  it  from  them  nor  any 
man.  This  was  Lord  Wey mouth,  who  had  twice  in  the 
most  dastardly  manner  run  out  of  employment  on  various 
apprehensions,  yet  had  neither  joined  the  Opposition  nor 
given  much  support  to  the  late  Administration.  Lord 
Shelburne  now  recommended  him  for  Groom  of  the  Stole, 
as  not  at  all  disagreeable  to  the  King;  and  Weymouth 
having  married  the  Duke  of  Portland's  sister,  Lord  Rock- 
ingham  did  not  oppose  it.  Yet  the  late  Court  were  so 
secure  of  Shelburne's  disposition  to  them,  that  the  Lord 
Advocate  said  to  Lord  North,  "You  should  not  let  your 
friends  abuse  Shelburne,  for  he  is  ours ;"  but  Lord  North 


536  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  MAR. 

was  not  at  all  disposed  to  cement  that  union.  The  Lord 
Advocate,  equally  ready  for  any  treachery  or  any  mischief, 
and  who,  from  a  vapouring  disposition,  often  betrayed  his 
intentions,  said,  on  hearing  that  Burke  proposed  to  anni- 
hilate certain  Scotch  sinecures,  "  Let  him  take  care ; 
Scotland  is  ready  to  break  the  Union  !  " 

One  promising  young  man  in  the  Opposition  the  public 
expected  to  see  advanced,  William  Pitt,  but  he  refused  all 
preferment.  What  was  offered  to  him  I  do  not  know,  nor 
whether  any  post  was  specified ;  but  that  he  declined 
neither  from  modesty  nor  virtue  was  soon  made  evident. 

I  have  said  that  the  new  Ministers  either  would  not  or 
could  not  pass  so  much  as  a  censure  on  their  very  criminal 
predecessors.  They  were  more  passive  still,  for  they 
endured  rewards  to  be  heaped  on  two  of  the  most  guilty. 
Lord  North  retired  with  a  pension  of  4000£.  a-year ;  and 
Robinson,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  and  who,  from  Lord 
North's  indolence,  was  a  principal  agent  in  all  business, 
had  another  of  1000£.  Charles  Fox,  it  is  true,  inveighed 
bitterly  in  the  House  of  Commons  against  the  former,  and 
Sawbridge  moved  for  a  question  on  both.  Robinson 
pleaded  poverty,  and  affected  it  by  letting  his  house  and 
selling  his  coach-horses,  though,  till  questioned,  he  had 
displayed  great  opulence,  and  had  just  given  his  daughter, 
with  a  large  fortune,  to  Lord  Abergavenny's  eldest  son ; 
but  the  motion  was  defeated  by  the  previous  question. 

27th.  Admiral  Barrington,  a  brave  seaman,  who,  in 
spite  of  the  connexions  of  his  family  (his  eldest  brother, 
and  the  Bishop,  and  the  Judge  being  zealous  Courtiers), 
had  declined  of  late  any  command  under  Lord  Sandwich 
and  the  last  Ministers,  had  accepted  one  under  the  new, 
and,  being  employed  in  the  Channel,  now  defeated  a  large 
French  armament  that  had  sailed  from  Brest,  and  was 


1782.  MEETING  OF  PARLIAMENT.  537 

supposed  to  be  destined  for  Jamaica.  He  took  a  74-gun 
ship,  thirteen  transports,  and  dispersed  the  rest.  These 
were  the  first  fruits  of  a  new  Administration. 

The  Lord  Advocate  commenced  an  inquiry  and  prose- 
cution in  Parliament  against  Sir  Thomas  Rumbold,  one  of 
the  most  enriched  of  the  Indian  nabobs. 


APRIL. 


4th.  THERE  was  a  meeting  of  the  Associations  at  York. 
They  agreed  to  trust  the  new  Ministers  at  least  for  the 
present,  and  adjourned  for  a  year  to  give  them  a  fair  trial. 
A  principal  inducement  to  this  temper  was,  that  the  Duke 
of  Richmond,  who  had  given  in  to  the  wildest  visions  of 
the  right  of  every  man  to  vote  for  representatives,  had 
extorted  an  unwilling  engagement  from  his  fellows,  the 
other  Ministers,  that  a  Committee  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons should  be  appointed  to  examine,  and,  if  they  could, 
agree  on  any  system  (which  was  most  unlikely  in  such  a 
chaos  of  opinions  and  interests)  to  settle  a  new  and  juster 
mode  of  representation — an  engagement  diverted  by  the 
subsequent  schisms,  and  forgotten  in  the  flat  rejection  of 
the  demands  of  the  Associations. 

8th.  The  new  Ministers  being  re-chosen,  the  House  of 
Commons  met  again,  when,  instead  of  any  crimination 
produced  by  them  against  any  of  their  predecessors,  a 
heinous  attempt  was  made  by  one  of  the  most  active  of 
the  late  criminal  tools  to  embarrass  the  Ministers,  by  a  deed 
that,  though  aimed  at  them,  might  have  produced  the 


538  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  AI-IUL, 

most   mischievous   consequences    and    confusions    to    the 
nation. 

Eden,  Lord  Carlisle's  Secretary,  had  posted  over  with 
the  Earl's  resignation.  So  exasperated  was  the  wretch, 
that  not  only,  keeping  himself  private,  he  had  secret  inter- 
course with  and  incitement  from  Lord  Loughborough, 
but  he  positively  refused  to  communicate  a  syllable  of  the 
state  of  Ireland  to  Lord  Shelburne,  the  Secretary  of 
State.  On  the  contrary,  Colonel  Luttrell,  an  ominous 
name,  instigated  probably  by  Loughborough  and  Eden, 
rose  as  soon  as  the  House  met,  and  called  on  the  new 
Ministers  to  declare  what  measures  they  meant  to  pursue 
for  pacifying  the  disquiets  and  alarms  of  Ireland,  not 
yet  satisfied  that  what  had  been  done  for  her  was  either 
substantial  or  irrevocable.  On  this  hostile  ground  mounted 
Eden,  and,  in  a  passionate  [speech,  ill  coloured  over  with 
pretended  zeal,  called  for  a  repeal  of  the  Act  of  George  I., 
that  was  the  most  grievous  link  of  their  chain  of  subjection. 
Unfortunately  for  this  incendiary,  a  spear,  like  that  of 
Milton's  angel,  that,  touching  Satan,  made  him  start  up  in 
his  proper  shape,  was  in  the  hand  of  Charles  Fox.  His 
vehement  eloquence,  that  had  so  often  borne  down  Lord 
North,  Sandwich,  and  the  late  Junto,  was  now  displayed 
in  detecting  all  the  abominable  artifice  and  insolence  of 
Eden :  while,  with  the  greatest  address  and  discretion,  he 
steered  clear  of  any  offence  to  Ireland,  he  overwhelmed 
Eden  with  shame  and  guilt — not  with  remorse — for  though 
universal  indignation  burst  on  the  head  of  Eden,  his  obsti- 
nate pride  would  not  recant,  nor  would  he  withdraw  his 
motion,  till  General  Conway,  as  powerful  in  expressing  in- 
dignant virtue  as  Fox,  in  the  thunder  of  abilities,  threatening 
Eden  with  a  vote  of  censure  on  his  wicked  conduct,  which 
was  re-echoed  by  an  hundred  voices  that  called  on  him  to 


1732.  LORD  CARLISLE  LORD  STEWARD.  539 

propose  that  stigma,   the  miscreant,   more   terrified  than 
abashed,  submitted  to  waive  his  purpose. 

I  will  heap  other  incidents  to  connect  further  circum- 
stances relative  to  Eden  and  his  patron  Lord  Carlisle, 
neither  of  them  being  of  consequence  enough  to  interrupt 
the  narration  again.  Soon  after  the  return  of  Lord 
Carlisle,  died  Earl  Talbot,  the  Lord  Steward,  who  had 
been  left  in  his  post  from  the  nearness  of  his  approaching 
dissolution.  The  new  Ministers  had  been  able  to  find  but 
few  places  for  many  Peers  who  had  long  supported  them 
in  Opposition.  The  King  had  saved  some  beyond  the 
two  that  he  had  been  indulged  to  protect,  as  the  Duke  of 
Dorset  and  Lord  Oxford.  Yet  was  not  one  of  the  new 
Ministers'  friends  thought  on  for  the  Steward's  wand. 
Lord  Shelburne,  who  was  seeking  to  fortify  himself 
against  the  Rockingham  division  by  potent  friends,  offered 
the  stick  to  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  and,  though  the 
Duke  declined  it,  gained  him.  Charles  Fox,  not  thinking 
his  debt  of  gratitude  yet  paid,  solicited  for  Lord  Carlisle, 
and  procured  him  to  be  appointed  Lord  Steward.  The 
young  Earl,  who  had  been  so  lightly  inflamed  by  Eden,  as 
lightly  was  seduced  from  his  influence,  and  was  charmed 
to  gain  a  showy  sinecure  in  lieu  of  the  important  office  he 
had  quitted.  Eden  affected  not  to  resent  his  dereliction. 
When  in  less  than  three  months  his  protector,  Fox,  re- 
signed his  office,  Carlisle  did  not  act  as  if  he  thought 
it  was  necessary  for  a  reciprocation  of  good  offices  to 
take  their  constant  turns  between  them.  He  adhered  to 
Fox's  enemy,  Shelburne ;  and  Carlisle's  friends  affirmed 
that  his  Lordship  did  not  owe  the  staff  to  Fox,  but  to  his 
father-in-law,  Lord  Gower,  who  at  that  moment  had  not  a 
glimpse  of  interest.  In  the  following  winter,  when  Shel- 
burne's  fall  advanced  rapidly,  Lord  Carlisle  fired  the 


540  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIT-, 

signal  for  deserting  him,  and,  on  the  pretence  of  the 
American  loyalists  being  abandoned,  resigned  his  office,  in 
concert,  it  was  reasonably  supposed,  with  Fox,  who  again 
rewarded  him  with  the  post  of  Privy  Seal,  and  a  seat  in 
the  Cabinet.  Eden  was  at  the  same  time  dragged  into 
light  and  emolument  by  Lord  North,  who  obtained  for  him 
a  Vice-Treasurership  of  Ireland. 

These  anecdotes  may  not  be  worthy  of  entering  into  a 
history  of  England ;  but  they  are  strong  lines  in  the  his- 
tory of  Courts,  of  factions,  of  the  human  heart ! 

12th.  The  bill  for  disabling  Contractors  from  sitting  in 
Parliament  passed  the  House  of  Commons.  Alderman 
Harley  defended  his  acting  as  a  contractor. 

15th.  The  King  sent  a  message  to  the  House  of  Com- 
mons recommending'economy.  Burke  in  that  House,  and 
Lord  Shelburne  in  the  other,  were  ridiculously  extra- 
vagant in  panegyrics  on  his  Majesty  for  this  magnanimity 
which  certainly  was  no  measure  of  his,  but  an  artifice 
of  their  own,  and  but  a  shallow  one,  to  persuade  the  people 
that  they  meant  to  adhere  to  their  former  principles,  while 
their  flattery  was  rather  a  symptom  that  they  would  not 

Overtures  were  made  by  the  new  Ministers  to  the 
Dutch  for  a  separate  peace,  but  were  rejected  by  them. 

I  have  said  that  the  new  Ministers  were  distressed  for 
want  of  places  to  satisfy  their  friends ;  yet,  to  the  honour 
of  their  party,  it  should  be  told,  that  neither  at  this  period 
nor  at  that  in  the  ensuing  year  did  they  lose  many  friends 
from  want  of  the  power  to  serve  them.  The  party  not  only 
saw  that  it  was  not  their  fault,  but  that  the  King  did  every- 
thing he  could  to  add  to  their  embarrassment  by  withholding 
whatever  he  could.  In  these  difficulties  Lord  Rockingham 
behaved  with  more  zeal  and  decency  than  Lord  Shel- 
burne, An  instance  of  the  latter's  impolitic  insensibility 


17H2.  LORD  SHELBURNE.  541 

appeared  in  the  case  of  Lord  Cholmondeley ;  and,  in  fact, 
artful  as  Lord  Shelburne  affected  to  be,  it  is  certain  that 
his  art  was  so  clumsy,  so  gross,  or  so  ill-timed  and  so  contra- 
dictory to  itself,  that  he  could  not  have  fallen  so  soon  as  he 
did  if  he  had  had  no  art  at  all.  Lord  Cholmondeley  had 
peculiarly  attached  himself  to'  him.  Not  being  able  to 
provide  for  him,  instead  of  excusing  himself,  he  congratu- 
lated Lord  Cholmondeley  on  remaining  independent,  which 
was,  and  was  felt  as,  an  insult.  I  have  mentioned  above 
his  flattery  to  the  King.  He  went  farther :  he  told  the 
Chancellor,  as  a  new  discovery  that  he  had  just  made,  that 
he  was  amazed  at  the  genius  he  found  in  the  King !  The 
Chancellor  laughed  in  his  face — could  it  be  avoided? 
Lord  Shelburne  had  been  early  intimate  with  the  King, 
from  his  youth,  through  Lord  Bute ;  and  had,  till  dis- 
missed by  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  been  Secretary  of  State 
for  some  time.  The  Chancellor,  instead  of  reporting  the 
encomium  to  the  Kirlg,  as  Shelburne  expected,  told  it  to 
everybody  else  with  contempt. 


MAY. 


1st.  THE  Contractors'  Bill"  was  carried  in  the  House  of 
Lords  by  a  majority  of  45.  Eden,  the  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  and  Lord  Townshend,  strenuous  supporters 
of  the  late  Administration,  voted  for  it.  The  Chancellor 
and  Lord  Mansfield  opposed  it. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond  obtained  the  pardon  of  the  infa- 
mous parson  Bate,  who  had  been  imprisoned  for  writing  a 
foul  libel  on  his  Grace. 


542  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

3rd.  The  Middlesex  election  was  at  last  rescinded. 
Charles  Fox,  who  had  always  opposed  that  correction, 
made  a  most  manly  and  fair  defence  of  himself  on  that 
occasion. 

7th.  William  Pitt,  meaning  to  acquire  popularity  against 
Charles  Fox,  who  he  hoped  would  lose  it  by  his  prefer- 
ment, and  possessed  of  a  plan  of  his  father  for  a  more 
equal  representation,  moved  for  a  Committee  to  inquire 
into  the  state  of  it,  according  to  the  promise  made  by  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  to  the  Yorkshire  Association,  but  it 
was  rejected,  by  a  motion  of  Sir  Horace  Mann  for  the 
previous  question,  by  161  to  141 ;  and  thus  the  House  of 
Commons  absolved  the  Ministers  from  their  engagement 
to  the  Duke. 

General  Conway  proposes  a  plan  for  arming  the  people, 
which  is  adopted. 

I  have  lost  the  notes  I  had  taken,  or  had  taken  scarce 
any,  of  what  passed  in  the  rest  of  *  Lord  Rockingham's 
Administration,  which  terminated  so  soon  that  the  hiatus 
is  inconsiderable.  The  public  events  may  be  found  in 
various  publications.  The  material  features  were  the 
masterly  abilities  of  Charles  Fox  and  the  intrigues  of  Lord 
Shelburne.  The  former  displayed  such  facility  in  compre- 
hending and  executing  all  business  as  charmed  all  who 
approached  him.  No  formal  affectation  delayed  any 
service  or  screened  ignorance. '  He  seized  at  once  the  im- 
portant points  of  every  affair,  and  every  affair  was  thence 
reduced  within  small  compass — not  to  save  himself  trouble, 
for  at  once  he  gave  himself  up  to  the  duties  of  his  office. 
His  good  humour,  frankness,  and  sincerity  pleased,  and  yet 
inspired  a  respect  which  he  took  no  other  pains  to  attract. 
The  Foreign  Ministers  were  in  admiration  of  him.  They 
had  found  few  who  understood  foreign  affairs,  or  who 


1782.  FOX— LORD  SHELBURNE.  543 

attended  to  them  ;  and  no  man  who  spoke  French  so  well, 
or  could  explain  himself  in  so  few  words.  While  Fox 
thus  unfolded  his  character  so  advantageously,  Shelburne 
was  busied  in  devoting  himself  to  the  King  and  in  tra- 
versing Lord  Rockingham  and  Fox  in  every  point.  If 
they  opened  a  negotiation,  he  commenced  another  under- 
hand at  the  same  Court.  Mr.  Fox  despatched  Thomas 
Grenville  to  Paris ;  Lord  Shelburne  sent  one,  two,  or 
three  privately  to  the  same  place,  and  addressed  them 
to  different  Ministers,  or  persons  of  supposed  credit.  He 
instigated  young  Pitt  against  Fox,  and  courted  the  Asso- 
ciations in  the  country.  All  these  treacheries  were  soon 
discovered ;  no  doubt  many  more  little  artifices  escaped 
notice.  Fox  warmly  resented  being  traversed  in  material 
points,  and  did  not  disguise  them  to  the  Earl.  He  even 
threatened  to  resign,  which  was  far  from  damping  Shel- 
burne's  insincerity — probably  encouraged  it.  Yet,  while 
he  crossed  and  offended  his  allies,  he  put  little  confidence 
in  most  of  his  own  friends.  Building  on  the  King's  favour, 
he  fancied  it  able  to  bear  him  out — only  because  he 
intended  it  should.  He  could  have  no  better  foundation 
for  his  hopes  than  his  resolution  of  buying  it  by  any 
servility,  at  any  price.  Was  it  probable,  when  Lord 
North  had  been  just  borne  from  the  King  against  his  will, 
that  Shelburne,  really  hated  by  his  Majesty,  should  be 
able,  with  the  fragment  of  a  faction,  to  stand  against  all 
England  ?  It  had  been  the  precise  case  and  tenor  of  Lord 
Grenville.  When  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  been  over- 
turned by  the  Opposition,  and  Mr.  Pelham,  like  Lord 
Kockingham,  had  succeeded  on  the  ground  of  a  fair 
character,  and  by  the  support  of  great  alliances  and  con- 
nections with  potent  Lords,  Lord  Grenville  imagined  that, 
by  gratifying  the  German  views  of  George  II.,  he  should 


544  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

stem  all  opposition.     The  cases  were  parallel,  and  so  were 
the  consequences. 

Lord  Rockingham  had  been  unhealthy  from  his  child- 
hood, and  had  lost  one  or  two  elder  brothers  by  the 
badness  of  their  constitutions.  Ill  health,  and  a  frame  most 
nervous  and  without  vigour,  ought  to  have  checked  his 
vanity  of  desiring  to  be  Prime  Minister — for  it  was  vanity 
rather  than  ambition.  When  he  attained  his  point  this 
second  time,  he  was  much  more  debilitated.  His  physi- 
cians were  aware  that  the  fatigue  of  business  would  soon 
destroy  him — and  it  did.  In  the  very  last  days  of  June 
it  was  known  that  he  was  at  the  point  of  death. 


JULY. 


1st.  LORD  Rockingham  expired  calmly,  and  perfectly  in 
his  senses. 

The  King  showed  his  aversion  to  Lord  Rockingham  so 
indecently  and  so  meanly,  that,  though  he  had  accepted 
him  for  his  Minister,  he  did  not  once  send  to  inquire  how 
the  Marquis  did  when  he  was  dying. 

Lord  Rockingham's  history,  in  the  abstract,  was  short 
and  singular.  By  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire, 
and  by  the  want  of  a  man  at  once  of  high  birth,  influence, 
and  abilities,  Lord  Rockingham  had  been  regarded  as  the 
head  of  the  Opposition ;  not  that  a  proper  leader  was 
wanting.  Lord  Chatham  might  have  commanded  the 
Opposition,  but  his  intractable  mind,  his  unsociable  ob- 
stinacy, and  his  scorn  of  owing  anything  but  to  himself, 
had  estranged  the  Opposition,  in  reality  not  well  inclined 


1782.  DEATH  OF  LORD  ROCKINGHAM.  545 

to  him,  but  too  destitute  of  capacity  among  themselves  not 
to  be  often  ready  to  obey  him,  had  he  condescended  to 
dictate ;  and  thus,  by  having  driven  all  men  from  him,  he 
lived  for  some  years  vainly  expecting  that  his  name  would 
again  lift  him  to  pre-eminence,  and  died  when  nothing  but 
the  manner  of  his  death  (in  the  midst  of  an  oration  in  Par- 
liament) could  have  occasioned  the  smallest  sensation,  or 
revived  a  respect  which  he  had  worn  out.  The  eccentri- 
city of  Lord  Chatham  left  room,  in  the  year  1765,  for 
Lord  Rockingham  to  attain  the  first  post,  which  he  was 
forced  to  quit  in  a  year  to  Lord  Chatham,  who  had 
repented  of  his  unpliability.  A  second  dissolution  of  Go- 
vernment, in  1782,  again  opened  the  way  to  Lord  Rock- 
ingham. Thus  he  twice  attained  his  object,  but  kept  it 
the  first  time  only  a  year,  the  second  but  for  three 
months. 

It  was  puerile  though  not  strange  want  of  policy  in 
Lord  Rockingham 's  friends  not  to  have  seized  the  oppor- 
tunity of  his  Lordship's  approaching  dissolution  to  take 
measures  for  naming  the  successor.  He  died  before  there 
was  the  least  guess  in  the  public  who  it  would  be.  This 
looked  as  if  the  Rockingham  party  thought  themselves 
unprovided  with  any  man  fit  for  so  arduous  a  charge.  Lord 
John  Cavendish  seemed  so  little  prepared  for  the  emer- 
gency, that  he  indecently  declared  in  private  that  now 
Lord  Rockingham  was  gone  he  cared  no  more  about 
politics.  This  was  his  first  sensation  ;  his  next,  and  which, 
though  not  uppermost  on  the  loss  of  Lord  Rockingham, 
was  nearest  to  his  heart,  was  that  the  house  of  Cavendish 
ought  to  have  the  exclusive  right  of  naming  a  Prime 
Minister — not  that  the  honour  of  enjoying  such  exclusive 
nomination  was  all  that  flattered  Lord  John's  vanity.  He 
could  not  help  looking  a  little  in  that  nomination  to  the 

VOL.  II.  2  N 


546  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

practicability  of  the  person  he  should  name.  Disclaiming 
ambition  in  his  own  person,  Lord  John  did  not  dislike  to 
govern  the  Prime  Minister. 

Of  the  Rockingham  faction  there  were  but  two  persons 
who  could  pretend  to  any  expectation  of  succeeding  to  the 
Marquis.  These  were  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Charles 
Fox.  The  marvellous  abilities  of  the  second  excluded  all 
competition  in  that  respect :  every  other  consideration  was 
against  him  —  the  King's  aversion,  his  own  desperate 
fortune,  disreputation  with  the  public ;  nor  had  he  been 
but  of  late  at  all  connected  with  that  faction.  The  pru- 
dery of  Lord  John's  virtue,  that  had  excommunicated 
Wilkes,  had  long  distasted  Fox ;  the  present  emergence 
endeared  him  to  Lord  John :  yet  Fox  was  of  too  superior 
abilities  and  too  apt  to  think  and  act  for  himself,  to  present 
a  tame  candidate  to  one  so  fond  of  dictating  as  Lord  John. 
He  entered  into  the  strictest  union  with  Fox,  but  had  the 
address  to  make  him  his  instrument,  not  his  nominee. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond  was  not  only  the  first  of  that 
faction  in  rank  and  abilities,  but  ought  long  before  to 
have  had  the  pre-eminence  of  Lord  Rockingham.  Im- 
pressed with  the  meanest  opinion  of  Lord  Rockingham's 
talents  and  firmness,  which  I  frequently  ridiculed  to  the 
Duke,  I  had  more  than  once  pressed  him  to  assume  the 
command  of  the  party,  and  had  represented  the  impropriety 
of  such  parliamentary  abilities,  spirit,  and  activity  as  his 
Grace's  acting  in  subordination  to  an  almost  unit;  yet 
such  was  the  Duke's  sacred  respect  to  friendship  that 
he  would  never  hear  of  any  competition  with  Lord  Rock- 
ingham. 

When  the  Marquis  was  out  of  the  question,  confidence 
in  himself,  justice,  and  perhaps  my  former  suggestions 
must  have  whispered  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond  that  the 


LORD  ROCKINGHAM'S  SUCCESSOR.  547 

vacant  place  was  due  to  him.  I  had  reason  afterwards  to 
believe  that  he  at  least  expected  that  the  Cavendishes,  his 
dear  friends,  would  think  of  no  other  man ;  yet  at  that 
time  he  gave  not  the  slightest  indication  of  such  a  wish. 
Lord  John  took  care  not  to  inspire  him  with  it ;  nor  did 
it  sL'eiii  to  occur  even  to  Burke  ;  though  as  he,  with  all  his 
ungovernable  fancy  and  want  of  judgment,  had  a  great 
ascendant  over  the  Duke,  as  well  as  over  Charles  Fox,  he 
might  have  expected  much  weight  under  the  Duke's 
administration. 

Objections  no  doubt  there  were.  The  King's  aversion 
to  the  Duke  was  not  less  known  than  to  Fox.  The  Duke, 
with  a  thousand  virtues,  was  exceedingly  unpopular;  but 
these  were  not,  I  should  think,  what  operated  on  Lord 
John,  at  least,  not  the  first.  But  the  Duke,  though  so 
warm  a  friend,  was  far  from  being  always  a  tractable  one. 
He  was  apt  to  have  speculative  visions,  not  suited  to  prac- 
tice, and  was  peculiarly  romantic  upon  the  article  of 
Parliamentary  representation,  even  beyond  the  ideas  of 
the  Associations.  With  the  Yorkshire  Association  Lord 
Buckingham  had  been,  and  Lord  John  was,  at  most  open 
enmity. 

But  when  Lord  John  recurred  to  his  first  principles, 
a  Cavendish  for  First  Minister,  and  a  tool  ductile  to  him- 
self, his  thoughts  did  not  wander  to  another  great  family. 
In  two  days  the  town  heard  with  astonishment  that  the 
Rockingham  faction  set  up  for  First  Minister  the  Duke  of 
Portland,  then  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  a  novel  symp- 
tom by  which  alone  he  was  at  all  known.  Nobody  recol- 
lected that  he  had  been  Lord  Chamberlain  in  Lord 
Rockingham's  first  administration.  From  that  time  he 
had  lived  in  the  most  stately  but  most  domestic  privacy, 
often  in  the  country,  and  latterly  in  Burlington  House, 

2x2 


548  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

lent  to  him  by  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  whose  sister  Port- 
land had  married,  the  Duke  of  Portland  being  in  too  great 
straits  to  have  a  house  of  his  own.  His  fortune  (though 
12,000/.  a  year  were  still  detained  from  him  by  his 
mother  the  Duchess  Dowager)  had  been  noble ;  but 
obscure  waste,  enormous  expense  in  elections  in  contesting 
the  counties  of  Westmoreland  and  Cumberland  with  Sir 
James  Lowther,  in  which  the  Duke  had  received  bitter 
treatment  from  the  Crown,  and  too  much  compassion  for 
an  idle  and  worthless  younger  brother,  Lord  Edward,  to 
support  whose  extravagance  he  had  deeply  dipped  his 
estate,  had  brought  him  into  great  distresses,  now  increased 
by  the  expense  of  his  Viceroyalty,  which  he  did  not 
enjoy  long  enough  to  indemnify  himself.  In  other  respects 
his  character  was  unimpeached,  but  he  had  never  at- 
tempted to  show  any  Parliamentary  abilities,  nor  had  the 
credit  of  possessing  any ;  nor  did  it  redound  to  the  honour 
of  his  faction,  that  in  such  momentous  times  they  could 
furnish  their  country  with  nothing  but  a  succession  of 
mutes. 

Still  Lord  John's  arrogant  modesty  was  received  as 
law  by  his  faction,  and  Lord  Shelburne  was  desired  by  the 
voice  of  the  party  to  acquaint  his  Majesty  that  the  Whigs 
recommended  the  Duke  of  Portland  to  his  Majesty  to 
succeed  Lord  Rockingham.  Lord  Shelburne  with  equal 
mummery  accepted  the  commission,  and,  returning  with 
modest  confusion  and  friendly  grief,  reported  to  the  dele- 
gates that  to  his  own  extreme  surprise  and  affliction  his 
Majesty  had  been  pleased  to  appoint  himself  First  Lord  of 
the  Treasury. 

Such  an  affront  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  Cavendishes 
was  received  with  proper  spirit.  The  signal  of  resignation 
was  fired  by  Charles  Fox,  who  instantly  carried  the  seals 


1782.  LORD  SHELBURNE  PRIME  MINISTER.  549 

to  St.  James's,  declaring  that  the  day  before  the  death  of 
Lord  Rockingham  he  had  notified  his  intention  of  resign- 
ing, unable  to  endure  the  treacheries  of  Shelburne,  and 
his  interference  in  his  (Fox's)  province.  Lord  John  as 
immediately  announced  his  own  retreat,  and  no  doubt 
expected  it  would  be  followed  by  all  of  his  connection ; 
but  he  was  disappointed,  as  he  had  been  when  his  brother 
had  been  disgraced  in  1763.  He  now  made  but  few 
martyrs.  Few  saw  the  propriety  or  expediency  of  the 
Duke  of  Portland  being  Minister.  The  temperate  did 
see  the  mischief  of  disunion  in  the  party,  and  appre- 
hended that  it  would  tend  to  a  restoration  of  the  old 
Ministry,  and  consequently  to  a  revival  of  the  American 
war.  The  King,  no  doubt,  exulted  (as  he  often  did  in 
events  that  soon  heaped  new  humiliations  on  himself)  in 
having  divided  a  party  that  had  often  thwarted  his  views, 
and  had  so  lately  compelled  him  to  receive  them  on  their 
own  terms. 

In  the  first  moment  of  the  breach  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond was  inclined  to  resign  with  the  Cavendishes.  He 
could  not  be  willing  to  remain  in  a  Court  to  which  he  was 
unwelcome,  nor  to  break  with  his  party,  nor  to  quit  them 
for  Shelburne,  whose  intrusion  and  obstruction  to  the 
views  of  Lord  Rockingham  and  his  friends  he  had  so 
lately  with  them  resented  ;  but  whether  sensibility  to  their 
preference  of  the  Duke  of  Portland  offended  him,  whether 
they  demanded  his  co-operation  too  impetuously,  or  whether 
his  delight  in  his  new  office,  the  Ordnance,  which  furnished 
his  activity  with  employment  and  his  virtue  with  prospects 
of  reformation,  preponderated,  he  soon  disapproved  of  the 
measure  of  retreat;  and  Burke  and  Charles  Fox,  as  in- 
considerately as  the  Cavendishes,  though  more  decently, 
as  steadily  condemned  the  Duke's  separation  from  them. 


550 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


JULY, 


Fox  being  his  Grace's  nephew,  the  Duke  was  most 
offended  with  him.  I  was  fortunately  one  of  those  even- 
ings with  the  Duke  when  Fox  came  to  expostulate  with 
him.  I  would  have  retired,  but  the  Duke  pressed  me  to 
stay.  Fox  was  very  urgent,  the  Duke  very  firm.  I 
interposed,  and  told  Fox  that,  though  I  was  persuaded 
that  no  man  in  England  was  so  fit  to  be  Minister  as  him- 
self, yet  I  could  not  but  disapprove  his  and  his  friends' 
disuniting  the  party,  nor  thought  they  had  sufficient 
grounds  for  breaking  with  Lord  Shelburne.  I  entreated 
both  him  and  the  Duke  to  argue  without  passion,  and  to 
remember  that  being  such  near  relations  they  must  come 
together  again,  and  therefore  I  hoped  neither  would  say 
what  the  other  could  never  forgive.  I  did  prevent  any 
warmth,  and  they  parted  civilly,  though  equally  discontent 
with  each  other.  The  point  that  stuck  most  with  the 
Duke  was  his  cousin  and  friend  Admiral  Keppel,  whom 
the  zeal  of  Lord  Rockingham  and  the  Cavendishes  on 
his  trial  called  on  to  fulfil  his  debt  of  gratitude.  To  Lord 
Shelburne  he  had  had  no  obligations ;  to  the  Duke  of 
Richmond  the  same  as  to  the  Cavendishes.  The  Duke 
did  prevent  the  Admiral's  immediate  resignation,  but  he 
declared  he  meditated  it,  and  did  intend  it  so  much  that  he 
satisfied  the  Cavendishes ;  and  they  in  their  turn  chose  to 
seem  satisfied,  that  by  maintaining  friendship  with  him 
they  might  preserve  opportunities  of  urging  him  to  resign. 
This  dubious  conduct  to  Keppel  led  the  Duke  to  profess 
the  same  kind  of  neutral  ambiguity.  Keppel  professed  to 
retain  the  Admiralty  but  till  the  peace : 1  the  Duke,  the 
Ordnance  till  he  should  complete  his  reforms. 


1  It  would  have  been  improper  in 
Keppel  to  resign  at  that  moment.  He 
had  sent  Admiral  Pigot  to  supersede 
Lord  Rodney,  who  had  just  obtained  a 
great  victory.  News  had  come  of  the 


Quebec  fleet  being  taken.  Had  Keppel 
retired  then,  he  would  have  opened  new 
ways  to  his  enemies  of  loading  him  with 
obloquy,  and  given  them  power  to  op- 
press him. 


1782.  GENERAL  CONWAY.  551 

General  Conway  was  not  in  the  same  difficult  situation. 
Lord  Rockingham,  it  was  true,  had  placed  him  at  the  head 
of  the  army ;  but  his  acceptance  had  been  a  reciprocal 
compliment :  he  had  been  earnestly  solicited  during  Lord 
North's  administration  to  take  the  command,  and  all  man- 
kind had  allowed  him  to  be  the  only  proper  person ;  yet, 
disapproving  the  American  war  and  Lord  North's  mea- 
sures, he  had  declined  acceptance  ;  yet  he  had  uniformly 
on  all  occasions  declared  himself  of  no  party,  nor  in  any 
opposition  but  to  the  American  war.  He  had  never 
engaged  in  any  concert  or  counsels  with  Lord  Rockingham'; 
and  if  he  leaned  to  any  faction  by  ties,  it  was  to  the  Duke 
of  Grafton,  who  chose  him  into  Parliament,  and  who  adhered 
to  Lord  Shelburne,  and  to  his  son-in-law,  the  Duke  of 
Richmond.  He  looked  on  the  resignation  of  Fox  as  a 
violence  of  faction,  which  might  impede  the  peace  and 
restore  the  old  Ministers ;  and  could  have  no  idea  why  the 
Duke  of  Portland  should  be  Minister,  nor  why  any  man 
should  resign  because  he  was  not.  Still  less  did  he  think 
that  the  government  of  the  army  ought  to  be  an  instrument 
of  faction  ;  and  having  long  determined  to  confine  himself 
to  his  profession,  he  would  not  be  the  tool  of  intrigues. 
Fox  and  Burke  resented  his  neutrality,  and  the  latter  par- 
ticularly ridiculed  it  in  a  speech  in  the  House  of  Commons ; 
though  on  Conway 's  motion  that  gave  the  first  majority  to 
the  Opposition,  Fox  had  pronounced  a  sublime  panegyric 
on  the  services  of  Conway,  whom  he  congratulated  as 
having  twiced  saved  his  country :  first,  by  moving  for  the 
repeal  of  the  Stamp  Act  in  1765  ;  and  recently,  by  moving 
to  stop  the  prosecution  of  the  American  war.  Conway 
replied  with  temper,  called  the  House  to  witness  how  often 
he  had  disclaimed  all  factions,  and  referred  to  the  disin- 
terestedness of  his  life  for  the  purity  of  his  intentions  and 
conduct. 


552  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

But  Con  way's  strongest  reason  for  remaining  in  office 
was  of  far  higher  nature  than  any  political  ties.  Negocia- 
tions  for  peace  both  with  France  and  America  were  in 
agitation — was  the  consideration  of  whether  Portland  or 
Shelburne  should  be  Prime  Minister  important  enough  to 
cross  such  national,  such  urgent  objects  ? 

In  a  conversation  with  Lord  John  Cavendish  not  long 
afterwards  I  told  him  frankly  that  I  should  rejoice  that 
Mr.  Conway  had  retained  his  post.  He  had  pledged  him- 
self to  the  House  of  Commons  and  to  the  public  that 
America  was  disposed  to  make  peace  with  us ;  was  not 
his  honour  then  at  stake  to  endeavour  to  realize  his  en- 
gagements ? 

The  paucity  of  followers  was  a  sad  lesson  to  the  designers 
of  their  ill-digested  precipitation.  Fox  grew  sensible  of 
it,  and  confessed  it.  Richard  Fitzpatrick,  his  friend,  and 
Secretary  of  Ireland,  who  seconded  the  admonitions  of  the 
Cavendishes  to  the  Duke  of  Portland  to  quit  his  Vice- 
royalty,  as  he  did,  though  entreated  by  the  new  Premier 
in  the  King's  name  to  retain  it — Fitzpatrick,  I  say,  though 
his  sister  was  Lord  Shelburne's  wife,  chose  to  follow  the 
fortune  of  his  friend  rather  than  of  his  brother-in-law. 
Meeting  me  at  the  play  on  his  return  from  Ireland,  he 
said  to  me,  "I  hear  you  disapprove  us,  and  indeed  I  do 
not  know  whether  we  have  not  been  in  the  wrong."  I 
replied,  "  Mr.  Fitzpatrick,  I  feel  too  much  concern  to  have 
any  room  for  blame." 

Edmund  Burke  was  too  considerable  a  personage  at  that 
moment  not  to  demand  a  fuller  detail  on  his  conduct.  I 
had  seen  more  than  once  circumstances  that  made  me 
question  the  immaculate  purity  of  his  views.  Still  he 
stood  in  the  highest  light  of  integrity  with  the  Rockingham 
party  ;  for,  though  reduced  to  almost  indigence  by  the 


1782.  CONDUCT  OF  BURKE. 

failure  of  his  stockjobbing,  he  had  preserved  incorruptible 
attachment  to  his  party.  Lord  Rockingham  had  immedi- 
ately on  becoming  Minister  a  second  time  heaped  on  him 
and  his  family  the  most  lucrative  offices.  Himself  was 
made  Paymaster  in  the  room  of  Rigby,  though,  according 
to  his  ewn  Reforming  Bill,  with  a  salary  of  only  4000/. 
a  year.  His  son  was  made  Deputy- master,  and  had  a 
small  sinecure  for  life  added.  His  brother  was  appointed 
Secretary  to  the  Treasury ;  and  his  cousin  William  was 
sent  to  India  a  with  very  rich  office  created  on  purpose  for 
him.  Such  opulence,  scarce  tasted,  it  was  hard  to  give 
up — yet  he  did  not  hesitate.  Nor,  as  usual,  did  he  take 
his  part  with  temper.  The  enthusiasm  of  his  luxuriant 
imagination  presented  every  measure  to  him  in  the  most 
vivid  colours.  In  truth,  it  had  been  suspected  for  above 
a  year  that  his  intellects  and  sensations  had  mutually 
overheated  each  other :  his  behaviour  in  the  ensuing  year 
did  not  remove  the  supposition. 

At  the  very  moment  when  the  Cavendishes  sounded 
highest  their  encomiums  on  the  sacrifices  Mr.  Burke  was 
going  to  make,  I  received  a  letter  from  him  to  desire  an 
interview  with  me  the  very  next  morning.  As  he  had 
imagined  on  a  former  occasion  that  his  eloquence  could 
persuade  me  to  use  my  interest  with  General  Conway  to 
adapt  himself  to  Lord  Rockingham's  dictates,  I  concluded 
that  a  similar  overture  was  to  be  made  to  me  now,  though 
the  former  had  made  no  impression  on  me ;  but  how 
astonished  was  I  when  he  came  and  opened  his  business ! 

It  must  be  observed  that,  though  Lord  John  Cavendish 
had  notified  his  resolution  of  quitting  the  Treasury,  it  had 
been  necessary  for  him  to  retain  the  office  of  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer,  which  cannot  remain  vacant  a  day,  till  the 
new  Board  should  take  possession  ;  consequently,  there 


554  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

being  no  First  Lord  regularly  admitted,  the  Chancellor 
of  the  Exchequer  and  the  other  Commissioners,  who  also 
had  not  yet  given  up  their  trusts,  were  empowered  to 
bestow  whatever  places  should  become  vacant  in  the  gift 
of  the  Treasury  till  the  new  Commission  should  be  issued 
out.  Be  it  remembered,  too,  that  Lord  John  was  drawn 
within  forty-eight  hours  of  the  time  when  his  occupation  of 
the  office  was  to  cease. 

Burke's  business  with  me  was  to  desire  me  to  propose  to 
my  brother  Sir  Edward  Walpole,  Clerk  of  the  Pells  (an 
employment  for  life,  which  during  the  war  had  been  stated 
by  the  Commissioners  of  Accounts  to  produce  to  him  7000/. 
a  year),  to  resign  that  office,  in  consideration  of  receiving 
the  full  yearly  value  of  it  during  Sir  Edward's  life  (and  I 
think  there  was  an  additional  offer  to  Sir  Edward  of  the 
disposal  of  the  junior  Burke's  place).  The  resignation  was 
to  be  made  that  very  day,  that  Lord  Cavendish  might 
bestow  it  on  Edmund  Burke  the  father,  before  his  Lordship 
resigned  his  office.  Full  security,  Burke  assured  me, 
should  be  given  to  Sir  Edward  that  he  should  be  no  loser, 
unless  the  office  should  be  reduced  by  Parliament,  as  it 
probably  would  be,  and  then  Sir  Edward  should  receive 
the  full  of  the  reduced  value. 

So  frantic  a  proposal  I  suppose  was  never  made.  I 
had  at  no  time  lived  in  friendship  with  Mr.  Burke,  and 
latterly  we  had  had  no  intercourse,  though  always  on  civil 
terms  when  we  met  by  accident.  With  Sir  Edward,  Mr. 
Burke  I  believe  had  never  exchanged  a  syllable.  How 
was  it  possible  to  expect  that  a  man  possessed  of  the  second 
most  valuable  office  in  the  Exchequer  for  life  would  resign 
it  in  favour  of  a  man  with  whom  he  had  not  the  slightest 
acquaintance — and  merely  to  leave  the  disposal  of  another 
very  trifling  place  to  some  other  person  ?  But  to  expect  he 


1782.  BUBKK'S  PROPOSAL. 

would  resign  it  on  a  promise  of  security  from  a  man  of 
desperate  fortune,  which  security  he  could  not  possibly 
have  time  to  examine — and,  what  was  a  thousand  times 
more  wonderful,  that  he  should  resign  it  on  the  mere  pro- 
mise of  security  from  a  stranger,  for  it  would  have  been 
utterly  impossible  to  have  executed  the  deeds  before  Lord 
John  should  resign  his  place — not  to  mention  that  such  a 
transfer  of  office  at  a  moment  of  reformation  would  have 
been  the  most  likely  of  all  circumstances  to  have  provoked 
Parliament  to  annihilate  the  office ;  could  a  man  be  in  his 
senses  who  had  encouraged  such  a  vision,  or  must  not  he 
have  hoped  that  I  had  lost  mine,  when  he  proposed  to  me 
to  go  on  such  a  message  ?  However,  astonished  as  I  was 
at  the  absurdity  of  the  request,  I  commanded  myself 
enough  to  make  the  following  temperate  answer — that  I 
would  acquaint  my  brother  with  Mr.  Burke's  request, 
though  I  would  not  bind  myself  to  advise  it ;  that  though, 
for  fear  of  being  thought  to  make  my  court  to  him  (Burke) 
while  our  patent  places  were  in  suspense,  as  I  had  deter- 
mined never  to  take  any  step  to  solicit  for  saving  mine, 
but  to  submit  the  decision  entirely  to  Parliament,  I  had 
never  taken  notice  of  my  gratitude  to  him  (Burke)  for  his 
handsome  mention  of  my  father  in  his  speech  for  reforma- 
tion, yet  I  had  felt  it  and  had  expressed  my  gratitude  in 
a  state  of  my  case  which  I  had  drawn  up.  But  I  could 
by  no  means  venture  to  give  advice  to  my  brother  on  a 
point  of  such  very  great  consequence — he  must  do  on  it  as 
he  should  please :  he  was  not  in  town,  but  at  Isle  worth, 
whither  I  must  go  to  him.  This  was  strictly  true,  and 
made  it  still  more  impracticable  to  despatch  such  an  affair  in 

so  short  a  time.     And  I  added,  that  I  must  be  so  frank  as 

' 

to  tell  Mr.  Burke  that  Sir  Edward  was  a  most  warm  anti- 
American,  and  did  not  speak  with  much  patience  on  those 
who  disapproved  the  American  war. 


556  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

Mr.  Burke  was  much  disheartened  at  so  unexpected  a 
state  of  the  case,  and  chose  to  say  no  more  himself  on  the 
subject,  but  he  made  his  son  write  to  me  that  night  and 
come  to  me  the  next  morning;  to  persuade  me  of  the  good- 
ness of  the  security ;  but  I  so  amply  exposed  to  him  the 
improbability  of  a  man's  resigning  7000£.  a  year  for  no 
reason,  and  merely  on  a  promise  of  indemnification,  that 
the  son  saw  the  folly  of  the  proposal  and  gave  it  up. 

One  passage  the  son  dropped  that  was  very  memorable. 
He  said  his  father  had  always  intended  to  get  the  office  of 
Clerk  of  the  Pells.  This  struck  me,  and  explained  what  I 
had  never  comprehended,  which  was  why  in  Mr.  Burke's 
reforming  bill  that  office  had  not  been  mentioned  among 
the  great  sinecures  that  were  to  be  annihilated  on  the 
deaths  of  the  present  incumbents.  Can  one  but  smile  at  a 
reformer  of  abuses  reserving  the  second  greatest  abuse  for 
himself? 

This  transaction  was  known  to  very  few  indeed.  A  more 
heinous  one  soon  became  public,  and  deservedly  raised  the 
indignation  of  mankind.  On  this  change  of  the  Ministry 
it  came  out  that  Lord  Shelburne  had  obtained  a  pension  of 
3000/.  a  year  for  life  for  his  friend  Colonel  Barre.  Lord 
Shelburne  had  had  the  address  to  persuade  Lord  Rocking- 
ham,  and  he  had  had  the  folly,  with  Lord  John  Cavendish 
and  Frederick  Montagu,  to  pass  that  grant.  It  was  so  offen- 
sive that  notice  was  immediately  taken  of  it  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  where  Barre's  defence  of  himself  was  still  more 
impudent  than  his  acceptance  of  the  grant.  He  pleaded 
having  lost  his  commission  in  the  army  for  having  opposed 
the  Court  from  conscience;  and  urged  that,  had  he  re- 
mained in  the  service,  he  might  by  that  time  have  been  a 
General,  and  have  had  a  regiment  and  government  equal  in 
value  to  his  pension.  When  men  calculate  their  own 
merits,  and  how  much  they  have  lost  by  their  virtue,  and 


1782.  PENSIONS  TO  BARRfi  AND  DUNNING.  557 

bring  in  their  bill  accordingly,  it  is  impossible  not  to  sup- 
pose that  they  never  intended  to  be  losers  by  their  con- 
science— nay,  that  they  preferred  virtue  as  having  the 
better  of  the  day.  The  House  of  Commons  accepted  that 
broker-like  apology.  I  have  often  observed  that  a  great 
assembly  is  as  cowardly  as  any  individual.  No  man  likes 
to  utter  to  another's  face  in  a  personal  question  the  gross 
reproaches  the  latter  deserves.  Lord  North's  and  Robin- 
son's pensions  had  escaped  by  the  same  general  timidity. 

Scandalous  as  Barre's  case  was,  I  think  Dunning's  still 
worse.  He  and  Barre,  the  latter  indeed  more  brutally, 
had  declared  on  Burke's  reforming  bill  for  taking  away  all 
sinecure  patent  places  even  from  the  present  possessors, 
though,  as  it  appeared,  in  1783  the  lawyers  and  the  whole 
House  of  Commons,  within  a  very  few,  declared  that  no 
freehold  was  or  ought  to  be  more  sacred.  Dunning,  being 
a  lawyer,  had  less  excuse  than  Barre  for  breaking  a  law 
which  he  himself  had  co-operated  in  making.  Parliament 
had  voted  abolishment  of  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster,  with  a 
pension  of  4000/.  a  year  for  life.  It  has  been  not  uncus- 
tomary to  give  pensions  to  eminent  lawyers  who  accept 
great  offices,  to  indemnify  them  for  losing  the  gains  by 
their  profession.  Dunning  might  have  had  a  pension — but 
why  the  abolished  Duchy?  Was  it  not  wanton  insolence? 
Did  he  not  seem  the  moment  he  became  a  Courtier  to 
have  satisfaction  in  laughing  at  his  own  act  of  patriotism  ? 

This  effrontery  of  Shelburne,  Barre,  and  Dunning,  and 
the  rapacious  profligacy  of  the  two  latter,  was  still  more 
cruelly  contrasted  at  the  end  of  the  year.  Shelburne,  pre- 
tending to  pursue  reformation,  struck  off  a  parcel  of 
small  offices  and  pensions  that  had  been  bestowed  on 
old  servants  and  dependants,  now  grown  aged  and  inca- 
pable of  getting  their  bread ;  yet  Dunning's  and  Barre's 


558  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

pensions  perhaps   wasted  more   public   money    than   the 
salaries  of  fifty  reduced  persons  would  discharge. 

The  whole  scene  of  reformation  was  a  mummery  that 
at  once  insulted  the  nation,  virtue,  and  charity,  and  en- 
riched only  the  principal  reformers. 

I  have  mentioned  the  negligence  or  stupefaction  of  Lord 
Rockingham's  friends  on  his  death,  in  having  taken  no 
measures  to  procure  the  election  of  a  successor  from  among 
themselves,  or  to  sound  the  inclinations  of  their  friends 
whether  it  would  not  be  better  to  remain  in  place  with 
Shelburne  than  divide  the  party,  before  they  could  assign 
any  ostensible  reason  for  breaking  with  him.  He  had 
concurred  with  them  in,  nay  boasted  that  he  had  procured 
the  King's  assent  to  the  independence  of  America;  he 
had  supported  their  reforming  plans,  even  to  the  abolition 
of  votes  in  officers  of  the  revenue,  though  such  was  a  defal- 
cation of  the  Crown's  influence.  To  divide  from  him  on 
the  single  question  of  whether  he,  at  least  accustomed  to 
business,  or  the  Duke  of  Portland,  totally  unpractised, 
should  be  selected,  was  reducing  all  to  a  personal  contest 
for  power.  Shelburne,  consequently,  being  also  avowedly 
preferred  by  the  King,  detached  many  Whigs  from  the 
Rockingham  remnant,  and  left  them  so  scanty  a  faction, 
that,  though  Shelburne's  folly  soon  played  the  game  again 
into  their  hands,  they  were  not  able  to  avail  themselves 
of  the  opportunity  but  by  calling  in  the  aid  of  enemies 
against  whom  they  had  urged  far  deeper  charges  of  guilt. 

The  Rockingham  party,  in  a  council  of  nine,  had  pro- 
posed to  declare  America  independent  previously  to  any 
treaty.  Shelburne  objected — and  theyvwere  divided  four 
and  four ;  but  Conway  turned  the  question  in  favour  of 
the  negative  by  representing  that  the  acknowledgment 
of  independence  might  be  a  leading  argument  for  their 


FOX  AND  PITT.  559 

making  peace  with  us ;  but  should  they  refuse  peace, 
should  we  not  weaken  our  right  of  warring  on  them  by 
having  acknowledged  their  independence  ? 

Fox  and  their  junto  having  resigned,  Lord  Shelburne 
took  possession  of  the  Treasury,  and  adorned  his  new 
Board  with  the  most  useful  acquisition,  and  by  the  most 
artful  address,  of  his  whole  administration — this  was  by 
offering  the  Seals  of  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  to 
young  William  Pitt,  who,  with  youthful  and  thence  par- 
donable vanity,  readily  accepted  them,  and  the  more 
difficult  task  of  enlisting  himself  as  the  rival  of  Charles 
Fox,  who  had  fondly  espoused,  and  kindly,  not  jealously 
nor  fearfully,  wished  to  have  him  his  friend. 

Young  as  Fox  was,  Pitt  was  then  ten  years  younger ; 
and  what  a  fund  of  knowledge  and  experience  were  ten 
years  in  possession  of  such  a  master  genius  as  Fox,  besides 
the  prodigious  superiority  of  solid  parts !  Yet  Fox  left  by 
neglect  some  advantages  to  Pitt.  The  one  trusted  to  his 
natural  abilities,  and,  whenever  he  wanted,  never  found 
them  fail ;  Pitt,  on  the  contrary,  attended  to  nothing  but 
the  means  of  gratifying  his  ambition.  His  application  was 
not  a  moment  relaxed,  and  he  was  not  less  abstemious  and 
temperate — even  attention  to  his  health  was  un remitted— 
as  if  he  feared  that  hereditary  gout  would  traverse  his 
career,  as  it  had  often  broken  in  on  his  father's.  No 
juvenile  avocations  diverted  him  from  his  studies,  nor  left 
reproaches  from  the  grave  on  his  character.  Fox  seemed 
to  leave  pleasure  with  regret,  and  to  bestow  only  spare 
moments  on  the  government  of  a  nation ;  Pitt  to  make 
industry  and  virtue  the  ladders  of  his  ambition.  Fox's 
greatness  was  innate ;  and  if  he  had  ambition,  it  was  the 
only  passion  which  he  took  no  pains  to  gratify.  He  dis- 
guised no  vice,  he  used  no  art,  he  despised  application, 


560  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

he  sought  no  popularity ;  a  warm  friend  and  almost  in- 
capable of  being  provoked  by  one ;  void  of  all  inveteracy  ; 
and  only  an  enemy  when  spirit  called  on  him  to  resent,  or 
the  foe  was  so  great  that  he  was  too  bold  not  to  punish,  as 
he  showed  the  next  year  by  insisting  on  the  dismission  of 
the  Lord  Chancellor  and  the  Lord  Advocate.  Pitt  cul- 
tivated friends  to  form  a  party,  and  had  already  attached 
many  considerable  young  men  to  himself. 

It  is  a  singular  and  perhaps  a  totally  novel  combination 
of  circumstances,  that  Charles  Fox  and  William  Pitt,  the 
second  sons  of  Henry  Lord  Holland  and  William  Lord 
Chatham,  who  themselves  were  second  sons,  should  become 
rivals  and  the  first  men  in  the  House  of  Commons,  as  their 
fathers  had  been  a  little  more  than  twenty  years  before. 

Pitt  had  not  the  commanding  brilliancy  of  his  father, 
nor  his  imposing  air  and  person ;  but  his  language  was 
more  pure  and  correct,  and  his  method  and  reasoning 
better.  Fox  had  not  the  ungraceful  hesitation  of  his 
father,  yet  scarce  equalled  him  in  subtlety  and  acuteness. 
But  no  man  ever  exceeded  him  in  the  closeness  of  argu- 
ment, which  flowed  from  him  in  a  torrent  of  vehemence,  as 
declamation  sometimes  does  from  those  who  most  want 
argument. 

He  alone  was  a  match  for  the  nervous  sense  of  Thurlow, 
and  could  dismount  the  wit  and  pleasantry  of  Lord  North. 
Without  that  conciliating  jocoseness,  and  without  the  exu- 
berant imagery  of  Burke,  Fox's  allusions  were  beautiful 
and  happy,  and  he  often  possessed  that  superior  kind  of  wit 
which,  without  being  sought,  results  from  the  clearness  of 
ideas  and  knowledge  of  the  world,  and  which  comes  by 
intuition  and  not  by  fancy.  It  was  one  of  Fox's  merits 
that,  though  he  idolized  the  imagination  of  Burke,  the 
quickness  and  fire  of  Hare,  the  genteel  irony  and  badinage 


1782.  NEW  METHOD  OF  WRITING  HISTORY.  "ilil 

of  Fitzpatrick,  and  the  gaiety  of  Sheridan,  he  never  aimed 
at  wit  himself,  which  was  not  his  peculiar  talent.  Good 
sense  and  reasoning  were  his  native  language ;  he  neither 
sought  what  he  had  not  nor  studied  to  make  the  most  of 
what  he  had.  Nature  had  given  him  genius,  and  to  her 
he  left  it  to  furnish  him  with  occasions  of  displaying  it.  If 
he  affected  anything  it  was  vice — all  his  abilities  and  good 
qualities  were  born  with  him.  Intrepid,  he  did  not  fear 
even  reproach,  and  he  either  was  incapable  of  fear  or  de- 
spised it.  I  do  not  believe  that  he  had  one  black  or  loose 
object — it  is  pity  that  he  was  as  inattentive  to  having  a 
good  one.  He  acted  as  the  moment  impelled  him ;  but  as 
his  conception  was  just,  and  his  soul  void  of  malice  or  trea- 
chery, he  meditated  no  ill,  but  might  have  advantaged 
himself  and  his  country  more  had  he  acted  with  any  fore- 
sight or  any  plan. 


LOOSE  PAPERS. 

A  SKETCH  OF  A  NEW  METHOD  OF  WRITING  HISTORY. 


Mr.  Pitt  said,  "  I  will  make  you  the  greatest  King  that 
ever  reigned  in  England ;  you  shall  humble  France  and 
Spain,  you  shall  destroy  their  navies,  you  shall  conquer 
Canada,  you  shall  be  Sovereign  of  Bengal,  you  shall  sup- 
port the  King  of  Prussia  against  France  and  two  Empresses ; 
the  French  shall  be  driven  out  of  India,  the  trade  and 
prosperity  of  America  shall  flourish  beyond  example,  and 
the  English  flag  shall  be  formidable  to  every  quarter  of  the 

globe : " — 

"  Hiatus  valde  deflendus." 

VOL.  II.  2    O 


562  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 


His  mother  said,  "  You  must  be  absolute."  Lord  Bute 
said,  "  Turn  out  Mr.  Pitt  and  the  Whigs,  who  have  made 
England  so  glorious  and  prosperous ;  make  me  Prime 
Minister,  and  countenance  the  Jacobites  and  Tories ;  make 
peace  with  France  and  Spain,  and  restore  them  to  a  condi- 
tion of  supporting  you,  as  they  did  Charles  II.  and  James 
II. ;  sacrifice  the  King  of  Prussia,  as  James  I.  sacrificed 
his  own  daughter  and  son-in-law  for  peace — and  you  shall 
be  as  despotic  as  any  monarch  of  the  House  of  Stuart." 

Mr.  Fox  said,  "  The  King  may  make  a  footman  Prime 
Minister  if  he  pleases."  The  Bishops  said,  "  The  Duke  of 
Newcastle  has  made  us  all  Bishops,  but  Lord  Bute  can 
make  us  Archbishops ;  let  us  go  to  the  latter's  levee." 

The  Duke  of  Bedford  said,  "  My  grandfather  was  a 
fool  and  a  rascal  ;  I  will  go  to  France,  and  beg  them  to 
dictate  a  peace,  instead  of  our  dictating  peace  to  them." 

Count  Villi  said,  "  Give  me  a  pension  in  Ireland, 
and  I  will  buy  peace  for  you." 

The  Members  of  both  Houses  said  to  themselves,  "  This 
peace  will  be  as  shameful  as  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht." 

Mr.  Fox  said,  "  Give  them  twenty-five  thousand  pounds, 
and  they  will  change  their  note." 

Both  Houses  said,  "  It  is  an  excellent  peace." 

His  mother  said,  "  Now  my  son  is  King  of  England." 

Sir  Francis  Dash  wood  said,  "  I  am  an  old  apple- wo- 
man, and  I  will  lay  a  tax  on  Cider." 

The  Western  Counties  said,  "  It  is  a  partial  tax." 

The  City  said,  "We  will  go  to  St.  James's,  and  petition 
that  the  tax  may  not  be  passed." 

Lord  Bute  said,  "  Fifty  thousand  men  will  come  to  St. 
James's  and  tear  me  to  pieces,  and  though  I  have  pre- 
pared the  epitaph  for  my  tomb,  I  am  frightened  out  of  my 


1782.  NEW  METHOD  OP  WRITING  HISTORY.  563 

wits  at  the  thought  of  death ;  I  will  say  I  have  lost  my 
stomach,  and  I  will  go  to  Harrowgate." 

Mr.   Wilkes    said, — "The    mother   and    Lord    Bute! 
.    There  is  a  lie  in  the  speech." 

Churchill  said,  "  The  Scotch  have  always  been  traitors," 
&c.  &c. 

Lord  Egremont  and  Lord  Halifax  said,  "  We  will  do 
whatever  you  bid  us." 

Mr.  Wood  and  Carteret  Webbe  said,  "  We  will  do 
more  than  you  bid  us." 

Lord  Mansfield  said,  "  I  will  strain  every  law." 

Wilkes  said,  "  I  am  not  afraid."  Lord  Mansfield  said, 
"I  am." 

"Wilkes  has  written  a  blasphemous  and  indecent 
poem,"  said  Carteret  Webbe.  "  Who  told  you  so?"  said 
the  King.  "  Parson  Kidgell  told  it  Lord  March,  and  he 
told  Lord  Bute  and  me," said  Lord  Sandwich,  "and  I  have 
heard  him  repeat  it."  "Where?"  said  the  King.  "At 
our  Club  at  the  top  of  Covent  Garden  Theatre,"  said  Lord 
Sandwich.  "  And  so  have  I,"  said  Lord  Despencer,  "  at 
our  Abbey  of  Mederiham,  where  we  used  to  practise  all 
kinds  of  impiety  and  indecency." 

"  This  will  do,"  said  the  King.  "  I  will  betray  and 
impeach  my  friend,"  said  Lord  Sandwich.  "  Do  so,"  said 
the  Scotch,  "I  will  cant,"  said  Lord  Sandwich.  "  Do 
so,"  said  Bishop  Warburton.  "  I  will  protect  Wilkes," 
said  Lord  Temple.  "  You  will  break  with  him,  as  you 
have  done  with  every  other  friend,  from  interest,  passion, 
or  vanity,"  said  all  his  family.  "  Lord  Sandwich  is  a 
pious  man,"  said  the  House  of  Commons,  "  and  Wilkes 
an  infidel  not  fit  to  sit  amongst  us." 

Alexander  Dun  said,  "  I  will  murder  Wilkes."  "  So 
will  I,"  said  Samuel  Martin.  "  So  will  I,"  said  Forbes. 

2o2 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOE  ACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

"  I  will  tax  America,"  said  Mr.  Grenville.  "  You  shall 
not,"  said  America. 

"There  must  be  a  Regency  Bill,"  said  the  King. 
"Your  mother  shall  have  no  share  in  it,"  said  Mr.  Gren- 
ville. "Who  made  you  Minister?"  said  the  King. 

"You  must  disgrace  your  mother  by  Act  of  Parlia- 
ment," said  Lord  Halifax  and  Lord  Sandwich. 

"  You  shall  restore  her,"  said  the  King.  "  I  will,"  said 
Mr.  Grenville,  Lord  Halifax,  and  Lord  Sandwich. 

"I  will  send  for  my  uncle,  the  Duke  of  Cumberland," 
said  the  King,  "and  he  shall  fetch  Lord  Chatham."  "I 
will  not  come,"  said  Lord  Chatham. 

Said  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  "  You  must  send  for 
your  old  Ministers  again." 

"  You  shall  abandon  Lord  Bute,  and  Mr.  Mackenzie, 
and  Lord  Holland,"  said  the  old  Ministers. 

"He  shall  not  name  one  of  his  own  footmen,"  said  Mr. 
Rigby. 

"  You  shall  hear  a  lecture  of  an  hour  long  on  all  your 
faults  and  breaches  of  promise,"  said  the  Duke  of  Bedford, 
Mr.  Grenville,  Lord  Halifax,  and  Lord  Sandwich. 

' '  I  cannot  bear  such  indignities,"  said  the  King.  "  I 
will  send  for  my  uncle,  and  he  shall  make  a  new  Adminis- 
tration for  me." 

"You  shall  repeal  the  Stamp  Act  and  the  Cider  Tax," 
said  Lord  Rockingham,  "  and  act  according  to  law,  and 
for  the  good  of  this  country." 

"  I  will  turn  out  Lord  Rockingham  and  my  new 
Ministers,"  said  the  King,  "and  will  send  for  Lord 
Chatham." 

*•  Renew  your  alliance  with  the  King  of  Prussia,"  said 
Lord  Chatham,  "and  put  the  Duke  of  Grafton  at  the 
head  of  the  Treasury,  and  make  Charles  Townshend 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer." 


L78K  NEW  METHOD  OF  WRITING  HISTORY.  565 

"  Lord  Chatham  is  incapable  of  business,"  said  the 
Duke  of  Grafton. 

"  Then  I  will  lay  new  taxes  on  America,"  said  Charles 
Townshend. 

"  I  will  stand  for  Middlesex,"  said  Wilkes.  "  We  will 
abuse  you,"  said  the  county.  *'  He  shall  not  sit,"  said  the 
House  of  Commons.  "  You  have  no  right  to  hinder  him," 
said  the  law.  "  They  have,"  said  the  lawyers. 

"  We  will  chose  him  again,"  said  the  county.  "  It  will 
be  to  no  purpose,"  said  the  courtiers. 

"  Colonel  Luttrell  shall  stand,"  said  Lord  Bute.  "  We 
will  not  choose  him,"  said  the  county.  "  We  will  say  you 
did,"  said  the  House  of  Commons. 

"  Is  a  minority  more  numerous  than  a  majority  ?"  said 
the  Opposition.  "Not  in  the  House  of  Commons,  thank 
God,"  said  the  majority,  "  but  we  will  say  it  is  anywhere 
else." 

"  We  will  petition  against  a  House  of  Commons,  who 
can  be  bribed  to  contradict  arithmetic,"  said  counties  and 
towns.  "Do  so,"  said  Mr.  Wedderburn,  "and  I  will  draw 
the  Remonstrance." 

"  I  will  not  dissolve  a  Parliament  that  has  disgraced 
itself  for  my  sake,"  said  the  *  *  *  *. 

"  You  are  a  corrupt  and  scandalous  assembly,"  said  Sir 
George  Saville,  "  I  thought  so  last  night,  and  I  think  so 
this  morning." 

"  We  think  so,  too,"  said  the  assembly,  by  their  silence. 

"The  House  of  Commons  has  acted  illegally,"  said  the 
Chancellor,  Lord  Camden. 

*'  Give  me  the  Great  Seal,"  said  the  King. 

"  You  shall  be  Chancellor,"  said  the  Duke  of  Grafton 
to  Lord  Mansfield.  Lord  Mansfield  said,  "  I  dare  not." 

"  I  will  be  Chancellor,"  said  Norton.     "  Your  character 


566  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JULY, 

is  too  bad,"  said  everybody.  "  You  are  good  enough  to  be 
our  Speaker,"  said  the  House  of  Commons. 

"  You  shall  be  Chancellor,"  said  the  King  to  Yorke.  "I 
have  vowed  I  would  not,"  said  Yorke.  "  You  never  shall 
be  so  if  you  will  not  now,"  said  the  King ;  "  and  I  will 
make  your  younger  son  a  Peer  if  you  consent."  "  I  will," 
said  Yorke. 

"  How  could  you  break  your  word?  "  said  his  brother. 
"  I  am  distracted,"  said  Yorke.  *  *  *  *  "  I  will  not 
give  his  son  the  Peerage,"  said  the  King 

"I  cannot  find  a  Chancellor,"  said  the  Duke  of  Grafton, 
"  I  must  resign."  "  Do  so,"  said  Lord  Gower,  and  Rigby, 
and  Bradshawe. 

"  Odd  man,  odd  man  I  "  said  the  King.  "  Coming,  Sir," 
said  Lord  North. 

"  Since  we  cannot  have  a  sensible  man  for  Chancellor, 
we  must  take  a  fool,"  said  the  King.  "  Your  Majesty  is 
very  good,"  said  Lord  Bathurst. 


OHAKACTER  OF  LORD  SHELBURNE. 

His  falsehood  was  so  constant  and  notorious,  that  it  was 
rather  his  profession  than  his  instrument.  It  was  like  a 
fictitious  violin,  which  is  hung  out  of  a  music  shop  to  indi- 
cate in  what  goods  the  tradesman  deals ;  not  to  be  of  service, 
nor  to  be  depended  on  for  playing  a  true  note.  He  was 
so  well  known  that  he  could  only  deceive  by  speaking 
truth.  His  plausibility  was  less  an  artifice  than  a  habit ; 
and  his  smiles  were  so  excited  that,  like  the  rattle  of  the 
snake,  they  warned  before  he  had  time  to  bite.  Both  his 
heart  and  his  face  were  brave ;  he  feared  neither  danger 


1782.  CHARACTER  OF  LORD  SHELBURNE.       ^          567 

nor  detection.  He  was  so  fond  of  insincerity  as  if  he  had 
been  the  inventor,  and  practised  it  with  as  little  caution  as 
if  he  thought  nobody  else  had  discovered  the  secret. 

With  an  unbounded  ambition  of  governing  mankind,  he 
had  never  studied  them.  He  had  no  receipt  but  indiscrimi- 
nate flattery,  which  he  addressed  to  all,  without  knowing  how 
to  adapt  it  to  any  particular  person,  for  he  neither  under- 
stood the  characters  of  men  nor  penetrated  them.  Hence 
his  flatteries  were  so  gross,  that  instead  of  captivating,  they 
prompted  laughter.  So  ignorant  was  he  of  mankind,  that 
he  did  not  know  how  absurd  it  was  in  a  man  of  such 
glaring  ambition  to  affect  having  none.  He  would  talk  of 
himself  as  void  of  all  views,  when  there  was  no  industry 
and  intrigue  of  which  he  was  not  suspected.  The  folly  of 
his  professions  was  the  only  chance  he  had  for  not  being 
thought  a  deep  politician,  for  who  could  believe  that  such 
palpable  duplicity  was  the  offspring  of  anything  but  of 
want  of  sense  ?  He  not  only  had  no  principles,  but  was 
ready  for  any  crime  that  suited  his  plans,  which  seemed 
drawn  from  histories  of  the  worst  ages — for  he  was  rather 
a  pedant  in  villany,  than  a  politician  who  adapted  himself 
to  the  times  in  which  he  lived.  Thus  a  Catiline  or  a 
Borgia  were  his  models  in  an  age  when  half  their  wicked- 
ness would  have  suited  his  purpose  better — for  when 
refinements  have  taken  place  of  horrid  crimes,  and  the 
manners  of  men  are  rather  corrupt  than  flagitious,  excess 
of  profligacy  is  more  destructive  to  ambition  than  service- 
able. He  determined  to  be  Prime  Minister  by  any  means, 
but  forgot  that,  in  a  country  where  the  faction  has  any 
weight,  character  is  a  necessary  ingredient  towards  ac- 
quiring or  preserving  power.  The  King  hated  him,  all 
the  higher  orders  knew  him,  the  people  could  have  no 
favourable  opinion  of  him.  To  combat  hatred,  suspicion, 


568  ,  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  1782. 

and  at  best  indifference,  he  had  no  arms  but  a  resolution 
of  recommending  himself  to  the  King  by  unbounded 
flattery  and  servility,  and  the  power  and  money  of  the 
Crown  he  trusted  would  maintain  him  against  all  other 
sinister  impressions.  But  more  was  wanting  than  versa- 
tility to  acquire  confidence.  He  must  re-establish  the 
King's  power  as  well  as  show  a  desire  of  it,  and  he  must 
perform  real  services  for  the  kingdom  before  he  could 
gain  its  affections.  If  he  attempted  the  former,  he  con- 
tradicted his  own  professions,  and  those  of  his  late  allies, 
who  would  have  no  mercy  in  his  failures  ;  and  to  hope  to 
recover  the  affairs  of  the  nation  was  a  presumption  that 
betrayed  vanity,  not  consciousness  of  abilities.  Lord  North, 
with  an  unimpeached  private  character,  agreeable  to,  if 
not  possessing  the  confidence  of,  the  King,  and  extremely 
popular  with  the  greater  part  of  the  nation,  had  fallen  by 
mere  want  of  success,  and  by  his  own  inactivity.  The 
other  enjoyed  none  of  those  supports,  and  was  in  nothing 
preferable  to  Lord  North  but  in  vigilance  and  industry. 
He  might  have  succeeded  where  Lord  North  had  miscarried 
by  indolence ;  but  Lord  North  had  miscarried  too  much  for 
diligence  to  retrieve — and  if  Lord  Shelburne  was  equally 
unprosperous,  he  had  none  of  Lord  North's  good  qualities 
to  procure  the  same  indulgence.  Thus  having  raised 
himself  by  want  of  character,  he  was  sure  of  wanting 
character  to  break  his  fall. 

He  had  offended  and  dreaded  Lord  Bute.  He  had 
treated  Lord  North  with  unpardonable  contempt.  He  had 
wantonly  on  all  occasions  personally  provoked  Lord  Mans- 
field. He  had  earlier  broken  with  Rigby,  and  exasperated 
him  lately.  He  had  offended  Charles  Fox,  Burke,  and 
the  Cavendishes  to  the  highest  degree ;  nor  had  he  one 
friend  of  character  but  Lord  Camdui,  for  he  heaped  such 


1782.  CHARACTER  OF  LORD  SHELBURNE.  569 

impudent  gratifications  on  Dunning  and  Barre  that  they 
were  as  justly  abhorred  for  receiving  the  wages  of  corrup- 
tion as  he  for  conferring  them.  To  them  he  had  newly 
added  that  most  abandoned  man  the  Lord  Advocate,  whom 
he  might  have  for  a  champion  while  he  retained  his  power, 
but  could  not  trust  a  moment  should  it  decline.  If  he 
reckoned  on  the  Chancellor,  he  leant  on  an  insolent  asso- 
ciate, who  perhaps  wished  himself  in  his  place  and  loved 
nobody.  Still  it  was  likely  that  the  King's  countenance 
would  draw  most  of  these  rays  to  the  focus  of  the  Court, 
and  thence  Lord  Shelburne  might  for  some  time  establish 
his  preeminence — but  as  his  own  insincerity  and  want  of 
judgment  would  raise  him  new  enemies  every  day,  it  was 
most  probable  that  his  real  enemies  would  seize  with 
alacrity  any  moment  of  overturning  him ;  and  the  facility 
with  which  the  King  had  abandoned  every  servant  made 
it  more  than  probable  that  he  would  not  be  ^beadier  to  one 
who  had  been  forced  into  his  service,  and  whose  zeal,  how- 
ever servile,  His  Majesty  had  reason  to  hope  would  not 
exceed  that  of  most  whom  he  might  honour  with  a  prefer- 
ence, or  be  obliged  to  prefer. 

Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lord  Rawdon.  New  Ministers 
would  not  banish  the  old. 

July  and  August.  Lord  George  to  Lord  North.  Lord 
Shelburne  made  Lord  Advocate  Treasurer  of  the  Navy, 
gave  him  his  Scotch  place  for  life,  and  let  him  keep  Lord 
Advocate  :  he  had  sent  for  him  up.  The  Advocate  came, 
yet  pretended  to  hesitate — yet  but  for  one  day.  Lord 
Shelburne  pretended  he  would  resign  if  Advocate  refused. 

Charles  Fox  in  love  with  Mrs.  Robinson.  Rigby  goes 
to  see  Lord  Shelburne,  who  makes  great  professions. 

Georgia  given  up.     Lord  Rockingham. 


570  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  17b2. 

Lord  Temple  made  Lord  Lieutenant. 
Combined  fleets  at  the  mouth  of  the  Channel,  to  protect 
their  own  expected  trade  and  intercept  ours,  and  to  hinder 
our  assisting  Gibraltar.  Their  Western  trade  arrived  safe  : 
so  did  our  Jamaica  and  leeward  fleets,  and  then  they  went 
home.  Dutch  fleet  sailed  northward,  but  returned  to 
Texel,  and  then  Lord  Howe  sent  part  after  the  Dutch  to 
the  Baltic. 

Dissensions  thereon. 

Vast  preparations  against  Gibraltar.     Count  D'Artois 
and  Duke  of  Bourbon. 

Rodney  lets  the  beaten  French  fleet  escape,  and  go  to 
New  York.     Mr.  Fitzherbert  sent  to  Paris. 

Draper  accused  Murray.  Court-martial.  Nation  took 
no  part,  nor  of  Sir  Henry  Clinton  when  he  returned. 
August  30th.  News  of  Kempenfelt  lost  in  Royal  George. 
Nov. — Violent  pamphlet  against  Lord  Shelburne,  ironi- 
cally called  a  defence  of  him.  Supposed  to  be  by  Edmund 
Burke;1  by  others  said  to  be  by  Sheridan.  The  Com- 
mittee of  the  York  Association  had  met  in  October  to  give 
an  account  of  their  proceedings,  which  had  been  done,  and 
to  resign  their  trust.  The  Association  agreed  to  meet  again 
at  the  end  of  December,  probably  to  observe  what  Parlia- 
ment would  do.  Wyvill  sent  an  account  of  that  meeting 
to  most  of  the  Common  Council  of  London.  One  of  them 
returned  his  letter  with  a  severe  answer  and  printed  it  in 
the  papers.  Lord  Shelburne  had  had  a  meeting  with  Mr. 
Wyvill  in  summer,  and  made  great  professions  to  him ; 
but  it  was  said  Wyvill  did  not  trust  him. 

In  August  1782,  Lord  North  received  in  triumph  at 
Manchester.     People  drew  his  coach. 


11  was  l>y  Dennis  O'Bryeii. 


1782.  LOOSE  PAPERS.  571 

Sept. — Sir  James  Lowther  gives  a  74-gun  ship :  price 
30,000£. 

IQth.  Admiral  Millbank  being  returned  from  fetching 
the  Baltic  trade  ships,  Lord  Howe  at  last  sailed  to  the 
relief  of  Gibraltar,  besieged  by  28,000  men. 

Strong  report  that  four  of  the  colonies  had  thrown  off 
obedience  to  the  Congress,  displeased  with  the  French. 

Lord  Howe  had  refused  to  sail  unless  he  had  Admiral 
Hood,  which  Keppel  was  forced  to  make  a  merit  of  con- 
senting to. 

30th.  Account  of  the  attack  on  Gibraltar  on  13th,  and 
the  destruction  of  the  floating  batteries  in  nine  hours,  and 
the  destruction  of  1500  men. 

Oct. — Resolutions  of  Congress  against  offers  of  inde- 
pendence. 

22/id.  Lord  George  Gordon's  letter  to  Lord  Shelburne 
on  that  subject. 

Affairs  in  India  better  than  was  thought. 

Ten  Dutch  ships  refused  to  go  to  Brest. 

28^/i.  Account  of  Lord  Howe  having  relieved  Gibraltar, 
the  French  and  Spanish  fleets  having  been  dispersed  by  a 
storm  and  four  stranded. 

Nov.  7th. — Captain  Duncan  and  Conway  arrived  from 
Lord  Howe,  with  news  that  the  combined  fleets  had  at- 
tacked Lord  Howe  in  the  evening,  but  retired.  No  ship 
taken  on  either  side.  Captain  Fielding  wounded  in  the 
arm,  and  60  seamen  killed  on  our  side.  Lord  Howe 
coming  home. 

When  Lord  Rockingham  died,  Lord  Shelburne  went 
directly  to  Windsor.  The  Rockingham  party  had  no  meet- 
ing that  night.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  went  to  Mr. 
Cornwallis  in  the  evening,  and  was  pretty  temperate.  Mr. 
Cornwallis  and  I  much  for  their  submission  to  let  Lord 


572  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  1782. 

Shelburne  be  Premier,  as  it  would  else  seem  to  be  quar- 
relling for  places.  They  had  reason  enough  to  suspect, 
him :  Fox  did  strongly,  as  he  had  lately  set  up  William 
Pitt  against  him,  but  he  had  joined  in  their  public  mea- 
sures. It  was  wiser  to  wait  and  have  some  fault  in  him 
that  they  could  allege  to  the  public.  He  had  yielded 
to  independence  of  America,  pretended  to  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond to  be  strong  for  change  of  the  House  of  Commons, 
had  supported  their  reforms,  even  of  Excise  officers  voting, 
which  not  only  lessened  the  influence  of  the  Crown  but 
obliged  the  Excise  officers  to  be  diligent.  Duchess  of 
Richmond  warm  against  submitting  to  Lord  Shelburne. 
King  never  sent  to  inquire  after  Lord  Rockingham. 

Lord  Weymouth  would  not  go  to  the  House  of  Lords 
nor  take  his  seat,  though  he  took  a  place. 

Lord  Shelburne,  with  Mr.  Conway,  said  the  King  called 
on  him  to  make  a  new  Administration.  Professed  good 
disposition  ;  said  had  got  over  many  difficulties  with  King 
for  the  new  Ministers,  as  he  got  him  to  come  into  inde- 
pendence of  America ;  but  Fox  and  others  suspected  him. 
Conway  owned  others  did,  but  he  did  not.  Conway  and 
Richmond  for  going  on.  Lord  John,  who  loved  to  govern 
a  small  party  and  disliked  his  office,  would  not  be  called 
Governor.  Lord  Rockingham — nobody  else.  Charles  Fox 
saw  he  could  not  be  Minister  and  hoped  to  get  the  Whigs. 
Russia  and  Holland  would  fly  off;  perhaps  America.  Lord 
Shelburne,  who  had  discovered  his  tricks,  particularly 
by  setting  William  Pitt  against  Fox,  now  suffered  them. 
Barre,  who  probably  knew  him,  grieved  at  Lord  Rocking- 
ham's  death.  Lord  Shelburne  had  brought  a  bill  for  * 

in  Colonies.  Conway 's  and  Charles  Fox's 
speech  at  word  "  America."  It  was  given  up,  but  Hartley 
went  on  with  it,  and  Sir  George  Saville,  till  Conway  told  the 


1782.  "  A  NEW  BALLAD."  573 

latter,  King  and  Council  for  independence.  Fox  said — 
this  bill  without  his  knowledge.  Fox  and  Rockingham,  in 
council  of  nine,  had  been  for  immediately  declaring  America 
independent.  Lord  Shelburne  against  it,  4  and  4.  Con- 
way  turned  it  by  being  against  it.  News  of  the  Quebec 
Fleet  taken  :  this  made  it  imprudent  for  Keppel  to  go  out 
now ;  as  it  was  for  Con  way  till  peace  was  made,  as  he 
had  answered  for  it. 

Grenville  had  been  sent  to  Paris  by  Charles  Fox  ;  an- 
other by  Lord  Shelburne.  King  giving  up  all  but  Ash- 
burton  and  Montagu. 

Lord  Weymouth  not  taking  his  seat ;  Lord  Gower's 
refusal  of  Premier,  yet  swayed  by  Chancellor  to  be  for 
Lord  Shelburne.  Lord  North  rather  for  Fox.  Fox's 
idleness  and  love  for  Mrs.  Robinson. 


THE  MARRIAGE  ACT  NOT  MADE  BY  THE  LATE 

KING. 

A  NEW  BALLAD. 

To  the  tune  of  '  King  John  and  the  Abbot.' 

"  There  was  once  a  King  of  the  Hanover  race, 
Who  had  more  sense  within  than  appear'd  in  his  face ; 
And  yet  though  his  head-piece  was  not  his  best  part, 
It  was  excellent  good,  if  compared  with  his  heart. 

Deny  down. 

"  This  Prince,  like  his  grandpapa  Charles,  was  devout, 
And,  like  his  great  ancestor  Jamey,  was  stout ; 
Like  Jamey  the  Second,  by  mother  and  wife, 
Two  notable  dames,  he  was  led  all  his  life. 

Derry  down. 


574  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. .  1782. 

"  This  King  had  a  brother  as  wise  as  himself, 
A  chattering,  gossiping,  puppet-like  elf, 
Who  had  tutors  so  learned,  and  was  brought  up  so  well, 
That  he  wrote  fine  love-letters — and  almost  could  spell. 

Deny  down. 
******* 

"  The  husband,  a  beautiful  kind  of  a  swain, 
"Who  was  fonder  of  honours  than  eager  for  gain, 
Would  have  pulled  in  his  horns,  had  his  Majesty  pleased, 
With  an  earl's  coronet  his  own  brows  to  have  eased. 

Deny  down. 

"  No,  cried  George,  who,  like  Midas,  had  very  long  ears, 
All  my  brothers  make  cuckolds,  I  will  not  make  Peers  ; 


Deny  down. 

"  The  Duke  was  restored  to  his  brother's  high  favour, 
And  continued  as  usual  his  wanton  behaviour  ; 
For  adultery  at  Court  was  not  thought  an  unfitness, 
As  a  twice-married  maiden  of  honour  can  witness. 

Deny  down. 

"  But  Hymen,  indignant  to  see  his  laws  broke, 
Determined  to  bend  the  loose  youth  to  his  yoke ; 
So  a  votary  true,  a  bright  widow  he  chose, 
And  the  pert  little  Prince  was  soon  caught  in  the  noose. 

Derry  down. 

"  But  oh !  all  ye  gods,  who  inspire  ballad-singers, 
Ye  muses,  with  nine-times-ten  ivory  fingers,  • 
I  invoke  ye  to  guide  both  my  voice  and  my  pen, 
While  I  sing  of  the  fury  that  seized  King  and  Queen. 

Derry  down. 

"  King  and  Queen  when  they  heard  how  th'  undutiful  whelp, 
Had  disgraced  the  great  houses  of  Mecky  and  Guelp, 
Swore  and  cried,  curs'd  and  fainted,  and  calling  for  Bute, 
Of  your  Luttrell-connexion,  cried  George,  see  the  fruit. 

Derry  down. 

"  This  Irish-alliance  my  projects  all  bilks, 
I'd  as  lief  he  had  married  the  daughter  of  Wilkes  ; 
While  to  humour  my  mother  and  yoti  I  conspire, 
I  am  out  of  the  fiying-pan  into  the  fire. 

Derry  down. 


1782.  "A  NEW  BALLAD."  575 

"  The  slave  looked  aghast  and  had  nothing  to  say, 
AVhich  historians  agree  was  too  often  his  way ; 
He  never  for  difficult  times  had  a  fit  heart, 
So  he  called  for  his  chair,  and  sought  out  Miss  Vansittart. 

Derry  down. 

"  Then  the  Scotch  were  consulted,  with  Martyn  and  Dyson — 
Martyn  offered  his  pistol,  the  Scots  were  for  poison  ; 
But  Mansfield,  best  prop  of  the  Hanover  line, 
Thus  connected  the  zeal  of  the  Junto  divine. 

Derry  down. 

"  Ye  friends  of  the  King,  and  ye  foes  of  the  nation, 
This  matter  requires  a  deep  consideration  ; 
It  is  not  enough  to  correct :  politicians 
From  misfortunes  know  how  to  extract  good  conditions. 

Derry  down. 

"  A  King,  like  a  Sultan,  should  reign  all  alone, 
Xo  brothers,  no  cousins,  be  seen  near  the  throne ; 
Pent  in  dungeons  a  few  should  be  kept  for  the  breed, 
For  it  is  not  enough  to  teach  'em  to  read. 

Derry  down. 

"  From  the  Duke's  breach  of  duty  my  act  shall  receive 
The  highest-flown  doctrines  of  prerogative ; 
Plantagenets,  Tudors,  nay,  Stuarts  I'll  quote, 
And  what  law  cannot  prove  shall  be  proved  by  a  vote. 

Derry  down. 

"  To  marry,  unmarry,  son,  brother,  or  heir, 
Has  been  always  his  right  our  good  King  shall  declare,  ^ 

Though  as  far  from  the  truth,  as  the  north  from  the  south — 
It  is  not  the  first  lie  we  have  put  in  his  mouth. 

Deny  down. 

"  They  may  burn  and  bo  damn'd,  but  they  never  shall  marry  ; 
George  the  Third  as  despotic  shall  be  as  Eighth  Harry ; 
He  shall  cut  off  the  heads  of  his  sons  and  his  spouses, 
For  we'll  have  no  more  war  between  red  and  white  roses. 

Derry  down. 

"  Not,  my  friends,  that  I  hate,  as  you  know,  a  Pretender, 
But  a  Christian  can  ne'er  be  a  good  faith's  defender : 
The  Church  and  the  Bible  are  different  things ; 
The  last's  for  the  mob,  but  the  first  is  for  Kings. 

Derry  down. 


576  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  1782. 

"  Of  the  bishops  I'm  sure ;  they  are  pliable  tools  : 
Of  the  twenty-six  prelates  full  twenty  are  fools. 
Not  the  Gospel,  preferment  is  all  they  regard, 
Or  would  Warburton  now  be  an  orthodox  card ! 

Derry  down. 

"  The  judges  shall  say — or  at  least  I'll  say  for  'em, 
That  it  is  the  opinion  of  their  learned  quorum, 
That  whate'er  has  been  law  must  always  annoy, 
And  no  time  can  prescribe,  Sirs,  against  Droit  le  Eoi. 

Derry  down. 

"  But  should  they  ask  time  to  consider  and  ponder, 
And  not,  like  the  Bench,  to  our  pleasure  knock  under, 
In  both  Houses  we'll  swear  they  have  said  as  we  say, 
For  we're  sure  of  ten  yeas  for  one  patriot  nay. 

Derry  down. 

"  For  myself,  as  I  ever  have  done,  I  will  keep 
In  the  dark,  for  I  love  in  a  whole  skin  to  sleep, 
And  since  I  would  ne'er  risk  my  neck  for  King  Jamey, 

Do  ye  think  I'll  be  martyr'd  for  Brunswick  ? — no,  d n  me. 

Derry  down." 


(    577    ) 


1783. 
JANUARY. 


2lst.  THE  Parliament  met  again  after  the  recess.  As 
the  account  of  the  Preliminaries  of  Peace  being  signed  at 
Paris  was  every  moment  expected,  the  Opposition  lay  by 
and  would  not  say  a  word. 

22nd.  Bill  brought  in  for  ceding  all  control  of  England 
over  Ireland.  [Vide  Debates.] 

23rd.  At  last,  in  the  evening,  courier  arrived  with 
account  of  the  Preliminaries  being  signed  by  France, 
Spain  and  America,  but  not  with  Holland,  only  a  suspen- 
sion of  arms.  Thus  in  one  week  the  King  gave  up  all 
control  over  Ireland,  and  the  total  sovereignty  of  North 
America,  by  grasping  at  despotism  over  which,  he  lost 
both  America  and  Ireland  !  What  a  lesson  to  despotic 
ambition — if  ambition  would  learn  from  example !  Here 
was  the  House  of  Hanover  stripped  of  such  vast  power  and 
dominions  by  treading  in  the  steps  of  the  House  of  Stuart, 
to  whose  prejudice  they  had  been  called  to  the  Crown ! 
Lord  Oxford  told  Lord  Hertford  that  the  King,  speak- 
ing to  him  of  his  late  Speech  on  opening  of  Session,  in 
which  he  gave  up  America,  asked  him  if  he  had  not 
observed  him  lowering  his  voice  when  he  came  to  that  part 
of  his  speech.  This  showed  he  had  not  been  insensible  to 
the  ignominious  part  Lord  Shelburne  had  forced  him  ta 

VOL.  IL  2  P 


578  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  JAN. 

act.     It  was  still   more   foolish   to   mention  it   to  Lord 
Oxford. 

23rd.  In  the  morning  the  Duke  of  Kichmond  declared 
to  the  King  that,  disapproving  of  Lord  Shelburne's 
assumption  of  too  much  power  in  the  negotiation,  he 
would  go  no  more  to  Council ;  but,  as  he  had  begun  and 
could  carry  on  great  savings  in  the  Ordnance,  he  would 
keep  it  if  the  King  desired  it,  which  he  did  desire. 

24th.  Lord  Keppel  resigned  the  Admiralty. 

27th.  The  Preliminaries  laid  before  both  Houses,  and 
ordered  to  be  printed,  after  some  opposition  from  Thomas 
Townshend,  though  Lord  Shelburne  had  consented  in  the 
other  House. 

Same  day  was  printed  in  the  papers,  a  letter  from  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  to  the  Sheriff  of  Sussex,  to  excuse  his 
not  attending,  from  illness,  the  meeting  on  Eeform  of 
Representation,  in  which  his  Grace  attacked  Mr.  Wyvil, 
who  had  called  the  Duke's  late  idea,  at  a  former  meeting, 
of  all  persons  having  a  right  to  vote  at  all  elections,  a 
vision ;  and  had  said,  that  only  what  was  practicable 
should  be  asked. 

28th.  Lord  Howe  made  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty, 
and  Sir  Robert  Harland,  who  was  dying,  and  intended  to 
resign,  resigning,  Lord  Howe,  to  mark  regard  to  Lord 
Keppel,  recommended  his  friend,  Captain  Leveson  Gower, 
as  one  of  the  Lords,  in  Harland's  room. 

29th.  Report  on  trial  of  General  Murray ;  of  twenty- 
nine  articles  alleged  by  Draper,  twenty-seven  declared 
frivolous;  for  the  other  two,  Murray  to  be  reprimanded; 
but,  Draper  having  written  to  Murray  during  the  siege, 
that  Murray's  suspecting  Draper  of  wanting  the  command 
was  false  and  infamous,  Court-martial,  to  prevent  a  duel, 
ordered  Draper  to  make  an  apology  to  Murray,  which 


1783. 


MUTINY  AT  PORTSMOUTH. 


579 


Draper  did,  because,  as  he  said,  they  ordered  him.  Mur- 
ray would  not,  just  in  the  words  they  prescribed,  and 
wrote  to  General  Conway  that  he  would  rather  resign  his 
regiment,  but  as  he  should  be  undone,  and  had  a  wife  and 
three  children,  and  another  coming,  begged  Conway  to 
get  her  a  pension  of  300/.  a  year.  Conway  tried  to  soften 
him,  and  in  the  mean  time  he  was  put  under  arrest. 
Draper  was  mad,  and  Murray  a  wrong-headed  man. 

Mutiny  at  Portsmouth  of  the  77th  regiment,  who 
pleaded  having  been  promissed  dismission,  and  yet  were 
now  to  be  sent  to  the  East  Indies.  They  shot  one  man, 
wounded  their  Lieutenant-Colonel,  and  would  have  killed 
the  Duke  of  Athol  *,  and  Murray,  their  Colonel,  had  they 
appeared.  Lord  George  Gordon  offered  Lord  Shelburne 
to  go  and  pacify  them.  They  were  quieted. 

31  st.  Lord  Maitland  moved  in  the  House  of  Commons 
for  proclamation  of  all  under  promises  being  disbanded  on 
peace. 

Lord  Loughborough  and  Eden  trying  to  unite  Lord 
North  and  Fox;  the  Lord  Advocate,  Sir  Grey  Cooper, 
and  Robinson,  to  unite  him  with  Lord  Shelburne. 


1  John,  the  fourth  Duke,  whose  fea- 
tures as  an  old  man  are  so  well  known 
to  the  public  in  Landseer's  picture, 


"  Death  of  the  Stag  in  Glen  Tilt."  Ho 
enjoyed  the  ducal  title  upwards  of  sixty 
years. — D. 


2  P  2 


580  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 


FEBRUARY. 


ACCOUNT  that  the  66th  regiment,  though  embarked  for 
the  East  Indies,  had  mutinied  too ;  composed. 

Canada  merchants  remonstrated  with  Lord  Shelburne 
against  the  treaty  respecting  the  fur  trade.  His  foolish 
answer.  ('London  Chronicle/  Feb.  1.) 

5th.  Lord  Carlisle  resigned  the  place  of  Lord  Steward, 
giving  out  that  he  disapproved  the  sacrifice  of  the  Ameri- 
can Loyalists.  He  had  been  Commissioner  with  Governor 
Johnston  and  W.  Eden,  both  now  violently  in  Opposition. 
But  the  true  reasons  were  supposed  to  be,  that  Lord  Car- 
lisle had  wished  to  go  Ambassador  to  Paris,  whither  Lord 
Caermarthen  was  named ;  and  that  Eden  had  wrought  on 
Carlisle,  who  might  also  wish  to  get  back  to  Charles  Fox, 
as  the  extreme  unpopularity  of  Lord  Shelburne  made  it 
probable  that  he  would  not  be  able  long  to  keep  his  power, 
the  Preliminaries  becoming  every  day  more  disliked.  Lord 
Carlisle  had  quitted  Ireland  abruptly  on  the  change  of  the 
Ministry ;  had  been  made  Lord  Steward  by  Charles  Fox, 
leaving  his  secretary,  Eden,  in  the  lurch.  On  Fox's  resig- 
nation immediately  after,  Lord  Carlisle  deserted  him, 
pretending  to  owe  the  stick  to  his  father-in-law,  Lord 
Gower,  yet  now  was  perhaps  persuaded  by  Charles  Fox 
and  Eden  to  resign  as  a  signal  that  Lord  Shelburne  was 
falling.  Shelburne's  insolence  and  folly  advanced  his  fall 
daily.  He  consulted  nobody  but  W.  Pitt,  and  flattered 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  neglected  Lord  Camden,  Duke  of 
Grafton,  Conway,  and  everybody  else,  trusting  to  maintain 
himself  entirely  by  the  King.  He  had  neither  treated 


1783. 


THE  PEACE  NOT  POPULAR. 


581 


directly  with  Lord  North,  nor  with  Charles  Fox ;  and 
they,  either  hoping  he  would,  or  waiting  to  see  the  peace 
concluded,  had  lain  quiet,  and  given  no  marks  of  dis- 
pleasure; yet,  if  Shelburne  thus  got  his  peace  secured, 
the  long  delay  of  the  ratification  of  the  Preliminaries  had 
given  time  to  all  sorts  of  opponents  to  cry  down  the  arti- 
cles ;  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  Loyalists  was  made  the  chief 
handle.  Lord  Mansfield  was  openly  an  enemy.  Lord 
Loughborough  and  Eden  warmly  endeavoured  to  unite 
Lord  North  and  Fox ;  Robinson  and  Sir  Grey  Cooper,  to 
join  Lord  North  and  Lord  Shelburne ;  while  the  Duke  of 
Richmond  wished  Shelburne  and  Fox  to  unite. 

New  Order  of  St.  Patrick  instituted  in  Ireland. 

8th.  Ratification  of  Preliminaries  with  France  arrived, 
and  soon  after  that,  of  Spain. 

12/A.  The  peace  growing  very  unpopular,  Lord  Shel- 
burne became  alarmed,  and  began  to  treat  with  the  two 
opposing  parties.  First,  with  Charles  Fox,  through  Lord 
Keppel,  who  owned  to  Conway  he  did  not  wish  it  to 
succeed ;  nor  did  it,  for,  Fox  insisting  on  the  Treasury 
for  the  Duke  of  Portland,  Lord  Shelburne  (who  certainly 
did  not  mean  to  sacrifice  himself  in  order  to  save  himself) 
said,  the  King  insisted  on  his  keeping  it.  He  then  treated 
with  Lord  North,  and  acquainted  the  Duke  of  Grafton, 
who  objected  strongly,  and  said  he  should  not  like  to  sit 
in  Council  with  Lord  North  and  that  party.  Shelburne 
said,  Oh  !  it  was  not  meant  Lord  North  should  have 
influence  in  the  Council,  but  would  the  Duke  object  to 
that  party  having  a  few  places  ?  The  Duke  said  he  must 
consider  it,  and  would  not  give  positive  assent.1  This 


1  Lord  Shell lunif  had  begun  to  sound 
Charles  Fox,  and  that  faction,  by  Duke 
of  Richmond  and  Lord  Keppel ;  but 
finding  that  they  insisted  on  tliu  Trea- 


sury for  the  Duke  of  Portland,  he  sent 
Mr.  W.  Pitt  in  form  to  Charles  Fox,  in 
order  to  have  it  to  say  that  they  had  re- 
fused on  account  of  places. 


582  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

treaty  was  negociated  by  the  Lord  Advocate,  but  Lord 
North  was  irresolute,  and  it  did  not  succeed ;  yet,  even 

13th,  While  it  was  pending,  Lord  Shelburne  foolishly 
made  the  Duke  of  Rutland  (a  weak  young  man)  not  only 
Lord  Steward,  in  the  room  of  Lord  Carlisle,  but  made 
him  of  the  Cabinet  Council ;  a  most  unusual  honour  for  a 
Lord  Steward,  but  filling  up  one  of  the  best  posts,  with 
which  he  might  have  trafficked  with  the  Opposition.  All 
his  measujes  were  rash,  and  undigested,  and  unconnected. 

15th,  Indecent  motion  of  Lord  Maitland  and  Lord 
Parker  for  greater  reward  to  General  Elliot  than  a  pen- 
sion of  1500£.  a  year  and  a  red  riband;  rejected  by  a 
great  majority. 

Motion  by  Sheridan  and  Charles  Fox  on  Trincomale 
distressing  to  Administration  ;  put  Pitt  into  a  passion. 

17th,  Being  appointed  for  discussion  of  the  Prelimina- 
ries in  both  Houses,  General  Conway  objected  in  the 
Cabinet  to  any  words  of  approbation  being  inserted  in  the 
intended  address ;  but  was  overruled  by  the  majority. 
However,  on  the  18th,  at  a  meeting  of  the  chief  Members 
of  the  Commons,  the  Lord  Advocate  prevailed  to  have  no 
applauding  epithets  in  the  Address. 

Charles  Fox,  on  rejecting  Lord  Shelburne's  offers 
through  Pitt,  acquainted  Lord  North,  who  had  also  re- 
fused them,  and  Lord  North  and  Charles  Fox  instantly 
leagued,  though,  as  Charles  Fox  declared  in  the  House 
on  the  17th,  no  farther  than  to  censure  the  Preliminaries. 

In  the  Lords,  Lords  Pembroke  and  Caermarthen  moved 
the  Address.  An  Amendment  was  proposed  by  Lord 
Carlisle  similar  to  that  in  the  Commons  (and  very  artful 
and  temperate,  as  it  engaged  to  confirm  the  peace),  but 
threatened  to  consider  the  Preliminaries.  Lord  Dudley, 
Lord  Townshend  very  warmly  (though  Lord  Shelburne 


1783. 


DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  PRELIMINARIES. 


583 


had  been  earnest  to  serve  him),  Lord  Keppel,  and  Lord 
Stormont,2  in  a  very  long  speech,  attacked  the  Prelimina- 
ries. The  Duke  of  Richmond  expressed  his  dissatisfaction 
with  them,  but  declared  he  would  not  vote.  Lord  Sack- 
ville,  and  then  Lord  Loughborough,  very  ably  and  long 
opposed.  Lord  Shelburne  defended  himself  well,  and  the 
Chancellor  handled  Lord  Loughborough  very  roughly. 
Lord  Grantley  pretended  he  had  intended  to  vote  against 
the  Preliminaries,  but  that  he  had  been  convinced  by 
Lord  Shelburne.  Lord  Grower  spoke  faintly  against, 
though  inclined  to  be  for,  them.  His  brother-in-law,  the 
Duke  of  Bridge  water,  whose  estate  he  expected,  and  who 
hated  Lord  Shelburne,  had  insisted  on  Lord  Gower  and 
his  son,  Lord  Trentham,  voting  against  the  Preliminaries. 
Lady  Gower  had  endeavoured  to  bias  her  husband  the 
other  way,  and  did  make  her  own  brother,  Keith  Stewart, 
her  husband's  son-in-law,  Mr.  Macdonald,  and  Lord 
Gower's  nephew,  Macdonald,  vote  for  the  Preliminaries. 
In  fact,  many  Scots  were  for  Lord  Shelburne,  and  most 
connections  had  been  so  broken  and  divided  by  the  late 
•changes,  that  scarce  one,  or  even  family,  remained  united.3 
The  Lord  Advocate  and  Andrew  Stuart,  a  most  subtle 
able  man,  who  had  obtained  Shelburne's  protection  for  his 
bother  in  India,  kept  many  Scots  to  him,  and  their  hatred 
to  Fox  others.  In  the  House  of  Commons,  some  of  the 
stanch est  friends  of  Fox  and  the  Cavendishes  left  them 
because  they  had  joined  Lord  North  ;  and  some  of  Lord 
North's  friends  deserted  him  because  he  had  united  with 
Fox. 


It  had  been  given  out  that  Lord 
would  speuk  against  the  Pre- 
liminaries ;  but  either  from  timidity  or 
i"  >i  t  off  Lord  Stormont,  what  ho  would 


have  said  he  did  not. 

*  Lord  Grtmtly  spoke  for  the  peace. , 
His  eldest  son  spoke,  but  went  away: 
his  youngest  sou  spoke  against  it. 


584 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


Lord  Howe  spoke  unintelligibly  for  Shelburne,  but  told 
too  intelligibly,  as  did  Jarvis  in  the  Commons,  that  the 
peace  was  necessary,  as  our  Fleets  were  in  a  wretched 
decayed  condition.  The  Duke  of  Grafton,  though  highly 
dissatisfied  with  Shelburne,  handsomely  defended  him. 
The  House  sat  till  between  three  and  four  in  the  morning 
(unusually  late  for  them),  when  the  Address  was  carried 
by  only  69  to  55.  Of  thirteen  Bishops  present,  only  six 
or  seven  voted  for  the  Minister.4 

The  event  was  much  more  unfavourable  still  in  the 
other  House,  which  sat  till  past  seven  the  next  morning, 
when  Lord  John  Cavendish's  amendment  was  carried 
against  Lord  Shelburne  by  224  to  208.  Lord  North 
spoke  with  great  temper,  though  professing  not  to  infringe 
the  speech.  Charles  Fox  admirably,  beginning  with  say- 
ing that  the  Ministers  seemed  to  have  neglected  every 
thing,  to  study,  recollect,  and  reproach  him  with  all  his 
actions,  sayings,  and  most  careless  words.  The  Lord 
Advocate  behaved  in  the  most  abandoned  manner,  and 
abused  his  late  friend,  Lord  North,  grossly. 5  He  was 
justly  reproved  by  Fox  and  Sheridan,  and  having  said  he 
would  act  with  any  man  who  agreed  with  him  in  princi- 
ples, they  asked  him  if  he  had  agreed  with  Shelburne  on 
Representation  ? — No.  On  Reformation  ? — No.  On  East 
India  ? — No.  Or  only  by  Shelburne's  coming  over  to  his 
opinion  ?  Burke  was  excellent  on  .the  Loyalists  sent  to 


4  Neither  Lord  Camden  nor  Lord 
Ashburton  spoke.  The  former  either 
waited  to  answer  Lord  Mansfield,  or, 
being  much  dissatisfied  with  Lord  Shel- 
burne, was  silent.  He  was  much  dis- 
pleased at  the  adoption  of  the  Lord 
Advocate,  and  at  not  being  consulted 
nor  acquainted  with  any  measures,  and 
at  Lord  Shelburne's  intention  of  lowering 
considerably  the  places  of  the  Tellers, 


and  refusing  to  tell  him  even  how  much. 
*  One  expression  of  the  Advocate  was 
remembered.  He  said  the  new  amour 
of  Lord  North  to  Charles  Fox  had  pro- 
duced nothing  but  that  abortive  puer- 
ility, the  motion.  He  toasted  that  on 
their  next  motion  he  should  retort  Fox's 
sarcasms  ;  but,  probably  from  reflecting 
on  the  hitter's  success,  he  did  not  speak 
on  the  following  Friday. 


1783.  LORD  JOHN  CAVENDISH'S  AMENDMENT.  585 

East  Florida,  now  ceded  to  Spain ;  they  had  loved  kingly 
power,  now  they  would  have  enough  of  it :  they  would  feel 
Castilian  power.  Charles  Fox 6  said,  Lord  Shelburne  had 
outrun  all  the  demands  of  the  Associations  in  so  hard  a 
manner,  that  it  looked  as  if  he  meant  to  make  men  sick  of 
Reformation.  The  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  who 
spoke  late  and  languidly,  but  haughtily,  and  to  Sheridan 
grossly  on  his  theatric  management,  was  answered  excel- 
lently, coolly,  civilly,  but  severely,  by  Sheridan,  who 
applied  to  and  fixed  on  him  the  name  of  the  Angry  Boy. 
His  relation,  T.  Pitt,  who  moved  the  Address  ably,  pro- 
tested he  had  always  been  against  using  force  to  America 
(yet,  he  had  been  the  confidant  of  all  Mr.  Grenville's 
violence  on  the  Stamp  Act).  T.  Pitt  had  certainly 
been  jealous  of  and  offended  at  the  preference  given  to  his 
young  cousin,  W.  Pitt,  who  was  a  younger  son  of  the 
younger  branch,  and  had  meant  to  accept  nothing ;  but, 
being  connected  with  "W.  Pitt  and  Lord  Temple,  wishing 
for  a  Peerage,  and  perhaps  to  save  his  borough  of  Old 
Sarum  by  softening  W.  Pitt  on  the  intended  alteration  of 
Representation,  against  which  he  had  lately  written  a 
pamphlet,  he  probably  had  entered  with  more  warmth 
lately  into  Shelburne's  measures.  Lee,  the  late  Attorney- 
General,  was  very  brutal,  commending  Lord  North  (to 
draw  an  opposite  picture  of  Shelburne),  saying  the  former 
had  never  broken  his  word,  had  never  lied  to  the  public, 
nor  made  a  treacherous  peace,  and  was  so  amiable  in 
private  life  that  his  character  had  made  him  preserve  his 
power  so  long.  Rigby,  who,  to  keep  off  the  demand  of 
his  balances,  and,  by  the  mediation  of  the  Lord  Advocate 
and  Mrs.  Howe,  had  made  his  peace  with  Shelburne,  spoke 


•  Charles  Fox  reflected  ou  his  uncle,  the  Duke  of  Richmond, 


586 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


warmly  for  him.  Conway  did  not  speak  •,  he  had  fairly 
apprised  W.  Pitt,  that  if  anything  was  said  on  Trincomale, 
he  should,  as  tenderly  as  he  could,  declare  he  had  been 
against  restoring  it,  and  would  have  preferred  continuing 
the  war.  Indeed,  his  silence  was  fairly  interpreted  as 
dislike  of  the  peace,  though  he  would  not  desert  Shelburne. 

Jenkinson 7  voted  for  him ;  but,  though  he  was  sup- 
posed to  hold  out  the  flag  of  the  King's  inclination,  it  had 
not  then  its  effect,  for  the  Court  was  beaten  ;  and  thus, 
twice  in  one  twelvemonth,  the  same  House  of  Commons 
overturned  two  Administrations — a  strong  argument 
against  touching  the  mode  of  Representation.  Did  it 
want  correction,  if  a  Parliament  chosen  by  the  Court,  and 
reckoned  most  corrupt  and  abandoned,  tore  two  Ministers 
from  the  King  in  one  year?  The  measure,  indeed,  was 
rather  violent,  and  might  tempt  France  to  break  off  the 
peace,  either  doubting  whether  new  Ministers  might  main- 
tain it,  or  expecting  confusion. 

It  was  now  to  be  seen  whether  Lord  Shelburne  would 
venture  or  attempt  to  stand  with  the  House  of  Commons 
against  him,  and  with  so  small  a  majority  in  the  Lords. 
He  was  both  timid  and  rash,8  and  might  hazard  from 
despair.  Pitt  and  the  Lord  Advocate  both  reckoned  the 
game  desperate,  and  it  soon  grew  more  so.  It  was  evident 
that  Fox  and  Lord  North  agreed,  and  that  the  Cabinet 
was  much  divided.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  fluctuated, 
Conway  was  not  pleased,  and  on  the 


7  Lord  Clarendon,  though  his  second 
son  had  been  lately  made  an  extra  Groom 
of  the  Bedchamber  to  the  King,  voted 
against  the  peace,  and  being  a  favourite, 
made  it  suspected  that  the  King  meant 
to  betray  Lord  Shelburne. 

8  The   Chancellor  was   reported    to 
have  said  to  me  in  the  House  of  Lords 
during  the  debute  that  if  Lord  Shel- 


burne was  successful  that  day  he  in- 
tended to  dissolve  the  Parliament.  He 
himself  had  gone  farther  not  long  be- 
fore, and  had  dropped  to  Conway  that 
if  he  was  unsuccessful  on  the  peace,  he 
would  dissolve  the  Parliament.  Con- 
way  remonstrated  against  the  phrenzy 
of  such  a  measure. 


1783. 


RESIGNATION  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  GRAFTON. 


587 


2(M,  The  Duke  of  Grafton  resigned  the  Privy  Seal. 
He  had  long  been  dissatisfied ;  the  refusal  of  the  mitre  of 
Salisbury  for  Bishop  Hinchliffe  had  disobliged  him;  he 
had  absented  himself  from  Council,  and  Shelburne  had 
acquainted  him  with  nothing,  particularly  not  with  the 
promotion  of  the  Duke  of  Rutland,  and  with  the  very 
extraordinary  introduction  of  him  into  the  Cabinet.  This 
last  was  the  grievance  he  pleaded  to  the  King,  and  to 
Lord  Shelburne,  who  treated  his  design  of  resigning  with 
the  utmost  indifference.9  Lord  Shelburne  slightly  men- 
tioned to  Conway,  in  the  window  of  the  public  room  at 
St.  James's,  that  he  had  some  thoughts  of  standing  in 
spite  of  the  House  of  Commons,  but  not  as  asking  advice ; 
nor  had  he  acquainted  him  or  Lord  Camden  with  his 
intention  of  raising  the  Duke  of  Rutland  so  high.  Con- 
way  treated  his  thought  of  retaining  his  place  as  most 
impudent. 

2 1st.  Lord  John  Cavendish  produced  five  new  motions, 
one  of  which  was  a  direct  condemnation  of  the  peace  Of 
this  indecency  he  and  his  friends  were  told  severely.  On 
the  former  day,  they  had  declared  they  could  not  applaud 
the  peace  till  they  had  examined  it,  which  they  would  do ; 
and  now  censured  it  in  the  lump,  without  calling  for  a 
single  paper  or  examining  a  single  article.  Such  a  gross 
indecorum  was,  perhaps,  occasioned  by  the  desire  of  saving 
Lord  North,  their  new  ally  (as  both  he  and  they  owned 
he  was  become),  from  any  retrospect,  the  neglect  of  which 
they  could  not  justify,  if  they  went  into  articles  against 
Lord  Shelburne.  Thus,  by  this  junction,  Lord  North  got 


9  He  told  the  Duke  he  could  not 
show  him  more  attention  than  he  had 
done;  and  on  the  Duke's  saying  he 
should  then  resign,  Lord  Shelburne  re- 
plied, "  My  Lord,  I  cannot 


that."  The  Duke  had  only  intended  to 
quit  the  Cabinet,  but  on  this  treatment 
told  the  King  he  would  resign  his 
place. 


588  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

himself  whitewashed  by  his  bitterest  enemies.  Mr.  Powis, 
Sir  Cecil  Wray,  and  others  were  very  severe  on  the  new 
junction,  which  Mr.  Fox  had  declared  in  Parliament  he 
never  would  make ;  they x  both  quitted  Fox  and  that  party 
with  whom  they  had  acted,  and  Mr.  Powis  said  he  had  till 
then  thought  Lord  John's  character  the  most  perfect  in 
England,  with  many  other  high  compliments,  which  Lord 
John,  with  much  insolence,  desired  him  to  take  back. 
He  also  told  T.  Townshend  with  equal  haughtiness  that 
he  must  take  the  fate  attending  his  change  of  system.  On 
Lord  North  the  most  cutting  reproaches  were  heaped, 
particularly  by  T.  Pitt,  who  compared  him  to  a  man  at 
Bury,  who,  having  caused  his  brother-in-law  to  be  assassi- 
nated, though  not  killed,  and  visiting  him,  had  torn  off  his 
plaisters.  So  Lord  North  had  ruined  us  by  the  war,  and 
now  would  tear  off  the  plaister  of  peace.  Lord  North 
betrayed  the  utmost  anguish  at  those  taunts.  The  young 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  spoke  with  surprising  elo- 
quence and  matter  for  two  hours  and  a  half;  but,  quoting 
the  unanimous  Address  of  the  Commons  on  the  peace,  was 
laughed  at.  At  past  three  in  the  morning,  Lord  John's 
motions  were  carried  by  207  to  190. 

It  was  now  evident  that  Lord  Shelburne  could  not  main- 
tain his  ground.  None  of  the  supplies  for  the  year  were 
voted.  At  last,  on  the 

23rd,  he  called  a  Cabinet  Council,  and  in  the  evening 
a  larger  assembly  of  his  adherents,  to  both  which  meetings 
he  declared  his  resolution  of  resigning  his  post,  as  on  the 

24th,  he  did. 

That  very  day  (without  having  received  any  invitation 
from  the  King,  but  looking  on  themselves  as  sure  of  the 


Sir  Cecil  Wray  only  for  that  day. 


1783.     DUNCOMBE  PRESENTS  PETITION  FROM  YORKSHIRE.    589 


Administration)  the  Duke  of  Portland,  designed  by  the 
united  factions  as  the  ostensible  Minister,  went  to  the  Duke 
of  Richmond  and  intreated  him  to  stay  in  his  place  and  re- 
unite with  his  old  friends,  who  would  have  all  the  power, 
as  Lord  North  asked  but  two  places  in  the  Cabinet.  The 
Duke  of  Richmond  thanked  him,  but  said  he  could  not  see 
his  own  name  standing  to  so  many  protests  against  Lord 
North,  and  consent  to  act  with  him.  He  had  blamed  his 
friends  for  retiring  in  the  summer,  and  hoped  they  would 
not  blame  him  for  retiring,  as  he  intended  to  acquaint  the 
King  he  should  do. 

The  same  day  Mr.  Duncombe  presenting  the  petition  , 
from  Yorkshire  for  a  new  mode  of  Representation,  signed 
by  10,000  freeholders,  with  the  produces  of  the  freeholds  of 
each,  and  saying  that  he  should  reluctantly  support  any 
Administration  of  which  Lord  North  should  be  part,  Mr. 
Edmund  Burke  had  the  amazing  affrontery,  profligacy  and 
folly  to  say,  that  he  was  glad  to  find  that  Mr.  Duncombe 
(if  he  would  even  reluctantly  support  Lord  North)  had 
abandoned  the  flagitious  principle  of  regarding  measures  not 
men.  The  preference  of  men  to  measures  was  in  truth  the 
flagitious  principle  of  Lord  John  Cavendish.  He  had 
avowed  it  on  the  death  of  Lord  Rockingham^  had  on  that 
ground  set  up  the  Duke  of  Portland,  and  persuaded  Charles  i 
Fox  to  resign,  and  now  joined  Lord  North  to  support  that 
family  pride 2  which  made  him  imagine  that  the  House  of 
Cavendish  was  always  to  name  the  Minister.  His  brother, 
Lord  George,  a  much  better  man,  but  governed  by  Lord 
John,  owned  to  me  at  this  very  time  that  he  liked  an  aris- 


2  From  the  time  that  the  King,  at  the 
beginning  of  his  reign,  had  turned  out 
the  late  Duke  of  Devonshire  in  the 
roughest  and  haughtiest  manner,  Lord 


John,  I  believe,  had  never  forgiven  it 
This  ought  to  be  a  lesson  to  Princes. 
Lord  .John  was  now  punishing  the  King, 
twenty  years  afterwards,  for  that  affront. 


590  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  FEB. 

tocracy  and  thought  it  right  that  great  families  with  great 
connections  should  govern.  I  replied  I  thought  it  the  worst 
system  of  all. 

Lord  Camden  told  me  that  from  the  moment  Lord  Shel- 
burne  became  Minister,  he  had  set  himself  to  disgust  and 
root  all  the  Whigs  out  of  the  Cabinet — as  him  (Camden), 
Grafton,  Keppel,  Conway,  and  Eichmond.  Thence,  said 
Lord  Camden,  it  was  plain  what  promises  Shelburne  had 
made  to  the  King.  The  day  after  the  first  majority,  Lord 
Camden  told  me,  the  King  consulted  the  Cabinet  what  he 
should  do.  Lord  Camden  said  he  had  told  him  he  was  a 
party  man,  and  advised  him  to  stick  to  the  Whigs. 

It  now  appeared  evidently  that  the  King  was  unwilling 
to  part  with  Lord  Shelburne ;  at  least,  that  he  disliked  the 
junction  of  Lord  North  with  Fox,  or  was  averse  to  receiv- 
ing the  latter  and  his  party ;  or,  if  his  indifference  for  all 
men  made  him  partial  to  none,  at  least,  he  could  not  be  in- 
sensible to  the  force  put  upon  him  now  a  second  time  in 
one  year,  and  to  the  little  or  no  option  left  him  in  naming 
his  own  Ministers.  This  repugnance  was  no  doubt  fomented 
by  Lord  Shelburne.  The  insolence  of  the  victorious  allies 
soon  added  fuel  to  that  secret  flame.  They  had  so  wantonly 
marked  out  the  victims  they  intended  to  make,  particu- 
larly of  two  capital  ones,  the  Lord  Chancellor  Thurlow  and 
the  Lord  Advocate,  that  they  and  their  friends  soon  con- 
certed measures  to  baffle  the  conquerors.  Those  two 
lawyers,  with  Lord  Weymouth,  Lord  Gower,  and  Rigby, 
who  had  all  united  with  or  were  grown  inclined  to  Shel- 
burne, communicated  their  discontents  to  the  King,  who 
received  their  overtures  with  alacrity  from  the  Lord  Ad- 
vocate, and  actually  wrote  to  Lord  Weymouth  to  desire  his 
support  against  his  new  tyrants.  His  Majesty  wished  Lord 
Gower  to  accept  the  Treasury,  but  he  had  not  courage.  In 


1783. 


W.  PITT  REFUSES  TO  BE  PRIME  MINISTER. 


591 


that  distress  the  Lord  Advocate,  one  of  the  boldest  of  men, 
proposed  to  the  King  to  send  for  the  very  young  Chancellor 
of  the  Exchequer  William  Pitt,  not  yet  past  twenty-three. 
The  offer  was  no  doubt  dazzling,  and  so  far  worth  accepting, 
as  to  obtain  the  CJiariot  for  a  day  was  glorious  at  his  age — 
and  to  one  so  ambitious,  it  was  placing  him  at  the  head  of  a 
party,  a  rank  which  he  must  always  preserve,  in  or  out  of 
place.  The  young  man  had  the  discretion,  however,  to  ask 
time  to  consider.  The  Advocate,  in  the  mean  time,  on  the 

25M,  moved  to  adjourn  the  House  of  Commons  to  the 
28th.  Lord  Nugent  (not  in  the  secret)  opposed  the  ad- 
journment on  the  urgency  of  Irish  affairs,  but  on  a  division 
in  a  very  thin  House  the  Lord  Advocate  prevailed  by  49 
to  37. 

27th.  Mr.  W.  Pitt 3  excused  himself  to  the  King  from 
undertaking  the  charge  of  Prime  Minister.  In  fact,  it  was 
in  every  light  wise — in  a  personal  one  it  showed  modera- 
tion, and  that  he  was  not  intoxicated  by  such  splendid  for- 
tune ;  nor,  were  his  experience  adequate,  could  he  have 
maintained  the  post  at  that  moment.  No  supplies  were 
voted,  nor  would  be  granted  by  a  hostile  majority.  A  vic- 
torious majority,  too,  of  a  popular  assembly,  if  thwarted,  grow 
violent,  and  the  disappointment  of  those  who  have  expected 
to  share  the  spoils  of  their  enemies  impels  their  party  on 
all  excesses.  Nor  could  Pitt  himself  appear  but  as  the 
substitute  of  Lord  Shelburne,  against  whom  even  impeach- 
ments might  be  voted.  On  the  contrary,  by  giving  a  career 
to  the  hopes  of  the  triumphant  was  the  best  way  to  hurt 
them  ;  most  men,  not  connected  with  the  new  and  strange 
junction,  could  but  be  scandalized  at  it,  and  were.  Com- 


3  He  certainly  consented  for  a  few 
hours,  but  soon  retracted.  Some  thought 
Lord  Sliclliiiriii-  di&rauded  him 


jealousy ;  but  there  might  be  another 
reason,  the  King  made  the  offer  vi-ry 
drily  and  ungraciously. 


592 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


FEB. 


passion  for  the  insult  to  the  King  would  weigh  with  others. 
All  who  should  be  dismissed  would  become  more  en- 
venomed enemies  ;  and  all  the  partizans  of  Fox  who  should 
not  be  provided  for,  or  of  Lord  North  who  should  not  be 
restored  to  the  places  thus  lost,  would  not  be  less  incensed. 
The  probable  rapacity  of  the  victors  would  furnish  matter 
for  abuse ;  the  character  of  Fox  would  be  an  inexhaustible 
fund  of  objections ;  and  the  yet  unstained  one  of  Pitt,  with 
a  large  following  of  young  men  who  worshipped  him,  would 
soon  contribute  to  raise  him  to  a  formidable  height.  He 
might  contemplate  too,  as  certain  devotees,  the  Yorkshire 
Association  in  particular,  and  those  of  Westminster,  and 
others.  Pitt  had  been  steady  in  countenancing  (in4  general) 
their  Petition  for  a  new  mode  of  Representation,  which  Lord 
North  had  more  loudly  reprobated.  Lord  Shelburne  had 
made  Wyvil,  their  ostensible  tribune,  expect  (?)  his  sup- 
port, and  would  now  undoubtedly  give  it.  Mr.  Mason 
(the  real  instigator)  did  not  love  Lord  John  Cavendish, 
and  hated  Burke,  and  had  offered  incense  to  Pitt.  Here 
was  ample  foundation  for  Opposition — and  Shelburne  and 
Pitt  were  not  likely  to  be  blind  to  such  future  advantages 
and  to  such  opportunities  of  revenge  ;  while  the  new  Coali- 
tion could  neither  promise  themselves  sincerity  in  the  King 
nor  attachment  in  the  people. 


4  He  had  lately  repeated  his  inten- 
tion of  moving  for  an  alteration,  but  in 
very  guarded  and  restricted  terms  ;  and 
it  was  said  intended  to  propose  very 


moderate  reform.  If  he  goes  into  Op- 
position he  may,  perhaps,  enlarge  that 
mode. 


1783.      LORD  RAWDON  AND  TOWNSHEND  MADE  PEERS.      593 


MARCH. 


IT  was  declared  that  the  King  had  created  two  new 
English  Barons — Lord  Rawdon,  and  Thomas  Townshend1 
the  Secretary  of  State.  The  reason  of  exalting  the  latter 
was  evident ;  he  had  detached  himself  entirely  from  Fox 
and  the  Cavendishes ;  had  addicted  himself  to  Lord  Shel- 
burne,  and  had  always  been  chiefly  connected  with  the  late 
Lord  Chatham  and  his  family ;  and  it  was  expected  that 
the  present  Earl  would  marry  his  second  daughter.  How 
Lord  Rawdon  came  to  obtain  the  honour  was  more  uncer- 
tain ;  he  was  nephew  of  Lord  Huntingdon,  from  whom  he 
was  likely  to  inherit  the  Barony  of  Hastings,  which  made 
another  Barony  less  necessary  to  him.  Lord  Huntingdon 
had  been  very  ill  treated  by  the  King,  and  had  loudly  ex- 
pressed his  resentment ;  but  perhaps  had  made  court  to 
Shelburne — yet  it  was  said  that  the  King  had  offered  the 
new  Barony  of  his  own  accord — perhaps  to  show  dislike  to 
the  Americans,  who  had  been  near  executing  Lord  Rawdon 
— perhaps,  because  of  his  challenging  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond, whom,  though  the  King  had  employed,  he  certainly 
had  not  forgiven,  and  at  this  very  time  had  coloured  on 
the  Duke,  but  dropping  a  hint  that  he  might  yet  retain 
his  post  in  the  Ordnance.  To  add  two  Peers  to  that  House 
was  not  unwise  in  Lord  Shelburne,  especially  Townshend, 


1  Baron  Rawdon  was  subsequently 
Marquis  of  Hastings,  Governor-General 
of  India,  whose  memoirs  have  recently 
been  published,  and  edited  by  his 


1826.  John  Thomas  Townshend  was 
created  Raton,  and,  six  years  later,  Vis- 
count, Sydney.  He  died  A.D.  1800, 
aged  sixty-seven. — D. 


third  daughter,   Sclina.     He  died    in 

VOL.  II.  2   Q 


594  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MAKCH, 

a  speaker.  The  approaching  Ministry  was  not  likely  to 
be  strong  in  speakers,  which  Shelburne's  and  Pitt's  faction 
would  be ;  Shelburne  himself,  the  Chancellor  Thurlow  who 
was  to  be  dismissed,  Lord  Camden  in  the  same  predicament ; 
the  Lords  Ashburton  and  Grantley,  Lord  Gower,  Lord 
Weymouth,  Lord  Sandwich,  if  not  restored ;  and  perhaps 
the  Dukes  of  Richmond  and  Grafton,  who  though  discon- 
tent with  Shelburne,  more  likely  to  be  in  Opposition  than 
good  humour,  would  be  an  overmatch  for  the  silent  Duke  of 
Portland,  Lord  Derby  and  Carlisle,  and  even  for  the  Lords 
Mansfield  and  Loughborough  and  the  pompous  Stormont. 
It  gave  still  more  offence  when  it  was  immediately  known 
that,  previous  to  his  dismission,  Lord  Shelburne  had  obtained 
and  been  wantonly  squandering  pensions  on  his  associates. 
The  Chancellor  was  to  have  2800/.  a  year  if  he  lost  the 
Seals;  Lord  Grantham  2000^.,  and  Sir  Joseph  Yorke  1500£., 
or  20001.,  with  some  lesser  pensions.  Many  circumstances 
rendered  the  two  former  scandalous.  The  Duke  of  Man- 
chester enjoyed  a  patent  place  in  the  Custom-House  for 
two  lives,  bestowed  by  Charles  II.  on  his  ancestor  in 
lieu  of  a  vast  debt  due  from  the  Crown.  On  the  Duke's 
being  appointed  Lord  Chamberlain  in  the  preceding  year, 
his  Grace  solicited  to  have  the  life  of  one  of  his  sons  added 
to  the  patent,  which  the  King  granting,  the  Duke  sur- 
rendered his  old  patent  to  have  a  new  one  made  out ;  but 
the  Chancellor  refused  to  set  the  great  Seal  to  the  new 
patent,  alleging  an  obsolete  law  of  Henry  V.,  which  re- 
stricted the  Crown  from  granting  patents  for  life,  but  which 
had  never  been  put  in  execution  from  the  reign  of  James  I. 
This  injustice  inflaming  the  Duke,  gave  rise  to  a  bill, 
afterwards  moved  by  Mr.  W.  Pitt,  for  abrogating  all  the 
patent  places  in  the  Custom-House,  indemnifying  the 
patentees,  and  for  changing  the  whole  system  of  the  direc- 


1783.  PENSIONS.  595 

tion  of  the  customs,  a  total  subversion  violently  opposed  by 
Mr.  Burke.  So  gross  a  contradiction  in  the  Chancellor 
was  equal  to  the  late  effrontery  of  Colonel  Barre'  and  Lord 
Ashburton.  Lord  Grantham's  case  was  little  less  indecent. 
He  already  enjoyed  a  pension  of  3000/.  a  year  for  life,  was 
lately  married  to  one  of  the,  probably,  greatest  fortunes  in 
England,  and  received  this  reward  after  having  been  Secre- 
tary of  State  not  nine  months.  With  this  rapacity  he  was 
bitterly  reproached  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  the 

6th,  when  Mr.  Powis  moving  to  address  the  King  to 
give  away  no  more  pensions  before  the  5th  of  April,  when 
he  would  be  restrained  by  Burke's  late  Reforming  Bill  from 
giving  any  pension  larger  than  300/.  per  annum,  many 
reflections  were  cast  on  this  waste,  and  on  Lord  Shelburne, 
a  pretended  great  reformer ;  when  it  was  said  that  there 
had  been  at  least  one  honest  man,  Lord  Grantham,  who 
would  not  sell  himself — till  promised  this  pension.  Lord 
Shelburne  was  truly  highly  culpable  :  on  taking  the  Treasury 
after  Lord  Rockingham's  death,  he  had  affected  great  rigour 
and  retrenchment — some  said,  proposing  to  strike  so  many 
and  so  much  from  salaries  and  pensions  as  woud  compose 
a  revenue  of  an  hundred  thousand  pounds  a  year  for  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  which  would  both  save  to  the  King  a  de- 
falcation of  so  much  of  his  revenue,  and  gain  the  Prince  of 
Wales,  to  whose  favour  he  aspired,  too.  He  set  one  Gilbert, 
a  Member  of  Parliament  and  formerly  steward  to  Lord 
Gower,  and  a  great  dabbler  in  the  laws  about  the  poor,8  at 
the  head  of  that  inquest,  who  executed  it  not  only  with 
severity  but  brutality — but  Lord  Shelburne,  with  his  usual 


1  It  was  said  that  Gilbert  had  for- 
merly made  laws  for  the  poor,  and  now 
was  making  poor  for  the  laws.  [The 


than  a  quarter  over  two  millions.  They 
are  now  about  seven  millions  annually. 
-D.] 


poor-rak-3  at  thid  time  amounted  to  less 

2  Q  2 


596  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

versatility,  dealed  out  as  many  or  more  pensions  than  he 
retrenched. 

He  retrenched  some  of  the  Housekeepers  of  the  Royal 
Houses,  and  raised  the  salary  of  another.  I  could  quote 
many  such  instances,  but  they  are  needless.  The  follow- 
ing epigram  was  made  on  one  of  those  occasions:  — 

"  Ye  fools,  for  economy  clamour  no  more ; 

For  each  twopence  you  save  you  '11  be  made  to  pay  four : 

Nor  is  State-scavenger  so  inexpert 

As  not  to  make  new  on  removing  old  dirt. 

No  catcher  of  vermin  destroys  the  whole  race  :     j 

Gilbert  took  away  twenty  to  get  one  good  place  ;  > 

For  what 's  sin  in  a  sinner  in  saints  is  but  grace,  j 

Reformation  's  a  trade  that  enriches  the  cunning, 

From  Luther  to  Barr£,  from  Calvin  to  Dunning." 

Lord  Shelburne,  with  good  nature,  restored  parts  of  so 
many  pensions  said  to  be  retrenched,  that  he  saved  little  or 
nothing,  was  guilty  of  idle  profusion,  and  made  enemies  of 
all  he  cashiered,  and  no  friends  of  those  he  restored  partially. 
How  many  old  servants  who  had  obtained  small  places  or 
slender  pensions  were  cashiered  or  reduced,  to  compose  the 
four  pensions  of  Barre,  Lord  Ashburton,  the  Chancellor, 
and  Lord  Grantham  !  The  parsimony  and  the  extravagance 
were  set  against  each  other,  and  the  clamour  of  the  sufferers 
contributed  prodigiously  to  that  mass  of  unpopularity  which 
so  soon  overturned  Lord  Shelburne. 

The  King  continued  to  closet  the  Lord  Advocate  and 
Lord  Gower,  and  the  few  he  trusted,  of  whom  Jenkinson 
was  the  chief,  trying  every  method  to  avoid  submitting  to 
take  the  Duke  of  Portland  and  Fox.  His  counsellors  were 
as  inveterate  as  his  Majesty,  but  had  less  boldness — finding 
which,  he  told  the  Lord  Advocate  that  sooner  than  yield, 
he  would  go  to  Hanover,  and  had  even  prevailed  on  the 
Queen  to  consent.  He  had  meditated  such  abdication  at 


1783.         LORD  NORTH  REFUSES  TO  BREAK  WITH  FOX.         597 

the  time  of  the  riots  for  Wilkes ;  he  had  carried  that  in- 
tention farther  the  last  year,  having  held  the  Royal  yacht 
in  readiness  a  fortnight  for  that  purpose.  If  the  Queen  had 
given  in  to  the  project,  it  was  probably  from  judging  that 
it  is  wiser  to  humour  a  person  in  a  passion  than  contra- 
dict. It  gives  credit,  and  time  to  soothe.  This,  perhaps, 
the  Queen  did,  for  one  evening,  early  in  the  month,  the 
King  sent  for  Lord  Guilford,  Treasurer  to  the  Queen  and 
Lord  North's  father,  to  try  by  his  intervention  to  separate 
Lord  North  from  Fox,  and  it  was  given  out  that  it  would 
break  the  old  man's  heart  that  he  could  not  succeed.  On 
the  following  evening,  the  King  sent  for  Lord  North  him- 
self, and  after  long  and  most  earnest  endeavours  to  persuade 
him  to  break  his  coalition  with  Fox,  and  retake  the  first 
post  himself,  both  which  Lord  North  positively  refused  to 
do,  recommending  the  Duke  of  Portland,  the  King  told 
him  in  wrath,  that  he  would  not  put  the  Treasury  into  the 
hands  of  the  head  of  a  faction.  This  latter  phrase  Lord 
North  indecently  repeated  to  his  new  allies,  as  proof  of  his 
fidelity — but  it  was  new  ingratitude,  after  receiving  such 
numerous  favours ;  for  besides  the  office  of  Prime  Minister, 
he  had  received  the  Garter,  the  place  of  Warden  of  the 
Cinque  Ports,  a  patent  place  for  his  son,  Bushy  Park  for 
his  wife,  a  pension  of  4000/.  a  year  on  his  late  resignation, 
and  some  said,  a  grant  of  part  of  the  Savoy — though  that 
has  not  yet  been  verified — his  father  was  Treasurer  to  the 
Queen,  and  his  brother  has  the  rich  Bishopric  of  Win- 
chester. But  if  Lord  North's  conduct  was  not  grateful,  it 
was  wise.  He  had  been  taunted,  baited  in  the  extreme, 
both  by  Shelburne  and  Fox ;  as  they  had  quarrelled,  he 
could  not  be  revenged  of  both  at  once.  He  therefore,  by 
allying  with  the  latter,  overturned  the  former;  and  by 
that  alliance  received  an  ablution  from  Fox,  which  seemed 


598          .     LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 

to  make  all  his  invectives  appear  the  result  of  faction  and 
ambition.  By  waiving  the  first  place,  he  would  secure 
lucrative  posts  for  his  family  and  friends,  without  the 
odium  of  heaping  them  on  himself — the  Duke  of  Portland 
or  Fox  would  be  charged  with  giving  them  to  purchase  his 
assistance.  Nor  was  Fox's  a  good  life — North  on  his 
death  might  retain  his  old  power. 

But  if  North  acted  like  an  artful  politician,  he  had 
not  left  his  secret  to  his  Master.  Sending  for  North  in- 
stead of  the  Duke  of  Portland  was  repeating  the  stale 
artifice  of  the  preceding  year,  when  he  employed  Shel- 
burne  to  negotiate  with  Lord  Rockingham ;  and  perhaps 
he  was  weak  enough  to  expect  the  same  success,  though 
the  artifice  was  known,  that  of  sowing  jealousy  ;  but  it  had 
just  the  contrary  effect.  It  was  not  North's,  as  it  had  been 
Shelburne's,  place  to  supplant  the  Duke  of  Portland — on 
the  contrary,  the  overtures  made  to  North  gave  him  an 
opportunity  of  vaunting  his  fidelity  to  his  new  allies — 
thus,  instead  of  disuniting  them,  the  King,  by  this  silly 
manoeuvre,  cemented  their  union.  The  next  morning  he 
sent  again  for  Lord  North,  but  repenting  before  his  arrival, 
dismissed  him  immediately,  saying  he  had  not  yet  resolved 
what  he  would  do. 

But  the  secret  lay  deeper  than  even  his  general  aversion 
to  the  Cavendish  faction.  His  son,  the  Prince  of  Wales, 
had  of  late  thrown  himself  into  the  arms  of  Charles  Fox, 
and  this  in  the  most  indecent  and  undisguised  manner. 
Fox  lodged  in  St.  James's  Street,  and  as  soon  as  he  rose, 
which  was  very  late,  had  a  levee  of  his  followers,  and  of 
the  members  of  the  Gaming  Club,  at  Brookes's,  all  his 
disciples.  His  bristly  black  person,  and  shagged  breast 
quite  open,  and  rarely  purified  by  any  ablutions,  was 
wrapped  in  a  foul  linen  night-gown,  and  his  bushy  hair 


1783.  THE  PRINCE  OP  WALES  AND  FOX.  599 

dishevelled.  In  these  cynic  weeds,  and  with  epicurean 
good  humour,  did  he  dictate  his  politics — and  in  this 
school  did  the  heir  of  the  Crown  attend  his  lessons  and 
imbibe  them.  Fox's  followers,  to  whom  he  had  never 
enjoined  Pythagorean  silence,  were  strangely  licentious  in 
their  conversation  about  the  King.  At  Brookes's  they  pro- 
posed wagers  on  the  duration  of  his  reign ;  and  if  they 
moderated  their  irreverent  jests  in  the  presence  of  the 
Prince,  it  was  not  extraordinary  that  the  orgies  at  Brookes's 
might  be  reported  to  have  passed  at  Fox's  levees,  or  that 
the  King  should  suspect  that  the  same  disloyal  topics 
should  be  handled  in  the  morning  that  he  knew  had  been 
the  themes  of  each  preceding  evening.  The  Prince  not 
only  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Coalition,  but  was  not  at 
all  guarded  in  his  expressions ;  he  was  even  reported  to 
have  said  aloud  in  the  Drawing-room,  "  that  his  father  had 
not  yet  agreed  to  the  plan  of  the  Coalition,  but,  by  God, 
he  should  be  made  to  agree  to  it." 

This  anguish  to  a  mind  that  had  from  the  Prince's  child- 
hood anticipated  jealousy,  rendered  the  already  conceived 
antipathy  to  Fox  a  rankling  ulcer.  How  far  his  suspicions 
went  I  do  not  know ;  but  while  he  kept  all  Government 
at  a  stand,  and  was  searching  for  any  succedaneum,  it 
transpired  that  he  had  consulted  the  Chancellor  and  Lord 
Ashburton  on  the  still  nearer  question  of  his  son.  One  or 
both  whispered  the  consultation,  if  not  the  purport.  At 
first  it  was  supposed  to  have  been  on  the  Prince's  debts, 
but  as  they  did  not  appear  considerable,  it  was  believed 
that  the  Royal  parent  had  demanded  of  the  two  lawyers 
what  redress  he  could  have  against  a  man  who  alienated 
from  him  the  affection  of  his  sou  ?  Rumour  added,  that  the 
blunt  and  surly  Chancellor  had  replied,  '*  that  he  would  have 
no  peace  till  his  son  and  Fox  were  secured  in  the  Tower." 


600 


LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MARCH, 


I  do  not  pretend  to  give  credit  to  this  violence,  nor  am  cer- 
tain that  even  the  interrogatory  was  proposed ;  yet  the  ex- 
treme vehemence  with  which  Fox  and  his  associates,  even 
with  the  concurrence  of  his  allies,3  proscribed  the  Chancellor 
at  this  crisis,  seems  to  imply  some  foundation  in  the  story. 
Fox  had  lived  upon  amicable  terms  with  the  Chancellor, 
who  had  certainly  supported  Shelburne  in  the  faintest, 
loosest  manner.  On  the  contrary,  Lord  North's  friends 
had  till  this  minute  affectedly  asserted  that  Lord  North 
would  insist  on  the  Chancellor's  retaining  the  Seals ;  and 
as  he  now  abandoned  him  abruptly,  they  were  puzzled  to 
excuse  North  or  themselves,  and  strengthened  the  report 
of  the  offence.  In  truth  the  Chancellor  had  never  loved, 
but  rather  despised  North,  and  if  the  latter  protected  him 
for  a  short  time,  I  should  suspect  that  it  was  more  to  de- 
precate his  resentment  than  from  zeal  to  serve  him. 

Though  the  King  had  failed  both  in  attempting  to 
form  an  Administration  himself,  or  to  detach  Lord  North 
from  his  new  friends,  he  would  still  not  yield  to  the  latter ; 
and  though  there  was  in  reality  no  Government,  for  Lord 
Shelburne  had  actually  resigned,  and  the  other  Ministers 
only  transacted  the  ordinary  business  without  opening  any 
new  matter,  though  the  Houses  continued  to  sit,  yet  his 
Majesty  went  to  Windsor,  leaving  everything  in  suspense ; 
and  though  he  returned  to  town  at  the  end  of  the  week 
and  appointed  a  Drawing-room,  it  was  put  off,  and  he  was, 
or  it  was  given  out  that  he  was,  ill.  In  the  mean  time,  the 
peace  was  not  finished :  the  Dutch  had  not  acceded  to  the 
terms  recommended  by  France;  it  was  not  certain  that 


8  The  Prince  of  Wales  said  aloud  at 
supper,  at  the  Duchess  of  Cumberland's, 
that  he  hoped  that  damned  fellow,  the 
Chancellor,  would  be  turned  out.  If 


this  is  combined  with  the  proscription 
of  Fox,  it  seems  to  confirm  the  report 
of  the  Chancellor  having  expressed 
himself  roughly  on  their  connection. 


1783. 


THE  MUTINY  BILL. 


601 


the  latter  had  begun  to  disband  their  army  and  navy,  and 
we  had;  and  great  disorders  were  stirring,  especially  at 
Portsmouth,  where  the  sailors  remained  very  mutinous,  and 
would  not  sail  to  India  without  being  paid  their  arrears, 
which  there  was  not  money  enough  in  the  Treasury  to 
discharge ;  and  though  Lord  Howe  himself  went  more  than 
once  to  Portsmouth,  it  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  they 
could  be  restrained.  Some  militia  regiments  too  had  been 
mutinous  and  would  not  give  up  their  clothes,  which  the 
War  Office  was  forced  to  allow  them  to  keep.  But  the 
most  pressing  urgency  was  the  approaching  expiration  of 
the  Mutiny  Bill,  which,  however,  was  prolonged  for  a 
month  without  a  negative.  Such  an  alarming  situation 
made  many  apprehend  that  France  would  profit  by  our 
confusions,  and  break  the  peace.4  That  she  did  not  was 
demonstration  that  peace  was  as  necessary  to  her  as  to  us. 
All  this  time  many  Addresses  were  presented  to  the  King 
to  thank  him  for  the  peace,  against  which  all  clamour 
ceased  the  moment  Lord  Shelburne  had  resigned ;  nor  did 
it  at  all  appear  that  the  majority  in  the  House  of  Commons 
had  pleased  their  constituents  by  condemning  the  peace. 

The  suspense  still  continued;  and  it  was  evident  to 
thinking  men  that  whichever  side  had  most  temper  would 
get  the  better.  Fox  was  aware  of  that,  and  said  not  a 
word  in  Parliament,  and  restrained  his  friends.  Had  they 
made  any  violent  motion,  as  perhaps  the  King  expected 
and  hoped,  it  was  very  likely  that  the  Tories  would  have 
returned  to  him  and  resented  the  force  that  was  laid  on  his 
prerogative.  Of  one  hundred  and  sixty  votes  that  Lord 
North  had  governed,  he  was  not  likely  to  retain  half. 


4  This  was,  "perhaps,  what  the  King 
hoped.  One  day,  during  the  suspense, 
Sir  George  Yonge,  Secretary-at-War, 


naming  the  disbanding  of  the  troops, 
the  King  cried  out  eagerly,  "  Dis- 
band !  why,  the  peace  is  not  made  yet  1" 


602  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.         MARCH, 

The  House  of  Lords  was  still  less  disposed  to  obey  the 
Coalition.  If  Lord  North  demanded  many  places  for  his 
friends,  the  Cavendish  faction  would  have  refused  them, 
fearing  his  predominated.  If  he  obtained  but  few,  and 
those  for  his  family  and  particular  friends,  the  number  who 
had  fallen  with  him,  and  should  not  be  indemnified,  would 
become  his  enemies;  and  to  satisfy  them  all  was  im- 
possible. Burke's  reform  had  struck  off  many  places ;  no 
more  pensions  could  be  given ;  and  to  satisfy  Fox's  de- 
pendents, all  indigent,  North's  connections,  the  friends  of 
the  Cavendishes,  and  the  rapacity  of  Burke  and  his  family, 
there  would  be  wanting  more  places  than  existed  even 
before  his  retrenchment. 

12/A.  When  the  inter-ministerium  had  lasted  seventeen 
days,  the  King  sent  again  for  Lord  North,  and  told  him 
he  should  form  an  Administration  according  to  the  plan 
he  had  proposed ;  but,  as  he  should  not  like  to  change 
again,  he  desired  it  might  be  made  broad  enough.  Lord 
North  proposed  to  his  Majesty  to  see  the  Duke  of  Port- 
land himself,  but  that  the  King  refused,  and  told  Lord 
North  to  desire  the  Duke  to  send  him  his  arrangement 
in  writing.  This  was  as  positively  refused  by  the  Duke, 
who  sent  word  that  if  his  Majesty  condescended  to  employ 
him,  it  would  be  necessary  for  him  to  see  his  Majesty. 

Some  days  more  wrere  spent  on  messages  of  this  kind, 
yet  with  partial  discussions,  either  between  the  King  and 
his  future  Ministers,  or  amongst  themselves.  The  King 
was  peremptory  against  dismissing  the  Chancellor;  Lord 
North  as  positive  for  Lord  Stormont  being  Secretary  of 
State,  who  would  take  nothing  else.  The  King's  friends 
complained  that  his  Majesty  was  not  allowed  to  make  one 
of  his  own  Cabinet  Council ;  and  he  himself  once,  and  but 
once,  spoke  to  General  Conway  on  that  subject,  and  com- 


1783.  LORD  NORTH  SECRETARY  OF  STATE.  603 

plained  that  when  he  summoned  them  to  settle  his  Ad- 
ministration, they  replied  they  were  not  agreed  amongst 
themselves. 

Coke  of  Norfolk,  attached  to  the  Cavendishes,  gave 
notice  that  if  no  Administration  were  appointed  by  the 
22nd  he  would  move  to  know  the  reason.  This  was  pro- 
bably to  terrify  the  King.  Coke  had  the  promise  of  a 
peerage  from  Lord  Rockingham.  On  the  17 th  a  great 
meeting  of  that  party  was  held  at  Lord  Fitzwilliam's,  whom 
the  Cavendishes  were  nursing  up  as  a  young  Octavius,  to 
succeed  his  uncle  Rockingham.  The  Duke  of  Portland 
presided,  declared  nothing  was  settled,  but  hoped  things 
were  in  a  good  way. 

19^.  Lord  Howe  had  for  some  time  pressed  the  re- 
maining Ministers  to  hold  a  Cabinet  on  the  tumults  at 
Portsmouth.  They  had  told  him  they  had  no  authority  : 
however,  at  last  a  few  consented  to  assemble  on  the  IQth — 
the  Chancellor,  Mr.  Pitt,  twok  Secretaries  of  State,  Lord 
Howe,  General  Con  way,  and,  ft  think,  Lord  Ashburton — 
and  took  measures.  Before  tlj/y  parted  they  recommended 
to  the  Chancellor  to  advise  tfee  King  to  settle  Administra- 
tion with  the  Duke  of  Portland. 

At  first  Lord  North,  and  all  his  friends  for  him,  declared 
he  would  take  no  place  himself,  and  would  ask  but  for  six 
of  his  friends.  Then  he  tried  to  get  three  or  four  into  the 
Cabinet,  and  now  stooped,  after  being  First  Minister  so  long, 
to  take  the  subordinate  place  of  Secretary  of  State.  This 
proved  him,  what  I  had  long  thought  him,  a  great  hypocrite, 
and  very  ambitious.  Why  else  did  he  unite  with  his 
bitter  enemy  Fox,  who  had  opposed  both  his  principles  and 
measures?  Why  offer  to  take  the  Seals,  but  to  have 
access  to  the  King,  and  be  ready  to  supplant  Fox.  Ac- 
cordingly, on  the 


604  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.         MABCH, 

20th,  the  Chancellor,  not  to  hinder  an  arrangement, 
declared  to  the  King  he  would  not  keep  the  Seals.  Yet  was 
the  settlement  not  advanced ;  for  now  Lord  North,  who 
had  at  last,  for  accommodation,  as  he  pretended,  consented 
to  take  the  Seals  of  one  Secretary  instead  of  Lord  Stor- 
mont,  with  whom  Charles  Fox  had  declared  he  could  not 
nor  would  not  act,  so  much  did  their  principles  differ 
(yet  they  were  to  come  in  together!  Hopeful  union!), 
acquainted  the  Coalition,  on  the 

21s#,  that  he  had  persuaded  Lord  Stormont  to  be 
President.  At  this  they  exclaimed,  and  said  he  had  done 
it  of  himself  without  consulting  them;  and  though  the 
Duke  of  Portland  had  been  admitted  to  the  King  in  the 
morning  (Lord  North,  to  force  the  King  to  comply,  de- 
claring he  was  tired  and  would  carry  no  more  messages), 
and  had  been  asked  for  his  list,  which  he  still  would  not 
give  in  writing,  the  party  were  so  angry  at  Lord  North, 
that  at  eight  in  the  evening  they  despatched  the  Duke  of 
Portland  to  the  King  to  say  that  all  negotiation  was  at  an 
end.  However,  they  still  consulted,  and  Fox's  necessitous 
friends  being  very  clamorous,  and  Lord  North  declaring 
that,  though  he  would  support  them,  he  would  take  no 
part,  they  determined  to  say  that  Lord  North  had  not 
violated  the  agreement,  though  they  had  said  he  had ;  and 
in  two  hours  after  sending  the  Duke  of  Portland  to  the 
King  to  declare  off,  they  at  ten  that  night  begged  Lord 
North  to  acquaint  the  King  that  they  would  recommence 
it.  The  Duke,  two  hours  before,  on  acquainting  the  King 
that  Lord  North  would  not  take  a  part  with  them,  had 
offered  to  make  an  arrangement  himself  for  his  Majesty. 
The  King  replied  coldly,  "  I  thank  your  Grace,  I  will  not 
give  you  that  trouble."  On  the  contrary,  he  sent  secretly 
forW.  Pitt  next  day. 


1783.  THE  DUKE  OF  PORTLAND.  605 

One  much  connected  with  Lord  North,  telling  me  of  this 
coolness  between  him  and  Fox,  added,  "  Lord  North  at 
first  thought  Mr.  Fox  was  to  support  him  ;  now  he  finds 
he  is  to  support  Mr.  Fox,  and  therefore  he  will  have  done 
with  him."  Lord  North  had  even  on  the  20th,  in  the 
evening,  wrote  circular  letters  to  call  a  meeting  of  his 
friends  and  acquaint  them  with  his  reasons  for  breaking  off 
with  Fox. 

22nd.  Mr.  Coke  made  his  intended  motion,  but  the 
Coalition  begged  him  to  waive  it,  declaring  they  believed 
that  his  Majesty  would  soon  appoint  an  Administration ; 
and  he  did  consent  to  drop  his  motion. 

23rd.  The  Duke  of  Portland  was  again  with  the  King, 
and  carried  a  list  of  their  intended  Cabinet ;  but  the  King 
would  not  look  at  it,  demanding  to  see  their  whole  list, 
which  the  Duke  would  not  produce,  but  continued  to  press 
the  Cabinet  list  on  him,  saying,  "  I  implore  your  Majesty 
to  look  at  it;"  but  the  King  held  his  hands  behind  him, 
and  would  not  take  it.  I  believe  it  was  the  next  day  that 
the  Duke  wrote  to  the  King,  and,  to  palliate  the  refusal  of 
the  whole  list,  assured  him  they  did  not  intend  to  remove 
anybody  about  his  person  or  in  the  household — whatever 
day  it  was,  the  King,  on  the 

23rd,  wrote  both  to  the  Duke  and  Lord  North  a  few 
words,  to  declare  all  negotiation  with  them  was  at  an  end, 
and  he  sent  for  Mr.  Pitt ;  and,  on  the 

24th,  it  was  universally  believed  that  he  had  undertaken 
the  Administration,  till  the  House  of  Commons  meeting, 
Mr.  Coke  rose,  and  declaring  that,  as  he  understood  the 
negotiation  was  at  an  end,  he  would  repeat  his  motion  unless 
Mr.  Pitt  would  declare  that  he  had  accepted  the  first  place. 
Mr.  Pitt  rose  and  declared  he  was  not  Minister,  nor  knew 


606  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MARCH, 

of  any  arrangement  formed.  A  most  remarkable  debate 
followed,  the  chief  particulars  of  which  were,  that  Mr. 
Fox,  accusing  the  King's  secret  friends  of  breaking  off  the 
negotiation,  which  at  first  seemed  levelled  at  the  Chan- 
cellor, but  afterwards,  looking  fully  at  Jenkinson,  the 
latter  rose  with  great  emotion,  and  did  in  effect  own  that 
he  was  the  secret  Minister,  though  he  protested  he  had 
never  gone  to  the  King  but  when  sent  for ;  and  he  appealed 
to  Lord  North  whether  he  had  ever  found  obstructions 
from  him.  Of  that  Lord  North  fully  acquitted  him  ;  and 
then  took  occasion  to  protest  that  he  and  his  friend  had 
had  no  difference  for  above  twenty-four  hours.  There  how- 
ever had  for  some  hours  been  a  total  rupture,  as  is  said 
in  the  preceding  page.  The  Address  was  carried  with  very 
few  dissenting  voices. 

Thus  three  capital  mistakes  had  been  made.  First  by 
the  King :  had  he  admitted  the  Coalition  at  first,  while  their 
union  was  so  extremely  unpopular,  I  believe  they  would 
not  have  been  able  to  hold  the  Administration  for  three 
months.  The  Tories  would  have  returned  to  the  King ; 
Lord  North,  by  not  being  able  to  provide  for  his  numerous 
adherents,  would  have  lost  and  enraged  them.  The  bad 
characters  of  Fox  and  his  friends,  and  the  great  emoluments 
he  would  have  bestowed  on  them,  would  have  given  infinite 
offence,  and  Lord  North  and  Lord  Stormont,  the  latter  of 
whom  had  been  excluded  by  Fox  from  the  Secretary's 
Seals,  would  not  have  agreed.  The  King's  delays,  and  the 
impatience  of  mankind  for  an  Administration ;  the  want 
of  it  on  many  accounts,  as  for  money  for  the  East  India 
Company,  for  disbanding  the  army  and  navy,  the  un- 
finished state  of  the  peace,  the  refusal  of  Holland  to  accede 
to  it  without  indemnification,  &c., — these  things  alarmed 


1783.         MOORE  MADE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  CANTERBURY.         607 

and  offended  many ;  the  runners  of  the  Coalition  threw  the 
whole  blame  on  the  King,  and  as  he  had  in  reality  no 
Ministers,  nobody  took  any  pains  to  defend  him. 

The  next  error  was  Jenkiuson's,  in  owning  his  secret 
correspondence  with  the  King. 

The  last  was  the  irresolution  of  Pitt,  of  which  the  King 
complained.  Had  he,  on  that  day,  declared  he  was 
Minister  it  would  have  prevented  the  Address ;  it  would 
have  drawn  many  to  the  King  in  hopes  of  preferment,  and 
though  he  might  not  have  been  able  to  form  an  Adminis- 
tration, he  would  have  gained  time  to  the  King ;  but  to  j 
have  partly  yielded  twice  without  avowing  it,  was  only 
confessing  the  King's  weakness  and  his  own ;  and  warned 
all  lookers-out  to  apply  to  the  Coalition.  It  was  that 
weakness  that  determined  the  House  of  Commons,  and 
their  determination  decided  Pitt  not  to  accept.  He  told 
the  Lord  Advocate  the  next  day  that  he  found  the  House 
favoured  the  Coalition,  but  it  was  he  himself  and  the  King 
who  had  driven  the  House  to  that  party. 

During  this  inter-ministerium  died  Dr.  Cornwallis,  Arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury.  The  King,  lest  his  future  Ministers 
should  intercept  his  choice,  immediately  offered  it  to  his 
most  favoured  of  the  bench,  Dr.  Hurd,  Bishop  of  Wor- 
cester, lately  preceptor  to  the  Prince.  Hurd  declining  it, 
the  Primacy  was  offered,  probably  out  of  decency,  to 
Lowth,  Bishop  of  London,  but  he  had  been  dying  for  some 
time,  and  also  excused  himself.  The  mitre  was  then  con- 
ferred on  Moore,  Bishop  of  Bangor,  at  the  request,  it  was 
given  out,  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  whose  tutor  he  had 
been;  but  it  was  probably  obtained,  to  please  that  great 
Peer,  by  Lord  Shelburne,  who  had  entirely  gained  the 
Duke. 

On  the  Address  being  voted  on  the  Monday,  the  King 


608  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.          MABCH, 

immediately  went  to  Windsor  that  evening  to  hunt  the 
next  day — in  all  likelihood  to  carry  away  the  Prince  of 
Wales  from  Fox;  and,  in  fact,  as  the  King  had  never 
hunted  till  the  Prince  of  Wales  grew  a  man,  it  was  gene- 
rally thought  that  the  King  employed  the  chase  to  take 
the  Prince,  as  often  as  he  could,  from  other  diversions  and 
connections.  He  returned  on  the 

25#A,  received  the  Address,  and  gave  a  gracious  answer 
to  it,  though  no  explicit  one.  At  night  the  Lord  Mayor 
sent  to  General  Conway  for  guards,  as  many  handbills  had 
been  dispersed,  inviting  "  the  friends  of  Liberty  to  meet  in 
St.  George's  Fields  on  the  %7th,  when  something  would  be 
proposed  that  would  amaze  all  Europe"  and  they  ended 
with,  "Damn  the  King!"  General  Conway  ordered  a 
piquet  guard  to  be  ready ;  but  nobody  obeyed  the  sum- 
mons, nor  did  any  persons  assemble.  At  first  some 
meeting  was  apprehended  from  disbanded  sailors,  of  whom 
great  numbers  were  come  to  London ;  but  as  no  more  was 
heard  of  it,  it  seemed  the  production  of  some  madman ; 
perhaps  of  that  most  mischievous  of  all  madmen,  Lord 
(  George  Gordon,  who  was  daily  labouring  to  excite  some 
commotion,  had  been  instrumental  in  the  meeting  at  Ports- 
mouth, and  who,  two  days  after  those  handbills,  took  up 
the  cause  of  some  seamen  who  demanded  their  discharge 
from  Lord  Howe. 

26^A.  General  Conway  being  with  the  King  on  business 
of  the  Army,  the  King  spoke  to  him  a  little  on  the  present 
strange  situation ;  though  not  so  much  as  he  wished,  to  give 
him  an  opening  to  advise  the  King  to  take  the  Coalition— 
the  more  honest  and  handsome  in  him,  as  he  expected  they 
intended  to  lay  him  aside,  not  one  of  them  having  talked  to 
him  of  their  politics,  though  the  Duke  of  Portland  and  the 
Cavendishes  kept  up  intimacy  with  him ;  but  they  had  left 


1783.  RESIGNATION  OF  LORD  SHELBURNE.  609 

him  out  of  their  proposed  cabinet.  Burke,  too,  had  of  late 
paid  great  court  to  him,  though  hostile  and  cold  towards 
him  when  he  would  not  resign  with  them ;  and  Burke  had 
lately  declared  in  the  House  of  Commons  that  the  Army 
never  had  had  so  useful  and  indefatigable  a  Commander- 
in-chief,  and  he  believed  never  would  have.  The  King 
said  to  him,  "  It  was  a  strange  debate  on  Monday ! "  and 
then  complained  that  the  Duke  of  Portland  had  refused  to 
show  him  the  list  of  their  arrangements.  Conway  replied, 
"Yes,  Sir,  of  the  great  posts  I  thought  they  had."  "No," 
said  the  King,  "none  but  the  Cabinet — not  the  Lord 
Lieutenant  of  Ireland ;  but  I  can  tell  them,  Lord  Temple 
will  not  stay  with  them — and  you — what  have  you  done 
to  them?"  said  the  King,  artfully.  "I  know  nothing," 
said  Conway;  "nobody  talks  tome,  nor  I  to  any  of 
them."  "Why,  they  have  left  you  out  of  the  Cabinet," 
said  the  King.  "I  suppose  they  design  to  have  no  Com- 
mander-in-chief." "And  what  will  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
do  ?"  continued  the  King.  Conway  said  he  did  not  know ; 
and  the  King  changed  the  discourse.  Lord  Shelburne 
resigned  but  that  morning. 

The  same  day  his  Majesty's  answer  to  the  Address  was 
reported  to  the  House ;  yet  Lord  Surrey  declared  he 
would  renew  it  on  the  following  Monday,  if  no  Administra- 
tion were  formed  by  that  time.  Lord  North  rose  to  depre- 
cate pressing  the  King,  who,  he  said,  had  made  so  gracious 
an  answer  that  he  did  not  doubt  but  he  would  soon  fulfil  it. 

This  apology  for  the  King  was  remarkable,  and,  concurr- 
ing with  another  circumstance,  was  very  artful.  It  might 
have  been  expected  that  Jenkinson's  late  indiscreet  avowal 
would  have  thrown  the  Cavendishes  and  their  adherents 
into  great  violences.  Here  was  the  secret  influence 
(connected  with  Lord  Bute)  avowed,  against  which  they 

VOL.  II.  2  R 


610  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MARCB, 

had  always  clamoured  ;  I  am  therefore  inclined  to  believe 
that  its  not  being  taken  up  was  owing  to  Lord  North's 
intervention  and  advice.  Fox  indeed  had  conducted  him- 
self with  great  caution  and  temper ;  yet,  as  he  kept  no 
measures  about  the  Prince,  I  rather  believe  Lord  North 
kept  his  new  friends  quiet.  It  was  not  his  interest  to  have 
the  favour  of  Jenkinson  fathomed,  which  had  subsisted 
during  all  his  Administration.  He  might  too  let  the  King 
know  that  the  silence  on  Jenkinson  was  owing  to  his  ad- 
vice ;  and  his  flattery  on  the  King's  answer  now  was  in- 
dustriously recommending  himself  while  the  Duke  of  Port- 
land was  offending.  All  North's  conduct  was  so  artful 
and  double  that  I  am  persuaded  he  hopes  to  be  Minister 
again.  He  had  set  out  in  the  Coalition  with  declaring  he 
would  take  nothing  himself;  pretended  to  stickle  for  the 
Chancellor,  till  outweighed  by  Fox ;  to  please  Lord  Mans- 
field, recommended  Lord  Stormont  for  Secretary  of  State ; 
when  rejected  by  Fox,  pressed  Stormont  to  take  the  place 
of  President,  without  the  knowledge  of  Fox ;  and  then,  as 
if  to  facilitate  that,  offered  to  take  the  Secretary's  Seals 
himself,  which  would  give  him  constant  access  to  the  King. 
\  There  has  been  so  much  duplicity  in  his  whole  life,  and 
especially  of  late,  always  protesting  a  wish  of  retirement, 
yet  never  retiring  till  forced  out,  and  now  swallowing  every 
i  indignity  and  enmity  to  return  to  power,  that  I  sometimes 
suspect  he  may  be  in  private  intelligence  with  the  King,  or 
at  least  may  have  given  such  hints  of  interposing  to  prevent 
greater  heats,  as  may  have  encouraged  the  King  to  persist 
in  his  repeated  affronts  to  the  other  part  of  the  Coalition. 
In  many  of  the  debates  Lord  North  openly  declared  his 
principles  of  defending  the  Prerogative,  while  Fox,  to  keep 
up  his  interest  in  Westminster,  was  forced  to  profess  the 
same  adherence  to  his,  the  contrary  principles.  This 


1783.  LORD  NORTH  REFUSES  TO  BE  MINISTER. 

alone  was  sufficient  to  sway  the  King  to  North's  side,  and 
Lord  Stormont  was  a  proper  second. 

27^.  It  was  suddenly  declared  that  there  was  to  be  no 
levee,  and  that  the  King  would  not  go  to  the  oratorio. 

29M.  The  King  sent  again  for  Lord  North  at  night,  and 
pressed  him  to  be  Minister,  but  he  refused. 

30th.  The  King  was  ill,  and  fell  away  much  with  vexa- 
tion. 

When  the  King  saw  Lord  North  on  the  29th  he  again 
pressed  him  to  be  IV^inister,  but  Lord  North  refused,  and 
said  he  could  not,  but  that  the  Duke  of  Portland  was  ready 
to  be  so.  "  Then,"  said  the  King,  "  I  wish  your  Lordship 
good  night." 

The  county  of  Suffolk  addressed  the  King  on  the  Peace, 
but  begged  him  not  to  take  Ministers  again  (Lord  North) 
who  had  lost  the  confidence  of  the  people. 

31st.  Mr.  W.  Pitt  resigned.  Lord  Surrey  proposed  two 
more  motions  of  inquiry, — on  who  prevented  an  Adminis- 
tration, and  to  desire  one ;  but  the  first  was  universally 
disapproved,  and  the  Tories  discouraging  the  second,  both 
were  dropped ;  yet  Charles  Fox,  attacking  Jenkinson 
warmly,  his  fear  probably  at  last  fixed  the  King's  reso- 
lution, for  on 


2  u  2 


612  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  Amur,, 


APRIL 


1st,  HE  sent  once  more  for  Lord  North,  and  said,  "  Well, 
so  the  Duke  of  Portland  is  firm  !  "  "  Yes,  Sir."  "  Well 
then,  if  you  will  do  the  business,  I  will  take  him."  "  I 
have  told  your  Majesty  I  cannot."  •"  Well  then,  tell  him 
he  may  come  and  kiss  my  hand  to-morrow."  Accord- 
ingly on  the 

2nd,  the  Duke  of  Portland  was  made  First  Lord  of  the 
Treasury ;  Lord  John  Cavendish,  again,  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer;  Lord  North  and  Charles  Fox,  Secretaries  of 
State  ;  Lord  Stormont,  Lord  President ;  Lord  Carlisle, 
Privy  Seal;  and  Lord  Keppel,  First  Lord  of  the  Admi- 
ralty. 

The  King  received  the  Duke  of  Portland  and  Charles 
Fox  graciously;  to  Lord  Carlisle,  who  had  now  changed 
sides  three  times  in  one  year,  and  whose  resignation  had 
been  the  signal  for  blowing  up  Lord  Shelburue,  he  did  not 
speak ;  and  Lord  North  he  received  with  the  utmost  cold- 
ness, and  continued  to  treat  with  visible  aversion. 

Thus  from  the  24#A  of  February,  when  Lord  Shelburne 
declared  he  resigned,  to  the  2nd  of  April,  the  nation  had 
been  without  any  head  of  Administration. 

The  Duke  of  Portland,  on  quitting  the  King,  went 
directly  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  and  begged  him  to 
remain  Master  of  the  Ordnance.  The  latter  desired  time 
to  consider  of  it,  but  expressed  dislike  of  acting  with  Lord 
North ;  yet  rather  inclined  to  stay  in  place. 

Thence  Portland  went  to  General  Conway,  and  desired 


1783.  FOrS  VINDICATION.  613 

him  to  remain  at  the  head  of  the  army ;  made  many 
excuses  for  his  being  left  out  of  the  Cabinet,  in  which  his 
Grace  said  he  himself  had  wished  he  should  remain.  Con- 
way  told  him  frankly  he  was  glad  not  to  be  of  it ;  he  did  not 
love  politics,  had  always  declared  he  was  no  party-man, 
and  was  willing  to  stick  to  the  military  line.  Next  day 
he  acquainted  the  King  with  the  proposal,  with  which  he 
said  he  should  not  close  unless  it  had  his  Majesty's  appro- 
bation. The  King  said  he  did  approve  it. 

3rd.  The  new  Ministers  (pressed,  as  they  said,  for 
places,  and  by  Lord  North,  who  wished  to  restore  Lord 
Townshend  to  the  Ordnance ;  but,  I  rather  think,  hoping 
to  fix  the  Duke  of  Richmond's  irresolution,  in  which  they 
acted  unwisely,  as,  had  they  let  him  alone,  I  am  persuaded 
he  would  have  gone  on  with  them)  sent  for  the  Duke's 
answer.  He  was  offended,  immediately  threw  up  the 
Ordnance,  and  they  were  disappointed  and  vexed ;  for 
Richmond  was  sure  to  give  them  much  trouble  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  and  the  Duke  of  Portland  was  no  match 
for  him.  The  Ordnance  was  restored  to  Lord  Towns- 
hend. 

Fox,  in  his  first  audience  of  the  King,  vindicated  him- 
self on  the  aspersions  thrown  on  him  as  instigating  the 
Prince  of  Wales  to  disobedience ;  protested  he  had  never 
said  a  word  to  the  Prince  which  he  should  not  have  been 
glad  to  have  his  Majesty  hear ;  he  had  promised  nothing 
to  the  Prince  but  to  get  his  family  settled.  "Oh,"  said 
the  King,  "  that  will  be  all  in  due  time."  Fox  hinted 
plainly  at  the  Chancellor  as  author  of  those  aspersions, 
which  the  King  shuffled  off;  but  this  proved  that  that  had 
been  the  true  cause  of  the  Chancellor's  disgrace ;  and  he 
not  resigning,  and  it  being  reported  that  he  would  not, 
Fox,  by  the  King's  leave,  sent  to  him  for  the  great  Seal. 


614  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

Yet,  the  impression  remained,  and  the  King  was  said  to 
call  this  his  sons  Ministry.  When  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond resigned,  the  King  was  so  pleased  with  it  that  he 
seemed  quite  reconciled  to  the  Duke,  and  laughed  at  Lord 
North  to  him. 

The  first  offence  given  by  the  new  Ministers  was  the 
Act  of  Lord  Keppel.  When  he  had  been  arraigned  by 
Sir  Hugh  Palliser,  one  of  his  most  zealous  and  spirited 
defenders  had  been  Captain  John  Leveson  Gower,  half- 
brother  of  Earl  Grower,  and  a  brave  and  excellent  officer. 
When  Keppel  had  lately  resigned  the  Admiralty,  Lord 
Howe,  his  successor,  to  compliment  Keppel,  as  he  said, 
named  Leveson  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  Leveson 
acquainted  Keppel,  and  asked  his  approbation.  Keppel, 
though  pretending  to  be  in  friendship  with  Lord  Howe, 
was  offended,  and  answered  coldly  to  Leveson  that  he 
must  judge  for  himself.  Leveson  accepted ;  but,  the 
moment  Lord  Howe  was  removed  and  Keppel  reinstated, 
he  dismissed  Leveson,  though  with  much  ill-timed  flattery, 
urging  that  Sir  John  Lindsay  must  be  a  Lord  of  the 
Admiralty  (Lord  Mansfield's  nephew),  and  promising 
Leveson  a  command  at  sea — a  new  offence,  as  the  peace 
was  now  near  conclusion.  This  ingratitude  made  signal 
noise ;  and  had  Leveson  been  wanting  to  Keppel,  which  is 
very  questionable,  nothing  could  excuse  such  want  of 
gratitude  to  so  essential  a  friend. 

As  Mr.  Burke's  bill  had  struck  off  many  employments, 
as  some  of  the  two  last  Administrations  remained  in  place, 
as  the  new  Ministers  had  promised  the  King  not  to  turn 
out  any  about  his  person,  they  were  much  hampered  to 
find  offices  to  satisfy  their  friends,  especially  as  Lord 
North  by  no  means  adhered  to  his  first  professed  modera- 
tion, pleading,  /  suppose,  to  his  new  allies,  that  as  his 


1783.        DISSOLUTE  CHARACTER  OP  FOX'S  PARTIZANS.         015 

faction  was  the  strongest  of  all,  he  should  lose  them  if  he 
abandoned  his  friends  who  had  fallen  with  him ;  and,  in- 
deed, as  will  appear,  he  did  not  neglect  them.  Still,  it  was 
believed  that,  as  there  was  nothing  else  to  give,  a  very 
large  number  of  peerages  must  be  given  in  payment. 
These  the  King  expected  would  be  asked,  and  had  com- 
plained to  Conway  that  they  would  not  disclose  to  him 
before  they  came  in,  no  more  than  some  of  the  candidates 
for  some  of  the  first  offices.  They  had  pleaded  that  men 
did  not  like  to  be  named  before  sure  of  the  offices ;  and 
as  some  of  Charles  Fox's  partizans  were  most  dissolute 
characters,  they  probably  apprehended  that  the  King 
would  plead  those  bad  characters  as  reasons  for  rejecting 
their  terms.  However,  they  were  much  in  the  wrong  not 
to  make  all  their  demands  at  first.  They  had  once  before 
experienced  the  King's  pliancy  in  distress  and  his  subse- 
quent insincerity.  In  1766,  he  granted  all  Lord  Rocking- 
ham  asked ;  but,  as  soon  as  that  Administration  was 
settled,  they  could  not  make  him  remove  one  man  for 
whose  disgrace  they  had  not  stipulated  at  first.  I  do 
suspect  (April  12th)  that  the  King  will  not  grant  half  the 
peerages  they  will  demand  ;  he  has  given  a  symptom 
already. 

Among  Lord  North's  terms  was  a  Dukedom  for  Lord 
Hertford ;  and  here  I  suspect  Lord  North  of  no  less 
double-dealing.  Lord  Hertford  had  always  declared  he 
belonged  only  to  the  King — not  to  Lord  North  or  any 
Minister ;  yet,  in  the  first  week  this  Dukedom  was  asked 
for  him.  The  King,  it  is  true,  had  last  year  sacrificed 
Lord  Hertford  gaily,  and  even  without  a  civil  regret. ! 
Lord  Hertford,  having  found  no  favour  from  his  Majesty, 
had  recurred  to  Lord  North ;  but  that  was  no  reason  for 
Lord  North  to  be  so  officious  to  serve  him  so  early.  The 


616 


LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE. 


APRIL, 


King  peremptorily  refused,  and  said  he  would  not  make  a 
Duke  to  accommodate  an  arrangement  of  Administration, 
but  would  give  him  back  the  Chamberlain's  staff.  As  the 
Duke  of  Manchester  had  been  offered,  and  accepted,  the 
Embassy  to  Paris,  I  cannot  but  suspect  that  Lord  North 
had  but  faintly  pressed  the  Dukedom,  and  had  suggested 
the  other  expedient,  that  his  relation,  Colonel  Keene,1 
might  be  restored  to  his  place  of  Secretary  to  the  Lord 
Chamberlain,  from  which  he  had  been  unprecedentedly 
removed  by  the  Duke  of  Manchester.  Lord  Hertford 
took  his  staff  and  restored  Colonel  Keene. 

4th.  Burke  was  made  Paymaster ;  Charles  Townshend, 
Treasurer  of  the  Navy  ;  Lord  Surrey,  Fred.  Montagu,  and 
Sir  Grey  Cooper,  Lords  of  the  Treasury ;  Eden,  Vice- 
Treasurer  of  Ireland ;  Lord  Duncannon,  Admiral  Pigot 
(of  the  old  set),  John  Townshend,  Sir  John  Lindsay, 
Colonel  Keene,  and  Mr.  Joliffe,  Lords  of  the  Admiralty ; 
the  latter  in  the  room  of  Lord  Apsley,  son  of  Earl 
Bathurst,  who  had  been  recommended  by  Lord  North, 
but  declined,  being  much  acquainted  with  Mr.  "W.  Pitt. 

7th.  Charles  Fox  was  re- chosen  for  Westminster  ;  there 
was  some  hissing,  but  no  opposition ;  nor  was  there  any 
to  Lord  John  Cavendish  even  at  York. 

15th.  On  the  bill  for  ceding  Jurisdiction  to  Ireland,  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lord  Thurlow  showed  that  they 
intend  opposition.  They  pressed  the  Duke  of  Portland 
hardly  to  say  what  his  plan  was  for  Ireland,  or  whether 
he  had  one,  though  in  fact  the  Bill  in  question  had  been 
the  act  of  Lord  Shelburne's  Administration.  The  Duke, 
though  decent,  bore  hard,  and  the  late  Chancellor  rudely, 


1  Colonel  Keene  married  Miss  Legge, 
sister  of  Lord  Dartmouth,  whose  mother 
had  remarried  Lord  Guilford,  Lord 


North's  father.  Mrs.  Keene  was  always 
treated  by  Lord  North  as  a  favourite 
sister. 


1783.        LORD  NORTHINGTON  MADE  LORD  LIEUTENANT.     617 

between  whom  and  Lord  Loughborough  very  warm  words 
passed.  Thurlow  made  a  ridiculous  panegyric  on  Lord 
Temple,  as  if  he  was  designed  by  that  party  for  Minister, 
the  King  having  said  that  he  had  never  seen  so  irresolute 
a  young  man  as  Mr.  W.  Pitt.  The  Duke  of  Portland 
defended  himself  modestly,  but  was  not  likely  to  be  able 
to  stand  such  coarse  attacks. 

16th.  Lord  John  Cavendish  opened  the  loan,  which  he 
had  been  obliged  to  accept,  though  a  very  bad  one,  from 
want  of  time.  Mr.  Pitt  attacked  it  in  a  very  long  speech, 
but  so  superficially  that  Charles  Fox  told  him  how  igno- 
rant he  was,  and  how  much  to  blame  for  its  badness  by  his 
neglect. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  month,  Lord  Northington  was 
made  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland.  The  new  Ministers 
had  wished  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  or  Lord  Fitzwilliam 
to  accept  it,  but  neither  would.  They  then  offered  it  to 
Lord  Althorpe,  but  he  also  declined  it.  In  this  distress 
they  fixed  on  Lord  Northington,  a  man  very  unequal  to 
the  task.  He  was  not  a  weak  man,  yet  had  never  been 
noticed  for  sense  :  but  in  point  of  interest,  connections,  or 
wealth,  nobody  was  less  distinguished,  nor  could  he  afford 
the  expense  that  would  be  necessary  after  the  ostentatious 
profusions  of  the  very  opulent  Lord  Temple,  who,  though 
reckoned  parsimonious,  had  given  proofs  of  his  ambition 
by  his  liberality.  Lord  Northington  was  stately  in  his 
manner,  the  only  indication  he  had  given  of  thinking  him- 
self qualified  for  a  Minister  :  in  business  he  had  never 
been  tried.  Mr.  Fox  gave  him  for  Secretary  Mr.  Wind- 
ham,  a  Norfolk  gentleman  of  good  fortune,  of  most  fair 
character,  in  his  principles  much  disposed  to  Republi- 
canism, and  reckoned  to  have  good  parts,  but  so  ignorant 
of  the  world,  that  if  it  was  evidence  of  his  virtue,  it  was 


618  LAST  JOURNALS  OP  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  APRIL, 

no  proof  of  his  sense,  nor  do  I  think  he  had  a  considerable 
share. 

At  the  end  of  this  month  and  the  beginning  of  the  next, 
Burke  ran  into  the  wildest  intemperance  in  his  speeches. 
/  On  the  bill  for  a  loan  to  the  East  India  Company,  he 
ranted  outrageously  and  most  indecently  against  Governor 
Hastings,  which  drew  on  him  severe  reprimands  from 
Governor  Johnston  and  in  the  public  prints ;  and,  in  May, 
he  was  no  less  extravagant  in  his  own  defence.  Powel, 
the  confidant  and  creature  of  the  first  Lord  Holland,  and 
one  Bembridge,  both  officers  of  the  Pay  Office,  had  been 
largely  deficient  in  their  balances,  and  were  under  prosecu- 
tion. Colonel  Barre,  the  late  Paymaster,  had  dismissed 
them.  Burke  had  not  only  restored  them,  but  had  not  even 
communicated  their  restoration  to  his  associate  Ministers, 
who  first  learnt  it  by  complaints  made  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, where  Martin  and  Sir  Edward  Astley  termed  it  an 
insult  to  the  public.  Burke  flamed  at  those  words  in  so 
•/  frantic  a  manner,  that  Fox  and  Sheridan  were  forced  to 
hold  him  down,  and  both  laboured  to  palliate  his  conduct, 
though  so  difficult  to  be  excused.  In  fact  for  the  last  two 
winters  so  intemperate  had  been  Burke's  behaviour,  that 
many  thought  his  intellects  disordered. 


1783.  LORD  GEORGE  GORDON  AND  LORD  PETRE.  619 


MAY. 


1st.  Lord  Shelburne  and  the  late  Chancellor  attacked 
Lord  John  Cavendish's  loan,  and  the  latter  complained  that 
Lord  Stormont  had  told  him  it  would  not  be  debated  till 
the  5th,  yet  the  Ministers  now  were  pressing  to  hurry  it 
through  without  delay.  Both  pretended  to  disapprove  Op- 
position from  personal  motives — a  falsehood  more  suited 
to  Lord  Shelburne's  insincerity  than  to  Lord  Thurlow's 
brutal  frankness.  The  Duke  of  Portland  urged  the  abso- 
lute emptiness  of  the  Treasury,  where  there  was  not  a 
guinea.  It  was  at  last  agreed  that  the  bill  should  be  hur- 
ried through  all  the  stages  but  the  last,  which  should  be 
debated  on  the  5th. 

The  2nd  Regiment  of  Guards,  called  the  Scotch,  or  the 
Coldstream,  had  been  near  mutinying,  400  demanding 
their  discharge.  It  was  not  impossible  but  Lord  George 
Gordon  had  been  instilling  mischief.  General  Conway,  by 
prudence  and  severe  injunctions,  pacified  them.  Lord 
George  had  lately  betrayed  in  print  a  long-passed  conver- 
sation between  him  and  Lord  Petre,  who  had  endeavoured 
to  obtain  mitigation  of  Lord  George's  hostilities  to  the  Ca- 
tholics, but  in  which  Lord  Petre  had  been  guilty  of  no 
impropriety  or  indiscretion.  Thus  the  incendiary  wretch 
rather  hurt  himself  by  thus  warning  men  to  shun  his  con- 
verse, when  he  was  capable  of  divulging  the  matter  how- 
ever innocent. 

7th.  The  long  expected  day  when  the  alteration  of  the 
mode  of  Representation  was  to  be  attempted.  The  West- 


620  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HOE  ACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

minster  Association  had  lately  assumed  a  menacing  tone, 
and  had  voted  that  they  would  not  be  content  under  their 
full  demand.  A  silly  vapour,  as  no  one  meeting  could  have 
any  right  to  dictate  to  the  whole  Legislature  and  kingdom, 
and  would  imply  nothing  but  armed  resentment,  which 
they  had  neither  strength  nor  courage  to  employ.  There 
were  but  fourteen  counties  in  which  any  association  had 
been  formed,  and  of  those  very  few,  or  perhaps  not  half, 
comprised  anything  like  a  majority  of  the  county.  Mr. 
William  Pitt,  in  a  very  long,  guarded,  and  fluctuating 
speech,  made  the  motion.  It  produced,  as  had  been  fore- 
seen, variety  of  opinions  for  different  modes;  was  reso- 
lutely opposed  by  Lord  North,  was  supported  by  no 
strength  of  solid  argument,  and  acquired  two  new  cham- 
pions, who  made  themselves  completely  ridiculous,were  both 
adequately  ridiculed  in  the  House,  and  afterwards  by  the 
public.  These  were  the  Lord  Advocate  Dundas,  who  the 
last  year  had  warmly  declared  against  any  alteration ;  but 
having  lost  his  place  of  Treasurer  of  the  Navy  on  the  late 
change,  pretended  to  be  converted  by  Mr.  Pitt's  speech, 
though  he  himself  seemed  not  convinced  by  his  own  argu- 
ments. The  other  was  Mr.  Thomas  Pitt,  who,  the  last 
year,  after  a  faint  self-denial  on  his  own  borough  of  Old 
Sarum,  had  owned  he  trusted  that  private  property  would 
not  be  violated,  and  had  since  published  a  pamphlet  against 
any  alteration.  He  now,  in  the  most  affected  and  hypo- 
critic  manner,  offered  to  give  up  his  borough,  which  he 
could  have  no  power  of  doing.  The  House  divided  at 
near  three  in  the  morning,  when  the  motion  was  quashed 
by  293  to  149 — a  defeat  so  considerable,  that  the  pert 
Committee  at  Westminster  were  struck  dumb — and,  for  a 
week,  Lord  Shelburne,  for  his  last  vain-glorious  harangue 
on  himself, — Lord  Thurlow,  for  his  blundering  calcula- 


1783.  THE  NEW  MINISTRY.  621 

tions,  and  the  Lord  Advocate  and  Mr.  Thomas  Pitt,  for 
their  unprincipled  conversions,  amused  the  town,  and  the 
Associations  were  entirely  forgotten. 

Lord  Sandwich,  who  had  threatened  the  new  Ministry 
with  the  number  of  votes  at  his  command,  was  made 
Ranger  of  the  Parks,  in  the  room  of  Lord  Orford ;  and 
his  son,  Hinchinbrook,  got  a  place  likewise.  It  was  not 
very  creditable  to  tumble  from  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty 
to  be  a  Ranger — not  more  so  for  Mr.  Fox  to  countenance 
him — yet  as  decent  as  for  him  to  have  joined  Lord  North  ! 
But  thus  were  all  parties  so  jumbled  and  so  prostituted, 
that  no  shadow  of  principles  remained  in  any  party ;  nor 
could  any  man  say  which  faction  was  Whig  or  Tory. 
The  Crown  was  humbled  and  disgraced — the  people  were 
sold ;  a  coalition  of  potent  chiefs  had  seized  power,  yet 
could  not  be  called  the  Aristocracy,  for  the  Peers  were 
divided  too.  Lord  North  had  much  credit  in  the  House 
of  Commons  ;  Mr.  Fox  arid  Mr.  Pitt,  of  different  factions, 
had  much  sway  there  too,  and  with  the  people.  Lord 
Shelburne,  Lord  Temple,  and  Lord  Thurlow  were  consi- 
derable in  the  other  House,  the  first  by  readiness  of  speak- 
ing, the  last  by  abilities,  the  second  by  his  wealth.  The 
Duke  of  Portland  and  Lord  John  Cavendish  were  power- 
ful by  their  connections  with  the  nobility.  Thus  no  set  of 
men  could  be  classed  to  any  denomination.  Consequently 
new  struggles  must  give  new  and  separate  distinctions, 
and  some  time  probably  will  pass  before  either  of  the  three 
constituent  parts  of  the  Legislature  will  preponderate  emi- 
nently. The  King,  it  is  likely,  will  soon  attempt  to  get 
rid  of  his  present  Ministers,  and  perhaps  will  not  better 
his  condition — for  those  to  whom  he  will  lean  have  no 
popularity.  Lord  Shelburne  is  despised,  and  will  be  hated 
the  more  he  is  active.  Lord  Thurlow  is  morose  and  igno- 


622  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

rant  of  the  world,  and  unpliant.  The  Duke  of  Richmond 
not  beloved ;  the  Lord  Advocate  decried  by  excess  of 
prostitution  ;  Jenkinson's  want  of  judgment  has  exposed 
him  to  all  manner  of  jealousy.  Lord  Temple  and  Mr. 
William  have  most  chance  of  success  from  their  extreme 
ambition  and  industry — but  the  first  has  many  disgusting 
qualities,  as  pride,  obstinacy  and  want  of  truth,  with 
natural  propensity  to  avarice.  Mr.  Pitt  has  betrayed  irre- 
solution ;  and  presuming  too  much  on  such  very  premature 
success,  has  discovered  that  his  judgment  is  by  no  means 
so  premature  as  his  eloquence.  Yet  his  attention  to  cha- 
racter, and  future  experience,  is  more  likely  to  set  him  at 
\  the  head  of  this  country  than  any  man,  though  his  abilities 
f  are  infinitely  inferior  to  Mr.  Fox's,  who,  the  longer  he  re- 
mains in  power,  will  reconcile  mankind  to  him,  and  ac- 
quire their  admiration  and  attachment ;  for  besides  his 
superiority  of  parts,  he  has  as  much  quickness  of  common 
sense  as  some  men  have  of  wit.  He  sees  to  the  bottom  of 
everything,  and  views  it  in  its  true  light  as  rapidly  as  they 
skim  surfaces  and  descry  resemblances  or  allusions.  His 
good  humour  is  as  constitutional  as  his  common  sense,  and 
both  are  clear  of  affectation.  Mr.  Pitt,  like  his  father,  is 
more  facetious.  Application  has  given  him  as  much  as 
nature,  but  his  natural  parts  would  not  have  carried  him 
far  without  that  aid.  All  his  attention  is  consecrated  to 
his  ambition  or  love  of  fame.  It  appears  even  in  his  tem- 
perance and  £are  of  his  health.  Mr.  Fox,  when  not  in 
office,  thinks  of  nothing  but  his  pleasures ;  nor  of  business 
but  at  the  moment  he  is  doing  it  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons. Void  of  art  or  design,  if  Nature  had  not  made 
him  the  most  powerful  reasoner  of  the  age,  he  would 
never  have  distinguished  himself.  He  never  stooped  to 
any  of  the  manoeuvres  of  a  politician.  Had  not  Pitt  so 


1783.  CHARACTER  OP  LORD  SHELBURNE.  623 

early  aspired  to  be  his  rival,  Fox  would  have  cherished 
Pitt  as  his  friend  and  disciple.  Fox  was  charmed  with 
his  outset  and  loved  him  ;  Pitt,  with  a  boy's  arrogance,  in- 
toxicated with  success,  pronounced  presumptuously,  '*  Mr. 
Fox  has  never  yet  been  answered."  When  he  forced  Fox 
to  answer  him,  it  was  with  such  facility  of  superiority,  that 
Pitt  had  better  have  remembered  that  neither  Thurlow  nor 
Dundas,  nor  both  together,  could  defeat  Fox. 

Pitt  still  was  a  phenomenon  when  at  all  able  to  enter  the 
melee  with  such  men  as  Fox,  Thurlow,  Dundas,  and  Lord 
Loughborough,  all  men  of  first-rate  abilities ;  but  how  per- 
fectly ridiculous  was  it,  when  that  vain-glorious  talker, 
Lord  Shelburne,  imagined  himself  capable  of  shuffling  and 
making  subservient  to  his  views  all  these,  and  other  such 
able  men,  as  Lord  North,  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  General 
Conway,  and  Burke.  Phaeton's  presumption  was  not 
greater,  nor  his  fall  scarce  more  rapid.  With  a  character 
most  decried,  with  no  address,  but  a  boundless  resolution 
of  flattery,  lying,  betraying  and  corrupting,  this  silly  man 
persuaded  himself  he  could  divide,  reconcile,  or  affront  all 
men  at  his  pleasure.  Believing  that  profuse  promises  to 
the  King  of  carrying  the  Prerogative  to  the  proudest 
height  would  assure  him  steady  and  full  support,  he  rioted 
in  attempting  everything  at  once  that  nothing  but  the  most 
delicate  art  and  length  of  time  could  reduce  towards  an 
approach  to  practicability — nor  had  he  sooner  laid  his  de- 
sign— (of  plan  it  does  not  deserve  the  name) — than  he 
thought  he  had  brought  it  to  perfection,  and  that  nothing 
remained  but  mere  cajoleries  to  maintain  his  power.  He 
shook  off  his  few  real  adherents,  offended  or  flattered  his 
associates  as  any  little  momentary  view  prompted,  precipi- 
tated his  measures  before  his  schemes  were  digested,  and, 
like  the  frantic  Tribune,  Nicolo  Rienzi,  seemed  to  think 


624  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

that  the  trappings  of  his  post  were  the  buttresses  of  his 
power. 

It  were  wasting  words  to  detail  the  extravagant  and 
daily  instances  of  his  fulsome  flatteries  and  falsehoods ;  men 
paid  court  to  him  at  last  but  to  collect  tales  of  his  promises, 
professions,  compliments  and  boasts.  His  adulation  and 
insincerity  were  so  much  a  joke,  that  he  would  have  been 
torn  to  pieces  by  the  indignation  of  mankind,  if  it  had  not 
been  sufficient  to  hoot  him  out  of  his  post  by  laughing  at 
his  absurdities.  Nor  did  the  universal  voice  of  ridicule, 
nor  did  his  fall,  that  was  the  rapid  consequence,  discover 
him  to  himself.  His  rhodomontade  speech  on  his  own 
popularity,  when  universally  exploded,  showed  how  little 
he  was  sensible  of  his  own  opprobrium  :  nor  were  his  hy- 
perboles on  himself  surprising,  when  no  man  that  ap- 
proached him  during  his  transient  reign  received  less 
bombast  incense  than  his  own  self-love  had  hoarded  for 
itself. 

If  such  excess  of  folly  could  be  heightened,  it  was.  He 
had  outraged  and  contributed  to  drive  Lord  North  from 
his  power ;  he  had  stolen  the  succession  from  Lord  Rock- 
ingham,  and  he  had  trampled  on  Fox  ;  yet,  while  he 
dealt  bribes  liberally,  flattered  indiscriminately,  promised 
profusely,  and  above  all  things  prided  himself  on  his  art, 
he  took  not  the  smallest  step  to  reconcile  either  of  the 
powerful  factions  that  he  had  provoked  and  insulted.  He 
neglected  his  own  friends,  affronted  those  that  had  adhered 
to  him  when  Fox  and  the  Cavendishes  broke  with  him, 
and  though  he  had  so  very  recently  concurred  in  tearing  a 
well-planted  Minister  from  the  Crown  (Lord  North),  he 
was  so  blind  as  to  suppose  that  his  subservience  to  the 
Crown  would  balance  all  the  other  factions.  If  he  flat- 
tered himself  that  Lord  North  ;md  Fox  were  irreconcile- 


1783.  CHARACTER  OF  LORD  SHELBURNK.  625 

able,  he  knew  little  of  mankind.     Nothing  is  more  true 
than  that  men  are  always  most  enraged  at  those  that  have  \ 
offended  them  last ;   nor  is  it  less  true,  that  when  three 
men  hate  each  other  reciprocally,  the  two  who  have  lost 
power  will  be  most  angry  with  him  who  has  deprived  them 
of  it ;  nor  was  it  possible  for  Lord  Shelburne  to  prevent 
such  a  junction  but  by  gaining  either  the  one  or  the  other 
of  his  adversaries.      Whether  he  could  have  succeeded 
must  remain  uncertain.     Not  to  have  tried  leaves  his  folly, 
indisputable.     The  moment  Lord  North  and  Fox  united,/ 
Shelburne's  fall  was  inevitable,  nor  was  it  delayed  a  mo- 
ment. 

To  the  nation,   amidst  its  losses  and  disgraces,  many 
advantages  have  accrued  from  the  late  struggle  of  parties, 
and  even  from  those  misfortunes.       Had  the  American 
war  been  prosperous,  I  have  no  doubt  but  the  power  of  the  v 
Crown  would  have  swelled  to  most  dangerous  heights.    Its 
miscarriage  has  compensated  to  the  country  by  the  diminu- 
tion of  the  Crown's  influence.     It  even  is  deprived,  at  pre- 
sent, of  the  choice  of  its  Ministers.     Could  the  King  have 
preserved  his  power  he  would  not  have  consented  to  peace ; 
nor,  had  Lord  Shelburne  had  any  support  but  the  King, 
would   he   have  combated  the  King's  aversion   to  peace. 
His  obtaining  the  King's  acquiescence  implies  what  in- 
demnification he  must  have  promised.     The  badness  of  the 
peace,  though  preferable  to  the  ruinous  continuance  of  the 
war,  contributed  to  Lord  Shelburne's  ruin.     The  friends 
that  the  King  abandoned  on  Lord  North's  fall  destroyed 
the  trust  that  servile  men  had  put  in  the  King,  and  the 
various  manreuvres  and  intrigues  of  Shelburne  and  his  anta- 
gonists have  divided  the  Scots  :  Lord  Mansfield  and  Lord 
Loughborough  took  a  different  side  from  the  Lord  Advo- 
cate.    The  King's  resistance  of  the  Coalition  of  North 
VOL.  n.  2  s 


626  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  MAY, 

and  Fox  produced  the  foolish  but  salutary  avowal  of  Jen- 
kinson  that  there  is  a  secret  influence ;  and  should  Fox 
and  North  prove  bad  Ministers,  which  I  think  very  un- 
likely, Lord  Thurlow,  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  Mr.  Pitt, 
the  Lord  Advocate,  and  even  Shelburne  himself  will  not 
be.  timid  or  tacit  opponents  5  and  when  there  are  such 
enmities  and  animosities,  the  people  are  sure  of  being 
courted.  It  is  a  happier  state  for  a  country  to  have  the 
people  umpires  rather  than  opponents.  When  the  People 
are  reduced  to  resist  the  encroachments  of  power  their 
rage  is  both  blind  and  transient,  and  they  either  repent  or 
are  quelled.  When  the  Crown  and  Nobility  contend,  or 
contending  factions,  both  endeavour  to  conciliate  the  favour, 
not  to  provoke  the  passions,  of  the  people ;  and  though 
the  ultimate  end  of  the  contentions  of  the  great  is  to  op- 
press the  people,  many  advantages  are  conferred  on  the 
latter  to  purchase  their  support. 

26th,  Mr.  Powell,  of  the  Pay-office,  cut  his  throat.  He 
had  been  a  confidential  officer  of  Henry  Lord  Holland,  and 
his  executor,  and  had  made  a  vast  fortune — it  was  supposed 
300, 000 /.  Last  year'  the  Commissioners  of  accounts  had 
discovered  that  he  had  taken  a  false  oath  and  concealed  a 
deficiency  of  70,000^.  Colonel  Barre  had  dismissed  him 
and  one  Bembridge,  of  the  same  office.  On  Burke's  suc- 
ceeding Barre  on  the  late  change,  he  had  restored  both 
Powell  and  Bembridge,  though  they  were  to  be  prosecuted, 
and  Powell  even  for  perjury.  This  indecent  re-establish  - 
ment  of  two  men  under  such  circumstances  was  severely 
censured  in  the  House  of  Commons,  and  was  defended  in 
a  most  frantic  manner  by  Mr.  Burke,  who  on  two  different 
days  poured  forth  rhapsodies  of  eloquence,  wit,  enthusiasm, 
and  indecency ;  urging  that  from  excess  of  tenderness  and 
compassion  to  the  two  delinquents,  who  protested  their  in- 


1783.  SUICIDE  OF  MR.  POWELL.  627 

nocence,  and  were  in  agonies  on  the  accusation,  and  had 
begged  to  be  left  to  their  own  justification,  he  had  replaced 
them,  and  though  blamed  on  earth,  should  be  glorified  by 
the  angels  in  heaven  for  his  humanity.  Many  were  per- 
suaded by  his  transports,  and  a  majority  supported  his  act, 
which  he  had  not  communicated  to  his  best  friends  and 
fellow  Ministers.  Still  the  example  was  so  offensive,  that 
even  the  Ministers  were  forced  to  abandon  and  let  them  re- 
sign. Powell,  unable  to  bear  the  shame,  destroyed  him- 
self; but  on  the  evidence  of  Burke,  Rigby,  his  late  principal, 
and  others,  the  Coroner's  Inquest  pronounced  him  to  have 
been  insane. 

Lord  John  Cavendish  opened  the  taxes,  and  they  proved 
popular  beyond  example.  Lord  Mahon,  a  wild  young  man 
connected  with  Pitt,  opposed  them,  and  fell  severely  on 
Lord  North,  who  turned  him  completely  into  ridicule.  Pitt 
supported  him  in  one  of  his  best  speeches,  in  which  his 
language  was  thought  equal  to  his  father's,  his  reasoning 
superior,  and  his  spirit  greater  than  he  had  yet  exerted — but 
injudiciously  treating  Charles  Fox  as  flimsy  and  flippant, 
the  latter  showed  how  much  more  justly  those  epithets 
belonged  to  himself. 


2  s  2 


628  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 


JUNE. 


THE  Opposition  endeavoured  to  raise  a  great  clamour 
against  the  new  tax  on  Receipts,  and  some  interested  per- 
sons did  procure  meetings  and  petitions  in  the  City  and 
other  places  ;  but  it  did  not  spread  as  they  hoped,  and  had 
no  effect  in  the  House  of  Commons,  where  it  was  voted 
without  a  division.  Mr.  Pitt  even  acted  candour  and  spoke 
for  it,  as  he  said  it  was  too  late  in  the  year  to  find  any  tax 
in  the  room  of  it.  In  general  it  was  much  approved. 
Sheridan  was  said  to  be  the  author  of  it  and  proved  its  best 
support.  He  improved  daily  in  speaking,  turned  all  the 
Opposition  said  into  excellent  ridicule,  and  always  brought 
the  House  into  good  humour  with  the  Ministers. 

The  Prince  of  Wales  being  now  within  few  weeks  of 
being  of  age,  it  became  impossible  for  the  King  to  delay 
any  longer  the  settling  a  revenue  and  family  for  him  ;  ac- 
cordingly, on  the 

1  It h,  the  King  told  the  Duke  of  Portland  that  he 
intended  it.  The  Duke  approved  the  intention,  but  in- 
discreetly told  the  King  that  the  Ministers  would  take  the 
burthen  from  his  Majesty,  and  would  bait  liberally ;  they 
i  would  get  100,000/.  a  year  for  the  Prince.  This  was 
exceedingly  imprudent,  both  in  letting  the  King  see  at 
once  their  intention  of  gaining  the  Prince's  affection,  and 
in  so  vast  a  revenue,  which  would  be  double  what  the  late 
Prince  of  Wales  had  had  long  after  he  had  a  wife  arid 
children.  I  believe  the  Ministers  had  gone  so  far  because 
Lord  Shelburne  had,  or  it  was  given  out,  I  know,  had 


1783.  PROVISION  FOR  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES.  629 

said,  in  excuse  for  striking  off  many  small  places  and  pen- 
sions, that  he  did  it  towards  forming  an  income  of  100,000/. 
a  year  for  the  Prince.  Had  they  offered  less,  the  Prince 
would  naturally  have  turned  towards  Lord  Shelburne. 
The  King  disguised  his  pleasure,  and,  even  on  the 

13th,  heard  the  Ministers  arrange  their  plans,  for 
which  even  they  summoned  the  House  of  Lords ;  yet,  the 
King  contradicted  nothing,  and  the  messages  to  be  given 
on  the  16th  were  determined;  but,  in  the  mean  time,  the 
King  saw  Lord  Temple,  who  was  just  arrived  from  Ire- 
land, in  private,  and,  it  was  universally  supposed,  offered 
him  the  Administration,  which  he  as  readily  accepted,  and 
even  sent  a  servant  of  his  own,  in  livery,  to  stop  the  Duke 
of  Richmond  from  going  to  France;  for,  on  the 

15#A,  when  the   Duke  of  Portland    took  the  message 
that  was  to  be  delivered  in  writing  for  his  approbation, 
the  King  sent  him  orders  not  to  deliver  it, /or  he  had' 
changed  his  mind. 

The  Ministers  were  thunderstruck,  and  disgusted  to  the 
utmost.  The  Prince  was  enraged,  pressed  them  to  resign, 
and  had  a  fever  with  vexation.  The  Ministers  knew  not 
what  to  say  to  both  Houses,  to  whom  the  intention  had 
been  notified,  and  where  they  were  called  upon  for  a 
solution. 

On  the  I6th,  the  Ministers  held  a  meeting,  whence  they 
were  to  go  and  resign  their  employments ;  but,  before 
they  separated,  the  Duke  of  Portland  was  summoned  to 
the  King,  who,  in  an  agony  of  tears,  kissed  the  Duke, 
confessed  he  had  gone  too  far,  and  begged  the  Duke  to 
rescue  him. 

This  strange  weakness  saved  the  Ministers  from  the 
embarrassing  situation  into  which  they  had  fallen.  Charles 
Fox  went  to  the  Prince  and  prevailed  on  him  to  submit 


630  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

himself  entirely  to  his  father,  which,  at  last,  he  did ;  and 
the  Ministers,  who  had  thus  the  King  in  their  power  and 
the  Prince  in  their  hands,  extricated  themselves  with  great 
address  and  pleased  everybody.  No  revenue  was  de- 
manded from  Parliament ;  the  King  gave  50,000/.  a  year 
to  the  Prince  out  of  his  own  income,  with  the  Duchy  of 
Cornwall  (the  Prince's  right),  of  12,000/.  a  year  more,  and 
all  that  was  asked  of  Parliament  was  30,000^.  to  pay  the 
Prince's  debts,  and  as  much  to  set  him  out.  But  the 
Prince  declared  he  would  never  forgive  Lord  Temple. 

The  last  sudden  turn  in  the  King's  mind  I  believe,  from 
the  following  reasons,  to  have  been  effected  by  the  timidity 
of  Lord  Bute  and  the  prudence  of  the  Scotch.  Andrew 
Stuart,  one  of  the  most  shrewd  of  the  latter,  said  it  would 
be  most  disgraceful  to  change  the  Administration  again  so 
soon.  Lord  Mountstewart,  who  had  wavered  about  the 
Embassy  to  Spain  on  the  accession  of  the  present  Ministers, 
now  declared  openly  that  he  would  not  go  if  they  were  to 
be  dismissed ;  and  Lady  Betty  McKenzie l  being  asked 
during  the  suspense  when  she  was  to  go  to  Scotland,  said, 
"  We  must  go  back  to  Ham  first,  for  we  left  everything  in 
disorder,  being  sent  for  at  a  minute's  warning."  Lord 
Bute  was  too  timid  to  like  to  offend  the  Prince  on  so 
personal  an  occasion,  or  to  be  involved  in  a  change  to 
which  he  would  be  suspected  to  have  contributed,  and 
in  which  he  was  not  likely  to  have  much  influence,  as 
Lord  Temple  is  one  of  the  most  obstinate,  proud,  and  vain 
men  living.  Lord  Thurlow,  too,  the  late  Chancellor, 
declared  to  Charles  Fox  his  disapprobation  of  such  a 
change,  though  that  might  be  to  disguise  his  share  in  it. 
He,  the  Lord  Advocate,  and  Lord  Weymouth  were  cer- 


1  Wife  of  Stuart  M'Kouzie,  brother  of  Lord  Bute. 


1783.  THE  KING'S  INSINCERITY.  631 

tainly  endeavouring  secretly,  in  concert  with  the  King,  to 
make  another  change.  The  Lord  Advocate  was,  indeed, 
gone  to  Scotland,  but  had  whispered  that  it  would  soon 
take  place,  and  that  Mr.  W.  Pitt  had  consented  to  be  the 
Minister ;  but  I  did  not  believe  it,  for  had  it  been  in- 
tended, the  Lord  Advocate  would  not  have  divulged  it; 
he  rather  propagated  the  report  to  stagger  those  who  sup- 
ported the  present  Ministers.  Lord  Weymouth,  who, 
though  he  had  warmly  endeavoured  the  exclusion  of  the 
present  Ministers,  and  who  had  pitifully  and  meanly 
stooped  to  stay  in  place  with  them,  was  daily  in  private 
with  the  King  or  Duke  of  Montagu,  late  Governor  of  the 
Prince,  and  who,  though  the  most  shallow  of  men,  was 
the  person  in  whom  the  King  had  most  confidence,  and  to 
whom  alone  he  ever  spoke  of  his  son,  and  who  betrayed 
the  King's  sentiments  by  officiously  seeking  occasions  to 
abuse  the  Prince. 

All  the  above  particulars  I  believe  to  be  true,  as  I  had 
them  from  very  good  authorities.  I  do  not  answer  for 
the  truth  of  the  following  report,  but  it  was  much  asserted, 
that  the  King  reproaching  the  Duke  of  Portland  with 
their  setting  up  his  son  against  him,  the  Prince  gave  the 
King  a  letter  he  had  received  from  the  Duke,  in  which  the 
latter  had  conjured  the  Prince  to  submit  to  his  father,  and 
given  him  the  best  advice ;  that  the  King  was  charmed, 
and  said  he  did  not  know  the  Duke  was  so  honest  a  man. 

The  miscarriage  of  this  change  certainly  was  a  great 
step  towards  a  much  firmer  establishment  of  the  Adminis- 
tration. The  King  would  not  be  in  haste  to  risk  another 
defeat,  and  his  secret  adherents  would  see,  as  indeed  on 
every  change  all  mankind  did  see,  the  little  dependence 
they  could  have  in  his  firmness  or  sincerity. 


632  LAST  JOUENALS  OF  HOKACE  WALPOLE.  JUNE, 

Lord  Shelburne,  who  had  postponed  his  journey  to  Spa 
on  the  prospect  of  a  change,  could  not  conceal  his 
vexation  at  the  disappointment,  the  only  chance  he  could 
have  of  emerging  again.  He  had  been  at  once  so  rascally 
and  so  ridiculous  a  Minister,  that  if  the  former  quality  did 
not,  as  it  ought,  the  latter  would  prevent  his  being  so  but 
on  some  sudden  emergency  when  a  system  was  to  be 
formed  from  any  dregs  and  adventurers  of  any  party. 

30th.  Mr.  Pitt's  Reform  Bill,  which  had  passed  the 
House  of  Commons,  was  thrown  out  by  the  Lords,  and 
was  a  remarkable  day.  Lord  Temple  moved  for  an 
account  of  fees  received  in  offices  (though  he  himself  had 
suppressed  his  own  deputy  or  first  clerk  to  engross  the 
fees).  He  spoke  often,  ill  and  tediously.  The  Duke  of 
Portland  opposed  the  bill  firmly,  though  he  said  he  knew 
he  should  be  unpopular.  Lord  Mansfield  and  Lord 
Loughborough,  Lord  Stormont  and  Lord  Townshend, 
supported  him.  Lord  Thurlow  was  warmly  for  the  bill, 
though  he  had  declared  he  would  be  against  it,  and  did 
own,  though  he  pressed  for  its  going  to  the  committee,  that 
he  should  oppose  every  clause  of  it.  But  the  most  remark- 
able part  was,  that  Lord  Brudenel,  Lord  Southampton, 
and  others  of  the  Court  lords  went  away,  not  to  support 
the  Ministers.  Lord  Weyrnouth  was  absent,  who  had 
stayed  in  place,  and  had  said  he  would  support  them,  unless 
the  King  forbade  him — which  by  this  it  appeared  he  had 
now  done.  Three  bishops  also  were  all  that  were  present, 
and  two  of  them,  and  Thurlow  and  Warren,  voted  against 
the  Ministers.  Mr.  W.  Pitt  was  thought  to  have  gained 
the  Chancellor,  or  rather  had  concerted  the  affair  with 
the  King  and  him. 


1783.  UNHAPPINESS  OF  THE  KING.  633 


JULY. 


4th.  LORD  J.  Cavendish's  bill  for  reform  of  Exchequer 
places,  in  committee.  Mr.  Courtney  abused  Lord  Temple 
grossly,  but  with  much  wit,  for  having  pocketed  6001.  a 
year  from  his  under  officer. 

On  the  same  bill  Rigby  proposed  by  a  clause  to  put  the 
Chancellor  Thurlow  upon  the  same  foot  with  the  other 
Tellers,  as  if  he  had  taken  the  reversion  when  it  was  offered. 
He  had  bragged  much  of  not  taking  it,  and  had  thrown 
out  hints  as  if  such  grants  were  illegal :  but  the  reason  was 
said  to  be,  that  he  did  not  care  to  insert  his  son's  name  in 
the  patent,  whose  legitimacy  was  doubtful.     Charles  Fox, 
whom  he  had  lately  termed  a  bankrupt,  violently  opposed  , 
the  clause,   as   did   Sheridan,  and  it  was  rejected  by   a  ' 
majority  of  eight,  and  with  great  disgrace  to  Thurlow. 

The  King  greatly  unhappy  :  he  told  Lord  Hertford  that 
he  disliked  the  Ministers,  but  would  give  them  fair  play, 
would  play  them  no  tricks ;  yet  he  had  tried  to  play 
them  one  on  Pitt's  Reform  Bill.  He  also  said,  that  every  , 
morning  he  wished  himself  eighty,  or  ninety,  or  dead.  He 
had  long  conversations  frequently  with  Lord  Stormont, 
whom,  with  Lord  Mansfield,  it  was  supposed  he  wished  to 
detach  from  the  Ministry,  as  he  daily  tried  others.  He 
told  Lord  North,  "You  have  often  seen  me  keep  my 
temper,  but  now  I  often  cannot  command  it." 

The  Lord  Advocate  was  turned  out,  though  he  had 
vaunted  that  no  man  in  Scotland  would  dare  to  take  his 
post,  but  Charles  Fox  was  not  a  man  to  be  intimidated. 


634  LAST  JOUKNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  AUG. 

He  insisted  on  the  dismission  of  both  Lord  Thurlow  and 
Dundas,  by  far  the  two  ablest  of  his  antagonists. 

\Qth.  The  Parliament  was  at  last  prorogued. 

2 1st.  Confirmation  came  of  the  death  of  Hyder  Ally. 

The  Irish  Parliament  was  dissolved. 


AUGUST. 


EXPOSTULATION  of  Charles  Fox  with  General  Conway  on  not 
obliging  him  with  promotions  in  the  army,  nor  acquainting 
him  and  the  Ministers  with  his  measures.  Conway  justifies 
himself  well. — N.B.  Fox  had  talked  to  the  Prince  of  Wales 
of  setting  Prince  Frederick  at  the  head  of  the  army  5  either 
to  flatter  the  Prince,  or  not  thinking  his  a  good  life — per- 
haps for  both  reasons. 

Account  of  Washington  resigning  his  command  and  re- 
tiring. The  King  thought  Washington  retired  prudently 
from  having  lost  popularity  with  the  army.  The  King  said 
to  a  person,  "  I  believe  the  Articles  of  the  Boundaries  in  the 
Treaty  were  well  drawn — but  I  never  did  read  the  Articles 
nor  the  Treaty,  nor  read  anything  about  America," — pro- 
bably from  disgust.  He  said  to  another  person  in  August, 
"  This  Ministry  will  not  last." 

Washington's  sensible  letter  to  the  President  of  the  Con- 
gress, with  reflections  on  the  promises  to  the  army  not  per- 
formed. If  he  really  retires,  admirable  character — we  wait 
to  see  whether  no  design  beneath  the  patronage  of  the  army. 
Appearances  also  in  his  letter  of  different  Provinces  not 
being  cordially  united  with  the  Congress. 


1783.  ARRIVAL  OF  DEFINITE  TREATIES.  635 

Volunteers  of  Ireland  consult  the  Duke  of  Richmond  on 
Reform  of  Parliament. 

29th.  Mr.  Fox  wrote  to  the  Lord  Mayor  that  Definite 
Treaties  were  to  be  signed  on  the  following  Wednesday, 
September  3rd,  by  England,  France,  Spain,  and  America. 


SEPTEMBER. 

6th.  DEFINITE  Treaties  arrived  signed. 


Here  the  entries  cease ;  but  several  loose  papers  lie 
within  the  succeeding  sheets  of  the  last  volume ;  the  first 
of  them,  "A  New  Song,"  to  the  tune  of  "A  Free  and 
Accepted  Mason,"  is  a  witty  satire  against  Statesmen  gene- 
rally ;  but  it  is  too  coarse  for  insertion.  The  remainder 
will  be  found  below. — D. 

LOOSE    PAPERS. 

1783.  JANUARY  2nd.  General  Conway  came  to  me,  told  me 
the  Duke  of  Richmond  was  offended  at  Lord  Shelburne  and 
had  a  mind  to  resign.  France  had  asked  an  island  which 
Council  would  not  give.  Lord  Shelburne  had  offered  some- 
thing in  India,  without  East  India  Company's  consent,  but 
kept  it  from  Council.  Conway  had  dined  the  day  before 
with  Shelburne,  Chancellor,  Lord  Grantham,  Townshend 
and  Pitt,  and  they  had  mentioned  it.  Conway  taxed  Towns- 
hend, who,  gained  by  Lord  Shelburne's  flattery,  shuffled  it 


636  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HOEACE  WALPOLE.  1783. 

off.  Con  way  and  the  Parliament  asked  Lord  Grantham, 
who  likewise  shuffled.  Duke  of  Richmond  asked  Conway 
what  he  would  do  if  he  resigned.  Conway  said,  could  not 
determine  at  once  :  unwilling  to  quarrel  for  trifles  and  stop 
the  peace.  Duke  talked  of  absenting  from  Council  but 
keeping  his  place.  Conway  said  that  would  be  said  to 
be  for  his  place.  I  said,  would  lose  himself  both  with 
Minister  and  Opposition.  Conway  thought  he  had  a  mind 
to  reunite  with  Charles  Fox.  I  said  this  would  be  break- 
ing for  less  than  Charles  Fox  had  broken.  Duke  told  Con- 
way  if  he  complained,  Shelburne  would  promise  better  and 
not  keep  his  word ;  then  said  I,  Duke  will  have  more 
reason  to  break  with  him.  I  advised  Conway  to  try  to 
soften  Duke  and  to  wait  for  more  substantial  reasons,  and 
warn  Shelburne  against  his  present  conduct,  not  to  break 
peace,  for  which  I  begged  Conway  to  stay,  and  quit  with 
them,  but  not  to  stay  alone  with  Shelburne  after  peace,  or 
if  broken  off. 

Shelburne  telling  Lord  Loughborough  he  had  had  a 

mind  to  marry  Lady  L ,  she  protested  he  had  never 

spoke  to  her. 


However,  I  do  not  know  whether  I  ought  not  to  retract 
what  I  have  been  saying;  and  though  the  Tories  probably 
will  not  claim  the  honour  I  am  willing  to  allow  them,  I 
do  not  know  whether  one  Tory,  or,  rather,  one  half  Tory, 
half  Jacobite  Administration,  have  not  conferred  as  great 
benefits  on  two  countries  as  any  Whig  Administration 
ever  procured  to  our  own.  Yet  the  late  Administration, 
by  their  tyranny,  cruelties,  negligence,  blunders,  and 
incapacity,  have  made  both  America  and  Ireland  free  and 
independent.  The  alacrity  of  one  leap  over  the  Rubicon 


1783.  LOOSE  PAPERS.  637 

gave  liberty  to  thirteen  Colonies.  A  pert  oration  at  the 
Council  table  sent  a  Legislator  to  America,  and  the  happily 
coined  word,  "  Starvation,"  delivered  a  whole  continent 
from  the  Northern  harpies  that  meant  to  devour  it ;  who 
can  say  the  Tories  never  conferred  benefits  on  mankind  ? 


For  the  *  Morning  Chronicle.1 

ON  THE  KING'S  COMMANDING  THE  TRAGEDY  OF  '  THE  GRECIAN  DAUGHTER,' 
ox  THURSDAY  THE  2ND  INSTANT. — Jan.  10,  1783. 

EPIGRAMMATIC. 

"  Siddons  to  see, — King,  Lords,  and  Commons  run, 
Glad  to  forget  that  Britain  is  undone. 
The  Jesuit  Shelburne,  the  apostate  Fox; 
And  Bulls  and  Bears,  together  in  a  box. 
Thurlow  neglects  his  promises  to  friends  ; 
And  scribbling  Townshend  no  more  letters  sends. 
Cits  have  their  feasts,  and  sots  desert  their  wine  ; 
Each  youth  cries,  '  Charming  ! '  and  each  maid,  '  Divine  ! ' 
See,  of  fake  tears,  a  copious  torrent  flows, 
But  not  one  real,  for  their  country's  woes. 
The  club  of  spendthrifts,  the  rapacious  bar 
Of  words,  not  arms,  support  the  bloodless  war. 
Let  Spain  Gibraltar  get,  our  islands  France, 
So  Siddons  acts,  or  Vestris  leads  the  dance. 
Run  on,  mad  nation !  pleasure's  frantic  round ; 
For  acting,  fiddling,  dancing  be  renown'd  ! 
Soon  foreign  fleets  shall  rule  the  western  main ; 
George  fill  no  throne  but  that  of  Drury  Lane !  " — MERLIN. 


638  LAST  JOURNALS  OF  HORACE  WALPOLE.  1783. 

For  the  '  Public  Advertiser.' 

AN  ODE  TO  THE  PREMIER. 

"  Great  Lord,  who  rul'st  the  loaves  and  fishes, 
A  bard  whose  board  ne'er  smoked  with  dishes, 

Though  craving  is  his  maw, 
Will,  to  attract  thy  look  benign, 
If  thou'lt  enable  him  to  dine, 

Thy  genuine  portrait  draw. 

"  Where  shall  I,  then,  begin, — where  end  ? 
But,  as  I  wish  to  be  your  friend, 

Your  lineage  first  I'll  trace. 
Pray,  then,  which  would  you  choose  to  be, 
Since  double  is  your  fam'ly  tree, — 

Of  Teague  or  Saxon  race  ? 

"  Shall  I  to  Maurice  quite  go  back, 
Who,  Scotchman-like,  erst  bore  a  pack, 

A  merchant  in  those  days  ? 
Or,  as  I  mean  not  here  to  fret  ye, 
Shall  I  commence  with  Surgeon  Petty, 

Well  vers'd  in  land-surveys  ? 

"  But  from  whatever  source  you  spring, 
You  're  now  the  favourite  of  our  K — g, 

Yet  owe  to  Bute  this  meed  : 
'  Blest  he  who  in  his  younger  days 
Shall  strive  to  steer  aright  his  ways ; 

He  must  at  last  succeed.' 

"  Great  Bute,  with  aspect  dark  but  mild, 
Oft  o'er  your  growing  virtues  smil'd, 

And  prais'd  your  art  and  wit ; 
When  you,  your  first  essay  to  try, 
Employ 'd  your  champion  with  one  eye, 

To  throw  his  dirt  on  Pitt. 


1783.  LOOSE  PAPERS.  639 

"  When  you,  a  boy  both  sleek  and  round, 
Were  to  old  Fox  apprentice  bound 

To  learn  State  pettyfogging, 
You  play'd  him  such  a  slipp'ry  trick, 
I  heard  him  swear,  by  Father  Nick, 

That  you  deserv'd  a  flogging. 

"  Your  great  exploits,  in  order  long, 
And  fair  succession,  court  my  song, 
In  strains  that  all  might  please  ; 
But  may  this  hand  commit  a  murther, 
If  1  advance  one  stanza  further, 
Until  I  'm  paid  for  these." 


THE  END. 
