REMINISCENCES 


OF 


THE   COURTS  OF 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND: 


WRITTEN  IN  1788, 


FOR  THE  AMUSEMENT  OF 


MISS  MARY  AND  MISS  AGNES  BERRY. 


n  ne  fiiut  point  d*esprit  pour  B*occaper  dea  vieoz  ^vtaemens.— Voltai&i. 


REMINISCENCES. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Motives  to  the  Undertaklng-^Precedents — Geor^  the  First^s  Reign  a  Proem  to 
the  History  of  the  Reigoing  House  of  Brunswick — The  Reminiscent  introduced 
to  that  Monarch — His  Person  and  Dress— The  Duchess  of  Kendal — her  Jealousy 
of  Sir  Robert  WaJ pole's  Credit  with  the  King — and  Intrigues  to  displace  him, 
and  make  Bolingbroke  Minister. 

You  were  both  so  entertained  with  the  old  stories  I  told  you  one 
evening  lately,  of  what  I  recollected  to  have  seen  and  heard  from  my 
childhood  of  the  courts  of  King  George  the  First,  and  of  his  son  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  afterwards  George  the  Second,  and  of  the  latter's 

frincess,  since  Queen  Caroline ;  and  you  expressed  such  wishes  that 
would  commit  those  passages  (for  they  are  scarce  worthy  of  the 
title  even  of  anecdotes)  to  writing,  that,  having  no  greater  pleasure 
than  to  please  you  both,  nor  any  more  important  or  laudable  occupa- 
tion, I  will  begin  to  satisfy  the  repetition  of  your  curiosity.  But  ob- 
serve, I  promise  no  more  than  to  begin ;  for  I  not  only  cannot  answer 
that  I  shall  have  patience  to  continue,  but  my  memory  is  still  so  fresh, 
or  rather  so  retentive  of  trifles  which  first  made  impression  on  it,  that 
it  is  very  possible  my  life  (turned  of  seventy-one)  may  be  exhausted 
before  my  stock  of  remembrances ;  especially  as  I  am  sensible  of  the 
earrulity  of  old  age,  and  of  its  eagerness  of  relating  whatever  it  recol- 
lects, whether  of  moment  or  not.  Thus,  while  I  fancy  I  am  comply- 
ing with  you,  I  may  only  be  indulging  myself,  and  consequently  may 
wander  into  many  digressions  for  which  you  will  not  care  a  straw, 
and  which  may  intercept  the  completion  of  my  design.  Patience, 
therefore  young  ladies ;  and  if  you  coin  an  old  gentleman  into  narra- 
tives, you  must  expect  a  good  deal  of  alloy.  I  engage  for  no  method, 
no  regularity,  no  polish.  Afy  narrative  will  probably  resemble  siege- 
pieces,  which  are  struck  of  any  promiscuous  metals ;  and^  though 
they  bear  the  impress  of  some  sovereign's  name,  only  serve  to  quiet 
the  garrison  for  the  moment,  and  afterwards  are  merely  hoarded  by 
collectors  and  virtuosos,  who  think  their  series  not  complete,  unless 
they  have  even  the  coins  of  base  metal  of  every  reign. 
As  I  date  from  my  nonage,  I  must  have  laid  up  no  state  secrets. 


I 


58  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

Most  of  the  facts  I  am  going  to  tell  you,  though  new  to  you  and  to 
roost  of  the  present  age,  were  known  perhaps  at  the  time  to  my  nurse 
and  my  tutors.  Thus,  my  stories  will  have  nothing  to  do  with 
history. 

Luckily,  there  have  appeared  within  these  three  months  two  publica- 
tions, that  will  serve  as  precedents  for  whatever  I  am  going  to  say : 
I  mean  Les  Fragmens  of  the  Correspondence  of  the  Duchess  of 
Orleans,*  and  those  of  the  Memoires  of  the  Due  de  St.  Simon.^ 
Nothing  more  decousu  than  both :  they  tell  you  what  they  please ;  or 
rather,  what  their  editors  have  pleased  to  let  them  tell. 

In  one  respect  I  shall  be  less  satisfactory.  They  knew  and  were 
well  acquainted,  or  thought  they  were,  with  their  personages.  I  did 
not  at  ten  years  old,  penetrate  characters ;  and  as  George  I.  died  at 
the  period  where  my  reminiscence  begins,  and  was  rather  a  ^ood  sort 
of  man  than  a  shining  king;  and  as  the  Duchess  of  Kendsu  was  no 
genius,  I  heard  very  little  of  either  when  he  and  her  power  were  no 
more.  In  fact,  the  reign  of  George  I.  was  little  more  than  the  proem 
to  the  history  of  England  under  the  House  of  Brunswick.  That 
family  was  established  here  by  surmounting  a  rebellion;  to  which 
settlement  perhaps  the  phrensy  of  the  South  Sea  scheme  contributed, 
by  diverting  the  national  attention  from  the  game  of  faction  to  the 
delirium  of  stockjobbing ;  and  even  faction  was  split  into  fractions  by 
the  quarrel  between  the  king  and  the  heir  apparent — another  interlude, 
which  authorizes  me  to  call  the  reign  of  George  I.  a  proem  to  the 
history  of  the  reigning  House  of  Brunswick,  so  successively  agitated 
by  parallel  feuds. 

Commen^ons. 

As  my  first  hero  was  going  off  the  stage  before  I  ought  to  have 
come  upon  it,  it  will  be  necessary  to  tell  you  why  the  said  two  per- 
sonages happened  to  meet  just  two  nichts  before  they  were  to  part 
for  ever ;  a  rencounter  that  barely  enables  me  to  give  you  a  general 
idea  of  the  former's  person  and  of  his  mistress's — or,  as  has  been  sup- 
posed, his  wife's. 

As  I  was  the  youngest  by  eleven  years  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole's 
children  by  his  first  wife,  and  was  extremely  weak  and  delicate,  as 
you  see  me  still,  though  with  no  constitutional  complaint  till  I  had  the 
gout  after  forty,  and  as  my  two  sisters  were  consumptive  and  died  of 
consumptions,  the  supposed  necessary  care  of  me  (and  I  have  over- 
heard persons  saying,  ''That  child  cannot  possibly  live")  so  engrossed 
the  attention  of  my  mother,  that  compassion  and  tenderness  soon  be- 
came extreme  fondness ;  and  as  the  infinite  good-nature  of  my  father 

*  Charlotte  Elizabeth,  daug^hter  of  the  Elector  of  Bavaria.  In  1671  she  became  the 
aecoDd  wife  (his  fint  beinff  poisoned)  of  the  brother  of  Louis  XIV. ;  by  whom  she  was  the 
moUier  of  the  regent,  Duke*  of  Orleans.  She  died  in  1723.  A  collection  of  her  letter*, 
addressed  to  Prince  Ulric  of  Brunswick,  and  to  the  Princess  of  Wales,  afterwards  Queen 
Caroline,  was  published  at  Paris  in  1788. — E. 

^  These  celebrated  Memoires  of  the  Court  of  Louis  XIV.  were  first  pubHshed,  in  a 
mutilated  state,  in  1 788.    A  complete  edition,  in  thirteen  Tohunes,  appmred  in  1791. — ^E. 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SEOOND.  69 

never  thwarted  any  of  his  children,  he  suffered  me  to  be  too  much 
indulged,  and  permitted  her  to  gratify  the  first  vehement  inclination 
that  I  ever  expressed,  and  which,  as  I  have  never  since  felt  any 
enthusiasm  for  royal  persons,  I  must  suppose  that  the  female  attend- 
ants in  the  family  must  have  put  into  my  head,  to  long  to  see  the  king. 
This  childish  caprice  was  so  strong,  that  my  mother  solicited  the 
Duchess  of  Kendal  to  obtain  for  me  the  honour  of  kissing  his  Majesty's 
hand  before  he  set  out  for  Hanover.  A  favour  so  unusual  to  be  asked 
for  a  boy  of  ten  years  old,  was  still  too  slight  to  be  refused  to  the  wife 
of  the  first  minister  for  her  darling  child ;  yet  not  being  proper  to  be 
made  a  precedent,  it  was  settled  to  be  in  private,  and  at  night 

Accordingly,  the  night  but  one  before  the  king  began  his  last 
journey,  my  mother  carried  me  at  ten  at  night  to  the  apartment  of 
the  Countess  of  Walsingham,'  on  the  ground  floor,  towards  the  garden 
at  St  James's,  which  opened  into  that  of  her  aunt,  the  Duchess  of 
Kendal's :  apartments  occupied  by  George  II.  after  his  queen's  death, 
and  by  his  successive  mistresses,  the  Countesses  of  Suffolk  and 
Yarmouth. 

Notice  being  given  that  the  king  was  come  down  to  supper.  Lady 
Walsingham  took  me  alone  into  the  duchess's  ante-room,  where  we 
found  alone  the  king  and  her.  I  knelt  down,  and  kissed  his  hand.  He 
said  a  few  words  to  me,  and  my  conductress  led  me  back  to  my 
mother.** 

The  person  of  the  kinff  is  as  perfect  in  my  memory  as  if  I  saw  him 
but  yesterday.  It  was  that  of  an  elderlv  man,  rather  pale,  and  ex- 
actly like  his  pictures  and  coins;  not  tall;  of  an  aspect  rather  good 
than  august;  with  a  dark  tie-wig,  a  plain  coat,  waistcoat,  and 
breeches  of  snuff-coloured  cloth,  with  stocking  of  the  same  colour, 
and  a  blue  riband  over  all.  So  entirely  was  he  my  object  that  I  do 
not  believe  I  once  looked  at  the  duchess ;  but  as  I  could  not  avoid 
seeing  her  on  entering  the  room,  I  remember  that  just  b^ond  his 
Majesty  stood  a  very  tall,  lean,  ill-favoured  old  lady;  but  I  did  not 
retain  the  least  idea  of  her  features,  nor  know  what  the  colour  of  her 
dress  was. 

My  childish  loyalty,  and  the  condescension  in  gratifying  it,  were,  I 
tappose,  causes  that  contributed,  very  soon  afterwards,  to  make  me 
shed  a  flood  of  tears  for  that  sovereign's  death,  when,  with  the  other 
scholars  at  Eton  college,  I  walked  in  procession  to  the  proclamation 
of  the  successor;  and  which  (though  I  think  they  partly  fell  because 
I  imagined  it  became  the  son  of  a  prime-minister  to  be  more  con- 
cerned than  other  boys)  were  no  doubt  imputed  by  many  of  the  spec- 
tators who  were  politicians,  to  fears  of  my  father's  most  probable  fall, 
but  of  which  I  had  not  the  smallest  conception,  nor  should  have  met 

*  Melusina  Schulemberg,  niece  of  the  Duchess  of  Kendal,  created  Coantess  of  WaL 
imghani,  and  afterwards  married  to  the  famous  Philip  Stanhope,  Earl  of  Chesterfield. 

*  The  following  is  the  account  of  this  introduction  ffiven  m  "  Walpoliana :"— *»  I  do 
lemember  somethinjr  of  George  the  First  My  father  todt  me  to  St  James*s  while  I  was 
i  fery  little  boy ;  after  waiting  some  time  in  an  ante*room,  a  gentleman  came  in  all 
dressed  in  brown,  even  his  stockings,  and  with  a  riband  and  star.  He  took  me  up  in  bii 
inns,  kissed  me,  and  chatted  some  time.** — E. 


70  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

with  any  more  concern  than  I  did  when  it  really  arrived,  in  the  year 
1742;  by  which  time  I  had  lost  all  taste  for  courts  and  princes  and 

Eower,  as  was  natural  to  one  who  never  felt  an  ambitious  \hought  for 
imself. 

It  must  not  be  inferred  from  her  obtaining  this  grace  for  me,  that 
the  Duchess  of  Kendal  was  a  friend  to  my  father ;  on  the  contrary, 
at  that  moment  she  had  been  labouring  to  displace  him,  and  intro- 
duce Lord  Bolingbroke'  into  the  administration;  on  which  I  shall 
say  more  hereafter. 

It  was  an  instance  of  Sir  Robert's  singular  fortune,  or  evidence  of 
his  talents,  that  he  not  only  preserved  his  power  under  two  succes- 
sive monarchs,  but  in  spite  oi  the  efforts  of  both  their  mistresses'*  to 
remove  him.  It  was  perhaps  still  more  remarkable,  and  an  instance 
unparalleled,  that  Sir  Robert  governed  George  the  First  in  Latin,  the 
King  not  speaking  English,*"  and  his  minister  no  German,  nor  even 
French.**  It  was  much  talked  of,  that  Sir  Robert,  detecting  one  of 
the  Hanoverian  ministers  in  some  trick  or  falsehood  before  the  King's 
face,  had  the  firmness  to  say  to  the  German,  "  Mentiris,  impuden- 
tissime !"  The  good-humoured  monarch  only  laughed,  as  he  often 
did  when  Sir  Robert  complained  to  him  of  his  Hanoverians  selling 
places,  nor  would  be  persuaded  that  it  was  not  the  practice  of  the 
English  court ;  and  wnich  an  incident  must  have  planted  in  his  mind 
with  no  favourable  impression  of  English  disinterestedness.  **  This 
is  a  strange  country  1"  said  his  Majesty ;  *'  the  first  morning  after  my 
arrival  at  St  James's,  I  looked  out  of  the  window,  and  saw  a  park 
with  walks,  a  canal,  &c.  which  they  told  me  were  mine.  The  next 
day,  Ix>rd  Chetwynd,  the  ranker  of  my  park,  sent  me  a  fine  brace  of 
carp  out  of  my  canal ;  and  I  was  told  I  must  give  five  guineas  to 
Lord  Chetwynd's  servant  for  bringing  me  my  own  carp  out  of  my 
awn  canal  in  my  own  park  I" 

I  have  said,  that  the  Duchess  of  Kendal  was  no  friend  of  Sir 

*  The  well-known  Henzy  St  John,  Viscount  Bolingbroke,  Becretary  of  state  to  Qoeen 
Anne ;  on  whose  death  he  fled,  and  was  attainted.  [**We  have  the  authority  of  ^ 
Robert  Walpole  himself,**  says  Coze,  ^  that  the  restoration  of  Lord  Bolinffbroke  was  the 
work  of  the  Duchess  of  Kendal.  He  gained  the  duchess  by  a  present  of  eleven  thousand 
pounds,  and  obtained  a  {nromise  to  use  her  influence  over  the  King,  for  the  purpose  of 
rorwarding  his  complete  restoration.**] 

^  The  Duchess  of  Kendal  and  Lady  Sufiblk. 

'  **  Sir  Robert  was  frequenUy  heard  to  say,  that  during  the  reign  of  the  first  Greoree, 
he  ffovemed  the  kingdom  by  means  of  bad  Latin:  it  is  a  matter  of  wonder  that,  under 
such  disadvantages,  the  King  should  take  pleasure  in  transacting  business  with  him ;  a 
circumstance  which  was  principally  owing  to  the  method  and  perspicuity  of  his  calcula- 
lions,  and  to  the  extreme  flicility  with  which  he  arranged  and  explained  the  most 
abstruse  and  difficult  combinations  of  finance.**    Coxe. — £. 

^  Prince  William,  afterwards  Duke  of  Cumberland,  then  a  child,  being  carried  to  his 
grandfather  on  his  birthday,  the  King  asked  him  at  what  hour  he  rose.  The  I^rince 
replied,  **when  the  chimneysweepers  went  about**  **yat  is  de  chimney-sweeper  7** 
said  the  King. — ^  Have  you  been  so  long  in  England,**  said  the  boy,  **  and  do  not  luiow 
what  a  chimney-sweeper  is  7  Why,  they  are  like  that  man  there  ;**  pointing  to  Lcutl 
Finch,  afterwards  Earl  of  Winchilsea  and  Nottingham,  of  a  family  uncommonly  swarthy 
and  dark — 

— **  the  black  fimereal  Finches — ** 

Sir  Charles  WiUiams*s  Ode  to  a  Number  of  Great  Men,  1742. 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECX)ND.  71 

Robert,  and  wished  to  make  Lord  Bolingbroke  minister  in  his 
room.  I  was  too  young  to  know  any  thing  of  that  reign,  nor  was 
acquainted  with  the  pohtical  cabals  of  the  court,  which,  however,  I 
might  have  learnt  from  my  father  in  the  three  years  after  his  retire- 
ment ;  but  being  too  thoughtless  at  that  time,  nor  having  youi^  lauda- 
ble curiosity,  I  neglected  to  inform  myself  of  many  passages  and 
circumstances,  of  which  I  have  often  since  regretted  my  fatdty  igno- 
rance. 

By  what  I  can  at  present  recollect,  the  Duchess  seems  to  have 
been  jealous  of  Sir  Robert's  credit  with  the  King,  which  he  had 
acquired,  not  by  paying  court,  but  by  his  superior  abilities  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  by  his  knowledge  in  finance,  of  which  Lord 
Sunderland  and  Craggs  had  betrayed  their  ignorance  in  counte- 
nancing the  South  Sea  scheme ;  and  who,  though  more  agreeable  to 
the  King,  had  been  forced  to  give  way  to  Walpole,  as  the  only  man 
capable  of  repairing  that  mischief.  The  Duchess,  too,  might  be 
alarmed  at  his  attacnment  to  the  Princess  of  Wales ;  from  whom,  in 
case  of  the  King's  death,  her  grace  could  expect  no  favour.  Of  her 
jealousy  I  do  know  the  following  instance ;  Queen  Anne  had  bestowed 
the  rangership  of  Richmond  New  Park  on  her  relations  the  Hydes 
for  three  lives,  one  of  which  was  expired.  King  Georffe,  fond  of 
shooting,  bought  out  the  term  of  the  last  Earl  of  Clarendon,  and  of 
his  son  Lord  Cornbury,  and  frequently  shot  there ;  having  appointed 
my  eldest  brother.  Lord  Walpole,  ranger  nominally,  but  my  father  in 
reality,  wished  to  hunt  there  once  or  twice  a  week.  The  park  had 
run  to  great  decay  under  the  Hydes,  nor  was  there  any  mansion* 
better  than  the  common  lodges  of  the  keepers.  The  King  ordered  a 
stone  lodge,  designed  by  Henry,  Earl  ot  Pembroke,  to  be  erected 
for  himself,  but  merely  as  a  banqueting-house,^  with  a  large  eating- 
room,  kitchen,  and  necessary  offices,  where  he  might  dine  after  his 
sport  Sir  Robert  began  another  of  brick  for  himself,  and  the  under- 
ranger,  which,  by  degrees,  he  much  enlarged ;  usually  retiring  thither 
from  business,  or  rather,  as  he  said  himself,  to  do  more  business  than 
he  could  in  town,  on  Saturdays  and  Sundays*  On  that  edifice,  on  the 
thatched-house,  and  other  improvements,  he  laid  out  fourteen,  thou- 
sand pounds  of  his  own  money.  In  the  meantime,  he  hired  a  small 
house  for  himself  on  the  hill  without  the  park ;  and  in  that  small 
tenement  the  King  did  him  the  honour  of  dining  with  him  more  than 
once  after  shooting.    His  Majesty,  fond  of  private®  joviality,  was 

*  The  Earl  of  Rochester,  who  sacceeded  to  the  title  of  Clarendon  on  the  extinction  of 
itMd  elder  branch,  had  a  villa  dote  without  the  park ;  but  it  had  been  burnt  down,  and 
cnly  one  wing  was  left.  W.  Stanhope,  Earl  of  Harrington,  purchased  the  ruins,  and 
bout  the  house,  since  bcmght  by  Lord  Camelfbrd. 

^  It  was  afterwards  enlarged  by  Princess  Amelia ;  to  whom  her  fiither,  George  II.  had 
mnted  the  reyersioo  of  the  rangership  after  Lord  Walpole.  Her  Royal  Highness  sold 
It  to  George  III.  for  a  pension  on  Ireland  of  twelve  hundred  pounds  a-year,  and  his 
Majesty  appointed  Lord  bute  ranger  for  life. 

c  The  Kuig  hated  the  parade  of  royalty.  When  he  went  to  the  opera,  it  was  in  no 
state  ;  nor  did  he  sit  in  the  stage-box,  nor  forwards,  but  behind  the  Duchess  of  Kendal 
and  Lady  Walsingham,  in  the  second  box,  now  allotted  to  the  maids  of  honour. 


72  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

{leased  with  punch  after  dinner,  and  indulged  in  it  freely.  The 
)uchess,  alarmed  at  the  advantage  the  minister  might  make  of  the 
openness  of  the  King's  heart  in  those  convivial,  unguarded  hours,  and 
at  a  crisis  when  she  was  conscious  Sir  Robert  was  apprised  of  her 
inimical  machinations  in  favour  of  Lord  Bolingbroke,  enjoined  the 
few  Germans  who  accompanied  the  King  at  those  dinners  to  prevent 
his  Majesty  from  drinking  too  freely.  Her  spies  obeyed  too  punctually, 
and  without  any  address.  The  King  was  offended,  and  silenced  the 
tools  by  the  coarsest  epithets  in  the  German  language.  He  even, 
before  his  departure,  ordered  Sir  Robert  to  have  the  stone  lodge 
finished  against  his  return :  no  symptom  of  a  falling  minister,  as  has 
since  been  supposed  Sir  Robert  then  was,  and  that  Lord  Bolingbroke 
was  to  have  replaced  him,  had  the  King  lived  to  come  back.  But 
my  presumption  to  the  contrary  is  more  strongly  corroborated  by 
what  had  recently  passed :  the  Duchess  had  actually  prevailed  on  the 
King  to  see  Bolingbroke  secretly  in  his  closet  That  intriguing  Pro- 
teus, aware  that  he  might  not  obtain  an  audience  long  enough  to 
efface  former  prejudices,  and  make  sufficient  impression  on  the  King 
against  Sir  Robert,  and  in  his  own  favour,  went  provided  with  a  long 
memorial,  which  he  left  in  the  closet,  and  begged  his  Majesty  to 
peruse  coolly  at  his  leisure.  The  King  kept  the  paper,  but  no  longer 
than  till  he  saw  Sir  Robert,  to  whom  ne  delivered  the  poisoned 
remonstrance.  If  that  communication  prognosticated  the  minister's 
fall,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know  what  a  mark  of  confidence  is. 

Nor  was  that  discovery  the  first  intimation  that  Walpole  had 
received  of  the  measure  of  Bolingbroke's  latitude.  The  minister, 
against  the  earnest  representations  of  his  ramily  and  most  intimate 
friends,  had  consented  to  the  recall  of  that  incendiary  from  banish- 
ment,* excepting  only  his  readmission  into  the  House  of  Lords,  that 
every  field  of  annoyance  might  not  be  open  to  his  mischievous  turbu- 
lence. Bolingbroke,  it  seems,  deemed  an  embargo  laid  on  his  tongue 
woukl  warrant  his  hand  to  launch  every  envenomed  shaft  against  his 
benefactor,  who  by  restrigting  had  paid  him  the  compliment  of  avow- 
inff  that  his  eloquence  was  not  totally  inofiensive.  Craftsmen,  pam- 
phlets, libels,  combinations,  were  showered  on  or  employed  for 
years  against  the  prime-minister,  without  shaking  his  power  or 
ruflling  his  temper ;  and  Bolingbroke  had  the  mortification  of  finding 
his  rival  had  abilities  to  maintain  his  influence  against  the  mistresses 
of  two  kings,  with  whom  his  antagonist  had  plotted  in  vain  to  over- 
ture him.*" 

'  Bbling^broke  at  hit  retam  com  not  avoid  waiting  on  Sir  Robert  to  thank  him,  and 
4  ^«s  iiWitQd  to  dine  with  him  at  fflelsea ;  but  whether  tortured  at  witnessing  Walpole** 
sercnr  Iiankness  and  felicity,  or  suffocated  with  indignation  and  confusion  at  being- 
forcbU  to  be  obliged  to  one  whom  he  hated  and  envied,  the  first  morsel  he  put  into  hit 
mouth  was  near  choking  him,  and  he  was  reduced  to  rise  firom  table  and  leave  the 
room  for  some  minutes.    I  never  heard  of  their  meeting  more. 

^  George  II.  parted  with  Lady  Suffolk,  on  Princess  Amelia  informing  Queen  Caroline 
firom  Bath,  that  the  -mistress  had  interviews  there  with  Lord  Bolingbroke.  Lady  Suffolk, 
above  twenty  years  after,  protested  to  me  that  she  had  not  once  seen  his  lordship  there ; 
and  I  should  believe  she  did  iiot,  for  she  was  a  woman  of  truth :  but  her  great  intimacy 


OB0R6E  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  73 


CHAPTER  11. 

Marriage  of  George  the  First,  while  Electoral  Prince,  to  the  Princess  Sophia  Doro- 
thea— Assassination  of  Count  Konigsmark — Separation  from  the  Princess — 
Lefl-banded  Espousal — Piet^  of  the  Duchess  of  Kendal-:— Gonfiuement  and 
Death  of  Sophia  Dorothea  m  the  Castle  of  Aldeo — French  Prophetess-^The 
King*8  Superstition — Mademoiselle  Schulemberg — Royal  Inconstancy— Coun- 
tess of  Platen. — Anne  Brett — Sudden  Death  of  George  the  First. 

George  the  First,  while  Electoral  Prince,  had  married  his  cousin, 
the  Princess  Dorothea,"  only  child  of  the  Duke  of  Zell ;  a  match  of 
convenience  to  reunite  the  dominions  of  the  family.  Though  she  was 
very  handsome,  the  Prince,  who  was  extremely  amorous,  had  several 
mistresses ;  which  provocation,  and  his  absence  in  the  army  of  the 
confederates,  probably  disposed  the  Princess  to  indulge  some  degree 
of  coquetry.  At  that  moment  arrived  at  Hanover  the  famous  and 
beautiful  Count  Konigsmark,*'  the  charms  of  whose  person  ought  not  to 
have  obliterated  the  memory  of  his  vile  assassination  of  Mr.  Thynne.® 

and  connexion  with  Pope  and  Swift,  the  intimate  friends  of  Bolinffbroke,  even  before 
the  death  of  George  I.  and  her  being  the  channel  through  whom  that  faction  had  flat- 
tered themselves  they  should  gain  the  ear  of  the  new  King,  can  leave  no  doubt  of  Lady 
Suffolk's  support  of*^  that  party.  Her  dearest  friend  to  her  death  was  William,  after- 
wards Lord  Chetwynd,  the  known  and  most  trusted  confidant  of  Lord  Bolingbrokc.  Of 
those  political  intrigues  I  shall  say  more  in  these  Reminiscences. 

*  Her  names  were  Sophia  Dorothea ;  but  I  call  her  by  the  latter,  to  distinguish  her 
fiora  the  Princess  Sophia,  her  mother-in-law,  on  whom  the  crown  of  Great  Britain  waa 
settled. 

^  Konigsmark  behaved  with  great  intrepidity,  and  was  wounded  at  a  buU.fcast  in 
Spain,  ^c  Letters  firom  Spain  of  the  Comtesse  D*Anois,  vol.  ii.  He  was  brother  of  the 
beautiful  Comtesse  de  Konigsmark,  mistress  of  Augustus  the  Seoood,  King  of  Poland. 

'  It  was  not  this  Count  Konigsmark,  but  an  elder  orother,  who  was  accused  of  having 
suborned  Colonel  Vratz,  Lieutenant  Stem,  and  one  George  Boroskey,  to  murder  Mr. 
Thynne  in  Pall-Mall,  on  the  12th  of  February,  1683,  and  ror  which  they  were  executed 
in  that  street  on  the  10th  of  March.  For  the  particulars,  see  Howell's  State  Trials,  vol.  ix. 
p.  1,  and  Sir  John  Reresby*s  Memoirs,  p.  135.  "This  day,**  says  Evelyn,  in  his  Diary 
of  the  10th  of  March,  •*  was  executed  Colonel  Vrats,  for  the  execrable  murder  of  Mr. 
Thynne,  set  on  by  the  principal,  Konigsmark :  he  went  to  execution  like  an  undaunted 
hero,  as  one  that  had  done  a  fl-iendly  office  fbr  that  base  coward.  Count  Konigsmark, 
who  had  hopes  to  marry  bis  widow,  the  rich  Lady  Ogle,  and  was  ac<^uitted  by  a  corrupt 

I'ury,  and  so  got  away :  Vrats  told  a  friend  of  mine,  who  accompamed  him  to  the  gal- 
ows,  and  gave  him  some  advice,  that  he  did  not  value  dying  of  a  rush,  and  hoped  and 
believed  God  would  deal  with  him  like  a  gentleman.** ^Mr.  Thynne  was  buried  in  West- 
minster Abbey ;  the  manner  of  his  death  being  repremntcd  on  his  monument  He  was 
the  Issachar  of  Absalom  and  Achitophel ;  in  which  poem  Dryden,  describing  thj^  respect 

and  favour  with  which  Monmouth  was  received  upon  his  progress  in  the  year  168!  ^ays : 

1.. 

** Hospitable  hearts  did  most  commend 

Wise  Issachar,  his  wealthy,  western  fViend.** 

Reresby  states,  that  Lady  Ogle,  immediately  afler  the  marriage,  "  repenting  herself  of 
the  match,  fled  fixjm  him  into  Holland,  before  they  were  bedded.**  This  circumstance, 
added  to  the  fact,  that  Mr.  Thynne  had  formerly  seduced  Miss  Trevor,  one  of  the  maids 
of  honour  to  Catherine  of  Portugal,  wife  of  Charles  II.,  gave  birth  to  the  following  lines : 

VOL.  I.  7 


74  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

His  vanity,  the  beauty  of  the  Electoral  Princess,  and  the  neglect 
under  which  he  found  her,  encouraged  his  presumption  to  make  his 
addresses  to  her,  not  covertly ;  and  she,  though  believed  not  to  have 
transgressed  her  duty,  did  receive  them  too  indiscreetly.  The  old 
Elector  flamed  at  the  insolence  of  so  stigmatized  a  pretender,  and 
ordered  him  to  quit  his  dominions  the  next  day.  The  Princess,  sur- 
rounded by  women  too  closely  connected  with  her  husband,  and  con- 
sequently enemies  of  the  lady  they  injured,  was  persuaded  by  them 
to  sufier  the  count  to  kiss  her  hand  before  his  abrupt  departure ;  and 
be  was  actually  introduced  by  them  into  her  bedchamber  the  next 
morning  before  she  rose.  From  that  moment  he  disappeared ;  nor 
was  it  known  what  became  of  him,  till  on  the  death  of  George  L,  on 
his  son  the  new  King's  first  journey  to  Hanover,  some  alterations  in 
the  palace  being  ordered  by  him,  the  body  of  Konigsmark  was  dis- 
covered under  the  floor  of  the  Electoral  Princess's  dressing-room — 
the  Count  having  probably  been  strangled  there  the  instant  he  left 
her,  and  his  body  secreted.  The  discovery  was  hushed  up ;  George 
n.  entrusted  the  secret  to  his  wife.  Queen  Caroline,  who  told  it  to 
my  father :  but  the  King  was  too  lender  of  the  honour  of  his  mother 
to  utter  it  to  his  mistress ;  nor  did  Lady  Suffolk  ever  hear  of  it,  till 
I  informed  her  of  it  several  years  afterwards.  The  disappearance 
of  the  Count  made  his  murder  suspected,  and  various  reports  of  the 
discovery  of  his  body  have  of  late  years  been  spread,  but  not  with 
the  authentic  circumstances. 

The  second  George  loved  his  mother  as  much  as  he  hated  his 
father,  and  purposed,  as  was  said,  had  the  former  survived,  to  have 
brought  her  over  and  declared  her  Queen  Dowager.*  Lady  SuflTolk 
has  told  me  her  surprise,  on  going  to  the  new  Queen  the  morning 
after  the  news  arrived  of  the  death  of  George  I.,  at  seeing  hune  up 
in  the  Queen's  dressing-room  a  whole  length  of  a  lady  in  royal  robes ; 
and  in  the  bedchamber  a  half  length  of  the  same  person,  neither  of 
which  Lady  SuflTolk  had  ever  seen  before.  The  Prince  had  kept 
them  concealed,  not  daring  to  produce  them  during  the  life  of  his 
father.    The  whole  length  he  probably  sent  to  Hanover  ;**  the  half 

*«  Here  lies  Tom  Thynne,  of  Longrleat  Hall, 
Who  never  would  have  miscarried. 
Had  he  married  the  woman  he  lay  wiUial, 
Or  lain  with  the  woman  he  married.** 

On  the  30th  of  May,  in  the  same  year,  Lady  Ogle  was  married  to  Charles  Seymour, 
Duke  of  Somerset— E. 

*  Lady  Suffolk  thought  he  rather  would  have  her  recent  of  Hanover ;  and  she  also 
told  me,  that  George  I,  had  offered  to  live  again  with  his  wife,  but  she  refused,  unless 
her  pardon  were  asked  publicly.  She  said,  what  most  affected  her  was  Uie  disgrace  that 
would  be  broujErht  on  her  children ;  and  if  she  were  only  pardoned,  that  would  not  remove 
it  Lady  Suffolk  thought  she  was  then  divorced,  though  the  divorce  was  never  pub- 
lished ;  and  that  the  old  Elector  consented  to  his  son*s  marrying  the  Duchess  of  Kendal 
with  the  left  hand — but  it  seems  strange,  that  Georire  I.  should  oflfer  to  live  again  with 
his  wife,  and  yet  be  divorced  from  her.  Perhaps  Greorge  IL  to  vindicate  his  mother, 
supposed  that  offer  and  her  spirited  refbsal. 

^  George  II.  was  scrupulously  exact  in  separatinfr  and  keeping  in  each  country  what- 
ever belonged  to  England  or  Hanover.  Lady  Suffolk  told  me,  that  on  his  accession  he 
could  not  6nd  a  knife,  fork,  and  spoon  of  gold  which  had  belonged  to  Queen  Anne,  and 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  75 

length  I  have  frequently  and  frequently  seen  in  the  library  of  Princess 
Amelia,  who  told  me  it  was  the  portrait  of  her  grandmother.  She 
bequeathed  it,  with  other  pictures  of  her  family,  to  her  nephew,  the 
Landgrave  of  Hesse. 

Of  the  circumstances  that  ensued  on  Konigsmark's  disappearance 
I  am  ignorant ;  nor  am  I  acquainted  with  the  laws  of  Germany  rela- 
tive to  divorce  or  separation :  nor  do  I  know  or  suppose  that  des- 
potism and  pride  allow  the  law  to  insist  on  much  formality  when  a 
sovereign  has  reason  or  mind  to  get  rid  of  his  wife.  Perhaps  too 
much  difficulty  of  untying  the  Gordian  knot  of  matrimony  thrown  in 
the  way  of  an  absolute  prince  would  be  no  kindness  to  the  ladies,  but 
might  prompt  him  to  use  a  sharper  weapon,  like  that  butchering  hus- 
band, our  Henry  VIII.  Sovereigns,  who  narrow  or  let  out  the  law 
of  God  according  to  their  prejudices  and  passions,  mould  their  own 
laws  no  doubt  to  the  standard  of  their  convenience.  Genealogic 
purity  of  blood  is  the  predominant  folly  of  Germany ;  and  the  code 
of  Malta  seems  to  have  more  force  in  the  empire  than  the  ten  com- 
mandments. Thence  was  introduced  that  most  absurd  evasion  of  the 
indissolubility  of  marriage,  espousals  with  the  left  hand — as  if  the 
Almighty  had  restrained  his  ordinance  to  one  half  of  a  man's  person, 
and  allowed  a  greater  latitude  to  his  left  side  than  to  his  right,  or 
pronounced  the  former  more  ignoble  than  the  latter.  The  consciences 
DOth  of  princely  and  noble  persons  in  Germany  are  quieted,  if  the 
more  plebeian  side  is  married  to  one  who  would  degrade  the  more 
illustrious  moiety — but,  as  if  the  laws  of  matrimony  had  no  reference 
to  the  children  to  be  thence  propagated,  the  children  of  a  left-handed 
alliance  are  not  entitled  to  inherit.  Shocking  consequence  of  a  sense- 
less equivocation,  that  only  satisfies  pride,  not  justice ;  and  calculated 
for  an  acquittal  at  the  herald's  office,  not  at  the  last  tribunal. 

Separated  the  Princess  Dorothea  certainly  was,  and  never  admitted 
even  to  the  nominal  honours  of  her  rank,  being  thenceforward  always 
styled  Duchess  of  Halle.  Whether  divorced*  is  problematic,  at  least 
to  me;  nor  can  I  pronounce,  as,  though  it  was  generally  believed,  I 
am  not  certain  that  George  espoused  the  Duchess  of  Kendal  with  his 
left  hand.  As  the  Princess  Dorothea  died  only  some  months  before 
him,  that  ridiculous  ceremony  was  scarcely  deferred  till  then ;  and 
the  extreme  outward  devotion  of  the  Duchess,  who  every  Sunday 
went  seven  times  to  Lutheran  chapels,  seemed  to  announce  a  legalized 
wife.     As  the  genuine  wife  was  always  detained  in  her  husband's 

which  be  remembered  to  have  seen  here  at  his  first  arriyal.  He  found  them  at  Hanover 
on  his  first  journey  thither  after  he  came  to  the  crown,  and  hroug^ht  them  back  to  En^ 
land.  He  could  not  recollect  much  of  grreater  value ;  for,  on  Queen  Anne*s  death,  and 
in  the  interval  before  the  arrival  of  the  new  family,  such  a  clearance  had  been  made  of 
her  Majesty's  jewels,  or  the  new  King  so  instanUy  distributed  what  he  found  amongst 
his  German  favourites,  that,  as  Lady  S.  told  me.  Queen  Caroline  never  obtained  of  me 
late  Queen's  jewels  but  one  pearl  necklace. 

*  **  George  I^'*  says  Coxc,  **wbo  never  loved  his  wife,  gave  implicit  credit  to  the 
account  of  her  infidelity,  as  related  by  his  father ;  consented  to  her  imprisonment,  and 
obtained  firom  the  ecclesiastical  consistory  a  divorce,  which  was  passed  on  the  28th  of 
December  1694.*'    Memoirs  of  Walpole.— E. 


76  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

power,  he  seems  not  to  have  wholly  dissolved  their  union ;  for,  on  the 
approach  of  the  French  army  towards  Hanover,  during  Queen 
Anne's  reign,  the  Duchess  of  Halle  was  sent  home  to  her  father  and 
mother,  who  doted  on  iheir  only  child,  and  did  retain  her  for  a  whole 
year,  and  did  implore,  though  in  vain,  that  she  might  continue  to 
reside  with  them.  As  her  son  too,  George  II.,  had  thoughts  of  bring- 
ing her  over  and  declaring  her  Queen  Dowager,  one  can  hardly 
believe  that  a  ceremonial  divorce  had  passed,  the  existence  of  which 
process  would  have  glared  in  the  face  of  her  royalty.  But  though 
German  casuistry  might  allow  her  husband  to  take  another  wife  with 
bis  left  hand,  because  his  legal  wife  had  suffered  her  right  hand  to  be 
kissed  in  bed  by  a  gallant,  even  Westphalian  or  Aulic  counsellors 
could  not  have  pronounced  that  such  a  momentary  adieu  constituted 
aduhery ;  and  therefore  of  a  formal  divorce  I  must  doubt — and  there 
I  must  leave  that  case  of  conscience  undecided,  till  future  search 
into  the  Hanoverian  chancery  shall  clear  up  a  point  of  little  real  im- 
portance- 

I  have  said  that  the  disgraced  Princess  died  but  a  short  time  before 
the  King.'  It  is  known  that  in  Queen  Anne's  time  there  was  much 
noise  about  French  prophets.  A  female  of  that  vocation  (for  we 
know  from  Scripture  that  the  gift  of  prophecy  is  not  limited  to  one 
gender)  warned  George  I.  to  take  care  of  his  wife,  as  he  would  not 
survive  her  a  year.  That  oracle  was  probably  dictated  to  the  French 
Deborah  by  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Zell,  who  might  be  apprehei>- 
sive  lest  the  Duchess  of  Kendal  should  be  tempted  to  remove  entirely 
the  obstacle  to  her  conscientious  union  with  their  son-in-law.  Most 
Germans  are  superstitious,  even  such  as  have  few  other  impressions 
of  religion.  George  gave  such  credit  to  the  denunciation,  that  on  the 
eve  of  his  last  departure  he  took  leave  of  his  son  and  the  Princess  of 
Wales  with  tears,  telling  them  ho  should  never  see  them  more.  It 
was  certainly  his  own  approaching  fate  that  melted  him,  not  the 
thought  of  qutting  for  ever  two  persons  he  hated.  He  did  sometimes 
so  much  justice  to  his  son  as  to  say,  *^  II  est  fougueux,  ma  is  il  a  de 
I'honneur." — For  Queen  Caroline,  to  his  confidants  he  termed  her 
"  cette  diablesse  Madame  la  Princesse." 

I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  about  the  same  period,  that  in  a 
tender  mood  he  promised  the  Duchess  of  Kendal,  that  if  she  survived 
him,  and  it  were  possible  for  the  departed  to  return  to  this  world,  he 
would  make  her  a  visit.  The  Duchess,  on  his  death,  so  much 
expected  the  accomplishment  of  that  engagement,  that  a  large  raven, 
or  some  black  fowl,  flying  into  one  of  the  windows  of  her  villa  at 

■  •*  The  unfortunate  Sophia  was  confined  in  tlie  castle  of  Alden,  situated  on  the  small 
river  Alter,  in  the  duchy  of  ZelL  She  terminated  her  miscraMe  existence,  after  a  long 
captivity  of  thirty-two  years,  on  the  13th  of  November  1726,  only  seven  months  before 
the  death  of  George  the  First;  and  she  was  announced  in  the  Gazette,  under  the  title  of 
the  Electress  Dowager  of  Hanover.  During  her  whole  confinement  she  behaved  with  no 
less  mildness  than  dignity;  and,  on  receiving  the  sacrament  once  every  week,  never 
omitted  makingr  the  most  solemn  asseverations,  that  she  was  not  guilty  of  the  crime  laid 
to  her  charge."    Coze,  vol.  i.  p.  268. — E. 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  77 

Isleworth,  she  was  persuaded  it  was  the  soul  of  her  departed 
monarch  so  accoutred,  and  received  and  treated  it  with  all  the 
respect  and  tenderness  of  duty,  till  the  royal  bird  or  she  took  their 
last  flight. 

George  IL,  no  nriore  addicted  than  his  father  to  too  much  religious 
credulity,  had  yet  implicit  faith  in  the  German  notion  of  vampires, 
and  has  more  than  once  been  angry  with  my  father  for  speaking 
irreverently  of  those  imaginary  bloodsuckers. 

The  Duchess  of  Kendal,  of  whom  1  have  said  so  much,  was  when 
Madenooiselle  Schulemberg,  maid  of  honour  to  the  Elec tress  Sophia, 
mother  of  King  George  I.  and  destined  by  King  William  and  the  Act 
of  Settlement  to  succeed  Queen  Anne.  George  fell  in  love  with 
Mademoiselle  Schulemberg,  though  by  no  means  an  inviting  object — 
80  little,  that  one  evening  when  she  was  in  waiting  behind  the  Elec- 
tress's  chair  at  a  ball,  the  Princess  Sophia,  who  had  made  herself  mis- 
tress of  the  language  of  her  future  subjects,  said  in  English  to  Mrs. 
Howard,  afterwards  Countess  of  Suffolk,  then  at  her  court,  "Look  at 
that  mawkin,  and  think  of  her  being  my  son's  passion !"  Mrs.  Howard, 
who  told  me  the  story,  protested  that  she  was  terrified,  forgetting  that 
Mademoiselle  Schulemberg  did  not  understand  English. 

The  younger  Mademoi^le  Schulemberg,  who  came  over  with  her 
and  was  created  Countess  Walsingham,  passed  for  her  niece;  but 
was  so  like  to  the  King,  that  it  is  not  very  credible  that  the  Duchess, 
wbo  had  affected  to  pass  for  cruel,  had  waited  for  the  left-handed 
marriage. 

The  Duchess,  under  whatever  denomination,  had  attained  and  pre- 
served to  the  last  her  ascendant  over  the  king :  but  notwithstanding 
that  influence,  he  was  not  more  constant  to  her  than  he  had  been  to 
his  avowed  wife ;  for  another  acknowledged  mistress,  whom  he  also 
brought  over,  was  Madame  Kilmansegge,  Countess  of  Platen,  who 
was  created  Countess  of  Darlington,  and  by  whom  he  was  indis- 
putably father  of  Charlotte^  married  to.  Lord  Viscount  Howe,  and 
mother  of  the  present  earl.'  Lady  Howe  was  never  publicly 
acknowledged  as  the  King's  daughter ;  but  Princess  Amelia**  treated 
her  daughter,  Mrs.  Howe,*"  upon  that  foot,  and  one  evening,  when  I 
was  present,  gave  her  a  ring,  with  a  small  portrait  of  George  I,  with 
a  crown  of  diamonds. 

Lady  Darlington,  whom  I  saw  at  my  mother's  in  my  infancy,  and 
whom  I  remember  by  being  terrified  at  her  enormous  figure,  was  as 
corpulent  and  ample  as  the  Duchess  was  long  and  emaciated.  Two 
fierce  black  eyes,  large  and  roHin^  beneath  two  lofty  arched  eye- 
brows, two  acres  of  cheeks  spread  with  crimson,  an  ocean  of  neck 
that  overflowed  and  was  not  distinguished  from  the  lower  part  of 

*  Admiral  Lord  Howe,  and  also  of  Sir  William,  afterwards  Viscomit  Howe. — E. 
^  Second  daughter  of  George  the  Second ;  bom  in  1711,  died  October  the  Slst,  1786. 
«  Caroline,  the  eldett  of  Lady  Howe's  children,  had  married  a  genUeman  of  her  own 
name,  John  Howe,  Esq.  of  Hanslop,  in  the  county  of  Bucks. 


76  REBIINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

her  body,  and  no  part  restrained  by  stays* — no  wonder  that  a  child 
dreaded  such  an  ogress,  and  that  the  mob  of  London  were  highly 
diverted  at  the  importation  of  so  uncommon  a  seraglio !  They  were 
food  from  all  the  venom  of  the  Jacobites ;  and,  indeed  nothing  could 
be  grosser  than  the  ribaldry  that  was  vomited  out  in  lampoons, 
libels,  and  every  channel  of  abuse,  against  the  sovereign  and  the 
new  court,  and  chaunted  even  in  their  hearing  about  the  public 
streets.*' 

On  the  other  hand,  it  was  not  till  the  last  year  or  two  of  his  reign 
that  their  foreign  sovereign  paid  the  nation  the  compliment  of  taking 
openly  an  English  mistress.  That  personage  was  Anne  Brett,  eldest 
daughter  by  her  second  husband*"  of  the  repudiated  wife  of  the  Earl 
of  Macclesfield,  the  unnatural  mother  of  Savage  the  poet.  Miss 
Brett  was  very  handsome,  but  dark  enough  by  her  eyes,  complexion, 
and  hair,  for  a  Spanish  beauty.  Abishag  was  lodged  in  the  palace 
under  the  eyes  of  Bathsheba,  who  seemed  to  maintain  her  power,  as 
other  favourite  sultanas  have  done,  by  suffering  partners  in  the  sove- 
reign's affections.  When  his  Majesty  should  return  to  England,  a 
countess's  coronet  was  to  have  rewarded  the  young  lady's  com- 
pliance, and  marked  her  secondary  rank.  She  might,  however,  have 
proved  a  troublesome  rival,  as  she  seemed  so  confident  of  the  power 
of  her  charms,  that  whatever  predominant  ascendant  the  Duchess 
might  retain,  her  own  authority  in  the  palace  she  thought  was  to 
yield  to  no  one  else.  George  I.^  when  his  son  the  Prince  of  Wales 
and  the  Princess  had  quitted  St.  James's  on  their  quarrel  with  him, 
had  kept  back  their  three  eldest  daughters,  who  lived  with  him  to  his 
death,  even  after  there  had  outwardly  been  a  reconciliation  between 
the  King  and  Prince.  Miss  Brett,  when  the  King  set  out,  ordered  a 
door  to  be  broken  out  of  her  apartment  into  the  royal  garden.  Anne, 
the  eldest  of  the  Princesses,  offended  at  that  freedom,  and  not  choosing 

*  According  to  Coxe,  she  was,  when  young,  a  woman  of  great  beauty,  but  became 
extremely  corpulent  as  she  advanced  in  years.  **  Her  power  over  the  King,"  he  adds, 
**  was  not  equal  to  that  of  the  Duchess  of  Kendal,  but  her  character  for  rapacity  was  not 
inferior.*'  On  the  death  of  her  husband,  in  1721,  she  was  created  Countess  of  Leinsler 
in  the  kingdom  of  Ireland,  Baroness  of  Brentford,  and  Countess  of  Darlington. — E. 

^  One  of  the  German  ladies,  being  abused  by  the  mob,  was  said  to  have  put  her  head 
OfQt  of  the  coach,  and  cried  in  bad  English,  **  G^ood  people,  why  you  abuse  us  7  We  come 
fi>r  all  your  goods.**  **  Yes,  damn  ye,**  answered  a  fellow  in  the  crowd,  **  and  for  all  our 
chattels  too.**  I  mention  this  because  on  the  death  of  Princess  Amelia  the  newspapers 
revived  the  story  and  told  it  of  her,  though  I  had  heard  it  threescore  years  before  of  one  of 
her  grandfather's  mistresses. 

'  Colonel  Brett,  the  companion  of  Wycherley,  Steele,  Davenant,  &.c.  and  of  whom  the 
following  particulars  are  recorded  by  Spence,  on  the  authority  of  Dr.  Young : — "  The 
Colonel  was  a  remarkably  handsome  man.  The  Countess  lookmg  out  of  her  window  on 
a  great  disturbance  in  the  street,  saw  him  assaulted  by  some  bailiffs,  who  were  going 
to  arrest  him.  She  paid  his  debt,  released  him  from  their  pursuit,  and  soon  afler  mar- 
ried him.  When  she  died,  she  left  him  more  than  he  expected ;  with  which  he  bought 
an  estate  in  the  country,  built  a  very  handsome  house  upon  it,  and  furnished  it  in  the 
highest  taste ;  went  down  to  see  the  finishing  of  it,  returned  to  London  in  hot  weather 
and  in  too  much  hurry  ;  got  a  fever  by  it,  and  died.  Nobody  had  a  better  taste  of  what 
would  please  the  town,  and  his  opinion  was  much  regarded  by  the  actors  and  dramatic 
poets.**    Anecdotes,  p.  355. — £. 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECX)ND.  79 

such  a  companion  in  her  walks,  ordered  the  door  to  be  walked  up 
a^ain.  Miss  Brett  as  imperiously  reversed  that  command.  The 
King  died  suddenly,  and  the  empire  of  the  new  mistress  and  her 
promised  coronet  vanished.  She  afterwards  married  Sir  William 
Leman,  and  was  forgotten  before  her  reign  had  transpired  beyond 
the  con6nes  of  Westminster  1 


CHAPTER  III. 

Quarrel  between  George  the  First  and  bis  Son — Earl  of  Sunderland — Lord  Stan- 
hope— South  Sea  Scheme — Death  of  Craggs — Royal  Reconcilement — Peerage 
Bill  defeated — Project  for  seizing  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  conveying  him  to 
America — Duke  of  Newcastle — Royal  Christening — Open  Rupture — Prince 
and  Princess  of  Wales  ordered  to  leave  the  Palace. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  occurrences  in  the  reign  of  George  I. 
was  the  open  quarrel  between  him  and  his  son  the  Prince  of  Wales. 
Whence  the  dissension  originated ;  whether  the  prince's  attachment 
to  his  mother  embittered  his  mind  against  his  father,  or  whether 
hatred  of  his  father  occasioned  his  devotion  to  her,  I  do  not  pretend 
to  know.  I  do  suspect  from  circumstances,  that  the  hereditary 
enmity  in  the  House  of  Brunswick  between  the  parents  and  their 
eldest  sons  dated  earlier  than  the  divisions  between  the  first  two 
Georges.  The  Princess  Sophia  was  a  woman  of  parts  and  great 
vivacity :  in  the  earlier  part  of  her  life  she  had  professed  much  zeal 
for  the  deposed  House  of  Stuart,  as  appeared  by  a  letter  of  hers  in 
print,  addressed  to  the  Chevalier  de  St.  George.  It  is  natural  enough 
for  all  princes,  who  have  no  prospect  of  being  benefited  by  the  depo- 
sition of  a  crowned  head,  to  choose  to  think  royahy  an  indelible 
character.  The  Queen  of  Prussia,  daughter  of  George  I.  lived  and 
died  an  avowed  Jacobite.  The  Princess  Sophia,  youngest  child  of 
the  Queen  of  Bohemia,  was  consequently  the  most  remote  from  any 
pretensions  to  the  British  crown ;'  but  no  sooner  had  King  William 
procured  a  settlement  of  it  after  Queen  Anne  on  her  Electoral  High- 
ness, than  nobody  became  a  stancher  Whig  than  the  Princess  Sophia, 
nor  could  be  more  impatient  to  mount  the  throne  of  the  expelled 
Stuarts.  It  is  certain,  that  during  the  reign  of  Anne,  the  Elector 
George  was  inclined  to  the  Tories ;  though  after  his  mother's  death 

*  It  is  remarkable,  that  either  the  weajc  propensity  of  the  Stuarts  to  popery,  or  the 
▼isible  connexion  between  regnal  and  ecclesiastic  power,  had  such  operation  on  many  of 
the  branches  of  that  family,  who  were  at  a  distance  from  the  crown  of  England,  to  wear 
which  it  is  necessary  to  be  a  Protestant,  that  two  or  three  of  the  daughters  of  the  King 
and  Queen  of  Bohemia,  though  their  parents  had  lost  every  thing  in  the  struggle  between 
the  two  religions,  turned  Roman  Catholics ;  and  so  did  one  or  more  of  the  sons  of  the 
Princess  Sophia,  brothers  of  the  Protestant  candidate,  George  I. 


so  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

and  his  own  accession  he  gave  himself  to  the  opposite  party.  But  if 
he  and  his  mother  espoused  different  factions,  Sophia  found  a  ready 
piartisan  in  her  grandson,  the  Electoral  Prince  ;*  and  it  is  true,  that 
the  demand  made  by  the  Prince  of  his  writ  of  summons  to  the  House 
of  Lords  as  Duke  of  Cambridge,  which  no  wonder  was  so  offea- 
sive  to  Queen  Anne,  was  made  in  concert  with  his  grandmother, 
without  the  privity  of  the  Elector  his  father.  Were  it  certain,  as  was 
believed,  that  Bolingbroke  and  the  Jacobites  prevailed  on  the  Queen^ 
to  consent  to  her  brother  coming  secretly  to  England,  and  to  seeing 
him  in  her  closet ;  she  might  have  been  induced  to  that  step,  when 
provoked  by  an  attempt  to  force  a  distant  and  foreign  heir  upon  her 
while  still  alive. 

The  Queen  and  her  heiress  being  dead,  the  new  King  and  his  son 
came  over  in  apparent  harmony ;  and  on  his  Majesty's  first  visit  to 
his  electoral  dominions,  the  Prince  of  Wales  was  even  left  Regent ; 
but  never  being  trusted  afterwards  ,with  that  dignity  on  like  occasions, 
it  is  probable  that  the  son  discovered  too  much  mndness  for  acting 
the  king,  or  that  the  father  conceived  a  jealousy  of  his  son  having 
done  so.  Sure  it  is,  that  on  the  King's  return  great  divisions  arose 
in  the  court ;  and  the  Whigs  were  divided — some  devoting  themselves 
to  the  wearer  of  the  crown,  and  others  to  the  expectant.  I  shall  not 
enter  into  the  detail  of  those  squabbles,  of  which  I  am  but  superficially 
informed.  The  predominant  ministers  were  the  Earls  of  Sunderland 
and  Stanhope.  The  brothers-in-law,  the  Viscount  Townshend  and 
Mr.  Robert  Walpole,  adhered  to  the  Prince.  Lord  Sunderland  is 
said  to  have  too  much  resembled  as  a  politician  the  earl  his  father, 
who  was  so  principal  an  actor  in  the  reign  of  James  II.  and  in 
bringing  about  the  Revolution.  Between  the  earl  in  question  and  the 
Prince  of  Wales  grew  mortal  antipathy ;  of  which  an  anecdote  told 
me  by  my  father  himself  will  leave  no  doubt.  When  a  reconciliation 
had  been  patched  up  between  the  two  courts,  and  my  father  became 
first  lord  of  the  treasury  a  second  time.  Lord  Sunderland  in  a  Uete-H'tele 
with  him  said,  "  Well,  Mr.  Walpole,  we  have  settled  matters  for  the 
present ;  but  we  must  think  whom  we  shall  have  next"  (meaning  in 
case  of  the  King's  demise).  Walpole  said,  "  Your  lordship  may  think 
as  you  please,  but  my  part  is  taken  ;"  meaning  to  support  the  esta- 
blished settlement. 

Earl  Stanhope  was  a  man  of  strong  and  violent  passions,  and  had 
dedicated  himself  to  the  army;  and  was  so  far  from  thinking  of  any 
other  line,  that  when  Walpole,  who  first  suggested  the  idea  of  appoint- 
ing him  secretary  of  state,  proposed  it  to  him,  he  flew  into  a  furious 
rage,  and  was  on  the  point  of  a  downright  quarrel,  looking  on  him- 
self as  totally  unqualified  for  the  post,  and  suspecting  it  for  a  plan  of 

*  Afterwards  Georgt  II. 

^  I  believe  it  was  a  fact,  that  the  poor  weak  Queen,  beiqg  disposed  even  to  cede  the 
crown  to  her  brother,  consulted  Bishop  Wilkins,  called  the  Prophet,  to  know  what  would 
be  the  consequence  of  such  a  step.  He  replied,  **  Madam,  you  would  be  in  the  Tower  in  a 
month,  and  dead  in  three."  This  sentence,  (tictated  by  common  sense,  her  Majesty  took 
Ibr  inspiratioD,  and  dropped  all  thoo^rhts  of  resigning  the  crown. 


GEOROE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  81 

mocking  him.  He  died  in  one  of  those  tempestuous  sallies,  being 
pushed  in  the  House  of  Lords  on  the  explosion  of  the  South  Sea 
scheme.  That  iniquitous  affair,  which  Walpole  had  early  exposed, 
and  to  remedy  the  mischiefs  of  which  he  alone  was  deemed  adequate, 
had  replaced  him  at  the  head  of  affairs,  and  obliged  Sunderland  to 
submit  to  be  only  a  coadjutor  of  the  administration.  The  younger 
Craggs,*  a  showy  vapouring  man,  had  been  brought  forward  by  the 
ministers  to  oppose  Walpole;  but  was  soon  reduced  to  beg  his 
assistance  on  one**  of  their  ways  and  means.  Craggs  caught  his  death 
by  calling  at  the  gate  of  Lady  March,®  who  was  ill  of  the  small-pox ; 
and  being  told  so  by  the  porter,  went  home  directly,  fell  ill  of  the 
same  distemper,  and  died.  His  father,  the  elder  Craggs,  whose  very 
good  sense  Sir  R.  Walpole  much  admired,  soon  followed  his  son,  and 
his  sudden  death  was  imputed  to  grief;  but  having  been  deeply  dipped 
in  the  iniquities  of  the  South  Sea,  and  wishing  to  prevent  confiscation 
and  save  his  ill-acquired  wealth  for  his  daughters,  there  was  no  doubt 
of  his  having  despatched  himself.  When  his  death  was  divulged, 
Sir  Robert  owne^d  that  the  unhappy  man  had  in  an  oblique  manner 
hinted  his  resolution  to  him. 

The  reconciliation  of  the  royal  family  was  so  little  cordial,  that  I 
question  whether  the  Prince  did  not  resent  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  return 
to  the  King's  service.  Yet  had  Walpole  defeated  a  plan  of  Sunder- 
land that  would  in  futurity  have  exceedingly  hampered  the  successor, 
as  it  was  calculated  to  do ;  nor  do  I  aSect  to  ascribe  Sir  Robert's 
victory  directly  to  zeal  for  the  Prince:  personal  and  just  views 

Erompted  his  opposition,  and  the  commoners  of  England  were  not 
iss  indebted  to  him  than  the  Prince.  Sunderland  had  devised  a  bill 
to  restrain  the  crown  from  ever  adding  above  six  peers  to  a  number 
limited.**  The  actual  peers  were  far  from  disliking  the  measure  ]  but 
Walpole,  taking  fire,  instantly  communicated  his  dissatisfaction  to  all 
the  great  commoners,  who  might  for  ever  be  excluded  from  the  peer- 
age. He  spoke,  he  wrote,*  he  persuaded,  and  the  bill  was  rejected  by 
the  Commons  with  disdain,  after  it  had  passed  the  House  of  Lords.' 

*  James  Cragn,  Jun.  buried  in  Westminster  Abbey,  with  an  epitaph  by  Pope. 
[Craggs  died  on  Uie  16th  of  February,  1731.  His  monument  was  executed  by  Guelphi, 
whom  Lord  Burlinc^ton  invited  into  the  kingdom.  Walpole  considered  it  graceful  and 
simple,  but  that  the  artist  was  an  indifferent  sculptor.  Dr.  Johnson  objects  to  Pope's 
inscription,  that  it  is  partly  in  Latin  and  partly  in  English.  "  If  either  language,**  he 
says,  *'  be  preferable  to  the  other,  let  that  only  be  used ;  for  no  reason  can  be  given  why 
part  of  the  information  should  be  given  in  one  tongue,  and  part  in  another,  on  a  U>um 
more  than  in  any  other  place  or  any  other  occasion  :  such  an  epitaph  resembles  the  con- 
versation of  a  foreigner,  who  tells  part  of  his  meaning  by  words,  and  conveys  part  by 
signs.*'] 

^  I  think  it  was  the  sixpenny  tax  on  offices. 

'  Sarah  Cadogan,  afterwards  Duchess  of  Richmond* 

*  Queen  Anne*s  creation  of  twelve  peers  at  once,  to  obtain  a  majority  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  ofTered  an  ostensible  plea  for  the  restriction. 

"Sir  Robert  published  a  pamphlet  against  the  bill,  entitled,  **The  Thou^hU  of  a 
Member  of  the  Lower  House,  in  relation  to  a  project  for  restraining  and  limiting  the 
powers  of  the  Crown  in  the  future  creation  of  Peers.**  On  the  other  side,  Addi8an*s  pen 
was  employed  in  defending  the  measure,  in  a  paper  called  "  The  Old  Whig,**  against 
Steele,  who  attacked  it  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  **  The  Plebeian.** — E. 

'  **  The  effect  of  Sir  Robert's  speech  on  the  House,**  says  Coze,  ^  exceeded  the  most 


132  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

But  the  hatred  of  some  of  the  junto  at  court  had  gone  farther,  hor- 
ribly farther.  On  the  death  of  George  I.  Queen  Caroline  found  in 
bis  cabinet  a  proposal  of  the  Earl  of  Berkeley,*  then,  I  think,  first  lord 
of  the  adn[>iralty,  to  seize  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  convey  him  to 
America,  whence  he  shouM  never  be  heard  of  more.  This  detestable 
project,  copied  probaWy  from  the  Earl  of  Falmouth's  offer  to  Charles 
II.  with  regard  to  his  Queen,  was  in  the  handwriting  of  Charles  Stan- 
hope, elder  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Harrington  :**  and  so  deep  was  the 
impression  deservedly  made  on  the  mind  of  George  II.  by  that  abo- 
minable paper,  that  afl  the  favour  of  Lord  Harrington,  when  secretary 
of  state,  could  never  obtain  the  smallest  boon  to  his  brother,  though 
but  the  subordinate  transcriber.®  (Jeorge  I.  was  too  humane  to  listen 
to  such  an  atrocious  deed.  It  was  not  very  kind  to  the  conspirators 
to  leave  such  an  instrument  behind  him ;  and  if  virtue  and  conscience 
will  not  check  bold  bad  men  from  paying  court  by  detestable  offers,  the 
King's  carelessness  or  indifference  in  such  an  instance  ooght  to  warn 
them  of  the  little  gratitude  that  such  macbinationsr  can  inspire  or 
expect 

Among  those  who  had  preferred  the  service  of  the  King  to  that  of 
the  heir  apparent,  wasr  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  ;*  who,  having  mar- 
ried his  sister  to  Lord  Townshend,  both  his  Royal  Highness  and  the 
viscount  had  expected  would  have  adhered  to  that  connexion — and 

neither  forgave  his  desertion. 1  am  awareof  the  desultory  manner 

in  which  I  have  told  my  story,  having  mentioned  the  reconcifiation  of 
the  King  and  Prince  before  I  have  given  any  account  of  their  public 
rupture.  The  chain  of  my  thoughts  led  me  into  the  preceding  details, 
and,  if  I  do  not  flatter  myself,  will  have  let  you  into  the  motives  of 
my  dramatis  person©  better  than  if  I  had  more  exactly  observed 
chronology:  and  as  I  am  not  writing  a  regular  tragedy,  and  profess 
but  to  relate  facts  as  I  recollect  them ;  or  (if  you  will  aHow  me  to 
imitate  French  writers  of  tragedy)  may  I  not  plead  that  1  have  un- 
folded my  piece  as  they  do,  by  introducing  two  courtiers  to  acquaint 
one  another,  and  by  bricole  the  audience,  with  what  had  passed  in  the 
penetralia  before  the  tragedy  commences? 

The  exordium  thus  duly  prepared,  you  must  suppose,  ladies,  that 
the  second   act  opens  with  a  royal  christening.     The  Princess  of 

rangtiine  expectations:  it  fixed  those  who  had  before  been  waverings  and  irresolute, 
brouiifht  over  many  who  had  been  tempted  by  the  spectousness  of  the  measure  to  favour 
its  introduction,  and  procured  its  rejection,  by  a  triumphant  majority  of  269  against  177.** 
Memoirs,  vol  i. — E. 

•  James,  third  Earl  of  Berkeley,  knight  of  the  grarter,  Slc,  fin  March  1718,  he  was 
appointed  first  lord  of  the  admiralty,  in  which  poftt  he  continued  all  the  reign  of  George 
the  First    He  died  at  the  castle  of  Aubifmy,  in  France,  in  1736.] 

^  William  Stanhope,  first  Earl  of  Harrington  of  that  family. 

c  Coxe  states,  that  such  was  the  indignation  which  the  perusal  of  this  paper  excited, 
that,  when  Sir  Robert  espoused  Charles  Stanhope's  interest,  the  King  rejected  the  appli- 
cation with  some  expressions  of  resentment,  and  declared  that  no  consideration  should 
itadoce  him  to  assign  to  him  any  place  of  trust  or  honour. — E. 

•*  Thomas  Holies  Pelham,  Duke  of  Newcastle,  lord  chamberlain,  then  secretary  pf 
■tate,  and  lastly,  first  lord  of  the  treasury  under  George  II. ;  the  same  King  to  whom  he 
had  been  so  obnoxious  in  the  preceding  reigiu  He  was  obliged  by  George  IIL  to  resign 
his  post 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  83 

Wales  had  been  delivered  of  a  second  son.  The  Prince  had  intended 
his  uncle,  the  Duke  of  York,  Bishop  of  Osnaburg,  should  with  his 
Majesty  be  godfathers.  Nothing  could  equal  the  indignation  of  his 
Royal  Highness  when  the  King  named  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  for 
second  sponsor,  and  would  hear  of  no  other.  The  christening  took 
place  as  usual  in  the  Princess's  bedchamber.  Lady  Suffolk,  then  in 
waiting  as  woman  of  the  bedchamber,  and  of  most  accurate  memory 
painted  the  scene  to  me  exactly.  On  one  side  of  the  bed  stood  the 
godfathers  and  godmother;  on  the  other  the  Prince  and  the  Prin- 
cess's ladies.  No  sooner  had  the  Bishop  closed  the  ceremony,  than 
the  Prince,  crossing  the  feet  of  the  bed  in  a  rage,  stepped  up  to  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle,  and,  holding  up  his  hand  and  fore-finger  in  a 
menacing  attitude,  said,  '^  You  are  a  rascal,  but  I  shall  find  you ;" 
meaning,  in  broken  English,  **  I  shall  find  a  time  to  be  revenged." — 
*•  What  was  my  astonishment,"  continued  Lady  Suffolk,  "  when  going 
to  the  Princess's  apartment  the  next  morning,  the  yeomen  in  the 
guard-chamber  pointed  their  halberds  at  my  breast,  and  told  me  I 
must  not  passl  I  urged  that  it  was  my  duty  to  attend  the  Princess. 
They  said,  *  No  matter ;  I  must  not  pass  that  way.' " 

In  one  word,  the  ICing  had  been  so  provoked  at  the  Prince's  out- 
rage in  his  presence,  that  it  had  been  determined  to  inflict  a  still 
greater  insult  on  his  Royal  Highness.  His  threat  to  the  Duke  was 
pretended  to  be  understood  as  a  challenge;  and  to  prevent  a  duel  he 
bad  actually  been  put  under  arrest — as  if  a  Prince  of  Wales  could 
stoop  to  fight  with  a  subject  The  arrest  was  soon  taken  off;  but  at 
night  the  rrince  and  Princess  were  ordered  to  leave  the  palace,*  and 
retired  to  the  house  of  her  chamberlain,  the  Earl  of  Grantham,  in 
Albemarle  Street. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Bill  of  PaiDS  and  Penalties  against  Bishop  Atterbury — Projected  Asaanination  of 
Sir  Robert  Walpole — Revival  of  the  Order  of  the  Bath — Instance  of  George 
the  First* 8  good-humoured  Presence  of  Mind. 

As  this  trifling  work  is  a  miscellany  of  detached  recollections,  I 
will,  ere  I  quit  the  article  of  George  I,  mention  two  subjects  of  very 
unequal  import,  which  belong  peculiarly  to  his  reign.  The  first  was 
the  deprivation  of  Atterbury,  Bishop  of  Rochester.  Nothing  more 
oflTensive  to  men  of  priestly  principles  could  easily  have  happened : 
yet,  as  in  a  country  of  which  the  constitution  was  founded  on  rational 
and  liberal  grounds,  and  where  thinking  men  had  so  recently  exerted 
themselves  to  explode  the  prejudices  attached  to  the  persons  of  Kings 

*  "Notice  was  also  fbrmaDy  given  that  no  persons  who  paid  their  respects  to  the 
Prince  and  Princess  of  Wales  would  be  received  at  court ;  and  thev  were  deprived  of 
their  guard,  and  of  all  other  marks  of  distinction.*'    Coxe,  vol  i.  p.  133.--E. 


04  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

and  churchmen,  it  was  innpossible  to  defend  the  Bishop's  treason,  but 
by  denying  it;  or  to  condemn  his  condemnation,  but  by  supposing 
illegalities  in  the  process :  both  were  vehemently  urged  by  his  faction, 
as  his  innocence  was  pleaded  by  himself.  That  punishment  and  ex- 
pulsion from  his  country  may  stagger  the  virtue  even  of  a  good  man, 
and  exasperate  him  against  his  country,  is  perhaps  natural,  and 
humanity  ought  to  pity  it.  But  whatever  were  the  prepossessions  of 
his  friends  in  his  favour,  charity  must  now  believe  that  Atterbinry  was 
always  an  ambitious,  turbulent  priest,  attached  to  the  House  of  Stuart, 
and  consequently  no  friend  to  the  civil  and  religious  liberties  of  his 
country ;  or  it  must  be  acknowledged,  that  the  disappointment  of  his 
ambition  by  the  Queen's  death,  and  the  proscription  of  his  ministerial 
associates,  had  driven  on  attempts  to  restore  the  expelled  family  in 
hopes  of  realizing  his  aspiring  views.  His  letters  published  by  Nichols 
breathe  the  impetuous  spirit  of  his  youth.  His  exclamation  on  the 
Queen's  death,  when  he  offered  to  proclaim  the  Pretender  at  Charing 
Cross  in  pontificalibns,  and  swore,  on  not  being  supported,  that  there 
was  the  best  cause  in  England  lost  for  want  of  spirit,  is  now  believed 
also.  His  papers,  deposited  with  King  James's  in  the  Scottish  Col- 
lege at  Paris,  proclaimed  in  what  sentiments  he  died ;  and  the  fac- 
similes of  his  letters  published  by  Sir  David  Dalrymple  leave  no  doubt 
of  his  having  in  his  exile  entered  into  the  service  of  the  Pretender. 
Culpable  as  he  was,  who  but  must  lament  that  so  classic  a  mind  had 
only  assumed  so  elegant  and  amiable  a  semblance  as  he  adopted  after 
the  disappointment  of  his  prospects  and  hopes  ?  His  letter  in  defence 
of  the  authenticity  of  Lord  Clarendon's  History,  is  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  and  touching  specimens  of  eloquence  in  our  language. 

It  was  not  to  load  the  character  of  the  bishop,  nor  to  affect  candour 
by  applauding  his  talents,  that  I  introduced  mention  of  him,  much  less 
to  impute  to  nim  any  consciousnesses  ofthe  intended  crime  that  I  am 
going  to  relate.  The  person  against  whom  the  blow  was  supposed 
to  be  meditated  never,  in  the  most  distant  manner,  suspected  the 
bishop  of  being  privy  to  the  plot — No:  animosity  of  parties,  and 
malevolence  to  the  champions  of  the  House  of  Brunswick,  no  doubt 
suggested  to  some  blind  zealots  the  perpetration  of  a  crime  which 
would  necessarily  have  injured  the  bishop's  cause,  and  could  by  no 
means  have  prevented  his  disgrace. 

Mr.  Johnstone,  an  ancient  gentleman,  who  had  been  secretary  of 
state  for  Scotland,  his  country,  in  the  reign  of  King  William,  was  a 
zealous  friend  of  my  father.  Sir  Robert,  and  who,  in  that  period  of 
assassination  plots,  had  imbibed  such  a  tincture  of  suspicion  that  he 
was  continually  notifying  similar  machinations  to  my  father,  and 
warning  him  to  be  on  his  guard  against  them.  Sir  Robert,  intrepid 
and  unsuspicious,*  used  to  rally  his  good  monitor;  and,  when  serious, 

•  At  the  time  of  the  Preston  rebellion,  a  Jacobite,  who  sometimes  furnished  Sir 
Robert  with  intelligence,  sittin?  alone  with  him  one  night,  suddenly  putting  his  hand  into 
his  bosom  and  rising,  said,  **  Why  do  not  I  kill  you  now  ?"  Walpole  starting  up,  replied, 
**  Because  lama  younger  man  and  a  stronger.**  They  sat  down  again,  and  discussed 
the  person^s  information.     But  Sir  Robert  afterwards  had  reasons  for  thinking  that  the 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  8B0OND.  85 

told  him  that  his  life  was  too  constantly  exposed  to  his  enemies  to 
make  it  of  any  use  to  be  watchful  on  any  particular  occasion  ;  nor, 
though  Johnstone  often  hurried  to  him  with  intelligence  of  such  de- 
signs, did  he  ever  see  reason,  but  once,  to  believe  in  the  soundness  of 
the  information.  That  once  arrived  thus :  a  day  or  two  before  the 
bill  of  pains  and  penalties  was  to  pass  the  House  of  Commons  against 
the  Bishop  of  Rochester,  Mr.  Johnstone  advertised  Sir  Robert  to  be 
circumspect,  for  three  or  four  persons  meditated  to  assassinate  him  as 
he  should  leave  the  house  at  night.  Sir  Robert  laughed,  and  forgot 
the  notice.  The  morning  after  the  debate,  Johnstone  came  to  Sir 
Robert  with  a  kind  of  good-natured  insult,  telling  him,  that  though  he 
had  scoffed  his  advice,  he  had  for  once  followed  it,  and  by  so  doinff 
preserved  his  life.  Sir  Robert  understood  not  what  he  meant,  and 
protested  he  had  not  given  more  credit  than  usual  to  his  warning. 
**  Yes,"  said  Johnstone,  "  but  you  did ;  for  you  did  not  come  from  the 
House  last  night  in  your  own  chariot"  Walpole  affirmed  that  he  did ; 
but  his  friend  persisting  in  his  asseveration.  Sir  Robert  called  one  of 
the  footmen,  who  replied,  '^  I  did  call  up  your  honour's  carriage ;  but 
Colonel  Churchill  bemg  with  you,  and  his  chariot  driving  up  first,  your 
honour  stepped  into  that,  and  your  own  came  home  empty."  John- 
stone, triumphing  on  his  own  veracity,  and  pushing  the  examination 
farther,  Sir  Robert's  coachman  recollected  that,  as  he  left  Palace-yard, 
three  men,  much  muffled,  had  looked  into  the  empty  chariot.  The 
mystery  was  never  farther  cleared  up ;  and  my  father  frequently  said 
it  was  the  only  instance  of  the  kind  in  which  he  had  ever  seen  any 
appearance  of  a  real  design. 

The  second  subject  that  I  promised  to  mention,  and  it  shall  be  very 
briefly,  was  the  revival  of  the  Order  of  the  Bath.  It  was  the  measure 
of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  and  was  an  artful  bank  of  thirty-six  ribands  to 
supply  a  fund  of  favours  in  lieu  of  places.  He  n^eant,  too,  to  stave  off 
the  demand  for  garters,  and  intended  that  the  red  should  be  a  step  to 
the  blue,  and  accordingly  took  one  of  the  former  himself.  He  offered 
the  new  order  to  old  Sarah,  Duchess  of  Marlborough,  for  her  grand- 
son the  duke,  and  for  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  who  had  married  one  of 
her  grand-daughters.'  She  haughtily  replied,  they  should  take  nothing 

apj  had  no  intention  of  usawination,  but  had  hoped,  by  intimidating,  to  extort  money 
from  him.  Yet  if  no  real  attempt  waa  made  on  his  life,  it  was  not  nt>m  want  of  tug. 
ratwos  to  it :  one  of  the  weekly  journals  pointed  out  Sir  Robeal*8  frequent  passing 
Putney  .bridge  late  at  night,  attended  but  by  one  or  two  senrants,  on  his  way  to  New 
Park,  as  a  proper  place ;  and  after  Sir  Robertas  death,  the  second  Earl  of  Egmont  told 
me,  that  he  was  once  at  a  consultation  of  the  Opposition,  in  which  it  was  propMed  to  have 
Sir  Robert  murdered  by  a  mob,  of  which  the  earl  had  declared  his  abhorrence.  Such  an 
attempt  was  actually  made  in  1733,  at  the  time  of  the  &ibous  excise  bill.  As  the 
minister  descended  the  stairs  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  night  he  carried  the  bill,  he 
was  guarded  on  one  side  by  his  second  son  Eldward,  and  on  the  other  by  Grencral  Charlbs 
Churchill ;  but  the  crowd  behind  endeavoured  to  throw  him  down,  as  he  was  a  bulky 
nan,  and  trample  him  to  death ;  and  that  not  succeeding,  they  tried  to  strangle  him  l^ 
pulling  his  red  cloak  tight — ^but  fortunately  the  strings  broke  by  the  violence  of  the  tug. 
*  Wriothealy,  Duke  of  Bedford,  had  married  Lady  Anne  Egerton,  only  daughter  of 
Scroop,  Duke  of  Bridgewater,  by  Lady  Eliiabeth  Churchill,  daughter  of  John,  puke  of 
Marllxxough. 

VOL.  U  8 


Se  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

but  the  garter.  "  Madam,"  said  Sir  Robert  coolly,  "  they  who  take 
the  bath  will  the  sooner  have  the  garter."  The  next  year  he  took  the 
latter  himself  with  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  both  having  been  previously 
installed  knights  of  the  revived  institution. 

Before  I  quit  King  George  I.  I  will  relate  a  story,  very  expressive 
of  his  good-humoured  presence  of  mind. 

On  one  of  his  journeys  to  Hanover  his  coach  broke.  At  a  distance 
in  view  was  the  chateau  of  a  considerable  German  nobleman.  The 
king  sent  to  borrow  assistance.  The  possessor  came,  conveyed  the 
king  to  his  house,  and  begged  the  honour  of  his  Majesty's  accepting 
a  dinner  while  his  carriage  was  repairing ;  and,  while  the  dinner  was 
preparing,  begged  leave  to  amuse  his  Majesty  with  a  collection  of 
pictures  which  he  had  formed  in  several  tours  to  Italy.  But  what  did 
the  king  see  in  one  of  the  rooms  but  an  unknown  portrait  of  a  person 
in  the  robes  and  with  the  regalia  of  the  sovereigns  of  Great  Britain ! 
George  asked  whom  it  represented.  The  nobleman  replied,  with  much 
diffident  but  decent  respect,  that  in  various  journeys  to  Rome  he  had 
been  acquainted  with  the  Chevalier  de  St.  George,  who  had  done  him 
the  honour  of  sending  him  that  picture.  "  Upon  my  word,"  said  the 
king  instantly,  "  it  is  very  like  to  the  family."  It  was  impossible  to 
remove  the  embarrassment  of  the  proprietor  with  more  good  breeding. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Accession  of  (jeor|re  the  Second — Sir  Spencer  Compton — Elxpected  Cbanffe  in 
Administration — Continuation  of  Lord  Townshend  and  Sir  Robert  Walpole  bj 
the  Intervention  of  Queen  Caroline— Mrs.  Howard,  afterwards  CoontesB  of 
SuflK>ik — ^Her  character  by  Swift — and  by  Lord  Chesterfield. 

• 

The  unexpected  death  of  George  I.  on  his  road  to  Hanover  was 
instantly  notified  by  Lord  Townshend,  secretary  of  state,  who  attended 
his  Majesty,  to  his  brother  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who  as  expeditiously 
was  the  first  to  carry  the  news  to  the  successor  and  hail  him  King. 
The  next  step  was,  to  ask  who  his  Majesty  would  please  should  draw 
his  speech  to  the  Council.  "  Sir  Spencer  Compton,"  replied  the  new 
monarch.  The  answer  was  decisive,  and  implied  Sir  Robert's  dis- 
mission. Sir  Spencer  Compton  was  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, and  treasurer,  I  think,  at  that  time,  to  his  Royal  Highness,  who 
b^  that  first  command,  implied  his  intention  of  making  Sir  Spencer 
his  prime-minister.  He  was  a  worthy  man,  of  exceedingly  grave 
formality,  but  of  no  parts,  as  his  conduct  immediately  proved.  The 
poor  gentleman  was  so  little  qualified  to  accommodate  nimself  to  the 
grandeur  of  the  moment,  and  to  conceive  how  a  new  sovereign  should 
address  himself  to  his  ministers,  and  he  had  also  been  so  far  from 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  87 

meditating  to  supplant  the  premier,'  that,  in  his  distress,  it  was  to  Sir 
Robert  himself  tnat  he  had  recourse,  and  whom  he  besought  to  make 
the  draught  of  the  King's  speech  for  him.  The  new  Queen,  a  better 
judge  than  her  husband  of  the  capacities  of  the  two  candidates,  and 
who  had  silently  watched  for  a  moment  proper  for  overturning  the 
new  designations,  did  not  lose  a  moment  in  observing  to  the  King 
how  prejudicial  it  would  be  to  his  affairs  to  prefer  to  the  minister  in 
possession  a  man  in  whose  own  judgment  his  predecessor  was  the 
fittest  person  to  execute  his  office.  From  that  moment  there  was  no 
more  question  of  Sir  Spencer  Comptorr  as  prime-minister.  He  was 
created  an  earl,  soon  received  the  garter,  and  became  president  of 
that  council,  at  the  head  of  which  he  was  much  fitter  to  sit  than  to 
direct.  Fourteen  years  afterwards,  he  was  again  nominated  by  the 
same  Prince  to  replace  Sir  Robert  as  first  lord  of  the  treasury  on  the 
latter's  forced  resignation,  but  not  as  prime-minister ;  the  conduct  of 
affairs  being  soon  ravished  from  him  by  that  dashing  genius  the  Earl 
of  Granville,  who  reduced  him  to  a  cipher  for  the  little  year  in  which 
he  survived,  and  in  which  his  incapacity  had  been  obvious. 

The  Queen,  impatient  to  destroy  all  hopes  of  change,  took  the 
earliest  opportunity  of  declaring  her  own  sentiments.  The  instance 
I  shdl  cile  will  be  a  true  picture  of  courtiers.  Their  Majesties  had 
removed  from  Richmond  to  their  temporary  palace  in  Leicester- 
fields**  on  the  very  evening  of  their  receiying  notice  of  their  accession 
to  the  crown,  and  the  next  day  all  the  nobility  and  genti;y  in  town 
crowded  to  kiss  their  hands;  my  mother  amongst  the  rest,  who. 
Sir  Spencer  Compton's  designation,  and  not  its  evaporation,  being 
known,  could  not  make  her  way  between  the  scornful  backs  ana 
elbows  of  her  late  devotees,  nor  could  approach  nearer  to  the 
Queen  than  the  third  or  fourth  row ;  but  no  sooner  was  she  descried 
by  her  Majesty  than  the  Queen  said  alQud,  '<  There,  I  am  sure,  I  see 
a  friend  !**  The  torrent  divided  and  shrunk  to  either  side ;  "  and  as  I 
came  away,"  said  my  mother,  "  I  might  have  walked  over  their  heads 
if  I  had  pleased." 

The  preoccupation  of  the  Queen  in  favour  of  Walpole  must  be 
explained.  He  had  early  discovered  that,  in  whatever  gallantries 
George  Prince  of  Wales  indulged  or  affected,  even  the  person  of  his 
Princess  was  dearer  to  him  than  any  charms  in  his  mistresses;  and 
though  Mrs.  Howard  (afterwards  Lady  Suffolk)  was  openly  his 
declared  favourite,  as  avowedly  as  the  Duchess  of  Kendal  was  his 
father's.  Sir  Robert's  sagacity  discerned  that  the  power  would  be 
lodged  with  the  wife,  not  with  the  mistress ;  and  he  not  only  devoted 

*  Sir  Spencer  Compton,  afterwards  ESarl  of  Wilmin^n,  was  so  far  ftom  resenting^  Sir 
Robert*!  superior  talents,  that  he  remained  steadfastly  attached  to  him ;  and  when  the 
fiunous  motion  for  removing  Sir  Robert  was  made  in  both  Houses,  Lord  Wilmington, 
though  confined  to  his  bed,  and  with  his  head  blistered,  rose  and  went  to  the  House  of 
Lon»,  to  vote  against  a  measure  that  avowed  its  own  injustice,  by  being  grounded  only 
on  popular  clamour. 

^  It  was  the  town  residence  of  the  Sidneys,  Earls  of  Leicester,  of  whom  it  was  hired, 
as  it  was  afterwards  by  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  on  a  similar  quarrel  with  his  father: 
he  added  to  it  Savile  douse,  belonging  to  Sir  Groorge  SaTile,  for  his  children. 


88  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

himself  to  the  Princess ;  but  totally  abstained  from  even  visiting  Mrs. 
Howard ;  while  the  injudicious  multitude  concluded,  that  the  common 
consequences  of  an  inconstant  husband's  passion  for  his  concubine 
would  follow,  and  accordingly  warmer,  if  not  public  vows  were  made 
to  the  supposed  favourite,  than  to  the  Prince's  consort.  They,  espe- 
cially, who  in  the  late  reign  had  been  out  of  favour  at  court,  had,  to 
pave  their  future  path  to  favour,  and  to  secure  the  fall  of  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  sedulously,  and  no  doubt  zealously,  dedicated  themselves  to 
the  mistress :  Bolingbroke  secretly,  his  friend  Swift  openly,  and  as 
ambitiously,  cultivated  Mrs.  Howard ;  and  the  neighbourhood  of  Pope's 
villa  to  Richmond  facilitated  their  intercourse,  though  his  religion 
forbade  his  entertaining  views  beyond  those  of  serving  his  friends. 
LfOrd  Bathurst,  another  of  that  connexion,  and  Lord  Chesterfield,  too 
early  for  his  interest,  founded  their  hopes  on  Mrs.  Howard's  influence; 
but  astonished  and  disappointed  at  finding  Walpole  not  shaken  from 
his  seat,  they  determined  on  an  experiment  that  should  be  the  touch- 
stone of  Mrs.  Howard's  credit  They  persuaded  her  to  demand  of  the 
new  King  an  earl's  coronet  for  Lord  Bathurst  She  did — the  Queen 
put  in  her  veto,  and  Swift,  in  despair,  returned  to  Ireland,  to  lament 
Queen  Anne,  and  curse  Queen  Caroline,  under  the  mask  of  patriotism, 
in  a  country  he  abhorred  and  despised.* 

To  Mrs.  Howard,  Swift's  ingratitude  was  base.  SAe,  indubitably,  had 
not  only  exerted  all  her  interest  to  second  his  and  his  faction's  interests, 
but  loved  Queen  Caroline  and  the  minister  as  Uttle  as  they  did ;  yet, 
when  Swift  died,  he  left  behind  him  a  Character  of  Mrs.  Howard  by 
no  means  flattering,  which  was  published  in  his  posthumous  works. 
On  its  a{^pearance,  Mrs.  Howard  (become  Lady  Suffolk)  said  to  me, 
in  her  calm,  dispassionate  manner,  '<  All  I  can  say  is,  that  it  is  very 
different  from  one  that  he  drew  of  me,  and  sent  to  me,  many  years 
ago,  and  which  I  have,  written  by  his  own  hand."** 

Ix)rd  Chesterfield,  rather  more  ingenuous — as  his  character  of  her, 
but  under  a  feigned  name,  was  printed  in  his  life,  though  in  a  paper 
of  which  he  was  not  known  to  be  the  author — was  not  more  consis- 

*  Mr.  Croker,  in  his  biographical  notice  of  Lady  Suffolk,  prefixed  to  the  edition  of  her 
Letters,  thus  Batis&ctorily  confutes  this  anecdote :  **  On  this  it  is  to  be  observed,  that 
G^eor^  the  Second  was  proclaimed  on  the  14th  of  June  1727,  that  Swifl  returned  to  Ire- 
land m  the  September  of  the  same  year,  and  that  the  first  creation  of  peers  in  that  reini 
did  not  take  place  till  the  28th  of  May  1728.  Is  it  credible,  that  Mrs.  Howard  should 
have  made  such  a  request  of  the  new  King,  and  suffered  so  decided  a  refusal  ten  or  eleven 
months  before  any  peers  were  made  7  But,  again,  upon  this  first  creation  of  peers  Mrs. 
Howard's  brother  is  the  second  name.  Is  it  probable  that,  with  so  gje&t  an  object  for  bor 
own  fiimily  in  view,  she  risked  a  solicitation  for  Lord  Bathurst  7  But  that  which  seems 
most  convincing,  is  Swifl^s  own  correspondence.  In  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Howard,  of  the  9Ui 
o£  July  1727,  in  which,  rallying  her  on  the  solicitation  to  which  the  new  King  would  be 
exposed,  he  says,  *  for  my  part,  you  may  be  secure,  that  I  will  never  venture  to  recom- 
mend even  a  mouse  to  Mrs.  Cole's  cat,  or  a  shoe-cleaner  to  your  meanest  domestic*  ** 
Vol.  I.  p.  XXV. — E. 

^  **  This,**  says  her  bio^pher,  **  is  a  complete  mistake,  to  give  it  no  harsher  name. 
The  Character  which  Swifl  left  behind,  and  which  was  published  in  his  posthuoKHii 
works,  is  the  very  same  which  Lady  Sufiblk  had  in  her  possession.  If  it  be  not  flatter- 
ing,  it  is  to  Swifl*s  honour  that  he  did  not  condescend  to  flatter  her  in  the  days  of  her 
hiirhest  favour ;  and  the  accusation  of  having  written  another  less  &vourable,  is  wholly 
fiik).*'    Ibid,  vol  L  p.  zxxviu.— E. 


GEORGE  THE  FIK3T  AND  SECOND.  89 

tent  Eudosia,  described  in  the  weekly  journal  called  Common  Sense, 
for  September  10,  1737,  was  meant  for  Lady  Suffolk :  yet  was  it  no 
fault  of  hers  that  he  was  proscribed  at  court ;  nor  did  she  perhaps  ever 
know,  as  he  never  did  till  the  year  before  his  death,  when  I  acquainted 
him  with  it  by  his  friend  Sir  John  Irwin,  why  he  had  been  put  into 
the  Queen's  Index  expurgatorius.*  The  queen  had  an  obscure  win- 
dow at  St.  James's  that  looked  into  a  dark  passage,  lighted  only  by  a 
single  lamp  at  night,  which  looked  upon  Mrs.  Howard's  apartment 
Lord  Chesterfield,  one  Twelfth-night  at  court,  had  won  so  large  a 
sum  of  money,  that  he  thought  it  imprudent  to  carry  it  home  in  the 
dark,  and  deposited  it  with  the  mistress.  Thence  the  queen  inferred 
great  intimacy,  and  thenceforwards  Lord  Chesterfield  could  obtain 
no  favour  from  court:  and  finding  himself  desperate,  went  into  oppo- 
sition. My  father  himself  long  a^erwards  told  me  the  story,  and  had 
become  the  principal  object  of  the  peer's  satiric  wit,  though  he  had 
not  been  the  mover  of  his  disgrace.  The  weight  of  that  anger  fell 
more  disgracefully  on  the  king,  as  I  shall  mention  in  the  next  chapter. 
I  will  here  interrupt  the  detail  of  what  I  have  heard  of  the  com- 
mencement of  that  reign,  and  farther  anecdotes  of  the  queen  and  the 
mistress,  till  I  have  related  the  second  very  memorable  transaction  of 
that  era ;  and  which  would  come  in  awkwardly,  if  postponed  till  I 
have  despatched  many  subsequent  particulars. 


CHAPTER  VL 

De8tractk>n  of  George  the  First^s  will 


At  the  first  council  held  by  the  new  sovereign.  Dr.  Wake,  Arch- 
bbhop  of  Canterbury,  produced  the  will  of  the  late  King,  and  delivered 
it  to  the  successor,  expecting  it  would  be  opened  and  read  in  counciL 
On  the  contrary,  his  Majesty  put  it  into  his  pocket,  and  stalked  out  of 
the  room  without  uttering  a  word  on  the  subject  The  poor  prelate 
was  thunderstruck,  and  had  not  the  presence  of  mind  or  the  courage 
to  demand  the  testament's  being  opened,  or  at  least  to  haveit  register^ 
No  man  present  chose  to  be  more  hardy  than  the  person  to  whom  the 
deposit  had  been  trusted — perhaps  none  of  them  immediately  conceived 
the  possible  violation  of  so  solemn  an  act  so  notoriously  existent ;  still, 
as  the  King  never  mentioned  the  will  more,  whispers  only  by  degrees 
informed  the  public  that  the  will  was  burnt;  at  least  that  its  injunctions 
were  never  fulfilled. 

*  *«  It  certainlj  would  haTe  been  eztraordinarj,**  obeervee  Mr.  Croker,  **  that  Lord 
Chesterfield,  in  1737,  when  he  was  on  terms  of  the  most  familiar  friendship  with  Lady 
8uffi>lk,  shocdd  have  published  a  deprecatory  character  of  her,  and  in  revenge  too,  wt 
hang  disgraced  at  court— Lady  Suffolk  being  at  the  same  time  in  disgrace  also.  Bui, 
imlackily  for  Walpole*8  conjecture,  the  character  of  Eudosia  (a  female  sooaiite,  as  the 
name  imports,)  has  not  the  slightest  resemblance  to  Lady  Soflfolk,  and  coDtains  no  aUn- 
sion  to  courts  or  ooortiers.**    Ibid.  toL  ii.  p.  " 

8* 


90  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

What  the  contents  v/ere  was  never  ascertained.  Report  said,  that 
forty  thousand  pounds  had  been  bequeathed  to  the  Duchess  of  Kendal ; 
and  nnore  vague  rumours  spoke  of  a  large  legacy  to  the  Queen  of 
Prussia,  daughter  of  the  late  King.  Of  that  bequest  demands  were 
afterwards  said  to  have  been  frequently  and  roughly  made  by  her  son 
the  great  King  of  Prussia,  between  whom  and  his  uncle  subsisted 
much  inveteracy. 

The  legacy  to  the  Duchess  was  some  time  after  on  the  brink  of 
coming  to  open  and  legal  discussion.  Lord  Chesterfield  marrying  her 
niece  and  heiress,  the  Countess  of  Walsingham,  and  resenting  his 
own  proscription  at  court,  was  believed  to  have  instituted,  or  at  least 
to  have  threatened,  a  suit  for  recovery  of  the  legacy  to  the  Duchess, 
to  which  he  was  then  become  entitled ;  and  it  was  as  confidently 
believed  that  he  was  quieted  by  the  payment  of  twenty  thousand 
pounds. 

But  if  the  Archbishop  had  too  timidly  betrayed  the  trust  reposed  in 
him  from  weakness  and  ws^nt  of  spirit,  there  were  two  other  men  who 
had  no  such  plea  of  imbeciUty,  and  who,  being  independent,  and  above 
being  awed,  basely  sacrificed  their  honour  and   their  integrity  for 

Eositive  sordid  gain.  George  the  First  had  deposited  duplicates  of 
is  will  with  two  sovereign  German  princes :  I  will  not  specify  them, 
because  at  this  distance  of  time  I  do  not  perfectly  recollect  their  titles ; 
but  I  was  actually,  some  vears  ago,  shown  a  copy  of  a  letter  from 
one  of  our  ambassadors  abroad  to  a  secretary  of  state  at  that  period, 
in  which  the  ambassador  said,  one  of  the  princes  in  question  would 
accept  the  proffered  subsidy,  and  had  delivered,  or  would  deliver,  the 
duplicate  of  the  King's  will.  The  other  trustee,  was  no  doubt,  as 
little  conscientious  and  as  corrupt  It  is  pity  the  late  King  of  Prussia 
did  not  learn  their  infamous  treachery. 

Discoursing  once  with  Lady  Suffolk  on  that  suppressed  testament, 
she  made  the  only  plausible  shadow  of  an  excuse  that  could  be  made 
for  George  the  Second.  She  told  me  that  George  the  First  had  burnt 
two  wills  made  in  favour  of  his  son.  They  were,  probably,  the  wills 
of  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Zell ;  or  one  of  them  might  be  that 
of  his  mother,  the  Princess  Sophia.  The  crime  of  the  first  George 
eould  only  palliate,  not  justify,  the  criminality  of  the  second ;  for  the 
second  did  not  punish  the  guilty,  but  the  innocent  But  bad  prece- 
dents are  always  dangerous,  and  too  likely  to  be  copied.* 

*  On  the  robiectof  the  royal  will,  Walpole,  in  his  Memoires,  voL  ii.  p.  458,  relates  the 
fbllowin^  anecdote :— "  The  morning  after  the  death  of  Georgre  the  Second,  Lord  Walde- 
grave  showed  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  an  extraordinary  piece:  it  was  endorsed,  *very 
private  paper,*  and  was  a  letter  ftom  the  Duke  of  NewcasUe  to  the  first  Earl  of  Walde- 
grave ;  in  which  his  grace  inibrmed  the  Earl,  then  our  ambassador  in  France,  that  he 
had  received  by  the  messenger  the  copy  of  the  will  and  codicil  of  George  the  First;  that 
he  had  ddivereid  it  to  his  Majesty,  who  put  it  into  the  fire  without  opening  it :  *  So,*  adds 
the  Duke,  *  we  do  not  know  whether  it  confirms  the  other  or  not  ;*  and  he  proceeds  to 
say,  *  Desoatch  a  messenger  to  the  Duke  of  WolfenbutUe  with  the  treaty,  in  which  he  b 

E  anted  all  he  desires;  and  we  expect,  by  return  of  the  messenger,  the  original  will  fixxn 
m.*  George  the  First  had  left  two  wills ;  one  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Wake,  Arch- 
bishop  of  Canterbury,  the  other  with  the  Duke  of  Wolfenbuttle.  He  had  been  in  the 
right  to  take  these  precautioiis :  he  himself  had  burned  hit  wife's  testtment,  and  her 


OBQKOfi  THE  FIRST  AND  SfiOOKD.  Ql 


CHAPTER  VIL 

History  of  Mrs.  Howard,  afterwards  Countess  of  Safiblk — Miss  Bellenden— Her 
Marria^re  with  Colonel  John  Campbell,  afterwards  fourth  Duke  of  Argyle — Anec- 
dotes ^  Queen  Caroline — Her  last  Illness  and  Death — Anecdotes  of  Sarah, 
Duchess  of  Marlborough — Last  Years  of  George  the  Second— 'Mrs.  ClavtoUt 
afterwards  Lady  Sundon^— Lady  Diana  Spencer — Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales — 
Sudden  Removal  of  the  Prince  and  Princess  from  Hampton  Court  to  St  Jameses 
— Birth  of  a  Princess^Rupture  with  the  King— Anecdotes  of  Lady  Yarmouth. 

I  WILL  now  resume  the  story  of  Lady  Suffolk  whose  history,  though 
she  had  none  of  that  influence  on  the  transactions  of  the  cabinet  that 
was  expected,  will  still  probably  be  more  entertaining  to  two  young 
ladies  than  a  magisterial  detail  of  poUtical  events,  the  traces  of 
which  at  least  may  be  found  in  journals  and  brief  chronicles  of 
the  times.  The  interior  of  courts,  and  the  lesser  features  of  history, 
are  precisely  those  with  which  we  are  least  acquainted, — I  mean  of 
the  age  preceding  our  own.  Such  anecdotes  are  forgotten  in  the 
multiplicity  of  those  that  ensue,  or  reside  only  in  the  memory  of  idle 
old  persons,  or  have  not  yet  emerged  into  publicity  from  the  porte- 
feuilles  of  such  garrulous  Brantomes  as  myself.  Trifling  I  will  not 
call  myself;  for,  while  I  hav^  such  charming  disciples  as  you  two  to 
inform ;  and  though  acute  or  plodding  politicians,  for  whom  they  are 
not  meant,  may  condemn  these  pages ;  which  is  preferable,  the  labour 
of  an  historian  who  toils  for  fame  and  for  applause  from  he  knows 
not  whom  ;  or  my  careless  commission  to  paper  of  perhaps  insignifi- 
cant passages  that  I  remember,  but  penned  for  the  amusement  pf  a 
pair  of  such  sensible  and  cultivated  minds  as  I  never  met  at  so  early 
an  age,  and  whose  fine  eyes  I  do  know  will  read  me  with  candour, 
and  allow  me  that  mite  of  fame  to  which  I  aspire,  their  approbation 
of  my  endeavours  to  divert  their  evenings  in  the  country  ?  O  Guic^ 
ciardin!  is  posthumous  renown  so  valuable  as  the  satisfaction  of 
reading  these  court-tales  to  the  lovely  Berrys  t 

Henrietta  Hobart  was  daughter  of  Sir  Henry,  and  sister  of  Sir 
John  Hobart,  Knight  of  the  Bath  on  the  revival  of  the  order,  and 
afterwards  by  her  interest  made  a  baron ;  and  since  created  Earl  of 
Buckinghamshire. 

&ther's,  the  Duke  of  Zell ;  both  of  whom  had  made  Georsre  the  Second  their  heir — a 
palliatiTe  of  the  latter's  obliquity,  if  justice  would  allow  of  any  violation.**  From  the 
foUowing  wunage  in  Boswell's  Life  of  Johnwin,  the  Doctor  appears  to  have  given  cre- 
dence to  the  story  of  the  will :— **  Tom  Davies  instanced  Charles  the  Second ;  Johnson 
taking  fire  at  an  attack  upon  that  prince,  exclaimed,  *  Charles  the  Second  was  licentious 
in  his  practice,  but  he  always  had  a  reverence  for  what  was  good ;  Charles  the 
Second  was  not  such  a  man  as  George  the  Second  ;  he  did  not  destroy  his  &ther*s  will ; 
he  did  not  betray  those  over  whom  he  ruled ;  he  did  not  let  the  French  fleet  pass  ours.* 
He  roared  with  prodifioos  violence  against  Greorge  the  Second.  When  he  ceased,  Moody 
interjected,  in  an  Irish  tone,  and  a  comic  look,  *  Ah!  poor  Greorge  the  Second  !*  **  See 
voL  V.  p.  284,  ed.  1835.— E. 


00  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

She  was  first  married  to  Mr.  Howard,  the  younger  brother  of  m<Mre 
than  one  Earl  of  Suffolk ;  to  which  title  he  at  last  succeeded  himself, 
and  left  a  son  by  her,  who  was  the  fast  earl  of  that  branch.  She  had 
but  the  slender  fortune  of  an  ancient  baronet's  daughter ;  and  Mr, 
Howard's  circumstances  were  the  reverse  of  opulent.  It  was  the 
close  of  Queen  Anne's  reign :  the  young  couple  saw  no  step  more 
prudent  than  to  resort  to  Hanover,  and  endeavour  to  ingratiate  them- 
3elves  with  the  future  sovereigns  of  England.  Still  so  narrow  was 
their  fortune,  that  Mr.  Howard  finding  it  expedient  to  give  a  dinner 
to  the  Hanoverian  ministers,  Mrs.  Howard  is  said  to  have  sacrificed 
her  beautiful  head  of  hair  to  pay  for  the  expense.  It  must  be  recol- 
lected, that  at  that  period  were  in  fashion  those  enormous  full-bottomed 
wigs,  which  often  cost  twenty  and  thirty  guineas.  Mrs.  Howard 
was  extremely  acceptable  to  the  intelligent  Princess  Sophia ;  but  did 
not  at  that  time  make  farther  impression  on  the  Electoral  Prince,  than, 
on  his  father's  succession  to  the  crown,  to  be  appointed  one  of  the 
bedchamber-women  to  the  new  Princess  of  Wales. 

The  elder  Whig  politicians  became  ministers  to  the  King.  The 
most  promising  of  the  young  lords  and  gentleman  of  that  party,  and 
the  prettiest  and  liveliest  of  the  young  ladies,  formed  the  new  court 
of  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Wales.  The  apartment  of  the  bed- 
chamber-woman in  waiting  became  the  fashionable  evening  rendez- 
vous of  the  most  distinguished  wits  and  beauties.  Lord  Chester- 
field, then  Lord  Stanhope,  Lord  Scarborough,  Carr  Lord  Hervey, 
elder  brother  of  the  more  known  John  Lord  Hervev,  and  reckoned 
to  have  superior  parts.  General  (at  that  time  only  Colonel)  Charles 
Churchill,  and  others  not  necessary  to  rehearse,  were  constant  atteoi- 
dants :  Miss  Lepelle,  afterwards  Lady  Hervey,  my  mother.  Lady 
Walpole,  Mrs.  Selwyn,  mother  of  the  famous  George,  and  herself  of 
much  vivacity  and  pretty,  Mrs.  Howard,  and  above  all  for  universal 
admiration,  Miss  Bellenden,  one  of  the  maids  of  honour.  Her  face 
and  person  were  charming ;  lively  she  was  almost  to  ^tourderie  ;*  and 
so  agreeable  she  was,  that  I  never  heard  her  mentioned  afterwards  by 
one  of  her  contemp6raries  who  did  not  prefer  her  as  the  most  per- 
fect creature  they  ever  knew.  The  Prince  frequented  the  waiting- 
room,  and  soon  felt  a  stronger  inclination  for  her  than  he  ever  enter- 
tained but  for  his  Princess.  Miss  Bellenden  by  no  means  felt  a 
reciprocal  passion.  The  Prince's  gallantry  was  by  no  means  delicate ; 
and  his  avarice  disgusted  her.  One  evening  sitting  by  her,  he  took 
out  his  purse  and  counted  his  money.  He  repeatea  the  numeration : 
the  giday  Bellenden  lost  her  patience,  and  cried  out,  "  Sir,  I  cannot 
bear  it !  if  you  count  your  money  any  more,  I  will  go  out  of  the 
room."     The  chink  of  the  gold  did  not  tempt  her  more  than  the 

*  She  IB  thus  described  in  a  ballad,  made  upon  the  quarrel  between  George  the  First 
and  the  Prince  of  Wales,  at  the  christening  recorded  at  p.  83,  when  the  Prince  and  all 
his  household  were  ordered  to  quit  St  James*s : — 

**  But  Bellenden  we  needs  must  praise, 
'    Who,  as  down  the  stairs  she  jumps, 
Sings  over  the  hiUs  and  far  awav, 
Vwpuang  doleful  dumpi.**— £. 


6B0R6E  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  03 

person  of  his  Royal  Highness.  In  fact,  her  heart  was  engaged  ;  and 
80  the  Prince,  finding  his  love  fruitless,  suspected.  He  was  even  so 
eenerous  as  to  promise  her,  that  if  she  would  discover  the  object  of 
^r  choice,  and  would  ensage  not  to  marry  without  his  privity,  he 
would  consent  to  the  match,  and  would  be  kind  to  her  husband.  She 
gave  him  the  promise  he  exacted,  but  without  acknowledging  the 
person ;  and  then,  lest  his  Highness  should  throw  any  obstacle  in  the 
way,  married,  without  his  knowledge,  Colonel  Campbell,  one  of  the 
grooms  of  his  bedchamber,  and  who  long  afterwards  succeeded  to 
the  title  of  Argyle  at  the  death  of  Duke  Archibald.*  The  Prince 
never  forgave  the  breach  of  her  word ;  and  whenever  she  went  to 
the  drawing-room,  as  from  her  husband's  situation  she  was  sometimes 
obliged  to  do,  though  trembling  at  what  she  knew  she  was  to  undergo, 
the  Prince  always  stepped  up  to  her,  and  whispered  some  very  harsh . 
reproach  in  her  ear.  Mrs.  Howard  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Miss 
Bellenden ;  had  been  the  confidante  of  the  Prince's  passion ;  and,  on 
Mrs.  Campbell's  eclipse,  succeeded  to  her  friend's  podt  of  favouritOi 
— but  not  to  her  resistance. 

From  the  steady  decorum  of  Mrs.  Howard,  I  should  conclude  that 
she  would  have  preferred  the  advantages  of  her  situation  to  the 
ostentatious  ^clat  of  it :  but  many  obstacles  stood  in  the  way  of  total 
concealment ;  nor  do  I  suppose  that  love  had  any  share  in  the  sacri- 
fice she  made  of  her  virtue.  She  had  felt  poverty,  and  was  far  from 
disliking  power.  Mr.  Howard  was  probably  as  little  agreeable  to  her 
as  he  proved  worthless.  The  King,  though  very  amorous,  was  cer- 
tainly more  attracted  bv  a  silly  idea  be  had  entertained  of  gallantry 
being  becoming,  than  by  a  love  of  variety ;  and  he  added  the  more 
^regious  folly  of  fancying  that  inconstancy  proved  he  was  not 
governed ;  but  so  awkwardlv  did  he  manage  that  artifice,  that  it  but 
demonstrated  more  clearlv  the  influence  of  the  Queen.  With  such  a 
disposition,  secrecy  would  by  no  means  have  answered  his  Majesty's 
views ;  yet  the  publicity  of  the  intrigue  was  especially  owing  to  Mr. 
Howard,  who,  far  from  ceding  his  wife  quietly,  went  one  night  into 
the  quadrangle  of  St  James's,  and  vociferously  demanded  her  to  be 
restored  to  him  before  the  guards  and  other  audience.  Being  thrust 
out,  he  sent  a  letter  to  her  by  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  reclaim- 
ing her,  and  the  Archbishop  by  his  instructions  consigned  the  summons 
to  the  Queen,  who  had  the  malicious  pleasure  of  delivering  the  letter 
to  her  rival.** 

*  Colonel  John  Campbell  racceeded  to  the  dukedom  m  1761 :  Mn.  CampbeU  died  in 
1736.  She  was  the  mother  of  the  fifth  Duke  of  Argyle  and  three  other  sons,  and  of 
Lftdy  Caroline,  who  married,  first,  the  Earl  of  Aylesbury,  and,  secondly,  Walpole's 
bosom  fi'iend.  Marshal  Conway. — E. 

*»  ••  The  letter  which  Walpole  alludes  to,"  says  Mr.  Croker,  **  is  in  existence.  It  is  not 
a  letter  fi'om  Mr.  Howard  to  his  lady,  but  firom  the  Archbishop  to  the  Princess;  and 
although  his  grace  urges  a  compliance  with  Mr.  Howard's  demand  of  the  restoration  of 
his  wife,  he  treats  it  not  as  a  matter  between  them,  but  as  an  attack  on  the  Princess  her. 
■elf,  whom  the  Ardibishop  considers  as  the  direct  protectress  of  Mrs.  Howard,  and  the 
immediate  cause  of  her  resistance.  So  that  in  this  letter  at  least  there  is  no  ground  for 
imputing  to  Mrs.  Howard  any  rivalry  with  the  Princess,  or  to  the  Princess  any  malicious 
jeafensy  of  Mrs.  Howard."    VoL  i.  p.  ziv.— £. 


94  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

Such  intemperate  proceedings  by  no  means  invited  the  new  mis- 
tress to  leave  the  asylum  of  St.  James's.  She  was  safe  while  under  the 
royal  roof:  even  after  the  rupture  between  the  King  and  Prince  (for 
the  affair  commenced  in  the  reign  of  the  first  George),  and  though 
the  Prince,  on  quitting  St.  James's,  resided  in  a  private  house,  it  was 
too  serious  an  enterprise  to  attempt  to  take  his  wife  by  force  out  of 
the  palace  of  the  Prince  of  Wales.  The  case  was  altered,  when,  on 
the  arrival  of  summer,  their  Royal  Highnesses  were  to  remove  to 
Richmond.  Being  only  woman  of  the  bedchamber,  etiquette  did  not 
allow  Mrs.  Howard  the  entree  of  the  coach  with  the  Princess.  She 
apprehended  that  Mr.  Howard  might  seize  her  on  the  road.  To 
baffle  such  an  attempt,  her  friends,  John,  Duke  of  Argyle,  and  his 
brother,  the  Earl  of  Islay,  called  for  her  in  the  coach  of  one  of  them 
by  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  day,  at  noon  of  which  the 
Prince  and  Princess  were  to  remove,  and  lodged  her  safely  in  their 
house  at  Richmond.  During  the  summer  a  negotiation  was  com- 
menced with  the  obstreperous  husband,  and  he  sold  his  own  noisy 
honour  and  the  possession  of  his  wife  for  a  pension  of  twelve  hundred 
a-year.** 

These  now  little-known  anecdotes  of  Mr.  Howard's  behaviour  I 
received  between  twenty  and  thirty  years  afterwards,  from  the  mouth 
of  Lady  Suffolk  herself.  She  had  left  the  court  about  the  year  1735, 
and  passed  her  summers  at  her  villa  of  Marble  Hill,  at  Twickenham, 
living  very  retired  both  there  and  in  London.  I  purchased  Straw- 
berry Hill  in  1747;  and  being  much  acquainted  with  the  houses  of 
Dorset,  Vere,  and  others  of  Lady  Suffolk's  intimates,  was  become 
known  to  her ;  though  she  and  my  father  had  been  at  the  head  of 
two  such  hostile  factions  at  court  Becoming  neighbours,  and  both, 
after  her  second  husband's  death,  living  single  and  alone,  our  ac- 

^  Mr.  Croker  asserts,  that  **  neither  in  Mrs.  Howard*8  correspondence  with  the  Kin^, 
nor  in  the  notes  of  her  conversation  with  the  Queen,  nor  in  any  of  her  most  confidenUu 
papers,  has  he  found  a  single  trace  of  the  feelinff  which  Walpole  so  confidently  imputes." 
Upon  this  assertion.  Sir  Walter  Scott,  in  a  review  of  the  Suffolk  Correspondence,  plea- 
santly remarks, — **  We  regret  that  the  editor's  researches  have  not  enabled  him  to  state, 
whether  it  is  true  that  the  restive  husband  sold  his  own  noisy  honour  and  the  possession 
.of  his  lady  jfbr  a  pension  of  twelve  hundred  a-year.  For  our  own  parts,  without  believing 
all  Walpole*s  details,  we  substantially  agree  in  his  opinion,  that  the  King^s  friendship 
was  by  no  means  Platonic  or  refined ;  but  that  the  Queen  and  Mrs.  Howard,  by  mutual 
ibrbearance,  good  sense,  and  decency,  contrived  to  diminish  the  scandal :  after  all,  the 
question  has  no  great  interest  for  the  present  generation,  since  scandal  is  only  valued 
when  fresh,  and  the  public  have  generally  enough  of  that  poignant  fare,  without  ripping 
up  the  fi'ailties  of  their  grandmothers.*'  Sir  Walter  sums  up  his  notice  of  the  inaccura. 
cies  occurring  in  these  Reminiscences,  with  the  following  just  and  considerate  reflec- 
tion :  ♦*  When  it  is  recollected  that  the  noble  owner  of  Strawberry  Hill  was  speaking  of 
very  remote  events,  which  he  reported  on  hearsay,  and  that  hearsay  of  old  standing,  such 
errors  are  scarcely  to  be  wondered  at,  particularly  when  they  are  found  to  correspond 
with  the  pirtialities  and  prejudices  of  the  narrator.  These,  strengthening  as  we  grow 
older,  gradually  pervert,  or  at  least  alter,  the  accuracy  of  our  recollections,  until  thej 
assimilate  them  to  our  feelings,  while, 

**  As  beams  of  warm  imagination  play. 
The  memory's  faint  traces  melt  away." 

See  Prose  Works,  vol.  ziz.  p.  901^— £. 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SEbOND.  95 

quaintance  turned  to  intimacy.  She  was  extremely  deaf/  and  con- 
sequently bad  more  satisfaction  in  narrating  than  in  listening ;  her 
memory  both  of  remote  and  of  the  most  recent  facts  was  correct 
beyond  belief.  I,  like  you,  was  indulgent  to,  and  fond  of  old  anec- 
dotes. Each  of  us  knew  different  parts  of  many  court  stories,  and 
each  was  eager  to  learn  what  either  could  relate  more ;  and  thus,  by 
comparing  notes,  we  sometimes  could  make  out  discoveries  of  a  third 
circumstance,**  before  unknown  to  both.  Those  evenings,  and  I  had 
many  of  them  in  autumnal  nights,  were  extremely  agreeable ;  and  if 
this  chain  of  minutife  proves  so  to  you,  you  owe  perhaps  to  those 
conversations  the  fidelitv  of  my  memory,  which  those  repetitions 
recalled  and  stamped  so  lastingly. 

In  this  narrative  will  it  be  unwelcome  to  you,  if  I  subjoin  a  faithful 
portrait  of  the  heroine  of  this  part  1  Lady  Sufiblk  was  of  a  just 
height,  well  made,  extremely  fair,  with  the  finest  light  brown  hair ; 
was  remarkably  genteel,  and  always  well  dressed  with  taste  and 
simplicity.  Those  were  her  personal  charms,  for  her  face  was  regular 
and  agreeable  rather  than  beautiful ;  and  those  charms  she  retained 
with  little  diminution  to  her  death  at  the  age  of  seventy-nine.^  Her 
mental  qualifications  were  by  no  means  shining ;  her  eyes  and  coun- 
tenance showed  her  character,  which  was  grave  and  mild.  Her  strict 
love  of  truth  and  her  accurate  memory  were  always  in  unison,  and 
made  her  too  circumstantial  on  trifles.  She  was  discreet  without 
being  reserved ;  and  having  no  bad  qualities,  and  being  constant  to 
her  connexions,  she  preserved  uncommon  respect  to  the  end  of  her 
life ;  and  from  tlie  propriety  and  decency  of  her  behaviour  was  always 
treated  as  if  her  virtue  had  never  been  questioned ;  her  friends  even 
affecting  to  suppose,  that  her  connexion  with  the  King  had  been  con- 
fined to  pure  friendship.  Unfortunately,  his  Majesty's  passions  were 
too  indelicate  to  have  been  confined  to  Platonic  love  for  a  woman 
who  was  deaf  ** — sentiments  he  had  expressed  in  a  letter  to  the  Queen, 

'  Pope  alludes  to  this  personal  defect  in  his  Lines  **  On  a  certain  Lady  at  Court:'* 

**  I  know  a  tbinsr  Uiat*s  most  uncommon ; 

(Envy  be  si^nt,  and  attend !) 
I  know  a  reasonable  woman. 

Handsome  and  witty,  yet  a  friend. 
Not  warpM  by  passion,  awed  by  rumour ; 

Not  grrave  through  pride,  or  gay  through  folly —  , 

An  equal  mixture  of  good  humour 

And  sensible,  soft  melancholy. 
« Has  she  no  faulte  then,*  (Envy  says,)  *  Sir  7* 

*  Yes,  she  has  one,  I  must  aver ; 
When  all  the  world  conspires  to  praise  her — 

Tlie  woman*s  dea^  and  does  not  hear.*  ** — E. 

^  The  same  thing  has  happened  to  me  by  books.  A  passage  lately  read  has  recalled 
Mine  other  formerly  perused ;  and  both  together  have  opened  to  me,  or  cleared  up  some 
third  fact,  which  neiuMr  separately  would  nave  expounded. 

«  Lady  Suffolk  died  in  July,  1767.— E. 

*  Lady  Suffolk  was  early  affected  with  deafness.  Cheselden,  the  surgeon,  then  in 
iavour  at  court,  persuaded  her  that  he  had  hopes  of  being  able  to  cure  deamess  by  some 
«yftrati<m  on  the  drum  of  the  ear,  and  offered  to  try  the  experiment  on  a  condemned  con- 
ni  then  in  Newgate,  who  was  deaf.    If  the  man  ooold  be  pardoned,  he  would  try  it ; 


06  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

who,  however  jealous  of  Lady  Suflfolk,  had  latterly  dreaded  the  King's 
contracting  a  new  attachment  to  a  younger  rival,  and  had  prevented 
Lady  Suffolk  from  leaving  the  court  as  early  as  she  had  wished  to 
do.  "  I  don't  know,"  said  his  Majesty,  "  why  you  will  not  let  rae 
part  with  an  old  deaf  woman,  of  whom  I  am  weary." 

Her  credit  had  always  been  extremely  limited  by  the  Queen's  supe- 
rior influence,  and  by  the  devotion  of  the  minister  to  her  Majesty, 
Except  a  barony,  a  red  riband,  and  a  good  place  for  her  brother, 
Lady  Suffolk  could  succeed  but  in  very  subordinate  recommendations. 
Her  own  acquisitions  were  so  moderate,  that,  besides  Marble  Hill, 
which  cost  the  King  ten  or  twelve  thousand  pounds,  her  complaisance 
had  not  been  too  dearly  purchased.  She  left  the  court  with  an  income 
8o  little  to  be  envied,  that,  though  an  economist  and  not  expensive, 
by  the  lapse  of  some  annuities  on  lives  not  so  prolonged  as  her  own, 
she  found  herself  straitened;  and,  besides  Marble  Hill,  did  not  at 
most  leave  twenty  thousand  pounds  to  her  family.  On  quitting  court, 
she  married  Mr.  George  Berkeley,  and  outlived  him.® 

No  established  mistress  of  a  sovereign  ever  enjoyed  less  of  the 
brilliancy  of  the  situation  than  Lady  Suffolk.  Watched  and  thwarted 
by  the  Queen,  disclaimed  by  the  minister,  she  owed  to  the  dignity  of 
her  own  behaviour,  and  to  the  contradiction  of  their  enemies,  the 
chief  respect  that  was  paid  to  her,  and  which  but  ill  compensated  for 
the  slavery  of  her  attendance,  and  the  mortifications  she  endured.  She 
was  elegant ;  her  lover  the  reverse,  and  most  unentertaining,  and 
void  of  confidence  in  her.  His  motions  too  were  measured  by  eti- 
quette and  the  clock.  He  visited  her  eveiy  evening  at  nine ;  but  with 
such  dull  punctuality,  that  he  freauently  walked  d)out  his  chamber 
for  ten  minutes  with  his  watch  in  his  hand,  if  the  stated  minute  was 
not  arrived. 

But  from  the  Queen  she  tasted  vet  more  positive  vexations.  Till 
she  became  Countess  of  Suffolk,  she  constantly  dressed  the  Queen's 
head,  who  delighted  in  subjecting  her  to  such  servile  offices, 
though  always  apologizing  to  her  good  Howard.  Often  her  Majesty 
Jiad  more  complete  triumph.  It  happened  more  than  once,  that  the 
King,  coming  into  the  room  while  the  Queen  was  dressing,  has 
snatched  off  the  handkerchief,  and,  turning  rudely  to  Mrs.  Howard, 
has  cried,  "Because  you  have  an  ugly  neck  yourself,  you  hide  the 
Queen's." 

It  is  certain  that  the  King  always  preferred  the  Queen's  person  to 
that  of  any  other  woman ;  nor  ever  described  his  idea  of  beauty,  but 
he  drew  the  picture  of  his  wife. 

Queen  Caroline  is  said  to  have  been  very  handsome  at  her  mar- 

and,  if  he  succeeded,  would  practise  the  same  cure  on  her  ladyship.  She  obtained  the 
man's  pardon,  who  was  cousin  to  Cheselden,  who  had  feigned  Uiat  pretended  disooretj 
to  save  his  relation — and  no  more  was  heard  of  the  experiment.  The  man  saved  his  ear 
too-— but  Cheselden  was  disfirraoed  at  court 

^  Lady  Suffolk  fbrmalhr  retired  from  court  in  1734,  and  in  the  following-  year  married 
the  Honourable  George  Berkeley,  youngest  son  of  the  second  Earl  of  Berkeley.  He  was 
Master  of  St  Catherine's,  in  the  Tower,  and  had  served  in  two  parliaments  as  member 
for  Dover.    He  died  in  174&— E. 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  97 

iriage,  soon  after  which  she  had  the  small-pox ;  but  was  little  marked 
by  it,  and  retained  a  most  pleasing  countenance.  It  was  full  of 
majesty  or  mildness  as  she  pleased,  and  her  penetrating  eyes  expressed 
whatever  she  had  a  mind  they  should.  Her  voice  too  was  captivating, 
and  her  hands  beautifully  small,  plump,  and  graceful.  Her  under- 
standing was  uncommonly  strong;  and  so  was  her  resolution.  From 
their  earliest  connexion  she  had  determined  to  govern  the  King,  and 
deserved  to  do  so ;  for  her  submission  to  his  will  was  unbounded,  her 
sense  much  superior,  and  his  honour  and  interest  always  took  place 
of  her  own :  so  that  her  love  of  power  that  was  predominant,  was 
dearly  bought*  and  rarely  ill  employed.  She  was  ambitious  too  of 
fame ;  but,  shackled  by  her  devotion  to  the  King,  she  seldom  could 

Eursue  that  object  She  wished  to  be  a  patroness  of  learned  men : 
ut  George  had  no  respect  for  them  or  their  works ;  and  her  Majesty's 
own  taste  was  not  very  exquisite,  nor  did  he  allow  her  time  to  cul- 
tivate any  studies.  Her  generosity  would  have  displayed  itself,  for 
she  valued  money  but  as  the  instrument  of  her  ^ood  purposes :  but 
he  stinted  her  alike  in  almost  all  her  passions ;  and  though  she  wished 
for  nothing  more  than  to  be  liberal,  she  bore  the  imputation  of  his 
avarice,  as  she  did  of  others  of  his  faults.  Often,  when  she  had  made 
prudent  and  proper  promises  of  preferment,  and  could  not  persuade 
the  King  to  comply,  she  suffered  the  breach  of  word  to  fall  on  her, 
rather  man  reflect  on  him.  Though  his  affection  and  confidence  in 
her  were  implicit,  he  lived  in  dread  of  bein^  supposed  to  be  governed 
by  her ;  and  that  silly  parade  was  extended  even  to  the  most  private 
moments  of  business  with  my  father.  Whenever  he  entered,  the 
Queen  rose,  courtesied,  and  retired  or  offered  to  retire.  Sometimes 
the  King  condescended  to  bid  her  stay*— on  both  occasions  she  and 
Sir  Robert  had  previously  settled  the  business  to  be  discussed.  Some- 
times the  King  would  quash  the  proposal  in  question,  and  yield  after 
retalking  it  over  with  her — ^but  then  he  boasted  to  Sir  Robert  that  he 
himself  had  better  considered  it 

One  of  the  Queen's  delights  was  the  improvement  of  the  garden  at 
Richmond ;  and  the  King  believed  she  paid  for  all  with  her  own 
money — nor  would  he  ever  look  at  her  intended  plans,  saying  he  did 
not  care  how  she  flung  away  her  own  revenue.  He  little  suspected 
the  aids  Sir  Robert  furnished  to  her  from  the  treasury*  When  she 
died,  she  was  indebted  twenty  thousand  pounds  to  the  nine. 

Her  learning  I  have  said  was  superficial ;  her  knowledge  of  lan^ 
guages  as  little  accurate.  The  King,  with  a  bluff  Westphalian  accent, 
spoke  English  correctly.  The  Queen's  chief  study  was  divinity,  and 
sne  had  rather  weakened  her  faith  than  enlightened  it  She  was  at 
least  not  orthodox ;  and  her  confidante,  Lady  Sundon,  an  absurd  and 
pompous  simpleton,  swayed  her  countenance  towards  the  less-believing 
clergy.  The  Queen,  however,  was  so  sincere  at  her  death,  that  when 
Archbishop  Potter  was  to  administer  the  sacrament  to  her,  she  de- 
clined taking  it,  yery  few  persons  being  in  the  room.  When  the 
prelate  retired,  the  courtiers  in  the  ante-room  crowded  round  him, 
crying,  "  My  lord,  has  the  Queen  received  ?"     His  grace  artfully 

VOL.  I.  9 


98  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

eluded  the  question,  only  saying  most  devoutly,  ''Her  Majesty  was 
in  a  heavenly  disposition" — and  the  truth  escaped  the  public. 

She  suffered  more  unjustly  by  declining  to  see  her  son,  the  Prince  of 
Wales,  to  whom  she  sent  her  blessing  and  forgiveness;  but  con- 
ceiving the  extreme  distress  it  would  lay  on  the  Kin^,  should  he 
thus  be  forced  to  forgive  so  impenitent  a  son,  or  to  banish  him  again 
if  once  recalled,  she  heroically  preferred  a  meritorious  husband  to  a 
worthless  child. 

The  Queen's  greatest  error  was  too  high  an  opinion  of  her  own 
address  and  art ;  she  imagined  that  all  who  did  not  dare  to  contradict 
her  were  imposed  upon;  and  she  had  the  additional  weakness  of 
thinking  that  she  could  play  off  many  persons  without  being  dis- 
covered. That  mistaken  humour,  and  at  other  times  her  hazarding 
very  offensive  truths,  made  her  many  enemies ;  and  her  duplicity  in 
fomenting  jealousies  between  the  ministers,  that  each  might  be  more 
dependent  on  herself,  was  no  sound  wisdom.  It  was  the  Queen  who 
blew  into  a  flame  the  ill-blood  between  Sir  Robert  Walpole  and  his 
brother-in-law,  Lord  Townshend.  Yet  though  she  disliked  some  of 
the  cabinet,  she  never  let  her  own  prejudices  disturb  the  King's 
affairs,  provided  the  obnoxious  paid  no  court  to  the  mistress.  Lord 
Islay  was  the  only  man,  who,  by  managing  Scotland  for  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  was  maintained  by  him  in  spite  of  his  attachment  to  Lady 
Suffolk. 

The  Queen's  great  secret  was  her  own  rupture,  which,  till  her  last 
illness,  nobody  knew  but  the  King,  her  German  nurse,  Mrs.  Mailborne, 
and  one  other  person.  To  prevent  all  suspicion,  her  Majesty  would 
frequently  stand  some  minutes  in  her  shift  talking  to  her  ladies  ;*  and 
though  labouring  with  so  dangerous  a  complaint,  she  made  it  so  inva- 
riable a  rule  never  to  refuse  a  desire  of  the  King,  that  every  morning 
at  Richmond  she  walked  several  miles  with  him ;  and  more  than  once, 
when  she  had  the  gout  in  her  foot,  she  dipped  her  whole  leg  in  cold 
water  to  be  ready  to  attend  him.  The  pain,  her  bulk,  and  the  exercise, 
threw  her  into  such  fits  of  perspiration  as  vented  the  gout;  but 
those  exertions  hastened  the  crisis  of  her  distemper.  It  was  great 
shrewdness  in  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who,  before  her  distemper  broke 
out,  discovered  her  secret.  On  my  mother's  death,  who  was  of  the 
Queen's  age,  her  Majesty  asked  Sir  Robert  many  physical  questions ; 
but  he  remarked  that  she  oAenest  reverted  to  a  rupture,  which  had 
not  been  the  illness  of  his  wife.  When  he  came  home,  he  said  to  me, 
**  Now,  Horace,  I  know  by  possession  of  what  secret  Lady  Sundon^ 

*  While  the  Queen  dressed,  prayers  used  to  he  read  in  the  outward  room,  where  hun^ 
a  naked  Venus.  Mrs.  Selwyn,  bedchamber-woman  in  waiting,  was  one  day  ordered  to 
bid  the  chaplain,  Dr.  Maddox,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Worcester,  begin  the  service.  He 
said  archly,  **  And  a  very  proper  altar-piece  is  here,  Madam  !**  Queen  Anne  had  the 
same  custom ;  and  once  ordering  the  door  to  be  shut  while  she  shifted,  the  chaplain 
stopped.  The  Queen  sent  to  ask  why  he  did  not  proceed.  He  replied,  **  he  would  not 
whisUe  the  word  of  God  through  the  keyhole.'* 

^  Mrs.  Clayton,  wife  of  Robert  Clayton,  Esq.  of  the  Treasury,  bedchamber-woman  to 
the  Queen.  This  lady,  who  had  the  art  to  procure  her  husband  to  be  created  Lord  Sun- 
don,  possessed  over  her  royal  mistress  an  influence  of  which  even  Sir  Robert  Walpole 
WIS  jealous. — £. 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  M 

has  preserved  such  an  ascendant  over  the  Queen."  He  was  in  the 
right  How  Lady  Sundon  had  wormed  herself  into  that  mystery 
was  never  known.  As  Sir  Robert  maintained  his  influence  over  the 
clergy  by  Gibson,  Bishop  of  London,  he  often  met  with  troublesome 
obstructions  from  Lady  Sundon,  who  espoused,  as  I  have  said,  the 
heterodox  clergy ;  and  Sir  Robert  could  never  shake  her  credit. 

Yet  the  Queen  was  constant  in  her  protection  of  Sir  Robert,  and 
the  day  before  she  died  gave  a  strong  mark  of  her  conviction  that  he 
was  the  firmest  supporter  the  King  had.  As  they  two  alone  were 
standing  by  the  Queen's  bed,  she  pathetically  recommended,  not  the 
minister  to  the  sovereign,  but  the  master  to  the  servant.  Sir  Robert 
was  alarmed,  and  feared  the  recommendation  would  leave  a  fatal 
impression  ;  but  a  short  time  after,  the  King  reading  with  Sir  Robert 
some  intercepted  letters  from  Germany,  which  said  that  now  the 
Queen  was  gone.  Sir  Robert  would  have  no  protection :  "  On  the 
contrary,"  said  the  King,  "  you  know  she  recommended  me  to  you." 
This  marked  the  notice  he  nad  taken  of  the  expression ;  and  it  was 
the  only  notice  he  ever  took  of  it :  nay,  his  Majesty's  grief  was  so 
excessive  and  so  sincere,  that  his  kindness  to  his  minister  seemed  to 
increase  for  the  Queen's  sake. 

The  Queen's  dread  of  a  rival  was  a  feminine  weakness ;  the  beha- 
viour of  her  elder  son  was  a  real  thorn.  He  early  displayed  his 
aversion  to  his  mother,  who  perhaps  assumed  too  much  at  first ;  yet 
it  is  certain  that  her  good  sense,  and  the  interest  of  her  family,  would 
have  prevented,  if  possible,  the  mutual  dislike  of  the  father  and  son, 
and  their  reciprocal  contempt.  As  the  Opposition  gave  into  all  adu- 
lation towards  the  Prince,  his  ill-poised  head  and  vanity  swallowed 
all  their  incense.  He  even  early  after  his  arrival  had  listened  to  a 
high  act  of  disobedience.  Money  he  soon  wanted :  old  Sarah,  Duchess 
of  Marlborough,*  ever  proud  and  ever  malignant,  was  persuaded  to 

*  That  woman,  who  had  riien  to  greatness  and  mdependent  wealth  by  the  weakness 
of  another  Qaeen,  f(Nrgrot,  like  Due  d*£pemon,  her  own  unmerited  exaltation,  and  affected 
to  brave  successive  courts,  though  sprung  from  the  dregs  of  one.  When  the  Prince  of 
Orange  came  over  to  marry  the  Princess  Royal,  Anne,  a  boarded  gallery  with  a  pent- 
house roof  was  erected  for  the  procession  from  the  windows  of  the  great  drawing-room 
at  St  James*s  cross  the  garden  to  the  Lutheran  chapel  in  the  friary.  The  Prince  being 
indisposed,  and  going  to  %ath,  the  marriage  was  deferred  for  some  weeks,  and  the  boarded 
gallery  remained,  darkening  the  windows  of  Marlborough  House.  The  Duchess  cried, 
"  I  wonder  when  my  neighbour  Greorge  will  take  away  his  orange-chest  !** — which  it  did 
resemble.  She  did  not  want  that  sort  of  wit,*  which  ill-temper,  long  knowledge  of  the 
world,  and  insolence  can  sharpen — and  envying  the  favour  which  she  no  longer  possessed. 
Sir  R.  Walpole  was  often  the  object  of  her  satire.  Yet  her  great  friend,  Lord  Godolphin, 
the  treasurer,  had  enjoined  her  to  preserve  very  different  sentiments.  The  Duchess  and 
my  father  and  mother  were  standing  by  the  £arl*s  bed  at  St  Albans  as  he  was  dying. 
Taking  Sir  Robert  by  the  hand,  Liord  Godolphin  turned  to  the  Duchess,  and  said, 
"  Madam,  should  you  ever  desert  this  yojimg  man,  and  there  should  be  a  possibility  of  re- 
tnming  fh>m  the  grave,  I  shall  certainly  appear  to  you."  Her  grace  did  not  believe  in 
spirits. 

*  Baron .  Gleicken,  minister  from  Denmark  to  France,  being  at  Paris  soon  afler  the 
King  his  master  had  been  there,  and  a  French  lady  being  so  iu-bred  as  to  begin  censur- 
ing the  King  to  him,  saying,  "  Ah !  Monsieur,  c'est  une  tdte !" — **  Couronn6e,"  replied 
he  instanUy,  stopping  her  by  so  gentle  a  hint 


100  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

offer  her  favourite  grand-daughter,  Lady  Diana  Spencer,  afterwards 
Duchess  of  Bedford,  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  with  a  fortune  of  a 
hundred  thousand  pounds.  He  accepted  the  proposal,  and  the  day 
was  fixed  for  their  being  secretly  married  at  the  Duchess's  lodge  in 
the  great  park  at  Windsor.  Sir  Rofbert  Walpole  got  intelligence  of 
the  project,  prevented  it,  and  the  secret  was  buried  in  silence. 

l^outh,  folly,  and  indiscretion,  the  beauty  of  the  young  lady,  and  a 
large  sum  of  ready  money,  might  have  offei*ed  something  like  a  plea 
for  so  rash  a  marriage,  had  it  taken  place;  but  what  could  excuse, 
what  indeed  could  provoke,  the  senseless  and  barbarous  insult  offered 
to  the  Kinff  and  Queen,  by  Frederick's  taking  his  wife  out  of  the 
palace  of  Hampton  Court  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  when  she  was 
in  actual  labour,  and  carrying  her,  at  the  imminent  risk  of  the  lives 
of  her  and  the  child,  to  the  unaired  palace  and  bed  at  St  James's  7 
Had  he  no  way  of  affronting  his  parents  but  by  venturing  to  kill  his 
wife  and  the  heir  of  the  crown  ?  A  baby  that  wounds  itself  to  vex 
its  nurse  is  no  more  void  of  reflection.  The  scene  which  commenced 
by  unfeeling  idiotism  closed  with  paUry  hypocrisy.  The  Queen  on 
the  first  notice  of  her  son's  exploits,  set  out  for  St.  James's  to  visit  the 
Princess  by  seven  in  the  mornmg.  The  gracious  Prince,  so  far  from 
attempting  an  apology,  spoke  not  a  word  to  his  mother ;  but  on  her 
retreat  gave  her  his  hand,  led  her  into  the  street  to  her  coach — still 
dumb ! — but  a  crowd  being  assembled  at  the  gate,  he  kneeled  down 
in  the  dirt,  and  humbly  kissed  her  Majesty's  hand.  Her  indignation 
must  have  shrunk  into  contempt 

After  the  death  of  the  Queen,  Lady  Yarmouth'  came  over,  who 
had  been  the  King's  mistress  at  Hanover  during  his  latter  joumevs — 
and  with  the  Queen's  privity,  for  he  always  made  her  the  confidante 
of  his  amours ;  which  made  Mrs.  Selwyn  once  tell  him,  he  should  be 
the  last  man  with  whom  she  would  have  an  intrigue,  for  she  knew  he 
would  tell  the  Queen.  In  his  letters  to  the  latter  from  Hanover,  he 
said,  "  You  must  love  the  Walmoden,  for  she  loves  iwc."  She  was 
created  a  countess,  and  had  much  weight  with  him  ;  but  never  em- 
ployed her  credit  but  to  assist  his  ministers,  or  to  convert  some  honours 
and  favours  to  her  own  advantage.  She  had  two  sons,  who  both  bore 
her  husband's  name ;  but  the  younger,  though  never  acknowledged, 
was  supposed  the  King's,  and  consequently  did  not  miss  additional 
homage  from  the  courtiers.  That  incense  being  one  of  the  xecom* 
mendations  to  the  countenance  of  Lady  Yarmouth,  drew  Lord  Ches- 
terfield into  a  ridiculous  distress.  On  his  being  made  secretary  of 
state,  he  found  a  fair  young  lad  in  the  ante-chamber  at  St  James's, 
who  seeming  much  at  home,  the  earl,  concluding  it  was  the  mistress's 
son,  was  profuse  of  attentions  to  the  boy,  and  more  prodigal  still  of 
his  prodigious  regard  for  his  mamma.  The  shrewd  boy  received  all 
his  lordship's  vows  with  indulgence,  and  without  betraying  himself: 
at  last  he  said,  "  I  suppose  your  lordship  takes  me  for  Master  Louis; 
but  I  am  only  Sir  William  Russel,  one  of  the  pages." 

'  Amelia  Sophia,  wife  of  the  Baron  de  Walmoden,  created  Countess  of  Yarmouth  in 
1739. 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  101 

The  King's  last  years  passed  as  regularly  as  clockwork.  At  nine 
at  night  he  had  cards  in  the  apartment  of  his  daughters,  the  Prin- 
cesses Amelia  and  Caroline,  with  Lady  Yarmouth,  two  or  three  of 
the  late  Queen's  ladies,  and  as  many  of  the  most  favoured  officers  of 
his  own  household.  Every  Saturday  in  summer  he  carried  that  uni- 
form party,  but  without  his  daughters,  to  dine  at  Richmond :  they 
went  in  coaches  and  six  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  with  the  heavy 
horse-guards  kicking  up  the  dust  before  them — dined,  walked  an  hour 
in  the  garden,  returned  in  the  same  dusty  parade ;  and  his  Majesty 
fancied  himself  the  most  gallant  and  lively  prince  in  Europe. 

His  last  year  was  glorious  and  triumphant  beyond  example ;  and 
his  death  was  most  felicitous  to  himself,  being  without  a  pang,  without 
tasting  a  reverse,  and  when  his  sight  and  hearing  were  so  nearly  ex- 
tinguished that  any  prolongation  could  but  have  swelled  to  calamities.* 


CHAPTER  Vni. 


George  the  Second's  Daaghters — Anne,  Princees  of  Orange — PrincesB  Amelia*— 
Princess  Caroline — Lord  Hervey — Duke  of  Cumberland. 

I  AM  tempted  to  drain  my  memory  of  all  its  rubbish,  and  will  set 
down  a  few  more  of  my  recollections,  but  with  less  method  than  I 
have  used  in  the  foregoing  pages. 

I  have  said  little  or  nothing  of  the  King's  two  unmarried  daughters. 
Though  they  lived  in  the  palace  with  him,  he  never  admitted  them  to 
any  share  in  his  politics ;  and  if  any  of  the  ministers  paid  them  the 
compliment  of  seeming  attachment,  it  was  more  for  the  air  than  for 
the  reality.  The  Princess  Royal,  Anne,  married  in  Holland,  was  of 
a  most  imperious  and  ambitious  nature ;  and  on  her  mother's  death, 
hoping  to  succeed  to  her  credit,  came  to  Holland  on  pretence  of  ill- 
health  ;  but  the  King,  aware  of  her  plan,  was  so  offended  that  he  sent 
her  to  Bath  as  soon  as  she  arrived,  and  as  peremptorily  back  to  Hol- 
land— I  think,  without  suffering  her  to  pass  two  nights  in  London. 

Princess  Amelia,  as  well  disposed  to  meddle,  was  confined  to  re- 
ceiving court  from  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  who  affected  to  be  in 
love  with  her ;  and  from  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  in  whose  connexion 
with  her  there  was  more  reality. 

Princess  .Caroline,  one  of  the  most  excellent  of  women,  was  devoted 
to  the  Queen,  who,  as  well  as  the  King,  had  such  confidence  in  her 
veracity,  that  on  any  disagreement  among  their  children,  they  said, 
"  Stay,  send  for  Caroline,  and  then  we  shall  know  the  truth." 

The  memorable  Lord  Hervey  had  dedicated  himself  to  the  Queen, 
and  certainly  towards  her  death  had  gained  great  ascendance  with 

*  For  an  interestinflr  account  of  the  death  of  George  the  Second,  on  the  24th  of  Octo. 
ber,  1760,  and  also  ot  his  funerd  in  Westminster  Abbey,  see  WalpoIe*8  letters  to  Mr. 
Bfontagu  on  the  25th  of  that  month,  and  of  the  13th  of  NoTember. — E. 

9» 


102  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

her.  She  had  made  him  privy-seal ;  and  as  he  took  care  to  keep  as 
well  with  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  no  man  stood  in  a  more  prosperous 
light.  But  Lord  Hervey,  who  handled  all  the  weapons  of  a  court,* 
had  also  made  a  deep  impression  on  the  heart  of  the  virtuous  Princess 
Caroline ;  and  as  there  was  a  mortal  antipathy  between  the  Duke  of 
Grafton  and  Lord  Hervey,  the  court  was  often  on  the  point  of  being 
disturbed  by  the  enmity  of  the  favourites  of  the  two  Princesses.  The 
death  of  the  Queen  deeply  affected  her  daughter  Caroline ;  and  the 
change  of  the  ministry  four  years  after,  dislodged  Lord  Hervey ; 
wtiom  for  the  Queen's  sake  the  King  would  have  saved,  and  who  very 
ungratefully  satirized  the  King  in  a  ballad,  as  if  he  had  sacrificed  him 
voluntarily.  Disappointment,  rage,  and  a  distempered  constitution 
carried  Lord  Hervey  off,  and  overwhelmed  his  Princess :  she  never 
appeared  in  public  after  the  Queen's  death;  and,  being  dreadfully 
afflicted  with  the  rheumatism,  never  stirred  out  of  her  apartment,  and 
rejoiced  at  her  own  dissolution  some  years  before  her  father. 

Her  sister  Amelia  leagued  herself  with  the  Bedford  faction  during 
the  latter  part  of  her  father's  life.  When  he  died,  she  established  her- 
self respectably;  but  enjoying  no  favour  with  her  nephew,  and  hating 
the  Princess-dowager,  she  made  a  plea  of  her  deafness,  and  soon 
totally  abstained  from  St  James's. 

The  Duke  of  Cumberland,  never,  or  very  rarely,  interfered  in 

E clitics.  Power  he  would  have  liked,  but  never  seemed  to  court  it 
is  passion  would  have  been  to  command  the  army,  and  he  would,  I 
doubt,  have  been  too  ready  to  aggrandize  the  crown  by  it :  but 
successive  disgusts  weaned  his  mind  from  all  pursuits,  and  the  gran- 
deur of  his  sense^  and  philosophy  made  him  indifferent  to  a  world 
that  had  disappointed  all  his  views.  The  unpopularity  which  the 
Scotch  and  Jacobites  spread  against  him  for  his  merit  in  suppressing 
the  rebellion,  his  brother's  jealousy,  and  the  cor^tempt  he  himself  felt 
for  the  Prince,  his  own  ill  success  in  his  battles  abroad,  and  his 
father's  treacherous  sacrifice  of  him  on  the  convention  of  Closter- 
seven,  the  dereliction  of  his  two  political  friends,  Lord  Holland  and 
Lord  Sandwich,  and  the  rebuffing  spite  of  the  Princess-dowager ;  all 
those  mortifications  centring  on  a  constitution  evidently  tending  to 
dissolution,  made  him  totally  neglect  himself,  and  ready  to  shake  off 
being,  as  an  encumbrance  not  worth  the  attention  of  a  superior  under- 
standing. 

From  the  time  the  Duke  first  appeared  on  the  stage  of  the  public, 

^  •  He  had  broken  with  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  on  havinfirshared  the  favonrs  of 
his  mistresB,  Miss  Vane,  one  of  the  Queen*s  maids  of  honour.  When  she  fell  in  labour 
at  St.  James*!,  and  was  delivered  of  a  son,  which  she  ascribed  to  the  Prince,  Lord  Henrey 
and  Lord  Haningion  each  told  Sir  Robert  Wdpole  that  he  beliered  himself  father  of  tin 
child. 
^  7*he  Duke,  in  his  very  childhood,  grave  a  mark  of  his  sense  and  firmness.    He  had 


— -  neaame  wnai  f— -  ine  niDie." — -  And  what  did  you  read  there  r' — "  About  Jesus 
and  Mary.'^— "And  what  about  them T"—** Why,  that  Jesus  said  to  Mary,  Woman! 
what  hast  thou  to  do  with  ms  V* 


OBORGE  TH£  FIRST  AND  flECX)ND.  103 

all  his  father's  ministers  had  been  blind  to  his  Royal  Highness's  capa- 
city, or  were  afraid  of  it  Lord  Granville,  too  giddy  himself  to  sound 
a  young  Prince,  had  treated  him  arrogantly  when  the  Kin^  and  the 
Earl  had  projected  a  match  for  him  with  the  Princess  of  Denmark. 
The  Duke,  accustomed  by  the  Queen  and  his  governor,  Mr.  Poyntz, 
to  venerate  the  wisdom  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  then  on  his  death-bed, 
sent  Mr.  Poyntz,  the  day  but  one  before  Sir  Robert  expired,  to  con- 
sult him  how  to  avoid  the  match.  Sir  Robert  advised  his  Royal 
Highness  to  stipulate  for  an  ample  settlement  The  Duke  took  the 
sa^  counsel,  and  heard  no  more  of  his  intended  bride. 

The  low  ambition  of  Lord  Hardwicke,  the  childish  passion  for 

f[)wer  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  and  the  peevish  jealousy  of  Mr. 
elham,  combined  on  the  death  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  to  exclude 
the  Duke  of  Cumberland  from  the  regency  (in  case  of  minority,)  and 
to  make  them  flatter  themselves  that  they  should  gain  the  favour  of 
the  Princess-dowager  by  cheating  her  with  the  semblance  of  power. 
The  Duke  resented  the  slight,  but  scorned  to  make  any  claim.  The 
Princess  never  forgave  the  insidious  homage;  and,  in  concurrence 
with  Lord  Bute,  totally  estranged  the  affection  of  the  young  King 
from  his  uncle,  nor  allowed  him  a  shadow  of  influence. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Anecdotes  of  Sarah,  DacheaB  of  Marlboroogh — aod  of  Catherine  Duchess  of 

Buckingham. 

I  HAVE  done  with  royal  personages:  shall  I  add  a  codicil  on 
some  remarkable  characters  that  I  remember  t  As  I  am  writing  for 
young  ladies,  I  have  chiefly  dwelt  on  heroines  of  your  own  sex ;  they, 
too,  shall  compose  my  last  chapter:  enter  the  Duchesses  of  Marl- 
borough and  Buckingham. 

Those  two  women  were  considerable  personages  in  their  day. 
The  first,  her  own  beauty,  the  superior  talents  of  her  husband  in  war, 
and  the  caprice  of  a  feeble  princess,  raised  to  the  highest  pitch  of 
power;  and ^ the  prodigious  weahh  bequeathed  to  her  by  her  lord, 
and  accumulated  in  concert  with  her,  gave  her  weight  in  a  free 
country.  The  other,  proud  of  royal,  though  illegitimate  birth,  was, 
from  the  vanity  of  that  birth,  so  zealously  attached  to  her  expelled 
brother,  the  Pretender,  that  she  never  ceased  labouring  to  effect  his 
restoration ;  and,  as  the  opposition  to  the  House  of  Brunswick  was 
composed  partly  of  principled  Jacobites — of  Tories,  who  either  knew 
not  what  their  own  principles  were,  or  dissembled  them  to  them- 
selves, and  of  Whigs,  who,  from  hatred  of  the  minister,  both  acted  in 
concert  with  the  Jacobites  and  rejoiced  in  their  assistance— two 


104  REMINtSCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

women  of  such  wealth,  rank,  and  enmity  to  the  court,  were  sure  of 
great  attention  from  all  the  discontented. 

The  beauty  of  the  Duchess  of  Marlborough  had  always  been  of  the 
scornful  and  imperious  kind,  and  her  features  and  air  announced 
nothing  that  her  temper  did  not  confirm ;  both  together,  her  beauty 
and  temper,  enslaved  her  heroic  lord.  One  of  her  principal  charms 
was  a  prodigious  abundance  of  fine  fair  hair.  One  day  at  her  toilet, 
in  anger  to  him,  she  cut  off  those  commanding  tresses,  and  flung  them 
in  his  face.  Nor  did  her  insolence  stop  there,  nor  stop  till  it  had 
totally  estranged  and  worn  out  the  patience  of  the  poor  Queen,  her 
mistress.  The  Duchess  was  often  seen  to  give  her  Majesty  her  fan 
and  gloves,  and  turn  away  her  own  head,  as  if  the  Queen  had  offen- 
sive smells. 

Incapable  of  due  respect  to  superiors,  it  was  no  wonder  she  treated 
her  children  and  inferiors  with  supercilious  contempt.  Her  eldest 
daughter^  and  she  were  long  at  variance,  and  never  reconciled. 
When  the  young  Duchess  exposed  herself  by  placing  a  monument 
and  silly  epitaph,  of  her  own  composition  and  bad  spelling,  to  Con- 
greve,  in  Westminster  Abbey,  her  mother,  quoting  the  words,  said, 
**  I  know  not  what  pleasure  she  might  have  in  his  company,  but  I  am 
sure  it  was  no  hononrJ*^  With  her  youngest  daughter,  the  Duchess 
of  Montagu,  old  Sarah  agreed  as  ill.  "  I  wonder,"  said  the  Duke  of 
Marlborough  to  them,  "  that  you  cannot  agree,  you  are  so  alike !" 
Of  her  grand-daughter,  the  Duchess  of  Manchester,  daughter  of  the 
Duchess  of  Montagu,  she  affected  to  be  fond.  One  day  she  said  to 
her,  "  Duchess  of  Manchester,  you  are  a  good  creature,  and  I  love 
you  mightily — but  you  have  a  mother !" — "  And  she  has  a  mother  !" 
answered  the  Duchess  of  Manchester,  who  was  all  spirit,  justice,  and 
honour,  and  could  not  suppress  sudden  truth. 

One  of  old  Marlborough's  capital  mortifications  sprung  from  a 

£  rand-daughter.   The  most  beautiful  of  her  four  charming  daughters, 
ady  Sunderland,''  left  two  sons,**  the  second  Duke  of  Marlborough, 
and  John  Spencer,  who  became  her  heir,  and  Anne  Lady  Bateman, 

*  The  Lady  Henrietta,  married  to  Lord  Godolphin,  who,  by  act  of  Parliament,  sac- 
oeeded  as  Dachess  of  Marlborough.  She  died  in  1738,  childless ;  and  the  issue  of  her 
next  sister,  Lady  Sunderland,  succeeded  to  the  duchy  of  Marlborough. — E. 

*>  **  For  reasons,**  says  Dr.  Johnson,  **  either  not  known,  or  not  mentioned,  Congreve 
bequeathed  a  legacy  of  about  ten  thousand  pounds  to  the  Duchess ;  the  accumulation  of 
attentive  parsimony,  which,  though  to  her  superfluous  and  useless,  mirht  have  given 
great  assistance  to  the  ancient  family  from  which  he  descended,  at  that  tune,  by  the  im- 
prudence of  his  relation,  reduced  to  difficulties  and  distress.** — E. 

^  Lady  Sunderland  was  a  great  politician ;  and  having,  like  her  mother,  a  most  beau* 
tiAil  head  of  hair,  used,  while  combmg  it  at  her  toilet,  to  receive  men  whose  votes  or  inte- 
rests she  wished  to  influence. 

^  She  had  an  elder  son,  who  died  young,  while  only  Earl  of  Sunderland.  He  had 
parts,  and  all  the  ambition  of  his  parents  and  of  his  family  (which  his  younger  brother 
had  not) ;  but  Greorge  II.  had  conceived  such  an  aversion  to  his  father,  that  he  would  not 
employ  him.  The  young  Earl  at  last  asked  Sir  Robert  Waluole  for  an  ensigncy  in  the 
Guards.  The  minister,  astonished  at  so  humble  a  request  from  a  man  of  sucn  conse- 
quence, expressed  his  surprise.  ^  I  ask  it,**  said  the  young  lord,  "  to  ascertain  whether  it 
is  determined  that  I  shall  never  have  any  thing.*'    He  died  soon  after  at  Paris. 


OEOROE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  10| 

and  Lady  Diana  Spencer,  whom  I  have  mentioned,  and  who  became 
Duchess  of  Bedfoni.  The  Duke  and  his  brother,  to  humour  their 
grandmother,  were  in  opposition,  though  the  eldest  she  never  loved. 
He  had  good  sense,  infinite  generosity,  and  not  moi*e  economy  than 
was  to  be  expected  from  a  young  man  of  warm  passions  and  such 
vast  expectations.  He  was  modest  and  diffident  too,  but  could  not 
digest  total  dependence  on  a  capricious  and  avaricious  grandmother. 
His  sister,  Lady  Bateman,  had  the  intriguing  spirit  of  her. father  and 
grandfather,  Earls  of  Sunderland.  She  was  connected  with  Henry 
Fox,  the  first  Lord  Holland,  and  both  had  great  influence  over  the 
Duke  of  Marlborough.  What  an  object  would  it  be  to  Fox  to  con- 
vert to  the  court  so  great  a  subject  as  the  Duke  I  Nor  was  it  much 
less  important  to  his  sister  to  give  him  a  wife,  who,  with  no  reasons 
for  expectation  of  such  shining  fortune,  should  owe  the  oUigation  to 
her.  Lady  Bateman  struck  the  first  stroke,  and  persuaded  her  brother 
to  marry  a  handsome  young  lady,  who,  unluckily,  was  daughter  of 
Lord  Trevor,  who  had  been  a  bitter  enemy  to  his  grandfamer,  the 
victorious  Duke.  The  grandam's  rage  exceeded  all  bounds.  Having 
a  portrait  of  Lady  Bateman,  she  blackened  the  face,  and  wrote  on  it, 
'*  Now  her  outside  is  as  black  as  her  inside.*'  The  Duke  she  turned 
out  of  the  little  lodge  in  Windsor  Park ;  and  then  pretending  that  the 
new  Duchess  and  her  female  cousins  (eight  Trevors)  had  stripped  the 
house  and  gardens,  she  had  a  puppet-show  made  with  waxeQ  figures^ 
representing  the  Trevors  tearing  up  the  shrubs,  and  the  Duchess 
carrying  off  the  chicken-coop  under  her  arm. 

Her  fury  did  but  increase  when  Mr.  Fox  prevailed  on  the  Duke  to 
go  over  to  the  court  With  her  coarse  intemperate  humour,  she 
said,  '*  that  was  the  Fox  that  had  stolen  her  goose."  Repeated 
injuries  at  last  drove  the  Duke  to  go  to  law  with  her.  Fearing  that 
even  no  lawyer  would  come  up  to  the  Billingsgate  with  which  she 
was  animated  herself,  she  appeared  in  the  court  of  justice,  and  with 
some  wit  and  infinite  abuse,  treated  the  laughing  public  with  the 
spectacle  of  a  woman  who  had  held  the  reigns  of  empire,  metamo]^- 
phosed  into  the  widow  Blackacre.  Her  grandson,  in  his  suit,  de- 
manded a  sword  set  with  diamonds,  given  to  his  grandsire  by  the 
Emperor.  **  I  retained  it,"  said  the  beldam,  "  lest  he  should  pick  out 
the  diamonds  and  pawn  thenx." 

I  will  repeat  but  one  more  instance  of  her  insolent  asperity,  which 

Soduced  an  admirable  reply  of  the  famous  Lady  Mary  Wortley 
ontague.  Lady  Sundon  had  received  a  pair  of  diamond  ear-rings 
as  a  bribe  for  procuring  a  considerable  post  in  Queen  Caroline's 
family  for  a  certain  peer ;  and,  decked  with  those  jewels,  paid  a  visit 
to  the  old  Duchess ;  who,  as  soon  as  she  was  gone,  said,  "  What  an 
impudent  creature,  to  come  hither  with  her  bribe  in  her  ear!" 
"  Madam,"  replied  Lady  Mary  Wortley,  who  was  present,  "  how 
should  people  know  where  wine  is  sold,  unless  a  bush  is  hung  out  ?" 
The  Duchess  of  Buckingham  was  as  much  elated  by  owing  her 
birth  to  James  II.'  as  the  Marlborough  was  by  the  favour  of  his 

*  By  Catherine  Sedley,  created  by  ha  royal  lorer  Counteai  of  Dorcbeater  for  lifk — 11 


106  REMINISCENCES  OF  THE  COURTS  OF 

daughter.  Lady  Dorchester,*  the  mother  of  the  former  endeavoured 
to  curb  that  pride,  and,  one  should  have  thought,  took  an  eflectual 
method,  though  one  few  mothers  would  have  practised  :  "  You  need 
not  be  so  vain,"  said  the  old  profligate,  "  for  you  are  not  the  King's 
daughter,  but  Colonel  Graham's."  Graham  w^s  a  fashionable  man 
of  those  days  and  noted  for  dry  humour.  His  legitimate  daughter, 
the  Countess  of  Berkshire,  was  extremely  like  to  the  Duchess  of 
Buckingham :  "  Well !  well !"  said  Graham,  "  kings  are  all  powerful, 
and  one  must  not  complain  ;  but  certainly  the  same  man  begot  those 
two  women."  To  discredit  the  wit  of  both  parents,  the  Duchess 
never  ceased  labouring  to  restore  the  House  of  Stuart,  and  to  mark 
her  filial  devotion  to  it.  Frequent  were  'her  journeys  to  the  Conti- 
nent for  that  purpose.  She  always  stopped  at  Paris,  visited  the 
church  where  lay  the  unburied  body  of  James,  and  wept  over  it  A 
poor  Benedictine  of  the  convent,  observing  her  filial  piety,  took 
notice  to  her  grace  that  the  velvet  pall  that  covered  the  coffin  was 
become  threadbare — and  so  it  remained. 

Finding  all  her  efibrts  fruitless,  and  perhaps  aware  that  her  plots 
were  not  undiscovered  by  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  who  was  remarkable 
for  his  intelligence,  she  made  an  artful  double,  and  resolved  to  try 
what  might  be  done  through  him  himself.  I  forget  how  she  con- 
tracted an  acquaintance  with  him :  I  do  remember  that  more  than 
once  he  received  letters  from  the  Pretender  himself,  which  probably 
were  transmitted  through  her.  Sir  Robert  always  carried  ihem  to 
George  11.  who  endorsed  and  returned  them.  That  negotiation  not 
succeeding,  the  Duchess  made  a  more  home  push.  Learning  his 
extreme  fondness  for  his  daughter,  (afterwards  Lady  Mary  Churchill,) 
she  sent  for  Sir  Robert,  and  asked  him  if  he  recollected  what  had  not 
been  thought  too  great  a  reward  to  Lord  Clarendon  for  restoring  the 
royal  family?  He  afiected  not  to  understand  her.  "Was  not  he 
allowed,"  urged  the  zealous  Duchess,  "  to  match  his  daughter  to  the 
Duke  of  York  ?"     Sir  Robert  smiled,  and  left  her. 

Sir  Robert  being  forced  from   court,  the  Duchess  thought   the 
moment^  favourable,  and  took  a  new  journey  to  Rome ;  but  con- 
scious of  the  danger  she  might  run  of  discovery,  she  made  over  her  ' 
estate  to  the  famous  Mr.  Pulteney  (afterwards  Earl  of  Bath),  and  left 
the  deed  in  his  custody.     What  was  her  astonishment,  when  on  her 

'  Ladj  Dorchester  is  well  Ipown  for  her  wit,  and  for  saying  that  she  wondered  for 
what  James  chose  his  mistresses :  **  We  are  none  of  us  handsome,**  said  she ;  **  and  if 
we  haye  wit,  he  has  not  enough  to  find  it  out**  But  I  do  not  know  whether  it  is  .as 
public,  that  her  style  was  gross  and  shameless.  Meeting  the  Duchess  of  Portsmouth  and 
Lady  Orkney,  the  favourite  of  King  William,  at  the  drawing-room  of  George  the  First, 
'^Gm!!**  said  she,  **who  would  have  thought  that  we  three  whores  should  have  met 
here?**  Having,  after  the  King*s  abdication,  married  Sir  David  Collyer,  by  whom 
she  had  two  sons,  she  said  to  them,  **  If  any  body  should  call  you  sons  of  a  whore,  you 
must  bear  it ;  for  you  are  so :  but  if  they  call  you  bastards,  fight  till  you  die ;  for  yoa 
are  an  honest  man*s  sons.**  Susan,  Lady  Bellasis,  another  of  King  James*s  mistresses, 
had  wit  too,  and  no  beauty.  Mrs.  Godfi^y  had  neither.  Grammont  has  recorded  why 
she  was  chosen. 

^  I  am  not  quite  certain  that,  writing  by  memory  at  the  distance  of  fifty  years,  I  place 
that  journey  exactly  at  the  right  period,  nor  whether  it  did  not  t^e  place  bdbre  Sir 
]Robert*8  falL    Nothing  materul  depends  on  the  precise  period. 


GEORGE  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND.  I07 

return  she  redemanded  the  instrument !— It  was  mislaid — he  could 
not  find  it — he  never  could  find  it !  The  Duchess  grew  clamorous. 
At  last  his  friend  Lord  Mansfield  told  him  plainly,  he  could  never 
show  his  face  unless  he  satisfied  the  Duchess.  Lord  Bath  did  then 
sign  a  release  to  her  of  her  estate.  The  transaction  was  recorded  in 
print  by  Sir  Charles  Hanbury  Williams,  in  a  pamphlet  that  had  great 
vogue,  called  a  Congratulatory  Letter,  with  many  other  anecdotes  of 
the  same  personage,  and  was  not  less  acute  than  Sir  Charles's  Odes 
on  the  same  hero.  The  Duchess  dying  not  long  after  Sir  Robert's 
entrance  into  the  House  of  Lords,  Lord  Oxford,  one  of  her  executors, 
told  him  there,  that  the  Duchess  had  struck  Lord  Bath  out  of  her  will, 
and  made  him.  Sir  Robert,  one  of  her  trustees  in  his  room.  **  Then," 
said  Sir  Robert,  laughing,  '*  I  see,  my  lord,  that  I  have  got  Lord 
Bath's  place  before  he  has  got  mine."  Sir  Robert  had  artfully  pre- 
vented the  last  Before  he  quitted  the  King,  he  persuaded  his  Majesty 
to  insist,  as  a  preliminary  to  the  change,  that  Mr.  Pulteney  should  go 
into  the  House  of  Peers,  his  great  credit  lying  in  the  other  house ; 
and  I  remember  my  Father's  action  when  he  returned  from  court  and 
told  me  what  he  had  done — "  I  have  turned  the  key  of  the  closet  on 
him," — making  that  motion  with  his  hand.  Pulteney  had  jumped  at 
the  proffered  earldom,  but  saw  his  error  when  too  late ;  and  was  so 
enraged  at  his  own  oversight,  that,  when  he  went  to  take  the  oaths  in 
the  House  of  Lords,  he  dashed  his  patent  on  the  floor,  and  vowed  he 
would  never  take  it  up— but  he  had  kissed  the  Kind's  hand  for  it,  and 
it  was  too  late  to  recede. 

But  though  Miadam  of  Buckingham  could  not  effect  a  coronation 
to  her  will,  she  indulged  her  pompous  mind  with  such  puppet-shows 
as  were  appropriate  to  her  rank.  She  had  made  a  funeral  for  her 
husband  as  splendid  as  that  of  the  creat  Marlborough :  she  renewed 
that  pageant  for  her  only  son,  a  weak  lad,  who  died  under  age ;  and  for 
herself;  and  prepared  and  decorated  waxen  dolls  of  him  and  of  herself 
to  be  exhibited  in  glass-cases  in  Westminster  Abbey.    It  was  for  the 

trocession  at  her  son's  burial  that  she  wrote  to  old  Sarah  of  Marl- 
orough  to  borrow  the  triumphal  car  that  had  transported  the  corpse 
of  the  Duke.  "  It  carried  my  Lord  Marlborough,"  replied  the  other, 
"  and  shall  never  be  used  for  any  body  else."  "  I  have  consulted  the 
undertaker,"  replied  the  Buckingham,  "  and  he  tells  me  I  may  have  a 
finer  for  twenty  pounds." 

One  of  the  last  acts  of  Buckingham's  life  was  marrying  a  grand- 
son she  had  to  a  daughter  of  Lord  Hervey.  That  intriguing  man, 
sore,  as  I  have  said,  at  his  disgrace,  cast  his  eyes  every  where  to 
revenge  or  exalt  himself.  Professions  or  recantations  of  any  principles 
cost  him  nothing :  at  least  the  consecrated  day  which  was  appointed 
for  his  first  interview  with  the  Duchess  made  it  presumed,  that  to 
obtain  her  wealth,  with  her  grandson  for  his  daughter,  he  must  have 
sworn  fealty  to  the  House  of  Stuart,  It  was  on  the  martyrdom  of 
her  grandfather:  she  received  him  in  the  great  drawing-room  of 
Buckingham  House,  seated  in  a  chair  of  state,  in  deep  mourning, 
attended  by  her  women  in  like  weeds,  in  memor}^  of  the  royal  martyr. 


108  REMINISCENCES^  ETa 

It  will  be  a  proper  close  to  the  history  of  those  curious  ladies  to 
mention  the  anecdote  of  Pope  relative  to  them.  Having  drawn  his 
famous  character  of  Atossa,  he  communicated  it  to  each  Duchess, 
pretending  it  was  levelled  at  the  other.  The  Buckingham  believed 
him:  the  Marlborough  had  more  sense,  and  knew  herself,  and 
gave  him  a  thousand  pounds  to  suppress  it ; — and  yet  he  left  the 
copy  behind  him  1* 

Bishop  Burnet,  from  absence  of  mind,  had  drawn  as  strong  a  picture 
of  herself  to  the  Duchess  of  Marlborough,  as  Pope  did  under  covert 
of  another  lady.  Dining  with  the  Duchess  after  tne  Duke's  disgrace, 
Burnet  was  comparing  him  to  Belisarius:  ''But  how,"  said  she, 
**  could  so  great  a  general  be  so  abandoned  ?"  ''  Oh !  Madam,"  said 
the  Bishop,  "  do  not  you  know  what  a  brimstone  of  a  wife  he  had  ?" 

Perhaps  you  know  this  anecdote,  and  perhaps  several  others  that  I 
have  been  relating.  No  matter;  they  will  go  under  the  article  of 
my  dotage — and  very  properly — I  began  with  tales  of  my  nursery, 
and  prove  that  I  have  been  writing  in  my  second  childhood. 

H.  W. 

Januaet  13th,  1789. 

*  The  story  is  thus  told  by  Dr.  Warton: — ^"  These  lines  were  shown  to  her  grace,  as 
if  they  were  intended  for  the  portrait  of  the  Dachess  of  Buckingham ;  but  she  soon 
•topped  the  person  who  was  readmg  them  to  her,  as  the  Duchess  o£  Portland  inftrmed 
me,  and  called  out  aloud,  *I  cannot  be  so  imposed  upon ;  I  see  plainly  enough  fyr  whom 
they  are  designed  ;*  and  abused  Pope  most  plentifully  on  the  subject :  though  she  was 
afterwards  reconciled  to  him,  and  courted  him,  and  gave  him  a  thousand  pounds  to  si^i. 
press  this  portrait,  which  he  accepted,  it  is  said,  by  the  persuasion  of  Mrs.  M.  Blount ; 
and,  after  the  Ducbess*s  death,  it  was  printed  in  a  folio  sheet,  1746,  and  aAerwards  in- 
■erted  in  his  Moral  Essays.  This  is  the  greatest  blemish  on  our  poet*8  mcunal  charac- 
ter."—R 


Thi  following  extracts  from  Letters  of  Sarah,  Dachess  of  Marlborough,  were 
copied  by  me  from  the  original  letters  addressed  to  the  Earl  of  Stair,  left  by  him 
to  Sir  David  Dalrymple,  his  near  relation,  and  lent  to  me  by  Sir  David*s  brother, 
Mr.  Alexander  Dalrymple,  long  employed  as  Geographer  in  the  service  of  the  East 
India  Company.  They  formed  part  of  a  large  volume  of  MS.  lettera,  chiefly  from 
the  same  person. 

The  Duchess  of  Marlborough's  virulence,  her  prejudices,  her  style  of  writing, 
are  already  well  known ;  and  every  line  of  these  extracts  will  only  serve  to  con- 
firm the  same  opinion  of  all  three.  But  it  will,  probably,  be  thought  curious  thus 
to  be  able  to  compare  the  notes  of  the  opposite  political  parties,  and  their  diflferent 
account  of  the  same  trifling  facts,  magnified  by  the  prejudices  of  both  into  a&irs  of 
importance. 

MB. 

Janoaiy  1840. 
