Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


iiiiiniiiii 

600095448- 


V 


THB 

ECCLESIASTICAL    POLITY 


^       AND  OIHER 


WORKS 


OF 


RICHARD    HOOKER: 


WITH 


HIS   LIFE   BY   IZAAK    WALTON, 


AND    STRYPB*S    INTERPOLATIONS  : 


TO  WHICH  ARE  NOW  FIRST  ADDED, 

THE  "CHRISTIAN  LETTER"  TO  MR.  HOOKER; 

AND 

DR  COVEL'S  "  JUST  &  TEMPERATE  DEFENCE  "  IN  REPLY  TO  IT ; 

ACCOMPANIED  BY 

AN  INTRODUCTION, 
A  LIFE  OF  THOMAS  CARTWRIGHT,  B.  D. 

AND 

NUMEROUS  NOTES, 

BY    BENJAMIN    HANBURY. 


IN  THREE  VOLUMES. 

VOL.  m. 


LONDON : 

HOLDSWORTH    AND    BALL, 

18,  ST.  Paul's  church -yard. 

MDCCCXXX. 


CONTENTS  TO  VOL.  III. 


Ecclesiastical  Polity: —  page 

Book  VI. — Containing  their  Fifth  Assertion,  That  our  Laws  are  corrupt 
and  repugnant  to  the  Laws  of  God,  in  matter  belonging 
to  the  power  of  Ecclesiastical  Jurisdiction,  in  that  we 
have  not  throughout  all  Churches  certain  Lay-elders  esta- 
blished for  the  exercise  of  that  power 1 

VII. — ^Their  Sixth  Assertion,  That  there  ought  not  to  be  in  the 
Church,  Bishops  indued  with  such  authority  and  honour 
as  ours  are 87 

VIII. — Containing  their  Seventh  Assertion,  That  to  no  Civil  Prince 
or  Governor  there  may  be  given  such  Power  of  Ecclesi- 
astical Dominion,  as  by  the  Laws  of  this  Land  belongeth 
unto  the  Supreme  Regent  thereof 251 

Tracts  and  Seemons:  — 

I. — ^A  Supplication  to  the  Privy  Council,  by  Walter  Traverb.  . . ,  335 

II. — Hooker's  Answer  to  that  Supplication 353 

III.<~A  Learned  Discourse  of  Justification,  Works,  and  How  the 

Foundation  of  Faith  is  overthrown 377 

IV. — A  Learned  Sermon  of  the  Nature  of  Pride    428 

y. — ^A  Remedy  against  Sorrow  and  Fear:  deh'vered  in  a  Funeral 

Sermon  440 

VI.—- Of  the  Certainty  and  Perpetuity  of  Faith  in  the  Elect:  especially 

the  Prophet  Habakkuk's  Faith 450 

YIL— Two  Sermons  on  part  of  St  Jude's  Epistle    462 

VIIL— A  Sermon  on  Matt,  vii  7J  8 501 

Index ^.,..  ••«•:•/ •••  513 


OF 


THE    LAWS 


OP 


ECCLESIASTICAL    POLITY. 


BOOK  VI. 

CONTAINING  THEIR  FIFTH  ASSERTION,  THAT  OUR  LAWS  ARE  CORRUPT 
AND  REPUGNANT  TO  THE  LAWS  OF  GOD,  IN  MATTER  BELONGING  TO 
THE  POWER  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  JURISDICTION,  IN  THAT  WE  HAVE 
NOT  THROUGHOUT  ALL  CHURCHES  CERTAIN  LAY-ELDERS  ESTA- 
BLISHED  FOR   THE    EXERCISE    OF    THAT    POWER. 


THE  MATTER  CONTAINED  IN  THIS  SIXTH  BOOK. 

1.  The  Question  between  us,  Whether  all  Congregations  or  Parishes  ought  to  have 

Lay-elders  invested  with  Power  of  Jurisdiction  in  Spiritual  Causes  ? 

2.  The  nature  of  Spiritual  Jurisdiction. 

3.  Of  Penitency,  the  chiefest  end  propounded  by  Spiritual  Jurisdiction.     Two  kinds 

of  Penitency ;  the  one  a  private  duty  toward  God,  the  other  a  duty  of  external 
discipline.  Of  the  Virtue  of  Repentance,  from  which  the  former  duty  pro- 
ceedeth ;  and  of  Contrition,  the  first  part  of  that  duty. 

4.  Of  the  Discipline  of  Repentance  instituted  by  Christ,  practised  by  the  Fathers, 

converted  by  the  Schoolmen  into  a  Sacrament ;  and  of  Confession,  that  which 
belongeth  to  the  Virtue  of  Repentance,  that  which  was  used  among  the  Jews, 
that  which  Papacy  imagineth  a  Sacrament,  and  that  which  ancient  Discipline 
practised. 

5.  Of  Satisfaction. 

6.  Of  Absolution  of  Penitents. 


1.  The. same  men  which  in  heat  of  contention  do  hardly  x^^ 
either  spealf  or  pve  ear  to  reason,  being  after  sharp  and  gJJJj^ 
bitter  conflicts  retired  to  a  calm  remembrance  of  all  their  thiJ^u** 
former   proceedings ;   the   causes  that   brought  them  into  ^*{JJJJ" 
quarrel,    the   course  which  their  striving  affections  have  ^^^ 
followed,  and  the  issue  whereunto  they  are  come,  may  per-  JJ|^*^^ 
adventure,  as  troubled  waters,  in  small  time,  of  their  own  Lay-fi- 

Q6rS  lU' 

accord,  by  certain  easy  degrees  settle  themselves  again,  and  ^^^^ 
so  recover  that  clearness  of  well-advised  judgment  whereby  Power 

''of  Juris- 
VOL.  III.  B 


2  THE   SIXTH   BOOK  [Sect.   1 

diction   they  shall  stand  at  the  length  indifferent  both  to  yield  and 

ritnai     admit  any  reasonable  satisfaction^  where  before  they  could 

not  endure  with  patience  to  be  gainsaid.     Neither  will  I 

despair  of  the  like  success  in  these  unpleasant  controversies 

touching  Ecclesiastical  Polity ;  the  time  of  silence^  which  both 

parts  have  willingly  taken  to  breathe^  seeming  now  as  it  were 

a  pledge  of  all  men*s  quiet  contentment  to  hear  with  more 

indifferency  the  weightiest  and  last  remains  of  that  Cause^ — 

Lib.vi.  Jurisdiction,  Dignity,  Dominion  Ecclesiastical.  For,  let  [not] 

*  any  man  imagine,  that  the  bare  and  naked  difference  of  a 

few  Ceremonies  could  either  have  kindled  so  much  fire,  or 

have  caused  it  to  flame  so  long ;  but  that  the  parties  which 

herein  laboured  mightily  for  change,  and  (as  they  say)  for 

Reformation,  had  somewhat  more  than  this  mark  whereat 

to  aim. 

Having  therefore  drawn  out  a  complete  Form,  as  they 
suppose,  of  public  Service  to  be  done  to  God,  and  set  down 
their  plot  for  the  Office  of  the  Ministry  in  that  behalf,  they 
very  well  knew  how  little  their  labours  so  far  forth  bestowed 
would  avail  them  in  the  end,  without  a  claim  of  Jurisdiction 
to  uphold  the  fabric  which  they  had  erected ;  and  this  neither 
likely  to  be  obtained  but  by  the  strong  hand  of  the  People, 
nor  the  people  unlikely  to  favour  it ;  the  more,  if  overture 
were  made  of  their  own  interest,  right,  and  title  thereunto. 
Whereupon  there  are  many  which  have  conjectured  this  to 
be  the  cause,  why  in  all  the  projects  of  their  Discipline  (it 
being  manifest  that  their  drift  is  to  wrest  the  Key  of  Spiritual 
Authority  out  of  the  hands  of  former  Governors,  and  equally 
to  possess  therewith  the  Pastors  of  all  several  Congregations) 
the  People,  first  for  surer  accomplishment,  and  then  for 
better  defence  thereof,  are  pretended  necessary  Actors  in 
those  things,  whereunto  their  ability  for  the  most  part  is  as 
slender  as  their  title  and  challenge  unjust.  Notwithstanding 
(whether  they  saw  it  necessary  for  them  to  persuade  the 
People,  without  whose  help  they  could  do  nothing,  or  else, 
which  I  rather  think,  the  affection  which  they  bear  towards 
this  new  Form  of  Government  made  them  to  imagine  it 
God*s  own  Ordinance),  their  doctrine  is.  That,  by  the  Law 
of  God,  there  must  be  for  ever  in  all  Congregations  certain 
Lay-elders,  ministers  of  Ecclesiastical  Jurisdiction,  inasmuch 
as  our  Lord  and  Saviour  by  testament  (for  so  they  presume) 
hath  left  all  Ministers  or  Pastors  in  the  Church  executors 


Sect.  2.]  OP    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  3 

equally  to  the  whole  Power  of  Spiritual  Jurisdiction ,  and 
with  them  hath  joined  the  People  as  colleagues.  By  main* 
tenance  of  which  assertion  there  is  unto  that  part  apparently 
gained  a  twofold  advantage^  both  because  the  People  in  this 
respect  are  much  more  easily  drawn  to  favour  it,  as  a  matter 
of  their  own  interest ;  and  for  that,  if  they  chance  to  be 
crossed  by  such  as  oppose  against  them,  the  colour  of  Divine 
Authority,  assumed  for  the  grace  and  countenance  of  that 
Power  in  the  Vulgar  sort,  furnisheth  their  leaders  with  great 
abundance  of  matter  behoveful  for  their  encouragement  to 
proceed  always  with  hope  of  fortunate  success  in  the  end, 
considering  their  cause  to  be  as  David's  was,  a  just  defence 
of  power  given  them  from  above,  and  consequently,  their 
adversaries'  quarrel  the  same  with  SauFs,  by  whom  the 
Ordinance  of  God  was  withstood.  Now,  on  the  contrary 
side,  if  this  their  surmise  proves  false ;  if  such,  as  in  justi- 
fication whereof  no  evidence  suffiicient  either  hath  been  or  can 
be  alleged  (as  I  hope  it  shall  clea  rly  appear  after  due  exami- 
nation and  trial),  let  them  then  consider  whether  those  words 
of  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  against  Moses  and  against  Nomb. 
Aaron,  ''  It  is  too  much  that  ye  take  upon  you,  seeing  all 
the  Congregation  is  holy,*'  be  not  the  very  true  abstract  and 
abridgment  of  all  their  published  Admonitions,  Demonstra- 
tions, Supplications,  and  Treatises  whatsoever,  whereby  they 
have  laboured  to  void  the  rooms  of  their  Spiritual  superiors 
before  authorized,  and  to  advantce  the  new  fancied  sceptre 
of  Lay-presbyterial  Power.* 

S.  But  before  there  can  be  any  settled  determination,  The  im. 
whether  Truth  do  rest  on  their  part  or  on  ours,  touching  spfru 
Lay-elders,  we  are  to  prepare  the  way  thereunto  by  expli-  SldiJ*^ 
cation  of  some  things  requisite    and  very  needful  to   be  ****"' 
considered ;    as,  first,  how  besides  that  Spiritual  Power 

*  ["  I  know  that  in  the  primitive  Church  they  had,  in  every  Church,  certain  Seniors  to 
whom  the  Government  of  the  Congregation  wcis  committed ;  but  that  was  before  there  was 
any  Christian  Prince  or  Magistrate  that  openly  professed  the  Gospel,  and  before  there  was 
any  Church  by  public  Authority  established,  ox  under  Civil  Government.  Both  the  names 
and  Offices  of  Seniors  were  extinguished  before  Ambrose'  time,  as  he  himself  doth  testify 
writing  upon  the  fifth  of  the  First  to  Timothy."  Whitoift,  Ans,  to  the  J  dm,  p.  114. 
"  That  which  I  have  said  of  the  being  of  Senion)  in  every  Church  I  say  still;  neither  is  that 
the  question,  for  I  ask  the  question  of  your  Seniors,  not  of  Ministers  (whom  I  call  Seniors)  { 
neither  did  I  mean  that  in  every  particular  Parish  there  was  such  a  Seigniory,  but  in  every 
chief  City ;  nor  that  it  was  at  all  times,  in  persecution  and  where  there  was  no  Christian 
Magistrate,  but  sometimes;  neither  that  this  kind  of  Government  must  be  in  such  times,  bat 
that  it  may  be.  And  therefore  you  (T.  C.)  had  done  well,  if  you  had  not  been  so  sparing  of 
your  proo6,  fi>r  all  my  grant"  Whitgift,  Drf,  irfthe  Ans,  p.  633.  Compare  this  Note 
with  that  in  Vol.  I.  p.  33,  and  with  Hooker's  text  i^nnected  with  it] 

b2 


4  THE   SIXTH    BOOK  \SecU  2. 

which  is  of  Order,  and  was  instituted  for  performance  of 

those  duties  whereof  there  hath  been  speech  already  had, 

there  is  in  the  Church  no  less  necessary  a  second  kind, 

which   we  call  the   Power  of  Jurisdiction.*     When  the 

Acts      Apostle  doth  speak  of  ruling  the  Church  of  God,  and  of 

iTim.'   receiving  accusations,  his  words  have  evident  reference  to 

^*  ^^'    the  Power  of  Jurisdiction :    our  Saviour's  words,   to  the 

Mark     Power  of  Order,  when  he   giveth   his  Disciples  charge, 

mtu^'  saying,  "  Preach ;  baptize ;  do  this  in  remembrance  of  me." 

xjviii.    (t  ^  Bishop  (saith  Ignatius)  doth  bear  the  image  of  God  and 

lif  ai    of  Christ ;  of  God  in  ruHng,  of  Christ  in  administering  holy 

things  :"t  By  this  therefore  we  see  a  manifest  difference 

acknowledged  between  the  Power  of  Ecclesiastical  Order, 

and  the  Power  of  Jurisdiction  Ecclesiastical. 

The  Spiritual  Power  of  the  Church  being  such  as  neither 
can  be  challenged  by  right  of  nature,  nor  could  by  human 
authority  be  instituted,  because  the  forces  and  effects  thereof 
are  supernatural  and  divine,  we  are  to  make  no  doubt  or 
question  but  that  from  him  which  is  the  Head  it  hath  de- 
scended unto  us  that  are  the  Body  now  invested  therewith. 
He  gave  it  for  the  benefit  and  good  of  souls,  as  a  mean  to  keep 
them  in  the  path  which  leadeth  unto  endless  felicity,  a  bridle 
to  hold  them  within  their  due  and  convenient  bounds,  and, 
if  they  do  go  astray,  a  forcible  help  to  reclaim  them.  Now 
although  there  be  no  kind  of  Spiritual  Power,  for  which  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  did  not  give  both  commission  to  exercise, 
and  direction  how  to  use  the  same;  although  his  Laws  in 


•  ["  If  the  Rulers  of  the  Church,  the  greatest  of  them,  have  only  a  Ministerial  Power 
committed  unto  them,  and  are  precisely  limited  thereto  (Luke  xxii.  25,  Matt.  xx.  26 — 28); 
if  in  the  exercise  thereof  they  are  servants  of  the  Church  unto  its  edification,  (Rom.  xv.  1 — 3, 
2  Cor.  X.  8,  xiii.  10,  Ephes.  iv.  12,  18) ;  if  all  lordly  domination  in  an  exaltation  above  the 
Church,  or  the  Members  of  it,  in  dignity  and  authority  of  this  world,  and  the  exercise  of 
Power  by  external  coercive  Jurisdiction,  be  forbidden  unto  them ;  if  the  whole  Power  and 
Rule  of  the  Church  be  Spiritual  and  not  Carnal,  *  mighty  through  God,'  2  Cor.  x.  4,  and  not 
through  the  Laws  of  men ;  and  to  be  exercised  by  spiritual  means  for  spiritual  ends  only ;  it 
is  apparent  how  it  hath  been  lost  in,  or  cast  out  of  the  world,  for  the  introduction  of  a  lordly 
domination,  a  secular  coercive  Jurisdiction,  with  Laws  and  Powers  no  way  derived  from  Christ 
in  the  room  thereof.  Neither  is  it  possible  for  any  man  alive  to  reconcile  the  present  govern- 
ment of  some  Churches,  either  as  unto  the  Officers  who  have  the  administration  of  that  Rule, 
fa  the  Bules  and  Laws  whereby  they  act  and  proceed,  or  Powers  which  they  exercise,  or  the 
Jurisdiction  which  they  claim,  or  the  manner  of  their  proceeding  in  its  administration,  unto  any 
tolerable  consistency  with  the  Principles,  Rules  and  Laws  of  the  government  of  the  Church, 
given  by  Christ  himself.  And  this  alone  is  a  sufficient  reason  why  those  who  endeavour  to 
preserve  their,  loyalty  entire  unto  Jesus  Christ,  should  in  their  own  practice  seek  after  the 
reduction  of  the  Rule  of  the  Church  unto  his  commands  and  appointments."  The  True 
Nature  of  a  Gospel  Church  and  its  Government.  By  John  Owen,  D.  D.  1688.  Posthu.  4to. 
p.  31.] 

t  Tl/JM  itjkv  rhv  9cby,  &s  tUriov  rav  tiXxav  Koi  K^tpioV    *EirloKoiroif  Si,  &s  &ffX^^P^^  ^ov 
€hc6va  lipoma,  Ko^ra  yukv  rh  &px^"^f  Stovf  Kor^  Bk  rh  UpcfTtitiv,  Xpurrov.    Epist.  ad  Smym. 


Sect.  3.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL    POLITY.  6 

that  behalf^  recorded  by  the  holy  Evangelists,  be  the  only 
ground  and  foundation  whereupon  the  practice  of  the  Church 
must  sustain  itself;  yet,  as  all  multitudes,  once  grown  to 
the  form  of  societies,  are  even  thereby  naturally  warranted 
to  enforce  upon  their  own  subjects  particularly  those  things 
which  public  wisdom  shall  judge  expedient  for  the  common 
good;  so  it  were  absurd  to  imagine  the  Church  itself,  the 
most  glorious  amongst  them,  abridged  of  this  liberty,  or  to 
think  that  no  Law,  Constitution,  or  Canon  can  be  further 
made  either  for  limitation  or  amplification  in  the  practice  of 
our  Saviour's  Ordinances,  whatsoever  occasion  be  offered 
through  variety  of  times  and  things,  during  the  state  of  this 
inconstant  world,  which  bringeth  forth  daily  such  new  evils 
as  must  of  necessity  by  new  remedies  be  redrest ;  did  both 
of  old  enforce  our  venerable  Predecessor*,  and  will  always 
constrain  others,  sometime  to  make,  sometime  to  abrogate, 
sometime  to  augment,  and  again  to  abridge  sometime ;  in 
sum,  often  to  vary,  alter,  and  change  customs  incident  into 
the  manner  of  exercising  that  Power  which  doth  itself  con- 
tinue always  one  and  the  same :  I  therefore  conclude.  That 
Spiritual  Authority  is  a  Power  which  Christ  hath  given  to 
be  used  over  them  which  are  subject  unto  it  for  the  eternal 
good  of  their  souls,  according  to  his  own  most  sacred  Laws 
and  the  wholesome  positive  Constitutions  of  his  Church. 

In  Doctrine  referred  unto  action  and  practice,  as  this  is 
which  concerns  Spiritual  Jurisdiction,  the  first  sound  and 
perfect  understanding  is  the  knowledge  of  the  end,  because 
thereby  both  use  doth  frame,  and  contemplation  judge,  all 
things. 

3.  Seeing:  that  the  chiefest  cause  of  Spiritual  Jurisdiction  or  peni- 

tency 

is  to  provide  for  the  health  and  safety  of  men's  souls,  by  i»»e 
bringing  them  to  see  and  repent  their  grievous  offences  end  pro- 
committed  against  God,  as  also  to  reform  all  injuries  offered  by*spi- 
with  the  breach  of  Christian  love  and  charity  toward  their  Jnrisdic 
brethren  in  matters  of  Ecclesiastical  cognizance;  the  use  of  Two 
this  Power  shall  by  so  much  the  plainlier  appear,  if  first  the  of^Peni- 
nature  of  Repentance  itself  be  known.  throne 

We  are  by  Repentance  to  appease  whom  we  offend  by  Siuy  uJ* 
sin.     For  which  cause,  whereas  all  sin  deprives  us  of  the  ood.  the 
favour  of  Almighty  God,  our  way  of  reconciliation  with  him  SSy'^oJ 
is  the  inward  secret  Repentance  of  the  heart ;  which  inward  ternai 


[Abp.  Whitgift,  Hooker's  "  predecessor"  in  this  controversy.] 


6  THE   SIXTH   BOOK  [Sect.  3. 

disci-     Repentance  alone  sufficeth^  unless  some  speciaJ  thing,  in  the 
Of  the    quality  of  sin  committed,  or  in  the  party  that  hath  done 
R«pent.  amiss,  require  more.     For  besides  our  submission  in  God's 
from      sight.  Repentance  must  not  only  proceed  to  thet  private  con- 
the*for-  tentation  of  men,  if  the  sin  be  a  crime  injurious;  but  also 
proceedu  farther,  where  the  wholesome  Discipline  of  Good's  Church 
ofCo''°.  exacteth  a  more  exemplary  and  open  satisfactiion.*     Now 
thi^fint  the  Church  being  satisfied  with  outward  Repentance,  as 
^i  ^'  God  is  with  inward,  it  shall  not  be  amiss  for  more  perspi- 
**"*^'     cuity,  to  term  this  latter  always  the  Virtue,  the  former  the 
Discipline  of  Repentance ;  which  Discipline,  hath  two  sorts 
of  Penitents  to  work  upon,  inasmuch  as  it  hath  been  accus- 
tomed to  lay  the  offices  of  Repentance  on  some  seeking, 
others  shunning  them;   on  some  at  their  own   voluntary 
request,  on  others  altogether  against  their  wills,  as  shall 
hereafter  appear  by  store  of  ancient  examples,     f  lepentance 
being,  therefore,  either  in  the  sight  of  God  alo  ne,  or  else 
with  the  notice  also  of  men;  without  the  one,  sometime 
throughly  performed,  but  always  practised  more  or  less  in 
our  daily  devotions  and  prayers,  we  have  no  remedy  for  any 
fault ;  whereas  the  other  is  only  required  in  sins  o»f  a  certain 
degree  and  quaUty:  the  one  necessary  for  ever,  the  other 
so  far  forth  as  the  Laws  and  Orders  of  God's  Church  shall 
make  it  requisite.    The  nature,  parts,  and  effects  of  the  one 
always  the  same;  the  other  limited,  extended,  varied  by 
infinite  occasions. 

The  Virtue  of  Repentance  in  the  heart  of  man  is  God's 
handy-work,  a  fruit  or  effect  of  divine  grace,  which  grace 
continually  offereth  itself  even  unto  them  that  have  forsaken 
it,  as  may  appear  by  the  words  of  Christ  in  St.  John's 
Revelation,  ^'I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock:"  nor  doth  he 
only  knock  without,  but  also  within  assist  to  open,  whereby 
access  and  entrance  is  given  to  the  heavenly  presence  of 
that  saving  power,  which  maketh  man  a  repaired  temple  for 
God's  good  Spirit  again  to  inhabit.  And  albeit  the  whole 
train  of  virtues  which  are  impUed  in  the  name  of  Grace  be 
infused  at  one  instant;  yet  because,  when  they  meet  and 
concur  unto  any  effect  in  man,   they  have  their  distinct 

*  Pcenitentis  secundae,  et  unius,  quanto  in  acta  negotium  est,  tanto  potior  probatio  est,  ut 
non  sola  consdentia  proferatur,  sed  aliquo  etiam  actu  administretur.  Second  Penitency, 
following  that  before  Baptism,  and  being  not  more  than  once  admitted  in  one  man,  reqnireth 
by  80  much  the  greater  labour  to  make  it  manifest,  for  that  it  is  not  a  work  which  can  come 
agun  in  trial,  but  must  be  therefore  with  some  open  solemnity  executed,  and  not  left  to  be 
dhcharged  with  the  privity  of  conscience  alone."    Tertull.  de  Poenit. 


[Rer. 
iii.90 


Sect.  3.]  OP   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  7 

operations  rising  orderly  one  from  another,  it  is  no  unnecessary 
thing  that  we  note  the  way  or  method  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
framing  man's  sinful  heart  to  Repentance.  A  work,  the  first 
foundation  whereof  is  laid  by  opening  and  illuminating  the 
eye  of  Faith,  because  by  Faith  are  discovered  the  principles 
of  this  action,  whereunto  unless  the  understanding  do  first 
assent,  there  can  follow  in  the  will  towards  Penitency  no  in- 
clination at  all.  Contrariwise,  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
the  judgment  of  the  world  to  come,  and  the  endless  misery 
of  sinners,  being  apprehended,  this  worketh  Fear ;  such  as 
theirs  was  who,  feeling  their  own  distress  and  perplexity  in 
that  passion,  besought  our  Lord's  Apostles  earnestly  to  give  [Aett 
them  counsel  what  they  should  do.  For  fear  is  impotent 
and  unable  to  advise  itself;  yet  this  good  it  hath,  that  men 
are  thereby  made  desirous  to  prevent,  if  possibly  they  may, 
whatsoever  evil  they  dread.  The  first  thing  that  wrought 
the  Ninevites'  Repentance,  was  fear  of  destruction  within 
forty  days :  signs  and  miraculous  works  of  God,  being  ex- 
traordinary representations  of  divine  power,  are  commonly 
wont  to  stir  any  the  most  wicked  with  terror,  lest  the  same 
power  should  bend  itself  against  them.  And  because  tract- 
able minds,  though  guilty  of  much  sin,  are  hereby  moved  to 
forsake  those  evil  ways  which  make  his  power  in  such  sort 
their  astonishment  and  fear,  therefore  our  Saviour  denounced  [Matt. 
his  curse  against  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida,  saying,  that,  if 
Tyre  and  Sidon  had  seen  that  which  they  did,  those  signs 
which  prevailed  little  with  the  one  would  have  brought  the 
others  to  Repentance :  as  the  like  thereunto  did  in  the  men 
given  to  curious  arts,  of  whom  the  Apostolic  History  saith, 
that  "  fear  came  upon  them,  and  many  which  had  followed  [Acu 
vain  sciences,  burnt  openly  the  very  books  out  of  which  i».] 
they  had  learned  the  same."  As  fear  of  contumely  and  dis- 
grace amongst  men,  together  with  other  civil  punishments, 
are  a  bridle  to  restrain  from  any  heinous  acts  whereinto 
men's  outrage  would  otherwise  break ;  so  the  fear  of  divine 
revenge  and  punishment,  where  it  taketh  place,  doth  make 
men  desirous  to  be  rid  likewise  from  that  inward  guiltiness 
of  sin  wherein  they  would  else  securely  continue.  Howbeit, 
when  Faith  hath  wrought  a  fear  of  the  event  of  sin,  yet 
Repentance  hereupon  ensueth  not,  unless  our  belief  conceive 
both  the  possibility  and  means  to  avert  evil :  the  possibility, 
inasmuch  as  God  is  merciful  and  most  willing  to  have  sin 


8  THE   SIXTH   BOOK  [Sect  3. 

cured ;  the  means,  because  he  hath  plainly  taught  what  is 
requisite  and  shall  suffice  unto  that  purpose.  The  nature 
of  all  wicked  men  is,  for  fear  of  revenge  to  hate  whom  they 
most  wrong ;  the  nature  of  hatred,  to  wish  that  destroyed 
which  it  cannot  brook;  and  from  hence  arise  the  furious 
endeavours  of  godless  and  obdurate  sinners  to  extinguish  in 
themselves  the  opinion  of  God,  because  they  would  not 
have  him  to  be,  whom  execution  of  endless  wo  doth  not 
suffer  them  to  love.  Every  sin  against  God  abateth,  and 
continuance  in  sin  extinguisheth,  our  love  towards  him.  It 
was  therefore  said  to  the  Angel  of  Ephesus  having  sinned, 
[Rev.  "  Thou  art  fallen  away  from  thy  first  love ;"  so  that,  as  we 
never  decay  in  love  till  we  sin,  in  like  sort  neither  can  we  pos- 
sibly forsake  sin,  unless  we  first  begin  again  to  love.  What 
is  love  towards  God,  but  a  desire  of  union  with  God  ?  And 
shall  we  imagine  a  sinner  converting  himself  to  God,  in  whom 
there  is  no  desire  of  union  with  God  presupposed  ?  I  there- 
fore conclude,  That  Fear  worketh  no  man's  inclination  to 
Repentance,  till  somewhat  else  have  wrought  in  us  Love  also. 
Our  love  and  desire  of  union  with  God  ariseth  from  the 
strong  conceit  which  we  have  of  his  admirable  goodness: 
the  goodness  of  God  which  particularly  moveth  unto  Re- 
pentance is,  his  mercy  towards  mankind,  notwithstanding 
sin :  for,  let  it  once  sink  deeply  into  the  mind  of  man,  that 
howsoever  we  have  injured  God,  his  very  nature  is  averse 
from  revenge,  except  unto  sin  we  add  obstinacy,  otherwise 
always  ready  to  accept  our  submission  as  a  full  discharge  or 
recompence  for  all  wrongs ;  and  can  we  choose  but  begin  to 
love  him  whom  we  have  offended  ?  or  can  we  but  begin  to 
grieve  that  we  have  offended  him  whom  we  love  ?  Re- 
pentance considereth  sin  as  a  breach  of  the  Law  of  God,  an 
act  obnoxious  to  that  revenge,  which  notwithstanding  may 
be  prevented  if  we  pacify  God  in  time. 

The  root  and  beginning  of  Penitency,  therefore,  is  the 

consideration  of  our  own  sin,  as  a  cause  which  hath  procured 

the  wrath,  and  a  subject  which  doth  need  the  mercy,  of  God. 

For  unto  man's  understanding  there  being  presented,  on  the 

rRom.    one  side,  ''  tribulation  and  anguish  upon  every  soul  that 

[Ven  7.]  doth  evil ;"  on  the  other,  "  eternal  life  unto  them  which  by 

continuance  in  well-doing  seek  glory,  and  honour,  and  im- 

CEph.     mortality:"  on  the  one  hand,  a  curse  to  the  children  of 

[v^? 9.]  disobedience;   on  the  other,  to  lovers  of  righteousness  all 


SectSJ]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  9 

grace  and  benediction:  yet  between  these  extremes  that 
eternal  God,  from  whose  unspotted  justice  and  undeserved 
mercy  the  lot  of  each  inheritance  proceedeth^  is  so  inclinable  [Ooh 
rather  to  shew  compassion  than  to  take  revenge,  that  all  his 
speeches  in  Holy  Scripture  are  almost  nothing  else  but  en- 
treaties of  men  to  prevent  destruction  by  amendment  of  their 
wicked  lives ;  all  the  works  of  his  providence  little  other 
than  mere  allurements  of  the  just  to  continue  stedfast,  and 
of  the  unrighteous' to  change  their  course;  all  his  dealings 
and  proceedings  towards  true  converts,  [such]  as  have  even 
filled  the  grave  writings  of  holy  men  with  these  and  the  like 
most  sweet  sentences :  Repentance  (if  I  may  so  speak)  stop-  cai^ui. 
peth  God  in  his  way,  when  being  provoked  by  crimes  past  c.%, 
he  Cometh  to  revenge  them  with  most  just  punishments; 
yea,  it  tieth  as  it  were  the  hands  of  the  avenger,  and  doth 
not  suffer  him  to  have  his  will.  Again,  The  merciful  eye  of 
God  towards  men  hath  no  power  to  withstand  Penitency,  at 
what  time  soever  it  comes  in  presence.*  And  again,  God 
doth  not  take  it  so  in  evil  part,  though  we  wound  that  which 
he  hath  required  us  to  keep  whole,  as  that  after  we  have 
taken  hurt  there  should  be  in  us  no  desire  to  receive  his 
help.  Finally,  lest  I  be  carried  too  far  in  so  large  a  sea. 
There  was  never  any  man  condemned  of  God  but  for 
neglect,  nor  justified  except  he  had  care,  of  Repentance. 
From  these  considerations,  setting  before  our  eyes  our  in- 
excusable both  unthankfulness  in  disobeying  so  merciful, 
foolishness  in  provoking  so  powerful,  a  God,  there  ariseth 
necessarily  a  pensive  and  corrosive  desire  that  we  had  done 
otherwise ;  a  desire  which  suffereth  us  to  foreslow  no  time, 
to  feel  no  quietness  within  ourselves,  to  take  neither  sleep 
nor  food  with  contentment,  never  to  give  over  supplications, 
confessions,  and  other  penitent  duties,  till  the  light  of  God's 
reconciled  favour  shine  in  our  darkened  soul. 

Fulgentius  asking  the  question.  Why  David's  confession  Fnig.  de 
should  be  held  for  effectual  Penitence,  and  not  Saul's  ?  an-  Pe^ 
swereth,  "  That  the  one  hated  sin,  the  other  feared  only  ip.  i6. 
punishment  in  this  world:   Saul's  acknowledgment  of  sin 
was  fear ;  David's,  both  fear  and  also  love."    This  was  the 
fountain  of  Peter's  tears,  this  the  life  and  spirit  of  David's 

*  Basil.  Epist.  Seleuc.  p.  106.  <f>t\dvOQo»froy  $\4/JLfia  irgotnovtrcaf  cuBeircu  fierdvoiay. 
Chry.  in  1  Cor.  Horn.  viii.  Ov  rh  rgooOriyai  otkoo  8€iv^v,  &s  rh  rgu0€ifra  fiii  fioi\€(rBcu  BiQa- 
ireiiffdtu.        Marc.  Erem.  [de  Poenit.]  O^SeU  KWTiKqi97\,  u  fi^  fiercfyoUis  icarc^^Kiyo'c,  Kal 


iii.  9. 


XT.  18.] 


10  THE   SIXTH   BOOK  [SecL  S. 

eloquence,  in  those  most  admirable  Hymns  entitled  Peni- 
tential,  where  the  words  of  sorrow  for  sin  do  melt  the  very 
bowels  of  God  remitting  it;  and  the  comforts  of  grace  in 
remitting  sin  carry  him  which  sorrowed  rapt  as  it  were  into 
Heaven^  with  ecstasies  of  joy  and  gladness.  The  first 
motive  of  the  Ninevites  unto  Repentance,  was  their  belief 
in  a  sermon  of  fear,  but  the  next  and  most  immediate,  an 

Jonah  axiom  of  love ;  "  Who  can  tell  whether  God  will  turn  away 
his  fierce  wrath,  that  we  perish  not  V*  No  conclusion  such 
as  theirs.  Let  every  man  turn  from  his  evil  way,  but  out  of 
premises  such  as  theirs  were,  fear  and  love.  Wherefore  the 
well-spring  of  Repentance  is  Faith,  first  breeding  Fear,  and 
then  Love;   which  love  causeth  hope,  hope  resolution  of 

[Lake  ^  attempt ;  *'  I  will  go  to  my  Father,  and  say,  I  have  sinned 
against  heaven  and  against  thee;"  that  is  to  say,  I  will  do 
what  the  duty  of  a  Convert  requireth. 

Now  in  a  Penitent's  or  convert's  duty  there  are  included, 
first,  the  aversion  of  the  will  from  sin ;  secondly,  the  sub- 
mission of  ourselves  to  God  by.  supplication  and  prayer; 
thirdly,  the  purpose  of  a  new  life,  testified  with  present 
works  of  amendment :  which  three  things  do  very  well  seem 
to  be  comprised  in  one  definition  by  them  which  handle 
Repentance,  as  a  virtue  that  hateth,  bewaileth,  and  sheweth 
a  purpose  to  amend  sin.  We  offend  God  in  thought,  word, 
and  deed:  to  the  first  of  which  three,  they  make  Contrition; 
to  the  second,  Confession;  and  to  the  last,  our  Works  of 
Satisfaction,  answerable. 

Contrition  doth  not  here  import  those  sudden  pangs  and 
convulsions  of  the  mind  which  cause  sometimes  the  most 
forsaken  of  God  to  retract  their  own  doings;  it  is  no 
natural  passion,  or  anguish,  which  riseth  in  us  against  our 
wills,  but  a  deUberate  aversion  of  the  will  of  man  from  sin ; 
which  being  always  accompanied  with  grief,  and  grief  often- 
times partly  with  tears,  partly  with  other  external  signs,  it 
hath  been  thought,  that  in  these  things  Contrition  doth 
chiefly  consist:  whereas  the  chiefest  thing  in  Contrition  is, 
that  alteration  whereby  the  will,  which  was  befo|*e  delighted 
with  sin,  doth  now  abhor  and  shun  nothing  more.  But  for- 
asmuch at  we  cannot  hate  sin  in  ourselves  without  heaviness 
and  grief,  that  there  should  be  in  us  a  thing  of  such  hateful 
quality,  the  will  averted  from  sin  must  needs  make  the 
affection  suitable ;  yea,  there  is  great  reason  why  it  should 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY,  11 

SO  do:  for  since  the  will  by  conceiving  sin  hath  deprived 
the  soul  of  life;  and  of  life  there  is  no  recovery  without 
Repentance,  the  death  of  sin ;  Repentance  not  able  to  kill 
sin,  but  by  withdrawing  the  will  from  it;  the  will  unpos- 
sible  to  be  vrithdrawn,  unless  it  concur  with  a  contrary 
affection  to  that  which  accompanied  it  before  in  evil ;  is  it 
not  clear  that  as  an  inordinate  delight  did  first  begin  sin, 
so  Repentance  must  begin  vrith  a  just  sorrow,  a  sorrow  of 
heart,  and  such  a  sorrow  as  renteth  the  heart;  neither  acjoei 
feigned  nor  slight  sorrow;  not  feigned,  lest  it  increase  sin,  * 
nor  slight,  lest  the  pleasures  of  sin  overmatch  it.  Where- 
fore of  Grace,  the  highest  cause  from  which  man's  Penitency 
doth  proceed ;  of  faith,  fear,  love,  hope,  what  force  and 
efficiency  they  have  in  Repentance;  of  parts  and  duties 
thereunto  belonging,  comprehended  in  the  Schoolmen's 
definitions;  finally,  of  the  first  among  those  duties.  Con- 
trition, which  disliketh  and  bewaileth  iniquity,  let  this 
suffice.  And  because  God  will  have  offences  by  Repen- 
tance not  only  abhorred  within  ourselves,  but  also  with 
humble  supplication  displayed  before  him,  and  a  testimony 
of  amendment  to  be  given,  even  by  present  works  worthy 
Repentance,  in  that  they  are  contrary  to  those  we  renounce 
and  disclaim;  although  the  Virtue  of  Repentance  do  require 
that  her  other  two  parts.  Confession  and  Satisfaction,  should 
here  follow;  yet  seeing  they  belong  as  well  to  the  Discipline 
as  to  the  Virtue  of  Repentance,  and  only  differ  for  that  in 
the  one  they  are  performed  to  man,  in  the  other  to  God 
alone,  I  had  rather  distinguish  them  in  joint-handling,  than 
handle  them  apart,  because  in  quality  and  manner  of  prac- 
tice they  are  distinct. 

4.  Our  Lord  and  Saviour  in  the  sixteenth  of  St.  Matthew's  or  the 
Gospel*  giveth  his  Apostles  regiment  in  general  over  God's  ginVor 
Church.     For  they  that  have  "  the  keys  of  the  Kingdom  of  tanS"" 
Heaven"  are  thereby  signified  to  be  stewards  of  the  House  tmed  by 
of  Gx>d,  under  whom  they  guide,  command,  judge,   and  p^^' 
correct  his  fanuly.     The  souls  of  men  are  God's  treasure,  tiT*  *^ 
committed  to  the  trust  and  fidelity  of  such  as  must  render  ^1^'"' 
a  strict  accountf  for  the  very  least  which  is  under  their  by'lhe 

School- 
men into  a  Sacnunent;  and  of  Confession,  that  which  belongeth  to  the  Virtne  of  Repentance, 
that  which  was  nsed'  amoni;  the  Jews,  that  which  Papacy  imaj^neth  a  Sacrament,  and  UuU  whicb 
ancient  Discipline  practised. 

*  Matt.  XTi.  19.  t  [Heb.  xiii.  17.] 


12  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [SecL  4. 

[Acts  custody.  God  hath  not  invested  them  with  power  to  make 
a  revenue  thereof^  but  to  use  it  for  the  good  of  them  whom 
Jesus  Christ  hath  most  dearly  bought.*  And  because 
their  office  therein  consisteth  of  sundry  Functions,  some 
belonging  to  Doctrine,  some  to  Discipline,  all  contained  in 
the  name  of  "  the  Keys;"  they  have  for  matters  of  Discipline, 
as  well  litigious  as  criminal,  their  Courts  and  Consistories 
erected  by  the  heavenly  Authority  of  his  most  sacred  voice, 
Matt,  who  hath  said.  Die  EcclesicB,  Tell  the  Church  ;t  against 
*^****  *'•  rebellious  and  contumacious  persons  which  refuse  to  obey 
their  sentence,  armed  they  are  with  power  to  eject  such 
out  of  the  Church,  to  deprive  them  of  the  honours,  rights, 
and  privileges  of  Christian  men,  to  make  them  as  Heathens 
and  Publicans,  with  whom  society  was  hateful.  Further- 
more, lest  their  acts  should  be  slenderly  accounted  of,  or 
had  in  contempt,  whether  they  admit  to  the  Fellowship  of 
Saints  or  seclude  from  it,  whether  they  bind  offenders  or 
set  them  again  at  liberty,  whether  they  remit  or  retain  sins, 
whatsoever  is  done  by  way  of  orderly  and  lawful  pro- 
ceeding, the  Lord  himself  hath  promised  to  ratify.     This  is 

*  [The  personal  effects  of  the  Archbishop  of  Armagh,  who  died  in  1822,  were  sworn  to 
be  under  d^200,0001] 

f  [*'  This  is  one  of  those  many  Scriptures  which  would  have  been  very  intelligible,  if 
they  had  not  been  learnedly  obscured  by  ingenious  men,  whose  interest  it  has  been  to 
spread  a  cloud  over  them....  The  old  English  editions  of  1539  and  1541  render  it, 
'  Tell  it  to  the  Congregation.'  . . .  The  word  Church  is  unhappily  grown  into  a  term 
of  art,  and  has  by  different  persons  a  variety  of  secondary  ideas  annexed  to  it;  as  Dr.  Watts 
has  beautifully  shewn  in  his  Essay  on  Uncharitableness,  p.  7 — 10.  But  it  signifies  io 
general  an  assembly,  or  number  of  people,  called  together  on  whatever  occasion,  as  is 
well  known :  compare  Acts  xix.  32,  39.  It  is  in  the  New  Testament  generally  used,  as  here, 
for  a  particular  assembly;  Actsxiv.  23,  ICor.vii.  17,  ziv.  23,  zvi.  19;  but  sometimes  it 
is  used  for  the  whole  body  of  Christians,  because  they  are  now  called  out  from  the  world, 
and  are  at  last  to  be  gathered  together  in  the  presence  of  Christ  their  Head ;  2  Thess.  ii.  1 ; 
and  to  dwell  for  ever  with  each  other  and  with  him;  1  Thess. iv.  17 ;  compare  Matt.  xvi.  18, 
Eph.i.22,  iiL  10,  v.  24,  Col.i.  18,24.  According  to  Bishop  Stillingfleet's  interpretation  of 
this  text,  Iren.  Book  II.  chap.  5,  sect  8,  it  should  be  rendered,  *  Tell  it  to  an  assembly,'  or 
a  select  company.  But  it  is  certain  the  force  of  the  article,  rg  iKK\ri<rla  "  unto  the 
church,"  is  better  preserved  by  our  version ;  and  as  undoubtedly  it  must  be  an  assembly 
of  Christians ;  comp.  1  Cor.  vi.  1 ;  so  no  interpretation  seems  so  natural,  as  that  it  should 
be  that  assembly  which  was  under  a  peculiar  obligation  to  watch  over  the  person  in  question ; 
comp.  1  Cor.  v.  12,  13,  and  2  Thess.  iii.  14,  15 ;  and  that  whose  advices  and  remonstrances 
he  was  peculiarly  obliged  to  hear.  And  this  was  likewise  conformable  to  ^he  usage  of  the 
Jews,  who  admonished  offenders  in  their  Synagogues,  and  to  many  of  their  maxims  which 
commentators  mention  on  this  text.  See  Lightfoot's  Hor.  Heb.  in  loc.  and  Selden,  de 
Synod.  lib.i.  cap.  9.  If  I  am  not  much  mistaken,  that  celebrated  text  in  Titus  relating  to 
heretics,  chap.  iii.  10,  which  requires  that  a  man  who  disturbs  the  peace  or  subverts  the 
fidth  of  his  Christian  brethren,  should  be  iwice  admonished^  and  then  discarded  by  the 
society,  may  be  much  illustrated  by  the  passage,  *  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican,' 
in  this  text.  When  such  a  case  occurs,  as  well  as  when  an  offended  brother  has  just  cause 
of  complaint,  each  particular  person  concerned  must  judge  as  well  as  he  can ;  remembering 
he  is  answerable  to  Christ  for  the  impartiality  of  such  judgment"  Dr.  Doddridge,  Fam. 
Expos,  tn  loc,"] 


Sect.  4.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  13 

that  grand  original  Warrant,  by  force  whereof  the  Guides  Matt, 
and  Prelates  in  God's  Church,  first  his  Apostles,  and  after-  John 
wards  others  following  them  successively,  did  both  use  and  i  coi^' 
uphold  that  Discipline,  the  end  whereof  is  to  heal  men's  2*cor. 
consciences,  to  cure  their  sins,  to  reclaim  Offenders  from  i  Tim. 
iniquity,  and  to  make  them  by  Repentance  just.*    Neither  **  ^* 
hath  it  of  ancient  time,  for  any  other  respect,  been  accus- 
tomed   to   bind    by   Ecclesiastical  censures,    to   retain   so 
bound   till  tokens  of  manifest  Repentance  appeared,   and 
upon  apparent  Repentance  to  release,  saving  only  because 
this  was  received  as  a  most  expedient  method  for  the  cure 
of  sin. 

The  course  of  Discipline  in  former  ages  reformed  open 
Transgressors  by  putting  them  unto  offices  of  open  Peni- 
tence, especially  Confession,  whereby  they  declared  their 
own  crimes  in  the  hearing  of  the  whole  Church,  and  were 
not  from  the  time  of  their  first  convention  capable  of  the 
holy  mysteries  of  Christ,  till  they  had  solemnly  discharged 
this  duty.  Offenders  in  secret  knowing  themselves  alto- 
gether as  unworthy  to  be  admitted  to  the  Lord's  Table,  as 
the  other  which  were  withheld,  being  also  persuaded,  that 
if  the  Church  did  direct  them  in  the  offices  of  their  Peni- 
tency,  and  assist  them  with  public  Prayer,  they  should  more 
easily  obtain  that  they  sought,  than  by  trusting  wholly  to 
their  own  endeavours ;  finally,  having  no  impediment  to  stay 
them  from  it  but  bashfulness,  which  countervailed  not  the 
former  inducements,  and  besides  was  greatly  eased  by  the 
good  construction  which  the  charity  of  those  times  gave  to 
such  actions,  wherein  men's  piety  and  voluntary  care  to  be 
reconciled  to  God  did  purchase  then  much  more  love  than 
their  faults  (the  testimonies  of  common  frailty)  were  able  to 
procure  disgrace,  they  made  it  not  nice  to  use  some  one  of 
the  Ministers  of  God,  by  whom  the  rest  might  take  notice 
of  their  faults,  prescribe  them  convenient  remedies,  and  in 
the  end,  after  public  Confession,  all  join  in  prayer  unto 
God  for  them.     The  first  beginner  of  this  custom  had  the 

*  [The  punishment  of  the  incestuous  person  was  directed  to  be  inflicted  by  the  Church 
when  it  was  *'  gathered  together,"  1  Cor.  v.  4,  comp.  with  2  Cor.  ii.  6,  rS»¥  irK^iivwf 
'*  of  the  many,"  as  it  is  in  the  Greek;  and  be  it  observed,  that  this  Church  was  iv,  in  or 
at  Corinth,  2  Cor.  i.  1,  not  </  the  province  of  which  it  was  the  capitaL  Paul  preached  in 
Achaia,  Actsxviii.  12,  and  <U  Corinth,  but  he  no  where  speaks  of  the  Church  of  Achaia, 
though  there  were  "  saints  in  all  Achua,"  2  Cor.  i.  1.  These  particulars  it  would  not 
have  suited  Hooker's  purpose  to  have  remarked  upon  !] 


14  THE   SIXTH   BOOK  [Sect.  4. 

more  followers,  by  means  of  that  special  favour  which  always 
was  with  good  consideration  shewed  towards  Voluntary  Peni- 
tents above  the  rest.  But  as  professors  of  Christian  Belief 
grew  more  in  number,  so  they  waxed  worse ;  when  Kings 
and  Princes  had  submitted  their  dominions  unto  the  sceptre 
of  Jesus  Christ,*  by  means  whereof  persecution  ceasing, 
the  Church  immediately  became  subject  to  those  evils  which 
peace  and  security  bringeth  forth ;  there  was  not  now  that 
love  which  before  kept  all  things  in  tune,  but  every  where 
schisms,  discords,  dissensions  amongst  men,  conventicles  of 
Heretics,  bent  more  vehemently  against  the  sounder  and 
better  sort  than  very  Infidels  and  Heathens  themselves ; 
faults  not  corrected  in  charity,  but  noted  with  delight,  and 
kept  for  malice  to  use  when  the  deadliest  opportunities 
should  be  offered.  Whereupon,  forasmuch  as  public  Con- 
fessions became  dangerous  and  prejudicial  to  the  safety  of 
well-minded  men,  and  in  divers  respects  advantageous  to 
the  enemies  of  God's  Church,  it  seemed  first  unto  some,  and 
afterwards  generally,  requisite,  that  voluntary  penitents 
should  surcease  from  open  Confession.  Instead  whereof, 
when  once  private  and  secret  Confession  had  taken  place 
with  the  Latins,  it  continued  as  a  profitable  Ordinance  till 
the  Lateran  Council  had  decreed  that  all  men  once  in  a  year 
at  the  least  should  confess  themselves  to  the  Priest,  t  So 
that  being  a  thing  thus  made  both  general  and  also  neces- 
sary, the  next  degree  of  estimation  whereunto  it  grew,  was 
to  be  honoured  and  liflied  up  to  the  nature  of  a  Sacrament ; 
that  as  Christ  did  institute  Baptism  to  give  life,  and  the 
Eucharist  to  nourish  life,  so  Penitence  might  be  thought  a 
Sacrament  ordained  to  recover  life,  and  Confession  a  part  of 
the  Sacrament. 
Scot,  in  They  define  therefore  their  private  Penitency  to  be  a 
StJiI*  Sactament  of  remitting  sins  after  Baptism:  the  Virtue  of 
j^-^  Repentance,  a  detestation  of  wickedness  with  full  purpose 
to  amend  the  same,  and  with  hope  to  obtain  pardon  at 
God's  hands.  Wheresoever  the  Prophets  cry  "  Repent," 
and  in  the  Gospel  Saint  Peter  maketh  the  same  exhortation 
inead.   to  the  Jcws  as  yet  unbaptized,  they  will  have  the  Virtue  of 

*  ["  Whether  motives  of  a  worldly  kind  did  not  contribute,  in  a  certain  measure,  to  give 
Christianity,  in  the  esteem  of  Constantine,  a  preference  to  all  other  religious  systems  V*  is  a 
question  which  Mosheim  {Eccl.  Hitt.  cent  iv.  Part  1.  chap.  1,  sect.  8)  says  **  might  be 
proposed."] 

f  [Decree  of  Pope  Innocent;  Cone.  Lat.  can.  Omnis  utriusque  sezus.] 


Sect.  4,]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY,  16 

Repentance  only  to  be  understood ;  the  Sacrament,  where  diit. 
he  adviseth  Simon  Magus  to  repent,   because  the  sin  ofS^'i. 
Simon  Magus  was  after  Baptism.     Now  although  they  have 
only  external  Repentance  for  a  Sacrament,  internal  for  a 
Virtue,  yet  make  they  Sacramental  Repentance  nevertheless 
to  be  composed  of  three  parts,  Contrition,  Confession,  and 
Satisfaction:   which  is  absurd;   because  Contrition,  being 
an  inward  thing,  belongeth  to  the  Virtue  and  not  to  the 
Sacrament  of  Repentance,  which  must  consist  of  external 
parts,  if  the  nature  thereof  be  external.     Besides,  which  Scot, 
is  more  absurd,  they  leave  out  Absolution,  whereas  some iiv/ 
of  their  School-divines,  handling  Penance  in  the  nature  of  q!4. 
a  Sacrament,  and  being  not  able  to  espy  the  least  resem- 
blance of  a  Sacrament  save  only  in  Absolution  (for  a  Sacra- 
ment by  their  doctrine  must  both  signify  and  also  confer  or 
bestow  some  special  or  divine  grace),  resolved  themselves, 
that  the  duties  of  the  Penitent  could  be  but  mere  prepara- 
tions to  the  Sacrament,  and  that  the  Sacrament  itself  was 
wholly  in  Absolution.     And  albeit  Thomas  with  his  fol- 
lowers have  thought  it  safer  to  maintain,  as  well  the  services 
of  the  Penitent,  as  the  words  of  the  Minister,  necessary 
unto  the  essence  of  their  Sacrament:  the  services  of  the 
Penitent,  as  a  cause  'material ;  the  words  of  Absolution,  as 
a  formal,  for  that  by  them  all  things  else  are  perfected  to 
the  taking  away  of  sin ;  which  opinion  now  reigneth  in  all 
their  schools,  since  the  time  that  the  Council  of  Trent  gave 
it  solemn  approbation,  seeing  they  all  make  Absolution,  if 
not  the  whole  essence,  yet  the  very  form  whereunto  they 
ascribe  chiefly  the  whole  force  and  operation  of  their  Sacra- 
ment;  surely  to  admit  the  matter  as  a  part,  and  not  to 
admit  the  form,  hath  small  congruity  with  reason.* 

Again,  forasmuch  as  a  Sacrament  is  complete,  having  the 
matter  and  form  which  it  ought,  what  should  lead  them  to 
set  down  any  other  parts  of  Sacramental  Repentance,  than 
Confession  and  Absolution,  as  Durandus  hath  done  ?  For, 
touching  Satisfaction,  the  end  thereof,  as  they  understand 
it,  is  a  further  matter  which  resteth  after  the  Sacrament 
administered,  and  therefore  can  be  no  part  of  the  Sacra- 
ment.     Will   they  draw  in   Contrition  with   Satisfaction, 

*  "  Docet  Sancta  Synodus  Sacramenti  Pcenitentiae  fonnam,  in  qua  praedpue  ipsius 
▼is  nta  est,  in  illis  Ministri  verbis  positam  esse,  Ego  te  absolvo.  Sunt  autem  quasi  materia 
hujus  Sacramend  ipsius  poenitentis  actus,  nempe  Contritio,  Confessio,  et  Satisfiictio." 
Sess.  xiv.  c.  3. 


16  THE   SIXTH    BOOK  [Sect.  4. 

which  are  no  parts,  and  exclude  Absolution  (a  principal 
part),  yea,  the  very  complement,  form,  and  perfection  of 
the  rest,  as  themselves  account  it  ?  But,  for  their  breach  of 
precepts  in  art  it  skilleth  not,  if  their  doctrine  otherwise 
concerning  Penitency,  and  in  Penitency  touching  Confes- 
sion, might  be  found  true.  We  say,  Let  no  man  look  for 
pardon,  which  doth  smother  and  conceal  sin  where  in  duty 
it  should  be  revealed. 

The  cause  why  God  requireth  Confession  to  be  made  to  him 
is,  that  thereby  testifying  a  deep  hatred  of  our  own  iniquity, 
the  only  cause  of  his  hatred  and  wrath  towards  us,  we  mighty 
because  we  are  humble,  be  so  much  the  more  capable  of 
that  compassion  and  tender  mercy  which  knoweth  not  how 
Lake     to  coudcmu  siuucrs  that  condemn  themselves.     If  it  be  our 
Saviour's  own  principle,  that  the  conceit  we  have  of  our 
debt  forgiven,  proportioneth  our  thankfulness  and  love  to 
him  at  whose   hands  we   receive  pardon ;   doth   not  God 
foresee  that  they  which  with  ill-advised  modesty  seek   to 
hide  their  sin  like  Adam,  that  they  which  rake  it  up  under 
ashes,  and  confess  it  not,  are  very  unlikely  to  requite  with 
offices  of  love  afterwards  the  grace  which  they  shew  them- 
selves unwilling  to  prize  at  the  very  time  when  they  sue  for 
it ;  inasmuch  as  their  not  confessing  what  crimes  they  have 
committed  is  a  plain  signification  how  loth  they  are  that  the 
benefit  of  God's  most  gracious  pardon  should  seem  great  ? 
Nothing  more  true  than  that  of  TertuUian,   "  Confession 
doth  as  much  abate  the  weight  of  men's  offences,  as  conceal- 
ment doth  make  them  heavier.     For  he  which  confesseth 
hath  a  purpose  to  appease  God ;  he,  a  determination  to 
persist  and  continue  obstinate  which  keeps  them  secret  to 
himself."*      St.  Chrysostom,    almost  in    the  same   words^ 
Horn.     "  Wickedness  is  by  being  acknowledged  lessened,  and  doth 
4?Epist.  ^^^  grow  by  being  hid."     If  men  having  done  amiss  let  it 
ad  Hcb.  gjjp^  j^g  though  they  knew  no  such  matter,  what  is  there  to 
stay  them  from  falling  into  one  and  the  same  evil  ?     To  call 
ourselves  sinners  availeth  nothing,  except  we  lay  our  faults 
in  the  balance,  and  take  the  weight  of  them  one  by  one. 
Confess  thy  crimes   to   God,    disclose  thy  transgressions 
before  thy  Judge,  by  way  of  humble  supplication  and  suit, 
if  not  with  tongue,  at  the  least  with  heart,  and  in  this  sort 

*  ''  Tantum  relevat  confessio  delictorum,  quantum  dissimulado  exaggerat  Confessio  autem 
Mtisfiictionis  conalium  est,  dissimulatio  contumacise."     Tertull.  de  Pcenit. 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  17 

seek  mercy.  A  general  persuasion  that  thou  art  a  sinner 
will  neither  so  humble  nor  bridle  thy  soul,  as  if  the  catalogue 
of  thy  sins  examined  severally  be  continually  kept  in  mind. 
This  shall  make  thee  lowly  in  thine  own  eyes ;  this  shall 
preserve  thy  feet  from  falling,  and  sharpen  thy  desires  to- 
wards all  good  things.  The  mind,  I  know,  doth  hardly 
admit  such  unpleasant  remembrances ;  but  we  must  force  it, 
we  must  constrain  it  thereunto.  It  is  safer  now  to  be  bitten 
with  the  memory,  than  hereafter  with  the  torment  of  sin. 

The  Jews,  with  whom  no  repentance  for  sin  is  available 
without  Confession  either  conceived  in  mind  or  uttered, 
(which  latter  kind  they  call  usually  ^m  Confession  delivered  Lev. 
by  word  of  mouth),  had  first  that  general  Confession  which 
once  every  year  was  made  both  severally  by  each  of  the 
people  for  himself  upon  the  Day  of  Expiation,  and  by  the 
Priest  for  them  all.*  On  the  Day  of  Expiation  the  High- 
priest  maketh  thr^e  express  Confessions,  acknowledging  unto 
God  the  manifold  transgressions  of  the  whole  nation,  his  own 
personal  offences  likewise,  together  with  the  sins,  as  well  of 
his  family  as  of  the  rest  of  his  rank  and  order.  They  had 
again  their  voluntary  Confessions,  at  the  times  and  seasons 
when  men,  bethinking  themselves  of  their  wicked  conversa- 
tion past,  were  resolved  to  change  their  course,  the  begin- 
ning of  which  alteration  was  still  Confession  of  sins.  Thirdly, 
over  and  besides  these,  the  Law  imposed  upon  them  also 
that  special  Confession,  which  they  in  their  book  call 
TTH'^ID  y!i)  by  ^m  Confession  of  that  particular  fault  for 
which  we  namely  seek  pardon  at  God's  hands.  The  words 
of  the  Law  concerning  Confession  in  this  kind  are  as  fol- 
loweth :  "  When  a  man  or  woman  shall  commit  any  sin  Num. 
that  men  commit  and  transgress  against  the  Lord,  their  sin  ^'  ' 
which  they  have  done  (that  is  to  say,  the  very  deed  itself  in 
particular)  they  shall  acknowledge."  In  Leviticus,  after 
certain  transgressions  there  mentioned,  we  read  the  like : 
"  When  a  man  hath  sinned  in  any  one  of  these  things,  he  Lev. 
shall  then  confess,  how  in  that  thing  he  hath  offended."  For 
such  kind  of  special  sins  they  had  also  special  sacrifices : 
wherein  the  manner  was,  that  the  Offender  should  lay  his 
hands  on  the  head  of  the  sacrifice  which  he  brought,  and 
should   there  make   Confession  to  God,    saying,    "  Now, 

*  "  All  Israel  is  bound  on  the  Day  of  Expiation  to  repent  and  confess."    R.  Mas.  in  lib. 
Mitsworth  haggadol.  par.  3.  prae.  16. 

VOL.  III.  C 


18  THE   SIXTH   BOOK  [Sect.  ^. 

O  Lordy  that  I  have  offended,  committed  sin,  and  done 
wickedly  in  thy  sight,  tliis  or  this  being  my  fault ;  behold  I 
repent  me,  and  am  utterly  ashamed  of  my  doings  ;  my  pur- 
pose is,  never  to  return  more  to  the  same  crime."*  None  of 
them,  whom  either  the  House  of  Judgment  hath  condemned 
to  die,  or  of  them  which  are  to  be  punished  with  stripes, 
can  be  clear  by  being  executed  or  scourged,  till  they  re- 
pent and  confess  their  faults,  f  Finally,  there  was  no  man 
amongst  them  at  any  time,  either  condemned  to  suffer  death, 
or  corrected,  or  chastised  with  stripes,  none  ever  sick  and 
near  his  end,  but  they  called  upon  him  to  repent  and  confess 
his  sins,  j;  Of  malefactors  convict  by  witnesses,  and  there- 
upon either  adjudged  to  die,  or  otherwise  chastised,  their 
custom  was  to  exact,  as  Joshua  did  of  Achan,  open  Con- 
Josh,  fession ;  "  My  son,  now  give  glory  to  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel ;  confess  unto  him,  and  declare  unto  me  what  thou 
hast  committed ;  conceal  it  not  from  me."  Concerning  in- 
juries and  trespasses,  which  happen  between  men,  they 
highly  commend  such  as  will  acknowledge  before  many.  It 
is  in  him  which  repenteth  accepted  as  an  high  Sacrifice,  if 
he  will  confess  before  many,  make  them  acquainted  with  his 
oversights,  and  reveal  the  transgressions  which  have  passed 
between  him  and  any  of  his  brethren ;  saying,  I  have  verily 
offended  this  man,  thus  and  thus  I  have  done  unto  him; 
but  behold  I  do  now  repent  and  am  sorry.  Contrariwise, 
whosoever  is  proud,  and  will  not  be  known  of  his  faults, 
but  cloaketh  them,  is  not  yet  come  to  perfect  repentance ; 
fP'^*».r-  for  so  it  is  written,  "  He  that  hides  his  sins  shall  not 
13]  prosper:"  which  words  of  Solomon  they  do  not  further 
extend  than  only  to  sins  committed  against  men,  which  are 
in  that  respect  meet  before  men  to  be  acknowledged  par- 
ticularly. But  in  sins  between  man  and  God,  there  is  no 
necessity  that  man  should  himself  make  any  such  open  and 
particular  recital  of  them ;  to  God  they  are  known,  and  of 
us  it  is  required,  that  we  cast  not  the  memory  of  them  care- 
lessly and  loosely  behind  our  backs,  but  keep  in  mind,  as 
near  as  we  can,  both  our  own  debt,  and  his  grace  which 
remitteth  the  same.  Wherefore,  to  let  pass  Jewish  Con- 
fession, and  to  come  unto  them  which  hold  Confession  in  the 


*  Misne  Tora  Tractatu  Teshuba  cap.  1,  et  R.  Mos.  in  lib.  Misnoth,  par  2.  cap.  10. 

t  Mos.  in  Misnotby  par  2.  prae.  16. 

X  "  To  him  which  is  sick  and  draweth  towards  death,  they  say.  Confess."     Idem. 


Sect.  4.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  Iflt 

ear  of  the  Priest  commanded,  yea,  commanded  in  the  nature 
of  a  Sacrament,  and  thereby  so  necessary  that  sin  without  it 
cannot  be  pardoned ;  let  them  find  such  a  commandment  in 
Holy  Scripture,  and  we  ask  no  more. 

John  the  Baptist  was  an  extraordinary  person ;  his  birth, 
his  actions  of  life,  his  office  extraordinary.     It  is  therefore 
recorded  for  the  strangeness  of  the  act,  but  not  set  down  as 
an  everlasting  Law  for  the  world,  '*  That  to  him  Jerusalem  M«tt.iu. 
and  all  Judea  made  Confession  of  their  sins;"  besides,  at  the^'^' 
time  of  this  Confession,  their  pretended  Sacrament  of  Re- 
pentance, as  they  grant, ^ was  not  yet  instituted;  neither 
was  it  sin  after  Baptism  which  Penitents  did  there  confess. 
When  that  which  befell  the  seven  sons  of  Sceva,  for  using 
the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  their  conjurations, 
was  notified  to  Jews  and  Grecians  in  Ephesus,  it  brought 
an  universal  fear  upon  them,  insomuch  that  divers  of  them, 
which  had  believed  before,  but  not  obeyed  the  Laws  of 
Christ,  as  they  should  have  done,  being  terrified  by  this 
example,  came  to  the  Apostle,  and  confessed  their  wicked  Acu 
deeds.     Which  good  and  virtuous  act  no  wise  man,  as  I 
suppose,  will  disallow,  but  commend  highly  in  them,  whom 
Grod^s  good  Spirit  shall  move  to  do  the  like  when  need  re- 
quireth.     Yet  neither  hath  this  example  the  force  of  any 
general  Commandment  or  Law,  to  make  it  necessary  for 
every  man  to  pour  into  the  ears  of  the  Priest  whatsoever 
hath  been  done  amiss,  or  else  to  remain  everlastingly  cul- 
pable and  guilty  of  sin ;  in  a  word,  it  proveth  Confession 
practised  as  a  virtuous  act,  but  not  commanded  as  a  Sacra- 
ment.    Now  concerning  St.  James,  his  exhortation,  whether 
the  former  branch  be  considered,  which  saith,  **  Is  any  sick  Jam. 
among  you  ?  let  him  call  for  the  Ancients  of  the  Church,  and  ^* 
let  them  make  their  prayers  for  him ;"  or  the  latter,  which 
stirreth  up  all  Christian  men  unto  mutual  acknowledgment 
of  faults  amongst  themselves,  "  Lay  open  your  minds,  make  [v;  i«.] 
your  Confessions  one  to  another ;  is  it  not  plain,  that  the 
one  hath  relation  to  that  gift  of  healing,  which  our  Saviour 
promised  his  Church,  saying,  "  They  shall  lay  their  hands  Mark 
on  the  sick,  and  the  sick  shall  recover  health ;"  relation  to 
that  gift  of  healing,  whereby  the  Apostle  imposed  his  hands 
on  the  father  of  Publius,  and  made  him  miraculously  a  sound  Acta 
man ;  relation,  finally,  to  that  gift  of  healing,  which  sp  long  s. 
continued  in  practice  after  the  Apostles'  times;  that  whereas 

c2 


20  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Sect.  4f. 

the  Novatianists  denied  the  power  of  the  Church  of  God  in 
curing  sin  after  Baptism,  St.  Ambrose  asked  them  again, 
Anibros.  "  Why  it  might  not  as  well  prevail  with  God  for  spiritual  as 
lib.  i?"*  for  corporal  and  bodily  health ;  yea,  wherefore  (saith  he) 
^'  ^'      do  ye  yourselves  lay  hands  on  the  diseased,  and  believe  it  to 
be  a  work  of  benediction  or  prayer,  if  haply  the  sick  person 
be  restored  to  his  former  safety  ?"    And  of  the  other  member, 
which  toucheth  mutual  Confession,  do  not  some  of  them- 
selves, as  namely  Cajetan,  deny  that  any  other  Confession 
is  meant,  than  only  that  ^'  which  seeketh  either  association 
of  prayers,  or  reconciliation,  or  pardon  of  wrongs  ?"     Is  it 
AnnoL    not  coufcssed  by  the  greatest  part  of  their  own  retinue,  that 
injacV.  we  cannot  certainly  affirm  Sacramental  Confession  to  have 
been  meant  or  spoken  of  in  this  place  ?     Howbeit,  Bellar- 
mine,  delighted  to  run  a  course  by  himself  where  colourable 
shifts  of  wit  will  but  make  the  way  passable,  standeth  as 
formally  for  this  place,  and  not  less  for  that  in  St.  John, 
1  John    than  for  this.     St.  John  saith,  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,  God 
is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse 
us  from  all  unrighteousness :"  doth  St.  John  say.  If  we  con- 
fess to  the  Priest,  God  is  righteous  to  forgive ;  and,  if  not, 
that  our  sins  are  unpardonable?     No,  but  the  titles  of  God 
just  and  righteous  do  import  that  he  pardoneth  sin  only  for 
his  promise'  sake ;  **  And  there  is  not  (they  say)  any  promise 
of  forgiveness  upon  Confession  made  to  God  without  the 
Priest;"  not  any  promise,  but  with  this  condition,  and  yet 
the  condition  no  where  exprest. 

Is  it  not  strange,  that  the  Scripture,  speaking  so  much  of 
Repentance  and  of  the  several  duties  which  appertain  there- 
unto, should  ever  mean,  and  no  where  mention,  that  one 
condition,  without  which  all  the  rest  is  utterly* of  none  effect? 
or  will  they  say,  because  our  Saviour  hath  said  to  his  Mi- 
[john  nisters,  **  Whose  sins  ye  retain,"  &c.  and  because  they  can 
remit  no  more  than  what  the  offenders  have  confcst,  that 
therefore,  by  the  virtue  of  his  promise,  it  standeth  with  the 
righteousness  of  God  to  take  away  no  man's  sins  until,  by 
auricular  Confession,  they  be  opened  unto  the  Priest.  They 
are  men  that  would  seem  to  honour  antiquity,  and  none  more 
to  depend  upon  the  reverend  judgment  thereof.  I  dare 
boldly  affirm,  that  for  many  hundred  years  after  Christ  the 
Fathers  held  no  such  opinion ;  they  did  not  gather  by  our 
Saviour's  words  any  such  necessity  of  seeking  the  Priest's 


Sect*  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  21 

Absolution  from  sin  by  secret  and  (as  they  now  term  it)  Sa- 
cramental Confession.  Public  Confession  they  thought  ne- 
cessary by  way  of  Discipline^  not  priyate  Confession,  as  in 
the  nature  of  a  Sacrament,  necessary. 

For,  to  begin  with  the  purest  times,  it  is  unto  them  which 
read  and  judge  without  partiality  a  thing  most  clear,  that 
the  ancient  iSpfMoXoyriatQ  or  Confession,  defined  by  Tertul- 
lian  to  be  a  Discipline  of  humiliation  and  submission,  framing 
men's  behaviour  in  such  sort  as  may  be  fittest  to  move  pity ; 
the  Confession  which  they  use  to  speak  of  in  the  exercise 
of  Repentance  was  made  openly  in  the  hearing  of  the  whole, 
both  Ecclesiastical  Consistory  and  Assembly.  This  is  the 
reason  wherefore  he  perceiving  that  divers  were  better 
content  their  sores  should  secretly  fester  and  eat  inward, 
than  be  laid  so  open  to  the  eyes  of  many,  blameth  greatly 
their  unwise  bashfulness  ;*  and,  to  reform  the  same,  per- 
suadeth  with  them,  saying,  ''  Amongst  thy  brethren  and 
fellow-servants,  which  are  partakers  with  thee  of  one  and 
the  same  nature,  fear,  joy,  grief,  sufierings  (for  of  one 
common  Lord  and  Father  we  have  all  received  one  spirit), 
why  shouldest  thou  not  think  with  thyself,  that  they  are  but 
thine  ownself  ?  wherefore  dost  thou  avoid  them,  as  likely  to 
insult  over  thee,  whom  thou  knowest  subject  to  the  same 
haps?  At  that  which  grieveth  any  one  part,  the  whole 
body  cannot  rejoice,  it  must  needs  be  that  the  whole  will 
labour  and  strive  to  help  that  wherewith  a  part  of  itself  is 
molested.*' 

St.  Cyprian,  being  grieved  with  the  dealings  of  them  who 
in  time  of  persecution  had  through  fear  betrayed  their  Faith, 
and  notwithstanding  thought  by  shift  to  avoid  in  that  case 
the  necessary  Discipline  of  the  Church,  wrote  for  their 
better  instruction  the  book  intituled  De  Lapsis ;  a  Treatise 
concerning  such  as  had  openly  forsaken  their  Religion,  and 
yet  were  loth  openly  to  confess  their  fault  in  such  manner 
as  they  should  have  done :  in  which  book  he  compareth 
with  this  sort  of  men,  certain  others  which  had  but  a  pur- 
pose only  to  have  departed  from  the  Faith ;  and  yet  could 
not  quiet  their  minds,  till  this  very  secret  and  hidden  fault 
was   confest :    **  How  much  both   greater  in  Faith   (saith  14"]"^* 

*  "  Plerosque  hoc  opus  ut  publicationem  sui  aut  suffugere,  aut  de  die  in  diem  difierre, 
presume  pudoris  magis  memores  quam  salutis;  velut  illi  qui,  in  partibus  verecundioribus 
OMpciu  contracta  vexatione,  conscientiam  medentium  vitant,  et  ita  cum  erubescentia  sua 
pereunt"     Tertull.  de  Poenit 


22  ^HB  SIXTH  BOOK  [Se^.  4. 

St.  Cyprian),  and  also  as  touching  their  fear,  better^  are 
those  men  who  although  neither  sacrifice  nor  libel*  could 
be  objected  against  them,  yet  because  they  thought  to  have 
done  that  which  they  should  not>  even  this  their  intent  they 
dolefully  open  unto  God's  Priests?  They  confess  that 
whereof  their  conscience  accuseth  them,  the  burthen  that 
presseth  their  minds  they  discover;  they  foreslow  not  of 
smaller  and  slighter  evils  to  seek  remedy;"  He  saith  they 
declared  their  faulty  not  to  one  only  man  in  private^  but  re- 
vealed it  to  God's  Priests ;  they  confest  it  before  the  whole 
Consistory. of  God's  Ministers. 

Salvianus  (for  I  willingly  embrace  their  conjecture^  who 
ascribe  those  Homilies  to  him  which  have  hitherto  by  com- 
mon error  past  under  the  counterfeit  name  of  Eusebius  Emis- 
senus),  I  say,  Salvianus,  though  coming  long  after  Cyprian 
in  time,  giveth  nevertheless  the  same  evidence  for  this  truth, 
in  a  case  very  little  different  from  that  before  alleged.  His 
Horn.  1.  words  are  these :  *^  Whereas,  most  dearly  beloved,  we  see 
qVa"*^  that  Penance  oftentimes  is  sought  and  sued  for  by  holy 
**'**"•  souls,  which  even  from  their  youth  have  bequeathed  them- 
selves a  precious  treasure  unto  God,  let  us  know  that  the 
inspiration  of  God's  good  Spirit  moveth  them  so  to  do  for 
the  benefit  of  his  Church,  and  let  such  as  are  wounded 
learn  to  enquire  for  that  remedy  whereunto  the  very  soundest 
do  thus  offer  and  obtrude  as  it  were  themselves,  that  if  the 
virtuous  do  bewail  small  ofiences,  the  others  cease  not  to 
lament  great."  And  surely,  when  a  man,  that  hath  less 
need,  performeth,  sub  oculis  Eccksice^  in  the  view,  sight, 
and  beholding  of  the  whole  Church,  an  office  worthy  of  his 
Faith  and  compunction  for  sin,  the  good  which  others  thereby 
reap  is  his  own  harvest,  the  heap  of  his  rewards  groweth  by 
that  which  another  gaineth,  and,  through  a  kind  of  spiritual 
usury,  from  that  amendment  of  Ufe  which  others  learn  by 
him,  there  returneth  lucre  into  his  coffers.  The  same  Sal- 
Hoin.io.  vianus,  in  another  of  his  Homilies,  '^  If  faults  haply  be  not 
Lch.^'  great  and  grievous  (for  example,  if  a  man  have  offended  in 
word,  or  in  desire,  worthy  of  reproof,  if  in  the  wantonness  of 
his  eye,  or  the  vanity  of  his  heart,)  the  stains  of  words  and 
thoughts  are  by  daily  prayer  to  be  cleansed,  and  by  private 
compunction  to  be  scoured  out:  but  if  any  man,  examining 

*  "  Qui  necessitatein  sacrificandi  pecunia  spud  magiftratum  redixnebant,  accepta  securi- 
tatis  syngrapha  Libellatici  dioebantor." 


Sed.  4.]  OF   ECCLBBIASTICAL  POLITY.  23 

inwardly  his  own  conscience^  have  committed  some  high  and 
capital  offence,  as  if  by  bearing  false  witness  he  have  quelled 
and  betrayed  his  Faith,  and  by  rashness  of  perjury  have 
violated  the  sacred  name  of  truth ;  if  with  the  mire  of  lustful 
imcleanness  he  hath  sullied  the  vafl  of  Baptism,  and  the 
gorgeous  robe  of  virginity ;  if,  by  being  the  cause  of  any 
man's  death,  he  have  been  the  death  of  the  new  man  within 
himself;  if,  by  conference  with  soothsayers,  wizards,  and 
charmers,  he  hath  enthralled  himself  to  Satan :  these  and 
such  like  committed  crimes  cannot  throughly  be  taken 
away  with  ordinary,  moderate,  and  secret  Satisfaction ;  but 
greater  causes  do  require  greater  and  sharper  remedies, 
they  need  such  remedies  as  are  not  only  sharp,  but  solemn, 
open,  and  public."*  Again,  "  Let  that  soul  (saith  he)  Hom.  s. 
answer  me,  which  through  pernicious  shamfacetness  is  now  JJcK*^" 
so  abasht  to  acknowledge  his  sin  in  conspectu  fratrum^ 
before  his  brethren,  as  he  should  have  been  abasht  to 
commit  the  same,  what  will  he  do  in  the  presence  of  that 
Divine  tribunal,  where  he  is  to  stand  arraigned  in  the 
assembly  of  a  glorious  and  celestial  host?"  I  will  here- 
unto add  but  St.  Ambrose's  testimony ;  for  the  places  which 
I  might  allege  are  more  than  the  cause  itself  needeth : 
"  There  are  many  (saith  he)  who,  fearing  the  judgment  De  Fas. 
that  is  to  come,  and  feeling  inward  remorse  of  conscience,  ub"* 
when  they  have  offered  themselves  unto  Penitency,  are**** 
enjoined  what  they  shall  do,  give  back  for  the  only  scar 
which  they  think  that  public  supplication  will  put  them 
unto."  He  speaketh  of  them  which  sought  voluntarily  to 
be  penanced,  and  yet  withdrew  themselves  from  open  Con- 
fession, which  they  that  are  Penitents  for  public  crimes  could 
not  possibly  have  done,  and  therefore  it  cannot  be  said  he 
meaneth  any  other  than  secret  sinners  in  that  place.  Gen- 
nadius,  a  Presbyter  of  Marseilles,  in  his  book  touching 
Ecclesiastical  Assertions,  maketh  but  two  kinds  of  Con- 
fession necessary :  the  one  in  private  to  God  alone  for 
smaller  offences :  the  other  open,  when  crimes  committed 
are  heinous  and  great :  ^'  Although  (saith  he)  a  man  be 
bitten  with  conscience  of  sin,  let  his  will  be  from  thence- 
forward to  sin  no  more;  let  him,  before  he  communicate, 
satisfy  with  tears  and  prayers,  and  then  putting  his  trust 
in  the  mercy  of  Almighty  God  (whose  wont  is  to  yield  to 

*  "  Graviores  et  acriores,  et  publicas  curas  reqairunt.'^ 


24  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Seci.  4. 

godly  Confessions)  let  him  boldly  receive  the  Sacrament. 
But  I  speak  this  of  such  as  have  not  burthened  themselves 
with  capital  sins :  Them  I  exhort  to  satisfy  first  by  public 
Penance,  that  so  being  reconciled  by  the  sentence  of  the 
Priest,  they  may  communicate  safely  with  others."  Thus 
still  we  hear  of  public  Confessions,  although  the  crimes 
themselves  discovered  were  not  public ;  we  hear  that  the 
cause  of  such  Confessions  was  not  the  openness,  but  the 
greatness,  of  men's  offences;  finally,  we  hear  that  the  same 
being  now  held  by  the  Church  of  Rome  to  be  a  Sacra- 
mental, were  the  only  Penitential  Confessions  used  in  the 
Church  for  a  long  time,  and  esteemed  as  necessary  remedies 
against  sin. 

They  which  will  find  Auricular  Confessions  in  St.  Cyprian, 
therefore,  must  seek  out  some  other  passage  than  that  which 
cypr.     Bellarmine  allegeth ;  ^'  Whereas  in  smaller  faults  which  are 
^  *      not  committed  against  the  Lord  himself,  there  is  a  compe- 
tent time  assigned  unto  Penitency,  and  that  Confession  is 
made,  after  that  observation  and  trial  had  been  had  of  the 
penitent's  behaviour,*  neither  may  any  communicate  till  the 
Bishop  and  Clergy  have  laid  their  hands  upon  him;  how 
much  more  ought  all  things  to  be  warily  and  stayedly  observed, 
according  to  the  Discipline   of  the  Lord,   in   these  most 
grievous   and   extreme   crimes  ?"      St.  Cyprian's   speech  is 
against  rashness  in  admitting  Idolaters  to  the  holy  Com- 
munion,  before    they   had  shewed    sufficient   Repentance, 
considering  that  other  Offenders  were  forced  to  stay  out 
their  time,  and  that  they  made  not  their  public  Confession, 
which  was  the  last  act  of  Penitency,  till  their  life  and  con- 
versation had  been  seen  into,  not  with  the  eye  of  auricular 
scrutiny,  but  of  pastoral  observation,  according  to  that  in 
the  Council  of  Nice,  where  thirteen  years  being  set  for  the 
Penitency  of  certain  Offenders,  the  severity  of  this  decree  is 
Con.      mitigated  with  special  caution :  '^  That,  in  all  such  cases, 
8,  eiiir  the  mind  of  the  penitent,  and  the  manner  of  his  Repentance, 
is  to  be  noted,  that  as  many  as  with  fear  and  tears,  and 
meekness,  and  the  exercise  of  good  works,  declared  them- 
selves to  be  Converts  indeed,  and  not  in  outward  appearance 
only,f  towards  them  the  Bishop  at  his  discretion  might  use 
more  lenity."    If  the  Council  of  Nice  suffice  not,  let  Gratian, 

*  "  Inspecta  vita  ejus  qui  agit  poenitentiam." 
f  *'  Pro  fide  et  conversatione  pcenitentium." 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.     •  25 

the  Founder  of  the  Canon  Law,  expound  Cyprian,  who  DePan. 
shewethy  that  the  stint  of  time  in  Penitency  is  either  to  be  cap'.  ' 
abridged,  or  enlarged,  as  the  Penitent's  faith  and  behaviour  ram. 
shall  give  occasion.     *^  I  have  easilier  found  out  men  (saith 
St.  Ambrose)  able  to  keep  themselves  free  from  crimes,  than  Ambrot. 
conformable  to  the  rules  which  in  Penitency  they  should  ub.  ^' 
observe."    St.  Gregory,  Bishop  of  Nice,  complaineth  and  "'**  ^^' 
inveigheth  bitterly  against  them,  who  in  the  time  of  their 
Penitency  lived   even   as   they  had   done   always  before : 
"  Their  countenance  as  cheerful,  their  attire  as  neat,  their  Greg, 
diet  as  costly,  and  their  sleep  as  secure  as  ever,  their  worldly  orat.'in 
business  purposely  followed,  to  exile  pensive  thoughts  from  aaV?** 
their  minds,  Repentance  pretended,  but  indeed  nothing  less  jadlcant. 
exprest."     These  were  the  inspections  of  life,  whereunto 
St.  Cyprian  alludeth ;  as  for  auricular  examinations,  he  knew 
them  not. 

Were  the  Fathers  then  without  use  of  private  Confession 
as  long  as  public  was  in  use  ?     I  affirm  no  such  thing. 
The  first  and  ancientest  that  mentioneth  this  Confession 
is  Origen,  by  whom  it  may  seem  that  men,  being  loth  to 
present  rashly  themselves  and  their  faults  unto  the  view  of 
the  whole  Church,  thought  it  best  to  unfold  first  their  minds 
to  some  one  special  man  of  the  Clergy,  which  might  either 
help  them  himself,  or  refer  them  to  an  higher  Court,  if  need 
were.     '^  Be  therefore  circumspect  (saith  Origen)  in  making  oHgen. 
choice  of  the  party  to  whom  thou  meanest  to  confess  thy  sin;  uxvS.' 
know  thy  physician  before  thou  use  him:  if  he  find  thy 
malady  such  as  needeth  to  be  made  public,  that  others  may 
be  the  better  by  it,  and  thyself  sooner  helpt,  his  counsel 
must  be  obeyed."     That  which  moved  sinners  thus  volun- 
tarily to  detect  themselves  both  in  private  and  in  public, 
was  fear  to  receive  with  other  Christian  men  the  mysteries 
of  heavenly  grace,  till  God's  appointed  Stewards  and  Mi- 
nisters did  judge  them  worthy :  It  is  in  this  respect  that 
St.  Ambrose  findeth  fault  with  certain  men  which  sought 
imposition  of  Penance,  and  were  not  wilUng  to  wait  their 
time,  but  would  be  presently  admitted  Communicants.  '^  Such  Ambro*. 
people  (saith  he)  do  seek,  by  so  rash  and  preposterous  de-  i Ai.""' 
sires,  rather  to  bring  the  Priest  into  bonds  than  to  loose  "**'  *" 
themselves."*     In  this  respect  it  is  that  St.  Augustine  hath  Hom.de 
likewise  said,  "  When  the  wound  of  sin  is  so  wide,  and  the  ^""*'* 


**  Si  non  tarn  se  lolyere  cupiunt  quam  Sacerdotem  ligare< 


>f 


^26  •  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [SecL  4. 

disease  so  far  gone,  that  the  medicinable  Body  and  Blood  of 
our  Lo^d  may  not  be  touched^  men  are  by  the  Bishop's 
authority  to  sequester  themselves  from  the  altar,  till  such 
time  as  they  have  repented,  and  be  after  reconciled  by  the 
same  authority." 

Furthermore,  because  the  knowledge  how  to  handle  our 
own  sores  is  no  vulgar  and  common  art,  but  we  either 
carry  towards  ourselves,  for  the  most  part,  an  over-soft  and 
gentle  hand,  fearful  of  touching  too  near  the  quick ;  or  else, 
endeavouring  not  to  be  partial,  we  fall  into  timorous  scru- 
pulosities, and  sometime  into  those  extreme  discomforts  of 
mind,  from  which  we  hardly  do  ever  lift  up  our  heads 
again ;  men  thought  it  the  safest  way  to  disclose  their  secret 
faults,  and  to  crave  imposition  of  Penance  from  them  whom 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  left  in  bis  Church  to  be  spi- 
ritual and  ghostly  Physicians,  the  Guides  and  Pastors  of 
redeemed  souls,  whose  office  doth  not  only  consist  in  general 
persuasions  unto  amendment  of  life,  but  also  in  the  private 
particular  cure  of  diseased  minds. 

Howsoever  the  Novatianists  presume  to  plead  against  the 
Horn.    Church  (saith  Salvianus)  that  "every  man  ought  to  be  his 
nfteuua  owu  Penitentiary,  and  that  it  is  a  part  of  our  duty  to  exercise, 
^*°*^*    but  not  of  the  Church's  authority  to  impose  or  prescribe. 
Repentance ;"  the  truth  is  otherwise,  the  best  and  strongest 
of  us  may  need,  in  such  cases,  direction :  **  What  doth  the 
Church  in  giving  Penance,  but  shew  the  remedies  which  sin 
requireth  ?  or  what  do  we  in  receiving  the  same,  but  fulfil 
her  precepts  ?  what  else  but  sue  unto  God  with  tears,  and 
fasts,  that  his  merciful  ears  may  be  opened  ?"   St.  Augustine's 
^„g,      exhortation  is  directly  to  the  same  purpose ;    "  Let  every 
p^iu*  man  whilst  he  hath  time  judge  himself,  and  change  his  life 
Gra"  *  ^^  ^^®  ^^^  accord ;  and  when  this  is  resolved,  let  him,  from 
jadices*^*  the  disposcrs  of  the  holy  Sacraments,  learn  in  what  manner 
he  is  to  pacify  God's  displeasure."*     But  the  greatest  thing 
which  made  men  forward  and  willing,  upon  their  knees,  to 
confess  whatsoever  they  had  committed  against  God,  and  in 
no  wise  to  be  withheld  from  the  same  with  any  fear  of  dis- 
grace, contempt  or  obloquy,  which  might  ensue,  was  their 
fervent  desire  to  be  helped  and  assisted  with  the  prayers  of 
Jam.      God's  Saints.     Wherein,   as  St.  James  doth  exhort  unto 
^•"*     mutual  Confession,  alleging  this  only  for  a  reason,  that  just 


(( 


A  prepositis  Sacramentorum  accipiat  satisfacdonis  suae  modum." 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  27 

men's  devout  prayers  are  of  great  avail  with  Grod ;  so  it  hath 
been  heretofore  the  use  of  Penitents  for  that  intent  to  un- 
burthen  their  minds,  even  to  private  persons,  and  to  crave 
their  prayers.     Whereunto  Cassianus  alluding,  counselleth, 
'^  That  if  men  possest  with  dulness  of  spirit  be  themselves  cassun. 
unapt  to  do  that  which  is  required,  they  should  in  meek  V.i, 
afiection  seek  health  at  the  lea;  t  by  good  and  virtuous  men's 
prayers   unto   God   for  them."    And   to  the  same  effect 
Gregory,  Bishop  of  Nice :  "  Humble  thyself,  and  take  unto  Greg. 
thee  such  of  thy  brethren  as  are  of  one  mind,  and  do  bear  orluone 
kind  afiection  towards  thee,  that  they  may  together  mourn  qnf  aiiet 
and  labour  for  thy  deliverance.     Shew  me  thy  bitter  andjadicut. 
abundant  tears,  that  I  may  blend  mine  own  with  them." 
But  because  of  all  men  there  is  or  should  be  none  in  that 
respect  more  fit  for  troubled  and  distressed  minds  to  repair 
unto  than  God's  Ministers,  he  proceedeth  further:  ^'Make 
the  Priest,  as  a  father,  partaker  of  thine  affliction  and  grief; 
be  bold  to  impart  imto  him  the  things  that  are  most  secret, 
he  will  have  care  both  of  thy  safety  and  of  thy  credit." 

'*  Confession  (saith  Leo)  is  first  to  be  offered  to  God,  and  LeoEp. 
dien  to  the  Priest,  as  to  one  which  maketh  supplication  for  £pi«cop. 
the  sins  of  penitent  offenders."   Suppose  we,  that  men  would  chSU"' 
ever  have  been  easily  drawn,  much  less  of  their  own  accord  p^Lni  d! 
have  come,  unto  public  Confession,  whereby  they  know  they  Jiffidt. 
should  sound  the  trumpet  of  their  own  disgrace ;  would  they 
willingly  have  done  this,  which  naturally  all  men  are  loth  to 
do,  but  for  the  singular  trust  and  confidence  which  they  had 
in  the  public  prayers  of  God's  Church  ?     "  Let  thy  Mother,  Ambr. 
the  Church,  weep  for  thee  (saith  Ambrose),  let  her  washpiiu! 
and  bathe  thy  faults  with  her  tears :  our  Lord  doth  love  that  *^'  ^®* 
many  should  become  suppliant  for  one."    In  like  sort,  long 
before  him,   TertuUian ;    ^'  Some   few   assembled    make   a  Tertuii. 
Church,  and  the  Church  is  as  Christ  himself;  when  thou 
dost   therefore  put  forth  thy  hands  to  the  knees  of  thy 
brethren,  thou  touchest  Christ,  it  is  Christ  unto  whom  thou 
art  a  supplicant :  so  when  they  pour  out  tears  over  them,  it 
is  even  Christ  that  taketh  compassion ;  Christ  which  prayeth 
when  they  pray  :  neither  can  that  easily  be  denied,  for  which 
the  Son  is  himself  contented  to  become  a  suitor.'*    Whereas 
in  these  considerations,  therefore,  voluntary  Penitents  had 
been  long  accustomed,  for  great  and  grievous  crimes,  though 
secret,  yet  openly  both  to  repent  and  confess  as  the  Canons 


28  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Sect.  4. 

of  ancient  Discipline  required ;  the  Greek  Church  first,  and 

in  process  of  time  the  Latin,  altered  this  Order,  judging  it 

sufficient  and  more  convenient,  that  such  Offenders  should 

do  Penance  and   make  Confession  in   private  only.     The 

Leo  Bp.  cause  why  the  Latins  did,  Leo  declareth,  saying,  "  Although 

that  ripeness  of  Faith  be  commendable,  which  for  the  fear 

of  God  doth  not  fear  to  incur  shame  before  all  men;  yet 

because  every  one's  crimes  are  not  such,  that  it  can  be  free 

and  safe  for  them  to  make  publication  of  all  things  wherein 

Repentance  is  necessary ;  let  a  custom,  so  unfit  to  be  kept, 

be  abrogated,  lest  many  forbear  to  use  remedies  of  Penitency, 

whilst  they  either  blush   or  are   afraid   to  acquaint  their 

enemies  with  those  acts,  for  which  the  Laws  may  take  hold 

upon  them.   Besides,  it  shall  win  the  more  [to]  Repentance, 

if  the  consciences  of  sinners  be  not  emptied  into  the  people's 

l^oKom.  ears."     And  to  this  only  cause  doth  Sozomen  impute  the 

Ecri'es.  changc  which  the  Grecians  made,  by  ordaining  throughout 

c.  16.]'  all  Churches  certain  Penitentiaries  to  take  the  Confessions, 

gocrat.  and  appoint  the  Penances  of  secret  Offenders.     Socrates 

Bceies.   (for  this  also  may  be  true,  that  more  inducements  than  one 

c.  19.]    did  set  forward  an  alteration  so  generally  made)  affirmeth 

the  Grecians  (and  not  unlikely)  to  have  specially  respected 

therein   the  occasion  which  the  Novatianists  took   at  the 

multitude  of  public  Penitents,  to  insult  over  the  Discipline 

of  the  Church,  against  which  they  still  cried  out  wheresoever 

they  had  time  and  place,  "  He  that  sheweth  sinners  favour, 

doth  but  teach  the  innocent  to  sin:"  and  therefore  they 

themselves  admitted  no  man  to  their  communion  upon  any 

Repentance  which  once  was  known  to  have  offended  after 

Baptism,  making  sinners  thereby  not  the  fewer,  but  the 

closer  and  the  more  obdurate,  how  fair  soever  their  pretence 

might  seem. 

The  Grecians'  Canon  for  some  one  Presbyter  in  every 
Church  to  undertake  the  charge  of  Penitency,  and  to  receive 
their  voluntary  Confessions  which  had  sinned  after  Baptism, 
continued  in  force  for  the  space  of  above  some  hundred  years, 
till  Nectarius,  and  the  Bishops  of  Churches  under  him, 
begun  a  second  alteration,  abolishing  even  that  Confession 
[Socrat.  which  their  Penitentiaries  took  in  private.  There  came  to 
otsop.]  ^j^^  Penitentiary  of  the  Church  of  Constantinople  a  certain 
gentlewoman,  and  to  him  she  made  particular  Confession  of 
her  faults  committed  after  Baptism,  whom  thereupon  he 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  29 

advised  to  continue  in  fasting  and  prayer,  that  as  with  tongue 
she  had  acknowledged  her  sins,  so  there  might  appear  like- 
wise in  her  some  work  worthy  of  Repentance :  but  the  gen- 
dewoman  goeth  forward,  and  detecteth  herself  of  a  crime, 
whereby  they  were  forced  to  disrobe  an  Ecclesiastical  person, 
that  is,  to  degrade  a  Deacon  of  the  same  Church.  When 
the  matter  by  this  mean  came  to  public  notice,  the  people 
were  in  a  kind  of  tumult  offended,  not  only  at  that  which 
was  done,  but,  much  more,  because  the  Church  should 
thereby  endure  open  infamy  and  scorn.  The  Clergy  per- 
plexed, and  altogether  doubtful  what  way  to  take ;  till  one 
Eudaemon,  born  in  Alexandria,  but  at  that  time  a  Priest  in 
the  Church  of  Constantinople,  considering  that  the  cause  of 
voluntary  Confession,  whether  public  or  private,  was  espe- 
cially to  seek  the  Church's  aid,  as  hath  been  before  declared, 
lest  men  should  either  not  communicate  with  others,  or  wit- 
tingly hazard  their  souls  if  so  be  they  did  communicate,  and 
that  the  inconvenience  which  grew  to  the  whole  Church  was 
otherwise  exceeding  great,  but  especially  grievous  by  means 
of  so  manifold  offensive  detections,  which  must  needs  be 
continually  more,  as  the  world  did  itself  wax  continually 
worse,  (for  antiquity,  together  with  the  gravity  and  severity 
thereof  (saith  Sozomen),  had  already  begun  by  little  and 
little  to  degenerate  into  loose  and  careless  living,  whereas 
before  offences  were  less,  partly  through  bashfulness  in  them 
which  open  their  own  faults,  and  partly  by  means  of  their 
great  austerity  which  thought  [sate]  as  judges  in  this  business) ; 
these  things  Eudaemon  having  weighed  with  himself,  resolved 
easily  the  mind  of  Nectarius,  that  the  Penitentiaries'  office 
must  be  taken  away,  and  for  participation  in  God's  holy 
mysteries  every  man  be  left  to  his  own  conscience;  which 
was,  as  he  thought,  the  only  mean  to  free  the  Church  from 
danger  of  obloquy  and  disgrace.  "  Thus  much  (saith  So- 
crates) I  am  the  bolder  to  relate,  because  I  received  it  from 
Eudaemon's  own  mouth,  to  whom  mine  answer  was  at  that 
time ;  Whether  your  counsel,  sir,  have  been  for  the  Church's 
good,  or  otherwise,  God  knoweth.  But  I  see  you  have  f^"^*  , 
given  occasion,  whereby  we  shall  not  now  any  more  repre- 
hend one  another's  faults,  nor  observe  that  Apostohc  precept 
which  saith.  Have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  [Eph. 
darkness,  but  rather  be  ye  also  reprovers  of  them."  With 
Socrates,  Sozomen  both  agreeth  in  the  occasion  of  abolishing  [Soaom. 


so  THE    SIXTH   BOOK  [Scct.  4/. 

Penitentiaries;  and^  moreover,  testifieth  also,  that  in  hia 
time,  living  with  the  younger  Theodosius,  the  same  aho- 
lition  did  still  continue,  and  that  the  Bishops  had  in  a 
manner  every  where  followed  the  example  given  them  by. 
Nectarius. 

Wherefore,  to  implead  the  truth  of  this  history,  Cardinal 
Baronius  allegeth  that  Socrates,  Sozomen,  and  Eudaemon 
were  all  Novatianists ;  and  that  they  falsify  in  saying  (for 
so  they  report),  that  as  many  as  held  the  consubstantial 
being  of  Christ,  gave  their  assent  to  the  abrogation  of  the 
fore-rehearsed  Canon.  The  sum  is,  he  would  have  taken  it 
for  a  fable,  and  the  world  to  be  persuaded  that  Nectarius 
did  never  any  such  thing.*  Why  then  should  Socrates 
first,  and  afterwards  Sozomen,  publish  it  ?  To  please  their 
pew-fellows,  the  disciples  of  Novatian?  A  poor  gratifi- 
cation, and  they  very  silly  friends  that  would  take  lies  for 
good  turns.  For  the  more  acceptable  the  matter  was,  being 
deemed  true,  the  less  they  must  needs  (when  they  found  the 
contrary)  either  credit,  or  affect  him  which  had  deceived 
them.  Notwithstanding,  we  know  that  joy  and  gladness, 
rising  from  false  information,  do  not  only  make  men  so 
forward  to  beheve  that  which  they  first  hear,  but  also  apt 
to  scholy  upon  it,  and  to  report  as  true  whatsoever  they 
wish  were  true.  But,  so  far  is  Socrates  from  any  such 
purpose,  that  the  fact  of  Nectarius,  which  others  did  both 
like  and  follow,  he  doth  disallow  and  reprove.  His  speech 
to  Eudaemon,  before  set  down,  is  proof  sufficient  that  he 
writeth  nothing  but  what  was  famously  known  to  all,  and 
what  himself  did  wish  had  been  otherwise.  As  for  Sozo- 
men's  correspondency  with  Heretics,  having  shewed  to  what 
end  the  Church  did  first  ordain  Penitentiaries,  he  addeth 
immediately,  that  Novatianists,  which  had  no  care  of  Re- 
pentance, could  have  no  need  of  this  office.  Are  these  the 
words  of  a  friend  or  enemy?     Besides,  in  the  entrance  of 

*.**  Tanta  hsec  Socrati  testanti  praestanda  est  fides,  quanta  cseteris  Hsereticis  de  suis 
dc^matibus  tractantibus ;  quippe  Novatianus  secta  cum  fuerit,  quam  vere  ac  sincere  hsc 
scripserit  adversus  Pcenitentiam  in  Ecclesia  administrari  solitaniy  quemlibet  credo  posse 
facile  judicare."  Baron,  vol.  i.  ann.  Chr.  56.  '*  Sozomenum  eandem  prorsus  causam 
fovisse  certum  est.  Nee  Eudsemonem  ilium  alium  quam  Novatianae  sectse  hominem  fuisse 
credendum  est."  Ibidem.  "  Sacerdos  iile  merito  a  Nectario  est  gradu  amotus  officioque 
depositus,  quo  facto  Novatiani  (ut  mos  est  Haereticorum)  quamcunque  licet  levem,  ut  dnceris 
dogmatibus  detrahant,  accipere  ausi  occasionem,  non  tantum  Presbyterum  Poenitentiarium  in 
ordinera  redactum,  sed  et  Pcenitentiam  ipsam  una  cum  eo  fuisse  proscriptami  calumniose 
admodum  condamarunt,  cum  tamen  ilia  potius  theatralis  fieri  interdum  solita  peccatorum 
fuerit  abrogata."     Ibidem. 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  31 

diat  whole  narration ;  '^  Not  to  sin  (saith  he)  at  all,  would 
require  a  nature  more  divine  than  ours  is :  hut  God  hath  [Matt. 
commanded  to  pardon  sinners ;  yea,  although  they  trans-  22.]  * 
gress  and  offend  often."  Could  there  be  any  thing  spoken 
more  directly  opposite  to  the  doctrine  of  Novatian? 
Eudaemon  was  Presbyter  under  Nectarius.  To  Nova- 
tianists  the  Emperor  gave  liberty  of  using  their  Religion 
quietly  by  themselves,  under  a  Bishop  of  their  own,  even 
within  the  city,  for  that  they  stood  with  the  Church  in 
defence  of  the  Catholic  Faith  against  all  other  Heretics 
besides.  Had  therefore  Eudaemon  favoured  their  Heresy, 
their  camps  were  not  pitched  so  far  off  but  he  might  at  all 
times  have  found  easy  access  unto  them.  Is  there  any  man 
that  hath  lived  with  him,  and  hath  touched  him  that  way? 
if  not,  why  suspect  we  him  more  than  Nectarius?  Their 
report,  touching  Grecian  Catholic  Bishops,  who  gave  appro- 
bation to  that  which  was  done,  and  did  also  the  like  them- 
selves in  their  own  Churches,  we  have  no  reason  to  discredit 
without  some  manifest  and  clear  evidence  brought  against  it. 
For  of  Catholic  Bishops,  no  Ukelihood  but  that  their  greatest 
respect  to  Nectarius,  a  man  honoured  in  those  parts  no 
less  than  the  Bishop  of  Rome  himself  in  the  Western 
Churches,  brought  them  both  easily  and  speedily  unto  con- 
formity with  him:  Arians,  Eunomians,  Apollinarians,  and 
the  rest  that  stood  divided  from  the  Church,  held  their 
Penitentiaries  as  before.  Novatianists  from  the  beginning 
had  never  any,  because  their  opinion  touching  Penitency 
was  against  the  practice  of  the  Church  therein,  and  a  cause 
why  they  severed  themselves  from  the  Church :  so  that  the 
very  state  of  things,  as  they  then  stood,  giveth  great  shew 
of  probability  to  his  speech,  who  hath  affirmed,  "  That  [Socrat. 
they  only  which  held  the  Son  consubstantial  with  the  *"** 
Father,  and  Novatianists  which  joined  with  them  in  the 
same  opinion,  had  no  Penitentiaries  in  their  Churches,  the 
rest  retained  them."  By  this  it  appeareth,  therefore,  how 
Baronius,  finding  the  relation  plain,  that  Nectarius  did 
abolish  even  those  private  secret  Confessions  which  the 
people  had  been  before  accustomed  to  make  to  him  that 
was  Penitentiary,  laboureth  what  he  may  to  discredit  the 
authors  of  the  report,  and  to  leave  it  imprinted  in  men's 
minds,  that  whereas  Nectarius  did  but  abrogate  pubUc  Con- 
fession, Novatianists  have  maliciously  forged  the  abolition 


32  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Seci.  4f. 

of  private ;  as  if  the  odds  between  these  two  were  so  great 
in  the  balance  of  their  judgment,  which  equally  hated  and 
contemned  both ;  or,  as  if  it  were  not  more  clear  than  light, 
that  the  first  alteration  which  established  Penitentiaries 
took  away  the  burthen  of  public  Confession  in  that  kind  of 
penitents ;  and,  therefore,  the  second  must  either  abrogate 
private,  or  nothing. 

Cardinal  Bellarmine,  therefore,  finding  that  against  the 
Writers  of  the  History  it  is  but  vain  to  stand  upon  so 
doubtful  terms  and  exceptions,  endeavoureth  mightily  to 
prove,  even  by  their  report,  no  other  Confession  taken  away 
than  public,  which  Penitentiaries  used  in  private  to  impose 
upon  public  Offenders :  **  For  why  ?  It  is  (saith  he)  very 
certain,  that  the  name  of  Penitents  in  the  Fathers'  writings 
signifieth  only  public  Penitents;  certain,  that  to  hear  the 
Confessions  of  the  rest  was  more  than  one  could  possibly 
have  done ;  certain,  that  Sozomen,  to  shew  how  the  Latin 
Church  retained  in  his  time  what  the  Greek  had  clean  cast 
off,  declareth  the  whole  Order  of  public  Penitency  used  in 
the  Church  of  Rome,  but  of  private  he  maketh  no  mention." 
And,  in  these  considerations,  Bellarmine  will  have  it  the 
meaning  both  of  Socrates  and  Sozomen,  that  the  former 
Episcopal  Constitution,  which  first  did  erect  Penitentiaries, 
could  not  concern  any  other  Offenders  than  such  as  publicly 
had  sinned  after  Baptism ;  that  only  they  were  prohibited 
to  come  to  the  Holy  Communion,  except  they  did  first 
in  secret  confess  all  their  sins  to  the  Penitentiary,  by  his 
appointment  openly  acknowledge  their  open  crimes,  and  do 
public  Penance  for  them ;  that  whereas,  before  Novatian's 
uprising,  no  man  was  constrainable  to  confess  publicly  any 
sin,  this  Canon  enforced  public  Offenders  thereunto,  till  such 
time  as  Nectarius  thought  good  to  extinguish  the  practice 
thereof. 

Let  us  examine,  therefore,  these  subtile  and  fine  conjec- 
tures, whether  they  be  able  to  hold  the  touch.  "  It  seemed 
good  (saith  Socrates)  to  put  down  the  Office  of  these  Priests 
which  had  charge  of  Penitency ;  what  charge  that  was,  the 
kinds  of  Penitency  then  usual  must  make  manifest."*  There 
is  often  speech  in  the  Fathers'  writings,  in  their  books  fre- 
quent mention,  of  Penitency  exercised  within  the  chambers 


•  Tohs  M  rris  pLtrauotas  irtptt\t7v  wpttrfivrtpovs. 


SecL  4.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  33 

of  our  heart,  and  seen  of  God,  and  not  communicated 
to  any  other,  the  whole  charge  of  which  Penitency  is 
imposed  of  God,  and  doth  rest  upon  the  sinner  himself. 
But  if  Penitents  in  secret,  being  guilty  of  crimes  whereby 
they  knew  they  had  made  themselves  unfit  guests  for  the 
Table  of  our  Lord,  did  seek  direction  for  their  better  per- 
formance of  that  which  should  set  them  clear,  it  was  in 
this  case  the  Penitentiary's  office  to  take  their  Confessions, 
to  advise  them  the  best  way  he  could  for  their  souls'  good, 
to  admonish  them,  to  counsel  them,  but  not  to  lay  upon 
them  more  than  private  Penance.  As  for  notorious  wicked 
persons,  whose  crimes  were  known,  to  convict,  judge,  and 
punish  them  was  the  office  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Consistory; 
Penitentiaries  had  their  institution  to  another  end.  But 
unless  we  imagine  that  the  ancient  time  knew  no  other 
Repentance  than  public,  or  that  they  had  little  occasion  to 
speak  of  any  other  Repentance,  or  else  that  in  speaking 
thereof  they  used  continually  some  other  name,  and  not  the 
name  of  Repentance,  whereby  to  express  private  Penitency, 
how  standeth  it  with  reason,  that  whensoever  they  write  of 
Penitents,  it  should  be  thought  they  meant  only  public 
Penitents  ?  The  truth  is,  they  handle  all  three  kinds,  but 
private  and  voluntary  Repentance  much  oft'ner,  as  being  of 
hr  more  general  use ;  whereas  public  was  but  incident  unto 
few,  and  not  oft'ner  than  once  incident  unto  any.  Howbeit, 
because  they  do  not  distinguish  one  kind  of  Penitency  from 
another  by  difference  of  names,  our  safest  way  for  construc- 
tion is  to  follow  circumstance  of  matter,  which  in  this 
narration  will  not  yield  itself  appliable  only  untp  Public 
Penance,  do  what  they  can  that  would  so  expound  it. 
They  boldly  and  confidently  affirm,  that  no  man  being 
compellable  to  confess  publicly  any  sin  before  Novatian's 
time,  the  end  of  instituting  Penitentiaries  afterward  in  the 
Church  was,  that  by  them  men  might  be  constrained  unto 
Public  Confession.  Is  there  any  record  in  the  world  which 
doth  testify  this  to  be  true?  There  is  that  testifieth  the 
plain  contrary :  for  Sozomen,  declaring  purposely  the  cause 
of  their  institution,  saith,  "  That  whereas  men  openly 
craving  pardon  at  God's  hands  (for  Public  Confession,  the 
last  act  of  Penitency,  was  always  made  in  the  form  of  a 
contrite  prayer  unto  God),  it  could  not  be  avoided,  but  they 
must  withal  confess  what  their  offences  were."    This,  in  the 

VOL.  III.  D 


34  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Sect.  4. 

opinion  of  their  Prelate^  seemed  from  the  first  beginning 
(as  we  may  probably  think)  to  be  somewhat  burthensome ; 
that  men,  whose  crimes  were  unknown,  should  blaze  their 
own  faults,  as  it  were,   on  the  stage,  acquainting  all  the 
people  with  whatsoever  they  had  done  amiss.     And,  there- 
fore, to  remedy  this  inconvenience,   they  laid  the  charge 
upon  one  only  Priest,  chosen  out  of  such  as  were  of  best 
conversation,  a  silent  and  a  discreet  man,  to  whom  they 
which  had  ofiended  might  resort,  anji  lay  open  their  Uves. 
He,  according  to  the  quality  of  every  one's  transgressions, 
appointed  what  they  should  do  or  suffer,  and  left  them  to 
execute  it  upon  themselves.     Can  we  wish  a  more  direct 
and  evident  testimony,  that  the  Office  here  spoken  of  was 
to  ease  voluntary  Penitents  from  the  burthen   of  public 
Confessions,  and  not  to  constrain  notorious  Offenders  there- 
unto ?     That  such  Ofienders  were  not  compellable  to  open 
Confessions  till  Novatian's  time,  that  is  to  say,  till  af);er  the 
days  of  persecution  under  Deckis  the  Emperor,   they  of 
all  men  should  not  so  peremptorily  avouch ;  with  whom,  if 
Fabian,  Bishop  of  Rome,  who  suffered  martyrdom  the  first 
year  of  Decius,  be  of  any  authority  and  credit,  it  must 
enforce  them  to  reverse  their  sentence ;  his  words  are  so 
Fab.      plsiin  and  clear  against  them.     '^  For  such  as  .commit  those 
Ep!?.*'  crimes,  whereof  the  Apostle  hath  said.  They  that  do  them 
SJSi''    ^^  never  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  must  (saith  he) 
p.  356.    })e  forced  unto  amendment,  because  they  slip  down  to  Hell, 
if  Ecclesiastical  Authority  stay  them  not."    Their  conceit  of 
impossibility,  that  one  man  should  suffice  to  take  the  general 
charge  of  Penitency  in  such  a  Church  as  Constantinople, 
hath  risen  from  a  mere  erroneous  supposal,  that  the  ancient 
manner  of  Private  Confession  was  like  the  Shrift  at  this 
day  usual  in  the  Church  of  Rome,  which  tieth  all  men  at 
one  certain  time  to  make  Confession;  whereas  Confession 
was  then  neither  looked  for,  till  men  did  offer  it,  nor  offered 
for  the  most  part  by  any  other  than  such  as  were  guilty  of 
heinous  transgressions,  nor  to  them  any  time  appointed  for 
that  purpose.     Finally,   the  drift  which  Sozomen  had  in 
relating  the  Discipline  of  Rome,  and  the  Form  of  Public 
Penitency  there  retained  even  till  his  time,  is  not  to  signify 
that  only  Public  Confession  was  abrogated  by  Nectarius, 
but  that  the  West  or  Latin  Church  held  still  one  and  the 
same  Order  from  the  very  beginning,  and  had  not,  as  the 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  ZS 

Greeks  first  cut  oflF  public  voluntary  Confession  by  Ordain- 
ing, and  then  private,  by  removing  Penitentiaries.  Where- 
fore, to  conclude,  it  standeth,  I  hope,  very  plain  and  clear, 
first,  against  the  one  Cardinal,  that  Nectarius  did  truly 
abrogate  Confession  in  such  sort  as  the  Ecclesiastical 
History  hath  reported;  and,  secondly,  as  clear  against  them 
both,*  that  it  was  not  Public  Confession  only  which  Necta- 
rius did  abolish. 

The  parodox  in  maintenance  whereof  Hessels  wrote  pur- 
posely a  book  touching  this  argument,  to  shew  that  Necta^ 
rius  did  but  put  the  Penitentiary  from  his  Office,  and  not 
take  away  the  Office  itself,  is  repugnant  to  the  whole  advice 
which  Eudsemon  gave,  of  leaving  the  people  from  that  time 
forward  to  their  own  consciences;  repugnant  to  the  con- 
ference between  Socrates  and  Eudsemon,  wherein  complaint 
is  made  of  some  inconvenience  which  the  want  of  the  Office 
would  breed ;  finally,  repugnant  tb  that  which  the  History 
declareth  concerning  other  Churches,  which  did  as  Nectarius 
had  done  before  them,  not  in  deposing  the  same  man  (for 
that  was  impossible),  but  in  removing  the  sanie  Office  out 
of  their  Churches,  which  Nectarius  had  banished  from  his. 
For  which  cause,  Bellarmine  doth  well  reject  the  opinion  of 
Hessels,  howsoever  it  please  Pamelius  to  adnmre  it  as  a 
wonderful  happy  invention.t  But  in  sum,  they  are  all 
gravelled,  no  one  of  them  able  to  go  smoothly  away,  and 
to  satisfy  either  others  or  himself  with  Iiis  own  conceit 
concerning  Nectarius.  Only  in  this  they  are  stiff*,  that 
Auricular  Confession  Nectarius  did  not  abrogate,  lest  if  so 
much  should  be  acknowledged,  it  might  enforce  them  to 
grant  that  the  Greek  Church  at  that  time  held  not  Con- 
fession, as  the  Latin  now  doth,  to  be  the  part  of  a  Sacrament 
instituted  by  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  which  therefore  the 
Church  till  the  world's  end  hath  no  power  to  alter.  Yet 
seeing  that  as  long  as  pubUc  voluntary  Confession  of  private 
crimes  did  continue  in  either  Church  (as  in  the  one  it 
remained  not  much  above  two  hundred  years,  in  the  other 
about  four  hundred),  the  only  acts  of  such  Repentance 
were ;  first,  the  Ofiender's  intimation  of  those  crimes  to  some 

*  [Baronius  and  Bellarmine.] 

t  "  Nee  est  quod  sibi  blandiantur  illi  de  facto  Nectarii,  cum  id  potius  secretoram  pecca- 
tonmi  Confesdonem  comprobet,  et  non  aliud  quam  Presbyterum  pcenitentialem  illo  officio 
tuo  morerlt ;  uti  ampUadme  dedudt  D.  Johannes  Hasselus."  PameL  in  Cypr.  lib.  de  anhdt.  98^ 
et  hi  lib.  TertulL  de  Poenit.  aimot  1. 

d2 


36  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Sect.  4f. 

one  Presbyter^  for  which  imposition  of  Penance  was  sought ; 
secondly^  the  undertaking  of  Penance  imposed  by  the 
Bishop ;  thirdly^  after  the  same  performed  and  ended,  open 
Confession  to  God  in  the  hearing  of  the  whole  Church; 
whereupon,  fourthly,  ensued  the  Prayer  of  the  Church; 
fifthly,  then  the  Bishop's  Imposition  of  Hands;  and  so, 
sixthly,  the  party's  reconciliation  or  restitution  to  his  former 
right  in  the  holy  Sacrament ; — I  would  gladly  know  of  them 
which  make  only  private  Confession  a  part  of  their  Sacra- 
ment of  Penance,  how  it  could  be  so  in  those  times  ?  For 
where  the  Sacrament  of  Penance  is  ministered,  they  hold 
that  Confession  to  be  Sacramental  which  he  receiveth  who 
must  absolve;  whereas  during  the  fore-rehearsed  manner 
of  Penance,  it  can  no  where  be  shewed,  that  the  Priest  to 
whom  secret  information  was  given  did  reconcile  or  absolve 
any;  for  how  could  he,  when  pubUc  Confession  was  to  go 
before  reconciUation,  and  reconciliation  likewise  in  public 
thereupon  to  ensue?  So  that  if  they  did  account  any  Con- 
fession Sacramental,  it  was  surely  Public,  which  is  now 
abolisht  in  the  Church  of  Rome ;  and  as  for  that  which  the 
Church  of  Rome  doth  so  esteem,  the  Ancient  neither  had 
it  in  such  estimation,  nor  thought  it  to  be  of  so  absolute 
necessity  for  the  taking  away  of  sin ;  but  (for  any  thing  that 
I  could  ever  observe  out  of  them)  although  not  only  in 
crimes  open  and  notorious,  which  made  men  unworthy  and 
uncapable  of  holy  mysteries,  their  Discipline  required  first 
Public  Penance,  and  then  granted  that  which  St.  Jerome 
mentioneth,  saying,  "  The  Priest  layeth  his  hand  upon  the 
Penitent,  and  by  invocation  entreateth  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
may  return  to  him  again;  and  so,  after  having  enjoined 
solemnly  all  the  people  to  pray  for  him,  reconcileth  to  the 
[icor.  altar  him  who  was  delivered  to  Satan  for  the  destruction 
of  his  flesh,  that  his  spirit  might  be  safe  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord."*  Although  I  say  not  only  in  such  offences  being 
famously  known  to  the  world,  but  also,  if  the  same  were 
committed  secretly,  it  was  the  custom  of  those  times  both 
that  private  intimation  should  be  given  and  public  Confes- 
sion made  thereof;  in  which  respect  whereas  all  men  did 
willingly  the  one,  but  would  as  willingly  have  withdrawn 


*  "  Sacerdos  imponit  manum  subjecto,  reditum  Spiritus  Sancti  invocat,  atque  ita  eum, 
qui  traditiu  fuerat  Satans  in  interitum  carnis,  ut  Spiritus  salvus  fieret,  indicta  in  populum 
oratione,  altari  reconciliat.*'     Hier.  advera.  Lucif. 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  37 

themselves  from  the  other  had  they  known  how ;  "  Is  it  Ambroi. 
tolerable    (saith   St.  Ambrose)    that  to  sue  to  God  thou  ut^u?"' 
shouldst  be  ashamed^  which  blushest  not  to  seek  and  sue  ^'  ^^* 
unto  man?     Should  it  grieve  thee  to  be  a  suppliant  to  him 
from  whom  thou  canst  not  possibly  hide  thyself;  when  to 
open  thy  sins  to  him^  from  whom^  if  thou  wouldst^  thou 
mightest  conceal  them^  it  doth  not  any  thing  at  all  trouble 
thee?     This  thou  art  loth  to  do  in  the  Churchy  where^  all 
being  sinners^  nothing  is  more  opprobrious  indeed  than 
concealment  of  sin^  the  most  humble  the  best  thought  of, 
and  the  lowliest  accounted  the  justest."     All  thb  notwith- 
standing,  we  should  do  them  very  great  wrong  to  father 
any  such  opinion  upon  them,  as  if  they  did  teach  it  a  thing 
impossible  for  any  sinner  to  reconcile  himself  unto  God 
without  Confession  unto  the  Priest.     Would  Chrysostom, 
thus  persuaded,  have  said,  ^'  Let  the  enquiry  and  punish- 
ment of  thy  offences  be  made  in  thine  own  thoughts;  let  the 
Tribunal  whereat  thou  arraignest  thyself  be  without  witness; 
let  God,  and  only  God,  see  thee  and  thy  Confession"?* 
Would  Cassianus,  so  believing,  have  given  counsel,  **  That  canian. 
if  any  were  withheld  with  bashfulness  from  discovering  their  so!  c*^8. 
faults  to  men,  they  should  be  so  much  the  more  instant  and 
constant  in  opening  them  by  suppUcation  to  God  himself, 
whose  wont  is  to  help  without  publication  of  men's  shame, 
and  not  to  upbraid  them  when  he  pardoneth"?    Finally, 
would  Prosper,  settled  in  this  opinion,  have  made  it,  as  touch- 
ing reconciliation  to  God,  a  matter  indifferent,  "  Whether  Protoer. 
men  of  Ecclesiastical  Order  did  detect  their  crimes  by  con.  * 
Confession,  or  leaving  the  world  ignorant  thereof,  would  \ih\i 
separate  voluntarily  themselves  for  a  time  from  the  altar,  ^' 
though  not  in  affection,  yet  in  execution  of  their  Ministry, 
and  so  bewail  their  corrupt  life"?    Would  he  have  willed 
them  as  he  doth  '^  to  make  bold  of  it,  that  the  favour  of 
God  being  either  way  recovered  by  fruits  of  forcible  Repen- 
tance, they  should  not  only  receive  whatsoever  they  had  lost 
by  sin,  but  also,  after  this  their  new  enfranchisement,  aspire 
to  the  endless  joys  of  that  supernal  City"?     To  conclude, 
we  every   where   find   the  use  of   Confession,    especially 
Public,  allowed  of  and  commended  by  the  Fathers ;  but  that 

*  Ocpl  fierayoias  Kai  i^otxoXjoyfia'tws.     Tlaph  ro7s  \oyifffio7s  ywicrBto  r&v  TvwK'm^i^Xri- 
Chrys.  Horn.  [ii.  in  Psal.  I.] 


i 


$S  THE   SIXTH    BOOK  [SecL  4. 

extreme  find  rigorous  necessity  of  Auricular  and  private 
Confession^  which  is  at  this  day  so  mightily  upheld  by  the 
Church  of  Rome,  we  find  not.  First,  it  was  not  then  the 
Faith  and  Doctrine  of  God's  Church,  as  of  the  Papacy  at 
this  present:  Secondly,  that  the  only  remedy  for  sin  after 
Baptism  is  Sacramental  Penitency :  Thirdly,  that  Confession 
in  secret  is  an  essential  part  thereof:  Fourthly,  that  God 
himself  cannot  now  forgive  sin  without  the  Priest :  That, 
because  forgiveness  at  the  hands  of  the  Priest  must  arise 
from  Confession  in  the  Ofienders,  therefore  to  confess  unto 
Iblm  is  a  matter  of  such  necessity,  as  being  not  either  in 
.deed,  or,  at  the  least,  in  desire  performed,  excludeth  utterly 
from  all  pardon,  and  must  consequently  in  Scripture  be 
commanded  wheresoever  any  promise  of  forgiveness  is  made. 
No,  no;  these  opinions  have  youth  in  their  countenance, 
antiquity  knew  them  not,  it  never  thought  nor  dreamed  of 

them. 

./  

But  to  let  pass  the  Papacy.    Forasmuch  as  Repentance 

doth  import  alteration  within  the  mind  of  a  sinful  man, 

,  whereby  through  the  power  of  God's  most  gracious  and 

blessed  Spirit,  he  seeth  and  with  unfeigned  sorrow  acknow- 

ledgeth  former  offences  committed  against  God,  hath  them 

in  utter  detestation,  seeketh  pardon  for  them  in  such  sort  as 

a  Christian  should  do,  and  with  a  resolute  purpose  settleth 

himself  to  avoid  them,  leading,  as  near  as  God  shaU  assist 

him,  for  ever  after,  an  unspotted  life ;  and  in  the  Order 

,..  (which  Christian  Religion  hath  taught  for  procurement  of 

God's  mercy  towards  sinners)  Confession  is  acknowledged  a 

principal  duty,  yea,  in  some  cases.  Confession  to  man,  not 

caiv.     to  God  only ;  it  is  not  in  reformed  Churches  denied  by  the 

m/ck  leameder  sort  of  Divines,  but  that  even  this  Confession, 

*^^ "'  cleared  from  all  errors,  is  both  lawful  and  behoveful  for 

God's  people.*     Confession  by  man  being  either  private  or 

*  ["  Although  James,  chap.  ▼.  16,  hath  assigned  no  man  by  name  into  whose  bosom  we 
should  unload  ourselves ;  leaveth  us  free  choice  to  confess  to  him  that  shall  seem  meetest  unto 
us  of  all  the  Flock  of  the  Church  ;  yet  we  ought  principally  to  choose  the  Pastors,  because  they 
are,  for  the  most  part,  in  comparison  of  the  other,  to  be  judged  meetest  I  say  that,  because 
the  Lord  appointeth  Uiem  by  the  very  calling  of  their  Ministry,  at  whose  mouth  we  should  be 
instructed  to  subdue  and  correct  our  sins,  and  also  may  receive  comfort  by  trust  of  pardon. 
For  as  the  office  of  mutual  admonishment  and  reproving  is  conmiitted  to  all  men,  Matt.  xvtiL 
15 — 20,  yet  it  is  specially  enjoined  to  the  Ministers.  So  whenas  we  all  ought  to  comfort 
and  confirm  one  another  in  confidence  of  God's  mercy;  yet  we  see  that  the  Ministers,  to 
assure  our  consdenoes  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  are  ordained,  as  it  were,  witnesses  and 
lodges  thereof,  insomuch  that  they  be  said  to  *  foigive  sins'  and  *  loose  souls,'  John  xx.  23, 
Matt.  xvi.  19.    When  thou  hearest  this  to  be  ascribed  unto  them,  think  that  it  is  for  thy 


Sect.  4f.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  89 

public,  private  Confession  to  the  Minister  alone  touching 
secret  crimes,  or  Absolution  thereupon  ensuing,  as  the  one, 
so  the  other  is  neither  practised  by  the  French  Discipline, 
nor  used  in  any  of  those  Churches  which  have  been  cast  by 
the  French  mould.  Open  Confession  to  be  made  in  the 
face  of  the  whole  Congregation  by  notorious  malefactors 
they  hold  necessary ;  howbeit  not  necessary  towards  the 
remission  of  sins;  but  only  in  some  sort  to  content  the 
Church,  and  that  one  man's  Repentance  may  seem  to 
strengthen  many,  which  before  had  been  weakened  by  one 
man's  fall.*  Saxonians  and  Bohemians  in  their  Discipline 
constrain  no  man  to  open  Confession.  Their  doctrine  is, 
that  whose  faults  have  been  public,  and  thereby  scandalous 
unto  the  world,  such,  when  God  giveth  them  the  spirit  of 
Repentance,  ought  as  solemnly  to  return,  as  they  have 
openly  gone  astray :  first,  for  the  better  testimony  of  their 
own  unfeigned  conversion  unto  God ;  secondly,  the  more  to 
notify  their  reconcilement  unto  the  ChUrch ;  and  lastly,  that 
others  may  make  benefit  of  their  example.  But  concerning 
Confession  in  private,  the  Churches  of  Germany,  as  well  Harm. 
the  rest  as  Lutherans,  agree,  that  all  men  should  at  certain  sect.  s. 
times  confess  their  ofiences  to  Gt)d  in  the  hearing  of  God's  co^m.* 
Ministers,  thereby  to  shew  how  their  sins  displease  them ;  ^  ^^ 
to  receive  instruction  for  the  warier  carriage  of  themselves 
hereafter ;  to  be  soundly  resolved,  if  any  scruple  or  snare  of 
conscience  do  entangle  their  minds ;  and,  which  is  most  ma- 
terial, to  the  end  that  men  may  at  God's  hands  seek  every 
one  his  own  particular  pardon,  through  the  power  of  those  CMatt. 
Keys,  which  the  Minister  of  God  using  according  to  our 

profit :  therefore,  let  every  one  of  the  Fsdthful  remember  this  to  be  his  duty,  if  he  be  privately 
so  vexed  and  troubled  with  the  feefing  of  sins  that  he  cannot  wind  out  himself  without  help  of 
another,  not  to  neglect  the  remedy  the  Lord  hath  offered  him ;  that  is,  lor  his  relief,  to  use 
the  private  confession  to  his  own  Pastor ;  and  for  his  comfort,  to  crave  the  private  help  of  him 
whose  duty  it  is  both  publicly  aind  privately  to  comfort  the  people  of  God  with  the  doctrine  of 
the  GospeL  But  alway  this  moderation  is  to  be  used,  where  God  appcHnteth  no  certaunty, 
not  to  bind  consciences  with  a  certain  yoke.  Hereupon  followeth  that  such  Confession  ought 
to  be  free :  not  to  be  required  of  all  men,  but  to  be  commended  to  those  only  that  shall  under^ 
stand  themselves  to  have  need  of  it  Then,  that  even  they  that  use  it  for  their  need,  should 
not  be  compelled  by  any  commandment,  or  trained  by  any  deceit  to  reckon  up  all  their  sins ; 
but  so  fiur  as  they  shall  think  it  behovefid  for  them,  that  they  may  receive  sound  fruit  of  com- 
fort. Faithful  Pastors  ought  not  only  to  leave  this  liberty  to  the  Churches,  but  also  to  main- 
tain it,  and  stoutly  stand  in  defence  of  it,  if  they  will  have  tyranny  absent  from  their  minbtry ; 
and  superstition,  from  the  people."  Calv.  Inst.  lib.  iii.  c.  4.  sect  12.  The  diligent  Student 
will  find  himself  rewarded  by  a  comparison  of  Calvin's  Third,  Fourth,  and  Fifth  Chapters  of 
his  Third  Book,  with  this  whole  Sixth  Book  of  Hooker.] 

*  "  Sed  tantum  ut  Ecclesiae  sit  aliqua  ratione  satis&ctum,  et  omnes  unius  poenitentia 
confinnentur,  qui  fuerant  unius  peocatiB  et  scandalis  vulneratL"  SadeeL  in  Psal.  xzziL 
▼er.  5. 


40  THE   SIXTH    BOOK  [Scct.  4. 

blessed  Saviour's  institution  in  that  case,  it  is  their  part  to 
accept  the  benefit  thereof  as  God's  most  merciful  Ordinance 
for  their  good,  and,  without  any  distrust  or  doubt,  to  em- 
brace joyfully  his  grace  so  given  them  according  to  the  word 
rjohn     ^^  ^^'  Lord,  which  hath  said,  "  Whose  sins  ye  remit,  are 
n*u.]  remitted/'     So  that  grounding  upon  this  assured   belief, 
Ctp.6.   they  are  to  rest  with  minds  encouraged  and  persuaded  con- 
B^h«m.'  ceming  the  forgiveness  of  all  their  sins,  as  out  of  Christ's 
own  word  and  power  by  the  Ministry  of  the  Keys. 

It  standeth  with  us  in  the  Church  of  England,  as  touching 
Public  Confession,  thus :  First,  seeing  day  by  day  we  in  our 
Church  begin  our  public  Prayers  to  Almighty  God  with 
public  acknowledgment  of  our  sins,  in  which  Confession 
every  man,  prostrate  as  it  were  before  his  glorious  Majesty, 
crieth  against  himself,  and  the  Minister  with  one  sentence 
pronounceth  universally  all  clear  whose  acknowledgment  so 
made  hath  proceeded  from  a  true  penitent  mind;  what 
reason  is  there  every  man  should  not,  under  the  general 
terms  of  Confession,  represent  to  himself  his  own  particulars 
whatsoever,  and  adjoining  thereunto  that  affection  which  a 
contrite  spirit  worketh,  embrace  to  as  full  effect  the  words 
of  divine  grace,  as  if  the  same  were  severally  and  particu- 
larly uttered  with  addition  of  Prayers,  Imposition  of  Hands, 
or  all  the  Ceremonies  and  Solemnities  that  might  be  used 
for  the  strength'ning  of  men's  affiance  in  God's  peculiar 
mercy  towards  them  ?  Such  complements  are  helps  to  sup- 
port our  weakness,  and  not  causes  that  serve  to  procure  or 
[Pmi.  produce  his  gifts.  If  with  us  there  be  *'  truth  in  the  inward 
'^^  parts,"  as  David  speaketh,  the  difference  of  general  and 
particular  Forms  in  Confession  and  Absolution  is  not  so 
material  that  any  man's  safety  or  ghostly  good  should  de- 
pend upon  it. 

And  for  Private  Confession  and  Absolution  it  standeth 
thus  with  us :  The  Minister's  power  to  absolve  is  publicly 
taught  and  professed,  the  Church  not  denied  to  have  au- 
thority either  of  abridging  or  enlarging  the  use  and  exercise 
of  that  power ;  upon  the  people  no  such  necessity  imposed 
of  opening  their  transgressions  unto  men,  as  if  remission  of 
sins  otherwise  were  impossible  ;*  neither  any  such  opinion 
had  of  the  thing  itself,  as  though  it  were  either  unlawful  or 

*  "  As  for  private  Confession,  abases  and  errors  set  apart,  we  condemn  it  not,  but  leave  it 
at  liberty."     Jewel,  Defen.  part  156. 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  41 

unprofitable,  save  only  for  these  inconveniences  which  the 
world  hath  by  experience  observed  in  it  heretofore.  And 
in  regard  thereof,  the  Church  of  England  hitherto  hath 
thought  it  the  safer  way  to  refer  men's  hidden  crimes  unto 
God  and  themselves  only;  howbeit,  not  without  special 
caution  for  the  admonition  of  such  as  come  to  the  holy 
Sacrament,  and  for  the  comfort  of  such  as  are  ready  to 
depart  the  world.  First,  because  there  are  but  few  that 
consider  how  much  that  part  of  Divine  Service  which  con- 
sists in  partaking  the  holy  Eucharist,  doth  import  their 
souls ;  what  they  lose  by  neglect  thereof,  and  what  by 
devout  practice  they  might  attain  unto :  therefore,  lest  care- 
lessness of  general  Confession  should,  as  commonly  it  doth, 
extinguish  all  remorse  of  men's  particular  enormous  crimes, 
our  custom  (whensoever  men  present  themselves  at  the 
Lord's  Table)  is, — solemnly  to  give  themselves  fearful  ad- 
monition, what  woes  are  perpendicularly  hanging  over  the 
heads  of  such  as  dare  adventure  to  put  forth  their  un- 
worthy hands  to  those  admirable  mysteries  of  Ufe,  which 
have  by  rare  examples  been  proved  conduits  of  irremediable 
death  to  impenitent  receivers ;  whom,  therefore,  as  we  repel 
being  known,  so  being  not  known,  we  can  but  terrify.  Yet, 
with  us,  the  Ministers  of  God's  most  Holy  Word  and  Sacra- 
ments, being  all  put  in  trust  with  the  custody  and  dispen- 
sation of  those  mysteries  wherein  our  Communion  is,  and 
hath  been  ever  accounted,  the  highest  grace  that  men  on 
earth  are  admitted  unto,  have  therefore  all  equally  the  same 
power  to  withhold  that  sacred  mystical  food  from  notorious 
evil  livers ;  from  such  as  have  any  way  wronged  their  neigh- 
bours; and  from  parties  between  whom  there  doth  open 
hatred  and  malice  appear ;  till  the  first  sort  have  reformed 
their  wicked  lives,  the  second  recompensed  them  unto  whom 
they  were  injurious,  and  the  last  condescended  unto  some 
course  of  Christian  reconciliation,  whereupon  their  mutual 
accord  may  ensue.  In  whieh  cases,  for  the  first  branch  of 
wicked  life,  and  the  last,  which  is  open  enmity,  there  can 
arise  no  great  difficulty  about  the  exercise  of  his  power ;  in 
the  second,  concerning  wrongs,  there  may,  if  men  shall 
presume  to  define  or  measure  injuries  according  to  their 
own  conceits,  depraved  oftentimes  as  well  by  error  as  parti- 
ality, and  that  no  less  in  the  Minister  himself,  than  in  any  other 
of  the  people  under  him.     The  knowledge,  therefore,  which 


1^  /THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Seci.  4i 

he  taketh>  of  wrongfr  must  rise,  as  it  doth  in  the  other  two, 
not  from  his  own  opinion  or  conscience^  but  from  the  evi- 
dence of  the  fact  which  is  committed ;  yea^  from  such  evi- 
dence as  neither  doth  admit  denial  nor  defence.  For  if  the 
Offender,  having  either  colour-  of  Law  to  uphold,  or  any 
other  pretence  to  excuse,  his  own  uncharitable  and  wrongful 
dealings,  shall  wilfiilly  stand  in  defence  thereof,  it  serveth 
as  bar  to  the  power  of  the  Minister  in  this  kind.  Because 
{as  it  is  observed  by  men  of  very  good  judgment  in  these 
affairs)  although  in  this  sort  our  separating  of  them  be  not 
to  strike  them  with  the  mortal  wound  of  Excommunication, 
but  to  stay  them  rather  from  running  desi>erately  headlong 
into  their  own  harm ;  yet  it  is  not  in  us  to  sever  from  the 
holy  Communion  but  such  as  are  either  found  culpable  by 
their  own  Confession,  or  have  been  convicted  in  some  public 
Secular,  or  Ecclesiastical  Court.*  For  who  is  he  that  dares 
take  upon  him  to  be  any  man's  both  accuser  and  judge  ?f 
Evil  persons  are  not  rashly,  and  as  we  list,  to  be  thrust 

*  [In  this  phrase  more  is  meant  than  meets  the  eye.  The  following  extracts,  therefore, 
will  not  be  inappropriate.  Peirce,  in  his  Vindication  ofihe  Dissenters;  in  Answer  to  Dr.  W. 
Nichols's  De£  of  the  Doct.  and  Disc,  of  the  Church  of  England,  1718;  at  p.  570,  having 
quoted  this  passage  from  Nichols,  *  If  the  excommunicated  person  obstinately  persists  tat 
forty  days,  the  King's  Writ  sends  him  to  prison,  where  he  is  to  continue  till  he  makes  satis- 
faction for  his  offence  by  Penance  and  humble  submission ;'  replies,  "  Our  adversaries  herein 
follow  the  base  example  of  the  Papists,  who  call  in  the  aid  of  the  Secular  power,  and  so 
enforce  their  Ecclesiastical  Censures  ....  'Tis  indeed  the  Magistrate's  part  to  appoint  penal- 
ties for  whatever  is  prejudicial  to  the  Commonwealth.  But  to  cast  men  out  of  the  Church, 
and  deliver  them  to  be  punished  by  the  Magistrate,  either  for  frivolous  matters,  or  for  such 
opinions  as  no  way  concern  the  State,  is  very  unjust ;  and  as  contrary  as  any  thing  can  be,  to 
the  Christian  religion,  and  the  mind  of  our  Saviour,  who  would  never  have  his  Rdigion 
spread  by  these  Mahometan  methods :  besides,  what  advantage  can  be  expected  by  such 
kind  of  punishments,  but  the  extorting  from  offenders  an  hypocritical  profession  of  repen- 
tance ?  . . .  <  Persons  of  a  superior  rank,  whose  honour  would  suffer  by  a  public  Penance,  are 
allowed  to  ransom  themselves  from  the  reproach  of  it,  by  a  good  round  sum  of  money,  to  be 
bestowed  either  upon  the  poor,  or  upon  the  buildings  of  the  Church.'  If  the  case  be  as  he 
says,  our  adversaries  are  deservedly  taxed,  as  guilty  of  that '  respect  of  persons'  which  the 
Apostle  condemns  (Jam.  ii.  1 — 9)  ....  There  is  not  a  syllable  of  pecuniary  punishments  in 
any  ancient  Father.  . . .  The  respect  to  money  is,  in  this  case,  greater  than  that  to  persons : 
whence,  if  a  man  has  ready  money  to  lay  down,  he  may  be  secure  of  an  easy  absolution."'— 
On  the  passage  in  James,  considt  Dr.  Doddridge's  Fam.  Expos,  note  b,  Milton  says, 
"  When  the  Church  without  temporal  support  is  able  to  do  her  great  works  upon  the  un- 
forced obedience  of  men,  it  argues  a  Divinity  about  her.  But  when  she  thinks  to  credit  and 
better  her  Spiritual  efficacy,  and  to  win  herself  respect  and  dread  by  strutting  in  the  false 
vizard  of  worldly  Authority,  it  is  evident  that  God  is  not  there,  but  that  her  apostolic  virtue 
is  departed  from  her,  and  hath  left  her  Key-cold ;  which  she  perceiving  as  in  a  decayed 
nature,  seeks  to  the  outward  fomentations  and  chafings  of  worldly  help,  and  external 
flourishes,  to  fetch,  if  it  be  possible,  some  mdtion  into  her  extreme  parts,  or  to  hatch  a  coun- 
terfeit life  with  the  crafty  and  artificial  heat  of  Jurisdiction."  The  Reason  of  Chureh-Oovem- 
ment,  Book  II.  chap.  iii.  Edit  fo.  1738.  p.  65.] 

f  "  Nos  a  Communione  quenquam  prohibere  non  possumus.  Quamvis  hsec  prohibitio 
nondum  sit  mortalis,  sed  medicinalis,  nisi  aut  sponte  confessum,  aut  aliquo  sive  seculari 
sive  Ecdesiastico  judido  accusatum  atque  oonvictum.  Quis  enim  sibi  utrumque  audet  assu- 
mere,  ut  cuiquam  ipse  rit  et  accusator  et  judex  V*    Rhenan.  admonit.  de  dogmat  Tertull. 


jS^.  4.]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  43 

fiom  Communion  with  the  Church:  insomuch  that,  if  we 
cannot  proceed  against  them  by  any  orderly  course  of  judg- 
ment, they  rather  are  to  be  suffered  for  the  time  than  mo- 
lested. Many  there  are  reclaimed,  as  Peter;  many,  as 
Judas^  known  well  enough,  and  yet  tolerated ;  many  which 
must  remain  undescried  till  the  day  of  His  appearance,  by 
whom  the  secret  comers  of  darkness  shall  be  brought  into 
open  light.*  Leaving  therefore  unto  His  judgment  them 
whom  we  cannot  stay  from  casting  their  own  souls  into  so 
great  hazard,  we  have  in  the  other  part  of  Penitential  Juris- 
diction, in  our  power  and  authority  to  release  sin,  joy  on  all 
sides,  without  trouble  or  molestation  unto  any.  And  if  to  CAeti 
give  be  a  thing  more  blessed  than  to  receive,  are  we  not  in-  [Lake' 
finitely  happier  in  being  authorized  to  bestow  the  treasure 
of  God,  than  when  necessity  doth  constrain  to  withdraw 
the  same? 

They  which,  during  life  and  health,  are  never  destitute  of 
ways  to  delude  Repentance,  do  notwithstanding  oftentimes, 
when  their  last  hour  draweth  on,  both  feel  that  sting  which 
before  lay  dead  in  them,  and  also  thirst  after  such  helps  as 
have  been  always,  till  then,  unsavoury.  St.  Ambrose'  words 
touching  late  Repentance  are  somewhat  hard,  "  If  a  man  be  lib.iu. 
penitent  and  receive  Absolution  (which  cannot  in  that  case  be  ^^  "*"' 
denkd  him)  even  at  the  very  point  of  death,  and  so  depart, 
I  dare  not  affirm  he  goeth  out  of  the  world  well ;  I  will 
counsel  no  man  to  trust  to  this,  because  I  am  loth  to  deceive 
any  man,  seeing  I  know  not  what  to  think  of  it.  Shall  I 
judge  such  a  one  a  castaway  ?  Neither  will  I  avouch  him 
safe :  all  I  am  able  to  say,  is,  let  his  estate  be  left  to  the 
will  and  pleasure  of  Almighty  God.  Wilt  thou  be  therefore 
deUvered  of  all  doubt  ?  Repent  while  yet  thou  art  healthy 
and  strong :  if  thou  defer  it  till  time  give  no  longer  possi- 
bihty  of  sinning,  thou  canst  not  be  thought  to  have  left  sin, 
but  rather  sin  to  have  forsaken  thee."  Such  admonitions 
may  in  their  time  and  place  be  necessary,  but  in  no  wise 
prejudicial  to  the  generaUty  of  God's  own  high  and  heavenly 
promise.  Whensoever  a  sinner  doth  repent  from  the  bottom  [Iml 
of  his  heart,  I  will  put  out  all  his  iniquity.     And  of  this, 

*  "  Non  enim  temere  et  quodammodo  libefc,  sed  propter  JHdicium,  ab  Ecclesise  Commtmione 
■eparandi  aunt  mali,  lit  si  propter  judicium  auferii  non  posaint,  tolerentur  potius,  velot  palea» 
earn  tritico.  Multi  oorriguntur»  ut  Petrus ;  muld  tolemntur,  ut  Judas ;  multi  nesciontur, 
donee  Teniat  Dominus,  et  illuminabit  abscoiidHa  tenebrsrum."    Rfaenan.  [at  sup.] 


44  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Sect.  4. 

although  it  have  pleased  God  not  to  leave  to  the  world  any 
multitude  of  examples^  lest  the  careless  should  too  far  pre- 
[Lnke  sume,  yet  one  he  hath  given^  and  that  most  memorable^  to 
42,43.]  withhold  from  despair  in  the  mercies  of  God,  at  what  instant 
soever  man's  unfeigned  conversion  be  wrought.  Yea,  be- 
cause to  countervail  the  fault  of  delay,  there  are  in  the  latest 
Repentance  oftentimes  the  surest  tokens  of  sincere  dealing ; 
therefore  upon  special  Confession  made  tq  the  Minister  of 
God,  he  presently  absolveth  in  this  case  the  sick  party  from 
all  sins  by  that  authority  which  Jesus  Christ  hath  committed 
unto  him,  knowing  that  God  respecteth  not  so  much  what 
time  is  spent,  as  what  truth  is  shewed  in  Repentance. 

In  sum,  when  the  offence  doth  stand  only  between  God  and 
man's  conscience,  the  counsel  is  good  which  St.  Chrysostom 
giveth :  ^*  I  wish  thee  not  to  bewray  thyself  publicly,  nor  to 
accuse  thyself  before  others.  I  wish  thee  to  obey  the  Pro- 
phet, who  saith.  Disclose  thy  way  unto  the  Lord,  confess 
thy  sins  before  him ;  tell  thy  sins  to  him  that  he  may  blot 
them  out :  if  thou  be  abashed  to  tell  unto  any  other  wherein 
thou  hast  offended,  rehearse  them  every  day  between  thee 
and  thy  soul.  I  wish  thee  not  to  confess  them  to  thy  fellow- 
servant,  who  may  upbraid  thee  with  them ;  tell  them  to  Gt)d, 
who  will  cure  them;  there  is  no  need  for  thee  in  the  presence 
of  witnesses  to  acknowledge  them ;  let  God  alone  see  thee  at 
thy  Confession.  I  pray  and  beseech  you,  that  you  would 
more  often  than  you  do,  confess  to  God  eternal,  and  reck- 
oning up  your  trespasses,  desire  his  pardon.  I  carry  you 
not  into  a  theatre  or  open  court  of  many  of  your  fellow- 
servants,  I  seek  not  to  detect  your  crimes  before  men ;  dis- 
close your  conscience  before  God,  unfold  yourself  to  him,  lay 
forth  your  wounds  before  him  the  best  physician  that  is,  and 
desire  of  him  salve  for  them/'*  If  hereupon  it  follow,  as  it 
[Psai.  did  with  David,  "  I  thought,  I  will  confess  against  myself 
xuii.    ^^  wickedness  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  and  thou  forgavest  me 


•  "  Non  dico  tibi,  ut  te  prodas  in  publicum,  neque  ut  te  apud  alios  accuses,  sed  obedire  te 
volo  Prophetse  dicenti,  *  revela  Domino  viam  tuam/  Ante  Deum  confitere  peccata  tua ; 
peccata  tua  dicito,  ut  ea  deleat;  si  confunderis  alicui  dicere  quae  peccasti,  dicito  ea  quotidie  in 
anima.  Non  dico  ut  confitearis  conservo  qui  exprobret :  Deo  dicito  qui  ea  curat ;  non  necesse 
est  prsesentibus  testibus  confiteri ;  solus  te  Deus  confitentem  videat.  Rogo  et  oro  ut  crebrius 
Deo  immortali  confiteamini,  et,  enumeratis  vestris  delictis,  veniam  petatis.  Non  te  in  theatrum 
conservoram  duco,  non  hominibus  peccata  tua  conor  detegere.  Repete  coram  Deo  conscien- 
dam  tuam,  te  ezplica,  ostende  me^co  praestantissimo  vulnera  tua,  et  pete  ab  eo  me^ca- 
meutum."  Chrysost.  Horn.  31.  ad  Hebr.  et  in  Psal.  lis.  Horn,  de  poen.  et  confess,  et 
Hom.  5.  de  incam.  Dei  natura,  Homil.  itemque  de  Lazaro. 


Sect.  5.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  45 

the  plague  of  my  sin/'  we  have  our  desire^  and  there  re- 
maineth  only  thankfuhiess  accompanied  with  perpetuity  of 
care  to  avoid  that^  which  9  being  not  avoided,  we  know  we 
cannot  remedy  without  new  perplexity  and  grief.  Contrai- 
wise,  if  peace  with  God  do  not  follow  the  pains  we  have 
taken  in  seeking  after  it,  if  we  continue  disquieted  and  not 
delivered  from  anguish,  mistrusting  whether  that  we  do  be 
sufficient ;  it  argueth  that  our  sore  doth  exceed  the  power  of 
our  own  skill,  and  that  the  wisdom  of  the  Pastor  must  bind 
up  those  parts,  which  being  bruised  are  not  able  to  be  re- 
cured  of  themselves. 

5.  There  resteth  now  Satisfaction  only  to  be  considered ;  Of  stUs. 
a  point  which  the  Fathers  do  often  touch,  albeit,  they  never  *^  ^°* 
aspire  to  such  mysteries  as  the  Papacy  hath  found  enwrapped 
within  the  folds  add  plaits  thereof.    And  it  is  happy  for  the 
Church  of  God,  that  we  have  the  writings  of  the  Fathers 
to  shew  what  their  meaning  was.    The  name  of  Satisfaction, 
as  the  ancient  Fathers  meant  it,  containeth  whatsoever  a 
Penitent  should  do  in  the  humbling  himself  unto  God,  and 
testifying  by  deeds  of  contrition  the  same  which  Confession 
in  words  pretendeth;  "He  which  by  Repentance  for  sinsTertnu. 
(saith  Tertullian,  speaking  of  fickle-minded  men)  had  a  pur-  mu 
pose  to  satisfy  the  Lord,  will  now  by  repenting  his  Repent-* 
ance  make  Satan  Satisfaction ;  and  be  so  much  more  hateful 
to  God,  as  he  is  unto  God's  enemy  more  acceptable."    Is  it 
not  plain,  that  Satisfaction  doth  here  include  the  whole  work 
of  Penitency,  and  that  God  is  satisfied  when  we  are  restored 
through  sin  into  favour  by  Repentance  ?     "  How  canst  thou 
(saith  Chrysostom)  move  God  to  pity  thee,  when  thou  wilt 
not  seem  as  much  as  to  know  that  thou  hast  ofiended?"* 
By  appeasing,  pacifying,  and  moving  God  to  pity,  St.  Chry- 
sostom meaneth  the  very  same  with  the  Latin  Fathers,  when 
they  speak  of  satisfying  God.     "  We  feel  (saith  Cyprian)  cypr. 
the  bitter  smart  of  his  rod  and  scourge,  because  there  is  in  ^^'  ^' 
us  neither  care  to  please  him  Mith  our  good  deeds,  nor  to 
satisfy  him  for  our  evil."    Again,  "  Let  the  eyes  which  have  £?•  se. 
looked  on  idols,  sponge  out  their  unlawful  acts  ^ith  those 
sorrowful  tears,  which  have  power  to  satisfy  God."    The 
Master  of  Sentencest  allegeth  out  of  St.  Augustine  that  g^^^ 
which  is  plain  enough  to  this  purpose :  "  Three  things  there  {|M^- 

*  Chrysost  in  1  Cor.  Horn.  viii.    Thv  Bthv  i^iKtoiceurBcu. 

t  [Peter,  Bishop  of  Paris,  sumamed  Lombard ;  his  followers  were  called  SaUmUiarii,] 


46  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Seci^  & 

are  in  perfect  Penitency,  Compunction^  Confession^  and 
Satisfaction ;  that  as  we  three  ways  ofiend  God,  namely  in 
hearty  word,  and  deed,  so  by  three  duties  we  may  satisfy 
God."  Satisfaction^  as  a  part,  comprehendeth  only  that 
[Lake  which  the  Baptist  meant  by  "  worthy  of  repentance ;"  and 
if  we  speak  of  the  whole  work  of  Repentance  itself,  we  may 
in  the  phrase  of  antiquity,  term  it  very  well  Satisfaction. 

Satisfaction  is  a  work  which  Justice  requireth  to  be  done 
for  contentment  of  persons  injured :  neither  is  it  in  the  eye 
of  Justice  a  sufficient  Satisfaction,  unless  it  fully  equal  the  in- 
jury for  which  we  satisfy.  Seeing  then  that  sin  against  God 
eternal  and  infinite  ijaust  needs  be  an  infinite  wrong ;  Justice, 
in  regard  thereof,  doth  necessarily  exact  an  infinite  recom- 
pense, or  else  inflict  upon  the  offender  infinite  punishment* 
Now,  because  God  was  thus  to  be  satisfied,  and  man  not 
able  to  make  Satisfaction  in  such  sort,  his  unspeakable  love 
and  inclination  to  save  mankind  from  eternal  death  ordained 
in  our  behalf  a  Mediator  to  do  that  which  had  been  for  any 
Bonav.  Other  impossible.  Wherefore  all  sin  is  remitted  in  the  only 
Hb.  i?!'  Faith  of  Christ's  Passion,  and  no  man  without  belief  thereof 
q!  9.'  ^^'  justified.  Faith  alone  maketh  Christ's  Satisfaction  outb, 
howbeit,  that  Faith  alone,  which  after  sin  maketh  us  by 
conversion  his.  For  inasmuch  as  God  will  have  the  benefit 
of  Christ's  Satisfaction  both  thankfully  acknowledged,  and 
duly  esteemed  of  all  such  as  enjoy  the  same,  he  therefore 
imparteth  so  high  a  treasure  unto  no  man,  whose  Faith  hath 
not  made  him  willing  by  Repentance  to  do  even  that  which 
of  itself,  how  unavailable  soever,  yet  being  required,  and 
accepted  with  God,  we  are  in  Christ  thereby  made  capable 
and  fit  vessels  to  receive  the  fruits  of  his  Satisfaction :  yea^ 
we  so  far  please  and  content  God,  that  because  when  we 
have  ofiended  he  looketh  but  for  Repentance  at  our  hands ; 
our  Repentance  and  the  works  thereof  are  therefore  termed 
satisfactory,  not  for  that  so  much  is  thereby  done  as  the 
Justice  of  God  can  exact,  but  because  such  actions  of  grief 
and  humility  in  man  after  sin  are  iUices  divince  misericordiUB 
(as  Tertullian  speaketh  of  them),  they  draw  that  pity  of  God 
towards  us,  wherein  he  is  for  Christ's  sake  contented,  upon 
our  submission,  to  pardon  our  rebellion  against  him;  and 
when  that  little  which  his  Law  appointeth  is  faithfully  exe- 
cuted, it  pleaseth  him  in  tender  compassion  and  mercy  to 
require  no  more. 


Sed.  5.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY*  47 

Repentance  is  a  name  which  noteth  the  habit  and  opera- 
tion of  a  certain  grace  or  virtue  in  us :  Satisfaction^  the  effect 
which  it  hath,  either  with  God  or  man.  And  it  is  not  in 
this  respect  said  amiss,  that  Satisfaction  importeth  accep- 
tation, reconciliation,  and  amity;  because  that,  through 
Satisfaction  on  the  one  part  made,  and  allowed  on  the  other, 
they  which  before  did  reject  are  now  content  to  receive, 
they  to  be  won  again  which  were  lost,  and  they  to  love  unto 
whom  just  cause  of  hatred  was  given.  We  satisfy,  there- 
fore, in  doing  that  which  is  sufficient  to  this  effect ;  and  they 
towards  whom  we  do  it  are  satisfied,  if  they  accept  it  as 
sufficient,  and  require  no  more :  otherwise  we  satisfy  not, 
although  we  do  satisfy:  for  so  between  man  and  man  it 
oftentimes  falleth  out,  but  between  man  and  God  never. 
It  is  therefore  true,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  one[Heb. 
most  precious  and  propitiatory  sacrifice,  which  was  his'* 
Body,  a  gift  of  infinite  worth,  offered  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world,  hath  thereby  once  reconciled  us  to  God, 
purchased  his  general  free  pardon,  and  turned  away  divine 
indignation  from  mankind.  But  we  are  not  for  that  cause 
to  think  any  office  of  Penitence  either  needless  or  fruitless 
on  our  own  behalf:  for  then  would  not  God  require  any 
such  duties  at  our  hands.  Christ  doth  remain  everlastingly 
a  gracious  Intercessor,  even  for  every  particular  Penitent. 
Let  this  assure  us,  that  God,  how  highly  soever  displeased 
and  incensed  with  our  sins,  is  notwithstanding,  for  his  sake, 
by  our  tears,  pacified,  taking  that  for  Satisfaction  which  is 
due  by  us,  because  Christ  hath  by  his  Satisfaction  made  it 
acceptable.  For,  as  he  is  the  High-priest  of  our  salvation,  Apoe. 
so  he  hath  made  us  Priests  likewise  under  him,  to  the  end 
we  might  offer  unto  God  praise  and  thankfulness  while  we 
continue  in  the  way  of  life;  and  when  we  sin,  the  satis- 
&ctory  or  propitiatory  sacrifice  of  a  broken  and  a  contrite  [Psaim 
heart.  There  is  not  any  thing  that  we  do  that  could  pacify  cassun. 
God  and  clear  us  in  his  sight  from  sin,  if  the  goodness  and  c  i 
mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  were  not;  whereas  now, 
beholding  the  poor  offer  of  our  religious  endeavours  meekly 
to  submit  ourselves  as  often  as  we  have  offended,  he  re- 
gardeth  with  infinite  mercy  those  services  which  are  as 
nothing,  and  with  words  of  comfort  reviveth  our  afilicted 
minds,  saying,  **  It  is  I,  even  I,  that  take  away  thine  [Imi 
iniquities  for  mine   own   sake."     Thus  doth   Repentance 


48  I'HE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Sect.  5. 

satisfy  God,  changing  his  wrath  and  indignation  unto  mercy. 
Anger  and  mercy  are  in  us  passions;  but  in  him  not  so. 
"  God  (saith  St.  Basil)  is  no  ways  passionate,  but  because 
the  punishments  which  his  judgments  do  inflict  are,  like 
effects  of  indignation,  severe  and  grievous  to  such  as  suffer 
them,  therefore  we  term  the  revenge  which  he  taketh  upon 
sinners,  anger;  and  the  withdrawing  of  his  plagues,  mercy."* 
*'  His  wrath  (saith  St.  Augustine)  is  not  as  ours,  the  trouble 
of  a  mind  disturbed  and  disquieted  with  things  amiss,  but 
a  calm,  unpassionate,  and  just  assignation  of  dreadful 
punishment  to  be  their  portion  which  have  disobeyed ;  his 
mercy  a  free  determination  of  all  feUcity  and  happiness  unto 
men,  except  their  sins  remain  as  a  bar  between  it  and 
them."t  So  that  when  God  doth  cease  to  be  angry  with 
sinful  men,  when  he  receiveth  them  into  favour,  when  he 
pardoneth  their  offences,  and  remembereth  their  iniquities 
no  more  (for  all  these  signify  but  one  thing),  it  must  needs 
follow,  that  all  punishments  before  due  in  revenge  of  sin, 
whether  they  be  temporal  or  eternal,  are  remitted.  For 
how  should  God's  indignation  import  only  man's  punish- 
ment, and  yet  some  punishment  remain  unto  them  towards 
whom  there  is  now  in  God  no  indignation  remaining? 
^^  God  (saith  Tertullian)  takes  Penitency  at  men's  hands; 
and  men  at  his,  in  lieu  thereof,  receive  impunity ;";{;  which 
notwithstanding  doth  not  prejudice  the  chastisements  which 
God,  after  pardon,  hath  laid  upon  some  offenders,  as  on 
Numb,  the  people  of  Israel,  on  Moses,  on  Miriam,  on  David,  either 
n?i2.'  for  their  own  more  sound  amendment,§  or  for  example  unto 
jfsaiJ;  others  in  this  present  world||  (for  in  the  world  to  come 
"*•  **•  punishments  have  unto  these  intents  no  use,  the  dead  being 
not  in  case  to  be  bettered  by  correction,  nor  to  take  warning 
by  executions  of  God's  justice  there  seen);  but  assuredly  to 
whomsoever  he  remitteth  sin,  their  very  pardon  is  in  itself  a 
full,  absolute,  and  perfect  discharge  for  revengeful  punishment 


*  Babil.  Horn,  in  Psal.  xzzvii.    Ilcanhs  yitp  wdSovs  hXK&rpiov  rh  Betoi^. 

f  "  Cum  Deus  irascitur,  non  ejus  significatur  perturbntio  qualis  est  in  animo  irascends 
hominis  ;  sed,  ex  humanis  motibus  translate  vocabulo,  vindicta  ejus,  quse  non  nisi  justa  est, 
irse  nomen  accepit"     Aug.  Ench.  cap.  33. 

X  **  Poenitentise  compensatione  redimendam  proponit  impunitatem  Deus."  TertuU.  de 
Pceniten. 

§  "  Cui  Deus  vere  propitius  est,  non  solum  condonat  peccata  ne  noceant  ad  futurum 
seculum,  sed  etiam  castigat,  ne  semper  peccare  delectet."     Aug.  in  Psal.  zcviii. 

II  "  Plectuntur  quidam,  quo  cseteri  corrigantur ;  ezempla  sunt  oroniumi  tormenta  pau- 
coram."    Cypr.  de  Lapsis. 


Sect  5.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  49 

which  God  doth  now  here  threaten,   but,  with  purpose 
of  revocation  if  men  repent,  no  where  inflict  but  on  them 
whom  impenitency  maketh  obdurate.     Of  the  one  therefore 
it  is  said,  ''  Thou2h  I  tell  the  wicked.  Thou  shalt  die  the  Exek. 
death ;  yet  if  he  turneth  from  his  sin,  and  do  that  which  is  i4«  is.' 
lawful  and  right,  he  shall  surely  live  and  not  die."    Of  the 
other,  *'  Thou,  according  to  thine  hardness,  and  heart  that  Rom. 
will  not  repent,  treasurest  up  to  thyself  wrath  against  the 
day  of  wrath,  and  evident  appearance  of  the  judgment  of 
God."     If  God  be  satisfied  and  do  pardon  sin,  our  Justifi- 
cation restored  is  as  perfect  as  it  was  at  the  first  bestowed : 
for  so  the  Prophet  Isaiah  witnesseth,  '^  Though  your  sins  im. 
were  as  crimson,  they  shall  be  made   as  white  as   snow ;  '*  *** 
though   they  were  as   scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as 
wool."     And  can  we  doubt  concerning  the  punishment  of 
revenge,  which  was  due  to  sin,  but  that  if  God  be  satisfied 
and  have  forgotten  his  wrath,  it  must  be,  even  as  St.  Augus- 
tine  reasoneth,    **  What  God   hath  covered  he   will  not 
observe,  and  what  he  observeth  not  he  will  not  punish."* 
The  truth  of  which  doctrine  is  not  to  be  shifted  ofi*  by 
restraining  it  unto  eternal  punishment  alone:  for  then  would 
not  David  have  said,  ''  They  are  blessed  to  whom  God  [Pmhb 
imputeth  not  sin;"  blessedness  having  no  part  or  fellowship 
at  all  with  malediction  ?     Whereas  to  be  subject  to  revenge 
for  sin,  although  the  punishment  be  but  temporal,  is  to  be 
under  the  curse  of  the  Law:    wherefore,  as  one  and  the 
same  fire  consumeth  stubble  and  refineth  gold,   so  if  it 
please  God  to  lay  punishment  on  them  whose  sins  he  hath 
forgiven ;   yet  is  not  this  done  for  any  destructive  end  of 
wasting  and  eating  them  out,  as  in  plagues  inflicted  upon 
the  impenitent,  neither  is  the  punishment  of  the  one  as  of 
the  other  proportioned  by  the  greatness  of  sin  past,  but 
according  to  that  future  purpose  whereunto  the  goodness 
of  God  referreth  it,  and  wherein  there  is  nothing  meant  to 
the  sufiTerer  but  furtherance  of  all  happiness,  now  in  grace, 
and  hereafter  in  glory.     St.  Augustine,  to  stop  the  mouths 
of  Pelagians  arguing,  '^  That  if  God  had  imposed  death 
upon  Adam,  and  Adam's  posterity,  as  a  punishment  of  sin, 
death  should  have  ceased  when  God  had  procured  sinners 
their  pardon;"  answereth,  first,  ^'  It  is  no  marvel,  either  that 

*  **  Si  texit  Dens  peccatai  noluit  advertere ;  si  noluit  advertere,  noluit  animadvertere." 
August  [ut  inf.] 

VOL.  III.  S 


50  THE   SIXTH   BOOK  [aSI^C^.  5. 

bodily  death  should  not  have  happened  to  the  first  man, 
unless  he  had  first  sinned  (death  as  punishment  following 
his  sin)^  or  that  after  sin  is  forgiven^  death  notwithstanding 
befalleth  the  faithful;  to  the  end  that  the  strength  of  righte- 
ousness might  be  exercised  by  overcoming  the  fear  thereof."* 
So  that  justly  God  did  inflict  bodily  death  on  man  for  com- 
mitting sin^  and  yet  after  sin  forgiven  took  it  not  away^ 
that  his  righteousness  might  still  have  whereby  to  be  exer- 
[3Saro.  cised.  He  fortifieth  this  with  David's  example,  whose  sin 
14.']  '  he  forgave^  and  yet  afilicted  him  for  exercise  and  trial  of 
his  humility.  Briefly^  a  general  axiom  he  hath  for  all  such 
chastisements,  *'  Before  forgiveness,  they  are  the  punish- 
ment of  sinners;  and  after  forgiveness,  they  are  exercises 
and  trials  of  righteous  men."f  Which  kind  of  proceeding 
is  so  agreeable  with  God's  nature  and  man's  comfort,  that 
it  sheweth  even  injurious  to' both,  if  we  should  admit  those 
surmised  reservations  of  temporal  wrath  in  God  appeased 
towards  reconciled  sinners.  As  a  Father  he  delights  in  his 
children's  conversion,  neither  doth  he  threaten  the  penitent 
with  wrath,  or  them  with  punishment  which  already  mourn; 
but  by  promise  assureth  such  of  indulgence  and  mercy,  yea, 
even  of  plenary  pardon,  which  taketh  away  all,  both  faults 
and  penalties:  there  being  no  reason  why  we  should  think 
him  the  less  just  because  he  sheweth  him[self]  thus  merciful; 
when  they,  which  before  were  obstinate,  labour  to  appease 
his  wrath  with  the  pensive  meditation  of  Contrition,  the 
meek  humility  which  Confession  expresseth,  and  the  deeds 
wherewith  Repentance  declareth  itself  to  be  an  amendment 
as  well  of  the  rotten  fruits,  as  the  dried  leaves  and  withered 
root  of  the  tree.  For  with  these  duties  by  us  performed, 
and  presented  unto  God  in  Heaven  by  Jesus  Christ,  whose 
blood  is  a  continual  sacrifice  of  propitiation  for  us,  we 
content,  please,  and  satisfy  God.  Repentance  therefore, 
even  the  sole  virtue  of  Repentance,  without  either  purpose 
of  Shrift  or  desire  of  Absolution  from  the  Priest ;  Repen- 
tance, the  secret  conversion  of  the  heart,  in  that  it  consisteth 


*  "  Miranduin  non  est,  et  mortem  corporis  non  fuisse  eventuram  homini,  nisi  pr«- 
cessisset  peccatum,  cujiis  etiam  talis  pcena  consequeretur,  et  post  remissionem  peccatorum 
eain  fidelibus  evenire,  ut  ejus  timorem  vincendo  exerceretur  fortitude  justitiae.  Sic  et 
mortem  corporis  propter  hoc  peccatum  Deus  homini  inflixit,  et  post  peccatorum  remissionem 
propter  exercendam  justitiam  non  ademit."     Aug.  de  pecc.  mer.  etrem.  lib.  ii.  c.  34. 

f  "  Ante  remissionem  esse  ilia  supplicia  peccatorum,  post  remissionem  autem  cfrtamina, 
exercitationesque  justorum."     [Aug.  ib.  ex]  Cypr.  epist.  53. 


SecL  5.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL    POLITY.  51 

of  these  three^  and  doth  by  these  three  pacify  God,  may 
be  without  hyberbolical  terms  most  truly  magnified,  as  a 
recovery  of  the  soul  of  man  from  deadly  sickness,  a  resti- 
tution of  glorious  light  to  his  darkened  mind,  a  comfortable 
reconciliation  with  God,  a  spiritual  nativity,  a  rising  from 
the  dead,  a  day-spring  from  out  the  depth  of  obscurity,  a 
redemption  from  more  than  Kgyptian  thraldom,  a  grinding 
of  the  old  Adam  even  into  dust  and  powder,  a  deliverance 
out  of  the  prisons  of  Hell,  a  full  restauration  of  the  seat 
of  Grace  and  throne  of  Glory,  a  triumph  over  sin,  and  a 
saving  victory. 

Amongst  the  Works  of  Satisfaction,  the  most  respected 
have  been  always  these  three.  Prayers,  Fasts,  and  Alms- 
deeds  :  by  Prayers,  we  lift  up  our  souls  to  him  from  whom 
sin  and  iniquity  had  withdrawn  them ;  by  Fasting,  we  reduce 
the  body  from  thraldom  under  vain  deUghts,  and  make  it 
serviceable  for  parts  of  virtuous  conversation;  by  Alms,  we 
dedicate  to  charity  those  worldly  goods  and  possessions, 
which  unrighteousness  doth  neither  get  nor  bestow  well:  the 
first,  a  token  of  piety  intended  towards  God ;  the  second, 
a  pledge  of  moderation  and  sobriety  in  the  carriage  of  our 
own  persons;  the  last,  a  testimony  of  our  meaning  to  do 
good  to  all  men.  In  which  three,  the  Apostle,  by  way  of 
abridgment,  comprehendeth  whatsoever  may  appertain  to 
sanctimony,  holiness,  and  good  life:  as  contrariwise,  the 
very  mass  of  general  corruption  throughout  the  world,  what 
is  it  but  only  forgetfulness  of  God,  carnal  pleasure,  immo- 
derate desire  after  worldly  things,  profaneness,  licentious- 
ness, covetousness?  All  offices  of  Repentance  have  these 
two  properties;  there  is  in  performance  of  them — painfulness, 
and  in  their  nature — a  contrariety  unto  sin.  The  one  consi- 
deration, causeth  them  both  in  Holy  Scripture  and  elsewhere  s.cor. 
to  be  termed  judgment  or  revenges  taken  voluntarily  on 
ourselves,  and  to  be  furthermore  also  preservatives  from 
future  evils,  inasmuch  as  we  commonly  use  to  keep  with 
the  greater  care  that  which  with  paip  we  have  recovered.* 
And  they  are  in  the  other  respect,  ^contrary  to  sin  com- 
mitted: Contrition,  contrary  to  the  pleasui^;  Confession, 
to  the  error,  which  is  the  mother  of  sin;  and  to^  the  deeds 
of  sin,  the  Works  of  Satisfaction  contrary ;  therefore  they 

t^  Kptr4i¥.    <5bry8.  Horn.  xxx.  in  Ep.  ad  Heb. 

e2 


52  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Sect.  5. 

are  the  more  effectual  to  cure  the  evil  habit  thereof.     Here- 
unto  it  was    that    St.  Cyprian    referred    his   earnest  and 
Cypr.de  vehement    exhortations^    "That    they   which    had  fallen^ 
^  *'  should  be  instant  in  prayer,  reject  bodily  ornaments  when 
once  they  had  stripped  themselves  out  of  Christ's  attire, 
abhor  all  food  after  Satan's  morsels  tasted,  follow  works 
of  righteousness  which  wash   away  sin,   and   be  plentiful 
in  alms-deeds  wherewith  souls  are  delivered  from  death: 
not,  as  if  God  did,  according  to  the  manner  of  corrupt 
Judges,  take  some  money  to  abate  so  much  in  the  punish- 
saiv.ad  ment  of  malefactors."    "  These  duties  must  be  offered  (saith 
CMh.     Salvianus)  not  in  confidence  to  redeem  or  buy  out  sin,  but 
"**•  '•     as  tokens  of  meek  submission ;  neither  are  they  with  God 
accepted,   because  of  their  value,   but  for   the  affection's 
sake,  which  doth  thereby  shew  itself."    Wherefore,   con- 
cerning Satisfaction  made  to  God  by  Christ  only;  and  of 
the  manner  how  Repentance  generally,  particularly  also, 
how  certain  special  Works  of  Penitency,  both  are  by  the 
Fathers,  in  their  ordinary  phrase  of  speech,  called  Satis- 
factory,  and   may  be  by  us  very  well  so  acknowledged, 
enough  hath  been  spoken. 

Our  offences  sometime  are  of  such  nature  as  requireth 
that  particular  Men  be  satisfied,  or  else  Repentance  to  be 
utterly  void  and  of  none  effect.  For  if,  either  through  open 
rapine,  or  cloaked  fraud,  if,  through  injurious,  or  uncon- 
scionable dealing,  a  man  have  wittingly  wronged  others 
to  enrich  himself;  the  first  thing  evermore  in  this  case 
required  (ability  serving)  is  Restitution.  For  let  no  man 
deceive  himself,  from  such  offences  we  are  not  discharged, 
neither  can  be,  till  recompence  and  restitution  to  Man 
accompany  the  penitent  Confession  we  have  made  to  Al- 
mighty God.  In  which  case,  the  Law  of  Moses  was  direct 
Levit.vi.  and  plain :  "  If  any  sin  and  commit  a  trespass  against  the 
Lord,  and  deny  unto  his  neighbour  that  which  was  given 
him  to  keep,  or  that  which  was  put  unto  him  of  trust ;  or 
doth  by  robbery  or  by  violence  oppress  his  neighbour;  or 
hath  found  that  which  was  lost,  and  denieth  it,  and  swear 
falsely :  for  any  of  these  things  that  a  man  doth  wherein  he 
sinneth,  he  that  doth  thus  offend  and  trespass,  shall  restore 
the  robbery  that  he  hath  taken,  or  the  thing  he  hath  gotten 
by  violence,  or  that  which  was  delivered  him  to  keep,  or 
the  lost  thing  which  he  found ;  and  for  whatsoever  he  hath 


SecL  5.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  53 

sworn   falsely,   adding   perjury   to    injury,    he    shall  both 
restore  the  whole  sum,  and  shall  add  thereunto  a  fifth  part 
more,  and  deliver  it  unto  him,   unto  whom  it  belongeth, 
the  same  day  wherein  he  offereth  for  his  trespass.*'    Now, 
because  men  are  commonly  overrslack  to  perform  this  duty, 
and  do  therefore  defer  it  sometime,  till  God  hath  taken  the 
party  wronged  out  of  the  world;  the  Law  providing  that 
trespassers  might  not  under  such  pretence  gain  the  resti- 
tution which  they  ought  to  make,  appointeth  the  kindred 
surviving  to  receive  what  the   dead   should,   if  they  had 
continued.     **  But  (saith  Moses)  if  the  party  wronged  have  Numb. 
DO  kinsman  to  whom  this  damage  may  be  restored,  it  shall 
then  be  rendered  to  the  Lord  himself  for  the  Priest's  use." 
The  whole  order  of  proceeding  herein  is  in  sundry  tradi- 
tional writings   set  down  by  their  great  Interpreters  and 
Scribes,  which  taught  them  that  a  trespass  between  a  man 
and  -his  neighbour  can  never  be  forgiven  till  the  offender 
have  by  Restitution  made  recompence  for  wrongs  done ;  yea, 
they  hold  it  necessary  that  he  appease  the  party  grieved 
by  submitting  himself  unto  him ;  or,  if  that  will  not  serve, 
by  using  the  help  and  mediation  of  others :  ''In  this  case 
(say  they)  for  any  man  to*  shew  himself  unappeasable  and 
cruel,  were  a  sin  most  grievous,  considering  that  the  people 
of  God  should  be  easy  to  relent,  as  Joseph  was  towards  his 
brethren:"  finally,  if  so  it  fall  out,  that  the  death  of  him 
which  was  injured,  prevent  his  submission  which  did  offend, 
let  him  then  (for  so  they  determine  that  he   ought)  go 
accompanied  with  ten  others  unto  the  sepulchre  of  the  dead, 
and  there  make  Confession  of  the  fault,  saying,  '*  I  have 
sinned  against  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  and  against  this 
man,  to  whom  I  have  done  such  or  such  injury:  and,  if 
money  be  due,  let  it  be  restored  to  his  heirs,  or  in  case 
he  have  none  known,  leave  it  with  the  House  of  Judg- 
ment:   that  is  to  say,   with  the  Senators,  Ancients,   and 
Guides  of  Israel.     We  hold  not  Christian  people  tied  unto 
Jewish  Orders  for  the  manner  of  restitution;  but,  surely. 
Restitution  we  must  hold  necessary,  as  well  in  our  own 
Repentance  as  theirs,   for   sins  of  wilful  oppression  and 
wrong.* 

Now,  although  it  suffices,  that  the  Offices  wherewith  we 

*  *'  Quamdiu  enim  res,  propter  quara  peccatum  e8t»  non  redditur,  si  reddi  potest,  non 
agitur  pcenitentia,  sed  fingitur."     Sent.  4.  d.  15. 


54  THE  SIXTH   BOOK  [ J^4^^  5. 

pacify  God  or  private  men  be  secretly  done;  yet  in  cases 
where  the  Church  must  be  also  satisfied^  it  was  not  to  this 
end  and  purpose  unnecessary^  that  the  ancient  Discipline 
did  farther  require  outward  signs  of  Contrition  to  be 
shewed^  Confession  of  sins  to  be  made  openly,  and  those 
Works  to  be  apparent  which  served  as  testimonies  for  con- 
gypjjj  version  before  men.  Wherein,  if  either  hypocrisy  did  at 
any  time  delude  their  judgment,  they  knew  that  God  is  he 
whom  masks  and  mockeries  cannot  blind,  that  he  which 
seeth  men's  hearts  would  judge  them  according  unto  his 
own  evidence,  and,  as  Lord,  correct  the  sentence  of  his 
Servants  concerning  matters  beyond  their  reach :  or,  if  such 
as  ought  to  have  kept  the  Rules  of  Canonical  Satisfaction 
would  by  sinister  means  and  practices  undermine  the  same, 
obtruding  presumptuously  themselves  to  the  participation 
of  Christ's  most  sacred  mysteries  before  they  were  orderly 
re-admitted  thereunto,  the  Church  for  contempt  of  holy 
things  held  them  uncapable  of  that  grace,  which  God  in 
the  Sacrament  doth  impart  to  devout  Communicants;  and 
no  doubt  but  he  himself  did  retain  boimd,  whom  the  Church 
HI  those  cases  refused  to  loose. 

The  Fathers,  as  may  appeat  by  sundry  Decrees   and 
Canons  of  the  primitive  Church,  were  (in  matter  specially 
of  public  Scandal)  provident  that  too  much  facility  of  par- 
Bsuii.     doning  might  not  be  shewed.     *'  He  that  casteth  off  his 
A mpMi.  lawful  wife   (saith  St.  Basil)    and  doth   take   another,    is 
**  ^**     adjudged  an  adulterer  by  the  verdict  of  our  Lord  himself; 
and  by  our  Fathers  it  is  canonically  ordained,  that  such  for 
the  space  of  a  year  shall  mourn,  for  two  years'  space  hear, 
three  years  be  prostrate,  the  seventh  year  assemble  with  the 
Faithful  in  prayer,  and  after  that  be  admitted  to  communi- 
cate, if  with  tears  they  bewail  their  fault."     Of  them  whioh 
had  fallen  from  their  Faith  in  the  time  of  Emperor  Licinius, 
and  were  not  thereunto  forced  by  any  extreme  usage,  the 
concii.   Nicene  Synod  under  Constantine  ordained,  *'  That  earnestly 
7n.  repenting,  they  should  continue  three  years  Hearers,  seven 
years  be  prostrate,  and  two  years  communicate  with  the 
people  in  prayer,  before  they  came  to  receive  the  Oblation." 
Which  rigour  sometimes  they  tempered  nevertheless  with 
lenity,  the  self-same  Synod  having  likewise  defined,  ''  That, 
whatsoever  the  cause  were,  any  man  desirous  at  the  time  of 
departure  out  of  this  life  to  receive  the  Eucharist,  might 


can 


SecL  5.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  55 

(with  examination  and  trial)  have  it  granted  him  by  the 
Bishop."*    Yea,  besides  this  case  of  special  commiseration^ 
there  is  a  Canon  more  large,  which  giveth  always  liberty 
to  abridge,   or  extend  out  the  time,   as  the  party's  meek 
or  sturdy  disposition  should  require.     By  means  of  which 
Discipline  the  Church  having  power  to  hold  them  many 
years  in  suspense,   there  was  bred  in  the  minds  of  the 
Penitents,  through  long  and  daily  practice  of  submission,  a 
contrary  habit  unto  that  which  before  had  been  their  ruin, 
and   for  ever  afterwards  wariness   not  to  fall  into  those 
snares  out  of  which  they  knew  they  could  not  easily  wind 
themselves.     Notwithstanding,  because  there  was  likewise 
hope  and  possibility  of  short'ning  the  time,  this  made  them 
in  all  the  parts  and  offices  of  their  Repentance  the  more 
fervent.     In  the  first  station,  while  they  only  beheld  others 
passing  towards  the  Temple  of  God,  whereunto  for  them- 
selves to  approach  it  was  not  lawful,  they  stood  as  miserable 
forlorn  men,  the  very  patterns  of  perplexity  and  woe.     In 
the  second,  when  they  had  the  favour  to  wait  at  the  doors 
of  God,  where  the  sound  of  his  comfortable  Word  might 
be  heard,   none  received  it  with  attention  like  to  theirs. 
Thirdly,  being  taken  and  admitted  to  the  next  degree  of 
prostrates,  at  the  feet,  yet  behind  the  back  of  that  Angel 
representing  God,  whom  the  rest  saw  face  to  face,  their 
tears,  and  entreaties  both  of  Pastor  and  people,  were  such 
as  no  man  could  resist.     After  the  fourth  step,  which  gave 
them  Uberty  to  hear  and  pray  with  the  rest  of  the  people, 
being   so  near  the  haven,   no  diligence  was  then  slacked 
which  might  hasten  admission  to  the  heavenly  Table   of 
Christ,  their  last  desire.     It  is  not  therefore   a  thing  to 
be  marvelled  at,  though  St.  Cyprian  took  it  in  very  ill  part, 
when  open  backsliders  from  the  Faith  and  sacred  Religion 
of  Christ   laboured   by  sinister  practice  to  procure  from 
imprisoned  Saints   those  requests  for  present  Absolution, 
which  the  Church  could  neither  yield  upto  with  safety  of 
Discipline,  nor  in  honour  of  martyrdom  easily  deny.     For, 
what  would  thereby  ensue  they  needed  not  to  conjecture, 
when  they  saw  how  every  man  which  came  so  commended 
to  the  Church  by  Letters  thought  that  now  be  needed  not 

*  Ka06^JOu  Koi  'K€pi  Tccanhs  ovrivuaow  i^oJie^yTos  alrovvros  fier^xfiy  ^itx<V^^as,  6 
iwUrKovos  fierh  JioKifJuaurias  fifradiSSrw  rrjs  vpo<T<popus,  can.  13.  ucrck  doKi/juuriaSf  id  est, 
Manifestis  indiciis  deprehcnsa  peccatoris  seria  convenione  ad  Deum.  can.  12. 


56  THE   SIXTH   BOOK  [Scct.  5. 

to  crave,  but  might  challenge  of  duty  his  peace ;  taking  the 
matter  very  highly,  if  but  any  httle  forbearance  or  small 
delay  was  used.  "  He  which  is  overthrown  (saith  Cyprian) 
menaceth  them  that  stand,  the  wounded  them  that  were 
never  toucht;*  and  because  presently  he  hath  not  the  Body 
of  our  Lord  in  his  foul  imbrued  hands,  nor  the  Blood 
within  his  polluted  lips,   the  miscreant  fumeth   at  God's 

2**81    ^"®s*S'   s^^^  ^^  *^y  niadness,  O  thou  furious  man,  thou 

iiuu  *^^  *i°gry  with  him  which  laboureth  to  turn  away  God's 
anger  from  thee;  him  thou  threatenest,  which  sueth  unto 
God  for  grace  and  mercy  on  thy  behalf."  Touching 
Martyrs  he  answereth,   '*  That  it  ought  not  in  this  case 

Esek.  to  seem  offensive,  though  they  were  denied,  seeing  God  did 
himself  refuse  to  yield  to  the  piety  of  his  own  righteous 
Saints,  making  suit  for  obdurate  Jews."  As  for  the  parties, 
in  whose  behalf  such  shifts  were  used ;  to  have  their  desire 
was,  in  very  truth,  the  way  to  make  them  the  more  guilty: 
such  peace  granted  contrary  to  the  rigour  of  the  Gospel, 
contrary  to  the  I^aw  of  our  Lord  and  God,  doth  but  under 
colour  of  merciful  relaxation  deceive  sinners,  and  by  soft 
handling  destroy  them,  a  grace  dangerous  for  the  giver, 
and  to  him  which  receiveth  it  nothing  at  all  available* 
The  patient  expectation  that  bringeth  health  is,  by  this 
means,  not  regarded;  recovery  of  soundness  not  sought 
for  by  the  only  medicine  available,  which  is  Satisfaction; 
Penitency  thrown  out  of  men's  hearts;  the  remembrance 
of  that  heaviest  and  last  Judgment  clean  banisht;  the 
wounds  of  dying  men,  which  should  be  healed,  are  covered; 
the  stroke  of  death,  which  hath  gone  as  deep  as  any 
bowels  are  to  receive  it,  is  overcast  with  the  slight  shew 
of  a  cloudy  look.  From  the  altar  of  Satan  to  the  holy 
[Table]  of  the  Lord,  men  are  not  afraid  to  come,  even 
belching,  in  a  manner,  the  sacrificed  morsels  they  have 
eaten;  yea,  their  jaws  yet  breathing  out  the  irksome  savour 
of  their  former  contagious  wickedness,  they  seize  upon  the 
blessed   Body   of   our   Lord,    nothing   terrified   with   that 

icor.  dreadful  commination,  which  saith,  "Whosoever  eateth  and 
drinketh  unworthily,  is  guilty  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of 
Christ."  They  vainly  think  it  to  be  peace,  which  is  gotten 
before  they  be  purged  of  their  faults,  before  their  crime  be 

*  **  Jaccns  stantibus,  ct  interns  vulneratui,  minatur."     [Dc  Laps.  c.  12.] 


3tl.  37. 


Seci*  5.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  57 

solemnly  confest,  before  their  conscience  be  cleared  by  the 
sacrifice  and  imposition  of  the  Priest's  hands^  and  before 
they  have  pacified  the  indignation  of  God.  Why  term  they 
that  a  favour,  which  is  an  injury  ?  Wherefore  cloak  they 
impiety  with  the  name  of  charitable  indulgence  ?  Such  fa- 
cility giveth  not,  but  rather  taketh  away,  peace ;  and  is  itself 
another  fresh  persecution  or  trial,  whereby  that  fraudulent 
enemy  maketh  a  secret  havock  of  such  as  before  he  had 
overthrown ;  and  now,  to  the  end  that  he  may  clean  swallow 
them,  he  casteth  sorrow  in  a  dead  sleep,  putteth  grief  to 
silence,  wipeth  away  the  memory  of  faults  newly  done, 
smothereth  the  sighs  that  should  rise  from  a  contrite  spirit, 
drieth  up  eyes  which  ought  to  send  forth  rivers  of  tears, 
and  permitteth  not  God  to  be  pacified  with  full  Repentance, 
whom  heinous  and  enormous  crimes  have  displeased.  By 
this  then  we  see,  that  in  St.  Cyprian's  judgment,  all  Abso- 
lutions are  void,  frustrate,  and  of  no  effect,  without  sufficient 
Repentance  first  shewed  ;  whereas  contrariwise,  if  true  and 
fiill  Satisfaction  have  gone  before,  the  sentence  of  man  here 
given  is  ratified  of  God  in  Heaven,  according  to  our  Sa- 
viour's own  sacred  testimony,  "  Whose  sins  ye  remit,  they  [Jo»»n 
are  remitted." 

By  what  Works  in  the  Virtue,  and  by  what  in  the  Dis-  The  end 
cipline,  of  Repentance  we  are  said  to  satisfy  either  God  or  facuon. 
men,  cannot  now  be  thought  obscure.  As  for  the  inventors 
of  Sacramental  Satisfaction,  they  have  both  altered  the  na- 
tural order  heretofore  kept  in  the  Church,  by  bringing  in  a 
strange  preposterous  course  to  absolve  before  Satisfaction 
be  made,  and  moreover  by  this  their  misordered  practice  are 
grown  into  sundry  errors  concerning  the  End  whcreunto  it  is 
referred.  They  imagine,  beyond  all  conceit  of  antiquity, 
that  when  God  doth  remit  sin  and  the  punishment  eternal 
thereunto  belonging,  he  reserveth  the  torments  of  hell-fire 
to  be  nevertheless  endured  for  a  time,  either  shorter  or 
longer,  according  to  the  quality  of  men's  crimes.  Yet  so, 
that  there  is  between  God  and  man  a  certain  composition  (as 
it  were)  or  contract,  by  virtue  whereof  Works  assigned  by  the 
Priest  to  be  done  after  Absolution,  shall  satisfy  God  as 
touching  the  punishment,  which  he  otherwise  would  inflict 
for  sin  pardoned  and  forgiven. 

Now,  because  they  cannot  assure  any  man,  that  if  he  per-  I^Ltli^ 
formeth  what  the  Priest  appointeth  it  shall  suffice ;  this  (I  o&t^^ 


58  THE   SIXTH   BOOK  [Sed.  5. 

gay)^  because  they  cannot  do^  inasmuch  as  the  Priest  hath 
no  power  to  determine  or  define  of  equivalency  between 
Sins  and  Satisfactions ;  and  yet  if  a  Penitent  depart  this 
life,  the  debt  of  Satisfaction  being  either  in  whole  or  in  part 
undischarged,  they  stedfastly  hold  that  the  soul  must  remain 
in  unspeakable  Torment  till  all  be  paid  :  therefore,  for  help 
and  mitigation  in  this  case,  they  advise  men  to  set  certain 
copesmates  on  work,  whose  prayers  and  sacrifices  may 
satisfy  God  for  such  souls  as  depart  in  debt.  Hence  have 
arisen  the  infinite  pensions  of  their  Priests,  the  building  of 
so  many  altars  and  tombs,  the  enriching  of  Churches  with 
so  many  glorious  costly  gifts,  the  bequeathing  of  lands  and 
ample  possessions  to  religious-companies,  even  with  utter 
forgetfulness  of  friends,  parents,  wife,  and  children,  all  na^- 
tural  affection  giving  place  unto  that  desire  which  men, 
doubtful  of  their  own  estate,  have  to  deliver  their  souls  from 
Torment  after  death.  Yet,  behold,  even  this  being  also  done, 
how  far  forth  it  shall  avail  they  are  not  sure ;  and  therefore 
the  last  upshot  unto  their  former  inventions  is,  that  as  every 
action  of  Christ  did  both  merit  for  himself,  and  satisfy  partly 
for  the  eternal,  and  partly  for  the  temporal  punishment  due 
unto  men  for  sin,  so  his  Saints  have  obtained  the  like  privi- 
lege of  grace,  making  every  good  Work  they  do,  not  only 
meritorious  in  their  own  behalf,  but  satisfactory  too  for  the 
benefit  of  others.  Or  if,  having  at  any  time  grievously 
sinned,  they  do  more  to  satisfy  God  than  he  in  justice  can 
exact  or  look  for  at  their  hands ;  the  surplusage  runneth  to 
a  common  stock,  out  of  which  treasury  containing  whatso-* 
ever  Christ  did  by  way  of  Satisfaction  for  temporal  punish- 
ment, together  with  the  satisfactory  force  which  resideth  in 
all  the  virtuous  Works  of  Saints,  and  in  their  Satisfactions 
whatsoever  doth  abound,  (I  say)  "  From  hence  they  hold 
God  satisfied  for  such  arrearages  as  men  behind  in  accompt 
discharge  not  by  other  means ;  and  for  disposition  hereof, 
as  it  is  their  doctrine.  That  Christ  remitteth  not  eternal  death 
without  the  Priest's  Absolution,  so  without  the  grant  of  the 
Pope  they  cannot  but  teach  it  aUke  unpossible  that  souls  in 
hell  should  receive  any  temporal  release  of  pain :  the  Sacra-  . 
ment  of  Pardon  from  him  being  to  this  effect  no  less  neces- 
sary, than  the  Priest's  Absolution  to  the  other."  So  that  by 
this  postern-gate  cometh  in  the  whole  mart  of  Papal  Indul- 
gences; a  gain  unestimable  unto  him,  to  others  a  spoil;  a 


iSrel.  6.]  OF  ecclesiastical  polity.  59 

9Com  both  to  God  and  man.  So  many  Works  of  Satisfaction 
pretended  to  be  done  by  Christ,  by  Saints,  and  Martyrs ; 
so  many  virtuous  acts  possessed  with  satisfactory  force  and 
Tirtue ;  so  many  supererogations  in  satisfying  beyond  the 
exigence  of  their  own  necessity ;  and  this,  that  the  Pope 
might  make  a  monopoly  of  all,  turning  all  to  his  own  gain^* 
or  at  least  to  the  gain  of  those  which  are  his  own :  such 
facility  they  have  to  convert  a  pretended  Sacrament  into  a 
Revenue. 

6.  Sin  is  not  helped  but  by  being  assecured  of  Pardon.    It  or  Ab- 
resteth  therefore  to  be  considered,  what  warrant  we  have  of'peo?. 
concerning  Forgiveness,  when  the  sentence  of  man  absolveth  ^*""* 
us  from  sin  committed  against  God.     At  the  words  of  our 
Saviour,  saying  to  the  sick  of  the  palsy,  ''  Son,  thy  sins  are  Matt. 
forgiven  thee,"  exception  was  taken  by  the  Scribes,  who  *** 
secretly  reasoned  against  him,  ^^  Is  any  able  to  forgive  sins,  Mark 
but  only  God  ?"    Whereupon  they  condemn  his  speech  as 
blasphemy ;  the  rest,  which  believed  him  to  be  a  Prophet 
sent  from  God,  saw  no  cause  wherefore  he  might  not  as 
lawfully  say,  and  as  truly,  to  whomsoever  amongst  them, 
^'  God  hath  taken  away  thy  sins,"  as  Nathan  (they  all  knew)  Luke 
had  used  the  very  like  speech ;  to  whom  David  did  not  [i  sam. 
therefore  impute  blasphemy,  but  embraced,  as  became  him,  *"*  *''*^ 
the  words  of  truth  with  joy  and  reverence. 

Now  there  is  no  controversy,  but  as  God  in  that  special 
case  did  authorize  Nathan,  so  Christ  more  generally  his 
Apostles  and  the  Ministers  of  his  Word  in  his  Name  to  ab- 
solve sinners.  Their  power  being  equal,  all  the  difference 
between  them  can  be  but  only  in  this,  that  whereas  the  one 
had  prophetical  evidence,  the  other  have  the  certainty 
partly  of  faith,  and  partly  of  human  experience,  where- 
upon to  ground  their  sentence;  faith,  to  assure  them  of 
God's  most  gracious  pardon  in  Heaven  unto  all  Penitents, 
tad  touching  the  sincerity  of  each  particular  party's  Re- 
pentance, as  much  as  outward  sensible  tokens  or  signs  can 
warrant. 

It  is  not  to  be  marvelled,  that  so  great  a  difference  ap- 
peareth  between  the  Doctrine  of  Rome  and  ours,  when  we 
teach  Repentance.  They  imply  in  the  name  of  Repentance 
much  more  than  we  do :  we  stand  chiefly  upon  the  due 
inward  Conversion  of  the  heart ;  they  more  upon  Works  of 
external  shew  :  we  teach,  above  all  things,  that  Repentance 


60  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [SecL  6« 

which  is  one  and  the  same  from  the  beginning  to  the  world's 
end ;  they  a  Sacramental  Penance^  of  their  own  devising  and 
shaping :  we  labour  to  instruct  men  in  such  sort^  that  every 
soul  which  is  wounded  with  sin  may  learn  the  way  how  to 
cui'c  itself;  they,  clean  contrary,  would  make  all  sores  seem 
incurable,  unless  the  Priests  have  a  hand  in  them.  Touching 
the  Force  of  whose  Absolution  they  strangely  hold,  that 
whatsoever  the  Penitent  doth,  his  Contrition,  Confession, 
and  Satisfaction  have  no  place  of  right  to  stand  as  material 
parts  in  this  Sacrament,  nor  consequently  any  such  force  as 
to  make  them  available  for  the  taking  away  of  sin,  in  that 
they  proceed  from  the  Penitent  himself  without  the  privity 
of  the  Minister,  but  only  as  they  are  enjoined  by  the  Mi- 
nister's authority  and  power.*  So  that  no  contrition  or 
grief  of  heart,  till  the  Priest  exact  it ;  no  acknowledgment  of 
sins,  but  that  which  he  doth  demand ;  no  praying,  no  fasting, 
no  alms,  no  recompence  or  restitution  for  whatsoever  we 
have  done,  can  help,  except  by  him  it  be  first  imposed.  It 
is  the  chain  of  their  own  doctrine,  no  remedy  for  mortal  sin 
committed  after  Baptism  but  the  Sacrament  of  Penance 
only ;  no  Sacrament  of  Penance,  if  either  matter  or  form  be 
wanting ;  no  ways  to  make  those  duties  a  material  part  of  the 
Sacrament,  unless  we  consider  them  as  required  and  exacted 
by  the  Priest.  Our  Lord  and  Saviour,  they  say,  hath  or- 
dained his  Priests  Judges  in  such  sort,  that  no  man  which 
sinneth  after  Baptism  can  be  reconciled  unto  God  but  by  their 
sentence.f  For  why  ?  If  there  were  any  other  way  of  Re- 
conciliation, the  very  promise  of  Christ  should  be  false,  in 
CMatt.  saying,  "  Whatsoever  ye  bind  on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in 
John  ^*"  Heaven;  and  whose  sins  soever  ye  retain,  they  are  retained." 
XX.  23.J  Except  therefore  the  Priest  be  willing,  God  hath  by  promise 
hampered  himself  so,  that  it  is  not  now  in  his  own  power  to 
pardon  any  man."  J  Let  him  which  hath  offended  crave  as 
[Lnke  *^®  Publicau  did,  **  Lord,  be  thou  merciful  unto  me  a  sinner;" 
]^^l"*  let  him,  as  David,  make  a  thousand  times  his  supplication, 
[Psai.  "  Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  God,  according  to  thy  loving- 
**•  ^'^     kindness ;  according  to  the  multitude  of  thy  compassions, 

*  **  Ipsius  pcenitentis  actio  non  est  pars  Sacramentii  nisi  quateiius  potestati  sacerdotali 
subjicitar,  et  a  Sacerdote  dirigitur  vel  jubetur."     Bellarmin.  de  Poenit.  1.  i.  c.  16. 

f  "  Christus  instituit  Sacerdotes  Judices  super  terram  cum  ea  potestate,  ut,  sine  ipsonim 
sententia,  nemo  post  Baptismum  lapsus  reconciiiari  possit."     Bellarmin.  de  Pcenit  1.  iii.  c  1. 

X  **  Quod  si  possent  ii  sine  Sacerdotum  sententia  absolvi,  non  esset  vera  Cluisti  promissio, 
Q'lsecunque,"  &c.     Bellann.  ibid. 


Seci»  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  QX 

put  away  mine  iniquities ;"  all  this  doth  not  help,  till  such 
time  as  the  pleasure  of  the  Priest  be  known,  till  he  have 
signed  us  a  Pardon,  and  given  us  our  quietus  est.  God 
himself  hath  no  answer  to  make  but  such  as  that  of  his 
Angel  unto  Lot :  I  can  do  nothing.  It  is  true,  that  our  rcea. 
Saviour  by  these  words,  "  Whose  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  re-  *' 
mitted,*'  did  ordain  Judges  over  our  sinful  souls,  give  them 
authority  to  absolve  from  sin,  and  promise  to  ratify  in 
Heaven  whatsoever  they  should  do  on  earth  in  execution 
of  this  their  office ;  to  the  end  that  hereby,  as  well  his 
Ministers  might  take  encouragement  to  do  their  duty  with 
all  faithfulness,  as  also  his  People  admonition,  gladly  with 
all  reverence  to  be  ordered  by  them ;  both  parts  knowing 
that  the  functions  of  the  one  towards  the  other  have  his  per- 
petual assistance  and  approbation.  Howbeit  all  this  with 
two  restraints,  which  every  Jurisdiction  in  the  world  hath ; 
the  one.  That  the  practice  thereof  proceed  in  due  order;  the 
other.  That  it  do  not  extend  itself  beyond  due  bounds ;  which 
bounds  or  limits  have  so  confined  Penitential  Jurisdiction, 
that  although  there  be  given  unto  it  power  of  remitting  sin, 
yet  not  such  sovereignty  of  power  that  no  sin  should  be  par- 
donable in  man  without  it.*  Thus  to  enforce  our  Saviour's 
words,  is  as  though  we  should  gather,  that  because  whatso- 
ever Joseph  did  command  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  Pharaoh's 
grant  is,  it  should  be  done ;  therefore  he  granteth  that  no- 
thing should  be  done  in  the  land  of  Egypt  but  what  Joseph 
did  command,  and  so  consequently,  by  enabling  his  servant 
Joseph  to  command  under  him,  disableth  himself  to  com- 
mand any  thing  without  Joseph.  But  by  this  we  see  how 
the  Papacy  maketh  all  sin  unpardonable,  which  hath  not  the 
Priest's  Absolution :  except  peradventure  in  some  extraordi- 
nary case,  where  albeit  Absolution  be  not  had,  yet  it  must 
be  desired.f 

What  is  then  the  Force  of  Absolution  ?  What  is  it  which 
the  act  of  Absolution  worketh  in  a  sinful  man  ?  Doth  it  by 
any  operation  derived  from  itself  alter  the  state  of  the  soul? 


*  **  Christus  ordinatiam  suam  potestatem  in  Apostolos  transtulit ;  cxtraordinariam  sibi 


rcservavit." 


f  "  Ordinaria  enim  remedia  in  Ecclesia  ad  remittenda  peccata  sunt  ab  eo  instituta,  Sacra- 
menta ;  sine  quibus  peccata  remittere  Christus  potest,  sed  eztraordinarie  et  multo  rarius  hoc 
tuntf  quam  per  Sacramenta.  Noluit  igitur  eos  extraordinariis  remediis  remissionis  pecca- 
toram  confidere,  quae  et  rara  sunt  et  incerta :  sed  ordinaria,  ut  ita  dicami  Tislbilia  Sacra- 
mentorum  quserere  remedia."     Maldon.  in  Matt.  xyi.  19. 


62  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Bed.  a. 

Doth  it  really  take  away  sin,  or  but  ascertain  us  of  God's 
most  gracious  and  merciful  pardon  ?  The  latter  of  which 
two  is  our  assertion^  the  former  theirs. 

At  the  words  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
Matt,     saying  unto  the  sick  of  the  palsy,  "  Son,  thy  sins  are  for- 
(xii.*     given  thee,"  the  Pharisees,  which  knew  him  not  to  be  "  Son 
of  the  living  God,"  took  secret  exception,  and  fell  to  reason- 
Mark     ing  with  themselves  against  him ;  "  Is  any  able  to  forgive 
Lnke     sins  but  God  only  ?"     "  The  sins  (saith  St.  Cyprian)  that 
cypl'.deare  committed  against  him,  he  alone  hath  power  to  forgive, 
Jf  K;     which  took  upon  him  our  sins,  he  which  sorrowed  and  suf- 
fered for  us,  he  whom  the  Father  delivered  unto  death  for 
our  offences."    Whereunto  may  be  added,  that  which  Cle- 
mens Alexandrinus  hath,  ^'  Our  Lord  is  profitable  every 
way,  every  way  beneficial,  whether  we  respect  him  as  man, 
or  as  God ;  as  God  forgiving,  as  man  instructing  and  leamr* 
iga.       ing  how  to  avoid,  sin.*     For  it  is  *  I,  even  I,  that  putteth 
xii«-25.^^^y  thine  iniquities  for  mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  re»- 
member  thy  sins,*  saith  the  Lord."     Now,  albeit  we  wilr 
lingly    confess    with    St.  Cyprian,    '^  The    sins    that   are 
tK>iximitted   against  him,   he   only  hath   power   to  forgive, 
who  hath  taken  upon  him  our  sins,  he  which  hath  sor- 
rowed and  suffered  for  us,  he  whom  God  hath  given  for 
our  offences."f    Yet  neither  did  St.  Cyprian  intend  to  deny 
the  power  of  the  Minister  otherwise  than  if  he  presume 
beyond  his  commission  to  remit  sin,  where  God's  own  wiH 
is  it  should  be  retained ;  for,  against  such  Absolutions  he 
speaketh   (which   being  granted   to  whom   they  ought  to 
have  been  denied,  are  of  no  validity) ;  and,  if  rightly  it  be 
considered  how  higher  causes  in  operation  use  to  concur 
with  inferior  means,  his  grace  with  our  Ministry,  God  really 
performing  the  same  which  man  is  authorized  to  act  as  ia 
his  name,  there  shall  need  for  decision  of  this  point  no 
great  labour. 

To  Remission  of  sins  there  are  two  things  necessary;  Grace, 
as  the  only  cause  which  taketh  away  iniquity ;  and  Repent- 
ance, as  a  duty  or  condition  required  in  us.  To  make  Re- 
pentance such  as  it  should  be,  what  doth  God  demand  but 

*  ndPTa  Ivlyriaiy  6  Kvpios  koX  vivra  ^^eXcT,  Ktd.  4(S  &v6paT05t  tccd  &$  Sfcs.  T^  fihp 
dftaprfifiara  &s  Qehs  iufujelSf  els  8c  rh  fiif  i^a/MfHTdyeiy  traihceyiay&v  &s  &tf0poHros.  CJkoit 
Alexandr.  Pedag.  1.  i. 

t  **  Veniam  peccatis,  quae  in  ipsum  oommisaa  sunt,  solus  potest  iUe  lai;giri,  qui  pecoAt# 
nostra  porta vit,  qui  pro  nobis  doluit,  quern  Deus  tradidit  pro  pecoAtli  nostiii." 


SccL  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  63 

inward  sincerity  joined  with  fit  and  convenient  offices  for 
diat  purpose?  the  one  referred  wholly  to  our  own  con- 
sciences, the  other  best  discerned  by  them  whom  God  hath 
appointed  Judges  in  this  court.  So  that  having  first  the 
promises  of  God  for  pardon  generally  unto  all  offenders 
penitent ;  and  particularly  for  our  own  unfeigned  meaning, 
the  unfallible  testimony  of  a  good  Conscience,  the  sentence 
of  God's  appointed  Officer  and  vicegerent  to  approve  with 
unpartial  judgment  the  quality  of  that  we  have  done,  and  as 
from  his  tribunal  in  that  respect,  to  assoil  us  of  any  crime ; 
I  see  no  cause  but  that  by  the  Rules  of  our  Faith  and  Re- 
ligion we  may  rest  ourselves  very  well  assured  touching 
God's  most  merciful  pardon  and  grace ;  who,  especially  for  victor. 
die  strengthening  of  weak,  timorous,  and  fearful  minds,  hath  Mcnt. 
so  far  endued  his  Church  with  Power  to  absolve  sinners.  It 
pleaseth  Gt)d  that  men  sometimes  should,  by  missing  this 
help,  perceive  how  much  they  stand  bound  to  him  for  so 
precious  a  benefit  enjoyed.  And  surely,  so  long  as  the 
world  lived  in  any  awe  or  fear  of  falling  away  from  God, 
so  dear  were  his  Ministers  to  the  People,  chiefly  in  this 
respect,  that  being  through  tyranny  and  persecution  de- 
prived of  Pastors,  the  doleful  rehearsal  of  their  lost  felicities 
hath  not  any  one  thing  more  eminent,  than  that  sinners 
distrest  should  not  now  know  how  or  where  to  unlade  their 
burthens.  Strange  it  were  unto  me,  that  the  Fathers,  who 
so  much  every  where  extol  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ,  in 
leaving  unto  his  Church  this  heavenly  and  divine  Power, 
should  as  men,  whose  simplicity  had  universally  been  abused, 
agree  all  to  admire  and  magnify  a  needless  Office. 

The  Sentence  therefore  of  Ministerial  Absolution  hath 
two  effects:  touching  sin,  it  only  declareth  us  freed  from 
the  guiltiness  thereof,  and  restored  into  God's  favour;  but 
concerning  right  in  sacred  and  divine  mysteries,  whereof 
through  sin  we  were  made  unworthy,  as  the  power  of  the 
Church  did  before  effectually  bind  and  retain  us  from 
access  unto  them,  so  upon  our  apparent  Repentance  it  truly 
restoreth  our  liberty,  looseth  the  chains  wherewith  we  were 
tied,  remitteth  all  whatsoever  is  past,  and  accepteth  us  no 
less  returned  than  if  we  never  had  gone  astray.  For,  inas- 
much as  the  Power  which  our  Saviour  gave  to  his  Church 
is  of  two  kinds ;  the'  one  to  be  exercised  over  voluntary 
Penitents  only,  the  other  over  such  as  are  to  be  brought  to 


64  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [SecL  6. 

amendment  by  Ecclesiastical  censures,  the  words  wherein 
he  hath  given  this  authority  must  be  so  understood,  as  the 
subject  or  matter  whereupon  it  worketh  will  permits  It 
doth  not  permit  that  in  the  former  kind  (that  is  to  say,  in 
the  use  of  power  over  voluntary  converts),  to  bind  or  loose, 
remit  or  retain,  should  signify  any  other  than  only  to  pro- 
nounce of  sinners  according  to  that  which  may  be  gathered 
by  outward  signs;  because  really  to  effect  the  removal  or 
continuance  of  sin  in  the  soul  of  any  Offender,  is  no  priestly 
act,  but  a  work  which  far  exceedeth  their  ability.  Con- 
trariwise, in  the  latter  kind  of  spiritual  Jurisdiction,  which 
by  Censures  constraineth  men  to  amend  their  lives ;  it  is  true, 
that  the  Minister  of  God  doth  then  more  declare  and  signify 
what  God  hath  wrought.  And  this  Power,  true  it  is,  that 
the  Church  hath  invested  in  it.  Howbeit,  as  other  truths, 
so  this  hath  by  error  been  oppugned  and  depraved  through 
abuse.  The  first  of  name  that  openly  in  writing  withstood 
the  Church's  authority  and  power  to  remit  sin,  was  Ter- 
tullian,  after  he  had  combined  himself  with  Montanists ; 
drawn  to  the  liking  of  their  Heresy  through  the  very  sour- 
ness of  his  own  nature,  which  neither  his  incredible  skill 
and  knowledge  otherwise,  nor  the  very  Doctrine  of  the 
Gospel  itself,  could  but  so  much  alter,  as  to  make  him 
savour  any  thing  which  carried  with  it  the  taste  of  lenity. 
A  sponge  steeped  in  wormwood  and  gall,  a  man  through 
too  much  severity  merciless,  and  neither  able  to  endure  nor 
to  be  endured  of  any.  His  Book  entitled  "Concerning 
Chastity,"  and  written  professedly  against  the  Discipline  of 
the  Church,  hath  many  fretful  and  angry  sentences,  de- 
claring a  mind  very  much  offended  with  such  as  would  not 
persuade  themselves,  that  of  sins,  some  be  pardonable  by 
the  Keys  of  the  Church,  some  uncapable  of  forgiveness; 
that  middle  and  moderate  offences,  having  received  chastise- 
ment, may  by  Spiritual  authority  afterwards  be  remitted; 
but  greater  transgressions  must  (as  touching  Indulgence)  be 
left  to  the  only  pleasure  of  Almighty  God  in  the  world  to 
come ;  that  as  idolatry  and  bloodshed,  so  likewise  fornication 
and  sinful  lust,  are  of  this  nature;  that  they,  which  so  far 
have  fallen  from  God,  ought  to  continue  for  ever  after  barred 
from  access  unto  his  Sanctuary,  condemned  to  perpetual 
profusion  of  tears,  deprived  of  all  ex'pectation  and  hope  to 
receive  any  thing  at  the  Church's  hands,  but  publication  of 


Seei.  6.]  of  ecclesiastical  polity.  65 

their  shame.  "  For  (saith  he)  who  will  fear  to  waste  out 
that,  which  he  hopeth  he  may  recover  ?  Who  will  be  care- 
ftil  for  ever  to  hold  that,  which  he  knoweth  cannot  for  ever 
be  withheld  from  him  ?  He  which  slackeneth  the  bridle  to 
sin,  doth  thereby  give  it  even  the  spur  also."*  Take  away 
fear,  and  that  which  presently  succeedeth  instead  thereof  is 
licentious  desire.  Greater  offences  therefore  are  punish- 
able, but  not  pardonable,  by  the  Church.  If  any  Prophet 
or  Apostle  be  found  to  have  remitted  such  transgressions, 
they  did  it  not  by  the  ordinary  course  of  Discipline,  but  by 
extraordinary  power.  For  they  also  raised  the  dead,  which 
none  but  God  is  able  to  do ;  they  restored  the  impotent  and 
lame  men,  a  work  peculiar  to  Jesus  Christ ;  yea,  that  which 
Christ  would  not  do,  because  executions  of  such  severity 
beseemed  not  him  who  came  to  save  and  redeem  the  world 
by  his  sufferings,  they  by  their  power  struck  Elymas  and 
Ananias,  the  one  blind,  and  the  other  dead.  Approve  first 
yourselves  to  be,  as  they  were.  Apostles  or  Prophets,  and 
then  take  upon  you  to  pardon  all  men.  But,  if  the  authority 
you  have  be  only  Ministerial,  and  no  way  sovereign,  over- 
reach not  the  limits  which  God  hath  set  you ;  know  that  to 
pardon  capital  sin  is  beyond  your  Commission.  Howbeit, 
as  oftentimes  the  vices  of  wicked  men  do  cause  other  their 
commendable  qualities  to  be  abhorred,  so  the  honour  of 
great  men's  virtues  is  easily  a  cloak  of  their  errors.  In 
which  respect,  Tertullian  hath  past  with  much  less  obloquy 
and  reprehension  than  Novatian ;  who,  broaching  afterwards 
the  same  opinion,  had  not  otherwise  wherewith  to  counter- 
vail the  offence  he  gave,  and  to  procure  it  the  like  toleration. 
Novatian,  at  the  first  a  Stoical  Philosopher  (which  kind  of 
men  hath  always  accounted  stupidity  the  highest  top  of 
wisdom,  and  commiseration  the  deadliest  sin),  became  by 
institution  and  study  the  very  same  which  the  other  had 
been  before,  through  a  secret  natural  distemper,  upon  his 
conversion  to  the  Christian  Faith  and  recovery  from  sickness, 
which  moved  him  to  receive  the  Sacrament  of  Baptism  in  his 
bed*  The  Bishop,  contrary  to  the  Canons  of  the  Church,  concu. 
would  needs,  in  special  love  towards  him,  ordain  him  Pres-  ^^^ 
byter,  which  favour  satisfied  not  him  who  thought  himself  ""'**' 
worthy  of  greater  place  and  dignity.  He  closed  therefore 
with  a  number  of  well-minded  men,  and  not  suspicious  what 

*  [TertulL  De  Pudic  cap.  9.]     "  Seciiritas  delicti,  etiam  libido  est  ejus." 
VOL.  III.  F 


66  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Sect.  6. 

his  secret  purposes  were,  and  having  made  them  sure  unto 
him  by  fraud,  procureth  his  own  consecration  to  be  their 
Bishop.     His  Prelacy  now  was  able,   as   he   thought,   to 
countenance  what  he  intended  to  publish,  and  therefore  his 
letters  went  presently  abroad  to  sundry  Churches,  advising 
them  never  to  admit  to  the  fellowship  of  holy  mysteries,  such 
as  had  after  Baptism  offered  sacrifice  to  Idols.     There  was 
socrat.  present  at  the  Council  of  Nice,  together  with  other  Bishops, 
c.  [28.]    one  Acesius  a  Novatianist,  touching  whose  diversity  in  opi- 
Niuiii.'  nion  from  the  Church,  the  Emperor,  desirous  to  hear  some 
socrat.*  reason,  asked  of  him  certain  questions ;  for  answer  where- 
c.  [id.]   unto,  Acesius  weaveth  out  a  long  history  of  things  that 
happened  in  the  persecution  under  Decius,  and  of  men, 
which  to  save  life,  forsook  Faith.    But  the  end  was  a  certain 
bitter  Canon,  framed  in  their  own  school :  "  That  men  which 
fall  into  deadly  sin  after  holy  Baptism,  ought  never  to  be 
again  admitted  to  the  Communion  of  divine  mysteries :  that 
they  are  to  be  exhorted  unto  Repentance ;  howbeit  not  to 
be  put  in  hope  that  pardon  can  be  had  at  the  Priest's  hands, 
but  with  God,  which  hath  sovereign  power  and  authority  in 
himself  to  remit  sins,  it  may  be  in  the  end  they  shall  find 
CEnscb.  mercy."    These  followers  of  Novatian,  which  gave  them* 
C.43.]    selves  the  title  of  Kadapol,  clean,  pure,  and  unspotted  men, 
had  one  point  of  Montanism  more  than  their  Master  did 
profess ;  for  amongst  sins  unpardonable  they  reckoned  second 
Marriages,  of  which  opinion  TertuUian  making  (as  his  usual 
manner  was)  a  salt  apology,  "  Such  is  (saith  he)  our  stony 
hardness,    that   defaming   our   Comforter  with   a   kind   of 
enormity  in  Discipline,  we  dam  up  the  doors  of  the  Church, 
no  less  against  twice-married  men,  than  against  adulterers 
and  fornicators."     Of  this  sort  therefore  it  was  ordained  by 
the  Nicene  Synod,  that  if  any  such  did  return  to  the  Catholic 
and  Apostolic  unity,  they  should  in  writing  bind  themselves 
to  observe  the  Orders  of  the  Church,  and  Communicate  as 
well  with  them  which  had  been  often  married,  or  had  fallen 
in  time  of  persecution,  as  with  other  sort  of  Christian  people. 
But  farther  to  relate,  or  at  all  to  refel  the  error  of  mis- 
believing men  concerning  this   point,  is  not  now  to  our 
present  purpose  greatly  necessary. 

The  Church  may  receive  no  small  detriment  by  corrupt 
practice,  even  there  where  Doctrine  concerning  the  sub- 
stance of  things  practised  is  free  from  any  great  or  dangerous 


SecU  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  87 

corruption.  If  therefore  that  which  the  Papacy  doth  in 
matter  of  Confessions  and  Absolution  be  offensive,  if  it  pal- 
pably serve  [swerve  f ]  in  the  use  of  the  Keys,  howsoever 
that  which  it  teacheth  in  general  concerning  the  Church's 
power  to  retain  and  forgive  sins,  be  admitted  true,  have  they  not 
on  the  one  side  as  much  whereat  to  be  abasht,  as  on  the  other 
wherein  to  rejoice  ?  They  bind  all  men,  upon  pain  of  ever- 
lasting condemnation  and  death,  to  make  Confession  to  their 
Ghostly  Fathers  of  every  great  offence  they  know,  and  can 
remember,  that  they  have  committed  against  God.  Hath 
Christ  in  his  Gospel  so  delivered  the  doctrine  of  Repentance 
unto  the  world  ?  Did  his  Apostles  so  preach  it  to  nations  ? 
Have  the  Fathers  so  believed  or  so  taught?  Surely  No- 
vatian  was  not  so  merciless  in  depriving  the  Church  of 
power  to  absolve  some  certain  Offenders,  as  they  in  im- 
posing upon  all  a  necessity  thus  to  confess.  Novatian 
would  not  deny  but  God  might  remit  that  which  the 
Church  could  not,  whereas  in  the  Papacy  it  is  maintained, 
that  what  we  conceal  from  men,  God  himself  shall  never 
pardon.  By  which  oversight,  as  they  have  here  surcharged 
the  world  with  multitude,  but  much  abated  the  weight  of 
Confessions,  so  the  careless  manner  of  their  Absolution  hath 
made  Discipline,  for  the  most  part,  amongst  them  a  bare 
formality ;  yea,  rather  a  mean  of  emboldening  unto  vicious 
and  wicked  life,  than  either  any  help  to  prevent  future,  or 
medicine  to  remedy  present  evils  in  the  soul  of  man.  The 
Fathers  were  slow  and  always  fearful  to  absolve  any  before  very 
manifest  tokens  given  of  a  true  penitent  and  contrite  spirit. 
It  was  not  their  custom  to  remit  sin  first,  and  then  to  impose 
Works  of  Satisfaction,  as  the  fashion  of  Rome  is  now;  inso- 
much that  this  their  preposterous  course  and  misordered 
practices,  hath  bred  also  in  them  an  error  concerning  the 
end  and  purpose  of  these  works.  For  against  the  guiltiness 
of  sin,  and  the  danger  of  everlasting  condemnation  thereby 
incurred.  Confession  and  Absolution  succeeding,  the  same 
are,  as  they  take  it,  a  remedy  sufficient ;  and  therefore  what 
their  Penitentiaries  do  think  to  enjoin  farther,  whether  it  be 
a  number  of  Ave-Maries  daily  to  be  scored  up,  a  journey 
of  pilgrimage  to  be  undertaken,  some  few  dishes  of  ordinary 
diet  to  be  exchanged,  offerings  to  be  made  at  the  shrines  of 
Saints,  or  a  little  to  be  scraped  off*  from  men's  superfluities 
for  relief  of  poor  people,  all  is  in  lieu  or  exchange  with  God, 

F   2 


as  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Sect.  6. 

whose  Justice^  notwithstanding  our  pardon,  yet  oweth  us 
still  some  temporal  punishment,  either  in  this  or  in  the  life 
to  come,  except  we  'quite  it  ourselves  here  with  Works  of  the 
former  kind,  and  continued  till  the  balance  of  God's  most 
strict  severity  shall  find  the  pains  we  have  taken  equivalent 
with  the  plagues  which  we  should  endure,  or  else  the  mercy 
of  the  Pope  relieve  us.  And  at  this  postern-gate  cometh  in 
the  whole  mart  of  Papal  Indulgences  so  infinitely  strewed, 
that  the  pardon  of  sin,  which  heretofore  was  obtained  hardly 
and  by  much  suit,  is  with  them  become  now  almost  impos- 
sible to  be  escaped. 

'  To  set  down  then  the  force  of  this  Sentence  in  absolving 
Penitents :  there  are  in  sin  these  three  things ;  the  Act  which 
passeth  away  and  vanisheth ;   the  Pollution  wherewith   it 
leaveth  the  soul  defiled ;   and  the  Punishment  whereunto 
they  are  made  subject  that  have  committed  it.*    The  Act 
of  sin  is  every  deed,  word,  and  thought  against  the  Law  of 
1  John    God ;  '*  for  sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  Law :"  and  al- 
"*•*•     though  the  Deed  itself  do  not  continue,   yet  is  that  bcul 
quatity  permanent,  whereby  it  maketh  the  soul  unrighteous 
ji,„.     and  deformed  in  God's  sight.     "  From  the  heart  come  evil 
'^^^'   cogitations,  murthers,  adulteries,  fornications,  thefts,  false 
testimonies,  slanders  ;  these  are  things  which  defile  a  man." 
They  do  not  only,  as  effects  of  impurity,  argue  the  nest  to 
be  unclean  out  of  which  they  came,  but  as  causes  they 
strengthen  that  disposition  unto  wickedness  which  brought 
them  forth ;  they  are  both  fruits  and  seeds  of  uncleanness, 
they  nourish  the  root  out  of  which  they  grow,  they  breed 
that  iniquity  which  bred  them.     The  Blot  therefore  of  sin 
abideth,  though  the  Act  be  transitory.     And  out  of  both 
ariseth  a  present  debt,  to  endure  what  Punishment  soever 
the  evil  which  we  have  done  deserveth;  an  obligation,  in 
the  chains  whereof  sinners,  by  the  Justice  of  Almighty  God, 
Xcxi      continue  bound  till  Repentance  loose  them.     ^^  Repent  this 
^"ia.    thy  wickedness  (saith  Peter  unto  Simon  Magus),  and  be- 
seech God,  that  if  it  be  possible  the  thought  of  thine  heart 
may  be  pardoned ;  for  I  see  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness, 
and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity."     In  like  manner  Solomon : 
Prov.     ^^  The  wicked  shall  be  held  fast  in  the  cords  of  his  own 
sin."    Nor  doth  God  only  bind  sinners  hand  and  foot  by  the 


▼.23. 


*  "  In  peccato  tria  sunt ;  actio  mala,  interior  maculai  et  sequela."     Bonav.  Sent.  1.  iv. 
d.  17.  q.  3. 


Sect.  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  69 

dreadful  determination  of  his  own  unsearchable  judgment 
against  them;  but  sometime  also  the  Church  bindeth  by 
the  censures  of  her  Discipline.*  So  that  when  Offenders 
upon  their  Repentance  are  by  the  same  Discipline  absolved^ 
the  Church  looseth  but  her  own  bonds^  the  chains  wherein 
she  had  tied  them  before.     The  Act  of  sin  God  alone  re-  Acu 

99        gtgk 

mitteth^  in  that  his  purpose  is  never  to  call  it  to  account^  or  mic.  ' 
to  lay  it  unto  men's  charge ;  the  Stain  he  washeth  out  by  the  i  cor.' 
sanctifying  grace  of  his  Spirit ;  and  concerning  the  Punish-  ii't.  m. 
ment  of  sin^  as  none  else  hath  power  to  cast  body  and  soul  lioke 
into  hell-fire,  so  none  power  to  deliver  either  besides  him.      Matf.* 
As  for  the  ministerial  Sentence  of  private  Absolution,  it  *'  *** 
can  be  no  more  than  a  Declaration  what  God  hath  done  ;  it 
hath  but  the  force  of  the  Prophet  Nathan's  Absolution, 
''  God  hath  taken  away  thy  sin :"  than  which  construction,  2  Sam. 
especially  of  words  judicial,  there  is  not  any  thing  more 
vulgar.     For  example,  the  Publicans  are  said  in  the  Gospel  Lake 
to  have   "justified  God;"  the  Jews  in  Malachi  to  have 
blessed  "  proud"  men,  which  sin  and  prosper;  not  that  the  Hai. 
one  did  make  God  righteous,  or  the  other  the  wicked  happy :  ***' "' 
but  to  bless,  to  justify,  and  to  absolve,  are  as  commonly  used 
for  words  of  judgment,  or  declaration,  as  of  true  and  real 
efficacy ;  yea,  even  by  the  opinion  of  the  Master  of  Sen-  sent.  j. 
tences.     It  may  be  soundly  affirmed  and  thought  that  God  u. 
alone  doth  remit  and  retain  sins,  although  he  have  given 
power  to  the  Church  to  do  both ;  but  he  one  way,  and  the 
Church  another.     He  only  by  himself  forgiveth  sin,  who 
cleanseth  the  soul  from  inward  blemish,  and  looseth  the 
debt  of  eternal  death:   so  great  a  privilege  he  hath   not 
given  unto  his  Priests,  who  notwithstanding  are  authorized 
to  loose  and  bind,  that  is  to  say,  declare  who  are  bound,  and 
who  are  loosed.     For  albeit  a  man  be  already  cleared  before 
God,  yet  he  is  not  in  the  Church  of  God  so  taken,  but  by 
virtue  of  the  Priest's  sentence ;  who  likewise  may  be  said  to 
bind  by  imposing  Satisfaction,  and  to  loose  by  admitting  to 
the  holy  Communion.     Saint  Jerome  also,  whom  the  Master 
of  the  Sentences  allegeth  for  more  countenance  of  his  own  xoZ\\, 
opinion,  doth  no  less  plainly  and  directly  affirm,  "  That  as  mSt. 
the  Priests  of  the  Law  could  only  discern,  and  neither  cause  mS? 

*  "  Sacerdotes  opus  justitis  ezercent  in  peccatores,  cum  eos  justa  poena  ligant ;  opus  mite- 
licordiaBi  cum  de  ea  aliquod  relaxant,  vel  Sacraraentorum  Communioni  conciliant ;  alia  opera 
in  peccatores  ezercere  nequeunt."     Sent.  1.  iv.  dis.  IS. 


70  THE  SIXTH  BOOK '  [Sect,  6. 

nor  remove  leprosies ;  so  the  Ministers  of  the  Gospel^  when 
they  retain  or  remit  sin,  do  hut  in  the  one  judge  how  long 
we  continue  guilty^  and  in  the  oth^  declare  when  we  are 
clear  or  free."  For  there  is  nothing  more  apparent^  than 
that  the  Discipline  of  Repentance^  both  public  and  private^ 
was  ordained  as  an  outward  mean  to  bring  men  to  the  virtue 
of  inward  conversion ;  so  that  when  this  by  manifest  tokens 
did  seem  effected^  Absolution  ensuing  (which  could  not 
make)  served  only  to  declare  men  Innocent. 

But  the  cause  wherefore  they  are  so  stiiF^-  and  have  for- 
saken their  own  Master  in  this  point  is^  for  that  they  hold 
the  private  Discipline  of  Penitency  to  be  a  Sacrament ;  Ab- 
solution an  external  Sign  in  this  Sacrament ;  the  signs  Kx- 
ternal  of  all  Sacraments  in  the  New  Testament,  to  be  both 
causes  of  that  which  they  signify,  and  signs  of  that  which 
they  truly  cause.     To  this  opinion  concerning  Sacraments, 
they  are  now  tied  by  expounding  a  Canon  in  the  Florentine 
Council,  according  to  a  former  Ecclesiastical  invention  re- 
ceived from  Thomas.     For  his  device  it  was,  that  the  mercy 
of  God,  which  useth  Sacraments  as  Instruments  whereby  to 
work,  indueth  them  at  the  time  of  their  Administration  with 
supernatural  force  and  ability  to  induce  Grace  into  the  souls 
of  men ;  even  as  the  axe  and  saw  doth  seem  to  bring  timber 
into  that  fashion  which  the  mind  of  the  artificer  intendeth. 
Scot.     His  conceit,  Scotus,  Occam,  Petrus  Alliacensis,  with  sundry 
Iffv.      others,  do  most  earnestly  and  strongly  impugn,  shewing  very 
iid*4.*     good  reason  wherefore  no  Sacrament  of  the  new  Law  can 
STJlin-  either  by  virtue  which  itself  hath,  or  by  force  supernatural 
oSJkm.  given  it,  be  properly  a  cause  to  work  Grace ;  but  Sacraments 
qnit?"*  *^®  therefore  said  to  work  or  confer  Grace,  because  the  will 
qiwt."    of  Almighty  God  is,  although  not  to  give  them  such  efficacy, 
lent.**    yet  himself  to  be  present  in  the  ministry  of  the  working  that 
effect,  which  proceedeth  wholly  from  him,  without  any  real 
operation  of  theirs,  such  as  can  enter  into  men*s  souls.     In 
which  construction,    seeing   that  our  book*   and   writings 
have  made  it  known  to  the  world  how  we  join  with  them,  it 
seemeth  very  hard  and  injurious  dealing,  that  Bellarmine 
throughout  the  whole  course  of  his  second  Book,  De  Sacra- 
mentis  in  Genere,  should  so  boldly  face  down  his  adversaries, 
.    as  if  their  opinion  were,  that  Sacraments  are  naked,  empty. 


[Sic  in  edit.  1648.] 


Sect.  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  71 

and  uneffectual  Signs ;  wherein  there  is  no  other  force,  than 
only  such  as  in  pictures^  to  stir  up  the  mind,  that  so  by 
theory  and  speculation  of  things  represented,  Faith  may 
grow :  finally,  that  all  the  operation  which  Sacraments  have, 
is  a  sensible  and  divine  instruction.*     But  had  it  pleased 
him  not  to  hoodwink  his  own  knowledge,  I  nothing  doubt 
but  he  fully  saw  how  to  answer  himself;  it  being  a  matter 
very  strange  and  incredible,  that  one  which  with  so  great 
diligence  hath  winnowed  his  adversaries*  writings,  should  be 
ignorant  of  their  minds,  t    For,  even  as  in  the  Person  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  both  God  and  Man,  when  his  human 
nature  is  by  itself  considered,  we  may  not  attribute  that  unto 
him,  which  we  do  and  must  ascribe  as  oft  as  respect  is  had 
unto  both  natures  combined ;  so  because  in  Sacraments  there 
are  two  things  distinctly  to  be  considered,  th^  outward  sign, 
and  the  secret  concurrence  of  God's  most  blessed  Spirit,  in 
which  respect  our  Saviour  hath  taught  that  Water  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  are  combined  to  work  the  mystery  of  new  birth ; 
Sacraments  therefore,  as  Signs,  have  only  those  effects  be- 
fore-mentioned;  but  of  Sacraments,  in  that  by  God's  own 
will  and  ordinance  they  are  Signs  assisted  always  with  the 
power  of  the   Holy   Ghost,   we   acknowledge  whatsoever 
either  the  places   of  the   Scripture,    or  the  authority  of 
Councils  and  Fathers,  or  the  proofs  and  arguments  of  reason 
which  he  allegeth,  can  shew  to  be  wrought  by  them.     The 
elements  and  words  have  power  of  infallible  signification,  for 
which  they  are  called  Seals  of  God's  truth ;  the  Spirit  affixed 
unto  those  elements  and  words,  power  of  operation  within 
the  soul,  most  admirable,  divine,  and  impossible  to  be  ex- 
prest.      For   so  God  hath  instituted  and  ordained,   that, 
together  with  due  administration  and  receipt  of  sacramental 
Signs,  there  shall  proceed  from  himself  Grace  effectual  to 

*  "  Lutheran!  de  hac  re  interdum  ita  scribunti  ut  videantur  a  Catholids  non  dissentire ; 
interdum  autem  apertissime  scribunt  contraria :  at  semper  in  eadem  sententia  manent,  Sacra- 
menta  non  habere  immediate  illam  efficientiam  respectu  gratioe,  sed  esse  nuda  signa,  tamen 
mediate  aliquid  efficere  quatenus  excitant  et  alunt  fidem;  quod  ipsum  non  faciunt  nisi  reprse- 
sentando,  ut  Sacramenta  per  visum  excitent  fidem,  quemadraodum  preedicatio  Verbi  per 
auditum."  Bellarm.  de  Sacram.  1.  ii.  c  2.  "  Quaedam  signa  sunt  theoricai  non  ad  alium 
finem  instiluta,  quam  ad  significandum ;  alia  ad  significandum  et  efficiendum,  quae  ob  id 
practica  did  possunt.  Controversia  est  inter  nos  et  Hsereticosi  quod  illi  faciunt  Sacramenta 
ngna  prions  generis.  Quare  si  ostendere  poterimus  esse  signa  posterioris  generis,  obtinuimus 
causam."     Ibid.  cap.  8. 

f  "  Semper  memoria  repetendum  est  Sacramenta  nihil  aliud  quam  instrumentales  esse 
cohferendse  nobis  gratise  causas."  Calv.  in  Ant.  con.  Frid.  sec.  7.  c  5.  "  Si  qui  sint  qui 
negent  Sacramends  contineri  gratiam  quam  figurant,  illos  improbamus."    Ibid.  c.  6. 


72  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [SecL  6. 

sanctify^  to  cure,  to  comfort,  and  whatsoever  else  is  for  the 
good  of  the  souls  of  men.  How)^t  this  opinion  Thomas 
rejecteth,  under  pretence  that  it  maketh  sacramental  words 
and  elements  to  be  in  themselves  no  more  than  signs, 
whereas  they  ought  to  be  held  as  Causes  of  that  they 
signify.*  He  therefore  reformeth  it  with  this  addition,  that 
the  very  sensible  parts  of  the  Sacraments  do  Instrumentally 
effect  and  produce,  not  Grace  (for  the  Schoolmen  both  of 
these  times,  and  long  after,  did,  for  the  most  part,  maintain 
it  untrue,  and  some  of  them  unpossible,  that  sanctifying 
Grace  should  efficiently  proceed  but  from  God  alone,  and 
that  by  immediate  creation,  as  the  substance  of  the  soul 
doth) ;  but  the  phantasy  which  Thomas  had  was,  that  sen- 
sible things,  through  Christ  and  the  Priest's  benediction, 
receive  a  certain  supernatural  transitory  Force,  which  leaveth 
behind  it  a  kind  of  preparative  quality  or  beauty  within  the 
soul,  whereupon  immediately  from  God  doth  ensue  the  grace 
4;hat  justifieth.f 

Now  they  which  pretend  to  follow  Thomas,  differ  from 
bim  in  two  points.  For  firsts  they  make  Grace  an  immediate 
effect  of  the  outward  sign,  which  he  for  the  dignity  and  ex- 
cellency thereof  was  afraid  to  do.  Secondly,  whereas  he, 
to  produce  but  a  preparative  quality  in  the  soul,  did  imagine 
God  to  create  in  the  Instrument  a  supernatural  gift  or  ability; 
they  confess,  that  nothing  is  created,  infused,  or  any  way 
inherent,  either  in  the  word  or  in  the  elements ;  nothing  that 
giveth  them  Instrumental  efficacy,  but  God's  mere  motion  or 
application.;]:  Are  they  able  to  explain  unto  us,  or  them- 
selves to  conceive,  what  they  mean  when  they  thus  speak? 
For  example,  let  them  teach  us,  in  the  Sacrament  of  Baptism, 
what  it  is  for  Water  to  be  moved  till  it  bring  forth  Grace. 
The  application  thereof  by  the  Minister  is  plain  to  sense ; 

*  *'  Iste  modus  non  transcendit  rationera  signii  cum  Sacramenta  novae  Legis  non  solum 
ngnificent,  sed,  causent  gradam."  Part.  iii.  q.  62.  art.  1.  Alexand.  part  iv.  q.  8.  memb.  3. 
art.  V.  sec.  1.  et  2.  Th.  de  verit.  q.  27.  art.  iii.  Alliac.  in  quart,  sent  ix.  1.  Capr.  in  4.  d.  1. 
q.  1.    Palud.  tom.  Ferrar.  lib.  iv.  cont.  Gent,  c  57. 

f  **  Necesse  est  ponere  aliquam  virtutem  supematuralem  in  Sacramentis."  Sent.iv.  d.  1. 
q.  1.  art  iv.  **  Sacramentum  consequitur  spiritualem  virtutem  cum  benedictione  Christ!, 
et  appficatione  Ministri  ad  usum  Sacramenti."  Part.  iii.  q.  62.  art.  iv.  Concil.  '*  Victus 
sacramentalis  habet  esse  transiens  ex  uno  in  aliud  et  incompletum."  Ibidem.  **  Ex  Sacra- 
mentis  duo  consequuntur  in  anima,  unum  est  character,  sive  aliquis  omatus ;  allud^  est  gratia. 
Respectu  primo,  Sacramenta  sunt  causae  aliquo  modo  efficientes ;  respectu  secundo,  sunt  dis- 
ponentes.  Sacramenta  causant  dispositionem  ad  formam  ultimam,  sed  ultimam  perfectionem 
non  inducunt."     Sent  iv.  d.  1.  q.  1.  art.  iv. 

X  **  Solus  Deus  efficit  gratiam  adeo  quod  nee  Angelis,  qui  sunt  nobiliores  sensibilibus 
creaturis,  hoc  communicetur."     Sent  iv.  d.  1.  q.  1.  art  iv. 


Sect.  6.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  73 

the  Force  which  it  hath  in  the  mind^   as  a  moral  Instru- 
ment of  information  pr ^ Instruction,   we  know  by  reason; 
and  by  faith,  we  understand  how  God  doth  assist  it  with  his  [Epb. 
Spirit :  whereupon  ensueth  the  Grace  which  Saint  Cyprian  ' 
did  in  himself  observe,  saying,  "  After  the  bath  of  regenerar 
tion  having  scowered  out  the  stained  foulness  of  former  life, 
supernatural  light  had  entrance  into  the  breast  which  was 
purified  and  cleansed  for  it :  after  that  a  second  nativity  had 
made  another  man,  by  inward  receipt  of  the  Spirit  from 
Heaven;   things  doubtful  began  in  marvellous  manner  to 
appear  certain,  that  to  be  open  which  lay  hid,  darkness  to 
shine  like  the  clear  light,  former  hardness  to  be  made  facility, 
impossibility  easiness:  insomuch  as  it  might  be  discerned 
how  that  was  earthly,  which  before  had  been  carnally  bred, 
and  lived  given  over  unto  sins ;  that  now  God's  own  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  did  quicken."     Our  opinion  is  therefore 
plain  unto  every  man's  understanding.     We  take  it  for  a 
very  good  speech  which  Bonaventure  hath  uttered  in  sa3dng, 
**  Heed  must  be  taken,  that  while  we  assign  too  much  to  the 
bodily  signs  in  way  of  their  commendation,  we  withdraw  not 
the  honour  which  is  due  to  the  Cause  which  worketh  in  them, 
and  the  soul  which  receiveth  them.*"     Whereunto  we  con- 
formably teach,  that  the  outward  sign  applied  hath  of  itself 
no  natural  efficacy  towards  Grace,  neither  doth  God  put 
into  it  any  supernatural  inherent  virtue.     And,  as  I  think, 
we  thus  far  avouch  no  more  than  they  themselves  confess  to 
be  very  true.     If  any  thing  displease  them,  it  is  because  we 
add  to  these  premises  another  assertion ;  That,  with  the  out- 
ward sign,  God  joineth  his  Holy  Spirit,  and  so  the  whole 
Instrument  of  God  bringeth  that  to  pass,  whereunto  the 
baser  and  meaner  part  could  not  extend.     As  for  operations 
through  the  motions  of  signs,  they  are  dark,  intricate,  and 
obscure ;  perhaps  possible,  howbeit,  not  proved  either  true 
or  likely,  by  alleging,  that  the  "  touch"  of  our  Saviour's  Lake 
garment  restored  health,  ^'  clay"  sight,  when  he  applied  it.  joimL^ 
Although  ten  thousand  such  examples  should  be  brought, 
they  overthrow  not  this  one  principle ;  That,  where  the  In- 
strument is   without  inherent,  the  effect  must  necessarily 
proceed  from  the  only  agent's  adherent,  power.     It  passeth 
a  man's  conceit  how  Water  should  be  carried  into  the  soul 

•  "  Cavendum  enim  ne  dum  nimis  damus  corporalibus  signis  ad  laudem,  subtrahamus 
honorem  causae  curanti  et  anims  sasdpienti." 


74  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [Sect.  6. 

with  any  force  of  divine  motion^  or  Grace  proceed  but  merely 
Beiiann.  from  the  influcncc  of  God's  Spirit.     Notwithstanding,  if 
ubfu^'  God  did  himself  teach  his  Chureh  in  this  case  to  beUeve 
^'^'      that  which  he  hath  not  given  us  capacity  to  comprehend^ 
how  incredible  soever  it  may  seem,  yet  our  wits  should  sub- 
mit themselves,  and  reason  give  place  unto  faith  therein* 
But  they  yield  it  to  be  no  question  of  faith,  how  Grace  doth 
proceed  from  Sacraments ;  if  in  general  they  be  acknow- 
ledged true  Instrumental  causes,  by  the  ministry  whereof 
men  receive  divine  grace :  and  that  they  which  impute  grace 
to  the  only  operation  of  God  himself,  concurring  with  the 
external  sign,  do  no  less  acknowledge  the  true  efficacy  of  the 
Sacrament,  than  they  that  ascribe  the  same  to  the  quality  of 
the  sign  applied,  or  to  the  motion  of  God  applying,  and  so 
far  carrying  it,  till  grace  be  not  created,  but  extracted,  out 
of  the  natural  possibility  of  the  soul.*    Nevertheless,  this 
last  philosophical  imagination  (if  I  may  call  it  philosophical) 
which  useth  the  terms,  but  overthroweth  the  rules  of  philo- 
sophy, and  hath  no  article  of  Faith  to  support  it,  but  what- 
soever it  be,  they  follow  it  in  a  manner  all ;  they  cast  off 
the  first  opinion,  wherein  is  most  perspicuity  and  strongest 
evidence  of  certain  truth.     The  Council  of  Florence  and 
Trent  defining,  that  Sacraments  contain  and  confer  Grace, 
the  sense  whereof  (if  it  liked  them)  might  so  easily  conform 
itself  with  the  same  opinion  which  they  drew  without  any 
just  cause  quite  and  clean  the  other  way,  making  Grace  the 
issue  of  bare  words,  in  such  Sacraments  as  they  have  framed 
destitute  of  any  visible  element,  and  holding  it  the  offspring 
as  well  of  elements  as  of  words  in  those  Sacraments  where 
both  are ;  but  in  no  Sacrament  acknowledging  Grace  to  be 
the  fruit  of  the  Holy  Ghost  working  with  the  outward  Sign, 
Tho.  de  and  not  by  it,  in  such  sort  as  Thomas  himself  teacheth ;  that 
q.V.     the  Apostles'  Imposition  of  Hands  caused  not  the  coming  of 
^p.  *'   the  Holy  Ghost,  which  notwithstanding  was  bestowed  to- 
Acu*'    gether  with  the  exercise  of  that  Ceremony ;  yea,  by  it  (saith 
▼m.  18.  ^j^^  Evangelist),  to  wit,  as  by  a  mean  which  came  between 
the  true  agent  and  the  effect,  but  not  otherwise. 

Many  of  the  ancient  Fathers,  presupposing  that  the  Faith- 
ful before  Christ  had  not,  till  the  time  of  his  coming,  that 

*  **  Dicimus  gratiam  non  creari  a  Deo,  sed  produci  ex  apticudine  et  potentia  naturali 
animae,  sicut  csetera  omnia  quae  producuntur  in  subjectis  talibus,  quae  sunt  apta  nata  ad  susd- 
piendum  accidentia."    Allen,  de  Sacr.  in  gen.  c.  37. 


Sect.  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY,  75 

perfect   life  and  salvation  which  they  looked  for  and  we 
possess,  thought  likewise  their  Sacraments  to  be  but  pre- 
figurations  of  that  which  ours  in  present  do  exhibit.     For 
which  cause  the  Florentine  Council,  comparing  the  one  with 
the  other,  saith,  ^'  That  the  old  did  only  shadow  Grace, 
which  was  afterward  to  be  given  through  the  Passion  of 
Jesus  Christ."    But  the  after-wit  of  latter  days  hath  found 
out  another  more  exquisite  distinction,  That  Evangelical  Sa- 
craments are  Causes  to  effect  grace,  through  motions  of  signs 
Legal,  according  to  the  same  signification  and  sense  wherein 
Evangelical  Sacraments  are  held  by  us  to  be  God's  Instru- 
ments for  that  purpose.'**'    For  howsoever  Bellarmine  hath 
shrunk  up  the  Lutherans'  sinews,  and  cut  off  our  doctrine 
by  the  skirts ;  Allen,  although  he  term  us  Heretics,  accord- 
ing to  the  usual  bitter  venom  of  his  proud  style,  doth  yet 
ingenuously  confess,  that  the  old  Schoolmen's  doctrine  and 
ours  is  one  concerning  Sacramental  efficacy,  derived  from 
God  himself,  assisting  by  promise  those  outward  signs  of 
elements  and  words,  out  of  which  their  Schoolmen  of  the 
newer  mint  are  so  desirous  to  hatch  grace.  +     Where  God 
do\h  work  and  use  these  outward  means,  wherein  he  neither 
findeth  nor  planteth  force  and  aptness  towards  his  intended 
purpose ;  such  means  are  but  Signs  to  bring  men  to  the  con- 
sideration of  his  omnipotent  power,  which,  without  the  use 
of  things  sensible,  would  not  be  marked.   At  the  time  there- 
fore when  he  giveth  his  heavenly  Grace,  he  applieth,  by  the 
hands  of  his  Ministers,  that  which  betokeneth  the  same ; 
nor  only  betokeneth,  but,  being  also  accompanied  for  ever 
with  such  power  as  doth  truly  work,  is  in  that  respect  termed 
God's  Instrument,  a  true  efficient  cause  of  grace ;  a  cause 
not  in  itself,  but  only  by  connexion  of  that  which  is  in  itself 
a  cause,  namely,  God's  own  strength  and  power.;};     Sacra- 

*  '*  Quod  ad  circunicisionem  sequebatur  remissio,  fiebat  ratione  rei  adjunctse  et  radone 
pacti  diviniy  eodem  plane  modo  quo  non  solum  Haeretici,  sed  etiam  aliquot  vetustiores  Scho- 
lastid  Toluerunt  nova  Sacramenta  conferre  gratiam."     Allen,  de  Sacr.  in  gen.  c.  39. 

f  "  Bonaventura,  Scotus,  Durandus,  Ricardus,  Occamus,  Marsilius,  Gabriel;  volunt  solum 
Deam  produceregratiam  ad  prsesentiam  Sacramentorum."  Bellarm.  de  Sacr.  in  gen.  lib.  ii.  c.  11. 

X  "  Puto  longe  probatiorem  et  tutiorem  sententiam  quae  dat  Sacramentis  veram  efficien- 
tiam.  Priroo  quia  doctores  passim  docent,  Sacramenta  non  agere  nisi  prius  a  Deo  virtutem 
sea  benedictionem  seu  sanctificationem  accipiant,  et  referunt  effectum  Sacramentorum  ad 
omnipotentiam  Dei,  et  conferunt  cum  veris  causis  efficientibus.  Secundo,  quia  non  esset 
differentia  inter  modum  agendi  Sacramentorum,  et  signorum  magicorum.  Tertio,  quia  tunc 
Don  esset  homo  Dei  minister  in  ipsa  actione  Sacramentali,  sed  homo  prseberet^  signum  actione 
sua,  et  Deus  alia  actione,  vise  eo  signo,  infunderet  gratiam,  ut  cum  unus  ostendit  syngrapham 
mercatori,  et  ille  dat  pecunias.  At  Scripturae  docent,  quod  Deus  baptizat  per  hominem." 
BdUurm.  ]ib.iir  cap.  11. 


76  THE  SIXTH   BOOK  [SecL  &i 

ments,  that  is  to  say,  the  outward  signs  in  Sacraments,  work 
nothing  till  they  be  blessed  and  'sanctified  by  God.  But 
what  is  God's  heavenly  benediction  and  sanctification,  saving 
only  the  association  of  his  Spirit?  Shall  we  say  that  Sacra- 
ments are  like  magical  signs,  if  thus  they  have  their  effect? 
Is  it  magic  for  God  to  manifest  by  things  sensible  what  he 
doth,  and  to  do  by  his  most  glorious  Spirit  really  what  he 
manifesteth  in  his  Sacraments?  The  delivery  and  admini- 
stration  whereof  remaineth  in  the  hands  of  mortal  men,  by 
whom,  as  by  personal  Instruments,  God  doth  apply  signs, 
and  with  signs  inseparably  join  his  Spirit,  and  through  the 
power  of  his  Spirit  work  grace.  The  first  is  by  way  of  con- 
comitance and  consequence  to  deliver  the  rest  also  that 
either  accompany  or  ensue.  It  is  not  here,  as  in  cases  of 
mutual  commerce,  where  divers  persons  have  divers  acts  to 
be  performed  in  their  own  behalf;  a  creditor  to  shew  his 
bill,  and  a  debtor  to  pay  his  money.  But  God  and  man  do 
here  meet  in  one  action  upon  a  third,  in  whom,  as  it  is  the 
work  of  God  to  create  grace,  so  it  is  his  work  by  the  hand 
of  the  Minister  to  apply  a  sign  which  should  betoken,  and 
his  work  to  annex  that  Spirit  which  shall  effect  it.  The 
action  therefore  is  but  one,  God  the  author  thereof,  and 
man  a  co-partner,  by  him  assigned  to  work  for,  with,  and 
under  him.  God  the  giver  of  grace  by  the  outward  ministry 
of  man,  so  far  forth  as  he  authorized  man  to  apply  the  Sa- 
craments of  Grace  in  the  soul,  which  he  alone  worketh, 
without  either  Instrument  or  co-agent.  Whereas  therefore 
with  us  the  Remission  of  sin  is  ascribed  unto  God,  as  a  thing 
which  proceedeth  from  him  only,  and  presently  foUoweth 
upon  the  virtue  of  true  Repentance  appearing  in  man ;  that 
which  we  attribute  to  the  Virtue,  they  do  not  only  impute 
to  the  Sacrament,  of  Repentance,  but,  having  made  Repent" 
ance  a  Sacrament,  and  thinking  of  Sacraments  as  they  do, 
they  are  enforced  to  make  the  Ministry  of  his  Priests  and 
their  Absolution  a  Cause  of  that  which  the  sole  omnipotency 
of  God  worketh.  And  yet,  for  my  own  part,  I  am  not  able 
well  to  conceive  how  their  Doctrine,  That  human  Absolution 
is  really  a  Cause  out  of  which  our  deliverance  from  sin  doth 
ensue;  can  cleave  with  the  Council  of  Trent,  defining, 
Cone  **  That  Contrition  perfected  with  Charity  doth  at  all  times 
sliJi  itself  reconcile  Offenders  to  God,  before  they  come  to  receive 
4.    actually  the  Sacrament  of  Penance."    How  can  it  stand  with 


xiv. 
can 


5ecl.  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  77 

those  discourses  of  the  learnedst  Rabbies,  which  grants 
"  That  whosoever  turneth  unto  God  with  his  whole  heart,  Beiiarm. 
hath  immediately  his  sins  taken  away ;  That  if  a  man  be  iib.  i?."' 
truly  converted,  his  pardon  can  neither  be  denied  nor  de-  ^' "' 
layed"?  it  doth  not  stay  for  the  Priest's  Absolution^  but 
presently  foUoweth:  *' Surely,  if  every  contrite  sinner,  in 
whom  there  is  charity  and  a  sincere  conversion  of  heart, 
have  Remission  of  sins  given  him  before  he  seek  it  at  the 
Priest's  hands ;  if  reconciliation  to  God  be  a  present  and 
immediate  sequel  upon  every  such  conversion  or  change ;  it 
must  of  necessity  follow,  seeing  no  man  can  be  a  true  Peni- 
tent or  contrite  which  doth  not  both  love  God  and  sincerely 
abhor  sin,  that  therefore  they  all  before  Absolution  attain 
forgiveness;  whereunto  notwithstanding  Absolution  is  pre- 
tended a  Cause  so  necessary,  that  sin  without  it,  except  in 
some  rare  extraordinary  case,  cannot  possibly  be  remitted." 
Shall  Absolution  be  a  Cause  producing  and  working  that 
efiect  which  is  always  brought  forth  without  it,  and  had 
before  Absolution  be  thought  of?  But,  when  they  which 
are  thus  beforehand  pardoned  of  God  shall  come  to  be  also 
assoiled  by  the  Priest,  I  would  know  what  Force  his  Absolu- 
tion hath  in  this  case?  Are  they  able  to  say  here,  that 
the  Priest  doth  remit  any  thing  ?  Yet,  when  any  of  ours 
ascribeth  the  work  of  Remission  to  God,  and  interpreteth 
the  Priest's  Sentence  to  be  but  a  solemn  Declaration  of  that 
which  God  himself  hath  already  performed,  they  scorn  at 
it ;  they  urge  against  it.  That  if  this  were  true,  our  Saviour 
Christ  should  rather  have  said.  What  is  loosed  in  Heaven, 
ye  shall  loose  on  earth,  than  as  he  doth,  *'  Whatsoever 
ye  loose  on  earth,  shall  in  Heaven  be  loosed."  As  if 
he  were  to  learn  of  us  how  to  place  his  words,  and  not 
we  to  crave  rather  of  him  a  sound  and  right  understand- 
ing, lest  to  his  dishonour  and  our  own  hurt  we  misex- 
pound  them.  It  sufficeth,  I  think,  both  against  their 
constructions  to  have  proved  that  they  ground  an  untruth 
on  his  speech,  and,  in  behalf  of  our  own,  that  his  words 
without  any  such  transposition  do  very  well  admit  the 
sense  vre  give  them;  which  is,  that  he  taketh  to  himself 
the  lawful  proceedings  of  authority  in  his  name,  and  that 
the  act  of  spiritual  authority  in  this  case,  is  by  sentence 
to  acquit  or  pronounce  them  free  from  sin  whom  they  judge 
to   be   sincerely  and   truly  penitent;    which   interpretation 


7S  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [SecL  6. 

they  themselves  do  acknowledge^  though  not  sufficient^  yet 
very  true.* 

Absolution^  they  say,  declareth  indeed^  but  this  is  not  all^ 
for  it  likewise  maketh^  Innocent;  which  addition  being  an 
untruth  proved^  our  truth  granted  hath^  I  hope,  sufficiency 
without  it,  and  consequently  our  opinion  therein  neither  to 
be  challenged  as  untrue,  nor  as  unsufficient.  To  rid  them* 
selves  out  of  these  briers,  and  to  make  Remission  of  sins 
an  effect  of  Absolution,  notwithstanding  that  which  hitherto 
hath  been  said,  they  have  two  shifts.  As,  first,  that  in 
many  Penitents  there  is  but  attrition  of  heart,  which  attrition 
they  define  to  be  grief  proceeding  from  fear  without  love ; 
and  to  these,  they  say.  Absolution  doth  give  that  Contrition 
whereby  men  are  really  purged  from  sin.t  Secondly,  that 
even  where  Contrition  or  inward  Repentance  doth  cleanse 
without  Absolution;  the  reason  why  it  cometh  so  to  pass 
is,  because  such  Contrites  intend  and  desire  Absolution, 
though  they  have  it  not. j:  Which  two  things  granted :  the 
one,  that  Absolution  given  maketh  them  contrite  that  are 
not;  the  other,  that  even  in  them  which  are  contrite,  the 
cause  why  God  remitteth  sin  is  the  purpose  or  desire  they 
have  to  receive  Absolution ;  we  are  not  to  stand  against  a 
sequel  so  clear  and  manifest  as  this.  That  always  remission 
of  sin  proceedeth  from  Absolution  either  had  or  desired.§ 
But  should  a  reasonable  man  give  credit  to  their  bare 
conceit,  and  because  their  positions  have  driven  them  t(y 
imagine  absolving  of  unsufficiently-disposed  Penitents  to  be 
a  real  creating  of  further  virtue  in  them,  must  all  other  men 
think  it  due?  Let  them  cancel  henceforward  and  blot  out 
of  all  their  books  those  old  cautions  touching  necessity 
of  wisdom,  lest  Priests  should  inconsiderately  absolve 
any  man  in  whom  there  were  not  apparent  tokens  of  true 
Repentance ;||    which  to  do,  was,   in  Cyprian's  judgment, 

*  "  Hsc  expositio,  Ego  te  absolvo,  id  est,  Absolutum  ostendo,  partim  quidem  vera  est,  non 
tamen  perfecta.  Sacranienta  quippe  novse  Legis  non  solum  sigmficanti  sed  efficiunt  quod 
significant."     Soto,  sent.  1.  iv.  dist.  14.  q.  1.  art.iii. 

f  "  Attritio  solum  dicit  dolorera  propter  poenas  inferri ;  dum  quis  accedit  attritus,  per 
gratiam  Sacramentalem  fit  contritus."     Soto,  sent.  iv.  dist  14.  q.  1.  art.  i. 

X  **  Dum  accedit  vere  contritus  propter  Deum,  ilia  etiam  Contritio  non  est  Contritioi  nisi 
quatenus  prius  natura  informetur  gratia  per  Sacramentum  in  voto."  Soto,  sent.  iv.  disL  14. 
q.  1.  art.  i. 

§i  "  Legitima  Contritio  votum  Sacrament!  pro  suo  tempore  debet  inducere,  atque  adeo 
in  virtu  te  futuri  Sacramenti  peccata  remittit."     Ibid.  art.  iii. 

II  '*  Tunc  sententia  Sacerdotis  judicio  Dei  et  totius  coelestis  Curiae  approbatur,  et  confir- 
matur,  cum  ita  ex  discretione  procedit,  ut  reorum  merila  non  contradicant."  Sent.  1.  iv.  d.  18. 
**  Non  est  periculosum  Sacerdoti  dicere,  Ego  te  absolvo,  illis  in  quibus  signa  Contritionit 


Sect.  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  79 

"  pestilent  deceit  and  flattery^  not  only  not  available^  but  DeLaps. 
hurtful  to  them  that  had  transgrest:  a  frivolous^  frustrate,^* 
and  false  peace^  such  as  caused  the  unrighteous  to  trust  to 
a  lie,  and  destroyed  them  unto  whom  it  promised  safety." 
What  needeth  observation  whether  Penitents  have  worthi- 
ness and  bring  Contrition,  if  the  words  of  Absolution  do 
infiise  Contrition?  Have  they  borne  us  all  this  while  in 
hand  that  Contrition  is  a  part  of  the  matter  of  their  Sacra- 
ment ;  a  condition  or  preparation  of  the  mind  towards  Grace 
to  be  received  by  Absolution  in  the  form  of  their  Sacra- 
ment? and  must  we  now  believe,  that  the  form  doth  give 
the  matter  ?  that  Absolution  bestoweth  Contrition,  and  that 
the  words  do  make  presently  of  Saul,  David;  of  Judas, 
Peter?  For  what  was  the  penitency  of  Saul  and  Judas, 
but  plain  attrition ;  horror  of  sin  through  fear  of  punishment, 
without  any  loving  sense,  or  taste  of  God's  mercy  ? 

Their  other  fiction,  imputing  Remission  of  sin  to  desire  of 
Absolution  from  the  Priest,  even  in  them  which  are  truly 
contrite,  is  an  evasion  somewhat  more  witty,  but  no  whit 
more  possible  for  them  to  prove.  Belief  of  the  world  and 
judgment  to  come,  faith  in  the  promises  and  sufferings  of 
Christ  for  mankind,  fear  of  his  majesty,  love  of  his  mercy, 
grief  for  sin,  hope  for  pardon,  suit  for  grace ;  these  we  know 
to  be  the  elements  of  true  Contrition:  suppose  that  besides 
all  this,  God  did  also  command  that  every  Penitent  should 
seek  his  Absolution  at  the  Priest's  hands ;  where  so  many 
causes  are  concurring  unto  one  effect,  have  they  any  reason 
to  impute  the  whole  effect  unto  one?  any  reason  in  the 
choice  of  that  one,  to  pass  by  faith,  fear,  love,  humility, 
hope,  prayer,  whatsoever  else,  and  to  enthronize  above 
them  all  a  desire  of  Absolution  from  the  Priest,  as  if,  in 
the  whole  work  of  man's  Repentance,  God  did  regard  and 
accept  nothing,  but  for  and  in  consideration  of  this?  Why 
do  the  Tridentine  Council  impute  it  to  Charity,  "  That 
Contrites  are  reconciled  in  God's  sight  before  they  receive 
the  Sacrament  of  Penance,"  if  desired  Absolution  be  the 
true  cause?  But  let  this  pass  how  it  will;  seeing  the  ques- 
tion is  not,  what  virtue  God  may  accept  in  penitent  sinners, 
but  what  grace  Absolution  actually  given  doth  really  bestow 
upon  them.     If  it  were,  as  they  will  have  it,   that  God 

▼idet,  qose  sunt  dolor  de  preteritis,  et  propositum  de  cstero  non  peccandi ;  alios  absolvere 
non  debet"     Tho.  Opusc.  22. 


80  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  iSect.  6. 

regarding  the  humiliation  of  a  contrite  spirit,  because  there 
is  joined  therewith  a  lowly  desire  of  the  Sacrament  of 
priestly  Absolution,  pardoneth  immediately  and  forgiveth 
all  offences ;  doth  this  any  thing  help  to  prove  that  Abso- 
lution received  afterward  from  the  Priest,  can  more  than 
declare  him  already  pardoned  which  did  desire  it?  To 
desire  Absolution,  presupposing  it  commanded,  is  obe- 
dience :  and  obedience  in  that  case  is  a  branch  of  the  Virtue 
of  Repentance ;  which  Virtue  being  thereby  made  effectual 
to  the  taking  away  of  sins  without  the  Sacrament  of  Repen- 
tance, is  it  not  an  argument  that  the  Sacrament  of  Abso- 
lution hath  here  no  efficacy,  but  the  Virtue  of  Contrition 
worketh  all  ?  For  how  should  any  effect  ensue  from  causes 
which  actually  are  not?  The  Sacrament  must  be  applied 
wheresoever  any  grace  doth  proceed  from  it.  So  that 
where  it  is  but  desired  only,  whatsoever  may  follow  upon 
God*s  acceptation  of  this  desire,  the  Sacrament,  afterwards 
received,  can  be  no  Cause  thereof.  Therefore  the  further 
we  wade,  the  better  we  see  it  still  appear,  that  the  Priest 
doth  never  in  Absolution,  no  not  so  much  as  by  way  of 
service  and  ministry,  really  either  forgive  them,  take  away 
the  uncleanness,  or  remove  the  punishment  of  sin:  but, 
if  the  party  penitent  come  contrite,  he  hath,  by  their  own 
grant.  Absolution  before  Absolution ;  if  not  contrite,  although 
the  Priest  should  seem  a  thousand  times  to  absolve  him,  all 
were  in  vain.  For  which  cause  the  Ancients  and  better 
sort  of  their  School-divines,  Abulensis,  Alexander  Hales, 
and  Bonaventure,  ascribe  ''  the  real  abolition  of  sin,  and 
eternal  punishment,  to  the  mere  pardon  of  Almighty  God, 
without  dependency  upon  the  Priest's  Absolution,  as  a  cause 
to  effect  the  same  :"*  his  Absolution  hath  in  their  doctrine 
certain  other  effects  specified,  but  this  denied.     Wherefore 

*  "  A  reatu  mortis  aternae  absolvitur  homo  a  Deo  per  Contritionem ;  manet  autem  reatus 
ad  quandam  pcenam  temporalem,  et  Minister  Ecclesiae  quicuoque  virtute  clavium  tolUt 
reatum  cujusdam  pards  pcense  illius."  Alml.  in  defens.  p.  i.  c.  7.  "  Signum  hvQos 
Sacramenti  est  causa  effectiva  gratis  sive  remissionis  peccatorum;  non  simpliciter,  sicut 
ipsa  prima  pcenitentia,  sed  secundum  quid ;  quia  est  causa  efficadse  gratise  qua  fit  remiasio 
peccati,  quantum  ad  aliquem  effectum  in  poenitente,  ad  minus  quantum  ad  remissionem 
sequelae  ipsius  peccati.  scilicet  poena;/'  Alex.  p.  iv.  q.  14.  roerab.  2.  "  Potestas  clavium 
proprie  loquendo  non  se  extendit  supra  culpam :  ad  illud  quod  objicitur."  To.  22.  "  Quorum 
remiseritis  peccata ;  dicendum,  quod  vel  illud  de  remissione  dicitur  quantum  ad  offensionem, 
vel  solum  quantum  ad  poenam."  Bon.  sent.  1.  i.  d.  18.  q.  1.  **  Ab  setema  pcena  nulb 
modo  solvit  Sacerdos,  sed  a  Purgatorio ;  neque  hoc  per  se,  sed  per  accidens,  quod  cum  in 
poenitente,  virtute  clavium,  roinuitur  debttum  poense  temporalis,  non  ita  acriter  punietur  in 
Purgatorio,  sicut  si  non  esset  absolutus."     Sent.  I.  iv.  d.  IS.  q.  2. 


Sect.  6»]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  81 

having  hitherto  spoken  of  the  Virtue  of  Repentance  re-CSect.4.1 
quired ;  of  the  Discipline  of  Repentance  which  Christ  did  [50 
establish ;   and  of  the  Sacrament  of  Repentance  invented  [6.] 
sithence,  against  the  pretended  force  of  human  Absolution 
in  Sacramental  Penitency;   let  it  suffice  thus  far  to  have 
shewed   how   God  alone   doth  truly  give,    the   Virtue   of 
Repentance  alone  procure,   and  private  Ministerial  Abso- 
lution but  declare.  Remission  of  sins. 

Now  the  last  and  sometimes  hardest  to  be  satisfied  by 
Repentance,  are  our  minds ;  and  our  minds  we  have  then 
satisfied,  when  the  Conscience  is  of  guilty  become  clear. 
For,  as  long  as  we  are  in  ourselves  privy  to  our  most 
heinous  crimes,  but  without  sense  of  God's  mercy  and  grace 
towards  us,  unless  the  heart  be  either  brutish  for  want  of 
knowledge,  or  altogether  hardened  by  wilful  Atheism,  the 
remorse  of  sin  is  in  it,  as  the  deadly  sting  of  a  serpent. 
Which  point  since  very  Infidels  and  Heathens  have  observed 
in  the  nature  of  sin  (for  the  disease  they  felt,  though  they 
knew  no  remedy  to  help  it),  we  are  not  rashly  to  despise 
those  sentences  which  are  the  testimonies  of  their  expe- 
rience touching  this  point.  They  knew  that  the  eye  of  a 
man's  own  conscience  is  more  to  be  feared  by  evil-doers 
than  the  presence  of  a  thousand  witnesses,  inasmuch  as  the 
mouths  of  other  accusers  are  many  ways  stopt,  the  ears  of 
the  accused  not  always  subject  to  glowing  with  contumely 
and  exprobration ;  whereas  a  guilty  mind  being  forced  to 
be  still  both  a  martyr  and  a  tyrant,  itself  must  of  necessity 
endure  perpetual  anguish  and  grief;  for,  as  the  body  is  rent 
with  stripes,  so  the  mind  with  guiltiness  of  cruelty,  lust, 
and  wicked  resolutions.  Which  furies  brought  the  Emperor 
Tiberius  sometimes  into  such  perplexity,  that  writing  to  the 
Senate,  his  wonted  art  of  dissimulation  failed  him  utterly  in 
this  case;  and  whereas  it  had  been  ever  his  peculiar  delight 
so  to  speak  that  no  man  might  be  able  to  sound  his  meaning, 
he  had  not  the  power  to  conceal  what  he  felt  through  the 
secret  scourge  of  an  evil  conscience,  though  no  necessity 
did  now  enforce  him  to  disclose  the  same.  "  What  to 
write,  or  how  to  write,  at  this  present,  if  I  know  (saith 
Tiberius),  let  the  gods  and  goddesses,  who  thus  continually 
eat  me,  only  be  worse  to  me  than  they  are."  It  was  not 
his  imperial  dignity  and  power  that  could  provide  a  way  to 
protect  him  against  himself;  the  fears  and  suspicion  which 

VOL.  III.  G 


82  THE  SIXTH  BOOK  [SecL  6. 

improbity  had  bred  being  strengthened  by  every  occasion, 
and  those  virtues  clean  banished  which  are  the  only 
foundation  of  sound  tranquiUity  of  mind.  For  which  cause 
it  hath  been  truly  said,  and  agreeably  with  all  men's  expe- 
rience, that  if  the  virtuous  did  excel  in  no  other  privilege, 
yet  far  happier  they  are  than  the  contrary  sort  of  men,  for 
that  their  hopes  be  always  better.  Neither  are  we  to  marvel, 
that  these  things,  known  unto  all,  do  stay  so  few  from  being 
authors  of  their  own  woe.  For  we  see  by  the  ancient 
example  of  Joseph's  unkind  brethren,  how  it  cometh  to 
remembrance  easily  when  crimes  are  once  past,  what  the 
difference  is  of  good  from  evil,  and  of  right  from  wrong: 
but  such  considerations,  when  they  should  have  prevented 
sin,  were  over-matcht  by  inordinate  desires.  Are  we  not 
bound  then  with  all  thankfulness  to  acknowledge  his  infinite 
goodness  and  mercy,  which  hath  revealed  unto  us  the  way 
how  to  rid  ourselves  of  these  mazes ;  the  way  how  to  shake 
off  that  yoke,  which  no  flesh  is  able  to  bear ;  the  way  how 
to  change  most  grisly  horror  into  a  comfortable  appre- 
hension of  heavenly  joy?  Whereunto  there  are  many  which 
labour  with  so  much  the  greater  difficulty,  because  imbe- 
cility of  mind  doth  not  suffer  them  to  censure  rightly  their 
own  doings.  Some  fearful  lest  the  enormity  of  their  crimes 
be  so  unpardonable  that  no  Repentance  can  do  them  good; 
some,  lest  the  imperfection  of  their  Repentance  make  it 
uneffectual  to  the  taking  away  of  sin.  The  one  drive  all 
things  to  this  issue.  Whether  they  be  not  men  that  have 
sinned  against  the  Holy  Ghost ;  the  other  to  this.  What 
Repentance  is  sufficient  to  clear  sinners,  and  to  assure  them 
that  they  are  delivered.  Such  as  by  error  charge  them- 
selves of  unpardonable  sin  must  think,  it  may  be  they  deem, 
[Matt,  that  unpardonable  which  is  not.  Our  Saviour  speaketh 
32.]  '  indeed  of  blasphemy  which  shall  never  be  forgiven;  but 
have  they  any  sure  and  infallible  knowledge  what  that 
blasphemy  is?  If  not,  why  are  they  unjust  and  cruel  to 
their  own  souls,  imagining  certainty  of  guiltiness  in  a  crime 
concerning  the  very  nature  whereof  they  are  uncertain?  For 
mine  own  part,  although,  where  this  blasphemy  is  mentioned, 
the  cause  why  our  Saviour  spake  thereof,  was  the  Pharisees' 
Matt,  blasphemy,  which  was  not  afraid  to  say,  ''  He  had  an  unclean 
Mark  *  spirit,  and  did  cast  out  spirits  by  the  power  of  Beelzebub;" 
'  ^'    nevertheless  I  dare  not  precisely  deny,  but  that  even  the 


Sect.  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  83 

Pharisees  themselves  might  have  repented  and  been  for- 
given^ and  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  peradventure  might 
but  take  occasion  at  their  blasphemy,  which,  as  yet,  was 
pardonable,  to  tell  them  further  of  an  unpardonable  blas- 
phemy, whereunto  he  foresaw  that  the  Jews  would  fall. 
For  it  is  plain,  that  many  thousands,  at  the  first  profess- 
ing Christian  Religion,  became  afterwards  wilful  apostates, 
moved  with  no  other  cause  of  revolt,  but  mere  indignation 
that  the  Gentiles  should  enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  Gospel  as 
much  as  they,  and  yet  not  be  burthened  with  the  yoke  of 
Moses'  Law.  The  Apostles  by  preaching  had  won  them 
to  Christy  in  whose  name  they  embraced  with  great  alacrity 
the  full  remission  of  their  former  sins  and  iniquities;  they 
received  by  the  imposition  of  the  Apostles'  hands  that  grace  Acts 
and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  whereby  they  cured  diseases, 
prophesied,  spake  with  tongues :  and  yet  in  the  end,  after 
all  this,  they  fell  utterly  away,  renounced  the  mysteries  of 
Christian  Faith,  blasphemed  in  their  formal  abjurations  that 
most  glorious  and  blessed  Spirit,  the  gifts  whereof  them- 
selves had  possest;  and  by  this  means  sunk  their  souls 
in  the  gulf  of  that  unpardonable  sin,  whereof  as  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  had  told  them  beforehand,  so  the  Apostle  at 
the  first  appearance  of  such  their  revolt,  putteth  them  in 
mind  again,  that  falling  now  to  their  former  blasphemies, 
their  salvation  was  irrecoverably  gone:  it  was  for  them  in  Heb.vi, 
this  case  impossible  to  be  renewed  by  any  Repentance ; 
because  they  were  now  in  the  state  of  Satan  and  his  angels ; 
the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead  had  passed  his  irrevocable 
sentence  against  them.  So  great  difference  there  is  between 
Infidels  unconverted,  and  backsliders  in  this  manner  fallen 
away,  that  always  we  have  hope  to  reclaim  the  one  which 
only  hate  whom  they  never  knew ;  but  to  the  other  which 
know  and  blaspheme,  to  them  that  with  more  than  infernal 
malice  accurse  both  the  seen  brightness  of  glory  which  is  in 
Him,  and  in  themselves  the  tasted  goodness  of  divine  grace, 
as  those  execrable  miscreants  did,  who  first  received  in 
extraordinary  miraculous  manner,  and  then  in  outrageous 
sort  blasphemed  the  Holy  Ghost,  abusing  both  it  and  the 
whole  Religion,  which  God  by  it  did  confirm  and  magnify ; 
to  such  as  wilfully  thus  sin,,  after  so  great  light  of  the  truth  Heb. 
and  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  there  remaineth  justly  no  fruit  or 
benefit  to  be  expected  by  Christ's  sacrifice.     For  all  other 

g2 


84 


THE    SIXTH    BOOK 


[Sect.  6. 


offenders,  without  exception  or  stint,  whether  they  be 
strangers  that  seek  access,  or  followers  that  will  make 
return  unto  God ;  upon  the  tender  of  their  Repentance,  the 
grant  of  his  grace  standeth  everlastingly  signed  with  his 
blood  in  the  Book  of  eternal  Life.  That  which  in  this  case 
over-terrifieth  fearful  souls  is,  a  misconceit  whereby  they 
imagine  every  act  which  they  do,  knowing  that  they  do 
amiss,  and  every  wilful  breach  or  transgression  of  God's 
Law  to  be  mere  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost;  forgetting  that 
the  Law  of  Moses  itself  ordained  sacrifices  of  expiation, 
as  well  for  faults  presumptuously  committed,  as  things 
wherein  men  offend  by  error. 

Now,  there  are  on  the  contrary  side  others,  who,  doubt- 
ing not  of  God's  mercy  towards  all  that  perfectly  repent, 
remain  notwithstanding  scrupulous  and  troubled  with  con- 
tinual fear,  lest  defects  in  their  own  Repentance  be  a  bar 
against  them.  These  cast  themselves  first  into  very  great, 
and  peradventure  needless,  agonies,  through  misconstruction 
of  things  spoken  about  proportioning  our  griefs  to  our  sins, 
for  which  they  never  think  they  have  wept  and  mourned 
enough,  yea,  if  they  have  not  always  a  stream  of  tears  at 
command,  they  take  it  for  a  heart  congealed  and  hardened 
in  sin;  when  to  keep  the  wound  of  Contrition  bleeding, 
they  unfold  the  circumstances  of  their  transgressions,  and 
endeavour  to  leave  nothing  which  may  be  heavy  against 
themselves.*  Yet,  do  what  they  can,  they  are  still  fearfiil, 
lest  herein  also  they  do  not  that  which  they  ought  and 
might.  Come  to  Prayer,  their  coldness  taketh  all  heart 
and  courage  from  them;  with  Fasting,  albeit  their  flesh 
should  be  withered,  and  their  blood  clean  dried  up,  would 
Psalm  they  ever  the  less  object.  What  is  this  to  David's  humilia- 
tion? wherein  notwithstanding  there  was  not  any  thing 
more  than  necessary.  In  works  of  Charity  and  Alms-deeds, 
it  is  not  all  the  world  can  persuade  them  they  did  ever 
reach  the  poor  bounty  of  the  widow's  two  mites,  or  by 
many  millions  of  leagues  come  near  to  the  mark  which 
Cornelius  touched;  so  far  they  are  off  from  the  proud 
surmise    of   any    penitential    supererogation    in    miserable 


Jer. 
vi.  26. 
Micah 
i.  8,  0. 
Lam. 
ii.  18. 


vi.  6. 


Mark 
xU.42 
Acts 
X.  31. 


*  "  Quam  magna  deliquimus,  tam  granditer  defleamus.     Alto  vulneri  diligens  et  longa 
medicina  non  desit;  pcenitentia  crimine  minor  non  sit"     Cypr.  de  Laps.  '*  Non  len 

agendum  est  contritione,  ut  debita  ilia  redimantur,  quibus  mors  sterna  debetur ;  nee  trans- 
itoria  opus  est  satisfactione  pro  malis  illis,  propter  quse  paratus  est  ignis  setemus.*'  Euteb. 
Emissenns,  vel  potius  Sal  v.  p.  106. 


Sect.  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  85 

¥rretched  worms  of  the  earth.  Notwithstanding^  forasmuch 
as  they  wrong  themselves  with  over  rigorous  and  extreme 
exactions,  by  means  whereof  they  fall  sometimes  into  such 
perplexities  as  can  hardly  be  allayed;  it  hath  therefore 
pleased  Almighty  God,  in  tender  commiseration  over  these 
imbecilities  of  men,  to  ordain  for  their  spiritual  and  ghostly 
comfort  Consecrated  Persons,  which  by  Sentence  of  power 
and  authority  given  from  above,  may,  as  it  were,  out  of  his 
very  mouth  ascertain  timorous  and  doubtful  minds  in  their 
own  particular,  ease  them  of  all  their  scrupulosities,  leave 
them  settled  in  peace  and  satisfied  touching  the  mercy  of 
God  towards  them.  To  use  the  benefit  of  this  help  for  our 
better  satisfaction  in  such  cases  is  so  natural,  that  it  can  be 
forbidden  no  man ;  but  yet  not  so  necessary,  that  all  men 
should  be  in  case  to  need  it. 

They  are,  of  the  two,  the  happier,  therefore,  that  can 
content  and  satisfy  themselves,  by  judging  discreetly  what 
they  perform,  and  soundly  what  God  doth  require  of  them. 
For  having,  that  which  is  most  material,  the  substance  of 
Penitency  rightly  bred  touching  signs  and  tokens  thereof, 
we  may  boldly  affirm  that  they  do  [err],  which  imagine  for 
every  ofience  a  certain  proportionable  degree  in  the  passions 
and  griefs  of  mind,   whereunto  whosoever  aspireth  not, 
repenteth  in  vain.     That  to  frustrate  men's  confessions  and 
considerations  of  sin,  except  every  circumstance  which  may 
aggravate  the  same  be  unript  and  laid  in  the  balance,  is  a 
merciless  extremity;  although  it  be  true,  that  as  near  as 
we  can  such  wounds  must  be  searched  to  the  very  bottom. 
Last  of  all,  to  set  down  the  like  stint,  and  to  shut  up  the 
doors  of  mercy  against  Penitents  which  come  short  thereof 
in  the  devotion  of  their  Prayers,  in  the  continuance  of  their 
Fasts,  in  the  largeness  and  bounty  of  their  Alms,  or  in  the 
course  of  any  other  such  like  duties;  is  more  than  God 
himself  hath  thought  meet,  and   consequently  more  than 
mortal  men  should  presume  to  do.     That  which  God  doth  jer. 
chiefly  respect  in  men's   Penitency  is  their  hearts.     The  jSef ' 
heart  is  it  which  maketh  Repentance  sincere,  sincerity  that "'  **' 
which  findeth  favour  in  God's  sight,  and  the  favour  of  God 
that  which  supplieth   by  gracious   acceptation  whatsoever 
may  seem  defective  in  the  faithful,  hearty,  and  true  offices 
of  his  servants.     "  Take  it  (saith  Chrysostom)   upon  my  chrys. 
credit.  Such  is  God's  merciful  inclination  towards  men,  that  ^par. 


86  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  [SecL  6. 

hips.  lib.  Repentance  offered  with  a  single  and  sincere  mind  he  never 
Theodor.  refuseth ;  no,  not  although  we  be  come  to  the  very  top 
(list.  3. '  of  iniquity."    If  there  be  a  will  and  desire  to  return,  he 

c.  Talis.  . 

receiveth,  embraceth,  omitteth  nothing  which  may  restore 
us  to  former  happiness;  yea,  that  which  is  above  all  the 
rest,  albeit  we  cannot,  in  the  duty  of  satisfying  him,  attain 
what  we  ought,  and  would,  but  come  far  behind  our  mark, 
he  taketh  nevertheless  in  good  worth  that  little  which  we 
do;  be  it  never  so  mean,  we  lose  not  our  labour  therein. 
The  least  and  lowest  step  of  Repentance  in  Saint  Chry- 
sostom's  judgment  severeth  and  setteth  us  above  them  that 
perish  in  their  sin :  I  therefore  will  end  with  St.  Augustine's 
Aug.  conclusion,  "  Lord,  in  thy  Book  and  Volume  of  Life  all 
csxxiz!  shall  be  written,  as  well  the  least  of  thy  Saints,  as  the 
chiefest."  Let  not  therefore  the  unperfect  fear;  let  them 
only  proceed  and  go  forward. 


BOOK  VII. 

THEIR  SIXTH  ASSERTION,  THAT  THERE  OUGHT  NOT  TO  BE  IN  THE 
CHURCH,  BISHOPS  INDUED  WITH  SUCH  AUTHORITY  AND  HONOUR 
AS  OURS  ARE. 


THE  MATTER  CONTAINED  IN  THIS  SEVENTH  BOOK. 

1.  The  state  of  Buhops  although  sometime  oppugned,  and  that  by  such  as  therein 

wonld  most  seem  to  please  God,  yet  by  his  providence  upheld  hitherto,  whose 
glory  it  is  to  maintun  that  whereof  himself  is  the  authw. 

2.  What  a  Bishop  is,  what  his  Name  doth  import,  and  what  doth  belong  unto  his 

Office  as  he  is  a  Bishop. 

3.  In  Bishops  two  things  traduced ;  of  which  two,  the  one  their  Authority ;  and  in 

it  the  first  thing  condemned,  their  Superiority  over  other  Ministers :  what 
kind  of  Superiority  in  Bifinisters  it  is  which  the  one  part  holdeth,  and  the  other 
denieth,  lawful. 
Am  From  whence  it  hath  grown,  that  the  Church  is  governed  by  Bishops. 

5.  The  time  and  cause  of  instituting  every  where  Bishops  with  restraint. 

6.  What  manner  of  power  Bishops  from  the  first  beg^mng  have  had. 

7.  After  what  sort  Bishops,  together  with  Presbyters,  have  used  to  govern  the 

Churches  which  were  under  them. 

8.  How  far  the  power  of  Bishops  hath  reached  from  the  beginning  in  respect  of 

territory,  or  local  compass. 

9.  In  what  respects  Episcopal  Regiment  hath  been  gainsayed  of  old  by  Aerius. 

ICL  In  what  respects  Episcopal  Regiment  is  gainsayed  by  the  authors  of  pretended 
reformation  at  this  day. 

11.  Their  arguments  in  disgrace  of  Regiment  by  Bishops,  as  being  a  mere  invention 

of  man,  and  not  found  in  Scripture,  answered. 

12.  Their  arguments  to  prove,  there  was  no  necessity  of  instituting  Bishops  in  the 

Church. 

13.  The  fore-alleged  arguments  answered. 

14.  An  answer  unto  £ose  things  which  are  objected,  concerning  the  difference 

between  that  power  which  Bishops  now  have,  and  that  which  andent  Bishops 
had,  more  than  other  Presbyters. 

15.  Concerning  the  Civil  power  and  authority  which  our  Bishops  have. 

16.  The  arguments  answered,  whereby  they  would  prove,  that  the  Law  of  God,  and 

the  judgment  of  the  best  in  all  ages,  condemneth  the  ruling  superiority  of  one 
Minister  over  another. 

17.  The  second  malicious  thing  wherein  the  state  of  Bishops  suffiereth  obloquy,  is 

their  Honour. 

18.  What  good  doth  publicly  grow  from  the  Prelacy. 

19.  What  kinds  of  Honour  be  due  unto  Bishops. 

20.  Honour  in  title,  place,  ornament,  attendance,  and  privilege. 

21.  Honour  by  endowment  with  Lands  and  Livings. 

22.  That  of  Ecclesiastical  goods,  and  consequentiy  of  the  Lands  and  Livings  which 

Bishops  enjoy,  the  propriety  belongs  unto  God  alone. 

23.  That  Ecclesiastical  persons  are  receivers  of  God's  rents,  and  that  the  Honour  of 

Prelates  is  to  be  thereof  his  chief  receivers,  not  without  liberty  from  him 
granted  of  converting  the  same  unto  their  own  use,  even  in  large  manner. 

24.  That  for  their  unworthiness  to  deprive  both  them  and  their  successors  of  such 

goods,  and  to  convey  the  same  unto  men  of  secular  callings,  [were]  now 
extreme  sacrilegious  injustice. 


88  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [SecL   I. 

The  1.  I  HAVE  heard  that  a  famous  Kingdom  in  the  world 

stAte  of 

Bishops  being  solicited  to  reform  such  disorders  as  all  men  saw  the 
some-     Church  exceedingly  burthened  with,  when  of  each  degree 
pngn^  great  multitudes  thereunto  inclined,  and  the  number  of  them 
by  snch  did  cvery  day  so  increase  that  this  intended  work  was  likely 
in  wo^aM  to  take  no  other  effect  than  all  good  men  did  wish  and  labour 
wemto  for;  a  principal  Actor  herein  (for  zeal  and  boldness  of  spirit) 
GodTyet  thought  it  good  to  shcw  them  betimes  what  it  was  which 
pfovi!    must  be  effected,  or  else  that  there  could  be  no  work  of 
nphctd    perfect  Reformation  accomplished.     To  this  purpose,  in  a 
whow'**'  solemn  Sermon,  and   in  a  great  Assembly,   he  described 
fi*tl7''  ""to  them  the  present  quality  of  their  Public  Estate  by  the 
uin  that  parable  of  a  tree,  huge  and  goodly  to  look  upon,  but  without 
h^mlSr  *^^*  ^^"^*  which  it  should  and  might  bring  forth ;  affirming, 
author    *^^'  ^^^  ^^^^  ^*y  ^^  rcdrcss  was  a  full  and  perfect  establish- 
ment of  Christ's  Discipline  (for  so  their  manner  is  to  entitle 
a  thing  hammered  out  upon  the  forge  of  their  own  invention), 
and  that  to  make  way  of  entrance  for  it,  there  must  be  three 
great  limbs  cut  off  from  the  body  of  that  stately  tree  of  the 
Kingdom.     Those   three   limbs  were  three  sorts  of  men: 
Nobles,  whose  high  estate  would  make  them  otherwise  dis- 
dain to  put  their  necks  under  that  yoke;  Lawyers,  whose 
Courts  being  not  pulled  down,  the  new  Church-consistories 
were  not  like  to  flourish;   finally,  Prelates,  whose  ancient 
dignity,   and  the  simplicity  of  their  intended  Church-dis- 
cipline, could  not  possibly  stand  together.     The  proposition 
of  which  device  being  plausible  to  active  spirits,  restless 
through  desire  of  innovation,  whom  commonly  nothing  doth 
more  offend  than  a  change  which  goeth  fearfully  on  by  slow 
and  suspicious  paces;   the  heavier  and  more  experienced 
sort  began  presently  thereat  to  pull  back  their  feet  again, 
and  exceedingly  to  fear  the  stratagem  of  Reformation  for 
ever  after.     Whereupon  ensued  those  extreme  conflicts  of 
the  one  part  with  the  other ;  which  continuing  and  increasing 
to  this  very  day,  have  now  made  the  state  of  that  flourishing 
Kingdom  even  such,  as  whereunto  we  may  most  fitly  apply 
[Lam.     those  words  of  the  Prophet  Jeremiah,  "  Thy  breach  is  great 
"         like  the  sea,  who  can  heal  thee  ?"     Whether  this  were  done 
in   truth,   according  to   the   constant  affirmation   of  some 
avouching  the  same,  I  take  not  upon  me  to  examine ;  that 
which  I  note  therein  is.  How  with  us  that  policy  hath  been 
corrected.     For  to  the  Authors  of  pretended  Reformation 


Sect.  1.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  g9 

with  us,  it  hath  not  seemed  expedient  to  offer  the  edge  of 
the  axe  unto  all  three  boughs  at  once,  but  rather  to  single 
them,  and  strike  at  the  weakest  first,  making  show  that  the 
lop  of  that  one  shall  draw  the  more  abundance  of  sap  to  the 
other  two,  that  they  may  thereby  the  better  prosper.  All 
prosperity,  felicity,  and  peace,  we  wish  multiplied  on  each 
Estate,  as  far  as  their  own  hearts'  desire  is :  but  let  men  know 
that  there  is  a  God,  whose  eye  beholdeth  them  in  all  their 
ways ;  a  God,  the  usual  and  ordinary  course  of  whose  justice, 
is  to  return  upon  the  head  of  malice  the  same  devices  which 
it  contriveth  against  others.  The  foul  practices  which  have 
been  used  for  the  overthrow  of  Bishops,  may  perhaps  wax 
bold  in  process  of  time  to  give  the  like  assault  even  there, 
from  whence  at  this  present  they  are  most  seconded.*  Nor 
let  it  over-dismay  them  who  suffer  such  things  at  the  hands 
of  this  most  unkind  world,  to  see  that  heavenly  estate  and 
dignity  thus  conculcated,  in  regard  whereof  so  many  their 
predecessors  were  no  less  esteemed  than  if  they  had  not 
been  men,  but  angels,  amongst  men.  With  former  Bishops 
it  was  as  with  Job  in  the  days  of  that  prosperity  which  at 
large  he  describeth,  saying,  "  Unto  me  men  gave  ear,  they  [Job 
waited  and  held  their  tongue  at  my  counsel;  after  my  words  22,2s.]' 
they  replied  not ;  I  appointed  out  their  way  and  did  sit  as 
chief;  I  dwelt  as  it  had  been  a  King  in  an  army."  At  this 
day,  the  case  is  otherwise  with  them ;  and  yet  no  otherwise 
than  with  the  self-same  Job  at  what  time  the  alteration  of  his 
estate  wrested  these  contrary  speeches  from  him,  "  But  now  [Jo* 
they  that  are  younger  than  I  mock  at  me,  the  children  of  1,  s,'  9.j 
fools,  and  offspring  of  slaves,  creatures  more  base  than  the 
earth  they  tread  on ;  such  as  if  they  did  shew  their  heads, 
young  and  old  would  shout  at  them  and  chase  them  through 
the  street  with  a  cry:  their  song  I  am,  I  am  a  theme  for 
them  to  talk  on."  An  injury  less  grievous,  if  it  were  not 
offered  by  them  whom  Satan  hath  through  his  fraud  and 
subtilty  so  far  beguiled,  as  to  make  them  imagine  herein 
they  do  unto  God  a  part  of  most  faithful  service.  Whereas  cyp. 
the  Lord  in  truth  whom  they  serve  herein  is,  as  St.  Cyprian  Ep.  3. 

*  [In  the  struggle  for  a  thorough  Reformation  much  that  is  not  defensible  must  have 
occurred,  but  impartial  history  has  pronounced  its  judgment  on  the  provocations.  Of  the 
iofiringements  made  and  maintained  by  Authority  in  relation  to  Religion  the  reader  may 
in  part  judge  from  what  is  before  him :  of  those  relating  to  Civil  Afi&irs,  Dr.  Warner, 
Rector  of  St.  Michael,  Queenhithe,  in  Vol.  II.  p.  247,  of  his  EccL  Hist,  of  England^  1757, 
has  not  hesitated  to  denominate  Queen  Elizabeth,  "  a  Tyrant,  who  violated  the  Laws  by 
which  she  held  her  Crown."] 


90  I'HE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  1. 

telleth  them,  like,  not  Christ  (for  he  it  is  that  doth  appoint 
and  protect  Bishops),  but  rather  Christ's  adversary  and 
enemy  of  his  Church.  A  thousand  five  hundred  years  and 
upward  the  Church  of  Christ  hath  now  continued  under  the 
sacred  Regiment  of  Bishops.*  Neither  for  so  long  hath 
Christianity  been  ever  planted  in  any  Kingdom  throughout 
the  world  but  with  this  kind  of  Government  alone ;  which 
to  have  been  ordained  of  God,  I  am  for  mine  own  part  even 
as  resolutely  persuaded,  as  that  any  other  kind  of  Govern- 
ment in  the  world  whatsoever  is  of  God.  In  this  Realm  of 
England,  before  Normans,  yea  before  Saxons,  there  being 
Christians,  the  chief  Pastors  of  their  souls  were  Bishops. 
This  Order  from  about  the  first  estabUshment  of  Christian 
Religion,  which  was  pubUcly  begun  through  the  virtuous 
disposition  of  King  Lucie  not  fully  two  hundred  years  after 
Christ,f  continued  till  the  coming  in  of  the  Saxons;  by 
whom  Paganism  being  every  where  else  replanted,  only  one 
part  of  the  Island,  whereinto  the  ancient  natural  inhabitants, 
the  Britons,  were  driven,  retained  constantly  the  Faith  of 
Christ,  together  with  the  same  form  of  spiritual  Regiment, 
which  their  fathers  had  before  received.  Wherefore  in  the 
Histories  of  the  Church  we  find  verv  ancient  mention  made 
saipit.  of  our  own  Bishops.  At  the  Council  of  Ariminum,  about 
ubJu?  the  year  three  hundred  and  fifty-nine,  Britain  had  three  of 
Beda,  her  Bishops  present.  At  the  arrival  of  Augustine,  the 
^^^     Monk,  whom  Gregory  sent  hither  to  reclaim  the  Saxons  from 


*  ["  It  is  well  observed  by  Gerhard,  that  a  Bishop, '  phrasi  Apostolica,'  that  is,  a  Bishop  that 
is  the  same  with  a  Presbyter,  is  of  fifteen  hundred  years'  standing;  but  a  Bishop,  '  phrad 
Pontificia,'  that  is,  a  distinct  Order  superior  to  a  Presbyter  invested  with  sole  power  of  Ordi- 
nation and  Jurisdiction,  is  but  a  novel  invention." — An  Answer  to  a  Book  entitled  An  Humble 
Remonstrancej  &c.     By  Smecttmnuus.  1641.  4to.  p.  19.] 

f  ["  The  story  of  king  Ludus  is  manifestly  a  £ible ;  the  bare  relation  of  which  will  suffice 
to  expose  its  absurdity.  The  earliest  writer  that  mentions  him  is  Nennius  (Hist.  Brit  c  18), 
who  lived  in  the  seventh  century,  and  states  that, '  In  the  year  164,  from  the  incarnation  of 
our  Lord,  Lucius  monarch  of  Britain,  with  all  the  other  petty  kings  of  Britain,  received 
baptism  from  a  deputation  sent  by  the  Roman  emperors,  and  by  the  Roman  pope  Evaristus.' 
That  this  short  relation  contains  as  many  ridiculous  falsehoods  as  it  does  incidents,  will  be 
apparent  to  an  ordinary  understanding.  For  if  there  ever  existed  such  a  person  as  this  king 
Lucius,  which  is  extremely  doubtful,  he  could  be  no  other  than  a  petty  prince,  holding  his 
limited  authority  by  favour  of  the  Roman  governor.  But  to  complete  the  farce,  two  Pagan 
emperors  are  represented  as  uniting  with  the  Pastor  of  the  Roman  Christians,  in  sending  forth 
Missionaries  to  convert  and  baptize  a  people  into  the  faith  which  they  persecuted !  . . . . 
Gildas,  the  most  ancient  of  our  historians,  who  was  himself  a  Briton,  and  a  zealous  Christian, 
makes  no  mention  of  this  extraordinary  event ;  which  affords  good  ground  to  believe  that  it  was 
no  other  than  a  pious  fraud  invented  by  the  Monks  to  delude  the  people."  Wilson,  Hist, 
and  Antiq,  of  Dissenting  Churcfiest  Sfc.  1814.  Vol.  IV.  App.  chap.  ii.  pp.  453,  4.  On  the 
authenticity  of  this  pretended  introduction  of  Christianity  into  Britain,  T.  C.  (lib.  ii.  p.  476) 
concludes  a  statement  of  four  pages  with  saying,  **  Upon  all  which  matter  may  appear,  what 
follies  they  be  which  the  Doctor  (Whitgift)  avoucheth  for  truth."] 


Sect*  2.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  91 

Gentility  about  six  hundred  years  after  Christy  the  Britons  he  Hist. 
found  observers  still  of  the  self-same  Government  by  Bishops  cs. ' 
over  the  rest  of  the  Clergy ;  under  this  form  Christianity 
took  root  again^  where  it  had  been  exiled.  Under  the  self-  ^^ 
same  form  it  remained  till  the  days  of  the  Norman  Conqueror. 
By  him  and  his  successors  thereunto  sworn^*  it  hath  from 
that  time  till  now,  by  the  space  of  above  five  hundred  years 
more^'been  upheld.  O  nation  utterly  without  knowledge, 
without  sense !  We  are  not  through  error  of  mind  deceived, 
but  some  wicked  thing  hath  undoubtedly  bewitched  us,  if 
we  forsake  that  Government,  the  use  whereof  universal  ex- 
perience hath  for  so  many  years  approved,  and  betake  our- 
selves unto  a  Regiment  neither  appointed  of  God  himself, 
as  they  who  favour  it  pretend,  nor  till  yesterday  ever  heard 
of  among  men.f  By  the  Jews  Festus  was  much  complained 
of,  as  being  a  Governor  marvellous  corrupt,  and  almost  in- 
tolerable :  such  notwithstanding  were  they  who  came  after 
him,  that  men  which  thought  the  public  condition  most 
afflicted  under  Festus,  began  to  wish  they  had  him  again, 
and  to  esteem  him  a  ruler  commendable.  Great  things  are 
hoped  for  at  the  hands  of  these  new  Presidents,  whom 
Reformation  would  bring  in :  notwithstanding  the  time  may 
come,  when  Bishops,  whose  Regiment  doth  now  seem  a  yoke 
so  heavy  to  bear,  will  be  longed  for  again,  even  by  them  that 
are  the  readiest  to  have  it  taken  off  their  necks.j:  But  in 
the  hands  of  divine  Providence  we  leave  the  ordering  of  all 
such  events,  and  come  now  to  the  Question  itself  which  is 
raised  concerning  Bishops.  For  the  better  understanding 
whereof,  we  must  beforehand  set  down  what  is  meant,  when 
in  this  question  we  name  a  Bishop. 

2.  For  whatsoever  we  bring  from  Antiquity,  by  way  ofwbata 
defence,  in  this  cause  of  Bishops,  it  is  cast  off  as  impertinent  is!  what 
matter ;   all  is  wiped  away  with  an  odd  kind  of  shifting  Name 
answer,  That  the  Bishops  which  now  are,  be  not  like  unto  port.a^ 


*  *<AIfredus  Eboracensis  Archiepiscopus  Gulielmum,  cognomento  Nothum,  spirantem 
adhuc  minarum  et  caedis  in  populum,  mitem  reddidit :  et  religiosis  pro  conservanda  Repub. 
taendaque  Ecdesiastica  Disdplina  sacramento  adstrinxit."     Nabrig.  lib.i.  c.  1. 

t  [Seep. 3,  Note.] 

X  [2  Pet.ii.  20 — 22.  Hooker's  prediction  affords  but  a  partial  triumph  to  the  Cause 
of  Episcopacy,  while  Scotland, — notwithstanding  the  example  of  her  neighbours,  the  benefit 
o{  her  own  experience,  and  the  effort  still  more  to  enlighten  her  by  an  additional  argument 
(as  History  amply  records)  of  the  most  forcible  nature,  even  the  ultima  ratio^ — cannot  be 
persuaded  to  prefer  her  reputed  Solomon's  adopted  **  religion  of  a  gentleman'^  before  that 
against  which  Hooker  exhausted  the  energies  of  his  mighty  mind  I] 


92  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [S>eci.  2. 

what  them  which  were.  We  therefore  beseech  all  indifferent 
long  to' judges  to  weigh  sincerely  with  themselves  how  the  case 
Office  as  doth  Stand.  If  it  should  be  at  this  day  a  controversy 
filthop.  whether  Kingly  Regiment  were  lawful  or  no^  peradventure 
in  defence  thereof^  the  long  continuance  which  it  hath  had 
sithence  the  first  beginning  might  be  alleged ;  mention  per- 
haps might  be  made  what  Kings  there  were  of  old^  even  in 
Abraham's  time,  what  Sovereign  Princes  both  before  and 
after.  Suppose  that  herein  some  man,  purposely  bending 
his  wit  against  Sovereignty,  should  think  to  elude  all  such 
allegations  by  making  ample  discovery  through  a  number  of 
particularities,  wherein  the  Kings  that  are,  do  differ  from 
those  that  have  been,  and  should  therefore  in  the  end  con- 
clude, that  such  ancient  examples  are  no  convenient  proofs 
of  that  Royalty  which  is  now  in  use.  Surely  for  decision 
of  truth  in  this  case  there  were  no  remedy,  but  only  to  shew 
the  nature  of  Sovereignty  ;  to  sever  it  from  accidental  pro- 
perties ;  make  it  clear  that  ancient  and  present  Regality  are 
one  and  the  same  in  substance,  how  great  odds  soever 
otherwise  may  seem  to  be  between  them.*  In  like  manner, 
whereas  a  question  of  late  hath  grown,  Whether  Ecclesi- 
astical Regiment  by  Bishops  be  lawful  in  the  Church  of 
Christ  or  no  ?  in  which  question,  they  that  hold  the  nega- 
tive, being  pressed  with  that  general  received  Order,  ac- 
cording whereunto  the  most  renowned  Lights  of  the  Christian 
world  have  governed  the  same  in  every  age  as  Bishops; 
seeing  their  manner  is  to  reply,  that  such  Bishops  as  those 
ancient  were,  ours  are  not,  there  is  no  remedy  but  to  shew. 
That  to  be  a  Bishop  is  now  the  self-same  thing  which  it  hath 
been ;  that  one  definition  agreeth  fully  and  truly  as  well  to 
those  elder,  as  to  these  latter.  Bishops.  Sundry  Dissimili- 
tudes we  grant  there  are,  which  notwithstanding  are  not 
such  that  they  cause  any  equivocation  in  the  Name,  whereby 
we  should  think  a  Bishop  in  those  times  to  have  had  a  clean 
other  definition  than  doth  rightly  agree  unto  Bishops  as 
they  are   now.      Many  things   there   are   in   the   state  of 

\  Bishops,  which  the  times  have  changed  ;  many  a  Parsonage 
at  this  day  is  larger  than  some  ancient  Bishoprics  were; 
many  an  ancient  Bishop  poorer  than  at  this  day  sundry 

*  [The  cases  are  not  parallel;  for  who  doubts  that  Civil  Officers  may  not  be  acconio 
modated  to  circumstances  ?  But  Scriptural  Church  Officers  have  a  definite  character  and 
purpose.] 


Sect.  2.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  93 

under  them  in  degree.  The  simple  hereupon^  lacking 
judgment  and  knowledge  to  discern  between  the  nature  of 
things  which  changeth  not,  and  these  outward  variable  acci- 
dents, are  made  believe  that  a  Bishop  heretofore  and  now 
are  things  in  their  very  nature  so  distinct  that  they  cannot 
be  judged  the  same.  Yet  to  men  that  have  any  part  of 
skill,  what  more  evident  and  plain  in  Bishops,  than  that 
augmentation  or  diminution  in  their  precincts,  allowances, 
privileges,  and  such  like,  do  make  a  difference  indeed,  but 
no  essential  difference  between  one  Bishop  and  another  ?* 
As  for  those  things  in  regard  whereof  we  use  properly  to 
term  them  Bishops,  those  things  whereby  they  essentially 
differ  from  other  Pastors,  those  things  which  the  natural 
definition  of  a  Bishop  must  contain ;  what  one  of  them  is 
there  more  or  less  appliable  unto  Bishops  now  than  of  old  ? 
The  name  Bishop  hath  been  borrowed  from  the  Grecians,f  . 
with  whom  it  signifieth  one  which  hath  principal  charge  to  C 
guide  and  oversee  others.  The  same  word  in  Ecclesiastical 
Writings  being  applied  unto  Church-governors,  at  the  first  Acts 
unto  all  and  not  unto  the  chiefest  only,  grew  in  short  time  pe-  phii.  ' 
culiar  and  proper  to  signify  such  Episcopal  authority  alone,  as  *'  ** 
the  chiefest  Governors  exercised  over  the  rest :  %  for  with  all 
names  this  is  usual,  that  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  given  till 
the  things  whereunto  they  are  given  have  been  sometime  first 
observed ;  §  therefore  generally,  things  are  ancienter  than  the 
Names  whereby  they  are  called. 

Again,  sith  the  first  things  that  grow  into  general  obser- 
vation, and  do  thereby  give  men  occasion  to  find  Names  for 
them,  are  those  which  being  in  many  subjects  are  thereby 
the  easier,  the  oftner,  and  the  more  universally  noted ;  it 
foUoweth,  that  names  imposed  to  signify  common  qualities 
or  operations  are  ancienter,  than  is  the  restraint  of  those 
names,  to  note  an  excellency  of  such  qualities  or  operations 
in  some  one  or  few  amongst  others.    For  example,  the  name 

*  [And  therefore  none  between  a  Bishop  and  the  Universal  Bishop,  or  Pope !] 

\  Oi  irop*  *Minvai(av  tls  rhs  vtttikSovs  v6\€is  ^TrurK^affdai  to.  irap'  l/c(£(rrots  v€fix6/JL€yoi, 
iwUncowoi  KM  <pv\aK€S  iKaKowrOf  obs  ol  AdKuyes  dgfxoarhs  ^Ar/ov.  Suid.  Kar4<rT7ia€v  4<l>* 
iicdarois  r&v  Trdyuv  &pxovTa  €iri(TK(nc6v  7€  kolL  xeplxoKov  rfjs  iBias  fwlpas.  Dionys.  Halicar. 
de  Numa  Pompilio,  Antiq.  lib.ii.  **  Vult  me  Pompeius  esse  quern  tota  hsec  Campania  et 
maritima  ora  habeat  *Exi<rKoiroyf  ad  quern  delectus  et  negotii  summa  referatw."  Cic.  ad 
Attic  lib.  viL  Epist.  11. 

X  [The  deduction  then  must  be,  that  according  to  Hooker,  the  name  of  the  Scriptural  Bishop 
is  now  so  exclusively  appropriated  as  to  be  properly  applied  only  to  u/^ra- Scriptural  Officers.] 

I  "  And  God  brought  them  unto  Adam,  that  Adam  might  see  or  consider  what  name  it 
was  meet  he  should  give  unto  them."     Gen.  ii.  19. 


94  THE    SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  2. 

Disciple  being  invented  to  signify  generally  a  Learner,  it 
cannot  choose  but  in  that  signification  be  more  ancient  than 
when  it  signifieth,  as  it  were  by  a  kind  of  appropriation, 
those  Learners  who,  being  taught  of  Christ,  were  in  that 
respect  termed  Disciples  by  an  excellency.*    The  like  is  to 
be  seen  in  the  name  Apostle,  the  use  whereof  to  signify  a 
Messenger  must  needs  be  more  ancient  than  that  use  which 
restraineth  it  unto  Messengers  sent  concerning  Evangelical 
affairs;  yea  this  use  more  ancient  than  that  whereby  the 
same  word  is  yet  restrained  farther  to  signify  only  those 
whom  our  Saviour  himself  immediately  did  send.     After  the 
same  manner  the  Title  or  name  of  a  Bishop,  having  been 
used  of  old  to  signify  both  an  Ecclesiastical  Overseer  in 
general,  and  more  particularly  also  a  principal  Ecclesiastical 
Overseer;   it  foUoweth,  that  this  latter  restrained  signifi- 
cation is  not  so  ancient  as  the  former,  being  more  common.f 
Yet  because  the  things  themselves  are  always  ancienter  than 
their  Names ;  therefore  that  thing,  which  the  restrained  use 
of  the  word  doth  import,  is  likewise  ancienter  than  the  re- 
straint of  the  word  is,  and  consequently  that  power  of  chief 
Ecclesiastical  Overseers,  which  the  term  of  a  Bishop  im- 
porteth,  was  before  the  restrained  use  of  the  name  which 
doth  import  it.     Wherefore  a  lame  and  impotent  kind  of 
reasoning  it  is,  when  men  go  about  to  prove,  that  in  the 
Apostles'  times  there  was  no  such  thing  as  the  restrained 
Name  of  a   Bishop  doth   now   signify ;   because  in   their 
Writings  there  is  found  no  restraint  of  that  name,  but  only 
a  general  use,  whereby  it  reacheth  unto  all  spiritual  Go- 
vernors and  Overseers. 

But,  to  let  go  the  Name,  and  come  to  very  nature  of  that 
thing  which  is  thereby  signified.  In  all  kinds  of  Regiment, 
whether  Ecclesiastical  or  Civil,  as  there  are  sundry  opera- 
tions public,  so  Ukewise  great  inequaUty  there  is  in  the  same 
operations,  some  being  of  principal  respect,  and  therefore 
not  fit  to  be  dealt  in  by  every  one  to  whom  pubUc  actions 
and  those  of  good  importance,  are  notwithstanding  well  and 
fitly  enough  committed.  From  hence  have  grown  those  dif- 
ferent degrees  of  Magistrates  or  public  persons,  even  Eccle- 
siastical as  well  as  Civil.     Amongst  Ecclesiastical  persons, 


*  So  also  the  name  Deacon,  is  a  Minister  appropriated  to  a  certain  Order  of  Ministers, 
t  The  name  likewise  of  a  Minister  was  common  to  divers  degrees,  which  now  is  peculiarly 
among  ourselves  given  only  to  Pastors,  and  not,  as  anciently,  to  Deacons  also. 


Sect.  3.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  95 

therefore.  Bishops  being  chief  ones,  a  Bishop's  Function  must 
be  defined  by  that  wherein  his  Chiefty  consisteth.  A  Bishop 
is  a  Minister  of  God,  unto  whom,  with  permanent  continu- 
ance, there  is  given,  not  only  Power  of  administering  the 
Word  and  Sacraments,  which  power  other  Presbyters  have ; 
but  also  a  farther  power  to  ordain  Ecclesiastical  persons, 
and  a  power  of  chiefty  in  government  over  Presbyters  as 
well  as  Laymen,  a  power  to  be  by  way  of  jurisdiction  a 
Pastor  even  to  Pastors  themselves.  So  that  his  Office,  as 
he  is  a  Presbyter  or  Pastor,  consisteth  in  those  things 
which  are  common  unto  him  with  other  Pastors,  as  in 
ministering  the  Word  and  Sacraments ;  but  those  things 
incident  unto  his  Office,  which  do  properly  make  him  a 
Bishop,  cannot  be  common  unto  him  with  other  Pastors. 
Now  even  as  Pastors,  so  likewise  Bishops,  being  principal 
Pastors,  are  either  at  large  or  else  with  restraint :  at  large, 
when  the  subject  of  their  Regiment  is  indefinite,  and  not 
tied  to  any  certain  place ;  Bishops  with  restraint,  are  they 
whose  Regiment  over  the  Church  is  contained  within  some 
definite,  local  compass,  beyond  which  compass  their  juris- 
diction reacheth  not.  Such  therefore  we  always  mean, 
when  we  speak  of  that  Regiment  by  Bishops  which  we 
hold  a  thing  most  lawful,  divine,  and  holy,  in  the  Church 
of  Christ. 

3.  In  our  present  Regiment  by  Bishops  two  things  there  lo  Bl- 
are complained  of;  the  one  their  great  Authority,  and  the  twT 
other  their  great  Honour.     Touching  the  Authority  of  our  tm"** 
Bishops,  the  first  thing  which  therein  displeaseth  their  ad-  of  which 
versaries,  is  their  Superiority  which  Bishops  have  over  other  ©nctheiJ 
Ministers.     They  which  cannot  brook  the  Superiority  which  ^V«nd * 
Bishops  have,   do  notwithstanding  themselves  admit  thatfi^suhL^g 
some  kind  of  difference  and  inequality  there  may  be  lawfully  Semned, 
amongst  Ministers.     Inequality  as  touching  gifts  and  graces  perforhy 
they  grant,  because  this  is  so  plain  that  no  mist  in  the^^^^ 
world  can  be  cast  before  men's  eyes  so  thick,  but  that  they  JJ^i*" 
needs  must  discern^  through  it,  that  one  Minister  of  the  J^y^f 
Grospel  may  be  more  learned,  holier,  and  wiser,  better  able  ^^^^^ 
to  instruct,  more  apt  to  rule  and  guide  them  than  another :  Jf^'J****** 
unless  thus  much  were  confest,  those  men  should  lose  their  ^^kh 

the  one 

fame  and  glory  whom  they  themselves  do  entitle  the  Lights  p*"^ 
and  grand  Worthies  of  this  present  age.     Again,  a  priority  •»<!  the* 
of  Order  they  deny  not  but  that  there  may  be,  yea,  such  a  denieth, 

lit  ^ViDl* 


96  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [SecL  3. 

priority  as  maketh  one  man  amongst  many  a  principal  actor 
in  those  things  whereunto  sundry  of  them  must  necessarily 
concur,  so  that  the  same  be  admitted  only  during  the  time 
of  such  actions,  and  no  longer ;  that  is  to  say,  just  so  much 
Superiority,  and  neither  more  nor  less  may  be  liked  of,  than 
it  hath  pleased  them  in  their  own  kind  of  Regiment  to  set 
down.     The  inequality  which  they  complain  of  is,  That  one 
Minister  of  the  Word  and  Sacraments  should  have  a  perma- 
nent Superiority  above  another,  or  in  any  sort  a  Superiority  of 
Power  mandatory,  judicial,  and  coercive  over  other  Ministers. 
By  us,  on  the  contrary  side.  Inequality,  even  such  inequality 
as  unto  Bishops,  being  Ministers  of  the  Word  and  Sacra- 
ments, granteth  a  Superiority  permanent  above  Ministers,  yea 
a  permanent  Superiority  of  Power  mandatory,  judicial,  and 
coercive  over  them,  is  maintained  a  thing  allowable,  lawful, 
and  good.     For,  Superiority  of  Power  may  be  either  above 
them,  or  upon  them,  in  regard  of  whom  it  is  termed  Supe- 
riority.     One   Pastor  hath   Superiority   of   Power   above 
another,   when   either  some   are   authorized  to  do  things 
worthier  than  are  permitted  unto  all ;  some  are  preferred 
to  be  principal  agents,  the  rest  agents  with  dependency  and 
subordination.     The  former  of  these  two  kinds  of  Supe- 
riority is  such  as  the  High-priest  had  above  other  Priests 
of  the  Law,  in  being  appointed  to  enter  once  a  year  the 
Holy  Place,  which  the  rest  of  the  Priests  might  not  do. 
The  latter  Superiority,  such  as  Presidents  have  in  those 
actions  which  are  done  by  others  with  them,  they  neverthe- 
less being  principal  and  chief  therein.     One  Pastor  hath 
Superiority  of  Power,  not  only  above,  but  upon,  another, 
when   some    are   subject  unto   others'  commandment   and 
judicial  controlment  by  virtue  of  public  jurisdiction.     Supe- 
riority in  this  last  kind  is  utterly  denied  to  be  allowable ;  in 
the  rest  it  is  only  denied,  that  the  lasting  continuance  and 
settled  permanency  thereof  is  lawful.     So  that,  if  we  prove 
at  all  the  lawfulness  of  Superiority  in  this  last  kind,  where 
the  same  is  simply  denied,  and  of  permanent  Superiority  in 
the  rest,  where  some  kind  of  Superiority  is  granted,  but 
with  restraint  to  the  term  and  continuance  of  certain  actions, 
with  which  the  same  must,  as  they  say,  expire  and  cease ;  if 
we  can  shew  these  two  things  maintainable,  we  bear  up  suf- 
ficiently that  which  the  adverse  party  endeavoureth  to  over- 
throw.  Our  desire  therefore  is,  that  this  issue  may  be  strictly 


Seci.  4.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  97 

observed,  and  those  things  accordingly  judged  of,  which  we 
are  to  allege.  This  we  boldly  therefore  set  down  as  a  most 
infallible  truth.  That  the  Church  of  Christ  is  at  this  day 
lawfully,*  and  so  hath  been  sithence  the  first  beginning, 
governed  by  Bishops  having  permanent  Superiority  and 
ruling  Power  over  other  Ministers  of  the  Word  and  Sacra- 
ments. 

For  the  plainer  explication  whereof,  let  us  briefly  declare, 
first.  The  birth  and  original  of  the  same  Power,  whence 
and  by  what  occasion  it  grew.  Secondly,  What  manner  of 
Power  antiquity  doth  witness  Bishops  to  have  had  more 
than  Presbyters  which  were  no  Bishops.  Thirdly,  After 
what  sort  Bishops,  together  with  Presbyters,  have  used  to 
govern  the  Churches  under  them,  according  to  the  like 
testimonial  evidence  of  antiquity.  Fourthly,  How  far  the 
same  Episcopal  Power  hath  usually  extended ;  unto  what 
number  of  persons  it  hath  reached ;  what  bounds  and  limits 
of  place  it  hath  had.  This  done,  we  may  afterwards  de- 
scend unto  those  by  whom  the  same  either  hath  been  hereto- 
fore, or  is  at  this  present  hour,  gainsaid. 

4.  The  first  Bishops  in  the  Church  of  Christ  were  his  From 
blessed  Apostles.     For  the  OflSce  whereunto  Matthias  was  hhST 
chosen  the  Sacred  History  doth  term  'ETrtcicoTri)!/,  an  Episco-  Santhe 
pal  Office ;  which  being  spoken  expressly  of  one,  agreeth  S'JI!* 
no  less  unto  them  all  than  unto  him.     For  which  cause  ^y'^sl? 
St.  Cyprian  speaking  generally  of  them  all  doth  call  them  *^^^^' 
Bishops,  f     They  which  were  termed  Apostles,   as  being 
sent  of  Christ  to  publish  his  Gospel  throughout  the  world, 
and  were  named  likewise  Bishops,  in  that  the  care  of  go- 
vernment was  also  committed  unto  them,  did  no  less  perform 
the  Offices  of  their  Episcopal  Authority  by  governing,  than 
of  their  Apostolical  by  teaching.     The  word  'ETricicoTny  ex- 
pressing that  part  of  their  Office  which  did  consist  in  Regi- 
ment, proveth  not  (I  grant)  their  Chiefty  in  Regiment  over 
others,  because  as  then  that  name  was  common  unto  the 
Function  of  their  inferiors,  and  not  peculiar  unto  theirs. 
But  the  history  of  their  actions  sheweth,  plainly  enough, 
how  the  thing  itself  which  that  name  appropriated  importeth, 

^  [In  Uds  word,  "  lawfully,"  the  ambiguity  lies,  and  on  which  -a  Volume  might  be 
written.  But  the  shortest  and  best  method  is  to  try  the  meaning  by  substituting  Scriptural, 
for  lawful,  here  and  elsewhere.] 

f  *'  Meminisse  Diaconi  debent,  quoniam  Apostolos,  id  est,  Episcopos  et  Prsepositos, 
Dominos  elegit.**    Cypr.  I.  iii.  ep.  9. 

VOL.  III.  H 


98  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  \Seci.  4k 

that  is  to  say,  even  such  spiritual  Chiefly,  as  we  have  already 
defined  to  be  properly  Episcopal,  was  in  the  holy  Apostles 
of  Christ.  Bishops  therefore  they  were  at  large.  But  was 
it  lawful  for  any  of  them  to  be  a  Bishop  with  restraint  ? 
True  it  is  their  charge  was  indefinite ;  yet  so,  that  in  case 
they  did  all,  whether  i^everally  or  jointly,  discharge  the 
Rom.ii.  Office  of  proclaiming  every  where  the  Gospel  and  of  guid- 
1  Cor.  ing  the  Church  of  Christ,  none  of  them  casting  off  his 
John  '  part  in  their  burthen  which  was  laid  upon  them,  there  doth 
15/16.  appear  no  impediment,  but  that  they  having  received  their 
common  charge  indefinitely,  might  in  the  execution  thereof 
notwithstanding  restrain  themselves,  or  at  leastwise  be  re^ 
strained  by  the  after  commandment  of  the  Spirit,  without 
contradiction  or  repugnancy  unto  that  charge  more  indefi- 
nite and  general  before  given  them ;  especially  if  it  seemed 
at  any  time  requisite,  and  for  the  greater  good  of  the 
Church,  that  they  should  in  such  sort  tie  themselves  unto 
some  special  part  of  the  flock  of  Jesus  Christ,  guiding  the 
same  in  several  as  Bishops.  For,  first,  notwithstanding  our 
Saviour's  commandment  unto  them  all,  to  go  and  preach 
unto  all  nations ;  yet  some  restraint  we  see  there  was  made, 
when  by  agreement  between  Paul  and  Peter,  moved  with 
those  effects  of  their  labours  which  the  providence  of  God 
Gal.  brought  forth,  the  one  betook  himself  unto  the  Gentiles,  the 
other  unto  the  Jews,  for  the  exercise  of  that  OflSce  of  every- 
where preaching.  A  further  restraint  of  their  Apostolical 
labours  as  yet  there  was  also  made,  when  they  divided  them- 
selves into  several  parts  of  the  world ;  John  for  his  charge 
taking  Asia,*  and  so  the  residue  other  quarters,  .to  labour 
in.  If  nevertheless  it  seem  very  hard  that  we  should  admit 
a  restraint  so  particular,  as  after  that  general  charge  re- 
ceived, to  make  any  Apostle  notwithstanding  the  Bishop  of 
some  one  Church ;  what  think  we  of  the  Bishop  of  Jeru- 
salem, James,f  whose  consecration  unto  that  Mother  See  of 
the  world,  because  it  was  not  meet  that  it  should  at  any  time 


•  Him  Eusebius  doth  name  the  Governor  of  the  Churches  in  Asia,  Hist.  Eccles.  lib.  ill 
c.  23.  Tertullian  calleth  the  same  Churches  St.  John's  Foster  -  daughters.  Adveis. 
Marcion.  lib.  iii. 

f  "  Jacobus,  qui  appellatur  Frater  Domini,  cognomento  Justus,  post  Passionem  Domini 
statim  ab  Apostolis  Hierosolymorum  Episcopus  ordinatus  est."  Hieron.  de  Scrip.  Ecdes. 
**  Eodem  tempore  Jacobum  primum  sedem  Episcopalem  Ecclesise,  quae  est  Hierosolynus, 
obtinuisse  memoriae  traditur."  Euseb.  Hist  Ecclesias.  lib.ii.  cap.  1.  The  same  seemeth 
to  be  intimated,  Actszv.  13.  xxi.  18. 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  99 

be  left  void  of  some  Apostk,*  doth  seem  to  have  been  the 
very  cause  of  St.  Paul's  miraculous  vocationy  to  make  up  the 
number  of  the  Twelve  again,  for  the  gathering  of  nations  Acts 
abroad,  even  as  the  martyrdom  of  the  other  James,  the  illi.^ 
reason  why  Barnabas  in  his  stead  was  called.     Finally, 
Apostles,  whether  they  did  settle  in  any  one  certain  place, 
as  James,+   or  else  did  otherwise,  as  the  Apostle  Pad, 
Episcopal  Authority  either  at  large  or  with  restraint  they 
had  and  exercised.     Their  Episcopal  Power  they  some- 
times gave  unto  others  to  exercise  as  agents  only  in  thdr 
stead,   and  as  it  were  by  commission  from  them.     Thus 
Titus,  and  thus  Timothy,  at  the.  first,  though  afterwards  That 
induied  with  Apostolical  Power  of  their  own. J      For  in***' 
process  of  time  the  Apostles  gave  Episcopal  Authority, 
and    that  to  continue   always  with    them  which  had  it. 
'*  We  are  able  to  number  up  them  (saith  Irenaeus),  who  iren. 
by  the  Apostles  were  made  Bishops."     In  Rome  he  ^af-II^Vs- 
firmeth  thai  the  Apostles  themselves  made  lanus  the  first 
Bishop.  §    Again,  of  Polycarp  he  ssgith  hkewise,  jthat  the 


*  [Vaj^bsius  in  a  Note  on  where  Eusebius  stfttes  that  this  James  'f  is  said  to  have  been 
one  of  the  Seventy,"  Eccl.  Hist,  lib.i.  c.  12. ;  says,  Many  ancient  w^it^  affirm  that  he  was 
not  of  the  Apostles,  but  of  the  Disciples ;  which  appears  to  be  corroborated  by  1  Cor.  zv.  7. 
BaMHIitti  also  says  "  many  more  besides  the  Twelye  were  called  Apostles  by  way  of  imi- 
tation, at  was  Paul."  Hooker  himself  seems  elsewhere  to  have  -observed  a  distinction ;  in 
Book'vffi.  Sect  8.,  "  The  Apostles  and  James." 

f  [On  fitaiuobce  (Hist  de  Manich.  lib.iL  cap.  3.  voLL  p.  181.)  remarking  t^at  "  Aa 
Peter  wa^  ^e  Ajpostle  of  the  Jews  scattered  abroad  among  the  Gendles,  St  James  having 
stayed  in  Judea,  he  went  to  Babylon,  where  a  great  number  of  the  Isradites  had  remained :" 
Dr.  LARbHBi  (!lb.iii.  p.  421,  4to.)  writes,  "  May  I  not  take  l;he  liberty  to  ask  a  question, 
and  aay.  Who  autgned  to  those  Apostles  those  several  provinces,  with  such  limitations  t 
St  James  stayed  in  Judea,  it  is  allowed.  We  are  certain  of  it  from  the  history  in  the  Acts, 
l^^jneitheless'he  did  not  cqir^ne  his  regards  to  the  Jews  in  the  land  of  Israel :  for  he  wroto  an 
Epistle  add^ssed  <  To  the  twelve  Tribes  scattered  abroad.'  And  if  Peter  also  was  an  ApoAte^ 
tM^y  of  tke  Circumcision;  it  was  not  of  those  only  who  were  in  Gentile  countries,  bnt  of 
tboM  likewise  who  were  in  Judea:  where,  as  I  ajpprehend,  he  spent  the  greatest  part  of  his 
Hfe,  even  after  our  Saviour's  ascension."] 

X  This  appeareth  by  those  subscriptions  which  are  set  pSifiX  th^.  Epistle  to  Titus,  and  the 
seomd  to  Timothy,  and  by  Euseb.  Eccles.  Hist.  lib.  iii.  cap.  4.  [As  Baxter  remarks,  those 
subscriptions  '*  are  no  part  of  the  Holy  Scripture."] 

I  [It  becomes  the  advocates  of  the  necessity  of  a  lineal  succession  to  produce  credentiak 
that  cannot. be  impeached,  and  to  de^nitively  decide  between  conflicting  claimants :  all  which, 
when  it  snits  them,  they  are  very  ready  to  shew  is  confused  and  dubious.  Till,  however, 
these  pofaits  be  indisputably  fixed  it  will  avail  them  nothing  to  tell  us  that  one  party  says 
Linus  was  **  the  first  Bishop"  of  Rome,  while  a  second  party  says  the  same  of  Clement,  and 
between  those  names  a  third  party  interpose. Gletus  or  Anadetqs ;  some  taking  these  latter  to 
be  Afferent  names  of  the  same  individual,  others  helieving  Ui«m  to  relate  to  two  individuals. 
See  the  parties  adduced  in  Barrow's  Treat  of  the  Pope's  Supremacy,  1630.  4to.  pp.  128, 
et  seq.  That  great  writer's  great  precursor.  Bishop  Jewel,  in  his  Apology,  Edit  1719.  8vo. 
p.  154,  wrote  with  the  influence  of  truth  dctuatibg  his  own  mind,  that  **  God  hath  promised 
his  grace  to  a  pious  mind,  and  to  one  that  fears  him ;  not  to  Sees  and  Successions.  Riches, 
says  St  Jerome,  may  make  one  Bishop  more  powerful  than  the  rest,  but  aU  Bishops,  whatso- 
etfer  they  be,  are  the  successors  of  the  Apqstl^.     If  the  place,  and  consecration,  only  be 

H   2 


100  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.  4. 

Apostles  made  him  Bishop  of  the  Church  of  Smyrna.     Of 

ia|p*   Antioch    they  made    Evodius    Bishop,    as    Ignatius  wit- 

tioch.     nesseth;    exhorting    that   Church    to   tread   in   his   holy 

steps,  and  to  follow  his  virtuous  example.    The  Apostles 

therefore  were  the  first  which  had  such  Authority,  and 

all  others  who  have  it   after  them  in  orderly  sort   are 

their  lawful  Successors,  whether  they  succeed  in  any  par* 

ticular  Church,    where  before  them    some  Apostle  hath 

been  seated,  as  Simon  succeeded  James  in  Jerusalem;  or 

else  be  otherwise  endued  with  the  same  kind  of  Bishopljf 

Power,  although  it  be  not  where  any  Apostle  before  hath 

been.     For  to  succeed  them,  is  after  them  to  have  that 

Episcopal  kind  of  Power  which  was  first  given  to  them. 

Hieroo.  "  All  Bishops  are  (saith  Jerome)  the  Apostles'  successors." 

cyp^*  In  like  sort  Cyprian  doth  term  Bishops,  ^^  Praepositos,  qui 

vt^^     Apostolis  vicaria  ordinatione  succedunt."     From  hence  it 

JJ»jo|*.   may  happily  seem  to  have  grown,  that  "  they  whom  we  now 

iu.      '  call  Bishops  were  usually  termed  at  the  first  Apostles,*'  and 

so  did  carry  their  very  names  in  whose  rooms  of  spiritual 

Authority  they  succeeded.     Such  as  deny  Apostles  to  have 

any  successors*  at  all  in  the  0£Bce  of  their  Apostleship, 

may  hold  that  opinion  without  contradiction  to  this  of  ours, 

if  they  will  explain  themselves  in  declaring  what  truly  and 

properly  Apostleship  is.    In  some  things  every  Presbyter, 

in  some  things  only  Bishops,  in  some  things  neither  one  nor 

the  other,  are  the  Apostles'  Successors.    The  Apostles  were 

sent  as  special  chosen  eye-witnesses  of  Jesus  Christ,f  fnnn 

•uffident,  then  Manaiees  succeeded  David,  and  Caiphas,  Aaron ;  and  an  idol  hath  often  stood 
in  the  temple  of  Ood."  Compare  this  with  Hoolier's  quotation  of  what  **  saith  Jerome,"  a  lew 
lines  hereafter,  in  the  text.  The  uncertainty  on  this  subject  is  manifested  in  the  following 
Table,  which  shews  that  the  Fathers  therein  mentioned  did  not  agree. 

AUTHORITIES.  ROME.  ANTIOCH. 

iRENiBUS,  Cent.  II. .  .    1.  Linus,  made  Bp.  by  Peter  and  Paul. 

3.  Anadetus. 

3.  Clement. 
Tertullian,  Cent  IL    Clement,  firat  after  Peter. 

EusEBius,  Cent  IV.  .    Umis,firat  afier  martyrdom  of  Peter.     /  ^^A  ^%  ^F' 

Orioen,  Cent  III Ignatiusi^ecoiiJafterPeter. 

'EpiPHANiU8,CentIV.    Peter  and  PauL 

Damaicds,  Cent  IV.  .    Peter,  25  years ;  came  to  Rome  in  the 

beginning  of  Nero's  reign. 
Jerome,  Cent  V.    .  .    Peter,  25  years ;  till  latt  year  of  Nero.^        Ignatius,/AlrJafterPeter.] 

^  *<  Ipsius  Apostolatus  nulla  successio.    Finitur  enim  legatio  cum  legato,  nee  ad  sucoes- 
aores  ipsius  transit"    StapL  doct  prin.  lib.  vi.  cap.  7. 
f  Actsi.  21,  22.     1  John  i.  3. 

*  [Nero  reigned  bqt  ISoorteen  yean.] 


Sect.  4.]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  101 

whom  immediately*  they  received  their  whole  embassage 
and  their  commission  to  be  the  principal  first  fomidersf  of  an 
House  of  God,  consisting  as  well  of  Gentiles  as  of  Jews.;|; 
In  this  there  are  not  after  them  any  other  like  unto  them ; 
and  yet  the  Apostles  have  now  their  successors  upon  earth, 
their  true  successors,  if  not  in  the  largeness,  surely  in  the 
kind  of  that  Episcopal  Function,  whereby  they  had  power 
to  sit  as  spiritual  ordinary  Judges,  both  over  Laity  and 
over  Clergy,  where  Churches  Christian  were  established.  § 

•  OaL LI.  t  Apocxzi.  14.  %  Matt xxviii.  19. 

I  [Hooker's  Episcopal  ediiSoe  required  other  ^  foondatioQ"  thaa  that  "  of  the  Apostles 
and  Prophets,"  Eph.  ii.  20  :  he  has  accordingly  placed  it  here  on  Irenseos  and  Ignatius,  whose 
writings  are  not  pretended  to  be  inspired,  and  whose  terms  are  the  subject  of  controversy* 
It  cannot  be  proved  from  Irenseus  that  Bishop  and  Presbyter  are  not  convertible  terms  ;  and 
his  alleged  ability  to  number  up  the  Bishops  in  no  way  helps  to  define  the  nature  and  extent 
of  dieir  diaiges.  Of  Ignatius,  as  he  calls  upon  the  Bishop  to  know  all  his  flock  by  name, 
even  to  the  servants;  that  was  certdnly  such  a  Bishop  as  Hooker  ought  not  to  assimilate  to 
dMMW  whose  cause  he  espoused.  The  particular  Book  of  Irenaeus  referred  to  by  Hooker,  is 
described  by  Dr.  Maclaine,  in  a  Note  to  Mosheim*s  Eccl.  Hist.  (Cent  ii.  Part  II.  chap.  ii. 
sect.  5),  as  being  only  preserved  in  an  esEcessively  barbarous  Latin  version,  the  ordinal,  in 
Greek,  being  lost  And  the  Bishop  of  Bristol,  in  his  Ecd.  Hist  of  the  2nd  and  3rd  Cent 
1820.  2nd  Edit  Svo.  p.  90,  says,  **  that  far  the  greater  portion  of  the  work  of  Irenaeus  is 
extant  only  in  a  barbarous  Latin  translation,  which  lies  under  heavy  suspicions  of  inter- 
polalkm."  Respecting  Ignatius,  the  first  of  these  writers  in  the  order  of  time ;  Dr.  Mosheim 
Uaiidf  says,  "  There  are  yet  extant  several  Epistles  attributed  to  him,  concerning  tho 
anthentSdty  of  which  there  have  been  tedious  and  warm  disputes  among  the  learned,  which 
idU  mlMUt;"  and  he  adds,  **  The  whole  question,  relating  to  the  Epistles  of  Ignatius  in 
gencnd,  seems  to  me  to  labour  under  much  obscurity,  and  to  be  embarrassed  with  many 
difflndties."  Ibid.  Centi.  PartlL  chap^H.  sect  20.  Whether  this  be  a  sandy  foundation 
(Matt  vfi.  26)  on  which  to  build  a  Christian  Church,  needs  no  &riher  proofi  **  In  te  omnia 
domns  in^nata  recumbit"  The  phrases  in  the  text,  *'  orderly  sort"  and  "  lawful  soccessors," 
and  the  oondnding  word  of  this  section,  "  established,"  are  alike  ambiguous,  and  only  prove 
the  akin  necessary  to  be  exercised  by  the  advocate  of  the  theory.  The  practical  effects  of 
m^ntaining  the  idleged  source  of  Episcopalian  and  Sacerdotal  dommation  may  be  seen  more 
at  large  in  the  Letter  from  whidi  this  extract  is  taken :  "  There  are  some  serious  dangers  to 
which  such  meetings  (Prayer-meetings  at  each  other's  houses)  are  liable,  against  which  it  & 
my  duty  to  caution  you,  and  by  avoiding  which  you  may  keep  your  intercourse  with  yoor 
Mlow-labourers,  as  now,  always  harmless  and  unblamed.  The  first  of  these  is  the  risk  of 
leneiimg,  in  the  eyes  of  others,  and  even  in  your  own,  the  peculiar  claims  to  attention  on  the 
part  of  men,  and  die  peculiar  hopes  of  grace  and  blessing  from  the  Most  High,  which,  as  we 
believe,  are  possessed  by  the  holders  of  an  ApotioUc  Commistion  over  those  whose  call  to  the 
Ministry  is  less  regular,  though  their  labours  are  no  less  sincere.  God  forbid,  my  brethren, 
that  I  should  teach  yon  to  think  on  this  account  highly  of  yourselves  I  Far  odierwise.  Thu 
sense  of  the  advantages  whidi  we  enjoy  should  humble  us  to  the  dust,  when  we  bethink  ua 
who  we  are,  and  wluit  we  ought  to  be,  who  have  received  the  Spirit  of  God,  by  the  dispen- 
aation  of  a  long  line  of  saints  and  martyrs, ....  and  who  are,  by  the  external  dispensation, 
at  least,  of  Providence,  the  inheritors  of  that  grace  which  fell  on  St  PauL  But  humbly,  yea 
meanly,  as  we  are  bound  to  think  of  ourselves,  we  must  not  appear  to  undervalue  our 

Apostolic  bond  of  union The  neglect,  or  abandonment,  or  apparent  abandonment  of  this 

principle,  is  the  first  danger  which  1  apprehend  to  be  inddental  to  such  (Prayer)  meetings  as 
I  have  described."  Pastoral  Letter  of  Dr.R.  Heder,  Bishop  of  Calcutta,  Sept  13,  1825, 
in  Narrative  of  a  Journey  through  the  Upper  Provinces  of  India.  3rd  Edit  1828.  Svo.  Vol.  III. 
p.  155.  "  It  is  a  very  precarious  and  uncomfortable  foundation  for  Christian  hope,  which 
is  laid  in  the  doctrine  of  an  uninterrupted  tucceasien  of  Bishops,  and  which  makes  the  validity 
of  the  administration  of  Christian  Ministers  depend  upon  such  a  Succession ;  since  there  is 
so  great  a  darkness  upon  many  periods  of  Eccledastical  History,  insomuch  that  it  is  not 
agreed,  who  were  the  first  seven  Bishops  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  though  that  Church  was 
so  celebrated ;  and  Euaebius  himself,  firam  whom  the  greatest  patrons  of  this  doctrine  have 


102  THE  SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  6. 

T^^         5.   The  Apostles  of  our  Lord  did,  according  unto  thbse 

c*n8e     directtond    Which    were    given    them    from    above,    eirect 

toting    Churches  iri  all  jsiibli  cities  as  received  the  Word  of  Truth, 

where    thc  Goi^pel  6t  God.    All  Churches  by  them  erected  re^ 

with^i^  ceived  from  them  the  satne  Faith,  the  same  Sacraments, 

the  same  Form  of  public  Regiment.    The  Form  of  Regi- 

'    ment  by  tli6m  established  at  firdt  was^  That  the  Laity  oir 

people  should  be  i3iit)ject  unto  a  College  of  Ecclesiastical 

persons,  which  were  in  every  such  city  appointed  for  that 

purpose.     These    in   their  writings    they  term    sometime 

Presbyters,  sometime  Bishops.     To  take  one  Church  out 

of  a  number  for  a  pattern  what  the  rest  were ;  the  Pres- 

Acte^  byters  of  Kphesus,  as  it  is  in  the  history  of  their  departure 

' '       from  the  Apostle  Paul  at  Miletuni,  are  said  to  have  wept 

abundantly  "  all,"  which  speech  doth  sliew  them  to  have  been 

mahy.    And  by  the  Apostle^s  exhortation  it  may  aj^pibar 

that  they  had  not  each  his  several  flock  to  feed,  but  were 

in  common  appointed  to  feed  that  one  Hock,  the  Church  oif 

JBphesus;  for  which  cause  the  phrase  of  his  speech  is  diis, 

Ac^  XX. "  Attendite  gregi,  Look  all  to  that  one  flock,  oyer  which 

the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  you  Bishops."    These  persons 

Ecclesiastical  being  termed  as  theii.  Presbyters  and  Bisbopli 

both,  were  all  subject  unto  Paul,  as  to  an  higher  Governor 

appointed  of  God  to  be  over  them.*    But  forasmtich  as  Ifi^ 

Apostles  could  not  themselves  be  present  in  all  Churches, 

and  as  the  Apostle  St.  Paiil  foretold  the  Presbyters  of  the 

Acts      Ephesians,  that  there  would  "  rise  up  from  amongst  their 

ownselves  men  speaking  perverse  things,  to  draw  disciples 

after  them;"  there  did  grow  in   short  time  amongst  the 

Governors  of  each  Church  those  emulations,  strifes,  land 

contentions,  whereof  there  could  be  no  sufficient  remedy 

provided,  except,  according  unto  the  Order  of  Jerusalem 

made  their  Catalogues,  expressly  owns,  that  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  tell  who  tncceeded  the 
Apo9tles  in  the  government  of  the  Churches,  excepting  sudi  as  may  be  collected  firoa 
St.  Paul's  own  words ;  (EcdL  Hist.  lib.  ii.  c.  35.  lib.  iii.  c.  4,  5.)  Contested  elections  in  ahnost 
all  considerable  cities  make  it  very  dubious  which  were  the  true  Bishops ;  and  Decrees  of 
Coimcils,  rendering  all  those  Ordinations  null,  where  any  simoniacal  contract  was  the  founda- 
tion of  them,  makes  it  impossible  to  prove  that  there  is  now  upon  earth  any  one  person,  who 
is  a  legal  successor  of  the  Apostles."  Led,  on  Pneumaiologyt  Ethics,  and  Divinity ;  by 
P.  Doddridge,  D.D.  Edit  1799.  8vo.  Vol.  II.  Fart  IX.  Prop.  150.  p.  354.] 

^  As  appeareth  both  by  his  sending  to  call  the  Presbyters  of  Ephesus  before  him  as  for  as 
to  Miletum  (Acts  xx.  17.),  which  was  almost  fifty  miles,  and  by  his  leaving  Timothy  in  his 
place  with  authority  and  instructions  for  ordaining  of  Ministers  there  (1  Tim.  v.  22.);  and  for 
proportioning  their  maintenance  (ver.  17,  18.);  and  for  judicial  hearing  of  accusadons 
brought  against  them  (ver.  19.);  and  for  holding  them  io  a  uniformity  of  doctrme  (Cb.i.3.) 


Sect.  5.}  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL    POLITY.  103 

already  begiuii  some  one  were  indued  with  Episcopal  Autho- 
^ty  over  the  rest,  which  one  being  resident  might  keep 
them  in  order,  and  have  pre-eminence  or  principality  in 
those  things  wherein  the  equality  of  many  agents  was 
the  cause  of  disorder  and  trouble.  This  one  President  or 
Governor,  amongst  the  rest,  had  his  known  Authority 
established  a  long  time  before  that  settled  difference  of 
Name  and  Title  took  place,  whereby  such  alone  were 
named  Bishops.*  And  therefore  in  the  Book  of  St.  John's 
Revelation  we  find  they  are  entituled  Angels.  It  will  perhaps  luv.  u. 
be  answered,  that  the  Angels  of  those  Churches  were  only  ' 
in  every  Church  a  Minister  of  the  Word  and  Sacraments  :t 
but  then  we  ask,  Is  it  probable  that  in  every  of  these 
Churches,  even  in  Ephesus  itself,  where  many  such  Mini- 
sters were  long  before,  as  hath  been  proved,  there  was  but 
one  such,  when  John  directed  his  speech  to  the  Angel 
of  that  Church  ?  If  there  were  many,  surely  St.  John,  in 
naming  but  only  one  of  them  an  Angel,  did  behold  in  that 
one  somewhat  above  the  rest.j:  Nor  was  this  Order  pecu- 
liar unto  some  few  Churches,  but  the  whole  world  univer- 
sally became  subject  thereunto;  insomuch  as  they  did  not 
account  it  to  be  a  Church  which  was  not  subject  unto  a 
Bishop*  It  was  the  general  received  persuasion  of  the 
aodent  Christian  world,  that  Ecclesia  est  in  Episcopo,  the  Cypniv. 
outward  being  of  a  Church  consisteth  in  the  having  of  a  ^^^' 
Bishop.  That  where  Colleges  of  Presbyters  were,  there  was 
at  the  first  equality  amongst  them,  St.  Jerome  thinketh 
it  a  matter  clear ;  but  when  the  rest  were  thus  equal,  so  that 
no  one  of  them  could  command  any  other  as  inferior  unto 

•  [Dr.  Doddridge,  in  a  Note  on  Acts  xx.  25,  Fatn,  Expos,  writes,  "  Dr.  E.  Calamy  observes, 
Uimt  iif  the  Apostles  had  been  used,  as  some  assert,  to  ordain  Diocesan  Bishops  in  their  last 
▼iritation,  this  had  been  a  proper  time  to  do  it;  or  that  if  Timothy  had  been  already  ordained 
Bishop  of  Ephesus,  Paul,  instead  of  calling  them  all  Bishops,  would  surely  have  given  some 
bint  to  enforce  Timothy's  authority  among  them,  especially  considering  what  is  lidded, 
ver.  29,  30."] 

f  [**  The  Minister  of  the  Synagogue,  who  officiated  in  offering  up  the  public  Prayers, 
being  the  mouth  of  the  Congregation,  delegated  by  them,  as  their  Representative,  Messenger, 
or  Angel,  to  address  God  in  prayer  for  them,  was  in  Hebrew,  called  Sheliach-Zibbor,  the 
Angel  of  the  Church,  and  from  hence  the  Bishops  of  the  seven  Churches  of  Asia,  are  in  the 
Revelations,  by  a  name  borrowed  from  the  Synagogue,  called.  Angels  of  those  Churches." 
Pkideaux,  Connect,  Old  and  New  Test,  Part  I.  Book  VI.         See  Malachi  ii.  7.] 

X  [**  That  there  was  one  Pastor  who  presided  in  each  of  these  Churches,  is  indeed  evideut 
£rom  the  expression  here  used :  but  that  he  was  a  Diocesan  Bishop,  or  had  several  congre- 
gationa  of  Christians  under  his  care,  can  by  no  means  be  proved.  Nor  is  there  the  least 
hint  of  it,  that  I  know  of,  in  any  of  these  Epistles."  Doddridge,  Fam,  Expos,  Rev.  ii.  1. 
In  diap.  ii.  24,  the  pronoun  "thou"  is  changed  into  "you;"  the  very  same  party  being 
still  addressed.  "  But  unto  you  I  say  {ytuv  tk  Aeyw),  and  unto  the  rest  in  Thyatira." 
Hence  the  argument  from  "  Angel"  is  too  indefinite  for  Hooker's  purpose.] 


104f  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Se{^.  5u 

him,  they  all  were  controllable  by  the  Apostles,  who  had 
that  Episcopal  Authority  abiding  at  the  first  in  themselves, 
which  they  afterwards  derived  unto   others.      The  cause 
wherefore  they  under  themselves  appointed  such  Bishopi» 
Hieron.  as  wcro  not  cvcry  where  at  the  first,  is  said  to  have  been 
•/ *  *" '   those  strifes  and  contentions,  for  remedy  whereof,  whether 
^*"^*  the  Apostles  alone  did  conclude  of  such  a  Regiment,  or  eke 
they  together  with  the  whole  Church  judging  it  a  fit  and 
needful  policy  did  agree  to  receive  it  for  a  custom ;  no  doubt 
but  being  established  by  them  on  whom  the  Holy  Ghost 
was  poured  in  so  abundant  measure  for  the  ordering  of 
Christ's  Church,  it  had  either  divine  appointment  before* 
hand,  or  divine  approbation  afterwards,  and  is  in  that  respect 
to  be  acknowledged  the  Ordinance  of  God,  no  less  than 
Ezod.    that  ancient  Jewish  Regiment,  whereof  though  Jethro  were 
the  deviser,  yet  after  that  God  had  allowed  it,  all  men  were 
subject  unto  it,  as  to  the  Pohty  of  God,  and  not  of  Jethro* 
That  so  the  ancient  Fathers  did  think  of  Episcopal  R^- 
ment;  that  they  held  this  Order  as  a  thing  received  from 
the  blessed  Apostles  themselves,  and  authorized  even  from 
Heaven,  we  may  perhaps  more  easily  prove,  than  obtakt 
Ep.  ad    that  they  all  shall  grant  it  who  see  it  proved.    St.  Augustine 
*"""'  setteth  it  down  for  a  principle,   that  whatsoever  positive 
Order  the  whole  Church  every  where  doth  observe,   the 
same  it  must  needs  have  received  from  the  very  Apostles 
themselves,  unless  perhaps  some  general  Council  were  the 
authors  of  it.     And  he  saw  that  the  ruling   Superiority 
of  Bishops  was  a  thing  universally  established,  not  by  the 
force  of  any  Council  (for  Councils  do  all  presuppose  Bishops, 
nor  can   there  any  Council   be  named  so  ancient,   either 
General,  or  so  much  as  Provincial,  sithence  the  Apostles' 
own  times,  but  we  can  shew  that  Bishops  had  their  Autho- 
rity before  it,  and  not  from  it) :   wherefore  St.  Augustine, 
knowing  this,  could  not  choose  but  reverence  the  Authority 
of  Bishops,  as  a  thing  to  him  apparently  and  most  clearly 
r ,..    Apostolical.    But  it  will  be  perhaps  objected,  that  Regiment 
by  Bishops  was  not  so  universal  nor  ancient  as  we  pretend; 
and  that  an  Argument  hereof  may  be  Jerome's  own  Testi- 
mony, who,  living  at  the  very  same  time  with  St.  Augustine, 
noteth  this  kind  of  Regiment  as  being  no  where  ancient, 
Ep.ci.    saving  only  in  Alexandria;  his  words  are  these:   **  It  was 
ad  Era.  £^^  ^  rcmcdyof  Schism  that  one  was  afterwards  chosen  to  be 


Sed.  5.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  105 

placed  above  the  rest ;  lest  every  man's  pulling  unto  himself, 
should  rend  asunder  the  Church  of  Christ.  For  (that 
which  also  may  serve  for  an  argument  or  token  hereof),  at 
Alexandria,  from  Mark  the  Evangelist,  unto  Heraclas  and 
Dionysius,  the  Presbyters  always  chose  one  of  themselves, 
whom  they  placed  in  higher  degree,  and  gave  unto  him  the 
title  of  Bishop."  Now  St.  Jerome,  they  say,*  would  never 
have  picked  out  that  one  Church  from  amongst  so  many, 
and  have  noted  that  in  it  there  had  been  Bishops  from  the 
time  that  St.  Mark  lived,  if  so  be  the  self-same  Order  were 
of  like  antiquity  every  where :+  his  words  therefore  must  be 
thus  schoUed,  In  the  Church  of  Alexandria,  Presbyters 
indeed  had,  even  from  the  time  of  St.  Mark  the  Evangelist, 
always  a  Bishop  to  rule  over  them,  for  a  remedy  against 
divisions,  factions,  and  schisms;  not  so  in  other  Churches, 
neither  in  that  very  Church  any  longer  than  usque  cul 
Heraclam  et  Dionysium,  till  Heraclas  and  his  successor 
Dionysius  were  Bishops,  But  this  construction  doth  be- 
reave the  words  construed,  partly  of  wit,  and  partly  of  truth ; 
it  maketh  them  both  absurd  and  false.  For,  if  the  meaning 
be  that  Episcopal  Government  in  that  Church  was  then 
expired,  it  must  have  expired  with  the  end  of  some  one, 
and  not  of  two  several  Bishops'  days,  unless  perhaps  it  fell 
dck  \mder  Heraclas,  and  with  Dionysius  gave  up  the  ghost. 
Besides,  it  is  clearly  untrue  that  the  Presbyters  of  that 
Church  did  then  cease  to  be  under  a  Bishop.  Who  doth 
not  know  that  after  Dionysius,   Maximus  was   Bishop  of 

*  '*  It  is  to  be  observed  that  Jerome  saitb,  it  was  so  in  Alexandria;  signifying  that  in 
odier  Churches  it  was  not  so."     T.  C.  lib.  i.  p.  105. 

t  [^  In  saying  that  the  word  '  Bishop'  is  <  not  commonly  used'  but  for  him  that  in  degree  is 
above  the  rest,  he  (Dr.  Whitgift)  at  unawares  confesseth  that  there  were  divers  Bishops  in  some 
CHiurdies. . . .  And  seeing  that  the  Answerer  (Dr.  W.)  cannot  deny  but  that  one  such  always  is 
not  sufficient  for  some  Churches,  especially  where  the  commodity  of  assemblies  is  so  good 
that  every  day  the  Word  of  God  is  to  be  preached,  it  cannot  be  denied  but  that  there  both 
may  and  ought  to  be  more  Bishops  in  a  Church,  much  more  in  a  city,  than  one.  . . .  Also  it 
is  not  to  be  forgotten,  that  although  this  corruption  of  giving  the  name  of  Bishop  to  one  in  a 
Church  from  the  rest  to  whom  it  did  of  right  belong  be  ancient,  yet  godly  men  misliked  it, 
and  by  all  likelihood  broke  it  off.  Which  Jerome's  words  do  apparently  import ;  '  this 
custom  was  in  the  Church  of  Alexandria  from  SL  Mark  until  Heraclas  and  Dionysius;'  for 
unless  there  were  some  change  then,  why  would  he  not  rather  have  said,  from  St.  Mark  until 
Ins  (Jerome's)  time  ?  conndering  that  all  that  time  there  was  continual  succession  of  Church 
and  Bishops. . . .  Furthermore,  it  is  diligently  to  be  considered,  that  this  order  of  having  only 
one  in  every  Church  to  have  the  name  of  Bishop,  overspread  not  the  Churches  suddenly, 
^  but  entered  by  little  and  little,'  (Jerome  on  the  Ep.  to  Tit.)  so  that  it  is  like  there  were 
(livers  ages  past,  or  ever  this  had  a  general  passage  through  all  the  Churches  in  the  world. 
By  all  which,  it  may  appear,  how  the  Answerer  is  abused  in  saying,  *  It  cannot  be  shewed 
from  Christ's  time,  that  ever  there  were  two  Bishops  in  one  Church.' "  T.  C.  lib.  iL 
p.  527,  529.] 


106  THE  SBVENTH  BOOK  [Sect*  5« 

Alexandria^  afler  him  Theonasi  after  him  Peter^  after  him 

Achillas^  after  him  Alexander?  of  whom  Socrates  in  this  sort 

socrat.  writeth :  It  fortuned  on  a  certain  time  that  this  Alexander. 

lih    i 

c.  5, '    in  the  presence  of  the  Presbyters  which  were  under  him, 
and  of  the  rest  of  the  Clergy  there,  discoursed  somewhat 
curiously  and  subtilly  of  the  holy  Trinity,  bringing  high 
philosophical  proofs,  that  there  is  in  the  Trinity  an  Unity* 
Whereupon  Arius,  one  of  the  Presbyters  which  were  placed 
in  that  degree  under  Alexander,  opposed  eagerly  himself 
against  those  things  which  were  uttered  by  the  Bishop. 
So  that  thus  long  Bishops  continued  even  in  the  Church  of 
Alexandria.     Nor  did  their  Regiment  here  cease,  but  these 
also  had  others  their  Successors  till  St.  Jerome's  own  time, 
who  living  long  after  Heraclas  and  Dionysius  had  ended 
their  days,  did  not  yet  live  himself  to  see  the  Presbyters  of 
Alexandria  otherwise  than  subject  unto  a  Bishop.     So  that 
we  cannot,   with  any  truth,  so  interpret  his  words  as  to 
mean,  that  in  the  Church  of  Alexandria  there  had  been 
Bishops    indued  with  Superiority  over    Presbyters   from 
St.  Mark's  time  only  till  the  time  of  Heraclas  and  of  Dio- 
nysius. Wherefore,  that  St.  Jerome  may  receive  a  more  pro* 
bable  interpretation  than  this, — ^We  answer,  that  generally 
of  Regiment  by  Bishops,  and  what  term  of  continuance  it 
had  in  the  Church  of  Alexandria,  it  was  no  part  of  his  mind 
to  speak,  but  to  note  one  only  circumstance  belonging  to 
the  manner  of  their  election,  which  circumstance  is,  that 
in  Alexandria  they  used  to  choose  their  Bishops  altogether 
out  of  the  College  of  their  own  Presbyters,  and  neither 
from  abroad  nor  out  of  any  other  inferior  Order  of  the 
Clergy;  whereas  oftentimes  elsewhere  the  use  was  to  choose 
as  well  from  abroad   as   at  home,    as  well  inferior  unto 
Presbyters,  as  Presbyters  when  they  saw  occasion.*     This 
Custom,  saith  he,  the  Church  of  Alexandria  did  always  keep, 
till  in  Heraclas  and  Dionysius  they  began  to  do  otherwise. 
These  two  were  the  very  first  not  chose  out  of  their  College 
of  Presbyters. 

The  drift  and  purpose  of  St.  Jerome's  speech  doth  plainly 
show  what  his  meaning  was:  for  whereas  some  did  over- 
extol  the  Office  of  the  Deacon  in  the  Church  of  Rome, 

*  Unto  Ignatius,  Bishop  of  Antioch,  Hero  a  Deacon  there  was  made  successor.  Chry- 
sostom,  being  a  Presbyter  of  Andoch,  was  chosen  to  succeed  Nectarius  in  the  Bbhoprick  of 
Constantinople. 


.Sett*  5.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  107 

where  Deacons  being  grown  greats  through  wealth,  chal- 
lenged jJace  aboYe  Presbyters ;  St.  Jerome,  to  abate  this 
insolency,  writing  to  Evagrius,*  diminisheth  by  all  means 
the  Deacons'  estimation,  and  lifteth  up  Presbyters  as  far 
2ttK  possible  the  truth  might  bear.  '^  An  Attendant  (saith  Ep.cu 
he)  upon  tables  and  widows  proudly  to  exalt  himself  above 
them  at  whose  prayers  is  made  the  Body  and  Blood  of 
CSirist ;  above  them,  between  whom  and  Bishops  there  was 
at  the  first  for  a  time  no  difference  neither  in  Authority  nor 
in  Title.  And  whereas  afterward  schisms  and  contentions 
made  it  necessary,  that  some  one  should  be  placed  over 
them,  by  which  occasion  the  Title  of  Bishop  became  proper 
unto  that  one,  yet  was  that  one  chosen  out  of  the  Pres- 
byters, as  being  the  chiefest,  the  highest,  the  worthiest 
degree  of  the  Clergy,  and  not  of  Deacons:  in  which  con* 
sideration  also  it  seemeth  that  in  Alexandria,  even  from 
St.  Mark  to  Heraclas  and  Dionysius,  Bishops  there,  the 
Presbyters  evermore  have  chosen  one  of  themselves,  and 
not  a  Deacon  at  any  time,  to  be  their  Bishop.  Nor  let  any 
tnan  think  that  Christ  hath  one  Church  in  Rome,  and 
anoiher  in  the  rest  of  the  world ;  that  in  Rome  he  alloweth 
Deacons  to  be  honoured  above  Presbyters,  and  otherwhere 
will  have  them  to  be  in  the  next  degree  to  the  Bishop. 
H  it  be  deemed  that  abroad  where  Bishops  are  poorer,  the 
Prcisbyters  under  them  may  be  the  next  unto  them  in 
honour,  but  at  Rome,  where  the  Bishop  hath  ample  reve- 
nues, the  Deacons,  whose  estate  is  nearest  for  wealth,  may 
be  also  for  estimation  the  next  unto  him;  we  must  know 
that  a  Bishop  in  the  meanest  city  is  no  less  a  Bishop  than 
he  who  is  seated  in  the  greatest ;  the  countenance  of  a  rich, 
and  the  meanness  of  a  poor  estate,  doth  make  no  oddii 
between  Bishops :  and  therefore,  if  a  Presbyter  at  Eiigubium 
be  the  next  in  degree  to  a  Bishop,  surely,  even  at  Rome  it 
ought  in  reason  to  be  so  likewise ;  and  not  a  Deacon  for 
wealth's  sake  only  to  be  above,  who  by  Order  should  be, 
and  elsewhere  is,  underneath  a  Presbyter.  But  ye  will  say, 
that  according  to  the  Custom  of  Rome,  a  Deacon  presenteth 
unto  the  Bishop  him  which  standeth  to  be  ordained  Pres- 
byter, and  upon  the  Deacon's  testimony  ^ven  concerning 
his  fitness,  he  receiveth  at  the  Bishop's  hands  Ordina* 
tion:    so  that  in   Rome  the   Deacon  having  this   special 

•  [Evangelus.] 


108  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  {SecL  5. 

pre-eminence,  the  Presbyter  ought  there  to  give  place  unto 
him.  Wherefore  is  the  Custom  of  one  city  brought  against 
the  practice  of  the  whole  world?  The  paucity  of  Deacons 
in  the  Church  of  Rome  hath  gotten  the  credit,  as  unto 
Presbyters  their  multitude  hath  been  cause,  of  contempt: 
howbeit,  even  in  the  Church  of  Rome,  Presbyters  sit, 
and  Deacons  stand;  an  argument  as  strong  against  the 
Superiority  of  Deacons,  as  the  fore-alleged  reason  doth 
seem  for  it.  Besides,  whosoever  is  promoted  must  needs 
be  raised  from  a  lower  degree  to  an  higher;  wherefore  either 
let  him  which  is  Presbyter  be  made  a  Deacon,  that  so  the 
Deacon  may  appear  to  be  the  greater,  or,  if  of  Deacons 
Presbyters  be  made,  let  them  know  themselves  to  be  in 
regard  of  Deacons,  though  below  in  gain,  yet  above  in 
Office.  And  to  the  end  we  may  understand  that  those 
Apostolical  Orders  are  taken  out  of  the  Old  Testament, 
what  Aaron  and  his  sons  and  the  Levites  were  in  the 
Temple,  the  same  in  the  Church  may  Bishops,  and  Pres- 
byters, and  Deacons  challenge  unto  themselves."  This  is 
the  very  drift  and  substance,  this  the  true  construction  and 
sense,  of  St.  Jerome's  whole  discourse  in  that  Epistle:  which 
I  have  therefore  endeavoured  the  more  at  large  to  explain, 
because  no  one  thing  is  less  effectual,  or  more  usual  to 
be  alleged  against  the  ancient  Authority  of  Bishops ;  con- 
cerning whose  Government  St.  Jerome's  own  words  other- 
where are  sufficient  to  shew  his  opinion,  that  this  Order 
was  not  only  in  Alexandria  so  ancient,  but  even  as  ancient 
in  other  Churches.  We  have  before  alleged  his  testimony 
touching  James  the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem.  As  for  Bishops 
in  other  Churches,  on  the  first  of  the  Epistle  to  Titus  thus 
he  speaketh,  "  Till  through  instinct  of  the  Devil  there  grew 
in  the  Church  factions,  and  among  the  people  it  began 
to  be  profest,  I  am  of  Paul,  I  of  Apollos,  and  I  of  Cephas, 
Churches  were  governed  by  the  common  advice  of  Pres- 
byters; but  when  every  one  began  to  reckon  those  whom 
himself  had  baptized,  his  own  and  not  Christ's,  it  was 
decreed  in  the  whole  World,  that  one  chosen  out  of  the 
Presbyters  should  be  placed  above  the  rest,  to  whom  all 
care  of  the  Church  should  belong,  and  so  the  seeds  of 
Schism  be  removed."*    If  it  be  so,  that  by  St.  Jerome's 

•  [That  this  difference  between  Bishops  and  Presbyters  was  brought  in  as  a  remedy 
against  Schism,  is,  says  Dr.  Whitaker,  *'  a  remedy  almost  worse  than  the  disease,  for  it 


Sect.  5.]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  109 

own  confession  this  Order  was  not  then  begun  when  people 
in  the  Apostles'  absence  began  to  be  divided  into  factions 
by  their  Teachers^  and  to  rehearse,  *•  I  am  of  Paul,"  but 
that  even  at  the  very  first  appointment  thereof  was  agreed 
upon  and  received  throughout  the  world;  how  shall  any 
man  be  persuaded  that  the  same  Jerome  thought  it  so 
ancient  no  where  saving  in  Alexandria,  one  only  Church  of 
the  whole  world  ?  A  sentence  there  is  indeed  of  St.  Jerome's, 
which,  being  not  throughly  considered  and  weighed,  may 
cause  his  meaning  so  to  be  taken,  as  if  he  judged  Episcopal 
Regiment  to  have  been  the  Church's  invention  long  after, 
and  not  the  Apostles'  own  institution ;  as  namely,  when  he 
admonisheth  Bishops  in  this  manner,  '^  As  therefore  Pres- 
byters do  know  that  the  Custom  of  the  Church  makes  them 
subject  to  the  Bishop  which  is  set  over  them ;  so  let  Bishops 
know,*  that  custom  rather  than  the  truth  of  any  Ordinance 
of  the  Lord's  maketh  them  greater  than  the  rest,  and  that 
with  common  advice  they  ought  to  govern  the  Church." 
To  dear  the  sense  of  these  words  therefore,  as  we  have 
done  already  the  former:  Laws  which  the  Church  from  the 
beginning  universally  hath  observed,  were  some  deUvered 
by  Christ  himself,  with  a  charge  to  keep  them  till  the 
world's  end,  as  the  Law  of  baptizing,  and  administering  the 
holy  Eucharist;  some  brought  in  afterwards  by  the  Apostles, 
yet  not  without  the  special  direction  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
as  occasions  did  arise.  Of  this  sort  are  those  Apostolical 
Orders  and  Laws,  whereby  Deacons,  Widows,  Virgins, 
were  first  appointed  in  the  Church. 

This  answer  to  St.  Jerome,  seemeth  dangerous ;  I  have 
qualified  it  as  I  may,  by  addition  of  some  words  of  restraint ; 
yet  I  satisfy  not  myself,  in  my  judgment  it  would  be  altered.f 
Now  tcherecis  Jerome  doth  term  the  Government  of  Bishops 

begat  and  brought  in  the  Pope  with  his  supremacy  into  the  Church."  De  Ecel,  Regim, 
Contr.iv.  q.  1.  sect  29.] 

*  Bishops  he  meaneth  by  restraint ;  for  the  Episcopal  power  was  always  in  the  Church 
inadtDted  by  Christ  himself,  the  Apostles  being  in  Government  Bishops  at  large ;  as  no  man 
will  deny,  having  received  from  Christ  himself  that  Episcopal  Authority.  For  which  cause 
Cyprian  hath  said  of  them:  **  Meminisse  Diaconi  debent,  quoniam  Apostolos,  id  est, 
Episoopos  et  Pnepositos,  Dominus  elegit:  Diaconos  autem,  post  ascensum  Domini  in  ooelos, 
Apostoli  sibi  oonstituerunt,  Episcopatus  sui  et  Ecclesise  Ministros."     Lib.  iii.  ep.  9. 

t  [Dr.M'CaiE,  in  his  Life  of  Andrew  Melville,  1819.  8vo.  VoL  I.  p.  156,  says,  **  He 
(Hel^e)  knew  that  the  words  Bishop  and  Presbyter  are  interchangeably  used  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  that  the  most  popular  arguments  for  the  divine  origin  of  Episcopacy  are 
fimnded  on  ignorance  of  the  original  language  of  Scripture."  This  passage  has  the  following 
Note :  "  Acts  xx.  17, 28.  1  Pet.  v.  1,  2.  In  the  venerable  Syriac  version  called  the  Peshito, 
'EiriffKtnroi  is  translated  *  the  Elders,'  and  *E/wurK<nrfi  *  the  Office  of  an  Elder.'    Philip.  L 1. 


tllO  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  ^Sect.  S. 

i^  restraint  an  Apostolical  Ji'aditionf  acknowlec^ng  thereby 
the  same  to  have  been  of  the.  Apostles^  own  institution,  U  may 
be  demanded,  How  these  two  will  stand  together;  namely, 
that  the  Apostles  by  divine  instinct  should  be,  ets  ^ereake 
confesseth,  the  authors  of  that  Regiment ;  and  yet  the  Custom 
of  the  Church  be  accompted  (for  so  by  Jerome  it  may  seem  to 
be  in  this  place  accompted)  the  chief  est  prop  that  uphotdeth 
the  same  ?  To  this  we  answer^  That  forasmuch  as  the  wh^ 
body  of  the  Church  hath  power  to  alter,  with  general  c&nsewt 
and  upon  necessary  occasions,  even  the  positive  Laws,  of  the 
Apostles,  if  there  be  no  commandment  to  the  contrary;  and  it 
manifestly  appears  to  her,  that  change  of  times  hdve  clewtiy 
taken  away  the  very  reason  of  God's  first  institution,  as  by 
sundry  examples  may  be  most  clearly  proved; — what  Laim 
the  universal  Church  might  change,  and  doth  not,  if  tbey 
have  long  tfontinued  without  any  alteration,  it  seemeth  thdt 
St.  Jerome  a^scribeth  the  contintsance  of  such  positive  Laws, 
though  instituted  by  God  him>self,  to  the  judgment  of  the 
Church.  For  they  which  might  abrogate  a  Law  and  do  not, 
are  properly  said  to  uphold,  to  establish  it,  and  to  give  it 
being.  The  Regiment  therefore  whereof  Jerome  speaieth 
being  positive,  and  consequently  not  absolutely  necessary, 
but  of  a  changeable  nature,  because  there  is  no  divine 
voice  which  in  express  words  forbiddeth  it  to  be  changed; 

1  Tim.  in.  1.  This  proves,  says  Dr.  Marsh  (Bishop  of  Peterborough)  that  the  Syiiac 
translator  understood  his  original,  and  that  he  made  a  proper  distinction  between  that  of  the 
Primitive  and  that  of  the  Hierarchical  Church.  Michaelis,  Introd.  to  New  Test.  18Q9, 
Vol.  II.  pp.  32,553."  In  a  Note  to  p.  461  of  Vol.1.  Life  of  Mel.  Dr.  M'Crie  writes, 
<'  Nothing  has  proved  more  puzzling  to  iYkejure  divino  Prelatists,  who  feel  a  great  vener^itioa 
for  the  Fathers,  than  the  sentiments  which  St.  Jerome  has  expressed,  in  various  parts  oif  his 
writings,  concerning  the  ori^n  of  Episcopacy.  A  very  curious  instance  of  this  occurs  in 
Hooker's  Eccl.  Polity.  Hooker  enters  into  an  elaborate  reply  to  the  objections  which  -the 
Presbyterians  have  raised  from  Jerome's  assertion,  that  the  superiority  of  Bishops  to  Pres- 
byters arose  from  custom  rather  than  divine  institution.  In  the  jmiddle  of  this  reply  tfa^ 
following  singular  sentence  occurs,  '  This  answer  to  St.  Jerome  seemeth  dangerous,'  &c. 
It  will  be  obliging  if  some  of  the  admirers  of  the  Eccl.  Polity  will  examine  this  passage,  and 
furnish  a  key  to  its  meaning,  and  the  design  with  which  it  was  introduced.  In  the  mean 
time  they  are  welcome  to  any  assistance  which  they  can  derive  from  the  followini;  expli* 
cation.  It  is  known  that  the  last  three  Books,  including  the  Seventh,  of  the  Polity  were 
not  published  during  the  life-time  of  their  Author.  In  looking  over  his  Manuscripts,  what 
he  had  written  on  this  part  of  the  subject  appeared  to  Hooker  '  dangerous ;'  he  retouched  it, 
and  '  qualified'  his  expressions,  but  still  his  answer  satisfied  not  himself;  it  required  yet  to  be 
altered :  and  to  keep  this  in  mind  he  made  a  jotting  of  it  on  the  margin.  The  Manuscript 
coming  into  the  hands  of  Dr.  Gauden,  Bishop  of  Exeter,  he  introduced  the  marginal  note 
into  the  text  and  published  both  together.  We  may  easily  conceive  how  '  the  judicious 
Hooker'  would  have  felt  at  seeing  his  acknowledgment  of  his  perplexity  in  answering  this 
objection  thus  ignorantly  and  rudely  exposed  to  the  public  eye.  Tet  the  blunder  has  been 
retained  in  all  the  Editions  which  I  have  seen,  from  that  of  1662  down  to  that  which  was 
lately  printed  at  Oxford !  The  Eccl.  Polity  is  one  of  the  Books  on  which  Candidates  for 
Holy  Orders  are  examined ;  but  this  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  either  they  or  their 
Examinators  have  made  themselves  masters  of  its  meaning  and  contents."] 


Sect,  5.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  1 1 1 

he  might  imagine  both  that  it  came  by  the  Apostles  by 
very  divine  appointment  at  the  first ^  and  notwithstanding  be, 
cfier  a  sort,  said  to  stand  in  force,  rather  by  the  Custom 
of  the  Church,  choosing  to  continue  in  it,  than  by  the 
necessary  constraint  of  any  commandment  from  the  Word, 
requiring  perpetual  continuance  thereof.*  So  that  St. 
Jerome's  admonition  is  reasonable^  sensible,  and  plain, 
being  contrived  to  this  effect;  The  ruling  Superiority  of 
one  Bishop  over  many  Presbyters  iir  each  Church,  is  an 
Order  descended  from  Christ  to  the  Apostles,  who  were 
themselves  Bishops  at  large;  and  from  the  Apostles  to  those 
whom  they  in  their  steads  appointed  Bishops  over  parti- 
cular countries  and  cities ;  and  even  from  those  ancient  times 
universally  established,  thus  many  years  it  hath  continued 
throughout  the  World;  for  which  cause  Presbyters  must 
not  grudge  to  continue  subject  unto  their  BisUbps,  unless 
they  will  proudly  oppose  themselves  against  that  which 
Gk>d  himself  ordained  by  his  Apostles,  and  the  whole 
Church  of  Christ  approveth  and  judgeth  most  convenient. 
On  the  other  side.  Bishops  albeit  they  may  avouch,  with 
conformity  of  truth,  that  their  Authority  hath  thus  descended 
even  from  the  very  Apostles  themselves,  yet  the  absolute 
and  everlasting  continuance  of  it  they  cannot  say  that 
any  commandment  of  the  Lord  doth  injoin;  and  there- 
fare  must  acknowledge  that  the  Church  hath  power  by 
universal  consent  upon  urgent  cause  to  take  it  away,  if  there- 
unto  she  be  constrained  through  the  proud,  tyrannical, 
and  unreformable  dealings  of  her  Bishops,  whose  Regiment 
she  hath  thus  long  dleUghted  in,  because  she  hath  found  it 
good  and  requisite  to  be  so  governed.  Wherefore,  lest 
Bishops  forget  themselves,  as  if  none  on  earth  had  Autho- 
rity to  touch  their  states,  let  them  (yntinually  bear  in 
mhtd,  that  it  is  rather  the  force  of  Custom,  wliereby  the 
Church  having  so  long  found  it  good  to  continue  under  the 
Regiment  of  her  virtuous  Bishops,  doth  still  uphold,  maintain, 
and  honour  them  in  that  respect,  than  that  any  such  true  and 
heavenly  Law  can  be  shouted,  by  the  evidence  whereof  it  may 
of  a  truth  appear  that  the  Lord  himself  hath  appointed  Pres- 
byters for  ever  to  be  under  the  Regiment  of  Bishops,  in  what 
sort  soever  they  behave  themsdves;  let  this  consideration 
be  a  bridle  unto  them,  let  it  teach  them  not  to  disdain  the 

*  [The  passages  in  italics f  are  so  distinguished  hi  the  Ed.  of  16C2.] 


112  THE  SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  5. 

advice  of  their  Presbyters,  but  to  use  their  Authority  with 
so  much  the  greater  humility  and  moderation,  as  a  sword 
which  the  Church  hath  power  to  take  from  them.  In  all 
this  there  is  no  let  why  St.  Jerome  might  not  think  the 
authors  of  Episcopal  Regiment  to  have  been  the  very  blessed 
Apostles  themselves,  directed  therein  by  the  special  motion 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  the  ancients  all  before,  and  besides 
him  and  himself  also  elsewhere,  being  known  to  hold,  we  are 
not,  without  better  evidence  than  this,  to  think  him  in  judg- 
ment divided  both  from  himself  and  from  them.  Another 
Argument  that  the  Regiment  of  Churches  by  one  Bishop 
over  many  Presbyters  hath  been  always  held  Apostolical, 
may  be  this.  We  find  that  throughout  all  those  cities  where 
the  Apostles  did  plant  Christianity,  the  history  of  times  hath 
noted  succession  of  Pastors  in  the  seat  of  one,  not  of  many 
(there  being  in  every  such  Church  evermore  many  Pastors), 
and  the  first  one  in  every  rank  of  succession  we  find  to  have 
Lib.  u.  been,  if  not  some  Apostle,  yet  some  Apostle's  Disciple.  By 
^cres.  ^igpjpjiQjiiug  ^}|Q  Bishops  of  Jerusalem  are  reckoned  down 

from  James  to  Hilarion  then  Bishop.*  Of  them  which 
boasted  that  they  held  the  same  things  which  they  received 
of  such  as  lived  with  the  Apostles  themselves,  TertuUian 
De  Prae-  speakcth  after  this  sort :  "  Let  them  therefore  shew  the 
«dvers.  beginnings  of  their  Churches,  let  them  recite  their  Bishops 
one  by  one,  each  in  such  sort  succeeding  other,  that  the 
first  Bishop  of  them  have  had  for  his  author  and  predecessor 
some  Apostle,  or  at  least  some  Apostolical  person  who  per- 
severed with  the  Apostles.  For  so  Apostolical  Churches 
are  wont  to  bring  forth  the  evidence  of  their  estates.  So 
doth  the  Church  of  Smyrna,  having  Polycarp,  whom  John 
did  consecrate. "t  Catalogues  of  Bishops  in  a  number  of 
other  Churches ;  Bishops,  and  succeeding  one  another  from 
the  very  Apostles'  times ;  are  by  EusebiusJ  and  Socrates 

•  [«  Epipbanius  wrote  a  Book  against  aU  the  Heresies  that  had  sprung  up  in  the  Church 
until  his  time.  This  work  has  little  or  no  reputation,  as  it  is  full  of  Inaccuracies  and  errors, 
and  discovers  almost  in  every  page  the  levity  and  ignorance  of  its  author."  Mosheim,  Eccl, 
Hist,  Cent.  iv.  Part  II.  chap.  ii.  sect.  9.  Maclaine's  Ed.] 

t  [Where  is  the  Church  of  England's  exact  Catalogue,  to  evidence  that  Heretics  and 
Impostors  have  neither  vitiated  her  Communion  nor  stepped  into  the  ranks  of  her  Clergy 
some  with  forged  Orders  and  others  with  Orders  simoniacally  obtuned  ?  See  Baxter's  DU' 
sertationtf  p.  170.] 

X  [**  It  being  impossible  for  us  to  recount  by  name  all  those  who  in  the  ^rst  succession  of 
the  Apostles  were  Pastors  or  Evangelists  in  the  Churches  throughout  the  world,  we  will  here 
commit  to  writing  the  mention  of  their  names  only,  whose  writings^  containing  the  Aposto^ 
Itcal  Doctrine  they  delivered,  are  to  this  day  extant  amongst  us."  Euseb.  Eccl,  Hist,  lib.  iii. 
c.  37.] 


Sect.  5.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  113 

collected ;  whereby  it  appeareth  so  clear,  as  nothing  in  the 
world  more^  that  under  them  and  by  their  appointment  this 
Order  began,  which  maketh  many  Presbyters  subject  unto 
the  Regiment  of  some  one  Bishop.  For  as  in  Rome  while 
the  civil  ordering  of  the  Commonwealth  was  jointly  and 
equally  in  the  hands  of  two  Consuls,  historical  records  con- 
cerning them  did  evermore  mention  them  both,  and  note 
which  two,  as  colleagues,  succeeded  from  time  to  time.  So 
there  is  no  doubt  but  Ecclesiastical  antiquity  had  done  the 
very  like,  had  not  one  Pastor's  place  and  calling  been  always 
80  eminent  above  the  rest  in  the  same  Church.  And  what 
need  we  to  seek  far  for  proofs  that  the  Apostles,  who  began 
this  Order  of  Regiment  of  Bishops,  did  it  not  but  by  divine 
instinct,  when  without  such  direction  things  of  far  less  weight 
and  moment  they  attempted  not  ?  Paul  and  Barnabas  did 
not  open  their  mouths  to  the  Gentiles,  till  the  Spirit  had 
said,  "  Separate  me  Paul  and  Barnabas  for  the  work  where-  Acti 
unto  I  have  sent  them."*  The  Eunuch  by  Philip  was  neither  Actl 
baptized  nor  instructed,  before  the  Angel  of  God  was  sent 
to  give  him  notice  that  so  it  pleased  the  Most  High.  In  Acts 
Asia,  Paul  and  the  rest  were  silent,  because  the  Spirit  for-*^*'*'*^* 
bade  them  to  speak:  when  they  intended  to  have  seen 
Bithynia  they  stayed  their  journey,  the  Spirit  not  giving 
them  leave  to  go.  Before  Timothy  was  employed  in  those 
Episcopal  affairs  of  the  Church,  about  which  the  Apostle 
St.  Paul  used  him,  the  Holy  Ghost  gave  special  charge  fori  Tim. 
his  Ordination,  and  prophetical  intelligence  more  than  once,  ' 
what  success  the  same  would  have.  And  shall  we  think  that 
James  was  made  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  Evodius  Bishop  of 
the  Church  of  Antioch,  the  Angels  in  the  Churches  of  Asia 
Bishops,  that  Bishops  every  where  were  appointed  to  take 
away  factions,  contentions,  and  schisms,  without  some  like 
divine  instigation  and  direction  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?f  Where- 


♦  [On  the  phrase  in  ver.  4.  **  So  they  being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Dr.  Dod- 
dridge remarks,  in  loc.,  "  This  seems  to  be  added  to  remind  us,  that  though  they  were 
solemnly  recommended  to  God  by  the  prayers  of  their  brethren,  their  Authority  was  not 
derived  from  them,  but  from  the  Holy  Spirit  himself."] 

f  ['*  Mark  whether  this  rare  device  of  man's  brain,  thus  preferred  before  the  Ordinance  of 
God,  had  better  success  than  fleshly  wisdom,  not  counselling  with  God,  is  wont  to  have.  So 
far  was  it  from  removing  Schism,  that  if  Schism  parted  the  Congregations  before,  now  it  rent 
and  mangled,  now  it  raged.  Heresy  begat  Heresy  with  a  certain  monstrous  haste  of  preg- 
nancy in  her  birth,  at  once  born  and  bringing  forth.  Contentions,  before  brotherly,  were 
now  hostile ;  Men  went  to  choose  their  Bishqp  as  they  went  to  a  pitched  field,  and  the  day  of 
hit  election  was  like  the  sacking  of  a  city ;  sometimes  ended  with  the  blood  of  thousands.    Nor 

VOL.  III.  I 


i 


114  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect*  6. 

fore  let  us  not  fear  to  be  herein  bold  and  peremptory.  That 

if  any  thing  in  the  Church's  Government,  surely  the  first 

institution  of  Bishops  was  from  Heaven,  was  even  of  God ; 

the  Holy  Ghost  was  the  author  of  it. 

What        6.  A  Bishop,  saith  St.  Augustine,  is  a  Presbyter's  su- 

ofPower  perior  :*  but  the  question  is  now.  Wherein  that  Superiority 

frimXc  did  consist.     The  Bishop's  pre-eminence  we  say  therefore 

ginniug  was  twofold.     First,  he  excelled  in  latitude  of  the  Power  of 

hid!      Order;   secondly,  in  that  kind  of  Power  which  belongeth 

unto  Jurisdiction.     Priests  in  the  Law  had  authority  and 

power  to  do  greater  things  than  Levites,  the  High-priest 

greater  than  inferior  Priests  might  do ;  therefore  Levites 

this  among  Heretics  only,  but  men  of  the  same  belief,  yea  Confessors ;  and  that  with  sudb 
odious  ambition,  that  Eusebius,  in  his  Eighth  Book,  testifies  he  abhorred  to  write.     And  the 
reason  is  not  obscure,  for  the  poor  dignity,  or  rather  burden,  of  a  parochial  Presbyter  could  not 
engage  any  great  party,  nor  that  to  any  deadly  feud :  but  Prelaty  was  a  power  of  that  extent 
and  sway,  that  if  her  election  were  popular,  it  was  seldom  not  the  cause  of  some  faction  or 
broil  in  the  Church.     But  if  her  dignity  came  by  favour  of  some  Prince,  she  was  from  that 
time  his  creature,  and  obnoxious  to  comply  with  his  ends  in  State,  were  they  right  or  wrong. 
So  that,  instead  of  finding  Prelaty  an  impeacher  of  Schism  or  Faction,  the  more  I  search,  ibs 
more  I  grow  into  all  persuasion  to  think  rather  that  Faction  and  she,  as  with  a  spousal  ring, 
are  wedded  together,  never  to  be  divorced.     But  here  let  every  one  behold  the  just  aod 
dreadful  judgment  of  God  meeting  with  the  audacious  pride  of  men,  that  durst  offer  to  mend 
the  Ordinances  of  Heaven.    God  out  of  the  strife  of  men  brought  forth  by  his  Apostles  to  the 
Church  that  beneficent  and  ever  distributing  Office  of  Deacons,  the  Stewards  and  Minister*  of 
holy  alms :  Man  out  of  the  pretended  care  of  peace  and  unity,  being  caught  in  the  snare  of 
his  impious  boldness  to  correct  the  will  of  Christ,  brought  forth  to  himself  upon  the  Church 
that  irreconcileable  Schism  of  Perdition  and  Apostacy,  the  Roman  Antichrist ;  for  that  the 
exaltation  of  the  Pope  arose  out  of  the  reason  of  Prelaty,  it  cannot  be  denied.     And,  that  the 
pattern  of  the  High  Priest  pleaded  for  in  the  Gospel  (for  take  away  the  head  Priest,  the  rest 
are  but  a  carcass)  sets  up  with  better  reason  a  Pope  than  an  Archbishop ;  for  if  Prelaty  must 
still  rise  and  rise  till  it  come  to  a  Primate,  why  should  it  stay  there  ?  whereas  the  Catholic 
Government  is  not  to.  follow  the  division  of  Kingdoms,  the  Temple  best  representing  the  Uni- 
versal Church,  and  the  High  Priest  the  Universal  Head :  so  I  observe  here,  that  if  to  quiet  Schism 
there  must  be  one  head  of  Prelaty  in  a  land  or  monarchy,  rising  from  a  provincial  to  a  national 
Primacy,  there  may  upon  better  grounds  of  repressing  Schism  be  set  up  one  Catholic  Head  over 
the  Catholic  Church.   For  the  peace  and  good  of  the  Church  is  not  terminated  in  the  schismlesi 
estate  of  one  or  two  kingdoms,  but  should  be  provided  for  by  the  joint  consultation  of  all  reformed 
Christendom :  that  all  controversy  may  end  in  the  first  pronounce  or  Canon  of  one  Arch- 
Primate  or  Protestant  Pope.     Although  by  this  means,  for  aught  I  see,  all  the  diameters  of 
Schism  may  as  well  meet  and  be  knit  up  in  the  centre  of  one  grand  Falsehood ....  It  was 
not  the  prevention  of  Schism,  but  it  was  Schism  itself,  and  the  hateful  thirst  of  lording  in  the 
Church,  that  first  bestowed  a  being  upon  Prelaty ;  this  was  the  true  cause,  but  the  pretence  is 
still  the  same.     The  Prelates,  as  they  would  have  it  thought,  are  the  only  mauls  of  Schism. 
Forsooth  if  they  be  put  down,  a  deluge  of  innumerable  sects  will  follow ;  we  shall  be  all 
Brownists,  Familists,  Anabaptists !     For  the  word  Puritan  seems  to  be  quashed,  and  all  that 

heretofore  were  counted  such,  are  now  Brownists Your  Prelaty  is  nothing  else  but  your 

ambition,  an  insolent  preferring  of  yourselves  above  your  brethren ;  and  all  your  learned 
scraping  in  antiquity,  even  to  disturb  the  bones  of  old  Aaron  and  his  sons  in  their  graves,  is 
but  to  maintain  and  set  upon  our  necks  a  stately  and  severe  dignity,  which  you  call  sacred, 
and  is  nothing  in  very  deed  but  a  grave  and  reverent  gluttony,  a  sanctimonious  avarice ;  in 
comparison  of  which,  all  the  duties  and  dearnesses  which  ye  owe  to  God  or  to  his  Church,  to 
Law,  Custom,  or  Nature,  ye  have  resolved  to  set  at  nought."  Milton's  Reason  of  Church 
Gov.  Edit.  1738,  fol.  Book  T.  chap.  vi.  pp.  50,  51,  54. 
^  Aug.  Ep.  19.  ad  Hieron.  et  de  Hseres.  53. 


Sect.  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  115 

were  beneath  Priests^  and  Priests  inferior  to  the  High-priest, 
by  reason  of  the  very  degree  of  dignity  and  of  worthiness 
in  the  nature  of  those  functions  which  they  did  execute; 
and  not  only,  for  that  the  one  had  power  to  command  and 
control  the  other.    In  like  sort,  Presbyters  having  a  weightier 
and  a  worthier  charge  than  Deacons  had,  the  Deacon  was 
in  this  sort  the  Presbyter's  inferior ;  and  where  we  say  that 
a  Bishop  was  likewise  ever  accompted  a  Presbyter's  superior, 
even  according  unto  his  very  Power  of  Order,  we  must  of 
necessity  declare  what  principal  duties  belonging  unto  that 
kind  of  Power  a  Bishop  might  perform,  and  not  a  Presbyter. 
The  custom  of  the  primitive  Church  in  consecrating  holy  i  cor. 
Virgins  and  Widows  unto  the  service  of  God  and  his  Church,  riim.' 
is  a  thing  not  obscure,  but  easy  to  be  known,  both  by  that 
which  St.  Paul  himself  concerning  them  hath,  and  by  the« 
latter  consonant  evidence  of  other  men's  writings :   now  a  Tertai. 
part  of  the  pre-eminence  which  Bishops  had  in  their  Power  vfrg.*^  * 
of  Order  was,  that  by  them  only  such  were  consecrated. 
Again,  the  Power  of  ordaining  both  Deacons  and  Presbyters, 
the  Power  to  give  the  Power  of  Order  unto  others,  this  also 
hath  been  always  peculiar  unto  Bishops.     It  hath  not  been 
heard  of,  that  inferior  Presbyters  were  ever  authorized  to 
ordain.     And  concerning  Ordination,   so  great  force  and 
d^nity  it  hath,  that  whereas  Presbyters,  by  such  power  as 
they  have  received  for  administration  of  the  Sacraments, 
are  able  only  to  beget  Children  unto  God ;  Bishops,  having  Epiph. 
power  to  ordain,  do  by  virtue  thereof  create  Fathers  to  the  Haer.75. 
people  of  God,  as  Epiphanius  fitly  disputeth.     There  are 
which  hold,  that  between  a  Bishop  and  a  Presbyter,  touch- 
ing Power  of  Order,  there  is  no  difference.     The  reason  of 
which  conceit  is,  for  that  they  see  Presbyters,  no  less  than 
Bishops,  authorized  to  offer  up  the  Prayers  of  the  Church, 
to  preach  the  Gospel,  to  baptize,  to  administer  the  holy 
Eucharist ;  but  they  considered  not  withal,  as  they  should, 
that  the  Presbyter's  authority  to  do  these  things  is  derived 
firom  the  Bishop's  which  doth  ordain  him  thereunto :  so  that 
even  in  those  things  which  are  common  unto  both,  yet  the 
power  of  the  one  is  as  it  were  a  certain  light  borrowed  from 
the  others'  lamp.     The  Apostles  being  Bishops  at  large,  or-  acu 
dained  every  where  Presbyters.     Titus  and  Timothy  having  "^' 
received  Episcopal  Power,  as  Apostolical  ambassadors  or 
legates,  the  one  in  Greece,  the  other  in  Ephesus,  they  both 

i2 


116  THE    SEVENTH    BOOK  [Sect.  6. 

Tit       did,*  by   virtue  thereof,   likewise  ordain,   throughout  all 

iTim.  Churches,  Deacons  and  Presbyters  within  the  circuits  al- 
lotted unto  them.  As  for  Bishops  by  restraint,  their  Power 
this  way  incommunicable  unto  Presbyters,  which  of  the 
ancients  do  not  acknowledge?  I  make  not  Confirmation 
any  part  of  that  Power,  which  hath  always  belonged  only 
unto  Bishops ;  because  in  some  placesf  the  custom  was,  that 
Presbyters  might  also  confirm  in  the  absence  of  a  Bishop, 
albeit,  for  the  most  part,  none  but  only  Bishops  were  thereof 
the  allowed  Ministers. 

Here  it  will  be  perhaps  objected,  that  the  Power  of  Or- 
dination itself  was  not  every  where  peculiar  and  proper  unto 
Bishops,  as  may  be  seen  by  a  Council  of  Carthage,  which 
fiheweth  their  Church's  Order  to  have  been.  That  Presby- 
ters should  together  with  the  Bishop  lay  hands  upon  the 
ordained.  But  the  answer  hereunto  is  easy;  for  doth  it 
hereupon  follow,  that  the  Power  of  Ordination  was  not 
principally  and  originally  in  the  Bishop  ?    Our  Saviour  hath 

[Matt,  said  unto  his  Apostles,  **  With  me  ye  shall  sit,  and  judge 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel ;"  yet  we  know  that  to  him  alone 

[John  it  belongeth  to  judge  the  world,  and  that  to  him  '^  all  judg- 
ment" is  given.  With  us,  even  at  this  day.  Presbyters  are 
licensed  to  do  as  much  as  that  Council  speaketh  of,  if  any 
be  present :  yet  will  not  any  man  thereby  conclude,  that  in 
this  Church  others  than  Bishops  are  allowed  to  ordain. 
The  association  of  Presbyters  is  no  sufficient  proof  that  the 
Power  of  Ordination  is  in  them ;  but  rather  that  it  never 
was  in  them  we  may  hereby  understand,  for  that  no  man  is 
able  to  shew  either  Deacon  or  Presbyter  ordained  by  Pres- 
byters only, J  and  his  Ordination  accounted  lawful  in  any 
ancient  part  of  the  Church ;  every  where  examples  being 
found  both  of  Deacons  and  of  Presbyters  ordained  by 
Bishops  alone  oftentimes,  neither  ever  in  that  respect 
thought  unsufficient.     Touching  that  other  Chiefty,  which 

^  [When,  and  where  in  any  Church?  Though  the  Epistle  to  Titus,  and  also  the  first 
Epistle  to  Timothy,  are  supposed  to  have  been  written  about  a.d.  56,  no  trace  is  found  of 
any  Ordination  by  either  of  those  "  Ambassadors,"  notwithstanding  that  the  Sacred  Writings 
eltend  to  a.  d.  95  or  96;  and  that  all  the  Evangelists  and  Epistles,  except  the  1  and  2  Thess. 
Gal.  and  the  1  Cor.  were,  on  the  supposition  of  Dr.  Lardner,  written  subsequently.] 

f  "  Apud  ^gyptum  Presbyteri  consignant,  si  praesens  non  sit  Episcopus."  Com.  q.  vulgo 
Ambros.  die.  in  4.  Ep.  ad  Ephes. 

X  [See  Note  on  1  Tim.  Sect.  9,  of  this  Book.  Surely  when  those  extraordinary  Officers, 
the  Apostles,  were  all  dead,  their  rank  became  extinct,  and  therefore  \eh  Presbyters  to  ordaio 
Presbyters.] 


Sect  6.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  117 

is  of  Jurisdiction ;  amongst  the  Jews  he  which  was  highest 
through  the  worthiness  of  peculiar  duties  incident  into  his 
function  in  the  Legal  service  of  God^  did  bear  always  in 
Ecclesiastical  Jurisdiction  the  chiefest  sway.     As  long  as 
the  glory  of  the  Temple  of  God  did  last^  there  were  in  it 
sundry  orders  of  men  consecrated  unto  the  service  thereof^ 
one  sort  of  them  inferior  unto  another  in  dignity  and  degree ; 
the  Nathiners  subordinate   unto  the  Levites,  the  Leviteslfj?"  , 
unto  the  Priests,  the  rest  of  the  Priests  to  those  twenty-four 
which  were  Chief-priests,  and  they  all  to  the  High-priest. 
If  any  man  surmise  that  the  difference  between  them  was 
only  by  distinction  in  the  former  kind  of  Power,  and  not  in 
this  latter  of  Jurisdiction,  are  not  the  words  of  the  Law 
manifest  which  made  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Aaron  the  Priest,  Nomb. 
chief  captain  of  the  Levites,  and  overseer  of  them  unto 
whom  the  charge  of  the  Sanctuary  was  committed  ?    Again,  iv.  v. 
at  the  commandment  of  Aaron  and  his  sons,  are  not  the 
Gersonites  themselves  required  to  do  all  their  service  in  the 
whole  charge  belonging  unto  the  Gersonites,  being  inferior 
Priests,  as  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  High-priests  ?     Did  not  schmn. 
Jehoshaphat  appoint  Amariah  the  Priest  to  be  chief  over  *'** 
them  who  were  Judges  for  the  cause  of  the  Lord  in  Jeru- 
salem ?    "  Priests  (saith  Josephus)  worship  God  continually,  Joseph. 
and  the  eldest  of  the  stock  are  Governors  over  the  rest.  ^^Si 
He  doth  sacrifice  unto  God  before  others,  he  hath  care  of 
the  lidws,  judgeth  controversies,  correcteth  offenders,  and 
whosoever  obeyeth  him  not  is  convict  of  impiety  against 
God."*     But  unto  this  they  answer.  That  the  reason  thereof 
was  because  the  High-priest  did  prefigure  Christ,  and  re- 
present to  the  people  that  Chiefty  of  our  Saviour  which 
was  to  come;   so   that  Christ  being   now  come,   there  is 


^  ["  The  Christian  Doctors  had  the  good  fortune  to  persuade  the  people,  that  the  Ministers 
of  the  Christian  Church  succeeded  to  the  character,  rights,  and  privileges,  of  the  Jewish 
Priesthood :  and  this  persuasion  was  a  new  source  both  of  honour  and  proifit  to  the  sacred 
Order.  This  notion  was  propagated  with  industry  some  time  after  the  reign  of  Adrian,  when 
the  second  destruction  of  Jerusalem  had  extinguished  among  the  Jews  all  hopes  of  seeing 
their  government  restored  to  its  former  lustre,  and  their  country  arising  out  of  its  ruins. 
And,  accordingly,  the  Bishops  considered  themselves  as  invested  with  a  rank  and  character 
similar  to  those  of  the  High  Priest  among  the  Jews,  while  the  Presbyters  represented  the 
Priests,  and  the  Deacons  the  Levites.  It  is,  indeed,  highly  probable,  that  they  who  first 
introduced  this  absurd  comparison  of  Offices,  so  entirely  distinct,  did  it  rather  through  igno- 
rance and  error  than  through  artifice  or  design.  The  notion,  however,  once  introduced, 
produced  its  natural  effects ;  and  these  effects  were  pernicious.  The  errors  to  which  it  gave 
rise  were  many ;  and  one  of  its  immediate  consequences  was,  the  establishing  a  greater 
difference  between  the  Christian  Pastors  and  their  Flock  than  the  genius  of  the  Gospel  seeim 
to  admit." — Mosheim,  Eccl,  Hist,  Cent.  ii.  Part  II.  chap.  ii.  sect.  4.] 


118  THB   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Seci.  6. 

no  cause  why  such  pre-eminence  should  be  given  unto  any 
one.  Which  fancy  pleaseth  so  well  the  humour  of  all  sorts 
of  rebeUious  spirits,  that  they  all  seek  to  shroud  themselves 
under  it.  Tell  the  Anabaptist,  which  holdeth  the  use  of 
the  sword  unlawful  for  a  Christian  man,  that  God  himself 
did  allow  his  people  to  make  wars ;  they  have  their  answer 
round  and  ready,  '^  Those  ancient  wars  were  figures  of  the 
spiritual  wars  of  Christ."  Tell  the  Barrowist  what  sway 
David,  and  others  the  Kings  of  Israel,  did  bear  in  the  order- 
ing of  spiritual  afiairs,  the  same  answer  again  serveth,  namely, 
^*  That  David  and  the  rest  of  the  Kings  of  Israel  prefigured 
Christ."  Tell  the  Martinist  of  the  High-priest's  great  au- 
thority and  jurisdiction  amongst  the  Jews,  what  other  thing 
doth  serve  his  turn  but  the  self-same  shift :  ''  By  the  power 
of  the  High-priest  the  universal  supreme  authority  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  shadowed."  The  thing  is  true,  that 
indeed  High-priests  were  figures  of  Christ,  yet  this  was  in 
things  belonging  unto  their  Power  of  Order ;  they  figured 
Christ  by  entering  into  the  Holy  Place,  by  ofiering  for  the 
sins  of  all  the  people  once  a  year,  and  by  other  the  like 
duties:  but,  that  to  govern  and  maintain  order  amongst 
those  that  were  subject  to  them,  is  an  Office  figurative,  and 
abrogated  by  Christ's  coming  into  the  Ministry ;  that  their 
exercise  of  Jurisdiction  was  figurative,  yea,  figurative  in 
such  sort,  that  it  had  no  other  cause  of  being  instituted,  but 
only  to  serve  as  a  representation  of  somewhat  to  come,  and 
that  herein  the  Church  of  Christ  ought  not  to  follow  them ; 
this  article  is  such  as  must  be  confirmed,  if  any  way,  by 
miracle,  otherwise  it  will  hardly  enter  into  the  heads  of 
reasonable  men,  why  the  High-priest  should  more  figure 
Christ  in  being  a  Judge,  than  in  being  whatsoever  he  might 
Gypr.  be  besides.  St.  Cyprian  deemed  it  no  wresting  of  Scripture, 
if,  9.  to  challenge  as  much  for  Christian  Bishops  as  was  given 
uJ^'  to  the  High-priest  amongst  the  Jews,  and  to  urge  the  Law 
of  Moses  as  being  most  effectual  to  prove  it.*    St.  Jerome 

^  [*'  The  face  of  things  began  now  (in  the  Third  Century)  to  change  in  the  Christian 
Church.  The  ancient  method  of  Ecclesiastical  Government  seemed,  in  general,  still  to  subsist, 
while,  at  the  same  time,  by  imperceptible  steps,  it  varied  from  the  primitive  rule,  and  de- 
generated towards  the  form  of  a  religious  monarchy.  For  the  Bishops  aspired  to  higher 
degrees  of  power  and  authority  than  they  had  formerly  possessed;  and  not  only  violated  the 
rights  of  the  people,  but  also  made  gradual  encroachments  upon  the  privileges  of  the  Pres- 
byters. And  that  they  might  cover  these  usurpations  with  an  air  of  justice,  and  an  appear- 
ance of  reason,  they  published  new  doctrines  concerning  the  nature  of  the  Church,  and  of 
the  Episcopal  dignity,  which,^however,  were,  in  general  so  obscure,  that  they  themselves  seem 
to  have  understood  them  as  httle  as  those  to  whom  they  were  delivered.     One  of  the  principal 


Sect.  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  119 

likewise  thought  it  an  argument  sufficient  to  ground  the 
authority  of  Bishops  upon :  **  To  the  end  (saith  he)  we  may  Hicr. 
understand  Apostolical  Traditions  to  have  been  taken  from 
the  Old  Testament ;  that  which  Aaron,  and  his  sons,  and 
the  Levites  were  in  the  Temple,  Bishops,  and  Presbyters, 
and  Deacons  in  the  Church  may  lawfully  challenge  to  them- 
selves."   In  the  office  of  a  Bishop,  Ignatius  observeth  these 
two  functions,  lepartvEiv  koX  apxtiv :  concerning  the  one,  such  Ep.  ad 
is  a  pre-eminence  of  a  Bishop,  that  he  only  hath    the   °*^'' 
heavenly  mysteries  of  God  committed  originally  unto  him, 
so  that  otherwise  than  by  his  Ordination,  and  by  Authority 
received  from  him,   others   besides  him  are  not  licensed 
therein  to  deal  as  ordinary  Ministers  of  God's  Church ;  and 
touching  the  other  part  of  their  sacred  function,  wherein 
the  Power  of  their  Jurisdiction  doth  appear,  first  how  the 
Apostles  themselves,  and  secondly  how  Titus  and  Timothy 
had   rule  and   jurisdiction  over  Presbyters,*    no  man  is 
ignorant.i-    And  had  not  Christian  Bishops  afterward  the 
lU^e  power  ?     Ignatius,  Bishop  of  Antioch,  being  ready  by 
blessed  martyrdom  to  end  his  life,  writeth  unto  his  Presbyters, 
the  Pastors  under  him,  in  this  sort ;  01  wpeafivTepoi,  iroifidyere  ignat. 
rd  iv  vfxiv  iroifivloy,  eufg  dvaSelirj  6  Oeog  rov  fieWovra  &pXEiv  vfiiiv.  Antioch. 

'Ey^  yap  rfSri  trTTEydofiau  After  the  death  of  Fabian,  Bishop 
of  Rome,  there  growing  some  trouble  about  the  receiving  of 
such  persons  into  the  Church  as  had  fallen  away  in  per- 
secution, and  did  now  repent  their  fall,  the  Presbyters 
and  Deacons  of  the  same  Church  advertised  St.  Cyprian 
thereof,  signifying,  "  That  they  must  of  necessity  defer  to  cypr. 
deal  in  that  cause  till  God  did  send  them  a  new  Bishop 
which  might  moderate  all  things."  Much  we  read  of  ex- 
traordinary Fasting  usually  in  the  Church;  and  in  this 
appeareth  also  somewhat  concerning  the  Chiefty  of  Bishops. 


authors  of  this  change,  in  the  government  of  the  Church,  was  Cyprian,  who  pleaded  for  the 
power  of  the  Bishops  with  more  zeal  and  vehemence  than  had  ever  heen  hitherto  employed 
in  that  cause,  though  not  with  an  unshaken  constancy  and  perseverance ;  for,  in  difficult  and 
perilous  times,  necessity  sometimes  obliged  him  to  yield,  and  to  submit  several  things  to  tite 
judgment  and  authonty  of  the  Church.  This  change  in  the  form  of  Ecclesiastical  government, 
was  soon  followed  by  a  train  of  vices,  which  dishonoured  the  character  and  authority  of  those 
to  whom  the  administration  of  the  Church  was  committed."  Mosheim,  EccL  Hist,  Cent.  iii. 
Part  II.  chap.  ii.  sect.  3,  4.] 

*  "  Against  a  Presbyter  receive  no  accusation  under  two  or  three  witnesses."   1  Tim.  v.  19. 

f  [And  no  man  in  his  senses  will  admit  Hooker's  Note  to  be  a  sufficient  proof  of  their 
exdusive  jurisdiction :  dvil  magistrates  always  act  with  double  caution  in  accusations  against 
a  brother  magistrate ;  it  does  not  follow  that  there  is  therefore  an  imparity  among  them. 
The  Chairman  of  a  bench  of  Justices  at  Quarter  Sessions  is  not  thereby  elevated  to  another 
Order  of  the  Magistracy.] 


120  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  6. 

^*  The  custom  is  (saith  Tertullian),  that  Bishops  do  appoint 

when  the  people  shall  all  fast."*    Yea,  it  is  not  a  matter  left 

to  our  own  free  choice,  whether  Bishops  shall  rule  or  no, 

Cypr.     but  "  the  will  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  is  (saith  Cyprian),  that 

***    '  every  act  of  the  Church  be  governed  by  her  Bishops."    An 

argument  it  is  of  the  Bishop*s  high  pre-eminence,  rule,  and 

government  over  all  the  rest  of  the  Clergy,  even  that  the 

sword  of  persecution  did  strike,  especially,  always  at  the 

Bishop  as  at  the  head ;  the  rest  by  reason  of  their  lower 

estate  being  more  secure,  as  the  self-same  Cyprian  noteth ; 

the  very  manner  of  whose  speech  unto  his  own  both  Deacons 

and   Presbyters  who   remained   safe,   when   himself,   then 

Bishop,  was  driven  into  exile,  argueth  likewise  his  eminent 

Cypr.     authority  and  rule  over  them :  **  By  these  letters  (saith  he)  I 

Vide  '  both  exhort  and  command,  that  ye  whose  presence  there  is 

Magnes.  not  cuvicd  at,  nor  so  much  beset  with  dangers,  supply  my 

room  in  doing  those  things  which  the  exercise  of  Religion 

doth  require."     Unto  the  same  purpose  serve  most  directly 

those  comparisons,  than  which  nothing  is  more  familiar  in 

the  books  of  the  ancient  Fathers,  who  as  oft  as  they  speak 

of  the  several  degrees  in  God's  Clergy,  if  they  chance  to 

compare  Presbyters  with  Levitical  Priests  of  the  Law,  the 

Bishop  they  compare  unto  Aaron  the  High-priest  ;t  if  they 

compare  the  one  with  the  Apostles,  the  other  they  compare 

(although  in  a  lower  proportion)  sometime  to  Christ,  and 

sometime  to  God  himself,  evermore  shewing  that  they  placed 

the  Bishop  in  an  eminent  degree  of  ruling  Authority  and 

Power  above  other  Presbyters. J  Ignatius,  comparing  Bishops 

with  Deacons,  and  with  such  Ministers  of  the  Word  and 

Sacraments  as  were  but  Presbyters,  and  had  no  authority 

lenat.     ovcr  Prcsbytcrs  ;  "  What  is  (saith  he)  the  Bishop,  but  one 

Tro.    *  which  hath  all  principality  and  power  over  all,  so  far  forth 

as  man  may  have  it,  being  to  his  power  a  follower  even  of 

God's  own  Christ  ?"     Mr.  Calvin  himself,  though  an  enemy 

unto  Regiment  by  Bishops,  doth  notwithstanding  confess, 

Jib.iv!    that  in  old  time§  ^'  the  Ministers  which  had  charge  to  teach, 

Set*  2.    chose  of  their  company  one  in  every  city,  to  whom  they 

•  "  Episcopi  universse  plebi  mandare  jejunia  assolent"     Tertul.  advers.  Psychic. 

t  "  Quod  Aaron  et  filios  ejus,  hoc  Episcopum  et  Presbyteros  esse  noverimus/'  Hier.  ad 
Nepotianum,  Ep.  2. 

X  **  Ita  est,  ut  in  Episcopis  Dominum,  in  Presbyteris  Apostolos  recognoscas."  Auctor 
opusc.  de  sept,  ordinib.     Eccl.  inter  opera  Hieron. 

§  [By  **  old  time"  Calvin  means  that  between  the  Apostolic  and  the  Papal.] 


SecL  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  121 

appropriated  the  title  of  Bishop,  lest  equality  should  breed 
dissension."  He  addeth  farther,  that  "  look  what  duty 
the  Roman  Consuls  did  execute  in  proposing  matters  unto 
the  Senate,  in  asking  their  opinions,  in  directing  them  by 
advice,  admonition,  exhortation,  in  guiding  actions  by  their 
Authority,  and  in  seeing  that  performed  which  was  with 
common  consent  agreed  on,  the  like  charge  had  the  Bishop 
in  the  assembly  of  other  Ministers."  Thus  much  Calvin 
being  forced  by  the  evidence  of  truth  to  grant,  doth  yet 
deny  "  the  Bishops  to  have  been  so  in  Authority  at  the 
first  as  to  bear  rule  over  other  Ministers :"  wherein  what 
rule  he  doth  mean,  I  know  not.*  But  if  the  Bishops  were 
so  far  in  dignity  above  other  Ministers  as  the  Consuls  of 
Rome  for  their  year  above  other  Senators,  it  is  as  much  as 
we  require.  And,  undoubtedly,  if  as  the  Consuls  of  Rome, 
so  the  Bishops  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  had  such  authority, 
as  both  to  direct  other  Ministers,  and  to  see  that  every 
of  them  should  observe  that  which  their  common  consent 
had  agreed  on,  how  this  could  be  done  by  the  Bishop 
not  bearing  rule  over  them,  for  mine  own  part  I  must 
acknowledge  that  my  poor  conceit  is  not  able  to  compre- 
hend. One  objection  there  is  of  some  force  to  make 
agunst  that  which  we  have  hitherto  endeavoured  to  prove, 
if  they  mistake  it  not  who  allege  it.  St.  Jerome,  comparing 
other  Presbyters  with  him  unto  whom  the  name  of  Bishop 
was  then  appropriate,  asketh,  "  What  a  Bishop,  by  virtue  of  Hieron. 
his  place  and  calling,  may  do  more  than  a  Presbyter,  except  Evang. 
it  be  only  to  ordain?"  In  like  sort,  Chrysostom  having 
moved  a  question,  wherefore  St.  Paul  should  give  Timothy 
precept  concerning  the  quality  of  Bishops,  and  descend 
from  them  to  Deacons,  omitting  the  order  of  Presbyters 
between,  he  maketh  thereunto  this  answer,  "  What  things  chrys. 
he  spake  concerning  Bishops,  the  same  are  also  meet  for  jn^  Tim! 
Presbyters,  whom  Bishops  seem  not  to  excel  in  any  thing  "*' 
but  only  in  the  Power  of  Ordination:"  wherefore,  seeing 
this  doth  import  no  ruling  Superiority,  it  follows  that 
Bishops  were  as  then  no  rulers  over  that  part  of  the  Clergy 
of  God.     Whereunto  we  answer,  that  both  St.  Jerome  and 

*  [*'  Every  city  had  a  company  of  Priests  which  were  Pastors  and  Teachers;  for  they  all 
did  execute  among  the  people  that  Office  of  teaching,  exhorting  sud  correcting,  which  Paul 

appointeth  to  the  Bishops,  Tit.  i.  9 Every  Company,  only  for  preservation  of  policy  and 

peace,  were  under  one  Bishop,  which  was  so  above  the  rest  in  dignity,  that  he  was  subject  to 
the  assembly  of  his  brethren."    Calv.  Intt,  lib.iv.  cap.  4.  sect.  2.  Norton's  TransL] 


122  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Skd.  6. 

St.  Chrysostom  had  in  those  their  speeches  an  eye  no 
farther  than  only  to  that  function  for  which  Presbyters 
and  Bishops  were  consecrated  unto  God.  Now  we  know 
that  their  consecration  had  reference  to  nothing  but  only 
that  which  they  did  by  force  and  virtue  of  the  Power  of 
Order,  wherein  sith  Bishops  received  theur  charge,  only 
by  that  one  degree,  to  speak  of,  more  ample  than  Pres- 
byters did  theirs,  it  might  be  well  enough  said  that  Pres- 
byters were  that  way  authorized  to  do,  in  a  manner,  ev^ 
as  much  as  Bishops  could  do,  if  we  consider  what  eadi 
of  them  did  by  virtue  of  solemn  consecration:  for  as  con- 
cerning Power  of  Regiment  and  Jurisdiction,  it  was  a  thing 
withal  added  unto  Bishops  for  the  necessary  use  of  such 
certain  persons  and  people  as  should  be  thereunto  subject 
in  those  particular  Churches  whereof  they  were  Bishops, 
and  belonged  to  them  only,  as  Bishops  of  such  or  such 
a  Church;  whereas  the  other  kind  of  Power  had  relation 
indefinitely  unto  any  of  the  whole  society  of  Christian  men, 
on  whom  they  should  chance  to  exercise  the  same,  and 
belonged  to  them  absolutely,  as  they  were  Bishops,  where- 
soever they  lived.  St.  Jerome's  conclusion  therefore  is, 
*'  That  seeing  in  the  one  kind  of  Power  there  is  no  greater 
difference  between  a  Presbyter  and  a  Bishop,  Bishops 
should  not,  because  of  their  pre-eminence  in  the  other,  too 
much  lift  up  themselves  above  the  Presbyters  under  them:" 
St.  Chrysostom's  collection,  "  That  whereas  the  Apostle 
doth  set  down  the  qualities  whereof  regard  should  be  had 
in  the  consecration  of  Bishops,  there  was  no  need  to  make 
a  several  discourse  how  Presbyters  ought  to  be  qualified 
when  they  are  ordained;  because  there  being  so  little 
difference  in  the  functions  whereunto  the  one  and  the  other 
receive  Ordination,  the  same  precepts  might  well  serve  fot 
both;  at  leastwise  by  the  virtues  required  in  the  greater, 
what  should  need  in  the  less  might  be  easily  understood. 
As  for  the  difference  of  Jurisdiction,  the  truth  is,  the 
Apostles  yet  living,  and  themselves,  where  they  were  resi- 
dent, exercising  the  Jurisdiction  in  their  own  persons,  it 
was  not  every  where  established  in  Bishops.**  When  the 
Apostles  prescribed  those  Laws,  and  when  Chrysostom  thus 
spake  concerning  them,  it  was  not  by  him  at  all  respected, 
but  his  eye  was  the  same  way  with  Jerome's ;  his  cogitation 
was  wholly  fixed  on  that  Power  which  by  Consecration  is 


Sect.  6.]  OP   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  123 

given  to  Bishops  more  than  to  Presbjrters,  and  not  on  that 
which  they  have  over  Presbyters  by  force  of  their  particular 
accessory  Jurisdiction.  Wherein  if  any  man  suppose  that 
Jerome  and  Chrysostom  knew  no  difference  at  all  between 
a  Presbyter  and  a  Bishop,  let  him  weigh  but  one  or  two  of 
their  sentences.  The  pride  of  insolent  Bishops  hath  not  a 
sharper  enemy  than  Jerome,  for  which  cause  he  taketh 
often  occasions  most  severely  to  inveigh  against  them, 
sometimes  for  shewing  disdain  and  contempt  of  the  Clergy 
under  them;*  sometime  for  not  suffering  themselves  to 
be  told  of  their  faults,  and  admonished  of  their  duty  by 
mferiors;t  sometime  for  not  admitting  their  Presbyters  to 
teach^  if  so  be  themselves  were  in  presence ;  sometimes  for 
not  vouchsafing  to  use  any  conference  with  them,  or  to  take 
any  counsel  of  them.;};  Howbeit,  never  doth  he,  in  such 
wise,  bend  himself  against  their  disorders  as  to  deny  their 
role  and  authority  over  Presbyters.  Of  Vigilantius,  being 
a  Presbyter,  he  thus  writeth,  '^  Miror  sanctum  Episcopum,  Ep.  54. 
in  cujus  Parochia  Presbyter  esse  dicitur,  acquiescere  furori  Ripar. 
ejus,  et  non  virga  Apostolica  virgaque  ferrea  confringere 
vas  inutile:  I  marvel  that  the  holy  Bishop,  under  whom 
Vigilantius  is  said  to  be  a  Presbyter,  doth  yield  to  his  fury, 
and  not  break  that  unprofitable  vessel  with  his  ApostoUc 
and  iron  rod."  With  this  agreeth  most  fitly  the  grave 
advice  he  giveth  to  Nepotian;  ^*  Be  thou  subject  unto  thy  Hier.  mi 
Bishop,  and  receive  him  as  the  Father  of  thy  soul.  This  ^*^^' 
abo  I  say,  that  Bishops  should  know  themselves  to  be 
Priests,  and  not  Lords  ;§  that  they  ought  to  honour  the 
Clergy  as  beseemeth  the  Clergy  to  be  honoured,  to  the  end 
dieir  Clergy  may  yield  them  the  honour  which,  as  Bishops, 
they  ought  to  have."  That  of  the  Orator  Domitius  is 
fiunaos;  **  Wherefore  should  I  esteem  of  thee  as  of  a  Prince, 
when  thou  makest  not  of  me  that  reckoning  which  should 
in  reason  be  made  of  a  Senator?     Let  us  know  the  Bishop 

•  "  Velut  in  aliqua  subHmi  specula  constituti^  vix  dignantur  videre  mortales  et  alloqm 
conservos  suos.**     In  c.  4.  Epist  ad  Gal. 

f  ''Nemo  peccantibos  Episcopis  audet  contradicere;  nemo  audet  accusare  majorem; 
propterea  quasi  sancti  et  beat!  et  in  prseceptis  Domini  ambulantes  augent  peccata  peccatis. 
IMffidHs  est  accusado  in  Episcopum.  Si  enim  peccaveriti  non  creditur;  et  si  convietiM 
foerit,  non  punitur."     In  cap.  8.  Ecclesiast. 

X  "  Pessimse  consuetudinis  est,  in  quibusdam  Ecclesiis  tacere  Presbyteros  et  prassentibus 
Episcojna  non  loqui ;  quasi  aut  Invideant  aut  non  dignentur  audire.**    Ep.  2.  ad  Nepotian. 

§  No  Bishop  may  be  a  Lord  in  reference  unto  the  Presbyters  which  are  under  him,  if  we 
take  that  name  in  the  worse  part,  as  Jerome  here  doth.  For  a  Bishop  is  to  rule  his 
Ynshyten,  not  as  Lords  do  their  slaves,  but  as  Fathers  do  their  children. 


124  THE   SEVENTH    BOOK  [Sed.Q. 

and  his  Presbyters  to  be  the  same  which  Aaron  sometime 
and  his  sons  were."  Finally,  writing  against  the  Heretics 
which  were  named  Luciferians,  "  The  very  safety  of  the 
Church  (saith  he)  dependeth  on  the  dignity  of  the  Chief- 
Priest,  to  whom  unless  men  grant  an  exceeding  and  an 
eminent  power,  there  will  grow  in  Churches  even  as  many 
Schisms  as  there  are  persons  which  have  authority."* 

Touching  Chrysostom,  to  shew  that  by  him  there  was 

also  acknowledged   a   ruling  Superiority  of  Bishops  over 

Presbyters,  both  then  usual,  and  in  no  respect  unlawful, 

what  need  we  allege  his  words  and  sentences,  when  the 

history  of  his  own  Episcopal  actions  in  that  very  kind  is 

till  this  day  extant  for  all  men  to   read  that  will?     For 

la  Vita  St.  Chrysostom,  of  a  Presbyter  in  Antioch,  grew  to  be  after- 

per^**    wards  Bishop  of  Constantinople  ;t  and,  in  process  of  time. 

Sen!    '  when  the  Emperor's  heavy  displeasure  had,  through  the 

practice   of  a  powerful  faction   against  him,   effected  his 

banishment.  Innocent  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  understanding 

thereof,  wrote  his  letters  unto  the  Clergy  of  that  Churchi 

"  That  no  successor  ought  to  be  chosen  in  Chrysostom's 

room ;  nee  efus  Clerum  alii  parere  Pontijici,  nor  his  Clergy 

obey  any  other  Bishop  than  him."     A  fond  kind  of  speech, 

if  so  be  there  had   been,   as  then,   in  Bishops  no  ruling 

Superiority  over  Presbyters.     When  two  of  Chrysostom's 

Presbyters  had   joined   themselves   to   the   faction  of   bis 

mortal  enemy   Theophilus,    Patriarch   in    the   Church    of 

Alexandria,  the  same  Theophilus  and  other  Bishops  which 

were  of  his  conventicle,   having   sent  those  two  amongst 

others  to  cite  Chrysostom  their  lawful  Bishop,  and  to  bring 

" — ■ r  ■ ' 

*  [It  is  proper  for  the  Reader  to  be  reminded  of  the  true  character  of  Jerome,  thaa 
whom,  Hooker  has  just  said,  "  The  pride  of  insolent  Bishops  hath  not  a  sharper  enemy." 
MosHEiM,  Eccl.  Hist.  Cent.  iv.  Part  II.  chap.  ii.  sect.  10,  writes  thus,  "  His  complexion  wu 
exceedingly  warm  and  choleric ;  his  bitterness  against  those  who  differed  from  him,  extremely 
keen ;  and  his  thirst  of  glory  insatiable.  He  was  so  prone  to  censure,  that  several  persons, 
whose  lives  were  not  only  irreproachable,  but  even  exemplary,  became  the  objects  of  his  unjust 
accusations.  All  this,  joined  to  his  superstitious  turn  of  mind,  and  the  enthusiastic  encomiunu 
which  he  lavished  upon  a  false  and  degenerate  sort  of  piety  which  prevailed  in  his  time, 
sunk  his  reputation  greatly,  and  that  even  in  the  esteem  of  the  candid  and  the  wise."  This 
is  one  of  those  pseudo-successors  of  the  Apostles,  on  whose  authority  we  are  required  by  the 
Church  of  Rome  to  receive  tainted  transfused  Doctrines  of  Faith;  and  agreed  with  by 
another  Church,  to  require  our  submission  to  and  our  approbation  of  the  transmitted  kindb 
and  powers  of  those  offices  for  which  the  Holy  Spirit  formerly  qualified  such  as  were 
appointed  to  them ;  Acts  vi.  3.] 

f  [MosHEiM,  in  a  Note  on  Chrysostom,  has  introduced  a  refined  sarcasm,  which  "  they 
may  feel  who  deserve  it  most:"  "  He  was  Preacher  at  Antioch  (a  function,  indeed,  which 
before  him  was  always  attached  to  the  episcopal  dignity),  and  afterwards  Patriarch  of 
Constantinople."     Eccl.  Hist.  Cent.iv.  Part  II.  chap.ii.  sect.  9.] 


Sect.  7.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  125 

him  into  public  judgment,  he  taketh  against  this  one  thing 
special  exception,  as  bein^  contrary  to  all  order,  That  Paiiad. 
those  Presbyters  should  come  as  Messengers,  and  call  him  Chrys. 
to  judgment,  who  were  a  part  of  that  Clergy  whereof  him- 
self was  Ruler  and  Judge.  So  that  Bishops  to  have  had  in 
those  times  a  ruling  Superiority  over  Presbyters,  neither 
could  Jerome  nor  Chrysostom  be  ignorant;  and  therefore, 
hereupon  it  were  superfluous  that  we  should  any  longer 
stand. 

7.    Touching   the  next  point.   How   Bishops,   together  After 
with  Presbyters,  have  used  to  govern  the  Churches  which  wrt 
were  under  them :  it  is  by  Zonaras  somewhat  plainly  and  togethS' 
at  large  declared.  That  the  Bishop  had  his  seat  on  high  in  Presby. 
the  Church  above   the  residue  which  were  present ;   that  hm 
a  number  of  Presbyters  did  always  there  assist  him ;  and  govern 
that  in  the  oversight  of  the  people  those  Presbyters  were  chnrches 
after  a  sort  the  Bishop's  coadjutors.*     The  Bishops,  and  Z^e^ 
Presbyters  who  together  with  him  governed  the  Church,  ^^^"^ 
are  for  the  most  part  by  Ignatius  jointly  mentioned.     In  the 
Epistle  to  them  of  Trallis,  he  saith  of  Presbyters,  that  they 
are   Sv/ij3oi;Xoi  koX  ^wtZpivToX  tov  ^^irifTKoirov,    **  Counsellors 
and  Assistants  of  the  Bishop ;"  and  concludeth  in  the  end, 
**  He  that  should  disobey  these  were  a  plain  Atheist,  and 
an  irreligious  person,  and  one  that  did  set  Christ  himself 
and  his  own  Ordinances  at  nought."     Which  Order  making 
Presbyters   or   Priests   the   Bishop's  Assistants,   doth   not 
import   that  they  were  of  equal  authority  with   him,   but 
radier  so  adjoined,  that  they  also  were   subject,   as  hath 
been  proved.     In  the  writings  of  St.  Cyprian   nothing   is 
more  usual,  than  to  make  mention  of  the  College  of  Pres- 
byters subject  unto  the  Bishop;  although  in  handling  the 
common  affairs  of  the  Church  they  assisted  him.f     But  of 
all  other  places  which  open  the  ancient  Order  of  Episcopal 
Presbyters,  the  most  clear  is  that  Epistle  of  Cyprian  unto 
Comelius,:|:  concerning  certain  Novatian  Heretics,  received 
again,  upon  their  conversion,  into  the  unity  of  the  Church. 
"  After  that  Urbanus  and  Sidonius,  Confessors,  had  come  [inCypr. 
and  signified  unto  our  Presbyters,  that  Maximus,  a  Con-    ^ 
fessor  and  Presbyter,  did,  together  with  them,  desire  to 

•  "CUnrtp  a^fivovoi  Sodevres  r^  *EviaK6v(p.     Zon.  in  can.  Apost.  53. 
f  *<  Cum   Episcopo   Presbyteri   Sacerdotal!  honore  conjuncti."    £p.  28.  **  Ego    et 

Compresbyteri  nostri  qui  nobis  adsidebant."     Ep.  27. 
X  [It  shoold  be  "  Cornelius  unto  Cyprian."] 


126  THE  SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  7. 

return  into  the  Church,  it  seemed  meet  to  hear  from  their 
own  mouths  and  confessions  that  which  by  message  they 
had  delivered.     When  they  were  come,  and  had  been  called 
to  accompt  by  the  Presbyters  touching  those  things  they 
had  committed,   their  answer  was,   That  they  had   been 
deceived;  and  did  request,  that  such  things  as  there  they 
were  charged  with  might  be  forgotten.     It  being  brought 
unto  me  what  was  done,  I  took  order  that  the  Presbytery 
might  be  assembled.     There  were  also  present  five  Bishops, 
that,  upon  settled  advice,  it  might  be  with  consent  of  all 
determined  what    should  ^be  done  about  their  persons*** 
Thus  far  St.  Cyprian.*    Wherein  it  may  be,  peradventure, 
demanded.  Whether  he  and  other  Bishops  did  thus  proceed 
with  advice  of  their  Presbyters  in  all  such  public  affairs 
of  the  Church,  as  being  thereunto  bound  by  Ecclesiastical 
Canons ;  or  else  that  they  voluntarily  so  did,  because  they 
judged  it  in  discretion  as  then  most  convenient.     Surely 
the  words  of  Cyprian  are  plain,  that  of  his  own  accord  he 
Cypr.     chose  this  way  of  proceeding.     "  Unto  that  (saith  he)  which 
^*       Donatus,  and  Fortunatus,  and  Novatus,  and  Gordius,  our 
Com-presbyters,  have  written,  I  could  by  myself  alone  make 
no  answer,  forasmuch  as  at  the  very  first  entering  into  my 
Bishoprick  I  resolutely  determined  not  to  do  any  thing  of 
mine  own  private  judgment,  without  your  counsel,  and  the 
people's  consent."    The  reason  whereof  he  rendereth  in  the 
same  Epistle,  saying,  "  When  by  the  grace  of  God  myself 
shall  come  unto  you"  (for  St.  Cyprian  was  now  in  exile),  "  of 
things  which  either  have  been  or  must  be  done  we  wiU 
consider,  sicut  honor  mutuus  poscit,  as  the  law  of  courtesy 
which  one  doth  owe  to  another  of  us  requireth."  And  to  this 
very  mark  doth  St.  Jerome  evermore  aim,  in  telling  Bishops, 
that  Presbyters  were  at  the  first  their  equals ;  that,  in  some 
Churches,  for  a  long  time  no  Bishop  was  made,  but  only 
such  as  the  Presbyters  did  choose  out  amongst  themselves, 
and  therefore  no  cause  why  the  Bishop  should  disdain  to 
consult  with  them,  and  in  weighty  affairs  of  the  Church 
to  use  their  advice;   sometime  to  countenance   their  own 
actions,  or  to  repress  the  boldness  of  proud  and  insolent 
spirits,   that   which   Bishops   had  in  themselves   sufficient 
Authority  and  Power  to  have  done,  notwithstanding  they 

*  [See  Note}  p.  135.] 


Sect.  7.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  127 

would  not  do  alone,  but  craved  therein  the  aid  and  assist- 
ance of  other  Bishops,  as  in  the  case  of  those  Novatian 
Heretics,  before  alleged,  Cyprian  himself  did.     And  in 
Cyprian  we  find  of  others  the  like  practice.     Rogatian,  a  cypr. 
Bishop,  having  been  used  contumeliously  by  a  Deacon  of  ^**'  ^ 
his  own  Church,  wrote  thereof  his  complaint  unto  Cyprian 
and  other  Bishops.     In  which  case  their  answer  was,  ''  That 
although  in  his  own  cause  he  did  of  humility  rather  shew 
hia  grievance,  than  himself  take  revenge,  which  by  the 
rigour  of  his  Apostolical  Office,  and  the  Authority  of  his 
Cbaur,  he  might  have  presently  done,  without  any  farther 
delay ;  yet  if  the  party  should  do  again  as  before,  their 
judgments  were  *^  fungaris  circa  eum  po testate  honoris  tui, 
et  eum  vel  deponas  vel  abstineas ;  Use  on  him  that  power 
which  the  honour  of  thy  place  giveth  thee,  either  to  depose 
him,  or  exclude  him  from  access  unto  holy  things."    The 
Biahop,  for  his  assistance  and  ease,  had  under  him,  to  guide 
and  direct  Deacons  in  their  charge,  his  Archdeacon:  so 
termed  in  respect  of  care  over  Deacons,  albeit  himself  were 
not  Deacon,  but  Presbyter.     For  the  guidance  of  Pres- 
byters in  their  function,  the  Bishop  had  likewise  under 
Idm  one  of  the  self- same   Order  with  them,   but  above 
them  in  authority,  one  whom  the  ancient  termed  usually 
an  Arch-presbyter,''^  we  at  this  day  name  him  Dean,  t 
For,  most  certain  truth  it  is,  that  Churches  Cathedral,  and 


^  Such  a  one  was  that  Peter  whom  Casdodore,  writing  the  Life  of  Chrysostom,  doth 
can  the  Archpresbyter  of  the  Church  of  Alexandria,  under  Theophilus,  at  that  time 
Bkhcm. 

f  [How  the  Ecclesiastical  Regiment  (as  Hooker  elsewhere  calls  it)  works,  in  the  Nine- 
teenth Century,  with  all  its  parade  of  Officers  superinduced  on  the  Scripturally  constituted 
Cfmrch-officers,  (See  Bk.  V.  Sect  76,  p.  394,)  is  exhibited,  on  authority  that  will  not  be  ques- 
tioBcdy  in  the  following  extracts.      *'  In  the  lapse  of  time  the  Office  of  Dean  has  been 
•bofithed,  although  the  name  of  his  Jurisdiction,  as  au  Ecclesiastical  DiTision,  is  retained .... 
Hid  tint  Office  of  Rural-Dean  existed  in  plenitude  of  power  and  activity,  it  is  not  conceivable 
diat  the  Church  would  have  experienced  that  neglect  in  Parochial  duty,  which  has  too  fire- 
qiiendy  occurred.     The  instances  to  which  I  advert  are,  a  total  omission  of  Divine  Service, 
tomcdmes  for  several  successive  Sundays,  occasionally,  subject  to  no  authoritative  inspectioii 
or  oootroulyhut  occurring  at  the  discretion  of  the  Officiating  Minister  with  perfect  impunity ;  a 
partial  omission,  where  the  duty  is  performed  only  every  other  Sunday,  or  less  frequently. 
In  direct  opposition  to  the  Canons,  which  ordain  its  regular  performance  every  Sunday ;  a 
mrftfo/  omission,  where  the  Minister  undertakes  so  many  Cures  as  to  render  it  impossible  for 
Um  to  attend  at  a  time  convenient  for  the  Parishioners.     This  overcharge  of  duty  induces 
the  necessity,  so  unfavourable  to  devotion,  of  rapidly  hurrying  through  a  very  impressive 
Service ;   and!,  with  not  inferior  speed,  reading  the  Sermon.      The  natural  consequence 
IbUowa :  it  fiiils  in  communicating  the  purposed  instruction,  and  producing  any  of  those 
deniable  effects  which  correspond  with  the  place  and  the  object  of  Worship !"     The  present 
Skate  of  ike  Estahtuhed  Church ;  poioHng  out  certain  operating  eaueet  of  SepartOien,  and 
their  Rewmdff,    By  the  Rev.  J.  L*OsTE,  LL.B.  Rector  of  Hayneford,  NorfellL.  1812,  Svo. 
p.  10.] 


128  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [SecL  8. 

the  Bishops  of  them,  are  as  glasses,  wherein  the  face  and 
very  countenance  of  Apostolical  antiquity  remaineth  even  as 
yet  to  be  seen,  notwithstanding  the  alterations  which  tract 
of  time  and  the  course  of  the  world  hath  brought.  For 
defence  and  maintenance  of  them  we  are  most  earnestly 
bound  to  strive,  even  as  the  Jews  were  for  their  Temple 
and  the  High-priest  of  God  therein:  the  overthrow  and 
ruin  of  the  one,  if  ever  the  sacrilegious  avarice  of  Atheists 
should  prevail  so  far,  which  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  forbid, 
ought  no  otherwise  to  move  us  than  the  people  of  God  were 
moved,  when  having  beheld  the  sack  and  combustion  of  his 
Sanctuary,  in  most  lamentable  manner  flaming  before  their 
eyes,  they  uttered  from  the  bottom  of  their  grieved  spirits, 
Psai.  those  voices  of  doleful  supplication,  **  Exurge,  Domine,  et 
13,' 14.     miserearis  Sion;  Servi  tui  diligunt  lapides  ejus,  pulveris  ejus 

miseret  eos.". 
Howter  8.  How  far  the  Power  which  Bishops  had  did  reach, 
Powerof  what  number  of  persons  was  subject  unto  them  at  the 
hath**"*"  first,  and  how  large  their  territories  were,  it  is  not  for  the 
from  the  question  we  have  in  hand  a  thing  very  greatly  material  to 
ntS^in  know.  For  if  we  prove  that  Bishops  have  lawfully*  of  old 
STerrl  ^^^^^  ^^^^  Other  Miuistcrs,  it  is  enough,  how  few  soever 
tory.  or  thosc  Ministers  have  been,  how  small  soever  the  circuit  of 

local 

compass,  place  which  hath  contained  them.  Yet  hereof  somewhat, 
to  the  end  we  may  so  far  forth  illustrate  Church-antiquities. 
A  Law  Imperial  there  is,  which  sheweth  that  there  was 
great  care  had  to  provide  for  every  Christian  city  a  Bishop, 
as  near  as  might  be,f  and  that  each  city  had  some  territory 
belonging  unto  it,  which  territory  was  also  under  the  Bishop 
of  the  same  city ;  that  because  it  was  not  universally  thus, 
but  in  some  countries  one  Bishop  had  subject  unto  him 
many  cities  and  their  territories,  the  Law  which  provided 
for  establishment  of  the  other  Orders,  should  not  prejudice 
those  Churches  wherein  this  contrary  custom  had  before 
prevailed.  Unto  the  Bishop  of  every  such  city, 'not  only 
the  Presbyters  of  the  same  city,  but  also  of  the  territory 

^ __ — __ — _ 

•  [See  Note  *  p.  97.] 

t  'EKdcrrr)  v6\is  tS/ov  *E'iria'KOTrou  ix^^'  'c^i  '^^v  Sik  Betas  &vriyQu<}>ri5  roKfi-fiffrj  rts  iup«- 
\iadtu  'ir6Kiv  rod  iZiov  ^EirtCKSvov  ^  rrjs  vepioiKidos  avrrjs  ri  rivhs  &K\ov  SiKoioVf  yvfi¥Ovrai 
rav  6vTay  kou  ariiMovrat.  'E^^grfTou  Sh  rf  Tofiewv  ^Kvdias  v6Kis.  'O  ydp  *Evla'Koiros  abrfis 
KoX  T«v  Koiiray  iroovou,  Kal  ^  \eovrhro\i5  *l(ruvpias  vjrh  rhy  *E'iri<TK0'jr6y  iarly  'Itravpo- 
w6K9»s,  L.  zxxvL  can.  de  Epis.  ad  Cler.  Besides,  Cypr.  Ep.  52.  "  Cum  jampridem  per 
omnes  provincias  et  per  urbes  singulas  ordinarii  sunt  Episcopi." 


Sect.  8.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  129 

thereunto  belonging,  were  from  the  first  beginning  subject. 
For  we  must  note,  that  when  as  yet  there  were  in  cities 
no  Parish  Churches,  but  only  Colleges  of  Presbyters  under 
their   Bishop's  Regiment,   yet  smaller  Congregations   and 
Churches  there  were  even  then  abroad,  in  which  Churches 
there  was  but  some  one  only  Presbyter  to  perform  amongst 
them  divine  duties.''^    Towns  and  villages  abroad  receiving 
the  Faith  of  Christ  from  cities  whereunto  they  were  adjacent, 
did  as  spiritual  and  heavenly  colonies,  by  their  subjection, 
honour  those  ancient  Mother-churches  out  of  which  they 
grew.     And  in  the  Christian  cities  themselves,  when  the 
mighty  increase  of  believers  made  it  necessary  to  have  them 
divided  into  certain  several  companies,  and  over  every  of 
those  companies  one  only  Pastor  to  be  appointed  for  the 
ministry  of  holy  things ;  between  the  first,  and  the  rest  after 
it,  there  could  not  be  but  a  natural  inequality,  even  as  be- 
tween the  Temple  and  Synagogues  in  Jerusalem.      The 
Clergy  of  cities  were  termed   Urbid,  to  shew  a  difference  cypr. 
between  them  and  the  Clergies  of  the  towns,  of  villages,  of  **' 
castles  abroad.     And  how  many  soever  these  Parishes  or 
Congregations  were  in  number,  which  did  depend  on  any  one 
principal  City-church,  unto  the  Bishop  of  that  one  Church 
they  and  their  several  sole  Presbyters  were  all  subject. 

For  if  so  be,  as  some  imagine,  every  petty  congregation  or 
hamlet  had  had  his  \its]  own  particular  Bishop,  what  sense 
could  there  be  in  those  words  of  Jerome  concerning  castles,  uieron. 
viUages,  and  other  places  abroad,  which  having  only  Presby-  lilSJk 
ters  to  teach  them,  and  to  minister  unto  them  the  Sacraments, 
were  resorted  unto  by  Bishops  for  the  administration  of  that 
wherewith  their  Presbyters  were  not  licensed  to  meddle. 
To  note  a  difference  of  that  one  Church  where  the  Bishop 
hath  his  seat,  and  the  re^t  which  depend  upon  it,  that  one 
hath  usually  been  termed  Cathedral,  according  to  the  same 
sense  wherein  Ignatius,  speaking  of  the  Church  of  Antioch, 
termeth  it  his  Throne;   and  Cyprian,  making  mention  ofcypr. 
Evaristus,  who  had  been  Bishop  and   was  now  deposed,    *** 
termeth  him  Ctdhedrce  extorremy  one  that  was  thrust  besides 

*  "  Ubi  Ecclesiastici  ordinis  non  est  consessiis,  et  offert  et  tingit  Sacerdos  qui  est  ibi  solus." 
TertuH.  exhort,  ad  castit.  ["  This  expression  is  quite  different  in  all  the  best  manuscripts, 
and  most  correct  editions ;  "Ubi  Ecclesiastici  ordinis  non  est  concessus,  et  offers,  et  tinguis,  et 
Sacerdos  es  tibi  solus."  Cap.  7.  Camfbbll's  LecU  on  EccL  Hist.  Edit.  1815.  Svo.  vol.i. 
LecCTii.  p.  236.  After  "  solus"  follow,  in  Tertullian,  the  words,  **  Sed  ubi  tres,  eodesia  est, 
licet  laid."] 

VOL.  III.  K 


130  TH£   SSYENTH  BOOK  [Seci.8* 

his  Chair.  The  Chi;nrch  where  the  Bishop  is  set  with  his 
College  of  Presbyters  about  hitn  we  call  a  See ;  the  local 
compass  of  his  authority  we  term  a  Diocess.  Unto  a  Bishop 
within  the  compass  of  his  own  both  See  and  Diocess,  it  hath  by 
right  of  his  place  evermore  appertained  to  ordain  Presbyters, 
to  make  Deacons,  and  with  judgment  to  dispose  of  all  things 
of  weight.*  The  Apostle  St.  Paul  had  Episcopal  Autho- 
rity, but  so  at  large,  that  we  cannot  assign  unto  him  any  one 
certain  Diocess.  Hisf  positive  Orders  and  Constitutions 
2<;or.  Churches  every  where  did  obey.  Yea,  ^'  a  charge  and  a 
**'  '  care  (saith  he)  I  have  even  of  all  the  Churches.''^  The 
walks  of  Titus  and  Timothy  were  lioated  within  the  bounds 
of  a  narrow  precinct:  as  for  other  Bishopis,  that  whidb 
Chrysostoiln  hath  concerning  them,  if  they  be  evil,  could  UO(t 
possibly  agree  unto  them,  unless  their  Authority  had  jreacbed 
€hTy«.  farther  than  to  some  one  only  Congregation :  *^  The  danger 
m  being  so  great,  as  it  is,  to  him  that  scandalizeth  one  soul, 
what  shall  he  (saith  Chrysostom,  speaking  of  a  Bishop),  what 
shall  he  deserve,  by  whom  so  many  souls,  yea,  even  whole 
cities  and  peoples,  men,  women,  and  children,  citisens, 
peasants,  inhabitants,  both  of  his  own  city,  and  of  other 
towns  subject  unto  it,  ure  olBS^nded?"  A  diing  to  unusuid 
it  was  for  a  Bishop  not  to  have  ample  Jurisdictioa,  that 
Theophihis,  Patriarch  of  Alexandria,  for  making  one  a 
Bishop  of  a  small  town,  is  noted  as  a  proud  despiser  of  the 
commendable  Orders  of  the  Church  with  this  censure, 
p«u«<i.  *^  Such  novelties  Theophilus  presumed  every  where  to 
chryk  begin,  taking  upon  him,  as  it  had  been  another  Moses." 
Whereby  is  discovered  also  their  error,  who  think,  that 
such  as  in  Ecclesiastical  writings  they  find  termed  C^are- 
piscopoSf  were  the  same  in  the  country  which  the  Bishop 
was  in  the  city :  whereas  the  old  Chorepiscopi  are  they  that 
were  appointed  of  the  Bishops  to  have,  as  his  Vicegerents^ 
some  oversight  of  those  Churches  abroad,  which  were  sub- 
ject unto  his  See ;  in  which  Churches  they  had  also  power 
to  make  Sub*deacons,  Readers,  and  such  like  petty  Cburch- 
ofBcers.     With  which  power  so  stinted,  they  not  contenting 

*  Cone  Antioch.  can.  9.  'AjcX^oi/s  $^  'ETMricoiroi/s  tnclp  Aioimiiyiu  firi  irtfialp€Uf,  •Mi 
X^ipvrwi^  ii  Tio-iv  &AA.(us  obcovofiifus  iHK\ri<nturruuus»  Cone.  Const  can.  2.  Tovro  yip 
wpir^pov  8ia  rohs  BiuyfMhs  iyiyero  iiiuup6po»s,     Socr.  lib.  v.  cap.  8. 

f  "  As  I  baTe  ordained  in  the  Churches  of  Oalatia,  the  same  do  ye  also."     1  Cor.  zvi.  1. 

X  [He  had  but  a  conjoint  care  of  **  all ;"  and  an  Apostolic  care  of  all  those  ChurchM  which 
he  was  instrumental  in  planting.] 


Sect.  8.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  131 

tbemselves,  but  adventuring  at  the  length  to  ordain  even 
Deacons  and  Presbyters  also,  as  the  Bishop  himself  did, 
their  presumption  herein  was  controlled  and  stayed  by  the 
aTicient  edict  of  Councils.  For  example,  that  of  Antioch,  Condi. 
*^  It  hath  seemed  good  to  the  holy  Synod,  that  such  in  towns  can.  lo.' 
and  countries  as  are  called  Chorepiscopi  do  know  their 
lixBits,  and  govern  the  Churches  under  them,  contenting 
themselves  with  the  charge  thereof,  and  with  authority  to 
make  Readers,  Sub-deacons,  Exorcists,  and  to  be  leaders 
or  guiders  of  them  ;  but  not  to  meddle  with  the  Ordination 
either  of  a  Presbyter  or  of  a  Deacon,  without  the  Bishop 
of  that  city,  whereunto  the  Chorepiscopus  and  his  territory 
also  is  subject."  The  same  Synod  appointeth  likewise  that 
those  Chorepiscopi  shall  be  made  by  none  but  the  Bishop 
of  that  city  under  which  they  are.  Much  might  hereunto 
be  added,  if  it  were  further  needful  to  prove,  that  the  local 
compass  of  a  Bishop's  Authority  and  Power  was  never  so 
straitly  listed,  as  some  men  would  have  the  world  to  imagine. 
But  to  go  forward;  degrees  there  are,  and  have  been  of 
old,  even  amongst  Bishops  also  themselves;  one  sort  o£ 
Bishops  being  superiors  unto  Presbyters  only,  another 
tort  having  pre-eminence  also  above  Bishops.  It  cometh 
here  to  be  considered  in  what  respect  inequality  of  Bishops 
was  thought  at  the  first  a  thing  expedient  for  the  Church, 
and  what  odds  there  hath  been  between  them,  by  how 
mmdi  the  Power  of  one  hath  been  larger,  higher,  and 
greater  than  of  another.  Touching  the  causes  for  which 
it  hath  been  esteemed  meet  that  Bishops  themselves  should 
not  every  way  be  equals ;  they  are  the  same  for  which 
the  wisdom  both  of  God  and  man  hath  evermore  approved 
it  MB  most  requisite  that  where  autfiy  governors  must  of 
necessity  Aoncmr,  for  the  ordering  of  the  $ame  affairs,  of 
what  BBture  soever  they  be,  one  should  have  some  kind 
of  sway  or  stroke  more  than  all  the  residue.  For  where 
number  is  there  must  be  order,  or  else  of  force  there  will 
be  confusion.  Let  there  be  divers  agents,  of  whom  each 
hath  his  private  inducements  with  resolute  purpose  to 
follow  them  (as  each  may  have),  unless  in  this  case  some 
had  pne-eaiinence  above  the  rest,  a  chance  it  were,  if  ever 
any  thing  shouJUl  be  either  beguji,  proceeded  in,  or  brought 
unto  any  conclusion  by  them;  deliberations  and  councils 
would  seldom  go  forward,  their  meetings  would  always  be 

K  2 


132  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [SecL  S. 

m  danger  to  break  up  with  jars  and  contradictions.  In  an 
Army^  a  number  of  Captains^  all  of  equal  power,  without 
some  higher  to  oversway  them ;  what  good  would  they  do  ?  In 
all  nations  where  a  number  are  to  draw  any  one  way,  there 
must  be  some  one  principal  mover.  Let  the  practice  of  our 
very  adversaries  themselves  herein  be  considered ;  are  the 
Presbyteries  able  to  determine  of  Church-afFairs,  unless 
their  Pastors  do  strike  the  chiefest  stroke,  and  have  power 
above  the  rest?  Can  their  pastoral  Synod  do  anything, 
unless  they  have  some  President  amongst  them  ?  In  Synods, 
they  are  forced  to  give  one  Pastor  pre-eminence  and  supe- 
riority above  the  rest.  But  they  answer.  That  he,  who  being 
a  Pastor  according  to  the  order  of  their  Discipline  is  for  the 
time  some  little  deal  mightier  than  his  brethren,  doth  not  con- 
tinue so  longer  than  only  during  the  Synod.  Which  answer 
serveth  not  to  help  them  out  of  the  briers ;  for,  by  their 
practice  they  confirm  our  principle,  touching  the  necessity 
of  one  man's  pre-eminence  wheresoever  a  concurrency  of 
many  is  required  unto  any  one  solemn  action :  this,  Nature 
teacheth,  and  this  they  cannot  choose  but  acknowledge. 
As  for,  the  change  of  his  person  to  whom  they  give  this 
pre-eminence,  if  they  think  it  expedient  to  make  for  every 
Synod  a  new  superior,  there  is  no  Law  of  God  which 
bindeth  them  so  to  [do]  ;  neither  any  that  telle th  them, 
that  they  might  suffer  one  and  the  same  man  being  made 
President,  even  to  continue  so  during  life,  and  to  leave 
his  pre-eminence  unto  his  successors  after  him,  as,  by 
the  ancient  order  of  the  Church,  Archbishops,  Presidents 
amongst  Bishops,  have  used  to  do.  The  ground  therefore 
of  their  pre-eminence  above  Bishops,  is  the  necessity  of 
often  concurrency  of  many  Bishops  about  the  public  afiairs 
of  the  Church :  as,  consecrations  of  Bishops,  consultations 
of  remedy  of  general  disorders,  audience  judicial,  when 
the  actions  of  any  Bishop  should  be  called  in  question, 
or  appeals  are  made  from  his  sentence  by  such  as  think 
themselves  wronged.  These,  and  the  hke  affairs,  usually 
requiring  that  many  Bishops  should  orderly  assemble, 
begin,  and  conclude  somewhat;  it  hath  seemed,  in  the 
eyes  of  reverend  antiquity,  a  thing  most  requisite,  that  the 
Church  should  not  only  have  Bishops,  but  even  amongst 
Bishops  some  to  be  in  Authority  chiefest.  Unto  which 
purpose  the  very  state  of  the  whole  world,  immediately 


Sect.  8*]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  133 

before  Christianity  took  place^  doth  seem  by  the  special 
providence  of  God  to  have  been  prepared.  For  we  must 
know,  that  the  countries  where  the  Gospel  was  first  planted^ 
were  for  the  most  part  subject  to  the  Roman  empire.  The 
Romans'  use  was  commonly,  when  by  war  they  had  subdued 
foreign  nations,  to  make  them  Provinces,  that  is,  to  place 
over  them  Roman  Governors,  such  as  might  order  them 
according  to  the  Laws  and  Customs  of  Rome.  And,  to 
the  end  that  all  things  might  be  the  more  easily  and  orderly 
done^  a  whole  country  being  divided  into  sundry  parts, 
there  was  in  each  part  some  one  city,  whereinto  they 
about  did  resort  for  justice.  Every  such  part  was  termed 
a  Diocess.''^  Howbeit,  the  name  Diocess  is  sometime  so 
generally  taken,  that  it  containeth  not  only  mo  [more] 
such  parts  of  a  Province,  but  even  moef  Provinces  also 
than  one;  as,  the  Diocess  of  Asia  contained  eight,  the 
Diocess  of  Africa  seven.  Touching  Diocesses  according 
unto  a  stricter  sense,  whereby  they  are  taken  for  part  of  a 
Province,  the  words  of  Livy  do  plainly  shew  what  order 
the  Romans  did  observe  in  them.  For  at  what  time  they 
had  brought  the  Macedonians  into  subjection,  the  Roman 
Governor,  by  order  from  the  Senate  of  Rome,  gave  charge 
that  Macedonia  should  be  divided  into  four  Regions  or 
Diocesses.  ^^  Capita  Regionum  ubi  Concilia  fierent,  primse 
sedis  Amphipolim,.  secundae  Thessalonicen,.  tertiae  Pellam, 
quartae  Pelagoniam  fecit.  Eo,  Concilia  suae  cujusque 
regionis  indici,  pecuniam  conferri,  ibi  Magistratus  creari 
jussit."  This  being  before  the  days  of  the  Emperors,  by 
their  appointment  Thessalonica  was  afterwards  the  chiefest, 
and  in  it  the  highest  Governor  of  Macedonia  had  his  seat. 
Whereupon  the  other  three  Diocesses  were  in  that  respect 
inferior  unto  it,  as  daughters  unto  a  Mother-city;  for  not 
unto  every  town  of  justice  was  that  title  given,  but  was 
peculiar  unto  those  cities  wherein  principal  Courts  were 
kept.  Thus  in  Macedonia  the  Mother-city  was  Thessa- 
lonica;  in  Asia,   Ephesus;J  in  Africa,    Carthage,   for   so 

*  "  Si  quid  habebis  cum  aliquo  Hellespontio  controversise,  ut  in  illam  Aioiicriaiu  rejicias." 
Cic  Fam.  Ep.  53.  lib.  xiii.  The  suit  which  Tully  maketh  was  this,  that  the  party,  in 
whose  behalf  he  wrote  to  the  Propraetor,  might  have  his  causes  put  over  to  that  Court  which 
was  held  in  the  Diocess  of  Hellespont,  where  the  man  did  abide,  and  not  to  his  trouble  be 
forced  to  follow  them  at  Ephesus,  which  was  the  chiefest  Court  in  that  Province. 

t  [See  Vol.  I.  p.  3,  Note  f.] 

X  Cic.  ad.  Attic  lib.  v.  Ep.  13.  Itern^  1.  observ.  D.  de  officio  Proconsulis  et  Legati.. 


134  THE  SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  8. 

Justinian  in  his  time  made  it.*  The  Governors,  Officerv,  and 
inhabitants  of  these  Mother-dties  were  termed  for  difference' 
sake  MeiropoUteSf  that  is  fo  say,  Mother -cHy  men;  than 
which  nothing  could  possibly  have  been  devised  more  fit  to 
suit  with  the  nature  of  that  Form  of  spiritual  Regiment, 
under  which  afterward  the  Church  should  live.f  Wherefore, 
if  the  Prophet  saw  eause  to  acknowledge  unto  the  Lord, 
that  the  light  of  his  gracious  providence  did  shine  no  where 
more  apparently  to  the  eye,  than  in  preparing  the  land  of 
Canaan  to  be  a  receptacle  for  that  Church  which  was  of 
Psai.  old,  ^'  Thou  hast  brought  a  Vine  out  of  Egypt,  thou  bast 
s"?  cast  out  the  Heathen  and  planted  it,  thou  madest  room  fer 
it,  and  when  it  had  taken  root  it  filled  the  land ;"  how  much 
more  ought  we  to  wonder  at  the  handy-work  of  Almighty 
God,  who  to  settle  the  Kingdom  of  bis  dear  Son,  did  not 
cast  out  any  one  people,  but  directed  in  such  sort  the  politic 
councils  of  them  who  ruled  far  and  wide  over  all,  that  they 
throughout  all  nations,  people,  and  countries,  upon  earth, 
should  unwittingly  prepare  the  field  wherein  the  Vine  which 
God  did  intend,  that  is  to  say,  the  Church  of  bis  dearly* 
beloved  Son,  was  to  take  root  ?  For  unto  nothing  else  can 
we  attribute  it,  saving  only  unto  the  very  incomprehensible 
force  of  Divine  Providence,  that  the  world  was  in  so  mar- 
vellous fit  sort  divided,  levelled,  and  laid  out  before-hand. 
Whose  work  could  it  be  but  his  alone  to  make  such  pro* 
vision  for  the  direct  implantation  of  his  Church?  J  Where* 
fore,  inequality  of  Bishops  being  found  a  thing  convenient 
for  the  Church  of  God,  in  such  consideration  as  hath  been 
shewed,  when  it  came  secondly  in  question,  which  Bishops 
should  be  higher  and  which  lower,  it  seemed  herein  not 
to  the  Civil  Monarch  only,  but  to  the  most,  expedient  that 
the  dignity  and  celebrity  of  Mother  -  cities  should  be  re- 
spected. §  They  which  dream,  that  if  Civil  Authority  had 
not  given  such  pre-eminence  unto  one  city  more  than  another, 

*  "  Sancimus,  ut  sicut  Oriens  atque  Illyricum,  ita  et  Africa  prsetoriana  maxima  potestatc 
specialiter  a  nostra  dementia  decoretur.  Cujus  sedem  jubemus  esse  Carthaginem ;  et  ab  ea, 
auxUiante  Deo,  septem  Provindae  cum  sius  Judicibus  disponantur."  Lib.  i.  Tit»  27.  L  1. 
sect.  1,  2.  Cod.  Justin. 

f  [As  no  wbole  nation  became  Christianized  before  the  Fourth  Century,  the  practice  on 
which  this  argument  is  founded  could  not  take  effect  till  then.] 

X  [Is  not  this  a  straining  of  Providence  ?] 

§  To{»y  Kvff  kKdffTviv  hruqxictv  ^E'iriffK6'jrovs  €iS4vai  xph  "^^^^  ^v  rf  Mrirpoir6\€i  irpocorcvra 
'ETrlffKoirov,  Kol  t^/v  tppovriZa  iLyaS^x^aBai  trdaris  rris  iirc^x^*'^  ^^^  "^^  ^f^  t^  Mifrpoir6\€i 
•Kcan-ax^^y  avvrpex^iv  irdvTas  robs  rd  irpdyiMxra  Hx'^f^^f  ^^^^  ^So^c  Kal  rf  ri/ip  irgoff 
ytTcrdou  mn6v,    Condi.  Antiochen.  can.  9. 


SeeU  8.]  of  ecclesiastical  polity*  135 

there  had  never  grown  an  inequality  among  Biaiiops  are  de- 
cetT^r  superiority  of  oee  Bii^op  over  another  would  be 
requisite  in  the  Church,  although  that  civil  distinction  were 
adbolished.  Other  causes  having  made  it  necessary,  even 
amongst  Bishops,  to  have  some  in  degree  higher  than  the 
xest,  the  Civil  dignity  of  place  was  oonsidered  only  as  a 
remaioii  wherefore  tfads  Bishop  should  be  preferred  before  that: 
which  deliberation  had  been  likely  enough  to  have  raised 
0O»  s»a&  trouble,  but  that  such  was  the  circumstance  of  place^ 
as  being  followed  in  that  ciioiee}  besides,  the  manifest  con* 
reniency  thereof,  took  away  all  show  of  partiaUty,  prevented 
secret  emulations,  and  gave  no  man  occasion  to  think  his 
pa^cpR  disgraced,  m  that  another  was  preferred  before  him.* 
Thus  we  see  upon  what  occasion  Metropolitan  Bishops 
became  Archbishops*  Now  while  the  whole  ChristiaB 
world,  kf  a  manner,  still  eontimied  under  one  Civil  Oovem- 
ment,  there  being  oftentimes,  within  some  one  more  large 
territory,  divers  and  sundry  Mother-churthes,  the  Metro- 
politans whereof  were  Archbishops,  as,  for  order's  sake,  it 
grew  hereupon  expedient,  there  should  be  a  difference  also 
amon^  them ;  so  no  way  seemed,  in  those  times,  more  fit 
tbas  to  give  pre-eminence  unto  them  whose  Metropolitan 
Sees  were  of  special  desert  or  dignity.  For  which  cause 
these,  as  being  Bishops  in  the  efaiefest  Mother-churches, 
were  termed  Prhnates,  and  at  the  length,  by  way  of  excel" 
lency.  Patriarchs ;  for  ignorant  we  are  not,  how  sometimes  vnieriu 
the  tide  of  Patriarch  k  generally  given  to  all  Metropolitan  primi- 
Bishops.  They  are  mightily  therefore  to  blame  which  are  ciesin. 
so  bold  and  confident,  as  to  affirm  that,  for  the  space  eif 
above  feur  hundred  and  thirty  j^ears  after  Christ,  all  Me-^ 
tvopolitan  Bishops  were  in  every  respect  eqnab,  tilt  the 
aecond  Cotfncil  of  Constantinople  exalted  certain  Metros 
polkans  above  the  rest^  True  it  is,  they  were  eqmals,  as 
tooching  the  exercise  of  Spiritual  Power  within  their  Dio* 
cesses,  when  they  dealt  with  their  own  flock.  For  what  is 
it  that  one  of  them  might  do  within  ttfe  compasa  of  his  own 
precuict,  but  another  within  his  might  do  the  same  ?  But 
that  there  was  no  subordination  at  all  of  one  of  them 

unto  another ;  that  when  they  all,  or  smidry  of  them,  were 



•  [No  one  can  justly  quarrel  with  the  distinction  that  age,  wisdom,  and  priority  of 
gtanding,  confer ;  but  these  make  a  very  different  sort  of  Prasides  to  those  who  combine 
**  dTir*  TiaA  and  secular  power  with  such  Ecclesiastical  rank  as  the  New  Testameiit  points 
out  and  enjoins :  Matt  xxiii.  S— 12.    Lidce  x^  24—27.    Rom.  xiL  10.} 


136.  ^H£   SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.  84 

to  deal  in  the.  same  causes,  there  was  no  difference  of  first 
and  second  in  degree,  no  distinction  of  higher  and  lowec  in. 
Authority  acknowledged  amongst  them,  is  most  untrue. 
The  great  Council  of  Nice  was  after  our  Saviour  Christ  but 
three  hundred  [and]  twenty-four  years,  and  in  that  Council, 
certain  Metropolitans  are  said  even  then  to  have  had  ancient, 
pre-eminence  and  dignity  above  the  rest;  namely,  the  Pri- 
mate of  Alexandria,  of  Rome,  and  of  Antioch.  Threescore 
Socr.  1.  years  after  this,  there  were  Synods  [was  a  Synod]  under  the 
^**'*  Emperor  Theodosius;  which  Synod  was  the  first  at  Con- 
stantinople, whereat  one  hundred  and  fifty  Bishops  were 
assembled :  at  which  Council  it  was  decreed,  that  the  Bi- 
shop of  Constantinople  should  not  only  be  added  imto  the 
former  Primates,  but  also  that  his  place  should  be  second 
amongst  them,  the  next  to  the  Bishop  of  Rome  in  dignity. 
Can.  38.  The  samc  decree  [was]  again  renewed  concerning  Constan- 
tinople, and  the  reason  thereof  laid  open  in  the  Council  of 
Can.  30.  Chalccdou.  At  the  length  came  that  second  of  Constan- 
tinople, whereat  were  six  hundred  and  thirty  Bishops  for 
a  third  confirmation  thereof.  Laws  Imperial  there  are 
likewise  extant  to  the  same  effect.  Herewith  the  Bishop. of 
Constantinople  being  overmuch  puffed  up,  not  only  could 
not  endure  that  See  to  be  in  estimation  higher,  whereunto 
his  own  had  preferment  to  be  the  next,  but  he  challenged 
more  than  ever  any  Christian  Bishop  in  the  world  before 
either  had,  or  with  reason  could  have.  What  he  chal- 
lenged, and  was  therein  as  then  refused  by  the  Bishop  of 
Rome,  the  same  the  Bishop  of  Rome  in  process  of  time 
obtained  for  himself,  and,  having  gotten  it  by  bad  means,  hath 
both  upheld  and  augmented  it,  and  upholdeth  it  by  acts  and 
Novel,  practices  much  worse.*  But  Primates,  according  to  their 
^23.  first  institution,  were  all,  in  relation  unto  Archbishops,  the 
same  by  prerogative  which  Archbishops  were  being  com- 
pared unto  Bishops.  Before  the  Council  of  Nice,  albeit 
there  were  both  Metropolitans  and  Primates,  yet  could  not 
this  be  a  means  forcible  enough  to  procure  the  peace  of  the 
Church;  but  all  things  were  wonderful  tumultuous  and 
troublesome,  by  reason  of  one  special  practice  common 
unto  the  Heretics  of  those  times;  which  was.  That  when 
they  had  been  condemned  and  cast  out  of  the  Church  by 

*  [Thus  Hooker  has  brought  his  argument  to  a  notable  situation;   it  could  not  but 
inevitably  introduce  Popedom.    See  Notefi  p.  113.] 


Sect.  &]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY,  137 

the  sentence  of  their  own  Bishops,  they,  contrary  to  the 
ancient-received  Orders  of  the  Church,  had  a  custom  to 
wander  up  and  down,  and  to  insinuate  themselves  into 
favour  where  they  were  not  known,  imagining  themselves  to 
be  safe  enough,  and  not  to  be  clean  cut  off  from  the  body 
of  the  Church,  if  they  could  any  where  find  a  Bishop  which 
was  content  to  communicate  with  them :  whereupon  ensued, 
as  in  that  case  there  needs  must,  every  day  quarrels  and  jars 
unappeasable  amongst  Bishops.  The  Nicene  Council,  for 
redress  hereof,  considered  the  bounds  of  every  Archbishop's 
Ecclesiastical  Jurisdiction,  what  they  had  been  in  former 
times;  and  accordingly  appointed  unto  each  grand  part  of 
the  Christian  world  some  one  Primate,  from  whose  judgment 
no  man  living  within  his  territory  might  appeal,  unless  it 
were  to  a  Council*general  of  all  Bishops.  The  drift  and 
purpose,  of  which  Order  was,  that  neither  any  man  opprest 
by  his  own  particular  Bishop  might  be  destitute  of  a  remedy, 
trough  appeal  unto  the  more  indifferent  sentence  of  some 
other  ordinary  Judge;  nor  yet  every  man  be  left  at  such 
liberty,  as  before,  to  shift  himself  out  of  their  hands  for 
whom  it  was  most  meet  to  have  the  hearing  and  determining 
of  his  cause.  The  evil,  for  remedy  whereof  this  Order  was 
taken,  annoyed  at  that  present  especially  the  Church  of 
Alexandria,  in  Egypt,  where  Arianism  begun:  for  which 
cause  the  state  of  that  Church  is  in  the  Nicene  Canons, 
concerning  this  matter,  mentioned  before  the  rest.  The 
words  of  their  sacred  Edict  are  these :  ^^  Let  those  customs  conc 
remain  in  force  which  have  been  of  old  the  customs  of  cai^V 
Egjrpt,  and  Libya,  and  Pentapolis ;  by  which  customs  the 
Bishop  of  Alexandria  hath  Authority  over  all  these;  the 
rather,  for  that  this  hath  also  been  the  use  of  the  Bishop 
of  Rome,  yea,  the  same  hath  been  kept  in  Antioch,  and  in 
other  Provinces."  Now,  because  the  custom  likewise  had 
been,  that  great  honour  should  be  done  to  the  Bishop  of 
IEWb,  or  Jerusalem ;  therefore,  lest  their  Decree  concerning 
the  Primate  of  Antioch  should  any  whit  prejudice  the 
dignity  and  honour  of  that  See,  special  provision  is  made,  Ejnsd. 
that  although  it  were  inferior  in  degree,  not  only  unto  cwH^r. 
Antioch  the  chief  of  the  East,  but  even  unto  Caesarea  too ; 
yet  such  pre-eminence  it  should  retain  as  belonged  to  a 
Mother-city,  and  enjoy  whatsoever  special  prerogative  or 
privilege  it  had  besides.     Let  men,  therefore,  hereby  judge 


138  THE  sfiYEKTH  BOOK  [Sect.  8. 

of  y/hnt  continuance  this  Older  which  upholdeth  degrees  of 
Bishops  must  needs  hate  been^  when  a  General  Cooneit 
of  three  hundred  and  eighteen  Bishops,  living  themtelteii 
within  three  hundred  years  after  Christ,  doth  reverence  the 
same  for  antiquity's  sake,  as  a  thing  which  had  been  even 
then  of  old  observed  in  the  most  renowned  parts  of  the 
Christian  world.  Wherefore,  needless  altogether  are  thote 
tain  and  wanton  demands,  ^^  No  mention  of  an  ArehbisAiKyp- 
in  Theophihis  Biahop  of  Antioeh?  None  in  Ignatius  t 
None  in  Clemens  of  Alexandria?  None  in  Justin  i/ltcttftf 
Irenseus,  TertuUi&n,  Cyprian  ?  None  in  all  those  old  Hb* 
toriographers,  out  of  which  Eusebius  gathereth  his  story  t 
None  till  the  time  of  the  Council  of  Nice,  three  hundrei 
and  twenty  years  after  Christ  ?"*  As  if  the  mention,  whidt 
is  thereof  made  in  that  very  Council  where  so  many  Bisbopv 
acknowledge  Archtepiscopal  Dignity  even  then  ancient^ 
were  not  of  far  more  weight  and  value  than  if  every  of  thorn 
Fathers  had  written  large  discoorses  thereof.  But  wimet  m 
it  which  they  will  blush  at  who  dare  so  confidently  aet  it 
down,  that  in  the  Council  of  Nice  some  Bishops  being 
termed  Metropolitans,  no  nore  difference  v»  thereby  meaoK^ 
to  have  been  between  ofici  Bishop  and  another  than  i» 
shewed  between  one  Minister  and  another,  when  we  flay 
such  a  one  is  a  Minister  in  the  city  of  London,  and!  sodi  A 
one  a  Minister  in  the  town  of  Newington?t  So  tba:^  to  be 
termed  a  Metropolitan  Bishop  did,  in  their  conceit,  impovt 
no  more  pre-eminence  above  other  Bishops,  than  we  meaa 
that  a  girdler  hath  over  others  of  the  same  trade,  if  we  tefin 
him  which  dotb  inhabit  some  Mother-city  for  difference^ 
sake  a  Metropolitan  girdler.  But  the  truth  is  too  manifost 
to  be  so  deluded ;{  a  Bishop  at  that  time  had  Power  in  hk 


^* 


*  <<  VHiftt !  no  mentioii  of  him  in  Theophilus  Bishop  of  Antioeh  ?  none  in  Ignatias  ?  iMM 
in  Clemens  Alezandrinus?  none  in  Justin  Martyr?  in  Irenseus,  in  Tertullian,  in  Origen,  iff 
Cyprian  ?  in  those  old  Historiographers,  oat  of  which  Eusebius  gathereth  his  story  ?  Was  it 
for  his  baseness  and  smallness  that  lie  could  not  be  seen  amongst  the  Bishops,  Eldert,  and 
Deacons,  being  the  chief  and  principal  of  them  aU?  Can  the  cedar  of  Lebanon  be  hid 
amongst  the  box-trees  V*     T.  C.  lib.  i.  p.  92. 

f  "  A  Metropolitan  Bishop  was  nothing  else  but  a  Bishop  of  that  place  which  it  pitomtd 
the  Emperor  or  Magistrate  to  make  the  chief  city  of  the  Diocess  or  Shire ;  and  as  for  this 
name,  it  maketh  no  more  difference  between  Bishop  and  Bishop,   than  when   I  say  a 
Minister  of  London  and  a  Minister  of  Newington."     T.  Cr  lib.  i.  p.  92. 
X  [Frustrated, 

"  I  have  sought, 
To  have  the  Word  of  God  deluded  utterly; 
0h>  fiur  sorrow !  yet  it  will  not  be." 

Lutty  JuvenhUf  an  Interlude  by  Abr.  Veale,  temp,  Eliz.] 


Sect.  8.]  OF  BjCCLBSIASTICAL  POXITT.  139 

own  Diocesff  over  all  other  Ministers  there,  and  a  Metro^ 
pofitan  Bishop  sundry  preeminences  above  other  Bishops, 
one  of  which  pre-eminences  was,  in  the  Ordination  of 
Bihops,  to  have  KvpoQ  rtay  yivofUrwy,  the  chief  Power  of 
ordering  att  things  done.  Which  pre-eminence  that  Council 
itself  doth  mention,*  as  also  a  greater  belonging  unto  the 
Patriarch  or  Primate  of  Alexandria,  concerning  whom  it  is 
there  likewise  said,  that  to  him  did  belong  iiovvla,  authority 
and  power  over  aU  Egypt ^  Pentapolis,  and  Libya:  within 
which  compass  sundry  MetropoUtan  Sees  to  have  been, 
there  is  no  man  ignorant,  which  in  those  antiquities  have 
any  knowledge.  Certain  prerogatives  there  are  wherein 
Metropohtans  excelled  other  Bishops,  certain  also  wherein 
Prhnates  excelled  other  MetropoUtaiis.f  Archiepiscopal  or 
Metropolitan  prerogatives  are  those  mentioned  in  old 
Imperial  Constitutions,  to  convocate  the  holy  Bishops  under  notci. 
them,  within  the  compass  of  their  own  Provinces,  whenSSw. 
need  required  their  meeting  together  for  inquisition  and 
redress  of  public  disorders ;  to  grant  unto  Bishops  under  ^9^ 

*  Cone.  Nicen.  can.  6.  "  Illud  autem  oranino  manifestum,  quod  siquis  absque  Metro- 
pililwii  aenfentia  factus  tk  Episcopus,  hunc  magna  Synodus  deftnivit  Episcopum  esse  non 
oportere."     Can.  4. 

f  \^  Tbe  Churches,  in  those  early  times,  were  entirely  Independent ;  none  of  them 
mtk^ect  tt  any  foreign  jurisdiction,  but  each  one  governed  by  its  own  Rulers  and  its  own 
Laws.  For  though  the  Churches  founded  by  the  Apostles  had  this  particular  difference  shewn 
tbem,  tint  they  were  consulted  in  di£Bcult  and  doubtful  cases ;  yet  they  had  no  juridical 
antkoit^,  no  tort  o(  supremacy  over  the  others,  nor  the  least  right  to  enact  laws  for  them. 
NoCluDg,  on  tbe  contrary,  is  more  evident  than  the  perfect  equality  that  reigned  among  the 
Frimitive  Churches ;  nor  does  there  even  appear  in  this  First  Century,  the  smallest  trace  of 
that  aaOTCiation  of  provincial  Churches,  from  which  Councils  and  Metropolikms  derive  their 
origin. ...  These  Councils,  of  which  we  find  not  the  smallest  trace  before  the  middle  of  this 
(Seoond)  Century,  changed  the  whole  face  of  the  Church,  and  gave  it  a  new  form ;  for  by 
thtoa  riM  andeat  privileges  of  the  people  were  considerably  diminished,  and  the  power  and 
antboffity  of  the  Bishops  greatly  augmented  ...  At  their  first  appearance  in  these  general 
Conncils,  they  acknowledged  that  they  were  no  more  than  the  Delegates  of  their  respective 
Cfanataefl,  and  that  they  acted  in  the  name,  and  by  the  appointment  of  their  people.  But 
they  soon  changed  this  humble  tone,  imperceptibly  extended  the  limits  of  their  authority, 
tamed  tbeir  influence  into  Dominion,  and  their  counsels  into  Laws;  and  openly  asserted,  at 
length,  that  Christ  had  empowered  them  to  prescribe  to  his  people  authoritative  Rules  of 
Faith  and  Manners.  Another  effect  of  these  Councils  was,  the  gradual  abolition  of  that 
perfect  equality,  which  reigned  among  all  Bishops  in  tbe  Primitive  times.  For  the  order  and 
decency  of  these  assemblies  required,  that  some  one  of  the  prorincial  Bishops  met  in  Council, 
should  be  invested  with  a  superior  degree  of  power  and  authority ;  and  hence  the  rights  of 
Metropolitans  derive  their  origin.  In  the  mean  time,  the  bounds  of  tbe  Church  were  enlarged; 
the  eostom  of  holding  Councils  was  followed  wherever  the  sound  of  the  Gospel  had  reached; 
and  the  universal  Church  had  now  the  appearance  of  one  vast  republic,  formed  by  a 
oomlnnadon  of  a  great  number  of  little  states.  This  occasioned  the  creation  of  a  new  (urder 
of  Ecclesiastics,  who  were  appointed,  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  as  Heads  of  the  Church, 
and  whose  office  it  was  to  preserve  the  consistence  and  union  of  that  immense  body,  whose 
members  were  so  widely  dispersed  throughout  the  nations.  Such  was  the  nature  and  office 
of  the  PatfiarcJu,  among  whom,  at  length,  ambition  being  arrived  at  its  most  insolent 
period,  formed  a  new  dignity,  investing  the  Bishop  of  Rome  and  hu  successors,  with  the 
tide  and  authority  of  Prinee  qf  the  Patriarcht,"  Mo8HBm>  Etch  Hut.  Centi.  PlutIL 
chap.  ii.  sect.  14.  and  Centn.  Part  II.  chap.ii.  sect.  8.] 


140  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  {Sect.  8« 

them  leave  and  faculty  of  absence  from  their  own  Diocesses^ 
when  it  seemed  necessary  that  they  should  otherwhere  con- 
!«**•    verse  for  some  reasonable  while ;  to  give  notice  unto  Bishops 
under  them  of  things  commanded  by  supreme  authority; 
cxxiu.    to  have  the  hearing  and  first  determining  of  such  causes  aa 
cndii.    any  man  had  against  a  Bishop ;  to  receive  the  appeals  of  the 
*^**-  inferior  Clergy,  in  case  they  found  themselves  overborne 
by  the  Bishop,  their  immediate  Judge.     And  lest  happily  it 
should  be  imagined  that  Canons  Ecclesiastical  we  want  to 
make  the  self-same  thing  manifest;  in  the  Council  of  Antioch 
Can.  9.  it  was  thus  decreed,  "  The  Bishops  in  every  Province  must 
know,  that  he  which  is  Bishop  in  the  Mother-city  hath  not 
only  charge  of  his  own  Parish  or  Diocess,  but  even  of  the 
whole  Province  also."    Again :  *'  It  hath  seemed  good,  that 
other  Bishops  without  him  should  do  nothing  more  than 
only  that  which  concerneth  each  one's  Parish,  and  the  places 
Can.  i«.  underneath   it."     Further,    by   the    self-same   Council  all 
Councils  Provincial  are  reckoned  void  and  frustrate,  unless 
the  Bishop  of  the  Mother-city  within  that  Province  where 
such  Councils  should  be,  were  present  at  them.     So  that 
the  want  of  his  presence,  and,  in  Canons  for  Church-govern- 
ment, want  of  his  approbation  also,  did  disannul  them :  not 
so  the  want  of  any  others.     Finally,  concerning  elections  of 
Can.  4.   Bishops,  the  Council  of  Nice  hath  this  general  Rule,  That 
po/rSv  *^®  chief  ordering  of  all  things  here,  is  in  every  Province 
ytpo-     committed   to    the    Metropolitan.      Touching    them,    who 
^  "'''   amongst   Metropolitans  were   also    Primates,    and   had  of 
sundry  united  Provinces,  the  chiefest  Metropolitan  See,  of 
Can.  23.  such  that  Cauou  in  the  Council  of  Carthage  was  eminentr 
whereby  a  Bishop  is  forbidden  to  go  beyond  seas  vnthout 
the  licence  of  the  highest  Chair  within  the  same  Bishop's  own 
country;  and  of  such  which  beareth  the  name  of  Aposto- 
Can;  84.  Ucal,*  is  that  ancient  Canon  likewise,  which  chargeth  the 
Bishops  of  each  Nation  to  know  him  which  is  First  amongst 
them,  and  to  esteem  of  him  as  an  Head,  and  to  do  no  extra- 
ordinary thing  but  with  his  leave.     The  chief  Primates  of 
the  Christian  world  were  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  Alexandria, 
S*vita*  and   Antioch.      To   whom   the   Bishop   of  Constantinople 
t^u'     being  afterwards  added,  St.  Chrysostom  the  Bishop  of  that 

*  [^*  To  quote  the  Apostolic  Canons  would  bring  on  me  severe  ridicule,  though,  whatever 
opinion  may  be  entertained  of  their  genuineness,  the  greater  part  cannot  be  later  than  the 
Fourth  Century."  Episcopacy  considered  with  reference  to  the  modem  Popular  Societits^ 
1S20.  Edit.  2.  8vo.  p.  30.    See  Hooker,  Vol.  II.  p.  227,  Note.] 


Sect.  9.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  141 

See  is  in  that  respect  said  to  have  had  the  care  and  charge 
not  cHiIy  of  the  city  of  Constantinople,  ^^  sed  etiam  totius 
Thraciae,  quae  sex  Prasfecturis  est  divisa,  et  Asiae  totius, 
quae  ab  undecim  Praesidibus  regitur."  The  rest  of  the  East 
was  under  Antioch,  the  South  under  Alexandria,  and  the 
West  under  Rome.  Whereas,  therefore,  John  the  Bishop 
of  Jerusalem  being  noted  of  Heresy,  had  written  an  Apo- 
logy for  himself  unto  the  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  named  Theo- 
philus;  St.  Jerome  reproveth  his  breach  of  the  Order  of 
the  Church  herein,  saying,  ^^  Tu,  qui  regulas  quaeris  Eccle-  Hieron. 
siasticas,  et  Niceni  Concilii  Canonibus  uteris,  responde  mihi,  ^^' 
ad  Alexandrinum  Episcopum  Palaestina  quid  pertinet?  Ni 
fallor,  hoc  ibi  decernitur,  ut  PalaestinaB  Metropolis  Caesarea 
sit,  et  totius  Orientis  Antiochia.  Aut  igitur  ad  Caesa- 
riensem  Episcopum  referre  debueras;  aut  si  procul  expe- 
tendum  judicium  erat,  Antiochiam  potius  literas  dirigendae." 
Thus  much  concerning  that  local  compass  which  was 
anciently  set  out  to  Bishops;  within  the  bounds  and  limits 
whereof  we  find,  that  they  did  accordingly  exercise  that 
Episcopal  Authority  and  Power  which  they  had  over  the 
Church  of  Christ.* 

9.  The  first  whom  we  read  to  have  bent  themselves  against  in  what 
the  Superiority  of  Bishops  were  Aerius  and  his  followers.  Epfsco? 
Aerios  seeking  to  be  made  a  Bishop,  could  not  brook  that  |^h!>eiit 
Eustathius  was  thereunto  preferred  before  him.     Whereas  be^ 
therefore  he  saw  himself  unable  to  rise  to  that  greatness  Idof*^' 
which  his  ambitious  pride  did  afiect,  his  way  of  revenge  was  j[^a^ 
to  try  what  wit,   being  sharp'ned  with  envy  and  malice, 
could  do  in  raising  a  new  seditious  opinion.  That  the  Su- 
periority which  Bishops  had  was  a  thing  which  they  should 
not  have ;  that  a  Bishop  might  not  Ordain ;   and  that  a 
Bishop  ought  not  any  way  to  be  distinguished  from  a  Pres- 
byter.^   For  so  doth  St.  Augustine  deliver  the  opinion  ofAng.de 
Aerius.     Epiphanius  not  so  plainly  nor  so  directly,  but  after  q^  ^ 
a  more  rhetorical  sort.     His  speech  was  rather  furious  than  deam. 
convenient  for  man  to  use :  "  What  is  (saith  he)  a  Bishop 

*  ["  If  there  be  a  necessity  of  setting  up  one  Bishop  over  many  Presbyters  for  preventing 
SehismSy  there  is  as  great  a  necessity  of  setting  up  one  Archbishop  over  many  Bishops,  and 
one  Patriarch  over  many  Archbishops,  and  one  Pope  over  all ;  unless  men  will  imagine,  that 
there  is  a  danger  of  Scltism  only  among  Presbyters  and  not  among  Bishops  and  Archbishops ; 
which  is  contrary  to  reason,  truth,  history,  and  our  own  experience."  Smectymnuus. 
1641.  p.  30.     Seett^jtip.  Note*,  p.  90.] 

f  "  Aeriani  ab  Aerio  quodam  sunt  nominati ;  qui  quum  esset  Presbyter,  doluisse  fertur, 
quod  Episeopas  non  potest  ordinari.  Dioebat  Episcopum  a  Presbytero  nulla  ratione  debcie 
discemL"     Aug.  de  Hsei*. 


142  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [ScCt.  9. 

move  than  a  Presbyter  ?  The  one  dotib  differ  from  the  other 
nothing.  For  their  Order  is  one,  their  Honour  one,  one 
their  Dignity.  A  Bishop  imposeth  his  hands^  so  dodi  a 
Presbyter.  A  Bishop  baptizeth^  the  like  doth  a  Presbyter. 
The  Bishop  is  a  Minister  of  divine  Service^  a  Presbyter  is 
the  same.  The  Bishop  sitteth  as  judge  in  a  throne,  even 
the  Presbyter  sitteth  also.  A  Presbyter  therefore  doing 
thus  far  the  seif-same  thing  which  a  Bishop  did,  it  was  by 
Aerius  enforced,  that  they  ought  not  in  any  thing  to  diffisr." 
Are  we  to  think  Aerius  had  wrong  in  being  judged  aa 
Heretic  for  holding  this  opinion?  Surely,  if  Heresy  be  an 
error  falsely  £Eithered  upon  Scriptures,  but  indeed  repugnant 
to  the  truth  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  by  the  consent  of  the 
universal  Church  in  the  Councils,  or  in  her  contrary  uniform 
practice  throughout  the  whole  world,  declared  to  be  such ; 
and  the  opinion  of  Aerius  in  this  point  be  a  plain  error 
of  that  nature,  there  is  no  remedy,  but  Aerius,  so  schianm- 
tically  and  stiffly  maintaining  it,  must  even  stand  where 
E^iphanius  and  Augustine  have  placed  him.  An  error 
repugnant  unto  die  truth  of  the  Word  of  God  is  held  by 
them,  whosoever  they  be,  that  stand  in  defence  of  any  4^n- 
elusion  drawn  erroneously  out  of  Scripture,  and  untruly 
thereon  fatl^red.  The  opinion  of  Aerius  therefore  being 
falsely  collected  out  of  Scripture,  must  needs  be  acknow- 
ledged an  error  repugnant  unto  the  truth  of  the  Word  of 
God.*  His  opinion  was,  that  there  ought  not  to  be  any 
difference  between  a  Bishop  and  a  Presbyter.  His  grounds 
and  reasons  for  his  opinion  were  sentences  of  Scripture. 
Under  pretence  of  which  sentences,  whereby  it  seemed  that 
Bishops  and  Presbyters  at  the  first  did  not  dififer,  it  wa6 
concluded  by  Aerius,  that  the  Church  did  ill  in  permitting 
any  difference  to  be  made.  The  answer  which  Epiphanius 
maketh  unto  some  part  of  the  proofs  by  Aerius  alleged,  wa6 
not  greatly  studied  or  laboured ;  for  through  a  contempt  of 
so  base  an  error  (for  this  himself  did  perceive  and  profess) 


*  I"  Indeed  were  we  to  determine  things  by  importance  of  words,  and  things  signited  by 
them,  the  Power  of  Ordination  was  proper  to  the  name  Presbyter,  and  not  Bishop,  beGaaie 
the  former  name  did  then  (in  the  Primitive  Churches)  import  that  Power,  and  not  the  latter." 
Thus  the  learned  Bishop  Stiliingfleet  strenuously  supports  the  lawfulness  and  validity  of  Or- 
dination by  Presbyters ;  and  gives  bis  deliberate  opinion  in  favour  of  Medina's  judgment,  thit 
''  Jerome,  Austin,  Ambrose,  Sedulius,  Primasius,  Chrysostom,  Theodoret,  and  Theophylaet, 
were  all  of  Aeiius's  judgment  as  to  the  identity  of  both  Name  and  Order  of  Biahops  and 
JEV«8byter8  in  the  Primitive  Chuzch.*'  See  Stillingfleet,  Iremeum.  Part  IL  chap.  «• 
sect  11.] 


SecL  9.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  143 

yieldeth  he  thereof  expressly  this  reason,  Men  that  have 
wit  do  evidently  see  that  all  this  is  mere  foolishness.     But 
how  vain  and  ridiculous  soever  his  opinion  seemed  unto  v^ise 
men,  with  it  Aerius  deceived  many  ;*  for  which  cause  some- 
what was  convenient  to  be  said  against  it.    And  in  that  very 
extemporal  slightness  which  Epiphanius  there  useth,  albeit 
the  answer  made  to  Aerius  be  in  part  but  raw^t  yet  ought 
not  hereby  the  truth  to  find  any  less  favour  than  in  other 
eaufies  it  doth,  where  we  do  not  therefore  judge  Heresy  to 
hare  the  better,  because  now  and  then  it  allegeth  that  for 
itadf,   which  Defenders  of  Truth  do  not  always  so  fully 
answer.     Let  it  therefore  suffice,  that  Aerius  did  bring 
nothing  unanswerable.     The  weak  solutions  which  the  one 
doth  give,  are  to  us  no  prejudice  against  the  cause,  as  long 
as  the  other's  oppositions  are  of  no  greater  strength  and 
▼alidity.     Did  not  Aerius,  trow  ye,  deserve  to  be  esteemed 
ae  a  new  Apollos,  "  mighty  and  powerful  in  the  Word,*'  [Acts 
which  could  for  maintenance  of  his  cause  bring  forth  sou.] 
plain  divine  authorities,   to  prove  by  the  Apostles*  own 
writings  that  Bishops  ought  not  in  any  thing  to  differ  from 
odier  Presbyters  ?     For  example,  where  it  is  said  that  Pres- 
byters made  Timothy  Bishop,  is  it  not  clear  that  a  Bishop 
sbould  not  differ  from  a  Presbyter,  by  having  Power  of 
Ordination  ?j:    Again,  if  a  Bishop  might  by  Order  be  dis- 
tinguished from  a  Presbyter,  would  the  Apostle  have  ^ven 
as  he  dotiii  unto  Presbyters  the  title  of  Bishops  ?§     These 
w€re  the  invincible  demonstrations  wherewith  Aerius  did  so 
fiercely  assault  Bishops.  But  the  sentenoe  of  Aerius  perhaps 
was  only.  That  the  difference  between  a  Bishop  and  a  Pres- 
byter hath  grown  by  the  Order  and  Custom  of  the  Church, 
the  Word  of  God  not  appointing  that  any  such  difference 
should  be.'    Well,  let  Aerius  then  find  the  favour  to  have 


•  *Eir  TO^y  iro\Xo^s  ^innff^.     [Epiph.  Haer.  Izxv.  8.] 

f  As  in  that  he  saSdi,  tlie  Aposde  doth  name  somedme  Presbjters  and  not  Bishops, 
1  T|«|.  nr.  li,  sometime  Bishops  and  not  Preshytersi  Phil,  i,  1,  because  aU  Churches  had  not 
both,  fat  want  of  able  and  sufficient  men.  In  such  Churches,  therefore,  as  had  but  the  one, 
the  ApMtie  could  not  mention  the  other.  Which  answer  is  nothing  to  the  latter  place  above- 
aifBtioatd :  lor  that  the  Church  of  Philippi  should  ha¥e  more  Bishops  than  one,  and  want  a 
few  able  men  to  be  Presbyters  under  the  Regiment  of  one  Bishop,  how  shall  we  think  it 
probable  or  likely  7 

X  lTim.iv.  14.  '<  With  the  imposition  of  the  Presbytery 'a  hands."  Of  whicfa  Presbytery 
Su  Panl  was  chief,[?]  2  Tim.  i.  6.  And  I  think  no  man  will  deny  that  St.  Paul  had  more  than 
a  simple  Presbyter's  Authority. 

§  ]phfl.L  1.  "  To  all  the  Saintsat  Philippi,  with  the  Bishops  and  Deacons."  For  as  yet  in 
the  Church  of  Philippi,  there  was  no  one  which  had  Authority  beades  the  Apostles,  but  their 
Pietbyten  or  Bishops  were  all  both  in  Title  and  in  Power  equal. 


•   1 

144  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  10. 

his  sentence  so  construed ;  yet  bis  fault  in  condemning  the 
Order  of  the  Churchy  his  not  submitting  himself  unto  that 
Order^  the  schism  which  he  caused  in  the  Church  about  it^ 
who  can  excuse?     No,  the  truth  is,  that  these  things  did 
even  necessarily  ensue,  by  force  of  the  very  opinion  which 
he  and  his  followers  did  hold.     His  conclusion  was^  That 
there  ought  to  be  no  diflference  between  a  Presbyter  and  a 
Bishop.     His  proofs,  those  Scripture-sentences  which  make 
mention  of  Bishops  and  Presbyters  without  any  such  distinc- 
tion or  difference.     So  that  if  between  his  conclusion  and 
the  proofs  whereby  he  laboured  to  strengthen  the  same, 
there  be  any  shew  of  coherence  at  all,  we  must  of  necessity 
confess,  that  when  Aerius  did  plead,  There  is  by  the  Word 
of  God  no  difference  between  a  Presbyter  and  a  Bishop ;  his 
meaning  was,  not  only  that  the  Word  of  God  itself  ap- 
pointeth  not,  but  that  it  enforceth  on  us  the  duty  of  not 
appointing,  nor  allowing,  that  any  such  difference  should 
be  made. 
In  what       10.  And  of  the  self-same  mind  are  the  enemies  of  Govem- 
Epfsco-  ment  by  Bishops,  even  at  this  present  day.     They  hold^  ais 
ment  if  Aerius  did,  that  if  Christ  and  his  Apostles  were  obeyed, 
say^     a  Bishop  should  not  be  permitted  to  Ordain ;  that  between 
amhors  a  Prcsbytcr  and  a  Bishop  the  Word  of  God  alloweth  not 
tindS    any  inequality  or  difference  to  be  made ;  that  their  Order, 
tioa^S^  their  Authority,  their  Power,  ought  to  be  one ;  that  it  is 
this  day.  y^^^  j^y  usurpation  and  corruption  that  the  one  sort  are  suf- 
fered to  have  rule  of  the  other,  or  to  be  any  way  superior 
unto  them.    Which  opinion  having  now  so  many  Defenders^ 
shall  never  be  able  while  the  world  doth  stand  to  find  in 
some,  believing  antiquity,  as  much  as  one  which  hath  given 
it  countenance,  or  borne  any  friendly  affection  towards  it.* 
Touching  these  men,  therefore,  whose  desire  is  to  have  all 
equal,  three  ways  there  are  whereby  they  usually  oppugn 
the  received  Order  of  the  Church  of  Christ.     First,  by  dis- 
gracing the  inequality  of  Pastors,  as  a  new  and  mere  human 
invention,  a  thing  which  was  never  drawn  out  of  Scripture, 
where  all  Pastors  are  found  (they  say)  to  have  one  and  the 
same  Power  both  of  Order  and  Jurisdiction :  secondly,  by 
gathering  together  the  differences  between  that  Power  which 
we  give  to  Bishops,  and  that  which  was  given  them  of  old 
in  the  Church ;  so  that,  albeit  even  the  ancient  took  more 

*  [See  Note,  p.  142.] 


Sect.  IL]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  14$ 

than  was  warrantable,  yet  so  far  thiey  swerved  not  as  ours 
have  done:  thirdly,  by  endeavouring  to  prove,  that  the 
Scripture  directly  forbiddeth,  and  that  the  judgment  of  the 
wisest,  the  holiest,  the  best,  in  all  ages,  condemneth  utterly 
the  inequality  which  we  allow. 

1 1.  That  inequality  of  Pastors  is  a  mere  human  invention.  Their  ar- 
a  thing  not  found  in  the  Word  of  God,  they  prove  thus :       m  df° 

i.  "  All  the  places  of  Scripture  where  the  word  Bishop  is  Sc^* 
used,  or  any  other  derived  of  that  name,  signify  an  over-  sfshopT, 
sight  in  respect  of  some  particular  Congregation  only,  and  V^n 
never  in  regard  of  Pastors  committed  unto  his  oversight.  {["Jn  of 
For  which  cause  the  names  of  Bishops,  and  Presbyters,  or  ^"iot 
Pastoral  Elders,  are  used  indiflferently,  to  signify  one  and  sS?^*** 
the  self-same  thing.     Which  so  indiflferent  and  common  use  J^7^° 
of  these  words  for  one  and  the  self-same  Office,  so  constantly  Tims 
and  perpetually  in  all  places,  declareth  that  the  word  Bishop  i  xim. 
in  the  Apostles'  writing  importeth  not  a  Pastor  of  higher  Phti.' 
Power  and  Authority  over  other  Pastors."  i'pit.v. 

ii.  **  All  Pastors  are  called  to  their  Office  by  the  same  ***' 
means  of  proceeding;  the  Scripture  maketh  no  diffi^rence 
in  the  manner  of  their  Trial,  Election,  Ordination :  which 
proveth  their  Office  and  Power  to  be  by  Scripture  all  one." 

UL  **  The  Apostles  were  all  of  equal  Power ;  and  all 
Pastors  do  alike  succeed  the  Apostles  in  their  Ministry  and 
Power,  the  commission  and  authority  whereby  they  succeed 
being  in  Scripture  but  one  and  the  same  that  was  committed 
to  the  Apostles,  without  any  difference  of  committing  to  one 
Pastor  more,  or  to  another  less." 

iv.  "  The  Power  of  the  Censures  and  Keys  of  the  Church, 
and  of  Ordaining  and  Ordering  Ministers  (in  which  two  points 
especially  this  Superiority  is  challenged),  is  not  committed 
to  any  one  Pastor  of  the  Church  more  than  to  another ;  but 
the  same  is  committed  as  a  thing  to  be  carried  equally  in  the 
guidance  of  the  Church.  Whereby  it  appeareth,  that  Scrip- 
ture maketh  all  Pastors,  not  only  in  the  Ministry  of  the 
Word  and  Sacraments,  but  also  in  all  Ecclesiastical  Juris* 
diction  and  Authority,  equal." 

V.  "  The  Council  of  Nice  doth  attribute  this  difference 
not  unto  any  Ordination  of  God,  but  to  an  ancient  Custom 
used  in  former  times,  which  judgment  is  also  followed  after- 
ward by  other  Councils :  Concil.  Antioch.  cap.  9." 

vi.  Upon  these  premises,  their  summary  collection  and 

VOL.  III.  L 


146  THE    SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  11. 

conclusion  is,  **  That  the  Ministry  of  the  Gospel,  and  the 
functions  thereof,  ought  to  be  from  Heaven  and  of  God 
(John  i.  23.) ;  that  if  they  be  of  God,  and  from  Heaven, 
then  are  they  set  down  in  the  Word  of  God  ;♦  that  if  they 
be  not  in  the  Word  of  God  (as  by  the  premises  it  doth 
appear  (they  say)  that  our  kind  of  Bishops  are  not),  it 
[T.c.  followeth,  they  are  *  invented  by  the  brain  of  men,'  and  are 
p.ss.]    of  the  earth,  and  that  consequently  they  can  do  no  good  in 

the  Church  of  Christ,  but  harm." 
Answer.  Our  auswcr  hereunto  is,  first.  That  their  proofs  are  un- 
available to  shew  that  Scripture  affordeth  no  evidence  for 
the  inequality  of  Pastors:  secondly.  That  albeit  the  Scripture 
did  no  way  insinuate  the  same  to  be  God's  Ordinance,  and 
the  Apostles  to  have  brought  it  in,  albeit  the  Church  were 
acknowledged  by  all  men  to  have  been  the  first  beginner 
thereof  a  long  time  after  the  Apostles  were  gone ;  yet  is  not 
the  Authority  of  Bishops  hereby  disannulled,  it  is  not  hereby 
proved  unfit  or  unprofitable  for  the  Church. 

i.  That  the  Word  of  God  doth  acknowledge  no  inequaUty 
of  Power  amongst  Pastors  of  the  Church ;  neither  doth  it 
appear  by  the  signification  of  this  word  Bishop,  nor  by  the 
indifferent  use  thereof.  For,  concerning  signification,  first, 
it  is  clearly  untrue  that  no  other  thing  is  thereby  signified 
but  only  an  oversight  in  respect  of  a  particular  Church  and 
Congregation.  For,  I  beseech  you,  of  what  Parish  or  par- 
Acts  ticular  Congregation  was  Matthias  Bishop  ?  His  Office 
Scripture  doth  term  Episcopal :  which  being  no  other  than 
was  common  unto  all  the  Apostles  of  Christ,  forasmuch  as 
in  that  number  there  is  not  any  to  whom  the  oversight  of 
many  Pastors  did  not  belong  by  force  and  virtue  of  that 
Office ;  it  followeth  that  the  very  word  doth  sometimes,  even 
in  Scripture,  signify  an  oversight  such  as  includeth  charge 
over  Pastors  themselves.  And  if  we  look  to  the  use  of  the 
word,  being  applied  with  reference  unto  some  one  Church, 
as  Ephesus,  Philippi,  and  such  like,  albeit  the  Guides  of 
those  Churches  be  interchangeably  in  Scripture  termed 
sometime  Bishops,  sometime  Presbyters,  to  signify  men 
having  oversight  and  charge,  without  relation  at  all  unto 

•  "  So  that  it  appeareth  that  the  Ministry  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  functions  thereof,  ought 
to  be  from  Heaven:  ....from  Heaven,  I  say,  and  heavenly,  because  although  it  be  executed 
by  earthly  men,  and  Ministers  are  chosen  also  by  men  like  unto  themselves,  yet  because  it  is 
done  by  the  Word  and  Institution  of  God,  it  may  v^ell  be  accounted  to  come  from  Heaven  and 
from  God.'*     T.C.  lib.i.  p.  83. 


1.20. 


SecL  11.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  147 

other  than  the  Christian  Laity  alone;  yet  this  doth  not 
hinder,  but  that  Scripture  may  in  some  place  have  other 
names,  whereby  certain  of  those  Presbyters  or  Bishops  are 
noted  to  have  the  oversight  and  charge  of  Pastors,  as  out 
of  all  peradventure  they  had  whom  St.  John  doth  entitle  Rev. 
Angels.*  "•  '• 

ii.  As  for  those  things  which  the  Apostle  hath  set  down 
concerning  Trial,  Election,  and  Ordination  of  Pastors,  that 
he  maketh  no  difference  in  the  manner  of  their  calUng ;  this 
also  is  but  a  silly  argument  to  prove  their  Office  and  their 
Power  equal  by  the  Scripture.  The  Form  of  admitting 
each  sort  unto  their  offices,  needed  no  particular  instruction : 
there  was  no  fear,  but  that  such  matters  of  course  would 
easily  enough  be  observed.  The  Apostle,  therefore,  toucheth 
those  things  wherein  judgment,  wisdom,  and  conscience  is 
[jfc]  required ;  he  carefully  admonisheth  of  what  quality  Ec- 
clesiastical persons  should  be,  that  their  dealing  might  not  be 
scandalous  in  the  Church.  And,  forasmuch  as  those  things 
are  general,  we  see  that  of  Deacons  there  are  delivered,  in 
a  manner,  the  self-same  precepts  which  are  given  concerning 
Pastors,  so  far  as  concerneth  their  Trial,  Election,  and  Or- 
dination. Yet  who  doth  hereby  collect  that  Scripture  maketh 
I>eacons  and  Pastors  equal  ?  If  notwithstanding  it  be  yet 
demanded,  "Wherefore  he  which  teacheth  what  kind  of 
persons  Deacons  and  Presbyters  should  be,  hath  nothing  in 
particular  about  the  quality  of  Chief-Presbyters,  whom  we 
call  Bishops?"  I  answer  briefly,  that  there  it  was  no  fit 
place  for  any  such  discourse  to  be  made,  inasmuch  as  the 
Apostle  wrote  unto  Timothy  and  Titus,  who,  having  by  com- 
mission Episcopal  Authority,  were  to  exercise  the  same  in 
ordaining,  not  Bishops  (the  Apostles  themselves  yet  living, 
and  retaining  that  power  in  their  own  hands)  but  Presbyters, 
such  as  the  Apostles  at  the  first  did  create  throughout  all 
Churches,  t  Bishops  by  restraint  (only  James  at  Jerusalem 
excepted)  were  not  yet  in  being.J 

•  [See  Note  •  p.  103.] 

t  [There  is  so  much  equivocation,  if  not  direct  contradiction,  in  this  sentence,  that  any 
attempt  at  explication  might  serve  hut  to  injure  its  effect  on  perusal,  after  approadi  made  to 
it  by  regular  progression.] 

X  ["  The  same  man  is  called  a  Bishop,  Tit.  i.  7,  who  is  called  an  Elder  in  ver.  5.  If  they 
were  distinct  Officers  Paul  neglected  to  describe  one  of  them,  which  is  not  credible,  when  he 
describeth  Deacons  and  Deaconesses.  Dr.  Hammond  confesseth  that  there  were  in  Scripture- 
tnnes  no  Subject- Presbyters,  save  Bishops,  that  were  under  the  Apostolic  Order ;  but  he  thinks 
that  Bishops  had  power  from  the  Aposties  to  institute  another  Order  of  Presbyters  under  them 
afterwards.  But,  where  is  there  any  proof  of  that  ? ...  It  is  thus  disproved :  Paul  giveth  Timothy 

t.2 


148  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  11. 

Hi.  About  equality  amongst  the  Apostles  there  is  by  us 
no  controversy  moved.  If  in  the  rooms  of  the  Apostles, 
which  were  of  equal  Authority,  all  Pastors  do  by  Scripture 
succeed  alike,  where  shall  we  find  a  commission  in  Scripture 
which  they  speak  of,  which  appointed  all  to  succeed  in  the 
self-same  equality  of  Power  ?  except  that  commission  which 
doth  authorize  to  preach  and  baptize  should  be  alleged, 
which  maketh  nothing  to  the  purpose;  for  in  such  things 
all  Pastors  are  still  equal.  We  must,  I  fear  me,  wait  very 
long  before  any  other  will  be  shewed.  For  howsoever  the 
Apostles  were  equals  amongst  themselves,  all  other  Pastors 
were  not  equals  with  the  Apostles  while  they  lived,  neither 
are  they  any  where  appointed  to  be  afterward  each  other's 
equal.  Apostles  had,  as  we  know.  Authority  over  all  such 
as  were  no  Apostles ;  by  force  of  which  their  Authority  they 
might  both  command  and  judge.  It  was  for  the  singular 
good  and  benefit  of  those  Disciples  whom  Christ  left  behind 
him,  and  of  the  Pastors  which  were  afterwards  chosen ;  for 
the  great  good,  I  say,  of  all  sorts,  that  the  Apostles  were 
in  Power  above  them.  Every  day  brought  forth  somewhat 
wherein  they  saw  by  experience,  how  much  it  stood  them  in 
stead  to  be  under  controlment  of  those  Superiors  and  higher 
Governors  of  God's  House.  Was  it  a  thing  so  behovefiil 
that  Pastors  should  be  subject  unto  Pastors  in  the  Apostles' 
own  times;  and  is  there  any  commandment  that  this  sub- 
jection should  cease  with  them,  and  that  the  Pastors  of  the 
succeeding  ages  should  be  all  equals  ?  No,  no,  this  strange 
and  absurd  conceit  of  equality  amongst  Pastors  (the  moAer 
of  schism  and  of  confusion)  is  but  a  dream  newly  brought 
forth,  and  seen  never  in  the  Church  before.* 


and  Titus  sufficient  instructions  what  Officers  to  Ordain  in  the  Church ;  which  Canons  were  to  be 
a  guide  to  all  after-ages.  But  Paul  gave  them  no  instruction  or  Canon  for  the  instituting  of  any 
new  Order  between  Bishops  (or  Elders,)  and  Deacons.  Therefore  it  is  not  credible  that  any 
such  power  was  then  given  to  other  Bishops,  which  he.  gave  not  to  Timothy  and  Titus.  But  as 
to  others,  who  say  that  the  Apostles  and  Evangelists  were  then  the  only  Bishops,  I  answer, 
de  rCt  we  confess  that  these  had  power  to  go  about  to  gather  and  settle  Churches ;  and  de 
nomine,  whether  such  may  be  called  Bishops,  let  them  quarrel  about  that  have  nothing  eke 
to  do.  But  besides  them,  every  town  or  Church  had  then  their  own  fixed  Bishop,  one  or 
more,  and  Deacons.  If  Diocesans  or  Metropolitans  will  be  Successors  of  the  Itinerant  Apostles 
and  Evangelists,  ,or  General  Bishops,  let  them  restore  to  every  Church  their  particular  proper 
Bishops,  and  not  make  Pastors  that  have  not  the  power  of  the  Keys.  As  for  them  that  say, 
Paul  indudeth  both  Orders  under  the  same  names.  Bishops  and  Presbyters;  I  answer,  Paul 
useth  not  only  the  same  name,  but  the  same  description,  and  so  the  Order  or  Office  also  must 
be  the  same;  and  both  name  and  thing  the  same.  Bishops  are  God's  Stewards,  entrusted 
to  govern  by  his  Law ;  and  not  Lords  of  his  Chiurch,  or  of  their  Faith."  Baxter's  Parafh. 
on  New  Test,  1695.  8vo.  2d  Edit,  in  Titi.  7.] 
•  [See  the  preceding  Note.] 


Sect.  II.]  OP  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  M9 

iv.  Power  of  Censure  and  Ordination  appeareth  even  by 
Scripture  marvellous  probable  to  have  been  derived  from 
Christ  to  bis  Churcb,  without  this  surmised  equality  in  them 
to  whom  he  hath  committed  the  same.  For  I  would  know, 
whether  Timothy  and  Titus  were  commanded  by  St.  Paul 
to  do  any  thing  more  than  Christ  hath  authorized  Pastors  to 
do  ?  And  to  the  one  it  is  Scripture  which  saith,  "  Against  i  Tim. 
a  Presbyter  receive  thou  no  accusation^  saving  under  two  or 
three  witnesses ;"  Scripture  which  likewise  hath  said  to  the 
other,  '^  For  this  very  cause  left  I  thee  in  Crete,  that  ihowRui^s. 
shouldst  redress  the  things  that  remain,  and  shouldst  ordain 
Presbyters  in  every  city,  as  I  appointed  thee'^  In  the  former 
place  the  power  of  Censure  is  spoken  of,  and  the  power  of 
Ordination  in  the  latter.  Will  they  say,  that  every  Pastor 
there  was  equal  to  Timothy  and  Titus  in  these  things?  If 
they  do,  the  Apostle  himself  is  against  it,  who  saith,  that  of 
their  two  very  persons  he  had  made  choice,  and  appointed 
in  those  places  them  for  performances  of  those  duties: 
whereas,  if  the  same  had  belonged  unto  others  no  less  than 
to  them,  and  not  principally  unto  them  above  others,  it  had 
been  fit  for  the  Apostle  accordingly  to  have  directed  his 
Letters  concerning  these  things  in  general  unto  them  all 
which  had  equal  interest  in  them ;  even  as  it  had  been  like- 
wise fit  to  have  written  those  Epistles  in  St.  John's  Re- 
velation, unto  whole  Ecclesiastical  Senates,  rather  than  only 
unto  the  Angels  of  each  Church,  had  not  some  one  been 
above  the  rest  in  Authority  to  order  the  affairs  of  the  Church. 
Scripture,  therefore,  doth  most  probably  make  for  the  in- 
equality of  Pastors,  even  in  all  Ecclesiastical  affairs,  and 
by  very  express  mention,  as  well  in  Censiures,  as  Or- 
dinations.* 

*  [It  is  difficult  to  imagine  otherwise  than  that  Hooker  did  not  feel  at  ease  just  here.  He 
would  wilfingly  have  dogmatized,  but  had  misgivings :  hence  his  cautious  commencement, 
*  marvellous  probable;*'  and  even  his  conclusion  rests,  iii  part,  on  '*most  probably."  At 
length,  however,  he  ventures  a  dictunit  which  he  fedn  would  have  to  be  received  as  decisive. 
Still  inequality  of  Pastors  in  Power  of  Censures  and  Ordinations  is  not  proved  from  the  places 
quoted ;  any  more  than  as  in  the  case  of  parties  deputed  to  arrange  some  local  circumstances 
connected  with  the  instituting  and  pronouncing  on  the  qualifications  of  matters  and  persons  of 
Uieir  own  profession,  imports  any  other  superiority  than  what  knowledge  and  experience  confer. 
It  cannot  be  objected  that  this  case  is  not  applicable  because  the  parties  are  not  invested  with 
die  like  to  Apostolic  Authority;  for  neither  Timothy  nor  Titus  could  have  exercised  their 
Powers,  if  the  Churches  had  not  willingly  received  them  into  their  communion :  New  Testa- 
ment Churches  being  entirely  voluntary  Societies,  and  therefore  unlike  National  Churches  ovet 
which  compulsory  power  is  exercised,  derived  from  a  pretended  Order  which,  usurping 
Spiritual  Dominion,  erects  itself  into  **  a  State  whqreunto  the  rest  of  God's  people  must  be 
ittlgect.''^    See  Vol  I.  p.  260.] 


150  TBB  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.  11. 

V.  In  the  Nicene  Council  there  are  confirmed  certain  pre- 
rogatives and  dignities  belonging  unto  Primates  or  Arch- 
bishops^ and  of  them  it  is  said^  that  the  ancient  Custom  of 
the  Chiurch  had  been  to  give  them  such  pre-eminence,  but 
no  syllable  whereby  any  man  should  conjecture  that  those 
Fathers  did  not  honour  the  Superiority  which  Bishops  had 
over  other  Pastors  only  upon  ancient  Custom,  and  not  as  a 
true  Apostolical,  Heavenly,  and  Divine  Ordinance. 

vi.  Now,  although  we  should  leave  the  general-received 
persuasion  held  from  the  first  beginning,  That  the  Apostles 
themselves  left  Bishops  invested  with  Power  above  other 
Pastors ;  although,  I  say,  we  would  give  over  this  opinion, 
and  embrace  that  other  conjecture  which  so  many  have 
thought  good  to  follow,*  and  which  myself  did  sometimes 
judge  a  great  deal  more  probable  than  now  I  do,t  merely 
That  after  the  Apostles  were  deceased,  Churches  did  agree 
amongst  themselves,  for  preservation  of  peace  and  order,  to 
make  one  Presbyter  in  each  city  chief  over  the  rest,  and  to 
translate  into  him  that  Power  by  force  and  virtue  whereof 
the  Apostles,  while  they  were  alive,  did  preserve  and  uphold 
Order  in  the  Church,  exercising  spiritual  Jurisdiction,  partly 

Tit.i.5.  by  themselves,  and  partly  by  Evangelists,  because  they  could 
not  always  every  where  themselves  be  present :  this  Order 
taken  by  the  Church  itself  (for  so  let  us  suppose,  that  the 
Apostles  did  neither  by  word  nor  deed  appoint  it)  were  not- 
withstanding more  warrantable,  than  that  it  should  give  place 

cr.  c.    and  be  abrogated,  because  "  the  Ministry  of  the  Gospel,  and 

p.  830  the  functions  thereof,  ought  to  be  from  Heaven."  There 
came  Chief-Priests  and  Elders  unto  our  Saviour  Christ  as 
he  was  teaching  in  the  Temple,  and  the  question  which  they 

Matt,     moved  unto  him  was  this,  "  By  what  Authority  dost  thou 
'  these  things,   and  who  gave  thee   this   authority?"  their 

prer. 20, question  he  repelled  with  a  counter-demand,  "The  Baptism 
of  John,  whence  was  it,  from  Heaven,  or  of  Men  ?"    Hereat 


•  They  of  Walden,  Mn,  Syl.  hist.  Bohem.  [c.  35.]  MarsUius,  defens.  pac  Nicl.  Thomas 
Wald.  c.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  60.  Calvin.  Com.  in  1.  ad  Tit  Bullinger,  Decad.  1.  Ser.  3.  JneL 
Def.  Apol.  par.  2.  c.  9.  di.  1.       Fulk.  Answ.  to  the  Test.  Tit.  i.  5. 

t  [Be  it  noticed,  that  from  this  phraseology  Hooker  was  still  undecided  respecting  the 
original  of  prelatical  Institution.  The  mode  of  reasoning  he  adopts  in  this  Paragraph  is 
iallacious  and  dangerous,  for  it  will  justify  taking  from,  as  well  as  what  Hooker  here  contends 
for,  adding  to,  the  Order  of  New  Testament  Church-government.  *'  Discourse  of  Reason,"  and 
''  unrepugnant  onto  revealed  Laws,  &c."  (p.  152)  are  phrases  that  amount  to  nothing  on  this 
subject,  because  the  questions  are  always  returning,  What  is  Reason  ?  What  is  Unrepugnancy  ? 
Hence  there  is  no  safety  but  in  dose  adherence  to  the  sublime  simplicity  of  the  organization 
of  New  Testament  Churches.] 


Sect.  11.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  151 

they  paused,  secretly  disputing  within  themselves,  "  If  we 
shall  say,  From  Heaven,  he  will  ask.  Wherefore  did  ye  not 
then  believe  him  ?  and  if  we  say.  Of  men,  we  fear  the  people, 
for  all  hold  John  a  Prophet."    What  is  it  now  which  here- 
upon these  men  would  infer  ?     That  all  functions  Ecclesias- 
tical ought  in  such  sort  to  be  from  Heaven,  as  the  function 
of  John  was  ?    No  such  matter  here  contained.     Nay,  doth 
not  the  contrary  rather  appear  most  plainly  by  that  which  is 
here  set  down  ?    For  when  our  Saviour  doth  ask  concerning 
the  Baptism,  that  is  to  say,  the  whole  spiritual  function  of 
John,  whether  it  were  "  from  Heaven,  or  of  men,"  he  giveth 
clearly  to  understand  that  Men  give  authority  unto  some, 
and  some  God  himself  from  Heaven  doth  authorize.     Nor 
is  it  said,  or  in  any  sort  signified,  that  none  have  lawful 
authority  which  have  it  not  in  such  manner  as  John,  from 
Heaven.     Again,  when  the  Priests  and  Elders  were  loth 
to  say,  that  John  had  his  calling  from  ^^  men,"  the  reason 
was  not  because  they  thought  that  so  John  should  not 
have  had  any  good  or  lawful  calling,  but  because  they  saw 
that  by  this  means  they  should  somewhat  embase  the  calling 
of  John ;  whom  all  men  knew  to  have  been  sent  from  God, 
according  to  the  manner  of  Prophets,  by  a  mere  celestial 
vocation.'    So  that  out  of  the  evidence  here  alleged,  these 
things  we  may  directly  conclude;   first,  that  whoso  doth 
exercise  any  kind  of  Function  in  the  Church,  he  cannot  law- 
fully so  do,  except  Authority  be  given  him ;  secondly,  that 
if  Authority  be  not  given  him  from  Men,  as  the  Authority  of 
teaching  was  given  unto  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  it  must  be 
given  him  from  Heaven,  as  Authority  was  given  unto  Christ, 
Elias,  John  Baptist,  and  the  Prophets :  for  these  two  only 
ways  there  are  to  have  Authority.    But  a  strange  conclusion 
it  is^   God  himself  did  from  Heaven  authorize  John  to 
bear  witness  of  the  Light,  to  prepare  a  way  for  the  pro- 
mised Messiah,  to  publish  the  nearness  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  to  preach  Repentance,  and  to  baptize  (for  by  this  part, 
which  was  in  the  function  of  John  most  noted,  all  the  rest 
are  together  signified) ;  therefore  the  Church  of  God  hath 
no  power  upon  new  occurrences  to  appoint,  to  ordain  an 
Ecclesiastical  Function,  as  Moses  did  upon  Jethro's  advice 
devise  a  Civil.   All  things  we  grant  which  are  in  the  Church 
ought  to  be  of  God.     But,  forasmuch  as  they  may  be  two 
ways  accompted  such;  one,  if  they  be  of  his  own  institution. 


152  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  II. 

and  not  of  ours ;  another,  if  they  be  of  ours^  and  yet 
with  his  approbation :  this  latter  way  there  is  no  impedi- 
ment, but  that  the  same  thing  which  is  of  Men,  may  be  also 
justly  and  truly  said  to  be  of  God,  the  same  thing  from 
Heaven  which  is  from  earth.  Of  all  good  things  God 
himself  is  author,  and  consequently  an  approver  of  them. 
The  Rule  to  discern  when  the  actions  of  men  are  good, 
when  they  are  such  as  they  ought  to  be,  is  more  ample  and 
large  than  the  Law  which  God  hath  set  particular  down  in 
his  holy  Word ;  the  Scripture  is  but  a  part  of  that  Rule,  as 

Lib.  i.  hath  been  heretofore  at  large  declared.  If  therefore  all 
things  be  of  God  which  are  well  done ;  and  if  all  things  be 
well  done,  which  are  according  unto  the  Rule  of  well-doing; 
and  if  the  Rule  of  well-doing  be  more  ample  than  the  Scrip- 
ture ;  what  necessity  is  there,  that  every  thing  which  is  of 
God  should  be  set  down  in  Holy  Scripture  ?  True  it  is  in 
things  of  some  one  kind,  true  it  is,  that  what  we  are  now 
of  necessity  for  ever  bound  to  believe  or  observe  in  the 
special  mysteries  of  salvation.  Scripture  must  needs  give 
notice  of  it  unto  the  world ;  yet  true  it  cannot  be,  touching 
all  things  that  are  of  God.  Sufficient  it  is  for  the  proof  of 
lawfulness  in  any  thing  done,  if  we  can  shew  that  God 
approveth  it.  And  of  his  approbation  the  evidence  is  suf- 
ficient, if  either  himself  have  by  Revelation  in  his  Word 
warranted  it,  or  we  by  some  discourse  of  Reason  find  it 
good  of  itself,  and  unrepugnant  unto  any  of  his  revealed 
Laws  and  Ordinances.  Wherefore,  injurious  we  are  unto 
God,  the  author  and  giver  of  human  capacity,  judgment, 
and  wit,  when,  because  of  some  things  wherein  he  precisely 
forbiddeth  men  to  use  their  own  inventions,  we  take  occa- 
sion to  disauthorize  and  disgrace  the  works  which  he  doth 
produce  by  the  hand  either  of  Nature  or  of  Grace  in  them. 
We  offer  contumely,  even  unto  him,  when  we  scornfully 
reject  what  we  list,  without  any  other  exception  than  this, 

rr.  c.     "  The  brain  of  man"  hath  devised  it.     Whether  we  look 

p.83!]  into  the  Church  or  Commonweal,  as  well  in  the  one  as 
in  the  other,  both  the  Ordination  of  Officers,  and  the  very 
institution  of  their  Offices,  may  be  truly  derived  from  God, 
and  approved  of  him,  although  they  be  not  always  of  him 
in  such  sort  as  those  things  are  which  are  in  Scripture. 

Rom.     Doth  not  the  Apostle  term  the  Law  of  Nature,  even  as  the 


i.  32. 


Lake     Evangelist  doth  the  Law  of  Scripture,  Aucaioffxa  tov  Oeov, 

i.  0* 


Sect.  IIJ]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  153 

God's  own  righteous  Ordinance?  The  Law  of  Nature  then 
being  his  Law,  that  must  needs  be  of  him  which  it  hath 
directed  men  unto.  Great  odds,  I  grant,  there  is  between 
things  devised  by  men,  although  agreeable  with  the  Law  of 
Nature,  and  things  in  Scripture  set  down  by  the  finger  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Howbeit  the  dignity  of  these  is  no  hin- 
derance,  but  that  those  be  also  reverently  accompted  of  in 
their  place.  This  much  they  very  well  saw,  who  although 
not  living  themselves  under  this  kind  of  Church  Polity,  yet 
being,  through  some  experience,  more  moderate,  grave,  and 
circumspect  in  their  judgment,  have  given  hereof  their 
sounder  and  better-advised  sentence :  "  That  which  the  confest. 
holy  Fathers  (saith  Zanchius)  have  by  common  consent,  ^^' 
without  contradiction  of  Scripture,  received,  for  my  part,  I 
neither  will,  nor  dare  with  good  conscience,  disallow.  And 
what  more  certain,  than  that  the  ordering  of  Ecclesiastical 
persons,  one  in  Authority  above  another,  was  received  into 
the  Church  by  the  common  consent  of  the  Christian  world  ? 
What  am  I,  that  I  should  take  upon  me  to  control  the  whole 
Church  of  Christ  in  that  which  is  so  well  known  to  have 
been  lawfully,  religiously,  and  to  notable  purpose,  insti- 
tuted?"* Calvin  maketh  mention  even  of  Primates  that  have 
Authority  above  Bishops :  *'  It  was  (saith  he)  the  institution  Eput 
of  the  ancient  Church,  to  the  end  that  the  Bishops  might, 
by  this  bond  of  concord,  continue  the  faster  linked  amongst 
themselves."  And,  lest  any  man  should  think  that  as  well 
he  might  allowt  the  Papacy  itself,  to  prevent  this  he  addeth, 

*  ["  I  may  not  conceal  this  from  you,  that  although  Zanchius  hath  written  so  modestly  of 
the  callings  of  Archbishops  and  Bishops,  yet  he  rat?ier  fancied  the  new  platform  of  Elder- 
ships :  which  Beza  omitteth  not  to  put  Saravia  in  mind  of,  when  having  yielded  to  Zanchius 
hb  said  opinion  of,  Bishops,  he  addeth  other  places  out  of  him  for  his  allowance  of  the  Elder- 
ship, and  then  concludeth.  Si  Zanchius  asserentis,  qua  de  re  contendimus  ?  If  you  agree 
widi  Zanchius,  whereabout  contend  we  ?  Beza  cont.  Sarav.  p.  164.'*  B avckovt* 8  Surveff 
•f  ike  pretended  Holy  Discipline,  Anno  1593.  4to.     Edit  1663.  p.  109.] 

f  ["  But  whereas  every  Province  had  among  their  Bishops  one  Archbishop :  also  in  the 
Nicene  Synod  there  were  ordained  Patriarchs :  . . .  The  government  so  ordered  many  called  a 
Hierarchy ;  by  a  name,  as  I  think,  unproper,  and  truly  unused  in  the  Scriptures.  For  die 
Holy  Ghost  willed  to  provide  that  no  man  should  dream  of  a  Principality,  or  Dominion, 
when  the  government  of  the  Church  is  spoken  of.  But  if,  leaving  the  word,  we  look  upon 
the  thing,  we  shall  find  that  the  old  Bishops  meant  to  forge  no  form  of  ruling  the  Church 
differing  from  that  which  the  Lord  appointed  by  his  Word."  Calvin.  Inst.  lib.  iv.  cap.  4. 
sect.  4.  Norton's  Transl.  *'  That  the  Office  of  Archbishop,  and  Patriarch,  by  Calvin  was 
nothing  but  to  assemble  the  Synod,  propound  the  matter,  gather  the  voices,  &c.  I  have 
shewed :  condemning  those  names  in  the  general,  he  must  needs  condemn  them  in  the  parti- 
cular; for  in  both  those  names,  the  word  of  Dominion  is  put,  which  he  condemneth.  That  he 
Gondemneth  the  Office  with  us,  is  clearer  than  the  sun;  and  that  in  divers  sorts ;  first,  general, 
in  that  upon  the  Apostle's  words,  Heb.  v.  4,  he  denieth  it  lawful '  to  set  up  any  government 
in  the  Chnrdi  at  the  pleasure  of  men,  without  waiting  fi>r  the  Coounandment  of  Ood  -,  and 


154  ^^^  SEVENTH  BOOK  [SscL  12. 

'^  Aliiid  est  moderatum  gerere  et  honorem,  quam  totum 
terrarum  orbem  immenso  imperio  complecti."    These  things 
standing  as   they  do,   we   may  conclude,   that,  albeit  the 
Offices  which  Bishops  execute  had  been  committed  unto 
them  only  by  the  Church,  and  that  the  Superiority  which 
they  have  over  other  Pastors  were  not  first  by  Christ  him- 
self given  to  the  Apostles,  and  from  them  descended  to 
others,  but  afterwards  in  such  consideration  brought  in  and 
agreed  upon,  as  is  pretended ;  yet  could  not  this  be  a  just 
or  lawful  exception  against  it. 
Their  ar-      l^-     But  they  wiU  Say,   "  There   was   no  necessity  of 
Sproie instituting  Bishops;    the   Church  might  have   stood  well 
was  no   enough  without  them ;  they  are  as  those  superfluous  things, 
^tTot    which  neither  while  they  continue  do  good,  nor  do  harm 
tSti^'g    when  they  are  removed,  because  there  is  not  any  profitable 
?i"ie^*  use  whereunto  they  should  serve,     i.  For  first,  in  the  primi*- 
church.  tive  Church  their  Pastors  were  all  equal,  the  Bishops  of 
those  days  were  the  very  same  which  Pastors  of  Parish^ 
churches  at  this  day  are  with  us,  no  one  at  commandment 
or  controlment  by  any  other's  Authority  amongst  them* 
The  Church    therefore    may  stand  and   flourish  without 
Bishops:   if  they  be  necessary,  wherefore  were   they  not 
sooner  instituted  ?"    ii.   Again,   '*  if  any  such  thing  were 
needful  for  the  Church,  Christ  would  have  set  it  down  in 
Scripture,  as  he  did  all  kind  of  Officers  needful  for  Jewish 
Regiment.     He  which  prescribed  unto  the  Jews  so  parti- 
cularly the  least  thing  pertinent  unto  their  Temple,  would 
not  have  left  so  weighty  Offices  undetermined  of  in  Scripr 
ture,  but  that  he  knew  the  Church  could  never  have  any 
Ep.  3.    profitable  use  of  them."    iii.  Furthermore,  "  it  is  the  judg- 
*  '     ment  of  Cyprian,  that  equity  requireth  every  man's  cause 
to  be  heard,  where  the  fault  he  is  charged  with  was  com- 
mitted: and  the  reason  he  allegeth  is,  forasmuch  as  there 
they  may  have  both  accusers  and  witnesses  in  their  cause* 
Sith  therefore  every  man's  cause  is  meetest  to  be  handled 
at  home  by  the  judges  of  his  own  Parish,  to  what  purpose 

that  the  Church-OfiSce  devised  without  his  Commandment  and  express  Ordinance,  is  unlaw- 
ful.' ....  Secondly,  in  that  he  doth  in  flat  words  declare,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  took  great 
heed  that  one  should  not  so  much  as  dream  of  Principality  and  Dominion  in  the  government 
of  the  Church,  Inst  lib.  iv.  c.  4.  sect.  4.  Thirdly,  in  that  he  doth  precisely  mislike  that 
any  should  have  pastoral  charge  over  a  Province,  in  Philip,  i. ;  which  he  declareth  yet  more 
manifestly  when  he  saith,  *  the  government  of  the  High-Priest  which  was  over  one  natioD« 
being  a  figure  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  ought  not  to  be  followed,'  Inst.  lib.  iv.  c.  6.  sect.  2." 
T.C.  lib.ii.  p.  629.] 


Sect.  IS.]  OP  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  1^5 

serveth  their  device^  which  have  appointed  Bishops  unto 
whom  such  causes  may  be  brought^  and  Archbishops  to 
whom  they  may  be  also  from  thence  removed?" 

13.  What  things  have  necessary  use  in  the  Church,  they  Thefore- 
of  all  others  are  the  most  unfit  to  judge,  who  bend  them-  al^^ 
selves  purposely  against  whatsoever  the  Church  useth,  JS'SJJr- 
except  it  please  themselves  to  give  it  the  grace  and  coun-  ^' 
tenance  of  their  favourable  approbation;  which  they  wil- 
lingly do  not  yield  unto  any  part  of  Church  Polity,  in  the 
forehead  whereof  there  is  not  the  mark  of  that  new-devised  ^ee 
stamp.  But  howsoever  men  like  or  dislike,  whether  they  p.°33.i 
judge  things  necessary  or  needless  in  the  House  of  God, 
a  conscience  they  should  have  touching  that  which  they 
boldly  affirm  or  deny.  i.  '^  In  the  primitive  Church  no 
Bishops,  no  Pastors  having  Power  over  other  Pastors,  but 
all  Elquals,  every  man  supreme  commander  and  ruler  within 
the  kingdom  of  his  own  Congregation  or  Parish.  The 
Bishops  that  are  spoken  of  in  the  time  of  the  primitive 
Church,  all  such  as  Parsons  or  Rectors  of  Parishes  are 
with  us?"  If  thus  it  have  been  in  the  prime  of  the  Church, 
the  question  is,  how  far  they  will  have  that  prime  to  extend? 
and  where  the  latter  spring  of  this  new-supposed  disorder 
to  begin?  That  primitive  Church,  wherein  they  hold  that 
amongst  the  Fathers  all  which  had  pastoral  charge  were 
Equal,  they  must  of  necessity  so  far  enlarge  as  to  contain 
some  hundred  of  years,  because  for  proof  hereof  they  allege 
boldly  and  confidently  St.  Cyprian,  who  suffered  martyrdom 
about  two  hundred  and  threescore  years  after  our  blessed 
Lord's  Incarnation.  A  Bishop,  they  say,  such  as  Cyprian 
doth  speak  of,  had  only  a  Church  or  Congregation,  such  as 
die  Ministers  and  Pastors  with  us,  which  are  appointed 
unto  several  towns.  Every  Bishop  in  Cyprian's  time  was 
Pastor  of  one  only  Congregation,  assembled  in  one  place  to 
be  taught  of  one  man.*  A  thing  impertinent,  although  it 
were  true.  For  the  question  is  about  personal  inequality 
amongst  Governors  of  the  Church.  Now  to  shew  there 
was  no  such  thing  in  the  Church  at  such  time  as  Cyprian 
lived,  what  bring  they  forth?  Forsooth,  that  Bishops  had 
then  but  a  small  circuit  of  place  for  the  exercise  of  their 

•  •*  The  Bishop  which  Cyprian  speaketh  of,  is  nothing  else  but  such  as  we  call  Pastor,  or, 
as  the  common  name  with  us  is,  Parson ;  and  his  Church,  whereof  he  is  Bishop,  is  neither 
Diocess  nor  Province,  but  a  Congregation  which  met  together  in  one  place,  and  to  be  taught 
of  one  man.''    T.  C.  lib.  i.  p.  99.  .  ^ 


156  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect'  13L 

Authority.   Be  it  supposed^  that  no  one  Bishop  had  more  than 
one  only  Town  to  govern,  one  only  Congregation  to  rule ;  doth 
it  by  Cyprian  appear,  that  in  any  such  Town  or  Congre- 
gation being  under  the  cure  and  charge  of  some  one  Bishop, 
there  were  not,  besides  that  one  Bishop,  others  also  Ministers 
of  the  Word  and  Sacraments ;  yet  subject  to  the  Power  of 
the  same  Bishop  ?     If  this  appear  not,  how  can  Cyprian  be 
alleged  for  a  witness   that  in  those  times  there  were  no 
Bishops  which  did  differ  from  other  Ministers,  as  being  above 
them  in  degree  of  Ecclesiastical  Power?     But  a  gross  and 
rr.  c.    a  palpable  untruth  it  is,  "  That  Bishops  with  Cyprian  were 
p.  iw*.]    as  Ministers  are  with  us  in  Parish-churches ;  and  that  each 
of  them  did  guide  some  Parish  without  any  other  Pastora 
under  him."     St.  Cyprian's  own  person  may  serve  for  a 
manifest  disproof  hereof.     Pontius,   being  Deacon   undei 
Cyprian,  noteth  that  his  admirable  virtues  caused  him  to  be 
Bishop  with   the   soonest;    which    advancement  therefore 
himself  endeavoured  for  a  while  to  avoid.     It  seemed  in  his 
own  eyes  too  soon  for  him  to  take  the  Title  of  so  great 
honour,  in  regard  whereof  a  Bishop  is  termed  Poni^ex; 
SacerdoSy   Antistes  Dei,     Yet  such  was  his  quaUty,   that 
whereas  others  did  hardly  perform  that  duty  whereunto  the 
Discipline  of  their  Order,  together  with  the  Religion  of  the 
Oath  they  took  at  their  entrance  into  the  Office,  even  con- 
strained them;  him  the  Chair  did  not  make,  but  receive, 
such  a  one,  as  behoved  that  a  Bishop  should  be.     But  soon 
after  followed  that  prescription,  whereby  being  driven  into 
exile,  and  continuing  in  that  estate  for  the  space  of  some 
two  years,  he  ceased  not  by  Letters  to  deal  with  his  Clergy, 
and  to  direct  them  about  the  public  affairs  of  the  Church* 
They  unto  whom  those  Epistles  were  written,  he  commonly 
entituleth  the  Presbyters  and  Deacons  of  that  Church.*    K 
any  man  doubt  whether  those  Presbyters  of  Carthage  were 
Ministers  of  the  Word  and  Sacraments  or  no,  let  him  con- 
sider but  that  one  only  place  of  Cyprian,  where  he  giveth 
them  this  careful  advice,  how  to  deal  with  circumspection  in 
the  perilous  times  of  the  Church,  that  neither  they  which 

•  *(  Etsi  Fratres  pro  dilecUone  sua  cupidi  sunt  ad  conveniendum  et  visitaudum  Confessores 
bonos,  quos  illustravit  jam  gloriosis  initiis  divina  dignatio,  tamen  caute  hoc,  et  non  glomeradm 
nee  per  multitudinem  siraul  junctam,  puto  esse  faciendum;  ne  ex  hoc  ipso  invidia  condtetur, 
et  introeundi  aditus  denegetur,  et  dum  insatiabiles  multum  volumus,  totum  perdamus:  coo- 
sulite  ergo  et  providete  ut  cum  temperamento  hoc  agi  tutius  possit;  ita  ut  Presbyter!  quoque, 
qui  iilic  apud  Confessores  offerunt,  singuli  cum  singulis  Diaconis  per  vices  altement,  quia  et 
mutatio  per8onarum»  et  vidMitudo  convenientium  minuit  invidiam.' '    Ep.  5. 


Sect.  18.]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  157 

were  for  the  truth's  sake  imprisoned  might  want  those 
ghostly  comforts  which  they  ought  to  have,  nor  the  Church 
by  ministering  the  same  unto  them  incur  unnecessary  danger 
and  peril.  In  which  Epistle  it  doth  expressly  appear,  that 
the  Presbyters  of  whom  he  speaketh  did  offer,  that  is  to 
say,  administer  the  Eucharist;  and  that  many  there  were 
of  them  in  the  Church  of  Carthage,  so  as  they  might  have 
every  day  change  for  performance  of  that  duty.  Nor  will 
any  man  of  sound  judgment,  I  think,  deny,  that  Cyprian 
was  in  Authority  and  Power  above  the  Clergy  of  that 
Church,  above  those  Presbyters  unto  whom  he  gave  direc- 
tion. It  is  apparently  therefore  untrue,  that  in  Cyprian's 
time  Ministers  of  the  Word  and  Sacraments  were  all  equal, 
and  that  no  one  of  them  had  either  Title  more  excellent 
than  the  rest,  or  Authority  and  Government  over  the  rest.* 
Cjrprian,  being  Bishop  of  Carthage,  was  clearly  superior 
unto  all  other  Ministers  there :  yea,  Cyprian  was,  by  reason 
of  the  dignity  of  his  See,  an  Archbishop,  and  so  consequently 
4niperior  unto  Bishops.f  Bishops,  we  say,  there  have  been 
always,  even  as  long  as  the  Church  of  Christ  itself  hath 
been.  The  Apostles  who  planted  it,  did  themselves  rule 
as  Bishops  over  it;  neither  could  they  so  well  have  kept 
things  in  order  during  their  own  times,  but  that  Episcopal 
Authority  was  given  them  from  above,  to  exercise  far  and 
wide  over  all  other  Guides  and  Pastors  of  God's  Church. 
The  Church  indeed  for  a  time  continued  without  Bishops 
by  restraint,  every  where  established  in  Christian  cities. 
But  shall  we  thereby  conclude  that  the  Church  hath  no 
use  of  them,  that  without  them  it  may  stand  and  flourish  ? 
No;  the  cause  wherefore  they  were  so  soon  universally 
appointed  was,  for  that  it  plainly  appeared,  that  without 
them  the  Church  could  not  have  continued  long,  j:  It  was 
by  the  special  providence  of  God,  no  doubt,  so  disposed, 
that  the  evil  whereof  this  did  serve  for  remedy  might  first 
be  felt,  and  so  the  reverend  Authority  of  Bishops  be  made 

*  [See  back,  sect  6.  p.  118.  Note  *.] 

f  ["  We  have  a  manifest  example  in  the  Centuries  (iii.  and  vii.)  which  confessing  there 
was  BO  Metropolitan  in  Cyprian's  time,  call  him  Metropolitan."     T.  C.  lib.  ii.  p.  481.  J 

X  [See  Matt,  xxviii.  20,  and  Rom.  iii.  4.  "  Machiavel  did  observe  that  Christian  Religion 
had  long  since  &nen  to  the  ground  had  not  the  regular  strictness  of  poor  inferior  Priests  and 
Friars  held  and  propped  up  the  reputation  of  it  in  the  world,  as  much  as  the  pride  and 
luxury  of  the  great  Cardinals  and  Prince-like- Bishops  did  strive  to  sink  and  demolish  it. 
The  same  observation  holds  true  amongst  us  Protestants  at  this  day."  A  Discourse  coii- 
cermmg  Puritant,  1641.  4to.  p.  36.] 


158  THE   SEVENTH  BOOK  [SecL  13. 

by  so  much  the  more  effectual,  when  our  general  expe- 
rience had  taught  men  what  it  was  for  Churches  to  want 
them.*     Good  Laws  are  never  esteemed  so  good,  nor  ac-» 
knowledged  so  necessary,  as  when  precedent  crimes  are 
as  seeds  out  of  which  they  grow.      Episcopal  Authority 
was  even  in  a  manner  sanctified  unto  the  Church  of  Christ 
by  that  little  bitter  experience  which  it  first  had  of  the 
pestilent  evil  of  schisms.f     Again,  when  this  very  thing 
was  proposed  as  a  remedy,  yet  a  more  suspicious  and 
fearful  acceptance  it  must  needs  have  found,  if  the  self- 
same provident  wisdom  of  Almighty  God  had  not  also 
given  beforehand  sufficient  trial  thereof  in  the  Regiment  of 
Jerusalem,  a  Mother-church,  which  having  received  the 
same  Order  even  at  the  first,  was  by  it  most  peaceably  go- 
verned, when  other  Churches  without  it  had  trouble.     So 
that  by  all  means,  the  necessary  use  of  Episcopal  Gt>vem- 
ment  is  confirmed,    yea,  strengthened  it  is  and  ratified, 
even  by  the  not  establishment  thereof  in  all  Churches 
every  where  at  the  first.J    ii.  When  they  further  dispute, 
"  That  if  any  such  thing  were  needful,   Christ  would  in 
Scripture  have  set  down  particular  Statutes  and  Laws, 
appointing  that  Bishops  should  be  made,  and  prescribing 
in  what  Order,   even  as  the   Law  doth  for  all   kind  of 
Officers  which  were  needful  in  the  Jewish  Regiment;'* 
might  not  a  man  that  would  bend  his  wit  to  maintain  the 
fury  of  the  Petrobrusian  Heretics,  in  pulling  down  Ora- 
tories, use  the  self-same  argument  with  as  much  counte- 
nance of  reason  ?      "  If  it  were  needful  that  we  should 
assemble  ourselves  in  Churches,  would  that  God,  which 
taught  the  Jews  so  exactly  the  frame  of  their  sumptuous 
Temple,  leave  us  no  particular  instructions  in  writing,  no 
not  so  much  as  which  way  to  lay  any  one  stone?"    Surely  such 
kind  of  argumentation  doth  not  so  strengthen  the  sinews  of 
their  cause,  as  weaken  the  credit  of  their  judgment  which 


♦  [Then  (with  reverence  be  it  said),  God  might  have  saved  Hooker  all  this  trouble  if  he 
had  made  "  the  evil"  more  severely  "  felt,"  that  so  the  recollection  of  it,  and  the  healing 
**  Authority  of  Bishops,"  might  never  have  been  forgotten  !] 

t  [Read  Cave's  Lives  of  the  Fathers  for  an  account  of  the  contentions,  abominations,  and 
schismatical  charges  and  counter-charges  of  Hooker's  prot^g^> Bishops.] 

X  [Admitting  it  to  be  true  that  the  Church  of  Jerusalem  was  governed  as  Hooker  would 
make  to  appear,  and  was  therefore  without  trouble ;  the  remedy  for  it  in  **  other  Churches*' 
was  obvious;  but  as  they  did  not  then  adopt  it,  neither  can  it  be  concluded  that  the  '*  Mother- 
church"  was  without  trouble,  nor  that  its  *'  Regiment"  could  have  allayed  the  troubles  of 
those  **  other  churches."] 


Sect.  14,]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY,  159 

are  led  therewith,     iii.  And  whereas,  thirdly,  in  disproof  of 
that  use  which  Episcopal  Authority  hath  in  judgment  of 
spiritual  causes,  they  bring  forth  the  verdict  of  Cyprian, 
who  saith,  **  That  equity  require th  every  man's  cause  to  be  cypr. 
heard,  where  the  fault  he  was  charged  with  was  committed,  Ep*.  a. 
forasmuch  as  there  they  may  have  both  accusers  and  wit- 
nesses in  the  cause;"   this  argument  grounding  itself  on 
principles  no  less  true  in  Civil  than  in  Ecclesiastical  causes, 
unless  it  be  qualified  with  some  exceptions  or  limitations, 
overturneth  the  highest  tribunal  seats  both  in  Church  and 
Commonwealth;  it  taketh  utterly  away  all  appeals;  it  se- 
cretly condemneth  even   the  blessed  Apostle  himself,   as 
having  transgressed  the  Law  of  Equity,  by  his  appeal  from  Acts 
the  Court  of  Judea  unto  those  higher  which  were  in  Rome.  "^' 
The  generality  of  such  kind  of  axioms  deceiveth,  unless  it 
be  construed  with  such  cautions  as  the  matter  whereunto 
they  are  appliable  doth  require.     An  usual  and  ordinary 
transportation  of  causes  out  of  Africa  into  Italy,  out  of  one 
Kingdom  into  another,  as  discontented  persons  list,  which 
was  the  thing   that  Cyprian  disalloweth,  may  be  unequal 
and  unmeet ;  and  yet  not  therefore  a  thing  unnecessary  to 
have  the  Courts  erected  in  higher  places,  and  judgment 
committed  unto  greater  persons,  to  whom  the  meaner  may 
bring  their  causes  either  by  way  of  appeal  or  otherwise, 
to  be  determined  according  to  the  order  of  Justice ;  which 
hath  been   always   observed  every  where  in  Civil   States, 
and  is  no  less  requisite  also  for  the  State  of  the  Church  of 
God.     The  reasons  which  teach  it  to  be  expedient  for  the 
(me,  will  shew  it  to  be  for  the  other  at  leastwise  not  un- 
necessary.     Inequality  of  Pastors  is   an   Ordinance   both 
divine  and  profitable.     Their  exceptions  against  it,  in  these 
two  respects,  we  have  shewed  to  be  altogether  causeless, 
unreasonable,  and  unjust. 

14.  The  next  thing  which  they  upbraid  us  with,  is  the  ^^j^-^^ 
difference  between  that  inequality  of  Pastors  which  hath  jo  those 
been  of  old,  and  which  now  is.     For  at  length  they  grant,  wwch^ 
"  That  the  Superiority  of  Bishops  and  of  Archbishops  is  jected. 
somewhat  ancient,  but  no  such  kind  of  Superiority  as  ours  ing^the 
have."     By  the  Laws  of  our  Discipline  a  Bishop  may  or-  ence  be- 
dain  without  asking  the  people's  consent,  a  Bishop  maythat^^ 
excommunicate  and  release  alone,  a  Bishop  may  imprison,  which 
a  Bishop  may  bear  Civil  Office  in  the  Realm,  a  Bishop  may  Jow*"^' 


160  THt  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.  14. 

have,  be  a  Counsellor  of  State;  those  things  ancient  Bishops 
which^^  neither  did  nor  might  do.  Be  it  granted,  that  ordinarily 
Bishops  neither  in  elections  nor  deprivations,  neither  in  excommu- 
more  nicating  nor  in  releasing  the  excommunicate,  in  none  of 
^r  the  weighty  affairs  of  Government,  Bishops  of  old  were 
tera!**^*  wont  to  do  any  thing  without  consultation  with  their  Clergy 
and  consent  of  the  people  under  them ;  be  it  granted,  that 
the  same  Bishops  did  neither  touch  any  man  with  corporal 
punishment,  nor  meddle  with  secular  affairs  and  offices, 
the  whole  Clergy  of  God  being  then  tied,  by  the  strict  and 
severe  Canons  of  the  Church,  to  use  no  other  than  ghostly 
power,  to  attend  no  other  business  than  heavenly.  Tar- 
quinius  was  in  the  Roman  Commonwealth  deservedly  hated, 
of  whose  unorderly  proceedings  the  History  speaketh  thus: 
Liv.  <^  Hie  Regum  primus  traditum  a  prioribus  morem  de  om- 
nibus Senatum  consulendi  solvit :  domesticis  consiliis  Rem- 
pub.  administravit ;  helium,  pacem,  foedera,  societates,  per 
seipsum,  cum  quibus  voluit,  injussu  Populi  ac  Senatus, 
fecit  diremitque."  Against  Bishops  the  like  is  objected, 
"  That  they  are  invaders  of  other  men's  right,  and  by 
intolerable  usurpation  take  upon  them  to  do  that  alone» 
wherein  ancient  Laws  have  appointed  that  others,  not  diey 
only,  should  bear  sway."  Let  the  case  of  Bishops  be  put, 
not  in  such  sort  as  it  is,  but  even  as  their  very  heaviest 
adversaries  would  devise  it.  Suppose  that  Bishops  at  the 
first  had  encroached  upon  the  Church  ;  that  by  sleights  and 
cunning  practices  they  had  appropriated  Ecclesiastical,  as 
Augustus  did  Imperial  Power;  that  they  had  taken  the 
advantage  of  men's  inclinable  affections,  which  did  not 
suffer  them  for  revenue'  sake  to  be  suspected  of  ambition ; 
that  in  the  meanwhile  their  usurpation  had  gone  forward 
by  certain  easy  and  unsensible  degrees ;  that  being  not 
discerned  in  the  growth,  when  it  was  thus  far  grown,  as 
we  now  see  it  hath  proceeded,  the  world  at  length  per- 
ceiving there  was  just  cause  of  complaint,  but  no  place  of 
remedy  left,  had  assented  unto  it  by  a  general  secret  agree- 
ment to  bear  it  now  as  an  helpless  evil :  all  this  supposed 
for  certain  and  true ;  yet  surely  a  thing  of  this  nature, 
as  for  the  Superior  to  do  that  alone  unto  which  of  right 
the  consent  of  some  other  Inferiors  should  have  been  re- 
quired by  them ;  though  it  had  an  indirect  entrance  at  the 
first,  must  needs^  through  continuance  of  so  many  ages 


Sect.  14.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  161 

as  this  hath  stood,  be  made  now  a  thing  more  natural  to 
the  Church,  than  that  it  should  be  opprest  with  the  men- 
tion of  contrary  Orders  worn  so  many  ages  since  quite 
and  clean  out  of  ure.  *  But  with  Bishops  the  case  is 
otherwise:  for  in  doing  that  by  themselves  which  others 
together  with  them  have  been  accustomed  to  do,  they  do 
not  any  thing  but  that  whereunto  they  have  been  upon  just 
occasions  authorized  by  orderly  means.  All  things  natural 
have  in  them  naturally,  more  or  less,  the  power  of  providing 
for  their  own  safety  ;  and  as  each  particular  man  hath  this 
power,  so  every  politic  Society  of  men  must  needs  have  the 
same,  that  thereby  the  whole  may  provide  for  the  good 
of  all  parts  therein.  For  other  benefit  we  have  not  any, 
by  sorting  ourselves  into  Politic  Societies,  saving  only  that 
by  this  mean  each  part  hath  that  relief  which  the  virtue 
of  the  whole  is  able  to  yield  it.  The  Church,  therefore, 
being  a  Politic  Society  or  Body,  cannot  possibly  want  the 
power  of  providing  for  itself;  and  the  chiefest  part  of  that 
power  consisteth  in  the  Authority  of  making  Laws.  Now, 
iiHrasmuch  as  Corporations  are  perpetual,  the  Laws  of  the 
ancienter  Church  cannot  choose  but  bind  the  latter,  while 
they  are  in  force.  But  we  must  note  withal,  that  because 
the  Body  of  the  Church  continueth  the  same,  it  hath  the 
same  Authority  still,  and  may  abrogate  old  Laws,  or  make 
new,  as  need  shall  require.  Wherefore,  vainly  are  the 
ancient  Canons  and  Constitutions  objected  as  Laws,  when 
CMice  they  are  either  let  secretly  to  die  by  disusage,  or 
are  openly  abrogated  by  contrary  Laws.f  The  Ancient 
had  cause  to  do  no  otherwise  than  they  did;  and  yet  so 
strictly  they  judged  not  themselves  in  conscience  bound 
to  observe  those  Orders,  but  that  in  sundry  cases  they 
easily  dispensed  therewith,  which  I  suppose  they  would 
never  have  done,  had  they  esteemed  them  as  things  where- 
unto everlasting,  immutable,  and  indispensable  observation 
did  belong.  The  Bishop  usually  promoted  none  which 
were  not  first  allowed  as  fit,  by  conference  had  with  the 
rest  of  his  Clergy  and  with  the  people.  Notwithstanding, 
in  the  case  of  Aurelius,   St.  Cyprian  did  otherwise.     In 


*  [Can  len^h  of  time  convert  an  abase  into  its  opposite,  or  error  into  truth  ?  If  that 
Doctrine  be  maintained,  the  Reformation  can  no  longer  be  justified.] 

f  [The  coarse  of  the  argument  at  this  place  would  enable  its  Author  to  make  what  escape 
lie  might  choose  firom  any  opponents.] 

VOL.  111.  M 


162  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  14. 

'  matters  of  deliberation  and  counsel,  for  disposing  of  that 
which  belongeth  generally  to  the  whole  Body  of  the  Churchy 
or  which  being  more  particular,  is  nevertheless  of  so  great 
consequence,  that  it  needeth  the  force  of  many  judgments 
conferred;  in  such  things  the  common  saying  must  neces- 
sarily take  place,  "  An  eye  cannot  see  that  which  eyes 
can."  As  for  Clerical  Ordinations,  there  are  no  such 
reasojis  alleged  against  the  Order  which  is,  but  that  it 
may  be  esteemed  as  good  in  every  respect  as  that  which 
hath  been,  and,  in  some  considerations,  better ;  at  leastwise 
{which  is  sufficient  to  our  purpose)  it  may  be  held  in  the 
Church  of  Christ  without  transgressing  any  Law,  either 
ancient  or  late,  divine  or  human,  which  we  ought  to  observe 
and  keep.  The  Form  of  making  Ecclesiastical  Officers  hath 
sundry  parts,  neither  are  they  all  of  equal  moment.  When 
Deacons  having  not  been  before  in  the  Church  of  Christi 
the  Apostles  saw  it  needful  to  have  such  ordained,  they, 
first,  assemble  the  multitude,  and  shew  them  how  needful  it 
is  that  Deacons  be  made :  secondly,  they  name  unto  them 
what  number  they  judge  convenient,  what  quality  the  men 
must  be  of,  and  to  the  people  they  commit  the  care  of 
finding  such  out:  thirdly,  the  people  hereunto  assenting, 
make  their  choice  of  Stephen  and  the  rest ;  those  chosen 
men  they  bring  and  present  before  the  Apostles ;  howbeit, 
all  this  doth  not  endue  them  with  any  Ecclesiastical  Power. 
But  when  so  much  was  done,  the  Apostles  finding  no  cause 
to  take  exception,  did  with  Prayer  and  Imposition  of  Hands 
make  them  Deacons.  This  was  it  which  gave  them  their 
very  being ;  all  other  things  besides  were  only  preparations 
unto  this.  Touching  the  Form  of  making  Presbyters,  al- 
though it  be  not  wholly  of  purpose  any  where  set  down  in 
the  Apostles'  writings,  yet  sundry  speeches  there  are  which 
insinuate  the  chiefest  things  that  belong  unto  that  action: 
Acts      as,    when   Paul  and   Barnabas  are   said  to   have   fasted. 

xiv  23a  ' 

iiim.  prayed,  and  made  Presbyters:  when  Timothy  is  willed  to 
"  lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,**  for  fear  of  participating 
with  other  men's  sins.  For  this  cause  the  Order  of  the 
primitive  Church  was,  between  choice  and  Ordination,  to 
have  some  space  for  such  probation  and  trial  as  the 
iTiin.  Apostle  doth  mention  in  Deacons,  saying,  "  Let  them 
***•  *^  first  be  proved,  and  then  minister,  if  so  be  they  be  found 
blameless." 


Sect.  14.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  163 

Alexander  Severus  beholding  in  his  time  how  careful  the  Lam. 
Church  of  Christ  was,  especially  for  this  point;  how,  after i7ex/° 
the  choice  of  their  Pastors,  they  used  to  publish  the  names  ^^^^' 
of  the  parties  chosen,  and  not  to  give  them  the  final  act  of 
Approbation,  till  they  saw  whether  any  let  or  impediment 
would  be  alleged ;   he  gave  commandment.  That  the  like 
should  also  be  done  in  his  own  Imperial  Elections ;  adding 
this  as  a  reason  wherefore  he  so  required,  namely,  ^'  For 
that  both  Christians  and  Jews  being  so  wary  about  the  Ordi- 
nation of  their  Priests,  it  seemed  very  unequal  for  him  not 
to  be  in  Uke  sort  circumspect  to  whom  he  committed  the 
Government  of  Provinces,  containing  power  over  men's  both 
estates  and  lives."     This  the  Canon  itself  doth  provide  for, 
requiring,  before  Ordination,   scrutuiy :    "  Let  them  dili-  d.  can. 
gently  be  examined  three  days  together  before  the  Sab-  SJJlJf** 
bath,  and  on  the  Sabbath  let  them  be  presented  unto  the  i^xvn. 
Bishop."    And  even  this  in  efiect  also  is  the  very  use  of  the 
Church  of  England,  at  all  solemn  Ordaining  of  Ministers ; 
and,  if  all  Ordaining  were  solemn,  I  must  confess  it  were 
much  the  better. 

The  pretended  disorder  of  the  Church  of  England  is, 
that  Bishops  ordain  them  to  whose  Election  the  people  give 
no  voices,  and  so  the  Bishops  make  them  alone ;  that  is  to 
say,  they  give  Ordination  without  popular  election  going 
before,  which  ancient  Bishops  neither  did  nor  might  do. 
Now  in  very  truth,  if  the  Multitude  have  hereunto  a  right, 
which  right  can  never  be  translated  from  them  for  any  cause, 
then  is  there  no  remedy  but  we  must  yield,  that  unto  the 
lawful  making  of  Ministers  the  voice  of  the  people  is  re- 
quired ;  and  that,  according  unto  the  adverse  party's  asser- 
tion, "  such  as  make  Ministers  without  asking  the  People's  Eccies. 
consent,  do  but  exercise  a  certain  Tyranny."  p.^? ' 

At  the  first  erection  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Rome,  the 
People  (for  so  it  was  then  fittest)  determined  of  all  affairs : 
afterwards,  this  growing  troublesome,  their  Senators  did  that 
for  them  which  themselves  before  had  done :  in  the  end  all 
came  to  one  man's  hands ;  and  the  Emperor  alone  was  in- 
stead of  many  Senators.* 

•  [At  the  first  erection  of  Christian  Churches,  the  People  (for  so  it  was  then  fittest)  deter- 
mined of  all  affiiin :  afterwards,  this  growing  troublesome,  their  Pastors  did  that  for  them 
which  themselves  before  had  done :  in  the  end  all  came  to  one  man's  hands ;  and  the  Urn- 
venal  Bishop  (or  Pope)  alone  was  mstead  of  many  Pastors  /] 

m2 


164  I'HE  SEVENTH   BOOK  [SccL  14. 

In  these  things,  the  experience  of  time  may  breed  both 
Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  change  from  that  which  hath  been 
before  received ;  neither  do  latter  things  always  violently 
exclude  former ;  but  the  one  growing  less  convenient  than  it 
hath  been,  giveth  place  to  that  which  is  now  become  more. 
That  which  was  fit  for  the  people  themselves  to  do  at  the 
first,  might  afterwards  be  more  convenient  for  them  to  do  by 
some  other :  which  other  is  not  hereby  proved  a  Tyrant, 
because  he  alone  doth  that  which  a  multitude  were  wont  to 
do,  unless  by  violence  he  take  that  authority  upon  him, 
against  the  order  of  Law,  and  without  any  public  appoint^ 
ment ;  as  with  us,  if  any  did,  it  should  (I  suppose)  not  long 
be  safe  for  him  so  to  do. 

This  answer  (I  hope)  will  seem  to  be  so  much  the  more 
reasonable,  in  that  themselves,  who  stand  against  us,  have 
furnisht  us  therewith.  For,  whereas  against  the  making 
of  Ministers  by  Bishops  alone,  their  use  hath  been  to 
object,  What  sway  the  People  did  bear  when  Stephen  and 
the  rest  were  ordained  Deacons ;  they  begin  to  espy  how 
their  own  Platform  swerveth  not  a  little  from  that  example 
wherewith  they  control  the  practice  of  others.  For,  touch- 
ing the  form  of  the  people's  concurrence  in  that  action,  they 
observe  it  not ;  no,  they  plainly  profess,  that  they  are  not 
in  this  point  bound  to  be  followers  of  the  Apostles.  The 
Apostles  ordained  whom  the  People  had  first  chosen. 
They  hold,  that  their  Ecclesiastical  Senate  ought  both  to 
choose,  and  also  to  ordain.  Do  not  themselves  then  take 
away  that  which  the  Apostles  gave  the  people,  namely,  the 
privilege  of  choosing  Ecclesiastical  Officers?  They  do. 
But  behold  in  what  sort  they  answer  it. 
Ecci.  **  By  the  sixth  and  the  fourteenth  of  the  Acts  (say  they) 
^if^'  it  doth  appear,  that  the  People  had  the  chiefest  power  of 
choosing.  Howbeit  that,  as  unto  me  it  seemeth,  was  done 
upon  special  cause  which  doth  not  so  much  concern  us, 
neither  ought  it  to  be  drawn  unto  the  ordinary  and  per- 
petual Form  of  governing  the  Church.  For,  as  in  estabUsh- 
ing  Commonweals,  not  only  if  they  be  popular,  but  even 
being  such  as  are  ordered  by  the  power  of  a  few  the 
chiefest,  or  as  by  the  sole  authority  of  one,  till  the  same 
be  established,  the  whole  sway  is  in  the  people's  hands, 
who  voluntarily  appoint  those  Magistrates  by  whose  autho- 
rity they  may  be  governed;    so   that  afterward   not  the 


Sect.  14.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  165 

multitude  itself^  but  those  Magistrates  which  were  chosen  by 
the  multitude,  have  the  ordering  of  public  aflPairs :  after  the 
self-same  manner  it  fared  in  establishing  also  the  Church; 
when  there  was  not  as  yet  any  placed  over  the  people, 
all  authority  was  in  them  all ;  but  when  they  all  had  chosen 
certain  to  whom  the  Regiment  of  the  Church  was  com-* 
mitted,  this  power  is  not  now  any  longer  in  the  hands 
of  the  whole  multitude,  but  wholly  in  theirs  who  are  ap- 
pointed Guides  of  the  Church.  Besides,  in  the  choice  of 
Deacons,  there  was  also  another  special  cause  wherefore 
the  whole  Church  at  that  time  should  choose  them.  For 
inasmuch  as  the  Grecians  murmured  against  the  Hebrews, 
and  complained  that  in  the  daily  distribution  which  was 
made  for  relief  of  the  poor,  they  were  not  indifferently  re- 
spected, nor  such  regard  had  of  their  widows  as  was  meet ; 
this  made  it  necessary  that  they  all  should  have  to  deal  in 
the  choice  of  those  unto  whom  that  care  was  afterwards  to 
be  committed,  to  the  end  that  all  occasion  of  jealousies  and 
complaints  might  be  removed.  Wherefore,  that  which 
was  done  by  the  People  for  certain  causes,  before  the 
Church  was  fully  settled,  may  not  be  drawn  out  and  ap- 
plied unto  a  constant  and  perpetual  Form  of  ordering  the 
Church." 

Let  them  cast  the  Discipline  of  the  Church  of  England 
into  the  same  scales  where  they  weigh  their  own,  let  them 
give  us  the  same  measure  which  here  they  take,  and  our 
strifes  shall  soon  be  brought  to  a  quiet  end.  When  they 
urge  the  Apostles  as  precedents;  when  they  condemn  us 
of  Tyranny,  because  we  do  not  in  making  Ministers  the 
same  which  the  Apostles  did ;  when  they  plead,  "  That 
with  us  one  alone  doth  ordain,  and  that  our  Ordinations 
are  without  the  people's  knowledge,  contrary  to  that  exam- 
ple which  the  blessed  Apostles  gave;"  we  do  not  request 
at  their  hands  allowance  as  much  as  of  one  word  we  speak 
in  our  own  defence,  if  that  which  we  speak  be  of  our  own ; 
but  that  which  themselves  speak,  they  must  be  contented 
to  listen  unto.  To  exempt  themselves  from  being  over-far 
prest  with  the  Apostles'  example,  they  can  answer,  "  That 
which  was  done  by  the  people  once  upon  special  causes, 
when  the  ChurcK  was  not  yet  established,  is  not  to  be 
made  a  Rule  for  the  constant  and  continual  ordering  of  the 
Church."    In  defence  of  their  own  election,  although  they 


166  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  14f. 

do  not  therein  depend  on  the  people  so  much  as  the 
Apostles  in  the  choice  of  Deacons^  they  think  it  a  very 
sufficient  apology,  that  there  were  special  considerations 
why  Deacons  at  that  time  should  be  chosen  by  the  whole 
Church,  but  not  so  now.  In  excuse  of  dissimilitudes  be- 
tween their  own  and  the  Apostles'  Discipline,  they  are  con- 
tented to  use  this  answer,  ^^  That  many  things  were  done 
in  the  Apostles'  times,  before  the  settling  of  the  Church, 
which  afterward  the  Church  was  not  tied  to  observe."  For 
countenance  of  their  own  proceedings,  wherein  their  Go- 
vernors do  more  than  the  Apostles,  and  their  People  less 
than  under  the  Apostles  the  first  Churches  are  found  to 
have  done  at  the  making  of  Ecclesiastial  Officers,  they  deem 
it  a  marvellous  reasonable  kind  of  pleading  to  some,  **  That 
even  as  in  Commonweals,  when  the  multitude  have  once 
chosen  many,  or  one  to  rule  over  them,  the  right  which  was 
at  the  first  in  the  whole  body  of  the  people  is  now  derived 
into  those  many,  or  that  one  which  is  so  chosen ;  and,  that  this 
being  done,  it  is  not  the  whole  multitude,  to  whom  the  ad- 
ministration of  such  public  affairs  any  longer  appertaineth, 
but  that  which  they  did,  their  Rulers  may  now  do  lawfully 
without  them ;  after  the  self-same  manner  it  standeth  with 
the  Church  also." 

How  easy  and  plain  might  we  make  our  defence,  how 
clear  and  allowable  even  unto  them,  if  we  could  but  obtain 
of  them  to  admit  the  same  things  consonant  unto  equity  in 
our  mouths,  which  they  require  to  be  so  taken  from  their 
own  !  If  that  which  is  truth,  being  uttered  in  maintenance 
of  Scotland  and  Geneva,  do  not  cease  to  be  truth  when  the 
Church  of  England  once  allegeth  it,  this  great  crime  of 
"  Tyranny,"  wherewith  we  are  charged,  hath  a  plain  and 
an  easy  defence.  Yea,  but  we  do  not  at  all  ask  the  People's 
approbation,  which  they  do,  whereby  they  shew  them- 
selves more  indifferent  and  more  free  from  taking  away 
the  people's  right.  Indeed,  when  their  Lay-elders  have 
chosen  whom  they  think  good,  the  people's  consent  there- 
unto is  asked,  and,  if  they  give  their  approbation,  the  thing 
standeth  warranted  for  sound  and  good.  But  if  not,  b 
Ecciea.  the  former  choice  overthrown?  No,  but  the  people  is  to 
p/iT.  yield  to  reason ;  and,  if  they  which  have  made  the  choice 
do  so  like  the  people's  reason,  as  to  reverse  their  own  deed 
at  the  hearing  of  it,  then  a  new  election   to  be   made; 


Sect.  14*.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  167 

otherwise  the  former  to  standi  notwithstanding  the  people's 
negative  and  dislike.  What  is  this  else  but  to  deal  with 
the  people^  as  those  nurses  do  with  infants^  whose  mouths 
they  besmear  with  the  backside  of  the  spoon,  as  though 
they  had  fed  them,  when  they  themselves  do  devour  the 
food  ?  They  cry  in  the  ears  of  the  people,  that  all  men's  * 
consent  should  be  had  unto  that  which  concerns  all ;  they 
make  the  people  beUeve  we  wrong  them,  and  deprive  them 
of  their  right  in  making  Ministers,  whereas  with  us  the 
people  have  commonly  far  more  sway  and  force  than  with 
them.  For,  inasmuch  as  there  are  but  two  main  things  ob- 
served in  every  Ecclesiastical  function.  Power  to  exercise  the 
duty  itself,  and  some  Charge  of  people  whereon  to  exercise 
the  same ;  the  former  of  these  is  received  at  the  hands  of 
the  whole  visible  Catholic  Church.  For  it  is  not  any  one 
particular  multitude  that  can  give  power,  the  force  whereof 
may  reach  far  and  wide  indefinitely,  as  the  Power  of  Order 
doth,  which  whoso  hath  once  received,  there  is  no  action 
which  belongeth  thereunto  but  he  may  exercise  effectually 
the  same  in  any  part  of  the  world  without  iterated  Ordi- 
nation. They  whom  the  whole  Church  hath  from  the  first 
beginning  used  as  her  agents  in  conferring  this  Power,  are  not 
either  one  or  moe  [more]  of  the  Laity,  and  therefore  it  hath 
not  been  heard  of  that  ever  any  such  were  allowed  to  ordain 
Ministers:  only  persons  Ecclesiastical,  and  they,  in  place 
of  calling.  Superiors  both  unto  Deacons  and  unto  Pres- 
byters ;  only  such  persons  Ecclesiastical  have  been  autho- 
rized to  ordain  both,  and  give  them  the  Power  of  Order, 
in  the  name  of  the  whole  Church."*  Such  were  the  Apostles, 
such  was  Timothy,  such  was  Titus,  such  are  Bishops.  Not 
that  there  is  between  these  no  difference,  but  that  they  all 
agree  in  pre-eminence  of  place  above  both  Presbyters 
and  Deacons,  whom  they  otherwise  might  not  ordain.  Now 
whereas  hereupon  some  do  infer,  that  no  Ordination  can 
stand  but  only  such  as  is  made  by  Bishops,  which  have  had 
their  Ordination  likewise  by  other  Bishops  before  them, 
till  we  come  to  the  very  Apostles  of  Christ  themselves ;  in 
which  respect  it  was  demanded  of  Beza  at  Poissie,  "  By 
what  Authority  he  could  administer  the  holy  Sacraments, 
being  not  thereunto  ordained  by  any  other  than  Calvin,  or 

•  "  Neque  enim  fas  erat  aut  licebat,  ut  inferior  ordioaret  majorem."    Comment,  q.  Ambros. 
tribuuntur,  in  1  Tim.  iii. 


16S  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  14.  , 

by  such  as  to  whom  the  Power  of  Ordination  did  not  belong, 
according  to  the  ancient  Orders  and  Customs  of  the  Church; 
sith  Calvin  and  they  who  joined  with  him  in  that  action 
were  no  Bishops  ?*'  and  Athanasius  maintaineth  the  fact  of 
Macarius  a  Presbyter,  which  overthrew  the  Holy  Table 
whereat  one  Ischyras  would  have  ministered  the  blessed 
Sacrament,  having  not  been  consecrated  thereunto  by  Lay- 
ing on  of  some  Bishop's  Hands,"*  according  to  the  Eccle- 
siastical Canons;  as  also  Epiphanius  inveigheth  sharply 
against  divers  for  doing  the  Uke,  when  they  had  not  Epis- 
copal Ordination:  to  this  we  answer,  that  there  may  be 
sometimes  very  just  and  sufficient  reason  to  allow  Ordina- 
tion made  without  a  Bishop.  The  whole  Church  visible 
being  the  true  original  subject  of  all  Power,  it  hath  not  or- 
dinarily allowed  any  other  than  Bishops  alone  to  ordain: 
howbeit,  as  the  ordinary  course  is  ordinarily  in  all  things  to 
be  observed,  so  it  may  be  in  some  cases  not  unnecessary  that 
we  decline  from  the  ordinary  ways.  Men  may  be  extraor- 
dinarily, yet  allowably,  two  ways  admitted  unto  Spiritual 
Functions  in  the  Church.  One  is,  when  God  himself  doth 
of  himself  raise  up  any,  whose  labour  he  useth  without  re- 
quiring that  Men  should  authorize  them  :  but  then  he  doth 
ratify  their  calling  by  manifest  signs  and  tokens  himself 
from  Heaven :  and  thus  even  such  as  believed  not  our  Sa- 
viour's teaching,  did  yet  acknowledge  him  a  lawful  Teacher 

[John  ^^^^  ^^°"^  ^^^ '  "  Thou  art  a  Teacher  sent  from  God, 
"*'**3  otherwise  none  could  do  those  things  which  thou  dost." 
Luther  did  but  reasonably,  therefore,  in  declaring  that  the 
Senate  of  Mulheuse  should  do  well  to  ask  of  Muncer,t 
from  whence  he  received  Power  to  teach  ?  who  it  was  that 
had  called  him?  and  if  his  answer  were,  that  God  had  given 
him  his  charge,  then  to  require  at  his  hands  some  evident 
sign  thereof  for  men's  satisfaction ;  because  so  God  is  wont, 
when  he  himself  is  the  author  of  any  extraordinary  calling.}; 

f  [A  celebrated  German  Enthusiast  After  being  implicated  in  troubles  in  Thuring^a  and 
other  places,  he  was  put  to  death  in  1526.  His  Biographer  has  accumulated  testimonies  of 
Muncer's  learnings  given  by  Melancthon,  Luther,  Spangenberg,  Camerarius,  and  others; 
and  from  his  own  writings  on  Faith,  on  the  Scriptures,  and  on  Baptism.  He  also  gives 
some  proofs  of  the  dreadful  oppressions  under  which  the  peasantry  laboured  in  the  time  of 
Muncer ;  from  which  there  may  be  reason  to  conclude  that  an  explosion  would  have  taken  place 
even  if  he  had  not  existed.     See  Chalmers'  Gen,  Biog.  Die.  1815.  8vo.  Volxxii.  p  511.] 

X  ['*  If  Christ  had  determined  from  the  beginning,  that  nothing  should  be  taught  and 
preached  without  a  license  from  the  Bishops,  and  had  referred  all  his  doctrine  to  Annas  and 
Caiphas,  what  had  become  of  the  Christian  Faith  by  this  time  ?  or,  who  had  ever  heard  any 
thing  of  the  Gospel  ?    Jewel's  Apology,  1562.    Cheyne's  edit  1719,  Svo.  p.  122.] 


Sect.  14».]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  169 

Another  extraordinary  kind  of  vocation  is^  when  the  exi- 
gence of  Necessity  doth  constrain  to  leave  the  usual  ways 
of  the  Church,  which  otherwise  we  would  willingly  keep : 
where  the  Church  must  needs  have  some  ordained,  and 
neither  hath,  nor  can  have  possibly,  a  Bishop  to  ordain; 
in  case  of  such  Necessity,  the  ordinary  institution  of  God 
hath  given  oftentimes,  and  may  give,  place.  And  therefore 
we  are  not,  simply  without  exception,  to  urge  a  Uneal 
descent  of  Power  from  the  Apostles  by  continued  succes- 
sion of  Bishops  in  every  effectual  Ordination.*  These 
cases  of  inevitable  Necessity  excepted,  none  may  ordain  but 
only  Bishops :  by  the  Imposition  of  their  Hands  it  is,  that 
the  Church  giveth  Power  of  Order  both  unto  Presbyters 
and  Deacons.  Now,  when  that  Power  so  received  is  once 
to  have  any  certain  subject  whereon  it  may  work,  and 
whereunto  it  is  to  be  tied,  here  cometh  in  the  People*s 
consent,  and  not  before.  The  Power  of  Order  I  may  law- 
fully receive,  without  asking  leave  of  any  Multitude ;  but 
that  Power  I  cannot  exercise  upon  any  one  certain  people 
utterly  against  their  wills ;  neither  is  there  in  the  Church 
of  England  any  man,  by  order  of  Law,  possessed  with  Pas- 
toral charge  over  any  Parish,  but  the  People  in  effect  do 
choose  him  thereunto.  For,  albeit,  they  choose  not  by 
giving  every  man  personally  his  particular  voice,  yet  can 
they  not  say,  that  they  have  their  Pastors  violently  ob- 
truded upon  them,  inasmuch  as  their  ancient  and  original 
interest  therein  hath  been  by  orderly  means  derived  into 
the  Patron  who  chooseth  for  them.f  And  if  any  man  be 
desirous  to  know  how  Patrons  came  to  have  such  interest, 
we  are  to  consider,  that  at  the  first  erection  of  Churches, 
it  seemed  but  reasonable  in  the  eyes  of  the  whole  Christian 
world  to  pass  that  right  to  them  and  their  successors,  on 
whose  soil  and  at  whose  charge  the  same  were  founded.}; 
This  all  men  gladly  and  willingly  did,  both  in  honour  of  so 
great  piety,  and  for  encouragement  of  many  others  unto  the 
like,  who  perad venture  else  would  have  been  as  slow  to  erect 

*  [No  doubt  but  Hooker  would  have  allowed  that  his  Doctrine  on  this  point  is  confiMm- 
able  with  experience.  How  thenceforth  can  they,  who  claim  to  be  regularly  constituted 
Successors,  assure  themselves  and  their  charges  that  they  are  of  the  *'  lineal  descent  V*  See 
Sec.  4.  p.  101.     Note  §.] 

f  [Who  may  be  so  imbecile  as  to  be  all  but  an  idiot ;  or  even  if  otherwise  mentally  gifted, 
an  unbeliever.] 

X  [That  is,  they  were  permitted  to  purchase  a  passport  to  Heaven  by  their  good  works; 
and  were  allowed  a  perpetual  Ikn  as  a  sort  of  "  keeping  back  part  of  the  price."] 


170  ^HE  SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  14v 

Churches,  as  to  endow  them,  as  we  are  forward  both  to  spoil 
them,  and  to  pull  them  down. 

It  is  no  true  assertion,  therefore,  in  such  sort  as  the  pre- 
tended Reformers  mean  it,  **  That  all  Ministers  of  God's 
Word  ought  to  be  made  by  consent  of  many,  that  is  to  say, 
by  the  People's  suffrages ;  that  ancient  Bishops  neither  did 
nor  might  ordain  otherwise ;  and  that  ours  do  herein  usurp 
a  far  greater  power  than  was,  or  then  lawfully  could  have 
been,  granted  unto  Bishops  which  were  of  old."    Further- 
more, as  touching  Spiritual  Jurisdiction,  our  Bishops,  they 
say,  do  that  which  of  all  things  is  most  intolerable,  and 
which  the  Ancient  never  did ;  '^  Our  Bishops  excommunicate 
and  release  alone,  whereas  the  Censures  of  the  Church  neither 
ought,  nor  were  wont  to  be,  administered  otherwise  than  by 
consent  of  many."    Their  meaning  here,  when  they  speak 
of  "  many,"  is  not  as  before  it  was.     When  they  hold  that 
Ministers  should  be  made  with  consent  of  many,  they  under- 
stand by  manyy  the  Multitude,  or  common  people ;  but  in 
requiring  that  many  should  evermore  join  with  the  Bishop 
in  the  administration  of  Church-censures,   they  mean  by 
manyy  a  few  Lay-elders  chosen  out  of  the  rest  of  the  people 
Goncii.  to  that  purpose.     This,  they  say,  is  ratified  by  ancient 
iv!c.^!  Councils,  by  ancient  Bishops  this  was  practised.     And  the 
iib?*Hi.   reason  hereof,  as  Beza  supposeth,  was,  "  Because  if  the 
i4^iib?ii.  Power  of  Ecclesiastical  Censures  did  belong  unto  any  one, 
^^'  ®'    there  would  this  great  inconveniency  follow ;  Ecclesiastical 
Regiment  should  be  changed  into  mere  Tyranny,  or  else  into 
a  Civil  Royalty :  therefore  no  one,  either  Bishop  or  Presby- 
ter, should  or  can  alone  exercise  that  Power,  but  with  his 
Ecclesiastical  Consistory  he  ought  to  do  it,  as  may  appear 
by  the  old  Discipline." 

And  is  it  possible,  that  one  so  grave  and  judicious  should 
think  it  in  earnest  Tyranny  for  a  Bishop  to  excommunicate, 
whom  Law  and  Order  hath  authorized  so  to  do  ?  or  be  per- 
suaded, that  Ecclesiastical  Regiment  degenerateth  into  Civil 
Regality,  when  one  is  allowed  to  do  that  which  hath  been  at 
any  time  the  deed  of  moe  [more]  ?  Surely,  far  meaner  witted 
men  than  the  world  accompteth  Master  Beza  do  easily  per- 
ceive, that  Tyranny  is  Power  violently  exercised  against 
Order,  against  Law;  and  that  the  difference  of  these  two 
Regiments  Ecclesiastical  and  Civil,  consisteth  in  the  matter 
about  which  the  actions  of  each  are  conversant ;  and  not  in 


Sect.  15.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  171 

this,  that  Civil  Royalty  admitteth  but  one.  Ecclesiastical 
Government  requireth  many  supreme  Correctors.  Which 
allegation,  were  it  true,  would  prove  no  more  than  only,  that 
some  certain  number  is  necessary  for  the  assistance  of  the 
Bishop :  but  that  a  number  of  such  as  they  do  require  is 
necessary,  how  doth  it  prove  ?  Wherefore,  albeit  Bishops 
should  now  do  the  very  same  which  the  Ancients  did,  using 
the  Colleges  of  Presbyters  under  them  as  their  assistants 
when  they  administer  Church-censures,  yet  should  they  still 
swerve  utterly  from  that  which  these  men  so  busily  labour 
for^  because  the  agents  whom  they  require  to  assist  in  those 
cases  are  a  sort  of  Lay-elders,  such  as  no  ancient  Bishop 
ever  was  assisted  with.* 

Shall  these  fruitless  jars  and  janglings  never  cease?  shall 
we  never  see  end  of  them  ?  How  much  happier  were  the 
world  if  those  eager  taskmasters,  whose  eyes  are  so  curious 
and  sharp  in  discerning  what  should  be  done  by  many,  and 
what  by  few,  were  all  changed  into  painful  doers  of  that 
which  every  good  Christian  man  ought  either  only  or  chiefly 
to  do,  and  to  be  found  therein  doing  when  that  great  and 
glorious  Judge  of  all  men's  both  deeds  and  words  shall 
appear  ?t  In  the  meanwhile,  be  it  one  that  hath  this  charge, 
or  be  they  many  that  be  his  assistants,  let  there  be  careful 
provision  that  justice  may  be  administered,  and  in  this 
shall  our  God  be  glorified  more  than  by  such  contentious 
disputes.^: 

15.  Of  which  nature  that  also  is,  wherein  Bishops  are,  con- 
over  and  besides  all  this,  accused  '^  to  have  much  more  SeCi& 

*  [Be  it  remembered  that  Hooker's  whole  argument  on  the  Ministry  goes  to  the  alleged 
necessityi  from  experience  of  evil,  and  the  Laws  of  the  Jewish  and  Civil  economies,  that 
there  should  be  grades  of  rank  among  them :  but  his  principles  carried  out  terminate  in  such 
an  apex  as  it  was  one  object  of  the  Promoters  of  the  Reformation  to  remove.  For  a  sub- 
tdtute,  however.  Hooker  is  compelled  to  adopt  a  plan  exactly  the  reverse  of  the  Presbyterians', 
and  therefore  in  the  following  Book  he  advocates  '  a  supreme  Regent'  over  the  Church  in  the 
single  person,  male  or  female  of  a  Lay  0£Scer,  from  whom  emanates  a  congi  €Pilire  without 
wluch  there  are  none  of  Hooker's  modern  Bishops  constituted.] 

f  [An  Admonition  equally  to  all  who  promoted  the  Reformation  !] 
X  ["  If  any  shall  make  advantage  of  this  complaint,  That  where  the  People  have  their 
due  liberty  granted  unto  them,  they  are  apt  to  assume  that  Power  unto  themselves  which 
belongs  not  unto  them;  an  evil  attended  with  troublesome  impertinendes  and  disorder, 
tending  unto  Anarchy :  let  them  remember,  on  the  other  hand,  how  upon  the  confinement 
of  Power  and  Authority  unto  the  Guides,  Bishops,  or  Rulers  of  the  Church,  they  have 
dianged  the  nature  of  Church-power,  and  enlarged  their  usurpation,  until  the  whole  Rule 
of  the  Church  issued  in  absolute  Tyranny.  Wherefore,  no  fear  of  consequents  that  may 
ensue  and  arise  from  the  darkness,  ignorance,  weakness,  lusts,  corruptions  or  secular  interests 
oi  men  ought  to  entice  us  unto  the  least  alteration  of  the  Rule  by  any  prudential  provisions 
of  our  own."  Dr.  Owen's  True  Nature  qf  a  Gospel  Church.  1689.  4to.  (Posth.)  chap.viiL 
sect  2.  p.  163.] 


172  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.  15^ 

Power    excessive  Power  than  the  ancient,  inasmuch  as  unto  their 
thority    Ecclcsiastical  Authority,  the  Civil  Magistrate,  for  the  better 

which  

onr  Bi-  repressing  of  such  as  contemn  Ecclesiastical  Censures,  hath 
have!  for  divcrs  ages  annexed  Civil."  The  crime  of  Bishops 
herein  is  divided  into  these  two  several  branches ;  '^  the 
one,  that  in  causes  Ecclesiastical  they  strike  with  the  sword 
of  secular  punishments ;  the  other,  that  offices  are  granted 
them,  by  virtue  whereof  they  meddle  with  Civil  affairs." 
Touching  the  one,  it  reacheth  no  farther  than  only  unto 
restraint  of  liberty  by  imprisonment  (which  yet  is  not  done 
but  by  the  Laws  of  the  land,  and  by  virtue  of  Authority 
derived  from  the  Prince).  A  thing  which  being  allowable 
in  Priests  amongst  the  Jews,  must  needs  have  received  some 
strange  alteration  in  nature  since,  if  it  be  now  so  pernicious 
and  venomous  to  be  coupled  with  a  spiritual  vocation  in  any 
man  which  beareth  Office  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  She- 
maiah  writing  to  the  College  of  Priests  which  were  in  Jeru- 
salem, and  to  Zephaniah  the  principal  of  them,  told  them 
xjdz.86  *^®y  were  appointed  of  God,  "  that  they  might  be  officers  in 
the  House  of  the  Lord,  for  every  man  which  raved,  and  did 
make  himself  a  Prophet,"  to  the  end  that  they  might,  by 
the  force  of  this  their  authority,  ^^  put  such  in  prison,  and 
in  the  stocks."  His  malice  is  reproved,  for  that  he  provoketh 
them  to  shew  their  power  against  the  innocent.  But  surely, 
when  any  man  justly  punishable  had  been  brought  before 
them,  it  could  be  no  unjust  thing  for  them  even  in  such  sort 
then  to  have  punished.*  As  for  Offices,  by  virtue  whereof 
Bishops  have  to  deal  in  Civil  affairs,  we  must  consider  that 
Civil  affairs  are  of  divers  kinds ;  and  as  they  be  not  all  fit 
for  Ecclesiastical  persons  to  meddle  with,  so  neither  is  it 
necessary,  nor  at  this  day  happily  convenient,  that  from 
meddling  with  any  such  thing  at  all  they  all  should  without 
exception  be  secluded.  I  will  therefore  set  down  some  few 
causes  wherein  it  cannot  but  clearly  appear  unto  reasonable 
men  that  Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  Functions  may  be  lawfully 
united  in  one  and  the  same  person. 

First,  therefore,  in  case  a  Christian  Society  be  planted 
amongst  their  professed  enemies,  or  by  toleration  do  live 
under  some  certain  State  whereinto  they  are  not  incorporated, 


•  [This  illustration  of  Jewish  example  proves  too  much :  besides,  that  Regiment  being 
purely  Theocratic,  no  reasoning  from  it  to  the  Christian  dispensation  can  assimilate  the  two 
economies.] 


Sect.  15.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  173 

whom  shall  we  judge  the  meetest  men  to  have  the  hear- 
ing and  determining  of  such  mere  Civil  controversies  as 
are  every  day  wont  to  grow  between  man  and  man  ?  Such 
being  the  state  of  the  Church  of  Corinth^  the  Apostle  giveth 
them  this  direction,  "  Dare  any  of  you,  having  business  icor.vi. 
against  another,  be  judged  by  the  unjust,  and  not  under 
Saints  ?  Do  ye  not  know  that  the  Saints  shall  judge  the 
world  ?  If  the  world  then  shall  be  judged  by  you,  are  ye 
unworthy  to  judge  the  smallest  matters?  Know  ye  not  that 
we  shall  judge  the  Angels?  how  much  more  things  that 
appertain  to  this  life?  If  then  ye  have  judgment  of  things 
pertaining  to  this  life,  set  up  them  which  are  least  esteemed 
in  the  Church.  I  speak  it  to  your  shame ;  is  it  so,  that  there 
is  not  a  wise  man  amongst  you  ?  no,  not  one  that  can  judge 
between  his  brethren,  but  a  brother  goeth  to  law  with  a 
brother,  and  that  under  the  Infidels  ?  Now  therefore  there 
is  utterly  a  fault  among  you,  because  ye  go  to  law  one  with 
another ;  why  rather  suffer  ye  not  wrong,  why  rather  sustain 
ye  not  harm  ?"  In  which  speech  there  are  these  degrees ; 
better  to  suffer  and  to  put  up  injuries,  than  to  contend; 
better  to  end  contention  by  arbitrement,  than  by  judgment; 
better  by  judgment  before  the  wisest  of  their  own,  than 
before  the  simpler ;  better  before  the  simplest  of  their  own, 
than  the  wisest  of  them  without:  so  that  if  judgment  of 
secular  affairs  should  be  committed  unto  wise  men,  unto  vide 
men  of  chiefest  credit  and  accompt  amongst  them,  when  the  Briuoo! 
Pastors  of  their  souls  are  such,  who  more  fit  to  be  also  their  jQ°r.3b. 
Judges  for  the  ending  of  strifes?  The  wisest  in  things  ^*^ 
divine  may  also  be  in  things  human  the  most  skilful.  At 
leastwise  they  are  by  likelihood  commonly  more  able  to  know 
right  from  wrong,  than  the  common  unlettered  sort.  And 
what  St.  Augustine  did  hereby  gather,  his  own  words  do  Aug.  de 
suflBciently  shew :  '^  I  call  God  to  witness  upon  my  soul  SE^nkch. 
(saith  he),  that  according  to  the  order  which  is  kept  in  well-  ^  ^' 
ordered  Monasteries,  I  could  wish  to  have  every  day  my 
hours  of  labouring  with  my  hands,  my  hours  of  reading  and 
of  praying,  rather  than  to  endure  these  most  tumultuous 
perplexities  of  other  men's  causes,  which  I  am  forced  to 
bear  while  I  travail  in  secular  businesses,  either  by  judging 
to  discuss  them,  or  to  cut  them  off  by  entreaty :  unto  which 
toils  that  Apostle,  who  himself  sustained  them  not,  for  any 
thing  we  read,  hath  notwithstanding  tied  us  not  of  his  own 


X74  THE  SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  15- 

accord,  but  being  thereunto  directed  by  that  Spirit  which 
speaks  in  him.  His  own  Apostleship,  which  drew  him  to 
travel  up  and  down,  suffered  him  not  to  be  any  where  settled 
for  this  purpose ;  wherefore  the  wise,  faithful,  and  holy  men 
which  were  seated  here  and  there,  and  not  them  which 
travelled  up  and  down  to  preach,  he  made  examiners  of  such 
businesses.  Whereupon  of  him  it  is  no  where  written,  that 
he  had  leisure  to  attend  these  things,  from  which  we  cannot 
excuse  ourselves  although  we  be  simple :  because  even  such 
he  requireth,  if  wise  men  cannot  be  had,  rather  than  the 
affairs  of  Christians  should  be  brought  into  public  judgment 
Howbeit,  not  without  comfort  in  our  Lord  are  these  travels 
undertaken  by  us,  for  the  hope's  sake  of  eternal  Life,  to  the 
end  that  with  patience  we  may  reap  the  fruit."  So  far  is 
St.  Augustine  from  thinking  it  unlawful  for  Pastors  in  such 
sort  to  judge  Civil  causes,  that  he  plainly  collecteth  out  of 
the  Apostle's  words  a  necessity  to  undertake  that  duty ;  yea, 
himself  he  comforteth  with  the  hope  of  a  blessed  reward,  in 
lieu  of  travail  that  way  sustained. 

Again,  even  where  whole  Christian  Kingdoms  are,  how 
troublesome  were  it  for  Universities,  and  other  great  Col- 
legiate-societies, erected  to  serve  as  nurseries  unto  the 
Church  of  Christ,  if  every  thing  which  Civility  doth  concern 
them  were  to  be  carried  from  their  own  peculiar  Governors, 
because  for  the  most  part  they  are  (as  fittest  it  is  they  should 
be)  persons  of  Ecclesiastical  calling  ?  It  was  by  the  wisdom 
of  our  famous  predecessors  foreseen  how  unfit  this  would 
be,  and  hereupon  provided  by  grant  of  special  Charters,  that 
it  might  be  as  now  it  is  in  the  Universities  ;  where  their  Vice- 
chancellors,  being  for  the  most  part  Professors  of  Divinity, 
are  nevertheless  Civil  Judges  over  them  in  the  most  of  their 
ordinary  causes. 

And  to  go  yet  some  degrees  further,  A  thing  impossible 
it  is  not,  neither  altogether  unusual  for  some  who  are  of 
Royal  blood  to  be  consecrated  unto  the  Ministry  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  so  to  be  Nurses  of  God's  Church,  not  only  as 
[isai.  the  Prophet  did  foretell,  but  also  as  the  Apostle  St.  Paul 
33.]'  was.  Now  in  case  the  Crown  should  by  this  mean  descend 
unto  such  persons,  perhaps  when  they  are  the  very  last, 
or  perhaps  the  very  best,  of  their  race,  so  that  a  greater 
benefit  they  are  not  able  to  bestow  upon  a  Kingdom,  than 
by  accepting  their  right  therein ;  shall  the  sanctity  of  their 


Sect,  15.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  175 

Order  deprive  them  of  that  honour  whereunto  they  have 
right  by  blood  ?  or  shall  it  be  a  bar  to  shut  out  the  public 
good  that  may  grow  by  their  virtuous  Regiment  ?  If  not, 
then  must  they  cast  off  the  Office  which  they  received  by 
divine  Imposition  of  Hands ;  or,  if  they  carry  a  more  reli-^ 
gious  opinion  concerning  that  heavenly  Function,  it  foUoweth, 
that  being  invested  as  well  with  the  one  as  the  other,  they 
remain  God's  lawfully  anointed  both  ways.  With  men  of  zancb. 
skill  and  mature  judgment  there  is  of  this  so  little  doubt,  in  co^ 
that  concerning  such  as  at  this  day  are  under  the  Archbishops  ^'.  ^' 
of  Mentz,  Colon,  and  Treves,  being  both  Archbishops  and 
Princes  of  the  Empire ;  yea,  such  as  Uve  within  the  Pope's 
own  civil  territories,  there  is  no  cause  why  any  should  deny 
to  yield  them  Civil  obedience  in  any  thing  which  they  com- 
mand, not  repugnant  to  Christian  piety ;  yea,  even  that 
civilly,  for  such  as  are  under  them,  not  to  obey  them,  were 
but  the  part  of  seditious  persons:  howbeit,  for  persons 
Ecclesiastical  thus  to  exercise  Civil  dominion  of  their  own, 
is  more  than  when  they  only  sustain  some  public  Office,  or 
deal  in  some  business  Civil,  being  thereunto  even  by  supreme 
Authority  required.*  As  nature  doth  not  any  thing  in  vain, 
so  neither  Grrace.  Wherefore,  if  it  please  God  to  bless 
some  principal  attendants  on  his  own  Sanctuary,  and  to 
endue  them  with  extraordinary  parts  of  excellency,  some  in 
CBie:.kind,  and  some  in  another,  surely  a  great  derogation  it 
were  to  the  very  honour  of  him  who  bestoweth  so  precious 
graces,  except  they  on  whom  he  hath  bestowed  them  should 
accordingly  be  employed,  that  the  fruit  of  those  heavenly 
gifts  might  extend  itself  unto  the  body  of  the  Commonwealth 
wherein  they  Uve;  which  being  of  purpose  instituted  (for  so 
all  Commonwealths  are)  to  the  end  that  all  might  enjoy  what- 
soever good  it  pleaseth  the  Almighty  to  endue  each  one  with, 
must  needs  suffer  loss,  when  it  hath  not  the  gain  which 
eminent  Civil  ability  in  Ecclesiastical  persons  is  now  and 
then  found  apt  to  afford. t  Shall  we  then  discommend  the 
people  of  Milan  for  using  Ambrose  their  Bishop  as  an  Am- 
bassador about  their  public  and  politic  affiiirs ;  the  Jews  for 
electing  their  Priests  sometimes  to  be  leaders  in  war ;  David 

*  [Hooker  felt  the  ground  beg:inning  to  shake  under  him,  hence  this  remark  by  way  of 
precaution:  bnt  how  does  it  accord  with  the  introductory  sentences  of  this  paragraph?] 

f  [Apostolic  Precedent  and  Canon  are  directly  opposed  to  all  this.  Acts  yi.  4.  1  Tim.  iv. 
15.] 


176  THE   SEVENTH    BOOK  [Sect.  15. 

for  making  the  High-priest  his  chiefest  Counsellor  of  State : 
finally,  all  Christian  Kings  and  Princes  which  have  appointed 
unto  like  services  Bishops  or  other  of  the  Clergy  under  them? 
No,  they  have  done  in  this  respect  that  which  most  sincere 
and  religious  wisdom  alloweth.  Neither  is  it  allowable  only, 
when  either  a  kind  of  necessity  doth  cast  Civil  offices  upon 
them,  or  when  they  are  thereunto  preferred  in  regard  of 
some  extraordinary  fitness ;  but  further  also,  when  there  are 
even  of  right  annexed  unto  some  of  their  places  or  of  course 
imposed  upon  certain  of  their  persons.  Functions  of  dignity 
and  accompt  in  the  Commonwealth ;  albeit  no  other  consi* 
deration  be  had  therein  save  this,  that  their  credit  and 
countenance  may  by  such  means  be  augmented.  A  thing, 
if  ever  to  be  respected,  surely  most  of  all  now,  when  God 
himself  is  for  his  own  sake  generally  no  where  honoured, 
Religion  almost  no  where,  no  where  religiously,  adored^  the 
Ministry  of  the  Word  and  Sacraments  of  Christ  a  very  cause 
of  disgrace. in  the  eyes  both  of  high  and  low,  where  it  hath 
not  somewhat  besides  itself  to  be  countenanced  with.*  For 
unto  this  very  pass  things  are  come,  That  the  glory  of  God 
is  constrained  even  to  stand  upon  borrowed  credit ;  which 
yet  were  somewhat  the  more  tolerable,  if  there  were  not 
that  dissuade  to  lend  it  him.  No  practice  so  vile,  but  pre- 
tended holiness  is  made  sometime  as  a  cloak  to  hide  it. 

The  French  King,  Philip  Valois,  in  his  time  made  an 
Ordinance,  that  all  Prelates  and  Bishops  should  be  clean 
excluded  from  Parliaments,  where  the  afikirs  of  the  ELing- 
dom  were  handled ;  pretending  that  a  King,  with  good  con- 
science, cannot  draw  Pastors,  having  Cure  of  souls,  from  so 
weighty  a  business,  to  trouble  their  heads  with  consultations 
of  State.  But  irreligious  intents  are  not  able  to  hide  them- 
selves, no,  not  when  holiness  is  made  their  cloak.  This  is 
plain  and  simple  truth.  That  the  councils  of  wicked  men  hate 
always  the  presence  of  them  whose  virtue,  though  it  should 
not  be  able  to  prevail  against  their  purposes,  would  notwith- 
standing be  unto  their  minds  a  secret  corrosive :  and  there- 
fore, till  either  by  one  shift  or  another  they  can  bring  all 
things  to  their  own  hands  alone,  they  are  not  secure.  Ordi- 
nances holier  and  better  there  stand  as  yet  in  force  by  the 
grace  of  Almighty  God,  and  the  works  of  his  providence, 

-  *  [For  an  iUustration  of  this  part  of  the  argument  see  Vol.  I.  p.  45,  Note  on  the  Court  of 
High  Coiiiiiii8non.J 


Sect.  15.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  177 

amongst  us.  Let  not  envy  so  far  prevail,  as  to  make  us 
account  that  a  blemish,  which  if  there  be  in  us  any  spark 
of  sound  judgment,  or  of  religious  conscience,  we  must  of 
necessity  acknowledge  to  be  one  of  the  chiefest  ornaments 
unto  this  Land :  by  the  ancient  Laws  whereof,  the  Clergy 
being  held  for  the  chief  of  those  Three  Estates,  which  to- 
gether make  up  the  entire  body  of  this  Commonwealth, 
under  one  supreme  Head  and  Governor,  it  hath  all  this  time 
ever  borne  a  sway  proportionable  in  the  weighty  affairs  of 
the  Land ;  wise  and  virtuous  Kings  condescending  roost  will- 
ingly thereunto,  even  of  reverence  to  the  Most  High ;  with 
the  flower  of  whose  sanctified  inheritance,  as  it  were  with  a 
kind  of  divine  presence,  unless  their  chiefest  Civil  assemblies 
were  so  far  forth  beautified  as  might  be  without  any  notable 
impediment  unto  their  heavenly  Functions,  they  could  not 
satisfy  themselves  as  having  showed  towards  God  an  affection 
most  dutiful. 

Thus,  first,  in  defect  of  other  Civil  Magistrates ;  secondly, 
for  the  ease  and  quietness  of  Scholastical  Societies ;  thirdly, 
by  way  of  political  necessity ;  fourthly,  in  regard  of  quality, 
care,  and  extraordinancy ;  fifthly,  for  countenance  unto 
the  Ministry;  and,  lastly,  even  of  devotion  and  reverence 
towards  God  himself;  there  may  be  admitted,  at  leastwise 
in  some  particulars,  well  and  lawfully  enough,  a  Conjunction 
of  Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  Power,  except  there  be  some  such 
Law  or  Reason  to  the  contrary,  as  may  prove  it  to  be  a 
thing  simply  in  itself  naught* 

Against  it  many  things  are  objected,  as,  first,  ^^  That 
the  matters  which  are  noted  in  the  Holy  Scripture  to  have 
belonged  to  the  ordinary  Office  of  any  Minister  of  God's 
holy  Word  and  Sacraments,  are  these  which  follow,  with 
such  Uke,  and  no  other;  namely,  the  watch  of  the  Sanctuary, 
the  business  of  God,  the  ministry  of  the  Word  and  Sacra- 
ments, oversight  of  the  House  of  God,  watching  over  his 
flock,  prophecy,  prayer,  dispensations  of  the  mysteries  of 
God,  charge  and  care  of  men's  souls."  If  a  man  would 
shew  what  the  offices  and  duties  of  a  Chirurgeon  or  Phy- 
sician are,  I  suppose  it  were  not  his  part,  as  much  as  to 
mention  any  thing  belonging  unto  the  one  or  the  other,  in 
case  either  should  be  also  a  Soldier,  or  a  Merchant,  or  an 
Housekeeper,  or  a  Magistrate;  because  the  Functions  of 
these  are  different  from  those  of  the  former,  albeit  one  and 

VOL.  in.  N 


][78  ^^^  SEVENTH  BOOK  {Sect.  15. 

the  sftme  man  may  happily  be  both.  The  ease  is  like,  when 
the  Scripture  teacheth  what  duties  are  required  in  an  Eccle- 
siastical Minister ;  in  describing  of  whose  Office,  to  touch 
any  other  thing  than  such  as  properly  and  directly  toucheth 
his  Office  that  way,  were  impertinent.* 

Yea,  "  But  in  the  Old  Testament  the  two  Powers  Civil 
and  EcclesiasticaL  twere  distinguished,  not  only  in  naturCi 
but  also  in  person ;  the  one  committed  unto  Moses,  and  the 
Magistrates  joined  with  him;  the  other  to  Aaron  and  his 
sons.  Jehosaphat  in  his  reformation  doth  not  only  dis- 
tinguish causes  Ecclesiastical  from  Civil,  and  erecteth  divers 
Courts  for  them,  but  appointeth  also  divers  Judges."  With 
the  Jews  these  two  Powers  were  not  so  distinguished,  but 
that  sometimes  they  might  and  did  concur  in  one  and  the 
same  person.  Was  not  Eli  both  Priest  and  Judge?  after 
their  return  from  captivity,  Ezra  a  Priest,  and  the  safne 
their  chief  Governor  even  in  Civil  affairs  also?  .  These  men 
which  urge  the  necessity  of  making  always  a  personal  dis- 
tinction of  these  two  Powers,  as  if  by  Jehosaphat's  example 
the  same  person  ought  not  to  deal  in  both  causes,  yet  are 
not  scrupulous  to  make  men  of  Civil  place  and  calling 
Presbyters  and  Ministers  of  Spiritual  Jurisdiction  in  their 
own  Spiritual  Consistories.       > 

I  If  it  be  against  the  Jewish,  precedents  for  us  to  give  Civil 
Power  unto  euch  as  have  Ecclesiastical ;  is  it  not  as  much 
against  the  same  for  them  to  give  Ecclesiastical  Power 
unto  such  as  have  Civil?  They  will  answer,  perhaps,  That 
their  position  is  only,  against  Conjunction  of  Ecclesiastical 
Power  of  Order,  and  the  Power  of  Civil  Jurisdiction  in  one 
person.  But  this  answer  will  not  stand  with  their  prooft, 
which  make  no  less  against  the  Power  of  Civil  and  Eccle- 
siastical Jurisdiction  in  one  person;  for  of  these  two 
Powers  Jehosaphat's  example  is:  besides,  the  contrary 
example  of  EU  and  of  Ezra,  by  us  alleged,  do  plainly  shew^ 
that  amongst  the  Jews  even  the  Power  of  Order  Ecele* 
siastical  and  Civil  Jurisdiction  were  sometimes  lawfully 
united  in  one  and  the  same  person.     Pressed  further  we  are 


•rr 


•  [In  a  Note  on  1  Tim.  iv.  15,  Baxter  says,  **  Even  those  that  are  extraordinarily 
inspired  and  qualified,  must  study  hard,  and  wholly  give  themselves  (iv  ro{nois  Mt)  to 'that 
and  all  their  Ministerial  work,  if  they  would  appear  good  proficients :  therefore  those  that 
have  no  such  inspiration  have  need  of  hard  study.  And  they  that  wholly  addict  themselves 
to  the  Ministry,  have  no  leisure  for  Magistracy  or  worldly  avocations ;  nor  can  do  that  for  many 
hundred  Churches,  which  required  the  whole  of  a  Timothy  for  one."   Paraph,  on  New  Tett,] 


Sect.  15.]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  179 

with  our  Lord  and  Saviour's  example^  who  "  denieth  his 
Kingdom  to  be  of  this  world,  and  therefore,  as  not  standing 
with  his  caUing,  refused  to  be  made  a  King ;  to  give  sen- 
tence in  a  Criminal  cause  of  adultery;  and  in  a  Civil,  of 
dividing  an  inheritance." 

The  Jews  imagining  that  their  Messiah  should  be  a 
patent  Monarch  upon  earth,  no  marvel,  though  when  they 
did  otherwise  wonder  at  Christ's  greatness,  they  sought 
forthwith  to  have  him  invested  with  that  kind  of  dignity, 
td  the  end  he  might  presently  begin  to  reign.  Others  of 
the  Jews,  which  likewise  had  the  same  imagination  of  the 
Messiah,  and  did  somewhat  incline  to  think  that  peradven- 
ttire  this  might  be  he,  thought  good  to  try  whether  he  would 
take  upon  him  that  which  he  might  do,  being  a  King,  such 
as  they  supposed  their  true  Messiah  should  be.  But  Christ 
r^ftised  to  be  a  King  over  them,  because  it  was  no  part  of 
tb^  Office  of  their  Mesisiah,  as  they  did  falsely  conceive; 
and  to  intermeddle  in  those  acts  of  Civil  judgment  he 
refused  also,  because  he  had  no  such  Jurisdiction  in  that 
Commonwealth,  being,  in  regard  of  his  Civil  person,  a  man 
of  mean  and  low  calling.  As  for  repugnancy  between 
Ecclesiastical  and  Civil  Power,  or  any  inconvenience  that 
these  two  Powers  should  be  united,  it  doth  not  appear  that 
this '  was  the  cause  of  his  resistance  either  to  reign,  or  else 
to 'judge.* 

■  Whiat  say  we  then  to  the  blessed  Apostles  who  teach, 
**  That  soldiers  entansrle  not  themselves  with  the  businesses  s  Tim. 

ii.  4. 

of  this  life,  but  leave  them,  to  the  end  they  may  please  him 
wlio  hath  chosen  them  to  serve;  and  that  so  the  good 
soldiers  of  Christ  ought  to  do?" 

The  Apostles  which  taught  this,  did  never  take  upon 
tbem  any  place  or  office  of  Civil  Power.  No,  they  gave  [Acts 
ovei*  th6  Ecclesiastical  care  of  the  poor>  that  they  might 
wholly  attend  upon  the  Word  and  Prayer.  St.  Paul  indeed 
doth  exhdrt>  Timothy  after  this  manner,  *^  Suffer  thou  evilpnm. 
as  a  noble  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ:  no  man  warring  is 
entangled  with  the  affairs  of  life,  because  he  must  serve 
such  as  have  pressed  him  unto  warfare."  The  sense  and 
meaning  v^hereof  is  plain,  that  Soldiers  may  not  be  nice 
and  tender,  that  they  must  be  able  to  endure  hardness,  that 


•  [See  John  vi.  38.] 
N  2 


180  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  15« 

no  man  betaking  himself  unto  wars  continueth  entangled 
with  such  kind  of  businesses,  as  tend  only  unto  the  ease 
and  quiet  felicity  of  this  life ;  but  if  the  service  of  him  who 
hath  taken  them  under  his  banner  require  the  hazard,  yea 
the  loss,  of  their  lives,  to  please  him  they  must  be  content 
and  willing,  with  any  difficulty,  any  peril,  be  it  never  so 
much  against  the  natural  desire  which  they  have  to  live  in 
safety.     And  at  this  point  the  Clergy  of  God  must  always 
stand ;  thus  it  behoveth  them  to  be  affected  as  oft  as  their 
Lord  and  Captain  leadeth  them  into  the  field,  whatsoever 
conflicts,  perils,  or  evils,  they  are  to  endure.     Which  duty 
being  not   such,  but  that  therewith   the  Civil  Dignities, 
which   Ecclesiastical  persons   amongst   us   do   enjoy,   may 
enough  stand ;  the  exhortation  of  Paul  to  Timothy  is  but 
a  slender  allegation  against  them.     As  well  might  we  gather 
out  of  this  place,  that  men  having  children  or  wives,  are  not 
fit  to  be  Ministers  (which  also  hath  been  collected,   and 
that  by  sundry  of  the  ancient)  ;*  and  that  it  is  requisite  the 
Clergy  be  utterly  forbidden  Marriage.     For,  as  the  burthen 
of  Civil  Regiment  doth  make  them  who  bear  it  the  less  able 
[1  Cor.  to  attend  their  Ecclesiastical  charge ;  even  so  St.  Paul  doth 
33.]  '   say,  that  the  married  are  careful  for  the  world,  the  un- 
married freer  to  give  themselves  wholly  to  the  service  of 
God.     Howbeit,  both  experience  hath  found  it  safer,  that 
the  Clergy  should  bear  the  cares  of  honest  marriage,  than 
be  subject  to  the  inconveniences  which  single  life,  imposed 
upon  them,  would  draw  after  it:   and  as  many  as  are  of 
sound  judgment  know  it  to  be  far  better  for  this  present  age, 
that  the  detriment  be  borne  which  happily  may  grow  through 
the  lessening  of  some  few  men's  spiritual  labours,  than  that 
the   Clergy   and   Commonwealth   should    lack   the   benefit 
which  both  the  one  and  the  other  may  reap  through  their 
dealing  in  Civil  affairs.     In  which  consideration,  that  men 
consecrated  unto  the  spiritual  service  of  God  be  licensed 
so  far  forth  to  meddle  with  the  secular  affairs  of  the  worlds 
as  doth  seem  for  some  special  good  cause  requisite,  and  may 
be  without  any  grievous  prejudice  unto  the  Church,  surely, 
there  is  not  in  the  Apostles,  being  rightly  understood,  any 
let.     That  no  Apostle  did  ever  bear  Office,  may  it  not  be  a 

*  "  Convenit  hujusmodi  eligi  et  ordinari  Sacerdotes,  quibus  nee  liberi  sunt  nee  nepotes. 
Etenim  fieri  vix  potest,  ut  vacans  hujus  vitse  quotidianae  cuns,  quas  liberi  creant  parentibus 
maxime,  omne  studium  omnemque  cogitationem  circa  divinam  Liturgiam  et  res  Eccle* 
siasticas  consumat."     Lib.  xlii.  sect.  1.  C.  de  Episc.  et  Cler. 


Sect.  15.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  181 

wonder,  considering  the  great  devotion  of  the  age  wherein 
they  lived,  and  the  zeal  of  Herod,  of  Nero  the  great  com- 
mander of  the  known  world,  and  of  other  Kings  of  the  earth, 
at  that  time  to  advance  by  all  means  Christian  Religion? 
Their  deriving  unto  others  that  smaller  charge  of  distri- 
butmg  of  the  goods  which  were  laid  at  their  feet,  and  of 
making  provision  for  the  poor,  which  charge,  being  in  part 
Civil,  themselves  had  before  (as  I  suppose,  lawfully)  under-  [Acu 
taken,  and  their  following  of  that  which  was  weightier,  may  ^*' 
serve  as  a  marvellous  good  example  for  the  dividing  of 
one  man's  OiEce  into  divers  slips,  and  the  subordinating 
of  inferiors  to  discharge  some  part  of  the  same,  when,  by 
reason  of  multitude  increasing,  that  labour  waxeth  great 
and  troublesome,  which  before  was  easy  and  light :  but  very 
small  force'*^  it  hath  to  infer  a  perpetual  divorce  between 
Ecclesiastical  and  Civil  Power  in  the  same  persons.  The 
most  that  can  be  said  in  this  case  is,  *^  That  sundry  eminent 
Canons,  bearing  the  name  of  Apostolical,  and  divers 
Councils  likewise  there  are,  which  have  forbidden  the 
Clergy  to  bear  any  Secular  OflSce ;  and  have  enjoined  them 
to  attend  altogether  upon  reading,  preaching,  and  prayer : 
whereupon  the  most  of  the  ancient  Fathers  have  shewed 
great  dislikes  that  these  two  Powers  should  be  united  in 
one  person." 

For  a  full  and  final  answer  whereunto,  I  would  first 
demand,  Whether  commixtion  and  separation  of  these  two 
powers  be  a  matter  of  mere  positive  Law,  or  else  a  thing 
simply  with  or  against  the  Law  immutable  of  God  and 
Nature  ?  That  which  is  simply  against  this  latter  Law  can 
at  no  time  be  allowable  in  any  person,  more  than  adultery, 
blasphemy,  sacrilege,  and  the  like.  But  Conjunction  of 
Power  Ecclesiastical  and  Civil,  what  Law  is  there  which 
liath  not  at  some  time  or  other  allowed  as  a  thing  con- 
venient and  meet?  In  the  Law  of  God  we  have  examples 
sundry,  whereby  it  doth  most  manifestly  appear,  how  of  him 
the  same  hath  oftentimes  been  approved.  No  kingdom  or 
nation  in  the  world,  but  hath  been  thereunto  accustomed 
without  inconvenience  and  hurt.i-    In  the  prime  of  the  world, 

•  [Hooker  admits  some  force.     But  see  Note  f ,  p.  176.] 

t  [•*  In  this  instance,  at  least  experience  is  against  his  Lordship's  (Dr.  Gibson,  Bp.  of 
London)  Rule,  That  the  Clergy  are  the  most  proper  assistants  to  the  Prince  in  the  admi- 
nistration of  all  affiurs  that  concern  Spiritual  Persons  and  Spiritual  Things.  The  Reformation, 
which  nearly  concerned  both,  was  happily  conducted  by  other  counsels.     And  if,  on  the 


182  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  16. 

Kings  and  Civil  Rulers  were  Priests  for  the  most  part  alL 
The  Romans  note  it  as  a  thing  beneficial  in  their  own 
Commonwealth,*  and  even  to  them  apparently  forcible  for 
the  strengthening  of  the  Jews'  Regiment  under  Mose»  and 
SamueLt  I  deny  not,  but  sometime  there  may  be^  and 
hath  been  perhaps,  just  cause  to  ordain  otherwise.  Where- 
fore we  are  not  to  urge  those  things  which  heretofore  have 
been  either  ordered  or  done,  as  thereby  to  prejudice  those 
Orders,  which,  upon  contrary  occasion,  and  the  exigence 
of  the  present  time,  by  like  Authority  have  been  estabUshed. 
For,  what  is  there  which  doth  let,  but  that  from  contrary 
occasions  contrary  Laws  may  grow,  and  each  be  reasoned 
and  disputed  for  by  such  as  are  subject  thereunto,  during 
the  time  they  are  in  force ;  and  yet  neither  so  opposite  to 

other  hand,  we  tarn  our  thoughts  to  the  times  since  the  Reformation,  wherein  his  Lordship's 
scheme  took  place,  perhaps  the  experience  of  those  times  may  further  convince  us  of  die 
weakness  of  the  scheme.  It  will  not  be  denied,  that  our  Ecclesiastical  affiurs  were  under  a 
meer  Clerical  Administration  from  the  year  1628  to  the  meeting  of  the  Long  Parliament 
A  period  remarkably  in&mous  for  a  series  of  weak,  angry,  ill-concerted  measures:  measures 
calculated  to  beget  in  weak  minds  a  veneration  towards  the  Hierarchy ;  but  execilted  with  a 
pedantic  severity,  which  produced  a  quite  contrary  effect  Certain  enthuuastic  conceits 
concerning  the  external  beauties  of  Religion,  and  the  Necessity  of  a  general  Uniformity  in 
the  business  of  holy  garments,  holy  seasons,  significant  gestures,  chturch  utenrfb  and 
ornaments,  seem  to  have  been  the  ruling  principles  of  those  times.  These  filled  the  gads 
with  Church  Criminals,  and  sent  thousands  of  our  most  useful  hands  to  seek  their  bread  in 
foreign  parts.  Through  the  influence  these  principles  had  on  our  Spiritual  Oovemon, 
multitudes  of  learned  and  conscientious  preachers  were  silenced,  and  exposed  at  onpe  to  the 
two  greatest  trials  which  can  befal  human  nature,  public  infamy  and  remediless  want 
These  principles  alone,  and  a  conduct  on  our  part  suited  to  them,  broke  our  union  with  the 
Reformed  Churches  abroad  and  fomented  a  war  in  Scotiand ;  which,  together  with  a  general 
alienation  of  affections  at  home,  occasioned  in  great  measure  by  a  rigorous  exercise  of 
Ecclesiastical  Discipline,  prepared  things  for  that  scene  of  misery  lArhich  ended  in  the  ruin  of 
our  Constitution.  These  were  the  effects  of  an  Administration  purely  Sacerdotal,  in  matters 
commonly  called  Spiritual !  And  though  his  Lordship  is  pleased  to  say,  That  there  are  few 
times  in  which  the  Church  bath  not  been  a  sufferer  under  a  different  management,  I  believe 
it  would  puzzle  a  wise  man  to  shew  wherein  the  Church  hath  been  a  greater  sufferer  than  in 
the  effects  of  Laud's  Administration,  which  takes  in  the  whole  period  I  have  mentioned 
For  though  he  did  not  get  to  Canterbury  till  the  year  1633,  he  was,  notwithstanding,  Prime 
Minister  for  Ecclesiastical  Affairs,  from  the  moment  he  was  advanced  to  the  See  of  London, 
an.  1628."  Examination  of  the  Scheme  of  Church-Power ,  laid  down  in  the  Codex  Jurii 
Ecclesiastici  Aglicani,  by  Sir  Michael  Foster,  1735,  8vo.  p.  72.  Compare  this  Note  with 
one  from  Gauden,  in  Vol.  I.  Epis,  to  Charles  11.] 

*  **  Cum  multa  divinitus,  Pontifices,  a  majoribus  nostris  inventa  atque  instituta  sunt,  torn 
nihil  prseclarius,  quam  quod  vos  eosdem  et  Religionibus  Deorum  immortalium,  et  sumnue 
Reipub.  praeesse  voluerunt"     Cic.  pro  Domo  sua  ad  Pontiff.  "  Honor  Sacerdotii  fir- 

mamentum  potentise  assumebatur."  Tacit  Hist  lib.  v.  He  sheweth  the  reason  wherefore 
their  Rulers  were  also  Priests.  The  joining  of  these  two  Powers,  as  now,  so  then  likewise, 
profitable  for  the  public  State,  but  in  respects  clean  opposite  and  contrary.  For,  whereas 
then  Divine  things  being  more  esteemed,  were  used  as  helps  for  the  countenance  of  Secular 
power;  the  case  in  these  latter  ages  is  turned  upside  down,  earth  hath  now  brought  Heaven 
under  foot,  and,  in  the  course  of  the  world,  hath  of  the  two  the  greater  credit  Priesthood 
was  then  a  strengthening  to  Kings,  which  now  is  forced  to  take  strength  and  credit  from  &r 
meaner  degrees  of  Civil  Authority. 

t  **  Hie  mos  apud  Judseos  fuit,  ut  eosdem  Reges  et  Sacerdotes  haberent,  quorum  Justitis 
Reiigioni  penmxta  incredibile  quantum  evaluere."    Just.  Hbt  lib.  zxzvi. 


Sect.  15.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  183 

tkther^  but  that  both  may  laudably  continue^  as  long  as  the 
ages  which  keep  them  do  see  no  necessary  cause  which  may 
draw  them  unto  alteration?     Wherefore  in  these   things^ 
Canons,  Constitutions,  and  Laws,  which  have  been  at  one 
time  meet,  do  not  prove  that  the  Church  should  always 
be  bound  to  follow  them.     Ecclesiastical  persons  were  by 
ancient  Order  forbidden  to  be  executors  of  any  man's  testa- 
ment, or  to  undertake  the  wardship  of  children.     Bishops,  c.  de 
by  Ae  Imperial  Law,  are  forbidden  to  bequeath  by  testa-  iib."«t. 
ment,  or  otherwise  to  alienate,  any  thing  grown  unto  them  "*^****' 
after  they  were  made  Bishops.    Is  there  no  remedy  but  that 
these,  or  the  like  Orders,  must  therefore  every  where  still 
be  observed?    The  reason  is  not  always  evident,  why  former 
Orders  have  been  repealed  and  other  established  in  their 
room.     Herein  therefore  we  must  remember  the  axiom  used 
in  the  Civil  Laws,  **  That  the  Prince  is  always  presumed  to 
do  that  with  reason,  which  is  not  against  reason  being  done, 
although  no  reason  of  his  deed  be  exprest."    Which  being 
in  every  respect  as  true  of  the  Church,   and  her  divine 
Authority  in  making  Laws,  it  should  be  some  bridle  unto 
those  malapert  and  proud  spirits^  whose  wits  not  conceiving 
the  reason  of  Laws  that  are  established,  they  adore  their 
own  private  fancy  as  the  supreme  'Law  of  all,  and  accord- 
ingly take  upon  them  to  j^dge  tb^t  whereby  they  should  be 
judged**    But 'why  labour  we  thus  in  vain?     For  even  to 
change  that  which  now  is,  and  to  establish  instead  thereof 
that  which  themselves  would   acknowledge  the  very  self- 
same which  hath  been,  to  what  purpose  were  it,  sith  they 
protest,    That  they  utterly  condemn  as   well  that  which  t.c. 
hath  been,  as  that  which  is ;   as  well  the  ancient,  as  the  p.  126. 
present  Superiority,  Authority,  and  power  of  Ecclesiastical 
persons  ?+ 

*  [If  all  were  agreed  what  '<  reason"  is,  the  above  axiom  might  pass  for  a  wise  one ;  but 
because  opposites  are  often  maintdned  to  be  reason,  respectively,  it  follows  that  as  '*  where 
no  Law  is,  there  is  no  transgression,'*  Rom.  iv.  15,  unless  the  dicta  of  Tyrants  be  Laws, 
therefore  the  right  to  question  and  examine  the  merits  of  deeds  sanctioned  by  no  legislative  or 
competent  authority,  belongs  to  every  individual  affected  by  those  deeds,  whether  Eccle* 
dastical  or  Civil;  and  hence  the  Reformation,  and  the  glorious  Revolution  of  .1688.] 

f  [''  And  thus  will  I  make  an  end,  leaving  to  the  consideration  and  indifferent  weighing  of 
the  indifferent  Reader,  how  true  it  is  that  I  have  before  propounded.  That  our  Archbishops, 
Metropolitans,  Archdeacons,  Bishops,  have  besides  the  names  ahnost  nothing  common  with 
those  which  have  been  in  elder  times,  before  the  sun  of  the  Gospel  began  to  be  marvel* 
lously  darkened.  . . .  But  I  have  done ;  only  this  I  admonish  the  Reader,  that  I  do  not  allow 
of  all  those  things  which  I  before  alleged  in  the  comparison  between  our  Archbishops  and  the 
Archbishops  of  old  time,  or  our  Bishops  and  theirs :  only  my  intent  is  to  shew  that  although 
there  were  corruptions,  yet  .in  respect  of  ours  they  be  much  more  tolerable ;  and  that  it 


184  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  16. 

The  ar-       16,    Now  where  they  lastly  allege^  That  the  Law  of  our 
answer-  Lord  Jesus  ChHst,  and  the  judgment  of  the  best  in  all  ages, 
whereby  condemn  all  ruling  Superiority  of  Ministers  over  Ministers; 
would    they  are  in  this^  as  in  the  rest^  more  bold  to  affirm^  than 
SaTSie  able  to  prove,  the  things  which  they  bring  for  support  of 
God/    their  weak  and  feeble  cause.     "  The  bearing  of  dominion 
judg-  *  or  the  exercise  of  authority  (they   say),  is  that  wherein 
£e°beM  the  Civil    Magistrate   is    severed  from   the   Ecclesiastical 
ll^e,*/     Officer,  according  to  the  words  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
d^mueth '  Kings  of  uatious  bear  rule  over  them,  but  it  shall  not  be 
riling    SO  with  you  :'*  therefore  bearing  of  dominion  doth  not  agree 
?io?uy    *^  ^^^  Minister  over  another. "t    This  place  hath  been,  and 
MiXter  ^^^^  ^^'  although  most  falsely,  yet  with  far  greater  shew  and 
Mother,  livelihood  of  truth,  brought  forth  by  the  Anabaptists,   to 
prove  that  the  Church  of  Christ  ought  to  have  no  Civil 
Magistrates,  but  ordered  only  by  Christ.    Wherefore  they 
urge  the  opposition  between  Heathens  and  them  unto  whom 
our  Saviour  speaketh.    For,  sith  the  Apostles  were  oppo- 
site to  Heathens,  not  in  that  they  were  Apostles,  but  in  that 
they  were  Christians,  the  Anabaptists'  inference  is,  ^^  That 
Christ  doth  here  give  a  Law,  to  be  for  ever  observed  by  all 
true  Christian  men,  between  whom  and  Heathens  there 
must  be  always  this  difference,  that  whereas  Heathens  have 
their  Kings  and  Princes  to  rule.  Christians  ought  not  in  this 
thing  to  be  hke  unto  them."    Wherein  their  construction 
hath  the  more  shew,  because  that  which  Christ  doth  speak 
to  his  Apostles  is  not  found  always  agreeable  unto  them  as 
Apostles,  or  as  Pastors  of  men's  souls,  but  oftentimes  it 
toucheth  them  in  generality,  as  they  are  Christians ;  so  that 
Christianity  being  common  unto  them  with  all  belie  vers» 
such  speeches  must  be  so  taken  that  they  may  be  applied 
unto  all,  and  not  only  unto  them.     They  which  consent  with 
us,  in  rejecting  such  collections  as  the  Anabaptist  maketh 
with  more  probability,  must  give  us  leave  to  reject  such  as 
themselves  have  made  with  less  ;  for  a  great  deal  less  likely 
it  is,   that  our  Lord  should  here  establish  an  everlasting 
difference,  not  between  his  Church  and  Pagans,  but  between 
the  Pastors   of  his  Church  and  Civil  Governors.     For,  if 
herein  they  must  always  differ,  that  the  one  may  not  bear 

might  appear  how  small  cause  there  is,  that  they  should  allege  their  examples  to  confirm  the 
Archbishops  and  Bishops  that  now  are."     T.  C.  lib.i.  p.  126.] 
•  Luke  xxii.  25,  26.  f  T.  C.  lib.i.  p.  22. 


Sect.  16.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  185 

Rule^   the  other  may;    how  did  the  Apostles  themselves 
observe   this  difference^   the  exercise  of  whose  authority, 
both  in  commanding  and  in  controlling  others^  the  Scripture 
hath  made  so  manifest  that  no  gloss  can  overshadow  it? 
Again^  it  being,  as  they  would  have  it,  our  Saviour's  pur- 
pose to  withhold  his  Apostles,  and  in  them  all  other  Pastors, 
from  bearing  Rule,  why  should  Kingly  Dominion  be  men- 
tioned, which  occasions  men  to  gather,  that  not  all  dominion 
and  rule,  but  this  one  only  form,  was  prohibited,  and  that 
authority  was    permitted    them,    so    it  were    not    Regal? 
furthermore,  in  case  it  had  been  his  purpose  to  withhold 
Pastors  altogether  from  bearing  rule,  why  should  Kings  of 
nations  be  mentioned,   as  if  they  were  not  forbidden  to 
exercise,  no,  not  Regal  dominion  itself,  but  only  such  Regal 
dominion  as  Heathen  Kings  do  exercise  ?     The  very  truth 
is,  our  Lord  and  Saviour  did  aim  at  a  far  other  mark  than 
these  men  seem  to  observe.     The  end  of  his  speech  was  to 
reform  their  particular  mispersuasion  to  whom  he  spake: 
and  their  mispersuasion  was,    that  which    was    also    the 
common  fancy  of  the  Jews  at  that  time,  that  their  Lord 
being  the  M essias  of  the  world,  should  restore  unto  Israel  [^cts 
ibat  Kingdom,  whereof  the  Romans  had  as  then  bereaved 
them;  they  imagined  that  he  should  not  only  deliver  the 
State  of  Israel,  but  himself  reign  as  King  in  the  throne  of 
David  with  all  Secular  pomp  and  dignity;  that  he  should 
subdue  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  make  Jerusalem  the  seat 
of  universal  Monarchy.     Seeing  therefore   they  had  for- 
saken all  to  follow  him,  being  now  in  so  mean  condition, 
they  did  not  think  but  that  together  with  him  they  also 
should  rise  in  state ;  that  they  should  be  the  first  and  the 
most  advanced  by  him. 

Of  this  conceit  it  came,  that  the  mother  of  the  sons  of  [Matt. 

XX 

Zebedee  sued  for  her  children's  preferment ;  of  this  conceit  ao^wo 
it  grew,  that  the  Apostles  began  to  question  amongst  them-  [i^k* 
selves  which  of  them  should  be  greatest;  and  in  control- X3di.24.] 
ment  of  this  conceit  it  was,  that  our  Lord  so  plainly  told 
them,  that  the  thoughts  of  their  hearts  were  vain.     The 
Kings  of  nations  have  indeed  their  large  and  ample  domi- 
nions, they  reign  far  and  wide,   and   their  servants  they 
advance  unto  honour  in  the  world ;  they  bestow  upon  them 
large  and  ample  secular  preferments,  in  which  respect  they 
are  also  termed  many  of  them  Benefactors,  because  of  th  e 


186  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  16. 

liberal  band  wbicb  they  use  in  rewarding  such  as  have  done 
them  service:  but^  was  it  the  meaning  of  the  ancient  Pn>- 
pfaets  of  God  that  the  Messias,  the  King  of  Israel,,  should 
he  like  unto  these  Kings,  and  his  retinue  grow  in  such  sort 
«3  theirs  ?.    Wherefore .  ye  are  not  to  look  for  at  my  hands 
such  preferments  as  Kings  of  nations  are  wont  to  bestow 
4ipon  their  attendants, ^^  Witli  you  not  so.''    Your  reward  in 
Heaven  shall  be  most,  ample,  on  earth  your  chiefest  honour 
must  be  to  suffer  persecution  for  righteousness'  sake ;  sub- 
mission, humility,,  and  meekness,  are  things  fitter  for  yon  to 
inure  your  minds  withal,  than  these  aspiring  cogitations^ 
if  any  amongst  yon  be  greater  than  other,  let  him  shew 
himself  greatest  in  being  lowliest,  let  him  be  above  them  in 
being  under  them,  even  as  a  servant  for  their  good*     Those 
are  affections  which  you  must  put  on ;  as  for  degrees  of 
preferment  and  honour  in  this  world,  if  ye  expect  any  such 
thing  at  my  hands  ye. deceive  yourselves,  for  in  the  world 
your  portion  is  rather  the  clear  contrary.     Wherefore. they 
who  allege  this  place  against  Episcopal  Authority  abuse  it, 
they  many  ways  deprave,  and  wrest  it  clean  from  the  true 
understanding  wherein  our.  Saviour  himself  did  utter  it.*    ^ 
For,  first,  whereas  he  by  way  of  mere  negation  bad  said, 
tMatt.     ^*  With  you  it  shall  not  be  so,"  foretelling  them  only  that  k 
XX.  26.]  g}JQ^u  jjqI;  3q  come  to  pass  as  they  vainly  surmised ;  these 
men  take  his  words  in  a  plain  nature  of  a  prohibition,  as  if 
Christ  had  thereby  forbidden  all  inequaUty  of  Ecclesiastical 
Power.    Secondlyy  whereas  he  did  but  cut  off*  their  idle  hope 
of  secular  advancements;  all  standing  Superiority  amongst 
persons  Ecclesiastical  these  men  would  rase  off*  with  the 
edge  of  his  speech.     Thirdly,  whereas  he  in  abating  their 
hope  evefn  of  secular   advancements  spake  but  only  with 
relation  unto  himself,  informing  them  that  he  would  be  no 
such  munificent  Lord  unto  them  in  their  temporal  dignity 


*  [^*  As  the  request  of  James  and  John  plainly  shewed  that  they  did  not  understand  our 
Lord's  words  to  Peter,  Mattxvi.  18, 19,  as  designed  to  invest  him  with  any  Authority  over 
the  rest  of  his  brethren,  so  the  answer  which  Christ  here  gives  them,  far  from  intimating  any 
thing  of  that  kind,  concludes  as  strongly  against  any  such  Authority  as  a  negative  argument 
can  be  supposed  to  do.  "  But  so  it  shall  not  be  among  you  :  but  whosoever  shall  be  great 
among  you,  shall  be  your  minister:  and  whosoever  of  you  will  be  the  chiefest,  shall  be  the 
servant  of  all"  Mark x.  43,  44.  There  is  a  gradation  here  not  commonly  observed.  The 
word  hoKovos,  which  for  want  of  a  better  word,  we  render  Minister,  is  a  name  which  might 
be  given  to  any  who  occasionally  attended  others,  or  was  statedly  employed  to  render  them 
any  particular  kind  of  service ;  but  SoSAos,  Servant,  signifies  one  whose  whole  business  it  is 
lo  serve,  and  who  is  indeed  the  property  of  another.  The  words  '  of  all,'  do  likewise 
increase  the  gradation."    Dr.  Doddridge's  Fam,  Expos.  Notes  on  Matt.  xx.  26, 27.] 


Sect  16.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  187 

and  honour,  as  they  did  .erroneously  suppose ;  so  that  any 
Apostle  might  afterwards  have  grown  by  means  of  others 
to  be  even  Emperor  of  Rome  for  any  thing  in  those  words 
to  the  contrary  ; — these  meny  removing  quite  and  clean  the 
hedge  of  all  restraints,  enlarge  so  ^r  the  bounds  of  his 
meaning,  as  if  his  very  precise  intent  and  purpose  had  been 
not  to  reform  the  error  of  his  Apostles  conceived  as  touch- 
ing him,  and  to  teach  what  himself  would  not  be  towards 
them ;  but  to  prescribe  a  special  Law  both  to  them  and  their 
successors  for  ever,  a  Law  determining  what  they  should 
not  be  in  relation  of  one  to  another,,  a  Law  forbidding  that 
•any  such  title  should  be  given  to  any  Minister  as  might 
import  or  argue  in  him  a  Superiority  over  other  Ministers. 
Being  thus  defeated  of  that  succour  which  they  though!;  t.  a 
their  cause  might  have  had  out  of  the  words  of  our  Saviour  p.^^. 
Christ,  they  try  their  adventure  in  seeking  what  aid  man's 
testimony  will  yield  them :  "  Cyprian  objeeteth  it  to  Florenr  Lib.iv. 
tinus  as  a  proud  thing,  that  by  believing  evil  reports,  and  mis-  ^^' 
judging  of  Cyprian,  he  made  himself  Bishop  of  a  Bishop,  and 
Judge  over  him  whom  God  had  for  the  time  appointed  to  be 
Judge."  "  The  endeavour  of  godly  men  to  strike  at  these  ft.  c. 
insolent  names  may  appear  in  the  Council  of  Carthage :  p.  95'] 
where  it  was  decreed.  That  the  Bishop  of  the  chief  See 
should  not  be^ntituled  the  JSxarch  of  Priests,  or  the  Highest 
Priest,  or  any  other  thing  of  like  sense,  but  only  the  Bishop 
•f  the  chiefest  See;"^  whereby  are  shut  out  the  name  of 
Archbishop,  and  all  other  such  haughty  Titles."  In  these 
allegations  it  fare th  as  in  broken  reports  snatched  out  of  the 
author's  mouth,  and  broached  before  they  be  half  either  told 
on  the  one  part,  or  on  the  other  understood.  The  matter 
which  Cyprian  complaineth  of  in  Florentinus  was  thus: 
Novatus  misliking  the  easiness  of  Cyprian  to  admit  men 
into^  the  fellowship  of  behevers  after  they  had  fallen  away 
from  the  bold  and  constant  confession  of  Christian  Faith, 
took  thereby  occasion  to  separate  himself  from  the  Church  ; 
and  being  united  with  certain  excommunicate  persons,  they 
joined  their  wits  together,  and  drew  out. against. Cyprian, 
their  lawful  Bishop,  sundry  grievous  accusations ;  the  crimes 
such,  as  being  true,  had  made  him  uncapable  of  that  OfBce 
whereof  he  was  six  years  as  then  possessed ;  they  went  to 

•  *'floT€  rhv  T^$  TTpdurris  Kod^pas  ^ETrCffKoirov  fx^  KfyttrBcu  ''E^apxov  rStv  'Up4(oif  ^  ^AKpw 
'l€p4a  ^  roMVT6TporKW  ri  iroT«,  &\Kit  fi&vov  *E^tffKOKOv  t^s  irptirris  KaS^pas.    Can.  39. 


188  THE  SEVENTH   BOOK  \^Sect  16. 

Rome^  and  to  other  places,  accusing  him  every  where  as 
guilty  of  those  faults  of  which  themselves  had  lewdly  con- 
demned him,  pretending  that  twenty-five  African  Bishops 
(a  thing  most  false)  had  heard  and  examined  his  cause  in  a 
solemn  Assembly,  and  that  they  all  had  given  their  sentence 
against  him,  holding  his  election  by  the   Canons  of  the 
Church  void.     The  same  factious   and  seditious  persons 
coming  also  unto  Florentinus,  who  was  at  that  time  a  man 
imprisoned  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  yet  a 
favourer  of  the  error  of  Novatus,  their  malicious  accusations 
he  over-willingly  hearkened  unto,  gave  them  credit,  con- 
curred with  them,   and  unto  Cyprian,   in  fine,   wrote  his 
Letters  against  Cyprian :  which  Letters  he  justly  taketh  in 
marvellous  evil  part,  and  therefore  severely  controUeth  his 
so  great  presumption  in  making  himself  a  Judge  of  a  Judge, 
and,  as  it  were,  a  Bishop's  Bishop,  to  receive  accusations 
against  him,  as  one  that  had  been  his  Ordinary.     '^  What 
height  of  pride  is  this  (saith  Cyprian),  what  arrogancy  of 
spirit,  what  a  puflSng  up  of  mind,  to  call  Guides  and  Priests 
to  be  examined  and  sifted  before  him !     So  that,  unless  we 
shall  be  cleared  in  your  Court,  and  absolved  by  your  sen- 
tence, behold  for  these  six  years'  space  neither  shall  the 
brotherhood  have  had  a  Bishop,  nor  the  people  a  Guide, 
nor  the  flock  a  Shepherd,  nor  the  Church  a  Governor,  nor 
Christ  a  Prelate,  nor  God  a  Priest."     This  is  the  pride 
which  Cyprian  condemneth  in  Florentinus,  and  not  the  Title 
or  Name  of  Archbishop  ;  about  which  matter  there  was  not 
at  that  time  so  much  as  the  dream  of  any  controversy  at  all 
between  them.     A  silly  collection  it  is,  that  because  Cyprian 
reproveth  Florentinus  for  lightness  of  belief  and  presump- 
tuous rashness  of  judgment,  therefore  he  held  the  Title  of 
Archbishop  to  be  a  vain  and  a  proud  name.     Archbishops 
were  chief  amongst  Bishops,  yet  Archbishops  had  not  over 
Bishops  that  full  Authority  which  every  Bishop  had  over 
his  own  particular  Clergy.     Bishops  were  not  subject  unto 
their  Archbishop  as  an  Ordinary,  by  whom  at  all  times 
they  were  to  be  judged,  according  to  the  manner  of  inferior 
Pastors,  within  the  compass  of  each  Diocess.     A  Bishop 
might  suspend,  excommunicate,   depose,  such  as  were  of 
his  own  Clergy  without  any  other  Bishops-assistants ;   not 
so  an  Archbishop  the  Bishops  that  were  in  his  own  Pro- 
vince^  above  whom  divers  prerogatives   were  given  him. 


Sect,  16.]  OP   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  189 

howbeit  no  such  Authority  and  Power  as  alone  to  be  Judge 
over  them.     For  as  a  Bishop  could  not  be  ordained,  so 
neither  might  he  be  judged  by  any  one  only  Bishop,  albeit 
that  Bishop  were  his  MetropoUtan.     Wherefore  Cyprian, 
concerning  the  liberty  and  freedom  which  every  Bishop 
had,  spake  in  the  Council  of  Carthage,  whereat  fourscore 
and  seven  Bishops  were  present,  saying,  *'  It  resteth  that  con. 
every  of  us  declare  what  we  think  of  this  matter,  neither  deH«r. 
judging  nor  severing  from   the  right  of  Communion   anyJ!£di^ 
that  shall  think  otherwise :  for  of  us  there  is  not  any  which 
maketh  himself  a  Bishop  of  Bishops,  or  with  tyrannical 
fear  constraineth  his  colleagues  unto  the  necessity  of  obedi- 
ence, inasmuch  as  every  Bishop,  according  to  the  reach  of 
his  liberty  and  power,  hath  his  own  free  judgment,  and  can 
no  more  have  another  his  Judge,  than  himself  be  Judge  to 
another."    Whereby  it  appeareth,  that  amongst  the  African 
Bishops  none  did  use  such  Authority  over  any  as  the  Bi- 
shop of  Rome  did  afterwards  claim  over  all,  forcing  upon 
them  opinions  by  main  and  absolute  Power.     Wherefore, 
unto  the  Bishop  of  Rome  the  same  Cyprian  also  writeth 
concerning  his  opinion  about  Baptism :  ^^  These  things  we  Lib.  ii. 
pi^esent  unto  your  conscience,  most  dear  brother,  as  well 
for  common  honour's  sake,  as  of  single  and  sincere  love, 
trusting  that  as  you  are  truly  yourself  reUgious  and  faithftil, 
80  those  things  which  agree  with  Religion  and  Faith  will  be 
acceptable  unto  you ; — howbeit  we  know,  that  what  some 
have   over-drunk  in,   they  will  not   let  go,   neither  easily 
change   their   mind,   but  with   care   of  preserving  whole 
amongst  their  brethren  the  bond  of  peace  and  concord, 
retaining    still  to   themselves   certain  their   own    opinions 
wherewith  they  have  been  inured; — ^wherein  we   neither 
use  force,  nor  prescribe  a  Law  unto  any,  knowing  that  in 
the  government  of  the  Church  every  Ruler  hath  his  own 
voluntary  free  judgment,  and  of  that  which  he  doth  shall 
render  unto  the  Lord  himself  an  account."     As  for  the 
Council  of  Carthage,  doth  not  the  very  first  Canon  thereof 
estabUsh  with  most  effectual  terms  all  things  which  were 
before  agreed  on  in  the  Council  of  Nice  ?    And  that  the 
Council  of  Nice  did  ratify  the  pre-eminence  of  Metropo- 
litan Bishops,  who  is  ignorant  ?*     The  name  of  an  Arch- 

*    "Xlore    T^    h    rfi    JHucawv   'Zvv6^    dpur0€tna    ir carrl    rp6fKtp    irapapvKax^fr^au 
[Can.  13.] 


190  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  16. 

bishop  importeth  only  a  Bishop  having  Chiefty  of  certain 
prerogatives  above  his  brethren  of  the  same  Order.  Which 
thing,  sith  the  Council  of  Nice  doth  allow,  it  cannot  be 
that  the  other  of  Carthage  should  condemn  it,  inasmuch 
as  this  doth  yield  unto  that  a  Christian  unrestrained  appro- 
bation. 

The  thing  provided  for  by  the  Synod  of  Carthage  can  be 
no 'Other,  therefore,  than  only  that  the  chiefest  Metropo- 
litan,  where  many  Archbishops   were  within  any  greater 
Province,  should  not  be  termed  by  those  names,  as  to  im- 
port the  Power  of  an  ordinary  Jurisdiction  belonging  in 
such  degree  and  manner  unto  him  over  the  rest  of  the 
Bishops  and  Archbishops  as  did  belong  unto  every  Bishop 
over  other  Pastors  under  Him.     But  much  more  absurd  it 
T.C;     is  to  aflSrm,  that  both  Cyprian  and  the  Council  of  Carthage 
p.  lis.    condemn  even  such  Superiority  also  of  Bishops  themselves 
over  Pastors  their  inferiors,  as  the  words  of  Ignatius  imply> 
in  terming  the  Bishop  ''a  Prince  of  Priests."    Bishops  to 
be  termed  Arch-priests;  in  regard  of  their  Superiority  over 
Priests,  is  •  in  the  writings  of  the  ancient  Fathers  a  thing 
so  usual  and  f^uniliar,  as  almost  no  one  thing  more.     At 
the  Council  of  Nice,  sAithTheodoret,  three  hundred  and 
eighteen  Arch-priests  were  present.*    Were  it  the  mean- 
ing of  the  Council  of  Carthage,  that  the  Title  of  Chief- 
priest  and  such  like  ought  not  in  any  sort  at  all  to  be  giv6n 
unto  any  Christian  Bishop,  what  excuse  should  we  make  for 
so  many  ancient  both  Fathers^  and  Synods  of  Fathers,  as 
have  generally  applied  the  Title  of  Arch-priest  unto  eveiy 
Bishop's  OflSce  ?f     High  time  I  think  it  is,  to  give  over  tl^ 
obstinate  defence  of  thi&  most  miserable  forsaken  cause; 
in  the  favour  whereof  neither  God,  nor  amongst  so  many 
wise  and  virtuous  men  as   antiquity  hath  brought  forth, 
any  one  can  be  found  to  have  hitherto  directly  spoken. 
Irksome  confusion  must  of  necessity  be  the  end  whereunt6 
all  such  vain  and  ungrounded  confidence  doth  bring,  as  hath 
nothing  to  bear  it  out  but  only  an  excessive  measure  of  bold 
and  peremptory  words,  holpen  by  the  start  of  a  Uttle  time, 
before  they  came  to  be  examined.     In  the  writings  of  the 


*  Theod.  Hist.  Eccles.  lib.  i.  cap.  7.    *A(>xtep€rs. 

t  Hieronymus  contra  Lucifer,  salutem  Ecclesiae  pendere  dicit  a  summi  Sacerdotis  dignitate, 
id  est,  Episcopi.  Idem  est  in  Hieronynio  Summus  Sacerdos  quod  'AKffhs  'Upths  in  Cartha- 
ginensi  Concilio.  Vide  C.  Omnes,  dist.38.  Item  C.  Fontifices,  12.  q.  3.  Item  C.  De  his, 
De  conseq.  dist  5. 


SecL  17.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  191 

ancient  Fathers,  there  is  not  any  thing  with  more  serious 
asseveration  inculcated,  than  that  it  is  God  which  maketh 
Bishops ;  that  their  Authority  hath  divine  allowance ;  that 
the  Bishop  is  the  Priest  of  God ;  that  he  is  Judge  in  Christ's 
stead ;  that,  according  to  God's  own  Law,  the  whole  Chris- 
tian fraternity  etandeth  bound  to  obey  him.     Of  this  there 
was  not  in  the  Christian  world  of  old  any  doubt  or  contro- 
versy made ;  it  was  a  thing  universally  every  where  agreed 
upon.     What  should  move  men  to  judge  that  now  so  un- 
lawful and  naught,  which  then  was  so  reverendly  esteemed  ? 
Surely  no  other  cause  but  this.  Men  were  in  those  times 
meek,  lowly,  tractable,  willing  to  live  in  dutiful  awe  and 
subjection  unto  the  Pastors  of  their  souls ;  *  now.    We 
imagine  ourselves  so  able  every  man  to  teach  and  direct 
all  others,  that  none  of  us  can  brook  it  to  have  superiors, 
and,  for  a  mask  to  hide  our  pride,  we  pretend  falsely  the 
Law  of  Christ,  as  if  we  did  seek  the  execution  of  his  will, 
when  in  truth  we  labour  for  the  mere  satisfaction  of  our  own 
against  his. 

17.  The  chiefest  cause  of  disdain  and  murmur  against  The 
Bishops  in  the  Church  of  England  is,  that  evil-affected  eye  maUci- 
wherewith  the  world  looked  upon  them  since  the  time  that  [ung 
irrehgious  profaneness,  beholding  the  due  and  Just  advance-  Sellute 
ments  of  God's  Clergy,  hath  under  pretence  of  enmity  unto  %f^ 
ambition  and  pride  proceeded  so  far,  that  the  contumely  o'mow* 
of  old  offered  unto  Aaron  in  the  like  quarrel  may  seem  Honolr. 
very  moderate  and  quiet  dealing,  if  we  compare  it  with  the 
fury  of  our  own  times.     The  ground  and  original  of  both 
their  proceedings  one  and  the  same  ;  in  declaration  of  their 
grievances  they  .differ  not ;  the  complaints  as  well,  of  the 
one  as  the  other  are,  ^'  Wherefore  lift  ye  up  yourselves  thus  NumK 
far  above  the  Congregation  of  the  Lord  ?     It  is  too  much 
which  ye  take  upon  you ;  too  much  Power,  and  too  much 
Honour."    Wherefore,  as  we  have  shewed  that  there  is  not 
in  their  Power  any  thing  unjust  or  unlawful,  so  it  resteth 
that  in  their  Honour  also  the  like  be  done.     The  labour  we 
take  unto  this  purpose  is  by  so  much  the  harder,  in  that  we 
are  forced  to  wrestle  with  the  stream  of  obstinate  affection, 

*  [What  reliance  can  be  placed  on  this  representation  may  be  judged  of  by  investigating 
the  history  of  iJtie  period.  Cyprian  being  principally  referred  to  in  this  Section,  it  may 
suffice  to-  adduce  the  testimony  of  Mosheim,  Ecel.  Hiat,  Cent  iii.  Pt  i.  chap.  2.  sect.  4, 
where  is  instanced,  "  a  keen  dispute  between  Cyprian  and  the  Martyrs,  Confe^^ors,  Fres- 
byters,  and  lapsed,  seconded  by  the  People."] 


192  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [SecL   IT, 

mightily  carried  by  a  wilful  prejudice^  the  dominion  whereof 
is  so  powerful  over  them  in  whom  it  reigneth^  that  it  giveth 
them  no  leave^   no  not  as  much  as  patiently  to  hearken 
unto  any  speech  which  doth  not  profess  to  feed  them  in 
this  their  bitter  humour.      Notwithstanding,  forasmuch  as 
I  am  persuaded  that  against  God  they  will  not  strive,  if 
they  perceive  once  that  in  truth  it  is  he  against  whom  they 
open  their  mouths,  my  hope  is  their  own  confession  will 
be  at   the  length,    "  Behold,    we  have    done    exceeding 
foolishly;   it  was  the  Lord,  and  we  knew  it  not;  him  in 
his  Ministers  we  have  despised,  we  have  in  their  Honour 
impugned  his."     But  the  alteration  of  men's  hearts  must 
be  his  good  and  gracious  work,  whose  most  omnipotent 
power  framed  them.     Wherefore,  to  come  to  our  present 
purpose.  Honour  is  no  where  due,  saving  only  unto  such 
as  have  in  them  that  whereby  they  are  found,  or  at  the 
least  presumed,  voluntarily  beneficial  unto  them  of  whom 
they  are  honoured.     Wheresoever  Nature  seeth  the  coun- 
tenance of  a  man,  it  still  presumeth  that  there  is  in  him  a 
mind  willing  to  do  good,  if  need  require,  inasmuch  as  by 
nature  so  it  should  be ;  for  which  cause  men  unto  men  do 
honour,  even  for  very  humanity'  sake  :  and  unto  whom  we 
deny  all  honour,  we  seem  plainly  to  take  from   them  all 
opinion  of  human  dignity,  to  make  no  account  or  reckon- 
ing of  them,  to  think  them  so  utterly  without  virtue,  as  if 
no  good  thing  in  the  world  could  be  looked  for  at  their 
hands:   seeing  therefore  it  seemeth  hard  that  we  should 
so  hardly  think  of  any  man,  the  Precept  of  St.  Peter  is, 
I  Pet.    "  Honour  all  men."     Which  duty  of  every  man  towards  all 
doth  vary  according  to  the  several  degrees  whereby  they  are 
EociM.  more  or  less  beneficial,  whom  we  do  honour.     "  Honour 
1.         thy  Physician,"    saith   the  Wise   Man :    the   reason  why, 
because   for  necessity's   sake   God   created  him.      Again, 
Levit.    "Thou  shalt  rise  up  before  the  hoary  head,  and  honour 
the  person  of  the  aged :"    the  reason  why,  because   the 
younger  sort  have  great  benefit  by  their  gravity,  experience, 
Eccios.  and  wisdom ;  for  which  cause,  these  things  the  Wise  man 
termeth  the  crown  or  diadem  of  the  aged.     Honour  due  to 
parents:  the  reason  why,  because  we  have  our  beginning 
Prov.     from  them ;    "  Obey  the  father  that  hath  begotten  thee, 
XXH1.22.  jj^^  mother  that  bare  thee  despise  thou  not."     Honour  due 
unto  Kings  and  Governors :  the  reason  why,  because  God 


Sect.  17.]  OF  ECCLBSIASTICAL  POLITY.  ]03 

hath,  set  them  '^  for  the  punishment  of  evil-doers,  and  for  i  Peu 
the  praise  of  them  that  do  well.**  Thus  we  see  by  every  of  ** 
these  particulars,  that  there  i  is  always  some  kind  of  virtue, 
beneficial,  wherein  they  excel  who  receive  Honour;  and 
that  degrees  of  Honour  are  distinguished  according  to  the 
value  of  those  effects  which  the  same  beneficial  virtue  doth 
produce. 

Nor  is  Honour  only  an  inward  estimation,  whereby  they 
are  reverenced  and  well  thought  of  in  the  minds  of  men ; 
but  Honour,  whereof  we  now  speak,  is  defined  to  be  an 
External  Sign,  by  which  we  give  a  sensible  testification  that 
we  acknowledge  the  beneficial  virtue  of  others.  Sarah  [Gen. 
honoured  her  husband  Abraham ;  this  appeareth  by  the  u^] ' 
title  she  gave  him.  The  brethren  of  Joseph  did  him  Honour 
in  the  land  of  Egypt ;  their  lowly  and  humble  gesture 
sheweth  it..  Parents  will  hardly  persuade  themselves  that 
this  intentional  Honour,  which  reacheth  no  farther  than  to 
the  mward  conception  only,  is  the  Honour  which  their 
children  owe  them. 

Touching  that  Honour  which,  mystically  agreeing  unto 
Christ,  was  yielded  Uterally  and  really  unto  Solomon,  the 
words  of  the  Psalmist  concerning  it  are,  /^  Unto  him  they  Psai. 
shall  giiw  of  the  gold  of  Sheba,  they  shall  pray  for  him  ^  '  ' 
continually,  and  daily  bless  him."  Weigh  these  things  in 
themselves,  titles,  gestures,  presents,  other  the  like  External 
Signs  wherein  Honour  doth  consist,  and  they  ^e  matters  of 
no  great  moment.  Howbeit,  take  them  away,  let  them  cease 
to  be  required,  ,and.  they  are  not  things  of  small  importance, 
which  that  surcease  were  likely  to  draw  after  it.  Let  the 
Lord 'Mayor  of  London,:; or  any  otiier  unto  whose  OflSce 
Honour  belongeth,  be  deprived  but  of  that  Tide  which  in 
itself  is  a  matter  of  nothing;  and  suppose  we^that  it  would 
be  a. small  maim  unto  the  credit^  force,  and  .countenance  of 
his  Of&ce  i  It  hath  not  without  the  singular  wisdom  of  God 
been  provided,  ihat,  the  ordinary  outward  tokeiia  of  Honour 
should  for  the  most  part  be  in  themselves  things  of  mean 
account;  for  to  the  end  they  might  easily  follow  as  faithfiil 
testimonies  of  that  beneficial  virtue  whereunto  they  are  due, 
it  behoved  them  to  be  of  such  nature,  that  to  himself  no 
man  might  over-eagerly  challenge  them,  without  blushing ; 
nor  any  man  where  they  are  due  withhold  them,  but  with 
manifest  appearance . of  too  great  malice  oi:. pride.    NoW| 

VOL.  III.  o 


194l  the  seventh  book  [SecL  18, 

forasmuch  as,  according  to  the  ancient  Orders  and  Customs 
of  this   Landj   as  of  the   Kingdom  of  Israel,   and   of  all 
Christian  Kingdoms  through  the  world,  the  next  in  degree 
of  Honour  unto  the  chief  Sovereign  are  the  chief  Prelates 
of  God's  Church ;  what  the  reason  hereof  may  be,  it  resteth 
next  to  be  enquired, 
i^at         18.  Other  reason  there  is  not  any,  wherefore  such  Honour 
Soh      hath  been  judged  due,  saving  only  that  public  good  which 
JJow'^^y  the  Prelates  of  God's  Clergy  are  authors  of.     For  I  would 
ProiaS'!  '^"ow  which  of  these  things  it  is  whereof  we  make  any 
question,  either  that  the  favour  of  God  is  the  chiefest  pillai 
to  bear  up  Kingdoms  and  States;   or,  that  true  Religion 
publicly  exercised  is  the  principal  mean  to  retain  the  favoui 
of  God ;  or,  that  the  Prelates  of  the  Church  are  they  without 
whom  the  exercise  of  true  Religion  cannot  well  and  long 
continue  ?    If  these  three  be  granted,  then  cannot  the  public 
benefit  of  Prelacy  be  dissembled.  And  of  the  first  or  second 
of  these  I  look  not  for  any  profest  denial :  the  world  at  this 
will  blush  not  to  grant,  at  the  leastwise  in  word,  as  much  ai 
Heathens  themselves  have  of  old  with  most  earnest  assevera- 
tion acknowledged,  concerning  the  force  of  divine  grace  in 
upholding  Kingdoms.*     Again,  though  his  mercy  doth  sc 
far  strive  with  men's  ingratitude,  that,  all  kind  of  public 
iniquities  deserving  his  indignation,  their  safety  is  througli 
his  gracious  providence  many  times  nevertheless  continued; 
to  the  end  that  amendment  might,  if  it  were  possible,  avert 
their  envy ;  so  that  as  well  Commonweals  as  particular  per 
sons  both  may  and  do  endure  much  longer,  when  they  an 
careful,  as  they  should  be,  to  use  the  most  effectual  meani 
of  procuring  his  favour  on  whom  their  continuance  principal!] 
dependeth:  yet  this  point  no  man  will  stand  to  argue,  n< 
man  will  openly  arm  himself  to  enter  into  set  disputatioi 
against    the   Emperors   Theodosius    and   Valentinian,    foi 
making  unto  their  Laws  concerning  Religion  this  Preface 
Xit.  1.    ^'  Decere  arbitramur  nostrum  Imperium,  subditos  nostros  d( 
c^d^   Religione  commonefacere.     Ita  enim  et  pleniorem  acquii 
TiiSdtf   Dei  ac  Salvatoris  nostri  Jesu  Christi  benignitatem  possibil 
esse  existimamus,  si  quando  et  nos  pro  viribus  ipsi  placer 
studuerimus,  et  nostros  subditos  ad  earn  rem  instituerimus : 

*  **  Quis  est  tam  vecors,  qui  aut,  cum  suspexerit  in  ccelum,  Deos  esse  non  sendat,  et  a 
quse  tanta  mente  fiunt,  ut  vix  quisquam  arte  ulla  ordinem  rerum  ac  vicissitudinem  perseqi 
possit,  casu  fieri  putet;  aut,  cum  Deos  esse  intellexerit,  uon  intelligat  eorum  numine  bio 
lantum  Imperium  esse  natum,  et  auctum,  et  retentum  V    Cic.  Orat.  de  Haras,  respon.  e.  iz. 


Sect.  18.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  195 

or^  against  the  Emperor  Justinian^  for  that  he  also  maketh 
the  like  profession ;  '^  Per  sanctissimas  Eeclesias  et  nostrum  Lib.  m. 
Imperium  sustineri,  et  communes  res  clementissimi  Dei  gratia  Epise. 
muniri^  credimus :"  and  in  another  place,  ^*  Certissime  credi-  ^^b. 
mus^  quia  Sacerdotum  puritas  et  decus,  et  ad  Dominum  ^f  d^J* 
Deum  ac  Salvatorem  nostrum  Jesum  Christum  fervor,  et  ab  an^^end. 
ipsis  missae  perpetuae  preces,  multum  favorem  nostras  Reipub- 
licae  et  incrementum  praebent." 

Wherefore  only  the  last  point  is  that  which  men  will  boldly 
require  us  to  prove ;  for  no  man  feareth  now  to  make  it  a 
question,  "  Whether  the  Prelacy  of  the  Church  be  any  thing 
avdlable  or  no,  to  effect  the  good  and  long  continuance  of 
true  Religion  ?*'    Amongst  the  principal  blessings  wherewith 
God  enriched  Israel,  the  Prophet  in  the  Psalm  acknow- 
ledgeth  especially  this  for  one,  "  Thou  didst  lead  thy  people  Psai. 
like  sheep  by  the  hands  of  Moses  and  Aaron."     That  which  20?^* 
sheep  are,  if  Pastors  be  wanting,  the  same  are  the  people  of 
God,  if  so  be  they  want  Governors:  and  that  which  the         , 
principal  Civil  Governors  are,   in  comparison  of  Regents 
under  them,  the  same  are  the  Prelates  of  the  Church,  being 
compared  with  the  rest  of  God's  Clergy.* 

Wherefore  inasmuch  as  amongst  the  Jews  the  benefit  of 
Civil  Government  grew  principally  from  Moses,  he  being 
their  principal  Civil  Governor ;  even  so  the  benefit  of  Spiri- 
tual Regiment  grew  from  Aaron  principally,  he  being  in  the 
other  kind  their  principal  Rector,  although  even  herein 
subject  to  the  sovereign  dominion  of  Moses.  For  which 
cause,  these  two  alone  are  named  as  the  heads  and  well- 
springs  of  all.  As  for  the  good  which  others  did  in  service 
either  of  the  Commonwealth  or  of  the  Sanctuary,  the  chiefest 
glory  thereof  did  belong  to  the  chiefest  Governors  of  the 
one  sort  and  of  the  other,  whose  vigilant  care  and  oversight 
kept  them  in  their  due  order.  Bishops  are  now  as  High- 
priests  were  then,  in  regard  of  Power  over  other  Priests,  and 
in  respect  of  subjection  unto  High-priests.  What  Priests 
were  then,  the  same  now  Presbyters  are,  by  way  of  their 
place  under  Bishops.t  The  ones'  Authority  therefore  being 

*  [The  fallacy  here,  Is  the  assuming  of  the  cases  to  be  parallel :  for  it  has  not  been  proved 
that  the  outward  condition  of  a  Church  constituted  agreeably  to  New  Testament  precedent 
and  injunction  can  follow  the  pattern  of  every  kind  of**  Civil  Governors,"  whether  Monarchical, 
Oligarchical,  or  Republican.     See  Note  *,  sect  2.  p.  92,  and  Note  *,  sect.  8.  p.  135.] 

t  "  Qui  Sacerdotesin  Veteri  Testamento  vocabantur,  hi  sunt  qui  nunc  Presbyteri  appellan- 
tur :  et  qui  tunc  Prioceps  Sacerdotum,  nunc  Episcopus  vocatur."  Raban.  Maur.  de  Instit. 
Cler.  nb.  i.  cap.  6. 

o2 


196  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Skct.  18. 

SO  profitable,  how  should  the  others'  be  thought  unnecessary? 
Is  there  any  man  professing  Christian  Religion  which  holdeth 
it  not  as  a  maxim.  That  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  did  reap 
a  singular  benefit  by  Apostolical  Regiment,  not  only  for 
other  respects,  but  even  in  regard  of  that  Prelacy  whereby 
they  had  and  exercised  Power  of  Jurisdiction  over  lower 
Guides  of  the  Church  ?  Prelates  are  herein  the  AposUes' 
successors,  as  hath  been  proved. 

Thus  we  see  that  Prelacy  must  needs  be  acknowledged 
exceedingly  beneficial  in  the  Church ;  and  yet  for  more  per* 
spicuity's  sake,  it  shall  not  be  pain  [sic]  superfluously  taken, 
if  the  manner  how  be  also  declared  at  large.  For  this  one 
thing  not  understood  by  the  vulgar  sort,  causeth  all  Contempt 
to  be  offered  unto  higher  powers,  not  only  Ecclesiastical,  but 
Civil ;  whom  when  proud  men  have  disgraced,  and  are  tbeie^ 
fore  reproved  by  such  as  carry  some  dutiful  affection  of  mind, 
the  usual  apologies  which  they  make  for  themselves  are  these, 
*'  What  more  virtue  in  these  great  ones  than  in  others  ?  we 
see  no  such  eminent  good  which  they  do  above  other  men." 
We  grant  indeed,  that  the  good  which  higher  Governors  do 
is  not  so  immediate  and  near  unto  every  of  us,  as  many  times 
the  meaner  labours  of  others  under  them,  and  this  doth  make 
it  to  be  less  esteemed. 

But  we  must  note,  that  it  is  in  this  case  as  in  a  ship ;  he 
that  sitteth  at  the  stern  is  quiet,  he  moveth  not,  he  seemeth 
in  a  manner  to  do  little  or  nothing  in  comparison  of  them 
that  sweat  about  other  toil,  yet  that  which  he  doth  is  in 
value  and  force  more  than  all  the  labours  of  the  residue 
laid  together.  The  influence  of  the  heavens  above  worketh 
infinitely  more  to  our  good,  and  yet  appeareth  not  half  so 
sensible  as  the  force  doth  of  things  below.  We  consider 
not  what  it  is  which  we  reap  by  the  Authority  of  our  chiefest 
spiritual  Governors,  nor  are  Ukely  to  enter  into  any  con- 
sideration thereof*  till  we  want  them ;  and  that  is  the  cause 
why  they  are  at  our  hands  so  unthankfiilly  rewarded.  Au- 
thority is  a  constraining  power ;  which  power  were  needless 
if  we  were  all  such  as  we  should  be,  willing  to  do  the  things 
we  ought  to  do  without  constraint.  But,  because  generally 
we  are  otherwise,  therefore  we  all  reap  singular  benefit  by 
that  Authority  which  permitteth  no  men,  though  they  would, 
to  slack  their  duty.  It  doth  not  suffice,  that  the  Lord  of 
an  Household  appoint  labourers  what  they  shall  do,  unless 


Sect.  18.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  197 

he  set  over  them  some  chief  workman  to  see  they  do  it. 
Constitutions  and  Canons  made  for  the  ordering  of  Church* 
affairs  are  dead  taskmasters.  The  due  execution  of  Law^ 
Spiritual  dependeth  most  upon  the  vigilant  care  of  the  chiefest 
spiritual  Governors,  whose  charge  is  to  see  that  such  Laws 
be  kept  by  the  Clergy  and  people  under  them :  with  those 
duties  which  the  Law  of  God  and  the  Ecclesiastical  Canons 
require  in  the  Clergy,  Lay-governors  are  neither  for  the 
most  part  so  well  acquainted,  nor  so  deeply  and  nearly 
touched.  Requisite  therefore  it  is,  that  Ecclesiastical  per- 
sons have  authority  in  such  things ;  which  kind  of  Authority 
maketh  them  that  have  it  Prelates.  If  then  it  be  a  thing 
confest,  as  by  all  good  men  it  needs  must  be,  to  have  Prayers 
read  in  all  Churches,  to  have  the  Sacraments  of  G^d  admi- 
nistered, to  have  the  Mysteries  of  Salvation  painfully  taught, 
to  have  God  every  where  devoutly  worshipped,  and  all  this 
perpetually,  and  with  quietness,  bringeth  unto  the  whole 
Church,  and  unto  every  member  thereof,  inestimable  good ; 
how  can  that  Authority  which  hath  been  proved  the  Ordi- 
nance of  God  for  preservation  of  these  duties  in  the  Church, 
how  can  it  choose  but  deserve  to  be  held  a  thing  publicly 
most  beneficial?  It  were  to  be  wished,  and  is  to  be  laboured 
for  as  much  as  can  be,  that  they  who  fire  set  in  such  rooms 
may  be  furnished  with  honourable  qualities  and  graces  every 
way  fit  for  their  calling :  but,  be  they  otherwise,  howsoever, 
jso  long  as  they  are  in  Author^y^  all  men  reap  some  good  by 
them,  albeit  not  so  much  good  as  if  they  were  abler  men. 
There  is  not  any  amongst  us  all,  but  is  a  great  deal  more 
apt  to  exact  another  man's  duty,  than  the  best  of  us  is  to 
discharge  exactly  his  own ;  and  therefore  Prelates,  although 
neglecting  many  ways  their  duty  unto  God  and  men,  do  not- 
'Withstanding  by  their  Authority  great  good,  in  that  they  •  ■> 
keep  others,  at  the  leastwise,  in  some  awe  under  them. 

It  is  our  duty,  therefore,  in  this  consideration,  to  honour 
them  that  rule  as  Prelates,  which  Office  if  they  discharge 
well,  the  Apostle's  own  verdict  is,  that  the  Honour  they  i  Tim. 
have  they  be  worthy  of,  yea,  though  it  were  double.  And  ^*  *^* 
if  their  government  be  otherwise,  the  judgment  of  sage  men 
hath  ever  been  this,  That  albeit  the  dealings  of  Governors  be 
culpable,  yet  honourable  they  must  be,  in  respect  of  that 
Authority  by  which  they  govern.  Great  caution  must  be 
used  that  we  neither  be  emboldened  to  follow  them  in  evil. 


198  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.  18. 

whom  for  authority's  sake  we  honour,  nor  induced  in  au- 
thority to  dishonour  them,  whom  as  examples  we  may  not 
follow.  In  a  word,  not  to  dislike  Sin,  though  it  should  be  in 
the  highest,  were  unrighteous  meekness,  and  proud  right- 
eousness it  is  to  contemn  or  dishonour  Highness,  though  it 
should  be  in  the  sinfullest  men  that  live.  But  so  hard  it  is 
to  obtain  at  our  hands,  especially  as  now  things  stand,*  the 

Bom.  yielding  of  honour  to  whom  honour  in  this  case  belongeth, 
that  by  a  brief  declaration  only  what  the  duties  of  men  are 
towards  the  principal  Guides  and  Pastors  of  their  souls,  we 
cannot  greatly  hope  to  prevail,  partly  for  the  malice  of  their 
open  adversaries,  and  partly  for  the  cunning  of  such  as  in  a 
sacrilegious  intent,  work  their  dishonour  under  covert,  by 
more  mystical  and  secret  means.  Wherefore  requisite,  and 
in  a  manner  necessary,  it  is,  that  by  particular  instances  we 
make  it  even  palpably  manifest  what  singular  benefit  and 
use  public  the  nature  of  Prelates  is  apt  to  yield. 

First.  No  man  doubteth  but  that  unto  the  happy  condition 
of  Commonweals  it  is  a  principal  help  and  furtherance,  when 
in  the  eye  of  Foreign  States  their  estimation  and  credit  is 
great.  In  which  respect,  the  Lord  himself  commending  his 
own  Laws  unto  his  people,  mentioneth  this  as  a  thing  not 

Dent,  meanly  to  be  accounted  of,  That  their  careful  obedience 
yielded  thereunto  should  purchase  them  a  great  good  opinion 
abroad,  and  make  them  every  where  famous  for  wisdom. 
Fame  and  reputation  groweth  especially  by  the  virtue,  not 
of  common  ordinary  persons,  but  of  them  which  are  in  each 
estate  most  eminent  by  occasion  of  their  higher  place  and 
calling.  The  mean  man's  actions,  be  they  good  or  evil,  they 
reach  not  far,  they  are  not  greatly  enquired  into,  except 

Matt,     perhaps  by  such  as  dwell  at  the  next  door :  whereas  men  of 

^*  ^^  more  ample  dignity  are  as  cities  on  the  tops  of  hills,  their 
lives  are  viewed  afar  off;  so  that  the  more  there  are  which 
observe  aloof  what  they  do,  the  greater  glory  by  their  well- 
doing they  purchase  both  unto  God  whom  they  serve,  and 
to  the  State  wherein  they  live.  Wherefore,  if  the  Clergy 
be  a  beautifying  unto  the  Body  of  this  Commonweal  in  the 
eyes  of  Foreign  beholders,  and  if  in  the  Clergy  the  Prelacy 
be  most  exposed  unto  the  world's  eye,  what  public  benefit 
doth  grow  from  that  Order,  in  regard  of  reputation  thereby 

*  [Who  can  wonder  that  such  Prelates  as  Whitgift,  Bancroft,  &c  should  bring  their  Office 
Into  disrepute  ?     That  they  were  learned,  aggravates  their  enormities.] 


Sect.  18.1  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  199 

gotten  to  the  Land  from  abroad^  we  may  soon  conjecture. 
Amongst  the  Jews  (their  Kings  excepted)  who  so  renowned 
throughout  the  world  as  their  High-priest  ?  Who  so  much 
or  so  often  spoken  of  as  their  Prelates  ? 

ii.  Which  Order  is  not  for  the  present  only  the  most  in 
sighty  but  for  that  very  cause  also  the  most  commended 
onto  posterity.  For  if  we  search  those  records  wherein 
there  hath  descended  from  age  to  age  whatsoever  notice 
and  intelligence  we  have  of  those  things  which  were  before 
us^  is  there  any  thing  almost  else,  surely  not  any  thing  so 
muchy  kept  in  memory^  as  the  successions,  doings,  suffer- 
ings, and  affairs  of  Prelates.*  So  that  either  there  is  not 
any  public  use  of  that  light  which  the  Church  doth  receive 
from  Antiquity ;  or  if  this  be  absurd  to  think,  then  must 
we  necessarily  acknowledge  ourselves  beholden  more  unto 
Prelates  than  unto  others  their  inferiors,  for  that  good  of 
direction  which  Ecclesiastical  actions  recorded  do  always 
bring. 

III.  But  to  call  home  our  cogitations,  and  more  inwardly 
to  weigh  with  ourselves  what  principal  commodity  that 
Order  yieldeth,  or  at  leastwise  is  of  it  \its\  own  disposition  and 
nature  apt  to  yield:  Kings  and  Princes,  partly  for  infor- 
mation of  their  own  consciences,  partly  for  instruction 
what  they  have  to  do  in  a  number  of  most  weighty  affairs, 
entangled  with  the  cause  of  Religion,  having,  as  all  men 
know,  so  usual  occasion  of  often  consultations  and  con- 
ferences with  their  Clergy;  suppose  we,  that  no  public 
detriment  would  follow  upon  the  want  of  honourable  per- 
sonages Ecclesiastical  to»  be  used  in  those  cases?  It  will 
be  haply  said,  **  That  the  highest  might  learn  to  stoop,  and 
not  to  disdain  the  advice  of  some  circumspect,  wise,  and 
Tirtuous  Minister  of  God,  albeit  the  Ministry  were  not  by 
such  degrees  distinguished."  What  Princes  in  that  case 
might  or  should  do,  it  is  not  material.  Such  difference 
being  presupposed  therefore,  as  we  have  proved  already 
to  have  been  the  Ordinance  of  God,  there  is  no  judicious 
man  will  ever  make  any  question  or  doubt,  but  that  fit  and 
direct  it  is  for  the  highest  and  chiefest  Order  in  God's 
Clergy  to  be  employed  before  others,  about  so  near  and 
necessary  Offices  as  the  sacred  estate  of  the  greatest  on 

*  [**  Qui  legit  historiam  Eccleaasticani,  quid  legit  niii  vitia  Episoopomm  ?"    GROTiuf.1 


200  THE   SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect- 18, 

0a|}th  doth  feiqfiive.  For,  this  cause  Joshua  h^d  Eleazar; 
K)ayidi  ■■  Abi^di&i' ;  Coiistan^ine^  Hodud  Bishop  of  CSorduba ; 
dther  Emperors  find  Kings ;  their  Prelates^  by  whom  in-  pri*- 
vate  (for  with  Princes  thid  is  the  most  effectual  way  of  doing 
good)  to  be  admonished}  counselled^  comforted ,  and  if  nteed 
^ireyfi,  ^^proved.* 

-Whensoever  Sovereign  Rulers  are  willing  to  admit  these 
«o  laeoessary  private  conferences  for  their  fipitituial  and 
ghostly  good}  inasmuch  as  they  do  for -the  timOyvWhile-  they 
take  ndvice,  grant  a  kind  of  Superiority  tmto  them  of  Whom 
they  receive  it^  albeit  haply  they  can  be  contented  ^eyen  so 
{av  to  bend  to  the  gravest  and  chiefest  persons  in  the  Order 
of  God's  Clergy,t  yet  this  of  the  very  best  being  -ritrely  and 
hardly  obtained^  now  that  there  are  whose  greater  and 
higher '  callings  do  somewhat  more  proportion;  them  unte 
that  ample  conceit  atid  spirit  wherewith  the  minds  of  IM> 
powerful  persons  are  possessed;  what  should  we  look  for 
in  case  God  himself  not  authorizing  any  by  miraculoul 
means>  as  of  old  he  did  his  Prophets,  the  equal  meaijSiess 
of  all  did  leave,  in  respect  of  calling,  no  xhorC'^place  of 
decency  for  one  than  for  another  to  be  admitted?!  iXiet 
une^cperienced  wits  imagine  what  pleaseth  them,  in  having 
to  deal  with  so  great  personages  these  personal  differences 
are  so  necessary  that  there  must  be  regard  had  of  them. 

iv.  Kingdoms  being  principally  (next  unto  God  s  Al- 
mightiness,  and  the  sovereignty  of  the  highest  under  God) 
upheld  by  wisdom  and  by  valour,  as  by  the  chiefest  human 
means  to  cause  continuance  in  safety  with  honour  (for  the 
labours  of  them  who  attend  the  s^vice  of  God,  we  reckon 
as  means  divine,  to  procure  out  protection  from  Heaven); 
from  hence  it  riseth,  that  men  excelling  in  either  of  these,* 
or  descending  from  such,  as  for  excellency  either  way  have 
been  ennobled,  or  possessing  howsoever  the  rooms  of  such 
as  should  be  in  politic  wisdom  or  in  martial  prowess  emi- 
nent, are  had  in  singular  recommendation.    Notwithstanding, 


*  [Eccles.  viii.  4.     Isai.  xxix.  16.] 

f  [Whose  Clergy  are  they,  of  whom  Kings  make  the  Bishops,  and  Bishops  make  the 
others?  Wycliffe  has  denonunated  the  intermediate  party  "a  Csesarean  prelacy."  See 
Vaughan's  LifSf   ^c.   of  Wycliffe,   Vol.  11.  p.  342.  "  Archbishops,    Bishops,   Arch- 

deacons, and  all  other  Ecclesiastical  Officers,  have  no  manner  of  Jurisdiction  Ecclesiastical, 
but  by,  under,  and  from,  hia  royal  Majesty.'*  Jet  of  Pari.  temp.  Hen.  VIII.  Henct 
Bishop  Burnet  acknowledges  that  **  The  King  gave  Bishops  their  power  to  ordain  or 
deprive  Ministers ;  to  exercise  Ecclesiastical  Jurisdiction ;  and  perform  all  other  parts  of  the 
Episcopal  Function" !] 


SecU  18.]  OF   £CCIr£SIASTICA];<  POLITY.  gQl 

beeaose '.  they  are  by  the  state  of  Nobility  ^great^  but 
not! thereby  made  inclinable  to  good  things;  such  they 
oftentimes  prove  even  under  the  best  Princes,  as  under 
David  certain  of  the  Jewish  Nobility  were.  In  Polity  and 
Council  the  world  had  not  Achitophers  equals  nor  hell  his 
equal: in  deadly  malice.  Joab  the  General  of  the  Host  of 
Israel,  valiant,  industrious,  fortunate  <  in  war,  but  withal 
headstrong^  crueU  treacherous,  void  of  piety  towards  God ; 
ID  a  word^  so  conditioned,  that  easy  it  is  not  to  define, 
whether  it  were  .for  David  harder  to  miss  the  benefit  of  his 
warEke  ability,  or  to: bear  the  enormity  of  his  other  crimes* 
As  well  for  the  cherishing  of  those  virtues  therefore,  wherein 
if>  Nobility  do  chance  to  flourish,  ^they  are  both  an  ornament 
and  a  stay  to  the  Commonwealth  wherein  they  live;  as  also 
for  the  bridling  of  those  disorders,  which  if  they  loosely  run 
into,  they  are  by  reason  of  their  greatness  dangerous;  what 
help  could  there  ever  have  been  invented  more  divine,  than 
the  sorting  of  the  Clergy  into  such  degrees,  that  the  chiefest 
of  the  Prelacy  being  matched  in  a  kind  of  equal  yoke^  as 
it  were,  with  the  higher,  the  next  with  the  lower  degree  of 
Nobility,  the  reverend  Authority  of  the  one  might  be  to  the 
other  as  a  courteous  bridle,  a  mean  to  kqep.  them  lovingly  in 
awe  that  are  exorbitant,  and  to  correct  such  excesses  in 
them  as  whereunto  their  courage,  state,  and  dignity  make 
them  over-prone?*  O  that. there  were  for  encouragement 
of  Prelates  herein,  Ihat  inclination  of.  all  Christian  Kings 
and  Princes  towards  them^  which  sometime  a  famous  King 
of  this  Land  either  had,  or  pretended  to  have,  for  the  coun-* 
tenancing  of  a  piincipal  Prelate  under  him  in  the  actions 
of  Spiritual  Authority  !t 

"  Let  my  Lord  Archbishop  know  (saith  he),  that  if  a  Petr. 
Bishop,  or  Earl,  or  any  other  great  person,  yea,  if  my  own  £p!T'* 
chosen  Son,  shall  presume  to  withstand,  or  to  hinder  his 
will  and  disposition,  whereby  he  may  be  withheld  from 
performing  the  work  of  the  embassage  committed  unto  him ; 
such  a  one  shall  find,  that  of  his  contempt  I  will   shew 


■«i«- 


•  ["  Behold  your  Bishop  !    Well  he  plays  his  part, 
Christian  in  name,  and  Infidel  in  heart, 
Ghostly  in  office,  earthly  in  his  plan, 
A  slave  at  Court,  elsewhere  a  lady's  man. 
Dumb  as  a  Senator,  and  as  a  Priest 
A  piece  of  mere  Churchy-furniture  at  best." 

Poems  by  W.  Cowper,  Esq.  TV^-octrntMi,  1. 420.] 
f  [Henry  II.  and  Thomas  k  Becket] 


202  ^THs  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.  18* 

myself  no  less  a  persecutor  and  revenger^  than  if  treason 
were  committed  against  mine  own  very  Crown  and  Dignity." 
Sith^  therefore^  by  the  Fathers  and  first  Founders  of  this 
Commonweal  it  hath^  upon  great  experience  and  forecast^ 
been  judged  most  for  the  good  of  all  sorts,  that  as  the 
whole  Body  Politic  wherein  we  live  should  be  for  strength's 
sake  a  threefold  cable,  consisting  of  the  King  as  a  supreme 
Head  over  all,  of  Peers  and  Nobles  under  him,  and  of  the 
People  under  them;  so  likewise,  that  in  this  conjunction  of 
states,  the  second  wreath  of  that  cable  should,  for  important 
respects,  consist  as  well  of  Lords  Spiritual  as  Temporal.* 
Nobility  and  Prelacy  being  by  this  mean  twined  together, 
how  can  it  possibly  be  avoided,  but  that  the  tearing  away  of 
the  one  must  needs  exceedingly  weaken  the  other,  and  by 
consequent  impair  greatly  the  good  of  all? 

y.  The  force  of  which  detriment  there  is  no  doubt  but 
that  the  common  sort  of  men  would  feel  to  their  helpless 
woe,  how  goodly  a  thing  soever  they  now  surmise  it  to  be, 
that  themselves  and  their  godly  Teachers  did  all  alone, 
without  controlment  of  their  Prelate.  For,  if  the  manifold 
jeopardies  whereto  a  people  destitute  of  Pastors  is  subjiect, 
be  unavoidable  without  Government,  and  if  the  benefit  of 
Government,  whether  it  be  Ecclesiastical  or  Civil,  do  grow 
principally  from  them  who  are  principal  therein,  as  hath 
been  proved  out  of  the  Prophet,  who,  albeit  the  people  of 
Israel  had  sundry  inferior  Governors,  ascribeth  not  unto 
them  the  public  benefit  of  Government,  but  maketh  mention 
of  Moses  and  Aaron  only,  the  chief  Prince  and  chief  Pre- 
late, because  they  were  the  well-spring  of  all  the  good 
which  others  under  them  did ;  may  we  not  boldly  conclude, 
that  to  take  from  the  people  their  Prelate,  is  to  leave  them 
in  eiSect  without  guides ;  at  leastwise,  without  those  guides 
which  are  the  strongest  hands  that  God  doth  direct  them 


•  ["  At  first,"  remarks  the  learned  Dr.  Barrow,  "  every  Church  was  settled  apart  under 
its  own  Bishop  and  Presbyters;  so  as  independently  and  separately  to  manage  its  own 
concerns ;  each  was  governed  by  its  own  head,  and  had  its  own  laws."  ..."  The  Metro- 
political  Governance,"  he  adds,  "  was  introduced  by  human  prudence,  following  conside- 
rations of  public  necessity :"  and  he  shews,  that  it  was  by  the  moulding  of  the  Ecclesiastical 
Government  in  conformity  to  the  Civil,  that  the  power  of  the  Metropolitans,  Primates, 
Patriarchs,  and  at  length,  the  Papacy,  successively  originated.  "  There  are,  indeed,  some," 
he  remarks,  "  who  think  it  (the  Metropolitical  Government)  was  instituted  by  the 
Apostles ;  but  their  arguments  do  not  seem  convincing ;  and  such  a  constitution  doth  not,  as 
I  take  it,  well  suit  to  the  state  of  their  times,  and  the  course  which  they  took  in  founding 
Churches."     TreatUe  of  the  Pope's  Supremacy.    1680,  4to.  p.  240.] 


Sect.  18.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  203 

by?     '*  Thou  didst  lead  thy  people  like  sheep  (saith  thePMim 
Prophet)  by  the  hands  of  Moses  and  Aaron."  S 

If  now  there  arise  any  matter  of  grievance  between  the 
Pastor  and  the  people  that  are  under  him,  they  have  their 
Ordinary,  a  Judge  indifferent  to  determine  their  causes, 
and  to  end  their  strife.  But  in  case  there  were  no  such 
appointed  to  sit,  and  to  hear  both,  what  would  then  be  the 
end  of  their  quarrels  ?  They  will  answer,  perhaps,  "  That 
for  such  purposes  their  Synods  shall  serve."  Which  is,  as 
if  in  the  Commonwealth,  the  higher  Magistrates  being  re- 
moved, every  Township  should  be  a  State  altogether  free 
and  independent;  and  the  controversies  which  they  cannot 
end  speedily  within  themselves,  to  the  contentment  of  both 
parties,  should  be  all  determined  by  solemn  Parliaments.* 
Merciful  God!  where  is  the  light  of  wit  and  judgment, 
which  this  age  doth  so  much  vaunt  of  and  glory  in,  when 
unto  these  such  odd  imaginations  so  great  not  only  assent, 
but  also  applause,  is  yielded  ? 

vi.  As  for  those  in  the  Clergy  whose  place  and  calling 
is  lower,  were  it  not  that  their  eyes  are  blinded  lest  they 
should  see  the  thing  that  of  all  others  is  for  their  good  most 
effectual,  somewhat  they  might  consider  the  benefit  which 
they  enjoy  by  having  such  in  Authority  over  them  as  are  of 
the  self-same  profession,  society,  and  body  with  them ;  such 
as  have  trodden  the  same  steps  before ;  such  as  know  by 
their  own  experience  the  manifold  intolerable  contempts 
and  indignities  which  faithfulf  Pastors,  intermingled  with 
the  multitude,  are  constrained  every  day  to  suffer  in  the 
exercise  of  their  spiritual  charge  and  function ;  unless  their 
Superiors,  taking  their  causes  even  to  heart,  be,  by  a  kind 
of  sympathy,  drawn  to  believe  and  aid  them  in  their  virtuous 
proceedings  no  less  effectually,  than  loving  parents  their 
dear  children. 

Thus  therefore  Prelacy,  being  unto  all  sorts  so  beneficial, 
ought  accordingly  to  receive  Honour  at  the  hands  of  all: 
but  we  have  just  cause  exceedingly  to  fear  that  those  mise- 
rable times  of  confusion  are  drawing  on,  wherein  "  the  isa. 
people  shall  be  oppressed  one  of  another;"  inasmuch  as 
already  that  which  prepareth  the  way  thereunto  is  come  to 

*  [Is  not  something  like  this  really  the  case,  in  **  this  age,"  among  Corporate  Towns  and 
Cities  in  the  Germanic  Circles  ?] 

f  [The  Reader  can  make  his  own  comment  on  this  epithet.] 


204  THE   SEVENTH  BOOK  [SecU  19. 

pass^  **  Children  presume  against  the  ancient^  and  the  vile 
against  the  honourable."  .  Prelacy,  the  temperature  of  ex- 
cesses in  all  estates,  the  glue  and  soder  of  the  public-weal, 
the  ligament  which  tieth  and  connecteth  the  limbs  of  this 
body-politic  each  to  other,:  hath,  instead  of  deserved  Honour, 
all  extremity  of  disgrace^  The  foolish  every  where  plead, 
that  unto  the  wise  in  heart*  they  owe  neither  Service,  Sub- 
jection, nor  Honour.t 
ki2d8  of  ^^*  Now  thiat  we  have  laid  open  the  causes  for  which 
Honour  Houour  is  duc  unto  Prelates,  the  next  thing  we  are  to  con* 
SSo  8  ®^^'  ^^>  what  kinds  of  Honour  be  due.  The  good  Grovern- 
ment  either  of  the  Church  or  .the  Commonwealth  dependeth 
scarcely  on  any  one  external  thing  so  much  as  on  the  public 
marks  and  tokens  whereby  the  estimation  that  Governors 
are  in  is  made  manifest  to  the  eyes  of  men.  True  it  is,  that 
Governors  are  to  be  esteemed  according  to  the  excellency 
of  their  virtues ;  ^he  more  virtuous  they  are,  the  more  they 
ought  to  be  honoured,  if  respect  be  had  unto  that  which 
every  man  should  voluntarily  perform  unto  his  superiors. 
But  the  question  is  now,  of  that  Honour  which  PubUc 
Order  doth  appoint  unto  iChurch-governors,  in  that  they 
are  Governors ;  the  end  whereof  is,  to  give  open,  sensible 
testimony,  that  the  place  which  they  hold  is  judged  publicly 
in  such  degree  beneficial,  as  the  marks  of  their  excellency, 
the  Honours  appointed  to  be  done  unto  them,  do  import. 
Wherefore  this  Honour  we  are  to  do  them,  without  prer 
suming  ourselves  to.  examine  how  worthy  they  are;  and 
withdrawing  it,  if  by  us  they  be  thought  unworthy.  It  is 
a  note  of  that  public  judgment  which  is  given  of  them;  and 
therefore  not  tolerable  that  men  in  private  should,  by  refusal 
to  do  them  such  Honour,  reverse,  as  much  as  in  them  lieth^ 
the  public  judgment.  If  it  deserve  so  grievous  punishment, 
when  any  particular  person  adventureth  to  deface  those 
marks  whereby  is  signified  what  value  some  small  piece  of 
coin  is  pubUcly  esteemed  at ;  is  it  sufferable  that  Honours, 
the  characters  of  that  estimation  which  publicly  is  had  of 
public  estates  and  callings  in  the  Church  or  Commonwealth, 


•  [Job  xxxiL  9.] 

f  ["  The  Civil  respect  due  to  rank  has  no  aflSnity  to  the  Moral  deference  which  we  yield 
to  the  character  of  the  Minister  of  Christ . . .  The  artificial  distinctions  of  Civil  society, 
Christianity  teaches  us  to  respect ;  it  leaves  them  inviolate ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  passes 
sentence  upon  their  nothingness,  and  disdains  to  employ  their  aid."  Condcr's  Protest* 
Non-cotif.  1818.  Vol.  L  p.  151.] 


SecU  19.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  205 

should  at  every  man's  pleasure  be  cancelled?  Let  us  not 
think  that  without  most  necessary  cause  the  same  have  been 
thought  expedient.  The  first  authors  thereof  were  wise  and 
judicious  men ;  they  knew  it  a  thing  altogether  impossible, 
for  each  particular  in  the  multitude  to  judge  what  benefit 
doth  grow  unto  them  from  their  Prelates,  and  thereupon 
uniformly  to  yield  them  convenient  Honour.  Whereforei 
that  all  sorts  might  be  kept  in  obedience  and  awe,  doing 
that  unto  their  Superiors  of  every  degree,  not  which  every 
man's  special  fancy  should  think  meet,  but  which,  being 
beforehand  agreed  upon  as  meet  by  public  sentence  and 
decision,  might  afterwards  stand  as  a  rule  for  each  in  parti- 
cular to  follow;  they  found  that  nothing  was  more  necessary 
than  to  allot  unto  all  degrees  their  certain  Honour,  as  marks 
of  public  judgment  concerning  the  dignity  of  their  places; 
which  mark  when  the  multitude  should  behold,  they  might 
be  thereby  given  to  know,  that  of  such  or  such  estimation 
their  Governors  are,  and  in  token  thereof  do  carry  those 
notes  of  excellency.  Hence  it  groweth,  that  the  diiSerent 
notes  and  signs  of  Honour  do  leave  a  correspondent  im- 
pression in  the  minds  of  common  beholders.  Let  the  people 
be  asked,  who  are  the  chiefest  in  any  kind  of  calling  ?  who 
most  to  be  list'ned  unto?  who  of  greatest  account  and 
reputation?  and  see  if  the  very  discourse  of  their  minds 
lead  them  not  unto  those  sensible  marks,  according  to 
the  di£Perence  whereof  they  give  their  suitable  judgment, 
esteeming  them  the  worthiest  persons  who  carry  the  prin- 
cipal note  and  public  mark  of  worthiness.  If  therefore  they 
see  in  other  estates  a  number  of  tokens  sensible,  whereby 
testimony  is  given  what  account  there  is  publicly  made  of 
them,  but  no  such  thing  in  the  Clergy;  what  will  they 
hereby,  or  what  can  they  else  conclude,  but  that  where  they 
behold  this,  surely  in  that  Commonwealth,  Religion,  and 
they  that  are  conversant  about  it,  are  not  esteemed  greatly 
beneficial?  Whereupon,  in  time,  the  open  contempt  of 
God  and  godliness  must  needs  ensue:  '^  Qui  bona  fide  Deos  pner. 
colit,  amat  et  Sacerdotes,"  saith  Papinius.  In  vain  doth  that  siiVl' 
ELingdom  or  Commonwealth  pretend  zeal  to  the  Honour  of 
God,  which  doth  not  provide  that  his  Clergy  also  may  have 
Honour.*     Now  if  all  that  are  employed  in  the  service  of 

*  [*'  That  spell  is  past,  by  which  the  very  name  of  a  Clergyman,  in  common  acceptation, 
carried  with  it  associations  of  a  sacred  character,  and  staihped  its  bearer  as  a  holy  man,  to 


orna 
ment 
tend- 
ency 


206  I'HE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  20. 

God  should  have  one  kind  of  Honour,  what  more  confiised, 
absurd,  and  unseemly?  Wherefore,  m  the  Honour  which 
hath  been  allotted  unto  God's  Clergy,  we  are  to  observe, 
how  not  only  the  kinds  thereof,  but  also  in  every  particular 
kind,  the  degrees  do  differ.  The  Honour  which  the  Clergy 
of  God  hath  hitherto  enjoyed,  consisteth  especially  in  the 
pre-eminence  of  title,  place,  ornament,  attendance,  privilege, 
endowment.  In  every  of  which  it  hath  been  evermore 
judged  meet,  that  there  should  be  no  small  odds  between 
Prelates  and  the  inferior  Clergy. 
Honour  20.  Conccming  Title,  albeit  even  as  under  the  Law,  all 
{JiMe*'  they  whom  God  had  severed  to  offer  him  sacrifice  were 
, at- generally  termed  Priests;  so  likewise  the  name  of  Pastor 
or  Presbyter  be  now  common  unto  all  that  serve  him  in  the 
Ji£ge![*'  Ministry  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ ;  yet  both  then  and 
now  the  higher  Orders,  as  well  of  the  one  sort  as  of  the 
other,  have  by  one  and  the  same  congruity  of  reason  their 
different  Titles  of  Honour,  wherewith  we  find  them  in  the 
phrase  of  ordinary  speech  exalted  above  others.  Thus 
the  Heads  of  the  twenty-four  companies  of  Priests  are  in 
•A|x»e-  Scripture  termed  Arch-priests ;  Aaron  and  the  successors  of 
'^"'  Aaron  being  above  those  Arch-priests;  themselves  are  in 
that  respect  further  entituled  High  and  Great.  After  what 
sort  Antiquity  hath  used  to  style  Christian  Bishops,  and  to 
yield  them  in  that  kind  Honour  more  than  were  meet  for 
inferior  Pastors,   I  may  the  better  omit  to  declare,   both 

whom  respect  was  paid,  if  not  on  his  own  accounti  for  his  very  Order's  sake.  That  spell  is 
past;  and  little  now  remains  to  remind  us,  however  faintly,  that  it  once  existed.  The 
present  year  (1827)  itself  has  witnessed  the  erasure  from  our  Statute  Books  of  that  '  plea  of 
benefit  of  Clergy/  which,  though  it  had  long  ceased  to  operate  as  an  exclusive  protection  for 
the  members  of  our  profession,  in  whom  indeed  Crime  was  always  least  of  all  excusable,  yet 
recalled  to  memory  that  a  time  has  been  when  reverential  regard  was  paid  to  the  Ministers  of 
the  Church  in  virtue  of  their  pious  office.  Scripture  tells  us,  that  '  the  judgment  of  God 
slumbereth  not,'  (2  Pet.  ii.  3.).  We  may  assert,  in  our  own  days,  with  equal  certainty  of 
assurance,  that  the  judgment  of  man  slumbereth  not.  Let  me  not,  however,  be  mbunder- 
stood.  Do  I  complsdn  of  those  jealous  eyes  which  are  ever  watching,  with  an  Argus^like 
vigilance,  to  detect  in  the  Pastor  of  the  Flock  the  absence  of  those  qualities  by  which  the 
Chief  Shepherd  was  distinguished  ?  Do  I  wish  to  recall  those  days  of  almost  supersdtioof 
reverence  for  the  Priesthood,  when  the  dominion  of  the  Clergy  over  the  minds  of  men 
deserved  less  to  be  considered  as  the  legitimate  ascendaney  of  high  talent  and  extraordinary 
piety,  than  as  the  offspring  of  a  monopoly  of  learning  in  an  age  of  darkness ;  the  despotism 
of  exclusive  knowledge  over  ignorance  and  its  associate  error!  No,  my  reverend  brethren, 
happily  for  ourselves,  as  well  as  for  the  world  in  general,  whatever  be  the  character  we  enjoy, 
it  cannot  be  acquired  by  hereditary  charter ,  or  put  on  at  pleasure,  as  belonging  to  the  habit  oif 
our  profession.  Respect  must  be  deserved  before  it  can  be  won ;  and  as,  generally  speaking, 
it  will  rarely  be  long  withheld  when  it  is  fairly  due,  so  it  will  seldom  be  long  conferred 
contrary  to  desert,  however  high  the  office,  or  sacred  the  functions  of  him  who  challenges  it." 
A  Charge,  Sept.  1827,  at  the  Primary  Fisitatim,  By  Charles  Richard  (Sumner), 
Bishop  of  Llandaff.    8va  pp.  11, 12.] 


Sect.  20.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  207 

because  others  have  sufficiently  done  it  already^  and  in  so 
slight  a  thing  it  were  but  a  loss  of  time  to  bestow  further 
travail.  The  allegation  of  Christ's  prerogative  to  be  named 
an*  Arch-pastor  simply,  in  regard  of  his  absolute  excellency 
over  ally  is  no  impediment  but  that  the  like  Title  in  an 
unlike  signification  may  be  granted  unto  others  besides 
him,  to  note  a  more  limited  superiority,  whereof  men  are 
capable  enough  without  derogation  from  his  glory,  than 
which  nothing  is  more  sovereign.  To  quarrel  at  syllables, 
and  to  take  so  poor  exceptions  at  the  first  four  letters  in  the 
name  of  an  Archbishop,  as  if  they  were  manifestly  stolen 
goods  whereof  restitution  ought  to  be  made  to  the  Civil 
Magistrate,  toucheth  no  more  the  Prelates  that  now  are, 
than  it  doth  the  very  blessed  Apostle,  who  giveth  unto  him- 
self the  title  of  an  Arch-builder.f 

As  for  our  Saviour's  words  alleged  against  the  Style  of 
Lordship  and  Grace,  we  have  before  sufficiently  opened 
bow  far  they  are  drawn  from   their  natural  meaning,   to 
bolster  up   a  cause  which  they  nothing    at  all   concern,  nut. 
Bishop,  Theodoret  entituleth,  '^  most  honourable:"  Emperors  iib.%.' 
writing  unto  Bishops,  have  not  disdained  to  give  them  their  c.  de 
appellations  of  Honour,  "  Your  Holiness,"  "  Your  Blessed-  TrkS! 
ness,"   "  Your  Amplitude,"    "  Your   Highness,"   and   the  cM"' 
like:  such  as  purposely  have  done  otherwise  are  noted  of  cSf'** 
insolent  singularity  and  pride.j;  et™de' 

Honour  done  by  giving  pre-eminence  of  Place  unto  one  fJciSl 
sort  before  another,  is,  for  decency,  order,  and  quietness'  *"  *^*' 
sake,   so   needful,   that  both  Imperial   Laws  and   Canons 
Elcclesiastical   have  made  their  special  provisions  for  it.§ 


;p 


Cf  The  Chief  Shepherd,"  rod  i^nroifUvos'   1  Pet  v.  4.] 

A  wise  Architect,"  aoiphs  apx^'f^^f^v  ^  Cor.  iiL  10.  Hooker  makes  no  aDusioii 
to  the  first  clause  of  this  verse,  nor  to  Paul  being  able  to  say,  *'  I  have  received  of  the  Lord/' 
cibap.  xi.  ver.  23 ;  but  "  the  Prelates  that  now  are"  say,  I  have  received  of  the  King  I  As  to 
imking  exceptions  at  *'  four  letters,"  Hooker  would  have  sustained  his  dignity  better  had  he 
justified  their  meaning,'] 

X  [Robinson,  in  a  Note  to  Claude's  Essay  en  the  ComposUUm  of  a  Sermon  (1779.  Vol.  II. 
p.  SO),  and  dting  Bebelius  de  Abus.  Ling.  Lat,  says,  one  source  of  Puritanical  mirth  **  arose 
firom  a  contrast  of  qualifications  of  Churchmen  with  the  epithets  which  were  given  them  by 
one  another:  Admirabilissime ;  Reverendissime;  Dignissime;  Ornatissime;  Venerabilissime; 
Ben^mssime;  Scientificentisrime;  Singularissime ;  Sociabilissime ;  Vigilantissime ;  Pientis- 
nme ;  Sanctissime ;  Beatissime  ;  &c"] 

{  ['*  In  the  Primitive  Church  modem  titles  were  unknown.  Cyprian  wrote  to  the  Bishop 
of  Rome,  Cyprianus  Comelio  fratri  salutem,  Cyprian  wisheth  health  to  his  brother  Cornelius; 
and  in  this  style  ran  all  the  addresses  of  Primitive  Bishops.  After  the  time  of  Constantine, 
the  Clergy,  infected  with  Court  air,  complimented  one  another  in  polite  language,  and  with 
Ingfa-sounding  titles ;  St.  Jerome  styled  Pope  Damasus  Most  blessed  Sir ;  and  St.  Augustine 
and  be  interdianged  similar  compliments.  In  process  of  time,  the  Clergy,  long  accustomed 
to  titular  dutinctions,  were  a£&onted,  when  their  titles  were  omitted :  St.  Chrysostom  says. 


208  .  THS  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.  20. 

Our  Saviour's  invective  against  the  vain  affectation  of  Supe- 
riority, whether  in  Title  or  in  Place,*  may  hot  hinder  these 
seemly  differences  usual  in  giving  and  taking  Honour,  either 
according  to  the  one  or  the  other. 

Something  there  is,  even  in  the  Ornaments  of  Honour 
also ;  otherwise  idle  it  had  been  for  the  Wise  Man,  speak- 
ing of  Aaron,  to  stand  so  much  upon  the  circumstance  of 
his  Priestly  Attire,  and  to  urge  it  as  an  argument  of  such 
Eccies.  dignity  and  greatness  in  him :  '^  An  everlasting  covenant 
xiv.  7.  Qq^  made  with  Aaron,  and  gave  him  the  Priesthood  among 
the  people,  and  made  him  blessed  through  his  comely^  Orna- 
ment, and  clothed  him  with  the  Garment  of  Honour."  ^he 
robes  of  a  Judge  do  not  add  to  his  virtue;  the  chiefest  orna- 
ment of  Kings  is  justice;  holiness  and  purity  of  conversa- 
tion doth  much  more  adorn  a  Bishop,  than  his  peculiar  form 
of  clothing.  Notwithstanding,  both  Judges,  through  the 
Garments  of  judicial  Authority,  and  through  the  Ornaments 
of  Sovereignty,  Princes;  yea.  Bishops,  through  the  very 
attire  of  Bishops,  are  made  blessed,  that  is  to  say,  marked 
and  manifested  they  are  to  be  such  as  God  hath  poured  his 
blessing  upon,  by  advancing  them  above  others,  and  pladng 
them  where  they  may  do  him  principal  good  service.  Thus 
to  be  called  is  to  be  blessed,  and  therefore  to  be  honoured 
with  the  signs  of  such  a  calUng  must  needs  be  in  part  a  bless- 
ing also ;  for  of  good  things  even  the  signs  are  good. 

Of  Honour,  another  part  is  Attendancy ;  and  therefore  in 
the  visions  of  the  glory  of  God,  Angels  are  spoken  of  as  his 
[Psai.  Attendants.  In  setting  out  the  Honour  of  that  mystical 
»*^'i4.]  Queen  ^  t^g  Prophet  mentioneth  the  Virgin  Ladies  which 
waited  on  her.  Amongst  the  tokens  of  Solomon's  honour- 
able condition,  his  Servants  and  Waiters  the  Sacred  Hb- 
tory  omitteth  not.  This  doth  prove  Attendants  a  part  of 
Honour :  but  this  as  yet  doth  not  shew  with  what  Attend- 
ancy Prelates  are  to  be  honoured.  Of  the  High-priest's 
retinue  amongst  the  Jews,  somewhat  the  Gospel  itself  doth 
intimate.  And,  albeit  our  Saviour  came  to  minister,  and 
not,  as  the  Jews  did  imagine  their  Messias  should,  to  be 

'  A  most  vehement  Heretic,  conversing  in  time  of  persecution  with  a  Prelate,  neither  called 
him  Pontiff,  nor  Archbishop,  nor  Most-ReUgious,  nor  Holy :  but  what  ?  your  Revereocey 
your  Wisdom,  your  Prudence ;  and,  by  addressing  him  by  these  common  appellations  denied 
his  Authority.'  ...  The  same  title  that  ascribes  Dominion  to  a  Priest  attributes  Subj^tioa 
to  the  People."     Robinson,  utsup,  p.  36.] 

*  **  They  love  to  have  the  chief  seats  in  the  assemblies,  and  to  be  called  of  men  Rabbi." 
Man,  zziii.  6.  7. 


Sect.  80.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  209 

ministered  unto,  in  this  world,  yet,  attended  on  he  was  by 
his  blessed  Apostles,  who  followed  not  only  as  Scholars, 
but  even  as  Servants  about  him.  After  that  he  had  sent 
them,  as  himself  was  sent  of  God,  in  the  midst  of  that  hatred 
and  extreme  contempt  which  they  sustained  at  the  world's 
hands,  by  Saints  and  Believers  this  part  of  Honour  was 
most  plentifully  done  unto  them.  Attendants  they  had  pro- 
vided in  all  places  where  they  went ;  which  custom  of  the 
Church  was  still  continued  in  Bishops  their  successors,  as 
by  Ignatius  it  is  plain  to  be  seen.  And  from  hence  no 
doubt  those  Acolythes  took  their  beginning,  of  whom  so 
frequent  mention  is  made:  the  Bishop's  Attendants,  his 
Followers  they  were ;  in  regard  of  which  service  the  name 
of  Acolythes  seemeth  plainly  to  have  been  given.  The  Novel. 
custom  for  Bishops  to  be  attended  upon  by  many  is,  as  ^' 
Justinian  doth  shew,  ancient:  the  affairs  of  Regiment, 
wherein  Prelates  are  employed,  make  it  necessary  that 
they  always  have  many  about  them  whom  they  may  com- 
mand, although  no  such  thing  did  by  way  of  Honour  belong 
unto  them. 

Some  men's  judgment  is,  that  if  Clerks,  Students,  and 
Religious  persons  were  moe  {morels  common  Serving-men 
and  Lay-retainers  fewer  than  they  are,  in  Bishops'  Palaces, 
the  use  and  the  honour  thereof  would  be  much  more  suitable 
than  now.  But  these  things,  concerning  the  number  and 
quality  of  persons  fit  to  attend  on  Prelates,  either  for  ne- 
cessity, or  for  Honour's  sake,  are  rather  in  particular  discre- 
tion to  be  ordered,  than  to  be  argued  of  by  disputes.  As 
for  the  vain  imagination  of  some,  who  teach  the  original  t.  c. 
hereof  to  have  been  a  preposterous  imagination  of  Maxi-  p.**i^. 
minus  the  Emperor,  who  being  addicted  unto  Idolatry,  Eweb. 
chose  of  the  choicest  Magistrates  to  be  Priests,  and,  to  the  J:  V".' 
end  they  might  be  in  great  estimation,  gave  unto  each  of 
them  a  train  of  followers;  and  that  Christian  Emperors, 
thinking  the  same  would  promote  Christianity  which  pro- 
moted Superstition,  eiideavoured  to  make  their  Bishops 
encounter  and  match  with  those  idolatrous  Priests :  such 
frivolous  conceits  having  no  other  ground  than  conceit,  we 
weigh  not  so  much  as  to  frame  any  answer  unto  them ;  our 
declaration  of  the  true  original  of  ancient  Attendancy  on 
Bishops  being  sufficient.  Now,  if  that  which  the  light  of 
sound  reason  doth  teach  to  be  fit,  have  upon  like  inducements 

VOL.  Hi.  p 


210  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [SeCt.Zl^ 

reasonable^  allowablei  and  good^  approved  itself  in  «uch 
wise  as  to  be  accepted,  not  only  of  us,  but  of  Pagan3 
and  Infidels  also,  doth  conformity  with  them  that  are  evil 
in  that  which  is  good,  make  that  thing  which  is  good,  evil  ? 
We  have  not  herein  followed  the  Heathens,  nor  the  Heathens 
us,  but  both  we  and  they  one  and  the  self-same  divine  Rule, 
the  light  of  a  true  and  sound  imderstanding ;  which  sheweth 
what  Honour  is  At  for  Prelates,  and  what  Attendancy  con** 
venient  to  be  a  part  of  their  Honour. 

Touching  Privileges  granted  for  Honour's  sake,  partly  io 

general  unto  the  Clergy,  and  partly  unto  Prelates,  the  chiefest 

Persons  Ecclesiastical,  in  particular  ;*  of  such  quality  and 

number  they  are,  that  to  make  but  rehearsal  of  them  we 

scarce  think  it  safe,  lest  the  very  entrails  of  some  of  our 

'^  godly  brethren,"  as  they  term  themselves,  should  thereat 

haply  burst  in  sunder. 

HonoHr      ^^'  ^^^  ^^^  of  alLthesc  things  rehearsed,  it  may  be  there 

^en.    never  would  have  grown  any  question,  had  Bishops  been 

nent     honoured  only  thus  far  forth.     But  the  honouring  of  the 

Lands    Clergy  with  Wealth,  this  is,  in  the  eyes  of  them  which  pre- 

Livings.  tcud  to  scek  uothiug  but  mere  Reformation  of  abuses,  a  sin 

that  can  never  be  remitted. 

How  soon,  O  how  soon,  might  the  Church  be  perfect, 
even  without  any  spot  or  wrinkle,  if  PubUc  Authority  would 
at  the  length  say  Amen  unto  the  holy  and  devout  requests 
of  those  godly  brethren,  who  as  yet  with  outstretched  necks 
groan  in  the  pangs  of  their  zeal  to  see  the  Houses  of  Bishops 
rifled,  and  their  so -long -desired  Livings  gloriously  di- 
vided amongst  the  righteous !  But  there  is  an  impediment, 
a  let,  which  somewhat  hind'reth  those  good  men's  prayers 
from  taking  e£Pect :  they  in  whose  hands  the  Sovereignty  of 
Power  and  Dominion  over  this  Church  doth  rest,  are  per- 
suaded there  is  a  God ;  for  undoubtedly,  either  the  name  of 
Godhead  is  but  a  feigned  thing,  or,  if  in  Heaven  there  be 
a  God,  the  sacrilegious  intention  of  Church-robbers,  which 
lurketh  under  this  plausible  name  of  Reformation,  is  in  his 
sight  a  thousand  times  more  hateful  than  the  plain  professed 
[Matt,  nialice  of  those  very  miscreants  who  threw  their  vomit  in  the 
^.J**     open  fiice  of  our  blessed  Saviour. 

They  are  not  words  of  persuasion  by  which  true  men  C4ii 

*  L.  xii.  C.  de  sacr.  Eccles.    1.  v.  C.  de  sacr.  Eccles.    JL  ii.  C.  de  Episc  et  Cler.    1.  x. 
C.  de  Episc.  eC  Cler. 


Sect.  22J]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  211 

hold  their  own  when  they  are  over-beset  with  thieves.  And 
therefore  to  spieak  in  this  cause  at  all  were  but  labour  lost, 
saving  only  in  respect  of  them,  who  being  as  yet  unjoined 
unto  this  conspiracy,  may  be  haply  somewhat  stayed,  when 
they  shall  know  betimes  what  it  is  to  see  thieves,  and  to  run 
on  with  them,  as  the  Prophet  in  the  Psalm  speaketh ;  "  When  pgai. 
thou  sawest  a  thief,  then  thou  consentedst  with  him,  and  hast ''  ^^' 
been  partaker  with  adulterers." 

For  the  better  information  therefore  of  men  which  carry 
true,  honest,  and  indifferent  minds,  these  things  we  will  en- 
deavour to  make  most  clearly  manifest  :* 

First,  That  in  Goods  and  Livings  of  the  Church  none 
hath  propriety  but  God  himself.  Secondly,  That  the 
Honour  which  the  Clergy  therein  hath,  is  to  be,  as  it  were, 
God's  Receivers ;  the  Honour  of  Prelates,  to  be  his  chief  and 
principal  Receivers.  Thirdly,  That  from  him  they  have 
right,  not  only  to  receive,  but  also  to  use  such  Goods,  the 
lower  sort  in  smaller,  and  the  higher  in  larger,  measure. 
Fourthly,  That  in  case  they  be  thought,  yea,  or  found  to 
abuse  the  same,  yet  may  not  such  Honour  be  therefore  law- 
fully taken  from  them,  and  be  given  away  unto  persons  of 
other  calling. 

22.  Possessions,  Lands,  and  Livings  spiritual,  the  Wealth  That  or 
of  the  Clergy,  the  Goods  of  the  Church,  are  in  such  sort  the  Su^ai*" 
Lord's  own,  that  man  can  challenge  no  propriety  in  them.f  SS 


Goods, 
con- 


*  ['*  When  Reformation  of  Religion  was  first  urged,  it  was  thought  such  an  e£fectiial 
motive  as  would  procure  attention,  namely,  To  entitle  Princes,  after  a  sort,  to  the  Church- 
goods.  The  learned  men  persuaded  themselves,  that  if  by  any  policy  they  could  overthrow 
Popery,  it  would  be  afterwards  a  very  easy  matter  to  recover  them  again.  If  error  and  su- 
pentitioa  had  been  so  beneficial  to  the  Church,  they  notMng  doubted  but  that  truth  and  sincerity 
would  bring  forth  at  the  least  as  plentiful  fruits.  Besides,  they  did  not  so  yield  over  their 
right  in  those  matters  to  Princes  but  it  was  done  with  divers  cautions  and  provisoes  by  virtue 
whtreof  they  supposed  in  time  to  recover  all  again  into  their  hands.  But  it  is  not  good  to 
dally  with  Princes :  indeed  they  played  wary-beguile,  themselves  ;  which  since  hath  won- 
derfoUy  moved  them.  And  now  they,  all  of  them  in  a  manner,  do  run  upon  the  ground, 
namely,  That  Kings  and  Princes  are  bound  by  the  Word  of  God  to  restore  to  the  Church 
such  goods  as  heretofore  they  have  taken  from  her ;  and  generally,  that  nothing  once  sepa- 
rated from  a  common  use,  and  bestowed  upon  the  Church,  may  be  afterwards  alienated  to 
aay  other  use."     Bancroft's  Survey,  1593.  Edit  1663,  4to.  p.  190.] 

f  [What  accordance  with  this  sentiment  there  is  in  practice  among  Churchmen  themselves, 
will  be  seen  below.  It  is  but  a  sample  of  numerous  instances.  Perhaps  no  other  Church  in 
the  whole  world,  assuming  to  be  Apostoliiial,  can  be  subjected  to  the  like  exposure  of  actually 
malritig  «  merchandise  of  Uie  souls  of  men"  (Rev.  xviii.  13).  With  what  decorum  an  Incumbent 
who  knows  that  he  has  obtained  his  *'  Living'*  by  such  means  can,  at  his  induction,  face  a 
congregation  and  solemnly  assert  that  he  is  set  over  them  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  for  those  to 
exhibit  and  to  justify  who  countenance  and  advocate  an  Ecclesiastical  system  which  openly 
and  unceremoniously  admits  of  Parishes  and  the  People  being  put  up  for  sale  to  the  higtiest 
bidder  !  "  Valuable  Church  Preferment  in  the  County  of  Sussex.  Particulars  of  the 
Perpetual  Advowson  of  and  next  Presentation  to  the  Rectory  of  South  Ease,  desirably 
situate  within  seven  miles  of  Brighton ;  with  the  great  and  small  Tithes  of  the  whole  Pariah.^ 

p2 


212  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.2Z. 

seqaent-  His  they  are^  and  not  ours^  all  things  are  his,  in  that  from 

Sii2d»***  him  they  have  their  being :  "  My  corn,  and  my  wine,  and 

livings,  mine  oil,"*  saith  the  Lord.     All  things  his,  in  that  he  hath 

Bbhops  absolute  power  to  dispose  of  them  at  his  pleasure.     '^  Mine 

fhi^pr'o-  (saith  he)  are  the  sheep  and  oxen  of  a  thousand  hills."t 

gJi^^g.  All  things  his,  in  that  when  we  have  them,  we  may  say  with 

G^™*^  Job,  "  God  hath  given;"  and  when  we  are  deprived  of  them, 

alone.    «  ^he  Lord,"  whose  they  are,  hath  likewise  "  taken  them 

away"j;  again.     But  these  sacred  Possessions  are  his  by 

another  tenure ;  his  because  those  men  who  first  received  them 

from  him,  have  unto  him  returned  them  again,  by  way  of 

religious  gift  or  oblation :  and  in  this  respect  it  is,  that  the 

Lord  doth  term  those  houses,  wherein  such  gifts  and  obla- 

Mai.      tions  were  laid,  "  his  Treasuries." 

The  ground  whereupon  men  have  resigned  their  own  inte- 
rest in  things  Temporal,  and  given  over  the  same  unto  God, 
is  that  Precept  which  Solomon  borroweth  from  the  Law  of 
ProY.  Nature,  '^  Honour  the  Lord  out  of  thy  substance,  and  of 
iii.  0,10.  ^|jg  chiefest  of  all  thy  revenue :  so  shall  thy  bams  be  filled 
with  plenty,  and  with  new  wine  the  fat  of  thy  press  shall 
overflow."  For  although  it  be  by  one  most  fitly  spoken 
against  those  superstitious  persons  that  only  are  scrupu- 
Seneca.  lous  in  cxtcmal  Rites;  "  Wilt  thou  win  the  favour  of  God? 
Be  virtuous.  They  best  worship  him  that  are  his  followers." 
It  is  not  the  bowing  of  your  knees,  but  of  your  hearts ;  it  is 
not  the  number  of  your  oblations,  but  the  integrity  of  your 
lives ;  not  your  incense,  but  your  obedience,  which  God  is 
delighted  to  be  honoured  by :  nevertheless,  we  must  beware, 
lest  simply  understanding  this,  which  comparatively  is  meant; 
that  is  to  say,  whereas  the  meaning  is,  that  God  doth  chiefly 
respect  the  inward  disposition  of  the  heart,  we  must  take 
heed  we  do  not  hereupon  so  worship  him  in  spirit,  that 
outwardly  we  take  all  worship,  reverence,  and  honour  firom 
him. 

Our  God  will  be  glorified  both  of  us  himself,  and  for  us 
by  others:  to  others,  because  our  hearts  are  known,  and 
yet  our  example  is  required  for  their  good ;  therefore  it  is 

comprising  upwards  of  eight  hundred  acres,  &c.  The  whole,  of  the  estimated  annual  Taloe 
of  Three  Hundred  Pounds,  which  will  be  sold  by  Auction,  by  Stevens  and  Brenchley,  at  the 
Auction  Mart,  on  Friday,  the  5th  of  June,  1829,  at  Twelve  o'Clock.  Particulars  may  be 
had,  at  the  Star,  Oxford;  Eagle  and  Child,  Cambridge;  and  of  Stevens  and  Brenchley,  No.  30, 
Old  Jewry.     The  present  Incumbent  is  in  the  Sixty-first  year  of  his  age."] 

•  Hos.u.  8.  t  PsalJ.  10.  J  Jobi.  21. 


Sect.  22.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  218 

not  sufficient  to  carry  Religion  in  our  hearts^  as  fire  is 
carried  in  flint-stones^  but  we  are  outwardly^  visibly^  appa- 
rently, to  serve  and  honour  the  living  God ;  yea,  to  employ 
that  way,  as  not  only  our  souls,  but  our  bodies,  so  not 
only  our  bodies,  but  our  goods ;  yea,  the  choice,  the  flower, 
"  the  chiefest  of  all  thy  revenue,"  saith  Solomon :  If  thou 
hast  any  thing  in  all  thy  possessions  of  more  value  and 
price  than  other,  to  what  use  shouldest  thou  convert  it, 
rather  than  this?  Samuel  was  dear  Unto  Hannah  his 
mother:  the  child  that  Hannah  did  so  much  esteem,  she 
could  not  but  greatly  wish  to  advance ;  and  her  religious 
conceit  was,  that  the  honouring  of  God  with  it  was  the  [i  Sam. 
advancing  of  it  unto  honour.  The  chiefest  of  the  offspring  «so 
of  men  are  the  males  which  be  first. born:  and  for  this 
cause,  in  the  ancient  world  they  all  were  by  right  of  their 
birth  Priests  of  the  Most  High.  By  these  and  the  like 
precedents,  it  plainly  enough  appeareth,  that  in  what  heart 
soever  doth  dwell  unfeigned  Religion,  in  the  same  there 
resteth  also  a  willingness  to  bestow  upon  God  that  soonest 
which  is  most  dear.  Amongst  us  the  Law  is,  that  sith 
gold  is  the  chiefest  of  metals,  if  it  be  any  where  found  in 
the  bowels  of  the  earth,  it  belongeth  in  right  of  honour,  as 
all  men  know,  to  the  King :  whence  hath  this  custom  grown, 
but  only  from  a  natural  persuasion,  whereby  men  judge 
it  decent,  for  the  highest  persons  always  to  be  honoured 
with  the  choicest  things  ?  "  If  ye  offer  unto  God  the  blind  Mai. 
(saith  the  Prophet  Malachi),  is  it  not  evil  ?  if  the  lame  and  ' 
sick,  is  it  good  enough  ?  Present  it  unto  thy  Prince,  and 
see  if  he  will  content  himself,  or  accept  thy  person,  saith 
the  Lord  of  Hosts."  When  Abel  presented  God  with  an  [Gen. 
offering,  it  was  the  fattest  of  all  the  lambs  in  his  whole '^' 
flock  ;  he  honoured  God  not  only  out  of  his  substance,  but 
out  of  the  very  chiefest  therein ;  whereby  we  may  somewhat 
judge  how  religiously  they  stand  affected  towards  God,  who 
grudge  that  any  thing  worth  the  having  should  be  his. 
Long  it  were  to  reckon  up  particularly  what  God  was 
owner  of  under  the  Law ;  for  of  this  sort  was  all  which 
they  spent  in  Legal  Sacrifices ;  of  this  sort,  their  usual  Ob- 
lations and  Offerings ;  of  this  sort.  Tithes  and  Firstfruits ; 
of  this  sort,  that  which  by  extraordinary  occasions  they 
vowed  unto  God ;  of  this  sort,  all  that  they  gave  to  the 
building  of  the  Tabernacle ;  of  this  sort,  all  that  which  was 


214  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.  2SL 

gathered  amongst  them  for  the  erecting  of  the  Temple,  and 
the  adorning  of  it  erected  ;♦  of  this  sort,  whatsoever  their 

[Mark  Corban  contained,  wherein  that  blessed  widow's  deodate 
was  laid  up.  Now,  either  this  kind  of  Honour  was  pre- 
figuratively  altogether  Ceremonial,  and  then  our  Saviour 
accepteth  it  not ;  or,  if  we  find  that  to  him  also  it  hath  been 
done,  and  that  with  divine  approbation  given  for  encourage- 
ment of  the  world,  to  shew,  by  such  kind  of  service,  their 
dutiful  hearts  towards  Christ ;  there  will  be  no  place  left  for 
men  to  make  any  question  at  all  whether  herein  they  do  well 
or  no. 

Wherefore,  to  descend  from  the  Synagogue  unto  the 
Church  of  Christ ;  albeit  sacrifices,  wherewith  sometimes 
God  was  highly  honoured,  be  not  accepted  as  heretofore 

Psai.  1.  at  the  hands  of  men,  yet,  forasmuch  as  "  Honour  God  with 

'    *    thy  riches,"  is  an  edict  of  the  unseparable  Law  of  Nature, 

so  far  forth  as  men  are  therein  required  by  such  kind  of 

Phil,  homage  to  testify  their  thankful  minds,  this  "  sacrifice"  Grod 
doth  accept  still.     Wherefore  as  it  was  said  of  Christ,  that 

Psai.      ^'  all  Kings  should  worship  him,  and  all  Nations  do  him 

*  service ;"  so  this  very  kind  of  worship  or  service  was  Iike7 

wise  mentioned,  lest  we  should  think  that  our  Lord  and 

▼er.  10.  Saviour  would  allow  of  no  such  thing :  "  The  Kings  of 
Tarshish  and  of  the  isles  shall  bring  presents ;  the  Kings 
of  Sheba  and  of  Seba  shall  brings  gifts."  And,  as  it  maketh 
not  a  little  to  the  praise  of  those  sages  mentioned  in  the 
Gospel,  that  the  first  amongst  men  which  did  solemnly 
honour  our  Saviour  on  earth  were  they ;  so  it  soundeth  no 
less  to  the  dignity  of  this  particular  kind,  that  the  rest  by  it 

Matt,  were  prevented ;  "  They  fell  down  and  worshipped  him,  and 
opened  their  treasures,  and  presented  unto  him  gifts ;  gold, 
and  incense,  and  myrrh." 

Of  all  those  things  which  were  done  to  the  honour  of 
Christ  in  his  lifetime,  there  is  not  one  whereof  he  spake  in 
such  sort  as  when  Mary,  to  testify  the  largeness  of  her 
affection,  seemed  to  waste  away  a  gift  upon  him,  the  price 
of  which  gift  might,  as  they  thought  who  saw  it,  much  better 
have  been   spent  in  works  of  mercy  towards  the  poor: 

Matt.     "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  wheresoever  this  Gospel  shall  be 

preached,  throughout  all  the  world,  there   shall  also  this 

— — — — — __^ _ —  , 

*  **  Because  (saith  David)  I  have  a  delight  in  the  House  of  my  God,  therefore  I  have 
given  thereunto  of  mine  own  both  gold  and  Bilver  to  adorn  it  with."     1  Chron.  ^TJ^r  3. 


Sect.  S3.]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  215 

that  she  hath  done  be  spoken  of^  for  a  memorial  of  her." 
Of  service  to  God,  the  best  works  are  they  which  continue  John 
longest ;  and^  for  permanency,  what  like  Donation,  wheteby 
things  are  unto  him  for  ever  dedicated  ?  That  the  ancient 
Lands  and  Livings  of  the  Church  were  all  in  such  sort 
^ven  into  the  hands  of  God  by  the  just  lords  and  owners 
of  them,  that  unto  him  they  passed  over  their  whole  interest 
and  right  therein,  the  form  of  sundry  the  said  donations,  as 
yet  extant,  most  plainly  sheweth.  And  where  time  hath 
left  no  such  evidence  as  now  remaining  to  be  seen,  yet 
the  same  intention  is  presumed  in  all  donors,  unless  the 
contrary  be  apparent  But  to  the  end  it  may  yet  more 
plainly  appear  unto  all  men  under  what  title  the  several 
kinds  of  Ecclesiastical  possessions  are  held,  '^  Our  Lord  Ang. 
himself  (saith  St.  Augustine)  had  coffers  to  keep  those  things  de  men- 
which  the  fedthful  offered  unto  him.  Then  was  the  form  of 
the  Church-treasury  first  instituted,  to  the  end,  that  withal 
we  might  understand,  that,  in  forbidding  to  be  careful  for 
to-morrow,  his  purpose  was  not  to  bar  his  saints  from  keep- 
hig  money,  but  to  withdraw  them  from  doing  God  service 
for  wealth's  sake,  and  from  forsaking  righteousness  through 
fear  of  losing  their  wealth." 

The  first  Gifts  consecrated  unto  Christ  after  his  departure  [Acts 
out  of  the  world,  were  sums  of  money ;  in  process  of  time  iv.  34'.] 
other  moveables  were  added,  and  at  length  goods  unmove- 
able ;  Churches  and  Oratories  hallowed  to  the  honour  of  his 
glorious  name ;  houses  and  lands  for  perpetuity  conveyed 
unto  him;  inheritance  given  to  remain  his  as  long  as  the 
world  should  endure.     ^'  The  Apostles  (saith  Melchiades),  c.  it. 
they  foresaw  that  God  would  have  his  Church  amongst  the  SlpVw. 
Gentiles,  and  for  that  cause  in  Judea  they  took  no .  Lands,  **  **^ 
but  price  of  Lands  sold."    This  he  conjectureth  to  have 
been  the  cause  why  the  Apostles  did  that  which  the  History 
reporteth  of  them.* 

The  truth  is,  that  so  the  state  of  those  times  did  require, 
as  well  otherwhere  as  in  Judea.  Wherefore,  when  after- 
wards it  did  appear  much  more  commodious  for  the  Church 
to  dedicate  such  inheritances,  then  the  value  and  price  of 


*  [This  fanciful  conjecture  might  seem  plausible  were  there  any  Scripture  record  of  the 
Apostles,  &C.  accepting  Lands  elsewhere  than  in  Judea.  But  why  resort  to  such  an  hypo- 
thesis? Hereafter  Hooker  says,  **  To  lurk  under  shifting  ambiguities  and  equivocations  of 
words  in  matter  of  principal  weight,  is  childish."     Book  VIII.  Sect.  1.] 


216  THE   SEVENTH    BOOK  [SecL  22. 

them  being  sold,  the  former  custom  was  clianged  for  this,  as 
for  the  better.    The  devotion*  of  Constantine  herein,  all  the 
world,  even  till  this  very  day,  admireth.     They  that  lived 
in  the  prime  of  the  Christian  world,  thought  no  testament 
Christianly  made,  nor  any  thing  therein  well  bequeathed, 
unless  something  were  thereby  added  unto  Christ's  patri- 
mony.    Touching  which   men,  what  judgment  the  world 
doth  now  give,  I  know  not ;  perhaps  we  deem  them  to  have 
been  herein  but  blind  and  superstitious  persons.     Nay,  we 
in  these  cogitations  are  blind;  they  contrariwise  did  with 
Proy.     Solomon  plainly  know  and  persuade  themselves,  that  thus 
'"'  ^^'    to  diminish  their  wealth  was,  not  to  diminish  but  to  augment 
it;  according  to  that  which  God  doth  promise  to  his  own 
Mai.      people  by  the  Prophet  Malachi,  and  which  they  by  their 
2  ch?in.  ^^^  particular  experience  found  true.    If  Wickliff  therefore 
xxxi.  10.  ^ere  of  that  opinion  which  his  adversaries  ascribe  unto  him 
(whether  truly,  or  of  purpose  to  make  him  odious,  I  cannot 
Th.        tell,  for  in  his  writings  I  do  not  find  it),  namely,  "  That 
tora.i.    Constantine,  and  others  following  his  steps,   did  evil^   as 
c.  39.^'    having  no  sufficient  ground  whereby  they  might  gather,  that 
such  donations  are  acceptable  to  Jesus  Christ;"  it  was  in 
Wickliff  a  palpable  error.f     I  will  use  but  one  only  argu- 
ment, to  stand  in  the  stead  of  many :    Jacob,  taking  his 

*  [See  Vol.  II.  p.  38,  Note  •.] 

t  ['*  It  appears  by  the  ingenious  writer,  the  Rev.  John  Lewis,  author  of  a  Life  of  Wick- 
liffe,  as  well  as  by  the  Catalogus  Testium,  that  Wicklifife  was  for  rejecting  all  human  rites, 
and  new  shadows  or  traditions  in  Religion :  and  with  regard  to  the  identity  of  the  Order  of 
Bishops  and  Priests  in  the  Apostolic  age,  he  is  very  positive :  *  Unum  audacter  assero,  one 
thing  I  boldly  assert,  That  in  the  Primitive  Church,  or  in  the  time  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  two 
Orders  of  Clergy  were  thought  su£5cient,  namely  Priest  and  Deacon ;  and  I  do  also  say,  that 
in  the  time  of  Paul,  fiiit  idem  Presbyter  atque  Episcopus,  A  Priest  and  a  Bishop  were  one 
and  the  same ;  for  in  those  times  the  distinct  Orders  of  Pope,  Cardinals,  Patriarchs,  Arch- 
bishops, Bishops  [diocesan?].  Archdeacons,  Officials,  and  Deans,  were  not  invented.'  "  See 
"Seal^s  Hist,  Purit,  1754.  4to.  Vol.  I.  p.  890.  This  being  the  only  passage  in  which 
Hooker  has  referred  to  Wyclifie,  his  authority  on  the  principal  subject  of  this  Seventh  Book 
cannot  be  inappropriate  here.  In  the  Life  and  Opinions  of  Wycliffe,  by  the  Rev.  R.  Vaughan, 
1828,  8vo.  Vol.  II.  p.  288,  it  is  recorded,  that  in  a  MS.  of  the  Bodleian,  entitled  Vita  Sacer- 
dotum,  **  The  foul  endowing  of  the  Church"  is  described  as  having  "  always  harmed  clerks 
and  lords  and  commons."  And  in  p.  289  another  MS.  is  stated  to  contain  this  passage, 
**  True  it  is,  that  Tithes  were  due  to  Priests  and  Deacons  in  the  Old  Law ;  and  so  bodUy 
circumcision  was  then  needful  to  all  men,  but  it  is  not  so  now,  under  the  Law  of  Grace. 
Christ,  however,  was  circumcised,  and  yet  we  read  not  where  he  took  Tithes  as  we  do ;  nor  do 
we  read  in  all  the  Gospels,  that  he  paid  them  to  the  High  Priest,  or  bade  any  other  man  do  so. 
Lord,  why  should  our  worldly  Clergy  claim  Tithes  and  Offerings  and  Customs  from  Christian 
people  more  than  did  Christ  and  his  Apostles,  and  even  more  than  men  were  burdened  with 
under  the  Law  V*  Wycliffe's  "  Sentence  of  the  Curse  Expounded,  chap,  xviii."  Again,  in 
p.  290,  is  another  passage  from  this  latter  MS.  **  Would  God,"  he  exclaims,  "  that  all  wise 
and  true  men  would  enquire  whether  it  were  not  better  for  to  find  Priests  by  the  free  alms 
of  the  people,  and  in  a  reasonable  livelihood,  that  they  may  teach  the  Gospel  in  word  and 
deed,  as  did  Christ  and  his  Apostles,  than  thus  to  pay  Tithes  as  men  are  now  constrained  by 
a  new  ordinance  of  Priests,  to  a  worldly  Priesthood."] 


Se^a.^.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  217 

journey  unto  Haran,  made  in  this  sort  his  solemn  vow;  ^*  If  oen. 
God  will  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me  in  this  journey  which  aoLxs. 
I  go,  and  will  give  me  bread  to  eat,  and  clothes  to  put  on, 
so  that  I  come  again  to  my  father's  house  in  safety ;  then 
shall  the  Lord  be  my  God,  and  this  stone  which  I  have  set 
up  a  pillar  shall  be  the  House  of  God,  and  of  all  that  thou 
shalt  give  me,  will  I  give  the  Tenth  unto  thee."  May  a 
Christian  man  desire  as  great  things  as  Jacob  did  at  the 
hands  of  God  ?  May  he  desire  them  in  as  earnest  manner  ? 
May  he  promise  as  great  thankfulness  in  acknowledging  the 
goodness  of  God  ?  May  he  vow  any  certain  kind  of  public 
acknowledgment  beforehand  ?  Or,  though  he  vow  it  not, 
perform  it  after,  in  such  sort  that  men  may  see  he  is  per- 
suaded how  the  Lord  hath  been  his  God  ?  Are  these  parti- 
cular kinds  of  testifying  thankfulness  to  God,  the  erecting 
of  Oratories,  the  dedicating  of  Lands  and  Goods  to  maintain 
them,  forbidden  any  where  ?  Let  any  mortal  man  living 
shew  but  one  reason  wherefore  in  this  point  to  follow  Jacob's 
example,  should  not  be  a  thing  both  acceptable  unto  God, 
and  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  for  ever  most  highly  commend- 
able.* Concerning  goods  of  this  nature,  goods,  whereof 
when  we  speak,  we  term  them  rd  r^  Qef  d^piepuiOevTay  the  goods 
that  are  consecrated  unto  God,  and,  as  TertuUian  speaketh, 
deposita  pietatis,  things  which  piety  and  devotion  hath  laid 
up  as  it  were  in  the  bosom  of  God ;  touching  such  goods, 
the  Law  Civil,  following  mere  light  of  Nature,  defineth  them 
to  be  no  man's,  because  no  mortal  man,  or  community  of 
men,  hath  right  of  propriety  in  them. 

23.  Persons  Ecclesiastical  are  God's  Stewards,  not  only  That 

Eccleii- 

for  that  he  hath  set  them  over  his  family,  as  the  Ministers  asucai 
of  Ghostly  food,  but  even  for  this  very  cause  also,  that  they  w"re-* 
are  to  receive  and  dispose  his  temporal  Revenues ;  the  gifts  of^^M's 
and  oblations  which  men  bring  him.    Of  the  Jews  it  is  plain  l[^d  that 
that  their  Tithes  they  offered  unto  the  Lord,  and  those  ?oar^o*f 
offerings  the  Lord  bestowed  upon  the  Levites.t    When  the  i^'tJ^*' 
Levites  gave  the  Tenth  of  their  Tithes,  this  their  gift  the  ^f'hu"" 
Law  doth  term  the  Lord's  Heave-offering,  and  appoint  that  6dve«T 
the  High-priest  should  receive  the  same.J    Of  spoils  taken  SSubwI 
in  war,  that  part  which  they  were  accustomed  to  separate  Km"^**"* 

*  [Hooker  has  turned  the  position  attributed  to  Wycliffe  round  from  "  Jesus  Christ"  to 
"  Jacob,"  and  then  argued  from  "  Jacob"  to  "  Jesus  Christ:"  can  any  mode  of  arguing  be 
more  feeble  to  prove  **a  palpable  error?"] 

t  Num.  xviiL  24.  I  Ver.  28. 


218  THE   SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect  23. 

granted,  utito  God,  thcj  brought  it  before  the  Priest  of  the  Lord^  by 
yerUng  whom  it  wos  laid  up  in  the  Tabernacle  of  the  Congregation^ 
unto      for  a  memorial  of  their  thankfulness  towards  God.  and  his 
owniue,  goodness  towards  them  in  fighting  for  them  against  their 
hu^V^  enemies.*    As  therefore  the  Apostle  magnifieth  the  honour 
nir*''  ^^  Melchisedec,  in  that  he,  being  an  Highrpriest,  did  receive 
▼>*•  i-    at  the  hands  of  Abraham  the  Tithes  which  Abraham  did 
honour  God  with  ;t  so  it  argueth  in  the  Apostles  themselves 
Acts      great  Honour,  that  at  their  feet  the  price  of  those  possessions 
was  laid,  which  men  thought  good  to  bestow  on  Christ. 
St.  Paul,  commending  the  Churches  which  were  in  Mace- 
donia, for  their  exceeding  liberality  this  way,  saith  of  them, 
that  he  himself  would  bear  record,  they  had  declared  their 
forward  minds  according  to  their  power,  yea,  beyond  their 
power,  and  had  so  much  exceeded  his  expectation  of  them, 
«  Cor.    that  "  they  seemed  as  it  were  even  to  give  away  themselves 
first  to  the  Lord  (saith  the  Apostle),  and  then  by  the  will  of 
God  unto  us :"  to  him,  as  the  Owner  of  such  giftd ;  to  us, 
as  his  appointed  receivers  and  dispensers.    The  gift  of  the 
Acts      Church  of  Antioch,  bestowed  unto  the  use  of  distressed 


xi.  30. 


»i  18.  brethren  which  were  in  Judea,  Paul  and  Barnabas  did 
dfeliver  unto  the  Presbyters  of  Jerusalem ;  and  the  Head 
of  those  Presbyters  was  James,  he  therefore  the  chiefest 
disposer  thereof. 

Amongst  those  Canons  which  are  entituled  Apostolical,j: 
one  is  this,  "  We  appoint  that  the  Bisliop  have  care  of  those 
things  which  belong  to  the  Church  ;"§  the  meaning  is  of 
Church-goods,  as  the  reason  following  sheweth :  "  For  if  the 
precious  souls  of  men  must  be  committed  unto  him,  of  trust, 
much  more  it  behoveth  the  charge  of  money  to  be  given 
him,  that  by  his  Authority  the  Presbyters  and  Deacons  may 
administer  all  things  to  them  that  stand  in  need."  So  that 
he  which  hath  done  them  the  Honour  to  be,  as  it  were,  his 
Treasurers,  hath  left  them  also  Authority  and  Power  to  n&e 
these  his  treasures,  both  otherwise  and  for  the  maintenance 
even  of  their  own  estate :  the  lower  sort  of  the  Clergy,  ac- 
cording unto  a  meaner;  the  higher,  after  a  larger,  proportion. 
The  use  of  Spiritual  Goods  and  Possessions  hath  been  a  matter 
much  disputed  of;    grievous  complaints  there  are  usually 


*  Num.  xxxi.  t  [See  Book  V.  sect.  79.  p.  399,  Note.] 

X  [See  sect  8.  p.  140,  Note.] 

§  *Eir((rKowov  ex^iv  rS>y  ttjs  *EKK\7j(rias  trpayfJLdtcou  i^ovcriav,  &(rr€  BtoiKciv  els  wdrras 
Beofievovs  /uer^  irdarris  ^bXafielas  Koi  <f>6fiov  Ocov.     Can.  41.  et  Cone.  Antioch.  can.  25. 


Sect.  23.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  219 

made  against  fhe  evil  and  unlawful  usage  of  them,  but  with 
no  certain  determination  hitherto  on  what  things  and  persons, 
with  what  proportion  and  measure  they  being  bestowed,  do 
retain  their  lawful  use.  Some  men  condemn  it  as  idle,  su- 
perfluous, and  altogether  vain,  that  any  part  of  the  treasure 
of  God  should  be  spent  upon  costly  Ornaments  appertaining 
unto  his  service :  who  being  best  worshipped,  when  he  is  John 
served  in  spirit  and  truth,  hath  not  for  want  of  pomp  and 
magnificence  rejected  at  any  time  those  who  with  faithful 
hearts  have  adored  him.  Whereupon  the  Heretics,*  termed 
Henriciani  and  Petrobrusiani,  threw  down  Temples  and 
Houses  of  Prayer,  erected  with  marvellous  great  charge,  as 
being  in  that  respect  not  fit  for  Christ  by  us  to  be  honoured 
in.  We  deny  not,  but  that  they  who  sometime  wand'red  Heb. 
as  pilgrims  on  earth,  and  had  no  Temples,  but  made  caves 
and  dens  to  pray  in,  did  God  such  honour  as  was  most 
acceptable  in  his  sight:  God  did  not  reject  them  for  their 
poverty  and  nakedness'  sake ;  their  Sacraments  were  not 
abhorred  for  want  of  vessels  of  gold.  Howbeit,  let  them 
who  thus  delight  to  plead,  answer  me :  When  Moses  first, 
and  afterwards  David,  exhorted  the  people  of  Israel  unto 
matter  of  charge  about  the  service  of  God ;  suppose  we 
it  had  been  allowable  in  them  to  have  thus  pleaded ; 
"  Our  Fathers  in  Egypt  served  God  devoutly,  God  was 
with  them  in  all  their  afflictions,  he  heard  their  prayers, 
pitied  their  case,  and  delivered  them  from  the  tyranny  of 
their  oppressors ;  what  House,  Tabernacle,  or  Temple  had 
they?"  Such  argumentations  are  childish  and  fond;  God 
doth  not  refuse  to  be  honoured  at  all  where  there  lacketh 
wealth ;  but  where  abundance  and  store  is,  he  there  re- 
quireth  the  flower  thereof,  being  bestowed  on  him,  to  be 

♦  [Whether  it  be  worthy  of  Protestants  to  follow  Papists  in  denominating  "  Heretics" 
Aose  whom  they  termed  so,  is  a  question  deserving  serious  consideration.  The  only  accounts 
we  can  have  of  these  in  particular,  for  instance,  are  originally  derived  from  Popish  writers, 
the  bitterest  enemies  of  Reformation.  Doubtless  to  many  Blartyrs  like  Henry  the  Monk, 
and  Peter  de  Bruys,  (for  Martyrs,  notwithstanding  some  perhaps  unjustifiable  excesses,  many 
SDch  might  be  called  with  propriety),  we  owe  the  first  awakenings  of  those  principles  and 
energies  that  ultimately  dragged  off  the  slough  of  Corruption,  and  left  Antichrist  agast  and, 
to  this  day,  writhing  in  horrid  deformity.  Consult  Mosheim,  Eccl.  Hist.  Cent  xii.  Part  II. 
chap.  vii.  viii.  and  the  authorities  he  gives,  for  particulars  respecting  these  unfortunates,  8tig« 
matized  by  the  semi-Protestant  Hooker,  and  even  by  Mosheim  himself.  They  flourished  in 
the  Twelfth  Century,  and  unquestionably  held  what  are  now  Protestant  Doctrines,  mixed  as 
appears  with  great  errors ;  nevertheless  shame  be  to  the  writers  who  perpetuate  an  eternal 
unqualified  reproach  against  men  who,  without  our  means  of  information,  contributed  to  let 
In  that  flood  of  light  which  our  happier  age  beholds,  and  to  whom  we  are  undeniably  in* 
debted  for  scotching  the  great  Dragon  wUch  we  glory  in  seeing  felled  and  comparatively 
innocuous.] 


220  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Seci.  23» 

employed  eyen  unto  the  Ornament  of  his  service.  In  Egypt 
the  state  of  his  people  was  servitude^  and  therefore  his 
service  was  accordingly.  In  the  Desert  they  had  no  sooner 
ought  of  their  own^  but  a  Tabernacle  is  required ;  and  in 
the  Land  of  Canaan  a  Temple.  In  the  eyes  of  David  it 
seemed  a  thing  not  fit^  a  thing  not  decent,  that  himself 
should  be  more  richly  seated  than  God.* 

But  concerning  the  use  of  Ecclesiastical  Goods  bestowed 
this  way,  there  is  not  so  much  contention  amongst  us,  as 
what  measure  of  Allowance  is  fit  for  Ecclesiastical  persons 
to  be  maintained  with.     A  better  rule  in  this  case  to  judge 
things  by  we  cannot  possibly  have,  than  the  wisdom  of  God 
himself:    by  considering  what  he  thought  meet  for  each 
degree  of  the  Clergy  to  enjoy  in  time  of  the  Law ;  what  for 
Levites,  what  for  Priests,  and  what  for  High-priests,  some- 
what we  shall  be  the  more  able  to  discern  rightly  what  may 
be  fit,  convenient,  and  right  for  the  Christian  Clergy  like- 
^".?\«  wise.     Priests  for  their  maintenance  had  those  first-fruits  of 
13,  IS.  '  cattle,  corn,  wine,  oil,  and  other  commodities  of  the  earth, 
which  the  Jews  were  accustomed  yearly  to  present  God 
Ver.  16.  with.     They  had  the  price  which  was  appointed  for  men  to 
pay  in  lieu  of  the  first-bom  of  their  children,  and  the  price 
of  the  first-born  also  amongst  cattle  which  were  unclean : 
Mvii.    *^^y  ^^^  ^^®  vowed  gifts  of  the  people,  or  the  prices,  if 
11,14-    they  were  redeemable  by  the  donors  after  vow,  as  some 
xX's  *^^"gs  were :  they  had  the  free  and  unvowed  oblations  of 
ver.  9.    men :   they  had  the  remainder  of  things  sacrificed :   with 
ver. 28.  Tithcs  the  Levites  were  maintained;    and  with  the  Tithe 
of  their  Tithes  the  High-priest. 

In  a  word,  if  the  quality  of  that  which  God  did  assign  to 
his  Clergy  be  considered,  and  their  manner  of  receiving  it, 
without  labour,  expence,  or  charge,  it  will  appear  that  the 
tribe  of  Levi,  being  but  the  twelfth  part  of  Israel,  had  in 
effect  as  good  as  four  twelfth  parts  of  all  such  goods  as  the 
Holy  Land  did  yield  :  so  that  their  worldly  estate  was  four 
times  as  good  as  any  other  tribe's  in  Israel  besides.     But  the 

*  [Were  this  argument  worth  any  thing,  it  should  seem  that  all  the  means  which  the  Church 
could  employ  ought  to  be  bestowed  on  some  one  edifice,  1  Chron.  xxii.  5 ;  because  the  more 
glorious  that  were,  the  more  fit  for  a  Christian  Temple :  but  Christ  will  not  be  so  mocked. 
His  cause  is  best  diffused,  and  his  bounty  to  us  is  best  acknowledged  by  being  bestowed  on 
purposes  connected  with  convenience  principally,  not  with  splendour.  See  Acts  vii.  48,  49. 
xvii.  24.  JosEPHUS,  indeed,  has  a  curious  argument,  compared  with  which  Hooker's  may 
seem  reasonable :  Eh  vabi  kvhs  0€ov.  (piKov  yh^  k^i  ircunX  rh  %iwiov.  Koiyhs  dirdvTwu,  KOiyov 
Bwv  dwdyrcDV.     Cont,  Jpp,  lib.  ii.  c.  23.  edit  Haverc] 


Sect.  23.]  OF   ECCI^ESIASTICAL   POLITY.  221 

High-priest's  condition,  how  ample  ?  to  whom  belonged  the 
Tenth  of  all  the  Tithe  of  this  land,  especially  the  Law 
providing  also,  that  as  the  people  did  bring  the  best  of  all 
things  unto  the  Priests  and  Levites,  so  the  Levite  should 
deliver  the  choice  and  flower  of  all  their  commodities  to  the 
High-priest,  and  so  his  tenth  part  by  that  mean  be  made  the 
very  best  part  amongst  ten :  by  which  proportion,  if  the 
Levites  were  ordinarily  in  all  not  above  thirty  thousand  men 
(whereas  when  David  numbered   them,   he   found   almost  i  chron. 
thirty-eight  thousand  above  the  age  of  thirty  years),  the*"  * 
High-priest,  after  this  very  reckoning,  had  as  much  as  three 
or  four  thousand  others  of  the  Clergy  to  live  upon.     Over 
and  besides  all  this,  lest  the  Priests  of  Egypt,  holding  lands.  Gen. 
should  seem  in  that  respect  better  provided  for  than  the 
Priests  of  the  true  God,  it  pleased  him  further  to  appoint 
unto  them  forty  and  eight  whole  cities  with  territories  of  Nam. 
land  adjoining,  to  hold  as  their  own  free  inheritance  for  ever.  USS' 
For  to  the  end  they  might  have  all  kind  of  encouragement,  **^' 
not  only  to  do  what  they  ought,  but  to  take  pleasure  in  that 
they  did ;  albeit  they  were  expressly  forbidden  to  have  any 
part  of  the  Land  of  Canaan  laid  out  whole  to  themselves, 
by  themselves,  in  such  sort  as  the  rest  of  the  tribes  had : 
forasmuch  as  the  will  of  God  was  rather  that  they  should 
throughout  all  tribes  be  dispersed,  for  the  easier  access  of 
the  people  unto  knowledge ;  yet  were  they  not  barred  alto-  Dent. 
gether  to  hold  a  {sic]  land,  nor  yet  otherwise  the  worse  pro-  Lev/ 
vided  for,  in  respect  of  that  former  restraint ;  for  God,  by  way  34. '    ' 
of  special  pre-eminence,  undertook  to  feed  them  at  his  own 
table,  and  out  of  his  own  proper  treasury  to  maintain  them, 
that  want  and  penury  they  might  never  feel,  except  God 
himself  did  first  receive  injury.     A  thing  most  worthy  our 
consideration  is  the  wisdom  of  God  herein ;  for  the  common 
sort  being  prone  unto  envy  and  murmur,  little  considereth 
of  what  necessity,  use,  and  importance  the  sacred  duties  of 
the  Clergy  are,  and  for  that  cause  hardly  yielded  them  any 
such  honour  without  repining  and  grudging  thereat;  they 
cannot  brook  it,  that  when  they  have  laboured  and  come  to 
reap,  there  should  so  great  a  portion  go  out  of  the  fruit  of 
their  labours,  and  be  yielded  up  unto  such  as  sweat  not  for 
it.     But  when  the  Lord  doth  challenge  this  as  his  own  due, 
and  require  it  to  be  done  by  way  of  homage  unto  him,  whose 
mere  liberality  and  goodness  had  raised  them  from  a  poor 


222  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  c  \SecU9&. 

and  8er?ile  estate,  to  place  them  where  they  had  all  those 
ample  and  rich  possessions ;  they  must  be  worse  than  brute 
beasts,  if  they  would  storm  at  any  thing  which  he  did  receive 
at  their  hands.     And  for  him  to  bestow  his  own  on  his  own 
servants  (which  liberty  is  not  denied  unto  the  meanest  of 
men),  what  man  liveth  that  can  think  it  other  than  most 
reasonable  ?  Wherefore  no  cause  there  was,  why  that  which 
the  Clergy  had  should  in  any  man's  eye  seem  too  much, 
unless  God  himself  were  thought  to  be  of  an  over-having 
disposition.'^ 
Deut.         This  is  the  mark  whereat  all  those  speeches  drive,  '^  Levi 
^'  ^*      hath  no  part  nor  inheritance  with  his  brethren,  the  Lord  is 
Josh,     his  inheritance ;"  again,  **  To  the  tribe  of  Levi  he  gave  no 
xiii.  14.  inheritance,  the  sacrifices  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  [are  the] 
Num.     inheritance  of  Levi ;"  again,  "  The  Tithes  of  the  which  they 
*  shall  ofier,  as  an  offering  unto  the  Lord,  I  have  given  the 
▼er.  19.  Levites  for  an  inheritance ;"  and  again,  '^  All  the  heave- 
offerings  of  the  holy  things  which  the  children  of  Israel 
shall  offer  imto  the  Lord,  I  have  given  thee,  and  thy  sons, 
and  thy  daughters  with  thee,  to  be  a  duty  for  ever ;  it  is  a 
perpetual  covenant  of  salt  before  the  Lord."     Now  that, 
if  such  provision   be  possible   to  be  made,  the  Christian 
Clergy  ought  not  herein  to  be  inferior  unto  the  Jewish,  what 
sounder  proof  than  the  Apostle's  own  kind  of  argument? 

*  [**  Certainly  if  Christ  or  his  Apostles  had  approved  of  Tithes,  they  would  have,  either 
by  writing  or  tradition,  recommended  them  to  the  Church :   and  that  soon  would  have 
appeared  in  the  practice  of  those  primitive  and  the  next  ages.    But  for  the  first  three  hundred 
years  and  more,  in  all  the  Ecclesiastical  story,  I  find  no  such  doctrine  or  example :    though 
errour  by  that  time  had  brought  back  again  Priests,  Altars,  and  Oblations ;  and  in  many 
other  points  of  Religion  had  miserably  Judaized  the  Church.     So  that  the  defenders  of 
Tithes,  after  a  long  pomp,  and  tedious  preparation  out  of  Heathen  Authors,  telling  us  that 
Tithes  were  paid  to  Hercules  and  Apollo,  which  perhaps  was  imitated  from  the  Jews,  and  as 
it  were  bespeaking  our  expectation,  that  they  will  abound  much  more  with  Authorities  oat 
of  Christian  story,  have  nothing  of  general  approbation  to  begin  with  from  the  first  three  or 
four  ages,  but  that  which  abundantly  serves  to  the  confiitation  of  Tithes ;  while  they  confess 
that  Churchmen  in  those  ages  lived  merely  upon  firee-will  offerings.     Neither  can  they  say 
that  Tithes  were  not  then  paid  for  want  of  a  Civil  Magistrate  to  ordain  them,  for  Christians 
had  then  also  lands,  and  might  give  out  oi  them  what  they  pleased ;  and  yet  of  Tithes  then 
given  we  find  no  mention.     And  the  first  Christian  Emperors,  who  did  all  things  as  Bishops 
advised  them,  supplied  what  was  wanting  to  the  Clergy  not  out  of  Tithes,  which  were  never 
mentioned,  but  out  of  their  own  Imperial  revenues;  as  is  manifest  in  Eusebius,  Theodore^ 
and  Sozomen,  from  Constantine  to  Arcadius. . . .  Tithes  were  fitted  to  the  Jews  only,  a 
National  Church  of  many  incomplete  Synagogues,  uniting  the  accomplishment  of  divine 
Worship  in  one  Temple ;  and  the  Levites  there  had  their  Tithes  paid  where  they  did  their 
bodily  work ;  to  which  a  particular  tribe  was  set  apart  by  divine  appointment,  not  by  the 
people's  election:   but  the  Christian  Church' is  universal;  not  tied  to  Nation,  Diocess,  or 
Parish,  but  consisting  of  many  Particular  Churches  complete  in  themselves,  gathered  not  by 
compulsion,  or  the  accident  of  dwelling  nigh  together,  but  by  free  consent,  choosing  both 
their  Particular  Church  and  their  Church-Ofiieers.     Whereas  if  Tithes  be  set  up,  all  these 
Christian  privileges  will  be  disturbed  and  soon  lost,  and  with  them  Christian  liberty." 
Milton's  Likeliest  Means,  8fc.    Works.  Ed.  1738.  VoL  I.  p.  568.] 


Sect^  33.]  OF  ECCLESUSTICAL  POLITY.  223 

*^  Do  ye  not  know  tl^at  tbey  which  minister  about  the  holy  i  Cor. 
things,  eat  of  the  things  of  the  Temple  ?  and  they  which  m. 
wait  at  the  altar,  are  partakers  with  the  altar?  so,  even  so^ 
hath  the  Lord  ordained  that  they  which  preach  the  Gospel, 
should  live  of  the  Gospel."  Upon  which  words  I  thus  con- 
clude. That  if  the  people  of  God  do  abound,  and  abounding 
can  so  &r  forth  find  in  their  hearts  to  shew  themselves  to- 
wards Christ  their  Saviour  thankful  as  to  honour  him  with 
their  riches  (which  no  Law  of  God  or  Nature  forbiddeth), 
no  less  than  the  ancient  Jewish  people  did  honour  God ;  the 
plain  Ordinance  of  Christ  appointeth  as  large  and  as  ample 
proportion  out  of  his  own  treasure  unto  them  that  serve  him 
in  the  Gospel,  as  ever  the  Priests  of  the  Law  did  enjoy, — 
what  further  proof  can  we  desire?  It  is  the  blessed  Apostle's 
testimony.  That  '*  even  so  the  Lord  hath  ordained."  Yea, 
I  know  not  whether  it  be  sound  to  interpret  the  Apostle 
otherwise  than  that  whereas  he  judgeth  the  Presbyters 
''which  rule  well  in  the  Church  of  Christ  to  be  worthy  of » Tim. 
double  honour,"  he  means  double  unto  that  which  the  Priests 
of  the  Law  received;*  "  For  if  that  Ministry  which  was  of  »Cor. 
the  Letter  were  so  glorious,  how  shall  not  the  Ministry  of 
the  Spirit  be  more  glorious  ?"  If  the  Teachers  of  the  Law  vide... 
of  Moses,  which  God  delivered  written  with  letters  in  tables  %%X'rr» 
of  stone,  were  thought  worthy  of  so  great  honour,  how  shall  ^ 
not  the  Teachers  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  be  in  his  sight 
most  worthy,  the  Holy  Ghost  being  sent  from  Heaven  to 
engrave  the  Gospel  on  their  hearts  who  first  taught  it,  and 
whose  successors  they. that  teach  it  at  this  day  are?  So 
that,  according  to  the  Ordinance  of  God  himself,  their  estate 
for  worldly  maintenance  ought  to  be  no  worse  that  is  granted 
unto  other  sorts  of  men,  each  according  to  that  degree  they 
were  placed  in.  Neither  are.  we  so  to  judge  of  their  worldly 
condition  as  if  they  were  servants  of  men,  and  at  men's  hands 
did  receive  those  earthly  bene^ts  by  way  of  stipend  in  lieu 
of  pains  whereunto  they  are  hired ;  nay,  that  which  is  paid 
unto  them  is  homage  and  tribute  due  unto  the  Lord  Christ. 
His  servants  they  are,  and  from  him  they  receive  such  goods 


^  [If  the  17th  verse  be  coupled  with  the  last  clause  of  the  preceding  verse,  a  very  different 
inference  is  deducible  than  what  is  here  suggested.  Dr.  Doddridge,  Fam»  Expos,  in  Iqc.  note, 
says  "  It  is  a  scrupulous  nicety  of  interpretation  to  explain  this  as  a  decision  that  they  were 
to  have  twice  as  much  as  the  Deaconesses.  Different  circumstances  might  require  different 
exhibitions  to  persons  in  the  same  Office.  It  seems  only  to  express  a  plentiful  maintenance, 
according  to  what  they  needed,  and  the  Society  could  afford,  given  in  a  liberal  and  respectful 
manner."] 


224  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [SecL  23. 

by  way  of  stipend.  Not  so  from  men  :^for  at  the  hands  of 
men  he  himself  being  honoured  with  such  things,  hath  ap- 
pointed his  servants  therewith  according  to  their  several 
degrees  and  places  to  be  maintained.  And  for  their  greater 
encouragement  who  are  his  labourers,  he  hath  to  their  com- 
fort assured  them  for  ever,  that  they  are,  in  his  estimation, 

i^8.*  "  worthy  the  hire"  which  he  alloweth  them ;  and  therefore, 
if  men  should  withdraw  from  him  the  store  which  those  his 
servants  that  labour  in  his  work  are  maintained  with,  yet  he 
in  his  Word  shall  be  found  everlastingly  true,  their  labour  in 
the  Lord  shall  not  be  forgotten;  the  hire  he  accounteth 
them  worthy  of,  they  shall  surely  have  either  one  way  or 
other  answered. 

Acts  In  the  prime  of  the  Christian  world,  that  which  was  brought 

and  laid  down  at  the  Apostles'  feet,  they  disposed  of  by  dis- 
tribution according  to  the  exigence  of  each  man's  need. 
Neither  can  we  think  that  they,  who  out  of  Christ's  treasury 
made  provision  for  all  others,  were  careless  to  furnish  the 
Clergy  with  all  things  fit  and  convenient  for  their  estate : 
and  as  themselves  were  chiefest  in  place  of  authority  and 
calling,  so  no  man  doubteth  but  that  proportionably  they  had 
power  to  use  the  same  for  their  own  decent  maintenance. 
The  Apostles,  with  the  rest  of  the  Clergy  in  Jerusalem, 
lived  at  that  time  according  to  the  manner  of  a  Fellowship, 
or  Collegiate  Society,  maintaining  themselves  and  the  poor 
of  the  Church  with  a  common  purse,  the  rest  of  the  faithfiil 
keeping  that  purse  continually  stored.     And  in  that  sense 

Acta  it  is,  that  the  Sacred  History  saith,  "  All  which  believed 
were  in  one  place,  and  had  all  things  common."*  In  the 
histories  of  the  Church,  and  in  the  writings  of  the  ancient 
Fathers  for  some  hundreds  of  years  after,  we  find  no  other 
way  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Clergy  but  only  this,  the 
treasury  of  Jesus  Christ  furnished  through  men's  devotion, 
bestowing  sometimes  Goods,  sometimes  Lands  that  way, 
and  out  of  his  treasury  the  charge  of  the  service  of  God 
was  defrayed,  the  Bishop  and  the  Clergy  under  him  main- 

*  ['*  Do  you  not  see  your  own  dotage  which  restrain  that  to  a  Sect  and  Sort  of  your 
Popelings,  which  Luke  maketh  common  to  the  whole  Church  even  of  those  which  were  but 
newly  entered  into  the  profession  of  Christianity,  and  that  you  ascribe  that  to  a  work  of 
supererogation  which  in  some  sort  the  Commandment  of  loving  the  neighbour,  much  more 
our  brother,  as  ourselves,  will  draw  from  us.  And  notwithstanding  this  community  they 
retained  every  one  his  house  whereinto  it  may  seem  that  by  course  they  invited  and  guested 
one  another  and  assembled  not  into  any  common  Cloister."  T.  C.  Conf.  of  the  Ehemitti 
New  Test,  on  Acts  ii.  44 — 46.] 


SeeL  28.]  of  ecclesiastical  polity.  225 

tained,  the  poor  in  their  necessity  ministered  unto.  For 
which  purpose,  every  Bishop  had  some  one  of  the  Pres- 
byters under  him  to  be  Treasurer  of  the  Church,  to  receive, 
keep,  and  deliver  all;*  which  Office  in  Churches  Cathedral 
remaineth  even  till  this  day,  albeit  the  use  thereof  be  not 
altogether  so  large  now  as  heretofore.  The  disposition  of 
these  Goods  was  by  the  appointment  of  the  Bishop.  Where- 
fore Prosper,  speaking  of  the  Bishop's  care  herein,  saith, 
"  It  was  necessary  for  one  to  be  troubled  therewith,  to  the  Pro«p. 
€nd  that  the  rest  under  him  might  be  freer  to  attend  quietly  co«"* 
their  spiritual  businesses."  And  lest  any  man  should  ima-c/ii. 
gine,  that  Bishops  by  this  means  were  hind'red  themselves 
from  attending  the  service  of  God,  "  Even  herein  (saith  he) 
they  do  God  service;  for  if  those  things  which  are  bestowed 
on  the  Church  be  God's,  he  doth  the  work  of  God,  who, 
not  of  a  covetous  mind,  but  with  purpose  of  most  faithful 
administration,  taketh  care  of  things  consecrated  unto  God." 
And  forasmuch  as  the  Presbyters  of  every  Church  could  not 
all  live  with  the  Bishop,  partly  for  that  their  number  was 
great,  and  partly  because  the  people  being  once  divided  into 
Parishes,  such  Presbyters  as  had  severally  charge  of  them 
were  by  that  mean  more  conveniently  to  live  in  the  midst 
each  of  his  own  particular  flock,  therefore  a  competent 
number  being  fed  at  the  same  table  with  the  Bishop,  the 
rest  had  their  whole  allowance  apart,  which  several  allow- 
ances were  called  sportuke,  and  they  who  received  them, 
sportulanies  frcUres.^  Touching  the  Bishop,  as  his  place 
and  estate  was  higher,  so  likewise  the  proportion  of  his 
charges  about  himself,  being  for  that  cause  in  all  equity  and 
reason  greater;  yet,  forasmuch  as  his  stint  herein  was  no 
other  than  it  pleased  himself  to  set,  the  rest  (as  the  manner 
of  inferiors  is  to  think  that  they  which  are  over  them  always 
have  too  much)  grudged  many  times  at  the  measure  of 
the  Bishop's  private  expence,  perhaps  not  without  cause. 
Howsoever,    by   this   occasion   there    grew  amongst   them 

*  Disp.  Prosp.  de  Vita  Contempl  I.  ii.  c.  12.  CEcon.  1.  ziv.  C.  de  Sacr.  Eccles.  et 
Novel.  7.  in  princip. 

f  *'  Presbyterii  honorem  designasse  nos  illis  jam  sciatis,  ut  et  sportulis  eisdem  cum 
Presbyteris  honorentur  et  divisiones  mensuratas  sequatis  quantitatibus  partiantur,  sessuri 
nobiscum  provectis  et  corroboratis  annis  suis."  Cypr.  lib.  iv.  ep.  5.  Which  words  of  Cyprian 
do  shew,  that  every  Presbyter  had  his  standing  allowance  out  of  the  Church-treasury; 
that  besides  the  same  allowance  called  sportukif  some  also  had  their  portion  in  that  dividend 
which  was  the  remainder  of  every  month's  expence ;  thirdly,  that  out  of  the  Presbyters 
under  him,  the  Bishop  as  then  had  a  certain  number  of  the  gravest,  who  lived  and  com- 
moued  always  with  him. 

VOL.  III.  Q 


226  THE   SEVENTH  BOOK  [SecL  2S. 

great  heart-burning,  quarrel,  and  strife:  where  the  Bishops 
were  found  culpable,  as  eating  too  much  beyond  their 
tether,  and  drawing  more  to  their  own  private  maintenance 
than  the  proportion  of  Christ's  patrimony,  being  not  greatly 
abundant,  could  bear,  sundry  Constitutions  hereupon  were 
made  to  moderate  the  same,  according  to  the  Church's 
condition  in  those  times.  Some  before  they  were  made 
Bishops,  having  been  owners  of  ample  possessions,  sold 
them  and  gave  them  away  to  the  poor :  thus  did  Paulinus, 
Hilary,  Cyprian,  and  sundry  others.*  Hereupon  they, 
who,  entering  into  the  same  spiritual  and  high  Function, 
held  their  secular  possessions  still,  were  hardly  thought  of: 
and  even  when  the  case  was  fully  resolved,  that  so  to  do 
was  not  unlawful,  yet  it  grew  a  question,  "  Whether  they 
lawfully  might  then  take  any  thing  out  of  the  public  treasury 
of  Christ?"  a  question,  "  Whether  Bishops,  holding  by 
Civil  Title  sufBcient  to  live  of  their  own,  were  bound  in 
conscience  to  leave  the  Goods  of  the  Church  altogether  to 
the  use  of  others  ?"t  Of  contentions  about  these  matters 
there  was  no  end,  neither  appeared  there  any  possible 
way  for  quietness  otherwise  than  by  making  partition  of 
Church-revenues  according  to  the  several  ends  and  uses 
for  which  they  did  serve,  that  so  the  Bishop's  part  might  be 
certain.  Such  partition  being  made,  the  Bishop  enjoyed 
his  portion  several  to  himself;  the  rest  of  the  Clergy  like- 
wise theirs ;  a  third  part  was  severed  to  the  furnishing  and 
upholding  of  the  Church;  a  fourth  to  the  erection  and 
maintenance  of  houses  wherein  the  Poor  might  have  relief. 
After  which  separation  made.  Lands  and  Livings  began 
every  day  to  be  dedicated  unto  each  use  severally,  by  means 
whereof  every  of  them  became  in  short  time  much  greater 
than  they  had  been  for  worldly  maintenance ;  the  fervent 

♦  Prosp.  de  Vita  Cont.  1.  ii.  c.  9.  Pont.  Diacon.  in  vita  Cypr. 

f  ["  The  Primitive  Church  thought  it  no  shame  to  receive  all  their  maintenance  as  the 
Alms  of  their  Auditors.  Which  they  who  defend  Tithes  (as  if  it  made  for  their  cause, 
whenas  it  utterly  confutes  them)  omit  not  to  set  down  at  large;  proving  to  our  hands  out  of 
Origen,  Tertullian,  Cyprian,  and  others,  that  the  Clergy  lived  at  first  upon  the  mere 
benevolence  of  their  hearers;  who  gave  what  they  gave,  not  to  the  Clergy,  but  to  the 
Church;  out  of  which  the  Clergy  had  their  portions  given  them  in  baskets,  and  were  thence 
called  Sportularii,  Basket-Clerks:  that  their  portion  was  a  very  mean  allowance,  only  for  a 
bare  livelihood;  according  to  those  precepts  of  our  Saviour,  Matt  x.  7,  &c.,  the  rest  wai 
distributed  to  the  Poor.  They  cite  also  out  of  Prosper,  the  disciple  of  St  Austin,  that  such 
of  the  Clergy,  as  had  means  of  their  own,  might  not  without  sin  partake  of  Churdi- 
maintenance. . . .  T>us  far  Tithers  themselves  have  contributed  to  their  own  confutation,  by 
confessing  that  the  Church  lived  primitively  on  Alms."  Milton's  Likeliest  Means,  Ac 
Works,  Ed.  1738.  VoL  I.  p.  576.] 


Sect.  23.1  ^F  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  227 

devotion  of  men  being  glad  that  this  new  opportunity  was  given 
of  shewing  zeal  to  the  House  of  God  in  more  certain  order. 
By   these   things  it  plainly  appeareth  what  proportion 
of  maintenance  hath  been  ever  thought  reasonable  for  a 
Bishop ;  sith  in  that  very  partition  agreed  on  to  bring  him 
unto  his  certain  stint,  as  much  is  allowed  unto  him  alone 
as  unto  all  the  Clergy  under  him,  namely,  a  fourth  part  of 
the  whole  yearly  rents  and  revenues  of  the  Church.     Nor 
is  it  likely,  that  before  those  Temporalities,  which  now  are 
such  eyesores,  were  added  unto  the  Honour  of  Bishops, 
their  state  was  so  mean  as  some  imagine.     For,  if  we  had 
no  other  evidence  than  the  covetous  and  ambitious  humour 
of  Heretics,  whose  impotent  desires  of  aspiring  thereunto, 
and  extreme  discontentment  as  oft  as  they  were  defeated, 
even  this  doth  shew  thlit  the  state  of  Bishops  was  not  a 
few  degrees  advanced  above  the  rest.     Wherefore,  of  grand 
Apostates  which  were  in  the  very  prime  of  the  primitive 
Church,    thus    Lactantius   above  thirteen  hundred   years 
sithence  testified,  "  Men  of  a  slippery  faith  they  were,  who  Lact.de 
feigning  that  they  knew  and  worshipped  God,  but  seeking  Sap. 
only  that  they  might  grow  in  wealth  and  honour,  affected  c.  30!^' 
the  place  of  the  highest  Priesthood;  whereunto,  when  their 
betters  were  chosen  before  them,  they  thought  it  better  to 
leave  the  Church,  and  to  draw  their  favourers  with  them, 
than  to  endure  those  men  their  Governors,  whom  them- 
selves desired  to  govern."    Now,  whereas  against  the  pre- 
sent estate  of  Bishops,  and  the  greatness  of  their  port,  and 
the  largeness  of  their  expences  at  this  day,  there  is  not  any 
thing  more  commonly  objected  than  those  ancient  Canons, 
whereby  they  are  restrained  unto  a  far  more  sparing  life ; 
their  houses,  their  retinue,  their  diet,  limited  within  a  far 
more  narrow  compass  than  is  now  kept;  we  must  know, 
that  those  Laws  and  Orders  were  made  when  Bishops  lived 
of  the  same  purse  which  served  as  well  for  a  number  of 
others  as  them,  and   yet  all  at  their  disposing.     So  that 
convenient  it  was  to  provide  that  there  might  be  a  moderate 
stint  appointed  to  measure  their  expences  by,  lest  others 
should   be   injured    by   their  wastefulness.      Contrariwise, 
there  is  now  no  cause  wherefore  any  such  Law  should  be 
urged,   when  Bishops  live  only  of  that  which  hath  been 
peculiarly  allotted  unto  them.      They  having,    therefore. 
Temporalities  and  other  revenues  to  bestow  for  their  own 

q2 


1^28  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect  SS. 

private  use,  according  to  that  which  their  state  requireth, 
and  no  other  having  with  them  any  such  common  interest 
therein,  their  own  discretion  is  to  be  their  Law  for  this 
matter ;  neither  are  they  to  be  pressed  with  the  rigour  of 
such  ancient  Canons  as  were  framed  for  other  times,  much 
less  so  odiously  to  be  upbraided  with  unconformity  unto  the 
pattern  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour's  estate,  in  such  circum-^ 
stances  as  himself  did  never  mind  to  require  that  the  rest  of 
the  world  should  of  necessity  be  like  him.  Thus  against  the 
wealth  of  the  Clergy  they  allege  how  meanly  Christ  himself 
was  provided  for;  against  Bishops'  Palaces,  his  want  of  a 
hole  to  hide  his  head  in;  against  the  service  done  unto  them, 

[Matt,  that  *'  he  came  to  minister,  and  not  to  be  ministered  unto 
in  the  world."  Which  things,  as  they  are  not  unfit  to  control 
covetous,  proud,  or  ambitious  desires  of  the  Ministers  of 
Christ,  and  even  of  all  Christians,  whatsoever  they  be,  and 
to  teach  men  contentment  of  mind,  how  mean  soever  their 
estate  is,  considering  that  they  are  but  servants  to  him, 
whose  condition  was  far  more  abased  than  theirs  is,  or  can 
be ;  so  to  prove  such  difference  in  state  between  us  and  him 
unlawful,  they  are  of  no  force  or  strength  at  all.  If  one 
convented  before  their  Consistories,  when  he  standeth  to 
make  his  answer,  should  break  out  into  invectives  against 
their  Authority,  and  tell  them  that  Christ,  when  he  was  on 
earth,  did  not  sit  to  judge,  but  stand  to  be  judged;  would 
they  hereupon  think  it  requisite  to  dissolve  their  Eldership, 
and  to  permit  no  tribunals,  no  judges  at  all,  for  fear  of 
swerving  from  our  Saviour's  example  ?  If  those  men,  who 
have  nothing  in  their  mouths  more  usual  than  the  poverty  of 
Jesus  Christ  and  his  Apostles,  allege  not  this  as  Julian  some- 
time did  beati  pauperes^  unto  Christians,  when  his  meaning 
was  to  spoil  them  of  that  they  had;  our  hope  is  then,  that  as 
they  seriously  and  sincerely  wish,  that  our  Saviour  Christ  in 
this  point  may  be  followed,  and  to  that  end  only  propose 
his  blessed  example;  so,  at  our  hands  again,  they  will  be 
content   to  hear  with   like  willingness   the   holy  Apostle's 

1  Cor.  exhortation  made  unto  them  of  the  Laity  also,  **  Be  ye 
followers  of  us,  even  as  we  are  of  Christ;"  let  us  be  your 
example,  even  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  ours,  that  we 

Phil 

iii.  16.    may  all  proceed  "  by  one  and  the  same  rule."* 

•  [**  Must  this  *  rule'  be  for  the  Universal  Church,  or  a  National  Church,  or  a  Particular 
Church?    If  for  the  Universal  Church,  it  crosses  the  judgment  of  your  National  Church; 


Seci'24f*]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  229 

24-   But  beware  we  of  following  Christ  as  thieves  follow  That  for 
true  men,  to  take  their  Goods  by  violence  from  them.     Beworthi-' 
it  that  Bishops  were  all  unworthy,  not  only  of  Living,  but  deprive 
even  of  life,  yet  what  hath  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  deserved,  them 
for  which  men  should  judge  him  worthy  to  have  the  things  racces^**^ 
that  are  his  given  away  from  him  unto  others  that  have  no  m?h^ 
right  unto  them?     For  at  this  mark  it  is  that  the  head  Lay-  Cdlto 
reformers  do  all  aim.     Must  these  unworthy  Prelates  givCthelSie 
place?     What  then?     Shall  better  succeed  in  their  rooms?  men  of 
Is  this   desired,   to   the   end   that  others  may  enjoy  their  JSSITbs, 
Honours,  which  shall  do  Christ  more  faithful  service  than  "^^rlme 
they  have  done  ?     Bishops  are  the  worst  men  living  upon  g*oJJJtn. 
earth;  therefore  let  their  sanctified  possessions  be  divided  •J"*'**®- 
amongst  whom?     O  blessed  Reformation!     O  happy  men, 
that  put  to  their  helping  hands  for  the  furtherance  of  so 
good  and  glorious  a  work!     Wherefore,  albeit  the  whole 
world  at  this  day  do  already  perceive,  and  posterity  be  like 
hereafter  a  great  deal  more  plainly  to  discern,  not  that  the 
Clergy  of  God  is  thus  heaved  at  because  they  are  wicked, 
but  that  means  are  used  to  put  it  into  the  heads  of  the 
simple  multitude  that  they  are  such  indeed,  to  the  end  that 
those  who  thirst  for  the  spoil  of  Spiritual  possessions  may, 
till  such  time  as  they  have  their  purpose,  be  thought  to 
covet  nothing  but  only  the  just  extinguishment  of  unre- 
formable  persons ;  so  that  in  regard  of  such  men's  intentions, 
practices,   and   machinations   against  them,   the   part  that 
suffereth   these   things   may  most   fitly   pray   with   David, 
"  Judge  thou  me,  O  Lord,  according  to  my  righteousness,  pgaim 
and  according  unto  mine  innocency :  O  let  the  malice  of  the  ^**'  ^' 
wicked  come  to  an  end,  and  be  thou  the  guide  of  the  just.*' 
Notwithstanding,  forasmuch  as  it  doth  not  stand  with  Chris- 
tian  humility   otherwise   to  think,    than   that  this   violent 
outrage  of  men  is  a  rod  in  the  ireful  hands  of  the  Lord  our 
God,  the  smart  whereof  we  deserve  to  feel ;  let  it  not  seem 
grievous  in  the  eyes  of  my  reverend  LL.  [Lords]  the  Bishops, 
if  to  their  good  consideration  I  offer  a  view  of  those  sores 
which  are  in  the  kind  of  their  heavenly  Function  most  apt  to 
breed,  and  which,  being  not  in  time  cured,  may  procure  at 

which  says,  it  is  not  necessary  that  Rites  and  Ceremonies  be  alike :  if  for  a  National  Church 
it  must  be  proved  that  ever  the  Apostle  understood  any  such  creature :  if  for  a  Particular 
Church  only,  then  what  will  become  of  Uniformity  in  the  face  of  the  National  Church, 
which  is  the  great  thing  for  which  this  '  rule'  is  pretended  useful  and  necessary  V*  Alsop's 
Mischief  of  ItnpoHtions,  1680.  p.  14.] 


230  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK        [SecL  24. 

the  length  that  which  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  avert.     Of 
Bishops  in  his  time  St.  Jerome  complaineth^  that  they  took 
it  in  great  disdain  to  have  any  faulty  great  or  small,  found 
with   them.     Epiphanius  likewise,   before  Jerome,   noteth 
their  impatiency  this  way  to  have  been  the  very  cause  of  a 
Epiph.    schism  in  the  Church  of  Christ;  at  what  time  one  Audius, 
here?,    a  man  of  great  integrity  of  life,  full  of  faith  and  zeal  towards 
iuer.70.  God,  beholding  those  things  which  were  corruptly  done  in 
the  Church,  told  the  BB.  [Bishops']  and  Presbyters  their  faults 
in  such  sort  as  those  men  are  wont  who  love  the  truth  from 
their  hearts,  and  walk  in  the  paths  of  a  most  exact  life. 
Whether  it  were  covetousness  or  sensuality  in  their  lives, 
absurdity  or  error  in  their  teaching,   any  breach  of  the 
Laws  and  Canons  of  the  Church  wherein  he  espied  them 
faulty,  certain  and  sure  they  were  to  be  thereof  most  plainly 
told.   Which  thing  they,  whose  dealings  were  justly  culpable, 
could  not  bear;  but,  instead  of  amending  their  faults,  bent 
their  hatred  against  him  who  sought  their  amendment,  till  at 
length  they  drove  him,  by  extremity  of  infestation,  through 
weariness  of  striving  against  their  injuries,   to  leave  both 
them,  and  with  them  the  Church.     Amongst  the  manifold 
accusations,  either  generally  intended  against  the  Bishops 
of  this  our  Church,  or  laid  particfularly  to  the  charge  of  any 
of  them,  I  cannot  find  that  hitherto  their  spitefuUest  adver- 
saries have  been  able  to  say  justly,  that  any  man  for  telling 
them  their  personal  faults  in  good  and  Christian  sort  hath 
sustained  in  that  respect  much  persecution.*    Wherefore, 
notwithstanding  mine  own  inferior  estate  and  calling  in  God's 
Church,  the  consideration  whereof  assureth  me,  that  in  this 
kind  the  sweetest  sacrifice  which  I  can  offer  unto  Christ  is 
meek   obedience,   reverence,   and  awe,   unto  the  Prelates 
which  he  hath  placed  in  seats  of  higher  Authority  over  me, 
emboldened  I  am,  so  far  as  may  conveniently  stand  with 
that  duty  of  humble  subjection,  meekly  to  crave  my  good 
LL.  [Lords']  your  favourable  pardon,  if  it  shall  seem  a  fault 
thus  far  to  presume;  or,  if  otherwise,  your  wonted  courteous 
acceptation, 

^neid*  Sine  me  hsec  baud  mollia  fatu 

"**•  ***•  Sublatis  aperire  dolis. 


•  [The  reader  who  may  be  acquainted  with  the  true  history  of  the  time  when  this  work 
was  written,  will  not  fail  to  appreciate  correctly  the  concluding  words  of  this  altogether  remade- 
able  sentence.] 


SecL  S4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  231 

i.  In  Govenimenti  be  it  of  what  kind  soever,  but  espe- 
cially if  it  be  of  such  kind  of  Government  as  Prelates  have 
over  the  Churchy  there  is  not  one  thing  'publicly  more  hurt- 
fiil,  than  that  an  hard  opinion  should  be  conceived  of 
Governors  at  the  first :  and  a  good  opinion  how  should  the 
world  ever  conceive  of  them  for  their  after-proceedings  in 
Regiment,  whose  first  access  and  entrance  thereunto  giveth 
just  occasion  to  think  them  corrupt  men,  which  fear  not 
that  God  in  whose  name  they  are  to  rule  ?  Wherefore  a 
scandalous  thing  it  is  to  the  Church  of  God,  and  to  the 
actors  themselves  dangerous,  to  have  aspired  unto  rooms  of 
Prelacy  by  wicked  means.  We  are  not  at  this  day  troubled 
much  with  that  tumultuous  kind  of  ambition  wherewith  the 
elections  of  Damascus  in  St.  Jerome's  age,*  and  of  Maximus 
in  Gregory's  time,t  and  of  others,  were  long  sithence  stained. 
Our  greatest  fear  is  rather  the  evil  which  Leo  and  Anthe- 
mius  did  by  Imperial  Constitution  endeavour  as  much  as 
in  them  lay  to  prevent4  He  which  granteth,  or  he  which 
receiveth,  the  Office  and  Dignity  of  a  Bishop,  otherwise 
than  beseemeth  a  thing  divine  and  most  holy;  he  which 
bestoweth  and  he  which  obtaineth  it,  after  any  other  sort 
than  were  honest  and  lawful  to  use,  if  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
were  present  himself  on  earth  to  bestow  it  even  with  his 
own  hands,  sinneth  a  sin  by  so  much  more  grievous  than 
the  sin  of  Belshazzar,  by  how  much  Offices  and  Functions 
heavenly  are  more  precious  than  the  meanest  ornaments 
or  implements  which  thereunto  appertain.  If  it  be,  as  the 
Apostle  saith,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  make  Bishops, 
and  that  the  whole  action  of  making  them  is  God's  own 
deed,  men  being  therein  but  his  agents,  what  spark  of  the 
fear  of  God  can  there  possibly  remain  in  their  hearts,  who, 
representing  the  person  of  God  in  naming  worthy  men  to 
Ecclesiastical  charge,  do  sell  that  which  in  his  name  they 
are  to  bestow ;  or  who,  standing  as  it  were  at  the  throne  of 
the  living  God,  do  bargain  for  that  which  at  bis  hands  they 

*  Ammian.  Marcel,  lib.  zxvii.  f  Vide  in  WtdL  Greg.  Naz. 

X  **  Nemo  gradum  Sacerdoiii  pretii  venalitate  mercetur ;  quantum  quisque  mereatur,  non 
quantum  dare  sufficiat,  sestimetur.  Profecto  enim,  quis  locus  tutus  et  quse  causa  esse  poterit 
excusata,  si  veneranda  Dei  Templa  pecuniis  expugnentur  ?  Quern  murum  integritatis  aut 
Tallnm  providebimus,  si  auri  sacra  fames  in  penetralia  veneranda  proserpat?  quid  denique 
cautum  esse  poterit  aut  securum,  si  sanctitas  incorrupta  corrumpatur?  Cesset  altaribus 
imminere  profanus  ardor  avaritise,  et  a  sacris  adytis  repellatur  piaculare  flagitium.  Itaque 
caatUB  et  humilis  nostris  temporibus  eligatur  Episcopus,  ut  quocunque  locorum  pervenerit, 
omnia  vitea  proprise  integritate  purificet.  Nee  pretio  sed  precibus  ordinetur  Antistes." 
C.  de  Episc.  et  Cler.  lib.  zxzi. 


232  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [Sect.24f. 

are  to  receive?  Woe  worth  such  impious  and  irreligious 
profanations!  The  Church  of  Christ  hath  been  hereby 
made^  not  "  a  den  of  thieves,"  but  in  a  manner  the  very 
dwelling-place  of  foul  spirits ;  for  undoubtedly  such  a  number 
of  them  have  been  in  all  ages  who  thus  have  climbed  into 
the  seat  of  Episcopal  Regiment.* 

ii.  Men  may  by  orderly  means  be  invested  with  Spiritual 
Authority  and  yet  do  harm,  by  reason  of  ignorance  how  to 
use  it  to  the  good  of  the  Church.  '^  It  is  (saith  Chrysostom) 
voXKov  flip  ot£cal/iaroc>  BvaKoXoy  Si  linaKOTreiv ;    a  thing   highly 

to  be  accompted  of,  but  an  hard  thing  to  be  that  which  a 
Bishop  should  be."  Yea,  a  hard  and  a  toilsome  thing  it 
is  for  a  Bishop  to  know  the  things  that  belong  unto  a 
Bishop.  A  right  good  man  may  be  a  very  unfit  Magistrate* 
And  for  discharge  of  a  Bishop's  Office,  to  be  well  minded 
is  not  enough,  no  not  to  be  well  learned  also.  Skill  to 
instruct  is  a  thing  necessary,  skill  to  govern  much  more 
necessary,  in  a  Bishop.  It  is  not  safe  for  the  Church  of 
Christ,  when  Bishops  learn  what  belongeth  unto  Govern- 
ment, as  empirics  learn  physic  by  killing  of  the  sick.  Bi- 
shops were  wont  to  be  men  of  great  learning  in  the  Laws, 
both  Civil  and  of  the  Church ;  and  while  they  were  so,  the 
wisest  men  in  the  land  for  counsel  and  government  were 
Bishops. 

iii.  Know  we  never  so  well  what  belongeth  unto  a  charge 
of  so  great  moment,  yet  can  we  not  therein  proceed  but 
with  hazard  of  public  detriment,  if  we  rely  on  ourselves 
alone,  and  use  not  the  benefit  of  conference  with  others. 
A  singular  mean  to  unity  and  concord  amongst  themselves, 
a  marvellous  help  unto  uniformity  in  their  dealings,  no  small 
addition  of  weight  and  credit  unto  that  which  they  do,  a 
strong  bridle  unto  such  as  watch  for  occasions  to  stir  against 
them ;  finally,  a  very  great  stay  unto  all  that  are  under  their 
Government,  it  could  not  choose  but  be  soon  found,  if 
Bishops  did  often  and  seriously  use  the  help  of  mutual 
consultation.  These  three  rehearsed  are  things  only  pre- 
paratory unto  the  course  of  Episcopal  proceedings.  But 
the  hurt  is  more  manifestly  seen  which  doth  grow  to  the 
Church  of  God  by  faults  inherent  in  their  several  actions : 
as,  when  they  carelessly  ordain ;  when  they  institute  neg- 
ligently ;    when    corruptly   they    bestow    Church  -  livings, 

•  [See  Sect.  5,  p.  113,  Note  f.] 


SecLiif.']  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  233 

Benefices^  Prebends^  and  Rooms  especially  of  Jurisdiction ; 
when  they  visit  for  gain'  sake^  rather  than  with  serious 
intent  to  do  good ;  when  their  Courts  erected  for  the  main- 
tenance of  good  order  are  disordered ;  when  they  regard 
not  the  Clergy  under  them ;  when  neither  Clergy  nor  Laity 
are  kept  in  that  awe  for  which  this  Authority  should  serve ; 
when  any  thing  appeareth  in  them  rather  than  a  fatherly 
affection  towards  the  flock  of  Christ;  when  they  have  no 
respect  to  posterity ;  and  finally,  when  they  neglect  the 
true  and  requisite  means  whereby  their  Authority  should 
be  upheld.  Surely,  the  hurt  which  groweth  out  of  these 
defects  must  needs  be  exceeding  great.  In  a  Minister  igno- 
rance and  disability  to  teach  is  a  maim ;  nor  is  it  held  a 
thing  allowable  to  ordain  such,  were  it  not  for  the  avoiding 
of  a  greater  evil  which  the  Church  must  needs  sustain,  if 
in  so  great  scarcity  of  able  men,  and  insufficiency  of  most 
Parishes  throughout  the  Land  to  maintain  them,  both  Public 
Prayer  and  the  administration  of  Sacraments  should  rather 
want,  than  any  man  thereunto  be  admitted  lacking  dex- 
terity and  skill  to  perform  that  which  otherwise  was  most 
requisite.  Wherefore  the  necessity  of  ordaining  such  is  no 
excuse  for  the  rash  and  careless  ordaining  of  every  one  that 
hath  but  a  friend  to  bestow  some  two  or  three  words  of 
ordinary  commendation  in  his  behalf.  By  reason  whereof 
the  Church  groweth  burdened  with  silly  creatures  more 
than  need,  whose  noted  baseness  and  insufficiency  bring 
their  very  Order  itself  into  contempt.* 

It  may  be  that  the  fear  of  a  Quare  impedit  doth  cause  In- 
stitutions to  pass  more  easily  than  otherwise  they  would. 
And  to  speak  plainly  the  very  truth,  it  may  be  that  Writs  of 
Quare  n(m  impedit  were  for  these  times  most  necessary  in 
the  other's  place:  yet  where  Law  will  not  suffer  men  to 
follow  their  own  judgment,  to  shew  their  judgment  they  are 
not  hind'red.  And  I  doubt  not  but  that  even  conscience- 
less and  wicked  Patrons,  of  which  sort  the  swarms  are  too 
great  in  the  Church  of  England,  are  the  more  imboldened 
to  present  unto  Bishops  any  refuse,  by  finding  so  easy  ac- 
ceptation thereof.  Somewhat  they  might  redress  this  sore, 
notwithstanding  so  strong  impediments,  if  it  did  plainly 
appear  that  they  took  it  indeed  to  heart,  and  were  not  in  a 
manner  contented  with  it. 


•  [See  VoL  II.  p.  419.    Note  ♦.] 


234  ^I^HE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.24f» 

Shall  we  look  for  care  in  admitting  whom  others  Present, 
if  that  which  some  of  yourselves  confer  be  at  any  time  cor- 
ruptly bestowed  ?  A  foul  and  an  ugly  kind  of  deformity  it 
hath,  if  a  man  do  but  think  what  it  is  for  a  Bishop  to  draw 
commodity  and  gain  from  those  things  whereof  he  is  left  a 
free  bestower^  and  that  in  trusty  without  any  other  obliga- 
tion than  his  sacred  Order  only^  and  that  rehgious  inte- 
grity which  hath  been  presumed  on  in  him.  Simoniacal 
corruption  I  may  not  for  honour's  sake  suspect  to  be 
amongst  men  of  so  great  place.  So  often  they  do  not,  I 
trust,  offend  by  sale,  as  by  unadvised  gift  of  such  Prefer- 
can.  ments,  wherein  that  ancient  Canon  should  specially  be  re- 
^■**  membered,  which  forbiddeth  a  Bishop  to  be  led  by  human 
affection,  in  bestowing  the  things  of  God.  A  fault  no 
where  so  hurtful,  as  in  bestowing  places  of  Jurisdiction, 
and  in  furnishing  Cathedral  Churches,  the  Prebendaries 
and  other  Dignities  whereof  are  the  very  true  successors 
of  those  ancient  Presbyters  which  were  at  the  first  as 
Counsellors  unto  Bishops.  A  foul  abuse  it  is,  that  any 
one  man  should  be  loaded  as  some  are  with  Livings  in 
this  kind,  yea,  some  even  of  them  who  condemn  utterly 
the  granting  of  any  two  Benefices  unto  the  same  man, 
whereas  the  other  is  in  truth  a  matter  of  far  greater  sequel,  as 
experience  would  soon  shew,  if  Churches  Cathedral  being  fur- 
nished with  the  residence  of  a  competent  number  of  virtuous, 
grave,  wise,  and  learned  Divines,  the  rest  of  the  Prebends 
of  every  such  Church  were  given  within  the  Diocess  unto 
men  of  worthiest  desert  for  their  better  encouragement  unto 
industry  and  travel ;  unless  it  seem  also  convenient  to  extend 
the  benefit  of  them  unto  the  learned  in  Universities,  and 
men  of  special  emplo3rment  otherwise  in  the  affairs  of  the 
Church  of  God.  But  howsoever,  surely  with  the  public 
good  of  the  Church  it  will  hardly  stand,  that  in  any  one 
person  such  favours  be  more  multiplied  than  Law  permitteth 
in  those  Livings  which  are  with  CureT. 

Touching  Bishops'  Visitations,  the  first  institution  of 
them  was  profitable,  to  the  end  that  the  state  and  condition 
of  Churches  being  known,  there  might  be  for  evils  growing 
convenient  remedies  provided  in  due  time.  The  observa- 
tion of  Church-laws,  the  correction  of  faults  in  the  service 
of  God  and  manners  of  men,  these  are  things  that  Visitors 
should  seek.     When  these  things  are  inquired  of  formally. 


Sect.  24.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  235 

and  but  for  custom*  sake^  fees  and  pensions  being  the  only 
thing  which  is  sought,  and  little  else  done  by  Visitations ;  we 
are  not  to  marvel^  if  the  baseness  of  the  end  doth  make  the 
action  itself  loathsome.  The  good  which  Bishops  may  do 
not  only  by  these  Visitations  belonging  ordinarily  to  their 
Office^  but  also  in  respect  of  that  Power  which  the  Founders 
of  Colleges  have  given  them  of  special  trust,  charging  even 
fearfully  their  consciences  therewith ;  the  good,  I  say,  which 
they  might  do  by  this  their  Authority,  both  within  their 
own  Diocess,  and  in  the  well-springs  themselves,  the  Uni- 
versities, is  plainly  such  as  cannot  choose  but  add  weight 
to  their  heavy  accounts  in  that  dreadful  day,  if  they^  do  it 
not.* 

In  their  Courts,  where  nothing  but  singular  integrity  and 
justice  should  prevail,  if  palpable  and  gross  corruptions  be 
found,  by  reason  of  Offices  so  often  granted  unto  men  who 
seek  nothing  but  their  own  gain,  and  make  no  accompt  what 
disgrace  doth  grow  by  their  unjust  dealings  unto  them  under 
whom  they  deal,  the  evil  hereof  shall  work  more  than  they 
which  procure  it  do  perhaps  imagine. 

At  the  hands  of  a  Bishop,  the  first  thing  looked  for  is  a 
care  of  the  Clergy  under  him,  a  care,  that  in  doing  good 
they  may  have  whatsoever  comforts  and  encouragements 
his  countenance,  authority,  and  place  may  yield.  Other- 
wise what  heart  shall  they  have  to  proceed  in  their  painful 
course,  all  sorts  of  men  besides  being  so  ready  to  malign, 
despise,  and  every  way  oppress  them?  Let  them  find 
nothing  but  disdain  in  Bishops ;  in  the  enemies  of  present 
Government,  if  that  way  they  list  to  betake  themselves,  all 
kind  of  favourable  and  friendly  helps:  unto  which  part 
think  we  it  likely  that  men  having  wit,  courage,  and  stomach, 
will  incline  ?  As  great  a  fault  is  the  want  of  severity  when 
need  requireth,  as  of  kindness  and  courtesy,  in  Bishops. 
But  touching  this,  what  with  ill  usage  of  their  Power 
amongst  the  meaner,  and  what  with  disusage  amongst  the 
higher  sort,  they  are  in  the  eyes  of  both  sorts  as  bees  that 
have  lost  their  sting.     It  is  a  long  time  sithence  any  great 

*  ["  It  is,  we  believe,  very  generally  lamented,  by  all  our  Bishops,  Clergy,  and  Laity, 
who  have  the  welfare  of  Religion  deeply  at  heart,  that  our  Visitations,  both  Episcopal  and 
Archidiaconal,  have  degenerated  too  often  into  little  more  than  a  periodical  Ceremony,  for 
the  transaction  of  certain  affairs  more  Secular  than  Religious  or  Spiritual,  and  producing 
scarcely  any  benefit  beyond  the  orderly  discharge  of  the  current  business  of  the  Diocess." 
The  Christian  Observer,  conducted  by  Members  of  the  Established  Church.  Oct.  1823, 
p.  656.] 


236  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.  24. 

one  hath  felt,  or  almost  any  one  much  feared,  the  edge  of 
that  Ecclesiastical  severity,  which  sometime  held  Lords  and 
Dukes  in  a  more  religious  awe  than  now  the  meanest  are 
able  to  be  kept.  A  Bishop,  in  whom  there  did  plainly 
appear  the  marks  and  tokens  of  a  fatherly  affection  towards 
them  that  are  under  his  charge,  what  good  might  he  do  ten 
thousand  ways  more  than  any  man  knows  how  to  set  down? 
But  the  souls  of  men  are  not  loved ;  that  which  Christ  shed 
his  blood  for  is  not  esteemed  precious.  This  is  the  very 
root,  the  fountain  of  all  negligence  in  Church -govern- 
ment.* 

Most  wretched  are  the  terms  of  men's  estate  when  once 
they  are  at  a  point  of  wretchlessness  so  extreme,  that  they 
bend  not  their  wits  any  further  than  only  to  shift  out  the 
present  time,  never  regarding  what  shall  become  of  their 
Successors  after  them.  Had  our  Predecessors  so  loosely 
cast  off  from  them  all  care  and  respect  to  posterity,  a 
Church  Christian  there  had  not  been,  about  the  Regiment 
whereof  we  should  need  at  this  day  to  strive.  It  was  the 
barbarous  affection  of  Nero,  that  the  ruin  of  his  own  Im- 
perial seat  he  could  have  been  well  enough  contented  to  see, 
in  case  he  might  also  have  seen  it  accompanied  with  the  fall 
of  the  whole  world :  an  affection  not  more  intolerable  than 
theirs,  who  care  not  to  overthrow  all  posterity,  so  they  may 
purchase  a  few  days  of  ignominious  safety  unto  themselves 
and  their  present  estates ;  if  it  may  be  termed  a  safety  which 
tendeth  so  fast  unto  their  very  overthrow  that  are  the  pur- 
chasers of  it  in  so  vile  and  base  manner. 

Men  whom  it  standeth  upon  to  uphold  a  reverend  esti- 
mation of  themselves  in  the  minds  of  others,  without  which 
the  very  best  things  they  do  are  hardly  able  to  escape  dis- 
grace, must,  before  it  be  over-late,  remember  how  much 
easier  it  is  to  retain  credit  once  gotten,  than  to  recover  it 


•  ["  We  have  frequently  lamented  to  observe  the  undue  proportion  of  Secular  Topics 
often  introduced  into  our  Archidiaconal  and  Episcopal  Charges.  It  is,  indeed,  very  rarely 
that  we  meet  with  a  Charge  so  peculiarly  exceptionable  in  this  respect  as  the  Primary  one  of 
the  present  Bishop  of  Peterborough  on  which  we  were  lately  constrained  to  animadvert,  as 
not  containing  one  single  sentence  strictly  religious,  not  a  syllable  perhaps  which  a  Socinian, 
or  even  a  Deist,  might  not  have  uttered  with  a  safe  conscience ;  the  whole  being  a  mere 
technical  document,  without  a  prayer  or  benediction,  or  allusion  to  any  Christian  doctrine,  or 
any  thing,  in  short,  to  indicate  that  the  Writer  had  ever  read  the  Charge  of  Him  who  said, 
*  Feed  my  sheep,  feed  my  lambs.'  We  hope  and  believe  that  a  Charge  so  completely  forensic 
is  quite  unique ;  but  many  Charges,  even  of  some  distinguishment  in  other  respects,  are  ex- 
ceptionable in  their  degree,  in  the  general  Secularity  of  their  contents."  The  Cmristian 
Observer,  p.  658.  vide  ut  sup.  p.  235.] 


SecLZifJ]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  287 

being  lost.  The  executors  of  Bishops  are  sued,  if  their 
Mansion-house  be  suffered  to  go  to  decay:  but  whom  shall 
their  Successors  sue  for  the  dilapidations  which  they  make 
of  that  credit,  the  unrepaired  diminutions  whereof  will  in 
time  bring  to  pass,  that  they  which  would  most  do  good  in 
that  calling  shall  not  be  able,  by  reason  of  prejudice  generally 
settled  in  the  minds  of  all  sorts  against  them  ?  By  what 
means  their  estimation  hath  hitherto  decayed,  it  is  no  hard 
thing  to  discern.  Herod  and  Archelaus  are  noted  to  have  Egenp. 
sought  out  purposely  the  dullest  and  most  ignoble  that  could  c.  12/ 
be  found  amongst  the  people,  preferring  such  to  the  High- 
priest's  Office,  thereby  to  abate  the  great  opinion  which  the 
multitude  had  of  that  Order,  and  to  procure  a  more  expedite 
course  for  their  own  wicked  counsels,  whereunto  they  saw 
the  High-priests  were  no  small  impediment,  as  long  as  the 
common  sort  did  much  depend  upon  them.  It  may  be 
there  hath  been  partly  some  show  and  just  suspicion  of  like 
practice  in  some,  in  procuring  the  undeserved  Preferments 
of  some  unworthy  persons,  the  very  cause  of  whose  advance- 
ment hath  been  principally  their  un worthiness  to  be  advanced. 
But  neither  could  this  be  done  altogether  without  the  in- 
excusable fault  of  some  preferred  before,  and  so  oft  we 
cannot  imagine  it  to  have  been  done,  that  either  only  or 
chiefly  from  thence  this  decay  of  their  estimation  may  be 
thought  to  grow.  Somewhat  it  is  that  the  malice  of  their 
cunning  adversaries,  but  much  more  which  themselves  have 
effected  against  themselves.  A  Bishop's  estimation  doth 
grow  from  the  excellency  of  virtues  suitable  unto  his  place. 
Unto  the  place  of  a  Bishop  those  high  divine  virtues  are 
judged  suitable,  which  virtues  being  not  easily  found  in 
other  sorts  of  great  men,  do  make  him  appear  so  much  the 
greater  in  whom  they  are  found. 

.  Devotion,  and  the  feeling  sense  of  Religion,  are  not  usual 
in  the  noblest,  wisest,  and  chiefest  personages  of  State,  by 
reason  their  wits  are  so  much  employed  another  way,  and 
their  minds  so  seldom  conversant  in  heavenly  things."*  If 
therefore  wherein  themselves  are  defective  they  see  that 
Bishops  do  blessedly  excel,  it  frameth  secretly  their  hearts 
to  a  stooping  kind  of  disposition,  clean  opposite  to  contempt. 
The  very  countenance  of  Moses  was  glorious  after  that  God 
had  conferred  with  him :  and  where  Bishops  are,  the  powers 

~  •  [lCor.L26.] 


238  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.24f. 

and  faculties  of  whose  souls  God  hath  possest,  those  very 
actions^  the  kind  whereof  is  common  unto  them  with  other 
men,  have  notwithstanding  in  them  a  more  high  and  heavenly 
form,  which  draweth  correspondent  estimation  unto  it,  by 
virtue  of  that  celestial  impression  which  deep  meditation  of 
holy  things,  and,  as  it  were,  conversation  with  God,  doth 
leave  in  their  minds.  So  that  Bishops,  which  will  be  esteemed 
of  as  they  ought,  must  frame  themselves  to  that  very  pattern 
from  whence  those  Asian  Bishops  unto  whom  St.  John 
writeth  were  denominated,  even  so  far  forth  as  this  our 
frailty  will  permit ;  shine  they  must  as  Angels  of  God  in  the 
midst  of  perverse  men.  They  are  not  to  look  that  the  world 
should  always  carry  the  affection  of  Constantine,  to  bury 
that  which  might  derogate  from  them,  and  to  cover  their 
imbecilities.     More  than  high  time  it  is,  that  they  bethink 

riTim.  themselves  of  the  Apostle's  admonition,  Attende  tibi,  "  Have 
a  vigilant  eye  to  thyself."  They  err,  if  they  do  not  persuade 
themselves,  that  wheresoever  they  walk  or  sit,  be  it  in  their 
Churches  or  in  their  Consistories,  abroad  and  at  home,  at 
their  tables  or  in  their  closets,  they  are  in  the  midst  of 
snares  laid  for  them.  Wherefore  as  they  are  with  the 
Prophet  every  one  of  them  to  make  it  their  hourly  prayer 

[Psai.  unto  God,  "  Lead  me,  O  Lord,  in  thy  righteousness,  be- 
cause of  enemies;"  so  it  is  not  safe  for  them,  no  not  for  a 
moment,  to  slacken  their  industry  in  seeking  every  way  that 
estimation  which  may  further  their  labours  unto  the  Church's 
good.  Absurdity,  though  but  in  words,  must  needs  be  this 
way  a  maim,  where  nothing  but  wisdom,  gravity,  and  judg- 
ment are  looked  for.     That  which  the  son  of  Sirach  hath 

[Eccias.  concerning  the  writings  of  the  old  Sages,  "  Wise  sentences 

3, 0.] '  are  found  in  them,"  should  be  the  proper  mark  and  character 
of  Bishops'  speeches,  whose  lips,  as  doors,  are  not  to  be 
opened,  but  for  egress  of  instruction  and  sound  knowledge. 
If  base  servility  and  dejection  of  mind  be  ever  espied  in 
them,  how  should  men  esteem  them  as  worthy  the  Rooms  of 
the  great  Ambassadors  of  God?  A  wretched  desire  to  gain 
by  bad  and  unseemly  means  standeth  not  with  a  mean  man's 
credit,  much  less  with  that  reputation  which  Fathers  of  the 
Church  should  be  in.  But,  if  besides  all  this  there  be  also 
coldness  in  works  of  piety  and  charity,  utter  contempt  even 
of  learning  itself,  no  care  to  further  it  by  any  such  helps  as 
they  easily  might  and  ought  to  afford,  no  not  as  much  as 


Sect.Zif.'l  OP  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  239 

that  due  respect  unto  their  very  families  about  them,  which 
all  men  that  are  of  account  to  order,  as  near  as  they  can,  in 
such  sort  that  no  grievous  offensive  deformity  be  therein 
noted ;  if  there  still  continue  in  that  most  reverend  Order 
such  as  by  so  many  engines  work  day  and  night  to  pull 
down  the  whole  frame  of  their  own  estimation  amongst  men, 
some  of  the  rest  secretly  also  permitting  others  their  in* 
dustrious  opposites  every  day  more  to  seduce  the  multitude, 
how  should  the  Church  of  God  hope  for  great  good  at  their 
hands  ? 

What  we  have  spoken  concerning  these  things,  let  not 
malicious  accusers  think  themselves  therewith  justified;  no 
more  than  Shimei  was  by  his  Sovereign's  most  humble  andcssam. 
meek  acknowledgment  even  of  that  very  crime  which  so 
unpudent  a  caitiff's  tongue  upbraided  him  withal;  the  one 
m  the  virulent  rancour  of  a  cankered  affection  took  that 
deUght  for  the  present  which  in  the  end  did  turn  to  his  own 
more  tormenting  woe,  the  other  in  the  contrite  patience  even 
of  deserved  malediction  had  yet  this  comfort,  "  It  may  be  ver.  12. 
the  Lord  will  look  on  mine  affliction,  and  do  me  good  for 
his  cursing  this  day."  As  for  us,  over  whom  Christ  hath 
placed  them  to  be  the  chiefest  Guides  and  Pastors  of  our 
souls,  our  common  fault  is,  that  we  look  for  much  more  in 
our  Governors  than  a  tolerable  sufficiency  can  yield,  and 
bear  much  less  than  humanity  and  reason  do  require  we 
should.  Too  much  perfection  over  rigorously  exacted  in 
them,  cannot  but  breed  in  us  perpetual  discontentment,  and 
on  both  parts  cause  all  things  to  be  unpleasant.  It  is  ex- 
ceedingly worth  the  noting,  which  Plato  hath  about  the 
means  whereby  men  fall  into  an  utter  dislike  of  all  men  with 
whom  they  converse :  ^'  This  sourness  of  mind  which  maketh  Piatin 
every  man's  dealings  unsavoury  in  our  taste,  entereth  by  an 
unskilful  overweening,  which  at  the  first  we  have  of  one, 
and  so  of  another,  in  whom  we  afterwards  find  ourselves  to 
have  been  deceived,  they  declaring  themselves  in  the  end  to 
be  frail  men,  whom  we  judged  demigods:  when  we  have 
oftentimes  been  thus  beguiled,  and  that  far  besides  ex- 
pectation, we  grow  at  the  length  to  this  plain  conclusion. 
That  there  is  nothing  at  all  sound  in  any  man.  Which 
bitter  conceit  is  unseemly,  and  plain  to  have  risen  from  lack 
of  mature  judgment  in  human  affairs :  which  if  so  be  we 
did  handle  with  art,  we  would  not  enter  into  dealings  with 


240  THE   SEVENTH   BOOK  [SecL  24i 

men^  otherwise  than  being  beforehand  grounded  in  this 
persuasion,  that  the  number  of  persons  notably  good  or  bad 
is  but  very  small ;  that  the  most  part  of  good  have  some  evil^ 
and  of  evil  men  some  good  in  them."  So  true  our  experience 
M.Tris.  doth  find  those  Aphorisms  of  Mercurius  Trismegistus,  'A^v- 

mandro,  vaTOv  TO  dyaddv  ivddBe  Kadapeveiy  Trjg  KaKiag,  **  To  purge  good^ 

******  ^*'  ness  quite  and  clean  from  all  mixture  of  evil  here  is  a  thing 
impossible."  Again,  TcJ  firj  Xlav  KaKov  evddh  Td  dyadov  cori, 
**  When  in  this  world  we  term  a  thing  good,  we  cannot  by 
exact  construction  have  any  other  true  meaning,  than  that 
the  said  thing  so  termed  is  not  noted  to  be  a  thing  exceed- 
ingly evil."  And  again,  Movov,  ^  'Aoric\?i7rt£,  to  ovofia  row 
dyadov  iv  dvOpdiroig,  rd  he  epyov  ovdafiov,    **  Amongst  men,   Q 

Asclepius,  the  name  of  that  which  is  good  we  find,  but  no 
where  the  very  true  thing  itself."     When  we  censure  the 
deeds  and  deahngs  of  our  Superiors,  to  bring  with  us  a 
fore-conceit  thus  qualified  shall  be  as  well  on  our  part  aa 
theirs  a  thing  available  unto  quietness.     But  howsoever  the 
case  doth  stand  with  men's  either  good  or  bad  quality,  the 
verdict  which  our  Lord  and  Saviour  hath  given  should  con- 
[Matt.    tinue  for  ever  sure ;  "  Quae  Dei  sunt,  Deo,"  Let  men  bear 
xxu.2i.]^j^g  burthen  of  their  own  iniquity;  as  for  those  things  which 
are  God's,  let  not  God  be  deprived  of  them.     For,  if  only 
to  withhold  that  which  should  be  given  be  no  better  than 
Mai.      to  "  rob  God,"  if  to  withdraw  any  mite  of  that  which  is  but 
in  purpose  only  bequeathed,  though  as  yet  undelivered  into 
j^cts      the  sacred  treasure  of  God,  be  a  sin  for  which  Ananias  and 
^*  *•      Sapphira  felt  so  heavily  the  dreadful  hand  of  divine  revenge; 
quite  and  clean  to  take  that  away  which  we  never  gave,  and 
that  after  God  hath  for  so  many  ages  therewith  been  pos- 
sessed, and  that  without  any  other  show  of  cause,  saving 
only  that  it  seemeth  in  their  eyes  who  seek  it  to  be  too  much 
for  them  which  have  it  in  their  hands,  can  we  term  it  or 
think  it  less  than  most  impious  injustice,  most  heinous  sacri- 
Gen.      lege  ?     Such  was  the  religious  affection  of  Joseph,  that  it 
22!* '     suffered  him  not  to  take  that  advantage,  no  not  against  the 
very  idolatrous  Priests  of  Egypt,  which  he  took  for  the 
purchasing  of  other  men's  lands  to  the  King ;  but  he  con- 
sidered, that  albeit  their  Idolatry  deserved  hatred,  yet  for 
the  honour's  sake  due  unto  Priesthood,  better  it  was  the 
King  himself  should  yield  them  relief  in  public  extremity, 
than  permit  that  the  same  necessity  should  constrain  also 


Sect.  24.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  241 

tfaem  to  do  as  the  rest  of  the  people  did.  But  it  may  be, 
men  have  now  found  out,  that  God  hath  proposed  the 
Christian  Clergy  as  a  prey  for  all  men  freely  to  seize  upon ; 
that  God  hath  left  them  as  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  which 
every  man  that  listpth  to  gather  into  his  net  may ;  or  that 
there  is  no  OoA  in  Heaven  to  pity  them,  and  to  regard  the 
injuries  which  man  doth  lay  upon  them :  yet  the  public  good 
of  this  Church  and  Commonwealth  doth,  I  hope,  weigh 
somewhat  in  the  hearts  of  all  honestly-disposed  men.  Unto 
the  public  good  no  one  thing  is  more  directly  available,  than 
that  such  as  are  in  place,  whether  it  be  of  Civil  or  of  Eccle- 
siastical Authority,  be  so  much  the  more  largely  furnished 
even  with  external  helps  and  ornaments  of  this  Ufe,  how 
much  the  more  highly  they  are  in  power  and  calling  ad- 
vanced above  others.  For  Nature  is  not  contented  with 
bare  sufficiency  unto  the  sustenance  of  man,  but  doth  ever- 
more covet  a  decency  proportionable  unto  the  place  which 
man  hath  in  the  body  or  society  of  others.  For  according 
unto  the  greatness  of  men's  calling,  the  measure  of  all  their 
actions  doth  grow  in  every  man's  secret  expectation,  so  that 
great  men  do  always  know  that  great  things  are  at  their 
hands  expected.  In  a  Bishop  great  liberality,  great  hospi- 
tality, actions  in  every  kind  great,  are  looked  for :  and  for 
actions  which  must  be  great,  mean  instruments  will  not 
serve.  Men  are  but  men,  what  room  soever  amongst  men 
they  hold.  If,  therefore,  the  measure  of  their  worldly 
abilities  be  beneath  that  proportion  which  their  calling  doth 
make  to  be  looked  for  at  their  hands,  a  stronger  inducement 
it  is  than  perhaps  men  are  aware  of  unto  evil  and  corrupt 
dealings  for  supply  of  that  defect.  For  which  cause  we 
must  needs  think  it  a  thing  necessary  unto  the  common  good 
of  the  Church,  that,  great  Jurisdiction  being  granted  unto 
Bishops  over  others,  a  state  of  wealth  proportionable  should 
likewise  be  provided  for  them.  Where  wealth  is  had  in  so 
great  admiration,  as  generally  in  this  golden  age  it  is,  that 
without  it  angelical  perfections  are  not  able  to  deliver  from 
extreme  contempt,  surely  to  make  Bishops  poorer  than  they 
are,  were  to  make  them  of  less  account  and  estimation  than 
they  should  be.*     Wherefore,  if  detriment  and  dishonour 

•  ["  There  are,  in  England  alone,  in  the  gift  of  the  Crowns  two  Archbishoprics,  twenty-four 
Bishoprics,  thirty -eight  Deaneries,  forty-six  Prebends,  and  one  thousand  and  twenty  Livings. 
The  larger  Bishoprics  give  from  fifteen  to  twenty  thousand  pounds,  per  annum ;  the  Bishopric 
of  Dmrham  is  a  kind  of  Principality,  and  they  all  of  them  have  a  Patronage  of  Livings,  which, 

VOL.  lil.  R 


242  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  \Sect.  24. 

do  gcow  to  Religion,  to  God,  to  his  Chmxjh,  when  the  puMic 
account  which  is  made  of  the  chief  of  the  Cfergy  decayeth, 
bow  should  it  be,  but  in  this  respect,  for  the  good  of  Re- 
ligion, of  God,  of  his  Church,  that  the  wealth  of  Bishops  be 
carefully  preserved  from  further  diannxxtioia  ?  The  travels, 
and  crosses  wheretwith  Prelacy  is  never  unaccompanied,  they 
which  feel  them  know  how  heavy  and  how  great  they  a^e: 
unless  such  difficulties,  therefore,  annexed  usiito  that  estate 
be  tempered  by  eo*annesing  thereunto  things  esteemed  of 
in  this  world,  how  should  we  hope  that  the  minds  of  me% 
shunning  naturally  the  burthens  of  each  function,  wilL  be 
drawn  to  undertake  the  burthen  of  Episcopal  care  and  labour 
in  the  Church  of  Christ  ?  WheKeflwre,  if  long  we  desire  to 
enjoy  the  peace,  quietmess,  order,,  and  staJ^ility  of  Religion, 
which  Prelacy  (as  hath  been  declared)  cau^eth,  then  must 
we  necessarily,  even  in  fovowr  of  the  public  good,  uphold 
those  things,  the  hope  whereof  being  taken  away,  it  is  not 
the  mere  goodines^  of  the  charge,  and  the  Divine  acceptation 
thereof,  that  will  be  able  to  invite  many  thereunto.  What 
shall  become  of  that  Cosamonwealth  or  Church  in  the  end, 
which  hath  not  the  eye  of  Learning  to  beautify,  guide,  asd 
direct  it?  At  the  length,  what  shall  become  of  that  learning, 

in  some  instances,  afford  a  rich  provision  for  a  whole  family.  The  lands  belonging  to  the 
Bishoprics  are  let  on  leases  for  lives,  so  that  when  a  life  falk  in,  but  especially  if  two  lives 
fail  in  before  the  bargain  is  completed,  a  large  Fine  accrues  to  the  Bishop.  In  this  way, 
even  in  some  of  the  inferior  Bishoprics,  a  fortune  of  two  or  three  hundred  thousand  poimdfr 
has  been  made.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  several  that  are  very  poor ;  and  the  Bishopric 
of  Llandaff  is  stud  to  be  under  one  thousand  pounds  a  year.  The  Church  of  Irelanji-  is 
still  more  richly  endowed.  There  are  in  Ireland  four  Archbishops,  and  eighteen  Bishops, 
whose  united  income  is  estimated  at  one  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand,  seven  hundred 
pounds  a  year.  The  Bishop-  of  Derry  has  fifteen  thousand  pounds  a  year,  the  Bishop  <£ 
Elphin  twelve  thousand  pounds,  the  Bishop  of  Raphoe  ten  thousand  pounds,  and  none  are 
under  four  thousand  pounds  a  year.  But  besides  this  acknowledged  income,  the  revenue 
the  Irish  Bishops  draw  from  Fines  is  enormous ;  their  landed  property  is  immense ;  leases 
are  for  twenty-one  years,  and  Fines  are  taken  every  seven,  or  even  every  three  years ;  thus 
becoming  a  kind  of  triennial  rents.  Mr.  Wakefield  calculates  that  the  estates  of  the  follow- 
ing Sees  would,  if  fairly  let,  bring  the  undermentioned  sums :  The  Primacy  of  Armagh  one 
hundred  and  forty  thousand  pounds  a  year,  the  See  of  Derry  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand 
pounds,  the  See  of  Kilmore  one  hundred  thousand  pounds,  the  See  of  Clogher  one  hundred 
thousand  pounds,  the  See  of  Waterford  seventy  thousand  pounds.  The  patronagie  is  ex- 
tremely valuable.  In  the  Bishopric  of  Cloyne,  one  Living  is  worth  three  thousand  pounds 
a  year;  one,  two  thousand  pounds;  one,  one  thousand  pounds;  and  six  from  one  thousand 
five  hundred,  to  one  thousand  two  hundred  pounds :  the  whole  of  the  Livings  in  the  gift  of 
the  Bishop  of  Cloyne  are  valued  at  fifty  thousand  pounds  a  year.  There  are  about  one 
thousand  three  hundred  Benefices  in  Ireland,  upwards  of  two  hundred  of  which  are  in  the 
gift  of  the  Crown."  An  Essay  on  the  History  of  the  English  Government  and  Constitution^ 
from  the  reign  qf  Henry  VIII,  to  the  present  time.  By  Lord  John  Russell.  1823.  Edit  2. 
8vo.  chap,  xxxiv.  pp.  413 — 415.  See  this  subject  elaborately  set  forth  by  analytical  tables 
in  RBmarks  on  the  Consumption  of  Public  Wealth  by  the  Clergy  of  every  Christian  Nationf  and 
particularly  by  the  Established  Church  in  England  and  Wales,  and  in  Jreland,  Sfc,  1832. 
SrWCi.  pp.  84.] 


SecU  34.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  243 

which  hath  not  wherewith  any  more  to  encourage  her  in- 
dustrious followers?     And  finally ^  what  shall  become   of 
that  courage  to  follow  learning,  which  hath  already  so  much 
failed  through  the  only  diminution  of  her  chiefest  rewards. 
Bishoprics?*    Surely,  wheresoever  this  wicked  intendment 
of  oYerthrowing  Cathedral  Churches,   or  of  taking  away 
those   Livings,    Lands,    and   Possessions,    which   Bishops 
hitherto  have  enjoyed,  shall  once  prevail,  the  handmaids 
attending  thereupon  will  be  Paganism  and  extreme  Barbarity. 
In  the  Law  of  Moses  how  careful  provision  is  made  that 
goods  of  this  kind  might  remain  to  the  Church  for  ever : 
'^  Ye  shall  not  make  common  the  holy  things  of  the  children  Namb. 
of  Israel,  lest  ye  die,  saith  the  Lord."     Touching  the  fields*^"' 
annexed  unto  Levitical  cities,  the  Law  was  plain,  they  might 
not  be  sold ;  and  the  reason  of  the  Law  this,  *^  for  it  was  Lev. 
their  possession  for  ever."    He  which  was  Lord  and  owner  "^*^' 
of  it,  his  will  and  pleasure  was,  that  from  the  Levites  it 
should  never  pass  to  be  enjoyed  by  any  other.     The  Lord's 
own  portion,  without  his  own  commission  and  grant,  how 
should  any  man  justly  hold}    They  which  hold  it  by  his 
appointment  ha4  it  plainly  with  this  condition,  ''  They  shall  Ezek. 
not  seU  of  it,  neither  change  it,  nor  alienate  the  first-fruits  liy"*' 
of  the  land ;  for  it  is  holy  unto  the  Lord."     It  faUeth  some- 
times out,  as  the  Prophet  Habakkuk  noteth,  that  the  very 
^*  prey  of  savage  beasts  becometh  dreadful  unto  themselves."  Habak. 
It  did  so  in  Judas,  Acban,  Nebuchadnezzar;    their  evil-  ** 
purchased  goods  were  their  snare,  and  their  prey  their  own 
terror;  a  thing  no  where  so  likely  to  follow,  as  in  those 
goods  and  possessions,  which  being  laid  where  they  should 
not  rest,  have  by  the  Lord's  own  testimony  his  most  bitter  Mai 
curse,  their  undividable  companion.     These  persuasions  we  "*'  ^' 


*  [**  In  the  Cbiwliv  tl»e  iaimense  and  valuable  patronage  of  Government  is  uniformly 
bestowed  on  their  Political  adherents.  No  talents,  no  learning,  no  piety  can  advance  the 
fiMtone  of  a  Clergyman  whose  Political  opinions  are  adverse  to  these  of  the  governing  party. 
The  utmost  that  is  permitted  to  a  Bishop  is  moderation  in  his  manner  of  maintaining  the 
orthodox  Political  faith ;  any  hesitation  in  his  vote  is  ^n  unpardonable  son.  He  may  be  a 
high  Calvinist,  or  a  controversial  Arminian ;  a  bigotted  enemy  of  all  other  religious  opinions. 
Of  an  enlightened  friend  of  toleration,  but  if  he  shews  himself  of  a  different  creed  from  his 
patrons  in  Civil  concerns,  and  is  guilty  of  Political  heresy,  his  further  rise  is  stopt  for  ever.  . . . 
Connected  with  Power  and  Office  by  their  very  profession,  all  the  members  of  the  Church 
have  an  original  tendency,  not  easily  overcome,  to  take  the  side  of  Government;  and  those 
who  desire  to  rise  to  distinction  in  the  Hierarchy,  generally  make  a  display  of  serrility  as 
the  sorest  means  of  elevation ;  or  if  raised  by  some  rare  accident  from  real  merit,  superadd 

a  varnish  of  adulation  to  their  other  acquirements There  are,  however,  a  number  of 

Clergymen  whose  honourable  and  enlightened  opinions  make  them  at  once  proscribed  and 
Tespected."    Lord  John  Russell,  pp.  417,  421,  m^  tup,'] 

r2 


244  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  [Sect.  24f. 

use  for  other  men's  cause^  not  for  theirs  with  whom  God 
and  Religion  are  parts  of  the  abrogated  Law  of  Ceremonies* 
Wherefore,  not  to  continue  longer  in  the  cure  of  a  sore 
desperate,  there  was  a  time  when  the  Clergy  had  almost  as 
little  as  these  good  people  wish.  But  the  Kings  of  this  Realm 
and  others,  whom  God  had  blest,  considered  devoutly  with 
themselves,  as  David  in  like  case  sometimes  had  done.  Is  it 
meet  that  we  at  the  hands  of  God  should  enjoy  all  kinds  of 
abundance,  and  God's  Clergy  suflfer  want?  They  con- 
Prov.  sidered  that  of  Solomon,  "  Honour  God  with  thy  substance, 
and  the  chiefest  of  all  thy  revenue ;  so  shall  thy  barns  be 
filled  with  corn,  and  thy  vessels  shall  run  over  with  new 
2  chron.  winc."  They  considered  how  the  care  which  Jehoshaphat 
****  ^*  had,  in  providing  that  the  Levites  might  have  encouragement 
to  do  the  work  of  the  Lord  cheerfully,  was  left  of  God  as 
a  fit  pattern  to  be  followed  in  the  Church  for  ever.  They 
considered  what  promise  our  Lord  and  Saviour  hath  made 
[Matt,  unto  them,  at  whose  hands  his  Prophets  should  receive  but 
the  least  part  of  the  meanest  kind  of  friendliness,  though  it 
were  but  a  draught  of  water ;  which  promise  seemeth  not  to 
be  taken,  as  if  Christ  had  made  them  of  any  higher  courtesy 
uncapable,  and  had  promised  reward  not  unto  such  as  give 
them  but  that,  but  unto  such  as  leave  them  but  that.  They 
considered  how  earnest  the  Apostle  is,  that  if  the  Ministers 
of  the  Law  were  so  amply  provided  for,  less  care  then  ought 
not  to  be  had  of  them,  who  under  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
possess  correspondent  Rooms  in  the  Church.  They  con- 
sidered how  needful  it  is,  that  they  who  provoke  all  others 
unto  works  of  mercy  and  charity  should  especially  have^ 
wherewith  to  be  examples  of  such  things,  and  by  such  means 
to  win  them,  with  whom  other  means,  without  those,  do 
commonly  take  very  small  effect. 

In  these  and  the  like  considerations,  the  Church  revenues 
were  in  ancient  times  augmented,  our  Lord  thereby  perform- 
[Mark  ing  manifestly  the  promise  made  to  his  servants,  that  they 
ai.] '  which  did  "  leave  either  father,  or  mother,  or  lands,  or  goods, 
for  his  sake,  should  receive  in  this  world  an  hundred  fold." 
For  some  hundreds  of  years  together,  they  which  joined 
themselves  to  the  Church  were  fain  to  relinquish  all  worldly 
emoluments  and  to  endure  the  hardness  of  an  afflicted  estate. 
Afterward  the  Lord  gave  rest  to  his  Church,  Kings  and 
Princes  became  as  Fathers  thereunto,  the  hearts  of  all  men 


iSect.  ^.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  245 

inclined  towards  it,  and  by  his  providence  there  grew  unto 
it  every  day  earthly  possessions  in  more  and  more  abun- 
dance, till  the  greatness  thereof  bred  envy,  which  no  diminu- 
tions are   able  to  satisfy.     For,   as  those  ancient  nursing 
Fathers  thought  they  did  never  bestow  enough;   even  so 
in  the  eye  of  this  present  age,  as  long  as  any  thing  re- 
maineth,   it  seemeth   to  be  too  much.     Our  Fathers  we 
imitate  "  in  perversum,"  as  Tertullian  speaketh ;  like  them 
we  are,  by  being,  in  equal  degree,  the  contrary  unto  that 
which  they  were.     Unto  those  earthly  blessings  which  God 
as  then  did  with  so  great  abundance  pour  down  upon  the 
Ecclesiastical  state,  we  may,   in  regard  of  most  near  re- 
semblance, apply  the  self-same  words  which  the  Prophet 
hath,  "God  blessed  them  exceedingly;  and,  by  this  verypsai.cv. 
mean,  turned  the  hearts  of  their  own  Brethren  to  hate  them,  ^'  ^ 
and  to  deal  politicly  with  his  servants."     Computations  are 
made,  and  there  are  huge  sums  set  down  for  Princes,  to  see 
how  much  they  may  ampUfy  and  enlarge  their  own  treasure ; 
how  many  public  burthens  they  may  ease ;  what  present  means 
they  may  have  to  reward  their  servants  about  them,  if  they 
please  but  to  grant  their  assent,  and  to  accept  of  the  spoil  of 
Bishops,  by  whom  Church-goods  are  but  abused  unto  pomp 
and  vanity.     Thus  albeit  they  deal  with  one  whose  princely 
virtue  giveth  them  small  hope  to  prevail  in  impious  and 
sacrilegious  motions ;    yet  shame   they  not  to   move   her 
Royal  Majesty  even  with  a  suit  not  much  unlike  unto  that 
wherewith  the  Jewish  High-priest  tried  Judas,  whom  they 
solicited  unto   treason  against  his  Master,   and   proposed 
unto  him  a  number  of  silver  pence  in  lieu  of  so  virtuous  and 
honest  a  service.     But  her  sacred  Majesty  disposed  to  be 
always  like  herself,  her  heart  so  far  estranged  from  willing- 
ness to  gain  by  pillage  of  that  estate,  the  only  awe  whereof 
Tinder  God  she  hath  been  unto  this  present  hour,  as  of  all 
other  parts  of  this  noble  Commonwealth,  whereof  she  hath 
vowed  herself  a  protector  till  the  end  of  her  days  on  earth, 
which  if  Nature  could  permit,  we  wish,  as  good  cause  we 
have,  endless :  this  her  gracious  inclination  is  more  than  a 
seven-times-sealed  warrant,  upon  the  same  assurance  whereof 
touching  any  action,  so  dishonourable  as  this,  we  are  on  her 
part  most  secure,  not  doubting  but  that  unto  all  posterity  it 
shall  for  ever  appear,  that  from  the  first  to  the  very  last  of 
her  sovereign  proceedings  there  hath  not  been  one  authorized 


246  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  {jSect.  24f. 

Lib.z.  deed  other  than  consonant  with  that  Symmachufi  sfifkl^ 
Sdd.'  '^  Fiscus  bonorum  Principuniy  non  Sacerdotiim  damnis,  sed 
TheodoB.  hostiuDi  spoUis  augeatui:"  consonant  with  that  Imperial  LaW^ 
chad.  **  Ea  quae  ad  beatissimae  Efcclesiae  jiira  pertinefnt,  tanquatn 
sacros.  ^s^™  sacrosanctam  et  religiosam  Ecclesiam,  intaeta  ^oli- 
Eccies.  venit  venerabiliter  custodiri;  ut  sicut  ipsa  Religionis  et 
Fidei  Mater  perpetua  est,  ita  ejus  patrimoniam  ju^ter 
servetur  illaesum.'*  As  for  the  ease  of  pubUc  butthens^  fet 
any  Politician  living  make  it  appear,  that  by  confiscation 
of  Bishops'  Livings,  and  their  utter  dissolution  at  once,  the 
Commonwealth  shall  ever  have  half  that  relief  and  ease  which 
it  receiveth  by  their  continuance  as  now  they  are,  atid  it 
shall  give  us  some  cause  to  think,  that  albeit  we  see  they 
are  impiously  and  irreligiously  minded,  yet  we  may  esteem 
them  at  least  to  be  tolerable  Commonwealth's-men.  But 
the  case  is  too  clear  and  manifest,  the  world  doth  but  too 
plainly  see  it,  that  no  one  Order  of  subjects  whatsoever 
within  this  Land  doth  bear  the  seventh  part  of  that  pro- 
portion which  the  Clergy  beareth  in  the  burthens  of  the 
Commonwealth :  no  revenue  of  the  Crown  like  unto  it^ 
either  for  certainty  or  for  greatness.  Let  the  good  which 
this  way  hath  grown  to  the  Commonwealth  by  the  dissolu- 
tion of  religious-Houses,  teach  men  what  ease  unto  public 
burdens  there  is  like  to  grow  by  the  overthrow  of  die 
Clergy.  My  meaning  is  not  hereby  to  make  the  state  of 
Bishoprick  and  of  those  dissolved  Companies  alike,  the  one 
no  less  unlawful  to  be  removed  than  the  other.  For  those 
Religious  persons  were  men  which  followed  only  a  special 
kind  of  contemplative  life  in  the  Commonwealth,  they  were 
properly  no  portion  of  God's  Clergy  (only  such  amongst 
them  excepted  as  were  also  Priests),  their  goods  (that 
excepted  which  they  unjustly  held  through  the  Pope's 
usurped  power  of  appropriating  Ecclesiastical  Livings  unto 
them)  may  in  part  seem  to  be  of  the  nature  of  Civil  pos- 
sessions, held  by  other  kinds  of  Corporations,  such  as  the 
city  of  London  hath  divers.  Wherefore,  as  their  institution 
was  human,  and  their  end  for  the  most  part  superstitious, 
they  had  not  therein  merely  that  holy  and  divine  interest 
which  belongeth  unto  Bishops,  who  being  employed  by 
Christ  in  the  principal  service  of  his  Church,  are  receivers 
and  disposers  of  his  patrimony,  as  hath  been  showed, 
which  whosoever  shall  withhold  or  withdraw  at  any  tiooe 


JSed.  ^I>.]  OF  SGCLESKASTI^AL  POLITY.  247 

from  thcnn,  lie  undoubtedly  robbeth  God  himself.  If  tkey 
abuse  the  goods  of  the  Church  unto  pomp  and  vanity, 
such  faults  we  do  not  excuse  in  them.  Only  we  wish  it 
4o  be  considered  whether  such  faults  be  verily  in  them, 
^c»r  else  but  objected  against  them  by  such  as  gape  after 
spoil,  and  therefore  are  no  competent  judges  what  is 
moderate  and  what  excessive  in  them,  whom  under  this 
pretence  they  would  spoil.  But  the  accusation  may  be 
just.  ,  In  plenty  and  fulness  it  may  be  we  are  of  God  more 
forgetful  than  were  requisite.  Notwithstanding  men  should 
remember  how  not  to  the  Clergy  alone  it  was  said  by 
Moses  in  Deuteronomy,  "  Ne  cum  manducaveris,  et  bibe-  [Dent. 
-ris,  et  domos  optimas  aedificaveris."  If  the  remedy  pre- 12.]  ' 
scribed  for  this  disease  be  good,  let  it  impartially  be 
applied.  "  Interest  Reipub.  ut  re  sua  quisque  bene  utatur." 
Let  all  states  be  put  to  their  moderate  pensions,  let  their 
Livings  and  Lands  be  taken  away  from  them  whomsoever 
they  be,  in  whom  such  ample  possessions  are  found  to 
have  been  matters  of  grievous  abuse  :  were  this  just  ?  would 
Noble  families  think  this  reasonable  ?  The  Title  which  Bi- 
ahops  have  to  their  Livings  is  as  good  as  the  tide  of  any 
sort  of  men  unto  whatsoever  we  accompt  to  be  most  justly 
held  by  tbem ;  yea,  in  this  one  thing  the  claim  of  Bishops 
iiath  pre-eminence  above  all  secular  titles  of  right,  in  that 
ijrod's  own  interest  is  the  tenure  whereby  they  hold,  even  as 
ako  it  was  to  the  Priests  of  the  Law  an  assurance  of  their 
.'SfAritual  goods  and  possessions,  whereupon  though  they 
flMMsy  times  abused  greatly  the  goods  of  tibe  Churdh,  yet 
was  mot  God's  patrimony  therefore  taken  away  from  them, 
ond  made  saleable  unto  other  tribes.  To  rob  God,  to  ran- 
jsmk  the  CJhurch,  to  overthrow  the  whole  Order  of  Oiristian 
Bi^ops,  and  to  turn  l^m  -out  of  land  amd  living,  out  of 
h&QBe  and  borne,  what  man  -of  common  honesty  can  thinfk 
it  for  »ny  manner  of  abuse  to  be  a  remedy  lawful  or  just  ? 
We  must  confess  that  God  is  righteous  in  taking  away  that 
(|i4nch  men  abuse :  but  doth  that  excuse  the  violence  of 
'diieves  and  robbers?  Complain  we  will  noft  with  St.  Je- 
i*ome,  **  That  the  hands  of  men  are  so  straitly  tied,  and 
liieir  liberal  minds  so  much  bridled  and  held  back  from 
doing  good  by  augmentation  -of  the  Church -patrimony."* 

*  "  Podet  dicere,  Sacerdotes  idolorum,  aurigse,  mimi  et  scorta  haereditates  capiunt,  solis 
Clericis  et  Monachis  Id  lege  prohibetur,  et  prohibetur  non  a  persecutonbus  sed  Principibus 
Chiktiams.  Nee  de  lege  conqueror,  sed  doleo  quod  meruerimus  banc  Legem."    Ad  N«.^t.  *L. 


^4*8  I'Hfi    S£V£NTU   BOOK  [Sect.  /Mu 

For  we  confess  that  herein  mediocrity  may  be  and  hath 
been   sometime  exceeded.     There  did  want  heretofore  a 
Moses  to  temper  men's  liberality^  to  say  unto  them  who 
[Exod.    enriched  the  Church,  Suffidty  Stay  your  hands,  lest  fervour 
5."^  *    of  zeal  do  cause  you  to  empty  yourselves  too  far.     It  may 
be  the  largeness  of  men's  hearts  being  then  more  moderate, 
had  been  after  more  durable ;  and  one  state  by  too  much 
overgrowing  the  rest,  had  not  given  occasion  unto  the  rest 
to  undermine  it.     That  evil  is  now  sufficiently  cured :  the 
Church-treasury,  if  then  it  were  over  full,  hath  since  been 
reasonably  well  emptied.     That  which  Moses  spake  unto 
givers,  we  must  now  inculcate  unto  takers  away  from  the 
Church,    Let  there  be  some  stay,  some  stint  in  spoiling. 
Obad.     If  "  grape-gatherers  came  unto  them  (saith  the  Prophet), 
^"*  *    would  they  not  leave  some  remnant  behind  ?"     But  it  hath 
fared  with  the  wealth  of  the  Church  as  with  a  tower,  which 
being  built  at  the  first  with  the  highest,  overthroweth  itself 
after  by  its  own  greatness ;  neither  doth  the  ruin  thereof 
cease  with  the  only  fall  of  that  which  hath  exceeded  me- 
diocrity, but  one  part  beareth  down  another,  till  the  whole 
be  laid  prostrate.     For  although  the  State  Ecclesiastical, 
both  others  and  even  Bishops  themselves,  be  now  fallen  to 
so  low  an  ebb,  as  all  the  world  at  this  day  doth  see ;  yet, 
because  there  remaineth   still   somewhat  which  unsatiable 
minds  can  thirst  for,  therefore  we  seem  not  to  have  been 
hitherto  sufficiently  wronged.  Touching  that  which  hath  been 
taken  from  the  Church  in  appropriations  known  to  amount 
to  the  value  of  one  hundred  twenty-six  thousand  pounds 
yearly,  we  rest  contentedly  and  quietly  without  it,  till  it 
shall  please  God  to  touch  the  hearts  of  men,  of  their  own 
voluntary   accord,   to  restore  it   to  him  again ;  *  judging 
thereof  no  otherwise  than  some  others  did  of  those  goods 
which  were  by  Sylla  taken  away  from  the  citizens  of  Rome, 
that  albeit  they  were  in  truth  male  capta^  unconscionably 
taken  away  from  the  right  owners  at  the  first,  nevertheless, 
seeing  that  such  as  were  after  possessed  of  them  held  them 
not  without  some  title,  which  Law  did  after  a  sort  make 
Fior.      good,   "  repetitio   eorum  proculdubio  labefactabat  compo- 
Ij!*i3"'    sitam  Civitatem."     What  hath  been  taken  away  as  dedi- 
cated unto  uses  superstitious,  and  consequently  not  given 
unto   God,   or  at  the  leastwise  not   so  rightly   given,  we 

•  [See  Vol.  II.  p.  408.] 


Sect.  24.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  249 

repine  not  thereat.  That  which  hath  gone  by  means  secret 
and  indirect^  through  corrupt  compositions  or  compacts^ 
we  cannot  help.  What  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts  doth 
make  them  loth  to  have  exacted,  though  being  due  by 
Law,  even  thereof  the  want  we  do  also  bear.  Out  of  that 
which  after  all  these  deductions  cometh  clearly  unto  our 
hands,  I  hope  it  will  not  be  said  that  towards  the  public 
charge  we  disburse  nothing.  And  doth  the  residue  seem 
yet  excessive  ?  The  ways  whereby  temporal  men  provide 
for  themselves  and  their  Families  are  fore-closed  unto  us. 
All  that  we  have  to  sustain  our  miserable  life  with,  is  but 
a  remnant  of  God's  own  treasure,  so  far  already  diminished 
and  dipt,  that  if  there  were  any  sense  of  common  humanity 
left  in  this  hard-hearted  world,  the  impoverished  estate  of 
the  Clergy  of  God  would  at  the  length  even  of  very  com- 
miseration be  spared.  The  mean  Gentleman  that  hath  but 
an  hundred  pound  land  to  live  on,  would  not  be  hasty  to 
change  his  worldly  estate  and  condition  with  many  of  these 
so  over-abounding  Prelates  ;  a  common  artisan  or  tradesman 
of  the  city,  with  ordinary  Pastors  of  the  Church.  It  is  our 
hard  and  heavy  lot,  that  no  other  sort  of  men  being  grudged 
at,  how  little  benefit  soever  the  public-weal  reap  by  them, 
no  state  complained  of  for  holding  that  which  hath  grown 
unto  them  by  lawful  means ;  only  the  governors  of  our 
souls,  they  that  study  day  and  night  so  to  guide  us,  that 
both  in  this  world  we  may  have  comfort,  and  in  the  world  to 
come  endless  felicity  and  joy  (for  even  such  is  the  very 
scope  of  all  their  endeavours ;  this  they  wish,  for  this  they 
labour,  how  hardly  soever  we  use  to  construe  of  their 
intents);  hard,  that  only  they  should  be  thus  continually 
lifted  at  for  possessing  but  that  whereunto  they  have,  by 
Law  both  of  God  and  Man,  most  just  Title.  If  there 
should  be  no  other  remedy,  but  that  the  violence  of  men 
in  the  end  must  needs  bereave  them  of  all  succour,  further 
than  the  inclination  of  others  shall  vouchsafe  to  cast  upon 
them,  as  it  were  by  way  of  alms,  for  their  relief  but  from 
hour  to  hour ;  better  they  are  not  than  their  fathers,  which 
have  been  contented  with  as  hard  a  portion  at  the  world's 
hands :  let  the  light  of  the  sun  and  moon,  the  common 
benefit  of  heaven  and  earth,  be  taken  from  Bishops,  if  the 
question  were.  Whether  God  should  lose  his  glory,  and  the 
safety  of  his  Church  be  hazarded,  or  they  relinquish  the 


'250  ^^^  SEVENTH  BOOK.  [Sect.  2i. 

right  and  interest  which  they  have  in  the  things  of  this 
world?  But  sith  the  question  in  truth  is,  Whether  Levi 
shall  be  deprived  of  the  portion  of  God  or  no,  to  ihe  end 
that  Simeon  or  Reuben  may  devour  it  as  their  spoil?  the 
<x>mfort  of  the  one,  in  sustaining  the  injuries  which  the 
other  would  offer,  must  be  that  Prayer  poured  out  by 
Moses,  the  Prince  of  Prophets,  in  most  tender  affection  to 
Deat.  Levi,  '*  Bless,  O  Lord,  his  substance,  accept  thou  the 
u^  '  work  of  his  hands ;  smite  through  the  loins  of  them  that 
rise  up  against  him,  and  of  them  which  hate  him,  that  they 
rise  no  more."* 


*  [So  many  of  the  preceding  Notes  relate  to  tlie  subject  matter  of  this  Section,  that  much 
which  might  be  added  here  is  forborne  :  let  it  therefore  suffice  that  two  portions  of  Scripture 
are  adduced;  namely,  1  Tim.  vi.  11.  and  Matt.  y.  43,  44.  and  that  the  question  be  put, 
Whether  that  eminent  Civilian,  Samuel  Puffendorf,  has  not  betrayed  the  great  secret  on 
which  an  ultra-Scriptural  Hierarchy  or  **  Chiefty"  is  founded,  and  for  which  it  is  advocated, 
where  he  says,  **  Not  to  dissemble  the  truth,  it  would  appear  very  ill,  if  after  Princes  and 
entire  States  have  received  the  Doctrine  of  Christ,  enjoying  ample  Revenues,  they  should  deal 
sparingly  with  the  Church ;  and  the  more  because  it  is  a  general  maxim  among  men,  to  vahe 
a  Function  according  to  its  Revenues  ?" — The  Nature  and  Qual^fioation  qfBeligion  in  r^ennce 
to  Civil  Society,     1698.  p.  118.] 


BOOK  VIII. 

CONTAINING  THEIR  SEVEl^H  ASSERTION,  THAT  TO  NO  CIVIL  PRINCK 
OR  GOVERNOR  THERE  MAY  BE  GIVEN  SUCH  POWER  OF  ECCLESI- 
ASTICAL DOMINION,  AS  BY  THE  LAWS  OF  THIS  LAND  BELONGETH 
UNTO   THE    SUPREME    REGENT    THEREOF. 


THE  MATTER  CONTAINED  IN  THIS  EIGHTH  BOOK, 

1.  Whether  the  Church  and  the  Commonwealth  are,   with  us,  the  self-same 

Community  ? 

2.  What  the  Power  of  Dominion  is. 

3.  In  what  measure. 

4.  Of  the  Title  of  Headship. 

5.  To  call  and  dissolve  all  solemn  Assemblies  about  the  public  affairs  of  the  Church. 

6.  Of  the  Authority  of  making  Laws. 

7.  Power  to  Command  all  persons,  and  to  be  over  all  Judges  in  Causes  Ecclesiastical. 

8.  What  Laws  may  be  made  for  the  affairs  of  the  Church,  and  to  whom  the  Power 

of  making  them  appertaineth. 

9.  Of  Exemption  from  being  punishable. 


1.  We  come  now  to  the  last  thing  whereof  there  is  con-[Whc- 
troversy  moved,   namely,    The   Power   of  supreme  Juris- chorch 
diction;   which  for  distinction'  sake  we   call,    The  Power com.^ 
of  Ecclesiastical  Dominion.      It  was    not  thought  fit  in  wealth 
the  Jews'  Commonwealth,  that  the  exercise  of  Supremacy  asfthe 
Ecclesiastical  should  be  denied  unto  him,   to  whom   the  same 
exercise   of   Chiefty   Civil    did  appertain;    and   therefore S?™?"" 
their  Kings  were  invested  with  both.     This  Power  they  i  Mac 
gave  unto  Simon,  when  they  consented  that  he  should  be4i-l44.* 
their  Prince,  not  only  to  set  men  over  their  works,  and 
country,   and  weapons,  but  also  to  provide  for  the  holy 
things ;  and  that  he  should  be  obeyed  of  every  man,  and 
that  the  writings  of  the  country  should  be  made  in  his 
name,   and  that  it  should   not  be  lawful  for  any  of  the 
people  or  Priests  to  withstand  his  words,  or  to  call  any 
congregation  in  the  country  without  him.     And  if  happily 
it  be  surmised,  that  thus  much  was  given  to  Simon,  as  being 
both  Prince  and  High-priest,  which  otherwise  (being  their 
Civil  <3ovemor)  he  could  not  lawfully  have  enjoyed ;  we 


252  THE    EIGHTH    BOOK  [Sect.  1. 

must  note^  that  all  this  is  no  more  than  the  ancient  Kings 
of  that  people  had^  being  Kings  and  not  Priests.  By  this 
power  Davidy  Asa,  Jehoshaphat^  Josias,  and  the  rest,  made 
those  Laws  and  Orders  which  Sacred  History  speaketh  of, 
concerning  matters  of  mere  Religion,  the  affairs  of  the 
Temple,  and  service  of  God.  Finally,  had  it  not  been  by 
the  virtue  of  this  Power,  how  should  it  possibly  have  come 
to  pass,  that  the  piety  or  impiety  of  the  Kings  did  always 
accordingly  change  the  public  face  of  Religion,  which  things 
the  Prophets  by  themselves  never  did,  nor  at  any  time 
could,  hinder  from  being  done?  Had  the  Priests  alone 
been  possest  of  all  Power  in  Spiritual  affairs,  how  should 
any  thing  concerning  matter  of  Religion  have  been  made 
but  only  by  them  ?  In  them  it  had  been,  and  not  in  the 
King,  to  change  the  face  of  Religion  at  any  time;  the 
altering  of  Religion,  the  making  of  Ecclesiastical  Laws, 
with  other  the  like  actions  belonging  unto  the  Power  of  Do- 
minion, are  still  termed  "  The  deeds  of  the  King ;"  to  shew, 
that  in  him  was  placed  the  Supremacy  of  Power  in  this 
kind  over  all,  and  that  unto  their  Priests  the  same  was 
never  committed,  saving  only  at  such  times  as  the  Priests 
were  also  Kings  and  Princes  over  them.  According  to  the 
pattern  of  which  example*  the  like  Power  in  causes  Eccle- 
siastical is  by  the  Laws  of  this  Realm  annexed  unto  the  Crown : 
and  there  are  which  do  imagine,  that  Kings,  being  mere 
Lay-persons,  do  by  this  means  exceed  the  lawful  bounds  of 
their  callings ;  which  thing  to  the  end  that  they  may  per- 
suade, they  First,  make  a  necessary  separation  perpetual 
and  personal  between  the  Church  and  the  Commonwealth : 
Secondly,  they  so  tie  all  kind  of  Power  Ecclesiastical  unto 
the  Church,  as  if  it  were  in  every  degree  their  only  right 
who  are  by  proper  spiritual  functions  termed  Church-go- 
vernors, and  might  not  unto  Christian  Princes  in  any  wise 
appertain.  To  lurk  under  shifting  ambiguities  and  equi- 
vocations of  words  in  matter  of  principal  weight,  is  childish. 
A  Church  and  a  Commonwealth  we  grant  are  things  in 
nature   one   distinguished   from   the   other.      A  Common- 

•  [By  this  Apocryphal  **  example"  the  Law  of  God,  Num.  i.  50,  iii.  10,  xviii.  7,  was 
evidently  perverted,  *'  every  thing  of  the  altar"  having  been  forbidden  to  "  the  stranger,"  on 
pain  of  "  death  :"  see  the  case  of  "  Uzziah,  the  king,"  2  Chron.  xxvi.  18.  The  sophistry  of 
the  example  is.  That  if  the  king  might  not  interfere  with  the  priest's  office,  yet  the  priest  may 
become  King  I  As  respects  us,  however,  this  example  is  not  parallel ;  the  person,  he  or  she, 
who  arrives  at  the  **  Chiefty"  having  both  Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  investiture  simultaneously.] 


Sect.  L]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY,  253 

wealth  is  one  way,  and  a  Church  another  way,  defined.  In 
their  opinions,  The  Church  and  Commonwealth  are  Corpo- 
rations, not  distinguished  only  in  nature  and  definition,  but 
in  subsistence  perpetually  severed ;  so  that  they  which  are 
of  the  one  can  neither  appoint  nor  execute  in  whole  nor  in 
part  the  duties  which  belong  to  them  which  are  of  the  other, 
without  open  breach  of  the  Law  of  God,  which  hath  di- 
vided them,  and  doth  require  that  so  being  divided  they 
should  distinctly  or  severally  work,  as  depending  both  upon 
God,  and  not  hanging  one  upon  the  other's  approbation  for 
that  which  either  hath  to  do.  We  say.  That  the  care  of 
Religion  being  common  to  all  Societies  Politic,  such  So- 
cieties as  do  embrace  the  true  Religion  have  the  name  of 
the  Church  given  unto  every  one  of  them  for  distinction 
from  the  rest ;  so  that  every  Body  Politic  hath  some  Reli- 
gion, but  the  Church  that  Religion  which  is  only  time. 
TrtUh  of  Religion  is  the  proper  difference  whereby  a 
Church  is  distinguished  from  other  politic  Societies  of  men; 
we  here  mean  true  Religion  in  gross,  and  not  according  to 
every  particular  :*  for  they  which  in  some  particular  points 
of  Religion  do  sever  from  the  Truth,  may  nevertheless  truly 
(if  we  compare  them  to  men  of  an  heathenish  Religion)  be 
said  to  hold  and  profess  that  Religion  which  is  true.  For 
which  cause,  there  being  of  old  so  many  poUtic  Societies 
stablished  through  the  world,  only  the  Commonwealth  of 
Israel  which  had  the  Truth  of  Religion  was  in  that  respect 
the  Church  of  God :  and  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
every  such  politic  Society  of  men  as  doth  in  Religion  hold 
that  Truth  which  is  proper  to  Christianity.  As  a  politic 
Society  it  doth  maintain  ReUgion,  as  a  Church  that  Reli- 
gion which  God  hath  revealed  by  Jesus  Christ.  With  us, 
therefore,  the  name  of  a  Church  importeth  only  a  Society 
of  men,  first  united  into  some  public  form  of  Regiment, 
and  secondly,  distinguished  from  other  Societies  by  the 
exercise  of  Religion.  With  them  on  the  other  side,  the 
name  of  the  Church  in  this  present  question  importeth  not 
only  a  multitude  of  men  so  united  and  so  distinguished,  but 
also  further  the  same  divided  necessarily  and  perpetually 
from  the  body  of  the  Commonwealth ;  so  that  even  in  such 
a  politic  Society  as  consisteth  of  none  but  Christians,  yet 

•  [See  VoL  II.  p.  301,  <*  Church  is  a  word,  &c."] 


254  ^HE  EioHTH  BOOK  [Sect,  h 

the  Church  and  Commonwealth  ape  two  Corporations  [each] 
independently  subsisting  by  itself. 

We  hold^  That  seeing  there  is  not  any  man  of  the  Church 
of  England  but  the  same  man  is  also  a  member  of  the  Com- 
monwealth^  nor  any  member  of  the  Commonwealth  which 
is  not  also  of  the  Church  of  England  ;*  therefore  as  in  a 
figure  triangle  the  base  doth  differ  from  the  sides  thereof, 
and  yet  one  and  the  self-same  line  is  both  a  base  and  also 
a  side ;  a  side  simply,  a  base  if  it  chance  to  be  the  bottom 
and  underlie  the  rest ;  so,  albeit  properties  and  actione  of 
one  do  cause  the  name  of  a  Commonwealth,  quaUties  and 
fimctions  of  another  sort  the  name  of  the  Church,  to  be 
given  to  a  multitude,  yet  one  and  the  self-same  multitude 
may  in  such  sort  be  both.f  Nay,  it  is  so  with  us,  That 
no  person  appertaining  to  the  one  can  be  denied  also  to  be 
of  the  other :  contrariwise,  unless  they  against  us  should 
hold.  That  the  Church  and  the  Commonwealth  are  two, 
both  distinct  and  separate  societies ;  of  which  two  one 
comprehendeth  always  persons  not  belonging  to  the  other, 
(that  which  they  do)  they  could  not  conclude  out  of  the 
difference  between  the  Church  and  the  Commoawealtb, 
namely,  that  the  Bishops  may  not  meddle  with  the  affiiirs 
of  the  Commonwealth,  because  they  are  Governors  of 
another  Corporation,  which  is  <  the  Church ;  nor  Kings, 
with  making  Laws  for  the  Church,  because  they  have 
Government,  not  of  this  Corporation,  but  of  another  di- 
vided from    it,    the   Commonwealth ;  j;    and    the   walk  of 

*  [Thus  have  men  willingly  allowed  themselves  to  be  deluded,  and  would  delude  otberaj 
for  not  by  Scriptural  but  by  Secular  Law  is  every  individual  constrained  to  be  a  member  o(  a 
National  Church  ;  to  which  constraint  Reason  and  Revelation  being  equally  opposed,  it  is 
therefore  so  far  not  a  Scriptural  but  a  fictitious  Church.  A  Religion  consisdng  of  types  and 
ceremonies,  and  whose  requirements  could  be  observed  in  accordance  with  the  letter  of  its 
injunctions  might,  as  was  the  Jews',  be  one  with  a  Commonwealth.  But  such  a  Religion  not 
being  now  sanctioned  by  the  Deity,  and  one  of  a  totally  opposite  nature  having  been  substi- 
tuted, whose  ministrations  must  be  observed  "  not  of  the  letter,  but  of  the  spirit,"  (2  Coc 
iii.  6) ;  and  which  requires  of  all  its  followers  the  internal  qualifications  of  '*  belief"  and 
''regeneration,"  not  simply  ritual,  but  actual;  and  operative  from  a  divine  principle,  not 
because  of  "  the  commandments  and  doctrines  of  men"  (Colos.  ii.  22);  it  follows,  that  every 
Christian,  and  consequently  every  ^rtte  Church,  is  composed  only  of  members,  as  far  as  can  be 
judged  of  by  "  discerning  of  spirits"  (1  Cor.  xii.  10),  who  are  thus  Scripturally  combined; 
agreeably  to  Article  XIX.  of  the  Church  of  England,  "  The  visible  Church  of  Christ  is  a  Con- 
gregation of  faithful  men."] 

f  [Every  person  bom  within  the  bounds  of  the  Commonwealth  is  a  subject  thereof;  but 
Baptism  being  the  initiating  rite  into  the  visible  Church  of  Christ,  no  person  can  be  a 
member  of  it  so  soon  as  born,  and  may  never  ritually  become  one :  hence  it  is  only  by 
Secular  Law  that  every  **  member  of  the  Commonwealth  is  also  of  the  Church."] 

X  [A  New  Testament  Bishop  is  restrained  from  the  one,  in  2  Tim.  ii.  4 ;  and  though  a 
temporal  officer  may  hold  his  office  by  hereditary  successipn,  an  hereditary  vicegerent  in  the 


Sect.  1.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POUTY.  255 

separation  between  these  two  must  for  ever  be  upheld : 
they  hold  the  necessity  of  Personal  separation,  which  clean 
excludeth  the  power  of  one  man's  dealing  with  both ;  we 
of  Natural,  but  that  one  and  the  same  person  may  in  both 
bear  principal  sway. 

The  causes  of  common-received  errors  in  this  point  seem 
to  have  been  especially  two :  one.  That  they  who  embrace 
true  Religion,  living  in  such  Commonwealths  as  are  opposite 
thereunto ;  And,  in  other  public  affairs,  retaining  Civil  com- 
munion with  such  as  [them] ;  are  constrained,  for  the  exercise 
of  their  religion,  to  have  a  several  communion  with  those  who 
are  of  the  same  Religion  with  them.  This  was  the  state  of 
the  Jewish  Church  both  in  Egypt  and  Babylon;  the  state 
of  Christian  Churches  a  long  time  after  Christ.  And  ia 
this  case,  because  the  proper  affairs  and  actions  of  the 
Church,  as  it  is  the  Church,  hath  no  dependance  on  the 
Laws,  or  upon  the  Government  of  the  Civil  State,  aa 
opinion  hath  thereby  grown,  that  even  so  it  should  be 
always.  This  was  it  which  deceived  Allen  in  the  writing 
of  his  Apology:  '^  The  Apostles  (saitfa  he)  did  govern  the 
Church  in  Rome,  when  Nero  bare  rule,  even  as  at  this  day 
in  all  the  Church's  dominions :  the  Church  hath  a  spiritual 
Regiment  without  dependance,  and  so  ought  she  to  have 
amongst  Heathens,  or  with  Christians."  Another  occasion 
of  which  misconceit  is.  That  things  appertaining  to  Religion 
are  both  distinguished  from  other  affairs,  and  have  always 
had  in  the  Church  spiritual  persons  chosen  to  be  exercised 
about  them.  By  which  distinction  of  Spiritual  affairs  and 
persons  therein  employed,  from  Temporal,  the  error  of 
Personal  separation  always  necessary  between  the  Church 
and  Commonwealth  hath  strengthened  itself.  For  of  every 
politic  Society  that  being  true  which  Aristotle  saith,  namely, 
**  That  the  scope  thereof  is  not  simply  to  Kve,  nor  the  duty  Anst. 
so  much  to  provide  for  the  life,  as  for  means  of  living  Hb^hi. 
well:"*  and  that  even  as  the  soul  is  the  worthier  part  of*^*^*^* 

Church  of  Christ  is  a  monstrous  anomaly  in  its  economy,  and  miHtates  against  Christ's  doc- 
trine to  NicodemuS)  **  a  Ruler  of  the  Jews/'  Johniii.  1 — 7.] 

♦  [Bishop  Warburton,  in  his  Alliance  between  Church  and  States  Book  II.  chap.  5. 
(Works,  Vol.  IV.  1748.  4to.)  says,  "  Aristotle's  words  are  literally  these,  that  society  was 
instituted  first /or  the  sake  of  livings  simply  ;  and  then  for  the  sake  of  living  happily :  yivofx4vri 
fihf  oZv  Tov  g^p  IvcKci/,  odara  Bi  rev  ed  ^^v,  (Pol.  lib.  i.  c.  2.)  He  is  extremely  concise. 
But  his  meaning  seems  to  be  this,  That  the  primary  end  of  Civil  Society,  was  to  secure  men 
from  that  mutual  violence  to  which  they  are  exposed  in  a  state  of  nature :  the  secondary,  to 
promote  those  accommodeUions  of  life  which  Civil  Society  only  can  bestow.  And  here  I  am 
sorry  to  observe,  that  this  excellent  man,  in  paraphrasing  the  words  of  Aristotle,  so  as  to 


256  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sect.  1. 

maiiy  so  human  Societies  are  much  more  to  care  for  that 
which  tendeth  properly  to  the  soul's  estate,  than  for  such 
temporal  things  which  the  life  hath  need  of:  Other  proof 
[Matt.^  there  needeth  none  to  shew  that  as  by  all  men  the  Kingdom 
of  God  is  to  be  sought  first,  so  in  all  Commonwealths  things 
spiritual  ought  above  temporal  to  be  sought  for;   and  of 
things  spiritual,  the  chiefest  is  Religion.     For  this  cause, 
persons  and  things  employed  peculiarly  about  the  affairs 
of  Religion,  are  by  an  excellency  termed  Spiritual.*     The 
Arut.     Heathens  themselves  had  their  Spiritual  laws,  and  causes, 
ubivi.    and  affairs,   always   severed  from  their  temporal;   neither 
Lmos',  did  this  make  two  independent  estates  among  them.     God 
cap.*io.  by  revealing  true  Religion  doth  make  them  that  receive  it 
his  Church.     Unto  the  Jews  he  so  revealed  the  truth  of 
Religion,  that  he  gave  them  in  special  considerations  Laws, 
not  only  for  the  administration  of  things  spiritual,  but  also 
temporal.     The  Lord  himself  appointing  both  the  one  and 
the  other  in  that  Commonwealth,  did  not  thereby  distract 
it  into  several  independent  communities,  but  institute  several 
functions  of  one  and  the  self-same  community:  some  reasons 
therefore  must  there  be  all  ready  why  it  should  be  other- 
wise in  the  Church  of  Christ. 
Three         I  shall  Hot  uccd  to  spcud  any  great  store  of  words  in 
of  their  answcrfng  that  which  is  brought  out  of  the  Holy  Scripture 
ar^'    to  shew  that  Secular  and  Ecclesiastical  affairs  and  offices 
from'lJSare  distinguished;  neither  that  which  hath  been  borrowed 
encrof  from  antiquity,  using  by  phrase  of  speech  to  oppose  the 
In?"     Commonweal  to  the  Church  of  Christ;   neither  yet  their 
offices,    pgasons  which  are  wont  to  be  brought  forth  as  witnesses, 
that  the  Church  and  Commonweal  were  always  distinct: 
for  whether  a  Church  or  Commonweal  do  differ,  is  not  the 
question  we  strive  for ;  but  our  controversy  is  concerning 
the  kind  of  distinction  whereby  they  are  severed  the  one 
from  the  other ;    whether  as  under  Heathen   Kings   the 
Church  did  deal  with  her  own  affairs  within  herself  without 
depending  at  all  upon  any  in   Civil  Authority,   and   the 
Commonweal  in  hers,  altogether  without  the  privity  of  the 
Church,  so  it  ought  to  continue  still  even  in  such  Common- 
give  a  sense  to  his  purpose  (a  purpose  the  Greek  philosopher  never  thought  of)  has  added, 
*  nor   the  duty  so  much  to  provide  for  the  life/    meaning  this  life."     This   passage  in 
Aristotle  is  also  commented  on  in  Note  •,  Vol.  I.  p.  106.     The  passage  in  cap.  6  referred  to 
by  Hooker  is,  bv  Aristotle  himself,  referred  to  cap.  2.] 
*  fSee  VoLli.  p.  417.] 


Sect.  I.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  257 

weals  as  have  now  publicly  embraced  the  truth  of  Christian 
Religion ;  whether  they  ought  evermore  to  be  two  Societies 
in  such  sort^  several  and  distinct.  I  ask  therefore,  what 
Society  was  that  in  Rome,  whereunto  the  Apostle  did  give 
the  name  of  the  Church  of  Rome  in  his  time?  If  they 
answer  (as  needs  they  must)  that  the  Church  of  Rome  in 
those  days  was  that  whole  Society  of  men  which  in  Rome 
professed  the  name  of  Christ,  and  not  that  Religion  which 
the  Laws  of  the  Commonweal  did  then  authorize ;  we  say  as 
much,  and  therefore  grant  that  the  Commonweal  of  Rome 
was  one  Society,  and  the  Church  of  Rome  another,  in  such 
sort  that  there  was  between  them  no  mutual  dependence. 
But  when  whole  Rome  became  Christian,  where  they  all 
embraced  the  Gospel,  and  made  Laws  in  defence  thereof, 
if  it  be  held  that  the  Church  and  Commonweal  of  Rome 
did  then  remain  as  before,  there  is  no  way  how  this  could 
be  possible,  save  only  one,  and  that  is,  they  must  restrain 
the  name  of  a  Church  in  a  Christian  Commonweal  to  the 
Clergy,  excluding  all  the  rest  of  believers,  both  Prince  and 
people.  For,  if  all  that  believe  be  contained  in  the  name 
of  the  Church,  how  should  the  Church  remain  by  personal 
subsistence  divided  from  the  Commonweal,  when  the  whole 
Commonweal  doth  believe?  The  Church  and  the  Com- 
monweal are  in  this  case  therefore  personally  one  Society, 
which  Society  being  termed  a  Commonweal  as  it  liveth 
under  whatsoever  Form  of  secular  Law  and  Regiment,  a 
Church  as  it  liveth  under  the  spiritual  Law  of  Christ ;  for- 
somuch  as  these  two  Laws  contain  so  many  and  different 
Offices,  there  must  of  necessity  be  appointed  in  it  some  to 
one  charge,  and  some  to  another,  yet  without  dividing  the 
whole  and  making  it  two  several  impaled  Societies.*  The 
difference  therefore  either  of  affairs  or  offices  Ecclesiastical  i  Chron. 
from  Secular,  is  no  argument  that  the  Church  and  Com-  ueb.v.i.' 

*  [In  this  paragraph  the  word  "  Church"  has  two  meanings.  Without  stopping  to 
inquire  what  apostle,  and  where  does  any  apostle  name  "the  church  of  Rome?"  it  is 
granted  by  Hooker,  that  that  church  and  the  commonweal  had  "  no  mutual  dependence." 
But  it  must  indeed  be  seriously  inquired,  When  did  **  all  Rome  embrace  the  Gospel,"  and 
all  become  **  believers,  both  Prince  and  people  ?"  It  may  be  safely  answered,  Never  did 
they  become  that  "  peculiar  people,"  mentioned  Tit  ii.  14.  Again :  the  words  *'  embraced" 
and  **  believed"  must  here  be  understood  in  a  far  different  sense  from  Rom.  x.  8 — 10,  the 
majority  of  no  city  or  province  having  ever  united  the  sincerity  of  confession  and  belief  laid 
down  by  the  Apostle.  A  Church,  then,  not  made  up  principally  of  those  who  thus  confess 
and  believe ;  which  is  the  case  when  the  secular  power  places  all  indiscriminately  within 
the  same  enclosure,  is  not  that  kind  of  Church  which  Christ  and  his  apostles  instituted  and 
approved;  Eph.ii.  20.] 

VOL.  lU.  S 


other. 


258  THE   EIGHTH   BOOK  [Sect.  1. 

monweal  are  always  separate  and  independent  the  one  on 
Allen,    the  other:  which  thing  even  Allen  himself  considering  some- 
p.  151.    what  better,  doth  in  this  point  a  little  correct  his  former 
judgment  beforementioned,  and  confesseth  in  his  Defence  of 
English  Catholics,  that  the  Power  political  hath  her  Princes, 
Laws,  Tribunals ;  the  spiritual,  her  Prelates,  Canons,  Coun- 
cils,  Judgments;   and   those  (when   the   temporal  Princes 
are   Pagans)  wholly  separate;   but  in  Christian  Common- 
weals joined  though  not  confounded.     Howbeit  afterwards 
his  former  sting  appeareth  again;  for  in  a  Commonwealth 
he  holdeth,  that  the  Church  ought  not  to  depend  at  all 
upon  the  Authority  of  any  Civil  person  whatsoever,  as  in 
England  he  saith  it  doth. 
«.  Taken      It  will  be  objccted,  That  the  Fathers  do  oftentimes  men- 
speeches  tion  the  Commonweal  and  the  Church  of  God  by  way  of 
Fathers  oppositiou.*     Can  the   same  thing  be   opposed  to  itself? 
singth*  If  one  and  the  same  Society  be  both  Church  and  Com- 
^e*  ^    monwealth,  what  sense  can  there  be  in  that  speech,  "  That 
they  suffer  and  flourish  together?"     What  sense   is   that 
which  maketh  one  thing  to  be  adjudged  to  the  Church, 
and  another  to  the  Commonwealth  ?     Finally,  in  that  which 
putteth  a  difference  between  the  causes  of  the  Province 
and  the  Church,  doth  it  not  hereby  appear  that  the  Church 
and  the  Commonweal  are  things  evermore  personally  sepa- 
rate?    No,  it  doth  not  hereby  appear  that  there  is  per- 
petually any  such  separation;   we  speak  of  them  as  two, 
we  may  sever  the  rights  and  the  causes  of  the  one  well 
enough  from  the  other,  in  regard  of  that  difference  which 
we  grant  is  between  them,   albeit  we  make  no  personal 
difference.     For   the   truth   is,   that  the  Church   and  the 
Commonwealth  are  Names  which  import  things  really  dif- 
ferent ;  but  those  things  are  accidents,  and  such  accidents 
as  may,  and  always  should,  lovingly  dwell  together  in  one 
subject.     Wherefore  the  real  difference  between  the  acci- 
dents signified  by  these  Names,  doth  not  prove  different 
subjects  for  them  always   to  reside   in.      For  albeit    the 
subjects  wherein  they  be  resident  be  sometimes  different,  as 
when  the  people  of  God  have  their  residence  among  Infidels ; 
yet  the  nature  of  them  is  not  such  but  that  their  subject  may 
be  one,  and  therefore  it  is  but  a  changeable  accident,  in 

*  Euseb.  de  Vita  Constant,  lib.  iii.    Aug.  £p.  167. 


Sect.  1.]  OP  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  259 

those  accidents  they  are  to  be  divers.     There  can  be  no 
error  in  our  conceit  concerning  this  point,  if  we  remember 
still  what  accident  that  is  for  which  a  Society  hath  the  name 
of  a  Commonwealth,  and  what  accident  that  which  doth 
cause  it  to  be  termed  a  Church :  a  Commonwealth  we  name 
it  simply  in  regard  of  some  Regiment  of  PoUcy  under  which 
men  live;  a  Church  for  the  truth  of  that  Religion  which 
they  profess.      Now  Names    betokening    accidents  inab- 
stracted,  betoken  not  only  the  accidents  themselves,  .but 
also  together  with  them   subjects  whereunto  they  cleave. 
As  when  we  name  a  Schoolmaster  and  a  Physician,  those 
names  do  not  only  betoken  two  accidents,  teaching  and 
curing,  but  also  some  person   or  persons  in  whom   those 
accidents  are.     For  there  is  no  impediment  but  both  may 
be  in  one  man,  as  well  as  they  are  for  the  most  part  [in] 
divers.     The  Commonweal  and  the  Church  therefore  being 
such  names,  they  do  not  only  betoken  these  accidents  of 
Civil  Government   and  Christian  Religion  which  we  have 
mentioned,  but  also  together  with  them  such  multitudes  as 
are  the  subjects  of  those  accidents.     Again,  their  Nature 
being  such  as  they  may  well  enough  dwell  together  in  one 
subject,  it  foUoweth  that  their  Names,  though  always  im- 
plying that  difference  of  accidents  that  hath  been  set  down, 
yet  do  not  always  imply  different  subjects  also.     When  we 
oppose  therefore  the  Church  and   the  Commonwealth  in 
Christian   Society,  we  mean   by  the   Commonwealth   that 
Society  with  relation  to  all  the  public  affairs  thereof,  only 
the  matter  of  true  Religion  excepted ;  by  the  Church,  the 
same  Society  with  only  reference  unto  the  matter  of  true 
Religion,  without  any  affairs:   besides,  when  that  Society 
which  is  both  a  Church  and  a  Commonwealth  doth  flourish 
in  those  things  which  belong  to  it  as  a  Commonwealth,  we 
then  say,  the  Commonwealth  doth  flourish;  when  in  both 
them,   we   then   say,   the  Church  and  Commonwealth  do 
flourish  together.     The  Prophet  Esay  to  note  corruptions  isai.  i. 
in  the  Commonwealth  complaineth,   "  That  where  justice    ' 
and  judgment  had  lodged  now  were  murtherers:   Princes 
were  become  companions  of  thieves;  every  one  loved  gifts 
and  rewards;  but  the  fatherless  was  not  judged,  neither  did 
the  widow's  cause  come  before  them."    To  shew  abuses  in 
the  Church,  Malachy  doth  make  his  complaint :  "  Ye  offer  Mai.  i. 
unclean  bread  upon  mine  altar:  if  ye  offer  the  blind  for  '  * 

sS 


260  THE   EIGHTH   BOOK  [SecL  1. 

sacrifice^  it  is  not  evil  as  ye  think  ;  if  the  lame  and  the  sick, 
1  chron.  nothing  is  amiss."     The  treasure  which  David  bestowed 
^  '  upon  the  Temple  did  argue  the  love  which  he  bare  unto  the 
Nehem.  Church :  the  pains  which  Nehemiah  took  for  building  the 
walls  of  the  City  are  tokens  of  his  care  for  the  Common- 
wealth.    Causes  of  the  Commonwealth,  or  Province,   are 
Acts      such  as  Gallio  was  content  to  be  judge  of:  ^^  If  it  were 
'a  matter  of  wrong,  or  an  evil  deed  (O  ye  Jews),  I  would 
according  to  reason  maintain  you:"  causes  of  the  Church 
ver.  15.  are  such  as  Gallio  there  reciteth ;  **  If  it  be  a  question  of 
your  Law,  look  ye  to  it,  I  will  be  no  judge  thereof."    In 
respect   of  this  difference  therefore  the  Church  and  the 
Commonwealth  may  in  speech  be  compared  or  opposed 
aptly  enough  the  one  to  the  other ;  yet  this  is  no  argument 
that  they  are  two  independent  Societies. 
3.  Taken      Somc  othcT  Tcasous  there  are  which  seem  a  little  more 
effector  nearly  to  make  for  the  purpose,  as  long  as  they  are  but 
nentia-  heard  and  not  sifted.   For  what  though  a  man  being  severed 
by  the    by  Excommunicatiou  from  the  Church,  be  not  thereby  de- 
thl^  **'    prived  of  freedom  in  the  City,  or  being  there  discommoned, 
^^^^'    is  not  therefore  forthwith  excommunicated  and  excluded 
the  Church  ?  what  though  the  Church  be  bound  to  receive 
them  upon  repentance,  whom  the  Commonweal  may  refuse 
again  to  admit  ?^  if  it  chance  the  same  man  to  be  shut  out 
of  both,  division  of  the  Church  and  Commonweal,  which 
they  contend  for,  will  very  hardly  hereupon  follow :  for  we 
must  note,  that  members  of  a  Christian  Commonweal  have  a 
triple  state ;  a  Natural,  a  Civil,  and  a  Spiritual.     No  man's 
Natural  estate  is   cut  off  otherwise  than  by  that  capital 
execution :  after  which,  he  that  is  none  of  the  Body  of  the 
Commonwealth  doth  not,  I  think,  remain  fit  in  the  Body  of 
that  visible  Church.     And  concerning  man's  Civil  estate^ 
the  same  is  subject  partly  to  inferior  abatements  of  liberty, 

*  [^*  A  man  may  by  Excommunication  be  sundered  from  the  Church,  which  forthwith 
loseth  not  of  necessity  his  burghership  or  freedom  in  the  City  or  Commonwealth.  Likewise 
the  Civil  Magistrate  may,  by  banishment,  cut  o£f  a  man  from  being  a  member  of  the  Com- 
monwealth, whom  the  Church  cannot  by  and  by  cast  out  by  Excommunication.  Again, 
when  one  is  for  his  misbehaviour  deprived  of  his  privileges,  both  in  the  Church  and  Common- 
wealth ;  albeit  the  Church  be,  upon  his  repentance,  bound  to  receive  him  in  again  as  a 
member  thereof,  yet  the  Commonwealth  is  at  her  liberty  whether  she  will  restore  him  or  no. 
Finally,  Infidels  under  a  Christian  Prince  may,  until  such  dme  as  they  refuse  instruction,  be 
members  of  the  Commonwealth,  yet  are  they  not  therefore  members  of  the  Church :  where, 
if  the  Church  and  Commonwealth  were,  as  he  (Dr.  W.)  saith,  *  all  one,*  it  should  follow, 
that  whosoever  is  a  part  of  one  should  needs  be  a  part  of  the  other;  and  contrariwise,  who- 
joever  is  cut  off  from  one,  must  be  cut  off  from  the  other/'     T.  C.  lib.  iii.  p.  151.] 


Sect.  1.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  261 

and  partly  to  diminution  in  the  highest  degree,   such  as 
banishment  is ;  sith  it  casteth  out  quite  and  clean  from  the 
Body  of  the  Commonweal,  it  must  needs  also  consequently 
cast  the  banished  party  even  out  of  the  very  Church  he  was 
of  before,  because  that  Church  and  the  Commonweal  he 
-was  of  were  both  one  and  the  same' Society:  so  that  what- 
soever doth  utterly  separate  a  man's  person  from  the  one, 
it  separateth  from  the  other  also.     As  for  such  abatements 
of  Civil  estate  as  take  away  only  some  privilege,  dignity,  or 
other  benefit  which  a  man  enjoy eth  in  the  Commonweal, 
they  reach  only  to  our  dealing  with  public  affairs,   from 
which  what  may  let  but  that  men  may  be  excluded  and 
thereunto  restored  again  without  diminishing  or  augmenting 
the  number  of  persons  in  whom  either  Church  or  Common- 
wealth consisteth  ?     He  that  by  way  of  punishment  loseth 
his  voice  in  a  public  election  of  Magistrates,  ceaseth  not 
thereby  to  be  a  citizen.     A  man  disfranchised  may  notwith- 
standing enjoy  as  a  subject  the  common  benefit  of  pro- 
tection under  Laws  and  Magistrates.     So  that  these  inferior 
diminutions  which  touch  men  civilly,  but  neither  do  clean 
extinguish  their  estates  as  they  belong  to  the  Commonwealth, 
nor  impair  a  whit  their  condition  as  they  are  of  the  Church 
of  God ;  these,  I  say,  do  clearly  prove  a  difference  of  the 
one  from  the  other,  but  such  a  difference  as  maketh  nothing 
for  their  surmise  of  distracted  Societies. 

And  concerning  Excommunication,  it  cutteth  off  indeed 
from  the  Church,  and  yet  not  from  the  Commonwealth; 
howbeit  so,  that  the  party  excommunicate  is  not  thereby 
severed  from  one  Body  which  subsisteth  in  itself,  and  re- 
tained by  another  in  like  sort  subsisting ;  but  he  which  before 
had  fellowship  with  that  Society  whereof  he  was  a  member, 
as  well  touching  things  Spiritual  as  Civil,  is  now  by  force  of 
Excommunication,  although  not  severed  from  the  Body  in 
Civil  affairs,  nevertheless  for  the  time  cut  off  from  it  as 
touching  communion  in  those  things  which  belong  to  the 
same  Body,  as  it  is  the  Church.  A  man  having  been  both 
excommunicated  by  the  Church,  and  deprived  of  Civil 
dignity  in  the  Commonwealth,  is  upon  his  repentance  ne- 
cessarily reunited  into  the  one,  but  not  of  necessity  into  the 
other.  What  then?  that  which  he  is  admitted  unto  is  a 
communion  in  things  divine,  whereof  both  parts  are  par- 
takers ;  that  from  which  he  is  withheld  is  the  benefit  of  some 


262  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sect.  !• 

human  privilege  or  right  which  other  citizens  happily  enjoy. 
But  are  not  these  saints  and  citizens  one  and  the  same 
people?  are  they  not  one  and  the  same  society?  doth  it 
hereby  appear  that  the  Church  which  received  an  Excom- 
municate, can  have  no  dependency  on  any  person  which 
hath  chief  authority  and   power  of  these   things  in  the 
Commonwealth  whereunto  the  same  party  is  not  admitted  ? 
Wherefore  to  end  this  point,  I  conclude,  first,  That  under 
the  dominions  of  Infidels  the  Church  of  Christ  and  their 
Commonwealth  were  two  Societies  independent.     Secondly, 
that  in  those  Commonwealths,  where  the  Bishop  of  Rome 
beareth  sway,  one  Society  is  both  the  Church  and  the  Com- 
monwealth ;  but  the  Bishop  of  Rome  doth  divide  the  Body 
into  two  divers  bodies,  and  doth  not  suffer  the  Church  to 
depend  upon  the  power  of  any  Civil  Prince  and  Potentate. 
Thirdly,  that  within  this  Realm  of  England  the  case  is 
neither  as  in  the  one,  nor  as  in  the  other  of  the  former  two : 
but  from  the  state  of  Pagans  we  differ,  in  that  with  us  one 
Society  is  both  the  Church  and  Commonwealth,  which  with 
them  it  was  not;  as  also  from  the  state  of  those  nations 
which  subjected  themselves  to  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  in  that 
our  Church  hath  dependence  from  the  Chief  in  our  Common- 
wealth, which  it  hath  not  when  he  is  suffered  to  rule.     In 
a  word,  our  state  is  according  to  the  pattern  of  God's  own 
ancient  elect  people,  which  people  was  not  part  of  them  the 
Commonwealth,  and  part  of  them  the  Church  of  God,  but 
the  self-same  people  whole  and  entire  were  both  under  one 
chief  Governor  on  whose  supreme  authority  they  did  all 
depend.     Now  the  drift  of  all  that  hath  been  alleged  to 
prove  perpetual  separation  and  independency  between  the 
Church   and  the  Commonwealth  is,   that  this  being  held 
necessary,  it  might  consequently  be  thought  fit,  that  in  a 
Christian  Kingdom  he  whose  power  is  greatest  over  the 
Commonwealth,  may  not  lawfully  have  Supremacy  of  Power 
also  over  the  Church,  that  is  to  say,  so  far  as  to  order 
thereby  and  to  dispose  of  Spiritual  affairs,  so  far  as  the 
highest  uncommanded-Commander  in  them.     Whereupon  it 
is  grown  a  question.  Whether  Government  Ecclesiastical, 
and  Power  of  Dominion  in  such  degrees  as  the  Laws  of  this 
Land  do  grant  unto  the  Sovereign  Governor  thereof,  may 
by  the   said  Supreme  Governor  lawfully  be   enjoyed   and 
%.f^^'    held  ?     For  resolution  wherein,  we  are,  first,  to  define  what 


Sect.  2.]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  263 

the  Power  of  Dominion  is  \  secondly,  then  to  shew  by  what 
Right ;  thirdly,  after  what  Sort ;  fourthly,  in  what  Measure ; 
fifthly,  in  what  Inconveniency.     According  to  whose  Ex-[*3 
ample  Christian  Kings   may  have  it.     And  when  these 
generals  are  opened,   to  examine  afterwards  how  Lawful 
that  is  which  we  in  regard  of  Dominion  do  attribute  unto 
our  own :  namely,  the  Title  of  Headship  over  the  Church,  [4.1 
so  far  as  the  bounds  of  this  Kingdom  do  reach :  secondly,  [5.] 
the  Prerogative  of  calling  and  dissolving  great  assemblies, 
about  spiritual  affairs  public :  thirdly,  the  right  of  Assenting  [6.] 
unto  all  those  Orders  concerning  Religion,  which  must  after 
be  in  force  as  Law :  fourthly,  the  advancement  of  principal  PO 
Church-governors  to  their  rooms  of  Prelacy :  fifthly.  Judicial  [8-3 
Authority  higher  than  others  are  capable  of:  and  sixthly,  C^l 
Exemption  from  being  punishable  with  such  kind  of  censures 
as  the  Platform  of  Reformation  doth  teach  that  they  ought 
to  be  subject  unto. 

2.  Without  Order  there  is  no  living  in  public  Society,  Whatthe 
because  the  want  thereof  is  the  mother  of  confusion,  where-  of  Do- 
upon  division  of  necessity  followeth ;  and  out  of  division  ii. 
destruction.*  The  Apostle,  therefore,  giving  instruction  i  coj. 
to  public  Societies,  requireth  that  all  things  be  orderly  done. 
Order  can  have  no  place  in  things,  except  it  be  settled 
amongst  the  persons  that  shall  by  ofiice  be  conversant  about 
them :  and  if  things  and  persons  be  ordered,  this  doth  imply 
that  they  are  distinguished  by  degrees :  for  Order  is  a  gra- 
dual disposition.  The  whole  world  consisting  of  parts  so 
many,  so  different,  is  by  this  only  thing  upheld ;  he  which 
framed  them,  hath  set  them  in  order.  The  very  Deity  itself 
both  keepeth  and  requireth  for  ever  this  to  be  kept  as  a 
Law,  that  wheresoever  there  is  a  coagmentation  of  many, 
the  lowest  be  knit  unto  the  highest  by  that  which  being 
interjacent  may  cause  each  to  cleave  to  the  other,  and  so  all 
to  continue  one.  This  order  of  things  and  persons  in  public 
Societies  is  the  work  of  Policy,  and  the  proper  instrument 
thereof  in  every  degree  is  Power ;  Power  being  that  ability 
which  we  have  of  ourselves,  or  receive  from  others  for  per- 
formance of  any  action.  If  the  action  which  we  have  to 
perform  be  conversant  about  matters  of  mere  Religion,  the 
Power  of  performing  it  is  then  Spiritual ;  and  if  that  Power 

*  Lukexi.  17. 


264  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Seci.  2. 

be  such  as  hath  not  any  other  to  over-rule  it,  we  term  it 
Dominion  or  Power  supreme^  so  far  as  the  bounds  thereof 
extend.     When  therefore  Christian  Kings  are  said  to  have 
Spiritual   Dominion    or    supreme   Power   in   Ecclesiastical 
affairs  and  causes^  the  meaning  is,  that  within  their  own 
precincts  and  territories  they  have  an  authority  and  power 
to  command  even  in  matters  of  Christian  Religion,  and  that 
there  is  no  higher  nor  greater  that  can  in  those  cases  over- 
command  them,  where  they  are  placed  to  reign  as  Kings. 
But  withal  we  must  likewise  note  that  their  Power  is  termed 
Supremacy,  as  being  the  highest,  not  simply  without  ex- 
ception of  any  thing.     For  what  man  is  so  brain-sick,  as  not 
to  except  in  such  speeches  God  himself,  the  King  of  all 
Dominion  ?  Who  doubteth  but  that  the  King  who  receiveth 
it  must  hold  it  of,  and  order  the  Law  according  to  that  old 
axiom,  "  Attribuat  Rex  Legi,  quod  Lex  attribuit   ei  po- 
testatem :"  and  again,  "  Rex  non  debet  esse  sub  homine, 
sed  sub  Deo  et  Lege."    Thirdly,  whereas  it  is  altogether 
without  reason,  "  that  Kings  are  judged  to  have  by  virtue 
of  their  Dominion,  although  greater  Power  than  any,  yet 
not  than  all  the  state  of  those  Societies  conjoined,  wherein 
such  sovereign  Rule  is  given  them ;"  there  is  not  any  thing 
hereunto  to  the  contrary  by  us  afSrmed,  no,  not  when  we 
grant  supreme  Authority  unto  Kings ;  because  Supremacy 
is  not  otherwise  intended  or  meant  to  exclude  partly  foreign 
Powers  and  partly  the  Power  which  belongeth  in  several 
unto  others,  contained  as  parts  in  that  politic  Body  over 
which  those  Kings  have  Supremacy:  "  Where  the  King 
hath  Power   of  Dominion,   or   supreme  Power,   there  no 
foreign  State  or  Potentate,  no  State  or  Potentate  domestical, 
whether  it  consisteth  of  one  or  many,  can  possibly  have  in 
the  same  affairs  and  causes  Authority  higher  than  the  King.'* 
Power  of  Spiritual  Dominion  therefore  is  in  causes  Ecclesi- 
astical that  ruling  Authority  which  neither  any  foreign  State 
nor  yet  any  part  of  that  politic  Body  at  home,. wherein  the 
same  is  established,  can  lawfully  over-rule.     It  hath  been 
declared  already  in  general  how  '^  the  best  established  Do- 
minion is  where  the  Law  doth  most  rule  the  King:"  the  true 
effect  whereof  particularly  is  found  as  well  in  Ecclesiastical 
as  Civil  affairs.     In  these  the  King,  through  his  Supreme 
Power,  may  do  sundry  great  things  himself,  both  appertain- 
ing to  peace  and  war,  both  at  home,  and  by  command^  and 


Sect.  2.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  265 

by  commerce  with  States  abroad,  because  the  Law  doth  so 
much  permit.  Sometimes  on  the  other  side,  "  The  King 
alone  hath  no  right  to  do  without  consent  of  his  Lords  and 
Commons  in  Parliament:  the  King  himself  cannot  change 
the  nature  of  pleas,  nor  courts,  no  not  so  much  as  restore 
blood,"  because  the  Law  is  a  bar  unto  him;  the  positive 
Laws  of  the  Realm  have  a  privilege  therein,  and  restrain 
the  King's  Power ;  which  positive  Laws,  whether  by  custom 
or  otherwise  established  without  repugnancy  to  the  Laws  of 
God  and  Nature,  ought  not  less  to  be  in  force  even  in  super- 
natural affairs  of  the  Church,  whether  \wherefore\  in  regard 
of  Ecclesiastical  Laws,  we  willingly  embrace  that  of  Ambrose, 
*^  Imperator  bonus  intra  Ecclesiam,  non  supra  Ecclesiam, 
est;  Kings  have  Dominion  to  exercise  in  Ecclesiastical 
causes,  but  according  to  the  Laws  of  the  Church ;"  whether 
it  be  therefore  the  nature  of  Courts,  or  the  form  of  Pleas, 
or  the  kind  of  Governors,  or  the  order  of  proceeding  in 
whatsoever  business,  for  the  received  Laws  and  Liberty  of 
the  Church  "  the  King  hath  Supreme  Authority  and  Power, 
but  against  them  never."  What  such  positive  Laws  have 
appointed  to  be  done  by  others  than  the  King,  or  by  others 
with  the  King,  and  in  what  form  they  have  appointed  the 
doing  of  it,  the  same  of  necessity  must  be  kept ;  neither  is 
the  King's  sole  Authority  to  alter  it :  yet,  as  it  were  a  thing 
unreasonable,  if  in  Civil  affairs  the  King,  albeit  the  whole 
universal  Body  did  join  with  him,  should  do  any  thing  by 
their  absolute  Power  for  the  ordering  of  their  State  at  home, 
in  prejudice  of  those  ancient  Laws  of  Nations  which  are  of 
force  throughout  all  the  world,  because  the  necessary  com- 
merce of  Kingdoms  dependeth  on  them ;  so  in  principal  mat- 
ters belonging  to  Christian  Religion  a  thing  very  scandalous 
and  offensive  it  must  needs  be  thought,  if  either  Kings  or 
Laws  should  dispose  of  the  Law  of  God,  without  any  respect 
had  unto  that  which  of  old  hath  been  reverently  thought  of 
throughout  the  world,  and  wherein  there  is  no  Law  of  God 
which  forceth  us  to  swerve  from  the  ways  wherein  so  many 
and  holy  ages  have  gone.  Wherefore  not  without  good  con- 
sideration the  very  Law  itself  hath  provided,  "  That  Judges 
Ecclesiastical  appointed  under  the  King's  Commission  shall 
not  adjudge  for  Heresy  any  thing  but  that  which  heretofore 
hath  been  adjudged  by  the  Authority  of  the  Canonical 
Scriptures,  or  by  the  first  four  General  Councils,  or  by 


266  THE   EIGHTH   BOOK  [Sect.  2. 

some  other  General  Council  wherein  the  same  hath  been 
declared  Heresy  by  the  express  words  of  the  said  Canonical 
Scriptures,  or  such  as  hereafter  shall  be  determined  to  be 
Heresy  by  the  High  Court  of  Parliament  of  this  Realm, 
with  the  assent  of  the  Clergy  in  the  Convocation:"  An.  1. 
Reg.  Eliz.  By  which  words  of  the  Law,  who  doth  not 
plainly  see,  how  that  in  one  branch  of  proceeding  by  virtue 
of  the  King's  supreme  Authority,  the  credit  which  those 
four  first  General  Councils  have  throughout  all  Churches, 
and  evermore  had,  was  judged  by  the  making  of  the  foresaid 
Act  a  just  cause  wherefore  they  should  be  mentioned  in  that 
case,  as  a  requisite  part  of  that  Rule  wherewith  Dominion 
was  to  be  limited?  But  of  this  we  shall  further  consider 
when  we  come  unto  that  which  Sovereign  Power  may  do  in 
making  Ecclesiastical  Laws. 
The  Unto  which  Supreme  Power  in  Kings  two  kinds  of  adver- 

whfch  saries  there  are  which  have  opposed  themselves :  one  sort 
S5S,  defending,  "  That  supreme  Power  in  causes  Ecclesiastical 
ratifies,  throughout  the  world  appertaineth  of  Divine  Right  to  the 
Bishop  of  Rome  :"  another  sort,  "  That  the  said  Power  be- 
longing in  every  National  Church  unto  the  Clergy  thereof 
assembled.*'  We  which  defend  as  well  against  the  one  as 
against  the  other,  "  That  Kings  within  their  own  precincts 
may  have  it,"  must  shew  by  what  Right  it  must  come  unto 
them.  First,  unto  me  it  seemeth  almost  out  of  doubt  and 
controversy,  that  every  independent  multitude,  before  any 
certain  Form  of  Regiment  established,  hath,  under  God, 
Supreme  Authority,  full  Dominion  over  itself,*  even  as  a 
man  not  tied  with  the  band  of  subjection  as  yet  unto  any 
other,  hath  over  himself  the  like  power.f  God  creating 
mankind  did  endue  it  naturally  with  Power  to  guide  itself  in 
what  kind  of  Society  soever  he  should  choose  to  live.  A 
man  which  is  born  lord  of  himself  may  be  made  another's 
servant. J  And  that  Power  which  naturally  whole  Societies 
have,  may  be  derived  unto  many,  few,  or  one ;  under  whom 

•  [See  R.  Baxter's  Christian  Directory,  Part  IV.  or  Christian  Politics,  chap.  iii.  §  13.] 
f  ["  It  is  Bodin's  opinion  (de  Rep.  lib.  ii.  c.  1.)  That  in  the  Roman  State  the  govern- 
ment was  in  the  Magistrates ;  the  authority  and  council,  in  the  Senate ;  but  the  sovereign 
power  and  majesty,  in  the  People."  Sir  Rob.  Filmer's  Political  Works,  1680.  8vo.  p.  121. 
"  Bodin's  Six  Books  of  a  Commonwealth,  translated  by  Richard  Knolles,  1606 :  a  work 
replete  with  the  practical  knowledge  of  Politics,  and  of  which  Mr.  Dugald  Stewart  has  deli- 
vered a  high  opinion."  D*lsRAELi*s  Curiosities  of  Lit.  2nd  Series.  1823.  8vo.  vol.  ii.  p.  272. 
"  Plebis  intus  positae  fidelis  atquse  incorrupta  majestas."  Cypr.  Ep.  lix.] 
X  [See  Baxter,  §  14.  ut  sup.'] 


Sect.  2.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  267 

the  rest  shall  then  live  in  subjection.  Some  multitudes  are 
brought  into  subjection  by  force,  as  they  who  being  sub- 
dued are  fain  to  submit  their  necks  unto  what  yoke  it 
pleaseth  their  conquerors  to  lay  upon  them ;  which  con- 
querors by  just  and  lawful  wars  do  hold  their  Power  over 
such  multitudes  as  a  thing  descending  unto  them;  Divine 
Providence  itself  so  disposing.  For  it  is  God  who  giveth 
victory  in  the  day  of  war :  and  unto  whom  Dominion  in  this 
sort  is  derived,  the  same  they  enjoy  according  to  the  Law 
of  Nations,  which  Law  authorizeth  Conquerors  to  reign  as 
absolute  Lords  over  them  whom  they  vanquish.  Sometimes 
it  pleaseth  God  himself  by  special  appointment  to  choose 
out  and  nominate  such  as  to  whom  Dominion  shall  be  given, 
which  thing  he  did  often  in  the  Commonwealth  of  Israel.* 
They  which  in  this  sort  receive  Power  immediately  from 
God,  have  it  by  mere  Divine  Right :  they  by  Human,  on 
whom  the  same  is  bestowed  according  to  men's  discretion, 
when  they  are  left  freely  by  God  to  make  choice  of  their 
own  Governors.  By  which  of  these  means  soever  it  happen 
that  Kings  or  Governors  be  advanced  unto  their  estates,  we 
must  acknowledge  both  their  lawful  choice  to  be  approved 
of  God,  and  themselves  to  be  God's  Lieutenants,  and  confess 
their  Power  which  they  have  to  be  his.  As  for  Supreme 
Power  in  Ecclesiastical  affairs,  the  Word  of  God  doth  no 
where  appoint  that  all  Kings  should  have  it,  neither  that  any 
should  not  have  it ;  for  which  cause  it  seemeth  to  stand  alto- 
gether by  Human  Right,  that  unto  Christian  Kings  there  is 
such  Dominion  given. 

Again,  on  whom  the  same  is  bestowed  at  men's  discretions, 
they  likewise  do  hold  it  by  Divine  Right.f  If  God  in  his  re- 
vealed Word  hath  appointed  such  Power  to  be,  although 

*  "  Corona  est  potestas  delegata  a  Deo."     Bracton. 

f  ["  St  Paul  has  said,  *  Whosoever  resisteth  the  power,  resisteth  the  ordinance  of  God,' 
Rom.  xiii.  2.  This  phrase,  '  the  ordinance  of  God,'  is  by  many  so  interpreted  as  to  authorize 
the  most  exalted  and  superstitious  ideas  of  the  regal  character.  But,  surely,  such  interpreters 
have  sacrificed  truth  to  adulation.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  expression  as  used  by  St.  Paul, 
is  just  as  applicable  to  one  kind  of  Government,  and  to  one  kind  of  Succession,  as  to  another; 
to  the  elective  Magistrates  of  a  pure  Republic,  as  to  an  absolute  hereditary  Monarch.  In  the 
next  place,  it  is  not  afSrmed  of  the  Supreme  magistrate  exclusively,  that  he  is  the  ordinance 
of  God ;  die  title,  whatever  it  imports,  belongs  to  every  Inferior  officer  of  the  State  as  much 
as  to  the  highest.  The  Divine  Right  of  Kings,  is,  like  the  divine  right  of  other  magistrates,  the 
Law  of  the  Land,  or  even  actual  and  quiet  possession  of  their  office ;  a  right  ratified,  we 
humbly  presume,  by  the  Divine  approbation,  so  long  as  obedience  to  their  authority  appears 
to  be  necessary  or  conducive  to  the  common  welfare.  Princes  are  ordained  of  God  by  virtue 
only  of  that  general  decree,  by  which  he  assents,  and  adds  the  sanction  of  his  will,  to  every 
Law  of  Society,  which  promotes  his  own  purpose — the  communication  of  human  happiness : 


268  '^^^  EIGHTH  BOOK  [SecL  2. 

himself  extraordinarily  bestow  it  not,  but  leave  the  appoint- 
ment of  persons  to  men ;  yea  albeit  God  do  neither  appoint 
nor  assign  the  person,  nevertheless  when  men  have  assigned 
and  established  both,  who  doth  doubt  but  that  sundry  duties 
and  affairs  depending  thereupon  are  prescribed  by  the  Word 
of  God,  and  consequently  by  that  very  Right  to  be  exacted  ? 
For  example'  sake,  the  Power  which  Roman  Emperors  had 
over  foreign  Provinces  was  not  a  thing  which  the  Law  of 
God  did  ever  institute;  neither  was  Tiberius  Caesar  by 
especial  commission  from  Heaven  therewith  invested,  and 
yet  payment  of  tribute  unto  Caesar,  being  now  made  Em- 
peror, is  the  plain  Law  of  Jesus  Christ  :*  unto  Kings  by 
Human  Right,  Honour  by  very  Divine  Right,  is  due ;  man's 
Ordinances  are  many  times  proposed  as  grounds  in  the 
Statutes  of  God.  And  therefore  of  what  kind  soever  the 
means  be  whereby  Governors  are  lawfully  advanced  to  their 
States,  as  we  by  the  Laws  of  God  stand  bound  meekly  to 
acknowledge  them  for  God's  Lieutenants,  and  to  confess 
their  Power  his,  so  by  the  same  Law  they  are  both  autho- 
rized and  required  to  use  that  Power  as  far  as  it  may  be  in 
any  State  available  to  his  honour.  The  Law  appointeth  no 
man  to  be  a  husband,  but  if  a  man  hath  betaken  himself  unto 
that  condition,  it  giveth  him  power  and  authority  over  his 
own  wife.  That  the  Christian  world  should  be  ordered  by 
the  Kingly  Regiment,  the  Law  of  God  doth  not  any  where 
command ;  and  yet  the  Law  of  God  doth  give  them,  which 
once  are  exalted  unto  that  place  of  estate,  Right  to  exact  at 
the  hands  of  their  subjects  general  obedience  in  whatsoever 
affairs  their  Power  may  serve  to  command,  and  God  doth 
ratify  works  of  that  sovereign  Authority  which  Kings  have 
received  by  men.  This  is  therefore  the  Right  whereby 
Kings  do  hold  their  Power ;  but  yet  in  what  sort  the  same 
doth  rest  and  abide  in  them  it  somewhat  behoveth  further 
to  search ;  wherein  that  we  be  not  enforced  to  make  over- 
large  discourses  about  the  different  conditions  of  sovereign 
or  supreme  Power,  that  which  we  speak  of  Kings  shall  be 


according  to  which  idea  of  their  origin  and  constitution  (and  without  any  repugnancy  to  the 
words  of  St.  Paul),  they  are  by  St.  Peter  denominated  the  *  ordinance  of  man.*  1  Pet.  ii.  13." 
The  Principles  of  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy,  By  W.  Paley,  D.  D.  Archdeacon  of 
Carlisle.  1803.  8vo.  Vol.  II.  Bk.  vi.  chap.iv.  p.  165.] 

♦  ["  If  Caesar  were  a  Usurper,  paying  tribute  owned  not  his  Right,  any  more  than  contri- 
bution to  conquering  soldiers :  a  man  may  buy  his  life  or  peace  of  a  robber."  Baxter's 
ParapJirase,  1695.  8vo.  in  Matt.xxii.  21.] 


Sect.  2.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  269 

in  respect  of  the  State,  and  according  to  the  nature  of  this 
Kingdom,  where  the  people  are  in  no  subjection,  but  such 
as  willingly  themselves  have  condescended  unto  for  their 
own  most  behoof  and  security.  In  Kingdoms  therefore  of 
this  quality  the  highest  Governor  hath  indeed  universal 
Dominion,  but  with  dependency  upon  that  whole  entire 
Body,  over  the  several  parts  whereof  he  hath  Dominion ;  so 
that  it  standeth  for  an  axiom  in  this  case.  The  King  is 
**  major  singulis,  universis  minor."*  The  King's  dependency 
we  do  not  construe  as  some  have  done,  who.  are  of  opinion 
that  no  man's  birth  can  make  him  a  King,  but  every  parti- 
cular person  advanced  to  such  Authority  hath  at  his  entrance 
into  his  Reign  the  same  bestowed  on  him,  as  an  estate  in 
condition,  by  the  voluntary  deed  of  the  people,  in  whom  it 
doth  lie  to  put  by  any  one,  and  to  prefer  some  other  before 
him  better  liked  of,  or  judged  fitter  for  the  place,  and  that 
the  party  so  rejected  hath  no  injury  done  unto  him,  no,  al- 
though the  same  be  done  in  a  place  where  the  Crown  doth 
go  hid  yevog,  by  succession,  and  to  a  person  which  is  capital, 
and  hath  apparently,  if  blood  be  respected,  the  nearest  right. 
They  plainly  affirm,  in  all  well  -  appointed  Kingdoms,  the  Jnoins 
custom  evermore  hath  been,  and  is,  that  children  succeed  vlndi^!^ 
not^  their  parents  till  the  People  after  a  sort  have  created  ^' 
them  anew,  neither  that  they  grow  to  their  fathers  as  na- 
tural and  proper  heirs,  but  are  then  to  be  reckoned  for 
Kings  when  at  the  hands  of  such  as  represent  the  King's 
Majesty,  they  have  by  a  sceptre  and  a  diadem  received  as  it 
were  the  investiture  of  Kingly  Power.  Their  very  words  Page  85. 
are,  "  That  where  such  Power  is  settled  into  a  family  or 
kindred,  the  stock  is  thereby  chosen,  but  not  the  twig  that 
springeth  of  it  The  next  of  the  stock  unto  him  that  reigneth 
are  not  through  nearness  of  blood  made  Kings,  but  rather 
set  forth  to  stand  for  the  Kingdom :  where  Regal  Dominion 
is  hereditary,  it  is  notwithstanding  (if  we  look  to  the  persons 
which  have  it)  altogether  elective."  To  this  purpose  are 
selected  heaps  of  Scriptures  concerning  the  solemn  Coro- 
nation or  Inauguration  of  Saul,  of  David,  of  Solomon, 
and  others,  by  the  Nobles,   Ancients,  and  people  of  the 

•  [See  Baxter's  Christ.  Direc.  §  15.  uL  sup.'] 

f  [Vindiciae  contra  Tyrannos,  sive  de  Principis  in  Populum,  Populique  in  Prindpem 
Legitima  potestate.  Edin.  1579,  12mo.  Though  published  under  the  name  of  Stephanus 
Junius  Brutus,  and  bearing  the  imprint  of  Edinburgh,  its  author  was  Hubert  Languet,  and 
it  was  printed  at  Basil.] 


270  THE   EIGHTH   BOOK  [Sect  2. 

Commonweal  of  Israel ;  as  if  these  solemnities  were  a  kind 
of  deed,  whereby  the  Right  of  Dominion  is  given:  with 
strange,  untrue,  and  unnatural  conceits,  set  abroad  by 
seedsmen  of  rebellion,  only  to  animate  unquiet  spirits,  and 
to  feed  them  with  possibility  of  aspiring  to  thrones,  if  they 
cain  win  the  hearts  of  the  people,  what  Hereditary  Title 
soever  any  other  before  them  may  have.  I  say,  [their] 
unjust  and  insolent  positions  I  would  not  mention,  were  it 
not  thereby  to  make  the  countenance  of  truth  more  orient; 
for  unless  we  will  openly  proclaim  defiance  unto  all  law, 
equity,  and  reason,  we  must  (there  is  no  remedy)  acknow- 
ledge, that  in  Kingdoms  hereditary,  birth  giveth  Right  unto 
sovereign  Dominion ;  and  the  death  of  the  predecessor 
putteth  the  successor  by  blood  in  seisin.  Those  public 
Solemnities  before  specified  do  but  serve  for  an  open  tes- 
tification of  the  inheritor's  Right,  or  belong  unto  the  form 
of  inducting  him  into  possession  of  that  thing  he  hath  Right 
unto :  therefore  in  case  it  doth  happen  that  without  Right 
of  Blood  a  man  in  such  wise  be  possessed,  all  these  new 
elections  and  investings  are  utterly  void ;  they  make  him  no 
indefeasible  estate,  the  inheritor  by  blood  may  dispossess 
him  as  an  usurper.  The  case  thus  standing,  albeit  we  judge 
it  a  thing  most  true,  that  Kings,  even  inheritors,  do  hold 
their  Right  in  the  Power  of  Dominion,  with  dependency 
upon  the  whole  Body  politic  over  which  they  have  rule  as 
Kings ;  yet  so  it  may  not  be  understood  as  if  such  dependency 
did  grow,  for  that  every  Supreme  Governor  doth  personally 
take  from  thence  his  Power  by  way  of  gift,  bestowed  of 
their  own  free  accord  upon  him  at  the  time  of  his  entrance 
into  the  said  place  of  his  Sovereign  Government.  But  the 
cause  of  dependency  is  that  first  original  conveyance, 
when  Power  was  derived  from  the  whole  into  one ;  to  pass 
from  him  unto  them,  whom  out  of  him  nature  by  lawful 
births  should  produce,  and  no  natural  or  legal  inability 
T„,iy  make  uncapable :  "  Neither  can  any  man  with  reason  think, 
de  Offic.  jj^ij  ^Yiai^  the  first  institution  of  Kings,  a  sufficient  conside- 
ration wherefore  their  Power  should  always  depend  on  that 
from  which  it  did  always  flow  by  original  influence  of 
Power,  from  the  Body  into  the  King,  is  the  cause  of  Kings' 
dependency  in  Power  upon  the  Body."  By  dependency 
we  mean  subordination  and  subjection.*     A  manifest  token 

•  [See  Baxter,  §  16,  ut  supJ] 


SecLS.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  271 

of  which  dependency  may  be  this;  as  there  is  no  more 
certain  argument  that  lands  are  held  under  any  as  Lords, 
than  if  we  see  that  such  lands  in  defect  of  heirs  fall  unto 
them  by  escheat ;  in  like  manner  it  doth  follow  rightly,  that 
seeing  Dominion  when  there  is  none  to  inherit  it  returneth 
unto  the  Body,  therefore  they  which  before  were  inheritors 
thereof  did  hold  it  with  dependency  upon  the  Body,  so  that 
by  comparing  the  Body  with  the  Head,  as  touching  Power, 
it  seemeth  always  to  reside  in  both;  fundamentally  and 
radically  in  the  one,  in  the  other  derivatively ;  in  one  the 
habit,  in  the  other  the  act  of  Power.*  May  a  Body  politic 
then  at  all  times  withdraw,  in  whole  or  in  part,  the  influence 
of  Dominion  which  p^sseth  from  it,  if  Inconveniences  do 
grow  thereby  ?t  It  must  be  presumed,  that  Supreme 
Governors  will  not  in  such  case  oppose  themselves,  and 
be  stiff*  in  detaining  that,  the  use  whereof  is  with  public 
detriment : J  but  surely  without  their  consent  I  see  not  how 
the  Body  by  any  just  means  should  be  able  to  help  itself, 
saving  when  Dominion  doth  escheat;  such  things  therefore 
must  be  thought  upon  beforehand,  that  Power  may  be 
limited  ere  it  be  granted,  which  is  the  next  thing  we  are 
to  consider. 

S.  In  Power  of  Dominion,  all  Kings  have  not  an  equal  in  what 
latitude.  Kings  by  conquest  make  their  own  charter;  so  ^^ 
that  how  large  their  Power,  either  Civil  or  Spiritual,  is,  we 
cannot  with  any  certainty  define  further,  than  only  to  set 
them  in  the  Une  of  the  Law  of  God  and  Nature  for  bounds. 
Kings  by  God's  own  special  appointment  have  also  that 
largeness  of  Power  which  he  doth  assign  or  permit  with 
approbation.  Touching  Kings  which  were  first  instituted 
by  agreement  and  composition  made  with  them  over  whom 
they  reign;  how  far  their  Power  may  extend,  the  articles 
of  compact  between  them  is  to  shew:  not  only  the  articles  of 
compact  at  the  first  beginning,  which  for  the  most  part  are 
either  clean  worn  out  of  knowledge,  or  else  known  to  very 
few,  but  whatsoever  hath  been  aifter  in  free  and  voluntary 
manner  condescended  unto,  whether  by  express  consent 
(whereof  positive  Laws  are  witnesses),  or  else  by  silent 
allowance  famously  notified  through  custom,  reaching  be- 
yond the  memory  of  man.     By  which  means  of  after-agree- 


rare. 


•tf 


See  Baxter,  §  17.]  f  [See  Baxter,  ibid.'] 

See  Baxter,  ibid,'] 


272  THE   EIGHTH   BOOK  [Sect.S. 

Arist.  ment^  it  cometh  many  times  to  pass  in  Kingdoms^  that  they 
lib.'m.  whose  ancient  predecessors  were  by  violence  and  force  made 
^^^'  '  subject,  do  by  little  and  little  grow  into  that  sweet  form  of 
Kingly  Government  which  philosophers  define,  "  Regency 
willingly  sustained,  and  indued  with  Chiefty  of  Power  in  the 
Pytba-  greatest  things."  Many  of  the  ancients,  in  their  writings, 
lpa?Er.  do  speak  of  Kings  with  such  high  and  ample  terms,  as  if 
Regno.*  Universality  of  Power,  even  in  regard  of  things  and  not 
of  persons,  did  appertain  to  the  very  being  of  a  King: 
the  reason  is,  because  their  speech  concerning  Kings  they 
frame  according  to  the  state  of  those  Monarchs  to  whom 
unlimited  Authority  was  given ;  which  some  not  observing, 
imagine  that  all  Kings,  even  in  that  they  are  Kings,  ought 
to  have  whatsoever  Power  they  judge  any  Sovereign  Ruler 
Arist.  lawfully  to  have  enjoyed.  But  the  most  judicious  Philo- 
sopher, whose  eye  scarce  any  thing  did  escape  which  was 
to  be  found  in  the  bosom  of  Nature,  he  considering  how 
far  the  Power  of  one  Sovereign  Ruler  may  be  different 
from  another  Regal  Authority,  noteth  in  Spartan  Kings, 
"  That  of  all  others  they  were  most  tied  to  Law,  and  so  the 
most  restrained  Power."  A  King  which  hath  not  supreme 
Power  in  the  greatest  things,  is  rather  intituled  a  EJng, 
than  invested  with  real  Sovereignty.  We  cannot  properly 
term  him  a  King,  of  whom  it  may  not  be  said,  at  the 
leastwise,  as  touching  certain  the  chiefest  affairs  of  the 
State,  apx^tvy  apxeaOai  vwo  ovhvog,  his  right  in  them  is  to 
have  rule,  not  subject  to  any  other  predominancy.  I  am 
not  of  opinion  that  simply  in  Kings  the  most,  but  the  best 
limited  Power,  is  best  both  for  them  and  the  people:  the 
most  limited  is  that  which  may  deal  in  fewest  things ;  the 
best,  that  which  in  dealing  is  tied  unto  the  soundest,  per- 
fectest,  and  most  indifferent  Rule,  which  Rule  is  the  Law: 
I  mean  not  only  the  Law  of  Nature  and  of  God,  but  the 
National  Law  consonant  thereunto.  "  Happier  that  people 
whose  Law  is  their  King  in  the  greatest  things,  than  that 
whose  King  is  himself  their  Law.*  Where  the  King  doth 
guide  the  State,  and  the  Law  the  King,  that  Commonwealth 
is  like  an  harp  or  melodious  instrument,  the  strings  whereof 
are  tuned  and  handled  all  by  one  hand,  following  as  Laws 
the  Rules  and  Canons  of  musical  science."     Most  divinely, 

•  [See  Baxt£R,  §  101,  ut  sup.'] 


Sect.  SJ\  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  273 

therefore,  Archytas  maketh  unto  public  felicity  these  four 
steps  and  degrees,  every  of  which  doth  spring  from  the 
former,  as  from  another  cause,  6  U  (iatrCKtvc  vofiifiog,  6  U 

ap^Ufv   dKoXovOoSf    6    Be    dpxojJLevoQ   diroXvirog,   ij   ^e    6\ri  Koivufvla 

evBalfiwv,  '^  the  King  ruling  by  Law,  the  Magistrate  fol- 
lowing, the  Subject  free,  and  the  whole  society  happy:" 
adding  on  the  contrary  side,  that  where  this  order  is  not,  it 
Cometh  by  transgression  thereof  to  pass  that  a  King  groweth 
a  Tyrant ;  he  that  ruleth  under  him  abhorreth  to  be  guided 
by  him,  or  commanded;  the  people  subject  unto  both, 
have  freedom  under  neither;  and  the  whole  community  is 
wretched.  In  which  respect,  I  cannot  choose  but  commend 
highly  their  wisdom,  by  whom  the  foundations  of  the  Com- 
monwealth have  been  laid;  wherein  though  no  manner  of 
person  or  cause  be  unsubject  unto  the  King's  Power,  yet 
so  is  the  Power  of  the  King  over  all,  and  in  all  limited, 
that  unto  all  his  proceedings  the  Law  itself  is  a  Rule. 
The  axioms  of  our  Regal  Government  are  these,  "  Lex 
facit  Regem :"  the  King's  grant  of  any  favour  made  contrary 
to  the  Law  is  void ;  ^'  Rex  nihil  potest  nisi  quod  jure 
potest."*  Our  Kings,  therefore,  when  they  are  to  take 
possession  of  the  Crown  they  are  called  unto,  have  it  pointed 
out  before  their  eyes,  even  by  the  very  Solemnities  and 
Rites  of  their  Inauguration,  to  what  affairs,  by  the  same 
Law,  their  supreme  Power  and  Authority  reacheth;  crowned 
we  see  they  are,  enthronized,  and  anointed;  the  Crown,  a 
sign  of  a  miUtary  Dominion ;  the  Throne,  of  sedentary  or 
judicial ;  the  Oil,  of  reUgious  and  sacred  Power.  It  is  not 
on  any  side  denied,  that  Kings  may  have  Authority  in 
Secular  affairs.  The  question  then  is.  What  Power  they 
may  lawfully  have,  and  exercise  in  Causes  of  God  ?  '^  A  stapi. 
Prince,  or  Magistrate,  or  a  Community  (saith  Dr.  Stapleton,)  Prindp. 
may  have  Power  to  lay  corporal  punishment  on  them  which  c.  u.' 
are  teachers  of  perverse  things;  Power  to  make  Laws  for 
the  peace  of  the  Church;  Power  to  proclaim,  to  defend, 
and  even  by  revenge  to  preserve  dogmata^  the  very  Articles 
of  Religion  themselves  from  violation."  Others,  in  affection 
no  less  devoted  unto  the  Papacy,  do  likewise  yield,  that 
the  Civil  Magistrate  may  by  his  Edicts  and  Laws  keep  all 
Ecclesiastical  persons  within  the  bounds  of  their  duties, 

•  [See  Baxter,  §  18,74.] 
VOL.  III.  T 


274  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sect.  8. 

and  constrain  them  to  observe  the  Canons  of  the  Churchy 
to  follow  the  Rule  of  ancient  Discipline.  That  if  Joash 
was  commended  for  his  care  and  provision  concerning  ^o 
small  a  part  of  Religion  as  the  Church-treasure;  it  must 
needs  be  both  unto  Christian  Kings  themselves  greater 
honour^  and  to  Christianity  a  larger  benefit^  when  the 
custody  of  Religion  and  the  worship  of  God  in  general 
is  their  charge.  If^  therefore^  all  these  things  mentioned  be 
most  properly  the  affairs  of  God's  Ecclesiastical  Causes; 
if  the  actions  specified  be  works  of  Power;  and  if  that 
power  be  such  as  Kings  may  use  of  themselves^  without  the 
fear  of  any  other  power  superior  in  the  same  thing;  it 
foUoweth  necessarily,  that  Kings  may  have  supreme  Power, 
not  only  in  Civil,  but  also  in  Ecclesiastical  affairs;  and 
consequently,  that  they  may  withstand  what  Bishop  or  Pope 
soever  shall,  under  the  pretended  claim  of  higher  Spiritual 
Authority,  oppose  themselves  against  their  proceedings. 
But  they  which  have  made  us  the  former  grant,  will  never 
hereunto  condescend;  what  they  yield  that  Princes  may 
do,  it  is  with  secret  exception  always  understood — ^if  the 
Bishop  of  Rome  give  leave,  if  he  interpose  no  prohibition; 
wherefore  somewhat  it  is  in  shew,  in  truth  nothing,  which 
they  grant.  Our  own  Reformers  do  the  very  like;  when 
they  make  their  discourse  in  general  concerning  the  Autho- 
rity which  Magistrates  may  have,  a  man  would  think  them 
to  be  far  from  withdrawing  any  jot  of  that  which  with 
T.  c.  reason  may  be  thought  due :  "  The  Prince  and  Civil  Magi: 
p.  192.  strate  (saith  one  of  them)  hath  to  see  the  Laws  of  God 
touching  his  worship,  and  touching  all  matters  and  all 
orders  of  the  Church,  to  be  executed,  and  duly  observed ; 
and  to  see  every  Ecclesiastical  person  do  that  Office  where- 
unto  he  is  appointed,  and  to  punish  those  which  fail  in 
^Y"  their  Office  accordingly."  Another  acknowledgeth,  "  That 
Def.  of  the  Magistrate  may  lawfully  uphold  all  truth  by  his  Sword, 
Godly  punish  all  persons,  enforce  all  to  their  duties  towards  God 
strate.  and  mcu ;  maintain  by  his  Laws  every  point  of  God's  Word, 
punish  all  vice  in  all  men;  see  into  all  Causes,  visit  the 
Ecclesiastical  estate,  and  correct  the  abuses  thereof:  finally, 
to  look  to  his  Subjects,  that  under  him  they  may  lead  their 
lives  in  all  godliness  and  honesty."  A  third  more  frankly 
Mouo^il'  professeth,  **  That  in  case  their  Church-discipUne  were 
p.  63.  '  established,   so  little  it  short'neth  the  arms   of  sovereign 


Sect.  3.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  275 

Dominion  in  Causes  Ecclesiastical^  that  her  gracious  Majesty, 
for  any  thing  they  teach  or  hold  to  the  contrary,  may  no 
less  than  now  remain  still  over  all  persons,  in  all  things 
supreme  Governess;  even  with  that  full  and  royal  authority, 
superiority  and  preeminence,  supremacy,  and  prerogative, 
which  the  Laws  already  established  do  give  her,  and  her 
Majesty's  Injunctions,  and  the  Articles  of  the  Convocation- 
house,  and  other  writings  Apologetical  of  her  Royal  Autho- 
rity and  Supreme  Dignity,  do  declare  and  explain."     Posi- 
donius  was  wont  to  say  of  the  Epicure,  **  That  he  thought  cicero, 
there  were  no  gods,  but  that  those  things  which  he  spake  de'Nau 
concerning  the  gods  were  only  given  out  for  fear  of  growing  ^^^' 
odious  amongst  men ;  and,  therefore,  that  in  words  he  left 
gods  remaining,  but  in  very  deed  overthrew  them,  insomuch 
as  he  gave  them  no  kind  of  action."     After  the  very  self- 
same manner,  when  we  come  unto  those  particular  effects. 
Prerogatives  of  Dominion  which  the  Laws  of  this  Land  do 
grant  unto  the  Kings  thereof;  it  will  appear  how  these  men, 
notwithstanding  their  large  and  liberal  speeches,  abate  such 
parcels  out  of  the  afore-alleged  grant  and  flourishing  shew, 
that  a  man  comparing  the  one  with  the  other,  may  half 
stand  in  a  doubt,  lest  their  opinion  in  very  truth  be  against 
that  Authority  which  by  their  speeches  they  seem  mightily 
to  uphold,  partly  for  the  voiding  of  public  obloquy,  envy, 
and  hatred ;  partly  to  the  intent  they  may  both  in  the  end, 
by  the  establishment  of  their  Discipline,  extinguish   the 
force  of  Supreme  Power  which  Princes  have,  and  yet,  in 
the  meanwhile,   by   giving  forth  these  smooth  discourses, 
obtain  that  their  favourers  may  have  somewhat  to  allege 
for  them  by  way  of  apology,  and  that  such  words  only 
sound  towards  all  kind  of  fulness  of  Power.    But  for  myself, 
I  had  rather  construe  such  their  contradictions  in  the  better 
part,  and  impute  their  general  acknowledgment  of  the  law- 
fiilness  of  Kingly  Power  unto  the  force  of  truth,  presenting 
itself  before  them   sometimes  above  their  particular  con- 
trarieties, oppositions,  denials,  unto  that  error  which,  having 
so  fully  possest  their  minds,   casteth  things  inconvenient 
upon  them ;  of  which  things  in  their  due  place.     Touching 
that  which  is  now  in  hand,  we  are  on  all  sides  fully  agreed: 
first.  That  there  is  not  any  restraint  or  limitation  of  matter 
for  Regal  Authority  and  Power  to  be  conversant  in,  but 
of   Religion   only;    and    of   whatsoever    cause    thereunto 

t2 


276  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Seci.  3. 

appertaineth,  Kings  may  lawfully  have  charge^  they  lawfiilly 
may  therein  exercise  Dominion,  and  use  the  temporal  sword: 

Kioda.  secondly.  That  some  kind  of  actions  conversant  about  such  * 
affairs  are  denied  unto  Kings ;  as,  namely,  actions  of  Power 
and  Order,  and  of  Spiritual  Jurisdiction,  which  hath  with 
it  inseparably  joined  Power  to  administer  the  Word  and 
Sacraments,  Power  to  ordain,  to  judge  as  an  Ordinary,  to 
bind  and  loose,  to  excommunicate,  and  such  like:  thirdly. 

By  what  That  even  in  those  very  actions  which  are  proper  unto 
Dominion,  there  must  be  some  certain  Rule,  whereunto 
Kings  in  all  their  proceedings  ought  to  be  strictly  tied; 
which  Rule  for  proceeding  in  Ecclesiastical  affairs  and 
causes  by  Regal  Power,  hath  not  hitherto  been  agreed 
upon  with  such  uniform  consent  and  certainty  as  might  be 
wished.  The  different  sentences  of  men  herein  I  will  [not] 
now  go  about  to  examine,  but  it  shall  be  enough  to  propose 
what  Rule  doth  seem  in  this  case  most  reasonable. 

[Id  what     The  casc  [cause]  of  deriving  Supreme  Power  from  a  whole 

iSency^  intirc  multitude  into  some  special  part  thereof,  as  [is]  partly 
the  necessity  of  expedition  in  public  affairs ;  partly  the  incon- 
venience of  confusion  and  trouble,  where  a  multitude  of  equals 
dealeth ;  and  partly  the  dissipation  which  must  needs  ensue, 
in  companies  where  every  man  wholly  seeketh  his  own  par- 
ticular (as  we  all  would  do,  even  with  other  men's  hurts), 
and  haply  the  very  overthrow  of  themselves  in  the  end 
also,  if  for  the  procurement  of  the  common  good  of  all  men, 
by  keeping  every  several  man  in  order,  some  were  not 
invested  with  Authority  over  all,  and  encouraged  with  Pre- 
rogative-honour to  sustain  the  weighty  burthen  of  that 
charge.  The  good  which  is  proper  unto  each  man  be- 
longeth  to  the  common  good  of  all,  as  part  to  the  whole 
perfection ;  but  these  two  are  things  different ;  for  men  by 
that  which  is  proper  are  severed,  united  they  are  by  that 
which  is  common.  Wherefore,  besides  that  which  moveth 
each  man  in  particular  to  seek  his  private,  there  must  be 
of  necessity  in  all  public  Societies  also  a  general  mover 
directing  unto  common  good,  and  framing  every  man's  par- 
ticular unto  it.  The  end  whereunto  all  Government  was 
instituted,  was  bonum  publicumy  the  universal  or  common 
good.*     Our  question  is  of  Dominion,  for   that  end  and 

*  *^  Ob  udlitatem  publicam  Reip.  per  unum  consuli  oportere,  prudendssimi  docent" 
I.  C.  1 1.  F.  de  Origtne  Juris  Civilis. 


Sect.  3.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  277 

purpose  derived  into  One;  such  as  all  in  one  public  State 
have  agreed^  that  the  supreme  charge  of  all  things  should 
be  committed  unto  one;  they,  I  say,  considering  what  Incon* 
veniency  may  grow  where  States  are  subject  unto  sundry 
supreme  authorities,  have  for  fear  of  these  inconveniences 
withdrawn  from  Uking  to  establish  Many ;  oiSk  dyaOdv  xoXvicoi- 
paviri,  the  multitude  of  supreme  commanders  is  troublesome. 
"  No  man  (saith  our  Saviour)  can  serve  two  masters :"  [Mau. 
surely  two  Supreme  Masters  would  make  any  one's  service  ^'  ***^ 
somewhat  uneasy  in  such  cases  as  might  fall  out.  Suppose 
that  to-morrow  the  Power  which  hath  Dominion  in  Justice 
require  thee  at  the  Court;  that  which  in  War,  at  the  Field; 
that  which  in  Religion,  at  the  Temple,  all  have  equal 
Authority  over  thee,  and  impossible  it  is,  that  then  in  such 
case  thou  shouldst  be  obedient  unto  all :  by  choosing  any 
one  whom  thou  wilt  obey,  certain  thou  art  for  thy  disobe* 
dience  to  incur  the  displeasure  of  the  other  two. 

But  there  is  nothing  for  which  some  comparable  reason  Accord- 
or  other  may  not  be  found.     Are  we  able  to  shew  any  whatEz. 
commendable  state  of  Government,  which,  by  experience*"^*** 
and  practice,  hath  felt  the  benefit  of  being  in  all  causes 
subject  unto  the  supreme  Authority  of  One  ?     Against  the 
PoUcy  of  the  Israelites,  I  hope  there  will  no  man  except,  [Ezod. 
where  Moses  deriving  so  great  a  part  of  his  burthen  in  ^,20.] 
Government  unto  others,  did  notwithstanding  retain  to  him^ 
self  universal  Supremacy;  Jehoshaphat  appointing  one  to[2Ghron. 
be  choseo  in  the  affairs  of  God,  and  another  in  the  King's  ****  "*^ 
affairs,  did  this  as  having  Dominion  over  them  in  both.*     If 
therefore,  from  approbation  of  Heaven,  the  Kings  of  God's 


*  ["  Where,  upon  that  certain  Priests  and  Levites  had  the  handling  of  matters  pertain- 
ing unto  God,  and  certain  others  the  matters  pertaining  unto  the  King  (2  Chron.  xix.  8, 11.), 

1  concluded,  that  the  Church-judgments  ought  ordinarily  to  be  handled  by  the  Church 
Officers,  his  (Dr.  W.'s)  answer  hereunto  is,.  That  forasmuch  as  Jehoshaphat  the  King,  by  his 
authority  committed  both  Ecclesiastical  and  Civil  Causes,  therefore  he  had  power  himself  of 
both.  Whereunto  T  reply,  that  he  committed  not  those  Ecclesiastical  matters  unto  the 
Priests  and  Levites  as  those  which  he  might  have  retained  with  himself,  or  as  a  thing  in  his 
own  discretion ;  but  used  only  his  princely  authority  to  put  in  execution  that  which  the  Lord 
had  commanded.  For  it  is  manifest  that  the  seUf-same  thing  which  Jehoshaphat  did  here 
was  commanded  to  be  done  in  the  Law,  Deut.  xvii.  8 — 12.  And  if  this  prove,  that  the 
judgment  of  Ecclesiastical  Causes  pertaineth  to  the  King  because  he  confirmed  by  his 
authority  the  Ecclesiastical  Judges ;  it  proveth  also,  that  both  the  Ordination  of  Ministers 
and  the  Preaching  of  the  Word  belong  unto  him,  considering  that  this  very  King  is  said 

2  Chron.  xvii.  7 — 9,  to  have  sent  forth  Preachers  into  all  Jewry.  But  let  the  Reader 
observe  how  he  hath  here  utterly  passed  by  the  weight  of  my  aigument,  which  standeth  in 
this,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  maketh  this  partition — that  some  matters  pertain  to  God,  and 
others  to  the  King,  Heb.  v.  1,  whereas,  if  the  matters  pertaining  unto  God  pertained  also  to 
the  King  the  partition  should  be  faulty."     T.C.  lib.  iiu  p.  152.] 


278  THE   EIGHTH   BOOK  [Sect.  4^. 

own  chosen  people  had  in  the  affairs  of  Jewish  Religion 
supreme  Power,  why  not  Christian  Kings  the  like  also  in 
Christian  Religion  ?     First,  unless  men  will  answer,  as  some 
stapi.     have  done,  ^'  That  the  Jews'  ReUgion  was  of  far  less  per- 
Doct.  '  fection  and  dignity  than  ours,  ours  being  that  truth  whereof 
^'     '    theirs  was  but  a    shadowish    prefigurative    resemblance.'* 
stapi.     Secondly,  "  That  all  parts  of  their  Religion,  their  Laws, 
their  Sacrifices,   and  their  Rites   and   Ceremonies,   being 
fully  set  down  to  their  hands,  and  needing  no  more  but  only 
to  be  put  in  execution,  the  Kings  might  well  have  highest 
Authority  to  see   that  done;   whereas  with  us   there   are 
a  number  of  mysteries  even  in  belief,  which  were  not  so 
generally  for  them,  as  for  us,  necessary  to  be  with  sound 
express  acknowledgment  understood:  a  number  of  things 
belonging  to  external   Government,    and  our  manner   of 
serving  God,  not  set  down  by  particular  Ordinances,  and 
deUvered  to  us  in  writing,  for  which  cause  the  state  of  the 
Church  doth  now  require  that  the  Spiritual  Authority  of 
Ecclesiastical  persons  be  large,  absolute,  and  not  subordi- 
Idem-    nate  to  Regal  Power."     Thirdly,  "  That  whereas  God 
armeth  Religion  Jewish,  as  Temporal  Christian,  with  the 
sword  ;  but  of  Spiritual  punishment,  the  one  with  Power  to 
imprison,  to  scourge,  to  put  to  death ;  the  other  with  bare 
Authority  to  censure  and  excommunicate ;  there  is  no  reason 
that  the  Church,  which  hath  no  visible  sword,  should  in 
Regiment  be  subject  unto  any  other  power,  than  only  unto 
theirs  which  have  Authority  to  bind  and  loose."    Fourthly, 
*'  That  albeit  whilst  the  Church  was  restrained  into  one 
people,  it  seemed  not  incommodious  to  grant  their  King 
the  general  Chiefty  of  Power ;  yet  now  the  Church  having 
spread  itself  over  all  nations,   great  inconveniences   must 
thereby  grow,  if  every  Christian  King  in  his  several  terri- 
tory should  have  the  like  Power."     Of  all  these  differences, 
there  is  not  one  which  doth  prove  it  a  thing  repugnant  to 
the  Law  either  of  God  or  of  Nature,  that  all  Supremacy 
of  external  Power  be  in  Christian  Kingdoms  granted  unto 
Kings  thereof,  for  preservation  of  quietness,  unity,  order, 
and  peace,  in  such  manner  as  hath  been  shewed. 
Of  the        4.  For  the  Title  or  State  itself,  although  the  Laws  of  this 
Hewi-^    Land  have  annexed  it  to  the  Crown,  yet  so  far  we  should 
'^^^'     not  strive,  if  so  be  men  were  nice  and  scrupulous  in  this 
behalf  only;  because  they  do  wish  that,  for  reverence  to 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  279 

Christ  Jesus,  the  Civil  Magistrate  did  rather  use  some  other 
form  of  speech  wherewith  to  express  that  sovereign  Autho- 
rity which  he  lawfully  hath  over  all  both  persons  and  causes 
of  the  Church.     But  I  see  that  hitherto  they  which  con- 
demn utterly  the  Names  so  applied^  do  it  because  they  mis- 
like  that  such  Power  should  be  given  to  Civil  Governors. 
The  great  exception  that  Sir  Thomas  More  took  against 
that  Title,  who  suffered  death  for  denial  of  it,  was  ^^  for  Rof. 
that  it  maketh  a  Lay,  a  Secular  person,  the  Head  of  the  Epfst. 
State  Spiritual  or  Ecclesiastical;"  as  though  God  himself  pi' sam. 
did  not  name  Saul  the  Head  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel;  and  *^'  ^*^ 
consequently  of  that  tribe  also  among  the  rest,  whereunto 
the   State   Spiritual    or   Ecclesiastical    belonged.      When 
the  Authors  of  the  Centuries  reprove  it  in  Kings  and  Civil 
Governors,  the  reason  is,  "  istis  non  competit  iste  Primatus;"  pnef. 
such  kind  of  Power  is  too  high  for  them,  they  fit  it  not.     In  ^®°'''^- 
excuse  of  Mr.  Calvin,  by  whom  this  Realm  is  condemned  caivin 
of  blasphemy,   for  entituling  Henry  the  Eighth  Supreme  ^^^.r. 
Head  of  this  Church  under  Christ,*  a  charitable  conjecture  vilTs. 
is  made,  that  he  spake  by  misinformation ;  howbeit,  as  he 
professeth  utter  dislike  of  that  name,  so  whether  the  name 
be  used  or  no,  the  very  Power  itself  which  we  give  unto 
Civil  Magistrates  he  much  complaineth  of,  and  protesteth, 
"  That  their  Power  over  all  things  was  it  which  had  ever 
wounded  him  deeply:   that  unadvised  persons  had  made 
them  too  Spiritual ;  that  throughout  Germany  this  fault  did 
reign ;  that  in  those  very  parts  where  (Calvin)  himself  was, 
it  prevailed  more  than  was  to  be  wished;   that  Rulers, 
by  imagining  themselves  so   Spiritual,    have  taken  away 
Ecclesiastical   Government;    that   they  think   they  cannot 
reign  unless  they  abolish  all  the  Authority  of  the  Church, 

*  [^*  A  confession  was  extorted  from  them  (the  Convocation)  that  '  the  king  was  the 
protector  and  the  supreme  head  of  the  Church  and  Clergy  of  England ;'  though  some  of  them 
had  the  dexterity  to  get  a  clause  inserted  which  invalidated  the  whole  submission,  and  which 
ran  in  these  terms,  *  in  so  far  as  is  pemutted  by  the  Law  of  Christ.' "  Hume,  Hist,  Eng, 
Hen.  VIII.  cap.  xzz.  an.  1531.  ITie  Act  of  Supremacy  ^  2^  l^eii.y  III.  cap.  i.  1534,  says, 
^  Albeit  the  King's  Majesty  justly  and  rightfully  is,  and  ought  to  be,  supreme  head  of  ^e 
Church  of  England,  and  is  so  recognised  by  the  Clergy  of  this  realm  in  their  Convocations : 
yet  nevertheless,  for  confirmation  and  corroboration  thereof,  and  for  increase  of  virtue  in 
Christ's  religion,  within  this  realm  of  England,  &c  be  it  enacted  by  ihe  authority  of  this 
present  Parliament,  that  the  King,  our  sovereign  lord,  his  heirs  and  successors,  kings  of  this 
realm,  shall  be  taken,  accepted,  and  reputed,  the  only  supreme  head  on  earth  of  the  Church  of 
England;  and  shall  have  and  enjoy,  annexed  and  united  to  the  imperial  crown  of  this  realm, 
as  well  the  title  and  style  thereof,  as  all  honours,  dignities,  immunities,  profits,  and  com- 
modities, to  the  said  dignity  of  supreme  head  of  the  said  Chuixh  belonging  and  appertaining ; 
and  that,  &c."] 


280  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sect.  4f, 

and  be  themselves  the  chief  Judges,  as  well  in  Doctrine, 
as  in  the  whole  Spiritual  Regency."  So  that,  in  truth,  the 
question  is,  Whether  the  Magistrate,  by  being  Head  in 
such  sense  as  we  term  him,  do  use  or  exercise  any  part  of 
that  Authority,  not  which  belongeth  unto  Christ,  but  which 
other  men  ought  to  have? 

These  things  being  first  considered  thus,  it  will  be  easier 
to  judge  concerning  our  own  Estate,  whether  by  force  of 
Ecclesiastical  Government  Kings  have  any  other  kind  of 
prerogative  than  they  may  lawfully  hold  and  enjoy.  It  is, 
as  some  do  imagine,  too  much,  that  Kings  of  England  should 
be  termed  Heads,  in  relation  to  the  Church.  That  which 
we  do  understand  by  Headship  is,  their  only  Supreme  Power 
in  Ecclesiastical  affairs  and  causes.  That  which  lawful  Princes 
are,  what  should  make  it  unlawful  for  men  in  Spiritual  Styles 
or  Titles  to  signify  ?  If  the  having  of  supreme  Power  be 
allowed,  why  is  the  expressing  thereof  by  the  Title  of  Head 
condemned?  They  seem  in  words  (at  leastwise  some  of 
them)  now  at  length  to  acknowledge,  that  Kings^  may  have 
Dominion  or  supreme  Government  even  over  all,  both  per- 
sons and  causes.  We  in  terming  our  Princes  Heculs  of  the 
Church,  do  but  testify  that  we  acknowledge  them  such 
Governors.  Again,  to  this  it  will  peradventure  be  replied, 
T.  c.  "  That  howsoever  we  interpret  ourselves,  it  is  not  fit  for  a 
p.  ill.  mortal  man,  and  therefore  not  fit  for  a  Civil  Magistrate,  to 
EphcB.  be  intituled  the  Head  of  the  Church,  which  was  given  to 
(5oi.'     our  Saviour  Christ,  to  lift  him  above  all  Powers,  Rules, 

1    18 

Dominions,  Titles,  in  Heaven  or  in  earth.  Where,  if  this 
Title  belong  also  to  Civil  Magistrates,  then  it  is  manifest  that 
there  is  a  Power  in  earth  whereunto  our  Saviour  Christ  is 
not  in  this  point  superior.  Again,  if  the  Civil  Magistrate 
may  have  this  Title,  he  may  be  termed  also  the  first-begotten 
of  all  creatures,  the  first-begotten  of  all  the  dead,  yea,  the 
Redeemer  of  his  people.  For  these  are  alike  given  him,  as 
dignities  whereby  he  is  lifted  up  above  all  creatures.  Besides 
this,  the  whole  argument  of  the  Apostle,  in  both  places,  doth 
lead  to  shew  that  this  Title,  Head  of  the  Church,  cannot  be 
said  of  any  creature.  And  further,  the  very  demonstrative 
articles,  among  the  Hebrews  especially,  whom  St.  Paul  doth 
follow,  serveth  to  tie  that  which  is  verified  of  one,  unto  him- 
self alone :  so  that  when  the  Apostle  doth  say  that  Christ  is 
[Col.      V  Kc^aXiJ,  the  Head;  it  is  as  if  he  should  say,  Christ,  and 

i.  18.] 


SecL  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  281 

Done  other,  is  the  Head  of  the  Church."*    Thus  have  we 
against  the  entituling  of  the  Highest  Magistrate,  Head,  with 
relation  unto  the  Church,  four  several  arguments  gathered, 
by  strong  surmise,  out  of  words  marvellous  unlikely  to  have 
been  written  to  any  such  purpose  as  that  whereunto  they  are 
now  used  and  urged.   To  the  Ephesians  the  Apostle  writeth, 
*'  That  Christ,  God  had  set  on  his  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  Ephea. 
places  above  all  regency,  and  authority,  and  power,  and  23?^ 
dominion,  and  whatsoever  name  is  named,  not  in  this  world 
only,  but  in  that  which  shall  be  also:  and  hath  under  his 
feet  set  all  things,  and  hath  given  him  Head  above  all  things 
unto  the  Church,  which  is  his  Body,  even  the  fulness  of  him 
which  accomplisheth  all  in  all."    To  the  Colossians  in  like 
manner,  *^  That  he  is  the  Head  of  the  Body  of  the  Church,  coi. 
who  is  a  first-born  regency  out  of  the  dead,  to  the  end  he  '*  ^^* 
might  be  made  amongst  them  all  such  an  one  as  hath  the 

*  [The  reader  will  find  it  advantageous  to  have  this  part  of  T.  C/s  argument  in  his  own 
words ;  especially  as  he  will  see  reason  for  reverting  to  it,  a  few  pages  hence.  **  Thia 
distinction  confoundeth  and  shuffleth  together  the  authority  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  as  he  is 
the  Son  of  God  only  before  all  worlds,  coequal  with  his  Father ;  with  that,  which  he  hath 
g^ven  of  his  Father,  and  which  he  ezerciseth  in  respect  he  is  Mediator  hetween  God  and 
Ufl.  For  in  the  government  of  the  Church,  and  superiority  over  the  officers  of  it,  our  Saviour 
himself  hath  a  Superior,  which  is  his  Father  (1  Cor.  iii.  23  ;  xi.  3 ;  xv.  27,  28) ;  but  in  the 
govemment  of  kingdoms  and  other  commonwealths,  and  in  the  superiority  which  he  hath 
over  kings  and  judges,  he  hath  no  superior,  but  immediate  authority  with  his  Father. 
Therefore  the  moulding  up  of  the  two  estates  and  governments  together,  is  to  lay  the  founda- 
tions of  many  errors Here  remaineth  only  to  prove,  the  title,  Head  of  the  Church,  to 

belong  only  to  our  Saviour  Christ.  I  must  therefore  desire  the  reader  to  turn  unto  p.  181 
(Defl  of  the  Ans.),  where  the  Doctor  confesseth  as  much  as  I ;  that  Christ  is  only  the  Head 
of  the  Church.  lif  Christ  be  only  Head,  then  that  I  set  down,  That  the  Civil  Magistrate  is 
head  of  the  commonwealth,  and  not  of  the  Church,  standeth  :  but  if  the  Magistrate  be  head 
of  the  Church,  then  Christ  is  not  only.  Howbeit  having  for  fear  of  the  outcry  of  all,  made 
a  little  courtesy  unto  the  truth,  he  forthwith  lifteth  up  his  heel  against  it,  and  will  have  the 
Ciidl  Magistrate  head  also  of  the  Church ;  whereupon  must  follow  infinite  absurdities.  First, 
the  doctrine  of  the  Apostle,  Eph.  i.  21,  is  clean  overthrown,  which  sheweth  that  this  title, 
Head  of  the  Church,  was  given  to  our  Saviour  Christ,  to  lift  him  above  all  powers,  rules,  and 
dominions,  either  in  Heaven  or  earth  (Col.  i.  16).  Where,  if  this  title  belong  also  unto  the 
Civil  Magistrate,  then  it  is  manifest  that  there  is  a  Power  in  earth  whereunto  our  Saviour 
Christ  is  not  in  this  point  superior.  And  by  the  same  reason  that  he  may  give  the  Civil 
Magbtrate  this  title,  he  may  give  him  also  that  he  is  the  first  begotten  of  all  creatures,  the 
first  begotten  of  the  dead,  yea,  the  Redeemer  of  his  people  which  he  govemeth.  For  these 
all  are  alike  given  unto  him,  as  dignities  whereby  he  is  lifted  up  above  all  creatures.  And 
beside  that  the  whole  argument  of  the  Apostle,  in  both  places,  leads  to  shew  that  this  title, 
Head  of  the  Church,  cannot  be  said  of  any  creature,  it  is  confirmed  by  the  demonstrative 
article,  wherewith  the  Hebrews  especially,  whom  St  Paul  followed,  use  to  tie  that  which  is 
verified  of  one,  unto  himself  alone :  for  he  saith,  ahT6s  itmv  ri  K€<f>a\^,  he  is  The  Head ;  as  if 
he  should  say,  he  and  none  other  is  the  Head  of  the  Church.  Again ;  if  the  Church  be 
'the  Body  of  Christ*  (Eph. iv.  12)  and  of  the  Civil  Magistrate,  it  shall  have  two  heads; 
which  being  monstrous  is  to  the  great  dishonour  of  Christ  and  his  Church.  So  also  should 
it  come  to  pass,  that  the  Church  having  the  magistrate  for  head,  is  accomplished,  and  made 
'a  perfect  man'  (Eph. iv.  13)  without  Christ:  so  that  the  knitting  of  our  Saviour  Christ 
(Colos.  ii.  19)  should  not  be  an  accomplishment  of  that  which  lacked,  but  an  addition  of  that 
which  is  too  much.  And  if  the  Church  be  planted  in  a  popular  estate,  then  forsomuch  as  all 
govern  in  common,  and  all  have  authority,  all  shall  be  head  there,  and  no  body  at  all ;  which 
b  another  monster."    T.  C.  lib.  ii.  p.  411,  412.] 


282  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sed.  4h 

Chiefty :"  he  meaneth^  amongst  all  them  whom  he  mentioned 
Col.  before,  saying,  "  By  him  all  things  that  are,  were  made;  the 
things  in  the  Heavens,  and  the  things  in  the  earth,  the  things 
that  are  visible,  and  the  things  that  are  invisible,  whether 
they  be  thrones,  or  dominions,  or  regencies,''  &c.  Unto  the 
fore-alleged  arguments  therefore  we  answer:  first.  That  it  is 
not  simply  the  Title  of  Hecidy  in  such  sort  understood,  as  the 
Apostle  himself  meant  it ;  so  that  the  same  being  imparted 
in  another  sense  unto  others,  doth  not  any  ways  make  those 
others  his  equals ;  inasmuch  as  diversity  of  things  is  usually 
to  be  understood,  even  when  of  words  there  is  no  diversity; 
and  it  is  only  the  adding  of  one  and  the  same  thing  unto 
divers  persons,  which  doth  argue  equality  in  them.  K  I 
term  Christ  and  Caesar  Lords,  yet  this  is  no  equalizing  Caesar 
with  Christ,  because  it  is  not  thereby  intended :  ''  To  term 
the  Emperor  Lord  (saith  TertuUian),  I,  for  my  own  part, 
will  not  refuse,  so  that  I  be  not  required  to  call  him  Lord  in 
the  same  sense  that  God  is  so  termed."  Neither  doth  it 
follow,  which  is  objected  in  the  second  place,  That  if  the 
Civil  Magistrate  may  be  intituled  a  Head,  he  may  as  well 
also  be  termed,  ^'  the  first-begotten  of  all  creatures,  the  first- 
begotten  of  the  dead,  and  the  Redeemer  of  his  people/* 
For  albeit  the  former  dignity  doth  lift  him  up  no  less  than 
these,  yet  these  terms  are  not  appliable  and  apt  to  signify 
any  other  inferior  dignity,  as  the  former  term  of  Head  was. 
The  argument  or  matter  which  the  Apostle,  followeth  hath 
small  evidence  or  proof,  that  his  meaning  was  to  appropriate 
unto  Christ  that  the  aforesaid  Title,  otherwise  than  only 
in  such  sense  as  doth  make  it,  being  so  understood,  too  high 
to  be  given  to  any  creature. 

As  for  the  force  of  the  Article  where  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
is  called  The  Head,  it  serveth  to  tie  that  unto  him  by  way 
of  excellency,  which  in  meaner  degrees  is  common  to  others; 
it  doth  not  exclude  any  other  utterly  from  being  termed 
Head,  but  from  being  intituled  as  Christ  is.  The  Head,  by 
way  of  the  very  highest  degree  of  excellency.  Not  in  the 
communication  of  names,  but  in  the  confusion  of  things, 
there  is  error.  Howbeit,  if  Head  were  a  name  that  could 
not  well  be,  nor  never  had  been,  used  to  signify  that  which 
a  Magistrate  may  be  in  relation  to  some  Church,  but  were 
by  continual  use  of  speech  appropriated  unto  the  only  thing 
it  signifieth ;  being  applied  unto  Jesus  Christ,  then  although 


i&C/.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  288 

we  must  carry  in  ourselves  a  right  understanding,  yet  ought 
we  otherwise  rather  to  speak,  unless  we  interpret  our  own 
meaning  by  some  clause  of  plain  speech,  because  we  are 
else  in  manifest  danger  to  be  understood  according  to  that 
construction  and  sense  wherein  such  words  are  personally 
spoken.     But  here  the  rarest  construction,  and  most  re- 
moved from  common  sense,  is  that  which  the  word  doth 
import  being  applied  unto  Christ ;  that  which  we  signify  by 
it  in  giving  it  to  the  Magistrate,  is  a  great  deal  more  familiar 
in  the  common  conceit  of  men.    The  word  is  so  fit  to  signify 
all  kinds  of  superiority,  preeminence,  and  chiefty,  that  no- 
thing is  more  ordinary  than  so  to  use  it  in  vulgar  speech, 
and  in  common  understanding  so  to  take  it.*    If,  thereforci 
Christian  Kings  may  have  any  preeminence  or  chiefty  above 
all  other,  although  it  be  less  than  that  which  Theodore  Beza 
giveth,  who  placeth  Kings  amongst  the  principal  members 
whereunto  public  function  in  the  Church  belongeth,  and 
denieth  not,  but  that  of  them  which  have  public  function, 
the  Civil  Magistrate's  Power  hath  all  the  rest  at  command, 
in  regard  of  that  part  of  his  Office,  which  is  to  procure  that 
peace  and  good  order  be  especially  kept  in  things  concerning 
the  first  Table ;  if  even  hereupon  they  term  him  JTie  Head 
of  the  Church,  which  is  his  Kingdom,  it  should  not  seem  so 
unfit  a  thing :+  which  Title  surely  we  could  not  communicate 
to  any  other,  no  not  although  it  should  at  our  hands  be 
exacted  with  torments,  but  that  our  meaning  herein  is  made 
known  to  the  world,  so  that  no  man  which  will  understand 
can  easily  be  ignorant  that  we  do  not  impart  unto  Kings, 
when  we  term  them  Heads,  the  honour  which  is  properly 
given  to  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Christ,  when  the  blessed 
Apostle  in   Scripture   doth   term  him    The  Head  of  the 
Church. 

The  Power  which  we  signify  by  that  Name,  difiereth  in 
three  things  plainly  from  that  which  Christ  doth  challenge. 
First,  it  difiereth  in  order,  because  God  hath  given  him  to 

his  Church  for  the  Head,  vwtp  iravra,  vwepdvio  irdtnjg  dpxmi 

**  far  above  all  principalities,  and  powers,  and  might,  and  u^V 

*  Pekah  is  termed  the  Head  of  Samaria.     Esai.  vii.  9. 

f  ["  If,  as  I  see,  it  like  some  (Beza,  Confess,  cap.  v.  art  23),  to  call  Magistrates  a  kind  of 
ofiScers  in  the  Church,  because  they  being  members,  by  public  calling  procure  the  quiet 
thereof;  they  which  are  disposed  may  so  speak,  I  will  not  strive.  But  why  /  esteem  the 
title  of  Head  of  the  Church  not  to  agree  unto  any  simple  creature  either  in  heaven  or  earth, 
I  have  shewed  my  reasons,  let  the  Church  judge."     T.  C.  lib.  ii.  p.  420.] 


284  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sect.  4f* 

dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  in  this  world 
only,  but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come ;"  whereas  the  Power 
which  others  have,  is  subordinate  unto  his.  Secondly,  again, 
as  he  differeth  in  order,  so  in  measure  of  Power  also :  be* 
Psai.  cause  God  hath  given  unto  him  the  ends  of  the  earth  for  his 
possession ;  unto  him,  Dominion  from  sea  to  sea ;  unto  him, 
all  Power  both  in  Heaven  and  in  earth;  unto  him,  such  Sove- 
reignty, as  doth  not  only  reach  over  all  places,  persons,  and 
things,  but  doth  rest  in  his  own  only  person,  and  is  not  by 
any  succession  continued ;  he  reigneth  as  Head  and  King, 
nor  is  there  any  kind  of  Law  which  tieth  him,  but  his  own 
proper  will  and  wisdom;  his  Power  is  absolute,  the  same 
jointly  over  all  which  it  is  severally  over  each :  not  so  the 
Power  of  any  other  Headship.  How  Kings  are  restrained, 
and  how  their  Power  is  limited,  we  have  shewed  before ;  so 
that  unto  him  is  given,  by  the  Title  of  Headship  over  the 
Church,  that  largeness  of  Power,  wherein  neither  Man  nor 
Angel  can  be  matched  or  compared  with  him.  Thirdly,  the 
last  and  greatest  difference  between  him  and  them,  is  in  the 
very  kind  of  their  Power.  The  Head  being,  of  all  other 
parts  of  the  body,  most  divine,  hath  dominion  over  all  the 
rest ;  it  is  the  fountain  of  sense,  of  motion ;  the  throne 
where  the  guide  of  the  soul  doth  reign;  the  court  from 
whence  direction  of  all  things  human  proceedeth.  Why 
Christ  is  called  The  Head  of  the  Church,  these  causes  them- 
selves do  yield.  As  the  Head  is  the  chiefest  part  of  a  man, 
above  which  there  is  none,  always  joined  with  the  body ;  so 
Christ,  the  highest  in  his  Church,  is  always  knit  to  it.  Again, 
as  the  Head  giveth  sense  and  motion  unto  all  the  body,  so 
he  quick*neth  us,  and,  together  with  understanding  of 
heavenly  things,  giveth  strength  to  walk  therein.  Seeing 
therefore,  that  they  cannot  affirm  Christ  sensibly  present,  or 
always  visibly  joined  unto  his  Body  the  Church  which  is  on 
earth,  inasmuch  as  his  corporal  residence  is  in  Heaven; 
again,  seeing  they  do  not  affirm  (it  were  intolerable  if  they 
should)  that  Christ  doth  personally  administer  the  external 
Regiment  of  outward  actions  in  the  Church,  but,  by  the 
secret  inward  influence  of  his  grace,  giveth  spiritual  life  and 
the  strength  of  ghostly  motions  thereunto ;  impossible  it  is, 
that  they  should  so  close  up  their  eyes,  as  not  to  discern 
what  odds  there  is  between  that  kind  of  operation  which  we 
imply  in  the  Headship  of  Princes,  and  that  which  agreeth 


Sect4fJ]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY,  285 

to  our  Saviour's  Dominion  over  the  Church,  The  Headship 
which  we  give  unto  Kings  is  altogther  visibly  exercised^  and 
ordereth  only  the  external  frame  of  the  Church-aiFairs  here 
amongst  us ;  so  that  it  plainly  differeth  from  Christ's,  even 
in  very  nature  and  kind.  To  be  in  such  sort  united  unto 
the  Church  as  he  is ;  to  work  as  he  worketh,  either  on  the 
whole  Church,  or  upon  any  particular  assembly,  or  in  any 
one  man,  doth  neither  agree,  nor  hath  any  possibility  of 
agreeing,  unto  any  one  besides  him. 

Against  the  first  distinction  or  difference,  it  is  to  be  ob-  t.  c. 
jected,  "  That  to  entitle  a  Magistrate  Head  of  the  Church,  p.4ii. 
although  it  be  under  Christ,  is  not*  absurd.  For  Christ 
hath  a  twofold  Superiority,  over  his,  and  over  Kingdoms : 
according  to  the  one,  he  hath  a  Superior,  which  is  his 
Father ;  according  to  the  other,  none,  but  immediate  autho- 
rity with  his  Father;  that  is  to  say,  of  the  Church  he  is  Head 
and  Governor  only  as  the  Son  of  man ;  Head  and  Governor 
of  Kingdoms  only  as  the  Son  of  God."f  "  In  the  Church,  t.  c. 
as  Man,  he  hath  officers  under  him,  which  officers  are  Ec-  pl'iik 
clesiastical  persons :  as  for  the  Civil  Magistrate,  his  Office 
belongeth  unto  Kingdoms,  and  to  Commonwealths,  neither 
is  there  an  under  or  subordinate  Head,  considering  that  his 
Authority  cometh  from  God,  simply  and  immediately,  even 
as  our  Saviour  Christ's  doth."t  Whereunto  the  sum  of  our 
answer  is,  first.  That  as  Christ  being  Lord  or  Head  over  all, 
doth  by  virtue  of  that  Sovereignty  rule  all ;  so  he  hath  no 
more  a  Superior  in  governing  his  Church,  than  in  exercising 
sovereign  Dominion  upon  the  rest  of  the  world  besides: 
secondly,  That  all  Authority,  as  well  Civil  as  Ecclesiastical, 
is  subordinate  unto  him :  and,  thirdly,  The  Civil  Magistrate 
being  termed  Head,  by  reason  of  that  Authority  in  Ecclesias- 
tical affairs  which  hath  been  already  declared  that  themselves 

•  [Delete  «  not"] 

f  Revert  to  the  Note  in  p.  281,  where  T.  C/s  own  words  are  given.] 
X  [T.  C.'s  own  words  are :  "  The  Doctor  (Whitgift)  in  confessing  diat  the  Magistrate  is 
ordained  of  God  immediately,  standeth  with  us  that  he  is  not  ordained  of  our  Saviour  Christ 
in  respect  that  he  is  Mediator  between  God  and  us.  Hereupon  foUoweth,  that  the  office  of 
the  Civil  Magistrate  is  properly  one  of  those  means  which  serveth  the  Lord's  providence  in 
the  preservation  of  mankind.  Now  if  the  Civil  Magistrate  should  be  the  head  of  the  Church, 
he  must  be  an  under  and  subordinate  head  of  Christ :  considering  that  the  Lord  hath  com- 
mitted the  government  of  the  Church  unto  our  Saviour  Christ ;  and  that  otherwise  there 
should  be  two  heads  of  it,  whereof  one  were  not  under  another ;  which  is  absurd.  But  he  is 
not  an  under  and  subordinate  head  of  Christ,  considering  that  his  authority  cometh  from  God, 
simply  and  immediately,  even  as  our  Saviour  Christ's ;  and  therefore  not  the  head  of  the 
Church."    lib.  ii.  p.  417.] 


i.8. 


286  THE   EIGHTH   BOOK  \SeC§.  4« 

do   in   word    acknowledge   to   be   lawful,  *    it    followeth, 
that  he  is  a  Head  even  subordinated  of  Christ,  and  to 
[Matt.    Christ.    For  more  plain  explication  whereof,  unto  God  we 
^**^^     acknowledge  daily,  that  kingdom,  power,  and  glory,   are 
ri  Tim.  his ;  that  he  is  the  immortal  and  invisible  King  of  ages ; 
*  ^^'^     as  well  the  future  which  shall  be,  as  the  present  which  now 
is.     That  which  the  Father  doth  work  as  Lord  and  King 
over  all,  he  worketh  not  without,  but  by  the  Son,  who 
through  co-eternal  generation  receiveth  of  the  Father  that 
Power  which  the  Father  hath  of  himself.     And  for  that 
cause  our  Saviour's  words  concerning  his  own  Dominion 
[Malt.    fl-rCf  "  To  me  all  Power  both  in  Heaven  and  earth  is  given." 
xxviu.    rj^jjg  Father  by  the  Son  did  create,  and  doth  guide  all; 
wherefore  Christ  hath  supreme  Dominion  over  the  whole 
universal  world.     Christ  is  God,  Christ  is  Aoyoc,  the  con- 
substantial  Word  of  God ;  Christ  is  also  that  consubstantial 
Apoc.     Word  which  made  man.     As  God,  he  saith  of  himself,  "  I 
am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end :  He 
which  was,  and  which  is,  and  which  is  to  come ;  even  the 
very  Omnipotent."    As  the  consubstantial  Word  of  Gx)d, 
he  hath  with  God,  before  the  beginning  of  the  world,  that 
John     glory,  which,  as  he  was  man,  he  requireth  to  have;  *' Father, 
glorify  thy  Son  with  that  glory  which  with  thee  he  enjoyed 
before  the  world  was."    Further,  it  is  not  necessary  that 
all  tilings  spoken  of  Christ  should  agree  to  him  either  as 
God,  or  else  as  man  ;  but  some  things  as  he  is  the  consub- 
stantial Word  of  God,  some  things  as  he  is  that  Word  in- 
carnate.      The  works  of  supreme   Dominion  which  have 
been  since  the  first  beginning  wrought  by  the  Power  of  the 
Son  of  God,  are  now  most  properly  and  truly  the  works  of 
[John     the  Son  of  man :  the  Word  made  flesh  doth  sit  for  ever, 
and  reign  as  sovereign  Lord  over  all.*    Dominion  belongeth 
unto  the  Kingly  Office  of  Christ,  as  propitiation  and  medi- 
ation unto  his  Priestly;  instruction,  unto  his  Pastoral  and 
Prophetical  Office.     His  works  of  Dominion  are,  in  sundry 
degrees  and  kinds,  according  to  the  different  conditions  of 
them  which  are  subject  unto  it :  he  presently  doth  govern, 
and  hereafter  shall  judge  the  world,  in  tire  and  wholly ;  and 
therefore  his  Regal  Power  cannot  be  with  truth  restrained 
unto  a  proportion  of  the  world  only.     Notwithstanding, 

♦  [See  Note  f  p.  283.] 


zvii.  5. 


1.  14.] 


Seci.4f.]  OP   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  2&7 

forasmuch  as  all  do  not  shew  and  acknowledge,  with  dutiful 
submission,  that  obedience  which  they  owe  unto  him ;  there- 
fore such  as  do,  their  Lord  he  is  termed  by  way  of  excel- 
lency, no  otherwise  than  the  Apostle  doth  term  God  the  [i  Tim. 
Succour*  generally  of  all,  but  especially  of  the  faithful :  these  '^*  ^^'^ 
being  brought  to  the  obedience  of  faith,  are  every  where  CR?n>.  ^ 
spoken  of  as  men  translated  into  that  Kingdom,  wherein 
whosoever  is  comprehended,  Christ  is  the  author  of  eternal 
salvation  unto  them ;  they  have  a  high  and  ghostly  fellow- 
ship with  God  and  Christ,  and  Saints ;  or,  as  the  Apostle 
in  more  ample  manner  speaketh,  '^  Aggregated  they  are  Heb. 
unto  Mount  Sion,   and  the  City  of  the  living  God,   the2^^4. 
celestial  Jerusalem,   and  to  the  company  of  innumerable 
Angels,  and  to  the  Congregation  of  the  First-born,  which 
are  written  in  Heaven,  and  to  God  the  Judge  of  all,  and 
to  the  Spirits  of  just  and  perfect  men,  and  to  Jesus  the 
Mediator  of  the  New  Testament."    In  a  word,  they  are  of 
that  mystical  Body,  which  we  term  the  Church  of  Christ. 
As  for  the  rest,  we  account  them  "  aliens  from  the  Com-[Ep.H. 


IS. 


s- 


monwealth  of  Israel,  and  that  live  in  the  Kingdom  of  dark- 
ness, and  that  are  in  this  present  world  without  God." 
Our  Saviour's  Dominion  is  therefore  over  these,  as  over 
rebels;  over  them,  as  over  dutiful  and  loving  subjects. 
Which  things  being  in  Holy  Scriptures  so  plain,  I  some- 
what muse  at  the  strange  positions,  that  Christ  ^'  in  the 
Government  of  his  Church,  and  Superiority  over  the  officers 
of  it,  hath  himself  a  Superior  which  is  the  Father ;"  but 
in  governing  of  Kingdoms  and  Commonwealths,  and  in 
the  Superiority  which  he  hath  over  Kingdoms,  **  no  Su- 
perior."+ 

Again,  "  That  the  Civil  Magistrate's  Authority  cometh  t.  c. 
from  God  immediately,  as  Christ's  doth,  and  is  not  subordi-  ^l^'^i. 
nate  unto  Christ."  In  what  Evangelist,  Apostle,  or  Prophet, 
is  it  found,  that  Christ  (supreme  Governor  of  the  Church) 
should  be  so  unequal  to  himself,  as  he  is  supreme  Governoi: 
of  Kingdoms  ?  The  works  of  his  providence  for  the  pre- 
servation of  mankind  by  upholding  Kingdoms,  not  only 
obedient  unto,  but  also  obstinate  and  rebellious  against, 
him,  are  such  as  proceed  from  divine  Power ;  and  are  not 

*  ["  Saviour  of  all  men;"  thus  in  Tim.     Dr.  Doddridge  in  loc,  Fam,  Expos,  says,  **  This 
teems  a  title  parallel  to  that  in  Job  vii.  20, '  Preserver  of  men.'  ""^ 
t  [Compare  with  the  Note,  p.  281.] 


288  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sect.  4. 

the  works  of  his  providence  for  safety  of  God's  elect,  by 
gathering)  inspiring,  comforting,  and  every  way  preserving, 
his  Church,  such  as  proceed  from  the  same  Power  likewise  ? 
Surely,  if  Christ,  as  God  and  man,  have  ordained  certain 
means  for  the  gathering  and  keeping  of  his  Church,  seeing 
this  doth  belong  to  the  Government  of  that  Church ;  it  must 
in  reason  follow,  I  think,  that  as  God  and  man  he  worketh 
in  Church-regiment ;  and  consequently  hath  no  more  there 
any  superiors,   than  in  the  Government  of  the  Common- 
[Matt.    wealth.     Again,  to  ^^  be  in  the  midst  of  his,  wheresoever 
i9,^lj   they  are  assembled  in  his  name,"  and  to  be  *'  with  them  to 
the  world's  end,"  are  comforts  which  Christ  doth  perform  to 
his  Church  as  Lord  and  Governor ;  yea,  such  as  he  cannot 
perform  but  by  that  very  Power  wherein  he  hath  no  Su- 
perior.    Wherefore,  unless  it  can  be  proved,  that  all  the 
works  of  our  Saviour's  Government  in  the  Church  are  done 
by  the  mere  and  only  force  of  his  human  nature,  there  is  no 
remedy  but  to  acknowledge  it  a  manifest  error.  That  Christ 
in  the  Government  of  the  World  is  equal  to  the  Father,  but 
not  in  the  Government  of  the  Church.   Indeed,  to  the  honour 
of  this  Dominion,  it  cannot  be  said,  that  God  did  exalt  him 
otherwise  than  only  according  to  that  human  nature  wherein 
he  was  made  low.     For,  as  the  Son  of  God,  there  could 
no  advancement  or  exaltation  jgrow  unto  him :  and  yet  the 
Dominion  whereunto  he  was  in  his  human  nature  lifted  up, 
is   not  without   divine  Power  exercised.     It  is   by  divine 
Power,  that  the  Son  of  man,  who  sitteth  in  Heaven,  doth 
work  as  King  and  Lord  upon  us  which  are  on  earth.     The 
exercise  of  his  Dominion  over  the  Church  Militant  cannot 
choose  but  cease,  when   there   is  no  longer  any  Militant 
Church  in  the  world.     And  therefore,  as  Generals  of  Ar- 
mies, when  they  have  finished  their  work,  are  wont  to  yield 
up  such  commissions  as  were  given  for  that  purpose,  and 
to  remain  in  the  state  of  subjects,  and  not  as  lords,  as  con- 
cerning their  former  authority ;  even  so,  when  the  end  of 
[1  Cor.    ^^^  things  is  come,  the  Son  of  man  (who  till  then  reigneth) 
i«,«4.j  shall  do  the  like,  as  touching  Regiment  over  the  Militant 
Church  on  the  earth.     So  that  between  the  Son  of  man  and 
his  brethren,  over  whom  he  reigneth  now  in  this  their  war- 
fare, there  shall  be  then,  as  touching  the  exercise  of  that 
[Ver.  27,  Regiment,  no  such  difference ;  they  are  not  warfaring  any 
longer  under  him,  but  he,  together  with  them,  under  God, 


'SecL  4.]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  ;289 

teceiving  the  joys  of  everlasting  triumph^  that  so  God  may 
be  alMn  all;  all  misery  in  all  the  wicked^  through  his  justice; 
in  all  the  righteous^  through  his  love^  all  felicity  and  bliss. 
In  the  meanwhile  he  reigneth  over  the  world  as  King^  and 
doth  those  things  wherein  none  is  Superior  unto  him,  whether 
we  respect  thb  works  of  his  Providence  and  Kingdom^  or  of 
his  Regiment  over  the  Church :  the  cause  of  error  in  this 
point  doth  seem  to  have  been  a  misconceit,  that  Christ,  as 
Mediator,  being  inferior  to  his  Father,  doth,  as  Mediator, 
all  works  of  Regiment  over  the  Church ;  when,  in  truth. 
Regiment  doth  belong  to  his  Kingly  Office,  Mediatorship 
to  his  Priestly.     For,  as  the  High-priest  both  offered  sacri- 
fices, for  expiation  of  the  people's  sins,  and  entered  into  the 
Holy  Place,  there  to  make  intercession  for  them ;  so  Christ, 
having  finished  upon  the  Cross  that  part  of  his  Priestly 
Office  which  wrought  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,   did  Heb. 
afterwards  enter  into  very  Heaven,  and  doth  there,  as  Me-  '* 
diator  of  the  New  Testament,  appear  in  the  sight  of  God 
for  us.     A  like  sleight  of  judgment  it  is,  when  they  hold,  t.  c^ 
that   Civil  Authority   is   from   God,   but  not  immediately  p.  418. 
through  Christ,  nor  with  any  subordination  to  God  [Chrisf]^ 
nor  doth  any  thing  from  God  but  by  the  hands  of  our  Lord  Prov. 
Jesus  Christ.     They  deny  it  not  to  be  said  of  Christ  in  Hombie 
the  Old  Testament,  "  By  me  Princes  rule,  and  the  Nobles,  ^^'^T* 
and  all  the  Judges  of  the  eatth."    In  the  New  as  much  is 
taught,  ^^That  Christ  is  the  Prince  of  the  Kings  of  the  Rev.  1.5. 
earth."    Wherefore,  to  the  end  it  may  more  plainly  appear 
how  all  Authority  of  man  is  derived  from  God  through 
Christ,  and  must  by  Christian  men  be  acknowledged  to  be 
no  otherwise  held  than  of  and  under  him ;  we  are  to  note, 
that,  because  whatsoever  hath  necessary  being,  the  Son  of 
Gk)d  doth  cause  it  to  be,  and  those  things  without  which 
the  world  cannot  well  continue,  have  necessary  being  in  the 
world ;  a  thing  of  so  great  use  as  Government  cannot  choose  Rom. 
but  be  originally  from  him.    Touching  that  Authority  which  ***^*  ** 
Civil  Magistrates   have  in   Ecclesiastical  affairs,  it,  being 
from  God  by  Christ,  as  all  other  good  things  are,  cannot 
choose  but  be  held  as  a  thing  received  at  his  hands ;  and 
because   such  Power  is  of  necessity  for  the  ordering  of 
Religion,  wherein  the  essence  and  very  being  of  the  Church 
consisteth,  and  can  no  otherwise  flow  from  him,  than  ac- 
cording to  that  special  care  which  he  hath  to  govern  and 

VOL.  III.  u 


290  THE   EIGHTH   BOOK  {SecL  4. 

guide  his  own  people,  it  followetb,  that  the  said  Authority 
is  of  and  under  him  after  a  more  special  manner,  in  that 
^'  he  is  Head  of  the  Church/'  and  not  in  respect  of  his 
1  Cor.    general  Regency  over  the  world.    *'  All  things  (saith  the 
2^  23.   Apostle,  speaking  unto  the  Church)  are  yours,  and  ye  are 
Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."    Kings  are  Christ's  as  Saints, 
because  they  are  of  the  Church,  if  not  collectively^  yet  divi- 
sively  understood.     It  is  over  each  particular  person  within 
that  Church  where   they  are  Kings;    surely.    Authority 
reacheth  both  unto  all  men's  persons,  and  to  all  kinds  of 
causes  also :  it  is  not  denied  but  that  they  may  have  and 
lawfully  exercise  it;  such  Authority  it  is,  for  which,  and 
for  no  other  in  the  world,  we  term  them  Heads ;  such  Au- 
[Rom.    thority  they  have  under  Christ,  because  he  in  all  things 
**  ^^    is  Lord  over  all ;  and  even  of  Christ  it  is  that  they  have 
Rom.    received  such  Authority,  inasmuch  as  of  him  all  lawful 
'  *  '    Powers  are:   therefore  the  Civil  Magistrate  is,  in  regard 
of  this  Power,  an  under  and  subordinate  Head  of  Christ's 
people. 
T.  c.         It  is  but  idle  where  they  speak,  "  That  althou^,  for 
P?4i8*.    several  companies  of  men,  there  may  be  several  Heads  6t 
Governors,  differing  in  the  measure  of  their  authority  from 
the  chiefest,  who  is  Head  over  all ;  yet  seeing  it  cannot  be 
in  the  Church,  for  that  the  reason  why  Head-magistrates 
appoint  others  for  such  several  places  is,   because  they 
cannot  be  present  every  whiere  to  perform  the  Office  of  an 
Head.     But  Christ  is  never  from  his  body,  nor  from  any 
part  of  it,  and  therefore  needeth  not  to  substitute  any, 
which  may  be  Heads,  some  over  one  Church  and  same 
over  another."*      Indeed  the  consideration  of  man*s  im- 
becility, which  maketh  many  heads  necessary  where  the 
[Exod.   burthen  is  too  great  for  one,  moved  Jetliro  to  be  a  per- 
^]*   'suader  of  Moses,  that  the  number  of  Heads  or  Rulers 
might  be  instituted  for  discharge  of  that  duty  by  parts, 
which  in  whole  he  saw  was  troublesome.     Now,  although 

*  [T.  C.'s  words  are,  *'  If  it  be  said  that  the  Civil  Magistrate  is  a  subordinate  and  minis- 
terial head  of  the  Church,  as  the  Magistrate  being  head  of  the  Commonwealth  hath  other 
which  may  be  called  under  heads  beneath  him;  he  (Dr.  Whitgift)  must  understand  that 
those  heads  are  appointed  because  the  chief  magistrate  cannot  be  present  with  the  whole  body 
of  his  people,  nor  in  his  own  person  perform  the  office  of  a  head  unto  them  all.  But  foras- 
much as  Christ  is  never  severed  from  his  body,  nor  from  any  part  of  it,  and  is  able  and  doth 
perform  that  wherefore  he  is  called  Head  unto  all  his  Church ;  it  ought  not  to  seem  strange 
tliat  there  may  be  a  subordinate  head  in  the  Commonwealth,  where  there  can  be  none  in  the 
Church."] 


Sect.  4.]  OF  ECCLESIASTIOAL  POLITY.  291 

there  be  not  in  Christ  any  such  defect  or  weakness,  yet 
other  causes  there  be  divers,  more  than  we  are  able  to 
search  into,  wherefore  it  might  seem  unto  him  expedient 
to  divide  his  Kingdom  into  many  Provinces,  and  place  many 
Heads  over  it,  that  the  Power  which  each  of  them  hath 
in  particular  with  restraint,  might  illustrate  the  greatness 
of  his  unlimited  Authority.     Besides,  howsoever  Christ  be 
Spiritually  always  united  unto  every  part  of  his  Body,  which 
is  the  Church;  nevertheless,  we  do  all  know,  and  they  them- 
selves who  allege  this,  will,  J  doubt  [not],  confess  also,  that 
from  every  Church  here  visible,  Christ,  touching  visible  and 
corporal  presence,  is  removed  as  far  as  Heaven  from  the 
earth  is  distant.     Visible  Government  is  a  thing  necessary 
for  the  Church ;  and  it  doth  not  appear  how  the  exercise  of 
visible  Government  over  such  multitudes  every  where  dis- 
persed throughout  the  world,  should  consist  without  sundry 
visible  Governors ;  whose  Power  being  the  greatest  in  that 
kind,  so  far  as  it  reacheth,  they  are  in  consideration  thereof 
termed  so  far  Heads.     Wherefore,  notwithstanding  the  per- 
petual conjunction,  by  virtue  whereof  our  Saviour  always 
remaineth  Spiritually  united  unto  the  parts  of  his  mystical 
Body;  Heads  indeed  with  Supreme  Power,  extending  to  a 
certain  compass,  are  for  the  exercise  of  a  visible  Regiment 
not  unnecessary.     Some  other  reasons  there  are  belonging 
unto  this  branch  which  seem  to  have  been  objected,  rather 
for  the  exercise  of  men's  wits  in  dissolving  sophisms,  than 
that  the  authors  of  them  could  think  in  likelihood  thereby 
to  strengthen  their  cause.     For  example,  ^*  If  the  Magis-  t.  c. 
irate  be  <  Head  of  the  Church  within  his  own  Dominion,  then  p.^iik. 
is  he  none  of  the  Church :  for  all  that  are  of  the  Church 
make  the  Body  of  Christ,  and  every  one  of  the  Church 
fblfiUeth  the  place  of  one  member  of  the  Body.     By  making  ut  Hen. 
the  Magistrate  therefore  Head,  we  do  exclude  him  from^^^'* 
being  a  member  subject  to  the  Head,  and  so  leave  him  no 
place  in  the  Church.'*     By  which  reason,  the  name  of  a 
Body  politic  is  supposed  to  be  always  taken  of  the  inferior 
sort  alone,  excluding  the  principal  Guides  and  Governors, 
contrary  to  all  men's  customs  of  speech.     The  error  ariseth 
by  misconceiving  of  some  Scripture  sentences,  where  Christ 
as  the  Head,  and  the  Church  as  the  Body,  are  compared  or 
opposed  the  one  to  the  other.    And  because  in  such  com- 
parisons of  oppositions,  the  Body  is  taken  for  those  only 

u2 


292  THE   EIGHTH   BOOK  [SecL  4f* 

parts  which  are  subject  unto  the  Head/  they  imagine  That 
whoso  is  the  Head  of  any  Churchy  he  is  therefore  even 
excluded  from  being  a  part  of  that  Church ;  That  the  Magis- 
trate can  be  none  of  the  Church,  if  so  we  make  him  the 
Head  of  the  Church  in  his  own  Dominions :  a  chief  and 
principal  part  of  the  Church  therefore  next  this,  is  surely 
a  strange  conclusion.  A  Church  doth  indeed  make  the 
Body  of  Christ,  being  wholly  taken  together;  and  every 
one  in  the  same  Church  fulfilleth  the  place  of  a  member  in 
the  Body,  but  not  the  place  of  an  inferior  member  the 
which  hath  Supreme  Authority  and  Power  over  all  the  rest. 
Wherefore,  by  making  the  Magistrate  Head  in  his  own  Do- 
minions, we  exclude  him  from  being  a  member  subject  unto 
any  other  person  which  may  visibly  there  rule  in  place  of  a 
Superior  or  Head  over  him ;  but  so  far  are  we  off  from 
leaving  him  by  this  means  no  place  in  the  Church,  that  we 
do  grant  him  the  chief  place.  Indeed  the  Heads  of  those 
visible  Bodies,  which  are  many,  can  be  but  parts  inferior  in 
that  Spiritual  Body  which  is  but  one ;  yea,  they  may  from 
this  be  excluded  clean,  who  notwithstanding  ought  to  be 
honoured,  as  possessing  in  order  the  highest  rooms :  but  for 
the  Magistrate  to  be  termed,  in  his  Dominions,  an  Head, 
doth  not  bar  him  from  being  any  way  a  part  or  member  of 
the  Church  of  God. 

[T.  c.         As  little  to   the  purpose  are  those   other  cavils  :    "  A 

p.  412.]  Church  which  hath  the  Magistrate  for  Head,  is  perfect 
man  without  Christ ;  so  that  the  knitting  of  our  Saviour 
thereunto  should  be  an  addition  of  that  which  is  too  much.*' 

[Ibid.]  Again,  "  If  the  Church  be  the  Body  of  Christ,  and  of  the 
Civil  Magistrate,  it  shall  have  two  Heads;  which  being 
monstrous,   is   to  the  great  dishonour  of  Christ  and  his 

[Ibid.]  Church."  Thirdly,  "  If  the  Church  be  planted  in  a  popular 
estate,  then,  forasmuch  as  all  govern  in  common,  and  all 
have  authority,  all  shall  be  Heads  there,  and  no  Body  at 
all;  which  is  another  monster."  It  might  be  feared  what 
this  birth  of  so  many  monsters  together  might  portend,  but 
that  we  know  how  things,  natural  enough  in  themselves, 
may  seem  monstrous,  through  misconceit ;  which  error  of 
mind  is  indeed  a  monster :  and  the  skilful  in  Nature's  mys- 
teries have  used  to  term  it  the  womb  of  monsters ;  if  any  be, 
it  is  that  troubled  understanding,  wherein,  because  things 
lie  confusedly  mixt  together,  what  they  are  it   appeareth 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  29S 

not.  A  Church  perfect  without  Christy  I  know  not  how  a 
man  shall  imagine ;  unless  there  may  be  either  Christianity 
without  Christy  or  else  a  Church  without  Christianity.  If 
Magistrates  be  Heads  of  the  Church,  they  are  of  necessity 
Christians,*  then  is  their  Head  Christ.  The  adding  of 
Christ  universal  Head  over  all,  unto  Magistrates*  parti- 
cular Headship,  is  no  more  superfluous  in  any  Church 
than  in  other  Societies :  each  is  to  be  both  severally  subject 
unto  some  Head,  and  to  have  a  Head  also  general  for 
them  all  to  be  subject  unto.  For  so  in  Armies,  in  Civil 
Corporations,  we  see  it  fareth.  A  Body  Politic,  in  such 
respects,  is  not  like  a  natural  body ;  in  this,  more  Heads 
than  one  is  superfluous;  in  that,  not.  It  is  neither  mon- 
strous, nor  yet  uncomely,  for  a  Church  to  have  different 
Heads :  for  if  Christian  Churches  be  in  number  many,  and 
every  of  them  a  perfect  Body  by  itself,  Christ  being  Lord 
and  Head  over  all ;  why  should  we  judge  it  a  thing  more 
monstrous  for  one  Body  to  have  two  Heads,  than  one  Head 
so  many  Bodies  tf  Him,  that  God  hath  made  the  Supreme 
Head  of  the  whole  Church ;  the  Head,  not  only  of  that 
mystical  Body  which  the  eye  of  man  is  not  able  to  discern, 
but  even  of  every  Christian  politic  Society,  of  every  visible 
Church  in  the  world  ?  And  whereas,  lastly,  it  is  thought 
80  strange,  that  in  Popular  States  a  multitude  to  itself  should 
be  both  Body  and  Head;  all  this  wonderment  doth  grow 
from  a  litde  oversight,  in  deeming  that  the  subject  wherein 
Headship  ought  to  reside,  should  be  evermore  some  one 
person ;  which  thing  is  not  necessary.  For  in  the  Collective 
Body  that  hath  not  derived  as  yet  tho  Principality  of  Power 
into  some  one  or  few,  the  whole  of  necessity  must  be  Head 
over  each  part ;  otherwise  it  could  not  have  Power  possibly 
to  make  any  one  certain  person  Head :  inasmuch  as  the 
very  Power  of  making  a  Head  belongeth  unto  Headship. 
These  supposed  **  monsters'*  we  see  therefore  are  no  such 
giants,  as  that  there  should  need  any  Hercules  to  tame 
them. 

The  last  difference  which  we  have  between  the  Title  of 


♦  [See  Baxter,  §  22,  vi  sup.  p.  266.] 

f  ("  I  have  used  the  term  great  Head  of  the  Church  by  way  of  distinction  from  that  lUUe 
bead  which  the  Church  of  England  has  invented,  and  on  which,  whether  it  be  a  beauty  or 
deformity  in  the  Body  of  Christ,  the  Scriptures  are  certadnly  silent."  Rev.  Rob.  Hall,  A.  M» 
in  the  Lekuttr  Ckronkle,  Sat.  Feb.  9,  1822.] 


294  '^^^  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sect.  4. 

Head  when  we  give  it  unto  Christ,  and  when  we  give  it  to 

other  Governors,  is,  that  the  kind  of  Dominion  which  it 

rwhitg.  importeth  is  not  the  same  in  both.     Christ  is  Head,  as  being 

A^8*/    the  fountain  of  life  and  ghostly  nutriment,  the  w^llspring 

p.  301.]  ^^  spiritual  blessings  poured  into  the  Body  of  the  Church; 

they  Heads,  as  being  the  principal  instruments  for  the 

Church's  outward  government:  he  Head,  as  Founder  of 

the  House ;  they,  as  his  chiefest  Overseers.     Against  this 

[T.  c.    is  exception  especially  taken,  and  our  purveyors  are  herein 

P^4i4.j  said  to  have  their  provision  from  the  Popish  shambles:  for 

by  Pighius  and  Harding,*"  to  prove  that  Christ  alone  is  not 

Head  of  the  Church,  this  distinction,  they  say,  is  brought, 

"  that  according  to  the  inward  influence  of  grace,  Christ 

only  is  Head;  but  according  to  the  outward  government, 

the  being  Head  is  a  thing  common  to  him  with  others." 

To  raise  up  falsehoods  of  old  condemned,  and  bring  it  for 

confirmation  of  any  thing  doubtful,  which  already  hath  suf-* 

ficiently  been  proved  an  error,  and  is  worthily  so  taken,  this 

would  justly  deserve  censuring.     But  shall  manifest  truth 

therefore  be  reproached,  because  men  convicted  in  some 

things  of  manifest  untruth  have  at  any  time  thought  or 

alleged  it?     If  too  much  eagerness  against  their  adversaries 

had  not  made  them  forget  themselves,  they  might  remember 

where  being  charged  as  maintainers  of  those  very  things, 

for  which   others  before  them  have   been   condemned  of 

Heresy ;  yet,  lest  the  name  of  any  such  Heretic  holding  the 

same  which  they  do,  should  make  them  odious,  they  stick 

T.  G.      not  frankly  to  confess,  *'  That  they  are  not  afraid  to  consent 

p.  168.*    in  some  points  with  Jews  and  Turks."t    Which  defence, 

for  all  that,  were  a  very  weak  buckler  for  such  as  should 

consent  with  Jews  and  Turks  in  that  which  they  have  been 

abhorred  and  hated  for  in  the  Church.     But  as  for  this 

♦  [Pig.  Hierar,  EccL  lib.  iii.  c.  4.  Hard.  Def.  of  the  Apol,  pLii.  c.  2.] 
f  ["  So  that  so  ^  as  we  consent  here  with  papists,  we  do  it,  as  in  the  article  of  the  Hdy 
Trinity,  where  we  have  with  warrant  of  the  Word  of  God,  the  approbation  also  of  the  best 
We  hold  with  them,  things  in  common :  in  which  respect  we  are  not  afraid  to  confess,  that 
we  consent  in  some  points  with  the  Jews  and  Turks,  or  rather  they  with  us.  But  yon 
(Dr.  W.)  are  found  in  divers  places  in  their  private  orchards,  gathering  your  fruit  off  trees 
which  their  hands  did  first  plant ;  and  from  thence  you  bring  your  stocks,  which  you  would 
place  in  the  Lord's  vineyard."  "  How  unworthy  outcries  they  be  which  he  so  oft  raiseth 
against  us ;  that  '  we  give  no  more  to  a  godly  Christian  Magistrate  than  to  the  Tuik  or 
Nero,'  with  such  like:  for  who  will  communicate  the  Church  matters  with  Nero;  open  to 
him  the  necessity  of  holding  a  Council;  desire  his  confirmation  of  the  Church  Orders; 
pray  his  aid  in  the  maintaining  them ;  call  upon  him  as  well  for  making  them,  where  the 
lawful  Ministry  faileth,  as  for  redress  of  the  evil?"     T.  C.  lib.  iii.  p.  168, 169.] 


Sect.  4.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  295 

distinction  of  Headship,  Spiritual  and  mjstical  in  Jesus 
Christ,  ministerial  and  outward  in  others  besides  Christ; 
what  cause  is  there  to  mislike  either  Harding,  or  Pighius, 
or  any  other  besides,  for  it?     That  which  they  have  been 
reproved  for,  is,  not  because  they  did  therein  utter  an 
untrudi,  but  such  a  truth  as  was  not  sufficient  to  bear  up 
the  cause'  which  they  did  thereby  seek  to  maintain.     By 
this  distinction,  they  have  both  tridy  and  sufficiently  proved 
that  the  name  of  Head,  importing  Power  and  Dominion 
over  the  Church,  might  be  given  to  others  besides  Christ, 
without  prejudice  to  any  part  of  his  honour.     That  which 
they  should  have  made  manifest  was,  [that]  the  name  of 
Head,  importing  the  Power  of  universal  Dominion  over  the 
whole  Church  of  Christ  militant,  doth,  and  that  by  Divine 
Bight,  appertain  to  the  Pope  of  Borne.     They  did  prove 
it  lawful  to  grant  unto  others  besides  Christ,  the  Power  of 
Headship  in  a  different  kind  from  his;  but  they  should 
have  proved  it  lawful  to  challenge,  as  they  did  to  the  Bishop 
of  Bome,  a  Power  universal  in  that  different  kind.     Their 
£5iult  was  therefore  in  exacting  wrongfully  so  great  Power 
as  they  challenged  in  that  kind;   and  not  in  making  two 
kinds  of  Power,  unless  some  reasons  can  be  shewed  for 
which  thia  distinction  of  Power  should  be  thought  erro- 
neous and  false.    A  little  they  stir  (although  in  vain)  to 
prove  that  we  cannot  with  truth  make  such  distinction  of 
Power,  whereof  the  one  kind  should  agree  unto  Christ  only, 
and  the  other  be  further  communicated.     Thus  therefore 
they  argue,  '*  If  there  be  no  Head  but  Christ,  iii  respect  of  t.c* 
Spiritual  Grovemment,  there  is  no  Head  but  he  in  respect  of  pf^iS;; 
the  Word,  Sacraments,  and  Discipline,  administered  by 
those  whom  he  hath  appointed,  forasmuch  also  as  it  is  his 
Spiritual  Government.^'    Their  meaning  is,  that  whereas  we 
make  two  kinds  of  Power,  of  which  two,  the  one  being  Spi- 
ritual is  proper  unto  Christ;  the  other,  men  are  capable  of, 
because  it  is  visible  and  external;  we  do  amiss  altogether 
in  distinguishing,  they  think,  forasmuch  as  the  visible  and 
external  Power  of  Begiment  over  the  Church,  is  only  in 
relation  unto  the  Word,  the  Sacraments,  and  Discipline, 
administered  by  such  as  Christ  hath  appointed  thereunto, 
and  the  exercise  of  this  Power  is  also  his  Spiritual  Govern- 
ment;  therefore  we  do  but  vainly  imagine  a  visible  and 
external  Power  in  the  Church  difiering  from  his  Spiritual 


^96  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  {Sect.  4ss 

Power.     Such  disputes  as  this  doth  somewhat  resemble  the 
practising  of  well-willers  upon  their  friends  in  the  pangs  of 
death ;  whose  manner  is^  even  then,  to  put  smoke  in  their 
nostrils,  and  so  to  fetch  them  again,  although  they  know 
it  a  matter  impossible  to  keep  them  living.     The  kind  of 
affection  which  the  favourers  of  this  labouring  Cause  bear 
towards  it  will  not  suffer  them  to  see  it  die,  although  by 
what  means  they  should  make   it  live,   they  do   hot  see. 
But  they  may  see  that  these  wrestlings  will  not  help.     Can 
*    they  be  ignorant  how  little  it  booteth  to  overcast  so  clear  a 
light  with  some  mist  of  ambiguity  in  the  name  of  Spiritual 
Regiment?     To  make  things  therefore  so  plain,  that  hence- 
forward a  child's  capacity  may  serve  rightly  to  conceive 
our  meaning,  we  make  the  Spiritual  Regiment  of  Christ 
to   be    generally  that  whereby  his   Church  is  ruled  and 
governed  in  things  Spiritual.     Of  this  general  we  make  two 
distinct  kinds ;  the  one  invisible,  exercised  by  Christ  him- 
self in  his  own  person ;  the  other  outwardly  administered 
by  them  whom  Christ  doth  allow  to  be  Rulers  and  Guiders 
of  his  Church.    Touching  the  former  of  these  two  kinds^  we 
teach  that  Christ,  in  regard  thereof,  is  particularly  termed 
The  Hetkd  of  the  Church  of  God;  neither  can  any  other 
creature,   in    that  sense   and  meaning,    be   termed   Head 
besides  him ;  because  it  importeth  the  conduct  and  govern- 
[Eph.i.  ment  of  our  souls  by  the  hand  of  that  blessed  Spirit  where- 
with we  are  sealed  and  marked,  as  being  peculiarly  his; 
him  only  therefore  do  we   acknowledge   to  be  the  Lord, 
which  dwelleth,  liveth,  and  reigneth,  in  our  hearts;   him 
only  to  be  that  Head,  which  giveth  salvation  and  life  unto 
his  Body ;  him  only  to  be  that  Fountain  from  whence  the 
influence  of  heavenly  graces  distilleth,  and  is  derived  into 
all  parts,  whether  the  Word,  or  the  Sacraments,  or  Disci- 
pline, or  whatsoever  be  the  means  whereby  it  floweth.     As 
for  the  Power  of  administering  these  things  in  the  Church 
of  Christ,  which  Power  we  call  the  Power  of  Order,  it  is 
indeed  both  Spiritual  and  His:  Spiritual,  because  such  pro- 
perly concerns  the  Spirit ;  His,  because  by  him  it  was  insti- 
tuted.   Howbeit,  neither  Spiritual,  as  that  which  is  inwardly 
and  invisibly  exercised ;  nor  His,  as  that  which  he  himself  in 
person  doth  exercise.     Again,   that   Power  of  Dominion, 
which  is  indeed  the  point  of  this  controversy,  and  doth  also 
belong  to  the  second  kind  of  Spiritual  Government,  namelyi 


Sect.  4.}  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  297 

unto  that  Regiment  which  is  external  and  visible;  this  like- 
wise being  Spiritual  in  regard  of  the  matter  about  which  it 
dealeth^  and  being  His^  inasmuch  as  he  approveth  whatso- 
ever is  done  by  it^  must  notwithstanding  be  distinguished 
also  from  that  Power  whereby  he  himself  in  person  admi- 
nistereth  the  former  kind  of  his  own  Spiritual  Regiment, 
because  he  himself  in  person  doth  not  administer  this :  we 
do  not,  therefore,  vainly  imagine,  but  truly  and  rightly 
discern  a  Power  external  and  visible  in  the  Church  exer-> 
cised  by  men,  and  severed  in  nature  from  that  Spiritual 
Power  of  Christ's  own  Regiment ;  which  Power  is  termed 
Spiritual,  because  it  worketh  secretly,  inwardly,  and  invi- 
sibly ;  His,  because  none  doth,  nor  can,  it  personally  exer- 
cise, either  besides  or  together  with  him ;  seeing  that  him 
only  we  may  name  our  Head,  in  regard  of  his,  and  yet, 
in  regard  of  that  other  Power  from  this,  term  others  also, 
besides  him.  Heads,  without  any  contradiction  at  all. 
Which  thing  may  very  well  serve  for  answer  unto  that 
also  which  they  further  allege  against  the  aforesaid  dis- 
tinction, namely,  ^'  That  even  the  outward  societies  and  t.  o. 
assemblies  of  the  Church,  where  one  or  two  are  gathered  p.  4icl 
together  in  his  name,  either  for  hearing  of  the  Word,  or 
for  Prayer,  or  any  other  Church-exercise,  our  Saviour 
Christ  being  in  the  midst  of  them  as  Mediator,  must  be  their 
Head:  and,  if  he  be  not  there  idle,  but  doing  the  office 
of  a  Head  fully,  it  followeth,  that  even  in  the  outward 
societies  and  meetings  of  the  Church,  no  mere  man  can  be 
called  the  Head  of  it,  seeing  that  our  Saviour  Christ  doing 
the  whole  office  of  the  Head  himself  alone,  leaveth  nothing 
to  men,  by  doing  whereof  they  may  obtain  that  Title." 
Which  objection  I  take  as  being  made  for  nothing  but  only 
to  maintain  argument:  for  they  are  not  so  far  gone  as  to 
argue  thus  in  sooth  and  right  good  earnest.  ^'  God  standeth  [Psaim 
(saith  the  Psalmist)  in  the  midst  of  gods:*'  if  God  be  there  i.] 
present,  he  must  undoubtedly  be  present  as  God;  if  he  be 
not  there  idle,  but  doing  the  Office  of  a  God  fully,  it 
followeth,  that  God  himself  alone  doing  the  whole  Office  of 
a  God,  leaveth  nothing  in  such  assemblies  to  any  other, 
by  doing  whereof  they  may  obtain  so  high  a  name.  The 
Psalmist,  therefore,  hath  spoken  amiss,  and  doth  ill  to  call 
Judges,  gods  ?  Not  so :  for  as  God  hath  his  Office  differing 
from  theirsi  and  doth  fully  discharge  it  even  in  the  midst 


298  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [SecL  5. 

of  them^  so  they  are  not  hereby  excluded  from  all  kuid  of 

duty,  for  which  that  name  should  be  given  unto  them  also ; 

but  in  that  duty  for  which  it  was  given  them  they  are 

encouraged  religiously  and  carefully  to  order  themselves 

after  the  self-same  manner.     Our  Lord  and  Saviour  being 

in  the  midst  of  his  Church  as  Head,  is  our  comfort,  without 

the  abridgment  of  any  one  duty,  for  performance  whereof 

T.  G.     others  are  termed  Heads  in  another  kind  than  he  is.    If 

p.  413.    there  be  of  the  ancient  Fathers,  which  say,  **  That  there  b 

but  one  Head  of  the  Church,  Christ;  and  that  the  I^nister 

that  baptizeth  cannot  be  the  Head  of  him  that  is  baptized, 

because  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  whole  Church :  and  that 

Paul  could  not  be  Head  of  the  Churches  which  he  planted, 

because  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  whole  Body;***   they 

understand  the  name  of  Head  in  such  sort  as  we  grant  that 

is  not  appUable  to  any  other,  no  not  in  relation  to  the  least 

part  of  the  whole  Church ;  he  which  baptizeth,  baptizeth 

into  Christ;  he  which  converteth,  converteth  into  Christ; 

he  which  ruleth,  ruleth  for  Christ.     The  whole  Church 

can  have  but  one  to  be  Head  as  Lord  and  Owner  of  all; 

wherefore,  if  Christ  be  Head  in  that  kind,  it  foUoweth, 

that  no  other  besides  can  be  so  either  to  the  whole  or  to 

any  part. 

To  call        5.  Amongst  sundry  Prerogatives  of  Simon's   Dominion 

solve  ail  over  the  Jews  there  is  reckoned,  as  not  the  least,  **  That 

Au^-    no  man  might  gather  any  great  assembly  in  the  land  without 

aboiJtihe  him."+    For  so  the  manner  of  Jewish  Regiment  had  always 

affain     bccn,   that  whether  the  cause  for  which  men  assembled 

*  ["  As  it  hath  certain  ground  in  the  Scripture,  that  this  title  of  Head  of  the  Church,  u 
too  high  to  be  given  unto  any  man ;  so  hath  it  been  confirmed,  from  time  to  time,  by 
Writers  both  old  and  new,  which  have  had  the  honour  of  Christ  in  any  convenient  esti- 
mation. Let  us  therefore  see  whether  this  jealousy  over  the  title  of  Head  of  the  Church,  not 
only  in  respect  of  the  whole,  but  in  respect  also  of  a  particular  congregation,  have  tiieir 
approbation.  Cyprian  saith.  There  is  but  one  Head  of  the  Church  (De  Siraplidtate 
Praelat.)  The  Bishop  of  Salisbury  affirmeth  the  same  (Apol.  Part  II.  cap.  2.  div.  1.) 
Augustine  proveth,  that  the  Minister  which  baptizeth  cannot  be  the  Head  of  him  which  is 
baptized,  because  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  whole  Church  (Contra  Liter.  PetiL  lib.  i.  cap.  5.) 
And  in  another  place,  that  Paul  could  not  be  Head  of  the  Churches  which  he  planted, 
because  Christ  is  Head  of  the  whole  Body  (lib.  iii.  cap.  42.) ;  which  reason  should  be 
nothing  worth  if  either  St.  Paul,  or  any  other  Minister  might  be  a  ministerial  Head  of  the 
Church  under  Christ.  And  if  the  name  of  ministerial  Head  of  the  Churches  which  Paul 
planted  cannot  be  given  unto  him  which  was  governor  next  and  immediately  under  Christ 
in  that  same  kind  of  government  in  the  which  our  Saviour  Christ  is  Head,  that  is  to  say 
Spiritual,  no  not  then  when  there  was  no  Christian  Magistrate  to  make  challenge  unto  that 
title,  and  to  bring  it  into  doubt  whether  it  belonged  unto  St.  Paul,  or  to  him;  it  cannot  be 
that  the  Magistrate  may  take  unto  him  that  title,  whose  government  doth  not  approach  so 
oear  unto  our  Saviour  Christ's  as  he  is  Head  of  the  Church."     T.  C.  lib.  ii.  p.  413.] 

f  [1  Mac.  xiv.  44.] 


Sed.  5.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  299 

themselves  in  peaceable,  good,  and  orderly  sort,  were  Eccle-  of  tbe 
siastical  or  Civil,  Supreme  Authority  should  assemble  them.  ^ 
David  gathered  all  Israel  together  unto  Jerusalem;  when 
the  Ark  was  to  be  removed,  he  assembled  the  sons  of  Aaron 
and  the  Levites.  Solomon  did  the  like  at  such  time  as 
the  Temple  was  to  be  dedicated:  when  the  Church  was  to 
be  reformed,  Asa  in  hb  time  did  the  same :  the  same  upon 
like  occasions  was  done  afterwards  by  Joash,  Hezekias, 
Josiah,  and  others. 

The  Consuls  of  Rome  Polybius  affirmeth  to  have  had  a  poiyb. 
kind  of  Regal  Authority,  in  that  they  might  call  together  the  deiimt. 
Senate  and  People  whensoever  it  pleased  them.     Seeing,  m,^ 
therefore,  the  affairs  of  the  Church  and  Christian  Religion  S^'^'pi. 
are  pubUc  affairs,  for  the  ordering  whereof  more  solemn 
Assemblies  sometimes  are  of  as  great  importance  and  use, 
as  they  are  for  secular  affairs ;  it  seemeth  no  less  an  act  of 
Supreme  Authority  to  call  the  one,  than  the  other.     Where- 
fore the  Clergy,  in  such  wise  gathered  together,  is  an  £c* 
clesiastical  Senate,  which  with  us,  as  in  former  times,  the 
ehiefest  Prelate  at  his  <liscretion  did  use  to  assemble ;  so 
that  afterwards  in  such  considerations  as  have  been  before 
specified,  it  seemeth  more  meet  to  annex  the  said  Prerogative 
to  the  Crown.     The  Plot  of  Reformed  Discipline  not  Uking 
thereof  so  well,  taketh  order  that  every  former  Assembly 
before  it  breaketh  up  should  itself  appoint  both  the  time 
and  place  of  their  after-meeting  again.     But  because  I  find 
not  any  thing  on  that  side  particularly  alleged  against  us 
herein,  a  longer  disputation  about  so  plain  a  cause  shall 
not  need.     The  ancient  Imperial  Law  forbiddeth  such  As- 1,.  {.  ^e 
semblies  as  the  Emperor's  Authority  did  not  cause  to  be^^l^* 
made.     Before  Emperors  became  Christians,   the  Church  coSlen- 
had  never  any  General  Synod ;  their  greatest  meeting  con-  cap."de 
risting  of  Bishops  and  others,  the  gravest  in  each  Province,  f  ^Jj 
As  for  the  Civil  Governor's  Authority,  it  suffered  them  only 
as  things  not  regarded,  or  not  accounted  of  at  such  times  as 
it  did  suffer  them.     So  that  what  right  a  Christian  King 
hath  as  touching  Assemblies  of  that  kind,  we  are  not  able 
to  judge  till  we  come  to  later  times,  when  ReUgion  had  won 
the  hearts  of  the  highest  Powers.     Constantine  (as  Pighius  Hier. 
doth  grant)  was  not  only  the  first  that  ever  did  call  any  i.Ti.*ci. 
General  Council  together,  but  even  the  first  that  devised  staSl 
the  calling  of  them  for  consultation  about  the  businesses  of  l^cod. 


300  I^HB   EIGHTH   BOOK  [Seci.  5« 

sardi.    God.     After  he  had  once  given  the  example,  his  successors 
coDcu.    a  long  time  followed  the  same ;  insomuch  that  St.  Jerome, 
Itant?*   to  disprove  the  Authority  of  a  Synod  which  was  pretended 
Hierou.  to  bc  General,  useth  this  as  a  forcible  argument,  ^^  Die,  quia 
Roffi-'    Imperator  hanc  Synodum  jusserit  convocari  ?"   Their  answer 
Hb!"ii.    hereunto  is  no  answer,  which  say,  **  That  [the]  Emperors  did 
not  this  without  conference  had  with  the  Bishops:*'  for  to 
our  purpose  it  is  enough,  if  the  Clergy  alone  did  it  not 
otherwise  than  by  the  leave  and  appointment  of  their  So- 
vereign Lords  and  Kings.     Whereas,  therefore,  it  is  on 
soeo-    the  contrary  side  alleged,  that  Valentinian  the  Elder  being 
]ib.°vi.  requested  by  Catholic  Bishops  to  grant  that  there  might  be 
^*^*      a  Synod  for  the  ordering  of  matters  called  in  question  by 
AAibroB.  the  Arians,  answered,  that  he  being  one  of  the  Laity  might 
£p.  «e.  not  meddle  with  such  matters,  and  thereupon  willed,  that 
the  Priests  and  Bishops,  to  whom  the  care  of  those  things 
belongeth,  should  meet  and  consult  together  by  themselves 
where  they  thought  good  ;*  we  must,  with  the  Emperor's 
speech,  weigh  the  occasion  and  drift  thereof.     Valentinian 

*  ["  Where  the  Emperor  confesseth  the  Bishops'  matters  not  to  pertain  to  him  (Sosom. 
lib.  t  c.  17),  he  (Dr.  Whitgift)  answereth,  That '  the  Emperor  oi  modesty  refused'  the  deter- 
mination. But  what  modesty  is  it,  to  say  that  which  is  untrue ;  or  what  modesty,  to  affirm 
that  it  belongeth  not  to  him  wliich  is,  by  you,  '  his  office,'  and  '  committed  to  him  of  God,' 
especially,  unto  his  subjects  ?  For  it  might  liave  more  colour,  if  you  had  said,  that  it  were 
modesty  for  a  Bishop  to  say,  that  to  administer  the  Word  and  Sacraments  belongeth  not  to 
him,  but  unto  the  Prince.  Beside  that,  if  he  would  have  shewed  forth  modesty,  he  would 
have  rather  said,  that  he  was  not  worthy,  than  to  say  '  that  it  was  not  lawful  for  him  to  do 
it.'  To  that, '  That  the  Emperor  would  not  determine  of  Arius'  heresy,  but  committed  it  to 
the  Synod,'  he  answereth,  *  That  it  letteth  not  but  that  he  had  authority,  saving  that  thereby 
he  shewed  liis  wisdom  in  committing  matters  of  Doctrine  to  them,  which  are  most  fit  to  entreat 
of  them.'  A  strange  kind  of  wisdom,  to  put  over  that  which  belonged  unto  his  Office  to  them 
to  whose  office  that  did  not  belong  I  Verily  this  is  not  the  wisdom  which  cometh  from  above. 
For  although  it  be  lawful  for  a  Prince  to  discharge  part  of  his  burthen  upon  others,  for  the 
more  commodity  of  his  subjects ;  yet,  if  this  belong  unto  him,  as  he  is  appointed  of  God  the 
Civil  Magistrate,  he  cannot  put  it  unto  any  other  than  unto  a  Civil  Magistrate.  Here  also  I 
would  ask  of  him.  How  the  Council  of  Nice  was  fitter  to  judge  of  the  matter  than  the  Em- 
peror? Was  it  by  some  singular  case,  or  by  reason  of  their  Office  of  being  Bishops  T  If,  as 
needs  he  must,  he  answer,  that  they  are  by  Calling  and  by  Office  fitter  to  judge  of  suck 
causes ;  how  must  not  that  pertain  unto  them  which  are  hereof,  by  Calling,  the  fittest  judges? 
For,  although  there  be  found  sometimes  some  Civil  Governour  which  hath  more  skill  to 
judge  in  Church  matters  than  some  Bishop,  as  also  some  Bishops  to  have  more  skill  ift 
Commonwealth  matters,  than  some  Civil  Governour ;  yet  notwithstanding,  neither  the  one 
nor  the  other  hath  this  cunning  by  any  gift  incident  into  his  Office  which  he  exerciseth.  So 
that  the  Answerer,  in  reputing  it  for  *  wisdom  in  the  Emperor,  to  commit  these  matters  unto 
the  Bishops,  as  unto  the  most  able  judges,'  maketh  a  deep  wound  in  the  wisdom  of  God, 
whilst  he  supposeth  that  God  hath  committed  that  to  be  done  by  the  Magistrate  whereof,  by 

Office,  he  is  not  the  fittest  doer And,  that  this  is  most  properly  belonging  unto  a  Bishop, 

it  appeareth,  in  that  the  Apostle  requireth  that  he  should  be  able  '  to  convince  the  gainsayers' 
(Tit.  i.  9) ;  which  he  never  required  of  the  Civil  Magistrate ;  and  notwithstanding,  would 
have  required  it,  if  the  decision  of  such  causes  had  appertained  unto  him:  for  the  Lord 
calleth  no  man  to  any  thing,  of  whom  he  requireth  not  gifts  meet  to  furnish  his  Calling." 
T.C.  Ub.iU.  p.  157,  158.] 


Seci.  6.].  OP   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  301 

and  Valens,  the  one  a  Catholic,  the  other  an  Arian,  were 
Emperors  together :  Valens  the  Governor  of  the  East,  and 
Valentinian  of  the  West,  Empire.  Valentinian,  therefore, 
taking  his  journey  from  the  East  unto  the  West  parts,  and 
passing  for  that  intent  through  Thracia,  there  the  Bishops 
which  held  the  soundness  of  Christian  belief,  because  they 
knew  that  Valens  was  their  professed  enemy,  and  therefore 
if  the  other  was  once  departed  out  of  those  quarters,  the 
Catholic  cause  was  like  to  find  very  small  favour,  moved 
presently  Valentinian  about  a  Council  to  be  assembled  under 
the.  countenance  of  his  Authority ;  who  by  likelihood  con-^ 
sidering  what  inconvenience  might  grow  thereby,  inasmuch 
as  it  could  not  be  but  a  means  to  incense  Valens  the  more 
against  them,  refused  himself  to  be  author  of,  or  present  at 
any  such  Assembly:  and  of  this  his  denial  gave  them  a 
colourable  reason,  to  wit,  that  he  was,  although  an  Emperor, 
yet  a  secular  person,  and  therefore  not  able  in  matters  of  so 
great  obscurity  to  sit  as  a  competent  Judge;  but,  if  they 
which  were  Bishops  and  learned  men  did  think  good  to 
consult  thereof  together,  they  might:  whereupon,  when 
they  could  not  obtain  that  which  they  most  desired,  yet  that 
which  he  granted  unto  them  they  took,  and  forthwith  had  a 
Council.  Valentinian  went  on  towards  Rome,  they  remain- 
ing in  consultation  till  Valens  which  accompanied  him  re- 
turned back ;  so  that  now  there  was  no  remedy,  but  either 
to  incur  a  manifest  contempt,  or  else  at  the  hands  of  Valens 
himself  to  seek  approbation  of  that  they  had  done.  To 
him,  therefore,  they  became  suitors :  his  answer  was  short, 
"  Either  Arianism,  or  exile,  which  they  would ;"  whereupon 
their  banishment  ensued.  Let  reasonable  men  now  there- 
fore be  judges,  how  much  this  example  of  Valentinian  doth 
make  against  the  Authority,  which  we  say  that  Sovereign 
Rulers  may  lawfully  have  as  concerning  Synods  and  Meet- 
ings Ecclesiastical.* 

6.  There  are  which  wonder  that  we  should  account  any  or  the 
Statute  a  Law,  which  the  High  Court  of  Parliament  inHt:^^ 
England  hath  established   about  the  matter  of  Church- ^^'^^ 
regiment ;  the  Prince  and  Court  of  Parliament  having  (as 
they  suppose)  no  more  lawful  means  to  give  order  to  the 


•  [See  Vol.  II.  p.  135,  Note  f .  "  I  was  ever  of  Nazianzen's  opinion,  who  never  wished 
to  see  any  more  Synods  of  the  Clergy."  Bp.  Burnet,  Hist,  of  his  own  Time,  Edit.  Ozf. 
1S23.  Svo.  Vol  II.  an.  1674.  p.  47.] 


302  'THE  EIGHTH  BOOR  [Seei.  0, 

Church  and  Clergy  in  those  things,  than  they  have  to  make 
Laws  for  the  Hierarchies  of  Angels  in  Heaven ;  that  the  Par- 
liament being  a  mere  Temporal  Court,  can  neither  by  the  Law 
of  Nature,  nor  of  God,  have  competent  power  to  define  of 
such  matters ;  that  Supremacy  in  this  kind  cannot  belong  unto 
Kings,  as  Kings,  because  Pagan  Emperors,  whose  princely 
Power  was  true  Sovereignty,  never  challenged  so  much  over 
the  Church ;  that  Power,  in  this  kind,  cannot  be  the  right 
of  any  earthly  Crown,  Prince,  or  State,  in  that  they  be 
Christians,  forasmuch  as  if  they  be  Christians,  they  all  owe 
subjection  to  the  Pastors  of  their  souls ;  that  the  Prince 
therefore,  not  having  it  himself,  cannot  communicate  it  to 
the  Parliament,  and  consequently  cannot  make  Laws  here, 
or  determine  of  the  Church's  Regiment  by  himself,  Parlia- 
ment, or  any  other  Court  subjected  unto  him. 

The  Parliament  of  England,  together  with  the  Convoca- 
tion annexed  thereunto,  is  that  whereupon  the  very  essence 
of  all  Government  within  this  Kingdom  doth  depend :  it  is 
even  the  body  of  the  whole  Realm:  it  consisteth  of  the 
King,  and  of  all  thdt  within  the  Land  are  subject  unto  him. 
The  Parliament  is  a  Court,  not  so  merely  Temporal  as  if  it 
might  meddle  with  nothing  but  only  leather  and  wool. 
Those  days  of  Queen  Mary  are  not  yet  forgotten,  wherein 
the  Realm  did  submit  itself  unto  the  Legate  of  Pope  Julius, 
at  which  time,  had  they  been  persuaded,  as  this  man  seemeth 
now  to  be,  had  they  thought  that  there  is  no  more  force  in 
Laws  made  by  Parliament  concerning  Church-afiairs,  than 
if  men  should  take  upon  them  to  make  Orders  for  the  Hier- 
archies of  Angels  in  Heaven,  they  might  have  taken  all 
former  Statutes  of  that  kind  as  cancelled,  and,  by  reason  of 
nullity,  abrogated.  What  need  was  there  that  they  should 
bargain  with  the  Cardinal,  and  purchase  their  pardon  by 
promise  made  beforehand,  that  what  Laws  they  had  made, 
assented  unto,  or  executed,  against  the  Bishop  of  Rome's 
Supremacy,  the  same  they  would,  in  that  present  Parliament, 
effectually  abrogate  and  repeal  ?  Had  they  power  to  repeal 
Laws  made,  and  none  to  make  Laws  concerning  the  R^egi. 
ment  of  the  Church  ?  Again,  when  they  had  by  suit  obtained 
his  confirmation  for  such  foundations  of  Bishopricks,  Cathe- 
dral Churches,  Hospitals,  Colleges,  and  Schools ;  for  such 
Marriages  before  made,  for  such  institutions  into  Livings 
Ecclesiastical,  and  for  all  such  Judicial  processes,  as  having 


Sect.  6.]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  303 

been  ordered  according  to  the  Laws  before  in  force^  but 
contrary  unto  the  Canons  and  Orders  of  the  Church  of 
Rome,  were  in  that  respect  thought  defective,  although  the 
Cardinal  in  his  Letters  of  Dispensation  did  give  validity  unto 
those  Acts,  even  ^' Apostolicse  firmitatis  robur,  The  very 
strength  of  Apostolical  solidity  ;*'  what  had  all  these  been 
without  those  grave  authentical  words,  *'  Be  it  enacted  by  An.  i. 
the  Authority  of  this  present  Parliament,  that  all  and  singular  pui.  et 
Articles  and  Clauses  contained  in  the  said  Dispensation,  I!!?.* 
shall  remain  and  be  reputed  and  taken  to  all  intents  and 
constructions  in  the  Laws  of  this  Realm,  lawful,  good,  and 
effectual,  to  be  alleged  and  pleaded  in  all  Courts  Ecclesias- 
tical and  Temporal,  for  good  and  sufficient  matter  either  for 
the  plaintiff  or  defendant,  without  any  allegation  or  objection 
to  be  made  against  the  validity  of  them,  by  pretence  of  any 
general  Council,  Canon,  or  Decree,  to  the  contrary  ?'*  Some* 
what  beUke  they  thought  there  was  in  this  mere  Temporal 
Court,  without  which  the  Pope's  own  mere  Ecclesiastical 
Legate's  Dispensation  had  taken  small  effect  in  the  Church 
of  England ;  neither  did  they  or  the  Cardinal  imagine  any 
thing  committed  against  the  Law  of  Nature,  or  of  God, 
because  they  took  Order  for  the  Church's  affairs,  and  that 
even  in  the  Court  of  Parliament.  The  most  natural  and 
religious  course  in  making  Laws  is,  that  the  matter  of  them 
be  taken  from  the  judgment  of  the  wisest  in  those  things 
which  they  are  to  concern.  In  matters  of  God,  to  set  down 
a  Form  of  Prayer,  a  solemn  Confession  of  the  Articles  of  the 
Christian  Faith,  and  Ceremonies  meet  for  the  exercise  of 
Religion;  it  were  unnatural  not  to  think  the  Pastors  and 
Bishops  of  our  souls  a  great  deal  more  fit,  than  men  of 
secular  trades  and  callings:  howbeit,  when  all  which  the 
wisdom  of  all  sorts  can  do  is  done  for  the  devising  of  Laws 
in  the  Church,  it  is  the  general  consent  of  all  that  giveth 
them  the  form  and  vigour  of  Laws,  without  which  they 
could  be  no  more  unto  us  than  the  counsels  of  Physicians  to 
the  sick :  well  might  they  seem  as  wholesome  admonitions 
and  instructions;  but  Laws  could  they  never  be,  without 
consent  of  the  whole  Church,  to  be  guided  by  them ;  where- 
unto  both  Nature  and  the  practice  of  the  Church  of  God  set 
down  in  Scripture,  is  found  everyway  so  fully  consonant, 
that  God  himself  would  not  impose  no  not  his  own  Laws  [Ezod. 

upon  his  people  by  the  hand  of  Moses,  without  tlieir  free  xxiV.  a, 

••J 


d04  ^HE   EIGHTH   BOOK  ISeci.  6* 

and  open  consent.*  Wherefore,  to  define  and  determine, 
even  of  the  Church's  afiairs  by  way  of  assent  and  approba- 
tion, as  Laws  are  defined  of  in  that  Right  of  Power,  which 
doth  give  them  the  force  of  Laws ;  thus  to  define  of  our 
own  Church's  Regiment,  the  Parliament  of  England  hath 
competent  Authority. 

Touching  that  Supremacy  of  Power  which  our  Kings  have 
in  this  case  of  making  Laws,  it  resteth  principally  in  the 
strength  of  a  Negative  voice ;  which  not  to  give  them,  were 
to  deny  them  that,  without  which  they  were  Kings  but  by 
mere  Title,  and  not  in  exercise  of  Dominion.  Be  it  in  Regi- 
ment Popular,  Aristocratical,  or  Regal,  Principality  resteth 
in  that  person,  or  those  persons,  unto  whom  is  given  right  of 
excluding  any  kind  of  Law  whatsoever  it  hie,  before  establish- 
ment. This  doth  belong  unto  Kings  as  Kings ;  Pagan  Em- 
perors, even  ''  Nero"t  himself  had  no  less,  but  much  more 
than  this,  in  the  Laws  of  his  own  Empire.  That  he  chal- 
lenged not  any  interest  of  giving  voice  in  the  Laws  of  the 
Church,  I  hope  no  man  will  so  construe,  as  if  the  cause  were 
conscience  and  fear  to  encroach  upon  the  Apostles'  right. 
If  then  it  be  demanded,  by  what  right,  from  Constantine 
downward,  the  Christian  Emperors  did  so  far  intermeddle 
with  the  Church's  affairs,  either  we  must  here  condemn 
them,  as  being  over  presumptuously  bold,  or  else  judge 
that,  by  a  Law,  which  is  termed  Regia,  that  is  to  say. 
Regal,  the  People  having  derived  unto  their  Emperors 
their  whole  Power  for  making  of  Laws,  and  by  that  means 
his  Edicts  being  made  Laws,j:  what  matter  soever  they  did 
concern ;  as  Imperial  Dignity  endowed  them  with  competent 
Authority  and  Power  to  make  Laws  for  Religion,  so  they 
were  thought  by  Christianity  to  use  their  Power,  being 
Christians,  unto  the  benefit  of  the  Church  of  Christ.§  Was 
there  any  Christian  Bishop  in  the  world  which  did  then 
judge  this  repugnant  unto  the  dutiful  subjection  which 
Christians  do  owe  to  the  Pastors  of  their  souls ;  to  whom, 
in  respect  of  their  sacred  Order,  it  is  not  by  us,  neither 
may  be,  denied,  that  Kings  and  Princes  are  as  much  as  the 

♦  [See  Baxter,  §  19,  ut  sup,  p.  266.]  f  [See  Note  f,  p.  294.] 

X  **  Item  quod  Principi  placuit,  Legis  habet  vigorem."  Inst  de  J.  N.  G.  et  C. 
§  ["  Constantine's  open  profession  of  Christianity,  though  it  added  much  to  the  temporal 
prosperity,  yet  it  contributed  little  to  the  spiritual  graces  and  virtues  of  Christians.  It  enlarged 
their  revenues,  and  increased  their  endowments ;  but  proved  the  fatal  means  of  corrupting 
the  Doctrine  and  relaxing  the  Discipline  of  the  Church."  Dr.  Newton,  Bishop  of  Bristol, 
Dissert,  on  the  Prophecies,  Vol.  II.  p.  164.] 


Sect.  6.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  305 

very  meanest  that  liveth  under  them,  bound  in  conscience  to 
fihew  themselves  gladly  and  willingly  obedient ;  receiving  the 
Seals  of  Salvation^  the  blessed  Sacraments  at  their  hands^  as 
at  the  hands  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  with  all  reverence, 
not  disdaining  to  be  taught  and  admonished  by  them^  nor 
withholding  from  them  as  much  as  the  least  part  of  their 
due  and  decent  honour  ?  All  which,  for  any  thing  that  hath 
been  alleged,  may  stand  very  well  without  resignation  of 
Supremacy  of  Power  in  making  Laws,  even  Laws  concerning 
the  most  spiritual  affairs  of  the  Church ;  which  Laws  being 
made  amongst  us,  are  not  by  any  of  us  so  taken  or  inter- 
preted, as  if  they  did  receive  their  force  from  Power  which 
the  Prince  doth  communicate  unto  the  Parliament,  or  unto 
any  other  Court  under  him,  but  from  Power  which  the  whole 
Body  of  the  Realm  being  naturally  possest  with,  hath  by 
free  and  deliberate  assent  derived  unto  him  that  ruleth  over 
them,  so  far  forth  as  hath  been  declared :  so  that  our  Laws 
made  concerning  Religion,  do  take  originally  their  essence 
from  the  Power  of  the  whole  Realm  and  Church  of  England, 
than  which,  nothing  can  be  more  consonant  unto  the  Law 
of  Nature  and  the  will  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

To  let  these  go,  and  return  to  our  own  men ;  "  Ecclesias-  t.  c. 
tical  Governors  (they  say)  may  not  meddle  with  making  of  p.im. 
Civil  Laws,  and  of  Laws  for  the  Commonwealth ;  nor  the 
Civil  Magistrate,  high  or  low,  with  making  of  Orders  for  the 
Church."*  It  seemeth  unto  me  very  strange,  that  these  men, 
which  are  in  no  cause  more  vehement  and  fierce  than  where 
they  plead,  that  Ecclesiastical  persons  may  not  Kvpuvuv,  be 
lords,  should  hold  that  the  Power  of  making  Ecclesiastical 
liaws,  which  thing  of  all  other  is  most  proper  unto  Dominion, 
belongeth  to  none  but  Ecclesiastical  persons  only.  Their 
oversight  groweth  herein  for  want  of  exact  observation,  what 
it  is  to  make  a  Law.  Tully,  speaking  of  the  Law  of  Nature, 
saith,  '^  That  thereof  God  himself  was  inventor,  disceptator, 
lator,  the  deviser,  the  discusser,  and  deliverer :"  wherein  he 
plainly  alludeth  unto   the  chiefest   parts   which    then  did 

*  [**  As  for  the  making  of  the  Orders  and  Ceremonies  of  the  Church,  they  do  (where  there  is 
a  constituted  and  ordered  Church)  pertain  unto  the  Ministers  of  the  Church  and  to  the  Eccle- 
fiattical  Governours ;  and  that,  as  they  meddle  not  with  the  making  of  Civil  Laws  and  Laws 
for  the  Commonwealth :  so  the  Civil  Magistrate  hath  not  to  ordain  Ceremonies  pertaining  to 
the  Church.  But  if  those  to  whom  that  doth  appertain  make  any  orders  not  meet,  the 
Magistrate  may  and  -.  ought  to  hinder  them  and  drive  them  to  better,  forsomuch  as  the  Civil 
Magistrate  hath  this  cluirge,  to  see  that  nothing  be  done  against  die  glory  of  God  in  his 
Dominion."     T.  C.  fib.  L  p.  192.] 

VOL.  III.  X 


306  I'HE  EIGHTH  booi;l  {JSefiL^ 

appertain  to  his  public  action.  For  when  Lawa  were  made, 
the  first  thing  was  to  have  them  devised ;  the  second,  to  sift 
them  with  as  much  exactness  of  judgment  as  any  way.  might 
be  used ;  the  next,  by  solemn  voice  of  Sovereign  Authority 
to  pass  them^  and  give  them  the  force  of  Laws.  It  cannot 
In  any  reason  seem  otherwise  than  most  fit,  that  unto  £ccle* 
siastical  persons  the  care  of  devising  Ecclesiastical  Laws  be 
committed,  even  as  the  care  of  Civil  unto  them  which  are  in 
those  afiairs  most  skilful.  This  taketh  not  away  from  Eo- 
clesiastical  persons  all  right  of  giving  voice  with  others,  when 
Civil  Laws  are  proposed  for  Regiment  of  the  Conmionwealth, 
whereof  themselves,  though  now  the  world  would  have  them 
annihilated,  are  notwithstanding  as  yet  a  part;  much  less 
doth  it  cut  ofi^  that  p^rt  of  the  Power  of  Princes,  whereby^ 
as  they  claim,  so  we  know  no  reasonable  cau«e  where£Me  we 
may  not  grant  them,  without  ofience  to  Ahnigbly  Grod,  so 
much  Authority  in  making  all  manner  of  Law9vnthin  their 
own  Dominions,  that  neither  Civil  nor  Ecclesiastical  do  pass 
without  their  royal  assent.  v      . 

In  devising  and  discussing  of  Laws,  wisdomrt  especially 
is  required;  but  that  which  establisheth  them  and  maketh 
them,  is  power,  even  Power  of  Dominion ;  the  Chiefty  thereof 
(amongst  us)  resteth  in  the  person  of  the  King.    Is  there 
any  Law  of  Christ's  which  forbiddeth  Kings  and  Rulers  of 
the  earth  to  have  such  sovereign  and  supreme  Power  in.  the 
making  of  Laws  either  Civil  or  Ecclesiastical  ?     If  there  be# 
our  controversy  hath  an  end.     Christ,  in  his  Church,  hath 
not  appointed  any  such  Law  concerning  Temporal  Pow^^ 
as  God  did  of  old  unto  the  Commonwealth  of  Israel;,  but 
leaving  that  to  be  at  the  world's  free  choice,  his  chiefest  care 
is,  that  the  Spiritual  Law  of  the  Gospel  might  be  published 
far  and  wide.    They  that  received  the  Law  of  Chrii^t  werC) 
for  a  long  time,  people  scattered  in  sundry  Kingdoms,  Chris- 
tianity not  exempting  them  from  the  Laws  which  they  had 
been  subject  unto,  saving  only  in  such  cases  as  those  Laws 
did  enjoin  that  which  the  Religion  of  Christ  did  forbid. 
Hereupon  grew  their  manifold  persecutions  throughout  all 
places  where  they  lived ;  as  oft  as  it  thus  came  to  pass,  there 
was  no  possibility  that  the  Emperors  and  Kings  under  whom 
they  lived,  should  meddle  any  whit  at  all  with  making  Laws 
for  the  Church.    From  Christ,  therefore,  having  received 
Power,  who  doubteth,  but  as  they  did,  so  they  might  bind 


iSSrol^&^]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POtlTY.  307 

Aem  to  six^  Orders  as  seemed  fittest  for  the  maintenance 
of  their  Religiooy  without  the  leave  of  high  or  low  in  the 
Commonwealth ;  forasmuch  as  in  Religion  it  was  divided 
utterly  from  them,  and  they  from  it  ?  But  when  the  mightiest 
began  to  like  of  the  Christian  Faith;  by  their  means,  whole 
free  States  and  Kingdoms  became  obedient  unto  Christ. 
Now  the  questioa  is,  Whether  Kings,  by  embracing  Chris- 
tianity, do  thereby  receive  any  such  Law  as  taketh  from 
them  the  weightiest  part  of  that  Sovereignty  which  they  had 
even  when  they  were  Heathens  ?  whether,  being  Infidels, 
they  might  do  more  in  causes  of  Religion,  than  now  they 
can  by  the  Laws  of  God,  being  true  Believers?  For,  where- 
as in  Regal  States,  the  King,  or  Supreme  Head  of  the  Com- 
monwealth, had,  before  Christianity,  a  supreme  stroke  in 
making  of  Laws  for  Religion ;  he  must  by  embracing  Chris- 
tian Religion  utterly  deprive  himself  thereof,  and  in  such 
causes  become  subject  unto  his  Subjects,  having  even  within 
his  own  Dominions  them  whose  commandment  he  must  obey; 
imlesshis  Power  be  placed  in  the  Head[ship]  of  some  foreign 
Spiritual  Potentate :  so  that  either  a  foreign  or  domestical 
Commander  upon  earth,  he  must  admit  more  now,  than 
before  he  had,  and  that  in  the  chiefest  things  whereupon 
Commonwealths  do  stand.  But  apparent  it  is  unto  all  men 
which  are  not  strangers  unto  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ, 
diat  no  State  of  the  world  receiving  Christianity  is  by  any 
Law  therein  contained  bound  to  resign  the  Power  which 
they  lawfully  held  before:  but  oyer  what  persons  and  in 
what,  causes  soever  the  same  hath  been  in  force,  it  may  so 
remain  and  continue  still.  That  which,  as  Kings,  they  might 
do  in  matters  of  Religion,  and  did  in  matter  of  false  Religion, 
being  idolatrous  and  superstitious  Kings,  the  same  they  are 
now  even  in  every  respect  fully  authorized  to  do  in  all  affairs 
pertinent  to  the  state  of  true  Christian  Religion.  And,  con-T.c. 
ceming  the  supreme  Power  of  making  Laws  for  all  persons  p,  100.* 
in  all  causes  to  be  guided  by,  it  is  not  to  be  let  pass,  that 
the  head  enemies  of  this  Headship  are  constrained  to  ac- 
knowledge the  King  endued  even  with  this  very  Power,  ^p. 
that  he  may  and  ought  to  exercise  the  same,  taking  order 
for  the  Church  and  her  affairs  of  what  nature  or  kind 
soever,  in  case  of  necessity:  as  when  there  is  no  lawful 
Ministry,  which  they  interpret  then  to  be  (and  this  surely 
is  a  point  very  remarkable),  wheresoever  the  Ministry  is 

x2 


308  '^^^  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Seci»6. 

wicked.*  A  wicked  Ministry  is  no  lawful  Ministry ;  and  in 
such  sort  no  lawful  Ministry,  that  what  doth  belong  unto 
them  as  Ministers  by  right  of  their  calling,  the  same  to  be 
annihilated  in  respect  of  their  bad  qualities ;  their  wicked- 
ness in  itself,  a  deprivation  of  right  to  deal  in  the  affairs  of 
the  Church,  and  a  warrant  for  others  to  deal  in  them  which 
are  held  to  be  of  a  clean  other  Society,  the  members  where* 
of  have  been  before  so  peremptorily  for  ever  excluded  from 
Power  of  dealing  for  ever  with  affairs  of  the  Church.  They 
which  once  have  learned  throughly  this  lesson,  will  quickly 
be  capable  perhaps  of  another  equivalent  unto  it.  For  [if] 
the  wickedness  of  the  Ministry  transfers  their  right  unto  the 
King ;  in  case  the  King  be  as  wicked  as  they,  to  whom  then 
shall  the  right  descend  ?  There  is  no  remedy,  all  must  come 
by  devolution  at  length,  even  as  the  family  of  Brown  will 
have  it,  unto  the  godly  among  the  People,  for  confusion  unto 
the  wise  and  the  great  by  the  poor  and  the  simple ;+  some 
KimberdoUngyj:  with  his  retinue,  must  take  this  work  of  the 
Lord  in  hand ;  and  the  making  of  Church-laws  and  Orders 
must  prove  to  be  their  right  in  the  end.  If  not  for  love  of 
the  truth,  yet  for  shame  of  gross  absurdities,  let  these  con- 
tentions and  trifling  fancies  be  abandoned.  The  Cause  which 
moved  them  for  a  time  to  hold  a  wicked  Ministry  no  lawful 

*  [" '  Forsomuch  as  the  Ministers  are  most  able  to  decide  of  Church-matters,  thexefore  the 
decision  belongeth  unto  them/  hereunto  he  (Dr.  W.)  answereth,  first,  that  it  '  is  Uardii^*s 
reason,'  but  sheweth  not  where  it  is  to  be  found.  Where  I,  alleging  it  as  his  own  reason, 
pointed  him  the  place,  thereunto  he  answereth  not  a  word.  {*  The  Bishops  ought  tberefim 
to  ordain  Ministers,  because  they  are  best  able  to  judge  of  the  learning  and  ability  of  those 
which  are  the  fittest'  T.C.  lib.  i.  p.  192,  referring  to  Whitgift's  Ans.  p.  47.)  Secondly, 
he  saith  that, '  it  proveth  only  that  it  is  most  convenient  and  necessary,  that  the  Ministeit, 
while  they  be  godly  and  learned,  may  have  the  deciding  of  matters  of  religion.'  ....  In  this 
answer,  wherein  the  chief  point  of  the  question  doth  consist,  he  hath  given  both  the  Kifaops 
of  Salisbury  and  Master  Nowel  the  slip :  for  they  both  do  flatly  confess,  that  '  as  long  as 
the  Ministers  be  godly  and  learned,  it  is  necessary  they  should  decide  these  matters;  that  the 
Prince  is  commanded  to  have  recourse  unto  them  in  doubtful  matters ;  that  it  beloogedi  to 
the  Bishop's  office  to  decide  of  such  causes :  but  that  Christian  Princes  have  rather  to  do  with 
these  matters  than  ignorant  and  wicked  Priests,'  and  that  '  in  case  of  necessity,*  meaning 
when  the  Ministry  is  wicked,  *  The  Prince  ought  to  provide  for  convenient  remedy.'  (De£ 
of  the  ApoL  Part  VI.  chap.  xi.  div.  11;  and  chap.  zii.  div.  4.  Nowel,  Vol.  II.  p.  35,  38, 34, 
27).  The  very  self-same  thing  which  we  maintain  in  saying,  *  When  there  is  no  lawful 
Ministry,  that  then  the  Prince  ought  to  take  order  in  these  things.'  ....  He  durst  not  say 
that  *  it  is  necessary'  they  should,  but  that  *  they  may*  decide ;  where  in  saying  that  '  it  is 
necessary*  he  leavetb  no  choice :  again,  in  saying  that  '  they  may,*  he  deslroyeth  the  neces- 
sity which  he  had  before  put,  leaving  it  in  the  Prince's  power,  whether  they  shaU  or  no." 
'X.C.  lib.iii.  p.  159.] 

t  [See  1  Cor.  i.  27—29.] 

X  [It  should  be  Knipperdolling.  He  is  reputed  to  have  been  an  Anabaptist,  but  was  a  noble 
citizen  of  Munster  in  Westphalia,  and  was  judicially  executed  in  1536,  by  his  body  being 
lacerated  with  red-hot  pincers  (avec  des  tenailles  ardentes),  and  run  through  vrith  m  iword! 
See  Die,  Hist,  MoRERi.  VoL  VI.  sub  voce,'] 


Seci.6J]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  809 

Ministry;  and^  in  this  defect  of  a  lawful  Ministry,  authorized 
Kings  to  make  Laws  and  Orders  for  the  affairs  of  the  Church, 
till  it  were  well  established,  is  surely  this :  First,  they  see 
that,  whereas  the  continual  dealing  of  the  Kings  of  Israel  in 
the  affairs  of  the  Church  doth  make  now  very  strong  against 
them,  the  burthen  whereof  they  shall  in  time  well  enough 
shake  ofi^,  if  it  may  be  obtained  that  it  is  indeed  lawful  for 
Kings  to  follow  these  holy  examples;  howbeit  no  longer 
than  during  the  case  of  necessity,  while  the  wickedness,  and, 
in  respect  thereof,  the  unlawfulness  of  the  Ministry  doth 
continue.  Secondly,  they  perceive  right  well,  that  unless 
they  should  yield  Authority  unto  Kings  in  case  of  such 
supposed  necessity,  the  Discipline  they  urge  were  clean  ex- 
cluded, as  long  as  the  Clergy  of  England  doth  thereunto 
remain  opposite.  To  open  therefore  a  door  for  her  entrance, 
there  is  no  remedy  but  the  tenent*  must  be  this ;  That  now 
when  the  Ministry  of  England  is  universally  wicked,  and,  in 
that  respect,  hath  lost  all  Authority,  and  is  become  no  law- 
ful Ministry,  no  such  Ministry  as  hath  the  right,  which 
otherwise  should  belong  unto  them,  if  they  were  virtuous 
and  godly,  as  their  adversaries  are;  in  this  necessity  the 
King  may  do  somewhat  for  the  Church :  that  which  we  do 
imply  in  the  name  of  Headship,  he  may  both  have  and 
exercise  till  they  be  entered  which  will  disburthen  and  ease 
him  of  it :  till  they  come,  the  King  is  licensed  to  hold  that 
Power  which  we  call  Headship.  But  what  afterwards  ?  In 
a  Church  ordered,  "  that  which  the  Supreme  Magistrate  t.  c. 
hath,  is  to  see  that  the  Laws  of  God,  touching  his  worship,  p.igsk 
and  touching  all  matters  and  orders  of  the  Church,  be  exe- 
cuted and  duly  observed ;  to  see  that  every  Ecclesiastical 
person  do  that  Office  whereunto  he  is  appointed ;  to  punish 
those  that  fail  in  their  Office."  In  a  word,  that  which  Allen  Apoi. 
himself  acknowledgeth,  unto  the  earthly  Power  which  God  p*!  a. 
hath  given  him  it  doth  belong  to  defend  the  Laws  of  the 
Church,  to  cause  them  to  be  executed,  and  to  punish  rebels 
and  transgressors  of  the  same :  on  all  sides  therefore  it  is 
confest,  that  to  the  King  belongeth  Power  of  maintaining 
the  Laws  made  for  Church-regiment,  and  of  causing  them 

*  ["  Tenent"  Lat  they  hold;  it  answers  therefore,  when  applied  to  more  persons  than  one, 
in  distinction  from  tenet,  he  holds,  as  an  equivalent  to  the  phrase,  that  which  they  hold  ;  and 
accordingly  Bishop  Sanderson,  in  "  Cases  of  Consc."  where  several,  or  those  sentiments  or 
opinionf,  are  to  be  understood,  has  used  the  plural  termination :  "  principles  and  tenents  oC 
the  people."    See  Todd's  Die.] 


astical. 


310  THE   EIGHTH  BOOK  [Seci.l^ 

to  be  observed ;  but  Principality  of  Power  in  making  tbenif 
which  is  the  thing  we  attribute  unto  Kings,  this  both  the 
one  sort  and  the  other  do  withstand. 
Power  7.  Touching  the  King's  supereminent  Authority  in  Com* 
maDd^ii  manding,  and  in  Judging  of  causes  Ecclesiastidal ;  first,  to 
£^?o°be  explain  therein  our  meaning/  It  hath  been'  taken  tts  if  we 
Jadge**^  did  hold,  that  Kings  may  prescribe  what  themseltes  think 
EcdeJ^*good  to  be  done  in  the  service  of  God;  how  the  Word 
shall  be  taught,  how  the  Sacraments  administered:  that 
Kings  may  personially  sit  in  the  Consistory  where  the 
Bishops  do,  hearinjg  and  determining  what  causes  soever 
do  appertain  unto  the  Church :  that  Kings  and  Queens,* 


*  ['*  By  the  constitution  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  it  is  expressly  ordered  and  dedaied, 
that  the  '  Woman'  shall  not  be  suffered  publicly  *  to  teach,  nor  to  usurp  authority  ortr  the 
man/  1  Tim.ii.  12. ;  but  by  the  constitution  of  the  Church  of  England,  the  Woman  is  per- 
mitted publicly  to  teach ;  yea,  to  limit  and  controul  in  Spiritual  and  Religious  matters,  and 
authoritatiyely  to  instruct  the  Bishops  and  Clergy,  and  all  men  in  the  land.    Thus  did  Quacn 
Elizabeth,  thus  did  Queen  Anne,  and  thus  hath  every  Qu^en  authority  to  do, . . .  to  prescribe 
and  dictate  to  all . . .  what  the  one  are  to  preach  and  the  other  to  receive.    A  very  comely  and 
edifying  sight,  to  behold  the  two  Houses  of  Convocation  waiting  upon  Queen  Anne,  1711, 
in  the  case  of  Whiston's  books  upon  the  Trinity,  to  be  instructed  by  her  Majesty,  whether 
they  were  to  be  condemned  as  heretical  or  nott     That  venerable  and  learned  body  had 
solemnly  decreed  them  to  be  dangerous  and  heretical,  but  this  their  censure  was  of  no  iuet 
till  they  had  laid  it  before  the  Queen  to  have  her  judgment  upon  the  point ....  Her  Mar 
jesty, . . .  thought  not  fit  to  censure  the  books :  so  her  single  opinion,  strange  to  relate  I 
carried  it  against  that  of  her  Bishops  and  Clergy ;  she  overrules  and  sets  aside  aU  their  pro- 
ceedings, restrains  and  coimteracts  them,  in  one  of  the  very  chief  of  their  Pastoral  Functions, 
the  guarding  against  errors  and  heresies  in  the  Church. ...  Is  this  the  Constitution  and  frame 
of  the  Church  of  Christ? . . .  May  not  a  person  separate  peaceably  from  it  without  any,  the 
least  danger,  of  thereby  separating  himself  from  the  only  Scriptural,  Apostolic,  and  Catholic 
Church  t    When  the  Pope  was  stripped  of  his  Supremacy,  and  it  was  given  to  our  Princes, 
care  should  have  been  taken  not  to  leave  his  infallibility  behind.     An  infallible  Head  and 
Director  of  the  Church,  be  it  man  or  woman,  be  it  a  he  or  a  she  Bishop,  is  a  thing  plausible 
enough  . . .  but,  to  lodge  the  absolute  direction  of  the  consciences  and  the  faith,  and  the  dis- 
cipline, of  the  Church  with  a  &llible  Head ;  to  give  a  Prince,  yea,  a  Lady  bred  up  in  all  the 
softnesses  and  diversions  of  a  Court,  an  uncontroulable  Dominion  over  the  religious  conduct 
both  of  Clergy  and  Laity,  authoritatively  to  direct  what  those  are  to  preach,  aikl  what  tiiese 
to  believe  as  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ ;  to  make  her  the  sole  Judge  in  all  controversies  which 
shall  arise  upon  any,  the  most  mysterious  and  inexplicable  points,  so  that  all  '  the  Priests' 
are  to  ask  '  knowledge'  at  her  lips,  (Mal.ii.  7)  and  whatever  she  determines  is  to  be  received 
by  the  Church  as  Christian  verity ;  this  is  such  a  Constitution  as  quite  shocks  the  understand- 
ing, and  comes  not  a  whit  behind  transubstantiation  itsel£  . . .  Bishop  Burnet  (Hist  of  lus 
own  Time,  Vol.  vi.  p.  1134 — 5.  Edit  12mo.)  says,  *  That,  by  the  Act  of  1st  of  Elix.,  which 
defined  what  should  be  judged  heresy,  that  Judgment  was  declared  to  lie  in  the  Crown.  The 
Bishops,  in  Convocation,  drew  out  several  propositions  from  Whiston's  books,  which  seemed 
plainly  to  be  reviving  of  Arianism,  and  censured  them  as  such.    The  Lower  House  (excepting 
to  one  proposition)  censured  them  in  the  same  manner.     This  the  Archbishop,  being  then 
disabled  by  the  gout,  sent  by  one  of  the  Bishops  to  the  Queen,  for  her  Assent  (Approbaikm, 
p.  1 194) ;  who  promised  to  '  consider  of  it'     At  their  (the  Convocation's)  meetfog  next 
winter,  no  answer  being  come  from  the  Queen,  two  Bishops  were  sent  to  ash  it,  and  to  receive 
her  Migesty's  pleasure  in  it ;  but  she  could  not  tell  what  was  become  of  the  paper  the  Ardi- 
bishop  had  sent  her.     So  an  extract  of  the  Censure  was  again  sent  to  her ;  but  she  ihamght 
not  fit  to  send  any  answer  to  it.     So  Whiston's  affair  slept,  and  allfiuther  proceedings  against 
him  were  stopped,  since  the  Queen  did  not  confirm  the  step  that  we  had  made.' . .  •  Upon 
her  Majesty's  thoughts  the  issue  of  this  great  affair  is  seen  absolutely  to  depend . . .  lier  learned 


Seei.  f .]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  3ll 

in  their  own  proper  persons,  are  by  judicial  sentence  to 
decide  the  questions  which  do  rise  about  matters  of  Faith 
and  Christiim  Religion :  that  Kings  may  excommunicate : 
finally,  that  Kings  may  do  whatsoever  is  incident  unto  the 
9S&c%  and  duty  of  an  Ecclesiastical -Judge.  Which  opinion^ 
because  we  account  as  absurd  as  they  who  hatve  fathered  the 
tame  upon  us,  we  do  them  to  wit,  that  this  our  meaning  is 
and  no  otherwise,  There  is  not  within  this  Realm  an  Ec* 
clesiastical  Officer,  that  may,  by  the  Authority  of  his  own 
^^ace,  Command  universally  throughout  the  King's  domi- 
nions ;  but  they  of  this  people  whom  one  may  command, 
are  to  another's  ^commandment  unsubject :  Only  the  King's 
royal  Power  is  of  so  largie  a  compass,  that  no  man  com- 
maaded^by  him  according  to  the  order  of  Law,  can  pkad 
himsdf  to  be  without  the  bounds  and  limits  of  that  Autho- 
rity :- 1  say,  according  to  order  of  Law,  because  that  with  us 
tiie  Highest  have  thereunto  so  tied  themselves,  that  otherwise 
than  so,  they  take  not  upon  them  to  command  any.  And, 
that  Kings  should  be  in  such  sort  supreme  Commanders 
ever  all  men,  we  hold  it  as  requisite,  as  well  for  the  ordering 
ef  Spiritual  as  Civil  affairs ;  inasmuch  as  without  universal 
Authority  in  this  kind,  they  should  not  be  able  when  need 
is,  to  do  as  virtuous  Kings  have  done.  *^  Joash,  purposing  to  tchroo. 
renew  the  House  of  the  Lord,  assembled  the  Priests  and  > 
Levitesr  and  when  they  were  together,  gave  them  their 
charge,  saying.  Go  out  unto  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  gather 
of  Israel  money  to  repair  the  House  of  Grod  from  year 
to  year,  and  haste  the  thingilc  but  the  Levites  basted 
not.  Therefore  the  King  called  Jehoiada,  the  Chief,  and 
said  unto  him.  Why  hast  thour  not  required  of  the  Levites,^ 


Bbbops  and  Clergy  thought  Mr.  Whiston's  writings  contained  '  several  damnable  and  bias- 
phemoDf  assertions  against  the  doctrine  and  worship  of  the  ever  blessed  Trinity  ;■  and  earnestly 
beseech  all  Christian  people,  by  the  mercies  of  Christ,  to  take  heed  how  they  give  ear  to  these 
•Alse  doctrines/  and  judged  them  to  deserve  a  public  and  solemn  censure :   her  Majesty 

tiwnght  otherwise What  improvements  are  here  made,  by  the  wisdom  of  later  ages,  in 

the  primitive  Apostolic  plan !  Behold  the  ^  Woman'  now  empowered  not  only  <  to  teach/  but 
'to  usurp  authority  over  the  man/  over  all  the  Archbishops,  Bishops,  and  Priests  of  this 
Realm;  to  vacate  their  most  solemn  Censures ;  to -quash  and  stop  at  once  their  Spiritual  pro- 
ceedings in  an  aflEair  where  blasphemous  doctrines  and  damnable  and  wicked  errors  were 
Mnging  danger  of  everlasting  ruin  to  souls  over  whom  they  watched !  See  here,  the  two 
aealet  that  are  to  try  doctrines  and  opinions  in  this  holy  apostolic  Church  !  In  one  is  laid 
tiie  united  judgment  of  all  the  Bishops  and  Clergy  in  Convocation  convened ;  in  the  other,' 
die  Queen's  alone :  lo,  the  former  mounts  and  kicks  the  beam  !  The  single  judgment  of 
the  Qneen  in  the  balanoe  of  the  Church,  weighs  more  than  that  of  all  the  learned  Bbbops 
and  Priests  of  the  Reakn/' '  Towgood's  Dissent,  fiMy  justed,  p.  25— 27/aud  254—257. 
BdH.  1804.  12mo.] 


312  THE   EIOBTH  BOOK  [SeCt.  7* 

to  bring  in  out  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  the  tax  of  Moses 
the  servant  of  the  Lord,  and  of  the  congregation  of  Israeli 
for  the  Tabernacle  of  the  testimony  ?     For  wicked  Athaliah 
and  her  children  brake  up  the  House  of  the  Lord  God,  and 
all  the  things  that  were  dedicated  for  the  House  of  the  Lord 
did  they  bestow  upon  Baalim.     Therefore  the  King  com^ 
manded,  and  they  made  a  chest,  and  set  it  at  the  gate 
of  the  House  of  the  Lord  without; ;   and  they  made  a 
proclamation  through  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  to  bring  unto 
the  Lord  the  tax  of  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord,  laid 
2  Chron.  upon  Israel  in  the  wilderness."    Could  either  he  have  done 
^**  '  this,  or  after  him  Ezechias  the  like  concerning  the  cele- 
bration of  the  Passover,  but  that  all  sorts  of  men  in  all 
things  did  owe  unto  these  their  Sovereign  Rulers  the  same 
obedience  which  sometimes  Joshua  had  them  by  vow  and 
jo8h.     promise  bound  unto  ?     ''  Whosoever  shall  rebel  against  thy 
''  '^*     commandments,  and  will  not  obey  thy  words  in  all  thou 
commandest  him,  let  him  be  put  to  death ;  only  be  strong 
and  of  a  good  courage."     Furthermore,  Judgment  Eccle* 
siastical  we  say  is  necessary  for  decision  of  controversies 
rising  between  man  and  man,  and  for  coiTection  of  faulta 
committed  in  the  affairs  of  God :  unto  the  due  execution 
whereof  there  are  three  things  necessary.  Laws,  Judges^ 
and  Supreme   Governors    of  Judgments.      What   Courts 
there  shall  be,   and  what  causes   shall  belong  unto  each 
Court,  and  what  Judges  shall  determine  of  every  cause> 
and  what  order  in  all  judgments  shall  be  kept ;  of  those 
things  the   Laws   have   sufficiently   disposed,    so   that  his 
duty  who  sitteth  in  any  such  Court  is  to  judge,  not  of, 
Inst,      but  after,  the  same  Law ;  "  Imprimis  illud  observare  debet 
jud!^^*  Judex,  ne  aliter  judicet  quam  Legibus,  Constitutionibus,  aut 
Moribus  proditum  est,  ut  Imperator  Justinianus ;"   which 
Laws  (for  we  mean  the  positive  Laws  of  our  Realm  con- 
cerning Ecclesiastical  affairs)  if  they  otherwise  dispose  of 
any  such  thing  than  according  to  the  Law  of  Reason  and 
of  God,  we  must  both  acknowledge  them  to  be  amiss,  and 
endeavour  to  have  them  reformed :  but  touching  that  point, 
what  may  be  objected  shall  after  appear.     Our  Judges  in 
causes  Ecclesiastical  are  either  Ordinary  or  Commissionary: 
Ordinary,  those  whom  we  term  Ordinaries ;  and  such,  by 
the  Laws  of  this  Land,  are  none  but  Prelates  only,  whose 
Power  to  do  that  which  they  do  is  in  themselves,  and 


Sect.  7.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  SIS 

belonging  to  the  nature  of  their  Ecclesiastical  calling.  In 
spiritual  causes,  a  Lay-person  may  be  no  Ordinary ;  a  Corn- 
missionary  Judge  there  is  no  let  but  that  he  may  be ;  and 
that  our  Laws  do  evermore  refer  the  ordinary  judgment 
of  spiritual  causes  unto  spiritual  persons,  such  as  are 
termed  Ordinaries,  no  man  which  knoweth  any  [thing} 
of  the  practice  of  this  Realm  can  easily  be  ignorant.  Now 
besides  them  which  are  authorized  to  judge  in  several 
Territories,  there  is  required  an  universal  Power  which 
reacheth  over  all,  imparting  Supreme  Authority  of  Govern- 
ment over  Courts,  all  Judges,  all  Causes ;  the  operation  of 
which  Power  is  as  well  to  strengthen,  maintain,  and  uphold 
particular  Jurisdictions,  which  haply  might  else  be  of  small 
effect;  as  also  to  remedy  that  which  they  are  not  able  to 
help,  and  to  redress  that  wherein  they  at  any  time  do 
otherwise  than  they  ought  to  do.  This  Power  being  some- 
time in  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  who  by  sinister  practices  had 
drawn  it  into  his  hands,  was  for  just  considerations  by 
public  consent  annexed  unto  the  King's  royal  Seat  and 
Crown;  from  thence  the  authors  of  Reformation  would 
translate  it  into  their  National  Assemblies  or  Synods; 
which  Synods  are  the  only  helps  that  they  think  lawful 
to  use  against  such  evils  in  the  Church,  as  particular  Ju- 
risdictions are  not  sufficient  to  redress.  In  which  cause  our  i  eub. 
Laws  have  provided,  that  the  King's  Supereminent  Autho-  *^^'  ** 
rity  and  Power  shall  serve :  as  namely,  when  the  whole 
Ecclesiastical  State,  or  the  principal  persons  therein,  do 
need  visitation  and  reformation ;  when,  in  any  part  of  the 
Church,  errors,  schisms,  heresies,  abuses,  offences,  con- 
tempts, enormities,  are  grown ;  which  men  in  their  several 
Jurisdictions  either  do  not,  or  cannot  help.  Whatsoever 
any  Spiritual  Authority  and  Power  (such  as  Legates  from 
the  See  of  Rome  did  sometimes  exercise)  hath  done  or 
might  heretofore  have  done  for  the  remedy  of  those  evils 
in  lawful  sort  (that  is  to  say,  without  the  violation  of  the 
Laws  of  God  or  Nature  in  the  deed  done),  as  much  in 
every  degree  our  Laws  have  fully  granted  that  the  King 
for  ever  may  do,  not  only  by  setting  Ecclesiastical  Synods 
on  work,  that  the  thing  may  be  their  act  and  the  King  their 
motion  unto  it,  for  so  much  perhaps  the  masters  of  Re- 
formation will  grant;  but  by  Commissioners  few  or  many> 
who  having  the  King's  Letters  Patents,  may  in  the  virtue 


814  THE  EIGHTH   BOOK  [Sed.  T. 

thereof  execute  the  premises  as  agents  in  the  right,  ikot 
of  their  own  peculiar  and  ordinary,  hut  of  his  superemi-i 
nent,  Power*  When  men  are  wronged:  by  inferior  Judges, 
or  have  any  just  cause  to.  take  exception  against  them; 
their  way  for  redress  is  to  make  their  appeal^  and  Appeal 
is  a  present  delivery  of  him  which  maketh  it,  out  of  the 
hands  of  their  Power  and  Jurisdictions  from  whence  it  is 
made*  Pope  Alexander  having  sometimes  the  King  of 
England  at  advantage,  caused  him,  amongst  other  things, 
to  agree.  That  as  many  of  his  Subjects  as  would,  might 
Machu-  have  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Rome.  '*  And  thua^Csaith 
Fiorent/ one)  that  whereunto  a  mean  p^son  at  this  day.  would 
^^'^'  scorn  to  submit  himself,  so  great  a  King  was  content  to 
be  subject  [to].  Notwithstanding,  even  when  the- Pope 
(saith  he)  had  so  great  Authority  amongst  Princes  whidi 
were  far  off,  the  Romans  he  could  not  frame  to  obedience, 
Bor  was  able  to  obtain  that  himself  might  abide*  at  Rome, 
though  promising  not  to  meddle  with  other  than  Ecclesi- 
astical affairs."  So  much  are  things  that  terrify  aioie 
feared  by  such  as  behold  them  aloof  off  than  at  hand. 
Reformers  I  doubt  not  in  some  Causes  will  admit  appeals, 
but  appeals,  made  to  their  Synods ;  even  as  the  Church  of 
Rome  doth  allow  of  them  so  they  be  made  to  the  Bishop 
ssHen.  of  Romc.  As  for  that  kind  of  Appeal  which  the  English 
c.  19!  Laws  do  approve  from  the  Judge  of  any  certain  particular 
Court  unto  the  King,  as  the  only  Supreme  Governor  on 
earth,  who  by  his  delegates  may  give  a  final  definitive 
sentence,  from  which  no  farther  appeal  can  be  made;  will 
their  Platform  allow  of  this?  Surely,  forasmuch  as  in  that 
estate  which  they  all  dream  of,  the  whole  Church  must  be 
divided  into  Parishes,  in  which  none  can  have  greater  or 
less  Authority  and  Power  than  another :  again,  the  King 
himself  must  be  but  as  a  common  member  in  the  body  of  his 
own  Parish,  and  the  causes  of  that  only  Parish  must  be  by 
the  Officers  thereof  determinable  :  in  case  the  King  had  so 
much  favour  or  preferment,  as  to  be  made  one  of  those 
Officers  (for  otherwise  by  their  positions  he  were  not  to 
meddle  any  more  than  the  meanest  amongst  his  Subjects 
with  the  judgments  of  any  Ecclesiastical  cause),  how  is  it 
possible  they  should  allow  of  Appeals  to  be  made  from 
any  other  abroad  to  the  King  ?  To  receive  Appeals  from 
all  other  Judges,  belongeth  unto  the  highest  in  Power  of 


SecL  7.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY. 

all,  and  to  be  in  Power  over  all  (as  touching  judgment  in 
Ecclesiastical  causes),  this,  as  they  think,  belongeth  only 
to  Synods.  Whereas  therefore,  with  us  Kings  do  exercise 
over  all  things,  persons,  and  causes,  supreme  Power,  both 
of  voluntary  and  litigious  Jurisdictions ;  so  that  according 
to  the  one  they  incite,  reform,  and  command ;  according  to 
iSaie  other,  they  judge  universally,  doing  both  in  far  other 
sort  than  such  as  have  ordinary  Spiritual  Power;  oppugned 
we  are  herein  by  some  colourable  shew  of  argument,  as  if 
(o  grant  thus  much  to  any  Secular  person  it  were  unrea- 
sonable: **  For  sith  it  is  (say  they)  apparent  out  of  ther.c. 
Chronicles,  that  judgment  in  Church-matters  pertaineth  to  p.'^iM.' 
Grod;  seeing  likewise  it  is  evident  out  of  the  Apostle,  thatxis!*!?" 
the  High-priest  is  set  over  those  matters  in  God's  behalf;  ^^il 
it  must  needs  follow  that  the  principality  or  direction  of 
the  judgment  of  them  is,  by  God's  Ordinance,  appertaining 
to  the  High-priest,  and  consequently  to  the  Ministry  of  the 
Church:  and  if  it  be  by  God's  Ordinance' appertaining  unto 
them,  how  can  it  be  translated  from  them  to  the  Civil  Magi- 
strate?" Which  argument,  briefly  drawn  into  form,  lieth 
thus ;  ThAt  which  belongeth  unto  God,  may  not  be  trans- 
lated unto  any  other  but  whom  he  hath  appointed  to  have 
it  in  his  behalf;  but  Principality  of  Judgment  in  Church- 
natters  appertaineth  unto  God,  which  hath  appointed  the 
High-priest,  and  consequently  the  Ministry  of  the  Church 
alone,  to  have  it  in  his  behalf;  ergOy  it  may  not  from  them 
be  translated  to  the  Civil  Magistrate.  The  first  of  which 
propositions  we  grant,  as  also  in  the  second  that  branch 
which  ascribeth  unto  God  Principality  in  Church-matters. 
But,  that  either  he  did  appoint  none  but  only  the  High-^ 
priest  to  exercise  the  said  Principality  for  him ;  or  that  the 
Idinistry  of  the  Church  may  in  reason  from  thence  be  con- 
eluded  to  have  alone  the  same  Principality  by  his  appoint- 
ment, these  two  points  we  deny  utterly.  For,  concerning 
the  High-priest,  there  is,  first,  no  such  Ordinance  of  Grod  • 
to  be  found ;  *'  Every  High-priest  (saith  the  Apostle)  is  Heh. 
taken  from  amongst  men,  and  is  ordained  for  men  in  things  ^'  ^* 
pertaining  to  God;"  whereupon  it  may  well  be  gathered, 
that  the  Priest  was  indeed  ordained  of  God  to  have  Power 
in  things  appertaining  unto  God.  For  the  Apostle  doth 
there  mention  the  Power  of  ofiering  gifts  and  sacrifices  for 
sin ;  which  kind  of  Power  was  not  only  given  of  God  unto 


316  'THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sect.  7^ 

Priests,  but  restrained  unto  Priests  only.*  The  Power 
of  Jurisdiction  and  ruling  Authority^  this  also  God  gave 
them,  but  not  them  alone:  for  it  is  held,  as  all  men  know, 
that  others  of  the  Laity  were  herein  joined  by  the  Law 
with  them.  But,  concerning  Principality  in  Church-affairs 
(for  of  this  our  question  is,  and  of  no  other),  the  Priest 
neither  had  it  alone,  nor  at  all  but  in  Spiritual  or  Church- 
affairs,  (as  hath  been  already  shewed)  it  was  the  Royal 
prerogative  of  Kings  only.  Again,  though  it  were  so,  that 
God  had  appointed  the  High-priest  to  have  the  said  Princi- 
pality of  Government  in  those  matters ;  yet  how  can  they 
who  allege  this,  enforce  thereby,  that  consequently  the 
Ministry  of  the  Church,  and  no  other,  ought  to  have  the 
same,  when  they  are  so  far  off  from  allowing  so  much  to  the 
Ministry  of  the  Gospel,  as  the  Priesthood  of  the  Law  had 
by  God's  appointment.  That  we  but  collecting  thereout  a 
difference  in  Authority  and  Jurisdiction  amongst  the  Clergy, 
to  be  for  the  Polity  of  the  Church  not  inconvenient ;  they 
forthwith  think  to  close  up  our  mouths  by  answering,  "  That 
the  Jewish  High-priests  had  Authority  above  the  rest,  only 
in  that  they  prefigured  the  Sovereignty  of  Jesus  Christ;  as 
for  the  Ministers  of  the  Gospel,  it  is  altogether  unlawful  to 
give  them  as  much  as  the  least  title,  any  syllable  whereof 
may  sound  to  Principality."  And  of  the  Regency  which 
may  be  granted,  they  hold  others  even  of  the  Laity  no  less 
capable  than  the  Pastors  themselves.  How  shall  these 
things  cleave  together?  The  truth  is,  that  they  have  some 
reason  to  think  it  not  all  of  the  fittest  for  Kings  to  sit  as 
ordinary  Judges  in  matters  of  Faith  and  Religion.  An 
ordinary  Judge  must  be  of  the  quality  which  in  a  supreme 
Judge  is  not  necessary :  because  the  person  of  the  one  is 
charged  with  that  which  the  other's  Authority  dischargeth, 
without  employing  personally  himself  therein.  It  is  an  error 
to  think,  that  the  King's  Authority  can  have  no  force  nor 
power  in  the  doing  of  that  which  himself  may  not  personally 
do.  For  first,  impossible  it  is  that  at  one  and  the  same 
time,  the  King  in  Person  should  order  so  many  and  so  dif- 
ferent affairs,  as  by  his  Power  every  where  present  are  wont 

*  ["  To  the  place  in  Heb.  V.  1,  he  (Dr.W.)  answereth,  that  the  Apostle  declareth  that 
those  things  are  to  *  offer  gifts/  &&,  which  is  nothing  worth ;  for  the  proposition  is  general, 
whereupon  the  Apostle  concludeth  so  much  as  served  for  the  present  purpose :  otherwise 
you  may  as  well  say,  that  it  belonged  not  to  the  High-priest  to  preach,  because  the  Apostle 
mentioneth  not  that  part  of  his  office  in  that  place."     T.  C.  lib.  iii.  p.  153.] 


Sect.  7.]  OF    ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  817 

to  be  ordered  both  in  peace  and  at  war,  at  home  and  abroad. 
Again,  the  King  in  regard  of  his  Nonage  or  Minority  may 
be  unable  to  perform  that  thing  wherein  years  of  discretion 
are  requisite  for  personal  action;   and  yet  this  Authority 
even  then  be  of  force.     For  which  cause  we  say,  that  the 
King's  Authority  dieth  not,   but  is,  and  worketh,  always 
alike.     Sundry  considerations  there  may  be  effectual  to 
withhold  the  King's  Person  from  being  a  doer  of  that  which 
notwithstanding  his  Power  must  give  force  unto,  even  in 
Civil  affairs;  where  nothing  doth  more  either  concern  the 
duty,  or  better  beseem  the  majesty  of  Kings,  than  per- 
sonally to  administer  Justice  to  their  people  (as  most  famous 
Princes  have  done) :    yet  if  it  be  in  case  of  Felony  or  sumr. 
Treason,  the  Learned  in  the  Laws  of  this  Realm  do  affirm,  of  the 
that  well  may  the  King  commit  his  Authority  to  another  to  iib?7i?' 
judge  between  him  and  the  offender;  but  the  King  being ^'^ 
himself  there  a   party,  he   cannot  personally  sit  to   give 
judgment.* 

As  therefore  the  Person  of  the  King  may,  for  just  con- 
i^iderations,  even  where  the  cause  is  Civil,  be  notwithstand- 
ing withdrawn  from  occupying  the  Seat  of  Judgment,  and 
others  under  bis  Authority  be  fit,  he  unfit  himself  to  judge; 
so  the  considerations  for  which  it  were  haply  not  convenient 
for  Kings  to  sit  and  give  sentence  in  Spiritual  Courts,  where 
causes  Ecclesiastical  are  usually  debated,  can  be  no  bar  to 
that  force  and  efficacy  which  their  sovereign  Power  hath 
over  those  very  Consistories,  and  for  which  we  hold,  without 
any  exception,  that  all  Courts  are  the  King's.  All  men  are 
not  for  all  things  sufficient,  and  therefore  public  affairs 
being  divided,  such  persons  must  be  authorized  Judges  in 
each  kind,  as  common  reason  may  presume  to  be  most  fit: 
which  cannot  of  Kings  and  Princes  ordinarily  be  presumed 
in  causes  merely  Ecclesiastical;  so  that  even  common  sense 
doth  rather  adjudge  this  burthen  unto  other  men.  We  see 
it  hereby  a  thing  necessary,  to  put  a  difference,  as  well 
between  that  Ordinary  Jurisdiction  which  belongeth  to 
the  Clergy  alone,  and  that  Commissionary  wherein  others 
are  for  just  considerations  appointed  to  join  with  them ;  as 
also  between  both  these  Jurisdictions,  and  a  third,  whereby 
the  King  hath  transcendent  Authority,  and  that  in  all  causes 

*  [At  thU  place,  the  Edition  of  .the  Sixth  and  Eighth  Books,  pub.  in  1648,  concludes  with 
the  word  «  Finis."     The  rest  of  this  Book  was*  first  printed  in  Gauden*s  Ed.  of  1662.] 


318  ^THS  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sed.T. 

oyer  both.  Why  this  may  not  lawfully  be  granted  unto  him 
there  is  no  reason*  A  time  there  was  when  Kings  were  not 
capable  of  any  such  Power,  as,  namely,  when  they  professed 
themselves  open  enemies  unto  Christ  and  Christianity.  A 
time  there  followed,  when  they,  being  capable,  took  some- 
times more,  sometimes  less,  to  themselves,  as  seemed  best  in 
their  own  eyes^  because  no  certainty,  touching  their  right, 
was  as  yet  determined.  The  Bishops,  who  alone  were 
before  accustomed  to  have  the  orderings  of  such  iJbivs, 
saw  very  just  cause  of  grief,  when  the  Highest,  iavouirkig 
Heresy,  withstood,  by  the  strength  of  Sovereign  Authorityy 
Religious  proceedings..  Whereupon  they  oftentimes,  against 
this  unresistible  Power,  pleaded  the  use  and  custom  wbioh 
had  been  to  the  contrary;  namely,  that  the  affairs  of  the 
Church  should  be  dealt  in  by  the  Clergy,  and  by  no  other'; 
unto  which  purpose,  the  sentences  that  then  were  uttered, 
in  defence  of  unabolished  Orders  and  Laws,  against  such  as 
did  of  their  own  heads  contrary  thereunto,  are'  now  alto- 
gether  impertinently  brought  in  opposition  against  them, 
who  use  but  that  Power  which  Laws  have  given  them, 
unless  men  can  shew  that  |;here  is  in  those  Laws  some 
T. c.  manifest  iniquity  or  injustice.  •  Whereas. therefore  agtiinst 
p.  155.'  the  force  Judicial  and  Imperial,  which  supreme  Authority 
Easeb.  hath,  it  is  alleged,  how  Constantine  termeth  Church-offiders, 
coDst."^  ^'  Overseers  of  thinsfs  within  the  Church ;  himself,  of  those 

lih    I  O  -  '  ' 

Ang/'    without  the  Church;"  how  Augustine  witnesseth,  '*  that  the 

^^'     '  Emperor  not  daring  to  judge  of  the  Bishop's  cause,  com- 

ep.  166.  mitted  it  to  the  Bishops ;"  and  ^*  was  to  crave  pardon  of  the 

Bishops,  for  that  by  the  Donatists'  importunity,  which  made 

no  end  of  appealing  unto  him,  he  was,  being  weary  of  them^ 

drawn  to  give  sentence  in  a  matter  of  theirs  i"*  how  Hilary 

Hilar.    *'  beseecheth  the  Emperor  Constance,  to  provide  that  the 

c?i.''     Governors  of  his  Provinces  should  not  presume  to  take 

upon  them  the  judgment  of  Ecclesiastical  causes,  to  whom 

only  Commonwealth-matters  belonged  ;"f  how  Ambrose  af- 

Ambros.  firmcth,  ''  that  Palaces  belong  unto  the  Emperor,  Churches 

ep.  33.*   to  the  Minister ;  that  the  Emperor  hath  the  Authority  over 

the  common  walls  of  the  city,  and  not  in  holy  things ;%  for 

which  cause  he  never  would  yield  to  have  the  causes  of  the 

Church  debated  in  the  Prince's  Consistories,  but  excused 

♦  [T.C.  Ub.m.  p.  163.]  t  [T.  C.  Ub.iiL  p,  155.] 

X  [T.C.  Iib.ui.  p.  156.] 


Sect.  7*]  OF   BCCLESIASTJCAI.  POLITY.  319 

himself  to  the  Emperor  Valentinian,  for  ihi^  being  con* 
yented  to  answer  concerning  Church-matters  m  a  Civil 
Court,  he  came  not  ;"*  we  may  by  these  testimonies  drawn 
from  antiquity,  if  we  list  to  consider  them,  discern  how 
reqtusite  it  is,  that  Authority  should  always  follow  received 
Laws  in  the  maimer  of  proceeding.  For,  inasmuch  as  there 
was  at  the  first  no  certain  Law  determining  what  force  the 
principal  Civil '  Magistrate's  Authority  should  be  of,  how 
far  it  should  reach,  and  what  order  it  should  observe ;  but 
Christian  Emperors  from  time  to  time  did  what  themselves 
thought  most  reasonable  in  those  affairs;  by  this  means  it 
Cometh  to  pass  that  they  in  their  practice  vary,  and  are 
not  uniform.  Virtuous  Emperors,  such  as  Constantine  the 
Grreat  was,  made  conscience  to  swerve  unnecessarily,  from 
the  custom  which  had  been  used  in  the  Church,  even  when 
it  lived  under  Infidels ;  Constantine,  of  Reverence  to  Bishops 
and  their  spiritual  Authority,  rather  abstained  from  that 
which  him^lf  might  lawfully  do,  than  was  willing  to  claim 
a  Power  not  fit  or  decent  for  him  to  exercise. f  The  Order 
which  hath  been  before,  he  ratifieth,  exhorting  the  .Bishops 
to  look  to  the  Qhurch,  and  promising  that  he  would  do  the 
oflSce  of  a. Bishop  over  the  Commonwealth ;:t^  which  viery 
Constantine  notwithstanding,  did  not  thereby  so  renounce 
aU  Authority  in  judging  of  special  causes,  but  that  some? 
time  he  took,  as  St.  Augustine  witnessetb,.. even. personal 
cognition  of  them;  howbeit,  whether  as  purposing  to. give 
therein  judicially  any  sentence,  I  stand  in.  doubt.§  For  if 
the  other,  of  whom  St.  Augustine  elsewhere  speaketh,  did 
in.  such  sort  judge,  surely  there  was  cause  why  he  should 
excuse  Jt  as  a  thing  not  usually  done.  Otherwise  there  is  no 
let,  but  that  any  such  great  person  may  hear  those  causes 
tp  and  fro  debated,  and  deliver  in  the  end  his  own  opinion 
of  them,  declaring  on  which  side  himself  doth  judge  that 

•  [T.  C  Ub.  iii.  p.  161.J  f  [See  Note  §,  p.  304.] 

X  f*  The  word  Bishop  is  taken  sometimes  generally,  for  any  Overseer;  and  not  only  for 
tile  Church  Minister.  In  which  respect  Constantine  calleth  himself  a  Bishop,  but  putteth  a 
manifiMt  difference  between  his  Bishopric  and  theirs :  namely,  that  the  Church  officers  were 
Bishops  and  Overseers  '  of  things  within  the  Church,  and  he  Bishop  or  Overseer  of  those 
tiuit  were  without  the  Church ;'  (Euseb.  de  vit  Const  Ub.  iv.);  whereby  he  clearly  also  esta- 
Uisbeth  the  distinction  of  the  Church  and  Commonwealtii  under  a  Christian  Prince." 
T.C.  lib.  in.  p.  155.] 

§  ["Constantine  although  but  a  Catechumen,  plays  the  Doctor! ...  In  Ecclesiastic 
Affitirs  he  took  something  more  upon  himself  than  might  befit  a  Prince  that  was  a  Laic; 
the  Bishopd  permitting  him  in  all  things,  and  rejoicing  greatly  with  themselves,  because 
they  saw  an  Emperor  a  Christian.*'    Vales,  in  Buseb.  Fit,  Contt,  lib.  iii.  c.  51.]  ■ 


820  THE   £lGHtH  BOOK  [Seci.  7. 

the  truth  is.  But  this  kind  of  sentence  bindeth  no  side 
to  stand  thereunto ;  it  is  a  sentence  of  private  persuasion^ 
and  not  of  solemn  Jurisdiction,  albeit  a  King  or  an  Emperor 
pronounce  it.  Again,  on  the  contrary  part,  when  Governors 
infected  with  Heresy  were  possessed  of  the  highest  Power, 
they  thought  they  might  use  it  as  pleased  themselves,  to 
further  by  all  means  that  opinion  which  they  desired  should 
prevail;  they,  not  respecting  at  all  what  was  meet,  presumed 
to  command  and  judge  all  men  in  all  causes,  without  either 
care  of  orderly  proceeding,  or  regard  to  such  Laws  and 
Customs  as  the  Church  had  been  wont  to  observe.  So  that 
the  one  sort  feared  to  do  even  that  which  they  might;  and 
that  which  the  other  ought  not,  they  boldly  presumed 
upon:  the  one  sort  of  modesty  excused  themselves  where 
they  scarce  needed ;  the  other,  though  doing  that  which  was 
inexcusable,  bare  it  out  with  main  power,  not  enduring  to 
be  told  by  any  man  how  far  they  roved  beyond  their 
bounds.  So  great  odds  was  between  them  whom  before 
we  mentioned,  and  such  as  the  younger  Valentinian,  by 
whom  St.  Ambrose  being  commanded  to  yield  up  one  of 
the  Churches  under  him  unto  the  Arians,  whereas  they 
which  were  sent  on  his  message  alleged.  That  the  Emperor 
did  but  use  his  own  right,  forasmuch  as  all  things  were  in 
his  Power ;  the  answer  which  the  holy  Bishop  gave  them 
was,  ^^  That  the  Church  is  the  House  of  God,  and  that 
those  things  that  are  God's  are  not  to  be  yielded  up,  and 
disposed  of  at  the  Emperor's  will  and  pleasure ;  his  Palaces 
he  might  grant  to  whomsoever  he  pleaseth,  but  God's  own 
habitation  not  so."  A  cause  why  many  times  Emperors  do 
more  by  their  absolute  Authority  than  could  very  well  stand 
with  reason,  was  the  over-great  importunity  of  wicked 
Heretics,  who,  being  enemies  to  peace  and  quietness,  can- 
not otherwise  than  by  violent  means  be  supported. 

In  this  respect  therefore  we  must  needs  think  the  state  of 
our  own  Church  much  better  settled  than  theirs  was;  be- 
cause our  Laws  have  with  far  more  certainty  prescribed 
bounds  unto  each  kind  of  Power.  All  decision  of  things 
doubtful,  and  corrections  of  things  amiss,  are  proceeded  in 
by  order  of  Law,  what  person  soever  he  be  unto  whom  the 
administration  of  judgment  belongeth.  It  is  neither  per- 
mitted unto  Prelates  nor  Prince  to  judge  and  determine  at 
their  own  discretion,  but  Law  hath  prescribed  what  both 


Sect  7.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  321 

shall  do.  What  Power  the  King  hath,  he  bath  it  by  Law, 
the  bounds  and  limits  of  it  are  known ;  the  intire  community 
giveth  general  order  by  Law^  how  all  things  publicly  are 
to  be  done,  and  the  King,  as  the  Head  thereof,  the  Highest 
in  Authority  over  all,  causeth,  according  to  the  same  Law, 
every  particular  to  be  framed  and  ordered  thereby.*  The 
whole  Body  politic  maketh  Laws,  which  Laws  give  Power 
unto  the  King;  and  the  King  having  bound  himself  to  use 
according  unto  Law  that  Power,  it  so  falleth  out,  that  the 
execution  of  the  one  is  accomplished  by  the  other  in  most 
religious  and  peaceable  sort.  There  is  no  cause  given  unto 
any  to  make  supplication,  as  Hilary  did.  That  Civil  Gover- 
nors, to  whom  Commonwealth-matters  only  belong,  may  not 
presume  to  take  upon  them  the  judgment  of  Ecclesiastical 
causes.  If  the  cause  be  Spiritual,  Secular  Courts  do  not 
meddle  with  it:  we  need  not  excuse  ourselves  with  Ambrose, 
but  boldly  and  lawfully  we  may  refuse  to  answer  before  any 
Civil  Judge  in  a  matter  which  is  not  Civil,  so  that  we  do  not 
mistake  either  the  nature  of  the  cause  or  of  the  Court,  as 
we  easily  may  do  both,  without  some  better  direction  than 
can  be  by  the  Rules  of  this  new-found  Discipline.  But  of 
this  most  certain  we  are,  tha|  our  Laws  do  neither  suffer  a 
Spiritual  Court  to  entertain  those  causes  which  by  the  Law 
are  Civil;  nor  yet,  if  the  matter  be  indeed  Spiritual,  a  mere 
Civil  Court  to  give  judgment  of  it.f  Touching  Supreme 
Power,  therefore,  to  Command  all  men,  and  in  all  manner 
of  causes  of  Judgment  to  be  highest,  let  thus  much  suffice 
as  well  for  declaration  of  our  own  meaning,  as  for  defence 
of  the  truth  therein. 

The  cause  is  not  like  when  such  Assemblies  are  gathered 
together  by  supreme  Authority  concerning  other  affairs 
of  the  Church,  and  when  they  meet  about  the  making 
of  Ecclesiastical  Laws  or  Statutes.     For  in  the  one  they  are 

*  [See  Baxter,  §  23,  ut  sup.  p.  266.] 

f  See  the  Statutes  of  Edw.  T.  and  Edw.  II.  and  Nat.  Brey.  touching  Prohibition.  See  also 
in  Bracton  these  sentences,  lib.  v.  cap.  2.  '*  Est  jurisdictio  ordinaria  qusedam  delegata,  quae 
pettinet  ad  Sacerdotium,  et  Forum  Ecclesiasticum,  sicut  in  causis  Spiritualibus  et  Spiri- 
tuafirati  annexis.  Est  etiam  alia  jurisdictio  ordinaria  vel  delegata,  quae  pertinet  ad  Coronam, 
et  Dignitatem  Regis,  et  ad  Regnum  in  causis  et  placitis  rerum  temporalium  in  Foro  Seculari.*' 
Again :  "  Cum  diversae  sint  hinc  inde  jurisdictiones,  et  diversi  judices,  et  diversae  causae, 
debet  quilibet  ipsorum  imprimis  aestimare,  an  sua  sit  jurisdictio,  ne  falcem  videatur  ponere  in 
messem  alienam."  Again :  "  Non  pertinet  ad  Regem  injungere  pceniteutias,  nee  ad 
Jodicem  Secularem ;  nee  etiam  ad  eos  pertinet  cognoscere  de  iis,  quae  sunt  Spiritualibut 
anneza,  sicut  de  Dedmis  et  aliis  Ecdesiae  proventionibus.'*  Again :  "  Non  est  Laicus 
conveniendus  coram  Judice  Ecclesiastico  de  idiqao,  quod  in  Foro  Seculari  terminari  posdt  et 
debnt" 

VOL.  III.  Y 


322  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sect.  8. 

only  to  advise^  in  the  other  to  decree.     The  persons  which 
are  of  the  one,  the  King  doth  voluntarily  assemble^  as  being 
in  respect  of  quaUty  fit  to  consult  withal;  them  which  are 
of  the  other  he  calleth  by  prescript  of  Law,  as  having  right 
to  be  thereunto  called.    Finally,  the  one  are  but  them- 
selves, and  their  sentence  hath  but  the  weight  of  their  own 
judgment ;  the  other  represent  the  whole  Clergy,  and  thtir 
voices  are  as  much  as  if  all  did  give  personal  verdict.    Now 
the  question  is.  Whether  the  Clergy  alone  so  assembled 
ought  to  have  the  whole  Power  of  making  Ecclesiastical 
Laws,  or  else  consent  of  the  Laity  may  thereunto   be 
made  necessary,  and  the  King's  assent  so  neceissary  that 
his  sole  denial  may  be  of  force  to  stay  them  from  being 
Laws. 
What        8.   If  they  with  whom  we  dispute  were  uniform,  strongs 
^y"be  and  constant  in  that  which  they  say,  we  should  not  need  to 
^^tr^'  trouble  ourselves  about  their  Persons  to  whom  the  pov^er 
the"^^   of  making  Laws  for  the  Church  belongs.     For  they  are 
and  to*'  sometimes  very  vehement  in  contention,   That  from  tbe 
whom    greatest  thing  unto  the  least  about  the  Church,  all  imut 
J/*^®'    needs  be  immediately  from  God.     And  to  this  they  apfdy 
JS^'m)-  ^^®  pattern  of  the  ancient  Tabernacle  which  God  delivered 
pertain-  „n|.Q  Moscs,  and  was  therein  so  exact,  that  there  was  not 
left  as  much  as  the  least  pin  for  the  wit  of  man  to  devise  in 
the  framing  of  it.     To  this  they  also  apply  that  strait  and 
severe  charge  which  God  so  often  gave  concerning  his  own 
Dent.     Law,   *'  Whatsoever  I  command  ye,  take  heed  ye  do  it; 
fyi'l^*    thou  shalt  put  nothing  thereto,   thou  shalt  take  nothing 
Josh,      {yqtji  it ;"  nothing,  whether  it  be  great  or  small.     Yet  some- 
times bethinking  themselves  better,  they  speak  as  acknow- 
ledging that  it  doth  suffice  to  have  received  in  such  sort 
the  principal  things  from  God,  and  that  for  other  mattets 
the  Church  had  sufficient  Authority  to  make  Laws.   Where- 
upon they  now  have  made  it  a  question,  What  Persons 
they  are  whose  right  it  is  to  take  order  for  the  Church's 
affairs,  when  the  institution  of  any  new  thing   therein  is 
requisite  ?     Law  may  be  requisite  to  be  made,  either  con- 
cerning things  that  are  only  to  be  known  and  beUeved  in, 
or  else  touching  that  which  is  to  be  done  by  the  Church  of 
Thom.    God.     The  Law  of  Nature  and  the  Law  of  God  are  suf- 
qaii!'    ficient  for  declaration  in  both  what  belongeth  unto  each 
In.' 2.    man  separately,  as  his  soul  is  the  spouse  of  Christ ;  yea,  so 


Sect.  8.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  323 

attfficiexit,  that  they  plainly  and  fully  shew  whatsoever  Grod 
doth  require  by  way  of  necessary  introduction  unto  the 
state  of  everlasting  bliss.     But  as  a  man  liveth  joined  with 
odienr  in  commoa  society  ,i  and  belongeth  to  the  outward 
politic  Body  of  the  Church,  albeit  the  same  Law  of  Nature 
and  Scripture  have  in  this  respect  also  made  manifest  the 
things  that  are  of  greatest  necessity;  nevertheless,  by  reason 
of  new  occasions  still  arising,  wbdch  the  Church,  having 
caace  of  souk,  must  take  order  for  as  need  requireth,  herel^ 
it  Cometh  to  passi,  that  there  is^  and  ever  will  be,  so  great 
uae  evert  of  Human  Laws  aad  Ordinasces,  deducted  by  way 
of  discourse  as  a  conclusion  lirom  the  former  Divine  and 
Natural,  serving  as  principles  thereunto.    No  man  doubteth, 
but  that  for  matters  of  action  and  practice  in  the  afiairs  of 
Grod,  for  manner  in  Divine  Service,  for  order  in  Eccle* 
aiastical  proceedings  about  the  Regiment  of  the  Church, 
there  may  be  oftentimes  cause  very  urgent  to  have  Laws 
made;,  but  the  reason  is  not  so  plain,  wherefore  Human 
Laws  should  appoint  men  what  to  believe.    Wherefore  in 
this  we  must  note  two  things :  i.  That  in  matters  of  Opinion, 
the  Law  doth  not  make  [that]  to  be  Truth  which  before  was 
not,  as  in  matter  of  action  it  causeth  that  to  be  a  duty  which 
was  not  before ;  but  manifesteth  only  and  giveth  men  notice 
of  that  to  be  truth,  the  contrary  whereunto  they  ought  not 
before  to  have  believed.    iL    That  Opinions  do  cleave  to 
die  understanding,  and  are  in  heart  assented  unto ;  it  is  not 
in  the  po^er  of  any  Human  Law  to  command  them,  because 
to  prescribe  what  men  shall  Think  befongeth  only  unto 
God:  "  Corde  creditur,  ore  fit  Confessio,"  saith  the  Apo-[Roni. 
stle.    As  Opinions  are  either  fit  or  inconvenient  to  be  pro-  ^'  ^^'^ 
fessed,  so  man's  Law  has  to  determine  of  them.    It  may^ 
for  pobhe  unity's  sake,  require  men's  professed  Assent,  <» 
prohibit  their  contradiction  to  special  Articles,  wherein,  a* 
there  haply  bath  been  controversy  what  is  true,  so  the  same 
were  fike  to  continue  still,  not  without  grievous  detriment 
unto  a  number  of  souls,  except  Law,  to  remedy  that  eviU 
should  set  down  a  certainty  which  no  man  afterwards  is  to 
gwisayr    Wherefore,  as  in  regard  of  Divine  Laws,  which 
the  Church  receiveth  from  God,  we  may  unto  every  man 
apply  those  words  of  wisdom  in  Solomon,  ^*  My  son,,  keep  Prov. 
thou  thy  father's  Precepts ;  Conserve,  AH  mi,  Prsecepta  patris  ^*  ^' 
tui:"  even  so  concerning  the  Statutes  and  Ordinances  which 

y2 


324  THE   £IGHTH  BOOK  [Seci.B. 

the  Church  itself  makes,  we  may  add  thereunto  the  worda 
that  follow^  **  Et  ne  demittas  Legem  matris  tuae^  And  for- 
sake  thou  not  thy  mother's  Law."* 

It  is  a  thing  even  undoubtedly  natural,  that  all  free  and 
independent  Societies  should  themselves  make  their  own 
Laws,  and  that  this  Power  should  belong  to  the  whole,  not 
to  any  certain  part  of  a  politic  Body,t  though  happily  some 
one  part  may  have  greater  sway  in  that  action  than  the 
rest ;  which  thing  being  generally  fit  and  expedient  in  the 
making  of  all  Laws,  we  see  no  cause  why  to  think  other* 
wise  in  Laws  concerning  the  Service  of  God,  which  in  all 
well-ordered  States  and  Commonwealths  is  the  first  thing 
that  Law  hath  care  to  provide  {ot.%  When  we  speak  of 
the  right  which  naturally  belongeth  to  a  Commonwealth, 
we  speak  of  that  which  must  needs  belong  to  the  Church 
of  God.  For  if  the  Commonwealth  be  Christian,  if  the 
people  which  are  of  it  do  publicly  embrace  the  true  Reli- 
gion, this  very  thing  doth  make  it  the  Church,  as  hath  been 
shewed.  So  that  unless  the  verity  and  purity  of  Religion 
do  take  from  them  which  embrace  it,  that  Power  wherewith 
otherwise  they  are  possessed;  look,  what  Authority,  as 
touching  Laws  for  Religion,  a  Commonwealth  hath  simply, 
it  must  of  necessity,  being — Christian  Religion. 

It  will  be  therefore  perhaps  alleged,  That  a  part  of  the 
verity  of  Christian  Religion  is  to  hold  the  Power  of  making 
Ecclesiastical  Laws  a  thing  appropriated  unto  the  Clergy  in 
their  Synods;  and  that  whatsoever  is  by  their  only  voices 
agreed  upon,  it  needeth  no  further  approbation  to  give 
unto  it  the  strength  of  a  Law,  as  may  plainly  appear  by  the 
Canons  of  that  first  most  venerable  Assembly;  where,  those 
Acu  things  the  Apostles  and  James§  had  concluded,  were  after- 
u-23.  wards  published  and  imposed  upon  the  Churches  of  the 

*  ["  Among  Christians  of  every  denomination,  an  affectionate  union  of  hearts  is  a  fiff 
more  important  object  than  a  visionary  attempt  to  produce  Uniformity  of  Religious  OpinioD, 
and  far  more  characteristic  of  every  real  disciple  of  Christ"  Dr.  Bathurst,  Bishop  of 
Norwich,  May  2,  1820.  See  Sixteenth  Report  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society, 
1820.  8vo.  p.  221.] 

f  [See  Baxter,  §  20,  ut  sup,"] 

X  A€i  rhv  vSfiov  rit  ircpl  B€oifs  Kal  Bcdfwvas  Ka\  yovtas,  Kui  Z\a5  rit  KoXa  ^  ri/uot  v^^a 
ri$€(r0at*  Z^^ntpov  tk  rh  avfitpcpoma'  rdi  yhp  fiucpd  ro7s  ficlloffiv  iuco\ov$€7r  wgoiniKtu 
Archit  de  Leg.  et  Instit.  That  is,  It  behoveth  the  Law  first  to  establish  or  settle  those 
things  which  belong  to  the  gods,  and  divine  powers,  and  to  our  parents,  and  universally 
those  things  which  be  virtuous  and  honourable :  in  the  second  place,  those  things  that  be 
convenient  and  profitable;  for  it  is  fit  that  matters  of  the  less  weight  should  come  after 
the  greater. 

§  [See  p.  99,  Note  •.] 


Sect.  8.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL   POLITY.  325 

Gentiles  abroad  as  Laws,  the  records  thereof  remaining 
stOl  in  the  Book  of  God  for  a  testimony,  that  the  Power  of 
making  Ecclesiastical  Laws  belongeth  to  the  successors  of 
the  Apostles*  the  Bishops  and  Prelates  of  the  Church  of 
God.* 

To  this  we  answer.  That  the  Council  of  Jerusalem  is  no 
argument  for  the  Power  of  the  Clergy  to  make  Laws.  For 
first,  There  hath  not  been  sithence  any  Council  of  like 
Authority  to  that  in  Jerusalem:  secondly.  The  cause  why 
that  was  of  such  Authority  came  by  a  special  accident: 
thirdly.  The  reason  why  other  Councils  being  not  like  unto 
that  in  nature,  the  Clergy  in  them  should  have  no  Power 
to  make  Laws  by  themselves  alone,  is  in  truth  so  forcible, 
that  except  some  commandment  of  God  to  the  contrary  can 
be  shewed,  it  ought  notwithstanding  the  aforesaid  example 
to  prevail.  The  Decrees  of  the  Council  of  Jerusalem  were 
not  as  the  Canons  of  other  Ecclesiastical  Assemblies,  human, 
but  very  Divine  Ordinances :  for  which  cause  the  Churches 
were  far  and  wide  commanded  every  where  to  see  them 
kept,  no  otherwise  than  if  Christ  himself  had  personally 
on  earth  been  the  author  of  them.  The  cause  why  that 
Council  was  of  so  great  Authority  and  Credit  above  all 
others  which  have  been  sithence,  is  expressed  in  those 
words  of  principal  observation,  ^*  Unto  the  Holy  Ghost  Acta 
and  to  us  it  hath  seemed  good:"  which  form  of  speech, *^'^ 
though  other  Councils  have  likewise  used,  yet  neither  could 
they  themselves  mean,  nor  may  we  so  understand  them,  as 
if  both  were  in  equal  sort  assisted  with  the  Power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost;  but  the  latter  had  the  favour  of  that  general  Matt. 
assistance  and  presence  which  Christ  doth  promise  unto  m'^ 
all  his,  according  to  the  quality  of  their  several  estates  and  ^' 

*  ["  In  ascribing  unto  the  Ministry  the  decision  of  matters  in  controversy,  and  the 
making  of  Church  Ceremonies,  our  meaning  is  not  utterly  to  seclude  the  Magistrate.  For 
when  experience  teaclieth  us,  that  oftentimes  a  simple  man,  and,  as  the  proverb  saith.  The 
Gardener  hath  spoken  to  good  purpose  (Ruff.  lib.  i.  c.  3.);  but  especially  when  in  the  Holy 
Scripture,  the  Old  Testament  end  the  New  (2  Chron.  xxx.  2, 4,  24.  Acts  xL  2 — 4.  xv.  22. 
xxi.  22.);  and,  thirdly,  when  in  the  Ecclesiastical  writers  it  is  found,  that  there  have  been  of 
the  People  admitted  unto  these  consultations;  when,  further,  it  is  found,  that  they  have  had 
their  consent  there,  and  sometime  also  their  speech  (Concil.  Vol.  I.  in  praef.  1  Cone.  Carthag. 
Ambrose,  lib.  v.  Ep.32.  Jewel  Def.  of  the  Apol.  Part  VI.  chap.  iii.  divis.  3.);  with  &r 
greater  reason  may  the  Christian  Magistrate  both  be  assistant,  and  have  his  voice  in  such 
assemblies.  That,  then,  which  we  give  unto  the  Ministry  in  such  Church  consultations 
which  are  not  of  the  daily  ministry,  as  Synods  be,  is  both  a  fore-consultation,  as  we  see  te 
Jiave  been  done  in  the  Scripture,  Acts  xxi.  18,  to  the  end  that  the  matter  being  digested, 
and  as  it  were  cut  out  and  prepared  aforehand,  it  might  be  the  better  handled  in  a  fuller 
assembly,  as  also  the  direction  and  moderation  of  that  Meeting,  where  these  matters  are 
defined  and  conduded  of.'*    T.  C.  lib.  iu.  p.  167.] 


326  THE   EIGHTH   BOOK  [Sedt.S^ 

callings ;  the  former,  the  grace  of  special,  miraculous,  rare, 
and  extraordinary  illumination,  in  relation  wheveunto  the 
9  Cor.  Apostle,  comparing  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  to* 
gether,  termeth  the  one  a  Testament  of  the  Letter,  for  that 
God  delivered  it  written  in  stone  ;  the  other,  a  Testament  of 
the  Spirit,  because  God  imporinted  it  in  the  hearts,  amd  de- 
clared it  by  the  tongues  of  his  chosen  Apostles,  through  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  feigning  [sic]  both  their  conceits 
and  speeches  in  most  divine  and  incomprehensible  manner* 
Wherefore,  inasmuch  as  the  Council  of  Jerusalem  did 
chance  to  consist  of  men  so  enlightened,  it  had  Authority 
greater  than  were  meet  for  any  other  Council  besides  to 
challenge,  wherein  such  kind  of  persons  are,  as  now  the 
state  of  the  Church  doth  stand ;  Kings  being  not  then  that 
which  now  they  are,  and  the  Clergy  not  now  that  which 
then  they  were.  Till  it  be  proved  that  some  speciid  Law 
of  Christ  hath  for  ever  annexed  unto  the  Clergy  alone  the 
Power  to  make  Ecclesiastical  Laws,  we  are  to  hold  it  t 
thing  most  consonant  with  equity  and  reason,  that  no 
Ecclesiastical  Laws  be  made  in  a  Christian  Commonwealtb, 
without  consent  as  well  of  the  Laity  as  of  the  Clergy,  but 
least  of  all  without  consent  of  the  Highest  Power. 
Gap.  For  of  this  thing  no  man  doubteth,  namely,  That  in  all 

de  ex-    Societies,  Companies,  and  Corporations,  what  severally  each 
Praia,    shall  be  bound  unto,  it  must  be  with  all  their  assents  ratified. 
p/r  fan-  Against  all  equity  it  were,  that  a  man  should  suffer  detriment 
RoTti-     at  the  hands  of  men,  for  not  observing  that  which  he  never  did, 
pSe'd.  et  either  by  himself  or  by  others,  mediately  or  immediately,  agree 
jrgVijJJm  uJ^to  ;*  much  more  that  a  King  should  constrain  all  others 
divfi?*"'  unto  the  strict  observation  of  any  such  human  Ordinance 
as  passeth  without  his  own  approbation.    In  this  case  there- 
fore especially,  that  vulgar  axiom  is  of  force,  '^  Quod  omnes 
tangit,  ab  omnibus  tractari  et  approbari  debet."     Where- 
upon Pope  Nicholas,    although    otherwise   not   admitting 
Lay-persons,  no  not  Emperors  themselves,  to  be  present 
at  Synods,  doth  notwithstanding  seem  to  allow  of  their  pre- 
sence when  matters  of  Faith  are  determined  whereunto  all 
GI088.     men   must   stand  bound :    ''  Ubinam  legistis  Imperatores, 
antecessores  vestros,  Synodalibus  Conventibus  interfuisse; 
nisi  forsitan  in  quibus  de  Fide  tractatum  est,  quae  non  solum 


XCVl.  c. 

Ubinam. 


*  [See  Baxter,  §  21,  u^  sup."] 


i 


Sect.  8.]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  827 

ad  Clericosy  verum  etiam  ad  Laicos  et  omnes  pertinet  Chris- 
tianos?"  A  Law,  be  it  Civil  or  Elcclesiastical,  is  a  public 
obligation,  wherein,  seeing  that  the  whole  standeth  charged, 
no  reason  it  should  pass  without  his  privity  and  will,  whom 
principally  the  whole  doth  depend  upon.  "  Sicut  Laici  J^JJ 
jurisdictionem  Clericorum  perturbare,  ita  Clerici  jurisdic- ^c"« 
tionem  Laicorum  non  debent  minuere,"  saith  Innocentius ; 
^'  As  the  Laity  should  not  hinder  the  Clergy's  jurisdiction, 
8o  neither  is  it  reason  that  the  Laity's  right  should  be 
abridged  by  the  Clergy,"  saith  Pope  Innocent.  But  were  it 
so  that  the  Clergy  alone  might  give  Laws  unto  all  the  rest, 
forasmuch  as  every  estate  doth  desire  to  enlarge  the  bounds 
of  their  own  liberties,  is  it  not  easy  to  see  how  injurious  this 
might  prove  to  men  of  other  conditions  ?  Peace  and  justice 
lure  maintained  by  preserving  unto  every  order  their  rights, 
and  by  keeping  all  estates,  as  it  were,  in  an  even  balance. 
Which  thing  is  no  way  better  done,  than  if  the  King,  their 
common  parent,  whose  care  is  presumed  to  extend  most  in- 
differently over  all,  do  bear  the  chiefest  sway  in  making 
Laws  which  all  must  be  ordered  by.  Wherefore,  of  them 
which  in  this  point  attribute  most  to  the  Clergy,  I  would 
demand.  What  evidence  there  is  whereby  it  may  clearly  be 
ahew,ed,  that,  in  ancient  Kingdoms  Christian,  any  Canon 
Revised  by  the  Clergy  alone  in  their  Synods,  whether  Pro- 
Tincial,  National,  or  General,  hath  by  mere  force  of  their 
agreement,  taken  place  as  a  Law,  making  all  men  constrain- 
aible  to  be  obedient  thereunto,  without  any  other  approbation 
from  the  King,  before  or  afterwards  required  in  that  behalf? 
But  what  speak  we  of  ancient  Kingdoms,  when  at  this  day, 
«ven  the  Papacy  itself,  the  very  Tridentine  Council  hath  not 
watery  where  as  yet  obtained  to  have  in  all  points  the  strength 
^f  Ecclesiastical  Laws.  Did  not  Philip,  King  of  Spain,  Boet. 
^publishing  that  Council  in  the  Low  Countries,  add  thereunto  jf^olc. 
an  express  clause  of  special  provision,  that  the  same  should  J^^ 
in  no  wise  prejudice,  hurt,  or  diminish,  any  kind  of  privilege 
which  the  King  or  his  vassals  aforetime  had  enjoyed,  touchr 
ing  either  possessory  Judgments  of  Ecclesiastical  Livings, 
or  concerning  Nominations  thereunto,  or  belonging  to  what- 
soever rights  they  had  else  in  such  affairs  ?  If  therefore 
the  King's  exception,  taken  against  some  part  of  the  Canons 
x^ontained  in  that  Council,  were  a  sufficient  bar  to  make 
them  of  none  effect  within  [his]  territories ;  it  foUoweth  that 


sect. 
284. 


328  TH£  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Seci.  9* 

the  like  exception  against  any  other  part  had  been  also  of 
like  efficacy,  and  so  consequently  that  no  part  thereof  had 
obtained  the  strength  of  a  Law,  if  he  which  excepted  against 
a  part  had  so  done  against  the  whole.  As,  what  reason  was 
there,  but  that  the  same  Authority  which  limited,  might 
quite  and  clean  have  refused  that  Council  ?  Whoso  alloweth 
the  said  act  of  the  Catholic  King's  for  good  and  lawful, 
must  grant  that  the  Canons,  even  of  General  Councils,  have 
but  the  face  of  wise  men's  opinions  concerning  that  whereof 
they  treat,  till  they  be  publicly  assented  unto,  where  they 
are  to  take  place  as  Laws ;  and  that,  in  giving  such  pubhc 
assent  as  maketh  a  Christian  Kingdom  subject  unto  those 
Laws,  the  King's  Authority  is  the  chiefest.  That  which  an 
University  of  men,  a  Company  or  Corporation,  doth,  without 
consent  of  their  Rector,  is  as  nothing.  Except,  therefore^ 
we  make  the  King's  Authority  over  the  Clergy  less  in  the 
greatest  things,  than  the  Power  of  the  meanest  Governor  is 
in  all  things  over  the  College  or  Society  which  is  under  him ; 
how  should  we  think  it  a  matter  decent,  that  the  Clergy  should 
impose  Laws,  the  Supreme  Governor's  assent  not  asked  ? 
[Of  Ex.  9.  Yea,  that  which  is  more,  the  Laws  thus  made,  Grod 
from*^''  himself  doth  in  such  sort  authorize,  that  to  despise  them,  is 
Danish,  to  dcspisc  iu  them,  him.  It  is  a  loose  and  licentious  opinion, 
■"®*^  which  the  Anabaptists  have  embraced,  holding  That  a  Chris- 
tian man's  liberty  is  lost,  and  the  soul  which  Christ  hath 
redeemed  unto  himself  injuriously  drawn  into  servitude  under 
the  yoke  of  human  Power,  if  any  Law  be  now  imposed 
besides  the  Gospel  of  Christ;  in  obedience  whereunto  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  not  the  constraint  of  men,  is  to  lead  us, 
[Rom.  according  to  that  of  the  blessed  Apostle,  '^  Such  as  are  led 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God,"  and  not 
such  as  live  in  thraldom  unto  men.  Their  judgment  is, 
therefore,  that  the  Church  of  Christ  should  admit  of  no 
Lawmakers  but  the  Evangelists,  no  Courts  but  Presbyteries, 
no  Punishments  but  Ecclesiastical  censures.  As  against  this 
sort,  we  are  to  maintain  the  use  of  Human  Laws,  and  the 
continual  necessity  of  making  them  from  time  to  time,  as 
long  as  this  present  world  doth  last;  so  likewise  the  Au- 
thority of  Laws  so  made  doth  need  much  more  by  us  to  be 
strengthened  against  another  sort,  who,  although  they  do 
not  utterly  condemn  the  making  of  Laws  in  the  Church,  yet 
make  they  a  deal  less  account  of  them  than  they  should  do. 


Sect.  9.]  OF   ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  329 

There  are  which  think  simply  of  Human  Laws,  that  they 
can  in  no  sort  touch  the  conscience :  that  to  break  and  trans- 
gress them  cannot  make  men  in  the  sight  of  God  culpable, 
as  Sin  doth ;  only  when  we  violate  such  Laws,  we  do  thereby 
make  ourselves  obnoxious  unto  external  punishment  in  this 
world,  so  that  the  Magistrate  may,  in  regard  of  such  offence 
committed,  justly  correct  the  offender,  and  cause  him,  with- 
out injury,  to  endure  such  pains  as  Law  doth  appoint,  but 
further  it  reacheth  not.  For  first,  the  Conscience  is  the 
proper  Court  of  God,  the  guiltiness  thereof  is  sin,  and  the 
punishment  eternal  death;  men  are  not  able  to  make  any 
Law  that  shall  command  the  heart,  it  is  not  in  them  to  make 
inward  conceit  a  crime,  or  to  appoint  for  any  crime  other 
punishment  than  corporal ;  their  Laws,  therefore,  can  have 
no  power  over  the  soul,  neither  can  the  heart  of  man  be 
polluted  by  transgressing  them.  St.  Augustine  rightly  de- 
fineth  Sin  to  be  that  which  is  spoken,  done,  or  desired,  not 
against  any  Laws,  but  against  the  Law  of  the  living  God. 
The  Law  of  God  is  proposed  unto  man,  as  a  glass  wherein 
to  behold  the  stains  and  the  spots  of  their  sinful  souls :  by 
it  they  are  to  judge  themselves,  and  when  they  feel  them- 
selves to  have  transgressed  against  it,  then  to  bewail  their 
offences  with  David,  "  Against  thee  only,  O  Lord,  have  I  [^^t 
sinned,  and  done  wickedly  in  thy  sight;'*  that  so  our  present 
tears  may  extinguish  the  flames,  which  otherwise  we  are  to 
feel,  and  which  God  in  that  day  shall  condemn  the  wicked 
unto,  when  they  shall  render  accompt  of  the  evil  which  they 
have  done,  not  by  violating  Statute-Laws  and  Canons,  but 
by  disobedience  unto  his  Law  and  his  Word. 

For  our  better  instruction,  therefore,  concerning  this  point, 
first,  we  must  note,  that  the  Law  of  God  itself  doth  require 
at  our  hands  Subjection.    "  Be  ye  subject,"  saith  St.  Peter;  i Pet. 
and  St.  Paul,  '^  Let  every  soul  be  subject ;  subject  all  unto  Rom. 
such  Powers  as  are  set  over  us."    For  if  such  as  are  not  set  *  *  ' 
over  us  require  our  Subjection,  we  by  denying  it  are  not 
disobedient  to  the  Law  of  God,  or  undutiful  unto  higher 
Powers ;  because,  though  they  be  such  in  regard  of  them 
over  whom  they  have  lawful  Dominion,  yet  having  not  so 
over  us,  unto  us  they  are  not  such.*     Subjection,  therefore, 

*  "  Yeram  ac  proprium  civis  a  peregrino  discrimen  est,  quod  alter  imperio  ac  potestate 
dvili  obligatur ;  aiter  jussa  Prindpis  alieni  respuere  potest.  Ilium  Princeps  ab  bostium 
aque  ac  dyium  injoria  tueri  tenetur;  hiuic  non  item  nisi  rogatus  at  humanitatis  offidis  im- 
pidaus/'  saith  Bodin.  de  Rep.  lib.  L  cap.  6.  non  muUiini  a  fine  p.  61.  edit.  Lugd.  in  fol.  1586. 


830  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  [Sed.  9« 

we  owe,  and  that  by  the  Law  of  God ;  we  are  in  conscience 
bound  to  yield  it  even  unto  every  of  them  that  hold  the  Seats 
of  Authority  and  Power  in  relation  unto  us.  Howbeit,  not 
all  kinds  of  Subjection  unto  every  such  kind  of  Power. 
Concerning  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  our  Saviour's  precept 

[Matt,  was,  **  Whatsoever  they  shall  tell  ye,  do  it :"  was  it  his 
*  meaning,  that  if  they  should  at  any  time  enjoin  the  people 
to  levy  an  army,  or  to  sell  their  lands  and  goods  for  the 
furtherance  of  so  great  an  enterprize;  and,  in  a  word,  that 
simply  whatsoever  it  were  which  they  did  command,  they 
ouglit,  without  any  exception,  forthwith  to  be  obeyed?  No, 
but  whatsoever  they  shall  tell  you,  must  be  understood  in 
pertinenUbus  ad  Cathedram^  it  must  be  construed  with  limi- 
tation, and  restrained  unto  things  of  that  kind  which  did 
belong  to  their  Place  and  Power:  for  they  had  not  Power 
general,  absolutely  given  them  to  command  all  things.  The 
reason  why  we  are  bound  in  conscience  to  be  subject  unto 

IRom.  all  such  power  is,  because  all  "  Powers  are  of  God."  They 
are  of  God  either  instituting  or  permitting  them.  Power  is 
then  of  Divine  institution,  when  either  God  himself  doth 
deliver,  or  men  by  light  of  Nature  find  out,  the  kind  thereof. 
So  that  the  Power  of  parents  over  children,  and  of  husbands 
over  their  wives,  the  Power  of  all  sorts  of  superiors,  made 
by  consent  of  Commonwealths  within  themselves,  or  grown 
from  agreement  amongst  Nations,  such  Power  is  of  God's 
own  institution  in  respect  of  the  kind  thereof.  Again,  if 
respect  be  had  unto  those  particular  persons  to  whom  the 
same  is  derived,  if  they  either  receive  it  immediately  from 
God,  as  Moses  and  Aaron  did ;  or  from  Nature,  as  parents 
do ;  or  from  men  by  a  natural  and  orderly  course,  as  every 
Governor  appointed  in  any  Commonwealth,  by  the  orders 
thereof,  doth;  then  is  not  the  kind  of  their  Power  only  of 
God's  instituting,  but  the  derivation  thereof  also  into  their 
Persons,  is  from  him.  He  hath  placed  them  in  their  Rooms, 
and  doth  term  them  his  Ministers ;  Subjection,  therefore,  is 
due  unto  all  such  Powers,  inasmuch  as  they  are  of  God's 
own  institution,  even  then  when  they  are  of  Man's  creation, 
onmi  humance  creaturce:  which  things  the  Heathens  them- 
selves do  acknowledge. 

^Krjfrrrovxos  fioffi^jsbsf  yrc  Zeis  kv^s  llBctKtv** 

*  A  sceptre-swaying  King,  to  whom  even  Jupiter  himself  hath  given  honour  and  com- 
mandment.    Horn.  11.  lib.  A.  v.  279. 


I 


SeeLdJ]  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  POLITY.  831 

As  for  them  that  exercise  Power  altogether  againist  Order, 
ahhoiigh  the  kind  of  power  which  they  have  may  be  of  €rod, 
3^  is  llieir  exercise  thereof  against  Ood,  and  therefore  not 
of  God,  otherwise  than  by  permission,  as  all  injustice  is.* 

Touching  such  Acts  as  are  done  by  that  Power  which  la 
according  to  his  institution,  that  Grod  in  like  sort  doth  au- 
thorize them,  and  account  them  to  be  his ;  though  it  were 
not  confessed,  it  might  be  proved  undeniably.  For  if  that 
be  accounted  our  deed,  which  others  do,  whom  we  have 
appointed  to  be  our  agents,  how  should  God  but  approve 
those  deeds,  even  as  his  own,  which  are  done  by  virtue  of 
that  commission  and  power  which  he  hath  given.  ^'Take^chroo. 
heed  (saith  Jehoshaphat  unto  his  Judges),  be  careful  and 
circumspect  what  ye  do ;  ye  do  not  execute  the  judgments 
of  man,  but  of  the  Lord."  The  Authority  of  Caesar  over 
the  Jews,  from  whence  was  it  ?  Had  it  any  other  ground 
than  the  Law  of  Nations,  which  maketh  Kingdoms,  subdued 
by  just  war,  to  be  subject  unto  their  conquerors?  By  this 
Power  Caesar  exacting  tribute,  our  Saviour  confesseth  it  to  I^*^* 
be  bis  right,  a  right  which  could  not  be  withheld  without 
injury,  yea  disobedience  herein  unto  him,  and  even  rebellion 
against  God.  Usurpers  of  Power,  whereby  we  do  not  mean 
them  that  by  violence  have  aspired  unto  places  of  highest 
Authority,  but  them  that  use  more  Authority  than  they  did 
ever  receive  in  form  and  manner  before  mentionedf  (for  so 
they  may  do,  whose  title  unto  the  Rooms  of  Authority  which 
they  possess,  no  man  can  deny  to  be  just  and  lawful :  even 
as  contrariwise  some  men's  proceedings  in  Government  have 
been  very  orderly,  who  notwithstanding  did  not  attain  to  be 
made  Governors  without  great  violence  and  disorder) ;  such 
usurpersj;  thereof,  as  in  the  exercise  of  their  Power  do  more 
than  they  have  been  authorized  to  do,  cannot  in  Conscience 
Innd  any  man  unto  obedience.§ 

That  Subjection  which  we  owe  unto  lawful  Powers,  doth 

not  only  import  that  we  should  be  under  them  by  order  of 

our  state,  but  that  we  shew  all  submission  towards  them 

tboth  by  honour  and  obedience.    He  that  resisteth  them, 

resisteth  God :  and  resisted  they  be,  if  either  the  Authority 

•  [See  Baxter,  §  23,  ut  nip.  and  Part  II.  Cases  of  Conscience,  Quest.  132.] 

t  [See  Baxter,  ut  supJ] 

i  [See  Baxter,  (chap.iii.  apudfinJ)  ut  sup,  p.  266.1 

§  [Sec  Baxter,  §  23,  ut  sup,  and  Part  II.  Cases  of  Consc,  Quest.  132.] 


833  ^HB  EIGHTH  BOOK.  ^  [Sect.  9. 

itself  which  they  iexercise  be  denied,  as  by  Anabaptists  all 
Secular  Jurisdiction  is ;  or  if  resistance  be  made  but  only  so 
far  forth  as  doth  touch  their  persons  which  are  invested  with 
Power  (for  they  which  said,  ^*  Nolumus  hunc  regnare/'  did 
not  utterly  exclude  Regiment ;  nor  did  they  wish  all  kind  of 
Government  clearly  removed,  which  would  not  at  the  first 
have  David  to  govern) ;  or  if  that  which  they  do  by  virtue 
of  their  Power,  namely,  their  Laws,  Edicts,  Services,  or 
other  acts  of  Jurisdiction,  be  not  suffered  to  take  effect> 
Heb.  contrary  to  the  blessed  Apostle's  most  holy  Rule,  **  Obey 
*  ^^*  them  that  have  the  oversight  of  you."  Or  if  they  do  take 
effect,  yet  is  not  the  will  of  God  thereby  satisfied  neither,  as 
long  as  that  which  we  do  is  contemptuously  or  repiningly 
done,  because  we  can  do  no  otherwise.  In  such  sort  the 
Israelites  in  the  Desert  obeyed  Moses,  and  were  notwith- 
standing deservedly  plagued  for  disobedience.  The  Apostle's 
[Rom.  Precept  therefore  is,  "  Be  subject  even  for  God's  cause  ;  be 
Jj  •  *~  subject,  not  for  fear,  but  of  mere  Conscience,  knowing,  that 
he  which  resisteth  them,  purchaseth  to  himself  condemna- 
tion." Disobedience,  therefore,  unto  Laws  which  are  made 
by  Men,  is  not  a  thing  of  so  small  account  as  some  would 
make  it. 

Howbeit,  too  rigorous  it  were,  that  the  breach  of  every 
Human  Law  should  be  held  a  deadly  sin  :*  a  mean  there  is 
between  those  extremities,  if  so  be  we  can  find  it  out.t 


•  [See  Baxter,  §  70,  ut  sup."] 

t  [Bishop  Warburton,  ut  sup.  (see  Note  •  in  p.  255  of  this  Vol.)  says,  "  The  result  of  the 
principles  contended  for  in  this  Eighth  Book  was  this.  That  the  Puritan  principle  established 
an  imperium  in  imperio :  and  that  Hooker's  introduced  Persecution  for  Opinion."  He  thinks 
it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  last  three  Books  of  Hoolser  '*  are  indeed  of  the  same  hand 
with  the  other  five,"  p.  180,  utsup.  And  in  p.  243,  ibid,  he  styles  Hooker,  **  The  best  good 
man  of  our  Order."  Anthony  Wood  remarking  on  the  authenticity  of  Hooker's  last  three 
Books,  says,  **  The  reason  why  Mr.  Rich.  Baxter  contends  so  earnestly  for  their  genuineness, 
is  because  the  said  three  Books,  but  more  especially  the  Eighth,  do  contain  certain  popular 
and  false  principles,  concerning  the  true  nature  of  the  Legislative  Power,  the  Original  of 

Government  and  the  Office  of  Kings  itself,  as  derived  from  the  People And  that  he  may 

charge  these  destructive  assertions  home  on  our  Author,  he  (in  his  Pref  to  the  fourth  part  of 
his  Christian  Directory,  1673)  saith,  *  If  any  do  causelessly  question  whether  the  Eighth 
(imperfect)  Book  be  in  those  passages  his  own,  let  them  remember  that  the  sum  of  them  ii 
in  his  First  Book,  which  is  old,  and  highly  honoured  by  the  Prelatists* "  Atherue  Oxon.  edit. 
Bliss.  1813.  4to.  Vol.  I.  col. 697.  Baxter's  words  are — "and  highly  honoured,  by  you 
know  whom :  and  I  will  do  him  (Hooker)  the  honour,  and  myself  the  dishonour  to  confess, 
that  I  think  the  far  greater  number  of  Casuists  and  authors  of  Politics ;  Papists,  and  Pro- 
testants;  are  on  his  side,  and  fewest  on  mine."] 


TRACTS  AND  SERMONS. 


THE  TREATISES  FOLLOWING. 

I.    A  Supplication  to  the  Privy  Council,  by  Walter  TRAyERS. 
II.     Hooker's  Answer  to  that  Supplication. 

III.  A  Learned  DiseourBe  of  Justificatioi^  Works,  and  How  the  Foun- 

dation of  Faith  is  overthrown. 

IV.  A  Learned  Sermon  of  the  Nature  of  Pride. 

y.    A  Remedy  against  Sorrow  and  Fear:    delivered  in  a  Funeral 

Sermon. 
VI.     Of  the  Certainty  and  Perpetuity  of  Faith  in  the  Elect:  especially 
the  Prophet  Habakkuk's  Faith. 
VII.    Two  Sermons  on  part  of  St  Jude's  Epistle. 
VIII.    A  Sermon  on  Matt  vii.  7, 8. 


"A  SUPPLICATION 


MADE   TO  THB 


PRIVY  COUNCIL, 


BY 


MASTER  WALTER   TRAVERS."* 


"  RIGHT   HONOURABLE, 

^'  1,  The  manifold  benefits  which  all  the  subjects  within 
this  Dominion  do  at  this  pi'esent,  and  have  many  years  en- 
joyed under  her  Majesty's  most  happy  and  prosperous  reign, 
by  your  godly  wisdom  and  careful  watching  over  this  Estate 
night  and  day,  I  truly  and  unfeignedly  acknowledge,  from 
the  bottom  of  my  heart,  ought  worthily  to  bind  us  all  ta 
pray  continually  to  Almighty  God  for  the  continuance  and 
increase  of  the  life  and  good  estate  of  your  Honours,  and 

^  [An.  1591.    Printed,  together  with  Hooker's  Answer,  at  Oxford,  1612.   4to.— and, 
in  a  subsequent  e^tioti,  with  die  following  Address : — 

"To  the  Reader.  —  The  pleasures  of  thy  spacious  walks  in  Mr.  Hooker's  Temple- 
garden  (not  unfitly  so  called,  both  for  the  Temple  whereof  he  was   Master,   and  the 
subject.  Ecclesiastical  Polity)  do  promise  acceptance  to  these  flowers,  planted  and  watered  by 
the  same  hand,  and,  for  thy  sake,  composed  into  this  posy.     Sufficiently  are  they  commended 
by  their  fragrant  smell,  in  the  dogmatical  Truth ;  by  their  beautiful  colours,  in  the  accurate 
Style ;  by  their  medicinable  virtue,  against  some  diseases  in  our  neighbour  Churches,  now 
proving  epidemical,  and  threatening  farther  infection ;  by  their  straight  feature  and  spreading 
nature,  growing  from  the  root  of  Faith  (which,  as  here  is  proved,  can  never  be  rooted  up), 
and  extending  the  branches  of  Charity  to  the  covering  of  Noah's  nakedness ;  opening  the 
windows  of  Hope  to  men's  misty  conceits  of  their  bemisted  forefathers.     Thus,  and  more  than 
thus,  do  the  Works  commend  themselves  :  the  Workman  needs  a  better  workman  to  com- 
mend him,  (Alexander's  picture  requires  Apelles  his  pencil) ;  nay,  he  needs  it  not»  His  '  own 
Works  commend'  him  *  in  the  gates'  (Prov.  xxxi.  31.);  and,  '  being  dead  he  yet  speaketh' 
(Heb.  xi.  4.) ;  the  syllables  of  that  memorable  name,  Mr.  Richard  Hooker,  proclaiming 
more,  than  i£  I  should  here  stvle  him,  a  painful  Student,  a  profound  Scholar,  a  judicious 
Writer,  with  other  due  titles  of  his  honour.     Receive  then  this  posthume  Orphan  for  his  own, 
yea,  for  thine  own  sake ;  and  if  the  Printer  hath,  with  overmuch  haste,  like  MepMboshetfa's 
nurse,  lamed  the  child  with  slips  and  falls,  yet  be  thou  of  David's  mind,  '  shew  kindness'  to 
him  for  his  '  father  Jonathan's  sake'  (2  Sam.  ix.  7.).     God  grant,  that  the  rest  of  his  brethren 
be  not  more  than  lamed,  and  that  as  Saul's  three  sons  died  the  same  day  with  him  ( 1  Chron. 
z.  6.),  so  those  three  promised  to  perfect  his  Polity,  with  other  issues  of  that  learntd  brain  be 
not  buried  in  the  grave  with  their  renowned  Father.     Farewell. 

W.  S."  •] 

*  [Qaery,  William  SoMKBRt    See  Life  of  Hooker,  App.] 


336  A  SUPPLICATION,  [Sect  1. 

to  be  ready,  with  all  good  duties,  to  satisfy  and  serve  the 
same  to  our  power.     Besides  public  benefits  common  unto 
all,  I  must  needs,  and  do  willingly,  confess  myself  to  stand 
bound  by  most  special  obligation,  to  serve  and  honour  you 
more  than  any  other,   for  the  honourable  favour  it  hath 
pleased  you  to  vouchsafe  both  oftentimes  heretofore,  and 
also  now  of  late,  in  a  matter  more  dear  unto  me  than  any 
earthly  commodity,  that  is.  The  upholding  and  furthering  of 
my  service  in  the  ministering  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 
For  which  cause,  as  I  have  been  always  careful  so  to  carry 
myself  as  I  might  by  no  means  give  occasion  to  be  thought 
unworthy  of  so  great  a  benefit,  so  do  I  still,  next  unto  her 
Majesty's  gracious  countenance,   hold  nothing  more  dear 
and  precious  to  me,  than  that  I  may  always  remain  in  your 
Honours'  favour,  which  hath  oftentimes  been  helpful  and 
comfortable  unto  me  in  my  Ministry,  and  to  all  such  as 
reaped  any  fruit  of  my  simple  and  faithful  labour.      In 
which  dutiful  regard  I  humbly  beseech  your  Honours  to 
vouchsafe  to  do  me  this  grace.  To  conceive  nothing  of  me 
otherwise  than  according  to  the  duty  wherein  I  ought  to 
live,  by  any  information  against  me,  before  your  Honours 
have  heard  my  answer,   and  been  throughly  informed  of 
the  matter.     Which,   although   it  be   a  thing  that  your 
Wisdoms,  not  in  favour,  but  in  justice,  yield  to  all  men, 
yet  the  state  of  the  calling  unto  the  Ministry,  whereunto  it 
hath  pleased  God  of  his  goodness  to  call  me,  though  un- 
worthiest  of  all,  is  so  subject  to  misinformation,  as,  except 
we  may  find  this  favour  with  your  Honours,  we  cannot  look 
for  any  other,  but  that  our  unindifferent  parties  may  easily 
procure  us  to  be  hardly  esteemed  of;  and  that  we  shall  be 
made  Uke  the  poor  fisher-boats  in  the  sea,  which  every 
swelling  wave  and  billow  raketh  and  runneth  over.  Wherein 
my  estate  is  yet  harder  than  any  others'  of  my  rank  and 
calling,  who  are  indeed  to  fight  against  flesh  and  blood  in 
what  part  soever  of  the  Lord's  host  and  field  they  shall 
stand  marshalled  to  serve,  yet  many  of  them  deal  with  it 
naked,  and  unfurnished  of  weapons :  but  my  service  was  in 
a  place  where  I  was  to  encounter  with  it,  well  appointed  and 
armed  with  skill  and  with  authority;  whereof,  as  I  have 
always  thus  deserved,  and  therefore  have  been  careful  by 
all  good  means  to  entertain  still  your  Honours'  favourable 
respect  of  me,   so  have  I  special  cause  at  this  present. 


Sect.  1.]  BY   WALTER   TRAVERS.  337 

wherein  tnisinfonnation  to  the  Lord  Archbishop  of  Canter-> 
bury,  and  other  of  the  High  Commission,  hath  been  able  so 
far  to  prevail  against  me,  that  by  their  Letter  they  have  in- 
hibited me  to  preach,  or  execute  any  act  of  Ministry,  in  the 
Temple  or  elsewhere ;  having  never  once  called  me  before 
them,  to  understand  by  mine  answer  the  truth  of  such  things 
as  had  been  informed  against  me.^  We  have  a  story  in  our 
books  wherein  the  Pharisees,  proceeding  against  our  Sa- 
viour Christ,  without  having  heard  him,  are  reproved  by  an 
honourable  Counsellor  (as  the  Evangelist  doth  term  him,) 
sa)fing,  ^  Doth  our  Law  judge  a  man  before  it  hear  him,  [John 
and  know  what  he  hath  done  V  Which  I  do  not  mention,  ^"* 
to  the  end  that  by  an  indirect  and  covert  speech  I  might  so 
compare  those  who  have,  without  ever  hearing  me,  pro- 
nounced a  heavy  sentence  against  me ;  for  notwithstanding 
such  proceedings,  I  purpose,  by  God's  grace,  to  carry  myself 
towards  them  in  all  seeming  duty,  agreeable  to  their  places : 
much  less  do  I  presume  to  liken  my  cause  to  our  Saviour 
Christ's,  who  hold  it  my  chiefest  honour  and  happiness  to 
serve  him,  though  it  be  but  among  the  hinds  and  hired 
servants  that  serve  him  in  the  basest  comers  of  his  House : 
but  my  purpose  in  mentioning  it  is,  to  shew,  by  the  judg- 
ment of  a  prince  and  great  man  in  Israel,  that  such  proceed- 
ing standeth  not  with  the  Law  of  God,  and  in  a  princely 
pattern  to  shew  it  to  be  a  noble  part  of  an  honourable 
Counsellor,  not  to  allow  of  indirect  dealings,  but  to  love  and 
affect  such  a  course  in  Justice  as  is  agreeable  to  the  Law  of 
God.  We  have  also  a  plain  rule  in  the  Word  of  God,  not  i  Tim. 
to  proceed  any  otherwise  against  any  Elder  of  the  Church ; 
much  less  against  one  that  laboureth  in  the  Word,  and  in  ver.  ir. 
Teaching.  Which  rule  is  delivered  with  this  most  earnest 
charge  and  obtestation,  *  I  beseech  and  charge  thee  in  the  ver.  21. 
sight  of  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  ^nd  the  elect 
Angels,  that  thou  keep  those  (rules)  without  preferring  one 
before  another,  >doing  nothing  of  partiality,'  or  incUning  to 
either  part ;  which  Apostolical  and  most  earnest  charge,  I 
refer  it  to  your  Honours'  wisdom  how  it  hath  been  regarded 
in  so  heavy  a  judgment  against  me,  without  ever  hearing 
my  cause ;  and  whether,  as  having  God  before  their  eyes, 
and  the  Lord  Jesus,  by  whom  all  former  judgments  shall  be 
tried  again;  and,  as  in  the  presence  of  the  elect  Angels, 
witnesses  and  observers  of  the  Regiment  of  the  Churchy 

YOL.  III.  z 


338  A  SUPPLICATION,  [«&crf.  3. 

they  have  proceeded  thus  to  such  a  Sentence.  They  allege 
indeed  two  reasons  in  their  Letter,  whereupon  they  restrain 
my  Ministry ;  which,  if  they  were  as  strong  against  me  as 
they  are  supposed,  yet  I  refer  to  your  Honours'  wisdoms, 
whether  the  quality  of  such  an  offence  as  they  charge  me 
with,  which  is  in  effect  but  an  indiscretion,  deserve  so 
grievous  a  punishment  both  to  the  Church  and  me,'  m 
taking  away  my  Ministry,  and  that  poor  little  commodity 
which  it  yieldeth  for  the  necessary  maintenance  of  my  life ; 
if  so  unequal  a  balancing  of  faults  and  punishments  should 
have  place  in  the  Commonwealth,  surely  we  should  shortly 
have  no  actions  upon  the  case,  nor  of  trespass,  but  all  should 
be  pleas  of  the  Crown,  nor  any  man  amerced,  or  fined,  bat 
for  every  light  offence  put  to  his  ransom.  I  have  credibly 
heard,  that  some  of  the  Ministry  have  been  committed  for 
grievous  transgressions  of  the  Laws  of  God  and  men,  being 
of  no  ability  to  do  other  service  in  the  Church  than  to  read; 
yet  hath  it  bBen  *  thflught  charitable,  and  standing  with 
Christian  moderaticnRoid  temperancy  not  to  deprive  such 
of  Ministry  and'  faeimeency,  but  to  inflict  some  more  to- 
lerable punishment*  '>Wfaich  I  write  not  because  such,  as 
I  think,  were  to  be  fatoured,  but  to  shew  how  unUke  their 
dealing  is  with  me,  being  through  the  goodness  of  God  not 
to  be  touched  with  any  such  blame ;  and  one,  who,  accord- 
ing to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  God,  have  laboured  now 
some  years  painfully,  in  regard  of  the  weak  estate  of  my 
body,  in  preaching  the  Gospel,  and,  as  I  hope,  not  alto- 
gether unprofitably,  in  respect  of  the  Church.*  But  I  be- 
seech your  Honours  to  give  me  leave  briefly  to  declare  the 
particular  reasons  of  their  Letter,  and  what  answer  I  have 
to  make  unto  it. 

2.  "  The  first  is,  that,  as  they  say,  *  I  am  not  lawfully 
called  to  the  Function  of  the  Ministry,  nor  allowed  to  preach, 
according  to  the  Laws  of  this  Church  of  England.' 

*'  For  answer  to  this,  I  had  need  to  divide  the  points. 
And  first  to  make  answer  to  the  former ;  wherein,  leaving  to 
shew  what  by  the  Holy  Scriptures  is  required  in  a  Lawfiil 
Calling,  and  that  all  that  is  to  be  found  in  mine,  that  I  be 
not  too  long  for  your  other  weighty  affairs,  I  rest  in  this 
answer : 

•  [See  Vol.  I.  p.  45,  Note.] 


Sect.  2.]  BY   WALTER   TRAVERS.  339 

"  My  Calling  to  the  Ministry  was  such  as,  in  the  calling 
of  any  thereunto,  is  appointed  to  be  used  by  the  Orders 
agreed  upon  in  the  National  Synods  of  the  Low  Countries, 
for  the  direction  and  guidance  of  their  Churches;  which 
Orders  are  the  same  with  those  whereby  the  French  and 
Scottish  Churches  are  governed;   whereof  I  have  shewed 
such  sufficient  Testimonial  to  my  Lord  the  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,   as  is  requisite  in  such  a  matter:    whereby  it 
must  needs  fall  out,  if  any  man  be  lawfully  called  to  the 
Ministry  in  those  Churches,  then  is  my  Calling,  being  the 
same  with  theirs,   also  Lawful.     But  I  suppose,  notwith- 
standing they  use  this  general  speech,  they  mean  only,  my 
Calling  is  not  sufficient  to  deal  in  the  Ministry  within  this 
Land,  because  I  was  not  made  Minister  according  to  that 
Order,  which  in  this  cause  is  ordained  by  our  Laws.    Where- 
unto  I  beseech  your  Honours  to  consider  throughly  of  mine 
answer,  because  exception  now  again  is  taken  to  my  Mi* 
nistry,  whereas,  having  been  heretofore  called  in  question 
for  it,  I  so  answered  the  matter,  as  I  continued  in  my  Mi- 
nistry, and,  for  any  thing  I  discerned,  looked  to  hear  that 
no  more  would  be  objected  unto  me.     The  Communion  of 
Saints  (which  every  Christian  man  professeth  to  believe)  is 
such,  as  that  the  acts  which  are  done  in  any  true  Church  of 
Christ's  according  to  his  Word,  are  held  as  Lawful,  being 
done  in  one  Church  as  in  another.     Which,  as  it  holdeth  in 
other  acts  of  Ministry,  as  Baptism,  Marriage,  and  such  like, 
so  doth  it  in  the  Calling  to  the  Ministry ;  by  reason  whereof, 
all  Churches  do  acknowledge  and  receive  him  for  a  Minister 
of  the  Word,  who  hath  been  lawfully  called  thereunto  in  any 
Church  of  the  same  profession.     A  Doctor  created  in  any 
University  of  Christendom,  is  acknowledged  sufficiently  qua- 
lified to  teach  in  any  country.     The  Church  of  Rome  itself, 
and  the  Canon  Law  holdeth  it,  that  being  ordered  in  Spain, 
they  may  execute  that  [which]  belongeth  to  their  Order,  in 
Italy,  or  in  any  other  place.     And  the  Churches  of  the 
Gospel  never  made  any  question  of  it :  which  if  they  shall 
now  begin  to  make  doubt  of,  and  deny  such  to  be  Lawfully 
called  to  the  Ministry,  as  are  called  by  another  Order  than 
our  own ;  then  may  it  well  be  looked  for,  that  other  Churches 
will  do  the  like :  and  if  a  Minister  called  in  the  Low  Coun- 
tries be  not  Lawfully  called  in  England,  then  may  they  say 
to  our  PreacherfiT  which  are  there,  that  being  made  by 

z  2 


340  A  SUPPLICATION,  [SecL  2. 

another  Order  than  theirs,  they  cannot  suffer  them  to 
execute  any  act  of  Ministry  amongst  them ;  which  in  the  end 
must  needs  breed  a  schism,  and  dangerous  division  in  the 
Churches.  Further,  I  have  heard  of  those  that  are  Learned 
in  the  Laws  of  this  Land,  that  by  express  Statute  to  that 
purpose,  anno  13  [Eliz.]  upon  subscription  of  the  Articles 
agreed  upon,  anno  1562,  that  they  who  pretend  to  ha?e 
been  ordered  by  another  Order  than  that  which  is  now 
established,  are  of  like  capacity  to  enjoy  any  place  of  Mi- 
nistry within  the  Land,  as  they  that  have  been  ordered 
according  to  that  [which]  is  now  by  Law  in  this  case  esta- 
blished. Which  comprehending  manifestly  all,  even  such  as 
were  made  Priests  according  to  the  Order  of  the  Church  of 
Rome,  it  must  needs  be,  that  the  Law  of  a  Christian  land, 
professing  the  Gospel,  should  be  as  favourable  for  a  Mi- 
nister of  the  Word,  as  for  a  Popish  Priest ;  which  also  was 
so  found  in  Mr.  Whittingham's  case,  who,  notwithstanding 
such  replies  against  him,  enjoyed  still  the  benefit  he  had  by 
his  Ministry,  and  might  have  done  until  this  day,  if  Grod 
had  spared  him  life  so  long ;  which  if  it  be  understood  so, 
and  practised  in  others,  why  should  the  change  of  the 
person  alter  the  right  which  the  Law  giveth  to  all  others?* 
The  Place  of  Ministry  whereunto  I  was  called  was  not  Pre- 
sentative :  and  if  it  had  been  so,  surely  they  would  never 
have  presented  any  man  whom  they  never  knew ;  and  the 

*  [Sandys,  Archbishop  of  York,  having  excommunicated  Whittingham,  Dean  of  Durham, 
he  appealed  to  the  Queen,  who  directed  a  Commission  to  hear  and  determine  the  Talidity  of 
his  Ordination,  &c.  Dr.  Hutton,  Dean  of  York,  boldly  averred,  **  That  Dean  Whittinghtm 
was  ordained  in  a  better  sort  than  even  the  Archbishop  himself."  Sandys  being  foiled  by 
that  Commission,  obtained  one  directed  to  himself  and  some  other  partisans;  designing  to 
deprive  Whittingham,  as  a  Layman.  On  being  cited  before  them  he  produced  this  Certificate, 
signed  at  Geneva  by  eight  persons,  "  It  pleased  God,  by  the  suffrages  of  the  whole  Congre- 
gation, orderly  to  choose  Mr.  W.  Whittingham  unto  the  Office  of  Preaching  the  Word  of  God 
and  Ministering  the  Sacraments ;  and  he  was  admitted  Minister,  and  so  published,  with  such 
other  Ceremonies  as  are  used  and  accustomed."  It  was  objected,  that  there  was  no  mentioa 
of  a  Bishop  or  Superintendent,  nor  of  any  external  solemnities,  nor  so  much  as  of  impoaitkm 
of  hands;  the  Dean  replied,  "  There  was  mention  in  general  of  the  Ceremonies  of  that  Church; 
and,  that  he  was  able  to  prove  his  vocation  to  be  the  same  that  all  the  Ministers  of  Geneva 
had."  The  Lord  -  President  of  the  North  then  rose  and  said,  **  That  he  could  not,  in  con- 
science, agree  to  deprive  him  for  that  cause  only ;  for  it  would  be  ill  taken  by  all  the  Godly 
and  learned  both  at  home  and  abroad,  that  we  should  allow  of  the  Popish  Massing- Priests  in 
our  ministry,  and  disallow  of  Ministers  made  in  a  Reformed  Church  !"  The  Commissioo 
consequently  adjourned,  and  never  resumed  its  design.  To  question  such  Ordination  was 
expressly  contrary  to  the  Statute  of  13th  of  Eliz.  cap.  12,  by  which,  the  Ordination  of  foreign 
Reformed  Churches  was  declared  valid ;  and,  those  that  had  no  other  Orders  were  made  of 
like  capacity  with  others  to  enjoy  any  place  of  Ministry  within  England.  Consult  Strtpe's 
Annals,  Vol.ii.  p.  481,  519 — 524.  Travers  was  ordained  al  Antwerp,  May  8,  1578;  the 
certificate  is  copied  in  Fuller's  Church  History,  bk.  ix.  p.  214.  Besides  this  Supplication  in 
vindication  of  his  Ordination,  he  also  addressed  a  Letter  to  the  Lord  Treasureri  for  which  see 
Strype's  Life  of  Whitgift.  bk.  iii.  No.  12,  Records.] 


Sect.  4}.]  BY  WALTER  TRAVERS.  341 

Order  of  this  Church  is  agreeable  herein  to  the  Word  of 
God,  and  the  ancient  and  best  Canons^  That  no  man  should 
be  made  Minister  sine  tituh :  therefore  having  none,  I  could 
not  by  the  Orders  of  this  Church  have  entered  into  the 
Ministi*y,  before  I  had  Charge  to  tend  upon.  When  I  was 
at  Antwerp,  and  to  take  a  place  of  Ministry  among  the 
people  of  that  nation,  I  see  no  cause  why  I  should  have  re- 
turned again  over  the  seas  for  Orders  here ;  nor  how  I  could 
have  done  it,  without  disallowing  the  Orders  of  the  Churches 
provided  in  the  country  where  I  was  to  live.  Whereby  I 
hope  it  appeareth,  that  my  Calling  to  the  Ministry  is  Lawful, 
and  maketh  me,  by  our  Law,  of  capacity  to  enjoy  any  benefit 
or  commodity,  that  any  other,  by  reason  of  his  Ministry, 
may  enjoy.  But  my  cause  is  yet  more  easy,  who  reaped  no 
benefit  of  my  Ministry  by  Law,  receiving  only  a  benevolence  ' 
and  Voluntary  Contribution ;  and  the  Ministry  I  dealt  with 
being  Preaching  only,  which  every  Deacon  here  may  do 
being  licensed,  and  certain  that  are  neither  Ministers  nor 
Deacons.  Thus  I  answer  the  former  of  these  two  points, 
whereof,  if  there  be  yet  any  doubt,  I  humbly  desire,  for  a 
final  end  thereof,  that  some  competent  judges  in  Law  may 
determine  of  it;  whereunto  I  refer  and  submit  myself  with  all 
reverence  and  duty. 

3.  '*  The  second  is,  '  That  I  preached  without  Licence.' 
Whereunto  this  is  my  answer:  I  have  not  presumed,  upon 
the  Calling  I  had  to  the  Ministry  abroad,  to  preach  or  deal 
with  any  part  of  the  Ministry  within  this  Church,  without 
the  consent  and  allowance  of  such  as  were  to  allow  me  unto 
it.  My  allowance  was  from  the  Bishop  of  London,  testified 
by  his  two  several  Letters  to  the  Inner  Temple,  who,  with- 
out such  testimony,  would  by  no  means  rest  satisfied  in  it : 
which  Letters  being  by  me  produced,  I  refer  it  to  your 
Honours*  wisdom,  whether  I  have  taken  upon  me  to  preach, 
without  being  allowed  (as  they  charge)  according  to  the 
Orders  of  the  Realm.  Thus  having  answered  the  second 
point  also,  I  have  done  with  the  objection,  ^  Of  deaUng  with.- 
out  Calling  or  Licence.* 

4.  *'  The  other  reason  they  allege  is,  concerning  a  late 
action,  wherein  I  had  to  deal  with  Mr.  Hooker,  Master  of 
the  Temple.  In  the  handling  of  which  cause,  they  charge 
me  with  an  indiscretion,  and  want  of  duty,  '  in  that  I 
inveighed  (as  they  say)  against  certain  points  of  Doctrine 


342  A  SUPPLICATION,  [Sect  5, 

taught  by  him,  as  erroneous,  not  conferring  with  him,  nor 
complaining  of  it  to  them/  My  answer  hereunto  standedi, 
in  declaring  to  your  Honours  the  whole  course  and  carriage 
of  that  cause,  and  the  degrees  of  proceeding  in  it,  which  I 
will  do  as  briefly  as  I  can,  and  according  to  the  truth,  God 
be  ray  witness,  as  near  as  my  best  memory,  and  notes  of 
remembrance,  may  serve  me  thereunto.  After  that  I  have 
taken  away  that  which  seemeth  to  have  moved  them  to  think 
me  not  charitably  minded  to  Mr.  Hooker ;  which  is,  because 
he  was  brought  into  Mr.  Alvey's  place,  wherein  this  Church 
desired  that  I  might  have  succeeded ;  which  place,  if  I  would 
have  made  suit  to  have  obtained,  or  if  I  had  ambitiously 
affected  and  sought,  I  would  not  have  refused  to  have 
satisfied,  by  Subscription,  such  as  the  matter  then  seemed 
to  depend  upon:  whereas  contrariwise,  notwithstanding  I 
would  not  hinder  the  Church  to  do  that  they  thought  to  be 
the  most  for  their  edification  and  comfort,  yet  did  I,  neither 
by  speech  nor  Letter,  make  suit  to  any  for  the  obtaining  of 
it ;  following  herein  that  resolution,  which  I  judge  to  be 
most  agreeable  to  the  Word  and  will  of  God ;  that  is,  that 
labouring  and  suing  for  places  and  charges  in  the  Church  is 
not  Lawful.  Further,  whereas,  at  the  suit  of  the  Church, 
some  of  your  Honours  entertained  the  cause,  and  brought  it 
to  a  near  issue,  that  there  seemed  nothing  to  remain,  but  the 
Commendation  of  my  Lord  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
whenas  he  could  not  be  satisfied,  but  by  my  subscribing  to 
his  late  Articles  ;^  and  that  my  answer,  agreeing  to  subscribe 
according  to  any  Law,  and  to  the  Statute  provided  in  that 
case,  but  praying  to  be  respited  for  subscribing  to  any  other, 
which  I  could  not  in  conscience  do,  either  for  the  Temple 
(which  otherwise  he  said  he  would  not  commend  me  to),  nor 
for  any  other  place  in  the  Church,  did  so  little  please  my 
Lord  Archbishop,  as  he  resolved  that  otherwise  I  should 
not  be  commended  to  it:  I  had  utterly  here  no  cause  of 
offence  against  Mr.  Hooker,  whom  I  did  in  no  sort  esteem 
to  have  prevented  or  undermined  me,  but  that  God  disposed 
of  me  as  it  pleased  him,  by  such  means  and  occasions  as  I 
have  declared. 

5.  '^  Moreover,  as  I  had  taken  no  cause  of  offence  at 
Mr.  Hooker   for    being   preferred,    so  there    were    many 
— — — ___ — _ — ..  ■         ....■,,.       ..  ■    III.        .     II.  i  I  ■  .  11 

♦  [See  Strype's  Life  of  WhUgift^  p.  115,  116.] 


I 


Sect.  7.]  BY  WALTER   TRAVERS.  843 

witnesses^  that  I  was  glad  that  the  place  was  given  him,  hoping 
to  live  in  all  godly  peace  and  comfort  with  him^  both  for 
acquaintance  and  good-will  which  hath  been  between  US| 
and  for  some  kind  of  affinity  in  the  marriage  of  his  nearest 
kindred  and  mine.  Since  his  coming,  I  have  so  carefully 
endeavoured  to  entertain  all  good  correspondence  and  agree- 
ment with  him,  as  I  think  he  himself  will  bear  me  witness 
of  many  earnest  disputations  and  conferences  with  him  about 
the  matter;  the  rather,  because  that,  contrary  to  my  ex- 
pectation, he  inclined  from  the  beginning  but  smally  there- 
untOy  but  joined  rather  with  such  as  had  always  opposed 
themselves  to  any  good  order  in  this  Charge,  and  made 
themselves  to  be  brought  indisposed  to  his  present  state  and 
proceedings.  For,  both  knowing  that  God's  commandment 
charged  me  with  such  duty,  and  discerning  how  much  our 
peace  might  further  the  good  service  of  God  and  his  Churchy 
and  the  mutual  comfort  of  us  both,  I  had  resolved  constantly 
to  seek  for  peace ;  and  though  it  should  fly  from  me  (as  I 
saw  it  did  by  means  of  some,  who  little  desired  to  see  the 
good  of  our  Church),  yet  according  to  the  rule  of  God's  CtPe'' 
Word,  to  follow  after  it.  Which  being  so  (as  hereof  I  take 
God  to  witness,  who  searcheth  the  heart  and  reins,  and  who 
by  his  Son  will  judge  the  world,  both  the  quick  and  dead), 
I  hope  no  charitable  judgment  can  suppose  me  to  have 
stood  evil-affected  towards  him  for  his  place,  or  desirous  to 
fall  into  any  controversy  with  him. 

6.  "  Which  my  resolution  I  so  pursued,  that,  whereas  I 
discovered  sundry  unsound  matters  in  his  Doctrine  (as  many 
of  his  Sermons  tasted  of  some  sour  leaven  or  other),  yet  thus 
I  carried  myself  towards  him.  Matters  of  smaller  weight, 
and  so  covertly  discovered ,  that  no  great  offence  to  the 
Church  was  to  be  feared  in  them,  I  wholly  passed  by,  as  one 
that  discerned  nothing  of  them,  or  had  been  unfurnished  of 
replies:  for  other  of  greater  moment,  and  so  openly  de- 
livered, as  there  was  just  cause  of  fear  lest  the  Truth  and 
Church  of  God  should  be  prejudiced  and  perilled  by  it,  and 
such  as  the  conscience  of  my  duty  and  calling  would  not 
suffer  me  altogether  to  pass  over,  this  was  my  course ;  to  de- 
liver, when  I  should  have  just  cause  by  my  text,  the  truth  of 
such  Doctrine  as  he  had  otherwise  taught  in  general  speeches, 
without  touch  of  his  person  in  any  sort,  and  further  at  con- 
venient opportunity  to  confer  with  him  on  such  points. 


I 


344  A  SUPPLICATION^  [Sect.8^ 

7.  ''  According  to  which  determination!  whereas  he  had 
taught  certain  things  concerning  Predestination  otherwise 
than  the  Word  of  God  doth,  as  it  is  understood  by  all 
Churches  professing  the  Gospel^  and  not  unlike  that  where- 
with Coranus  sometimes  troubled  hisChurch,  I  both  delivered 
the  truth  of  such  points  in  a  general  doctrine,  without  any 
touch  of  him  in'  particular,  and  conferred  with  him  also  pri- 
vately upon  such  articles.  In  which  conference,  I  remember, 
when  I  urged  the  consent  of  all  Churches  and  good  writers 
against  him  that  I  knew ;  and  desired,  if  it  were  otherwise, 
What  Authors  he  had  seen  of  such  doctrine  ?  he  answered 
me,  That  his  best  author  was  his  own  Reason :  which  I  wished 
him  to  take  heed  of,  as  a  matter  standing  with  Christian 
modesty  and  wisdom  in  a  doctrine  not  received  by  the  Church, 
not  to  trust  to  his  own  judgment  so  far  as  to  publish  it  before 
he  had  conferred  with  others  of  his  profession  labouring  by 
daily  prayer  and  study  to  know  the  will  of  God,  as  he  did, 
to  see  how  they  understood  such  doctrine.  Notwithstand- 
ing, he,  with  wavering,  replying  That  he  would  some  other 
time  deal  more  largely  in  the  matter ;  I  wished  him,  and 
prayed  him  not  so  to  do,  for  the  peace  of  the  Church,  which, 
by  such  means,  might  be  hazarded ;  seeing  he  could  not  but 
think,  that  men,  who  make  any  conscience  of  their  Ministry, 
will  judge  it  a  necessary  duty  in  them  to  teach  the  truth, 
and  to  convince  the  contrary. 

8.  ^'  Another  time,  upon  like  occasion  of  this  Doctrine  of 
his,  *  That  the  assurance  of  that  we  believe  by  the  Word, 
is  not  so  certain,  as  of  that  we  perceive  by  sense ;'  I  both 
taught  the  doctrine  otherwise,  namely,  the  assurance  of  Faith 
to  be  greater,  which  assureth  both  of  things  above,  and  con- 
trary to  all  sense  and  human  understanding,  and  dealt  with 
him  also  privately  upon  that  point :  according  to  which  course 
of  late,  whenas  he  had  taught,  '  That  the  Church  of  Rome 
is  a  true  Church  of  Christ,  and  a  sanctified  Church  by  pro- 
fession of  that  Truth,  which  God  hath  revealed  imto  us  by 
his  Son,  though  not  a  pure  and  perfect  Church ;'  and  further, 
'  That  he  doubted  not,  but  that  thousands  of  the  Fathers, 
which  lived  and  died  in  the  Superstitions  of  that  Church, 
were   saved,  because  of  their  Ignorance,  which  excuseth 

1  Tim.  them ;'  misalleging  to  that  end  a  text  of  Scripture  to  prove 
it:  the  matter  being  of  set  purpose  openly  and  at  large 
handled  by  him,  and  of  that  moment,  that  might  prejudice 


Sect.  9.]  BY  WALTER   TRAVERS.  345 

the  Faith  of  Christ,  encourage  the  ill-affected  to  continue 
still  in  their  damnable  ways,  and  others  weak  in  Faith  to 
suffer  themselves  easily  to  be  seduced  to  the  destruction  of 
their  souls ;  I  thought  it  my  most  bounden  duty  to  God  and 
to  his  Church,  whilst  I  might  have  opportunity  to  speak  with 
him,  to  teach  the  Truth  in  a  general  speech  in  such  points  of 
doctrine. 

9.  "  At  which  time  I  taught,  *  That  such  as  die,  or  have 
died  at  any  time  in  the  Church  of  Rome,  holding  in  their 
Ignorance  that  faith  which  is  taught  in  it,  and  namely.  Justifi- 
cation in  part  by  Works,  could  not  be  said  by  the  Scriptures 
to  be  saved.*  In  which  matter,  foreseeing  that  if  I  waded 
not  warily  in  it,  I  should  be  in  danger  to  be  reported  (as 
bath  fallen  out  since  notwithstanding)  to  condemn  all  the 
Fathers,  I  said  directly  and  plainly  to  all  men's  understand- 
ing, *  That  it  was  not  indeed  to  be  doubted,  but  many  of  the 
Fathers  were  saved ;  but  the  means  (said  I)  was  not  their 
Ignorance,  which  excuseth  no  man  with  God,  but  their 
knowledge  and  faith  of  the  Truth,  which,  it  appeareth,  God 
vouchsafed  them,  by  many  notable  monuments  and  records 
extant  of  it  in  all  ages.'  Which  being  the  last  point  in  all 
my  Sermon,  rising  so  naturally  from  the  text  I  then  ex- 
pounded, as  would  have  occasioned  me  to  have  delivered 
such  matter,  notwithstanding  the  former  doctrine  had  been 
sound;  and  being  dealt  in  by  a  general  speech,  without 
touch  of  his  particular ;  I  looked  not  that  a  matter  of  con- 
troversy would  have  been  made  of  it,  no  more  than  had  been 
of  my  like  dealing  in  former  time.  But,  far  otherwise  than 
I  looked  for,  Mr.  Hooker,  shewing  no  grief  of  offence  taken 
at  my  speech  all  the  week  long,  the  next  Sabbath,  leaving 
to  proceed  upon  his  ordinary  text,  professed  to  preach  again 
that  he  had  done  the  day  before,  for  some  question  that  his 
Doctrine  was  drawn  into,  which  he  desired  might  be  exa- 
mined with  all  severity. 

**  So  proceeding,  he  bestowed  his  whole  time,  in  that  Dis- 
course, concerning  his  former  doctrine,  and  answering  the 
places  of  Scripture  which  I  had  alleged  to  prove  that  a  man  Apoc 
dying  in  the  Church  of  Rome  is  not  to  be  judged  by  the  6a\*V.' 
Scriptures  to  be  saved.     In  which  long  speech,  and  utterly  *"** 
impertinent  to  his  text,  under  colour  of  answering  for  himself, 
be  impugned  directly  and  openly  to  all  men's  understanding, 
the  true  Doctrine  which  I  had  delivered ;  and,  added  to  his 


346  A  SUPPLICATION,  [Scct.  10. 

former  points  some  other  like  (as  willingly  one  error  foUoweth 
another),  that  is,  '  That  the  Galatians  joining  with  Faith 
in  Christ,  Circumcision,  as  necessary  to  salvation,  might  be 
saved ;'  and  *  That  they  of  the  Church  of  Rome  may  be 
saved  by  such  a  Faith  of  Christ  as  they  had,  with  a  general 
repentance  of  all  their  errors,  notwithstanding  their  opinion 
of  Justification  in  part  by  their  Works  and  Merits :'  I  was 
necessarily,  though  not  willingly,  drawn  to  say  something  to 
the  points  he  objected  against  sound  Doctrine ;  which  I  did 
in  a  short  speech  in  the  end  of  my  Sermon,  with  protestation 
of  so  doing  not  of  any  sinister  affection  to  any  man,  but  to 
bear  witness  to  the  Truth  according  to  my  calling ;  and  wished, 
if  the  matter  should  needs  further  be  dealt  in,  some  other 
more  convenient  way  might  be  taken  for  it.  Wherein,  I 
hope,  my  dealing  was  manifest  to  the  consciences  of  all  in- 
different hearers  of  me  that  day,  to  have  been  according  to 
peace,  and  without  any  uncharitableness,  being  duly  con- 
sidered. 

"  For  that  I  conferred  [not]  with  him  the  first  day,  I  have 
shewed  that  the  cause  requiring  of  me  in  duty  at  the  least 
not  to  be  altogether  silent  in  it,  being  a  matter  of  such  con- 
sequence ;  that  the  time  also  being  short  wherein  I  was  to 
preach  after  him,  the  hope  of  the  fruit  of  our  communication 
being  small  upon  experience  of  former  conferences ;  [and]  my 
expectation  being  that  the  Church  should  be  no  further 
troubled  with  it,  upon  the  motion  I  made  of  taking  some 
other  course  of  dealing ;  I  suppose  my  deferring  to  speak 
with  him  till  some  fit  opportunity,  cannot  in  charity  be 
judged  uncharitable. 

10.  ^'  The  second  day,  his  unlooked-for  opposition  with 
the  former  reasons,  made  it  to  be  a  matter  that  required  of 
necessity  some  public  answer;  which  being  so  temperate 
as  I  have  shewed,  if  notwithstanding  it  be  censured  as  un- 
charitable, and  punished  so  grievously  as  it  is,  what  should 
have  been  my  punishment,  if  (without  all  such  cautions  and 
respects  as  qualified  my  speech)  I  had  before  all,  and  in  the 
understanding  of  all,  so  reproved  him  offending  openly,  that 
others  might  have  feared  to  do  the  like  ?  Which  yet,  if  I  had 
done,  might  have  been  warranted  by  the  rule  and  charge  of 
[I  Tim.  the  Apostle,  '  Them  that  offend  openly,  rebuke  openly,  that 
the  rest  may  also  fear ;'  and  by  his  example,  who,  when 
Peter  in  this  very  case  which  is  now  between  us,  had,  not  in 


SecL  11.]  BY  WALTER   TRAVERS.  847 

preachings  but  in  a  matter  of  conversation,  not  gone  with  a 
right  foot,  as  was  fit  for  the  Truth  of  the  Gospel,  conferred  [Gai.ii. 
not  privately  with  him,  but,  as  his  own  rule  required,  re-  ' 
proved  him  openly  before  all,  that  others  might  hear,  and 
fear,  and  not  dare  to  do  the  like.  All  which  reasons  together 
weighed,  I  hope,  will  shew  the  manner  of  my  dealing  to  have 
been  charitable,  and  warrantable  in  ever  sort. 

11.  "  The  next  Sabbath-day  after  this,  Mr.  Hooker  kept 
the  way  he  had  entered  into  before,  and  bestowed  his  whole 
hour  and  more  only  upon  the  questions  he  had  moved  and 
maintained ;  wherein  he  so  set  forth  the  agreement  of  the 
Church  of  Rome  with  us,  and  their  disagreement  from  us, 
as  if  we  had  consented  in  the  greatest  and  weightiest  points, 
and  differed  only  in  certain  smaller  matters.  Which  agree- 
ment noted  by  him  in  two  chief  points,  is  not  such  as  he 
would  have  made  men  believe:  the  one,  in  that  he  said, 
'  They  acknowledged  all  men  sinners,  even  the  blessed  Vir- 
gin, though  some  of  them  freed  her  from  sin;'  for  the 
Council  of  Trent  holdeth,  *  That  she  was  free  from  sin :' 
another,  in  that  he  said,  ^  They  teach  Christ's  Righteousness 
to  be  the  only  meritorious  cause  of  taking  away  sin,  and 
differ  from  us  only  in  the  applying  of  it.'  For  Thomas 
Aquinas  their  chief  Schoolman,  and  Archbishop  Catherinus, 
teach,  *  That  Christ  took  away  only  original  sin,  and  that 
the  rest  are  to  be  taken  away  by  ourselves;'  yea,  the 
Council  of  Trent  teacheth,  ^  That  righteousness  whereby 
we  are  righteous  in  God's  sight,  is  an  inherent  righteous- 
ness;' which  must  needs  be  of  our  own  Works,  and  cannot 
be  understood  of  the  righteousness  inherent  only  in  Christ's 
person,  and  accounted  unto  us.  Moreover  he  taught  the 
same  time,  ^  That  neither  the  Galatians,  nor  the  Church  of 
Rome,  did  directly  overthrow  the  Foundation  of  Justification 
by  Christ  alone,  but  only  by  consequent,  and  therefore 
might  well  be  saved ;  or  else  neither  the  Churches  of  the 
Lutherans,  nor  any  which  hold  any  manner  of  error,  could 
be  saved ;  because  (saith  he)  every  error  by  consequent 
overthroweth  the  Foundation.'  In  which  discourses,  and 
such  like,  he  bestowed  his  whole  time;  and  more,  which, 
if  he  had  affected  either  the  truth  of  God,  or  the  peace  of 
the  Church,  he  would  truly  not  have  done.  Whose  ex- 
ample could  not  draw  me  to  leave  the  Scripture  I  took  in 
hand,  but  standing  about  an  hour  to  deUver  the  doctrine 


348  A  SUPPLICATION,  [S^L  12. 

of  it,  in  the  end,  upon  just  occasion  of  the  text,  leaving 
sundry  other  his  unsound  speeches,  and  keeping  me  still 
to  the  principal,  I  confirmed  the  believing  the  doctrine  of 
Justification  by  Christ  only,  to  be  necessary  to  the  justifi- 
cation of  all  that  should  be  saved,  and  that  the  Church  of 
Rome  directly  denieth.  That  a  man  is  saved  by  Christ,  or 
by  Faith  alone,  without  the  works  of  the  Law.  Which  my 
answer,  as  it  was  most  necessary  for  the  service  of  God  and 
the  Church,  so  was  it  without  any  immodest  or  reproachful 
speech  of  Mr.  Hooker:  whose  unsound  and  wilful  dealings 
in  a  cause  of  so  great  importance  to  the  Faith  of  Christ, 
and  salvation  of  the  Church,  notwithstanding  I  knew  well 
what  speech  it  deserved,   and  what  some  zealous  earnest 

Mark  man  of  the  spirit  of  John  and  James,  surnamed  Boanerges, 
Sons  of  Thunder,  would  have  said  in  such  a  case;  yet  I 
chose  rather  to  content  myself  in  exhorting  him  to  revisit 

s  Sam.    his  Doctrine,  as  Nathan  the  Prophet  did  the  devise  [advice?^; 

'  which,  without  consulting  with  Crod,  he  had  of  himself  given 

to  David,  concerning  the  building  of  the  Temple:  and,  with 

Gal.  ii.  Peter  the  Apostle,  to  endure  to  be  withstood  in  such  a  case, 
not  unUke  unto  this.  This  in  efiect  was  that  which  passed 
between  us  concerning  this  matter,  and  the  invectives  I 
made  against  him,  wherewith  I  am  charged.  Which  re- 
hearsal, I  hope,  may  clear  me  (with  all  that  shall  indiffe- 
rently consider  it)  of  the  blames  laid  upon  me  for  want  of 
duty  to  Mr.  Hooker  in  not  conferring  with  him,  whereof  I 
have  spoken  sufficiently  already;  and  to  the  High  Com- 
mission, in  not  revealing  the  matter  to  them,  which  yet 
now  I  am  further  to  answer.  My  answer  is.  That  I  protest, 
no  contempt  nor  wilful  neglect  of  any  lawful  Authority 
stayed  me  from  complaining  unto  them,  but  these  reasons 
following : 

12.  "  First,  I  was  in  some  hope,  that  Mr.  Hooker,  not- 
withstanding he  had  been  over-carried,  with  a  shew  of 
charity,  to  prejudice  the  Truth,  yet  when  it  should  be 
sufficiently  proved,  would  have  acknowledged  it,  or  at  the 
least  induced  with  peace,  that  it  might  be  offi^red  without 
either  offence  to  him,  or  to  such  as  would  receive  it;  either 
of  which  would  have  taken  away  any  cause  of  just  com- 
plaint. When  neither  of  these  fell  out  according  to  my 
expectation  and  desire,  but  that  he  replied  to  the  Truth,  and 
objected  against  it,  I  thought  he  might  have  some  doubts 


Sect.  13.]  BY   WALTER   TR AVERS.  349 

and  scruples  in  himself;  which  yet,  if  they  were  cleared,  he 
would  either  embrace  some  [sound]  doctrine,  or  at  least  suffer 
it  to  have  his  {its]  course :  which  hope  of  him  I  nourished 
so  long,  as  the  matter  was  not  bitterly  and  immodestly 
handled  between  us. 

"  Another  reason  was,  the  Cause  itself,  which,  according 
to  the  parable  of  the  tares  (which  are  said  to  be  sown 
amongst  the  wheat),  sprung  up  first  in  his  grass :  therefore, 
as  the  servants  in  that  place  are  not  said  to  have  come  to  [Matt. 
complain  to  the  Lord,  till  the  tares  came  to  shew  their  fruits 
ki  their  kind ;  so  I,  thinking  it  yet  but  a  time  of  discovering 
of  it,  what  it  was,  desired  not  their  sickle  to  cut  it  down. 

"  For  further  answer,  it  is  to  be  considered.  That  the 
conscience  of  my  duty  to  God,  and  to  his  Church,  did  bind 
me  at  the  first,  to  deliver  sound  doctrine  in  such  points  as 
had  been  otherwise  uttered  in  the  place,  where  I  had  now 
some  years  taught  the  Truth ;  otherwise  the  rebuke  of  the 
Prophet  had  fallen  upon  me,  for  not  going  up  to  the  breach,  Esek. 
and  standing  in  it,  and  the  peril  of  answering  for  the  blood  "^ ' 
of  the  City,  in  whose  watch-tower  I  sate;  if  it  had  been  sur-  xxxUlo. 
prised  by  my  default.  Moreover,  my  public  protestation,  in 
being  [not]  unwilling.  That  if  any  were  not  yet  satisfied,  some 
other  more  convenient  way  might  be  taken  for  it.  And, 
lastly.  That  I  had  resolved  (which  I  uttered  before  to  some, 
dealing  with  me  about  the  matter)  to  have  protested  the 
next  Sabbath-day,  that  I  would  no  more  answer  in  that 
place  any  objections  to  the  Doctrine  taught  by  any  means, 
but  some  other  way  satisfy  such  as  should  require  it. 
.  13.  ^^  These,  I  trust,  may  make  it  appear,  that  I  failed 
not  in  duty  to  Authority,  notwithstanding  I  did  not  com- 
plain, nor  give  over  so  soon  dealing  in  the  case.  If  I  did, 
how  is  he  clear,  which  can  allege  none  of  all  these  for  him- 
self? who  leaving  the  expounding  of  the  Scriptures,  and  his 
ordinary  calling,  voluntarily  discoursed  upon  school-points 
and  questions,  neither  of  edification  nor  of  truth  ?  Who  after 
all  this,  as  promising  to  himself  and  to  untruth,  a  victory 
by  my  silence,  added  yet  in  the  next  Sabbath-day,  to  the 
maintenance  of  his  former  opinions,  these  which  follow : 

"  *  That  no  additament  taketh  away  the  Foundation, 
except  it  be  a  privative ;  of  which  sort  neither  the  Works 
added  to  Christ  by  the  Church  of  Rome,  nor  Circumcision 
by  the  Galatians,  were;  as  one  denieth  him  not  to  be  a 


360  A  SUPPLICATION,  [Sect.  18. 

man,  that  saith,  he  is  a  Righteous  man,  but  he  that  saith  he 
is  a  Dead  man  :'  whereby  it  might  seem,  that  a  man  might, 
without  hurt,  add  Works  to  Christ,  and  pray  also  that  Grod 
and  St.  Peter  would  save  him. 

*^  ^  That  the  Galatians'  case  is  harder  than  the  case  of 
the  Church  of  Rome,  because  the  Galatians  joined  Circum- 
cision with  Christ,  which  God  hath  forbidden  and  abolished; 
but  that  which  the  Church  of  Rome  joined  with  Christ, 
were  good  Works,  which  God  hath  commanded.'  Wherein 
he  committed  a  double  fault:  one,  in  expounding  all  the 
questions  of  the  Galatians,  and  consequently  of  the  Romans, 
and  other  Epistles,  of  Circumcision  only,  and  the  cere- 
monies of  the  Law  (as  they  do,  who  answer  for  the  Ciiurch 
of  Rome  in  their  writings),  contrary  to  the  clear  meaning 
of  the  Apostle,  as  may  appear  by  many  strong  and  sufficient 
reasons ;  the  other,  in  that  he  said,  '  The  addition  of  the 
Church  of  Rome  was  of  Works  commanded  of  God.' 
Whereas  the  least  part  of  the  Works,  whereby  they  looked 
to  merit,  was  of  such  Works :  and  most  were  of  supereroga- 
tion, and  of  Works  which  God  never  commanded,  but  was 
highly  displeased  with,  as  of  Masses,  Pilgrimages,  Pardons, 
Pains  of  Purgatory,  and  such  like.  Further,  *  That  no 
one  sequel  urged  by  the  Apostle  against  the  Galatians 
for  joining  Circumcision  with  Christ,  but  might  be  as  well 
enforced  against  the  Lutherans;  that  is,  that  for  their 
Ubiquity  it  may  be  as  well  said  to  them.  If  ye  hold  the 
Body  of  Christ  to  be  in  all  places,  you  are  fallen  from 
grace,  you  are  under  the  curse  of  the  Law,  saying.  Cursed 
be  he  that  fulfilleth  not  all  things  written  in  this  Book,' 
with  such  like.  He  added  yet  further,  '  That  to  a  Bishop 
of  the  Church  of  Rome,  to  a  Cardinal,  yea,  to  the  Pope 
himself,  acknowledging  Christ  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the 
world,  denying  other  errors,  and  being  discomforted  for 
want  of  Works  whereby  he  might  be  justified,  he  would 
not  doubt,  but  use  this  speech;  Thou  boldest  the  Foun- 
dation of  Christian  Faith,  though  it  be  but  by  a  slender 
thread;  thou  boldest  Christ,  though  but  as  by  the  hem 
of  his  garment;  why  shouldst  thou  not  hope  that  virtue 
may  pass  from  Christ  to  save  thee?  That  which  thou 
boldest  of  Justification  by  thy  Works,  overthroweth  indeed 
by  consequent  the  Foundation  of  Christian  Faith;  but 
be  of  good  cheer,   thou  hast  not  to  do  with  a  captious 


Sect.  14.]  BY   WALTER   TRAVERS.  351 

sophister^  but  with  a  merciful  God,  who  will  justify  thee 
for  that  thou  holdest,  and  not  take  the  advantage  of  doubt- 
ful construction  to  condemn  thee.  And  if  this  (said  he) 
be  an  error,  I  hold  it  willingly;  for  it  is  the  greatest 
comfort  I  have  in  this  world,  without  which  I  would  not 
wish  either  to  speak  or  to  live.*  Thus  far,  being  not  to 
be  answered  in  it  any  more,  he  was  bold  to  proceed; 
the  absurdity  of  which  speech  I  need  not  to  stand  upon. 
I  think  the  like  to  this,  and  other  such  in  this  Sermon, 
and  the  rest  of  this  matter,  hath  not  been  heard  in  public 
places  within  this  Land  since  Queen  Mary's  days.  What 
consequence  this  Doctrine  may  be  of,  if  he  be  not  by 
Authority  ordered  to  revoke  it,  I  beseech  your  Honours, 
as  the  truth  of  God  and  his  Gospel  is  dear  and  precious 
unto  you,  according  to  your  godly  wisdoms  to  consider. 

14.  "  I  have  been  bold  to  offer  to  your  Honours  a  long 
and  tedious  discourse  of  these  matters;  but  speech  being 
like  to  tapestry,  which,  if  it  be  folded  up,  sheweth  but 
part,  of  that  which  is  wrought,  and  being  unlapt  and  laid 
open,  sheweth  plainly  to  the  eye  all  the  work  that  is  in 
it;  I  thought  it  necessary  to  unfold  this  tapestry,  and  to 
hang  up  the  whole  chamber  of  it  in  your  most  honourable 
Senate,  that  so  you  may  the  more  easily  discern  of  all 
the  pieces,  and  the  sundry  works  and  matters  contained 
in  it.  Wherein  my  hope  is,  your  Honours  may  see  I 
have  not  deserved  so  great  a  punishment  as  is  laid  upon 
the  Church  for  my  sake,  and  also  upon  myself,  in  taking 
from  me  the  exercise  of  my  Ministry.  Which  punishment, 
how  heavy  it  may  seem  to  the  Church,  or  fall  out  indeed 
to  be,  I  refer  it  to  them  to  judge,  and  spare  to  write  what 
I  fear;  but  to  myself  it  is  exceeding  grievous,  for  that  it 
taketh  from  me  the  exercise  of  my  calling.  Which  I  do 
not  say  is  dear  unto  me,  as  the  means  of  that  Uttle  benefit 
whereby  I  live  (although  this  be  a  lawful  consideration, 
and  to  be  regarded  of  me  in  due  place,  and  of  the  Autho- 
rity under  whose  protection  I  most  willingly  live,  even  by 
God's  commandment  both  unto  them  and  unto  me);  but 
which  ought  to  be  more  precious  to  me  than  my  life,  for 
the  love  which  I  should  bear  to  the  glory  and  honour 
of  Almighty  God,  and  to  the  edification  and  salvation  of 
his  Church,  for  that  my  life  cannot  any  other  way  be  of 
like  service  to  God,  nor  of  such  use  and  profit  to  men 


u.  ir.] 


362  A  SUPPLICATION.  [SecL  14. 

by  any  means.     For  which  cause,  as  I  discern  how  dear  any 
[my]  Ministry  ought  to  be  unto  me,  so  it  is  my  hearty  de* 
sire,  and  most  humble  request  unto  God,  to  your  Honours, 
and  to  all  the  Authority  I  live  under,  to  whom  any  dealing 
herein  belongeth,  that  I  may  spend  my  lif^  (according  to 
[Phii.^    his  example,  who  in  a  word  of  like  sound,  of  fuller  sense, 
comparing  by  it  the  bestowing  of  his  Life  to  the  offering 
poured  out)  upon  the  sacrifice  of  the  Faith  of  God's  people, 
and  especially  qf  this  Church,  whereupon  I  have  already 
poured  out  a  great  part  thereof  in  the  same  Calling,  from 
which  I  stand  now  restrained.     And  if  your  Honours  shall 
find  it  so,  that  I  have  not  deserved  so  great  a  punishment, 
but  rather  performed  the  duty  which  a  good  and  faithful 
servant  ought,  in  such  a  case,  to  do  to  his  Lord  and  the 
people  he  putteth  him  in  trust  withal  carefully  to  keep ;  I 
am  a  most  humble  suitor  by  these  presents  to  your  Honours, 
that,  by  your  godly  wisdom,   some  good  course   may  be 
taken  for  the  restoring  of  me  to  my  Ministry  and  place 
again.     Which  so  great  a  favour,   shall  bind  me   yet  in 
a  greater  obligation  of  duty  (which  is  already  so  great, 
as  it  seemed  nothing  could  be  added  unto  it  ta  make  it 
greater)  to  honour  God  daily  for  the  continuance  and  in- 
crease of  your  good  estate,  and  to  be  ready,  with  all  the 
poor  means  God  hath  given  me,  to  do  your  Honours  that 
faithful  service  I  may  possibly  perform.     But  if,  notwith- 
standing my  cause  be  never  so  good,   your  Honours  can 
by  no  means  pacify  such  as  are  ofiended,  nor  restore  me 
again,  then  am  I  to  rest  in  the  good  pleasure  of  God; 
and  to  commend  to  your  Honours'  protection,  under  her 
Majesty's,  my  private  life,  while  it  shall  be  led  in  duty; 
and  the  Church,  to  Him,  who  hath   redeemed  to  himself 
a  people  with  his  precious  blood,  and  is  making  ready  to 
come  to  judge  both  the  quick  and  the  dead,  to  give  to  every 
one  according  as  he  hath  done  in  this  Ufe,  be  it  good  or 
evil;  to  the  wicked  and  unbeliever,  justice  unto  death;  but 
to  the  faithful,  and  such  as  love  his  truth,  mercy  and  grace 
to  life  everlasting. 

"  Your  Honours'  most  bounden,  and 
"  Most  humble  Suppliant, 

"  WALTER  TRAVERS, 

"  Minister  of  the  Word  of  God." 


ANSWER* 


TO  THE 


"SUPPLICATION. 


» 


TO  MY  LORD  OF  CANTERBURY  HIS  GRACE. 

!•  My  duty  in  my  most  humble  wise  remembered:  May 
it  please  your  Grace  to  understand,  that  whereas  there  hath 
been  a  late  controversy  raised  in  the  Temple,  and  pursued 
by  Mr.  Travers,  upon  conceit  taken  at  some  words  by  me 
uttered,  with  a  most  simple  and  harmless  meaning;  in  the 
heat  of  which  pursuit,  after  three  public  invectives,  silence 
being  enjoined  him  by  Authority,  he  hath  hereupon,  for 
defence  of  his  proceedings,  both  presented  the  Right  Ho- 
nourable Lords,  and  others  of  her  Majesty's  Privy  Council, 
with  a  Writings  and  also  caused  or  suffered  the  same  to  be 
copied  out,  and  spread  through  the  hands  of  so  many,  that 
well  nigh  all  sorts  of  men  have  it  in  their  bosoms ;  the  matters 
wherewith  I  am  therein  charged,  being  of  such  quality  as 
they  are,  and  myself  being  better  known  to  your  Grace  than 
to  any  other  of  their  Honours  besides,  I  have  chosen  to  offer 
to  your  Grace's  hands  a  plain  declaration  of  my  innocency 
in  all  those  things  wherewith  I  am  so  hardly  and  so  heavily 
charged:  lest,  if  I  still  remain  silent,  that  which  I  do  for 
quietness'  sake,  be  taken  as  an  argument,  that  I  lack  what 
to  speak  truly  and  justly  in  mine  own  defence. 

2.  First,  because  Mr.  Travers  thinketh  it  is  expedient  to 
breed  an  opinion  in  men's  minds,  That  the  root  of  all  incon- 
venient events  which  are  now  sprung  out,  is  the  surly  and 
unpeaceable  disposition  of  the  man  with  whom  he  hath  to 
4o ;  therefore,  the  first  in  the  rank  of  accusations  laid  against 
me,  is,  my  inconformity,  which  have  so  little  inclined  to  so 
many  and  so  earnest  exhortations  and  conferences,  as  myself 
(he  saith)  can  witness,^  to  have  been  spent  upon  me,  for  my 
better  fashioning  unto  good  correspondence  and  agreement. 

*  [Printtd  at  Oilbrd,  1513.  4to.]  f  [See  8up»  p.  343.] 

VOL.  III.  A  A 


354  hooker's  answer  to  [Sect.if. 

3.  Indeed,  when  at  the  first,  by  means  of  special  well- 
willers,  without  any  suit  of  mine,  as  they  very  well  know 
(although  I  do  not  think  it  had  been  a  mortal  sin,  in  a 
reasonable  sort,  to  have  shewed  a  moderate  desire  that 
way),  yet  when  by  their  endeavour  without  instigation  of 
mine,  some  Reverend  and  Honourable,  favourably  affecting 
me,  had  procured  her  Majesty's  grant  of  the  place ;  at  the 
very  point  of  my  entering  thereinto,  the  evening  before  I 
was  first  to  preach,  he  came,  and  two  other  gentlemen  joined 
with  him :  the  effect  of  his  conference  then  was,  "  That  he 
thought  it  his  duty  to  advise  me,  not  to  enter  with  a  strong 
hand,  but  to  change  my  purpose  of  preaching  there  the 
next  day,  and  to  stay  till  he  had  given  notice  of  me  to  the 
congregation,  that  so  their  allowance  might  seal  my  Callnig.'* 
The  effect  of  my  answer  was,  *^  That,  as  in  a  place  where 
such  order  is,  I  would  not  break  it ;  so  here,  where  it  never 
was,  I  might  not,  of  mine  own  head,  take  upon  me  to  begin 
it :"  but  liking  very  well  the  motion,  for  the  opinion  which  I 
had  of  his  good  meaning  who  made  it,  requested  him  not 
to  mislike  my  answer,  though  it  were  not  correspondent  to 
his  mind. 

4.  When  this  had  so  displeased  some,  that  whatsoever 
was  afterwards  done  or  apoken  by  me,  it  offended  their 
taste,  angry  informations  were  daily  sent  out,  intelligence 
given  far  and  wide,  what  a  dangerous  enemy  was  crept  in; 
the  worst  that  jealousy  could  imagine  was  spoken  and 
written  to  so  many,  that  at  the  length  some  knowing  me 
well,  and  perceiving  how  injurious  the  reports  were,  which 
grew  daily  more  and  more  unto  my  discredit,  wrought 
means  to  bring  Mr.  Travers  and  me  to  a  second  conference. 
Wherein,  when  a  common  friend  unto  us  both  had  quietly 
requested  him  to  utter  those  things  wherewith  he  found 
himself  any  way  grieved,  he  first  renewed  the  memory  of  my 
entering  into  this  Charge,  by  virtue  only  of  an  human  creature 
(for  so  the  want  of  that  formality*  of  popular  allowance 
was  then  censured),  and  unto  this  was  annexed  a  catalogue, 
partly  of  causeless  surmises,  as,  *'  That  I  had  conspired 
against  him,  and  that  I  sought  superiority  over  him ;"  and 
partly  of  faults,  which  to  note,  I  should  have  thought  it  a 
greater  offence  than  to  commit,  if  I  did  account  them  faults, 

*  A  mere  formality  it  had  been  to  me  in  that  place  ;  where,  as  no  man  had  eyer  used  it 
before  me,  so  it  could  neither  further  me  if  I  did  use  it,  nor  hinder  me  if  I  did  not. 


Skct.  6.]  TRAVERS'   SUPPLICATION.  356 

and  had  heard  them  so  curiously  observed  in  any  other  than 
myself;  they  are  such  silly  things^  as,  "  praying  in  the  en- 
trance of  my  Sermons  only,  add  not  in  the  end,"  "  naming 
Bishops  in  my  Prayer,"  "  kneeling  when  I  pray,  and  kneeling 
when  I  receive  the  Commuiiion,"t  with  such  like,  which  I 
would  be  as  loth  to  recite,  ad  I  was  sorry  to  hear  them  ob- 
jected, if  the  rehearsal  thereof  were  not  by  him  thus  wrested 
from  me.  These  are  the  conferences  wherewith  I  have  been 
wooed  to  entertain  peace  and  good  agreement. 

5.  As  for  the  vehement  exhortations  he  speaketh  of,  I 
would  gladly  know  some  reason  wherefore  he  thought  them 
needful  to  be  used.  Was  there  any  .thing  found  in  my 
speeches  or  dealings  that  gave  them  occasion,  who  are 
studious  of  peace,  to  think  that  I  disposed  myself  to  some 
unquiet  kind  of  proceedings  ?  Surely,  the  special  providence 
of  Ood  I  do  now  see  it  was,  that  the  first  words  I  spake  in 
this  place,  should  make  the  first  thing^  whereof  I  am  accused 
to  appear  not  only  untrue,  but  improbable,  to  as  many  as 
then  heard  me  with  indifferent  ears;  and  do,  I  doubt  not^ 
in  their  consciences  clear  me  of  this  suspicion.  Howbeit,  I 
grant  this  were  nothing,  if  it  might  be  shewed,  that  my 
deeds  following  were  not  suitable  to  my  words.  If  I  had 
spoken  of  peace  at  the  first,  and  aflterwards  sought  to  molest 
and  grieve  him,  by  crossing  him  in  his  function ;  by  storming, 
if  my  pleasure  were  not  asked  and  my  will  obeyed  in  the 
least  occurrences;  by  carping  needlessly  sometimes  at  the 
manner  of  his  teaching,  sometimes  at  this,  sometimes  at  that 
point  of  his  doctrine;  I  might  then  with  some  likelihood 
have  been  blamed,  as  one  disdaining  a  peaceable  hand  when 
it  hath  been  offered.  But  if  I  be  able  (as  I  am)  to  prove 
that  myself  have  now  a  full  year  together,  borne  the*  con- 
tinuance of  such  dealings,  not  only  without  any  manner  of 
resistance,  but  also  without  any  such  complaint,  as  might 
let  or  hinder  him  in  his  course,  I  see  no  cause  in  the  world 
why  of  this  I  should  be  accused,  unless  it  be,  lest  I  should 
accuse,  which  I  meant  not.  If  therefore  I  have  given  him 
occasion  to  use  conferences  and  exhortations  unto  peace,  if 
when  they  were  bestowed  upon  me  I  have  despised  them,  it 
will  not  be  hard  to  shew  some  one  word  or  deed  wherewith 
I  have  gone  about  to  work  disturbance:  one  is  not  much,  I 
require  but  one.     Only,  I  require  if  any  thing  be  shewed, 

*  [Sec  Vol.  U.  p.  299,  Note  f.]  ~ 

A  aS 


356  hooker's  answer  to  [Seci.  & 

it  may  be  proved,  and  not  objected  only  as  this  is,  "  That  I 
have  joined  with  such  as  hare  always  opposed  themselves 
to  any  good  Order  in  this  Church,  and  made  themselves  to 
be  thought  indisposed  to  the  present  estate  and  proceed- 
ings."* The  words  have  reference,  as  it  seemeth,  unto  some 
such  things  as  being  attempted  before  my  coming  to  the 
Temple,  went  not  so  effectually,  perhaps,  forward,  as  he 
which  devised  them  would  have  wished.  An  Order,  as  I 
learn,  there  was  tendered,  that  Communicants  should  nieither 
kneel,  as  in  the  most  places  of  the  Realm ;  nor  sit,  as  in  this 
place  the  custom  is ;  but  walk  to  the  one  side  of  the  Table, 
and  there  standing  tiU  they  had  received,  pass  afterwards 
away  round  about  by  the  other.  Which  being  on  a  sudden 
begun  to  be  practised  in  the  Church,  some  sat  wondering 
what  it  should  mean,  others  deliberating  what  to  do:  till 
such  time  as  at  length  by  name  one  of  them  being  called 
openly  thereunto,  requested  that  they  might  do  as  they  had 
been  accustomed,  which  was  granted ;  and  as  Mr.  Travers 
had  ministered  this  way  to  the  rest,  so  a  Curate  was  sent 
to  minister  to  them  after  their  way.  Which  unprosperous 
beginning  of  a  thing  (saving  only  for  the  inconvenience  of 
needless  alterations  otherwise  harmless)  did  so  disgrace  that 
Order,  in  their  conceit  who  had  to  allow  or  dissallow  it,  that 
it  took  no  place.  For  neither  they  could  ever  induce  them- 
selves to  think  it  good,  and  it  so  much  offended  Mr.  Travers, 
who  supposed  it  to  be  the  best,  that  he,  since  that  time, 
although  contented  himself  to  receive  it  as  they  do,  at  the 
hands  of  others,  yet  hath  not  thought  it  meet  that  they  should 
ever  receive  it  out  of  his,  which  would  not  admit  that  Order 
of  receiving  it,  and  therefore  in  my  time  hath  been  always 
present  not  to  minister,  but  only  to  be  ministered  unto. 

6.  Another  Order  there  was  likewise  devised,  but  an  Order 
of  much  more  weight  and  importance.  This  soil,  in  respect 
of  certain  immunities  and  other  specialties  belonging  tmto 
it,  seemed  Ukely  to  bear  that  which  in  other  places  of  the 
Realm  of  England  doth  not  take.  For  which  cause,  request 
was  made  to  some  of  her  Majesty's  Privy  Council,  that  where- 
as it  is  provided  by  a  Statute  there  should  be  Collectors  and 
Sidemen  in  Churches,  which  thing,  or  somewhat  correspon- 
dent unto  it,  this  place  did  greatly  want ;  it  would  please 
their  Honours  to  motion  such  a  matter  to  the  Ancients  of 

*  [Compare  with  tup,  p.  343.] 


Seet.6J]  TRAVERs*  supplication.  357 

the  Temple.     And,  according  to  their  honourable  manner 
of  helping  forward  all  motions  so  grounded,  they  wrote  their 
Letters,  as  I  am  informed,  to  that  effect.     Whereupon, 
although  these  Houses*  never  had  use  of  such  Collectors 
and  Sidemen  as  are  appointed  in  other  places,  yet  they 
both  erected  a  box  to  receive  men's  devotion  for  the  poor, 
appointing  the  Treasurer  of  both  Houses  to  take  care  for 
bestowing  it  where  need  is;  and  granting  further,  that  if 
any  could  be  entreated  (as  in  the  end  some  were)  to  under- 
take the  labour  of  observing  men's  slackness  in  divine  duties, 
they  should  be  allowed,  their  complaints  heard  [at]  all  times, 
and  the  faults  they  complained  of,  if  Mr.  Alvej'sf  private 
admonition  did  not  serve,  then  by  some  other  means  [to  be] 
redressed ;   but  according  to  the  old  received  Orders  of 
both  Houses.     Whereby  the  substance  of  their  Honours' 
Letters  was  indeed  fully  satisfied.    Yet  because  Mr.  Travers 
intended  not  this,  but,  as  it  seemed,  another  thing ;  there- 
fore, notwithstanding  the  Orders  which  have  been  taken, 
and  for  any  thing  I  know,    do  stand  still   in  as  much 
force  in  this  Church   now  as  at  any  time  heretofore,  he 
complaineth  much   of  the    good   Orders  which   he  doth 
mean  have  been  withstood.     Now  it  were  hard,  if  as  many 
as  any  way  oppose  unto  these  and  the  Uke  Orders,  in  his 
persuasion  good,  do  thereby  make  themselves  to  be  thought 
dislikers  of  the  present  state  and  proceedingis.  ^  If  they,  whom 
he  aimeth  at,  have  any  otherwise  made  themselves  to  be 
thought    such,    it   is  likely  he  doth   know  wherein,    and 
will,  I  hope,  disclose  to  whom  it  appertaineth,  both  the 
persons  whom  he  thinketh,  and  the  causes  why  he  thinketh 
them   so   ill-affected.     But  whatsoever  the  men  be,    do 
their  faults  make  me  faulty?    They  do,  if  I  join. myself 
with  them.     I  beseech  him  therefore  to  declare  wherein  I 
have  joined  with  them.     Other  joining  than  this  with  any 
man  here,  I  cannot  imagine:  it  may  be  I  have  talked,  or 
walked,  or  eaten,   or  interchangeably  used  the  duties  of 
common  humanity,  with  some   such  as  he  is  hardly  per- 
suaded of.     For  I  know  no  Law  of  God  or  man>  by  force 
whereof  they  should  be  as  Heathens  and  Publicans  unto 
me,  that  are  not  gracious  in  the  eyes  of  another  man, 

*  [Or  Societies,  called  The  Inner  and  The  Middle  Temple.] 

t  (Mr.  Travers.  «tc  MS.  Bodl.)    [Alvey  had  been  Master  of  the  Temple,  and  Travers 
Lecturer,  at  that  time.     See  p.  342.] 


358  hooker's  answer  to  [Seei.*I. 

perhaps  without  cause,  or  if  with  cause,  yet  such  ciuuse  as  he 
is  privy  unto,  and  not  I.  Could  he,  or  any  reasonable  man, 
think  it  a  charitable  course  in  me,  to  observe  them  that 
shew  by  external  courtesies  a  favourable  inclination  towards 
him,  and  if  I  spy  out  any  one  amongst  them  of  whom  I  think 
not  well,  hereupon  to  draw  such  an  accusation  as  this  against 
him,  and  to  offer  it  where  he  hath  given  up  his  against  me  ? 
which  notwithstanding  I  will  acknowledge  to  be  juat  and 
reasonable,  if  he  or  any  man  living  shall  shew,  that  I  use  as 
much  as  the  bare  familiar  company  but  of  one^  who  by  word 
or  deed  hatfi  ever  given  me  cause  to  suspect  or  cpnjectuie 
him  such  as  here  they  are  termed,  with  whom  complaint  is 
made  that  I  join  myself.  This  being  spoken>  therefore,  and 
written  without  all  possibility  of  proot^  doth  not  Mr.  Travers 
give  me  over-great  cau^  to  stand  in  some  fear  lest  be  make 
too  little  conscience  how  he  useth  bis  tongue  or  pen?  Thms^ 
things  are  not  laid  against  me  for  nothing ;  they  arQ  to  some 
purpose  if  they  take  place.  For  in  a  mind  per9uaded  tbi^  I 
am,  as  he  deciphereth  me,  one  which  refiise  to  be  a^  pence 
with  such  as  embrace  the  Truth,  and  side  myself  with  men 
ainisterly  affected  thereunto,  any  thing  that  shafl  be.  spoken 
concerning  the  unsoundness  of  my  Doctrine  camnpt  choose 
but  be  favourably  entertained.  This  presupposed,  it  will 
have  likelihood  enough  which  afterwards  followetb,  *^  That 
many  of  my  Sermons  have  tasted  of  some  sour  leaven  or 
other;  that  in  them  he  hath  discovered  many  unsound 
matters."^  A  thing  much  to  be  lamented,  that  such  a  place 
as  this,  which  might  have  been  so  well  provided  for,  hath 
fallen  into  the  Imnds  of  one  np  better  instructed  in  the  Truth. 
But  what  if  in  the  end  it  be  found  that  he  judgeth  my  words, 
as  they  do  colours  which  look  upon  them  with  green  spec- 
tacles, and  think  that  which  they  see  is  green,  when  indeed 
that  is  green  whereby  they  see  ? 

7.  Touching  the  first  point  of  his  discovery,  which  is 
about  the  matter  of  Predestination^f  to  set  down  that  I 
spake  (for  I  have  it  written),  to  declare  and  confirm  the 
several  branches  thereof,  would  be  tedious  now  in  this 
Writing,  where  I  have  so  many  things  to  touch,  that  I 
can  but  touch  them  only.  Neither  is  it  herein  so  needful 
for  me   to  justify  my  speech,  when  the   very  place  and 


[See  sup.  p.  343.]  f  [Ibid.  p.  344.] 


Sect.9J]  TRAVfiRS'  SUPPLICATION.  369 

presence  where  I  spake,  doth  itself  speak  sufficiently  for 
my  clearing*  This  matter  was  not  broached  in  a  blind 
alley,  or  uttered  where  none  was  to  hear  it  that  had  skill 
with  authority  to  control;  or  covertly  insinuated  by  some 
gliding  sentence. 

8.  That  which  I  taught  was  at  Paul's  Cross ;  it  was  not 
huddled  in  amongst  other  matters,  in  such  sort  that  it  could 
pass  without  noting :  it  was  opened,  it  was  proved,  it  was 
some  reasonable  time  stood  upon.  I  see  not  which  way  my 
Lord  of  London,  who  was  present  and  heard  it,  can  excuse 
so  great  a  fault,  as  patiently,  without  rebuke  or  control- 
ment  afterwards,  to  hear  any  man  there  teach  otherwise  than 
"  the  Word  of  Grod  doth ;"  not  as  it  is  understood  by  the 
private  interpretation  of  some  one  or  two  men,  or  by  a  special 
construction  received  in  some  few  books ;  but,  as  it  is  under- 
stoop  **  by  all  Churches  professing  the  Gospel ;"  *  by  them 
all,  and  therefore  even  by  our  own  also  amongst  others.  A 
man  that  did  mean  to  prove  that  he  speaketh,  would  surely 
take  the  measure  of  his  words  shorter. 

9.  The  next  thing  discovered,  is  an  opinion  about  the 
assurance  of  men's  persuasion  in  matters  of  Faith.  I  have 
taught,  he  saith,  ^'  That  the  assurance  of  things  which  we 
believe  by  the  Word,  is  not  so  certain  as  of  that  we  per** 
ceive  by  sense." f  And,  is  it  as  certain?  Yea,  I  taught, 
as  he  himself,  I  trust,  will  not  deny.  That  the  things  which 
God  doth  promise  in  his  Word  are  surer  unto  us  than  any 
thing  we  touch,  handle,  or  see.  But  are  we  so  sure  and 
certain  of  them  ?  if  we  be,  why  doth  God  so  often  prove 
his  promises  unto  us,  as  he  doth  by  arguments  taken  from 
our  sensible  experience  ?  We  must  be  surer  of  the  proof, 
than  of  the  thing  proved,  otherwise  it  is  no  proof.  How  is 
it,  that  if  ten  men  do  all  look  upon  the  moon,  every  one  of 
them  knoweth  it  as  certainly  to  be  the  moon  as  another; 
bat  many  believing  one  and  the  same  promise,  all  have  not 
one  and  the  same  fulness  of  persuasion  ?  How  falleth  it 
out,  that  men  being  assured  of  any  thing  by  Sense,  can  be 
no  surer  of  it  than  they  are ;  whereas  the  strongest  in  Faith 
that  liveth  upon  the  earth,  hath  always  need  to  labour  and 
strive,  and  pray,  that  his  assurance  concerning  heavenly  and 
spiritual  things,  may  grow,  increase,  and  be  augmented? 


^"*»^^^fW** 


•  [See  tup.  ^  344.]  f  [Ibid.  p.  344.J 


360  hooker's  answer  to  [Sect.  1%. 

10.  Tfae  Sermon  ii^herein  I  have  spoken  somewhat  largely 
of  this  point  was,  long  before  this  late  controversy  rose  be* 
tween  him  and  me,  upon  request  of  some  of  my  friends,  seen 
and  read  by  many,  and  amongst  many,  some  who  are  thought 
able  to  discern ;  and  I  never  heard  that  any  one  of  them 
hitherto  hath  condemned  it  as  containing  unsound  matter. 
My  case  were  very  hard,  if,  as  oft  as  any  thing  I  speak  dis- 
pleasing one  man's  taste,  my  doctrine  upon  his  only  word 
should  be  taken  for  ^^  sour  leaven." 

1 1 .  The  rest  of  this  discovery  is  all  about  the  matter  now 
in  question ;  wherein  he  hath  two  faults  predominant  which 
would  tire  out  any  that  should  answer  unto  every  point  seve- 
rally ;  unapt  speaking  of  School-controversies ;  and  of  my 
words  sometimes  so  untoward  a  reciting,  that  he  which 
should  promise  to  draw  a  man's  countenance,  and  did  in- 
deed express  the  parts,  at  leastwise  most  of  them,  truly, 
but  perversely  place  them,  could  not  represent  a  more  of- 
fensive visage,  than  unto  me  my  own  speech  seemeth  in 
some  places,  as  he  hath  ordered  it.  For  answer  whereunto, 
that  Writing  is  sufficient,  wherein  I  have  set  down  both  my 
words  and  meaning  in  such  sort,  that  where  this  accusation 
doth  deprave  the  one,  and  either  misinterpret,  or  without  just 
cause  mislike  the  other,  it  will  appear  so  plainly,  that  I  may 
spare  very  well  to  take  upon  me  a  new  and  a  needless  labour 
here. 

12.  Only  at  one  thing  which  is  there  to  be  found,  because 
Mr.  Travers  doth  here  seem  to  take  such  a  special  advan- 
tage, as  if  the  matter  were  Unanswerable,  he  constraineth 
me  either  to  detect  his  oversight,  or  to  confess  mine  own  in 
it.  In  setting  the  question  between  the  Church  of  Rome 
and  us,  about  Grace  and  Justification,  lest  I  should  give 
them  an  occasion  to  say,  as  commonly  they  do.  That  when 
we  cannot  refute  their  opinions,  we  propose  to  ourselves 
such  instead  of  theirs,  as  we  can  refute :  I  took  it  for  the 
best  and  most  perspicuous  way  of  teaching,  to  declare  first, 
how  far  we  do  agree,  and  then  to  shew  our  disagreement: 
not  generally  (as  Mr.  Travers  his  words*  would  carry  it,  for 

*  His  words  be  these  :  "  The  next  Sabbath-day  after  this,  Mr.  Hooker  kept  the  way  he 
had  entered  into  before,  and  bestowed  his  whole  hour  and  more  only  upon  the  questions  he 
had  moved  and  maintained  ;  wherein  he  so  set  out  the  agreement  of  the  Church  of  Rome  with 
us,  and  their  disagreement  from  us,  as  if  we  had  consented  in  the  greatest  and  weightiest 
points,  and  differed  only  in  certun  smaller  matters.     Which  agreement,  noted  by  him  in  two 


Sect.  13.]  TRAVERS*   SUPPLICATION.  361 

the  easier  fastening  that  upon  me  wherewith,  saving  only  by 
him,  I  was  never  in  my  life  touched) ;  but  about  the  matter 
only  of  Justification :  for  farther  I  had  no  cause  to  meddle 
at  that  time.  What  was  then  my  oifence  in  this  case  ?  I 
did,  as  he  saith,  so  set  it  out  as  if  we  had  consented  in  the 
greatest  and  weightiest  points,  and  differed  only  in  smaller 
matters.  It  will  not  be  found,  when  it  cometh  to  the  balance, 
a  light  difference  where  we  disagree,  as  I  did  acknowledge 
that  we  do,  about  the  very  essence  of  the  medicine  whereby 
Christ  cureth  our  disease.  Did  I  go  about  to  make  a  shew  of 
agreement  in  the  weightiest  points,  and  was  I  so  fond  as  not 
to  conceal  our  disagreement  about  this  ?  I  do  wish  that  some 
indifferency  were  used  by  them  that  have  taken  the  weighing 
of  my  words. 

13.  Yea,  but  our  agreement  is  not  such  in  two  of  the 
chiefest  points,  as  I  would  have  men  believe  it  is :  and  what 
are  they  ?  The  one  is,  I  said,  "  They  acknowledge  all  men 
sinners,  even  the  Blessed  Virgin,  though  some  of  them  free 
her  from  sin."  Put  the  case  I  had  affirmed,  that  only  some 
of  them  free  her  from  sin,  and  had  delivered  it  as  the  most 
current  opinion  amongst  them,  that  she  was  conceived  in 
sin :  doth  not  Bonaventure  say  plainly,  '*  omnes  fere,*'  in  a 
manner  all  men  do  hold  this?  Doth  he  not  bring  many 
reasons  wherefore  all  men  should  hold  it?  Were  their 
voices  since  that  time  ever  counted,  and  their  number  found 
smaller  which  hold  it  than  theirs  that  hold  the  contrary? 
Let  the  question  then  be.  Whether  I  might  say,  the  most  of 
them  **  acknowledged  all  men  sinners,  even  the  Blessed 
Virgin  herself?"  To  shew  that  their  general  received  opi- 
nion is  the  contrary,  the  Tridentine  Council  is  alleged, 
peradventure  not  altogether  so  considerately.  For,  if  that 
Council  have  by  resolute  determination  freed  her,  if  it  hold, 
as  Mr.  Travers  saith  it  doth,  that  she  was  free  from  sin ; 
then  must  the  Church  of  Rome  needs  condemn  them  that 


chief  points,  is  not  such  as  he  would  hare  made  men  hetieve :  the  one,  in  that  he  said. 
They  aclinowledge  all  men  sinners,  even  the  Blessed  Virgin,  though  some  of  them  freed  her 
from  sin ;  for  the  Council  of  Trent  holdeth,  that  she  was  free  from  sin :  another,  in  that  he 
said,  They  teach  Christ's  righteousness  to  be  the  only  meritorious  cause  of  taking  way  sin, 
and  differ  from  us  only  in  the  applying  of  it :  for  Thomas  Aquinas,  their  chief  Schoolman, 
and  Archbishop  Calharinus,  teach,  That  Christ  took  away  only  original  sin,  and  that  the  rest 
are  to  be  taken  away  by  ourselves  ;  yea,  the  Council  of  Trent  teacheth.  That  the  righteous- 
ness whereby  we  are  righteous  in  God's  sight,  is  inherent  righteousness ;  wiiich  must  needs 
be  of  our  own  works,  and  cannot  be  understood  of  the  righteousness  inherent  only  in  Christ's 
person,  and  accounted  unto  us."  (mi  sup,  p.  347») 


862  hooker's  answer  to  [Sect.  13. 

hold  the  contrary.  For  what  that  Council  holdeth,  the 
same  they  all  do  and  must  hold.  But  in  the  Church  of 
Rome,  who  knoweth  not,  that  it  is  a  thing  indifferent  to 
think  and  defend  the  one  or  the  other?  So  that,  this  argu- 
ment. The  Council  of  Trent  holdeth  the  Virgin  free  from 
sin,  ergOy  it  is  plain  than  none  of  them  may,  and  therefore 
untrue  that  most  of  them  do  acknowledge  her  a  sinner; 
were  forcible  to  overthrow  my  supposed  assertion,  if  it  were 
true  that  the  Council  did  hold  this.  But  to  the  end  it  may 
clearly  appear,  how  it  neither  holdeth  this  nor  the  contrary, 
I  will  open  what  many  do  conceive  of  the  Canon  that  con- 
cemeth  this  matter. — ^The  Fathers  of  Trent  perceived^  that 
if  they  should  define  of  this  matter,  it  would  be  dangerous 
howsoever  it  were  determined.  If  they  had  freed  her  from 
her  original  sin,  the  reasons  against  them  are  unanswerable, 
which  Bonaventure  and  others  do  allege,  but  especially 
Thomas,  whose  line,  as  much  as  may  be,  they  follow. 
Again,  if  they  did  resolve  the  other  way,  they  should 
control  themselves  in  another  thing,  which  in  no  case  might 
be  altered.  For  they  profess  to  keep  no  day  holy  in  the 
honour  of  an  unholy  thing,  and  the  Virgin's  Conception 
they  honour  with  a  feast,*  which  they  could  not  abrogate 
without  cancelling  a  Constitution  of  Xystus  Quartus.  And, 
that  which  is  worse,  the  world  might  perhaps,  hereupon 
suspect,  that  if  the  Church  of  Rome  did  amiss  before  in 
this,  it  is  not  impossible  for  her  to  fail  in  other  things.  In 
the  end,  they  did  wisely  quote  out  their  Canon  by  a  middle 
thread,  establishing  the  Feast  of  the  Virgin's  Conception, 
and  leaving  the  other  question  doubtful  as  they  found  it; 
giving  only  a  caveat.  That  no  man  should  take  the  Decree 
which  pronounceth  all  mankind  originally  sinful,  for  a  defi- 
nitive  sentence  concerning  the  Blessed  Virgin.  This  in  my 
sight  is  plain  by  their  own  words,  "  Declarat  hac  ipsa  sancta 
Synodus,"  &c.  Wherefore  our  countr3rmen  at  Rhemes,  men- 
tioning this  point,  are  marvellous  wary  how  they  speak; 
they  touch  it  as  though  it  were  a  hot  coal :  *'  Many  godly 

*  This  doth  much  trouble  Thomas,  holding  her  conceptiun  stained  with  the  natural 
blemish  inherent  in  mortal  seed.  And  therefore  he  putteth  it  off  with  two  answers:  the 
one,  that  the  Church  of  Rome  doth  not  allow,  but  tolerate  the  Feast ;  which  answer  now  will 
not  serve  :  the  other,  that  being  sure  she  was  sanctified  before  birth,  but  unsure  how  long  a 
while  after  her  conception,  therefore,  under  the  name  of  her  Conception-day,  they  honour 
the  time  of  her  sanctification.  So  that,  besides  this,  they  have  now  no  soder  to  make  the 
certain  allowance  of  their  Feast,  and  their  uncertain  sentence  concerning  her  tin,  to  dent 
together.    Thorn,  part  iii.  quest.  27.  art  2.  ad  2m.  et  3m. 


Sect.  13.]  TRAVERS'  SUPPLICATION.  303^ 

devout  men  judge  that  our  Blessed  Lady  was  neither  born  Annot. 
nor  conceived  in  sin."    Is  it  their  wont  to  speak  nicely  of  v.  sec  o' 
things  definitively  set  down  in  that  Council  ? 

In  like  sort,  we  find  that  the  rest»  which,  have  since  the 
tinie  of  the  Tridentine  Synod  written  of  Original  Sin,  are  in 
tibis  point,  for  the  most  part,  either  silent,  or  very  sparing 
in  speech :  and,  when  they  speak,  either  doubtful  what  to 
thiokf  or  whatsoever  they  think  themselves,  fearful  to  set 
down  any  certain  determination.  If  I  be  thought  to  take 
the  Canon  of  that  Council  otherwise  tlum  they  themselves 
£^Qf  let  him  expound  it  whose  sentence  was  neither  last 
asked,  nor  his  pen  least  occupied  in  setting  it  down;  I 
mean  Andradius,  whom  Gregory  the  Thirteenth  hath  al-  ub.  t. 
lowed  plainly  to  confess,  that  it  is  a  matter  which  neither  Add. 
le^preas  evidence  of  Scripture,  nor  the  tradition  of  the 
Fathers,  nn^^  the  sentence  of  the  Church,  hath  determined ; 
that  they  are  too  surly  and  self-willed,  which,  defending 
(hither  opinion,  are  displeased  with  them  .by  whom  the  other 
i^  maintained :  finally,  that  the  Fathers  of  Trent  have  not  set 
4own  any  certainty  about  this  question,  but  left  it  doubtful 
gnA  indifferent,. 
.  Now  whereas  my  words,  which  I  had  set  down  in  writing 
before  I  uttered  them,  were  indeed  these,  '^  Although  they 
jin^ine,  th^  the  Mother  of  pur  Lord  Jesus  Christ  were, 
fpr  hi?  honour,  and  by  his  special  protection,  preserved 
xl(e^  i^om  ftU  sin :  yet  concerning  the  rest,  they  teach  as 
yfp  do,  that  all  have  sinned/'  Against  my  words  they  might, 
wjJt|i  miore  pretence,  take  exception,  because  so  many  of 
^qi^  think  she  h^d  ^in :  which  exception  notwithstand- 
.pg,  the  proposition  being  indefinite  and  the  matter  cour- 
tiogent,  they  icannot  take>  because  they  grant,  that  many 
«rhoni  they  count  grave  and  devout  amongst  them  think  that 
j^p  YfM  clear  from  all  sin*  But  whetlier  Mr.  Tiravers  did 
99te  my  wp|?ds  himself,  or  take  them  upon  the  credit  of 
fspme  other  nlan'^  noting,  the  tables  were  faulty  wherein 
Jjt  was  n^ted,  ''  A}1  men  sinners,  even  the  Blessed  Virgin.'* 
.When  my  spjsech  was  rather,  '/  AU  men  except  the  Blessed 
Virgin."  To  leave  this;  another  fault  he  findeth,  that  I 
aaid,  ^'  They  teach  Christ's  Righteousness  to  be  the  only 
meritorious  cause  of  taking  away  sin,  and  differ  from  us 

•only  ia  the  apfdying  of  it."*    I  did  say  and  do,  '^  They 

^-  -   ■         ■■..■•  -         -  '■ 

*  [See  sup,  p.  347.] 


f 

864  hooker's  answer  to  [Sect.  14. 

teach  as  we  do^  That  although  Christ  be  the  only  meri- 
torious cause  of  our  justice,  yet  as  a  medicine,  which  is 
made  for  health,  doth  not  heal  by  being  made,  but  by  being 
applied ;  so,  by  the  merits  of  Christ,  there  can  be  no  life 
nor  justification,  without  the  application  of  his  merits :  but 
about  the  manner  of  applying  Christ,  about  the  number  and 
power  of  means  whereby  he  is  applied,  we  dissent  from 
them.**  This  of  our  dissenting  from  them  is  acknow- 
ledged. 

14.  Our  agreement  in  the  former  is  denied  to  be  such  as 
I  pretend.  Let  their  own  words  therefore  and  mine  con- 
orthod.  cerning  them  be  compared.  Doth  not  Andradius  plainly 
confess ;  **  Our  sins  do  shut,  and  only  the  merits  of  Christ 
In  open,  the  entering  unto  blessedness?"  And  Soto,  **  It  is 
distM.*  put  for  a  ground,  that  all,  since  the  fall  of  Adam,  obtain 
u^V^  salvation  only  by  the  Passion  of  Christ:  howbeit,  as  no 
cause  can  be  effectual  without  applying,  so  neither  can  any 
man  be  saved,  to  whom  the  suffering  of  Christ  is  not 
applied."  In  a  word,  who  not?  When  the  Council  of 
Trent,  reckoning  up  the  causes  of  our  first  Justification, 
doth  name  no  end  but  God's  glory,  and  our  felicity;  no 
efficient  but  his  Mercy;  no  instrumental  but  Baptism;  no 
meritorious  but  Christ:  whom  to  have  merited  the  taking 
away  of  no  sin  but  Original,  is  not  their  opinion :  which 
himself  will  find,  when  he  hath  well  examined  his  wi^ 
nesses,  Catharinus  and  Thomas.  Their  Jesuits  are  mar- 
vellous angry  with  the  men  out  of  whose  gleanings  Mr. 
Travers  seemeth  to  have  taken  this;  they  openly  disclaim 
it ;  they  say  plainly,  "  Of  all  the  Catholics  there  is  not  one 
that  did  ever  so  teach;"  they  make  solemn  protestation, 
"  We  believe  and  profess,  that  Christ  upon  the  Cross  hath 
altogether  satisfied  for  all  sins,  as  well  original  as  actual.*** 
Indeed  they  teach,  that  the  merit  of  Christ  doth  not  take 
away  Actual  sin  in  such  sort  as  it  doth  Origuial ;  wherein, 
if  their  doctrine  had  been  understood,  I  for  my  speech  had 
never  been  accused.  As  for  the  Council  of  Trent,  con- 
cerning inherent  righteousness,  what  doth  it  here?  No 
man  doubteth,  but  they  make  another  formal  cause  of 
Justification   than   we   do.      In   respect  whereof,    I    have 

*  "  Nemo  Catholioorum  unquam  sic  docuit ;  sed  credimiu  et  profitemur,  Christum  ia 
Cruce  pro  omnibus  omnino  peccatis  satisfecisse,  tam  originalibus  quam  actualibua."  Bellann. 
Judic  de  lib.  Concor.  Mendac.  18. 


Sect.  16.]  TRAVERS'  SUPPLICATION.  366 

shewed  already,   that  we  disagree  about  the  very  essence 
of  that  which  cureth  our  spiritual  disease.     Most  true  it  is 
which  the  grand  Philosopher  hath,  "  Every  man  judgeth  [ah- 
well  of  that  which  he  knoweth;"  and   therefore,   till  we  "**"**•* 
know  the  things  throughly  whereof  we  judge,  it  is  a  point 
of  judgment  to  stay  our  judgment. 

15.  Thus  much  labour  being  spent  in  discovering  the 
unsoundness  of  my  Doctrine,  some  pains  he  taketh  further 
to  open  faults  in  the  Manner  of  my  teaching,  as  that,  I 
bestowed  my  whole  hour  and  more,  my  time  and  more  than 
my  time,  in  discourses  utterly  impertinent  to  my  text.* 
Which,  if  I  had  done,  it  might  have  past  without  com- 
plaining of  to  the  Privy  Council. 

16.  But  I  did  worse,  as  he  saith,  **  I  left  the  expounding 
of  the  Scriptures,  and  my  ordinary  calling,  and  discoursed 
upon  School-points  and  questions,  neither  of  edification, 
nor  of  truth."t  I  read  no  Lecture  in  the  Law,  or  in  Physic. 
And,  except  the  bounds  of  ordinary  calling  may  be  drawn 
like  a  purse,  how  are  they  so  much  wider  unto  him  than  to 
me,  that  he  within  the  limits  of  his  ordinary  calling,  should 
reprove  that  in  me,  which  he  understood  not;  and  I  labour- 
ing that  both  he  and  others  might  understand,  could  not  do 
this  without  forsaking  my  calling  ?  The  matter  whereof  I 
spake  was  such,  as  being  at  the  first  by  me  but  lightly 
touched,  he  had  in  that  place  openly  contradicted,  and 
solemnly  taken  upon  him  to  disprove.  If  therefore  it  were 
a  School^uestion,  and  unfit  to  be  discoursed  of  there,  that 
which  was  in  me  but  a  proposition  only  at  the  first,  where- 
fore made  he  a  problem  of  it?  Why  took  he  first  upon 
him  to  maintain  the  negative  of  that  which  I  had  affirma- 
tively spoken  only  to  shew  mine  own  opinion,  little  thinking 
that  ever  it  would  have  [become]  a  question  ?  Of  what  nature 
soever  the  question  were,  I  could  do  no  less  than  there 
explain  myself  to  them,  unto  whom  I  was  accused  of  un- 
sound Doctrine ;  wherein  if  to  shew  what  had  been  through 
ambiguity  mistaken  in  my  words,  or  misapplied  by  him  in 
this  cause  against  me,  I  used  the  distinctions  and  helps  of 
Schools,  I  trust  that  herein  I  have  committed  no  unlawful 
thing.  These  School-implements  are  acknowledged  by 
grave  and  wise  men  not  unprofitable  to  have  been  invented.  J! 

•  [See  9up.  p.  347.]  t  flbW.  p.  349.] 

X  Calv.  Init.  lib.  i.  cap.  8.  sect.  1. 


366  hooker's  answer  to  [Sect.  17. 

The  most  approved  for  learning  and  judgment  do  use  them 
without  blame ;  the  use  of  them  hath  been  Iv^ell  liked  in 
some  that  have  taught  even  in  this  very  place  before  me: 
the  quality  of  my  hearers  is  such,  that  I  could  liot  but 
think  them  of  capacity  very  sufficient^  for  the  most  part^  to 
conceive  harder  [sentences]  than  I  used  any;  the  cause  I 
had  in  hand  did  in  my  judgment  necessarily  require  them 
which  were  then  used:  when  my  words  spoken  generally 
without  distinctions  had  been  perverted^  what  other  way 
was  there  for  me,  but  by  distinctions  to  ky  them  open 
in  their  right  meaning,  that  it  might  appear  to  all  men 
whether  they  were  consonant  to  Truth  or  no?  And  although 
Mr.  Travers  be  so  inured  with  the  City,  that  he  thtnketh 
it  unmeet  to  use  my  speech  which  savoureth  of  the  School, 
yet  his  opinion  is  no  Canon;  though  unto  him,  his  mind 
being  troubled,  my  speech  did  seem  like  fetters  and  mana- 
cles, yet  there  might  be  some  more  calmly  afFecled  whioli 
thought  otherwise;  his  private  judgment  will  hardly  wammt 
his  bold  words,  that  the  things  which  I  spake  '^  were  neither 
of  edification  nor  truth.'*  They  might  edify  some  otheri 
for  any  thing  he  knoweth,  and  be  true  for  any  thing  ha 
proveth  to  the  contrary.  For  it  is  no  proof  to  cry,  **  Absnr* 
dities,  the  like  whereunto  have  not  been  heard  in  puUic 
places  within  this  Land  since  Queen  Mary's  days  !*'*  If  this 
came  in  earnest  from  him,  I  am  sorry  to  see  hitn  so  much 
offended  without  cause ;  more  sorry,  that  his  fit  should  be 
so  extreme,  to  make  him  speak  he  knoweth  not  what.  That 
I  neither  **  afiected  the  truth  of  God  nor  the  peace  of  the 
Chureh,*'^  mihi  pro  minimo  esty  it  doth  not  much  move  me, 
when  Mr.  Travers  doth  say  that,  which,  I  trust,  a  greatei 
than  Mr.  Travers  will  gainsay. 

17.  Now  let  all  this  which  hitherto  he  hath  said  be 
granted  him,  let  it  be  as  he  would  have  it,  let  my  Doctrine 
and  Manner  of  teaching  be  as  much  disallowed  by  all 
men's  judgment  as  by  his,  what  is  all  this  to  his  purpose? 
He  allegeth  this  to  be  the  cause  why  he  bringeth  it  in; 
the  High  Commissioners  charge  him  with  an  indiscretion 
and  want  of  duty  in  th&t  he  inveighed  against  certain  points 
of  doctrine  taught  by  me,  as  erroneous,  not  conferring  first 
with  me,  nor  complaining  of  it  to  them,  j:  Which  faults,  a  sea 


[See«tt/>.  p.  351.]  f  [Ibid.  p.  347.]  J  [Ibid.  p.  348.] 


Sect.  17.]  TRAVERS'   SUPPLICATION.  867 

of  such  matter  as  he  hath  hitherto  waded  in,  will  never  be 
able  to  scour  from  him.  For  the  avoiding  of  schism  and 
disturbance  in  the  Church,  which  must  needs  grow,  if  all 
men  might  think  what  they  list,  and  speak  openly  what 
they  think;*  there£Dre  by  a  Decree  agreed  upon  by  the 
Bishops,  and  confirmed  by  her  Majesty's  Authority,  it  was 
ordered  that  erroneous  Doctrine,  if  it  were  taught  publicly, 
diould  not  be  publicly  refuted;  but  that  notice  thereof 
should  be  given  unto  such  as  are  by  her  Highness  appointed 
to  hear  and  to  determine  such  causes.  +  For  breach  of  which 
Order,  when  he  is  charged  with  lack  of  duty,  all  the  faults 
that  can  be  heaped  upon  me  will  make  but  a  weak  defence 
for  him.  As  surely  his  defence  is  not  much  stronger,  when 
he  allegeth  for  himself,  that.  He  was  in  some  hope  his 
speech  in  proving  the  Truth,  and  clearing  those  scrupled 
which  I  had  in  myself,  might  cause  me  either  to  embrace 
sound  Doctrine,  or  suffer  it  to  be  embraced  of  others ; 
which,  if  I  did,  he  should  not  need  to  complain  4  that.  It 
was  meet  he  should  discover  first  what  I  had  sown,  and  make 
it  manifest  to  be  tares,  and  then  desire  their  scythe  to  cut 
It  down:§  that.  Conscience  did  bind  him  to  do  otherwise, 
than  the  foresaid  Order  requireth:||  that^  He  was  unwilling 
to  deal  in  that  public  manner,  and  wished  a  more  conve- 
nient wav  were  taken  for  it:'*t  that.  He  had  resolved  to 
have  protested  the  next  Sabbath-day,  that  he  would  some 
other  way  satisfy  such  as  should  require  it,  and  not  deal 
more  in  that  place.**  Be  it  imagined  (let  me  not  be  taken 
as  if  I  did  compare  the  ofienders,  when  I  do  not,  but  their 
answers  only)  be  it  imagined  that  a  libeller  did  make  this 
^x>logy  for  himself;  I  am  not  ignorant  that  if  I  have  just 
matter  against  any  man  the  Law  is  open,  there  are  Judges 
to  hear  it,  and  Courts  where  it  ought  to  be  complained  of: 
I  have  taken  another  course  against  such  or  such  a  man, 
yet  without  breach  of  duty;   forasmuch  as  I  am  able  to 

•  [See  Vol.  11.  p.  d60,  Note.] 

f  In  tbe  Advertisements  publbhed  in  the  seventh  year  of  her  Mi^e8t3r'8  reign:  "  If 
any  Preacher,  or  Parson,  Vicar,  or  Curate  so  licensed,  shall  fortune  to  preach  any  matter 
ten^ng  to  dissension,  or  to  derogation  of  the  Religion  and  Doctrine  received,  that  the  hearers 
denounce  the  same  to  the  Ordinary,  or  the  next  Bishop  of  the  same  place,  but  not  openly 
to  contrary,  or  to  impugn  the  same  speech  so  disorderly  uttered,  whereby  may  grow  offence, 
and  disquiet  of  the  people,  but  shall  be  convinced  and  reproved  by  the  Ordinary,  after  such 
agreeable  oider  as  shall  be  sieen  to  him,  according  to  the  gravity  of  the  offence :  and  that  it 
be  presented  withiu  one  month  after  the  words  spoken.'* 

X  [See  sup,  p.  348.]  §  [Ibid.  p.  349.]  ||  [Ibid.] 

f  [Ibid.]  ••  [Ibid.] 


368  hooker's  answer  to  [SecL  19. 

yield  a  reason  of  my  doingi  I  conceive  some  hope  that  a 
little  discredit  amongst  men  would  make  him  ashamed  of 
himselfi  and  that  his  shame  would  work  his  amendment; 
whichy  if  it  did^  other  accusation  there  should  not  need: 
could  his  answer  be  thought  sufficient^  could  it  in  the 
judgment  of  discreet  men  free  him  from  all  blame?  No 
more  can  the  hope  which  Mr.  Travers  conceived  to  re- 
claim me  by  public  speech,  justify  his  fault  against  the 
established  Order  of  the  Church. 

18.  His  thinking  it  meet,  He  should  first  openly  discover 
to  the  people  the  tares  that  had  been  sown  amongst  them, 
and  then  require  the  hand  of  Authority  to  mow  them  down;* 
doth  only  make  it  a  question,  whether  his  opinion  that  this 
was  meet,  may  be  a  privilege  or  protection  against  that  lawful 
Constitution  which  had  before  determined  of  it  as  of  a  thing 
unmeet  ?  Which  question  I  leave  for  them  to  discuss  whom 
it  most  concerneth.  If  the  Order  be  such,  that  it  cannot 
be  kept  without  hazarding  a  thing  so  precious  as  a  good 
conscience,  the  peril  whereof  could  be  no  greater  to  him, 
than  it  needs  must  be  to  all  others  whom  it  toucheth  in  like 
causes;  when  this  is  evident,  it  will  be  a  most  efiectual 
motive,  not  only  for  England,  but  also  for  other  reformed 
Churches,  even  Geneva  itself  (for  they  have  the  like),  to 
change  or  take  that  away  which  cannot  but  with  great 
inconvenience  be  observed.  In  the  meanwhile  the  breach 
of  it  may,  in  such  consideration,  be  pardoned  (which  truly 
I  wish,  howsoever  it  be),  yet  hardly  defended  as  long  as  it 
standeth  in  force  uncancelled. 

19.  Now  whereas  he  confesseth  another  way  had 
"  been  more  convenient,"f  land  that  he  found  in  himself 
secret  unwillingness  to  do  that  which  he  did,  doth  he  not 
say  plainly,  in  effect,  that  the  light  of  his  own  under- 
standing proved  the  way  that  he  took  perverse  and  crooked? 
Reason  was  so  plain  and  pregnant  against  it,  that  his  mind  was 
alienated,  his  will  averted  to  another  course,  yet  somewhat 
there  was  which  so  far  over-ruled,  that  it  must  need  be  done 
even  against  the  very  stream;  what  doth  it  bewray?  Finally, 
his  purposed  protestation,  whereby  he  meant  openly  to  make 
it  known,  that  he  did  not  allow  this  kind  of  proceeding,  and 
therefore  would  satisfy  men  otherwise,  "  and  deal  no  more 

♦  [Compare  with  tup.  p.  349.]  f  [Ibid.] 


Sed.  20.]  TR AVERS*  SUPPLICATION.  369 

in  this  place/'*  sheweth  his  good  mind  in  this,  that  he 
meant  to  stay  himself  from  further  offending ;  but  it  serveth 
not  his  turn.  He  is  blamed  because  the  thing  he  had  done 
was  amiss,  and  his  answer  is.  That  which  I  would  have 
done  afterwards  had  been  well,  if  so  be  I  had  done  it. 

SO.  But  as  in  this  he  standeth  persuaded,  that  he  hath 
done  nothing  besides  duty,  so  he  taketh  it  hardly,  that  the 
High  Commissioners  should  charge  him  with  indiscretion. 
Wherefore,  as  if  he  could  so  wash  his  hands,  he  maketh  a 
long  and  a  large  declaration  concerning  the  carriage  of 
himself;  how  he  waded  in  "  matters  of  smaller  weight,'* 
and  how  in  things  of  ^*  greater  moment  ;*'  how  warily  he  dealt; 
how  **  naturally  he  took  his  things  rising  from  the  text ;" 
how  *'  closely  he  kept  himself  to  the  Scripture  he  took  in 
hand ;"  how  "  much  pains  he  took  to  confirm  the  necessity 
of  believing  Justification  by  Christ  only,*'  and  to  shew  how 
^*  the  Church  of  Rome  denieth  that  a  man  is  saved  by 
Faith  alone,  without  Works  of  the  Law  ;**  what  "  the  Sons 
of  Thunder  would  have  done,**  if  they  had  been  in  his  case; 
that  his  "  answer  was  very  temperate,  without  immodest  or 
reproachfiil  speech  ;'*  that  when  he  might  '^  before  all  have 
reproved  me,**  he  did  not,  ''  but  contented  himself  with 
ejdiorting  me**  before  all,  ''  to  follow  Nathan's  example, 
and  revisit  my  Doctrine;**  when  he  might  have  followed 
St.  Paul's  example  in  *'  reproving**  Peter,  he  did  not,  but 
exhorted  me,  with  Peter,  to  "  endure  to  be  withstood.*'f 
This  testimony  of  his  discreet  carrying  himself  in  the 
handlinir  of  his  matter,  being  more  agreeably  framed  and 
giren  iL  by  another  than  by  himself  might  n>ake  some- 
what  for  the  praise  of  his  person ;  but  for  defence  of  his 
action,  unto  them  by  whom  he  is  thought  undiscreet  for  not 
conferring  privately  before  he  spake,  will  it  serve  to  answer, 
that  when  he  spake,  he  did  it  considerately?  He  per- 
eriveth  it  will  not,  and  therefore  addeth  reasons,  such  as 
they  are :  as,  namely,  how  he  purposed  at  the  first  to  take 
another  course,  and  that  was  this,  '^  Publicly  to  deliver  the 
truth  of  such  doctrine  as  I  had  otherwise  taught,  and  at 
eoavenient  opportunity  to  confer  with  me  upon  such  points.*' 
la  this  the  Rule  of  Christ?  If  thy  brother  offend  openly 
in  his  speech,  control  it  first  with  contrary  speech  openly, 

•  [See  tup.  p.  349.]  f  [Ibid.  p.  348.] 

VOL.  III.  B  B 


370  hooker's  answer  to  [Sect.  SO. 

and  confer  with  him  afterwards  upon  it,  when  convement 
opportunity  serveth  ?     Is  there  any  Law  of  God  or  of  man, 
whereupon  to  ground  such  a  resolution?  any  Church  extant 
in  the  world,  where  Teachers  are  allowed  thus  to  do,  or  to 
be  done  unto  ?  He  cannot  but  see  how  weak  an  allegation  it 
is,  when  he  bringeth  in  his  following  this  course,  first  in  one 
matter,  and  so  afterwards  in  another,  to  approve  himself 
now  following  it  again.     For,  if  the  very  purpose  of  doing  a 
thing  so  uncharitable  be  a  fault,  the  deed  is  a  greater  fault; 
and  doth  the  doing  of  it  twice,  make  it  the  third  time  fit 
and  allowable  to  be  done?     The  weight  of  the  Cause, 
which  is  his  third  defence,  relieveth  him  as  little.     The 
weightier  it  was,  the  more  it  required  considerate  adTioe 
and  consultation,  the  more  it  stood  him  upon  to  take  good 
heed,  that  nothing  were  rashly  done  or  spoken  in  it.     But 
he  meaneth  weighty,  in  regard  of  the  wonderful  danger, 
except  he  had  presently  withstood  me  without  expecting  a 
time  of  conference.    /^  This  cause  being  of  such  moment 
that  might  prejudice  the  Faith  of  Christ,  encourage  the 
ill-affected  to  continue  still  in  their  damnable  ways,  and 
others  weak  in  Faith  to  suffer  themselves  to  be  seduced, 
to  the  destruction  of  their  souls,  he  thought  it  his  boundeo 
duty  to  speak  before  he  talked  with  me."*    A  man  that 
should  read  this,  and  riot  know  what  I  had  spoken,  might 
imagine   that  I   had   at  the  least   denied   the  Divinity  of 
Christ.     But  they  which  were  present  at  my  speech,  and 
can  testify  that  nothing  passed  my  lips  more  than  is  con- 
tained in  their  writings,  whom,  for  soundness  of  doctrine, 
learning,  and  judgment,  Mr.  Travers  himself  doth,  I  dare 
say,  not  only  allow,  but  honour ;  they  which  heard,  and  do 
know,  that  the  Doctrine  here  signified  in  so  fearful  mannefi 
the  Doctrine  that  was  so  dangerous  to  the  Faith  of  Christ, 
that  was  so  likely  to  "  encourage  ill-affected  men  to  con- 
tinue  still  in   their  damnable  ways;"   that  gave   so  great 
cause  to  tremble  for  fear  of  the  present   "  destruction  of 
souls,"  was  only  this ;  "  I  doubt  not  but  God   was  me^ 
ciful  to  save  thousands  of  our  Fathers,  living  heretofore 
in   Popish   Superstitions,   inasmuch   as   they  sinned  Igno- 
rantly;"  and  this  spoken  in  a  Sermon,  the  greatest  part 
whereof  was  against  Popery ;   they  will  hardly  be  able  to 

[See  sup,  p.  344.  ] 


Sect.  21.]  TRAVERS*  SUPPLICATION.  371 

discern  how  Christianity  should  herewith  be  so  grievously 
shaken. 

21.  Whereby  his  fourth  excuse  is  also  taken  from  him. 
For  what  doth  it  boot  him  to  say,  "  The  time  was  short 
wherein  he  was  to  preach  after  me,"t  when  his  preaching 
of  this  matter  perhaps  ought,  surely  might  have  been  either 
very  well  omitted,  or  at  the  least  more  conveniently  for 
awhile  deferred;  even  by  their  judgments  that  cast  the 
moist  favourable  aspect  towards  these  his  hasty  proceed- 
ings. The  poison  which  men  had  taken  at  my  hands,  was 
not  so  quick  and  strong  in  operation,  as  in  eight  days  to 
make  them  past  cure;  by  eight  days'  delay,  there  was  no 
likelihood  that  the  force  and  power  of  his  speech  could  die; 
longer  meditation  might  bring  better  and  stronger  proofs  to 
mind,  than  extemporal  dexterity  could  furnish  him  with. 
And,  who  doth  know  whether  time,  the  only  mother  of 
sound  judgment  and  discreet  dealing,  might  have  given 
that  action  of  his  some  better  ripeness,  which  by  so  great 
festination  hath,  as  a  thing  born  out  of  time,  brought  small 
joy  unto  him  that  begat  it?  Doth  he  think  it  had  not  been 
better,  that  neither  my  speech  had  seemed  in  his  eyes  as 
an  arrow  sticking  in  a  thigh  of  flesh ;  nor  his  own  as  a  child 
whereof  he  must  needs  be  delivered  by  an  hour?  His  last 
way  of  disburdening  himself  is,  by  casting  his  load  upon 
my  back,  as  if  I  had  brought  him  by  former  conferences 
out  of  hope,  that  any  fruit  would  ever  come  of  conferring 
with  me.  Loth  I  am  to  rip  up  those  conferences,  whereof 
he  maketh  but  a  slippery  and  loose  relation.  In  one  of 
them,  the  question  between  us  was.  Whether  the  persuasion 
of  Faith  concerning  remission  of  sins,  eternal  life,  and  what- 
soever God  doth  promise  unto  man,  be  as  free  from  doubting, 
as  the  persuasion  which  we  have  by  Sense  concerning  things 
tasted,  felt,  and  seen?  For  the  negative,  I  mentioned  their 
example,  whose  Faith  in  Scripture  is  most  commended,  and 
the  experience  which  all  faithful  men  have  continually  had 
of  themselves.  For  proof  of  the  affirmative,  which  he  held, 
I  desiring  to  have  some  reason,  heard  nothing  but  ^*  all 
good  writers**  oftentimes  inculcated.  At  the  length,  upon 
request  to  see  some  one  of  them,  Peter  Martyr's  Common 
Places  were  brought,  where  the  leaves  were  turned  down, 

*  -  [See  sup,  p.  346.] 
BB2 


372  hooker's  answ£r  to  [Sect  28. 

at  a  place  sounding  to  this  effecti  ^'  That  the  Gospel  doth 
make  Christians  more  virtuous  than  Moral  Philosophy  doth 
make  Heathens:'*  which  came  not  near  the  question  by 
many  miles. 

22.  In  the  other  conference  he  questioned  about  the 
matter  of  Reprobation ,  misliking  first,  That  I  had  termed 
God  a  permissive,  and  no  positive  Cause  of  the  evO  which 
the  Schoolmen  do  call  ^^  malum  culpae."    Secondly,  that  to 
their  objection,  who  say,  "  If  I  be  elected,  do  what  I  will  I 
shall  be  saved,"  I  had  answered.  That  the  will  of  Gt>d  in 
this  thing  is  not  absolute,  but  conditional,  to  save  his  elect 
believing,  fearing,  and  obediently  serving  him.     Thirdly, 
that  to  stop  the  mouths  of  such  as  grudge  and  repine 
against  God  for  rejecting  castaways,  I  had  taught.  That 
they  are  not  rejected,  no  not  in  the  purpose  and  coimsel 
of  God,  without  a  foreseen  worthiness  of  rejection  going, 
though  not  in  time,  yet  in  order,  before.     For,  if  God's 
electing  do  in  order  (as  needs  it  must)  presuppose  the  fore- 
sight of  their  being  that  are  elected,  though  they  be  elected 
before  they  be,*  nor  only  the  positive  foresight  of  thdr 
being,  but  also  the  permissive  of  their  being  miserable, 
because  election  is  through  mercy,  and  mercy  doth  always 
presuppose  misery :  it  foUoweth,  that  the  very  chosen  of 
God  acknowledge,   to  the  praise  of  the  riches  of  his  ex- 
ceeding free  compassion,  that  when  he  in  his  secret  deter- 
mination set  it  down,  ^*  Those  shall  Uve  and  not  die,"  they 
lay  as  ugly  spectacles  before  him,   as  lepers  covered  with 
dung  and  mire,  as  ulcers  putrefied  in  their  father's  loins, 
miserable,  worthy  to  be  had  in  detestation ;  and  shall  any 
forsaken  creature  be   able  to  say  unto  God,   Thou  didst 
plunge  me  into  the  depth,  and  assign  me  unto  endless  tor- 
ments, only  to  satisfy  thine  own  will,  finding  nothing  in  me 
for  which  I  could  seem  in  thy  sight  so  well  worthy  to  fed 
everlasting  flames  ? 

23.  When  I  saw  that  Mr.  Travers  carped  at  these  things, 
only  because  they  lay  not  open,  I  promised  at  some  conve- 
nient time  to  make  them  clear  as  light,  both  to  him  and 
all  others.  Which,  if  they  that  reprove  me  will  not  grant 
me  leave  to  do,  they  must  think  that  they  are  for  some 
cause  or  other  more  desirous  to  have  me  reputed  an  un- 
sound man,  than  willing  that  my  sincere  meaning  should 
appear  and  be  approved.    When  I  was  farther  asked.  What 


SecL24}.]  TR avers'  supplication.  373 

my  grounds  were  ?  I  answered,  That  St.  Paul's  words 
concerning  this  cause  were  my  grounds.  His  next  demand. 
What  author  I  did  follow  in  expounding  St.  Paul,  and 
gathering  the  doctrine  out  of  his  words,  against  the  judg- 
ment (he  saith)  "  of  all  Churches  and  all  good  writers?" 
I  was  well  assured,  that  to  control  this  over-reaching  speech, 
the  sentences  which  I  might  have  cited  out  of  Church- 
confessions,  together  with  the  best  learned  monuments  of 
former  times,  and  not  the  meanest  of  our  own,  were  mo 
[mare]  in  number  than  perhaps  he  would  willingly  have 
heard  of:  but  what  had  this  booted  me?  For,  although 
he  himself  in  generality  do  much  use  those  formal  speeches, 
**  all  Churches,"  and  "  all  good  writers,"  yet  as  he  holdeth 
it  in  the  pulpit  lawful  to  say  in  general,  the  Painims  think 
this,  or  the  Heathens  that,  but  utteriul  unlawful  to  cite  any 
sentence  of  theirs  that  say  it ;  so  he  gave  me  at  that  time 
great  cause  to  think,  that  my  particular  alleging  of  other 
men's  words,  to  shew  their  agreement  with  mine,  would  as 
much  have  displeased  his  mind,  as  the  thing  itself  for 
which  it  had  been  alleged :  for  he  knoweth  how  often  he 
hath  in  public  place  bitten  me  for  this,  although  I  did 
never  in  any  Sermon  use  many  of  the  sentences  of  other 
writers,  and  do  make  most  without  any;  having  always 
thought  it  meetest,  neither  to  affect  nor  to  contemn  the  use 
of  them. 

24f,  He  is  not  ignorant,  that  in  the  very  entrance  to  the 
talk  which  we  had  privately  at  that  time,  to  prove  it  un- 
lawful altogether  in  preaching,  either  for  confirmation, 
declaration,  or  otherwise,  to  cite  any  thing  but  mere  Ca- 
nonical Scripture,  he  brought  in,  "The  Scripture  is  given p Tim. 
by  inspiration,  and  is  profitable  to  teach,  improve,  &c."  it!]  * 
urging  much  the  vigour  of  these  two  clauses,  "  the  man  of 
God,"  and  "  every  good  work."  If  therefore  the  Work 
were  good  which  he  required  at  my  hands,  if  privately  to 
shew  why  I  thought  the  doctrine  I  had  delivered  to  be 
according  to  St.  Paul's  meaning,  were  a  good  work,  can 
they  which  take  the  place  before  alleged  for  a  Law,  con- 
demning every  man  of  God,  who  in  doing  the  work  of 
preaching  any  way  useth  human  authority,  like  it  in  me, 
if  in  the  Work  of  strength'ning  that  which  I  had  preached, 
I  should  bring  forth  the  testimonies  and  the  sayings  of 
mortal  men?    I  alleged  therefore  that  which  might  under  no 


374  hooker's  answer  to  [Sect.  S5« 

pretence  in  the  world  be  disallowed^  namely,  Reasons ;  not 
meaning  thereby  my  own  reason  as  now  it  is  reported,  but 
true,  sound,  divine  reason ;  reason  whereby  those  conclusions 
might  be  out  of  St.  Paul  demonstrated,  and  not  probably 
discoursed  of  only;  reason,  proper  to  that  science  whereby 
the  things  of  God  are  known ;  theological  reason,  which  out 
of  principles  in  Scripture  that  are  plain,  soundly  deduceth 
more  doubtful  inferences,  in  such  sort,  that  being  heard 
they  cannot  be  denied,  nor  any  thing  repugnant  unto  them 
received;  but  whatsoever  was  before  otherwise  by  miscol- 
lecting  gathered  out  of  dark  places,  is  thereby  forced  to 
yield  itself,  and  the  true  consonant  meaning  of  sentences 
not  understood  is  brought  to  light.  This  is  the  reason 
which  I  intended.  If  it  were  possible  for  me  to  escape 
the  ferula  in  any  thing  I  do  or  speak,  I  had  undoubtedly 
escaped  it  in  this.  In  this  I  did  that  which  by  some  is 
enjoined  as  the  only  allowable,  but  granted  by  all  as  the 
most  sure  and  safe  way,  whereby  to  resolve  things  doubted 
of  in  matters  appertaining  to  Faith  and  Christian  Religion. 
So  that  Mr.  Travers  had  here  small  cause  given  him  to 
be  weary  of  conferring,  unless  it  were  in  other  respects 
than  that  poor  one  which  is  here  pretended,  that  is  to 
say,  the  little  hope  he  had  of  doing  me  any  good  by  con- 
ference. 

25.  Yet  behold  his  first  reason  of  not  complaining  to  the 
High  Commission  is.  That  sith  I  offended  only  through 
an  over -charitable  inclination,  he  conceived  good  hope, 
when  I  should  see  the  Truth  cleared,  and  some  scruples 
which  were  in  my  mind  removed  by  his  diligence,  I  would 
yield.*  But  what  experience  soever  he  had  of  former 
conferences,  how  small  soever  his  hope  was  that  fruit  would 
come  of  it,  if  he  should  have  conferred,  will  any  man  judge 
this  a  cause  sufficient,  why  to  open  his  mouth  in  public, 
without  any  one  word  privately  spoken?  He  might  have 
considered  that  men  do  sometimes  reap,  where  they  sow  but 
with  small  hope ;  he  might  have  considered,  that  although 
unto  me  (whereof  he  was  not  certain  neither),  but  if  to  me 
his  labour  should  be  as  water  spilt  or  poured  into  a  torn 
dish,  yet  to  him  it  could  not  be  fruitless  to  do  that  which 
Order  in  Christian  Churches,  that  which  charity  amongst 


♦  [See  sup,  p.  348.] 


Sect.  26."]  TRAVERS*  SUPPLICATION.  375 

Christian  men,  that  which  at  many  men's  hands,  even 
common  humanity  itself,  at  his,  many  other  things  besides, 
did  require.  What  fruit  could  there  come  of  his  open 
contradicting  in  so  great  haste,  with  so  small  advice,  but 
such  as  must  needs  be  unpleasant,  and  mingled  with  much 
acerbity  ?  Surely,  he  which  will  take  upon  him  to  defend, 
.that  in  this  there  was  no  oversight,  must  beware,  lest  by 
such  defences  he  leave  an  opinion  dwelling  in  the  minds 
of  men,  that  he  is  more  stiff  to  maintain  what  he  hath  done, 
than  careful  to  do  nothing  but  that  which  may  justly  be 
maintained. 

26.  Thus  have  I,  as  near  as  I  could,  seriously  answered 
things  of  weight :  with  smaller  I  have  dealt  as  I  thought 
their  quality  did  require.  I  take  no  joy  in  striving,  I  have 
not  been  nuzzled  or  trained  up  in  it.  I  would  to  Christ 
they  which  have  at  this  present  enforced  me  hereunto,  had 
so  ruled  their  hands  in  any  reasonable  time,  that  I  might 
never  have  been  constrained  to  strike  so  much  as  in  mine 
own  defence.  Wherefore  to  prosecute  this  long  and  tedi- 
ous contention  no  further,  I  shall  wish  that  your  Grace, 
and  their  Honours  (unto  whose  intelligence  the  dutiful 
regard  which  I  have  of  their  judgments  maketh  me  de- 
sirous, that  as  accusations  have  been  brought  against  me, 
so  that  this  my  Answer  thereunto  may  likewise  come),  did 
both  with  the  one  and  the  other,  as  Constantine  with  books 
containing  querelous  matter.  Whether  this  be  convenient 
to  be  wisht  or  no,  I  cannot  tell :  but  sith  there  can  come 
nothing  of  contention,  but  the  mutual  waste  of  the  parties 
contending,  till  a  common  enemy  dance  in  the  ashes  of 
them  both,  I  do  wish  heartily  that  the  grave  advice  which 
Constantine  gave  for  re-uniting  of  his  Clergy  so  many  times, 
upon  so  small  occasions,  in  so  lamentable  sort  divided ;  or 
rather  the  strict  commandment  of  Christ  unto  his,  that 
they  should  not  be  divided  at  all ;  may  at  the  length,  if  it 
be  his  blessed  will,  prevail  so  far,  at  the  least  in  this  corner 
of  the  Christian  world,  to  the  burying  and  quite  forgetting 
of  strife,  together  with  the  causes  which  have  either  bred  it, 
or  brought  it  up:  that  things  of  small  moment  never  dis- 
join them,  whom  one  God,  one  Lord,  one  Faith,  one  Spirit, 
one  Baptism,  bands  of  so  great  force,  have  linked:  that 
a  respective  eye  towards  things  wherewith  we  should  not 
be  disquieted,  make  us  not,  as  through  infirmity  the  very 


376  hooker's  answer.  [Sect.  S6. 

Patriarchs  themselves  sometimes  were,  full  gorged,  unahle 
to  speak  peaceably  to  their  own  brother:  finaUy,  that  no 
strife  may  ever  be  heard  of  again,  but  this, — ^wbo  shall  hate 
strife  most,  who  shall  pursue  peace  and  unity  with  swiftest 
paces !* 


*  [Dr.  Wordsworth,  EccL  Biog,  e^t  1818,  says  at  p.  205,  "  Respecting  the  point  on 
which  he  incurred  the  censure  of  Mr.Travers,  Hooker  did  not  hesitate  to  »Ti^iTtf*w*  tiie 
same  distinction  in  his  Ecdes.  PoL  BooIl  V.  Sect  49.] 


DISCOURSE 


OF 


JUSTIFICATION,  WORKS,  AND  HOW  THE  FOUNDATION  OF 

FAITH  IS  OVERTHROWN.* 


**  The  wicked  doth  compass  about  the  righteous;  therefore  perverse  judgment  doth 

proceed."     Habak.  i.  4. 

1.  For  the  better  manifestation  of  the  Prophet's  meaning  in 
this  place,  we  are,  first,  to  consider  *'  the  Wicked/'  of  whom 
he  saith,  that  they  **  compass  about  the  righteous :"  secondly, 
*'  the  Righteous"  that  are  compassed  about  by  them :  and 
thirdly,  that  which  is  inferred ;  "  Therefore  perverse  judg- 
ment proceedeth."  Touching  the  first,  there  are  two  kinds 
of  wicked  men,  of  whom  in  the  fifth  of  the  former  to  the 
Corinthians,  the  blessed  Apostle  speaketh  thus,  **  Do  ye  not  i  cor.  ▼. 
judge  them  that  are  within  ?  but  God  judgeth  them  that  are  ' 
without."  There  are  wicked,  therefore,  whom  the  Church 
may  judge,  and  there  are  wicked  whom  God  only  judgeth: 
wicked  within,  and  wicked  without,  the  walls  of  the  Church. 
If  within  the  Church,  particular  persons  be  apparently  such, 

*  [Printed  at  Oxford,  1612,  4to.  "To  the  Christian  Reader. — Whereas  many,  deurout 
of  resolution  in  some  points  handled  in  this  Learned  Discourse,  were  earnest  to  have  it  copied 
out;  to  ease  so  many  labours,  it  hath  been  thought  most  worthy  and  very  necessary  to  be 
printed;  that  not  only  they  might  be  satisfied,  but  the  whole  Church  also  hereby  edified. 
The  ralher,  because  it  will  firee  Uie  Author  firom  the  suspicion  of  some  errors,  which  he  hath 
been  thought  to  have  favoured.  Who  might  well  have  answered  with  Cremutius  in  Tacitus, 
'Verba  mea  arguuntur;  adeo  &ctorum  innocens  sum'  (Anna!  lib.iv.).  Certainly  the  event 
ef  that  time  wherein  he  lived,  shewed  that  to  be  true  which  the  same  Author  spake  of  a 
worse) '  Cui  deerat  inimicus,  per  amicos  oppressus;'  and  that  there  is  not '  minus  periculum 
ex  magna  fama,  quam  ex  mala'  (Hist  lib.  i.).  But  he  hath  so  quit  himself,  that  all  may  see 
how,  as  it  was  said  of  Agricola,  *  Simul  suis  virtutibus,  simul  vitiis  aliorum,  in  ipsam  gloriara 
praeceps  agebatur'  (In  Vita  Agric).  Touching  whom  I  will  say  no  more,  but  that  wlSch  my 
Author  said  of  the  same  man,  '  Integritatem,  &c  in  tanto  viro  referre,  injuria  virtutum  fuerit.' 
But  as  of  all  other  his  writings,  so  of  this  I  will  add  that  which  Velleius  spake  in  commenda- 
tion of  Piso, '  Nemo  fiiit,  qui  magis  quae  agenda  erant  curaret,  sine  ulla  ostentatione  agendi' 
(Lib.  it).  So  not  doubting,  good  Christian  Reader,  of  thy  assent  herein,  but  wishing  thy 
fiivourable  acceptance  of  this  work  (which  will  be  an  inducement  to  set  forth  others  of  hb 
learned  labours),  I  take  my  leave,  fix>m  Corpus  Christi  College  in  Oxford,  the  6th  of  July, 
1612.*    Thbe  in  Christ  Jesus,  Henrt  Jackson.!] 

•  [This  date  ii  not  hi  the  Edition  of  1612.]  t  [See  Vol.  I.  Dr.  Kiog'i  Letter.] 


378  DISCOURSE  [Sect.  2. 

as  cannot  otherwise  be  reformed^  the  rule  of  the  Apostolical 
scor.Ti.  judgment  is  this^  "  Separate  them  from  among  you  :**  if  whole 
▼er.  14.  assemblies,  this,  ^'Separate  yourselves  from  among  them: 
for  what  society  hath  light  with  darkness  V*  But  the  wicked, 
whom  the  Prophet  meaneth,  were  Babylonians,  and  there- 
fore, without.  For  which  cause  we  have  heard  at  large 
heretofore  in  what  sort  he  urgeth  God  to  judge  them. 

2.  Now  concerning  the  Righteous,  there  neither  is^  nor 
ever  was,  any  mere  natural  man  absolutely  righteous  in  him- 
self; that  is  to  say,  void  of  all  unrighteousness,  of  all  sin. 
We  dare  not  except,  no  not  the  Blessed  Virgin  herself,  of 
whom,  although  we  say  with  St.  Augustine,  for  the  honour* 
sake  which  we  owe  to  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Christ,  we 
are  not  willing,  in  this  cause,  to  move  any  question  of  his 
Mother ;  yet  forasmuch  as  the  Schools  of  Rome  have  made 
it  a  question,  we  may  answer  with  Eusebius  Emissenus,* 
who  speaketh  of  her,  and  to  her,  in  this  effect ;  **  Thou  didst 
by  special  prerogative  nine  months  together  entertain  within 
the  closet  of  thy  flesh  the  hope  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth, 
the  honour  of  the  world,  the  common  joy  of  men.    He,  from 
whom  all  things  had  their  beginning,  had  his  beginning  from 
thee ;  of  thy  body  he  took  the  blood  which  was  to  be  shed 
for  the  life  of  the  world ;  of  thee  he  took  that  which  even 
for  thee  he  paid.     A  peccati  enim  veteris  nexu,  per  se-f-  non 
est  immunis  ipsa  Genitrix  Redemptoris :  The  Mother  of  the 
Redeemer  herself  is  not  otherwise  loosed  from  the  bond  of 
ancient  sin,  than  by  Redemption.*'     If  Christ  have  paid  a 
ransom  for  all,  even  for  her,  it  followeth,  that  all,  without 
[2  Cor. V.  exception,  were  captives.     If  one  have  died  for  all,  then 
all  were  dead  in  sin ;  all  sinful,  therefore,  none  absolutely 
righteous  in  themselves ;  but  we  are  absolutely  righteous  in 
Christ.     The  world  then  must  shew  a  righteous  man,  other- 
wise it  is  not  able  to  shew  a  man  that  is  perfectly  righteous: 
ri  Cor. i. "  Christ  is  made  to  us  wisdom,  justice,  sanctification,  and 
redemption :"  Wisdom,  because  he  hath  revealed  his  Father's 
will ;  Justice,  because  he  hath  offered  up  himself  a  sacrifice 
for  sin;  Sanctification,  because  he  hath  given  us  his  Spirit; 
Redemption,  because  he  hath  appointed  a  day  to  vindicate 

•  Or  whosoever  it  be,  that  was  the  author  of  those  Homilies,  that  go  under  his  name. 

t  Knowing  how  the  Schoolmen  hold  this  question,  some  critical  wits  may  perhaps  half 
suspect  that  these  two  words,  per  se,  are  inmates.  But,  if  the  place  which  they  have  be  their 
own,  their  sense  can  be  none  other  than  that  which  I  have  given  them  by  a  paraphrastical 
interpretation. 


Sect.  5.]  OP  JUSTIFICATION,  &c.  379 

his  children  out  of  the  hands  of  corruption  into  Uherty  which 
is  glorious.  How  Christ  is  made  Wisdom,  and  how  Redemp- 
tion, it  may  he  declared  when  occasion  serveth ;  hut  how  Christ 
is  made  tlie  Righteousness  of  men,  we  are  now  to  declare. 

3.  There  is  a  glorifying  righteousness  of  men  in  the  world 
to  come ;  as  there  is  a  justifying  and  sanctifying  righteous- 
ness here.  The  righteousness,  wherewith  we  shall  he  clothed 
in  the  world  to  come,  is  hoth  perfect  and  inherent.  That 
wherehy  here  we  are  justified  is  perfect,  hut  not  inherent: 
that  whereby  we  are  sanctified  is  inherent,  but  not  perfect. 
This  openeth  a  way  to  the  understanding  of  that  grand 
question,  which  hangeth  yet  in  controversy  between  us 
and  the  Church  of  Rome,  about  the  matter  of  Justifying 
Righteousness. 

4.  First,  although  they  imagine  that  the  Mother  of  our  Tinsy 
Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  were  for  his  honour,  and  we  do, 
by  his  special  protection,  preserved  clean  from  all  sin ;  yet  dJth 
touching  the  rest,  they  teach  as  we  do.  That  Infants  which  the  soui 
never  did  actually  offend,  have  their  natures  defiled,  destitute  aio?eT 
of  justice,  averted  from  God ;  that  in  making  man  righteous,  Tny  co- 
none  do  efficiently  work  with  God,  but  God.     They  teach  cfawof 
as  we  do.  That  unto  justice  no  man  ever  attained,  but  by  ■*""**• 
the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ.*    They  teach  as  we  do.  That 
although  Christ  as  God  be  the  efficient,  as  man  the  meri- 
torious cause  of  our  justice ;  yet  in  us  also  there  is  some- 
thing required.f     God  is  the  cause  of  our  natural  life;  in 
him  we  live:  but  he  quick'neth  not  the  body  without  the 
soul  in  the  body.     Christ  hath  merited  to  make  us  just:  but 

as  a  medicine  which  is  made  for  health,  doth  not  heal  by 
being  made,  but  by  being  applied  ;  so,  by  the  merits  of  Christ 
there  can  be  no  Justification,  without  the  application  of  his 
merits.     Thus  far  we  join  hands  with  the  Church  of  Rome. 

6.  Wherein  then  do  we  disagree?     We  disagree  about  The  dif- 
the  nature   and  essence   of  the  medicine  whereby  Christ  betwixt 
cureth  our  disease;  about  the  manner  of  applying  it;  about  pists and 
the  number  and  the  power  of  means,  which  God  requireth  jnstifi. 
in  us  for  the  effectual  applying  thereof  to  our  soul's  comfort. 
When  they  are  required  to  shew  what  the  righteousness  is 
whereby  a  Christian  man  is  justified,  they  answer,  That  it 
is  a  divine  spiritual  quality ;  which  quality  received  into  the 

*  "  Deua  line  medio  coeffectivo  animam  jostiiicat.'*   Casal.  de  quadripart.  jnst.  lib.  i.  tap.  8. 
\  Idem,  lib.  iii.  cap.  9. 


380  DISCOURSE  [Sect.  5. 

soul,  doth  first  make  it  to  be  one  of  them  who  are  bom  of 
God :  and^  secondly,  indue  it  with  a  power  to  bring  forth 
such  Works,  as  they  do  that  are  bom  of  him;  even  as  the 
soul  of  man  being  joined  to  his  body,  doth  first  make  him 
to  be  of  the  number  of  reasonable  creatures,  and  secondly 
enable  him  to  perform  the  natural  functions  which  are  proper 
to  his  kind ;  that  it  maketh  the  soul  amiable  and  gracious 
in  the  sight  of  God,  in  regard  whereof  it  is  termed  Grace ; 
that  it  purgeth,  purifieth,  and  washeth  out,  all  the  stains 
and  pollutions  of  sin ;  that  by  it,  through  the  Merit  of  Christ, 
we  are  delivered  as  from  sin,  so  from  eternal  death  and  con- 
demnation, the  reward  of  sin.  This  Grace  they  will  have 
to  be  applied  by  infiision ;  to  the  end,  that  as  the  body  is 
warm  by  the  heat  which  is  in  the  body,  so  the  soul  might  be 
righteous  by  the  inherent  Grace :  which  Grace  they  make 
capable  of  increase ;  as  the  body  may  be  more  and  more 
warm,  so  the  soul  more  and  more  justified,  according  as 
Grace  shall  be  augmented ;  the  augmentation  whereof  is 
merited  by  Good  Works,  as  good  works  are  made  merito- 
rious by  it.*  Wherefore,  the  first  receipt  of  Grace,  in  their 
divinity,  is  the  first  Justification ;  the  increase  thereof,  the 
second  Justification.  As  Grace  may  be  increased  by  the 
merit  of  Good  Works ;  so  it  may  be  diminished  by  the  de- 
merit of  sins  Venial ;  it  may  be  lost  by  Mortal  sin.  Inas- 
much, therefore,  as  it  is  needful  in  the  one  case  to  repair, 
in  the  other  to  recover,  the  loss  which  is  made ;  the  infiision 
of  Grace  hath  her  sundry  after-meals ;  for  the  which  cause 
they  make  many  ways  to  apply  the  infusion  of  Grace.  It  is 
applied  to  Infants  through  Baptism,  without  either  Faith  or 
Works,  and  in  them  really  it  taketh  away  Original  Sin,  and 
the  punishment  due  unto  it ;  it  is  applied  to  Infidels  and 
wicked  men  in  the  first  Justification,  through  Baptism  with- 
out Works,  yet  not  without  Faith ;  and  it  taketh  away  both 
sins  Actual  and  Original  together,  with  all  whatsoever 
punishment,  eternal  or  temporal,  thereby  deserved.  Unto 
such  as  have  attained  the  first  Justification,  that  is  to  say, 
the  first  receipt  of  Grace,  it  is  applied  farther  by  Good 

*  Tho.  Aquin.  1.  2.  qusest.  100.  **  Gratia  gratum  faciens,  id  est,  justificans,  est  in  anima 
quiddam  reale  et  positivum,  qualitas  quaedam  (art.  ii.  cond.)  supernaturalis,  non  eadem  com 
virtute  infusa,  ut  magister ;  sed  aliquid  (art  iii.)  prseter  virtutes  infusas,  fidem,  spem,  chari- 
tatem,  habitudo  qusdam  (art.  iii.  ad  3.)  quse  prsesupponitur  in  virtutibus  btis  sicut  earum  prin- 
cipium  et  radix ;  essentiam  animae  tanquam  subjectum  occupat,  non  potentias,  sed  ab  ipsa  (art. 
IT.  ad  1.)  eflfluunt  virtutes  in  potentias  animse,  per  quas  potentise  moventur  ad  actus."  Plura 
vid.  qusBst.  113.  de  Justificatione. 


Sect.6.']  OP  JUSTIFICATION,  &c.  381 

Works  to  the  increase  of  former  Grace,  which  is  the  second 
Justification.  If  they  work  more  and  more,  Grace  doth  more 
increase,  and  they  are  more  and  more  justified.  To  such 
as  [have]  diminished  it  by  Venial  sins,  it  is  applied  by  Holy 
Water,  Ave  Marias,  Crossings,  Papal  Salutations,  and  such 
like,  which  serve  for  reparations  of  Grace  decayed.  To 
such  as  have  lost  it  through  Mortal  sin,  it  is  applied  by  the 
Sacrament  (as  they  term  it)  of  Penance ;  which  Sacrament 
hath  force  to  confer  Grace  anew,  yet  in  such  sort,  that 
being  so  conferred,  it  hath  not  altogether  so  much  power  as 
at  the  first.  For  it  only  cleanseth  out  the  stain  or  guilt  of 
sin  committed,  and  changeth  the  punishment  eternal  into  a 
temporal  satisfactory  punishment  here,  if  time  do  serve ;  if 
not,  hereafter  to  be  endured,  except  it  be  lightened  by 
Masses,  Works  of  Charity,  Pilgrimages,  Fasts,  and  such 
like;  or  else  shortened  by  pardon  for  term,  or  by  plenary 
pardon  quite  removed  and  taken  away.  This  is  the  mystery 
of  the  Man  of  sin.  This  maze  the  Church  of  Rome  doth 
cause  her  followers  to  tread,  when  they  ask  her  the  way  to 
Justification.  I  cannot  stand  now  to  unrip  this  building, 
and  to  sift  it  piece  by  piece ;  only  I  will  pass  by  it  in  few 
.words,  that  that  may  befall  Babylon,  in  the  presence  of  that  [t  sam. 
which  God  hath  builded,  as  happened  unto  Dagon  before 
the  Ark. 

6.  **  Doubtless  (saith  the  Apostle),  I  have  counted  allPhu.iL 
things  loss,  and  judge  them  to  be  dung,  that  I  may  win 
Christ,  and  be  found  in  him,  not  having  my  own  righteous- 
ness, but  that  which  is  through  the  Faith  of  Christ,  the 
righteousness  which  is  of  God  through  Faith."  Whether 
they  speak  of  the  first  or  second  Justification,  they  make 
it  the  essence  of  a  divine  quahty  inherent,  they  make  it 
righteousness  which  is  in  us.  If  it  be  in  us,  then  is  it  ours, 
as  our  souls  are  ours,  though  we  have  them  from  God,  and 
can  hold  them  no  longer  than  pleaseth  him ;  for  if  he  with- 
draw the  breath  of  our  nostrils,  we  fall  to  dust:  but  the 
righteousness  wherein  we  must  be  found,  if  we  will  be  justi- 
fied, is  not  our  own;  therefore  we  cannot  be  justified  by 
any  inherent  quality.  Christ  hath  merited  righteousness  for 
as  many  as  are  found  in  him.  In  him  God  findeth  us,  if  we 
be  faithful ;  for  by  Faith  we  are  incorporated  into  Christ. 
Then,  although  in  ourselves  we  be  altogether  sinfiil  and 
unrighteous,  yet  even  the  man  which  is  impious  in  himself, 


382  DISCOURSE  ISeet  6. 

fiill  of  iniquity,  full  of  sin ;  him  being  found  in  Christ  through 
Faith,  and  having  his  sin  remitted  through  Repentance; 
him  God  upholdeth  with  a  gracious  eye,  putteth  away  his 
sin  by  not  imputing,  taketh  quite  away  the  punishment  due 
thereunto  by  pardoning  it,  and  accepteth  him  in  Jesus  Christ, 
as  perfectly  righteous  as  if  he  had  fulfilled  all  that  was  com- 
manded him  in  the  Law ;  shall  I  say  more  perfectly  righteous 
than  if  himself  had  fulfilled  the  whole  Law  ?     I  must  take 

9  Cor.  heed  what  I  say :  but  the  Apostle  saith,  **  God  made  him 
to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin;  that  we  might  be  made 
the  righteousness  of  God  in  him."  Such  we  are  in  the  sight 
of  God  the  Father,  as  is  the  very  Son  of  God  himself.  Let 
it  be  counted  folly,  or  frenzy,  or  fiiry,  whatsoever,  it  is  our 
comfort,  and  our  wisdom;  we  care  for  no  knowledge  in 
the  world  but  this.  That  man  hath  sinned,  and  God  hath 
suffered ;  that  God  hath  made  himself  the  Son  of  man,  and 
that  men  are  made  the  righteousness  of  God.  You  see, 
therefore,  that  the  Church  of  Rome,  in  teaching  Justification 
by  inherent  Grace,  doth  pervert  the  truth  of  Christ ;  and 
that  by  the  hands  of  the  Apostles  we  have  received  other- 
wise than  she  teacheth.  Now  concerning  the  righteoosneu 
of  Sanctification,  we  deny  it  not  to  be  inherent ;  we  grant, 
that  unless  we  work,  we  have  it  not ;  only  we  distinguish  it 
a  thing  different  in  nature  from  the  righteousness  of  Justifi- 
cation: we  are  righteous  the  one  way,  by  the  Faith  of 
Abraham;   the   other  way,   except  we  do   the  Works  of 

Rom.  Abraham,  we  are  not  righteous.  Of  the  one,  St.  Paul,  **  To 
him  that  worketh  not,  but  belie veth.  Faith  is  counted  for 

1  John  righteousness."  Of  the  other,  St.  John,  "  Qui  facit  justitiam, 
Justus  est;  He  is  righteous  which  worketh  righteousness.*' 

[Rom.    Of  the  one,  St.  Paul  doth  prove  by  Abraham's  example,  that 

[iiin.ii.]  we  have  it  of  Faith  without  Works.  Of  the  other,  St.  James 
by  Abraham's  example,  that  by  Works  we  have  it,  and  not 
only  by  Faith.  St.  Paul  doth  plainly  sever  these  two  parts 
of  Christian  righteousness  one  from  the  other.     For  in  the 

Rom.  Sixth  to  the  Romans  thus  he  writeth,  "  Being  freed  from  sin, 
and  made  servants  to  God,  ye  have  your  fruit  in  holiness, 
and  the  end  everlasting  life."  "  Ye  are  made  free  from  sin, 
and  made  servants  unto  God ;"  this  is  the  righteousness  of 
Justification:  "Ye  have  your  fruit  in  holiness;"  this  is  the 
righteousness  of  Sanctification.  By  the  one  we  are  interessed 
in  the  right  of  inheriting,  by  the  other  we  are  brought  to 


Sect  7.}  OF  JUSTIFICATION,   &c.  38«3 

the  actual  possession  of  eternal  bliss,  and  so  the  end  of  both 
is  "  everlasting  life." 

7.  The  Prophet  Habakkuk  doth  here  term  the  Jews 
'*  righteous"  men,  not  only  because  being  justified  by  Faith 
they  were  free  from  sin;  but  also  because  they  had  their 
measure  of  fruits  in  holiness.  According  to  whose  example 
of  charitable  judgment,  which  leaveth  it  to  God  to  discern 
what  we  are,  and  speaketh  of  them  according  to  that  which 
they  do  profess  themselves  to  be,  although  they  be  not  holy 
men  whom  men  do  think,  but  whom  God  doth  know  indeed 
to  be  such ;  yet  let  every  Christian  man  know,  that  in  Chris- 
tian equity,  he  standeth  bound  for  to  think  and  speak  of  his 
brethren,  as  of  men  that  have  measure  in  the  fruit  of  holi- 
ness, and  a  right  unto  the  titles  wherewith  God,  in  token  of 
special  favour  and  mercy,  vouchsafeth  to  honour  his  chosen 
servants*  So  we  see  the  Apostles  of  our  Saviour  Christ  do 
use  every  where  the  name  of  "  Saints  ;''*  so  the  Prophet,  the 
name  of  '^  Righteous."  But  let  us  all  be  such  as  we  desire 
to  be  termed :  "  Reatus  impii  est  pium  nomen,"  saith  Sal- 
Tianus ;  Godly  names  do  not  justify  godless  men.  We  are 
but  upbraided,  when  we  are  honoured  with  names  and  titles 
whereunto  our  lives  and  manners  are  not  suitable.  If  indeed 
we  have  our  fruit  in  holiness,  notwithstanding  we  must  note, 
that  the  more  we  abound  therein,  the  more  need  we  have  to 
crave  that  we  may  be  strengthened  and  supported.  Our 
very  virtues  may  be  snares  unto  us.  The  enemy  that  waiteth 
for  all  occasions  to  work  our  ruin,  hath  found  it  harder  to 
overthrow  an  humble  sinner,  than  a  proud  Saint.  There  is 
no  man's  case  so  dangerous  as  his  whom  Satan  hath  per- 
suaded that  his  own  righteousness  shall  present  him  pure 
and  blameless  in  the  sight  of  God.  If  we  could  say,  we 
were  not  guilty  of  any  thing  at  all  in  our  consciences  (we 
know  ourselves  far  from  this  innocency;  we  cannot  say,  we 
know  nothing  by  ourselves,  but  if  we  could),  should  we 
therefore  plead  not  guilty  before  the  presence  of  our  Judge, 
that  sees  further  into  our  hearts  than  we  ourselves  can  do  ? 
If  our  hands  did  never  offer  violence  to  our  brethren,  a 
bloody  thought  doth  prove  us  murderers  before  Him :  if  we 
had  never  opened  our  mouth  to  utter  any  scandalous,  of- 
fensive, or  hurtful  word,  the  cry  of  our  secret  cogitations  is 

*  [The  andents  very  seldom  gave  this  epithet  even  to  the  evangelists  and  apostles :  thus, 
Tebtull.  {de  PrdMc,  p.  78.)  "  A  Petro  ordinatnni."    *<  Ab  Johaime  conlocatum."] 


384  DISCOURSE  [Seei.  7. 

heard  in  the  ears  of  God.     If  we  did  not  commit  the  sins, 
which  daily  and  hourly  either  in  deed,  word,  or  thoughts 
we  do  commit ;  yet  in  the  good  things  which  we  do,  how 
many  defects  are  there  intermingled !     God,  in  that  which 
is  done,  respecteth  the  mind  and  intention  of  the  doer.    Cut 
off  then  all  those  things  wherein  we  have  regarded  our  own 
glory;  those  things  which  men  do  to  please  men,  and  to 
satisfy  our  own  liking ;  those  things  which  we  do  by  any 
respect,  not  sincerely  and  purely  for  the  love  of  God ;  and  a 
small  score  will  serve  for  the  number  of  our  righteous  deeds. 
Let  the  holiest  and  best  thing  we  do  be  considered :  we  are 
never  better  affected  unto  God  than  when  we  pray;  yet 
when  we  pray,  how  are  our  affections  many  times  distracted! 
How  little  reverence  do  we  shew  unto  the  grand  Majesty  of 
God,  unto  whom  we  speak !    How  little  remorse  of  our  own 
miseries!     How  little  taste  of  the  sweet  influence  of  his 
tender  mercies  do  we  feel !    Are  we  not  as  unwilling  many 
times  to  begin,  and  as  glad  to  make  an  end ;  as  if  in  saying, 
"  Call  upon  me,"  he  had  set  us  a  very  burdensome  task  ?  It 
may  seem  somewhat  extreme,  which  I  will  speak ;  therefore 
let  every  one  judge  of  it,  even  as  his  own  heart  shall  tdl 
him,  and  no  otherwise;  I  will  but  only  make  a  demand:  If 
God  should  yield  unto  us,  not  as  unto  Abraham,  if  fifty, 
forty,  thirty,  twenty,  yea,  or  if  ten  good  persons  could  be 
found  in  a  city,  for  their  sakes  that  city  should  not  be  de- 
stroyed ;  but,  and  if  he  should  make  us  an  offer  thus  large, 
Search  all  the  generations  of  men  sithence  the  fall  of  our 
father  Adam,  find  one  man,  that  hath  done  one  action, 
which    hath    past  from  him    pure,    without    any   stain  or 
blemish  at  all;   and  for  that  one  man's  one  only  action, 
neither  Man  nor  Angel  shall  feel  the  torments  which  are 
prepared  for  both ;  do  you  think  that  this  ransom,  to  deliver 
Men  and  Angels,  could  be  found  to  be  among  the  sons  of 
men  ?    The  best  things  which  we  do  have  somewhat  in  them 
to  be  pardoned.   How  then  can  we  do  any  thing  meritorious, 
or  worthy  to  be  rewarded  ?   Indeed,  God  doth  liberally  pro- 
mise whatsoever  appertaineth  to  a  blessed  life,  to  as  many  as 
sincerely  keep  his  Law,  though  they  be  not  exactly  able  to 
keep  it.     Wherefore,  we  acknowledge  a  dutiful  necessity 
of  doing  well;  but  the  meritorious  dignity  of  doing  well  we 
utterly  renounce.     We  see  how  far  we  are  from  the  perfect 
righteousness  of  the  Law :  the  little  fruit  which  we  have  in 


Sect.  9.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,  &c.  386 

holiness,  it  is,  God  knowetb,  corrupt  and  unsound ;  we  put 
no  confidence  at  all  in  it,  we  challenge  nothing  in  the  world 
for  it,  we  dare  not  call  God  to  reckoning,  as  if  we  had  him 
in  our  debt-books:  our  continual  suit  to  him  is,  and  must 
be.  To  bear  with  our  infirmities,  and  pardon  our  ofiences. 

8.  But  the  people  of  whom  the  Prophet  speaketh,  were 
they  all,  or  were  the  most  part  of  them,  such  as  had  care  to 
walk  uprightly?  Did  they  thirst  after  righteousness?  did 
they  wish,  did  they  long  with  the  righteous  Prophet,  "  O  tP»*»^ 
that  our  ways  were  made  so  direct  that  we  might  keep  thy 
Statutes?"  Did  they  lament  with  the  righteous  Apostle, 
"  O  miserable  men,  the  good  which  we  wish  and  purpose,  Rol- 
and strive  to  do,  we  cannot?"  No;  the  words  of  the  other 
Prophet  concerning  this  people  do  shew  the  contrary. 
How  grievously  doth  Esay  mourn  over  them!  "  O  sinfiil  isa. 
nation,  laden  with  iniquity,  wicked  seed,  corrupt  children !" 
All  which  notwithstanding,  so  wide  are  the  bowels  of  his 
compassion  enlarged,  that  he  denieth  us  not,  no  not  when 
we  were  laden  with  iniquity,  leave  to  commune  familiarly 
whh  him^  liberty  to  crave  and  entreat,  that  what  plagues 
soever  we  have  deserved,  we  may  not  be  in  worse  case  than 
unbelievers,,  that  we  may  not  be  hemmed  in  by  Pagans 
and  Infidels.  Jerusalem  is  a  sinful,  polluted,  city;  but 
Jerusalem  compared  with  «Baby Ion  is  righteous.  And  shall 
the  righteous  be  overborne  ?  Shall  they  be  compast  about 
by  the  wicked?  But  the  Prophet  doth  not  only  complain. 
Lord,  how  cometh  it  to  pass  that  thou  handiest  us  so 
hardly,  of  whom  thy  name  is  called,  and  bearest  with  the 
Heathen  nations,  that  despise  thee?  no,  he  breaketh  out 
through  extremity  of  grief,  and  inferreth  violently.  This 
**  proceeding  is  perverse,"  the  "  righteous"  are  thus  han- 
dled; *'  therefore  perverse  judgment  doth  proceed." 

•9.  Which  illation  containeth  many  things,  whereof  it 
were  better  much  both  for  you  to  hear,  and  me  to  speak, 
if  necessity  did  not  draw  me  to  another  task.  Paul  andAcu 
Barnabas  being  requested  to  preach  the  same  things  again  42!^^ 
which  once  they  had  preached,  thought  it  their  duties  to 
satisfy  the  godly  desires  of  men  sincerely  afiected  to  the 
truth.  Nor  may  it  seem  burdenous  to  me,  or  for  you  un- 
profitable, that  I  follow  their  example,  for  the  like  occasion 
unto  theirs  being  offered  me.  When  we  had  last  the  Epistle 
of  St.  Paul  to  the  Hebrews  in  hand,  and  of  that  Epistle 

VOL.  III.  c  c 


386  DISCOURSE  [Sect.  10. 

Heb.  these  words,  *^  In  these  last  days  he  hath  spoken  unto  us 
by  his  Son;"  after  we  had  thence  collected  the  nature  of 
the  visible  Church  of  Christ,  and  had  defined  it  to  be  a 
community  of  men  sanctified*  through  the  profession  of  the 
truth  which  God  hath  taught  the  world  by  his  Son ;  and  had 
declared,  that  the  scope  of  Christian  doctrine  is  the  comfort 
of  them  whose  hearts  are  overcharged  with  the  burden 
of  sin;  and  had  proved  that  the  doctrine  professed  in  the 
Church  of  Rome,  doth  bereave  men  of  comfort,  both  in 
their  Uves,  and  in  their  deaths;  the  conclusion  in  the  end, 
whereunto  we  came,  was  this,  The  Church  of  Rome  being 
in  faith  so  corrupted,  as  she  is,  and  refusing  to  be  reformed, 
as  she  doth,  we  are  to  sever  ourselves  from  her:  the  ex- 
ample of  our  Fathers  may  not  -retain  us  in  communion  with 
that  Church,  under  hope  that  we  so  continuing,  may  be 
saved  as  well  as  they.f  God,  I  doubt  not,  was  merdfid 
to  save  thousands  of  them,  though  they  lived  m  Popish 
Superstitions,  inasmuch  as  they  sinned  Ignorantly:  but  the 
truth  is  now  laid  before  our  eyes.  The  former  part  of  thtt 
last  sentence,  namdy,  these  words,  I  doubt  not  hui  Gvd 
wcu  merciful  ta  save  thousands  of  our  Fathers  living  m 
Popish  Superstitions,  inasmuch  as  theg  sinned  IgnormUbfi 
this  sentence  I  beseech  you  to  mark,  and  to  sift  it  with  the 
severity  of  austere  judgment,  that  if  it  be  found  to  be  gold, 
it  may  be  suitable  to  the  -precious  foundation  whereon  it 

[1  Cor.  was  then  laid ;  for  I  protest,  that  if  it  be  hay  or  stubble,  my 
own  hand  shall  set  fire  to  it.  Two  questions  have  ri^en  by 
this  speech  before  alleged:  the  one.  Whether  our  Fathers, 
infected  with  Popish  errors  and  superstitions,  may  be  saved! 
the  other.  Whether  their  Ignorance  be  a  reasonable  induce- 
ment to  make  us  think  they  might?  We  are  then  to 
examine,  first,  what  possibility;  then,  what  probability 
there  is,  that  God  might  be  mercifiil  unto  so.  many  of  our 
Fathers. 

10.  So  many  of  our  Fathers  living  in  Popish  Supersti- 
tions, yet  by  the  mercy  of  God  to  be  saved  ?  No ;  this  could 
not  be :  God  hath  spoken  by  his  Angel  from  Heaven  unto 

*  By  sanctificadon,  I  mean  a  separation  from  others  not  professing  as  they  ^q.  For  tme 
holiness  conasteth  not  in  professing,  but  in  obeying  the  truth  of  Christ. 

f  [The  text  quoted  in  p.  378,  2  Cor.  vi.  17,  refers  to  infidels  and  idolaters.  If  then  it 
were  allowable  to  "  separate"  from  the  Church  of  Rome,  on  the  grounds  Hooker  states^ 
surely  it  is  equally  allowable  for  any  Christian  after  deliberate  reflection  to  separate  hioisdf 
from  any  other  communion,  which  he  may  judge  sufficiently  defective :  and,  who  shall  be 
the  umpire  between  him  and  his  conscience  ?     Rom.  ziv.  4,  5.] 


Sect.  11.]  OP  JUSTIFICATION,   &c.  387 

his  people  concerning  Babylon  (by  Babylon  we  understand 
the  Church  of  Rome) ;  "  Go  out  of  her,  my  people,  that  you  Apoc 
be  not  partakers  of  her  plagues."    For  answer  whereunto,  *^ 
first,  I  do  not  take  the  words  to  be  meant  only  of  temporal 
plagues,  of  the  corporal  death,  sorrow,  famine,  and  fire, 
whereunto  God  in  his  wrath  hath  condemned  Babylon ;  and 
that  to  save  his  chosen  people  from  these  plagues,  he  saith, 
**  Gk)  out;"  with  like  intent,  as  in  the  Gospel^  speaking  of  [Dan. 
Jerusalem's  dei^lations,  he  saith,  *'  Let  them  that  are  in  Mau. 
Judea  flee  unto  the  lAountains,  and  them  that  are  in  the  ***^*  *** 
midst  thereof  depart  otit;""  or,  as  in  former  times  to  Lot, 
"  Arise,  take  thy  wife  and  thy  daughters  which  are  there,  cen. 
lest  thou  be  destroyed  in  the  punishment  of  the  city:**  but,  "*•**• 
forasmuch  as  here  it  is  said,  **  Go  out  of  Babylon;"  we 
doubt,  their  everlasting  destruction,  which  are  partakers 
therein,  is  either  principally  meant,  or  necessarily  implied 
in  this  sentence.     How  then  was  it  possible  for  so  many  of 
our  Fathers  to  be  saved,  sith  they  were  so  far  from  depart- 
ing out  of  Babylon,  that  they  took  her  for  their  Mother,  and 
in  her  bosom  yielded  up  the  ghost? 

11.  First,  for  the  plagues  being  threatened  unto  them 
that  are  ''  partakers"  in  the  sins  of  Babylon,  we  can  define 
nothing  concerning  our  Fathers  out  of  this  sentence;  unless 
we  shew  what  the  sins  of  Babylon  be,  and  what  they  be 
which  are  such  partakers  of  them,  that  their  everlasting 
plagues  are  inevitable.  The  sins  which  may  be  common 
both  to  them  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  to  others  de- 
parted thence,  must  be  severed  from  this  question.  He 
which  saith,  "  Depart  out  of  Babylon,  lest  you  be  partakers 
of  her  sins,"  sheweth  plainly,  that  he  meaneth  such  sins, 
as  except  we  separate  ourselves,  we  have  no  power  in  the 
world  to  avoid ;  such  impieties,  as  by  the  Law  they  have 
established,  and  whereunto  all  that  are  among  them,  either 
do  indeed  assent,  or  else  are,  by  powerable  means  forced 
in  shew  and  appearance  to  subject  themselves.  As,  for 
example,  in  the  Church  of  Rome  it  is  maintained,  that 
the  same  credit  aifid  reverence  that  we  give  to  the  Scriptures 
of  God,  ought  also  to  be  given  to  unwritten  verities ;  that 
the  Pope  is  Supreme  Head  Ministerial  over  the  universal 
Church  Militant;  that  the  bread  in  the  Eucharist  is  tran- 
substantiated into  Christ ;  that  it  is  to  be  adored,  and  to  be 
offered  up  unto  Gdd,  as  a  sacrifice  propitiatory  for  quick 

cc2 


388  DISCOURSE  [Sect.  12. 

and  dead ;  that  images  are  to  be  worshipped ;  Saints  to  be 
called  upon  as  intercessors ;  and  such  like.  Now^  because 
some  Heresies  do  concern  things  only  believed,  as  the 
Transubstantiation  of  the  Sacramental  Elements  in  the 
Eucharist;  some  concern  things  which  are  practised  and 
put  in  ]ire,  as  the  Adoration  of  the  elements  transubstan- 
tiated ;  we  must  note,  that  erroneously,  the  practice  of  that 
is  sometime  received,  whereof  the  doctrine,  Uiat  teacheth  it, 
is  not  heretically  maintained.  They  are  all  partakers  in 
the  maintenance  of  Heresies,  who  by  word  or  deed  allow 
them,  knowing  them,  although  not  knowing  them  to  be 
Heresies;  as  also  they,  and  that  most  dangerously  of  all 
others,  who  knowing  Heresy  to  be  Heresy,  do  notwithstand- 
ing, in  worldly  respects,  make  semblance  of  allowing  that, 
which  in  heart  and  judgment  they  condemn :  but  Heresy  is 
heretically  maintained,  by  such  as  obstinately  hold  it  after 
wholesome  admonition.  Of  the  last  sort,  as  of  the  next 
before,  I  make  no  doubt,  but  that  their  condemnatioD, 
without  an  actual  repentance,  is  inevitable.  Lest  any  man 
therefore  should  think,  that  in  speaking  of  our  Fathers, 
I  should  speak  indifferently  of  them  all;  let  my  words,  I 
beseech  you,  be  well  marked,  /  doubt  not  but  God  was 
merciful  to  save  thousands  of  our  Fathers:  which  thing 
I  will  now,  by  God's  assistance,  set  more  plainly  before 
your  eyes. 

12.  Many  are  partakers  of  the  Error,  which  are  not  of  the 
Heresy  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  The  People  following  the 
conduct  of  their  Guides,  and  observing  as  they  did,  exactly 
that  which  was  prescribed,  thought  they  did  God  good  ser- 
vice, when  indeed  they  did  dishonour  him.*  This  was  their 
error:  but  the  Heresy  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  their  dog- 
matical positions  opposite  unto  Christian  truth,  what  one 
man  among  ten  thousand  did  ever  understand?  Of  them, 
which  understand  Roman  Heresies,  and  allow  thein,  all  are 
not  alike  partakers  in  the  action  of  allowing.  Some  allow 
them  as  the  first  founders  and  establishers  of  them;  which 
crime   toucheth   none  but  their  Popes  and  Councils;  the 


•  [Hence  the  necessity  of  exercising  private  judgment  in  matters  of  religion !  1  John  ir.  1. 
This  right  (it  has  heen  remarked)  was  not  questioned  before  the  corruption  of  the  Christiaii 
Faith ;  because  the  Clei^  entertained  no  fears  of  being  detected  in  teaching  new  Doctrinci 
of  men's  invention !  "  The  Hearers,"  says  St  Basil,  "  that  are  instructed  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, must  examine  the  Doctrines  of  their  Teachers,  they  must  receiTe  those  things  which 
are  agreeable  to  Scripture,  and  reject  what  are  contraiy  to  it"    Mor.  Reg,  cap,  72,  in  ioit] 


SecU  15«]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,   &c.  389 

People  are  clear  and  free  from  this.  Of  them  which  main- 
tain Popish  Heresies,  not  as  authors,  but  receivers  of  them 
from  others,  all  maintain  them  not  as  masters.  In  this  are 
not  the  People  partakers  neither,  but  only  the  Predicants 
and  Schoolmen.  Of  them  which  have  been  partakers  in 
thb  sin  of  teaching  Popish  Heresy,  there  is  also  a  difference; 
for  they  have  not  all  been  teachers  of  all  Popish  Heresies. 
**  Put  a  difference  (saith  St.  Jude);  have  compassion  uponver.ss. 
some."  Shall  we  lay  up  all  in  one  condition?  shall  we  cast 
them  all  headlong?  shall  we  plunge  them  all  into  that 
infernal  and  everlasting  flaming  lake?  Them  that  have  been 
partakers  of  the  Errors  of  Babylon,  together  with  them 
which  are  in  the  Heresy?  them  which  have  been  the  authors 
of  Heresy,  with  them  that  by  terror  and  violence  have  been 
forced  to  receive  it?  them  who  have  taught  it,  with  them 
whose  simplicity  hath  by  sleights  and  conveyances  of  false 
teachers  been  seduced  to  believe  it  ?  them  which  have  been 
partakers  in  one,  with  them  which  have  been  partakers  in 
many?   them  which  in  many,  with  them  which  in  all? 

\S.  Notwithstanding  I  grant,  that  although  the  condem- 
nation of  them,  be  more  tolerable  than  of  these ;  yet  from 
the  man  that  laboureth  at  the  plough,  to  him  that  sitteth  in 
the  Vatican;  to  all  ''partakers"  in  the  sins  of  Babylon ^  to 
our  Fathers,  though  they  did  but  erroneously  practise  that 
which  the  Guides  heretically  taught;  to  all,  without  excep- 
tion, plagues  were  due.  The  pit  is  ordinarily  the  end,  as 
well  of  the  guide,  as  of  the  guided  in  bhndness.  But  wo 
worth  the  hour  wherein  we  were  born,  except  we  might 
promise  ourselves  better  things;  things  which  accompany [Heb. 
man's  salvation,  even  where  we  know  that  worse,  and  such 
as  accompany  condemnation,  are  due.  Then  must  we  shew 
some  way  how  possibly  they  might  escape.  What  way  is 
there  that  sinners  can  find  to  escape  the  judgment  of  God, 
but  only  by  appealing  to  the  seat  of  his  saving  Mercy? 
Which  mercy,  with  Origen,  we  do  not  extend  to  devils  and 
damned  spirits.  God  hath  mercy  upon  thousands,  but 
there  be  thousands  also  which  he  hardeneth.  Christ  hath 
therefore  set  the  bounds,  he  hath  fixed  the  limits  of  his 
saving  mercy  within  the  compass  of  these  terms,  ''  God  sent  john 
not  his  own  son  to  condemn  the  world,  but  that  the  world  "** 
through  him  might  be  saved."  In  the  third  of  St.  John's 
Gospel,  mercy  is  restrained  to  believers; ''  He  that  believeth 


390  DISCOURSE  [Sect.  16. 

John  shall  not  be  condemned :  he  that  believeth  not.  is,  condeinned 
ahready,  because  he  believed  not  in  theSon  of.Grod."  In 
the  second  of  the  Revelation^  mercy  is  reatrained  to  the 
penitent:  for  of  Jezebel  and  h^r  sectaries  thus  he  speaketh, 

Rev.ii.  '^  I  gave  her  space  to  repent*  and  she  repented  not.  Be- 
"  hold,  I  will  cast  her  into  a  bed^  f^^d  them  thajt  commit 
fornication  with  her  into  a  great  affliction,  except  they 
repent  them  of  their  works;  and  I  will  kill  her  children  with 
death."  Our  hope  therefore  of  the  Fathers  is,  jf  they  were 
not  altogether  faithless  and  impenitent. 

14.  They  are  not  all  faithless  that  are  weak  in  assenting 
to  the  Truth,  or  stiff  in  maintaining  things  any  way  opposite 
to  the  truth  of  Christian  doctrine.  But  as  many  as  hold 
the  Foundation  which  is  precious,  though  they  hold  it  but 
weakly,  and  as  it  were,  with  a  slender  thread,  although 
they  frame  many  base  and  unsuitable  things  upon  it,  things 
that  cannot  abide  the  trial  of  the  fire ;  yet  shall  they  pass 
the  fiery  trial  and  be  saved,  which  indeed  havebnilded 
themselves  upon  the  Rock,  which  is  the  foundation  of  the 
Church.  .  If  then  our  Fathers  did  not  hold  the  Foundation 
of  Faith,  there  is  no  doubt  but  •  they  were  faithless. .  If 
many  of  them  held  it,  then  is  therein  no  impediment  but 
many  of  them  might  be  saved.  Then  let  us  see  what  the 
Foundation  of  Faith  is,  and  whether  we  may  think  that 
thousands  of  our  Fathers  being  in  Popish  Superstitions, 
did  notwithstanding  hold  the  foundation. 

15.  If  the  foundation  of  Faith  do  inpiport  the  general 
ground  whereupon  we  rest  when  we  do  believe ;  the  Writings 
of  the  Evangelists  and  the  Apostles  are  the  foundation  of 
Christian  Faith:  ^^  Credimus  quia  legimus,"  saith  St.  Jerome. 
O  that  the  Church  of  Rome  did  as  soundly  interpref*^  these 
fundamental  Writings  whereupon  we  build  our  Faith,  as  she 
doth  willingly  hold  ai)d  embrace  them ! 

16.  But  if  the  name  of  Foundation  do  note  the  principal 
thing  which  is  believed  ;  then  is  that  the  foundation  of  our 

1  Tim.    Faith  which  St.  Paul  hath  to  Timothy,  "  God  manifested 

in  the  flesh,  justified  in  the  Spirit,  &c.:"  that  of  Nathanael, 

John      «*  Thou  art  the  Son  of  the  living  God;  thou  art  the  King 

ii.  42.    of  Israel :"  that  of  the  inhabitants  of  Samaria,  **  This  is 

— 

*  They  misinterpret,  not  only  by  making  false  and  corrupt  glosses  upon  the  Scripture, 
but  also  by  forcing  the  old  vulgar  Translation  as  the  only  authentical,  howbeit,  they  refoae 
no  Book  which  is  Canonical,  though  they  admit  sundry  which  are  not. 


Sect.  17.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,   &c.  391 

Clirist  the  Saviour  of  the  world :'-  he^  that  dkectly  denieth 
this,  doth  utterly  raze  the  very  foundation  of  our  Faith.  I 
have  proved  heretofore,  that  although  the  Church  of  Rome 
hath  played  the  harlot  worse  than  ever  did  Israel,  yet  are 
they  not,  as  now  the  Synagogue  of  the  Jews  which  plainly 
deny  Christ  Jesus,  quite  jand  clean. excluded  from  the  New 
Covenant.  But  as  Samaria  compared  with  Jerusalem  is  [EmIe. 
termed. Al^olah,  a  Church  or: Tabernacle  of  her  own;  con- 
trariwise Jerusalem,  Aholibah,  the  resting .  place  of  the 
Lord ;  so,  whatsoever  we  term  the  Church  of  Rome,  when 
we  compai;e  her  with  reformed.  Churches, .  still  we  put  a 
difference,  as  then  between  Babylon  and  Samaria,  so  now 
between  Rome  and  the  Heathenish  'assemblies.  Which 
oi».iiion  I  must  and. will  recall;.!  must. grant  and  will,  that 
the  Church  of  Rome,  together  with  all  her  children,  is  clean 
excluded ;  there  is  no  difference  in  the  world  between 
our  Fathers  and  Saracens,  Turks  and  -  Painims,  if  they 
did  directly  deny  Christ  crucified  for  the  salvation  of  the 
world. 

17.  But  how  many  millions  of  them  were  known  so  to 
have  ended  their  mortal  Uves^  that  the  drawing  of  their 
breath  hath  ceased  with  the  uttering  of  this  Faith,  f'  Christ 
my  Saviour,  my  Redeemer  Jesus?'*  Ailswer  is  made,  '*  That 
this  they. might  unfqignedly  confess^  and  yet  be  £ir  enough 
from  salvation.  For  behold,  saith  the  Apostle,  ^'  I,  Paul,  oti. 
say  unto  you,  that  if  you  be  circumcised,  Christ  shall  profit^'*' 
you  nothing."  Christ,  in  the  work  of  man's  salvation,  is 
alone:  the  Qalatians  were  cast  away  by  joining  Circumcbion 
and, the  other  Rites  of  the  Law  with  Christ  t  the  Church  of 
Borne  doth  teach  her  children  to  join  other  things  likewise 
with  him;  therefore  their  Faith,  their  Belief,  doth  not  profit 
them  any  thing  at  all."  It  is  true,  that  they  do  indeed 
joud  other  things  with  Christ;  but  how?  Not  in  the  work 
of  redemption  itself,  which  they  grant  that  Christ  alone  hath 
performed  sufficiently  for  the  salvation  of  the  whole  world ; 
but  in  the  application  of  this  inestimable  treasure,  that  it 
may  be  effectual  to  their  salvation:  how  demurely  soever 
they  confess  that  they  seek  remission  of  sins  no  otherwise 
than  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  using  humbly  the  means 
appointed  by  him  to  apply  the  benefit  of  holy  blood ;  they 
teach,  indeed,  so  many  things  pernicious  in  Christian  Faith, 
in  setting  down  the  means  whereof  they  speak,  that  the 


392  DISCOURSE  [Sect.  ]S« 

yery  Foundation  of  Faith  which  they  hold^  is  thereby  plainly 
overthrown,*  and  the  force  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
extinguished.  We  may  therefore  dispute  with  them,  urge 
them  even  with  as  dangerous  sequels  as  the  Apostle  doth 
the  Galatians.  But  I  demand,  if  some  of  those  Galatians^ 
heartily  embracing  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  sincere  and  sound 
in  Faith  (this  one  only  error  excepted)  had  ended  their 
lives  before  they  were  ever  taught  how  perilous  an  opinion 
they  held ;  shall  we  think  that  the  damage  of  this  error  did 
so  overweigh  the  benefit  of  their  Faith,  that  the  mercy  of 
God  might  not  save  them?  I  grant  they  overthrew  the 
very  Foundation  of  Faith  by  consequent :  doth  not  that  so 
likewise  which  the  Lutheran  Churches  do  at  this  day  so 
stiffly  and  so  firmly  maintain  ?f  For  mine  own  part,  I  dare 
not  here  deny  the  possibility  of  their  salvation,  which  have 
been  the  chiefest  instruments  of  ours,  albeit  they  carried  to 
their  grave  a  persuasion  so  greatly  repugnant  to  the  Truth. 
Forasmuch  therefore,  as  it  may  be  said  of  the  Church -of 
Rome,  she  hath  yet  a  little  strength,  she  doth  not  directly 
deny  the  foundation  of  Christianity ;  I  may,  I  trust  without 
offence,  persuade  myself  that  thousands  of  our  Fathers,  in 
former  times,  Uving  and  dying  within  her  walls,  have  found 
mercy  at  the  hands  of  God. 

18.  What,  although  they  repented  not  of  their  errors? 
God  forbid  that  I  should  open  my  mouth  to  gainsay  that 
[Loke  ^  which  Christ  himself  hath  spoken ;  ^'  Except  ye  repent,  ye 
shall  all  perish."  And  if  they  did  not  repent,  they  perished. 
But  withal  note,  that  we  have  the  benefit  of  a  double  re- 
pentance :  the  least  sin  which  we  commit  in  deed,  thought, 
or  word,  is  death,  without  repentance.  Yet  how  many 
things  do  escape  us  in  every  of  these,  which  we  do  not 
know?  how  many,  which  we  do  not  observe,  to  be  sins? 
and  without  the  knowledge,  without  the  observation  of  sin, 
there  is  no  actual  repentance.     It  cannot  then  be  chosen. 


xiii.  3.] 


*  Plainly  in  all  men's  sight  whose  eyes  God  hath  enlightened  to  behold  his  truth.  For 
they  which  are  in  error  are  in  darkness,  and  see  not  that  which  in  light  is  plain.  In  that 
which  they  teach  concerning  the  natures  of  Christ,  they  hold  the  same  which  Nestorius  [did] 
fully,  the  same  which  Eutyches,  about  the  proprieties  of  his  nature. 

f  The  opinion  of  the  Lutherans,  though  it  be  no  direct  denial  of  the  Foundation,  may 
notwithstanding  be  damnable  unto  some ;  and  I  do  not  think  but  that  in  many  respects  it  is 
less  damnable,  as  at  this  day  some  maintain  it,  than  it  was  in  them  which  held  it  at  first;  as 
Luther  and  others  whom  I  had  an  eye  unto  in  this  speech.  The  question  is  not,  whether  our 
error  with  such  and  such  circumstances ;  but  simply,  whether  [or  not]  an  error  overthrowing  the 
Foundation,  do  exclude  all  possibility  of  salvation,  if  it  be  recanted,  and  expressly  repented  oL 


SectSOJ]  OP  JusTtFiCATioN,  &c.  393 

but  that  for  as  many  as  hold  the  Foundation:  and  have  all 
holden  sins  and  errors  in  hatred?  the  blessing  of  repentance 
for  unknown  sins  and  errors  is  obtained  at  the  hands  of  God, 
through  the  gracious  mediation  of  Jesus  Christy  for  such 
suitors  as  cry  with  the  Prophet  David,  "  Purge  me,  O  Lord,  [P«a. 
from  my  secret  sins."  xix.12.3 

19.  But  we  wash  a  wall  of  loam ;  we  labour  in  vain ;  all 
this  is  nothing;  it  doth  not  prove,  it  cannot  justify,  that 
which  we  go  about  to  maintain !  Infidels  and  Heathen  men 
are  not  so  godless,  but  that  they  may,  no  doubt,  cry  "  God 
mercy,"  and  desire  in  general  to  have  their  sins  forgiven 
them.  To  such  as  deny  the  foundation  of  Faith,  there  can 
be  no  salvation  (according  to  the  ordinary  course  which 
God  doth  use  in  saving  men)  without  a  particular  repent- 
ance of  that  error.  The  Galatians,  thinking  that  unless  they 
were  circumcised,  they  could  not  be  saved,  overthrew  the 
foundation  of  Faith  directly :  therefore  if  any  of  them  did 
die  so  persuaded,  whether  before  or  after  they  were  told 
of  their  error,  their  end  is  dreadful ;  there  is  no  way  with 
them  but  one,  death  and  condemnation.  For  the  Apostle 
speaketh  nothing  of  men  departed,  but  saith  generally  of 
idl,  '*  If  you  be  circumcised,  Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing,  cai.  ▼. 
You  are  abolished  from  Christ,  whosoever  are  justified  by 
the  Law ;  ye  are  fallen  from  grace."  Of  them  in  the  Church 
of  Rome  the  reason  is  the  same.  For  whom  Antichrist  hath 
seduced,  concerning  them  did  not  St.  Paul  speak  long  before, 
that  '^  They  received  not  the  word  of  truth,  that  they  might  sThew. 
be  saved ;  therefore  God  would  send  them  strong  delusions  is. 
to  believe  lies,  that  all  they  might  be  damned  which  be- 
lieved not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness?" 
And  St.  John,  **  All  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  worship  adoc 
him,  whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  Book  of  Life  ?" 
Indeed  many  in  former  times,  as  their  books  and  writings  do 
yet  shew,  held  the  Foundation,  to  wit,  salvation  by  Christ 
alone,  and  therefore  might  be  saved.  God  hath  always  had 
a  Church  amongst  them,  which  firmly  kept  his  saving  truth. 
As  for  such  as  hold  with  the  Church  of  Rome,  that  we  can- 
not be  saved  by  Christ  alone  without  Works ;  they  do  not  only 
by  a  circle  of  consequence,  but  directly,  deny  the  foundation 
of  Faith ;  they  hold  it  not,  no  not  so  much  as  by  a  thread. 

SO.  This,  to  my  remembrance,  being  all  that  hath  been 
opposed  with  any  countenance  or  shew  of  reason,  I  hope, 


J 


394  DISCOURSE  [SeeL  90. 

if  this  be  answered,  the  cause  in  question  is  at  an  end. 
Concerning  general  repentance,  therefore:  what?'  a  mur- 
derer, a  blasphemer,  an  unclean  person,  a  Turk,  a  Jew, 
any  sinner  to  escape  the  wrath  of  God  by  a  general  re- 
pentance, "  God  forgive  me?"    Truly,  it  never  came  wiUim 
mine  heart,  that  a  general  repentance  doth  serve  for  all 
sins:   it  serveth  only  for  the  common  oversights  of  our 
sinful  life,  and  for  the  faults  which  either  we  do  not  mark, 
or  do  not  know  that  they  are.  faults.     Our  Fathers  were 
actually  penitent  for  sins,  wherein  they  knew  they  displeased 
God ;  or  else  diey  fall  not  within  the  compass  of  my  first 
speech*    ,Agun,  That  otherwise  they  could  not  be  saved, 
than  holding  the  foundation  of  Christian  Faith,  we  have  not 
only  affirmed,  but  proved.^    Why  is  it  not  then  confessed, 
that  thousands  of  our  Fathers  which  lived  in  Popish  Su- 
perstitions, might  yet,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  be  aavedt 
First,  if  .they  had  directly  denied,  the  very  foundaftions  of 
Christianity,  without  repenting  them  particularly  of  that 
sin :  he  which  saith,  there  could  be  no  salvation  for  theuii 
according  to  the  ordinary  course  which  God  doth  use  in 
saving  men,  granteth  plainly^  or  at  the  least  closely  insinu- 
ateth,  that  an  extraordinary  privilege  of  mercy  might  deliver 
their  souls  from  hell ;  which  is  more  than  I  required.    Se- 
condly, if  the  foundation  be  denied,  it  is  denied  for  fear  of 
some  Heresy  which  the  Church  of  Rome  maintaineth.    Bat 
how  many  were  there  .  amongst  our  Fathers,   who  being 
seduced  by  the  common  error  of  that  Church,  never  knew 
the  meaning  of  her  Heresies  ?     So  that  although  all  Popish 
Heretics' did  perish,  thousands  of  them  which  Jived  in  Popish 
Superstitions  might  be  saved.     Thirdly,  seeing  all  that  held 
Popish  Heresies  did  not  hold  all  the  Heresies  of  the  Pope; 
why  might  not  thousands  which  were  infected  with  odier 
leaven,  live  and  die  unsoured  with  this,  and  so  be  saved! 
Fourthly,  if  they  all  held  this  Heresy,  many  there  were 
that  held  it,  no  doubt,  but  only  in  a  general  form  of  words, 
which  a  favourable  interpretation  might  expound  in  a  sense 
differmg  far  enough  from  the  poisoned  conceit  of  Heresy. 
As  for  example ;  did  they  hold  that  we  cannot  be  saved  by 
Christ  without  good  works  ?*     We  ourselves  do,  I  think, 

*  For  this  is  the  only  thing  alleged  to  prove  the  impossibility  of  their  salvation ;  The  Church 
of  Roroe  joineth  Works  with  Christ,  which  is  a  denial  of  the  Foundation ;  and  unless  we  hold 
the  Foundation,  we  cannot  be  saved. 


Seci.ZlJ]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,  &c.  395 

all  say  as  much,  with  this  constructioiii  salvation  lieing 
taken  as  in  that  sentence,  *'  Gorde  creditor  ad  jostitiam,  i^om. 
ore  fit  confessio  ad  salutem ;"  except  infants,  and  men  cut 
off  upoii  the  point  of  their  conversiont  of  the  rest  none 
shall  see  God,  but  such  as  seek  peace  and  holiness,  though 
not  [as]  a  cause  of  their  salvation,  yet  as  a  way  which  they 
must  walk  which  will  be  /^aved.  Did  they  that  hold,  [that] 
without  Works  we  are  not  justified,  take,  Justification  so 
as  it  may  also  imply  Sanctification  ?  And  St*  James  doth 
say  as  •much*  For  except  there  be  an  ambiguity  in  the 
same  term,  St.  Paul  and  St.  James  do  contradict  each  the 
other ;  whi<^h .  cannot  be.  Now  there  is  no .  ambiguity  in 
the  name  either  of  Faith  or  of  Works,  being  meant  by 
them  both  in  one  and  the  same  sense.  Finding,  there- 
fore, that  Justification  is  spoken  of  by  St.  Paul  without 
implying  Sanctificatidn,  when  he  proveth  that  a  man 
is  justified  by .  Faith  without  Works ;  finding  likewise 
that  Justification  doth  sometime  imply  Sanctification 
also  with  it;  I  suppose  nothing  to  be  more  sound, 
than  so  to  interpret  St.  James  speaking  not  in  that  sense, 
but  in  this. 

2h  We  have  already  shewed,  that  there  be  two  kinds  of 
Christiaiii  righteousness:  the  one  without  us,  which  we  have 
by  imputation;  the  other  in  us,  which  consisteth  of  Faith, 
Hope^  and  Charity,  and  other  Christian  virtues:  &ndg*«|^i' 
S^«: James  doth  t>rove  that  Abraham  had  not  only  the 
one,  because  the  thing  believed  was  imputed  unto  him  for 
rigkteousneps;'  but  also  the  other,  beciEtUse  he  offered  up 
hik  80ta.i  . .  God  giveth  ua  both  the  one  justice  and  the 
9ther:.  the  one  by  accepting  us  for  righteous  in:  Christ: 
the  other  by  working  Christian  righteousness  in  us.  The 
proper  and  o^ost  immediate  efficient  cause  in  us  of  this 
latter^  isi,  **  the  Spirit  of  Adoption*'  we  have  received  into  ^"^j 
our  hearts.  That  whereof  it  consisteth^  whereof  it  is  really 
and  formally  made,  are  those  infiised  virtues  proper  and 
peculiar  unto  Saints ;  which  the  Spirit,  in  the  very  moment 
when. first  it  is  given  of  God,  bringeth  with  it:  the  effects 
whereof  are  such  actions  as  the  Apostle  doth  call  the  fruits 
of  Works^  the  operations  of  the  Spirit.  The  difference  of 
the  which  operations  from  the  root  whereof  they  spring, 
maketh  it  needful  to  put  two  kinds  likewise  of  sanctifying 
righteousness,  habitual  and  actual.    Habitual,  that  holiness, 


396  m^oVMU  [Seei.9h 

wherewith  our  souls  are  inwardly  indued,  the  same  in- 
stant when  first  we  begin  to  be  the  temples  of  the  Holy 
Ghost;  actual,  that  holiness  which  afterwards  beautifieth 
all  the  parts  and  actions  of  our  life,  the  holiness  for  which 
Enoch,  Job,  Zachary,  Elizabeth,  and  other  Saints,  are  in 
the  Scriptures  so  highly  commended.  If  here  it  be  de- 
manded, which  of  these  we  do  first  receive?  I  answer, 
that  the  Spirit,  the  virtues  of  the  Spirit,  the  habitual 
justice,  which  is  ingrafted,  the  external  justice  of  Jesos 
Christ,  which  is  imputed,  these  we  receive  all  at  one  and 
the  same  time ;  whensoever  we  have  any  of  these,  we  have 
all;  they  go  together:  yet  sith  no  man  is  justified  except 
he  believe,  and  no  man  believeth  except  he  haye  Futh, 
and  no  man  except  he  have  received  the  Spirit  of  Adop- 
tion, hath  Faith,  forasmuch  as  they  do  necessarily  infer 
Justification,  and  Justification  doth  of  necessity  presuppose 
them;  we  must  needs  hold  that  imputed  righteousness,  in 
dignity  being  the  chiefest,  is  notwithstanding  in  order  to 
the  last  of  all  these,  but  actual  righteousness,  which  is  the 
righteousness  of  good  works,  succeedeth  all,  foUoweth  after 
all,  both  in  order  and  time.  Which  being  attentively 
marked,  sheweth  plainly  how  the  Faith  of  true  believers 
cannot  be  divorced  from  Hope  and  Love ;  how  Faith  is 
a  part  of  Sanctification,  and  yet  unto  Justification  neces- 
sary ;  how  Faith  is  perfected  by  good  Works,  and  no 
Work  of  ours  without  Faith ;  finally,  how  our  Fathers 
might  hold,  that  we  are  justified  by  Faith  alone,  and  yet 
hold  truly  that  without  Works  we  are  not  justified.  Did 
they  think  that  men  do  merit  rewards  in  Heaven  by  the 
Works  they  perform  on  earth  ?  The  Ancient  use  meriting 
for  obtaining^  and  in  that  sense  they  of  Wittenberg  have 
it  in  their  Confession ;  "  We  teach  that  good  Works  com- 
manded of  God  are  necessarily  to  be  done,  and  by  the 
free  kindness  of  God  they  merit  their  certain  rewards." 
Therefore,  speaking  as  our  Fathers  did,  and  we  taking 
their  speech  in  a  sound  meaning,  as  we  may  take  our 
Fathers',  and  might,  forasmuch  as  their  meaning  is  doubt- 
ful, and  charity  doth  always  interpret  doubtful  things  fa- 
vourably ;  what  should  induce  us  to  think  that  rather  the 
damage  of  the  worst  construction  did  light  upon  them  all| 
than  that  the  blessing  of  the  better  was  granted  unto  thou- 
sands?    Fifthly,  if  in  the  worst  construction  that  may  be 


Sect  02.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,  &c.  397 

made,  they  had  generally  all  embraced  it  living,  might  not 
many  of  them  dying  utterly  renounce  it  ?  Howsoever  men, 
when  they  sit  at  ease,  do  vainly  tickle  their  hearts  with  the 
wanton  conceit  of  I  know  not  what  proportionable  corre- 
spondence between  their  merits  and  their  rewards,  which, 
in  the  trance  of  their  high  speculations,  they  dream  that 
God  hath  measured,  weighed,  and  laid  up,  as  it  were,  in 
bundles  for  them ;  notwithstanding  we  see  by  daily  expe- 
rience, in  a  number  even  of  them,  that  when  the  hour  of 
death  approacheth,  when  they  secretly  hear  themselves  sum- 
moned forthwith  to  appear,  and  stand  at  the  bar  of  that 
Judge,  whose  brightness  causeth  the  eyes  of  the  Angels 
themselves  to  dazzle,  all  these  idle  imaginations  do  then 
be^  to  hide  their  faces;  to  name  merits  then,  is  to  lay 
their  souls  upon  the  rack,  the  memory  of  their  own  deeds 
is  loathsome  unto  them,  they  forsake  all  things  wherein 
they  have  put  any  trust  or  confidence ;  no  staff  to  lean 
upon,  no  ease,  no  rest,  no  comfort  then,  but  only  in  Jesus 
Christ. 

22.  Wherefore  if  this  proposition  were  true,  "  To  hold 
in  such  wise,  as  the  Church  of  Rome  doth,  that  we  cannot 
be  saved  by  Christ  alone  without  Works,  is  directly  to  deny 
the  foundation  of  Faith ;"  I  say,  that  if  this  proposition 
were  true;  nevertheless  so  many  ways  I  have  shewed, 
whereby  we  may  hope  that  thousands  of  our  Fathers 
which  lived  in  Popish  Superstition  might  be  saved.*  But 
what  if  it  be  not  true  ?  What  if  neither  that  of  the  Gala- 
tians  concerning  Circumcision,  nor  this  of  the  Church  of 
Rome  by  Works,  be  any  direct  denial  of  the  Foundation, 
as  it  is  a£Srmed  that  both  are  ?  I  need  not  wade  so  far 
as  to  discuss  this  controversy,  the  matter  which  first  was 
brought  into  question  being  so  clear,  as  I  hope  it  is.  How- 
beit,  because  I  desire  that  the  truth  even  in  that  also  should 
receive  light,  I  will  do  mine  endeavour  to  set  down  some- 
what more  plainly ;  first,  the  foundation  of  Faith,  what  it 
is;  secondly,  what  it  is  directly  to  deny  the  Foundation; 
thirdly,  whether  they  whom  God  hath  chosen  to  be  heirs 
of  life,  may  fall  so  far  as  directly  to  deny  it;  fourthly, 
whether  the  Galatians  did  so  by  admitting  the  error  about 

*  They  may  cease  to  put  any  confidence  in  Works,  and  yet  never  think,  living  in  Popish 
Superstition,  they  did  amiss.  Pighius  died  Popish,  and  yet  denied  Popery  in  the  article  of 
Justification  by  Works  long  befi)re  his  death. 


398  DISCOURSE  [Seei.  SS. 

Circumcision  and  the  Law ;  last  of  all,  whether  the  Church 
of  Rome,  for  this  one  opinion  of  Works,  may  be  thought  to 
do  the  like,  and  thereupon  to  be  no  more  a  Chiistian  Church, 
than  are  the  assemblies  of  Turks  and  Jews. 
What        23.  This  word  Foundation  being  figuratively  used,  hath 
fonnda.  always  reference  to  somewhat  whidi  resembleth  a  material 
vSthis,  building,  as  both  that  doctrine  of  Laws  and  the  community 
of  Christians  do.-    By  the  Masters  of  Civil  Policy  nlything 
is  so  much  inculcated,  as  that  Commonweals  lire  founded 
upon  Ldws ;  for  that  a  multitude  cannot  be  compacted  into 
one  l)ody  otherwise  than  by  a  common  acception  of  Laws, 
whereby  they  are  to  be  kept  in  order.*    The  ground  of  all 
Civil  Lskws  is  this,  **  No  man  ought  to  be  hurt  ot  injured 
by  another."  Take  away  the  persuasion,  and  ye  take  away 
all  the  Laws;   take  away  Laws,  and  what  shall  become 
of  Commonweals?     So  it  is  in  our  spiritual  Christian  Com- 
Epbea.    Munity I   I  do  not  mean  that  "body"  mystical,  whereof 
iVfli.    Christ  is  only  "  the  Head,"   that  building  undiscemible 
II.  so.     by  mortal  eyes,    wherein    "  Christ  is  the   chief  Comer- 
stone:"   but  I  speak  of  the  visible  Church;   "  the  foun- 
ibid.      dation"  whereof  is  the  Doctrine  which  "  the  Prophets  add 
the  Apostles"  profest.    The  mark  whereuhto  their  Doc- 
trine tendeth,  is  pointed  at  in  these-  words  *of  Peter  unto 
John      Christ,    "  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  Life :"  in  these 
2  Tim*,    words  of  Paul  to  Timothy,  "  The  Holy  Scriptures  are  able 
*"•"•    to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation."     It  is  the  demand  of 
Nature  itself,    **  What  shall  we  do  to  have  eternal  KfeT 
The   desire    of   immortality  and    the   knowledge   of  that 
whereby  it  may  be  obtained,  is  so  natural  unto  all  men, 
that  even  they  who  are  not  persuaded  that  they  shall,  do 
notwithstanding  wish  that  they  might,  know  a  "way  how  to 
see  no  end  of  life.     And  because  natural  means  are  not 
able  still  to  resist  the  force  of  death,  there  is  no  people 
in  the  earth  so  savage,  which  hath  not  devised  sotne  su- 
pernatural help  or  other,  to  fly  to  for  aid  and  succour  in  ex- 
tremities, against  the  enemies  of  their  Laws  [Lives],  A  longing 
therefore  to  be  saved,  without  understanding  the  true  way 
how,  hath  been  the  cause  of  all  the  Superstitions  in  the 
world.     O  that  the  miserable  state  of  others,  which  wander 


*  "  Vocata  ad  condonem  multitudine,  qu«  coalescere  in  populi  unius  corpos  nulla  re  pnr- 
terquam  legibos  potent."     Li?,  de  Rom.  lib.  i. 


Sect.  ^.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,  &c.  399 

in  darknessj  and  wot  not  whither  they  go,  could  give  us 
understanding  hearts,  worthily  to  esteem  the  riches  of  the 
mercy  of  God  towards  us,  before  whose  eyes  the  doors 
of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  are  set  wide  open!     Should 
we  offer  violence  unto  it?     It  offereth  violence  unto  us, 
and  we  gather  strength  to  withstand  it.     But  I  am  besides 
my  purpose  when  I  fall  to  bewail  the  cold  affection  which 
we  bear  towards  that  whereby  we  should  be  saved;  my 
purpose  being  only  >  to  set  down  what  the  ground  of  sal- 
vation is.     The  doctrine  of  the  Gospel  proposeth  salva- 
tion as  the  end ;  and  doth  it  not  teach  the  way  of  attaining 
thereunto  ?     Yet  the  Damsel  possest  with  a  spirit  of  di- 
vination spake  the  truth;  '^  These  men  are  the  servants  Acu 
of  the  most  high  God,  which  Vshew  unto  us  the  way  of 
salvation:"    '^  A  new  and  living  way  which  Christ  hath  Heb. 
prepared  for  us  through  the  vail,  that  is,  his  flesh:"  sal- 
vation purchased  by  the  death  of  Christ.      By  this  foun- 
dation the  children  of  God,  before  the  written  Law,  were 
distinguished  from  the  sons  of  men ;    the  reverend   Pa-  Gen. 
triarchs  both  possesst  it  living,  and  spake  expressly  of  it  ^"^ 
at  the  hour  of  their  death.     It  comforted  Job  in  the  midst  Job 
of  grief;    it  was  afterwards  the  anchor -hold  of  all  the^*' 
righteous  in  Israel,  from  the  writing  of  the  Law  to  the 
time  of  Grace.     Every  Prophet  maketh  mention  of  it.     It 
was  famously  spoken  of,  about  the  time  when  the  coming 
of  Christ,  to  accomplish  the  promises  which  were  made  long 
before  it,  drew  near,  that  the  sound  thereof  was  heard  even 
amongst  the  Gentiles.      When  he  was  come,  as  many  as 
were  his,  acknowledged  that  he  was  their  salvation;  he, 
that  long-expected  *'  Hope  of  Israel ;"  he,  that  **  seed,  in  [Acts 
whom  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed."    So  2o.j 
that  now  he  is  a  name  of  ruin,  a  name  of  death  and  con- 
demnation, unto  such  as  dream  of  a  new  Messias,   to  as 
many  as  look  for  salvation  by  any  other  than  by  him ;  **  For  Acu 
amongst  men  there  is  given  no  other  name  under  Heaven 
whereby  we  must  be  saved."    Thus  much  St.  Mark  doth 
intimate  by  that  which  he  doth  put  in  the  front  of  his  book, 
making  his  entrance  with  these  words,  **  The  beginning  of 
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Soh  of  God."    His  doctrine 
he  termeth  ^*  the  Gospel,"  because  it  teacheth  salvation ; 
**  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,"  because  it 
teacheth  salvation  by  htm.    This  is  then  the  foundation^ 


iii.  11. 


400  DISCOURSE  [Sect.  25. 

whereupon  the  frame  of  the  Gospel  is  erected;  that  very 
Jesus  whom  the  Virgin  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom 
Simeon  embraced  in  his  arms,  whom  Pilate  condemned, 
whom  the  Jews  crucified,  whom  the  Apostles  preached,  he 

Lnke  is  "  Christ  the  Lord,*'  the  only  ^^  Saviour"  of  the  world; 
"  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay."    Thus  I  have  briefly 

1  Cor.  opened  that  principle  in  Christianity,  which  we  call  the 
Foundation  of  our  Faith.  It  followeth  now  that  I  declare 
unto  you,  what  it  is  directly  to  overthrow  it.  This  will  be 
better  opened,  if  we  understand,  what  it  is  to  hold  the 
foundation  of  Faith. 

S4.  There  are  which  defend,  that  many  of  the  Gentiles, 
who  never  heard  the  name  of  Christ,  held  the  foundatioii 
of  Christianity :  and  why  ?  They  acknowledged,  many  of 
them,  the  providence  of  God^  his  infinite  wisdom,  strei^lth, 
power;  his  goodness,  and  his  mercy  towards  the  childroi 
of  men ;  that  God  hath  judgment  in  store  for  the  wicked, 
but  for  the  righteous  which  serve  him  rewards,  &c.  In 
this  which  they  confessed,  that  lieth  covered  which  we 
believe;  in  the  rudiments  of  their  knowledge  concemii^ 
God,  the  foundation  of  our  Faith  concerning  Christ  lieth 
secretly  wrapt  up,  and  is  virtually  contained :  therefore  they 
held  the  foundation  of  Faith,  though  they  never  had  it 
Might  we  not  with  as  good  a  colour  of  reason  defend, 
that  every  ploughman  hath  all  the  sciences,  wherein  philo- 
sophers have  excelled  ?  For  no  man  is  ignorant  of  their 
first  principles,  which  do  virtually  contain  whatsoever  by 
natural  means  is  or  can  be  known.  Yea,  might  we  not 
with  as  great  reason  affirm,  that  a  man  may  put  three  mighty 
oaks  wheresoever  three  acorns  may  be  put?  For  virtually 
an  acorn  is  an  oak.  To  avoid  such  paradoxes,  we  teach 
plainly,  that  to  hold  the  foundation  is,  in  express  terms  to 
acknowledge  it. 

25.  Now,  because  The  Foundation,  is  an  affirmative  posi- 
tion, they  all  overthrow  it,  who  deny  it ;  they  directly  over- 
throw it,  who  deny  it  directly ;  and  they  overthrow  it  by 
consequent,  or  indirectly,  which  hold  any  one  assertion 
whatsoever,  whereupon  the  direct  denial  thereof  may  be 
necessarily  concluded.  What  is  the  question  between  the 
Gentiles  and  us,  but  this,  Whether  salvation  be  by  Christ? 
What  between  the  Jews  and  us,  but  this.  Whether  by  this 
Jesus,  whom  we  call  Christ,  yea,  or  no  ?     This  to  be  the 


Sect.  26.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,   &c.  401 

main  point  whereupon  Christianity  stahdeth,  it  is  clear  by 
that  one  sentence  of  Festus  concerning  Paul's  accusers; 
"  They  brought  no  crime  of  such  things  as  I  supposed,  but  [Acts 
had  certain  questions  against  him  of  their  Superstition,  and 
of  one  Jesus  which  was  dead,  whom  Paul  affirmed  to  be 
alive."  Where  we  see  that  Jesus,  dead  and  raised  for  the 
salvation  of  the  world,  is  by  Jews  denied,  despised  by  a 
Grentile,  by  a  Christian  Apostle  maintained.  The  Fathers 
therefore  in  the  primitive  Church,  when  they  wrote ;  Ter- 
tiillian,  the  Book  which  he  calleth  Apologeticus ;  Minutius 
F^lix,  the  Book  which  he  intitleth  Octavius ;  Arnobius,  the 
seven  Books  against  the  Gentiles ;  Chrysostom,  his  Orations 
against  the  Jews;  Eusebius,  his  ten  Books  of  Evangelical 
Demonstration ;  they  stand  in  defence  of  Christianity  against 
them,  by  whom  the  Foundation  thereof  was  directly  denied. 
But  the  writings  of  the  Fathers  against  Novatians,  Pelagians, 
and  other  Heretics  of  the  like  note,  refel  positions,  whereby 
the  foundation  of  Christian  Faith  was  overthrown  by  conse- 
quent only.  In  the  former  sort  of  writings  the  Foundation 
is  proved ;  in  the  latter,  it  is  alledged  as  a  proof,  which  to 
men  that  had  been  known  dire^ptly  to  deny,  must  needs  have 
seem'd  a  very  beggarly  kind  ^  of  disputing.  All  Infidels 
therefore  deny  the  Foundation  of  Faith  directly ;  by  conse- 
quent, many  a  Christian  man,  yea  whole  Christian  Churches 
have  denied  it,  and  do  deny  it  at  this  present  day.  Christian 
Churches !  the  Foundation  of  Christianity  ?  not  directly,  for 
then  they  cease  to  be  Christian  Churches ;  but  by  a  conse- 
quent, in  respect  whereof  we  condemn  them  as  erroneous, 
although,  for  holding  the  Foundation,  we  do  and  must  hold 
them  Christian. 

-  36.  We  see  what  it  is  to  hold  the  Foundation ;  what 
directly,  and  what  by  consequent,  to  deny  it.  The  next 
thing  which  foUoweth  is.  Whether  they  whom  God  hath 
chosen  to  obtain  the  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  may, 
once  effectually  called,  and  through  Faith  justified  truly, 
afterwards  fall  so  far  as  directly  to  deny  the  Foundation 
which  their  hearts  have  before  embraced  with  joy  and  com- 
fort in  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  such  is  the  Faith,  which  indeed 
doth  justify.  Devils  know  the  same  things  which  we  believe, 
and  the  minds  of  the  most  ungodly  may  be  fully  persuaded 
of  the  truth ;  which  knowledge  in  the  one  and  in  the  other, 
is  sometimes  termed  Faith,  but  equivocally,  being  indeed  no 

VOL.  III.  D  D 


I 


402  DISCOURSE  [SecL  26» 

such  Faith  as  that  whereby  a  Christian  man  is  justified.    It 
is  th^  Spirit  of  Adoption  which  worketh  Faith  in  us,  in  them 
not :  the  things  which  we  believe,  are  by  us  apprehended, 
not  only  as  true,  but  also  as  good,  and  that  to  us :  as  good, 
they  are  not  by  thetti  apprehended ;  as  true,  they  are.  Where^ 
upon  foUoweth  the  third  difference ;  the  Christian  man  the 
more  he  increaseth  in  Faith,  the  more  his  joy  and  comfort 
aboundeth :  but  they,  the  more  sure  they  are  of  the  torutfa, 
the  more  they  quake  and  tremble  at  it.     This  begetteth 
another  effect,  where  the  hearts  of  the  one  sort  have  a  dif- 
ferent disposition  from  the  other.     *'  Non  ignoro  plerosqut 
conscientia  meritorum,  nihil  se  esse  per  mortem  magis  optare 
quam  credere ;  malunt  enim  extingui  penitus,  quam  ad  sup- 
plicia  reparari:  I  am  not  ignorant,  saith  Minutius,  that  therfe 
be  many,  who  being  conscious  what  they  are  to  look  for,  do 
rather  wish  that  they  might,  than  think  that  they  shall  cease, 
when  they  cease. to  live;  because  they  hold  it  better  that 
death  should  consume  them  unto  nothing,  than  Ood  revive 
them  unto  punishment."     So  it  is  in  other  articles  of  Faith, 
whereof  wicked  men  think,  no  doubt,  many  times  they  art 
too  true :  on  the  contrary  side,  to  the  other,  there  is  no  grief 
or  torment  greater,  than  to  feel  their  persuasion  weak  in 
things,  whereof,  when  they  are  persuaded,  they  reap  such 
comfort  and  joy  of  spirit:  such  is  the  Faith  whereby  we 
are  justified ;  such,  I  mean,  in  respect  of  the  quality.    For 
touching  the  principal  object  of  Faith,  longer  than  it  holdeth 
the  Foundation  whereof  we  have  spoken,  it  neither  justifietb, 
nor  is ;  but  ceaseth  to  be  Faith  when  it  ceaseth  to  believe 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  Saviour  of  the  world.     The 
cause  of  life  spiritual  in  us,  is  Christ,  not  carnally  or  cor^ 
porally  inhabiting,  but  dwelling  in  the  soul  of  man,  as  a  thing 
which  (when  the  mind  apprehendeth  it)  is  said  to  inhabit  or 
[Rom.    possess  the  mind.    The  mind  conceiveth  Christ  by  "  hearing" 
*'  *^'"'    the  Doctrine  of  Christianity,  as  the  light  of  Nature  doth 
[enable]  the  mind  to  apprehend  those  truths  which  are  merely 
rational ;  so  that  saving  truth,  which  is  far  above  the  reach 
of  human  reason,  cannot  otherwise,  than  by  the  Spirit  of 
the  Almighty,  be  conceived.   All  these  are  implied,  whereso- 
ever any  of  them  is  mentioned  as  the  cause  of  the  spiritual 
viii'"io.  life.     Wherefore  if  we  have  read,  that  "  the  Spirit  is  our 
K.     life;"  or,  "the  Word,  our  life;"  or,  "  Christ,  our  life;"  we 
iii.  4.     are  in  every  of  these  to  understand,  that  our  "  life"  is  Christ, 


Sect.  26.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,  &c.  40S 

by  the  "  hearing"  of  the  Gospel,  apprehended  as  a  Saviour, 
and  assented  unto  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  first  intellectual  conceit  and  comprehension  of  Christ 
so  embraced,  St.  Peter  calleth  the  "  seed"  whereof  we  be  i  pet. 
"  new  born :"  our  first  embracing  of  Christ,  is  our  first  k^i, 
reviving  from  the  state  of  •*  death"  and  condemnation.    *'  He  ^joim 
that  hath  the  Son  hath  life,"  saith  St.  John,  "  and  he  that  ""•  *** 
hath  not  the  Son  of  God,  hath  not  life."  If  therefore  he  which 
once  hath  the  Son,  may  cease  to  have  the  Son,  though  it  be 
for  a  moment,  he  ceaseth  for  that  moment  to  have  life.    But 
the  life  of  them  which  have  the  Son  of  God,  is  **  everlast-  i  John 
ing"  in  the  world  to  come.     But  because  as  "  Christ  being  Perpi- 
raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more,  death  hath  no  more  Falth.^ 
power  over  him ;"  so  the  justified  man,  being  allied  to  God  Roiti. 
in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  doth  as  necessarily  from  that  time  " ' 
forward  always  Uve,  as  Christ,  by  whom  he  hath  life,  liveth  John 

xiv    10 

always.     I  might,  if  I  had  not  otherwhere  largely  done  it 
already,  shew  by  many  and  sundry  manifest  and  clear  proofs, 
how  the  motions  and  operations  of  life  are  sometimes  so 
indiscernible,  and  so  secret,  that  they  seem  stone-dead,  who 
notwithstanding  are  still  alive  unto  God  in  Christ.     For  as 
long  as  that  abideth  in  us,  which  animateth,  quick'neth,  and 
giveth  life,  so  long  we  live ;  and  we  know  that  the  cause  of 
our  Faith  abideth  in  us  for  ever.     If  Christ,  the  fountain  of 
life,  may  flit  and  leave  the  habitation  where  once  he  dwelleth, 
what  shall  become  of  his  promise,  ''  I  am  with  you  to  the  [Mau. 
world's  end  ?"    If  the  seed  of  God,  which  containeth  Christ,  20.] 
may  be  first  conceived  and  then  cast  out,  how  doth  St.  Peter  1  Pet. 
term  it  **  immortal?"  How  doth  St.  John  affii*m  it  "  abideth?"  1  join 
If  the  Spirit,  which  is  given  to  cherish  and  preserve  the  seed 
of  life,  may  be  given  and  taken  away,  how  is  it  '^  the  earnest  Ephet. 
of  our  inheritance  until  redemption  ?"  how  doth  it  continue  **  *"** 
wth  us  "  for  ever  ?"    If  therefore  the  man  which  is  once  just  John 
by  Faith,  shall  live  by  Faith,  and  live  for  ever,  it  followeth,  that 
he  which  once  doth  believe  the  Foundation,  must  needs  believe 
the  Foundation  for  ever.    If  he  believe  it  for  ever,  how  can  he 
ever  directly  deny  it  ?     Faith  holdeth  the  direct  affirmation ; 
the  direct  negation,  so  long  as  Faith  continueth,  is  excluded. 
But  you  will  say,   "  That  as  he  that  is  to  -  day  holy, 
tnay   to-morrow   forsake  his   holiness,    and    become    im- 
•pure;  as  a  friend  may  change  his  mind,  and  be  made  an 
enemy;   as  hope  may  wither;   so  Faith  may  die  in  the 

DD2 


X.  28. 


404  .  *      DISCOURSE  [Sect.  S6. 

heart  of  msLU,  the  Spirit  may  be  quenched,  Grace  may  be 
extinguished,  they  which  believe  may  be  quite  turned  away, 
from  the  Truth."  The  case  is  clear,  long  experience  hath 
made  this  manifest ;  it  needs  no  proof.  I  grant  we  are  apt, 
prone,  and  ready,  to  forsake  God ;  but  is  God  ready  to  for- 
sake us?  Our  minds  are  changeable;  is  his  so  likewise? 
Whom  God  hath  justified,  hath  not  Christ  assured,  that  it  • 
[Lnkc  is  "  his  Father's  will  to  give  them  a  Kingdom  V*  Notwith- 
coi.?.'^  standing,  it  shall  not  be  otherwise  given  them,  than  *'  if  they 
^'  continue  grounded  and  stablished  in  the  Faith,  and  be  not 
iTim.  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  Gospel;"  "  if  they  abide 
in  love  and  holiness."  Our  Saviour  therefore,  when  he 
spake  of  the  sheep  effectually  called,  and  truly  gathered  into 
John  his  fold,  ''I  give  unto  them  eternal  Life,  and  they  shall 
never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand  ;** 
in  promising  to  save  them,  he  promised,  no  doubt,  to  pre- 
serve tbem  in  that  without  which  there  can  be  no  salvaticMO, 
as  also  from  that  whereby  it  is  irrecoverably  lost.  Every 
error  in  things  appertaining  unto  God  is  repugnant  unto 
Faith ;  every  fearful  cogitation,  unto  Hope ;  unto  Love,  every 
straggling  inordinate  desire;  unto  Holiness,  every  blembh 
wherewith  either  the  inward  thoughts  of  our  minds,  or  the 
outward  actions  of  our  lives,  are  stained.  But  Heresy,  such 
as  that  of  Ebion,  Cerinthus,  and  others,  against  whom  the 
Apostles  were  forced  to  bend  themselves,  both  by  word  and 
also  by  writing ;  that  repining  discouragement  of  heart  which 
tempteth  God,  whereof  we  have  Israel  in  the  Desert  for  a 
pattern;  coldness,  such  as  that  in  the  Angels  of  Ephesus; 
foul  sins,  known  to  be  expressly  against  the  first  or  second 
Table  of  the  Law,  such  as  Noah,  Manasses,  David,  Solomon, 
and  Peter,  committed;  these  are,  each  in  their  kind,  so 
opposite  to  the  former  virtues,  that  they  leave  ho  place  for 
salvation  without  an  actual  repentance.  But  infidelity,  ex- 
treme despair,  hatred  of  God  and  all  goodness,  obduration 
in  sin,  cannot  stand  where  there  is  but  the  least  spark  of 
Faith,  Hope,  Love,  and  Sanctity ;  even  as  cold  in  the  lowest 
degree  cannot  be,  where  heat  in  the  highest  degree  is  found. 
Whereupon  I  conclude,  that  although  in  the  first  kind,  no 
man  liveth  which  sinneth  not;  and  in  the  second,  as  perfect 
as  any  do  live,  may  sin ;  yet,  sith  the  man  which  is  born  of 
1  John  God  hath  a  promise,  that  in  him  "  the  seed  of  God  shaD 
abide,"  which  seed  is  a  sure  preservative  against  the  sins 


iii.  9. 


Sect.  26.3  OF  JUSTIFICATION,   &c.  405 

that  are  of  the  third  suit;  greater  and  clearer  assurance 
we  cannot  have  of  any  thing,  than  of  this,  That  from  such 
sins  God  shall  preserve  the  righteous,  as  the  apple  of  his 
eye,  for  ever.  Directly  to  deny  the  Foundation  of  Faith,  is 
plain  infidelity;  where  Faith  is  entered,  there  infidelity  is 
for  ever  excluded :  therefore,  by  him  which  hath  once 
sincerely  believed  in  Christ,  the  foundation  of  Christian 
Faith  can  never  be  directly  denied.  Did  not  Peter  ?  did 
not  Marcellinus  ?  did  not  others,  both  directly  deny  Christ 
after  that  they  had  believed,  and  again  believe  after  they 
had  denied  ?  No  doubt,  as  they  confess  in  words,  whose 
condemnation  is  nevertheless  their  not  believing  (for  example 
we  have  Judas);  so  likewise,  they  may  believe  in  heart 
whose  condemnation,  without  repentance,  is  their  not  con- 
fessing. Although,  therefore,  Peter  and  the  rest,  for  whose 
faith  Christ  hath  prayed  that  it  might  not  fail,  did  not  by 
denial  sin  the  sin  of  infidelity,  which  is  an  inward  abnegation 
of  Christ  (but  if  they  had  done  this,  their  faith  had  clearly 
failed) ;  yet,  because  they  sinned  notoriously  and  grievously, 
committing  that  which  they  knew  to  be  expressly  forbidden 
by  the  Law,  which  saith,  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  [Dent. 
thy  God,,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve ;"  necessary  it  was, 
that  he  which  purposed  to  save  their  souls  should,  as  he  did, 
touch  their  hearts  with  true  unfeigned  repentance,  that  his 
mercy  might  restore  them  again  to  life,  whom  sin  had  made 
the  children  of  death  and  condemnation.  Touching  this 
point  therefore,  I  hope  I  may  safely  set  down.  That  if  the 
justified  err,  as  he  may,  and  never  come  to  understand  his 
error,  God  doth  save  him  through  general  repentance ;  but 
if  he  fall  into  Heresy,  he  calleth  him  at  one  time  or  other  by 
actual  repentance;  but  from  infidelity,  which  is  an  inward 
direct  denial  of  the  Foundation,  he  preserveth  him  by  special 
providence  for  ever.  Whereby  we  may  easily  know,  what 
to  think  of  those  Galatians  whose  hearts  were  so  possest 
with  the  love  of  the  Truth,  that,  if  it  had  been  possible,  [Cai. 
they  would  have  pluckt  out  their  eyes  to  bestow  upon  their  *^'  '^ 
Teachers.    It  is  true,  that  they  were  greatly  changed,*  both 

*  Howsoever  men  be  changed  (for  changed  they  may  be,  even  the  best  amongst  men),  if 
they  that  have  received,  as  it  seemeth  some  of  the  Galatians,  which  fell  into  error,  had 
received,  the  gifts  and  graces  of  God,  which  are  called  ^uera/i^irra)  such  as  faith,  hope,  and 
charity  are,  which  God  doth  never  take  away  from  him  to  whom  they  are  given,  as  if  it 
repented  him  to  have  given  them ;  if  such  might  be  so  far  changed  by  error,  as  that  the 
very  root  of  Futh  should  be  quite  extinguished  in  them,  and  so  their  salvation  utterly  lost, 
it  would  shake  the  hearts  of  tlie  strongest  and  stoutest  of  us  alL  See  the  contrary  in  Bezt^ 
his  Observations  upon  the  Harmony  of  Confessions. 


406  DISCOURSE  ISeci*  2& 

in  persuasion  and  affection ;  so  that  the  Galatians,  when 
St.  Paul  wrote  unto  them^  were  not  now  the  Galatian?  which 
they  had  been  in  former  timoi  for  that  through  error  they 
wandered^  although  they  were  his  sheep.  I  do  not  deny, 
but  that  I  should  deny  that  they  were  his  sheep,  if  I  should 
grants  that  through  error  they  perished.  It  was  a  perilous 
opinion  that  they  held ;  perilous  even  in  them  that  held  it 
only  as  an  error,  because  it  overthroweth  the  Foundation  by 
consequent.  But  in  them  which  obstinately  maintain  it,  I 
cannot  think  it  less  than  a  damnable  Heresy.  We  most 
therefore  put  a  difference  between  them  which  err  of 
ignorance,  retaining  nevertheless  a  mind. desirous  to  be  in- 
structed in  truth,  and  them  which,  after  the  truth  is  laid 
open,  persist  in  the  stubborn  defence  of  their  blindness. 
Heretical  defenders,  froward  and  stiff-necked  teachers  of 
rphii.  Circumcision,  the  blessed  Apostle  calls  ^'  dogs :"  silly  men, 
who  were  seduced  to  think  they  taught  the  truth,  he  pitieth, 
he  taketh  up  in  his  arms,  he  lovingly  embraceth,  he  kissetb, 
and  with  more  than  fatherly  tenderness  doth  so  temper, 
qualify,  and  correct  the  speech  he  useth  toward  them,  that 
a  man  cannot  easily  discern,  whether  did  most  abound«  the 
love  which  he  bare  to  their  godly  affection,  or  the  grief  which 
the  danger  of  their  opinion  bred  them.  Their  opinion  was 
dangerous ;  was  not  theirs  also,  who  thought  the  Kingdom 
of  Christ  should  be  earthly?  was  not  theirs,  which  thought 
the  Gospel  only  should  be  preached  to  the  Jews?  What 
more  opposite  to  Prophetical  doctrine,  concerning  the  coming 
of  Christ,  than  the  one  ?  concerning  the  Catholic  Church, 
than  the  other  ?  Yet  they  which  had  these  fancies,  even 
when  they  had  them,  were  not  the  worst  men  in  the  world. 
The  Heresy  of  Free-will  was  a  millstone  about  the  Pelagians 
neck ;  shall  we  therefore  give  sentence  of  death  inevitable 
against  all  those  Fathers  in  the  Greek  Church,  which  being 
mispersuaded,  died  in  the  error  of  Free-will?  Of  these 
Galatians,  therefore,  which  first  were  justified,  and  then 
deceived,  as  I  can  see  no  cause,  why  as  many  (is  died  before 
admonition  might  not  by  mercy  be  received,  even  in  error; 
so  I  make  no  doubt,  but  as  many  as  lived  till  they  were 
admonished,  found  the  mercy  of  God  effectual  in  converting 
them  from  their  error,*  lest  any  one  that  is  Christ's  should 

*  Error  convicted,  and  afterwards  maintained,  is  more  than  error ;  for  although  opinion 
be  the  same  it  was,  in  which  respect  I  still  call  it  error,  yet  they  are  not  now  the  «aine  they 
^ere  when  they  are  taught  what  the  truth  is,  and  plainly  taught. 


Sk^.  ^0  OF  JUSTIffCATION^  &C.  407 

perish-    Of  this,  I  take  it,  there  ia  no  controversy :  only 
^goinst  the  salvation  of  them  that  died,  though  before  ad« 
monition,  yet  in  error,  it  is  objeeted,  that  their  opinion  was 
a  very  plain  direct  denial  of  the  Foundation.    If  Paul  and 
Barnabas  had  been  persuaded,  they  would  haply  have  used 
the  terms  otherwise,  speaking  of  the  Masters  themselvea 
who  did  first  set  that  error  abroach,  **  certain  of  the  sect  of 
the  Pharisees  which  believed''    What  difference  was  there acis 
between  these  Pharisees  and  other  Pharisees,  from  whom  by  *^' 
a  special  description  they  are  distinguished,  but  this.  These 
which  came  to  Antioch»  teaching  tlie  necessity  of  Circum^ 
eision,  were  Christians ;  the  other,  enemies  of  Christianity  ? 
Why  then  should  these  be  termed  so  distinctly  Believers,  if 
they  did  directly  deny  the  Foundation  of  our  belief;  besides 
which,,  there  was  no  otlier  thing,  that  made  the  rest  to  be 
no  believers?    We  need  go  no  farther  than  St.  Paul's  very 
reac(oning  against  them  for  proof  of  this  matter :  '^  Seeing  you  oai.  it. 
know  God,  or  rather  are  known  of  God,  how  turn  you  again 
to  impotent  rudiments?   The  Law  engendereth  servants,  her  ver.24, 
children  are  in  bondage :  they  which  are  begotten  by  the  ve'r.  26. 
Gospel,  are  free.     Brethren,  we  are  not  children  of  thever.  si. 
aervant,  but  of  the  free  woman,  and  will  ye  yet  be  under  the  ▼«'.  si. 
Law?"    That  they  thought  it  unto  salvation  necessary,  for 
the  Church  of  Christ  to  observe  days,  and  months,  and  times,  ver.  le. 
^xA  years,  to  keep  the  Ceremonies  and  Sacraments  of  the 
Law,  this  was  their  error.    Yet  he  which  condemneth  their 
error,  confesseth  that,  notwithstanding,  they  knew  God  and 
were  known  of  him ;  he  taketh  not  the  honour  from  them  to 
be  termed  Sons  begotten  of  the  immortal  seed  of  the  Gospel. 
Let  the  heaviest  words  which  he  used  be  weighed ;  consider 
the  drift  of  those  dreadful  conclusions,  ^'  If  ye  be  circumcised,  cai.  v. 
Christ  $hall  profit  you  nothing :  as  many  as  are  justified  by  ' 
the  Law,  are  fallen  from  Grace.'*    It  had  been  to  no  purpose 
in  the  world  so  to  urge  them,  had  not  the  Apostle  been 
persuaded,  that  at  the  bearing  of  such  sequels,  '^  No  benefit 
by  Christ,  A  defection  from  Grace,"  their  hearts  would 
tremble  and  quake  within  them:   and  why?  because  that 
they  knew,  that  in  Christ,  and  in  Grace,  their  salvation  lay; 
which  is  a  plain  direct  acknowledgment  of  the  Foundation. 
Lest  I  should  herein  seem  to  hold  that  which  no  one  learned 
W  godly  hath  done,  let  these  words  be  considered,  which 
import  as  inuch  as  I  affirm :  '^  Surely  those  brethren  which. 


408  DISCOURSE  [Sect.  26. 

Bocir.  in  St.  Paul's  timc^  thought  that  Qod  did  lay  a  necessity 
^1^.  upon  them  to  make  choice  of  days  and  meatSj  spake  as  they 
^anda.  beHeved,  and  could  not  but  in  words  condemn  the  liberty, 
which  they  supposed  to  be  brought  in  against  the  authority 
of  Divine  Scripture.  Otherwise  it  had  been  needless  for 
St.  Paul  to  admonish  them  not  to  condemn  such  as  eat 
without  scrupulosity,  whatsoever  was  set  before  them.  This 
error,  if  you  weigh  what  it  is  of  itself,  did  at  once  overthrow 
all  Scriptures,  whereby  we  are  taught  salvation  by  Faith  in 
Christ,  all  that  ever  the  Prophets  did  foretell,  all  that  ever 
the  Apostles  did  preach  of  Christ;  it  drew  with  it  the  denial 
of.  Christ  utterly:  insomuch,  that  St.  Paul  complaineth,  that 
his  labour  was  lost  upon  the  Galatians,  unto  whom  this 
error  is  obtruded,  affirming  that  Christ,  if  so  be  they  were 
circumcised,  should  not  profit  them  any  thing  at  all.  Yet 
so  far  was  St.  Paul  from  striking  their  names  out  of  Christ's 
Book,  that  he  commandeth  others  to  entertain  them,  to 
accept  them  with  singular  humanity,  to  use  them  like 
brethren ;  he  knew  man's  imbecility ;  he  had  a  feeling  of  our 
blindness  which  are  mortal  men,  how  great  it  is ;  and  being 
sure  that  they  are  the  sons  of  God  whosoever  be  indued 
with  his  Fear,  would  [he]  have  them  counted  enemies  of  that 
whereunto  they  could  not  as  yet  frame  themselves  to  be  friends, 
but  did  ever,  upon  a  very  religious  affection  to  the  truth,  wil- 
lingly [wittingly  ?]  reject  the  truth  [?]  They  acknowledged 
Christ  to  be  their  only  and  perfect  Saviour,  but  saw  not  how 
repugnant  their  believing  the  necessity  of  Mosaical  Cere- 
monies was  to  their  Faith  in  Jesus  Christ."  Hereunto  a 
reply  is  made,  that  if  they  had  not  directly  denied  the  Foun- 
dation, they  might  have  been  saved;  but  saved  they  could 
not  be,  therefore  their  opinion  was,  not  only  by  consequent, 
but  directly,  a  denial  of  the  Foundation.  When  the  question 
was  about  the  possibility  of  their  salvation,  their  denying 
of  the  Foundation  was  brought  to  prove  that  they  could  not 
be  saved:  now,  that  the  question  is  about  their  denial  of 
the  Foundation,  the  impossibility  of  their  salvation  is  alleged 
to  prove  they  denied  the  Foundation.  Is  there  nothing 
which  excludeth  men  from  salvation,  but  only  the  Founda- 
tion of  Faith  denied  ?  I  should  have  thought,  that  besides 
this,  many  other  things  are  death  unto  as  many  as,  being 
given  to  understand  that  to  cleave  thereunto  was  to  fall 
from  Christ,  did  notwithstanding  cleave  unto  it.    But  of  this 


Sect.  27.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,   &c.  409 

enough.  Wherefore  I  come  to  the  last  question,  "  Whether 
that  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  concerning  the  ne- 
cessity of  Works  unto  salvation,  beadirect  denial  of  our  Faith?" 
9!7.  I  seek  not  to  obtrude  unto  you  any  private  opinion 
of  my  own.  The  best  learned  in  our  profession  are  of  this 
judgment.  That  all  the  corruptions  of  the  Church  of  Rome 
do  not  prove  her  to  deny  the  Foundation  directly ;  if  they 
did,  they  should  grant  her  simply  to  be  no  Christian  Church. 
"  But  I  suppose  (saith  one)  that  in  the  Papacy  some  Church  Caiv. 
remaineth,  a  Church  crazed,  or,  if  you  will,  broken  quite  in  ^* 
pieces,  forlorn,  mishapen,  yet  some  Church :"  his  reason  is 
this,  "  Antichrist  must  sit  in  the  Temple  of  God."  Lest 
any  man  should  think  such  sentences  as  these  to  be  true 
only  in  regard  of  them  whom  that  Church  is  supposed  to 
have  kept  by  the  special  providence  of  God,  as  it  were,  in 
the  secret  corners  of  his  bosom,  free  from  infection,  and  as 
sound  in  the  Faith,  as  we  trust,  by  his  mercy,  we  ourselves 
are ;  I  permit*  it  to  your  wise  considerations,  Whether  it  be 
more  likely,  that  as  frenzy,  though  itself  take  away  the 
use  of  reason,  doth  notwithstanding  prove  them  reasonable 
creatures  which  have  it,  because  none  can  be  frantic  but 
they;  so  Antichristianity  being  the  bane  and  plain  over- 
throw of  Christianity,  may  nevertheless  argue,  the  Church 
wherein  Antichrist  sitteth,  to  be  Christian.  Neither  have  I 
hitherto  heard  or  read  any  one  word  alleged  of  force  to 
warrant,  that  God  doth  otherwise  than  so  as  in  the  two 
next  questions  before  hath  been  declared,  bind  himself  to 
keep  his  elect  from  worshipping  the  Beast,  and  from  re- 
ceiving his  mark  in  their  foreheads ;  but  he  hath  preserved, 
and  will  preserve  them  from  receiving  any  deadly  wound 
at  the  hands  of  the  Man  of  Sin,  whose  deceit  hath  prevailed 
over  none  unto  death,  but  only  unto  such  as  never  loved 
the  Truth,  such  as  took  a  pleasure  in  unrighteousness:  they 
in  all  ages,  whose  hearts  have  delighted  in  the  Principal 
Truth,  and  whose  souls  have  thirsted  after  righteousness,  if 
they  received  the  mark  of  Error,  the  mercy  of  God,  even 
erring,  and  dangerously  erring,  might  save  them;  if  they 
received  the  mark  of  Heresy,  the  same  mercy  did,  I  doubt 
not,  convert  them.  How  far  Romish  Heresies  may  prevail 
over  God's  Elect ;  how  many  God  hath  kept  [from]  falling 
into  them,  how  many  have  been  converted  from  them;  is 

♦  \Reiign :  thus  Dry  den,  "  To  the  gods  permit  the  rest.*'] 


410  DISCOURSE  [Seei.^ 

not  the  question  now  in  band:  for  if  Heaven  bad  not  re-< 
ceived  any  one  of  tbat  coat  for  tbese  thousand  years,  it 
may  still  be  true,  tbat  tbe  Doctrine  wbicb  tbis  day  tbey 
do  profess,  dotb  not  directly  deny  tbe  Foundation,  and  so 
prove  tbem  simply  to  be  no  Christian  Church.  One  I  havQ 
alleged,  whose  words,  in  my  ears,  sound  tbat  way:  shall  I 
MorD.  ^dd  another,  whose  speech  is  plain?  ^^  I  deny  her  not  the 
Ecciei.  pame  of  a  Church,*'  saith  another,  '^  no  more  than  to  a  man 
tbe  name  of  a  man,  as  long  as  be  livetb,  what  sickness 
soever  be  bath."  His  reason  is  tbis,  ^'  Salvation  in  Jesu9 
Christ,  wbicb  is  tbe  mark  wbicb  joineth  tbe  Head  with  the 
Body,  Jesus  Christ  with  the  Church,  is  so  cut  off  by  many 
merits,  by  tbe  merits  of  Saints,  by  tbe  Pope's  pardons,  and 
such  other  wickedness,  tbat  the  life  of  tbe  Church  boldeth 
by  a  very  thread,  yet  still  the  life  of  tbe  Church  boldeth." 
zaiieb.  A  third  hath  tbese  words,  ^^  I  acknowledge  tbe  Church  of 
deReiig.  Romc,  ovcu  at  this  present  day,  for  a  Church  of  Christ, 
such  a  Church  as  Israel  did  Jeroboam,  yet  a  Church/ 
His  reason  is  tbis,  ^^  Every  man  seeth,  except  he  willingly 
hoodwink  himself,  that  as  always,  so  now,  the  Church  of 
Rome  boldeth  firmly  and  stedfastly  the  doctrine  of  truth 
concerning  Christ ;  and  baptizeth  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost;  confesseth  and  avoucheth 
Christ  for  the  only  Redeemer  of  tbe  world,  and  tbe  Judge 
tbat  shall  sit  upon  quick  and  dead,  receiving  true  believers 
into  endless  joy,  faithless  and  godless  men  being  cast  with 
Satan  and  his  Angels  into  flames  inquencbable.'* 

28,  I  may,  and  will,  rein  tbe  question  shorter  than  they 
do.  Let  the  Pope  take  down  his  top,  and  captivate  no 
more  men's  souls  by  bis  Papal  Jurisdiction;  let  him  no 
longer  count  himself  Lord  Paramount  over  tbe  Princes  of 
the  world,  no  longer  bold  Kings  as  his  servants  paravcule;* 
let  his  stately  Senate  submit  their  necks  to  the  yoke  of 
Christ,  and  cease  to  die  their  garments,  like  Edom,  in 
blood ;  let  them,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  bate  and 
forsake  their  idolatry,  abjure  all  their  errors  and  heresies, 
wherewith  they  have  any  way  perverted  the  Truth ;  let  tbem 
strip  their  Church,  till  they  leave  no  polluted  rag,  but  only 
this  one  about  her,  "  By  Christ  alone,  without  Works,  we 
cannot  be  saved:"  it  is  enough  for  me,  if  I  shew,  that  the 

*  [A  Law  term.     The  lowest  Tenant;  or  he  that  is  Tenant  to  one  that  holds  his  Fee  of 
another.] 


Seci.SOJ]  OF   JUSTIFICATIOI^j   &c.  4J1 

holding  of  this  one  thing  doth  not  prov^  the  Foundation  of 
Faith  directly  denied  in  the  Church  of  Rome. 

29.  Works  are  an  addition:  he  it  90,  what  then?  the 
Foundation  is  not  subverted  by  every  kind  of  addition: 
simply  to  add  unto  those  fundamental  words^  is  not  to 
mingle  wine  with  water^  Heaven  with  earth,  things  polluted 
with  the  sanctified  Blood  of  Christ:  of  which  crime  indict 
them  which  attribute  those  Operations  in  whole  or  in  part 
to  any  creature,  which,  in  the  work  of  our  salvation,  wholly 
lire  peculiar  unto  Christ ;  and,  if  I  open  my  mouth  to  speak 
in  their  defence,  if  I  hold  my  peace,  and  plead  not  against 
them  as  long  as  breath  is  within  my  body,  let  me  be  guilty 
of  all  the  dishonour  that  ever  hath  been  done  to  the  Son  of 
God*  But  a  dreadful  thing  it  is  to  deny  salvation  by  Christ 
alone ;  [therefore]  the  more  slow  and  fearful  I  am,  except 
it  be  too  manifest,  to  lay  a  thing  so  grievous  to  any  man's 
charge.  Let  us  beware,  lest  if  we  make  too  many  ways  of 
denying  Christ,  we  scarce  leave  any  way  for  ourselves  truly 
and  soundly  to  confess  him.  Salvation  only  by  Christ  is 
the  true  Foundation  whereupon  indeed  Christianity  standeth. 
But  what  if  I  say  you  cannot  be  saved  only  by  Christ, 
without  this  addition,  Christ  believed  in  heart,  confessed 
with  mouth,  obeyed  in  life  and  conversation?  Because  I 
add,  do  I  therefore  deny  that  which  I  did  directly  affirm? 
There  may  be  an  additament  of  explication,  which  over* 
tbroweth  not,  but  proveth  and  concludeth  the  proposition 
whereunto  it  is  annexed.  He  which  saith,  Peter  was  a 
obief  Apostle,  doth  prove  that  Peter  was  an  Apostle:  he 
vhich  aaith.  Our  salvation  is  of  the  Lord,  through  Sancti-  2  Tbes«. 

nil 

fication  of  the  Spirit,  and  Faith  of  the  truth,  proveth  that 
our  salvation  is  of  the  Lord.  lEfut  if  that  which  is  added, 
1)6  such  a  privation  as  taketh  away  the  very  essence  of  that 
whereunto  it  is  added,  then  by  the  sequel,  it  overthroweth. 
He  which  saith,  Judas  is  a  dead  man,  though  in  word  he 
granteth  Judas  to  be  a  man,  yet  in  effect  he  proveth  him 
by  that  very  speech  no  man ;  because  death  depriveth  him 
of  being.  In  like  sort,  he  that  should  say,  Our  election 
is  of  grace  for  our  works'  sake,  should  grant  in  sound  of 
words,  but  indeed  by  consequent  deny,  that  our  election  is 
of  Grace ;  for  the  grace  which  electeth  us  is  no  grace,  if  it  roou 
elect  us  for  our  works'  sake. 

30.  Now  whereas  the  Church  of  Rome  addeth  Works, 


412  DiscouRS£  [SecL  31. 

we  must  note  farther,  That  the  adding  of  Works*  is  not  like 
the  adding  of  Circumcision  unto  Christ.  Christ  came  not 
to  abrogate  and  put  away  good  Works:  he  did,  to  change 
Circumcision;  for  we  see  that  in  place  thereof  he  hath 
substituted  Holy  Baptism.  To  say,  ye  cannot  be  saved  by 
Christ  except  ye  be  circumcised,  is  to  add  a  thing  excluded, 
a  thing  not  only  not  necessary  to  be  kept,  but  necessary 
not  to  be  kept  by  them  that  will  be  saved.  On  the  other 
side,  to  say,  ye  cannot  be  saved  by  Christ  without  Works, 
is  to  add  things  not  only  not  excluded,  but  commanded,  as 
being  in  their  place  and  in  their  kind  necessary,  and  there- 
fore subordinated  unto  Christ,  by  Christ  himself,  by  whom 
the  web  of  salvation  is  spun:  ^'  Except  your  righteousness 
Matt,     exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye 

V.  20. 

shall  not  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven."     They  were 
Lnke     rigorous  exacters  of  things  not  utterly  to  be  neglected  and 
left  undone,  washings  and  tithings,  &c.     As  they  were  in 
these,  so  must  we  be  in  judgment  and  the  love  of  God. 
Matt.v.  Christ,  in  Works  Ceremonial,  giveth  more  liberty,  in  Moral 
'    '    much  less,  than  they  did.     Works  of  righteousness  there- 
fore are  not  so  repugnantly  added  in  the  one  proposition ;  as 
in  the  other.  Circumcision  is. 

31.  But  we  say,  our  salvation  is  by  Christ  alone;  there- 
fore howsoever,  or  whatsoever,  we  add  unto  Christ  in  the 
matter  of  salvation,  we  overthrow  Christ.  Our  case  were 
very  hard,  if  this  argument,  so  universally  meant  as  it  is 
proposed,  were  sound  and  good.  We  ourselves  do  not 
teach  Christ  alone,  excluding  our  own  Faith,  unto  Justi- 
fication ;  Christ  alone,  excluding  our  own  Works,  unto 
Sanctification ;  Christ  alone,  excluding  the  one  or  the  other 
unnecessary  unto  salvation.  It  is  a  childish  cavil  wherewith 
in  the  matter  of  Justification  our  adversaries  do  so  greatly 
please  themselves,  exclaiming,  that  we  tread  all  Christian 
virtues  under  our  feet,  and  require  nothing  in  Christians 
but  Faith;  because  we  teach  that  Faith  alone  justifieth: 
whereas  by  this  speech  we  never  meant  to  exclude  either 

•  I  deny  not  but  that  the  Church  of  Rome  requireth  some  kinds  of  works  -which  she 
ought  not  to  require  at  men's  hands.  But  our  question  is  general  about  the  adding  of  good 
works,  not  whether  such  or  such  works  be  good.  In  this  comparison  it  is  enough  to  touch 
so  much  on  the  matter  in  question  between  St.  Paul  and  the  Galatians,  as  inferreth  those 
conclusions,  **  Ye  are  fallen  from  grace;  Christ  can  profit  you  nothing:'*  which  conclusions 
will  foHow  upon  Circumcision  and  Rites  of  the  Law  Ceremonial,  if  they  be  required  as 
things  necessary  to  salvation.  This  only  was  alleged  against  me :  and  need  I  touch  more 
than  was  alleged  ? 


Sect.  31.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,  &c.  413 

Hope  or  Charity  from  being  always  joined  as  inseparable 
mates  with  Faith  in  the  man  that  is  justified ;  or  Works  from 
being  added  as  necessary  duties,  required  at  the  hands  of 
every  justified  man:  but  to  shew  that  Faith  is  the  only 
hand  which  putteth  on  Christ  unto  Justification ;  and  Christ 
the  only  garment,  which  being  so  put  on,  covereth  the  shame 
of  our  defiled  natures,  hideth  the  imperfections  of  our  works, 
preserveth  us  blameless  in  the  sight  of  God,  before  whom 
otherwise  the  weakness  of  our  Faith  were  cause  sufficient 
to  make  us  culpable,  yea,  to  shut  us  from  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven,  where  nothing  that  is  not  absolute  can  enter. 
That  our  dealing  with  them  be  not  as  childish  as  theirs 
with  us ;  when  we  hear  of  salvation  by  Christ  alone,  consi- 
dering that  "  alone,"  as  an  exclusive  particle,  we  are  to 
note  what  it  doth  exclude,  and  where.  If  I  say,  "  Such 
a  Judge  only,  ought  to  determine  such  a  case,'*  all  things 
incident  to  the  determination  thereof,  besides  the  person  of 
the  Judge,  as  Laws,  Depositions,  Evidences,  &c.  are  not 
hereby  excluded ;  persons  are  not  excluded  from  witnes- 
sing herein,  or  assisting,  but  only  from  determining  and 
giving  sentence.  How  then  is  our  salvation  wrought  by 
Christ  alone?  It  is  not  our  meaning,  that  nothing  is  re- 
quisite to  man's  salvation  but  Christ  to  save,  and  he  to  be 
saved  quietly  without  any  more  ado.  As  we  have  received, 
so  we  teach,  that  besides  the  bare  and  naked  work,  wherein 
Christ,  without  any  other  associate,  finished  all  the  parts  of 
our  redemption,  and  purchased  salvation  himself  alone, — for 
conveyance  of  this  eminent  blessing  unto  us,  many  things 
are  of  necessity  required ;  as,  to  be  known  and  chosen  of 
God  before  the  foundation  of  the  world ;  in  the  world  to  be 
called,  justified,  sanctified ;  after  we  have  left  the  world, 
to  be  received  unto  glory ; — Christ  in  every  of  these  hath 
somewhat  which  he  worketh  alone.  Through  him,  accord- 
ing to  the  eternal  purpose  of  God  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world,  born,  crucified,  buried,  raised,  &c.  we  were  in  a 
^acious  acception  known  unto  God  long  before  we  were  Eph. 
seen  of  men :  God  knew  us,  loved  us,  was  kind  to  us  in  ii.  r. 
Jesus  Christ,  in  him  we  were  elected  to  be  heirs  of  Ufe. 
Thus  far  God  through  Christ  hath  wrought  in  such  sort 
alone,  that  ourselves  are  mere  patients,  working  no  more 
than  dead  and  senseless  matter,  wood,  or  stone,  or  iron, 
doth  in  the  artificer's  hands ;  no  more  than  the  clay,  when  the 


414  DISCOURSE  [Seet.  S2. 

potter  fippointeth  it  to  be  framed  for  an  honourable  use ; 
tk^jf  not  so  much  ;  for  the  matter  whereupon  the  craftsman 
worketh  he  chooseth,  being  moved  by  the  fitness  which  is 
in  it  to  serve  his  turn ;  in  us  no  such  thing.  Touching  the 
rest  which  is  laid  for  the  Foundation  of  our  Faith ;  it  im- 
porteth  farther^  that  by  him  we  are  called,*  that  we  have 
redemption,  remission  of  sins  through  his  Blood  ;f  health 
by  his  stripes;!  justice  by  him  ;§  that  he  doth  sanctify  his 
Church,  and  make  it  glorious  to  himself  ;||  that  entrance  into 
joy  shall  be  given  us  by  him :  f  yea,  all  things  by  him  alone. 
Howbeit,  not  so  by  him  alone,  as  if  in  us,  to  our  Vocation, 
the  hearing  of  the  Gospel ;  **  to  our  Justification,  Faith ;  ft 
to  our  8anctification,  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  ;JJ  to  our 
Entrance  into  rest,  perseverance  in  Hope,  in  Faith,  in  Holi- 
ness, §§  were  not  necessary. 

32,  Then  what  is  the  fault  of  the  Church  of  Romet 
Not  that  she  requireth  Works  at  their  hands  which  will  be 
saved :  but  that  she  attributeth  unto  Works  a  power  of 
satisfying  God  for  sin ;  yea,  a  virtue  to  merit  both  grace 
here,  and  in  Heaven  glory.  That  this  overthroweth  the 
Foundation  of  Faith,  I  grant  willingly ;  that  it  is  a  direct  de- 
nying thereof,  I  utterly  deny.  What  it  is  to  hold,  and  what 
directly  to  deny,  the  Foundation  of  Faith,  I  have  already 
opened.  Apply  it  particularly  to  this  cause,  and  there 
needs  no  more  ado.  The  thing  which  is  handled,  if  the 
form  under  which  it  is  handled  be  added  thereunto,  it 
sheweth  the  foundation  of  any  doctrine  whatsoever.  Christ 
is  the  matter  whereof  the  Doctrine  of  the  Gospel  treateth ; 
and  it  treateth  of  Christ  as  of  a  Saviour.  Salvation  there- 
fore by  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  Christianity :  as  for 
Works,  they  are  a  thing  subordinate,  no  otherwise  than 
because  our  Sanctification  cannot  be  accomplished  without 
them.  The  doctrine  concerning  them  is  a  thing  builded 
upon  the  foundation ;  therefore  the  doctrine  which  addeth 
unto  them  the  power  of  satisfying,  or  of  meriting,  addeth 
unto  a  thing  subordinated,  builded  upon  the  foundation, 
not  to  the  very  foundation  itself;  yet  is  the  foundation  by 
this  addition  consequently  overthrown,  forasmuch  as  out  of 


•  Gal.  V.  8.     1  Pet.  ii.  9.     2  Pet.  i.  3.  f  Eph.  i.  7.  +    Isa.  liii.  5. 

§  Jer.xxiii.5.  ||   Eph.  v.  26.  ^  Matt.xxv.  2». 

••  2  Thess.ii.  14.  ft  Gal.  ii.  16.  H  Gal.  v.  22. 

§§  2  Thes8.ii.  16,  17. 


•Sect.  82.]  OF  justiPicATioK,  &c.  416 

this  addition  it  may  be  negatively  concIuded^'-^He  which 
ttiaketh  any  Work  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God, 
to  proceed  from  the  natural  freedom  of  our  will ;  he  which 
giveth  unto  any  good  Works  of  ours  the  force  of  satisfying 
the  wrath  of  God  for  sin,  the  power  of  meriting  either 
earthly  or  Heavenly  rewards;  he  which  holdeth  Works 
going  befolre  our  Vocation,  in  congruity  to  merit  our  Vo- 
cation; Works  following  our  first,  to  merit  our  second 
Justification,  and  by  condignity  our  last  reward  in  the 
Kingdom  of  Heaven ;— puUeth  up  the  doctrine  of  Faith  by 
the  roots :  for  out  of  every  of  these  the  plain  direct  denial 
thereof  nlay  be  necessarily  concluded.  Not  this  only,  but 
what  other  Heresy  is  there  that  doth  not  raze  the  very 
Foundation  of  Faith  by  consequent  ?  Howbeit,  we  make  a 
difference  of  Heresies ;  accounting  [them]  in  the  next  degree 
to  Infidelity,  which  directly  deny  any  one  thing  to  be  which 
is  expressly  acknowledged  in  the  Articles  of  our  Belief;  for 
out  of  any  one  Article  so  denied,  the  denial  of  the  very 
Foundation  itself  is  straightway  inferred.*  As  for  example ; 
if  a  man  should  say,  *'  There  is  no  Catholic  Church,"  it 
fblloweth  immediately  thereupon,  that  this  Jesus  whom  we 
call  the  Saviour,  is  not  the  Saviour  of  the  World ;  because 
all  the  Prophets  bear  witness,  that  the  true  Messias  should 
^*  shew  light  unto  the  Gentiles ;"  that  is  to  say,  gather  such  Acts 
a  Church  as  is  Catholic,  not  restrained  any  longer  unto  one 
drcumcised  nation.  In  the  second  rank  we  place  them,  out 
of  whose  positions  the  denial  of  any  of  the  foresaid  Articled 
may  be  with  like  facility  concluded  ;  such  as  are  they  which 
have  denied  either  the  Divinity  of  Christ,  with  Hebion,  or 
with  Marcion,  his  Humanity ;  an  example  whereof  may  be 
that  of  Cassianus  defending  the  Incarnation  of  the  Son  of 
God  against  Nestorius  Bishop  of  Antioch,  which  held,  that 
the  Virgin  when  she  brought  forth  Christ,  did  not  bring 
forth  the  Son  of  God,  but  sole  and  a  mere  man.  Out  of 
which  Heresy  the  denial  of  the  Articles  of  the  Christian 
Faith  he  deduceth  thus ;  **  If  thou  dost  deny  our  Lord  Lib.  vi. 
Jesus  Christ,  in  denying  the  Son,  thou  canst  not  choose  but  Dom!""' 
deny  the  Father ;  for,  according  to  the  voice  of  the  Father  *^*p*  ^^' 

*  ''  Hsc  ratio  ficclesiastici  Sacrament!  et  Catholicse  Fidei  est,  ut  qui  partem  divini  Sacra* 
mcnti  negat,  partem  non  valeat  conflteri.  Ita  enim  sibi  conneza  et  concorporata  sunt  omnia, 
ut  aliud  sine  alio  stare  non  pessit,  et  qui  unum  ex  omnibus  denegaverit,  alia  ei  omnia  credi- 
disse  non  prosit."  Cassian.  lib.  vi.  de  lacarnat.  Dom.  If  he  obstinately  stand  in  denial, 
p.  198. 


416  DISCOURSE    ^  [^^^.33. 

himself,  ^*  He  that  hath  not  the  Son,  hath  not  the  Father/' 
Wherefore  denying  him  which  is  begotten,  thou  deniest  him 
which  doth  beget."  Again,  "  Denying  the  Son  of-  God  to 
have  been  bom  in  the  flesh,  how  canst  thou  believe  him  to 
have  suffered?  believing  not  his  Passion,  what  remaineth, 
but  that  thou  deny  his  Resurrection?  For  we  believe  him 
not  raised,  except  we  first  believe  him  dead :  neither  can 
the  reason  of  his  rising  from  the  dead  stand,  without  the 
Faith  of  his  death  going  before.  The  denial  of  his  Death 
and  Passion  iiiferreth  the  denial  of  his  rising  from  the 
depth.  Whereupon  it  foUoweth,  that  thou  also  deny  his 
Ascension  into  Heaven.  The  Apostle  afiirmeth,  '  That  he 
which  ascended,  did  first  descend ;'  so  that,  as  much  as  lieth 
in  thee,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  neither  risen  from  the 
depth,  nor  is  ascended  into  Heaven,  nor  sitteth  at  the  right 
hand  of  God  the  Father,  neither  shall  he  come  at  the  day  of 
the  final  account,  which  is  looked  for,  nor  shall  judge  the 
quick  and  dead.  And  darest  thou  yet  set  foot  in  the  Church? 
Canst  thou  think  thyself  a  Bishop,  when  thou  hast  denied 
all  those  things  whereby  thou  dost  obtain  a  Bishoply  callingr 
Nestorius  confessed  all  the  Articles  of  the  Creed,  but  his 
opinion  did  imply  the  denial  of  every  part  of  his  Confession. 
Heresies  there  are  of  the  third  sort ;  such  as  the  Church  of 
Rome  maintaineth,  which  be  removed  by  a  greater  distance 
from  the  Foundation,  although  indeed  they  overthrow  it. 
Yet  because  of  that  weakness,  which  the  Philosopher 
noteth  in  men's  capacities  when  he  saith,  That  the  common 
sort  cannot  see  things  which  follow  in  reason,  when  they 
follow,  as  it  were,  afar  off  by  many  deductions; — there- 
fore the  repugnancy  of  such  Heresy  and  the  Foundation 
is  not  so  quickly  or  so  easily  found,  but  that  an  Heretic 
of  this,  sooner  than  of  the  former  kind,  may  directly 
grant,  and  consequently  nevertheless  deny,  the  Foundation 
of  Faith. 

33.  If  reason  be  suspected,  trial  will  shew  that  the 
Church  of  Rome  doth  no  otherwise,  by  teaching  the  doc- 
trine she  doth  teach  concerning  good  Works :  offer  them 
the  very  fundamental  words,  and  what  man  is  there  that 
will  refuse  to  subscribe  unto  them  ?  Can  they  directly 
grant,  and  directly  deny,  one  and  the  very  self-same  thing? 
our  own  proceedings  in  disputing  against  their  Works  Sa- 
tisfactory and  Meritorious  do  shew,  not  only  that  they  hold, 


Sect.  33.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,   &c.  417 

but  that  we  acknowledge  them  to  hold,  the  Foundation, 
notwithstanding  their  opinion.  For  are  not  these  our  argu- 
ments against  them  ?  ''  Christ  alone  hath  satisfied  and 
appeased  his  Father's  wrath :  Christ  hath  merited  salva- 
tion alone."  We  should  do  fondly  to  use  such  disputes, 
neither  could  we  think  to  prevail  by  them,  if  that  where- 
upon we  ground,  were  a  thing  which  we  know  they  do  not 
bold,  which  we  are  assured  they  will  not  grant.  Their  very 
answers  to  all  such  reasons,  as  are  in  this  controversy 
brought  against  them,  will  not  permit  us  to  doubt  whether 
they  hold  the  Foundation  or  no.  Can  any  man,  that  hath 
read  their  books  concerning  this  matter,  be  ignorant  how 
they  draw  all  their  answers  unto  these  heads  ?  *'  That  the 
remission  of  all  our  sins,'  the  pardon  of  all  whatsoever 
punishments  thereby  deserved,  the  rewards  which  God 
hath  laid  up  in  Heaven,  are  by  the  Blood  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  purchased,  and  obtained  sufiiciently  for  all 
men :  but  for  no  man  effectually  for  his  benefit  in  particular, 
except  the  Blood  of  Christ  be  applied  particularly  unto 
him  by  such  means  as  God  hath  appointed  that  to  work 
by.  That  those  means  of  themselves,  being  but  dead 
things,  only  the  blood  of  Christ  is  that  which  putteth  life, 
forccj  and  efiicacy  in  them  to  work,  and  to  be  available, 
each  in  his  kind,  to  our  salvation.  Finally,  that  Grace 
being  purchased  for  us  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  freely 
without  any  merit  or  desert  at  the  first  bestowed  upon  us, 
the  good  things  which  we  do,  after  grace  received,  be 
thereby  made  satisfactory  and  meritorious."  Some  of  their 
sentences  to  this  effect  I  must  allege  for  mine  own  war- 
rant. If  we  desire  to  hear  foreign  judgments,  we  find  in 
one  this  confession,  ^^  He  that  could  reckon  how  many  the  Lewis 
virtues  and  merits  of  our  Saviour  Christ  have  been,  might  Granada, 
Ukewise  understand  how  many  the  benefits  have  been  that  chap.^' 
are  to  come  to  us  by  him,  for  so  much  as  men  are  made  ****'*  **** 
partakers  of  them  all  by  means  of  his  Passion :  by  him  is 
given  unto  us  remission  of  our  sins,  grace,  glory,  liberty, 
praise,  salvation,  redemption,  justification,  justice,  satisfac- 
tion, sacraments,  merits,  and  all  other  things  which  we  had, 
and  were  behoveful  for  our  salvation."  In  another  we  have 
these  oppositions,  and  answers  made  unto  them ;  ^^  All  Paniga- 
grace  is  given  by  Christ  Jesus.  True;  but  not  except i^t'zi. 
Christ  Jesus  be  applied.     He  is  the  propitiation  for  our 

VOL.  III.  £  £ 


418  DISCOURSE  \Seci.  33. 

fiins ;  by  his  stvipes  we  are  healed ;  he  hath  ofiered  him- 
self up  for  us :  all  this  is  "true,  but  apply  it.  We  put  aH 
siltisfiEictioii  in !  the  Blood  of  JesUs  Christ-;  but  we  hold> 
that  the  means  which  Christ  hath  appointed  fol*  us  in  this 
case  to  apply  it,  Are  our  penal  Worki/'  Our  coon trymen 
Annot.  in  Rhemes  make  the  like  answer,  that  they  seek  isalTili^ 
John  i.  tion  no  other  way  than  by  the  Blood  of  Christ ;  and  that 
humbly  they  do  use  Prayers,  Fastings^  Alms,  Fakb;  Cha- 
irjity,  Sacrifice,  Sacraidents,  Priests,  only  as  the  means  ap- 
pointed by  Christ,  to  apply  the  benefit  of  his  holy  Slooi 
unto  them :  touching  our  good  Works,  that  in  their  own 
natures  they  are  not  meritorious,  nor  answerable  to  the 
joys  of  Heaven  ;  it  cometh  by  the  grace  of  Christy  and  net 
of  the  work  itself,  that  We  have  by  well-doing  a  rig}it>l9 
Heaven,  and  deserve  it  worthily.  If  any  iman  llbink  ^tAt 
seek  to  varnish  their  opinions,  to  set  the  better  iPbdt  iH  t 
lame  cause  foremost ;  let  him  know,  that .  since  I  began 
throughly  to  understand 'iiheir  meaning,  I  have  fotnd  Ibeir 
halting  greater  than  perhaps  it  seemeth  to  tbem  which 
^Hev.  know  not  the  deepness  of  Satan,  as  the  blessed  Divine 
speaketb.  For,  although  this  be  proof  sufficient,  that  they 
do  not  directly  deny  the  Foundation  of  Faith ;  yet,  if  there 
were  no  other  leaven  in  the  lump  of  their  doctrine  but 
this,  this  were  sufficient  to  prove,  that  their  doctrine  is  not 
agreeable  unto  the  Foundation  of  Christian  Faith.  The  Pe- 
lagians being  over-great  friends  unto  Nature,  made  them- 
selves enemies  unto  Grace,  for  all  their  confessing,  that 
men  have  their  souls  and  all  the  faculties  thereof^  their 
wills  and  all  the  ability  of  their  wills,  from  God.  And  is 
not  the  Church  of  tlome  still  an  adversary  to  Christ's 
merits,  because  of  her  acknowledging,'  that  We  hkviere^ 
inhw  -  ceived  the  power  of  meriting  by  the  BloOd  of  Christ?  Sir 
couMia-  Thomas  More  setteth  down  the  odds  between  us  and  tbe 
Church  of  Rome  in  the  matter  of  Works  thus,  **  Like  as 
we  grant  them,  that  no  good  Work  of  man  is  rewardalble  in 
Heaven  of  his  own  nature,  but  through  the  mere  goodness 
of  God,  that  list  to  set  so  high  a  price  upon  so  poor  a 
thing;  and  that  this  price  God  setteth  through  Christ's 
Passion,  and  for  that  also  they  be  his  own  Works  with 
us ;  for  good  Works  to  Godward  worketh  no  man,  with- 
out God  work  in  him :  and  as  we  grant  them  also,  that 
no  man  may  be  proud  of  his  Works,  for  his  imperfect 


Seci.33.]  OF  justification,  &c.  419 

working ;  and  for  that  in  all  that  man  may  do^  he  can  do 
God  no  good,  but  is  a  servant  improfitable,  and  doth  but 
his  bare  duty :  as  we,  I  say,  grant  unto  them  these  things, 
so  this  one  thing  or  twain  do  they  grant  us  again,  that  men 
are  bound  to  work  good  Works, .if  they  have  time  and 
power;  and  that  whoso  worketh  in  true  Faith  most,  shall 
be  most  rewarded ;  but  then  set  they  thereto,  that  all  his 
rewards  shall  be  given  him  for  his  Faith  alone,  and  nothing 
for  his  Works  at  all,  because  his  Faith  is  the  thing,  they 
say,  that  forceth  him  to  work  well/'    I  see  by  this  of  Sir 
Thomas  More,  how  easy  it  is  for  men  of  the  greatest  capa* 
city  to  mistake  things  written  or  spoken  as  well  on  the  one 
side  as  on  the   other.      Their  doctrine^  as  he   thought, 
maketh  the  work  of  man  rewardable  in  the  world  to  come 
through  the  goodness  of  God,  whom  it  pleaseth  to  set  so 
high  a  price  upon  so  poor  a  thing ;  and  ours,  that  a  man 
doth  receive  that  eternal  and  bjgh  reward,  not  for  1w 
Works',  but  for  his  Faith's  sake,  by  which  he  worketh: 
whereas  in  truth  our  doctrine  is  no  other  than  that  wa 
have  learned  at  the  fact  of  Christ;  namely,  that  God  doth 
justify  the  beUeving  man,  yet  not  for  the  worthiness  of  his       ,  . 
behef,  but  for  the  worthiness  of  hipi  which  is  believed^ 
God  rewardeth  abundantly  every  one  which  worket]^>  yet 
not  for  any  meritorious  dignity  which  is,  or  can  be,  in 
the  work,  but  through  his  mere  mercy,  by  whose  coi^- 
mandment  he  worketh.      Contrariwise,   their  doctrine  is, 
that  as  pure  water  of  itself  hath  no  savour,  but  if  it  pass 
through  a  sweet  pipe,   it  taketh  a  pleasant  smell  of  the 
pipe  through  which  it  passeth ;  so^  although  before  Graoe 
received,  our  Works  do  neither  satisfy  nor  merit ;  yet.after^ 
they  do  both  the  one  and   the  other.      Every  virtuous 
action  hath  then  power  in  such  t^  satisfy,  that  if  .we  our-^ 
selves  commit  no  mortal  din,  no  heinous  crime,  wher^i^li 
to  spend  this  treasure  of  Satisfaction  in  our  own  behalf,  tt  works 
tup;ietb  to  the  benefit  of  other  men's  release,  'on  whom  it  perero- 
shall  please  the  Steward  of  the  House  of  Gtid  to  bestow  **'*"*"* 
it;  so  that' we  may  satisfy  fbr  ourselves  and  others,  but 
merit  only  fpr  ourselves.      In  meriting,    our   actions  do 
work  with  two  hands :  with  one,  they  get  their  morning 
stipend^  the  increase  of  grace;  with  the  other,  their  even- 
ing hire,  the  everlasting  crown  of  glory.      Indeed  iihey 
te^chj  that  our  good  works  do  not  these  things  as  .they 

E£  2 


420  DISCOURSE  {Sect.  S5, 

come  from  us,  but  as  they  come  from  grace  in  us;  which 
grace  in  us  is  another  thing  in  their  divinity,  than  is 
the  mere  goodness  of  God's  mercy  towards  us  in  Christ 
Jesus. 

34.  If  it  were  not  a  strong  deluding  spirit  which  hath 
possession  of  their  hearts,  were  it  possible  but  that  they 
should  see  how  plainly  they  do  herein  gainsay  the  very 
ground  of  Apostolic  Faith?  Is  this  that  salvation  by 
Ghrace,  whereof  so  plentiful  mention  is  made  in  the  Scrip- 
tures of  God  ?  Was  this  their  meaning,  which  first  taught 
the  world  to  look  for  salvation  only  by  Christ  ?     By  Grrace, 

rsph.  the  Apostle  saith,  and  by  Grace  in  such  sort  as  a  gift ;  a 
*  **^  thing  that  cometh  not  of  ourselves,  not  of  our  works,  lest 
any  man  should  boast  and  say,  I  have  wrought  out  my  own 
salvation.  By  Grace  they  confess;  but  by  Grace  in  such 
sort,  that  as  many  as  wear  the  diadem  of  bliss,  they  wear 
nothing  but  what  they  have  won.  The  Apostle,  as  if  he 
had  foreseen  how  the  Church  of  Rome  would  abuse  the 
world  in  time  by  ambiguous  terms,  to  declare  in  what 
sense  the  name  of  Grace  must  be  taken,  when  we  male 
it  the  cause  of  our  salvation,  saith,  **  He  saved  us  ac- 
cording to  his  mercy  :*'  which  mercy,  although  it  exclude 
not  the  washing  of  our  new  birth,  the  renewing  of  our 
hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  means,  the  virtues,  the 
duties,  which  God  requireth  of  their  hands  which  shall 
be  saved ;  yet  is  it  so  repugnant  unto  merits,  that  to  say, 
we  are  saved  for  the  worthiness  of  any  thing  which  is  ours, 
is  to  deny  we  are  saved  by  Grace.  Grace  bestoweth  freely; 
and  therefore  justly  requireth  the  glory  of  that  which  is 
bestowed.  We  deny  the  Grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
we  abuse,  disannul,  and  annihilate  the  benefit  of  his  bitter 
Passion,  if  we  rest  in  these  proud  imaginations, — that  life 
is  deservedly  ours,  that  we  merit  it,  and  that  we  are  worthy 
of  it. 

35.  Howbeit,  considering  how  many  virtuous  and  just 
men,  how  many  Saints,  how  many  Martyrs,  how  many  of 
the  ancient  Fathers  of  the  Church,  have  had  their  sundry 
perilous  opinions ;  and  amongst  sundry  of  their  opinions 
this.  That  they  hoped  to  make  God  some  part  of  amends 
for  their  sins,  by  the  voluntary  punishments  which  they  laid 
upon  themselves;  because  by  a  consequent  it  may  follow 
hereupon,  that  they  were  injurious  unto  Christ,  shall  we 


mt. 

iU.  6.1 


Sect  35.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION^   &c.  42^1 

^erefore  make  such  deadly  epitaphs,  and  set  them  upon 
their  graves,  "  They  denied  the  Foundation  of  Faith  di- 
rectly; they  are  damned;  there  is  no  salvation  for  them??' 
St.  Augustine  saith  of  himself,  **  Errare  possum,  Hsereticus. 
esse  nolo."  And,  except  we  put  a  difference  between- 
them  that  err,  and  them  that  obstinately  persist  in  error, 
how  is  it  possible  that  ever  any  man  should  hope  to  be 
saved  ?  Surely,  in  this  case,  I  have  no  respect  of  any 
person  alive  or  dead.  Give  me  a  man,  of  what  state 
or  condition  soever,  yea,  a  Cardinal  or  a  Pope,  whom  in 
the  extreme  point  of  his  life  affliction  hath  made  to  know 
himself;  whose  heart  God  hath  touched  with  tnie  sorrow 
for  all  his  sins,  and  filled  with  love  towards  the  Gospel 
of  Christ;  whose  eyes  are  opened  to  see  the  Truth,  and 
his  mouth  to  renounce  all  Heresy  and  error  any  wise  op- 
posite thereunto  (this  one  opinion  of  Merits  excepted)  he 
thinketh  God  will  require  at  his  hands,  and  because  he 
wanteth,  therefore  trembleth,  and  is  discouraged ;  it  may 
be  I  am  forgetful,  and  unskilful,  not  furnished  with  things 
new  and  old,  as  a  wise  and  learned  Scribe  should  be,  nor 
able  to  allege  that,  whereunto,  if  it  were  alleged,  he  doth 
bear  a  mind  most  willing  to  yield,  and  so  to  be  recalled,  as 
well  from  this,  as  from  other  errors :  and  shall  I  think,  be- 
cause of  this  only  error,  that  such  a  man  toucheth  not  so 
much  as  the  hem  of  Christ's  garment  ?  If  he  do,  wherefore  SJf*^^ 
should  not  I  have  hope,  that  virtue  may  proceed  from  Christ 
to  save  him  ?  Because  his  error  doth  by  consequent  over- 
throw his  Faith,  shall  I  therefore  cast  him  off,  as  one  that 
hath  utterly  cast  off  Christ?  one  that  holdeth  not  so  much 
as  by  a  slender  thread?  No;  I  will  not  be  afraid  to  say  unto 
a  Pope  or  Cardinal  in  this  plight.  Be  of  good  comfort,  we 
have  to  do  with  a  merciful  God,  rather  [recidt/]  to  make  the 
best  of  a  little  which  we  hold  well ;  and  not  with  a  captious 
Sophister,  which  gathereth  the  worst  out  of  every  thing 
wherein  we  err.  Is  there  any  reason  that  I  should  be 
suspected,  or  you  offended,  for  this  speech  ?  Is  it  a  danger- 
ous thing  to  imagine,  that  such  men  may  find  mercy?*  The 
hour  may  come,  when  we  shall  think  it  a  blessed  thing  to 
hear,  that  if  our  sins  were  the  sins  of  the  Popes  and  Car- 
dinals, the  bowels  of  the  mercy  of  God  are  larger.  I  do 
not  propose  unto  you,  a  Pope  with  the  neck  of  an  Eniperor 

*  Let  all  afifbction  be  laid  aside ;  let  the  matter  indifferently  be  considered. 


under  his  fe^t ;  a  Cardinal  riding  his  horse  to  the  bridle 
in  the  blood  of  Saints }  bat  a  Pope  or  Cardinal  sorrowfuli 
penitent^  disrobed,  stript,  not  only  of  usurped  power,  bat 
also  delivered  and  recalled  from  error ;  Antichrist,  converted 
atid  lying  prostrate  at  the  foot  of  Christ ;  and  shall  I  think 
that  Christ  shall  spoilt  at  him  ?  and,  shall  I  cross  and  gainsay 
the  merciiill  promises  of  God,  generally  made  unto  penitent 
sinners,  by  opposing  the  name  of  a  Pope,  of  a  Cardinal? 
What  difference  is  there  in  the  world  between  a  jpope  and 
a  Cardinal,  and  John  Style,  in  this  case  ?    If  We  thmk  it 
impossible  for  them,  after  they  be  once  come  within  that 
rank,  to  be  afterwards  touched  with  any  such  remorse,  let 
\^^'     ihat  be  granted*    The  Apostle  saith,  ^'If  I,  or  an  Angel 
from  Heaven,  preach  unto,"  &c.     Let  it  be  as  likely,  that 
St.  Paul,  or  an  Angel  from  Heaven,  should  preach  Heresy, 
as  that  a  Pope  or  a  Cardinal  should  be  brought  so  far  forth 
to  acknowledge  the  Truth ;  yet  if  a  Pope  or  a  Cardinal  should, 
what  find  we  in  their  persons  why  they  might  not  be  saved  ? 
It  is  not  the  persons,  yon  will  say,  but  the  error  wherein  I 
suppose  them  to  die,  which  excludeth  them  from  the  hope 
of  merey ;  the  opinion  of  merits  doth  take  away  all  possibility 
of  salvation  from  them.    What !  if  they  hold  it  only  as  an 
error  t  although  they  hold  the  Truth  truly  and  sincerely  in 
all  other  parts  of  Christian  Faith  i  although  they  have  in 
some  measure  all  the  virtues  and  graces  of  the  Spirit,  all 
other  tokens  of  God's  elect  children  in  them  ?  although  they 
be  far  from  having  any  proud  presumptuous  opinion,  that 
they  shall  be  saved  by  the  worthiness  of  their  deeds  ?  al- 
though the  only  thing  which  troubleth  and  molesteth  them, 
be  but  a  little  too  much  dejection,  somewhat  too  great  a  fear, 
rising  from  an  erroneous  conceit  that  God  will  require  a 
worthiness  in  them,  which  they  are  grieved  to  find  wanting 
in  themselves  ?  although  they  be  not  obstinate  in  this  per- 
suasion?  although  they  be  willing,  and  would  be  glad  to 
forsake  it,  if  any  one  reason  were  brought  sufficient  to  dis- 
prove it  ?  although  the  only  let,  why  they  do  not  forsake  it 
ere  they  die,  be  the  ignorance  of  the  means  by  which  it 
might  be  disproved  ?  although  the  cause,  why  the  ignorance 
in  this  point  is  not  removed,  be  the  want  of  knowledge  in 
such  as  should  be  able,  and  are  not,  to  remove  it  ?     Let  me 
die,  if  ever  it  be  proved,  that  simply  an  error  doth  exclude 
a  Pope  or  a  Cardinal,  in  such  a  case,  utterly  from  hope  of 


S^L36^}  OF   JUSTIFICATION^  &C.  4^ 

Ufe.  Surely,  I  must  ooafesB  unto  you.  If  it  be  an  eiror, 
that  God  may  be  merciful  to  save  men  even  when  tbey  erri 
my  greatest  comfort  is  my  error ;  were  it  not  for  the  love 
J  bear  unto  this  error,  I  would  never  wish  to  speak,  nor 
to  live,* 

S6.  Wherefore  to  resume  that  mother-isehtehce,  whereof 
I  little  thought  that  so  mueh  trouble  woiild  have  growa, 
^I  doubt  not  but  God  was  mercifol  to  save  thousands  of 
our  Fathers,  living  in  Popish  Superatitioiis,  inasmuch  as 
they  sinned  ignorantly  :'*  alas !  what  bloody  matter  is  there 
contained  in  this  sentence,  that  it  should  be  an  occasion  of 
so  many  hard  censures?  Did!  say,  ^^  That  thousands  .of 
pur  Fathers  might  be  saved?*'  I  have  shewed  which  way  it 
cannot  be  denied.  Did  I  say,  *^  I  doubted  not  but  they  were 
saved?"  I  see  no  impiety  in  this  persuasion,  though  I  had 
no  reason  for  it.  Did  I  say^  **  Their  ignorance  did  make 
ine  hope  they  did  find  mexoy,  and  so  were  saved?'*  What 
Jiindereth  salvation  but  sin?  Sins  are  not  equal;  and  igno- 
rance, though  it  doth  not  make  sin  to  be  no  sin,  yet  seeing 
it  did  make  their  sin  the  less,  why  should  it  not  make  our 
'hop^  conoeming  their  life  the  gi^eater'f  ^  We  pity  the  most, 
and  doubt  not  but  God  hath  most  compassion  over  them 
that'  sin  for  want  of  understanding.  As  much  is  confessed 
by  sundry  others,  almost  in  the  self-same  words  which  I  have 
used.  It  is  but  only  my  evil  hap,  that  the  same  sentences 
^hich  skvour  verity  in  other  n^n's  books,  should  i^eem  to 
bolster  Heresy  when  they  are  onoe  by  me  recited.  If' I /be 
deuQCived  in  this  point,  not  they,  but  the  blessed  Apostle 
bath  deceived  me.  What  I  said  of  others,  the  same  he  said 
iof  himself,  ^^  I  obtained  mercy,  for  I  did  it  ignorantly."  [i  Tim. 
Conster  his  woi^ds,  and  you  cannot  misconster  ^lii^e.  I  spake 
no  otherwise,  I  meant  no  otherwise,  than  he  did. 

*  [''  It  is  npt  easy  to  conceive  Hooker's  Tape  or  Cardinal,  filled  toith  a  hve  qf  Christ  and 
ms  Chtpel ;  whose  eyes  are  willingly  open  to  see  the  truth,  and  his  mouth  ready  to  renounce 
^U  fffror;  an^  hf^viag  in  soifte  measure  all  the  wirp\ie^  and  graces  ^  the  Spirit.  It  ^  not  easy 
to  conceive  that '  love  of  the  brethren/  whereby  '  we  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death 
snto  life'  (1  Johniii.  14),  existing  in  the  heart  of  one  whose  head,  wearing^  a  triple  crown, 
4r  >  r«d  halt,  hiculcafes  the  damnation  of  all  such  Heretics  as  British  Protestants.  Especially, 
when  evei)  religious'  sincerity  is  a  quality  of  very  spurious  character,  unless  the  '  senses'  are 
Cpiritoally  '  exerdsed'  (Heb.  ▼.  14),  and  Scripturally  informed;  and  when  men  may  be  judi- 
•d^y  ^v^n.dv^r  of  iSofl,  to  '.believe  aUe'  (2  Thess. ii*.ll)  I  At  the  same  time,  it  is  de- 
ligbtral  to  believe  that  a  Pascal,  a  Q,uesnel,  and  a  Fenelon,  'have  washed' their  robes  and 
^Sid^  them'w^ite  iii  the  bibodof  1^4  Deiiiib'  (Rev.vii.  14);-^iave  had  iheir' il(mish  ideas 
■neutralized  b^  MboM^  vinaally  Protestant  ;aii4.'^t  i^^  .bel^  the  *  foifpf^^on,'  while 
buHding  i)pon  it  such  combustibles  as  'wood,  and  hay,  and  stubble'  (1  Cor. iii.  12)!" — 
The  Christian  Guardian,  and  Church' o/ Eitglakd  Jtfa^.'June,' 1S28.  pl2(ffS[  ' 


424  DISCOURSE  \Seci»  S8« 

37.  Thus  have  I  brought  the  question  concerning  our 
Fathers,  at  the  length,  unto  an  end.  Of  whose  estate,  upon 
so  fit  an  occasion  as  was  offered  me,  handling  the  weighty 
causes  of  separation  between  the  Church  of  Rome  and  us, 
and  the  weak  motives  which  ai^e  commonly  brought  to 
retain  men  in  that  Society ;  amongst  which  motives  the  ex- 
amples of  our  Fathers  deceased  is  one ;  although  I  saw  it 
convenient  to  utter  that  sentence  which  I  did,  to  the  end  that 
all  men  might  thereby  understand,  how  untruly  we  are  said 
to  condemn  as  many  as  have  been  before  us  otherwise  per- 
suaded than  we  ourselves  are;  yet  more  than  that  one  sen- 
tence, I  did  not  think  it  expedient  to  utter,  judging  it  a 
great  deal  meeter  for  us  to  have  regard  to  our  own  estate, 
than  to  sift  over-curiously  what  is  become  of  other  men; 
and  fearing,  lest  that  such  questions  as  these,  if  voluntarify 
they  should  be  too  far  waded  in,  might  seem  worthy  of  that 
rebuke  which  our  Saviour  thought  needful  in  a  case  not 

[John  unlike,  ''  What  is  this  unto  thee  V*  When  I  was  forced, 
much  beside  mine  expectation,  to  render  a  reason  pf  my 
speech,  I  could  not  but  yield  at  the  call  of  others,  and  pro- 
ceed so  far  as  duty  bound  me,  for  the  fuller  satisfying  of 
minds*  Wherein  I  have  walked,  as  with  reverence,  so  with 
fear :  with  reverence,  in  regard  of  our  Fathers,  which  lived 
in  former  times;  not  without  fear,  considering  them  that 
are  alive. 

38.  I  am  not  ignorant  how  ready  men  are  to  feed  and 
sooth  up  themselves  in  evil.  Shall  I,  will  the  man  say, 
that  loveth  the  present  world  more  than  he  loveth  Christ, 
shall  I  incur  the  high  displeasure  of  the  mightiest  upon 
earth?  shall  I  hazard  my  goods,  endanger  my  estate,  put 
myself  in  jeopardy,  rather  than  yield  to  that  which  so  many 
of  my  Fathers   embraced,    and   yet  found   favour   in  the 

Judges  sight  of  God?  **  Curse  Meroz  (saith  the  Lord,)  curse  her 
inhabitants,  because  they  helped  not  the  Lord,  they  helped 
him  not  against  the  mighty."  If  I  should  not  only  not  help 
the  Lord  against  the  mighty,  but  help  to  strengthen  them 
that  are  mighty  against  the  Lord;  worthily  might  I  fall 
under  the  burden  of  that  curse,  worthy  I  were  to  bear  my 
own  judgment :  but,  if  the  doctrine  which  I  teach  be  a  flower 
gathered  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  a  part  of  the  saving 
truth  of  the  Gospel,  from  whence  notwithstanding  poisoned 
creatures  do  suck  venom ;  I  can  but  wish  it  were  otherwise, 


T.23. 


Sect.  39.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION^  &c.  425 

and  content  myself  with  the  lot  that  hath  befallen  me,  the 
rather,  because  it  hath  not  befallen  me  alone.  St.  Paul 
teached  a  truth,  and  a  comfortable  truth,  when  he  taught, 
that  the  greater  our  misery  is,  in  respect  of  our  iniquities, 
the  readier  is  the  mercy  of  God  for  our  release.  If  we  seek 
unto  him,  the  more  we  have  sinned,  the  more  praise,  and 
glory,  and  honour  unto  him  that  pardoneth  our  sin.  But 
mark  what  lewd  collections  were  made  hereupon  by  some : 
**  Why  then  am  I  condemned  for  a  sinner?"  And  the  Apostle  [y**°*«, 
(as  we  are  blamed,  and  as  some  affirm  that  we  say,  "  Why 
do  we  not  evil  that  good  may  come  of  it  ?")  he  was  accused 
to  teach  that  which  ill-disposed  men  did  gather  by  his 
teaching,  though  it  were  clean  not  only  besides,  but  against 
his  meaning.  The  Apostle  addeth,  "  Their  condemnation 
(which  thus  do)  is  just."  I  am  not  hasty  to  apply  sentences 
of  condemnation :  I  wish  from  mine  heart  their  conversion, 
whosoever  are  thus  perversely  affected.  For  I  must  needs 
say,  their  case  is  fearful,  their  estate  dangerous,  which 
harden  themselves,  presuming  on  the  mercy  of  God  towards 
others.  It  is  true,  that  God  is  merciful,  but  let  us  beware 
of  presumptuous  sins.  God  delivered  Jonah  from  the  bottom 
of  the  sea ;  will  you  therefore  cast  yourselves  headlong  from 
the  tops  of  rocks,  and  say  in  your  hearts,  God  shall  deliver 
118  ?  He  pitieth  the  blind  that  would  gladly  see ;  but  will 
he  pity  him  that  may  see,  and  hardeneth  himself  in  blind- 
ness ?  No ;  Christ  hath  spoken  too  much  unto  you,  to  claim 
the  privilege  of  your  Fathers. 

39.  As  for  us  that  have  handled  this  cause  concerning 
the  condition  of  our  Fathers,  whether  it  be  this  thing  or  any 
other  which  we  bring  unto  you,  the  counsel  is  good  which 
the  Wise  Man  giveth,  '^  Stand  thou  fast  in  thy  sure  under- [EccIim. 
standing,  in  the  way  and  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  and  have  ^' 
but  one  manner  of  word,  and  follow  the  word  of  peace  and 
righteousness."    As  a  loose  tooth  is  a  grief  to  him  that 
eateth,  so  doth  a  wavering  and  unstable  word  in  speech, 
that  tendeth  to  instruction,   offend.     '^  Shall  a  wise  man  i^^\ , 
speak  words  of  the  wind,"  said  Eliphaz ;  light,  unconstant, 
unstable  words  ?    Surely  the  wisest  may  speak  words  of  the 
wind :  such  is  the  untoward  constitution  of  our  nature,  that 
we  do  neither  so  perfectly  understand  the  way  and  know- 
ledge of  the  Lord,  nor  so  stedfastly  embrace  it  when  it  is 
understood;  nor  so  graciously  utter  it,  when  it  is  embraced; 


496  DiscouESE  [Sect.  40. 

nor  so  peaceably  maintain  it,  when  it  is  uttered ;  but  that 
the  best  of  us  are  overtaken  sometime  through  blindness, 
sometime  through  hastiness,  sometime  through  impatience, 
sometime  through  other  passions  of  the  mind,  whereunto 
(Ood  doth  know)  we  are  too  subject.  We  must  therefore 
be  contented  both  to  pardon  others,  and  to  crave  that  others 
may  pardon  us  for  such  things.  Let  no  man,  that  speaketh 
as  a  man,  think  himself,  whiles  he  liveth,  always  freed  from 
scapes  and  oversights  in  his  speech^  The  things  themselves 
which  I  have  spoken  unto  you  are  sound,  howsoever  they 
have  seemed  otherwise  unto  some :  at  whose  hands  I  have, 
in  that  respect,  received  injury,  I  willingly  forget  it;  al« 
though,  indeed,  considering  the  benefit  which  I  have  reaped 
by  this  necessary  speech  of  truth,  I  rather  incline  to  that  of 

[Gal.     the  Apostle,  "  They  have  not  injured  me  at  all."     I  have 
cause  to  wish  them  as  many  blessings  in  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven,  as  they  have  forced  me  to  utter  words  and  sylla- 
bles in  this  cause ;  wherein  I  could  not  be  more  sparing  of 
speech  than  I  have  been.     '^It  becometh  no  man  (saith 
St.  Jerome)  to  be  patient  in  the  crime  of  Heresy."     Patient, 
as  I  take  it,  we  should  be  always,  though  the  crime  of 
Heresy  were  intended ;   but  silent  in  a  thing  of  so  great 
consequence  I  could  not.  Beloved,  I  durst  not  be ;  especially, 
the  love,  that  I  bear  to  the  Truth  of  Christ  Jesus,  being 
hereby  somewhat  called  in  question.     Whereof  I  beseech 
them  in  the  meekness  of  Christ,  that  have  been  the  first 
original  cause,  to  consider  that  a  watchman  may  cry  '^  An 
enemy !"  when  indeed  a  friend  cometh.     In  which  cause,  as 
I  deem  such  a  watchman  more  worthy  to  be  loved  for  his 
care,  than  misliked  for  his  error ;  so  I  have  judged  it  my 
own  part  in  this,  as  much  as  in  me  lieth,  to  take  away  all 
suspicion  of  any  unfriendly  intent  or  meaning  against  the 
Truth,  from  which,  God  doth  know,  my  heart  is  free. 

40.  Now  to  you,  Beloved,  which  have  heard  these  things, 
I  will  use  no  other  words  of  admonition,  than  those  which 

[fam^  are  oflfered  me  by  St.  James,  "  My  brethren,  have  not  the 
faith  of  our  glorious  Lord  Jesus  in  respect  of  persons."  Ye 
are  not  now  to  learn,  that  as  of  itself  it  is  not  hurtful,  so 
neither  should  it  be  to  any  scandalous  and  ofifensive,  in 
doubtful  cases,  to  hear  the  difiPerent  judgments  of  men.  Be 
it  that  Cephas  hath  one  interpretation,  and  Apollos  hath 
another*;  that  Paul  is  of  thrs  mind,  and  Barnabas  of  that; 


ii.  1.] 


I 


Sect.  40.]  OF  JUSTIFICATION,   &c.  427 

if  this  offend  you,   the  fault  is  yours.     Carry  peaceable 
minds,  and  you  may  have  comfort  by  this  variety. 

Now  the  God  of  peace  give  you  peaceable  minds,  and 
turn  it  to  your  everlasting  comfort.* 

*  ["  Hooker,  the  great  defender  of  our  Church  Polity ,  was  clearly  a  Calvuiist  See  his 
Serm.  on  Justification." — Dyer's  PrwUeges  of  the  University  qf  Cambridge,  1824.  8?o. 
Vol.  11.  p.  130.] 


A  SERMON 


OF 


THE  NATURE  OF  PRIDE.* 


Habak.  ii.  4. 
<*  His  mind  swelleth,  and  is  not  right  in  him:  hut  the  just  hy  his  Faith  shall  live." 

!•  The  nature  of  man^  being  much  more  delighted  to  be 
led  than  drawn,  doth  many  times  stubbornly  resist  authority, 
when  to  persuasion  it  easily  yieldeth.  Whereupon  the 
wisest  Law-makers  have  endeavoured  always,  that  those 
Laws  might  seem  most  reasonable,  which  they  would  have 
most  inviolably  kept.  A  Law  simply  commanding  or  for- 
bidding, is  but  dead  in  comparison  of  that  which  expresseth 
the  reason  wherefore  it  doth  the  one  or  the  other.  And, 
surely,  even  in  the  Laws  of  God,  although  that  he  hath 
given  commandment  be  in  itself  a  reason  sufficient  to  exact 
all  obedience  at  the  hands  of  men,  yet  a  forcible  induce- 
ment it  is  to  obey  with  greater  alacrity  and  cheerfulness  of 
mind,  when  we  see  plainly  that  nothing  is  imposed  more 
than  we  must  needs  yield  unto,  except  we  will  be  unrea- 
sonable. In  a  word,  whatsoever  we  be  taught,  be  it  precept 
for  direction  of  our  manners,  or  article  for  instruction  of  our 
Faith,  or  document  any  way  for  information  of  our  minds, 
it  then  taketh  root  and  abideth,  when  we  conceive  not  only 
what  God  doth  speak,  but  why.  Neither  is  it  a  small  thing 
which  we  derogate,  as  well  from  the  honour  of  his  Truth,  as 
from  the  comfort,  joy,  and  delight  which  we  ourselves 
should  take  by  it,  when  we  loosely  slide  over  his  speech  as 
though  it  were  as  our  own  is,  commonly  vulgar  and  trivial: 
whereas,  he  uttereth  nothing  but  it  hath,  besides  the  sub- 
stance of  doctrine  delivered,  a  depth  of  wisdom,  in  the  very 
choice  and  frame  of  words  to  deliver  it  in.  The  reason 
whereof  being  not  perceived,  but  by  greater  intention  of 

•  [Printed  at  Oxford,  1612.  4to.] 


SecL  S.]  OF   THE   NATURE   OF   PRIDE.  429 

brain  that  our  nice  minds  for  the  most  part  can  well  away 
with,  fain  we  would  bring  the  world,  if  we  might,  to  think 
it  but  a  needless  curiosity,  to  rip  up  any  thing  further  than 
extemporal  readiness  of  wit  doth  serve  to  reach  unto. 
Which  course,  if  here  we  did  list  to  follow,  we  might  tell 
you,  that  in  the  first  branch  of  this  sentence  God  doth 
condemn  the  Babylonian's  pride;  and  in  the  second,  teach 
what  happiness  of  state  shall  grow  to  the  righteous  by  the 
constancy  of  their  Faith,  notwithstanding  the  troubles  which 
now  they  suffer;  and,  after  certain  notes  of  wholesome  in- 
struction hereupon  collected,  pass  over  without  detaining 
your  minds  in  any  further  removed  speculation.  But,  as  I 
take  it,  there  is  a  difference  between  the  talk  that  beseemeth 
nurses  amongst  children,  and  that  which  men  of  capacity 
and  judgment  do,  or  should,  receive  instruction  by. 

2.  The  mind  of  the  Prophet  being  erected  with  that 
which  hath  been  hitherto  spoken,  receiveth  here  for  full 
satisfaction  a  short  abridgment  of  that  which  is  afterwards 
more  particularly  unfolded.  Wherefore,  as  the  question 
before  disputed  of  doth  concern  two  sorts  of  men,  theiPMim 
wicked  flourishing  as  the  bay,  and  the  righteous  like  the  35. 
withered  grass,  the  one  full  of  pride,  the  other  cast  down 
with  utter  discouragement;  so  the  answer  which  God  doth 
make  for  resolution  of  doubts  hereupon  arisen,  hath  reference 
unto  both  sorts,  and  this  present  sentence,  containing  a 
brief  abstract  thereof,  comprehendeth  summarily  as  well 
the  fearful  estate  of  iniquity  over-exalted,  as  the  hope  laid 
up  for  righteousness  opprest.  In  the  former  branch  of 
which  sentence,  let  us  first  examine  what  this  rectitude  or 
straightness  importeth,  which  God  denieth  to  be  in  the 
mind  of  the  Babylonian.  All  things  which  God  did  create, 
he  made  them  at  first  true,  good,  and  right:  true,  in  respect 
of  correspondence  unto  that  pattern  of  their  being,  which 
was  eternally  drawn  in  the  counsel  of  God's  foreknowledge; 
good,  in  regard  of  the  use  and  benefit  which  each  thing 
yieldeth  unto  other ;  right,  by  an  apt  conformity  of  all  parts 
with  that  end  which  is  outwardly  proposed  for  each  thing 
to  tend  unto.  Other  things  have  ends  proposed,  but  have 
not  the  faculty  to  know,  judge,  and  esteem  of  them;  and 
therefore  as  they  tend  thereunto  unwittingly,  so  likewise 
in  the  means  whereby  they  acquire  their  appointed  ends, 
they  are  by  necessity  so  held  that  they  cannot  divert  from 


430  SERMON  [Skct^  3. 

them.  The  ends  why  the  hearens  do  move^  the  heavens 
themselves  know  not^  and  their  motions  they  cannot  but 
continue.  Only  men  in  all  their  actions  know  what  ii  is 
which  they  seek  fory  aeither  are  they  by  Any  snch  neeeasity 
tied  naturally  unto  any  certain  determinate  meanto 'olitaiii 
their  end  by,  but  that  they  may,  if  they  will,  forsake  it. 
And  therefore,  in  the  whole  world,  no  creature  but  only 
man,  which  hath  the  last  end  of  his  actions  proposed  :«8  a 
redompence  and  reward ;  whereunto  his  mind  directly  faend-* 
ing  itself,  is  termed  right  or  straight,  otherwise  perverse. 

3.  To  make  this  somewhat  more  plain,  we  must  note, 
that  as  they,  which  travel  from  city  to  city,  enquire  ever  for 
the  Btraightest  way^  because  the  straightest  is  that  nrbicfa 
(Heb.  soonest  bringeth  them  unto  their  journey's  end ;  so  ^^  we, 
**"•  ^**^  having  here,  (as  the  Apostle  speaketh,)  no  abiding  city,'' 
but  being  alwayis  in  travel  towards  that  place  of  joy, 
inmiortalityi  and  seat,  cannot  but  in  «very  of  oitr  deeds, 
words,  and  Noughts,  tfadnk  that  to  be  best,  which  wkh  most 
expedition  leadeth  us  ^diereunto,  and  is  fot  that  very  canse 
termed  right.  That  sovereign  good,  which  is  the  eternal 
fruition  of  all  good,  .  being  our  last  and  ohiefest  iEbticitj, 
there  is  no  desperate  despiser  of  God  and  godliaess  fivii^i 
which  doth  not  wish  for.  The  difference  between  right  and 
crooked  minds,  is  in  the  means  which  the  one  or  the  other 
do  eschew  or  follow.  Certain  it  is,  that  all  particular  things 
which  are  ;naturally  desired  in  the  world,  as  food,  xaimeht, 
honour,  wealth,  pleasure,  knowledge,  they  are  subordinated 
in  such  wise  unto  that  future  good  which  we  look  for  in  the 
world  to  come,  that  even  in  them  there  lieth  a  direct  way 
tending  unto  this.  Otherwise  we  must  think,  that  <Srod, 
making  promises  of  good  things  in  this  life,  did  seelk  ito 
pervert  liien  and  to  lead  them  from  their  r^t  imindB. 
Where  is  then  the  obliquity  of  the  mind  of  man?  ISs 
mind  is  perverse,  cam,*  and  crooked,  not  when  it  bendedi 
itself  unto  any  of  these  things,  but  when  it  bendeth  so  that 
it  swerveth  either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left,  hj  excess 
or  defect,  from  that  exact  ruleivhereby  human  adtions  'are 
measured.  The  Rule  to  measure  and  judge  them  by,  is 
the  Law  of  God.     For  this  cause,  the  Prophet  doth  make 


♦  ['*  Sicinius,     This  is  clean  ham, 
Brutus.     Merely  awry  J* 

Shaksp.  Coriolanus.  Act  III.  sc.  1.] 


Sed.  4^3  OF   THE   NATURE   OF   PRIDE.  43X 

SO  often  and  so  earnest  suit^  ''  O  direct  me  in  the  way  of  [Psaim 
(jby   commandments :    as  long    as  I  have  respect   to   thy  fifeo 
Statutes,  I  am  sure  not  to, tread  amiss."     Under  the  name 
of  the  L«fr^  we  must  comprehend  not  only  that  which  Grod 
hath  written  in  tables  and  leaves,   but  diat  which  nature 
also  hath  engraven  on  the  hearts  of  men.     Else  bow  should 
those  Heathen,   which  never  had   books   but  heaven  and 
eaith  to  look  upon,  be  convicted  of  perverseness?     "Butptom.H. 
the  Oentiles,  which  had  not  the  Law  in  books,  had  (saith    ' 
the  AjKwtle)  the  effect  of  the  Law  written  in  their  hearts." 
4.  Then  seeing  that  the  heart  of  man  '^  is  not  right"  exactly, 
unless  it  be  found  in  all  parts  su(^,  that  God  examining  and 
calling  it  unto  account  with  all  severity  of  rigour,  be  not  able 
once  to  charge  it  with  declining  or  swerving  aside  (which 
absolute  perfection  when  did  Ood  ever  find  in  the  sons  of 
mere  mortal  men?),   doth  it  not  follow,  that  all  flesh  must 
of  necessity  fall  down  and  confess.  We  are  not  dust  and 
ashes,  but  worse ;  our  minds  !firom  the  highest  to  the  lowest 
are  not  right.    If  not  rigfet,  then  undoubtedly  not  capable  of 
thflt  blessedness  which  we  naturally  seek,  but  subject  unto 
that  which  we  must  abhor,  anguish,  tribulation,  death,  woe, 
endless  misery.     For  whatsoever  misseth  the  way  of  life^ 
the  issue  thereof  cannot  be  but  perdition.     By  which  rea- 
son, all  being  wrapped  up  in  sin,  and  made  thereby  the  CEpb. 
children  of  death,  tibe  minds  of  all  men  being  plainly  con-  '  ^'^ 
victed  not  to  be  right;  shall  we  think  that  God  hath  indued 
Aem  with  so  inany  excellencies  mo  [more],  not  only  than  any, 
but  than  all  the  creatures  in  the  world  besides,  to  leave  them 
in  such  estate,   that  they  had  been  happier  if  they  had 
Mvev  been  ?     Here  cometh  necessarily  in  a  new  way  uiito 
salvation,  so  that  they  which  were  in  the  other  perverse, 
may  in  this  be  found'  straight  and  righteous.     That,  the  way 
of  Nature;  this,  the  way  of  Grace.     The  end  of  that  way, 
salvation  merited,  \presupposing  tihe  righteousness  of  men's 
works ;  their  righteousness,  a  natural  abiUty  to  do  them ; 
that  ability,  the  goodness  of  God  which  created  them  in     ..j 
such  perfection:  but  the  end  of  this  way,  salvation  bestowed 
upon  men  as  a  gift,  presupposing,  not  their  righteousness, 
but  the  forgiveness  of  thdr.  unrighteousness,  justification; 
their  justification,  not  their  natural  ability  to  do  good,  but 
their  hearty  sorrow  for  their  not  doing,  and  unfeigned  beUef 
in  Him,  -for  whose  sake  not«doers  are  accepted,  which  js 


432  s£RMON  [Sect.  5. 

their  vocation ;  their  vocation,  the  election  of  God,  taking 
them  out  from  the  number  of  lost  children ;  their  election, 
.  a  Mediator  in  whom  to  he  elect ;  this  mediation,  inexplicable 
mercy;  his  mercy,  their  misery,  for  whom  he  vouchsafed  to 
make  himself  a  Mediator.  The  want  of  exact  distinguishing 
between  these  two  ways,  and  observing  what  they  have 
common,  what  peculiar,  hath  been  the  cause  of  the  greatest 
part  of  that  confusion  whereof  Christianity  at  this  day 
laboureth.  The  lack  of  diligence  in  searching,  la3ang  down, 
and  inuring  men's  minds  with  those  hidden  grounds  of 
reason,  whereupon  the  least  particulars  in  each  of  these  are 
most  firmly  and  strongly  builded,  is  the  only  reason  of  all 
those  scruples  and  uncertainties,  wherewith  we  are  in  such 
sort  entangled,  that  a  number  despair  of  ever  discerning 
what  is  right  or  wrong  in  any  thing.  But  we  will  let  this 
matter  rest,  whereinto  we  stepped  to  search  out  a  way,  how 
some  minds  may  be,  and  are  '*  right,"  truly,  even  in  the  sight 
of  God,  though  they  be  simply  in  themselves  "  not  right." 

5.  Howbeit,  there  is  not  only  this  difference  between  the 
just  and  impious,  that  the  mind  of  the  one  is  '^  right'*  in  the 
sight  of  God,  because  his  obliquity  is  not  imputed;  the 
other  perverse,  because  his  sin  is  unrepented  of;  but,  even 
as  lines  that  are  drawn  with  a  trembling  hand,  but  yet  to 
the  point  which  they  should,  are  thought  ragged  and  un- 
even, nevertheless  direct  in  comparison  of  them  which  run 
clean  another  way;  so  there  is  no  incongruity  in  terming 
them  right-minded  men,  whom  though  God  may  charge 
with  many  things  amiss,  yet  they  are  not  as  those  hideous 
and  ugly  monsters,  in  whom,  because  there  is  nothing  but 
wilful  opposition  of  mind  against  God,  a  more  than  tolerable 
deformity  is  noted  in  them,  by  saying,  that  their  minds  are 
not  right.     The  Angel  of  the  Church  of  Thyatira,  unto 

[Rcv.ii.  whom  the  Son  of  God  sendeth  this  greeting,  "  I  know  thy 
'    '^  works,  and  thy  love,  and  thy  service,  and  faith;  notwith- 
standing, I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,"  was  not  as  he 

[Actb  unto  whom  St.  Peter,  "  Thou  hast  no  fellowship  in  this 
'^  business;  for  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God.** 
So  that  whereas  the  orderly  disposition  of  the  mind  of  man 
should  be  this ;  perturbations  and  sensual  appetites  all  kept 
in  awe  by  a  moderate  and  sober  will,  will  in  all  things 
framed  by  reason,  reason  directed  by  the  Law  of  God  and 
Nature ;  this  Babylonian  had  his  mind,  as  it  were,  turned 


Sect.  7.]  OF   THE    NATURE    OF   PRIDE.  433 

upside  down.  In  him  unreasonable  cecity  and  blindness 
trampled  all  Laws,  both  of  God  and  Nature,  under  feet; 
wilfiJness  tyrannized  over  reason,  and  brutish  sensuality 
over  will:  an  evident  token  that  his  outrage  would  work 
his  overthrow,  and  procure  his  speedy  ruin.  The  mother 
whereof  was  that  which  the  Prophet  in  these  words  sig- 
nifieth,  **  His  mind  doth  swell." 

6.  Immoderate  swelling,  a  token  of  very  eminent  breach, 
and  of  inevitable  destruction:  Pride,  a  vice  which  cleaveth 
so  fast  unto  the  hearts  of  men,  that  if  we  were  to  strip 
ourselves  of  all  faults  one  by  one,  we  should  undoubtedly 
find  it  the  very  last  and  hardest  to  put  off*  But  I  am  not 
here  to  touch  the  secret  itching  humour  of  vanity,  where- 
with men  are  generally  touched.  It  was  a  thing  more  than 
meanly  inordinate,  wherewith  the  Babylonian  did  swelL 
Which  that  we  may  both  the  better  conceive,  and  the  more 
easily  reap  profit  by,  the  Nature  of  this  vice,  which  setteth 
the  whole  world  out  of  course,  and  hath  put  so  many,  even 
of  the  wisest,  besides  themselves,  is  first  of  all  to  be  in- 
quired into:  secondly,  the  Dangers  to  be  discovered  which 
it  draweth  inevitably  after  it,  being  not  cured :  and,  last  of 
all,  the  Ways  to  cure  it. 

7.  Whether  we  look  upon  the  gifts  of  Nature,  or  of 
Grace,  or  whatsoever  is  in  the  world  admired  as  a  part  of 
man's  excellency,  adorning  his  body,  beautifying  his  mind, 
or  externally  any  way  commending  him  in  the  account  and 
opinion  of  men,  there  is  in  every  kind  somewhat  possible 
which  no  man  hath,  and  somewhat  had  which  few  men  can 
attain  unto.  By  occasion  whereof,  there  groweth  dispa- 
ragement necessarily;  and  by  occasion  of  disparagement. 
Pride  through  men's  ignorance.  First,  therefore,  although 
men  be  not  proud  of  any  thing  which  is  not,  at  the  least  in 
opinion,  good ;  yet  every  good  thing  they  are  not  proud  of, 
but  only  of  that  which  neither  is  common  unto  many,  and 
being  desired  of  all,  causeth  them  which  have  it  to  be 
honoured  above  the  rest.  Now  there  is  no  man  so  void 
of  brain,  as  to  suppose  that  Pride  consisteth  in  the  bare 
possession  of  such  things;  for  then  to  have  virtue  were  a 
vice,  and  they  should  be  the  happiest  men  who  are  most 
wretched,  because  they  have  least  of  that  which  they  would 
have.  And  though  in  speech  we  do  intimate  a  kind  of 
vanity  to  be  in  them  of  whom  we  say,  **  They  are  wise  men, 

VOL.  III.  F   F 


434  SERMON  [Sect.  7. 

jmd  they  know  it ;"  yet  this  doth  not  prove,  that  erery  wise 
man  is  proud  which  doth  not  think  himself  to  be  blockish. 
What  we  may  have,  and  know  that  we  have  it  without 
offence,  do  we  then  make  offensive  when  we  take  joy  and 
delight  in  having  it?  What  difference  between  men  en- 
riched with  all  abundance  of  earthly  and  heavenly  blessingSi 
and  idols  gorgeously  attired,  bat  this.  The  one  takes  pleasure 
in  that  which  they  have,  the  other  none  ?  If  we  be  possest 
with  beauty,  strength,  riches,  power,  knowledge,  if  we  may 
be  privy  what  we  are  every  way,  if  glad  and  joyful  for  our 
own  welfare,  and  in  all  this  remain  unblaneable ;  neyerthe- 
less,  some  there  are,  who,  granting  thus  much,  doubt  whether 
it  may  stand  with  banality,  to  accept  those  testimoni^  of 
praise  and  commendation,  those  titles,  rooms,  and  otber 
honours,  which  the  world  yieldeth,  as  acknowledgments  of 
some  men's  excellency  above  others*  For,  inasmuch  as 
[Lake  Christ  hath  said  unto  those  that  are  his,  ''  The  Kings  of 
20-]  the  Gentiles  reign  over  them,  and  they  that  bear  nile  over 
ihem,  are  called  gracious  Lords;  be  ye  not  so;"  the  Ana- 
baptist hereupon  urgeth  equality  amongst  Christians,  itt  if 
all  exercise  of  audiority  were  nothing  else  but  heathenish 
Pride.  Our  Lord  and  Saviour  had.no  such  meaning.  But 
his  Disciples  feeding  themselves  with  a  vain  imagination  for 
the  time,  that  the  Messias  of  the  world  should  in  Jerusalem 
erect  his  throne,  and  exercise  dominion  with  great  pomp 
and  outward  stateliness,  advanced  in  honour  and  terrene 
power  above  all  the  Princes  of  the  earUi,  began  to  think 
how  with  their  Lord's  condition  their  own  would  also  rise; 
that  having  left  and  forsaken  all  to  follow  him,  their  place 
about  him  should  not  be  mean;  and  because  they  were 
many,  it  troubled  them  much,  which  of  them  should  be  the 
greatest  man.  When  suit  was  made  for  two  by  name,  that 
FMatt  ^  of  them  "  one  might  sit  at  his  right  hand,  and  the  other  at 
his  left,"  the  rest  began  to  stomach,  each  taking  it  grievously 
that  any  should  have  what  all  did  affect:  their  Lord  and 
Master,  to  correct  this  humour,  turneth  aside  their  cogi- 
tations from  these  vain  and  fanciful  conceits,  giving  them 
plainly  to  understand,  that  they  did  but  deceive  themselves ; 
his  coming  was  not  to  purchase  an  earthly,  but  to  bestow 
an  heavenly,  Kingdom,  wherein  they  (if  any)  shall  be 
greatest,  whom  unfeigned  humility  maketh  in  this  world 
lowest,  and  least  amongst  others :  "  Ye  are  they  which  hare 


XX.  21  ] 


Sect.  8.]  OF   THE   NATURE   OF    PRIDE.  435 

contimied  with  me  in  my  temptations^  therefore  I  leave  unto  Lake 
you  a  Kingdom^  as  my  Father  hath  appointed  me,  that  ye  ^. ' 
may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in  my  kingdom,  and  sit  on 
seats,   and   judge  the  twelve  tribes   of  Israel/'     But  my 
Kingdom  is  no  such  Kingdom  as  ye  dream  of;  and,  there- 
fore, these  hungry  ambitious  contentions  are  seemlier  in 
Heathens  than  in  you.     Wherefore,   from  Christ's  intent 
and  purpose,   nothing  is  further  removed  than  dislike  of 
distinctions  in  titles  and  callings,  annexed  for  order's  sake 
unto  Authority,  whether  it  be  Ecclesiastical  or  Civil.     And 
when  we  have  -examined  :throughly  what  the  nature  of  this 
vice  is,  no  man  knowing  it  can  be  so  simple,  as  not  to  see 
an  uglier  shape  thereof  apparent  many  times  in  rejecting 
honours  offered,  than  in  the  very  exacting  of  them  at  the 
hands  of  men.     For,  as  Judas  his  care  for  the  poor  was  [Matt. 
mere  covetousness ;    and    that  frank-*hearted  wastefulness  7^\i.\ 
spoken  of  in  the  Gospel,  thrift ;  so,  there  is  no  doubt,  but 
that  going  in  rags  may  be  Pride,  and  thrones  be  clothed 
with  unfeigned  humility. 

8.  We  must  go  further,  therefore,  and  enter  somewhat 
deeper,  before  we  can  come  to  the  closet  wherein  this 
poison  lieth.  There  is  in  the  heart  of  every  proud  man, 
first,  an  error  of  understanding ;  a  vain  opinion  whereby  he 
thinketh  his  own  excellency,  and  by  reason  thereof  his 
worthiness  of  estimation,  regard,  and  honour,  to  be  greater 
than  in  truth  it  is.  This  maketh  him  in  all  his  affections 
accordingly  to  raise  up  himself;  and  by  his  inward  affec- 
tions his  outward  acts  are  fashioned.  Which  if  you  list 
to  have  exemplified,  you  may,  either  by  calling  to  mind 
things  spoken  of  them  whom  God  himself  hath  in  Scripture 
specially  noted  with  this  fault ;  or  by  presenting  to  your 
secret  cogitations  that  which  you  daily  behold  in  the  odious 
lives  and  manners  of  high-minded  men.  It  were  too  long 
ito  gather  together  so  plentiful  an  harvest  of  examples  in 
this  kind  as  the  sacred  Scripture  affordeth.  That  which 
we  drink  in  at  our  ears  doth  not  so  piercingly  enter,  as 
that  which  the  mind  doth  conceive  by  sight.  Is  there  any 
thing  written  concerning  the  Assyrian  Monarch,  in  the  tenth 
of  Ibaiah,  of  his  swelling  mind,  his  haughty  looks,  his  great 
and  presumptuous  vaunts;  "By  the  power  of  mine  own[i«ai. 
hand  I  have  done  all  things,  and  by  mine  own  wisdom  I 
have    subdued    the  world?"    any   thing,    concerning    the 

ff2 


436  SERMON  [Sect.  8. 

[isai.  dames  of  Sion,  in  the  third  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  of  their 
stretched-out  necks,  their  immodest  eyes,  their  pageant-like, 
stately,    and   pompous   gait?    any   thing,    concerning    the 

rNom.  practices  of  Corah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram,  of  their  impatience 
to  live  in  subjection,  their  mutinies,  repining  at  lawful  Autho* 
rity,  their  grudging  against  their  Superiors,  Ecclesiastical  and 
Civil  ?  any  thing,  concerning  Pride  in  any  sort  of  sect,  which 
the  present  face  of  the  world  doth  not,  as  in  a  glass,  re- 
present to  the  view  of  all  men's  beholding?  So  that  if 
books,  both  jMrofane  and  holy,  were  all  lost,  as  long  as  the 
manners  of  men  retain  the  state  they  are  in ;  for  him  which 
observeth,  how  that  when  men  have  once  conceived  an 
over-weening  of  -  themselves,  it  maketh  them  in  all  their 
affections  to  swell;  how  deadly  their  hatred,  how  heavy 
their  displeasure,  how  unappeasable  their  indignation  and 
wrath  is  above  other  men's,  in  what  manner  they  compose 
themselves  to  be  as  Heteroclites,  without  the  compass  of  all 
such  rules  as  the  common  sort  are  measured  by;  how  the 
oaths  which  religious  hearts  do  tremble  at,  they  affect  as 
principal  graces  of  speech;  what  felicity  they  take  to  $ee 
the  enormity  of  their  crimes  above  the  reach  of  Laws  and 
punishments ;  how  much  it  delighteth  them  when  they  are 
able  to  appal  with  the  cloudiness  of  their  look ;  how  far  they 
exceed  the  terms  wherewith  man's  nature  should  be  limited; 
how  high  they  bear  their  heads  over  others ;  how  they  brow- 
beat all  men  which  do  not  receive  their  sentences  as  oracles, 
with  marvellous  applause  and  approbation;  how  they  look 
upon  no  man,  but  with  an  indirect  countenance,  nor  hear 
any  thing,  saving  their  own  praise,  with  patience,  nor  speak 
without  scornfulness  and  disdain;  how  they  use  their  ser- 
vants, as  if  they  were  beasts,  their  inferiors  as  servants,  their 
equals  as  inferiors,  and  as  for  superiors  they  acknowledge 
none;  how  they  admire  themselves  as  venerable,  puissant, 
wise,  circumspect,  provident,  every-way  great,  taking  all 
men  besides  themselves  for  ciphers,  poor,  inglorious,  silly 
creatures,  needless  burthens  of  the  earth,  off-scouringS| 
nothing:  in  a  word,  for  him  which  marketh  how  irregular 
and  exorbitant  they  are  in  all  things,  it  can  be  no  hard 
thing  hereby  to  gather,  that  Pride  is  nothing  but  an  inordi- 
nate elation  of  the  mind,  proceeding  from  a  false  conceit  of 
men's  excellency  in  things  honoured,  which  accordingly 
frameth  also  their  deeds  and  behaviour,   unless   there  be 


Sect.  9.]  OF  THE   NATURE   OF   PRIDE.  437 

cunning  to  conceal  it;  for  a  foul  scar  may  be  covered  with 
a  fair  cloth;  and  as  proud  as  Lucifer,  may  be  in  outward 
appearance,  lowly. 

No  man  expecteth  grapes  of  thistles ;  nor  from  a  thing  [Matt. 
of  so  bad  a  nature,  can  other  than  suitable  fruits  be  looked 
for.  What  harm  soever  in  private  families  there  groweth 
by  disobedience  of  children,  stubbornness  of  servants,  un- 
tractableness  in  them,  who,  although  they  otherwise  may 
rule,  yet  should  in  consideration  of  the  imparity  of  their 
sex,  be  also  subject;  whatsoever,  by  strife  amongst  men 
combined  in  the  fellowship  of  greater  societies,  by  tyranny 
of  Potentates,  ambition  of  Nobles,  rebellion  of  Subjects 
in  Civil  States;  by  heresies,  schisms,  divisions  in  the  Church; 
naming  Pride,  we  name  the  mother  which  brought  them 
forth,  and  the  only  nurse  that  feedeth  them.  Give  me  the 
hearts  of  all  men  humbled,  and  what  is  there  that  can  over- 
throw or  disturb  the  peace  of  the  world?  wherein  many 
things  are  the  cause  of  much  evil;  but  Pride  of  all. 

9.  To  declaim  of  the  swarms  of  evils  issuing  out  of  Pride, 
is  an  easy  labour.  I  rather  wish  that  I  could  exactly  pre- 
scribe and  persuade  effectually  the  Remedies,  whereby  a 
sore  so  grievous  might  be  cured,  and  the  Means  how  the 
pride  of  swelling  minds  might  be  taken  down.  Whereunto 
so  much  we  have  already  gained,  that  the  evidence  of  the 
cause  which  breedeth  it,  pointeth  directly  unto  the  likeliest 
and  fittest  helps  to  take  it  away:  diseases  that  come  of 
fulness,  emptiness  must  remove.  Pride  is  not  cured  but 
by  abating  the  error  which  causeth  the  mind  to  swell. 
Then  seeing  that  they  swell  by  misconceit  of  their  own 
excellency;  for  this  cause,  all  which  tends  to  the  beating 
down  of  their  Pride,  whether  it  be  advertisement  from  men, 
or  from  God  himself  chastisement;  it  then  maketh  them 
cease  to  be  proud,  when  it  causeth  them  to  see  their  error 
in  overseeing  the  thing  they  were  proud  of.  At  this  mark 
Job,  in  his  apology  unto  his  eloquent  friends,  aimeth.  For 
perceiving  how  much  they  delighted  to  hear  themselves  talk, 
as  if  they  had  given  their  poor  afflicted  familiar  a  schooling 
of  marvellous  deep  and  rare  instruction,  as  if  they  had  taught 
him  more  than  all  the  world  besides  could  acquaint  him 
with ;  his  answer  was  to  this  effect ;  Ye  swell  as  though  ye 
had  conceived  some  greater  matter;  but  as  for  that  which  ye 
are  delivered  of,  who  knoweth  it  not?     Is  any  man  ignorant 


438  SERMON  [SeeLlO. 

of  these  thinga?  At  the  same  mark  the  blessed  Aposde 
[I  Cor.  driveth ;  ''  Ye  abound  in  all  things,  ye  are  rich,  ye  reign^ 
and  would  to  Christ  we  did  reign  with  you  :**  but  boc»t  not 
For  what  have  ye,  or  are  ye  of  yourselves?  To  tMs  mark 
all  those  humble  confessions  are  referred,  whieh  have  been 
always  frequent  in  the  mouths  of  Saints,  truly  wading  in 
[In,  the  trial  of  themselves;  as  that  of  the  Prophet,  "  We  are 
nothing  but  soreness,  and  festered  corruption;"  oar  veiy 
light  is  darkness,  and  our  righteousness  itself  unrighteofift- 
ness:  that  of  Gregory,  ''  Let  no  man  ever  put  confidence  ifi 
his  own  deserts;  Sordet  in  conspectn  Judicb,  quod  fidget 
in  conspectu  operantis,  in  the  sight  of  the  dreadful  Judge,  it 
is  noisome,  which  in  the  doer's  judgment  maketh  a  beautiful 
shew :"  that  of  Anselm,  '^  I  adore  thee,  I  bless  thee.  Lord 
God  of  Heaven  and  Redeemer  of  the  world,  with  all  the  power, 
ability,  and  strength  of  my  heart  and  soul,  for  thy  goodness 
so  unmeasurably  extended;  not  in  regard  of  my  merits, 
whereunto  only  torments  were  due,  but  of  thy  mere  unpro- 
cured  benignity."  If  these  Fathers  shoiSifkl  be  raised  agttin 
from  the  dust,  and  have  the  books  laid  open  before  them, 
^nnot.  wherein  such  sentences  are  found  as  this,  "  Works,  bo 
in  ]  Cor.  Other  than  the  value,  desert,  price,  and  the  worth  of  die 
joys  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven;  Heaven,  in  relation  to 
our  works,  as  the  very  stipend,  which  the  hired  labourer 
covenanteth  to  have  of  him  whose  work  he  doth,  a  thing 
equally  and  justly  answering  unto  the  time  and  weight  of 
his  travails,  rather  than  to  a  voluntary  or  bountiful  gift;" 
if,  I  say,  those  reverend  fore-rehearsed  Fathers,  whose 
books  are  so  full  of  sentences  witnessing  their  Christian 
humility,  should  be  raised  from  the  dead,  and  behold  with 
their  eyes  such  things  written ;  would  they  not  plainly  pro- 
nounce of  the  authors  of  such  writ,  that  they  were  fioller 
of  Lucifer  than  of  Christ,  that  they  were  proud-hearted 
men,  and  carried  more  swelling  minds  than  sincerely  and 
feelingly  known  Christianity  can  tolerate  ? 

10.  But  as  unruly  children,  with  whom  wholesome  admo- 
nition prevaileth  little,  are  notwithstanding  brought  to  fear 
that  ever  after  which  they  have  once  well  smarted  for ;  &o 
the  mind  which  falleth  not  with  instruction,  yet  under 
the  rod  of  divine  chastisement  ceaseth  to  swell.  If,  there- 
fore, the  Prophet  David,  instructed  by  good  experience, 
have  acknowledged,  Lord,  I  was  even  at  the  point  of  clean 


Sect.  10.]  OF   THE   NATURE  OF  PRIDE.  439 

forgetting  myself^  and  so  straying  from  my  right  mind^  but  CPtaim 
thy  rod  hath  been  my  reformer ;  it  hath  been  good  for  me,  even  *'*"*^**^ 
as  much  as  my  soul  is  worth,  that  I  have  been  with  sorrow 
troubled:  if  the  blessed  Apostle  did  need  the  corrosive  of 
sharp  and  bitter  strokes,  lest  his  heart  should  swell  with 
too  great   "abundance   of  heavenly  revelations:"    surely, p cor. 
upon  us  whatsoever  God  in  this  world  doth  or  shall  inflict,  ***'  ^'^ 
it  cannot  seem  more  than  our  Pride  doth  exact,  not  only 
by  way  of  revenge,  but  of  remedy.     So  hard  it  is  to  cure  a 
sore  of  such  quality  as  Pride  is,  inasmuch  as  that  which 
rooteth  out  other  vices,  causeth  this;  and  (which  is  even 
above  all  conceit)  if  we  were  clean  from  all  spot  and  blemish 
both  of  other  faults  and  of  Pride,  the  fall  of  Angels  doth 
make  it  almost  a  question,  whether  we  might  not  need  a 
jNreservative  still,  lest  we  slK>uld  happily  wax  proud,  that 
we  are  not  proud.     What  is  virtue  but  a  medicine,  and  vice 
bnt  a  wound  ?    Yet  we  have  so  often  deeply  wounded  our- 
selves with  medicines,  that  Gt)d  hath  been  fain  to  make 
wounds  medicinable;  to  cure  by  vice  where  virtue  hath 
stricken ;  to  suffer  the  just  man  to  fall,  that,  being  raised, 
be  may  be  taught  what  power  it  was  which  upheld  him 
standing.     I  am  not  afraid   to  affirm  it  boldly,  with  St. 
Augustine^  that  men  puffed  up  through  a  proud  opinion  of 
tbeir  own  sanctity  and  holiness,  receive  a  benefit  at  the 
bands  of  God,  and  are  assisted  with  his  grace,  when  with 
his  grace  they  are  not  assisted,  but  permitted,  and  that 
grievoudy,  to  transgress;  whereby,  as  they  were  in  over- 
great  liking  of  themselves  supplanted,  so  the  disUke  of  that 
which  did  supplant  them,  viay  estaUish  them  afterwards 
the  surer.     Ask  the  very  soul  of  Peter,  and  it  shall  un- 
doubtedly make  you  itself  this  answer.  My  eager  protes- 
tations, made  in  the  glory  of  my  ghostly  strength,  I  am 
ashamed  of;  but  those  crystal  tears,  wherewith  my  sin  and 
weakness  was  bewailed,  have  procured  my  endless  joy ;  my 
strength  hath  been  my  ruin,  and  my  fall  my  stay ! 


REMEDY  AGAINST  SORROW  AND  FEAR 

DELIVERED  IK  A 

FUNERAL   SERMON* 


John  ziv.  27. 
**  Let  not  yoar  hearts  be  troubled,  nor  fear." 

I.  The  holy  Apostles  having  gathered  themselves  to- 
gether by  the  special  appointment  of  Christy  and  being  in 
expectation  to  receive  from  him  such  instructions  as  they 
had  been  accustomed  with,  were  told  that  which  they  least 
looked  for,  namely,  that  the  time  of  his  departure  out  of  the 
world  was  now  come.  Whereupon  they  fell  into  consi- 
deration, first,  of  the  manifold  benefits  which  his  absence 
should  bereave  them  of;  and,  secondly,  of  the  sundry  evils 
which  themselves  should  be  subject  unto,  being  once  be- 
reaved of  so  gracious  a  Master  and  Patron.  The  one  con- 
sideration overwhelmed  their  souls  with  Heaviness ;  the 
other,  with  Fear.  Their  Lord  and  Saviour,  whose  words 
had  cast  down  their  hearts,  raiseth  them  presently  again 
with  chosen  sentences  of  sweet  encouragement :  My  dears, 
it  is  for  your  own  sakes  that  I  leave  the  world ;  I  know 
the  affections  of  your  hearts  are  tender,  but  if  your  love 
were  directed  with  that  advised  and  staid  judgment  which 
should  be  in  you,  my  speech  of  leaving  the  world,  and 
going  unto  my  Father,  would  not  a  little  augment  your  joy. 
Desolate  and  comfortless  I  will  not  leave  you ;  in  Spirit  I 
am  with  you  to  the  world's  end.  Whether  I  be  present  or 
absent,  nothing  shall  ever  take  you  out  of  these  hands. 
My  going  is  to  take  possession  of  that,  in  your  names, 
which  is  not  only  for  me,  but  also  for  you  prepared  ;  where 
I  am,  you  shall  be.  In  the  mean  while,  "  My  peace  I  give, 
not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you :  let  not  your 
hearts  be  troubled,  nor  fear."    The  former  part  of  which 


•  [Printed  at  Oxford,  1612.  4to.] 


Sect,  3.]  SORROW  AND   FEAR.  441 

sentence  having  otherwhere  already  been  spoken  of,  this 
unacceptable  occasion  to  open  the  latter  part  thereof  here> 
I  did  not  look  for.  But  so  God  disposeth  the  ways  of  men. 
Him  I  heartily  beseech,  that  the  thing  which  he  hath  thus 
ordered  by  his  providence,  may  through  his  gracious  good- 
ness turn  unto  your  comfort. 

2.  Our  nature  coveteth  preservation  from  things  hurt- 
ful. Hurtful  things  being  present,  do  breed  Heaviness; 
bemg  future,  do  cause  Fear.  Our  Saviour,  to  abate  the 
one,  speaketh  thus  unto  his  Disciples,  '^  Let  not  your 
hearts  be  troubled;"  and  to  moderate  the  other,  addeth, 
*^  Fear  not."  Grief  and  heaviness  in  the  presence  of  sen- 
sible evils,  cannot  but  trouble  the  minds  of  men.  It  may 
therefore  seem  that  Christ  required  a  thing  impossible. 
"  Be  not  troubled."  Why,  how  could  they  choose  ?  But 
we  must  note,  this  being  natural,  and  therefore  simply  not 
reprovable,  is  in  us  good  or  bad,  according  to  the  causes 
for  which  we  are  grieved,  or  the  measure  of  our  Grief.  It 
is  not  my  meaning  to  speak  so  largely  of  this  affection,  or 
to  go  over  all  particulars  whereby  men  do  one  way  or 
other  offend  in  it;  but  to  teach  it  so  far  only,  as  it  may 
cause  the  very  Apostles'  equals  to  swerve.  Our  grief  and 
heaviness  therefore  is  reprovable,  sometime  in  respect  of 
the  Cause  from  whence,  sometime  in  regard  of  the  Measure 
whereunto  it  groweth. 

3.  When  Christ,  "  the  life  of  the  world,"  was  led  unto  [john 
cruel  death,  there  followed  a  number  of  people,  and  women,  ^** 
which  women  bewailed  much  his  heavy  case.     It  was  na- 
tural compassion  which  caused  them,  where  they  saw  un- 
deserved miseries,   there  to  pour  forth  unrestrained  tears. 
Nor  was  this  reproved.     But  in  such  readiness  to  lament 
where  they  less  needed,  their  blindness  in  not  discerning 
that  for  which  they  ought  much  rather  to  have  mourned ; 
this,  our  Saviour  a  little  toucheth,  putting  them  in  mind 
that  the  tears  which  were  wasted  for  him,  might  better  have 
been  spent  upon  themselves ;    **  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  ^^ake 
weep  not  for  me,  weep  for  yourselves  and  for  your  children."  ^"' 
It  is  not,  as  the  Stoics  have  imagined,  a  thing  unseemly 
for  a  wise  man  to  be  touched  with  grief  of  mind :  but  to  be 
sorrowful  when  we  least   should ;   and,  where  we   should 
lament,   there   to  laugh,   this   argueth   our  small  wisdom. 
Again,  when  the  Prophet  David  confesseth  thus  of  himself. 


442  REMEinr  against  [Sect.S. 

Paai.  ^'  I  grieved  to  see  the  great  prosperity  of  gpdless.  men,  how 
ixxiii.  3.  ^j^^y  flourish  and  go  untoacht ;"  himself  hereby  openeth 
both  our  common^  and  his  peculiaor^  imperfection^  whom 
this  cause  should  not  have  made  so  pensive.  To  grieve  at 
this,  is  to  grieve  where  we  should  not^  because  this  grief 
doth  rise  from  error.  We  err,  when  we  grieve  at  wicked 
men's  impuiiity  and  prosperity  ;  because^  their  estate  being 
rightly  discerned^  they  nekher  prosper  nor  ga  unpnnished. 
It  may  seem  a  paradox^  it  is  a  truth,  that  no  wicked  man's 
estate  is  prosperous,  fortunate,  or  happy.  For  wiiat  though 
they  bless  themselves,  and  think  their  happiness  great? 
Have  not  frantic  persons  many  times  a  great,  opinion  of 
their  own  wisdom?  It  may  be  thai  such  as  they  think 
themselves,  others  also  do  accompt  them.  But  what  c»thers? 
Surely  such  as  themselves  are.  Truth  and  reason  dis- 
cemeth  far  otherwise  of  them.  Unto  whom  the  Jews,  wish 
all  prosperity,  unto  than  the  phrase  of  their  speech  is  to 
wish  peace.  Seeing  then  the  name  of  peace  containeth 
in  it  all  parts  of  true  happiness,  when  the  Prophet  saith 
[isa.  plainly,  ^^  That  the  wicked  have  no  peace;  how  can  we 
^y"^'  think  them  to  have  any  part  of  other  than  vainly-imagined 
felicity?  What  wise  man  did  ever  accompt  fools  happy? 
If  wicked  men  were  wise,  they  would  cease  to  be  wicked. 
Their  iniquity  therefore  proving  their  folly,  how  can  we 
stand  in  doubt  of  their  misery?  They  abound  in  those 
things  which  all  men  desire.  A  poor  happiness  to  have 
Eceies.  g^^^  things  iu  possession :  "  A  man  to  whom  God  hath 
^*  *•  given  riches,  and  treasures,  and  honour,  so  that  he  wanteth 
nothing  for  his  soul  of  all  that  it  desireth,  but  yet  God 
giveth  him  not  the  power  to  eat  thereof;"  such  a  felicity 
Solomon  esteemeth  but  as  "  vanity,"  a  thing  of  nothing. 
If  such  things  add  nothing  to  men's  happiness,  where  they* 
are  not  used,  surely  wicked  men,  that  use  them  ill,  the 
more  they  have,  the  more  wretched.  Of  their  prosperity, 
therefore,  we  see  what  we  are  to  think.  Touching  their 
impunity,  the  same  is  likewise  but  supposed.  They  are 
oftner  plagued  than  we  are  aware  of.  The  pangs  they 
feel  are  not  always  written  in  their  foreheads.  Though 
wickedness  be  sugar  in  their  mouths,  and  wantonness  as 
oil  to  make  them  look  with  cheerful  countenance;  never- 
theless, if  their  hearts  were  disclosed,  perhaps  their  gUtter^ 
ing  estate  would  not  greatly  be  envied.     The  voices  that 


Sed.if.']  SORROW  AND  FEAR.  443^ 

have  broken  out  from  some  of  them,  '^  O  that  God  had 
giveD  me  a  heart  senseless,  like  the  flints  in  the  rocks  of 
stone  !**  which  as  it  can  taste  no  pleasure,  so  it  feeleth  no 
woe ;  these  and  the  like  speeches  are  surely  tokens  of  the 
curse  which  Zophar,  in  the  book  of  Job,  poureth  upon  the 
head  of  the  impious  man,  *^  He  shall  suck  the  gall  of  asps,  [J<n> 
and  the  viper's  tongue  shall  slay  him."  If  this  seem  light, 
because  it  is  secret,  shall  we  think  they  go  unpunisht,  be- 
cause no  apparent  plague  is  presently  seen  upon  them? 
The  judgments  of  God  do  not  always  follow  crimes,  as 
thunder  doth  lightning ;  but  sometimes  the  space  of  many 
ages  coming  between*  When  the  sun  hath  shined  fair 
the  space  of  six  days  upon  the  tabernacle,  we  know  not 
what  clouds  the  seventh  may  bring.  And  when  their  pu- 
nishment doth  come,  let  them  make  their  account  in  the 
greatness  of  their  sufferings,  to  pay  the  interest  of  that 
respite  which  hath  been  given  them.  Or  if  they  chance  to 
escape  clearly  in  this  world,  which  they  seldom  do,  in  the 
day  when  the  heavens  shall  shrivel  as  a  scroll,  and  the 
mountains  move  as  frighted  men  out  of  their  places,  what 
cave  shall  receive  them?  What  mountain  or  rock  shall 
they  get  by  enti'eaty  to  fall  upon  them  ?  What  covert  to 
hide  them  from  that  wrath  which  they  shall  be  neither 
able  to  abide  nor  to  avoid?  No  man's  misery  therefore 
being  greater  than  theirs  whose  impiety  is  most  fortunate ; 
nrach  more  cause  there  is  for  them  to  bewail  their  own 
infelicity,  than  for  others  to  be  troubled  with  their  pros- 
perous and  happy  estate,  as  if  the  hand  of  the  Almighty  did 
not,  or  would  not,  touch  then.  For  these  Causes,  and  the 
like  unto  these,  therefore,  "  Be  not  troubled." 

4.  Now,  though  the  cause  of  our  Heaviness  be  just,  yet 
may  not  our  affections  herein  be  yielded  unto  with  too  much 
indulgency  and  favour.  The  grief  of  compassion,  whereby 
we  are  touched  with  the  feeling  of  other  men's  woes,  is  of 
all  other  least  dangerous :  yet  this  is  a  let  unto  sundry  duties; 
by  this  we  are  apt  to  spare  sometimes  where  we  ought  to 
strike.  The  grief  which  our  sufferings  do  bring,  what  temp- 
tations have  not  risen  from  it  ?  What  great  advantage  Satan 
hath  taken  even  by  the  godly  grief  of  hearty  contrition  for 
sins  committed  against  God,  the  near  approaching  of  so  many 
afBicted  souls,  whom  the  conscience  of  sin  hath  brought  unto 
itke  very  brink  of  extreme  despair,  doth  but  too  abundantly 


444  REMEDY  AGAINST  [Sect  5. 

shew.  These  things^  wheresoever  they  fall^  cannot  but 
trouble  and  molest  the  mind.  Whether  we  be  therefore 
moved  vainly  with  that  which  seemeth  hurtful,  and  is  not; 
or  have  just  cause  of  grief,  being  pressed  indeed  with  those 
things  which  are  grievous,  our  Saviour's  lesson  is  touching 
the  one  "  Be  not  troubled,"  nor  over-troubled  for  the  other. 
For,  though  to  have  no  feeling  of  that  which  nearly  con- 
cemeth  us  were  stupidity,  nevertheless,  seeing  that  as  the 
Author  of  our  salvation  was  himself  consecrated  by  a£9iction, 
so  the  way  which  we  are -to  foUow  him  by  is  not  strewed  with 
rushes,  but  set  with  thorns;  be  it  never  so  hard  to  learn, 
we  must  learn  to  suffer  with  patience,  even  that  which 
seemeth  almost  impossible  to  be  suffered ;  that  in  the  hour 
when  God  shall  call  us  unto  our  trial,  and  turn  this  honey 
of  peace  and  pleasure,  wherewith  we  swell,  into  that  gall 
and  bitterness  which  flesh  doth  shrink  to  taste  of,  nothing 
may  cause  us  in  the  troubles  of  our  souls  to  storm,  and 
grudge,  and  repine  at  God,  but  every  heart  be  enabled  with 
divinely-inspired  courage  to  inculcate  unto  itself,  *^  Be  not 
troubled;"  and  in  those  last  and  greatest  conflicts  to  re- 
member it,  that  nothing  may  be  so  sharp  and  bitter  to  be 
suffered,  but  that  still  we  ourselves  may  give  ourselves  this 
encouragement,  Even  learn  also  patience,  O  my  soul. 

5.  Naming  Patience,  I  name  that  virtue  which  only 
hath  power  to  stay  our  souls  from  being  over-excessively 
troubled.  A  virtue,  wherein  if  ever  any,  surely  that  soul 
had  good  experience,  which  extremity  of  pains  having 
chased  out  of  the  tabernacle  of  this  flesh,  Angels,  I  nothing 
doubt,  have  carried  into  the  bosom  of  her  father  Abraham. 

[Psalm   The  death  of  the  Saints  of  God  is  precious  in  his  sight. 

1^] '  And  shall  it  seem  unto  us  superfluous  at  such  times  as 
these  are,  to  hear  in  what  manner  they  have  ended  their 
lives?  The  Lord  himself  hath  not  disdained  so  exactly 
to  register  in  the  Book  of  Life,  after  what  sort  his  servants 
have  closed  up  their  days  on  earth,  that  he  descendeth 
even  to  the  very  meanest  actions ;  what  meat  they  have 
longed  for  in  their  sickness,  what  they  have  spoken  unto 
their  children,  kinsfolks  and  friends,  where  they  have  willed 
their  dead  carcases  to  be  laid,  how  they  have  framed 
their  wills  and  testaments ;  yea,  the  very  turning  of  their 
faces  to  this  side  or  that,  the  setting  of  their  eyes,  the 
degrees  whereby  their  natural  heat  hatb  departed   from 


Sect.SJ]  SORROW  AND   FEAR.  445 

them^  their  cries,  their  groans,  their  pantings,  breathings, 
and  last  gaspings,  he  hath  most  solemnly  commended 
unto  the  memory  of  all  generations.  The  care  of  the 
living  both  to  live  and  die  well  must  needs  be  somewhat 
increased,  when  they  know  that  their  departure  shall  not 
be  folded  up  in  silence,  but  the  ears  of  many  be  made  ac- 
quainted with  it.  Again,  when  they  hear  how  mercifully 
God  hath  dealt  with  others  in  the  hour  of  their  last  need, 
besides  the  praise  which  they  give  to  God,  and  the  joy  which 
they  have,  or  should  have,  by  reason  of  their  fellowship  and 
communion  of  Saints,  is  not  their  hope  also  much  confirmed 
against  the  day  of  their  own  dissolution  ?  Finally,  the  sound 
of  these  things  doth  not  so  pass  the  ears  of  them  that  are 
most  loose  and  dissolute  of  life,  but  it  causeth  them  some- 
time or  other,  to  wish  in  their  hearts,  "  Oh,  that  we  might  [Nom. 
die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  that  our  end  might  be  To.] ' 
like  his!"  Howbeit,  because  to  spend  herein  many  words, 
would  be  to  strike  even  as  many  wounds  into  their  minds, 
whom  I  rather  wish  to  comfort;  therefore  concerning  this 
virtuous  gentlewoman  only  this  little  I  speak,  and  that  of 
knowledge.  She  lived  a  dove,  and  died  a  lamb.  And  if 
amongst  so  many  virtues,  hearty  devotion  towards  God, 
towards  poverty  tender  compassion,  motherly  affection  to- 
wards servants,  towards  friends  even  serviceable  kindness, 
mild  behaviour  and  harmless  meaning  towards  all ;  if,  where 
so  many  virtues  were  eminent,  any  be  worthy  of  special 
mention,  I  wish  her  dearest  friends  of  that  sex,  to  be  her 
nearest  followers  in  two  things :  Silence,  saving  only  where 
duty  did  exact  speech ;  and  Patience,  even  then  when  ex- 
tremity of  pains  did  enforce  grief.  "  Blessed  are  they  which  jj^^jj, 
die  in  the  Lord."  And  concerning  the  dead  which  are 
blessed,  let  not  the  hearts  of  any  living  be  overcharged,  with 
grief  over-troubled. 

6.  Touching  the  latter  affection  of  Fear,  which  respecteth 
evils  to  come,  as  the  other  which  we  have  spoken  of  doth 
present  evils;  first,  in  the  nature  thereof  it  is  plain,  that 
we  are  not  of  every  future  evil  afraid.  Perceive  we  not 
how  they,  whose  tenderness  shrinketh  at  the  least  rase  of  a 
needle's  point,  do  kiss  the  sword  that  pierceth  their  souls 
quite  through  ?  If  every  evil  did  cause  Fear,  sin,  because  it 
is  sin,  would  be  feared ;  whereas  properly  sin  is  not  feared 
as  sin,  but  only  as  having  some  kind  of  harm  annexed.    To 


446  REMEDY   AGAINST  [Sect.  7. 

teach  men  to  avoid  sin,  it  had  been  suffident  for  the  Aposde 
to  say,  "  Fly  it :"  but  to  makeihem  afraid  of  committixig  ein, 
because  the  naming  of  sin  sufficed  not,  ther^ore  he  addeth 

[icor.  further,  that  it  is  as  a  ^^  serpent  which  stingeth  the  soul/* 
Again,  be  it  that  some  nocive  or  hurtful  thing  be  towards  us, 
must  Fear  of  necessity  follow  hereupon  ?  Not,  except  that 
hurtful  things  do  threaten  us  either  with  destruction  or 
vexation,  and  that,  such  as  we  have  neither  a  conceit  of 
ability  to  resist,  nor  of  utter  impossibility  to  avoid.  That 
which  we  know  ourselves  able  to  withstand,  we  fear  not; 
and  that  which  we  know  we  are  unable  to  def^  or  diminish, 
or  any  way  avoid,  we  cease  to  fear ;  we  give  ourselves  over 
to  bear  and  sustain  it.  The  evil  therefore  which  is  feared, 
must  be  in  our  persuasion  unable  to  be  resisted  when  it 
Cometh,  yet  not  utterly  impossible  for  a  time  in  whole  or  in 
part  to  be  shunned.  Neither  do  we  much  fear  sach  evils, 
except  they  be  imminent  and  near  at  hand ;  nor  if  they  be 
near,  except  we  have  an  o^iinion  that  they  be  so.  When 
we  have  once  conceived  an  opinion,  or  apprehended  an 
imagination  of  such  evils  prest,  and  ready  to  invade  us; 
because  they  are  hurtful  unto  our  nature,  we  fodi  in  our- 
selves a  kind  of  abhorring ;  because  they  are  though  near, 
yet  not  present,  our  nature  seeketh  forthwith  how  to  shift 
and  provide  for  itself;  because  they  are  evils  which  cannot 
be  resisted,  therefore  she  doth  not  provide  to  withstand,  but 
to  shun  and  avoid.  Hence  it  is,  that  in  extreme  tear,  the 
mother  of  life  contracting  herself,  avdiding  as  much  as  may 
be  the  reach  of  evil,  and  drawing  the  heat  together  with 
the  spirits  of  the  body  to  her,  leaveth  the  outward  parts 
cold,  pale,  weak,  feeble,  unapt  to  perform  the  functions  of 

[Dan.  life ;  as  we  see  in  the  fear  of  Belshazzar  King  of  Babel. 
By  this  it  appeareth,  that  Fear  is  nothing  else  but  a  pertur- 
bation of  the  mind,  through  an  opinion  of  some  imminent 
evil,  threatening  the  destruction  or  great  annoyance  of  our 
nature,  which  to  shun,  it  doth  contract  and  deject  itself. 

7.  Now  because,  not  in  this  place  only,  but  otherwhere 
often,  we  hear  it  repeated,  "  Fear  not,"  it  is  by  some  made 
a  long  question.  Whether  a  man  may  fear  destruction  or 
vexation,  without  sinning?  First,  the  reproof  wherewith 
Christ  checketh  bis  Disciples  more  than  once,  '*  O  men  of 
Uttle  faith,  wherefore  are  ye  afraid  ?"  Secondly,  the  punish- 
ment threat'ned  in  Rev.  xxi.  to  wit,  the  lake,  and  fire,  and 


V.  6.] 


Sect.  &]  SORROW   AND  P£jUl.  447 

brimstone^  not  only  to  murderers,  unclean  pearsons,  sorcerers, 
idolaters,  liars,  but  also  to  the  fearful  and  faint-hearted :  this 
seeraeth  to  argue,  that  Fearfulness  eannot  but  be  sin.  On 
the  contrary  «ide  we  see,  that  he  which  never  felt  motion 
unto  sin,  had  of  this  affection  more  than  a  slight  feeling. 
How  clear  is  the  evidence  of  the  Spirit,  that  "  in  the  days  Heb. 
of  his  flesh  he  oflered  up  prayers  and  supplications,  with  ^' 
strong  cries  and  tears,  unto  him  that  was  able  to  save  him 
from  death,  and  was  also  heard  in  that  which  he  feared?" 
Whereupon  if  followeth,  that  Fear  in  itself  is  a  thing  not 
sinfuL  For,  is  not  Fear  a  thing  natural,  and  for  men's  pre- 
servation necessary,  implanted  in  us  by  the  provident  and 
most  gracious  Oiver  of  all  good  things,  to  the  end  that  we 
might  not  run  headlong  upon  those  mischiefs  wherewith  we 
are  not  able  to  encounter,  but  use  the  remedy  of  shunning 
those  evils  which  we  have  not  ability  to  withstand?  Let 
that  people  therefore  which  receive  a  benefit  by  the  length 
of  their  Prince's  days,  that  father  or  mother  that  rejoiceth 
to  see  the  offspring  of  their  flesh  grow  like  green  and 
pleasant  plants,  let  those  children  that  would  have  thdur 
parents,  those  men  that  would  gladly  have  their  friends  and 
brethren's  days  prolonged  on  earth  (as  there  is  no  natural- 
hearted  man  but  gladly  would),  let  them  bless  the  Father  of 
lights,  as  in  other  things,  so  even  in  this,  that  be  hath  given 
nan  a  Fearful  heart,  and  settled  naturally  that  affection  in 
him,  which  is  a  preservation  against  so  many  ways  of  death. 
Fear,  then,  in  itself  being  mere  Nature,  cannot  in  itself  be 
sin,  which  sin  is  not  nature,  but  thereof  an  accessary  de- 
privation. 

&  But  in  the  Matter  of  Fear  we  .may  sin,  and  do,  two  ways. 
If  any  man's  danger  be  great,  theirs  is  greatest  that  have  put 
the  Fear  of  danger  farthest  from  them.     Is  there  any  estate 
more  fearful  than  that  Babylonian  strumpet's  that  sitteth 
upon  the  tops  of  the  seven  hills,  glorying  and  vaunting,  ^*  I  Rev. 
am  a  Queen,"  &c.?    How  much  better  and  happier  they,  *^"* 
whose  estate  hath  been  always  as  his,  who  speaketh  after 
this  sort  of  himself,  **  Lord,  from  my  youth  have  I  borne  thy  [Mark 
yoke  ?"    They  which  sit  at  continual  ease,  and  are  settled  **  ^* 
in  the  lees  of  their  security,  look  upon  them^  view  their 
countenance,  their  speech,  their  gesture,  their  deeds ;  "  Put  JP»^ 
them  in  Fear,  O  God,  (saith  the  Prophet),  that  so  they  may 
know  themselves  to  be  but  men;"  worms  of  earCh^  dust  and 


448  REMEDY   AGAINST  [SecL  9. 

ashes^  frail^  corruptible,  feeble  things.  To  shake  off  security^ 
therefore,  and  to  breed  Fear  in  the  hearts  of  mortal  men,  so 
many  admonitions  are  used  concerning  the  power  of  evils 
which  beset  them,  so  many  threat'nings  of  calamities,  so 
many  descriptions  of  things  threat'ned,  and  those  so  lively, 
to  the  end  they  may  leave  behind  them  a  deep  impression  of 
such  as  hath  force  to  keep  the  heart  continually  waking. 
All  which  do  shew,  that  we  are  to  stand  in  fear  of  nothing 
more  than  the  extremity  of — not  fearing. 

9.  When  Fear  hath  delivered  us  from  that  pit,  wherein 
they  are  sunk  that  have  put  far  from  them  the  evil  day ;  that 
have  made  a  league  with  death,  and  have  said.  Tush,  we 
shall  feel  no  harm ;  it  standeth  us  upon  to  take  heed  it  cast 
us  not  into  that,  wherein  souls  destitute  of  all  hope  are 
plunged.  For  our  direction,  to  avoid  as  much  as  may  be 
both  extremities,  that  we  may  know,  as  a  ship-master  by  his 
card,  how  far  we  are  wide,  either  on  the  one  side  or  on  the 
other,  we  must  note,  that  in  a  Christian  man  there  is,  first. 
Nature ;  secondly.  Corruption  perverting  Nature ;  thirdly, 
Grace  correcting  and  amending  Corruption.  In  Fear  all 
these  have  their  several  operations :  Nature  teacheth  simply, 
to  wish  preservation,  and  avoidance  of  things  dreadful ;  for 
which  cause  our  Saviour  himself  prayeth,  and  that  often, 
[Matt.    "  Father,  if  it  be  possible"  In  which  cases,  corrupt  Nature's 

xxvi 

30.] '      suggestions  are,  for  the  safety  of  temporal  life,  not  to  stick 
at  things  excluding  from  eternal;    wherein  how  far  even 
the  best  may  be  led,  the  chiefest  Apostle's  frailty  teacheth. 
Were  it  not  therefore  for  such  cogitations  as,  on  the  con- 
trary side,  Grace  and  Faith  ministereth,  such  as  that  of  Job, 
[Job       "  Though  God  kill  me ;"  that  of  Paul,  "  Scio  cui  credidi,  I 
2  Tim. '  know  him  on  whom  I  do  rely ;"  small  evils  would  soon  be 
[piov.    able  to  overwhelm  even  the  best  of  us.    "  A  wise  man  (saith 
"""•  '^  Solomon)  doth  see  a  plague  coming,  and  hideth  himself." 
It  is  Nature  which  teacheth  a  wise  man  in  Fear  to  hide  him- 
self, but  Grace  and  Faith  doth  teach  him  where.     Fools 
care  not  where  they  hide  their  heads:  but  where  shall  a 
wise  man  hide  himself  when  he  feareth  a  plague  coming? 
where  should  the  frighted  child  hide  his  head,  but  in  the 
bosom  of  his  loving  father?   where  a  Christian,  but  under 
isa.  ^  the  shadow  of  the  wings  of  Christ  his  Saviour?  "  Come,  my 
people  (saith  God  in  the  Prophet)  enter  into  thy  chamber, 
hide  thyself,"  &c.     But  because  we   are   in   danger,   Uke 


xxvi.  20. 


Sect.  9«]  SORROW  AND   FEAR.  449 

chased  birds^  like  doves^  that  seek  and  cannot  see  the  resting 
holes  that  are  right  before  them ;  therefore  our  Saviour  giveth 
his  Disciples  these  encouragements  beforehand,  that  Fear 
might  never  so  amaze  them,  but  that  always  they  might  remem- 
ber, that  whatsoever  'evils  at  any  time  did  beset  them,  to  him 
they  should  still  repair  for  comfort,  counsel  and  succour.   For 
their  assurance  whereof,  his  '^  Peace  he  gave  them,  his  Peace  [John 
he  left  unto  them ;  not  such  Peace  as  the  world  offereth," 
by  whom  his  name  is  never  so  much  pretended,  as  when 
deepest  treachery  is  meant;  but  '*  Peace  which  passeth  all[PhiL 
understanding,"  Peace  that  bringeth  with  it  all  happiness,  *^' '^ 
Peace  that  continueth  for  ever  and  ever  with  them  that 
have  it. 

This  Peace  God  the  Father  grant,  for  his  Son's  sake; 
unto  whom,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  three  Persons,  one  eternal 
and  everliving  God,  be  all  honour,  glory,  and  praise,  now 
and  for  ever.    Amen. 


VOL.  III.  a  G 


SERMON 


OF 


THE  CERTAINTY  AND  PERPETUITY  OF  FAITH  IN 

THE  ELECT: 

ESPECIALLY    OF    THE    PROPHET    HABAKKUK*S   FAITH.* 


Habak.  L  4. 

Whether  the  Prophet  Habakkuk,  by  admitting  this  cogitation  into  his  mind,  **  The 
Law  doth  fail,"  did  thereby  shew  himself  an  unbeliever  ? 

1.  We  have  seen  in  the  opening  of  this  clause^  which 
concerneth  the  weakness  of  the  Prophet's  Faith^  first,  what 
things  they  are,  whereunto  the  Faith  of  sound  believers  doth 
assent;  secondly,  wherefore  all  men  assent  not  thereunto; 
and  thirdly,  why  they  that  do,  do  it  many  times  with  small 
assurance.  Now,  because  nothing  can  be  so  truly  spoken, 
but  through  misunderstanding  it  may  be  depraved ;  there- 
fore to  prevent,  if  it  be  possible,  all  misconstruction  in  this 
cause,  where  a  small  error  cannot  rise  but  with  a  great 
danger,  it  is  perhaps  needful,  ere  we  come  to  the  fourth 
point,  that  something  be  added  to  that  which  hath  been 
already  spoken  concerning  the  third. 
[1  Cor.  2.  That  mere  natural  men  do  neither  know  nor  acknow- 
"•  ^^'^  ledge  the  things  of  God,  we  do  not  marvel,  because  they 
are  spiritually  to  be  discerned;  but  they  in  whose  hearts 
the  light  of  grace  doth  shine,  they  that  are  taught  of  God, 
why  are  they  so  weak  in  Faith  ?  why  is  their  assenting  to 
the  Law  so  scrupulous?  so  much  mingled  with  fear  and 
wavering  ?  It  seemeth  strange  that  ever  they  should  imagine 
the  Law  to  fail.     It  cannot  seem  strange  if  we  weigh  the 

♦  [Printed  at  Oxford,  1612.  4lo.] 


Sect.  3.]  OP   FAITH   IN   THE   ELECT.  461 

reason.  If  the  things  which  we  believe  be  considered  in 
themselres^  it  may  truly  be  said  that  Faith  is  more  certain 
than  any  science.  That  which  we  know  either  by  sense,  or 
by  infallible  demonstration,  is  not  so  certain  as  the  principles, 
articles,  and  conclusions  of  Christian  Faith.  Concerning 
which  we  must  note,  that  there  is  a  Certainty  of  Evidence, 
and  a  Certainty  of  Adherence.  Certainty  of  Evidence  we 
call  that,  when  the  mind  doth  assent  unto  this  or  that,  not 
because  it  is  true  in  itself,  but  because  the  truth  is  clear, 
because  it  is  manifest  to  us.  Of  things  in  themselves  most 
certain,  except  they  be  also  most  evident,  our  persuasion  is 
not  so  assured  as  it  is  of  thfaigs  more  evident,  although  in 
themselves  they  be  less  certain.  It  is  as  sure,  if  not  surer, 
that  there  be  spirits,  as  that  there  be  men ;  but  we  be  more 
assured  of  these  than  of  them,  because  these  are  more 
evident.  The  truth  of  some  things  is  so  evident,  that  no 
man  which  heareth  them  can  doubt  of  them :  as  when  we 
hear  that  ^^  a  part  of  any  thing  is  less  than  the  whole,*'  the 
mind  is  constrained  to  say,  this  is  true.  If  it  were  so  in 
matters  of  Faith,  then,  as  all  men  have  equal  certainty  of 
this,  so  no  believer  should  be  more  scrupulous  and  doubtful 
than  another.  But  we  find  the  contrary.  The  Angels  and 
Spirits  of  the  righteous  in  Heaven  have  certainty  most 
evident  of  things  spiritual:  but  this  they  have  by  the  light 
of  Glory.  That  which  we  see  by  the  light  of  Grace,  though 
it  be  indeed  more  certain ;  yet  it  is  not  to  us  so  evidently 
certain,  as  that  which  sense  or  the  light  of  Nature  will  not 
suffer  a  man  to  doubt  of.  ProofSs^'are  vain  and  frivolous, 
except  they  be  more  certain  than  is  the  thing  proved.  And 
do  we  not  see  how  the  Spirit  every  where  in  the  Scripture 
proveth  matters  of  Faith,  laboureth  to  cpnfirm  us  in  the 
things  which  we  believe  by  things  whereof  we  have  sensible 
knowledge?  I  conclude  therefore  that  we  have  less  certainty 
of  evidence  concerning  things  believed,  than  concerning 
sensible  or  naturally  perceived.  Of  these  who  doth  doubt 
at  any  time  ?  Of  them  at  some  time  who  doubteth  not  ?  I 
will  not  here  allege  the  sundry  confessions  of  the  perfectest 
that  have  lived  upon  earth,  concerning  their  great  imper- 
fections this  way ;  which,  if  I  did,  I  should  dwell  too  long 
upon  a  matter  sufficiently  known  by  every  faithful  man  that 
doth  know  himself. 

3.  The  other,  which  we  caU  the  Certainly  of  Adherence 


452  CERTAINTY    AND   PERPETUITY  [Sect.  5. 

is^  when  the  heart  doth  cleave  and  stick  unto  that  which  it 

doth  believe.    This  certainty  is  greater  in  us  than  the  other. 

The  reason  is  this :  the  Faith  of  a  Christian  doth  apprehend 

the  words  of  the  Law^  the  promises  of  God^  not  only  as  true, 

but  also  as  good ;  and  therefore  even  then,  when  the  evidence 

which  he  hath  of  the  truth  is  so  small,  that  it  grieveth  him 

to  feel  his  weakness  in  assenting  thereto,  yet  is  there  in  him 

such  a  sure  adherence  unto  that  which  he  doth  but  faintly 

and  fearfully  believe,  that  his  spirit  having  once  truly  tasted 

the  heavenly  sweetness  thereof,  all  the  world  is  not  able 

quite  and  clean  to  remove  him  from  it ;  but  he  striveth  with 

himself  to  hope  against  all  reason  of  believing,  being  settled 

[Job      with  Job  upon  this  unmoveable  resolution,  ^^  Though  Grod 
xiu.i5.]yi|  ^^^  J  ^jji  ^^^  gj^^  ^^^^  trusting  in  him."    For  why? 

Psai.     this  lesson  remaineth  for  ever  imprinted  in  him,  ^'  It  is  good 
28.  *    for  me  to  cleave  unto  God." 

4.  Now  the  minds  of  all  men  being  so  darkened  as  they 
are  with  the  foggy  damp  of  original  corruption,  it  cannot 
be  that  any  man's  heart  living  should  be  either  so  enlight- 
ened in  the  knowledge,  or  so  established  in  the  love  of  that 
wherein  his  salvation  standeth,  as  to  be  perfect,  neither 
doubting  nor  shrinking  at  all.  If  any  such  were,  what 
doth  let  why  that  man  should  not  be  justified  by  his  own 
inherent  righteousness  ?  For  righteousness  inherent,  being 
perfect,  will  justify.  And  perfect  Faith  is  a  part  of  perfect 
righteousness  inherent ;  yea,  a  principal  part,  the  root  and 
the  mother  of  all  the  rest :  so  that  if  the  fruit  of  every  tree 
be  such  as  the  root  is,  Faith  being  perfect,  as  it  is  if  it  be 
not  at  all  mingled  with  distrust  and  fear,  what  is  there  to 
exclude  other  Christian  virtues  from  the  like  perfections? 
And  then  what  need  we  the  righteousness  of  Christ  ?  His 
garment  is  superfluous ;  we  may  be  honourably  clothed  with 
our  own  robes,  if  it  be  thus.  But  let  them  beware,  who 
challenge  to  themselves  a  strength  which  they  have  not,  lest 
they  lose  the  comfortable  support  of  that  weakness  which 
indeed  they  have. 

5.  Some  shew,  although  no  soundness  of  ground,  there  is, 
which  may  be  alledged  for  defence  of  this  supposed  per- 
fection in  Certainty  touching  matters  of  our  Faith ;  as,  first, 
that  Abraham  did  believe,  and  doubted  not :  secondly,  that 
the  Spirit,  which  God  hath  given  us  to  no  other  end,  but 
only  to  assure  us  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God ;  to  embolden 


Sect.  6.]  OP  FAITH  IN  THE  ELECT.  453 

US  to  call  upon  him  as  our  Father,  to  open  our  eyes,  and  to 
make  the  truth  of  things  believed  evident  unto  our  minds,  is 
much  mightier  in  operation  than  the  common  light  of  Nature, 
whereby  we  discern  sensible  things :  wherefore  we  must  needs 
be  more  sure  of  that  we  believe,  than  of  that  we  see ;  we 
must  needs  be  more  certain  of  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus,  than  we  are  of  the  light  of  the  sun  when  it  shineth 
upon  our  faces.  To  that  of  Abraham,  "  He  did  not  doubt;" 
I  £mswer,  that  this  negation  doth  not  exclude  all  fear,  all 
doubting,  but  only  that  which  cannot  stand  with  true  Faith. 
It  freeth  Abraham  from  doubting  through  infidelity,  not 
irom  doubting  through  infirmity ;  from  the  doubting  of  un- 
believers, not  of  weak  believers ;  from  such  a  doubting  as 
that  whereof  the  Prince  of  Samaria  is  attainted,  who,  hear- 
ing the  promise  of  sudden  plenty  in  the  midst  of  extreme 
dearth,  answered,  "  Though  the  Lord  would  make  windows  [«  King* 
in  heaven,  were  it  possible  so  to  come  to  pass  ?"  But  that 
Abraham  was  not  void  of  all  doubting,  what  need  we  any 
other  proof  than  the  plain  evidence  of  his  own  words  ?  The  Oen. 
reason  which  is  taken  from  the  power  of  the  Spirit  were 
effectual,  if  God  did  work  like  a  natural  agent,  as  the  fire 
doth  inflame,  and  the  sun  enlighten,  according  to  the  utter- 
most ability  which  they  have  to  bring  forth  their  effects: 
but  the  incomprehensible  wisdom  of  God  doth  limit  the 
effects  of  his  power  to  such  a  measure  as  it  seemeth  best 
unto  himself;  wherefore  he  worketh  that  certainty  in  all, 
which  sufficeth  abundantly  to  their  salvation  in  the  life  to 
come;  but  in  none  so  great  as  attaineth  in  this  life  unto 
perfection.  Even  so,  O  Lord,  it  hath  pleased  thee;  even 
80  it  is  best  and  fittest  for  us,  that  feeling  still  our  own  in- 
firmities, we  may  no  longer  breathe  than  pray,  "  Adjuva, 
Domine — Help,  Lord,  our  incredulity."  Of  the  third  ques- 
tion, this  I  hope  will  suffice,  being  added  unto  that  which 
hath  been  thereof  already  spoken.  The  fourth  question 
resteth,  and  so  an  end  of  this  point. 

6.  That  which  cometh  last  of  all  in  this  first  branch  to  be 
considered  concerning  the  weakness  of  the  Prophet's  Faith 
is,  Whether  he  did  by  this  very  thought,  "  The  Law  doth 
fail,"  quench  the  Spirit,  fall  from  Faith,  and  shew  himself  an 
unbeliever,  or  no  ?  The  question  is  of  moment ;  the  repose 
and  tranquillity  of  infinite  souls  doth  depend  upon  it.  The 
Prophet's  case  is  the  case  of  many ;  which  way  soever  we 


464  CERTAINTY  AND  PBRPETUITY       [Sed.  6. 

cast  for  hiaij  the  same  way  it  passeth  for  all  others.  If  in 
him  this  cogitation  did  extinguish  Grace^  why  the  like 
thoughts  in  us  should  not  take  the  like  effect,  there  is  no 
cause.  Forasmuch,  therefore,  as  the  matter  is  weighty, 
dear,  and  precious,  which  we  have  in  hand,  it  behoveth  us 
with  so  much  the  greater  chariness  to  wade  through  it, 
taking  special  heed  both  what  we  build,  and  whereon  we 
build ;  that  if  our  building  be  pearl,  our  foundation  be  not 
stubble;  if  the  doctrine  we  teach  be  full  of  comfort  and 
consolation,  the  ground  whereupon  we  gather  it  be  sure: 
otherwise  we  shall  not  save,  but  deceive,  both  ourselves  and 
others.  In  this  we  know  we  are  not  deceived,  neither  can 
we  deceive  you,  when  we  teach  that  the  Faith  whereby  ye 
are  sanctified  cannot  fail ;  it  did  not  in  the  Prophet,  it  shall 
not  in  you.  If  it  be  so,  let  the  difference  be  shewed  between 
the  condition  of  unbelievers  and  his,  in  this  or  in  the  like 
imbecility  and  weakness.    There  was  in  Habakkuk  that 

lu'oj"  ^Wch  St.  John  doth  call  "the  seed  of  God,"  meaning 
thereby  the  Jirst  grace  which  God  poureth  into  the  hearts 
of  them  that  are  incorporated  into  Christ ;  which  having  re- 
ceived, if,  because  it  is  an  adversary  unto  sin,  we  do  there- 
fore think  we  sin  not  both  otherwise,  and  also  by  distrustful 
and  doubtful  apprehending  of  that  which  we  ought  stedfastly 
to  believe,  surely  we  do  but  deceive  ourselves.  Yet  they 
which  are  of  God  do  not  sin  either  in  this,  or  in  any  thing, 
any  such  sin  as  doth  quite  extinguish  Grace,  clean  cut  them 

[▼er.  9.]  Qff  from  Christ  Jesus ;  because  the  seed  of  God  "  abideth" 
in  them,  and  doth  shield  them  from  receiving  any  irremedia- 
ble wound.  Their  Faith,  when  it  is  at  the  strongest,  is  but 
weak ;  yet  even  then,  when  It  is  at  the  weakest,  so  strong, 
that  utterly  it  never  faileth,  it  never  perisheth  altogether,  no 
not  in  them  who  think  it  extinguished  in  themselves.  There 
are  for  whose  sakes  I  dare  not  deal  slightly  in  this  cause, 
sparing  that  labour  which  must  be  bestowed  to  make  it  plain. 
Men  in  like  agonies  unto  this  of  the  Prophet  Habakkuk's, 
are  through  extremity  of  grief,  many  times  in  judgment  so 
confounded,  that  they  find  not  themselves  in  themselves. 
For  that  which  dwelleth  in  their  hearts  they  seek,  they 
make  diligent  search  and  enquiry.  It  "  abideth,"  it  worketh 
in  them,  yet  still  they  ask,  where  ?     Still  they  lament  as  for 

[jere.     a  thing  which  is  past  finding :  they  mourn  as  Rachel,  and 

15.]'*     refuse  to  be  comforted,  as  if  that  were  not  which  indeed 


Sect.  6.]  OF  FAITH  IN   THE   ELECT.  455 

i«;  and  as  if  tbat^  which  is  not  were;  as  if  they  did  not 
believe  when  they  do,  and,  as  if  they  did  despair  when 
they  do  not.  Which  in  some,  I  grant,  is  but  a  melancholy 
passion,  proceeding  only  from  that  dejection  of  mind,  the 
cause  whereof  is  in  the  body,  and  by  bodily  means  can  be 
iaken  away.  But  where  there  is  no  such  bodily  cause, 
the  mind  is  not  lightly  in  this  mood,  but  by  some  of  these 
three  occasions:  One,  that  judging  by  comparison  either 
:with  other  men,  or  with  themselves  at  some  other  time  more 
strong,  they  think  imperfection  to  be  a  plain  deprivation, 
weakness  to  be  utter  want,  of  Faith.  Another  cause  is,  they 
often  mistake  one  thing  for  another.  St.  Paul,  wishing  well 
to  the  Church  of  Rome,  prayeth  for  them  after  this  sort, 
•*  The  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  of  believing.**  [Rom. 
Hence  an  error  groweth,  when  men  in  heaviness  of  spirit'^' 
suppose  they  lack  Faith,  because  they  find  not  the  sugared 
joy  and  delight  which  indeed  doth  accompany  Faith,  but  so 
as  a  separable  accident,  as  a  thing  that  may  be  removed 
from  it;  yea,  there  is  a  cause  why  it  should  be  removed. 
The  hght  would  never  be  so  acceptable,  were  it  not  for  that 
usual  intercourse  of  darkness.  Too  much  honey  doth  turn 
to  gall ;  and  too  much  joy,  even  spiritually,  would  make  us 
wantons.  Happier  a  great  deal  is  that  man's  case,  whose 
soul  by  inward  desolation  is  humbled,  than  he  whose  heart 
is  through  abundance  of  spiritual  delight  lifted  up  and 
exalted  above  measure.  Better  it  is  sometimes  to  go  down 
into  the  pit  with  him,  who,  beholding  darkness,  and  be- 
wailing the  loss  of  inward  joy  and  consolation,  crieth  from 
the  bottom  of  the  lowest  hell,  ^^  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  [Psaim 
thou  forsaken  me?'*  than  continually  to  walk  arm  in  arm""* 
with  Angels,  to  sit  as  it  were  in  Abraham's  bosom,  and  to 
have  no  thought,  no  cogitation,  but  ^^  I  thank  my  God  it  [Lake 
is  not  with  me  as  it  is  with  other  men."  No,  God  will  have 
them  that  shall  walk  in  Ught  to  feel  now  and  then  what  it  is 
to  sit  in  the  shadow  of  death.  A  grieved  spirit  therefore  is 
no  argument  of  a  faithless  mind.  A  third  occasion  of  men's 
misjudging  themselves,  as  if  they  were  faithless  when  they 
are  not,  is,  they  fasten  their  cogitations  upon  the  distrustful 
suggestions  of  the  flesh,  whereof  finding  great  abundance 
in  themselves,  they  gather  thereby.  Surely  unbelief  hath  full 
dominion,  it  hadi  taken  plenary  possession  of  me ;  if  I  were 
faithful  it  could  not  be  thus:  not  marking  the  motions  of  the 


456  CBRTiUNTY   AND   FEflPETUITY  \8ect.  6. 

Spirit  and  of  Faiths  because  they  lie  buried  and  overwhelmed 
with  the  contrary:   when  notwithstanding,  as  the  blessed 

[Rom;  Apostle  doth  acknowledge,  that  the  Spirit  groaneth,  and 
that  God  heareth  when  we  do  not ;  so  there  is  no  doubt  but 
that  our  Faith  may  have,  and  hath,  her  privy  operations 
secret  to  us,  in  whom,  yet  known  to  him  by  whom  they  are. 
Tell  this  to  a  man  that  hath  a  mind  deceived  by  too  hard 
an  opinion  of  himself,  and  it  doth  but  augment  his  grief:  he 
bath  his  answer  ready.  Will  you  make  me  think  otherwise 
than  I  find,  than  I  feel  in  myself?  I  have  throughly  con- 
sidered and  exquisitely  sifted  all  the  corners  of  my  heart, 
and  I  see  what  there  is;  never  seek  to  persuade  me  against 
my  knowledge ;  I  do  not,  I  know,  I  do  not  believe.  Well,  to 
favour  them  a  little  in  their  weakness,  let  that  be  granted 
which  they  do  imagine;  be  it  that  they  are  faithless  and 
without  belief.  But  are  they  not  grieved  for  their  unbelief? 
They  are.  Do  they  not  wish  it  might,  and  also  strive  that 
it  may,  be  otherwise  ?  We  know  they  do.  Whence  cometh 
this,  but  from  a  secret  love  and  liking  which  they  have  of 
those  things  that  are  believed?  No  man  can  love  things 
which  in  his  own  opinion  are  not.  And  if  they  think  those 
things  to  be,  which  they  shew  that  they  love  when  they 
desire  to  believe  them ;  then  must  it  needs  be, .  that  by 
desiring  to  believe  they  prove  themselves  true  believers: 
for  without  Faith  no  man  thinketh  that  things  believed  are. 
Which  argument  all  the  subtilty  of  infernal  powers  will 
never  be  able  to  dissolve.  The  Faith  therefore  of  true 
believers,  though  it  have  many  and  grievous  downfalls,  yet 
doth  it  still  continue  invincible;  it  conquereth  and  re- 
covereth  itself  in  the  end.  The  dangerous  conflicts,  where- 
unto  it  is  subject,  are  not  able  to  prevail  against  it.  The 
Prophet  Habakkuk  remained  faithful  in  weakness,  though 
weak  in  Faith.  It  is  true,  such  is  our  weak  and  wavering 
nature,  that  we  have  no  sooner  received  Grace,  but  we  are 
ready  to  fall  from  it :  we  have  no  sooner  given  our  assent  to 
the  Law,  that  it  cannot  fail,  but  the  next  conceit  which  we 
are  ready  to  embrace  is,  that  it  may,  and  that  it  doth  fail. 
Though  we  find  in  ourselves  a  most  willing  heart  to  cleave 
unseparably  unto  God,  even  so  far  as  to  think  unfeignedly 

[Luke  with  Peter,  "  Lord,  I  am  ready  to  go  with  thee  into  prison 
and  to  death ;"  yet  how  soon  and  how  easily,  upon  how 
small  occasions,  are  we  changed,  if  we  be  but  awhile  let 


SecU  6.]  OP  faith:*  in  the  elect.  467 

alone^  and  left  unto  ourselves?    The  Galatians  to-day,  for 
their  sakes  which  teach  them  the  truth  in*  Christ,  content, 
if  need  were,  to  pluck  out  their  own  eyes,   and  the  next  [6ai. 
day,  ready  to  pluck  out  theirs  which  taught  them.     The*^' 
love  of  the  Angel  of  the  Church  of  Ephesus,  how  greatly 
inflamed,  and  how  quickly  slacked !     The  higher  we  flow, 
the  nearer  we  are  unto  an  ebb,  if  men  be  respected  as  mere 
men,  according  to  the  wonted  course  of  their  alterable  incli- 
nation, without  the  heavenly  support  of  the  Spirit.     Again, 
the  desire  of  our  ghostly  enemy  is  so  uncredible,  and  his 
means  so  forcible  to  overthrow  our  Faith,  that  whom  the 
blessed  Apostle  knew  betrothed  and  made  hand-fast  unto 
Christ,  to  them  he  could  not  write  but  with  great  trembling ; 
'*  I  am  jealous  over  you  with  a  godly  jealousy,  for  I  have  [2  cor. 
prepared  you  to  one  Husband,  to  present  you  a  pure  Virgin  ^'  *' 
unto  Christ :  but  I  fear,  lest  as  the  Serpent  beguiled  Eve 
through  his  subtilty,  so  your  minds  should  be  corrupted 
from  the  simplicity  which  is  in  Christ."    The  simplicity  of 
Faith  which  is  in  Christ,  taketh  the  naked  promise  of  God, 
his  bare  Word,  and  on  that  it  resteth.     This  simplicity  the 
Serpent  laboureth   continually  to  pervert,   corrupting  the 
mind  with  many  imaginations  of  repugnancy  and  contrariety 
between  the  promise  of  God  and  those  things  which  sense  or 
experience,  or  some  other  fore-conceived  persuasion,  hath 
imprinted.    The  word  of  the  promise  of  God  unto  his  people 
is,  ^^  I  will  not  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee:"  upon  this  therjosh. 
simplicity  of  Faith  resteth,  and  it  is  not  afraid  of  famine.  *  ^'^ 
But  mark  how  the  subtilty  of  Satan  did  corrupt  the  minds 
of  that  rebellious  generation,  whose  spirits  were  not  faithful 
imto  God.     They  beheld  the  desolate  state  of  the  Desert 
in  which  they .  were,   and  by  the  wisdom  of  their   sense 
concluded  the  promise  of  God  to  be  but  folly ;  ^^  Can  God  [Psaim 
prepare  a  table  in  the  Wilderness  ?"    The  word  of  the  pro-  wT" ' 
mise  to  Sarah  was,   ^^  Thou  shalt  bear  a  son."    Faith  is 
simple,  and  doubteth  not  of  it :  but  Satan,  to  corrupt  this 
simplicity  of  Faith,  entangleth  the  mind  of  the  woman  with 
an  argument  drawn  from  common  experience  to  the  con- 
trary; A  woman  that  is  old;  Sarah  now  to  be  acquainted [Oen. 
again  with  forgotten  passions  of  youth !     The  word  of  the  S" ' 
promise   of  God  by  Moses  and   the  Prophets  made   the 

*  [Eph.iv.21.] 


468  CERTAIMTV  AND   PERPETUITY  \8eci.  & 

[John  Saviour  of  the  world  so  apparent  unto  Philip,  that  his 
simplicity  could  conceive  no  other  Messias  than  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  the  son  of  Joseph.  But  to  stay  Nathanael,  lest 
[yer.  40.]  being  invited  to  "  come  and  see/'  he  should  also  believe, 
and  so  be  saved,  the  subtilty  of  Satan  casteth  a  mist  before 
his  eyes,  putteth  in  his  head  against  this  the  common- 
[ibid.]  conceived  persuasion  of  all  men  concerning  Nazareth,  ''  Is 
it  possible  that  a  good  thing  should  come  from  thence  ?" 
This  stratagem  he  doth  use  vrith  so  great  dexterity,  die 
minds  of  all  men  are  so  strangely  ensorceled*  with  it,  that 
it  bereaveth  them,  for  the  time,  of  all  perceivance  of  that 
which  should  relieve  them  and  be  their  comfort;  yea,  it 
taketh  all  remembrance  from  them,  even  of  things  where* 
with  they  are  most  familiarly  acquainted.  The  people  of 
Israel  could  not  be  ignorant,  that  he  which  led  them  through 
the  sea  was  able  to  feed  them  in  the  Desert :  but  this  was 
obUterated  and  put  out  by  the  sense  of  their  present  want 
FeeUng  the  hand  of  God  against  them  in  their  food,  they 
remembered  not  his  hand  in  the  day  that  he  delivered  them 
from  the  hand  of  the  oppressor,  Sarah  was  not  then  to 
[Matt,  learn,  that  *^  with  God  all  things  are  possible."  Had 
n  con'il  Nathanael  never  noted  how  **  God  doth  choose  the  base 
^'  ^'^  things  of  this  world  to  disgrace  them  that  are  most  honour- 
ably esteemed?"  The  Prophet  Habakkuk  knew  that  the 
promises  of  grace,  protection,  and  favour,  which  God  in 
the  Law  doth  make  unto  his  people,  do  not  grant  them  any 
such  immunity  as  can  free  and  exempt  them  from  all  chas- 
tisements: he  knew  that,  as  God  said,  ^'  I  will  continue  my 
mercy  for  ever  towards  them;"  so  he  likewise  said,  "  Their 
transgressions  I  will  punish  with  a  rod:"  he  knew  that  it 
cannot  stand  with  any  reason,  we  should  set  the  measure  of 
our  own  punishments,  and  prescribe  unto  God  how  great, 
or  how  long,  our  sufferings  shall  be :  he  knew  that  we  were 
blind,  and  altogether  ignorant  what  is  best  for  us ;  that  we 
sue  for  many  things  very  unwisely  against  ourselves,  think- 
ing we  ask  fish,  when  indeed  we  crave  a  serpent :  he  knew 
that  when  the  thing  we  ask  is  good,  and  yet  God  seemeth 
slow  to  grant  it,  he  doth  not  deny  but  defer  our  petitions, 
to  the  end  we  might  learn  to  desire  great  things  greatly: 
all  this  he  knew.     But,  beholding  the  land  which  God  had 


•  [French:  "Bewitched."] 


Sect.  7.]  OF   FAITH   IN   TH£  ELECT.  4^ 

seyered  for  his  own  people^  and  seeing  it  abandoned  unto 
Heathen  nations;  viewing  how  reproachfully  they  did  tread 
it  down  9  and  wholly  make  havock  of  it  at  their  pleasure ; 
beholding  the  Lord's  own  royal  seat  made  an  heap  of  stones^ 
his  Temple  defiled^  the  carcasses  of  his  servants  cast  out 
for  the  fowls  of  the  air  to  devour^  and  the  flesh  of  his  meek 
ones  for  the  beasts  of  the  field  to  feed  upon;  being  con- 
scious to  himself  how  long  and  how  earnestly  he  had  cried, 
**  Succour  us,  O  God  of  our  welfare,  for  the  glory  of  thine 
own  name ;"  and  feeling  that  their  sore  was  still  increased : 
ihe  conceit  of  repugnancy  between  this  which  was  objected 
to  his  eyes,  and  that  which  Faith  upon  promise  of  the  Law 
did  look  for,  made  so  deep  an  impression,  and  so  strong, 
that  he  disputeth  not  the  matter ;  but,  without  any  further 
-enquiry  or  search,  inferreth,  as  we  see,  "  The  Law  doth  fail." 
7.  Of  us,  who  is  here  which  cannot  very  soberly  advise 
his  brother ;  Sir,  you  must  learn  to  strengthen  your  Faith 
by  that  experience  which  heretofore  you  have  had  of  God's 
great  goodness  towards  you,  ^^  Per  ea  quse  agnoscas  prse- 
stita,  discas  sperare  promissa.  By  those  things  which  you 
have  known  performed,  learn  to  hope  for  those  things  which 
are  promised?"     Do  you  acknowledge  to  have  received 
much?    Let  that  make  you  certain  to  receive  more.     ^'  Ha-  [Luke 
benti  dabitur;  To  him  that  hath,  more  shall  be  given." 
When  you  doubt  what  you  shall  have,  search  what  you 
have  had  at  God's  hands.     Make  this  reckoning,  that  the 
benefits,  which  he  hath  bestowed  are  bills  obUgatory  and 
sufficient  sureties,  that  he  will  bestow  further.     His  present 
mercy  is  still  a  warrant  of  his  future  love,  because,  '*  whom  [John 
he  loveth,  he  loveth  unto  the  end."    Is  it  not  thus  ?     Yet  if 
we  could  reckon  up  as  many  evident,  clear,  undoubted  signs 
of  God's  reconciled  love  towards  us  as  there  are  years,  yea 
d&ysy  ycA  hours,  past  over  our  heads ;  all  these  set  together 
have  not  such  force  to  confirm  our  Faith,  as  the  loss,  and 
sometimes  the  only  fear  of  losing  a  little  transitory  goods, 
credit,  honour,  or  favour  of  men ;  a  small  calamity,  a  matter 
of  nothing,  to  breed  a  conceit,  and  such  a  conceit  as  is  not 
easily  again  removed,  that  we  are  clean  crost  out  of  God's 
book,  that  he  regards  us  not,  that  he  looketh  upon  others, 
but  passeth  by  us  like  a  stranger  to  whom  we  are  not 
known.      Then  we  think,  looking  upon  others,  and  com- 
paring them  with  ourselves,  4;heir  tables  are  furnished  day 


460  CERTAINTY   AND   PERPETUITY  [Sect,^^ 

by  day ;  earth  and  ashes  are  our  bread :  they  sing  to  the 
lute,  and  they  see  their  children  dance  before  them;  our 
hearts  are  heavy  in  our  bodies  as  lead,  our  sighs  beat  as 
thick  as  a  swift  pulse,  our  tears  do  wash  the  beds  wherein 
we  lie:  the  sun  shineth  fair  upon  their  foreheads;  we  are 
hanged  up  like  bottles  in  the  smoke,  cast  into  comers  like 
the  shreds  of  a  broken  pot :  tell  not  us  of  the  promises  of 
God's  favour,  tell  such  as  do  reap  the  fruit  of  them ;  they 
belong  not  to  us,  they  are  made  to  others :  the  Lord  be 
merciful  to  our  weakness,  but  thus  it  is.  Well,  let  the 
frailty  of  our  nature,  the  subtilty  of  Satan,  the  force  of  our 
deceivable  imaginations  be,  as  we  cannot  deny  but  they  are, 
things  that  threaten  every  moment  the  utter  subversion  of 
our  Faith ;  Faith  notwithstanding  is  not  hazarded  by  these 
things:    that  which   one   sometimes  told   the  Senators  of 

fSaii.3  Rome,  ^'  Ego  sic  existimabam,  P.  C,  uti  patrem  ssepe  meiim 
prsedicantem  audiveram,  qui  vestram  amicitiam  diligenter 
colerent,  eos  multum  laborem  suscipere,  cseterum  ex  om* 
nibus  maxime  tutos  esse,  As  I  have  often  heard  my  father 
acknowledge,  so  I  myself  did  ever  think,  that  the  friends 
and  favourers  of  this  State  charged  themselves  with  great 
labour,  but  no  man's  condition  so  safe  as  theirs ;"  the  same 
we  may  say  a  great  deal  more  justly  in  this  case.  Our 
Fathers  and  Prophets,  our  Lord  and  Master,  hath  full 
often  spoken,  by  long  experience  we  have  found  it  true,  as 
many  as  have  entered  their  names  in  the  mystical  Book  of 
Life,  "  eos  maximum  laborem  suscipere,"  they  have  taken 
upon  them  a  laboursome,  a  toilsome,  a  painful  profession, 
^'  sed  omnium  maxime  tutos  esse,"   but  no  man's  security 

[Luke  like  to  theirs.  ^^  Simon,  Simon,  Satan  hath  desired  to 
'  31,32.]  winnow  thee  as  wheat;"  here  is  our  toil:  *'  but  I  have 
prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not ;"  this  is  our  safety. 
No  man's  condition  so  sure  as  ours  :  the  prayer  of  Christ  is 
more  than  sufficient  both  to  strengthen  us,  be  we  never  so 
weak ;  and  to  overthrow  all  adversary  power,  be  it  never  so 
strong  and  potent.    His  prayer  must  not  exclude  our  labour : 

[Psai.     their  thoughts  are  vain  who  think  that  their  watching  can 

cMvu.i]  preserve  the  city,  which  God  himself  is  not  willing  to  keep. 
And  are  not  theirs  as  vain,  who  think  that  God  will  keep 
the  city,  for  which  they  themselves  are  not  careful  to 
watch  ?  The  husbandman  may  not  therefore  burn  his 
plough,  nor  the  merchant  forsake  his  trade,  because  God 


Sect.  7.]  OF   FAITH   IN   THE    ELECT.  461 

hath  promised   *'  I  will  not  forsake  thee.'*     And  do  the 
promises  of  God  concerning  our  stability,  think  you,  make 
it  a  matter  indifferent  for  us  to  use,  or  not  to  use,  the 
means  whereby  to  attend,  or  not  to  attend,  to  reading?  to 
pray,  or  not  to  pray,  that  we  "  fall  not  into  temptation  ?" 
Surely,  if  we  look  to  stand  in  the  Faith  of  the  sons  of  God, 
we  must  hourly,  continually,  be  providing  and  setting  our- 
selves to  strive.     It  was  not  the  meaning  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  in  saying,  "  Father,  keep  them  in  thy  name,"  that  [John 
we   should  be  careless  to  keep   ourselves.      To  our  own*^"'^ 
safety,  our  own  sedulity  is  required.     And  then  blessed  for 
ever  and  ever  be  that  mother's  child,  whose  Faith  hath 
made  him  the  child  of  God.     The  earth  may  shake,  the 
pillars  of  the  world  may  tremble  under  us,  the  countenance 
of  the  Heaven  may  be  appalled,  the  sun  may  lose  his  lights 
the  moon  her  beauty,  the  stars  their  glory ;  but  concerning 
the  man  that  trusteth  in  God,  if  the  fire  have  proclaimed 
itself  unable  as  much  as  to  singe  a  hair  of  his  head,  if  lions, 
beasts  ravenous  by  nature,  and  keen  with  hunger,  being  set 
to  devour,  have  as  it  were  religiously  adored  the  very  flesh 
of  the  faithful  man;  what  is  there  in  the  world  that  shall 
change  his  heart,  overthrow  his  Faith,  alter  his  affection 
towards  God,  or  the  affection  of  God  to  him?    If  I  be  of 
this  note,  who  shall  make  a  separation  between  me  and  my 
God  ?   ^'  shall  tribulation,   or  anguish,   or  persecution,  or  cRom. 
famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?     No ;  I  am  per-  w^iSff 
suaded,  that  neither  tribulation,  nor  anguish,  nor  persecu- 
tion, nor  famine,  nor  nakedness,  nor  peril,  nor  sword,  nor 
death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers, 
nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,   nor       « 
depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  ever  prevail  so  far  over 
me."     ^^  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed;  I  am  not  ignorant  [2Tim.L 
whose  precious  blood  hath  been  shed  for  me ;  I  have  a 
Shepherd  full  of  kindness,  full  of  care,  and  full  of  power, 
unto  him  I  commit  myself;  his  own  finger  hath  engraven  this 
sentence  in  the  tables  of  my  heart,  '^  Satan  hath  desired  to  [Lake 
winnow  thee  as  wheat,  but  I  have  prayed  that  thy  Faith  fail  * 
not :"  therefore  the  assurance  of  my  hope  I  will  labour  to 
keep,  as  a  jewel,  unto  the  end ;  and  by  labour,  through  the 
gracious  mediation  of  bis  prayer,  I  shall  keep  it. 


i 


TWO   SERMONS 


ON 


PART    OF   ST.  JUDFS    EPISTLE.* 


SERMON  I. 

JUDB  17 — 21. 

**  But  ye,  beloved,  remember  the  words  which  were  spoken  before  of  the  Apostles  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  How  that  they  told  you,  that  there  should  be  Mockers  in 
the  last  time,  which  should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly  lusts.  These  are  msken 
of  sects,  fleshly,  having  not  the  Spirit.  But  ye,  beloved,  edify  yourselves  in  yotfr 
most  holy  Faith,  praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of 
God,  looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  etemid  Life.** 

1.  The  occasion  whereupon,  together  with  the  end  where- 
fore>  this  Epistle  was  written,  is  opened  in  the  firont  and 
entry  of  the  same.  There  were  then,  as  there  are  now, 
many  evil  and  wickedly-disposed  persons,  not  of  the  mystical 
[Jad«,4.]  Body,  yet  within  the  visible  bounds  of  the  Church,  "  men 
which  were  of  old  ordained  to  condemnation,  ungodly  men, 

•  [Printed  at  Oxford,  1614,  4to.  **To  the  Worshipful  Mr.  George  Summaster,  Prin- 
cipal of  Broad-Gates  Hall,  in  Oxford,  Henry  Jackson  ivisheth  all  happiness.  Sir,  your 
kind  acceptance  of  a  former  testification  of  that  respect  I  owe  you,  hath  made  me  venture  to 
shew  the  world  these  godly  Sermons  under  your  name.  In  which,  as  every  point  is  worth 
observation,  so  some  especially  are  to  be  noted :  the  first,  that  as  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy  is 
from  God  himself,  who  doth  inwardly  heat  and  enlighten  the  hearts  and  minds  of  his  holy 
Penmen  (which  if  some  would  diligently  consider,  they  would  not  puzzle  themselves  with 
the  contentions  of  Scot  and  Thomas,  Whether  God  only,  or  his  ministering  Spirits,  do  infiise 
into  men's  minds  prophetical  revelations  *  per  species  inteliigibiles'),  so  God  framed  their 
words  also.  Whence  the  holy  Father  St.  Augustine  religiously  observeth,  *  That  all  those 
which  understand  the  Sacred  Writers,  will  also  perceive  that  they  ought  not  to  use  other  words 
than  they  did,  in  expressing  those  heavenly  mysteries  which  their  hearts  conceived,  as  the 
blessed  Virgin  did  our  Saviour,  by  the  Holy  Ghost*  (De  Doct.  Chr.  lib.  iv.  c.  6).  The  greater 
is  Castellio  his  offence,  who  hath  laboured  to  teach  the  Prophets  to  speak  otherwise  than  they 
have  already.  Much  like  to  that  impious  King  of  Spain,  Alphonsus  the  Tenth,  who  found 
&ult  with  God's  works :  '  Si  (inquit)  creationi  affuissem,  mundum  melius  ordinassem  ;*  If  he 
had  been  with  God  at  the  creation  of  the  worid,  the  world  had  gone  better  than  now  it 
doth.'  (Rob.  Tolet.  lib.  iv.  c.  5).  As  this  man  found  fault  with  God*s  works,  so  did  the  othct 
with  God's  words ;  but,  because  *  we  have  a  most  sure  word  of  the  Prophets,*  to  which  we 
must  *  take  heed,'  (2  Pet.i.  19)  I  will  let  his  words  pass  with  the  wind,  having  elsewhere 
(Prsef.  in  Orat.  D.  Rainold.)  spoken  to  you  more  largely  of  his  errorus,  whom,  notwithstand- 
ing, for  his  other  excellent  parts,  I  much  respect. 

'*  You  shall  moreover  from  hence  understand,  how  Christianity  consists  not  in  formal  and 
seeming  purity  (under  which  who  knows  not  notorious  villany  to  mask?),  but  in  the  heart- 
root.  Whence  the  Author  truly  teacheth,  that  Mockers,  which  use  Religion  as  a  cloak,  to 
put  off  and  on,  as  the  weather  serveth,  are  worse  than  Pagans  and  Infidels.    Where  I  cannot 


Sect.  1.1  ON  ST.  JUDE.  463 

which  turned  the  grace  of  our  God  into  wantonness^  and 
denied  the  Lord  Jesus."    For  this  cause  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  is  in  the  hand  of  "  Jude  the  servant  of  Jesus  and  [ver.  i.] 
brother  of  James/*   to  exhort  them  that  are  called^  and 
sanctified  of  God  the  Father,  that  they  would  **  earnestly 

omit  to  shew  how  justly  this  kind  of  men  hath  been  reproved  by  that  renowned  Martyr  of 
Jesus  Christ,  Bishop  Latimer,  both  because  it  will  be  apposite  to  this  purpose,  and  also  free 
that  Chrisdan  worthy  from  the  danderous  reproaches  of  him  (Parsons  in  3.  Convers.))  'vrho 
was,  if  ever  any,  a  Mocker  of  God,  Religion,  and  all  good  men.  But  first  I  must  desire  you, 
and  in  you  all  readers,  not  to  think  lightly  of  that  excellent  man,  for  using  this  and  the  like 
witty  similitudes  la  his  Sermons.  For  whosoever  will  call  to  mind  with  what  rifif-raff  God's 
people  were  fed  in  those  days,  when  their  Priests,  whose  '  lips  should  have  preserved 
knowledge*  (MaL  iL  7.),  preached  nothing  else  but  dreams  and  fidse  miracles  of  counterfeit 
Saints,  enrolled  in  that  sottish  Legend,  coined  and  amplified  by  a  drowsy  head  between 
sleeping  and  waking;*  he  that  will  consider  this,  and  also  how  the  people  wore  delighted 
with  audi  toys  (God  sending  them  stroBg  delusions  that  they  should  believe  lies),  and  how 
hard  it  would  have  been  for  any  man  wheUy,  and  upon  the  sudden,  to  draw  their  minds  to 
another  bent,  will  easily  perceive,  both  how  necessary  it  was  to  shew  symbolical  discourse, 
and  how  wisely  and  moderately  it  was  appfied  by  that  religious  Father,  to  the  end  he 
might  lead  their  understanding  so  far,  till  it  were  so  convinced,  informed,  and  settled,  that  it 
might  forget  the  means  and  way  by  which  it  was  led,  and  think  only  of  that  it  had  acquired* 
For  in  all  such  mystical  speedbes  who  knows  not  that  the  end  for  which  they  are  used,  is 
only  to  be  thought  upon  ? 

**  This  then  being  first  considered,  let  us  hear  the  story,  as  it  is  related  by  Mr.  Fox : 
(Page  1903.  ed,  1570.)  *  Mr.  Latimer  (saith  he)  in  his  Sermon,  gave  the  people  certain  cards 
out  of  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  chapters  of  Matthew.  For  the  chief  triumph  in  the  cards 
he  fimited  the  heart,  as  the  principal  thing  that  they  should  serve  God  withal ;  whereby  he 
qnke  overthrew  all  hypocritical  and  external  Ceremonies,  not  tending  to  the  necessary 
ftirtherance  of  God's  holy  Word  and  Sacraments.  By  tliis,  he  exhorted  all  men  to  serve  the 
Lord  with  inward  heart  and  true  affection,  and  not  with  outward  Ceremonies;  adding, 
aaoreover,  to  the  .praise  of  that  triumph,  that  though  it  were  never  so  small,  yet  it  would 
take  up  the  best  coat-card  beside  in  the  bunch,  yea,  though  it  were  the  King  of  Clubs,  &c. 
meaning  thereby,  how  the  Lord  would  be  worshipped  and  served  in  simplicity  of  the  heart, 
and  verity,  wherein  consisteth  true  Christian  Religion,  &c.'     Thus  Mr.  Fox. 

«  By  which  it  appears,  that  the  holy  man's  intention  was  to  lift  up  the  people's  hearts  to 
God,  and  not  that  he  made  '  a  Sermon  of  playing  at  cards,  and  taught  them  how  to  play  at 
Triumph,  and  played  (himself)  at  cards  in  die  pulpit,*  as  that  base  companion  Parsonaf- 
reports  the  matter  in  his  wonted  scurrilous  vein  of  railing,  whence  he  calleth  it  a  Christmaa 
SermoH.!  Now  he  that  will  think  ill  of  such  allusions,  may,  out  of  the  abundance  of  \dr 
foUy,  jest  at  Demosthenes  &r  his  story  of  the  sheep,  wolves,  and  dogs;§  and  Menenius,  for 
his  fiction  of  the  belly.||  But,  *  hinc  illse  lacrymse,'  the  good  Bishop  meant  that  the  Romish 
Religion  came  not  from  the  heartf  but  consisted  in  outward  Ceremonies:  which  sorely 
grieved  Parsons,  who  never  had  the  least  warmth,  or  spark  of  honesty.  Whether  Bishop 
liatkoer  compared  the  Bisho|)s  to  the  Knave  of  Clubs,  as  the  fellow  interprets  him,  I  kanr 
not :  I  am  sure  Parsons,  of  all  others,  deserved  those  colours ;  and  so  I  Idvre  him.  We  see 
then,  what  inward  purity  is  required  of  all  Christians,  which  if  they  have,  then  in  prayer, 
and  all  other  Christian  duties,  they  shall  lift  up  pure  hands,  as  the  Apostle  speaks  (1  Tim. 
li.  8.);  not  asBaronius  would  have  it,  washed  from  sins  with  holy  water  ;^  hut  pure,  that  is, 
holy,  free  from  the  pollution  of  sin,  as  the  Greek  word  6<riovs  doth  signify. 

"  You  may  see  also  here  refuted  those  calumnies  of  the  Papists,  that  we  abandon  all  reli- 
gious Rites  and  godly  duties ;  as  also  the  confirmation  of  our  doctrine,  touching  Certainty  of 
Faith,  (and  so  of  salvation,)  which  is  so  strongly  denied  by  some  of  that  fru:tion,  that  they 
have  told  the  world,  St.  Paul  himself  was  uncertain  of  his  own  salvation.**  What  then  shall 
we  say,  but  pronounce  a  woe  to  the  most  atirict  observers  of  St.  Frauds'  Rule  and  his  Canonical 

*   CmhsIocot.  Kb.  xi.  c.6.      Yives,  lib.  ii.  de  Corrnpt.  u-t.     Hard.  lib.  iv.  deTect. 

t  In  the  third  part  of  The  thr6e  CoDversions  of  Ensland :  in  the  examination  of  Fox's  Saints,  c.  14. 
sect*  53  54.  d.  215. 

X  Sect.  55.  *       *  §  Plutarch,  in  Demotlbeo.  If  Liv.  l>ee.  1.  lib.  ii.  an.  U.  C.  eo. 

IT  Annal.  torn.  i.  an.  57.  Nnm.  100,110,  et  tom.ii.  to.  132,  Nora.  5. 

**  S,  Paalos  de  sua  salute  ineertat;  Rkheom  Jesuit,  lib.  il.  «« It.  Idolat.  Huguenot,  p.  119.  in  marg. 
edit.  Lat,  Mognnt.  1013.  interpret.  Marcel.  Bom  par.  Jesnita. 


i 


464  SERMON  I.  [Sect.  9. 

[ver.  3.]  contend  to  maintain  the  Faith,  which  was  once  delivered  to 
the  Saints."  Which  Faith,  because  we  cannot  maintain, 
except  we  know  perfectly,  first,  against  whom ;  secondly,  in 
what  sort  it  must  be  maintained ;  therefore  in  the  former 
three  verses  of  that  parcel  of  Scripture  which  I  have  read, 
the  enemies  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  are  plainly  described ; 
and  in  the  latter  two,  they  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  have 
a  sweet  lesson  given  them  how  to  strengthen  and  stablish 
themselves  in  the  Faith.  Let  us  first  therefore  examine  the 
description  of  these  reprobates  concerning  Faith ;  and  after- 
wards  come  to  the  exhortation,  wherein  Christians  are  taught 
how  to  rest  their  hearts  on  God's  eternal  and  everlasting 
Truth.  The  description  of  these  Godless  persons  is  two- 
fold, general  and  special.  The  general  doth  point  them 
out,  and  shew  what  manner  of  men  they  should  be.  The 
particular  pointeth  at  them,  and  saith  plainly,  these  are 
they.  In  the  general  description  we  have  to  consider  of 
these  things ;  First,  when  they  were  described ;  "  They 
were  told  of  before:"  Secondly,  the  men  by  whom  they 
were  described ;  "  They  were  spoken  of  by  the  Apostles 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ:"  Thirdly,  the  days  when  they 
should  be  manifested  unto  the  world,  they  told  you^  ''  they 
should  be  in  the  last  time :"  Fourthly,  their  disposition 
and  whole  demeanour,  "  Mockers  and  walkers  after  their 
own  ungodly  lusts." 

2.  In  the  third  to  the  Philippians,  the  Apostle  describeth 

[Phil,     certain ;  **  They  are  men  (saith  he)  of  whom  I  have  told  you 

19.]'*'    often,  and  now  with  tears  I  tell  you  of  them,  their  god  is 

their  belly,  their  glory  and  rejoicing  is  in  their  own  shame, 

they  mind  earthly  things."      These  were  enemies  of  the 


Disdpline,  though  they  make  him  even  equal  with  Christ/  and  the  most  meritorious 
Monk  that  ever  was  registered  in  their  Calendar  of  Saints?  But  we,  for  our  comfort,  are 
otherwise  taught  out  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  therefore  exhorted  to  build  ourselves  in  cor 
most  holy  Faith,  that  so,  '  When  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  shall  be  destroyed,  we 
may  have  a  building  given  of  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  but  eternal  in  the  Heavens.' 
(2  Cor.  V.  1.) 

"  This  is  that  which  is  most  piously  and  feelingly  taught  in  these  few  leaves,  so  that  you 
shall  read  nothing  here,  but  what  I  persuade  myself  you  have  long  practised  in  the  constant 
course  of  your  life.  It  remaineth  only  that  you  accept  of  these  labours  tendered  to  you  by 
him,  who  wisheth  you  the  long  joys  of  this  world,  and  the  eternal  of  that  which  is  to  come. 
Oxon,  from  Corpus  Christi  College,  this  13th  of  January,  1613."] 

•  Witness  the  verses  of  Horatias,  a  Jesuit,  recited  by  Possevin.  Bibliotb.  Select,  part.  2.  lib.  xrii. 
c.  19. 

'  Exne  FraDciscam  tanica  iaceroque  cncnlio : 
Qai  Franciscas  erat,  jam  tibi  Christas  erit. 
Francisci  exnviis  (si  qaa  licet)  indae  Christam : 
Jam  FranciflCQB  erit,  qoi  mode  Christns  erat.' 
The  like  hath  Bencins,  another  Jesnit. 


Sect.  3.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  405 

Cross  of  Christ;  enemies  whom  he  saw^  and  his  eyes  gusht 
out  with  tears  to  behold  them.  But  we  are  taught  in  this 
place,  bow  the  Apostle  spake  also  of  enemies,  whom  as  yet 
they  bad  not  seen,  described  a  family  of  men  as  yet  unheard 
of,  a  generation  reserved  for  the  end  of  the  world,  and  for 
the  last  time ;  tbey  had  not  only  declared  what  they  beard 
and  saw  in  the  days  wherein  they  lived,  but  they  have  pro- 
phesied also  of  men  in  time  to  come.  And  ''  you  do  well  [2  Pet. 
(saith  St.  Peter)  in  that  ye  take  heed  to  the  words  of  pro-  ib.]  * 
phecy,  so  that  ye  first  know  this,  that  no  prophecy  in  the 
Scripture  cometh  of  any  man's  own  resolution."  No  pro- 
phecy in  Scripture  cometh  of  any  man's  own  resolution ;  for 
all  prophecy  which  is  in  Scripture,  came  by  the  secret  in- 
spiration of  God.  But  there  are  prophecies  which  are  no 
Scripture ;  yea,  there  are  prophecies  against  the  Scripture : 
my  brethen,  beware  of  such  prophecies,  and  take  heed  you 
heed  them  not.  Remember  the  things  that  were  spoken  of 
before ;  but  spoken  of  before  by  the  Apostles  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Take  heed  to  prophecies,  but 
to  prophecies  which  are  in  Scripture ;  for  both  the  manner 
and  matter  of  those  prophecies  do  shew  plainly  that  they  are 
of  God. 

3.  Touching  the  manner  how  men,  by  the  Spirit  of  Pro-  Of  the 
phecy  in  Holy  Scripture,  have  spoken  and  written  of  things  p?ophe- 
to  come,  we  must  understand,  that  as  the  knowledge  of  that  ceiyed 
they  spake,  so  likewise  the  utterance  of  that  they  knew,  came  g^ 
not  by  these  usual  and  ordinary  means  whereby  we  are  ^^""  * 
brought  to  understand  the  mysteries  of  our  salvation,  and 
are  wont  to  instruct  others  in  the  same.     For  whatsoever  we 
know,  we  have  it  by  the  hands  and  ministry  of  men,  which 
lead  us  along  like  children  from  a  letter  to  a  syllable,  from 
a  syllable  to  a  word,  from  a  word  to  a  line,  from  a  line  to  a 
sentence,  from  a  sentence  to  a  side,  and  so  turn  over.     But 
God  himself  was  their  instructor,  he  himself  taught  them, 
partly  by  dreams  and  visions  in  the  night,  partly  by  reve- 
lations in  the  day,  taking  them  aside  from  amongst  their 
brethren,  and  talking  with  them  as  a  man  would  talk  with 
his  neighbour  in  the  way.     Thus  they  became  acquainted 
even  with  the  secret  and  hidden  counsels  of  God  ;  they  saw 
things  which  themselves  were  not  able  to  utter;  they  beheld 
that  whereat  men  and  angels  are  astonished ;  they  understood 
in  the  beginning,  what  should  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days. 

VOL.  III.  H  H 


466  SERMON  I.  ISeci.  4. 

or  the        ^*  Grod,  which  lightened  thus  the  eyes  of  their  under- 

ph^<     standing,  giving  them  knowledge  by  unusual  and  extraor- 

manner  binary  meaus,    did  also  miraculously   himself  frame   and 

speech,  fashion  their  words  and  writings,  insomuch  that  a  greater 

difference  there  seemeth  not  to  be  between  the  manner  of 

their  knowledge,  than  there  is  between  the  manner  of  their 

speech  and  ours.     When  we  have  conceived  a  thing  in  our 

hearts,  and  throughly  understand  it,   as  we  think  within 

ourselves,  ere  we  can  utter  in  such  sort,  that  our  brethren 

may  receive  instruction  or  comfort  at  our  mouths,  how  great, 

how  long,  how  earnest  meditation  are  we  forced  to  use? 

And  after  much  travail  and  much  pains,  when  we  open  our 

lips  to  speak  of  the  wonderful  works  of  God,  our  tongues 

do  faulter  within  our  mouths,  yea,  many  times  we  disgrace 

the  dreadful  mysteries  of  our  Faith,  and  grieve  the  spirit  of 

our  hearers  by  words  unsavoury,  and  unseemly  speeches : 

Job       <<  Shall  a  wise  man  fill  his  belly  with  the  eastern  wind 

zv  2  3 

(saith  Eliphaz)?     Shall  a  wise  man  dispute  with  words  not 

comely  ?  or  with  talk  that  is  not  profitable  V*    Yet  behold, 

even  they  that  are  wisest  amongst  us  living,  compared  with 

the  Prophets,  seem  no  otherwise  to  talk  of  God,  than  as 

if  the  children  which  are  carried  in  arms,  should  speak 

of  the  greatest  matters  of  state.     They  whose  words  do 

most  shew  forth  their  wise  understanding,  and  whose  lips 

do  utter  the  purest  knowledge,  so  long  as  they  understand 

and  speak  as  men,  are  they  not  fain  sundry  ways  to  excuse 

themselves?       Sometimes    acknowledging    with    the    Wise 

wisd.     Man,    "  Hardly  can  we   discern   the   things   that   are  on 

**'^**    earth,  and  with  great  labour  find  we  out  the  things  that 

are  before  us :  who  can  then  seek  out  the  things  that  are  in 

[Job      heaven?"     Sometimes  confessing  with   Job  the  righteous, 

xui.  3.]  jjj  treating  of  things  too  wonderful  for  us,  we  have  spoken 

we  wist  not  what :  sometimes  ending  their  talk,  as  does  the 

[2  Mace,  history  of  the  Maccabees,  "  If  we  have  done  well,  and  as 

XV.  38.]  ^YiQ  cause  required,  it  is  that  we  desire  ;  if  we  have  spoken 

slenderly  and  barely,  we  have  done  what  we  could."     But 

isa.       "  Crod  hath  made  my  mouth  like  a  sword,"  saith  Isaiah: 

[i'con    ^^^  ^'  w^  have  received  (saith  the  Apostle),  not  the  spirit 

13.]*'     of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit  which  is  of  God,  that  we  might 

know  the  things  which  are  given  to  us  of  God  ;  which  things 

also  we  speak,  not  in  words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth, 

but  which  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  teach."     This  is  that  which 


Sect.  5.]  ON  ST,  JUDE,  467 

the  Prophets  mean  by  those  books  written  full  within  and 
without ;  which  books  were  so  often  delivered  them  to  eat^ 
not  because  God  fed  them  with  ink  and  paper,  but  to  teach 
usy  that  so  oft  as  he  employed  them  in  this  heavenly  work, 
they  neither  spake  nor  wrote  any  word  of  their  own,  but 
uttered  syllable  by  syllable,  as  the  Spirit  put  it  into  their 
mouths,  no  otherwise  than  the  harp  or  the  lute  doth  give  a 
sound,  according  to  the  discretion  of  his  hands  that  holdeth 
and  striketh  it  with  skill.  The  difference  is  only  this :  an 
instrument,  whether  it  be  a  pipe  or  harp,  maketh  a  dis- 
tinction in  the  times  and  sounds,  which  distinction  is  well 
perceived  of  the  hearer,  the  instrument  itself  understandeth 
not  what  is  piped  or  harped.  The  Prophets  and  holy  men 
of  God,  not  so  :  ^^  I  opened  my  mouth  (saith  Ezekiel),  and  Euk. 
God  reached  me  a  scroll,  saying.  Son  of  man,  cause  thy 
belly  to  eat,  and  fill  thy  bowels  with  this  I  give  thee;  I 
ate  it,  and  it  was  sweet  in  my  mouth  as  honey,"  saith  the 
Prophet ;  yea,  sweeter,  I  am  persuaded,  than  either  honey 
or  the  honey-comb.  For  herein  they  were  not  like  harps 
or  lutes,  but  they  felt,  they  felt  the  power  and  strength  of 
their  own  words.  When  they  spake  of  our  peace,  every 
corner  of  their  heart  was  filled  with  joy.  When  they 
prophesied  of  mournings,  lamentations,  and  woes  to  fall 
upon  us,  they  wept  in  the  bitterness  and  indignation  of 
spirit,  the  arm  of  the  Lord  being  mighty  and  strong  upon 
them. 

6.  On  this  manner  were  all  the  prophecies  of  Holy  Scrip- 
ture. Which  prophecies,  although  they  contain  nothing 
which  is  not  profitable  for  our  instruction ;  yet  as  one  star 
differeth  from  another  in  glory,  so  every  word  of  prophecy 
hath  a  treasure  of  matter  in  it ;  but  all  matters  are  not  of 
like  importance,  as  all  treasures  are  not  of  equal  price :  the 
chief  and  principal  matter  of  prophecy  is  the  promise  of 
righteousness,  peace,  holiness,  glory,  victory,  immortatity, 
unto  *^  every  soul  which  believeth  that  Jesus  is  Christ,  of  (Rom. 
the  Jew  first,  and  of  the  Gentile."  Now  because  the  doc-  *' 
trine  of  salvation  to  be  looked  for  by  Faith  in  Him,  who  was 
in  outward  appearance,  as  it  had  been,  a  man  forsaken  of 
God;  in  him,  who  was  numbered,  judged,  and  condemned 
with  the  wicked ;  in  him,  whom  men  did  see  buffeted  on 
the  face,  scofft  at  by  the  soldiers,  scourged  by  tormentors, 
hanged  on  the  cross,  pierced  to  the  heart;  in  him,  whom 

H  H  2 


468  SERMON  I.  [SectG. 

the  eyes  of  many  witnesses  did  behold,  when  the  anguish 
of  his  soul  enforced  him  to  roar,  as  if  his  heart  had  rent  in 
[Matt,     sunder,   "  O  my  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
40.]"'     me?"    I  say,  because  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  him  is 
a  thing  improbable  to  a  natural  man,   that  whether  we 
preach  it  to  the  Gentile,  or  to  the  Jew,  the  one  condemneth 
our  Faith  as  madness,  the  other  as  blasphemy ;  therefore, 
to  establish  and  confirm  the  certainty  of  this  saving  truth  in 
the  hearts  of  men,  the  Lord,  together  with  their  preachings 
whom  he  sent  immediately  from  himself  to  reveal  these  things 
unto  the  world,  mingled  prophecies  of  things,  both  Civil  and 
Ecclesiastical,  which  were  to  come  in  every  age,  from  time 
to  time,  till  the  very  last  of  the  latter  days,  that  by  those 
things,  wherein  we  see  daily  their  words  fulfilled  and  done, 
[H«b.     we  might  have  strong  consolation  in   the  hope  of  things 
'^®*^   which   are  not  seen,  because  they  have  revealed  as  well 
the  one  as  the  other.     For  when  many  things  are  spoken 
of  before  in  Scripture,   whereof  we   see  first   one   thing 
accomplished,  ^nd  then  another,  and  so  a  third,  perceive 
we  not  plainly,   that  God  doth  nothing  else  but  lead  us 
along  by  the  hand,  till  he  have  settled  us  upon  the  rock 
of  an  assured  hope,  that  no  one  jot  or  tittle  of  his  Word 
shall  pass,  till  all  be  fulfilled  ?     It  is  not  therefore  said  in 
vain,   that   these   godless   wicked   ones    *'  were  spoken  of 
before." 
A  natn-       6.  But  by  whom  ?  By  them  whose  words,  if  men  or  Angels 
perceiv-  from  Hcaveu,  gainsay,  they  are  accursed ;  by  them,  whom 
heavenly  whosoever  dcspiscth,  "  despiseth  not  them  but  me,"  saith 
[Lake'    Christ.     If  any  man  therefore  doth  love  the  Lord  Jesus, 
**  ^^'^    (and  woe  worth  him  that  loveth  not  the  Lord  Jesus !),  hereby 
we  may  know  that  he  loveth  him  indeed,  If  he  despise  not 
the  things  that  are  spoken  of  by  his  Apostles,  whom  many 
have  despised  even  for  the  baseness  and  simpleness  of  their 
persons.     For  it  is  the  property  of  fleshly  and  carnal  men 
to  honour  and  dishonour,  credit  and  discredit,   the  words 
and  deeds  of  every  man,  according  to  that  he  wanteth  or 
James    hath  without.  '*  If  a  man  with  gorgeous  apparel  come  amongst 
us,"  although  he  be  a  thief  or  a  murderer  (for  there  are 
thieves  and  murderers  in  gorgeous  apparel),   be  his  heart 
whatsoever,  if  his  coat  be  of  purple  or  velvet,  or  tissue,  every 
one  riseth  up,  and  all  the  reverent  solemnities  we  can  use 
are  too  little.     But  the  man  that  serveth  God  is  contemned 


Sect.  7.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  469 

and  despised  amongst  us  for  his  poverty.     Herod  speaketh 
in  judgment^  and  the  people  cry  out,  "  The  voice  of  God,  Acts 
and  not  of  man."     Paul  preacheth  Christ,  they  term  him  a  *"' 
**  trifler."     "  Hearken,  beloved,  hath  not  God  chosen  the  j]^^*^,  * 
poor  of  this  world,  that  they  should  be  rich  in  Faith  ?""•*• 
Hath  he  not  chosen  the  refuse  of  the  world  to  be  heirs  of 
his  Kingdom,  which  he  hath  promised  to  them  that  love 
him  ?     Hath  he  not  chosen  the  off-scourings  of  men  to  be 
the  Lights  of  the  world,  and  the  Apostles  of  Jesus  Christ  ? 
Men  unlearned,    yet    how   fully   replenished  with   under- 
standing ?     Few  in  number,  yet  how  great  in  power  ?     Con- 
temptible in  shew,  yet  in  spirit  how  strong  ?  how  wonderful  ? 
**  I  would  fain  learn  the  mystery  of  the  eternal  generation 
of  the  Son  of  God,"  saith  Hilary.*     Whom  shall  I  seek  ? 
Shall  I  get  me  to  the  schools  of  the  Grecians?     Why,  I 
have  read,  "  Ubi  Sapiens?    ubi  Scriba?    ubi  Conquisitor U Cor. 
hujus  seculi?"     These  wise  men  in  the  world  must  needs 
be  dumb  in  this,  because  they  have  rejected  the  wisdom  of 
God.     Shall  I  beseech  the  Scribes  and  Interpreters  of  the 
Law  to  become  my  Teachers  ?     How  can  they  know  this^ 
sith  they  are  offended  at  the  Cross  of  Christ  ?     It  is  death 
for  me  to  be  ignorant  of  the  unsearchable  mystery  of  the 
Son  of  God ;  of  which  mystery^  notwithstanding,  I  should 
have  been  ignorant,  but  that  a  poor  fisherman,  unknown^ 
unlearned,  new  come  from  his  boat,  with  his  clothes  wringing 
wet,  hath  opened  his  mouth,  and  taught  me,  **  In  the  be-  [John 
ginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and 
the  Word  was  God."    These  poor  silly  creatures  have  made 
us  rich  in  the  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  Christ. 

7.  Remember  therefore  that  which  is  spoken  of  by  the  Wemnst 
Apostles ;  whose  words  if  the  children  of  this  world  do  not  betw^ 
regard,  is  it  any  marvel  ?     They  are  the  Apostles  of  our  ^ont? ' 
Lord  Jesus;   not  of  their  Lord,  but  of  ours.     It  is  true 
which  one  hath  said  in  a  certain  place,  "  Apostolicam  fidem 
seculi  homo  non  capit,  A  man  sworn  to  the  world  is  not 
capable  of  that  faith  which  the  Apostles  do  teach."    What 
mean  the  children  of  this  world  then  to  tread  in  the  courts 
of  our  God  ?    What  should  your  bodies  do  at  Bethel,  whose 
hearts  are  at  Bethaven  ?     The  god  of  this  world,  whom  ye 
serve,  hath  provided  Apostles  and  Teachers  for  you,  Chal- 
deans, Wizards,  Soothsayers,  Astrologers,  and  such  like; 

•  [See  YoL  U.  p.  183,  Note  ff.] 


470  SERMON  I.  [Sect.  8. 

hear  them.  Tell  not  us  that  ye  will  sacrifice  to  the  Lord 
our  God,  if  we  will  sacrifice  to  Ashtaroth  or  Melcom ;  that 
ye  will  read  our  Scriptures,  if  we  will  listen  to  your  Tradi- 
tions ;  that  if  ye  may  have  a  Mass  by  permission,  we  shall 
have  a  Communion  with  good  leave  and  liking ;  that  ye  will 
admit  the  things  that  are  spoken  of  by  the  Apostles  of  our 
Lord  Jesus,  if  your  Lord  and  Master  may  have  his  Ordi- 
nances observed,  and  his  Statutes  kept.  Solomon  took  it  (as 
he  well  might)  for  an  evident  proof,  that  she  did  not  bear  a 
motherly  affection  to  her  child,  which  yielded  to  have  it  cut 
in  divers  parts.  He  cannot  love  the  Lord  Jesus  with  his 
heart,  which  lendeth  one  ear  to  his  Apostles,  and  another  ear 
to  false  Apostles ;  which  can  brook  to  see  a  mingle-mangle 
of  Religion  and  Superstition,  Ministers  and  Massing^priests, 
Light  and  Darkness,  Truth  and  Error,  Traditions  and  Scrip- 
tures. No,  we  have  no  Lord  but  Jesus;  no  Doctrine  but 
the  Gospel ;  no  Teachers  but  his  Apostles.  Were  it  reason 
to  require  at  the  hands  of  an  English  subject,  obedience  to 
the  Laws  and  Edicts  of  the  Spaniard  ?  I  do  marvel,  that 
any  man,  bearing  the  name  of  a  servant  of  the  servants  of 
Jesus  Christ,  wiU  go  about  to  draw  us  from  our  allegiance. 
We  are  his  sworn  subjects ;  it  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  hear 
the  things  that  are  not  told  us  by  his  Apostles.  They  have 
told  us,  that  ^*in  the  last  days  there  shall  be  Mockers," 
therefore  we  believe  it ;  "  Credimus  quia  legimus,"  We  are 
so  persuaded,  because  we  read  it  must  be  so.  If  we  did  not 
read  it,  we  would  not  teach  it :  "  Nam  quae  Libro  Legis  non 
continentur,  ea  nee  nosce  debemus,"  saith  Hilary;  Those 
things  that  are  not  written  in  the  Book  of  the  Law,  we 
ought  not  so  much  as  to  be  acquainted  with  them.  '^  Re- 
member the  words  which  were  spoken  before  of  the  Apostles 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Mockers  8.  The  third  thing  to  be  considered  in  the  description  of 
last  ^  these  men  of  whom  we  speak,  is  the  time  wherein  they  should 
™*'  be  manifested  to  the  worid.  They  told  you  "  there  should 
be  Mockers  in  the  last  time."  Noah,  at  the  commandment 
of  God,  built  an  ark,  and  there  were  in  it  beasts  of  all  sorts, 
clean  and  unclean.  A  husbandman  planteth  a  vineyard,  and 
looketh  for  grapes,  but  when  they  come  to  the  gathering, 
behold,  together  with  grapes,  there  are  found  also  wild 
grapes.  A  rich  man  prepareth  a  great  supper,  and  biddeth 
many ;  but  when  he  sitteth  him  down,  he  findeth  amongst 


SecU  9.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  471 

his  friends  here  and  there  a  man  whom  he  knoweth  not. 
This  hath  been  the  state  of  the  Church  sithence  the  be- 
ginning.    God  always  hath  mingled  his  Saints  with  faithless 
and  godless  persons^  as  it  were  the  clean  with  the  unclean, 
grapes  with  sour  grapes,  his  friends  and  children  with  aliens 
and  strangers.     Marvel  not  then,  if  in  the  last  days  also,  ye 
see  the  men  with  whom  you  live  and  walk  arm  in  arm,  laugh 
at  your  Religion,  and  blaspheme  that  glorious  Name  whereof 
you  are  called.     Thus  it  was  in  the  days  of  the  Patriarchs 
and  Prophets,  and  are  we  better  than  our  Fathers  ?    Albeit 
we  suppose  that  the  blessed  Apostles,  in  foreshowing  what 
manner  of  men  were  set  out  for  the  last  days,  meant  to  note 
a  calamity  special  and  peculiar  to  the  ages  and  generations 
which  were  to  come.     As  if  he  should  have  said.  As  God 
hath  appointed  a  time  of  seed  for  the  sower,  and  a  time  of 
harvest  for  him  that  reapeth ;  as  he  hath  given  unto  every 
herb  and  every  tree  his  own  fruit  and  his  own  season,  not 
the  season  nor  the  fruit  of  another  (for  no  man  looketh  to 
gather  figs  in  the  winter,  because  the  summer  is  the  season 
for  them;  nor  grapes  of  thistles,  because  grapes  are  the 
fruit  of  the  vine);  so  the  same  Gt)d  hath  appointed  sundry 
for  every  generation  of  men,  other  men  for  other  times,  and 
for  the  last  times  the  worst  men,  as  may  appear  by  their 
properties ;  which  is  the  fourth  point  to  be  considered  of  in 
this  description. 

9.  **  They  told  you  that  there  should  be  Mockers;"  heMocken 
meaneth  men  that  shall  use  Religion  as  a  cloak,  to  put  off  than  Pa. 
and  on,  as^  the  weather  serveth ;  such  as  shall,  with  Herod,  fnfideu. 
hear  the  preaching  of  John  Baptist  to-day,  and  to-morrow 
condescend  to  have  him  beheaded ;  or  with  the  other  Herod, 
say  they  will  worship  Christ,  when  they  purpose  a  massacre 
in  their  hearts;  kiss  Christ  with  Judas,  and  betray  Christ 
with  Judas :  these  are  Mockers.    For  as  Ishmael,  the  son  of 
Hagar,  laughed  at  Isaac,  which  was  heir  of  the  promise^  so 
shall  these  men  laugh  at  you  as  the  maddest  people  under 
the  sun,  if  ye  be  like  Moses,  ^'choosing  rather  to  suffer [H^- 
affliction  with  the  people  of  Gt>d,  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures 
of  sin  for  a  season;"  and  why?     God  hath  not  given  them 
eyes  to  see,  nor  hearts  to  conceive,  that  exceeding  ^'  recom-  [ver.se.] 
pence"  of  your  reward.     The  promises  of  salvation  made  to 
you,  are  matters  wherein  they  can  take  no  pleasure,  even  as 
Ishmael  took  no  pleasure  in  that  promise  wherein  God  had 


472  SERMON  I.  [Sect.  9. 

[G«ii.  said  unto  Abraham^  '^  In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called  ;** 
because  the  promise  concerned  not  him,  but  Isaac.  They 
are  termed  for  their  impiety  towards  God,  **  mockers ;"  and 
for  the  impurity  of  their  life  and  conversation,  "  walkers 
after  their  own  ungodly  lusts."  St.  Peter,  in  his  second 
Epistle,  and  third  chapter,  soundeth  the  very  depth  of  their 
impiety;  shewing  first,  how  they  shall  not  shame  at  the 
length  to  profess  themselves  profane  and  irreligious,  by  flat 
denying  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  deriding  the  sweet 
and  comfortable  promises  of  his  appearing.  Secondly,  that 
they  shall  not  only  be  deriders  of  all  Religion,  but  also  dis- 
puters  against  God,  using  truth  to  subvert  the  truth;  yea. 
Scriptures  themselves  to  disprove  Scriptures.  Being  in  this 
sort  "  mockers,"  they  must  needs  be  also  followers  of  "  their 
own  ungodly  lusts."  Being  Atheists  in  persuasion,  can  they 
choose  but  be  beasts  in  conversation  ?  For  why  remove  they 
quite  from  them  the  fear  of  God  ?  Why  take  they  such 
pains  to  abandon  and  put  out  from  their  hearts  all  sense,  all 
taste,  all  feeling  of  Religion  ?  But  only  to  this  end  and 
purpose.  That  they  may,  without  inward  remorse  and  grudg- 
ing of  conscience,  give  over  themselves  to  all  uncleanness. 
Surely,  the  state  of  these  men  is  more  lamentable  than  is  the 
condition  of  Pagans  and  Turks.  For  at  the  bare  beholding 
of  Heaven  and  earth  the  InfideFs  heart  by  and  by  doth  give 
him,  that  there  is  an  eternal,  infinite,  immortal,  and  ever- 
living  God,  whose  hands  have  fashioned  and  framed  the 
world ;  he  knoweth  that  every  house  is  builded  of  some  man, 
though  he  see  not  the  man  which  built  the  house ;  and  he 
considereth  that  it  must  be  God  which  hath  built  and  created 
all  things,  although  because  the  number  of  his  days  be  few, 
he  could  not  see  when  God  disposed  his  works  of  old ;  when 
he  caused  the  light  of  his  clouds  first  to  shine,  when  he  laid 
the  corner-stone  of  the  earth,  and  swaddled  it  with  bands 
of  water  and  darkness,  when  he  caused  the  morning  star  to 
know  his  place,  and  made  bars  and  doors  to  shut  up  the  sea 
[Job  within  his  house,  saying,  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no 
iL]  ^  *  farther.  He  hath  no  eye-witness  of  these  things ;  yet  the 
light  of  natural  Reason  hath  put  this  wisdom  in  his  reins, 
and  hath  given  his  heart  thus  much  understanding.  Bring 
[1  Cor.  a  Pagan  to  the  schools  of  the  Prophets  of  God ;  prophesy 
MO  '  to  an  Infidel,  rebuke  him,  lay  the  judgments  of  God  before 
him,  make  the  secret  sins  of  his  heart  manifest,  and  he  shall 


SecL  11.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  473 

fall  down  and  worship  God.    They  that  crucified  the  Lord 
of  Glory,  were  not  so  far  past  recovery,  but  that  the  preach- 
ing of  the  Apostles  was  able  to  move  their  hearts,  and  to 
bring  them  to  this,  ^*  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do?" Acts 
Agrippa,  that  sate  in  judgment  against  Paul  for  preaching,  ^' 
yielded  notwithstanding  thus  far  unto  him,  ^'  Almost  thou  Acts 
persuadest  me  to  become  a  Christian."    Although  the  Jews, 
for  want  of  knowledge,  have  not  submitted  themselves  to  the 
righteousness  of  God ;  yet  "  I  bear  them  record  (saith  the  Rom. 
Apostle),  that  they  have  a  zeal."     The  Athenians,  a  people  *' 
having  neither  zeal  nor  knowledge,  yet  of  them  also  the 
same  Apostle  beai  eth  witness,  ^'  Ye  men  of  Athens,  I  per-  Acts 
ceive    ye  are   BeitnBaifxoveaTepoif  some   way   religious ;"    but 
**  mockers,"  walking  "  after  their  own  ungodly  lusts,"  they 
have  smothered  every  spark  of  that  heavenly  light,  they  have 
stifled  even  their  very  natural  understanding.     O  Lord,  thy 
mercy  is  over  all  thy  works,  thou  savest  man  and  beast !  yet 
a  happy  case  it  had  been  for  these  men,  if  they  had  never 
been  bom ;  and  so  I  leave  them. 

10.  St.  Jude  having  his  mind  exercised  in  the  doctrine  of  jodu 
the  Apostles  of  Jesus  Christ,  concerning  things  to  come  in  pl^Tet 
the  last  time,  became  a  man  of  wise  and  staid  judgment.  Jadidi. 
Grieved  he  was  to  see  the  departure  of  many,  and  their 
falling  away  from  the  Faith  which  before  they  did  profess ; 
grieved,  but  not  dismayed.  With  the  simpler  and  weaker 
Bort  it  was  otherwise :  their  countenance  began  by  and  by 
to  change,  they  were  half  in  doubt  they  had  deceived 
themselves  in  giving  credit  to  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 
St.  Jude,  to  comfort  and  refresh  these  silly  lambs,  taketh 
them  up  in  his  arms,  and  sheweth  them  the  men  at  whom 
they  were  offended.  Look  upon  them  that  forsake  this 
blessed  profession  wherein  you  stand :  they  are  now  before 
your  eyes;  view  them,  mark  them,  are  they  not  carnal? 
are  they  not  like  to  noisome  carrion  cast  out  upon  the 
earth?  is  there  that  Spirit  in  them,  which  crieth  ^*  Abba, 
Father,"  in  your  bosoms?  Why  should  any  man  be  discom- 
forted? Have  you  not  heard  ^^  that  there  should  be  Mockers 
in  the  last  time?"  These  verily  are  they  that  now  do 
**  separate  themselves."  [jodci©.] 

11.  For  your  better  understanding  what  this  severing  and  Three- 
separating  of  themselves  doth  mean,  we  must  know  that  the  pLrJ^ 
multitude  of  them  which  truly  believe  (howsoever  they  be  ^°* 


474  SERMON  I.  [SecL  11. 

[Bpb.u.  dispersed  far  and  wide,  each  from  other)  is  all  one  Body, 
'  '  whereof  the  Head  is  Christ;  one  Building,  whereof  he  is  the 
corner-stone,  in  whom  they,  as  the  members  of  the  body, 
being  knit,  and  as  the  stones  of  the  building,  being  coupled, 
grow  up  to  a  man  of  perfect  stature,  and  rise  to  an  holy 
Temple  in  the  Lord.  That  which  linketh  Christ  to  us  is 
his  mere  mercy  and  love  towards  us.  That  which  tieth  us 
to  him,  is  our  Faith  in  the  promised  salvation  revealed  in  the 
word  of  Truth.  That  which  uniteth  and  joineth  us  amongst 
ourselves,  in  such  sort  that  we  are  now  as  if  we  had  but  one 
heart  and  one  soul,  is  our  love.  Who  be  inwardly  in  heart 
the  lively  members  of  this  Body,  and  the  polished  stones  of 
this  Building,  coupled  and  joined  to  Christ,  as  flesh  of  his 
flesh,  and  bones  of  his  bones,  by  the  mutual  bond  of  his 
unspeakable  love  towards  them  and  their  unfeigned  faith  in 
him,  thus  linked  and  fastened  each  to  other,  by  a  spiritual, 
sincere,  and  hearty  affection  of  love,  without  any  manner  of 
simulation ;  who  be  Jews  within,  and  what  their  names  be, 
none  can  tell,  save  he  whose  eyes  do  behold  the  secret 
disposition  of  all  men's  hearts.  We,  whose  eyes  are  too 
dim  to  behold  the  inward  man,  must  leave  the  secret  judg- 
ment of  every  servant  to  his  own  Lord,  accounting  and 
using  all  men  as  brethren,  both  near  and  dear  unto  us, 
supposing  Christ  to  love  them  tenderly,  so  as  they  keep  the 
profession  of  the  Gospel,  and  join  in  the  outward  Commu- 
nion of  Saints.  Whereof  the  one  doth  warrantize  unto  us 
their  Faith,  the  other  their  Love,  till  they  fall  away,  and 
forsake  either  the  one,  or  the  other,  or  both ;  and  then  it  is 
no  injury  to  term  them  as  they  are.  When  they  separate 
themselves,  they  are  avroKaraKpiroif  not  judged  by  us,  but 
by  their  own  doings.     Men  do  separate  themselves  either 

Hcreay.  by  Hcrcsy,  Schism,  or  Apostacy.  If  they  loose  the  bond 
of  Faith,  which  then  they  are  justly  supposed  to  do  when 
they   frowardly   oppugn   any  principal  point  of  Christian 

scbism.  Doctrine,  this  is  to  separate  themselves  by  Heresy.  If  they 
break  the  bond  of  unity,  whereby  the  Body  of  the  Church 
is  coupled  and  knit  in  one,  as  they  do  which  wilfully  forsake 
all  external  Communion  with  Saints  in  holy  exercises,  purely 
and  orderly  established  in  the  Church,  this  is  to  separate 

^?J^     themselves   by  Schism.*     If  they   willingly  cast   off*,   and 

*  [Hooker  does  not  appeal  to  1  Cor.  i.  10,  as  some  modern  high  Episcopalians  have 
unadvisedly  done,  and  endeavoured  to  make  the  word  Sx^/t^cra  in  that  text  convey  t 


Sect.  12.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  475 

utterly  forsake  both  profession  of  Christ  and  Communion 
with  Christians^  taking  their  leave  of  all  Religion,  this  is  to 
separate  themselves  by  plain  Apostacy.  And  St.  Jude,  to 
express  the  manner  of  their  departure  which  by  Apostacy 
fell  away  from  the  Faith  of  Christ,  saith,  "  They  separated 
themselves;"  noting  thereby,  that  it  was  not  constraint  of 
others,  which  forced  them  to  depart;  it  was  not  infirmity 
and  weakness  in  themselves ;  it  was  not  fear  of  persecution 
to  come  upon  them,  whereat  their  hearts  did  fail;  it  was 
not  grief  of  torments,  whereof  they  had  tasted,  and  were 
not  able  any  longer  to  endure  them :  no,  they  voluntarily  did 
**  separate  themselves"  with  a  fully-settled  and  altogether- 
determined  purpose,  never  to  name  the  Lord  Jesus  any 
more,  nor  to  have  any  fellowship  with  his  Saints,  but  to 
bend  all  their  counsel,  and  all  their  strength,  to  raze  out 
their  memorial  from  amongst  men. 

IS.  Now,  because  that  by  such  examples,  not  only  the 
hearts  of  Infidels  were  hardened  against  the  Truth,  but  the 
minds  of  weak  brethren  also  much  troubled,  the  Holy  Ghost 
hath  given  sentence  of  these  backsliders,  that  they  were 
carnal  men,  and  had  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  Jesus,  lest 
any  man  having  an  over-weening  of  their  persons  should  be 
over-much  amazed  and  offended  at  their  fall.  For  simple 
men,  not  able  to  discern  their  spirits,  were  brought  by  their 
Apostacy  thus  to  reason  with  themselves :  If  Christ  be  the 
Son  of  the  living  God,  if  he  have  the  words  of  eternal  Life, 
if  he  be  able  to  bring  salvation  to  all  men  that  come  unto 
him,  what  meaneth  this  Apostacy  and  unconstrained  de- 
parture? Why  do  his  servants  so  willingly  forsake  him? 
Babes,  be  not  deceived,  his  servants  forsake  him  not.  They 
that  **  separate  themselves"  were  amongst  his  servants,  but 
if  they  had  been  of  his  servants,  they  had  not  separated 
themselves.  ^^  They  were  amongst  us,  not  of  us,"  saithijoha 
St.  John ;    and   St.  Jude  proveth  it,    because    they  were 

meaning  which  the  Apostle  never  thought  of;  for,  as  Dr.  Doddridge  says,  (Fam,  Expos, 
in  loe.)  **  It  was  morally  impossible,  considering  the  diversity  of  the  education  and  capacities 
(of  the '  brethren'),  that  they  should  all  agree  in  opinion;  nor  could  he  intend  that,  because 
he  does  not  urge  any  argument  to  reduce  them  to  such  an  agreement,  nor  so  much  as 
dedare  what  that  one  opinion  was  in  which  he  would  have  them  agree."  And  Richard 
Baxter  says,  upon  the  same  text  (Paraph,  on  New  Test,)  "  It  must  be  in  the  necessary 
things  that  we  must  unite,  and  be  of  the  same  mind  and  judgment,  and  not  in  things 
donbtful  and  unnecessary!  else  it  would  be  as  vain,  as  to  beseech  them  to  be  all  men  of 
learning  or  of  the  highest  understanding."  See  **  On  Schism,"  in  The  Christian  Bemem' 
hranceri  or  ihe  Churchman*s  Bibk  Eccles,  and  Lit,  Miscellany,  Feb.  1829,  p.  105.] 


476  SERMON  I.  l&ct,  14. 

"  carnal/'  and  "  had  not  the  Spirit."  Will  you  judge  of 
wheat  by  chaff,  which  the  wind  hath  scattered  from  amongst 
it  ?  Have  the  children  no  bread,  because  the  dogs  have  not 
tasted  it?  Are  Christians  deceived  of  that  salvation  they 
looked  for,  because  they  denied  the  joys  of  the  life  to  come 
which  were  no  Christians?  What  if  they  seemed  to  be 
pillars  and  principal  upholders  of  our  Faith  ?  What  is  that 
to  us,  which  know  that  Angels  have  fallen  from  Heaven? 
Although  if  these  men  had  been  of  us  indeed  (O  the  blessed- 
ness of  a  Christian  man's  estate!),  they  had  stood  surer 
than  the  Angels  that  had  never  departed  from  their  place: 
whereas  now  we  marvel  not  at  their  departure  at  all,  neither 
are  we  prejudiced  by  their  falling  away;  because  they  were 
not  of  us,  sith  they  are  fleshly,  and  have  not  the  Spirit 
[John     Children  abide  in  the  house  for  ever;   they  are  bondmen 

and  bondwomen  which  are  cast  out. 
iDfaiii-        13.    It  behove th   you   therefore  greatly,   every  man  to 
dence '  cxaminc  his  own  estate,  and  try  whether  you  be  bond  or 
Faitb^i,  free,  children  or  no  children.     I  have  told  you  already,  that 
areGod'^  WO  must  bcwarc  we  presume  not  to  sit  as  gods  in  judgment 
children,  yp^j,  othcrs,  and  rashly,  as  our  conceit  and  fancy  doth  lead 
us,  so  to  determine  of  this  man,  he  is  sincere,  or  of  that 
man,  he  is  an  hypocrite ;  except  by  their  falling  away  they 
rjas.      make  it  manifest  and  known  what  they  are.     For  who  art 
Tcor!     thou   that  takest  upon  thee  to  judge  another  before  the 
time  ?     Judge  thyself.     God  hath  left  us  infallible  evidence, 
whereby  we.  may  at  any  time  give  true  and  righteous  sen- 
tence upon  ourselves.     We  cannot  examine  the  hearts  of 
fi  John   other  men,  we  may  our  own.     '*  That  we  have  passed  from 
death  to  life,  we  know  it  (saith  St.  John),  because  we  love 
[2 Cor.    our  brethren:"   and  "  Know  ye  not  your  ownselves,  how 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  in   you,  except  you  be  reprobates.^" 
I  trust,  beloved,  we  know  that  we  are  not  reprobates,  be- 
cause our  spirit  doth  bear  us  record,  that  the  Faith  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  in  us. 

14.  It  is  as  easy  a  matter  for  the  Spirit  within  you  to 
tell  whose  ye  are,  as  for  the  eyes  of  your  body  to  judge 
where  you  sit,  or  in  what  place  you  stand.  For  what  saith 
Co^s.i.  the  Scripture?  "  Ye  which  were  in  times  past  strangers 
and  enemies,  because  your  minds  were  set  on  evil  works, 
Christ  hath  now  reconciled  in  the  body  of  his  flesh,  through 
death,  to  make  you  holy  and  unblameable,  and  without  fault 


Sect.  l4.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  477 

in  his  sight;  if  you  continue  grounded  and  established  in 
the  Faith,  and  be  not  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the 
Gospel:"  and  in  the  third  to  the  Colossians,  "Ye  know,  yer.ta. 
that  of  the  Lord  ye  shall  receive  the  reward  of  that  inheri- 
tance ;  for  ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ,"     If  we  can  make  this 
account  with  ourselves — I  was  in  times  past  dead  in  tres- 
passes and  sins,  I  walked  after  the  prince  that  ruleth  in  the 
air,   and  after  the  spirit  that  worketh  in  the  children  of 
disobedience;  but  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  through  his 
great  love,  wherewith  he  loved  me,  even  when  I  was  dead, 
hath  quick'ned  me  in  Christ.     I  was  fierce,  heady,  proud, 
high-minded;  but  God  hath  made  me  like  the  child  that 
is  newly  weaned:  I  loved  pleasures  more  than  God,  I  fol- 
lowed greedily  the  joys  of  this  present  world ;  I  esteemed 
him  that  erected  a  stage  or  theatre,  more  than  Solomon, 
which  built  a  Temple  to  the  Lord ;  the  harp,  viol,  timbrel, 
and  pipe,  men-singers  and  women-singers,  were  at  my  feasts; 
it  was  my  felicity  to  see  my  children  dance  before  me ;   I 
said  of  every  kind  of  vanity,  O  how  sweet  art  thou  unto 
my  soul !     All  which  things  now  are  crucified  to  me,  and  I 
to  them :  now  I  hate  the  pride  of  life,  and  pomp  of  this 
world ;   now  "  I  take  as   great  delight  in  the  way  of  thy  [Psaim 
testimonies,  O  Lord,  as  in  all  riches ;"  now  I  find  more  joy  ^ 
of  heart  in  my  Lord  and  Saviour,  than  the  worldly-minded 
man,  when  "  his  wheat  and  oil  do  much  abound  ;*'  now  I 
taste  nothing   sweet  but  the    "  bread   which   came  down  [john 
from  Heaven,  to  give  life  unto  the  world ;"  now  mine  eyes  ^**  ^'^ 
see  nothing  but  Jesus  rising  from  the  dead;  now  my  ear 
refuseth  all  kind   of  melody,   to  hear   the  song  of  them 
that  have  gotten  victory  of  the  Beast,   and  of  his  image, 
and  of  his  mark,   and  of  the  number  of  his  name,   that 
stand  on  the  sea  of  glass,  "  having  the  harps  of  God,  and  [Rct. 
singing  the  Song  of  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  and  the*^'*' 
Song  of  the  Lamb,  saying,  Great  and  marvellous  are  thy 
works.  Lord  God  Almighty,  just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  O 
King   of  Saints."     Surely,    if  the   Spirit  have   been   thus 
effectual  in  the  secret  work  of  our  regeneration  unto  new- 
ness of  life ;  if  we  endeavour  thus  to  frame  ourselves  anew ; 
then  we  may  say- boldly  with  the  blessed  Apostle,  in  the 
tenth  to  the  Hebrews,  "  We  are  not  of  them  which  with-  [Heb. 
draw  ourselves  to  perdition,  but  which  follow  Faith  to  the  '*  ***^ 
conservation  of  the  soul."    For  they  that  fall  away  from  the 


478  SERMON  I.  [Sect.  15. 

Grace  of  God,  and  separate  themselves  unto  perdition,  they 
are  fleshly  and  carnal,  they  have  not  God's  Holy  Spirit 
[OaL     But  unto  you,  **  because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth 
the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your  hearts,"  to  the  end  ye  might 
know  that  Christ  hath  built  you  upon  a  rock  unmoveable ; 
that  he  hath  registered  your  names  in  the  Book  of  Life; 
that  he  hath  bound  himself  in  a  sure  and  everlasting  cove- 
nant to  be  your  God,  and  the  God  of  your  children  after 
you;  that  he  hath  suffered  as  much,  groaned  as  oft,  prayed 
as  heartily,  for  you,  as  for  Peter,  "  O  Father,  keep  them 
[John     in  thy  name;  O  righteous  Father,  the  world  hath  not  known 
26,26.]   thee,  but  I  have  known  thee,  and  these  have  known  that 
thou  hast  sent  me.     I  have  declared  thy  name  unto  them, 
and  will  declare  it,  that  the  love  wherewith  thou  hast  loved 
me,  may  be  in  them,  and  I  in  them."    The  Lord  of  his 
infinite  mercy  give  us  hearts  plentifully*  fraught  vnth  the 
treasure  of  this  blessed  assurance  of  Faith  unto  the  end. 
The  15.   Here  I  must  advertise  all  men  that  have  the  testi- 

faiseiy    mouy  of  God's  holy  fear  within  their  breasts  to  consider, 
oiof     how  unkindly   and  injuriously   our  own  countrymen   and 
and"^   brethren  have  dealt  with  us  by  the  space  of  four-and-twenty 
sUHsy.     years,  from  time  to  time,  as  if  we  were  the  men  of  whom 
St.  Jude  here  speaketh ;  never  ceasing  to  charge  us,  some 
with  Schism,  some  with  Heresy,  some  with  plain  and  mani- 
fest Apostacy,  as  if  we  had  clean  separated  ourselves  from 
Christ,  utterly  forsaken  God,  quite  abjured  Heaven,  and 
trampled  all  Truth  and  all  Religion  under  our  feet.    Against 
this  third  sort,  God  himself  shall  plead  our  cause  in  that 
day,  when  they  shall  answer  us  for  these  words,  not  we 
them.     To  others,  by  whom  we  are  accused  for  Schism  and 
Heresy,  we  have  often  made  our  reasonable  and,   in  the 
Acts  ^    sight  of  God,   I  trust,   allowable   answers.     "  For  in  the 
way  which  they  call  Heresy,  we  worship  the  God  of  our 
Fathers,  believing  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  Law 
and   the   Prophets."     That  which   they   call   Schism,    we 
know  to  be  our  reasonable  service  unto  God,  and  obedience 
Apoc.     to  his  voice,  which  crieth  shrill  in  our  ears,  "  Go  out  of 
Babylon,   my  people,   that  you  be   not  partakers   of  her 
sins,  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues."    And  there- 
fore, when  they  rise  up  against  us,  having  no  quarrel  but 
this,   we  need  not  to   seek  any  farther  for  our  Apology, 
than  the  words  of  Abiah  to  Jeroboam  and  his  army;  **  O 


xxiv.  14. 


xviii.  4. 


Sect.  15.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  479 

Jeroboam  and  Israel^  hear  you  me ;  ought  you  not  to  know^  ^  chron. 
that  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  hath  given  the  Kingdom  over     '  '  * 
Israel  to  David  for  ever,  even  to  him,  and  to  his  sons,  by 
a  Covenant  of  Salt?"  that  is  to  say,  an  everlasting  Cove- 
nant.    Jesuits  and  Papists,  hear  ye  me.  Ought  you  not  to 
know  that  the  Father  hath  given  all  power  unto  the  Son, 
and   hath   made   him    the   only   Head    over    his   Church, 
wherein  he  dwelleth  as  an  husbandman  in  the  midst  of  his 
vineyard,  manuring  it  with  the  sweat  of  his  own  brows,  not 
letting  it  forth  to  others?     For,  as  it  is  in  the  Canticles, 
'*  Solomon  had  a  vineyard   in  Baalhamon,    he   gave  the  capt. 
vineyard  unto  keepers,   every  one  bringing  for  the  fruit 
thereof  a  thousand  pieces  of  silver;"  but  "  my  Vineyard,  [vcr.ia.] 
which  is  mine,  is  before  me,"  saith  Christ.     It  is  true,  this  is 
meant  of  the  mystical  Head  set  over  the  Body,  which  is  not 
seen.     But  as  he  hath  reserved  the  mystical  administration 
of  the  Church  invisible  unto  himself;  so  he  hath  committed 
the  mystical  government  of  congregations  visible   to   the 
sons  of  David,  by  the  same  Covenant ;  whose  sons  they  are 
in  the  governing  of  the  flock  of  Christ,  whomsoever  the 
Holy  Ghost  hath  set  over  them,  to  go  before  them,  and  to 
lead  them  in  their  several  pastures,  one  in  this  congregation, 
another  in  that ;  as  it  is  written,  **  Take  heed  unto  your-  Acts 
selves,  and  to  all  the  flock  whereof  the  Holy  Ghost  hath 
made  you  overseers,  to  feed  the  Church  of  God,  which  he 
hath  purchased  with  his  own  blood."    Neither  will  ever  The 
any  Pope  or  Papist  under  the  cope  of  Heaven  be  able  to  Xt^U 
prove   the  Romish  Bishop's   usurped  Supremacy  over  allm"?y!" 
Churches  by  any  one  word  of  the  Covenant  of  Salt,  which 
is  the  Scripture.     For  the  children  in  our  streets  do  now 
laugh  them  to  scorn,  when  they  force,  "  Thou  art  Peter,"  to 
this  purpose.     The  Pope  hath  no  more  reason  to  draw  the 
Charter  of  his  universal  Authority  from  hence,  than  the 
brethren  had  to  gather  by  the  words  of  Christ  in  the  last  of 
St.  John,  that  the  Disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  should  never 
die.     **  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  [John 
thee  ?"  saith  Christ.     **  Straightways  a  report  was  raised  S]    ' 
amongst  the  brethren,   that  this  Disciple  should  not  die: 
yet  Jesus  said  not  to  him.  He  shall  not  die ;  but  if  I  will 
that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee?"    Christ 
hath  said  in  the  sixteenth  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel  to  Simon 
the  son  of  Jonas,  **  I  say  to  thee.  Thou  art  Peter."    Hence  Matt. 

^  '  xvl.  18. 


480  SERMON  I.  [Sect.  IS. 

an  opinion  is  held  in  the  world,  that  the  Pope  is  universal 
Head  of  all  Churches.  Yet  Jesus  said  not.  The  Pope  is 
universal  Head  of  all  Churches ;  but,  "  Tu  es  Petrus,  l?hou 
[«chron.  art  Peter."  Howbeit,  as  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat.  the 
7-j  servant  of  Solomon,  rose  up  and  rebelled  against  his  Lord, 
and  there  were  gathered  unto  him  vain  men  and  wicked, 
which  made  themselves  strong  against  Rehoboam,  the  son 
of  Solomon,  because  Rehoboam  was  but  a  child,  and  tender- 
hearted, and  could  not  resist  them ;  so  the  Son  of  Perdition 
and  Man  of  Sin,  being  not  able  to  brook  the  words  of  oar 
Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  which  forbade  his  Disciples 
[Loke  to  be  like  Princes  of  Nations,  "  They  bear  rule  that  are 
X.*]'  ^'  called  gracious,  it  shall  not  be  so  with  you,"  hath  risen  up 
and  rebelled  against  his  Lord ;  and,  to  strengthen  his  arm, 
he  hath  crept  into  the  houses  almost  of  all  the  noblest 
families  round  about  him,  and  taken  their  children  from  the 
cradle  to  be  his  Cardinals;  he  hath  fawned  upon  the  Kings 
and  Princes  of  the  earth,  and  by  spiritual  cozenage  hath 
made  them  sell  their  lawful  authority  and  jurisdiction  for 
titles  of  CathoUcus,  Ckristianissimus,  Defensor  Fidei,  and 
such  like ;  he  hath  proclaimed  sale  of  pardons  to  inveigle 
the  ignorant ;  built  seminaries  to  allure  young  men  de- 
sirous of  learning;  erected  stews  to  gather  the  dissolute 
unto  him.*  This  is  the  rock  whereupon  his  Church  is  built. 
Hereby  the  man  is  grown  huge  and  strong,  like  the  cedars 
which  are  not  shaken  with  the  wind,  because  Princes  have 
been  as  children,  over-tender-hearted,  and  could  not  resist. 
Hereby  it  is  come  to  pass,  as  you  see  this  day,  that  the 
Man  of  Sin  doth  war  against  us,  and  not  by  men  of  a 
language  which  we  cannot  understand,  but  he  cometh  as 
Jeroboam  against  Judah,  and  bringeth  the  fruit  of  our  own 
bodies  to  eat  us  up,  that  the  bowels  of  the  child  may  be 
made  the  mother's  grave;  that  he  hath  caused  no  small 
number  of  our  brethren  to  forsake  their  native  country,  and 
with  all  disloyalty  to  cast  off  the  yoke  of  their  allegiance  to 
our  dread  Sovereign,  whom  God  in  mercy  hath  set  over 
them;  for  whose  safeguard,  if  they  carried  not  the  hearts 
of  tigers  in  the  bosoms  of  men,  they  would  think  the  dearest 
[2Chron.  blood  in  their  bodies  well  spent.     "  But  now  (saith  Abiiah 

xiii.  8  9  1  .  ^  •» 

"to  Jeroboam)  Ye  think  ye  be  able  to  resist  the  Kingdom  of 

♦  Concil.  delector.  Card.  Laurent.  Surius  Com.  de  reb.  gest.  a  Pio  V.  Francisc.  Saiisom. 
de  gubern.  Regn.  et  Rerum  pub.  lib.  xL  cap.  de  Jud.  Marescal.  et  Soldan. 


Seek  15.]  ON  ST.  jtJDE.  481 

the  Lord,  which  is  in  the  hands  of  the  sons  of  David :  ye 
be  a  great  muhitude,  the  golden  calves  are  with  you,  which 
Jeroboam  made  you  for  gods :  have  ye  not  driven  away  the 
Priests  of  the  Lord,  the  sons  of  Aaron,  and  the  Levites, 
and  have  made  you  Priests  like  the  people  of  nations  ?  who- 
soever Cometh  with  a  young  bullock  and  seven  rams,  the 
(same  may  be  a  Priest  of  them  that  are  no  gods."  If  I  should 
follow  the  comparison,  and  here  uncover  the  cup  of  those 
deadly  and  ugly  abominations,  wherewith  this  Jeroboam^  of 
whom  we  speak,  hath  made  the  earth  so  drunk  that  it  hath 
reeled  under  us,  I  know  your  godly  hearts  would  loath  to 
see  them.  For  my  own  part,  I  delight  not  to  rake  in  such 
filth,  I  had  rather  take  a  garment  upon  my  shoulders,  and 
go  with  my  face  from  them  to  cover  them.  The  Lord  open 
their  eyes,  and  cause  them,  if  it  be  possible,  at  the  length 
to  see  how  they  are  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and 
blind,  and  naked!  Put  it,  O  Lord,  in  their  hearts  to  seek 
white  raiment,  and .  to  cover  themselves,  that  their  filthy 
nakedness  may  no  longer  appear.  For,  beloved  in  Christ, 
we  bow  our  knees,  and  lift  up  our  hands  to  Heaven  in  our 
chambers  secretly,  and  openly  in  our  Churches  we  pray 
heartily  and  hourly,  even  for  them  also :  though  the  Pope* 
have  given  out,  as  a  Judge,  in  a  solemn  declaratory  sentence 
of  Excommunication  against  this  Land,  that  our  gracious 
Lady  hath  quite  abolished  Prayers  within  her  Realm ;  and 
his  Scholars,  whom  he  hath  taken  from  the  midst  of  us,  have 
in  their  published  writings  charged  us,  not  only  not  to  have 
any  Holy  Assemblies  unto  the  Lord  for  Prayer,  but  to  hold 
a  common  School  of  sin  and  flattery ;  to  hold  sacrilege  to  be 
God's  service ;  unfaithfulness  and  breach  of  promise  to  God, 
to  give  it  to  a  strumpet,  to  be  a  virtue ;  to  abandon  Fasting ; 
to  abhor  Confession ;  to  mislike  with  Penance ;  to  like  well 
of  usury ;  to  charge  none  with  restitution ;  to  find  no  good 
before  God  in  single  life,  nor  in  no  well-working;  that  all 
men,  as  they  fall  to  us,  are  much  worsed,  and  more  than 
afore,  corrupted.  I  do  not  add  one  word  or  syllable  unto 
that  which  Master  Bristow,  a  man  both  born  and  sworn 
amongst  us,  hath  taught  his  hand  to  deliver  to  the  view  of 
all.  I  appeal  to  the  conscience  of  every  soul,  that  hath  been 
truly  converted  by  us,  whether  his  heart  were  never  raised 


•  [PiusV.  1571.] 
VOL.  III.  I  I 


482  SEBMON  I.  [Sect.  15. 

up  to  God  by  our  preaching ;  whether  the  words  of  our  ex« 
hortation  never  wrung  any  tear  of  a  penitent  heart  from  his 
eyes ;  whether  his  soul  never  reaped  any  joy  and  comfort, 
and  consolation  in  Christ  Jesus  by  our  Sacraments,  and 
Prayers,  and  Psalms,  and  Thanksgivings ;  whether  he  were 
never  bettered,  but  always  worsed  by  us. 

O  merciful  God !  if  Heaven  and  earth  in  this  case  do  not 
witness  with  us,  and  against  Uiem,  let  us  be  razed  out  from 
the  land  of  the  living !  Let  the  earth  on  which  we  stand, 
swallow  us  quick,  as  it  hath  done  Corah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram ! 
3  chroB.  But  if  we  belong  unto  *'  the  Lord  our  God,  and  have  not 
11.'  '  forsaken  him;*'  if  our  **  Priests,  the  Sons  of  Aaron,  minister 
unto  the  Lord,  and  the  Levites  in  their  Office ;"  if  we  "  offer 
unto  the  Lord  every  morning  and  every  evening  the  bumt- 
ofierings  and  sweet  incense"  of  Prayers  and  Thanksgivings; 
if  the  bread  be  ^'  set  in  order  upon  the  pure  table,  and  the 
candlestick  of  gold,  with  the  lamps  thereof  to  bum  every 
evening;"  that  is  to  say,  if  amongst  us  fjl^od's  blessed  Sacra* 
ments  be  duly  administered,  his  Holy  Word  sincerely  and 
daily  preached ;  if  ''  we  keep  the  watch  of  the  Lord  our 
God,"  and  if  ^^  ye  have  forsaken  him ;"  then  doubt  ye  not, 
▼er.  12.  this  God  is  with  us  as  a  '^  Captain,  his  Priests  with  sounding 
trumpets  must  cry  alarm  against  you ;  O  ye  children  of  Israel, 
fight  not  against  the  Lord  God  of  your  Fathers,  for  ye  shall 
not  prosper." 


SERMON  II. 

JUDB  17 — 21. 

"  But  ye,  beloved,  remember  the  words  which  were  spoken  before  of  the  Apostles  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  How  that  they  told  you,  that  there  should  be  Mockers  in 
the  last  time,  which  should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly  lusts.  These  are  makers 
of  sects,  fleshly,  having  not  the  Spirit  But  ye,  beloved,  edify  yourselves  in  your 
most  holy  Futh,  praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost  And  keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of 
God,  looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life.'' 

1.  Haying  otherwhere  spoken  of  the  words  of  St.  Jude, 
going  next  before,  concerning  **  Mockers"  which  should 
come  in  the  last  time,  and  backsliders  which  even  then  fell 
away  from  the  Faith  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ; 
I  am  now,  by  the  aid  of  Almighty  God,  and  through  the 
assistance  of  his  good  Spirit,  to  lay  before  you  the  words  of 
exhortation  which  I  have  read. 

2.  Wherein,  first  of  all,  whosoever  hath  an  eye  to  see  let 
him  open  it,  and  he  shall  well  perceive  how  careful  the  Lord 
is  for  his  children,  how  desirous  to  see  them  profit  and  grow 
up  to  a  manly  stature  in  Christ,  how  loth  to  have  them  any 
way  misled  either  by  examples  of  the  wicked,  or  by  entice- 
ments of  the  world,  and  by  provocation  of  the  flesh,  or  by 
any  other  means  forcible  to  deceive  them,  and  likely  to 
estrange  their  hearts  from  God.  For  God  is  not  at  that 
point  with  us,  that  he  careth  not  whether  we  sink  or  swim. 
No,  he  hath  written  our  names  in  the  palm  of  his  hand,  in 
the  signet  upon  his  finger  are  we  graven ;  in  sentences  not 
only  of  mercy,  but  of  judgment  also,  we  are  remembered; 
he  never  denounceth  judgments  against  the  wicked,  but  he 
maketh  some  proviso  for  his  children,  as  it  were  for  some 
certain  privileged  persons ;  **  Touch  not  mine  anointed,  do  [Psai. 
my  Prophets  no  harm :  Hurt  not  the  earth,  nor  the  sea,  nor  r^V.  * 
the  trees,  till  we  have  sealed  the  servants  of  God  in  their 
foreheads."  He  never  speaketh  of  Godless  men,  but  he 
adjoineth  words  of  comfort,  or  admonition,  or  exhortation, 
whereby  we  are  moved  to  rest  and  settle  our  hearts  on  him* 

In  the  second  to  Timothy,  the  third  chapter,  ^^Evil  men[2Tim. 
(saith  the  Apostle)  and  deceivers,  shall  wax  worse  and  worse,  14./'' 
deceiving  and  being  deceived.    But  continue  thou  in  the 

iiS 


484  SERMON  II.  [Sect  4. 

things  which  thou  hast  learned."  And  in  the  first  to  Timothy, 
[iTim.   the  sixth  chapter,  '*  Some  men  lusting  after  money,  have 
11*.]  '    erred  from  the  Faith,  and  pierced  themselves  through  with 
many  sorrows :  but  thou,  O  man  of  God,  fly  these  things, 
and  follow  after  righteousness,  godliness,  faith,  love,  patience, 
meekness,"     In  the  second  to  the  Thessalonians,  the  second 
|3Tbes8.  chapter,  "  They  that  have  not  received  the  love  of  the  truth, 
11. 13.]  that  they  might  be  saved,  God  shall  send  them  stroi^  delu- 
sions that  they  may  believe  lies.    But  we  ought  to  give  thanks 
alway  to  God  for  you,  brethren,  beloved  of  the  Lord,  be- 
cause God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen  you  to  salvation, 
through  Sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  and  Faith  in  the  truth." 
And  in  this  Epistle  of  St.  Jude,  ''  There  shall  come  mockers 
in  the  last  time,  walking  after  their  t)wn  ungodly  lusts.    But, 
beloved,  edify  ye  yourselves  in  your  most  holy  Faith." 

3.  These  sweet  exhortations,  which  God  putteth  every 
where  in  the  mouths  of  the  Prophets  and  Apostles  of  Jesus 
Christ,  are  evident  tokens  that  God  sitteth  not  in  Heaven 

[isai.  careless  and  unmindful  of  our  estate.  Can  a  mother  forget 
her  child  ?  Surely  a  mother  will  hardly  forget  her  chfld. 
But  if  >a  mother  be  happily  found  unnatural,  and  do  forget 
the  fruit  of  her  own  womb;  yet  God's  judgments  shew 
plainly  that  he  cannot  forget  the  man  whose  heart  he  hath 
framed  and  fashioned  anew  in  simplicity  and  truth  to  serve 
and  fear  him.  For  when  the  wickedness  of  man  was  so 
great,  and  the  earth  so  filled  with  cruelty,  that  it  could  not 
stand  with  the  righteousness  of  God  any  longer  to  forbear, 
wrathful  sentences  brake  out  from  him,  like  wine  from  a 

Gen.vi.  vcsscl  that  liath  no  vent:  '*  My  Spirit  (saith  he)  can  struggle 
and  strive  no  longer ;  an  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me." 

ver. 8,  Yet  then  did  "  Noah  find  grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord:" 
"  I  will  establish  my  covenant  with  thee  (saith  God) ;  thou 
fehalt  go  into  the  Ark,  thou,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  wife,  and 
thy  sons'  wives  with  thee." 

4.  Do  we  not  see  what  shift  God  doth  make  for  Lot  and 
for  his  family,  in  the  nineteenth  of  Genesis,  lest  the  fiery  de- 
struction of  the  wicked  should  overtake  him  ?  Over-night 
the  Angels  make  inquiry  what  sons  or  daughters,  or  sons- 
in-law,  what  wealth  and  substance,  he  had.     They  charge 

Gen.      him  to  carry  out  all,  "  Whatsoever  thou  hast  in  the  city, 

»«.  !*•  bring  it  out."     God  seemeth  to  stand  in  a  kind  of  fear,  lest 

something  or  other  would  be  left  behind.     And  his  wilf  was, 


Sect.  6.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.^  485 

that  nothing  of  that  which  he  had,  not  an  hoof  of  any  beast, 
not  a  thread  of  any  garment,  should  be  singed  with  that 
fire.    In  the  morning  the  Angels  fail  not  to  call  him  up,  and 
to  hasten  him  forward ;    "  Arise,   take   thy  wife  and  thy  Gen. 
daughters  which  are  here,  that  they  be  not  destroyed  in  the  ^*'  **' 
punishment  of  the  city."     The  Angels  having  spoken  again 
and  again,  Lot  for  all  this  lingereth  out  the  time  still,  till  at 
length  they  were  forced  to  take  "  both  him,  and  his  wife,  and  ▼«'•  w- 
his  daughters,  by  the  arms  (the  Lord  being  merciful  unto  him), 
and  to  carry  them  forth,  and  set  them  without  the  city.". 

5.  Was  there  ever  any  father  thus  careful  to  save  his  child 
from  the  flame  ?  A  man  would  think,  that  now  being  spoken 
unto  to  escape  for  his  life,  and  not  to  look  behind  him,  nor 
to  tarry  in  the  plain,  but  to  hasten  to  the  mountain,  and 
there  to  save  himself,  he  should  do  it  gladly.  Yet  behold, 
now,  he  is  so  far  off  from  a  cheerful  and  willing  heart  to 
do  whatsoever  is  commanded  him  for  his  own  weal,  that  he 
beginneth  to  reason  the  matter,  as  if  God  had  mistaken  one 
place  for  another,  sending  him  to  the  hill,  when  salvation 
was  in  the  city :  "  Not  so,  my  Lord,  I  beseech  thee ;  behold,  ver. 
thy  servant  hath  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  and  thou  hast  " 
magnified  thy  mercy,  which  thou  hast  shewed  unto  me  in 
saving  my  life.  I  cannot  escape  in  the  mountain,  lest  some 
evil  take  me  and  I  die.  Here  is  a  city  hard  by,^  a  small 
thing;  O,  let  me  escape  thither  (is  it  not  a  small  thing?) 
and  my  soul  shall  live."     Well,  God  is  contented  to  yield  to 

any  conditions:  *'  Behold,  I  have  received  thy  request  con-  ver. 21, 
eerning  this  thing  also,  I  will  spare  this  city  for  which  thou 
hast  spoken;  haste  thee,  save  thee  there;  for  I  can  do  no- 
thing till  thou  come  hither." 

6.  He  could  do  nothing!  Not  because  of  the  weakness 
of  his  strength  (for  who  is  like  unto  the  Lord  in  power?), 
but  because  of  the  greatness  of  his  mercy,  which  would  not 
suffer  him  to  Uft  up  his  arm  against  that  city,  nor  to  pour 
out  his  wrath  upon  that  place,  where  his  righteous  servant 
had  a  fancy  to  remain,  and  a  desire  to  dwell.  O  the  depth 
of  the  riches  of  the  mercy  and  love  of  God !  God  is  afraid 
to  offend  us,  which  are  not  afiraid  to  displease  him.  God  can 
do  nothing  till  he  have  saved  us,  which  can  find  in  our  hearts 
rather  to  do  any  thing  than  to  serve  him.  It  contenteth 
him  not  to  exempt  us  when  the  pit  is  digged  for  the  wicked ; 
to  comfort  us  at  every  mention  which  is  made  of  reprobates. 


486  SERMON  II.  [Sect.  9. 

and  Godless  men ;  to  save  us  as  the  apple  of  his  own  eye, 
when  fire  cometh  down  from  Heaven  to  consume  the  in- 
habitants of  the  earth;  except  every  Prophet,  and  every 
Apostle,  and  every  servant  whom  he  sendeth  forth,  do  come 
loaden  with  these  and  the  like  exhortations,  '^  O  beloved, 
edify  yourselves  in  your  most  holy  Faith  :  give  yourselves  to 
prayer  in  the  Spirit;  keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God; 
look  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal 
life." 

7.  "  Edify  yourselves."  The  speech  is  borrowed  from 
material  builders,  and  must  be  spiritually  understood.  It 
appeareth,  in  the  sixth  of  St.  John's  Gospel,  by  the  Jews, 
that  their  mouths  did  water  too  much  for  bodily  food; 

[Johnyi.  **  Our  fathcrs  (say  they)  did  eat  manna  in  the  Desert,  as  it 

'    '    is  written.  He  gave  them  bread  from  Heaven  to  eat ;  Lord, 

<•     evermore  give  us  of  this  bread."      Our  Saviour,  to  turn 

their   appetite    another    way,    maketh   them    this   answer, 

[ver.as.]*'  I  am  the  Bread  of  Life;   he  that  cometh  to  me   shall 

not   hunger;    and  he    that   believeth   in   me   shall   never 

thirst." 

8.  An  usual  practice  it  is  of  Satan,  to  cast  heaps  of 
worldly  baggage  in  our  way,  that  whilst  we  desire  to  heap 
up  gold  as  dust,  we  may  be  brought  at  the  length  to  esteem 

Matt,  vilely  that  spiritual  bliss.  Christ,  in  the  sixth  of  Matthew, 
to  correct  this  evil  affection,  putteth  us  in  mind  to  lay  up 

1  Tim.  treasure  for  ourselves  in  Heaven.  The  Apostle,  misliking 
'  '  the  vanity  of  those  women  which  attired  themselves  more 
costly  than  beseemed  the  heavenly  calling  of  such  as  pro- 
fessed the  fear  of  God,  willeth  them  to  clothe  themselves 
with  shamefacetness  and  modesty,  and  to  put  on  the  apparel 
of  good  works.  *'  Taliter  pigmentatae,  Deum  habebitis 
amatorem,"  saith  Tertullian.  Put  on  righteousness  as  a 
garment ;  instead  of  civet,  have  Faith,  which  may  cause  a 
savour  of  life  to  issue  from  you,  and  God  shall  be  ena- 
moured, he  shall  be  ravished  with  your  beauty.  These  are 
the  ornaments,  bracelets,  and  jewels  which  inflame  the  love 
of  Christ,  and  set  his  heart  on  fire  upon  his  spouse.  We 
see  how  he  breaketh  out  in  the  Canticles  at  the  beholding 

[Cant,    of  this  attire ;  "  How  fair  art  thou,  and  how  pleasant  art 

VII.  6.]    |.]^Qy^  Q  jjjy  love,  in  these  pleasures  !" 

9.  And  perhaps  St.  Jude  exhorteth  us  here  not  to  build 
our  houses,  but  ourselves,  foreseeing  by  the  Spirit  of  the 


Sect.  10.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  487 

Almighty  which  was  with  him^  that  there  should  be  men  ia 
the  last  days  Uke  to  those  in  the  first,  which  should  encou- 
rage and  stir  up  each  other  to  make  brick,  and  to  burn  it  in 
the  fire,  to  build  houses  huge  as  cities,  and  towers  as  high 
as  Heaven,  thereby  to  get  them  a  name  upon  earth ;  men 
that  should  turn  out  the  poor,  and  the  fatherless,  and  the 
widow,  to  build  places  of  rest  for  dogs  and  swine  in  their 
rooms;  men  that  should  lay  Houses  of  Prayer  even  with 
[the]  ground,  and  make  them  stables  where  God*s  people 
have  worshipped  before  the  Lord.  Surely  this  is  a  vanity 
of  all  vanities,  and  it  is  much  amongst  men,  a  special  sick- 
ness of  this  age.  What  it  should  mean  I  know  not,  except 
Grod  have  set  them  on  work  to  provide  fuel  against  that  day, 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  shew  himself  from  Heaven  with 
his  mighty  Angels  in  flaming  fire.  *'  Wiiat  good  cometh  [Eccies. 
unto  the  owners  of  these  things  (saith  Solomon),  but  only 
the  beholding  thereof  with  their  eyes?"  "  Martha,  Martha,  [i^* 
thou  busiest  thyself  about  many  things  ;  one  thing  is  neces-  42.] ' 
sary."  Ye  are  too  busy,  my  brethren,  with  timber  and  brick ; 
they  have  chosen  the  better  part,  they  have  taken  a  better 
course  that  build  themselves.  '*  Ye  are  the  temples  of  the  [s  Cor. 
living  God,  as  God  hath  said,  I  will  dwell  in  them,  and  will 
walk  in  them ;  and  they  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be 
theu-  God." 

10.  Which  of  you  will  gladly  remain  or  abide  in  a  mis- 
shapen, a  ruinous,  or  a  broken  house  ?  And  shall  we  suffer 
sin  and  vanity  to  drop  in  at  our  eyes,  and  at  our  ears,  and  at 
every  corner  of  our  bodies,  and  of  our  souls,  knowing  that 
we  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Which  of  you  re-  Ci  Cor. 
ceiveth  a  guest  whom  he  honoureth,  or  whom  he  loveth, 
and  doth  not  sweep  his  chamber  against  his  coming  ?  And 
shall  we  suffer  the  chamber  of  our  hearts  and  consciences  to 
lie  fiill  of  vomiting,  full  of  filth,  full  of  garbage,  knowing  that 
Christ  hath  said,  ''I  and  my  Father  will  come  and  dwell  with  [John 
you  ?"  Is  it  meet  for  your  oxen  to  lie  in  parlours,  and  your- 
selves to  lodge  in  cribs  ?  Or  is  it  seemly  for  yourselves  to 
dwell  in  your  settled  houses,  and  the  House  of  the  Almighty 
to  lie  waste,  whose  house  ye  are  yourselves  ?  Do  not  our 
eyes  behold,  how  God  every  day  overtaketh  the  wicked  in 
their  journeys  ?  How  suddenly  they  pop  down  into  the 
pit?  How  God's  judgments  for  their  crimes  come  so 
swiftly  upon  them,  that  they  have  not  the  leisure  to  cry. 


488  SERMON  II.  IShct.  11. 

alas  i  How  their  life  is  cut  off  like  a  thread  in  a  moment ! 
How  they  pass  like  a  shadow  ?  How  they  open  their  mouths 
to  speak,  and  God  taketh  them  even  in  the  midst  of  a  vain 
or  an  idle  word  ?  And  dare  we  for  all  this  lie  down,  take 
our  rest,  eat  our  meat  securely  and  carelessly  in  the  midst 
of  so  great  and  so  many  ruins  ?  Blessed  and  praised  for 
ever  and  ever  be  his  name,  who  perceiving  of  how  senseless 
and  heavy  metal  we  are  made,  hath  instituted  in  his  Church 
TheSa.  a  Spiritual  Supper  and  an  Holy  Communion,  to  be  cele- 
o7£r^  brated  often,  that  we  might  thereby  be  occasioned  often 
sapper,  to  examine  these  buildings  of  ours,  in  what  case  they  stand. 
For  sith  God  doth  not  dwell  in  Temples  which  are  unclean, 
sith  a  Shrine  cannot  be  a  Sanctuary  unto  him;  and  this 
Supper  is  received  as  a  seal  unto  us,  that  we  are  his  House, 
and  bis  Sanctuary;  that  his  Christ  is  as  truly  united  to 
me,  and  I  to  him,  as  my  arm  is  united  and  knit  unto  my 
shoulder ;  that  he  dwelleth  in  me  as  verily  as  the  elements 
of  bread  and  wine  abide  within  me ;  which  persuasion,  by 
receiving  these  dreadful  mysteries,  we  profess  ourselves  to 
have ;  a  due  comfort,  if  truly ;  and  if  in  hypocrisy,  then  woe 
worth  us.  Therefore  ere  we  put  forth  our  hands  to  take 
this  blessed  Sacrament,  we  are  charged  to  examine  and 
to  try  our  hearts  whether  God  be  in  us  of  a  truth  or  no : 
and  if  by  Faith  and  Love  unfeigned  we  be  found  the 
Temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  then  to  judge  whether  we 
have  had  such  regard  every  one  to  our  building,  that  the  Spirit 
which  dwelleth  in  us  hath  no  way  been  vexed,  molested, 
and  grieved :  or  if  it  have,  as  no  doubt  sometimes  it  hath 
by  incredulity,  sometimes  by  breach  of  charity,  sometimes 
by  want  of  zeal,  sometimes  by  spots  of  life,  even  in  the  best 
and  most  perfect  amongst  us,  (for  who  can  say  his  heart  is 
clean  ?),  O  then  to  fly  unto  God  by  unfeigned  repentance, 
to  fall  down  before  him  in  the  humility  of  our  souls,  begging 
of  him  whatsover  is  needful  to  repair  our  decays,  before  we 
fall  into  that  desolation,  whereof  the  Prophet  speaketh, 
Lam.  saying,  "  Thy  breach  is  great  like  the  sea,  who  can  heal 
"• '''     thee  r 

11.  Receiving  the  Sacrament  of  the  Supper  of  the  Lord 
after  this  sort  (you  that  are  spiritual,  judge  what  I  speak)  is 
not  all  other  wine  like  the  water  of  Marah,  being  compared 
to  the  cup  which  we  bless  ?  Is  not  manna  like  to  gall,  and 
our  bread  like  to  manna  ?     Is  there  not  a  taste,  a  taste  of 


Sect.  14.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  489 

Christ  Jesus  in  the  heart  of  him  that  eateth  ?  Doth  not  he 
which  drinketh  behold  plainly  in  this  cup,  that  his  soul  is 
bathed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  ?  O  beloved  in  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  if  ye  will  taste  how  sweet  the 
Lord  is,  if  ye  will  receive  the  King  of  Glory,  "  build  your- 
selves." 

12.  Young  men,  I  speak  this  to  you,  for  ye  are  his  House, 
because  by  Faith  ye  are  conquerors  over  Satan,  and  have 
overcome  that  evil.  Fathers,  I  speak  it  also  to  you,  ye  are 
his  House,  because  ye  have  known  him,  which  is  from  the 
beginning.  Sweet  Babes,  I  speak  it  even  to  you  also,  ye 
are  his  House,  because  your  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  his 
name's  sake.  Matrons  and  Sisters,  I  may  not  hold  it  from 
you,  ye  are  also  the  Lord's  Building :  and  as  St.  Peter 
speaketh,  "  Heirs  of  the  grace  of  life  as  well  as  we."  Though  [i  Pet. 
it  be  forbidden  you  to  open  your  mouths  in  public  assemblies,  *""  "^'^ 
yet  ye  must  be  inquisitive  in  things  concerning  this  building 
which  is  of  God,  with  your  husbands  and  friends  at  home ; 
not  as  Delilah  with  Samson,  but  as  Sarah  with  Abraham ; 
whose  daughters  ye  are,  whilst  ye  do  well,  and  "  build  your- 
selves." 

13.  Having  spoken  thus  far  of  tlie  exhortation,  as 
whereby  we  are  called  upon  to  "  edify"  and  build  our- 
selves ;  it  remaineth  now,  that  we  consider  the  thing  pre- 
scribed, namely,  wherein  we  must  be  built.  This  prescription 
standeth  also  upon  two  points,  the  thing  prescribed,  and 
die  adjuncts  of  the  thing.  And  that  is,  our  most  pure 
and  "  holy  Faith." 

14.  The  thing  prescribed  is  "  Faith."  For,  as  in  a  chain 
which  is  made  of  many  links,  if  you  pull  the  first,  you  draw 
the  rest ;  and  as  in  a  ladder  of  many  staves,  if  you  take 
away  the  lowest,  all  hope  of  ascending  to  the  highest  will 
1)0  removed;  so,  because  all  the  precepts  and  promises  in 
the  Law  and  in  the  Gospel  do  hang  upon  this,  '^  Believe;" 
and  because  the  last  of  the  graces  of  God  doth  so  follow  the  [Rom. 
first,  that  he  glorifieth  none,  but  whom  he  hath  justified,  ^ 
nor  justifieth  any,  but  whom  he  hath  called  to  a  true,  effec- 
tual, and  lively  Faith  in  Christ  Jesus ;  therefore  St.  Jude 
exhorting  us  to  Build  ourselves,  mentioneth  here  expressly 
only  Faith,  as  the  thing  wherein  we  must  be  edified;  for 
that  Faith  is  the  ground  and  the  glory  of  all  the  welfare  of 
this  building. 


490  SERMON  II.  Sect.  16. 

Ephe».       15.  ^'  Ye  are  not  strangers  and  foreigners,  but  citizens 
22.        with  the  Saints,  and  of  the  Household  of  God  (saith  the 
Apostle),  and  are  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  Prophets 
and  Apostles,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  Corner- 
stone, in  whom  all  the  building  being  coupled   together, 
groweth  unto  an  holy  Temple  in  the  Lord,  in  whom  ye 
also  are  built  together  to  be  the  habitation  of  God  by  the 
Spirit.'*    And  we  are  the  habitation  of  God  by  the  Spirit, 
[1  John  if  we  believe ;   for  it  is  written,   "  Whosoever  confesseth 
*^'"*^  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  in  him  God  dwelleth,  and 
he  in  God.'*     The  strength  of  this  Habitation  is  great,  it 
prevaileth  against  Satan,  it  conquereth  sin,  it  hath  death 
in  derision ;  neither  principalities  nor  powers  can  throw  it 
down;  it  leadeth  the  world  captive,   and  bringeth   every 
enemy  that  riseth  up   against  it  to  confusion  and  shame, 
1  John    and  all  by  Faith ;  for  "  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh 
'  *  the  world,  even  our  Faith.     Who  is  it  that  overcometh  the 
world,  but  he  which  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 
God  ?'* 

16.  The  strength  of  every  building  which  is  of  God, 
standeth  not  in  any  man's  arms  or  legs ;  it  is  only  in  our 
Faith,  as  the  valour  of  Samson  lay  only  in  his  hair.     This  is 
the  reason,  why  we  are  so  earnestly  called  upon  to  "  edify" 
ourselves  "  in  Faith.'^     Not  as  if  this  bare  action  of  our 
minds,  whereby  we  believe  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  were  able 
in  itself,  as  of  itself,  to  make  us  unconquerable,  and  invin- 
cible, like  stones,  which  abide  in  a  building  for  ever,  and  fall 
not  out.     No,  it  is  not  the  worthiness  of  our  believing,  it  is 
the  virtue  of  him  in  whom  we  believe,  by  which  we  stand  sure, 
Matt     as  houses  that  are  builded  upon  a  rock.     He  is  a  wise  man 
which  hath  builded  his  house  upon  a  rock ;   for  he  hath 
chosen  a  good    foundation,   and  no  doubt  his  house  will 
stand  ;  but  how  shall  it  stand  ?     Verily,  by  the  strength  of 
the  rock   which  beareth   it,   and   by  nothing  else.      Our 
fathers,  whom  God  delivered  out  of  the  land   of  Egypt, 
were  a  people  that  had  no  peers  amongst  the  nations  of  the 
earth,   because  they  were  built  by  Faith  upon  the  rock, 
[1  Cor.    which  rock  is  Christ.     **  And  the  rock  (saith  the  Apostle 
*'  ^'^     in  the  first  to  the  Corinthians,  the  tenth  chapter)  did  follow 
them."     Whereby  we  learn  not  only  this,  that  being  built 
Rom.     l>y  Faith  on  Christ,  as  on  a  rock,  and  graflted  into  him  as 
**•  ^^-    into  an  olive,  we  receive  all  our  strength  and  fatness  from 


Sect.  18.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  491 

him ;  but  also,  that  this  strength  and  fatness  of  ours  ought 
to  be  no  cause,  why  we  should  be  high-minded,  and  not 
work  out  our  salvation  with  a  reverent,  trembling,  and  holy 
fear.     For  if  thou  boastest  thyself  of  thy  Faith,  know  this, 
that  Christ  chose  his  Apostles,  his  Apostles  chose  not  him ; 
that  Israel  followed  not  the  rock,  but  the  rock  followed 
Israel ;  and  that  '*  thou  bearest  not  the  root,  but  the  root  Rom. 
thee***     So  that  every  heart  must  this  think,  and  every 
tongue  must  thus  speak,    *'  Not  unto  us,  O  Lord,  not  [Psai. 
unto  us,'*  nor  unto  any  thing  which  is  within  us,  but  unto  ^'^^'''^ 
thy  Name  only,  only  to  thy  Name  belongeth  all  the  praise 
of  all  the  treasures  and  riches  of  every  Temple  which  is 
of  God.     This  excludeth  all  boasting  and  vaunting  of  our 
Faith. 

17.  But  this  must  not  make  us  careless  to  *^  edify"  our- 
selves **  in  Faith.**  It  is  the  Lord  that  delivereth  men's  souls 
from  death,  but  not  except  they  put  their  trust  in  his  mercy. 

It  is  God  that  hath  given  us  eternal  life,  but  no  otherwise  i  John 
than  thus.  If  we  believe  in  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God ;  for  * 
he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God,  hath  not  life.     It  was  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  which  came  upon  Samson,  and  made 
him  strong  to  tear  a  lion,  as  a  man  would  rent  a  kid ;  but 
his  strength  forsook  him,  and  he  became  like  other  men, 
when  the  razor  had  touched  his  head.      It  is  the  power 
of  God  whereby  the  faithful  **  have  subdued  Kingdoms,  [Heb. 
wrought  righteousness,  obtained  the  promises,  stopped  the  84*0  * 
mouths  of  lions,  quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped  the 
edge  of  the  sword :"  but  take  away  their  Faith,  and  doth 
not  their  strength  forsake  them  ?    Are  they  not  like  unto 
other  men? 

18.  If  ye  desire  yet  farther  to  know,  how  necessary  and  No 
needful  it  is  that  we  edify  and  build  up  ourselves  in  Faith,  \vS<a^ 
mark  the  words  of  the  blessed  Apostle ;  "  Without  Faith  it  pith? 
is  impossible  to  please  God."    If  I  offer  unto  God  all  the  ki.%.'] 
sheep  and  oxen  that  are  in  the  world ;  if  all  the  temples  that 
were  builded  since  the  days  of  Adam  till  this  hour,  were  of 

my  foundation ;  if  I  break  my  very  heart  with  calling  upon 
God,  and  wear  out  my  tongue  with  preaching ;  if  I  sacrifice 
my  body  and  my  soul  unto  him,  and  have  no  Faith,  all  this 
availeth  nothing.  '*  Without  F&ith  it  is  impossible  to  please 
God."  Our  Lord  and  Saviour  therefore,  being  asked  in 
the  sixth  of  St.  John's  Gospel,  **  What  shall  we  do  that 


492  SERMON  n.  [Sect  20. 

John      we  might  work  the  Works  of  God  ?"  maketh  answer^  "  This  is 
20*    '    the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  in  him,  whom  he  hath  sent*" 

19.  That  no  Work  of  ours,  no  building  of  ourselves  in 
any  thing  can  be  available  or  profitable  unto  us,  except  we 
be  edified  and  built  in  Faith,  what  need  we  to  seek  about 
for  long  proof?  Look  upon  Israel,  once  the  very  chosen 
and  peculiar  of  God,  to  whom  the  Adoption  of  the  faithful, 
and  the  glory  of  Cherubim,  and  the  Covenants  of  Mercy, 
and  the  Law  of  Moses,  and  the  Service  of  God,  and  the 
Promises  of  Christ  were  made  impropriate,  who  not  only 
were  the  offspring  of  Abraham,  father  unto  all  them  which 
do  believe,  but  Christ  their  offspring,  which  is  God  to  be 
blessed  for  evermore. 

20.  Consider  this  people,  and  learn  what  it  is  to  ^'  build 
rpsaim  yourselves  in  Faith."  They  were  the  Lord's  Vine :  "  He 
8"m.]   brought  it  out  of  Egypt,  he  threw  out  the  Heathen  from 

their  places,  that  it  might  be  planted  ;  he  made  room  for  it, 
and  caused  it  to  take  root,  till  it  had  filled  the  earth ;  the 
mountains  were  covered  with  the  shadow  of  it,  and  the 
boughs  thereof  were  as  the  goodly  cedars ;  she  stretched 
out  her  branches  unto  the  sea,  and  her  boughs  unto  the 
river.*'  But,  when  God  having  sent  both  his  Servants  and 
his  Son  to  visit  this  vine,  they  neither  spared  the  one,  nor 
received  the  other,  but  stoned  the  Prophets,  and  crucified 
the  Lord  of  Glory  which  came  unto  them ;  then  began  the 
curse  of  God  to  come  upon  them,  even  the  curse  whereof 
Psai.  the  Prophet  David  hath  spoken,  saying,  "  Let  their  table  be 
2V23.  made  a  snare,  and  a  net,  and  a  stumbling-block,  even  for  a 
xKiJ/io.  recompence  unto  them :  let  their  eyes  be  darkened,  that 
they  do  not  see,  bow  down  their  backs  for  ever,"  keep 
them  down.  And  sithence  the  hour  that  the  measure  of 
their  infidelity  was  first  made  up,  they  have  been  spoiled 
with  wars,  eaten  up  with  plagues,  spent  with  hunger  and 
famine ;  they  wander  from  place  to  place,  and  are  become 
the  most  base  and  contemptible  people  that  are  under  the 
sun.  Ephraim,  which  before  was  a  terrour  unto  nations, 
and  they  trembled  at  his  voice,  is  now  by  infidelity  so  vile, 
that  he  seemeth  as  a  thing  cast  out  to  be  trampled  under 
men's  feet.  In  the  midst  of  these  desolations  they  cry, 
Paai.  "  Return,  we  beseech  thee,  O  God  of  hosts,  look  down 
*  from  Heaven,  behold  and  visit  this  Vine :"  but  their  very 
prayers  are  turned  into  sin,  and  their  cries  are  no  better 


Sect.^i^]  ON  ST.  JtJDE.  493 

than  the  lowing  of  beasts  before  him.     '*  Well  (saith  the  Rom. 
Apostle),  by  their  unbelief  they  are  broken  off,  and  thou  ». 
dost  stand  by  thy  Faith  :  behold  therefore  the  bountifulness 
and  severity  of  God ;  towards  them  severity,  because  they 
have  fallen,  bountifulness  towards  thee,  if  thou  continue  in 
his  bountifulness,  or  else  thou  shalt  be  cut  oflT."    If  they 
forsake  their  unbelief  and  be  grafted  in  again,  and  we  at 
any  time  for  the  hardness  of  our  hearts  be  broken  off,  it 
will  be  such  a  judgment  as  will  amaze  all  the  powers  and 
principalities  which  are   above.     Who  hath   searched  the 
counsel  of  God  concerning  this  secret?     And  who  doth  not 
see,  that  Infidelity  doth  threaten  Lo-ammi  unto  the  Gen-Hosea 
tiles,  as  it  hath  brought  Lo-rukamah  upon  the  Jews?     It  '  * 
may  be  that  these  words  seem  dark  unto  you :  but  the  words 
of  the  Apostle,  in  the  eleventh  to  the  Romans,  are  plain 
enough ;  "  If  God  have  not  spared  the  natural  branches,  Rom. 
take   heed,    take    heed,    lest    he    spare   not  thee :"    build  **'  **' 
thyself  in  Faith.     Thus  much  of  the  thing  which  is  pre- 
scribed, and   wherein  we   are  exhorted   to   "  edify"  our- 
selves.    Now  consider  the  conditions  and  properties  which 
are  in  this  place  annexed  unto  Faith.     The  former  of  them 
(for  there  are  but  two)  is  this,  "  Edify  yourselves  in  your 
Faith." 

21.  A  strange  and  a  strong  delusion  it  is  wherewith  the 
Man  of  Sin  hath  bewitched  the  world ;  a  forcible  spirit  of 
error  it  must  needs  be,  which  hath  brought  men  to  such  a 
senseless  and  unreasonable  persuasion  as  this  is,  not  only 
that  men  clothed  with  mortality  and  sin,  as  we  ourselves 
are^  can  do  God  so  much  service  as  shall  be  able  to  make 
a  full  and  a  perfect  satisfaction  before  the  tribunal  seat  of 
God  for  their  own  sins,  yea,  a  great  deal  more  than  is  sufB- 
cient  for  themselves ;  but  also,  that  a  man  at  the  hands  of 
a  Bishop  or  a  Pope,  for  such  or  such  a  price,  may  buy 
the  overplus  of  other  men's  merits,  purchase  the  fruits  of 
other  men's  labours,  and  build  his  soul  by  another  man's 
Faith*  Is  not  this  man  drowned  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  ? 
Is  his  heart  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  Can  he  have  any 
part  or  fellowship  with  Peter,  and  with  the  successors  of 
Peter,  which  thinketh  so  vilely  of  building  the  precious  Tem- 
ples of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Let  his  money  perish  with  him,  [Acts 
and  he  with  it,  because  he  judgeth  that  the  gift  of  God  may  *'  ^'^ 
be  sold  for  money. 


494  SERMON  II.  [Sect.  95. 

22.  Buty  beloved  in  the  Lord^  deceive  not  yourselves^ 
neither  suffer  ye  yourselves  to  be  deceived:  ye  can  receive 
no  more  ease  nor  comfort  for  your  souls  by  another  man's 
faith,  than  warmth  for  your  bodies  by  another  man's  clothes, 
or  sustenance  by  the  bread  which  another  doth  eat.  **  The 
[Hab.  just  shall  live  by  his  own  Faith/'  *'  Let  a  Saint,  yea  a 
"'  ^'^  Martyr,  content  himself  that  he  hath  cleansed  himself  of 
his  own  sins*'  (saith  TertuUian).  No  Saint  or  Martyr  can 
cleanse  himself  of  his  own  sins.  But  if  so  be  a  Saint  or  a 
Martyr  can  cleanse  himself  of  his  own  sins,  it  is  sufficient 
that  he  can  do  it  for  himself.  Did  ever  any  man  by  his 
death  deliver  another  man  from  death,  except  only  the  Son 
of  God  ?  He  indeed  was  able  to  safe-conduct  a  thief  from 
the  cross  to  Paradise:  for  to  this  end  he  came,  that  being 
himself  pure  from  sin,  he  might  obey  for  sinners.  Thou 
which  thinkest  to  do  the  like,  and  supposest  that  thou  canst 
justify  another  by  thy  righteousness,  if  thou  be  without  sm, 
then  lay  down  thy  life  for  thy  brother ;  die  for  me.  But  if 
thou  be  a  sinner,  even  as  I  am  a  sinner,  how  can  the  oil  of 
thy  lamp  be  sufficient  both  for  thee  and  for  me  ?  Virj^ 
that  are  wise,  get  ye  oil,  while  ye  have  day,  into  your  own 
lamps:  for  out  of  all  peradventure,  others,  though  they 
would,  can  neither  give  nor  sell.  "  Edify  yourselves  in 
your  own  most  holy  Faith."  And  let  this  be  observed  for 
the  first  property  of  that  wherein  we  ought  to  edity  our- 
selves. 

2S.  Our  Faith  being  such,  is  that  indeed  which  St.  Jude 
doth  here  term  "  Faith:"  namely,  a  thing  "  most  holy." 
[Rom.  The  reason  is  this,  we  are  justified  by  Faith :  for  Abraham 
*^  ^'^  believed,  and  this  was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteousness. 
Being  justified,  all  our  iniquities  are  covered;  God  be- 
holdeth  us  in  the  righteousness  which  is  imputed,  and  not 
in  the  sins  which  we  have  committed. 

24*.  It  is  true  we  are  full  of  sin,  both  original  and  actual; 

whosoever  denieth  it  is  a  double  sinner,  for  he  is  both  a 

[1  johu  sinner  and  a  liar.     To  deny  sin,  is  most  plainly  and  clearly 

**®^      to  prove  it;  because  he  that  saith  he  hath  no  sin,  lieth,  and 

by  lying  proveth  that  he  hath  sin. 

25.  But  imputation  of  righteousness  hath  covered  the 
sins  of  every  soul  which  believeth ;  God  by  pardoning  our 
sin  hath  taken  it  away:  so  that  now,  although  our  trans- 
gressions be  multiplied  above  the  hairs  of  our  head,  yet 


Sect^.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  495 

being  justified,  we  are  as  free  and  as  clear  as  if  there 
were  no  one  spot  or  stain  of  any  iincleanness  in  us.  For 
it  is  God  that  justifieth ;  '^  And  who  shall  lay  any  thing 
to  the  charge  of  God's  chosen?'*  saith  the  Apostle  in 
Romans.  [v  111.33.] 

26.  Now  sin  being  taken  away,  we  are  made  the  right- 
eousness of  God  in  Christ:  for  David,  speaking  of  this 
righteousness,  saith,  *'  Blessed  is  the  man  whose  iniquities  [Pnim 
are  forgiven."  No  man  is  blessed,  but  in  the  righteousness 
of  God:  every  man  whose  sin  is  taken  away  is  blessed; 
therefore  every  man  whose  sin  is  covered,  is  made  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  Christ.  This  righteousness,  doth 
make  us  to  appear  most  holy,  most  pure,  most  unblameable 
before  him. 

S7.  This  then  is  the  sum  of  that  which  I  say.  Faith  doth 
justify;  Justification  washeth  away-  sin;  sin  removed,  we 
are  clothed  with  the  Righteousness  which  is  of  God ;  the 
righteousness  of  God  maketh  us  most  Holy.  Every  of 
these  I  have  proved  by  the  testimony  of  God's  own  mouth ; 
therefore  I  conclude,  that  Faith  is  that  which  maketh  us 
most  holy,  in  consideration  whereof,  it  is  called  in  this 
place,  "  Our  most  holy  Faith." 

28.  To  make  a  wicked  and  a  sinful  man  most  holy 
through  his  believing,  is  more  than  to  create  a  world  of 
nothing.  Our  Faith  most  holy!  Surely,  Solomon  could 
not  shew  the  Queen  of  Sheba  so  much  treasure  in  all  his 
Kingdom,  as  is  lapt  up  in  these  words.  O  that  our  hearts 
were  stretched  out  like  tents,  and  that  the  eyes  of  our 
understanding  were  as  bright  as  the  sun,  that  we  might 
throughly  know  the  riches  of  the  glorious  inheritance  of 
Saints,  and  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power 
towards  us,  whom  he  accepteth  for  pure,  and  most  holy, 
through  our  believing!  O  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
would  give  this  doctrine  entrance  into  the  stony  and  brazen 
heart  of  the  Jew,  which  followeth  the  Law  of  Righteous-  mom. 
ness,  but  cannot  attain  unto  the  Righteousness  of  the  Law !  8i*--83.] 
Wherefore,  saith  the  Apostle,  they  seek  Righteousness, 
and  not  by  Faith ;  wherefore  they  stumble  at  Christ,  they 
are  bruised,  shivered  to  pieces,  as  a  ship  that  hath  run 
herself  upon  a  rock.  O  that  God  would  cast  down  the 
eyes  of  the  proud,  and  humble  the  souls  of  the  high-minded! 
that  they  might  at  the  length  abhor  the  garments  of  their 


496  SERMON  II.  [Sect.  29» 

own  flesh,  which  cannot  hide  their  nakedness,  and  put  on 
the  Faith  of  Christ  Jesus,  as  he  did  put  it  on,  which  hath 

rphii.ui.  said,  ''  Doubtless  I  think  all  things  but  loss,  for  the  excel- 
'  '  lent  knowledge*  sake  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord,  for  whom  I 
have  counted  all  things  loss,  and  do  judge  them  to  be  dung, 
that  I  might  win  Christ,  and  might  be  found  in  him,  not 
having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  Law;  but 
that  which  is  through  the  Faith  of  Christ,  even  the  Right- 
eousness which  is  of  God  through  Faith."  O  that  God 
would  open  the  Ark  of  mercy,  wherein  this  doctrine  lieth, 
and  set  it  wide  before  the  eyes  of  poor  a£3icted  consciences, 
which  fly  up  and  down  upon  the  water  of  their  afflictions, 
and  can  see  nothing  but  only  the  gulf  and  deluge  of  their 
sins,  wherein  there  is  no  place  for  them  to  rest  their  feet. 
The  God  of  pity  and  compassion  give  you  all  strength  and 
courage,  every  day,  and  every  hour,  and  every  moment,  to 
build  and  "edify  yourselves"  in  this  most  pure  and  "  holy 
Faith,"  And  thus  much  both  of  the  thing  prescribed  in 
this  exhortation,  and  also  of  the  properties  of  the  thing, 
"  Build  yourselves  in  your  most  holy  Faith."  I  would 
come  to  the  next  branch,  which  is  of  Prayer ;  but  I 
cannot  lay  this  matter  out  of  my  hands,  till  I  have  added 
somewhat  for  the  applying  of  it,  both  to  others  and  to 
ourselves. 

29.  For  your  better  understanding  of  matters  contained 
in  this  exhortation,  "  Build  yourselves,"  you  must  note, 
that  every  Chprch  and  Congregation  doth  consist  of  a 
multitude  of  believers,  as  every  house  is  built  of  many 
stones.  And  although  the  nature  of  the  mystical  body  of 
the  Church  be  such,  that  it  suffereth  no  distinction  in  the 

[1  Cor.    visible  members,  but  whether  it  be  Paul  or  Apollos,  Prince 

jS.f**  or  Prophet,  he  that  is  taught,  or  he  that  teacheth,  all  are 
equally  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  equally  theirs:  yet  in  the 
external  administration  of  the  Church  of  God,  because  God 
is  not  the  author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  it  is  necessary 
that  in  every  Congregation  there  be  a  distinction,  if  not  of 
inward  dignity,  yet  of  outward  degree;  so  that  all  are 
Saints,  or  seem  to  be  Saints,  and  should  be  as  they  seem: 
but  are  all  Apostles?  If  the  whole  body  were  an  eye,  where 
were  then  the  hearing?     God,  therefore,  hath  given  some 

[Eph.iv.  to  be  Apostles,  and  some  to  be  Pastors,  &c.  '*  for  the  edifi- 
' "'    cation  of  the  Body  of  Christ."    In  which  work  **  we  are 


SkcUSl.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  4^ 

God's  labourers   (saith   the  Apostle)^    and  ye  are   God's  cicor. 
husbandry,  and  God's  building." 

30.  The  Church,  respected  with  reference  unto  Admi- 
nistration Ecclesiastical,  doth  generally  consist  but  of  two 
sorts  of  men,  the  Labourers  and  the  Building ;  they  which 
are  ministered  unto,  and  they  to  whom  the  work  of  the 
Ministry  is  committed;  Pastors,  and  the  Flock  over  whom 
the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  them  Overseers.  If  the  Guide 
of  a  congregation,  be  his  name  or  his  degree  whatsoever, 

be  diligent  in  his  vocation,  feed  ''  the  Flock  of  God'  which  i  Pet.  r: 
dependeth  upon  him,  caring  for  it  ''  not  by  constraint,  ' 
but  willingly;  not  for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  ready  mind;  not 
as  though  he  would  tyrannize  over  God's  heritage,  but  as  a 
pattern  unto  the  Flock,"  wisely  guiding  them :  if  the  People 
in  their  degree  do  yield  themselves  frameable  to  the  truth, 
not  like  rough  stone  or  flint,  refusing  to  be  smoothed  and 
squared  for  the  building:  If  the  Magistrate  do  carefully 
and  diligently  survey  the  whole  order  of  the  work,  pro- 
viding by  Statutes  and  Laws,  and  bodily  punishments,  if 
need  require,  that  all  things  may  be  done  according  to 
the  rule  which  cannot  deceive ;  even  as  Moses  provided,  that 
all  things  might  be  done  according  to  the  pattern  which  he 
saw  in  the  Mount ;  there  the  words  of  this  exhortation  are 
truly  and  effectually  heard.  Of  such  a  congregation  every 
man  will  say,  *'  Behold  a  people  that  are  wise,  a  people  that 
walk  in  the  Statutes  and  Ordinances  of  their  God,  a  people 
full  of  knowledge  and  understanding,  a  people  that  have 
skill  in  building  themselves."  Where  it  is  otherwise,  there, 
**  as  by  slothfulness  the  roof  doth  decay;"  and  as  by  "  idle- 
ness of  hands  the  house  droppeth  through,"  as  it  is  in 
Ecclesiastes  x.  18.  so  first  one  piece,  and  then  another  of 
their  building  shall  fall  away,  till  there  be  not  a  stone  left 
upon  a  stone. 

31.  We  see  how  fruitless  this  exhortation  hath  been  to 
such  as  bend  all  their  travail  only  to  build  [and]  manage  a 
Papacy  upon  earth,  without  any  care  in  the  world  of  build- 
ing themselves  in  their  *'  most  holy  Faith."  God's  people 
have  enquired  at  their  mouths,  '*  What  shall  we  do  to  have 
eternal  Life?"  Wherein  shall  we  build  and  edify  ourselves? 
And  they  have  departed  home  firom  their  Prophets,  and 
from  their  Priests,  laden  with  doctrines  which  are  precepts 
of  men;  they* have  been  taught  to  tire  out  themselves  with 

VOL.  III.  K  K 


498  SERMON  II.  [Sect.  S3. 

.  bodily  exercise :  those  things  are  enjoined  them,  which  God 
did  never  require  at  their  hands,  and  the  things  he  doth 
require  are  kept  from  them;  their  eyes  are  fed  with  pictures, 
and  their  ears  filled  with  melody,  but  their  souls  do  wither, 
and  starve,  and  pine  away :  they  cry  for  bread,  and  behold 
stones  are  offered  them;  they  ask  for  fish,  and  see  they 
bav6  scorpions  in  their  hands*  Thou  seest,  O  Lord,  that 
they  build  themselves,  but  not  in  **  Faith ;"  they  feed  their 
children,  but  not  with  food :  their  rulers  say  with  shame. 
Bring,  ^nd  not.  Build.  But  God  is  righteous;  their  drunken- 
ness  stinketh,  their  abominations  are  known,  their  madness 
is  manifest,  the  wind  hath  bound  them  up  in  ber  wings, 

iv^in  ^"^  ^^^y  ^^^^  ^^  ashamed  of  their  doings.  **  £phraim 
(saith.the  Prophet)  is  joined  to  idols,  let  him  alone.'*  I 
will  turn  me,  therefore,  from  the  Priests,  which  do  minister 
unto  idols,  and  apply  this  exhortation  to  them  whom  God 
hath  appointed  to  feed  his  chosen  in  Israel. 

32.  If  there  be  any  feeling  of  Christ,  and  drop  of  heavenly 
dew;  any  spark  of  God's  good  Spirit  within  you,  stir  it 
up,  be  careful  to  build  and  **  edify,"  first  "  yourselves,"  and 
then  your  Flocks,  in  this  "  most  holy  Faith." 

33.  I  say,  first,  "  yourselves;"  for,  he  which  will  set  the 
hearts  of  other  men  on  fire  with  the  love  of  Christ,  must 
himself  burn  with  love.  It  is  want  of  Faith  in  ourselves, 
my  brethren,  which  makes  us  retchless  in  building  others. 
We  forsake  the  Lord's  inheritance,  and  feed  it  not.  What 
is  the  reason  of  this?  Our  own  desires  are  settled  where 
they  should  not  be.  We  ourselves  are  like  those  women 
which  have  a  longing  to  eat  coals,  and  lime,  and  filth ;  we 
are  fed,  some  with  honour,  some  with  ease,  some  with 
wealth;  the  Gospel  waxeth  loathsome  and  unpleasant  in 
our  taste ;  how  should  we  then  have  a  care  to  feed  others 
with  that  which  we  cannot  fancy  ourselves?  If  Faith  wax 
cold  and  slender  in  the  heart  of  the  Prophet,  it  will  soon 
perish  from  the  ears  of  the  people.     The  Prophet  Amos 

Amos     speaketh  of  a  famine,  saying,  ^^  I  will  send  a  famine  in  the 

12.'*    '  land,  not  a  famine  of  bread,  nor  a  thirst  of  water,  but  of 

hearing  the  Word  of  the  Lord.     Men  shall  wander  from 

sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  North  unto  the  East  shall  they 

run  to  and  fro,  to  seek  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  shall 

1  i>et.     not  find   it."     "  Judgment   must  begin   at  the   House  of 

'^•^''    God,"  saith  Peter.     Yea,  I  say,  at. the  Sanctuary  of  God 


Sect.  34.]  ON  ST.  JUDE.  499 

this  judgment  must  begin.  This  famine  must  begin  at  the 
heart  of  the  Prophet.  He  must  have  darkness  for  a  vision, 
he  must  stumble  at  nbon-days,  as  at  the  twilight/  and  then 
truth  shall  fall  in  [the]  midst  of  the  streets;  then  shall  the 
people  wander  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  North  unto 
the  East  shall  they  run  to  and  fro,  to  seek  the  Word  of 
the  Lord. 

84i   In  the  second  of  Haggai,  "  Speak  now  (saith  God  Hagg.u. 
to  his   Prophet),   speak  no#   to   Zerubbabel,   the   son  of  ' 
Shealtiel,  Prince  of  \Jud^h,  and  to  Jehoshua,  the  son  of 
Jehdzadakthe  High^priest,  and  to  the  residue  of  the  peo-" 
pfe,  saying.  Who  is  left  amottg  you  that  saw  this  House  in 
her  first  glory?   and  how  do  you  see  it  now?     Is  not  this 
House  in  your  eyes,  in  compariso»of  it,  as  nothing?'*    The 
Pr6phet  would  have  all  men's  eyes  turned  to  the  view  of 
themselves,  every  6ort  brought  to  the  consideration  of  their 
present  state.     This  is  no  place  to  shew  what  duty  Zerub- 
babel or  Jehoshua  doth  owe  unto  God  in  this  respect. 
They  have,  I  doiibt  not^  such  as  put  them  hereof  in  remem- 
brance.    I  ask  of  you,  which  are  a  part  of  the  residue  of 
God*s  elect  and  chosen  ]^eople.  Who  is  there  amongst  you 
that  hath  tiak^h  a  stirvey  of  the  House  of  God,  as  it  was  in 
the  days  of  the  blessed  Apoi^les  of  Jesus  Christ?    Who  is 
there  amongst  you  that  hath  sden  and  considered  this  holy 
Temple  in  her  first  glory?     And  how  do  you  see  it  now? 
Is  it  not,  in  comparison  of  the  other,  almost  as  nothing? 
When  ye  look  upon  them  that  have  undertaken  the  charge 
of  your  souls,  and  know  how  far  these  are,  for  the  most 
part,  grown  out  of  kind,  how  few  there  be  that  tread  the 
steps  of  their  ancient  predecessors,  ye  are  easily  filled  with 
indignation,  easily  drawn  into  these  complaints,  wherein  the 
difference  of  present  from  former  times  is  bewailed ;  easily 
persuaded  to  think  of  them  that  lived  to  enjoy  the  days 
which   now  are  gone.     Surely  they  were  happy  in  com- 
parison of  us  that  have  succeeded  them:   were  not  their 
Bishops  men  unreprovable,  wise,  righteous,  holy,  temperate,  fi  Tim. 
well  reported  of,  even  of  those  which  were  without  ?     Were 
not  their  Pastors,  Guides,  and  Teachers,  able  and  willing 
to   "exhort"  with  wholesome  doctrine,  and  to  "  reprove"  12  nm. 
those  which  gainsayed  the  truth?     Had  they  Priests  made  ^'  '' 
of  the  refuse  of  the  people?     Were  men,  like  to  the  chil- 
dren which  were  in  Nineveh,  unable  to  discern  between  the 

K  K  2 


500  SERMON  11.  [Sect  34. 

right  hand  and  the  left^  presented  to  the  charge  of  their 
congregations  ?  Did  their  Teachers  leave  their  flocks,  over 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  had  made  them  overseers?  Did 
their  Prophets  enter  upon  holy  things  as  spoils,  without  a 
reverend  calling  ?  Were  their  Leaders  so  unkindly  affected 
towards  them,  that  they  could  find  in  their  hearts  to  sell 
them  as  sheep  or  oxen,  not  caring  how  they  made  them 
away?  But,  beloved,  deceive  not  yourselves.  Do  the  faults 
of  your  Guides  and  Pastors  ofiPend  you?  It  is  your  fault  if 
they  be  thus  faulty.  **  Nullus,  qui  malum  Rectorem  patitur, 
eum  accuset :  quia  sui  fuit  meriti  perversi  Pastoris  subjacere 
ditioni,"  saith  St.  Gregory ;  "  Whosoever  thou  art,  whom 
the  inconvenience  of  an  evil  Governor  doth  press,  accuse 
thyself,  and  not  him:  his  being  such  is  thy  deserving." 
Jer.  m.  **  O  ye  disobedient  children,  turn  again,  saith  the  Lord, 
and  then  will  I  give  you  Pastors  according  to  mine  own 
heart,  which  shall  feed  you  with  knowledge  and  under- 
standing." So  that  the  only  way  to  repair  all  ruins, 
breaches,  and  offensive  decays,  in  others,  is  to  begin  refor- 
mation at  yourselves.  Which,  that  we  may  all  sincerely, 
seriously,  and  speedily  do,  God  the  Father  grant  for  his 
Son  our  Saviour  Jesus'  sake,  unto  whom,  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  three  Persons,  one  eternal  and  everlasting  God,  be 
honour,  and  glory,  and  praise,  for  ever.     Amen. 


14,  Iff* 


SERMON 

FOUND    IN    THE    8TUOT    OF 

BISHOP    ANDREWS.* 


Matt.  viL  7,  8. 
**  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you ;  seek,  and  you  shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be 

opened  unto  you.    For  whosoever  asketh,"  &c. 

1.  As  all  the  creatures  of  God,  which  attain  their  highest 
perfection  by  process  of  time,  are  in  their  first  beginning 
raw ;  so  man,  in  the  end  of  his  race  the  perfectest,  is  at  his 
entrance  thereunto  the  weakest,  and  thereby  longer  enforced 
to  continue  a  subject  for  other  men*s  compassion  to  work 
upon  voluntarily,  without  any  other  persuader,  besides  their 
own  secret  incUnation,  moving  them  to  repay  to  the  common 
stock  of  humanity  such  help,  as  they  know  that  themselves 
before  must  needs  have  borrowed ;  the  state  and  condition 
of  all  flesh  being  herein  alike.  It  cometh  hereby  to  pass, 
that  although  there  be  in  us,  when  we  enter  into  this  present 
world,  no  conceit  or  apprehension  of  our  own  misery,  and 
for  a  long  time  after  no  ability,  as  much  as  to  crave  help  or 
succour  at  other  men's  hands;  yet  through  his  most  good 
and  gracious  providence,  which  feedeth  the  young,  even  of 
feathered  fowls  and  ravens  (whose  natiu'al  significations  of 
their  necessities  are  therefore  termed  in  Scripture  "  prayers 
and  invocations'*  which  God  doth  hear),  we  amongst  them 
whom  he  values  at  a  far  higher  rate  than  millions  of  brute 
creatures,  do  find  by  perpetual  experience,  daily  occasions 
given  unto  every  of  us,  religiously  to  acknowledge  with  the 
Prophet  David,  ''  Thou,  O  Lord,  from  our  birth  hast  been  Pml 

xxil.  0, 

•  [Published  by  L  Walton,  1678.  Svo.] 


502  SERMON  ISect.  3. 

merciful  unto  us,  we  have  tasted  thy  goodness,  hanging  even 
at  our  mothers'  breasts."  That  God,  which  during  infancy 
preserveth  us  without  our  knowledge,  teacheth  us  at  years 
of  discretion  how  to  use  our  own  abilities  for  procurement 
of  our  own  good. 

2.  ^^  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you ;  seek,  and  you 
shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.  For 
whosoever  doth  ask,  shall  receive;  whosoever  doth  seek, 
shall  find ;  the  door  unto  every  one  which  knocks  shall  be 
opened." 

In  which  words  we  are  first,  commanded  to  ask,  seek,  and 
knock :  secondly,  promised  grace  answerable  unto  every  of 
these  endeavours ;  asking,  we  shall  have ;  seeking,  we  shall 
find;  knocking,  it  shall  be  opened  unto  us:  thirdly,  this 
grace  is  particularly  warranted,  because  it  is  generally  here 
averred,  that  no  man  asking,  seeking,  and  knocking,  shall 
fail  of  that  whereunto  his  serious  desire  tendeth. 

i.  Of  asking  or  praying  I  shall  not  need  to  tell  you, 
either  at  whose  hands  we  must  seek  our  aid,  or  to  put  jou 
in  mind  that  our  hearts  are  those  golden  censers. froiifi  wj|;iich 
the  fume  of  this  sacred  incense  must  asceiid.    .For  concero- 

pgai.  ing  the  one,  you  know  who  it  is  which  hath  said,  "  Call 
upon  me ;"  and  of  the  other,  we  may  very  well  think,  that 
if  any  where,  surely  first  and  most  of  all  in  our  prayers, 

Prov.     God  doth  make  his  continual   claim,  "  Fili,  da  mihi  cor 
'  tuum,"  Son,   let  me   never  fail  in   this  duty  to  have  thy 
heart. 

3.  Against  invocation  of  any  other  than  God  alone,  if  all 
arguments  else  should  fail,  the  number  whereof  is  both 
great  and  forcible,  yet  this  very  bar  and  single  challenge 
might  suffice;  that  whereas  God  hath  in  Scripture  delivered 
us  so  many  patterns  for  imitation  when  we  pray,  yea,  framed 
ready  to  our  hands  in  a  manner  all,  for  suits  and  supplica- 
tions, which  our  condition  of  life  on  earth  may  at  any  time 
need,  there  is  not  one,  no  not  one  to  be  found  directed  unto 
Angels,  Saints,  or  any,  saving  God  alone.  So  that,  if  in 
such  cases  as  this  we  hold  it  safest  to  be  led  by  the  best 
examples  that  have  gone  before,  when  we  see  what  Noah, 
what  Abraham,  what  Moses,  what  David,  what  Daniel,  and 
the  rest  did ;  M'hat  Form  of  Prayer  Christ  himself  likewise 
taught  his  Church,  and  what  his  blessed  Apostles  did  prac- 
tise ;  who  can  doubt  but  the  way  for  us  to  pray  so  as  we 


Sect.  5.]  ON   ST.  MATTHEW.  503 

may  undoubtedly  be  accepted^  is  by  conforming  our  prayers 
to  theirs,  whose  supplications  we  know  were  acceptably? 

4.  Whoso  Cometh  unto  God  with  a  gift,  must  bring  with 
him  a  cheerful  heart,  because  he  loveth  hUarem  datoreniy  a 
liberal  and  frank  affection  in  giving.  Devotion  and  fer- 
vency addeth  unto  prayers  the  same  that  alacrity  doth  unto 
gifts  ;  it  putteth  vigour  and  life  in  them. 

Prayer  proceedeth  from  want,  which  beitig  seriously  laid 
to  heart,  maketh  suppliants  always  importunate;  which  im- 
portunity our  Saviour  Christ  did  not  only  tolerate  in  the 
woman  of  Canaan,  but  also  invite  and  exhort  thereunto,  as  Matt. 
the  parable  of  the  wicked  Judge  sheweth.     Our  fervency  &c*. 
sheweth  us  sincerely  affected  towards  that  we  crave:  butxvuf. 
that  which  must  make  us  capable  thereof,   is  an  humble 
spirit ;  for  God  doth  load  with  his  grace  the  lowly,  when  the 
proud  he  sendeth  empty  away :  and  therefore  to  the  end  that  [i.  63.] 
all  generations  of  the  world  might  know  how  much  it  standetb 
them  upon  to  beware  of  all  lofty  and  vain  conceits  when  we 
offer  up  our  supplications  before  him,  he  hath  in  the  Gospel 
both  delivered  this  caveat,  and  left  it  by  a  special  chosen 
parable  exemplified.  The  Pharisee  and  Publican  having  pre- 
sented themselves  in  one  and  the  same  place,  the  Temple  of  r^^^i- 
God,  for. performance  of  one  and  the  same  duty,  the  duty  of 
prayer,  did  notwithstanding,  in  that  respect  only,  so  far  differ 
the  one  from  the  other,  that  our  Lord's  own  verdict  of  them 
remaineth  (as  you  know)  on  record,  They  departed  home, 
the  sinful  Publican,,  through  humility  of  prayer,  just ;  the 
just  Pharisee,  through  pride,  sinful.     So  miich  better  doth 
he  accept  of  a  contrite  peccavi,  than  of  an  arrogant  Deo 
gratiiis. 

5.  Asking  is  very  easy,'  if  that  were  all  God  did  require : 
but  because  there  were  means  which  his  providence  hath 
appointed  for  our  attainment  unto  that  which  we  have  from 
him,  and  those  means  now  and  then  intricated,  such  as  re-r 
quire  deUberation,  study,  and  intention  of  wit ;  therefore  he 
which  emboldeneth  to  ask,  doth  after  invocation  exact  in- 
quisition ;  a  work  of  difficulty.  The  baits  of  sin  every  where 
open,  ready  always  to  offer  themselves ;  whereas  that  which 
is  precious,  being  hid,  is  not  had  but  by  being  sought. 

**  Prsemia  non  ad  magna  praevenitur  nisi  per  magnos  la-  Bernard. 
bores;"  Straightness  and  roughness  are  qualities  incident 
unto  every  good  and  perfect  way«  .What  booteth  it  toodiers 


504  s£RMOK  [Sect.  6. 

that  we  wish  them  well^  and  do  nothing  for  them  ?     As  little 
ourselves  it  must  needs  avails  if  we  pray  and  seek  not.     To 
trust  to  labour  without  prayer,  it  argueth  impiety  and  pro- 
faneness ;  it  maketh  light  of  the  providence  of  God :  and 
although  it  be  not  the  intent  of  a  religious  mind ;  yet  it  is 
the  fault  of  those  men  whose  religion  wanteth  light  of  mature 
judgment  to  direct  it,  when  we  join  with  our  prayer  sloth- 
fulness  and  neglect  of  convenient  labour.     He  whic^  hath 
rjam.     said,  '^  If  any  man  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask" — hath  in  like 
[Prov.    sort  commanded  also  to  seek  wisdom,  to  search  for  under- 
standing as  for  treasure.  To  them  which  did  only  crave  a  seat 
in  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  his  answer,  as  you  know,  in  the 
[Matt.     Gospel  was  this  ;  To  sit  at  my  right  hand  and  left  hand  in 
"**^'^  the  seat  of  glory  is  not  a  matter  of  common  gratuity,  but  of 
divine  assignment  from  God.     He  liked  better  of  him  which 
[xix.10,  enquired,  '*  Lord,  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may  be  saved?" 
^^'^       and  therefore  him  he  directed  the  right  and  ready  way, 
"  Keep  the  commandments." 

6.  I  noted  before  unto  you  certain  special  qualities  belong- 
ing unto  you  that  '^  ask :"  in  them  that  *'  seek"  there  are  the 
like :  which  we  may  observe  it  is  with  many  as  with  them  of 
sum.    whom  the  Apostle  speaketh,  they  ''are  alway  learning,  and 
never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."     "  Ex 
amore  non  quaerunt."  saith  Bernard ;  they  seek  because  they 
are  curious  to  know,  and  not  as  men  desirous  to  obey.     It  was 
distress  and  perplexity  of  mind  which  made  them  inquisitive, 
[Acts      of  whom  St.  Luke  in  the  Acts  reporteth,  that  sought  counsel 
**  ^'^     and  advice  with  urgent  solicitation ;  Men  and  brethren,  sith 
God  hath  blessed  you  with  the  spirit  of  understanding  above 
others,  hide  not  from  miserable  persons  that  which  may  do 
them  good ;  give  your  counsel  to  them  that  need  and  crave 
it  at   your  hands,   unless  we  be  utterly  forlorn;  shew  us, 
[Matt,     teach    us,   what  we   may  do   and   live.      That  which  our 
Saviour  doth  say  of  prayer  in  the  open  streets,  of  causing 
trumpets  to  be  blown  before  us  when  we  give  our  alms, 
and  of  making  our  service  of  God  a  means  to  purchase  the 
praise  of  men,  must  here  be  applied  to  you,  who  never  seek 
what  they  ought,  but  only  when  they  may  be  sure  to  have 
[Cant,    store  of  lookers   on.     "  On  my  bed,"  saith  the  Canticles, 
''  there  did  I  seek  whom  my  soul  doth  love."     When  there- 
fore thou  resolvest  thyself  to  "  seek,"  go  not  out  of  thy 
chamber  into  the  streets,  but  shun  that  frequency  which 


Sect.  7.]  ON   St.  MATTHEW.  505 

distracteth;  single  thyself  from  thyself,  if  such  sequestration 
may  be  attained.  When  thou  seekest,  let  the  love  of  obe- 
dience,  the  sense  and  feeling  of  thy  necessity,  the  eye  of 
singleness  and  sincere  meaning  guide  thy  footsteps,  and  thou 
canst  not  slide. 

7.  You  see  what  it  is  to  "  ask"  and  "  seek;"  the  next  is 
*'  knock."  There  is  always  in  every  good  thing  which  we  ask, 
and  which  we  seek,  some  main  wall,  some  barred  gate, 
some  strong  impediment  or  other  objecting  itself  in  the  way 
between  us  and  home ;  for  removal  whereof,  the  help  of 
stronger  hands  than  our  own  is  necessary.  As  therefore 
asking  hath  relation  to  the  want  of  good  things  desired,  and 
seeking  to  the  natural  ordinary  means  of  attainment  there- 
unto ;  so  knocking  is  required  in  regard  of  hindrances,  lets, 
or  impediments,  which  are  doors  shut  up  against  us,  till  such 
time  as  it  please  the  goodness  of  Almighty  God  to  set  them 
open :  in  the  mean  while  our  duty  here  required  is  to 
"  knock."  Many  are  well  contented  to  ask,  and  not  unwil- 
ling to  undertake  some  pains  in  seeking;  but  when  once 
they  see  impediments  which  flesh  and  blood  doth  judge  invin- 
cible, their  hearts  are  broken.  Israel  in  Egypt,  subject  to 
miseries  of  intolerable  servitude,  craved  with  sighs  and  tears 
deliverance  from  that  estate,  which  then  they  were  fully  per- 
suaded they  could  not  possibly  change,  but  it  must  needs 
be  for  the  better.  Being  set  at  liberty  to  seek  the  land 
which  God  hath  promised  unto  their  Fathers,  did  not  seem 
tedibus  or  irksome  unto  them :  this  labour  and  travail  they 
undertook  with  great  alacrity,  never  troubled  with  any  doubt, 
nor  dismayed  with  any  fear,  till  at  the  length  they  came  to 
knock  at  those  brazen  gates,  the  bars  whereof,  as  they  had 
no  means,  so  they  had  no  hopes,  to  break  asunder.  Moun- 
tains on  this  hand,  and  the  roaring  sea  before  their  faces ; 
then  all  the  forces  that  Egypt  could  make,  coming  with  as 
much  rage  and  fury  as  could  possess  the  heart  of  a  proud, 
potent,  and  cruel  tyrant :  in  these  straits,  at  this  instant. 
Oh  that  we  had  been  so  happy  as  to  die  where  before  we 
lived  a  life,  though  toilsome,  yet  free  from  such  extremities 
as  now  we  are  fallen  into  !  Is  this  the  milk  and  honey  that 
hath  been  so  spoken  of?  Is  this  the  paradise  in  description 
whereof  so  much  glossing  and  deceiving  eloquence  hath  been 
spent?  have  we  after  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  left 
Egypt  to  come  to  this  ?     While  they  are  in  the  midst  of 


509  SERMON  [Sect.  8. 

their  mutinous  cogitations,  Moses  with  all  instiemcy  beateth, 
and  God  with  the  hand  of  his  onmipotency  pasteth  open  the 
gates  before  them,  maugre  even  their  own  infidelity  and 
despair.  It  was  not  strange  then,  nor  that  they  afterwards 
stood  in  like  repining  terms ;  for  till  they  came  to  the  very 
brink  of  the  river  Jordan,  the  least  cross  accident,  which 
lay  at  any  time  in  their  way,  was  evermore  utitO.them  a 
cause  of  present  recidivation  and  relapse.  They  having  the 
land  in  their  possession,  being  seated  in  the  heart  thereof, 
and  all  their  hardest  encounters  past,  Joshua  and  the  better 
sort  of  their  Governors,  who  saw  the  wonders  which  God 
had  wrought  for  the  good  of  that  people,  had  no  sooner 
ended  their  days,  but  first  one  tribe,  then  another,  in  the 
end  all,  delighted  in  ease ;  fearful  to  hazard  themselves  in 
following  the  conduct  of  Gt)d,  weary  of  passing  so  many 
strait  and  narrow  gates,  condescended  to  ignominious  con- 
ditions of  peace,  joined  hands  with  Infidels,  forsook  him 
which  had  been  always  the  Rock  of  their  salvation,  and 
so  had  none  to  open  unto  them,  although  their  occasions 
of  knocking  were  great  afterward,  more  and  greater  than 
before.  Concerning  Issachar,  the  words  of  Jacob,  the 
Gen.  father  of  all  the  Patriarchs,  were  these ;  Issachar,  though 
15.  '  bonny  and  strong  enough  unto  any  labour,  doth  couch 
notwithstanding  as  an  ass  under  all  burdens ;  he  shall  think 
with  himself  that  rest  is  good,  and  the  land  pleasant;  he 
shall  in  these  considerations  rather  endure  the  burden  and 
yoke  of  tribute,  than  cast  himself  into  hazard  of  war.  We 
are  for  the  most  part  all  of  Issachar's  disposition,  we  ac« 
count  ease  cheap,  howsoever  we  buy  it.  And  although 
we  can  haply  frame  ourselves  sometimes  to  *'  ask,"  or 
endure  for  a  while  to  **  seek ;"  yet  loath  we  are  to  follow 
a  course  of  life,  which  shall  too  often  hem  us  about  with 
those  perplexities,  the  dangers  whereof  are  manifestly 
great. 

8.  But  of  the  duties  here  prescribed  of  asking,  seeking, 
knocking,  thus  much  may  suiBce.  The  promises  follow 
which  God  hath  made. 

ii.  "  Ask  and  receive,  seek  and  find,  knock  and  it  shall 
be  opened  unto  you."  Promises  are  made  of  good  things 
to  come ;  and  such,  while  they  are  in  expectation,  have  a 
kind  of  painfulness  with  them ;  but  when  the  time  of  per- 
formance and  of  present  fruition  cometh,  it  bringeth  joy. 


SecU  9.]  ON  ST.  MATTHEW.  507 

Abraham  did  somewhat  rejoice  in  that  which  he  saw  would 
come,  although  knowing  that  many.age^  and  generations 
must  first  pass :  theii'  exultation  far  greater,  who  beheld  with 
their  eyes,  and  embraced  in  their  arms  him  which  had  been 
before  the  hope  of  the  whole  world.     "  We  have  found  that['®^n 
Messias,"  ' "  have  seen  the  salvation:"   "Behold  here  thej*"^* 
Lamb,  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world."  John* 
Tbede  are  speeches  of  men  not  comfofted  with  the  hope  of 
that  they  desire,  but  rapt  with  admiration  at  the  view  of 
enjoyed  bliss. 

As  oft  therefore  as  our  case  is  the  same  with  the  Prophet 
David's;  or  that  experience  of  God's  abundant  mercy  to- 
wards us  doth  wrest  from  our  mouths  the  same  acknowledg- 
ments which  it  did  from  his,  "  I  called  on  the  name  of  the  Pmi. 
Lord,  and  he  hath  rescued  his  servant  x  I  was  in  misery,  and  ^! 
he  saved  me :  Thou,  Lord,  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  death, 
mine  eyes  from  tears,  and  my  feet  from  falling :"  I  have  ^ask^ 
and  received,  sought  and  found,  knocked  and  it  hath  been 
opened  unto  me:  can  there  less  be  expected  at  our  hands, 
than  to  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  bless,  magnify,  and 
extol  the  mercies  heaped  upon  the  heads  of  the  sons  of 
men?  Are  we  in  the  case  of  them,  who  as  yet  do  only  ask 
and  have  not  received  ?  It  is  but  attendance  a  small  time, 
we  shall  rejoice  then ;  but  how  ?  we  shall  find,  but  where  ? 
it  shall  be  opened,  but  with  what  hand?  To  all  which  der 
mands  I  must  answer, 

9.  Use  the  words  of  our  Saviour  Christ ;  ^*  Quid  hoc  ad  [John 
te  ?"  what  are  these  things  unto  us  ?  Is  it  for  us  to  be  made 
acquainted  with  the  way  he  hath  to  bring  his  counsel  and 
purposes  about  ?  God  will  not  have  great  things  brought 
to  pass,  either  altogether  without  means,  or  by  those  ineans 
altogether  which  are  to  our  seeming  probable  and  likely. 
Not  without  means,  lest  under  colour  of  repose  in  God  we 
should  nourish  at  any  time  in  ourselves  idleness :  not  by 
the  mere  ability  of  means  gathered  together  through  our 
own  providence,  lest  prevailing  by  helps  which  the  common 
course  of  nature  yieldeth,  we  should  offer  the  sacrifice  of 
thanksgiving  for  whatsoever  prey  we  take  to  the  nets  which 
our  fingers  did  weave ;  than  which  there  cannot  be  to  him 
more  intolerable  injury  offered.  "Vere  et  absque  dubio> 
(saith  St.  Bernard,)  hoc  quisque  est  pessimus,  quo  optimus, 
si  hoc  ipsum  quo  est  optimus  ascribat  sibi;"  the  more  blest. 


508  SBRMON  [Sect  10. 

the  more  curst^  if  we  make  his  graces  our  own  glory,  without 
imputation  of  all  to  him ;  whatsoever  we  have  we  steal,  and 
the  multiplication  of  God's  favours  doth  but  aggravate  the 
crime  of  our  sacrilege :  he  knowing  how  prone  we  are  to 
unthankfulness  in  this  kind,  tempereth  accordingly  the  means, 
whereby  it  is  his  pleasure  to  do  us  good.    This  is  the  reason 

r'«>d«  why  God  would  neither  have  Gideon  to  conquer  without  any 
army,  nor  yet  to  be  furnished  with  too  great  an  host.  This 
is  the  cause  why,  as  none  of  the  promises  of  God  do  fail,  so 
the  most  are  in  such  sort  brought  to  pass,  that,  if  we  after 
consider  the  circuit,  wherein  the  steps  of  his  providence 
have  gone,  the  due  consideration  thereof  cannot  choose  but 
draw  from  us  the  self-same  words  of  astonishment,  which 

[Rom.  the  blessed  Apostle  hath ;  "  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  of 
the  wisdom  of  God !  how  unsearchable  are  his  counsels, 
and  his  ways  past  finding  out !"  Let  it  therefore  content  us 
always  to  have  his  Word  for  an  absolute  warrant :  we  shall 
receive  and  find  in  the  end;  it  shall  at  length  be  opened 
unto  you :  however,  or  by  what  means,  leave  it  to  God. 

10.  iii.  Now  our  Lord  groundeth  every  man's  particular 
assurance  touching  this  point  upon  the  general  rule  and 
axiom  of  his  providence,  which  hath  ordained  these  effects 
to  flow  and  issue  out  of  these  causes ;  gifts  of  suits,  finding 
out  of  seeking,  help  out  of  knocking ;  a  principle  so  generally 
true,  that  on  his  part  it  never  faileth. 

For  why  ?  it  is  the  glory  of  God  to  give ;  his  very  nature 
delighteth  in  it ;  his  mercies  in  the  current,  through  which 
they  would  pass,  may  be  dried  up,  but  at  the  head  they 
never  fail.  Men  are  soon  weary  both  of  granting  and  of 
hearing  suits,  because  our  own  insufficiency  maketh  us  still 
afraid,  lest  by  benefiting  of  others  we  impoverish  ourselves. 
We  read  of  large  and  great  proffers,  which  Princes  in  their 
fond  and  vain-glorious  moods  have  poured  forth :  as  that  of 

Mark     Hcrod ;  and  the  like  of  Ahasuerus  in  the  Book  of  Esther. 


▼i.23. 


Esther  "  Ask  what  thou  wilt,  though  it  reach  to  the  half  of  my 
Kingdom,  I  will  give  it  thee :"  which  very  words  of  pro- 
fusion do  argue,  that  the  ocean  of  no  estate  in  this  world 
doth  so  flow,  but  it  may  be  emptied.  He  that  promiseth 
half  of  his  Kingdom,  foreseeth  how  that  being  gone,  the 
remainder  is  but  a  moiety  of  that  which  was.  What  we 
give  we  leave ;  but  what  God  bestoweth  benefiteth  us,  and 
from  him  it  taketh  nothing:  wherefore  in  his  propositions 


Sect.  10.]  ON    ST.  MATTHEW.  509 

there  are  no  such  fearful  restraints ;  his  terms  are  general  in 
regard  of  making,  "  Whatsoever  ye  ask  the  Father  in  my  ^f^^Jj , 
name ;"  and  general  also  in  respect  of  persons,  '^  whosoever 
asketh,  whosoever  seeketh."    It  is  true,  St.  James  saith, 
*'  Ye  ask,  and  yet  ye  receive  not,  because  you  ask  amiss :"  [Jam. 
ye  crave  to  the  end  ye  might  have  to  spend  upon  your  own  [ver.j.] 
lusts.     The  rich  man  sought  Heaven,  but  it  was  then  that  x.  17.] 
he  felt  hell.     The  Virgins  knocked  in  vain,  because  they 
overslipped  their  opportunity ;  and  when  the  time  was  to 
knock,  they  slept :  but  ''  Quserite  Dominum  dum  inveniri  ^^ 
potest,"  Perform  these  duties  in  their  due  time  and  due 
sort.     Let  there,  on  our  part,  be  no  stop,  and  the  bounty  of 
God  we  know  is  such,  that  he  granteth  over  and  above  our 
desires.     Saul  sought  an  ass,  and  found  a  Kingdom.     Solo- 
mon named  wisdom,  and  God  gave  Solomon  wealth  also,  by 
way  of  surpassing.    *'  Thou  hast  prevented  thy  servant  with  Pmi. 
blessings,"  saith  the  Prophet  David.     "  He  asked  life,  and  4.  *  ' 
thou  gavest  him  long  life,  even  for  ever  and  ever."    God  a 
giver ;  ''  He  giveth  liberally,  and  upbraideth  none  in  any  jun. 
wise :"  and  therefore  he  better  knoweth  than  we  the  best  * 
times,  and  the  best  means,  and  the  best  things,  wherein  the 
good  of  our  souls  consisteth. 


"v 


INDEX. 


INDEX. 


Absolution;  of  its  efficacy  since  the 
Apostles,  II.  37 1 — of  its  being  purchase- 
able,  III.  42 — whence  the  power  of  it, 
59— -abused  by  Papists,  60,  67— what 
it  is,  according  to  Hooker,  62,  68 — im- 
pugned by  Tertullian,  64. 

"  Abstract  of  certain  Acts  of  Parliament," 
dted,  II.  415,416,426,427,429,444. 

Acaster,  Rev.  J.  on  the  source  of  danger 
to  the  Established  Church,  I.  zlvii. 

Acolythes ;  their  ori^n.  III.  209. 

Action;  what  laws  of,  guide  the  Will, 
1.87. 

Actions;  what,  direct  man  to  the  imitation 
of  God,  I.  84-'the  Will,  the  root  of  all, 
104  —  God,  the  only  rewarder  and 
avenger  of  all  secret,  105. 

Acts,  must  perfect  habits,  II.  322. 

Adherence;  certainty  o{,  what.  III.  451. 

"  Admonition  to  the  Parliament,"  I.  cztiii. 
clii.  9,  21,  22;  II.  60,  97,  106,  129, 
168,  248,  258,  259,  380. 

Adversity;  of  the  prayer  to  be  evermore 
delivered  from  it,  II.  155. 

Advice;  of  whom  to  be  sought,  II.  103. 

Aerius;  on  Fasting,  II.  343— opposed  the 
Order  of  Bishops,  III.  141. 

Affiurs,  politic;  how  fiir  Religion  supplies 
the  fit  Instruments  for,  II.  4 — Church ; 
of  the  outward  public  ordering  of,  17 

Agents,  natural,  the  law  of;  how  distin« 
guished  from  voluntary,  I.  79. 

Aikin,  Miss ;  her  Memoirs  of  James  I., 
I.  56. 

Ainsworth,  Henry ;  cited,  I.  xvi. 

A'Lasco,  John;  of  him  and  his  Church, 
I.  288. 

Alddamas ;  of  the  kinds  of  delivery,  II.  76. 

Alexander  Severus;  imitated  the  Ordina- 
tions of  the  Church  in  his  imperial 
elections.  III.  163« 

VOL.  III. 


"  Alliance  between  Church  and  State," 
by  Bishop  Warburton;  strictures  on, 
I.  xxiv.  et  seq. 

Alsop,  Vincent;  on  the  Rule  of  the  Church, 
III.  228. 

Ambrose;  on  the  desire  of  Grace,  II.  219. 

America;  the  experience  of,  on  the  sepa- 
ration of  Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  aflhbrs, 
I.  cxlviil. 

Anabaptism ;  remarkable  opinion  of  Arch- 
bishop Whitgift,  concerning.  III.  162. 

Anabaptists,  Gennan;  their  early  tenets, 
1. 55-— how  they  spread  themselves,  59 — 
their  bold  asserdons,  62 — their  notions 
of  Christian  liberty,  234 — and  of  human 
Laws,  III.  184,  328. 

Anderton,  James.     See  Brereley. 

Andrews,  Bishop;  of  Hooker's  MSS.  Lczz. 

Angels;  of  the  Law  they  work  by,  I.  81 — 
how  some  came  to  &11,  83— their  dis- 
persion afterward,  ib. — their  knowledge 
full  and  complete,  85. 

of  the  Churches ;  whom  so  styled, 

III.  103 — no  proof  of  their  being  Bidiopt 
of  a  superior  Order,  ib. 

Antiquity ;  of  deference  to  it  in  disputable 
points,  II.  19 — of  no  value  apart  firom 
Truth,  21 — danger  of  confiding  in  it,  Id. 

Apocryphal;  what  books  so  termed  for- 
merly, and  what  now,  II.  54 — of  read- 
ing them  in  Churches,  56.  ' 

ApoUinarians ;  their  heresy,  11.175,182, 
187. 

Apostacy;  what,  IIL  474. 

Apostles ;  what  the  term  includes,  II.  387, 
391~the  term  generalized,  IIL  99, 
404 — in  what  they  have  successors,  in 
what  not,  99 — consequence  of  thdr  9Sr. 
tinction,  116 — of  despising  their  diDC* 
trine,  468. 

Creed;  of  its  composure,  11.  133. 

Apostolic  Canons,  the;  spurious,  11.227, 
404;  IIL  140. 

L  L 


5li 


INDEX. 


Apostolic  commission;  how  appropriated  by 

Papists,  and  Anglo- Diocesans,  III.  100. 

"  Constitutions,  The;    impeached, 

II.  227. 

Appetite;  how  it  differs  from  Will,  I.  89. 
Appropriations;   yearly  amount  of  those 

taken  from  the  Church,  III.  248. 
Arch ;  this  syllable  remarked  on.  III.  207. 
■^—    Bishop;   why  appointed.   III.  131, 

139 — import  of  the  name,  189.     See 

Metropolitan. 

Deacon;  his  OflBce,  III.  127. 

Presbyter ;  his  Office,  ib, 

Archytas ;   of  public  or  national  felicity, 

III.  273. 

Arguing;  of  a  sceptical  mode  of,  II.  298. 

Arianism;  its  rise  and  progress,  II.  134, 
231. 

Aristotle;  surpassed  by  Lord  Bacon,  I. 
87 — strictures  on,  by  Bp.  Warburton, 
106;  III.  29^. 

Armagh,  the  late  Archbishop  of;  his 
wealth,  III.  12. 

Articles  of  Religion ;  those  of  the  Church 
of  England  insufficient  to  prevent  diver- 
sity of  Opinions;  and  also  promote 
acrimonious  controversy,  I.  xvii. — of 
the  Furst,  II.  183— of  the  Tenth,  I. 
90 —  of  the  Eleventh,  120  —  of  the 
Twelfth,  94— of  the  Thirteenth,  t6.— 
of  the  Fifteenth,  II.  164— of  the  Seven- 
teenth, 168— of  the  Nmeteenth,  I.  201; 
II.  73 ;  III.  254— the  Twentieth  com- 
mented on,  I.  xxix. — contains  a  forged 
clause,  ib. — remarks  on  the  "  Christian 
Remembrancer"  concerning  this  Article, 
xxxii.— of  the  Twenty-first,  118— of 
the  Twenty-third,  II.  372  — of  the 
Twenty-fifth,  204, 283— of  the  Twenty- 
sixth,  209  —  of  the  Twenty-seventh, 
215 — of  the  Twenty-eighth,  289. 

Ascham,  Roger;  cited,  I.  cxxxv. 

Assent;  the  grounds  of  it,  I.  181. 

Asses  and  oxen ;  whom  so  termed,  II.  429. 

Assurance,  the  certsunty  of;  what,  III. 
451. 

Athanasian  Creed.     See  Creed. 

Atheism;  its  radical  cause,  II.  9— when 
most  opposite  to  Religion,  ib. 

Attendancy ;  derived,  from  the  example  of 
the  Angels,  upon  the  Hierarchy,  III. 
208 — opinion  of  Puritans  on  its  origin 
and  use,  209. 

Attire  of  Ministers ;  of  the,  II.  96. 

Augustine ;  statement  ascribed  to,  re- 
specting the  Apostles'  Creed,  II.  133— 
cited,  339— remarked  on,  349. 
Authority,  human;  how  far  to  be  urged, 
I.  177 — unsafe,  in  matters  of  Faith, 
185 — when  injurious  to  all  knowledge 
and  truth,  II.  21 — instrumental  to 
error,  140  — Truth,  not  its  offvpring, 
283. 


B. 


Babylon ;  her  sins.  III.  387. 
Bacon,  Lord;  of  single-men,  I.  clxxviii.— - 
has  surpassed  Arixtotle,  87^-on  Unity 
and  Uniformity,  196  (see  Addendum, 
III.  536,  and  referred  to  this  place) — 
on  the  value  of  Antiquity,  II.  21— of 
what  beguiles  Truth*  283— on  Non-re- 
sidence, 428. 
Baker's  MS.  Collections;   cited,   I.  clxa. 

cc.  ccii. 
Ballard,  the  Jesuit;  his  judgment  on  Abp. 

Whitgift's  writings,  I.  clxvi. 
Bancroft,  Abp. ;  his  character,  L  xiv. — 
cited,  XV.  Ixxv.  cxxvi.  20,  22,  51,  III. 
153,  198,211. 
Baptism ;  by  alleged  Heretics,  why  re- 
jected by  ancient  Councils,  I.  199^- 
extravagant  notions  of,  II.  206 — its  Sub- 
stance and  Rites,  207 — when  admini- 
stered without  the  usual  ceremonies, 
210,  220— of  its  Necessity,  210,  212, 
215,  218,  221,  535— of  Grace  given 
with  it,  213 — the  Grace  conferred, 
where  outward  means  cannot  be  bad, 
217 — of  Infants  dying  without  it,  218 — 
of  the  necessity  of  privately  administer- 
ing it,  221-'-of  its  administration  by 
Laymen  and  Women,  226 — to  be  ad- 
ministered but  once,  228 — opinions  of 
the  Fathers  on  its  iteration,  229-— 
whether  frustrated  by  the  incompetency 
of  the  Minister,  234— an  action,  moral, 
ecclesiastical,  and  mystical,  237 — points 
on,  by  Calvin,  245 — of  Interrogatories 
in,  touching  Faith,  246— of  Infants,  and 
Interrogatories  through  Sponsors,  248 — 
of  the  Cross  in,  256.     See  Cross. 

Baptists.    See  Anabaptists. 

Barrow,  Dr.  Isaac ;  cited,  I.  zxl.  xxiii. 
xxix.  in.  99,  202. 

Barrowe,  Henry:  cited,  I.  cxxvii. 

Barwick,  Dr.  John,  his  Life  cited,  I.  xlviil 

Basil ;  his  advice  where  ordinances  are  not 
approved,  II.  104 — of  Sacred  Music, 
124— of  Private  Judgment,  III.  388. 

Bathurst,  Bp. ;  of  Uniformity,  III,  324. 

Baxter,  Richard ;  cited,  I.  xiii.  xxvii. ;  II. 
332,  352;  IIL  99,  112,  148,  178,266, 
ib.  268,  269,  270,  271,  272,  273,  293, 
304,  321,  324,  326,  331,  332,  475. 

Bayle,  Peter ;  of  the  pacific  spirit  of  Chris- 
tianity, I.  xxvi. 

Belief;  why  not  attained  by  bare  con- 
templation of  heaven  and  earth,  II.  67. 

Believers;  how  saved,  II.  71. 

Benedictus;  its  use  in  the  Liturgy,  II.  128. 

Benefice ;  what  the  Name  signifies,  II.  417. 

Bentham,  Jeremy;  of  the  Catechism,  II. 
46. 

Bernard,  Dr.  N. ;  cited,  I.  cxx.  clxxxix. 

Bertelier;  opposed  by  Calvin,  I.  17. 


INDEX. 


515 


Beveridge,  Bp.;  of  the  Apostles'  Creed, 

II.  133. 

Beza;  his  Book  ordered  to  be  burnt,  I 

civ. — his  opinion  of  Cartwright,  cxl. 

clxxvii. — and  of  the  First  Admonitioni 

civil.  —  his  controversy  with    Erastus, 

21. 

Bingham,  Rev.  John;  cited,  II.  98,  333. 

Binkes,  Dr. ;  his  extravagant  Sermon  on 

Chas.  I.,  I.  xlv. 
Biographia  Britannica;  cited,  I.  clxxv. 
Bishops ;  how  far  their  Order  appointed  of 
God,  III.  90 — a  Query,  by  Smectym- 
niius,  on  this  point,  I.  cxxii. — ^were  in 
Churches  for  1500  years  after  Christy 
III.  90— in  England,  before  A.  d.  359, 
ib, — whether  their  Office  be  essentially 
what  it  was  in  the  Primitive  Church, 
91 — a  distinction  between  the  Primitive 
and  the  Hierarchical  Church,  admitted 
by  Bp.  Marsh,  110 — whether  the  varia- 
tions in  their  Order  be  analagous   to 
those  in  Sovereignty,  92 — whence  the 
Name,  93 — the  Name  diverted  from  its 
first  usage,  ib. — the  Order  older  than 
the  Name,  94 — definition  of  a  Bishop ; 
and  in  what  his  Office  consists,  95— at 
large,  and  with  restraint ;  distinguished, 
95,  102 — the  case  of  James,  at  Jeru- 
salem, 99 — superiority;    in  what  dis- 
puted, 96— the  term  **  Angel,"  affords  no 
plea  for  Superiority,  103 — Bp.  Jewel's 
distinction  respecting  a  Bishop's  quali- 
fications,   99 — the  Apostles    the    first 
Bishops,  97 — all  Bishops  the  Apostles' 
Successors,  according  to  Jerom,  100— 
originally  called  Apostles,  ib, — Jerom's 
notion   of   their  institution;    and    re- 
marks on  it,  104 — their  succession  from 
the  Apostles  said  to  be  traced  in  all 
Churches    they    founded,    112 — their 
Power,  originally,  114 — of  Ordination; 
if  peculiar  unto  Bishops?  115,  142— 
of  Jurisdiction ;  if  vested  solely  in  them  ? 
117 — how  far  Bishops  and  Presbyters 
united  in  exercising  Jurisdiction,  125 — 
Bishops  and  their  Cathedrals  said  to  re- 
flect the  very  countenance  of  Apostolical 
antiquity,  127 — extent  of  their  terri- 
torial Power,  originally,  138— why  some 
Bishops  superior  to  others,  131 — this, 
suggested  by  the  state  of  the  World, 
132 — who    first    opposed    Episcopacy, 
141 — the  interest  Bishops  have  in  Civil 
affairs,  171 — what  Honours  are  their 
due,    and    why,    191 — ^whence    their 
power  of  Office  derived,  200-*Cowper'8 
description  of  a  State  Bishop,  201 — 
wherein    honour    should    be    shewn 
Bishops,  206 — their  share  out  of  the 
public  maintenance  of  the  Church,  an- 
ciently, 225 — why  maintenance  is  not 
limited,  as  formerly,  227— whether  to 


be  deprived  of  their  lawful  possessions 
on  pretence  of  Unworthiness,  229 — 
what  should  be  their  behaviour  and 
conduct,  230— of  procuring  their  office 
by  Simony,  231 — careless  Bishops  in- 
jurious to  the  Church,  232,  236 — of 
corruptly  bestowing  places  of  Ecclesias- 
tical charge,234 — Visitations  and  Courts, 
how  they  should  be  managed,  234,235 — 
care  of  their  Clergy,  required  of  Bishops, 
235 — Clergy  and  People  required  to 
bear   with    their   Bishops'    infirmities, 
239 — Bishops'  Revenues  to  be  duly  pro- 
tected, 240 — their  Title  to  revenues,  on 
what  it  rests,  247.     See  Episcopacy-— 
Maintenance — Prelates. 
Blackbume,  Archdeacon ;  cited,  I.  xiv.  xx. 

cxxi.  clxi. 
Blackstone,  Sir  William;  his  exposure  of 

Clerical  rapacity,  II.  409. 
Blomfield,  Bp. ;  cited,  I.  xliii. 
Bodin ;    of  the  Roman   Commonwealth, 

III.  266. 
Body-politic,  and  Laws-politic,  I.  105. 
Body,  8iou\,  and  spirit,  I.  97. 
Boniface;  of  Baptismal  Interrogatories,  II. 

249. 
Bowing  at  the  name  of  Jesus,  II.  106. 
Brazen  Serpent ;  of  it,  II.  268. 
Brereley,  John  (a/.  Jas.  Anderton) ;  dted 

II.  307. 
Brodie,  George,  Esq. ;  cited,  I.  xvi. 
Brook,    Rev.   Benj. ;    cited,    I.  lii.  civ. 

cxxxiv.  civ.  clxxxii.;  II.  100,  395. 
Brougham,  Henry,  Esq.  M.  P.;  referred  to, 

I.  xvi. 
Brown,  T.  M.D.;  cited,  II.  22. 
Brown,  Robert ;   founder  of  the  Sect  of 
Brownists,  I.  cxxvi.;  II.  407;  III.  308. 
Brutus,  Steph.  Junius.     See  Languet,  H. 
Bullinger;  a  remark  on,  I.  61. 
Burghley,  Lord ;  his  Letter  to  Abp.  Whit- 
gift  respecting   Travers,  I.  Ixxi. — his 
treatment  of  Hooker,  ci. — Admonitory 
Letter  to  Whitgift,  clxxix.— Hooker's 
Epistle  to  his  Lordship,  1. 
Burial  Office;    its  design,  II.  356 — ^Bp. 

Hoadly's  censure,  361. 
Burnet,  Bp.;  on  chanting  Prayers,  IL 
128 — on  Athanasius'  Creed,  140 — cited, 
244,  269,  284,  ib,  361— of  Confirma- 
tion, 283^— censures  the  Clergy,  361—^ 
admits  whence  Bishops  derive  their 
power  of  Office,  III.  200— of  Synods, 
30  L 


C. 


C.  T.    See  Cartwright,  Thomas. 
Csecilius  k  Bilta ;  dted,  I.  199. 
Calamy,  Dr.  E.;  on  Timothy's  episcopate, 

IH.  103. 
Calvin;  his  original  profession,  I,  12-k- 

ll2 


516 


INDEX. 


introduced  into  the  Cliurch  of  Geneva,  I. 
12. — Dr.  M'Crie'B  remark  on  him,  t6.— 
banished,  and  recalled,  14 — conditiotis 
on  his  return,  15 — their  subtlety,  t*. — 
his  reception  by  the  people,  16-— being 
disgusted,  takes  his  leave,  17 — praue  of 
him;  and  how  honoured,  19 — defended 
against  Hooker,  in  the  "  Christian 
Letter,"  22— Dr.  Covel's  reply  to  the 
Letter,  II.  551 — adverse  to  political 
freedom,  I.  26 — on  difference  in  Cere- 
monies, 314 — various  points  of  his  on 
baptism,  adduced,  II.  245 — on  Christ's 
example  respecting  Fasts,  334 — and  the 
example  of  Moses,  335— on  the  abroga- 
tion of  Fasts,  339 — cited,  373,  III. 
120 — of  Confession  39 — of  Bishops; 
their  antiquity  and  utility,  120 — their 
power  and  rank,  121 — of  Archbishops 
and  Patriarchs,  153. 

Calvinism ;    reproached    by    Dr.  Words- 
worth, I.  cxii.;  II.  451. 

Camden,  William ;   cited,   I.   dL  cxxxv. 
ccvi.  clxxxii.  35. 

Campbell,  Geo.  D.D.;  cited,  I.  xiL  xxviii. 
IL  374 ;  in.  129. 

Canons  Ecclesiastical ;   extravagant  con- 
clusion respecting,  I.  231. 

of  1603;  cited,  H.  106,  254,  335, 

393 — Bp.  C.  R.  Sumner,  on  them,  420. 
I^e  Apostolic  Canons,  and  Apostolic 
Constitutions. 

Canterbury,  Abp. ;  pageantry  of  the,  I. 
xxxiii.  xxxiv. 

Cardinal.    See  Pope. 

Caroldus  ;  Calvin's  associate,  I.  14. 

Carte,  Thomas ;  cited,  I.  cl. 

Cartwright,  Thomas ;  what  he  was  styled, 
I.  xxxvii.  cxxxiv. — his  birth;  and  en- 
trance at  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge, 
cxxxiv. — retires ;  is  a  barrister's  assist- 
ant; returns  to  College,  and  exhibits 
before  Queen  Elizabeth,  cxxxv. — made 
Margaret  Reader ;  his  popularity  at  St. 
Mary's  and  his  influence  in  Trinity 
Coll.  cxxxvi. — measures  to  silence  him 
commenced,  and  his  appeal  to  the 
Chancellor  of  the  University,  cxxxvii. — 
be  is  vindicated  to  the  Chancellor,  who 
favours  him,  but  does  not  prevent  his 
being  placed  under  prohibition,  cxxxviii. 
— his  six  propositions  for  Church  re- 
form, cxxxix. — Beza's  remarks  concern- 
ing him,  cxI. — the  University  Statutes 
altered  to  preclude  him  from  becoming 
Vice-Chancellor,  cxl. — of  his  being  dis- 
putatious, cxli. — his  expulsion  from  the 
University  ;  accused  of  perjury  ;  and 
his  remarks  on  it,  Ixxxiv.  cxlii.  —  his 
conduct  and  opinions  respecting  Uni- 
versity Titles  of  Degrees,  cxliii. — of  the 
personality  between  him  and  Whitgift, 
cxliv. — of  their  mode  of  warfare,  cxl  v. — 


he  is  endeavoured  to  be  depredated,  but 
it  fidls,  cxlvi. — of  the  hierarchy,  ift. — 
parallel    between  Latimer    and    Cart- 
wright;   and  aspect  of  the    State  re- 
ligion, cxlvii. — ^free discussion  restrained; 
evil  effiscts  of  that ;  and  gross  instance  of 
adulation,  ib.  cxlviiu — the  state  of  En- 
dowments ;  and  external  state  <^  reli- 
gion, cxlix.  d. — Cartwright's  condition 
after  his  expulsion,  di. — settles  at  Ant- 
werp and  Middleburg,  diL — account  of 
the  First  Admonition  to  the  Parliament, 
ih, — its  popularity ;  and  of  the  reply  to 
it  by  Whitgift  and  others,  div. — Cart- 
wri^t  composes  the  Second  Admoni- 
don;    account  of  it,  civ.  dvL — of  his 
"Replye"  to  Whitgift,    dviii.— the 
prindple  on  which  he  proposed  to  con- 
duct that  controversy,  zv.  clx. — warrant 
issued  for  his  apprehen8ion,dxL'— escapes 
to    Heidelberg,  dxu.  —  of    Whitgift's 
"  Defense  "    against    the  «  Replye ;" 
with  strictures  on  the  motto,  ib, — Ex- 
tracts, in  which  Whitgift  advaocet  the 
positions  HodLer  undwtook  to  mdn- 
tun,  clxiiL  dxiv. — posture  of  the  com- 
batants at  this  time;  and  the  Jesuit 
Ballard's  judgment  of  Whitgift's  Works, 
clxv. — Cartwright's  ''  Second  Replie," 
ib* — settles  again  at  Antwerp,  dadx. — 
returns,  and  is  apprehended ;  disgrace- 
ful exposure  resulting   from    it ;   his 
rdease,  ib,  dzz. — of  the  "  Rest  of  the 
Second  Replie,"  clxx. — ^that  work  doses 
the  controversy  between  him  and  Whit- 
gift; but  it  is  taken  up  by   Hooker, 
clxxiii.  22 — opinion   on  Hooker's  at- 
tempt, clxxiii. — time  occupied  by  Hooker 
on  his  Work,  clxxiv. — Cartwright  mean- 
while had  been  employed  on  the  Rhe- 
mists'   Testament,  ib. — ^particulars  re- 
specting it,  dxxv. — incidental  remarks 
on  Cartwright  and  Whitgift,  clxxviil — 
Lord  Burghley's  severe  letter  to  Whit- 
gift, clxxix.— discord  between  the  Coun- 
cil and  the  Prelates;   and   Wlutgift's 
duplicity,  clxxxi.  —  Cartwright's  mar- 
riage ;  and  family,  dxxxii. — appointed 
Master  of  the   Hospital  at   Warwick, 
clxxxiii.  —  the   Earl   of  Leicester,  his 
patron,  Ixxxiv.  clxxxiii. — summoned  to 
the  Star  Chamber  Court;  its  composi- 
tion and  fate,  ib. — severity  of  the  Pre- 
lates;  James,  then  King  of  Scotland, 
intercedes    for   Cartwright,   dxxxiv. — 
interview  between  the  High  Commis- 
sioners and  Cartwright,  ib. — results  of 
it,  cxc. — Cartwright  treated  vrith  less 
lenity  than  his  fellow  prisoners;  peti- 
tions Lord  Burghley  to  intercede  with 
Whitgift,  ib. — its  failure,  and  remarks 
on  it,  cxciii. — Petition  to  her  Majesty, 
cxciv. — when  released,  and  how,  cxdx. — 


INDEX. 


517 


retires  to  Warwick,  and  under  what  cir- 
cumstances, cc— endeavours  made  to 
implicate  him  in  the  affair  of  Hacket, 
cci. — is  again  silenced,  and  visits  Guern* 
sey,  cdi. — represented  as  disposed  to 
disavow  his  Presbyterian  principles,  ib. 
— ^his  final  residence  at  Warwick,  cciii.-— 
Fuller's  account  of  his  conduct  there, 
cdv. — his  expected  recantation  shewn  to 
be  futile,  ib.  —  his  pecuniary  circum- 
stances, and  liberality,  ib. — his  remark- 
able assiduity  ;  bodily  infirmities ;  and 
death  ;  with  remarks  on  his  being  under 
the  necessity  of  kneeling  tq  study,  ccv. 
— his  character  as  a  scholar,  and  list  of 
his  Works,  ccvi. — judgment  of  Divines 
respecting  him,  II.  221. 

Catalogue  of  the  Apostolical  Succession, 
required.  III.  112. 

Catediising;  its  design  and  usefulness,  II. 
45 — public,  a  kind  of  Preaching,  46. 

Catechism,  Church  -of-  England ;  defec- 
tive, II.  46— cited,  171,  213. 

Catechumens;  why  called  **  Hearers,"  II. 
46. 

Cathedral- singing;  treated  on,  II.  124. 
Bp.  Burnet's  remark  on  its  indecency, 
128. 

Cause,  First;  opinions  of  the  Heathen  on 
it,  I.  73. 

Cave,  Dr. ;  on  the  festival  of  the  Nativity, 

II.  332 — on  the  quarrels  of  Bishops, 

III.  158. 

Cawdrey,  Rob.;  resists  the  High-Com- 
missioners, I.  clxxxiv. 

Cecil,  Rev.  R.;  cited,  I.  xi. 

Sir  William.    See  Burghley. 

Ceremonies ;  on  the  Rule  of  **  decency," 
regarding,  I.  xxx. — ^the  Puritans  misre- 
presented, concerning  them ;  and  where- 
fore, ccv. — ^whatis  meant  by  them,  253, 
264--how  universal,  265 — their  use, 
ib. — ^how  far  primitive,  may  be  varied, 
269 — objections  against  the  Church  of 
England's,  as  Popish,  270 — those  ob- 

-  jections  seem  to  contradict  themselves, 
274 — not  therefore  to  be  abolished,  be- 
cause of  the  boasts  and  hopes  of  Papists, 
288 — indifferent ;  importance  of  such  to 
the  Church  of  England,  291 — not  in- 
different, when  established  by  Law, 
311— of  grief  on  account  of  them,  and 
its  remedy,  292 — are  not  always  to  be 
rejected  because  Jewish,  294— -scanda- 
lous, and  when  not,  305-— when,  through 
scandal,  to  be  removed;  and  when  not, 
309 — elder  Churches'  not  necessarily 
patterns,  311 — procedure  of  the  Church 
of  England  in  establishing  them,  320 — 
the  burden  of  Subscription  to  them,  II. 
104 — Cowper's  personification  of  them, 
107 — no  Church  without  some,  260. 

Certainty  of  Assurance  ;^  what,  III.  451. 


Certainty  of  Evidence ;  what,  ib, 
Chalmers,  Dr.  Thomas ;  on  the  Declaration 

substituted  for  the  Sacramental  Test, 

I.  xix. 
Charges,    Archidiaconal   and   Episcopal ; 

their  Secularity,  III.  236. 
Charity  hopeth  and  prayeth  for  all  men's 

Salvation,  and  why,  II.  167. 
Chark,  Mr. ;  of  him,  I.  cxviL  clxxvL 
Charles  I. ;  of  his  canonization,  I.  xlv.— 

commended  Hooker's  Ecclesiastical  Po- 
lity to  his  children,  ib. — ^result  of  that 

commendation,  66. 
II.;  Bp.  Gauden's  Dedication  to, 

I.  xliv. — cited,  311. 
Chatham,  Lord ;  cited,  I.  xviii.  xxiii. 
Chaucer;  cited,  I.  3;  II.  356,  360. 
Children,  made  Priests,  II.  427. 
Chorepiscopi ;    Bishops'  vicegerents,  III. 

130. 
Christ;  his  Coetemity,  I.  133;  II.  468 — 

and  Moses ;  their  Faithfulness  compared, 

I.  242 — ^his  Prayer  under  his  sufferings, 

II.  156 — ^in  what  respect  he  prayed, 
157 — the  second  Person  in  the  Trinity 
united  with  his  incarnation,  173 — but 
one  Person,  176 — ^hath  two  Natures, 
177 — which  have  distinct  properties, 
though  joined,  182 — what  his  Humanity 
gained  by  union  with  Deity,  182,  190 — 
eternal  generation,  union,  unction,  182, 
183 ;  III.  286 — ^his  Body  not  present 
every  where,  II.  187,  194 — ^how  said 
to  be  every  where,  as  Man,  191 — of  his 
delivering  up  the  Kingdom,  193 — ^how 
united  with  his  Church,  194 — imputa- 
tion of  his  Righteousness,  201 — ^his 
institution  of  Sacraments,  209,  530 — 
whether  he  bestows  the  power  of  Ab- 
solution, III.  59 — ^his  Authority  in  the 
government  of  the  World,  the  same  as 
ui  the  Church,  286. 

Christian  Guardian,  the;    cited,  I.  xiii. 
zcL;  IIL423. 

Christian  Letter,  A;  its  full  Title,  I. 
cxii. — its  effect  on  Hooker,  ib, — the 
Freikce,  I.  11;  II.  460— the  Deity  of 
the  Son,  183,  465— the  Coetemity  of 
the  Son,  and  Proceeding  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  I.  133;  II.  463— tiie  Holy 
Scriptures  contain  all  things  necessary 
to  Salvation,  I.  136;  II.  472— Holy 
Scripture  above  the  Church,  I.  158; 
II.  476— of  Free  WUl,  I.  90 ;  II.  480— 
of  Faith  and  Works,  I.  126;  IL484— 
Oie  Virtue  of  Works,  I.  94;  II.  488— 
Works  of  Supererogation,  I.  190;  II. 
492 — ^none  free  from  all  Sin,  164, 
495— Predestination,  168,  499 — ^Oie 
Visible  Church ;  and  of  the  Church  of 
Rome,  I.  201 ;  II.  503— of  Preaching, 
73,  513— of  the  Minister's  Office,  372, 
519 — of  the  Sacraments,  204,  525— of 


518 


INDEX. 


Christ's  Institution,  209,  530— ^eces- 
nty  of  Baptism,  2 1 5,  535 — of  Transub^ 
itantiation,  289,  539 — of  speculative 
doctrine,  401,  545 — of  Calvin  and  the 
Reformed  Churches  I.  22;  II.  551 — 
Schoolmen,  Philosophy,  and  Popery, 
444,  558 — Hooker's  style  and  manner 
of  writing,  445,  563,     See  Covel,  Dr. 

Christian   Observer,   the;  cited,  II.  50, 
488;  111.235,236. 

Religion;    reproached  for  No- 
velty, II.  21. 

Remembrancer,  the;  cited,  I. 


xxix.;  III.  475. 

Christmas;  one  hundred  and  thirty-six 
opinions  of  it,  II.  332. 

Chrysostom ;  on  Bishops'  Jurisdiction,  III. 
121 — cited,  II.  267,  333— a  remark 
on.  III.  124. 

Church;  Scripture  an  authority  above  it, 
I.  158,  193;    II.  476 — mystical   and 
vbible,  sound  and  unsound;  how  dis- 
tinguished, I.  194,201;  11.503 — not 
an  Assembly,  but  a  Society,  I.  206 — 
conditions  of  that  Society,  according  to 
Locke,  I.  xxvii. — ^its  Power  in  making 
Laws,  254 — Western  and  Greek;   of 
their  heresies,  II.  14 — ^its  Judgment; 
what  deference  due  to,  22 — its  Name ; 
whence  derived,  35 — has  many  accepta- 
tions 302 — ^now  a  term  of  Art,  III. 
12 — the  state  of  the ;  in  the  time  of 
Eusebius,  II.  39 — ^its  union  vrith  Christ 
here,  1 95 — visible ;  its  signification,  30 1 ; 
III.  386 — who  accounted  of  the  Visible, 
I.   197 — whether   its  Officers  may  be 
moulded  after  all  Civil  Governors,  III. 
195 — distinguished  from  the  Common- 
wealth, 252 — whether  both  it  and  the 
Commonwealth   be  the   same   Society, 
254,  256 — of  the  objection,  from  differ- 
ence of  affairs  and  offices,  255 — from 
the  Fathers  opposing  each  other,  258 — 
from  the  effects  of  its  punishments,  and 
those  of  the  State,  260.     See  Head  of 
the  Church. 

of  England ;  her  Ministers  divided 


into  parties,  I.  xvii. — ^its  forms  and 
opinions,  how  originated,  and  settled, 
xl. — has  no  Constitutional  existence, 
xlii. — ^in  danger  from  Herself,  xlvii. 

Churches;  the  first  edifice  for  a,  II.  31  — 
of  dedicating  them,  32,  35 — of  giving 
them  Names,  35—  of  their  Forms,  37 — 
their  sumptuousness,  ib.;  III.  220 — 
their  Holiness  and  virtue,  II.  41 — 
though  abused  to  superstitious  uses,  not 
to  be  destroyed,  42 — interest  of  Patrons 
in  them.  III.  1G9. 

Church  Goods ;  Lands,Offerings,Revenues, 
&c.  God's  property.  III.  211  —  this 
sentiment,  qualified,  II.  408 — Princes 
made  the  depositaries  of  them,  at  the 


Reformation;  and  consequences.  III. 
211 ;  of  the  Clergy's  right  to  their  use, 
217 — occasion  of  their  partition,  226 — 
sacrilege  to  alienate  them,  229 — conse- 
quences of  their  sacrilegious  alienation, 
242,  245. 

Church  Patron;  who  he  may  be.  III. 
169. 

Polity.     See  Ecclesiastical  Polity. 

Churching  of  Wom^n;  of  the  Rite,  II. 
354 — women  not^  anciently  excluded, 
as  unholy,  355 — of  the  woman's  attire, 
ib, — her  offerings,  termed  oblations,  356. 

Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  offices;  of  their 
union  in  the  same  person.  III.  175, 
178. 

Civil  Powers.    See  King. 

Cicero  and  Hooker  compared,  I.  148. 

Clarendon,  Lord ;  cited,  I.  clxxxiii. 

Clarke,  Samuel;  his  Life  of  Cartwright 
dted,  I.  cxxxiv.  &c. 

Clarkson,  David;  on  Liturgies,  II.  90, 
93. 

Clemens  Alexandrinus;  cited,  II.  333. 

Clergy;  whether  three, orders  of,  in  the 
New  Testament,  II.  390,  393— alleged 
to  be  the  chief  of  the  three  Estates  of  the 
Realm,  III.  177,  201 — God's  stewards, 
217 — have  not  an  exclusive  right  of 
principality  in  Church-government,  315. 

the     English     Episcopal,      State 

Officers,   II.  100  —  their  subserviency, 

I.  ccvi.  —  their  Body,  notorious  for 
factions,  ib, — their  hardships,  formerly, 

II.  109 — their  power  dangerous.  III. 
181 — of  their  titular  distinctions,  207 — 
their  wealth,  241. 

Jewish ;    their  Orders  and  Offices, 


II.  383— their  maintenance.   III.  220. 
See  Maintenance. 

Clerks ;  whom  so  termed  by  the  Fathers, 
II.  393. 

Codrington's  Life  of  the  Earl  of  Essex; 
cited,  I.  6. 

Collects;  of  their  shortness,  11.112 — on 
Confirmation,  and  Article  XXV.  con- 
tradictory, 283. 

Collier's  Ecclesiastical  History;  cited,  I. 
clxvi.  clxxxix. 

CoUinge,  Dr.  John ;  of  prescribed  Forms 
of  Prayer,  II.  92. 

Commission,  Court  of  High.     See  Court 

Commonalty ;  "  A  lamentable  complaint  of 
the,"  II.  82 — the  Nobility  averse  from 
worshipping  with  the,  428. 

Common- Prayer;  argument  against  Books 
of,  II,  84  —  of  the  Place  where  per- 
formed, 88 — of  the  minister  who  per- 
forms it,  89 — of  the  antiquity  of  prescribed 
Liturgies,  90  —  not  prescribed  in  the 
New  Testament,  92  —  of  exceptions 
against  it,  93,  115 — of  Forms  of 
Hymns,   93 — of  the   Common   Prayer 


INDEX. 


519 


being  Popish,  II.  95 — ea^ness  of  Reading 
it,  107— lengtli  of  it,  109— its  frequent 
Petitions  for  Temporal  blessings,  115— 
want  of  particular  ThanlLsgivings,  145 — 
of  ''  witnesses"  at  Baptism,  255.  See 
Forms  of  Prayer— -Prayer. 

Commonwealth ;  of  the  violence  of  Reli- 
gious dissensions  in  it,  I.  4.— of  its  dis- 
tinction from,  and  identity  with  the 
Established  Church,  III.  252,  254. 

Communicants ;  the  number  of,  II.  307. 

Communion.     See  Eucharist. 

•  —   of  Saints ;  what,  II.  202. 

Conder,  Josiah;  cited,  1.191;  11.135, 
136,  206,  213  ;  III.  204. 

Conferences;  the  Puritans  charged  with 
holding  irregular,  I.  cxcvii.  See  Dis- 
putation. 

Confession;  how  practised  by  the  primi- 
tive Chureh,  III.  13  —  by  the  Jews, 
17 — by  Protestants  abroad,  38 — in  the 
Church  of  England,  40. 

Auricular;     of    its    Scriptural 

authority.  III.  19 — its  rise,  progress, 
&c  21 — ^abused  by  Papists,  38,  66 — 
its  practice  in  the  Church  of  England, 
40. 

Confirmation;  its  antiquity,  II.  276  — 
appropriated  by  Bishops,  278 — ^its  seve- 
ration  from  Baptism,  279— Dr.  Whitby's 
judgment  on  this  rite,  279— objections 
and  replies  concerning  the  rite,  282—' 
Bp.  Burnet's  remarks  on,  283,  284 — 
Article  XXV.  and  the  Collect,  contra- 
dictory, 283. 

Congregational  Board  of  London;  ad- 
dressed from  America,  I.  cxiviii. 

■  Magazine;   cited,   I.  xvi. 

cxiviii. 

Congregationalists.     See  Independents. 
Consecration,  Ceremonial ;   of  the  holiness 
it  imparts  to  Places,  II.  41. 

■  —  Eucharistical;  no  ancient 
Form  of  Prayer  adapted  to  it,  II.  90. 

Constantine;  of  his  alleged  Conversion, 
II.  38  —  the  probable  motives  of  his 
adopting  Christianity,  III.  14 — effects  of 
his  profession  of  it,  304 — his  influence  in 
Church  affairs,  319. 

Constitution,  British ;  the  National  Church 
no  part  of  it,   I.  xlii. 

Contemplation  of  Natural  objects;  insuf- 
ficient to  produce  Belief,  II.  65. 

Contrition;  wherein  it  consists.  III.  10. 

Conventicles ;  their  inconveniency,  II.  33. 

Convocation  ;  Injustice  or  Timidity 
charged  on  the  Civil  Government,  re- 
specting it,  I.  XX. — when  it  ceased  de- 
liberating, ih.  —  mischiefi  arising  from 
the,  xxix. — conduct  of  those  of  1587, 
cxiviii. — Proceedings  of  that  of  1562, 
21 — conduct  of  that  of  1531  respecting 
the  Supremacy,  III.  279. 


Corona  Militis,  de;  account  of  Tertul- 
lian's,  ^168. 

Cosin,  Dr.  Richard;  cited,  I.  cxxv.  cci'$ 
II.  415. 

Cotton,  Charles;  his  lines  on  Hooker, 
Lli. 

Council ;  the  word  misapplied,  I.  43 — no 
trace  of  one  in  the  First  century,  III. 
139. 

■  Oeneral ;  Four  of  them  determine 

concerning  the  Nature  of  Christ,  II. 
187  —  to  be  called  and  dissolved  by 
Civil  Power,  III.  298.  /See  Jerusalem — 
Privy  Council — Synods — Trent 

Counsel  and  advice ,  of  whom  to  be  sought^ 
II.  103. 

Court  of  High  Commission;  a  query  re^ 
specting  it,  I.  (»vii.— (-opposition  be- 
tween Clerical  and  Lay  members, 
clxxxi. — Cartwright's  conference  with 
Bp.  A  ylmer  and  other  officers,  clxxxiv.-y 
its  auUiority  narrowed,  ih. — its  abolitioa 
and  character,  45.  —  Abp.  Whitgifl's 
connexion  with,  hinted  at.  III.  5.-* 
referred  to,  176. 

Courts,  Bishops' ;  how  pernicious,  III. 
235. 

Covel,  Dr. William;  of  his  Defenee  of 
Hooker,  I.  cxiL  cxxxiv.  clxxiv. — the 
Defence,  II.  449.    See  Christian  Letter. 

Coverdale,  Bp.     See  Frankfort 

Cowley,  Abr.;  on  God's  eternity,  11.312. 

Cowper,  William,  Esq. ;  his  Poems  dtedi 
IL  107,409,436;  IIL  20L 

Cox,  Richard,  Bp.  of  Ely;  opposed  the 
Puritans,  I.  21. 

Cranmer,  Abp. ;  cited,  II.  388. 

Geo. ;   his   Letter  "  Concerning^ 

the  new  Church-Discipline,"  I.  cxxiiL 

Creatures ;  none  on  earth  but  man,  capable 
of  Felicity,  L  121. 

Creedj  Apostles*;  credulity  respecting  it, 
IL  133. 

— —  Athanasian;  of  it,  II.  133 — when 
written,  139— of  its  anathema,  140^— 
its  use,  in  the  Liturgy,  143^— appealed 
to,  183. 

Nicene;  of  it,  IL  135. 

Creeds,  the  ancient;  Re?.  W.  Orme'sjudg;* 
ment  respecting  them,  II.  1-83. 

Critical  Review,  the ;  cited,  I.  ix.  Izv. 

Cross,  in  Baptism ;  of  it,  II.  256 — its  an- 
tiquity, use,  and  why  made  in  the  fore* 
head,  260  —  Texts  which  afford  no 
authority  for  it,  262 — Hooker's  treat- 
ment of  those  Texts,  263 — whether  to 
be  discontinued,  because  abused  by 
Papists,  263,  267  —  its  effects  on  the 
imagination,  266  —  Bp.  Burnet,  on  it 
being  a  sacramental  and  superstitious 
action,  269. 

Custom  ;  worthless  without  Truth,  II.  21. 

Cyprian;  of  him,  I.  164— his  opinioa  of 


520 


INDEX. 


.  custom^  II.  SI — a  promoter  of  Prelacy, 
in,  119— his  keen  dispute,  191. 

Cyiil;  miatal^en  on  the  Incarnation,  by 
Etttyches,  11.  178. 


D. 


Danii,  M.;  dted,  II.  251. 

David:  why  a  man  after  God's  own  heart, 

II.  8. 
Deaconesses;  of  them,  II.  393,394.  III. 

223. 
Deacons ;  tlieir  order  and  office,  II.  287 

— of  their  being  licensed  to  Preach, 

888. 
Deans ;  what,  III.  127. 
Death,  sudden  i  of  the  Petition  agunst  it, 

II.  151. 
Decency,  in  Religious  actions;  what,  I. 


Decree,  human ;  cannot  restrain  Christian 
liberty,  II.  328. 

Devil,  the;  on  his  tempting  Christ,  II. 
111. 

Dialogues,  Moral  and  Political;  dted,  I* 
d. 

Diary  of  a  Lover  of  Literature,  the;  dted, 
L84. 

Diocess,  a  Bishop's;  what.  III.  130  — 
suffers  from  a  Province,  133  —  whence 
the  distinction  arose,  ib, 

Dionydus ;  the  proverb  of  his  navigation, 
IL  407. 

Disdpline;  why  that  of  the  Puritans 
spread  among  the  people,  I.  23 — why 
among  the  learned,  33  —  what  might 
follow  from  it,  49— -difference  between 
Discipline  and  Doctrine,  209 — not  im- 
mutable, 240 — where  said  to  be  feulty 
among  the  Puritans,  261 — severity  of 
Penitential,  in  the  Primitive  Church, 
III.  54 — danger  of  remitting,  too  easily, 
56 — abused  by  Papists,  57. 

Dispensations ;  their  nature,  II.  242. 

Disputation,  public ;  where  to  be  held,  I. 
39 — not  to  be  admitted,  on  all  demands, 
40 — ^how  to  be  managed,  41 — the  means 
to  end  it,  42. 

D'Israeli,  I.  Esq. ;  dted,  III.  266. 

Dissent ;  why  connected  with  Religious 
freedom,  I.  ziii. 

Dissolution,  and  nullities;  contrary  to 
nature,  II.  235. 

— — — of  Religious  Houses  ;  not  un- 
just, III.  246. 

Distinction  and  division;  the  difference 
between,  I.  209. 

Divinations ;  Political  benefits,  among  the 
Romans,  II.  7. 

Division.     See  Distinction. 

Doctrine,  of  speculative,  II.  401,  545.  Sec 
Discipline. 


Dod,  John,  MA.;  preadi'ed  Cartwright's 

funeral  flermon,  L  cev. 
Doddridge,   Dr.  PhiHp;    dted,  IL    163, 

371,  434;  IIL   12,  102,  103,  ib.  113, 

186,287,475. 
Doles,  at  Funerals;  of  them,  II.  359. 
Dominion,  power  otf  in  England ;  whence 

its  origin,  and  to  whom  it  escheats,  III. 

270. 

,  Spiritual ;  its  power,  III.  263. 

See  Head  of  the  Clmrdi—Khiff— Su- 
premacy. 
Donations,  Endowments,  or  Foundations, 

Religious;   of  impairing  or  alienating 

them,  IL  405. 
Donatlsts  and  Arians;  of  their  rise  and 

schism,  IL  231. 
Doxologies;    explained,    II.    142.      See 

Gloria  PatrL 
Drunkenness;  Pittacus'  Law  respecting, 

L  113. 
Dver,  George,  Esq. ;  dted,  I.  dL — ityles 

'Hooker  a  Calvinist,  IIL  427. 


£. 


Easter ;  how  the  East  and  West  Churches 

.  differed  in  solemnizing  it,  I.  302. 

Ecdesiastical  Jurisdiction  ;  temporary  ma- 
nagement respecting,  I.  xxix. 

I  PoUty ;  its  prindplea  not  de- 

fined, I.  xxix — of  the  Matter  contained 

.  in  Hooker's  Treatise  on,  I.  47— why  he 
chose  this  Title,  206 — whether  neces- 
sary to  be  the  same  in  all  Churches, 
207— of  its  limitation  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament, ib.     See  Disdpline. 

Eclectic  Review,  the ;  dted,  I.  xL  xviii. 

Elders;  not  an  intermediate  Order,  III. 
147.     See  Presbyter. 

Elect ;  never  wholly  fall.  III.  403,  453, 
475 — God's  care  of  them,  while  exe- 
cuting his  judgments,  483. 

Election,  Reprobation,  and  Predestination, 
IL214. 

Eldon,  the  Earl  of;  dted,  I.  xxi. 

Ellis,  Henry,  Esq. ;  Roysd  Letters  edited 
by,  I.  xlv. 

Elizabeth,  Queen ;  was  arbitrary  and  Pa- 
pistical, I.  xxxiv. ;  III.  89 — Cartwright 
exhibits  before  her,  at  Canibridge,cxxxv. 
—  her  confidence  betrayed  by  Bishop 
Aylmer,  clxx. — ^Patron  of  the  English 
Episcopal  Church,  8,  21,  327;  III. 
245. 

Endowments,  Religious  ;  state  of  them  in 
Elizabeth's  reign,  I.  cxlix. ;  of  their 
lawfulness,  III.  210 — Wycliffe's  opinion 
respecting  them,  216. 

Epiphanius;  of  his  levity  and  ignorance, 
IIL  112. 

Episcopacy ;  occasion  of  its  overthrow,  I. 


INDEX. 


m 


zWL-^the  English  model  of  It  can  only 
subnst  under  Monarcby,xlTi. — equivocal 
phrase  of  Hooker,  respecting,  34 — by 
whom  oppossd  anciently,  III.  141 — in 
what  respect  opposed,  in  modem  times, 
144 — argued  to  be  a  human  invention, 
145-^Hoo]Ler'8  reply,  146 — its  neces- 
sity axgued  against,  154  —  Hooker's 
reply,  155 — that  Bishops  usurp  more 
power  than  formerly ;  replied  to,  159-— 

.  whether  condemned  in  Scripture,  or  by 
antiquity,  184 — Dr.  Doddridge's  remark 
on  the  negative  argument,  186.  See 
Bishops — Prelates. 

Epithets;  how  abused.  III.  207. 

Equity,  and  Law ;  not  contrary,  II.  27. 

Erastus;  on  Excommunication,  L  21. 

Error,  and  Heresy ;  in  what  they  differ, 
III.  388,  406. 

Essex,  the  Earl  of;  anecdote  of,  I.  6. 

Establishments,  Religious;  philosophical 
remarks  on,  I.  xxL — of  their  end,  de- 
sign, or  object,  xxv.— Palladium  of  the 
opponents  of,  xxxv. — effects  of  separat- 
ing the  Church  from  the  State,  xli. 

Estates,  public ;  more  have  decayed  from 
internal  disorders,  than  external  vio« 
lence,  I.  3. 

Eternal-generation;  Christ's,  II.  182;  III. 
286. 

Eternity  of  matter ;  maintained  by  Melis- 
sus,  II.  312. 

Eucharist ;  no  ancient  Forms  of  Prayer  for 
it,  II.  90 — not  to  precede  Baptism,  284 
— its  design  and  use,  ib, — of  curiously  in- 
quiring into  Christ's  presence  in  it,  286, 
294 — how,  Christ's  Body  and  Blood, 
288 — opinions  of  the  Fathers  on  this 
point,  292 — of  considering  on  the  Dis- 
putes concerning  it,  294 — of  distributing 
to  communicants  individually  and  not 
collectively,  297 — of  kneeling  on  re- 
ceiving, I.  ccv. ;  II.  299-— of  examina- 
tion of  Communicants,  300  —  Papists, 
conforming,  not  to  be  repelled  from  par- 
taking, ib, — fewness  of  Communicants ; 
remarks  on,  307^-of  it  being  adminis- 
tered at  mstrriages,  853 — the  Minister's 
power  to  exclude  from  it.  III.  41.  See 
Sacramentaries. 

Busebius;  his  cautious  relation  of  Con- 
stantine's  alleged  conversion,  &c.  II.  38 
— describes  the  state  of  the  Church  in 
his  own  time,  39. 

Eutychas;  his  error,  what,  II.  178, 
187. 

Evangelists ;  what  they  were,  II.  390. 

Evidence,  certainty  of;  what.  III.  451. 

Evident ;  necessity  of  something  being  so, 

1.95. 
Evil,  as  evil;  not  to  be  desired,  I.  91. 
Evils ;  not  curable  by  thebr  contraries,  L 
285. 


EhtaminatioD,  ielf;  Its  necessity,  III. 
476. 

Example  ;  of  that  of  the  aged,  and  of  pre- 
decessors in  Political  affairs,  II.  19,  &c 
— of  its  force,  261,  268,  273. 

Excommunication ;  sentiments  of  Puritans 
on,  I.  cxcvi.— does  not  shut  out  from 
the  mystical,  but  only  from  fellowship 
with  the  Church  visible  in  holy  duties, 
I.  205 — exercised  by  Bishops  alone, 
III.  170. 


F. 


Fabridus ;  on  the  year  of  Christ's  birth, 
II.  332. 

Faith ;  of  it  and  Works,  1. 126 ;  II.  484— 
the  difference  between  matters  of;  and 
those  of  Discipline  and  Polity,  I.  209 — 
not  produced  by  contemplation  of  na- 
tional objects,  II.  67-^ustification  by, 
at  variance  with  the  doctrine  of  Baptis- 
mal regeneration,  213 — its  eridence 
redsted  when  the  dispodtion  is  morally 
evil,  247 — ^its  Foundation ;  what,  IIL 
390, 398— what  it  is  to  hold  it,  400-* 
what  to  deny  it  directiy,  and  by  con- 
sequent, ib. — ^its  difference  in  the  good 
and  the  wicked,  401 — whether  once 
held,  it  can  be  directiy  denied,  403 — a 
Sermon  on  its  certainty,  450  — why 
weak  and  imperfect  in  some,  «&.— Sa- 
tan's stratagems  to  overthrow  it,  457 — 
once  received  never  entirely  foils,  475 
— ^a  Christian's  sole  basis,  491. 

Family  of  Love ;  their  notions,  and  Insti- 
tutor,  L  28. 

Farel ;  Calvin's  associate,  I.  14. 

Fasting ;  its  design  and  use,  II.  333. 

Fasts ;  what  observed  by  Jews,  II.  336— 
by  Christians,  339 — abused  by  Heretics, 
341 — of  oppositions  to  Fasts,  342  — 
their  agreement  with  and  difference 
from  Festivals,345 — more  requisite  than 
Festivals,  346 — their  political  benefits, 
348 — why  appointed  before  Festivals, 
ib, — the  Aposties  set  no  time  for  them, 
349.     See  Holidays. 

Father;  his  presence  not  required  at  his 
child's  baptism,  II.  254. 

Fathers,  the;  Cartwright  appeals  from 
their  authority,  I.  xv.— of  their  use  of 
negative  arguments,  162.  See  Roman- 
ists. 

Fear ;  it  and  zeal  the  roots  of  supersti- 
tion, II.  18 — a  Sermon  on.  III.  440 — 
its  nature,  447 — not  sinful  in  itself,  ib, 
— on  what  to  be  exercised,  448. 
Fenelon,  Abp. ;  on  kings  interfering  with 
religion,  I.  xxiv. 

Festivals;  cause  of  their  institution,  II. 
311 — how  to  be  celebrated,  314— • 
whether  idolatrous,  t6. — what  days  to 


522 


INDEX. 


lie  obtenred,  818  —  objections  oonsi* 
dered,  820 — their  agreement  with,  and 
difference  jfrom  Fast-days,  345.  See 
Holidays. 

Fidd,  John,  A.M.;  re]mted  to  be  one  of 
the  Admonitioners,  I.  cliiL  22. 

First-Cause;  opinions  of  Heathens  con- 
cerning it,  I.  73. 

Fletcher,  Rev.  Joseph,  A.M. ;  cited,  I.  xvi. 

Food ;  of  the  Laws  respecting  it,  I.  147. 

Form  ;  in  inanimate  things,  answers  to  the 
soul,  I.  79. 

Forms  of  Prayer ;  no  ancient  one  adapted 
to  the  Eucharist,  II.  90  —  whether 
primitive  Christians  used  those  of 
Jews,  91 — the  Lord's  Prayer,  not  pre- 
scribed in  exact  words,  ib, — no  Public 
Form  prescribed  in  the  New  Testament, 
92. 

Fortitude ;  Religious,  the  only  true,  II.  5. 

Foster,  Sir  M. ;  on  Ecclesiastics  being 
admitted  into  the  pubUc  administration, 
IIL  181. 

Foundation.     See  Faith. 

Foundations,  Religious.     See  Donations. 

Frabkfort;  troubles  at,  (the  History  of, 
written  by  Bp.  Coverdale,)  I.  21. 

Freake,  Bp. ;  summons  Cartwright,  I. 
ccii. 

Free-WiU.    See  Will. 

— — . ,  o£ferings ;  the  Primitive  Church 

supported  by,  III.  216,  222,  226. 

Fulke, Dr. William;  cited,I.clxxvL  clxxvii. 
II.  318— his  character,  94. 

Fuller,  Dr.  Thomas ;  cited,  I.  Ixxxii.  cv. 
cxi.  cxvi.  cxxv.  cxxxv.  &c. 

Fulman's  MS.  Hist,  of  C.  C.  Coll.  Oxford  ; 
cited  I.  Ivil.  Ixiii.  cxv. 

Funerals ;  of  mourning  attire  at,  II.  357 
— processions  at,  ib.  —  Sermons  and 
Orations  at,  358  —  testification  of  hope 
of  a  Resurrection,  at  them,  359 — offices 
at,  used  by  Jews  and  Christians  auci- 
entiy,  360.     See  Burial-office. 


G. 


Galatians ;  of  their  joining  Circumcision 
with  Faith,  IIL  391,405. 

Gauden,  Bp. ;  his  dedication  of  Hooker's 
Works  to  Charles  II.,  I.  xliv. — on  what 
occasioned  the  overthrow  of  Episcopacy, 
xlvi.  —  said  to  have  fabricated  the 
"  Eikon  Basilik^,"  xlviii. — his  ambi- 
guous character,  ib. — cited,  xci.  c.  cv. 
cxviii. — his  account  of  Hooker's  slander, 
ex. — suspected  to  have  mdiscreetly  in- 
troduced a  remarkable  passage  into 
Hooker's  Text,  III.  110. 

Generalities  ;  danger  of  wholly  following, 
n.  27. 

Generation  of  the  Son  of  God.  See  Christ 
— Eternal- Gen. 


Geneva;  the  Service  Book  of,  I.  21 — 
Answer  of  the  College  at,  to  Knox, 
respecting  Baptism,  204  —  the  Church 
of,  follows  the  Papists  in  some  Ceremo- 
nies, 278.     Su  Calvin. 

Gentleman's  Magazine ;  cited,  I.  iz. 

Gentlemen ;  why  they  should  be  induced 
to  become  Clergymen,  II.  429 — of  the 
Religion  of  a.  III.  91. 

Germanic  Circles ;  of  them.  III.  203. 

Gestures;  of  different,  at  Prayers,  11.105 
— of  Fiety,  what,  299. 

Gibson,  Bp.;  cited,  II.  353. 

Gilbye,  A. ;  mention  of,  I.  clxii.  22. 

Gillespie,  Geo. ;  cited,  II.  41,  218,314, 
318,  325. 

Glaucus ;  the  old  saying  of,  from  Homer, 
IL  409. 

Gloria  Patri ;  why  the  usual  conclusion  of 
Psalms,  &c  II.  140 — used  against  the 
Arians,  141 — their  Doxology,  orthodox 
in  words,  142— its  utility  in  the  English 
Liturgy,  143 — frequency  of  recurrence, 
ib. 

God ;  why  he  permits  frailties  in  great  and' 
good  men,  I.  39 — ^is  unsearchable,  72— 
a  law  to  himself,  73 — why  the  effects 
of  his  Power  limited,  74 — does  nothing 
without  Reason,  ib. — ^his  Glory,  153 — 
the  end  and  excellency  of  his  Word,  II. 
60~how  all  things  his  Offspring,  196— 
to  be  honoured  with  our  substance, 
395 — Ecclesiastical  Goods,  &c.  his  pro- 
perty, III.  211— that  He  "  may  be  all 
in  all,"  how  to  be  understood,  289. 

Godfathers;  referred  to,  I.  178;  II. 
229,  248 — Question  between  Boniface 
and  Augustine,  respecting,  249 — no 
Parent  to  answer  as,  254 — of  being 
termed  "  Witnesses,"  255 — the  office, 
an  innovation,  ib. — of  being  represented 
by  proxies,  ib. — what  the  Puritans 
thought  of  Godfathers,  257,  258. 

Godwin,  William,  Esq.;  on  the  insincerity 
of  Chas.  I.,  I.  xlv. 

Goodman,  Christopher;  his  lame  recanta- 
tion, I.  clxxxix. 

Goodness ;  its  degrees,  and  whence  it  pro- 
ceeds, I.  84 — how  to  be  distinguished 
from  evil,  93 — how  to  be  discerned,  ib; 

Good- Works;  of  them,  I.  94,  123,  126. 
IL  484,  488;  IIL  395,  411.  See 
Works. 

Gospel,  the ;  promotes  Anabaptism,  in  the 
opinion  of  Abp.  Whitgift,  I.  62. 

Government,  PubUc;  how  and  when  it 
began,  I.  109~its  kinds,  arbitrary,  t6. — 
dependent  on  Religion,  II.  366,  &c 

Grace ;  before  and  with  Baptism,  II.  213 — 
no  falling  from,  entirely,  IIL  403,  454, 
475. 

Graham,  Rev.  W. ;  on  Episcopacy  in 
England,  I.  xxvi. 


INDEX. 


52S 


Granger,  Rev.  Jas. ;  his  B!og.  Diet  cited, 

I.  Ixxvi.  Ixxviii.  45  ;  11.  90. 
Grftnt,  Rev.  Johnson ;  referred  to,  I.  xvi« 
Grief;  when  reprovable.  III.  441. 
Grimshawe,  Rev.  T.  S. ;    on  the  internal 

condition  of  the  National  Church,  I. 

xlvii. 
Grindal,  Abp. ;  of  him,  I.  cxxxvii.  21; 

cited,  II.  84,  244. 
Grotius,  H. ;  on  Ecclesiastical  History,  III. 

199. 
Gualter;  of  his  Discipline,  I.  20. 
Gunton's  Hist  of  Peterborough ;  dted,  I. 

Ixxxvi. 


H. 


Habakkuk's  Futh;  a  Sermon  on,  III. 
450. 

Hacket,  William ;  account  of,  I.  cci.  4. 

Habits,  Clerical ;  of  one  defiled  with  super- 
stition, II.  97 — not  used  in  the  first 
three  Centuries,  98 — the  imposing  of 
them  deprecated  by  Whitgift,  I.  cxli. ; 

II.  395 — of  their  being  proper  for  dis- 
tinction, 395. 

Hale,  Sir  Matthew;  cited,  II.  163. 
Hall,  Bp. ;  cited,  I.  cxxiv.  22;  II.  324. 
— ' —  Rev.  Robert,  A.  M. ;    cited,  TI.  8 ; 

III.  293. 

Hallam,  Henry,  Esq. ;  cited,  I.  xii.  xiii. 
ciii.  exxi.  cxxii.  21,  ib,  66,  148. 

Halting  (or  hesitation);  condemned.  III. 
469. 

Hamilton,  Rev.  Richard  Winter;  cited, 
I.  xviii.  xxxiv.  xli.  xlii. 

Hammond,  Dr. ;  on  Elders,  or  Subject- 
Presbyters,  III.  147. 

Hanbury,  Benj. ;  his  "  Historical  Re- 
search," cited,  I.  cxxvii. 

Harmony;  its  correspondency  with  the 
Soul,  II.  123. 

Hawkins,  Sir  John ;  cited,  I.  xxxvii. 

Head  of  the  Church ;  of  its  application  to 
the  King,  III.  278— not  to  him,  in  the 
same  sense  as  to  Christ,  282 — how  ap- 
plied to  one  and  the  other,  283,  293 — 
whether  contradictory  and  absurd  when 
applied  to  the  King,  285,  297 — of  the 
necessity  of  such,  under  Christ,  290 — 
applied  to  the  King  and  the  Pope  dif- 
ferently, 295. 

Hearers.     See  Catechumens. 

Heber,  Bp. ;  dted,  I.  x.  xi.  xviii.  —  put 
a  restraint  on  free  inquiry,  xxxii. — 
restricts  the  ''  peculiar  hopes  of  grace," 
to  Diocesan  Clergymen,  III.  101. 

Heidelberg ;  the  Church  of,  I.  20. 

Henriciani;  whether  justly  termed  He- 
retics, III.  219. 

Heresy ;  proceedings  of  the  Nicene  Council 


to  expel  it,  II.  135~&ilure  of  expe- 
dients respecting  it,  136 — does  not  se- 
parate from  the  Visible  Church,  304^* 
what  it  is  by  the  Laws  of  England,  HI. 
265 --how  it  differs  from  Error,  388, 
406— what  it  is,  474. 
Heretics;  whom  so  termed  unjustly.  III. 

219. 
Hezekiah;  of  his  destroying  the  Brasen 

Serpent,  II.  268. 
Hicks,  Michael,  Esq. ;  mentioned,  I.  cdi. 
Hierarchy ;  its  apex  Popedom,  III.  136. 
High'Commission.    See  Court 
Hoadly,  Bp.;  of  Athanasius'  Creed,  II. 

140-- of  the  Burial  Office,  361. 
Hobby,  Sir  Edward ;  anecdote  of,  I.  xxxiii. 
Hoker.     See  Hooker. 
Holidays;    Baxter  and  others,  upon,  II. 
332— the  number  of  them,  335.     See 
Fasts — Festivals. 
Holy  Ghost;  the  Proceeding  of  the,  1. 133 ; 
II.  468 — of  the  sin  against,  83 — ^how 
given  and  received  in  Ordination,  375 — 
the  words  *'  Receive,"  &c.  in  no  andent 
Ritual,  ib. — ^the  case  of  Saul  and  Barna- 
bas, III.  113 — when  indecorously  men- 
tioned, 211.     iSfee  Spirit 
Home,  Henry  (Lord  Kames) ;   dted,  I. 

xxix. 
Homily,  Tenth;  of  its  exordium,  I.  148. 
Honour;  to  whom  due,  and  why,  III. 
192 — ^how  to  be  expressed,  193 — why 
its  outward  tokens  are  in  themselves 
mean  and  trivial,  ib, — why  due  to  the 
Clergy,  203,  206.     See  Bbhops— Pre- 
lates. 
Hooker,  Richard ;  styled  the  ''  Father  of 
the  Whigs,"  I.  xiii. — effect  of  his  poli- 
tical principles,  ib, — ^his  propositions  in 
the  Eccles.  Polity,  as  deduced  by  Neal, 
xxxvii. — his  Life  byGauden ;  dted,xliv. 
xlvii.  Iv.  xci.  c.  cv.  cxviii.  cxxxiii. — 
his  LiFB,  by  Walton,  xlix. — Lines  on, 
by   Cotton,  IL — stated  to  be  "unan- 
swered," Hi. — ^his  patronymick,  proba- 
bly HoRER,  Iviii. — that  word  applied 
to    him,   II.  360 — slighted    by    Lord 
Biirghley  whose  patronage  he  had  sup- 
plicated, T.  ci. — ^incredibility  of  his  Slan- 
der; and  Gauden's  account  of  it,  cviii. 
ex. — his  death,  how  hastened,  cxii. — 
his  Will,  cxv. — whether  his  Wife  was  a 
Puritan;  and  of  her  extraordinary  death, 
cxvi.  cxvii. — ^his  epitaph,  and  monu- 
mental inscription,  cxxxiiL — description 
and  probable  fate  of  his  scheme  of  Ec- 
clesiastical  Polity,  clxxiii. — how  long 
he  was  employed  on  it,  clxxiv. — avows 
himself  a  Competitor  against  Cartwright, 
22— fatal  effect  of  his  Work  on  Jas.  II. 
66— his  Calvinism,  III.  427. 
Horn,  Bp. ;  cited,  II.  244. 
Horton,  S  ;  Hooker's  Parish  Clerk,  f.  vi. 


6S4 


INDEX. 


Honley,  Bp.flii8'character  of  Warburton's 

Alliance,  I.  xxv. 
Hospinian;  cited,  II.  41. 
Hudibnu;  cited,  II.  435. 
Human  authority ;  how  fiur  to  be  urged,  I. 

177. 
Hume,  David;   Hist,  of  Eng.   dted,    I. 

exxxv.  exxxvi.  cxlviiiL  cxc.  45;    II. 

445 ;  III.  279. 
Hymns ;  Forms  of,  no  argument  for  Forms 

of  Prayer,  II.  93. 
Antiphonal ;  a  correction  relating 

to,  II.  125 — no  certainty  that  the  first 

Christians  used,  126 


I. 


Idleness  and  Rest;  distinguished,  11.316. 

Idolaters;  their  miserableness,  II.  42 — not 
to  be  destroyed  because  the  Canaanites 
were,  43. 

Idolatry ;  a  Cause  of  it,  I.^  102. 

Ignatius;  cited,  II.  87-^ his  authority 
untenable.  III.  101. 

Ignorance  in  the  Clergy ;  its  true  Cause, 
II.  425— rin  some  cases  not  remediable, 

•  426 — its  state  in  recent  times,  437 — 
not  to  be  suffered  unnecessarily,  III. 
232. 

Images,  the  Popish  doctrine  of;  appro- 
priated to  Places,  II.  41. 

Imagination,  the  ;  described,  II.'262. 

Imposition  of  hands;  an  ancient  Cere- 
mony in  Blessing,  &c.  II.  276. 

Inauguration  of  Kings;  confers  no  right 
to  the  Crown,  III.  269. 

Incarnation  of  God ;  in  the  person  of  Christ, 

II.  172  —  diversly  misinterpreted  by 
Heretics,  174 — the  doctrine,  expressed 
in  four  words,  in  refutation  of  so  many 
heresies,  188. 

Independent;    all  Churches  originally  so, 

III.  139,  202. 

Independents,  or  Congregationalists ;  their 
steady  attachment  to  Toleration,  I. 
xvi. — their  principles  summarily  con- 
tained in  Barrow's  Treatise  on  the 
Pope's  Supremacy,  xxi. 

Indulgences,  Popish;  exposed.  III.  58. 

Infants,  dying  unbaptized ;  their  case,  II. 
218 — of  Boniface  and  Augustine,  re- 
garding Interrogatories,  at  the  Baptism 
of,  249 — Fathers  not  to  be  present  at 
their  Children's  Baptism,  254. 

Injunctions  of  Queen  Eliz.;  cited,  II. 
106,  335. 

Intention  of  the  Minister,  in  the  admini- 
stration of  Sacraments ;  presumed  to  be 
sincere,  II.  209. 

Interrogatories  in  Baptism ;  touching 
Faith,  II.  246  —  proposed  to  Infants 
through  Sponsors,  248,  255. 


Irenseus;  his  authority  untenable.    III. 

101. 
Israelites;  their  case  respecting  Idolatrous 

neighbours,  I.  278 — of  their  destroying 

Places    used  for    Idolatrous    purposes, 

II.  42. 
Ithadus;   lus  zeal  agunst  Priscillianists, 

1.6. 


J. 


Jackson,  Henry;  his  Address  to  the 
Reader,  III.  377-— dedication  to  Prin- 
cipal Summaster,  462. 

Dr.  Thomas;  cited,  II.  163. 

Jacob;  his  example  fatal  to  Tithes,  II. 
400. 

James;  of  his  AposUeship,  III.  99 — 
his  abode  in  Jerusalem,  no  proof  that 
he  was  restrained  to  that  place  and 
vicinity,  ib. 

James  I.;  his  apothegms,  I.  xlvi. — hit 
approadi  towards  Popery,  liv. — styles 
his  son,  a  little  god,  cxlix. 

II.;  conduct  of  the  Churdi  of  Eng- 
land to,  I.  xxxvii — made  a  confirmed 
Papist  by  Hooker's  Work,  66. 

— —  Rev.  John  Angell;  dted,  I.  xvi. 

Jenyns,  Soame,  Esq.  his  philosophical  re- 
marks on  Religious  Establishments,  I. 
xxi.-— Strictures  on  him,  xxvi. 

Jerom ;  his  notions  of  Episcopacy,  III. 
104,  121— Hooker's  qualified  addition 
to  a  "  dangerous  answer  to,"  109 — 
Dr.  Mosheim's  character  of;  with  a  re- 
mark on  it,  124. 

Jerusalem  ;  of  the  Council  of,  I.  43,  297 
— the  Church  at,  a  remark  on.  III. 
158  —  the  Coundl  of  (so  called),  no 
argument  of  authority  for  the  Clergy  to 
make  Laws,  325. 

Jesus  ;  of  bowing  at  his  Name,  II.  106. 

Jewel,  Bp.  patronizes  Hooker,  at  fifteen 
years  of  age,  I.  lix. — anecdote  of  them, 
Ix. — in  favour  of  leaving  off  the  Sur- 
plice and  Popish  Ceremonies,  21. — his 
opinion  of  Calvin,  22 — his  distinction 
respecting  the  qualification  of  a  Bishop, 
III.  99 — of  an  exclusive  authoritative 
power  in  Bishops,  168. 

Jewish  Ceremonies  and  Rites;  how  far 
lawfully  retained  by  Christians,  I.  295. 

Clergy.     See  Clergy. 

"  Regiment;    a  remark   on,    III. 
172. 

Jews,  their  revolt  from  Christianity ;  whe- 
ther the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost? 
III.  83 — their  destruction,  the  result  of 
their  Infidelity,  492. 

Johnson,  Dr.  Samuel ;  dted,  I.  xii. 

Jones,  Rev.  John;  his  "  Free  and  candid 
Disquisitions,"  cited,  I.  xviii. ;  II.  119, 
143,  148— shews  that  the  Lord's  Prayer 


INDEX. 


535 


is  f  i^ined  to  be  used  seven ;  and  may- 
be required  more  than  thirteen  times  in 
.one  day,  11.  118. 

Joseph's  brethren;  exemplify  good  and 
evU,  III.  82. 

Josephus;  his  curious  argument  for  but 
one  Temple,  III.  220. 

Jude's  Epistle;  two  Sermons  on  part  of, 
III.  462. 

Judge ;  of  the  nullity  of  his  acts,  without 
jurisdiction,  II.  238. 

Judges,  in  causes  Ecclesiastical ;  ordinary 
or  commissionary.  III.  312,  317. 

Judgment,  private;  discouraged  by  the 
Church  of  England,  I.  xxxL — Hooker 
terms  it,  an  **  insolency,"  184  — 
matter  for  the  opponents  of,  to  weigh, 

II.  138 — not  questioned  before  the 
corruption  of  Christianity;    and  why, 

III.  388. 

Jurisdiction ;  a  distinct  power  from  Order, 
III.  4 — to  what  end  said  to  be  given, 
ib, — the  power  questioned,  in  certain 
respects,  ib. — Milton's  censure  of  it,  42 
—  derived  from  the  Jews,  117.    See 

■    Ecclesiastical  Jurisdiction. 

Justice;  antecedent  to  positive  laws,  I. 
234 — ^inseparable  from  Religion,  II.  4. 

Justification ;  at  variance  with  the  doc- 
trine of  Baptismal  Regeneration,  II. 
213 — a  Discourse  of,  III.  377 — what, 
in  the  doctrine  of  the  Romish  Church, 
379  —  what,  in  the  Anglican,  381  — 
wliat,  according  to  the  Jews,  383 — 
how  it  difibrs  from  Sanctification,  382—- 
by  Christ  alone ;  how  to  be  understood, 
412 — the  gift  of  God,  through  Grace, 
431. 

Juzon,  Bp. ;  case  of  consdence  submitted 
to  by  Charles  I.,  I.  xlv. 


K. 


Kames,  (Henry  Home,)  Lord;  dted,   I. 

Kaye,  Bp. ;  dted,  II.  373  ;  III.  101. 

Kennet,  Bp. ;  dted,  I.  xiv. 

Kent  Herald,  the;  dted,  I.  xxxiv. 

King ;  his  office  united  with  that  of  the 
Priest,  by  the  ancients ;  and  why,  III. 
1 82 — an  axiom  of  the  Civil  Law  concern- 
ing his  actions,  183 — had  asupremacy  in 
Ecclesiastical  afllurs  among  the  Jews, 
251  —  has  the  same  power  over  the 
Church  of  England,  252  —  by  what 
Right  he  has  it,  266 — in  what  sort, 
267 — ^in  what  measure,  271 — by  what 
rule,  276 — according  to  what  example, 
277 — what  the  ceremonies  of  his  inau- 
guration denote,  273 — in  a  limited 
sense,  the  Head  of  the  Church,  278— 
power  to  call  and   dissolve  Coundls, 


298 — ^power  to  make  tmn  concerning 
Ecdesiastical  affairs,  304 — ^power  in  all 
Causes  and  over  all  Persons,  as  well. 
Ecclesiastical  as  Civil,  310 — ^his  power 
extends  to  Courts  when  he  does  not 
sit  in  person,  316 — the  nature  of  his 
Supremacy  in  all  causes ;  and  how  re- 
struned,  321 — ^his  consent  necessary  to 
the  making  of  Laws,  326.  See  Domimon 
— Head  of  the  Church — Supremacy. 

King,  Bp.  H, ;  his  Letter  to  Walton,  I. 
xlix. — a  note  respecting  him,  liv. 

,  Bp.  J.  Bartholomew  Legale  bmut 

in  his  jurisdiction,  II.  lii. 

,  Lord ;  cited,  I.  xxi. 

— ,  Sir  Peter;  (afterward  Lord  Chan- 
cellor,) cited,  II.  134. 

Kingdom's  MS.  Collections;  dted,  I. 
clxix. 

Kiss,  holy ;  of  it,  I.  36. 

Kneeling,  at  the  Sacrament;  on  what 
ground  the  Puritans  resisted  its  impo- 
sition as  a  Rite,  I.  cev. — Cartwright's 
opinion  concerning  it,  II.  259,  299 — 
of  it  being  a  dgnificant  sign,  260  — 
Hooker  calls  it  "  the  gesture  of  piety," 
299 — he  admits  it  to  be  a  departure 
from  Christ's  example,  300. 

Knipperdoiling;  his  cruel  execution,  III. 
308. 

Knox,  Dr.  Y. ;  dted,  II.  436. 


L. 


Laing,  Malcolm;    History  of   Scotland, 
dted,  I.  xlviii. 

Laity;  Private  judgment  in  matters  of 
Fdth,  their  safest  guide,  I.  184 — an 
order  of,  II.  373 — when  they  may  ex- 
ercise the  Functions  of  the  Clergy,  ib. 
»-not  endued  with  Ecclesiastical  power 
though  they  chose  the  first  Deacons, 
III.  i62—their  right  of  electing  Mhii- 
sters  infringed  by  the  Diidpline  of  the 
Puritans ;  and  by  that  of  the  Episcopa- 
lians, 165 — never  suffered  to  confer  the 
Power  of  Order,  167 — their  consent 
necessary  in  Ecclesiastical  Laws,  326. 

Landor,  W.  S. ;  cited,  I.  xv:  xxiii. 

Lands ;  none  possessed  by  the  Apostles, 
&c.  IIL  215. 

Langfaome,  Revds.  J.  and  W. ;  their  cen- 
sure of  a  superstitimi  respecting  Num- 
bers, II.  402. 

Languet,  Hubert,  author  of  Vindidae  con- 
tra Tyrannos,  111.  269. 

Lansdowne  MSS.  dted,  I.  Ixx.  dxx. 
dxxxiv.  cxd.  ib.  cxdii. 

Lardner,  Dr.  N. ;  referred  to  I.  193 ;  II. 
38;  dted,  21,  135;  99,  116. 

Latimer,  Bp. ;  parallel  between  his  case 
and   Cartwright's,  I.   cxlvii.— of  his 


526 


INPEX« 


introdudng  Cardi  into  his  Sennon,  III. 
463. 

Laud,  Abp. ;  instanced,  L  xxx.  cited,  II. 
106. 

Law,  in  general ;  what  it  is,  1. 72. 

— ,  Eternal;  what  it  is,  I»  ib» 

— ,  Unsearchal)le,  I.  Ut, 

,  set  by  God  himself,  what,  1. 73,  95. 

,  that  observed  by  Natural  agents ; 
what,  I.  76,  95. 

,  observed  by  Angels  ;  what,  I.  81. 

,  that  by  which  Man  is  to  be  guided ; 

what,  I.  84. 

,  defined  according  to  its  subjects,  I. 
95. 

■    ■    of  Reason ;  what,  and  how  known, 
1.99. 

— ,  the  benefit  of  keeping  it,  I.  103. 

Laws ;  the  deed  of  the  whole  Body  Politic, 
I.  40— of  submitting  to  those  in  being, 
46 — why  they  who  oppose  them,  are 
more  popular  than  they  who  defend 
Laws,  69  — Politic,  to  what  end  or- 
duned,  106,  110 — by  whom  to  be 
made,  111  —  whence  they  have  their 
force,  f 6.  —  why  various,  112  —  mixed 
and  merely  human,  how  they  differ, 
114  —  of  Nations;  their  use,  115 — 
primary  and  secondary;  what,  117 — 
supernatural;  why  revealed,  119  — 
Natural  and  Rational,  why  set  down 
In  Scripture,  127 — Divine ;  the  benefit 
of  their  being  written,  129,  134 — how 
to  judge  of  Laws,  1 42 — who  to  judge 
of  them  ;  and  why,  183 — when  well  or 
ill  made,  231 — Positive;  did  not  ori- 
ginate Justice,  234 — when  mutable  and 
when  not,  235 — of  Christ  and  Moses  ; 
how  they  differ,  242 — whether  Christ 
hath  forbidden  all  change  of  his  Laws,  ib. 
254  —  Moral  and  Ceremonial ;  how 
they  differ,  244 — inconveniences  and 
danger  of  altering  Laws,  320 — they 
must  be  understood  according  to  the 
rules  of  natural  equity,  II.  217 — Hu- 
man and  divine ;  their  difference,  237 
—-whether  human,  have  what  God 
leaveth  free  subject  unto  them,  324 — 
— Ecclesiastical ;  by  whom  to  be  made, 
III.  301,322;  how  far  human,  may 
appoint  men  what  to  believe,  323 — how 
how  far  to  be  obeyed,  329. 

Lawful;  ambiguity  of  the  term,  III.  97. 

Lawson,  J.  P.,   M.  A.  cited,  I.  xiv.  xv. 
xvii.  clxvi. 

Lay-Baptism  ;  whether  valid,  II.  226. 

Learning  in  the  Clergy  ;  not  always  to  be 
expected,  II.  425 — the  want  of  it  does 
not  vacate  their  commission,  433. 
Legends ;  why  abolished,  II.  56. 
Lessons ;  of  the  intermingling  them  with 
the  public  service,  II.  112. 


Letter,  a  ChristiaiL    See  Christian  letter. 
Letten  Commendatory ;  abused,  IL  380. 
Lever,  Thomas,  B.  D.  mentioned,  I.  22. 
Libellatici ;  who  they  were.  III.  22. 
Licences,  to  eat  meat  in  Lent,  I.  Izziz. 
Limborch;  cited,  II.  163. 
Lingard's  History  of  England;  dtedy  I. 

46. 
Linus ;  of  the  link  he  formed  in  the  chain 

of  Succession,  III.  99. 
Litanies;    their  antiquity    and   use,   II. 

130. 
Liturgy ;  Lord  Chatham's  character  of  it 

I.  xviiL  —  indifference    to  it   by    the 

Royalist  Clergy  in  the  time  of  Charles 

I.,  I.  xlvi.    See  Common  Prayer. 
Locke,  John  ;    dted,  I.  xxiii.  xxvii.  xxx. 

xl.  86,  87,  89,  105,    106,   108,  109, 

111,  112,  117,  145,  233. 
Lombard,  Peter,  styled  the  Master  of  Seu- 

tences ;  dted,  I.  20  ;  III.  45. 
IiOrd*s  Prayer,  the ;  of  its  frequent  use  in 

the  Liturgy,  II.  116 — different  versions 

of  it  in  Matthew,  Luke,  and  the  Liturgy, 

118. 
L'Oste,  Rev.  J.,  LL.B. ;  dted,  I.  xiiL  III. 

127. 
Love.     See  Family  of. 
Lowth ,  Bp. ;  cited,  I.  xi. 
Ludus,  King;    the  history  of,  &bulous, 

in.  90. 


M. 


Macedonius;  his  heresy,  II.  175. 

Machiavel ;  to  whom  he  attributed  the  pre- 
servation of  Religion,  III.  157. 

Maclaine,  Dr.  A.     See  Mosheim,  passim. 

Magee,  Abp. ;  on  the  Thirty-nine  Articles 
failing  to  prevent  diversity  of  opinions, 

I.  xvii. 

Magistracy;    faithful  Ministers  have    no 

leisure  for.  III.  178. 
Magistrates ;  how  far  resistance  to,  sinful, 

in.  328. 
Magnificat ;  its  use  in  the  Church  Service, 

II.  128. 

Maintenance  of  the  Clergy;  among  the 
the  Jews,  how  liberal,  III.  220 — should 
be  so  among  Christians,  222,  244 — how 
it  was  with  the  Church  of  England  in 
Hooker's  time,  248  —  its  alienation, 
sacrilege,  229,  245. 

Man ;  aspires  to  a  conformity  with  God, 
I.  84 — by  what  degrees  he  attained  to 
knowledge,  92 — the  happiness  or  per- 
fection he  aims  at,  119  —  no  other 
creature,  in  the  world,  capable  of  feli- 
city, 121  —  how  it  must  be  attained, 
123  —  the  best  men  otherwise,  not 
always  the  best  as  respects  society; 
and  why,   146 — how  far  man's  judg- 


INDEX. 


527 


Bleat  shotdd  have  autbortty,  185 — why 
men  are  natnnUy  desirous  Co  seem 
neither  to  judge  nor  to  do  amiss,  281. 

Marinarus ;  exposed  the  necesdty  cS  out- 
ward  Baptism,  II.  218. 

Marriage.     iSee  Matrimony. 

Marsh,  Bp. ;  advocates  Toleration,  I.  xrl. 
—  of  the  indifference  of  the  royalist 
Clergy  towards  the  Liturgy  in  the  time 
of  Charles  I.,  xlvi. — ^his  hundred  and 
twenty -three  Articles  or  Questions, 
clxxxi. —  admits  a  distinction  between 
**  the  Primitive  and  the  Hierarchical 
Church,"  III.  no. 

Martin  Mar-Prelate ;  notice  of,  I.  Ixxxvi. 
ccii.  anecdote  of,  6— cited,  242. 

Martyrs ;  their  Lives  formerly  read  in  the 
Church,  II.  55. 

Masses  for  the  dead ;  exposed.  III.  58. 

Master  of  Sentences.    See  Peter  Lombard. 

Matrimony;  why  instituted,  II.  349  — 
how  esteemed  by  Heathens  and  Jews^ 
350 — of  the  Form  of  solemnizing  it  in 
the  Church  of  England,  ib» — not  to  be 
celebrated  at  certain  times  without  ex- 
traordinary Fees,  ib, — the  use  of  the 
Ring  in,  352 — of  the  term  Worship,  in 
the  Office  of,  353 — a  Civil  compact, 
ratified  by  Ecclesiastics,  ib. 

Matter,  the  eternity  of;  maintained  by 
Melissus,  II.  312. 

M«Crie,  Dr.T.;  cited,  I.  12,  20;  III. 
109,  110. 

Measure;  the  perfection  and  preservation 
of  all  things,  II.  188. 

Melancthon ;  anecdote  of,  I.  Ixviii. 

Melchiades;  his  conjecture,  why  the 
Apostles  took  no  land  in  Judea,  but 
only  the  price  of  lands  sold.  III.  215. 

Melchisedec;  his  example  no  authority 
for  the  exaction  of  Tithes,  II.  399. 

Melissus ;  on  the  eternity  of  Matter,  II. 
312. 

Merchandise;  Parishes  made  Spiritual, 
IIL211. 

Mercy  for  all  men  ;  the  Prayer  for  it,  con- 
sidered, II.  166. 

Merits ;  none  in  the  best  of  men,  III. 
SSi—the  Popish  doctrine  of,  refuted, 
420,  493. 

Metropolitan  Bishops;  when  and  how 
they  became  Archbishops,  III.  134, 
135  —  how  Metropolitans  themselves 
arose,  202. 
Middleton,  Rev.  Erasmus ;  cited,  I.  cxlvii. 
dxxv. 

»  J.  W.,  A.M. ;  his  enumeration 
of  parties  within  the  Established  Church, 
I.  xvii. 
Midwives  licensed  to  Baptize,  II.  228. 
Milton,  John ;  cited,  I.  xlUi.  cxlviii.  250 ; 
IL  353,  400,  404,  ib.;  IIL  42,  114, 
222,  226 — a  query  respecting,  I.  142. 


Mind,  a;   feeling  present  Joy,  does  9ot 
indulge  cuiious  and  intricate  specula- 
tions, II.  286. 
Ministers ;  called  anciently,  "  God's  most 
beloved,"  II.  89— their  zeal  in  Public 
Prayer,    how   necessary,  ib,  —  of  the 
nature  of  their  Function,  361 — ^impor- 
tant to  the  welfare  of  Commonwealtfaa, 
362  —  their    authority    and     power, 
370— 'the  character  imparted  to  them 
affirmed  to  be  indelible,  372  —  whether 
absolutely  necessary  that  they  should 
have  the  faculty  of  preaching,  434— 
faithfid  have  no  leisure  for  Magistracy, 
III.  178.     See  Clergy. 
Ministry ;   whether  it  may  be  voluntarily 
sought  for   without   offence,     I.  cxliii. 
II.  370,  378— of  admitting  unfit  per- 
sons to  it,  431 — tendency  of  grades  of 
rank  among  the.  III.  171. 
Mockers;    who  properly  so  called.    III. 
470 — worse  than  pagans  and  infidels, 
471. 
Montesquieu;    dted,    I.  zxiii.  xxvi.  196, 

234. 
Moral-righteousness,  or  "Mrtue ;  not  proper 
unto  Christians,  as  such,   I.  197 — the 
want  of  it  excludes  from  Salvation,  ib. 
More,  Sir  Thomas ;  of  the  difi^erence  be- 
tween Papists  and  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land about  Works,  III.  418. 
Morley,  Bp.;    Dedication  to  by  Walton, 

I.  xlix. — query  respecting,  ex. 
Mortimer,  Rev.  T.  M.  A. ;  cited,  I.  185. 
Mortmain,    Statute  of;    conduct  of  the 

Clergy  respecting  it,  II.  409. 
Mosheim,  Dr.  J.  L. ;    cited,   I.  xxix.  20, 
43,  87,  168;    IL    134,  227;   IIL  14, 
101,  112,  117,  119,  124,  ib,  139,  191, 
219. 
Mourning-attire;  of  it,  11.356 — Cyprian 

and  Augustine  opposed  to,  357. 
Muncer;  account  of  him.  III.  168. 
Music;    its  power,    IL  122-^ a  help  to 
Devotion,    123  —  of  its  regulation  in 
Churches,  ib.    See  Harmony. 


N. 


Names;  not  so  ancient  as  Things,  III. 
93 — that  of  Bishop,  exemplified  by  the 
Rule,  that  Things  denoting  common 
qualities  are  older  than  the  Names  re- 
strained to  note  any  excellency  of  such 
qualities,  ib. 

National  Church;  how  constituted.  III. 
254 — can  exist  only  in  a  secular  sense, 
L  xxi. ;  IIL  257. 

Nature;  sometimes  controlled  by  Neces- 
sity, II.  24. 

Natures;  two  distinct,  in  Christ,  II.  177— 
what  Christ's  Divine,  received  firom  the 


5S8 


Il^BBX. 


Father;  and,  what  hU  human,  Ky  union 
with  the  Divine,  182. 

Neal,  Daniel,  M.  A. ;  his  History  of  the 
Pnritans  cited,  I.  xi.  xxxvii*  xliii.  Izzxvi. 
dv.  clxv.  clxxxii.  ccii.;  II.  415. 

Necessity ;  how  fiur  it  may  dispense  with 
Laws,  II.  24 — sometimes  controls  Na- 
ture, ib. 

Negative  argfuroents  fVom  Scripture;  how 
far  of  force,  I.  163 — how  used  by  the 
Fathers,  ib, 

voice ;  of  the  l^g's.  III.  304. 

Nelson ;  cited,  III.  375. 

Nestorius;  his  heresy,  what,  II.  175 — 
confuted,  188. 

Newton,  Bp. ;  on  the  effect  of  Constantine's 
profession  of  Christianity,  III.  304. 

'  Dr.;    his  strictures  on  matricu- 

lating at  Oxford,  II.  436. 

Nicene  Creed;  of  it,  II.  135,  139. 

Nicholas,  H. ;  institutor  of  the  Sect 
called  The  Family  of  Love,  I.  28. 

Nichols,  John,  Esq. ;  his  Literary  Anec- 
dotes cited,  I.  Iviii.  cxxxv.  cxxxvi. 

Noah's  seven  precepts;  according  to  the 
Jews,  I.  299. 

Nobility,  the  English;  averse  from  wor- 
shipping with  the  Commonalty,  II.  428. 

Non-residence;  how  far  reprovable,  IL 
420  —  when  allowed  of,  427  —  Lord 
Bacon's  judgment  on,  428 — ^how, .  and 
by  whom,  to  be  redressed,  441. 

Non-resistance.     See  Pasnve-obedience. 

Novatian ;  his  error.  III.  20,  65. 

Now;  a  metaphysioid  term,  II.  312. 

Nowell,  Dr. ;  mentioned,  1.21. 

Nunc  d^mittis ;  its  use  in  the  Church  Ser- 
vice, II.  128. 


O. 


Oath,  Ex  Offido  mero;   of  it,  I.  clxxxvi. 

cxc.  cxdv.  63. 
Obedience;  of  what  is  due  to  Scripture, 

Reason,  and  the  Church,  II.  23. 
Oblations;  of  them,  II.  395. 
O'Driscol;  dted,  II.  429. 
Offensive,   or  Scandalous;   what  properly 

so,  I.  304. 
OfiScers,  Civil  and  Ecclesiastical ;  of  their 

being  united  in  the  same  person,   III. 

172 — objections  discussed,  177. 
Opinions,  variety  of;  argues  obscurity,  II. 

294. 
Order,  the  Power  of;  whether  it  may  be 

sought  or  sued  for,   I.  cxiiii. ;  II.  370, 

378— the  degrees  of  it,    383— distinct 

from  Jurisdiction,  III.  4 — of  its  being 

derived  from  the  Jewish  Priesthood,  117. 
Ordinary,   an ;    of  his  deciding  disputes 

between   the   Pastor   and  the   People, 

in.  202. 


Ordtnation;  what  conferred  by  Ef^sco- 
pal,  II.  372 — ^whether  it  restrains  to 
Places  or  to  Functions,  413 — in  whom 
the  Power  was,  originally.  III.  142-^ 
whether  lawful  without  Titles  or  Popu- 
lar elections,  164 — sometimes  lawful 
without  Bishops,  108.  See  Jurisdic- 
tion— Receive  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Origen ;  adverse  to  the  Necessity  of  out- 
ward Baptism,  II.  218. 

Orme,  Rev.  William ;  dted,  I.  xvL  xviii. ; 
IL  183. 

Ornaments  of  honour;  why  used  by  the 
Clergy,  III.  208. 

Orthodoxy  of  the  Church  of  England; 
what  is  it?  L  xviL 

Oscula  sancta,  I.  30. 

Owen,  Dr.  John ;  on  Hooker  being  said  to 
be  "  unanswered,"  I.  hi.^-of  the  eternal 
generation  of  the  Son  of  God,  II.  183 — 
of  the  office  of  Deacon,  388— of  Mini- 
sterial Jurisdiction,  III.  4 — his  compa- 
rative view  of  popular  and  prelatical 
Power,  171. 

Oxen  and  asses ;  whom  so'termed,  II.  429. 


P. 


Padanus ;  on  the  regenerating  efficacy  of 
Priests,  II.  284. 

Paganism;  the  System  of,  contained  a 
mixture  of  Truth,  IL  8. 

Pagans;  how  heatiiens  came  to  be  so 
called,  II.  410. 

Paley,  Archdeacon;  of  oppression  and 
resistance,  I.  xv. — of  Apostolical  pre- 
cedent, xxvii. — of  making  the  Church 
an  engine  of  the  State,  xxviii. — of  pri- 
vate judgment,  xxxi. — of  Test  Laws, 
xxxvi. — of  the  nature  and  qualifications 
of  Divine  Right,  III.  267. 

Palladium ;  that  of  the  opponents  of  Esta- 
blishments, I.  XXXV. 

Papists.     See  Romanists. 

Paravaile ;  a  Law  term,  III.  410. 

Parishes ;  their  first  appointment,  II.  41 1 — 
state  of  many  in  England,  in  the  nine- 
teenth Century,  III.  127. 

Parker,  Abp.;  of  him,  I.  ccvi.  21;  II. 
228. 

■  •  Robert;   dted,    I.  xiv.;    II.  258, 
260,  263,  ib,  264,  266,  ib,  267,  275. 

Samuel,  Bp. ;  on  Hooker's  Works 


being  **  unanswered,"  I.  Hi. 

Parliament,  the ;  of  its  authority  to  make 
Laws  in  Ecclesiastical  affiiirs,  I.  xL; 
in.  30L 

Long;  Bp.  Warburton's  cha- 
racter of  those  who  composed  it,  I.  cvL 

Passive-obedience;  an  exploded  doctrine, 
I.  Ivi.  xdi. 


IN  DEX. 


529 


P«Btoi»$  wlutrthey  were  In  the  New  Tet- 
tament,  II.  391— of  the  inequality  of, 
III.  U9. 

Patriarcbsi  or  Primates ;  what  their  Supe- 
riority was,  III.  135,  139. 

Patron,  Church;  who  he  may  be.  III.  169. 

JPatronage  of  Churches ;  whence,  II.  418 — 
its  corrupting  influence  on  the  Clergy, 
III.  243. 

Paule,  Sir  George ;  his  Life  of  Abp.  Whit- 
gift  cited,  I.  zzziiL  Ixzzii.  cxxxv.  && 
55. 

Paul,  St.;  of  his  Scholastic  education,  I. 
224 — his  care  of  all  the  Churches,  its 
limitation,  IIL  130->he  and  St.  James 
reconciled  respecting  Justification  and 
Faith  by  Works,  395. 

Pead,  Eleonor;  a  midwife,  licensed  to  Bap- 
tize, II.  228. 

Peck's  Desiderata  Curiosa,  cited,  T.  ezxzvi. 

Peirce,  Rev.  James;  cited,  I.  cli.;  II. 
269,  300,  319,  335,  353;  III.  42. 

Penance;  its  Discipline,  instituted  by 
Christ,  III.  11— practised  by  the  pri- 
mitive Churches,  13 — made  a  sacrament 
by  the  Papists,  14 — what  it  is,  and  of 
its  parts ;  according  to  Papists,  15 — 
severe  in  the  primitive  Church,  54 — 
abused  by  Papists,  56 — danger  if  too 
remiss,  ib, 

Penitency;  how  observed  anciently,  and 
its  expediency,  II.  344. 

Penitentiary's  Office;  of  its  origin  and  dis- 
continuance, III.  28. 

People,  the;  how  trained  into  the  liking 
of  the  Puritans'  Discipline,  I.  23 — ^their 
right  of  electing  Ministers  infringed  by 
that  Discipline ;  and  by  that  of  the  Epis- 
copalians, III.  165 — not  to  be  deprived 
of  their  liberty  for  fear  of  consequents, 
171 — ^their  position  in  the  Roman  Com- 
mon-wealth, 266. 

Persecution ;  the  Puritans  not  adverse  to, 

I.  XX.  ccv.;  II.  307. 

Person ;  one  only,  and  not  two,  in  Christ, 

II.  176. 

Peterborough,  Bp.  of.    See  Marsh,  Dr. 

«  — •  Earl  of;  of  a  Parliamentary 

Religion,  I.  xL 

Petition,  a ;  its  Author  disabused,  I.  27. 

Petrobrusiani ;  whether  justly  termed  here- 
tics, III.  219. 

Phenix,  the  ;  cited,  I.  21. 

Philip,  of  Spain ;  his  conduct  regarding  the 
Council  of  Trent,  III,  327. 

_..  of  Valois ;  excludes  Bishops  from 
Parliaments,  III.  176. 

Phillpot,  Dr.  H. ;  dted,  I.  xx. 

Philosophy;  of  it,  II.  444,  558.  See 
Reason. 

Pittadus ;  a  singular  Law  of  his,  I.  113. 

Pius  V. ;  excommunicates  Queen  Eliza- 
beth, in.  48 1. 

VOL.  III. 


Places  for  Divine  Worship ;  how  univer- 
sally set  apart,  II.  30 — of  their  holiness, 
88.    See  Churches. 

Plato ;  of  the  dislike  men  conceive  of  those 
they  converse  with,  III.  239. 

Pluralities ;  considered,  II.  422 — when  al- 
lowed by  the  Laws,  429 — how  to  be 
retrenched,  441. 

Plutarch ;  dted,  concerning  odd  and  even 
Numbers,  II.  401. 

Policy;  an  objectionable  instance  o^  II. 
407. 

Polity;  what  Laws  of,  the  Church  re- 
quires, L  194 — what  Laws  of,  may  be 
made  by  the  advice  of  men,  231. 

— and  Faith ;  the  difference  between 

matters  of,  I.  209. 

Pope,  Alexander ;  cited,  I.  xxxvi. 

■  the ;  his  Supremacy  an  usurpadon, 
III.  479  —  why  he  excommunicated 
Queen  Elizabeth,  481. 

—  and  Cardinals ;  Hooker's  judgment 
of  their  case,  when  penitent.  III.  421. 

Popedom ;  an  inevitable  result  of  a  gra- 
duated Hierarchy,  III.  136,  139^  141, 
202. 

Popery ;  See  Romanists. 

Pott,  Archdeacon ;  cited,  I.  xxv.  ib. 

Prayer ;  described,  II.  85 — public,  its  pro- 
priety and  excellency,  86 — Ignatius  dted 
on  its  efficacy,  87 — two  Churches  rarely 
agreed  in  the  Rite  of,90 — extempore,  con- 
temners of,  reproved,  91 — of  the  short- 
ness of  the  Public,  112 — St  Augustine, 
of  the  excellencies  of  Short,  ib, — of  Re- 
petition by  the  people  after  the  Ministeff 
119 — of  singing  or  chanting  them,  128 — 
petitionary,  its  nature,  155 — two  uses  of 
Prayer,  156 — sprayer  for  blessings  we 
are  not  sure  to  receive,  not  unlawful, 
157,  163 — for  blessings  we  are  sure  we 
shall  not  receive,  in  some  cases  lawful, 
157 — how  God  accepts  the  Prayer  which 
he  does  not  grant,  168 —to  be  addressed 
to  God  alone.  III.  502 — how  to  be  per- 
formed, 503.     See  Common-Prayer. 

Preaching ;  what  so  called,  II.  45. — ^pub- 
lic Catechising  a  kind  of,  46 —foolish- 
ness of;  what,  71 — of  it  generally,  7S, 
513 — why  it  profits  more  than  Reading, 
81 — superiority  of  the  Puritans  in  the 
faculty  of,  84— Abp.  Grindall's  judg- 
ment on  it,  ib, — a  function  originally 
attached  to  the  office  of  Bishop,  III. 
124. 

Prebends  and  Places  of  Jurisdiction ;  their 
design.  III.  234. 

Precepts ;  the  seven  of  Noah,  according  to 
the  Jews,  I.  299. 

Predestination ;  of  it,  Ilr  168,  499. 

Prejudice;  its  effect  on  the  members  of 
the  Established  Church,  I.  xiv. 

Prelacy ;  «  Sion's  Plea  against"  dted,  I. 
M  M 


re&rSchiam,  in.  108,  113— 
of  CTprian  being  a  promoler  of  it,  and 
Ihe  ImDDediatc  eSecta  of  the  cbaoge, 
119  —  the  diignce  it  wa*  in,  made 
Hooker  fbresoo  troublei  and  conliuion, 
203,  229. 
Frcbt»  {  their  origin  not  Hliifu:ltiril]i  ac- 
coDQted  for,  III.  ISO— of  (be  beneiil  of 
Ibem,  194^(0  ReUpon,  195— Com- 
moD-Kealthi,  198 — Kinga  and  Princea, 
ISe— the  NoUlity,  aOO— (he  People, 
S02~the  Clerg;,  S03.  See  Buhops— 
Epifcopacj' — Honoor. 

Fmbjrter ;  thii  name  more  proper  than 
Fri«(,  II.  386 — thdr  order  and  ofRce, 
it.— nhelher  their  laying  on  of  handa 
nith  the  Bishop,  in  Ordination,  proves 
■  power  of  Ordaining,  III.  118  — of 
their  concern  in  Juriadictioa,  1S5.  Stt 
Elden. 

PreBhyleiJani ;  Bp.  HaD  on  Ibe  origla  of, 
1.33. 

Pmence;  Chiiit'i  peraonal,  everywhere; 
in  what  lenae,  II.  188.     &e  Heal^pre- 

Pride ;  a  Sermon,  III.  4SS— what  it  i>, 
433  —  it)  haughtioeia  and  inaolenee, 
43S— the  cauae  of  all  ita  e«ils,  437— 


Prorfnce  and  DIoceM  of  a  Btahop}  thdr 

distiDetton,  and  ita  origin.  III.  133. 
Froiiea  at   Bnptiao!) ;    remarked  on,   H. 

Fialtnai  their  luefulneaa  i  and,  mora  fre- 
quent repetititm  than  other  pofdeoi  of 
Scripture,  tad  in  ■  diSfaient  manneT,  II. 
ISO — of  the  ainging  them  with  Unk, 
123 — of  Ihe  ainging  or  repeatiiig  them 
alternately ,  IS 4. 

Puffendorf,  Samnel ;  on  the  aeeuhiky  of 
the  Clergy,  III.  250. 

PuoiihaUe;  of  exemption  iroin  being.  III. 


Pnrgalory; 


;  their 


;. }  II.  307— 
rebellion  impnted  to  diem,  I.  cicr. — their 
anperiority  in  (he  fiualty  of  preaching, 
II.  B4 — origin  of  (he  (enn,  III.  611. 
Pythagoras ;  a  precept  oC,  regarfing  Uiaa- 
bera,  II.  401. 


Prldeani,  Deani  cited.  III.  103. 

Fiieal  I  why  a  name  applied  to  Preihytera, 

II.  3S4— children  made  Priead,  427. 
iPiimatea.   Set  Fatriarchi. 
Ftince,  John ;  hia  Wortlwn  of  Demn  died. 

Princes ;  when  made  the  Depoaitaiiea  of 

Ctiurch-goodi,  III.  211. 
Principles ;    danger  of  entirely   falloning 
Oeneral,    II.    26,    423  — first,    in    an; 
Bcience,  »hat,  II.  246. 
PrlscillJaniati ;  Ithaciiu'  leal  againit,  I.  G. 
Private-jndgmeaL    See  Judgment. 
Privilege ;  Ita  nature,  II.  432. 
PriTjr-Council ;  Travers'  SuppUcarion  to  it, 

ni.  335— Answer  (a  l[,  353. 
Proceeding  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  I.  73. 
Proceaainni  at  Funerala  <  ancient  and  re- 
cent, II.  357.    See  Burial  Office. 
Pronoun ;  Ihe  neuter  posieiuve,  not  used 

by  Hooker,  I.  81. 

Propertiei;    thoee  eaaential  to  Deity  and 

Hnmanity,  not  diminished  or  increased 

bf  their  union  In  Chrlit,  II.  17D. 

Prophets  ;  had  their  inslroclioo*  from  God 

"    iself,  HI.  405— of  their  being  eom- 

■  •  t    Books,  467— in   Ihe 

1,  whit  they  were,  II. 

'the  Pray  er,  "  Thai  all  men  may 

■■  II.  170. 
dangerous,  espedally  to  the 
I  IfiS—lhataf  the  wicked,  no 
ptothcri.'gnef.  III.  443. 


Quare    Impedil  i    iti   iDconveiueDce  and 

abase.  III.  233. 
Quarterly   Seview ;  died,  1.  ludr.  lUL 

xliii.  xlvlS.  Irii. 


Reading  in  the  Church  ;  rtot  so  proGlable 
as  Preaching,  II.  81 — Abp.  Grindal'i 
judgment  on  this,  84. 

Real  Presence  of  Christ  ia 


c^Tcr,  II.  288,  294.     See  Presence. 
Reason  ;  Cicero  and  Hooker,  alike  unsatis- 
Iiic(ory  in  treating  of,  T.  84 — Ihe  guide 
of  human  actions ;  and  (he  nalural  judge 
if  right  and  wrong,  91 — sii  objediant 


agtdnsi 


r  the  ' 


■wplif. 


nilh  replies,  219_ita  use  in  judgiugif 
Divine  matters,  with  Tertulliaa's  judg- 
ment on  il,  332,  22S.      See  Philosophj. 

Rebaptiiation;  unlawfiil;  the  Fathers' o|^ 
nions  respecting  it,  II.  223,  229. 

Rebellion ;    imputed  lo  the  Puritans,  L 

Receive  Ihe  Holy  Ghost ;  of  this  phrase  in 

Ihe  Ordination  Service,  II.  375. 
Rees,  Dr.  Abr.   his  CyctopEdia,  cited,  I. 


INDEX. 


531 


Reformation  of  the  Church  of  England ; 

Incomplete,  I.  zriii. — Defined,  201. 
Reformers ;  the  opinions  and  practices  of 
some  in  Hooker's  time,  as  set  forth  by 
him,  I.  55. 
Regeneration,  Baptismal ;  at  variance  with 

justification  by  Faith,  II.  213. 
Jlehgion ;  of  imposition  in  matters  of,  I. 
xiii.  et  seq.  41  —  of  inconvenience  of 
alteration  in  matters  concerning  it ;  and 
how  the  Church  of  England  proceeded 
at  the  Reformation,  320 — the  support 
of  Commonwealths,    II.  3  —  how  far 
False,  may  contribute  to  the  support  of 
a  State,  6 — none  can  consist  wholly  of 
untruths,  9 — danger  of  contentions  in 
it,  11 — a  more  effectual  restraint  from 
crimes  than  positive  laws,  ib,  — '.internal, 
how  testified  by  outward  duties,  18 — 
its  mysteries  above  our  comprehension, 
246  —  is  the  foundation  of  temporal 
happiness  and  prosperity,  365,  369. 
Rehgious  freedom ;  its  uiJform  conneuon 

with  Dissent,  I.  xiii. 
Repentance ;  its  nature,  III.  5 — ^its  virtue 
and  discipline,  how  distinguished,  6 — 
how  the  heart  is  framed  to  it,  ib, — ^for 
secret  sins;  how  to  be  performed  ac- 
cording to  St  Chrysostom,  44  —  its 
advantages,  50 — of  scrupulosity  in  it, 
84.    See  Penance. 

Repetitions;  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  II. 
118— of  Prayers,  after  tiie  Minister,  119 
—of  the  Psalms,  120. 

Residence.     See  Non-residence. 

Resistance  to  Magistrates  and  Laws ;  sin- 
gular sentiment  respecting,  by  Bishop 
Sanderson,  I.  cxxi.— bow  far  sinful, 
in.  328. 

Responses,  vocal;  the  English  the  only 
Protestant  Church  which  has  enjoined 
them,  II.  120. 

Rest  and  idleness ;  distioguished,  II.  316. 

Restitution;  its  necessity,  and  to  whom, 
IIL  352. 

Rewards  and  Punishments;  pre-suppose 
good  and  evil  willingly  done,  I.  104 — 
received  only  frcnn  those  who  have 
power  to  judge,  105 — to  what  end  de- 
signed, 111  —who  to  assign  them, 
ib. 

Reynolds,  Dr.  J.     See  Rainolds. 

Rhemists;  of  Cartwright's  controversy  with 
them,  I.  clxxiv. — ^their  work  cited,  IL 
371. 

Richmond,  Rev.  Legh ;  cited,  I.  xiv. 

Righteous.     See  Elect. 

Righteousness ;  actual  and  habitual,  their 
difference,  III.  395. 

Righdy  to  divide  the  Word ;  its  meaning, 
II.  434. 

Ring  in  marriage ;  its  use,  II.  352. 

Robinson,  Rev.  Robert,  on  the  abuse  of 


epithets,  III.  207 — on  the  titles  of  the 
Clergy,  ib. 

Rogations.     See  Litanies. 

Romanists ;  of  their  holding  the  Founda- 
tion of  Faith ;  with  Vincent  Alsop's  re- 
marks, I.  xd. ;  III.  390,  409  — may 
possibly  be  saved,  notwithstanding  their 
errors ;  with  the  Rev.  Thomas  Scott's 
remarks,  I.  xd. ;  III.  409  —  of  their 
Church,  I.  201;  IL  444,  503,558— 
to  be  followed  in  some  things,  though 
not  the  People  of  God,  I.  277— not  to 
be  dissented  from  in  every  thing,  be- 
cause Heretics  and  Neighbours,  278 — 
the  impolicy  of  disagreeing  with  thera 
about  things  sound,  285  —  not  to  be 
denied  the  Communion  when  they 
Conform,  II.  301 — not  to  be  compelled 
to  it,.  307  —  the  alleged  motive,  why 
Episcopalians  profess  the  Church  of 
Rome  to  be  a  true  Church,  ib. — who 
are  partakers  of  their  errors,  387 — how 
their  Error  and  their  Heresy  differ, 
388— accuse  tiie  Church  of  England  of 
Heresy  and  Apostacy,  478. 

Russell,  Lord  John,  dted,  IIL  242,  243. 


S. 


Sabbath  ;  its  change  from  Jewish  to  Chris- 
tian, IL  318. 

Sacramentaries;  their  opinion  concerning 
the  Eucharist,  IL  291. 

Sacraments;  what,  I.  267 — their  Name, 
Author,  and  Force,  1 1.  171 — all  articles 
of  Faith,  and  duties  of  Religion,  called 
by  this  name,  by  the  Fathers,  ib. — their 
use,  203,  525 — several  definitions  of 
them,  208  —  whether  Signs  only,  or 
Means  of  Grace,  III.  70  —  Papists^ 
errors  in  this  respect,  ib.  See  Baptism 
— Eucharist — Intention. 

Sacrilege ;  representations  of  it,  1 1.  404 ; 
III.  229,  243,  245. 

Saint;  the  use  of  this  epithet,  IIL  383. 

Saints  and  Martyrs;  Lives  of,  formerly 
read  in  Churches,  II.  55. 

Salvation;  whether  the  Scriptures  con- 
tain all  tilings  necessary  to,**  I.  136; 
IL  472. 

'    by  Christ  alone,  how  to  be 
understood,  IIL  412. 

Sampson,  Thomas,  D.D. ;  mentioned,  I. 
22. 

Sanctification ;  of  Baptism  being  the  first 
step  in  it,  IL  215 — its  difference  from 
justification,  IIL  382. 

Sanderson,  Bp. ;  his  strange  doctrine,  L 
cxxi. ;  cited,  iiu  309. 

Sandys,  Bp. ;  mentioned,  I.  21. 

Saravia,  Dr.  Hadrian;  of  him,  I.  ciii. 
clxxjii. 


5S2 


INDEX. 


Sadflfacdon ;  what,  luxordfog  to  the  Fa- 
then,  III.  45 — of  its  being  made  to 
God  for  tin,  46 — its  prescribed  Works, 
51-— of  offenders,  in  the  primitive 
Chnrch,  54^-of  remitting  it  too  easily, 
56 — abased  by  Papists,  57. 

ScMidaloas,  or  offensiTe;  what  properiy 
90,  I.  304. 

JBchism;  of  its  application  by  the  Church 
of  England,  I.  xri. — charged  upon  the 
Puritans,  cxcr. — not  effectually  healed 
by  Creeds,  II.  140 — does  not  separate 
from  the  Visible  Church,  304  —  not 
cored  by  Diocesan  Supremacy  or  Pre^ 
lacy.  III.  108,  113,  141  — what  it  is, 
474 — ^remarks  on,  ib. 

Schoohoen ;  of  them,  II.  444,  558. 

Scotland;  of  her  repudiation  of  Episco- 
pacy, I.  xlvi. — mars  a  prediction,  II  1.91. 

Scott,  Rev.  Thomas;  dted,  I.  zv.  zxxv. 
zd. 

Scriptures ;  a  perfect  and  sufficient  rule  of 
Faith  and  Practice,  I.  xxvii.  191,  193 

—  want  nothing  needful,  and  contain 
nothing  superfluous,  131 — sufficient  to 
their  end,  132,  136,  II.  472— their 
right  use,  1. 141 — whether  designed  to 
direct  in  actions  indifferent,  151,  162, 
186,  191,  214— above  the  Church,  158 

II.  476 — negative  arguments  from; 
their  force,  I.  162,  170 — whether  their 
honour  be  impaired  by  the  Established 
Church,  212  —  how  far  their  general 
Rules  applicable  to  particular  Duties, 
214 — whence  their  authority  deduced, 
226  —  Reading  them  in  Churches  a 
kind  of  Preaching,  II.  47,  62  —  of 
seeming  contradictions  in  certain  trans- 
lations, 47 — an  hypothesis  in  defence  of 
certain  passages  seemingly  contradictory, 
50— of  the  method  and  choice  of  Read< 
ing,  ib. — how  read  in  the  Synagogues, 
52 — how  they  conduce  to  Salvation,  61 

—  great  use  of  reading  them  publicly, 
64,  77 — reading  them,  has  precepts  and 
promises  annexed,  92  —  an  infallible 
rule  in  interpreting,  211 — whether  only 
part  of  the  Rule  to  judge  of  men's 
actions  and  institutions  by,  III.  152. 

Scfuples  of  penitent  minds;  resolved,  III. 
81,  85. 

Sealr^he  case  of  a  stolen,  applied  to  Bap- 
tism, II.  241. 

Seeker,  Abp. ;  cited,  I.  xx. 

Sects,  Religious;  their  advantage  to  the 
Community,  I.  xxiii. 

Secularity  of  the  Clergy ;  accounted  for, 

III.  250. 

See;  a  Bishop's;  what  it  is,  III.  130. 

Selden,  John;  cited,  II.  53. 

Sense,  the ;  how  far  to  be  operated  on  in 

Religion,  II.  1 16. 
Sententiarii ;  who  they  were,  II,  45. 


Serapion ;  Ma  caae  iCated,  IL  S09» 

Sermons;  not  the  only  means  to  save 
•ouls,  IL  62,  69 — compared  with  bare 
Reading  of  Scriptures,  6S,  85 — their 
good  use,  63,  76 — whether  ths  Word  of 
God,  73  —  infrequency  of  them,  79 — 
what  gains  them  their  repute,  84  — 
their  proper  use  at  Funerals,  358. 
See  Rnding. 

Severus,  Alex.     See  Alex.  Severua. 

Shaftesbury,  Lord ;  on  a  Government  in- 
terfering with  Religions  opinions,  I. 
xxiv. 

Shakspeare ;  dted,  I.  cxlvL  4,  35,  100 ; 
IL  36,  316,  341,  407  ;  IIL  430. 

Sheldon,  Abp. ;  mentioned,  T.  xlviii.  Iv. 

Shipley,  Bp.;  dted,  I.  xvhi. 

Sidney,  Sir  Philip ;  dted,  I.  4. 

Signs;  utility  of  visible,  I.  265. 

Simony ;  its  heinousness  in  Bish<9s,  IIL 
231. 

Sin ;  none  free  from  all,  II.  164,  495 — 
horror  of  it  when  committed.  III.  81-— 
against  the  Holy  Ghost,  what,  82. 

Singularity;  the  Puritans  charged  with,  L 
cxcviii. 

Sitting  at  Communion ;  of  it,  II.  259 — a 
gesture  of  Piety,  299. 

Smectymnuus :  dted,  I.  cxxIL ;  IIL  90, 
14L 

Smith,  Rev.  Sydney ;  dted,  I.  xix. 

Smollett's  History  of  England ;  dted,  I. 
xL 

Sodetles,  Public ;  their  foundation,  1.105. 

Socrates,  the  Historian;  dted,  II.  90, 
125. 

Somner,  William;  of  him.  III.  335. 

Sophism,  a ;  noticed,  I.  40. 

Sorrow  and  Fear ;  a  Sermon  on.  III. 
440. 

South-Ease,  the  Rectory  of;  its  Sale  by 
Auction,  III.  211. 

Sparke,  Bp. ;  of  the  Church  Catechism, 
II.  47. 

Sparrow,  Dr.  ;  cited,  II.  356. 

Speculations  ;  of  curious  and  intricate,  II. 
286. 

Speculative  doctrine;  of,  11.401,  545. 

Spelman,  Sir  H. ;  cited,  I.  Ixxx.  Ixxxi. 

Spencer,  Dr.  John  ;  **  had  a  special  hand  " 
in  the  Ecclesiastical  Polity,  I.  xcviii.; 
cited,  c.  cv.  cxviii. 

Spenser,  Edmund ;  dted,  I.  xi.  Ixxix.  3. 

Spirit,  Holy  ;  proceeding  of  the,  I.  72 — 
how  its  testimony  is  to  be  discovered, 
229.     See  Holy  Ghost. 

Sponsors.     See  Godfathers. 

Sportulae,  et  Sportulantes  Fratres ;  what, 
IIL  225,  226. 

Spotswood's  History  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland;  noticed,  I.  20. 

Star-Chamber;  composition  of  that  Court, 
1.  clxxziii. 


INDEX. 


5SS 


State ;  efl^ts  of  making  the  Church  an 
engine  or  an  ally  of  it,  I.  xxviii. — what 
the  Episcopalians  sacrifice  to  it,  zzxvi« 
See  Estates. 

Stewart,  Rev.  J.  H. ;  cited,  II.  307. 

Stillingfleet,  Bp. ;  on  the  lawfulness  of 
Separation,  I.  xvii.  on  thtf  possessors  of 
the  power  of  Ordination,  III.  142. 

Stubbs,  John  ;  singular  punishment  of,  I. 
clxxxii. 

Strype,  John  ;  remarked  on,  I.  20 ;  cited, 
XV.  Ixix.  Ixxiiu  Ixxxii.  exxxv.  &c.; 
22,  63 ;  II.  84,  228,  395,  415 ;  III. 
340,  342. 

Subscription  to  the  Ceremonies;  the  burden 
of,  II.  104. 

Substance;  part  to  be  dedicated  to  Re- 
ligion, II.  395— Tithes  or  tenths  of  it, 
formerly  allotted,  399. 

Succession  of  Bishops;  its  chain  lost  in 
uncertainty.  III.  99,  169— a  Table  re- 
specting it,  100 — a  precarious  founda- 
tion for  Christian  hope,  101 — ^vitiated 
by  Heretics,  112 — Eusebius  no  autho- 
rity to  prove  a  lineal  Succession,  tfr.-*- 

Sudden  death ;  of  the  petition  against  it, 
in  the  Litany,  II.  151. 

Sulpitius,  Severus;  cited,  I.  6. 

Summaster,  George;  Dedication  to,  III. 
462. 

Sumner  (C.  R.)  Bp. ;  what  the  Canons^ 
&c  were  devised  for,  II.  420 — of  the 
nature  of  the  respect  to  which  the 
Clergy  are  entitled,  III.  205. 

Sunday ;  the  state  of  it  in  the  Metropolis, 

II.  307. 

Superiority  of  some  Ministers  over  others ; 
discussed,  III.  184. 

Superior-stations ;  require  proportional  en- 
dowments, III.  241. 

Supererogation;  Works  of,  I.  190;  11.492. 

Superstition ;  its  spring,  II.  13 — of  redress 
of  it,  15. 

Supremacy ;  the  Puritans  charged  with  im- 
peaching it,  I.  cxcvi. — the  King's,  what, 

III.  263— his  Right  ofinvestiture,  266 — 
the  sort  of  it,  267— its  Measure,  27 1 — 
its  Rule,  276— its  Example,  277 — quali- 
fied by  the  Convocation,  279.  See  Do- 
minion— King. 

Surplice ;  the  names  of  the  most  eminent 
Churchmen  willing  to  discard  it,  I.  cxli. 
21 — ^its  retention  attributed  to  Queen 
Eliz.  f  6. — objections  to  it  considered,  II. 
96 — indefensible  firom  the  New  Testa- 
ment, 100.     See  Habits. 

Sussex,  H.  R.  H.  the  Duke  of;  presides  at 
the  Commemoration  Dinner  on  the  abo- 
lition of  the  Sacramental  Test,  I.  xix. 

Sutcliffe,  Dean;  cited,  I.  cxxxiv.  cxlviii. 
cxlix.  clii. 

Sutton,  Abp. ;  his  liberal  sentiments,  I.  xx. 


Swift,  Dean ;  his'  character  of  the  Eikoit 

Basilik^,  I.  xlviii. 
Sydney,  Algernon;  cited,  I.  112. 
Synods ;  their  evils,  and  whence  they  arise, 

I.  xxix. — of  Arimine  and  Seleucia ;  an 

account  of  them,  II.  137. 
— >— -«  and  Councils ;  of  their  being  called 

and  dissolved  by  the  Civil  Powers,  III. 

298 — Bp.  Burnet's  opinion  i;^specting 

them,  301. 


T, 


T.  C.    See  Cartwright,  Thomas. 

Tabernacle  and  Temple ;  their  sumptuous- 
ness,  II.  397. 

Taylor,  Jeremy,  his  insincerity  respecting 
Toleration,  I.  xviii. — on  the  effects  of 
persecution,  xxiii. — of  the  insecurity  of 
exceeding  Apostolic  precedents,  xxviii. — 
his  distinction  between  Sects  and  Re- 
ligions, xlii. — his  opinion  of  Creeds,  II. 
140. 

Teachers;  in  the  New  Testament;  what 
they  were,  II.  391. 

Teaching.    See  Preaching. 

Temple.     See  Tabernacle. 

■  Church;    the  Communicants  re- 

ceived the  Sacramental  elements  stand- 
ing, III.  356. 

Temporal  happiness,  or  prosperity;  how 
far  a  blessing,  II.  362 — ^the  consequence 
of  Religion ;  and  in  what  it  consists, 
365,  367. 

Ten  Commandments;  given  differently 
from  the  other  Mosuc  Laws,  L  243* 

Tenths.     See  Tithes. 

Tertullian ;  his  use  of  the  word  **  Disci- 
pline," -I.  164 — Dr.  Mosheim's  charao 
ter  of  him,  168— dted,  267 ;  IL  267, 
302— his  austerity,  I.  283 ;  III.  64 — 
opposed  to  Aerius  on  Fasting,  II.  342 — 
impugns  Ministerial  Absolution,  III. 
64— various  reading  of  a  passage  in  his 
Works,  129. 

Testament;  how  the  Old,  that  of  the  Letter; 
and  the  New,  that  of  the  Spirit,  III. 
326. 

Test,  Sacramental;  its  repeal,  I.  xix. — Dr. 
Chalmers  on  the  Declaration  substituted 
for  it,  ib. 

Thanksgivings,  particular ;  of  the  want  of, 
in  the  then  Liturgy,  II.  145 — since,  sup- 
plied; with  a  remark  on,  148. 

Things;  why  the  greatest  and  oldest  chiefly 
admired,  II.  311 — ^generally  older  than 
their  Names,  IIL  93. 

Ticket;  cited,  IL  151. 

Tillotson,  Abp. ;  mentioned,  IL  90 — dissa* 
tisfiod  with  Athana^us'  Creed,  140» 


fiS4 


INDEX. 


Time ;  what  it  U,  IL  812. 

TimoUiy;  a  query  respecting)  III.  116 — 
not  proved  to  have  had  cxcluaive  Juris- 
diction, 119. 

Tithes,  or  Tenths;  offered  to  God,  II. 
399 — whether  claimable  by  Divine 
Right,  399,  4U4— offered  by  Pagans  to 
their  gods,  400 — preposterous  judgment 
of  by  the  Canonists,  403 — whether  to  be 
alienated,  404,  406 — ^WycUffe,  on  them, 
III.  216  —  Milton's  account  of  them, 
222,  226. 

Title  at  Ordination;  what  the  name  im- 
plies, II.  415 — why  required,  416 — 
not  absolutely  necessary,  ib. 

Titles  of  honour;  how  derived  to  the 
Clergy,  III.  206. 

Titus;  a  query  respecting,  III.  116 — not 
proved  to  have  had  exclusive  Jurisdic- 
tion, 119. 

Toleration ;  testimonies  of  the  attachment 
of  the  Independents  to,  I.  xvi. — ^remarks 
of  Lords  Eldon  and  King  respecting  it, 
XX. — Act  of;  when  passed,  and  why, 
II.  29 — the  term  odious,  361~unli- 
mited,  the  ocly  expedient  for  Civil 
union,  445. 

Tory ;  Hooker  and  Baxter  the  reverse  of 
each  other,  I.  xiii. 

Toulmin,  Dr. ;  cited,  I.  xL 

Towgood,  Rev.  Micaiah;  cited,  I.  xxxii.; 
II.  279;  III.  310. 

Tradition,  oral;  its  uncertainty,  I.  130 — 
when  of  authority,  137  —  what,  used, 
II.  257. 

Traditions,  the  doctrine  of;  a  query  re- 
specting, II.  59. 

Transmigration  of  souls ;  Political  benefits 
of  the  doctrine,  II.  7. 

Transubstantiation ;  of  it,  11.289,539. 

Travers,  Walter,  B.  D. ;  chaplain  to  Lord 
Burghley,  I.  Ixx. — mentioned,  22  — 
his  Supplication  to  the  Council,  III. 
335. 

Treasures  of  the  Church  ;  the  conduct  of 
an  Archdeacon  to  save  them,  II.  406. 

Trent,  the  Council  of;  cited,  II.  372 — 
its  decrees  not  of  the  same  force  in  all 
Popish  countries,  III.  327. 

Trinity;  how  united  and  distinguished, 
II.  172,  195 — why  the  Second  Person 
of  it,  should  be  made  a  man,  rather  than 
the  First  or  Third,   173. 

Truth ;  it  alone  imparts  value  to  Antiquity 
and  Custom,  II.  21 — its  final  victory, 
329. 


U. 


Udal,  John ;  a  work  attributed  to,  I.  63. 
Unbelievers ;  want  of  readiness  in  replying 
to,  an  occasion  of  their  vaunting,  II.  10. 


Unction,  gift  of,  bestowed  on  Christ ;  what, 

IL  186. 
Uniformity;    L<»d  Bacon,  of,    I.  196 — 

Montesquieu,  of,  ib.    (see  Addendum, 

III.  536) — of  the  attempt  at,  under  Con- 

stantine,  II.  135 — visionary.  III.  324. 
Unity;  different  from  unifornuty,  I.  196. 
Universities;   why  their  Vice-Chancellors 

judges  in  Civil  causes.  III.  174. 
Unworthiness ;  the  Petition  respecting  it, 

considered,  II.  153. 
Urbid;  whom  so  called.  III.  129. 
Usher,  Abp.;  visits  Christopher  Goodman, 

I.  clxxxix. — of  the  antiquity  of  God- 

£EUhera,  II.  255. 


V. 


Valendnian ;  of  his  refusal  to  call  a  Synod, 

being  a  Layman,  III.  300. 

■  Heretics;  of  them,  II.  215. 

Valesiua;  on  the  apostlesblp  of  James,  III. 

99. 
Veal,'Abr.;  cited,  IIL  138. 
Veil,  the;   at  Churchii^  of  Women,   II. 

356. 
Vestments ;  opinions  of  the  Puritans  and 

most  eminent  Churchmen  on,    I.  cxlL 

2L 
Vice,  the ;  a  character  so  called,  I.  cxxiv. 
Virgin  Mary;    whether  conceived  in  sin, 

IIL  361. 
Virtue  ;  lies  between  extremes,  II.  275. 
Virtuous,  the ;  of  their  enjoying  ihe  good 

things  of  this  life,  and  the  Wicked  not, 

IL  362. 
Visitations  of  Bishops;  their  design,  IIL 

234. 
Voluntary  offerings ;  preferred  by  Wycliffe 

to  Tithes,  III.  216. 
Vowell,  John  ;  Hooker's  uncle,  I.  Iviii. 


W. 


Walton,  Izaak;    his  Life  of  Hooker,    I. 

xlix. — of  his  unconstitutional  doctrines, 

and  the  general  character  of  the  Life, 

Ivi. 
Warburton,  Bp.;  cited,  I.  xi.  xviii.  xxiii. 

xxiv.    XXV.   xxviii.   xxix.    xxxiv.   xxxv. 

xxxvi.   xxxvii.   xxxviii.   xxxix.    xL  xli. 

xlii.   Ivii.   cvi.  clxxxii.   106;    II.  353; 

IIL  255,  332. 
Warner,  Dr,;  cited,  IIL  89. 
Watts,  Dr.  Isaac;  cited,  I.  ciii. 
Wealth  of  the  Clergy;  of  it,  IIL  241. 


INDEX. 


635 


Wharton,  H. ;  dted,  I.  c. 
**  When  thou  hadst  overcome  the  sharpness 
of  Death,"  &c.,  in  the  Te  Deum,  con- 
sidered, II.  149. 
Whigs;    Hooker    styled,    the    Father  of 

them,  I.  xiii. 
Whiston,   Dr.;   Queen  Anne  declines  to 

confirm  his  sentence.  III.  320. 
Whitaker,  William,  D.  D. ;  cited,  I.  xxvii. 

cxlvi.  clxxvi.;  III.  108. 
Whitby,  Dr. ;  of  Confirmation,  II.  279. 
Whitgift,  Abbot ;  of  him,  I.  55. 

Abp.;  of  his  pageantry,  I.  xxxiii. 

^-of  his  temper,   Ixxviii.  cxciii.  —  the 
Jesuit  Ballard's  judgment  of  his  Writings, 
clxvi. — ^Walton  and  Strype's  account  of 
him,  see  Life  of  Hooker,  passim — (for 
other  particulars,  of  him,  see  the  Life  of 
Cartwright,   patsim)  —  his  opinion   of 
Calvin's  Writings,  22 — a  pedtio  prin- 
cipii,  of,  37 — a  promoter  of  the  Court 
of  High  Commission,   45 — remarkable 
opinion  of,  concerning  Anabaptism,  62 — 
cited,  150;  IL  106, 164,227,228,328, 
340,  356,  372,  380,  419— of  the  Apo- 
cryphal Books,  57 — of  Homilies  and 
Sermons,   60 — of  Forms  of  Prayer  in 
the  New  Testament,  92 — of  over  hasty 
reading  or  singing  the  Psalms,   122 — 
of  the  efficacy  of  Baptism,  210 — depre- 
cated the    imposition    of  the  Clerical 
Habits,  L  cxli.;  II.  395 — of  Seniors  or 
Presbyters,  III.  3 — effects  of  his  admini- 
stration of  Church  affiurs,  198. 
Whitdngham,   Dean;   extraordinary  pro- 
ceedings respecting  his  Ordinadon,  III. 
340. 
Wicked  men;  cannot  enjoy  happiness  in 
this  world,  II.  363 — ^their  prosperity  no 
just  cause  of  others'  grief,  442. 
Wickes,  Rev.  W.  W. ;  of  him,  II.  221. 
Widows ;  whom  St  Paul  means  by  there, 

IL  393. 
Wilcocks,  Thomas,  A.  M. ;  of  him,  I.  civ. 

cliii.  clxii.  22. 
Wilkins,  Bp.;   on  extempore  Prayer,  II. 

91. 
Will;  of  man,  how  influenced,  I.  88 — dif- 
fers from  appedte,  89 — firee,  90;  II. 
480— the  Will,  the  root  of  all  acdons, 
104— but  one  Will  in  God,  160 — two 
Wills  in  Christ,  t&.— of  God,  that  all 
might  be  saved,  166. 
Wilson's  Hut  of  James  I. ;  dted,  I.  cxdiL 


Witnesses  at  Baptism ;  of  them,  II.  255. 
Women  ;  apt  to  be  drawn  into  admiration 

of  New  Doctrines,  I.  31 — ef  Baptism 

by,  II.  226. 
Wood,  Anthony  k;   dted,   I.  xviiL  lii. 

Ixiii.  xcviii.  c.  cxvii. 
Words ;  their  original  use,  II.  384. 
Wordsworth,  Dr. ;  dted,  I.  Ixxv.  cxiL  27, 

39;  IL451;  IIL  376. 
Works ;  of  Supererogation,  I.  190,  492. 

See  Good  Works. 
Worship ;  in  what  sense  promised,  in  the 

office  of  Matrimony,  II.  352. 
Wren,  Bp. ;  institutes  inquiry  respecting 

Divinity  being  matter    of   Table-talk 

among  the  Laity,  I.  xxxii. 
Wycliffe,    calls    Bishops     "  a    Csesarean 

Prelacy,"  III.  200 — an  opinion  ascribed 

to,  216— K>f  the  identity  of  Bishops  and 

Priests;  and  of  Tithes,  tfr.— Treatment 

of  him  by  Hooker,  217. 


X. 


IQstus,  Bp.  of  Rome;  his  Archdeacon's 
conduct,  II.  406. 


Y. 

Telverton,  Sir  H. ;  dted,  I.  cdv. 


Z. 


Zanchy ;  lus  opinion  of  the  superiority  of 

Bishops,   as  represented   by   Hooker, 

contrasted  with  Bancroft,  III.  153. 
Zeal  and  Fear ;  roots  of  Superstition,  II. 

13. 
Zipporah ;    the  case  of  her  drcumd^g 

her  son,  considered,  II.  242. 
Zouch,  Dr. ;  dted,  I.  Ut.  Ivi.  Ixiii.  Ixxiv. 

Ixxix.  Ixxxi.  Ixxxii.  xcviii.  di.  cvL  cxiv. 

cxviii.  cxxL  cxxxiii.  cxlix.  cxdiL;  II. 

451. 

-,  Lord ;  Cartwright  attends  him  to 

Guernsey,  I.  ceil. 


THE   END. 


ADDENDA  ET  ERRATA. 

VOL.  I. 

Page  vxxtI.  Note  §,  for  p.  six.  read  p.  xxv. 
Ixxxi.  line  17,  before  by  me,  insert  or 
cxxxiii  7,  bot./for  XTll,  read  XTI, 

cxlv.  Note  if,  for  clxiv.  read  cxliv. 
clvi.   line  2,  hot.,  for  1633,  read  1638. 
ccii.  20,  for  residant,  read  resiant. 

24,  32,  for  inctiements,  read  incitements. 

196,  Note  t  should  commence  thus, — ^Tbis  position  mnst  not  be  regarded  as  involving 
the  necessity  of  Uniformity  as  to  the  mode  or  form  of  Chnrch  Government,  or  Discipline ;  which 
concerns  subsequent  Sections.    In  this  latter  sense,  "  It  is  noted,  &c. 
Page  252,  line  10,  bot,,  before  and  after  Dr.Whitgift,  ^u/  [  ]. 

VOL.  II. 

Page  130,  line  7,  bot.,  dele  the  be/ore  amazement. 

299,  7,  bot.,  dele  the  inverted  commas  before  "See. 

267,  Note  t,  before  Chrysostom.  place  " 
400,  line  11,  bot.,  for  1730  read  1738. 

VOL.'  III. 

Page  163,  line  17,  bot.,  for  Zanchios,  read  Zanchio. 
347,  8, /or  ever,  read  every. 


LONDON: — PRINTED    BY   R.    CLAY, 
BREAD-STREET-HILL. 


f 


^  fc> 


*«■ 


,# 


•1  ■ 


w 


3t
