Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



THE RULE AND EXERCISES OF 



HOLY LIVING 



WITH PRAYERS CONTAINING THE WHOLE 



DUTY OF A CHRISTIAN 







'4^ 



THE RULE AND EXERCISES OF 



olj> iHitJing 



BY JER R D.D. 



iLonbon 

WILLIAM PICKERING 

1847 



T^5 



I The Right Honourable and Truly Noble 

*" RICHARD 

Lord Vaughan, Earl of Carbery, Knight 
of the Honourable Ordof^ 

the Bath. A\t , 

My Lord, \Q ^ - -.^ .- "-^ '■.•■ / 

HAVE lived to fee Religion pamte'dup- 
on Banners, and thruft out of Churches, 
and the Temple turned into a Taber- 
nacle, and that Tabernacle made ambu- 
latory, and covered with Ikins of Beafts and torn 
curtains, and God to be worftiipped not as he is the 
Father of our Lord "Jefus (an affli<Scd Prince, the 
King of fuifcrings) nor as the God of peace (which 
two appellatives God newly took upon him in the 
New Tcftament, and glories in for ever:) but he is 
owned now rather as die Lord of Hojis^ which title 
he was plea&d to lay afide when the Kingdom of the 
Goipcl was preached by the Prince of peace. But 
when Religion puts on Armour, and God is not ac- 
knowledged by his New-Tcftament titles. Religion 
may have in it the power of the Sword, but not the 
power of Godlineis, and we may complain of this to 
God, and amongil them that are affli<^ed, but we 
have no remedy, but what we muft expefl: from the 
fellowihip of Chrift's fuilerings, and the returns of 
the God of peace. In the mean time, and now that 
b 



vi THE EPISTLE DEDICATORT. 

Religion pretends to ftranger aftions upon new prin- 
ciples, and men are apt to prefer a profperous errojr 
before an afflidted truth, and fome will think they 
are religious enough if their worfhippings have in 
them the prevailing ingredient, and the Minifters of 
Religion are fo fcattered that they cannot unite to 
flop the inundation, and from Chairs or Pulpits, 
from their Synods or Tribunals, chaftife the iniquity 
of the error and the ambition of evil Guides, and 
the infidelity of the willingly-feduced multitude, and 
that thofe few good people who have no other plot 
in their Religion but to ferve God and fave their 
Souls, do want fuch afSftances of ghoftly counfel as 
may ferve their emergent needs, and affift their en- 
deavours in the acquifl of virtues, and relieve their 
dangers when they are tempted to fin and death ; I 
thought I had reafons enough inviting me to draw 
into one body thofe advices which the feveral necef- 
fities of many men mufi: ufe at fome time or other, 
and many of them daily : that by a collection of holy 
precepts they might lefs feel the want of perfonal 
and attending Guides, and that the Rules tor con- 
dudl of Souls might be committed to a Book which 
they might always have ; fince they could not always 
have a Prophet at their needs, nor be fufiFered to go 
up to the Houfe of the Lord to inquire of the ap- 
pointed Oracles. 

I know, my Lord, that there are ibme interefted 
perfons who add fcorn to the afflictions of the Church 
of England f and becaufe fhe is afflicted by Men, call 
her forfaken of the Lord; and becaufe her fblemn 
Afl!emblies are fcattered, think that the Religion is 
loft, and the Church divorced from God, fuppofing 
Chrift (who was a Man of forrows) to be angry with 
his Spoufe when fhe is like him, [for that's the true 
ftate of the Error] and that he who promifed his 
Spirit to aflift his fervants in their troubles, will, be- 



THE EPISTLE DEDICArORT. vii 

caufe they are in trouble, take away the Comforter 
from them, who cannot be a comforter, but while 
he cures our fadnefles, and relieves their forrows, and 
turns our perfecutions into joys, and Crowns, and 
Scepters. But concerning the prefent ftate of the 
Church of England^ I confider, that becaufe we now \ 
want the bleffings of external communion in many } 
degrees, and the circumftances of a prosperous and 
unafHi(fled people, we are to take eftimate of our- 
felves with fingle judgments, and every man is to 
give fentence concerning the ftate of his own Soul 
by the precepts and rules of our Law-giver^ not by 
the after-decrees and uiages of the Church ; that is, 
by the eflential parts of Religion rather than by the 
uncertain iignifications of any exterior adherencies: 
for though it be uncertain, when a man is the Mem- 
ber of a Church, whether he be a Member to Chrift 
or no, becaufe in the Churches Net there are fifties 
good and bad ; yet we may be fure that if we be 
members of Chrift, we are of a Church to all pur- 
pofes of fpiritual religion and ialvation ; and in order 
to this give me leave to fpeak this great Truth : 

That man does certainly belong to God, who i , 
Believes and is baptifed into all the Articles of the 
Chriftian faith, and ftndies to improve his know- 
ledge in the matters of God, fo as may beft make 
him to live a holy life. 2. He that in obedience to 
Chrift worftiips God diligently, frequently, and con- 
ftantly with natural Religion, that is of prayer, 
praifes and thankfgiving. 3. He that takes all op- 
portunities to remember Chrift*s death by a frequent 
Sacrament (as it can be had ;) or elfe by inward a6ts\ 
of underftanding, will and memory (which is the 1 
fpiritual communion) fupplies the want of the external I 
rite. 4. He that lives chaftely ; 5. And is merciful ; \ 
6. And defpifes the World, ufing it as a Man, but 
never fuffering it to rifle a duty ; 7. And is juft in 



viii rUE EPISTLE DEDICATORT. 

his dealing, and diligent in his calling. 8 . He that 
\s humble in his Spirit, g. And obedient to Go- 
vernment, ID. And content in his fortune and em- 
ployment. . II. He that does his duty becaufe he 
loves God: 12. And efpecially if after all this he 
be afHidted, and patient, or prepared to fufFer afflic- 
tion for the caufe of God. The man that hath thefe 
twelve figns of grace and predeftination, does as cer- 
tainly belong to God, and is his Son, as furely as he 
is his creature. 

And if my brethren in perfecution and in the bonds 
of the Lord Jefus^ can truly fhew thefe marks, they 
£ball not need be troubled that others can fhew a 
profperous out-fide, great revenues, public aflem- 
blies, uninterrupted fucceffions of Bimops, prevail- 
ing Armies, or any arm of flefh, or lefs certain cir- 
cum fiance. Thefe are the marks of the Lord ye/us 
and the characters of a Chriflian : this is a good Re- 
ligion : and thefe things God*s grace hath put into 
our powers, and God's Laws have made to be our 
duty, and the nature of Men and the needs of Com- 
mon-wealth have made to be necefTary. The other 
accidents and pomps of a Church are things without 
our power, and are not in our choice : they are good 
to be ufed when they may be had, and they do illuf- 
tratc or advantage it : but if any of them conflitute 
a Church in the being of a Society and a Govern- 
ment, yet they are not of its conftitution as it is 
Chriflian, and hopes to be faved. 

And now the cafe is fo with us that we are re- 
duced to that Religion which no man can forbid, 
which we can keep in the midfl of a perfecution, by 
which the Martyrs in the days of our Fathers went 
to Heaven ; that by which we can be fervants of God, 
and receive the Spirit of Chrifl, and make ufe of his 
comforts, and live in his love and in charity with all 
men : and they that do fb cannot perifh. 



THE EPISTLE DEDICATORT. ix 

My Lordy I have now defcribed fome general lines 
and features of that Religion which I have more par- 
ticularly fet down in the following pages : in which 
I have neither ferved nor deferved tne intereft of any 
party of Chriftians as they are divided by unchari- 
table names from the reft of their brethren, and no 
man will have reafbn to be angry with me for re- 
fufing to mingle in his unneceflary or vicious quar- 
rels ; eipecially while I ftudy to do him good by con- 
dudling him in the narrow way to Heaven, without 
intricating him in the Labyrinths and wild turnings 
of Queftions and uncertain talkings. I have told 
what men ought to do, and by what means they 
may be ailifted ; and in moft cafes I have alfo told 
them why: and yet with as much quicknefs as I 
could think neceilary to eftabliih a Rule, and not to 
engage in Homily or Difcourfe. In the ufe of 
whicn Rules (although they are plain, uieful, and 
fitted for the beft and worft underftandings, and for 
the needs of all men, yet) I fhall defire the Reader 
to proceed with the following advices. 

I. They that will with profit make ufe of the 
proper inftruments of virtue, muft io live as if they 
were always under the Phyfician's hand. For the 
Counfels of Religion are not to be applied to the 
diftempers of the Soul as men ufe to take Hellebore; 
but they muft dwell together with the Spirit of a 
man, and be twifted about his underftanding for 
ever : They muft be ufed like nourifhment, that is, 
by a daily care and meditation; not like a fingle 
medicine, and upon the adlual prefiure of a prefent 
neceflity. For counfels and wife difcourfes applied 
to an adual diftemper, at the beft are but like ftrong 
finells to an Epileptic perfon, fometimes they may 
raife him, but they never cure him. The following 
ruled if they be made familiar to our natures, and 
the thoughts of every day, may make Virtue and 



X THE EPISTLE DEDICATORT. 

Religion become eafy and habitual : but when the 
temptation is prefent, and hath already feized upon 
fome portions of our confent, we are not fo apt to 
be counfelledy and we find no gufl or relifh in the 
Precept ; the LefTons are the fame, but the Inftru- 
ment is unftrung, or out of tune. 

2. In uiing the inflruments of virtue we muft be 
curious to diftinguifh inflruments from duties, and 
prudent advices from neceflary injun<fHons ; and if by 
any other means the duty can be fecured, let there 
be no fcruples ftirred concerning any other helps : 
only, if they can in that cafe ftrengthcn and fecure 
the duty, or help towards perfeverance, let them 
ferve in that ftation in which they can be placed. 
For there are fome perfons in whom the Spirit of 
God hath breathed fo bright a flame of love, that 
they do all their adls of virtue by perfect choice and 
without objedtion, and their zeal is warmer than that 
it will be allayed by temptation : and to fuch perfons 
mortification by Philofophical inflruments, as fafling, 
fackcloth, and other rudenefTes to the body, is wholly 
ufelefs ; it is always a more uncertain means to ac- 
quire any virtue, or fecure any duty; and if love hath 
filled all the corners of our Soul, it alone is able to 
do all the work of God. 

3 . Be not nice in flating the obligations of Reli- 
gion ; but where the duty is neceflary, and the means 
very reafonable in itfelf, difpute not too bufily whe- 
ther in all Circumflances it can fit thy particular ; 
hnt fuper totam materiam^ upon the whole, make ufe 
of it. For it is a good fign of a great Religion, and 
no imprudence, when we have fufficiently confidered 
the fubflance of afiairs, then to be eafy, humble, 
obedient, apt and credulous in the circumflances 
which are appointed to us in particular by our fpi- 
ritual Guides, or in general by all wife men in cafes 
not unlike. He that gives Alms, does befl, not al- 



THE EPISTLE DEDICATORT. xi 

ways to coniider the minutes and flridt meafures of 
his ability, but to give freely, incurioufly and abun- 
dantly. A man muft not weigh grains in the ac- 
counts of his repentance ; but for a great fin have a 
great forrow, and a great feverity, and in this take 
the ordinary advices ; though it may be a lefs rigour 
might not be infufficient : cacfifioSUeaoVf or Arithme- 
tical meafures, efpecially of our own proportioning, 
are but arguments of want of Love and of forward- 
nefs in Religion ; or elfe are inftruments of fcruple, 
and then become dangerous. Ufe the rule heartily 
and enough, and there will be no harm in thy error, 
if any fhould happen. 

4. If thou intended heartily to ferve God, and 
avoid fin in any one infiance, refufe not the hardefi; 
and moft fevere advice that is prefcribed in order to 
it, though poflibly it be a ftranger to thee ; for what- 
foever it be, cuftom will make it eafy. 

5. When any inftruments for the obtaining any 
virtue or reftraining any vice are propounded, ob- 
ferve which of them fits thy perfon, or the circum- 
fiances of thy need, and ufe it rather than the other; 
that by this means thou mayeft be engaged to watch 
and ufe ipiritual arts and obfervation about thy Soul. 
Concerning the managing of which as the intereft 
is greater, fo the necefilities are more and the cafes 
more intricate, and the accidents and dangers greater 
and more importunate ; and there is greater fkill re- 
quired than in the fecuring an eftate, or reftoring 
health to an infirm body. I wifh all men in the 
world did heartily believe fo much of this as is true ; 
it would very much help to do the work of God. 

Thus (my Lord) I have made bold by your hand 
to reach out this little fcroU of cautions to all thofe 
who by feeing your Honoured names fet before my 
Book, fhall by the fiiirnefs of fuch a Frontifpiece be 
invited to look into it. I muft confefs it cannot but 



xii THE EPISTLE DEDICATORT. 

look like a defign in me to borrow your Name and 
beg your Patronage to my book, that if there be no 
other worth in it, yet at leaft it may have the fplen- 
dor and warmth of a buming-glafs, which borrow- 
ing a flame from the Eye of Heaven, fhines and 
burns by the rays of the Sun its patron • I will not 
quit myfelf from the fufpicion : for I cannot pretend 
it to be a prefent either of itfelf fit to be offered to 
fuch a perfonage, or any part of a juft return (but I 
humbly defire you would own it for an acknowledg- 
ment) of thofe great endearments and nobleft ufages 
you have paft upon me : But fo, men in their Reli- 
gion give a piece of Gum, or the fat of a cheap 
Lamb, in Sacrifice to him that gives them all that 
they have or need : and unlefs He who was pleafed 
to employ your Lordfhip as a great Minifter of his 
Providence in making a Promife of his good to me, 
the meaneft of his fervants, \that he would never leave 
me nor forfake me] fhall enable me by greater fer- 
vices of Religion to pay my great Debt to your 
Honour, I muft ftill increafe my fcore, fince I fhall 
now Ipend as much in my needs of pardon for this 
boldnefs, as in the reception of thofe favours by 
which I ftand accountable to your Lordfhip, in all 
the bands of iervice and gratitude ; though I am in 
the deepefl fenfe of duty and affe<flion. 

My moji Honoured Lord^ 
Tour Honour* s mojl obliged 

and moJi Humble Servant ^ 

JER. TAYLOR, 



CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER I. 

Confideration of the general InftrumenU and Means ferving 
to a Holy Life^ by way of IntrodtUflon. 

Sect. L Care of Time, and the Manner of fpending it . • 4 

Twenty-three Rules for employing our Time . • • . 6 

The five Benefits of this Exercife 16 

Sect. II. Purity of Intention or Purpofe in all our Aftions, &c. 17 

Ten Rules for our Intentions 19 

Eight Signs of Purity of Intention 23 

Three Appendant Confiderations 26 

Sect. III. The Confideration and Pra&ice of the Prefence 

ofGod 28 

Six (everal Manners of the Divine Prefence 29 

Ten Rules of exercifing this Confideration 33 

The five Benefits of this Exercife 37 

Prayers and Devotions according to the Religion and 

PurpoJes of the foregoing Confiderations 39 

Devotions for ordinary Days 40 

CHAPTER. II. 
OfChriJUan Charity. 

Sect. I. Of Sobriety in the general Senfe 64 

Five evil Confequents of Voluptuoufhefs or Senfuality . 65 

Three Degrees of Sobriety 66 

Six Rules for fuppreffing Voluptuoufnefs 67 

Sect. II. Of Temperance in Eating and Drinking ... 71 

Four Meafures of Temperance in Eating 72 

Eight Signs and EfFe£b of Temperance 74 

Of Drunkennefs 75 

Seven Evil Confequefits to Drunkennefs 77 

Eight Signs of Drunkennefs 79 

Eleven Rules for obtaining Temperance 80 

Sect. III. Of Chaflity 83 

The ten evil Confequents of Uncleannefs 87 



xiv CONTENTS. 

Page 

Seven ASts of Chaftity in general 92 

Five ASts of Virginal or Maiden Chaftity 94 

Five Rules for Widows or Vidual Chaftity 95 

Six Rules for married Peribns, or Matrimonial Chaftity . 96 

Ten Remedies againft Uncleannefs 100 

Sect. IV. Of Humility 105 

Nine Arguments againft Pride, by way of Confideration • 105 

Nineteen AAs or Offices of Humility 108 

Fourteen Means and Exercifes of obtaining and increafmg 

the Grace of Humility • ii5 

Seventeen Signs of Humility 122 

Sect. V. OfModefty 124 

Four A£ls and Duties of Modefty as it is oppofed to Curi- 

ofity 124 

Six AAs of Modefty as it is oppofed to Boldnefs . • . 128 

Ten ASts of Modefty as it is oppofed to Indecency . . 130 

Sect. VI. Of Contentednefs in all Eftatcs, &c 133 

Two general Arguments for Content 135 

Eight Inftruments or Exercifes to procure Contentednefs . 139 

Eight Means to obtain Content, by way of Confideration 153 

The Conflderations applied to particular cafes .... 154 

Of Poverty or a low Fortune 162 

The Charge of many Children 169 

Violent Neceffides «... 170 

Death of Children, Friends, &c 172 

Untimely Death 173 

Death unfeafbnable 175 

Sudden Death or violent 177 

Being Childlefs 177 

Evil, or unfortunate Children 177 

Our own Death 1 78 

Prayers for the feveral Graces and parts of Chriftian So- 
briety, fitted to the neceffity of feveral Perfbns ... 1 79 

CHAPTER III. 

Of Cbrtfiian Jujiice. 

Sect. I. Of Obedience to our Superiors 188 

Fifteen AAs and Duties of Obedience to all our Superiors 189 
Twelve Remedies againft Difobedience, by way of Con- 
fideration 193 



CONTENTS, XV 

Page 

Three Degrees of Obedience 198 

Sect. II. Of Provifion of that part of Juftice which is due 

from Superiors to Inferiors iqa 

Twelve Duties of Kings and all the Supreme Power, as 

Law-givers aoo 

Two Duties of Superiors, as they are Judges .... 203 

Five Duties of Parents to their Children * 204 

Duty of Hufbands and Wives reciprocally 207 

Seven Duties of Matters of Families 209 

Duty of Guardians or Tutors 210 

Sect. III. Of Negotiation, or Civil Contra^ 211 

Thirteen Rules and Meafures of Juftice in bargaining • 211 

Sect. IV. Of Reftitution 216 

Seven Rules of making Reftitution as it concerns the Per- 

fbns obliged 2i8 

Nine Rules as it concerns other Circumftances • • • 221 
Prayers to be faid in relation to the feveral Obligations and 

Offices of Juftice 226 

CHAPTER IV. 
OfChriJiian Religion. 

Of the internal A£lions of Religion 236 / 

Sect. I. Of Faith 236 

The Seven Afts and Offices of Faith 236 

Two Signs of true Faith . 239 

Eight Means and Inftruments to obtain Faith .... 241 

Sect. II. Of Chriftian Hope 244 

The five A£ls of Hope 244 

Five Rules to govern our Hope 246 

Twelve Means of Hope, and Remedies againft Defpair . 248 -f' 

Sect. III. Of Charity, or the Love of God 254 \ 

The eight A£b of Love to God 256 

The three Meafures and Rules of Divine Love . . . 259 

Six Helps to increafe our Love to God, by way of Exercife 261 
The two feveral States of Love to God, viz. 

The State of Obedience ; the State of Zeal • • . • 264 

Eight Cautions and Rules Concerning Zeal 265 

2. Of the external Anions of Religion 268 

Sect. IV. Of Reading or Hearing the Word of God . . 269 

Five General Confideradons concerning it 270 



xvi CONTENTS. 

Page 

Five Rules for Hearing or Reading the Word . . . . 271 

Four Rules for reading fpiritual Books or hearing Sermons 272 

Sect. V. OfFafting 274 

Fifteen Rules for Chriftian Fading 274 

Benefits of Failing 281 

Sect. VI. Of keeping Feftivals, and days holy to the Lord ; 

particularly the Lord's Day 28 1 

Ten Rules for keeping the Lord^s Day and other Chriftian 

Feftivals 284 

3. Of the mixed Anions of Religion 289 

Sect. VIL Of Prayer 289 

Eight Motives to Prayer 290 

Sixteen Rules for the Practice of Prayer 291 

Six Cautions for making Vows 300 

Seven Remedies againft wandering Thoughts, &c. • . 302 
Ten Signs of Tedioufnefs of Spirit in our Prayers and all 

A£lions of Religion 303 

Eleven Remedies againft Tedioufhefs of Spirit • . • . 305 

Sect. VIIL Of Alms 310 

The eighteen feveral kinds of Corporal Alms . . • • 311 

The fourteen feveral kinds of Spiritual Alms . . . • 312 

The five feveral kinds of mixed Alms 313 

Sixteen Rules for giving Alms 313 

Thirteen Motives to Charity 322 

Remedies againft the Parents of Unmercifulneis • . . 324 

1. Nine Remedies againft Envy, by way of Confideradon 324 

2. Twelve Remedies againft Anger, by way of Exercife . 326 
Thirteen Remedies againft Anger, by way of Confideration 330 
Seven Remedies againft Covetou(he(s 333 

Sect. IX. Of Repentance 341 

Eleven A£h and Parts of Repentance ..*... 344 

Four Motives to Repentance 352 

Sect. X. Of Preparation to, and the Manner how to re- 
ceive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper .... 355 
Fourteen Rules for Preparation and worthy Communicating 358 
The Eflncds and Benefits of worthy Communicating, &c. 366 
Prayers for all Sorts of Men 369 



THE RULE AND EXERCISES OF 

HOLT UFING. 

In which an defcribed 

The MEANS and INSTRUMENTS of obtaining cvciy Virtue, 

and the Remedies againil every Vice, and Conjideratims 

ferving to the refifting all Temptations. 

Together with 

Prayers containing the whole duty of a Chriftian, and the parts 
of Devotion fitted to all Occafions, and fumifhed 

for all Neceffities. 



#• 



The Rule and Exercifes 

of Holy Living, Sec, 

CHAPTER I. 

Confideration of the general inftruments and means 
ferving to a Holy Life, by wiy of IntroduSfion. 

T is neceflary that every Man fhould con- 
fider that fince God hath given him an 
excellent nature, wifdom and choice, 
an underflanding foul, and an immor- 
tal fpirit, having made him Lord over the BeaAs, 
and but a little lower than the Angels ; he hath alfo 
appointed for him a work and a fervxce great enough 
to employ thofe abilities, and hath alfo defigned him 
to a ftate of life after this to which he can only ar- 
rive by that fervice and obedience. And therefore 
as every man is wholly God's own portion by the title 
of Creation : (o all our labours and care, all our 
powers and feculties muft be wholly employed in' 
the fervice of God, even all the days of our life,: 
that this life being ended, we may live with himl 
for ever. 

Neither is it fufficient that we think of the fer- 
vice of God as a work of the leaft nccelfity, or of 



2 THE INTRODUCTION C. i. 

fmall employment, but that it be done by us as God 
intended it ; that it be done with great earneftnefs 
and paflion, with much zeal and defire ; that we re- 
fufe no labour, that we beftow upon it much time, 
that we ufe the beft guides, and arrive at the end of 
glory by all the ways of grace, of prudence and re- 
ligion. 

And indeed if we confider how much of our lives 
is taken up by the needs of nature, how many years 
are wholly fpent before we come to any ufe of rea- 
fon, how many years more before that reafon is ufe- 
ful to us to any great purpofes, how imperfedl our 
difcourfe is made by our evil education, falfe princi- 
ples, ill company, bad examples, and want of expe- 
rience, how many parts of our wifeft and beft years 
are fpent in eating and fleeping, in neceflary bufi- 
nefles and unneceflary vanities, in worldly civilities 
and lefs ufeful circumftances, in the learning arts and 
fciences, languages or trades ; that little portion of 
hours that is left for the pradlices of piety and reli- 
gious walking with God is fo fhort and trifling, that 
were not the goodnefs of God infinitely great, it 
might feem unreafonable or impoflible for us to ex- 
pert of him eternal joys in heaven, even after the 
well fpending thofe few minutes which are left for 
God and God's fervice, after we have ferved ourfelves 
and our own occafions. 

And yet it is confiderable, that the fruit which 
comes from the many days of recreation and vanity 
is very little, and although we fcatter much, yet we 
gather but little profit : but from the few houra we 
fpend in prayer and the exercifes of a pious life, the 
return is great and profitable ; and what we fbw in 



C.I. TO HOLr LIFE. 3 

the minutes and fpare portions of a few years, grows 
up to crowns and icepters in a happy and a glorious 
eternity. 

1. Therefore, although it cannot be enjoined, 
that the greateft part of our time be fpent in the 
direct actions of devotion and religion, yet it will 
become, not only a duty, but alfo a great provi- 
dence, to lay afide for the fervices of God and the 
bufinefles of the Spirit as much as we can : becaufe 
God rewards our minutes with long and eternal hap- 
pinefs ; and the greater portion of our time we give 
to God, the more we treafure up for ourfelves ; and 
No man is a better Merchant than he that lays out his 
time upon God^ and his money upon the Poor. 

2. Only it becomes us to remember and to adore 
God's goodnefs for it, that God hath not only per- 
mitted us to ferve the neceffities of our nature, but 
hath made them to become parts of our duty ; that 
if we by directing thefe actions to the glory of God 
intend them as inftruments to continue our perfons 
in his fervice, he by adopting them into religion may 
turn our nature into grace, and „^^ ^^ ^.^ ,^ 
accept our natural aftions as ac- i<rfl/mAfitrScfl«?c; •? w 

tions or Religion. God is plealed «« ?«r»c, ««< iy«f*T5c, w« 

to elteem it for a part of his ler- wcOiorc; 

vice, if we eat or drink; fo it be Arrain,Epift.i.i.c..3. 

done temperately, and as may beft preferve our 
health, that our health may enable our fervices to- 
wards him : And there is no one minute of our lives 
(after we are come to the ufe of reafon) but we are 
or may be doing the work of God, even then when 
we moft of all ferve ourfelves. 

3 . To which if we add, that in thefe and all other 



4 THB INTRODUCTION. C i. 

actions of our lives we always fland before God, 
afting, and fpeaking, and thinking in his prefence, 
and that it matters not that our confcience is fealed 
with fecrecy, fince it lies open to God, it will con- 
cern us to behave ourfelves carefully, as in the pre- 
fence of our Judge. 

Thefe three confiderations rightly managed, and 
applied to the feveral parts and inftances of our lives, 
will be, like E/iJha ftretched upon the child, apt to 
put life and quicknefs into every part of it, and to 
make us live the life of grace, and do the work of 
God. 

I (hall therefore by way of introdudlion reduce 
thefe three to praftice, and fhew how every Chrif- 
tian may improve all and each of thefe to the advan- 
tage of piety, in the whole courfe of his life : that 
if he pleafe to bear but one of them upon his Ipirit, 
he may feel the benefit, like an univerfal inftrument, 
helpful in all fpiritual and temporal adtions. 



SECT. I. 

Thejirji general inftrument of holy Livings 

Care of our Time. 

lE that is choice of his time will alfo be 
choice of his company, and choice of his 
aftions : left the firft engage him in vanity 
and lofs, and the latter by being criminal be a throw- 
ing his time and himfelf away, and a going back in 
the accounts of Eternity. 

God hath given to man a fhort time here upon 
earth, and yet upon this fliort time Eternity depends: 




S. 1. CARE OF OUR TIME. 5 

but fo, that for every hour of our life (after we are 
perfons capable of laws, and know good from evil) 
we muft give account to the great Judge of Men 
and Angels. And this is it which our blefled Sa- 
viour told us, that we muft account for every idle 
word: not meaning, that every word which is not 
defigned to edification, or is lefs prudent, (hall be 
reckoned for a fin ; but that the time which we fpend 
in our idle talking and unprofitable difcourfings, that 
time which might and ought to have been employed 
to ipiritual and ufeful purpofes, that is to be ac- 
counted for. 

For we muft remember that we have a great 
work to do, many enemies to conquer, many evils to 
prevent, much danger to run through, many difii- 
culties to be maftered, many neceflities to ferve, and 
much good to do, many children to provide for, or 
many friends to fupport, or many poor to relieve, or 
many difeafes to cure, befides the needs of nature 
and of relation, our private and our public cares, 
and duties of the world, which neceflity and the 
providence of God hath adopted into the family of 
Religion. 

And that we need not fear this inftrument to be a 
fiiare to us, or that the duty muft end in fcruple, 
vexation and eternal fears, we muft remember that 
the life of every man may be fo ordered (and indeed 
muft) that it may be a perpetual ferving of God: The 
greateft trouble and moft bufy trade and worldly in- 
cumbrances, when they are neceflStry, or charitable, 
or profitable in order to any of thofe ends which we 
are bound to ferve, whether public or private, being 
a doing God's work. For God provides the good 



6 CARE OF OUR TIME. C. i. 

things of the world to fervc the needs of nature, by 
the labours of the Ploughman, the fkill and pains of 
the Artifitn, and the dangers and traffic of the Mer- 
chant : Thefe men are, in their callings, the Minif- 
ters of the Divine providence, and the ftewards of 
the creation, and fervants of a great ^mily of God, 
the world, in the employment of procuring necefla- 
ries for food and clothing, ornament and Phyfic. 
In their proportions alfo, a King and a Prieft and a 
Prophet, a Judge and an Advocate, doing the works 
of their employment according to their proper rules, 
are doing the work of God, becaufe they ferve thofe 
neceffities which God hath made, and yet made no 
provifions for them but by their Miniftry. So that 
no man can complain that his calling takes him off 
from religion : his calling itfelf and his very worldly 
employment in honeft trades and offices is a ferving 
of God, and if it be moderately purfued, and accord- 
ing to the rules of Chriftian prudence, will leave* 
void fpaces enough for prayers and retirements of a 
more fpiritual religion. 

God hath given every man work enough to do, 
that there fhall be no room for idlenefs ; and yet hath 
fo ordered the world, that there fhall be fpace for 
devotion. He that hath the fewefl bufineffes of the 
world, is called upon to fpend more time in the 
dreffing of his Soul ; and he that hath the mod af- 
fairs, may fo order them, that they {hall be a fervice 
of God ; whilft at certain periods they are blefTed 
with prayers and actions of religion, and all day long 
are hallowed by a holy intention. 

However, fo long as idlenefs is quite fhut out 
from our lives, all the fins of wantonnefs, foftnefs 



-S.I. CARE OF OUR TIME. 7 

and effeminacy are prevented, and there is but little 
room left for temptation : and therefore to a bufy 
man temptation is fain to climb up together with 
his bufinefles, and fins creep upon him only by ac- 
cidents and occaiions; whereas to an idle perfbn 
they come in a full body, and with open violence, 
and the impudence of a reftlefs importunity. 

Idlenefs is called the Jin of Sodom and £zek. x6. 49. 
her daughters^ and indeed is the burial ^*^"^' 
of a living man ; an idle perfbn being fo ufelefs to 
any purpofes of God and man, that he is like one 
that is dead, unconcerned in the changes and necef- 
fities of the world ; and he only lives to fpend his 
time, and eat the fruits of the earth ; like a vermin 
or a wolf, when their time comes* they die and 
perifh, and in the mean time do no good ; they nei- 
ther plough nor carry burdens; all that they do 
either is unprofitable, or mifchievous. 

Idlenefs is the gteatefl prodigality in the world : 
it throws away that which is unvaluable in refpedl 
of its prefent ufe, and irreparable when it is pafl, 
being to be recovered by no power of art or nature. 
But the way to fecure and improve our time we may 
pradife in the following Rules. 

Rules for employing our Time. 

I . In the morning, when you awake, accuflom 
yourfelf to think Jirji upon God^ or fomething in or- 
der to his fervice ; and at night alfo, let him clofe 
thine eyes : and let your fleep be neceflary and 
healthful, not idle and expenfive of time, beyond 
the needs and conveniences of nature ; and fome- 
times be curious to fee the preparation which the Sun 



8 CjiRE OF OUR TIME. C.i. 

makeSy when he is coming forth from his chambers 
of the Eaft. 

2. Let every man that hath a Calling, be diligent 
in purfuance of its emplo3rment, fo as not lightly or 
without reafonable occafion to negledt it in any of 
thofe times which are ufually and by the cuftom of 
prudent perfons and good hufbands employed in it. 

3. Let all the intervals or void fpaces of time be 
employed in prayers, reading, meditating, works of 
nature, recreation, charity, friendlinefs and neigh- 
bourhood, and means of fpiritual and corporal health: 
ever remembering fo to work in our Calling, as not 
to negledt the work of our high Calling ; but to be- 
gin and end the day with God, with fuch forms of 
devotion as fhall be proper to our neceilities. 

4. The refting days of Chriftians, and Fejiivals of 
the Church, muft in no fenfe be days of idlenefs ; 
for it is better to plough upon holy days, then to do 
nothing, or to do vicioufly : but let them be fpent 
in the works of the day, that is, of Religion and 

. Sec Chap. 4. Sea. 6. Charity, accordiog to the rules ap- 

pointed.* 

5. Avoid the company of Drunkards and bujy^ 
bodies^ and all fuch as are apt to talk much to little 
purpofe : for no man can be provident of his time 
that is not prudent in the choice of his company : 
and if one of the Speakers be vain, tedious and tri- 
fling, he that hears and he that anfwers in the dif- 
courfe arc equal lofers of their time. 

6. Never talk with any man, or undertake any 
trifling employment, merely to pafs the time away : 

s,Bcm.dctripUcicuf. ^r cvcry day well fpent may be- 
^^^^^' come a day of Salvation j and time 



^. I. CARE OF OUR TIME. 9 

rightly employed is an acceptable time. And remem- 
ber that the time thou trifleft away was given thee 
to repent in, to pray for pardon of fins, to work out 
thy falvation, to do the work of grace, to lay up againft 
the day of Judgment a treafure of good works, that 
thy time may be crowned with Eternity, 

7. In the midft of the works of thy calling often 
retire to God in p^ort prayers and ejaculations, and 
thofe may make up the want of ^ , . « ^ 
thofe larger portions of time which far apud Lucanum, 

« ,r J /* /I. /• J "" — media inter pnclia 

It may be thou defireft for devo- femper 
tion, and in which thou thinkeft X'^SfquTSaf ^ 
other perfons have advantage of 
thee ; for fo thou reconcileft the outward work and 
thy inward calling, the Church and the Common- 
wealth, the employment of the body and the intereft 
of thy Soul : for be fure that God is prefent at thy 
breathings and hearty fighings of prayer as foon as 
at the longer offices of lefs bufied perfons ; and thy 
time is as truly fan£tified by a trade, and devout, 
though fhorter, prayers, as by the longer offices of 
thofe whofe time is not filled up with labour and 
ufeful bufinefs. 

8 . Let your employment be fuch as may become 
a reafonable perfbn ; and not be a bufinefs fit for chil- 
dren or diflradted people, but fit for your age and 
under Jianding. For a man may be very idly buly, 
and take great pains to fo little purpofe, that in his 
labours and expenfe of time he fhall ferve no end 
but of folly and vanity. There are Ibme Trades 
that wholly ferve the ends of idle perfons and fools, 
and fuch as are fit to be feized upon by the feverity 
of laws, and banifht from under the fun : and there 



lo CARE OF OUR TIME. C. i. 

are ibme people who are bufy, but it is, as Domi- 
ttan was in catching flies. 

9. Let your employment be fitted to your per/on 
and calling. Some there are that employ their time 
in affairs infinitely below the dignity of their perfon, 
and being called by God or by the Republic to help 
to bear great burdens, and to judge a people, do en- 
feeble their underftandings, and difable their perfons 
by fordid and brutifh bufinefs. Thus Nero went up 
and down Greece, and challenged the fiddlers at their 
trade. Mropus a Macedonian King made Lanterns. 
Harcatius the King of Parthia was a Mole-catcher : 
Biantes the Lydian filed needles. He that is ap- 
pointed to minifter in holy things, muft not fuffer 
fecular aflFairs and fordid arts to eat up great portions 
of his employment : a Clergyman muft not keep a 
Tavern, nor a Judge be an Inn keeper; and it 
was a great idlenefs in TheophylaSl the Patriarch of 
C. P. to fpend his time in his ftable of horfes when 
he fhould have been in his ftudy, or the Pulpit, or 
faying his holy Ofiices. Such employments are the 
difeafes of labour, and the ruft of time, which it 
contradts, not by lying ftill, but by dirty employ- 
ment. 

10. Let our employment be fuch as becomes a 
Chrijlian, that is, in no fenfe mingled with fin : for 
he that takes pains to ferve the ends of covetouf- 
nefs, or minifters to another*s luft, or keeps a fhop 
of impurities or intemperance, is idle in the worft 
fenfe ; for every hour fo fpent runs him backward, 
and muft be fpent again in the remaining and fhorter 
part of his life, and fpent better. 

1 1 . Perfons of great quality, and of no trade, are 



S. I. CARE OF OUR TIME. ii 

to be moft prudent and curious in their employment 
and traffic of time. They are miferable, if their 
education hath been fo loofe and undifciplined as to 
leave them unfurnifhed of fkill to fpend their time : 
but moft miferable are they, if iiich mifgovemment 
and unfkilfulnefs make them fall into vicious and 
bafer company, and drive on their time by the fad 
minutes and periods of fin and death. *They that 
are learned know the worth of time, and the manner 
how well to improve a day; and they are to prepare 
themfelves for fuch purpofes in which they may be 
moft ufeful in order to arts or arms, to counfel in 
public or government in their Country : But for 
others of them that are unlearned^ let them choofe 
good company, fuch as may not tempt them to a 
vice, or join with them in any; but that may fupply 
their defedts by counfel and difcourfe, by way of 
condudt and converfation. Let them learn eafy and 
ufeful things, read hiftory and the laws of the Land, 
learn the cuftoms of their country, the condition of 
their own eftate, profitable and charitable contri- 
vances of it : let them fludy prudently to govern 
their families, learn the burdens of their Tenants, 
the necefllties of their neighbours, and in their pro- 
portion fupply them, and reconcile their enmities, 
and prevent their Law fuits or quickly end them ; 
and in this glut of leifure and difemployment, let 
them fet apart greater portions of their time for Re- 
ligion and the neceffities of their Souls. 

12. Let the women of noble birth and great for- 
tunes do the fame things in their proportions and 
capacities, nurfe their children, look to the afiairs of 
the houfe, vifit poor cottages, and relieve their ne- 



12 CARE OF OUR TIME. C. i. 

ceflitics, be courteous to the neighbourhood, learn in 
filence of their hufbands or their fpiritual Guides, 
read good books, pray often and fpeak little, and 
learn to do good works for necejfary ufes ; for by that 
phrafe S. Ptf r^/ exprefles the obligation of Chriftian 
women to good houfewifery, and charitable provi- 
fions for their family and neighbourhood. 

1 3 . Let all perfons of all conditions avoid all deli- 
cacy and nicenefs in their clothing or dietj becaufe 
fuch foftnefs engages them upon great miilpendings 
of their time, while they drefs and comb out all 
their opportunities of their morning devotion, and 
half the day's feverity, and fleep out the care and 
provifion for their Souls. 

14. Let every one of every condition avoid curi- 
qfity^ and all enquiry into things that concern them 
not. For all bufinefs in things that concern us not 
is an employing our time to no good of ours, and 
therefore not in order to ajia^py Eternity. In this 
account our neighbour's neceflities are not to be rec- 
koned ; for they concern us as one member is con- 
cerned in the grief of another: but going from 
houfe to houfe, tattlers and bufy-bodies, which are 
the canker and ruft of idlenefs, as idlenefs is the 
ruft of time, are reproved by the Apoftles in fevere 
language, and forbidden in order to this exercife. 

15. As much as may be, cut off all impertinent 
and ufelefs employments of your life, unneceflary and 
fantaftic vifits, long waitings upon great perfbn- 
ages, where neither duty nor neceffity nor charity 
obliges us, all vain meetings, all laborious trifles, and 
whatfoever fpends much time to no real, civil, reli- 
gious, or charitable purpofe. 



s. I. Cj4re of our time. 13 

16. Let not your recreations be lavifti fpenders of 
your time, but choofe fuch which are healthful, 
fhort, tranfient, recreative, and apt to refrefh you ; 
but at no hand dwell upon them, or make them your 
great employment: for he that fpends his time in 
fports, and calls it recreation, is like him whofe 
garment is all made of fringes, and his meat no- 
thing but fauces; they are JiealdilefsA_ chargeable, 
and ufelefs. And therefore avoid fuch games which 
require much time or long attendance; or which 
are apt to fteal thy aiFeftions from more fevere em- 
ployments. For to whatfoever thou haft given thy 
afFedtions, thou wilt not grudge to give thy time. 
Natural neceffity and the example of St, John (who 
recreated himfelf with fporting with a tame Par- 
tridge) teach us that it is lawful to caffian, CoUat. 24. 
relax and unbind our bow, but not ^- *'* 

to fuffer it to be unready or unftrung. 

17. Set apart fome portions of every day for more 
folemn devotion and religious employment, which, be 
fevere in obferving : and if variety of employment, or 

prudent affairs, or civil fociety prefs upon you, yet 
£0 order thy rule, that the neceflary parts of it be not 
omitted ; and though juft occafions may make our 
prayers ftiorter, yet let nothing but a violent, fudden 
and impatient neceflity make thee upon any one day 
wholly to omit thy morning and evening devotions ; 
which if you be forced to make very fhort, you may 
fupply and lengthen with ejaculations and fhort re- 
tirements in the day-time in the midft of your em- 
ployment, or of your company. 

1 8 . Do not the work of God negli-* 
gently and idly ; let not thy heart be 



14 CARE OF OUR TIME. C. i. 

upon the world ; when thy hand is lift up in prayer: 
and be fure to prefer an a(ftion of religion in its 
place and proper feafon before all worldly pleafure, 
letting fecular things (that may be difpenfed with in 
themfclves) in thefe circumflances wait upon the 
other ; not like the Patriarch who ran from the Al- 
tar in St. Sophia to his flable in all his Pontificals, 

and in the midfl of his office, to 

Plutarch, dc Cunofit. t /• 11 r i- 

lee a Colt newly fallen from his 
beloved and much valued Mare Phorbante. More 
prudent and fevere was that of Sir Thomas MorCy who 
being fent for by the King when he was at his 
prayers in public, returned anfwer, he would attend 
him when he had firft performed his fervice to the 
KING of Kings. And it did honour to Rujiicusy that 
when Letters from Cafar were given to him, he re- 
fufed to open them till the Philofopher had done his 
Lecture. In honouring God and doing his work 
put forth all thy ftrength; for of that time only 
thou mayeft be moft confident that it is gained, which 
is prudently and zealoufly fpent in God's fervice. 

19. When the Clock Jirikesy or however elfe you 
(hall meafure the day, it is good to fay a fhort eja- 
culation every hour, that the parts and returns of de- 
votion may be the meafure of your time : and do fo 
alfo in all the breaches of thy fleep, that thofe ipaces 
which have in them no diredt bufinefs of the world 
may be filled with religion. 

20. If by thus doing you have not fecured your 
0/ If ivToic it;)teifc5mc time by an early and fore-handed 

ti^HiX'St".^ ca'-e. yet be fure by a timely dili- 
Procop. 1. Vandal, gencc to redeem the timey that is, 

to be pious and religious in fuch inftances in which 



S. I. CjiRE OF OUR TIME. 15 

formerly you have finned^ and to beftow your time 
efpecially upon fuch graces, the contrary whereof 
you have formerly pradtifed, doing adlions of chaftity 
and temperance with as great a zeal and earneftnefs 
as you did once a£t your uncleannefs ; and then by 
all arts to watch againft your prefent and future 
dangers, from day to day fecuring your ftanding : 
this is properly to redeem your time^ that is to buy your 
fecurity of it at the rate of any labour and honefl 
arts. 

21. Let him that is moft bufied fet apart fome 
folemn time every year^ in which, for 

the time quitting all worldly bufinefs, 
he may attend wholly to fafting and prayer, and the 
dreffing of his Soul by confeflions, meditations, and 
attendances upon God ; that he may make up his 
accounts, renew his vows, make amends for his care- 
leffnefs, and retire back again from whence levity 
and the vanities of the world, or the opportunity of 
temptations, or the diftradlion of fecular affairs have 
carried him. 

22. In this we fhall be much aflifted, and we fhall 
find the work more eafy, if before we fleep every 
nifirht *we examine the aSiions of 

tbepajt day with a particular fcru- iv »<«(«««»,««{. rf.,,n,j» 
tiny, if there have been any acci- tXr^:^'::^^ 
dent extraordinary; as long dif- WS «>*»»«' ^*«^^- 
courfe, a Feaft, much bufinefs, 
variety of company. If nothing but common hath 
happened, the lefs examination will fufiice : only 
let us take care that we fleep not without fuch a re- 
colle<5tion of the actions of the day as may reprefent 
any thing that is remarkable and great either to be 



1 6 CARE OF OUR TIME. C i. 

the matter of forrow or thankfgiving : for other 
things a general care is proportionable. 

23. Let all thefe things be done prudently and 
moderately; not with fcruple and vexation. For 
thefe are good advantages, but the particulars are 
not divine commandments ; and therefore are to be 
ufed as fhall be found expedient to every one's con- 
dition. For, provided that our duty be fecured, for 
the degrees and for the inftruments every man is 
permitted to himfelf and the condudt of fuch v^ho 
fhall be appointed to him. He is happy that can 
fecure every hour to a fbber or a pious employment : 
but the duty confifls not fcrupuloufly in minutes and 
half hours, but in greater portions of time ; provided 
that no minute be employed in fin, and the great 
portions of our time be fpent in fober employment, 
and all the appointed days and fome portions of every 
day be allowed for Religion. In all the lefler parts 
of time we are left to our own elediions and prudent 
management, and to the confideration of the great 
degrees and differences of glory that are laid up in 
Heaven for us, according to the degrees of our care, 
and piety, and diligence. 

The benefits of this exercife. 

This exercife, befides that it hath influence upon 
our whole lives, it hath a fpecial efficacy for the 
preventing of i. Beggarly fins, that is, thofe fins 
which idlenefs and beggary ufually betray men to ; 
fuch as are lying, flattery, flealing and diflimulation. 
2. It is a proper antidote againfl carnal fins, and fuch 
as proceed from fulnefs of bread and emptinefs of 
employment. 3 . It is a great inflrument of pre- 



s. I. Cj4re of our time. 17 

venting the fmalleft fins and irregularities of our 
life, which ufually creep upon idle, difemployed, and 
curious perfons. 4. It not only teaches us to avoid 
evil, but engages us upon doing good, as the proper 
bufinefs of all our days. 5. It prepares us fo againft 
fudden changes, that we {hall not eafily be furprifed 
at the fudden coming of the Day of the Lord : For 
he that is curious of his time, will not eafily be un- 
ready and unfurnifhed. 




SECT. II. 

The Second general Injlrument of Holy Living, 

Purity of Intention. 

(HAT we fhould intend and defign God's 
glory in every adtion we do, whether it 
be natural or chofen, is exprefled by St. 
Paul, Whether ye eat or drink do all to 
the glory of God. Which rule when we ' ^'' '^' ^'' 
obferve, every adtion of nature becomes religious, 
and every meal is an aft of worfhip, and fliall have 
its reward in its proportion, as well as an aft of 
prayer. Blefi!ed be that goodnefs and grace of God, 
which, out of infinite defire to glorify and fave man- 
kind, would make the very works of nature capable 
of becoming afts of virtue, that all our life time we 
may do him fervice. 

This grace is fo excellent, that it ianftifies the 
mofi: common aStion of our life ; and yet fo necefl&ry, 
that without it the very beft aftions of our devotion 
are imperfcft and vicious. For he that prays out of 
cuflom, or gives alms for praife, or fafts to be ac- 

c 



1 8 PURirr OF INTENTION. C. i. 

counted religious, is but aPharifee in his devotion,and 
a beggar in his alms, and an hypocrite in his faft. But 
a holy end fandtifies all thefe, and all other aftions 
which can be made holy, and gives diftinftion to 
them, and procures acceptance. 

For, as to know the end diftinguifhes a Man from 
a Beafl ; fo to choofe a good end diftinguiflies him 
from an evil man. Hezekiah repeated his good 
deeds upon his fick-bed, and obtained favour of 
God; but the Pharifee was accounted inlblent for 
doing the fame thing : becaufe this man did it to 
Atticus cximie fi ccenat, Upbraid his brother, the other to 
siRiX:deten;i obtaiu a mcrcy of God. Zacharias 
juven. Sat. II. queftioucd with the Angel about 

his meflage, and was made (peechlefs for his incre- 
dulity ; but the bleffed Virgin Mary queflioned too, 
and was blamelefs : for flie did it to enquire after 
the manner of the thing, but he did not believe the 
thing itfelf: he doubted of God's power, or the truth 
of the meflenger ; but (he only of her own incapa- 
city. This was it which diftinguifhed the mourn- 
ing of David from the exclamation of Saul ; the 
confeflion of Pharaoh from that of Manajfes; the 
tears of Peter from the repentance of yudas : * for 

* the praife is not in the deed done, but in the man- 

* ner of its doing. If a man vifits his 

ScnccH. 

* fick friend, and watches at his pillow 

* for charity fake, and becaufe of his old affediion, we 

* approve it : but if he does it in hope of legacy, he 

* is a Vulture, and only watches for the carcafs. The 

* fame things are honeft and diflioneft : the manner 
' of doing them and the endoi the defign makes the fe- 

* paration.' 



S. 2. PURirr OF INTENTION. 19 

Hofy intention is to the actions of a man that 
which the Soul is to the body, or form to its matter, 
or the root to the tree, or the Sun to the World, or 
the Fountain to a River, or the Bafe to a Pillar : for 
without thefe the body is a dead trunk, the matter 
is fluggifh, the tree is a block, the world is darknefs, 
the river is quickly dry, the pillar ruflies into flat- 
nefs and a ruin ; and the adtion is finful, or unpro- 
fitable and vain. The poor Farmer that gave a difh 
of cold water to Artaxerxes was rewarded with a 
golden goblet ; and he that gives the fame to a T>ifci- 
pie in the name of a Difciple (hall have a crown : but 
if he gives water in defpite when the Difciple needs 
wine or a Cordial, his reward fhall be to want that 
water to cool his tongue. 

* But this Duty muft be reduced to Rules. 

Rules for our Intentions. 

1. In every action refleft upon the end; and in 
your undertaking it, confider why you do it, and 
what you propound to yourfelffor a reward^ and to 
your aBion as its end. 

2. Begin every adtion in the Name of the Father, 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghoft : the meaning of 
which is, I . That we be careful that we do not the 
adtion without the permiffion or warrant of God. 
2. That we defign it to the glory of God, if not in 
the dire<9: adlion, yet at leaft in its confequence ; if 
not in the particular, yet at leaft in the whole order 
of things and accidents. 3. That it may be fo 
blefled, that what you intend for innocent and holy 
purpofes, may not by any chance or abufe or mif- 



20 PURirr OF INTENTION. C. i. 

underftanding of men be turned into evil, or made 
the occafion of fin. 

3 . Let every adion of concernment be begun with 
prayer^ that God would not only blefs the action, but 
fanftify your purpofe ; and make an oblation of the 
aftion to God : holy and well-intended adtions being 
the befl oblations and prefents we can make to God; 
and when God is entitled to them^ he will the ra- 
ther keep the firft upon the Altar bright and fliin- 
ing. 

4. In the profecution of the aftion, renew and 
re-inkindle your purpofe hy Jhort ejaculations to thefe 
purpofes : [Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but 
unto thy Name let all praife be given .•] and confider 
[Now I am working the work of God; I am hisfer- 
vant, I am in a happy employment, I am doing my 
Majler's bujinefs, I am not at my own difpofe, I am 
ujing his talents, and all the gain muji be his f\ for 
then be fure, as the glory is his, fo the reward fhall 
be thine. If thou bringeft his goods home with in- 
creafe, he will make thee ruler over Cities. 

5. Have a care that while the Altar thus fends 
up a holy fume thou doft not fuffer the birds to 
come and carry away the facrifice : that is, let not 
that which began well, and was intended for God's 
glory, decline and end in thy own praife, or tempo- 
ral fatisfaftion, or a fin. A fl:ory told to reprefent 
the vilenefs of unchafl:ity is well begun : but if thy 
female auditor be pleafed with thy language, and 
begins rather to like thy perfon for thy ftory, then to 

diflike the crime, be watchful, left 

Qui ruratur ut mceche- -. hi \ r y \ \ r 1 

tur, moechus eft magis this goodly head oi gold deiccnd 

quam fur. Arift. Eth. • r\ 1 1 /• j j • • 

^ m nlver and brals, and end in iron 



S. 2. PURirr OF INTENTION. 21 

and clay, like Nebuchadnezzar^ s image; for from 
the end it (hall have its name and reward. 

6. If any accidental event which was not firft in- 
tended by thee can come to pafs, let it not be taken 
into thy purpofes, not at all be made ufe of: as if 
by telling a true ftory you can do an ill turn to your 
enemy, by no means do it ; but when the temptation 
is found out, turn all thy enmity upon that. 

7. In every more folemn adlion of Religion, join 
together many good ends, that the coniideration of 
them may entertain all your afFedlions, and that 
when any one ceafes, the purity of your intention 
may be fupported by another fupply. He that fafts 
only to tame a rebellious body, when he is provided 
of a remedy either in Grace or Nature, may be 
tempted to leave off his failing. But he that in his 
fail intends the mortification of every unruly appe- 
tite, and accuftoming himfelf to bear the yoke of 
the Lord, a contempt of the pleafures of meat and 
drink, humiliation of all wilder thoughts, obedience 
and humility, aufterity and charity, and the conve- 
nience and affiftance to devotion, and to do an aft of 
repentance, whatever happens, will have reafon 
enough to make him to continue his purpofe, and 
to fandlify it. And certain it is, the more good ends 
are defigned in an aftion, the more degrees of ex- 
cellency the man obtains. 

8. If any temptation to fpoil your purpofe hap- 
pens in a religious duty, do not prefently omit the 
aSHoHy but rather ftrive to redify your intention and 
to mortify the temptation. St. Bernard taught us 
this rule: For when the Devil obferving him to 
preach excellently, and to do much benefit to his 



22 PURirr OF INTENTION. C. i. 

hearers, tempted him to vainglory, hoping that the 
good man to avoid that would ceafe preaching, he 
gave this anfwer only, / neither began for thee^ nei- 
ther for thee will I make an end. 

9. In all anions which are of long continuance^ 
deliberation and abode, let your holy and pious in- 
tention be aBualy that is, that it be by a fpecial 
prayer or adtion, by a peculiar ad of refignation or 
oblation given to God : but in imaller actions, and 
little things and indifferent, fail not to fecure a pious 
habitual intention ; that is, that it be included within 
your general care, that no adtion have an ill end; 
and that it be comprehended in your general prayers, 
whereby you offer yourfelf and all you do to God's 
glory. 

10. Call not every temporal endy a defiling of thy 
intention, but only, i . When it contradidh any of 
the ends of God, or 2. When it is principally in- 
tended in an adtion of Religion. For fbmetimes a 
temporal end is part of our duty : and fuch are all 
the adtions of our calling, whether our employment 
be religious or civil. We are commanded to pro- 
vide for our family : but if the Minifler of Divine 
Offices fhall take upon him that holy calling for 
covetous or ambitious ends, or fhall not defign the 
glory of God principally and efpecially, he hath pol- 
luted his hands and his heart : and the fire of the 
Altar is quenched, or it fends forth nothing but the 
fmoke of mufhrooms or unpleafant gums. And it 
is a great unworthinefs to prefer the interefl of a 
creature before the ends of God the Almighty Cre- 
ator. 

But becaufe many cafes may happen in which a 



S. 2. PURirr OF INTENTION. 23 

man's Aeart may deceive himy and he may not well 
know what is in his own fpirit : therefore by thefe 
following figns we (hall befl make a judgment whe- 
ther our intentions be pure, and our purpofes holy. 

Signs of Purity of Intention. 

1 . It is probable our hearts are right with God, 

and our intentions innocent and secSca.i.ofthisCh. 
pious, if we fet upon adtions of ^"^^ »^- 

Religion or civil life with an affeBion proportionate 
to the quality of the work ; that we ad: our tem- 
poral affairs with a defire no greater than our necef- 
fity ; and that in adtions of Religion we be zealous, 
aftive, and operative, fo far as prudence will permit; 
but in all cafes, that we value a religious defign be- 
fore a temporal, when otherwife they are in equal 
order to their feveral ends : that is, that whatfoever 
is neceffary in order to our Soul's health be higher 
efteemed than what is for bodily; and the ne- 
ceflities, the indifpenfable neceflities of the fpirit be 
ferved before the needs of nature, when they are re- 
quired in their feveral circumflances : or plainer yet, 
when we choofe any temporal inconvenience rather 
than commit a fin, and when we choofe to do a 
duty rather than to get gain. But he that does his 
recreation or his merchandife cheerfully, promptly, 
readily, and bufily, and the works of Religion flowly, 
flatly, and without appetite, and the fpirit moves 
like Pharaoh's chariots when the wheels were off, it 
is a fign that his heart is not right with God, but 
it cleaves too much to the world. 

2. It is likely our hearts are pure and our inten- 
tions fpotlefs, wherf we are not folicitous of the opinion 



24 PURirr OF INTENTION. C. i. 

and cenfures of men ; but only that wc do our duty, 
and be accepted of God. For our eyes will certainly 
be fixed there from whence we expeft our reward : 
and if we defire that God fhould approve us, it is a 
fign we do his work, and expedl him our Pay-mafter. 

3 . He that does as well in private between God 
and his own Soul as in public ^ in Pulpits, in Theatres, 
and market-places, hath given himfelf a good tefti- 
mony that his purpofes are full of honefty, noble- 
nefs, and integrity. For what Elkanah faid to the 
Mother of Samuel^ Am not I better to thee than ten 

fons ? is moft certainly verified concerning God, that 
he who is to be our Judge is better than ten thou- 
fand witnefles. But he that would have his virtue 
publifhed, ftudies not virtue but glory. * He is not 

*juft that will not be juft without 

Seneca, Ep. 113. *', , .- 

'praife : but he is a righteous man 

* that does juftice, when to do fo is made infamous : 

* and he is a wife man who is delighted with an ill 

s. chiyf. 1. ». de Com- ' ^^^^ that is Well gotten. And in- 
pun. cordis. c j^^j ^^j ^^j^ hath a ftrange co- 

*vetoufnefs, or folly, that is not contented with 

* this reward that he hath pleafed God. And fee what 
s. Greg. Moral. 8. cap. * he gets by it. He that does good 

*^' ^ works for praife or fecular ends, 

* fells an ineflimable jewel for a trifle ; and that 

* which would purchafe Heaven for him, he parts 

* with for the breath of the people, which at the 

* beft is but air, and that not often wholefome.* 

4. It is well alfo when we are not folicitous or 
troubled concerning the effeSl and event of all our 
adions ; but that being firft by Prayer recommended 
to him, is left at his difpofe : for then in caie the 



S. 2. PURirr OF INTENTION. 25 

event be not anfwerable to our defires, or to the ef- 
ficacy of the inftfument, we have nothing left to 
reft in but the honefty of our purpofes ; which it is 
the more likely we have fecured, by how much 
more we are indifferent concerning the fuccefs. St. 
yames converted but eight perfons, when he preached 
in Spain; and our blefled Saviour converted fewer 
than his own Difciples did : And if thy labours 
prove unprofperous, if thou beefl much troubled at 
that, it is certain thou didfl not think thyfelf fecure 
of a reward for your intention, which you might 
have done if it had been pure and jufl. 

5. He loves virtue for God's fake and its own, 
that loves and honours it wherever it is to be feen ; 
but he that is envious or angry at a virtue that is not 
his own, at the perfection or excellency of his Neigh- 
bour, is not covetous of the virtue, but of its reward 
and reputation, and then his intentions are polluted. 
It was a great ingenuity in Mofesy that wifhed all 
the people might be Prophets ; but if he had defigned 
his own honour, he would have prophefied alone. 
But he that defires only that the work of God and 
Religion fhall go on, is pleafed with it, whoever is 
the inflrument. 

6. He that defpifes the world zvA all its appendant 
vanities is the befl Judge, and the mofl fecured of 
his intentions, becaufe he is the fiirthefl: removed 
from a temptation. Every degree of mortification 
is a teflimony of the purity of our purpofes : and in 
what degree we defpife fenfual pleafure, or fecular 
honours, or worldly reputation, in ^^ fame degree 
we fhall conclude our heart right to Religion and 
fpiritual defigns. 



26 PURirr OF INTENTION. C. i. 

y. When we are not folicitous concerning the /)?- 
Jiruments and means of our adlions, but ufe thofe 
means which God hath laid before us, with refigna- 
tion, indifierency and thankfiilnefs, it is a good fign 
that we are rather intent upon the end of God's 
glory, than our own conveniency or temporal fatif- 
fadtion. He that is indifferent whether he ferve 
God in riches or in poverty, is rather a feeker of God 
than of himfelf ; and he that will throw away a 
good book becaufe it is not curioufly gilded, is 
more curious to pleafe his eye, than to inform his 
under ftanding. 

8. When a temporal end confifting with a fpiri- 
tual, and pretended to be fubordinary to it, happens 
to fail and be defeated, if we can rejoice in that, fo 
God's glory may be fecured and the interefts of Re- 
ligion, it is a great fign our hearts are right, and our 
ends prudently defigned and ordered. 

When our intentions are thus balanced, regulated, 
and difcerned, we may confider, i . That this exer- 
cife is of fo univerfal efficacy in the whole courfe of 
a holy life, that it is like xh^foul to every holy adlion, 
and muft be provided for in every undertaking ; and 
is of itfelf alone fufficient to make all natural and 
indifferent adtions to be adopted into the family of 
Religion. 

2. That there are fome adtions which are ufually 
reckoned as parts of our Religion, which yet of 
themfelves are fo relative and imperfed:, that with- 
out the purity of intention they degenerate : and 
unlefs they be diredted and proceed on to thofe pur- 
pofes which God defigned them to, they return into 
the family of common, fecular, or finful adtions. 



S. 2. PURirr OF INTENTION. 27 

Thus a/ms are for charity yfajling for temperance sprayer 
is for religion^ humiliation is for humility ^ aufierity or 
fufferance is in order to the virtue of patience : and 
when thefe actions fail of their feveral ends, or are 
not diredted to their own purpofes, ^ //»j are mif-fpent, 
fafiing is an impertinent trouble, prayer is but lip- 
labour, humiliation is but hy^ocvify y fufferance is but 
vexation ; for fuch were the alms of the Pharifee, 
xhtfajl of Jezabely the prayer of jfudah reproved by 
the Prophet Ifaiahy the humiliation of Ahab, the mar- 
tyrdom of Heretics ; in which nothing is given to God 
but the body, or the forms ofReligiony but the foul 
and the power of Godlinefs is wholly wanting, 

3 . We are to confider that no intention Q2Sifan6Hfy 
an unholy or unlawful action. Saul the King dif- 
obeyed God's commandment, and fpared the cattle 
of Amalek to referve the befl for facrifice : and Saul 
the Pharifee perfecuted the Church of God with a 
defign to do God fervice : and they that killed the 
Apoftles had alfo good purpofes, but they had un- 
hallowed aftions. * When there s. Bcm. lib. de Pnc- 

* is both truth in eleftion and cha- ^^p^' 

* rity in the intention,* when we go to God in ways of 
his own choofing or approving, then our eye isfngle^ 
and our hands are clean, and our hearts are pure. 
But when a man does evil that good may come of it, 
or good to an evil purpofe, that man does like him 
that rolls himfelf in thorns that he may fleep eafily; 
he roafts himfelf in the fire, that he may quench his 
thirfl with his own fweat ; he turns his face to the 
Eafl, that he may go to bed with the Sun. I end this 
with the faying of a wife Heathen : 

* TT • ^ f 11 1 '1 ^v ^ • Publius Mimus. 

' He IS to be called evil that is 



28 PURirr OF INTENTION. C. i. 

* good only for his own fake. Regard not how fiill 

* hands you bring to God, but how pure. Many ceaie 

* from fin out of fear alone, not out of innocence or 

* love of virtue,' and they (as yet) are not to be called 
innocent but timorous. 



SECT. III. 

. The Third genera/ Injirument of Holy Lhing ; or the 
PraBice of the Prefence of God. 

HAT God is prefent in all places, that he 

fees every at^ion, hears all difcourfes, and 

underftands every thought, is no ftrange 

thing to a Chriftian ear, who hath been taught this 

doitrine not only by right reafon^ and the conftnt 

of all the wife men in the world, but alfo by God 

himfelf in holy Scripture. \Am I a 

a God afar off? Can arrf hide himfelf in fecret places 
that I Jhall not fee him ? (faith the LordyJ Do not 
If II heaven and earth ! Neither is there 
ar^ creature that is not manifefi in his 
fight: but all things are naked and open to the eyes of 
him with whom we have to do. For in 
him we live and move and have our Being. ^ 
God is wholly in every place, included in no place, 
not bound with cords, (except thofe of love) not di- 
vided into parts, not changeable into feveral fhapes, 
filling heaven and earth with his prefent power, and 
with his never-abfent nature. So St. Augujlin ex- 
prefTes this article. So that we may 

Lib. ?• dc CWit. c. to. . • >-. i t • n ■ i 

imaguie God to be as the Air and 



S. 3. PRESENCE OF GOD. 29 

the Sea^ and we all inclofed in his circle^ wrapt up 
in the lap of his infinite nature, or as infants in the 
wombs of their pregnant Mothers : and we can no 
more be removed from the prcfence of God, than 
from our own being. 

Several Manners of the 'Drome Prefence. 

The prcfence of God is underflood by us in feve- 
ral manners and to feveral purpofes. 

1 . God is prefent by bis EJfence^ which becaufe it 
is infinite cannot be contained within the limits of 
any place : and becaufe he is of an eflential purity 
and fpiritual nature, he cannot be undervalued by 
being fuppofed prefent in the places of unnatural 
uncleannefs : becaufe as the Sun reflecting upon the 
mud of flrands and fhores is unpolluted in its beams, 
fo is God not difhonoured when we fuppofe him in 
every of his Creatures, and in every part of every 
one of them, and is flill as unmixed with any un- 
handfbme adherence, as is the Soul in the bowels of 
the body. 

2. God is every where prefent by his Power. He 
rolls the Orbs of Heaven with his 

Hand, he fixes the Earth with his ^lt;:S^'^^^SZ 
Foot, he guides all the Creatures "^ ^^^ So^<^^ 
with his Eye, and refrefhes them 
with his influence : He makes the powers of Hell to 
fhake with his terrorsv and binds the Devils with his 
Word, and throws them out with his command, and 
fends the Angels on Embafiies with his decrees: 
He hardens the joints of Infants, and confirms the 
bones when they are fafhioned beneath fecretly in 
the earth. He it is that affifls at the numerous 



30 PRACTICE OF THE C. i. 

produdtions of fifhes, and there is not one hollownefs 
in the bottom of the fea but he (hews himfelf to be 
Lord of it, by fuftaining there the Creatures that 
come to dwell in it : And in the wildernefs, the 
Bittern and the Stork, the Dragon and the Satyr, the 
Unicorn and the Elk live upon his provifions, and 
revere his pow^er, and feel the force of his Al- 
mightinefs . 

3. God is more fpecially prefent in fome places by 
the feveral and more fpecial manifeftations of him- 
felf to extraordinary purpofes. Yxx^j by glory. Thus 
his feat is in Heaven ; becaufe there he fits encir- 
cled with all the outward demonftrations of his 
glory, which he is pleafed to (hew to all the inha- 
bitants of thofe his inward and fecret Courts, And 
thus they that die in the Lord may be properly faid 
to be gone to God; with whom although they were 
before, yet now they enter into his Courts, into the 
fecret of his Tabernacle, into the retinue and fplen- 
dour of his glory. Hhat is called walking with God, 
but this is dwelling or being with him. / dejire to be 
diffolved and to be with Chrijl, fo faid St. Paul. But 
this manner of the Divine prefence is referved for 
the eledt people of God, and for their portion in their 
country. 

4. God is by Grace and benediSlion fpecially pre- 
Mat. 18. 10. ^^^' ^^ holy places and in the folemn af- 
Hcb. 10. 15. femblies of his fervants. If holy people 
meet in grots and dens of the earth, when perfecu- 
tion or a public neceflity difturbs the public order, 
circumftance, and convenience, God fails not to come 
thither to them : but God is alfo by the fame or a 
greater reafon prefent there where they meet ordina- 



S. 3. PRESENCE OF GOD. 31 

rt7y, by order and public authority : there God is pre- 
fent ordinarily, that is, at every fuch meeting. God 
will go out of his way to meet his Saints, when 
themfelves are forced out of their way of order by a 
fad neceflity : but elfe, God's td/ua/ way is to be pre- 
fent in thofe places where his fer- , ^jn g 
vants are appointed ordinarily to Pfaim. 138. i, 2. 
meet. But his prefence there fignifies nothing but 
a readinefs to hear their prayers, to blefs their per- 
fons, to accept their offices, and to like even the 
circumftance of orderly and public meeting. For 
thither the prayers of confecration, the public au- 
thority feparating it, and God's love of order, and 
the reafonable cuftoms of Religion, have in ordinary, 
and in a certain degree fixed this manner of his 
prefence ; and he loves to have it fb. 

5. God is efpecially prefent in the hearts of his 
people by his holy Spirit : and indeed the hearts of 
holy men are Temples in the truth of things, and 
in type and (hadow they are Heaven itfelf. For 
God reigns in the hearts of his fervants : there is 
his Kingdom. The power of grace hath fubdued all 
his enemies : there is his power. They ferve him 
night and day, and give him thanks and praife: 
that is his glory. This is the religion and worfhip 
of God in the Temple. The Temple itfelf is the 
heart of man ; Chrift is the High Prieft, who from 
th^^e fends up the incenfe of prayers, and joins them 
to his own interceffion, and prefents all together to 
his Father; and the HolyGhofl,byhis dwelling there, 
hath alfo confecrated it into a Temple; , c^r. 3. 16. 
and God dwells in our hearts by faith, * ^^^- ^- '^• 
and Chrifl by his Spirit, and the Spirit by his puri- 



32 PRACTICE OF THE C i. 

ties : fo that we are alfo Cabinets of the Myfterious 
Trinity ; and what is this fhort of Heaven itfelf, but 
as infancy is (hort of manhood, and letters of words ? 
The fame ftate of life it is, but not the fame age. 
It is Heaven in a looking-glafs (dark, but yet true) 
reprefenting the beauties of the Soul, and the graces 
of God, and the images of his eternal glory by the 
reality of a fpecial prefence. 

6. God is fpecially prefent in the confciences of all 
perfbns, good and badj by way of Tejiimony and judg-- 
ment : that is, he is there a remembrancer to call 
our aftions to mind, a witnefs to bring them to 
judgment, and a Judge to acquit or to condemn. 
And although this manner of prefence is in this life 
after the manner of this life, that is, imperfedt, and 
we forget many adlions of our lives ; yet the great- 
eft changes of our ftate of grace or fin, our moft con- 
fiderable actions are always prefent, like Capital Letters 
to an aged and dim eye : and at the day of judgment 
God fhall draw afide the cloud, and manifeft this 
manner of his prefence more notorioufly, and make 
it appear that he was an obferver of our very thoughts; 
and that he only laid thofe things by, which becaufe 
we covered with duft and negligence, were not then 
difcerned. But when we are rifen from our duft and 
imperfeftion, they all appear plain and legible. 

Now the confideration of this great truth is of a 
very univerfal ufe in the whole courfe of the life of 
a Chriftian. All the confequents and efFedls of it 
are univerfal. *He that remembers that God ftands 
a witnefs and a judge ^ beholding every fecrecy, be- 
fides his impiety, muft have put on impudence, if 
he be not much reftrained in his temptation to fin. 



S. 3. PRESENCE OF GOD. 33 

' For the greateft part of fin is ta- s. Au^.dc ycrbisDo- 

* ken away, if a man have a wit- mmicis, c. 3. 

' nefs of his converfation : And he is a great defpifer 

* of God who fends a Boy away when he is going 

* to commit fornication, and yet will dare to do it, 
' though he knows God is prefent, and cannot be 

* fent off : as if the eye of a little Boy were more 

* awful than the all-feeing eye of God. He is to be 

* feared in public, he is to be feared in private : if 

* you go forth, he fpies you ; if you go in, he fees 

* you : when you light the candle, he obferves you ; 

* when you put it out, then alfb God marks you. 
' Be fure that while you are in his fight you behave 

* yourfelf as becomes fb holy a prefence.' But if you 
will fin, retire yourfelf wifely, and go where God 
cannot fee : for no where elfe can you be fafe. 
And certainly, if men would always actually confider, 
and really efteem this truth, that God is the great 
Eye of the World, always watching over our aftions, 
and an ever-open Ear to hear all bur words, and an 
unwearied Arm ever lifted up to crufh a finner into 
ruin, it would be the readied way in the world to 
make fin to ceafe from amongil the children of men, 
and for men to approach to the bleflfed eftate of the 
Saints in Heaven, who cannot fin, for they always 
walk in the prefence and behold the face of God. 
This inftrument is to be reduced to pradtice accord- 
ing to the following Rules. 

m 

Rules ofexercifing this confideration. 

I . Let this adlual thought often return, that God 
is omniprefent, filling every place, and fay with 

D 



34 PRACriCE OF THE C. i. 

David, Whither Jhall I go from thy 
Spirit, or whither Jhall I flee from 
thyprefence? Iflafcendup into heaven, thou art there: 
If I make my bed in hell, thou art there, &c. This 
thought by being frequent will make an habitual 
dread and reverence towards God, and fear in all thy 
aftions. For it is a great neceflity and engagement 
to do unblameably, when we aft before the Judge, 

who is infallible in his fentence, 

Bocth. 1. 5. dc Confol. ,, , . . , . . ^ . >, 

all-knowtng m his information, yi?- 
vere in his anger, powerful in his providence, and 
intolerable in his wrath and indignation « 

2. In the beginning of adtions of Religion, make 
an aSl of Adoration, that is, fblemnly worfhip God, 
and place thyfelf in God*s prefence, and behold him 
with the eye of faith, and let thy defires adlually fix 
on him as the objedt of thy worfhip, and the reafon 
of thy hope, and the fountain of thy bleffing. For 
when thou haft placed thyfelf before him and kneel- 
eft in his prefence, it is moft likely, all the following 
parts of thy devotion will be anfwerable to the wif- 
dom of fuch an apprehenfion, and the glory of fuch 
a prefence. 

3 . Let every thing you fee reprefent to your fpirit 
the prefence, the excellency and the power of God, 
and let your converfation with the creatures lead you 
unto the Creator ; for fo fhall your adlions be done 
more frequently with an adtual eye to God's pre- 
fence, by your often feeing him in the glafs of the 
Creation. In the face of the Sun you may fee God's 
beauty ; in the fire you may feel his heat warming; 
in the water his gentlenefs to refrefh you ; he it is 
that comforts your fpirit when you have taken Cor- 



S. 3. PRESENCE OF GOD. 35 

dials : it is the dew of Heaven that makes your 
field give you bread ; and the breafts of God are the 
bottles that minifter drink to your neceffities. This 
Philofophy, which is obvious to every man*s experi- 
ence, is a good advantage to our piety, and by this 
aft of underflanding our wills are checked from vio- 
lence and mifdemeanour. 

4. In your retirement mzkt frequent Colloquies or 
(hort difcourfings between God and thy own Soul. 
Seven times a day do I praife thee : and in the night 

feafon alfo I thought upon thee while I was walking. 
So did David: and every adt of complaint or thanks- 
giving, every adt of rejoicing or of mourning, every 
petition and every return of the heart in thefe inter- 
courfes, is a going to God, an appearing in his pre- 
fence, and a reprefenting him prefent to thy fpirit 
and to thy neceffity. And this was long fince by a 
Ipiritual perfbn called, a building to God a Chapel in 
our heart. It reconciles Martha's employment with 
Mary's Devotion, Charity and Religion, the necefli- 
ties of our calling and the employments of devotion. 
For thus in the midft of the works of your Trade, 
you may retire into your Chapel [your Heart] and 
converfe with God by fi-equent addrefTes and returns. 

5 . Reprefent and offer to God aBs of love and fear ^ 
which are the proper efFedts of this apprehenfion, 
and the proper exercife of this confideration. For 
as God is every where prefent by his power ^ he calls 
for reverence and godly fear : as he is prefent to thee 
in all thy needs^ and relieves them, he deferves thy 
love: and fince in every accident of our lives we 
find one or other of thefe apparent, and in mofl 
things we fee both, it is a proper and proportionate 



36 PRACTICE OF THE C. i. 

return, that to every fuch demonftration of God, we 
exprefs ourfelves fenfible of it by admiring the Di- 
vine goodnefs, or trembling at his prefence, ever 
obeying him becaufe we love him, and ever obeying 
him becaufe we fear to offend him. This is that 
which EnocA did, who thus walked with God. 

6. Let us remember that God is in us, and that 
we are in him : we are his . workmanfhip, let us not 
deface it ; we are in his prefence, let us not pollute 

it by unholy and impure aftions. God 
hath alfo wrought all our works in us : 
and becaufe he rejoices in his own works, if we de- 
file them, and make them unpleafant to him, we 
walk perverfely with God, and he will walk crook- 
edly toward us. 

7. God is in the bowels of thy brother ; refrefh 
them when he needs it, and then you give your 
alms in the prefence of God, and to God, and he feels 
the relief which thou providefl for thy brother. 

8. God is in every place ; fuppofe it therefore to 
be a Church : and that decency of deportment and 
piety of carriage, which you are taught by Religion 
or by cuflom or by civility and public manners to ufe 
in Churches, the fiime ufe in all places : with this dif- 
ference only, that in Churches let your deportment 
be religious in external forms and cicrumflances alfo; 
but there and every where let it be religious in ab- 
flaining from fpiritual indecencies, and in readinefs 
to do good adtions : that it may not be faid of us as 

jer. II. 15. fccun. God once complained of his peo- 
vuig.Edit. pig^ j^f^y f^^^f^ ^y i^^i^^^j j^^^ 

wickednefs in my houfe ? 

9. God is in every creature : be cruel towards none, 



S. 3. PRESENCE OF GOD. 37 

neither abufe any by intemperance. Remember 
that the creatures, and every member of thy own 
body is one of the lefler cabinets and receptacles of 
God. They are fuch which Goii hath blefled with 
his prefence, hallowed by his touch, and feparated 
from unholy ufe by making them to belong to his 
dwelling. 

10. He walks as in the prefence of God thatcon- 
verfes with him in frequent prayer and frequent 
communion, that runs to him in all his neceflities, 
that afks counfel of him in all his doubtings, that 
opens all his wants to him, that weeps before him 
for his fins, that afks remedy and fupport for his 
weaknefs, that fears him as a Judge, reverences him 
as a Lord, obeys him as a Father, and loves him as 
a Patron. 

TAe Benefits of this exercife. 

The benefits of this confideration and exercife 
being univerfal upon all the parts of piety, I (hall 
lefs need to fpecify any particulars; but yet moft 
properly this exercife of confidering the Divine pre- 
fence is, I . An excellent help to prayer^ producing 
in us reverence and awfiilnefs to the Divine Majefty 
of God^ and afhial devotion in our ofiices. 2. It pro- 
duces a confidence in God^ and fearlefilhefs of our 
enemies, patience in trouble, and hope of remedy, 
fince God is fo nigh in all our fad accidents, he is a 
difpofer of the hearts of men and the events of 
things, he proportions out our trials, and fupplies us 
with remedy, and where his rod firikes us^ his fiaff 
fupports us. To which we may add this, that God, 
who is always with us, is efpecially by promife with 



38 PRACTICE OF THE C. i. 

us in tribulation^ to turn the mifery into a mercy, 
and that our greateft trouble may become our ad- 
vantage by entitling us to a new manner of the Di- 
vine prefence. 3. It is apt to produce y^ andrejoic- 
ing in God, wre being more apt to delight in the 
partners and witneffes of our converfation ; every 
degree of mutual abiding and converfing being a re- 
lation and an endearment : we are of the fame 
houfehold with God ; he is with us in our natural 
adtions to preferve us, in our recreations to reftrain 
us, in our public a(ftions to applaud or reprove us, 
in our private to obferve us, in our deeps to watch 
by us, in our watchings to refrefh us : and if we 
walk with God in all his ways as he walks with us 
in all ours J we (hall find perpetual reafbns to enable 
us to keep that rule of God, Rejoice in the Lord aU 
ways, and again I fay rejoice. And this puts me in 
mind of a faying of an old religious pcrfon, [There 

is one way of overcoming our 

In vita St. Antho. «/%, . /••. i-i 

ghoftly enenues; Ipintual mirth, 
and a perpetual bearing of God in our minds.] 
This effectively refifts the Devil, and fuffers us to 
receive no hurt from him. 4. This exercife is apt 
alfo to enkindle holy dejires of the enjoyment of God, be- 
caufe it produces joy when we do enjoy him ; the 
fame defires that a weak man hath for a Defender, 
the fick man for a Phyfician, the poor for a Patron, 
the child for his Father, the efpoufed Lover for her 
betrothed. 5. From the fame fountain are apt to 
ifliie humility of fpirity apprehenfions of our great 
didance and our great needs, our daily wants and 
hourly fupplies, admiration of God's unfpeakable 
mercies : It is the caufe of great modefty and de- 



S. 3. PRESENCE OF GOD. 39 

cency in our actions; it helps to recolledlion of 
mind, and reftrains the fcatterings and loofenefs of 
wandering thoughts; it eftabliflies the heart in 
good purpofes, and leadeth on to perfeverance ; it 
gains purity and perfedlion, (according to the faying 
of GoJ to Abrahanty Walk before me^ and be perfeSf) 
holy fear, and holy love, and indeed every thing that 
pertains to holy living: virhen we fee ourfelves 
placed in the Eye of God, who fets us on work and 
will reward us plenteoufly, to ferve him with an 
Eyefervice is very pleafing; for he alio fees the 
heart : and the want of this confideration was de- 
clared to be the caufe why Ifrael finned fo grievoufly, 
\For they fay ^ the Lord hathfqrfaken the E^ck. 9. 9. 
earthy and the Lord feet h not : therefore ^^^' '*^' "• 
the land is full of bloody and the city full of perverfenefs.^ 
What a child would do in the eye of his Father, and 
a Pupil before his Tutor, and a Wife in the prefencc 
of her Hufband, and a Servant in the fight of his 
Mailer, let us always do the fame : for we are made 
a fpeSlacle to Gody to Angels y and to men ; we are al- 
ways in the fight and prefence of the All-feeing and 
Almighty God, who alfo is to us a Father and a 
Guardian, a Hufband and a Lord. 

Prayers and Devotions according to the religion and 
purpofes of the foregoing Conf derations. 

I. 

For grace tofpend our time well. 

O ETERNAL Gody who from all eternity doll 
behold and love thy own glories and perfedlions 
infinite, and has created me to do the work of God 



40 DEVOTIONS FOR AdC. i. 

after the manner of men, and to ferve thee in this 
generation, and according to my capacities ; give me 
thy grace, that I may be a curious and prudent 
fpender of my time, fo as I may beft prevent or re- 
fift all temptation, and be profitable to the Chris- 
tian Commonwealth, and by difcharging all my 
duty may glorify thy Name. Take from me all 
flothfulnefs, and give me a diligent and an adlive 
fpirit, and wifdom to choofe my employment ; that 
I may do works proportionable to my perfbn, and 
to the dignity of a Chriftian, and may fill up all 
the fpaces of my time with adtions of Religion and 
Charity; that when the Devil aflaults me, he may 
not find me idle, and my dearefi: Lord at his fud- 
den coming may find me bufy in lawful, neceflary 
and pious aftions, improving my talent intrufted to 
me by thee, my Lord, that I may enter into the 
joy of my Lord, to partake of his eternal felicities, 
even for thy mercy fake, and for my deareft Sa- 
viour*s fake. Amen. 

Here follows the devotion of ordinary days ; for the 
right employment of thofe portions of time which 
every day muji allow for Religion. 

Thefrji Prayers in the Morning asfoon as we are 

drejfed. 

Humbly and reverently compofe yourfelf with heart 
lift up to God and your head bowed ^ and meekly 
kneeling upon your knees y fay the Lords Prayer : 
after which ufe the following ColleSlsj or as many 
of them as you Jhall choofe . 

Our Father which art in Heaven, Gfr. 



H 



AdC.i. ORDINART DATS. 41 

I. 

An ASi of Adoration J being the Song that the 

Angels Jing in Heaven. 

OLY, Holy, Holy, Lord God Al- 
mighty, which was, and is, and is 
to come : Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men, the 
Air and the Sea give glory, and honour, 
and thanks to him that fitteth on the 
throne, who liveth for ever and ever. All the blefled 
fpirits and Souls of the righteous caft 
their crowns before the throne, and ^* '°* 
worfliip him that liveth for ever and ever. * Thou 
art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, 
and power; for thou haft created all things, and 
for thy pleafure they are and were crea- 
ted. * Great and marvellous are thy 
works, O Lord God Almighty : Juft and true are thy 
ways, thou King of Saints. Thy wifdom is infinite, 
thy mercies are glorious ; and I am not worthy, O 
Lord, to appear in thy prefence, before whom the 
Angels hide their faces. O Holy and Eternal Jefus^ 
Lamb of God, who wert flain from the beginning of 
the world, thou haft redeemed us to God by thy blood 
out of every nation, and haft made us unto our God 
Kings and Priefls, and we fhall reign with thee for 
ever. Blefling, honour, glory and power be unto 
him that fitteth on the throne, and to the Lamb for 
ever. Amen. 

n. 

An ASl of Thankfgivingy being the Song of David 

for the Morning. 

OING praifes unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, 
^^ and give thanks to him for a remembrance of 



42 DEVOTIONS FOR Ad. C. i. 

his holinefs. For his wrath endureth but the twink- 
ling of an eye, and in his pleafure is life : heavinefs 
may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morn- 
ing. Thou, Lord, haft preferved me this night from 
the violence of the fpirits of darknefs, from all fad 
cafualties and evil accidents, from the wrath which 
I have every day deferved : thou haft brought my 
Soul out of hell, thou haft kept my life from them 
that go down into the pit : thou haft fhewed me 
marvellous great kindnefs, and haft blefTed me for 
ever : the greatnefs of thy glory reacheth unto the 
heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds. Therefore 
ftiall every good man fing of thy praife without 
ceafing. O my God, I will give thanks unto thee 
for ever. Allelujah. 

III. 

An A£i of Oblation or prefenting ourfehes to God 

for the day. 

A/f OST Holy and Eternal God, Lord and Sover- 
^^ eign of all the creatures, I humbly prefent to 
thy Divine Majefty myfelf, my Soul and body, my 
thoughts and my words, my actions and intentions, my 
paflions and my fufferings, to be diipofed by thee to 
thy glory, to be blefled by thy providence, to be 
guided by thy counfel, to be fanftified by thy Spirit, 
and afterwards that my body and Soul may be re- 
ceived into glory : for nothing can perifli which is 
under thy cuftody ; and the enemy of Souls cannot 
devour what is thy portion, nor take it out of thy 
hands. This day, O Lord, and all the days of my 
life I dedicate to thy honour, and the actions of my 
calling to the ufes of grace, and the Religion of all 



Ad. C. I. ORDINART DATS. 43 

my days to be united to the merits and interceflion 
of my holy Saviour "Jefusy that in him and for him 
I may be pardoned and accepted. Amen. 

IV, 

An ASt of Repentance or Contrition. 

T^OR as for me, I am not worthy to be called thy 
^ fervant, much lefs am I worthy to be thy fon ; 
for I am the vileft of finners and the worft of men, a 
lover of the things of the world and a defpifer of the 
things of God, [proud and envious ^ i^ftful and intern- 
perate] greedy of fin and impatient of reproof, de- 
firous to feem holy and negligent of being fo, trans- 
ported with intereft, fooFd with prefumption and 
falfe principles, difturbed with anger, with a peevifh 
and unmortified fpirit, and difordered by a whole 
body of fin and death. Lord, pardon all my fins for 
my fweeteft Saviour's fake : thou who didft die for me. 
Holy Je/us, fave me and deliver me : referve not my 
fins to be puniflied in the day of wrath and eternal 
vengeance ; but wafli away my fins, and blot them 
out of thy remembrance, and purify my Soul with 
the waters of repentance and the blood of the crofs; 
that for what is pafl: thy wrath may not come out 
againft me, and for the time to come I may never 
provoke thee to anger or to jealoufy. O juft and dear 
God, be pitiful and gracious to thy fervant. Amen. 

V. 
The Prayer or Petition. 

BLESS me, gracious God, in my calling to fuch 
purpofes as thou fhalt chooie for me, or employ 
me in : Relieve me in all my fadnefles, make my 



44 DEVOTIONS FOR Ad C. i. 

bed in my ficknefs, give me patience in my fbrrows, 
confidence in thee, and grace to call upon thee in 
all temptations. O be thou my guide in all my ac- 
tions, my Proteftor in all dangers : give me a 
healthful body, and a clear underftanding, a fandi- 
fied and Jufl, a charitable and humble, a religious 
and a contented fpirit : let not my life be miferablc 
and wretched, nor my name flained with fin and 
fhame, nor my condition lifted up to a tempting 
and dangerous fortune; but let my condition be 
blefied, my converfation ufeful to my Neighbours 
and pleafing to thee, that when my body fhall lie 
down in itsbed of darknefs, my Soul may pais into 
the Regions of light, and live with thee for ever, 
through "Jefus Chrift. Amen. 

VI. 

An ASt of Inter cejjion or Prayer for others ^ to be ad- 
ded to this or any other Office ^ as our Devotion^ or 
Duty^ or their Needs fliall determine us. 

OGOD of infinite mercy, who haft compaflion 
on all men, and relieveft the neceflities of all 
that call to thee for help, hear the prayers of thy 
fervant who is unworthy to afk any petition for him- 
felf, yet in humility and duty is bound to pray for 
others. 

* O let thy mercy defcend upon the whole Church, 

preferve her in truth and peace, in 

For tki Church, ^ . , ^ ^ . ,, ^ i 

unity and lafety, m all ftorms, and 
againft all temptations and enemies ; that (he offer- 
ing to thy glory the never-ceafing facrifice of prayer 
and thankfgiving, may advance the honour of her 



AdC. I. ORDINART DATS. 45 

Lord, and be filled with his Spirit, and partake of 
his glory. Amen. 

* In mercy remember the King ; preferve his 
perfon in health and honour, his 

crown m wealth and dignity, his 
kingdoms in peace and plenty, the Churches under 
his proteftion in piety and knowledge, and a ftrift 
and holy Religion : keep him perpetually in thy 
fear and favour, and crown him with glory and im- 
mortality. Amen. 

* Remember them that minifter about holy things, 
let them be clothed with righte- 

oufnefs, and fing with joyfulnefs, ^^ ' ^' 
Amen. 

* Blefs thy fervant [my Wife, or Hufband] with 
health of body and of fpirit. O 

let the hand of thy blefling be 
upon his [or her] head night and day, and fupport 
him in all neceffities, ftrengthen him in all tempta- 
tions, comfort him in all his forrows, and let him be 
thy fervant in all changes; and make us both to 
dwell with thee for ever in thy favour, in the light 
of thy countenance, and in thy glory. Amen. 

* Blefs my Children with healthful bodies, with 
good underftandings, with the 

1 */* /*1 C • • *1 ^OT OUT CmldtCfl, 

graces and girts of thy Ipirit, with 
fweet difpofitions and holy habits, and fandlify them 
throughout in their bodies and Souls and fpirits, and 
keep them unblamable to the coming of the Lord 
yefus. Amen. 

* Be pleafed, O Lord, to remember my friends, 
all that have prayed for me, and ^^ p,unds and 
all that have done me good. [Here Benrfaawrs. 



46 DEVOTIONS FOR Ad. C. i. 

name fuch whom you would Jpecially recommend J] Do 
thou good to them and return all their kindnefs 
double into their own bofom, rewarding them with 
bleffings, and fanftifying them with thy graces, and 
bringing them to glory. 

* Let all my family and kindred, my neighbours 

^ ., and acquaintance \here name what 

For our Fofiufy. ** , ^ 

Other relation you pleafe] receive 
the benefit of my prayers, and the bleffings of God; 
the comforts and fupports of thy providence, and the 
fandtification of thy Spirit. 

* Relieve and comfort all the perfecuted and af- 

flidled: fpeak pea ce to troubl ed 

For all in mfiry, - . •-'' — --r — *• -^ I 

confciences : ftrengthen the weak : 
confirm the ftrong : inftrud: the ignorant : deliver 
the opprefled from him that fpoileth him, and relieve 
the needy that hath no helper; and bring us all by the 
waters of comfort and in the ways of righteoufnefs 
to the kingdom of reft and glory, through jfefus 
Chrift our Lord. Amen. 

To God the Father of our Lord Jefus Chrift, To 
the eternal Son that was incarnate and born of a Vir- 
gin, To the Spirit of the Father and the Son, be all 
honour and glory, worftiip and thankfgiving now 
and for ever. Amen. 

Another Form of Prayer for the Morning. 

In the Name of the Father^ and of the Son, and of the 

Holy Ghoji. Our Father, &c. 

I. 



M 



Ad. C. I. ORDINART DATS. 47 

thee with the loweft humility of my Soul and body, 
and give thee all thanks and praife for thy infinite and 
cflential glories and perfedlions, and for the continual 
demonftration of thy mercies upon me, upon all 
mine, and upon thy holy Catholic Church. 

II. 

1 ACKNOWLEDGE, dear God, that I have de- 
ferved the greateft of thy wrath and indignation ; 
and that if thou hadfl dealt with me according to my 
deferving, I had now at this inftant been defperately 
bewailing my miferies in the forrows and horrors 
of a fad eternity. But thy mercy triumphing over 
thy juftice and my fins, thou haft ftill continued to 
me life and time of repentance ; thou haft opened 
to me the gates of grace and mercy, and perpetually 
calleft upon me to enter in and to walk in the paths 
of a holy life, that I might glorif^^,,the«tRd?b6^1o- 
rified of thee eternally. 

III. 




BEHOLD, O God, for this^ ^^, ,^^^^^ 
fpeakable goodnefs, for the prelervafion of me 
this night, and for all other thy graces and bleflings, 
I offer up my Soul and body, all that I am, and all 
that I have, as a Sacrifice to thee and thy fervice ; 
humbly begging of thee to pardon all my fins, to 
defend me from all evil, to lead me into all good, 
and let my portion be amongft thy redeemed ones 
in the gathering together of the Saints, in the King- 
dom of grace and glory. 



48 DEVOriONS FOR AdC.i^ 

IV. 

GUIDE me, O Lord, in all the changes and va- 
rieties of the world, that in all things that fhall 
happen, I may have an evennefs and tranquillity of 
fpirit ; that my Soul may be wholly refigned to thy 
Divineft Will and pleafure, never murmuring at thy 
gentle chaftifements and fatherly correction, never 
waxing proud and infolent, though I feel a torrent 
of comforts and profperous fuccefles. 

V. 

FIX my thoughts, my hopes and my defires upon 
Heaven and heavenly things ; teach me to dc- 
fpife the world, to repent me deeply for my fins; 
give me holy purpofes of amendment, and ghoftly 
ftrength and affiftances to perform faithfully what- 
foever I fhall intend pioufly. Enrich my undef- 
ftanding with an eternal treafure of Divine truths, 
that I may know thy will ; and thou who workeft 
in us to will and to do of thy good pleafure, teach 
me to obey all thy Commandments, to believe all 
thy Revelations, and make me partaker of all thy 
gracious promifes. 

• 

VI. 

TEACH me to watch over all thy ways, that I 
may never be furprifed by fudden temptations 
or a carelefs fpirit, nor ever return to folly and vanity. 
Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouthy and keep 
the door of my lips, that I offend not in my tongue 
neither againfl piety nor charity- Teach mc to 
think of nothing but thee, and what is in order to 



AdC.i. ORDINART DATS. 49 

thy glory and fervice ; to fpeak nothing but thee 
and thy glories ; and to do nothing but what becomes 
thy fervant, whom thy infinite mercy by the graces 
of thy holy Spirit hath fealed up to the day of Re- 
demption. 

VII. 

LET all my paflions and afFeftions be fo mortified 
and brought under the dominion of grace, that 
I may never by deliberation and purpofe, nor yet by 
levity, raflmefs, or inconfideration offend thy Divine 
Majefly. Make me fuch as thou wouldfl have me 
to be : flrengthen my faith, confirm my hope, and 
give me a daily increafe of charity, that this day and 
ever I may ferve thee according to all my opportu- 
nities and capacities ; growing from grace to grace, 
till at lafl by thy mercies I fhall receive the confum- 
mation and perfeftion of grace, even the glories of 
thy Kingdom in the full fruition of the face and ex- 
cellencies of God the Father, the Son, and the holy 
Ghofl, to whom be glory and praife, honour and 
adoration given by all Angels, and all Men, and all 
creatures, now and to all eternity. Amen. 

To this may be added the Prayer of Inter cejjion for 
others whom we are bound to remember y which is 
at the end of the foregoing Prayer ; or elfe you 
may take fuch fpecial Prayers which follow at the 
end of the fourth Chapter [for Parents, for Chil- 
dren, Gfr.] 

After which conclude with this Ejaculation. 

Now in all tribulation and anguifh of fpirit, in all 

E 



50 DEVOTIONS FOR Add. 

dangers of Soul and body, in profperity and adver- 
fity, in the hour of death and in the day of Judg- 
ment, holy and moft blefled Saviour yefus^ have 
mercy upon me, fave me and deliver me and all 
faithful people. Amen. 

Between this and noon ufually are f aid the pubHc 
Prayers appointed by Authority j to which all the 
Clergy are obliged^ and other devout perfons that 
have leifure to accompany them. 

After noon or at any time of the day^ when a devout 
perfon retires into his clofet for private Prayer y or 
fpiritual exercifes, he may fay the following devo- 
tions. 



I 



An exercife to be ufed at any time of the day. 

N the Name of the Father, and of the Son, Gfr. 
Our Father, &c. 



The Hymn colleSled out of the Pfalms^ recounting the 

excellencies and great nefs of God. 

O be joyful in God all ye lands jfng praifes unto the 

honour of his Name, make his name to be 
glorious. * O come hither and behold 
the works of God, how wonderful he is in his doings to- 
wards the children of men. He ruleth with bis power 
for ever. 

He is the father ofthefatherlefsy and defendeth the 

caufe of the widow y even God in his holy 
habitation. He is the God that maketb 



AdC.i. ORDINART DATS. 51 

men to be of one mind in a houfe^ and bringeih the pri-- 
f oners out of captivity ; but letteth the runagates con-- 
tinue infcarcenefs. 

It is the Lord that commandeth the waters y it is the 
glorious God that maketh the thunder. 
* // is the Lord that ruleth thefea : the 
voice of the Lord is mighty in operation ^ the voice of 
the Lord is a glorious voice. 

Let all the earth fear the Lord : Jiand in awe of 
him all ye that dwell in the world. Thou 
/halt Jhew us wonderful things in thy V^'^^' ^' 
righteoufnefs y O God of our falvation^ 
thou that art the hope of all the ends of the Earthy and 
of them that remain in the broad Sea. 

Glory be to the Father, &c. 

Or this. 

O Lordy thou art my God, I will exalt thee : I will 
praife thy Name, for thou hajl done won- 
derful things : thy counfels of old are 
faithfulnefs and truth. 

Thou in xhy Jlrength fetteji faji the Mountains, and 
art girded about with power. Thou 
Jiilleji the raging of the Sea, and the noife 
of his waves, and the madnefs of his people. 

They alfo that remain in the uttermoji parts of the 
Earth Jhall be afraid at thy tokens ; thou 
that makejl the outgoings of the morning 
and evening to praife thee. 

O Lord God of Hojis, who is like unto thee ? thy 
truth, moft mighty Lord, is on every fde. 
Among the gods there is none like unto ^^'%sW, 
thee ; O Lord, there is none that can do 



52 DEVOTIONS FOR Ad C. i. 

as thou doeji. * For thou art great and doejl won- 
drous things y thou art God alone. 

God is very greatly to be feared in the counfel of the 

Saints y and to be had in reverence of all 
'* ^' them that are round about him. 
Right eoufnefs and equity is in the habitation of thy feat ^ 

mercy and truth Jhall go before thy face. 
pf^L ^6 6^ * Glory and worjhip are before him^ 

power and honour are in his SanStuary. 
Thou, Lord J art the thing tliat I long for, thou art 

my hope even from my youth. Through 
thee have I been holden up ever f nee I 
was born ; thou art he that took me out of my mother^ s 
womb : my praife Jhall be always of thee. 

Glory be to the Father, ^c. 

After this may be read fome portion of holy Scrip- 
ture out of the New Tejiament or out of the Sa- 
piential books of the Old, viz. Proverbs, Eccle- 
fiaftes, &c. becaufe thefe are of great ufe to piety 
and to civil converfation. Upon which when you 
have a while meditated, humbly compofng yourfelf 
upon your knees, fay asfolloweth. 

Ejaculations. 

My help Jiandeth in the name of the Lord who hath 

poa. 114. 7. made Heaven and Fiarth. 
Shew the light of thy countenance upon thy fervant, 

Pfai. 80. 3. and I Jhall befafe. 
Do well, O Lord, to them that be true of heart, and 

Pfai. 125. 4. evermore mightily defend them. 
DireSl me in thy truth and teach me, for thou art 

Pfai. 15. 5. my Saviour and my great Mafter. 



AdC.i. ORDINART DATS. 53 

Keep me from fin and death eternal, and from my 
enemies vifible and invifible. 

Give me grace to live a holy life, and thy favour 
that I may die a godly and happy death. 

Lord, hear the prayer of thy fervant, and give me 
thy holy Spirit, 

The Prayer. 

O ETERNAL God, merciful and gracious, 
vouchfafe thy favour and thy bleffing to thy 
fervant : let the love of thy mercies and the dread 
and fear of thy M ajefty make me careftil and inqui- 
fitive to fearch thy will, and diligent to perform it, 
and to perfevere in the practices of a holy life, even 
to the laft of my days. 

II. 

KEEP me, O Lord, for I am thine by creation ; 
guide me, for I am thine by purchafe, thou 
haft redeemed me by the blood of thy Son ; and 
love me with the love of a Father, for I am thy 
child by adoption and grace : let thy mercy pardon 
my fins, thy providence fecure me from the punifh- 
ments and evils I have deferved, and thy care watch 
over me, that I may never any more offend thee : 
make me in malice to be a child; but in under- 
flanding, piety, and the fear of God, let me be a 
perfedt man in Chrift, innocent and prudent, readily 
furnifhed and inftrudted to every good work. 



54 DEVOTIONS FOR Ad C. i. 

III. 

KEEP me, O Lord from the deftroying Angel, 
and from the wrath of God : let thy anger 
never rife againft me, but thy rod gently corredl my 
follies, and guide me in thy ways, and thy ftafF iup- 
port me in all fufferings and changes. Preferve me 
from fradture of bones, from noifome, infectious and 
fliarp fickneiles, from great violences of Fortune and 
fudden furprifes: keep all my fenfes entire till the 
day of my death, and let my death be neither fudden, 
untimely, nor unprovided : let it be after the com- 
mon manner of men, having in it nothing extraor- 
dinary, but an extraordinary piety, and the manifefl- 
ation of thy great and miraculous mercy. 

IV. 

LET no riches make me ever forget myfelf, no 
poverty ever make me to forget thee : Let no 
hope or fear, no pleafure or pain, no accident with- 
out, no weaknefs within, hinder or difcompofe my 
duty, or turn me from the ways of thy Command- 
ments. O let thy fpirit dwell with me for ever, 
and make my Soul juft and charitable, full of honefty, 
full of Religion, refblute and conftant in holy pur- 
pofes, but inflexible to evil. Make me humble 
and obedient, peaceable and pious : let me never 
envy any man's good, nor deferve to be defpifed 
myfelf: and if I be, teach me to bear it with meek- 
nefs and charity. 



AdC. I. ORDINART DATS. 55 

V. 

C^ IVE me a tender confcience ; a converfation dif- 
^ creet and affable, modeft and patient, liberal 
and obliging ; a body chafte and healthful, compe- 
tency of living according to my condition, content- 
ednefs in all eflates, a refigned will and mortified 
affeAions : that I may be as thou wouldfl have me, 
and my portion may be in the lot of the righteous, 
in the brightnefs of thy countenance, and the glories 
of eternity. Amen. 

* Holy is our God. * Holy is the Almighty. 
* Holy is the Immortal. Holy, holy, holy 
Lord God of Sabaoth, have mercy upon me. 

A form of Prayer for the Evening to befaid by fuch 
who have not time or opportunity to fay the public 
Prayers appointed for this office. 

I. 

O ETERNAL God, great Father of Men and 
Angels, vvrho hafl eflablifhed 
the Heavens and the Earth in a 
wonderful order, making day and night to fucceed 
each other ; I make my humble addrefs to thy Di- 
vine Majefly, begging of thee mercy and protection 
this night and ever. O Lord, pardon all my fins, 
my light and rafh words, the vanity and impiety of 
my thoughts, my unjufl and uncharitable a<5tions, 
and whatfoever I have tranfgrefled againfl thee this 
day, or at any time before. Behold, O God, my 
Soul is troubled in the remembrance of my fins, in 



56 DEVOTIONS FOR j4d C. 2. 

the frailty and finfulnefs of my flefli expofed to 
every temptation, and of itfelf not able to refift any. 
Lord God of mercy, I earneftly beg of thee to give 
me a great portion of thy grace, fuch as may be fuffi- 
cient and efFedtual for the mortification of all my 
fins and vanities and diforders : that as I have for- 
merly ferved my luft and unworthy defires, fb now 
I may give myfelf up wholly to thy fervice and the 
fludies of a holy life. 

11. 

BLESSED Lord, teach me frequently and fadly 
to remember my fins ; and be thou pleafed to 
remember them no more : let me never forget thy 
mercies, and do thou ftill remember to do me good. 
Teach me to walk always as in thy prefence : En- 
noble my Soul with great degrees of love to thee, 
and confign my fpirit with great fear, religion and 
veneration of thy holy Name and laws ; that it may 
become the great employment of my whole life to 
ferve thee, to advance thy glory, to root out all the 
accurfed habits of fin, that in holinefs of life, in hu- 
mility, in charity, in chaftity and all the ornaments 
of grace, I may by patience wait for the coming of 
our Lord J ejus. Amen. 

IIL 

TEACH me, O Lord, to number my days, that 
I may apply my heart unto wifdom ; ever to 
remember my laft: end, that I may not dare to fin 
againft thee. Let thy holy Angels be ever prefent 
with me to keep me in all my ways from the malice 



AdC.i. ORDINART DATS. S7 

and violence of the fpirits of darknefs, from evil 
company, and the occafions and opportunities of 
evil, from perifliing in popular judgments, from all 
the wrays of finful fhame, from the hands of all mine 
enemies, from a finful life, and from defpair in the 
day of my death • Then, O brighteft Jefu^ fhine 
glorioufly upon me, let thy mercies and the light of 
thy countenance fufrain me in all my agonies, weak- 
nefles and temptations. Give me opportunity of a 
prudent and fpiritual Guide, and of receiving the 
holy Sacrament ; and let thy loving Spirit fo guide 
me in the ways of peace and fafety, that vsrith the 
teftimony of a good confcience and the fenfe of thy 
mercies and refrefliment, I may depart this life in 
the unity of the Church, in the love of God, and a 
certain hope of falvation through Jefus Chrift our 
Lord and moft blefTed Saviour. Amen. 

Our Father, Gfr. 

Another form of Evening Prayer which may alfo be 

ufed at bed-time. 

Our Father, Sfr. 

I WILL lift up my eyes unto the hills ^ from whence 
Cometh my help. 

My help comet h of the Lord which » . m. i, c. 
made heaven and earth. 

He will not fuffer thy foot to be moved: he that 
keepeth thee will not flumber. 

Behold y he that keepeth Ifrael /hall neither Jlumber 
norjleep. 

I'he Lord is thy keeper^ the Lord is thy jhade upon 
thy right hand. 



58 DEVOTIONS FOR Ad. C. i 

Thefunjhall not/mite thee by day^ neither the mwn 
by night. 

The Lordjhall preferve thee from all evil ; he Jhall 
preferve thy Soul. 

The Lordjhall preferve thy going out and thy coming 
in, from this time forth for evermore. 

Glory be to the Father, &c. 

I. 

VISIT, I befeech thee, O Lord, this habitation 
with thy mercy, and me with thy grace and 
falvation. Let thy holy Angels pitch their tents 
round about and dwell here, that no illufion of the 
night may abufe me, the fpirits of darknefs may not 
come near to hurt me, no evil or fad accident op- 
prefs me ; and let the eternal Spirit of the Father 
dwell in my Soul and body, filling every corner of 
my heart with light and grace. Let no deed of 
darknefs overtake me ; and let thy bleffing, moft 
blefled God, be upon me for ever, through yefus 
Chrift our Lord. Amen. 

IL 

INTO thy hands, moft blefled Jefu, I commend 
my Soul and body, for thou haft redeemed both 
with thy moft precious blood. So blefs and fandtify 
my fleep unto me, that it may be temperate, holy 
and fafe, a refrelhment to my wearied body, to ena- 
ble it fo to ferve my Soul, that both may ferve thee 
with a never-failing duty. O let me never fleep in 
fin or death eternal, but give me a watchful and a 



AdC. I. ORDINART DATS. 59 

prudent fpirit, that I may omit no opportunity of 
ferving thee ; that whether I fleep or wake, live or 
die, I may be thy fervant and thy child : that when 
the work of my life is done, I may reft in the bofom 
of my Lord, till by the voice of the Archangel, the 
trump of God, I fhall be awakened and called to fit 
down and feaft in the eternal fupper of the Lamb. 
Grant this, O Lamb of God, for the honour of thy 
mercies, and the glory of thy name, O moft merci- 
ful Saviour and Redeemer ye/us. Amen. 

IIL 

BLESSED be the God and Father of our Lord 
Jefusj who hath fent his Angels, and kept me 
this day from the deftrudlion that walketh at noon, 
and the arrow that flieth by day ; and hath given 
me his Spirit to reftrain me from thofe evils to which 
my own weaknefles, and my evil habits, and my un- 
quiet enemies would eafily betray me. Bleiled and 
for ever hallowed be thy name for that never-ceaf- 
ing fliower of blefling by which I live, and am con- 
tent and bleffed, and provided for in all neceffities, 
and fet forward in my duty and way to heaven. 

♦ Blefling, honour, glory and power be unto him 
that iitteth on the throne, and to the Lamb, for ever 
and ever. Amen. 

* Holy is our God. * Holy is the Almighty. 

* Holy is the Immortal. Holy, holy, holy Lord 
God of Sabaoth, have mercy upon me. 



6o DEVOTIONS FOR AdC.i. 



Ejaculations andjhort meditations to be ufed in the 

Night when we wake. 

Stand in awe and Jin not : commune with your own 

heart upon your bed and be flill. I will 

P{a.l A. ^ 8 

lay me down in peace andjleep : for thou 
Lordy only makeji me to dwell infafety. 

O Father of Spirits and the God of all flefh, have 
mercy and pity upon all fick and dying Chriftians, 
and receive the Souls which thou haft redeemed re- 
turning unto thee. 

Bleiled are they that dwell in the heavenly yeru- 

falem^ where there is no need of the Sun, 

Rev n 2 1 

neither of the Moon to jhine in it : for 
the glory of God does lighten it^ and the Lamb is the 

light thereof And there Jhall be no 
night there, and they need no candle; for 
the Lord God giveth them light, and they Jhall reign 
for ever and ever. 

Meditate on Jacob's wreftling with the Angel all 
night: be thou alfo importunate with God for a 
blefling, and give not over till he hath blefled thee. 

Meditate on the Angel pafling over the children 
of Ifrael, and deftroying the Egyptians for difbbedi- 
ence and oppreffion. Pray for the grace of obedi- 
dience and charity, and for the Divine protedlion. 

Meditate on the Angel who deftroyed in a night 
the whole army of the AJfyrians for fornication. 
Call to mind the fins of thy youth, the fins of thy 
bed ; and fay with David, My reins chajien me in the 
night Jeajon and my Soul refufeth comfort. Pray for 
pardon and the grace of chaftity. 



AdC.i. ORDINART DATS. 6i 

Meditate on the agonies of Chrift in the garden, 
his fadnefs and afHidtion all that night ; and thank 
and adore him for his love that made him fuffer fo 
much for thee : and hate thy fins which made it ne- 
ceilary for-the Son of God to fuffer fo much. 

Meditate on the four laft things, i. The cer- 
tainty of Death. 2. The terrors of the day of 
Judgment. 3. The joys of Heaven. 4. The pains 
of Hell, and the eternity of both. 

Think upon all thy friends which are gone before 
thee, and pray that God would grant to thee to meet 
them in a joyful refurredlion. 

^he day of the Lord will come as a thief in the nighty 
in the which the heavens Jhall pafs 
away with a great noife^ and the ele- * « e > 3. 10, n, la. 

ments Jhall melt with fervent heat^ the earth alfo and 
the works that are therein Jhall be burnt up. Seeing 
then that all thefe things Jhall be dijfolvedy what man- 
ner ofperfons ought we to be in all holy converfation and 
godlinefs^ Looking for and hajiening unto the coming of 
the day of God? 

Lord, in mercy remember thy fervant in the day 
of Judgment. 

Thou fhalt anfwer for me, O Lord my God. In 
thee, O Lord, have I trufted : let me never be con- 
founded. Amen. 

I DESIRE the Chrijiian Reader to obferve that all 
thefe offices or forms of Prayer (if they Jhould 
be ufed every day) would not fpend above an hour and 
a half: but becaufe fome of them are double (and 
fo but one of them to be ufed in one day) it is much 
lefs : and by affording to God one hour in 24. thou 



62 DEVOTIONS FOR Add. 

mayeft have the comforts and rewards of devotion. 
But he that thinks this is too much^ either is very bufy in 
the world or very carelefs of heaven. However I have 
parted the Prayers into fmaller portions^ that he may 
ufe which and how many he pleafe in any one of the 
forms. 

AdSt&. 2. 

A Prayer for Holy Intention in the beginning and 

purfuit of any conjiderable ASlion^ as 

Study y Preachings &c. 

O ETERNAL God, who haft made all things 
for man, and man for thy glory, {kn6tify my 
body and Soul, my thoughts and my intentions, my 
words and adtions, that whatfoever I fliall think, or 
ipeak, or do, may be by me defigned to the glorifi- 
cation of thy Name, and by thy blefling it may be 
efFedtive and fuccefsful in the work of God, accord- 
ing as it can be capable. Lord, turn my neceffitics 
into virtue, the works of nature into the works of 
grace, by making them orderly, regular, temperate, 
fubordinate, and profitable to ends beyond their own 
proper efficacy : and let no pride or felf-feeking, no 
covetoufiiefs or revenge, no impure mixture or un- 
handfbme purpofes, no little ends and low imagina- 
tions pollute my fpirit, and unhallow any of my 
words and actions : but let my body be a fervant of 
my fpirit, and both body and fpirit fervants of ye/us ; 
that doing all things for thy glory here, I may be 
partaker of thy glory hereafter, through Je/iis Chrift 
our Lord. Amen. 



AdC. I. ORDINART DATS. 63 

AdStet. 3. 

A Prayer meditating and referring to the Divine 

prefence. 

This Prayer isjpecially to be ufed in temptation to 

private Jins. 

O Almighty God, infinite and eternal, thou fiUefl 
all things with thy prefence; thou art every 
where by thy eflence and by thy power, in heaven 
by Glory, in holy places by thy grace and favour, in 
the hearts of thy fervants by thy Spirit, in the con- 
fciences of all men by thy teftimony and obfervation 
of us. Teach me to walk always as in thy prefence, 
to fear thy Majefty, to reverence thy wifdom and 
omnifcience, that I may never dare to commit any 
indecency in the eye of my Lord and my Judge ; but 
that I may with fb much care and reverence de- 
mean myfelf, that my Judge may not be my accufer, 
but my Advocate ; that I, exprefling the belief of 
thy prefence here by careful walking, may feel the 
effects of it in the participation of eternal glory, 
through yefus Chrift. Amen. 



CHAPTER 11. 

OF CHRISTIAN SOBRIETY. 

Sect. I. 
Of Sobriety in the general fenfe. 

HRISTIAN Religion in all its moral 
parts .is nothing elfe but the Liaw of 
Nature, and great Reafon, complying 
with the great necelTities of all the 
world, and promoting the great profit of all rela- 
tions, and carrying us through all accidents of va- 
riety of chances to that end which God hath from 
eternal ages purpofed for all that live according to 
it, and which he hath revealed in Jefus Chrift : and 
according to the Apoftle's Arithmetic hath but thcfc 
three parts of it; i. Sobriety, 2. Juftice, 3. Reli- 
gion, For the grace of God bringing fahation hath 
appeared to all men, teaching us that denying ungodli- 
nefs and worldly lujis, we Jhould live i. Soberly, 2. 
Righteoufly, 3. Godly in this prefent world, looking for 
that blejfed hope and glorious appearing of the great 
God and our Saviour Jefus Chrift. The firft contains 
all our deportment in our peribnal and private capa- 
cities, the feir treating of our bodies and fpirits. 
The fccond enlarges our duty in all relations to our 



S. I. CHRISTIAN SOBRIETr. 65 

Neighbour. The third contains the offices of dire<Sb 
Religion, and intercourfe with God. 

Chrijiian Sobriety is all that duty that concerns 

ourfelves in the matter of meat and drink and plea- 

fures and thoughts ; and it hath within it the duties 

of I . Temperance, 2. Charity, 3. Humility, 4. Modejly, 

5. Content. 

It is a ufing feverity, denial and fruftration of our 
appetite when it grows unreafonable in any of thefe 
inflances : the neceffity of which we fhall to beft 
purpofe underftand by confidering the evil confe- 
quences of fenfuality, effeminacy, or fondnefs after 
carnal pleafures. 

Rvil confequents of Voluptuoufnefs or Senfuality. 

I • A longing after fenfual pleafures is a diflblu- 
tion of the fpirit of a man, and makes it loofe, foft 
and wandering, unapt for noble, wife, or fpiritual 
employments; becaufe the principles upon which 
pleafure is chofen and purfued, are ^ ^^ ^.^^^ ^.^.^. ^ 
fbttifh, weak and unlearned, fuch *>us quam animus tc, 

r iiti/» 101 eft quod gaudeas, 

as prefer the body before the Soul, Qjii animum vincunt, 

^f • ^ % t^ r r r quam quos animus. 

the appetite before realon, lenle ?empcr ^robiorcs ciu- 
before the fpirit, the pleafures of «^^-Trinum. 

a (hort abode before the pleafures of eternity. 

2. The nature of fenfual pleaiiire is vain, empty 
and unfatisfying, biggeft always in expedlation, and 
a mere vanity in the enjoying, and leaves a fting and 
thorn behind it when it goes off. Our laughing if 
it be loud and high commonly ends in a deep figh, 
and all the inflances of pleafure have a fling in the 
tail, though they carry beauty on the face and fweet- 
nefs on the lip. 

F 



66 CHRISTIAN SOBRIETT. C. 2. 

3. Senfual pleafure is a great abufe to the fpirit 
of a man, being a kind of fafcination or witchcraft 

, , , ^ blinding the underftanding and en- 
•rt» ^.ims irp*»/pi(r», i|»v- flaving the will. And he that 

Vf, ft fAvHf aXX»f /jA ixiyov , 1 • /* i i i 

airrh tto,Kiur^. Knows he IS tree-bom or redeemed 

Arrian, c. ^. 1. ,. ^j^j^ ^j^^ j^j^^j ^^ ^j^^ g^^^ of God, 

will not eafily fufFer the freedom of his Soul to be 
entangled and rifled. 

4. It is moft contrary to the ftate of a Chriftian ; 
, , , whofe life is a perpetual exercife. 

Air n tirraxTUf, iwyicoTpo- a wreftliug aud warfare, to which 

firr, awix*^ai wtfAfAArm, /-ri t r i«rt_i i- t 

yvfAfiiiir^^fkif^ynm.Scc. lenlual pkalure dilables hmi, by 
p» . cap. 35- yielding to that enemy with whom 

he muft ftrive if ever he will be crowned. And 

this argument the Apoftle intimated : 

1 Cor. 9. 25. f /I . J /• n ' 

He that Jtrtveth jor majtertes ts tempe- 
rate in all things : Now they do it to obtain a corruptible 
crown J but we an incorruptible. 

5. It is by a certain confequence the greateft im- 
pediment in the world to martyrdom : that being a 
fondnefs, this being a cruelty to the flefh ; to which 
a Chriftian man arriving by degrees muft firft have 
crucified the leiTer affedlions : for he that is over- 
come by little arguments of pain will hardly conient 
to lofe his life with torments. 



Degrees of Sobriety. 

Againft this Voluptuoufnefs Sobriety is oppofcd 
in three degrees. 

I . A defpite or difaffeStion to pleafures^ or a refolv- 
ing againft all entertainment of the inftances and 
temptations of fenfuality : and it confifts in the in- 



S. I. CHRISTIAN SOBRIETr. 67 

ternal faculties of will and underftanding, decreeing 
and declaring againft them, difapproving and dif- 
liking them upon good reafon and ftrong refolu- 
tion. 

2. A fight and aStual war againfl all the tempta- 
tions and offers of fenfual pleafure in all evil inftances 
and degrees : and it confifts in prayer, in fading, in 
cheap diet, and hard lodging, and laborious exercifes, 
and avoiding occafions, and ufing all arts and induftry 
of fortifying the Spirit, and making it fevere, manly 
and Chriftian. 

3 . Spiritual pleafure is the bigheft degree of So- 
briety : and in the fame degree in wrhich we relifh 
and are in love with fpiritual delights, the hidden 
Manna, with the fweetneffes of de- 

votion, with the joys of thankfgiving, 
with rejoicings in the Lord, with the comforts of 
hope, with the delicioufnefs of charity and alms- 
deeds, with the fweetnefs of a good confcience, with 
the peace of meeknefs, and the felicities of a con- 
tentol Spirit; in the fame degree we difrelifh and 
loath the Jiufks jof fwinifh lufts, and the parings of 
the apples of Sodom ; and the tafte of iinful pleafures 
is un^voury as the Drunkard's vomit. 

Rules for fupprejfing Voluptuoufnefs. 

The precepts and advices which are of beft and 
of general ufe in the curing of fenfuality are thefe : 

I . Accuftom thyfelf to cut off all fuperfluity in 
the provifions of thy life ; for our defires will en- 
large beyond the prefent pofleffion fo long as all the 
things of this world are unfatisfying : if therefore 



68 CHRISTIAN SOBRIETT. C. 2. 

you fufFer them to extend beyond the meafures of 
neceflity or moderated conveniency, they will ftill 
fwell : but you reduce them to a little compafs, when 
you make nature to be your limit. We muft more 
Defidena tua parvo re- take care that our defircs (hould 
S.rr;5rb«Tder„r ceafe, than that they (hould be fa- 

senec. tisfied : and therefore reducing 
them to narrow fcantlings and fmall proportions is 
the bed inftrument to redeem their trouble, and 
prevent the dropfy, becaufe that is next to an uni- 
verfal denying them : it is certainly a paring off 
from them all unreafonablenefs and irregularity. For 

whatfoever covets unfeemly things^ 

Lib. 3. Eth. cap. 12. , . /* # » • 

and ts apt to Jwell to an tnconve" 
ntent bulky is to be chajiened and tempered: and fuch 
arefenfualityy and a Boy, faid the Philofopher. 

2. Supprefs your fenfual defires in their firft ap- 
Faciiius eft initia afFcc- proach ; for then they are leaft, 

JZT^^.r^^'i^^^^^^ "^""^ and thy faculties and eleftion arc 

impetum regere. J 

senec. cp. 86. ftronger : but if they in their 
weaknefs prevail upon thy ftrengths, there will be 
no refifting them when they are increafed, and thy 
abilities leflened. Tou Jhall fcarce obtain of them to 
end J if you fuffer them to begin. 

3. Divert them with fome laudable employment, 
and take off their edge by inadvertency, or a not-at- 
tending to them. For fince the faculties of a man 
cannot at the fame time with any (harpneis attend 
to two objects, if you employ your fpirit upon a 
book or a bodily labour, or any innocent and indif- 
ferent employment, you have no room left for the 
prefentjrpuble of a fenfual temptation. For to this\ 

f fenfe it was that Alexander told the Queen of Caria, \ 



S. I. CHRISTIAN SOBRIETT. 69 

that his Tutor Leonidas had provided two Cooks for 

him [Hard marches all night, and 

a Imall dmner the next day : J theie 

tamed his youthful aptnefles to diifolution, fo long 

as he ate of their provifions. 

4. Look upon pleafures not upon that fide that is 
next the Sun, or where they look beauteoufly, that 
is, as they come towards you to be enjoyed ; for then 
they paint, and finile, and dreis themfelves up in 
tinfel and glafs, gems and counter- ^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^^ 
fcit imagery : but when thou haft feffas ct panitcntii plena* 

.^ 11-r rii •! animis noltris natura fub- 

rined and diicompoled them with jecit, quo minus cupid^ 

^•1 . r tr t ^» J repetantur. Seneca, 

enjoymg their falle beauties, and L»ta venire venui, 
that they begin to go off, then be- '''^' ^^''' ^''^''' 
hold them in their nakednefs and wearinefs. See 
what a figh and forrow, what naked unhandfbme 
proportions and a filthy carcafe they difcover ; and 
the next time they counterfeit, remember what you 
have already difcovered, and be no more abufed. 
And I have known fome wife perfons have advifed 
to cure the paflions and longings of their children 
by letting them tafte of everything they pafiionately 
fancied; for they fhould be fure to find lefs in it 
than they looked for, and the impatience of their 
being denied would be loofened and made flack t 
and when our wifhings are no bigger than the thing 
deferves, and our ufages of them according to our 
needs, (which may be obtained by trying what they 
are, and what good they can do us) we fhall find in 
all pleafures fi> little entertainment, that the vanity 
of the poflfcfllon will foon reprove the violence of 
the appetite. And if this permiflion be in innocent 
inftances, it may be of good ufe : But Solomon tried 



70 CHRISriAN SOBRIETr. C. 2. 

it in all things^ taking his fill of all pleafures, and 
foon grew weary of them all. The fame thing we 
may do by reafon which we do by experience, if 
either we will look upon pleafures as we are fure 
they look when they go off, after their enjoyment ; 
or if we will credit the experience of thofe men who 
have tailed them and loathed them. 

5. Often confider and contemplate the joys of 
Heaven, that when they have filled thy defircs which 
are the fails of the Soul, thou mayeft fleer only 
thither, and never more look back to Sodom. And 
when thy Soul dwells above, and looks down upon 
the pleafures of the World, they feem like things at 
diflance, little and contemptible, and men running 
after the fatisfaftion of their fottifh appetites feem 
foolifh as fifhes, thoufands of them running after a 
rotten worm that covers a deadly hook ; or at the 
befl but like children with great noife purfuing a 
bubble rifing from a walnut-fhell, which ends fboner 
than the noife. 

6. To this, the example of Chrifl and his Apof- 
tles, of Mo/es and all the Wife men of all ages of the 
world will much help ; who underflanding how to 
diflinguifh good from evil did choofe a fad and me- 
lancholy way to felicity, rather than the broad, plea- 
fant and eafy path to folly and mifery. 

But this is but the general. Its firfl particular is 
Temperance. 



S.2. OF TEMPERANCE. 71 




SECT. II. 

Of Temperance in Eating and Drinking. 

lOBRIETY is the bridle of the paffions of 
defire, and Temperance ,g^^. .^. ^^^, 
is the bit and curb of ru ix*'^ -^ iit^f^a,. 

that bridle, a reftraint put into a man's mouth, a 
moderate ufe of meat and drink, fo as may beft con- 
fifl with our health, and may not hinder but help 
the works of the Soul by its neceflary fupporting us, 
and miniftering cheerfulnefs and refrefhment. 

Temperance confifts in the actions of the Soul 
principally: for it is a grace that choofes natural 
means in order to proper and natural 'and holy ends : 
it is exercifed about eating and drinking becaufe 
they are neceflary ; but therefore it permits the ufe 
of them only as they minifter to lawful ends ; it 
does not eat and drink for pleafure, but for need, 
and for refrefhment, which is a part or a degree of 
need. . I deny not but eating and drinking may be, 
and in healthful bodies always isy with pleafure ; be- 
caufe there is in nature no greater pleafure than that 
all the appetites which God hath made fhould be 
fatisfied : and a man may choofe a morfel that is 
pleaiant, the lefs pleafant being rejected as being lefs 
ufeful, lefs apt to nourifh, or more agreeing with an 
infirm flomach, or when the day is feflival by order, 
or by private joy. In all thefe cafes it is permitted 
to receive a more free delight, anch to defign it too, 
as the lefs principal : that is, that the chief reafon 
why we choofe the more delicious, be the ferving 



72 OF TEMPERANCE C. 2. 

that end for which fuch refrefhments and choices 
are permitted. But when delight is the only end, 
and refts itfelf, and dwells there long, then eating 
and drinking is not a ferving of God, but an inordi- 
nate adlion ; becaufe it is not in the way to that end 
whither God diredled it. But the choofing of a 
delicate before a more ordinary difh is to be done as 
other human aftions are in which there are no de- 
grees and precife natural limits defcribed, but a 
latitude is indulged ; it mud be done moderately, 
prudently, and according to the accounts of wife, 
religious and fober men : and then God who gave 
us fuch variety of creatures, and our choice to ufe 
which we will, may receive glory from our temper- 
ate ufe, and thankfgiving, and we may ufe them in- 
differently without fcruple, and a making them to 
become fnares to us, either by too licentious and 
ftudied ufe of them, or too reftrained and fcrupulous 
fear of ufing them at all, but in fuch certain circum- 
flances in which no man can be fure he is not mif- 
taken. 

But Temperance in meat and drink is to be efti- 
mated by the following Meafures. 

Meafures of Temperance in Eating. 

I . Eat not before the time, unlefs neceffity, of cha- 
rity, or any intervening accident, which may make 
it reafonable and prudent, fhould happen. Remem- 
ber it had almoft coft Jonathan his life becaufe he 
tailed a little honey before the fun went down, con- 
trary to the King's commandment ; and although a 
great need, which he had, excufed him from the fin 



S. 2. IN EATING. 73 

of gluttony, yet it is inexcufable when thou eateft 
before the ufual time, and thrufteft thy hand into 
the difti unfeafbnably, out of greedinefs of the plea- 
fure, and impatience of the delay. 

2. Eat not hajiily and impatiently ^ but with fuch 
decent and timely adtion, that your eating be a hu- 
man ad;, fubjed to deliberation and choice, and that 
you may confider in the eating: whereas he that 
cats haftily, cannot confider particularly of the cir- 
cumftances, degrees, and little accidents and chances 
that happen in his meal ; but may contrad: many 
little indecencies, and bejuddenly flirprifed. 

3. Eat not delicately^ or nicely j that is, be not 
troublefbme to thyfelf or others in the choice of thy 
meats, or the delicacy of thy fauces. It was im- 
puted as a fin to the fons oflfraelj that they loathed 
Manna and longed for flefh : the Sluailsjiuck in their 
nojlrils^ and the wrath of God fell upon them. And 
for the manner of drefllng, the fons of Eli were 
noted of indifcreet curiofity : they would not have 
the flefh boiled, but raw, that they might roajl it 
withfre. Not that it was a fin to eat it, or defire 
meat roafted ; but that when it was appointed to be 
boiled, they refufed it: which declared an intem- 
perate and a nice palate. It is lawful in all fenfes to 
comply with a weak and a nice ftomach : but not with 
a nice and curious palate. When our health requires 
it, that ought to be provided for ; but not fo our fen- 
fuality and intemperate longings. Whatfoever isfet 
before you\ eat ; if it be provided for you, you may eat 
it, be it never fo delicate ; and be it plain and com- 
mon, fo it be wholefome and fit for you, it muft not 
be refufed upon curiofity : for every degree of that is 



74 OF TEMPERANCE C. 2. 

a degree of intemperance. Happy and innocent were 
the ages of our forefathers, who ate herbs and parched 
1? r • •*: «, ^^^. o^. corn, and drank the pure ftreanii 

Felix initium pnor aetas ' r ' 

contentaduicibusarvis. and broke their faft with nuts and 

Facilequc fcra folebat je- i i i 

junia foiverc giandc. roots ; and when they were pcr- 

ArbuJ^* fetus^ m£ii- mittcd flefli, ate it only dreffcd 
naquc fraga legebant. ^j^ hungcr and firc ; and the 

firft fauce they had was bitter herbs, and fbmetimes 
bread dipt in vinegar. But in this circumflance 
moderation is to be reckoned in proportion to the 
prefent cuftoms, to the company, to education, and 
the judgment of honefl and wife perfons, and the 
neceflities of nature. 

4. Eat not too- much : load neither thy ftomach nor 
thy underftanding. If thou Jit at a bountiful taHe, 
be not greedy upon it^ and fay not there is much meat 
on it. Remember that a wicked Eye is an evil thing : 
and what is created more wicked than an eye ? There- 
fore it weepeth upon every occafon. Stretch not tbj 
hand whitherfoever it lookethy and thruji it not with 
him into the dijh. A very little is fufficient for a man 
well nurtured y and he fetcheth not his wind Jhort upon 
his bed. 

Signs and effeBs of Temperance. 

We (hall beft know that we have the grace of 
Temperance by the following figns, which are as 
fo many arguments to engage us alfo upon its ftudy 
and pradlice. 

I. A Temperate man is modeft: greedinefs is 
unmannerly and rude. And this is intiniated in the 
advice of the fon of Sirach^ When thoufttejl amongst 
many reach not thy hand out fir jl of all. Leave offfirji 



S. 2. IN EAriNG. 75 

for manners^ fake J and be not infatiablej left thou offend. 

* 2. Temperance is accompanied cicero vocat Tcmpc- 
with gravity of deportment: gree- ^JtrmTiw K 
dinefs is garifli, and rejoices loofely '^^^^ ^^^ ^^• 

at the fight of dainties, ♦ 3. Sound, but mode- 
rate, fleep is its fign and its efFe<ft. Sound fteep cometh 
of moderate eatings he rifeth early and his wits are with 
him. * 4. A j^iritual joy and a devout prayer. 

* 5. A fupprefied and feldom anger. * 6. A com- 
mand of our thoughts and paffions. * 7. A feldom- 
rcturning, and a never-prevailing temptation. * 8. 
To which add, that a Temperate perfon is not curi- 
ous of fancies and delicioufnefs. He thinks not 
much, and fpeaks not often of meat and drink ; hath 
a healthful body and long life, unlefs it be hindered 
by fome other accident : whereas to gluttony, the 
pain of watching and c holer ^ the pangs of the belly are 
continual company. And therefore Stratonicus faid 
handibmely concerning the luxury of the Rhodians^ 

* They built houfes as if they were immortal, but 
' they feafled as if they meant to live but a little 

* while.* And Antipater by his ^, . . ..... 

, /-f 111 T-^ Plutarch, de cupid. divit. 

reproach of the old glutton De- 
mades well exprefled the bafenefs of this fin, faying 
that Demades now old, and always a glutton, was 
like a fpent facrifice, nothing left of him but his 
belly and his tongue, all the man befides is gone. 

Of Drunkennefs. 

But I defire that it be obferved, that becaufe in- 
temperance in eating is not fo foon perceived by 
others as immoderate drinking, and the outward 



76 OF TEMPERANCE C.2. 

vifible efFedls of it are not either fo notorious or fo 
ridiculous^ therefore gluttony is not of fo great dif- 
reputation amongfl men as drunkennefs : yet ac- 
cording to its degree it puts on the greatnefs of the 
fin before God, and is moft ftriftly to be attended 
to, left we be furprifed by our fecurity and want of 
diligence, and the intemperance is alike criminal in 
bcJth, according as the afFedtions are either to the 
meat or drink. Gluttony is more uncharitable to 
the body, and Drunkennefs to the Soul, or the un- 
derftanding part of man ; and therefore in Scripture 
is more frequently forbidden and declaimed agaioft 
than the other : and Sobriety hath by ufe obtained 
to fignify Temperance in drinking. 

Drunkennefs is an immoderate afFe<5tion and ufe of 
drink. That 1 call imTiioderate that isT)efides or 
beyond that order of good things for which God 
hath given us the ufe of drink. The ends are digcf- 
tion of our meat, cheerfulnefs and refrefhment of our 
fpirits, or any end of health ; befides which if we go, 
or at any time beyond it, it is inordinate and criminal, 
it is the vice of drunkennefs. It is forbidden by 
our bleflcd Saviour in thefe words, \Take heed to 

yourf elves leji at any time your hearts be 
overcharged with furfeiting and drunken- 
ne/s.] Surfeiting, that is the evil effedls, the ibt- 
tifhnefs and remaining ftupidity of habitual, or of 
the laft night's drunkennefs. For Chrift forbids both 
the actual and the habitual intemperance ; not only 
the efFedl of it, but alfo the afFedion to it : for in 

both there is fin. He that drinks 
Jilt ini x^'K^i^^^'^^' * hut little, if that little make him 

SchoL in Ariftoph. i i j 'r i_ i i ^ 

^ drunk, and if he know before- 



S.2. IN DRINKING. yy 

hand his own infirmity, is guilty idem fcr^ apud piu- 

r r n * ^ r i in ^^ch. Vinolentia animi 

Ol Jurjetttngy not or drunkennejs. quandam remiffioncm et 

But he that drinks much and is utem^fi^ifi^!^^ ^^*^*" 
ftrong to bear it, and is not dc- ^^'^"^- ^ ^^'^• 
prived of his reafon violently, is guilty of the fin of 
drunkennejs. It is a fin not to prevent fuch uncha- 
ritable efFedts upon the body and underftanding : 
And therefore a man that loves not the drink is 
guilty oi furfeitingy if he does not watch to prevent 
the evil effedl: and it is a fin, and the greater of 
the two, inordinately to love or to ufe the drink, 
though the furfeiting or violence do not follow. 
Good therefore is the counfel of the 
fon of Sirach, Shew not thy valiantnefs 
in wine ; for wine hath dejlroyed many. 

Evil confequents to Drunkennefs. 

•The evils and fad confequents of drunkennefs (the 
confideration of which are as fo many prov. 23. 29. 
arguments to avoid the fin) are to this ^^^^^*' ^'^ *^' 
fenfe reckoned by the Writers of holy Scripture, and 
other wife perfbnages of the world, i . It caufeth 
woes and niifchief, wounds and forrow, fin and 
*fhame: it maketh bitternefs of . ,, , ^ . 

, • Multa faciunt ebni 

fpirit, brawhng and quarrellmg, qu« poftca fobnos pudct. 
it increafeth rage and leflfeneth 
flrength, it maketh red eyes and a loofe and bab- 
bling tongue. 2. It particularly minifters to luft, 
and yet difables the body ; fo that in effedt it makes 
man wanton as a Satyr, and impotent as age. And 
Solomon in enumerating the evils of this vice adds 
this to the account. Thine eyes Jhall behold Jirange 



78 OF rEMPERANCE C.i. 

women^ and thy heart Jhall utter per- 
verfe things : as if the drunkard were 
only defire, and then impatience, muttering and en- 
joying like an Eunuch embracing a woman. 3. It 
befbts and hinders the a<ftions of the underftanding, 

making a man brutifh in his paf- 

Inlaniae comes eft ira, ^ /- i • i • r 

contubtrnaib ebrietas. fions, and a fool lu his reaibo; 

** "^^ * and differs nothing from madnefs, 

Corpas onuftum . . <=» t /. . 

Heftemis vitiis animum Dut that it IS Voluntary, and 10 15 

quoque praegravat. t m * ^ i 

Horat, an equal evil m nature, and a 
Ebrietas eft voiuntaria worfe in mauuers. 4. It takes 

off all the guards, and lets loofc 
the reins of all thofe evils to which a man is by 
his nature or by his evil cuftoms inclined, and 
from which he is reftrained by reafbn and fevcrc 
principles. Drunkennefs calls off the Watchmen 
from their towers ; and then all the evils that can 
proceed from a loofe heart, and an untied tongue, 
and a diffolute fpirit, and an unguarded, unlimited 
will, all that we may put upon the accounts of drunk- 
ennefs, 5. It extinguifheth and quenches the Spirit 
of God, for no man can be filled with the Spirit of 
God and with wine at the fame time. And there- 
fore Saint Paul makes them exclufive of each other : 
ir^K-« , 9 Be not drunk with wine wherein is 

J2«plies. 5. IB. 

oWc « Tpoiti iu\i^, 5c n excefsy but be filled with the Spirit. 

f.ul!^Ti»i^xa^txn And fince Jofeph's cup was put 
i^ni'ax<ni^wiin,. Homer. Jj^^q Benjamin's fack, no man had 

a divining goblet. 6. It opens all the Sandtuaries 
of Nature, and difcovers the nakednefs of the Soul, 
all its weakneffes and follies, it multiplies (ins and 
difcovers them, it makes a man incapable of being 
a private fi-iend, or a public Counfellor. 7. It taketh 



S.2. IN DRINKING. 79 

a man's Soul into flavery and impriibnment more 
than any vice whatfoever, becaufe prov. ji. 4. 
it difarms a man of all his reafon ■J^titu^'"'^' 
and his wifdom whereby he might * '"«^* Phiiem. 
be cured, and therefore commonly it grows upon 
him with age; a drunkard being ftill more a fool 
and lefs a man. I need not add any fad examples, 
fince all ftory and all ages have too many of them. 
Ammon was flain by his brother Abfalom when he 
was warm and high with wine. Simon the High 
Prieft and two of his Ions were flain by their bro- 
ther at a drunken feaft. Holofernes was drunk when 
Judith flew him : and all the great Aicxandrum intempe- 
things that Daniel fpake of Alex^ "^^^S^^^ 
ander were drowned with a fur- perdidit. 
feit of one night's intemperance : and the drunken- 
nefs of Noah and Lot are upon record to eternal 
ages, that in thofe early inflances, and righteous 
perfons, and lefs criminal drunkenneis than is that 
of Chriftians in this period of the world, God might 
fliew that very great evils are prepared to punifli 
this vice ; no lefs than fhame, and flavery, and in- 
ceft ; the firft upon Noab^ the fecond upon one of 
his fons, and the third in the perfon of Lot. 

Signs of Drunkennefs. 

But if it be enquired concerning the periods and 
diftinft fignifications of this crime, and when a man 
is faid to be drunk ; to this I anfwer. That drunk- 
ennefs is in the fame manner to be judged as fick- 
nefs. As every illnefs or violence done to health in 
every part of its continuance is a part or degree of 



8o OF TEMPERANCE. C.i. 

ficknefs ; fo is every going off from our natural and 
common temper and our ufual feverity of behaviour, 
a degree of drunkennefs. He is not only drunk 
that can drink no more ; for few are fb : but he 
hath finned in a degree of drunkennefs who hath 
done anything towards it beyond his proper meafure. 
But its parts and periods are ufually thus reckoned. 
I. Apifli geftures. 2. Much talking. 3. Immo- 
derate laughing. 4. Dulnefs of fenfe. 5. Scurri- 
lity, that is, wanton, or jeering, or abufive language. 
6. An ufelefs underftanding. 7. Stupid deep. 8. 
Epilepfies, or fallings and reelings, and beaftly vo- 
mitings. The leaft of thefe, even when the tongue 
begins to be untied, is a degree of drunkennefs. 

But that we may avoid the fin of Intemperance in 
meats and drinks, befides the former rules of mea- 
fures, thefe counfels alfo may be ufeful. 

Rules for obtaining Temperance. 

1 . Be not often prefent at feafts, nor at all in dif- 
folute company, when it may be avoided : for va- 
riety of pleafing objedts fteals away the heart of man; 
and company is either violent or enticing ; and wc 
are weak or complying, or perhaps defirous enough 
to be abufed. But if you be unavoidably or indif- 
creetly engaged, let not miftaken civility or good 
nature engage thee either to the temptation of flay- 
ing (if thou underflandefl thy weaknefs) or the fin 
of drinking inordinately. 

2. Be fevere in your judgment concerning your 
proportions, and let no occafion make you enlarge 
far beyond your ordinary. For a man is furprifed 



S.2. OF TEMPERANCE. 8i 

by parts ; and while he thinks one glafs more will 
not make him drunk, that one glafs hath difabled 
him from well difcerning his prefent condition and 
neighbour danger. While men think them/elves wife 
they become fools: they think they fhall tafte the 
aconite and not die, or crown their heads with juice 
of poppy and not be drowfy ; and if they drink off 
the whole vintage, ftill they think they can fwallow 
another goblet.* But remember 

, - . Scnec. ep. 83. 

this, whenever you begm to con- chi ha bevuto tutto ii 
fider whether you may fafely take ""^> p"° ^"^ *"^^^ ^"^ 

' •' ' ^ trano. 

one draught more, it is then high 
time to give over. Let that be accounted a fign 
late enough to break off : for every reafon to doubt, 
is a fufficient reafon to part the company. 

3. Come not to table but when thy need invites 
thee ; and if thou beeft in health, leave fomething 
of thy appetite unfilled, fomething of thy natural 
heat unemployed, that it may fecure thy digeftion, 
and ferve other needs of nature or the fpirit. 

4. Propound to thyfelf (if thou beeft in a capacity) 
a conftant rule of living, of eating and drinking : 
which though it may not be fit to obferve fcrupu- 
loufly, left it become a fnare to thy confcience, or 
endanger thy health upon every accidental violence ; 
yet let not thy rule be broken often nor much, but 
upon great neceflity and in fmall degrees. 

5. Never urge any man to eat or drink beyond 
his own limits and his own defires. Nil intcreft, favcas fee- 
He that does otherwife is drunk i^^, an iUud facias, sem. 

with his brother's furfeit, and reels and falls with 
his intemperance ; that is, the fin of drunkennefs is 



82 OF TEMPERANCE. C. 2. 

upon both their fcores, they both lie wallowing in 
the guilt. 

6. Ufe St. PauPs inftruments of Sobriety : Ltt 

us who are of the day be fobeVj putting on the breafi- 

plate of faith and love^ and for an helmet the hope of 

falvation. Faith, Hope and Charity are the bcft 

weapons in the world to fight againft intemperance. 
The faith of the Mahometans forbids them to drink 
wine, and they abflain religion fly, as the fons of 
Rechab : and the faith of Chrift forbids drunkenneis 
to us ; and therefore is infinitely more powerful to 
fupprefs this vice, when we remember that we art 
Chrijlians^ and to abflain from drunkennefs and 
gluttony is part of the Faith and Difcipline of Jefus^ 
and that with thefe vices neither our love to God, 
nor our hopes of heaven can poffibly confifl ; and 
therefore when thefe enter the heart, the others go 
out at the mouth : for this is the Devil that is caft 
out by fading and prayer, which are the proper 
actions of thefe graces. 

7. As a purfuance of this Rule, it is a good ad- 
vice, that as we begin and end all our times of eat- 
ing with prayer and thankfgiving ; fb at the meal 
we remove and carry up our mind and fpirit to the 
Celeflial table, often thinking of it, and often defir- 
ing it; that by enkindling thy defire to Heavenly 
banquets, thou mayefl be indiflferent and lefs paf- 
fionate for the Earthly. 

8. Mingle difcourfes pious, or in fome ienfe pro^ 
fitable, and in all fenfes charitable and innocent, 
with thy meal, as occafion is miniflered. 

9. Let your drink fo ferve your meat, as your 
meat doth your health ; that it be apt to convey and 



S. 2. OF TEMPERANCE. 83 

digeft it, and refrefh the fpirits : but let it never go 
beyond fuch a refrefhment as may a little lighten 
the prcfcnt load of a (ad or troubled fpirit ; never 
to inconvenience, lightnefs, fottifhnefs, vanity, or 
intemperance ; and know that the looting the bands 
of the tongue, and the very firft diflblution of its 
du^, is one degree of the intemperance. 

ID. In all cafes be careful that you be not brought 
under the power of fuch things which otherwife 
are lawful enough in the ufe. ji/I things are Jaw- 
fulfor me 9 but I will not be brought under the power 
of any things fiiid St. Paul. And to be perpetually 
longing, and impatiently defirous of any thing, fo 
that a man cannot abflain from it, is to lofe a man's 
liberty, and to become a fervant of meat and drink, 
or fmoke. And I wifh this lafl inflance were more 
confidered by peribns who little fufped: themfelves 
guilty of intemperance, though their defires are 
flrong and impatient, and the ufe of it perpetual 
and unreaibnable to all purpofes, but that they have 
made it habitual and neceflary, as intemperance itfelf 
is made to fome men. 

1 1 . Ufe thofe advices which are prefcribed as in- 
ftruments to fupprefs Voluptuoufnefs in the fore- 
going Sei^on. 

SECT. III. 

OfChaJlity. 

READER^ Jiayy and read not the advices ofthefol- 
lowing SeBion^ unlefs thou haji a chajie fpirit, or 
defireji to be chafie, or at leajl art apt to confider whe- 



84 OF cHAsrirr. c. 2. 

ther you ought or no. For there are fotne fpirits Jo 
Ath eijitca jf andfomefo wholly pojfejfed with afphrit of 
uncleannefs^ that they turn the moji prudent and chajie 
difcourfes into dirt and filthy apprehenfions ; like cho- 
leric fiomachsj changing their very Cordials and medi- 
cines into bitternefs ; and in a literal fen/e turning the 
grace of God into wantonnefs. They fiudy cafes of 
confidence in the matter ofi carnal fins y not to avoids but 
to learn ways how to offend God and pollute their own 
fipirits ; and fiearch t heir hou fes wtthja^S unbeam ^ that 
they may bemfiruSled in all the corners of nafiinefis. I 
have ufied all the care I could y in the following periods^ 
that I might neither be wanting to ajfifi thofie that need 
it, nor yet minifier any occafion of fiancy or vainer 
thoughts to thofie that need them not. Ifi ^ fnan will 
finatch the pure taper firom my hand, and bold it to 
the Devil, he will only burn his own fingers, but fhall 
not rob me of the reward ofi my care and good intention^ 
fince I have taken heed how to exprefis the fiollowing 
duties, and given him caution how to read them. 




iHASTITY is that duty which was myfti- 
cally intended by God in the law of Cir- 
cumcifion. It is the circumcifion of the 
heart, the cutting oS all fiuperfiuity ofi naught inefisy 
and a fuppreflion of all irregular defires in the mat- 
ter of fenfual or carnal pleafure. I call all defires 
irregular and finful that are not fandtiiied, i . By the 
holy inftitution, or by being within the protedtion 
of marriage; 2. by being within the order of na- 
ture ; 3 . by being within the moderation of Chrif- 
tian modefty. Againfi the firfi are fomicatioDi 



s. 3. OF cHAsrirr. 85 

adultery 9 and all voluntary pollutions of either fex, 
Againji the fecund are all unnatural lufts and inces- 
tuous mixtures. Againji the third is all immoderate 
ufc of permitted beds; concerning which judgment 
is to be made as concerning meats and drinks : there 
being no certain degree of frequency or intention 
prefcribed to all perfons, but it is to be ruled as the 
other adlions of a man, by proportion to the end, 
by the dignity of the perfon in the honour and 
fcvcrity of being a Chriftian, and by other circum- 
fiances, of which I am to give account. 

Chajiity is that grace which forbids and reftrains 
all thefe, keeping the body and Soul pure in that 
ftate in which it is placed by God, whether of the 
fingle or of the married life. Concerning which 
our duty is thus defcribed by St. Paul^ [For this is 
the will of Gody even your fanSliJica-' 
tion^ that ye jhould abjiain from for-- 
nication ; that every one of you Jhould know how to 
pojfefs his vejfel in JanSHfication and honour : Not in 
the lujl of concupifcencey even as the Gentiles which 
know not God.] 

Chajiity is either abjiinence or continence. Abjii- 
nence is that of Virgins or Widows : Continence of 
married perfons. Chajie marriages are honourable 
and pleafing to God : Widowhood is pitiable in its 
folitarinefs and lofs, but amiable and comely when 
it is adorned with gravity and purity, and not ful- 
lied with remembrances of the paffed licenfe^ nor 
with prefent defires of returning to a fecond bed. 
But, Virginity is a life of Angels, virginitas eft in came 
the enamel of the Soul, the huge ;:^e?:f ^^^^^^^ 
advantage of Religion, the great ^''^- ^- ^ ^r?- ^- « i- 



86 OF cHAsrirr. c. 2. 

opportunity for the retirements of devotion: and 
being empty of cares it is full of prayers ; being 
unmingled with the world, it is apt to converfe with 
God ; and by not feeling the warmth of a too- 
forward and indulgent nature, flames out with holy 
fires, till it be burning like the Cherubim and the 
moft extafied order of holy and unpolluted Spirits^ 

Natural virginity of itfelf is not a ftate more ac- 
ceptable to God : but that which is chofen and vo- 
luntary in order to the conveniences of Religion and 
feparation from worldly incumbrances, is therefore 
better than the married life, not that it is more 
holy, but that it is a freedom from cares, an oppor- 
tunity to fpend more time in fpiritual employments ; 
it is not allayed with bufinefies and attendances upon 
lower affairs : and if it be a chofen condition to 
thefe ends, it containeth in it a vid:ory over lufls, 
and greater defires of Religion, and felf-denial, and 
therefore is more excellent than the married life, in 
that degree in which it hath greater religion, and a 
greater mortification, a lefs fatisfaftion of natural 
defires, and a greater fulnefs of the fpiritual : and 
jufl fo is to expedt that litde coronet or fpecial re- 
ward which God hath prepared (extraordinary and 
befides the great Crown of all faithful Souls) for 

Apoc I thofe wAo have not defiled themfehes 

with women f but follow the Virgin Lamb 
for ever. 

But fome married perfons even in their marriage 
do better pleafe God than fome Virgins in their ftate 
of virginity : They by giving great example of con- 
jugal affedtion, by preferving their faith unbroken, 
by educating children in the fear of God, by patience 



S, 3. OF CHASTirr. 87 

and contentednefs and holy thoughts and the excr- 
cile of virtues proper to that ftate, do not only pleafe 
Gody but do in a higher degree than thofe Virgins 
whoie piety is not anfwerable to their great oppor- 
tunities and advantages. 

However, married perfons and Widows and Vir- 
gins are all fervants of God and co-heirs in the inheri- 
tance of jfefusj if they live within the reflraints and 
laws of their particular eftate, chaftely, temperately, 
jufUy and religioufly. 

The evil confequents of Uncleannefs. 

The bleflings and proper efFefts of Chaftity we 
(hall beft underfland by reckoning the evils of un- 
cleannefs and carnality. 

1 . Uncleannefs of all vices is the mofl fhamefiil. 
The eye of the adulterer waiteth for 

the twilight^ faying 9 No eye Jhallfee 
me^ and difguifeth his face. In the dark they dig 
through houfes which they had marked for themf elves 
in the day-time ; they know not the light : for the morn- 
ing is to them as the ft>adow of death. He is fwift as 
the waters ; their portion is curfed in the earthy he be- 
holdeth not the way of the vineyards. 
Shame is the eldefl daughter of Un- 
cleannefs. 

2. The appetites of uncleannefs are full of cares 
and trouble, and its fruition is fbrrow and repen- 
tance. The way of the adulterer is 

hedged with thorns ; full of fears AppeL'fotnicationis 
and jealouiies, burnincr defires and anxietas eft, fatietas verd 

impatient waitmgs, tedioufnefs of 



88 OF cHAsrirr. c.i 

delay, and fufFerance of affronts, and amazements of 
difcovery, 

3. Moft of its kinds are of that condition, that 
they involve the ruin of tvro Souls ; and he that is 
a fornicator or adulterous, fteals the Soul as well as 
difhonours the body of his Neighbour ; and fo it be- 
comes like the fin of falling Lucifer^ who brought a 
part of the ftars with his tail from Heaven. 

4. Of all carnal fins it is that alone which the 
Devil takes delight to imitate and counterfeit ; com- 
municating with Witches and impure perfbns in the 
corporal aft, but in this only. 

5. Uncleannefs with all its kinds is a vice which 
1 Cor 6 18 ^^^ aprofefled enmityagainft thebody. 

Every Jin which a man doth is without 
the^body ; but he that committeth fornication Jinneth 
againjfjiis own body. 

6. Uncleannefs is hugely contrary to the fpirit of 

Government by embafing the fpirit 
or a man, makmg it effemmate, 
fneaking, foft and foolifli, without courage, without 
confidence. David felt this after his folly with 
Bathjheba, he fell to unkingly arts and flratagems to 
hide the crime ; and he did nothing but increafe it, 
and remained timorous and poor-fpiritcd, till he 
Spiritu principaii mc prayed to God once more to cftab- 
conSrma. p/. 51. jiflj him with a free and a Princely 

fpirit. And no fuperior dare ftriftly obferve difci- 
pline upon his charge, if he hath let himfelf looie to 
xh^Jhame of incontinence . 

7» The Gofpel hath added two arguments againft 
uncleannefs which were never before ufed, nor in- 
deed could be : fince God hath given the holy Spirit 



s. 3. OF cHAsrirr. 89 

to them that* are baptized^ and rightly confirmed^ and 
entered into covenant with him^ our bodies are made 
temples of the holy Ghoft in which he dwells ; and 
therefore uncleannefs is Sacrilege and defiles a Tern- 
pie,, It is St. PauFs argument [Know 
ye not that your body ts the temple oj the 
holy Ghoji ?] and [He that defiles a temple j him will 
God defiroy^ Therefore glorify God in 
your bodiesy that is, fiee Fornication. 
To which for the likenefs of the argument add, that 
our bodies are members of Chrifiy and therefore God 
forbid that we (hould take the members of Chrifi and 
make them members of a harlot. So that uncleannefs 
dishonours Chrift, and difhonours the holy Spirit: 
it is a fin againfl Grod, and in this fenfe a fin againfl 
the Holy Ghofl. 

8. The next fpecial argument which the Gofpel 
miniflers efpecially againft adultery, and for the pre- 
fervation of the purity of marriage, is 

that [Marriage is by Chrifi hallowed 
into a myflery to fignify the Sacramental and myfli- 
cal union of Chrifi and his Church.] He therefore 
that breaks this knot which the Church and their 
mutual faith hath tied, and Chrifi hath knit up into 
a myflery, difhonours a great rite of Chriflianity, 
of high, fpiritual and excellent fignification. 

9. St. Gregory reckons uncleannefs to be the pa- 
rent of thefe monflers, Blindnefs of 

• J • /« 1 • . . Moral. 

mmd, mconuderation, precipitancy or 
giddinefs in adlions, felf-love, hatred of God, love of 
the prefent pleafures, a defpite or defpair of the joys 
of Religion here and of heaven hereafter. Whereas 
a pure mind in a chafle body is the mother of wif- 



90 OF CHASTirr. C. 2. 

dom and deliberation, fbber counfels and ingenuous 
actions, open deportment and fweet carriage, fincere 
principles and unprejudicate underftanding, love of 
God and felf-denial, peace and confidence, holy 
prayers and fpiritual comfort, and a pleafure of ipirit 
infinitely greater than the fottifli and beaftly plea- 
st. Cyprian, dc bono fures of unchaftity. For to over- 
pudiciti«. ^^^^ pleafure is the greateji plea- 

fure^ and no viSlory is greater than that which is got- 
ten over our lujis and fit hy inclinations. 

lo. Add to all theie, the public difhonefty zsA 
difreputation that all the nations of the world have 
cad upon adulterous and unhallowed embraces. 
Abimelech to the men of Gerar made it death to 
meddle with the wife of Ifaac : and Judah con- 
demned Thamar to be burnt for her Adulterous con- 
ception : and God, befides the Law made to put the 

adulterous perfon to death, did coniH- 
tute a fettled and conflant miracle to 
difcover the adultery of a fuipedled woman, that her 
bowels (hould burft with drinking the waters of Jea- 
loufie. The Egyptian Law was to cut off the nofc 
of the adulterefs, and the offending part of the 
adulterer. The Locrians put out the adulterer's 
both eyes. The Germans (as Tacitus reports) placed 
the adulterefs amidil her kindred naked, and £baved 
her head, and caufed her huiband to beat her with 
clubs through the city. The Gortynaans crowned 
the man with wool to fhame him for his effeminacy: 
and the Cumani caufed the woman to ride upon an 
Afs naked and hooted at, and for ever after called her 

by an appellative of fcom, [A Rider 
. upon the A/s.] All nations barbarous 



5. 3. OF cHAsrirr. 91 

and civil agreeing in their general defign of rooting 

fb di(honeft and fhameful a vice from under heaven. 

The ♦ middle ages of the Church were not pleafed 

that the adulterefs ihould be put to • ConcU. Tribur. c. 49. 

. - - . . T^ • • • Concil. Aurel. i. fub 

leath : but m the Prinutive ages ciodoTso. 
the * civil Laws, by which Chrif- • cod. de aduiteriis ad 
dans were then governed, gave ^S'r&d'iul! 
leave to the wronged hulband to *'"*'' ""' p^^*^- 
kill his adulterous wife, if he took her in the fa6t : 
but becaufe it was a privilege indulged to men, ra- 
ther than a dired deteilation of the crime, a confi- 
deration of the injury rather than of the unclean- 
nefs, therefore it was foon altered, but yet hath 
caufed an inquiry. Whether is worfe, the adultery of 
the man or the woman. 

The refolution of which cafe in order to our pre- 
fent aflair is thus. In refpeSi of the perfon, the fault 
is greater in a man than in a woman, who is of a 
more pliant and eafyfpirit,and weaker underftanding, 
and hath nothing to fupply the unequal ftrengths of 
men; but the defeniative of a paffive nature and ar- 
tnour of modefty, which is the natural ornament of 
diat iex. And it is unjuji that the 

n u J J L au Jr ApudAug.de adulter. 

man Jhoula demand cnajttty andje- conjug. 

verity jrom hu wtje^ which htmjelj ^ ^ ^ 

will not obferve towards her^ laid the good Emperor 
Antoninus : it is as if the man (hould perfuade his 
wife to fight againft thoie enemies to which he had 
jrielded himfelf a prifoner. 2. In refpeSl of the 
tffeBs and evil confequentSy the adultery of the woman 
18 worfe, as bringing baflardy into a family, and dif- 
inherifons or great injuries to the lawful children, 
and infinite violations of peace, and murders, and 



92 OF cHAsrirr. c.i. 

divorces, and all the efFedts of rage and madneis. 
3 . But in refpeSi of the crime ^ and as relating to God, 
they are equal, intolerable, and damnable : and iince 
it is no more permitted to men to have many wives, 
than to women to have many hufbands, and that in 
this refpeft their privilege is equal, their fin is fi) 
too. And this is the cafe of the queftion in Chrif- 
tianity. And the Church anciently refufed to admit 
fuch perfons to the holy Communion, until they had 
done feven years penances in failing, in fackcloth, in 
fevere inflidlions and inftruments of chaftity and ibr- 
row, according to the difcipline of thofe ages. 

ASis of Chafiity in general. 

The adtions and proper offices of the grace of 
Chaftity in general are thefe. 

1 . T^o rejiji all unchajie thoughts : at no hand enter- 
taining pleafure in the unfruitful fancies and re- 
membrances of uncleannefs, although no definite 
defire or refolution be entertained. 

2. At no hand to entertain any defre^ or any fantaftic, 

— Caflb faitcra dciec- imaginative bves,though by fliamc» 

r tcerp"oerp'a^:£ or difability or other circumftance, 
luxuriae ocuios, dixit ifi- they be reftrained from adt. 

dorus. trr* 1 in 

'Axy«Wp«c k^r^m, 3 . T^o have a chajte eye and hand: 

alius quidam. for it is all onc with what part of 

Time vidcrc undc pof- the body wc commit adultery: 

fis cadere, ct noli fieri per- j • /• i i_ • ^ r J 

versa fimpiicitate fecurus. ^nd It a man Icts his eye loole, and 
St. Aug. enjoys the luft of that, he is an 
adulterer. Look not upon a woman to luji after her. 
And fuppofing all the other members reftrained, yet 
if the eye be permitted to luft, the man can no other- 




s. 3. OF cHAsrirr. 93 

wife be called chafte, than he can be called fevere 
and mortified^ that fits all day long feeing plays and 
revellings, and out of greedinefs to fill his eye, neg- 
lects his belly. There are fome veflels which if you 
offer to lift by the belly or bottom, you cannot flir 
them, but are foon removed if you take them by the 
ears. It matters not with which of your members 
you are taken and carried off from your duty and fe- 
verity. 

4. To have a heart and mind cbajie and pure ; that 
is, detefling all uncleannefs : difliking all its motions, 
pafl actions, circumflanpes, likeneffes, difcourfes : 
and this ought to be the chaflity of Virgins and 
Widows, of old perfons and Eunuchs efpecially, and 
generally of all men, according to their feveral ne- 
ceflities. 

5. To difcourfe chajlely and purely ; with great 
care declining all indecencies of sd. Minutius Pontifcx 
language, chaflening the tongue, J^f "-^ -^mtiam 
and reflraining it with grace, as va- "^° aeou*"*^^^ utcrctur. 
pours of wine are reflrained with i*^. 

a bunch of myrrh. 

6. To dif approve by an after-aSl all involuntary and 
natural pollutions : for if a man delights in having 
fuffered any natural pollution, and with pleafure re- 
members it, he choofes that which was in itfelf 
involuntary ; and that which being natural was in- 
nocent, becoming voluntary is made finful. 

7. They that have performed thefe duties and 
parts of Chaflity, will certainly abflain from all ex- 
terior adtions of uncleannefs, thofe noon-day and 
mid-night Devils, thofe lawlefs and ungodly wor- 
fhippings of fhame and uncleannefs, whofe birth is 



94 OF CHASTirr. C.z. 

in trouble, whofe growth is in folly, and whofe end 
is in fhame. 

But befides thefe general a<^s of Chaflity which 
are common to all dates of men and women, there 
are fome few things proper to the feverals. 

A£fs of Virginal Chajiity. 

1 . Virgins muft remember that the Virginity of 
the body is only excellent in order to the purity of 
the Soul ; who therefore mufl confider that fince 
they are in fome meafure in a condition like that of 
Angels, it is their duty to fpend much of their time 
in Angelical employment: for in the fame degree that 
Virgins live more fpiritually than other perfons, in 
the fame degree is their Virginity a more excellent 
ftate. But elfe it is no better than that of involuntary 
or conftrained Eunuchs ; a mifery and a trouble, or 
elfe a mere privation, as much without excellency as 
without mixture. 

2 . Virgins muft contend for a fingular modefly ; 
whofe firft part muft be an ignorance in the diftinc- 
tion of fexes, or their proper inflruments ; or if they 
accidently be inftru(5bed in that, it muft be fupplied 
with an inadvertency or neglect of all thoughts and 
remembrances of fuch difference : and the foUowiiig 
parts of it muft be pious and chafte thoughts, holy 
language, and modeft carriage. 

3 . Virgins muft be retired and un public : for all 
freedom and loofenefs of fociety is a violence done to 
virginity, not in its natural, but in its moral capacity : 
that is, it lofes part of its feverity, fb-idinefs and op- 
portunity of advantages, by publifhing that perfon. 



S. 3. OF CHASTirr. 95 

whofe work is Religion, whofe company is Angels, 
whofe thoughts muft dwell in heaven, and feparate 
from all mixtures of the world. 

4. Virgins have a peculiar obligation to charity : 
for this is the virginity of the Soul ; as purity, integ- 
rity and feparation is of the body : which dodlrine 
we are taught by St. Peter ^ Seeing ye 
have purified your fouls in obeying the 
truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the bre-- 
thren,fee that ye love one another with a pure heart 
fervently. For a Virgin that confecrates her body 
to God, and pollutes her fpirit with rage, or impa- 
tience, or inordinate anger, gives him what he moft 
hates, a moft foul and defiled SouL 

5* Thefe Rules are neceflary for Virgins, that 
ofier that ftate to God, and mean not to enter into 
the ftate of marriage : for they that only wait the 
opportunity of a convenient change, are to fteer 
themfelves by the general Rules of Chaftity. 

Rules for Widows^ or vidual Chajlity. 

For Widows, the fontinel of whofe defires hath 
been opened by the former permiflions of the mar- 
riage-bed, they muft remember, 

1. That God hath now reftrained the former 
licenfe, bound up their eyes, and ftiut up their heart 
into a narrower compafs, and hath given them forrow 
to be a bridle to their defires. A Widow muft be a 
mourner ; and (he that is not, cannot fo well fecure 
the chaftity of her proper ftate. 

2. It is againft public honefty to marry another 
man fo long as (he is with child by her former Huf- 



96 OF CHASTirr. C. 2. 

band : and of the fame feme it is in a lefler propor- 
tion, to marry within the year of mourning : but 
anciently it was infamous for her to marry, till by 
common account the body was diflblved into its firft 
principle of earth. 

3. A Widow muft reftrain her memory and her 
fancy, not recalling or recounting her former pcr- 
miflions and freer licenfes with any prefent delight; 
for then fhe opens that fluice which her Hufband's 
death and her own forrow have fhut up. 

4. A Widow that defires her Widowhood ihould 
be a ftate pleafing to God, muft fpend her time as 
devoted Virgins (hould, in faftings, and prayers, and 
charity. 

5. A Widow muft forbid herfelf to ufe thofc 
temporal fblaces which in her former eftate were 
innocent, but now are dangerous. 

Rules for married perfons, or matrimonial Chajiity. 

Nifi fiindamcnta ftirpis Concerning married peribns,bc- 

iSffc^Y^^^ fides the keeping of their mutual 

pofteros.-£«ri/. f^j^}^ ^^^ contraift with each other, 

thefe particulars are ufeful to be obferved, 

1. Although their mutual endearments are iafe 
within the proteftion of marriage, yet they that have 
Wives or Hufbands, muft be as though they had 
them not; that is, they muft have an affedtion 
greater to each other than they have to any perfon in 
the world, but not greater than they have to God: 
but that they be ready to part with all int^reft in 
each other's perfon rather than fin againft God. 

2. In their permiffions and licenfe, they muft be 



-s. 3- OF cHAsrirr. 97 

furc to obfcrvc the order of Nature, and the ends of 
God. He is an ill Hu/band that m ^ u a 

J Non debemus eodem 

ufes his Wife as a man treats a amico uti ct aduiatore; 

I.. / 1 • 1 11 i^cc eadem uti uxore et 

Harlot 9 having no other end but {cono.^Piut.coMjug.^it- 
pleafure. Concerning which our ^'^'' 
beft rule is, that although in this, as in eating and 
drinking, there is an appetite to be fatisfied, which 
cannot be done without pleafing that defire ; yet 
fince that defire and fatisfad:ion was intended by Na- 
ture for other ends, they fhould never be feparate 
from thoie ends, but always be joined with all or one 
of thefe ends, wit A a dejire of children^ or to trooid for- 
nication ^ or to lighten and eafe the cares and fadnejfes 
of houfehold affair s^ or to endear each other ; but never 
with a purpofe either in adt or defire to feparate the 
fcnfuality from thefe ends which hallow it. Onan 
did feparate his adt from its proper eiid, and fo or- 
dered his embraces that his Wife fhould not conceive, 
and God punifhed him. 

3. Married perfons mufl keep fuch modefly and 
decency of treating each other, that ,, o^. .^ t^ „ 

•^ ^ ^ , . Non rcfte eft ab Hcro- 

they never force themfelves into doto diaum, fimui cum 

«•« i*<i 1A1 •! tunica mulierem verecun- 

high and violent lufts, with arts diam cxuerc. Qux n. 

and mifbecoming devices : always rctfnd?ar£7oco In^ 
remembering that thofe mixtures duit, maximcque vcrecun- 

o ^ dia conjugcs teflera max- 

arc mofl innocent which are moji imi inviccm amons utun- 

y . , /, in ^^* Plut.conjug, precept, 

Jimple and mojt natural^ mojt or- 
derly^ and mojlfafe. 

4. It is a duty of matrimonial chaflity to be re- 
ftrained and temperate in the ufe of their lawful 
pleafures : concerning which although no univerfal 
Rule can antecedently be given to all perfons, any 
more than to all bodies one proportion of meat and 



98 OF cHAsrirr. c. 2. 

drink ; yet married perfons arc to eftimate the de- 
gree of their licenfe according to the following pro- 
portions, * I . That it be moderate, fo as to confift 
with health. ♦ 2. That it be fo ordered as not to 
be too expenfive of time, that precious opportunity of 
working out our falvation. * 3. That when duty is 
demanded, it be always paid (fo far as is in our powers 
and elediion) according to the foregoing meafures. 
* 4. That it be with a temperate aiFeftion, without 
violent tranfporting defires, or too fenfual applica- 
tions. Concerning which a man is to make judg- 
ment by proportion to other adlions, and the fevcri- 
ties of his religion, and the fentences of ibber and 
wife perfons ; always remembering that marriage is 
a provifion for fupply of the natural neceffitics of the 
body, not for the artificial and procured appetites of 
the mind. And it is a fad truth, that many married 
perfons thinking that the flood-gates of liberty arc 
fet wide open without meafures or reflraints (fb they 
fail in that channel) have felt the final rewards of 
intemperance and lufl, by their unlawful ufing of 
lawful permiflions. Only let each of them be tem- 
perate, and both of them be modeft. Socrates was 
wont to fay, that thofe women to whom Nature had 
not been indulgent in good features and colours, 
(hould make it up themfelves with excellent man- 
ners; and thofe who were beautiful and comely, (hould 
be careful that fo fair a body be not polluted with 
unhandfome ufages. To which Plutarch adds, that 
_ ^ . a Wife . if fhe be unhandibme, 

Dc Conjug. pnecept. ^ •- rj U ^ i 

ihould conuder how extremely 
ugly fhe (hould be if (he wanted modefty : but if 
(he be handfome, let her think how gracious that 
beauty would be if (he fuperadds chaftity. 



S. 3. OF CHASTirr. 99 

5. Married pcrfons by confcnt arc to abftain from 
their mutual entertainments at folemn times of de- 
votion ; not as a duty of itfelf neceflary, but as being 
the moft proper z&, of purity which in their condi- 
tion they can prefent to God, and being a good ad- 
vantage for attending their preparation to the iblemn 
duty and their demeanour in it. It is 
S. PauPs counfeU that by confent for a 
time they jhould abftain^ that they may give them/elves 
tofajiing and prayer. And though when Chriftians 
did receive the holy communion Hoc ctiam ex more 

J -^^ ^'^r j-j . Chriftianorum Tertul. 

every day, it is certain they did not foadens faminis chrifti. 
abftain,buthad children: yet when ^Src&'^a^ST^^^^^ 
the Communion was more feldom, niburi>afch« abnoaan- 

1 1-t -tT^f- \ e\ • r ^^"* fecurus fuftinebit ? 

tneydidwithReligion abftain from Tertui. ad uxor. a. 1. 

1 • 111* 1 • £t ex more etiam Genti- 

the marriage-bed during the time iium.piut.fympof. 3.(^.6. 
oftheir folemn preparatory devo- J^Sfr^lTo^^^^^^ 
tions, as anciently they did from ^""!/?» "^ ^^ ^^'"p^^ 55 

^ ' J J lacnncia accedamus.paulo 

eating and drinking till the folem- ante re venerea ufi. ita- 

. ^^ , - ^ ^ que expedit noftc et fom- 

mty of the day was paft. no interjeao, jultoque in- 

6-r. 11 •/• 'J tervallo adhibito, mun- 

• It were well it married per- dos mrfum quafi de intc- 

fons would in their penitential ^v'a "ojta"^ V'lu 
prayers and in their general con- Democntus) furgerc. 

feffions fufpedt themfelves, and accordingly afk a ge- 
neral pardon for all their indecencies and more pai^ 
fionate applications of themfelves in the offices of 
marriage : that what is lawful and honourable in its 
kind may not be fullied with imperfedt circum- 
ftances ; or if it be, it may be made clean again by the 
interruption and recallings of fuch a repentance of 
which fuch uncertain parts of adtion are capable. 

But becaufe of all the dangers of a Chriflian none 
more preffing and troublefome than the temptations 



lOO 



OF cHAsrirr. c. 2. 



to luft, no enemy more dangerous than that of the 
flefh, n o accounts greater than what^we have^to 
reckon for at the Audit of Concupifcence, therefore 
it concerns all that would be fafe from this death to 
arm themfelves by the following Rules to prevent, 
or to cure all the wounds of our flefli made by the 
poifoned arrows of Luft. 

Remedies agatnji Uncleannefs. 

1. When a temptation of luft aflaults thee, do 
Contra libidinis impe- not rcfift it by heaping up argu- 
es X^e^tiaS^ ments againft it, and difputing 

St. Aug. with it, confidering its offers and its 

dangers, hntJJy from it, that is, think not at all of it; 

lay afide all confideration concerning it, and turn away 

from it by any fevere and laudable thought of bufi- 

Neiia giicrra d' amor ucfs. Saiut Hierome Very wittily 

Chi fuge vince. ^eproves the Gentile fuperftition, 

who pictured the Virgin-Deities armed with a fhield 
and lance, as if Chaftity could not be defended with- 
out war and direct contention. No : this enemv is 
to be treated otherwife. If you hear it fpeak, though 
but to difpute with it, it ruins you ; and the very ar- 
guments you go about to anfwer leave a relifh upon 
the tongue. A man may be burned if he goes near 
the fire, though but to quench his houfe ; and by 
handling pitch, though but to draw it from your 
clothes, you defile your fingers. 

2. Avoid idlenefsy and fill up all the fpaces of thy 
time with fevere and ufeful employment: for luft 
ufually creeps in at thofe emptinefles where the Soul 
is unemployed and the body is at eafe. For no eafy, 



S. 7. OF CHASTITr. 



lOI 



healthful and idle perfon was ever chafte, if he could 
be tempted. But of all employments, bodily labour 
is moft ufeful and of greateft benefit for the driving 
away the DeviL 

3 . Give no entertainment to the beginnings^ xhtjirji 

motions and fecret whifpers of the Q^ifquis in- 

fpirit of impurity. For if you to- p P™? °^^^' 

^ ... Rcpulitque amorem, tu- 

tally fupprefs it, it dies : if you per- ^» ac waor fuit : 

. ' - ^-* - , • /• 1 Q^* blandicndo dulce nu- 

mit the furnace to breathe its fmoke trivit malum, 

J n ^ ^ ^ -a. -ii Scro recufat ferre quod 

and flame out at any vent, it will fubiitjugum. 
rage to the confumption of the SenecHippoL 

whole. This Cockatrice is fooneft crufhed in the 
(hell ; but if it grows, it turns to a ferpent, and a 
Dragon, and a DeviL 

4. Corporal mortification and hard ufages of our 
body hath by all ages of the Church been accounted 
a good inflrument and of fome profit againft the 
fpirit of fornicat ion. A fpare diet, and a thin coarfe 
table, feldom refrefhment, frequent fafls, not violent 
and interrupted with returns to ordinary feeding, but 
conflantly little, unpleafant, of wholefome but fpar- 
ing nourishment : For by fuch cutting off the pro- 
vifions of vidtual we fhall weaken the flrengths of 
our Enemy. To which if we add lyings upon the 
ground, painful poflures in prayer, reciting our de- 
votions with our arms extended at full length, like 
Mofes praying againfl Amalek^ or our bleflTed Saviour 
hanging upon his painful bed of forrows, the Crofs, 
and (if the lufl be upon us and (harply tempting) 
by infliding any fmart to overthrow the flrongefl 
paffion by the moft violent pain, we (hall find great 
eafe for the prefent, and the refolution and apt fuflfer- 
ance againft the future danger. And this was S. PauVs 



I02 OF cHAsrirr. c. 2. 

remedy, / Arinfr my body under ^ he 

In Vita S. Pauli. r % r i rr % 

ufed fome rudenefles towards it 
But it was a great noblenefs of chaftity which S. 
Hierome reports of a Son of the King of Nicomedki 
who being te mpted upon flowers and a perfumed bed 
with a foft violence, but yet tied down to the temp- 
tation, and ibllcited witn circumftances of j^fiOL 
Luxury by an impure Couftefan^ left the eafinefs of 
his^pollure (hould abuie him, ipit out his tongue 
« 12 j^a, • r • into her face : to reprefent that no 

• BenediChis in fpinis ^ i 

fc voiutavit. s. Martini- virtue hath coft the Saints * fb 

anus facicm ct manus. r • r r>\^ /!.• 

S. Johannes cognomento mUCh aS thlS Of Chaitlty. 

Bonus, calamos acutos r^/ y* // r 

inter ungues et camcm 5' rlyfrom all OCCOfronS, tcmp- 

SSsinSmo^ tations, loofeneffes of company. 
ferarura vixit, ne inter galls and Revellings, indcccDt 

Arabes pollucretur. . ^ , 

mixtures of wanton dancings, idle 
talk, private fociety with ftrange women, ftaringi 
upon a beauteous face, the company of women that 
are fingers, amorous geftures, garifh and wanton 
dreflings, feafts and Hberty, banquets and perfumes, 

iTi^.cirKWir.a'.Spari, winc and ftrong drinks, which aic 
Tjrc^c'>^«,iuiiTS»irTf. jnade to perfecute chaftity ; fome 

fm XATao'Xtn Wawnv- item •* ^ •' ' 

•Tiof, xmBm ^ Unm «5m, juu of thefe being the very Prologues 

yafymxi^u, juUan, to luit, and the moft innocent of 

JferulT"-S: them being but like condited or 

iibamus, pickled M ufhrooms, which if care- 

Venter mero aefhians /-n rLt tz-ii /ij 

cito defpumatur in Ubi- lully corrccted, and leldom taued, 
dines s. Hieran. ^^ harmlcfs, but cau never do 

II fuoco che non mi ' ' ^ 

fcaida, non vogiio chc mi good : Ever remembering that it 

is eafier to die for chaftity than to 
live with it ; and the Hangman could not extort a 
confent from fome perfons, from whom a Lover 
would have entreated it. For the glory of chaftity 



S. 3. OF CHASriTr. 103 

will eafily overcome the rudenefs of fear and vio- 
lence ; but eafinefs and foftnefs and fmooth tempta- 
tions creep in, and like the Sun make a maiden lay 
by her veil and robe, which perfecution like tl^ 
Northern wind made her hold faft and clap clofe 
about her. 

6. He that will fecure his chaftity muHJlr/i cure 
his pride and his rage. For oftentimes hift is the 
puniihment of a proud man, to tame the vanity of 
his pride by the (hame and affronts of unchaftity : 
and the iame intemperate heat that makes anger does 
enkindle luil. 

7. If thou beeft aflaulted with ^numquid ego \ tc 

an unclean Spirit, truft not thyfelf ^If^ZT^^^^' 
alone, but run forth into compa- VcUtaquc ftoiimcacum 

- * conierbuit ira ? 

ny, whole reverence and modeity Horat.serm.Li,Sat,z. 
may fupprefs, or whofe fociety may divert thy 
thoughts : and a perpetual witneis of thy converfation 
is of efpecial ufe againft this vice, which evaporates 
in the. open air like Camphire, being impatient of 
light and witnefles. 

8. Ufe frequent and earneft prayers to the King 
of Purities, the firft of Virgins, the eternal God, 
who is of an eflential purity, that he would be 
pleafed to reprove and caft out the unclean Spirit. 
For befides the bleffings of prayer by way of reward, 
it hath a natural virtue to reftrain this vice : becaufe 
a prayer againft it is an unwillingnefs to aft it ; and 
fo long as we heartily pray againft it our defires are 
fecured, and then this Devil hath no power. This 
was Saint PauFs other remedy : [For /his caufe Ibe- 

fought the Lord thrice^ And there is much reafon 
and much advantage in the ufe of this inftrument ; 



104 OF cHAsrirr. c. 2. 

becaufc the main thing that in this affair is to be 
..... . fecured is a man's mind. He 

Mens impudicam la- t /v i_ 

cere, non corpus folet. that gOCS aboUt tO CUFC luft by 

bodily exercifes alone (as S. PauFs phrafe is) or 
mortifications, (hall find them fometimes inftru- 
mental to it, and incitations of fudden defires, but 
always infufficient and of little profit : but he that 
hath a chafte mind fhall find his body apt enough 
to take laws ; and let it do its worft, it cannot make 
a fin, and in its greateft violence can but produce a 
little natural uneafinefs, not fo much trouble as a fe- 
vere fafting-day, or a hard night's lodging upon 
boards. If a man be hungry he muft eat, and if 
he be thirfty he muft drink in ibme convenient 
time, or elfe he dies : but if the body be rebellious» 
fo the mind be chafte, let it do its worft, if you rc- 
folve perfectly not to fatisfy it, you can receive no 
great evil by it. Therefore the proper cure is by 
applications to the fpirit, and fecurities of the mind, 
which can no way fo well be fecured as by frequent 
and fervent prayers, and fober refolutions, and feverc 
difcourfes. Therefore, 

9. Hither bring in fuccour from confideration of 
the Divine prefence^ and of his holy Angels, medita^ 
tion of Deaths and the paffions of Chrift upon the 
Crofs, imitation of his Purities^ and of the Virgin 
Mary his unfpotted and holy Mother, and of fuch 
eminent Saints who in their generations were burn- 
ing and (hining lights, unmingled with fuch un- 
cleannefl^es which defile the foul, and who now fol- 
low the Lam^ whitherfoever he goes. 

10. Thefe remedies are of univerfal efficacy in 
all cafes extraordinary and violent ; but in ordinary 



S. 3. OF CHASTirr. 105 

and common, the remedy which God hath provided, 
that is. Honourable ^marriage, hath * panda eft opera ut 

I /J* 1 /• 1 • matrimoniodevinciantur, 

a natural emcacy, befides a virtue quod eft tutiffimum ju- 
by Divine bleffing, to cure the in- T£ ""' '^'^' 
conveniences v^rhich otherwife might afflidl perfons 
temperate and fober. 




SECT. IV. 

Of Humility. 

UMILITY is the great Ornament and 
Jewel of Chriftian Religion, that where- 
by it is diftinguifhed from all the wifdom 
of the world ; it not having been taught by the 
wife men of the Gentiles, but firft put into a difci- 
pline, and made part of a Religion, by our Lord Je-- 
Jus Chrift, who propounded himfelf imitable by his 
Difciples fo fignally in nothing as in the twin-fifters 
of Meeknefs and Humility. Learn of me ^ for I am 
meekandliumblef and ye jhall find refi unto your Souls. 
For all the World, all that we are, and all that 
we have» our bodies and our Souls, our adtions and 
our fufFerings, our conditions at home, our accidents 
abroad, our many fins and our feldom virtues, are as 
fo many arguments to make our Souls dwell low in 
the deep valleys of Humility. * 

Arguments againfi Pride by way of Confideration. 

I. Our body is weak and impure, fending out 
more uncleanneiTes from its feveral finks than could 



io6 OF HUMILirr. C. 2. 

be endured if they were not necefJary and natural : 
and we are forced to pafs that through our mouths, 
which as foon as we fee upon the ground, we loath 
like rottennefs and vomiting. 

2. Our jirength is inferior to that of many Beaftsi 
and our infirmities fo many that we are forced to 
drefs and tend Horfes and AfTes, that they may help 
our needs, and relieve our wants. 

3. Our beauty is in colour inferior to many 
flowers, and in proportion of parts it is no better 
than nothing ; for even a Dog hath parts as weU 
proportioned and fitted to his purpofes, and the de*' 
figns of his nature, as we have : and when it is 
moft florid and gay, three fi ts of an ague can change 
it into yellownefs andTeannefs, and the hollowneis 
and wrinkles of deformity. 

4. Our learning is then beft when it teaches moft 
humility : but to be proud of learning is the great- 
eft ignorance in the World. For our learning is ia 
long in getting, and fo very imperfedt, that the 
greateft Clerk knows not the thoufandth part of 
what he is ignorant ; and knows fo uncertainly what 
he feems to know, and knows no otherwife than a 
Fool or a Child, even what is told him or what he 
gueflfes at, that except thofe things which concern 
his duty, and which God hath revealed to him, 
which alfo every Woman knows fo far as is neccf- 
fary, the moft Learned Man hath nothing to be proud 
of, unlefs this be a fufiicient argument to exalt him, 
that he uncertainly gueflfes at fome more unnecef- 
fary thing than many others, who yet know all that 
concerns them, and mind other things more ncccf- 
fary for the needs of life and Commonwealths. 



S. 4. OF HUMILirr. 107 

5 . He that is proud of riches is a fool. For if he 
be exalted above his Neighbours becaufe he hath 
more gold^ how much inferior is he to a gold Mine ? 
how much is he to give place to a chain of Pearl, 
or a knot of Diamonds ? for certainly that hath the 
greateft excellence from whence he derives all his 
gallantry and preeminence over his Neighbours. 

6. If a man be exalted by reafon of any excel-- 
knee in his Soul, he may pleafe to remember that all 
Souls are equal ; and their differing operations are 
becaufe their inftrument is in better tune, their body 
is more healthful, or .better tempered : which is no 
more praife to him, than it is that he was born in 
Italy. 

y. He that is proud of his birth is proud of the 
blefSngs of others, not of himfelf: for if his parents 
were more eminent in any circumflance than their 
Neighbours, he is to thank God, and to rejoice in 
them ; but fHU he may be a Fool, or unfortunate, 
or deformed ; and when himfelf was born, it was 
indifferent to him whether his Father were a King 
or a Peafant, for he knew not any thing, nor chofe 
any thing : and mofl commonly it is true, that he 
that boafls of his Anceftors, who were the founders 
and raifers of a Noble Faniily, doth confefs that he 
hath in himfelf a lefs virtue and a lefs honour, and 
therefore that he is degenerated. 

8. Whatfocver other difference there is between 
thee and thy Neighbour, if it be bad, it is thine 
own, but thou haft no reafon to boaft of thy mifery 
and fhame : if it be good, thou haft received it from 
God ; and then thou art more obliged to pay duty 
and tribute, ufe and principal to him : and it were 



io8 OF HUMILirr. C. 2. 

a ftrange folly for a man to be proud of being more 
in debt than another. 

9. Remember what thou wert before thou wcrt 
begotten. Nothing. What wert thou in the firft 
regions of thy dwelling, before thy birth ? Un- 
cleannefs. What wert thou for many years after? 
Weaknefs. What in all thy life ? A great finncr. 
What in all thy excellencies ? A mere debtor to 

Apuieius de D^on. ^od, to thy parents, to the earth, 
socratis. to all the crcaturcs. ♦But we may 

if we pleafe ufe the method of the Platonifts, who 
reduce all the caufes and arguments for humili^ 
which we can take from ourfelves, to thefe feven 
heads, i . The fpirit of a man is light and troublc- 
fome. 2. His body is brutifh and fickly. 3. He 
is conftant in his folly and error, and inconftant in 
his manners and good purpofes. 4. His labours 
are vain, intricate and endlefs. 5. His fortune is 
changeable, but feldom pleafing, never perfed. 
6. His wifdom comes not till he be ready to die, 
that is, till he be paft ufing it. 7. His death is 
certain, always ready at the door, but never far off.* 
Upon thefe or the like meditations if we dwell, or 
frequently retire to them, we fhall fee nothing more 
reafonable than to be humble^ and nothing moTtfool- 
ijh than to be proud. 

ASls or Offices of Humility. 

The grace of Humility is exercifed by thefe fol- 
lowing Rules. 

I . Think not thyfelf better for any thing that 
happens to thee from without. For although thou 



^.4- OF HUMILirr. 109 

maycft by gifts beftowcd upon thee be better than 
another, as one horfe is better than another, that is 
of more ufe to others ; yet as tho\i art a man, thou 
haft nothing to commend thee to thyfelf but that 
only by which thou art a man, that is, by what thou 
choofeft and refufeft. 

2. Humility confifts not in railing againft thyfelf, 
or wearing mean clothes, or going foftly and fub- 
miflly : but in hearty and real evil or mean opinion 
of thyfelf. Believe thyfelf an unworthy perfon 
heartily, as thou believeft thyfelf to be hungry, or 
poor, or fick, when thou art fo. 

3. Whatfoever evil thou fay eft of thyfelf be con- 
tent that others fhould think to be true : and if thou 
calleft thyfelf Jho/, be not angry if another fay fo of 
thee. For if thou thinkeft fo truly, all men in the 
world defire other men to be of their opinion ; and 
he is an hypocrite that accufes himfelf before others, 
with an intent not to be believed. But he that 
calls himfelf intemperate, foolifh, luftful, and is an- 
gry when his neighbours call him fo, is both a falfe 
and a proud perfon. 

4. Love to be concealed, and little efteemed : be 
content to want praife, never being Ama ncfciri & pro ni- 
troubled when thou art ftighted ^^^^i?^^- ^«/«»- 
or undervalued ; for thou canft not undervalue thy- 
felf, and if thou thinkeft fo meanly as there is 
reafon, no contempt will feem unreaibnable, and 
therefore it will be very tolerable. 

5. Never be afhamed of thy birth, or thy parents, 

or thy »trade, or thy prefent em- luiuan nobiiitado non 
ployment, for the meannefs or po- cognofce parentado. 

^ ^ r /• r J 1. • Chi del arte fua fc 

verty of any 01 them: and when vcrgognafcmprcvivccon 
there is an occafion to fpeak of ^^^sog"*- 



no OF HUMILirr. Ci. 

them, fuch an occafion as would invite you to ipcak 
of anything that pleafes you, omit it not ; but fpcak 
as readily and indifferently of thy meannefs as of 
thy greatnefs- Primijlaus the firft King of Bohemu 
kept his country (hoes always by him, to remember 
from whence he was raifed : And Agat bodes by the 
furniture of his Table confefled, that from a Potter 
he was raifed to be the King of Sicily. 

6. Never fpeak anything diredlly tending to thy 
praife or glory ; that is, with a purpofe to be com- 
mended, and for no other end. If other ends be 
mingled with thy honour, as if the glory of God, 
or charity, or neceflity, or anything of prudence be 
thy end, you are not tied to omit your diicourfe or 
your defign that you may avoid praife, but purfue 
your end, though praife come along in the compaay. 
Only let not praife be the defign. 

7. When thou hafl faid or done anything fbf 
which thou receivefl praife or eflimation, take it in- 
differently, and return it to God ; refledting upofl 
him as the Giver of the gift, or the Blefler of the 
action, or the Aid of the defign : and give God 
thanks for making thee an inflrument of his gloiyi 
or the benefit of others. 

8 . Secure a good name to thy felf by living virtu- 
oufly and humbly : but let this good name be nurfed 
abroad, and never be brought home to look upon it : 
let others ufe it for their own advantage ; let them 
fpeak of it if they pleafe ; but do not thou at all 
ufe it, but as an inflrument to do God glory, and 
thy neighbour more advantage. Let thy face like 
Mofes's fhine to others, but make no looking-glaiTes 
for thy felf. 



N 



S. 4- OF HUMILirr. Ill 

9. Take no content in praife when it is offered 
thee : but let thy rejoicing in God's gift be allayed 
with fear, left this good bring thee to evil. Ufe the 
praife as you ufe your pleafure in eating and drink- 
ing : if it comesy make it do 

drudgery, let it lerye other ends, «A,;*,p«r«Tiic;«e»x»ft.^ 
and minifter to neceffities, and to '::^'J^Z:^:S^ 
caution, left by pride you lofe your ^^^^^c^^^' 
juft praife which you have de- 
ferved ; or elfe by being praifed unjuftly, you re- 
ceive fhame unto yourfelf with God and wife men. 

10. Ufe no ftratagems and devifes to get praife. 
Some ufe to inquire into the faults of their own 
actions or difcourfes on purpofe to hear that it was 
well done or fpoken, and without fault : others 
bring the matter into talk, or thruft themfelves into 
company, and intimate and give occaiion to be 
thought or fpoke of* Thefe men make a bait to 
perfuade themfelves to fwallow the hook, till by 
drinking the waters of vanity they fwell and burft. 

1 1 . Make no fuppletories to thyfelf, when thou 
art difgraced or flighted, by pleaf- Alter aiteri fatis am- 
ing thyfelf with fuppofing thou &uLtTisSi«s! 
didft deferve praife, though they ^«»- 
underftood thee not, or envioufly detracted from 
thee : neither do thou get to thyfelf a private thea- 
tre and flatterers, in whofe vain noifes and fantaftic 
praifes thou mayeft keep up thine own good opinion 
of thyfelf. 

. 12. Entertain no fancies of vanity and private 
whifpers of this Devil of pride : fuch as was that 
of Nebuchadnezzar ; Is not this great Babylon which 
I have built for the honour of my name^ and the might 



112 OF HUMILirr. C. 2. 

of my majejly^ and the power of my kingdom ? Some 
fantaftic fpirits will walk alone, and dream waking 
of greatnefles, of palaces, of excellent orations, full 
theatres, loud applaufes, fudden advancement, great 
fortunes, and fo will fpend an hour with imaginative 
pleafure ; all their employment being nothing but 
fumes of pride, and fecret indefinite defires and fig- 
nifications of what their heart wifhes. In this al- 
though there is nothing of its own nature diredly 
vicious, yet it is either an ill mother or an ill 
daughter, an ill fign or an ill efFeft ; and therefore 
at no hand confifling with the fafety and interefls of 
humility. 

13. Suffer others to be praifed in thy prcfencc, 
and entertain their good and glory with delight; 
but at no hand difparage them, or lefTen the report, 
or make an objedlion ; and think not the advance- 
ment of thy brother is a lefTening of thy worth. 
But this adt is alfo to extend further. 

14. Be content that he fhould be employed, and 
thou laid by as unprofitable ; his fentence approved, 
thine rejected ; he be preferred, and thou fixed in a 
low employment. 

15. Never compare thyfelf with others, unlels it 
be to advance them and to deprefs thyfelf. To 
which purpofe we mufl be fure in fome fcnfe (X 
other to think ourfelves the worfl in every company 
where we come : one is more learned than I am» 
another is more prudent, a third honourable, t 
fourth more chafle, or he is more charitable, or le6 
proud. For the humble man obferves their goodi 
and refledts only upon his own vilenefs ; or confiders 
the many evils of himfelf certainly known to him- 



S. 4. OF HUMILirr. 1 1 3 

felf, and the ill of others but by uncertain report : 
or he coniiders that the evils done by another are 
out of much infirmity or ignorance, but his own 
fins are againft a clearer light ; and if the other had 
fo great helps, he would have done more good and 
lefs evil : or he remembers that his old fins before 
his converfion were greater in the nature of the 
thing, or in certain circumftances, than the fins of 
other men. (So S. P^a/ reckoned himfelf the chief- 
eft: of finners, becaufe formerly he had afted the 
chiefeft fin of perfecuting the Church of God.) 
But this rule is to be ufed with this caution. That 
though it be good always to tAink meaneft of our- 
felves, yet it is not ever fafe Xofpeak it, becaufe thofe 
circumftances and confiderations which determine 
thy thoughts, are not known to others as to thy felf ; 
and it may concern others, that they hear thee give 
God thanks for the graces he hath given thee. But 
if thou preferveft thy thoughts and opinions of thy- 
felf truly humble, you may with more fafety give 
God thanks in public for that good which cannot, 
or ought not to be concealed. 

1 6. Be not always ready to excufe every overfight, 
or indifcretion, or ill adtion : but if thou beeft guilty 
of it, confefs it plainly ; for virtue fcorns a lie for its 
cover : bat to hide a fin with it, is like a cruft of 
leprofy drawn upon an ulcer. If thou beeft not 
guilty, (unlefs it be fcandalous) be not over-earneft 
to remove it : but rather ufe it as an argument to 
chaftife all greatnefs of fancy and opinion in thy felf ; 
and accuftom thyfelf to bear reproof patiently and 
contentedly, and the harfti words of thy enemies, 
as knowing that the anger of an enemy is a better 



114 OF HUMiL irr. C. 2. 

Monitor, and reprefents our faults or admoniihes us 
of our duty with more heartinefs, than the kindncis 
does, or precious balms of a friend. 

17. Give God thanks for every wreaknefs, defor- 
mity and imperfedtion, and accept it as a favour and 
grace of God, and an inftrument to refift pride and 
nurfe humility ; ever remembering that when God, 
by giving thee a crooked back, hath alfo made thy 
fpirit ftoop or lefs vain, thou art more ready to enter 
the narrow gate of Heaven, than by being ftraight, 
and {landing upright, and thinking highly. Thus 
the Apoftles rejoiced in their injirmitiesy not moral, 
but natural and accidental, in their being beaten and 
whipt like flaves, in their nakednefs and poverty. 

18. Upbraid no man's weaknefs to him to'dif- 
comfort him, neither report it to difparage him, 
neither delight to remember it to leflen him, or to 
fet thyfelf above him. Be fure never to praife thy- 
felf, or to difpraife any man elfe, unlefs God's glory 

or fome holy end do hallow it. 

ii ^^:J^:\TJZ And it was noted to the praife of 

Guiis pueri invifi aiiis non Cvrusy that amongft his CQuals iu 

ncnt, fi non omnino in*^ •^ ^ 

difputationibus viaoriam age he would ncver play at any 

fcmpcr obtincre laborcnt. ^ ^ • /• • 1 • l 

Non tantum egregiiim eft Iport, or ulc any qxercilc m whicn 
^?c vtrpuifn^^^^^^^^ he knew himfelf more excellent 

ubi viaoria eft damnofa. ^^^ ^^^ . ^^^ \^ f^^J^ Jj^ J^^ 
Fm. de eauc. Uber. J 

he was unfkilful he would make 
his challenges, left he fhould fhame them by his 
viftory, and that himfelf might learn fomething of 
their fkill, and do them civilities. 

19. Befides the foregoing parts and actions, hu- 
mility teaches us to fubmit ourfelves and all our fa- 
culties to God, To believe all things^ to do all thingSt 



-S. 4- OF HUMILirr. 1 1 5 

fofuffer all things which his will enjoins us : to be 
conteht in every eftate or change, knowing we 
have deferved worfe than the worft we feel ; and 
(as Anytus faid to Alcibiades) he hath taken but half, 
when he might have taken all : to adore his good- 
ne(s, to fear his greatnefs, to worfliip his eternal and 
infinite excellencies, and to fubmit Nihil ita dignum eft 
ourfelves to all our fuperiors in all Siyi^/S 
things according to Godlinefs, and pnebem. ?/«/. 
to be meek and gentle in our converfation towards 
others. 

Now, although according to the nature of every 
grace, this begins as a gift, and is increafed like a 
habit, that is, beft by its own a6ts ; yet befides the 
former afts and offices of humility, there are certain 
other exercifes and confiderations, which are good 
helps and inftruments for the procuring and increaf- 
ing this grace, and the curing of pride. 

Means and exercifes of obtaining and increafng the 

grace of Humility. 

I . Make confeffion of thy fins often to God ; and 
confider what all that evil amounts to which you 
then charge upon yourfelf. Look not upon them 
as fcattered in the courfe of a long life ; now, an 
intemperate anger, then, too fiill a meal ; now, idle 
talking, and another time, impatience : but unite 
them into one continued reprefentation, and remem- 
ber that he whofe life feems fair by reafon that his 
faults are fcattered at large diflances in the feveral 
parts of his life, yet if all his errors and follies were 
articled againfl him, the man would feem vicious 



1 16 OF HUMILirr. C. 2. 

and miferable : and poflibly this exercife, really ap- 
plied upon thy fpirit, may be ufeful. 

2. Remember that we ufually difparage others 
upon flight grounds and little inftances ; and towards 
them one fly is enough to fpoil a whole box of oint- 
ment : and if a man be highly commended, we think 
him fufficiently leflTened, if we clap one fin, or folly 
or infirmity into his account. Let us therefore be 
juft: to ourfelves, fince we are fo fevere to others, and 
confider, that whatfoever good any one can think or 
fay of us, we can tell him of hundreds of bafe and 
unworthy and foolifli anions, any one of which were 
enough (we hope) to deft:roy another's reputation: 

Therefore, let fo many be fufficient 
oixorro...v*«pi^,.:^a^ to defl:roy our over-high thoughts 

Titytiv on /Lunvorrat ; ri out wo J O O 

tSt /iutt»o/ulw»v fliXftf flav/Lut- q£^ OUrfclvCS. 

{irflai. Arrian. 1. I.e. 21. 

3 . When thy Neighbour is cried 
up by public fame and popular noifes, that we may 
difparage and leflfen him, we cry out that the peo- 
ple is a Herd of unlearned and ignorant perfons, ill 
judges, loud trumpets, but which never give certain 
found : let us ufe the fame art to humble ourfelves, 
and never take delight and pleafure in public reports, 
and acclamations of aflfemblies, and pleaie ourfelves 
with their judgment, of whom in other the like cafes 
we affirm that they are mad. 

4. We change our opinion of others by their 
kindnefs or unkindnefs towards us. If he be my 
Patron and bounteous, he is wife, he is noble, his 
faults are but warts, his virtues are mountainous: 
but if he proves unkind, or rejedls our importunate 
fuit, then he is ill-natured, covetous, and his free 
meal is called gluttony : that which before we called 



S. 4. OF HUMILirr. 1 17 

croility^ is now very drunkennefsy and all he fpeaks is 
flat and duU^ and ignorant as a fwine. This indeed 
is unjuft towards others, but a good inftrument, if 
we turn the edge of it upon ourfelves. We ufe 
ourfelves ill, abufing ourfelves with falfe principles, 
cheating ourfelves with lies and pretences, flealing 
the choice and eledlion from our wills, placing vo- 
luntary ignorance in our underflandings, denying the 
defires of the Spirit, fetting up a fadlion againfl every 
noble and jufl defire ; the leafl of which becaufe we 
fhould refent up to reviling the injurious perfon, it 
is but reafon we fhould at leafl not flatter ourfelves 
with fond and too kind opinions. 

5. Every day call to mind fbme one of thy foulefl 
fins, or the mofl fhameful of thy difgraces, or the 
indifcreetefl of thy adtions, or anything that did then 
mofl trouble thee, and apply it to the prefent fwelling 
of thy fpirit and opinion, and it may help to allay it. 

6. Pray often for his grace with all humility of 
geflure and paflion of defire, and in thy devotion 
interpofe many adts of humility by way of confef- 
fion and addrefs to God, and reflexion upon thyfelf. 

7. Avoid great Offices and employments, and the 

noifes of worldly honour. For in thofe flates many 

times fo many ceremonies and circumflances will 

feem necefTary, as will defb-oy the fobriety of thy 

thoughts. If the number of thy fervants be fewer, 

and their obfervances lefs, and their reverences lefs 

folemn, poffibly they will feem lefs than thy dignity : 

and if they be fo much and fo 

many, it is likely they will be too J^^^i'^^"'^ 

biff for thy fpirit. *And here be oiim enim Magjftratus 

o J r per lutrragia rabis lata 

thou very careful, left thou be creabantur. Piut, 



1 18 OF HUMILirr. C. 2. 

abufed by a pretence that thou wouldft ufe thy great 
dignity as an opportunity of doing great good. For 
fuppofing it might be good for others, yet it is not 
good for thee : they may have encouragement in 
noble things from thee, and by the fame inftru- 
ment thou mayeft thyfelf be tempted to pride and 
vanity. And certain it is God is as much glorified 
by thy example of humility in a low or temperate 
condition, as by thy bounty in a great and dang- 
erous. 

8. Make no reflex adts upon thy own humility, 
nor upon any other grace with which God hath en- 
riched thy foul. For fince God oftentimes hides 
from his Saints and Servants the fight of thofe ex- 
cellent things by which they fhine to others (though 
the dark fide of the Lantern be toward themfelves) 
that he may fecure the grace of humility ; it is good 
that thou do fo thyfelf: and if thou beholdeft a grace 
of God in thee, remember to give him thanks for 
it, that thou mayeft not boaft in that which is none 
of thy own : and confider how thou haft fuUied it, 
by handling it with dirty fingers, with thy own im- 
perfedlions, and with mixture of unhandfome cir- 
cumftances. Spiritual pride is very dangerous, not 
only by reafbn it fpoils fo many graces by which we 
drew nigh unto the Kingdom of God, but alfo be- 
caufe it fo frequently creeps upon the fpirit of holy 
perfons. For it is no wonder for a Beggar to call 
himfelf poor, or a drunkard to confefs that he is no 
fober perfon : but for a holy perfon to be humble, 
for one whom all men efteem a Saint, to fear left 
himfelf become a Devil, and to obferve his own 
danger, and to difcern his own infirmities, and make 



S. 4. OF HUMILirr. 1 1 9 

difcovery of his bad adherences, is as hard as for a 
Prince to fubmit himfelf to be guided by Tutors, 
and make himfelf fubjedl to difcipline like the mean- 
eft of his fervants. 

9. Often meditate upon the effedts of Pride on 
one fide, and Humility on the other. Firft, That 
Pride is like a Canker, and deftroys the beauty of 
the faireft flowers, the moft excellent gifts and 
graces ; but Humility crowns them all. Secondly, 
That pride is a great hindrance to the perceiving 
the things of God ; and Humility is an 
excellent preparative and inftrument of * • "• *^- 
fpiritual wifdom. Thirdly, That Pride hinders the 
acceptation of our prayers ; but Humility pierceth the 
clouds y and will not depart till the moji High Jhall re- 
gard. Fourthly, That Humility is but a fpeaking 
truth, and all Pride is a lie. Fifthly, that Humi- 
lity is the moft certain way to real honour, and Pride 
is ever affronted or defpifed. Sixthly, That Pridei 
turned Lucifer into a Devil, and Humility exalted | 
the Son of God above every Name, and placed him . 
eternally at the right hand of his Father. Seventhly, 
That God rejijleth the proud^ profefling 
open defiance arid hoftility againft fuch ^ ** 
perfbns ; but giveth grace to the humble : * Grace 
and pardon, ♦ remedy and relief againft mifery and 
oppreflion, ♦ content in all conditions, * tranquillity 
of fpirit, * patience in afflidlions, * love abroad, 
* peace at home, * and utter freedom from conten- 
tion and * the fin of cenfuring others * and the 
trouble of being cenfured themfelves. For the 
humble man will not judge his brother for the mote 
in his eye^ being more troubled at the beam in his own 



I20 OF HUMILirr. C. 2. 

eye ; and is patient and glad to be reproved, becaufe 
himfelf hath caft the firft ftone at himfelf, and there- 
fore wonders not that others are of his mind. 

John 13. 15. 10. Remember that the bleiled Sa- 
viour of the world hath done more to prefcribe, and 
tranfmit, and fecure t/iis grace than any other; his 
whole life being a great continued example of humi- 
lity, a vaft defcent from the glorious bofbm of his Fa- 
ther to the womb of a poor maiden, to the form of a 
fervant, to the miferies of a finner, to a life of labour, 
to a ftate of poverty, to a death of malefactors, to 
the grave of death, and the intolerable calamities 
which we deferved : and it were a good defign, and 
yet but reafonable, that we fhould be as humble in 
the midft of our greateft imperfedlions and bafeft fins, 
as Chrift was in the midft of his fulnefs of the Spirit, 
great wifdom, perfect life, and moft admirable vir- 
tues. 

1 1 • Drive away all flatterers from thy company, 
and at no hand endure them ; for he that endures 
himfelf fo to be abufed by another, is not only a 
fool for entertaining the mockery, but loves to have 
his own opinion of himfelf to be heightened and 
cherifhed. 

12. Never change thy employment for the fud- 
den coming of another to thee : But if modefty per- 
mits or difcretion, appear to him that vifits thee the 
fame that thou wert to God and thyfelf in thy pri- 
vacy. But if thou wert walking or fleeping, or in 
any other innocent employment or retirement, fnatcb 
not up a book to feem ftudious, nor fall on thy knees 
to feem devout, nor alter anything to make him be- 
lieve thee better employed than thou wert. 



^.4- OF HUMILirr. 1 2 1 

1 3. To the lame purpofe it is of great ufe that he 
who would preferve his humility, fhould choofe fome 
fpiritual perfon to whom he fhall oblige himfelf to 
difcover his very thoughts, and fancies, every adl of 
his, and all his intercourfe with others in which 
there may be danger ; that by fuch an opennefs of 
fpirit he may expofe every blaft of vain-glory, every 
idle thought, to be chaflened and leiTened by the 
rod of fpiritual difcipline : and he that fhall find 
himfelf tied to confefs every proud thought, every 
vanity of his fpirit, will alfo perceive they muft not 
dwell with him, nor find any kindnefs fi-om him : 
and befides this, the nature of pride is fo fhameful 
and unhandfbme, that the very difcovery of it is a 
huge mortification and means of fupprefiing it. A 
man would be afhamed to be told that he enquires 
after the faults of his laft Oration or adtion on pur- 
pofe to be commended : and therefore when the 
man fhall tell his fpiritual Guide the fame fhameful 
flory of himfelf, it is very likely he will be hum- 
bled, and heartily afhamed of it. 

1 4. Let every man fuppofe what opinion he fhould 
have of one that fhould fpend his^time in playing with 
drum-flicks and cockle-fhells, and that fliould wran- 
gle all day long with a little boy for pins, or fhould 
ftudy hard and labour to cofen a child of his gauds ; 
and who would run into a river deep and dangerous 
with a great burden upon his back, even then when he 
were told of the danger, and earneflly importuned 
not to do it ? and let him but change the Inflances 
and the perfon, and he fhall find that he hath the 
fame reafon to think as bad of himfelf, who pur- 
fues trifles with earneflnefs, fpending his time in 



122 OF HUMILirr. C.2. 

vanity, and his labour for that which profits not ; who 
knowing the laws of God, the rewards of virtue, 
the curfed confequents of fin, that it is an evil fpirit 
that tempts him to it, a Devil, one that hates him, 
that longs extremely to ruin him, that it is his own 
deftrudion that he is then working, that the plea- 
fures of his fin are bafe and brutifli, unfatisfying in 
the enjoyment, foon over, fhameful in their ftory, 
bitter in the memory, painful in the efFed: here, 
and intolerable hereafter, and for ever ; yet in dcfpitc 
of all this, he runs fooliflily into his fin and his ruin, 
merely becaufe he is a fool, and winks hard, and 
rufhes violently like a horfe into the battle, or like 
a madman to his death. He that can think great 
and good things of fuch a perfon, the next ftep may 
court the rack for an infl:rument of pleafure, and ad- 
mire a fwine for wifdom, and go for counfel to the 
prodigal and triaing j^raflhop^ej:^ 

After the ufe of^thefe and fuch like inftrumcflts 
and confiderations, if you would try how your foul 
is grown, you fhall know that humility, like the 
root of a goodly tree, is thruft very far into the 
ground, by thefe goodly fruits which appear above 
ground. 

Signs of Humility. 

I . The humble man trufl:s not to his own difcre- 
tion, but in matters of concernment relies rather 
upon the judgment of his friends, counfellors, or 
fpiritual guides. 2. He does not pertinacioufly pur- 
fue the choice of his own will, but in all things lets 
God choofe for him, and his Superiors in thofc things 



-S. 4. OF HUMILirr. 123 

which concern^ them, 3. He does not murmur 
againfl commands. 4. He is not inquifitive into 
the reaibnablenefs of indifferent and innocent com- 
mands, but believes their command Affai commanda chi 
to be reafon enough in fuch cafes ^^bidifceaifaggio. 

to exad: his obedience. 5. He lives according to a 
rule, and with compliance to public cufloms, with- 
out any afFeftation or Angularity. 6. He is meek 
and indifferent in all accidents and chances, j. He 

patiently bears injuries. 8. He is venim humiiem pati. 
always unfatisfied in his own con- ^^^^ oftcndit. s. Hier. 

du6t, refolutions and counfels. 9. He is a great 
lover of good men, and a praifer of wife men, and 
a cenfurer of no man. 10. He is modeft in his 
ipeech, and referved in his laughter, 1 1 . He fears 
when he hears himfelf commended, left God make 
another judgment concerning his anions than men 
do. 12. He gives no pert or faucy anfwers when 
he is reproved, whether juftly or unjuftly. 13. 
He loves to fit down in private, and if he may he 
refufes the temptation of offices and new honours. 
14. He is ingenuous, free and open in his adlions 
and difcourfes. 15. He mends his fault, and gives 
thanks when he is admonifhed. 16. He is ready 
to do good offices to the murderers of his fame, to 
his flanderers, backbiters and detradtors, as Chrift 
waflied the feet of Judas. 17. And is contented to 
be fufpedted of Indifcretion, fo before God he may 
be really innocent, and not offisnfive to his neigh- 
bour, nor wanting to his juft^ad^nidert^ intereft. 







.'■■^ 



124 OF MODESrr. C.2. 




SECT. V. 

Of Modejly. 

ODESTY is the appendage of Sobriety, 
and is to Chaftity, to Temperance, and to 
Humility, as the fringes are to a garment 
It is a grace of God that moderates the ove^-adiv^ 
nefs and curiofity of the mind, and orders the pat 
fions of the body, and external aftions, and is di- 
redlly oppofed to Curiofity^ to Boldnefsy to UnJecencj* 
The pradlice of Modefty confifts in thefe following 
Rules. 

EZ<rxnfxo<r6fn. -^^s and duttcs of Modcfty as it is ofpofd 

to Curiofity. 

1 . Enquire not into the fecrets of God, but be 

content to learn thy duty accord' 
ing to the quality of thy pcrfo^ 
or employment : that is plainly, if thou beeft not 
concerned in the condud: of others ; but if th* 
beeft a teacher, learn it fo as may beft enable thee 
to difcharge thy office. God's commandments wcK 
proclaimed to all the world, but God's counfels ait 
to himfelf and to his fecret ones, when they are ad* 
mitted within the veil. 

2. Enquire not into the things which are toohald 
Q^i fcrutator eft Ma- for thcc, but Icam modcftly tokiioW 

K^V^^T ' ^^^ thy infirmities and abilities ; and 

aDti. ipx" -^ 4«>^o«t«5'» raife not thy mind up to enquire 

ir£ff ixK f^rk yaf rd yrSitai iTXto mylteries OX Statc, or the le- 



5.5- OF MODESTT. 125 

crets of government, or difficulties *"/^nfic, ^ hm flixA«i 
Theological, it thy employment «. Arrian.iib.i.cap.26. 

really be, or thy underftanding aJ^Xs'P i-t 
be judged to be, of a lower rank. *"™ opus eft lapiat. Lac- 

3, Let us not enquire into the 

affairs of others that ccmcern us not, but be bufied 
within ourfelves and our own fpheres ; ever remem- 
bering that to pry into the a<ftions or interefts of 
other men not under our charge may minifter to 
pride, to tyranny, to uncharitablenefs, to trouble, 
but can never confift with modefty, unlefs where 
duty or the mere intentions of charity and relation 
do warrant it. 

4. Never liften at the doors or windows: for be- 
fides that it contains in it danger eccIus. 7. 21. 

J /v '^ • ir • J' _ Nc occhi in lettera, ne 

and a fnare, it is alio an mvadmg my j„ano in tafca, nc oreichi 
neighbour's privacy, and a laying "* ^^^^ *^'~*- 
that open which he therefore enclofed that it might 
not be open. Never aik what he carries covered fo 
curioufly ; for it is enough that it is covered curi- 
oufly. Hither alfo is reducible that we never open 
letters without public authority, or reafonably pre- 
fumed leave, or great neceffity, or charity. 

Every man hath in his own life fins enough, in 
his own mind trouble enough, in his own fortune 
evils enough, and in performance of his offices fail- 
ings more than enough to entertain his own inquiry : 
fo that curiofity after the affairs of others cannot be 
without envy and an evil mind. What is it to me 
if my Neighbour's Grandfather were a Syrian or his 
Grandmother illegitimate, or that another is in- 
debted five thoufand pounds, or whether his wife be 
expenfive ? But commonly curious peribns or (as 



126 OF MODESrr. C. 2. 

the Apoftle*s phrafc is) bufy-bodies are not folicitous 
or inquifitive into the beauty and order of a well- 
governed family, or after the virtues of an excellent 
perfon; but if there be anything for which men keep 
locks and bars, and porters, things that blufh to fee the 
light, and either are fhameful in manners, or private 
in nature, thefe things are their care and their bufi- 
nefs. * But if great things will fatisfy our inquiry, 
the courfe of the Sun and Moon, the fpots in their 
faces, the Firmament of Heaven and the fuppofed 
Orbs, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, are work 
enough for us : or if this be not, let him tell me 
whether the number of the ftars be even or odd, 
and when they began to be fo; fince fome ages 
have difcovered new ftars which the former knew 
not, but might have feen if they had been where 
now they are fixed. ♦ If thefe be too troublefome, 
fearch lower, and tell me why this turf this year brings 
forth a Daify, and the next year a Plantain ; why 
the Apple bears his feed in his heart, and Wheat 
bears it in his head : let him tell why a graft taking 
nourifhment from a crab-ftock fhall have a fruit 
more noble than its nurfe and parent : let him fay 
why the beft of oil is at, the top, the beft of wine 
in the middle, and the beft of honey at the bottom, 
otherwife than it is in fome liquors that are thinner, 
and in fome that are thicker. But thefe things are 
not fuch as pleafe Bufy-bodies ; they muft feed 
upon Tragedies, and ftories of misfortunes, and 
crimes : and yet tell them ancient ftories of the ra- 
vifhment of chafte maidens, or the debauchment of 
nations, or the extreme poverty of learned perfons, 
or the perfecutions of the old Saints, or the changes 



S. 5. OF MODESrr. 127 

of government^ and fad accidents happening in 
Royal families amongft the Arfacidce^ the Ccofars^ 
the Ptolemies^ thefe were enough to fcratch the itch 
of knowing fad ftories ; but unlefs you tell them 
fomething fad and newy fomething that is done 
within the bounds of their own knowledge or rela- 
tion, it feems tedious and unfatisfying ; which fhows 
plainly it is an evil fpirit : . envy and idlenefs married 
together, and begot curiofity. Therefore Plutarch 
rarely well compares curious and inquifitive ears to 
the execrable gates of cities, out of which only 
Malefadlors and Hangmen and Tragedies pafs, no- 
thing that is chafte or holy. * If a Phyfician fliould 
go from houfe to houfe unfent for, and enquire what 
woman hath a cancer in her bowels, or what man 
hath a fiftula in his colic-gut, though he could pre- 
tend to cure it, he would be almofl as unwelcome 
as the diieaie itfelf : and therefore it is inhuman to 
enquire after crimes and difafters without pretence 
of amending them, but only to difcover them. We 
are not angry with Searchers and Publicans when 
they look only on public merchandife ; but when 
they break open trunks, and pierce veflels, and unrip 
packs, and open fealed letters. 

Curiofity is the diredt incontinency of the fpirit ; 
and adultery itfelf in its principle is many times 
nothing but a curious inquifition after, and envy of 
another man's enclofed pleafures : and there have 
been many who refufed fairer objefts that they 
might ravifh an enclofed woman from her retire- 
ment and fingle pofTeflbr. But thefe inquifitions are 
feldom without danger^ never without bafencfs; 
they are neither juft, nor honeftt nor delightful, and 



128 OF MODESrr. C.i. 

very often ufelefs to the curious enquirer. For men 
ftand upon their guards againft them as they fccuic 
their meat againft Harpies and Cats, laying all their 
counfels and fecrets out of their way ; or as men 
clap their garments clofe about them when the 
fearching and faucy winds would difcover their na- 
kednefs : as knowing that what men willingly hear, 
they do willingly fpeak of. Knock therefore at the 
door before you enter upon your neighbour's pri- 
vacy ; and remember that there is no difference be- 
tween entering into his houfe, and looking into it. 

hWx^' Adls of Modejiy as it is oppqfed to 

Boldnefs. 

1 . Let us always bear about us fuch impreflions 
of reverence and fear of God as to tremble at his 
voice, to exprefs our apprehenfions of his greatncfi 
in all great accidents, in popular judgments, loud 
thunders, tempefts, earthquakes ; not only for fear 
of being fmitten ourfelves, or that we are concerned 
in the accident, but alfo that we may humble our- 
felves before his Almightinefs, and exprels that infi- 
nite diftance between his infinitenefs and our wcak- 
nefles, at fuch times efpecially when he gives iiich 
vifible arguments of it. He that is merry and airy 
afhore, when he fees a fad and a loud tempeft on 
the fea, or dances brifkly when God thunders from 
Heaven, regards not when God ipeaks to all the 
world, but is poflefTed with a firm immodefty. 

2. Be reverend, modeft and referved in the prc- 
fence of thy betters, giving to all according to their 
quality, their titles of honour, keeping diftance, 



S. 5. OF MODESrr. 129 

fpeaking little, anlwcring pertinently, not interpof- 
ing without leave or reafon, not anfwering to a 
queftion propounded to another ; and ever prefent 
to thy fuperiors the faireft fide of thy difcourfe, of 
thy temper, of thy ceremony, as being afhamed to 
ferve excellent perfons with unhandfbme intercourfe. 

3 . Never lie before a King, or a great perfon, nor 
ftand in a lie when thou art accufed, nor offer to juf- 
tify what is indeed a fault, but ^ t> * * 
modeftly be afhamed of it, afk cundrae paiiio, hujus ma- 

* ^ m 1 culas hominibus non ol- 

pardon and make amends. tendit. 

•XT t_ /I- /• ^i_ /• t_ .1. Mmmoh, Can, Em, 

4. Never boafl of thy fin, but „^,^a^^^^, 
at leafl lay a veil upon thy naked- *'^«p«' ** aia-x^foi. Mciiff. 

^ - 1 , 111 Obftarc primuin eft vcUc 

neis and fhame, and put thy hand nee labi via ; 
before thine eyes, that thou mayeft ^''^diTodJl "°"' 
have this beginning; of repentance, ^^^^' ^'^, . 

... t n t 1/1 A Chione faltem vel ab 

to believe thy fin to be thy fhame. Heiide difce pudorem. 
For he that blufhes not at his ^monS^^^^^^ 
crime, but adds fhameleflfnefs to his ^^'- ^- '• ^^'^' ^^' 
fhame, hath no inflrument left to reflore him to the 
Hopes of virtue. 

5. Be not confident and affirmative in an uncer- 
tain matter, but report things modeflly and tempe- 
rately according to the degree of that perfuafion 
which is or ought to be begotten in thee by the effi- 
cacy of the authority, or the reafon inducing thee. 

6. Pretend not to more knowledge than thou hafl^ 
but be content to feem ignorant „ , 

where thou art, left thou beeft 

cither brought to fhame, or retirefl into fhamelefT- 

nefs. 



K 



130 



OF MODESrr. C.i. 



n^f.^. .in.iu, or ^^s of Modejiy as it is oppofed to 
•^^''**- Undecency. 

In your prayers, in Churches and places of Reli- 
gion ufe reverent poflures, great attention^ grave ctr 
remony, the loweft geftures of humility, remember- 
ing that we fpeak to God in our reverence to whom 
we cannot poflibly exceed ; but that the expreiSon 
of this reverence be according to law or cuftom, and 
the example of the moft prudent and pious perfons : 
that is, let it be the beft in its kind to the bcft of 
eflences. 

2. In all public meetings, private addreiles, in dif- 
courfes, in journeys, ufe thofe forms of falutation, re- 
verence and decency, which the cuftom prefcribes, 
and is ufual amongft the moft fober perlbns ; giving 
honour to whom honour belongeth, taking place cl 
none of thy betters, and in all cafes of queftion con- 
cerning civil precedency giving it to any one that wiB 
take it, if it be only thy own right that is in queftion. 

3 . Obferve the proportion of affedlions in all meet- 
ings and to all perfons : be not merry at a funeral, nor 
fad upon a feftival ; but rejoice with them that rejoice^ 
and weep with them that weep. 

4. Abftain from wanton and diilblute laughter, 
petulant and uncomely jefts, loud talking, jeering, 
and all fuch adtions which in civil account are called 
undecencies and incivilities. 

5. Towards your parents ufe all modefty of du^ 
and humble carriage; towards them and all your 
kindred be fevere in the modefties of chaftity ; ever 
fearing left the freedoms of natural kindnefs (hould 



S. 5. OF MODESrr. 131 

enlarge into any neighbourhood of unhandfomenefs. 
For all inceftuous mixtures, and all circumflances and 
degrees towards it, are the higheft violations of mo- 
defty in the world : for therefore Inceft is grown to 
be fo high a crime, efpecially in the laft periods of 
the world, becaufe it breaks that reverence which 
the confent of all nations, and the feverity of human 
laws hath enjoined towards our parents and nearefl 
kindred, in imitation of that law which God gave to 
the Jews in profecution of Modefty in this inftance. 
6. Be a curious obferver of all thofe things which 
are of good report, and are parts of 
public honefty. For public fame, and 
the fentence of prudent and public perfons, is the mea- 
fure of good and evil in things indifferent : and cha- 
rity requires us to comply with thofe fancies and 
affedtions which are agreeable to nature, or the ana- 
logy of virtue, or public laws, or old cuftoms. It is 
againft Modefty for a woman to marry a fecond huf- 
band as long as (he bears a burthen by the firft, or to 
admit a fecond love while her funeral tears are not 
wiped from her cheeks. It is 
againft public honefty to do fome J^eT^^^^S t 
lawful adlions of privacy in pub- *?*!"*> ^ mcmini, fomice 

/ -^ , ^ nmapatct. Mart, 

he theatres, and therefore m fuch 
cafes retirement is a duty of Modefty. 

7.( Be grave, decent and modeft in thy clothing 
and ornament : never let it be above thy condition, 
not always equal to it, never light or amorous, never 
difcovering a nakednefs through a thin veil, which 
thou pretendeft to hide, never to lay a fiiare for a 
Soul ; but remember what becomes a Chriftian, pro- 
feffing holinefs, chaftity, and the difcipline of the 



132 OF MODESTT. C.i. 

holy ye/us : and the firft efFeft of this let your fcr- 
vants feel by your gentlenefs and aptnefs to be pleafed 

Tutafitornatrix:odiqu« ^uh their ufual diligence, and or- 
fauciat ora dinary condudt. For the man or 

Unguibus, ct rapta bra- ' • i /y i 

chia figit acu. womau that IS dreued with anger 

Devovct, ct tangit Do- • . . • i i 

minae caput ilia, fimui- and impatience, wears pride under 

piorat ad invifas fangui- ^^ir robes and immodefty above. 
noicnta comas, o-vid, 3^ Hither alfo is to bc reduced 

Angular and afFeded walking, proud, nice and ridi- 
culous geftures of body, painting and lafciviooi 
dreffings : all which together God reproves by the 

Prophet, The Lord faiths Becaufe the 
daughters of Sion are haughty and wJi 
'withjlretched-forth necks and wanton eyes, walking ani 
mincing as they go, and make a tinkling with their feet ^ 
Therefore, the Lord will f mite her with a fcah of thi 
crown of the head, and will take away the bravery of their 
tinkling ornaments. And this duty of modef^ in this . 
inftance is expreflly enjoined to all Chriflian women 

by S . Paul, That women adorn themfehes 

in mo deft apparel with jhamefacednefs ani 

fobriety, not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearl, or 

cojily array, but (which becometh women prof ejjing god- 

linefsj with good works. 

9. As thofe meats are to be avoided which tempt 
our ftomachs beyond our hunger ; fo alfo fhould pru- 
dent perfons decline all fuch fpedtacles, relations^ 
Theatres, loud noifes and outcries which concern ui 
not, and are befides our natural or moral interefL 
Our fenfes fhould not, like petulant and wanton Giffc 
^,. . ^ . wander into Markets and Thca- 

CEdipum curiofitas in • 1 • n 1 l 

cxtrcmas conjccit calami- trcs without juft employment ; but 

when they are fent abroad by rea- 



S. 5. OF MODESrr. 133 

fon, return quickly with their errand, and remain 
modeftly at home under their guide, till they be fent 
again. 

10. Let all perfons be curious in obferving Mo- 
defty towards themfelves in the handfome treating 
their own body, and fuch as are in their power, whe- 
ther living or dead. Againft this rule they offend 
who expofe to others their own, or pry into others' 
nakednefs beyond the limits of neceflity, or where a 
leave is not made holy by a permiflion from God. It 
is alfb faid that God was pleafed to work a miracle 
about the body of Epiphanius^ to reprove the immo- 
deft curiofity of an unconcerned perfon who pried 
too near, when charitable people were compofing it 
to the grave. In all thefe cafes and particulars, al- 
though they feem little, yet our duty and concern- 
ment is not little. Concerning which I ufe the words 
of the fon of Sir achy He that defpifeth little things Jhall 
perijh by little and little. 



SECT. VI. 

Of Contentednefs in all EJiates and Accidents. 

lIRTUES and Difcourfes are like Friends, 
neccflary in all fortunes ; but thofe are the 
beft which are Friends in our fadneiles, and 
fupport us in our forrows and fad accidents : and in 
this fenfe, no man that is virtuous can be friendlefs ; 
nor hath any man reafon to complain of the Divine 
Providence, or accufe the public difbrder of things, 
or his own infelicity, fince God hath appointed one 







134 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.i. 

remedy for all the evils in the World, and that is t 
contented fpirit : For this alone makes a man pais 
through fire, and not be fcorched ; through Seas, and 
n ot be drowned ; through hunger and nakednefs, and 
\ want nothing. For fince all the evil in the world 
confifts in the difagreeing between the objedt and die 
appetite, as when a man hath what he defires not| 
or defires what he hath not, or defires amifs ; he that 
compofes his fpirit to the prefent accident, hath va- 
riety of inftances for his virtue, but none to troubk 
him, becaufe his defires enlarge not beyond his pre- 
fent fortune : and a wife man is placed in the variety 
of chances, like the Nave or Centre of a wheel in the 
midfl of all the circumvolutions and changes of pof* I 
ture, without violence or change, fave that it turns | 
gently in compliance with its changed parts, and is 
indifferent which part is up and which is down ; for 
there is fbme virtue or other to be exercifed whatever 
happens, either patience or thankfgiving, love or fear, 
moderation or humility, charity or contentednefs, and 
they are every one of them equally in order to his 
great end and immortal felicity : and beauty is not 
made by white or red, by black eyes and a round face, 
by a flraight body and a fmooth fkin ; but by a pro- 
portion to the fancy. No rules can make amiability, 
our minds and apprehenfions make that ; and fo is 
our felicity: and we may be reconciled to poverty and 
a low fortune, if we fuflfer contentednefs and the grace 
of God to make the proportion. (For no man is poor 
that does not think himfelf fo : But if in a full fortune 
with impatience he defires more, he proclaims his 
wants and his beggarly condition. But becaufe this 
grace of Contentednefs was the fum of all the old 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 135 

moral Philofophy, and a great duty Non faaa tiw eft, fi 
in Chriftianity, and of moft uni- ^li^imuies, injuria. 

^erfal ufe in the whole courfe of our lives, and the 
only inftrument to eafe the burthens of the world and 
the enmities of &d chances, it will not be amifs to 
prefs it by the proper arguments by which God hath 
bound it upon our fpirits, it being faflened by Reafon 
uid Religion, by duty and intereft, by neceffity and 
cronveniency, by example, and by the propofition of 
excellent rewards, no lefs than peace and felicity. 

I . Contentednefs in all eilates is a duty of Reli- 
gion ; it is the great reafonablenefs of complying with 
the Divine Providence which governs all the world, 
and hath fo ordered us in the adminiftration of his 
great Family. He were a ftrange fool that fhould 
be angry becauie Dogs and Sheep need no fhoes, and 
yet himielf is full of care to get fome. God hath 
fupplied thofe needs to them by natural provifions, 
and to thee by an artificial : for he hath given thee 
reaibn to learn a trade, or fome means to make or 
buy them, fb that it only differs in the manner of our 
provifion ; and which had you rather want, fhoes or 
Reaibn ? And my patron that hath given me a Farm 
is freer to me than if he gives a loaf ready baked. But 
however all thefe gifts come from him, and therefore 
it is fit he fhould difpenfe them as he pleafes ; and if 
we murmur here, we may at the next melancholy be 
troubled that God did not make us to be angels or 
Stars. For if that which we are or have do not con- 
tent us, we may be troubled for everything in the 
nforld which is befides our being or our pofTeflions. 

God is the mafler of the fcenes, we mufl not choofe 
part we fhall adl; it concerns us only to be care- 



136 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.i 

ful that we do it well, always faying, Ifthispleafe God^ 

El r^ r. e.- <Kxa„ /^^ ^^ ^^ ^s it is : and we who piay 
ToDToymVAi,. ^j^^^ God's will may be done in 

Earth as it is in Heaven, muft remember that the An- 
gels do whatfoever is commanded them, and go 
wherever they are fent, and refufe no circumftanccs : 
and if their employment be crofled by a higher de- 
cree, they fit down in peace and rejoice in the event ; 

and when the Angel of Judea could not 
prevail in behalf of the people com- 
mitted to his charge, becaufe the Angel of Perfia op- 
pofed it, he only told the ftory at the command of God 
and was as content, and worfhipped with as great 
an ecftafy in his proportion, as the prevailing Spirit. 
Do thou fo likewife : keep the ftation where God hath 
placed you, and you fhall never long for things with- 
out, but fit at home feafting upon the Divine Prm- 
dence and thy own reaforiy by which we arc taught that 
it is neceflary and reafonable to fubmit to God. 

For, is not all the world God's family ? Are not wc 
his creatures ? Are we not as clay in the hand of the 
Potter ? Do we not live upon his meat, and move by 
his flrength, and do our work by his light ? Arc wc 
anything but what we are from him ? And fhall there 
be a mutiny among the flocks and herds, becaufe their 
Lord or their Shepherd choofes their pailures, and 
fuflfers them not to wander into Deferts and unknown 
ways ? If we choofe, we do it fo foolifhly that wc 
cannot like it long, and moft commonly not at all : 
but God, who can do what he pleafe, is wife to choofe 
fafely for us, aftedlionate to comply with our needs, 
and powerful to execute all his wife decrees. Here 
therefore is the wifdom of the contented man, to let 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 137 

God choofe for him : for when we have given up our 
w^ills.to him, and ftand in that ftation of the battle 
vrhere our great General hath placed us, our fpirits 
muft needs reft while our conditions have for their 
fecurity the power, the wifdom, and the charity of 
God. 

2. Contentednefs in all accidents brings great peace 
of fpirit, and is the great and only inftrument of tem- 
poral felicity. It removes the fting from the acci- 
dent, and makes a man not to depend upon chance and 
the uncertain difpofitions of men for his well-being, 
but only on God and his own Spirit. We ourfelves 
make our fortunes good or bad ; , ^ » ,, , . 
and when God lets loofe a Tyrant •? « iyoBii^ dixfic, wfh «- 
upon US, or a ficknels, or icorn, or a 
leffened fortune, if we fear to die, or know not to be 
patient, or are proud, or covetous, then the calamity 
fits heavy on us. ButJ f weJcngwJ]©^ a 

noble principle, and fear not Death ib much as a dif- 
honeft a(Sion, and think impatience a worfe evil than 
a Fever, and Pride to be the biggeft difgrace, and po- 
verty to be infinitely defirable before the torments of 
covetoufnefs ; then we who now think vice to be fo 
eafy, and make it fb familiar, and think the cure fo 
impoflible, fhall quickly be of another mind, and 
reckon thefe accidents amongft things eligible. 

But no man can be happy that hath great hopes and 
great fears of things without, and events depending 
upon other men, or upon the chances of Fortune. 
The rewards of virtue are certain, and our provifions 
for our natural fupport are certain, or if we want meat 
till we die, then we die of that difeafe, and there are 
many worfe than to die with an atrophy or Confump- 



138 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.i. 

tion, or unapt and coarfer nourishment. But he that 
fuffers a traniporting paflion concerning things within 
the power of others, is free from forrow and amaz^ 
ment no longer than his enemy (hall give him leave; 
and it is ten to one but he fhall be fmitten then and 
there where it fhall moft trouble him : for fb the Ad- 
der teaches us where to ftrike, by her curious and fear- 
ful defending of her head. The old Stoics when you 
told them of a fad ftory, would ftill anfwer n irpog fii; 
What is that to me ? Yes, for the Tyrant hath fen- 
tenced you alfo to prifon. Well, what is that ? He 
will put a chain upon my leg, but he cannot bind my 
foul. No : but he will kill you. Then I'll die. If 
prefently , let me go, that I may prefently be freer than 
himfelf : but if not till anon or to-morrow, I will dine 
firft, or fleep, or do what reafon and nature calls for, 
as at other times. This in Gentile Philofophy is the 
Phil. 4. II. 12. f^"^^ with the difcourfe of S. Paul^ I 
I Tim. 6.6. have learned in whatfoever ft ate I am 

Heh lie • ^ J 

therewith to be content. I knoiw both km 

to be abafedy and I know how to abound: everywhere ad 

Chi bene mai non puo ^^ ^11 things I am inJiruBed, bothhn 

fofFrir, a grand honor non tO be full and tO be hungry ^ both tO 

abound andfuffer need. 
We are in the world like men playing at Tables, 
the chance is not in our power, but to play it is ; and 
when it is fallen we muft manage it as we can ; and let 
nothing trouble us, but when we do a bafe aiflion, or 
fpeak like a fool, or think wickedly : thefe things God 
hath put into our powers; but concerning thofe things 
which are wholly in the choice of another, they can- 
not fall under our deliberation, and therefore neither 
are they fit for our paflions. My fear may make me 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 139 

miferabley but it cannot prevent what another hath in 
his power and purpofe : and prolperities can only be 
enjoyed by them who fear not at all to lofe them, fince 
the amazement and pailion concerning the future 
takes off all the pleafure of the prefent poffeffion. 
Therefore, if thou haft loft thy land, do not alfo lofe 
thy conftancy : and if thou muft die a little fooner, 
yet do not die impatiently. For no chance is evil to 
him that is content, and to a man 
nothing fntferable unlefs tt be unrea- 
finable. No man can make another man to be his' 
flave, unlefs he hath firft enflaved himfelf to life and ; 
death, to pleafure or pain, to hope or fear : command 
thefe pafiions, and you are freer than the Parthian. 
Kings. 

Injiruments or Exercifes to procure Contentednefs. 

Upon the ftrength of thefe premifes we may re- 
duce this virtue to practice by its proper inftruments 
firft, and then by fome more fpecial confiderations or 
arguments of content. 

I . When anything happens to our difpleafure, let 
us endeavour to take off its trouble by turning it into 
fpiritual or artificial advantage, and handle it on that 
fide in which it may be ufeful to the defigns of Rea- 
fon. For there is nothing but hath a double handle, 
or at leaft we have two hands to apprehend it. When 
an enemy reproaches us, let us look on him as an im- 
partial relater of our faults, for he will tell thee truer 
than thy fondeft friend will ; and thou mayeft call 
them precious balms though they break thy heady and 
forgive his anger while thou makeft ufe of the plain- 



HO OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.i. 

nefs of his declamation. The ox when he is ivearj 
treads fureji : and if there be nothing elfe in the dif- 
grace but that it makes us to walk warily, and tread 
fure for fear of our enemies, that is better than to be 
flattered into pride and careleflhefs. This is the cha- 
rity of Chriftian Philofophy, which expounds the 
fenfe of the Divine providence fairly, and reconciles 
us to it by a charitable conftruftion : and we may as 
well refufe all phyfic, ijf we confider it only as unplea- 
fant in the tafle ; and we may find fiiult with the rich 
valleys of Thafus^ becaufe they are circled by fharp 
mountains : but fb alfo we may be in charity with 
every unpleafant accident, becaufe though it taftc 
bitter, it is intended for health and medicine. 

If therefore thou falleft from thy employment in 
public, take fandluary in an honeft retirement, being 
indiflferent to thy gain abroad, or thy fafety at home. 
If thou art out of favour with thy Prince, fecure the 
jfavour of the King of Kings, and then there is no 
harm come to thee. And when Zeno Citienfs loft 
all his goods in a ftorm, he retired to the ftudies of 
Philofophy, to his fhort cloak, and a fevere life, and 
gave thanks to fortune for his profperous mifchancc. 
When the north wind blows hard and it rains fadly, 
none but fools fit down in it and cry ; wife people 
defend themfelves againft it with a warm garment 
or a good fire and a dry roof : When a ftorm of a fad 
miichance beats upon our fpirits, turn it into fbme 
advantage by obferving where it can ferve another 
end, either of religion or prudence, of more fafety or 
lefs envy : it will turn into fomething that is good, 
if we lift to make it fo ; at leaft it may make us 
weary of the world's vanity and take oflF our conii- 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 141 

dence from uncertain riches, and make our ipirits to 
dwell in thofe regions where content dwells eflenti- 
ally. If it does any good to our fouls, it hath made 
more than fufficient recompenfe for all the temporal 
afflidlion. He that threw a ftone at a dog, and hit 
his cruel ftepmother, faid, that although he intended 
it otherwife, yet the ftone was not quite loft : and if 
we foil in the firft defign, if we bring it home to 
another equally to content us, or more to profit us, 
then we have put our conditions paft the power of 
chance ; and this was called in the old Greek Co- 
medy, a icing revenged on fortune by becoming Philo- 
Jopbersj and turning the chance into reafon or reli- 
gion : for fb a man fhall overrule his ftars, and have 
a greater influence upon his own content than all the 
conftellations and planets of the firmament. 

2, Never compare thy condition with thofe above 
thee ; but to fecure thy content, look upon thofe 
thoufands with whom thou wouldeft not for any in- 
tereft change thy fortune and condition. A foldier 
muft not think himfelf unprofperous, if he be not 
fuccefsful as the fon of Philips or cannot grafp a for- 
tune as big as the Roman Empire. Be content that 
thou art not leflened as was Pyrrhus : or if thou beeft, 
that thou art not routed like Crajfus : and when that 
comes to thee, it is a great profperity that thou art 
not caged and made a fpedtacle like Bajazet^ or thy 
eyes were not pulled out like Zedekiah^s^ or that thou 
wcrt not flayed alive like Valentinian. If thou ad- 
mireft the greatnefs of Xerxes j look alfo on thofe that 
digged the mountain Atho^ or whofe ears and nofes 
were cut off^, becaufe the Hellefpont carried away the 
bridge. It is a fine thing (thou thinkeft) to be car- 



142 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C. 2. 

ried on men*s flioulders : but give God thanks that 
thou art not forced to carry a rich fool upon thy 
flioulders, as thofe poor men do whom thou behold- 
eft. There are but a few Kings in mankind, but 
many thoufands who are very miferable, if compared 
to thee. However, it is a huge folly rather to grieve 
for the good of others, than to rejoice for that good 
which God hath given us of our own. 

And yet there is no wife or good man that would 
change perfbns or conditions entirely with any man 
in the world. It may be he would have one man's 
wealth added to himfelf, or the power of a fecondi 
or the learning of a third ; but ftill he would receive 
thefe into his own perfbn, becaufe he loves that beft, 
and therefore efteems it beft, and therefore overvalues 
all that which he is before all that which any other 
man in the world can be. Would any man be Dkes 
to have his wealth, or Judas for his office, or Smi 
for his kingdom, or Abfalom for his boimty, or Acli^ 
tophel for his policy ? It is likely he would wifli 
all thefe, and yet he would be the fame perfbn iUll. 
For every man hath defires of his own, and objedi 
juft fitted to them, without which he cannot be, un- 
lefs he were not himfelf. And let every man that 
loves himfelf fo well as to love himfelf before all the 
world, confider if he have not fomething for which 
in the whole he values himfelf far more than he can 
value any man elfe. There is therefore no reafbn to 
take the fineft feathers from all the winged nation to 
deck that bird that thinks already fhe is more valu- 
able than any the inhabitants of the air. Either 
change all or none. Ceafe to love yourfelf beft, or 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 143 

be content with that portion of being and blefUng 
for which you love yourfelf fo well. 

3 . It conduces much to our content, if we pafs by 
thofe things which happen to our trouble, and con- 
fiJer that tphich is pleqfing and profperousj that by the 
reprefentation of the better, the worfe may be blotted 
out : and at the worft you have enough to keep you 
alive, and to keep up and to improve your hopes of 
Heaven. If I be overthrown in my fuit at law, yet 
my houfe is left me ftill and my land ; or I have a 
virtuous wife, or hopeful children, or kind friends, 
or good hopes. If I have loft one child, it may be 
I have two or three ftill left me. Or elfe reckon the 
buffings which already you have received, and therefore 
be pleafed in the change and variety of affairs to re- 
ceive evil from the hand of God as well as good. An- 
tipater of Tarfus ufed this art to fupport his forrows 
on his death-bed, and reckoned the good things of 
his pail life, not forgetting to recount it as a blefling, 
an argument that God took care of him, that he had 
a profperous journey from Cilicia to Athens. Or elfe 

pleafe thy f elf with hopes of the fu- La fpcnmza c il pan de 

ture: for we were born with this N^fi'mai^ nunc, ct oiim 
£idnefs upon us; and it was a ^*^"*^' 
change that brought us into it, and a change may 
bring us out again. Harvejl will ^^,^y^^,x,^^,,^ 
come 9 and then every Farmer is rich, '*•^• 

at leajifor a month or two. It may be thou art en- 
tered into the cloud which will bring a gentle fhower 
to refrefli thy forrows. 

Now (vippofe thyfelf in as great a fadnefs as ever 
did load thy fpirit, wouldft thou not bear it cheer- 



144 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.2. 

fully and nobly, if thou wert fure that within a cer- 
tain fpace fome ftrange excellent fortune would re- 
lieve thee, and enrich thee, and recompenfe thee fo 
as to overflow all thy hopes and thy defires and ca- 
pacities ? Now then, when a fadnefs lies heavy upon 
thee, remember that thou art a Chriftian defigned 
to the inheritance ofye/us : and what doft thou think 
concerning thy great fortune, thy lot and portion of 
eternity ? Dofl thou think thou (halt be faved or 
damned ? Indeed if thou thinkeft thou fhalt perifli, I 
cannot blame thee to be fad, fad till thy heart-ftrings 
crack : but then why art thou troubled at the lo6 of 
thy money? what fhould a damned man do with 
money, which in fo great a fadnefs it is impoflible 
for him to enjoy ? Did ever any man upon the rack 
afflid: himfelf becaufe he had received a crofs anfwer 
from his miflrefs ? or call for the particulars of a 
purchafe upon the gallows ? If thou dofl really be- 
lieve thou fhalt be damned, I do not fay it will cure 
the fadnefs of thy poverty, but it will fwallow it up. 
* But if thou believefl thou fhalt be faved, confidcr, 
how great is that joy, how infinite is that change, 
how unfpeakable is the glory, how excellent is the 
recompenfe for all the fufFerings in the world, if thejr 
were all laden upon the fpirit ? So that let thy con- 
dition be what it will, if thou confiderefl thy own 
prefent condition, and comparefl it to thy future pof- 
fibility, thou canfl not feel the prefent finart of a 
crofs fortune to any great degree, either becaufe thou 
hafl a far bigger forrow, or a far bigger joy. Here 
thou art but a flranger travelling to thy Country, 
where the glories of a kingdom are prepared for 
thee ; it is therefore a huge folly to be much afflifted 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESSr. 145 

becaufe thou haft a lefs convenient Inn to lodge in 
by the way. 

But thefe arts of looking backwards and forwards 
are more than enough to fupport the fpirit of a 
Chriftian : there is no man but hath bleffings enough 
in prefent pofleflion to outweigh the evils of a great 
afflidion. Tell the joints of thy body, and do not 
accuie the univerfal providence for a lame leg, or the 
want of a finger, when all the reft is perfedl, and you 
have a noble Soul, a particle of Divinity, the image 
of God himfclf : and by the want of a finger you 
may the better know how to eftimate the remaining 
parts, and to account for every degree of the furviv- 
ing bleflings, Ariftippus in a great fuit^at law loft a 
Farm, and to a Gentleman who in civility pitied and 
deplored his lofs, he aniwered, I have two Farms 
left ftill, and that is more than I have loft, and more 
than you have by one- If you mifs an office for 
which you ftood Candidate, then befides that you are 
quit of the cares and the envy of it, you ftill have all 
thofe excellencies which rendered you capable to re- 
ceive it, and they are better than the beft Office in 
the Commonwealth. If your eftate be lefiened, you 
need the lefs to care who governs the Province, whe- 
ther he be rude or gentle. I am crofled in my jour- 
ney, and yet I fcaped robbers ; and I confider, that 
if I had been fet upon by Villains, I would have re- 
deemed that evil by this which I now fuffi^r, and 
have counted it a deliverance : or if I did fall into the 
hands of thieves, yet they did not fteal my land. Or 
I am fallen into the hands of Publicans and Sequef- 
trators, and they have taken all from me : what 



146 OF CONrENTEDNESS. C. i. 

now ? let me look about me. They have left mc 
the Sun and Moon, Fire and Water, a loving wife, 
and many friends to pity me, and fome to relieve mc, 
and I can ftill difcourfe, and unlefs I lift they have 
not taken away my merry countenance, and my 
cheerful fpirit, and a good confcience : they ftill have 
left me the providence of God, and all the.promifo 
of the Gofpel, and my Religion, and my hopes (rf 
Heaven, and my charity to them too ; and ftill I 
fleep and digeft, I eat and drink, I read and meditatCi 
I can walk in my neighbour's plea£int fields, and ice 
the varieties of natural beauties, and delight*in all 
that in which God delights, that is, in virtue and 
wifdom, in the whole creation, and in God himfelf. 
And he that hath fo many cauies of joy, and fb great, 
is very much in love with forrow and peeviffane^ 
who lofes all thefe pleafures, and choofes to fit down 
upon his little handful of thorns. Such a perfon were 
fit to bear Nero company in his funeral forrow fer 
the lofs of one of Poppea^s hairs, or help to mourn 
for Lepids fparrow : and becaufe he loves it, he d^ 
ferves to ftarve in the midft of plenty, and to veant 
comfort while he is encircled with bleflings. 
^ 4. Enjoy the prefent, whatfoever it be, andbcnrt 

folicitous for the future : for if yoo 
^^^^Z""^^' take your foot from the prcfert 
^urdabTt, kcT '^"" ftanding, and thruft it forward to- 
Apponc. ward to-morrow's event, vou arc ifl 

a reitlels condition : it is like rcfur 
ing to quench your prefent thirft by fearing you fhafi 
want drink the next day. If it be well to-day, it tt 
madnefs to make the prefent miferable by fearing J* 
may be ill to-morrow ; when your belly is full of 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. i^j 

to-day's dinner to fear you (hall want the next day's 
fupper : for it may be you fhall not, and then to 
what purpofe was this day's afHidtion ? But if to- 
morrow you (hall want, your for- ^^,^, f^^uri tcmpom 
row will come time enoueh, ^,^?'?™. « 

o ' Cuigmosa nocte premit 

though you da not haften it : let P^^ ^ 

-- •11 • t Ridetque,umortalis ultra 

your trouble tarry till its own day Fas tnpidet : quod adeft 
Gomes. But if it chance to be ill c^^mfre «qnus. 
to-day, do not increafe it by the Hor. 1,^,0^.29, 
care of to-morrow. Enjoy the blel- tj » i&^w rif .ihr 5 
fings of this day, if God fends them, and the evils of 
it bear patiently and fweetly : for this day is only 
ours, we are dead to yefterday, and we are not yet , 
born to the morrow. He therefore that enjoys the 
prefent, if it be good, enjoys as much as is poflible : 
and if only that day's trouble leans upon him, it is 
fingular and finite. Sufficient to the day (fiiid Chrift) 
is the evil thereof. Sufficient but not intolerable. But 
if we look abroad and bring into one day's thoughts 
the evil of many, certain and uncertain, what will be 
and what will never be, our load will be as intolerable 
as it is unreafonable. To reprove this inftrument of 
difcontent, the Ancients feigned that in Hell flood a 
man twifling a rope of Hay, and ftiU he twiflcd on, 
fuffering an Afs to eat up all that was finifhed : fb 
miferable is he who thrufb his paflions forwards 
towards future events, and fuffers all that he may 
enjoy to be lofl and devoured by folly and inconfi- 
deration, thinking nothing fit to be enjoyed but that 
which is noty or cannot be had. Jufl fo many young 
perfbns are loath to die, and therefore defire to live 
to old age, and when they are come thither, are 
troubled that they are come to that flate of life, to 



148 OF CONTENTBDNESS. C.i. 

which, before they were come, they were hugefy 
afraid they fhould never come. 

5 . Let us prepare our minds againft changes, al- 
ways expecting them, that we be not furprifed when 

ithey come : For nothing is fb great an enemy to tran- 
quillity and a contented fpirit, as the amazement and 
confufions of unreadinefs and inconfideration : and 
when our fortunes are violently changed, our ipirits 
are unchanged, if they always ftood in the Suburbs 
and expedlation of forrows. O Deaths how Utter art 
thou to a man that is at reji in his pojfeffions ! And to 
the rich man who had promifed to himfelf eafc and 
fulnefs for many years, it was a fad arreft, that his 
Soul was furprifed the jfirft night : but the Apoftles» 
who every day knocked at the gate of death, and 
looked upon it continually, went to their Mar^rdom 
in peace and evennefs. 

6 . Let us often frame to ourfelves and reprefent to 
our confiderations the images of thofe bleflings wc 
have, juft as we ufually underftand them when wc 
want them. Confider how deiirable health is to a 
fick man, or liberty to a prifoner ; and if but a fit of 
the toothache feizes us with violence, all thofe trou- 
bles which in our health afHidted us difband in- 
Aantly and feem inconfiderable. He that in his 
health is troubled that he is in debt, and fjpends flcep* 
lefs nights, and refufes meat becaufe of his infe* 
licity, let him fall into a fit of the Stone or a high 
Fever, he defpifes the arrefl of all his firft trouble^ 
and is as a man unconcerned. Remember then that 
God hath given thee a bleffing, the want of which is 
infinitely more trouble than thy prefent debt or po- 
verty or lofs ; and therefore is now more to be va- 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 149 

lued in the poileflion, and ought to outweigh thy 
trouble. The very privative bleffings, the bleffings 
of immunity, fafeguard, liberty and integrity which 
we commonly enjoy, deferve the thankfgiving of a 
whole life. If God fhould fend a Cancer upon thy 
face or a Wolf into thy fide, if he fhould fpread a cruft 
of Leprofy upon thy Ikin, what wouldft thou give to 
be but as now thou art ? Wouldft thou not on that 
condition be as poor as I am, or as the meaneft of 
thy brethren ? Would you not choofe your prefent 
lofs or affliiftion as a thing extremely eligible, and a 
redemption to thee, if thou mighteft exchange the 
other for this ? Thou art quit from a thoufand ca-^ 
lamities, every one of which if it were upon thee^ 
would make thee infenfible of thy prefent forrow : ■ 
and therefore let thy joy (which fhould be as great 
for thy freedom from them, as is thy fadnefs when 
thou feeleft any of them) do the fame cure upon thy 
difcontent. For if we be not extremely foolifli or 
vain, thanklefs or fenfelefs, a great joy is more apt 
to cure forrow and difcontent than a great trouble is, 
I have known an afFedionate Wife when fhe had 
been in fear of parting with her beloved Hufband, 
heartily defire of God his life or ibciety upon any 
conditions that were not finful ; and choofe to beg 
with him, rather than to feaft without him : and the 
fame perfon hath upon that confideration borne po- 
verty nobly, when God hath heard her prayer in the 
other matter. What wife man in the world is there 
who does not prefer a fmall fortune with peace be- 
fore a great one with contention, and war and vio- 
lence ? and then he is no longer wife if he alters his 
opinion when he hath his wifh. 



150 OF CONTENrEDNESS. C. 2. 

7. If you will fccurc a contented fpirit you muft 

jmeafure your defires by your fortune and condidon, 

jnot your fortunes by your defires: that is, be govemcd 

by your needs, not by your fancy ; by Nature, not 

Aflaibaftaperchinon ^y evil CuftoHlS and ambirioUS 

, c incordo. princi£les. He that would fhoot 

an arrow out of a Plough, or hunt a Hare with an 

' Elephant, is not unfortunate for miffing the mark or 
prey : but he is foolifli for choofing fuch unapt in- 
(Iruments : and fo is he that runs after his content 
with appetites not fpringing from natural needs, but 
from artificial, fantaflical and violent neceflitics. 
Thefe are not to be fatisfied ; or if they were, a man 
hath chofen an evil inflrument towards his content: 
Nature did not intend refl to a Man by filling of 
fuch defires. Is that Beafl better that hath two or 
three Mountains to graze on, than a little Bee that 
feeds on Dew or Manna, and lives upon what faDs 
every morning from the Store-houfes of Heaveni 
Clouds and Providence? Can a man quench his 
— Q^anto pneftantius thirfl better out of a River than a 
Numen aquae viridi fi f^U Um, or driuk bcttcr from die 

marginc clauderct un- FoUUtaiu whcU it is finely pvcd 

Herba,necingenuuravio- with Marble, than when it (wells 

larent marmora to- - 

phum! over the green Turf r Pride and ar- 

^ dZir S5- *^fi^^^^ gluttonies do butadultcmte 
maiv«. Nature, making our diet health- 

Frui paratis ct valido mi- ^ 

hi, lefs, our appetites impatient and 

HoraU, u od. 11. unfatisfiablc, and the tafte mixt, 

Amabo icvem cupreffuni, fautafHc and mcrctricious. But 

Omiflis Cretse palcuis : . i • i • n %% 

Teme mihi datum eft pa- that WhlCh WC milcall pOVertjT IS 

careo interim doioribus. indeed Naturc I and its propor- 
Ptndar. ^j^^g ^^^ ^j^^ j^^j. ni^afurcs of t 



S; 6. OF CONTENtEDNESS. 151 

Man, and the beft inftrumcnts of content. But 
when we create needs that God or Nature never 
made, we have eredted to ourfelves an infinite ftock 
of trouble that can have no period. Sempronius com- 
plained of want of clothes, and was much troubled 
for a new fiiit, being afhamed to appear in the Thea- 
tre with his Gown a little threadbare : but when he 
got it and gave his old clothes to Codrus, the poor 
man was ravifht with joy, and went and gave God 
thanks for his new purchafe ; and Codrus was made 
richly fine and cheerfully warm by that which Sem- 
pronius was afhamed to wear ; and yet their natural 
needs were both alike : the difference only was, that 
Sempronius had fbme artificial and fantaflical necef- 
fities fuperinduced, which Codrus had not ; and was 
harder to be relieved, and could not have joy at fo 
cheap a rate ; becaufe he only lived according to 
Nature, the other by Pride and ill cufloms, and mea- 
fures taken by other men's eyes and tongues, and ar- 
tificial needs. He that propounds to his &ncy things 
greater than himfelf or his needs, and is difcontent 
and troubled when he fails of fuch purchafes, ought 
not to accufe Providence, or blame his fortune, but 
his folly. God and Nature made no more needs 
than they mean to fatisfy ; and he that will make 
more mufl look for fatisfadtion when he can. 

8« In all troubles and fadder accidents let us take 
fandtuary in Religion, and by innocence cafl out an- 
chors for our Souls to keep them „ , , . , 

- ■*- Vacarc culpa m calam-> 

from fhip wreck, though they be itatibus maximum fola- 

not kept firom florm. For what '""' 
Philofbphy fhall comfort a Villain that is haled to 
the rack for murdering his Prince, or that is broken 



152 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.i. 

upon the^ wheel for Sacrilege ? His cup is ftiU of 
pure and unmingled forrow : his body is rent with 
torment, his name with ignominy, his Soul with 
fhame and forrow which are to laft eternally. But 
when a man fuffers in a good caufe, or is afflided, 
and yet walks not perverfely with his God, then 
Anytus and Melitus may kill me but they cannot hurt 
^ ^ me: then Saint PauFs charader is cn- 

2 Cor. 4. By 9. 

1 Pet. 3. 1 3. and graven in the forehead of our fortune; 
4. 15. 16. ffr^ are troubled on every Jide^ but not 
dijlrejfed ; perplexed^ but not in defpair; Perfecuteij 
but not forfaken ; caji down^ but not deftroyed. Ad 
who is he that ivill harm you^ if ye be followers of 
that which is good? For indeed every thing in the 
world is indifferent, but fin : and all the fcorchings 
of the Sun are very tolerable in refpedl of the 
burnings of a Fever or a Calenture. The greateft 
evils are from within us : and from ourfelves alfo 
we muft look for our greateft good : for God is 
the fountain of it, but reaches it to us by our own 
hands : and when all things look fadly round aboat 
us, then only we fhall find how excellent a fortune 
it is to have God to our friend ; and of all fiicnd- 
(hips that only is created to fupport us in our needs. 
For it is fin that turns an Ague into a Fever, and 
a Fever to the Plague, fear into defpair, anger into 
rage, and lofs into madnefs, and forrow to amaze- 
ment and confufion : but if either we were innocent, 
or elfe by the fadnefs are made penitent, we arc put 
to fchool, or into the Theatre, either to leam how, 
or elfe aftually to combat for a Crown ; the accident 
may ferve an end of mercy, but is not a meflenger of 
wrath. 



S. 6. OF CONTENtEDNESS. 153 

Let us therefore be governed by external, and pre-^ 
fent, 2XiAfeeming things ; nor let us make the ^me 
judgment of things that common and weak under- 
ftandings do ; nor make other men, and they not the 
wifeft, to be judges of our felicity, fo that we be 
happy or miferable as they pleafe to think us : but 
let Reafon, and experience, and Religion, and hope 
relying upon the Divine promifes, be the meafure of 
our judgment. No wife man did Beatitudopendetaitc- 
ever defcribe felicity without vir- Si^S^ltC 
tue; and no ^W/^;? did ever think ^^^•. ^^• 

virtue could depend upon the variety of a good or 
bad fortune. / It is no evil to be poor, but to be vi- 
cious and impatient. I 

Means to obtain Content By way of Confideration. 

To thefe exercifes and fpiritual inftruments if we 
add the following coniiderations concerning the na- 
ture and circumftances of human chance, we may 
better fecure our peace. For as to children, who 
are afraid of vain Images, we ufe to perfuade confi- 
dence by making them to handle and look nearer fuch 
things, that when in fuch a familiarity they perceive 
them innocent, they may overcome their fears : fo 
muft timorous, fimtaflical, fad and difcontented per- 
fons be treated ; they muft be made to confider and 
on all fides to look upon the accident, and to take 
all its dimenfions, and confider its confequences, and 
to behold the purpofe of God, and the common 
miftakes of men, and their evil fentences they ufually 
pais upon them* For then we fhall perceive that 
like Colts of unmanaged Horfes we ftart at dead 



154 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C. 2. 

bones and lifelefs blocks, things that are ina&ive as 
they are innocent. But if we fecure our hopes aod 
our fears, and make them OKxlerate and within go- 
vernment, we may the fooner overcome the evil of 
the accident ; For nothing that we feel is fo bad as 
what we fear. 

I . Confider that the univerfal providence of God 

hath fo ordered it, that the good things of Nature 

Non tc ad omnia i»ta and Fortunc are divided, that wc 

^otgamemnon,Atr.. "^^Y ^HOW hoW tO bear OUr OWD 

us.opuscfttegaudcre,ct and relieve each other's wants and 

moercre : Mortalis cnim . r n* t • r -m ^ 

natus es, et, ut haud veiis. imperieCtions. It IS not for a MaHi 

Suptri fic conftituenint. r^/* /^j^l_ 11 11 

^ but for a God to have all excellen- 

cies and all felicities. He fupports my poverty with 
his wealth ; I counfel and inftrudt him with my 
learning and experience. He hath many friends, I 
many children : He hath no heir, I have no inheri- 
tance : and any one great blefling together with the 
common portions of Nature and neceflity is a fair 
fortune, if it be but health or ftrength, or the fwift- 
nefs of Ahimaaz. For it is an unreaibnable difcon- 
tent to be troubled that I have not fo good Cocks cm" 
Dogs or Horfes as my Neighbour, being more trou- 
bled that I want one thing that I need not, than 
thankful for having received all that I need. Nen 
had this difeafe, that he was not content with the 
fortune of the whole Empire, but put the Fiddlers 
to death for being more fkilful in the trade than he 
was : and Dionyfus the elder was fo angry at PB- 
loxenusj for finging, and with Plato for disputing 
better than he did, that he fold Plato a Slave into 
JEgina^ and condemned the other to the Quarries. 

This confideration is to be enlarged by adding to 



S. 6. OF CONTEN^EDNESS. 155 

it, that there are fbme inftances of fortune and a fair 
condition that cannot ftand with fome others, but if 
you defire this, you muft lofe that, and unlefs you be 
content with one, you lofe the comfort of both. If 
you covet Learning, you muft have leifure and a re- 
tired life : if to be a Politician, you muft go abroad 
and get experience, and do all buiinefles, and keep 
all company, and have no leifure at all. If you will 
be rich, you muft be frugal : if you will be popular, 
you muft be bountiful : if a Philofopher, you muft 
defpife riches. The Greek that deiigned to makef 
the moft exquiiite pi<5ture that could be imagined, 
fancied the eye of CAione, and the hair of Pagnium, 
and TarficCs lip, Philenium^s chin, and the forehead 
of Delphiay and fet all thefe upon Milphidippds neck, . 

and thought that he ftiould outdo both Art and Na-» | 
ture. But when he came to view the proportions, 
he found that what was excellent in Tarjia did not 
agree with the other excellency of Philenium ; and 
although fingly they were rare pieces, yet in the 
whole they made a moft ugly face. The difperfed i 
excellencies and bleffings of many men, if given to 
one, would not make a handfome, but a monftrous 
fortune. Ufe therefore that faculty which Nature 
hath given thee, and thy education hath made adhial, . 
and thy calling hath made a duty. But if thou de- 
fireft to be a Saint, refufe not his periecution ; If 
thou wouldeft be famous as Epaminondas or Fabri-* 
ciusy accept alfo of their poverty; for that added 
luftre to their perfbns, and envy to their fortune^ and 
their virtue without it could not have been fo excel- 
lent. Let Euphorion fleep quietly with his old rich 
Wife ; "and let Medius drink on with Alexander ; and 



156 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C. 2. 

remember thou canft not have the riches of the firft, 
unlefs you have the old Wife too ; nor the favour 
which the fecond had with his Prince, unlefs you 
buy it at his price, that is, lay thy fobriety down at 

Prandct Ariftotcics firft, and thy health a little after; 
iTg^ncs^quiTD^^^^^^^^ f'^d then their condition, though 
^^' it look fplendidly, yet when you 

handle it on all fides, it will prick your fingers, 

2. Confider how many excellent perfbnages in all 
Ages have fufFered as great or greater calamities than 
this which now tempts thee to impatience. Agis 
\ was the moft noble of the Greeks, and yet his Wife 
bore a child by Alcibiades : and Philip was Prince of 
IturaUy and yet his Wife ran away with his brother 
Herod into Galilee : and certainly in a great fortune 
that was a great calamity. But thefe are but fingle 
inftances. Almoft all the Ages of the world have 
noted that their moft eminent Scholars were moft 
eminently poor, fome by choice but moft by chancei 
and an inevitable decree of providence : And in the 
whole fex of women God hath decreed the fharpeft 
pains of child-birth, to fhew that there is no ftate 
exempt from forrow, and yet that the weakeft per- 
fons have ftrength more than enough to bear the 
greateft evil : and the greateft Queens, and the Mo- 
thers of Saints and ApoflJes, have no charafterof 
exemption from this fad fentence. But the Lord of 
men and Angels was alfo the King of fufterings, and 
if thy coarfe robe trouble thee, remember the fwad- 
dling clothes of ye/us ; if thy bed be uneafy, yet it 
is not worfe than his manger ; and it is no iadneis 
to have a thin table, if thou calleft to mind that the 
King of heaven and earth was fed with a little brcaft 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 157 

milk : and yet befides this he fufFered all the for- 
rows which we deferved. We therefore have great 
reafon to fit down upon our own hearths, and warm 
ourfelves at our own fires, and feed upon content at 
home ; for it were a ftrange pride to expedt to be 
more gently treated by the Divine Providence than 
the beft and wifefl: men, than Apoftles and Saints, 
nay, the Son of the Eternal God, the heir of both 
the worlds. 

This Confideration may be enlarged by furveying 
all the flates and families of the ^ . , , . . 

Servius Sulpitius. 

world : and he that at once faw 
Mgina and Megara^ Pyraus and Corinth lie gafping 
in their ruins, and almofi: buried in their own heaps, 
had reafon to blame Cicero for mourning impatiently 
the death of one woman. In the mofl beauteous 
and fplendid fortune there are many cares and pro- 
per interruptions and allays : in the fortune of a 
Prince there is not the coarfe robe of beggary ; but 
there are infinite cares : and the Judge fits upon the 
Tribunal with great ceremony and hic in foro bcatus cffe 
oftentation of fortune, and yet at cum"^ foribus apcrtis fit 
his houfe or in his breafl: there is . ^"^ mifcirimus 5 

Imperatmulier, jubet om- 

ibmethine that caufes him to figh nia, fcmpcr litigat. 

, ^«, . T ^ Multa adff runt illi dolo- 

deeply. Ptttacus was a wile and rem, nihil mihi. 
valiant man, but his Wife over- ^^ti?r"omne°s^^™ ^*^" 
threw the Table when he had in- ^™^ "^^^^• 

vited his friends : upon which the good man, to ex- 
cufe her incivility and his own misfortune, faid. 
That every man had one evil, and he was mofl: 
jhappy that had but that alone. And if nothing elfe 
happens, yet ficknefs fb often do embitter the fortune 
and content of a family, that a Phyfician in a few 



158 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.i. 

years, and with the pradice upon a very few fami- 
lies, gets experience enough to adminiiler to almoft 
all difeaies. And when thy little misfortune troii- 
bles thee, remember that thou hail known the beft 
of Kings and the beft of men put to death publicly 
by his own fubjefts. 

3 . There are many accidents which are efleemed 
great calamities, and yet we have reafbn enough to 
bear them well and unconcernedly ; for they neither 
touch our bodies nor our fouls : our health and our 
virtue remain entire, our life and our reputation. 
It may be I am flighted, or I have received ill lan- 
guage ; but my head aches not for it, neither hath it 
broken my thigh, nor taken away my virtue, unleft 
I lofe my charity or my patience. Inquire there- 
fore what you are the worfe, either in your foul, or 
in your body, for what hath happened : for upon 
this very flock many evils will difappear, fince the 
body and the foul make up the whole man. And 
Si natus es, Trophime, whcu the daughter ofiS/zZ^provcd 

folus omnium hac lege, i_ /• • t • t 

ut Temper eant tibi res a wautou, he laid it was none ot 

FeiLtaton hanc fi quis ^is fin, and therefore there was no 
promifit Deus, rcafon it fliould be his mifay. 

Iraicereris jure, u mala is ^ / 

fi^c ^ .^ And if an enemy hath taken all 

Et improW cgiffet. \ r t> • 1 t t. 

Menan. that irom a rnnce whereby he 
was a King ; he may refrefli himfelf by confidering 
all that is left him, whereby he is a Man. 

4. Confider that fad accidents and a ilate of af- 
fliction is a School of virtue : it reduces our fpirits 
to fobernefs, and our counfels to moderation ; it cor- 
redls levity, and interrupts the confidence of finning. 

// is good for me (faid David) that 

Pfalm 119. part 10. y. 3. ^ .^ /rt-ri t n t t r 

I have been affltcted^ Jar thereby I 



S. 6. OF CONTENtEDNESS. 159 

have learned thy law. And, / knowy (O Lord) that 
thou of very fait hfulnefs haji caufed me to he troubled. 
For God, who in mercy and wifdom governs the 
world, would never have fuiFercd fo many fadnefles, 
and have fent them efpecially to the moft virtuous 
and the wifeft men, but that he intends they fhould 
be the feminary of comfort, the nurfery of virtue, 
the exercife of wifdom, the trial of patience, the 
venturing for a crown, and the gate of glory. 

5« Coniider that afflictions are oftentimes the oc- 
cafions of great temporal advantages : and we muft 
not look upon them as they fit down heavily upon 
us, but as they ferve fome of God's ends, and the 
purpofes of univerfal Providence. And when a 
Prince fights juftly, and yet unprofperoufly, if he 
could fee all thofe reafons for which God hath fo 
ordered it, he would think it the moft reafbnable 
thing in the world, and that it would be very ill to 
have it otherwife. If a man could have opened one 
of the pages of the Divine counfel, and could have 
feen the event oijojeph's being fold to the Merchants 
of Amalekj he might with much reafon have dried 
up the young man's tears : and when God*s pur- 
pofes are opened in the events of things, as it was 
in the cafe of Jqfepby when he fuftained his Father's 
family and became Lord of Egypt ^ then we fee what 
ill judgment we made of things, and that we were 
paiHonate as children, and transported with fenfe and 
miftaken inter eft. The cafe of T^hemijiocles was al- 
moft like that of Jofephy for being baniftied into 
Egypt y he alfo grew in favour with the King, and 
told his wife. He had been undone unlefs he bad been 
undone. For God efteems it one of his glories that 



i6o OF CONTENrEDNESS. C.2. 

he brings good out of evil : and therefore it were 
but reaibn we fhould truft God to govern his own 
world as he pleafes ; and that we fhould patiendy 
wait till the change comethy or the reafbn be difco- 
vered. 

And this confidcration is alfo of great ufe to them 
who envy at the profperity of the wicked, and the 
fuccefs of perfecutors, and the baits of fifhes, and the 
bread of dogs. God fails not to fow bleflings in the 
long furrows which the ploughers plough upon the 
back of the Church : and this fuccefs which trou- 
bles us will be a great glory to God and a great be- 
nefit to his Saints and fervants, and a great ruin to 
the Perfecutors, who fhall have but the fortune of 
Theramenes^ one of the thirty Tyrants of At hens ^ 
who efcaped when his houfe fell upon him, and was 
fhortly after put to death with torments by his Col- 
leagues in the tyranny. 

To which alfo may be added, that the great evils 
which happen to the beft and wifcfl men are one of 
the great arguments upon the flrength of which we 
can expedt felicity to our fouls and the joys of ano- 
ther world. And certainly they are then very tole- 
rable and eligible, when with fo great advantages 
they minifler to the faith and hope of a Chriflian. 
But if we confider what unfpeakable tortures arc 
provided for the wicked to all eternity, we fhould 
not be troubled to fee them profperous here, but 
rather wonder that their portion in this life is not 
bigger, and that ever they fhould be fick, or crofledt 
or affronted, or troubled with the contradi^on and 
difeafe of their own vices, fince if they were fortu- 
nate beyond their own ambition, it could not make 



S.6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. i6i 

them rccompenfe for one hour's torment in Hell, 
which yet they fhall have for their eternal portion. 
After all thefe confiderations deriving from fenfe 
and experience, Grace and Reafbn, there are two 
remedies ftill remaining, and they are NeceJJity and 

6. For it is but reafonable to bear that accident 
patiently which God fends, fince impatience does 
but entangle us like the fluttering of a bird in a net, 
but cannot at all eafe our trouble, or prevent the ac- 
cident : it muft be run through. Nemo rccufat ftrre 

and therefore it were better we q«od n^affe eft pati. 
compofe ourfelves to a patient, than to a troubled 
and miferable fuffering. 

7. But however, if you will not otherwifc be 
cured, time at laft will do it alone ; and then con- 
iider, do you mean to mourn always^ or buty^r a 
time ? If always, you are miferable and foolifh. If 
for a time, then why will you not apply thofe rea- 
fons to your grief at firft, with which you will cure 
it at laft ? or if you will not cure it with reafbn, fee 
how little of a man there is in you, that you fuflfer 
time to do more with you than Reafbn or Religion. 
You fufFer yourfelves to be cured juft as a beaft or a 
tree is ; let it alone, and the thing will heal itfelf : 
but this is neither honourable to thy perfon, nor of 
reputation to thy Religion. However, be content to 
bear thy calamity, becaufe thou art fure in a little 
time it will fit down gentle and eafy : For to a mor- 
tal man no evil is immortal. And here let the worft 
thing happen that can it will end in death, and we 
commonly think that to be near enough. 

8. Laftly, of thofe things which are reckoned 

M 



i62 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.2. 

amongft evils, fome are better than their contraries ; 
and to a good man the very worft is tolerable. 



Poverty or a low Fortune. 

I . Poverty is better than riches, and a mean for- 
tune to be chofen before a great and fplendid one. 
It is indeed defpifed and makes men contemptible: 
it expofes a man to the infolence of evil perfbns, and 
leaves a man defencelefs : it is always fufpedted : its 
ftories are accounted lies, and all its counfels follies : 
it puts a man from all employment : it makes a 
man's difcourfes tedious, and his fociety troublefome. 
This is the vsrorft of it : and yet all this, and far 
wrorfe than this, the Apoftles fuiFered for being 
Chriftians ; and Chriftianity itfelf may be efteemed 
an afflidtion as well as poverty, if this be all that can 
be faid againft it ; for the Apoftles and the moft 
eminent Chriftians were really poor, and were ufed 
contemptuoufly : and yet, that poverty is defpiied 
may be an argument to commend it, if it be defpifed 
by none but perfons vicious and ignorant. How- 

Aita fortuna aita tra- cvcr. Certain it is that a great for- 
vagiio apporta. ^^^^ j^ ^ ^^^^ vzxiity, and richcs 

is nothing but danger, trouble, and temptation ; like 
a garment that is too long, and bears a train ; not fi) 
ufeful to one, but it is troublefome to two, to him 
that bears the one part upon his fhoulders, and to 
him that bears the other part in his hand. But po- 
verty is the fifter of a good mind, the parent of fober 
counfels, and the nurfe of all virtue. 

For what is it that you admire in the fortune of a, 
great King ? Is it that he always goes in a great 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 163 

company ? You may thruft yourfelf into the fame 
crowd, or go often to Church, and then you have as 
great a company as he hath ; and that may upon as 
good grounds pleafe you as him, that is, Juilly nei- 
ther : for fo impertinent and ufelefs pomp, and the 
other circumftances of his diflance, are not made for 
him, but for his fubjedts, that they may leara to fe- 
parate him from common uiages, and be taught to be 
governed. But if you look upon them as fine things 
in themfelves, you may quickly alter your opinion 
vrhen you fhall confider that they ^^ ^^t^^ita la cere- 
cannot cure the toothache, nor moniaaiatto. 
make one wife, or fill the belly, or give one night's 
fleep, (though they help to break many) not fatisfy- 
ing any appetite of Nature, or Reafon, or Religion : 
but they are ilates of greatnefe, which only makes it 
pofiible for a man to be made extremely miferable. 
And it was long ago obferved by the Greek Trage- 
dians, and from them by Arrianus, ^^^^ ^ ^ ^^^^, 
ikying, * That all our Tragedies ^f*'''^^ ^ f^ x«<«^- 

r tr* in* i BJs fcx dierum menfura 

* are of Kmgs and Princes, and confcro ego agros, 
*rich or ambitious perfonages ; J^Ti^tl^^u'i fenfim 

* but you never fee a poor man «fqueeveau»adpoium 

J A Decidit humi, et mc fie 

* have a part, unlefs it be as a Cho- videtur aiioqui. 

* ^-- in Difcc haud nimis magni- 

' rus^ or to nil up the Scenes, to facen mortaiia^ 

* dance or to be derided ; but the ^^ ' ^ ^^^ ' 

* Kings and the great Generals. Firft (fays he) they 

* begin with joy, crei^ajB Idiiurot crown the houfes : 

* but about the third or fourth Aft they cry out, O 

* Qitheron ! why didA thou fpare my life to referve 

* me for this more fad calamity ? ' And this is really 
true in the great accidents of the world : for a 
great eftate hath great croiTes, and a mean fortune 



i64 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C. 2. 

hath but fmall ones. It may be the poor man loies 
a CoWy for if his Child dies he is quit of his biggeft 
care ; but fuch an accident in a rich and fplendid 
Family doubles upon the fpirits of the parents. Or 
it may be the poor man is troubled to pay his rent, 
and that's his biggeft trouble : but it is a bigger care 
to fecure a great fortune in a troubled eftate, or with 
equal greatneis, or with the circumftances of honour, 
and the nicenefs of reputation to defend a law-fuit; 
and that which will fecure a common man's whole 
eflate, is not enough to defend a great man's honour. 
And therefore it was not without myftery obierved 
r r. among the Ancients, that they 

ninelta pecunia o ' / 

Tempio who made Gods of gold and iilver, 

Nondum habitas, nullas ^ , j /• j /• 

numxnorum ereximus 01 hopc and tear, pcace and lor* 
ut^^iitur pax atquc fi- tune, Garlick and Onions, Beaib 

^** and Serpents, and a quartan Ague, 

yet never deified Money : meaning, that however 
wealth was admired by common or abufed under- 
{landings ; yet from riches, that is, from that pro- 
portion of good things which is beyond the ncceiS- 
ties of Nature, no moment could be added to a 
man's real content or happinefs. Com from SarS- 
nidj herds of Calabrian cattle, meadows through 
which pleafant Liris glides, filks from Tyrus^ and 
golden Chalices to drown my health in, arc nothiog 
but inftruments of vanity or fin, and fuppofe a dif- 
eafe in the foul of him that longs for them or ad- 

. Chap. 4. se£i. 8. Title mircs them. And this I have othe^ 
of covctoufhcfs. where reprefented more largctyj 

to which I here add, that riches have very great ioir 
gers to their fouls, not only who covet them^ but to 
all that have them. For if a great peribnage under* 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 165 

takes an a(ftion paflionately and upon great interefl, 
let him manage it indifcreetly, let the whole defign 
be unjuft, let it be aftcd with all the malice and im- 
potency in the World, he fhall have enough to flat- 
ter him, but not enough to reprove him. He had 
need be a bold man that fhall tell his Patron, he is 
going to Hell ; and that Prince had need be a good 
man that fhall fuffer fuch a Monitor : And though 
it be a ftrange kind of civility, and an evil dutiful- 
neis in Friends and Relatives to fuffer him to perifh 
without reproof or medicine, rather than to feem 
unmannerly to a great finner ; yet i t is n one of their 
leflft infglicii-jpfi^ that their wealth and greatnefs fhall 
put them into fin, and yet put them pafl reproof. I 
need not inflance in the habitual intemperance of 
rich Tables, nor the evil accidents and effefts of ful- 
nefs, pride and lufl, wantonnefs and foftnefs of dif- 
polition, hu ge talking a nd an imperious fpirit, defpite 
of Religion and contempt of poor perfons ; At the 
bcft, it is a great temptation for a man 

, .,.^ 1 ^r L James 2. 5, 6, 7. 

to ba!ve in nts power wnatjoever he can 
have in hisfenfual dejires : and therefore riches is a 
bleiling like to a prefent made of a whole Vintage 
to a Man in a Hedlic Fever; he will be much 
tempted to drink of it, and if he does he is inflamed, 
and may chance to die with the kindnefs. 

Now befides what hath been already noted in the 
ftate of poverty, there is nothing to be accounted for 
but the fear of wanting necejfaries^ of which if a man 
could be fecured, that he might live free from care, 
all the other parts of it might be reckoned amongft: 
the advantages of wife and fober perfons, rather than 
obje^ons againfl that flate of fortune. 



i66 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.t. 

But concerning this I confider, that there muft 
needs be great fecurity to all Chriflians, iince CArifi 
not only made exprefs promifes that we fhould have 
fufficient for this life ; but alfo took great pains and 
ufed many arguments to create confidence in us : and 
fuch they were which by their own ftrength were 
fufficient, though you abate the authority of the 
Speaker. The Son of God told us, his Father takes 
care of us : He that knew all his Father's counfels 
and his whole kindnefs towards mankind, told us 6). 
How great is that truth, how certain, how neceflarjTi 
which Cbriji himfelf proved by arguments ! The ex- 
cellent words and moft comfortable ientences which 
are our Bills of Exchange, upon the credit of which 
we lay our cares down, and receive provifions for our 

need, are thefe ; * Take no thought ht 

Mat. 6. 25, &c. /? 7f f 

* your life J what ye Jnall eat or whatjt 
jhall drink y nor yet for your body^ what ye Jball fut 
on. Is not the life more than meat^ and the body than 
raiment F Behold the fowls of the air ; for theyj99 
noty neither do they reapj nor gather into barnsy yet 
your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not muck 
better than they ? Which of you by taking thought 
can add one cubit to his jiature ? And why take jt 
thought for raiment ? Confder the Lilies of the 
field how they grow : T^hey toil not^ neither do thtj 
fpin ; and yet I fay unto you that even Solomon in 
all his glory was not arrayed like one ofthefe. I'hert- 
fore if Godfo clothe the grafs of the fields which tfh 
day is, and to-morrow is cafi into the oven, Jhall ht 
not much more clothe you, ye of little faith ? Then- 
fore take no thought, faying. What Jhall we eat? ^ 
what Jhall we drink ? or wherewithal Jhall we h 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 167 

• clothed? (for after all thefe things do the Gentiles 
^Jeek.J For your lieavenly Father knoweth that ye have 

• need of all thefe things. But feek ye firji the King-- 

• dom of God and his righteoufnefs^ and all thefe things 

• Jhall be added unto you. Take therefore no thought 
^ for the morrow ; for the morrow Jhall take thought 
^ for the things of itfelf : fufficient to the day is the evil 

• thereof! The fame difcourfe is 

, - ^ . - - - Luke 12.12 to vcrfe 31. 

repeated by Saint Luke : and ac- 
cordingly our duty is urged and our confidence abet- 
ted by the Difciples of our Lord, in divers places of 
holy Scripture, So Saint Paul^ Be care- 
ful for nothings but in everything by 
prayer and fupplication with thankfgiving let your re- 
quejls be made known unto God. And again. Charge 
them that are rich in this world that 
they be not high-minded, nor truji in un- ' '^""- '• ''• 
certain riches ^ but in the living Gody who giveth us 
richly all things to enjoy. And yet again. Let your 
conver Cation be without covetoufnefs^ and 

, ^ ' 1 r w J' 7 "«^- '3. 5,6. 

be content wtthjuch things as ye have ; 
for he hath faid^ I will never leave thee^ nor forfake 
thee : So that we may boldly fay. The Lord is my 
helper. And all this is by S. Peter fummed up in 
our duty, thus : Cajl all your care upon him, for he 
carethfor you. Which words he feems to have bor- 
rowed out of the 55 Pfalm, vtv. 23 ; where David 
faith the fame thing almofl in the fame words. To 
which I only add the obfervation made by him, and 
the argument of experience ; / have been young and 
now am old^ and yet f aw I never the righteous forfaken^ 
nor his feed begging their bread. And now after all 
this a fearlefs confidence in God, and concerning a 



i68 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.i. 

provifion of necefTaries^ is fo reaibnable that it is be- 
come a duty ; and he is fcarce a Chriflian whofe 
faith is fo little as to be jealous of God and fufpici- 
ous concerning meat and clothes : that man hath 
nothing in him of the noblenefs or confidence of 
Charity. 

Does not God provide for all the birds and beafts 
and fifhes ? Do not the fparrows fly from their bufh, 
and every morning find meat where they laid it not ? 
Do not the young ravens call to God and he feeds 
them ? And were it reafonable that the fbns of the 
family fhould fear the Father would give meat to the 
chickens and the fervants, his fheep and his dogs, 
but give none to them ? He were a very ill Father 
that fhould do fo : or he were a very foolifh fbn that 
fhould think fb of a good Father. * But befides the 
reafonablenefs of this faith and this hope, we have 
infinite experience of it : How innocent, how carc- 
lefs, how fecure is Infancy ? and yet how certainly 
provided ? We have lived at God*s charges all the 
days of our life, and have (as the Italian proverb fays) 
fat down to meat at the found of a bell ; and hitherto 
he hath not failed us : we have no reafon to fufped 
him for the future ; we do not ufe to ferve men fo; 
and lefs time of trial creates great confidences in us 
towards them who for twenty years together never 
broke their word with us : and God hath fb ordered 
it, that a man fhall have had the experience of many 
years' provifion, before he fhall underfland how to 
doubt ; that he may be provided for an anfwer againft 
the temptation fhall come, and the mercies felt in his 
childhood may make him fearlefs when he is a man. 
* Add to this that God hath given us his holy Spirit ; 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 169 

» 

he hath promifed Heaven tO'US ; he hath given us 
his Son ; and we are taught from Scripture to make 
this inference from hence^ How Jhould not he with 
him give us all things elfe ? 

The Charge of many Children. 

Wc have a title to be provided for as we are God's 
creatures^ another title as we are his Children, ano- 
ther becaufe God hath promifed ; and every of our 
children hath the fame title : and therefore it is a 
huge folly and infidelity to be troubled and full of 
care becaufe we have many children. Every child 
wc have to 'feed is a new revenue, a new title to 
God's care and providence ; fo that many children 
are a great wealth : and if it be faid they are charge- 
able, it is no more than all wealth and great revenues 
arc. For what difference is it ? Titius keeps ten 
ploughs, Cornelia hath ten children. He hath land 
enough to employ, and to feed all his hinds : fhe 
bleiiings, and promifes, and the provifions, and the 
truth of God to maintain all her children. His 
hinds and horfes eat up all his corn, and her children 
are fufficiently maintained with her little. They 
bring in and eat up ; and fhe indeed eats up, but 
they alfb bring in from the florehoufes of heaven, 
and the granaries of God : and my children are not 
io much mine as they are God's ; he feeds them in 
the womb by ways fecret and infenfible ; and would 
not work a perpetual miracle to bring them forth, 
and then to flarve them. 



I70 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.i. 

Violent necej/ities. 

But fome men are highly tempted, and are brought 
to a ftrait ; that without a miracle they cannot be 
relieved ; what fhall they do ? It may be their pride 
or vanity hath brought the neceflity upon them, and 
it is not a need of God's making : and if it be not, 
they mufl cure it themfelves by lejGTening their de- 
firesy and moderating their appetites ; and yet if it 
be innocent, though unneceflary, God does ufually 
relieve fuch neceflities ; and he does not only upon 
our prayers grant us more than he promiied of tem- 
poral things, but alfo he gives many times more than 
we afk. This is no obje6t for our jRiith, but grouad 
enough for a temporal and prudent hope : and if we 
fail in the particular, God will turn it to a bigger 
mercy, if we fubmit to his difpenfation, and adof c 
him in the denial. But if it be a matter of neceffi^t 
let not any man by way of impatience cry out that 
God will not work a miracle ; for God by miracle 
did give meat and drink to his people in the wil- 
dernefs, of which he had made no particular promiie 
in any Covenant : and if all natural means ^il, it is 
certain that God will rather work a miracle than 
break his word ; He can do that. He cannot do this^ 
Only we muft remember that our portion of tem- 
poral things is h\xt food and raiment : God hath not 
promifed us coaches and horfes, rich houies and 
jewels, Tyrian filks and Perfian carpets ; neither hath 
he promifed to miniiler to our needs in fuch circumr* 
fiances as we fhall appoint, but fuch as himfelf fhali 
choofe. God will enable either thee to pay thy 
debt (if thou beggefl it of him) or elfe he will pay 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 171 

it for thee^ that is^ take thy defire as a difcharge of 
thy duty, arid pay it to thy Creditor in bleffings, or 
in fo me fecretof his pro yidengg. It may be he hath 
laid up the corn that fhall feed thee in the granary 
of thy Brother ; or will clothe thee with his wool. 
He enabled Saint Peter to pay his Gabel by the mi- 
niftery of a fifli ; and E/ias to be waited on by a crow^ 
who was both his minifter and his fteward for pro- 
vifions : And his Holy Son rode in triumph upon 
an Afs that grazed in another man's paftures. And 
if God gives to him the dominion, and referves the 
ufe to thee, thou haft the better half of the two : but 
the charitable man ierves God and ferves thy need ; 
and both join to provide for thee, and God bleiOes 
both. But if he takes away the flefhpots from thee, 
he can alio alter the appetite, and he hath given thee 
power and commandment to reftrain it : and if he 
leflens the revenue, he will alfo fhrink the neceffity ; 
or if he gives but a very little, he will make it go a 
great way ; or if he fends thee but a coarfe diet, he 
will blefs it and make it healthful, and can cure all 
the anguifh of thy poverty by giving thee patience, 
and the grace of Contentednefs. For the grace of 
God fecures you of provifions, and yet the grace of 
God feeds and fupports the fpirit in the want of pro- 
vifions : and if a thin table be apt to enfeeble the 
fpirits of one ufed to feed better, yet the cheerfulnefs 
of a fpirit that is bleflcd will make a thin table be- 
come a delicacy, if the man was as well taught as he 
was fed, and learned his duty when he received the 
bleffing. Poverty therefore is in fome fenfes eligible 
and to be preferred before riches, but in all fenfes it 
is very tolerable. 



172 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.2. 

m 

Death of Children, or nearejt Relatives and Friends. 

There are fome perfons who have been noted for 
excellent in their lives and paflions, rarely innocent, 
and yet hugely penitent for indifcretions and harm- 
lefs infirmities : fuch as was Paulina, one of the 
ghoftly children of S. Hierom ; and yet when any of 
her children died, ftie was arretted with ft fbrrow b 
great as brought her to the margin of her grave. 
And the more tender our fpirits are made by Reli- 
gion, the more eafy we are to let in grief, if the caufc 
be innocent, and be but in any fenfe twifted with 
piety and due aifeftions. * To cure which we may 
confider that all the world mufl die, and therefore to 
be impatient at the death of a perfbn concerning 
whom it was certain and known that he muft diCj 
is to mourn becaufe thy friend or child was not boni 
an Angel, and when thou haft awhile made thyfelf 
miferable by an importunate and ufelefs grief, it may 
be thou (halt die thyfelf, and leave others to their 
choice whether they will mourn for thee or no : but 
by that time it will appear how impertinent that 
grief was which ferved no end of life, and ended in 
thy own funeral. But what great matter is it if 
fparks fly upward, or a ftonc falls into a pit ; if that 
which was combuftible be burned, or that which 
was liquid be melted, or that which is mortal to die ? 
It is no more than a man does every day : for every 
night death hath gotten pofl^eflion of that day, and wc 
ihall never live that day over again ; and when the 
laft day is come, there are no more days left for us to 
die. And what is fleeping and waking but living and 
dying ? what is Spring and Autumn, youth and old 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 173 

age, morning and evening, but real images of life and 
death, and really the fame to many confiderable efFedls 
and changes ? 

Untimely Death. 

But it is not mere dying that is pretended by fome 
as the caufe of their impatient mourning ; but that 
the child died young, before he knew good and evil, 
his right hand from his left, and fo loft all his por- 
tion of this world, and they know not of what excel- 
lency his portion in the next (hall be. * If he died 
young, he loft but little, for he underftood but little, 
and had not capacities of great pleafures or great 
cares: but yet he died innocent, and before the 
fweetnefs of his Soul was deflower ed and ravifhed 
from him by the flames and follies of a froward age : 
he went out from the dining-room before he had 
fellen into error by the intemperance of his meat, or 
the deluge of drink : and he hath obtained this £1- 
vour of God, that his Soul hath fuflfered a lefs im- 
prifonment, and her load was fboner taken ofl^, that 
he might with lefller delays go and converfe with 
immortal fpirits : and the babe is taken into Paradife 
before he knows good and evil. (For that know- 
ledge threw our great Father out, and this ignorance 
returns the child thither.) ♦ But (as concerning 
thy own particular) remove thy thoughts back to 
thofe days in which thy child was not born, and you 
are now but as then you was, and there is no differ- 
ence but that you had a fon born : and if you reckon 
that for evil, you are thankful for the blefiing ; if it 
be good, it is better that you had the blefiing for a 
while than not at all ; and yet if he had never been 



174 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.2. 

itidem fi puer paryuius bom, this iorrow had not been at 
^£pXtrfi'r,ot all. But be no more difpleafed at 

cunis,nequerendumqui- Qq^J fo^ giving VOU a blefluig foT 

dem ; atqui hoc acerbius ^00/ o 

cxcgit natura quod dede- a whUc, than VOU would havc bccn 

rit. At id quidem in cxte- •/•««, • . <.« « 

lis rebus melius putatur, II he had not given it at all ; and 

aliquam partem quam 1 ^1_ ^ • ^ • t_i /r 

nuilam attingcrc. Tcckon that intervening blefling 

senec, f^^ ^ gain, but account it not an 

evil ; and if it be a good, turn it not into forrow and 
fadnefs. * But if we have great reafon to complain 
of the calamities and evils of our life, then we havc 
the lefs reafon to grieve that thofe whom we loved 
have fo fmall a portion of evil affigned to them. And 
it is no fmall advantage that our children dying 
young receive : For their condition of a bleiled ina- - 
mortality is rendered to them fecure by being fnatch- 
ed from the dangers of an evil choice, and carried 
to their little cells of felicity, where they can weep 
no more. And this the wifeft of the Gentiles un- 
derftood well, when they forbad any offerings or li- 
bations to be made for dead Infants as was ufbal for 
their other dead ; as believing they were entered into 
a fecure poiTeffion, to which they went with no 
other condition, but that they pafled into it throngh 
the way of mortality, and for a few months wore an 
uneafy garment. And let weeping parents fay, if 
they do not think that the evils their little babes have 
fuffered are fufficient% If they be, why arc they 
troubled that they were taken from thofe many and 
greater, which in fucceeding years are great enough 
to try all the Reafon and Religion which art and 
nature and the grace of God hath produced in us, to 
enable us for fuch fad contentions? And poffibly 
we may doubt concerning men and women, but wc 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 175 

cannot fufpeA that to Infants death can be fuch an 
evil, but that it brings to them much more good 
than it takes from them in this life. 



Death unfeafonable. 

But others can well bear the death of Infants : but 
when they have fpent ibme years of childhood or 
youth, and are entered into arts and fociety, when 
they are hopeful and provided for, when the parents 
are to reap the comfort of all their fears and cares, 
then it breaks the fpirit to lofe them. This is true 
in many ; but this is not love to the dead, but to 
themfelves; for they mifs what they had flattered 
themfelves into by hope and opinion : and if it were 
kindnefs to the dead, they may confider, that fince 
we hope he is gone to God and to refl, it is an ill 
expreffion of our love to them, that we weep for 
their good fortune. For that life is not befl which 
is longefl : and when they are de- . ...... 

o ^ ' ^ Juvems relinquit vitam 

fcended into the grave, it fhall qucm Dii diiigunt. 
not be inquired how long they 
have lived, but how well : and yet this (hortening of 
their days is an evil wholly depending upon opinion. 
For if men did naturally live but twenty years, then 
we ihould be fatisfied if they died about fixteen or 
eighteen ; and yet eighteen years now are as long as 
eighteen years WQuld be then : and if a man were 
but of a day's life, it is well if he lafls till Evenfbng, 
and then fays his Compline an hour before the time : 
and we are pleafed and call not that death immature 
if he lives till feventy ; and yet this age is as fhort 
of the old periods before and fince the flood, as this 



176 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.%. 

youth's age (for whom you mourn) is of the prcfcnt 
fulnefs. Suppofe therefore a decree pafled upon this 
perfon (as there have been many upon all mankind) 
and God hath fet him a fliorter period ; and then wc 
may as well bear the immature death of the young 
man, as the death of the oldeft men : for they alio 
are immature and unfeafonable in reipedt of the oU 
periods of many generations • ♦ And why are wc 
troubled that he had arts and fciences before he died? 
or are we troubled that he does not live to make ufc of 
them? The firft is caufe of joy, for they arc excellent 
in order to certain ends : And the fecond cannot be 
caufe of forrow, becaufe he hath no need to ufe them 
as the cafe now ftands, being provided for with the 
provifions of an Angel, and the manner of eternity. 
However, the fons and the parents, friends and rck- 
tives are in the world, like hours and minutes to a 
day. The hour comes and mufl pafs ; and iomc 
flay but minutes, and they alfo pafs, and fhall never 
return again. But let it be confidered, that fiiom 
the time in which a man is conceived, from that 
time forward to Eternity he fhall never ceafe to be: 
and let him die young or old, flill he hath an ixDr 
mortal Soul, and hath laid down his body only for a 
time, as that which was the iriflrument of his trou- 
ble and forrow, and the fcene of ficknefles and difeafe. 
But he is in a more noble manner of being after death 
than he can be here : and the child may with more 
reafon be allowed to cry for leaving his mother's 
womb for this world, than a man can for changing 
this world for another. 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 177 



Sudden Death or violent. 

Others are yet troubled at the manner of their 
child's or friend's death. He was drowned, or loft 
his head, or died of the plague ; and this is a new 
fpring of forrow. But no man can give a fenfible 
account, how it fliall be worfe for a child to die with 
drowning in half an hour, than to endure a Fever of 
one and twenty days. And if my friend loft his 
heaii, fo he did not lofe his Conftancy and his Reli- 
gion, he died with huge advantage. 

Being Childlefs. 

But by this means I am left without an Heir. 
Well, fuppofe that : Thou haft no Heir, and I have 
no inheritance ; and there are many Kings and Em- 
perors that have died childlefs, many Royal lines are 
extinguifhed : and Augujius Cafar was forced to 
adopt his wife's fon to inherit all the Roman great- 
nefs. And there are many wife perfons that never 
married : and we read nowhere that any of the chil- 
dren of the Apoftles did furvive their Fathers : and 
all that inherit anything of Chrift's kingdom come 
to it by Adoption, not by natural inheritance : and 
to die without a natural heir is no intolerable evil, 
£nce it was fandtified in the perfon of Jefusj who 
died a Virgin. 

Evil or unfortunate Children. 

And by this means we are freed from the greater 
forrows of having a fool, a fwine, or a goat to rule 

N 



178 OF CONTENTEDNESS. C.i. 

after us in our families : and yet even this condition 

. 7 . admits of comfort. For all the 
(Ti KAH^aifxwa. Epia. wild Americans are fuppofed to be 
the fons of Dodonaim; and the fons of Jacob are now 
the mod fcattered and defpifed people in the whole 
world. The fon of Solomon was but a filly weak 
man ; and the fon of Hezekiah was wicked : and aD 
the fools and barbarous people, all the thieves and 
pirates, all the flaves and miferable men and women 
of the world are the fons and daughters of Noah: 
and we muft not look to be exempted from that 
portion of forrow which God gave to Noah and 
Adamy to Abrahamy to Ifaac and to "Jacob : I pray 

God fend us into the lot of Abra- 

/lam. But if anythmg happens 

worfe to us, // is enough for us that we bear it evenfy. 



Our own Death. 

And how if you were to die yourfelf ? you know 

Ad fines cum pervene- you muft. Only be ready for it, 
ris, ne revcrtito. PjtAag. j^y ^j^^ preparations of a good life; 

and then it is the greateft good that ever happened 
to thee : elfe there is nothing that can comfort you. 
But if you have ferved God in a holy life, fend away 
the women and the weepers, tell them it is as much 
intemperance to weep too much as to laugh too 
much.: and when thou art alone, or with fitting 
company, die as thou fliouldeft, but do not die im- 
patiently, and like a fox catched in a trap. For if 
you fear death, you fhall never the more avoid itf 
but you make it miferable. Fannius that killed him- 
felf for fear of death, died as certainly as Porcia that 



S. 6. OF CONTENTEDNESS. 179 

ate burning coals, or Cato that cut his own throat. 
VTo die is neceflary and natural, „. ^^^ ^,^^ ,^. 
and It may be honourable : but to •''^xf^f ^-w^*- 
aie poorly, and bafely, and finfully, that alone is it 
pat can make a man unfortunate. No man can be a 
Have but he that fears pain, or fears to die. To fuch 
a man nothing but chance and peaceable times can 
fccure his duty, and he depends upon things without 
for his felicity ; and fo is well but during the plea- 
furc of his enemy, or a Thief, or a Tyrant, or it 
may be of a dog or a wild bull. 



Prayers for the several Graces and 
PARTS OF Christian Sobriety. 

j4 Prayer againji Senfuality. 

O ETERNAL Father, thou that fitteft in Hea- 
ven invefted with eflential Glories and Di- 
vine perfcdtions, fill my Soul with fo deep a fenfe 
of the excellencies of fpiritual and heavenly things, 
that my affedtions being weaned from the pleafures 
of the world, and the falfe allurements of fin, I may 
with great feverity and the prudence of a holy dis- 
cipline and ftrid defires, with clear refolutions and 
a free fpirit, have my converfation in Heaven and 
lieavenly employments ; that being in affedtions as 
in my condition a Pilgrim and a ftranger here, I may 
covet after and labour for an abiding city, and at lafl 
tnay enter into and for ever dwell in the Celeflial 
jferufalem^ which is the mother of us all, through 
yefiis Chrift our Lord. Amen. 



i8o PRATERS FOR AdC.i. 

For Temperance. 

O ALMIGHTY God and gracious Father of 
men and Angels, who openeft thy hand and 
filleft all things with plenty, and haft provided for 
thy fervant fufficient to fatisfy all my needs ; teach 
me to ufe thy creatures foberly and temperately, that 
I may not with loads of meat or drink make the 
temptations of my enemy to prevail upon me, or my 
fpirit unapt for the performance of my duty, or my 
body healthlefs, or my afFedtions fenfual and unholy. ' 
O my God, never fufFer that the bleflings which 
thou giveft me may either minifter to fin or fickncfs, 
but to health and holinefs and thankfgiving, that in 
the ftrength of thy provifions I may cheerfully and 
adtively and diligently ferve thee that I may worthily 
feaft at thy table here, and be accounted worthy 
through thy grace to be admitted to thy table here- 
after at the eternal fupper of the Lamb, to fing an 
Allelujah to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghoft, for ever and ever. Amen. 

For Chajiity : to be /aid efpec tally by Unmarried 

Perfons. 

ALMIGHTY God, our moft holy and eternal 
Father, who art of pure eyes, and canft be- 
hold no uncleannefs ; let thy gracious and holy Spirit 
defcend upon thy fervant, and reprove the ipirit of 
Fornication and Uncleannefs, and caft him out, that 
my body may be a holy Temple, and my Soul* 
Sand:uary to entertain the PRINCE of purities tlw 
holy and eternal Spirit of God. O let no impure 
thoughts pollute that Soul which God hath fandi- 



jldC.2. SEVERAL GRACES. i8i 

fied ; no unclean words pollute that tongue which 
God hath commanded to be an Organ of his praifes ; 
no unholy and unchafte Aftion rend the veil of that 
Temple where the holy Jefus hath been pleafed to 
enter^ and hath chofen for his habitation : but feal 
up all my fenfes from all vain objedls, and let them 
be entirely poflefled with Religion, and fortified with 
prudence, watchfulnefs and mortification ; that I pof- 
iefling my veflel in holinefs, may lay it down with a 
.holy hope, and receive it again in a joyful refurrec- 
tion, through Jefus Chrift our Lord. Amen. 

A Prayer for the Love of God, to be f aid by Virgins 

and Widows, p^ofejfed or refolvedfo to live : 

and may be ufed by any one. 

OHOLY and pureft Jefus, who wert pleafed to 
eipouie every holy Soul, and join it to thee 
with a holy union and myfterious inftruments of re- 
ligious fociety and communications ; O fill my foul 
with Religion and defires, holy as the thoughts of 
Cherubim, pafiionate beyond the love of women ; 
that I may love thee as much as ever any creature 
loved thee, even with all my Soul, and all my facul- 
ties, and all the degrees of every faculty : let me know 
no loves but thofe of duty and charity, obedience 
and devotion ; that I may for ever run after thee 
who art the King of Virgins, and with whom whole 
kingdoms are in love, and for whofe fake Queens 
liave died, and at whofe feet Kings with joy have 
laid their Crowns and Sceptres. My Soul is thine 
O deareft Jefu, thou art my Lord, and haft bound 
Up my eyes and heart from all ftranger afFedions ; 



1 82 PRATERS FOR AdC.i. 

give me for my dowry purity and humility^ modefty 
and devotion, charity and patience, and at laflbringme 
into the Bride-chamber to partake of the felicities, 
and to lie in the bofom of the Bridegroom to eter- 
nal ages, O holy and fweeteft Saviour Jefus^ Amen. 



A Prayer to be /aid by Married Perfons in behalf oj 

themfehes and each other. 

O ETERNAL and gracious Father, who haft 
confecrated the holy eilate of Marriage to 
become myfterious, and to reprefent the union of 
Chrift and his Church, let thy holy Spirit fo guide 
me in doing the duties of this ftate, that it may not 
become a fin unto me ; nor that liberty which thoo 
haft hallowed by the holy yefus, become an occafion 
of licentioufnefs by my own weaknefs and fenfuality: 
and do thou forgive all thofe irregularities and too 
fenfual applications which may have in any degree 
difcompofed my fpirit and the feverity of a ChriP 
tian. Let me in all accidents and circumftances be 
fevere in my duty towards thee, affedtionate and dear 
to my Wife, [or Hufband] a guide and good exam- 
ple to my family, and in all quietnefs, fbbricty, pru- 
dence and peace, a follower of thofe holy pairs who 
have ferved thee with godlinefs and a good teftimony. 
And the bleflings of the eternal God, bleffings of the 
right hand and of the left, be upon the Body and 
Soul of thy fervant my Wife [or Hufband] and abide 
upon her [or him] till the end of a holy and happy 
life ; and grant that both of us may live togedicr 
for ever in the embraces of the holy and eternal 
Jefusy our Lord and Saviour. Amen. 



AdC.z. SEVERAL GRACES. 183 

A Prayer for the Grace of Humility. 

OHOLY and moft gracious Mafter and Saviour 
yefus, who by thy example and by thy pre- 
cept, by the praftice of a whole life and frequent 
difcourfes didft command us to be meek and hum- 
ble in imitation of thy incomparable fweetnefs and 
great humility ; be pleafed to give me the grace as 
thou haft given me the commandment : enable me 
to do whatfoever thou commandeft, and command 
whatfbever thou pleafeft. O mortify in me all proud 
thoughts and vain opinions of myfelf : let me return 
to thee the acknowledgment and the fruits of all 
thofe good things thou haft given me, that by con- 
feffing I am wholly in debt to thee for them, I 
may not boaft myfelf for what I have received, and 
for what I am highly accountable : and for what is 
my own, teach me to be afliamed and humbled, it 
being nothing but fin and mifery, weaknefs and un- 
cleamiefs. Let me go before my brethren in no- 
thing but in ftriving to do them honour and thee 
glory, never to feek my own praife, never to delight 
in it when it is offered ; that defpifing myfelf I may 
be accepted by thee in the honours with which thou 
flialt crown thy humble and defpifed fervants for 
jfefus his fake in the kingdom of eternal glory. 
Amen. 

A&s of Humility and Modejly by way of Prayer 

and Meditation. 

I. 

Lord, I know that my fpirit is light and thorny, 
my body is brutifh and expofed to ficknefs ; I am 



i84 PRATERS FOR AdC.i. 

conftant to folly, and inconftant in holy purpofcs. 
My labours are vain and fruitlefs ; my fortune full 
of change and trouble, feldom pleafing, never perfed: 
my wrifdom is folly ; being ignorant even of the parts 
and paffions of my ow^n body : and what am I, 
Lord, before thee, but a miferable perfon, hugely in 
debt, not able to pay ? 

11. 

Lord, I am nothing, and I have nothing of my- 
felf : I am lefs than the leaft of all thy mercies. 

in. 

What was I before my birth? Firft, nothingf 
and then uncleannefs. What during my childhood? 
weaknefs and folly. What in my youth ? folly ftill 
and paflion, luft and wildnefs. What in my whdc 
life ? a great finner, a deceived and an abufed perfon. 
Lord, pity me, for it is thy goodnefs that I am kept 
from confufion and amazement, when I confider the 
mifery and (hame of my perfon and the defilements 
of my nature. 

IV. 

Lord, what am I ? and Lord, what art thou ? 
What is man that thou art mindful of him ^ and thefai 
of man that thoufo regardeji him ? 

V. 

How can man be jujiified with God? or how can k 

be clean that is born of a Woman ? Behold even to the 

Moon J and it Jhineth not^yea, the Stars are not pure in 

his fight: How much lefs Man that is a Wormy and the 

fon of man which is a Worm ? Job 25. 4, 6cc. 



MC.2. SEVERAL GRACES. 185 



A Prayer for a Contented Spirit^ and the Grace of 

Moderation and Patience. 

O ALMIGHTY God, Father and Lord of all 
the creatures, who haft difpofed all things and 
dl chances fo as may beft glorify thy Wifdom, 
uid ferve the ends of thy Juftice, and magnify thy 
Mercy, by fecret and undifcernible ways bringing 
good out of evil ; I moft humbly befeech thee to 
give me wifdom from above, that I may adore thee, 
and admire thy ways and footfteps, which are in 
the great Deep and not to be fearched out : teach 
me to fubmit to thy providence in all things, to be 
content in all changes of perfon and condition, to be 
temperate in profperity, and to read my duty in the 
lines of thy mercy, and in adverfity to be meek, pa- 
tient and refigned, and to look through the cloud, 
that I may wait for the confolation of the Lord, and 
the day of Redemption ; in the mean time doing my 
duty with an unwearied diligence, and an undifhirbed 
refolution, having no fondnefs for the vanities or 
po£fefIions of this World, but laying up my hopes in 
Heaven and the rewards of holy living, and being 
ftrengthened with the Spirit of the inner man, 
through yefus Chrift our Lord. Amen. 



CHAPTER III. 

OF CHRISTIAN JUSTICE. 

USTICE is by the Chriftian Religion 
enjoined in all its parts by thcfe two 
propofitions in Scripture : [JVkatfimr 
ye -would that menjhould do to you, eoti 
Jb do to them.'\ This is the meafiire of commute 
jujiice, or of that juftice which fuppofes exchange of 
things profitable for things profitable : that as I fup- 
ply your need, you may fupply mine ; as I do a i«- 
nefit to you, I may receive one by you : and beanft 
every man may be injured by another, therefore )si 
fecurity fliall depend upon mine : if he will not let 
me be fafe, he fhall not be fafe himfelf, (only ^ 
manner of his being punished is upon great rca^ 
both by God and all the World taken from partico* 
lars, and committed to a public difintcrefted pcrfift 
who will do juftice without paffion both to himao^ 
to me) if he refufes to do me advantage, he (hall re- 
ceive none when his needs require it. And thu* 
God gave necejfities to men, that all men might need; 
znAfeveral abilities to feveral perfons, that each man 
might help to fupply the public needs and by join- 
ing to fill up all wants, they may be knit together by 
juftice, as the parts of the World are by nature : and 



OF CHRISTIAN JUSTICE. 187 

Ae hath made all obnoxious to injuries, and made every 
little thing ftrong enough to do us hurt by fome in- 
ftrument or other ; and hath given us all a fufficient 
flock of felf-love, and defire of felf-prefervation, to 
be as the chain to tie together all the parts of fociety, 
and to reftrain us from doing violence, left we be 
violently dealt withal ourfelves. 

The other part of juftice is commonly called dif- 
tributive^ and is commanded in this 
Rule, [Render to all their duesy tribute • '3- 7. 

to whom tribute is due^ cufiom to whom cujlom^fear to 
whom fear ^ honour to whom honour. Owe no man any 
things but to love one another.'] This juftice is dif- 
tinguiihed from the firft, becaufe the obligation de- 
pends not upon contradl or exprefs bargain, but pafles 
upon us by virtue of fome command of God, or of 
our Superior, by nature or by grace, by piety or Re- 
ligion, by truft or by office, according to that Com- 
mandment \As every man hath received 
the gift Jo let him minifter the fame one ' '" *• '"• 
to [another, as good Jlewards of the manifold grace of 
God.] And as the firft confiders an equality of per- 
fons in reipedt of the contradl or particular neceffity : 
this fuppofes a difference of perfons, and no particu- 
lar bargains, but fuch neceflary intercourfes as by 
the Laws of God or man are introduced. But I fhall 
reduce all the particulars of both kinds to thefe four 
heads, i. Obedience, 2, Provifion, 3. Negotiation, 
4. Reflitution. 



i88 OF OBEDIENCE. C. 3. 




SECT. I. 

OJ* Obedience to our. Superiors. 

[UR Superiors are fet over us in afiairs of 
the World, or the affairs of the Soul and 
things pertaining to Religion, and are 
called accordingly Ecclejiajiical or CiviL Towards 
whom our duty is thus generally defcribed in the 
New Teftament. For Temporal or Civil Govermrs 

the Commands are thefe : [Render to 
Cafar the things that are Ca:far^s\ and 
\Let every foul be fubjeSi to the higher powers : For 
there is no power but of God : The powers that be are 
ordained of God: Whofoever therefore reffeth the 
power y refjleth the ordinance of God ; and they thai 
refjl JJjall receive to themfehes damnation'] and [Put 
Titus X ^^^^ ^^ w/W to befubjeSl to principalitia 

and powers y and to obey Magijirates] and 

1 Pet. 2. 13. [Submit yourfelves to every ordinance oj 

man 9 for the Lord* s fake ; whether it be to the King, 

asfupreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that art 

fent by him for the punijhment of evil doers ^ and the 

praife of them that do well.] 

For Spiritual or Ecclejiajiical Governors thus wc 
„ , are commanded : [Obey them that have 

Hcb. 13. 17. I /• • 

the rule over you, and fubmit yourfelves^ 

for they watch for your fouls, as they that muji give an 

Phil. 2. 29. account] and [Hold fuch in reputation] 

2 Cor. 2. 9. and [To this end did I write, that I 

might know the proof of you, whether ye be obedient in 

all things] faid S. Paul to the Church of Corinth^ 



S.i. OF OBEDIENCE. 189 

* Our duty is reducible to pradtice by the following 
Rules. 

^£ts and Duties of Obedience to all our Superiors. 

1 . We muft obey all human laws appointed and 
conftituted by lawful Authority, that is, of the fu- 
preme power, according to the conftitution of the 
place in which we live; all laws, I mean, which are 
not againft the law of God. 

2. In obedience to human laws we muft obferve 
the letter of the Law where we can without doing 
violence to the reafbn of the Law, and the intention 
of the Lawgiver : but where they crofs each other, 
the charity of the Law is to be preferred before its 
difcipline, and the reafon of it before the letter. 

3. If the general reafbn of the Law ceafes in our 
particular, and a contrary reafon rifes upon us, we 
arc to procure difpenfation, or leave to omit the ob- 
fervation of it in fuch circumftances, if there be any 
perfbns or office appointed for granting it : but if 
there be none, or if it is not eafily to be had, or not 
without an inconvenience greater than the good of 
the obfervation of the Law in our particular, we are 
difpenfed withal in the nature of the thing, without 
further procefs or trouble. 

4. As long as the Law is obligatory, fo long our 
obedience is due ; and he that begins a contrary cuf- 
tom without reafon, fins : but he that breaks the 
Law when the cuftom is entered and fixed, is ex- 

Cufed; becaufe it is fuppofed the Mores le^es perduxcrunt 

legriflative power confents, when , '^^ potcftatcm fuam. 

^ Z Leges mon lerviunt. 

by not punifhing it fuffers difobe- Piaut. rnnum. 

dience to grow up to a cuftom. 



1 90 OF OBEDIENCE. C. 3. 

5. Obedience to human laws muft he for con- 
fcience^ fake: that is, becaufe in fuch obedience pub- 
lic order and charity and benefit is concerned, and 
becaufe the Law of God commands us, therefore wc 

^ ^^ , muft make a confcience in keep- 

^«y)io«rraiha<Hpii. mg thc juft Laws of Supenofs : 

.5. cap. 7. ^^j although the matter before the 

making of the Law was indifferent, yet now the 
obedience is not indifferent, but next to the Laws of 
God, we are to obey the laws of all our Superion, 
who the more public they are, the firft they are to 
be in the order of obedience. 

6. Submit to the punifhment and cenfure of the 
Laws, and feek not to reverfe their judgment by op- 
pofing, but by fubmitting, or flying, or filence, to 
pafs through it or by it as we can : and although 
from inferior Judges we may appeal where the Law 
permits us, yet we muft fit down and reft in the 
judgment of the Supreme ; and if we be wronged, 
let us complain to God of the injury, not of the 
perfons, and he will deliver thy Soul from unrigh- 
teous Judges. 

7. Do not believe thou haft kept the Law, when 
thou haft fuffered the punifhment. For although 
patiently to fubmit to the power of the fword be a 
part of Obedience, yet this is fuch a part as fuppofcs 
another left undone : and the Law punifhes, not be- 
caufe fhe is as well pleafed in taking vengeance as 
in being obeyed, but becaufe fhe is pleafed, fhe ufcs 
punifhment as a means to fecure obedience for the 
future, or in others. Therefore, although in fuch 
cafes the Law is fatisfied, and the injury and the in- 
juflice is paid for, yet the fins of irreligion, and 



S. 1. OF OBEDIENCE. 191 

fcandal, and difobedience to God muft ftill be fo ac- 
counted for, as to crave pardon, and be wafhed off 
by repentance. 

8 . Human Laws are not to be broken with fcan- 
dal, nor at all without reafbn ; for he that does it 
caufeleflly is a defpifer of the Law, and undervalues 
the authority. For human Laws differ from Di- 
vine Laws principally in this : i . That the pqfitroe 
commands of a man may be broken upon fmaller and 
more reafons than the pojitive commands of God ; we 
may upon a fmaller reafon omit to keep any of the 
fafting-days of the Church, than omit to give alms 
to the poor : only this, the reafon muft bear weight 
according to the gravity and concernment of the 
Law ; a Law in a fmall matter may be omitted for 
a fmall reafon, in a great matter not without a greater 
reafon. And 2. TAe negative precepts of men may 
ceafe by many inftruments, by contrary cuftoms, by 
public difrelifli, by long omiflion : but the negative 
precepts of God never can ceafe, but when they are 
expreflly abrogated by the fame Authority. But 
what thofe reafons are that can difpenfe with the 
command of a man, a man may be his own Judge, 
and fometimes take his proportions from his own 
reafon and neceffity, fometimes from public fame, 
and the pradtice of pious and fevere perfons, and 
from popular cuftoms, in which a man fhall walk 
moft fafely when he does not walk alone, but a fpi- 
ritual man takes him by the hand. 

9. We muft not be too forward in procuring dif- 
penfations ; nor ufe them any longer than the reafon 
continues for which we firft procured them : for to 
be difpenfed withal is an argument of natural infir- 



192 OF OBEDIENCE. C.3. 

mity, if it be neceflary ; but if it be not, it fignifies 
an undifciplined and unmortiiied ipirit. 

10. We muft not be too bufy in examining the 
prudence and unreafonablenefs of human Laws: for 
although we are not bound to believe them all to be 
the wifeft ; yet if by enquiring into the lawfulne^ 
of them, or by any other inftrument we find them 
to fail of that wifdom with which fbme others arc 
ordained, yet we muft never make ufe of it to dif- 
parage the perfon of the Law-giver, or to counte- 
nance any man's difobedience, much lels our own. 

1 1 . Pay that reverence to the perfon of thy Prince, 
of his Minifters, of thy Parents and fpiritual Guides, 
which by the cuftoms of the place thou liveft in are 
ufually paid to fuch perfons in their feveral degrees: 
that is, that the higheft reverence be paid to the 
higheft perfon, and fo ftill in proportion ; and that 
this reverence be exprefled in all the circumftances 
and manners of the City and Nation. 

12. Lift not up thy hand againft thy Prince or 
Parent upon what pretence foever : but bear all per- 
fonal affronts and inconveniences at their hands, and 
feek no remedy but by patience and piety, yielding 
and praying, or abfenting thyfelf. 

1 3 . Speak not evil of the Ruler of thy people^ neither 
curfe thy Father or Mother^ nor revile thy fpiritua) 
Guides, nor difcover and lay naked their infirmities: 
but treat them with reverence and religion, and prc- 
ferve their authority facred by efteeming their per- 
fons venerable. 

14. Pay tribute and cuftoms to princes according 
to the Laws, and maintenance to thy Parents accord- 
ing to their neceflity, and honourable fupport to the 



S. I. OF OBEDIENCE. 193 

Clergy according to thc' dignity of the work, and the 
cuftoms of the place. 

15. Remember always that duty to our Superiors 
is not an aft of commutative juftice, but of diftribu- 
tive : That is, although Kings and Parents and fpi- 
ritual Guides are to pay a great duty to their infe- 
riors, the duty of their feveral charges and govern- 
ment ; yet the good government of a King and of 
Parents are aftions of Religion as they relate to God, 
and of Piety as they relate to their people and fami- 
lies. And although we ufually call thtm Jujl Princes 
who adminifter their Laws exactly to the people, 
becaufe the adions are in the manner of yujiice ; 
yet in propriety of fpeech they are rather to be called 
Pious and Religious. For as he is not called a juji 
Father that educates his children well, but pious ; fo 
that Prince who defends and well rules his people is 
Religious, and does that duty for which alone he is 
anfwerable to God. The confequence of which is 
this, fo far as concerns our duty : If the prince or 
Parent fail of their duty, we muft not fail of ours ; 
for we are anfwerable to them and to God too, as 
being accountable to all our Superiors, and fo are 
they to theirs : they are above us, and God is above 
them. 

Remedies againft Difobedience, and Means to endear 
our Obedience by way of Confideration. 

I . Confidcr that all authority defcends from God, 
and our Superiors bear the image of the Divine 
Power, which God imprints on them as on an image 
of clay, or a coin upon a lefs perfect metal, which 
whofo defaces, (hall not be anfwerable for the lofs or 



1 94 OF OBEDIENCE. C. 3. 

fpoil of the materials, but the defacing the king's 
Image : and in the lame mealurc will God require 
it at our hands, if we defpile his authority upon 
whomfoever he hath imprinted it. He that defp^k 
you^ defpijetb me. And Dathan and Abhram were fiud 
to be gathered together againji the Lord. And tbii 
was S. PauVs argument for our obedience: [TAf 
p^/xers that be^ are ordained of God^ 

2. There is ver}' great peace and immunity from 
fin in refigning our wills up to the command of 
others : for provided that our duty to God be fccured, 
their commands are warrants to us in all things elfe; 
and the cafe of confcience is determined, if the com- 
mand be evident and prefling : and it is certain, the 
adion that is but inditferent, and without rewardi if 
done only upon our own choice, is an aft of duty 
and of Religion, and rewardable by the grace and 
favour of God, if done in obedience to the command 
of our Superiors. For fince naturally we defire what 
is forbidden us, (and fbmetimes there is no other evil 
in the thing but that it is forbidden us) God hadi 
in grace enjoined and proportionably accepts obedi- 
ence, as being diredly oppofed to the former irregu- 
larity ; and it is acceptable, although there be no 
other good in the thing that is commanded us, but 
that it is commanded. 

3 . By obedience we are made a fociety and a re- 
public, and diftinguifhed from herds of Beads, and 
leaps of flies, who do what they lifl, and are inca- 
pable of laws, and obey none, and therefore are killed 
and deftroyed, though never punifhed, and they never 
can have a reward. 

4. By obedience we are rendered capable of all 



S. I. OF OBEDIENCE. 195 

the bleffings of Government, fignified by S. Paul in 
thefe words, [He is the minijler of God Rom. 13. 4. 
to thee for good ;] and by S. Peter in i Pet. 2. 14. 
thefe, [Governors are fent by him for the punijhment 
of evil-doers y and for the praife of them that do well.] 
And he that ever felt or faw, or can underftand the 
miferies of confufion in public affairs, or amazement 
in a heap of fad, tumultuous and indefinite though ts» 
may from thence judge of the admirable effedts of 
order, and the beauty of Government, What health 
is to the body, and peace is to the fpirit, that is Go- 
vernment to the focieties of Men, the greatefl blef- 
fing which they can receive in that temporal capacity. 
5.(No man fhall ever be fit to govern others that 
knows not firfl how to obey. / For if the fpirit of a 
Subje<9: be rebellious, in a Prince it will be tyranni- 
cal and intolerable, and of fo ill example, that as it 
will encourage the difobedience of others, fo it will 
render it unreafonable for him to exadt of others 
what in the like cafe he refufed to pay. 

6. There is no fin in the world which God hath 
punifhed with fb great feverity and high deteflation 
as this of Difobedience. For the crime of Idolatry 
God fent the fword amongfl his people ; but it was 
never heard that the Earth opened and fwallowed | 
up any but rebels againfl their Prince. 

7. Obedience is better than the particular adtions 
of Religion ; and he ferves God better that follows 
his Prince in lawful fervices, than he that refufes his 
command upon pretence he mufl go fay his prayers. 
But Rebellion is compared to that fin which of all 
fin feems the mofl unnatural and damned impiety. 
Rebellion is as the Jin of Witchcraft. 



196 OF OBEDIENCE. C. 3. 

8. Obedience is a complicated aft of virtue and 
many graces are exercifed in one aft of obedience. 
It is an aft of humility, of mortification and fdf- 
denial, of charity to God, of care of the publici of 
order and charity to ourfelves and all our {ocictj, 
and a great inftance of a viftory over the moft rc- 
fraftory and unruly paffions. 

9. To be a fubjeft is a greater temporal felicity 
than to be a King : for all eminent Governments 
according to their height have a great burden, huge 
. . , . ,, ^ care, infinite bufinefs,* little reft, 

t^ 5»j|»«, innumerable fears ; and all that he 

ri^afjiifiL^, enjoys above another is, that nc 

Homer II. 2. j^^^ ^^j^^ ^^^ ^j^^^ ^^ ^^ ^^^j 

w^ith other circumftances, a nd a bigger noife ; and if 

Others go at his fingle command, it is alfb certain he 

muft fufFer inconvenience at the needs and diftur- 

bances of all his people : and the evils of one man 

and of one family are not enough for him to bear, 

unlefs alfo he be almoft crufhed with the .evils of 

mankind. He therefore is an ungrateful perfbn that 

will prefs the fcales down with a voluntary load, and 

by difobedience put more thorns into the Crown or 

Mitre of his Superior, Much better is the advice 

of Saint Paul, Obey them that have the 
e . 13. 17. ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^ ^^^y ^^^^ ^^ ^^ ^ 

account for your fouls ^ that they may do it with joy ad 
not with grief: for (befides that it is unpleafant to 
them) it is unprofitable for you. 

10. The Angels are miniftering fpirits, and per- 
petually execute the will and commandment of God: 
and all the wife men and all the good men of the 
World are obedient to their Governors; and the etcr- 



S. 1. OF OBEDIENCE. 197 

nal Son of God efteemed it his Meat and drink to do 
the will of his father^ and for his obedience alone ob- 
tained the greateft glory : and no man ever came to 
perfection but by Obedience: and thoufands of Saints 
have chofen fuch inflitutions and manners of living, 
in which they might not choofe their own work, 
nor follow their own will, nor pleafe themfelves, but 
be accountable to others, and fubjedt to difcipline, 
and obedient to command, as knowing tlnsjo bejhc 
highway of the Cr ofs, the way that the King of Suf- 
ferings and humility did choofe, and fo became the 
^^g of glory. 

1 1 . No man ever periflied who followed firft the 
will of God, and then the will of his Superiors : but 
thoufands have been damned merely for following 
their own will, and relying upon their own judg- 
ments, and choofing their own work, and doing their 
own fancies. For if we begin with ourfelves, what- 
fbcver feems good in our eyes is mofl commonly dif- 
pleafing in the eyes of God. 

1 2. The fin of rebellion, though it be a fpiritual 
fin, and imitable by Devils, yet it is of that diforder, 
unreafbnablenefs and impoflibility amongfl intelli- 
gent fpirits, that they never murmured or mutinied 
in their lower flations againfl their Superiors. Nay, 
the good Angels of an inferior Order durfl not revile 
a Devil of a higher Order. This confideration which 
I reckon to be mofl prefling in the difcourfes of rea- 
fbn, and obliging next to the neceflity of a Divine 
precept, we learn from Saint Judcy [Liiewtfe alfo 
thefe filthy dreamers defpife dominion andfpeak evil of 
dignities. And yet Michael the Archangel, when con- 
tending with the Devil he difputed about the body of 



198 OF OBEDIENCE. C. 3. 

Mofes, durjl not bring againji him a railing accufatm. 
But becaufe our Superiors rule by their example, 
by their word or law, and by the rod, therefore in 
proportion there are feveral degrees and parts of obe- 
dience, of feveral excellencies and degrees towards 
perfeftion. 

Degrees of Obedience. 

1 . The fir ft is the obedience of the outward Work: 
and this is all that Human Laws of themfelves regard; 
for becaufe Man cannot judge the heart, therefore it 
prefcribes nothing to it: the public end is fervednot 
by good wifhes, but by real and actual performances; 
and if a man obeys againft his will, he is not punifli- 
able by the Laws. 

2. The obedience of the Will: and this is alfonc- 
ceflary in our obedience to Human Laws, not be- 
caufe Man requires it for himfelf, but becaufe God 
commands it towards Man; and of it (although Man 
cannot, yet) God will demand an account. For wc 
are to do it as to the Lordy and not to men; and there- 
fore we muft do it willingly. But by this means our 
obedience in private is fecured againft fecret arts and 
fubterfuges : and when we can avoid the punilh- 
ment, yet we fliall not decline our duty, but fcrvc 
Man for God's fake, that is, cheerfully ^ promptly vi- 
goroujly ; for thefe are the proper parts of wilUng- 
nefs and choice. 

3 . The Vnderjianding muft yield obedience in gene- 
raly though not in the particular inftance ; that is, 
we muft be firmly perfuaded of the excellency of the 
obedience, though we be not bound in all cafes to 
think the particular Law to be moft prudent. But in 



S. I. OF OBEDIENCE. 199 

this our rule is plain enough. Our underftanding 
ought to be inquifitive whether the civil conftitu- 
tion agree with our duty to God ; but we are bound 
to enquire no further: and therefore beyond this, 
although he who, having no obligation to it, (as 
Counfellors have) enquires not at all into the wifdom 
or reafonablenefs of the Law, be not always the 
wifeft man, yet he is ever the beft fubjedl. For 
when he hath given up his underftanding to his 
Prince and Prelate, provided that his duty to God 
be fecured by a precedent fearch, he hath alfo with 
the beft, and with all the inftruments in the world, 
fecured his obedience to Man. 




SECT. II. 

Of Provijioni or that part of yujlice which is due 

from Superiors to Inferiors. 

|S God hath imprinted his authority in feve- 
ral parts upon feveral eftates of Men, as 
Princes, Parents, Spiritual Guides : fo he 
hath alfo delegated and committed parts of his care 
and providence unto them, that they may be inftru- 
mental in the conveying fuch bleflings which God 
knows we need, and which he intends fhould be the 
efFedls of Government. For fince God governs all 
the World as a King, provides for us as a Father, 
and is the great Guide and Conduftor of our fpirits 
as the Head of the Church, and the great Shepherd 
and Bifhop of our Souls, they who have portions of 
thefe dignities, have alfo their fliare of the adminiftra- 



200 THE DUrr C.3. 

tion : the fuin of all which is ufually fignified in 
thefe two words [Governing] and [Feedings] and is 
particularly recited in thefe following rules. 

Duties of Kings, and all the Supreme Power, as 

Lawgivers. 

1 . Princes of the people, and all that have Legif- 
lative power, muft provide ufeful and good Laws for 
the defence of propriety, for the encouragement of 
labour, for the fafeguard of their perfons, for deter- 
mining controverjQes, for reward of noble adioDS 
and excellent arts and rare inventions, for promoting 
trade, and enriching their people, 

2. In the making Laws Princes muft have regard 

to the public difpofitions, to the 

Omittenda potms pne- rr o* 1 i-r n- r^- r L 

vaiida et aduita vitia, atteCtions and dilaiTections of the 

quam hoc adfequi, lit pa- 1 j /\ ^ • ^ 1 ^ 

lam fiat quibus flagftiis pcople, and muft not mtroducc a 
imparcsfimus. Taat. L^^ ^j^ ^^^y^^ fcaudal and dif- 

pleafure ; but confider the public benefit, and the 
prefent capacity of affairs, and general inclinations of 
men's minds. For he that enforces a Law upon a 
people againft their firft and public apprehenfions, 
tempts them to difobedience, and makes Laws to 
become fnares and hooks to catch the people, and 
to enrich the treafury with the fpoil and tears and 
curfes of the Commonalty, and to multiply their 
mutiny and their fin. 

3. Princes muft provide that the Laws be duly 
executed. For a good Law without execution is 
like an unperformed promife : and therefore they 
muft be fevere exadlors of accounts from their De- 
legates and Minifters of Juftice. 



S 2. OF SUPERIORS. 201 

4. The feverity of Laws muft be tempered with 
difpenfations, pardons, and remif- . , , , ,. 
fions, according as the cafe fhall •v^^^^jWwifcATSjtAW- 
alter, and new neceiiities be in- 
troduced, or fbme iingular accident fhall happen, 
in which the Law would be unreafbnable or intole- 
rable as to that particular. And thus the people 
with their importunity prevailed againfl Saul in the 
cafe of JonatAan, and obtained his pardon for break- 
ing the Law which his Father made, becauie his 
neceffity forced him to tafte honey, and his breaking 
the Law in that cafe did promote that fervice whofe 
promotion was intended by the Law. 

5. Princes muft be Fathers of the people, and 
provide fuch inftances of gentlenefs, eafe, wealth and 
advantages, as may make mutual confidence between 
them ; and muft fix their fecurity under God in the 
love of the people, which therefore they muft with 
all arts of fweetnefs, remifEon, popularity, noblenefs 
and fincerity endeavour to fecure to themfelves. 

6. Princes muft not multiply public Oaths with- 
out great, eminent and violent neceffity, left the fe- 
curity of the King become a fnare to the people, and 
they become falfe when they fee themfelves fufpedled, 
or impatient when they are violently held faft : but 
the greater and more ufeful caution is upon things 
than upon perfons ; and if fecurity of Kings can be 
obtained otherwife, it is better that Oaths fhould^ be 
the laft refuge, and when nothing elfe can be fuffi- 
cient. 

7. Let not the people be tempted with arguments 
to difobey, by the impofition of j^.^y„^^ j, ^^ ^^^ 
great and unneceflary taxes: for dcR«gni- 



202 THE DUTT C.3. 

that loft to the fon of Solomon the dominion of the 
ten Tribes of Ifrael. 

8. Princes muft in an efpecial manner be Guar- 
dians of Pupils and Widows, not fuffering their per- 
fons to be oppreffed, or their eftates embezzled, or in 
any fenfe be expofcd to the rapine of covetous pcr- 
fons, but be provided for by juft Laws and provident 
Judges, and good Guardians, ever having an ear ready 
open to their juft complaints, and a heart full of pity, 
and one hand to fupport them, and the other to 
avenge them. 

9 . Princes muft provide that the Laws may be fo 
adminiftered, that they be truly and really an eafc to 
the people, not an inftrument of vexation : and there- 
fore muft be careful that the ftiorteft and moft equal 
ways of trials be appointed, fees moderated, and in- 
tricacies and windings as much cut off as may be, 
left injured peribns be forced to perifli under the op- 
preffion, or under the Law, in the injury, or in the 
fuit. Laws are like Princes, thofe beft and moft 
beloved who are moft eafy of accefs. 

10. Places of judicature ought at no hand to be 
fold by pious Princes, who remember themfelves to 

be fathers of the people. For they 

Chi compra il magif- m -y^ r 11 i a 

trato forza e chc vcndra la that OUy the ojfice Will Jell the J«, 

^*^ *^**' and they that at any rate will be 

Judges, will not at any eafy rate do Jufticc; and 
their bribery is lefs punifliable, when bribery opened 
the door by which they entered. 

1 1 . Ancient privileges, favours, cuftoms, and Afts 
of grace indulged by former Kings to their people, 
muft not without high reafon and great neccffities 
be revoked by their fucceflbrs, nor forfeitures be ex- 



S. 2. OF SUPERIORS. 203 

afted violently, nor penal Laws urged rigoroufly, nor 
in light cafes, nor Laws be multiplied without great 
need, nor vicious perfons, which are publicly and 
defervedly hated, be kept in defiance of popular de- 
fires, nor anything that may unnecefTarily make the 
yoke heavy and the aiFedtion light, that may increafe 
murmurs and leflen charity; always remembering 
that the intereft of the Prince and the People is fo 
enfolded in a mutual embrace, that they cannot be 
untwifted without pulling a limb off, or diflblving 
the bands and conjundtion of the whole body. 

12. All Princes muft efteem themfelves zsmuch 
bound by their word, by their grants, and by their 
promifes as the meaneft of their ^, „ . , . .,. . n.- 

•T ^ ^ Nulla lex (civilis) fibi 

Subje(fls are by the reftraint and fou confcientiam juftiti* 

. /•▼ 111. 1 ^^^ debet, fed eis a qui- 

penalty or Laws : and although bus obfequium expe^at. 
they are fuperior to the people, ^'''''^' ^^^^''• 

yet they are not fuperior to their own voluntary con- 
ceffions and engagements, their promifes and Oaths, 
when once they are pafTed from them. 

The Duty of Superiors as they are Judges. 

1 . Princes in Judgment and their Delegate Judges 
muft judge the caufes of all perfons uprightly and 
impartially, without any perfbnal confideration of the \ 
power of the mighty, or the bribe of the rich, or the ' 
needs of the poor. For although the poor muft fare 
no worfe for his poverty, yet in juftice he muft fare 
no better for it : And although the rich muft be no 
more regarded, yet he muft not be lefs. And to this 
purpofe the Tutor of Cyrus inftrufted him, when in 
a controverfy where a great Boy would have taken a 
large Coat from a little Boy, becaufe his own was too 



204 THE Durr C. 3. 

little for him, and the other's was too big, he adjudged 
the great Coat to the great Boy: his Tutor anfwcred, 
Sir, if you were made a Judge of decency or fitnefs, you 
had judged well in giving the biggeft to the biggeft; 
but when you were appointed Judge, not whom the 
Coat did fit, but whofe it was, you fliould have con- 
fidered the title and the pofleflion, who did the vio- 
lence, and who made it, or who bought it. And fo 
it muft be in judgments between the Rich and the 
Poor : it is not to be confidered what the pocx* man 
needs, but what is his own. 

2. A Prince may not, much lefs may inferior 
'Judges, deny juftice when it is legally and compe- 
I tently demanded : and if the Prince will ufe his Pre- 
' rogative in pardoning an offender againft whom Juf- 
tice is required, he muft be careful to give fatisfac- 
tion to the injured perfon, or his Relatives, by ferae 
other inftrument ; and be watchful to take away the 
fcandal, that is, left fuch indulgence might make 
perfons more bold to do injury : and if he fpares the 
life, let him change the punifliment into that which 
may make the offender (if not fuffer juftice, yet) do 
juftice, and more real advantage to the injured perfon. 
Thefe Rules concern Princes and their Delegates in 
the making or adminiftering Laws, in the appoint- 
ing rules of juftice and doing a6ts of judgment. The 
duty of Parents to their Children and Nephews is 
briefly defcribed by S. Paul. 

The Duty of Parents to their Children. 

I . Fathers provoke not your children to wrath : that 

is, be tender bowelled, pitiful and gen- 
^ ' ' ** tie, complying with all the infirmities 



S. 2. OF SUPERIORS. 205 

of the Children, and in their feveral ages propor- 
tioning to them feveral ufages according to their 
needs and their capacities. 

2. Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of 
the Lord: that is, fecure their Religion, feafon their 
younger years with prudent and pious principles, 
make them in love with virtue, and make them ha- 
bitually fo before they come to choofe or to difcern 
good from evil, that their choice may be with lefs 
difficulty and danger. For while Potior mihi ratio vi- 
they are under difcipline, they fuck ^f^^^rfn^^ "^^^^'^ 
in all that they are firft taught, and ^ ^''»^^- ^- «• ^- *• 

believe it infinitely. Provide for cratV a^J " piutarch. 
them wife, learned and virtuous ^c libcr. ecfccand. 

Tutors, and good company and difcipline,* feafon- 
able baptifm, catechifm and 'confirmation. For it is 
a great folly to heap up much wealth for our Chil- 
dren, and not to take care concerning the Children, 
for whom we get it. It is as if a man fhould take 
more care about his ihoe than about his foot. 

3. Parents muji *Jhew piety at home; 

that is, they muft give good example * *™' ^' ** 
and reverent deportment in the face of their children; 
and all thofe inflances of charity which ufually en- 
dear each other, fweetnefs of converfation, affability, 
frequent admonition, all fignifications of love and 
tendernefs, care and watchfulnefs, muft be exprefled 
towards Children, that they may look upon their Pa- 
rents as their friends and patrons, their defence and 
fandluary, their treafure and their Guide. Hither 
is to be reduced the nurfing of Children, which is 
the firft and moft natural and neceflfary inftance of 
piety which mothers can (hew to their Babes ; a 



2o6 THE DUTT C.y 

duty from which nothing will excufe, but a difability» 
ficknefs, danger, or public neceffity. 

4, Parents muft provide for their own according to 
their condition, education, and employment; called 

by Saint Pauly a laying up for the Chil" 

xCor. 12. 14. / . * -Vi- V r 

aren, that is, an enablmg them by com- 
petent portions, or good trades, arts or learning, to 
defend themfelves againft the chances of the world, 
that they may not be expofed to temptation, to beg- 
gary, or unworthy arts. And although this n^uftbe 
done without covetoufnefs, without impatient and 
greedy defires of making them rich ; yet it muft be 
done with much care and great affedtion, with all 
reafonable provifion, and according to our power: 
and if we can without fin improve our eftates for 
them, that alfo is part of the duty we owe to God 
for them. And this rule is to extend to all that dc- 
fcend from us, although we have been overtaken in 
a fault, and have unlawful iflue ; they alfo become 
part of our care, yet fo as not to injure the produc- 
tion of the lawful bed. 

5. This duty is to extend to a provifion of condi- 
• KvfjL^tv/xj^rc^ fAif rsi, ifA&f tions aud an eftate of life.* Pa- 
M^S^ i^ x,*w rents muft according to their power 

rih. Eurip.Eiear. ^^d rcafon provide Hufl)ands or 
Me tibi Tyndareus vita Wivcs for their Childrcn.f In 

gravis auctor et annis > 

Tradidit : arbitrium nep- which thcV muft fcCUrC pictV and 
tis habebat avus. rt ^• • jl. 11 rr • \ 

O'vid.inEpift.Hermiones. Religion,^ and the aiFedlion and 
tLiberi fine confenfu lovc of the intcrcftcd pcrfous ; and 

parentum contrahere non r. ^t. r 1 ^ ^U 1 L-* 

dcbcnt. Andromacha after thelc let them make what 
t^r'f^^rSXS - Proyifions they can for other con- 
foondit, patris fui effe venienccs or advantages : ever re- 

fponlalmm fuorum curam . ^ 

habere : et Achilles apud membcnng that they Can do no 






S. 2. OF SUPERIORS. 207 

iniury more affliAive to the chil- Homcnim Regis fjUam 

J ^ ^ ^ ^ fine patris fui confenfu 

dren than to join them with cords noiuit ducere. 11. 10. ''h 

of a dilagreemg atreCtion : it is ^u^* um^t, n^xftc ^ t^ 

like tying a Wolf and a Lamb, or S? "^^ i^^^Z 

.planting a Vine in a Garden of SSi 'i^tlT '^j/^'^r:; 

/Coleworts, Let them be per- nc fiiii ducant uxorcs dtra 

/ ., .* Parentum autnoritatem. 

fuaded with realOnable induce- Simo Xeientianus parat 

^ ^ \ .\ -IT J abdicationem quia Pam- 

ments to make tnem willing, and phiius ciam ipfo duxiflet 
to choofe according to the parent's ^ZTunSS^^^^^^ 
wifli, but at no hand let them be p^entes: At fi fubfe- 

, quuta eft copula, nc te- 

l forCed.§ Better to fit up all night mere refcindantur connu- 
m 1 1 • 1 T^ ^ia multz fuadcnt cau- 

than to go to bed with a Dragon, tiones et pericuia. Liberi 

autem quamdiu fecundum 
leges patrias (ui juris non funt, clandeftinas nuptias fi ineant, peccant contra 
quintum praeceptum, et jus naturale Secundarium. Proprie enim loquendo 
rarentes non habent llwrUty five poteftatem, fed authontatem ; habent jus 
jubendi aut prohibendi, fed non imtum faciendl. Atque etiam ifta authoritas 
exercenda en fecundum aequuin et bonum ; fcil. ut ne morofus et difficilis fit 
Pater. Mater enim vix habet aliquod Juris praeter fuafionis et amoris et 

fratitudinis. Si autem Pater filiam non collocaifet ante 25. annos^ filia nu- 
ere poterat cui voluerat, ex Jure Romanorum. Patrum enim authoritas ma- 
jor aut minor eft ex legibus patriis, et folet extendi ad certam aetatemi et turn 
exfpirat quoad Matrimonium ; et eft major in filias quam filios. Num. 30. 

X Eofdem quos maritus nofte deos et colere (bios uxor debet; fupervacaneis 
autem relig^onibus et alienis fuperftitionibus fores occludere. Nulli enim Deum 
grata funt facra quae mulier clanculum et fiirtim facit. Plutarch, Conjug, Pre- 
cept, § Vocemus puellam, et quaeramus os ejus. Gen. 24.. 57. 



The Duty of Hujbands, &c. 
See Chap. 2. Sedl. 3. 

Rules /or Married Perfons. 

T . Hufbands muft give to their Wives love, main- 
tenance, duty, and the fweetnefs ^^nMri^ah-n 

of converfation ; fand Wives * "^'*'^ '^^ *^} f'^* «^ ^f^ 
muft pay to them all they have or '^^^^' » a*>» y^ «5 y 
can with the mtereft of obedience *'h ss* ifM^p»Um voVuKny 
and reverence :] and they muft be *** ^'^ 



2o8 THE DUTr C.3. 

'Mif oi >««• «n^x' Jx>M complicated in afie<^ons and in- 

xi^p«T» »* iCfUffnm, A^x- tefcfty that there be no diftinftion 

odyff. 6. between them or Mme and 1/um. 

• "Ewrr* ix^ic f-XTf* liy- Aocl if the title be the man's, or 

tk;t>» u^roMfa-my ii^ Cm- the woman's, yet the uie moft be 

^ . , . ,,, common, only the wildom of me 

/o^MT ifdpii^vr man is to regulate all extravagan- 

«aiSx^4f«'* cies and mdilcretions. In otber 

'^ttn^'T^ ""^^ things no queftion is to be made; 
'E. duf^j^xi^ hufurim. ^j^ J jj^gjj. gQojg fliould be as their 

Homer. II. 10. children, not to be divided, but of 
one pofleflion and provifion : whatfoever is othcrwifei 
is not marriage but merchandife. And upon this 

Kxi4.- -xa nxif^f^ra grouttd I fuppofe it was, that S. 
invi^rai ii^oit^ iirocncn. jg^/ commendcd that woman who 

took part of her Hufband's goods to do good works 
withal : for fuppofing him to be unwilling, and that 
the work was his duty or hers alone, or both theirs 
in conjundtion, or of great advantage to either of 
their Souls, and no violence to the fupport of their 
families, fhe hath right to all that : And Abigaihi 
her own right made a coftly prefent to Davids when 
• Laetum cfl'e debet et hcr hufband Ncbal had refiifed it. 
rS^7/«r"'' '"'^'" The Hufband mufl * rule over his 

Namquc cs ci Pater et Wife, aS the Soul doCS OVCr Ac 
Frater,venerandaaue Ma- • - . - -• 

ter : Nee minus facit ad body , obnoxious to the fame fuficr- 

dignitatem viri fi mulier . . « 1 r 1 /• /r 

eum fuum Prgeceptorem, mgs, and Dound by the lame aflcc- 
t^rSi^uf 5«^iiet.^*/^^^ tions, and doing or fuffering bf 
^^^^^' the permiflions and interefl of each 

other : that (as the old Philofopher faid) as the hu- 
mours of the body are mingled with each other in 
the whole fubflances, fo marriage may be a mixture 
of interefts, of bodies, of minds, of friends, a con- 



S. 2. OF SUPERIORS. 209 

jundion ♦ of the whole life, and ^^l^iSl^Sotr; 
the nobleft of friend(hips. But if icntiae. 
after all the fair deportments and + '"t^-i^^t"^'^" ** 
innocent chafte compliances, the '^"^/^^"' ^^^ ^^ 
Hufband be morofe and ungentle, 'at j^ M^ia ma yumtuit 
let the -f' Wife diicourfe thus : If r^i«n luT^, w ^YMS<r» r' 
while I do my duty my Hulband infcri^Matrona fuo fit, 
negleifts me, what will he do if I ^J'^^X^io^. 
negle<a him ? And if (he thinks to ^'^^q"* p«»- 
be feparated by reafon of her Hufband's unchafte life, 
let her confider^ that then the man will be in- 
curably ruined, and her rivals could wifli nothing 
more than that they might pofTefs him alone. 



Tie Duty of Majiers of Families. 

I . The fame care is to extend to all of our family 
in their proportions as to our Children : for as by 
Saint PauFs economy the Heir differs nothing from 
a fervant while he is in minority (fo a fervant fliould 
differ nothing from a child in the fubflantial part of 
the care; and the difference is only in degrees. 
Servants and Maflers are of the fame kindred, of the 
fame nature, and heirs of the &me promifes, and 
therefore * i . mufl be provided with neceflaries for 
their fupport and maintenance. 2. They mufl be 
ufed with mercy. 3. Their work mufl be tolerable 
and merciful. 4. Their reflraints mufl be reafonable. 
5. Their recreations fitting and healthful. 6. Their 
Religion and the interefl of Souls taken care of. 7. 
And Maflcrs mufl correft their fervants with gen- 
tlenefs, prudence and mercy ; not for every flight 
fault, not always^ not with upbraiding and difgrace- 



210 THE DUrr OF SUPERIORS. C. 3. 

ful language, but with fuch only as may cxprefs and 
reprove the fault, and amend the peribn. But in all 
thefe things meafures are to be taken by the contrad 
made, by the Laws and cufloms of the place, by 
the fentence of prudent and merciful men^ and faj 
the cautions and remembrances given us by God; 
fuch as is that written by S. Pau/, [as knowing tiM 
we alfo have a Majier in Heaven.] The Mailer miii 
not be a lion in his houfe, left his power be obeyed, 
and his perfon hated ; his eye be waited on, and his 
bufinefs be negledted in fecret. No Icrvant will do 
his duty, unlefs he make a confcience, or love hif 
Mafter : if he does it not for God's fake or his Mat 
ter's, he will not need to do it always for his own. 

TAe duty of Guardians or Tutors. 

Tutors and Guardians are in the place of Parents; 
and what they are in fidlion of Law, they muft it- 
member as an argument to engage them to do in 
reality of duty. They muft do all the duty of Pa- 
rents, excepting thofe obligations which arc merely 
natural. 

f The duty of Minijiers and Spiritual Guides to tk 
people is offo great burthen^ fo various rules ^^j^ 
tricate^ and bufy caution^ that it requires a diJHMS 
traBate by itfelf 



5.3- OF CIVIL CONTRACrS. . 211 




SECT. III. 

Of Negotiationy or Civil Contrasts. 

HIS part of Jufticc is fuch as depends upon 
the Laws of Man direftly, and upon the 
Laws of God only by confequence and in- 
direct reafbn ; and from civil Laws or private agree- 
ments it is to take its eftimate and meafures : and 
although our duty is plain and eaiy, requiring of us 
honefty in contraAs, fincerity in affirming, fimplicity 
in bargaining, and faithfulnefs in performing ; yet it 
may be helped by the addition of thefe following 
rules and confiderations. 

Rules and Meafures ofjujiice in bargaining. 

1 . In making contrads ufe not many words ; for 
all the bufinefs of a bargain is fummed up in few fen- 
tences: and he that fpeaks leaft, means faireft as 
having fewer opportunities to deceive. 

2. Lie not at all, neither in a little thing nor in a 
great, neither in the fubftance nor in the circum- 
ftance, neither in word nor deed : that is, pretend not 
what is falfe, cover not what is true, and let the 
meafure of your affirmation or denial be the under- 
ftanding of your contractor ; for he that deceives the 
buyer or the feller, by fpeaking what is true in a 
fenfe not intended or underftood by the other, is a 
liar and a thief. For in bargains you are to avoid 
not only what isfalfey but that alfo which deceives. 

3. In prices of bargaining concerning uncertain 
Merchandife, you may buy as cheap ordinarily as you 



212 OF CIVIL CONrRACrS. C.3. 

can, and fell as dear as you can, fo it be i . without 
violence; and 2. when you contrail on equal tenns 
with perfons in all fenfes (as to the matter and ikill 
of bargaining) equal to yourfelf, that is. Merchants 
with Merchants, wife men with wife men, rich with 
rich ; and 3 . when there is no deceit, and no neceffity, 
and no monopoly : For in thefe cafes, viz. when the 
contractors are equal, and no advantage on cither fide, 
both parties are voluntary, and therefore there can 
be no injuftice or wrong to either. But then add alio 
this confideration, that the public be not oppreflcd 
by unreafonable and unjuft rates : for which the fol- 
lowing rules are the beft meafure. 

4. Let your prices be according to that meafiire 
of good and evil which is eftabliflied in the fame and 
common accounts of the wifeft and mofl merciful 
men fkilled in that manufadture or commodity ; and 
the gain fuch which without fcandal is allowed to 
perfons in all the fame circumftances. 

5. Let no prices be heightened by the neceffity or 
unikilfulnefs of the Contradlor : for the lirft is dired 
uncharitablenefs to the perfon, and injuftice in the 
thing (becaufe the man's neceffity could not naturally 
enter into the confideration of the value of the com- 
modity;) and the other is deceit and oppreffion: 
much lefs muft any man make neceffities; asbyen- 
groffing a commodity, by monopoly, by detaining 
corn, or the like indiredl arts ; for fuch perfons arc 
unjuft to all fingle perfons with whom in ftich cafes 
they contradt, and opprefTors of the public. 

6. In intercourfe with others do not do all which 
you may lawfully do ; but keep ibmething within 
thy power : and becaufe there is a latitude of gain in 



S. 3. OF CIVIL CONrRACrS. 213 

buying and felling, take not thou the utmoft penny 
that is lawful, or which thou thinkeft fo; for although 
it be lawful, yet it is not fafe ; and he that gains all 
that he can gain lawfully this year, poflibly next year 
will be tempted to gain ibmething unlawfully, 

7. He that fells dearer, by reafon he fells not for 
ready money, muft increafe his price no higher than 
to make himfelf recompenfe for the lofs which ac- 
cording to the Rules of trade he fuflained by his for- 
bearance, according to common computation, reckon- 
ing in alfo the hazard, which he is prudently, warily 
and charitably to eftimate. But although this be the 
meafure of his juftice, yet becaufe it happens either 
to their friends, or to neceffitous and poor perfonr 
they are in thefe cafes to confider the rules of friend 
fhip and neighbourhood, and the obligations of cha- 
rity, left juftice turn into unmercifulnefs. 

8. No man is to be raifed in his price or rents in 
regard of any accident, advantage Mcrcantia non vuoi n^ 
or difadvantage of his perfon. A ^'"^^ °^ p*«"'^- 
Prince muft be ufed confcionably as well as a com- 
mon perfon, and a beggar be treated juftly as well 
as a Prince ; with this only difference, that to poor 
perfons the utmoft meafure and extent of juftice is 
unmerciful, which to a rich perfon is innocent, be- 
caufe it is juft, and he needs not thy mercy and re- 
miflion. 

9. Let no man for his own poverty become more 
oppreffing and cruel in his bargain, but quietly, mo- 
deftly, diligently and patiently recommend his eftate 
to God, arid follow its intereft, and leave the fuccefs 
to him : for fuch courfes will more probably advance 
his trade, they will certainly procure him a blefling 



214 OF CIVIL CONTRACTS. C. j. 

and a recompenfe, and if they cure not his poverty* 
they will take away the evil of it : and there is no- 
thing elfe in it that can trouble him. 

10. Detain not the wages of the hireling; for every 
degree of detention of it beyond the time is injuftke 
and uncharitablenefsy and grinds his face till tears and 
blood come out : but pay him exadtly according to 
Covenant, or according to his needs. 

1 1 . Religiouily keep all promifes and Covenants, 
though made to your difadvantage, though afterwards 
you perceive you might have been better : and let 
not any precedent aft of yours be altered by any after- 
accident. Let nothing make you break your pro- 
mife, unlefs it be unlawful or impoilible : that is, 
either out of your natural, or out of your civil power, 
yourfelf being under the power of another ; or tbat 
it be intolerably inconvenient to yourfelf, and of 

• surgam ad fponfaiia ^^"^ advantage to anothcr ; or dttt 
quiapromiii,quamvisnoii you have Icavc exDrciled, or rea- 

concoxenm: fcdnonufe- /. . , /. . 

bricitavcro: fubeft cnim fouably prefumcd. 
tacita exceptio. Si potero. ^ . .1 

fi debebo. seaec. 1 2. Let no man take wages or 

Efficc ut idem ftatus fit f £ j^ ^ j^ ^ 

cumexigitur,quiniitcuni *^^" *^* •* TTvr**^ u^h^ a*^ ^^^^ammv*. ^^f 

iiromittcrcm. Dcftitucrc ^jj. cannot with probability undcr- 

le vitas non ent u aliquid ^ ^ J 

intcrvcncrit novi. Eadcm itakc, or in fomc fcnfc profitabtyi 

mihi omnia pne(bi,et idem . . ^ ^ -it 

Aim. Lib, 4. cap, 39. tU and With ealc, or with advantage 
^^^^' manage. Phyficians muft not med- 

dle with defperate difeafes, and known to be incu- 
rable, without declaring their fenfe beforehand ; that 
if the patient pleafe he may entertain him at adven- 
ture, or to do him fbme little eafe. Advocates muft 
deal plainly with their Clients, and tell them the 
true (late and danger of their cafe ; and muft not 
pretend confidence in an evil caufe : but when \A 



S. 2. OF CIVIL CONTRACrS. 215 

hath fo cleared his own innocence, if the Client will 
have collateral and legal advantages obtained by his 
induftry, he may engage his endeavour, provided he 
do no injury to the right Caufe, or any man's perfon. 

1 3 . Let no man appropriate to his own ufe what 
God by a fpecial mercy, or the Re- B«flkvoi. in exam, 
public hath made common; for ^p^- 

that is both againft Juftice and Charity too ; and by 
miraculous accidents God hath declared his difplea- 
fure againft fuch enclofure. When the Kings of 
Naples enclofed the Gardens of Oenotria, where the 
beft Manna of Calabria defcends, that no man might 
gather it without paying tribute, the Manna ceafed, 
till the tribute was taken off; and then it came again : 
and fo, when after the third trial, the Princes found 
they could not have that in proper which God made 
to be common, they left it as free as God gave it. 
The like happened in Epire, when caeiiusRhod. 1. 9.C. 1%. 
Lxfimachus laid an impoft upon the a*^"* ^^^p"*^^' ^' ^' 
Tragafaan Salt, it vaniflied, till Lyjimachus left it 
public. And when the Procurators of King Anti- 
gonus impofed a rate upon the fick people that came 
to Edepfum to drink the waters which were lately 
Iprung, and were very healthftil, inftantly the waters 
dried up, and the hope of gain peri(hed. 

The fum of all is in thefe words of S. Pauly [Let 
no man go beyond and defraud his bro- 
tner tn any matter, becauje the Lord ts 
the avenger of all fuch. ^ And our bleiled Saviour in 
the enumerating the duties of juftice, befides the 
Commandment of \Do not fteal] adds 
[Defraud not] forbidding (as a diftindl , cor. 6. «! 
explication of the old Law) the tacit ^^' "• »9. 



2i6 OF CIVIL CONrRACrS. C-3. 

and fecret theft of abufing our Brother in Civil Cod- 
tracts. And it needs no other arguments to enforce 
this caution, but only that the Lord hath undertaken 
to avenge all fuch perfons. And as he alwajrs doei 
it in the great day of recompenfes ; io very often lie 
does it here, by making the unclean portion of in- 
juflice to be as a Canker-worm eating up all tbe 
other increafe : it procures beggary, and a declining 
eflate, or a caitiff curfed fpirit, an ill name» the cur& 
of the injured and oppreiled perfon, and a Fool or t 
prodigal to be his heir. 




Chi non yuoI rendere, 
ia mal a prendere. 



SECT. IV. 

Of Rejiitution. 

ESTITUTION is that part of Juftice to 
which a man is obliged by a precedent 
Contra(ft, or a foregoing faxAi, by his own 
adt or another man's, either with, or without his will. 

He that borrows is bound to pay, 
and much more he that ftealsor 
cheats. For if he that borrows and pays not when 
he is able, be an unjud perfon and a robber, becaufe 
he poflefles another man's goods, to the right owner's 
prejudice ; then he that took them at firft without 
leave is the fame thing in every indant of his poffcf- 
fion, which the Debtor is after the time in which 
he fhould and could have made payment. For in all 
fins we are to diftinguifh the traniient or paffing ad 
from the remaining effedt or evil. The adtof fteal- 
ing was foon over, and cannot be undone, and for it 
the finner ii only anfwerable to God, or his Vice- 



S. 4. OF RESTITUTION. 217 

gerent^ and he is in a particular manner appointed 
to expiate it by fufFering puni(hment, and repenting, 
and afking pardon, and judging and condemning 
himfelf, doing afts of juftice and charity, in oppofi- 
tion and contradiction to that evil adtion. But be- 
caufe in the cafe of flealing there is an injury done 
to our neighbour, and the evil ftill remains after the 
action is paft, therefore for this we are accountable 
to our neighbour, and we are to take the evil off from 
him which we brought upon him, or elfe he is an 
injured perfon, a fufFerer all the while : and that any 
man fhould be the worfe for me, o. - 1 - ^ 

. Si tua culpa datum cit 

and my direct act, and by my m- damnum, jure fupcr hu 

. • • n ^i_ 1 /• •^ latisfaccrc te oportet. 

tention, is agamft the rule of equity, '^ 

of juftice and of charity ; I do not that to others 
which I would have done to myfelf, for I grow 
richer upon the ruins of his fortune. Upon this 
ground, it is a determined rule in Divinity, Our Jin 
can never be pardoned till we have rejiored what we 
unjujily tooky or wrongfully detain: reftored it (I mean) 
aftually, or in purpofe and defire, which we muft 
really perform when we can. And this dodrine, be- 
fides its evident and apparent reafonablenefs, is de- 
rived from the exprefs words of Scripture, reckon- 
ing Rejlitution to be a part of Repentance^ neceflary 
in orJer to the remiffion of our fins. [If the wicked 
rejlore the pledge ^ give again that he had 
robbed y &c., he Jhall furely livCj be "-^b'S- 
Jhall not die :] ♦ The practice of this part of Juftice 
is to be direfted by the following Rules. 



2i8 OF RESTITUTION. C.3. 



Ru/es of mating Refiitution. 

1 . Whofoever is an efFedlive real caufe of doing 
his Neighbour wrong, by what inflrument focver he 
does it (whether by commanding or encouraging it, 

• 'o ykf iir«,w^-c Wr «- ^y couufelling or commending* it, 

wfuMira^Mf -n w t5» ^y afting it, or not + hindering: it 

Totiias apud Procop. when he might and ought, by con- 

Qui laudat fcrvum fti- cealiug it or receiving it) is bound 

& V«cr laudiJSo to make reftitution to his Neigh- 

augcri malum. ^Qm- . jf without him the injury 

UlptoH. lib. I. cap, de ^ •' ' 

sem)o corrupto. had not bccn done, but by him or 

^r::]^r:t:r^^ His amftance it was. For by tbc 

^t:^;:' i^L." ^^^^ '•eafon that every one of thcfc 

Nicct. choniat. in Mi- is guilty of the fin, and is caufe of 

chael. Comnen. i • • t 

Sic syri ab Amphyai- the injury, by the fame they arc 

onibus judicio damnati, u -«J -«. i ^" L-. 

quiapiriticamnonprohi' Dound to make reparation; bc- 

bucruntcumpoterant. ^^^f^ ^y ^{xm his Ncighbour is 

made worfe, and therefore is to be put into that ftatc 
from whence he was forced. And fuppofe that tbou 
haft perfuaded an injury to be done to thy Neighbour, 
which others would have perfuaded if thou hadft 
not, yet thou art ftill obliged, becaufe thou really 
didft caufe the injury ; juft as they had been obliged 
if they had done it : and thou art not at all the lefs 
bound by having perfons as ill inclined as thou wcrt. 

2. He that commanded the injury to be done, is 
firft bound ; then he that did it ; and after thefe, 
they alio are obliged who did io aflift, as without 
them the thing would not have been done. If iatis- 
faiftion be made by any of the former, the latter is 
tied to repentance, but no reftitution : but if the in- 



S. 4. OF RESTITUTION. 219 

jured pcrfon be not righted, every one of them is 
wholly guilty of the injuflice, and therefore bound 
to reftitution fingly and entirely. 

7. Whofoever intends a little ^ Etian^ partem damni 
^ ^*^ ^ dare noluifti, in totum 

injury to his Neighbour, and adls quafi prudcns dcdcns, tc 

. . I • .. • nendus es. Ex toto enim 

It, and by it a greater evil acci- noiuiffe <kbet qui impm- 
dentally comes, he is obliged to '^S^tSumfS:^- 
make an entire reparation of all the """^ ** voiuBtario cen- 

A fetur pro voluntano. 

I injury, of that which he intended, strabo. 

j ^nd of that which he intended not, but yet aded by 
I tis own inflrument going further than he at firft pur- 
pofed it. He that fet fire on a plane-Tree to fpitc 
his Neighbour, and the plane-Tree fet fire on his 
Neighbour's Houfe, is bound to pay for all the lois, 
becaufe it did all arife from his own ill intention. It 
is like murder committed by a drunken perfon, invo- 
luntary infome of the effeSiy but voluntary in the other 
parts of it, and in all the caufe ; and therefore the 
guilty perfon is anfwerable for all of it. And when 
Ariarathes the Cappadocian King had but in wan- 
tonnefs flopped the mouth of the river Melanus, al- 
though he intended no evil, yet Euphrates being 
fwelled by that means, and bearing away fome of the 
ftrand of Cappadocia, did great fpoil to the Phrygians 
and Galatiansy he therefore by the Roman Senate was 
condemned in three hundred talents towards repara- 
tion of the damage. Much rather therefore when 
the lefler part of the evil was diredtly intended. 
4. He that hinders a charitable perfon from giving 
, alms to a poor man is tied to reflitution, if he hin- 
; dered him by fraud or violence ; becaufe it was a 
right which the poor man had when the good man 
had defigned and re(blved it, and the fraud or vio- 



220 OF RESTITUTION. C.y 

lence hinders the tffcA, but not the purpofc : and 
therefore he who ufcd the deceit or the force is in- 

nx«.««r ^^^B^ J^"o^s, and did damage to the 
w~cxfV*«^«'i»ixiufli^f. poor man. But if the alms were 

£th. 1. 5. c. 4. • 

hindered only by entreaty, the hin- 
derer is not tied to reflitution, becaufe entreaty took 
not liberty away from the giver, but left him ftill 
Mafter of his own a<ft, and he had power to alter his 
purpofe, and fo long there was no injuftice done. The 
fame is the cafe of a Teftator giving a legacy either 
by kindnefs or by promife and common right. He 
that hinders the charitable Legacy by fraud or vio- 
lence, or the due Legacy by entreaty, is equally 
obliged to reftitution. The reafon of the latter part 
of this cafe is, becaufe he that entreats or perfuades 
to a fin is as guilty as he that adts it : and if without 
his perfuafion the fin and the injury would not be 
adted, he is in his kind the entire caufe, and there- 
fore obliged to repair the injury as much as the pcr- 
fon that does the wrong immediately. 

5. He that refufes to do any part of his duty (to 
which he is otherwife obliged) without a bribe, is 
bound to reftore that money, becaufe he took it in 
his Neighbour's wrong, and not as a falary for his 
labour, or a reward of his wifdom, (for his ftipcnd 
hath paid all that) or he hath obliged himielf to do 
it by his voluntary undertaking. 

6. He that takes any thing from his Neighbour 
which was Juftly forfeited, but yet takes it not as a 
Minifter of Juftice, but to fatisfy his own revenge 
or avarice, is tied to repentance, but not to reftitu- 
tion. For my Neighbour is not the worfe for my 
a(fl, for thither the law and his own demerits bore 



S. 4. OF RESTITUTION. 221 

him ; but becaufe I took the forfeiture indiredlly I 
am anfwerable to God for my unhandfome, unjuft, 
or uncharitable^ circumftances. Thus Philip of Ma- 
cedon was reproved by Arijiides for deftroying the 
Phocenfes ; becaufe although they deferved it, yet he 
did it not in profecution of the Law of Nations, but 
to enlarge his own dominions. 
^ 7. The heir of an obliged perfon is not bound to 
make refUtution, if the obligation pafled only by a 
peribnal a£t ; but if it pafled from his perfon to his 
eflate, then the eftate paiTes with all its burden. If 
the Father by perfuading his neighbour to do injuf- 
ticc be bound to reftore, the adlion is extinguifhed 
by the death of the Father, becaufe it was only the 
Father's fin that bound him, which cannot direftly 
bind the fbn ; therefore the fon is free. And this is 
fb in all perfonal aiftions, unlefs where the civil Law 
interpofes and alters the cafe. 

^ TAe/e Rules concern the perfons that are obliged to 
make Rejiitution : the other circumjlances of it are 
thus defcribed. 

8 . He that by fadt, or word, or fign, either frau- 
dulently or violently does hurt to his Neighbour's 
body, life, goods, good name, friends, or Soul, is 
bound to make reflitution in the feveral inftances, 
according as they are capable to be made. In all 
thefe inftances, we muft feparate entreaty and entice- 
ments from deceit or violence. If I pcrfuade my 
Neighbour to commit adultery, I ftill leave him or 
her in their own power : and though I am anfwer- 
able to God for my fin, yet not to my Neighbour. 



222 OF RESTITUTION. C. 3. 

.^•ixu^i^^fc. For I made her to be willing; yet 
•un'c. Epia. {he was willing,* that is, the fame 

^rl"^il:^i:^iX at laft as I was at firft. But if I 
Non licet fuffurari men- havc ufed fraud, and made her to 

tcm vd Ssunantani. 

R. MaimoM. Com. Etk. bclieve a lie y upon which confi- 
dence fhe did the a£t, and without fhe would not, 
(as if I tell a woman her Hufband is dead^ or in- 
tended to kill her, or is himfelf an adulterous man) 
or if I ufe violence, that is, either force her or 
threaten her with death, or a grievous wound, or 
anything that takes her from the liberty of her 
choice, I am bound to reflitution, that is, to reftorc 
her to a right underftanding of things and to a full 
liberty, by taking from her the deceit or the violence. 

9. An adulterous perfon is tied to reftitution of the 
injury, fo far as it is reparable, and can be made to 
the wronged perfon ; that is, to make proviiion for 
the children begotten in unlawful embraces, that 
they may do no injury to the legitimate by receiving 
a common portion : and if the injured perfon do ac- 
count of it, he muft fatisfy him with money for the 
wrong done to his bed. He is not tied to offer this, 
becaufe it is no proper exchange ; but he is bound 
to pay it if it be reafonably demanded : for every 
man hath juftice done him, when himfelf is fatisfied, 
though by a word, or an adtion, or a penny. 

10. He that hath killed a man is bound to rcfti- 

d mr/ymXi rm»' j^Mrni, UaUCC tO thc ChlldrCU aud titZX FC" 

urai. ' ^^^ ^^ lati ves of the deceafed as they have 

Mich.Ephcf.ad5Eth. j^^ ^^ j^j^ j^^^^ coufidcring and 

allowing for all circumflances of the man's age, and 
health, and probability of living. And thus Hercuks 




S. 4. OF RESTITUTION. 223 

is laid to have made expiation for the death of Ip Ait us 
whom he flew, by paying a muldt to his children, 

1 1 . He that hath really leflened the fame of his 
neighbour by fraud or violence, is e. ,r. . ^ . . 

^ ^ . I . Sic Vivianus refipuit de 

bound to reftore it by its proper injufta accufatione : apud 
'A. ^ /• r r m Cafliodo. 4. 41. 

inltruments ; luch as are confelnon 

of his fault, giving teftimony of his innocence or 

worth, doing him honour, or (if that will do it, and 

both parties agree) by money, which anfwers all 

things. 

1 2. He that hath wounded his neighbour is tied 
to the expenfes of the Surgeon and other incidences, 
and to repair whatever lofs he fuilains by his difabi- 
lity to work or trade : and the fame is in the cafe of 
falie imprifonment, in which cafes only the real effed: 
and remaining detriment are to be mended and re- 
paired : for the a£tion itfelf is to be punifhed or re- 
pented of, and enters not into the queftion of refti- 
tution. But in thefe and all other cafes the injured 
peribn is to be reflored to that perfedt and good con- 
dition from which he was removed by my fraud or 
violence, fo far as is poflible. Thus a ravifher muft 
repair the temporal detriment or injury done to the 
maid, and give her a dowry, or marry her if fhe de- 
firc it. For this reftores her into that capacity of 
being a good wife, which by the injury was loft, as 
far as it can be done. 

13. He that robbeth his Neighbour of his goods, 
or detains any thing violently or fraudulently, is 
bound not only to reftore the principal, but all its 
fruits and emoluments which would have accrued to 
the right owner during the time of their being de- 
tained. * By proportion to thefe rules, we may judge 



224 OF RESTITUTION. C.3. 

of the obligation that lies upon all forts of injuriops 
perfbns : the facrilegious^ the detainers of tithes, 
cheaters of men's inheritances, unjufl Judges, falfe 
witnefles and accufers, thofe that do iraudulendy or 
violently bring men to fin, that force men to drink, 
that laugh at and difgrace virtue, that perfiiade fer- 
vants to run away, or commend fuch purpofes, vio- 
lent perfecutors of Religion in any inflance ; and all 
of the fame nature, 

14. He that hath wronged fo many, or in that 
manner, (as in the way of daily trade) that he knowi 
not in what meafure he hath done it, or who they 
are, mufl redeem his fault by arms and largefles to 
the poor, according to the value of his wrongful 
dealing as near as he can proportion it. { Better it is 
to go begging to Heaven than to go to Hell laden 
with the fpoils of rapine and injuftice. Vi 

15. The order of paying the debts of contrador 
reftitution are in fome inftances fet down by the dvil 
Laws of a kingdom, in which cafes their rule is to 
be obferved. In deftitution or want of fuch rules, 
we are i . to obferve the neceffity of the Creditor, 
2. then the time of the delay, and 3. the fpedal 
obligations of friendship or kindnefs ; and according 
to thefe in their feveral degrees make our refUtudon, 
if we be not able to do all that we fhould : but if we 
be, the befl rule is to do it fo foon as we can, taking 
our accounts in this as in our human anions, ac- 
cording to prudence, and civil or natural conveniences 
or pofilbilities ; only fecuring thefe two things, i. 
That the duty be not wholly omitted, and 2. That 
it be not deferred at all out of covetoufnefs, or any 
other principle that is vicious. Remember that the 



V 



S. 4. OF RESTITUTION. 225 

fame day in which Zaccheus made reftitution to all 
whom he had injured^ the fame day 
Chrift himfelf pronounced that falva- * '9- 9- 

tion was come to his houfe. 

1 6. But befides the obligation arifing from con- 
tradl or default, there is ♦one of ano- . ^ • d 
ther fort which comes from kindnefs 
and the ads of charity and friendfhip. He that does 
me a favour hath bound me to make him a return 
of thankfulnefs. The obligation comes not by cove- • 
nant, not by his own exprefs intention, but by the 
nature of the thing; and is a duty fpringing up 
within the fpirit of the obliged perfon, to whom it 
is more natural to love his friend, and to do good for 
good, than to return evil for evil : becaufe a man 
may forgive an injury, but he muft never forget a 
good turn. For every thing that is excellent, and 
every thing that is profitable, whatfoever is good in 
itfelf, or good to me, cannot but be beloved; and 
what we love we naturally cherifh and do good to. 
He therefore that refixfes to do good to them whom 
he is bound to love, or to love that which did him 
good, is unnatural and monftrous in his affections, 
and thinks all the world born to minifler to him,, 
with a greedinefs worfe than that of the fea, which 
although it receives all rivers into itfelf, yet it fur- 
nifhes the clouds and fprings with a return of all they 
need. 

Our duty to Benefadtors is to efleem and love their 
perfons, to make them proportionable returns of fer- 
vice or duty, or profit^ according as we can, or as they 
need, or as opportunity prefents itfelf, and according 
to the greatnefles of their kindnefs, and to pray to 



226 OF RESTITUTION. C.3. 

God to make them recompenfe for all the good they 
have done to us; which laft office is alfo requifite 
to be done for our Creditors, who in charity have 
relieved our wants. 



Prayers to be said in relation to the several 
Obligations and Offices of Justice. 

ji Prayer for the Grace of Obedience^ to be /aid bj 

all perfons under Command. 

O ETERNAL God, great Ruler of Men and 
Angels, who haft conftituted all things in a 
wonderful order, making all the creatures fubjed to 
man, and one man to another, and all to thee, die 
laft link of this admirable chain being faftened to 
the foot of thy throne ; teach me to obey all thofc 
whom thou haft fet over me, reverencing their per- 
fons, fubmitting indifferently to all their lawfiil com- 
mands, cheerfully undergoing thofe burthens which 
the public wifdom and neceftity fhall impoie upon 
me ; at no hand murmuring againft Government, left 
the fpirit of pride and mutiny, of murmur and diA 
order enter into me, and confign me to the portion 
of the difobedient and rebellious, of the defpifers of 
dominion and revilers of dignity. Grant this, O holy 
God, for his fake who for his obedience to the Fa- 
ther hath obtained the glorification of eternal ages, 
our Lord and Saviour ^efus Chrift. Amen. 

Prayers for Kings and all Magijirates^for our Parents 
Jpiritual and natural y are in the following Litanies 
at the end of the fourth Chapter. 



AdC.^. THE DUTIES OF JUSriCE. 227 

A Prayer to be /aid by SubjeBs^ when their Land is 
invaded and overrun by barbarous or wicked people^ 
enemies of the Religion ^ or the Government. 

I. 

O ETERNAL God, thou alone ruleft in the 
Kingdoms of men, thou art the great God of 
battles and recompenfes, and by thy glorious wiiHom, 
by thy Almighty power, and by thy fecret providence, 
doft determine the events of w^ar, and the iffues of 
human counfels, and the returns of peace and vidtory : 
now at laft be pleafed to let the light of thy counte- 
nance, and the eiFefts of a glorious mercy and a gra- 
cious pardon return to this Land. Thou feeft how 
great evils we fufFer under the power and tyranny of 
war ; and although we fubmit to and adore thy ju A 
tice in our fuiFerings, yet be pleafed to pity our mi- 
fery, to hear our complaints, and to provide us of 
remedy againfl our prefent calamities : let not the 
defenders of a righteous caufe go away afhamed, nor 
our couniels be for ever confounded, nor our parties 
defeated, nor Religion fuppreifed, nor learning dif- 
countenanced, and we be fpoiled of all the exterior 
ornaments, inftruments and advantages of piety, 
which thou haft been pleafed formerly to minifter 
to our infirmities, for the interefts of Learning and 
Religion. Amen. 

II. 

WE confefs dear God, that we have deferved to 
be totally extinft and feparate from the Com- 
munion of Saints, and the comforts of Religion, to 



228 PRATERS RELATING TO AdC.]. 

be made fervants to ignorant, unjuft and inferior pcr- 
fons, or to fufFer any other calamity which thou (halt 
allot us as the inftrument of thy anger, whom wc 
have fo often provoked to wrath and jealoufy. Lord, 
we humbly lie down under the burthen of thy rod, 
begging of thee to remember our infirmities, and no 
more to remember our fins, to fupport us with thy 
flafF, to lift us up with thy hand, to refrefli us with 
thy gracious eye : and if a fad cloud of temporal in- 
felicities muft flill encircle us, open unto us the 
window of Heaven, that with an eye of faith and 
hope we may fee beyond the cloud, looking upon 
thofe mercies which in thy fecret providence and 
admirable wifdom thou defigneft to all thy fervants, 
from fuch unlikely and fad beginnings. Teach us 
diligently to do all our duty, and cheerfully to fub- 
mit to all thy will ; and at lafl be gracious to thy 
people that call upon thee, that put their trufl in 
thee, that have laid up all their hopes in the bofom 
of God, that befides thee have no helper. Amen. 

III. 

PLACE a Guard of Angels about the perfon of 
the KING, and immure him with the defence 
of thy right hand, that no unhallowed arm may do 
violence to him. Support him with aids from 
Heaven in all his battles, trials and dangers, that he 
may in every inflant of his temptation become dearer 
to thee, and do thou return to him with mercy and 
deliverance. Give unto him the hearts of all his 
people, and put into his hand a prevailing rod of iron, 
a fceptre of power, and a fword of Juflice ; and en- 
able him to defend and comfort the Churches under 
his protcdlion. 



AdC.^. THE DUTIES OF JUSTICE. 229 

IV. 

BLESS all his Friends, Relatives, Confederates and 
Lieges ; diredt their Counfels, unite their hearts, 
ftrengthen their hands, blefs their adtions. Give 
unto them holinefs of intention, that they may with 
much candour and ingenuity purfue the caufe of God 
and the King. Sanftify all the means and inftru- 
ments of their purpofes, that they may not with 
cruelty, injuflice or oppreflion proceed towards the 
end of their juft defires : and do thou crown all their 
endeavours with a profperous event, that all may co- 
operate to, and adlually produce thofe great mercies 
which we beg of thee ; Honour and fafety to our 
Sovereign, defence of his juft rights, peace to his 
people, eftabliftiment and promotion to Religion, 
advantages and encouragement to Learning and holy 
living, deliverance to all the oppreffed, comfort to 
all thy faithful people, and from all thefe, glory to 
thy holy Name. Grant this, O KING of Kings, 
for his fake by whom thou haft configned to us all 
thy mercies and promifes, and to whom thou haft 
given all power in Heaven and Earth, our Lord and 
Saviour yejiis Chrift. Amen. 

A Prayer to be f aid by Kings or Magijirates^for 

themf elves and their People. 

OMY God and King, thou ruleft in the King- 
doms of men ; by thee Kings reign and Princes 
decree juftice : thou haft appointed me under thy- 
felf ♦ [and under my Prince] to . ^^^^^ ^^^ ^^ ^ 
govern this portion of thy Church added by a DeUgate or m- 
according to the Laws of Religion ''^*^' 
and the Commonwealth. O Lord, I am but an in- 



230 PRATERS RELATING TO AdC.^. 

firm man, and know not how to decree certain fen- 
tences without erring in judgment : but do thou give 
to thy fervant an underftanding heart to judge this 
people, that I may difcern between good and cviL 
Caufe me to walk before thee and all the people in 
truth and righteoufnefs, and in fincerity of heart, that 
I may not regard the perfon of the mighty, nor be 
afraid of his terror, nor defpife the perfon of the poor, 
and reject his petition ; but that doing juilice to all 
men, I and my people may receive mercy of thee, 
peace and plenty in our days, and mutual love, duty 
and correfpondence, that there be no leading into 
captivity, no complaining in our ftreets ; but we may 
fee the Church in profperity all our days, and Reli- 
gion eflablifhed and increafing. Do thou eflabliih 
the houfe of thy Servant, and bring me to a partici- 
pation of the glories of thy Kingdom, for his fake 
who is my Lord and King, the holy and ever-bleffcd 
Saviour of the world, our Redeemer Jefus. Amen. 

A Prayer to be /aid by Parents for their Children. 

O ALMIGHTY and moft merciful Father, who 
hafl promifed children as a reward to the 
righteous, and haft given them to me as a teftimony 
of thy mercy, and an engagement of my duty ; be 
pleafed to be a Father unto them, and give them 
healthful bodies, underftanding Souls, and fandified 
Ipirits, that they may be thy fervants and thy chil- 
dren all their days. Let a great mercy and provi- 
dence lead them through the dangers and temptations 
and ignorances of their youth, that they may never 
run into folly, and the evils of an unbridled appetite. 



AdC.^. THE DUTIES OF JUSTICE. 231 

So order the accidents of their lives, that by good 
education, careful Tutors, holy example, innocent 
company, prudent counfel, and thy retraining grace, 
their duty to thee may be fecured in the midft of a 
crooked and untoward generation : and if it feem 
good in thy eyes, let me be enabled to provide con- 
veniently for the fupport of their perfons, that they 
may not be deititute and miferable in my death ; or 
if thou {halt call me off from this World by a more 
timely fummons, let their portion be, thy care, mer- 
cy, and providence over their bodies and Souls : and 
may they never live vicious lives, nor die violent or 
untimely deaths ; but let them glorify thee here writh 
a free obedience, and the duties of a v^hole life ; that 
when they have ferved thee in their generations, and 
have profited the Chriflian Commonwealth, they 
may be co-heirs with ye/us in the glories of thy 
eternal Kingdom, through the fame our Lord Je/iis 
ChrifL jimen. 

A Prayer to be /aid by Majiers of Families , Curates^ 
Tutors^ or other obliged Perfons ^ for their Charges. 

O ALMIGHTY God, merciful and gracious, 
have mercy upon my Family [or Pupils, or 
Parifhioners, ficc.] and all committed to my charge : 
&ndtiiy them with thy grace, preferve them with 
thy providence, guard them from all evil by the cus- 
tody of Angels, direct them in the ways of peace and 
holy Religion by my Miniftry and the condudt of thy 
moft holy Spirit, and confign them all with the par- 
ticipation of thy bleffings and graces in this World, 
with healthful bodies, with good underflandings, and 



232 PRATERS RELATING TO AdC.i. 

fandtified fpirits, to a full fruition of thy glories here- 
after, through Jefus Chrift our Lord. 

A Prayer to be /aid by Merchants^ Tradejmen^ and 

Handicraft/men. 

O ETERNAL God, thou Fountain of jufticc, 
mercy and benedidtion, who by my education 
and other efFedts of thy Providence haft c^led me to 
this profeffion, that by my induftry I may in my fmaU 
proportion work together for the good of myfelf and 
others ; I humbly beg thy grace to guide me in my 
intention, and in the tranfadtion of my affairs, that I 
may be diligent, juft and faithful : and give me thy 
favour, that this my labour may be accepted by thcc 
as a part of my necefTary duty : and give me thy 
bleffing to affift and profper me in my Calling, to 
fuch meafures as thou fhalt in mercy choofe for me : 
and be pleafed to let thy holy Spirit be for ever prc- 
fent with me, that I may never be given to covetouf- 
nefs and fordid appetites, to lying and faliehood, or 
any other bafe, indired: and beggarly arts ; but give 
me prudence, honefty and Chriftian fincerity, that 
my Trade may be fandtified by my Religion, my 
labour by my intention and thy bleffing ; that when 
I have done my portion of work thou haft allotted 
me, and improved the talent thou haft entrufted to 
me, and ferved the Commonwealth in my capacity, 
I may receive the mighty price of my high calling, 
which I expedl and beg, in the portion and inherit- 
ance of the ever bleffed Saviour and Redeemer y^s/ir. 
Amen. 



AdC. 3. THE DUTIES OF JUSTICE. 233 

ji Prayer to be /aid by Debtors^ and all Perfons 
obliged^ whether by Crime or Contrast. 

O ALMIGHTY God, who art rich unto all, the 
treafury and fountain of all good, of all juf- 
tice, and all mercy, and all bounty, to whom we 
owe all that we are, and all that we have, being thy 
Debtors by reafon of our fins, and by thy own gra- 
cious contract made with us in Jefus Chrift ; teach 
me in the firft place to perform all my Obligations 
to thee, both of duty and thankfulnefs ; and next 
enable me to pay my duty to all my friends, and my 
debts to all my Creditors, that none be made mifera- 
ble or lefiened in his eftate by his kindnefs to me, 
or traffic with me. Forgive me all thofe fins and 
irregular adtions by which I entered into debt further 
than my neceflity required, or by which fuch necef- 
fity was brought upon me : but let not them fufFer 
by occafion of my fin. Lord, reward all their kind- 
nefs into their bofoms, and make them recompenfe 
where I cannot, and make me very willing in all 
that I can, and able for all that I am obliged to : or 
if it feem good in thine eyes to afflift me by the con- 
tinuance of this condition, yet make it up by fome 
means to them, that the prayer of thy fervant may 
obtain of thee at leaft to pay my debt in blefllngs. 
Amen. 

y. 

LORD, lanAify and forgive all that I have tempted 
to evil by my difcourfe or my example : in- 
ftrudt them in the right way whom I have led to 
error, and let me never run further on the fcore of 



234 "J^HE DUTIES OF JUSTICE. AdC.]. 

iin ; but do thou blot out all the evils I have d(»c 
b]^theft)onge of thy jpaffion, and the blood of dif 
Crofs; and give me a deep and an excellent repeo- 
tance^ and a free and a gracious pardon, that thoa 
mayeft anfwer for me, O Lord, and enable me to 
ftand upright in judgment ; for in thee, O Lord, 
have I trufted, let me never be confounded. Pity 
me and inftrudl me, guide me and fupport me, par- 
don me and fave me, for my fweet Saviour Jefus 
Chrift's fake. Amen. 

A Prayer for Patron and BenefaSlors. 

O ALMIGHTY God, thou Fountain of all good, 
of all excellency both to Men and Angek^ ex- 
tend thine abundant favour and loving-kindnefi to 
my Patron, to all my Friends and Benefadors : rc- 
vvrard them and make them plentiful recompenie £>r 
all the good which from thy merciful providence 
they have conveyed unto me. Let the light of thy 
countenance fhine upon them, and let them never 
come into any afHiAion or fadnefs, but fuch as may 
be an inflrument of thy glory and their eternal com- 
fort. Forgive them all their fins ; let thy Divincft 
Spirit preferve them from all deeds of Darkneis. 
Let thy miniftering Angels guard their peribns fixwn 
the violence of the fpirits of Darknefs. And thou 
who knoweft every degree of their neceflity by thy 
infinite wifdom, give fupply to all their needs by thy 
glorious mercy, preferving their perfons, fan^tifying 
their hearts, and leading them in the ways of rightc- 
oufnefs, by the waters of comfort, to the land of eter- 
nal refl and glory, through Jefus Chrifl our Lord. 
Amen. 



CHAPTER IV. 

OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 

ELIGION in a large fenfe doth fignify 
the whole duty of Man, comprehending 
in it Juftice, Charity, and Sobriety : be- 
caufe all thefe being commanded by 
God, they become a part of that honour and worfhip 
which we are bound to pay to him. And thus the 
word is ufed in S. yames. Pure Religion 
and undefiled before God and the Father ""** '" *'" 
is tbist To 'uijit the fatherlefi and widows in their af- 
JliSiion, and to keep himfelf unfpotted from the world. 
But in a more rei^rained fenfe it is taken for that part 
of duty which particularly relates to God in our wor- 
fhippings and adoration of him, in confeffing his ex- 
cellencies, loving his perfon, admiring his goodnefs, 
believing his Word, and doing all that which may 
in a proper and direi^ manner do him honour. It 
contains the duties of the firll Table only, and fo it 
is called Godlinefs^ and is by S. Faul 
diftinguiihed from fuftice and Sobriety. 
In this fenie I am now to explicate the parts of it. 



236 OF RELIGION. C.f 

0/ the internal ABions of Religion. 

Thofe I call the internal adions of Religion, in 
which the Soul only is employed, and miniAers fo 
God in the fpecial adtions of Faith^ Hope^ and Chi- 
rity. Faith believes the Revelations of God : Hofe 
expefts his Promifes : and Charity loves his excel- 
lencies and Mercies. Faith gives our underffaud- 
ing to God : Hope gives up all the Pafiions and af- 
fedtions to Heaven and heavenly things : and Charitj 
gives the Will to the fervice of God. Faith is op- ' 
pofed to Infidelity, Hope to Defpair, Charity ftJ en- 
mity and Hoflility ; and thefe three fandtify the whk 
Man, and make our duty to God and obedience to 
his Commandments to be chofen^ reafonable^ and k- 
lightfuly and therefore to be entire^ perfevering^ and 
univerfaL 



SECT. I. 

Of Faith. 

The ABs and Offices of Faith are, 

I. 

O believe everything which God hath rc-j 
vealed to us ; and when once we are con- ' 
vinced that God hath fpoken it, to make 

Demus Deum aiiquid ^^ farther enquiry, but humbly 
poffc quod nos fat^ur ^o fubmit, cvcr remembering that 

invcftigarc non poflc. ^ ^ 

s,Aug,L^i.c. j.de there are lome thmgs which our 
'^ ' underftanding cannot fathom nor 

fearch out their depth. 




S. I. OF FAITH. 237 

2. To believe nothing concerning God but what I 
IS honouraPle and excellent, as knowing that belief 
to be no honouring of (joi which entertains of him 
any difhonourable thoughts. Faith is the parent of 
Charity, and whatfoever Faith entertains muft be apt / 
to produce love to God : but he ^hat believes God U 
to be cruel or unmercifu l, or a rejoicer i n the una-l I 
voidable damnation of the greateft part^oT^man- \ "^ 
jcinB^, o r that lie ipea£s one thing and privately means 
another, thinks e vil thoughts concerning God, and 
fuch as for which we fhould hate a man, and there- I 
fore are great enemies of Faith, being apt to deftroy / 
Charity. Our Faith concerning God muft be as him- 
felf hath revealed and defcribed his own excellencies: 
and in our dilcourfes we muft remove from him all 
imperfedtion, and attribute to him all excellency. 

3. To give ourfelves wholly up to Chrift in heart 1 
and defire, to become Difciples of his doctrine with 
choice, (befides conviftion) being in the prefence of 
God but as Idiots, that is, without any principles of 
our own to hinder the truth of God ; but fucking in 
greedily all that God hath taught us, believing it in- 
finitely, and loving to believe it. For this is an aft 
of Love refleifted upon Faith, or an aft of Faith 
leaning upon Love. 

4. To believe all God's promifes, and that what- 
foever is promifed in Scripture ihall on God's part 
be as furely performed as if we had it in pofleffion. 
This aft makes us to rely upon God with the fame 
confidence as we did on our Parents when we were 
children, when we made no doubt but wha|fbever we 
needed we fhould have it if it were in their power. 

5. To believe alfo the conditions of the promife. 



238 OF FAITH. C.f 

or that part of the revelation which concerns our 
duty. Many are apt to believe the Article of rcmif- 
fion of finsy but they believe it without the condition 
of repentance, or the fruits of holy life : and that is 
to believe the Article otherwife than Chd intended 
it. For the Covenant of the Gofpel is the great ob- 
jeft of Faith, and that fuppofes our duty to anfwcr 
his grace ; that Chd will be our God^ fo long as wc 
are his people. The other is not Faith, but Flattery. 

6. To profefs publicly the dodlrine of 3^5/iaChrift, 
openly owning whatfoever he has revealed and com- 
manded, nor being afhamed of the Word of Gft/, or 
of any praftices enjoined by it ; and this, without 
complying with any man's intereft, not regarding 6- 
vour, nor being moved with good words, not fearing 
difgrace, or lofs, or inconvenience, or death itfclfc 

7. To pray without doubting, without wearine^i 
without faintnefs, entertaining no jealoufies or fuf- 
picions of God, but being confident of God's hearing 
us, and of his returns to us, whatfoever the manner 
or the inftance be, that if we do our duty, it will be 
gracious and merciful. 

Thefe adts of Faith are in ieveral degrees in the 
fervants of Jefus ; fome have it but as a grain of 
muftardfeed, fome grow up to a plants fome have 
the fulnefs of faith : but the leaft faith that is muft 
be a perfuafion fo ftrong as to make us undertake 
the doing of all that duty which Chrift built upon 

the foundation of believing. Bat 

Dial, adver. Lucif. ^^ ^^jj j^^^ jj^^^^^^ ^j^^ ^^ ^f 

our Faith by thefe following figns. S. Hkrme 
reckons three. 



S. I. OF FAITH. 239 

Signs of true Faith. 

1 . An earneft and vehement Prayer : for it is im- 
poffible we fhould heartily believe the things of God 
and the glories of the Gofpel, and not moft impor- 
tunately defire them. For every thing is deiired ac- 
cording to our belief of its excellency and poffibility. 

2. T o^o nothing^nr ^"^^'"-glnryj but wholly for 
the interelb ot Religion, and thefe Articles we be- 
lieve; valuing not at all the rumours oPmen, but 
the praife of God^ to whom by faith we have given 
up all our intelledtual faculties. 

3. To be content with God for.ourJiidge, for ou7^ 
Patron, for our Lord, for our friend, defiring God to l 
be all in all to us, as we are in our underftanding I 
and aifeAions wholly his. ^^ 

Add to thefe ; 

4. To be a ftranger upon earth in our affedions, 
and to have all our thoughts and principal deiires 
fixed upon the matters of Faith, the things of Hea- 
ven. For if a man were adopted heir to Cafar, he 
would (if he believed it real and efFedtive) defpiie the 
prefent, and wholly be at Court in his Father's eye ; 
and his defires would outrun his fwifteft ipeed, and all 
his thoughts would fpend themfelves in creating Ideas 
and little phantaftic images of his future condition. 
Now God hath made us Heirs of his Kingdom, and 
Co-heirs with Jefus : if we believed this, we would 
think and affedt and fludy accordingly. But he that 
rejoices in gain, and his heart dwells in the world, 
and is eipoufed to a fair eflate, and traniported with 
a light momentary joy, and is afHidted with loiles. 



240 OF FAirn. C.f 

and amazed with temporal perfecutions, and efteems 
difgrace or poverty in a good caufe to be intolerable, 
this man either hath no inheritance in Heaven or 
believes none ; and believes not that he is adopted to 
be the Son of God, the Heir of eternal glory. 

5. S. James's fign is the beft : [Show me thj 
faith by thy works.'] Faith makes the Merchant di- 
ligent and venturous, and that makes him rich. Fer- 
dinando of Arragon believed the ftory told him by 
Columbus^ and therefore he furniihed him with ihips, 
and got the Wejl Indies by his Faith in the under- 
taker. But Henry the feventh of England bcficvcd 
him not, and therefore trufted him not with (hipping, 
and loft all the purchafe of that Faith. It is told us 
by Chrift [^He that forgives Jhall be forgiven :] if we 
believe this, it is certain we (hall forgive our ene- 
mies ; for none of us all but need and defire to be 
forgiven. No man can poffibly defpife or refiifeto 
defire fuch excellent glories as are revealed to them 
that are fervants of Chrift, and yet we do nothii^ 
that is commanded us as a condition to obtain them. 
No man could work a day's labour without faith: 
but becaufe he believes he (hall have his wages at 
the day's or week's end, he does his duty. But he 
only believes who does that thing which other men 
in the like cafe do when they do believe. He that 
believes money gotten with danger is better than 
poverty with fafety, will venture for it in unknown 
lands or feas, and fo will he that believes it better 
to get Heaven with labour, than to go to Hell 
with pleafure. 

6. He that believes does not make hajle^ but waits 
patiently till the times of refrefhmcnt come ; and 




S. I. OF FAITH. 241 

dares truftjSQd-ibr the morrow, and is no more fo- 
licitous for the next year than he is for that which is 
paft : and it is certain, that man wants Faith, who 
dares be more confident of being fupplied when he 
hath money in his purfe, than when he hath it only 
in bills of exchange from God ; or that relies more 
upon his own induftry than upon God's providence, 
when his own induftry fails him. If you dare truft 1 
to God when the cafe to human reafon feems impof- 1 
fible, arid truft to God then alfo out of choice, not J 
becaufe you have nothing elfe to truft to, but becaufe \ 
he is the only fupport of a juft confidence, then you) 
give a good teftimony of your Faith. 

7. True Faith is co»fid^^» ^^d will venture all 
the world upon the ftrength of its perfuafion. Will 
you lay your life on it, your eftate, your reputation, 
that the doftrine of JESUS CHRIST is true in 
every Article ? Then you have true Faith. But he 
that fears men more than God, believes men more 
than he believes in GoJ. 

8. Faith, if it be true, living and juftiiying, can- 
not be feparated from a good life.: it works miracles, 
makes a drunkard become fober, a lafcivious perfon 
become chafte, a covetous man become liberal^ // 
overcomes the worlds it works right eouf- ^ cor. 13. 5. 
nefs^ and makes us diligently to do, and ^°'°- *• *^- 
cheerfully to fufl?er whatfoever God hath placed in 
our way to Heaven. 

The Means and Inftruments to obtain Faith are^ 

I . An humble, willing and docible mind, or de- 
fire to be inftrufted in the way of God : for perfua- 

R 



^^ 



242 OF FAITH. C.4. 

iion enters like a fun-beam, gently, and without 
violence; and open but the /window, and draw the 
curtain, and the Sun of righteoufnefs will enlighten 
your darknefs. 

2. Remove all prejudice and love to every thing 
which may be contradicted by Faith. Haw can ye 
believe (faid Chrift) that receive pratfe one of another f 
An unchafte man cannot eafily be brought to believe 
that without purity he fhall never fee God. He that 
loves riches can hardly believe the dodtrine of poverty 
and renunciation of the world : and Alms and Mar- 
tyrdom and the dodlrine of the Crofs is folly to him 
that loves his eafe and pleafures. He that hatE 
within him any principle contrary to the dodhines of 
Faith, cannot eafily become a Diiciple. 

3. Prayer, which is inftrumental to every thing, 
hath a particular promife in this thing. He that 
lacks wifdom let him ajk it of God : and. If you give 
good things to your children^ how much more Jhall ywr 
Heavenly Father give his Spirit to them that aJk him ? 

4. The confideration of the Divine omnipotence 

. . ^ and infinite wilclom. and our o wn 

In rebus mins lumma "^ ' ^ — "^^ ^— i^ ■ 

crcdendi ratio eft omnipo- ignorancc, are great inflruments 

tentia Creatoris. S.Aug. M. - ' it t 1 • t /•! 

of curing all doubtmg, and ulenc- 
ing the murmurs of infidelity. 

5. Avoid all curiofity of inquiry into particulars 
and circumftances and myfteries : for true faith is 
full of ingenuity and hearty fimplicity, free fix)m 
fufpicion, wife and confident, trufting upon generals» 
without watching and prying into unnecefiaiy or 
undifcernible particulars. No man carries his bed 
into his field, to watch how his corn grows, but be- 



S. I. OF FAITH. 243 

lieves upon the general order of Providence and Na- 
ture ; and at Harveft finds himfelf not deceived. 

6. ^rj^rnf* ^^ ttmptntinn ^^ n ot bufy to difo ute^ y^ 
but rely upon the Conclufion, and throw yourlelt ^^ 
upon God, and contend not v^rith him but in prayer, 

and in the prefence and with the help of a prudent 
untempted Guide : and be fure to cfteem all changes 
of belief which offer themfelves in the time ofyout 
greaf2tt"weaKnefs_(contrary to the perfuafiohs of 
your beft underftanding) to be temptations, and re- 
jed: them accordingly. 

7. It is a prudent courfe that i n our health and r ^ • 
beft advantag es we lay up partkular a i ^u^^^ and ^^ \ 
inftruments of perfuafion and confidence, to "'Fe *^^; 
brougK lorlh'ari'd uleff in th^^ greatday^oF expenfe ; 
and that efpecially in fuch things in which we ufe to 
be moft tempted, and in which we are leaft confi- 
dent, and which are moft hecefl!ary, and which com- " 
monly the Devil ufes to ailault us withal in the days 
of our vifitation. 

8 . The wifdom of the Church of God is very re- 
markable in appointing Feftivals or Holy-days, whofe 
Solemnity and Offices have no other Ipecial bufinefs 
but to record the Article of the day ; fuch as Trinity^ 
Sunday 9 Afcenfiofi^ Eajler^ Chrtftmas-day ^ and to thofe 
perfbns who can only believe, not prove or diipute, 
there is no better inftrument to caufe the remem- 
brance and plain notion, and to endear the affeftion 
and hearty aflent to the Article, than the proclaim- 
ing and recommending it by the feftivity and joy of 
a Holy-day. ' 







244 



OF HOPE. 



C.f 





SECT. IL 
0/tAe Hope of a Chriftian. 

AIT H difFe rs from Hope in t he cxteafi on 
its objeft, and in the i ntenfion of dc: 
ujlin ♦ thus accounts their 



grce, 

ferences, *Faith is of all things revealed, good and 

bad, rewards and punifhments, of things 

• Enchirid. c. 8. ^ ^ \ /• i • 

paft, prelent and to come, of things 
that concern us and of things that concern us not; 
but Hope hath for its Objedt things only that arc 
good and fit to be hoped for, future, and concerning 
ourfelves : and becaufe thefe things_ar£LJQffcred to 
us upon conditions of which we may (6 fail as wc 
. may change our will, therefbre our. certainty is. lefe 
; than the adherences of Fax tlj;,. which (becaufe Faith 
I relies only upon one propofition, that is, the truth of 
I the Word of God) cannot be made uncertain in 
' themfelves, though the obje6t of our Hope may be- 
come uncertain to us, and to our pofleflion. For it 
is infallibly certain, that there is Heaven for all the \ 
godly, and for me amongft them all if I do my duty. 
But that I fhall enter into Heaven, is the objcd of 
my Hope, not of my Faith, and is fo fure as it is 
certain I (hall perfevere in the ways of God. 



The ASis of Hope are ; 

I . To rely upon God with a confident expe&ir 
tion of his promifes ; ever efteeming that every pro- 



S. 2. OF HOPE. 245 

mife of God is a magazine of all that grace and re- 
lief which we can need in that in fiance for which 
the promife is made. Every degree of Hope is a de- 
jgree of Confidence. 

2. To efteem all the danger of an adlion, and the 
poffibilities of a mifcarriage, and every crofs accident 
that can intervene, to be no defeft on God's^part, but] 
either a mercy on his part, or a fault on ours : for 
then we fhall be fure to truft in God when we fee 
him to be our confidence, and ourfelves the caufe of 
all miichances. T^he hope of a Chrifiian is Prudent 
4md religious. 

3. To rejoice in the midft of a misfortune or 
ieeming fadnefs, knowing that this may work for 
gpod, and will, if we be not wanting to our Souls. 
This is a diredl a<ft of Hope, to look through the 
cloudy and look for a beam of the light from God : 
and this is called in Scripture, Rejoicing in tribulation^ 
vrhen the God of Hope fills us with all joy in believing. 
Eivery degree of Hope brings a degree of Joy. 

4. To defire, to pray, and to long for the great 
object of our Hope, the mighty price of our high 
Calling ; and to defire the other things of this life 
as they are promifed, that is, fo far as they are made 
necefi^ry and ufeflil to us in order to God's glory 
and the great end of Souls. Hope and Fafiing are 
&id to be the two wings of Prayer. Failing is but 
as the wing of a Bird ; but Hope is like the wing o 
an Angel fbaring up to Heaven, and bears our prayers 
to the throne of Grace. Without Hope it i s i 
poflible to pray ; but Hope makeS'Trar prayers rea- 
fonable^ paiuonate and religious ; for it relies upon 
God's promife, or experience, or providence, and 



246 OF HOPE. C.f 

ftory. Prayer is always in proportion to our Hofc 
zealous and affeBionate. 

5. Perfcvcrancc is , the perfeftion of the duty of 
Hope/and its laft adl ; and fo long as our hope con- 
tinues, fb long we go on in duty and diligence : but 
he that is to raife a Caille in an hour» fits down aod 
does nothing towards it : and Herod the Sophifter left 
off to teach his fon, when he faw that 24 Pages ap- 
pointed to wait on him, and called by the feveral 
Letters of the Alphabet, could never make him to 
underftand his letters perfeftly. 



Rules to govern our Hope. 

I . Letvour Hope be moderate, p roportioned to YQu r 
i^^^^j^^^ /iXi^ fnnf^l^t^•pn whctlier It be for gifts 
or graces, or temporal favours. It is an ambitious 
hope for perfons whofe diligence is like them that 
are leaft in the kingdom of Heaven, to believe thcm- 
felves endeared to God as the greateft Saints, or that 
they (hall have a throne equal to S. Paul^ or the 
blefled Virgin Mary. A Stammerer cannot with 
moderation hope for the gift of Tongues, or a Pealant 
to become learned as Origen : or if a Beggar deiires 
or hopes to become a King, or afks for a thouiand 
pounds a year, we call him impudent, not paJSionatei 
much lefs reafojiahle^Hope that God will crown 
your endeavours with equal meafures of that reward 
which he indeed freely gives, but yet gives acced- 
ing to our proportions. Hope for good flicce^ ac- 
^Tdufg* to, or hot much beyond, the efficacy of the 
caufes and the infbument: and let the Hufbandman 



S. 2. 



OF HOPE. 



247 



hope for a good Harveft, not for a rich Kingdom^ or 

a vidlorious Army. 

2. Let your Hope be nfi^ll f^j^^flfiA^-^ relying upon 

juft confidences^ that is, upon God according to his 

revelations and promifes. For it is poffible for a 

man to have a vain hope upon God: and in matters 

of Religion it is prefumption to hope that Go^s 
^ ^ < ' jr ^-1— ^' ■ ■■■ ■■ ■ ii«i — , 

mercief^ wjl] hf> p^^yr^iri for^n jj];^ lazv perlons that 
do nothing towards holy and ftriA 
(I iayj but trult, and long for an event beiides and 
againft all difpofition of the means. Every falfe 
priftCiple ill Religion li i Reed of Egypt y falfe and 
dangerous. * Rely not in temporal things upon 
uncertain prophecies and Aftrology, not upon our 
ovirn w^it or induftry, not upon gold or friends, not 
upon Armies and Princes ; expeft not health from 
Phyficians that cannot cure their ovsrn breath, much 
lefs their mortality : ufe all lawful inftruments, but 
expeft nothing from them above their natural or or- 
dinary efficacy, and in the ufe of them from God 
exped: a bleffing. A hope that is eafy 
and credulous is an arm of iiefh, an ill 
fupporter without a bone. 

3* Let ymr Hope be without vanity ^ or garifhnefs 
of ipirit, but lober, gr ave and lilc nt, fixed m the 
heart, not bom upon the Up, apt to iupport our fpirits 
within, but not to provoke envy abroad. 

4. Let your Hope be of things poffibkyfafe and ufefuL 
He that hopes for an opportunity d; cof, fuori di credenza 
of adting his revenge, or luft, or ^on vuoicr for fpcranza. 

rapine, watches to do himfelf a mifchief. All evils 
of ourfelves or brethren are objed:s of our fear, not 
hope ; and when it is truly underftood, things ufelefs 



Jer. 17. 5. 



,0^*, 



UV 



.A 



K.' ^ ' 



\ 



248 OF HOPE. C.4. 

and unfafe can no more be wlfhed for, than diing? 
impoffible can be obtained. 

5 . Let you r Hope b e pntUnt, without tediouihds 
of fpirit, or haftinefs of prefixing time. Make no 
limits or prefcriptions to God, but let your prayers 
and endeavours go on flill with a conflant attendance 
on the periods of God's providence. The men of 
Bethulia refolved to wait upon God but five days 
longer : but deliverance flayed feven days, and yet 
fckmc at laft. And take not every accident for an 
argument of defpair : but go on ftill in hoping, and 
begin again to work if any ill accident have inter- 
rupted you. 



Means of Hope, and Remedies againji Defpair. 

The means to cure Defpair, and to continue or in- 
creafe Hope, are partly b y confideration, p ardy by 
exercife. 

I . Apply your mind to the cure of all the proper 
caufes of Defpair : and they are weaknei[sji£5piDt,or 
violence of Paflion . He that gree3ily covets is im- 
patient of delay, and defperate in 
contrary accidents ; and he that is 
little of heart, is alfo little of hope, and apt to for- 
row and fufpicion. 

2. Defpifc the thing^s of the World , and be in- 
] different to all changes and events of providence : 
I and for the things of God the promifes are certain 
/ to be performed in kind ; and where there is lc6 

• wv uai ^ rc^n, ^iy. ^^"^^ ^f chaucc, thcFc is lefs pof- 
x«»>««, T^ ^ i"p<» Ability of being ♦ mocked : but he 
ifmf^ar iffm i|ut»- that creates to himfelf thoufands 



C'v.**--" 



S. 2. OF HOPE. 249 

of little hopes, uncertain in the o'^'-^J' w*™*; «»-»- 
promife, fallible in the event, and "omt yjifirfni^ ^ lo- 
depending upon ten tnouland cir- ^k^rfju^ra ^ b iw i/u^^ix- 
cumftances (as are all the things udK^^.^JfS^^^ z^ 
of this World) fhall often fail in - «^s.2™p«ft^;c 
his expectations, and be ufed to irriwirM. Homer, 
arguments of diftruft in fuch hopes. 

3. So long as your hopes are regular and reafon - 
able, though m temporal affairs, fuch as are deliver- 
ance from enemies, efcaping a ftorm or fhipv^reck, 
recovery from a ficknefs, ability to pay your debts, 
&c. remember that there ar e fome things ordinary ^ P^ Cfi^^^ 
and fo me things extraordinary to prevent Defpair , (p~ 
In g r^m/yy 'remember that the v ery hop ing in God 
is an endearment of him, and a means to obtain the 
blefling. [/ will deliver him becaufe he hath put his ^ 
trujl in me.] 2. There are in God all thofe glorious 
Attributes and excellencies Mrhich in the nature of 
things can poffibly create or confirm Hope. God is 
I. Strong, 2. Wife, 3. True, 4. Loving. .There 
cannot^be added another capacity to create a con- 
fidence ; for upon thefe premifes we cannot fail of _ 
receiving what is fit for us. 3. God hath obliged 
himfelf by promife that we fliall have the good of 
every thi ng we defir e : for even lofles and denials 
(Fall wori for the good of them that fear God. And 
if we will truft the Truth of God for performance 
of the general, we may well truft his Wifdom to ^ 
choofe for us the particular. * But the extraor^ q 
dinaries of God are apt to fupply the dcfejft ^ofall na- 
t ural and human po fiihpitifig. i . God hath in many 
inftances given extraordinary virtue to the adtive 
caufes and inftruments : to a jaw-bone to kill a mul- 



( 



ft 

250 OF HOPE. C.f 

titude; to 300 men to deftroy a great Army; to 
yonathan and his Armour-bearer to rout a whok 
Garrifon. 2. He hath given excellent fufierance 
and vigouroufnefs to the fufFerers, arming them with 
ftrange courage, herniral forrifiide^ invincible rcfo;:. 
l ution, and prlorious patien ce : and ^^ us he laysno 
■ more up on us than we are able to bear ; for when 
1 he ihcTeales our iufierings, he Teflcns~them by in- 
v:^C£fiafing our patience. 3. His Providence is extra- 
regular and produces ftrange things beyond comoioa 
rules : and he that led Ifrael through a Sea, and 
made a Rock pour forth waters, and the Heavens to 
give them bread and flefh, and whole Armies to be 
defh-oyed with fantaflic noifes, and the fortune of 
all France to be recovered and entirely revolved by 
the arms and conduct of a Girl againfl the torrent 
of the Englijh fortune and Chivalry ; can do what 
he pleafe, and ilill retains the fame affedtions to his 
people, and the fame providence over mankind as 
ever. And it is impoffible for that man to dcfpair 

who remembers that ^^'^ hfltcr t\ fTir*- 
wtent^ and can do what he pleaie. 
Let us reft there awhile ; he can if he pleafe : And 
he is infinitely lominvr^ willing enough : And he isjj> 
finitely wife^ choofing better for us than we can do 
for ourfelves. This in all ages and chances hath 
fupported the afflidled people of Gody and carrieth 
them on dry ground through a Red Sea. God in- 
vites and cheriflies the hopes of Men by all the 
variety of his Providence. 

4. If yo ur caf e be brought to t he laft extremig i 
and that you are at the pit's brink, even the very 
Margin of the Grave, yet then defpair not ; at leaft 



S. 2. 



OF HOPE. 



251 



put it off a little longer : and remember that what-' 
ib^v er final accident takes away all Hope from yo u, 
if vou-it av a little longer, and in the meanwhi le 
hpar i» fypfit^ly^ Itw}]] ^}^^ <; ake aw ay all Defpair too . 
For when you enter into the regions of death, y6ul 
reft from all your labours and your fears, 

5. Let them who are tempted to defpair of their 
ialvation, c onfider how much Chrift fufFered to re- 
d eem us from fin and its eternal punifliment : ^nd 
he that confiders tms mult needs believe that the de- 
fires which God had to fave us were not lefs than 
infinite, and therefore not eafily to be &tisfied with- 
out it. 

6. Let no man defpair of God*a mercies to forgive 
him, unlefs he be fure that his fins are greater than 
God's mercies. If they be not, we have much rea- 
fon to hope that the ftronger ingredient will prevail 
fo long as we are in the time and ilate of repentance, 
and within the pofiiibilities and latitude of the Co- 
venant, and as long as any promife can but refled: 
upon him with an oblique beam of comfort. Pof- 
fibly the man may err in his judgment of circumftan- 
ces, and therefore let him fear : but becaufe it is not 
certai n he is toiftaken, let him not defpair . 

7. Connder that God, who knows all the events \ 

,_. _, ^jSEfinaLoanditiQaJ^^ i 

(liall he faverl, and wl^p will pcrjfh. yet he treateth ) 
them as his own, calls them to "be his own, offers 
fair conditions as to his own, gives them bleflin^ s, 
argume nts of mercy , and inftances of fear to call 
the m ofF fron^ deathy and to call them home to life, 
and in all this flbews no defpair jQfJ^ 
and therefore much lefs ihoul4 any man defpair 



* 



N 






v^ ! 



252 



OF HOPE. 



C.4. 



V. Bcdc. 



ifot himfelf, fince he never was able to read the 

^oV Remember that defpair belongs only to_j)af-^ 

fionajfc. JFoplg ^r Villains, (fuch as were AcmtophelzsA 

yudas) or elfe^to Devils ord amned pj^rfons : and as 

the hope of falvatioh is a good difpofition towards 

) it ; fo is Defpair a certain confignation to etenial 

yruin. A man may be damned for defpairiny to be 

faved. Defpair is the pr oper paffion d 
damnation. God hath placed truth mi 1 
^elicityin Heaven; curtojity and repentance upon Earth: V 
hut mifery and defpair are the portions of Hell. 

Gather together into your fpirit and its trca- 
fure-houfe ["t he memory ] not only all the promifes of 
God, but alfo the remembrances of exper ience, and 
the former fenfes of the Divin e favou rs, that from 
thence you may argue from times paft to the prc- 
fent, and enlarge to the future, and to greater blcff- 

ingS. For although the rr>nj#>i9^iirfig an^^^yp^A^Hnnc 

of Hope are not like the conclufions of Faith, yet 
they arc a helmet againft the fcorchings of Defpair 

l1 things, and an anchor of the Soul fare 



in temporal tnings. 
and fteadfaft againft the flludluations of the Spirit in 
riiatters of the Soul. S, Bernard reckons divers prin- 
ciples of Hope by enumerating the inflances of the 
Divine Mercy ; and we may by them reduce this 
rule to pradlice in the following manner, i. God 
hath preferved me from many fins : his mer cies are 
infinite : I hope he will ftill preferve melfrom more, 
and for ever. * 2. I have finne d and God fmotc 
me no t: his mercies are flill over the penitent: I 
hope he will deliver me from all the evils I have 
deferved. He hath forgiven me many fins of malice, 



S. 2. OF HOPE. 253 

and therefore furely he will pity my infirmities. 
* 7. God vifi tcd mv heart and chaneed it : he loves" 



the work of his own hands^ and fo my heart is now 
become : I hope he will love this too. ♦ 4. When 
I repented he received me eracioufly ; and therefore 
I hope if 1 do my endeavour he will totally forgive 
me. * 5. He helped my flow and beginning en- 
deavours ; and therefore I hope he will lead me to 
pertcftion. * 6. When he had given me fome thing: 
firil, then he gave me more : I hope therefore he\ 
will keep me from falling, and give me the grace 01 
perfeverance. ♦ 7. He hath chofen me to be a 
Diiciple of Chrift's infHtution ; he hath elected me 
to his K ingdom of grace j and thexefore J_ hope^llp 
to the Kingdom of his glory. * 8. He died for m e 
when I was Ks eneniy ; and therefore I hope he 
will fave mVwhen he hath reconciled me to him, 
and is become my friend. ♦ 9. God hath given us 
his Son ; how Jhould not he with him give us all things 
elfe ? All thefe S. Bernard reduced to thefe three 
Heads^ as the infl:ruments of all our hopes : i . The 
charity of God adopting us, 2. The tr uth of his 
pro milc s, 7 . The power of his performance : whic 
if any truly weighs, no infirmity or accident can 
break his hopes into undifcernable fragments, but 
fome good planks will remain after the greateft 
ftorm and fliipwreck. This was Saint PauPs inftru- 
ment : Experience begets hope^ and hope maketh not 
ajhamed. 

10. Do thou take care only of thy duty, of the 
means and proper inftruments of thy purpofe, and 
leave the end to God: lay that up with him, and he 
will take care of all that is entrufted to him : and this 



2 54 OF HOPE. C.f 

being an adt of confidence in God, is alfo a means 

o?lecu rrQr't6 thee: " "*" 

* TT. iHfy Ipecial arts of fpiritual prudence and ar- 
guments fecure the confident belief of the Ref urreo 
tion, and thou canft not but hope for every thmgcT 
'^icli you may reafonably exped, or lawfully dcfiit 
upon the ftock of the Divine jncndc&jajpdj gromife s, 
12. If a defpair feizes you in a particular tempo- 
ral inftance, let it not defile thy fpirit with impure 
mixture, or mingle in fpiritual confiderations ; but 
rather let it make thee f ortify thv Soul in matte rs of 
Religion > that by being thrown out of your Earthly 
dwelling and confidence, you may retire into Ac 
ftrengths of grace, and hope the more flrongly in 
that, by how much you are the more defeated in 
this, that defpair of a fortune or a fuccefs may be- 
come the neceflity of all virtue. 



■'•••■: ^'n^.m ■»wji—«w>r— ■« 




SECT. III. 

Of Charity J or the Love of God. 

lOVE is the greatefl thing that God can 
give us, for himfelf is Love ; and it is the 
greatefl thing we can give to God, for it 
will alfo give ourfelves, and carry with it all that is 
ours. The ApofUe calls it the band of perfedion; 
it is the Old, and it is the New, and it is the Great 
Commandment, and it is all the Commandments, for 
it is the fulfilling of the Law. It does the work of 
all other graces, without any inflrument but its own 
immediate virtue. For as the love to fin makes a 



S. 3. OF CHARirr. 255 

man fin againil: all his own Reaibn^ and all the dif- 
courfes of wifdom, and all the advices of his friends, 
and without temptation, and without opportunity : 
(o does the love of God ; it makes a man chafte 
without the laborious arts of fading and exterior 
diiciplinesy temperate in the midft of feafts, and is 
active enough to choofe it without any intermedial 
appetites, and reaches at Glory through the very heart 
of Grace, without any other arms but thofe of Love. 
It is a grace that loves God for himfelf, and our: 
Neighbours for God. The coniideration of God's 
goodnefs and bounty, the experience of thofe pro- 
fitable and excellent emanations from him, may be, 
and moft commonly are, the firft motive of our 
Love: but when we are once entered, and have 
tailed the goodnefs of God, we love the fpring for 
its own excellency, pafling from paflion to reafbn, 
from thanking to adoring, from fenfe to fpirit, from 
confidering ourfelves to an union with God : and 
this is the image and little reprefentation of Heaven : 
it is beatitude in pidture, or rather the infancy and 
beginnings of glory. 

We need no incentives by way of fpecial enume- 
ration to move us to the love *of God, for we cannot 
love anything for any reafon real or imaginary, but 
that excellence is infinitely more eminent in God. 
There can but two things create Ix)ve, PerfeSiion 
and Ufefulnefs : to which anfwer on our part, i . Ad- 
miration 9 and 2. Defire ; and both thefe are centred 
in Love. For the entertainment of the Jirjiy there is 
in God an infinite nature, Immenfity or vaflnefs with- 
out extenfion or limit. Immutability, Eternity, Om- 
nipotence, Omnifcience, Holinefs, Dominion, Pro- 



256 OF CHARITT, OR C.4. 

vidence. Bounty, Mercy, Juftice, Perfedtion in him- 
felf, and the End to which all things and all adtions 
muft be directed, and will at laft arrive. The con- 
fideration of which may be heightened, if we con- 
fider our diftance from all thefe glories ; Our fmall- 
nefs and limited nature, our nothing, our inconftancy, 
our age like a fpan, our weaknefs and ignorance, 
our poverty, our inadvertency and inconfiderationi 
our difabilities and difafFedlions to do good, our harih 
natures and unmerciful inclinations, our u niverial 
iniquity, and our neceffities and dependencies, not 
only on God originally and eflentially, but even our 
need of the meaneft of God's creatures, and our i 
being obnoxious to the weakeft and moil contemp- \ 
tible. But for the entertainment ofthefecond^ wcmay , 
confider that in him is a torrent of pleafure for the 
voluptuous, he is the fountain of honour for the am- 
bitious, an inexhauftible treafure for the covetous. 
Our vices are in love with fantaftic pleafures and 
images of perfeftion, which are truly and really to 
be found nowhere but in God. And therefore our 
virtues have fuch proper objects, that it is but rca- 
fonable they (hould all turn into Love : for certain 
it is that this Love will turn all into virtue. For in the 

fcrutinies of righteoufnefs and judg- 
Confcn c. 6* nient. When it is enquired whether fuch 

a per/on be a good man or no^ the meoh 
ing is noty What does he believe ? or what does be hope^ 
but what he loves. 

The A Sis of Love to God are^ 

I . Love does all things which may pleafe the be- 
loved perfon; it performs all his commandments: 



-S*. 3. rHE LOVE OF GOD. 257 

and this is one of the greateft inftances and arguments 
of our love that God requires of us, [This is Love, 
that we keep his commandments.] Love is obedient. 

2. It does all the intimations and fecret figniiica- 
tions of his pleafure whom we love ; and this is an 
argument of a great degree of it. The firft inflance 
is it that makes the love accepted : but this gives a 
greatnefs and Angularity to it. The firft is the leaft, 
and lefs than it cannot do our duty : but without this 
fecond we cannot come to perfection. Great Love 
is alfo pliant and inquijitifue in the inftances of its ex- 
preflion. 

3 . Love gives away all things, that fo he may ad- 
vance the intereft of the beloved perfbn : it relieves 
all that he would have relieved, and fpends itfelf in 
fuch real fignifications as it is enabled withal. He 
never loved God that will quit anything of his Reli- 
gion to fave his money. Love is always liberal and 
communicative. 

4. It fuffers all things that are impofed by its be- 
loved, or that can happen for his fake, or that inter- 
vene in his fervice, cheerfully, fweetly, willingly, 
cxpedling that God fliould turn them into good, and 
inftruments of felicity. Charity hopeth 

-* fr X for t <» 

all things 9 endureth all things. Love is 

patient and content with anything, fo it be together 

with its beloved. 

5. Love is alfo impatient of anything that may 
difpleafe the beloved perfon, hating all fin as the 
enemy of its friend ; for love contra<9s all the fame 
relations, and marries the fame friendfhips and the 
fame hatreds ; and all affedion to a fin is perfectly 
inconfiftent with the love of God. Love is not di- 



258 OF CHARITT, OR C.4. 

vided between God and God*s enemy : we muft love 
God with all our heart, that is, give him a whole 
and undivided aiFeftion, having love for nothing clfe 
but fuch things which he allows, and which he com- 
mands, or loves himfelf. 

6. Love endeavours for ever to be prcfentj to con- 
verfe with, to enjoy, to be united with its objcd. 
Loves to be talking of him, reciting his praifes, tell- 
ing his ftories, repeating his words, imitating his 
geftures, tranfcribing his copy in everything; and 
every degree of union and every degree of likencfe 
is a degree of love ; and it can endure anything but 
the difpleafure and the abfence of its beloved. For 
we are not to ufe God and Religion as men ufe per- 
fumes, with which they are delighted when they 
have them, but can very well be without them. 
True Charity is reftlefs till it enjoys God in fuch in- 

Amorisutmorfumqui ^ances in which it wants him: it 
vercfenferit. jg ^1^^ huugcr and thirft, it muft 

be fed or it cannot be anfwered, and nothing can 
fupply the prefence, or make recompenfe for the ab- 
fence of God^ or of the effedls of his favour, and the 
light of his countenance. 

7. True Love in all accidents looJ^s upon the behnxi 
per/on J and obferves his countenance, and how he 
approves or difapproves it, and accordingly looks iad 
or cheerful. He that loves God is not diipleafed at 
thofe accidents which God choofes, nor murmurs at 
thofe changes which he makes in his family, nor 
envies at thofe gifts he beftows ; but choofes as he 
likes, and is ruled by his judgment, and is perfeflly 
of his perfuafion, loving to learn where God is the 
Teacher, and being content to be ignorant or filcnt 
where he is not pleafed to open himfelf. 



S. 3. THE LOVE OF GOD. 259 

8. Love is curious of little t kings j of circumftances 
and meafureSy and little accidents^ not allowing to 
itfelf any infirmity which it ftrives pj^^^^^, ,j^„, ^,. 
not to mafter, aimine at what it me" de fuo Apoiiinc, ad- 

J^ , jicit ex Herodoto quaii de 

cannot yet reach, definng to be of i'uo, De eo os meum con- 

« • « • ^ r tinens efto. 

an angelical purity , and of a per- 
fedt innocence, and a Seraphical fervour, and fears 
every image of offence ; is as much afflidted at an 
idle word as fome at an adt of adultery, and will not 
allow to itfelf fo much anger as will difturb a child, 
nor endure the impurity of a dream. And this is 
the curiofity and nicenefs of divine Love ; this is the 
Jear of God^ and is the daughter and production of 
Love. 

The Meafures and Rules of Divine Love. 

But becaufe this paffion is pure as the brighteft 
and fmootheft mirror, and therefore is apt to be ful- 
lied with every impurer breath, we muft be careful 
that our love to God be governed by thefc meafures. 

I . That our Love be fweet, even, and full of tran- 
quillity, having in it no violences or tranfportations, 
but going on in a courfe of holy adlions : and duties 
which are proportionable to our condition and pre- 
fent ftate ; not to fatisfy all the defire, but all the 
probabilities and meafures of our ftrength. A new 
beginner in Religion hath paflionate and violent de- 
fires; but they muft not be the meafure of his 
actions : But he muft confider his ftrength, his late 
ficknefs and ftate of death, the proper temptations of 
his condition, and ftand at firft upon his defence ; 
not go to ftorm a ftrong Fort, or attack a potent 
enemy, or do heroical adlions, and fitter for giants in 



26o OF CHARirr, OR C.4. 

Religion. Indifcreet violences and untimely for- 
wardnefs are the rocks of Religion, againft which 
tender fpirits often fufFer ftiipwreck. 

2. Let our Love be prudent and without illufion: 
that is, that it exprefs itfelf in fuch inftances which 
God hath chofen, or vv^hich we choofe ourfelvcs by 
proportion to his rules and meafures. Love tunis 
into doting, when Religion turns into Superftition. 
No degree of Love can be imprudent, but the cx- 
preflions may : we cannot love God too much, but 
we may proclaim it in indecent manners. 

3. Let our Love be firm, conftant, and infepara- 
ble ; not coming and returning like the tide, but dc- 
fcending like a never-failing river, ever running into 
the Ocean of Divine excellency, palling on in the 
channels of duty and a conftant obedience, and never 
ceafing to be what it is, till it comes to what it dc- 
fires to be ; ftill being a river till it be turned mto 
fea and vaftnefs, even the immenfity of a blciTcd 
Eternity. 

Although the confideration of the Divine excel- 
lencies and mercies be infinitely fufficient to produce 
in us love to God (who is invifible and yet not dif- 
tant from us, but we feel him in his bleflings, he 
dwells in our hearts by faith, we feed on him in the 
Sacrament, and are made all one with him in the 
incarnation and glorifications ofye/iis ;) yet that wc 
may the better enkindle and increafe our love to 
God, the following advices are not ufelefs. 



S. 3^ THE LOVE OF GOD. 261 

Helps to increafe our Love to Gody by way of 

Exercife. 

1 . Cut off all earthly and fenfual loves, for they 
pollute and unhallow the pure and Spiritual love. 
Every degree of inordinate affedlion to the things of 
this world, and every a<fl of love to a fin, is a per- 
fciSt enemy to the love of God : and it is a great 
fhame to take any part of our affedlion from the eter- 
nal God, to beftow it upon his creature in defiance 
of the Creator ; or to give it to the Devil, our open 
enemy, in difparagement of him who is the fountain 
of all excellencies and Celeftial amities. 

2. Lay fetters and reft:raints upon the imaginative 
and ikntaflic part ; becaufe our fancy being an im- 
perfed: and higher faculty is ufually pleafed with the 
entertainment of (hadows and gauds : and becaufe 
the things of the world fill it with fuch beauties and 
fantaftic imagery, the fancy prefents fuch objedts 
as amiable to the afFeftions and eledtive powers. 
Perfbns of fancy, fuch as are women and children, 
have always the moft violent loves : but therefore if 
we be careful with what reprefentments we fill our 
fancy, we may the fooner rectify our loves. To this 
purpofe it is good that we tranfplant the inftruments 
of fancy into Religion: and for this reafon mufic 
was brought into Churches, and ornaments, and per- 
fumes, and comely garments and folemnities, and 
decent ceremonies, that the bufy and lefs difcerning 
fancy being bribed with its proper objects may be 
infhiimental to a more celeftial and fpiritual love. 

3. Remove (blitude or worldly cares, and multi- 
tudes of fecular bufineflfes : for if thefe take up the 



262 OF CHARirr, OR C.4. 

intention and application of our thoughts and our 
employments, they will alfo poflefs our paffions, 
which, if they be filled with one objedt, though ig- 
noble, cannot attend another, though more excellent. 
We always contradt a friendfliip and relation with 
thofe with whom we converfe : our very country is 
dear to us for our being in it ; and the Neighbours 
of the fame Village, and thofe that buy and fell with 
us have feized upon fome portions of our love : and 
therefore if we dwell in the affairs of the World, wc 
fhall alfo grow in love with them ; and all our love 
or all our hatred, all our hopes or all our fears, which 
the eternal God would willingly fecure to himfclf, 
and efteem amongft his treafures and precious things, 
(hall be fpent upon trifles and vanities. 

4. Do not only choofe the things of God, but fe- 
cure your inclinations and aptnefles for God and for 
Religion. For it will be a hard thing for a man to 
do fuch a perfonal violence to his firft defires, as to 
choofe whatfoever he hath no mind to. A man will 
many times fatisfy the importunity and daily felici- 
tations of his firft longings : and therefore there is 
nothing can fecure our loves to God, but flopping 
the natural fountains, and making Religion to grow 
near the firft defires of the Soul. 

5. Converfe with God by frequent prayer. In 
particular, defire that your defires be right, and love 
to have your afl^edlions regular and holy. To which 
purpofe make very frequent addrefles to God by 
ejaculations and communions, and an ailiduous daily 
devotion : Difcover to him all your wants, complain 
to him of all your afl?ronts ; do as Hezekiah did, lay 
your misfortunes and your ill news before him, 



S. 3. THE LOVE OF GOD. 263 

fpread them before the Lord; call* to him for health , 
run to him for counfel, beg of him for pardon : and 
it is as natural to love him to whom we make fuch 
addrefles, and of whom we have fuch dependencies^ 
as it is for children to love their parents. 

6. . Confider the immenfity and vaftnefs of the Di- 
vine Love to us, exprefled in all the emanations of 
his Providence ; i. In his Creation, 2. In his confer- 
vation of us. For it is not my Prince, or my Patron, 
or my Friend that fupports me, or relieves my needs ; 
but God, who made the Corn that my friend fends 
me, who created the Grapes, and fupported him who 
hath as many dependences, and as many natural ne- 
ceffities, and as perfeA difabilities as myfelf. God 
indeed made him the inflrument of his providence 
to me, as he hath made his own Land or his own 
Cattle to him : with this only difference, that God 
by his miniilration to me intends to do him a favour 
and a reward, which to natural inftruments he does 
not. 3. In giving his Son, 4. In forgiving our fns, 
5. In adapting us to glory ; and ten thou fend times 
ten thoufand little accidents and incidents happening 
in the doing every of thefe : and it is not poflible but 
for fo great love we fhould give love again, for God 
we fhould give Man, for felicity we fhould part with 
our mifery. Nay, fo great is the ^. , ^ ^. . « ^ 
love or the holy jejus, God mcar- po apud Dionyfiumepift. 
nate, that he would leave all his * ^™°^ ^ ^^' 
triumphant glories, and die once more for Man, if it 
were neceflary for procuring felicity to him. 

In the ufe of thefe inflruments Love will grow in 
feveral knots and fleps, like the Sugar-canes oi India, 
according to a thoufand varieties in the perfbn loving ; 



264 OF CHARITT, OR C.\. 

and it will be great or lefs in fevcral perfons, and in 
the fame^ according to his growth in Chriftianity. 
But in general difcourfing there are but two ftates of 
Love, and thofe are Labour of love^ and the Zealcf 
love : the firft is duty, the fecond is perfeftion. 

TAe two States of Love to God. 

The leaft love that is muft be obedient^ pure^Jm^ 
pky and communicative : that is, it muft exclude all 
afFedtion to fin, and all inordinate afiedlion to the 
World, and muft be expreflive according to our 
power in the inftances of duty, and muft be love for 
love's fake : and of this love Martyrdom is the high- 
eft inftance, that is, a readinefs of mind rather to 
fuffer any evil than to do any. Of this our blcffed 
Saviour affirmed, TChat no man had greater lave t/um 
this : that is, this is the higheft point of duty, the 
greateft love that God requires of Man. And yet 
he that is the moft imperfedt, muft have this love 
alfb in preparation of mind, and muft differ from an- 
other in nothing, except in the degrees of prompt- 
nefs and alacrity. And in this fenfe, he that loves 
God truly, (though but with a beginning and tender 
love) yet he loves God with all his heart, that is, 
with that degree of love which is the higheft point 
of duty, and of God's charge upon us ; and he that 
loves God with all his heart, may yet increaie with 
the increafe of God : juft as there are degrees of love 
to God among the Saints, and yet each of them love 
him with all their powers and capacities. 

2. But the greater ftate of love is the zealoflove^ 
which runs out into excrefcences and fuckers, like a 



S. 3. THE LOVE OF GOD. 265 

fruitful and pleafant tree, or burfting into gums, and 
producing fruits, not of a monftrous, but of an ex- 
traordinary and heroical greatnefs. Concerning which 
theie cautions are to be obferved. 



Cautions and Rules concerning Zeal. 

1 . If Zeal be in the beginnings of our fpiritual 
birth, or be Ihort, fudden and ^.x^^^f^x.;^,,,,; 
tranfient, or be a confequent of a ««^**»''^- Gai.4. is. 

man's natural temper, or come upon any caufe but 
after a long growth of a temperate and well-regu- 
lated love^ it is to be fufpedted for paflion and fro- 
wardnefs, rather than the vertical point of love. 

2. That Zeal only is good which in a fervent love 
hath temperate expreffions. For let the afFedtion 
boil as high as it can, yet if it boil over into irregu- 
lar and ftrange adtions, it will have but few ^ but will 
need many excufes. Elijah was zealous for the Lord 
of Hofts, and yet he was fo tranfported with it, that 
he could not receive anfwer from God, till by mufic 
he was recompofed and tamed : and Mofes broke both 
the Tables of the Law by being paffionately zealous 
againft them that brake the iirfl. 

3 . Zeal muft fpend its greateft heat principally in 
thoie things that concern ourfelves ; but widi great 
care and reftraint in thofe that concern others. 

4. Remember that Zeal being an excrefcence of 
Divine Love, muft in no fenfe contradidt any adtion 
of Love. Love to God includes Love 

to our Neighbour, and therefore no ' ^ ' 

pretence of zeal for God's glory muft make us un- 



266 ZEAL. C. f 

charitable to our brother ; for that is juft fb pleafing 
to God, as hatred is an a£t of Liove. 

5. That zeal that concerns others, can fpend itfdf 
in nothing but arts and a£tions and charitable inftni- 
ments for their good : and when it concerns the 
good of many that one (hould fuffer, it muft be done 
by perfons of a competent authority, and in great 
neceffity, in feldom inftances, according to the Law 
of God or Man ; but never by private right, or for 
trifling accidents, or in miftaken propofitions. The 
Zealots in the Old Law had authority to transfix and 
ftab fome certain perfons : but God gave them war- 
rant ; it was in the cafe of Idolatry, or fuch notorious 
huge crimes, the danger of which was infupportabk, 
and the cognizance of which was infallible : and yet 
that warrant expired with the Synagogue, 

6. Zeal in the inftances of our own duty and per- 
fonal deportment is more fafe than in matters of 
counfel, and a(5tions befides our juft duty, and tend- 
ing towards perfection. Though in thefe inftances 
there is not a diredl fin, even where the zeal is leis 
wary, yet there is much trouble and fbme danger: 
(as if it be fpent in the too forward vows of Chaftity, 
and reftraints of natural and innocent liberties.) 

7. Zeal may be let loofe in the inftances of inter- 
nal, perfonal, and fpiritual a<ftions, that are matters 
of diredl duty ; as in prayers, and adts of adoratioO) 
and thankfgiving, and frequent addrefi^es : provided 
no indirect adt pafs upon them to defile them ; fuch 
as complacency, and opinions of fan<5tity, cenfuring 
others, fcruples and opinions of neceflity, unneceflaiy 
fears, fuperftitious numberings of times and hours : 



S. 3. ZEAL. 267 

but let the zeal be as forward as it will, as devout as 
it will, as Seraphical as it will, in the direft addrefs 
and intercourfe with God, there is no danger, no 
tranigreffion. Do all the parts of Lavora come fe tii ha- 
your duty as eameftly as if the fal- Xt^3Yf:la:Si 
vation of all the world, and the * ""^^^"^ *^ ^o*^- 
whole glory of God, and the confufion of all Devils, 
and all that you hope or defire did depend upon 
every one aftion. 

8, Let Zeal be feated in the will and choice, and 
regulated with prudence and a fober underftanding, 
not in the fancies and afFe6lions ; for 
tbeje will make it full of noife and 
empty of profit, but that will make it deep and 
finooth, material and devout. 

The fum is this : The Zeal is not a diredl duty, 
nowhere commanded for itfelf, and is nothing but a 
fbrwardnefs and circumftance of another duty, and 
therefore is then only acceptable when xit. 2. 14, 
it advances the Love of God and our ^^^- ^' '^• 
Neighbours, whofe circumftance it is. That Zeal 
is only ^c, only acceptable, which increafes Charity 
directly; and becaufe love to our Neighbour and 
obedience to God are the two great portions of cha- 
rity, we muft never account our Zeal to be good, 
but as it advances both thefe, if it be in a matter that 
relates to both ; or feverally, if it relates feverally. 
S. PauPs TitdX was expreffed in preaching without 
any offerings or ftipend, in travelling, in fpending 
and being fpent for his flock, in fuflfering, in being 
willing to be accurfed for love of the people of God 
and his country-men. Let our Zeal be as great as 



268 ZEAL. C.f 

his was» fo it be in afFedtions to others, but not at 
all in angers againfl them : In the iirft there is no 

danger; in the fecond there is no 

a Cor. 7. II. o » 

fafety. In brief, let your Zeal (if it 
muft be exprefled in anger) be always more fcvere 
againft thyfelf than againft others. 

% The other part of Love to God is Love to m 
Neighbour J for which I have referved the Ptf- 
ragraph of Alms. 

Of the external ASlions of Religion. 

Religion teaches us to prefent to God our bodies 
as well as our Souls ; for God is the Lord of both: 
and if the body ferves the Soul in actions natural and 
civil and intelleftual, in muft not be eafed in the 
only offices of Religion, unlefs the body fliall expefi 
no portion of the rewards of Religion, fuch as arc 

refurredlion, re-union, and glorification. 
Our bodies are to God a living facrijice: 
and to prefent them to God is holy and acceptable. 

The adlions of the body as it ferVes to Religion, 
and as it is diftinguifhed from Sobriety and Jufticc, 
either relate to the Word of God, or to Prayer, or to 
Repentance, and make thefe kinds of external ac- 
tions of Religion. i. Reading and hearing the 
Word of God ; 2. Fafting and corporal auftcritics, 
called by S. Paul, bodily exercife ; 3. Feafting, or 
keeping days of public joy and thankfgiving. 



5- 4- OF READING, HEARING, &c. 269 




SECT. IV. 

Of Reading or Hearing the Word of God. 

EADING and Hearing the Word of God 
are but the feveral circumftances of the 
fame duty; inftrumental efpecially to Faith, 
but confequently to all other graces of the Spirit. 
It is all one to us whether by the eye or by the ear 
the Spirit conveys his precepts to us. If we hear 
Saint Paul faying to us, that [Whoremongers and 
Adulterers God will judge'] or read it in one of his 
Epiftles : in either of them we are equally and fuf- 
ficiently inftruiled. The Scriptures read are the 
fame thing to us which the fame do6trine was when 
it was preached by the Difciples of our blefled Lord; 
and we are to learn of either with the fame difpofitions. 
There are many that cannot read the Word, and 
they mufl take it in by the ear ; and they that can 
read find the fame Word of God by the eye* It is 
necefTary that all men learn it in fome way or other, 
and it is fufficient in order to their practice that 
they learn it any way. The Word of God is all thofe 
Commandments and Revelations, thofe promifes and 
threatnings, the flories and fermons recorded in the 
Bible : nothing elfe is the Word of God; that we know 
of by any certain inflrument. The good books and 
fpiritual difcourfes, the Sermons or Homilies written 
or fpoken by men, are but the Word of men, or rather 
explications of, and exhortations according to the 



270 READING OR HEARING C.4. 

Word of God: but of themfelves they are not the 
Word of God. In a Sermon, the Text only is in a 
proper fenfe to be called God's Word: and yet good 
Sermons are of great ufe and convenience for the ad- 
vantages of Religion. He that preaches an hour 
together againfl drunkennefs with the tongue of men 
or Angels, hath ipoke no other word of God but this, 
[Be not drunk with wine wherein there is excefs :] and 
he that writes that Sermon in a book, and publifhes 
that book, hath preached to all that read it a louder 
Sermon than could be fpoken in a Church. This I 
fay to this purpofe, that we may feparate truth from 
error, popular opinions from fubfrantial Truths : For 
God preaches to us in the Scripture, and by his fecret 
aflifrances and fpiritual thoughts and holy motions: 
Good men preach to us when they by popular argu* 
ments and human arts and compliances expound and 
prefs any of thofe dodtrines which God hath preached 
unto us in his holy Word. But 

1 . The Holy Ghoft is certainly the bcft Preacher 
in the world, and the words of Scripture the bcft 
Sermons. 

2. All the doftrine of Salvation is plainly ietdown 
there, that the moft unlearned perfbn by hearing it 
read, may underftand all his duty. Whatcan be plainer 
fpoken than this, [ Thou Jhalt not kill. Be not drunk 
with wine. Hujbands love your Wives. Whatfoeverye 
would that menjijoulddo toyouy doyefo to them ?] The 
wit of man cannot more plainly tell us our duty, or 
more fully, than the Holy Ghoft hath ^one already. 

3 . Good fermons and good books are of excellent 
ufe : but yet they can ferve no other end but that we 
praftife the plain do<5trines of Scripture. 



5.4. 'J'HE JFORD OF GOD. 271 

4. What Abraham in the parable faid concerning 
the brethren of the rich man, is here very proper : 
^hey have Mofes and the Prophets y let 

them bear them: But if they refufe to 

hear thefe^ neither will they believe though one JhouU 

arifefrom the dead to preach unto them. 

5. Reading the holy Scriptures is a duty expreflly 
^commanded us, and is called in Scrip- • Deut. 31. n. 
turc [Preaching ;] all other preaching is ]^^ *+• +5- 
the eflFcft of human fkill and induftry, Aas 15.21. 
and although of great benefit, yet it is R«^; '• 3. 

but an Ecclefiaftical ordinance ; the Law * "»• 3- 1 . 
of God concerning Preaching being expreflcd in the 
matter of reading the Scriptures, and hearing that 
Word of God which is, and as it is there defcribed. 
But this duty is reduced to praftice in the follow- 
ing Rules. 

Rules for Hearing or Reading the Word of God. 

1 . Set apart fome portion of thy time, according 
to the opportunities of thy calling and neceflary em- 
ployment, for the reading of holy Scripture ; and, if 
it be poflible, every day read or hear fome of it read : 
you are fure that book teaches all truth, commands 
all holinefs, and promifes all happinefs. 

2. When it is in your power to choofe, accuftom 
yourlelf to fuch portions which are moft plain and 
certain duty, and which contain the ftory of the Life 
and Death of our blefled Saviour. Read the Gofpels, 
the Pfelms of David; and efpecially thofe portions 
of Scripture which by the wifdom of the Church 
are appointed to be publicly read upon Sundays and 



272 READING OR HEARING C.f 

Holydays, viz. the Epiftles and Golpels. In the 
choice of any other portions you may advife with a 
Spiritual Guide, that you may fpend your time with 
moft profit. 

3 . Fail not diligently to attend to the reading of 
holy Scriptures upon thofe days wherein it is moft 
publicly and folemnly read in Churches : for at fudi 
times, befides the learning our duty, wc obtain a 
blefling along with it, it becoming to us upon thofe 
days a part of the folemn Divine worfliip. 

4. When the Word of God is read or preached 
to you, be fure you be of a ready heart and mind, 
free from worldly cares and thoughts, diligent to 
hear, careful to mark, fludious to remember, and 
defirous to pradtice all that is commanded, and to 
live according to it : Do not hear for any other end 
but to become better in your life, and to be inftrudcd 
in every good work, and to increafe in the love and 
fervice of God. 

5 . Beg of God by prayer that he would give you 
the fpirit of obedience and profit, and that he would 
by his Spirit write the Word in your heart and that 
you defcribe it in your life. To which purpofe fcrvc 
yourfelf of fome affedlionate ejaculations to that pur- 
pofe, before and after this duty. 

Concerning fpiritual Books and ordinary Sermons ^ tab 

in thefe Advices alfo. 

m 

6. Let not a prejudice to any man's perfon hinder 
thee from receiving good by his dodtrine, if it be 
according to godlinefs : (but if occafion offer it, or 
efpecially if duty prefent it to thee, that is if it be 



S. 4. THE JVORD OF GOD. 273 

preached in that aflembly where thou art bound to 
be prefent) accept the word preached as a meflage 
from God, and the Minifter as his Angel in that 
miniftration. . 

7- Confider and remark the doftrine that is repre- 
fented to thee in any difcourfe ; and if the preacher 
adds accidental advantages, anything to comply with 
thy weaknefs, or to put thy fpirit into action, or holy 
refolution, remember it, and make ufe of it. But 
if the Preacher be a weak perfon, yet the text is the 
do(flrine thou art to remember : that contains all thy 
duty, it is worth thy attendance to hear that fpoken * 
often, and renewed upon thy thoughts : and though 
thou beeft a learned man, yet the fame thing which 
thou knoweft already, if fpoken by another, may be 
made adlive by that application. I can better be 
comforted by my own coniideration, if another hand 
applies them, than if I do it myfelf ; becaufe the 
Word of God does not work as a natural agent, but 
as a Divine inftrument : it does not prevail by the 
force of deduction and artificial difcourfings only, but 
chiefly by way of bleffing in the ordinance, and in 
the miniftry of an appointed perfon. At leaft obey 
the public order, and reverence the conftitution, and 
give good example of humility, charity and obe- 
dience. 

8. When Scriptures are read, you are only to en- 
quire with diligence and modefly into the meaning 
of the Spirit : but if Homilies or Sermons be made 
upon the words of Scripture, you are to confider 
whether all that be fpoken be conformable to the 
Scriptures. For although you may pradlife for human 
reafons, and human arguments miniftered from the 



274 1'HE WORD OF GOD. C.4. 

Preacher's art ; yet you muft pradlife nothing but 
the command of God, nothing but the Dodfaine of 
Scripture, that is, the Text. 

9. Ufe the advice of fome fpiritual or other pru- 
dent man for the choice of fuch fpiritual books 
which may be of ufe and benefit for the edification 
of thy ipirit in the ways of holy living ; and eftccm 
that time well accounted for that is prudendy and 
aflfeftionately employed in hearing or reading good 
books and pious difcourfes ; ever remembering that 
God by hearing us fpeak to him in prayer, obliges u$ 
to hear him fpeak to us in his Word, by what inftni- 
ment foever it be conveyed. 




SECT. V. 

OfFaJimg. 

ASTING, if it be confidered in itfelf with- 
out relation to fpiritual ends, is a duty 
nowhere enjoined or counfelled. But 
Chriftianity hath to do with it as it may be made 
an inftrument of the Spirit by fubduing the lufts 
of the flefh, or removing any hindrances of Religion. 
And it hath been pradtifed by all ages of the Church, 
and advifed in order to three miniftries, i . to Prayer, 
2. to Mortification of bodily lufts, 3. to Repentance: 
and it is to be pradtifed according to the following 
meafures. 

Rules for Chrijiian Fafting. 

I . Fafting in order to Prayer is to be meafured by 
the proportions of the times of prayer; that is, it ought 
to be a total faft from all things during the ibleninity 



S. 5. OF FASTING. 275 

(unlcfs a probable ncccflity intervene). Thus the Jews 
ate nothing upon the Sabbath-days till their great 
offices were performed, that is, about the fixth hour : 
and S. Peter ufed it as an argument that the ApofUes 
in Pentecoft were not drunk, becaufe it was but the 
third hour of the day, of fuch a day in which it was 
not lawful to eat or drink till the fixth hour : and 
the yews were offended at the difciples for plucking 
the ears of com on the Sabbath early in the morn- 
ing, becaufe it was before the time in which by their 
cuftoms they efteemed it lawful to break their faft. 
In imitation of this cuftom, and in profecution of the 
reafbn of it, the Chriftian Church hath religioufly 
obferved fafting before the holy Communion ; and 
the more devout perfons (though without any obli- 
gation at all) refufed to eat or drink till they had 
finifhed their morning devotions: and further yet 
upon days of public Humiliation, which are defigned 
to be fpent wholly in Devotion, and for the averting 
God's judgments (if they were imminent) fafting is 
commanded together with prayer ; commanded (I 
fay) by the Church to this end, that the ipirit might 
be clearer and more Angelical when it is quitted in 
ibme proportions from the loads of flefli. 

2 . Fafting, when it is in order to Prayer^ muft be 
a total abftinence from all meat, or elie an abatement 
of the quantity : for the help which fafting does to 
prayer cannot be ferved by changing flefh into fifh, or 
milk-meats into dry diet, but by turning much into 
little, or little into none at all, during the time of 
folemn and extraordinary prayer. 

3. Fafting, as it is injirumental to Prayer^ muft be 
attended with other aids of the like virtue and effi- 
cacy ; fuch as are removing for the time all worldly 



276 OF FASTING. C. 4. 

cares and fecular bufinefles ; and therefore our blcflcd 
Saviour enfolds thefe parts within the fame caution, 
[Take heed lejl your hearts be overcharged with fur- 
Jetting and drunkennefsy and the cares of this worlds 
and that day overtake you unawares. ^ To which add 

alms ; for upon the wings of faft- 

Jejunium fine elccmo- , • - - - • r ii* 

fyna, lampas fine oieo. mg and alms holy prayer inialli- 

^' ^"^^ bly mounts up to Heaven. 

4. When Fajling is intended to ferve the duty of 
Repentance^ it is then beft chofen when it is ihort, 
iharp and efFeftive ; that is, either a total abfiinenct 
from all nourifliment (according as we fliall appoint, 
or be appointed) during fuch a time as is feparate for 
the folemnity and attendance upon the employment: 
or if we (hall extend our feverity beyond the folemn 
days, and keep our anger againft our fin, as we arc 
to keep our forrow, that is, always in readinefs, and 
often to be called upon ; then to refufe a pleafant 
morfelj to abftain from the bread of our defires, and 
only to take wholefome and lefs-pleafing nourifli- 
ment, vexing our appetite by the refufing a lawful 
fatisfadlion, fince in its petulency and luxury it preyed 
upon an unlawful. 

5. Fajling dejigned for repentance muft be ever 
joined with an extreme care that we faft from fin : 
for there is no greater folly or indecency in the world, 
than to commit that for which I am now judging 
and condemning myfelf. This is the beft Faft, and 
the other may ferve to promote the intereft of this, 
by encreafing the difaffed:ion to it, and multiplying 
arguments againft it. 

6. He that fajls for repentance muft, during that 
folemnity, abftain from all bodily delights, and the 



S. 5. OF FASTING. 277 

ieniuality of all his fenfes and his appetites : for a 
man muft not, when he mourns in his Faft, be 
merry in his fport : weep at dinner, and laugh all 
day after ; have a filcnce in his kitchen, and mufic 
in his chamber; judge the ftomach and feaft the 
other fenfes. I deny not but a man may in a fingle 
inftance punifh a particular fin with a proper inftru- 
ment. If a man have offended in his palate, he may 
choofe to faft only ; if he have finned in foftnefs and 
in his touch, he may choofe to lie hard, or work 
hard, and ufe fharp inflidlions : but although this 
Diicipline be proper and particular, yet becaufe the 
forrow is of the whole man, no fenfe muft rejoice, 
or be with any ftudy or purpofe feafted and enter- 
tained fbftly. This rule is intended to relate to the 
(blemn days appointed for Repentance publicly or 
privately ; befides which in the whole courfe of our 
life, even in the midft of our moft feftival and freer 
joys, we may fprinkle fome fingle inftances and adts 
of felf-condemning, or punifhing; as to refufe a 
pleafant morfel or a delicious draught with a tacit 
remembrance of the fin that now returns to difpleafe 
my fpirit. And though thefe adlions be fingle, there 
is no indecency in them, becaufe a man may abate 
of his ordinary liberty and bold freedom with great 
prudence, fb he does it without fingularity in him- 
felf, or trouble to others ; but he may not abate of 
his fblemn forrow ; tAat may be caution ; but this 
Vfrould be foftnefs, effeminacy, and indecency. 

7. WYitVifaJiing is an a£l of mortification ^ that is, 
is intended to fubdue a bodily luft, as the fpirit^ of 
fornication, or the fondnefs of ftrong and impatient 
ippetites, it muft not be a fudden, fharp and violent 



278 OF FASriNG. C.f 

Faft, but a Jiate of fajling^ a diet of failing, a daily 
leflening our portion of meat and drink, and a choof- 
Digiuna aflai chi mai ing fuch a coarfe diet which may 
mangia. make the leaft preparation for the 

lufts of the body. He that fafts three days without 
food, will weaken other parts more than the minif- 
ters of fornication : and when the meals return as 
ufually, they alfo will be ferved as foon as any. In 
the mean time they will be fupplied and made adivc 
by the accidental heat that comes with fuch violent 
fadings : for this is a kind of aerial Devil; the Prince 
that rules in the air is the Devil of fornication ; and 
he will be as tempting with the windinefs of a vio- 

chi digiuna et aitro l^ut faft, as with the flefli of an 
ben non fa, Sparagna ii ordinary meal. But a daily fub- 

pane, et al intemo va. ^ ^ ' 

See Chap, 1, Sect i,&\. tradtion of the nourifliment will 
introduce a lefs bufy habit of body, and that will 
prove the more efFedtual remedy. 

8. Farting alone will not cure this Devil, though 
it helps much towards it : but it muft not therefore 
be negledted, but aflifted by all the proper inftru- 
ments of remedy againft this unclean ^irit; and 
what it is unable to do alone, in company with other 
inftruments, and God's blefling upon them, it may 
efFeft. 

9. All fafting, for whatfoever end it be under- 
taken, muft be done without any opinion of the ne- 
ceflity of the thing itfelf, without cenfuring others, 
with all humility, in order to the proper end; and 
juft as a man takes phyfic, of which no man hath 
reafon to be proud, and no man thinks it neceflary, 
but becaufe he is in fickncfs, or in danger and dif- 
pofition to it. 



S. s^ OF FASTING. 279 

10. All Fails ordained by lawful authority are to 
be obferved in order to the fame purpofes to which 
they are enjoined ; and to be accompanied with ac- 
tions of the fame nature, juft as it is in private fafts : 
for there is no other difference, but that in public* 
our Superiors choofe for us, what in private we do 
for ourfelves, 

1 1 . Fafts ordained by lawful authority are not to 
be negle(fted, becaufe alone they cannot do the thing 
in order to which they were enjoined. It may be one 
day of Humiliation will not obtain the blefling, or 
alone kill the luft, yet it muft not be defpifed if it 
can do any thing towards it. An adt of Fafting is 
an adt of felf denial, and though it do not produce 
the habit, yet it is a good adt. 

1 2. When the principal end why a Faft is pub- 
licly prefcribed is obtained by fome other inftrument 
in a particular perfon, as if the fpirit of Fornication 
be cured by the right of Marriage, or by a gift of 
Chaftity ; yet that perfon fo eafed is not freed from 
the Fafts of the Church by that alone, if thofe fafts 
can prudently ferve any other end of Religion, as 
that of prayer, or repentance, or mortification of 
fome other appetite : for when it is inftrumental to 
any end of the Spirit, it is freed from Superftition, 
and then we muft have fome other reafon to quit us 
from the Obligation, or that alone will not do it. 

13. When the Faft publicly commanded by rea- 
fon of fome indifpofition in the particular perfon 
cannot operate to the end of the Commandment ; 
yet the avoiding offence, and the complying with 
public order, is reafon enough to make the obedi- 
ence to be neceifary. For he that is otherwife dif- 



28o OF FASTING. C.4, 

obliged (as when the reafon of the Law ceafes as to 
his particular, yet) remains ftill obliged if he cannot 
do otherwife without fcandal : but this is an obli- 
gation of Charity not of Juftice. 

1 4. All fafting is to be ufed with prudence and 
charity : for there is no end to which fafting fervcs, 
but may be obtained by other inftruments: and 
therefore it muft at no hand be made an inftrument 
of fcruple, or become an enemy to our health, or be 
impofed upon perfons that are fick or aged, or to 
whom it is in any fenfe uncharitable, fuch as are 
wearied Travellers ; or to whom in the whole kind 
of it it is ufelefs, fuch as are Women with child, poor 
people and little children. But in thefe cafes the 
Church hath made provifion, and inferted caution 
into her Laws ; and they are to be reduced to pradice 
according to cuftom, and the fentence of prudent 
perfons, with great latitude, and without nicenefs 
and curiofity : having this in our firft care, that we 
fecure our virtue, and next that we fecure our health, 
that we may the better exercife the labours of virtue, 
• s.Bafii.Monaft.Con- left out of too much auftcrfty we 

ftit. cap. c. Caflian. col. i- r t ^^i^^ j"*.'« 

21. cap. 22. brmg ourlelves to that condition, 

Ne per caufam neccfli- « ^^^^ j^ ^e neceffary to be indulgent 

tatis eo impingamusy ut JO 

voiuptatibus fcrviamus. to foftucfs, cafc and cxtrcme ten- 
dernefs . 

1 ^. Let not intemperance be the Prologue or the 
Epilogue to your Faft, left the Faft be fo far from 
taking off any thing of the fin, that it be an occafion 
to increafe it : and therefore when the Faft is done, 

'Af^v^^ ^ i^i^,. be careful that no fuperveningj a 

Naz. Qf gluttony or e xcefiive drinking 

unhallow the religion of tEe^^afled day; but eat 

temperately according to the proportion of other 



S. 5. OF FASTING. 281 

mealsr leil gluttony keep either of the gates to ab- 
ftinence. 

The Benefits of Fajiing. 

He that undertakes to enumerate the benefits of 
Fftfting, may in the next page alfo reckon all the be- 
nefits of phyfic : for Fafting is not to be commended 
u a du^, but as an inffa-ument ; and in that fenfe no 
man can reprove it, or undervalue it, but he that 
knows neither fpiritual arts, nor fpiritual neceffities. 
But by the Doftors of the Church it is called the 
Dourifhment of prayer, the reftraint of luft, the wings 
of the Soul, the diet of Angels, the inftrument of 
humility and felf-denial, the purification of the Spirit : 
and the palenefs and meagrenefs of vifage which is 
confcquent to the daily Faft of great mortifiers, is by 
Saint Bqfil &id to be the mark in the Forehead which 
the Angel obferved when he figned the Saints in 
the Forehead to elcape the wrath of God. \ThefQul 
that is greatly vexed, which goeth ^ ^^ 1 

pooping and feeble y and the eyes that 

Jlaiif and the hungry foul, Jhall give thee fraife and 
righteoujhefs, O Lord.] 

SECT. VI. 

Of keeping Fefiivals, and Days holy to the Lord: 
particularly the Lord's Day. 

RUE' natural Religion, that which was 
common to all Nations and Ages, did 
principally rely upon four great propofi- 
tions ; i . That there is one God ; 2. That God is no- 
thing of thofe things which we fee; 3. That God 



282 OF KEEPING C.4. 

takes care of all things below^ and governs all the 
World; 4. That he is the great Creator of all 
things without himfelf : and according to thefe were 
framed the four firft precepts of the Decalogue. In 
the firft the Unity of the Godhead is expreflly af- 
firmed. In the fecondy his invi£bility and immat^ 
riality. In the third is affirmed God's government 
and providence, by avenging them that fwear falfcly 
by his Name ; by which alfo his Omniicience isd^ 
clared. In the fourth Commandment, he proclaims 
himfelf the Maker of Heaven and Earth : for in dm- 
mory of God's reft from the work of fix days, the 
feventh was hallowed into a Sabbath ; and the keep- 
ing it was a confeffing God to be the great Maker of 
Heaven and Earth ; and confequently to this, it alfo 
was a confeffion of his Goodnefs, his Omnipotence 
and his Wifdom, all which were written with a Sun- 
beam in the great book of the Creature. 

So long as the Law of the Sabbath was bound 
upon God's people, fo long God would have that to 
be the folemn manner of confeffing thefe attributes; 
but when t/ie Priejihood being c hanged ^ there was i 
change alfo of the LaWy the great duty remained un- 
alterable in changed circumftances. We are eternally 
bound to confefs God Almighty to be the Maker of 
Heaven and Earth ; but the manner of confeffing it 
is changed from a reft or a doing nothing to a fpcak- 
ing fomething, from a day to a fymbol, from a cere- 
mony to a fubftance, from a Jewifh rite to a Chrif- 
tian duty : we profefs it in our Creed, we conicis it 
in our lives, we defcribe it by every line of our life, 
by every adlion of duty, by faith, and truft, and 
obedience : and we do alfo upon- great reaibn comply 



6- THE LORD'S DAT. 283 

"With the Jcwifli manner of confefling the Creation, 

far as it is inftrumental to a real duty. We keep 

day in feven, and fo confefs the manner and cir- 

cumilance of the Creation ; and we reft alfo that we 

xnay tend holy duties : fo imitating God's reft better 

tlian the Jew in Synefius^ who lay upon his face from 

evening to evening, and could not by ftripes or 

\!rounds be raifed up to fteer the (hip in a great 

ftorm. God's reft was not a natural ceflation ; he 

ynho could not labour could not be faid to reft : but 

God's reft is to be underftood to be a beholding and 

a rejoicing in his work finifhed : and therefore we 

truly reprefent God's reft, when we confefs and re- 

■ joicc in God's Works and God's glory. 

This the Chriftian Church does upon every day, 
but clpecially upon the Lord's day, which fhe hath 
fct apart for this and all other Offices of Religion, 
being determined to this day by the Refurredlion of 
her deareft Lord, it being the firft day of joy the 
Church ever had. And now upon the Lord's day 
wc arc not tied to the reft of the Sabbath, but to all 
the work of the Sabbath ; and we are to abftain from 
bodily labour, not becaufe it is a dired: duty to us as 
it was to the Jews, but becaufe it is neceflary in 
order to our duty that we attend to the Offices of 
Religion. 

The obfervation of the Lord's day diffisrs nothing 
f]X)m the obfervation of the Sabbath in the matter of 
Religion^ but in the manner. They diffisr in the cere- 
mony and external rite; Reft with them was the 
principal ; with us it is the acceflbry. They diffi^r 
in the office or forms ofworjhip : For they were then 
to worfliip God as a Creator and a gentle Father ; 



284 OF KEEPING C.f 

we arc to add to that. Our Redeemer, and all his other 
excellencies and mercies. And though we have 
more natural and proper reafbn to keep the Lorfs 
day than the Sabbath, yet the Jews had a divine 
Commandment for their day, which we have not 
for ours : but we have many Commandments to do 
all that honour to God which was intended in Ac 
fourth Commandment ; and the Apoftles appointed 
the firft day of the week for doing it in folemn Af- 
femblies. And the manner of worfhipping God, 
and doing him folemn honour and fervice upon this 
day, we may beft obferve in the following mcafurci 



Rules Jor keeping the Lord's Day and other 

Chrijiian Fejiivals. 

1. When you go about to diftinguifli Fcftival 
days from common, do it not by leffening the devo- 
tions of ordinary days, that the common devoticai 
may feem bigger upon Feftivals ; but on every day 
keep your ordinary devotions entire, and enlarge upon 
the Holy-day. 

2. Upon the Lord's day we muft abftain from all 
fervile and laborious works, except fuch which ait 
matters ofnecejjtty^ of common life^ or of great charity: 
for thefe are permitted by that authority which hadi 
feparated the day for holy ufes. The Sabbath of 
the Jews, though confifling principally in reft, and 
eftabliflied by God, did yield to thefe. I'he laiour 
of Love and the labours of Religion were not againft 
the reafon and the fpirit of the Commandment, for 
which the Letter was decreed, and to which it 



S. 6. THE LORD'S DAT. 285 

ought to minifter. And therefore much more is it 
fo on the Lord's day, where the Letter is wholly 
turned into Spirit, and there is no Commandment 
of God but of fpiritual and holy aftions. The 
Priefls might kill their beafts and drefs them for fa- 
crifice; and Chrift, though born under the Law, 
might heal a fick man; and the fick man might 
carry his bed to witnefs his recovery, and confefs the 
mercy, and leap and dance to God for joy ; and an 
Ox might be led to water, and an Afs be haled out 
of a ditch ; and a man may take phyfic, and he may 
eat meat, and therefore there were of neceflity fome 
to prepare and minifter it< and the performing thefe 
labours did not confift in minutes and juft determin- 
ing ftages, but they had, even then, a reafonable 
latitude ; ib only as to exclude unneceflary labour, 
or fuch as did not minifter to Charity or Religion, 
And therefore this is to be enlarged in the Gofpel, 
whofe Sabbath or reft is but a circumftance, and 
acceflbry to the principal and fpiritual duties. Upon 
the Chriftian Sabbath neceflity is to be ferved firft, 
then Charity, and then Religion ; for this is to give 
place to Charity in great injlances^ and the fecond to 
the firft in all ; and in all cafes God is to be worjhipped 
infpirit and in truth. 

3. The Lord's day being the remembrance of a 
great blefllng, muft be a day of joy, feftivity, fpiri- 
tual rejoicing and thankfgiving : and therefore it is 
a proper work of the day to let your devotions fpend 
themfelves in finging or reading Pfalms, in recount- 
ing the gr^at works of God, in remembering his 
mercies, in worfhipping his excellencies, in cele- 
brating his attributes, in admiring his perfon,in fendr 



286 OF KEEPING C.^. 

ing portions of pleafant meat to them for whom no- 
thing is provided, and in all the arts and inftrumcnts 
of advancing God's glory and the reputation of R^ 
ligion : in which it were a great decency that a 
memorial of the refurredtion fhould be infertcd, that 
the particular Religion oflhe day be not fwallowcd 
up in the general. And of this we may the more 
eafily ferve ourfelves by rifing feafbnably in Ac 
morning to private devotion, and by retiring at tbc 
leifures and fpaces of the day not employed in puhlk 

offices. 

4. Fail not to be prefent at the public hours and 

places of prayer, entering early and cheerfully, at- 
tending reverently and devoutly, abiding patient^ 
during the whole office, pioufly affifling at die 
prayers, and gladly alfo hearing the Sermon ; and at 
no hand omitting to receive the holy Communioa 
when it is offered, (unlefs fome great reaibn excofe 
it) this being the great folemnity of thankigiving, 
and a proper work of the day. 

5. After the folemnities are paft, and in the inter- 
vals between the morning and evening devotion, (a$ 
you fhall find opportunity) vifit fick perfbns, recon- 
cile differences, do offices of neighbourhood, inquire 
into the needs of the poor, efpecially houiekeepers, 
relieve them as they fhall need, and as you arc able: 
for then we truly rejoice in God when we make our 
neighbours, the poor members of Chrift rejoice to- 
gether with us. 

6. Whatfoever you are to do yourfelf as neccfiaiy, 
you are to take care that others alfo, who are under 
your charge, do in their flation and manner. Let 
your fervants be called to Church and all your fa- 



S. 6. THE LORD'S DAT. 287 

snily that can be (pared from neceffary and great 
haufehold miniflries : thofe.that cannot let them go 
by tumSy and be fupplied otherwife as well as they 
may : and provide on thefe days efpecially that they 
be inftruded in the articles of Faith and neceflary 
{Mtts of their duty. 

7. Thofe who labour hard in the week, muft be 
eafed upon the Lord's day ; fuch eafe being a great 
charity and alms : but at no hand mufl they be per- 
mitted to ufe any unlawful games, anything forbid- 
den by the Laws, anything that is fcandalous, or 
anything that is dangerous and apt to mingle fin with 
it ; no games prompting to wantonnefs, to drunken- 
9e(s, to quarrelling, to ridiculous and fuperftitious 
coftoms ; but let their refreshments be innocent, and 
charitable and of good report, and not exclufive of 
the duties of Religion. 

8 . Beyond thefe bounds, becaufe neither God nor 
Man hath pailed any obligation upon us, we muft 
prcferve our Chrtfiian liberty ^ and not fuffer ourfehes 
to be entangled with a yoke of bondage : for even a 
good action may become a fnare to us, if we make 
it an occafion of fcruplq by a pretence of neceflity, 
binding loads upon the confcience, not with the 
bands of God, but of men, and of fancy, or of 
opinion, or of tyranny, Whatfoever is laid upon us 
by the hands of Man, muft be afted and accounted 
of by the meafures of a man : but our beft meafure 
is this ; He keeps the Lord's day beft that keeps it 
with moft Religion and with moft Charity. 

9. What the Church hath done in the article of 
die Rcfurredlion, fhe hath in fome meafure done in 
the other articles of the Nativity, of the Afcenfion, 



288 OF KEEPING C. 4. 

and of the Defcent of the Holy Ghoft at Pcntecoft: 
and fb great ble flings deferve an anniverfiuy iblem- 
nity ; fince he is a very unthankful perfon that docs 
not often record them in the whole year, and efteem 
them the ground of his hopes, the objecft of his feidi, 
the comfort of his troubles, and the great effluxes of 
the divine mercy, greater than all the vidlorics over 
our temporal enemies, for which all glad peribos 
ufually give thanks. And if with great reafon Ac 
memory of the Refurreftion does return folcmnly 
every week, it is but reafon the other fhould return 
once a year. * To which I add, that the comme- 
moration of the articles of our Creed in folemn days 
and offices is a very excellent inftrument to con?^ 
and imprint the fenfe and memory of it upon die 
fpirits of the moft ignorant perfon. For as a judnf^ 
may with more fancy convey a flory to a man tbin 
a plain narrative either in word or writing : fb a real 
reprefentment, and an office of remembrance, and a 
day to declare it, is far more impreffive than a pic- 
ture, or any other art of making and fixing imagery. 
10. The memories of the Saints are precious to 
God, and therefore they ought alio to be fb to us; 
and fuch perfons who ferved God by holy living, ia- 
dufl:rious preaching and religious dying, ought to 
have their names preferved in honour, and God be 
glorified in them, and their holy dodtrines and lives 
publiflied and imitated : and we by fo doing give 
teflimony to the article of t/ie communion of Saintu 
But in thefe cafes as every Church is to be Iparing 
in the number of days, fo alfo ihould fhe be tempe- 
rate in her injundtions, not impofing them but upon 
voluntary and unbufied perfons, without fnare or bur- 



S. 6. THE LORD'S DAT. 289 

den. But the Holy-day is beft kept by giving God 
dianks for the excellent perfons, Apoftles or Martyrs, 
wc then remember, and by imitating their lives : this 
all may do : and they that can alfo keep the folem- 
nity, muft do that too virhen it is publicly enjoined. 




The mixed A£Hons of Religion are^ i. Prayer^ 2. Alms^ 
3. Repentance y 4, Receiving the blejfed Sacrament. 

SECT. VII. 

Of Prayer. 

HERE is no greater argument in the v^'orld 
of our fpiritual danger and unwillingnefs 
to Religion, than the backwardnefs which 
JBioft men have always, and all men have fometimes, 
to lay their prayers ; fo weary of their length, fo 
gUid when they are done, fo witty to excufe and 
fitiftrate an opportunity : and yet all is nothing but 
a defiring of God to give us the greateft and the beft 
things we can need, and which can make us happy : 
It is a work fo eafy, fo honourable, and to fo great 
purpofe, that in all the inftances of Religion and 
Providence (except only the Incarnation of his Son) 
God hath not given us a greater argument of his 
Willingnefs to have us faved, and of our unwilling- 
nefs to accept it, his goodnefs and our graceleff- 
nefs^ his infinite condefcenfion and our careleflhefs 
and folly, than by rewarding fo eafy a duty with fo 
great bleflings. 



u 



290 OF PRATER. C.4. 

Motives to Primer. 

I cannot fay anything beyond this very confidcia- 
tion and its appendages to invite Chriftian people to 
pray often* But we may confider that i. It isadu^ 
commanded by God and his holy Son. 2. It is 
an ad: of grace and higheft honour, that wc duft and 
aflies are admitted to fpeak to the eternal God, to 
run to him as to a Father, to lay open our wants, to 
complain of our burdens, to explicate our fcrupks, 
to beg remedy and eafe, fupport and counfel, hcaldi 
and fafety, deliverance and falvation. And 3. God 
hath invited us to it by many gracious promifes of 
hearing us. 4. He hath appointed his moil glorioos 
Son to be the Precedent of Prayer, and to make con- 
tinual intercefiion for us to the throne of Grace. 
5. He hath appointed an Angel to prefent the Prayers 
of his fervants. And 6. Chrift unites them to his 
own, and fandtifies them, and makes them effedive 
and prevalent : and 7. Hath put it into the hands 
of men to refcind or alter all the decrees of God 
which are of one kind (that is, conditional, and con- 
cerning ourfelves and our final eflate, and many in- 
ftances of our intermedial or temporal) by the power 
of prayers. 8. And the Prayers of men have fivcd 
cities and kingdoms from ruin : Prayer hath railed 
dead men to life, hath flopped the violence of fire, 
fhut the mouths of wild beafts, hath altered the 
courfe of nature, caufed rain in Egypt^ and drougltt 
in the fea; it made the Sun to go from Weft to Eafti 
and the Moon to ftand ftill, and rocks and moun- 
tains to walk ; and it cures difeafes without phyfic, 
and makes phyfic to do the work of nature, and na- 



S. 7. OF PRATER. 291 

ture to do the work of grace, and grace to do the 
work of God, and it does miracles of accident and 
event : and yet Prayer, that does all this, is of itfelf 
nothing but an afcent of the mind to God, a defiring 
things fit to be defired, and an expreffion of this de- 
fire to God as we can, and as becomes us. And our 
unwillingnefs to pray is nothing elfe but a not defir- 
ing what we ought paflionately to long for ; or if we 
do defire it, it is a choofing rather to mifs our fatif- 
fadtion and felicity, than to afk for it. 

There is no more to be faid in this affair, but that 
we reduce it to practice according to the following 
Rules. 

Rules for the Pradiice of Prayer. 

1 . We muft be careful that we never afk anything 
of God that is finful, or that direftly minifters to fin : 
for that is to aflc of God to difhonour himfelf, and 
to undo us. We had need confider what we pray ; 
for before it returns in blefling it muft be joined with 
Chrift's interceflSon and prefented to God. Let us 
principally afk of God power and afiiftances to do our 
duty, to glorify God, to do good works, to live a 
good life, to die in the fear and favour of God, 
and eternal life : thefe things God delights to give, 
and commands that we (hall afk, and we may with 
confidence expecft to be anfwered gracioufly ; for 
thefe things are promifed without any refervation 
of a fecret condition ; if we afk them, and do our 
duty towards the obtaining them, we are fure never 
to mifs them. 

2. We may lawfully pray to God for the gifts of 
the Spirit that minifter to holy ends, fuch as are the 



292 OF PRATER. 0,4. 

gift of preaching, the fpirit of prayer, good exprcf- 
fion, a ready and unloofed tongue, good underftand- 
ing, learning, opportunities to publifh them, &c. 
with thefe only reftraints. i . That we cannot be 
fo confident of the event of thofe prayers as of the 
former. 2. That we muft be curious to fecure our in- 
tention in thefe defires, that we may not aik them to 
ferve our own ends, but only for God's glory ; and 
then we fhall have them, or a bleffing for dcfiring 
them. In order to fuch purpofes our intentions in 
the firft defires cannot be amifs ; becaufe they arc 
able to fandtify other things, and therefore cannot be 
unhallowed themfelves. 3. We muft fubmit to God's 
Will, defiring him to choofe our employment, and 
to furnifh our perfons as he fhall fee expedient. 

3. Whatfoever we may lawfully defire of tem- 
poral things, we may lawfully afk of God in prayer, 
and we may expeft them as they are promifed. 
I . Whatfoever is neceflary to our life and being is 
promifed to us : and therefore we may with cer- 
tainty expeifl food and raiment ; food to keep us 
alive, clothing to keep us from nakednefs and fliame: 
fo long as our life is permitted to us, fo long all things 
neceflary to our life fhall be miniftered. We may be 
fecure of maintenance, but not fecure of our life; for 
that is promifed, not this : only concerning food and 
raiment we are not to make accounts by the mcafurc 
of our defires, but by the meafure of our needs. 2. 
Whatfoever is convenient for us, pleafant, and mo- 
deftly delegable, we may pray for : fo we do it, i. 
with fubmiffion to God's Will; 2. without impatient 
defires; 3. that it be not a trifle and inconfiderabki 
but a matter fo grave and concerning, as to be a fit 



S. 7. OF PRATER. 293 

matter to be treated on between God and our Souls ; 
4. that we afk it not to fpend upon our lufts, but for 
ends of juftice, or charity, or Religion, and that they 
be employed with fobriety. 

4. He that would pray with effedl, muft live with 
care and piety. For although God 

i o I John 3. 11. 

gives to finners and evil perfons the john 9. 31. 
common bleffings of life and chance; i^a. 1^15. and 
yet either they want the comfort and Mai. 3. 10. 
bleffing of thofe bleffings, or they be- p J'™'g*\^'d 
come occafions of fadder accidents to ^6. «• 
tbem^ or ferve to upbraid them in their ingratitude 
or irreligion : and in all cafes, they are not the ef- 
feds of prayer, or the fruits of promife, or inftances 
of a father's love ; for they cannot be expefted with 
confidence, or received without danger, or ufed with- 
out a curfe and mifchief in their company- * But as 
all fin is an impediment to prayer, fo fome have a 
ipecial indifpofition towards acceptation ; fuch are 
Uncharitablenefs and Wrath, Hypocrify in the pre- 
fent a£tion. Pride and Lufl : becaufe thefe by defil- 
ing the body or the fpirit, or by contradicting fome 
ncceflary ingredient in prayer (fuch as are Mercy, 
Humility, Purity and Sincerity) do defile the prayer, 
and make it a direft fin in the circumftances or for- 
mality of the adtion. 

5. All Prayer muft be made with Faith and Hope : 
that is, we muft certainly believe we ftiall receive the 
grace which God hath commanded us to i^^rk 1 1 . 14. 
ajk ; and we muft hope for fuch things J*™- '• ^»7. 
which he hath permitted us to aJk ; and our Hope 
fhall not be vain, though we mifs what is not abfo- 
lutely promifed, becaufe we fhall at leaft have an 



294 OF PRATER. C. 4. 

equal bleffing in the denial as in the grant. And 
therefore the former conditions muft firft be fecured; 
that is, that we afk things neceflary, or at leaft good 
and innocent and profitable, and that our perfons be 
gracious in the eyes of God ; or clfe what God hath 
promifed to our natural needs, he may in many de- 
grees deny to our perfonal incapacity : but the thing 
being fecured, and the perfon difpofed, there can be 
no fault at all ; for whatfoever elfe remains is on 
God*s part, and that cannot poflibly foil. But bc- 
caufe the things which are not commanded cannot 
poffibly be fecured, (for we arc not fure they arc 
good in all circumftances) we can but hope for fuch 
things even after we have fecured our good inten- 
tions. We are fure of a bleffing, but in what in- 
ftance we are not yet affiired. 

6. Our prayers muft be fervent, intenfe, camcft 

and importunate, when we pray for things of high 

Rom. 11. II. concernment and neccffity, [Contnoh 

^JS' 30^. trig injiant in prayer : Jirroing in prayer: 

1 Thcf. 3. 10. labouring fervently in prayer : night aai 

Ephef. 6. 18. I . i*f • f 

I Pet. 4. 7. day praying exceedingly : • praying atwajs 
J""^-^-"'- with all prayer] fo S. Paul calls it: 
[watching unto prayer] fo S. Peter : [praying eamefilj] 
fo S. James. And this is not at all to be abated in 
matters fpiritual and of duty : for according as our 
defires are, fo are our prayers ; and as our prayers 
are, fo (hall be the grace ; and as that is, fo ftiall be 
the meafure of glory. But this admits of degrees 
according to the perfedlion or imperfeftion of our 
ftate of life : but it hath no other meafurcs, but ought 
to be as great as it can ; the bigger the better ; we 
muft make no pofitive reftraints upon ourfelves. In 



S. 7. OF PRATER. 295 

other things we are to ufe a bridle : and as we muft 
limit our defires with fubmiffion to God*s will, fo 
alfo we muft limit the importunity of our prayers 
by the moderation and term of our defires. Pray 
for it as eameftly as you may'defire it. 

7. Our defires muft be lafting, and our prayers 
frequent, afiiduous and continual : not afking for a 
blefiing once, and then leaving it;' but daily renew- 
ing our fuits, and exercifing our hope, and faith, and 
patience, and long fufFering, and Religion, and re- 
fignation, and felf-denial in all the degrees we fhall 
be put to. This circumftance of duty our blefifed 
Saviour taught, faying, [that men ought ahvays to 
pray and not to faint J] Always to pray Luke 18. i. 
fignifies the frequent doing of the duty & *»• 3^. 
in general : but becaufe we cannot always afk fe- 
veral things, and we alfo have frequent need of the 
fame thing, and thofe are fuch as concern our great 
intereft, the precept comes home to this very circum- 
ftance, and S. Paul [praying without ^ ^^^^ 
cea/lng] and himfelf in his own cafe 
gave a precedent, [For this caufe I bef ought the Lord 
thrice ^^ And fo did our blefi[ed Lord, he went thrice 
to God on the fame errand, with the lame words, 
in a fhort fpace, about half a night ; for his time to 
fblicit his fuit was but fhort. And the 
Philippians were remembered by the *'** 

Apoftle, their fpiritual Father, always in every prayer 
of his i And thus we muft always pray for the par- 
don of our fins, for the afllftance of God's grace, for 
charity, for life eternal, never giving over till we 
die : and thus alfo we pray for fupply of great tem- 
poral needs in their feveral proportions ; in all cafes 



296 OF PRATER. C.f 

being curious we do not give over out of wcarincfs 
or impatience. For God oftentimes defers to grant 
our fuit, becaufe he loves to hear us beg it, and hadi 
a defign to give us more than we afk, even a fatif- 
fiidUon of our defires, and a blefling for the very 
importunity. 

8. Let the words of our prayers be pertinenti 
grave, material, not ftudioufly many, but according 
to our need, fufficient to exprefs our wants, and to 
fignify our importunity. God hears us not the 
fooner for our many words, but much the fooner for 
an earnefl defire; to which let apt and fufficient 
words minifter, be they few or many, according as it 
happens. A long prayer and a (hort differ not in 
their capacities of being accepted ; for both of them 
take their value according to the fervency of fpirit, 
and the charity of the prayer. That prayer which is 
fhort by reafon of an impatient fpirit, or dulnefs, orde- 
fpite of holy things, or indifferency of defires, is very 
often criminal, always imperfedt; and that prayer 
which is long out of oflentation, or fuperftition, or 
a trifling fpirit, is as criminal and imperfed as the 
other in their feveral inflances. This rule relates to 
private prayer. In public, our devotion is to be 
meafured by the appointed office, and we are to 
fupport our fpirit with fpiritual arts, that our pri- 
vate fpirit may be a part of the public fpirit, and be 
adopted into the fociety and bleffings of the commu- 
nion of Saints. 

9. In all forms of prayer mingle petition with 
thankfgiving, that you may endear the prefent prayer 
and the future bleffing by returning praife and thanks 
for what we have already received. This is Saint 



S.J. OF PRATER. 297 

PauFs advice^ [Be careful far nothing ; 

but in every thing by prayer andfuppli-- 

cation and thankfgivingy let your requejis be made known 

unto God. 

I p. Whatever we beg of God, let us alfo work 
for it ; if the thing be matter of duty, or a confe- 
quent to induftry. For God loves to blefs labour 

and to revjrard it, but not to fup- bTt. xi>^.K.v« « fl«5c ; 
port idlenefs. And therefore our »5c/udiy-f.5;^pi,x"f^c 

•> mat iXitCt M;it iVMvri 0101 au- 

blefled Saviour in his Sermons joins -'^ • ^^'y '^x^ ^ »*^' 
watcniulnels with Prayer: for fimo-n Awifufcu fUxkn, 
God's graces are but affiftances, not "^^' . ». c i . 
new creations of the whole habit in every inftant or 
period of our life. Read Scriptures, and then pray 
to God for underftanding. Pray againft temptation : 
but you muft alfo reji^ the Devil, and then he will flee 
from you. Afk of God competency, of living : but 
you muft alfo work with your hands the things that are 
honefty that ye may have tofupply in time of need. We 
can do our endeavour, and pray for a bleffing, and 
then leave the fucccfs with God : and beyond this 
we cannot deliberate, we cannot take care ; but fo 
far we muft. 

1 1 . To this purpofe let every man ftudy his prayers, 
and read his duty in his Petitions. For the body of 
our Prayer is the fum of our duty: and as we muft afk 
of God whatfbever we need ; fo we muft labour for 
all that we afk. Becaufe it is our duty, therefore we 
muft pray for God's grace : but becaufe God's grace 
is neceflary, and without it we can do nothing, we 
are fufficiently taught, that in the proper matter of 
our religious Prayers is the juft matter of our duty ; 
and if we fhall turn our Prayers into precepts, we 



298 OF PRATER. C.4. 

(hall the eafier turn our hearty defires into effcfiivc 
pradlices. 

12. In all our Prayers we muft be careful to at- 

tend our prefent work, having a 

Inter fiicra ct vota vcr- / .0 

bis etiam profanis abfti- prelent mind, not Wandering upon 

oat. impertinent things, not diftant 
from our words, much lefs contrary to them : and if 
our thoughts do at any time wander, and divert upon 
other objeifts, bring them back again with prudent 
and fevere arts ; by all means ftriving to obtain a 
diligent, a fober, an untroubled and a compofed 
fpirit. 

13. Let your pofture and gefture of body in Prayers 
be reverent, grave, and humble : according to public 
order, or the beft examples, if it be in public, if it be 
in private, either fland, or kneel, or lie flat upon the 
ground on your face, in your ordinary and more fo- 
lemn prayers ; but in extraordinary, cafual and ejac- 
ulatory prayers, the reverence and devotion of the 
Soul, and the lifting up the eyes and hands to God 
with any other pofture not undecent, is ufual and 
commendable ; for we may pray in bed, on horfe- 

back, every where y and at all times^ and 
in all circumllances : and it is well if 
we do fo : and fome fervants have not opportunity 
to pray fo often as they would, unlefs they fupply 
the appetites of Religion by fuch accidental devo- 
tions. 

14. [Let prayers and fupplications and ghing of 
_. thanks be made for all men : for Kings and 

I lim. 1. 1.2. 3. , ^ •^ ^ 

all that are in authority. For this is good 
and acceptable in the fight of God our Saviour.] We 
who muft love our Neighbours as ourfelves, muft alfo 



S. 7. OF PRATER. 299 

pray for them as for ourfelves : with this only diffe- 
rence, that we may enlarge in our temporal defires for 
Kings, and pray for fecular profperity to them with 
more importunity than for ourfelves, becaufe they 
need more to enable their duty and government, and 
for the interefts of Religion and Juftice, This part 
of Prayer is by the Apoflle called [^InterceJJionj'] in 
which with ipecial care we are to remember our 
Relatives, our Family, our Charge, our Benefactors, 
our Creditors ; not forgetting to beg pardon and cha- 
rity for our Enemies, and proteftion againft them. 

15. Rely not on a fingle prayer in matters of 
great concernment ; but make it as public as you can 
by obtaining of others to pray for you : this being 
the great bleiling of the communion of Saints, that 
a prayer united is ftrong, like a well ordered Army; 
and God loves to be tied fail with fuch cords of love, 
and conftrained by a holy violence. 

16. Every time that is not feized upon by fome 
other duty, is feafonable enough for prayer : but let 
it be performed as a folemn duty morning and even- 
ing, that God may begin and end all our bufinefs, 
and the outgoing of the morning and evening may praije 
him; for fo we blefs Gody and God bleiTes us. And 
yet fail not to find or make opportunities to worfhip 
God at fome other times of the day ; at leaft by ejac- 
ulations and fhort addrefles, more or lefs, longer or 
fhorter, folemnly or without folemnity, privately or 
publicly, as you can, or are permitted, always remem- 
bering, that as every fin is a degree of danger and 
unfafety ; fo every pious prayer and well-employed 
opportunity is a degree of return to hope and pardon. 



300 OF PRArER. C.f 

Cautions for making Vows. 

ij. A vow to God is an aft of prayer, and a great 
degree and inftance of opportunity, and an incrcafc 
of duty by fbme new uncommanded inftance, or 
fome more eminent degree of duty, or frequency of 
adtion, or earneftnefs of fpirit in the fame. And bc- 
caufe it hath pleafed God in all Ages of the World 
to admit of intercourfe with his fervants in the mat- 
ters of vows, it is not ill advice, that we make vows 
to God in fuch cafes in which we have great need, 
or great danger. But let it be done according to 
thefe rules and by thefe cautions. 

I. That the matter of the Vow be lawful. 2. 
That it be ufeful in order to Religion or Charity. 
3. That it be grave, not trifling and impertinent, 
but great in our proportion of duty towards the blef- 
ling. 4. That it be an uncommanded inftance, that 
is, that it be of fomethingj or in fome manner^ or a 
fome degree to which formerly we were not obliged, 
or which we might have omitted without fin. 5. 
That it be done with prudence, that is, that it be 
fafe in all the circumftances of perfon, left we beg 
a blefling, and fall into a fnare. 6. That every vow 
of a new action be alfo accompanied with a new de- 
gree and enforcement of our eflential and unaltera- 
ble duty : fuch as was "Jacobus vow, that (befides the 
payment of a tithe) Godjhouldbe his God: that fo he 
might ftrengthen his duty to him firft in eflendals 
and precepts ; and then in additionals and acciden- 
tals. For it is but an ill Tree that fpends more 
in leaves and fuckers and gums than in fruit: and 
that thankfulnefs and Religion is beft that firft fe- 



S. 7. OF PRATER. 301 

cures duty, and then enlarges in counfels. There- 
fore, let every great prayer, and great need, and 
great danger draw us nearer to God by the approach 
of a pious purpofe to live more ftridtly ; and let 
every mercy of God anfwering that prayer produce 
a real performance of it. 7. Let 
not young beginners in Religion gf^^feSTd"*: 
enlarge their hearts and ftraiten ^^^ g^""? i»bcnim fcc- 

, ^ tare, ncc vinculo tcmctip- 

their liberty by vows of long con- fum obftringe. 

^m /• 1 i\ 1/- Plutarch. 

tmuance: nor (mdeed) any one elle, 
without a great experience of himfelf and of all acci- 
dental dangers. Vows of fingle adtions are fafeft, and 
proportionable to thofe fingle bleffings ever begged in 
fiich cafes of fudden and tranfient 

• . -.• o T -i. rL* S*c Novatus novitios 

importunities. O. i^et no action fuos compulit ad juran- 

which is matter of queftion and S - ^"^^;„f ^^I 
difpute in Religion ever become ""^v^ , r. , ^^ 

* ° Eufeb, /. 2; EccL htft, 

the matter of a vow. He vows 
foolifhly that promifes to God to live and die in fuch 
an opinion, in an article not neceflary, nor certain ; 
or that, upon confidence of his prefent guide, binds 
himfelf for ever to the profeflion of what he may 
afterwards more reafonably contradidt, or may find 
not to be ufeful, or not profitable, but of fome dan- 
ger, or of no necefSty. 

If we obferve the former rules, we fhall pray pi- 
oufly and effedlually : but becaufe even this duty 
hath in it fome fpecial temptations, it is necefTary 
that we be armed by fpecial remedies againfl them. 
The dangers are, i. Wandering thoughts, 2. Tedi- 
oufhefs of fpirit. Againfl the firfl thefe advices are 
profitable. 



302 OF PRATER. C. 4. 

Remedies again/} wandering Thoughts in Prayer. 

If we feel our fpirits apt to wander in our prayers, 
and to retire into the World, or to things unprofita- 
ble, or vain and impertinent ; 

1 . Ufe Prayer to be aflifted in Prayer : pray for 
the fpirit of fupplication, for a fober, fixed and re- 
colledted fpirit : and when to this you add a moral 
induftry to be fteady in your thoughts, whatfocvcr 
wanderings after this do return irremediably, arc a 
mifery of Nature and an imperfection, but no fin, 
while it is not cherifhed and indulged to. 

2. In private, it is not amifs to attempt the core 
by reducing your Prayers into Collecfts and ihort 
forms of prayer, making voluntary interruptions, and 
beginning again, that the want of fpirit and breadi 
may be fupplied by the fhort ftages and periods. 

3. When you have obferved any confiderabk 
wandering of your thoughts, bind yourfelf to repeat 
that prayer again with adtual attention^ or elfc re- 
volve the full fenfe of it in your fpirit, and repeat it 
in all the effects and defires of it : and pofiibly die 
tempter may be driven away with his own art, and 
may ceafe to interpofe his trifles, when he perceives 
they do but vex the perfon into carefulnefs and piety: 
and yet he lofes nothing of his devotion, but doubles 
the earneftnefs of his care. 

4. If this be not feafonable or opportune, or apt 
to any man's circumftances, yet be fure with adual 
attention to fay a hearty Amen to the whole prayer 
with one united defire, earneftly begging the graces 
mentioned in the prayer : for that defire does the 
great work of the Prayer, and fecures the blefling, 



S. 7. OF PRATER. 303 

if the wandering thoughts were againft our will, 
and difclaimed by contending againft them. 

5. Avoid multiplicity of bufinefles of the World; 
and in thofe that are unavoidable, labour for an 
evennefs and tranquillity of Ipirit, that you may be 
untroubled and fmooth in all tempefts of fortune : 
for fb we fhall better tend Religion, when we are 
not torn in pieces by the cares of the World, and 
feized upon with low affedtions, paflions and intereft. 

6. It helps much to attention and adual advertife- 
ment in our prayers, if we fay our prayers filently 
without the voice, only by the fpirit. For in mental 
prayer if our thoughts wander, we only ftand ftill ; 
when our mind returns we go on again : there is 
none of the prayer loft, as it is if our mouths fpeak 
and our hearts wander. 

7. To incite you to the ufe of thefe or any other 
counfels you (hall meet with, remember it is a great 
indecency to defire of God to hear thofe prayers, 
a great part whereof we do not hear ourfelves. 
If they be not worthy of our attention, they are far 
more unworthy of God's. 

Signs of Tedioufnefs of Spirit in our Prayers and all 

ASiions of Religion. 

The fecond temptation in our Prayer is a tediouf- 
nefs of fpirit, or a wearinefs of the employment ; like 
that of the Jews, who complained that they were 
weary of the new Moons, and their fouls loathed the 
frequent return of their Sabbaths : fo do very many 
Chriftians, who firft pray without fervour and ear- 
neftnefs of fpirit ; and fecondly, meditate but feldom, 
and that without fruit, or fenfe, or affedtion; or 



304 OF PRATER. C.4. 

thirdly, who feldom examine their conlciences, and 
when they do it, they do it but fleepily, (lightly, 
without compundlion, or hearty purpofe, or fruits of 
amendment. 4. They enlarge themfelves in the 
thoughts and fruition of temporal things, running 
for comfort to them only in any (adneis and misfor- 
tune. 5. They love not to frequent the Sacraments, 
nor any the inflruments of Religion^ as Sermons, 
Confeflions, Prayers in public. Failings ; but love 
eafe, and a^loofe undiiciplined life. 6. They obey 
not their Superiors, but follow their own judgment, 
when their judgment follows their affe&ions, and 
their affedtions follow fenfe and worldly pleafures. 
7. They negledl, or diffemble, or defer, or do not 
attend to the motions and inclinations to virtue whkh 
the Spirit of God puts into their Soul. 8. They re- 
pent them of their vows and holy purpofes, not be- 
caufe they difcover any indifcretion in them, or 
intolerable inconvenience, but becaufe they have 
within them labour, (as the cafe now flands) to 
them difpleafure. 9. They content themfelves with 
the firft degrees and neceflary parts of virtue ; and 
when they are arrived thither, they fit down, as if 
they were come to the mountain of the Lord, and 
care not to proceed on toward perfedlion. 10. Thqr 
enquire into all cafes in which it may be lawful to 
omit a duty ; and though they will not do lefs than 
they are bound to, yet they will do no more than 
needs muft ; for they do out of fear and ielf-love, 
not out of the love of God, or the fpirit of holineis 
and zeal. The event of which will be this: He 
that will do no more than needs mufl, will foon be 
brought to omit fomething of his duty, and will be 
apt to believe lefs to be neceflary than is. 



S. 7. OF PRATER. 305 



Remedies againji T'edioufnefs of Spirit. 

The Remedies againft this temptation are thefe. 

1 . Order your private devotions fo, that they be- 
come not arguments and caufes of tedioufnefs by their 
indifcreet length ; but reduce your Mrords into a nar- 
rower compafs, ftill keeping all the matter, and v^rhat 
is cut off in the length of your prayers, fupply in 
the earneftnefs of your fpirit : for fo nothing is loft 
while the words are changed into matter, and length 
of time into fervency of devotion. The forms are 
made not the lefs perfect, and the fpirit is more, and 
the fcruple is removed. 

2. It is not imprudent if we provide variety of 
forms of Prayer to the fame purpofes, that the 
change by confulting with the appetites of fancy 
may better entertain the Spirit : and poflibly we may 
be pleafed to recite a Hymn, when a CoUeft feems 
flat to us and unpleafant ; and we are willing to fing 
rather than to fay, or to fing this rather than that : 
we are certain that variety is delightful ; and whether 
that be natural to us, or an imperfeftion, yet if it be 
complied with, it may remove fome part of the 
temptation. 

3. Break your office and devotion into fragments, 
and make frequent returnings by ejaculations and 
abrupt intercourfes with God : for fo, no length can 
opprefs your tendernefs and ficklinefs of fpirit ; and 
by often praying in fuch manner and in all circum- 
ftances, we fhall habituate our Souls to prayer, by 
making it the bufinefs of many lefler portions of our 
time : and by thrufting in between all our other em- 



3o6 OF PRATER. C.f 

ployments, it will make everything relifh of Reli- 
gion, and by degrees turn all into its nature. 

4. Learn to abftradt your thoughts and defires from 
pleafures and things of the world. For nothing is a 
diredt cure to this evil, but cutting off all other loves 
and adherences. Order your affairs fo, that Religion 
may be propounded to you as a reward, and Prayer 
as your defence, and holy adtions as your fccurity, 
and Charity and good works as your treafure. Con- 
fider that all things elfe are fatisfadtions but to tbe 
brutifh part of a man, and that thefe are the refrdh- 
ments and reliflies of that noble part of us by which 
we are better than beads : and whatfbever other in- 
ftrument, exercife or confideration is of uie to take 
our loves from the world, the fame is apt to place 
them upon God. 

5. Do not feek for delicioufhefs and fenfiblccon- 
folations in the adlions of Religion, but only regard 
the duty and the confcience of it. For althou^ in 
the beginning of Religion moft frequently, and at 
fome other times irregularly, God complies with oar 
infirmity, and encourages our duty with little over- 
flowings of fpiritual joy, and feniible pleafure, and 
delicacies in prayer, fo as we feem to feel ibmc Kttfc 
beam of Heaven, and great refrefhments from die 
Spirit of confolation ; yet this is not always fitfe for 
us to have, neither fafe for us to expe6t and look for- 
and when we do, it is apt to make us cool in our 
enquiries and waitings upon Chrift when we want 
them : It is a running after him, not for the mira- 
cles, but for the loaves ; not for the wonderful things 
of God, and the defires of pleafing him, but for die 
pleafure of pleafing ourfelves. And as we muft not 




S. 7. OF PRATER. 307 

judge our devotion to be barren or unfruitful when 
we want the overflowings of joy running over : fo 
neither mull we ceafe for want of them. If our fpi- 
rits can ferve God choofingly and 
pure confcience of our duty> it is bei 
more fafe to us. 

6. Let him ufe to foften his fpii 
meditation upon fad and dolorous 
Death, the terrors of the day of Judgment, fearful 
judgments upon finners, ftrange horrid accidents, 
fear of God's wrath, the pains of Hell, t he unfpeak- 
abl e amazements of the damned, the intolerable 
load of a fad Eternity . For whatfoever creates fear, 
or makes the fpirit to dwell in a religious fadnefs, is 
apt to entender the fpirit, and make it devout and 
pliant to any part of duty. For a great fear, when 
it is ill managed, is the parent of fuperftition ; but a 
difcreet and well-guided fear produces Religion. 

7. Pray often and you fhall pray oftener; and 
when you are accuftomed to a frequent devotion, it 
will fo infenfibly unite to your nature and afl?eftions, 
that it will become trouble to omit your ufual or 
appointed prayers : and what you obtain at firft by 
doing violence to your inclinations, at laft will not 
be left without as great unwillingnefs as that by 
which at firft it entered. This rule relies not only 
upon reafon derived from the nature of habits, which 
turn into a fecond nature, and make their adlions 
eafy, frequent and delightful: but it relies upon a rea- 
fon depending upon the nature and conftitution of 
Grace, whofe produdiions are of the fame nature 
with the parent, and increafes itfelf, naturally grow- 
ing from grains to huge trees, from minutes to vaft 



3o8 OF PRATER. C.f 

proportions, and from moments to Eternity. But 
be fure not to omit your ufual prayers without great 
reafon, though without fin it may be done : becaufe 
after you have omitted fomething, in a little while 
you will be paft the fcruple of that, and begin to 
be tempted to leave out more. Keep yourfclf upto 
your ufual forms : you may enlarge when you will ; 
but do not contract or lefTen them without a very 
probable reafon. 

8. Let a man frequently and ferioufly by imagi- 
nation place himfelf upon his death-bed, and confi- 
der what great joys he fliall have for the remem- 
brance of every day well fpent, and what then he 
would give that he had fo fpent all his days. He 
may guefs at it by proportions ; for it is certain he 
fhall have a joyful and profperous night who hath 
ipent his day holily ; and he refigns his Soul with 
peace into the hands of God who hath lived in the 
peace of God and the works of Religion in his life- 
time. This confideration is of a real event, it is of 
a thing that will certainly come to pafs. // is ap- 
pointed for all men once to die^ and after death corns 
"Judgment ; the apprehenfion of which is dreadful, 
and the prefence of it is intolerable, unlefs by Reli- 
gion and Sandtity we are difpofed for fo venerable 
an appearance. 

9. To this may be ufeful that we confider the 
Sec the Great Exem- cafiuefs of ChrifFs yokc, the exccl- 
fhrESefe o^ chriftia^'n Icucics and fweetneflcs that are in 
^*^^'s>on- Religion, the peace of confcience, 

the joy of the Holy Ghoft, the rejoicing in God, the 
fimplicity and pleafure of virtue, the intricacy, trou- 
ble and bufinefs of fin ; the bleflings and health and 



S. 7. OF PRATER. 309 

reward of that ^ the curfes, the ficknefles and fad con- 
fequences of this ; and that if we are weary of the 
labours of Religion, we muft eternally fit ftill and 
do nothing : for whatfoever we do contrary to it, 
is infinitely more full of labour, care, difficulty and 
vexation. 

10. Confider this alfo, that tedioufnefs of fpirit is 
the beginning of the moft dangerous condition and 
eftate in the whole world. For it is a great diipofition 
to the fin againfl the Holy Ghoft : it is apt to bring 
a man to backfliding and the flate of unregeneration, 
to make him return to his vomit and his fink, and 
either to make the man impatient, or his condition 
icrupulous, unfatisfied, irkfome and defperate : and it 
is better that he had never known the way ofgodlinefsj 
than after the knowledge of it^ that he Jhould fall 
away. There is not in the world a greater fign that 
the fpirit of Re probation is beginning upon a man, 
than when he is habitually and conftantly, or very 
frequently, weary, and flights or loaths holy Offices. 

1 1 . The laft remedy that preferves the hope of 
fuch a man, and can reduce him to the flate of zeal 
and the love of God, is a pungent, fad, and a heavy 
affliction; not defperate, but recreated with fbme 
intervals of kindnefs, or little comforts, or entertained 
with hopes of deliverance; which condition if a man 
fhall fall into, by the grace of God he is likely to 
recover ; but if this help him not, it is infinite odds 
but he will quench the Spirit. 



3io OF ALMS. C.^. 




SECT. VIII. 

Of Alms. 

OVE is as communicative as fire, as bufy 
and as a<5tive, and it hath four twin Daugh- 
ters, extreme like each other ; and but that 
the Doctors of the School have done as Thamars 
Midwife did, who bound a Scarlet thread, fomething 
to diftinguifh them, it would be very hard to call 
them afunder. Their names are, i . Mercy ^ 2. Be- 
neficence, or welldoing, 3. Liberality : and 4. Alnis; 
which by a fpecial privilege hath obtained to be called 
after the mother's name, and is commonly called Cha- 
rity. The firft or eldeft is feated in the aifeftion, and 
it is that which all the other muft attend. For Merqr 
witliout Alms is acceptable, when the perfon is dil- 
abled to exprefs outwardly what he heartily defires. 
But Alms without Mercy are like prayers without 
devotion, or Religion without Humility. 2. Bene- 
Jicence, or well-doing, is a promptnefs and noblenefs 
of mind, making us to do offices of courtefy and hu- 
manity to all forts of perfons in their need, or out of 
their need. 3. Liberality is a difpofition of mind 
oppofite to Covetoufnefs, and confifts in the defpitc 
and negledt of money upon juft occafions, and relates 
to our friends, children, kindred, fervants and other 
relatives. 4. But Alms is a relieving the poor and 
needy. The firft and the laft only are duties of 
Chriftianity. The fecond and third are circumftances 
and adjund:s of thefe duties : for Liberality increafcs 
the degree of Alms, making our gift . greater ; and 



S.S. OF ALMS. 311 

Beneficence extends it to more perfons and orders of 
inen» fpreading it wider. The former makes us 
fbmetimes to give more than we are able ; and the 
latter gives to more than need by the neceflity of 
beggars and ferves the needs and conveniencies of 
perfbnsy and fupplies circumftances : whereas pro- 
perly. Alms are doles and largefles to the neceflitous 
and calamitous people, fupplying the neceffities of 
Nature, and giving remedies to their miferies. 

Mercy and Alms are the body and Soul of that 
charity which we muft pay to our Neighbour's need : 
and it is a precept which God therefore enjoined to 
the World, that the great inequality which he was 
pleafed to fuffer in the pofleffions and accidents of 
men might be reduced to fome temper and evennefs ; 
and the moft miferable perfbn might be reconciled 
to ibme fenfe and participation of felicity. 

Works of Mercy J or the fever al Kinds of corporal 

Alms. 

The works of Mercy are fo many as the afFedtions 
of Mercy have objedts, or as the World hath kinds 
of mifery • Men want meat, or drink, or clothes, or 
a houie, of liberty, or attendance, or a grave. In 
proportion to thefe, feven works are ufually afligned 
to Mercy, and there are feven kinds of corporal Alms 
reckoned, i. To feed the hungry. 2. 
To give drink to the thirfly. 3. Or 
clothes to the naked. 4. To redeem captives. 5. To 
vifit the fick. 6. To entertain ftrangers. 7. To 
bury the dead.* But many more may • Mat. 26. n. 
be added. Such as are 8. to give phy- * ^^"^' *• 5- 



312 OF ALMS. C.4. 

fie to fick perfons. 9. To bring cold and ftarvcd 
people to warmth and to the fire ; for fometimes 
clothing will not do it ; or this may be done when 
we cannot do the other. 10. To lead the blind in 
right ways. 1 1. To lend money. 12. To forgive 
debts. 13. To remit forfeitures. 14. To mend 
highways and bridges. 1 5 . To reduce or guide wan- 
dering travellers. 16. To eafe their labours by ac- 
commodating their work with apt inftruments; or 
their journey with beads of carriage. 17. To deli- 
ver the poor from their oppreflbrs. 18. To die for 
• Nobiiis h«c cffet picta- my brother.* 19. To pay maidens 
Q^'^Tro'^fi^^re mori dowrics, and to procurc for diem 
veiict uterque^or, honcft and chaftc marriages. 

Works offpiritual Alms and Mercy are, 

I. To teach the ignorant. 2. To counfel doubt- 
ing perfons. 3. To admonifh finners diligently^ pru- 
dently ^ feafonably and charitably : To which alfo may 
be reduced, provoking and encouraging to good 

Heb. 10. 24. works. 4. To comfort the afflided. 

iThcf. 5. 14. ^, To pardon offenders. 6. To fuc- 
cour and fupport the weak. 7. To pray for all eflates 
of men, and for relief to all their neceflities. To 
which may be added 8. To punifh or corred refrac- 
torinefs. 9. To be gentle and charitable in centr- 
ing the actions of others. 10. To eftablifh the fcru- 
pulous, wavering and inconftant fpirits. 1 1 . To con- 

*Puellaproftemitfead A^m the ftrong. 12. NottOgive 
pedes: Milerere virgini- fcandal. I 3. To QUit a man of his 

tatis meac, ne prodituas ^ a »-r« j 

hoc corpus fub tarn turpi tear. * 1 4. To rcdccm maidens 
ift. po. ya, from proftitution and publication 
of their bodies. 



S.8. OF ALMS. 313 

To both thefc kinds, a third alfo may be added of 
a mixed nature, partly corporal, and partly fpiritual : 
fiich are, i. Reconciline enemies; , ^.^ „ 

*^ Laudiduchimapudvet. 

2. Erecimg public Schools of at^^^ « jui«>i>« mTicoc i*- 
Leammg ; 3. Mamtammg Lee- 
tares of Divinity ; 4. Erefting Colleges of Religion, 
and retirement from the noifes and more frequent 
temptations of the World ; 5. Finding employment 
for unbufied perfons, and putting children to honefl 
Trades. For the particulars of Mercy or Alms can- 
not be narrower than Men's needs are : and the old 
method of Alms is too narrow to comprife them all ; 
and yet the kinds are too many to be difcourfed of 
particularly : only our blefled Saviour, in the precept 
of Almsy ufes the inftances of relieving the poor, and 
forgrvenefs of injuries ; and by proportion to thefe, 
the reft whofe duty is plain, fimple, eafy and necef- 
fary, may be determined. But Alms in general are 
to be difpofed of according to the following Rules. 

Rules for giving Alms. 

I . Let no man do Alms of that which is none of 
his own ; for of that he is to make re- s. Greg. 7. 1. 
ftitution; that is due to the owners, "o. Ipift. 
not to the poor: for every man hath need of his 
own, and that is firft to be provided for ; and then 
you muft think of the needs of the poor. He that 
gives the poor what is not his own, makes himfelf a 
thief, and the poor to be the receivers. This is not 
to be underflood as if it were unlawful for a man 
that is not able to pay his debts, to give fmaller 
Alms to the poor. He may not give fuch portions 
as can in any fenfe more difable him to do juflice : 



314 OF ALMS. C. 4. 

but fuch, which if they were faved could not advance 
^ , w. . J. the other duty, may retire to this, 

Prxbcant mifcncordia , , i 11 

ut confcrvctur juftitia. and do here what they may, fincc 
ug. nw. 3. 9- jj^ ^j^^ Other duty they cannot do 

what they fhould. But generally Cheaters and Rob- 
bers cannot give Alms of what they have cheated 
and robbed, unlefs they cannot tell the peribns whom 
they have injured, or the proportions ; and in fuch 
cafes they are to give thofe unknown portions to the 
poor by way of reftitution, for it is no Alms ; only 
God is the fupreme Lord to whom thofe efcheats 
devolve, and the poor are his Receivers. 

2. Of money unjuftly taken, and yet voluntarily 
parted with, we may and are bound to give Alms: 
fuch as is money given and taken for falfe witnefs, 
bribes, fimoniacal contradls; becaufe the Receiver 
hath no right to keep it, nor the Giver any right to 
recall it, it is unjuft money, and yet payable to none 
but the fupreme Lord (who is the perfon injured) 
and to his Delegates, that is, the poor. To which 
I infert thefe cautions, i . If the perfon injured by 
the unjuft fentence of a bribed Judge, or by felfe 
witnefs, be poor, he is the proper object and bo- 
fom to whom the reftitution is to be made. 2. In 

Dccret. Ep. tit. de Si- ^^^^ ^^ Simony, the Church to 

monia. whom the Simony was injurious, is 

the lap into which the reftitution is to be poured; 

and if it be poor and out of repair, the Alms, or 

Reftitution (fhall I call it ?) are to be paid to it. 

3 . There is fome fort of gain that hath in it no 
injuftice properly fo called ; but it is unlawful and 

^Ithy lucre : fuch as is money taken for work done 
unlawfully upon the Lord's day^ hire taken for dif- 



S.S. OF ALMS. 315 

figuring one's felf, and for being profefled jefters, 
the wages of fuch as make unjuft bargains, and of 
harlots : of this money there is fome preparation to 
be made before it be given in Alms. The money is 
infedled with the plague, and muft pafs through the 
fire or the water before it be fit for Alms : the per- 
fon muft repent and leave the crime, and then min- 
iftcr to the poor, 

4- He that gives Alms muft do it in mercy, that 
is, out of a true fenfe of the cala- 

/*i.i ^1 /•/T/'T -^ Donum nudum eft, 

mity of his brother, firft feelmg it nifi confcnfu veftiatur, 1. 
in himfelf in fome proportion, and ^* ^' "^^ p^^^'* 
then endeavouring to eafe himfelf and the other of 
their common calamity. Againft this Rule they of- 
fend who give Alms out of cuftom, or to upbraid the 
poverty of the other, or to make him mercenary and 
obliged, or with any unhandfome circumftances. 

5. He that gives Alms muft do it with a fingle eye 
and heart ; that is, without defigns to get the praife 
of men : and if he fecures that, he may either give 
them publicly or privately : for Chrift intended only 
to provide againft pride and hypocrify, when he bade 
Alms to be given in fecret, it being otherwife one 
of his commandments, t/iat our light Jhould JJjtne be- 
fore men : this is more excellent, that is more fafe. 

6. To this alfo appertains, that he who hath done 
a good turn fhould fo forget it as 

not to fpeak of it : but he that x^^x^xi^rr^tlT^i^^^, 
boafts it or upbraids it, hath paid ^^'^^^ 

himfelf, and loft the noblenefs of the charity. 

7. Give Alms with a cheerful heart and counte- 
nance, not grudgingly or of necejjity j for 

God loveth a cheerful giver ; and there- * ^^' ^' ^* 



3i6 OF ALMS. C.{. 

fore give quickly when the power is in thy hand, 
and the need is in thy Neighbour, and thy Neigh- 
bour at thy door. He gives twice that relieves 
fpeedily. 

8 . According to thy ability give to all men that 

Luke 6. to. ^^^^ • ^^^ ^^ equal needs give firft to 

good men, rather than to bad men; 
and if the needs be unequal do fo too; 
provided that the need of the pooreft be not vio- 
lent or extreme : but if an evil man be in extreme 
neceffity, he is to be relieved rather than a good man 
who can tarry longer, and may fubfift without it. 
And if he be a good man, he will defire it fhould 
be fo : becaufe himfelf is bound to favc the life of 
his brother with doing fome inconvenience to him- 
felf: and no difference of virtue or vice can make 
the eafe of one beggar equal with the life of an- 
other. 

9. Give no Alms to vicious perfons, if fuch Alms 

will fupport their fin : as if they will continue in 

2 Thcf. 3. 10. idlenefs, [if they will not work^ net- 
A Cavaiio chi non thcT let them eat^ or if they will 

porta fella Biada non fiy i-^-jki 1 r 

crevcUa. ipcnd it lu * drunkenncfs, or wan- 

• De Mcndico male tonuefs : fuch perions when they 

mcrctur, qui ci dat quod ^ J 

cdat aut quod bibat: are reduced to very great want, 

Nam et illud quod dat /ii_ i« y • r \ 

pcrdit, et iiii producit vi- muIt DC relieved in luch propor- 

tam ad miferiam. Trin, 4.* ^« ^« .^^ __j. i- ^i_ • 1 

tions as may not relieve their dy- 
ing luft, but may refrefh their faint or dying bodies. 

10. The beft objedls of charity are poor houfe- 
keepers that labour hard, and are burdened with 
many children; or Gentlemen fallen into fad po- 
verty, efpecially if by innocent misfortune, (and if 
their crimes brought them into it, yet they are to 



S.S. OF ALMS. 317 

be relieved according to the former rule) perfecuted 
perfons, widows and fatherlefs children, putting 
them to honeft trades or fchools of j^^^ ^^ j^^^uj^j, f„, 
learning. And fearch into the pcrcgcnumctpauDcrem. 

needs of numerous and meaner a donate e tcnere in- 
families : for there are many per- ^l^^ ^^^^^ *^^'"- 
fons that have nothing left them but mifery and mo- 
defty ; and towards fuch we muft add two circum- 
ftances of Charity, i. To enquire them out. 2. To 
convey our relief unto them fo as we do not make 
them afhamed. 

X I . Give, looking for nothing again, that is, with- 
out confideration of future advantages : give to chil- 
dren, to old men, to the unthankful, and the dying, 
and to thofe you fhall never fee again ; for elfe your 
Alms or courtefy is not charity, but traffic and mer- 
chandife : and be fure that you omit not to relieve 
the needs of your enemy and the injurious ; for fo 
poffibly you may win him to yourfelf ; but do you 
intend the winning him to God. 

12. Truft not your Alms to intermedial, uncer- 
tain and under difpenfers : by which rule is not 
only intended the fecuring your Alms in the right 
channel ; but the humility of your perfon,v and that 
which the Apoftle calls the labour of love. And if 
you converfe in Hofpitals and Alms-houfes, and mi- 
nifter with your own hand what your heart hath firft 
decreed, you will find your heart endeared and made 
familiar with the needs and with the perfons of the 
poor, thofe excellent images of Chrift. 

1 3 . Whatfoever is fuperfluous • — Pixmoniho tibi 

^i_ /L ^ • ^ 1^ J • /• /• J • Ut ita tc aliorum miferef- 

m thy eftate is to be dilpenled m eat, n^ tui alios mi- 
Alms. *He that hath two coats ^^™^- rrinufnmus. 



3t8 of alms. C.\. 

muji give to him that hath none ; that is, he that hath 
beyond his need muft give that which is beyond it. 
Only among needs we are to reckon not only what 
will fupport our life, but alfo what will maintain the 
decency of our eftate and perfon ; not only in prc- 
fent needs, but in all future neceffities, and very pro- 
bable contingencies, but no further : we are not 
obliged beyond this, unlefs we fee very great, public 
and calamitous neceffities. But yet, if we do extend 
beyond our meafures, and give more than we are 
able, we have the Philippians and many holy perfons 
for our precedent, we have S. Paul for our encou- 
ragement, we have Chrift for our Counfellor, wc 
have God for our rewarder, and a great treafure in 
Heaven for our recompenfe and reftitution. But I 
propound it to the confideration of all Chriftian 
people, that they be not nice and curious, fond and 
indulgent to themfelves in taking accounts of their 
perfonal conveniences, and that they make their pro- 
portions moderate and eafy, according to the order 
and manner of Chriftianity ; and the confequent will 
be this, that the poor will more plentifully be re- 
lieved, themfelves will be more able to do it, and the 
duty will'be lefs chargeable, and the owners of eftates 
charged with fewer accounts in the ipending them. 
It cannot be denied, but in the expenfes of all libe- 
ral and great perfonages many things might be fpared; 
fome fuperfluous fervants, fome idle meetings, feme 
unneceflary and imprudent feafts, fome garments too 
coftly, fome unneceflary Lawfuits, fome vain jour- 
neys : and when we are tempted to fuch needlefs 
expenfes, if we fhall defcend to moderation, and lay 
afide the furplufage, we fhall find it with more pro- 



S. 8. OF ALMS. 319 

fit to be laid out upon the poor members of Chrift, 
than upon our own with vanity. But this is only 
intended to be an advice in the matter of doing 
Alms : for I am not ignorant that great variety of 
clothes always have been permitted to Princes and 
Nobility, and others in their proportion ; and they 
ufually give thofe clothes as rewards to fervants, and 
other perfons needful enough, and then they may 
fcrve their own fancy and their duty too : but it is 
but reafon and Religion to be careful that they be 
given to fuch only where duty, or prudent Hberality, 
or alms determine them ; but in no fenfe let them 
do it fo as to minifter to vanity, to luxury, to prodi- 
gality. The like alfo is to be obferved in other in- 
ftances. And if we once give our minds to the ftudy 
and arts of Alms, we fljall find ways enough to make 
this duty eafy, profitable, and ufeful. 

1. He that plays at any game muft refolve be- 
forehand to be indifferent to win or lofe : but if he 
gives to the poor all that he wins, it is better than 
to keep it to himfelf : but it were better yet, that he 
lay by fo much as he is willing to lofe, and let the 
game alone, and by giving fo much Alms traflic for 
eternity. That is one way. 

2. Another is keeping the fafting days of the 
Church ; which if our condition be fuch as to be 
able to caft our accounts, and make abatements for 
our wanting fo many meals in the whole year, 
(which by the old appointment did amount to 153, 
and fince moft of them are fallen into defuetude, we 
may make up as many of them as we pleafe by vo- 
luntary Fafts) we may from hence find a confidera- 
ble relief for the poor. But if we be not willing 



320 ' OF ALMS. C.4. 

fometimes to faft that our brother may eat, wc (hould 
ill die for him. S. Martin had given all that he had 
in the world to the poor, fave one coat, and that alfo 
he divided between two beggars. A Father in the 
Mount of Nitria was reduced at laft to the Inventory 
of one Teftament, and that book alfb was tempted 
from him by the needs of one whom he thought 
poorer than himfelf. Greater yet : S. Paulinus fold 
himfelf to flavery to redeem a young man, for whofe 
captivity his Mother wept fadly : and it is feid that 
S. Katharine fucked the envenomed wounds of a 
villain who had injured her moft impudently. And 
I fhall tell you of a greater Charity than all thcfc 
put together : Chrift gave himfelf to fhame and 
death to redeem his enemies from bondage, and 
death 9 and Hell. 

3 . Learn of the frugal man, and only avoid for- 
did adlions, and turn good hufband, and change your 
arts of getting into providence for the poor, and we 
fhall foon become rich in good works : and why 
fhould we not do as much for charity as for covet- 
oufnefs ; for Heaven, as for the fading world; for 
God and the Holy Jefusy as for the needlefs fupcr- 
fluities of back and belly ? 

14. In giving Alms to beggars and perfons of that 
low rank, it is better to give little to each that wc 
may give to the more, fo extending our Alms to 
many perfons : but in charities of Religion, as build- 
ing Hofpitals, Colleges, and Houfes for Devotion, 
and fupplying the accidental wants of decayed per- 
fons, fallen from great plenty to great neceflity, it is 
better to unite our Alms than to difperfe them ; to 
make a noble relief or maintenance to one, and to 



S.B. OF ALMS. 321 

reftore him to comfort, than to fupport only his 
natural needs, and keep him alive only, unrefcued 
from fad difcomforts. 

15. The precept of Alms or Charity binds not 
indefinitely to all the inftances and kinds of Charity : 
for he that delights to feed the poor, and fpends all 
his portion that way, is not bound to enter into pri- 
fons and redeem captives : but we are obliged by the 
prefence of circumftances, and the ipecial difpofition 
of providence, and the pitiablenefs of an objedl, to 
this or that particular aft of charity. The eye is the 
fenfe of mercy, and the bowels are its organ, and 
that enkindles pity, and pity produces alms: when 
the eye fees what it never faw^ the heart will think 
what it never thought : but when we have an objeft, 
prefent to our eye, then we muft pity, for there the 
providence of God hath fitted our charity with cir- 
cumftances. He that is in thy fight or in thy 
neighbourhood is fallen into the lot of thy charity. 

1 6. If thou haft no money, yet thou ^^j^^ ^^ 
muft have mercy, and art bound to Afts 3. 6. 
pity the poor, and pray for them, and ^^. ^. ^^ ^^ ^^^ 
throw thy holy defires and devotions non ti vcrrcbbc 
into the treafure of the Church : and if 

thou doeft what thou art able, be it little or great, 
corporal or fpiritual, the charity of Alms or the cha- 
rity of prayers, a cup of wine or a cup of water, 
if it be but love to the brethren or a i Pct. 1. 22. 
defirc to help all or any of Chrift*s * ^^^^ *• "• 
poor, it ftiall be accepted according to what a man 
hath^ not according to what he hath not. For love is 
all this, and all the other Conimandments : and it will 



322 OF ALMS. C.4. 

cxprefs itfelf where it can ; and where it cannot, yet 
it is love ftilU and it is z\£oforrow that it cannot 

Motives to Charity. 

The motives to this duty are fuch as holy Scrip- 
ture hath propounded to us by way of confideration 
and propofition of its excellencies and confequcnt 
^, , reward, i. There is no one duty 

Mat. 6. 4.-25. 35. - . * -^ . . 

and which our blefled Saviour did recom- 

u c 11.41. 12.33. ^^^j ^^ j^jg Difciples with fb repeated 

an injunction as this of Charity and Alms. To which 

^ ^ add the words fpoken by our Lord, It 

Aas 20. 35. . r / ^ 

ts better to gtve than to receroe. And 
when we confider how great a blefling it is that we 
beg not from door to door, it is a ready inflance of 
our thankfulnefs to God, for his fake to relieve them 
that do. 2. This duty is that alone whereby the 
future day of Judgment fhall be tranfa<fted. For 
nothing but Charity and Alms is that whereby Chrift 
fhall declare the juflice and mercy of the eternal 
fentence. Martyrdom itfelf is not there expreffcd 
and no otherwife involved, but as it is the greatcft 
Charity. 3. Chrifl made himfelf the greatefl and 
daily example of Alms or Charity. He went up 
and down doing good, preaching the Gofpel, and 
healing all difeafes : and God the Father is imita- 
ble by us in nothing but in purity and mercy. 4- 
Philip. 4. 17. Alms given to the poor redound to the 

emolument of the Giver both tempo- 

Aasio ^^^ ^^^ eternal. 5. They are inibru- 

Heb. 13. 16. mental to the remiflion of fins. Our 

* * ^' * ' forgivenefs and mercy to others being 

made the very rule and proportion of our confidence 



5. 8. OF ALMS. 323 

and hope and our prayer to be forgiven ourfelves. 

6. It is a treafure in Heaven, it procures friends 
when we die. 6. It is reckoned as done to Chrift 
whatfoever we do to our poor brother ; and there- 
fore when a poor man begs for Chrift's fake, if 
he have reafon to afk for Chrift's fake, give it him 
if thou canft. Now every man hath title to afk 
for Chrift's fake whofe need is great, and himfelf 
unable to cure it, and if the man be a Chriflian. 
Whatfoever charity Chrift will reward, all that is 
given for Chrift's fake, and therefore it may be afked 
in his name : but every man that ufes that facred 
name for an endearment hath not a title to it, 
neither he nor his need. 7. It is one of the wings 
of prayer, by which it flies to the throne of grace. 
8. It crowns all the works of piety. 9. It caufes 
thankfgiving to God on our behalf. 10. And the 
bowels of the poor blefs us, and they pray for us. 
1 1 . And that portion of our eftate out of which a 

tenth, or a fifth, or a twentieth, or Nunquam memini me 

fome offering to God for Religion 'S^7'^:^:^lll 
and the poor goes forth, certainly ""^"^P^Hi^l^^^'^'ad Ne 
returns with a great blefling upon pou 
all the reft. It is like the efFufion of oil by the Si- 
donian woman ; as long as (he pours into empty vef- 
fels, it could never ceafe running : or like the wi- 
dow^s barrel of meal ; it confumes not as long as (he 
fed the prophet. 1 2. The fum of all is contained in 
the words of our bleflfed Saviour, Give alms offuch 
things as you have^ and behold all things are clean unto 
you. 13. To which may be added, that charity or 
mercy is the peculiar charadter of God's Eled, and 
a fign of predeftination ; which advantage we are 



324 OF ALMS. C. 4. 

taught by S. Paul: [Put on therefore 
coiom 3. la. ^^ ^^^ ^j^^ ^ Q^j^ f^^iy ^^^ beloved, 

bowels of mercy J kindnefs, &c. Forbearing one an-- 
other, andforgrving one another, if any man have a 
quarrel againjl any.] The refult of all which wc 
may read in the words of S . Chryfojiom : To know 
the art of Alms, is greater than to be crowned with the 
Diadem of Kings. And yet to convert one Soul is 
greater than to pour out ten thoufand talents into the 
bajketsof the poor. 

But becaufe giving Alms is an ad: of the virtue of 
mercifulnefs, our endeavour muft be by proper arts 
to mortify the parents of unmercifulnefs, which are, 
I. Envy, 2. Anger, 3. Covetoufnefs : in which we 
may be helped by the following rules or inftru- 
ments. 

Remedies againjl Unmercifulnefs and TJncharitablenefs^ 

I • Agfiinjl Envy, by way of Conjideration. 

Againfl Envy I (hall ufe the fame arguments I 
would ufe to perfuade a man from the Fever or the 
Dropfy . I . Becaufe it is a difeafe ; it is fo far from 
having pleafure in it, or a temptation to it, that it is 
full of pain, a great inftrument of vexation ; it eats 
the flefh, and dries up the marrow, and makes hol- 
low eyes, and lean cheeks, and a pale face. 2. It is 
nothing but a dired: refolution never to enter into 
Heaven by the way of noble pleafure taken in the 
good of others. 3. It is moft contrary to God; 4, 
And a juft contrary ftate to the felicities and.adtions 
of Heaven, where every ftar increafes the light of 



S. 8. OF ENVr. 325 

the other, and the multitude of guefts at the fupper 
of the Lamb makes the eternal meal more feftival. 
It is perfeftly the ftate of Hell, and the paffion of 
Devils: for they do nothing but • Nemo alien* vimiti 
defpair in themfelves, * and envy j?]J^^' *i"^ ^^ ^^'^^** 
others' tjuiet or fafety, and yet can- ^«^- ^^'^^ ^- ^«'««- 
not rejoice either in their good or in their evil, al- 
though they endeavour to hinder that, and procure 
this, with all the devices and arts of malice and of a 
great underftanding. 6. Envy can lerve no end in 
the world ; it cannot pleafe anything, nor do any- 
thing, nor hinder anything, but the content and feli- 
city of him that hath it. 7. Envy can never pretend 
to juftice, as hatred and uncharitablenefs fometimes 
may : for there may be caufes of hatred ; and I may 
have wrong done me, and then hatred hath fome 
pretence, though no juft argument. But no man is 
unjuft or injurious, for being profperous or wife. 
8 . And therefore many men profefs to hate another, 
but no man owns envy^ as being an enmity and dif- 
pleafure for no caufe but goodnefs or felicity : En- 
vious men being; like Cantharides „ ^, - . 

o ^ Homerus Thcrntis ma- 

and Caterpillars, that delight moft los mores dcfcribcns,inaii- 

- ^ . - n 11 tiaefummamappofuit. 

to devour ripe and moll excellent Pelid»impnmberatat- 

fruits. 9. It is of all crimes thebaf- ^^ ^^^^^^ y »• 
eft : for malice and anger are appeafed with benefits, 
but envy is exafperated, as envying to fortunate per- 
fbns both their power and their will to do good ; 
and never leaves murmuring till the envied perfon 
be levelled, and then only the Vulture leaves to eat 
the liver. For if his Neighbour be made miferable, 
the envious man is apt to be troubled : like him that 
is fb long unbuilding the turrets till all the roof is low 



326 OF ANGER. C-f 

or flat, or that the ftones fall upon the lower build- 
ings, and do a mifchief that the man repents of. 

2 . Remedies againfi Anger by way of Exercife. 

The next enemy to mercifulnefs and the grace of 
Alms is Anger : againft which there are proper in- 
ftruments both in Prudence and Religion. 

1 . Prayer is the great remedy againft Anger : for 
it mufl fuppofe it in fome degree removed before wc 
pray, and then it is the more likely it will be finifhed 
when the prayer is done. We mufl lay afide the 
adt of Anger, as a preparatory to prayer ; and the 
curing the habit will be the eflfedt and blefiing of 
prayer : fo that if a man to cure his anger refolves 
to addrefs himfelf to God by prayer, it is firft necef- 
fary that by his own obfervation and diligence he 
lay the anger afide, before his prayer can be fit to 
be prefented : and when we fo pray, and io endea- 
vour, we have all the bleffings of prayer which God 
hath promifed to it, to be our fecurity for fuccefs. 

2. If Anger arifes in thy breaft, inflantly feal up 
^ . ^ ., thy lips, and let it not go forth: 

Ira cum peous rapida oc- ' ^^ , ° 

cupavit 5 for like fire when it wants vent, 

Futifes lincrux iubeo ca- . •n/* /••/-i/< ▼• j 

It Will lupprels itlelf. It is good 



vere 



Vana latratus i^Ms, ^^ ^ p^^^ ^^ j^^^^ ^ ^^^^^^ ^^ ^ 

Turbatus furo, et non fmooth tougue ; but it is better 

fum locutus. Pfal, 79. - • t r • /••/•• 1 

that It be fo m anger : for if it be 
rough and difl:empered, there it is an ill fign, but here 
it is an ill caufe. Angry pafllon is a fire, and angry 
words are like breath to fan them ; together they are 
like fteel and flint, fending out fire by mutual colli- 
fion. Some men will difcourfe themielves into paf- 



S. 8. OF ANGER. 327 

lion, and if their neighbour be enkindled too, toge- 
ther they flame with rage and violence. 

3. Humility is the moft excellent natural cure 
for anger in the world : for he that by daily confi- 
dering his own infirmities and failings makes the 
error of his neighbour or fervant to be his own cafe, 
and remembers that he daily needs God*s pardon and 
his brother's charity, will not be apt to rage at the 
levities, or misfortunes, or indifcretions of another ; 
greater than which he confiders that he is very fre- 
quent and more inexcufably guilty of. 

4. Confider the example of the ever-blefled Jefus^ 
who fufFered all the contradictions of finners, and 
received all affronts and reproaches of malicious, 
rafh and foolifh perfons, and yet in all them was as 
difpaflionate and gentle as the morning Sun in Au- 
tumn : and in this alfb he propounded himfelf imi- 
table by us. For if innocence itfelf did fufFer fb 
great injuries and difgraces, it is no great matter for 
us quietly to receive all the calamities of fortune, and 
indifcretion of fervants, and miflakes of friends, and 
unkindneiles of kindred, and rudenefTes of enemies, 
/ince we have deferved thefe and worfe, even Hell 
itfelf. 

5. If we be tempted to Anger in the Adlions of 
Government and Difcipline to our inferiors, (in which 
cafe anger is permitted fo far as it is prudently inflru- 
mental to Government, and only is a fin when it is 
exceffive and unreafonable, and apt to diflurb our 
own difcourfe, or to exprefs itfelf in imprudent 
words or violent adlions) let us propound to our- 
felves the example of God the Father, who at the 
fame time, and with the fame tranquillity decreed 



328 OF ANGER. C. 4. 

Heaven and Hell, the joys of blefled Angels and 
Souls, and the torments of devils and accurfed fpi- 
rits : and at the day of judgment when all the World 
(hall burn under his feet, God fhall not be at all in- 
flamed, or fhaken in hiseflential featand centre of tran- 
quillity and joy . And if at firft the caufe feems reafon- 
able, yet defer to execute thy anger till thou mayft 
better judge. For as Phocion told the Athenians^ who 
upon the firft news of the death of Alexander were 
ready to revolt. Stay a while, for if the King be not 
dead, your hafte will ruin you ; but if he be dead, 
your ftay cannot prejudice your affairs, for he will 
be dead to-morrow as well as to-day : fo if thy fer- 
vant or inferior deferve punifhment, ftaying till to- 
morrow will not make him innocent; but it may 
pofTibly preferve thee fo, by preventing thy ftriking 
a guiltlefs perfon, or being furious for a trifle. 

6, Remove from thyfelf all provocations and in- 
centives to Anger ; efpecially i . Games of chance, 

• 'H^.. r^ ^ ..r,a «.. ^^^ gf^^^ .^^g^^s- * P^troclus kil- 
TiitT«w 'A^^i^rwc. led his friend, the fbn of Amphi- 

TpaT^xotcn xoXik^iic- damasy m nis rage and ludden lury, 

rifing upon a crofs game at Tables, 

Such alfo are petty curiofities and worldly buiinefs 

and carefulnefs about it : but manage thyfelf with 

indifferency, or contempt of thofe external things, 

and do not fpend a paflion upon them; for it is 

Qjii Dauca requirunt, ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^Y ^^C WOrth. But 

non muftis c^ccidun^ they that dcfirc but few things can 

be crofled but in a few. 2. In not 
heaping up with an ambitious or curious prodigality 
any very curious or choice Utenfils, Seals, Jewels, 
Glaffes, precious ftones ; becaufe thofe very many 



S. 8. OF ANGER. 329 

accidents which happen in the fpoiling or lofs of 
thefe rarities, are in event an irrefiftible caufe of 
violent anger. 3. Do not entertain nor fufFer tale- 
bearers : for they abufe our ear firft, and then our 
credulity, and then fteal our patience, and it may be 
for a lie ; and if it be true, the matter is not confi- 
derable ; or if it be, yet it is pardonable. And we 
may always efcape with patience at one of thefe out- 
lets : either i. By not hearing flanders, or 2. by not 
believing them, or 3 . by not regarding the thing, or 
4. by forgiving the perfon. 4. To this purpofe alfo 
it may ferve well if we choofe (as much as we can) 
to live with peaceable perfons, for that prevents the 
occafions of confufion : and if we live with prudent 
perfons, they will not eafily occafion our difturbance. 
But becaufe thefe things are not in many men's 
power, therefore I propound this rather as a felicity 
than a remedy or a duty, and an art of prevention 
rather than of cure. 

7. Be not inquifitive into the affairs of other 
men, nor the faults of thy fervants, nor the miftakes 
of thy friends ; but what is offered to you, ufe ac- 
cording to the former rules, but do not thou go out to 
gather flicks to kindle a fire to burn thine own 
houfe. And add this ; If my friend faid or did well 
in that for which I am angry, I am in the fault, not 
he ; but if he did amifs, he is in the mifery, not I : 
for cither he was deceived, or he was malicious, and 
either of them both is all one with a miferable per- 
fon ; and that is an obje<ft of pity, not of anger. 

8. Ufe all reafonable difcourfes to excufe the 
faults of others, confidering that there are many 
circumflances of time, of perfon, of accident, of in- 



330 OF ANGER. C. 4. 

advertency, of infrequcncy, of aptnefs to amend, of 
forrow for doing it : and it is well that we take any 
good in exchange for the evil is done or fuiFered. 

9. Upon the rifing of anger inftantly enter into a 
deep confideration of the joys of Heaven, or the 

Homer. pains of Hell : forjear and joy are 

naturally apt to appeafe this violence. 

10. In contentions be always paflive, never aftive, 
upon the defenfive, not the aiTaulting part ; and then 
alfo give a gentler anfwer, receiving the furies and 
indifcretions of the other like a ftone into a bed of 
Mofs and foft compliance ; and you fhall find it fit 
down quietly : whereas anger and violence makes 
the contention loud and long, and injurious to both 
the parties. 

1 1 . In the actions of Religion be careful to tem- 
per all thy in fiances with meeknefs, and the proper 
inftruments of it : and if thou beeft apt to be angry, 
neither faft violently, nor entertain the too forward 
heats of zeal ; h\xt fecure thy duty with conilant and 
regular actions, and a good temper of body with con- 
venient refrefhments and recreations. 

12. If Anger rifes fuddenly and violently, firft 
reftrain it with confideration, and then let it end in 
a hearty prayer for him that did the real or feeming 
injury. The former of the two flops its growth, 
and the latter quite kills it, and makes amends for 
its monflrous and involuntary birth. 

Remedies againjl Anger ^ by way of Confideration. 

I . Confider that Anger is a profefled enemy to 
Counfel ; it is a dir edl florm > in which no man can 
be heard to fpeak or call from without : for if you 
counfel gently, you are defpifcd ; if you urge it and 



5.8. OF ANGER. 331 

be vehement, you provoke it more. Be careful 
therefore to lay up beforehand a ^ , ., . r w- 

J r Kai futvOafAnr /biff da 9fay 

great ftock of reafbn and prudent t^^^ ««»^» 
conlideration, that like a belieged 0wuv^r^, 
Town you may be provided for, 
and be defenfible from v^ithin, fince you are not 
likely to be relieved from without. Anger is not to 
be fuppreiled but by fomething that is as inward as 
itielf, and more habitual. To which purpofe add, 
that 2. Of all paffions it endeavours moft to make 
Reafbn ufelefs. 3. That it is an univerfal poifon, of 
an infinite objedl : for no man was ever fo amorous 
as to love a Toad, none fo envious as to repine at 
the condition of the miferable, no man fo timorous 
as to fear a dead Bee ; but Anger is troubled at 
every thing, and every man, and every accident, and 
therefore unlefs it be fupprefTed it will make a man's 
condition refllefs. 4. If it proceeds .^. ^ . , 

* 1 O BufMf ^nwy airtofy avf*- 

from a great caufe, it turns to fury; ^^^riiA^x^* ^^^"c <^y 
II irom a Imall cauie, it is peevilh- iv^uui, in n mI ^sc 
nels : and 10 is always either tern- 
ble or ridiculous. 5. It makes a man's body mon- 
flrous, deformed and contemptible, the voice horrid, 
the eyes cruel, the face pale or fiery, the gait fierce, 
the fpeech clamorous and loud. 6. It is neither 
manly nor ingenuous. 7. It proceeds from foftnefs 
of fpirit and pufillanimity ; which makes that Wo- 
men are more angry than Men, fick perfons more 
than the healthful, old men more than young, un- 
profperous and calamitous people than the blefTed 
and fortunate. 8. It is a paflion fitter for Flies and 
Infedls than for perfons profefling noblenefs and 
bounty. 9. It is troublcfome not only to thofe that 
fufFer it, but to them that behold it; there being no 



332 OF ANGER. C. \. 

• Dicere quid ccena greater incivility * of entertain- 
poflis ingratius ifia? mtiit than foF thc Cook's fault, or 

the negligence of the fervants, to be cruel, or outra- 
geous, or unpleafant in the prefence of the guefts. 
lo. It makes marriage to be a neceflary and una- 
voidable trouble ; friendfhips, and focieties, and fa- 
miliarities to be intolerable, ii. It multiplies thc 
evils of drunkennefs, and makes the levities of Wine 
to run into madnefs. 12. It makes innocent jefting 
to be the beginning of Tragedies. It turns friend- 
fhip into hatred ; * it makes a man lofe himfelf, and 
his Reafon and his argument in diiputation. *It 
turns the defires of knowledge into an^itch of wran- 
gling. * It adds infolency to power. ♦ It turns 
juftice into cruelty, and judgment into oppreffion. 
* It changes difcipline into tedioufnefs and hatred of 
liberal inftitution. * It makes a profperous man to 
be envied, and the unfortunate to be unpitied. * It 
is a confluence of all the irreguly^aflions : there is 
in it envy and forrow, fear and fcorn, pride and pre- 
judice, rafhnefs and inconfideration, rejoicing in evil 
and a defire to' inflidt it, fclf-love, impatience and 
curiofity. * And laftly, though it be very trouble- 
fome to others, yet it is moft troublefome to him 
that hath it. 

In the ufe of thefe arguments and the former ex- 
ercifes be diligent to obferve, left in your defires to 
fupprefs anger you be paflionate and angry at your- 

. , ., felf for being angry : like Phyfi- 

Amaram amaro bilem o o y » / 

pharmaco qui eiuunt. ciaus, who givc a bitter potion 
when they intend to ejeft the bitternefs of choler; 
for this will provoke the perfon and incrcafe the 
paflion. But placidly and quietly fet upon the mor- 



S. 8. OF ANGER. 333 

tification of it ; and attempt it firft for a day, refolv- 
ing that day not at all to be angry, and to be watch- 
ful and obfervant, for a day is no great trouble : but 
then, after one day's watchfulnefs it will be as eafy 
to watch two days as at firft it was to watch one 
day ; and fo you may increafe till it becomes eafy 
and habitual. 

Only obferve that fuch an anger alone is criminal 
which is againft charity to myfelf or my neighbour ; 
but anger againft fin is a holy zeal, and an ^fft&. of 
love to God and my brother, for whofe intereft I 
am paflionate, like a concerned perfbn : and if I take 
care that my anger makes no refle<flion of cruelty or 
fcorn upon the offender, or of pride and violence, or 
tranfportation to myfelf, anger becomes charity and 
duty. And when one commended Charilausy the 
King of Spartay for a gentle, a good and a meek 
Prince, his colleague faid well, pj^^^ ^^ ^^.^ ^^ .^ 
Ho^ can he be good who is not an vidia. 

enemy even to vicious perfons ? 

3. Remedies againji Covetoufnefsy the third Enemy 

of Mercy. 

Covetoufnefs is alfb an enemy to Alms, though 
not to all the effedts of mercifulnefs : but this is to 
be cured by the proper motives to charity before 
mentioned, and by the proper rules of juftice ; which 
being fecurcd, the arts of getting money are not eafily 
made criminal. To which alfo we may add, 

I . Covetoufnefs makes a man miferable ; becaufe 
riches are not means to make a man happy : and un- 
lefs felicity were to be bought with money, he is a 
vain perfon who admires heaps of gold and rich pof- 



334 OF COFETOUSNESS. C, 4. 

feflions. For what Hippomachus faid to ibmc per- 
Q^id refert igitur quantis foDS who commended a tall man as 
PoSt ^S. nemo- At to bc a ChampioD in the Olym- 
juS:r;?r;Sn"t;^ P^^ games, it is tme (faid he) if 
quas emerit edcs ? fhc CFowii hang ft) high that the 

Nemo malus fclix. 11 t_- 1 

7iw. s-fl^. 4. longeft arm could reach it ; the 
fame we may fay concerning riches, they were excel- 
lent things, if the richeft man were certainly the 
wifeft and beft : but as they are, they are nothing 
to be wondered at, becaufe they contribute nothing 
towards felicity : which appears, becaufe fbme men 
choofe to be miferable that they may be rich, rather 
than be happy with the expenfe of money and doing 
noble things. 

2. Riches are ufelefs and unprofitable; for be- 
yond our needs and conveniences nature knows no 
ufe of riches : and they fay that the Princes of Italy y 
when they fup alone, eat out of a finglc difh, and 
drink in a plain glafs, and the wife eats without 
purple ; for nothing is more frugal than the back and 
belly y if they be ufed as they fhould : but when they 
would entertain the eyes of ftrangers, when they are 
vain and would make a noife, then riches come forth 
to fet forth the fpeftacle, and furnifli out the Comedy 
of wealthy of vanity. No man can with all the wealth 
in the world buy ft) much fkill as to be a good 
Lutenift ; he muft go the fame way that poor peo- 
ple do, he muft learn and take pains : much lefs can 
he buy conftancy, or chaftity, or courage ; nay, not 
fo much as the contempt of riches : and by poilefiing 
more than we need, we cannot obtain fo much 
power over our Souls as not to require more. And 
certainly riches muft deliver me from no evil, if the 



S. 8. OF COFETOUSNESS. 335 

poileflion of them cannot take away the longing for 
them. If any man be thirfty, drink cools him ; if he 
be hungry, eating meat fatisfies him : and when a 
man is cold, and calls for a warm cloak, he is pleafed 
if you give it him ; but you trouble him if you load 
him with fix or eight cloaks. Nature refts and fits 
ftill when (he hath her portion ; but that which ex- 
ceeds it, is a trouble and a burden : and therefore in 
true Philofophy, No man is rich but he that is poor, 
according to the common account : for when God 
hath fatisfied thofe needs which he made, that is, 
all that is natural, whatfoever is beyond it is thirft 
and a difeafe, and unlefs it be fent back again in 
charity or religion, can ferve no end but vice or 
vanity : it can increafe the appetite to reprefent the 
man poorer, and full of a new and artificial, unnatu- 
ral need ; but it never fatisfies the need it makes, or 
makes the man richer. No ivealth can fatisfy the 
covetous dejire of wealth. 

3. Riches are troublefome ; but the fatisfadlion of 
thofe appetites which God and ^^^^ ^^^^^^ ^ ^^^^^^ 
Nature hath made are cheap and pcmnia, vitx cs : 

• 1 r P^^ ^^ immatunim mortis 

eafy : for who ever paid uie-money adimus iter. 
for bread and onions and water to ^^^ ' 

keep him alive ? But when we covet after houfes 
of the frame and defign of Italy, or long for jewels, 
or for my next neighbour's field, or horfes fi"om 
Barhary, or the richeft perfumes of Arabia, or Ga- 
latian mules, or fat Eunuchs for our flaves from 
Tunis, or rich coaches from Naples, then we can 
never be fatisfied till we have the beft thing that is 
fiincied, and all that can be had, and all that can be 
defired, and that we can luft no more : but before 



336 OF COFETOUSNESS. C. 4. 

we come to the one half of our firfl wild defires, 
we are the bond-men of Ufurers, and of our worfe 
tyrant appetites, and the tortures of envy and impa- 
tience. But I confider that thofe who drink on ftill 
when their thirft is quenched, or eat after they have 
well dined, are forced to vomit not only their fuper- 
fluity, but even that which at firft was neceflary : (0 
thofe that covet more than they can temperately ufe, 
are oftentimes forced to part even with that patri- 
mony which would have fupported their perfons in 
freedom and honour, and have fatisfied all their rea- 
fonable defire. 

4. Contentednefs is therefore health, becaufe Co- 
vetoufnefs is a diredt ficknefs : and it was well faid 
of AriJiippuSy (as Plutarch reports him) If any man 
after much eating and drinking, be ftill unfatisfied, 
he hath no need of more meat or more drink, but 
of a Phyfician ; he more needs to be purged than to 
be filled : and therefore fince Covetoufnefs cannot 
be fatisfied, it muft be cured by emptinefs and eva- 
cuation. The man is without remedy, unlefs he be 
reduced to the fcantling of nature, and the meafures 
of his perfonal neceffity. Give to a poor man a 
houfe, and a few cows, pay his little debt, and fet 
him on work, and he is provided for, and quiet : but 
when a man enlarges beyond a fair pofleflion, and 
defires another Lordfliip, you fpite him if you let 
him have it ; for by that he is one degree the fur- 
ther oflF from reft in his defires and iatisfa<flion ; and 
now he fees himfelf in a bigger capacity to a larger 
fortune ; and he fhall never find his period, till you 
begin to take away fomething of what he hath ; for 
then he will begin to be glad to keep that which is 



S. 8. OF COFETOUSNESS. 337 

left : but reduce him to nature*s meafures, and there 
he fliall be fure to find reft : for there no man can 
defire beyond his bellyful, and when he wants that, 
any one friend or charitable man can cure his po- 
verty ; but all the world cannot fatisfy his Covetouf- 
nefs. 

5. Covetoufnefs is the moft fantaftical and con- 
tradictory difeafe in the whole world ; it muft there- 
fore be incurable, becaufe it ftrives againft its own 
cure. No man therefore abftains from meat, be- 
caufe he is hungry, nor from wine, becaufe he loves 
it and needs it : but the covetous man does fo ; for 
he defires it paflionately, becaufe he fays he needs it, 
and when he hath it, he will need it ftill, becaufe he 
dares not ufe it. He gets clothes becaufe he cannot 
be without them ; but when he hath them then he 
can : as if he needed corn for his granary, and clothes 
for his wardrobe, more than for his back and belly. 
For Covetoufnefs pretends to heap much together 
for fear of want ; and yet after all his pains and pur- 
chafe, he fuifers that really which at firft he feared 
vainly ; and by not ufing what he gets, he makes 
that fuiFering to be adlual, prefent and neceflary, 
which in his loweft condition was but future, con- 
tingent and poflible. It ftirs up the defire, and takes 
away the pleafure of being fatisfied. It increafes the 
appetite, and will not content it : it fwells the prin- 
cipal to no purpofe, and leflfcns the ufe to all pur- 
pofes ; difturbing the order of nature, and the de- 
figns of God ; making money not to be the inftru- 
ment of exchange or charity, nor corn to feed him- 
fclf or the poor, nor wool to clothe himfelf or his 
brother, nor wine to refrcfh the fadnefs of the af- 



338 OF COVETOUSNESS. C. 4. 

flidted> nor his oil to make his own countenance 
cheerful ; but all thefe to look upon, and to tell over, 
and to take accounts by, and make himfelf confide- 
rable, and wondered at by fools, that while he lives 
he may be called Rich; and when he dies may 
be accounted Miferable, and like the difh-makers of 
China^ may leave a greater heap of dirt for his Ne- 
phews, while he himfelf hath a new lot fallen to 
him in the portion of Drves. But thus the Afs car- 
ried wood and fweet herbs to the Baths, but was 
never waflied or perfumed himfelf: he heaped up 
fweets for others, while himfelf was filthy with 
fmoke and aihes. And yet it is coniiderable ; If the 
man can be content to feed hardly, and labour ex- 
tremely, and watch carefully, and fufier affronts and 
difgrace, that he may get money more than he ufes 
in his temperance and jufl needs, with how much 
eafe might this man be happy ? and with how great 
uneafinefs and trouble does he make himfelf mifera- 
ble ? For he takes pains to get content, and when 
he might have it, he lets it go. He might better be 
content with a virtuous and quiet poverty, than with 
an artificial, troublefome and vicious. The fame diet 
and a lefs labour would at firfl make him happy, and 
for ever after rewardable. 

6. The fum of all is that which the ApofUe fays, 
Covetoufnefs is Idolatry ; that is, it is an admiring 
money for itfelf, not for its ufe ; it relies upon mo- 
ney, and loves it more than it does God and Reli- 
gion : and it is the root of all evil; it teaches men to 
be cruel and crafty, induflrious in evil, full of care 
and malice ; it devours young heirs, and grinds the 
face of the poor, and undoes thofe who fpecially 



S. 8. OF COFETOUSNESS. 339 

belong to God's protection, helplefs, craftlefs and 
innocent people ; it inquires into our parents* age, 
and longs for the death of our friends; it makes 
f riendfhip an art of rapine, and changes a partner 
into a vulture, and a companion into a thief; and 
after all this it is for no good to itfelf, for it dare not 
fpend thofe heaps of treafure which it fnatched : and 
men hate Serpents and Baiiliiks worfe than Lions 
and Bears ; for thefe kill becaufe they need the prey, 

but they fting to death and eat .•„^.xoxf«f-^pW«- 
not. * And if they pretend all -^•^^fc «*i^5- ^ 
this care and heap for their Heirs, r^ i^Opos^roKrflr. 
(like the Mice of Africa hiding ici.rra xj^irvmf^ 
the golden ore in their bowels, rt/i«<.««io*- 

and refufing to give back the in- ^~ '^', *«"' i^" "' '^ 

digefted gold till their guts be out) *Ex%i ^ Tiitw >wr«ri,, ihx- 
they may remember that what was Phocyiid. 

unneceffary for themfelves, is as Prpdigr^^TTft I'lS 
unneceffary for their fbns : and >tate scncaus. 

^ . * . Hortulus hic, puteulque 

why cannot they be without it as brevis nee refte moven- 

well as their Fathers who did not in tenues piantas faciii 
ufe it ? And it often happens, that y^^f'^Zl^'^ et 
to the fons it becomes an inftru- „ ^;?*^^ ^'*}*^"' ^^15'' 

Unde epulum poms cen- 

ment to ferve fome luft or other; tuna dare Pythagoreis. 

- I -- /•!/• -.Eft aliquid quocunque lo- 

that as the gold was UlelelS to their co, quocunque receflu, 

T» ^t /* M.1^ r i_ ^ ^1_ Unius dominom fefc fc- 

Fathers, 10 may the Ions be to the ciffe laccrtae. 
public, fools or prodigals, loads to Juven. Sat. 3. 

their Country, and the curfe and punifhment of their 
Father's avarice : and yet all that wealth is fhort of 
one blefling ; but it is a load coming with a curfe, 
and defcending from the family of a long-derived 
fin. However the Father tranfmits it to the fon, 
and it may be the fon to one more, till a Tyrant, or an 



340 OF COFETOUSNESS. C. 4. 

Oppreflbr, or a War, or change of Government, or 
the Ufurer, or folly, or an expenfive vice, makes 
holes in the bottom of the bag, and the wrealth runs 
out like water, and flies away like a Bird from the 
hand of a child. 

7. Add to thefe the confideration of the advan- 
tages of poverty ; that it is a ftate freer from temp- 

Provocet ut fcgnes ani- tation, fecurc in dangers, but of 
mos, rcrumquc remo- ^^^ trouble, fafe Under the Divine 
ingcniofa vias pauiatim Providence, cared for in Heaven 
ciamUan. by a daily miniflxation, and for 
whofe fupport God makes every day a new decree ; 
a ftate of which Chrift was pleafed to make open 
profeffion, and many wife men daily make vows: 
that a rich man is but like a pool, to whom the poor 
run, and firft trouble it, and then draw it dry : that 
he enjoys no more of it than according to the few 
and limited needs of a man ; he cannot eat like a 
Wolf or an Elephant : that variety of dainty fare 
minifters but to fin and ficknefles: that the poor 
man feafts oftener than the rich, becaufe every litde 
enlargement is a feaft to the poor, but he that feafts 
every day feafts no day, there being nothing left to 
which he may beyond his Ordinary extend his ap- 
petite : that the rich man fleeps not fo foundly as the 
poor labourer ; that his fears are more, and his needs 
are greater (for who is poorer, he that needs 5/. or 
he that needs 5000/. ?) the poor man hath enough 
to fill his belly, and the rich hath not enough to fill 
his eye : that the poor man*s wants are eafy to be re- 
lieved by a common charity, but the needs of rich 
men cannot be fupplied but by Princes; and they 
are left to the temptation of great vices to make re- 



S. 8. OF COFETOUSNESS. 341 

paration of their needs ; and the ambitious labours 
of men to get great eftates is but like the felling of 
a Fountain to buy a Fever, a parting with content 
to buy neceffity, a purchafe of an unhandfbme con- 
dition at the price of infel icity : that Princes, and 
they that enjoy moft of the world, have moft of it 
but in title and fupreme rights and referved privi- 
leges, pepper-corns, homages, trifling fervices and 
acknowledgments, the real ufe defcending to others 
to more fubflantial purpofes. Thefe coniiderations 
may be ufeful to the curing of Covetoufhefs, that the 
grace of mercifulnefs enlarging the heart of a man, 
his hand may not be contradted, but reached out to 
the poor in Alms. 




SECT. IX. 

Of Repentance. 

EPENTANCE of all things in the World 
makes the greateft change; it changes 
things in Heaven and Earth: for it changes 
the whole Man from fin to grace, from vicious ha- 
bits to holy cuftoms, from unchafte bodies to An- 
gelical Souls, from Swine to Philofophers, from 
drunkennefs to fober counfels : and God himfelf, 
with whom is no variablenefs or Jhadow of change y is 
pleafed by defcending to our weak underftandings, 
to fay that he changes alfo upon man's Repentance, 
that he alters his decrees, revokes his fentence, can- 
cels the bills of accufation, throws the Records of 
fhame and forrow from the Court of Heaven, and 



342 OF REPENrANCE. C. 4- 

lifts up the finner from the grave to life, from his 
prifon to a throne, from Hell and the guilt of eter- 
nal torture, to Heaven and to a title to never-cealing 
felicities. If wc be bound on Earthy we ihall be bound 
in Heaven; if vsre be abfolved here, vvre fliall be loofed 
there : if w^e repent, God will repent, and not fend 
the evil upon us which we had deferved. 

But Repentance is a conjugation and fociety of 
many duties ; and it contains in it all the parts of a 
holy life, from the time of our return to the day of 
our death incluiively ; and it hath in it fome things 
fpecially relating to the fins of our former days, 
which are now to be aboliflied by fpecial arts, and 
have obliged us to fpecial labours, and brought it in 
many new neceflities, and put us into a very great 
deal of danger. And becaufe it is a duty confifting 
of fo many parts and fo much employment, it alfo re- 
pairs much time, and leaves a man in the fame de- 
gree of hope of pardon, as is his reftitution to the 
ftate of righteoufnefs and holy living, for which wc 
covenanted in Baptifm. For we muft know that 
there is but one Repentance in a man's whole life, 
if repentance be taken in the proper and ftridl Evan- 
gelical Covenant fenfe, and not after the ordinary 
underftanding of the word. That is, we are but once 
to change our whole ftate of life, from the power of 
the Devil and his entire pofleflion, from the ftate of 
fin and death, from the body of corruption, to the 
life of grace, to the pofleflion of Jefusy to the king- 
dom of the Gofpel ; and this is done in the baptifm 
of water, or in the baptifm of the Spirit, when the 
firft rite comes to be verified by God's grace coming 
upon us, and by our obedience to the heavenly call- 



S. 9. OF REPENTANCE. 343 

ing, we working together with God. After this 
change, if ever we fall into the contrary ftate, and be 
wholly eftranged from God and Religion, and pro- 
fefs ourfelves fervants of unrighteoufnefs, God hath 
made no more covenant of reftitution to us, there is 
no place left for any more Repentance, or entire 
change of condition, or new birth : a man can be 
regenerated but once : And fuch are voluntary ma- 
licious Apoftates, Witches, obftinate, impenitent 
perlbns, and the like. But if we be overtaken by 
infirmity, or enter into the marches or borders of 
this eftate, and commit a grievous fin, or ten, or 
twenty, fo we be not in the entire poflfeflion of the 
Devil, we are for the prefent in a damnable condi- 
tion if we die ; but if we live, we are in a recovera- 
ble condition ; for fo we may repent often. We re- 
pent or rife from death but once, but from ficknefs 
many times ; and by the grace of God we fhall be 
pardoned if fo we repent. But our hopes of pardon 
are juft as is the Repentance ; which, if it be timely, 
hearty, induflrious and efi^edlive, God accepts ; not 
by weighing grains or fcruples, but by eftimating 
the great proportions of our life. A hearty endea- 
vour and an effedtual general change fhall get the 
pardon ; the unavoidable infirmities, and paft evils, 
and prefent imperfections, and fhort interruptions, 
againfl which we watch, and pray, and ftrive, being 
put upon the accounts of the Crofs, and paid by the 
holy Jefus. This is the ftate and condition of Re- 
pentance : its parts and aftions muft be valued ac- 
cording to the following rules. 



344 OF REPENrANCE. C. 4. 



ji£fs and Parts of Repentance. 

I . He that repents truly is greatly fbirrowful for 
his paft fins : not with a fuperficial figh or tear, but 
a pungent afflidtive fo rrow ; fiich a forrow as hates 
the fin fo much, that the man would choofe to die 
rather than adt it any more : This forrow is called 
jcr. 13. 17. i^ Scripture [a weeping farely ^ a weep- 
^^ V ' 'i ^^S '^^^^ bitternefs of hearty a weeping 
James 4.. 9. day and night j a forrow of hearty a 
breaking of tbefpirity mourning like a don)e^ and chat- 
tering like afwallow ;] and we may read the degree 
and manner of it by the lamentations and fad ac- 
cents of the prophet Jeremy ; when he wept for the 
fins of the nation ; by the heart-breaking of David, 
when he mourned for his murder and adultery ; and 
the bitter weeping of S. Peter, after the fhameful 
denying of his Mafter. * The expreflion of this 
forrow differs according to the temper of the body, 
the fex, the age, and circumftance of adtion, and the 
motive of forrow, and by many accidental tender- 
nefles, or mafculine hardnefles ; and the repentance 
is not to be eftimated by the tears, but by the grief; 
and the grief is to be valued not by the fenfitive 
trouble, but by the cordial hatred of the fin, and 
ready aftual dereliction of it, and a refolution and 
real refifting its confequent temptations. Some peo- 
ple can filed tears for nothing ; but the proper and 
true efFefts of a godly forrow are, fear of the Divine 
judgments, apprehenfion of God's difpleafure, watch- 
ings and ftrivings againfl: fin, patiently enduring the 
crofs of forrow (which God fends as their punifli- 



S. 9. OF REPENTANCE. 345 

ment,) in accufation of ourfelves, in perpetually beg- 
ging pardon, in mean and bafe opinions of ourfelves, 
and in all the natural produdlions from thefc accord- 
ing to our temper and conftitution. For if we be apt 
to weep in other accidents, it is ill if we weep not alfo 
in the forrows of Repentance : not that weeping is 
of itfelf a duty ; but that the forrow, if it be as great, 
will be ftill expreiTed in as great a manner. 

2. Our forrow for fins mufl retain the proportion 
of our fins, though not the equality : we have no 
particular meafures of fins ; we know not which is 
greater, of Sacrilege or Superflition, Idolatry or Co- 
vetoufnefs. Rebellion or Witchcraft : and therefore 
God ties us not to nice meafure of forrow, but only 
that we keep the general Rules of proportion ; that 
is, that a great fin have a great grief, a fmaller 
crime being to be wafhed out with a leffer fhow er. 

3. Our forrow for fins is then 

befl accounted of for its degree, "go c . Vi or. 

when it together with all the penal and afflidtive du- 
ties of Repentance, fhall have equalled or exceeded 
the pleafure we had in commiffion of the fin. 

4. True Repentance is a punifhing duty, and adls 
its forrow, and judges and condemns the fin by vo- 
luntary fubmitting to fuch fadnefles as God fends on 
us, or (to prevent the judgments of God) by judging 
ourfelves, and punifhing our bodies and our fpirits 
by fuch inflruments of piety as are troublefbme to 
the body : fuch as are fafling, watching, long prayers, 
troublefbme poflures in our prayers, expenfive alms, 
and all outward afts of humiliation. For he that 
mufl judge himfelf, muft condemn himfelf if he be 
guilty ; and if he be condemned, he mufl be pu- 



346 OF REPENrANCE. C. 4. 

nifhed ; and if he be fb judged, it will help to pre- 
vent the judgment of the Lord, S. Paul 
or. II. 31. iiif^udting us in this particular. But 
I before intimated that the puni/hing aBions of Re- 
pentance are only aftions of forrow, and therefore 
are to make up the proportions of it. For our grief 
may be fo full of trouble as to outweigh all the bur- 
dens of fafts and bodily affliftions, and then the other 
are the lefs neceflary ; and when they are ufed, the 
benefit of them is to obtain of God a remifHon or a 
leiTening of fuch temporal judgments which God 
hath decreed againfl the fins, as it was in the cafe of 
Ahab : but the iinner is not by anything of this re- 
conciled to the eternal favour of God ; for as yet this 
is but the Introdudlion to Repentance. 

5. Every true penitent is obliged to confefs his 
fins, and to humble himfelf before God for ever. 

I Tohn I Confeffion of fins hath a fpecial pro- 

mife. If we confefs our Jins^ he is faith- 
ful andjufi to forgive us ourfns : meaning that God 
hath bound himfelf to forgive us if we duly confefs 
our fins, and do all that for which confeflion was 
appointed ; that is, be aihamed of them, and own 
them no more. For confeflion of our fins to God 
can fignify nothing of itfelf in its diredl nature : He 
fees us when we a<5t them, and keeps a record of 
them ; and we forget them unlefs he reminds us of 
them by his grace. So that to confefs them to God 
does not punijh us^ or make us ajham'd; but confejjion 
to him J if it proceed from Jhame and forrow^ and is an 
a£i of humility and f elf -condemnation y and is a laying 
open our wounds for cure, then it is a duty God de- 
lights in. In all which circumflances, becaufe we 



S. g. OF REPENTANCE. 24-7 

may very much be helped if we take in the afliftance 
of a fpiritual Guide ; therefore the Church of God in 
all ages hath commended, and inmoft ages enjoined, 
♦ that we confefs our fins, and dif- • 'AfayKamr<ncwfm<mv 
cover the ftate and condition of our C:;^ ^tr^oSX 
Souls, to fuch a perfon whom we ''^ ^r^ra. s. Bafli. 

' ^ f reg. brcv. 228. Concil. 

or our fuperiors judge fit to help Laod.c.». Concii.Quin. 

^ \ , V. /- r«/' Sext. c. 102. Tertul.dc 

us m luch needs. For lo [tj we panit. 
confefs ourfns one to another] as S. James advifes, we 
fhall obtain the prayers of the holy man whom God 
and the Church hath appointed fblemnly to pray 
for us : and when he knows our needs, he can bed 
minifter comfort or reproof, oil or Cauftics ; he can 
more opportunely recommend your particular ftate 
to God ; he can determine your cafes of confcience, 
and judge better for you than you do for yourfelf ; 
and the fliame of opening fuch Ulcers may reftrain 
your forwardnefs to contradl them : and all thefe cir- 
cumftances of advantage will do very much towards 
the forgivenefs. And this courfe was taken by the 
new Converts in the days of the Apoftles \^For 
many that believedj came and confejfed 
and JJjowed their deeds.] And it were 
well if this duty were pradtifed prudently and in- 
nocently in order to public difcipline, or private 
comfort and inftruftion : but that it be done to God 
is a duty, not diredtly for itfelf, but for its adjuncts 
and the duties that go with it, or before it, or after 
it : which duties, becaufe they are all to be helped 
and guided by our Paftors and Curates of Souls, he 
is careful of his eternal intereft that will not lofe the 
advantage of ufing a private Guide and Judge, He 
that hideth hisfns Jhall not profper ; [Non dirigetur^ 



348 OF REPENTANCE. C.4. 

faith the Vugar Latin, he Jhallnvant a guide] but who 

confejjeth and forfaketh them /hall have 
rov. 2.13. yj^^jrcy. And to this purpofe Climacus re- 
ports that divers holy perfons in that Age did ufe to 
carry Table-books with them, and in them defcrib'd 
an account of all their determinate thoughts, pur- 
pofes, words and aftions, in which they had fuffered 
infirmity ; that by communicating the eftate of their 
Souls they might be inftrudled and guided, and cor- 
refted or encouraged. 

6. True Repentance muft reduce to adl all its 

• Rom. 6. 3, 4, 7, and ^^ly purpofes, and enter into and 
8. 10. and 13. 13, 14, and ruu through the /late of holy ♦ Ik- 

II. 21, 27. Gal, 5- 6» . 1. r • ^ t /I 

24. and 6. 15. i Corinth, tfigy which IS Contrary to that itate 

7.10. 2 Corinth. 13. 5. /•ii /•• i»t_«-« a 

Coiof. 1. 21, 22, 23. of darknels m which m times paft 

^t;";:: l%ui:^t ^^ ^^^J^^^. {a) For to refolve to 
2 Pet. 1.4, 9, 10, and 3. Jq it and yet not to do it, is to 

II. I John, 1 . 6, and ^ . 

3. 8, 9, and 5. 16. break our refolution and our faith, 

bu^BeT^ufnt/^ to mock God, to falfify and eva- 
benc fecit. Trinummus. cuatc all the preceding afts of Re- 
pentance, and to make our pardon hopelefs, and our 
hope fruitlefs. He that refolves to live well when a 
danger is upon him, or a violent fear, or when the ap- 
petites of luft are newly fatisfied, or newly fervcd, 
and yet when the temptation comes again, fins again, 
and then is forrowful, and refolves once more againft 
it, and yet falls when the temptation returns, is a 
vain man, but no true penitent, nor in the flate of 
grace ; and if he chance to die in one of thefe good 
moods, is very fa r f rom falvation : for if it be necef- 
fary that we refolve to live well, it is neceflSiry we 
fhould do fo. For refolution is an imperfect aft, as 
Spring to the Harveft, as Eggs are to Birds, as a Re- 



S. g. OF REPENTANCE. 349 

lative to its Correfpondent, nothing without it. No 
man therefore can be in the ftate of grace and adtual 
favour by refolutions and holy purpofes, thefe are 
but the gate and portal towards pardon : a holy life 
is the only perfedlion of Repentance, and the firm 
ground upon which \ye can caft the anchor of hope 
in the mercies of God through Je/us Chrift. 

7. No man is to reckon his pardon immediately 
upon his returns from fin to the beginnings of good 
life, but is to begin his hopes and degrees of confi- 
dence according as fin dies in him, and grace lives ; 
as the habits of fin lefien, and righteoufnefs grows ; 
according as fin returns but feldom in fmaller in- 
flances and without choice, and by furprife without 
deliberation, and is highly difreliflied, and prefently 
dafhed againfl: the Rock Chrift Jejus by a holy for- 
row and renewed care and more ftridl watchfulnefs. 
For a holy life being the condition of the Covenant 
on our part, as we return to God, fo God returns to 
us, and our ftate returns to the probabilities of par- 
don. 

8. Every man is to work out his falvation with 
fear and trembling ; and after the commifllon of fins 
his fears muft multiply ; becaufe every new fin and 
every great declining from the ways of God is ftill a 
degree of new danger, and hath increafed God*s an- 
ger, and hath made him more uneafy to grant par- 
don : and when he does grant it, it is upon harder 
terms both for doing and fuffering ; that is, we muft 
do more for pardon, and, it may be, fufFer much 
more. For we muft know that God pardons our 
fins by parts ; as our duty increafes, and our care is 
more prudent and adtive, fo God*s anger decrcafes : 



350 OF REPENTANCE. C.4. 

and yet it may be the lad fin you committed made 
God unalterably relblved to fend upon you ibme fad 
judgment. Of the particulars in all cafes we are 
uncertain ; and therefore we have reafbn always to 
mourn for our fins that have fo provoked God, and 
made our condition fo full of danger, that it may be 
no prayers or tears or duty can alter his fentence 
concerning fome fad judgment upon us. Thus God 
irrevocably decreed to punifh the Ifraelites for 
Idolatry, although Mofes prayed for them, and God 
forgave them in fome degree; that is, io that he 
would not cut them off from being a people, yet he 
would not forgive them fo, but he would vifit that 
their fin upon them : and he did fo. 

9. A true penitent mufl all the days of his life 

Dandum interftitium pr^X ^^r pardou and ncver think 
pcenitcntia;. T^//. the worlc Completed till he dies ; 

not by any adt of his own, by no aft of the Church, 
by no forgivenefs by the party injured, by no refK- 
tution. Thefe are all inflruments of great ufe and 
efficacy, and the means by which it is to be done at 
length ; but flill the fin lies at the door ready to re- 
turn upon us in judgment and damnation, if we re- 
turn to it in choice or ad:ion. And whether God 
. . ^ , . . hath forgiven us or no, we know 

(a) I peccati et i debiti / \ j i r 

Ton fempre piu di quel not, [o) and how far we kuow not; 

and all that we have done is not of 
fufficient worth to obtain pardon : therefore flill pray, 
and flill be forrowful for ever having done it, and for 
ever watch againfl it ; and then thofe beginnings of 
pardon which are working all the way, will at laft 
be perfedled in the day of the Lord. 

10. Defer not at all to repent; much lefs mayefl 



S. g. OF REPENTANCE. 351 

thou put it off to thy death-bed. It \s not an eafy 
thing to root out the habits * of fin, 
wnicn a man s whole lire natn fi^ifS^ftdnfAniriharrimiBot. 
gathered and confirmed. We find "^'^' 

work enough to mortify one beloved luftt in our 
very bed advantage of ftrength and time, and before 
it is fo deeply rooted as it muft needs be fuppofed to 
be at the end of a wicked life ; and therefore it will 
prove impoflible when the work is fo great and the 
ftrength fo little, when fin is fo ftrong, and grace fo 
weak : for they always keep the fame proportion of 
increafe and decreafe, and as fin grows, grace decays : 
fo that the more need we have of grace, the lefs at 
that time we fhall have ; becaufe the greatnefs of our 
fins, which makes the need, hath leflfened the grace 
of God (which fhould help us) into nothing. To 
which add this confideration ; that Mortem venicntcm nc- 
on a man's death-bed the day of J| ,J"^™ -X''col- 
Repentance is paft: for Repen- pofucrat. 
tance being the renewing of a holy life, a living the 
life of grace, it is a contradid:ion to fay that a man 
can live a holy life upon his death-bed : efpecially if 
we confider, that for a finner to live a holy life muft 
firft fuppofe him to have overcome all his evil ha- 
bits, and then to have made a purchafe of the con- 
trary graces, by the labours of great prudence, watch- 
fulnefs, felf-denial and feverity. ^^ ^ ^^^^ ^ 
Nothing that is excellent can be >^*«'»'«- Arrian. 
wrought fuddenly . 

1 1 . After the beginnings of thy recovery, be infi- 
nitely fearful of a relapfe ; and therefore upon the 
ftock of thy fad experience obferve where thy failings 
were, and by efpecial arts fortify that faculty, and 



352 OF REPENTANCE. C. 4. 

arm againft that temptation. For in all thofe argu- 
ments which God ufes to us to preferve our inno- 
cence, and thy late danger, and thy fears, and the 
goodnefs of God making thee once to efcape, and the 
fhame of thy fall, and the fenfe of thy own weak- 
nefles will not make thee watchful againft a fall, 
efpecially knowing how much it cofts a man to be 
reftored, it will be infinitely more dangerous if ever 
thou falleft again; not only for fear God fhould 
no more accept thee to pardon, but even thy own 
hopes will be made more defperate, and thy impa- 
tience greater, and thy fhame turn to impudence, 
and thy own will be more eftranged, violent and re- 
fraftory, and tAy latter end 'will be worfe than thy be- 
ginning. To which add this confideration ; That thy 
fin which was formerly in a good way of being par- 
doned, will not only return upon thee with all its 
own loads, but with the bafenefs of unthankfulnefs, 
and thou wilt be fet as far back from Heaven as ever ; 
and all thy former labours and fears and watchings 
and agonies will be reckoned for nothing, but as ar- 
guments to upbraid thy folly, who when thou hadft 
fet one foot in Heaven, didft pull that back and carry 
both to Hell. 

Motives to Repentance. 

I fhall ufe no other arguments to move a finner 
to Repentance, but to tell him unlefs he does he fhall 
cert^nly peri fh ; and if he does repent timely and 
entirely, that is, live a holy life, he fhall be forgiven 
and be faved. But yet I defire that this confidera- 
tion be enlarged with fome great circumflances ; and 
let us remember. 



S. g. OF REPENTANCE. 353 

I • That to admit mankind to Repentance and par- 
don was a favour greater than ever God gave to the 
Angels and Devils : for they were never admitted 
to the conditioa of fec ond thoughts : Chrift never 
groaned one groan for them ; he never fulFered one 
ftripe nor one affront, nor flied one drop of blood to 
reftore them to hopes of bleflednefs after their firft 
failings. But this he did for us : he paid the fcore 
of our fins, only that we might be admitted to repent, 
and that this Repentance might be effedtual to the 
great purpofes of felicity and falvation. 

2. Confider that as it coft Chrift many millions of 
prayers and groans and fighs, fo he is now at this in- 
ftant, and hath been for thefe 1 600 years, night and 
day inceflantly praying for grace to us that we may 
repent, and for pardon when we do, and for degrees 
of pardon beyond the capacities of our infirmities, and 
the merit of our fbrrows and amendment ; and this 
prayer he will continue till his fecond coming : for 
he ever Iheth to make intercejjion for us. 

And that we may know what it is in 

behalf of which he intercedes, S, PaulttWs us his de- 

fign, [We are AmbaJJadors for Chrifty 

as though he did befeech you by us^ we * ^^^ ^' *^' 

pray you in Chrijt' s Jiead to be reconciled to God*] And 

what Chrift prays us to do, he prays to God that we 

may do ; that which he defires of us as his fervants, 

he defires of God, who is the fountain of the grace and 

powers unto us, and without w;hofe affiflance we can 

do nothing. 

3. That ever we fhould repent, was fo coftly a pur- 
chafe, and fo great a concernment, and fo high a fa- 

2 A 



354 OF REPENTANCE. C. 4. 

vour, and the event is efteemed by God himfelf fo 
great an excellency, that our blefled Saviour tells us, 

there Jhall be joy in Heaven over one Jin- 
ner that repenteth : meaning, that when 
Chrift (hall be glorified, and at the right hand of his 
Father make interceffion for us, praying for our Re- 
pentance, the Converfion and Repentance of every 
finner is part of Chrift*s glorification, it is the an- 
fwering of his prayers, it is a portion of his reward 
in which he does eflentially glory by the joys of his 
glorified humanity. This is the joy of our Lord 
himfelf diredtly, not of the Angels, fave only by re- 
flexion : The joy (faid our blefled Saviour) fhall be 
in the prefence of the Angels ; they fhall fee the glory 
of the Lord, the anfwering of his prayers, the fatis- 
fadtion of his defires, and the reward of his fuffer- 
ings, in the repentance and coniequent pardon of a 
finner. For therefore he once fuffered, and for that 
reafon he rejoices for ever. And therefore when a 
penitent finner comes to receive the eflfed: and fiill 
confummation of his pardon, it is called [an entering 
into the joy of our Lord] that is, a partaking of that 
joy which Chrifl: received at our converfion and en- 
joyed ever fince. 

4. Add to this, that the rewards of Heaven are fo 
great and glorious, and Chrift:*s burthen is fo light, 
his yoke is fo eafy, that it is a fhamelefs impudence 
to exped: fo great glories at a lefs rate than fo little 
a fervice, at a lower .rate than a holy life. It coft 
the heart-blood of the Son of God to obtain Heaven 
for us upon that condition ; and who fhall die again 
to get Heaven for us upon eafier terms ? What 
would you do if God fhould command you to kill 



S. 10. OF REPENTANCE. 355 

your eldeft fon, or to work in the mines for a thou- 
iand years together, or to fail: all thy life-time with 
bread and water ? were not Heaven a very great bar- 
gain even after all this? And when God requires 
nothingofusbuttolivefbberlyjuftlyandgodly (which 
things of themfelves are to a man a very great feli- 
city, and neceilary to our prefent well-being) fliall we 
think this to be an intolerable burthen, and that Hea- 
ven is too little a purchafe at that price ; and that 
God in mere juftice will take a death-bed figh or 
groan, and a few unprofitable tears and promifes in 
exchange for all our duty ? 

If thefe motives joined together with our own in- 
tereft, even as much as felicity, and the fight of God, 
and the avoiding the intolerable pains of Hell, and 
many intermedial judgments come to, will not move 
us to leave, 1. the filthinefs, and 2. the trouble, and 
3. the uneafinefs, and 4. the unreafonablenefs of fin, 
and turn to God, there is no more to be faid, we 
muft perifh in our folly. 



SECTION X. 

Of Preparation to, and the manner how to receive the 
holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. 

HE celebration of the holy Sacrament is 

the great myfteriouibefs of the Chriftian 

Religion, and fucceeds to the moft folemn 

1 tural and Judaical Religion, the Law of fa- 

crificing. For God fpared mankind, and took the 

facrifice of beafts together with our folemn prayers 



356 PREPARATION TO THE C. 4. 

for an inftrument of expiation. But thefe could not 
purify the Soul from fin, but were typical of the fa- 
crifice of fomething that could. But nothing could 
do this, but either the offering of all that finned, that 
every man fhould be the anathema or devoted thing ; 
or elfe by fome one of the fame capacity, who by 
fbme fuperadded excellency might in his own pcr- 
fonal fufFerings have a value great enough to fatisfy 
for all the whole kind of finning perfbns. This the 
Son of God, ye/us Chri/i, God and man, undertook, 
and finifhed by a Sacrifice of himfelf upon the Altar 
of the Crofs. 

2. This Sacrifice, becaufe it was perfeft, could be 
but one, and that once : but becaufe the needs of the 
world fhould lafl as long as the world itfelf, it was 
neceflary that there fhould be a perpetual miniflry 
cflablifhed, whereby this one fufficient facrifice fhould 
be made eternally effedtual to the feveral new-arifing 
needs of all the world who fhould defire it, or in any 
fenfe be capable of it. 

3 . To this end Chrifl was made a Priejifor ever : 
he was initiated or confecrated on the crofs, and there 
began his Prieflhood, which was to lafl till his coming 
to judgment. It began on earth, but was to lafl and 
be officiated in Heaven, where he fits perpetually re- 
prefenting and exhibiting to the Father that great 
efFedtive facrifice (which he offered on the crofs) to 
eternal and never-failing purpofes. 

4. As Chrifl is pleafed to reprefent to his Father 
that great Sacrifice as a means of atonement and ex- 
piation for all mankind, and with fpecial purpofes 
and intendment for all the eled, all that ferve him in 
holinefs : fo he hath appointed that the fame minif- 



S. lo. HOLr SACRAMENr. ^57 

try fhall be done upon earth too, in our manner, and 
according to our promotion ; and therefore hath con- 
flituted and feparated an order of men who, by Jhew- 
ing forth the Lord's death by Sacramental reprefenta- 
tion, may pray unto God after the fame manner that 
our Lord and high Prieft does, that is, offer to God 
and reprefent in this folemn prayer and Sacrament, 
Chrift as already offered ; fo fending up a gracious 
inftrument whereby our prayers may for his fake and 
in the fame manner of interceffion be offered up to 
God in our behalf, and for all them for whom we 
pray, to all thofe purpofes for which Chrifl died. 

5. As the Miniflers of the Sacrament do in a Sa- 
cramental manner prefent to God the facrifice of the 
crofs, by being imitators of Chrifl's interceffion ; fo 
the people are facrificers too in their manner: for 
befides that, by faying Amen^ they join in the adl of 
him that miniflers, and make it alfo to be their own ; 
fowhen they eat and drink the confecrated and bleffed 
Elements worthily, they receive Chrifl within them, 
and therefore may alfo offer him to God, while in 
their facrifice of obedience and thankfgiving, they 
prefent themfelves to God with Chrifl whom they 
have fpiritually received, that is, themfelves with that 
which will make them gracious and acceptable. The 
offering their bodies and Souls and fervices to God 
in him. and by him^ and with him^ ^Kf^a- . 

w ho is his Father's well-beloved^ and /ercni. 

, , . n r r J ^""^ t'ulgct placidus, 

tn whom he ts well pleajed^ cannot fuoque vuitu 
but be accepted to all the purpofes H", Ill^g^T^^'^^" ^"^ 
of bleffing, grace and glory.* ^^''^^*^'- ^^•^- 5- 6 

6. This is the fum of the greatefl my fiery of our 
Religion ; it is the copy of the Paffion, and the mi- 



358 PREPARAriON TO THE C. 4. 

niftration of the great myftery of our Redemption : 
and therefore whatfoever entitles us to the general 
privileges of Chrift^s paffion, all that is neceflary by 
way of difpofition to the celebration of the Sacrament 
of his Paffion ; becaufe this celebration is our manner 
of applying or ufing it. The particulars of which 
preparation are reprefented in the following rules. 

1 . No man muft dare to approach to the holy Sa- 

j ^. crament of the Lord's Supper if he 

Vafa pura ad rem Di- ^ ^*^ 

vinam. Piaut.inCap.Aa, be in a ftatc of any one fin; that 

is, unlefs he have entered into the 
ftate of repentance, that is, of forrow and amend- 
ment ; left it be faid concerning him, as it was con- 
cerning Judas, the hand of him that betrayeth me is 
with me on the table : and he that receiveth Chrift 
into an impure Soul or body, firft turns his moft 
excellent nourifhment into poifon, and then feeds 
upon it. 

2. Every Communicant muft firft have examined 
himfelf, that is, tried the condition and ftate of his 
Soul, fearched out the fecret ulcers, enquired out its 
weaknefi!es and indifcretions, and all thofe aptnefies 
where it is expofed to temptation ; that by finding 
out its difeafes he may find a cure, and by diicover- 
ing its aptnefies he may fecure his prefent purpofes 
of future amendment, and may be armed againft dan- 
gers and temptations. 

3. This examination muft be a man's own adl, and 
inquifition into his life : but then alfo it ftiould lead 
a man on to run to thofe whom the Great Phyfician 
of our Souls Chrift Je/us hath appointed to minifter 
phyfic to our difeafes ; that in all dangers and great 



S. lo. HOLr SACRAMENT. 359 

accidents w? may be affifted for comfort and remedy, 
for medicine and caution. 

4. In this affair let no man deceive himfelf, and 
againfl fuch a time which public Authority hath ap- 
pointed for us to receive the Sacrament, weep for 
his fins by way of folemnity and ceremony, and ftill 
retain the affection : but he that comes to this Feaft 
muft have on the wedding garment, that is, he muft 
have put on Jefus Chrijl^ and he muft have put off the 
old man with his affeStions and lujls ; and he muft be 
wholly conformed to Chriji in the image of his mind. 
For then we have put on Chrift, when our Souls 
are clothed with his righteoufnefs, when every fa- 
culty of our Soul is proportioned and vefted accord- 
ing to the pattern of Chrift's life. And therefore a 
man muft not leap from his laft night's Surfeit and 
Bath, and then communicate : but when he hath 
begun the work of God efFedtually, and made fome 
progrefs in repentance, and hath walked fome ftages 
and periods in the ways of godlinefs, then let him 
come to him that is to minifter it, and having made 
known the ftate of his Soul, he is to be admitted : 
but to receive it into an unhallowed Soul and body, 
is to receive the duft of the Tabernacle in the waters 
of jealoufy ; it will make the belly to fwell, and the 
thigh to rot; it will not convey Chrift to us, but the 
Devil will enter and dwell there, till with it he re- 
turns to his dwelling of torment. Remember al- 
ways that after a great fin or after a habit of fins, a 
man is not foon made clean ; and no unclean thing 
muft come to this Feaft. It is not the preparation 
of two or three days that can render a perfon capa- 



360 PREPARATIOK TO THE C. 4. 

ble of this banquet : For in this Feaft all Chrift, and 
Chrifl's pailion, and all his graces, the bleflings and 
efFedls of his fuffcrings are conveyed. Nothing can 
fit us for this, but what can unite us to Chrift, and 
obtain of him to prefent our needs to his heavenly 
Father : this Sacrament can no otherwife be cele- 
brated but upon the fame terms on which we may 
hope for pardon and Heaven itfelf. 

5. When we have this general and indifpenfably 
neceflary preparation, we are to make our Souls more 
adorned and trimmed up with circumftances of pious 
aftions and fpecial devotions, fetting apart fbme por- 
tion of our time immediately before the day of fo- 
lemnity, according as our great occafions will permit: 
and this time is fpecially to be fpent in adtions of re- 
pentance, confeffion of our fins, renewing our pur- 
pofes of holy living, praying for pardon of our fail- 
ings, and for thofe graces which may prevent the 
like fadnefles for the time to come, meditation upon 
the paflion, upon the infinite love of God exprefled 
in fo great myflerious manners of redemption ; and 
indefinitely in all adts of virtue which may build our 
Souls up into a Temple fit for the reception of Chrift 
himfelf and the inhabitation of the holy Spirit. 

6. The celebration of the holy Sacrament being 
the moft folemn prayer, joined with the mofl effec- 
tual inftrument of its acceptance, mufl fuppofe us 
in the love of God and in charity with all the World: 
and therefore we mufl, before every Communion 
efpecially, remember what differences or jealoufies 
are between us and any one elfe, and recompofe all 
difunions, and caufe right underflandings between 
each other ; offering to fatisfy whom we have in- 



S. lo. HOLT SACRAMENT. 361 

jured, and to forgive them who have injured us, 
without thoughts of refuming the quarrel when the 
folemnity is over; for that is but to rake the embers 
in light and fantaftic afhes : it muft be quenched, 
and a holy flame enkindled : no fires mud be at all, 
but the fires of love and zeal : and the altar of in- 
cenfe will fend up a fweet perfume, and make 
atonement for us. 

7. When the day of the Feaft is come, lay afide 
all cares and impertinencies of the World, and re- 
member that this is thy Soul's day, a day of traffic 
and intercourfe with Heaven. A rife early in the 
morning, i. Give God thanks for the approach of 
fo great a blefling. 2. Confefs thine own unwor- 
thinefs to admit fo Divine a Guefl. 3. Then re- 
member and deplore thy fins which have made thee 
fo unworthy. 4. Then confefs God*s goodnefs and 
take fanftuary there, and upon him place thy hopes. 
5. And invite him to thee with rfenewed adts of 
love, of hply defire, of hatred of his enemy, fin. 6. 
Make oblation of thyfelf wholly to be difpofed by 
him, to the obedience of him, to his providence and 
poflcffion, and pray him to enter and dwell there for 
ever. And after this, with joy and holy fear and 
the forwardnefs of love addrefs thyfelf to the re- 
ceiving of Aim, to whom and by whom and for whom 
all faith and all hope and all love in the whole Ca- 
tholic Church, both in Heaven and Earth, is de- 
figned; Aim, whom Kings and Queens and whole 
Kingdoms are in love with, and count it the greatefl 
honour in the World, that their Crowns and Scep- 
tres are laid at his holy feet. 

8. When the holy man flands at the Taile of 



362 PREPARATION TO THE C. 4. 

blejjing and minifters the right of confecration, then 
do as the Angels do, who behold, and love, and 
wonder that the Son of God (hould become food to 
the Souls of his fervants; that he who cannot fufFer 
any change or lejfeningy fhould be broken into pieces, 
and enter into the body to fupport and nourifh the 
Spirit, and yet at the fame time remain in Heaven 
while he defcends to thee upon Earth ; that he who 
hath eflential felicity (hould become miferable and 
die for thee, and then give himfelf to thee for ever 
to redeem thee from fin and mifery; that by his 
wounds he fhould procure health to thee, by his af- 
fronts he fhould entitle thee to glory, by his death he 
fhould bring thee to life, and by becoming a man he 
fhould make thee partaker of the Dhine jiature. 
Thefe are fuch glories, that although they are made 
fb obvious that each eye may behold them, yet they 
are alfo fo deep that no thought can fathom them; 
But fo it hath pleafed him to make thefe myfleries 
to hQ fenjible^ becaufe the excellency and depth of 
the mercy is not intelligible ; that while we are ra- 
vifhed and comprehended within the infinitenefs of 
fb vafl and myflerious a mercy, yet we may be as 
fure of it as of that thing we fee and feel and fmell 
and tafle, but yet it is fo great, that we cannot un- 
derfland it. 

9. Thefe holy myfleries are offered to our fenfes, 
but not to be placed under our feet ; they are fenfi- 
ble, but not common : and therefore as the weaknefs 
of the Elements adds wonder to the excellency of 
the Sacrament ; fo let our reverence and venerable 
ufages of them add honour to the Elements, and ac- 
knowledge the glory of the myflery, and the Divi- 



S. lo. HOLr SACRAMENT. 363 

nity of the mercy. Let us receive the confecrated 
Elements with all devotion and humility of body 
and fpirit ; and do this honour to it, that it be the 
firft food wre eat, and the firft beverage wre drink 
that day, unlefs it be in cafe of ficknefs, or other 
great neceffity ; and that your body and Soul both 
be prepared to its reception with abftinence from 
fecular pleafures, that you may ^.^ ,. 

better have attended fadings and Quels tuiit heftcma gau- 

•r» •/- dia no6te Venus. 

preparatory prayers, r or it ever 
it be feafonable to obferve the counfel of Saint Paul^ 
that married perfons by confent fhould abftain for a 
time, that they may attend to folemn Religion, it is 
now. It was not by Saint Paul nor the after-ages 
of the Church called a duty fo to do, but it is moft 
reafbnable that the more folemn actions of Religion 
fhould be attended to without the mixture of any 
thing that may difcompofe the mind, and make it 
more fecular or lefs religious. 

10. In the Z&, of receiving, exercife adts of Faith 
with much confidence and refignation, believing it 
not to be common bread and wine, but holy in their 
ufe, holy in their fignification, holy in their change, 
and holy in their effedt : and believe, if thou art a 
worthy Communicant, thou doft as verily receive 
Chrift's body and blood to all eifedts and purpofes of 
the Spirit, as thou doft receive the blefled Elements 
into thy mouth, that thou putteft thy finger to his 
hand, and thy hand into his fide, ^ . , r • 

' ^ ' ^ ^ Cruci haeremus, langui- 

and thy lips to his fontinel of ncm lUgimus, ct inter ip- 
-- iXi« ^^r r i_'i ^^ Redemptoris noftri vul- 

blood, fuckmg lire from his heart: nera fi^imus linguam. 
and yet if thou doft communicate ''^^'•'"" ^ ^""" ^^"• 
unworthily, thou eateft and drinkeft Chrift to thy 



364 RECEIVING THE C. 4. 

danger, and death, and deftruftion. Difpute not 
concerning the fecret of the myftery, and the nicety 
of the manner of Chrift's prefence : it is fufficient 
to thee that Chrift fhall be prefent to thy Soul, as an 
inftrument of grace, as a pledge of the refurreftion, 
as the earneft of glory and immortality, and a means 
of many intermedial bleffings, even all fuch as are 
neceflary for thee, and are in order to thy falvation. 
And to make all this good to thee, there is nothing 
neceflary on thy part but a holy life, and a true be- 
lief of all the fayings of Chrift ; amongft which, in- 
definitely aflfent to the words of inftitution, and be- 
lieve that Chrift in the holy Sacrament gives thee 
his body and his blood. He that believes not this 
is not a Chriftian. He that believes fo much needs 
not to inquire further, nor to entangle his faith by 
difbelieving his fenfe. 

1 1 . Fail not this folemnity, according to the cuf- 
tom of piotis and devout people, to make an offering 
to God for ufes of Religion and the poor ; according 
to thy ability. For when Chrift feafts his body, let 
us alfo feaft our fellow-members who have right to 
the fame promifes, and are partakers of the fame Sa- 
crament, and partners of the fame hope, and cared 
for under the fame providence, and defcend from the 
fame common parents, and whofe Father God is, 
and Chrift is their elder brother. If thou chanceft 
to communicate where this holy cuftom is not ob- 
ferved publicly, fuppl^ that want bj^^tl^f^pt^j^ate cha- 
rity ; but off^er it to God at his holy Table, at leaft 
by thy private defigning it there. 

12. When you have received, pray and give 
thanks. Pray for all eftates of men ; for they alfo 



S. lo. HOLT SACRAMENT. 365 

have an intereft in the body of Chrift whereof they 
are members : and you in conjundtion with Chrift 
(whom then you have received) are more fit to pray 
for them in that advantage, and in the celebration 
of that holy facrifice which then is facramentally re- 
prefented to God. * Give thanks for the paflion 
of our deareft Lord: remember all its parts, and all 
the inftruments of your Redemption ; and beg of 
God that by a holy perfevefance in well-doing you 
may from fhadows pafs on to fubftances, from eat- 
ing his body to feeing his face, from the Typical, 
Sacramental and Tranfient, to the Real and Eternal 
Supper of the Lamb. 

1 3 . After the folemnity is done, let Chrift dwell 
in your hearts by faith, and love, and obedience, and 
conformity to his life and death : as you have taken 
Chrift into youy fo put Chrijl on you, and conform 
every faculty of your Soul and body to his holy 
image and perfedion. Remember that now Chrift 
is all one with you ; and therefore when you are to 
do an aftion, confider how Chrift did or would do 
the like, and do you imitate his example, and tran- 
fcribe his copy, and underftand all his command- 
ments, and chufe all that he propounded, and defire 
his promifes, and fear his threatenings, and marry 
his loves and hatreds, and contract his friendfliips ; 
for then you do every day communicate ; efpecially 
when Chrift thus dwells in you, and you in Chrift, 
growing up towards aperfeB man in Chriji yefus. 

14. Do not inftantly upon your return from 
Church return alfo to the world, and fecular thoughts 
and employments ; but let the remaining parts of 
that day be like a poji Communion or an after-office. 



366 RECEIVING rUE C. 4. 

entertaining your bleffed Lord with all the carefles 
and fweetnefs of love and colloquies, and inter- 
courfes of duty and afFedion, acquainting him with 
all your needs, and revealing to him all your fecrets, 
and opening all your infirmities : and as the affairs 
of your perfon or employment call you off, fo retire 
again with often ejaculations and ads of entertain- 
ment to your beloved Gueft. 

The effeSls and benefits of worthy Communicating. 

When I faid that the facrifice of the crofs which 
Chrift offered for all the fins and all the needs of the 
world is reprefented to God by the Minifter in the 
Sacrament, and offered up in prayer and Sacramental 
memory, after the manner that Chrift himfelf inter- 
cedes for us in Heaven, (fo far as his glorious prieft- 
hood is imitable by his minifters on earth) I muft of 
neceflity alfo mean, that all the benefits of that fa- 
crifice are then conveyed to all that communicate 
worthily. But if we delcend to particulars. Then 
and there the Church is nourifhed in her faith, 
ftrengthened in her hope, enlarged in her bowels 
with an increafing charity ! there all the members 
of Chrift are joined with each other, and all to Chrift 
their head ; and we again renew the covenant with 
God in yefus Chrift, and God feals his part, and we 
promife for ours, and Chrift unites both, and the 
holy Ghoft figns both in the collation of thofe graces 
which we then pray for and exercife and receive all 
at once. There our bodies are nourifhed with the 
figns, and our Souls with the myftery : our bodies 
receive into them the feed of an immortal nature, 



S. lo. HOLr SACRAMENT. 367 

and our Souls are joined with him who is the firft- 
fruits of the refurredtion and never can die. And if 
we defire any thing elfe and need it, here it is to be 
prayed for, here to be hoped for, here to be received. 
Long life and health, and recovery from ficknefs, 
and competent fupport and maintenance, and peace 
and deliverance from our enemies, and content, and 
patience, and joy, and fandtified riches, or a cheerful 
poverty, and liberty, and whatfoever elfe is a bleff- 
ing, was purchafed for us by Chrift in his death and 
refurredlion, and in his interceffion in Heaven. And 
this Sacrament being that to our particulars which 
the great myfteries are in themfelves, and by defign 
to all the world, if we receive worthily we fhall re- 
ceive any of thefe bleffings, according as God fhall 
choofe for us; and he will not only choofe with 
more wifdom, but alfo with more aifedtion, than we 
can for ourfelves. 

After all this, it is adifij^d by the Guides of Souls, 
wife men and pi^us, that all perfons fhould commu- 
nicate very often, even as often as they can without 
excufes or delays. Every thing that puts us from 
fo holy an employment when we are moved to it, 
being either a fin or an imperfeftion, an infirmity or 
devotion, and an unadlivenefs of Spirit. All Chriftian 
people muft come. They indeed that are in the ftate 
of fin muft not come Jo, but yet they muft come. 
Firft they muft quit their ftate of death, and then 
partake of the bread of life. They that are at en- 
mity with their neighbours muft L'Evcfque de Geneve 

come, that is no excufe for their -trod, a la vie devote, 
not coming ; only they muft not bring their enmity 



368 THE HOLT SACRAMENT. C. 4. 

along with them, but leave it, and then cbme. They 
that have variety of fecular employments muft come ; 
only they muft leave their fecular thoughts and af- 
fections behind them, and then come and converfe 
w^ith God. If any man be w^ell grown in grace he 
muft needs come, becaufe he is excellently difpofed 
to fo holy a feaft : but he that is but in the infancy 
of piety had need to come, that fo he may grow in 
grace. The ftrong muft come, left they become 
weak ; and the weak, that they may become ftrong. 
The fick muft come to be cured, the healthful to be 
preferved. They that have leifure muft come, be- 
caufe they have no excufe : they that have no leifure 
muft come hither, that by fo excellent Religion they 
may fandtify their bufinefs. The penitent finners 
muft come, that they may be juftified : and they that 
are jufiijiedy that they may be juJlifiedJitlL They that 
have fears and great reverence to thefe myfteries, and 
think no preparation to be fufficient, muft receive, 
that they may learn how to receive the more wor- 
thily : and they that have a lefs degree of reverence 
muft come often to have it heightened : that as thofe 
Creatures that live amongft the fnows of the Moun- 
tains turn white with their food and converlationwith 
fuch perpetual whiteneifes ; fo our Souls maybe tranf- 
formed into the fimilitude and union with Chrift by 
our perpetual feeding on him, and converiation, not 
only in his Courts, but in his very heart, and moft 
fecret afFedions, and incomparable purities. 



^^-9.1,2,3- PRATERS. 369 

Primers for all forts of Men and all necejjities ; relating 
to the fever al parts of the Virtue of Religion. 

A Prayer for the Graces of Faiths Hope^ Charity. 

OLORD God of infinite mercy, of infinite ex- 
cellency, who haft fent thy holy Son into the 
world to redeem us from an intolerable mifery, and 
to teach us a holy religion, and to forgive us an in- 
finite debt ; give me thy holy Spirit, that my under- 
ftanding and all my faculties may be fo refigned to 
the dilcipline and doctrine of my Lord, that I may be 
prepared in mind and will to die for the teftimony 
of Jefusy and to fuflfer any affliftion or calamity that 
fliall oflier to hinder my duty, or tempt me to fhame 
or fin or apoftafy : and let my faith be the parent of 
a good life, a ftrong fhield to repel the fiery darts of 
the Devil, and the Author of a holy hope, of modeft 
defires, of confidence in God, and of a never-failing 
charity to thee my God, and to all the world ; that 
I may never have my portion with the unbelievers, 
or uncharitable and defperate perfbns ; but may be 
fupported by the ftrengths of faith in all temptations, 
and may be refreshed with the comforts of a holy 
hope in all my forrows, and may bear the burthen of 
the Lord, and the infirmities of my neighbour by the 
fupport of charity ; that the yoke of Jefus may be- 
come eafy to me, and my love may do all the mira- 
cles of grace, till from grace it fwell to glory, from 
earth to heaven, from duty to reward, from the im- 
perfecftions of a beginning and little growing love, 
it may arrive to the confummation of an eternal and 
never-ceafing charity, through Jefus Chrift the Son 

2 B 



370 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

of thy love, the Anchor of our hope, and the Author 
and finifher of our faith : to whom with thee, O Lord 
God, Father of Heaven and Earth, and with thy holy 
Spirit, be all glory, and love, and obedience, and do- 
minion now and for ever. 

A^s of Love by way of Prayer and 'Ejaculation ; to be 

ufed in private. 

1 . O Gody thou art my Godj early will Ifeek thee : 
my foul thirjieth for thee, my flejh longethfor thee in a 
dry andthirjiy land where no water is ; To fee thy power 
and thy glory fo as I have feen thee in the fanSluary. 
Becaufe thy loving kindnefs is better than life^ my lips 
JJjall praife thee. Pfal. 63, i, &c. 

2. I am ready not only to be bounds but to die for the 
name of the Lord "Jefus. Afts 21. 13. 

3 . How amiable are thy tabernacles y thou Lord of 
Hojis ? My foul longethy yea even fainteth for the 
courts of the Lord: my heart and my flejh crieth out 

for the living God. Blejfed are they that dwell in thy 
houfsy they will fill be praifng thee. Pfal. 84. i , 2, 4. 

4. O bleffed ^efuy thou art worthy of all adoration, 
and all honour, and all love : Thou art the Wonder- 
ful, the Counfellor, the mighty God, the Everlafting 
Father, the Prince of Peace ; of thy government and 
peace there fhall be no end : thou art the brightneis 
of thy Father's glory, the exprefs image of his per- 
fon, the appointed Heir of all things. Thou up- 
holdeft all things by the word of thy power ; Thou 
didft by thyfelf purge our fins : Thou art fet on the 
right hand of the Majefty on high : Thou art made 
better than the Angels, thou haft by inheritance ob- 
tained a more excellent name than they. Thou, O 



AdS.i—z. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 371 

deareft y^/, art the head of the Church, the be- 
ginning and the firft-born from the dead : in all things 
thou haft the pre-eminence, and it pleafed the Father 
that in thee fhould all fulnefs dwell. Kingdoms are 
in love with thee : Kings lay their Crowns and Scep- 
tres at thy feet, and Queens are thy handmaids, and 
wafli the feet of thy fervants. 

A Prayer to be /aid in any AffliSlionj as death of children y 
ofhujband or wife^ in great poverty j in imprifonment j 
in a fad and difconfolate fpirit^ and in temptations to 
defpair. 

O ETERNAL God, Father of Mercies and God 
of all comfort, with much mercy look upon 
the fadnefles and forrows of thy fervant. My fins 
lie heavy upon me, and prefs me fore, and there is 
no health in my bones by reafon of thy difpleafure 
and my fin. The waters are gone over me, and I 
ftick faft in the deep mire, and my miferies are with- 
out comfort, becaufe they are punifliments of my fin : 
and I am fo evil and unworthy a perfon, that though 
I have great defires, yet I have no diipofitions or wor- 
thinefs toward receiving comfort. My fins have 
caufed my forrow, and my forrow does not cure my 
fins : and unlefs for thy own fake, and merely becaufe 
thou art good, thou fhalt pity me and relieve me, I 
am as much without remedy as now I am without 
comfort. Lord, pity me ; Lord, let thy grace refrefli 
my fpirit. Let thy comforts fupport me, thy mercy 
pardon me, and never let my portion be amongft 
hopelefs and accurfed fpirits : for thou art good and 
gracious ; and I throw myfelf upon thy mercy. Let 



372 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

me never let my hold go, and do thou with me what 
feems good in thy own eyes, I cannot fuffer more 
than I have deferved : and yet I can need no relief 
fo great as thy mercy is : -for thou art infinitely more 
merciful than I can be miferable ; and thy mercy 
which is above all thy own works muft needs be far 
above all my fin and all my mifery. Deareft JefuSf 
let me truft in thee for ever, and let me never be 
confounded. Amen. 



Ejaculations andjhort Meditations to be ufed in time of 
Sicknefs and Sorrow ; or danger of Death. 

HEAR my Prayer^ O Lord, and let my cry come 
unto thee. ♦ Hide not thy face from me in the 
time of my trouble, incline thine ear unto me when I 
call : O hear me and tliat right foon. * For my days 
are confumed like fmoke, and my bones are burnt up as 

Pfai. 101. 1, a, ^^ '^^^^ ^ fire brand. ♦ My heart is 

3» 4» >o. fmitten down and withered like grafs, Jo 

that I forget to eat my bread: And that becaufe of 

thine indignation and wrath : for thou hafi taken me 

Pfai. 38. 1, 3, ^P ^^^ ^^fi ^^ down. * Thine arrows 
+» »^- fiick fafi in me, and thine hand prejfeth 
me fore. There is no health in my flejh becaufe of thy 
difpleafure, neither is there any refi in my bones by rea- 
fon of my fin. * My wickedneffes are gone over my bead, 
and are afore burthen too heavy for me to bear. * But 
/ will confefs my wickednefs, and be forryfor my fin. 

* O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indigna- 
tion, neither chafien me in thy difpleafure. 
* Lord, be merciful unto me, heal my foul, for I have 
finned againfi thee. 



AdS.i—i. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 373 

Have mercy upon me^ O Godj after thy great good- 
nefsj according to the multitude of thy mercies do away 
mine offences. ♦ remember not thejins pfai. 5,. , . 
and offences of my youth : but according *^' "^^ 

to thy mercy think thou upon me^ O Lor d^ for thy good- 
nefs. * Wajh me^ thoroughly from my wickednefs : and 
cleanfe me from my fn. * Make me a 
clean hearty O God, and renew a right 
fpirit within me. ♦ Caji me not away from thy pre- 
fence, from thy all-hallowing and life-giving pre- 
fence : and take not thy holy Spirit, thy fandtifying, thy 
guiding, thy comforting, thy fupporting and con- 
firming S^piritfrom me. 

O God, thou art my God for ever and ever : thou 
Jhalt be my guide unto death. * Lord, comfort me 
now that I lie fck upon my bed: make thou my bed 
in all myjicknefs. ♦ O deliver my foul from the place 
of Hell: and do thou receive me. * My heart isdif- 
quieted within me, and the fear of death is fallen upon 
me. ♦ Behold thou haji made my days as it were afpan 
long, and my age is even as nothing in refpeSt of thee ; 
and verily every man living is altogether p(ai.4S. 14541. 3 5 
vanity. * fThen thou with rebukes doji ^' 5/1 1/7,' it! 
chajien man for Jin, thou makeji his beauty '®» "» ' 3. 
to confume away like a moth fretting a garment : every 
man therefore is but vanity. * And now. Lord, what 
is my hope ? truly my hope is even in thee. * Hear my 
prayer, O Lord, and with thine ears conjider my call- 
ing: hold not thy peace at my tears. ♦ Take this 
plague away from me : I am confume d by the means of 
thy heavy hand. * I am a fir anger with thee and a 
fojourner, as all my fathers were. * O fpare me a 
little, that I may recover my firength before I go hence 



374 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

pfai. 119. 25 J ^^^ ^^ ^^ more feen. * My Soulcleaveth 

"6. 3. ^^^^ ^^^ ^iK^.' O quicken me according 

to thy word. * And when the fnares of death com- 

pafs me round about ^ let not the pains of bell take hold 

upon me. 

AnAB of Faith concerningRefurreStion and the Day of 
Judgment y to be faid by fck perfons or meditated. 

IKNOfV that my Redeemer livethj and that he /hall 
Jiand at the latter day upon the earth : and though 
after my Jkin worms dejiroy this body^ yet in my Jlejh 
jhall I fee God: whom I Jhall fee for my f elf and mine 
eyes Jhall behold^ though my reins be confumed within 
me^ Job 19, 25, Gf^. 

God Jhall come and Jhall not keepflence : there Jhall 
go before him a confuming fire^ and a mighty tempejl 

Jhall be Jlirred up round about him : he 
• 50. 3, 4. ^^// ^^// f/i^ heaven from above, and the 

earth, that he may judge his people. ♦ O blefled Jefu^ 
thou art my Judge and thou art my Advocate : have 
mercy upon me in the hour of my death, and in the day 
of judgment. See John 5. 28. and i Thejfal. 4. 15. 

Short Prayers to be faid byfck perfons. 

OHOLY Jefusy thou art a merciful High Prieft 
and touched with the fenfe of our infirmities; 
thou knoweft the fharpnefs of my ficknefs and the 
weaknefs of my perfon. The clouds are gathered 
about me, and thou haft covered me with thy ftorm: 
My underftanding hath not fuch apprehenfion of 
things as formerly. Lord, let thy mercy fupport 



AdS.i—^. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 375 

me, thy Spirit guide me, and lead me through the 
valley of this death fafely; that I may pafs it pa- 
tiently, holily, with perfed: refignation ; and let me 
rejoice in the Lord, in the hopes of pardon, in the 
expedlation of glory, in the fenfe of thy mercies, in 
the refrefhments of thy fpirit, in a vidtory over all 
temptations. 

Thou haft promifed to be with us in tribulation. 
Lord, my Soul is troubled, and my body is weak, 
and my hope is in thee, and my enemies are buiy 
and mighty; now make good thy holy promife. 
Now, O holy Jefusy now let thy hand of grace be 
upon me : reftrain my ghoftly enemies, and give me 
all forts of fpiritual affiftances. Lord, remember thy 
fervant in the day when thou bindeft up thy Jewels. 

O take from me all tedioufnefs of Spirit, all im- 
patiency and unquietnefs : let me poflefs my Soul in 
patience, and refign my Soul and body into thy 
hands, as into the hands of a faithful Creator, and a 
bleffed Redeemer. 

O holy Jefuy thou didft die for us ; by thy fad, 
pungent and intolerable pains which thou enduredft 
for me, have pity on me, and eafe my pain, or in- 
creafe my patience. Lay on me no more than thou 
(halt enable me to bear. I have deferved it all and 
more, and infinitely more. Lord, I am weak and 
ignorant, timorous and inconftant, and I fear left 
fomething ftiould happen that may difcompofe the 
ftate of my Soul, that may difpleafe thee : Do what 
thou wilt with me, fo thou doft but preferve me in 
thy fear and favour. Thou knoweft that it is my 
great fear; but let thy fpirit fecure, that nothing 
may be able to feparate me from the love of God in 



376 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

Je/us Chrift : then fmite me here, that thou maycft 
fpare me for ever : and yet, O Lord, fmite me 
friendly; for thou knoweft my infirmities. Into 
thy hands I commend my fpirit, for thou haft re- 
deemed me, O Lord, thou God of truth. * Come, 
holy Spirit, help me in this conflid. Come, Lord 
ye/us, come quickly. 

Let the Sick man often meditate upon thefe follow- 
ing promifes and gracious words of God. 

My help comet h of the Lord, who preferveth them 
that are true of hearty Pfal. 7. 1 1. 

And all they that know thy Name will put their trujl 
in thee : for thou. Lord, haji never failed them that 
feek thee, Pfal. 9. 10. 

O how plentiful is thy goodnefs which thou hajl laid 
up for them that fear thee, and that thou hajl prepared 
for them that put their truJl in thee, even before the 
fonsofmen! Pfal. 31. 21. 

Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear 
him, and upon them that put their truji in his mercy, to 
deliver their fouls from death, Pfal. 33. 17. 

The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart ; and will fave fuch as are of an humble fpirit, 
Pfal. 34. 17. 

Thou, Lord, /halt fave both man and beaji : how 
excellent is thy mercy, O God ! and the children of men 
jhall put their truJl under the Jhadow of thy wings, 
Pfal. 36. 7. 

They Jhall be fatisfied with the plenteoufnefs of thy 
houfe : and thou /halt give them to drink of thy plea- 
fures as out of the rivers, v. 8. 

For with thee is the well of life : and in thy light we 
Jhall fee light, v. 9. 



AdS.i—2. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 377 

Commit thy way unto the Lordj and put thy trujl in 
him J and he Jhall bring it to pafsy Pfal. 37. 5. 

But the falvation of the righteous comet h of the Lord: 
who is alfo their Jlrength in the time of trouble y v. 40. 

So that a man Jhall fay y verily there is a reward for 
the righteous : doubt lefs there is a God that judgeth the 
earthy Pfal. 58. 10. 

Bkffed is the man whom thou choofejl and receroeji 
unto thee : he Jhall dwell in thy court y and Jhall be fa-- 
tisfied with the pleafures of thy houfey even of thy holy 
temple y Pfal. 65. 4. 

They that fow in tears Jhall reap in joy y Pfal. 1 26. 6. 

// // writteny I will never leave thee nor forfake 
thecy Heb. 13. 5. 

The Prayer of faith Jhall fave the fck ; and the 
Lord Jhall raife him up : and if he have committed Jinsy 
they Jhall be forgiven himy Jam. 5. 15. 

Come and let us return unto the Lord: for he hath 
torny and he will heal us ; he hath fmitteny and he will 
bind us upy Hof. 6. i. 

If we Jin y we have an Advocate with the Father y 
Jefus Chriji the righteous ; And he is the propitiation 
for our JinSy i John 2, i, 2. 

If we confefs ourfnsy he is faithful and righteous to 
forgive us ourjinsy and to cleanfe us from all unrighte-- 
oufnefsy I John 1.9. 

He that forgives Jhall be forgiveny Luke 6, 37. 

And this is the confidence that we have in himy that 
if we ajk any thing according to his willy he heareth usy 
I John 5. 14. 

And ye know that he was manifejied to take away 
our fins y I John 3. 5. 

If yc being evil know to give good things to your 



378 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

children^ how much more fliall your Father which is 
in Heaven give good things to them that ajk him? 
Matth. 7. II. 

This is a faithful faying and worthy of all accepta- 
tion ^ that yefus Chrif came into the world tofavefn- 
nersy i Tim. i. 15. * He that hath given us his 
Son, how Jhould not he with him give us all things elfe ? 
Rom. 8. 32. 

Adls of Hope to be ufed by fick perfons after a 

pious life. 

I . T AM perfuaded that neither death, nor life, nor 
A Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor 
things prefent, nor things to come, nor height, nor depths 
nor any other creature jhall he able tofeparate me from 
the love of God which is in Chrijl Jefus our Lord^ 
Rom. 8. 38, 39. 

2. I have fought a good fight, I have finijhed my 
courfe, I have kept the faith : Henceforth there is laid 
up for me a crown of righteoufnefs, which the Lord the 
righteous Judge jhall give me at that day ; and not to 
me only, but unto all them alfo that love his appearing, 
2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. 

Blejfed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jefus 
Chrifi, the Father of mercies and the God of all com- 
forts. Who comforts us in all our tribulation, 2 Cor. 
I. 3,4. 



A Prayer to be f aid in behalf of a fick or dying perfon. 

OLORD God, there is no number of thy days 
nor of thy mercies, and the fins and fbrrows 



MS. I— 2. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 379 

of thy fervant alfo are multiplied. Lord, look upon 
him with much mercy and pity, forgive him all his 
fins, comfort his forrows, eafe his pain, fatisfy his 
doubts, relieve his fears, inftruft his ignorances, 
ftrengthen his underftanding, take from him all dif- 
orders of fpirit, weaknefs and abufe of fancy. Re- 
ftrain the malice and power of the fpirits of darknefs ; 
and fuiFer him to be injured neither by his ghoftly 
enemies, nor his own infirmities; and let a holy 
and a jufl: peace, the peace of God, be within his 
confcience. 

Lord, preferve his fenfes till the laft of his time, 
fl:rengthen his faith, confirm his hope, and give him 
a never-ceafing charity to thee our God, and to all 
the world : -ftir up in him a great and proportionable 
contrition for all the evils he hath done, and give 
him a juft meafure of patience for all he fuflfers, give 
him prudence, memory, and confideration, rightly 
to ftate the accounts of his Soul ; and do thou re- 
mind him of all his duty, that when it fhall pleafe 
thee that his Soul goes out from the prifon of his 
body, it may be received by Angels, and preferved 
from the furprife of evil fpirits, and from the horrors 
and amazements of new and ftrange Regions, and 
be laid up in the bofom of our Lord, till at the day 
of thy fecond coming it fhall be re-united to the 
body, which is now to be laid down in weaknefs 
and difhonour, but we humbly beg, may then be 
raifed up with glory and power for ever to live, and 
to behold the face of God in the glories of the Lord 
yefusy who is our hope, our refurredtion, and our 
life, the light of our eyes and the joy of our fouls, 
our bleflfed and ever-glorious Redeemer. Amen. 



38o PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

Hither the Jick perfons may draw in, and ufe the aSls 
of fever al virtues refperfedin the fever al parts of this 
book, the fever al Litanies, viz. of Repentance, of 
the PaJJion, and the Jingle prayers, according to his 
prefenl needs. 

A Prayer to be faid in a Storm at Sea. 

OMY God, thou didft create the Earth and the 
Sea for thy glory and the ufe of man, and doft 
daily fhew wonders in the deep : look upon the 
danger and fear of thy fervant. My fins have taken 
hold upon me, and without the fupporting arm of 
thy mercy I cannot look up ; but my truft is in thee. 
Do thou, O Lord, rebuke the fea, and make it calm ; 
for to thee the winds and the fea obey : let not the 
waters fwallow me up, but let thy Spirit, the Spirit 
of gentlenefs and mercy, move upon the waters. Be 
thou reconciled unto thy fervants, and then the face 
of the waters will be fmooth. I fear that my fins 
make me, like Jonas, the caufe of the tempefl. Caft 
out all my fins, and throw not thy fervants away 
from thy prefence and from the land of the living, 
into the depths where all things are forgotten. But 
if it be thy will that we fhall go down into the wa- 
ters. Lord, receive my Soul into thy holy hands, and 
preferve it in mercy and fafety till the day of refli- 
tution of all things : and be pleafed to unite my 
death to the death of thy Son, and to accept of it fo 
united as a punifliment for all my fins, that thou 
mayeil forget all thine anger, and blot my fins out 
of thy book, and write my Soul there, for Jefus 
Chrifl his fake our dearefl Lord and mofl mighty 
Redeemer. Amen. 



AdS.i—2,. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 381 



Then make an aSl of Rejignatton thus : 

TO God pertain the iflues of life and death. It 
is the Lord, let him do what feemeth good in 
his own eyes. Thy will be done in earth as it is in 
Heaven. 

Recite Pfalm 107. and 130. 

A Form of a Vow to be made in this or the like 

Danger. 

IF the Lord will be gracious and hear the Prayer 
of his fervant, and bring me fafe to (hore, then I 
will praife him fecretly and publicly, and pay unto 
the ufes of charity [or Religion] \then name the fum 
you dejign for holy ufes.'\ O my God, my goods are 
nothing unto thee : I will alfo be thy fervant all the 
days of my life, and remember this mercy and my 
prefent purpofes, and live more to God's glory, and 
with a ftridler duty. And do ^hou pleafe to accept 
this vow as an inftance of my importunity, and the 
greatnefs of my needs : and be thou gracioufly moved 
to pity and deliver me. Amen. 



This Form alfo may be ufed in praying for a BleJJing on 
an Enterprife, and may be injlanced in ASlions of 
Devotion as well as of Charity. 



o 



A Prayer before a Journey. 

ALMIGHTY God who filleft all things with 
thy prefence, and art a God afar off as well as 



382 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

near at hand ; thou didft fend thy Angel to blefs 
yacoi in his journey, and didft lead the children of 
I/rael through the Red Sea, making it a wall on the 
right hand and on the left : be pleafed to let thy 
Angel go out before me and guide me in my jour- 
ney, preferving me from dangers of robbers, from 
violence of enemies, and fudden and fad accidents, 
from falls and errors. And profper my journey to 
thy glory, and to all my innocent purpofes : and pre- 
ferve me from all fin, that I may return in peace and 
holinefs, with thy favour and thy blefling, and may 
ferve thee in thankfulnefs and obedience all the days 
of my pilgrimage ; and at laft bring me to thy coun- 
try, to the celeftial Jerujakm, there to dwell in thy 
houfe, and to fing praifes to thee for ever. Amen. 



Ad Sedt. 4.] A Prayer to be /aid before the hearing 

or reading the Word of God. 

OHOLY and Eternal Jefus^ who haft begotten 
us by thy Word, renewed us by thy Spirit, fed 
us by thy Sacraments and by the daily miniftry of 
thy Word, ftill go on to build us up to life eternal. 
Let thy moft holy Spirit be prefent with me and reft 
upon me in the reading [or hearing] thy facred 
Word ; that I may do it humbly, reverently, without 
prejudice, with a mind ready and defirous to learn 
and to obey ; that I may be readily furniftied and 
inftrufted to every good work, and may practice all 
thy holy laws and commandments, to the glory of 
thy holy name, O holy and eternal Jefus. Amen. 



AdS.s—io. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 383 

AJScA. 5, 9, 10.] A Form of confejjion of Sins and 
Repentance y to be ufed upon Fajltng-daysy or Days of 
Humiliation ; efpecially in Lenty and before the Holy 
Sacrament. 

HAVE mercy upon me, O Gody after thy great good- 
nefs ; according to the multitude of thy mercies do 
away mine offences. For I will confefs my wickednefs 
and beforryfor my Jin. * O my deareft Lord, I am 
not worthy to be accounted amongft the meaneft of 
thy fervants ; not worthy to be fuftained by the leaft 
fragments of thy mercy, but to be fhut out of thy 
prefence for ever with dogs and unbelievers. But 
for thy Name's fake y O Lordy be merciful unto my Jin y 
for it is great . 

I am the vileft of finners, and the worft of men ; 
proud and vain-glorious, impatient of fcorn or of 
juft reproof; not enduring to be flighted, and yet 
extremely deferving it : I have been confumed by the 
colours of humility, and when I have truly called 
myfelf vicious, I could not endure any man elfe 
fhould fay fo or think fo. I have been difobedient 
to my Superiors, churlifli and ungentle in my beha- 
viour, unchriftian and unmanly. But for thy Name^s 
fakey &c. 

O juft and dear God, how can I exped: pity or 
pardon, who am fo angry and peevifh, with and with- 
out caufe, envious at good, rejoicing at the evil of 
my neighbours, negligent of my charge, idle and 
ufelefs, timorous and bafe, jealous and impudent, 
ambitious and hard hearted, foft, unmortified and 
effeminate in my life, indevout in my prayers, with- 
out fancy or afFeftion, without attendance to them or 



384 PRATERS FOR C.4. 

perfeverance in them ; but paffionate and curious in 
pleafing my appetite of meat and drink and plca- 
fures, making matter both for fin and ficknefs ? and 
I have reaped the curfed fruits of fuch improvidence, 
entertaining indecent and impure thoughts ; and I 
have brought them forth in indecent and impure 
adlions, and the fpirit of uncleannefs hath entered in, 
and unhallovvred the temple w^hich thou didft confe- 
crate for the habitation of thy fpirit of love and ho- 
linefs. But for thy Name^sfake^ O Lord^ be merciful 
unto my Jin ^ for it is great. 

Thou haft given me a vv^hole life to ferve thee in, 
and to advance my hopes of heaven : and this pre- 
cious time I have thrown away upon my fins and 
vanities, being improvident of my time and of my 
talent, and of my grace and my own advantages, re- 
fifting thy Spirit and quenching him. I have been 
a great lover of myfelf, and yet ufed many ways to 
deftroy myfelf. I have purfued my temporal ends 
with greedinefs and indiredt means. I am revengeful 
and unthankful, forgetting benefits, but not fo foon 
forgetting injuries, curious and murmuring, a great 
breaker of promifes. I have not loved my neigh- 
bour's good, nor advanced it in all things where I could. 
I have been unlike thee in all things. I am unmerci- 
ful and unjuft; a fottifh admirer of things below, and 
carelefs of heaven and the ways that lead thither. 

But for thy Name's fakc^ O Lordj be merciful unto 
my Jin 9 for it is great. 

All my fenfes hav e been windows to let fin in, 
and death by"fin. ' Mine eyes have been adulterous 
and covetous ; mine ears open to flander and de- 
traiflion ; my tongue and palate loofe and wanton, 



AdS.s—io. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 385 

intemperate, and of foul language, talkative and ly- 
ing, rafh and malicious, falfe and flattering, irreligi- 
ous and irreverent, detradting and cenfbrious; my 
hands have been injurious and unclean, my paflions 
violent and rebellious, my defires impatient and un- 
reafonable : all my members and all my faculties 
heve been fervants of fin ; and my very beft a<3:ions 
have more matter of pity than of confidence, being 
imperfe£t in my beft, and intolerable in moil* But 
for thy Name's fake, Lord, &c. 

Unto this and a far bigger heap of fin I have added 
alfb the faults of others to my own fcorc, by ncglcdl- 
ing to hinder them to fin in all that I could and 
ought : but I alio have encouraged them in fin, have 
taken off their fears, and hardened their coniciences, 
and tempted them diredtly, and prevailed in it to 
my own ruin and theirs, unlefs thy glorious and un- 
fpeakable mercy hath prevented fo intolerable a ca- 
lamity. 

Lord, I have abufed thy mercy, defpifed thy judg- 
ments, turned thy grace into wantonnefs. I have 
been unthankful for thy infinite loving-kindnefs. I 
have finned and repented, and then finned again, and 
refolved againft it, and prefently broke it ; and then 
I tied myielf up with vows, and then was tempted, 
and then I yielded by little and little, till I was wil- 
lingly loft again, and my vows fell off lik cjgords of 
vanity. 

Mtferable man that I am ! who Jball deliver me 
from this body of Jin ? 

And yet, O Lord, I have another heap of fins to 
be unloaded. My fecret fins, O Lord, are innu- 
merable ; fins I noted not, fins that I willingly neg- 

2 c 



386 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

lefted, fins that I a6ted upon wilful ignorance and 
voluntary mifperfuafion, fins that I have forgot, and 
fins which a diligent and a watchful fpirit might 
have prevented, but I would not. Lord, I am con- 
founded with the multitude of them, and the horror 
of their remembrance, though I confider them na- 
kedly in their dire6t appearance, without the defor- 
mity of their unhandfome and aggravating circum- 
ftances : but fo dreflfed they are a fight too ugly, an 
inflance of amazement, infinite in degrees, and in- 
fuiFerable in their load. 

And yet thou haft: fpared me all this while, and 
haft not thrown me into Hell, where I have de- 
fended to have been long fince, and even now to 
have been ftiut up to an eternity of torments with 
infupportable amazement, fearing the revelation of 
thy Day. 

Miferable man that I am ! who Jhall deliver me 
from this body of Jin ? 

Thou Jhalt anfwer for me, O Lord my God. Thou 
that prayejifor me, Jhalt be my Judge. 

The Prayer. 

THOU haft prepared for me a more healthful 
forrow : O deny not thy fervant when he begs 
forrow of thee. Give me a deep contrition for my 
fins, a hearty deteftation and loathing of them, 
hating them worfe than death with torments. Give 
me grace entirely, prefently, and for ever to forfake 
them ; to walk with care and prudence, with fear 
and watchfulnefs all my days; to do all my duty 
with diligence and charity, with zeal and a never- 



AdS. 5—10. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 387 

fainting fpirit ; to redeem the time, to truft upon 
thy mercies, to make ufe of all the inftruments of 
grace, to work out my falvation with fear and trem- 
bling : that thou mkyeft have the glory of pardon- 
ing all my fins, (and I may reap the fruit of all thy 
mercies and all thy graces, of thy patience and 
long-fuffering, even to live a holy life here, and to 
reign with thee for ever, through Jefus Chrift our 
Lord. Amen. 

Ad Se<a. 6. 

Special devotions to be ufed upon the Lord's-day^ 
and the great Fejiivals of Chrijiians. 

In the Morning recite the following form of Thankf 
giving ; upon the fpecial Fejiivals adding the com- 
memoration of the fpecial blejjings according to the 
following Prayers : adding fuch Prayers as you Jh all 
choofe out of the foregoing Devotions. 

2 . Bejtdes the ordinary and public duties of the day^ if 
you retire into your clofet to read and meditate ^ after 
you have performed that duty^ fay the fong of Saint 
Ambrofe commonly called the [Te Deum] or [We 
praife thee, Gf^.] then add the Prayers for particu- 
lar graces which are at the end of the former Chap- 
ter^ fuch and as many of them as Jhall fit your 
prefent needs and affeSlions ; ending with the Lord's 
Prayer. This form of devotion may^ for variety^ 
be indifferently ufed at other times. 

A form of Thankf giving, with a recital of public and 

private blejjings ; to be ufed on Eafier-day, Whit- 

funday, Afcenfion-day , and all Sundays of the year : 

but the middle part of it may be referved for the 



388 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

more foletnn Fejitvals^ and the other ufed upon the 
ordinary ; as every man's affeBions or leifure Jhall 
determine. 

[I.] Ex Liturgia S. Ba/i/ii magna ex parte. 

O ETERNAL Effence, Lord God, Father Al- 
mighty, maker of all things in Heaven and 
Earth ; it is a good thing to give thanks to thee, O 
Lord, and to pay to thee all reverence, worfliip and 
devotion from a clean and prepared heart ; and with 
an humble fpirit to prefent a living and reafonable 
facrifice to thy Holinefs and Majefty ; for thou haft 
given unto us the knowledge of thy truth ; and who 
is able to declare thy greatnefs, and to recount all 
thy marvellous works which thou haft done in all 
the generations of the world ? • 

O Great Lord and Governor of all things. Lord 
and Creator of all things vifible and invifible, who 
fitteft upon the throne of thy Glory, and beholdeft 
the fecrets of the loweft abyfs and darknefs, thou 
art without beginning, uncircumfcribed, incompre- 
henfible, unalterable, and feated for ever unmoveable 
in thy own eflential happinefs and tranquillity: Thou 
art the Father of our Lord "Jefus Chrift, who is. 

Our Deareft and moft Gracious Saviour, our 
hope, the Wifdom of the Father, the image of thy 
Goodnefs, the Word Eternal, and the brightnefs of 
thy perfon, the power of God from eternal ages, the 
true light that lighteneth every man that cometh 
into the World, the Redemption of man, and the 
Sandification of our Spirits. 

By whom the holy Ghoft defcended upon the 
Church ; the holy Spirit of truth, the fcal of adop- 



AdS.e. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 389 

tion, the earneft of the inheritance of the Saints, the 
firft-fruits of everlafting felicity, the Hfe-giving power, 
the fountain of fandlification, the comfort of the 
Church, the eafe of the afflid:ed, the fupport of the 
weak, the weaUh of the poor, the teacher of the 
doubtful, fcrupulous and ignorant, the anchor of the 
fearful, the infinite reward of all faithful fouls, by 
whom all reafonable and underftanding creatures 
ferve thee, and fend up a never-ceafing and a never- 
rejedted facrifice of prayer and praifes and adora- 
tion. 

All Angels and Archangels, all Thrones and Do- 
minions, all Principalities and Powers, the Cheru- 
bims with many eyes, and the Seraphims covered 
with wings from the terror and amazement of thy 
brighteft glory ; thefe and all the powers of Heaven 
do perpetually fing praifes and never-ceafing Hymns 
and eternal Anthems to the glory of the eternal 
God, the Almighty Father of Men and Angels. 

Holy is our God : Holy is the Almighty : Holy 
is the Immortal : Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of 
Sabaoth, Heaven and Earth are full of the Majefty 
of thy glory. Amen. * With thefe holy and bleffed 
Spirits I alfo thy fervant, O thou great lover of Souls, 
though I be unworthy to offer praife to fuch a Ma- 
jefly, yet out of my bounden duty humbly offer up 
my heart and voice to join in this bleffed quire, and 
confefs the glories of the Lord. * For thou art 
holy, and of thy greatnefs there is no end ; and in 
thy juflice and goodnefs thou hafl meafured out to 
us all thy works. 

Thou madefl man out of the earth, and didfl form 
him after thine own image : thou didfl place him in 



390 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

a garden of pleafure, and gaveft him laws of right- 
eoufnefs to be to him a feed of immortality, 

O that men would therefore praife the Lord for His 
goodnefs, and declare the wonders that he hath done for 
the children of men. 

For when man finned and liftened to the whif- 
pers of a tempting fpirit, and rcfufcd to hear the voice 
of God, thou didft throw him out from Paradife, and 
fenteft him to till the Earth ; but yet lefteft not his 
condition without remedy, but didft provide for him 
the falvation of a new birth, and by the blood of thy 
Son didft redeem and pay the price to thine own Juf- 
tice for thine own creature, left the work of thine 
own hands ftiould perifli. 

O that men would therefore praife the Lordy &c. 

For thou, O Lord, in every age didft fend teftimo- 
nies from Heaven, bleflings and prophets, and fruit- 
ful feafons, and preachers of righteoufnefs, and Mira- 
cles of power and mercy, thou fpakeft by the prophets, 
and faidft, / will help by one that is mighty ; and in 
the fulnefs of time fpakeft to us by thy Son, by whom 
thou didft make both the Worlds, who by the word 
of his power fuftains all things ip Heaven and Earth, 
who thought it no robbery to be equal to the Father, 
who being before all time was pleafed to be born in 
time, to converfe with men, to be incarnate of a 
holy Virgin : he emptied himfelf of all his glories, 
took on him the form of a fervant, in all things being 
made like unto us, in a Soul of paftions and difcourfe, 
in a Body of humility and fbrrow, but in all things 
innocent, and in all things afflidted ; and fufFered 
death for us, that we by him might live, and be par- 
takers of his nature and his glories, of his body and 



AdS.b. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 391 

of his Spirit, of the ble flings of Earth, and of im- 
mortal felicities in Heaven, 

O that men would therefore praife the Lord^ &c. 

For thou, O holy and immortal God, O fweeteft 
Saviour Jefusy virert made under the Law to condemn 
fin in the flefh ; thou who knoweft no fin wert made 
fin for us : thou gaveft to us righteous Command- 
ments, and madefl: known to us all thy Father*s will : 
thou didfl redeem us from our vain converfation, and 
from the vanity of Idols, falfe principles and foolifli 
confidences, and broughteft us to the knowledge of 
the true and only God and our Father, and hafl: made 
us to thyfelf a peculiar people, of thy own purchafe, 
a royal Priefl:hood, a holy Nation : thou haft wafhed 
our Souls in the Laver of Regeneration, the Sacra- 
ment of Baptifm : thou haft reconciled us by thy 
Death, juftified us ty thy Refurredtion, iandlified us 
by thy Spirit [fending him upon thy Church in vifible 
forms, and giving him in powers and miracles and 
mighty figns, and continuing this incomparable fa- 
vour in gifts and fandtifying graces, and promifing 
that he fhall abide with us for ever :] thou haft fed 
us with thine own broken Body, and given drink to 
our Souls out of thine own heart, and haft afcended 
up on high, and haft overcome all the powers of 
Death and Hell, and redeemed us from the miferies 
of a fad eternity; and fitteft at the right hand of 
God, making interceflions for us with a never-ceafing 
charity. 

O that men would therefore praife the Lord, &c. 

The grave could not hold thee long, O holy and 
eternal Jefus ; thy body could not fee corruption, 
neither could thy Soul be left in Hell : thou wert 



392 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

free among the dead, and thou brakefl the iron gates 
of Death, and the bars and chains of the lower pri- 
fons. Thou broughteft comforts to the Souls of the 
Patriarchs, who waited for thy coming, who longed 
for the redemption of Man, and the revelation of 
thy Day. Abraliam^ Ifaac^ and Jacob faw thy day, 
and rejoiced : and when thou didfl arife from thy 
bed of darknefs, and lefteft the grave-clothes behind 
thee, and didft put on a robe of glory, (over which 
for 40 days thou didfl: wear a veil) and then enteredft 
into a cloud, and then into glory, then the powers of 
Hell were confounded, then Death loft its power and 
was fwallowed up into victory ; and though Death 
is not quite deftroyed, yet it is made harmlefs and 
without a fting, and the condition of Human Na- 
ture is made an entrance to eternal glory ; and art 
become the Prince of Life, the firft-fruits of the Rc- 
furredlion, the firft-born from the dead, having made 
the way plain before our faces, that we may alfo arife 
again in the Refurredtion of the laft day, when thou 
flialt come again unto us to render to every man ac- 
cording to his works. 

O that men would therefore pratfe the Lordj &c. 

O give thanks unto the Lor dy for he is gracious ^ and 
his mercy endurethfor ever. 

O all ye Angels of the Lordy praife ye the Lord: 
praife him and magnify him for ever. 

Oyefpirits and fouls of the Righteous ^ praife ye the 
Lord: praife him and magnify him for ever. 

And now, O Lord God, what fhall I render to thy 
Divine Majefly for all the benefits thou haft done 
unto thy fervant in my perfonal capacity ? 

Thou art my Creator and my Father, my Protec- 



AdS.6. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 393 

tor and my Guardian^ thou haft brought me from 
my Mother's womb, thou haft told all my joints, and 
in thy book were all my members written : Thou 
haft given me a comely body, Chriftian and careful 
parents, holy education : Thou haft been my guide 
and my teacher all my days : Thou haft given me 
ready faculties, an unloofed tongue, a cheerful fpirit, 
ftraight limbs, a good reputation, and liberty of per- 
fbn, a quiet life, and a tender confcience [a loving 
wife or hujband^ and hopeful children^ Thou wert 
my hope from my youth, through thee have I been 
holden up ever fince I was born. Thou haft clothed 
me and fed me, given me friends and blefled them : 
given me many days of comfort and health, free from 
thofe fad infirmities with whicR many of thy Saints 
and deareft fervants are afflifted. Thou haft fent 
thy Angel to fnatch me from the violence, of fire and 
water, to prevent precipices, frafture of bones, to 
refcue me from thunder and lightning, plague and 
peftilential difeafcs, murder and robbery, violence of 
chance and enemies, and all the fpirits of darknefs : 
and in the days of forrow thou haft refrefhed me ; 
in the deftitution of provifions thou haft taken care 
of me, and thou haft faid unto me, I will never leave 
thee norforfake thee. 

I will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole 
heart, fecretly among the faithful and in the congrega- 
tion. 

Thou, O my deareft Lord and Father, haft taken 
care of my Soul, haft pitied my miferies, fuftained my 
infirmities, relieved and inftrudted my ignorances : 
and though I have broken thy righteous Laws and 
Commandments, run paflionately after vanities, and 



394 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

was in love with Death, and was dead in fin, and 
was expofed to thoufands of temptations, and fell 
foully, and continued in it, and loved to have it fo, 
and hated to be reformed ; yet thou didfl call me 
with the checks of confcience, with daily Sermons and 
precepts of holinefs, with fear and fhame, with bene- 
fits and the admonitions of thy moft holy fpirit, by the 
counfel of my friends, by the example of good per- 
fons, with holy books and thoufands of excellent arts, 
and wouldfl not fufFer me to perifh in my folly, but 
didfl force me to attend to thy gracious calling, and 
hafl put me into a flate of repentance, and pofiibili- 
ties of pardon, being infinitely defirous I fhould live, 
and recover, and make ufe of thy grace, and partake 
of thy glories. 

Iwillghe thanks unto the Lord with my whole hearty 
fecretly among the faithful and in the congregation. 
* For fahation belongeth unto the Lord^ and thy blef 
fng is upon thy fervant. But as for me^ I will come 
into thy houfe in the multitude of thy mercies y and in 
thy fear will I worjhip toward thy holy temple. * For 
of thee^ and in theCy and through and for thee are all 
things. Blejfed be the name of God from generation to 
generation. Amen. 



AJhortform of T^hankf giving to befaid upon anyfpe- 

cial deliverance y as from Child-birth^ from Sicknefs^ 

from Battle y or imminent danger at Sea or Land, &c. 

OMOST merciful and gracious God, thou foun- 
tain of all mercy and ble fling, thou hafl opened 
the hand of thy mercy to fill me with bleflings, and 



AdS.6. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 295 

the iweet efFedts of thy loving kindnefs : thou feedeft 
us like a Shepherd, thou governeft us as a King, thou 
beared us in thy arms like a Nurfe, thou doft cover 
us under the fhadow of thy wings and fhelter us like 
a hen : thou (O deareft Lord) wakeft for us as a 
Watchman, thou provided for us like a Hufband, 
thou loveft us as a friend, and thinkeft on us per- 
petually, as a careful mother on her helplefs babe, 
and art exceeding merciful to all that fear thee. And 
now, O Lord, thou haft added this great blefEng of 
deliverance from my late danger, [Aere name the 
blejfing ;] it was thy hand and the help of thy mercy 
that relieved me, the waters of afflidlion had drowned 
me, and the ftream had gone over my Soul, if the 
fpirit of the Lord had not moved upon thefe waters. 
Thou, O Lord, didft revoke thy angry fentence, 
which I had deferved^ and which was gone out 
againft me. Unto thee, O Lord, I afcribe the praife 
and honour of my Redemption. I will be glad and 
rejoice in thy mercy, for thou haft confidered my 
trouble, and haft known my Soul in adverfity. As 
thou haft fpread thy hand upon me for a covering, 
fo alio enlarge my heart with thankfulnefs, and fill 
my mouth with praifes, that my duty and returns to 
thee may be as great as my needs of mercy are ; and 
let thy gracious favours and loving kindnefs endure 
for ever and ever upon thy fervant ; and grant that 
what thou haft fown in mercy, may fpring up in 
duty : and let thy grace fo ftrengthen my purpofes, 
that I may fin no more, left thy threatening return 
upon me in anger, and thy anger break me into 
pieces : but let me walk in the light of thy favour, 
and in the paths of thy Commandments: that I, living 



396 PRATERS FOR C.4. 

here to the glory of thy Name, may at laft enter 
into the glory of my Lord, to fpend a whole eter- 
nity in giving praife to thy exalted and ever-glorious 
Name. Amen. 

♦ We praife thee, O God, we acknowledge thee 
to be the Lord. * All the Earth doth worfhip thee 
the Father Everlafting. * To thee all Angels cry 
aloud, the Heavens and all the powers therein. * To 
thee Cherubim and Seraphim continually do cry. 

♦ Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaoth ; » Hea- 
ven and Earth are full of the Majefty of thy glory. 

♦ The glorious company of the Apoftles praife thee. 

♦ The goodly fellowfhip of the Prophets praife thee. 

♦ The noble Army of Martyrs praife thee. ♦ The 
holy Church throughout all the world doth acknow- 
ledge thee, * The Father of an infinite Majefty; 

♦ Thine honourable, true and only Son ; * Alfo the 
Holy Ghoft the Comforter. * Thou art the King 
of glory, O Chrift : * Thou art the everlafting Son 
of the Father. * When thou tookeft upon thee 
to deliver man, thou didft not abhor the Virgin's 
womb. * When thou hadft overcome the fliarp- 
nefs of death, thou didft open the Kingdom of Hea- 
ven to all Believers. ♦ Thou fitteft at the right 
hand of God in the glory of the Father. * We be- 
lieve that thou ftialt come to be our Judge. * We 
therefore pray thee help thy fervants whom thou haft 
redeemed with thy precious blood. * Make them 
to be numbered vith thy Saints in glory everlafting. 

♦ O Lord, fave thy people, and blefs thine heritage. 

♦ Govern them and lift them up for ever. * Day 
by day we magnify thee, and we worftiip thy Name 
ever world without end. * Vouchfafe, O Lord, to 
keep us this day without fin. * O Lord, have mercy 



AdS.6. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 397 

upon us, have mercy upon us. * O Lord, let thy 
mercy lighten upon us, as our truft is in thee. * O 
Lord, in thee have I trufted : let me never be con- 
founded. Amen. 



A Prayer of Thank/giving after the receiving of fome 
great blejjingy as the birth of an Heir^ the fuccefs of 
an honeji defgn, a viSiory^ a good harvejiy &c. 

OLORD God, Father of mercies, the Fountain 
of comfort and blefling, of life and peace, of 
plenty and pardon, who filleft Heaven with thy 
glory, and Earth with thy goodnefs ; I give thee the 
moft earneft, moft humble, and mod enlarged re- 
turns of my glad and thankful heart, for thou haft 
refrefhed me with thy comforts, and enlarged me 
with thy bleffing ; thou haft made my flefti and my 
bones rejoice : for befides the bleflings of all man- 
kind, the bleflings of nature and the bleflings of 
grace, the fupport of every minute, and the com- 
forts of every day, thou haft opened thy bofom, and 
at this time haft poured out an excellent exprefllon 
of thy loving kindnefs [^here name the blejjing.'\ What 
am I, O Lord, and what is my Father^s houfe, what 
is the life and what are the capacities of thy fervant, 
that thou fliouldeft do this unto me ; ♦ that the great 
God of Men and Angels fliould make a fpecial de- 
cree in Heaven for me, and fend out an Angel of 
blefling, and inftead of condemning and ruining me, 
as I miferably have deferved, to diftinguifli me from 
many my equals and my betters, by this and many 
other fpecial acfls of grace and favour ? 

Prated be the Lord daily ^ even the Lord that 
helpeth us, and poureth his benefits upon us. He 



398 PRATERS FOR C.4. 

is our God, even the God of whom cometh falva- 
tion : God is the Lord by whom we efcape death. 
Thou haft brought me to great honour, and com- 
forted me on every fide. 

Thou, Lord, haft made me glad through diy 
works : I will rejoice in giving praife for the opera- 
tions of thy hands. 

O give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his 
Name : tell the people what things he hath done. 

As for me I will give great thanks unto the Lord, 
and praife him among the multitude. 

Blefifed be the Lord God, even the Lord God of 
Ifraely which only doth wondrous and gracious 
things. 

And blefled be the Name of his Majefty for ever : 
and all the Earth fhall be filled with his Majefty. 
Amen. Amen. 

Glory be to the Father, Gfr. 
As it was in the beginning, Gfr. 

A Prayer to be /aid on the Feaji of Chrijimas, or the 
Birth of our blejfed Saviour Jefus Chriji : the fame 
alfo may be faid upon the Feaji of the Annunciation 
and Purification of the ^B. Virgin Mary. 

OHOLY and Almighty God, Father of mercies, 
Father of our Lord Jefus Chrift, the Son of 
thy love and eternal mercies, I adore and praife and 
glorify thy infinite and unfpeakable love and wifdom, 
who haft fent thy Son from the bofom of felicities 
to take upon him our nature and our mifery and our 
guilt, and haft made the Son of God to become the 
Son of Man, that we might become the Sons of God, 



AdS. 6. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 399 

and partakers of the Divine nature : fince thou haft 
fo exalted human nature, be pleafed alfo to fanftify 
my perfon, that by a conformity to the humility and 
laws and fufFerings of my deareft Saviour I may be 
united to his fpirit, and be made all one writh the 
moft Holy ye/us. Amen. 

O holy and Eternal Jefus^ vsrho didft pity man- 
kind lying in his blood and fin and mifery, and didft 
choofe our fadnefl!es and forrows, that thou mighteft 
make us to partake of thy felicities ; let thine eyes 
pity me, thy hands fupport me, thy holy feet tread 
down all the difficulties in my way to Heaven : let 
me dwell in thy heart, be inftriifted with thy wif- 
dom, moved by thy afFedtions, choofe with thy will, 
and be clothed with thy righteoufnefs ; that in the 
day of Judgment I may be found having on thy gar- 
ments, fealed with thy impreffion; and that bear- 
ing upon every faculty and member the character of 
my elder Brother, I may not be caft out with 
ftr angers and unbelievers. Amen. 

O Holy and ever-blefl^ed Spirit, who didft over- 
fhadow the holy Virgin-Mother of our Lord, and 
caufedft her to conceive by a miraculous and mys- 
terious manner ; be pleafed to over-ftiadow my Soul, 
and enlighten my fpirit, that I may conceive the 
holy Jefus in my heart, and may bear him in my 
mind, and may grow up to the fulnefs of the fta- 
ture of Chrift, to be a perfe<5t man in Chrift Jefus. 
Amen. 

To God the Father of our Lord Jefus Chrift, ♦ To 
the eternal Son that was incarnate and born of a Vir- 
gin y * To the Jpirit of the Father and the Son, be all 



402 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

tain hope and great beatitude until the day of refti- 
tution of all things. Blefled be the mercy and eter- 
nal goodnefs of God ; and the memory of all thy 
Saints is blefled. Teach me to prad:ice their doc- 
trine, to imitate their lives, following their example, 
and being united as a part of the fame myftical body 
by the band of the fame faith, and a holy hope, and 
a never-ceafing charity. And may it pleafe thee of 
thy gracious goodnefs fhortly to accomplifli the num- 
ber of thine eledb, and to haflen thy kingdom, that 
we, with thy fervant [ ♦ ] and all others departed in 
the true faith and fear of thy holy Name, may have 
our perfedt confummation and blifs in body and Soul 
in thy eternal and everlafting Kingdom. Amen. 

A Form of Prayer recording all the parts andmyjleries 
of Chrijfs PaJJiony being a Jhort hijiory of it : to be 
ufed efpecially in the week of the Pajfion^ and before 
the receiving the blejfed Sacrament. 

ALL praife, honour and glory be to the holy and 
eternal Jefus. I adore thee, O blefled Re- 
deemer, eternal God, the light of the Gentiles and 
the glory of Ifrael ; for thou haft done and fuffered 
for me more than I could wifli, more than I could 
think of, even all that a loft and a miferable and 
perifliing finner could poflibly need. 

Thou wert afflid:ed with thirft and hunger, with 
heat and cold, with labours and forrows, with hard 
journeys and reftlefs nights; and when thou wert 
contriving all the myfterious and admirable ways of 
paying our fcores, thou didft fuffer thyfelf to be de- 
figned to flaughter by thofe for whom in love thou 
wert ready to die. 



AdS. 6. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 403 

fV/iaf is Man that thou art mindful of him y and the 
Son of man y that thou thus viftejl him ? 

Blefled be thy name, O holy Jefus ; for thou 
wenteft about doing good, working miracles of mercy, 
healing the lick, comforting the diftreiled, inftrudt- 
ing the ignorant, railing the dead, enlightening the 
blind, ftrengthening the lame, ftraightening the 
crooked, relieving the poor, preaching the Golpel, 
and reconciling finners by the mightinefs of thy 
power, by the wifdom of thy Spirit, by the Word 
of God, and the merits of thy paffion, thy healthful 
and bitter Paffion. 

Lordf what is Man that thou art mindful of him y &c. 

Blefled be thy name, O holy Jefusy who wert con- 
tent to be conlpired againft by the yewsy to be fold 
by thy fervant for a vile price, and to wafh the feet 
of him that took money for thy life, and to give to 
him and to all thy Apoftles thy moft holy Body and 
Blood, to become a Sacrifice for their fins, even for 
their betraying and denying thee; and for all my 
fins, even for my crucifying thee afrefh, and for fuch 
fins which I am afhamed to think, but that the great- 
nefs of my fins magnify the infinitenefs of thy mer- 
cies, who didft fo great things for fo vile a perfon. 

Lordy what is Many &c. 

BlefiTed be thy Name, O holy Jefusy who being to 
depart the world, didft comfort thy apoftles, pour- 
ing out into their ears and hearts treafures of ad- 
mirable difcourfes ; who didft recommend them to 
thy Father with a mighty charity, and then didft 
enter into the Garden fet with nothing but Briers 
and forrows, where thou didft fujfFer a moft unfpeak- 
able agony, until the fweat ftrained through thy 



404 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

pure fkin like drops of blood, and there didft figh 
and groan, and fall flat upon the earth, and pray, 
and fubmit to the intolerable burthen of thy Father's 
wrath, which I had deferved and thou fufferedft. 
Lord, what is Man, &c. 

Blefled be thy name, O holy ^efus, who haft fanc- 
tified to us all our natural infirmities and paflions, 
by vouchfafing to be in fear and trembling and fore 
amazement, by being bound and imprifoned, by being 
harafled and dragged with cords of violence and rude 
hands, by being drenched in the brook in the way, 
by being fought after like a thief, and ufed like a 
finner, who wert the moft holy and the moft inno- 
cent, cleaner than an Angel, and brighter than the 
Morning Star. 

Lord, what is Man, &c. 

Bleflfed be thy name, O holy Jefus, and blefled be 
thy loving kindnefs and pity by which thou didft 
negledl thy own forrows, and go to comfort the fad- 
nefs of thy Difciples, quickening their dulnefs, en- 
couraging their duty, arming their weaknefs with 
excellent precepts againft the day of trial. Blefled 
be that humility and forrow of thine, who being Lord 
of the Angels, yet wouldeft need and receive comfort 
from thy fervant the Angel ; who didft ofl?er thyfelf 
to thy perfecutors, and madeft them able to feize 
thee ; and didft receive the Traitor*s kifs, and fuffer- 
edft a veil to be thrown over thy holy face, that thy 
enemies might not prefently be confounded by fo 
bright a luftre ; and wouldft do a miracle to cure a 
wound of one of thy fpiteful enemies ; and didft re- 
prove a zealous fervant in behalf of a malicious ad- 



Ad S. 6. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 405 

verfary; and then didft go like a Lamb to the 
flaughter, without noife or violence or refiftance, 
when thou couldft have commanded millions of An- 
gels for thy guard and refcue. 
Lord, what is Man, &c. 

Blefled be thy name, O holy Jefus, and bleffed be 
that holy forrow thou didft fufFer when thy Difciples 
fled, and thou wert left alone in the hands of cruel 
men, who like evening Wolves thirfted for a draught 
of thy beft blood, and thou wert led to the houfe 
of Annas, and there afked enfnaring queftions, and 
fmitten on the face by him whofe ear thou hadft but 
lately healed ; and from thence wert dragged to the 
houfe of Caiaphas, and there all night didft endure 
fpittings, aflfronts, fcorn, contumelies, blows, and in- 
tolerable infolencies ; and all this for Man, who was 
thy enemy and the caufe of all thy forrows. 
Lord, what is Man, &c. 

Blefled be thy Name, O holy Jefus, and bleflfed be 
thy mercy, who when thy fervant Peter denied thee 
and forfook thee and forfwore thee, didft look back 
upon him, and by that gracious and chiding look 
didft call him back to himfelf and thee ; who wert 
accufed before the High Prieft, and railed upon, and 
examined to evil purpofes, and with defigns of blood ; 
who wert declared guilty of death for fpeaking a moft 
neceflary and moft probable truth ; who wert fent to 
Pilate and found innocent, and fent to Herod and ftill 
found innocent, and wert arrayed in white, both to 
declare thy innocence, and yet to deride thy perfon, 
and wert fent back to Pilate and examined again, and 
yet nothing but innocence found in thee, and malice 



4o6 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

round about thee to devour thy life, which yet thou 
wert more defirous to lay down for them than they 
were to take it from thee, 
Lordy what is Marty &c. 

Blefled be thy Name, O holy Jefus^ and bleflcd be 
that patience and charity by which for our fakes thou 
wert content to be fmitten with canes, and have that 
holy face which Angels with joy and wonder do be- 
hold, be fpit upon, and be defpifed, when compared 
with Barabbasy and fcourged moft rudely with un- 
hallowed hands, till the pavement was purpled with 
that holy blood, and condemned to a fad and fhame- 
ful, a public and painful death, and arrayed in Scar- 
let, and crowned with thorns, and ftripped naked, 
and then clothed, and loaden with the Crofs, and tor- 
mented with a tablet ftuck with nails at the fringes 
of thy garment, and bound hard with cords, and 
dragged moft vilely and moft piteoufly till the load 
was too great, and did fink thy tender and virginal 
body to the earth ; and yet didft comfort the weep- 
ing woman, and didft more pity thy perfecutors than 
thy felf, and wert grieved for the miferies of Jerufa-- 
lem to come forty years after more than for thy pre- 
fent Paflion. 

Lordy what is Man^ &c. 

Blefled be thy Name, O holy Jefus, and blefled be 
that incomparable fweetnefs and holy forrow which 
thou fufFeredft, when thy holy hands and feet were 
nailed upon the Crofs, and the Crofs being fet in a 
hollownefs of the earth did in the fall rend the 
wounds wider, and there naked and bleeding, fick 
and faint, wounded and defpifed, didft hang upon 
the weight of thy wounds three long hours, praying 



AdS.6. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 407 

for thy perfccutors, fatisfying thy Father's wrath, 
reconciling the penitent thief, providing for thy holy 
and afflidted mother, tafting vinegar and gall ; and 
when the fulnefs of thy fuffering was accomplifhed, 
didft give thy Soul into the hands of God, and didft 
defcend to the regions of longing Souls, who waited 
for the revelation of this thy day in their prifons of 
hope : and then thy body was transfixed with a fpear, 
and iffued forth two Sacraments, Water and Blood ; 
and thy body was compofed to Burial, and dwelt in 
darknefs three days and three nights. 

Lord J what is Man, that thou art mindful of him, 
and the Son of Man, that thou thus vifteji him ? 

The Prayer. 

THUS, O bleffed Jefu, thou didft finifli thy holy 
Paffion with pain and anguifh fo great that 
nothing could be greater than it, except thyfelf and 
thy own infinite mercy ; and all this for Man, even 
for me, than whom nothing could be more miferable, 
thyfelf only excepted, who becameft fo by under- 
taking our guilt and our punifhment. And now. 
Lord, who haft done fo much for me, be pleafed 
only to make it effe(ftual to me, that it may not be 
ufelefs and loft as to my particular, left I become 
eternally miferable, and loft to all hopes and poffi- 
bilities of comfort. All this deferves more love than 
I have to give : but. Lord, do thou turn me all into 
love, and all my love into obedience, and let my obe- 
dience be without interruption, and then I hope thou 
wilt accept fuch a return as I can make. Make me 
to be fomething that thou delighteft in, and thou 



4o8 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

(halt have all that I am or have from thee, even 
whatfoever thou makeft fit for thyfelf. Teach me 
to live wholly for my Saviour Jefus^ and to be ready 
to die for "Jefus^ and to be conformable to his life 
and fufFerings, and to be united to him by infeparable 
unions, and to own no paflions but what may be fer- 
vants to Jefm and Difciples of his inftitution. 
fweeteft Saviour, clothe my Soul with thy holy robe; 
hide my fins in thy wounds, and bury them in thy 
grave; and let me rife in the life of grace, and 
abide and grow in it, till I arrive at the Kingdom of 
Glory. Amen. 
Our Father^ &c. 



Ad Seft. 7, 8, 10.] A Form of Prayer or Intercef- 

Jknfor all EJiates of People in the Chrijiian Church. 

The parts of which may be added to any other forms : 

and the whole office entirely as it lies is proper to he 

faid in our Preparation to the Holy Sacrament y or 

on the Day of Celebration. 

I . For Ourfehes. 

OTHOU gracious Father of mercy. Father of 
our Lord Jefus Chrift, have mercy upon thy 
fervants who bow our heads, and our knees, and our 
hearts to thee : pardon and forgive us all our fins : 
give us the grace of holy Repentance, and a ftrid 
obedience to thy holy Word : ftrengthen us in the 
inner man with the power of the holy Ghoft for all 
the parts and duties of our calling and holy living : 
preferve us for ever in the unity of the holy Catholic 
Church, and in the integrity of the ChrilUan faith. 



AdS.j,^. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 409 

and in the love of God and of our neighbours, and 
in hope of life Eternal. Amen. 

2. For the whole Catholic Church. 

O holy Jefusj King of the Saints, and Prince of the 
Catholic Church, preferve thy fpoufe whom thouhadfl 
purchafed with thy right hand, and redeemed and 
cleanfed with thy blood ; the whole Catholic Church 
from one end of the Earth to the other; fhe is founded 
upon a rock, but planted in the fea. O preferve her 
fafe from fchifm, herefy and facrilege. Unite all 
her members with the hands of Faith, Hope and 
Charity, and an external communion, when it fhall 
feem good in thine eyes. Let the daily facrifice of 
prayer and Sacramental thankfgiving never ceafe, but 
be for ever prefented to thee, and for ever united to 
the interceflion of her deareft Lord, and for ever 
prevail for the obtaining for every of its members 
grace and bleffing, pardon and falvation. Amen. 

3 . For all Chrijiian Kings ^ Princes and Governors. 

O King of Kings, and Prince of all the Rulers of 
the Earth, give thy grace and Spirit to all Chriftian 
Princes, the fpirit of wifdom and counfel, the ipirit 
of government and godly fear. Grant unto them to 
live in peace and honour, that their people may love 
and fear them, and they may love and fear God. 
Speak good unto their hearts concerning the Church, 
that they may be nurfing Fathers to it. Fathers to 
the Fatherlefs, Judges and Avengers of the caufe of 
Widows; that they may be compaflionate to the 
wants of the poor, and the groans of the opprefled ; 
that they may not vex or kill the Lord*s people with 



4IO PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

unjuft or ambitious wars, but may feed the flock of 
God, and may inquire after and do all things which 
may promote peace, public honefty and holy Reli- 
gion ; fo adminiflering things prefent, that they may 
not fail of the everlafting glories of the World to 
come, where all thy faithful people fhall reign Kings 
for ever. Amen. 

4. For all the orders of them that minijier about Holy 

things. 

O thou great Shepherd and Bifhop of our Souls, 
Holy and Eternal Jefus^ give unto thy fervants the 
Minifters of the Myfteries of Chriftian Religion, the 
Spirit of prudence and fandlity, faith and charity, 
confidence and zeal, diligence and watchfulnefs, that 
they may declare thy will unto the people faithfully, 
and difpenfe thy Sacraments rightly, and intercede 
with thee gracioufly and acceptably for thy fervants. 
Grant, O Lord, that by a holy life and a true belief, 
by well doing and patient fuflfering (when thou fhalt 
call them to it) they may glorify thee the great lover 
of Souls, and after a plentiful converfion of finners 
from the error of their ways, they may fhine like 
the flars in glory. Amen. 

Give unto thy fervants the Bifhops a difcerning 
Spirit, that they may lay hands fuddenly on no man, 
but may depute fuch perfons to the Miniflries of 
Religion who may adorn the Gofpel of God, and 
whofe lips may preferve knowledge, and fuch who 
by their good Preaching and Holy Living may ad- 
vance the fervice of the Lord j^e/us. Amen. 



AdS.j,^. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 411 

5. For our neareji relatives y as Hujbandy Wife^ 

Childrerty Family y &c. 

O God of infinite mercy, let thy loving mercy and 
compaffion defcend upon the head of thy fervants 
\my wtfey or hujbandy children and family ;] be pleafed 
to give them health of body and of fpirit, a compe- 
tent portion of temporals, fo as may with comfort 
fupport them in their journey to Heaven, preferve 
them from all evil and fad accidents, defend them in 
all aflaults of their enemies, direft their perfons and 
their adtions, fandlify their hearts and words and pur- 
pofes ; that we all may by the bands of obedience and 
charity be united to our Lord Jefusy and always feel- 
ing thee our merciful and gracious Father, may be- 
come a holy family, diicharging our whole duty in 
all our relations ; that we in this life being thy chil- 
dren by adoption and grace, may be admitted into 
thy holy family hereafter, forever to fing praifes to 
thee in the Church of the firft-born, in the family of 
thy redeemed ones. Amen. 

6. For our Parents y our Kindred in the Flejloy our 

Friends and Benefactors. 

O God merciful and gracious, who haft made 
\my Parents^ my friends and my Benefadlors minif- 
ters of thy mercy and inftruments of Providence to 
thy fervant, I humbly beg a bleffing to defcend upon 
the heads of \name the perfons or the relations. ^ De- 
pute thy holy Angels to guard their perfons, thy 
holy Spirit to guide their Souls, thy Providence to 
minifter to their neceflities : and let thy grace and 
mercy preferve them from the bitter pains of eternal 
death, and bring them to everlafting life through 
ycfus Chrift. Amen. 



412 PRATERS FOR C.^. 

7. For all that lie under the Rod of Wary Famine, 
Pejiilence : to be /aid in the Time of Plague ^ or 
War J &c. 

O Lord God Almighty, thou art our Father, we 
are thy children : thou art our Redeemer, we thy 
people purchafed with the price of thy moft preci- 
ous blood : be pleafed to moderate thy anger towards 
thy fervants ; let not thy whole difpleafure arife, left 
we be confumed and brought to nothing. Let health 
and peace be within our dwellings, let righteoufnefs 
and holinefs dwell forever in our hearts, and be ex- 
prefled in all our adlions, and the light of thy coun- 
tenance be upon us in all our fufFerings, that we may 
delight in the fervice and in the mercies of God for 
ever. Amen. 

O gracious Father and merciful God, if it be thy 
will, fay unto the deftroying Angel, It is enough : 
and though we are not better than our brethren who 
are fmitten with the rod of God, but much worfe, 
yet may it pleafe thee, even becaufe thou art good, 
and becaufe we are timorous and finful, not yet fitted 
for our appearance, to fet thy mark upon our fore- 
heads, that thy Angel the Minifter of thy juftice may 
pafs over us and hurt us not : let thy hand cover thy 
fervants, and hide us in the clefts of the rock^ in the 
wounds of the holy "Jefusy from the prefent anger 
that is gone out againft us ; that though we walk 
through the valley of the fhadow of death, we may 
fear no evil, and fufFer none : and thofe whom thou 
haft fmitten with thy rod, fupport with thy ftafF, and 
vifit them with thy mercies and falvation, through 
Jefus Chrift. Amen. 



AdS.j,^. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 413 

8 . For all Women with Child ^ and for unborn 

Children. 

O Lord God, who art the Father of them that 
truft in thee, and fhoweft mercy to a thoufand gene- 
rations of them that fear thee ; have mercy upon all 
women great with child, [*] be pleafed to give them 
a joyful and a fafe deliverance : and let thy grace 
preferve the fruit of their wombs, and conduft them 
to the holy Sacrament of Baptifm ; that they, being 
regenerated by thy Spirit, and adopted into thy fa- 
mily, and the portion and duty of Sons, may live to 
the glory of God, to the comfort of their parents and 
friends, to the edification of the Chriftian Common- 
wealth, and the falvation of their own Souls, through 
"Jefus Chrift. Amen. 

9. For all EJlates of Men and Women in the Chrijlian 

Church. 

O Holy God, King eternal, out of the infinite 
ftorehoufes of thy grace and mercy, give unto all 
Virgins chaftity, and a religious fpirit ; to all perfons 
dedicated to thee and to Religion, continence and 
meeknefs, an adlive zeal and an unwearied fpirit ; to 
all married pairs, faith and holinefs ; to widows and 
fatherlefs, and all that are opprefled, thy patronage, 
comfort and defence ; to all Chriftian women, fim- 
plicity and modefty, humility, chaftity, patience 
and charity : give unto the poor, to all that are 
robbed and fpoiled of their goods, a competent 
fupport, and a contented fpirit, and a treafure in 
heaven hereafter : give unto prifoners and cap- 
tives, to them that toil in the mines and row in 



414 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

the galleys, ftrength of body and of fpirit, liberty, 
and redemption, comfort and reftitution : to all that 
travel by land, thy Angel for their guide, and a holy 
and profperous return : to all that travel by fea, free- 
dom from Pirates and (hipwreck, and bring them to 
the Haven where they would be ; to diftrefled and 
fcrupulous confciences, to melancholy and difconfb- 
late perfons, to all that are afflifted with evil and 
unclean fpirits, give a light from Heaven, great grace 
and proportionable comforts, and timely deliverance; 
give them patience and refignation ; let their fbrrows 
be changed into grace and comfort, and let the ftorm 
waft them certainly to the regions of reft and glory. 

Lord God of mercy, give to thy Martyrs, Con- 
feflbrs, and all thy perfecuted, conftancy and pru- 
dence, boldnefs and hope, a full faith and a never- 
failing charity. To all who are condemned to death 
do thou minifter comfort, a ftrong, a quiet, and a 
refigned Ipirit : take from them the fear of death, 
and all remaining afFedlions to fin, and all imperfec- 
tions of duty, and caufe them to die full of grace, 
full of hope. And give to all faithful, and particu- 
larly to them who have recommended themfelves to 
the prayers of thy unworthy fervant, a fupply of all 
their needs temporal and fpiritual, and according to 
their feveral ftates and neceflities, reft and peace, 
pardon and refrefliment : and (how us all a mercy in 
the day of judgment. Amen. 

Give O Lord, to the magiftrates equity, fincerity, 
courage and prudence, that they may protedl the 
good, defend Religion, and punifli the wrong doers. 
Give to the Nobility wifdom, valour and loyalty : to 
Merchants, juftice and faithfulnefs : to all Artificers 



AdS. 7, 8. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 415 

and Labourers, truth and honefty : to our enemies, 
forgivenefs and brotherly kindnefs. 

Preferve to us the Heavens and the Air in health- 
ful influence and difpofition, the Earth in plenty, 
the Kingdom in peace and good government, our 
marriages in peace and fweetnefs and innocence of 
fociety, thy people from famine and peftilence, our 
houfes from burning and robbery, our perfons from 
being burnt alive : from banifhment and prifon, from 
widowhood and deftitution, from violence of pains 
and paflion, from tempefts and earthquakes, from 
inundation of waters, from rebellion or invafion, 
from impatience and inordinate cares, from tediouf- 
nefs of fpirit and defpair, from murder and all vio- 
lent, accurfed and unufual deaths, from the furprife 
of fudden and violent accidents, from paflionate and 
unreafonable fears, from all thy wrath, and from all 
our fins, good Lord, deliver and preferve thy fer- 
vants for ever. Amen. 

Reprefs the violence of all implacable warring and 
tyrant Nations : bring home unto thy fold all that 
are gone aftray : call into the Church all ftrangers : 
increafe the number and holinefs of thine own peo- 
ple ; bring infants to ripenefs of age and reafbn : 
confirm all baptifed people with thy grace and with 
thy Spirit : inftrudt the novices and new Chriftians : 
let a great grace and merciful providence bring 
youthful perfons fafely and holily through the indif- 
cretions and paflions and temptations of their younger 
years : and to thofe whom thou haft or fhalt permit 
to live to the age of a man, give competent ftrength 
and wifdom ; take from them covetoufiiefs and chur- 
liftinefs, pride and impatience ; fill them full of de- 



4i6 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

votion and charity, repentance and fobriety, holy 
thoughts and longing defires after Heaven and Hea- 
venly things ; give them a holy and a bleifed death, 
and to us all a joyful refurreftion, through Jefus 
Chrift our Lord. Amen. 

Ad Sed:. 10.] T!he manner ofufingthefe Devotions by 
Way of Preparation to the receiving the blejfed Sa- 
crament of the Lord's Supper. 

The juji preparation to this holy Feaji conjifiing 
principally in a holy life^ and confequently in the repeti- 
tion of the adts of all virtues y and ejpecialfy of Fait b^ 
Repentance y Charity and Thanijgiving ; to the exercife 
of thefefour graces y let the perfon that intends to com- 
municatCy in the times fet apart for his preparation and 
devotion f for the exercife of bis Faith recite the prayer 
or litany of the PaJJion ;for the exercife of Repentance ^ 
the form of confej/ion of fns with the prayer annexed; 
and for the graces of thankfgiving and charity , let him 
ufe the fpecial forms of prayer above defcribed. Or if 
a lefs time can be allotted for preparatory devotion^ the 
twofirjl will be the more proper ^ as containing in them 
all the perfonal duty of the communicant. To which 
upon the morning of that holy folemnity ^ let him add 

A Prayer of Preparation or Addrefs to the holy 

Sacrament. 

An AB of Love. 

OMOST gracious and eternal God, the helper of 
the helplefs, the comforter of the comfortlels, 
the hope of the afflidted, the bread of the hungry, 



AdS. \o. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 417 

the drink of the thirfty, and the Saviour of all them 
that wait upon thee ; I blefs and glorify thy Name, 
and adore thy goodnefs, and delight in thy love, that 
thou haft once more given me the opportunity of 
receiving the greateft favour which I can receive in 
this World, even the body and blood of my deareft 
Saviour. O take from me all affedlion to fin or va- 
nity : let not my afFedions dwell below, but foar 
upwards to the element of love, to the feat of God, 
to the Regions of Glory, and the inheritance of 
Jefus ; that I may hunger and thirft for the bread of 
life, and the wine of eledl Souls, and may know no 
loves but the love of God, and the moft merciful 
Jefus. Amen. 

An ASl ofDefire. 

O blefl!ed Jefus^ thou haft ufed many arts to fave 
me, thou haft given thy life to redeem me, thy holy 
Spirit to fandtify me, thyfelf for my Example, thy 
Word for my Rule, thy grace for my guide, the 
fruit of thy body hanging on the tree of the crofs 
for the fin of my Soul ; and after all this thou haft 
fent thy Apoftles and Miniftcrs of falvation to call 
me, to importune me, to conftrain me to holinefs 
and peace and felicity. O now come. Lord Jefus^ 
come quickly : my heart is defirous of thy prefence, 
and thirfty of thy grace, and would fain entertain 
thee, not as a gueft, but as an inhabitant, as the Lord 
of all my Faculties. Enter in and take poflfeflion, 
and dwell with me for ever ; that I alfo may dwell 
in the heart of my deareft Lord, which was opened 
for me with a fpear and love. 

2 £ 



41 8 PRATERS FOR C. 4- 

An A Si of Contrition. 

Lord, thou (halt find my heart full of cares and 
worldly defires, cheated with love of riches, and neg- 
le<Sb of holy things, proud and unmortified, falfe and 
crafty to deceive itfelf, intricated and entangled with 
difficult cafes of confcience, with knots which my 
own wildnefs and inconfideration and impatience 
have tied and ihufHed together. O my dearefl Lord, 
if thou canfl behold fuch an impure feat, behold the 
place to which thou art invited is full of paffion and 
prejudice, evil principles and evil habits, pcevifh and 
difobedient, luflful and intemperate, and full of &d 
remembrances that I have often provoked to jealoufy 
and to anger thee my God, my dearefl Saviour, him 
that died for me, him that fuffered torments for me, 
that is infinitely good to me^ and infinitely good and 
perfedt in him/elf. This, O dearefl Saviour, is a fad 
truth, and I am heartily afhamed, and truly forrow- 
ful for it, and do deeply hate all my fins, and am full 
of Indignation againfl myfelf for fo unworthy, fo 
carelefs, fo continued, fo great a folly : and humbly 
beg of thee to increafe my fbrrow, and my care, and 
my hatred againft fin ; and make my love to thee fwcll 
up to a great grace, and then to glory and immcnfity. 

An AB of Faith. 

This indeed is my condition: But I know, O 
blefled yefusy that thou didfl take upon thee my na- 
ture, that thou mightefl fufFer for my fins, and thou 
didfl fufFer to deliver me from them and from thy 
Father^s wrath : and I was delivered from this wrath 
that I might ferve thee in holinefs and righteouAjefs 



AdS. lo. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 419 

all my days. Lord, I am as fure thou didft the great 
work of Redemption for me and all mankind, as that 
I am alive. This is my hope, the ftrength of my 
fpirit, my joy and my confidence : and do thou never 
let the fpirit of unbelief enter into me and take me 
from this Rock. Here I wrill dwell, for I have a 
delight therein : Here I will live, and here I defire 
to die. 

• 

TAe Petition. 

Therefore, O blefled Je/u, who art my Saviour 
and my God, whofe body is my food, and thy righte- 
oufnefs is my robe, thou art the Prieft and the Sa- 
crifice, the mafter of the feaft and the feaft itfelf, the 
Phyfician of my Soul, the light of mine eyes, the 
purifier of my ftains : enter into my heart and caft 
out from thence all impurities, all the remains of 
t/ie old man ; and grant I may partake of this holy 
Sacrament with much reverence, and holy relifh, and 
great eflfedt, receiving hence the communication of 
thy holy body and blood, for the eftablifhment of an 
unreprovable Faith, of an unfeigned Love, for the 
fulnefs of wifdom, for. the healing my Soul, for the 
bleffing and prefervation of my body, for the taking 
out the fling of temporal death, and for the afTurance 
of a holy Refurre<5tion, for the ejeftion of all evil 
from within me, and the fulfilling all thy righteous 
Commandments, and to procure for me a mercy and 
a fair reception at the day of Judgment, through 
thy mercies, O holy and ever-blefTed Saviour Jefus. 
Amen. 

Here alfo may be added the Prayer after receiving 
the Cup. 



420 PRATERS FOR C. 4. 

Ejaculations to be faid before or at the receiving the 

holy Sacrament. 

Like as the heart defireth the waters-brooks: fo bng- 

pfai I ^'^ ^y ^^^^^fi^ ^^^^9 O ^^* ^y ^^^^ 

is athirjlfor God^ yea even for the Itving 

God : when Jhall I come before the prefence of God ? 

O Lord my God, great are thy wondrous works 

^. which thou haft done, like as be alio thy 

PfiJ. 40. 5. •; f 

thoughts which are to ufward: and ytt 

there is no man that orderfth them unto thee. 

fend out thy light and thy truth, that they may 

lead me, and bring me unto thy holy hill 

and to thy dwelling ; And that I may go 

unto the altar of God, even unto the God of my joy and 

gladnefs : and with my heart will I give thanks to thee, 

O God my God. 

1 will wajh my hands in innocency, O Lord; andfo 

willljto to thine altar : that I may (hew 

Pfal. 16.6 7.4 3. . . . 

' * ' ' ' the voice of thankfgiving, and tell of all 
thy wondrous works. 

Examine me, Lord, and prove me, try thou my 
reins and my heart. For thy loving-kindnefs is now and 
ever before my eyes : and I will walk in thy truth. 
Thou /halt prepare a table before me againjl them that 

trouble me : thou haji anointed my head 

with oil, and my cup Jl^all be full. But 

thy loving^kindnefs and mercy Jhall follow me all the days 

of my Ife, and I will dwell in the houfe of the Lord for 

ever^ 

This is the bread that cometh down from Heaven, 

that a man may eat thereof, and not 

John 6. 50. >• 

die. 



AdS.io. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 421 

Whofo eateth my fiejh and drinketh my blood dwelleth 
in me and I in himy and hath eternal life , ^ 
abtdtng tn htmy and I will raije htm up 
at the lajl day. 

Lardy whither Jhall we go but to thee ? thou haji 
the words of eternal life. 

If any man thirji let him come unto me ^' ^^' ^' ^^* 
and drink. 

The bread which we break y is it not the communica- 
tion of the body of Chriji ? and the cup 
which we drinky is it not the communica- 
tion of the blood of Chriji f 

What are thofe wounds in thy hands? They are 
thofe with which I was wounded in the . 

houfe of my friends. 

Immediately before the receiving, fay, 

Lordy lam not worthy that thou Jhouldejl enter un- 
der my roof But do thoufpeak the word mo. 
onlyy and thy fervant Jhall be healed. 

Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth (hall 
fhew thy praife. O God, make fpeed to fave me : 
O Lord, make hafte to help me. 

ComCy Lord JefuSy come quickly. 

After receiving the confecrated and blejfed Bready fayy 

O tafte and fee how gracious the Lord is : blefled 
is the man that trufteth in him. * The beafts do 
lack and fufFer hunger; but they which feek the 
Lord fhall want no manner of thing that is good. 
Lord, what am I, that my Saviour fhould become 
my food, that the Son of God fhould be the meat of 
Worms, of duft and afhes, of a finner, of him that 
was his enemy ? But this thou haft done to me, be- 



422 PRATERS FOR C.4- 

caufe thou art infinitely good and wonderfully gra- 
cious, and loveft to blefs every one of us, in turning 
us from the evil of our ways. Enter into me, blcffcd 
yejiis : let no root of bitternefs fpring up in my heart; 
but be thou Lord of all my faculties. O let me feed 
on thee by faith, and grow up by the increafe of God 
to a perfeft man in Chrift Je/us. Amen. Lord, I 
believe, help mine unbelief. 

Glory be to God the Father y Son^ &cc. 

After the receiving the Cup ofBleJJing. 

It is finifhed. Blefled be the mercies of God re- 
vealed to us in ^efus Chrifl. O blefled and eternal 
high Prieft, let the facrifice of the Crofs which thou 
didft once offer for the fins of the whole World, and 
which thou doft now and always reprefent in Heaven 
to thy Father by thy never-ceafing interceflion, and 
which this day hath been exhibited on thy holy Table 
Sacramentally, obtain mercy and peace, faith and 
charity, fafety and eflabliftiment to thy holy Church 
which thou haft founded upon a Rock, the Rock of 
a holy Faith ; and let not the gates of Hell prevail 
againft her, nor the enemy of mankind take any Soul 
out of thy hand, whom thou haft purchafed with 
thy blood, and fandlified by thy Spirit. Preferve all 
thy people from Herely and divifion of Ipirit, from 
fcandal and the fpirit of delufion, from (acrilege and 
hurtful perfecutions. Thou, O bleflfed Jefus^ didft 
die for us : keep me for ever in holy living, from fin 
and finful fhame, in the communion of thy Church, 
and thy Church in fafety and grace, in truth and 
peace unto thy fecond coming. Amen. 

Deareft ^efu^ fince thou art pleafed to enter into 



AdS.io. SEVERAL OCCASIONS. 423 

me, O be jealous of thy houfe and the place where 
thine honour dwelleth : fuifer no unclean fpirit or 
unholy thought to come near thy dwelling, left it 
defile the ground where thy holy feet have trod. O 
teach me fo to walk, that I may never difi-epute the 
honour of my Religion, nor ftain the holy robe which 
thou haft now put upon my Soul, nor break my holy 
Vows which / have tnade^ and thou haji fealed^ nor 
lofe my right of inheritance, my privilege of being 
co-heir with yefusy into the hope of which I have 
now further entered : but be thou pleafed to love me 
with the love of a Father, and a Brother, and a Hut- 
band, and a Lord; and make me to ferve thee in the 
communion of Saints, in receiving the Sacrament, in 
the practice of all holy virtues, in the imitation of 
thy life, and conformity to thy fufFerings; that I 
having now put on the Lord Jefus^ may marry his 
loves and his enmities, may defire his glory, may 
obey his laws, and be united to his Spirit, and in the 
day of the Lord I may be found having on the Wed- 
ding-garment ; and bearing in my body and Soul the 
marks of the Lord Jefus^ that I may enter into the 
joy of my Lord, and partake of his glories for ever and 
ever. Amen. 



Ejaculations to be ufed any time that day^ after 

the folemnity is ended. 

LORD, if I had lived innocently, I could not have 
deferved to receive the crumbs that fall from thy 
Table. How great is thy mercy, who haft feafted 
me with the Bread of Virgins, with the Wine of 
Angels, with Manna from Heaven ! 



424 PRATERS. C.4. 

O when fliall I pafs from this dark glafs, from this 
veil of Sacraments, to the vifion of thy eternal cha- 
rity ; from eating thy Body, to beholding thy face in 
thy eternal Kingdom ? 

Let not my fins crucify the Lord of life again: 
Let it never be faid concerning me, I'he hand of him 
that betrayeth me is with me on the Table. 

O that I might love thee as well as ever any crea- 
ture loved thee ! Let me think nothing but thee, de- 
fire nothing but thee, enjoy nothing but thee. 

O Jefusy be a Jefus unto me. Thou art all things 
unto me. Let nothing ever pleafe me but what fa- 
vours of thee and thy miraculous fweetnefs. 

Blefi!ed be the mercies of our Lord, who of God 
is made unto me Wifdom, and Righteoufiiefs, and 
Sandtification, and Redemption. 

He that gloriethy let him glory in the Lord. Amen. 



THE END. 



Charles Whittingham, Chifwick. 



is» •" ; i!^*
