Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/worksofdrjohntil01till 


THE 

i 

WORKS 


OF 

y 

DR.  JOHN  TILLOTSON, 

LATE 

ARCHBISHOP  OF  CANTERBURY* 


WITH  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR, 

BY 

THOs.  BIRCH,  M.A. 

ALSO, 

A  COPIOUS  INDEX,  AND  THE  TEXTS  OF  SCRIPTURE 
CAREFULLY  COMPARED. 


IN  TEN  VOLUMES.— VOL.  L 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  BY  J.  F.  DOVE,  ST.  JOHN'S  SQUARE; 

FOR  RICHARD  PRIESTLEY,  HIGH  HOLBORN. 

1820. 


I 


\ 


\ 


CONTENTS  TO  VOL.  I. 


Page 

Life  of  the  Author  -    --    --    --    --    --    -  i 

Preface        -------------    -  ccxcv 


SERMONS. 

1. — The  Wisdom  of  being  Religious  317 

II. — The  Folly  of  Scoffing  at  Religion     -----  390 

III.  — The  Advantages  of  Religion  to  Societies   -    -    -  409 

IV.  — The  Advantage  of  Religion  to  particular  Persons  424 
V. — The  Excellency  of  the  Christian  Religion  -    -    -  443 

VI. — The  Precepts  of  Christianity  not  grievous  -    -    -  466 
VII. — Of  the  Obligation  of  Christians  to  a  holy  Life     -  488 
VIII. — Of  the  Happiness  of  a  heavenly  Conversation  -    -  508 


THE 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


Dr.  John  Tillotson,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  was  de- 
scended of  a  family  anciently  of  the  name  of  Tilston,  of  Tilston,  in 
Cheshire,  the  ancestor  of  which  was  Nicolas  de  Tilston,  lord  of 
the  manor  of  Tilston,  from  whom  descended  Nicolas  de  Tilston, 
in  the  ninth  year  of  King  Edward  III.  whose  grandson  and  heir, 
Roger  Tilston,  Esq.  in  the  reign  of  Henry  V.  married  Catharine, 
second  daughter  of  Sir  John  Leigh,  of  Baguly,  in  Cheshire,  knt. 
His  son  and  heir,  Thomas  Tilston,  married  Elizabeth,  daughter 
and  heiress  of  Hugh  Heath,  of  Huxley,  in  the  same  county,  as 
Richard,  the  second  son  of  this  Thomas,  did  Maud,  daughter  of 
Richard  Bostock,  by  whom  he  had  several  sons;  of  whom  the 
third,  Ralph,  of  Newport,  in  Shropshire,  married  Elizabeth,  second 
daughter  of  William  Leighton,  second  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Leighton, 
of  Watlesborough,  in  the  same  county,  knt.  The  third  son  of  this 
Ralph  was  Thomas,  of  WooklifF,  in  the  parish  of  Carlton,  in  Cra- 
ven, in  the  county  of  York,  who  changed  his  name  from  Tilston  to 
Tillotson.  His  son,  George  Tillotson,  had  by  his  wife  Eleanor, 
daughter  of  Ellis  Nutter,  of  Pendle  Forest,  in  Lancashire,  a  son 
and  heir,  Robert,  the  father  of  the  Archbishop,*  who  was  the  el- 
dest of  three  sons,  Joshua  and  Israel  being  the  younger ;  and  was 
born  of  parents  more  distinguished  by  their  integrity  and  piety, 
than  their  rank  and  fortune.  +  His  father,  Mr.  Robert  Tillotson, 
was  a  considerable  clothier  of  Sowerby,  in  the  parish  of  Halifax, 
in  the  county  of  York,  and  remarkable  for  a  good  understanding, 
and  an  uncommon  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures ;  but  so  zealously 
attached  to  the  system  of  Calvin,  which  was  almost  universally  re- 

*  From  the  genealogy  of  the  family  of  Tilston,  or  Tillotson,  drawn  ap  in  the  year 
1682,  compared  with  one  in  the  office  of  heralds,  and  communicated  to  me  by  the 
Rev.  Joshua  Tillotson,  M,  A.  the  worthy  and  learned  surmaster  of  St.  Paul's  school, 
London,  and  great  nephew  of  the  Archbishop,  being  grandson  of  his  brother  Israo*. 

t  Prayers  before  his  Consecration. 

b 


11 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


ceived  in  that  age,  that  his  prejudices  in  favour  of  it  were  scarce 
to  be  moderated  by  all  the  reasonings  of  his  son,  whom  he  lived  to 
see  dean  of  Canterbury,  being,  as  appears  from  a  letter  of  the 
Dean,*  alive  in  May,  1679.  His  mother  was  Mary,  the  daughter 
of  Thomas  Dobson,  of  the  same  place,  gentleman, t  a  woman  of 
excellent  character,  but  unhappy  for  many  years  of  her  life  in  the 
loss  of  her  understanding.  J  He  was  born  at  a  house  called  Haugh 
End,  in  Sowerby,  in  the  latter  end  of  September,  or  beginning  of 
October,  1630,  and  baptized  there  on  the  3d  of  October ;  one  of 
his  godfathers  being  Mr.  Joshua  Witton,  a  native  of  Sowerby,  af- 
terwards rector  of  Thornhill,  in  the  same  county,  from  which  he 
was  ejected  in  1662,  for  nonconformity.}  His  enemies,  indeed, 
in  the  reign  of  Charles  II,  raised  a  story,  revived  after  his  pro- 
motion to  the  see  of  Canterbury,  alluded  to  by  himself  in  a  letter 
to  Lady  Russel,  in  1693,  and  said  by  Dr.  Hickes||  to  have  taken  its 
rise  from  his  father's  very  early  turning  anabaptist,  that  he  was 
never  baptized  at  all.  And  Dr.  Peter  Birch,  prebendary  of  West- 
minster, who,  though  himself  educated  in  the  presbyterian  princi- 
ples,^ affected  to  distinguish  himself  by  his  zeal  for  the  church, 
is  supposed  to  have  meant  our  prelate,  in  his  sermon  before  the 
House  of  Commons,  on  the  30th  of  January,  169 j ,  where**  he 
complained  of  "  fathers  of  the  church,  who  never  were  her  sons." 
But  his  baptism,  on  the  day  above-mentioned,  is  incontestably 
proved  by  the  parish  register,  the  certificate  of  which  was  attested 
by  Mr.  Joseph  Wilkinson,  vicar  of  Halifax ;  and  J.  Gaukroger, 
clerk  of  that  parish. 

His  father,  out  of  a  small  estate,  gave  him  so  liberal  an  educa- 
tion, as  became  the  foundation  of  that  eminence  of  character  and 

*  Directed  to  his  cousin,  Mr.  Timothy  Bentley,  of  Sowerby  Dean,  and  communi- 
cated to  me  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Tillotson. 

t  Life  of  Archbishop  Tillotson,  p.  4.  Edit.  London,  1717,  fol.  This  piece,  of 
which  there  is  also  an  edition  in  8vo.  is  pretended,  in  the  title-page,  to  have  been 
"  compiled  from  the  Minutes  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Young,  late  Dean  of  Salisbury,  by 
F.  H.  M.A.  with  many  curious  Memoirs,  communicated  by  the  late  Right  Rev.  Gil- 
bert, Lord  Bishop  of  Sarum."  Bishop  Kennet,  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Complete 
History  of  England,  p.  673,  note  (6),  second  edition,  observes,  that  "  some  persons 
had  reason  to  believe,  that  Bishop  Burnet  and  Dean  Young  had  little  or  no  hand  in 
that  Life  :"  and  both  the  performance  itself,  and  the  name  of  the  bookseller,  B.  Curll, 
will  confirm  that  suspicion.  $  Prayers,  ubi  supra. 

§  Dr.  Calainy's  Account,  vol.  ii.  p.  795,  2d  edit.  1713  ;  and  Continuation,  p.  942. 

|)  Some  Discourses  upon  Dr.  Burnet  and  Dr.  Tillotson,  occasioned  by  the  late 
Funeral  Sermon  of  th©  former  upon  the  latter,  p.  62.  Edit.  London,  1695,  in  4to. 

If  Wood.  Athen.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  1060,  2d  edit.  **  Page  20. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


Ill 


station,  which  lie  afterwards  attained,  and  enabled  him  to  return 
to  his  parents,  and  their  children,  the  kindness  which  he  had  re- 
ceived from  him,  and  to  shew  himself  a  father  to  them.* 

After  he  had,  with  a  quick  proficiency,  passed  through  the  gram- 
mar schools,  and  attained  a  skill  in  the  learned  languages  superior 
to  his  years,  he  was  sent  to  Cambridge,  in  the  year  1647,  at  the 
age  of  seventeen,  and  admitted  pensioner  of  Clare  Hall  on  the  23d 
of  April,  that  year,  and  into  the  matricula  of  that  university  on  the 
1st  of  July  following.  But  in  his  fourth  year  there,  the  course  of 
his  studies  received  a  considerable  interruption,  and  his  life  was  in 
imminent  danger  from  a  severe  sickness,  followed  by  an  uncom- 
mon kind  of  intermittent  delirium,  under  which  he  laboured  till  he 
was  gradually  relieved  from  it  at  his  father's  house,  at  Sowerby, 
whither  he  had  retired  from  the  university  for  the  re-establishment 
of  his  health.t  He  commenced  bachelor  of  arts  at  Midsummer, 
1650,  and  master  of  arts  in  1654,  having  been  chosen  fellow  of  his 
college  about  the  27th  of  November,  1651.  His  tutor,  in  whose 
fellowship  he  succeeded,  was  Mr.  David  Clarkson,  B.  D.  eminent 
for  his  writings,  particularly  one  intitled,  No  Evidence  of  Diocesan 
Episcopacy  in  the  Primitive  Times,  printed  in  1681,  in  4to.  in  an- 
swer to  Dr.  Stillingrleet ;  and  another,  on  the  same  subject,  printed 
two  vears  after  his  death,  which  happened  on  the  14th  of  June, 
1686,  J  under  the  title  of  Primitive  Episcopacy,  answered  by  Dr. 
Henry  Maurice,  in  1691,  in  his  Defence  of  Diocesan  Episcopacy. 
Mr.  Clarkson  was,  according  to  Mr.  Baxter,§  "  a  divine  of  extra- 
ordinary worth  for  solid  judgment,  healing,  moderate  principles, 
acquaintance  with  the  Fathers,  great  ministerial  abilities,  and  a 
godly,  upright  life."  But  his  attachment  to  the  principles  of  the 
nonconformists  deprived  him  of  the  living  of  Mortlake,  in  Surry, 
in  August,  1662.  However,  his  excellent  pupil  always  preserved 
that  singular  respect  for  him,  which  he  had  contracted  while  he 
was  under  his  tuition  ;  ||  as  he  did  his  early  friendship  for  two  other 
emiuent  nonconformist  ministers,  Mr.  Francis  Holdcraft,  who  had 

*  Prayers,  ubi  supra. 

t  This  was  probably  that  '*  great  and  dangerous  sickness,"  mentioned  in  his 
Prayers  before  his  Consecration.  The  aboveraentioned  account  of  it,  and  of  some 
remarkable  circumstances  attending  his  delirium,  was  transmitted  to  me  in  a  letter 
from  the  Rev.  and  learned  Mr.  Francis  Blackburne,  archdeacon  of  Cleveland,  and 
rectorof  Richmond,  in  Yorkshire,  who  had  received  it  from  the  late  Rev.  Mr.  Robert 
Denton,  son  of  John  Denton,  the  Archbishop's  chamber-fellow  at  Clare  Hall. 

*  A  short  Character  of  that  excellent  Divine,  Mr.  David  Clarkson,  printed  without 
the  name  of  place  or  year. 

$  Reliquiae  Baxteriame,  part  iii.  p.  97.  \\  Dr  Calamy's  Account,  p.  667. 


iv 


LIFB  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


been  his  chamber-fellow  at  Clare  Hall,*  and  Mr.  Thomas  Sharp, 
cousin  of  the  Archbishop  of  that  name,  who  had  been  his  pupil, 
and  was  nephew  of  Mr.  Clarkson,  his  own  tutor,  f 

Thus  his  first  education  and  impressions  were  among  those, 
who  were  then  called  Puritans,  but  of  the  best  sort.  And  yet, 
even  before  his  mind  was  opened  to  clear  thoughts,  he  felt  some- 
what within  him,  that  disposed  him  to  larger  notions,  and  a  better 
temper.  The  books  which  were  put  into  the  hands  of  the  youth 
at  that  time  being  generally  heavy,  he  could  scarce  bear  them,  even 
before  he  knew  better  things.  But  he  soon  met  with  the  immortal 
work  of  Mr.  Chillingworth,t  a  writer  whom  he  styles  §"  incom- 
parable, and  the  glory  of  his  age  and  nation,"  though  stigmatized, 
as  he  observes,  with  the  character  of  a  Socinian,  for  no  "  other 
cause,  but  his  worthy  and  successful  attempts  to  make  the  Christ- 
ian religion  reasonable,  and  to  discover  those  firm  and  solid  foun- 
dations, upon  which  our  faith  is  built."  This  admirable  book 
gave  his  mind  the  ply,  that  he  held  ever  after,  and  put  him  upon 
a  true  scent.  He  was  soon  freed  from  his  first  prejudices,  or  rather 
he  was  never  mastered  by  them.  Yet  he  still  adhered  to  that 
strictness  of  life  to  which  he  was  bred,  and  retained  a  just  value 
and  due  tenderness  for  the  men  of  that  persuasion  ;  and,  by  the 
strength  of  his  reason,  together  with  the  clearness  of  his  princi- 
ples, brought  oyer  more  serious  persons  from  their  scruples  to  the 
communion  of  the  church  of  England,  and  fixed  more  in  it,  than 
any  man  perhaps  of  that  time.  But  he  neither  treated  them  with 
contempt  or  hatred  ;  and  he  disliked  all  levities  and  railings  upon 
those  subjects.  This  gave  him  great  advantages  in  dealing  with 
them,  and  he  still  persisted  in  it,  how  much  soever  he  was  either 
disliked  or  suspected  by  angry  men. 

As  he  got  into  a  new  method  of  study,  so  he  entered  into  friend- 
ships with  some  great  men,  which  contributed  not  a  little  to  the 
perfecting  his  own  mind.  There  was  then  a  set  of  as  extraordi- 
nary persons  in  the  university,  where  he  was  formed,  as  perhaps  any 
age  has  produced ;  Dr.  Ralph  Cudworth,  master  of  Christ's  Col- 
lege ;  Dr.  Benjamin  Whichcot,  provost  of  King's ;  Dr.  Henry 
More,  and  Dr.  George  Rust,  fellows  of  Christ's,  and  the  latter 
afterwards  Bishop  of  Dromore,  in  Ireland ;  Dr.  John  Worthington, 

*  Dr.  Calami's  Account,  p.  86.  t  Ibid.  p.  813.  . 

$  A  Sermon  preached  at  the  Funeral  of  Dr.  Tillolson,  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, by  Dr.  Burnet,  Bishop  of  Sarum,  p.  10,  11.  Edit.  London,  1694,  in  4to. 

§  Sermon  on  Heb.  xi.  6.  intitlcd,  The  Efficacy,  Usefulness,  and  Reasonableness  of 
Divine  Faith. 


LIFE    OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


V 


master  of  Jesus;  and  Mr.  John  Smith,  fellow  of  Queen's  College, 
author  of  the  Select  Discourses,  less  known  at  present  than  the 
6ense  and  profound  learning  shewn  in  them  deserve.  These  emi- 
nent men  were  equally  admirable  for  the  clearness  and  comprehen- 
sion of  their  thoughts,  the  extent  of  their  knowledge,  and  the  ex- 
cellence of  their  tempers.  But  that  which  gave  him  his  last  finish- 
ing, was  his  close  and  long  friendship  with  Dr.  John  Wilkins,  after- 
wards bishop  of  Chester.  He  went  into  all  the  best  things  that 
were  in  that  great  man ;  but  so,  that  he  perfected  every  one  of  them. 
For  though  Bishop  Wilkins  had  more  general  knowledge,  yet  Dr. 
Tillotson  was  the  greater  divine  ;  and  if  the  former  had  more  flame, 
the  latter  was  more  correct.  Both  acted  with  great  plainness,  and 
were  raised  above  regarding  vulgar  censure.  And  as  Bishop  Wilkins, 
had  a  talent  so  peculiar  to  himself,  that  perhaps  never  any  man 
could  admonish  and  reprove  with  such  weight  and  authority,  and 
in  a  way  so  obliging,  as  he  did ;  so  no  man  knew  better  than  this 
his  great  friend  the  art  of  gaining  upon  mens'  hearts,  and  of  making 
themselves  find  out  that  which  might  be  amiss  in  them,  though  the 
gentleness  and  modesty  of  his  temper  had  not  so  well  fitted  him  for 
the  rough  work  of  reproving.* 

After  his  admission  into  a  fellowship  in  his  college,  besides  the 
pupils  transferred  to  him  by  his  own  tutor,  Mr.  Clarkson,  he  had 
several  others  entered  under  him  the  same  year  ;  the  first  of  whom 
was  Mr.  John  Beard  more,  whose  Memorials  of  him,  inserted  in  the 
Appendix,  gave  a  just  picture  of  his  admirable  temper,  unaffected 
piety,  well-directed  studies,  and  exemplary  care  of  those  under  his 
tuition  ;  and,  though  drawn  up  only  for  the  writer's  private  review 
of  a  character,  which  he  reverenced  and  admired,  serve  in  general 
to  confirm  the  highest  ideas  which  the  world  has  hitherto  formed 
of  it.  But  inoffensive  as  his  behaviour  was  during  his  residence 
in  the  university,  in  times  of  violence,  and  irreconcileable  opposi- 
tion both  of  political  and  religious  sentiments,  it  has  been  parties 
larly  attacked  by  Dr.  George  Hickes,  in  a  pamphlet  full  of  such 
virulence  against  our  great  prelate's  memory,  as  does  no  honour  to 
the  writer's  own,  and  deserves  to  be  treated  with  more  severity 
of  expression,  than  I  should  choose  to  use  concerning  a  man,  to 
whose  learning,  especially  in  the  northern  languages  and  antiqui- 
ties, the  world  is  highly  obliged.  In  this  piece,  +  among  other  un- 
authorized and  improbable  invectives,  having  represented  Mr.  Til- 
lotson as  seasoned  with  the  principles  of  resistance  and  rebellion, 

*  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  11,  12.  t  Some  Discourses,  &c.  p.  62. 


\1 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


when  he  was  first  entered  at  Cambridge,  he  affirms,  that  not  long 
after  his  coming  thither,  when  King  Charles  I.  was  brought  by  that 
town  to  Hampton  Court,  and  lodged  near  it,  at  Sir  John  Cutts' 
house  at  Childerley,  and  the  scholars  went  thither  to  kiss  his  Ma- 
jesty's hands,  Mr.  Tillotson,  and  some  few  more,  had  so  signalized 
themselves  on  the  side  of  those  who  were  then  called  Roundheads, 
that  they  were  not  admitted  to  that  honour  with  the  rest  of  the 
scholars.  Dr.  Hickes  adds,  that  within  two  years  after,  Mr.  Til- 
lotson went  out  Midsummer  bachelor  of  arts,  by  which,  having  lo- 
cally qualified  himself  for  a  fellowship,  u  he  got  the  Rump's  man- 
damus for  Dr.  Gunning  (which,  I  think,  says  Dr.  Hickes,  one  of 
his  own  gang  enjoyed  a  little  before  him),  as  a  reward  for  his  good 
affection  to  the  cause."  That  from  that  time,  to  his  leaving  the 
college,  he  governed  it,  the  senior  fellows  not  daring  to  oppose  him, 
because  of  the  interest  which  he  had  with  his  great  masters ;  and 
that  he  was  so  zealous  for  them,  that  the  corner  of  the  college, 
which  he  and  his  pupils  took  up  in  the  new  building,  was  called 
the  Roundhead  Corner.  And  that  when  King  Charles  II.  was  de- 
feated at  Worcester,  he  sent  for  the  tables,  in  which  the  college 
grace  was  written,  and  after  the  passage  of  thanksgiving  for  their 
benefactors,  Te  laudamus pro  benefacloribus  nostris,  &c.  he  added 
with  his  own  hand,  and  of  his  own  head,  prasertim  pro  nupera  vic- 
toria contra  Carolum  Stuartum  in  agro  Wigorniensi  reportatd,  or 
to  that  effect. 

The  grounds  of  these  charges  being  examined  by  the  members 
of  that  college,  immediately  after  the  publication  of  the  libel,  they 
were  found  to  be  absolutely  false  ;*  and  the  following  remarks 
will  be  sufficient  to  destroy  their  credit.  Mr.  Tillotson  was  not  en- 
tered of  the  college  till  April  23,  1647  ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  at  all 
surprising,  if  so  young  a  student  was  not  admitted  to  the  honour  of 
kissing  the  King's  hand,  when  his  Majesty  was  in  that  neighbour- 
hood, in  the  beginning  of  June  following. +  He  took  the  degree  of 
bachelor  of  arts  at  Midsummer,  1650,  and  became  a  fellow  of  the 
college  November  27,  the  year  following:];  whereas  Mr.  Gunning 
was  ejected  from  his  fellowship  six  years  before,  by  warrant  from  the 
Earl  of  Manchester,  aud  succeeded  in  it  by  Mr.  Clarkson,  May  5, 

*  Bishop  Burnet's  Reflections  upon  a  Pamphlet  intiiled,  Some  Discourses,  &c. 
p.  164,  165,  166.  edit.  London,  1696. 

t  Whitelocke's  Memorials,  p.  252.  2d  edit.  Bishop  Burnet  says,  by  mistake^ 
"  two  months  after  Mr.  Tillotson's  admission.'' 

$  Bu-hop  Burnet  sajs,  erroneously,  "  before  Christinas  that  year,"  viz.  1650. 


LIFE   OF  THE   AUTHOR.  Vll 

1645  ;*  so  that  it  cannot,  with  any  propriety,  be  said,  that  Mr.  Til- 
lotson  came  into  Mr.  Gunning's  fellowship.  For  though  men,  as 
Bishop  Burnet  observes,+  may  consider  the  avoidance,  that  imme- 
diately precede  their  own  admission,  yet  none  are  so  scrupulous  as 
to  pursue  the  inquiry  farther. 

With  respect  to  the  assuming  the  liberty  of  altering  the  college 
grace  after  meat,  and  adding  a  special  mention  of  the  battle  of  Wor- 
cester, there  was  not  the  least  memory  of  any  such  incident  in  the 
college  in  the  year  1606,  when  the  inquiry  was  made.  And  it  is 
highly  improbable,  that  the  junior  fellow,  and  so  young  a  bachelor 
of  aits,  could  have  presumed  to  have  done  such  a  thing ;  or  that  the 
master  and  senior  fellows  would  have  suffered  it.  Dr.  Bly  the,  master 
of  the  college,  and  Dr.  Vincent,  senior  fellow,  when  Bishop  Burnet 
wrote  his  Reflections  on  Dr.  Hickes's Discourses,  had  been  admitted 
of  Clare  Hall  soon  after  the  date  of  that  story :  but  neither  of  them 
ever  heard  of  any  thing  of  that  nature ;  which  is  scarce  possible,  if  the 
story  had  been  true,  considering  the  genius  of  such  societies,  where 
the  memory  of  incidents  of  that  kind  is  not  easily  lost.  And  it  is  fur- 
ther remarkable,  that  there  was  not  the  least  mention  of  it  in  the  year 
1660,  when,  as  is  usual  in  the  revolutions  of  public  affairs,  all  such 
stories  were  industriously  remembered  and  propagated,  and  made 
use  of,  to  fix  the  characters  of  men.  On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Tillot- 
son  was,  as  long  as  Dr.  Blythe  and  Dr.  Vincent  could  remember 
him,  the  same  modest  and  good-natured  man,  that  he  was  known  to 
be  in  a  higher  elevation.  To  this  vindication  of  his  behaviour,  while 
he  was  resident  in  the  university,  may  be  added  the  substance  of  a 
letter  from  Mr.  Denton,  of  Clare  Hall,}:  to  one  of  his  friends,  who 

*  Le  Neve,  ubi  supra,  p.  222.  t  Reflections,  p.  165. 

t  John  Denton  was  admitted  sizer  and  papil  to  Mr.  David  Clarkson  on  the  4th  of 
May,  1646,  as  appears  from  the  register  of  the  college.  He  was  ejected  by  the 
act  of  Uniformity,  in  1662,  from  the  living  of  0>waldkirk,  near  Helmsley,  in  York- 
shire, where  Archbishop  Tillotson  preached  his  first  sermon,  and  not  from  that  of 
Bolton,  as  Dr.  Calamy  affirms  in  his  Account,  p.  818,  who  has  rectified  his  mistake 
in  his  4th  volume,  p.  950  ;  though,  as  it  seems,  without  knowing  that  it  was  a  mis- 
take, it  being  indeed  Mr.  Nathan,  and  not  Mr.  John  Denton,  who  was  ejected  from 
Bolton-upon-Dearn,  or  more  properly  Darwent.  Mr.  John  Denton  afterwards  con- 
formed, and  being  re-ordained  by  Dr.  Thomas  Barlow,  bishop  of  Lincoln,  was  pre- 
sented to  the  living  of  Stonegrave,  within  two  miles  of  Oswaldkirk,  and  a  prebend  of 
the  church  of  York,  both  which  he  held  till  his  death  on  the  14th  of  January,  1708, 
in  the  83d  year  of  his  age,  as  is  ev  ident  from  the  inscription  on  his  tomb-stone  in  the 
church  of  Stonegrave;  in  which  he  was  succeeded  by  his  son,  Mr.  Robert  Denton, 
who  \ns  educated  at  Catherine  Hall,  in  Cambridge,  and  died  about  four  year»  ago. 


viii 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


bad  applied  to  him  for  that  purpose  ;*  in  which  he  remarks,  that  he 
had  found  out  two  persons,  besides  himself,  who  were  in  Clare  Hall 
that  summer,  in  which  Worcester  fight  happened,  viz.  Sir  Watkin- 
son  Payler,  who  was  nobleman,  and  Mr.  James  Montaigne,  who 
was  fellow  of  the  college ;  and,  if  there  had  been  any  such  altera- 
tion made  in  the  college  grace,  some  of  them,  who  daily  heard  it 
read,  would  have  known  it :  whereas  all  three  of  them  professed, 
that  they  never  knew  or  heard  of  any  such  thing  done,  or  attempted 
to  be  done,  but  believed  it  to  be  a  malicious  lie.  Mr.  Denton,  who 
was  in  the  college  when  King  Charles  I.  passed  by  Cambridge,  had 
forgotten,  whether  Mr.  Tillotson  went  to  Sir  John  Cutts'  house 
amongst  several  others,  who  did  ;  but  was  pretty  confident,  that 
the  story  of  his  being  denied  the  honour  to  kiss  his  Majesty's  hand 
was  not  true,  having  never  heard  of  any  such  thing ;  which,  if  it 
had  been  fact,  he  should  certainly  have  done,  if  not  from  Mr.  Til- 
lotson himself,  yet  from  some  others,  several  of  Mr.  Denton's  ac- 
quaintance being  there.  With  respect  to  the  charge  of  Mr.  Tillot- 
son's  governing  the  college,  and  the  senior  fellows  not  daring  to  op- 
pose him,  because  of  the  interest  which  he  had  with  his  great  mas- 
ters; Mr.  Denton  declares  this  to  be  very  malicious  and  false;  for 
he  was  far  from  being  of  an  imperious  humour,  and  was  remark- 
able for  that  sweetness  of  temper,  which  he  ever  after  retained,  and 
was  highly  respected  by  the  senior  fellows,  who  indeed,  out  of  re- 
gard to  the  common  understanding  and  prudence  conspicuous  in 
him,  even  in  those  early  years,  always  consulted  him  about  the  af- 
fairs of  the  college.  And  Mr.  Montaigne,  who  was  one  of  them, 
and  had  been  as  strongly  attached  as  any  person  to  the  interest  of 
King  Charles  I.  having  been  several  years  in  his  army,  always  re- 
tained a  very  great  honour  for  Mr.  Tillotson,  and  never  mentioned 
him  but  in  terms  of  high  respect ;  and,  after  the  publication  of  Dr. 
Hickes's  Some  Discourses,  wrote  a  letter  to  a  friend  in  vindication  of 
Mr.  Tillotson  from  the  imputations  cast  upon  him  in  that  libel, 
with  regard  to  his  conduct  in  Clare  Hall.    This  letterf  having 


Mr.  John  Denton  having  contracted  a  most  intimate  friendship  with  Mr.  Tillotson  at 
Clare  Hall,  where  he  was  particularly  serviceable  to  him  during  a  great  and  danger- 
ous sickness,  attended  for  some  time  after  with  a  very  uncommon  kind  of  intermittent 
delirium,  they  kept  up  a  constant  correspondence  during  his  Grace's  life. 

*  Life  of  Archbishop  Tillotson,  p.  6,  7  ;  and  Memoirs  of  the  Life  and  Writings 
of  Mr.  Winston,  written  by  Himself,  part  i.  p.  27,  28,  29. 

t  Communicated  to  me  from  the  papers  of  Dr.  Burnet,  bishop  of  Salisbury,  by  his 
son,  the  Honourable  Sir  Thomas  Burnet,  knt.  one  of  his  Majesty's  justices  of  the 
Common-pleas. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


II 


never  yet,  to  my  knowledge,  appeared  in  print,  will  be  proper  to  be 

inserted  at  length. 

"  SIR, 

u  I  do  very  well  remember  King  Charles  the  First's  being  brought 
by  Cambridge  to  Hampton  Court,  and  his  lodging  at  Sir  John 
Cutts's  house  ;  but  never  heard  of  Tillotson's  (to  give  him  the  name 
we  then  called  him  by)  either  going  thither,  or  being  refused  to  kiss 
the  King's  hand. 

"  I  am  thoroughly  persuaded  he  was  made  fellow  by  election  of 
the  master  and  fellows,  and  not  by  mandamus  ;  for  having  been 
in  the  King's  army  five  years,  and  returning  to  Clare  Hall  in  1647, 
1  do  not  remember  that  any  mandamus  was  sent  to  the  college  after 
that  time. 

"  I  never  heard,  that  the  corner,  where  his  chamber  was,  was 
called  the  Roundheads  Corner ;  and  he  could  not  fill  that  corner 
with  himself  and  pupils;  for  three  or  four  fellows  besides  himself 
had  their  chambers  there. 

"  And  what  the  pamphlet  adds  of  his  sending,  after  King 
Charles  II.  was  beaten  at  Worcester,  for  the  tables,  in  which  the 
college  grace  was  written,  and  after  the  passage  of  thanksgiving 
for  their  benefactors  adding  with  his  own  hand,  and  of  his  own  head, 
prcesertim  pro  nuperd  victoria  contra  Carolum  Stuartum,  fyc.  it  is  all  of 
it  a  most  false  and  impudent  lie,  reflecting  not  only  upon  the  per- 
son, whom  he  would  scandalize,  but  upon  the  whole  college. 

11  And  of  the  same  nature  is  what  the  libeller  saith  of  his  govern- 
ing the  college,  and  overawing  the  senior  fellows  by  the  interest  he 
had  with  his  great  masters :  and  I  am  much  concerned  (as  the 
rest  of  the  senior  fellows  would  have  been,  if  they  w  ere  living)  to 
assert  the  horrid  falsity  of  it.  I  think  I  am  the  only  surv  iving  of 
the  then  senior  fellows ;  and  I  can  truly  say  he  was  as  respective 
and  obliging  to  all  the  senior  fellows,  as  possibly  could  be,  and  was 
very  much  respected  by  them.  For  my  own  part,  I  always  thought 
myself  much  obliged  to  him  for  his  kind  respects  to  me,  both  in  the 
college,  and  since  1  left  it. 

"  As  to  his  being  chaplain  to  Prideaux,  and  teaching  of  his  son, 
I  know  nothing  of  it.  But  if  we  take  it  for  granted,  I  know  not  how 
his  teaching  the  young  man  his  grammar  should  influence  him  into 
a  rebellion,  which  happened  twenty  or  thirty  years  after. 

"  And  now,  by  what  I  have  written,  which  I  will  maintain  the 

c 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


truth  of,  you  may  see  what  little  reason  the  libeller  had  to  say,  that 
all  he  related  was  upon  very  good  authority. 
6t  I  am,  Sir, 

"  Your  humble  servant, 

"James  Montaigne." 

Mr.  Tillotson  left  his  college  in  1G5G,  or  the  beginning  of  1657, 
according  to  Dr.  Hickes,*  who  informs  us,  that  he  was  invited  by 
Edmund  Prideaux,  Esq.  of  Ford  Abbey,  in  Devonshire,  to  instruct 
his  son.  This  gentleman  had  been  commissioner  of  the  great  seal 
under  the  long  parliament,  and  was  then  attorney-general  to  OHver 
Cromwell,  the  Protector.  And  Dr.  Hickes,  who  omits  no  circum- 
stance, that  can  even  indirectly  reflect  upon  Mr.  Tillotson,  adds,  that 
his  pupil  was  afterwards  in  the  rebellion  of  the  Duke  of  Monmouth 
in  1685.  But,  not  to  repeat  Mr.  Montaigne's  remark,  that  the 
conduct  of  Mr.  Prideaux,  at  so  great  a  distance  of  time,  had  no 
real  connexion  with  his  tutor's  institution  of  him  in  the  rudiments 
of  learning  ;  nor  to  insist  upon  the  impropriety  of  such  a  reflection 
from  Dr.  Hickes,  whose  own  brother,  Mr.  John  Hickes,  a  noncon- 
formist minister,  was  actually  executed  for  that  rebellion, +  as  Mrs. 
Alicia  Lisle  was  for  harbouring  him  ;  the  charge  upon  that  gentle- 
man of  being  engaged  in  it  was  so  far  from  being  well-grounded, 
that  this  alone  will  be  sufficient  to  invalidate  the  authority  of  that 
admired  head  of  a  party,  in  all  points,  in  which  the  interests  of  it 
are  the  least  concerned.  For  the  case  of  Mr.  Prideaux  is  one  of  the 
many  instances  of  the  arbitrary  temper  of  that  government,  which 
forced  thenation  into  the  Revolution ;  and  the  true  circumstances  of 
that  case  appear  in  the  Journal  of  the  House  of  Commons.^  He  was 
seized  and  brought  to  London  on  the  19th  of  June,  1685,  by  a  war- 
rant from  the  Earl  of  Sunderland,  secretary  of  state,  dated  the  13th, 
two  days  after  the  landing  of  the  Duke  of  Monmouth  at  Lyme,  and  the 
same  day,  on  which  the  account  of  it  was  brought  to  the  court  at 
Whitehall, without  beingadmitted  to  an  examination,which  he  desired. 
He  continued  in  custody  of  a  messenger  till  the  14th  of  July  follow- 
ing, when  he  was  discharged  by  habeas  corpus,  giving  security  of 
10,000J.  for  his  appearance  the  first  day  of  the  next  term.  Staying 
in  London  for  that  purpose,  he  was  on  the  14th  of  September  again 
seized  by  a  warrant  of  the  Earl  of  Sunderland,  and  committed  close 

*  Some  Disccurses,  p.  63. 

t  General  Dictionary,  article  of  Dr.  Hickes,  vol.  iv.  p.  156. 
+  Vol.  x.  p.  113—116. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


XI 


prisoner  to  theTowerforhigh  treason.  "Whilehe  was  in  tliis  situation  a 
general  inquirv  was  made  by  the  agents  of  Lord  Jeffryes,  advanced  to 
the  post  of  lord  high  chancellor  on  the  28th  of  that  month,  amongst 
all  the  prisoners  and  condemned  persons  in  the  west,  for  an  accusa- 
tion against  him  ;  and  threats  and  promises  of  life  wre  employed 
to  that  end,  that  Lord  frequently  declaring  his  resolution  to  hang 
him.  The  dread  of  this  induced  Mr.  Prideaux  to  make  application 
to  the  king  by  several  persons  ;  but  receiving  no  other  answer  than 
that  his  Majesty  had  given  him  to  the  Lord  Chancellor,  as  a  reward 
for  his  service  in  the  west,  he  at  last  agreed  with  his  Lordship  for 
his  pardon,  after  seven  mouths  rigorous  confinement,  upon  the  pay- 
ment of  15,000/.  Theae  facts  being  proved  to  the  House  of  Com- 
mons soon  after  the  Revolution,  a  bill  was  ordered  in  on  the  first  of 
May,  1689,  to  charge  the  manors  of  Dolby-in-the-Wolds,  and  Nea- 
ther  Broughton,  in  Leicestershire,  the  estate  of  that  Lord,  then  de- 
ceased, with  the  repayment  of  the  15,000/.  and  interest,  extorted 
by  him  from  Mr.  Prideaux. 

While  Mr.  Tillotson  resided  in  the  elder  Mr.  Prideaux's  family, 
he  performed,  as  we  are  farther  assured  by  Dr.  Hickes,*  the  office 
of  chaplain.  And  this- is  affirmed  likewise  by  Mr.  Henry  Wharton, 
chaplain  to  Archbishop  Sancroft,  in  his  manuscript  collections 
concerning  the  English  archbishops  and  bishops  reposited  in  the 
library  at  Lambeth  ;t  though  that  learned  writer  is  mistaken  in 
giving  Mr.  Prideaux  the  title  of  Secretary  to  Cromwell.  But  how 
long  Mr.  Tillotson  lived  with  Mr.  Prideaux,  or  whether  till  that 
gentleman's  decease  on  the  19th  of  August,  1659,;  does  not  appear. 

He  was  in  London  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  the  Protector 
Oliver,  on  the  3d  of  September,  1658,  and  about  a  week  after 
was  present  at  a  very  remarkable  scene  at  the  palace  of  Whitehall. 
For,  happening  to  be  there  on  a  fast-day  of  the  household,  he 
went  out  of  curiosity  into  the  presence-chamber,  where  the  solem- 
nity was  kept ;  and  saw  there,  on  the  one  side  of  a  table,  the  new 
Protector  placed  with  the  rest  of  his  family,  and  on  the  other  six 
preachers,  among  whom  were  Dr.  John  Owen,  dean  of  Christ 
Church,  in  Oxford,  Dr.  Thomas  Goodwin,  president  of  Magdalen 
College,  Mr.  Joseph  Caryl,  author  of  the  voluminous  Commentary 
on  Job,  and  rector  of  St.  Maguus,  in  London,  and  Mr.  Peter  Stern". 
The  bold  sallies  of  enthusiasm,  which  Mr.  Tillotson  heard  upon 
this  occasion,  were  sufficient  to  disgust  a  man  less  disposed  to  it 
than  he  was  both  by  temper  and  principles.    God  was  in  a  man- 

*  Some  Discourses,  p.  85.       I  P.  81.       i  Wood  Fasti  Oxon.  rol.  i.  eol.  feSS. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


ner  reproached  with  the  deceased  Protector's  services,  and  chal- 
lenged for  taking  him  away  so  soon.  Dr.  Goodwin,  who  had  pre- 
tended to  assure  him  in  a  prayer,  a  very  few  minutes  before  he 
expired,  that  he  was  not  to  die,  had  now  the  assurance  to  say  to 
God,  "  Thou  hast  deceived  us,  and  we  were  deceived."  And 
Mr.  Sterry,  praying  for  Richard,  us^d  these  indecent  words,  next 
to  blasphemy — "  Make  him  the  brightness  of  the  father's  glory, 
and  the  express  image  of  his  person."* 

The  time  of  Mr.  Tillotson's  entering  into  holy  orders,  and  by 
whom  he  was  ordained,  are  facts,  which  I  have  not  been  able  to 
determine :  but  the  account  is  certainly  false,  which  represents 
him,t  as  curate,  some  time  before  the  Restoration,  to  Dr.  Wilkins, 
in  the  church  of  St.  Lawrence  Jewry ;  since  that  divine  was  not 
admitted  to  that  vicarage  till  near  two  years  after  the  Restoration, 
on  the  11th  of  April,  1662,%  by  the  recommendation  of  his  prede- 
cessor, Dr.  Seth  Ward,||  then  advanced  to  the  bishopric  of  Exe- 
ter, and  afterwards  translated  to  that  of  Salisbury. 

The  first  sermon  of  Mr.  Tillotson,  which  appeared  in  print,  was 
preached  at  the  Morning  Exercise,  at  Cripplegate,  on  Matth.  vii.  12. 
The  subject  was, — Wherein  lies  that  exact  Righteousness,  which  is 
required  between  Man  and  Man.  It  is  the  tenth  of  those  published 
by  Dr.  Samuel  Annesley,  at  London,  in  4to.  that  year,  under  the 
title  of,  The  Morning  Exercise  at  Cripplegate  ;  or,  several  Cases  of 
Conscience  practically  resolved  by  sundry  Ministers, — September, 
1661.  The  names  of  the  several  preachers  were  not  mentioned  iu 
that  edition ;  but,  in  the  subsequent  ones,  particularly  the  fourth, 
in  1677,  that  of  Mr.  Tillotson  appears  among  the  rest.  This  ser- 
mon was  never  reprinted  with  his  other  writings,  though  it  has 
been  more  than  once  published  separately ;  but  is  now  deservedly 
included  in  his  works,  as  a  discourse  full  of  good  sense,  though  in- 
ferior to  his  later  performances  in  elegance  of  style,  and  exactness 
of  composition. 

At  the  time  of  preaching  this  sermon  he  was  still  among  the 
presbyterians,  whose  commissioners  he  attended,  though  as  an  au- 
ditor only,  at  the  conference  held  at  the  Savoy  for  the  review  of 
the  Liturgy,  in  July,  1661. §    But  he  immediately  submitted  to  the 

*  Burnet's  History  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  82,  83.  t  Life,  p.  7. 

t  Kennet's  Register  and  Chronicle,  p.  658. 

||  Dr.  Walter  Pope's  Life  of  Dr.  Seth  Ward,  lord  bishop  of  Salisbury,  p.  52.  Edit. 
London,  1697. 

§  Reliquiae  Baxterianae,  part  ii.  p.  337. 


LIFE    OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


sin 


act  of  Uniformity,  which  commenced  on  St.  Bartholomew's  day  the 
year  following. 

Upon  his  dedicating  himself  to  the  service  of  the  church,  being 
sensible  of  the  importance  of  a  plain  and  edifying  manner  of  preach- 
ing, he  was  very  little  disposed  to  follow  the  patterns  then  set  him, 
or  indeed  those  of  former  times.  He  formed  therefore  one  to  him- 
self, which  has  been  justly  considered  as  the  best  model  for  all  suc- 
ceeding ages.* 

The  great  improvements,  which  he  made  in  this  important  branch 
of  publb  instruction,  whereby  Christianity  has  made  a  provision 
for  the  spreading  the  principles  of  morality  and  religion,  which  had 
been  forgot  by  the  pagan  legislators,  and  very  insufficiently  at- 
tempted by  the  philosophers  of  antiquity,  will  appear  to  those,  who 
consider  the  state  of  the  pulpit  at  the  time  when  he  entered  upon 
the  function  of  a  preacher.  The  whole  form  of  the  discourses  there 
was  oppressed  with  an  unnecessary  mixture  of  various  languages, 
affected  wit,  and  puerile  rhetoric ;  and  the  general  sense  of  the 
text  was  totally  neglected,  while  every  single  word  of  it  was  sepa- 
rately considered  under  all  its  possible  meanings.  The  history  of 
preaching  in  our  own  couutry  and  language,  which  caunot  iudeed 
be  traced  much  higher  than  the  Reformation,  would  shew,  that 
from  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  as  false  a  taste  had  in- 
fected the  pulpit,  as  had  prevailed  after  the  corruption  of  the  Ro- 
man eloquence,  from  the  time  of  Seneca  till  the  lower  empire  ;  and 
the  gravity  and  simplicity  of  style,  which  distinguished  the  writers 
of  the  preceding  age,  were  almost  entirely  lost  till  after  the  Restor- 
ation, when  our  Author  brought  back  botii  purity  of  language  and 
force  of  reasoning.  The  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  produced  two  very 
learned  divines,  Dr.  Fisher,  bishop  of  Rochester,  and  Dr.  Colet, 
dean  of  St.  Paul's  ;  the  former  of  whom  has  a  few  sermons,  and  the 
latter  one,t  still  extant,  not  contemptible  for  their  style  or  argument. 
Those  of  Dr.  Latimer,  bishop  of  Worcester,  are  defective  in  dignity 
and  elegance;  his  frank  remonstrances  to  persons  of  the  highest 
rank  being  delivered  in  expressions  of  peculiar  levity,  and  inter- 
mixed with  frequent  stones  unsuitable  to  the  solemnity  of  the  place 
and  occasion.  The  Homilies,  drawn  up  under  King  Edward  VI. 
are  to  be  considered  as  a  condescension  to  the  capacities  of  the 
common  people.   In  the  long  reign  of  his  sister  Elizabeth  appeared 

•  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  12,  13. 

t  The  English  translation  of  his  ?«rmon,  before  the  Convocation  in  1511,  is  sap- 
posed  to  bare  been  done  by  himself. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


importunate  with  him  to  preach,  though  he  was  not  furnished  with 
a  sermon,  he  ventured  into  the  pulpit,  where  lie  took  for  his  text 
one  of  the  plainest  and  fullest  of  matter  which  he  could  recollect. 
"  For  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ upon 
which  he  has  no  less  than  five  discourses  in  his  works  :  and  yet  he 
soon  found  himself  so  much  at  a  loss,  that  after  about  ten  minutes 
spent  with  great  pain  to  himself,  and  no  great  satisfaction  to  his 
audience,  he  came  down  with  a  resolution  never  to  make  the  like 
attempt  for  the  future.  And  it  is  observable,  that  the  same  kind 
of  confusion  happened  to  Dr.  Sanderson,  bishop  of  Lincoln,  who 
was  equally  remarkable  for  an  excellent  memory,  and  a  clear  and 
logical  head,  when,  at  the  persuasion  of  his  friend  Dr.  Hammond, 
he  left  his  sermon  with  him,  and  endeavoured  to  repeat  it  to  a  vil- 
lage congregation.* 

The  first  office  in  the  church,  in  which  we  find  him  employed, 
after  the  Restoration,  was  that  of  curate  at  Cheshunt,  in  Hertford- 
shire, in  the  years  1661  and  1662,t  to  Dr.  Thomas  Hacket,  the 
vicar,  who  had  been  before  dean  of  Cork  in  Ireland,  and  was  in 
August,  1662,  presented  to  the  rectory  of  St.  Christopher's,  in 
London,  in  the  room  of  Dr.  John  Pearson,  afterwards  bishop  of 
Chester,  which  rectory  he  resigned  in  August,  1663,  as  he  did 
Cheshunt,  in  October,  1672,  upon  being  made  bishop  of  Down 
and  Connor.^:  Here  Mr.  Tillotson  is  said,  by  his  mild  and  gentle 
behaviour,  and  persuasive  eloquence,  to  have  prevailed  with  an  old 
Oliverian  soldier,  who  preached  among  the  anabaptists  in  that 
town  in  a  red  coat,  and  was  much  followed,  to  desist  from  that, 
and  betake  himself  to  some  other  employment. J 

The  short  distance  of  Cheshunt  from  London  allowing  him  fre- 
quent opportunities  of  visiting  his  friends  in  that  city,  he  was 
frequently  invited  into  the  pulpits  there.  Accordingly  we  find 
that  his  sermon  on  Eccles.  xii.  1.  On  the  Advantages  of  Early 
Piety,  was  preached  at  St.  Lawrence  Jewry,  in  1662  ;  on  the  16th  of 
December  of  which  year  he  was  elected  minister  of  the  adjoining 
parish  of  St.  Mary  Aldermaubury,  by  the  parishioners,  in  whom  the 
right  of  choice  is  invested,  upon  the  deprivation  of  Mr.  Edmund 
Calamy  by  the  act  of  Uniformity.  But  Mr.  Tillotson  declined  the 
acceptance  of  that  living  ;  which  obliged  them  to  proceed  to  a  new 
choice  of  Mr.  Richard  Martin,  on  the  28th  of  January,  166§.f 

*  Mr.  Isaac  Walton's  Life  of  Bishop  Sanderson,  edit.  London^  1678. 
t  Life,  p.  7,  8.       t  Newcounl  Repertorium,  vol.  i.  p.  325.        §  Life,  p.  7,  8, 
1T  Rennet's  Register  and  Chronicle,  p.  843. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


ami 


But  lie  did  not  continue  long  without  the  offer  of  another  bene- 
fice, which  he  accepted,  being  presented  in  June,  1663,  to  the 
rectory  of  Ketton,  or  Keddington,  in  the  county  of  Suffolk,  worth 
2001.  a  year,  vacated  by  the  ejection  of  Mr.  Samuel  Fairclough  for 
nonconformity,  who  had  the  satisfaction  of  being  succeeded  by  a 
person  of  such  eminent  abilities,  candour,  and  moderation.* 

However,  his  residence  there  was  but  short,  being  called  to 
London  by  the  Society  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  to  be  their  preacher ;  and 
the  choice  of  him  is  said  to  have  taken  its  rise  from  the  following 
incident.  Mr.  Atkins,  one  of  the  benchers  of  that  inn,  and  after- 
wards lord-chief-baron  of  the  Exchequer,  being  present  at  the 
Tuesday  Jecture  at  St.  Lawrence  Jewry,  on  a  day  when  Mr.  Tillot- 
son  happened  to  supply  the  place  of  the  stated  lecturer,  was  so 
pleased  with  his  sermon,  that  he  went  to  him  in  the  vestry,  and 
offered  him  his  interest  for  the  place  of  preacher  of  Lincoln's  Inn, 
which  would  be  soon  vacant.  Mr.  Tillotson  was  accordingly  elect- 
ed to  that  office  on  the  26th  of  November,  1663,  upon  the  terms 
allowed  his  predecessor,  of  one  hundred  pounds,  payable  at  the 
end  of  every  term  by  equal  portions  ;  the  first  payment  to  begin  at 
the  end  of  the  next  term,  and  twenty-four  pounds  more  for  vaca- 
tion commons  ;  with  commons  for  himself  and  his  servant  in  term- 
time,  and  a  chamber.  And  five  of  the  masters  of  the  bench  were 
appointed  to  acquaint  him  with  his  election,  and  to  inform  him  of 
the  duty  expected  from  him,  that  he  should  preach  twice  every 
Lord's  day  in  term  time,  and  next  before  and  after  term,  and  in 
reading  time,  and  in  every  Lord's  day  in  the  vacation,  and  as  other 
occasions  should  require ;  and  administer  the  sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  supper,  together  with  the  chaplain  of  the  house,  every  term 
and  vacation  ;  and  reside  constantly  in  the  Society,  without  absent- 
ing himself  thence,  without  the  leave  of  the  masters  of  the  bench 
in  council. f 

His  predecessors  in  this  post  had  been  generally  men  of  the 
greatest  eminence  for  learning ;  and  among  these  were  Mr.  Thomas 
Gataker,  afterwards  rector  of  St.  Mary,  Rotherhithe,  in  Southward, 
and  Dr.  John  Donne,  dean  of  St.  Paul's,  whose  Pseudo  Martyr,  the 
most  valuable  of  his  prose  writings,  contains  an  unanswerable  con- 
futation of  the  papal  supremacy,  and  whose  poetical  works  shew 
a  prodigious  fund  of  genius,  under  the  disguise  of  an  affected  and 

*  Le  Neve,  p.  223.  Mr.  Samuel  Clarke's  Lives  of  Eminent  Men,  p.  175.  and 
Dr.  Calamy's  Account,  p.  638. 

t  From  the  books  of  the  Society  of  Lincoln's  Inn. 
VOL.  I.  D 


XV111  LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

obscure  style,  and  a  most  inharmonious  versification.  But  of  Mr. 
Tillotson's  immediate  predecessor,  Mr.Thomas  Greenfield,  educat- 
ed in  Pembroke  College,  in  Oxford,  where  he  took  the  degree  of 
master  of  arts,  on  the  4th  of  December,  1641  *  I  find  nothing  ex- 
tant, except  a  sermon  preached  before  the  House  of  Commons,  on 
Wednesday,  June  12th,  1661,  appointed  for  a  solemn  humiliation 
upon  the  late  abundance  of  rain,  and  the  danger  of  famine  and 
pestilence  likely  to  ensue  thereby ;  in  which  sermon  he  loudly  com- 
plains of  the  neglect  of  the  loyal  party,  as  the  sin,  which  had  pe- 
culiarly brought  down  that  judgment  upon  the  nation  ;  since  there 
were,  in  his  language,  6t  strange  and  monstrous  couples  then 
marching  together  in  England,  loyalty  and  rags,  loyalty  and  lice, 
loyalty  and  hunger,  loyalty  and  a  prison.''  But  this  whole  discourse 
is  written  so  much  in  the  bad  taste  of  the  preceding  times,  that 
the  Society  of  Lincoln's  Inn  were  considerable  gainers  in  the  ex- 
change of  Mr.  Greenfield  for  Mr.  TiHotson. 

The  invitation  to  that  Society  was  so  agreeable  to  Mr.  Tillotson, 
that  he  determined  to  settle  himself  entirely  among  them ;  and 
though  in  the  intervals  of  the  terms  he  could  have  given  a  large 
part  of  the  year  to  his  parish  in  Suffolk ;  yet  so  strict  was  he  to 
the  pastoral  care,  in  point  of  residence,  that  he  resigned  that  living, 
even  when  his  income  in  London  could  scarce  support  him.+  He 
was  the  more  disposed  to  this  from  the  strong  prejudices  of  the 
people  there,  in  favour  of  a  religious  system,  too  prevalent  in  that 
age,  but  directly  opposite  to  that  more  rational  one  of  real  and 
genuine  Christianity,  upon  which  he  had  formed  all  his  discourses 
to  them  ;  and,  soon  discovering  how  little  his  preaching  was  relished 
there,  he  communicated  to  his  patron  his  intention  of  quitting 
them  upon  that  account.    Sir  Thomas  Barnadiston  with  great  civi- 
lity endeavoured  to  persuade  him  that  he  was  mistaken  in  his 
suspicions ;  but  his  lady,  more  sincere,  being  desired  to  speak 
her  mind,  acknowledged,  that  neither  herself,  nor  even  Sir  Thomas, 
however  he  might  affect  to  disguise  his  sentiments,  were  at  all  of 
a  different  opinion  from  the  rest  of  the  parish,  who  universally 
complained  that  Jesus  Christ  had  not  been  preached  amongst  them, 
since  Mr.  Tillotson  had  been  settled  in  the  parish.    To  this  inci- 
dent, which  is  very  well  attested,  he  seems  clearly  to  allude  in  his 
sermon  against  Evil  Speaking,  preached  near  thirty  years  after, 
towards  the  close  of  which  he  has  this  passage  :  "  I  foresee  what 
will  be  said,  because  I  h  ive  heard  it  so  often -said  in  the  like  ea'se^ 

*  Wood.  Fasti  Oxon.  vol.  i.  co!.  2.  t  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  19. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR, 


XIX 


that  there  is  not  one  word  of  Jesus  Christ  in  all  this.  No  more 
i.s  there  in  the  text,  (Titus  iii.  2.)  and  yet  I  hope,  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  truly  preached,  whenever  his  will,  and  laws,  and  the  duties  en- 
joined by  the  christian  religion,  are  inculcated  upon  us." 

The  reputation,  which  his  preaching  gained  him  in  so  conspicuous 
a  station  as  that  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  recommended  him  the  year  fol- 
lowing to  the  trustees  of  the  Tuesday  lecture  at  St.  Lawrence  Jewry, 
founded  by  Elizabeth  Viscountess  Cambden.  And  there  he  was 
commonly  attended  by  a  numerous  audience,  brought  together 
from  the  remotest  parts  of  the  metropolis,  and  by  a  great  concourse 
of  the  clergy,  who  came  thither  to  form  their  minds.* 

Soon  after  his  settlement  at  Lincoln's  Inn,  he  was  invited  to 
preach  before  the  lord-mayor  and  court  of  aldermen  at  St.  Paul's, 
which  he  did  on  Job  xxviii.  23,  in  March,  166j  ;  and  on  the  15th 
of  that  month  he  was  desired  by  them  to  print  his  sermon ;  for 
which  purpose  it  had  the  imprimatur  of  Dr.  John  Hall,  chaplain 
to  Dr.  Humphrey  Henchman,  bishop  of  London,  on  the  13th  of 
May,  1GG4,  as  containing  *«  many  things  highly  useful  for  support- 
ing the  main  foundation  of  religion,  and  confuting  the  prodigious 
vanity  of  the  atheists  of  that  age."  Plurima,  quce  ad  prcecipuum 
religionis  fundamentum  tuiandum,  tt  ad  prodigiosan*  atheorum 
hujus  stculi  vanitatem  rcdargutndam  egrcgit  sunt  accommodate. 
It  was  accordingly  published  in  1G64,  in  4to.  under  the  title  of, 
The  Wisdom  of  being  Religious,  with  a  dedication  to  the  lord  mayor, 
Sir  Anthony  Bateman,  and  the  court  of  aldermen  ;  which,  not  being 
reprinted  in  our  Author's  works,  will  be  proper  to  be  inserted  here. 
"  In  obedience,"  says  he,  "  to  your  order,  I  here  present  you  with  a 
sermon,  which  you  formerly  heard.  I  know  not  how  acceptable 
discourses  of  this  nature  may  be :  I  am  sure  they  are  very  season- 
able in  this  degenerate  age,  in  which  atheism  and  profaneness  are 
grown  so  impudent,  and,  notwithstanding  the  restraints  of  shame 
and  laws,  do  appear  with  so  bold  a  face  in  the  world.  When  men 
arrive  to  that  degree  of  confidence,  as  to  tell  the  world,  that  +  the 
notion  of  a  spirit  implies  a  contradiction  ;  that  fear  and  fancy  are 
the  parents  of  a  deity,  and  ignorance  and  melancholy  the  true 
causes  of  devotion  ;  and  that  religion  is  nothing  else  J  "  but  the  fear 
of  invisible  power  feigned  by  the  mind,  or  imagined  from  tales 
publicly  allowed  :"  when  it  shall  be  counted  brave  to  defy  God, 
and  every  dabbler  in  natural  philosophy,  or  mathematics,  or  poli- 
tics, shall  set  up  for  an  atheist;  sure  then  it  is  high  time  to  resist 

*  Funeral  Sermon,  r>.  19,20.        t  Levialhan,  part  iii.  c.  34.         t  Part  i,  c.  tf, 


XX 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


this  growing  evil.  To  this  purpose  I  have  enlarged  that  part  of 
the  discourse,  which  is  more  immediately  levelled  against  atheism, 
beyond  what  the  limits  of  the  time  would  allow  me  in  the  preach- 
ing of  it ;  and  in  hope,  that  it  may  do  some  service  to  that  end,  it 
is  now  humbly  offered-^to  you."  This  sermon,  in  the  original 
edition,  contains  no  less  than  sixty-four  pages  in  4to.  and  it  was 
afterward  enlarged  and  improved  by  the  Author  in  the  manner  in 
which  it  now  appears  in  his  works,  and  is,  for  the  size  of  it,  one  of 
the  most  elegant,  perspicuous,  and  convincing  defences  of  religion 
in  our  own,  or  any  other  language. 

He  saw  now  with  deep  regret  the  fatal  corruption  of  that  age,  in 
which  the  hypocrisies  and  extravagances  of  the  times  preceding 
the  Restoration,  concurring  with  the  liberties  and  looseness  of 
morals  immediately  following  it,  disposed  many  persons  to  impiety 
and  atheism.  This  awakened  his  attention  and  zeal ;  and,  having 
considered  all  the  ancient  and  modern  apologies  for  the  Christian 
religion,  with  an  exactness,  that  became  the  importance  of  the  sub- 
ject, he  set  the  whole  strength  of  his  thoughts  and  studies  to  with- 
stand the  progress  which  irreligion  was  making.  In  order  to  that 
he  laboured  particularly  to  deduce  every  thing  from  the  clearest 
principles,  and  to  make  all  people  feel  the  reasonableness  of  the 
truths,  as  well  as  of  the  precepts,  of  the  Christian  religion.  When 
he  saw  that  popery  was  at  the  root  of  the  growing  contempt  of 
religion,  and  that  the  design  seemed  to  be  laid,  to  make  men 
first  atheists,  that  they  might  be  the  more  easily  made  papists, 
and  that  many  did  not  stick  to  own,  that  no  certainty  could 
be  had  of  the  Christian  faith,  unless  upon  the  basis  of  the 
infallibility  of  the  church  ;  this  gave  him  a  deep  and  just  indigna- 
tion. It  was  such  a  betraying  of  the  cause  of  God,  rather  than 
not  to  gain  their  own,  that  in  this  the  foundation  was  laid  of  his 
great  zeal  against  popery.  This  drew  his  studies  for  some  years 
much  that  way.  He  looked  on  the  whole  system  of  popery, 
as  such  a  corruption  of  the  entire  design  of  Christianity,  that 
he  thought  it  was  incumbent  on  him  to  set  himself  against  it  with 
the  zeal  and  courage,  suitable  to  that  cause,  and  necessary  for 
those  times.  He  thought,  that  the  idolatry  and  superstition  of  the 
church  of  Rome  enervated  true  piety  and  morality ;  and  that  its 
cruelty  was  such  a  contradiction  to  the  meekness  of  Christ,  and  that 
love  and  charity,  which  our  Lord  made  the  character  and  distinction 
of  his  disciples  and  followers,  that  he  resolved  to  sacrifice  every 
thing,  except  a  good  conscience,  in  a  cause,  for  which  he  had  de- 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


xxi 


termined,  if  it  should  come  to  extremities,  to  become  a  sacrifice 
himself.* 

His  enemies  soon  saw  how  much  he  stood  in  their  way,  and 
were  not  wanting  in  the  arts  of  calumny  to  disable  him  from  oppos- 
ing them  with  that  eminent  success,  which  his  writings  and  sermons 
had  on  the  nation.  His  life  was  too  pure  in  all  the  parts  of  it  to 
give  them  a  pretence  to  attack  him  in  that  respect.  So  regular  a 
piety,  such  an  unblemished  probity,  and  so  extensive  and  tender  a 
charity,  together  with  his  great  and  constant  labours,  both  in  pri- 
vate aud  public,  raised  him  above  reproach.  And  he  was  too 
generally  known  and  esteemed,  for  his  enemies  to  venture  upon 
the  common  arts  of  defaming;  so  that  subtiler  methods  were  to  be 
used,  since  his  virtue  was  too  exemplary  to  be  blemished  in  the  ordi- 
nary way.  His  endeavouring  to  make  out  every  thing  in  religion 
from  clear  and  plain  principles,  and  with  the  fulness  of  demonstra- 
tive proof,  was  laid  hold  on  to  make  him  pass  for  one,  who  could 
believe  nothing,  that  lay  beyond  the  compass  of  human  reason  : 
and  his  tender  method  of  treating  with  dissenters,  and  his  endea- 
vours to  unite  all  protestants  amongst  themselves,  were  represented 
as  a  want  of  zeal  in  the  cause  of  the  church,  and  an  inclination 
towards  those,  who  departed  from  it.  But  how  unhappily  success- 
ful soever  they  might  be  in  infusing  these  jealousies  of  him  into 
some  warm  and  unwary  men,  he  still  persevered  in  his  own  way. 
He  would  neither  depart  from  his  moderation,  nor  take  pains  to 
cover  himself  from  so  false  an  imputation.  He  thought  the  open- 
ness of  his  temper,  the  course  of  his  life,  his  sincerity,  and  the 
visible  effects  of  his  labours,  which  had  contributed  so  much  to 
turn  the  greatest  part  of  the  city  to  a  hearty  love  of  the  church, 
and  a  firm  adherence  to  the  communion  of  it,t  in  which  no  man 
was  ever  more  eminently  distinguished  than  he  was ;  he  thought, 

*  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  15, 16. 

t  His  success  in  this  respect,  and  that  of  some  of  his  friends,  is  confessed  hy 
that  rigid  independent  and  Calvinist,  Lewis  du  Moulin,  M.  D.  Camdenian  profes- 
sor of  history  at  Oxford,  b}*  the  appointment  of  the  parliament  till  the  Restoration, 
who  retracted  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Burnet  the  virulence  of  his  writings  against  the 
church  of  England  at  his  death,  October  20,  1683,  at  the  age  of  77.  He  observes 
in  his  last  tract,  intitled,  An  Appeal  of  all  the  Nonconformists  in  England  to  God 
and  all  the  Protestants,  in  order  to  manifest  their  Sincerity  in  Point  of  Obedience  to 
God  and  the  King, — printed  at  London,  1681,  in  4to.  that  "  several  bishops  and 
doctors  of  the  church  of  England,  as  Dr.  Lloyd,  Dr.  Tillotson,  Dr.  Stillingflect, 
Dr.  Patrick,  that  are  acknowledged  by  the  nonconformists  to  be  persons  of  great 
learning,  and  worth,  and  piety,  but  who  are  extreme  admirers  of  the  episcopacy  of 
England,  and  all  its  consequences,  and  who  hare  also  preferred  its  government  to 


xxii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR, 


that  constant  zeal,  with  which  he  had  always  served  such  as  came 
to  labour  in  the  city,  and  by  which  he  had  been  so  singularly  use^ 
ful  to  them  ;  he  thought  the  great  change,  that  had  been  made  in 
bringing  men's  minds  off  from  many  wild  opinions  to  sober  and 
steady  principles,  and  that  in  so  prudent  a  manner,  that  thing3 
were  done  without  men's  perceiving  it,  or  being  either  startled  or 
made  uneasy  by  the  peevishness,  which  is  raised  and  kept  up  by 
contradiction  or  disputing,  in  which  no  man  had  a  larger  share 
than  himself;  all  these  reasons  he  thought  would  prevent  his  con- 
duct from  needing  any  apology.* 

His  zeal  against  popery,  and  apprehensions  of  the  progress  of  it, 
having  led  him  to  examine  the  great  question  between  the  protestants 
and  church  of  Rome  concerning  the  rule  of  faith,  he  drew  up  an  an- 
swer to  a  treatise,  which  was  boasted  of  by  the  professors  of  that 
church,  as  an  impregnable  defence  of  their  cause,  and  intitled,  Sure 
Footing  in  Christianity;  or,  rational  Discourses  on  the  Rule  of  Faith, 
printed  in  1664,  in  a  large  8vo.  The  Author  of  it  was  Mr.  John  Sar- 
jeant,  w  hose  real  name  was  Smith,  a  secular  priest,  born  in  Lincoln- 
shire, about  the  year  1621,  and  admitted  of  St.  John's  College,  in 
Cambridge,  in  1637,  by  the  masters  and  seniors,  of  which  he  was  re- 
commended to  be  secretary  to  Dr.  Thomas  Morton,  bishop  of  Dur- 
ham ;  in  which  employment  he  continued,  till  falling  into  doubts  about 
his  religion  he  went  over  to  the  English  college  of  secular  priests  at 
Lisbon,  in  Portugal,  in  16 12,  and  was  afterwards  prefect  of  studies 
in  that  college ;  and  in  1652,  returned  to  England,  was  elected 
secretary  of  the  secular  clergy,  and  employed  in  propagating  his 
religion,  and  writing  books  in  defence  of  it,f  particularly  against 
Dr.  Hammond,  Dr.  Bramhall,  bishop  of  Derry,  and  Dr.  Thomas 
Pierce,  afterwards  dean  of  Sarum.  Mr.  Tillotson's  Rule  of  Faith 
was  licensed  for  the  press  by  Dr.  Humphrey  Henchman,  bishop  of 
London,  on  the  27th  of  February,  166f,  and  printed  at  London, 
1666,  in  8vo.  He  inscribed  it  in  a  prefatory  epistle  to  his  honour- 
ed and  learned  friend  Mr.  Edward  Stillingfleet,  afterwards  bishop 


all  other  establishments  in  Europe,  have  by  an  unlucky  accident  contributed  more 
towards  the  reputation  of  the  English  hierarchy  and  its  practices,  and  towards  the 
perpetuating  the  feuds  and  quarrels  between  the  conformists  and  nonconformists, 
than  it  had  been  possible  for  any  other  corrupted  party  to  do  by  all  their  irregularities 
and  advances  towards  Rome." 

*  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  1G,  17,  18. 

t  Wood.  Allien.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  cod.  1068. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


xxiii 


«f  Worcester,  whose  Rational  Account  of  the  Grounds  of  the  Pro- 
testant Religion,  printed  in  1664,  Mr.  Tillotson  had  read  witfi 
great  satisfaction,  and  now  returned  his  thanks  for  it,  not  only  as 
a  private  favour,  but  a  public  benefit.     This  excellent  writer, 
who  was  kuown  to  the  world  before  by  his  Ircnicum,  published  in 
1659,  and  his  Or igines  Sacrce,  in  1662,  and  was  a  native  of  Cranborn, 
in  Dorsetshire,  where  he  was  born  April  17th,  1635,  and  educated 
at  St.  John's  College,  in  Cambridge,  having  spent  some  years  at 
his  rectory  of  Sutton,  in  Bedfordshire,  except  in  term-time,  after 
he  was  appointed  chaplain  to  Sir  Harbottle  Grimston,  master  of 
the  rolls,  was  now  fixed  in  London  in  the  rectory  of  St.  Andrew, 
Holborn,  to  which  he  was  presented  in  January,  166 J,  by  the 
Earl  of  Southampton,  lord  high  treasurer.    His  Rational  Account 
having  likewise  been  attacked  by  Mr.  Sarjeant  in  his  third  Appen- 
dix, he  wrote  a  Reply,  in  the  form  of  a  letter,  to  Mr.  Tillotson, 
dated  at  London,  June  28th,  1665,  and  printed  as  an  Appendix  to 
the  Rule  of  Faith.    Mr.  Sarjeant  was  not  long  silent  with  regard 
to  Mr.  Tillotson,  but  published  A  Letter  of  Thanks  to  the  Author 
of  Sure  Footing  to  his  Answerer,  Mr.  J.  T.  said  in  the  title-page 
to  be  printed  at  Paris,  but  really  printed  at  London,  1666,  in  an 
octavo  of  one  hundred  and  thirty-one  pages,  dated  March  7th. 
The  year  following  also  Mr.  Sarjeant  published,  Faith  vindicated 
from  Possibility  of  Falsehood  ;  or,  the  immoveable  Firmness  and 
Certainty  of  the  Motives  to  Christian  Faith  asserted  against  that 
Tenet,  which  denying  Infallibility  of  Authority  subverts  its  Foun- 
dation, and  renders  it  uncertain.    This  was  printed  at  London, 
though  pretended  in  the  title-page  to  be  at  Louvain,  and  contains 
one  hundred  and  seventy-five  pages  in  8vo.  besides  a  postscript  of 
six  pages.    In  this  book  Mr.  Sarjeant  having  attacked  a  passage 
in  p.  31.  of  the  first  edition  of  Dr.  Tillotson's  sermon  On  the  Wis- 
dom of  being  Religious,  the  Doctor  replied  to  his  exceptions  to 
that  sermon,  and  to  his  Rule  of  Faith,  in  the  preface  of  the  first 
volume  of  his  sermons,  printed  in  1671,  in  8vo.  to  which  there  was 
a  rejoiuder  the  year  following,  in  a  piece  intitled,  Reason  against 
Raillery  ;  or,  a  full  Answer  to  Dr.  Tillotson's  Preface  against 
J.  Sarjeant.    There  was  drawn  up  also  A  punctual  Answer  to  his 
Rule  of  Faith,  by  Mr.  John  Austen,  a  gentleman  of  Norfolk,  and 
a  noted  writer  for  the  Roman  catholic  church,  to  which  he  was  a 
convert,  after  having  been  educated  in  St.  John's  College,  in  Cam- 
bridge, which  he  quitted,  as  well  as  his  religion,  about  the  year  1640, 
entering  himself  into  the  Society  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  till  the  breaking 


xxiv 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


out  of  the  civil  wars  forced  him  to  abandon  his  country,  to  which  he 
afterwards  returned,  and  died  at  his  house  in  Bow-street,  ovent- 
garden,  in  the  summer  of  the  year  1669.  His  Punctual  Answer 
was  actually  committed  to  the  press,  and  six  or  seven  sheets  of  it 
printed  off;  but  the  impression  was  never  finished.*  Dr.  Hickes 
endeavours  to  rob  our  great  divine  of  the  reputation  of  being  the 
author  of  the  Rule  of  Faith,+  pretending,  that  some  of  Dr.  Tillot- 
son's  friends  had  assured  him,  that  he  borrowed  that  book  from 
the  discourses  of  the  learned  Dr.  Zachary  Cradock,  provost  of 
Eton  College,  who  had  designed  to  answer  Mr.  Sarjeant's  Sure 
Footing.  To  this  charge  Bishop  Burnet  answers,^  that  though  it 
is  certain,  that  no  person  could  converse  with  Dr.  Cradock  on 
any  subject,  but  he  might  learn  much  from  him,  yet  •*  I  do  not," 
says  he,  "  believe  he  ever  intended  to  answer  Sarjeant,  or  any  other 
book  whatsoever.  I  am  sure  it  is  not  very  like  him.  Our  primale 
had  a  stock  of  his  own,  and  needed  to  borrow  from  nobody." 

His  love  of  learning,  and  zeal  for  the  promotion  of  the  study  of 
the  Scriptures,  made  him  one  of  the  earliest  encouragers  of  that 
useful  and  elaborate  work,  the  Synopsis  criticorum  aliorumque 
S.  Scriptures  interpretum,  undertaken  and  executed  by  Mr.  Mat- 
thew Pool.  The  author  had  first  given  the  world  a  specimen  of  his 
design,  with  a  recommendation  of  it  by  many  of  the  greatest  names 
in  the  church  at  that  time,  and  among  them  that  of  Dr.  Tillotson, 
who  had  taken  that  degree  in  divinity  in  1666  ;  and  he,  together 
with  Dr.  Patrick,  Dr.  Stillingfleet,  and  some  others,  had  the  trust 
and  management  of  the  monies  subscribed  for  the  publication  of 
the  Synopsis. §  His  Majesty  having  granted  a  patent  to  Mr.  Pool 
on  the  4th  of  October,  1667,  for  the  privilege  of  printing  his  work, 
the  two  first  volumes  were  published  at  London,  in  folio,  in  1669, 
and  three  more  afterwards.  This  learned  man,  whose  abilities  and 
piety  intitled  him  to  the  great  share,  which  he  had  in  Dr.Tillotson's 
friendship,  was  born  in  York,  and  son  of  Francis  Pool,  Esq.  and 
descended  of  an  ancient  family  of  that  name  at  Sprinkhill,  in 
Derbyshire.  His  education  was  in  Emanuel  College,  in  Cambridge, 
under  Dr.  John  Worthington,  where  he  took  the  degree  of  master 
of  arts,||  in  which  he  was  incorporated  at  Oxford,  in  June,  1657.1T 
He  was  at  the  head  of  a  scheme,  formed  and  completed  by  him, 
for  maintaining  young  men  of  eminent  parts  at  the  university  of 

*  Wood.  Athen.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  653.  t  Some  Discourses,  p.  46. 

|  Reflections,  p.  92,  93.  §  Vide  Prarfat.  Svnops.  criticor.  p.  vi. 

||  Dr.  Calami's  Account,  p.  14.  H  Wood.  Fasti  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  ecu1.  118. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


XXV 


Cambridge,  for  the  study  of  divinity,  having  by  his  solicitations  in 
a  short  time  raised  9001.  a  year  for  that  purpose ;  and  to  this 
scheme,  which  sunk  at  the  Restoration,  the  world  is  said  in  some 
measure  to  owe  Dr.  Sherlock,  afterwards  dean  of  St.  Paul's.  Mr. 
Pool  lost  his  rectory  of  St.  Michael  le  Quern,  in  London,  by  the 
act  of  Uniformity,  in  1662 ;  and,  retiring  at  last  to  Holland,  for  the 
free  exercise  of  his  religion,  died  at  Amsterdam,  in  October,  1679.* 
Besides  his  Synopsis,  which  was  the  product  of  ten  years'  indefatiga- 
ble industry,  he  published  English  Annotations  on  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures, in  which  he  proceeded  no  farther  than  the  58th  chapter  of 
Isaiah,  being  prevented  by  death,  and  several  other  books  both 
in  practical  and  controversial  divinity. 

The  high  reputation  of  Dr.  John  Wilkins,  and  the  interest  of 
Villiers,  duke  of  Buckingham,  having  at  last,  notwithstanding  the 
opposition  of  Archbishop  Sheldon,  and  other  great  men  of  the 
church,  induced  the  King  to  advance  him  to  a  bishopric,  Dr.  Til- 
lotson  was  desired  to  preach  the  sermon  on  Sunday,  the  15th  of 
November,  1668,  in  the  chapel  in  Ely  House,  at  his  consecration 
to  the  bishopric  of  Chester,  vacant  by  the  death  of  Dr.  George  Hall, 
on  the  23d  of  August  preceding,  of  a  wound  received  by  a  knife 
in  his  pocket,  in  a  fall  from  the  mount  in  his  garden  f  at  the  rec- 
tory-house at  Wigan.  Dr.  Tillotson  was  now  related  to  Bishop 
Wilkins  by  the  marriage  of  his  daughter-in-law,  Elizabeth  French, 
who  was  niece  to  Oliver  Cromwell,  being  daughter  of  Dr.  Peter 
French,  canon  of  Christ  Church,  in  Oxford,  by  Robina,  sister  to 
the  Protector,  re-married  about  the  year  1656  to  Dr.  Wilkins,  then 
warden  of  Wadham  College  ;  who  obtained  a  dispensation  of  the 
statutes  of  that  college  for  that  marriage  from  the  Protector,  his 
brother-in-law,  whose  interest  he  made  use  of  upon  all  occasions 
for  the  support  of  learning,  and  the  protection  of  learned  men  in 
that  university. 

The  natural  modesty  of  Dr.  Tillotson,  and  his  averseness  to  soli- 
citation, did  not  prevent  his  merit  from  having  justice  done  it,  by 
the  interest  which  it  gained  him  even  at  court,  as  well  as  in  the 
city  ;  for,  upon  the  promotion  of  Dr.  Peter  Gunning  to  the  bishop- 
ric of  Chichester,  in  February,  1669-70,  in  the  room  of  Dr.  Henry 
King,  he  was  presented  to  the  prebend  of  the  second  stall  in  the 
cathedral  of  Canterbury,  which  had  been  held  by  the  new  bishop; 

*  Dr.  Calamy,  ubi  supra. 

t  MS.  Diary  of  public  affairs,  in  the  possession  of  the  Right  Honourable  Thomas 
Lord  Viscount  Weymouth. 

VOL.  I.  E 


xxvi 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


and  was  admitted  to  it  on  the  14th  of  March.  He  kept  this  pre- 
bend till  he  was  advanced  to  the  deanery  of  that  church  i« 
October,  1672,  in  the  room  of  Dr.  Thomas  Turner,  who  died  on 
the  8th  of  that  month,  at  a  very  advanced  age,  having  been  do- 
mestic chaplain  to  Archbishop  Laud,  and  to  King  Charles  I.  by 
the  latter  of  whom  he  was  made  canon-residentiary  of  St.  Paul's, 
and  dean  of  Rochester,  in  February,  164J,  which  he  exchanged 
the  year  following  for  that  of  Canterbury.  Dr,  Tillotson  was  suc- 
ceeded in  his  prebend  of  Canterbury  by  Dr.  Samuel  Parker,  after- 
wards bishop  of  Oxford,  and  then  domestic  chaplain  to  Archbishop 
Sheldon,  by  whom  he  was  presented  to  it. 

Nor  was  Canterbury  the  only  cathedral,  in  which  Dr.  Tillotson 
was  preferred  ;  for,  on  the  18th  of  December,  1675,  he  was  pre- 
sented to  the  prebend  of  Ealdland  in  that  of  St.  Paul's,  London, 
which  he  resigned  for  that  of  Oxgate,  and  a  residentiaryship  in  the 
same  church  on  the  14th  of  February,  167J.  This  last  preferment 
was  obtained  for  him  by  the  interest  of  his  friend,  Dr.  John  Sharp, 
afterwards  archbishop  of  York,  with  Heneage  Lord  Finch,  lord 
high  chancellor,*  to  whom  Dr.  Sharp  had  been  domestic  chaplain 
above  ten  years  before,  having  lived  with  that  nobleman  while  he 
was  only  attorney-general,  his  Lordship,  after  he  was  possessed  of 
the  great  seal,  devolving  on  him  the  province  of  inquiring  into  the 
characters  of  those  divines,  who  were  candidates  for  preferment.f 
The  friendship  between  the  Dean  and  Dr.  Sharp  was  occasioned 
by  an  accidental  meeting  upon  this  occasion  :  Mr.  Joshua  Tillot- 
son, the  Dean's  brother,  was  a  wet  and  dry  salter,  or  oilman,  in 
London,  of  which  trade  was  the  Doctor's  father,  Mr.  Thomas  Sharp, 
at  Bradford,  in  Yorkshire.  The  Doctor  returning  from  thence  into 
Sir  Heneage  Finch's  family,  with  a  bill  drawn  on  Mr.  Joshua  Tillot- 
son, happened  to  meet  at  his  house  Dr.  Tillotson,  who  finding 
Mr.  Sharp  to  be  his  countryman,  and  a  young  clergyman  setting 
out  into  the  world,  being  above  fourteen  years  younger  than  him- 
self, with  his  usual  goodness  and  civility,  took  particular  notice  of 
him,  and,  after  some  conversation,  gave  Mr.  Sharp  leave  to  come 
freely  to  his  house  whenever  he  pleased,  and  to  have  recourse  to 
him  as  often  as  he  thought  it  might  be  serviceable  to  him.  Mr.  Sharp 

*  Letter  to  me  from  the  Rev.  and  learned  Dr.  Thomas  Sharp,  archdeacon  of 
Northumberland,  son  of  Archbishop  Sharp,  and  godson  of  Archbishop  Tillotson, 
dated  November  7,  1751. 

t  Life  of  George  Bull,  Bishop  of  St.  David's,  by  Robert  Nelson,  Esq.  p.  278, 279. 
2d  edit,  London,  1714, 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


XX  VII 


judged  tins  a  most  fortunate  interview,  and  himself  extremely  happv 
in  so  valuable  an  acquaintance,  and  ever  after  spoke  with  pleasure 
of  this  incident.  And  this  was  the  foundation  of  a  firm  and  lasting 
friendship  between  them,  improved  by  an  intimate  acquaintance 
for  many  years,  and  cemented  by  repeated  acts  of  mutual  good 
offices.* 

The  Dean  of  Canterbury  had  now  been  some  years  chaplain  to 
King  Charles  II.  though  his  Majesty  had  uo  kindness  for  him, 
according  to  the  suggestion  of  Bishop  Burnet,  +  admitted  by 
Dr.  Hickes.J  But  to  whomsoever  he  owed  his  preferments,  which 
can  only  be  considered  as  the  just  rewards  of  his  extraordinary 
merits,  they  had  no  other  effect  upon  him,  than  to  enlarge  his  ca- 
pacity of  doing  good.  He  neither  slackened  his  labours,  nor 
advanced  his  fortunes  by  them.  He  did  not  content  himself  with 
such  a  residence,  as  answered  the  statute,  considering  his  obliga- 
tions to  attend  the  court ;  but  gave  as  much  of  his  time  and  labours 
to  his  cathedral,  as  could  agree  with  his  other  obligations.  He 
neither  aspired  nor  hearkened  to  the  motions  of  a  farther  advance- 
ment; and  all  that  he  desired  afterwards  upon  the  Revolution,  was 
such  a  change  of  his  deanery  of  Canterbury  for  that  of  St.  Paul's, 
as  considerably  lessened  his  income,  by  the  resignation  of  his  resi- 
dentiaryship  §  of  the  latter,  but  delivered  him  from  the  invidious 
load  of  having  two  dignities.  He  bore  this  in  the  two  former  reigns, 
■because  the  practice  was  common ;  and  he  was  enabled  by  it  to 

*  Letter  of  Archdeacon  Sharp.  +  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  20,  21. 

$  Some  Discourses,  p.  63,  64. 

§  The  words  of  Bishop  Burnet's  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  20,  upon  which  I  grounded 
this  assertion  of  Dr.  Tillotson's  resigning  his  residentiaryship,  are  as  follow  :  "  All 
that  he  desired  upon  this  happy  revolution,  was  such  a  change,  as  did  considerably 
lessen  his  income,  but  delivered  him  from  the  invidious  load  of  having  two  dignities  :'* 
which  passage  Mr.  Beardmore,  in  his  Memorials,  seems  to  have  understood  in  the 
same  seuse  with  myself.  But  I  have  since  found  by  consulting  the  register-books 
of  the  cathedral  of  St.  Paul's,  that  Dr.  Tillotson  did  not  resign  his  resideutiaryship  in 
that  church,  when  he  was  chosen  dean  ;  both  those  preferments  being  probably  con- 
sidered by  him  as  one,  and  appearing  to  be  of  less  value  at  that  time  than  the  deanery 
of  Canterbury  with  tbe  residentiary  ship  ef  St.  Paul's,  especially  when  there  were  taken 
into  the  estimate  the  fees  of  admission  into  the  new  dignity,  the  first  fruits,  the  expense 
of  filling  up  and  furnishing  the  deanery-house,  and  the  advanced  age  of  the  Dean,  with 
an  apoplectic  fit,  which  he  had  suffered.  And  what  Bishop  Burnet  observes,  is  cer- 
tain, that  he  considerably  lessened  his  income  by  the  exchange,  since  during  the  two 
years  of  his  holding  the  deanery  of  St.  Paul's,  he  had  only  oue  fine,  and  that  a  small  one 
whereas,  the  fines  are  usually  one-third  of  the  income. 


XXVlii  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

go  so  far  in  bis  charities.    But  as  he  intended  to  put  a  stop  to 
that  abuse,  so  he  resolved  to  set  an  example  to  others.* 

His  zeal  against  popery,  as  the  grand  corruption  and  reproach 
of  the  most  excellent  religion  that  ever  appeared  in  the  world,  was 
not  at  all  abated  by  any  favours,  which  he  had  already  received,  or 
might  expect,  from  a  court  too  justly  suspected  of  favouring  the 
principles  of  the  church  of  Rome,  as  a  means  of  establishing  an 
absolute  despotic  government.    And  he  exerted  this  zeal  upon  all 
proper  occasions,  especially  when  there  appeared  any  immediate 
danger  of  the  progress  of  these  principles.    This  he  did  particu- 
larly in  the  year  1672,  towards  the  close  of  which  he  was  advanced 
to  the  deanery  of  Canterbury  ;  upon  the  King's  having,  on  the  15th 
of  March,  167^,  with  a  view  of  indulgence  to  the  papists,  publish- 
ed A  Declaration  for  Liberty  of  Conscience,  by  an  extraordinary 
act  of  power,  abrogating  several  acts  of  parliament,  or  at  least 
suspending  the  execution  of  them.    The  bishops  in  general,  and 
particularly  Dr.  Humphry  Henchman,  bishop  of  London,  being 
alarmed  at  this,  charged  their  clergy  to  preach  against  popery. 
But  the  King  complaining  to  Archbishop  Sheldon  of  this,  as  done 
on  purpose  to  inflame  the  people,  and  alienate  them  from  himself 
and  his  government,  that  prelate  called  together  some  of  the  clergy, 
to  consider  what  he  should  say  to  his  Majesty,  if  he  pressed  him 
any  farther  on  that  head  ;  when  Dr.  Tillotson,  who  was  one  of 
these,  suggested  this  answer:  That  since  his  Majesty  professed  the 
Protestant  religion,  it  would  be  a  thing  without  precedent,  that  he 
should  forbid  his  clergy  to  preach  in  defence  of  a  religion,  which 
they  believed,  while  he  declared  himself  of  it.    However,  there 
was  no  occasion  for  that,  or  any  other  answer,  his  Majesty  never 
renewing  the  motion. f 

But  the  Dean's  concern  for  the  essence  of  pure  and  uncorrupted 
Christianity  was  attended  with  a  proportionable  moderation  of  temper 
and  principles  with  respect  to  the  lesser  differences  amongst  protes- 
tants,and  especially  those  of  our  own  country.  Hence  followed  a  con- 
stant desire  in  him  of  a  more  entire  union  of  them,  not  only  on  account 
of  the  general  advantage  of  it,  but  likewise  of  the  particular  one 
x>f  forming  a  stronger  barrier  against  the  perpetual  encroachments 
of  the  see  of  Rome.  He  joined  therefore  with  Dr.  Stillingfleet,  and 
Mr.  Hezekiah  Burton,  in  the  treaty  proposed  by  Sir  Orlando  Bridg- 

*  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  20,  21 . 

t  Burnet's  History  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  509. 


LI  IE   Ol    THE  AUTHOR. 


XXIX 


man,  lord  keeper  of  the  great  seal,  about  January,  166^,  and 
countenanced  by  the  Lord  Chief  Baron  Hale,  for  a  comprehension 
of  such  of  the  dissenters,  as  could  be  brought  into  the  communion 
of  the  church,  and  a  toleration  of  the  rest.  Dr.  Bates,  Dr.  Manton, 
and  Mr.  Baxter  being  called  for,  on  the  side  of  the  presbyterians, 
a  project  was  prepared,  consisting  chiefly  of  those  things,  which 
the  King  had  promised  by  his  declaration  from  Breda,  in  the  year 
1660.  Only  in  the  point  of  re-ordination  this  temper  was  pro- 
posed, that  those  who  had  presbyterian  ordination,  should  be  re- 
ceived to  serve  in  the  church  by  an  imposition  of  hands,  accompa- 
nied with  words,  importing  that  the  person  so  ordained  was  re- 
ceived to  serve  as  a  minister  in  the  church  of  England.  But  this 
treaty  becoming  the  subject  of  common  discourse,  a  clamour  was 
raised,  especially  by  the  friends-of  the  Earl  of  Clarendon,  disgraced 
in  August,  1667,  and  now  in  banishment,  that  the  church  was  un- 
dermined and  betrayed  ;*  and  when  a  bill,  drawn  up  by  Lord  Chief 
Baron  Hale,  was  to  be  presented  to  the  parliament,  a  resolution 
passed  against  admitting  any  bill  of  that  nature. t  A  second  at- 
tempt was  made  in  1674,  when  the  Dean,  in  conjunction  with  Dr. 
Stillingfleet,  desired  a  meeting  with  the  principal  of  the  noncon- 
formists, Dr.  William  Bates,  Dr.  Thomas  Manton,  Mr.  Matthew 
Pool,  and  Mr.  Baxter,  in  order  to  an  accommodation;  for  which 
these  two  divines  declared  they  had  the  encouragement  of  several 
lords,  both  spiritual  and  temporal.  They  were  at  first  met  by  Mr. 
Baxter  alone  ;  with  whom  having  considered  and  canvassed  various 
draughts,  they  at  length  fixed  on  one,  in  which  they  agreed.  This 
being  communicated  to  the  nonconformists,  proved  satisfactorv  to 
them  ;  but  the  bishops  refusing  to  assent  to  many  particulars  in  it, 
the  treaty  was  soon  at  an  end.  Mr.  Baxter  sent  to  Dr.  Tillotson, 
to  know  whether  he  might  have  leave  to  speak  of  it,  in  order  to 
the  promoting  concord,  and  to  signify  how  far  they  were  agreed, 
that  their  names  might  be  some  advantage  to  the  work  ;  upon 
which  the  Doctor  returned  him  an  answer  on  the  11th  of  April, 
1675,  in  which  he  informed  him,  that  he  had  taken  the  first  oppor- 
tunity to  speak  to  the  Bishop  of  Sarum,+  who  promised  to  keep 
the  matter  private,  and  only  to  acquaint  the  Bishop  of  Chester  § 
with  it,  in  order  to  a  meeting:  but  that  upon  some  general  dis- 

*  Burnet's  History  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  259. 

t  Burnet's  Life  of  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  p.  42,  43  ;  and  Calamv's  Abridginenf  of  Mr. 
Baxter's  History  of  his  Life  and  Times,  p.  317—522;  2d  edit. 

♦  Dr.  Seth  Ward.  §  Dr.  John  Pearson. 


XXX 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


course,  he  plainly  perceived  several  things  could  not  be  obtained. 
That,  however,  the  Bishop  of  Sarum  had  promised  to  appoint  a 
time  of  meeting,  but  that  he  had  not  heard  from  his  Lordship  since. 
That,  for  his  own  part,  he  was  unwilling  that  his  name  should  be 
used  in  this  matter  ;  not  but  that  he  did  most  heartily  desire  an  ac- 
commodation, and  should  always  endeavour  it  ;  but  that  he  was 
sure  it  would  be  a  prejudice  to  him,  and  signify  nothing  to  the  ef- 
fecting of  the  thing,  which,  as  circumstances  were,  could  not  pass 
in  either  house  without  the  concurrence  of  a  considerable  part  of 
the  bishops,  and  the  countenance  of  his  Majesty,  which,  for  the 
present,  he  saw  little  reason  to  expect.* 

Dr.  Wilkins,  bishop  of  Chester,  dying  of  the  stone  at  the  Deaii 
of  Canterbury's  house,  in  Chancery-lane,  on  the  19th  of  November, 
1672,  by  his  last  will  committed  his  papers  to  the  Dean's  care, 
leaving  it  wholly  to  his  disposal,  whether  any,  or  what  part  of  them, 
should  be  made  pubiic.  The  Dean  knowing,  that  the  Bishop's 
Principles  of  Natural  Religion  had  been  always  designed  by  him 
for  that  purpose,  thought  it  a  justice  to  the  world  to  publish  that 
treatise,  though  a  considerable  part  of  it  wanted  the  author's  last 
hand,  the  first  twelve  chapters  only  being  transcribed  by  him  for  the 
press.  He  therefore  finished  the  remainder  out  of  the  Bishop's 
papers ;  and,  though  he  warns  the  reader  not  to  expect,  that  the 
work  should  be  of  equal  strength  and  beauty  in  all  the  parts  of  it ; 
yet  the  skill  of  the  compiler  was  probably  a  full  equivalent  for  the 
want  of  the  finishing  strokes  of  the  original  writer.  He  published 
it  in  1G75,  in  8vo.  with  an  excellent  preface  concerning  the  design 
of  it :  the  first  branch  of  which  is  the  establishing  the  great  princi- 
ples of  religion,  the  being  of  a  God,  and  a  future  state,  by  shew- 
ing how  firm  and  solid  a  foundation  they  have  in  the  nature  and 
reason  of  mankind  ;  a  work  never  more  necessary,  than  in  that  de- 
generate age,  so  miserably  over-run  with  scepticism  and  infidelity. 
The  next  point  in  view  was,  to  convince  men  of  the  natural  and 
indispensable  obligation  of  moral  duties,  comprehended  by  our 
Saviour  under  the  two  general  heads  of  love  of  God  and  our  neigh- 
bour. For  all  the  great  duties  of  piety  and  justice  are  written 
upon  our  hearts,  and  every  man  feels  a  secret  obligation  to  them  in 
his  own  conscience,  which  checks  and  restrains  him  from  acting 
contrary  to  them,  and  gives  him  peace  and  satisfaction  in  the  dis- 
charge of  his  duty ;  or,  in  case  he  offend  against  it,  fills  him  with 


Dr.  Culamv's  Abridgment,  p.  oio. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


XXXi 


guilt  and  terror.  And,  certainly,  it  is  a  thing  of  very  considerable 
use,  rightly  to  understand  the  natural  obligation  of  moral  duties, 
and  how  necessarily  they  flow  from  the  consideration  of  God  and 
of  ourselves.  For  it  is  a  great  mistake  to  think,  that  the  obligation 
of  them  depends  solely  upon  the  revelation  of  God's  will  made  to 
us  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  It  is  plain,  that  mankind  was  always 
under  a  law,  even  before  God  had  made  any  external  and  extraor- 
dinary revelation  :  else,  how  shall  God  judge  the  world  !  how  shall 
they,  to  whom  the  word  of  God  never  came  be  acquitted  or  con- 
demned at  the  great  day  ?  For  where  there  is  no  law,  there  can  be 
neither  obedience  nor  transgression.  "  It  is  indeed,"  adds  the 
Dean,  "an  unspeakable  advantage,  which  we,  who  are  Christians, 
do  enjoy,  both  in  respect  of  the  more  clear  and  certain  knowledge 
of  our  duty,  in  all  the  branches  of  it,  and  likewise  in  regard  of  the 
powerful  motives  and  assistance,  which  our  blessed  Saviour  in  his 
gospel  offers  to  us,  to  enable  and  encourage  us  to  the  discharge  of 
our  duty :  but  yet  it  is  nevertheless  very  useful  for  us  to  consider 
the  primary  and  natural  obligation  to  piety  and  virtue,  which  we 
commonly  call  the  law  of  nature  ;  this  being  every  whit  as  much  the 
law  of  God,  as  the  revelation  of  his  will  in  his  word  ;  and,  conse- 
quently, nothing  contained  in  the  word  of  God,  or  in  any  pretend- 
ed revelation  from  him,  can  be  interpreted  to  dissolve  the  obliga- 
tion of  moral  duties  plainly  required  by  the  law  of  nature.  And, 
if  this  one  thing  were  but  well  considered,  it  would  be  an  effectual 
antidote  against  the  pernicious  doctrines  of  the  Antinomians,  and 
of  all  other  libertines  whatsoever ;  nothing  being  more  incredible, 
than  that  Divine  revelation  should  contradict  the  clear  and  unques- 
tionable dictates  of  natural  light ;  nor  any  thing  more  vain  than  to 
fancy,  that  the  grace  of  God  does  release  men  from  the  law  of  na- 
ture/' This  Bishop  Wilkins  was  very  sensible  of,  and  wisely  saw 
of  what  consequence  it  was  to  establish  the  principles  and  duties 
of  religion  upon  their  true  and  natural  foundation ;  which  is  so 
far  from  being  a  prejudice  to  Divine  revelation,  that  it  prepares 
the  way  for  it,  and  gives  it  greater  advantage  and  authority  over 
the  minds  of  men.  The  third  point  of  his  design  was  to  persuade 
men  to  the  practice  of  religion,  and  the  virtues  of  a  good  life,  by 
shewing  how  natural  and  direct  an  influence  they  have,  not  only 
upon  our  future  blessedness  in  another  world,  but  even  upon  the 
happiness  and  prosperity  of  this  present  life,  "  And  surely,"  con- 
cludes the  Dean,  "  nothing  is  more  likely  to  prevail  with  wise  and 
considerate  men  to  become  religious,  than  to  be  thoroughly  con- 


LIFE   O!"   THE  AUTHOR. 


vineed,  that  religion  and  happiness,  our  duty  and  our  interest,  are 
but  one  and  the  same  thing  considered  under  several  notions." 

The  year  1676  deprived  the  Dean  of  one  of  his  most  valuable 
friends,  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  who,  after  having  filled  the  place  of  one 
of  the  justices  of  the  Common-pleas  under  the  Protector  Cromwell, 
and  during  the  several  changes  of  government  till  the  Restoration, 
and  after  that  of  lord  chief  baron  of  the  Exchequer,  and  lord  chief 
justice  of  the  King's  Bench,  had  resigned  the  last  post  on  account  of 
his  age  and  infirmities  on  the  21st  of  February,  167f,  and  died  on 
the  Christmas-day  following,  in  the  sixty-seventh  year  of  his  age, 
with  the  highest  reputation  for  integrity  and  abilities  in  his  profes- 
sion, in  which  his  writings  have  raised  him  a  character  equal  to  his 
greatest  predecessors,  and  will  always  be  esteemed  as  containing 
the  best  rationale  of  the  grounds  of  the  law  of  England.  Nor  was 
he  an  inconsiderable  master  of  polite,  philosophical,  and  especially 
theological  learning,  however  underrated  in  these  respects  by  a 
late  writer,*  evidently  biassed  by  party  prejudices;  his  treatise 
upon  the  Origination  of  Mankind  shewing  a  great  force  of  reason- 
ing, and  an  equal  compass  of  knowledge.  This  work,  designed 
to  evince  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  the  truth  of  the  Mosaical 
history,  was  part  of  a  larger  confutation  of  atheism,  and  proof  of 
Christianity ;  which,  as  soon  as  finished,  he  sent  by  an  unknown 
hand  to  Bishop  Wilkins  for  his  judgment,  but  with  no  other  account 
of  the  writer  than  that  he  was  not  a  clergyman.  The  Bishop  and 
Dr.  Tillotson  having  read  a  great  deal  of  it  with  much  satisfaction, 
were  absolutely  at  a  loss  in  their  conjectures  about  the  author,  and 
how  a  person,  furnished  with  such  talents  of  reasoning,  and  such  a 
variety  of  learning,  should  be  so  unknown  to  them,  that  they  could 
not  find  him  out  by  these  characters,  which  are  so  little  common. 
At  last  Dr.  Tillotson  fixing  upon  the  Lord  Chief  Baron  Hale,  the 
Bishop  immediately  agreed  to  his  opinion,  wondering  that  himself 
had  been  so  long  in  finding  it  out.  Upon  which  they  both  went  to 
him ;  and  the  Bishop  thanking  him  for  the  entertainment,  which 
he  had  received  from  his  manuscript,  he  blushed  extremely,  not 
without  some  displeasure,  apprehending  that  the  person,  whom  he 
had  trusted,  had  discovered  him.  But  the  Bishop  soon  cleared 
that  point,  and  told  him,  that  he  had  discovered  himself;  for  the 
learning  of  that  book  was  so  various,  that  none  but  he  could  be 
the  author  of  it.  And  that  prelate  having  a  freedom  in  delivering 
his  opinion  of  things  and  persons,  which  perhaps  few  ever  managed 

*  Life  of  the  Lord  Keeper  North,  by  Roger  North,  Esq.  p.  63. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


3XX111 


yvith  so  much  plainness  and  prudence,  told  him,  that  there  was  no- 
thing could  be  better  said  on  the  subject,  if  he  could  bring  it  into 
a  less  compass ;  but  if  he  had  not  leisure  for  that,  he  thought  it 
much  better  to  have  the  book  come  out,  though  a  little  too  large, 
than  that  the  world  should  be  deprived  of  the  advantage  of  it. 
But  his  Lordship  had  never  the  opportunity  of  revising  it;  yet  a 
little  before  his  death  sent  the  first  part  of  it  to  the  press.* 

The  Dean's  eminence  of  character,  as  well  as  the  personal  obli- 
gations of  the  writer,  produced  a  dedication  to  him  in  1677,  of  A 
Bief  Discourse  upon  the  Offices  of  Baptism,  Catechism,  and  Con- 
firmation, by  Thomas  Comber,  M.  A.  afterwards  doctor  of  divini- 
ty, and  precentor  of  York,  and  promoted  to  the  deanery  of  Dur- 
ham, in  April,  1691,  which  he  enjoyed  to  his  death  on  the  25th  of 
November,  1699,  in  the  fifty-fifth  year  of  his  age.  Mr.  Comber  be- 
gins his  dedication  by  observing,  that  he  did  not  imagine  that  he 
should  discharge  those  obligations,  which  the  Deau's  goodness  had 
laid  upon  him,  but  rather  increase  them,  by  presenting  those  little 
tracts  to  him :  "  For  it  will,''  says  he,  "  contribute  to  their  repu- 
tation to  be  ushered  in  with  so  worthy  a  name,  and  add  to  their 
author's  character  to  be  reckoned  among  the  number  of  your  friends. 
So  that  if  this  tender  be  accepted  but  as  the  testimony  of  my  gra- 
titude, I  shall  confess  myself  to  be  your  debtor  still  :  I  hope  they 
are  so  done,  that  they  may  be  honoured  with  your  approbation,  as 
well  as  your  name  ;  for  then  they  will  be  effectually  recommended 
to  all  the  judicious,  and  raised  above  the  censures  of  the  less  de- 
serving.'' 

The  rise  of  his  interest  with  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Orange, 
with  the  consequence  of  it  in  his  advancement  to  the  see  of  Canter- 
bury, has  been  ascribed  to  an  incident,  which  is  supposed  to  have 
happened  in  the  year  1677,  and  is  thus  represented  by  one  of  our 
historians, f  as  drawn  from  a  manuscript  account  taken  from  Arch- 
bishop Tillotson's  own  mouth  :  That  the  match  between  that  Prince 
and  Princess  being  made  upon  political  views  against  the  will  of 
the  Duke  of  York,  and  not  with  the  hearty  liking  of  the  King,  the 
country  party,  as  they  were  then  called,  were  exceedingly  pleased 
and  elevated;  and,  after  the  lord  mayor's  feast, J  a  secret  design 
was  laid  to  invite  the  new-married  couple  into  the  city  to  a  public 
and  solemn  entertainment  to  be  made  for  them.  To  prevent  this, 
the  court  hurried  both  the  bridegroom  and  bride,  as  fast  as  they 

*  Life  of  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  by  Dr.  Burnet,  p.  49—52-  Edit.  1682. 
t  Echard'i  History  of  England.   Appendix,  p.  11.       J  Oc lobar  29 
VOL.  I.  F 


XXXIV 


LIFE   OP   THE  AUTHOR. 


could,  out  of  town  ;  so  that  they  departed  with  such  precipitation, 
that  they  had  scarce  time  to  make  any  provision  for  their  journey. 
Their  servants  and  baggage  went  by  way  of  Harwich,  but  the 
Prince  and  Princess  by  Canterbury  road,  where  they  were  to  lie 
till  the  wind  was  fair,  and  the  yacht  ready  to  sail  with  them.  Be- 
ing arrived  at  Canterbury,  they  repaired  to  an  inn ;  and,  no  good 
care  being  taken  in  their  haste  to  separate  what  was  needful  for 
their  journey,  they  came  very  meanly  provided  thither.  Monsieur 
Bentinck,  who  attended  them,  endeavoured  to  borrow  some  plate 
and  money  of  the  corporation  for  their  accommodation  ;  but,  upon 
gra^e  deliberation,  the  mayor  and  body  proved  to  be  really  afraid 
to  lend  them  either.  Dr.  Tillotson,  dean  of  Canterbury,  at  that 
time  in  residence  there,  hearing  of  this,  immediately  got  together 
all  his  own  plate,  and  other,  that  he  borrowed,  together  with  a 
good  number  of  guineas,  and  all  other  necessaries  for  them,  and 
went  directly  to  the  inn  to  Mons.  Bentinck,  and  offered  him  all 
that  he  had  got :  and  withal  complained,  that  they  did  not  come  to 
the  deanery,  where  the  royal  family  used  to  lodge,  and  heartily  in- 
vited them  still  to  go  thither,  where  they  might  be  sure  of  a  better 
accommodation.  This  last  they  declined  ;  but  the  money,  plate, 
and  the  rest,  were  highly  acceptable  to  them.  Upon  this  the  Dean 
was  carried  to  wait  upon  the  Prince  and  Princess ;  and  his  great 
interest  soon  brought  others  to  attend  upon  them.  "  By  this  lucky 
accident,"  adds  the  account,  "  he  began  that  acquaintance  and  the 
correspondence  with  the  Prince  and  Mons.  Bentinck,  which  yearly 
increased  to  the  very  Revolution,  when  Mons.  Bentinck  had  great 
occasion  for  him  and  his  friends  on  his  own  account,  as  well  as  the 
Prince  himself,  when  he  arrived  at  the  crown.  And  this  was  the 
true  secret  ground,  on  which  the  Bishop  of  London  (whose  quality 
and  services  seemed  to  entitle  him  without  a  rival  to  the  archbish- 
opric) was  yet  set  aside,  and  Dr.  Tillotson  advanced  over  his  head." 
But  this  solemn  and  circumstantial  story,  when  examined,  will  be 
found  liable  to  great  exceptions  :  for,  not  to  anticipate  what  will 
in  the  course  of  this  life  be  produced  from  unquestionable  evidence 
concerning  the  true  causes  and  circumstances  of  our  Dean's  advance- 
ment to  the  archbishopric,  it  will  be  sufficient  at  present  to  point 
out  some  mistakes  in  the  other  parts  of  the  narrative  cited  by  the 
historian.  For  the  Prince  and  Princess  of  Orange  were  far  from 
being  hurried  out  of  town,  after  the  lord  mayor's  feast,  on  the 
29th  of  October,  1677,  or  their  own  marriage,  which  was  perform- 
ed by  Dr.  Henry  Compton,  bishop  of  London,  who  claimed  that 


L  J  F  E   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


XXXY 


office  at  St  James's,  in  the  presence  of  the  King,  and  Duke  and 
Dutchess  of  York,  and  some  of  the  chief  nobility,  on  Sunday,  No- 
vember the  4th,  being  the  birth-day  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  ;*  for 
the  new-married  couple  did  not  leave  Whitehall  till  Monday  morn- 
ing, the  10th  of  that  month:  and,  instead  of  taking  the  road  to 
Canterbury,  where  they  were  to  lie,  till  the  wind  was  fair,  and  the 
yacht  ready  to  sail  with  them,  they  were  accompanied  by  his  Ma- 
jesty and  the  Duke  of  York  as  far  as  Erith,  where  the  Prince  and 
Princess  went  on  board  the  yachts  appointed  to  convey  them  to 
Holland. t  Being  detained  at  Sheerness  by  contrary  winds,  the 
King  sent  an  express  to  them  to  return  to  London  ;  and  they  went 
ashore  there,  lodging  at  the  house  of  Col.  Dorrel,  the  governor; 
and,  the  next  day,  being  Friday,  the  23d  of  November,  went  from 
thence  to  Canterbury,  the  Prince  taking  with  him  Mons.  Bentinck, 
Mons.  Odyck,  and  Count  Horn,  and  the  Princes  I  cing  attended 
thither  by  the  Countess  of  Inehiquin,  and  one  of  her  dressers. 
During  their  stay  at  Canterbury  the  Prince  was  complimented  by 
all  the  gentlemen  of  the  country,  and  presented  by  them  with 
abundance  of  provisions  of  all  sorts  for  his  table  ;  and  on  Sunday 
he  went  to  the  cathedral,  where  he  heard  the  whole  Divine  service 
and  a  sermon.  +  The  other  circumstances  of  what  is  affirmed  to 
have  passed  at  their  arrival  at  Canterbury  in  respect  to  the  want 
of  necessaries,  and  the  corporation's  refusal  to  supply  them,  and 
the  Dean's  assistance,  which  would  never  be  wanting  upon  such  oc- 
casion, must  be  left  upon  the  authority  of  Mr.  Echard's  narrative. 
The  Prince  and  Princess  left  that  city  on  Mondav  morning,  No- 
vember  26,  and  went  that  night  on  board  the  Montagu,  command- 
ed by  Sir  John  Holmes,  in  Margate  Road,  who,  on  Wednesday 
the  28th,  set  sail,  and  landed  them  in  Holland  the  next  day.§ 

The  high  esteem,  which  that  inexhaustible  genius,  Dr.  Isaac  Bar- 
row, master  of  Trinity  College,  in  Cambridge,  had  for  our  Dean,  in- 
duced him  to  leave  his  manuscripts  to  the  care  of  a  friend  so  capa- 
ble of  bringing  them  into  the  world  with  all  possible  advantage. 
And  having,  during  his  last  illness,  and  not  long  before  his  death, 
which  happened  on  the  4th  of  May,  IG77,  given  him  a  particular 
permission  to  print  his  Treatise  of  the  Pope's  Supremacy,  the  Dean 

*  MS.  Diary  of  public  transactions,  in  the  possession  of  the  Right  Honourable 
Thomas  Lord  Viscount  Weymouth  ;  and  Gazette,  No.  1249,  from  Monday,  Nov,  5, 
to  Thursday,  Nov.  8,  1677. 

t  Gazette,  No.  1253,  from  Monday,  Nov.  IP,  to  Thursday,  Nov.  22,  1677;  and 
US.  Diary. 

♦  MS.  Dinry.  j  Ibid. 


xxxvi 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


accordingly  prepared  it  for  the  press,  and  published  it  in  1680,  at 
London,  in  quarto,  with  a  preface,  in  which  he  observes,  that  who- 
ever shall  carefully  peruse  that  discourse,  will  find,  that  this  point 
of  the  pope's  supremacy  (upon  which  Bellarmin  hath  the  confidence 
to  say  "  the  whole  of  Christianity  depends")  is  not  only  an  inde- 
fensible, but  an  impudent  cause,  as  ever  was  undertaken  by  learned 
pens.  "  And  nothing/'  adds  the  Dean,  "  could  have  kept  it  so  long 
from  being  ridiculous  in  the  judgment  of  mankind,  but  its  being  so 
strongly  supported  by  a  worldly  interest:  for  there  is  not  one  to- 
lerable argument  for  it ;  and  there  are  a  thousand  invincible  reasons 
against  it."  To  this  discourse  he  added  another  of  Dr.  Barrow, 
concerning  the  Unity  of  the  Church,  in  which  the  Doctor  so  ex- 
plains it,  as  quite  to  take  away  the  necessity  of  a  visible  head  over 
the  whole  church  for  the  preservation  of  its  unity ;  "  which  is,"  says 
Dr.  Tillotson,  "  the  only  specious,  but  yet  a  very  remote  pretence  for 
the  pope's  supremacy  :  for,  if  a  visible  monarch  of  the  church  were 
granted  necessary  (which  neither  yet  are,  nor  ever  ean  be  proved) 
to  make  the  Bishop  of  Rome  the  man." 

The  sudden  death  of  his  second  brother,  Mr.  Joshua  Tillotson, 
by  a  vomiting  of  blood,  on  the  16th  of  September,  1678,  affected 
him  in  a  very  sensible  manner  ;  and,  being  unwilling  to  shock  his 
father,  then  at  his  house,  at  Sowerby,  with  the  abrupt  communica- 
tion of  it,  wrote  the  same  day  to  his  kinsman,  Mr.  Timothy  Bentley, 
desiring  him  to  acquaint  him  with  the  loss  of  his  son,  and  to  intreat 
him  "  to  bear  it  with  patience  and  submission  to  the  will  of  God, 
and  to  comfort  himself,  as  I,"  says  he,  "  desire  to  do,  with  the  hope 
of  meeting  and  enjoying  him  in  a  better  life."  * 

About  this  time  he  succeeded  in  his  endeavours  to  serve  Mr. 
George  Bull,  afterwards  bishop  of  St.  David's,  then  only  rector  of 
Siddington,  St  Mary,  and  vicar  of  Siddington,  St  Peter,  near  Ci- 
rencester, in  Gloucestershire,  though  known  to  the  public  by  his 
Harmonia  Apostolica,  published  in  1669,  and  his  Examen  Censurce 
in  1678:  for  he  procured  a  prebend  of  Gloucester  for  Mr.  Bull,+  who 
was  enstalled  into  it  on  the  9th  of  October,  1678,  from  the  Lord 
Chancellor  Finch,  afterwards  Earl  of  Nottingham,  who  gave  the 
same  year  another  instance  of  his  regard  for  learning,  by  preferring 

•  Original  letter  of  the  Dean,  dated  at  London,  Sept.  16,  1678,  communicated  to 
me  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Tillotson,  surmaster  of  St.  Paul's  School. 

t  Wood.  Athen.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  954.    Mr.  Nelson,  in  his  Life  of  Bishop  Bull, 
-  p.  276 — 280,  mentions  nothing  of  the  Dean  of  Canterbury's  endeavours  in  obtaining, 
that  prebend  for  him. 


LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  .  XXXVlt 

in  that  cathedral  Dr.  Ralph  Cudworth,  whose  Intellectual  System 
of  the  Universe  has  raised  him  a  reputation,  to  which  nothing  can 
add  but  the  publication  of  his  other  writings.* 

The  discovery  of  the  popish  plot  in  September,  1678,  of  which 
the  reality,  or  at  least  extent,  has  been  since  treated  as  one  of  the 
greatest  problems  in  history,  having  given  great  alarm  to  the  parlia- 
ment, which  met  on  the  21st  of  October,  a  few  days  after  the  mur- 
der of  Sir  Edmundbury  Godfrey,  the  Dean  was  appointed  to  preach 
before  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  5th  of  November  following. 
His  text  was  Luke  ix.  55,  56.  and  the  design  of  his  discourse  is  to 
shew,  that  a  revengeful,  and  cruel,  and  destructive  spirit,  is  directly 
contrary  to  the  design  and  temper  of  the  gospel,  and  not  to  be  ex- 
cused upon  any  pretence  of  zeal  for  God  and  religion.  In  the  con- 
clusion he  makes  an  application  of  that  doctrine  to  the  occasion  of 
the  day,  by  exposing  the  principles  and  practices  of  the  church  of 
Rome,  and  particularly  in  the  gun-powder  treason  plot,  avowed  by 
the  authors  of  it,  who  expressed  a  concern  for  its  ill  success,  as  ap- 
peared by  the  original  papers  and  letters  of  Sir  Everard  Digby,  then 
in  the  Dean's  hands.  He  willingly  acknowledges  the  great  piety 
and  charity  of  several  persons,  who  had  lived  and  died  in  the  com- 
munion of  that  church,  as  Erasmus,  Father  Paul,  Thuanus,  and 
many  others,  "  who  had,"  says  he,  "  in  truth,  more  goodness  than 
the  principles  of  that  religion  do  either  incline  men  to,  or  allow  of." 
He  declares,  that  it  was  not  his  intention  to  exasperate  the  House 
of  Commons  to  any  unreasonable  or  unnecessary,  much  less  un- 
christian severities  against  the  papists.  "  No,"  adds  he,  M  let  us 
not  do  like  them.  Let  us  never  do  any  thing  for  religion  that  is 
contrary  to  it.  But- 1  speak  it  to  awaken  your  care  thus  far,  that 
if  their  priests  will  always  be  putting  these  pernicious  principles 
into  the  minds  of  the  people,  effectual  provision  may  be  made,  that 
it  may  never  be  in  their  power  again  to  put  them  in  practice."  He 
then  touches  upon  the  late  discovery  of  the  plot,  and  the  treacher- 
ous murder  of  Sir  Edmondbury  Godfrey,  a  very  good  man,  and  a 
most  excellent  magistrate,  who  had  been  active  in  that  discovery. 
He  closes  with  alleging,  that  if  he  had  been  transported  by  this 
subject  somewhat  beyond  his  usual  temper,  the  occasion  of  that 
day,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  time  would,  he  hoped,  bear  him 
out.  "  I  can  truly  say,"  continues  he,  "  as  the  Roman  orator  did 
of  himself  upon  another  occasion,  1  me  natiira  miscricordem,  jyatria 

*  See  tlie  lilies  ol'lhein  in  tin:  Life  of  Cud  wort!),  prefixed  to  the  2d  edition  of  fiis 
Intellect,  System,  London,  17-K5,  in  Ito.  p.  xix.  xx, 


xxxviii 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


severum  :  crudehm  nec  patria  nec  natura  esse  voluit.'  My  nature 
inclines  me  to  be  tender  and  compassionate.  A  hearty  zeal  for  our 
religion,  and  concernment  for  the  public  welfare  of  my  country, 
may  perhaps  have  made  me  a  little  severe:  but  neither  my  natural 
disposition,  nor  the  temper  of  the  English  nation,  nor  the  genius  of 
the  protestant,  that  is,  the  true  Christian  religion,  will  allow  me  to 
be  cruel." 

He  had,  not  long  after  this,  an  occasion  to  improve  these  consi- 
derations concerning  the  nature  and  tendency  of  popery,  to  the  dis- 
engaging young  noblemen  of  great  parts  from  the  profession  of  it, 
in  which  he  had  been  educated.  This  was  Charles,  Earl  of  Shrews- 
bury, created  a  duke  by  King  William,  to  whom  he  was  secretary 
of  state,  having  had  a  considerable  share  in  the  Revolution ;  and  in 
the  latter  end  of  whose  reign  he  retired  to  Italy  for  his  health,  where 
he  continued  till  about  the  year  1706,  when  he  returned  to  England, 
and  joined  the  new  ministry ;  notwithstanding  which  he  was  again 
made  lord  chamberlain  to  King  George  I.  as  he  had  been  to  Queen 
Anne,  and  died  on  the  1st  of  February,  171J.  His  Lordship  was 
led  into  an  inquiry  into  his  first  religion  by  the  discovery  of  the  po- 
pish plot ;  and  was  soon  made  sensible  of  its  errors  and  corruptions 
by  so  thorough  a  master  of  that  subject  as  the  Dean  of  Canterbury, 
whom  be  attended  for  the  first  time  at  the  public  worship  in  Lin- 
coln's Inn  Chapel,  on  Sunday,  the  4th  of  May,  1679.*  The  Dean's 
concern  for  the  Earl  induced  him  afterwards,  upon  being  informed 
of  his  Lordship's  being  engaged  in  a  conversation,  which  might 
prove  dangerous  to  his  virtue  as  well  as  his  character,  to  write  to 
him  the  following  letter,  which  may  be  considered  a  master-piece 
for  the  elegance  and  politeness,  as  well  as  force  and  pathos,  of  the 
remonstrance. 

"  MY  LORD, 

"  It  was  a  great  satisfaction  to  me  to  be  any  ways  instrumental 
in  the  gaining  your  Lordship  to  our  religion,  which  I  am  really  per- 
suaded to  be  the  truth.  But  I  am,  and  always  was,  more  concerned 
that  your  Lordship  would  continue  a  virtuous  and  good  man,  than 
become  a  protestant ;  being  assured,  that  the  ignorance  and  errors 
of  men's  understanding  will  find  a  much  easier  forgiveness  with 
God,  than  the  faults  of  the  will.    I  remember  that  your  Lordship 

*  MS.  Diary  of  public  transactions,  in  the  possession  of  the  Right  Honourable 
Thomas,  Lord  Viscount  Wevmouth. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


XXXiX 


once  told  me,  that  you  would  endeavour  to  justify  the  sincerity  of 
your  change,  by  a  conscientious  regard  to  all  other  parts  and  ac- 
tions of  your  life.    I  am  sure  you  cannot  more  effectually  condemn 
your  own  act  than  by  being  a  worse  man  after  your  profession  .to 
have  embraced  a  better  religion.    I  will  certainly  be  one  of  the 
last  to  believe  any  thing  of  your  Lordship  that  is  not  good,  but  I 
always  feared  I  should  be  one  of  the  first  that  should  hear  it.  The 
time  I  last  waited  upon  your  Lordship,  I  had  heard  something  that 
afflicted  me  very  sensibly ;  but  I  hoped  it  was  not  true,  and  was 
therefore  loth  to  trouble  your  Lordship  about  it :  but  having  heard 
the  same  from  those  who,  I  believe,  bear  no  ill-will  to  your  Lord- 
ship, I  now  think  it  my  duty  to  acquaint  you  with  it.    To  speak 
plainly,  I  have  been  told,  that  your  Lordship  is  of  late  fallen  into 
a  conversation  dangerous  both  to  your  reputation  and  virtue,  two 
of  the  tenderest  and  dearest  things  in  the  world.    I  believe  your 
Lordship  to  have  a  great  command  and  conduct  of  yourself,  but  I 
am  very  sensible  of  human  frailty,  and  of  the  dangerous  tempta- 
tions to  which  youth  is  exposed  in  this  dissolute  age :  therefore  I 
earnestly  beseech  your  Lordship  to  consider,  besides  the  high  pro- 
vocation of  Almighty  God,  and  the  hazard  of  your  soul,  whenever 
you  engage  in  a  bad  course,  what  a  blemish  you  will  bring  upon  a 
fair  and  unspotted  reputation ;  what  uneasiness  and  trouble  you 
will  create  to  yourself,  from  the  severe  reflections  of  a  guilty  con- 
science; and  how  great  a  violence  you  will  offer  to  your  good  prin- 
ciples, your  nature,  and  your  education,  and  to  a  mind  the  best 
made  for  virtuous  and  worthy  things.    And  do  not  imagine  you 
can  stop  when  you  please ;  experience  shews  us  the  contrary ;  and 
that  nothing  is  more  vain,  than  for  men  to  think  they  can  set  bounds 
to  themselves  in  any  thing  that  is  bad.    I  hope  in  God  no  tempta- 
tion has  yet  prevailed  on  your  Lordship,  so  far  as  to  be  guilty  of 
any  loose  act.    If  it  has,  as  you  love  your  soul,  let  it  not  proceed 
to  a  habit.    The  retreat  is  yet  easy  and  open,  but  will  every  day 
become  more  difficult  and  obstructed.    God  is  so  merciful,  that, 
upon  your  repentance  and  resolution  of  amendment,  he  is  not  only 
ready  to  forgive  what  is  past,  but  to  assist  us  by  his  grace  to  do 
better  for  the  future.    But  I  need  not  enforce  these  considerations 
upon  a  mind  so  capable  of,  and  easy  to  receive  good  counsel.  I 
shall  only  desire  your  Lordship  to  think  again  and  again,  how  great 
a  point  of  wisdom  it  is,  in  all  our  actions,  to  consult  the  peace  of 
our  minds,  and  to  have  no  quarrel  with  the  constant  and  insepara- 
ble companion  of  our  lives.    If  others  displease  us,  we  may  quit 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


their  company  ;  but  he  that  is  displeased  with  himself  is  unavoid- 
ably unhappy,  because  he  has  no  way  to  get  rid  of  himself. 

"  My  Lord,  for  God's  sake,  and  your  own,  think  of  being  happy, 
and  resolve  by  all  means  to  save  yourself  from  this  untoward  ge- 
neration. Determine  rather  upon  a  speedy  change  of  your  condi- 
tion, than  to  gratify  the  inclinations  of  your  youth  in  any  thing 
but  what  is  lawful  and  honourable;  and  let  me  have  the  satisfac- 
tion to  be  assured  from  your  Lordship,  either  that  there  has  been 
no  ground  for  this  report,  or  that  there  shall  be  none  for  the  future; 
which  will  be  the  welcomest  news  to  me  in  the  world.  I  have 
only  to  beg  of  your  Lordship  to  believe,  that  I  have  not  done  this 
to  satisfy  the  formality  of  my  profession,  but  that  it  proceeds  from 
the  truest  affection  and  good-will,  that  one  man  can  possibly  bear 
to  another.  I  pray  God  every  day  for  your  Lordship  with  the 
same  constancy  and  fervour  as  for  myself,  and  do  most  earnestly 
beg  that  this  counsel  may  be  acceptable  and  effectual. 

"  I  am,"  &c. 

Dr.  Gilbert  Burnet,  who  had  contracted  an  intimate  friendship 
with  our  Dean  in  his  first  journey  to  England,  in  1663,*  having 
finished  his  History  of  the  Reformation,  the  first  volume  of  which 
was  published  in  1679,  as  the  second  was  in  1681,  he  submitted 
the  manuscript  of  the  whole  work  to  his  perusal  and  correction,  as 
well  as  to  that  of  Dr.  William  Lloyd,  then  dean  of  Bangor,  and 
soon  after  bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  and  Dr.  Stiliingfleet,  promoted  to 
the  deanery  of  St.  Paul's,  in  the  room  of  Dr.  William  Sancroft, 
advanced  to  the  archbishopric  of  Canterbury,  in  January,  167$. 
And  Dr.  Burnet,  in  his  preface  to  that  history,  which  is  one  of  the 
most  valuable  in  our  own,  or  in  any  other  language,  returns  his 
acknowledgments  upon  that  account  to  these  three  great  divines, 
"  whose  lives,"  says  he,  "  are  such  examples,  their  sermons  such 
instructions,  their  writings  such  unanswerable  vindications  of  our 
church,  and  their  whole  deportment  so  suitable  to  their  profes- 
sion, that,  as  I  reckon  my  being  admitted  into  some  measure  of 
friendship  with  them  among  the  chief  blessings  of  my  life,  so  I 
know  nothing  can  more  effectually  recommend  this  work,  than  to 
say,  that  it  passed  with  their  hearty  approbation,  after  they  had 
examined  it  with  that  care,  which  their  great  zeal  for  the  cause 

*  See  the  Life  of  Bishop  Burn«t,  subjoined  to  the  2d  vol.  of  the  History  of  his 
Own  Time,  p.  676. 


LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  xli 

concerned  in  it,  and  their  goodness  to  the  author,  and  freedom 
with  him,  obliged  them  to  use." 

The  publication  of  this  history  was  a  most  seasonable  service  to 
the  nation,  amidst  the  alarms  of  popery  :  and  the  same  reason  in- 
duced the  Dean  to  take  all  opportunities  to  oppose  the  progress  of 
that  religion,  especially  at  court,  whence  the  greatest  danger  of  it 
was  then  apprehended.  Being  called  upon  therefore  unexpectedly 
to  preach  out  of  his  turn  before  the  King  at  Whitehall,  on  the  2d 
of  April,  1680,  he  took  for  his  text  Josh.  xxiv.  15  ;  and  his  sermon 
was  soon  after  published  by  his  Majesty's  special  command  at 
London,  in  4to.  under  the  title  of  The  Protestant  Religion  vindi- 
cated from  the  Charge  of  Singularity  and  Novelty.    §ut  this  dis- 
course, though  an  excellent  and  judicious  one  in  the  main  parts  of 
it,  yet  contained  some  incidental  assertions,  which  gave  no  small 
offence  to  many,  both  of  the  church  and  dissenting  communions, 
particularly  the  following  passage:* — "  I  cannot  think  (till  I  be 
better  informed,  which  I  am  always  ready  to  be)  that  any  pretence 
of  conscience  warrants  any  man,  that  is  not  extraordinarily  com- 
missioned as  the  apostles  and  first  publishers  of  the  gospel  were, 
and  cannot  justify  that  commission  by  miracles,  as  they  did,  to 
affront  the  established  religion  of  a  nation,  though  it  be  false,  and 
openly  to  draw  men  off  from  the  profession  of  it,  m  contempt  of 
the  magistrate  and  the  law.    All  that  persons  of  a  different  reli- 
gion can  iu  such  a  case  reasonably  pretend  to,  is  to  enjoy  the  pri- 
vate liberty  and  exercise  of  their  own  conscience  and  religion,  for 
which  they  ought  to  be  very  thankful,  and  to  forbear  the  open 
making  of  proselytes  to  their  own  religion  (though  they  be  never  so 
sure  that  they  are  in  the  right),  till  they  have  either  an  extraordi- 
nary commission  from  God  to  that  purpose,  or  the  providence  of 
God  make  way  for  it  by  the  permission  of  the  magistrate."  Dr. 
Hickes  styles  f  this  dow  nright  Hobbism  ;  and  tells  us,  that  a  witty 
Lord, J  standing  at  the  King's  elbow  when  it  was  delivered,  said, 
"  Sir,  sir,  do  you  hear  Mr.  Hobbes  in  the  pulpit?''  and  that  Dr. 
Gunning,  bishop  of  Ely,  complained  of  it  in  the  House  of  Lords, 
as  a  doctrine  that  would  serve  the  turn  of  popery.    He  cites  like- 
wise the  following  extract  of  a  letter  of  Dr.  Simon  Patrick,  after- 
wards bishop  of  Ely,  to  Dr.  Samuel  Parker,  then  archdeacon  of 
Canterbury: — "  A  passage,  I  assure  you,  which  I  and  some  of  our 

*  Page  11,  12.  Edit.  1680.  f  Some  Discourses,  p.  48. 

t  Mr.  Leslie,  in  his  Charge  of  Socinianism  against  Tillotson,  considered,  p.  13, 
bajs,  that  it  was  the  E.  of  D. 

VOL.  I.  G 


xlii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


common  acquaintance  read  not  without  a  great  deal  of  trouble, 
when  we  first  saw  it.  .  .  .  They  think  it  would  be  well  to  admo- 
nish him  in  a  letter  of  this  error,  and  to  represent  the  consequences 
of  it  to  him,  exposing  his  opinion.  .  .  .  It  is  plain,  by  another  pas- 
sage in  that  sermon,  that  he  was  not  awake,  nor  had  his  wits  about 
him,  as  he  used  to  have,  when  he  wrote  it.    The  place  I  mean  is, 
page  9.    There  the  very  existence  of  a  God  may  be  thought  to  be 
called  into  question  by  him,  and  to  be  in  his  account  but  a  politic 
invention.    For  thus  he  writes,  pressing  religion  as  the  strongest 
band  of  human  society  :  4  God  is  so  necessary  to  the  welfare  and 
happiness  of  mankind,  as*  if  the  being  of  God  himself  had  been 
purposely  designed  and  contrived  for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of 
men.'    In  which  his  meaning  is  so  untowardly  expressed,  that  you 
cannot  but  think  he  was  indisposed,  when  he  wrote  so  untowardly. 
He  hath  altered  this  passage,  I  hear,  in  the  second  edition ;  but 
so  it  is,  as  I  have  received  it  in  that,  which  he  sent  me  at  its  first 
coming  out.    And,  indeed,  that  parenthesis  in  the  first  part  of  the 
sermon  (till  I  be  better  informed)  shews  he  was  in  too  great  haste 
at  least  when  he  composed  it,  else  he  would  never  have  adventured 
to  deliver  his  opinion  in  a  matter  of  such  moment,  till  he  had  been 
better  informed  of  its  truth.  ...  I  do  not  write  this  out  of  any 
change  there  is  in  my  mind  concerning  persons  or  things,  having 
the  very  same  thoughts  I  had  when  you  and  I  conversed  more  fre- 
quently together,  but  the  lamentable  case  of  things  ...  I  can- 
not but  have  a  love  to  Dr.  Tillotson's  person,  though  I  have  none 
for  his  opinion.    I  therefore  would  gladly  have  him  well  treated, 
though  he  be  never  so  sharply  reproved."    Dr.  Hickes  adds,  that 
Dr.  Patrick  confirmed  all  this  to  Dr.  Parker,  when  he  met  the  lat- 
ter in  London,  and  said,  that  Dr.  Tillotson  ought  to  give  satisfac- 
tion by  a  retraction,  or  else  be  exposed.    "  If  he  will  not,"  says 
he,  "  be  reduced,  he  ought  to  have  no  mercy,  but  to  be  hunted 
out  of  the  Christian  church,  when  he  wili  not  own  it.'* 

The  Dean's  doctrine  was  likewise  animadverted  upon  by  Mr. 
Simon  Lowth,  vicar  of  Cosmus  Blene,  in  the  diocese  of  Canter- 
bury, in  his  treatise,  Of  the  Subject  of  Church  Power,  in  whom  it 
resides,  its  force,  extent,  and  execution,  that  it  opposes  not  Civil 
Government  in  any  one  instance  of  it.  Printed  at  London,  1685,  in 
8vo.  This  discourse  had  been  seen  in  manuscript  by  the  Dean 
and  his  friend  Dr,  Stillingfleet,  who  was  also  severely  reflected 

*  The  words  in  the  1st  edition  are,  "  as  he  could  uol  have  been  more,  if  we  could 
snppose  the  being,"  &c. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


xliii 


upon  in  it  for  his  Irenicum  ;  and  the  author  called  upon  them  by 
a  letter,  printed  afterwards  in  the  preface  to  that  book,  to  retract 
their  own  opinions,  or  to  confute  his.  But  the  Dean  of  Canter- 
bury did  not  think  proper  to  take  the  least  public  notice  of  so  con- 
fused and  unintelligible  a  writer,*  whose  style  is  a  mere  jargon, 
though  Dr.  Hickes  f  is  pleased  to  style  him  a  very  orthodox  and 
learned  divine,  and  his  book  an  excellent  one  ;  and  King  James  II. 
had  so  great  a  regard  for  him,  as  to  nominate  him  to  the  deanery 
of  Rochester,  in  the  latter  end  of  October,  1688,  which  Mr.  Lowth 
could  not  obtain  possession  of  for  want  of  the  degree  of  doctor  of 
divinity,  before  that  King's  abdication.^ 

But  it  will  be  now  requisite  to  see  how  the  Dean's  position 
abovementioned  was  received  by  the  nonconformists.  Dr.  Ca- 
lamy's  account  is,^  that  King  Charles  II.  having  slept  most  part  of 
the  time  while  the  sermon  was  delivered,  a  certain  nobleman  step- 
ped up  to  him,  as  soon  as  it  was  over,  and  said,  "  Tis  pity  your 
Majesty  slept ;  for  we  had  the  rarest  piece  of  Hobbism  that  ever 
you  heard  in  your  life.''  <4  Ods  fish,  he  shall  print  it  then,"  an- 
swered the  King,  and  immediately  called  the  Lord  Chamberlain, 
and  gave  him  his  command  to  the  Dean  to  print  his  sermon. 
When  it  came  from  the  press,  the  Dean  sent  it  as  a  present  (as  he 
usually  did  most  of  the  pieces  which  he  published)  to  Mr.  John 
Howe,  one  of  the  most  learned  among  the  nonconformist  ministers, 
and  who  had  been  chaplain  to  the  Protector,  Oliver  Cromwell.  Mr. 
Howe  immediately  perused  it,  and  was  not  a  little  troubled  to  find 
a  notion  there  of  so  ill  a  tendency.  Upon  this  he  drew  up  a  long 
letter,  in  which  he  freely  expostulated  with  the  Dean  for  giving 
such  a  wouud  to  the  Reformation  ;  intimating  to  him,  that  Luther 
and  Calvin,  and  the  rest  of  the  reformers  wrere  (thanks  be  to  God) 
of  another  mind.  The  Christian  religion,  says  he,  both  as  to  its 
precepts  and  promises  is  already  confirmed  by  miracles  ;  and  must 
it  be  repeated  every  time  a  wicked  governor  thinks  fit  to  establish 
a  false  religion  1    Must  no  one  stand  up  for  the  true  religion,  till 

*  Dr.  Stillingfleet  made  some  remarks  on  Mr.  Lowth's  book  in  his  epistle  dedi- 
catory prefixed  to  his  Sermon,  preached  at  a  Public  Ordination  at  St.  Peter's,  Corn- 
hill,  March  15th,  1684-5 ;  to  which  Mr.  Lowth  replied  in  a  letter  to  him,  printed  in 
1687,  in  4to, 

t  Some  Discourses,  p.  48. 

+  Wood.  Fasti  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  138. 

§  Memoirs  of  the  Life  of  Mr.  John  Howe,  p.  75,  76.  Edit.  London,  1724,  in  8vo. 
Dr.  Calamy  says,  p.  78,  that  the  person  from  whom  he  had  the  story  committed  it  to 
writing  presently  after  he  had  received  it  from  Mr.  Howe  himself. 


xliv 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


he  can  work  a  miracle  ?  He  signified  to  him,  how  much  he  was 
grieved,  that,  in  a  sermon  against  popery,  he  should  plead  the 
popish  cause  against  all  the  reformers  ;  and  insisted  upon  it,  that 
we  had  incontestable  evidence  of  the  miracles  wrought  by  the  apo- 
stles, and  that  we  are  bound  to  believe  them,  and  take  religion  to 
be  established  by  them  without  any  farther  expectations.  Mr. 
Howe  carried  the  letter  himself,  and  delivered  it  into  the  Dean's 
own  hands  ;  and  he,  taking  a  general  and  cursory  view  of  it,  signi- 
fied his  willingness  to  talk  that  whole  matter  freely  over;  but  said 
they  could  not  be  together  where  they  were  without  interruption, 
and  therefore  moved  for  a  little  journey  into  the  country,  that  so 
they  might  have  freedom  of  discourse.  They  accordingly  agreed 
to  go  and  dine  that  day  with  the  Lady  Falconbridge,  and  Mr. 
Howe  read  over  the  letter  to  the  Dean,  and  enlarged  upon  the  con- 
tents of  it,  as  they  were  travelling  along  together  in  his  chariot. 
The  Dean  at  length  fell  to  weeping  freely,  and  said,  that  this  was 
the  most  unhappy  thing  that  had  a  long  time  befallen  him ;  and 
that  he  saw  what  he  had  offered  was  not  to  be  maintained.  But 
he  told  him,  that  it  was  not  his  turn  to  preach  as  on  that  day  ;  but 
the  person  who  was  to  have  done  that  office  falling  sick,  the  Dean 
was  sent  to  by  the  Lord  Chamberlain  to  supply  his  place.  He 
added,  that  he  had  but  little  notice,  and  so  considered  the  general 
fears  of  popery,  and  his  text  offering  itself,  he  thought  the  notion 
resulted  from  it.  "  And,"  said  he,  "  immediately  after  preaching, 
I  received  a  command  from  the  King  to  print  the  sermon,  and  then 
it  was  not  in  my  power  to  alter  it."  A  discourse  having  been 
drawn  up,  on  occasion  of  some  of  the  passages  excepted  to  in  the 
Dean's  sermon,  and  sent  to  him,  he  returned  it,  with  the  follow- 
ing letter,  to  Mr.  Baxter,  the  original  of  which  was  communicated 
to  me  by  a  learned  friend. 

u  rev.  sir,  June  2,  1680. 

"  I  received  your  letter  and  the  papers  inclosed,  which,  having 
perused,  I  do  now  return.  And  I  cannot  think  myself  to  be  really 
much  concerned  in  them,  because  they  grant  all  along,  that  the 
obligation  of  duty  ceaseth  where  there  is  no  probability  of  success ; 
and  this  principle  is  the  true  ground  and  bottom  of  my  assertion : 
so  that  unless  upon  the  same  principle  opposite  conclusions  can  be 
built,  there  must  be  some  mistake  in  the  reasoning  of  one  side. 
But,  whether  I  be  really  concerned  in  it  or  not,  I  have  great  reason 
to  think,  that  it  will  generally  be  believed  that  this  discourse  is  par- 
ticularly designed  against  me ;  and  that  the  same  malice,  which 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


xlv 


raised  so  groundless  a  clamour  against  my  late  sermon,  will  be 
very  glad  to  find  me  struck  at  in  the  odious  company  of  Spinosa 
and  Mr.  Hobbes,  as  of  the  same  atlieistical  principles  with  them  ; 
a  blow  which  I  least  expected,  and  for  that  reason  should  be  very 
much  surprised  to  receive  from  your  hand.  I  could  be  glad  to 
meet  with  that  kindness  and  candour  which  I  have  ever  used  to- 
wards others  ;  but,  if  that  may  not  be,  I  must  content  myself  with 
the  conscience  of  having  endeavoured  to  deserve  well  of  all  men, 
and  of  the  truth  itself. — I  am,  sir,  with  great  sincerity,  as  I  have 
always  been, 

"  Your  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

"  John  Tillotson." 

This  letter  seems  to  have  prevented  the  publication  of  the  dis- 
course mentioned  in  it ;  and  appears  to  have  been  the  chief,  if  not 
only,  foundation  of  a  story  related  by  Dr.  Hickes,*  in  his  own  man- 
ner, as  a  proof  that  the  Dean's  tenderness  for  the  dissenters  was 
much  greater  than  for  those  of  the  church  ;  for  that  he  made  them 
satisfaction  for  the  scandal,  which  his  sermon  on  Joshua  xxiv.  15. 
had  given  them,  but  would  never  do  any  thing  to  remove  the  of- 
fence given  to  his  brethren  of  the  church.  The  Doctor  tells  us, 
that  he  came  to  know  this  secret  by  an  honourable  person  of  his 
acquaintance,  who  happening  to  give  Dr.  Coxt  a  visit  presently 
after  Dr.  Stillingfleet  had  published  his  sermon,  intitled,  The  Mis- 
chief of  Separation,  preached  before  the  lord  mayor  at  St.  Paul's, 
on  the  2d  of  May,  1680,  found  Mr.  Baxter  at  his  house  vehe- 
mently inveighing  both  against  it  and  him.|  "  This,"  adds  Dr. 
Hickes,  "  gave  occasion  to  that  gentleman  to  ask  him,  why  he  was 
so  severe  upon  that  sermon  and  the  author  of  it,  and  yet  took  no 
notice  of  another,  which  was  newly  come  out,  and  which  he 
thought  had  given  the  men  of  his  party  as  much  offence  as  it  did 
to  those  of  the  church  of  England  ?  4  What  sermon  is  that  V  said 
Mr.  Baxter.  It  is  the  Dean  of  Canterbury's  court-sermon,'  saith 
he,  6  wherein  he  tells  you,  that  you  must  not  affront  the  estab- 
lished religion,  nor  openly  draw  men  off  from  the  profession  of  it.' 

*  Some  Discourses,  p.  49,  50. 

t  Dr.  Tbomas  Cox,  who,  after  having  taken  the  degree  of  doctor  of  physic  at  Pa- 
dua, in  December,  1641,  was  incorporated  in  it  at  Oxford,  on  the  15lh  October,  1646, 
and  afterwards  fellow  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  and  at  last  president  of  it,  but 
was  deprived  of  that  oflice  in  October,  1683,  for  being  whiggishly  inclined,  as  Mr. 
Wood  informs  us,  Fasti  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  54. 

t  Mr.  Baxter  published  An  Auswer  to  Dr.  Stillingfleet's  Charge  of  Separation,  at 
London,  in  1680,  in  4to. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR, 


6  Oh !'  replied  Mr.  Baxter,  6  he  gave  us  great  offence  indeed,  but 
he  hath  cried  peccavi,  and  made  us  satisfaction ;  but  your  other 
Dean  is  a  proud,  haughty  man,  that  will  retract  nothing/  The 
gentleman  having  finished  his  visit,  took  leave  of  the  Doctor  and 
Mr.  Baxter ;  and  the  same  day  called  upon  the  Dean  of  St.  Paul's, 
to  give  an  account  of  what  had  passed  betwixt  him  and  Mr.  Bax- 
ter; and,  rinding  the  Dean  of  Canterbury  with  him,  told  the  story 
to  them  both.  Upon  which  the  Dean  of  St.  Paul's  asked  the  Dean 
of  Canterbury,  '  And  did  you  in  good  earnest  cry  peccavi  to  Mrv 
Baxter  ?'  '  Pish/  replied  he,  '  will  you  mind  what  Mr.  Baxter 
saith  V  But  the  Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  not  being  satisfied  with  that 
evasive  answer,  pressed  him  to  a  categorical  answer  ;  upon  which 
his  countenance  altering,  he  went  away  in  disorder  without  any  re- 
ply." What  judgment  is  to  be  formed  of  the  truth  of  the  circum- 
stances of  this  story,  will  appear  from  comparing  it  with  the  Dean 
of  Canterbury's  own  letter  to  Mr.  Baxter  just  given,  by  which  it  is 
evident,  that  he  neither  cried  peccavi,  nor  had  any  reason,  upon 
being  questioned  about  the  affair,  to  go  away  in  disorder  without 
any  reply. 

It  was  probably  one  of  the  nonconformists,  and  no  inconsider- 
able writer  among  them,  who,  soon  after  the  publication  of  the 
Dean's  sermon,  printed  in  4to.  "  Short  Animadversions  upon  it,  so 
far  as  the  said  sermon  asserteth  the  power  of  the  magistrate  in 
things  of  religion  over  his  subjects,  the  same  with  that  of  a  master 
of  a  family  over  his  family.  The  unlawfulness  of  preaching  the 
true  religion  by  ministers,  where  a  false  religion  is  established  by 
law,  without  an  extraordinary  commission  confirmed  by  miracles  ; 
and  the  hypocrisy  of  such  ministers,  as  think  themselves  obliged  to 
preach  Christ  (though  contrary  to  a  law)  in  their  own  country,  be- 
cause they  do  not  go  and  do  the  same  in  Turkey  or  Spain.  All 
which  assertions  are  shortly  examined.  The  first  proved  to  be  un- 
certainly true ;  the  second  condemning  the  practice  of  all  the  first 
ministers  of  the  gospel  after  the  apostles,  and  of  those  that  have 
laboured  in  the  Reformation ;  the  third,  most  uncharitable  and 
groundless."  This  piece  is  written  with  the  utmost  civility  to  the 
Dean,whom  the  author  acquits  of  any  thought  of  encouraging  a  per- 
secution of  protestant  dissenters,  at  a  time  when  it  was  the  most  ad- 
visable project  for  the  popish  design  imaginable,  u  because,"  says 
the  animadverter,*  "  he  hath  appeared  to  the  world  such  an  emi- 
nent assertor  of  the  true  religion  against  popery ;  and  as  he  is  a 
man  of  judgment  and  learning  above  thousands  of  others,  so  he 

*  Page  1. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


xlvii 


Lath  always  appeared  a  man  of  temper  and  exceeding  great  mode- 
ration." He  declares*  himself,  likewise,  so  far  from  the  base  dis- 
ingenuity  of  those,  who  can  see  nothing  good  in  their  adversaries, 
that  though  he  thought  himself  obliged  to  enter  his  dissent  to  some 
things  said  by  the  Dean,  concerning  the  power  of  the  magistrate  in 
matters  of  religion,  and  the  force  of  some  human  laws  prohibiting 
men  to  preach  the  gospel :  yet  he  was  so  far  pleased  with  the  rest 
of  the  discourse,  that  "  I  do,"  says  he,  "  for  myself,  and  I  dare  ven- 
ture in  the  name  of  all  dissenters,  to  give  him  thanks  for  what  he 
hath  said  in  it  in  defence  of  the  protestant  religion  (that  hogen- 
mogen  thing,  as  a  late  dialogist,  who  would  be  thought  a  protestant, 
is  pleased  to  call  it),  and  to  aver,  that  if  there  were  no  more  said 
by  any  in  the  world  to  loath  people  of  that  religion,  and  make  it 
an  abhorrence  to  all  good  princes  and  all  good  men,  than  he  hath 
said  in  thirteen  or  fourteen  lines,  nor  any  more  said  than  he  hath 
said,  to  baffle  their  popish  arguments  from  universality  and  anti- 
quity, yet  there  needed  no  more;  for  all  the  papists  on  earth  can 
never  either  wipe  off  the  first,  or  answer  the  latter."  The  animad- 
verter  then  remarks, f  that  all  that  he  had  to  enter  his  dissent  to, 
Jies  in  five  pages  of  the  Dean's  sermon ;  nor  should  he  have 
done  that,  if  he  had  not  judged  that  by  some  assertions  in  them 
the  magistrate  is  warranted,  if  not  in  the  slaying,  yet  in  the 
banishment,  or  severe  punishing,  of  his  subjects  dissenting, 
not  in  the  essentials  of  religion,  but  only  in  the  circumstantials  ; 
yet  such,  as  in  the  doing,  or  not  doing  of  them  aright,  the 
soul  may  become  guilty  before  God  :  and  also  that,  by  those  asser- 
tions, whosoever  succeeded  the  apostles  in  the  plantation  of  the 
gospel,  in  countries  where  a  false  religion  was  before  established  by 
a  law  ;  and  all  those  glorious  martyrs,  who  had  suffered  for  pub- 
lishing the  gospel  in  Englaud,  while  popery  was  here  established  by 
law,  or  in  other  countries  ;  "  and  so,"  continues  he,  "  all  the  first 
reformers  are  most  inconsiderately  condemned,  as  doing  that  they 
had  no  right,  no  authority  to  do  ;  and  all  those  divines  condemned 
for  hypocrites,  who  take  themselves  bound,  in  their  native  country 
and  to  their  neighbourhood,  under  a  necessity  to  preach  the  gospel, 
and  cannot  think  that  they  have  an  equal  obligation  upon  them  to 
traverse  the  world,  and  to  make  the  gospel  abound,  from  London 
to  Constantinople,  Rome,  or  Madrid."  He  assents  to  the  main 
proposition  of  the  Dean,  that  "  to  countenance  and  support  the 
true  religion,  and  to  take  care  that  the  people  be  instructed  in 
*  Page  t,  3.  t  Page  4,  5. 


xlviii  LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

it,  and  that  none  be  permitted  to  debauch  and  seduce  men  from  it, 
properly  belongs  to  the  civil  magistrate  but  then  proceeds  to  his 
exceptions  against  some  of  the  subsequent  passages  in  the  sermon. 
And  the  Dean  himself  thought  proper  to  review  it,  and  to  publish 
a  new  edition  of  it  the  same  year,  though  without  taking  notice  in 
the  title-page  that  it  was  a  second  edition;  in  which  he  made  an 
alteration  or  two  in  the  passages  excepted  to  ;  particularly  in  that, 
where  in  the  former  edition  he  spake  of  religion's  being  *  the 
strongest  band  of  human  society/'  and  u  so  necessary  to  the  wel- 
fare and  happiness  of  mankind,"  as  he  u  could  not  have  been  more," 
&c.  he  changed  the  word  he  into  it ;  and  again,  in  the  third  suc- 
ceeding paragraph,  after  the  word  "  permission  "  he  added  (or  con- 
nivance) u  of  the  magistrate."  These  alterations  were  preserved  in 
all  the  subsequent  editions ;  and,  in  the  first,  in  8vo.  in  the  third 
volume  of  his  Sermons  in  1686,  Sermon  ix.  he  made  an  addition 
of  near  a  page,  after  the  words  "  permission  or  connivance  of  the 
magistrate,"  beginning  thus — "  not  but  that  every  man  hath  a  right," 
&c.  and  ending  with  the  word  "  sufferings." 

The  Animadversions  abovementioned  came  to  his  hands  while 
he  was  in  residence  at  Canterbury,  in  July,  1680;  but  they  did 
not  "  seem  to  him  very  considerable/'  as  he  wrote  on  the  27th  of 
that  month  to  his  friend  Robert  Nelson,  Esq.  "  However,"  added 
he,  "  I  am  sorry  that  any  thing  of  mine  should  occasion  so  much 
talk  and  noise."  This  letter  is  the  earliest  in  date  of  the  collec- 
tion now  before  me,*  written  by  the  Dean  to  that  gentleman, 
whose  friendship  for  the  former,  notwithstanding  the  difference  of 
their  political  sentiments  after  the  Revolution,  is  equally  honour- 
able to  them  both.  This  letter  is  an  answer  to  one  from  Mr.  Nel- 
son, containing  his  acknowledgments  for  the  civilities  shewn  him 
during  his  stay  with  the  Dean,  whom  he  had  lately  visited  at  Can- 
terbury ;  and  shews  how  great  share  that  gentleman  then  had  in  the 
good  opinion  of  so  able  a  judge  of  men.  Mr.  Nelson  was  at  that 
time  but  four-and-twenty  years  of  age,  being  born  in  London  on 
the  22d  of  June,  1656.  He  was  son  of  Mr.  John  Nelson,  a  consi- 
derable Turkey  merchant  of  that  city,  by  Deliciae,  his  wife,  sister 
of  Sir  Gabriel  Roberts,  who  was  likewise  a  Turkey  merchant,  and 
a  particular  friend  of  Dr.  Tillotson.  His  father  dying  when  he  was 
but  two  years  old,  he  was  committed  to  the  care  of  his  mother  and 
her  brother  Sir  Gabriel,  who  was  appointed  his  guardian,  and  by 

*  Communicated  to  me  by  the  late  Rev.  Obadiah  Hughes,  D.  D.  who  married  th« 
daughter  of  Sir  Gabriel  Roberts,  uncle  to  Mr.  Nelson. 


LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  xlix 

whom  he  was  extremely  beloved,  not  only  on  account  of  his  near 
relation,  but  also  of  his  person  and  temper,  and  the  strength  and 
vivacity  of  his  understanding  even  in  his  earliest  years.  His  first 
education  was  at  St  Paul's  school,  in  London;  but  the  principal 
part  of  it  was  formed  uuder  a  private  tutor  in  his  mother's  house,* 
and  likewise  uo  less  a  man  than  Dr.  George  Bull,  afterwards  Bishop 
of  St.  David's,  and  then  rector  of  St.  Mary  Siddington,  with  the 
vicarage  of  St.  Peter  annexed  to  it,  near  Cirencester,  in  the  county 
of  Gioucester,t  to  whose  memory  Mr.  Nelson  returned  an  ample 
tribute  of  gratitude  and  regard,  in  the  elaborate  and  instructive 
Life,;  which  he  published  of  that  great  divine,  his  application  to 
which  is  thought  to  have  heightened  the  disorder,  uuder  which  he 
long  laboured,  an  asthma  and  dropsy  in  the  breast,  which  proved 
fatal  to  him  at  the  age  of  fifty-nine,  on  the  lGth  of  Januarv,  1714, 
at  Kensington,  in  the  house  of  his  cousin,  Mrs.  Wolf,  daughter  of 
Sir  Gabriel  Roberts,  and  then  a  widow.  His  body  was  interred  in 
the  new  burying-grouud  in  Lamb's  Conduit-fields,  where  a  monu- 
ment is  erected  to  him,  with  an  epitaph  in  Latin,  written  bv  the 
elegant  pen  of  Dr.  Smalridge,  bishop  of  Bristol ;  and  his  funeral 
sermon  was  preached  in  the  chapel  of  Ormond-street,  ou  the  6th  of 
February  following,  and  soon  after  published,  by  Dr.  John  Mar- 
shal, L.L.D.  in  which  his  character  for  learning,  piety,  charitv, 
and  humanity,  is  fully  represented.  He  had  adhered  to  the  com- 
munion of  the  deprived  bishops  till  the  death  of  Dr.  Llovd,  bishop 
of  Norwich,  on  the  1st  of  Januarv,  17^,  w  hich  terminating,  in  his 
and  Mr.  Dodwell's  opiuion,  what  they  had  before  thought  a  schism, 
he  joined  in  communion  with  the  bishops  who  had  taJken  the  oaths. 
His  conduct  in  that  respect  was  highly  disapproved  of  by  Dr. 
Hickes,  with  whom,  as  well  as  othtrs  of  the  most  eminent  nonju- 
rors, he  had  cultivated  the  strictest  intimacy;  which  will  account 
for  his  profound  silence  with  respect  to  his  old  friend  Archbishop 
Tillotson  in  all  his  writings  ;  Dr.  Hickes  being  now  his  favourite 
writer,  whom  he  represented  §  tc  as  the  most  considerable  reviver 
of  primitive  theology"  in  that  age,  and  one  who  had  "  created  such 
a  regard  to  antiquity,"  as  would  preserve  the  age  from  the  "  infec- 
tion of  latitudinarian  principles." 

*  Life  of  Mr.  John  Kettlewell,  p.  433,  434. 

t  Life  of  Dean  Colet,  by  Dr.  Samuel  Knight,  p.  420,  421 ;  and  account  of  Mr.  Nel- 
son, prefixed  to  the  19th  edit,  of  his  Companion  for  tie  Festivals  and  Feasts  of  the 
Church  of  England. 

♦  Life  of  Bishop  Bull,  bj  Mr.  Nelson,  p.  2.  2d  edit. 
$  Life  of  BUhop  Bull,  p.  514,  515. 

VOL.  I.  H 


1 


*   LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


The  death  of  John  Wilmot,  Earl  of  Rochester,  at  Woodstock 
Park,  in  Oxfordshire,  on  the  6th  of  July,  1680,  preceded  by  a  re- 
pentance equally  remarkable  with  the  unexampled  profligacy  of  his 
conduct  and  principles,  giving  occasion  to  a  letter  of  Mr.  Nelson 
a  few  days  after,  the  Dean  begins  his  answer  to  it  from  Canterbury 
on  the  2d  of  August,  in  these  words  :  4*  Could  I  have  found  any 
thing  in  myself  to  have  justified  your  kind  opinion  of  me,  I  might 
have  taken  the  opportunity  to  have  let  a  copy  of  your  letter  slip 
abroad,  under  pretence  of  publishing  my  Lord  of  Rochester's  re- 
pentance. I  am  sorry,  that  an  example,  which  might  have  been  of 
so  much  use  and  advantage  to  the  world,  is  so  soon  taken  from  us. 
But  God  had  pity  on  him,  and  would  not  venture  him  again  in  such 
circumstances  of  temptation,  as  were  pehaps  too  hard  for  human 
frailty."  The  case  of  his  Lordship  made  as  deep  an  impression  upon 
the  Dean,  as  such  an  uncommon  event  might  be  expected  to  do 
upon  a  mind  turned  and  habituated  so  much  to  reflection  upon 
every  incident  of  importance  ;  and  he  entered  into  his  common- 
place book  in  short  hand  the  following  thoughts  upon  that  occasion : 

"Oct.  1,  1680  MY  LORD  OF  ROCHESTER, 

"  The  omnipotency  of  God's  grace  can  easily  change  any  man, 
by  letting  in  light  into  his  mind,  and  pouring  in  strong  convictions 
into  his  conscience.  The  greatest  and  most  obstinate  minds,  he 
that  made  them,  how  easily  can  he  turn  them,  even  the  hearts  of 
kings,  as  the  rivers  of  water,  which  follow  the  channel  that  is  made 
for  them  ! 

"  An  example  encouraging  enough  to  keep  any  man  from  despair, 
but  not  strong  enough  to  found  an  absolute  predestination  of  all 
upon. 

"  If  this  great  general  and  leader  was  so  easily  conquered,  and 
yielded  up  himself  a  willing  captive  to  the  grace  of  God  *  * 

"  Bad  men  are  infidels  se  defendendo.  When  the  affection  to  our 
lusts  is  gone,  the  objections  against  religion  vanish  of  themselves, 

"  Choose  you  and  *  * 

tC  The  greatest  instance  any  age  hath  afforded  :  not  for  his  own 
sake,  as  St.  Paul  was  not,  who  yet  was  no  enemy  to  God  and  re- 
ligion, but  by  mistake.  I  cannot  think,  but  that  it  was  intended 
for  some  greater  good  to  others. 

"  If  reputation,  or  pleasure,  or  safety,  or  virtue,  or  even  happi- 
ness itself  have  any  religion  hath  ail  these  in  it. 

"  Atheism  and  infidelity  do  not  bind  up  the  senses  of  men  strongly 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR.. 


ii 


enough,  but  they  may  be  awakened  by  the  apprehension  of  death, 
or  some  great  calamity  coming  upon  them.  A  false  religion,  if  a 
man  be  sincere  in  it,  will  bear  up  a  man's  spirits  against  torments 
and  death,  because  every  man's  conscience  is  a  kind  of  god  to 
him ;  and  the  strongest  opiates  in  the  world  are  enthusiasm  and 
popery.  These  may  lock  up  men's  senses  beyond  the  power  of 
truth  to  awaken  them  ;  as  we  see  in  the  murderers  of  our  late 
sovereign,  and  in  our  present  Romish  conspirators." 

Some  of  these  reflections  were  afterwards  introduced  by  the 
Dean  into  his  sermon  on  Jerem.  xiii.  23.  "  Of  the  Difficulty  of  re* 
forming  vicious  Habits,"  in  the  following  passage  of  which  he 
evidently  alludes  to  the  recovery  of  Lord  Rochester  from  his 
enormous  course  of  vice.  "  Even  in  this  perverse  and  degenerate 
age,  in  which  we  live,  God  hath  not  been  wanting  to  give  some 
miraculous  instances  *  of  his  grace  and  mercy  to  sinners,  and  these 
perhaps  equal  to  any  of  those  we  meet  with  in  Scripture,  of 
Manasses,  or  Mary  Magdalene,  or  the  penitent  thief,  both  for  the 
greatness  of  the  offenders,  and  the  miracle  of  their  change,  to  the 
end  that  none  may  despair,  and  for  want  of  the  encouragement  of 
an  example  equal  to  their  own  case,  be  disheartened  from  so  noble 
an  enterprise.  I  am  loth  to  put  you  in  mind  how  bad  some  have 
been,  who  yet  have  been  {  snatched  as  firebrands  out  of  the  fire,' 
and  that  in  so  strange  a  manner,  that  it  would  even  amaze  a  man 
to  think  of  the  wonder  of  their  recovery.  Thosc\  who  have  sunk 
themselves  into  the  very  depth  of  infidelity  and  wickedness,  have 
by  a  mighty  hand,  and  outstretched  arm  of  God,  been  plucked 
out  of  this  horrible  pit.  And  will  we  still  stand  it  out  with  God, 
when  such  great  leaders  have  given  up  the  cause,  and  have  sur- 
rendered and  yielded  up  themselves  willing  captives  to  the  grace 
of  God  ?  that  omnipotent  grace  of  God,  which  can  easily  subdue 

•  Beside  the  case  of  the  Earl  of  Rochester,  there  was  another  instance  of  a  noble- 
maa  and  a  contemner  of  religion,  James  Lev,  earl  of  Marlborough,  bronght  to  a 
different  sense  of  things  upon  real  conviction,  eTen  in  fall  health,  some  time  before  he 
was  killed  in  the  sea-fight,  at  Southold  Bay,  under  the  Dake  of  York  against  the 
Dutch,  on  the  3d  of  June,  1665.  He  wrote  several  letters  to  his  friends,  whom  he 
was  conscious  of  ha>ing  injured  by  his  ill  example  and  impiety,  urging  them  to  return 
to  virtue  and  religion.  Mr.  Prince,  in  his  Worthies  of  Devonshire,  and  Bishop  Ken- 
net,  in  bis  Complete  History  of  England,  vol.  iii.  p.  276,  2d  edit,  have  published  one 
of  these  letters,  written  to  Sir  Hugh  Pollard,  comptroller  of  the  household :  and  I  have 
the  original  of  another  in  my  possession,  dated  23d  of  May,  1665,  and  directed  to 
William  Glascock,  Esq. 


Hi 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOK. 


the  stoutest  heart  of  man,  by  letting  in  so  strong  a  light  upon  our 
minds,  and  pouring  such  terrible  convictions  into  our  consciences, 
that  we  can  find  no  ease  but  in  turning  to  God/'  He  then  proceeds 
to  obviate  the  objections  of  those,  who  either  denied,  that  there 
had  been  such  examples,  or  imputed  the  behaviour  of  such  persons 
at  their  death,  either  to  a  disturbed  imagination,  or  to  the  faint 
and  low  spirits  of  men  under  great  bodily  weakness,  or  to  their 
natural  cowardice  and  fear,  or  to  I  know  not  what  foolish  and 
fantastical  design  of  completing  and  finishing  a  wicked  life  with 
an  hypocritical  death.  All  these  groundless  objections  were  most 
probably  urged  by  the  libertines  of  that  age,  in  opposition  to  the 
conclusions  naturally  arising  against  their  cause,  from  the  repent- 
ance of  so  eminent  a  member  and  professor  of  their  body ;  and 
they  even  subsist  in  some  measure  to  this  day,  and  are  too  often 
made  use  of  to  weaken  the  credit  and  effect  of  Dr.  Burnet's  book 
upon  that  subject,  written  by  the  Earl's  own  direction  on  his  death- 
bed.* The  Dean  appears  to  have  revised  and  improved  that  book, 
since  it  concludes  t  almost  in  the  exact  words  of  his  letter  to 
Mr.  Nelson  of  the  2d  of  August,  that  "  God  took  pity  on  the 
Earl,  and  seeing  the  sincerity  of  his  repentance,  would  try  and 
venture  him  no  more  in  circumstances  of  temptation,  perhaps  too 
hard  for  human  frailty." 

The  rectory  of  Barnes,  in  Surry,  being  vacant  in  August,  1G80, 
and  in  the  gift  of  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  St.  Paul's,  Mr.  Nelson 
wrote  to  the  Dean  of  Canterbury  in  favour  of  Mr.  Richard  Kidder. 
This  divine,  sufficiently  known  to  the  world  by  his  writings, 
especially  his  Demonstration  of  the  Messiah,  was  born  at  Bright- 
helmstone,  in  Sussex,^  and  educated  at  Emanuel  College,  in 
Cambridge,  of  which  he  was  chosen  fellow  in  1655,  having  taken 
the  degree  of  bachelor  of  arts,  in  165*2,  and  that  of  master,  in  1656, 
in  which  he  was  incorporated  in  the  University  of  Oxford,  on  the 
13th  of  July,  1653. §  His  first  preferment  was  the  vicarage  of 
Stanground,  in  the  county  of  Huntingdon,  to  which  he  was  pre- 
sented by  his  college,  and  deprived  of  it,  in  1662,  for  not  comply- 
ing with  the  act  of  Uniformity.  ||  But  he  conformed  some  time 
after,  and  in  October,  1664,  was  presented  by  Arthur,  Earl  of 

*  Printed  at  London,  1681,  in  8vo.    The  6th  edition  was  published  in  1724. 
t  P.  117.  6th  edit. 

\  Willis's  Survey  of  the  Cathedrals  of  Lincoln,  Ely,  kc.  p.  513. 
$  Wood.  Fasti  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  123. 

H  Kennet'a  Register  and  Chronicle,  p.  853.  and  Calaray's  Account,  p.  371. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


liii 


Essex,  to  the  rectory  of  Raine-parva,  in  Essex  ;*  and,  on  the 
24th  of  October,  1674,  instituted  to  that  of  St.  Martin-Outwich, 
in  London, f  to  which  he  had  been  elected  by  the  company  of 
merchant  tailors.  He  was  installed  prebendary  of  Norwich  on 
the  16th  of  September,  1681,  upon  the  death  of  Dr.  Hezekiah 
Burton.  Soon  after  the  Revolution,  in  1689,  he  was  made  dean  of 
Peterborough  in  the  room  of  Dr.  Simon  Patrick,  advanced  to  the 
see  of  Chichester;  and,  on  the  30th  of  August,  1691,  was  conse- 
crated to  the  bishopric  of  Bath  and  Wells,  upon  the  deprivation 
of  Dr.  Thomas  Kenn,  for  not  taking  the  oaths  to  their  majesties, 
and  the  refusal  of  Dr.  William  Beveridge  to  succeed  in  the  place 
of  the  deprived  bishop.  He  was  killed  with  his  "lady  in  his  palace 
at  Wells,  by  the  fall  of  a  stack  of  chimnies,  during  the  high  wind 
on  the  26th  of  November,  1703.  The  Dean  of  Canterbury's  in- 
timate friendship  with,  and  pre-engagement  to,  Dr.  Hezekiah  Bur- 
ton, prevented  his  compliance  with  Mr.  Nelson's  recommendation 
of  Mr.  Kidder.  *  1  know  not,"  says  he  in  his  letter  to  that  gentle- 
man from  Canterbury,  Aug.  15,  1680,  "  how  Mr.  Griffith  came 
to  understand  me  so  well ;  but  he  made  a  very  right  judgment, 
when  he  pitched  upon  you,  as  of  all  men  most  likely  to  command 
me  in  any  thing  you  should  desire.  And  no  man  should  have  been 
more  glad  to  have  gratified  so  worthy  a  person,  as  Mr.  Kidder. 
But  the  truth  is,  I  was  pre-engaged  for  Dr.  Burton,  and  have  writ- 
ten to  Dr.  Stillingfleet,  our  dean,  in  his  behalf,  though  I  fear  without 
success,  because  I  understand,  that  my  Lord  of  Danby  (from 
whom  I  received  a  letter  last  night)  hath  engaged  both  the  Dean 
and  Dr.  Turner  for  Dr.  Hawkins  of  the  Tower,  Dr.  Layfield's  J 
son-in-law.  I  had  a  letter  likewise  from  Sir  Gabriel  Roberts  for 
Mr.  Kidder,  whom  I  should  be  glad  to  have  been  able  to  oblige. 
But  I  wrote  to  him,  that  I  was  pre-engaged."  However,  Dr.  Haw- 
kins, whose  interest  with  the  Earl  of  Danby  might  arise  from  his 
Lordship's  being  then  prisoner  in  the  Tower,  of  which  the  Doctor 
was  chaplain,  failed  of  his  application  for  the  living,  which  was  given 
to  Dr.  Burton  ;  but  his  office  in  the  Tower  giving  him  afterwards 
great  opportunities  of  obliging  the  court,  especially  in  his  attend- 
ance of  Mr.  Edward  Fitzharris,  who  was  executed  on  the  1st  of  July, 
1681,  his  interest  became  so  considerable  with  King  James  II.  that 

*  Newcourt's  Repertorium,  vol.  ii.  p.  480. 
t  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  414. 

t  Vicar  of  All-hallows  Barring-,  and  archdeacon  of  Essev,  who  died  about  Janu- 
ary, 1680-1. 


Iiv 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


he  obtained  of  his  Majesty  the  deanery  of  Chichester,  upon  the 
death  of  Dr.  George  Stradling,  on  the  19th  of  April,  1688. 

In  this  letter  of  the  15th  of  August,  and  some  of  the  following 
ones,  the  Dean  of  Canterbury  mentions  Mr.  de  Viel  as  then  with 
him  ;  whom  he  patronized  on  account  of  his  learning  and  conver- 
sion to  the  protestant  religion.  This  gentleman,  whose  name 
was  Lewis  de  Compaigne  de  Viel,  had  published,  in  1679,  in  He- 
brew, with  a  Latin  version  by  himself,  Catechismus  Judseorum  in 
Disputatione  et  Dialogo  Magistri  et  Discipuli,  scriptus  a  R.  Abra- 
hamo  Jagel,  monteSicilis  oriundo,with  a  Dedication  to  Dr.Compton, 
Bishop  of  London;  and  thisbookwas  reprinted  at  Franeker,  in  1690, 
in  8vo.  He  gave  the  public  likewise  a  Latin  translation  of,  and 
notes  upon,  Rabbi  Moses  Maimonides's  book  De  Sacrificiis,  and 
his  tract  De  Consecratione,  et  de  ratione  intercalandi,  and  Abar- 
banel's  Exordium  sive  Procemium  in  Leviticum,  printed  at  London, 
in  1683,  in  4to.  He  had  published  also  at  Paris,  in  1678,  the 
eighth  book  of  Maimonides  De  Cultu  Divino,  with  a  Latin  version, 
just  before  he  left  France,  where  he  was  the  King's  interpreter  for 
the  Oriental  languages.  He  was  born  a  Jew,  but  afterwards  em- 
braced the  popish  religion,  which  he  at  last  renounced  for  the 
protestant,*  and  entered  into  the  communion  of  the  church  of 
England,  whither  he  retired  about  the  year  1679.  There  was  an- 
other learned  man  almost  of  the  same  name,  Charles  Marie  de  Viel, 
D.D.  of  the  university  of  Angers,  who  was  likewise  born  a  Jew  at 
Metz,  in  Lorraine  ;  but,  being  converted  to  Christianity,  while  he 
was  very  young,  became  a  canon-regular  of  St.  Augustin,  and  prior  of 
St.  Ambrose,  at  Melun  ;  which  preferments  he  quitted,  and  declared 
himself  a  protestant,  and  took  refuge  in  England,  +  where  he  preach- 
ed among  the  anabaptists  in  1685.  J  He  had  published,  while  he 
was  in  France,  commentaries  in  Latin,  upon  the  Gospels  of  St.  Mat- 
thew and  Mark,  the  Canticles,  and  the  Prophet  Joel ;  as  he  did 
one  in  the  same  language  in  England  upon  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
printed  at  London,  1684,  in  4to.  and  published  there  the  year  fol- 
lowing in  English. 

The  Dean  of  Canterbury  was  returned  from  thence  to  London, 
in  October,  1680,  whence  he  wrote  on  the  19th  of  that  month  to 
Mr.  Nelson,  then  at  Dryfield,  near  Cirencester,  in  Gloucestershire, 

*  Bartolaccii  Bibliotheca  Rabbinica,  torn.  iii.  n.  847.  fol.  843. 
t  Id.  ibid,  and  Bayle,  Nouvelle  de  la  Republique  de»  Lettres,  Decemb.  1684. 
art.  xi.  p.  518.  and  Sept.  1685.  art,  xi.  p.  1029, 
$  Id.  p.  1029, 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.  If 

in  answer  to  a  letter  received  from  that  gentleman  the  day  before, 
in  which  he  had  mentioned  a  report  spread  to  the  Dean's  disadvan- 
tage, with  regard  to  some  alterations,  which  had  been  made  in  his 
cathedral,  and  containing  probably  some  insinuations  of  his  disin- 
clination to  the  usual  ornaments  in  such  buildings.  "  And  now," 
replies  he,  "  it  is  time  to  be  sensible  of  the  kind  concernment  you 
are  pleased  to  express  for  me  in  your  letter.  Your  conjecture  is 
very  right.  We  only  took  down  the  sun  over  the  screen  behind  the 
communion  table,  which  was  done  with  so  little  noise,  that  several 
days  passed  before  it  was  taken  notice  of  to  be  removed  ;  and  no- 
thing done  besides,  not  so  much  as  the  table  stirred  out  of  its  place. 
I  have  often  heard  the  same,  which  you  write,  but  have  no  great 
reason  to  be  troubled,  when  I  consider  how  undeserved  a  share  of 
good  report  I  have  had  the  fortune  to  meet  withal."  In  this  letter 
he  takes  notice,  that  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  York  were  to  begin 
their  voyage  for  Scotland  the  next  day,  "  upon  a  sudden  resolution," 
adds  he,  "  of  the  council,  as  seems  to  us.  A  few  days  will  proba- 
bly make  much  more  news."  Their  royal  highnesses  accordingly 
left  Whitehall,  on  the  20th  of  October,  and  embarked  at  Woolwich, 
the  King  being  advised  by  his  council  to  part  with  the  Duke,  since 
it  would  be  impossible  to  support  him  during  the  session  of  the 
parliament,  which  met  the  day  following  in  a  temper  very  un- 
favourable to  his  royal  highness,  who  was  now  become  extremely 
obnoxious  to  the  nation  in  general,  and  had  been  just  before  pre- 
sented at  the  King's  Bench  bar,  in  Westminster  Hall,  as  a  popish  re- 
cusant, by  a  bill  in  form,  offered  by  the  Earls  of  Huntingdon  and 
Shaftesbury,  the  Lords  Grey  of  Werk,  Brandon-Gerad,  Russel, 
and  Cavendish,  and  several  considerable  gentlemen;  though,  by 
the  sudden  dismission  of  the  grand  jury,  the  matter  had  no  conse- 
queuce  in  the  forms  of  the  court.  And  the  Dean  himself  was  so 
deeply  affected  with  a  just  apprehension  of  the  danger  of  a  popish 
successor  to  the  civil  as  well  as  religious  liberties  of  his  country, 
that  he  could  not  but  wish  success  to  the  Exclusion  bill,  which  had 
been  stopped  in  the  preceding  session  of  parliament  in  May,  1679, 
by  his  Majesty's  prorogation,  and  was  now  resumed,  and  passed 
the  Commons  by  a  great  majority,  but  thrown  out  at  the  second 
reading  in  the  house  of  peers  by  sixty-three  against  thirty,  only 
three  of  eleven  bishops  then  present  giving  their  votes  for  it,  Dr. 
Compton,  bishop  of  London,  being  one  of  those  three.  The  Dean's 
zeal  for  it  iudeed  was  such,  that  he  employed  his  interest  with  Sa- 
ville,  viscount  (afterwards  marqnis)  of  Hallifax,  to  divert  hisLanWn'p 


Ivi 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


from  his  vehement  opposition  to  it  :*  and,  when  the  clergy  of  Lon- 
don agreed  upon  an  address  to  the  King,  upon  his  Majesty's  de- 
claring in  his  answer  of  the  4th  of  January,  163£,  to  the  address  of 
the  Commons,  that  he  could  not  consent  to  such  a  bill,  the  Dean 
refused  to  sign  that  address  of  his  brethren. +  He  takes  notice  of 
this  situation  of  public  affairs  in  a  letter  from  London  of  the  5th  of 
January,  168^,  to  Mr-  Nelson,  who  had  written  to  him  from  Paris, 
where  he  was  just  arrived.  "  His  Majesty,"  says  he,  u  and  his 
House  of  Commons,  still  differ  about  the  point  of  exclusion.  They 
will  give  any  thing  for  that,  and  his  Majesty  any  thing  but  that." 
But  these  disputes  were  soon  determined  by  a  dissolution  of  that 
parliament  on  the  18th  of  that  month,  and  of  the  succeeding  one, 
summoned  at  Oxford  on  the  14th  of  March  following,  after  a  ses- 
sion of  only  seven  days,  which  was  the  last  in  that  reign. 

In  this  letter  the  Dean  congratulates  Mr.  Nelson  upon  his  escape 
from  a  storm  at  sea,  in  which  three  merchant  ships  in  the  Downs 
were  cast  away,  and  his  safe  arrival  at  Paris,  fi  which,"  says  he, 
"  together  with  the  sight  of  the  great  King,  must  needs  make 
amends  for  all  the  difficulties  and  distresses  of  your  journey."  He 
observes,  likewise,  that  the  comet  had  appeared  in  London  very 
plain  for  several  nights,  with  a  stream  much  of  the  length  described 
by  Mr.  Nelson  :  and  he  adds  his  compliments  and  thanks  to  his 
learned  friend  and  companion,  Mr.  Edmund  Halley.  t(  1  have  not 
yet,''  says  he,  "  received  his  favour ;  but  shall  be  glad  to  see  any 
thing  of  his,  and  much  more,  to  be  able  to  understand  it."  What 
Mr.  Hallev  intended  to  write  to  the  Dean  was  probably  upon  the 
subject  of  that  comet,  which  that  great  astronomer  first  perceived 
in  the  midway  between  Calais  and  Paris,  in  company  with  Mr. 
Nelson,  with  whom  he  had  contracted  a  friendship  from  their  child- 
hood, as  himself  observes  in  his  Account  of  Mr.  Dodwell's  book 
De  Cyclis,  addressed  to  that  gentleman,  and  printed  in  1715,  at  the 
end  of  Mr.  Brokesby's  life  of  Mr.  Dodwell,  dedicated  likewise  to 
Mr.  Nelson.  This  comet,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  which  had 
ever  been  observed,  and  the  same  that  appeared  the  year  of  Julius 
Caesar's  death,  the  period  of  its  revolution  being  575  years,  af- 
forded Mr.  Halley  an  important  subject  of  inquiry,  and  produced 
his  Synopsis  Cometarum,  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  his  works. 
For  in  this  piece,  upon  the  foundation  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  prin- 
ciples, he  reduces  the  path  or  orbit  of  this  species  of  planets  to  a 
simple  parabola,  having  the  sun  for  one  focus,  in  common  with  the 

*  Burnet's  History  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  459.  t  Life,  p.  17. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


Ivii 


ellipses  described  by  the  motion  of  the  ordinary  planets ;  which 
greatly  facilitates  the  calculation  of  comets,  and  in  a  single  page 
has  comprised  the  result  of  almost  infinite  application,  exhibiting 
in  one  table  the  nodes,  perihelia,  distances,  and  course  of  twenty- 
four  comets,  the  most  considerable  and  most  accurately  described. 
He  was  now  famous  over  Europe,  though  he  was  but  four-and- 
twenty  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  his  journey  to  France,  whither 
he  went  to  visit  the  learned;  for  which  purpose  he  likewise  passed 
thence  into  Italy.  After  his  first  education  at  St.  Paul's  school, 
and  an  uncommon  progress,  not  only  in  the  Latin,  Greek,  and  He- 
brew languages,  but  also  in  geometry  and  astronomy,  he  was  ad- 
mitted in  1673,  at  seventeen,  into  Queen's  College,  Oxford  ;  and, 
having  at  nineteen  published  his  direct  and  geometrical  method  of 
rinding  the  aphelia  and  excentricity  of  planets,  his  merit  recom- 
mended him  to  King  Charles  II.  who  sent  him  to  St.  Helena,  in 
November,  1676,  to  make  a  catalogue  of  the  stars  of  the  southern 
hemisphere,  whence  he  returned  in  autumn,  1678,  and  was,  on 
the  3d  of  December  following,  created  master  of  arts,  having  been, 
on  the  30th  of  November,  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  Society ; 
and  in  1679  made  a  voyage  to  Dantzic,  to  converse  with  the  cele- 
brated Hevelius.  The  subsequent  history  of  this  excellent  astro- 
nomer, mathematician,  and  philosopher,  whose  various  pieces,  dis- 
persed in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society,  and  other  books, 
would,  if  collected  and  republished,  be  a  valuable  present  to  the 
public,  may  be  seen  in  the  eulogy  upon  him  by  Mons.  Mairan,  in 
the  Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris.  His  life, 
as  well  as  that  of  his  friend,  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  was  extended  to  an 
uncommon  age,  being  himself  an  instance  of  an  observation,  which 
I  have  often  heard  him  make,  that  a  studious  manner  of  life  gene- 
rally contributes  to  a  long  one,  by  keeping  a  man,  as  he  expressed 
it,  out  of  harm's  way. 

The  Dean  concludes  his  letter  to  Mr.  Nelson  in  terms,  which 
shewed  the  highest  regard  for  him.  "  If  I  were  able,"  says  he,  "  I 
need  not  to  advise  you  in  any  thing,  so  well  am  I  assured  of  your 
virtue  and  good  conduct.  I  pray  for  you  continually,  that  God 
would  preserve  you,  and  return  you  safe  and  the  same  to  us,  and 
give  you  all  the  advantages  you  expected,  and  will,  I  am  sure,  en- 
deavour to  make  by  your  travels.  I  never  knew  how  to  part  from 
you,  but  my  business  calls  me  off." 

His  next  letter  is  dated  from  London,  the  7th  of  March,  168?, 
in  which  he  thanks  Mr.  Nelson  for  his  two  letters,  and  his  account 

VOL.  I.  I 


Iviii 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


of  the  occurrences  in  France  ;  "  among  which,"  says  he,  M  nothing 
pleased  me  better  than  the  condescension  of  your  great  cardinal, 
in  honouring  your  St.  Bartholomew's  fair  with  so  secular  a  kind  of 
presence  and  demeanour."    With  regard  to  the  state  of  things  in 
England  at  that  time,  which  was  a  week  before  the  meeting  of  the 
parliament  at  Oxford,  he  observes — "  I  hope  our  affairs  are  not  in 
so  deplorable  a  condition  as  they  are  reported  at  Paris.    It  may 
yet  come  to  our  turn  to  talk  of  our  neighbours  with  as  much  pity, 
though  perhaps  with  less  pleasure.    Most  of  our  elections  for  the 
next  parliament  are  over,  almost  without  any  drinking  or  expense, 
which  is  great  news ;  and  generally  the  same  persons  are  chosen 
again."  He  then  takes  notice,  "  that  there  was  little  progress  made 
the  last  parliament  towards  a  reconciliation  of  dissenters.  Two 
bills  were  brought  into  the  House  of  Commons  to  that  purpose  ; 
the  one  called  a  Bill  of  Indulgence,  to  mitigate  the  severity  of  the 
laws  towards  those  who  could  not  come  into  the  national  consti- 
tution ;  the  other,  of  Union,  by  which  the  new  subscriptions  were 
to  be  taken  away,  and  the  ceremonies  left  indifferent.  I  never  saw 
the  bills,  but  this  was  the  substance  of  them  ;  which,  so  far  as  I 
can  learn,  pleased  neither  side.  The  bishops  thought  this  too  much, 
and  the  dissenters  too  little.    I  have  no  great  hopes  of  any  good 
issue  of  this  matter,  till  the  minds  of  men  become  more  calm."  The 
Bill  for  Uniting  the  King's  Protestant  Subjects,  referred  to  in  this 
letter,  and  read  for  the  first  time  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  the 
21st  of  December,  1680,  meeting  with  a  strong  opposition  there, 
another  was  brought  in  for  exempting  the  protestant  dissenters  from 
the  penalties  imposed  on  the  papists,  by  the  act  of  the  35th  of 
Queen  Elizabeth,  and  this  passed  both  houses :  but,  on  the  day  of 
the  prorogation  of  the  parliament,  when  it  ought  to  have  been  of- 
fered to  the  King,  for  his  assent,  it  was  withdrawn  by  the  clerk  of 
the  crown,  by  his  Majesty's  particular  orders;*  an  offence  which 
was  moved  to  be  inquired  into  in  the  subsequent  parliament  at  Ox- 
ford, the  sudden  dissolution  of  which  prevented  that  and  all  other 
inquiries. 

In  this  letter  the  Dean  inclosed  for  Mr.  Halley  some  observa- 
tions of  Mr.  Hill,  of  Canterbury,  "  not  a  learned,  but  a  very  indus- 
trious man,"  upon  the  late  comet,  which  he  told  the  Dean  within 
a  fortnight  past,  appeared  then,  but  was  very  little.  The  post- 
script mentions  Dr.  Zachary  Cradock's  being  elected  provost  of 
Eton  College,  as  he  was  by  the  fellows  upon  the  death  of  Dr.  Ab 

*  Burnet,  vol.  i.  p.  495. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


lix 


Jestree,  in  January  preceding,  in  opposition  to  Mr.  Waller,  the  poet, 
whose  pretensions  were  set  aside  by  a  determination  of  the  privy- 
council  on  the  22(1  of  February,  that  no  person  could  be  provost, 
who  was  not  capable  of  taking  the  care  of  souls.  This  eminent  di- 
vine, who  was  admired  in  his  own  time  for  his  uncommon  talents 
of  discoursing  from  the  pulpit  with  the  greatest  copiousness  and 
vivacity,  without  notes  or  preparation,  is  scarce  known  to  the  pre- 
sent age,  except  by  the  high  character  given  of  him  by  his  contem- 
poraries, and  two  of  his  sermons,  one  on  Eccles.  ix.  2,  published 
by  command  of  King  Charles  II.  before  whom  it  was  preached, 
February  10,  167  J  ;  and  another  on  1  Tim.  i.  5,  intitled,  The  great 
End  and  Design  of  Christianity,  printed  several  years  after  his  death, 
from  a  copy  said  to  be  given  by  him  to  one  of  his  friends.  He  had 
been  educated  in  Queen's  College,  Cambridge,  where  he  gained  so 
universal  an  esteem  by  his  learning  and  piety,  that  Dr.  Cud  worth 
wrote,  on  the  27th  of  October,  1656,  in  the  strongest  terms  in  his 
favour  to  Secretary  Thurlow,  to  recommend  him  to  the  Protector, 
that  he  might  be  appointed  chaplain  to  the  English  factory  at 
Lisbon.*  Some  years  after  the  Restoration,  lie  was  made  canon- 
residentiary  of  Chichester,  being  installed  on  the  11th  of  February, 
1669-70,  and  elected  fellow  of  Eton  College,  on  the  2d  of  Decem- 
ber, 1672 ;  and,  having  enjoyed  the  provostship  about  fourteen 
years,  died  on  the  16th  of  October,  1695,  in  the  sixty-second  year 
Df  his  age.f 

Mr.  Nelson  was  still  at  Paris  in  the  latter  end  of  April,  1681, 
whence  he  wrote  two  letters  to  the  Dean,  acquainting  him  with  a 
proposal  which  had  been  made  to  him,  for  the  purchase  of  a  place 
at  court.  The  offer  came  from  Mr.  Henry  Savilie,  brother  of  George, 
Viscount  Halifax,  and  envoy-extraordinary  from  the  King  to  the 
court  of  France,  and  sworn  vice-chamberlain  of  the  King's  house- 
hold September,  1680.  He  was  now  in  England,  whence  he  had  pro- 
bably wrote  to  Mr.  Nelson  upon  that  affair,  which  was  by  no  means 
an  agreeable  one  to  his  uncle,  Sir  Gabriel  Roberts,  or  to  the  Dean, 
for  reasons  which  will  appear  in  his  answer  from  London,  on  the 
28th  of  April,  1681.  "  But  now,"  says  he,  u  to  the  main  busi- 
ness, to  which  I  find  your  uncle  so  absolutely  averse,  that  he  did 
not  think  it  fit  your  mother  should  be  acquainted  with  it.  It  is 
well  if  you  escape  chiding  from  him.  As  for  myself,  than  whom 
no  person  in  the  world  can  wish  you  better,  since  you  are  pleased 

*  Thurlow's  Slate  Papers,  vol.  v.  p.  522,  523. 

t  Le  Neve  Monuraenta  Anglicana,  from  1680  to  1699,  p.  166. 


ix 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


to  repose  that  kind  confidence  in  me,  as  to  ask  my  advice,  I  will 
faithfully  give  it.  In  the  present  uncertainty  of  things,  I  would  not 
have  you  venture  so  considerable  a  sum  as  those  places  go  at ;  and, 
unless  somebody  grow  better,  which  I  hope  God  will  grant,  the 
temptations,  to  which  a  man  must  be  exposed  in  that  station,  are 
like  to  be  so  violent,  as  would  set  the  firmest  virtue  hard,  even  my 
friend's,  of  whom  I  have  so  good  an  opinion.  Your  mother  hath 
but  just  mastered  the  trouble  of  your  absence,  which,  I  understand 
by  your  aunt  Hanger,  was  for  a  great  while  very  grievous  to  her ; 
and  therefore  you  will,  I  am  sure,  be  very  tender  of  giving  any  new 
occasion.  I  will  wait  upon  Mr.  Saville,  and  make  the  best  acknow- 
ledgments I  can  of  his  great  civilities  and  favours  to  you,  and  let 
him  know  how  your  friends  stand  affected  in  this  matter,  to  whose 
judgment  and  determination  you  have  referred  it." 

He  expresses  in  this  letter  his  satisfaction  in  what  Mr.  Nelson 
had  written  to  him  concerning  Mons.  Claude,  minister  of  the 
French  protestant  church  atCharenton,  near  Paris,  and  one  of  the 
ablest  managers  of  the  controversy  against  that  of  Rome,  w  hich  that 
age  produced.  "  I  am  very  glad,"  saith  the  Dean,  "  Mons.  Claude 
hath  resolved,  as  I  think,  the  wiser  way,  though  I  hear  he  hath 
written  to  Mr.  Baxter  a  very  kind  and  honest  letter,  in  which  he 
wishes  that  the  bishops  would  shew  them*  more  favour ;  but  withal 
tells  him,  that  he  cannot  see  how  they  can  be  acquitted  of  schism; 
which  letter,  I  believe,  they  will  hardly  print."  This  seems  to  re- 
fer to  Mons.  Claude's  having  been  consulted  about  that  time, 
among  other  eminent  French  divines,  by  both  parties,  on  the  dis- 
putes between  the  church  of  England  and  the  nonconformists,  and 
particularly  by  the  Bishop  of  London,  to  whom  he  wrote  an  an- 
swer, dated  at  Paris,  November  29th,  1680,  N.S.;  which,  being 
printed  in  the  appendix  to  Dr.  Stillingfleet's  Unreasonableness  of 
Separation,!  at  London,  1081,  contrary  to  his  design  or  expecta- 
tion of  seeing  it  made  public,  he  wrote  another  letter  {  to  a  lady 
from  Paris,  April  16th,  1681,  in  which  he  farther  explained  his  sen- 
timents upon  the  subject  of  his  former  letter,  condemning  the  ex- 
cesses of  both  sides,  and  wishing  they  would  submit  to  a  just  and 
reasonable  accommodation. 

The  next  letter  of  the  Dean  to  Mr.  Nelson,  then  at  Saumur,  was 
written  from  London,  on  the  2d  of  June,  1681,  and  relates  to  the 
main  subject  of  his  former,  the  offer  to  that  gentleman  of  a  place 

*  The  dissenters.  t  Page  427. 

}  Oeuvres  Postliumes  de  Mons.  Claude,  toni.  v.  p.  2C4,  &c. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR, 


hi 


at  court.  "  I  wish,"  says  he,  i(  your  good  opinion  of  my  judgment 
were  as  well  grounded  as  that  of  my  sincere  friendship  and  affection 
for  you  most  certainly  is.  Your  mother  is  perfectly  well  satisfied, 
as  I  told  her  she  had  great  reason,  since  you  referred  yourself  to 
the  advice  and  judgment  of  your  friends ;  by  which  I  assured  her 
you  would  most  certainly  govern  your  resolution.  I  shall  be  glad 
to  see  England  so  happy,  as  that  the  court  may  be  a  fit  place  for 
you  to  live  in.  I  waited  on  the  ambassador,  and  made  the  best 
acknowledgments  to  him  I  could  of  his  great  favours  and  civilities 
to  you,  and  particularly  in  that  kind  offer  he  had  made  you.  But 
I  told  him,  that  your  friends  had  no  mind  to  it,  especially  as  things 
now  are ;  and  I  knew  you  would  do  nothing  against  their  inclina- 
tion: with  which  he  was  well  satisfied,  declaring  the  very  great 
kindness  and  esteem  he  had  for  you,  and  for  your  friend,  Mr.  Hal- 
ley  ;  in  which  I  did  not  contradict  him." 

The  siucere  concern  which  the  Dean  always  felt  for  his  friends, 
made  him  neglect  no  opportunities  of  suggesting  to  them  proper 
advice,  when  their  virtue,  reputation,  or  interest,  required  such  an 
interposition :  and  this  office  he  knew  how  to  discharge  with  all  the 
skill  and  delicacy  necessary  to  prevent  any  just  offence.  Of  this 
kind  is  the  following  letter,  entered  in  short-hand  in  his  common 
place  book,  written  to  Sir  Thomas  Colepepper,  bart.  of  Kent,  and 
dated  July  12th, 1681. 

"  HONOURED  SIR, 

"  I  was  heartily  troubled  I  was  from  home  when  you  did  me  the 
honour  of  a  visit  in  London :  and  the  more,  because  I  lost  the  op- 
portunity I  had  long  wished  for,  of  having  some  discourse  with  you 
in  relation  to  yourself ;  being  so  perfectly  persuaded  of  your  good 
disposition,  as  to  believe  you  would  not  take  it  amiss,  that  I,  who 
have  known  you  from  your  tender  years,  and  being  always  a  great 
well-wisher  to  your  family,  should  be  concerned  for  your  welfare : 
and,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  waited  upon  you  at  your  lodgings  with 
a  design  to  obtain  your  leave,  humbly  to  offer  some  advice  to  you, 
which  I  then  forbore  to  do,  because  I  could  not  in  civility  detain 
you  so  long  undrest.  What  I  could  not  then  say,  I  crave  leave 
now  to  write. 

"  I  remember  I  said  to  you,  that  I  had  hoped  before  that  time 
to  have  seen  you  married  and  settled  at  Canterbury.  Not  that  1 
had  in  my  mind  any  body  to  propose  to  you,  but  because  I  consi- 
dered, that  the  hopes  of  your  family  rested  upon  you;  and,  if  you 


Ixii  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

will  give  me  leave  to  use  so  much  freedom,  that  you  are  now  in  the 
slippery  and  dangerous  part  of  life,  exposed  to  many  and  powerful 
temptations,  especially  in  so  licentious  an  age :  and,  therefore,  I 
should  have  been  glad  to  have  seen  you  secured  against  this  dan- 
ger by  that  means. 

"  I  doubt  not  but  you  believe  and  consider,  that  after  this  there 
is  another  life  ;  to  secure  the  happiness  whereof,  no  care,  no  dili- 
gence can  be  too  great :  and  I  have  good  hope  that  you  are  not  yet 
entangled  in  any  very  bad  course.  But  if  any  of  the  vices,  to  which 
youth  is  incident,  have  gained  never  so  little  upon  you,  for  God's 
sake,  and  your  own,  resolve  presently  to  rescue  your  life.  Ask  par- 
don of  God  for  what  is  past,  and  the  assistance  of  his  grace  for  the 
future ;  neither  of  which  he  will  deny  to  a  sincere  and  well-uesolved 
mind. 

"  And  be  pleased  to  consider,  that  the  further  men  proceed  in 
any  thing  that  is  bad,  they  put  themselves  so  much  the  more  out 
of  God's  protection  and  their  own  power,  and  their  retreat  must 
every  day  become  more  difficult.  But,  above  all,  that  whatever  the 
pleasure  of  sin  may  be,  it  cannot  be  a  wise  thing  to  please  ourselves 
for  a  little  while,  at  the  intolerable  price  of  being  miserable  for 
ever. 

6t  You  see,  sir,  that  I  am  contented  to  venture  your  displeasure 
to  prevent  your  danger;  and  yet  I  promise  myself,  that  your  good- 
ness and  patience  will  pardon  the  presumption  of  this  advice,  when 
I  have  told  you,  that  it  proceedeth  from  so  much  good-will,  that  if 
your  own  good  had  been  to  counsel  you,  though  he 

would  have  done  it  with  more  skill,  he  could  not  have  done  it  with 
more  kindness.  I  pray  God  it  may  have  the  effect  which  I  so  ear- 
nestly wish.  I  entreat  you  to  give  my  very  humble  service  to  my 
lady,  your  mother,  and  to  believe  that  I  am,  with  the  greatest  sin- 
cerity and  respect, 

«  Sir, 

"  Your  most  faithful  and  humble  servant, 

"  J.  T." 

During  the  course  of  this  summer  he  lost  one  of  his  two  daugh- 
ters ;  upon  which  occasion  Mr.  Nelson  having  condoled  with  him 
in  one  of  his  letters,  the  Dean,  in  his  answer  from  London,  Novem- 
ber 7,  1681,  thanked  that  gentleman  for  his  compassionate  sense 
of  his  loss,  "  which,"  says  he,  went  very  near  me.  But  God's 
will  is  always  best,  and  I  have  no  doubt  but  she  is  infinitely  more 
happy  and  safe,  than  she  could  have  been  in  any  condition  in  this 


JLIFB    OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


hiii 


world.  It  hath  pleased  God  since  that,  to  add  another  great  afflic- 
tion, by  the  death  of  my  worthy  friend,  Dr.  Burton.  About  ten 
days  ago,  Mr.  Gouge,  another  excellent  man,  died  in  his  sleep,  as 
is  thought,  of  apoplexy.  But  I  ought  not  to  entertain  you  with 
such  dismal  things,  if  I  had  any  thing  better  to  write  you  from 
hence." 

The  death  of  Mr.  Thomas  Gouge  called  upon  the  Dean  to  per- 
form the  last  duty  to  his  memory,  by  preachins  his  funeral  sermon 
on  the  4th  of  November,  at  St.  Ann's,  Blackiriars,  in  which  he  has 
done  justice  to  the  character  of  that  pious  aud  charitable  man, 
who  had  been  vicar  of  St.  Sepulchre's,  in  London,  about  four-and- 
twentv  vears,  till  he  was  ejected  in  1662  for  not  submitting  to  the 
act  of  Uniformity.  He  insists  with  a  peculiar  satisfaction  upon  Mr. 
Gouge's  "  disposition  ready  to  embrace  and  oblige  all  men ;  allow- 
ing others  to  differ  from  him,  even  in  opinions,  that  were  verv  dear 
to  him;  and  provided  men  did  but  fear  God,  and  work  righteous- 
ness, he  loved  them  heartily,  how  distant  soever  from  him  in  judg- 
ment about  things  less  necessary :  in  all  hieh  he  is  very  worthy  to  be 
a  pattern  for  men  of  all  persuasions  whatsoever."  But  Mr.  Gouse's 
most  eminent  distinction  was  his  unwearied  diligence  in  doing 
good,  in  vshich  he  had  a  most  singular  sagacity  and  prudence  in 
contriving  the  most  effectual  means  for  it ;  one  branch  of  which 
was  the  procuring  the  Bible,  Liturgy,  Whole  Duty  of  Man,  and 
other  good  books,  to  be  printed  in  the  Welch  language,*  and  dis- 

*  A  passage  in  the  Dean's  Sermon,  relating  to  the  slate  of  Wales  at  that  time,  hav- 
ing been  excepted  to,  the  reader  w  ill  find  a  fall  vindication  of  it  in  the  following  let- 
ter of  a  very  learned  and  worthy  clergyman  : — 

"sir, 

"  Jn  the  History  of  Wales,  published  by  Mr.  William  Wynne,  fellow  of  Jesus 
College,  Oxford,  in  1697,  p.  328,  there  is  a  passage,  which,  as  it  is  not  a  little  inju- 
rious to  the  memory  of  that  excellent  prelate,  whose  life  you  are  writing,  mav  de- 
serve a  remark  or  two,  and  is  as  follows  : 

['*  And  here,  by  the  bye,  I  cannot  but  observe  what  a  reverend  writer  has  latelv 
insinuated,  relating  to  the  Christian  religion  planted  in  Wales.  For  that  lesrned  per- 
son, in  his  Funeral  Sermon  upon  Mr.  Gouge,  would  fain  indnce  the  world  to  be lieve, 
that  Christianity  was  very  corrupt  and  imperfect  among  the  Welch,  before  it  was  pu- 
riBed  by  that,  whom  he  terms  '  apostolical  man.'  W  hereas  it  is  notorionslv  evi- 
dent, that  since  the  Reformation  was  settled  in  that  countrv,  and  the  Bible,  with  the 
book  of  Common  Prayer,  translated  into  the  Welch  tongue,  no  place  has  been  more 
exact,  in  keeping  to  the  strict  rubric  and  constitution  of  the  church  of  England,  both 
as  to  the  substance  and  form  of  worship.] 

"  I  apprehend  this  matter  may  be  placed  in  a  just  light,  by  the  following  short 
account,  which  I  dra*  from  good  authority.    Mr.  Gouge,,  being  authorized  by  th« 


Ixiv 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


persed  among  the  people  of  that  country  ;  towards  the  impressiou 
of  the  first  of  which  the  Dean  himself  contributed  fifty  pounds.* 

The  suspicion  and  danger  of  that  time  prevented  him  from  en- 
tering into  a  detail  of  facts  or  reasonings  upon  public  affairs  in  let- 
ters, which  were  to  travel  so  far  as  those  to  Mr.  Nelson  ;  and  in 
that  above  cited  he  only  says,  "  we  are,  as  you  left  us,  between 
hope  and  fear  what  will  become  of  us.    The  Earl  of  Shaftesbury 


bishops  of  our  churcb,  and  having  great  encouragement  from  the  nobility  and  gentry 
of  "Wales,  as  well  as  from  many  persons  of  distinction  in  England,  went  into  a  coun- 
trv,  where,  at  that  time,  there  was  great  need  of  preaching,  and  where  he  found  his 
own  endeavours  in  that  way  to  be  both  acceptable  and  useful  to  many  of  the  poor  in- 
habitants, especially  in  those  parts  where  this  method  of  instruction  had  for  a  long 
course  of  rears  been  considerably  neglected.  Bat  where  there  was  no  such  need  (as 
in  several  places,  it  is  presumed,  there  was  not),  he  was  very  well  contented,  as  the 
preacher  at  his  funeral  observes,  to  hear  others  persuade  men  to  goodness,  and  to 
practise  it  himself.  Now  this  being  the  case,  I  cannot  but  be  sorry  to  see  it  misre- 
presented in  the  passage  I  have  cited  ;  where  the  author  not  only  shews  less  respect 
than  was  due  to  the  memory  of  the  deceased  Archbishop,  but  gives  his  words  a  turn, 
of  which  they  do  not  seem  to  be  fairly  capable;  as  may  easily  be  discerned,  on  com- 
paring what  this  gentleman  savs,  with  what  is  said  in  the  Sermon  to  which  he  refers  ; 
wherein  I  cannot  find  any  intimation,  such  as  this  writer  had  taught  me  to  expect, 
that  Christianity  was  very  corrupt  and  imperfect  in  Wales,  before  the  apostolical  Mr. 
Gouge  went  thither  to  purify  it.  The  true  reason  of  his  going  thither  (besides  his 
bestowing  much  alms  among  the  people)  has  been  given  above,  and  is  more  largely 
displayed  in  the  Sermon  itself;  to  which,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  no  just  exception  can 
be  made,  in  this  respect,  by  any  critic  who  is  inclined  to  be  candid.  And  the  account 
given  of  the  unhappy  state  of  religion  in  Wales,  by  the  late  Dr.  Saunders  (a  very 
knowing  and  worthy  native  of  that  principality),  fully  justifies  the  sermon,  and  Mr. 
Gouge's  errand.  But  even  supposing  (what  need  not,  I  think,  be  supposed,  or  at 
least  cannot  be  honourably  inferred  from  any  thing  which  Dr.  Tillotson  hath  said) 
that  Christianity  was  indeed  corrupt  in  some  instances,  and  imperfect  in  others,  with- 
in that  principality,  before  the  charitable  Mr.  Gouge  made  his  journeys  thither,  I  do 
not  see  that  the  historian  has  either  disproved  the  supposed  fact,  or  given  any  satis- 
factory answer  to  the  point,  by  observing,  that  the  inhabitants  were  very  exact  in  their 
adherence  to  the  rubrics  and  other  constitutions  of  our  church.  The  purity  and  per- 
fection of  Christianity  doth  not  altogether  consist  in  these  ;  and  both  may  be  carried 
farther,  by  preaching,  by  catechising,  by  dispersing  good  books,  and  such  other  pions 
methods  as  were  used  by  Mr.  Gouge,  when  he  travelled  into  those  parts.  So  that, 
upon  the  whole,  1  am  apt  to  think  his  charitable  labours  deserved  a  more  grateful 
acknowledgment,  and  the  Sermon  at  his  funeral  a  less  invidious  treatment,  than  Ihey 
have  met  witli  from  this  author ;  of  whom  I  shall  only  say  farther,  that  1  cannot  but 
wish  he  had  either  forborne  his  censure  upon  two  such  excellent  men  (since  it  was  at 
least  needless,  which  is  the  softest  thing  I  can  say),  or  had  delivered  it  in  terms  less 
derogatory  to  characters  so  justly  esteemed,  and  more  expressive  of  that  good- 
nature which  I  am  inclined  to  expect,  and  always  glad  to  find,  in  an  ancient  Briton."' 
*  Life  of  Mr.  Thomas  Firniin,  p.  50.  Edit.  London,  1698. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


makes  most  discourse  at  present,  whose  trial  or  enlargement  is  ex- 
pected some  time  this  term.',  That  Earl  had  been  committed  to 
the  Tower  on  the  2d  of  July,  1681,  for  high  treason  ;  and,  though 
the  grand  jury  had  found  the  bill  against  him  ignoramus,  on  the 
24th  of  November,  yet  he  was  not  discharged  from  his  bail  till  the 
13th  of  February  following ;  and  in  November,  1682,  he  retired  to 
Holland,  where  he  died  at  the  age  of  sixty-two,  on  the  22d  of  Ja- 
nuary, 168f. 

Mr.  Nelson  being  returned  to  Paris  in  his  way  home,  the  Dean 
wrote  to  him  from  London  on  the  5th  of  July,  1682,  in  which  let- 
ter he  speaks  of  the  situation  of  the  public  as  full  of  distraction 
and  discontent ;  and  observes,  that  he  had  heard  of  Mons.  Arnaud's 
book  about  the  plot,  but  had  not  seen  it :  and  adds,  u  it  is  much 
so  wise  a  man  should  think  fit  to  intermeddle  in  the  affairs  of  ano- 
ther country,  and  of  which  he  can  have  but  a  partial  information." 
This  book  of  Mon.  Arnaud,  doctor  of  Sorbonne,  is  intitled,  Apo- 
logie  pour  les  Catholiques,  designed  as  an  answer  to  La  Politique 
du  Clerge  de  France.  The  learned  author,  who  still  retained  the 
utmost  devotion  to  the  church  of  Rome,  of  which  he  was  one  of 
the  ablest  advocates  in  his  time,  notwithstanding  his  persecutions 
from  the  Jesuits,  on  account  of  his  attachment  to  Jansenism,  which 
obliged  him  to  leave  France  in  1679,  attempts  here  to  remove  the 
imputation  of  a  seditious  spirit  from  the  professors  of  that  church, 
and  to  transfer  it  upon  the  protestants,  and  to  demonstrate  the 
whole  popish  plot  in  England  to  be  the  mere  invention  of  Titus 
Oates. 

The  thoughts,  which  occasionally  occurred  to  the  Dean  upon 
subjects  of  importance,  being  sometimes  set  down  by  him  in  short- 
hand in  his  common-place  book,  I  find  the  following  remarks  upon 
Prayer,  under  the  date  of  August  12, 1682. 

"  Prayer. 

u  O  thou,  that  hearest,  &c. 

*  Dr.  Wilkins's  Natural  Religion,  Sermons,  and  Gift,  <fcc. 

M  Dr.  Barrow  and  Dr.  Bright. 

u  Xenophon's  Instit.    Seneca.  Tully. 

"  No  precept  of  prayer  in  the  law  of  Moses. 

u  Prayer  is  the  most  natural  means  of  religion,  which  the  word 
of  God  and  sacraments  are  of. 

"  Prayer  is  the  most  spiritual  means  of  religion,  because  it  is  im- 
mediate converse  with  God. 

▼  ol.  I.  K 


Ixvi 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


"  Prayer  is  that  which  sanctifies  all  other  means,  and  makes 
them  effectual. 

*'  Prayer  is  a  natural  means  to  work  those  good  dispositions  in  us 
we  pray  for,  as  well  as  a  supernatural  means. 

u  Prayer,  of  all  the  means  of  religion,  hath  most  of  the  end.  It 
exercises  our  dependance  upon  God,  our  adoration  and  praise  of 
him,  and  our  charity  to  men. 

*'  Some  of  the  means  of  religion  are  bare  and  dry  means :  but  this 
comes  near  the  end,  and  is  a  good  degree  of  it. 

"  That  part,  which  consists  in  praise  and  thanksgiving,  will  be 
our  great  work  to  all  eternity." 

Being  at  Canterbury  in  August,  1682,  he  was  visited  there  by 
Mr.  Nelson  in  his  return  from  France,  to  whom  the  Dean  expressed, 
in  his  letter  of  the  18th  of  that  month,  great  solicitude  to  hear  of 
that  gentleman's  safe  arrival  in  Gloucestershire,  whither  he  went  to 
see  his  mother. 

Two  days  after  the  date  of  this  letter,  a  calamity  of  the  most 
astonishing  nature  happened  to  an  ancient  and  noble  family,  for 
which  the  Dean  was  interested  by  all  the  motives  of  friendship  and 
esteem.  Ford,  Lord  Grey,  of  Werke,  who  had  married  Lady  Mary, 
fourth  daughter  of  George,  Earl  of  Berkley,  having  gained  the  af- 
fection of  her  younger  sister,  Lady  Henrietta,  then  but  eighteen 
years  of  age,  found  means  to  convey  her  away  from  Durdens,  near 
Epsom,  in  Surry,  on  the  20th  of  August,  1682.  The  Dean,  upon 
the  first  knowledge  of  it,  resolved  to  try  what  effect  a  strong  and 
pathetic  representation  of  her  crime  and  its  consequences  might 
make  on  a  young  mind,  before  it  should  lose  its  sensibility  by  en- 
gaging too  far  in  a  habit  of  vice :  for  which  purpose  he  wrote  to 
her  the  following  letter  :* 

<{  Though  I  have  found  by  experience,  that  good  counsel  is,  for 
the  most  part,  cast  away  upon  those,  who  have  plunged  themselves 
so  deep  into  a  bad  course,  as,  to  my  great  grief  and  amazement,  I 
understand  your  Ladyship  has  done ;  yet  the  concernment  I  have 
always  had  for  the  honour  and  welfare  of  your  noble  family,  and 
the  compassion  I  have  for  you,  whom  I  look  upon  as  one  of  the 
greatest  objects  of  pity  in  this  world,  will  not  suffer  me  to  leave 
any  means  untried,  that  may  conduce  to  your  recovery  out  of  that 

*  From  a  copy  in  Mr.  Nelson's  hand-writing,  among  the  tellers  of  Archbishop 
Tillolson  to  that  gentleman,  communicated  to  me  by  the  late  Dr.  Hughes. 


LIFE  OF  THE   AUTHOR.  IxVlI 

wicked  and  wretched  condition,  in  which  you  are.  And  therefore 
I  beg  of  you,  for  God's  sake,  and  your  own,  to  give  me  leave  plainly 
to  represent  to  you  the  heinousness  of  your  fault,  with  the  certain 
and  dismal  consequences  of  your  continuance  in  it.  And  it  is  of 
that  heinous  nature,  as  to  be,  for  aught  I  know,  without  example 
in  this  or  any  other  Christian  nation,  and  hath  in  it  all  possible 
aggravations,  of  guilt  towards  God,  of  dishonour  to  yourself,  of  a 
most  outrageous  injury  and  affront  to  your  sister,  of  reproach  and 
stain  to  your  family,  of  most  cruel  ingratitude  to  as  kind  and  in- 
dulgent parents  as  any  child  ever  had  ;  of  which  I  am  a  witness, 
as  I  have  since  been  of  the  deep  wound  and  affliction  you  have 
given  them,  to  that  degree,  as  would  grieve  the  heart  of  a  stranger, 
and  ought  surely  to  make  a  much  deeper  impression  upon  you,  their 
child,  who  have  been  the  cause  of  it. 

"  Consider  of  it,  as  you  will  answer  it  at  the  judgment  of  the  great 
day  :  and  now  you  have  done  what  you  can  to  ruin  your  reputation, 
think  of  saving  your  soul;  and  do  not,  to  please  yourself,  or  any  body 
else,  for  a  little  while,  venture  to  be  miserable  for  ever,  as  you  will 
most  certainly  be,  if  you  go  on  in  this  course.  Nay,  I  doubt  not 
but  that  you  will  be  very  miserable  in  this  world,  not  only  from  the 
severe  reflections  of  your  own  mind,  but  from  the  distress  you  will 
be  reduced  to,  when,  after  a  while,  you  will  in  all  probability  be 
despised,  and  hated,  and  forsaken  by  him,  for  whose  sake  you  have 
made  yourself  odious  to  all  the  world.  Before  this  happen,  think 
of  reconciling  yourself  to  God,  and  to  your  best  friends  under  him, 
your  parents,  of  whose  kindness  and  tenderness  you  have  had  that  ex- 
perience, that  you  have  little  reason  to  fear  their  cruelty  and  rigour. 

"  Despise  not  this  advice,  which  is  now  tendered  to  you  out  of 
great  charity  and  good-will:  and  I  pray  God  it  may  be  effectual 
to  bring  you  to  repentance  and  a  better  mind. 

"  I  have  but  one  thing  more  to  beg  of  you,  that  you  would  be 
pleased,  by  a  line  or  two,  to  let  me  understand,  that  you  have  read 
and  considered  this  letter  from, 

"  Madam, 

<c  Your  Ladyship's  most  faithful  and  humble  servant, 

*«  John  Tillotson." 

« 

It  is  very  possible  that  this  letter  might  not  reach  the  hand  of 
the  unfortunate  lady,  surrounded  as  she  was  with  persons  entirely 
in  the  interest  of  her  lover  ;  who,  in  order  to  secure  her  more  ef- 
fectually to  himself,  married  her  some  time  after  to  Mr.  Turner,  a 


Ixviii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AVTHOF. 


dependent  of  his,  who  claimed  her  as  his  wife,  when  she  was  de- 
manded by  her  father,  after  the  trial  of  Lord  Grey  for  seducing 
her,  on  the  23d  of  November  following,  when  a  verdict  was  given 
against  his  Lordship,  though  the  matter  being  compromised  before 
the  next  term,  no  judgment  passed,  the  attorney-general  entering  a 
noli  prosequi.*  She  afterwards,  with  her  husband,  accompanied 
his  Lordship  into  Holland,  when  he  fled  thither  in  June,  1683,  upon 
the  detection  of  the  Rye  house  plot,  after  escaping  from  the  Ser- 
jeant, who  had  taken  him  into  custody,  on  the  26th  of  that  month, 
for  high  treason,  and  whom  he  left  sleeping  in  his  Lordship's  own 
coach  in  their  way  to  the  Tower.  His  estate  being  forfeited,  part  of 
it  was  granted,  on  December  2,  1684,  to  his  father-in-law,  the  Earl 
of  Berkley,  for  the  use  of  his  wife,  by  whom  he  had  only  one  child, 
a  daughter.  He  returned  to  England  with  the  Duke  of  Monmouth, 
in  June,  1685  ;  but  was  on  good  grounds  suspected  of  treachery  to 
his  Grace,  and  purchased  his  own  pardon  by  an  ample  confession. 
However,  he  recovered  interest  enough  after  the  Revolution  to  be 
created  Viscount  Glendale  and  Earl  of  Tankerville,  in  May,  1695, 
and  appointed  first  commissioner  of  the  Treasury,  and  one  of  the 
lords-justices  during  his  Majesty's  absence  in  June,  1700,  and  lord 
privy  seal  on  the  5th  of  November  the  same  year ;  dying  on  the 
25th  of  June  the  year  following.  But  we  have  no  account  of  the 
sequel  of  the  history  of  his  unhappy  sister-in-law,  whose  disgrace 
forced  her  into  retirement  and  obscurity,  while  her  name  was  pros- 
tituted by  one  of  the  most  licentious  writers  of  her  own  sex,  in  that 
collection  of  letters  pretended  to  pass  between  her  and  her  gallant 
during  the  course  of  their  criminal  amour. 

The  Dean  of  Canterbury,  in  1682,  gave  the  public,  from  the  ma- 
nuscripts of  Bishop  Wilkins,  a  volume  in  8vo.  of  fifteen  sermons, 
which  he  introduced  with  a  preface  in  defence  of  that  prelate's  cha- 
racter against  the  reflections  cast  upon  him  in  the  Historia  et  An- 
I  quitates  Universitatis  Oxoniensis,  printed  in  1674,  whether  by  Mr. 
Anthony  Wood,  whose  name  that  work  bears,  or  by  some  other 
hand,  the  Dean  was  not  curious  to  know.  But  it  is  not  improba- 
ie  that  they  were  inserted  by  the  direction  of  Dr.  Fell,  bishop  of 
Oxford,  and  dean  of  Christ  Church,  under  whose  inspection  and 
patronage  that  book  was  published ;  and  they  are  not  unsuitable  to 
the  known  prejudices  of  that  prelate,  who,  though  an  eminent  en- 
i  ourager  of  learning,  and  an  excellent  governor  of  his  college,  and 
t<i  exemplary  conduct  in  his  episcopal  character,  yet,  from  a  sense 

*  State  Trials,  vol.  iii. 


LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  lx'lX 

perhaps  of  his  own  sufferings  before  the  Restoration,  was  capable 
of  some  excesses,  in  cases  wherein  (he  interests  of  party  could  bias 
him,  as  is  evident  from  the  letters  which  passed  between  him  and 
the  Earl  of  Sunderland,  secretary  of  state,  in  November,  1684,  re- 
lating to  his  expulsion  of  Mr.  Locke  from  his  student's  place  in 
Christ  Church.  The  former  part  of  Bishop  Wilkins's  character,  in 
Mr.  Wood  s  History,  lib.  ii.  p.  37G,  is  chiefly  made  up  of  invidious 
reflections  upon  his  carriage,  and  the  circumstances  of  his  condi- 
tion, in  the  times  preceding  the  Restoration  ;  "  in  all  which,"  says 
the  Dean,  "  because  I  did  not  then  know  him,  I  leave  him  to  be 
vindicated  or  censured  by  those,  who  were  witnesses  of  his  whole 
behaviour  and  temper  in  that  time."  The  latter  part  of  it  consists 
'*  of  flat  and  ill-favoured  commendations  ;  as,  that  he  was  '  philo- 
sophise et  mathematica  addictissimusj  a  great  well-wilier  to  philo- 
sophy and  the  mathematics ;  the  exact  character  of  an  empiric 
and  an  almanack-maker,  when  these  two  excellences  happen  to  be 
in  conjunction.  And  then,  that  to  the  study  of  divinity  he  added 
eloqiuntiam  in  concionando  man  contemnendam,  an  eloquence  in 
preaching  not  to  be  despised:  which,  though  it  be  but  a  very  cold 
and  slender  commendation  both  of  his  divinity  and  eloquence, 
yet  I  must  own  something  of  kindness  in  it,  because  there  is  in 
good  earnest  a  sort  of  eloquence  in  preaching,  that  is  to  be  despised. 
To  finish  the  kindness,  and  that  nothing  might  be  omitted  that  might 
any  ways  cast  an  odium  upon  him,  as  he  is  placed  next  before  Mr. 
Hobbes,  so  I  cannot  but  observe,  in  comparing  their  characters, 
that  there  is  apparently  far  less  of  envy  and  detraction  in  that  of 
Mr.  Hobbes,  than  in  this  of  the  reverend  Bishop,  for  which  I  can 
imagine  no  other  reason  but  this,  that  Mr.  Hobbes  was  then  alive* 
to  speak  for  himself;  but  the  dead  bite  not."  The  Dean  then  re- 
marks, that  it  had  been  often  no  small  wonder  to  him,  whence  it 
should  come  to  pass,  that  so  great  a  man,  and  so  great  a  lover  of 
mankind,  who  had  the  inclination,  the  skill,  and  the  opportunity 
to  oblige  so  very  many,  and  was  so  highly  valued  and  reverenced 
by  all  who  knew  him,  should  yet  have  the  hard  fate  to  fall  under 
the  heavy  displeasure  and  censure  of  those  who  knew  him  not; 
and  that  he,  who  never  did  any  thing  to  make  himself  one  personal 
enemy,  should  have  the  ill  fortune  to  have  so  many.  "  I  think," 
adds  he,  "  I  may  truly  say,  that  there  are,  or  have  been,  very  few 
in  this  age  and  nation  so  well  known,  and  so  greatly  esteemed  and 
favoured,  first  by  a  judicious  prince,  and  then  by  so  many  persons 
*  He  died  December  4,  1679. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOE. 


of  high  rank  and  quality,  and  of  singular  worth  and  eminency  in 
all  the  learned  professions,  as  our  author  was.  And  this  surely 
cannot  be  denied  him,  it  is  so  well  known  to  many  worthy  persons 
yet  living,  and  hath  been  so  often  acknowledged  even  by  his  ene- 
mies, that  in  the  late  times  of  confusion,  almost  all  that  was  pre- 
served and  kept  up  of  ingenuity  and  learning,  of  good  order  and 
government  in  the  university  of  Oxford,  was  chiefly  owing  to  his 
prudent  conduct  and  encouragement."  His  inducement  to  the 
publishing  of  the  Bishop's  sermons  was,  because,  though  there  be 
many  sermons,  yet  there  are  not  many  such,  whether  we  consider 
in  them  the  usefulness  and  weight  of  the  matters  treated  of ;  or  the 
suitable  manner  of  handling  them  in  a  style  of  so  much  clearness, 
and  closeness,  and  strength,  as  was  fitted  (as  the  Bishop  himself 
used  to  wish)  to  the  capacity  of  the  weakest,  and  the  conviction 
of  the  strongest;  or  the  solid  and  well-poised  judgment  of  the 
author  in  points  of  difficulty;  or,  lastly,  the  admirable  candour 
and  moderation  of  his  temper  in  matters  of  difference  and  dispute. 
"  And  I  purposely,"  says  the  Dean,  "  mention  his  moderation, 
and  likewise  adventure  to  commend  him  for  it,  notwithstanding  that 
this  virtue,  so  much  esteemed  and  magnified  by  wise  men  in  all 
ages,  hath  of  late  been  declaimed  against  with  so  much  zeal  and 
fierceness,  and  yet  with  that  good  grace  and  confidence,  as  if  it 
were  not  only  no  virtue,  but  even  the  sum  and  abridgment  of  all 
vices.  I  say,  notwithstanding  all  this,  I  am  still  of  the  old  opinion, 
that  moderation  is  a  virtue,  and  one  of  the  peculiar  ornaments  and 
advantages  of  the  excellent  constitutions  of  our  church,  and  must 
at  last  be  the  temper  of  her  members,  especially  the  clergy,  if  ever 
we  seriously  intend  the  firm  establishment  of  this  church,  and  do 
not  industriously  design,  by  cherishing  heats  and  divisions  among 
ourselves,  to  let  in  popery  at  these  branches." 

The  same  year,  1683,  Mr.  Daniel  Whitby,  praecentor  of  the 
church  of  Sarum,  urged  the  authority  of  our  Dean  in  favour  of  a 
scheme,  which  he  zealously  recommended  in  his  Protestant  Recon- 
ciler, printed  at  London,  1683,  "  humbly  pleading  for  condescen- 
sion to  dissenting  brethren,  in  things  indifferent  and  unnecessary, 
for  the  sake  of  peace  ;  and  shewing  how  unreasonable  it  is  to  make 
such  things  the  necessary  conditions  of  communion,*'  The  pas-, 
sage  cited  from  the  Dean  is  in  his  sermon  on  John  xiii.  34-,  35, 
preached  on  the  3d  of  December,  1678,  at  the  first  general  meet- 
ing of  the  gentlemen  and  others,  born  within  the  county  of  York. 
In  this  sermon  he  remarks,  that  nothing  can  be  a  bulwark  of  suffi- 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


Ixxi 


cient  force  to  resist  all  the  arts  and  attempts  of  popery,  but  an  es- 
tablished national  religion,  firmly  united  and  compacted  in  all  the 
parts  of  it  ;  and  that  little  sects  and  separate  congregations  can 
never  do  it,  but  will  be  like  a  foundation  of  sand  to  a  weighty 
building  ;  which  whatever  shew  it  makes  cannot  stand  long,  be- 
cause it  wants  union  at  the  foundation,  and  for  that  reason  must 
necessarily  want  strength  and  firmness.  He  then  proceeds  in  the 
words  quoted  in  the  Protestant  Reconciler.*  "  It  is  not  for  pri- 
vate persons  to  undertake  in  matters  of  public  concernment,  but  I 
think  we  have  no  cause  to  doubt  but  the  governors  of  our  church, 
(notwithstanding  all  the  advantages  of  authority,  and  we  think  of 
reason  too  on  our  side)  are  persons  of  that  piety  and  prudence, 
that  for  peace  sake,  and  in  order  to  a  firm  union  among  protes- 
tants,  they  would  be  content,  if  that  would  do  it,  not  to  insist  upon 
little  things,  but  to  yield  them  up,  whether  to  the  infirmity,  or  im- 
portunity, or  perhaps  in  some  very  few  things,  to  the  plausible  ex- 
ceptions of  those,  who  differ  from  us.''  In  a  copy  of  the  Protes- 
tant Reconciler  in  my  possession  greatly  improved  throughout  by 
the  author's  own  hand,  in  the  margin  of  this  quotation  from  Dr. 
Tillotson's  excellent  sermon,  as  he  styles  it,  Mr.  Whitby  has  in- 
serted some  short  notes,  as  upon  the  words,  "  it  is  not  for  private 
persons  to  undertake/'  he  adds,  "  but  only  modestly  and  humbly 
offer  upon  the  words,  "  we  think  of  reason  too/'  his  remark  is, 
"  except  in  some  few  things  ;"  and  upon  these,  "  in  order  to  a  firm 
union  among  protestants,"  his  observation  is,  "  at  which  the  Pro- 
testant Reconciler  only  aims."  But  how  well  intended  the  aim  was 
of  this  learned  writer,  whose  Paraphrase  and  Commentary  on  the 
New  Testament  is  sufficient  to  recommend  him  to  posterity,  even 
separate  from  his  other  works,  which  are  considerable  in  number 
and  value  ;  yet  his  book  gave  such  high  offence  at  its  first  publi- 
cation, that  it  was  condemned  by  the  university  of  Oxford  on  the 
21st  of  July,  1083,  and  burnt  by  the  hands  of  the  university -mar- 
shal in  tJie  schools  quadrangle  ;  and  Mr.  Whitby  being  discovered 
to  be  the  author  (for  he  had  printed  it  without  his  name)  he  was 
obliged  by  Dr.  Seth  Ward,  bishop  of  Salisbury,  whose  chaplain  he 
then  was,  to  make  a  public  retraction  of  it  on  the  9th  of  Octo- 
ber following :  and  the  same  year,  to  remove  the  clamour  raised 
against  the  first  part  of  his  book,  he  published  a  second,  "  ear- 
nestly persuading  the  dissenting  laity  to  join  in  full  communion 


*  Preface,  p.  19. 


Ixxii  LIFE  OF   THE  AUTHOR. 

with  the  church  of  England,  and  answering  all  the  objections  of 
the  nonconformists  against  the  lawfulness  of  the  submission  to  the 
rites  and  constitutions  of  that  church. 

The  task  of  preparing  the  sermons  of  Dr.  Barrow  for  the  press, 
which  had  employed  the  Dean  for  several  years,  and  cost  him  as 
much  pains,  as  would  have  produced  many  more  of  his  own,*  was 
now  finished,  and  the  edition  published  at  London,  in  1683,  in  fol. 
with  an  account  of  the  author,  by  Abraham  Hill,  Esq.  who  had  been 
left  by  him  joint  executor  with  the  Dean,  to  whom  that  account  is 
addressed,  as  materials  for  a  more  complete  life,  which  Mr.  Hill 
and  the  public  equally  wished  might  be  undertaken  by  a  hand  ca- 
pable of  setting  so  exalted  a  genius,  and  soamiable  a  character,  as 
that  of  Dr.  Barrow,  in  their  proper  light  and  just  proportions  ; 
since,  as  he  observes  himself  in  the  preface,  the  picture  of  that 
truly  great  man  deserved  to  be  drawn  at  full  length  for  the  know- 
ledge and  imitation  of  posterity.  The  narrow  limits  of  a  preface 
prevented  the  Dean  from  so  much  as  even  attempting  the  charac- 
ter of  his  incomparable  friend,  of  whom  either  not  a  little,  or  no- 
thing at  all,  ought  to  be  said.  He  only  advertises  the  reader  there- 
fore of  some  particulars  relating  to  his  sermons,  which  he  con- 
cludes with  remarking,  that  as  they  want  no  other  kind  of  excel- 
lency, so  particularly  they  are  animated  throughout  with  so  ge- 
nuine a  spirit  of  true  piety  and  goodness,  that  he  must  either  be  a 
perfectly  good,  or  prodigiously  bad  man,  who  can  read  them  over 
without  being  the  better  for  them.  Those  sermons,  which  he  is 
iullest  in  his  commendations  of,  are  the  ten  upon  the  vices  of  the 
tongue,  and  the  two  against  pragmaticalness  and  meddling  in  the 
affairs  of  others  ;  a  subject  which  has  an  immediate  connexion  with 
the  other,  since  that  vice  is  chiefly  managed  by  the  tongue,  and 
almost  always  attended  with  some  irregularity  and  indiscretion  of 
speech.  And  Dr.  Barrow  had  a  peculiar  right  to  expose  faults  of 
that  kind,  "  being  of  all  men,  I  ever  knew,"  says  the  Dean,  "  the 
clearest  from  this  common  guilt,  and  most  free  from  offending  in 
word,  coming  as  near,  as  is  possible  for  human  frailty  to  do,  to 
the  perfect  idea  of  St.  James's,  'perfect  man  :'  so  that  in  these  ex- 
cellent discourses  of  his,  he  hath  only  transcribed  his  own  practice. 
All  the  rules,  which  he  hath  given,  he  most  religiously  observed 
himself,  and  was  very  uneasy  when  at  any  time  he  saw  them  trans- 
gressed by  others  in  his  company.*' 


Account  of  the  Life  of  Dr.  Barrow,  bj  Abraham  Hill,  Eiq. 


-4.1  F  E    OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


lxxm 


the  laborious  office  of  editor  of  sueli  voluminous  writings  as 
those  of  Dr.  Barrow,  undertaken  by  one,  who  had  many  years  be- 
fore appeared  himself  to  so  much  advantage  as  an  original  writer, 
was  as  clear  an  evidence  of  the  modesty,  as  it  w  as  of  the  friendship, 
of  the  Dean  :  and  yet  his  own  merit  has  been  sometimes  attempted 
to  be  lessened  by  a  suggestion,  started  perhaps  through  envy,  and 
propagated  through  haste  and  inadvertency,  that  great  part  of  his 
excellence  as  a  preacher  was  owing  to  his  use  of  the  works  of  his 
friend.  But,  not  to  insist  on  the  prodigious  difference  of  their  man- 
ner and  style,  the  slightest  attention  to  the  chronology  of  the  lives 
of  those  great  men  is  sufficient  to  confute  such  a  suspicion.  For 
Dr.  Tillotson  was  eminent  in  his  profession  as  early  as  the  year 
1663,  and  had  given  the  public  the  first  volume  of  his  sermons  in 
1671,  in  which  the  first  and  only  sermon  published  by  Dr.  Barrow- 
appeared  ;  the  impression  of  that  upon  the  Passion  of  our  Savi- 
our not  being  finished  at  his  death.  Nor  had  the  latter  leisure  to 
apply  himself  thoroughly  to  theological  studies,  being  engaged  in 
those  of  a  very  different  kind,  till  his  resignation  of  the  Lucasian 
professorship  of  mathematics  at  Cambridge,  on  the  8th  of  Novem- 
ber, 1670,  to  his  immortal  pupil,  Mr.  Isaac  Newton. 

Dr.  Benjamin  Whichcot,  vicar  of  St.  Lawrence  Jewry,  dying  in 
May  of  this  year,  1683,  in  the  73d  year  of  his  age,  at  the  house  of 
Dr.  Cudworth,  master  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge,  the  Dean 
preached  on  the  24th  of  that  month  a  sermon  at  his  funeral,  wor- 
thy both  of  himself  and  his  deceased  friend ;  who  wanted  indeed 
no  other  memorial  than  his  own  writings,  one  volume  of  which,  in- 
titled  Select  Discourses,  was  published  by  the  Earl  of  Shaftesbury, 
author  of  the  Characteristics,  in  1698,  three  others  by  Dr.  John 
Jeffery,  archdeacon  of  Norwich,  in  1701  and  1702,  and  a  fourth 
by  Dr.  Samuel  Clarke. 

The  discovery  of  the  R\e-house  plot,  in  June  the  same  year  1683, 
opened  a  very  melancholy  scene,  in  which  the  Dean  had  a  large 
share  of  distress,  on  account  both  of  his  friendships  and  his  con- 
cern for  the  public.  One  of  the  principal  objects  of  his  solicitude 
and  anxiety  was  William  Lord  Russel,  eldest  son  of  William  Earl, 
and,  after  the  Revolution,  Duke,  of  Bedford.  His  Lordship  having 
shewn  so  warm  a  zeal  for  the  bill  of  Exclusion,  which  he  had  moved 
for  in  the  House  of  Commons  in  the  beginning  of  November,  1680, 
had  little  reason,  notwithstanding  the  integrity  of  his  own  personal 
character,  and  the  dignity  and  weight  of  his  family  and  its  con- 
nexions, to  expect  any  favour  from  the  court.    He  was  committed 

VOL.   I.  L 


IXXIV  LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 

to  the  Tower,  on  the  26th  of  June,  and  brought  to  his  trial  at  the 
Old  Bailey,  on  Friday,  the  13th  of  July,  where  he  was  found  guilty 
of  high  treason.  The  Dean  appeared  as  a  witness  for  his  Lordship's 
character  at  his  trial,  declaring,  that  he  had  been  many  years  past 
acquainted  with  him,  and  had  always  judged  him  a  person  of  great 
virtue  and  integrity,  and  very  far  from  any  such  wicked  design  as 
he  stood  charged  with.  And  after  Lord  Russel's  condemnation, 
the  Dean  and  Dr.  Burnet  were  sent  for  by  his  Lordship,  and  they 
both  continued  their  attendance  upon  him  till  his  death  ;  the  day 
before  which,  the  Dean  delivered  to  him  a  letter,  in  which  he  en- 
deavoured to  persuade  him  to  what  he  had  some  days  before  in 
vain  attempted,  a  declaration  against  the  lawfulness  of  resistance. 
This  letter,  which  was  a  few  days  after,  contrary  to  the  writer's  in- 
clination, published  to  the  world,  as  it  has  been  often  since,  was  in 
these  terms : 

u  MY  LORD, 

"  I  was  heartily  glad  to  see  your  Lordship  this  morning  in  that 
calm  and  devout  temper  at  receiving  the  sacrament.  But  peace  of 
mind,  unless  it  be  well  grounded,  will  avail  little.  And  because 
transient  discourse  many  times  hath  little  effect  for  want  of  time  to 
weigh  and  consider  it,  therefore,  in  tender  compassion  of  your 
Lordship's  case,  and  from  all  the  goodwill,  that  one  man  can  bear 
to  another,  I  do  humbly  offer  to  your  Lordship's  deliberate  thoughts 
these  following  considerations  concerning  the  points  of  resistance, 
if  our  religion  and  rights  should  be  invaded,  as  your  Lordship  puts 
the  case,  concerning  which,  I  understood  by  Dr.  Burnet,  that  your 
Lordship  had  once  received  satisfaction,  and  am  sorry  to  find  a 
change. 

"  First,  that  the  Christian  religion  doth  plainly  forbid  the  resist- 
ance of  authority. 

"  Secondly,  that  though  our  religion  be  established  by  law, 
(which  your  Lordship  argues  as  a  difference  between  our  case  and 
that  of  the  primitive  Christians)  yet  in  the  same  law,  which  estab- 
lishes our  religion,  it  is  declared, '  that  it  is  not  lawful  upon  any  pre- 
tence whatsoever  to  take  up  arms,'  &c.  Besides  that,  there  is  a  par- 
ticular law  declaring  the  power  of  the  militia  to  be  solely  in  the 
king.  And  this  ties  the  hands  of  subjects,  though  the  law  of  na- 
ture and  the  general  rules  of  Scripture  had  left  us  at  liberty,  which 
I  believe  they  do  not,  because  the  government  and  peace  of  human 
society  could  not  well  subsist  upon  these  terms. 


LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR  IXXV 

**  Thirdly,  your  Lordsliip's  opinion  is  contrary  to  the  declared 
doctrine  of  all  protestant  churches.  And  though  some  particular 
persons  have  thought  otherwise,  yet  they  have  been  contradicted 
herein,  and  condemned  for  it  by  the  gener  tlit  v  of  protestants.  And 
I  beg  of  your  Lordship  to  consider  how  it  will  agree  with  an  avowed 
asserting  of  the  protestant  religion,  to  go  contrary  to  the  general 
doctrine  of  the  protestants. 

"  My  eud  in  this  is  to  convince  your  Lordship,  that  you  are  in  a 
very  great  and  dangerous  mistake  ;  and,  being  so  convinced,  that, 
which  before  was  a  sin  of  ignorance,  will  appear  of  a  much  more 
heinous  nature,  as  in  truth  it  is,  and  calls  for  a  very  particular  and 
deep  repentance ;  which  if  your  Lordship  sincerely  exercise  upon 
the  sight  of  your  error  by  a  penitent  acknowledgment  of  it  to  God 
and  men.  you  will  not  only  obtain  forgiveness  of  God,  but  prevent 
a  mighty  scandal  to  the  reformed  religion. 

"  I  am  very  loth  to  give  your  Lordship  any  disquiet  in  the  dis- 
tress you  are  in,  which  I  commiserate  from  my  heart ;  but  am  much 
more  concerned,  that  you  do  not  leave  the  world  in  a  delusion  and 
false  peace,  to  the  hindrance  of  your  eternal  happiness. 

u  I  heartily  pray  for  you,  and  beseech  your  Lordship  to  believe, 
that  I  am  with  the  greatest  sincerity  and  compassion  in  the  world, 
"  My  Lord, 

'  Your  Lordship's  most  faithful  and  afflicted  servant, 
July  20,  1683.  "  John  Tillotson.'' 

The  principles  of  this  letter  were  the  ground  of  those  expres- 
sions, which  he  used  in  his  prayer  w  ith  his  Lordship  on  the  scaffold 
in  Lincoln's  Inn  fields,  on  Saturday,  the  21st  of  July:  "  Grant  that  all 
we,  who  survive,  by  this  and  other  instances  of  thy  providence, 
may  learn  our  duty  to  God  and  the  King."  And  this  prayer,  as 
well  as  his  letter,  were  considered  by  the  court  as  such  a  sanction 
to  their  favourite  doctrines  and  measures,  that  Mr.  Roger  L'Estrange 
was  furnished  with  copies  of  them,  inserted  by  him  in  his  fi  Consi- 
derations upon  a  printed  Sheet,  intitled,  '  The  Speech  of  the  late 
Lord  Russel  to  the  Sheriffs;'"*  in  which  he  gives  an  account  of 
the  Dean's  pious  and  friendly  visits  to  his  Lordship,  f  and  com- 
mends \\\m\  "  for  discharging  himself  from  first  to  last  in  all  the 
parts  of  a  churchman  and  of  a  friend." 

But  what  passed  in  his  attendance  upon  Lord  Russel,  and  the 

*  Printed  at  London,  1683,  in  4to.  p.  49,  50,  51.  t  Page  47v 

%  Page  48,  49. 
L  2 


hxVl  LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 

motives  and  circumstances  of  his  writing  that  letter,  will  be  best 
learned  from  the  Dean's  own  examination  after  the  Revolution,  be- 
fore a  committee  of  the  House  of  Lords,*  appointed  on  the  second 
of  November,  1689,  to  consider,  who  were  the  advisers  and  prose- 
cutors of  the  murders  of  the  Lord  Russel,  Colonel  Sidney,  Sir  Tho- 
mas Armstrong,  and  others ;  and  who  were  the  advisers  of  issuing 
out  writs  of  quo  warrantors  against  corporations  ;  and  who  were 
their  regulators ;  and  also,  who  were  the  public  asserters  of  the  dis- 
pensing power.    The  Dean  being  summoned,  among  others,  to  at- 
tend this  committee,  was  examined  on  the  18th  of  November,  1689, 
and  informed  their  Lordships,  that  he" wrote  a  letter  to  the  Lord 
Russel  the  day  before  his  Lordship's  death,  and  shewed  it  to  the  Lord 
Halifax  the  evening  on  which  hewrote  it;  and  that  he  wrote  it  merely  of 
himself;  but  did  notpublish  it,  the  publication  of  it  being  muchagainst 
his  will ;  nor  did  he  know  by  what  order  it  was  published.  That  Dr. 
Burnet  coming  from  the  Lord  Russel  had  told  him,  that  he  believ- 
ed he  had  brought  his  Lordship  to  a  willingness  to  declare  his  satis- 
faction in  that  point,  to  which  the  letter  relates ;  and  desired  him, 
the  Dean,  to  go  to  the  Lord  Halifax,  and  acquaint  him  with  it,  that 
his  Lordship  might  mitigate  the  thing  to  the  King,  and  so  be  a 
means  to  save  the  Lord  Russel's  life.    Lord  Halifax  promised  the 
Dean  to  do  it,  and  the  next  day  said  he  had  done  it,  and  that  the 
King  seemed  to  be  more  moved  with  it,  than  by  any  thing  else  that 
he  had  said  before.    On  the  Thursday  after  the  Dean  waited  on 
the  Lord  Russel,  and  told  him,  that  he  was  very  glad  to  hear,  that 
his  Lordship  was  so  well  satisfied  on  that  point,  hoping  he  would 
improve  it  to  his  advantage ;  but  his  Lordship's  answer  was,  that 
he  was  not  so  clearly  convinced  in  that  matter.    The  Dean  in  re- 
ply told  his  Lordship,  that  he  was  very  sorry  for  it,  because  the 
message  had  been  carried  to  the  King,  that  his  Lordship  was  con- 
vinced of  it,  and  would  declare  it  at  his  death  ;  for  so  he  had  been 
informed.    His  Lordship  said,  that  Dr.  Burnet  had  discoursed 
much  with  him  about  it,  and  that  he  was  willing  to  be  convinced, 
but  yet  could  not  say  that  he  absolutely  was.    The  Dean  was  much 
troubled  at  this  for  his  own  sake,  as  well  as  his  Lordship's,  because 
he  had  been  the  occasion  of  sending  a  message  to  the  King,  which 
seemed  to  contradict  him.    Hereupon  the  next  day,  which  was  Fri- 
day, he  wrote  the  letter,  which  he  carried  with  him  to  Lord  Rus- 
sel, fearing,  that  being  so  near  the  time  of  his  suffering,  his  relations 


Journal  of  Lhe  House  of  Lords 


LIFE   OF   THE    AUTHOR.  IxXVU 

would  be  with  his  Lordship,  and  so  he  might  not  have  the  opportu- 
nity of  speaking  with  his  Lordship  himself.  But  when  he  came,  he 
found  there  none  with  him  but  his  lady.  He  told  his  Lordship 
what  he  intended  ;  that  since  his  time  was  so  very  short,  he  rather 
chose  to  «ive  him  that  letter,  than  to  trouble  him  with  a  long  dis- 
course. His  Lordship  receiving  it  rose  up,  and  went  into  an  inner 
room,  and,  after  staying  there  some  time,  upon  his  return  told  the 
Dean,  that  he  had  read  the  letter,  and  was  willing  to  be  convinced, 
but  could  not  say,  that  he  was  so ;  and  that  it  was  not  a  time  to 
trouble  himself  with  politics  ;  but  that  though  he  was  in  an  error, 
yet  being  willing  to  be  convinced,  he  hoped  that  God  would  forgive 
him.  To  which  the  Dean  answered,  that  he  hoped  so  too ;  and, 
after  a  little  discourse  of  that  matter,  told  his  Lordship,  he  would 
trouble  him  about  it  no  more:  nor  did  he ;  but  after  his  Lordship 
came  out  of  the  room,  he  gave  the  Dean  his  letter  again  ;  who  upon 
leaving  his  Lordship  went  to  the  Lord  Halifax,  whom  he  told,  that 
he  was  sorry,  that  he  had  begged  his  Lordship's  favour  to  employ 
himself  in  the  message  to  the  King,  not  finding  the  Lord  Russel  so 
fully  satisfied,  as  Dr.  Burnet  believed  he  was,  though  he  had  en- 
deavoured to  give  his  Lordship  satisfaction  in  the  matter,  and  had 
written  a  letter  to  that  purpose,  which  he  delivered  into  his  own 
hands  himself.  He  then  shewed  the  letter  to  Lord  Halifax,  and 
just  as  he  began  to  read  it,  one  of  his  Lordship's  servants  came  in, 
and  told  him,  that  a  foreign  or  Spanish  ambassador  was  coming  in. 
Upon  which  the  Dean  told  the  Lord  Halifax,  that  he  must  leave 
the  letter  with  his  Lordship.  The  next  day,  being  that  of  the  Lord 
RussoVs  suffering,  the  Dean  attended  him  on  the  scaffold,  and  did 
not  speak  with  the  Lord  Halifax  till  some  days  after  ;  and  the  rea- 
son, why  he  applied  to  his  Lordship  before,  was  because  he  be- 
lieved, that  his  Lordship  would  do  the  Lord  Russel  all  the  good 
he  could.  The  day  after  that  Lord's  death,  the  Dean  was  com- 
manded to  appear  at  the  cabinet-council,  which  he  did  ;  and  there 
the  King,  the  Duke  of  York,  the  Lord-keeper  North,  the  Duke  of 
Ormond,  the  Lord  Halifax,  the  Lord  Rochester,  Sir  Leoline  Jen- 
kins, were  present.  The  King  asked  the  Dean,  whether  he  had  any 
hand  in  the  paper,  which  was  published  in  the  Lord  Russel's  name: 
to  which  he  answered,  that  he  had  not.  After  which  his  Majesty 
corned  to  be  satisfied.  The  next  day  Mr.  Roger  L'Es! range  came 
to  the  Dean,  and  told  him,  that  he  was  ordered  to  >:;ew  him  a  let- 
ter, and  asked  him,  whether  it  was  his,  or  no.  The  Dean  having 
s?iven  no  copy  of  his  letter,  though  he  kept  one  in  short-hand,  de- 


IxXVlil  LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

sired  Mr.  L'Estrange  to  read  the  letter,  which  he  shewed  him  ;  and, 
when  he  read  it,  the  Dean  told  him,  that  it  was  his,  except  two  or  three 
words  which  he  shewed  Mr.  L'Estrange  to  alter.  He  believed, 
that  copy  was  in  that  gentleman's  hand-writing,  and  told  him,  that 
he  was  very  sorry  that  it  was  to  be  published  ;  and  that,  if  it  were 
in  his  own  power,  it  should  not.  Some  day  in  the  week  following, 
the  first  time  he  spoke  with  the  Lord  Halifax,  he  asked  his  Lord- 
ship, how  his  letter  came  to  be  published.  To  which  he  answered, 
that  upon  the  coming  out  of  the  Lord  Russei's  paper,  there  was 
such  a  storm  raised  in  the  court  against  Dr.  Burnet  and  the  Dean, 
that  his  Lordship  in  kindness  to  the  latter  shewed  the  King  his 
letter ;  and  it  passing  through  several  hands,  it  became  out  of  his 
power  to  retrieve  it.  His  Lordship  said,  that  he  had  this  reason  to 
believe,  that  he  had  left  it  in  the  King's  hands,  because  the  Duke 
of  York  that  Sunday  (being  the  day  after  the  Lord  Russei's  death) 
at  the  cabinet-council  spoke  of  this  letter  ;  but  the  Dean  knew  no- 
thing of  the  publishing  of  it,  nor  by  whom,  nor  did  he  speak  to  the 
Lord  Halifax  between  the  time  of  the  delivery  of  the  letter  and  the 
publishing  of  it.  The  Dean  added,  that  his  Lordship  shewed  a 
very  compassionate  concern  for  the  Lord  Russel,  and  all  the  readi- 
ness to  serve  him,  that  could  be  wished ;  and  that  the  Lord  Russel 
desired  him,  the  Dean,  to  give  his  thanks  to  that  Lord  for  his  hu- 
manity and  kindness  to  him,  upon  the  Dean's  informing  the  Lord 
Russel  of  the  Lord  Halifax's  being  so  ready  to  carry  that  message 
to  the  King,  which  he  had  from  Dr.  Burnet. 

To  this  examination  of  the  Dean  it  will  not  be  improper  to  sub- 
join some  particulars  from  an  original  manuscript  of  Dr.  Burnet, 
intitled,  An  Account  of  all  that  passed  between  the  late  Lord  Rus- 
sel and  me,  concerning  his  last  Speech  and  Paper;*  written  at 
Lady  Russei's  desire,  and  but  just  finished,  when  he  was  sent  for 
before  the  council  the  day  after  his  Lordship's  death,  to  be  exa- 
mined concerning  that  speech.  In  this  account,  which  is  the  very 
Journal  mentioned  by  the  Doctor  in  The  History  of  his  Own 
Time;t  he  observes,  that  upon  his  being  sent  for  by  that  Lord,  on 
Monday,  July  16th,  1683,  he  thought,  that  by  the  ground  which 
he  had  gained  in  discoursing  upon  the  subject  of  resistance,  it 
would  be  easy  to  persuade  his  Lordship,  that  it  was  absolutely  un- 
lawful ;  though  indeed  he  went  no  farther  at  first  than  lie  did  at 
last.    However,  the  Doctor  thinking  that  the  step  which  his  Lord- 

*  Communicated  to  me  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Lord  Charles  Cavendish, 
grandson  to  the  Lord  Russel.  t  Vol.  i.  p.  562. 


LIFE    OF    THE  AUTHOR. 


ixxix 


ship  had  made  gave  farther  hopes,  told  the  Dean,  that  he  believed 
that  his  Lordship  was  convinced  of  that  point.  Lord  Russel  per- 
sisting in  his  former  opinion,  notwithstanding  the  endeavours  of  the 
Dean  and  Doctor  to  alter  it,  added  to  the  speech,  which  he  was 
composing,  the  following  passage,  not  now  extant  in  the  printed 
copy : — "  For  my  part,  I  cannot  deny  but  I  have  been  of  opinion, 
that  a  free  nation  like  this  might  defend  their  religion  and  liberties, 
when  invaded,  and  taken  from  them,  though  under  pretence  and 
colour  of  law.  But  some  eminent  and  worthy  divines,  who  have 
had  the  charity  to  be  often  with  me,  and  whom  I  value  and  esteem 
to  a  very  great  degree,  have  offered  me  weighty  reasons  to  persuade 
me,  that  faith  and  patience  are  the  proper  ways  for  the  preservation 
of  religion,  and  the  method  of  the  gospel  is  to  suffer  persecution 
rather  than  to  use  resistance.  But  if  I  have  sinned  in  this,  I  hope 
God  will  not  lay  it  to  my  charge,  since  he  knows  it  was  only  a  sin 
of  ignorance."  This  being  read  to  the  Dean  on  Friday  morning, 
July  20th,  he  was  sorry  to  flud  it  so  defective  ;  but,  not  having  then 
leisure  to  speak  to  Lord  Russel  of  it,  he  returned  in  the  afternoon, 
and  pressed  his  Lordship  very  earnestly  to  deliver  himself  more 
fully  in  that  matter,  and  gave  him  a  paper  concerning  it ;  and,  as 
he  came  out,  meeting  Dr.  Burnet,  desired  him  to  urge  the  point 
home  to  his  Lordship,  and  either  to  carry  him  farther,  or  to  strike 
out  the  whole  paragraph  above  cited,  since  the  conclusion  of  it  was 
so  cold ;  and  wished,  that  the  first  part  of  it  might  be  quite  left 
out.  The  Doctor  accordingly  discoursing  Lord  Russel  again  upon 
the  affair,  his  Lordship  answered,  that  he  could  not  say  a  lie,  and 
he  was  sure  that  the  Doctor  would  not  desire  it ;  and  he  was  sure, 
if  he  went  farther,  he  must  needs  lie.  He  said  that  he  had  not 
leisure  now  to  study  politics.  That  the  notion  which  he  had  of 
the  laws,  and  of  the  English  government,  was  different  from  that 
of  the  two  divines ;  yet  he  said,  so  far  did  he  submit  to  them,  and 
to  the  reasons  which  they  had  offered  him,  that  he  was  willing  to 
go  so  far  as  he  had  done,  but  he  could  not  go  farther  without  being 
disingenuous.  And  when  at  last  the  Doctor  proposed  the  sup- 
pressing of  the  whole  paragraph,  he  was  very  well  satisfied,  and 
said,  that  his  chief  reason  for  putting  it  in,  was  to  prevent  any  in- 
conveniency  that  might  arise  to  them. 

There  is  another  account  of  the  occasion  of  the  writing  the  let- 
ter to  Lord  Russel,  aud  the  circumstances  of  its  publication,  pub- 
lished by  Mr.  Ecbard,*  who  pretends  it  to  have  been  taken  from 

*  Appendix  to  bis  Historv  of  England,  p.  18. 


Ixxx 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


the  Dean's  own  mouth.  This  will  be  found  indeed  contradictory 
in  several  points  to  his  own  examination  inserted  above  ;  but  as  it 
supplies  some  few  particulars  not  mentioned  in  that  examination, 
especially  as  to  what  passed  when  he  was  called  before  the  King  in 
council,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  give  the  whole  here. 

Two  days  before  Lord  Russel's  death,  Dean  Tillotson  going  to 
attend  upon  him,  was  suddenly  stopped  in  the  street  by  Dr.  Bur- 
net, who  told  him,  that  he  had  now  some  good  hope  of  saving  his 
Lordship's  life,  the  main  impediment  of  which  being  his  avowed 
principle,  that  resistance  was  in  some  cases  lawful,  he  had  con- 
vinced him  of  his  mistake,  and  that  he  was  ready  to  own  his  error 
in  it.  He  therefore  desired  the  Dean  to  go  immediately  to  the  Earl 
of  Halifax,  and  acquaint  him  with  it,  who  would  thereupon  go  to 
the  King,  and  use  his  utmost  endeavours  to  obtain  Lord  Russel 
pardon.    The  Dean  went,  and  delivered  this  message  to  the  Earl  of 
Halifax ;  but,  calling  upon  Lord  Russel  in  Newgate  upon  his  re- 
turn, was  very  much  surprised  and  troubled  to  find  him  under  no 
such  conviction,  as  Dr.  Burnet  had  hastily  believed  and  reported 
him  to  be.    The  Dean,  vexed  and  uneasy  at  what  he  had  done,  and 
willing  to  clear  himself  after  the  best  manner,  resolved  the  next 
day  to  try  what  he  could  do  to  bring  his  Lordship  to  some  change 
in  his  opinion.  But  it  being  the  last  day  before  the  appointed  exe- 
cution, and  not  knowing  whether  he  should  be  able  to  see  his  Lord- 
ship alone,  he  wrote  the  letter  to  him,  aud  took  it  in  his  pocket,  re- 
solving, if  he  could  not  discourse  with  him,  to  desire  him  to  read 
and  consider  it.  He,  finding  his  Lordship  alone,  told  him  what  he 
had  done,  and  gave  the  letter  to  him,  who  read  it  with  great  deli- 
beration, and  acknowledged  to  him,  that  he  had  therein  offered 
more  to  convince  him,  than  he  had  ever  met  with  before :  that  he 
was  now  satisfied  that  nothing  but  a  case  of  a  very  extraordinary 
nature  could  justify  subjects  in  taking  up  arms  against  their  prince: 
that  he  was  fully  of  opinion,  that  no  such  cause  had  been  given  by 
the  King  to  justify  any  such  attempt  against  him  :  but  still  he 
thought  such  circumstances  there  might  be,  in  which  it  would  be 
lawful  for  them  to  resist.    Being  asked  by  the  Dean,  what  these 
cases  were,  he  answered,  that  he  had  not  considered  the  matter  so 
far  and  fully,  and  that  he  had  other  things  more  proper  to  be 
thought  on  at  that  time.    On  that  same  evening  the  Dean  waited 
upon  the  Earl  of  Halifax,  to  account  to  him  what  mistake  he  had 
been  led  into,  and  what  he  had  done  upon  it;  and,  the  better  to 
justify  himself,  shewed  him  the  very  letter  he  had  written  to  the 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


Ixxx? 


Lord  Russel.  While  that  Lord  was  reading  it,  Sir  Thomas  Clarges 
came  in,  and  after  a  little  time  the  Dean  took  leave  of  the  Earl,  put- 
ting the  letter  into  his  pocket,  and  promising  to  be  answerable  for 
it.  But,  in  the  meantime,  Sir  Thomas  not  only  found  opportunity  to 
read  it,  but  to  take  a  copy  of  it ;  and  from  that  copy  (and  it  is 
thought  by  his  means)  it  was  soon  after  printed.  On  the  evening 
of  the  next  day,  when  Lord  Russel  was  executed,  the  Dean  was 
sent  for  to  the  cabinet-council,  and  carefully  examined  touching 
that  Lord's  behaviour  before  and  at  his  death.  The  King  particu- 
larly recommended  the  Dean's  letter,  and  wondered  what  could  be 
said  to  it.  He  told  his  Majesty  the  Lord  Russel's  opinion,  that 
such  circumstances  there  might  be,  in  which  it  would  be  lawful  to 
resist;  and  farther  intimated,  as  though  it  was  his  own,  that  it  was 
not  impossible  to  find  out  a  case  of  exception,  though  he  would 
not  presently  pretend  to  specify  it.  The  Duke  of  York,  who  was 
willing  to  believe  there  was  none,  with  some  warmth  urged  him  to 
name  the  case;  and,  not  being  satisfied,  the  King  more  mildly  said, 
"  Brother,  the  Dean  speaks  like  an  honest  man  ;  press  him  no  far- 
ther/' After  which  he  informed  his  Majesty,  that  Lord  Russel  had 
declared  to  him,  that  he  was  persuaded  that  the  King  had  never 
done  any  thing  to  justify  anyone  in  rebelling  against  him  :  that  he 
had  never  any  such  thought  himself ;  and  kept  company  with  those 
unhappy  men,  only  to  preserve  the  Duke  of  Monmouth  from  being 
led  into  any  rash  undertaking  by  them,  and  more  particularly  the 
Earl  of  Shaftesbury.  Being  then  asked  why  Lord  Russel  did  not 
discover  their  design  to  the  King,  his  answer  was,  that  that  Lord 
had  said,  he  could  not  betray  his  friends,  nor  turn  informer  against 
them,  while  he  saw  there  was  no  danger :  but  if  things  had  come 
to  a  crisis,  he  would  have  contrived  some  notice  to  have  been  given 
the  King  of  it;  and,  in  case  of  violence,  would  himself  have  been 
ready  to  oppose  them  with  his  sword  in  his  hand.  The  King  him- 
self confirmed  the  truth  of  the  greatest  part  of  this  account,  and  in 
conclusion  said,  "  James  (meaning  the  Duke  of  Monmouth)  has 
told  me  the  same  thing. ' 

The  firmness  of  Lord  Russel,  in  refusing  the  only  means  of  pur- 
chasing his  life  from  an  exasperated  court,  by  the  least  retraction 
of  an  opinion,  of  which  his  conscience  was  thoroughly  persuaded, 
is  the  strongest  proof  of  that  integrity  and  virtue,  which  gave  him 
so  much  weight  and  influence  in  his  own  time,  and  have  endeared 
him  to  posterity,  being,  as  Sir  William  Temple,  no  enemy  to  the 
prerogative,  acknowledges,*  u  a  person  in  general  repute  of  an  ho 

•  Mcmoiis,  n.  1 1% 


Ixxxii 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


nest  and  worthy  gentleman,  without  tricks,  or  private  ambition." 
Dr.  Spratt,  bishop  of  Rochester,  iu  his  True  Account  and  Declara- 
tion of  the  horrid  Conspiracy  against  King  Charles  II.  by  whose 
order  it  was  written,  though  not  published  till  under  his  successor, 
has  indeed  described  his  Lordship,  u  as  a  person  carried  away  be- 
yond his  duty  and  allegiance  into  this  traitorous  enterprize  by  a 
vain  air  of  popularity,  and  a  wild  suspicion  of  losing  a  great  estate 
by  an  imaginary  return  of  popery."*  But  this  very  writer  declared 
afterwards,  in  his  Second  Letter  to  the  Earl  of  Dorset,  dated  March 
26,  1689.  that  he  lamented  his  Lordship's  fall,  after  he  was  fully 
convinced  by  discourse  with  the  Dean  of  Canterbury,  of  his  great 
probity,  and  constant  abhorrence  of  falsehood.  And  these  were 
qualities,  which  his  Lordship's  excellent  lady,  Rachel,  second 
daughter  of  that  great  and  honest  statesman,  Thomas  Wriothesley, 
earl  of  Southampton,  lord  high  treasurer  after  the  Restoration  till 
his  death,  represents  as  peculiarly  eminent  in  him  in  her  letters,  of 
which  a  large  collection  is  still  extant,  written  with  an  uncommon 
force  of  style  and  sentiment.  In  one  of  them  to  Dr.  John  Fitz- 
WillianiSjt  a  divine,  for  whom  she  had  a  great  esteem  and  friend- 
ship, dated  July  21,  1685,  a  few  days  after  the  defeat  and  death  of 
the  Duke  of  Monmouth,  she  declares  her  opinion,  that  his  Grace's 
design  had  no  connexion  with  any,  in  which  Lord  Russel  might  be 
supposed  to  be  engaged,  and  of  which  she  was  convinced  he  was 
innocent.  u  I  take  this  late  wild  attempt,"  says  she,  "  to  be  a 
new  project,  not  depending  on,  or  being  linked  in  the  least  to,  any 
former  design,  if  there  was  then  any  real  one,  which  I  am  satisfied 
was  not,  no  more  than  my  own  Lord  confessed,  talk ;  and,  it  is 
possible,  that  talk  going  so  far  as  to  consider,  if  a  remedy  to  sup- 
posed evils  might  be  sought,  how  it  could  be  formed.  .  .  He  had 
so  just  a  soul,  so  firm,  so  good,  he  could  not  warp  from  such  prin- 
ciples, that  were  so,  unless  misguided  by  his  understanding,  and 
that  his  own,  not  another's  :  for  I  dare  say,  as  he  could  discern,  he 
never  went  into  any  thing  considerable,  upon  the  mere  submission 
to  any  one's  particular  judgment." 

But  whatever  honour  Lord  Russel  might  gain  by  his  inflexibility 
against  disowning  the  principle  of  resistance,  the  Dean  of  Canter- 
bury and  Dr.  Burnet  have  been  severely  censured  for  urging  him 
so  strongly  on  that  topic.  It  is  not  improbable,  that  neither  of  them 

*  Page  21.  Edit.  1685.  fol. 

t  He  bad  been  cbaplain  to  her  father,  as  he  was  afterwards  to  the  Duke  of  York, 
rector  of  Cottenham,  in  Cambridgeshire,  and  canon  of  Windsor,  which  preferments 
he  left  after  the  Revolution,  upon  his  refusal  of  the  oaths. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


Ixxxni 


had  then  sufficiently  considered  the  point,  with  so  much  attention 
and  exactness,  as  the  subsequent  measures  of  that  reign,  and  the 
whole  series  of  conduct  of  the  following  one,  necessarily  led  them 
to  do.  The  Doctor  indeed  informs  us,*  that  though  the  Dean  was 
restrained  by  some  particular  considerations  from  mentioning  in  his 
letter  to  his  Lordship  the  case  of  a  total  subversion  of  the  constitu- 
tion, which  he  thought  would  justify  resistance;  yet  he  did  not 
decline  to  explain  himself  in  that  way,  as  often  as  there  was  occa- 
sion for  it ;  and  only  differed  from  Lord  Russel  in  opinion  with  re- 
gard to  the  attempts  already  made  upon  the  constitution,  which  he 
did  not  think  just  grounds  of  resistance  ;  nor  that  remote  fears  and 
consequences,  together  with  illegal  practices,  would  authorize  it : 
whereas  his  Lordship  declared,  that  upon  this  hypothesis  "  he  did 
not  see  a  difference  between  a  legal  and  a  Turkish  government ; 
and  that,  in  a  case  of  total  subversion,  it  would  be  too  late  to  re- 
sist." His  Lordship's  opinion  upon  the  subject  of  resistance  was 
justified  by  his  chaplain,  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson,  in  a  paper  written 
soon  after ;  the  impression  of  which  was  seized  at  the  same  time 
with  his  Address  to  King  James  II.'s  army;  though  not  designed 
to  be  published  at  that  time.  The  design  of  this  paper  was  to 
shew,  that  "  resistance  may  be  used,  in  case  our  religion  and  rights 
should  be  invaded,"  as  an  answer  to  the  Dean's  letter  to  his  Lord- 
ship; and  it  is  reprinted  among  Mr.  Johnson's  Works,t  who  ob- 
serves, that  this  opinion  could  not  be  wrested  from  his  Lordship  at 
his  death,  notwithstanding  the  disadvantages  at  which  he  was  taken 
"  when  he  was  practised  upon  to  retract  that  opinion,  and  to  be- 
queath a  legacy  of  slavery  to  his  country."  And  indeed  the  Dean 
was  so  apprehensive  of  Lady  Russel's  displeasure  at  his  pressing  his 
Lordship,  though  with  the  best  intentions,  upon  that  subject,  that 
when  he  was  first  admitted  to  her,  after  her  Lord's  death,  he  is  said 
to  have  addressed  her  in  this  manner,  that  he  first  thanked  God, 
and  then  her  Ladyship,  for  that  opportunity  bf  justifying  himself 
to  her ;  and  they  soon  returned  to  the  terms  of  a  cordial  and  un- 
reserved friendship. 

In  1684,  the  Dean  performed  again  the  office  of  an  editor  in 
the  publication  of  the  first  volume,  followed  the  next  year  by  a  se- 
cond, of  Discourses,  full  of  excellent  sentiments  in  a  strong,  clear, 
and  unaffected  style,  from  the  manuscript  notes  of  his  friend  Dr. 
Hezekiah  Burton,  who  had,  by  his  interest  with  the  chapter  of  St. 
Paul's,  been  settled  in  the  rectory  of  Barnes,  in  Surry,  about  a 

*  Reflections,  p.  38.  42.  90.  t  Page  159. 


Ixxxiv 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


year  before  his  death,  which  was  occasioned  by  a  malignant  fever 
in  August,  or  September,  1681.  He  had  been  educated  in  Mag- 
dalen College,  in  Cambridge,  of  which  lie  was  fellow,  and  an  emi- 
nent tutor  there,  and  was  incorporated  in  the  degree  of  master  of 
arts  in  the  university  of  Oxford,  July  11th,  1654.*  Entering  into 
holy  orders,  he  was  ordained  priest  by  Dr.  Robert  Sanderson,  on 
the  13th  of  February,  166^,  at  the  church  of  St.  Botolph,  Alders- 
gate  ;  f  and,  upon  the  advancement  of  Sir  Orlando  Bridgman, 
who  had  been  educated  in  the  same  college,  to  the  post  of  lord- 
keeper  from  that  of  lord  chief  justice  of  the  common-pleas,  upon 
the  disgrace  of  the  Earl  of  Clarendon,  in  1667,  was  appointed 
chaplain  to  his  Lordship,  by  whom  he  was  presented  to  a  prebend 
of  Norwich,  in  October  the  same  year,  and  to  the  rectory  of  St. 
George's,  in  Southwark,  which  he  resigned  after  he  was  presented 
to  that  of  Barnes.  His  great  modesty  prevented  him  from  pub- 
lishing any  thing  in  his  life-time,  except  the  short  Alloquium  ad 
Lectorem,  prefixed  to  the  excellent  treatise  De  Legibus  Naturae  of 
Dr.  Cumberland,  afterwards  bishop  of  Peterborough,  who  had 
been  his  fellow-collegiate  and  fellow-chaplain.  The  Dean  has 
given  us  his  character  in  the  preface  to  the  first  volume  of  his 
Discourses,  which,  though  they  want  the  exactness,  that  they 
would  have  had,  if  they  had  been  designed  and  prepared  for  the 
press  by  the  author's  own  hand,  yet  have  the  perfection  chiefly 
aimed  at  by  him,  being  well  fitted  to  do  good,  and  to  make  the 
reader  wiser  and  better.  For  Dr.  Burton  thoroughly  understood 
the  nature  of  religion,  the  excellent  design,  and  the  happy  effects 
of  it,  where  it  is  sincerely  embraced  and  entertained ;  and  he 
knew  how  to  distinguish  genuine  and  substantial  piety,  from  that 
which  is  counterfeit  and  superficial.  .He  had  likewise  a  just  and 
lively  sense  of  the  vast  concernment  and  importance  of  religion, 
both  to  the  private  and  public,  the  present  and  future,  the  tempo- 
ral and  eternal  happiness  of  mankind ;  which  made  him  seek  out 
all  sorts  of  arguments  to  convince  them  of  the  absolute  necessity 
and  unspeakable  advantages  of  religion,  and  all  kinds  of  motives 
and  inducements  to  persuade  and  allure  them  to  the  practice  of 
it;  that  so,  by  one  consideration  or  other,  he  might  take  hold  of 
all  capacities  and  tempers  of  men.  His  virtues  and  good  qualities 
were  as  eminent  as  his  abilities  and  learning,  particularly  his 
great  piety  towards  God,  the  native  simplicity  of  his  mind  and 

*  Wood.  Fasti  Oxon,  vol.  ii.  col.  107. 
t  Rennet's  Register  and  Chronicle,  p.  375. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


lxxxv 


manners,  the  singular  kindness  of  his  conversation,  and  his  cheer- 
ful readiness  to  every  good  work.  And  the  public  sustained  an 
irreparable  loss  by  the  death  of  him  in  the  ripeness  of  his  age, 
when  he  was  capable  of  doing  the  greatest  service  to  the  church 
of  God,  "  and  in  a  time,"  adds  the  Dean,  "  when  he  was  most 
likely  to  have  contributed  considerably  to  it,  as  being  by  the  in- 
comparable sweetness  of  his  temper,  and  prudence  of  his  behavi- 
our, admirably  fitted  to  allay  those  heats,  which  then  began  to 
break  out,  but  are  since  blown  up  to  all  the  degrees  of  a  violent 
and  implacable  enmity,  by  the  skill  and  industry  of  a  crafty  and 
restless  party  among  us,  playing  upon  our  weakness,  and  persuading 
us  to  receive  odious  names  of  distinction,  and  to  fling  them  like 
squibs  and  fire-balls  at  one  another,  to  make  the  Philistines  sport/' 

The  accession  of  King  James  II.  to  the  throne,  on  the  6th  of 
February,  168f ,  was  soon  followed  with  such  a  prospect  of  danger 
to  the  religion  and  liberties  of  the  nation,  as  filled  the  Dean  with 
the  deepest  concern  for  both ;  though  in  the  event  the  imprudence 
and  violence  of  the  measures  pursued  by  that  prince  defeated  his 
designs  against  them ;  a  consequence  foreseen  by  the  wiser  persons 
of  his  own  religion.  For  Mons.  Gourville,  a  man  of  great  credit 
in  the  court  of  France,  being  asked  by  Madam  Hamilton,  after- 
wards Duchess  of  Tyrconnel,  then  going  to  England,  what  answer 
she  should  return  for  him  to  the  King,  who  would  ask  her  what  he 
said  of  the  great  progress,  which  he  was  making  for  the  re-estab- 
lishment of  the  Roman-catholic  religion  in  that  kingdom,  he  de- 
sired her  to  tell  his  Majesty,  that  if  himself  was  pope,  his  Majesty 
would  have  been  excommunicated  before  that  time,  since  he  was 
going  to  ruin  all  the  catholics  in  England :  and  though  what  had 
been  lately  done  in  France  might  probably  be  his  model,  yet  the 
case  was  very  different ;  and  that  a  better  plan  for  him  to  have 
followed  would  have  been,  to  have  contented  himself  with  favour- 
ing the  catholics  upon  ail  occasions,  and  so  increasing  their  num- 
bers, and  to  leave  to  his  successors  the  task  of  reducing  England 
by  degrees  under  the  papal  authority.  \ 

The  Dean's  discourse  against  Transubstantiation,  printed  to- 
wards the  end  of  King  Charles  11/s  life,  and  of  which  the  fourth 
edition  appeared  in  1685,  began  the  debate  upon  that  doctrine, 
and  gave  occasion  to  several  tracts  on  both  sides  of  the  question, 
published  during  the  controversy  with  the  papists,  which  subsisted 
through  the  rest  of  the  short,  but  unhappy  reign  of  King  James, 

|  Memoirs  de  Mons.  De  Gourville,  torn.  ii.  y.  254.  Edit.  Paris,  1724,  in  12mo. 


ixxxvi 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


and  produced  so  many  pieces,  that  the  vast  collection  published  a 
few  years  ago,  in  three  volumes  in  folio,  under  the  direction  of 
Dr.  Gibson,  bishop  of  London,  is  only  a  part  of  those  written  by 
the  protestants  ;  and  even  the  catalogues  of  them  drawn  up  by 
Dr.  Wake,  afterwards  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  Dr.  Gee, 
dean  of  Lincoln  and  prebendary  of  Westminster,  and  the  latest 
by  Mr.  Francis  Peck,  are  defective  in  the  titles  of  them.  The 
most  considerable  of  those  published  against  the  Dean  of  Canter- 
bury's Discourses  were  the  two  following :  the  former  intitled, 
Transubstantiation  defended  and  proved  from  Scripture,  in  Answer 
to  the  first  Part  of  a  Treatise,  intitled,  A  Discourse  against  Tran- 
substantiation :  the  first  Part ;  published  with  Allowance,  London, 
1687,  in  4to.  the  second  part  of  which  never  appeared.  The  lat- 
ter was  published  there  the  same  year,  in  the  same  form,  under 
the  title  of  An  Answer  to  a  Discourse  against  Transubstantiation  ; 
the  author  of  which  in  his  introduction  says,  that  he  thought  him- 
self obliged  in  Christian  duty  to  endeavour  a  discovery  of  the 
Dean's  winning  artifices,  and  a  removal  of  his  plausible  appear- 
ances in  that  discourse. 

In  the  beginning  of  March  168^,  just  after  the  accession  of  King 
James  to  the  crown,  was  published  A  Discourse  against  Purgatory, 
printed  at  London  in  four  sheets,  in  4to.  This  was  then  reported 
to  be  written  by  the  Dean,  and  the  translation  of  it  gave  such  of- 
fence in  France,  that  it  was  soon  after  publicly  burnt  there.  But 
Mr.  Wood,*  who  mentions,  that  this  discourse  had  been  ascribed 
to  Dr.  Tillotson,  has  placed  it  among  the  writings  of  Mr.  John 
Hartcliffe. 

He  had  now  likewise  a  new  reason  for  his  zeal  against  that 
church,  besides  those  of  a  more  general  and  public  nature ;  and  it 
was  founded  upon  this  incident.  His  friend,  Mr.  Nelson,  who  had 
returned  from  his  travels  abroad  in  the  beginning  of  August,  1682, 
had  contracted  there  an  acquaintance  with  Lady  Theophila  Lucy, 
widow  of  Sir  Kingsmill  Lucy,  of  Broxbourn,  in  Hertfordshire,  bart. 
and  second  daughter  of  George  Earl  of  Berkley ;  who  soon  dis- 
covered a  strong  passion  for  him.  This  concluded  in  a  marriage 
after  their  arrival  in  England  ;  but  it  was  some  time  before  she  con- 
fessed to  Mr.  Nelson  the  change  of  her  religion,  which  was  owing 
to  her  conversations  at  Rome  with  Cardinal  Philip  Howard,  who 
was  grandson  of  Thomas  Earl  of  Arundel,  the  collector  of  the  an- 
tiquities, and  had  been  raised  to  the  purple  by  Pope  Clement  X. 

*  Ath.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  1130. 


LIFE    OF   THF  AUTHOR. 


lxxxvu 


in  May,  1675.  Nor  was  this  important  alteration  of  her  religious 
sentiments  confined  to  her  own  mind,  but  involved  in  it  her 
daughter  by  her  first  husband,  whom  she  drew  over  to  her  new  re- 
ligion ;  and  her  zeal  for  it  prompted  her  even  to  engage  in  the  lists 
of  the  public  controversy  then  depending  ;  for  she  is  the  supposed 
author  of  a  piece  printed  in  1686,  in  4to.  under  the  title  of  A  Dis- 
course concerning  a  Judge  of  Controversy  in  Matters  of  Religion, 
shewing  the  Necessity  of  such  a  Judge ;  a  point,  the  full  consider- 
ation of  which  afterwards  recovered  another  of  her  own  sex,  and 
one  of  its  greatest  ornaments,  Mrs.  Cockburne,*  from  the  Romish 
profession,  into  which  she  had  been  seduced  in  her  early  years. 
The  Dean's  concern  for  this  unhappy  step  of  Lady  Theophila  oc- 
casioned him,  among  other  means  of  reclaiming  her,  to  write  to 
her  a  letter  of  considerable  length  upon  that  subject,  which  is  un- 
fortunately missing  among  the  papers  of  her  husband ;  but  is  re- 
membered to  have  concluded  to  this  purpose ;  that  he  did  not 
doubt,  but  that  her  Ladyship  was  as  much  wearied  with  reading 
so  long  a  letter,  as  himself  was  in  writing  it ;  and  that  she  might 
imagine,  that  his  time  lay  heavy  upon  his  hands  :  but  the  truth  was, 
that  every  thing,  which  related  to  Mr.  Nelson,  lay  so  near  his 
heart,  that  he  could  not  say  less  upon  such  an  occasion.  But  the 
strength  of  her  prejudices  was  superior  to  the  goodness  of  his 
cause,  and  the  abilities  of  so  able  an  advocate ;  and  notwithstand- 
ing the  endeavours  of  Mr.  Nelson,  who  was  himself  well  instructed 
in  that  cause,  as  appears  from  a  tract  of  his  printed  in  1687,  in4to. 
and  iutitled,  Transubstantiation  contrary  to  Scripture,  or  the  Pro- 
testant's Answer  to  the  Seeker's  Request ;  yet  -she  continued  in 
the  communion  of  the  church  of  Rome  till  her  death  in  1705. 

The  persecution  of  the  protestants  in  France,  begun  some  years 
before,  but  now  carried  to  its  height  by  the  repeal  of  the  edict  of 
Nantes,  in  October,  1685,  was  not  only  a  fresh  proof  to  the  Dean 
of  the  genuine  spirit  of  unrestrained  popery,  but  an  occasion  of  ex- 
erting his  own  pity  and  humanity  towards  those  distressed  persons, 
who  escaped  thence  to  England,  and  had  the  peculiar  recommend- 
ation of  suffering  for  religion.  King  Charles  II.  had,  as  early  as  the 
year  1682,  granted  briefs  for  collecting  money  for  the  relief  of  these 
refugees;  and  his  example  was  afterwards  followed  by  his  succes- 
sor, who  pretended  on  all  occasions  a  tenderness  and  moderation 
in  matters  of  religion,  or  more  probably  was  in  this  case  influenced 

*  Life  of  Mrs.  Catherine  Cockburne,  p.  xxx.  prefixed  to  the  first  volume  of  her 
norks,  printed  at  London  1751,  in  8vo. 


ixxxviii  LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  , 

by  motives  of  policy  for  the  sake  of  adding  industrious  and  useful 
people  to  his  kingdom.  The  granting  of  these  briefs  gave  the  Dean 
an  opportunity  of  shewing  his  regard  for  the  persecuted  French 
protestants,  by  promoting  the  contributions  in  their  favour.  And 
the  warmth  of  his  zeal  upon  this  occasion  is  evident  from  an  an- 
swer, which  he  returned  to  Dr.  Beveridge,  one  of  the  prebendaries 
of  his  cathedral,  who,  from  a  coolness  towards  foreign  protestants, 
or  an  unnecessary  scruple  with  respect  to  forms  even  in  affairs  of 
weight  and  substance,  had  objected  to  the  reading  of  one  of  these 
briefs  there,  as  contrary  to  the  rubric.  The  Dean's  reply  rvas  short 
and  significant,  "  Doctor,  doctor,  charity  is  above  rubrics." 

The  friendship  between  the  Dean  and  Lady  Russel  was  culti- 
vated by  a  frequent  correspondence  of  letters  during  their  absence, 
some  of  which  will  be  found  in  the  course  of  this  Life  of  him.  Her 
Ladyship  had  written  to  him  in  October,  1685,  in  which  letter  she 
mentioned  the  small-pox  having  proved  fatal  to  a  cousin  of  her's, 
a  niece  of  her  cousin-german,  Mons.  Rouvigny,  afterwards  Earl  of 
Galway,  and  general  of  the  English  forces  in  Spain  ;  which  young 
lady  she  speaks  of  in  another  letter  to  Dr.  Fitz-Williams  ofthellth 
of  October,  as  a  pattern  to  all  who  kuew  her."  The  Dean's  answer 
was  as  follows  :  * 

"  HONOURED  MADAM,  Canterbury,  Nov.  "list,  1685. 

"  When  I  look  back  upon  the  date  of  your  Ladyship's  letter,  I  blush 
to  see  it  hath  lain  by  me  so  long  unanswered.  And  yet  I  assure 
you  no  day  passeth,  in  which  your  Ladyship  and  your  dear  chil- 
dren are  not  in  my  mind.  But  I  know  not  how,  in  the  hurry  I  am 
in,  in  London,  one  business  presseth  so  hard  upon  another,  that  I  have 
less  time  for  the  things  to  which  I  have  most  inclination.  I  am 
now  for  a  while  got  out  of  the  tumult  and  noise  of  that  great  city, 
and  do  enjoy  a  little  more  repose. 

"  It  was  a  great  trouble  to  me  to  hear  of  the  sad  loss  your  dear 
friend  sustained  during  his  short  stay  in  England.  But,  in  some 
circumstances,  to  die  is  to  live.  And  that  voice  from  heaven  runs 
much  in  my  mind,  which  St.  John  heard  in  his  vision  of  the  last  (as 
I  think)  and  most  extreme  persecution,  which  should  befal  the  faith- 
ful servants  of  God  before  the  final  downfall  of  Babylon,  *  Blessed 

*  From  a  collection  of  Archbishop  Tillotson's  letters  to  Lady  Russel,  in  the  pos- 
session of  Edmund,  late  lord  bishop  of  London,  communicated  to  me  by  his  Lord- 
ship's executors,  the  late  Dr.  Bettesworth,  dean  of  the  Arches,  and  George  Gibson. 
Esq. 


LtFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


Ixxxix 


are  the  dead,  that  die  in  the  Lord,  from  henceforth  meaning,  that 
they  were  happy,  that  were  taken  away  before  that  terrible  and  ut- 
most trial  of  the  faith  and  patience  of  the  saints.  But  however  that 
be,  I  do  greatly  rejoice  in  the  preservation  of  your  children  from 
the  great  danger  they  were  in  upon  that  occasion,  and  thank  God 
heartily  for  it,  because,  whatever  becomes  of  us,  I  hope  they  may 
live  to  see  better  things. 

"  Just  now  came  the  news  of  the  prorogation  of  the  parliament 
to  the  10th  of  February,  which  was  surprising  to  us.  We  are  not 
without  hopes,  that  in  the  mean  time  things  will  be  disposed  to  a 
better  agreement  against  the  next  meeting.  But  when  all  is  done, 
our  greatest  comfort  must  be,  that  we  are  in  the  hands  of  God,  and 
that  he  hath  the  care  of  us.  And  do  not  think,  madam,  that  he 
loves  you  the  less  for  having  put  so  bitter  a  cup  into  your  hand. 
He,  whom  he  loved  infinitely  best  of  all  mankind,  drank  much 
deeper  of  it. 

*  I  did  hope  to  have  waited  upon  my  Lord  of  Bedford  at  my 
return  to  London ;  but  now  I  doubt  this  prorogation  will  carry 
him  into  the  country  before  that  time.  I  intreat  you  to  present 
my  most  humble  service  to  his  Lordship,  to  dear  little  master,  and 
the  young  ladies.  I  am  not  worthy  of  the  consideration  you  are 
pleased  to  have  of  me,  but  I  pray  continually  for  you  all,  and  shall 
ever  be,  madam, 

**  Your  Ladyship's  most  faithful  and  humble  servant, 

"  J.  Tjllotson.'* 

The  Dean's  love  of  truth  and  justice  to  all  men,  without  distinc- 
tion, led  him,  in  the  beginning  of  the  following  year,  to  do  right  to 
the  character  of  Mr.  William  Penn.  This  gentleman,  who  was 
son  of  Sir  William  Penn,  admiral  in  the  expedition  against  Hispa- 
niola,  and  at  the  taking  of  Jamaica,  in  the  time  of  the  Protector 
Cromwell,  and  vice-admiral  of  England  under  King  Charles  II.  had 
some  part  of  his  education  at  Christ  Church,  in  Oxford,  and  then 
travelled  into  France  ;  but,  joining  the  quakers  in  1666,  at  the  age 
of  twenty-two,  soon  became  one  of  the  most  considerable  preachers 
and  writers  amongst  them,  though  he  is  now  much  less  known  to 
the  public  by  his  works,  reprinted  in  two  volumes,  in  folio,  in  1726, 
than  by  the  flourishing  colony,  which  bears  his  name,  and  was 
established  by  him  in  1681.  His  attachment  to,  and  favour  with, 
King  James  II.  soon  exposed  him  to  the  imputation  of  being  a  pa- 
pist in  disguise,  or  at  least  of  holding  a  correspondence  with  Je- 
vol.  i.  m 


xc 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


suits  at  Rome.  The  Dean's  suspicions  of  the  same  kind  being  re- 
ported to  Mr.  Penn,  the  latter  wrote  immediately  to  him  in  his  own 
justification  ;  affirming  himself  to  be  "  no  Roman  Catholic,  but  a 
Christian,  whose  creed  is  the  Scripture ;  of  the  truth  of  which," 
says  he,  "  I  hold  a  nobler  evidence,  than  the  best  church  autho- 
rity in  the  world."  The  result  was,  that  he  gave  the  Dean  such 
satisfaction  upon  that  head,  that  the  latter  returned  him  two  let- 
ters expressing  that  satisfaction.*  In  the  former  of  these,  dated 
January  2Gth,  168f ,  he  declares  his  full  concurrence  with  Mr. 
Penn  in  abhorring  the  two  principles  mentioned  by  him,  u  obe- 
dience upon  authority  without  conviction,  and  destroying  them, 
that  differ  from  us,  for  God's  sake;"  and  he  affirms,  that  he  had 
endeavoured  to  make  it  one  of  the  governing  principles  of  his  life, 
never  to  abate  any  thing  of  humanity  or  charity  to  any  man  for  his 
difference  from  him  in  opinion  ;  "  and  particularly,"  adds  he,  "  to 
those  of  your  persuasion,  as  several  of  them  have  had  the  experi- 
ence. I  have  been  ready  upon  all  occasions  to  do  all  offices  of  kind- 
ness, being  truly  sorry  to  see  them  so  hardly  used ;  and  though  I 
thought  them  mistaken,  yet  in  the  main  I  believed  them  to  be  very 
honest/' 

In  November,  1687,  he  lost  another  of  his  daughters,  and  the 
last  surviving  of  his  children,  Mary,  the  wife  of  James  Chadwicke, 
Esq.  by  whom  she  left  two  sons  and  a  daughter.  This  loss,  as  he  ob- 
served in  a  letter  of  the  11th  of  that  month  to  Mr.  Nelson,  then  in  Lon- 
don, deeply  pierced  his  heart ;  c<  but  I  endeavour,"  adds  he,  "  to  do 
as  becomes  me,  and  as  I  know  1  ought."  This  misfortune  probably 
occasioned  him  to  retire  to  Canterbury,  whence  he  wrote  again  to 
that  gentleman,  on  the  7th  of  December,  to  return  his  own  and  his 
wife's  thanks  to  him,  and  to  those  honourable  persons,  who,  upon 
Mr,  Nelson's  motion,  had  been  so  charitable  in  their  contributions, 
most  probably  to  the  French  protestants  in  that  city,  since  he  re- 
quests him  to  lay  out  five  pounds  in  French  Bibles  bound,  and  to 
desire  Mr.  Firmin  to  send  them  thither. 

Not  long  after  this,  the  Dean  was  seized  with  a  disorder  of  the 
apoplectic  kind  ;  but  escaped  the  consequences  of  it,  without  any 
return  till  that  fatal  one  about  seven  years  after.  Under  the  im- 
pressions of  this  melancholy  stroke,  and  the  loss  of  his  daughter 
just  before,  he  was  called  upon  himself  to  administer  consolation 
to  an  intimate  and  worthy  friend,  Mr.  Nicholas  Hunt,  of  Canter- 

*  Life  of  William  Penn,  p.  126—128,  prefixed  to  the  first  volume  of  his  Work* 
Edit.  Loudon,  1726,  fol. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


bury,  lingering  under  the  apprehensions  of  death  from  an  incura- 
ble cancer.  This  he  did  in  a  letter,  which,  on  account  of  the  sub- 
ject, and  the  manner  of  treating  it,  as  well  as  of  the  incorrectness 
of  the  copy  of  it  formerly  printed,  cannot  be  omitted  here. 

M  sir,  "  Edmonton,  Jan.  16th,*  168 J. 

"  I  am  sorry  to  understand  by  Mr.  Janeway's  letter  to  my  son, 
that  your  distemper  grows  upon  you,  and  that  you  seem  to  decline 
so  fast.  I  am  very  sensible  how  much  easier  it  is  to  give  advice 
against  trouble  in  the  case  of  another,  than  to  take  it  in  our  own. 

"  It  hath  pleased  God  to  exercise  me  of  late  with  a  very  sore 
trial,  in  the  loss  of  my  dear  and  only  child,  in  which  I  do  perfectly 
submit  to  his  good  pleasure,  firmly  believing,  that  he  always  does 
that  which  is  best.  And  yet,  though  reason  be  satisfied,  our  pas- 
sion is  not  so  soon  appeased  ;  and,  when  nature  has  received  a 
wound,  time  must  be  allowed  for  the  healing  of  it.  Since  that, 
God  hath  thought  fit  to  give  me  a  nearer  summons  of  a  closer 
warning  of  my  own  mortality  in  the  danger  of  an  apoplexy ;  which 
yet,  I  thank  God  for  it,  hath  occasioned  no  very  melancholy  reflec- 
tions. But  this  perhaps  is  more  owing  to  natural  temper,  than  phi- 
losophy and  wise  consideration. 

"  Your  case,  I  know,  is  very  different,  who  are  of  a  temper  na- 
turally melancholy,  and  under  a  distemper  apt  to  increase  it ;  for 
both  which  great  allowances  ought  to  be  made.  And  yet  methinks 
both  reason  and  religion  do  offer  us  considerations  of  that  solidity 
and  strength,  as  may  very  well  support  our  spirits  under  all  frailties 
and  infirmities  of  the  flesh  ;  such  as  these : 

•*  That  God  is  perfect  love  and  goodness :  that  we  are  not  only 
his  creatures,  but  his  children,  and  as  dear  to  him  as  to  ourselves: 
that  he  does  not  afflict  willingly,  or  grieve  the  children  of  men; 
and  that  all  evils  and  afflictions  which  befal  us,  are  intended  for 
the  cure  and  prevention  of  greater  evils  of  sin  and  punishment; 
and,  therefore,  we  ought  not  only  to  submit  to  them  with  patience, 
as  being  deserved  by  us,  but  to  receive  them  with  thankfulness,  as 
being  designed  by  him  to  do  us  that  good,  and  to  bring  us  to  that 
sense  othini  and  ourselves,  which  nothing  else  perhaps  would  have 
done.  That  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  but  short  and 
light,  compared  with  that  extreme  and  endless  misery,  which  we 
have  deserved,  and  with  that  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory, 
which  we  hope  for  in  the  other  world.    That  if  we  be  careful  to 

*  Another  copy,  which  I  have  seen,  dates  it  the  26th. 
M  2 


xcii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR* 


make  the  best  preparations  for  death  and  eternity,  whatever  bring* 
us  nearer  to  our  end,  brings  us  nearer  to  our  happiness ;  anr-V  how 
rugged  soever  the  way  be,  the  comfort  is,  that  it  leads  us  to  our 
Father's  house,  where  we  shall  want  nothing  that  we  can  wish. 
When  we  labour  under  a  dangerous  distemper,  which  threatens  our 
life,  what  would  we  not  be  content  to  bear,  in  order  to  a  perfect  re- 
covery, could  we  but  be  assured  of  it  ?  And  should  we  not  be  willing 
to  endure  much  more  in  order  to  perfect  happiness,  and  that  eternal 
life,  which  God,  that  cannot  lie,  hath  promised  ?  Nature,!  know,  is 
fond  of  life,  and  apt  to  be  still  lingering  after  a  longer  continuance 
here.  And  yet  a  long  life,  with  the  usual  burdens  and  infirmities 
of  it,  is  seldom  desirable.  It  is  but  the  same  thing  over  again,  or 
worse  ;  so  many  more  nights  and  days,  summers  and  winters,  a  re- 
petition of  the  same  pleasures,  but  with  less  pleasure  and  relish 
every  day ;  a  return  of  the  same  or  greater  pain  and  trouble,  but 
with  less  strength  and  patience  to  bear  them.  These  and  the  like 
considerations  I  use  to  entertain  myself  withal,  not  only  with  con- 
tentment, but  comfort,  though  with  great  inequality  of  temper  at 
several  times,  and  with  much  mixture  of  human  frailties,  which 
will  always  stick  to  us,  while  we  are  in  this  world.  However,  by 
these  kinds  of  thoughts,  death  will  become  more  familiar  to  us,  and 
we  shall  be  able  by  degrees  to  bring  our  minds  close  up  to  it,  with- 
out starting  at  it.  The  greatest  tenderness  I  find  in  myself  is  with 
regard  to  some  near  relations,  especially  the  dear  and  constant 
companion  of  my  life,  which  I  must  confess  doth  very  sensibly 
touch  me.  But  then  I  consider,  and  so,  I  hope,  will  they  also,  that 
this  separation  will  be  but  a  very  little  while  ;  and  that  though  I 
shall  leave  them  in  a  bad  work},  yet  under  the  care  and  protection 
of  a  good  God,  who  can  be  more  and  better  to  them  than  all  other 
relations,  and  will  certainly  be  so  to  those  that  love  him,  and  hope 
in  his  mercy. 

<c  I  shall  not  need  to  advise  you  what  to  do,  and  what  use  to 
make  of  this  time  of  your  visitation.  I  have  reason  to. believe  that 
you  have  been  careful  in  the  time  of  your  health  to  prepare  for  the 
evil  day,  and  have  been  conversant  in  those  books,  which  give  the 
best  directions  to  this  purpose ;  and  have  not,  as  too  many  do,  put 
off  the  great  work  of  your  life  to  the  end  of  it.  And  then  you  have 
nothing  to  do,  but,  as  well  as  you  can,  under  your  present  weak- 
ness and  pains,  to  renew  your  repentance  for  all  the  errors  and  mis- 
carriages of  your  life,  and  earnestly  to  beg  God's  pardon  and  for- 
giveness of  them,  for  bis  sake,  who  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins ; 


LITE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


xciii 


to  comfort  yourself  in  the  goodness  and  promises  of  God,  and  the 
kope  of  that  happiness  you  are  ready  to  enter  into ;  and,  in  the 
mean  time,  to  exercise  faith  and  patience  for  a  little  while.  And, 
be  of  good  courage,  since  you  see  land.  The  storm  which  you  are 
in  will  soon  be  over ;  and  then  it  will  be  as  if  it  had  never  been, 
or  rather  the  remembrance  of  it  will  be  pleasant. 

fi  I  do  not  use  to  write  such  long  letters,  but  I  do  heartily  com- 
passionate your  case,  and  should  be  glad,  if  I  could  suggest  any 
thin (j.  that  might  help  to  mitigate  your  trouble,  and  make  that 
sharp  and  rugged  way,  througli  which  you  are  to  pass  into  a  better 
world,  -a  little  more  smooth  and  easy. 

"  I  pray  God  to  fit  us  both  for  that  great  change,  which  we 
must  once  undergo  ;  and  if  we  be  but  in  any  good  measure  fit  for 
it,  sooner  or  later  makes  no  great  difference.  I  commend  you  to 
the  Father  of  all  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  consolation,  beseech- 
ing him  to  increase  your  faith  and  patieuce,  and  to  stand  by  you 
in  your  last  and  great  conflict  ;  that  when  you  walk  through  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  you  may  fear  no  evil ;  and,  when 
your  heart  fails,  and  your  strength  fails,  you  may  find  him  the 
strength  of  your  heart,  and  your  portion  for  ever. 

11  Farewell,  my  good  friend  ;  and,  whilst  we  are  here,  let  us 
pray  for  one  another,  that  we  may  have  a  joyful  meeting  in  another 
r.  orld.    I  rest,  sir, 

a  Your  truly  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

"  J.  TlLLOTSON." 

The  re-establishment  of  his  health  kept  him  at  Tuubridge  du- 
ring the  usual  season  of  the  year  1688,  where  he  had  the  honour 
of  frequent  conversations  with  the  Princess  Anne  of  Denmark,  be- 
fore whom  he  preached  there  on  the  2d  of  September,  on  the  pa- 
rable of  the  ten  virgins,  in  which  he  took  occasion  to  expose  some 
of  the  most  dangerous  doctrines  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and  con- 
cluded with  an  exhortation  peculiarly  adapted  to  his  audience  in 
that  critical  situation  of  things,  that  they  should  take  great  care,  not 
to  extinguish  their  lamps  by  quitting  the  profession  of  our  holy 
religion  upon  any  temptation  of  advantage,  or  for  fear  of  any  loss 
or  suffering  whatsoever.  *4  This  occasion,''  adds  he,  U  will  call  for 
all  our  faith  and  patience,  all  our  courage  and  constancy. 

■"  Xunc  animis  opus,  JEnea,  nunc  pectoreJinnoS' 

Immediately  after  preaching  this  sermon  he  went  to  Canterbury, 


XC1V 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


whence,  on  the  6th  of  that  month,  he  wrote  a  letter  to  Lady  Rus- 
sel  in  answer  to  one  from  her  Ladyship.  In  his  letter*  he  mentions 
his  having  left  the  good  Princess  at  Tunbridge.    "  As  for  my 
friend,"  says  he,  "  who  is  so  mindful  in  the  midst  of  his  prosperity 
of  his  old  friends,  I  beg  of  your  Ladyship  to  let  him  know,  that  I 
have  a  true  sense  of  his  constant  friendship.    For  the  paper  he 
mentions,  I  believe  it  is  well  received  generally  on  both  sides. 
For  men's  heats  are  much  allayed,  and  they  have  now  patience  to 
hear  of  their  faults,  if  they  be  told  of  them  in  a  civil  way,  without 
anger  or  ill  will,  as  that  paper  does  with  great  skill,  considering 
the  nicety  and  tenderness  of  the  subject;  so  that  if  it  has  not  fully 
pleased  both,  it  hath  the  good  fortune  to  have  provoked  neither.  It 
is  too  much,  according  to  my  mind,  for  me  to  be  fit  to  commend  it. 
I  will  only  say,  that  it  is  both  very  artificial  and  very  honest,  two 
things,  which  seldom  meet  together."    This  paper  was  proba- 
bly Mr.  Samuel  Johnson's  Way  to  Peace  among  all  Protestants ; 
being  a  Letter  of  Reconciliation  sent  by  Bishop  Ridley  to  Bishop 
Hooper ;  with  some  observations  upon  it ;  licensed  in  July,  1688, 
but  seized  soon  after  the  publication,  by  order  of  the  Earl  of  Sun- 
derland.    Mr.  Johnson  introduces  his  observations  on  that  Let- 
ter of  Bishop  Ridley  with  remarking,  that  as  there  could  not  be 
"  a  more  blessed  work  than  to  reconcile  protestants  with  protes- 
tants,"  this  was  the  only  design  of  his  paper,  by  proposing  the  ex- 
ample of  two  protestant  bishops,  who  wisely  found  out  the  way  to 
put  a  happy  period  to  their  unhappy  differences,  which  are  the 
very  same  as  have  been  since  taken  up  by  protestants  again,  after 
these  two  good  men  had  laid  them  down.    In  the  strugglings  of 
Ridley  and  Hooper,  there  were  two  nations  struggling  in  the 
womb,  the  two  great  parties  of  the  conformists  and  nonconform- 
ists ;  for  these  two  persons  differed  about  the  self-same  matters, 
as  we  do  now,  the  established  ceremonies,  the  dress  of  religion, 
certain  by-matters  and  circumstances  of  religion,  which  Hooper, 
the  nonconformist,  could  not  comply  with,  and  Ridley,  the  con- 
formist, because  they  were  according  to  law,  insisted  upon,  and 
would  not  abate.'' 

In  the  month  of  November  following,  memorable  for  the  land- 
ing of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  to  deliver  the  nation  from  the  most 
imminent  danger  to  its  most  important  interests,  and  for  the  gene- 
ral defection  of  the  King's  friends,  the  Dean  is  said  to  have  been 
employed  in  drawing  up  the  letter  sent  by  Prince  George  of  Den- 
mark, upon  his  leaving  his  Majesty  at  Andover,  on  the  24th  of 
•  Among  the  collection  oi  Ladv  Russel's  letters.         t  Dr.  Fitz- Williams. 


LIFE  OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


XCV 


that  month,  in*  the  King's  return  from  Salisbury  towards  London. 
There  is  only  traditional  evidence  of  this  fact,  but  it  is  rendered 
highly  probable,  by  the  Dean's  intimacy  with  both  their  Royal 
Highnesses,  his  known  abilities  in  writing  upon  subjects  of  the 
greatest  delicacy,  which  would  naturally  recommend  his  pen  upon 
such  an  occasion,  and  the  composition  of  the  letter  itself,  which  is 
exactly  in  his  manner,  and  the  following  passage  peculiarly  so : — 
"  I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  frequent  mischiefs  wrought  in  the  world 
by  factious  pretensions  of  religion.  But  were  not  religion  the  most 
justifiable  cause,  it  would  not  be  made  the  most  specious  pretence. 
And  your  Majesty  has  already  shewn  too  uninterested  a  sense  of 
religion  to  doubt  the  just  effects  of  it  in  one,  whose  practices  have, 
I  hope,  never  given  the  world  cause  to  censure  his  real  conviction 
of  it,  or  his  backwardness  to  perform  what  his  honour  and  con- 
science prompt  him  to." 

The  King  having  withdrawn  himself  from  Rochester  into  France, 
oh  the  23d  of  December,  a  few  days  after  he  had  been  desired,  for 
the  sake  of  the  public  peace  and  safety,  to  leave  Whitehall,  whi- 
ther he  had  returned  on  the  16th,  upon  being  stopped  at  Fever- 
sham,  and  where  he  had,  accordiug  to  a  very  unsuspected  autho- 
rity,* again  called  together  about  him  the  most  violent  papists, 
without  the  least  regard  to  any  men  of  prudence  and  moderation ; 
and  the  Prince  of  Orange  being  settled  in  the  palace  at  St.  James's, 
the  Dean  was  desired  to  preach  before  him  there  on  Sunday,  the 
■6th  of  January,  168f :  and  the  convention,  which  met  on  the  22d 
of  that  month,  having  appointed  Thursday,  the  31st,  for  a  day  of 
w  public  thanksgiving  to  Almighty  God,"  in  the  cities  of  London 
and  Westminster,  and  ten  miles  distant,  "  for  having  made  his 
Highness,  the  Prince  of  Orange,  the  glorious  instrument  of  the 
great  deliverance  of  this  kingdom  from  popery  and  arbitrary  power 
he  preached  a  sermon  upon  that  occasion  at  Lincoln's  Inn  Chapel, 
which  he  published  soon  after,  with  a  dedication  to  the  Society 
there,  in  which  he  acknowledged  himself  much  indebted  to  them 

*  That  of  the  learned  Mr.  Henry  Wharton,  then  chaplain  to  Archbishop  Sancroft 
who,  in  his  manuscript  history  and  diary  of  his  own  life,  written  in  Latin,  in  the  pos- 
session of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Calainy,  containing  a  very  odious  picture  of  King  James  II.  's 
government,  has,  under  the  16th  of  December,  1688,  entered  the  following  remark  : 
"  Rex  urbem  deductus  est :  cum  more  solito  perditissiinorum  pontificiorum  e  lale- 
bris  ad  adventum  ejus  erumpeiilium  satellitium  acciret,  iisque  solis  aurem  praeberet, 
exclusis  cordatioribus  viris,  pontificiosque  dimiltere  praefracte  recusaret;  Princeps 
Am  iacus  proceresque  Regui  illi  nrbe  cedendumesse  denunciarunt,  elRclganun  luima 
supatum  Rccestrium  deduci  caiwflnt  die  18. 


XCVl 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


for  their  great  and  continued  respects  to  him,  and  kind  acceptance 
of  his  labours  among  them,  for  above  the  space  of  five-and-twenty 
years.    In  this  sermon,  having  recapitulated  the  several  judgments 
inflicted  upon  the  nation  from  the  earliest  times,  and  represented 
the  greatness  of  their  late  deliverance,  with  the  strangeness  of  the 
means  by  which  it  had  been  effected,  and  the  suddenness  and  easi- 
ness of  it,  he  concludes  with  an  advice  suitable  to  his  own  temper, 
recommending  clemency  and  moderation  ;  "  making,"  says  he,  "  as 
few  examples  of  severity,  as  will  be  consistent  with  our  future  se- 
curity from  the  like  attempts  upon  our  religion  and  laws.  And  even 
in  the  execution  of  justice  upon  the  greatest  offenders,  let  us  not 
give  so  much  countenance  to  the  ill  examples  which  have  been  set, 
of  extravagant  fines  and  punishments,  as  to  imitate  those  patterns 
which  with  so  much  reason  we  abhor ;  no,  not  in  the  punishment 
of  the  authors  of  them."  Another  of  his  advices  was,  to  be  for  once 
so  wise,  as  not  to  forfeit  the  fruits  of  this  deliverance,  or  to  de- 
prive themselves  of  the  benefit  and  advantages  of  it  by  breaches 
and  divisions  among  them.    "  As  we  have  no  reason,"  continues 
he,  "  to  desire  it,  so  I  think  we  can  hardly  ever  hope  to  under- 
stand popery  better,  and  the  cruel  design  of  it,  than  we  do  already, 
both  from  the  long  trial  and  experience  which  we  have  had  of  it  in 
this  nation,  and  likewise  from  that  dismal  and  horrid  view,  which 
hath  of  late  been  given  us,  of  the  true  spirit  and  temper  of  it  in  one 
of  our  neighbouring  nations,  which  hath  long  pretended  to  the  pro- 
fession of  the  most  refined  and  moderate  popery  in  the  world,  but 
hath  now  at  last  shewed  itself  in  its  true  colours,  and  in  the  per- 
fection of  a  persecuting  spirit,  and  hath  therein  given  us  a  most  sad 
and  deplorable  instance  of  a  religion  corrupted  and  degenerated 
into  that,  which,  if  possible,  is  worse  than  none.'*  He  appears  from 
this  sermon  to  have  been  persuaded  of  the  papists  being  concerned 
in  the  fire  of  London  ;  observing,  that  there  was  "  too  much  rea- 
son to  believe,  that  the  enemy  did  this,  that  perpetual  and  implaca- 
ble enemy  of  the  peace  and  happiness  of  our  nation."    And  this 
persuasion  of  his  is  mentioned  by  Bishop  Burnet,*  who  adds,  that 
the  Dean  related  to  him  a  circumstance,  which  made  the  papists, 
employing  such  a  crazed  person  as  Hubert,  a  Frenchman  of  that 
religion,  in  such  a  service,  the  more  credible.    Mr.  Langhorn,  the 
popish  counsellor  at  law,  who  for  many  years  passed  for  a  protest- 
ant,  but  was  afterwards  executed  for  the  popish  plot,  was  dispatch- 
ing a  half-witted  man  to  manage  elections  in  Kent  before  the  Res- 

*  History  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  i.  p.  230. 


life  of  the  author. 


xcvii 


toration,  Mr.  Tillotson  being  present,  and  observing,  what  a  sort 
of  man  he  was,  asked  Mr.  Langhorn,  how  he  could  employ  him  in 
such  services.  His  answer  was,  that  it  was  a  maxim  with  him,  in 
dangerous  services  to  employ  none  but  half-witted  men,  if  they 
could  be  but  secret,  and  obey  orders  ;  for,  if  they  should  change 
their  minds,  and  turn  informers  instead  of  agents,  it  would  be  easy 
to  discredit  them,  and  to  carry  off  the  weight  of  any  discoveries 
they  could  make,  by  shewing  that  they  were  madmen,  and  so  uot 
like  to  be  trusted  in  critical  things. 

The  government  being  settled  upon  King  William  and  Queen 
Mary,  who  were  proclaimed  on  Ash-Wednesday,  the  13th  of  Fe- 
bruary, 168%,  and  crowned  on  the  11th  of  April  following,  some  of 
the  ecclesiastical  commissioners,  under  King  James,  thinking  it  ne- 
cessary to  excuse  their  acting  under  so  illegal  a  commission,  the 
Earl  of  Mulgrave,  afterwards  Duke  of  Buckinghamshire,  addressed 
his  apology,  dated  at  Whitehall,  March  27,  to  the  Dean,  who  had 
used  all  his  efforts  in  favour  of  his  Lordship,  while  that  commission 
was  in  question.  "  Nothing  in  this  world,"  says  the  Earl,  "  is,  or 
ought  to  be,  so  dear  to  any  man  as  his  reputation ;  and,  conse- 
quently, the  defence  of  it  is  the  greatest  obligation  that  one  man 
can  lay  upon  another.  There  are  also  some  circumstances,  that 
render  this  obligation  yet  more  acceptable  and  valuable  ;  as  when 
it  is  conferred  generously,  without  any  self-interest,  or  at  least  de- 
sire or  invitation  from  the  person  so  defended.  All  this  happens 
to  be  ray  case  at  this  time ;  and,  therefore,  I  hope  you  will  not  be 
surprised  to  find  I  am  not  the  most  ungrateful  and  insensible  man 
living;  which  certainly  I  should  be,  if  I  did  not  acknowledge  all 
your  industrious  concern  for  me  about  the  busiuess  of  the  eccle- 
siastical commission,  which  now  makes  so  much  noise  in  the  world. 
You  have,  as  I  am  told,  so  cordially  pleaded  my  cause,  that  it  is 
almost  become  your  own  :  and,  therefore,  unwilling  as  I  am  to 
speak  of  myself,  especially  in  a  business  which  I  cannot  wholly  ex- 
cuse ;  yet  I  think  myself  now  a  little  obliged  to  shew,  that  my  part 
in  this  matter,  though  imprudent  enough,  yet  is  not  altogether  un- 
worthy of  so  just  and  so  considerable  an  advocate."  He  then  re- 
presents, that  he  had  been  kept  out  of  all  the  secret  counsels  of 
that  reign,  and  had  taken  all  occasions  to  oppose  the  French  in- 
terest, which  he  knew  to  be  directly  opposite  both  to  the  King's  and 
kingdom's  good.  He  owns  himself  now  as  sensible  of  his  error  in 
sitting  in  the  ecclesiastical  commission,  as  he  was  at  first  ignorant 
o(  it,  being  so  unhappily  conversant  in  the  midst  of  a  perpetual 


xcviii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


court-flattery,  as  never  to  have  heard  the  least  word  of  any  illegality 
in  that  commission,  before  he  was  unfortunately  engaged  in  it ; 
which  he  was  desirous  to  have  avoided,  if  possible,  as  a  troublesome 
employment,  that  had  not  the  least  temptation  of  honour  or  profit 
to  recommend  it ;  and  in  which  therefore  he  continued  upon  no 
account  in  the  world,  but  to  serve  both  King  and  clergy  with  the 
little  ability  he  had,  in  moderating  those  counsels,  which  he  thought 
might  grow  higher,  if  he  left  his  place  to  be  filled  by  any  of  those, 
who  waited  for  it  greedily,  in  order  to  their  ill  designs.  Besides 
which,  it  was  to  be  considered,  that  one  of  the  important  affairs 
which  passed  in  the  ecclesiastical  court,  the  suspension  of  the  Bi- 
shop of  London,  was  done  some  months  before  the  Earl  was  a  com- 
missioner ;  and  the  other,  the  incapacitating  the  members  of  Mag- 
dalen College,  in  Oxford,  was  opposed  by  his  Lordship  both  in 
voting  and  speaking,  with  all  the  interest  that  he  was  able  to  make; 
and  he  never  acted  in  that  court  after,  except  in  restoring  the  Bi- 
shop of  London.  His  Lordship  adds,  that  he  had,  in  his  office  of 
lord-chamberlain,  filled  the  vacancies  of  the  chaplainships  to  the 
King  with  the  ablest  approved  divines  whom  he  could  find,  most 
commonly  recommended  to  him  by  the  bishops,  who  were  not  of 
the  court ;  believing,  that  it  had  been  better  for  the  King,  as  well 
as  the  kingdom,  if  the  greater  ecclesiastical  dignities  had  been  dis- 
posed of  by  others  with  as  much  caution.  "  And  thus,  sir,"  con- 
cludes his  Lordship,  "  I  have  endeavoured  to  confirm  you  in  your 
favourable  opinion  of  me,  which  must  be  acknowledged  by  every 
body  an  approbation  of  such  weight,  that,  as  I  hope  it  may  be  an 
example  of  authority  to  many,  so  it  is  sufficient  of  itself  to  balance 
the  censoriousness  of  others." 

Another  of  the  ecclesiastical  commissioners,  for  whom  the  Dean 
interceded,  and  at  last  obtained  favour,  was  Dr.  Nathaniel  Crew, 
bishop  of  Durham,  a  man  much  more  considerable  for  his  birth 
and  station,  in  which  indeed  he  lived  with  great  hospitality,  than 
for  the  firmness  and  consistency  of  his  conduct.  He  was  fifth  son 
of  John  Lord  Crew,  to  which  title  he  succeeded  upon  the  death  of 
his  elder  brother,  and  was  born  January  31st,  163J.  He  was  edu- 
cated at  Lincoln  College,  in  Oxford,  of  which  university  he  was 
proctor  iu  1663.  In  April,  1668,  he  was  made  clerk  of  the  closet 
to  King  Charles  II.  and  the  same  month  dean  of  Chichester;  and, 
in  1671,  bishop  of  Oxford,  from  which  see  he  was  translated  to 
that  of  Durham,  in  October,  1674.  Upon  the  accession  of  King 
James  II.  to  the  crown,  he  was  made  dean  of  the  royal  chapel,  and 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


xcix 


sworn  of  the  privy-council ;  and,  in  1686,  was  appointed  of  the 
ecclesiastical  commission,  expressing  his  high  satisfaction  in  it,  that 
his  name  would  now  be  recorded  in  history.*  He  was  likewise 
commissioned,  with  Dr.  Sprat,  bishop  of  Rochester,  and  Dr.  White, 
bishop  of  Peterborough,  upon  the  suspension  of  the  Bishop  of  Lon- 
don, to  exercise  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  in  that  diocese.  In  this 
office  he  was  present  in  February,  168-f,  at  the  examination  of  Mr. 
Henry  Wharton  for  orders,  and,  admiring  the  readiness  of  his  an- 
swers, promised  to  make  Mr.  Wharton  his  chaplain,  but  broke  his 
word  with  him ;  for  which  reason  that  learned  writer,  in  his  MS. 
diary  of  his  life,  speaks  of  him  with 'great  contempt,  as  a  man  of  no 
veracity. t  His  Lordship  was  on  all  occasions  so  compliant  with 
the  court,  that  he  was  forward  in  shewing  respect  to  the  Pope's 
nuncio  sent  thither;  and  refused  to  introduce  Dr.  Patrick,  dean  of 
Peterborough,  to  kiss  the  King's  hand,  on  account  of  his  zeal 
against  popery. %  But  the  apprehension  of  the  Prince  of  Orange's 
landing  immediately  put  an  end  to  his  concurrence  with  the  mea- 
sures of  Kiug  James,  from  whose  council-board  he  withdrew :  and 
the  dread  of  the  consequences  of  his  former  behaviour  induced  him 
to  abscond  upon  the  abdication  of  that  King,  in  which  situation  he 
offered  to  compound  for  his  offences  by  a  resignation  of  his  bi- 
shopric^ particularly  to  Dr.  Burnet,  on  whose  generosity  he  would 
depend  for  an  allowance  of  a  thousand  pounds  a  year  during  his 
life ;  which  offer  the  Dr.  refused.  ||  The  Bishop  afterwards  ventured 
out  of  his  retreat  to  the  convention-parliament,  in  order  to  make  a 
merit  with  the  new  government  by  voting  for  it.tf  But  their  Ma- 
jesties had  so  ill  an  opinion  of  him,  that  he  was  excepted  out  of 
the  act  of  Indemnity,  passed  in  1690.  However,  at  last,  a  full  par- 
don was  procured  for  him  by  the  Dean,  as  well  from  his  own  dis- 
position to  offices  of  that  kind,  as  the  solicitations  of  his  friend  Dr. 
William  Bates,  the  politest  writer  among  the  presbyterians  of  his 
time,  who  had  been  engaged  in  the  Bishop's  interest.  His  Lord- 
ship lived  to  the  age  of  eighty-eight,  dying  Sept.  12,  1721. 

During  the  debate  in  parliament  concerning  the  settlement  of 
the  crown  on  King  WTilliam  for  life,  the  Dean  was  advised  with 

*  Burnet,  vol.  i.  p.  676. 
t  Levis  iste  ac  versipellis  episcopus  :  .  .  .  summam  levissimi  viri  perfidiani  de- 
testa  tus. 

t  General  Dictionary — article,  Patrick  (Samuel). 

(  Burnet,  vol.  ii  p.  8C2.  ||  Life  of  Bishop  Burnet,  p.  696. 

%  Burnet,  vol.  i.  p.  WtA 


c 


LITE   OF  THE  Al'THOB. 


upon  that  point  by  the  Princess  Anne  of  Denmark,  who  had  at  first 
refused  to  give  her  consent  to  it,  as  prejudicial  to  her  own  right. 
Her  favourite,  the  Lady  Churchill,  afterwards  duchess  of  Marl- 
borough, accordingly  took  great  pains  to  promote  the  Princess's 
pretensions.  But  that  Lady,  soon  finding  that  all  her  endeavours 
of  this  kind  would  be  ineffectual ;  lhat  all  the  principal  men,  ex- 
cept the  jacobites,  were  for  the  king,  and  that  the  settlement  would 
be  carried  in  parliament,  whether  her  Royal  Highness  consented 
to  it  or  not ;  and,  being  fearful  about  every  thing,  which  the  Prin- 
cess did,  while  she  was  thought  to  be  advised  by  her  Ladyship,  she 
could  not  satisfy  her  own  miud,  till  she  had  consulted  with  several 
persons  of  undisputed  wisdom  and  integrity,  and  particularly  with 
the  Lady  Russel,  and  the  Dean  of  Canterbury.  She  found  them 
all  unanimous  in  the  expediency  of  the  settlement  proposed,  as 
things  were  then  situated;  and  therefore  carried  the  Dean  to  the 
Princess,  who,  upon  what  he  said  to  her,  took  care  that  no  disturb- 
ance should  be  made  by  her  pretended  friends,  the  jacobites, 
who  had  pressed  her  earnestly  to  form  an  opposition.* 

The  Dean  was  now  admitted  into  a  high  degree  of  favour  and 
confidence  with  the  King  and  Queen,  before  the  latter  of  whom  he 
preached  at  Whitehall,  on  the  8th  of  March,  168f,  his  sermon  con- 
cerning "  the  forgiveness  of  injuries,  and  against  revenge,"  as  he 
did  on  the  14th  of  April  following  before  both  their  Majesties  at 
Hampton  Court,  that  "  on  the  care  of  our  souls,  and  the  one  thing 
needful."  And,  on  the  27th  of  that  month,  he  was  promoted  to  an 
office,  which  required  his  frequent  attendance  near  their  Majesties' 
persons,  being  appointed  clerk  of  the  closet  to  the  King. 

The  House  of  Commons  having  the  next  month  appointed  a  fast 
on  the  5th  of  June,  the  Dean  was  desired  to  preach  before  them  on 
that  occasion :  but  his  indisposition  preventing  him  from  being 
able  to  perform  that  duly,  the  House  on  the  31st  of  May  request- 
ed Dr.  Tennison  to  supply  his  place,  and  Mr.  Wake  to  preach  be- 
fore them  in  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day. 

The  vacancies  of  some  bishoprics  soon  turned  the  thoughts  of 
his  Majesty  and  his  ministers  upon  the  Dean  for  filling  one  of 
them ;  but  this  design  was  so  far  from  being  agreeable  to  him, 
that  he  used  all  possible  solicitations  to  avoid  it.  There  are  ex- 
tant in  his  common-place  book  the  heads  of  a  letter,  which  he 
wrote  for  that  purpose;  but  these  so  defective,  that  several  of  the 


*  Account  of  llic  Conduct  of  the  Dowager  Dixhcss  of  Marlborough,  p.  22 — 24. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


CI 


sentences  are  not  filled  up,  and  some  words  omitted  through  haste 
or  inattention.  The  name  of  the  nobleman,  to  whom  it  was  ad- 
dressed, is  not  marked;  but  there  is  little  doubt  that  it  was  William, 
earl  of  Portland,  the  favourite  and  confident  of  King  William,  by 
whom  he  had  been  created  an  earl,  on  the  19th  of  April,  1G89. 
The  imperfect  draught  of  this  letter  has  so  many  marks  of  the  ge- 
nius and  temper  of  the  writer,  as  to  deserve  to  be  perpetuated,  for 
want  of  the  finished  letter. 

**  I  beg  of  your  Lordship,  who  have  deservedly  the  freedom 
and  credit  with  both  their  Majesties,  which  few  others  have,  to 
possess  them  of  two  things  ;  one  whereof  concerns  the  public,  and 
the  other  myself. 

"  1st.  Of  the  church  of  England  

"  2.  The  other  concerns  myself.  And  I  earnestly  beg  of  your 
Lordship,  to  defend  me  from  a  bishopric.  Few  can  believe  me  in 
this,  but  I  hope  your  Lordship  does.  I  am  now  upon  the  verge  of 
threescore  years  of  age.  I  have  had  great  afflictions  to  wean  me 
from  the  world,  having,  &c.  I  have  had  a  loud  summons  by  a  fit 
of  apoplexy  above  a  year  ago.  I  feel  the  infirmities  of  age  grow- 
ing upon  me.  I  cannot  now  do  that  in  three  weeks,  which,  since 
I  was  fifty,  I  could  with  ease  have  done  In  three  days.  It  is  a  me- 
lancholy thought  to  me  to  in  a  bishopric,  especially  in  the 
house  of  peers,  where  there  are  some  wise,  and  so  many  witty 
young  men,  to  make  observations  upon  an  old  one. — For  the  sake 
of  the  protestarit  religion  and  their  Majesties,  for  whom  I  have 
so  true  esteem,  I  w  ould  take  any  burden  upon  me,  which  I  am  able 
to  stand  under.  But  I  do  not  love  either  the  ceremony  or  trouble 
of  a  great  place. — When  men  are  children  again,  it  is  fit  they 
should  not  appear  in  public,  but  go  back  into  the  nursery. — I  de- 
sire to  be  as  useful  as  I  can  ;  but  I  do  not  affect  to  be  famous.  I 
firmly  believe  another  world,  in  which  I  do  not  think  I  shall  be 
happier  for  having  been  famous  in  this  world.  That  little  good, 
which  I  have  been  able  to  do,  has  been  in  the  city  of  London, 
which  I  foresee  will  be  stript  of  its  ablest  men ;  and,  if  I  can  be 
serviceable  any  where  it  is  there.  They,  that  have  known  me  for 
thirty  years,  will  best  bear  with  my  infirmities,  and  perhaps  least 
discern  them  ;  because  they  see  me  every  day,  and  the  change  will 
be  insensible  to  them. 

"  I  thank  God  I  have  lived  to  have  my  last  desire  in  this  world, 
which  was  this  happy  Revolution;  and  now  I  care  for  no  more  but 


Cll  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

to  see  it  established.  And  I  have  declared  my  sense  of  this  great 
deliverance  so  openly,  and  shall  always  do  so,  that  I  do  not  fear  to 
be  suspected  of  sullenness  and  discontent  for  my  declining  prefer* 
ment,  which  is  the  only  objection  that  I  can  foresee. — I  think  it  may 
be  somewhat  for  the  honour  of  our  religion,  and  the  advantage  of 
the  government,  to  have  one  so  hearty  for  both  without  any  expecta- 
tion or  desire  of  preferment  by  it.  This  is  the  only  vanity  I  can  be 
thought  to  be  guilty  of ;  and  if  nobody  else  perhaps  is  so  willing  I 
am  contented  to  lie  under  the  burden  of  it.  And  it  is  not  incon- 
venient there  should  be  an  example  of  one,  that  without  any  visi- 
ble interest  wisheth  well  to  the  public,  and  desires  to  deserve  well 
of  it. — I  beg  of  your  Lordship,  if  there  be  need,  as  I  hope  there 
will  not,  to  intercede  for  me  in  this  particular  ;  and  the  rather,  be- 
cause I  hope  nobody  will  prevent  me  in  this  petition,  nor  envy  me 
the  grant. — As  of  all  things  I  would  not  displease  their  Majesties, 
so  I  am  confident  they  would  not  take  from  me  the  happiness  of 
my  life  " 

Instances  of  this  kind  of  self-denial  will  perhaps  be  thought  rare 
in  any  age  ;  but  there  was  a  remarkable  one  under  Henry  VIII.  of 
another  Dean  of  Canterbury,  well  known  in  our  history  by  his  em- 
bassies and  public  negociations  in  that  and  the  succeeding  reigns, 
Dr.  Nicholas  Wotton,  great  uncle  ofSirHe  nry  Wotton.  This 
great  politician,  as  well  as  divine,  being  informed  of  an  intention  to 
advance  him  to  the  mitre,  wrote  to  Dr.  Bellasis,  from  Dusseldorp, 
November  11th,  1539,  requesting  him,  "  for  the  passion  of  God, 
to  convey  that  bishopric  from  him.  So  I  might,''  adds  he, <6  avoid 
it,  without  displeasure,  I  would  surely  never  meddle  with  it.  There 
be  enough,  that  be  meet  for  it,  and  will  not  refuse  it.  I  cannot 
marvel  enough,  cur  obtrudatur  non  cupienti,  iramo  ne  idoneo  qui- 

dem.    My  mind  is  as  troubled  as  my  writing  is  Your's  to 

his  little  power,  Nicholas  Wotton  :  add  whatsoever  you  will  more 
to  it,  if  you  add  not  bishop." 

But  to  return  to  our  Dean  of  Canterbury,  in  August,  1G89,  he 
was  appointed  by  the  chapter  of  his  cathedral  to  exercise  the  ar- 
chiepiscopal  jurisdiction  of  that  province,  devolved  on  himself  and 
that  body,*  on  the  first  of  that  month,  by  the  suspension  of  the 

*  The  Bishop  of  London  seemed  to  doubt  of  their  right  to  this  jurisdiction  ;  but 
Dr.  Stillingfieet  was  clear  in  that  point  in  his  letter,  which  he  wrote  to  his  Lordship 
the  19th  of  August,  1689.  See  his  Miscellaneous  Discourses,  p.  234.  seq.  Edit. 
London,  1735. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


CUl 


primate,  Dr.  Sancroft,  for  refusal  of  the  new  oaths  appointed  by 
the  act  of  parliament  of  the  24th  of  April,  instead  of  the  form- 
er of  allegiance  and  supremacy  :  and  enjoined  to  be  taken  by  all 
persons,  who  were  in  any  offiee,  civil,  military,  or  ecclesiastical, 
IB  the  kingdom.  By  the  first  of  these,  allegiance  was  sworn  to 
their  Majesties  ;  by  the  second,  the  papal  and  foreign  jurisdictions 
are  renounced  ;  and,  by  the  statute,  which  enjoins  the  taking  of 
these  oaths,  it  is  enacted,  that  not  only  such  as  shall  from  that 
time  be  preferred  to  any  ecclesiastical  dignity  or  benefice,  but  all 
others,  then  in  actual  possession  of  any  such  preferments,  should 
take  the  said  oaths  before  the  first  of  August  following,  on  the  pe- 
nalty of  suspension  for  six  months  following;  and  that,  at  the  end 
of  the  said  six  months,  if  they  still  persisted  not  to  take  the  said 
oaths,  they  were  ipso  facto  to  be  deprived.  The  Archbishop's  ex- 
ample was  followed  by  several  of  the  bishops.  Dr.  Thomas,  of 
Worcester;  Dr.  Lake,  of  Chichester;  Dr.  Turner,  of  Ely  ;  Dr.  Lloyd, 
of  Norwich  ;  Dr.  Kenn,  of  Bath  and  Wells  ;  Dr.  Frampton,  of 
Gloucester ;  and  Dr.  White,  of  Peterborough.  His  Grace  had  in- 
deed early  shewed  his  disinclination  to  the  Revolution  government, 
having  never  waited  upon  the  King  and  Queen  since  their  arrival, 
nor  appeared  in  the  house  of  peers.  His  chaplain,  Mr.  Wharton, 
in  his  diary,  mentions  a  remarkable  circumstance  of  his  Grace's 
conduct  on  the  day  of  their  Majesty's  proclamation.  The  Queen 
had  sent  on  that  very  day  two  of  her  chaplaius  to  Lambeth,  to  ask 
the  Archbishop's  blessing ;  after  which  they  went  to  the  chapel 
there,  with  a  design  to  observe  whether  their  Majesties  were  prayed 
for.  Mr.  Wharton,  being  the  only  chaplain  of  his  Grace  in  wait- 
ing, and  solicitous  to  do  nothing  that  might  injure  his  patron,  con- 
sulted him  upon  what  he  should  do  upon  that  occasion.  The 
Archbishop  left  him  to  his  own  discretion,  declaring  that  he  would 
give  him  no  new  orders  ;  the  other  chaplains  having  before  alter- 
ed the  prayers  as  they  thought  proper,  without  any  command  or 
reprehension  from  his  Grace.  Mr.  Wharton  therefore  imagining 
that  he  might  take  the  same  liberty,  and  being  concerned  for  the 
safety  of  the  Archbishop,  and  for  his  own  part  resolved  to  obey 
that  government,  which  Providence  should  establish,  prayed  in 
express  terms  for  King  William  and  Queen  Mary.  But  the  same 
evening  his  Grace  sent  for  him,  and  in  a  great  passion,  vehemen- 
ttr  excandescens,  told  him,  that  he  must  either  omit  naming  the 
new  King  and  Queen  in  his  prayers,  or  pray  no  more  in  his  cha- 
pel, since  they  could  not  be  so  during  the  life  of  King  James. 


civ 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


This  Mr.  Wharton  imputes  to  the  suggestions  of  the  Bishops  of 
Norwich,  Chichester,  and  Ely,  to  the  great  misfortune,  says  he, 
of  the  church  ;  for  from  that  time  his  Grace,  who  might  easily 
have  had  every  thiug  under  his  own  direction,  resigned  so  far  all 
authority  in  the  state,  that  the  church  on  his  account  was  after- 
wards exposed  to  extreme  danger.*  The  Archbishop  persisting 
in  his  refusal  of  the  oaths,  at  the  end  of  his  six  months'  suspension 
was  deprived  on  the  1st  of  February,  169§£,  though  he  lived  with 
the  same  splendour  and  attendance  as  before  till  the  1st  of  August, 
1690,  when  he  dismissed  most  of  his  servants,  and  discontinued 
his  public  hospitality.  After  the  nomination  of  his  successor,  in 
April,  1691,  he  was  warned  by  an  order  from  the  Queen  of  the 
20th  of  May,  to  leave  the  palace  of  Lambeth.  Before  that  time  he 
had  resolved  to  leave  all  his  books  to  Lambeth  Library,  in  which 
they  were  placed,  and  to  that  purpose  had  ordered  Mr.  Wharton 
to  take  an  account  of  them.  But  thinking  himself  unkindly  used, 
in  being  ordered  to  depart  within  ten  days,  he  removed  his  books, 
and  resolved  not  to  stir  himself,  till  he  should  be  ejected  by  law. 
He  was  cited  therefore  to  appear  before  the  barons  of  the  Exche- 
quer upon  the  first  day  of  Trinty  Term,  June  12,  1691,  to  answer 
a  writ  of  intrusion  :  where  he  appeared  by  his  attorney  several 
times;  but  always  cautiously  avoided  putting  in  any  plea,  wherein 
the  names  of  the  King  or  Queen  might  be  mentioned,  or  their  ti- 
tle owned.  On  Tuesday,  the  23d  of  that  month,  the  attorney-ge- 
neral moved  for  judgment ;  when  his  Grace's  council  pleaded,  that 
according  to  the  rules  of  that  court,  imparlance  ought  to  be  al- 
lowed till  the  next  term  ;  but  the  judges  alleging,  that  it  was  in 
their  own  power  to  change  the  rules  of  the  court,  and  that  this 
was  an  extraordinary  case,  over-ruled  their  plea,  and  ordered 
judgment  to  pass,  if  they  would  not  join  issue  that  day  ;  which 
the  Archbishop's  agents  refused  to  do,  and  so  judgment  passed. 
The  same  day,  between  seven  and  eight  in  the  evening,  he  left 
Lambeth,  attended  by  his  steward,  Dr.  Paman,  master  of  the  fa- 
culties, Fr.  Nicolls,  and  Mr.  Jacob,  having  not  given  any  notice  to 
his  chaplains,  nor  sent  for  them.  He  took  boat  at  Lambeth  Bridge, 
and  went  to  a  private  house  in  the  Temple.  The  next  morning  he 
was  waited  on  by  his  chaplains,  whom  he  received  with  extraor- 

*  Id  animi  illi  indiderant  Episcopi  Norwicensis,  Cicestrensis,  et  Eliensis,  possliuo 
ccclcsise  fato.  Hinc  enira  Arcbiepiscopas,  cui  facile  fuisset  res  onines  pro  libitusta- 
tuere,  omnem  in  rcpublica  aulboritatem  usque  adco  oniisit,  ut  ecclesia  ipsus  caus& 
deinceps  maxime  periclitari  cyperit. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


dinarv  kindness,  and  caused  them  to  celebrate  Divine  service  be- 
fore him  according  to  the  office  of  the  day.  That  day,  after  din- 
ner, at  Lambeth,  the  family  was  dissolved  by  the  steward  :  all  the 
servants  having  their  wages  till  Michaelmas  followiug,  and  being 
dismissed  with  much  kindness.  An  alms  was  likewise  given  to 
the  poor  of  the  parish,  and  a  present  to  the  curate,  Mr.  Clerk.  On 
the  Saturday  followiug,  the  attorney-general  sent  a  messenger  to 
receive  possession  of  the  palace  :  but  the  steward  having  orders  to 
deliver  it  to  none  besides  the  legal  officer,  refused  to  surrender  it 
to  him,  desiring  that  the  under-sheriff  might  come  and  receive  it. 
The  messenger  accordingly  departed,  and  within  two  hours  brought 
w  ith  him  the  under-sheritf  and  the  writ  ad  faciendum,  Sec.  issued 
out  in  virtue  of  the  conviction  of  intrusion  ;  when  possession  was 
delivered  to  him  with  great  civility :  but  the  body  of  the  steward 
Was  attached,  and  carried  to  the  Marshalsea,  though  10,000/.  bail 
was  offered:  and  he  was  kept  there  with  design,  as  Mr.  Wharton 
averts,*  of  forcing  the  Archbishop  thereby  to  write  to  the  other 
bishops  in  the  same  circumstances,  to  deliver  up  possession  with- 
out any  contest,  which  he  refused  to  do  ;  and,  after  ten  davs,  the 
steward  was  released  upon  100/.  bail ;  and,  in  Michaelmas  term 
following,  appeared  at  the  Exchequer  bar,  where,  his  case  being 
argued,  he  was  sentenced  by  the  judges  in  a  fine  of  three  hundred 
marks  to  the  King,  which  he  paid  dow  n  immediately,  and  was  dis- 
missed. The  Archbishop  departed  privately  from  London,  on  the 
3d  of  August,  attended  only  by  his  steward,  Mr.  Jacob,  Mr.  Ni- 
colls,  and  three  other  servants,  and  arrived  on  the  5th  at  Frefin^. 
field,  in  Suffolk,  w  here  he  was  born,  and  where  he  died  November 
24th,  1693,  without  making  a  will,  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  the 
probate  of  it  before  his  successor,  but  only  a  deed  of  gift  with  con- 
ditions. In  his  last  illness,  and  a  day  or  two  before  his  death,  he 
professed  to  Mr.  Wharton  his  great  repentance  for  all  sins,  but 
more  particularly  for  not  having  acted  with  that  vigour,  authority 
and  power,  in  his  archiepiscopal  office,  as  the  cause  and  state  of 
the  church  might  have  required,  and  thereby  having  omitted  to 
employ  the  means  of  serving  the  church  of  Christ,  which  God  had 
put  into  his  hands,  to  the  utmost.t  This  condemnation  of  himself 
for  not  having  exerted  a  proper  vigour  and  spirit  in  his  great  sta- 
tion in  the  church,  can  scarce  be  understood  of  his  conduct  after 


*  MS.  collections  of  Mr.  H.  Wharton  in  Lambeth  Library,  p.  76,  «t  $eq. 
t  Mr.  Wharton's  MS.  collections. 
VOL.  I.  N 


CVl 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


the  Revolution,  when  his  utmost  endeavours  would  not  have  pre- 
vented the  settlement  of  the  new  government,  or  the  submission  of 
the  clergy  to  it.  But  it  may  more  justly  be  applied  to  his  behavi- 
our before  that  important  event,  which  had  been  certainly  less  ac- 
tive and  spirited,  than  the  dangers  and  encroachments  of  popery 
required ;  his  timidity  and  apprehensions  of  exasperating  the  court 
having  restrained  him  from  many  things,  which  were  necessary  to 
the  interests  of  the  protestant  religion  at  so  critical  a  season.  Of 
this  we  have  one  remarkable  instance  mentioned  by  Mr.  Wharton 
in  his  diary,  who,  having  translated  into  English  Mons.  Dellon's 
History  of  the  Inquisition  of  Goa,  printed  at  Paris  in  October, 
1687,  could  not  procure  an  imprimatur  at  Lambeth  for  his  transla- 
tion, notwithstanding  his  frequent  solicitations. 

Archbishop  Sancroft  was  born  on  the  30th  of  January,  161^,  and 
educated  at  Emanuel  College,  in  Cambridge,  beiug  matriculated 
in  that  university  on  the  3d  of  July,  1634,  and  afterwards  chosen 
fellow  of  that  College,  next  after  Dr.  Worthington,  who  was  ad- 
mitted April  4th,  1642.*  His  refusal  to  the  engagement  imposed 
after  the  death  of  King  Charles  I.  occasioned  his  being  deprived  of 
his  fellowship;  upon  which  he  travelled  into  France  and  Italy. t 
He  published  at  London,  in  1652,  in  8vo.  a  small  piece,  iniitled 
Modern  Politics,  taken  from  Machiavel,  Borgia,  and  other  Modern 
Authors,  by  an  Eye-witness;  and  he  joined  with  Mr.  George  Da- 
venport, and  another  of  his  friends,  in  composing  that  severe  satire 
upon  Calvinism,  intitled  Fur  Praedestinatus,]:  printed  at  London,  in 
1651 ;  and  he  published  Bishop  Andrews's  Defence  of  the  vulgar 
Translation  of  the  Bible,  with  a  preface  of  his  own.  In  the  begin- 
ning of  the  year  1660  he  was  at  Rome,  but  returned  to  England 
soon  after  the  restoration  of  King  Charles  II.||  and  on  the  8th  of 
May  that  year  was  chosen  one  of  the  university  preachers,  being 
then  bachelor  of  divinity.§  Upon  the  advancement  of  Dr.  John 
Cosin  to  the  bishopric  of  Durham,  he  was  appointed  chaplain  to 
his  Lordship,  whose  consecration  sermon  he  preached  on  the  2d  of 
December,  1660,  and  dedicated  it  to  him  with  a  Latin  inscription. 

*  Le  Neve,  p.  197",  198.       t  Walker's  Sufferings  of  the  Clergy,  Part  ii.  p.  144. 

%  The  whole  title  of  this  remarkable  piece  is  as  follows  :  Fur  Praedestinatus  ■  sive 
dialogismus  inter  quendain  ordinis  praedicantium  Calvinistam  et  farem  ad  laqueum 
damuatum  habitus.  In  quo  ad  vivum  repracsentatur  non  tantum  quomodo  Calvi- 
nistarum  dogmata  ex  seipsis  ansain  praebent  scelera  et  irapietates  quasvis  patrandi, 
sed  insuper  quomodo  eadem  maxime  impediunt,  quo  minus  peccator  ad  vitae  emen- 
dationem  et  reiipiscentiam  reduci  possit. 

||  Mr,  Wharton's  MS.  collections.  §  Le  Nere,  p.  198. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CVll 


In  fhe  convocation  of  the  year  1G61,  he  was  particularly  useful  in 
rectifying  the  calender  and  rubric,*  in  which  he  was  assisted  by 
Mr.  John  Pell,  the  celebrated  mathematician  ;  +  and  in  March, 
166^  he  was  created  doctor  of  divinity  at  Cambridge,  in  virtue  of 
his  Majesty's  letters  patent  of  the  15th  of  that  month  for  that  pur- 
pose.^ The  same  month  he  was  presented  by  his  patron  to  a  prebend 
of  the  church  of  Durham,  having  been,  on  the  7th  of  Decem- 
ber preceding,  presented  by  him  to  the  rectory  of  Houghton  in  the 
spring,  in  the  county  palatine  of  Durham ;  and,  on  the  14th  of 
August,  1662,  he  was  elected  master  of  Emanuel  College.||  He  was 
advanced  to  the  deanery  of  York,  in  January,  166f,  which  he  held 
but  ten  months,  and  in  that  time  expended  in  buildings  and  charges 
200/.  more  than  he  received.  He  made  a  rental  of  that  church, 
and  reduced  into  order  the  accounts  of  it,  which  had  been  before 
wholly  neglected.  Upon  his  nomination  to  the  deanery  of  St. 
Paul's,  in  October,  1664,  the  tenants  of  that  of  York,  being  appre- 
hensive of  the  covetous  temper  of  his  successor,  Dr.  Robert  Hitch, 
then  designed,  and  earnestly  desiring  him  to  renew  their  leases ;  he 
absolutely  refused,  though  the  fines  then  offered  amounted  to  400/. 
After  the  fire  of  London,  in  1666,  he  spent  1000/.  in  rebuilding 
the  deanery  house  at  St.  Paul's,  the  rest  of  the  expense  being  de- 
frayed out  of  the  money  brought  in  from  the  Coal  Act  for  the  re- 
building the  church  and  edifices  of  St.  Paul's;  which  act  he  pro- 
cured by  his  unwearied  industry  and  solicitation. §  In  1668,  on 
the  7th  of  October,  he  was  admitted  archdeacon  of  Canterbury  on 
the  King's  presentation,  which  he  held  till  1670,  and  then  resigned 
it.  He  was  advanced  to  the  archbishopric  in  January,  167J,  while 
he  was  prolocutor  of  the  convocation,  being  consecrated  to  that 
see  on  the  27th  of  that  month.1T  His  firmness  in  refusing,  with  six 
other  bishops,  to  order  the  reading  King  James  II. 's  declaration  of 
indulgence,  did  him  great  honour;  and,  in  November,  1688,  he  ex- 
cused himself  from  publishing  an  abhorrence  of  the  Prince  of 
Orange's  invasion,  and  concurred  with  other  lords  spiritual  and 
temporal  at  the  meeting  at  Guildhall,  on  the  11th  of  December, 
in  a  declaration  to  that  Prince  for  a  free  parliament  and  due  indul- 


*  Walton's  Life  of  Bishop  Sanderson. 

t  Kennel's  Register  and  Chronicle,  p.  574. 

||  Walker,  ubi  supra. 

§  Mr.  Wharton's  MS.  collections. 

f  Le  Neve,  p.  200. 

N  2 


t  Ibid.  p.  647. 


CV111 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


gence  to  protestant  dissenters.*  But  he  would  not  submit  to  the 
new  settlement  of  the  crown.  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir)  Isaac  Newton 
happened  to  be  at  Lambeth,  when  the  news  was  brought,  that  the 
House  of  Commons  had  declared  the  throne  vacant.  Upon  which 
the  Archbishop  appeared  concerned,  expressing  his  wishes,  that 
they  had  proceeded  in  a  more  regular  method,  and  examined  into 
the  birth  of  the  young  child,  since  there  was  reason  to  believe, 
that  he  was  not  the  same  with  the  first,  which  might  be  easily 
known,  as  he  had  a  mole  on  his  neck.  And  after  he  had  refused  the 
oaths,  when  Mr.  John  Dubourdieu,  minister  of  the  French  church, 
in  the  Savoy,  went  to  take  his  leave  of  him,  upon  going  chaplain 
to  Duke  Schomberg  in  Piedmont,  his  Grace  told  him,  that  he  did 
not  doubt,  that  the  foreign  protestants  would  blame  his  conduct ; 
but  he  declared,  that  before  he  took  that  step,  he  had  foreseen 
«very  thing  that  could  be  said,  and  even  the  injury,  which  it  might 
do  to  the  protestant  cause  ;  and  that  he  was  greatly  concerned,  and 
had  fasted  and  prayed,  but  that  at  last  his  conscience  would  not 
suffer  him  to  act  any  otherwise  than  he  had  done.+  Bishop  Burnet 
represents  him,  J  as  a  man  considerably  learned,  and  of  solemn  de- 
portment, with  a  sullen  gravity  in  his  looks,  and  a  monastic  strict- 
ness, and  abstraction  from  company ;  dry,  cold,  reserved  and  pee- 
vish; so  that  none  loved  him,  and  few  esteemed  him.  And,  indeed, 
upon  an  impartial  examination  of  his  conduct  and  character,  he  will 
appear  to  have  been  slow,  timorous,  and  narrow-spirited,  but  at 
the  same  time  a  good,  honest,  and  well-meaning  man.  He  was 
very  laborious  in  his  studies,  and  had  amassed  a  vast  collection  of 
papers,  having  written  perhaps  more  with  his  own  hand  than  any 
person  of  his  time.||  But  the  three  sermons,  which  he  published, 
give  us  a  very  low  idea  of  his  taste  and  judgment,  and  are  more 
suitable  to  a  disciple  of  Bishop  Andrews,  than  a  contemporary 
of  Dr.  Tillotson, 

The  refusal  of  Archbishop  Sancroft  to  acknowledge  the  govern- 
ment of  their  Majesties,  made  it  necessary  to  look  out  for  a  suc- 
cessor to  him.   The  King  soon  fixed  upon  the  Dean  of  Canterbury 

*  Upon  these  facts  the  common  historians  may  be  compared  with  the  account 
drawn  up  by  Dr.  Francis  Turner,  bishop  of  Ely,  published  in  1717,  in  8vo.  in  a 
pamphlet,  intitled,  A  Vindication  of  the  late  Archbishop  Sancroft  and  his  Brethren 
the  rest  of  the  deprived  Bishops,  from  the  Reflections  of  Mr.  Marshal,  in  his  Defence 
of  our  Constitution. 

t  The  two  last  facts  are  taken  from  the  MS.  notes  of  Mr.  Des  Maizeaax. 

X  Vol.  i.  p.  392. 

j|  Mr  Wharton's  preface  to  Archbishop  Laud's  trial. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cix 


for  that  purpose,  whose  desires  and  ambition  had  extended  no  far- 
ther than  the  exchange  of  his  deanery  for  that  of  St.  Paul's,  vacant 
by  the  promotion  of  Dr.  Stillingfleet  to  the  bishopric  of  Worcester, 
upon  the  death  of  Dr.  Thomas.  This  was  readily  granted  him  in 
September,  1689,  and  he  was  installed  on  the  21st  of  November. 
It  was  indeed  a  considerable  diminution  of  his  income,  as  he  re- 
signed, at  the  same  time,  the  residentiaryship  of  St.  Paul's.  But 
he  chose,  as  has  been  already  observed,  to  disburthen  himself  of 
the  load  and  envy  of  holding  two  dignities  together.  Yet  however 
satisfied  lie  was  in  that  situation,  his  Majesty  would  not  let  him 
rest  till  he  submitted  to  a  much  higher  post,  to  which  he  had  an 
almost  unconquerable  aversion.  But  before  the  circumstances  of 
this  affair  are  opened,  it  will  be  proper  to  give  a  just  representation 
of  another  very  important  one,  of  which  he  had  the  principal  share 
of  the  trouble  while  it  was  depending,  and  of  the  odium  attending 
the  progress  and  event  of  it. 

This  was  the  scheme  of  a  comprehension,  which  had  been  in 
vain  attempted  under  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  but  in  the  succeed- 
ing one  was  projected  and  promised  by  Archbishop  Sancroft,  and 
his  brethren,  from  a  sense  of  the  danger  of  disunion  among  protest- 
ants.  Those  of  the  church,  who  then  saw  the  papists  endeavour- 
ing to  draw  the  dissenters  to  concur  with  them  in  their  designs 
against  the  church  of  England,  applied  to  the  Prince  of  Orange, 
desiring  him  to  make  use  of  his  interest  with  them  for  diverting 
them  from  such  a  concurrence ;  and  in  the  letters  wrote  for  that 
purpose,  assurances  were  given,  that  the  church  was  then  in  such  a 
temper,  and  so  well  convinced  of  former  errors,  that  if  ever  she  es- 
caped from  her  present  distress,  all  those  differences  should  be  cer- 
tainly made  up.*  In  the  articles  recommended  by  Archbishop 
Sancroft  to  all  the  bishops  within  his  metropolitical  jurisdiction, 
on  the  16th  of  July,  1688,  containing  some  heads  of  things  to  be 
more  fully  insisted  by  the  bishops  in  their  addresses  to  the  clergy 
and  people  of  their  respective  dioceses,  the  clergy  are  advised  "  to 
have  a  very  tender  regard  to  our  brethren,  the  protestant  dissent- 
ers :  that,  upon  occasion  offered,  they  visit  them  at  their  houses, 
and  receive  them  kindly  at  their  own,  treating  them  fairly  wherever 
they  meet  them,  discoursing  calmly  and  civilly  with  them,  persuad- 
ing them  (if  it  may  be)  to  a  full  compliance  with  our  church,  or,  at 
least,  that  whereto  we  have  already  attained,  we  may  all  walk  by 

*  Bishop  Burnet's  triennial  visitation  Charge,  in  1704. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


the  same  rule,  and  mind  the  same  thing;  and,  in  order  thereunto, 
that  they  take  all  opportunities  of  assuring  them,  that  the  bishops 
of  this  church  are  really  and  sincerely  irreconcileable  enemies  to 
the  errors,  superstitions,  idolatries,  and  tyrannies  of  the  church  of 
Rome  ;  and  that  the  very  unkind  jealousies,  which  some  have  had 
of  us  to  the  contrary,  were  altogether  groundless.  .  .  .  And,  in  the 
last  place,  that  they  warmly  and  most  affectionately  exhort  them 
to  join  with  us  in  daily  fervent  prayer  to  the  God  of  peace  for  an 
universal  blessed  union  of  all  reformed  churches,  both  at  home  and 
abroad,  against  our  common  enemies ;  and  that  all  they  who  do 
confess  the  holy  name  of  our  dear  Lord,  and  do  agree  in  the  truth 
of  his  holy  word,  may  also  meet  in  one  holy  communion,  and  live 
in  perfect  unity  and  godly  love."  The  Archbishop,  foreseeing  some 
such  revolution,  as  soon  after  was  happily  brought  about,  began 
to  consider,  how  utterly  unprepared  they  had  been  at  the  restora- 
tion of  King  Charles  II.  to  settle  many  things  to  the  advantage  of 
the  church,  and  what  a  happy  opportunity  had  been  lost,  for  want 
of  such  a  previous  care,  as  he  was  therefore  desirous  should  now 
be  taken  for  the  better  and  more  perfect  establishment  of  it.  And 
he  at  the  same  time  was  considering  what  might  be  done  to  gain 
the  dissenters,  without  doing  any  prejudice  to  the  church.  The 
scheme  was  laid  out,  and  the  several  parts  of  it  were  committed, 
not  only  with  his  approbation,  but  likewise  direction,  to  such  di- 
vines of  the  church,  as  were  thought  most  proper  to  be  intrusted 
with  it.  His  Grace  took  one  part  to  himself;  another  was  committed 
to  Dr.  Patrick,  afterwards  bishop  of  Ely.  And  the  reviewing  of 
the  daily  service  and  communion  book  was  referred  to  a  select 
number  of  divines,  of  whom  Dr.  Sharp,  afterwards  archbishop  of 
York,  and  Dr.  Patrick,  were  two.  The  design  was  to  improve  and 
enforce  the  discipline  of  the  church,  to  review  and  enlarge  the  li- 
turgy, by  correcting  some  things,  and  adding  others;  and,  if  it 
should  be  thought  advisable  by  authority,  when  this  matter  should 
come  to  be  legally  considered,  first  in  convocation,  then  in  parlia- 
ment, by  leaving  some  few  ceremonies,  confessed  to  be  indifferent 
in  their  natures,  as  indifferent  in  their  usage,  so  as  not  necessarily 
to  be  observed  by  such,  who  should  make  a  scruple  of  them.* 

How  far  this  design  was,  not  only  known  to,  but  approved  by, 
the  other  bishops,  appears  from  the  petition,  for  which  seven  of 
them  were  committed  to  the  Tower,  and  tried,  but  acquitted  ; 

*  Speech  of  Dr.  Wake,  bishop  of  Lincoln,  at  the  opening  of  the  second  article  of 
the  impeachment  against  Dr.  Sacheverel,  March  17,  IT'O.j*, 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cxi 


wherein  they  declared  their  readiness  "  to  come  to  such  a  temper 
with  regard  to  the  dissenters,  as  should  be  thought  fit,  when  that 
matter  shall  be  considered  and  settled  in  parliament  and  convoca- 
tion." The  Prince  of  Orange  in  his  Declaration,  dated  at  the 
Hague,  October  10th,  1608,  O.  S.  represented,  that  the  design  of 
his  coming  was  no  other  but  to  have  a  free  and  lawful  parliament, 
that  so  the  two  houses  might  concur  in  the  preparing  such  laws,  as 
they  upon  full  and  free  debate  should  judge  necessary  and  conve- 
nient, both  for  the  confirming  and  executing  the  law  concerning  the 
test,  and  such  other  laws,  as  were  necessary  for  the  security  and 
maintenance  of  the  protestant  religion ;  as  likewise,  for  "  making 
such  laws,  as  might  establish  a  good  agreement  between  the  church 
of  England  and  all  protestant  dissenters,  and  cover  and  secure  all 
those,  who  would  live  peaceably  under  the  government,  from  all 
persecution  upon  account  of  their  religion."  And  Mr.  Wharton,  in 
his  MS.  diary  of  his  own  life,  mentions  a  discourse  of  Dr.  William 
Lloyd,  then  bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  afterwards  of  Worcester,  to  him 
on  the  25th  of  June,  1688,  four  days  before  the  trials  of  the  bi- 
shops ;  in  which  that  prelate  having  observed,  that  the  papists  had  by 
their  injustice  and  tyranny  so  exasperated  the  minds  of  the  people 
in  general,  that  the  latter  would  soon  drive  them  out  of  England, 
and  banish,  or  perhaps  destroy  the  King  himself,  since  it  was  im- 
possible for  popery  to  reign  in  England  above  a  year,  and  that  a 
wonderful  change  of  things  was  approaching  ;  he  then  said,  that  if 
himself  and  his  brethren  should  escape  the  present  rage  of  the  pa- 
pists, they  were  resolved  to  use  their  utmost  endeavours  to  purge 
the  church  from  all  corruptions,  to  procure  the  admission  of  the 
sober  and  pious  dissenters  into  the  church,  a  thing  so  much  wished 
for;  to  relieve  even  those,  who  were  obstinate,  by  abolishing  the 
penal  laws;  and  to  take  entirely  away  the  abuses  of  chancellors, 
officials,  and  ecclesiastical  courts.* 

After  the  Prince  of  Orange  was  come  to  St.  James's,  the  dissent- 

*  Is  fausla  omnia  sperarejussit,  adeo  plebis  enim  animos  injustitia  et  tyrannide  ex- 
accrbasse  pontificios,  ut  omnes  tuinullu  facto  arreptisque  armis,  illos  ex  Anglia  quam 
citissime  eliminaluri  essent,  regemque  ipsum  (quod  factum  nolumus)  aut  exilio  aut 
nece  mulctaturi.  Utcunque  vero  fieri  nullo  modo  posse,  ut  papismus  in  Anglia  ultra 
annum  regnaret :  minim  rerum  catastrophen  adesse,  cui  si  ipse  sociique  episcopi,  prae- 
senti  pontificiorum  rabie  erepti,  superfuerint,  omni  modo  curaturos,  ut  ecclesia  sordi- 
bus  et  corruptelis  penitus  exueretur :  ut  sectariis  reformatis  reditus  in  ecclesiae  sinum 
exoptati  occasio  ac  ratio  concederelur,  si  qui  sobrii  et  pii  essent :  ut  perlinacibus  in- 
terim juguin  levaretur,  exlinctis  penitus  legibus  mnlctatnriis ':  utque  cancellariorum, 
olfieialium,  et  curiarum  ecclesiasticarum  abusus  funditus  lollerctur. 


CXii  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOfc. 

ing  ministers  in  a  body  attending  him  there,  his  Highness  assured 
them,  that  he  would  exert  his  utmost  endeavours  **  for  promoting 
a  firm  union  among  protestants."    And,  upon  his  establishment  on 
the  throne,  when  they  presented  their  address  to  him  and  Queen 
Mary,  Dr.  Bates,  in  his  speech  to  the  King,  upon  that  occasion, 
observed  to  him,  "  We  are  encouraged  by  your  gracious  promise, 
upon  our  first  address,  humbly  to  desire  and  hope,  that  your  Ma- 
jesty will  be  pleased,  by  your  wisdom  and  authority,  to  establish  a 
firm  union  of  your  protestant  subjects  in  the  matters  of  religion, 
by  making  the  rule  of  Christianity  to  be  the  rule  of  conformity. 
Our  blessed  union  in  the  purity  and  peace  of  the  gospel  will  make 
the  church  a  fair  and  lovely  type  of  heaven,  and  terrible  to  our 
autichristian  enemies.    This  will  make  England  the  steady  centre, 
from  whence  a  powerful  influence  will  be  derived  for  the  support 
of  reformed  Christianity  abroad.  This  will  bring  immortal  honour 
to  your  name  above  the  triumphs  of  the  most  renowned  conquerors. 
We  do  assure  your  Majesty,  that  we  shall  cordially  embrace  the 
terms  of  union,  which  the  ruling  wisdom  of  our  Saviour  has  pre- 
scribed in  his  word."    And  in  his  speech  to  Queen  Mary  he  said, 
"  We  humbly  desire  your  Majesty  will  be  pleased  by  your  wisdom 
and  goodness  to  compose  the  differences  between  your  protestant 
subjects,  in  things  of  less  moment  concerning  religion.    We  hope 
those  reverend  persons,  who  conspire  with  us  in  the  main  end, 
the  glory  of  God,  and  the  public  good,  will  consent  to  terms  of 
union,  wherein  all  the  reformed  churches  agree."  The  King  in  his 
answer  assured  them,  that  whatever  was  in  his  power  should  be 
employed  for  obtaining  such  an  union ;  and  the  Queen,  that  she 
would  use  all  endeavours  for  the  obtaining  au  union,  that  is  neces- 
sary for  the  edifying  of  the  church.    His  Majesty,  likewise,  in  his 
speech  to  the  parliament,  on  the  16th  of  March,  168f,  told  them, 
that  he  hoped  that  they  would  make  room  for  the  admission  of  all 
protestants,  who  were  willing  and  able  to  serve  ;  since  this  conjunc- 
tion in  his  service  would  tend  to  the  better  uniting  them  among 
themselves,  and  the  strengthening  them  against  their  common  ad- 
versaries. 

In  conformity  to  this  desire  of  the  King,  first  signified  to  his 
privy  council,  when  the  "  Act  for  the  abrogating  of  the  Oaths  of 
Allegiance  and  Supremacy,  and  appointing  other  Oaths  in  their 
stead,"  was  read  a  second  time  in  the  House  of  Lords,  a  select 
committee  of  that  House  was  ordered  to  draw  up  two  clauses;  the 
one  to  "  explain  the  abrogating  the  said  oaths,"  the  other  to  "  take 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cxiii 


Vtmj  the  necessity  of  receiving  the  sacrament,  to  make  a  man  ca- 
pable of  enjoying  any  office,  employment,  or  place  of  trust."  But 
this  latter  clause  being  reported  to  the  House,  was  rejected  by  a 
great  majority  ;  the  Lords  Delamere,  Stamford,  North,  and  Grey, 
Chesterfield,  Wharton,  Lovelace,  and  Vaughan,  entering  their  dis- 
sent, and  insisting,  "  that  a  hearty  union  among  protestants  was  a 
greater  security  to  the  church  and  state,  than  any  test  that  could 
be  invented  :  that  this  obligation  to  receive  the  sacrament  was  a 
test  on  the  protestants,  rather  than  on  the  papists  :  that  as  long 
as  it  continued,  there  could  not  be  that  hearty  and  thorough  union 
among  protestants,  as  had  always  been  wished,  and  was  at  this 
time  indispensably  necessary:  and,  lastly,  that  a  greater  caution 
ought  not  to  be  required  from  such,  as  were  admitted  into  offices, 
than  from  the  members  of  two  houses  of  parliament,  who  were 
not  obliged  to  receive  the  sacrament,  to  enable  them  to  sit  in 
either  house."  This  point  being  lost,  another  attempt  was  made 
u  favour  of  the  moderate  dissenters,  by  inserting  a  clause  in  the 
>aid  bill,  "  to  prevent  the  receiving  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's 
supper  upon  any  other  account,  than  in  obedience  to  the  holy  in- 
stitution thereof;"  and  to  provide,  that  any  man  should  be  suffi- 
ciently qualified  for  any  office,  employ  ment,  or  place  of  trust,  who, 
within  a  year  before  or  after  his  admission  or  entrance  thereto,  did 
receive  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  supper,  either  according  to  the 
usage  of  the  church  of  England,  or  in  any  other  protestant  congre- 
gation, and  could  produce  a  certificate  under  the  hands  of  the  mi- 
nister, or  two  other  credible  witnesses,  members  of  such  a  pro- 
testant congregation.  But  this  was  likewise  rejected  by  a  great 
majority,  six  lords,  Oxford,  Lovelace,  Wharton,  Mordauut,  Mon- 
tagu, and  Paget,  entering  their  dissent. 

But  though  these  designs  failed,  the  Toleration  act  easily  passed 
both  houses,  and  received  the  royal  assent  on  the  24th  of  May, 
1689,  under  the  title  of  "  An  Act  for  exempting  their  Majesties'  Pro- 
testant Subjects,  dissenting  from  the  Church  of  England,  from  the 
Penalties  of  certain  Laws."  It  excused  the  dissenters  from  all  pe- 
nalties for  their  not  coming  to  church,  and  for  going  to  their  sepa- 
rate meetings.  There  was  an  exception  to  the  Socinians ;  but  a 
provision  was  inserted  in  favour  of  the  quakers  ;  and,  though  the 
rest  were  required  to  take  the  oaths  to  the  government,  thev  were 
excused  upon  making  in  lieu  thereof  a  solemn  declaration.  The 
dissenters  were  to  take  out  warrants  for  the  houses  in  which  thev 
met,  and  the  justices  were  required  to  grant  them.    It  had  been 


cxir 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


proposed  by  some  members  of  the  parliament,  that  this  act  should 
only  be  temporary,  as  a  necessary  restraint  upon  the  dissenters, 
that  they  might  demean  themselves  so,  as  to  merit  the  continuance 
of  it,  when  the  term  of  years  now  offered  should  end.  But  this  was 
rejected,  there  being  now  so  general  a  disposition  to  pass  the  act, 
as  could  not  be  expected  at  another  time.* 

Another  bill  was  likewise  under  the  consideration  of  the  parlia- 
ment, "  for  uniting  their  Majesties'  protestant  subjects  to  which 
some  amendments  being  proposed  in  the  House  of  Lords,  and  the 
question  being  put  on  the  4th  of  April,  whether  to  agree  with  the 
committee  in  leaving  out  the  clause  about  the  indifferency  of  the 
posture  at  the  receiving  the  sacrament  ]  and  the  votes  being  equal, 
it  was,  according  to  the  ancient  rule  in  the  like  case,  carried  in  the 
negative.  The  next  day  the  Lords  resumed  the  debate  of  the  re- 
port of  the  said  amendments,  particularly  of  a  clause  concerning  a 
commission  to  be  given  out  by  the  King  to  some  bishops  and  others 
of  the  clergy  :  and  it  was  proposed,  that  some  laymen  should  be 
added  in  the  commission  :  upon  which  the  question  being  put,  the 
votes,  including  the  proxies,  were  equal,  and  so  it  was  again  car- 
ried in  the  negative  ;  four  lords,  the  Marquis  of  Winchester,  Lord 
Mordaunt,  Lord  Lovelace,  and  the  Earl  of  Stamford,  entering  their 
dissent  with  the  following  reasons : — 1.  Because  the  act  itself 
beiug,  as  the  preamble  sets  forth,  designed  for  the  peace  of  the 
state,  the  putting  the  clergy  into  commission,  with  a  total  exclusion 
of  the  laity,  lays  this  humiliation  on  the  laity,  as  if  the  clergy  of 
the  church  of  England  were  alone  friends  to  the  peace  of  the  state; 
and  the  laity  less  able,  or  less  concerned,  to  provide  for  it.  2.  Be- 
cause the  matters  to  be  considered  being  barely  of  human  consti- 
tution, viz.  the  liturgy  and  ceremonies  of  the  church  of  England, 
which  had  their  establishment  from  king,  lords  spiritual  and  tern 
poral,  and  commons,  assembled  in  parliament,  there  can  be  no  rea- 
son why  the  commissioners  for  altering  any  thing  in  that  civil  con- 
stitution should  consist  only  of  men  of  one  sort  of  them;  unless  it 
be  supposed,  that  human  reason  is  to  be  quitted  in  this  affair,  and 
the  inspiration  of  spiritual  men  to  be  alone  depended  upon.  3.  Be- 
cause though  upon  Romish  principles  the  clergy  may  have  a  title 
to  meddle  alone  in  matters  of  religion,  yet  with  us  they  cannot, 
w  here  the  church  is  acknowledged  and  defined  to  consist  of  clergy 
and  laity  ;  and  so  those  matters  of  religion,  w  hich  fall  under  human 
de  termination,  being  properly  the  business  of  the  church,  belong 

*  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  10. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


CXV 


to  both ;  for  in  what  is  of  Divine  institution,  neither  clergy  nor 
laity  can  make  any  alteration  at  all.  4.  Because  the  pretending, 
that  differences  and  delays  may  arise  by  mixing  laymen  with  eccle- 
siastics, to  the  frust  rating  the  design  of  the  commission,  is  vain  and 
out  of  doors;  unless  those,  that  make  use  of  this  pretence,  sup- 
pose, that  the  clergy-part  of  the  church  have  distinct  interests  or 
design^  from  the  lay-part  of  the  same  church ;  and  this  will  be  a 
reason,  if  good,  why  one  or  other  of  them  should  quit  the  house 
for  fear  of  obstructing  the  business  of  it.  5.  Because  the  commis- 
sion being  intended  for  the  satisfaction  of  dissenters,  it  would  be 
convenient,  that  laymen  of  different  ranks,  nay,  perhaps  of  dif- 
ferent opinions  too,  should  be  mixed  in  it,  the  better  to  find  expe- 
dients for  that  end,  rather  than  clergy  men  alone  of  our  church,  who 
are  generally  observed  to  have  very  much  the  same  way  of  reason- 
ing and  thinking.  6.  Because  it  is  the  most  ready  way  to  facilitate 
the  passing  the  alterations  into  a  law,  that  lay-lords  and  commons 
should  be  joined  in  the  commission,  who  may  be  able  to  satisfy- 
both  the  houses  of  the  reasons  upon  which  they  were  made,  and 
thereby  remove  all  fears  and  jealousies  which  ill  men  may  raise 
against  the  clergy,  of  their  endeavouring  to  keep  up,  without 
grounds,  a  distinct  interest  from  that  of  the  laity,  whom  thty  so 
carefully  exclude  from  being  joined  with  them  in  consultations  of 
common  concernment,  that  they  will  not  have  those  have  any  part 
in  the  declaration,  who  must  have  the  greatest  in  the  determining. 
7.  Because  such  a  restrained  commission  lies  liable  to  this  great 
objection,  that  it  might  be  made  use  of  to  elude  repeated  promises, 
and  the  present  general  expectation  of  compliance  with  tender  con- 
sciences, when  the  providing  for  it  is  taken  out  of  the  ordinary 
course  of  parliament,  to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  those  alone,  who 
were  latest  in  admitting  any  need  of  it,  and  who  may  be  thought 
the  more  unfit  to  be  the  sole  composers  of  our  differences,  when 
they  are  looked  upon  by  some  as  parties.  Lastly,  Because,  after 
all,  this  carries  a  dangerous  supposition  with  it,  as  if  the  laity  were 
not  a  part  of  the  church,  nor  had  any  power  to  meddle  in  matters 
of  religion  ;  a  supposition  directly  opposite  to  the  constitution  both 
ol  church  and  state,  which  will  make  all  alterations  utterly  impos- 
sible, unless  the  clergy  alone  be  allowed  to  have  power  to  make 
laws  in  matters  of  religion,  since  what  is  established  by  law,  cannot 
be  taken  away  or  changed  but  by  consent  of  laymen  in  parliament, 
the  clergy  themselves  having  no  authority  to  meddle  in  this  very 
case,  in  which  the  laity  are  excluded  by  this  vote,  but  what  they 


cxvi 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


derive  from  lay  hands.  These  reasons  were  signed  by  the  Marquis 
of  Winchester,  and  the  Lords  Mordaunt  and  Lovelace ;  and  the 
Earl  of  Stamford  wrote  under  them,  that  he  dissented  for  the  fol- 
lowing, as  well  as  other  reasons,  because  it  is  contrary  to  the  three 
statutes  made  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  and  one  in  Edward  VI. 
which  empower  thirty-two  commissioners  to  alter  the  canon  and 
ecclesiastical  laws,  &c.  whereof  sixteen  to  be  of  the  laity,  and  six- 
teen of  the  clergy. 

Bishop  Burnet,  who  had  been  consecrated  to  the  see  of  Salis- 
bury, March  31,  1689,  upon  the  death  of  Dr.  Seth  Ward,  argued 
warmly  on  the  other  side,  imagining  that  the  clergy  would  have 
come  into  the  design  of  the  bill  with  zeal  and  unanimity,  and  being 
apprehensive  that  the  proposed  amendment  of  the  clause  would  be 
looked  on  by  them,  as  taking  the  matter  out  of  their  hands.  But 
he  was  soon  after  convinced  that  he  had  taken  wrong  measures, 
and  that,  the  method  proposed  by  the  lords  on  the  other  side,  was 
the  only  one  like  to  be  effectual.  Nor  did  his  opposition  to  it  so 
recommend  him  to  the  clergy,  as  to  balance  the  censure  which  he 
fell  under,  for  movi.  g,  in  another  proviso  in  that  bill,  that  the  sub- 
scription, instead  of  assent  and  consent,  should  be  only  to  submit 
with  a  promise  of  conformity  ;  and  for  his  zeal  for  the  other  clause 
abovementioned,  of  dispensing  with  the  posture  of  kneeling  at  the 
sacrament.* 

While  this  bill  and  that  of  Toleration  were  depending,  Mr.  Locke, 
whose  principles  are  well  known  to  have  been  favourable  to  both, 
wrote  a  letter,  dated  March  12,  168f,+  to  his  friend  Philip  a  Lim- 
borch,  an  eminent  writer  and  professor  of  divinity  among  the  Ar- 
minians  in  Amsterdam,  in  which  he  declares  it  as  his  opinion,  that 
the  episcopal  clergy  were  no  great  friends  to  those  bills,  and  other 
matters  then  in  agitation  in  England  ;  "  whether,"  says  he,  u  to 
their  own  or  the  nation's  advantage,  let  them  consider." 

The  bill  of  Union,  as  well  as  that  of  Toleration,  had  been  moved 
for  by  some  of  the  bishops,  who  afterwards  scrupled  the  oaths  ; 
and  they  both  were  drawn  and  offered  by  the  Earl  of  Nottingham, 
who  had  been  appointed  one  of  the  principal  secretaries  of  state  on 
the  day  of  their  Majesty's  proclamation  ;  and  they  were  the  same, 
which  had  been  prepared  for  the  House  of  Commons  in  King 
Charles  11. 's  reign,  during  the  debates  of  the  exclusion  ;  but  then 
considered  rather  as  artifices  to  allay  the  heat  of  that  time,  and  to 

*  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  10,  11. 

t  Familiar  Lellcr  between  Mr.  Locke  and  several  of  liis  Friends,  j>.  329,  350. 


LIFE  OF  THE   AUTHOR.  CXVU 

render  the  church  party  more  popular.*  And  even  now  those  who 
had  moved  for  the  bill  of  Union,  and  afterwards  brought  it  into  the 
house,  acted  a  very  disingenuous  part ;  for  while  they  studied  to 
recommend  themselves  by  this  shew  of  moderation,  they  set  on 
their  friends  to  oppose  it;  and  such  as  were  sincerely  and  cor- 
dially for  it,  were  represented  as  the  enemies  of  the  church,  who 
intended  to  subvert  it  When  the  bill  had  passed  the  Lords,  and 
was  sent  down  to  the  House  of  Commons,  it  was  suffered  to  lie 
upon  the  table  ;t  and,  instead  of  proceeding  in  it,  they  resolved 
upon  au  address  to  the  King,  in  which  they  were  joined  by  the 
Lords,  and  which  was  presented  to  his  Majesty,  on  the  20th  of 
April,  desiring  him  to  continue  his  care  for  the  preservation  of  the 
church  of  England  established  by  law  ;  and  to  issue  forth  writs, 
according  to  the  ancient  usage  and  practice  of  the  kingdom  in  time 
of  parliament,  for  calling  a  convocation  of  the  clergy,  to  be  ad- 
vised with  in  ecclesiastical  matters  ;  assuring  him,  that  it  was  their 
intention  forthwith  to  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  giving  ease 
to  protestant  dissenters.  The  King  returned  no  answer  till  the 
next  day,  when  he  declared,  that  the  church  of  England  should 
always  be  his  peculiar  care ;  and  he  hoped,  that  the  ease  which 
they  designed  to  dissenters  would  contribute  very  much  to  the 
establishment  of  the  church  ;  and  therefore  earnestly  recommended 
to  them,  that  the  occasions  of  differences  and  mutual  animosities 
might  be  removed  ;  and  that  as  soon  as  conveniently  might  be,  he 
would  summon  a  convocation. 

The  party,  which  was  now  beginning  to  be  formed  against  the 
government,  pretended  great  zeal  for  the  church,  and  declared 
their  apprehension  that  it  was  in  danger ;  which  was  imputed  by 
;  many  to  the  Earl  of  Nottingham's  management.  These,  as  they 
went  heavily  into  the  Toleration,  so  they  were  much  offended  with 
the  bill  of  Union,  as  containing  matters  relating  to  the  church,  in 
which  the  representative  body  of  the  clergy  had  not  been  so  much 
as  advised  with.  Nor  was  that  bill  supported  by  those  who  seemed 
most  favourable  to  the  dissenters.  They  proceeded  upon  a  maxim, 
that  it  was  fit  to  keep  up  a  strong  faction  in  church  and  state;  and 
thought,  that  it  was  not  agreeable  to  this,  to  suffer  so  great  a  body 
as  the  presbyterians  to  be  more  easy,  or  more  inclinable  to  the 
church ;  and  that  the  Toleration  would  be  best  maintained  when 
great  numbers  should  need  it,  and  be  concerned  to  preserve  it. 
This  design  therefore  being  zealously  opposed,  and  but  faintly  pro- 
*  Burnet,  voJ.  ii.  p.  6.  t  Ibid.  p.  11. 


CXV111 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


moted,  proved  abortive*  The  temper  and  situation  of  the  nation, 
during  the  agitation  of  this  affair,  will  appear  from  a  conversation, 
related  by  Sir  John  Reresby,t  governor  of  York,  and  afterwards  a 
nonjuror,  who  was  present,  between  the  Marquis  of  Halifax,  lord 
privy-seal,  and  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  who,  a  few  days  after  their 
Majesties'  coronation,  complained  highly  of  the  slow  proceedings 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  saying,  that  the  Dutch  would  clap  up  a 
peace  with  France,  if  they  did  not  mend  their  pace  ;  and  observed, 
that  the  church  of  England  was  in  the  fault,  expressing  himself,  as 
if  he  thought  that  they  meant  a  kindness  to  King  James  by  their 
method  of  procedure.  The  Lord  Privy-Seal  agreed  with  him  in  his 
sentiments,  and  added,  that  the  church-people  hated  the  Dutch, 
and  had  rather  turn  papists  than  receive  the  presbyterians  among 
them ;  but  that,  on  the  other  hand,  these  were  to  the  full  as  rank 
and  inveterate  against  those,  and  would  mar  all  their  business  by 
their  inadvertence  with  regard  to  their  bill  of  Comprehension,  and 
their  ill-timing  of  other  bills  :  in  short,  that  they  would  disgust  those 
from  whom  they  looked  for  indulgence.  Both  his  Lordship  and  the 
Bishop  were  angry  with  the  Commons'  address  to  the  King  the  day 
before,  desiring  him  to  support  and  defend  the  church  of  England, 
according  to  his  former  declaration,  and  to  call  a  convocation  of 
the  clergy,  which  the  Bishop  said  would  be  the  utter  ruin  of  the 
comprehension  scheme. 

While  the  bill  of  Union  was  depending  in  parliament,  Dean  Til- 
lotson,  as  we  are  informed  by  Dr.  Nichols,}:  persuaded  the  King  to 
pursue  another  method  for  accomplishing  the  design  of  it.  He  re- 
minded his  Majesty  of  the  reproach  often  cast  upon  the  Reforma- 
tion by  the  papists,  that  it  was  founded  chiefly  upon  parliamentary 
authority ;  and  that  no  handle  ought  for  the  future  to  be  given  for 
such  an  objection.  That  the  affairs  of  the  church  chiefly  belonged 
to  synodical  authority  ;  and,  if  they  were  passed  by  the  members 
of  the  convocation,  they  would  not  only  be  more  acceptable  to  the 
body  of  the  clergy,  but  would  be  more  religiously  observed  by  the 
aity.  He  added,  that  lest  affairs  of  this  nature,  consisting  of  such 
a  multitude  of  particulars,  might  proceed  too  slowly  in  so  numerous 
a  body,  it  would  be  best,  as  had  been  formerly  done,  for  his  Ma- 
jesty to  authorize,  by  his  letters-patent,  several  of  the  most  emi- 
nent of  the  clergy,  to  consider  of  some  methods  of  healing  the 
wounds  of  the  church,  and  establishing  a  durable  peace  ;  that  so 

*  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  11.  +  See  his  Memoirs,  p.  343,  344.  Edit.  1735. 

t  Apparatus  act  Defensionera  Eccles.  Anglicanse,  p.  93. 


LIFE    OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


what  they  should  agree  upon  being  laid  before  a  convocation,  might 
first  have  their  sanction,  and  then  that  of  parliamentary  authority. 
In  pursuance  of  this  advice,  the  King  summoned  a  convocation, 
and  issued  out  likewise,  on  the  13th  of  September,  1689,  a  com- 
mission to  ten  bishops  and  twenty  divines  to  prepare  matters  to  be 
considered  by  the  convocation.    It  was  in  these  terms  : 

"  Whereas  the  particular  forms  of  Divine  worship,  and  the  rites 
and  ceremonies  appointed  to  be  used  therein,  being  things  in  their 
own  nature  indifferent  and  alterable,  and  so  acknowledged ;  it  is 
but  reasonable,  that  upon  weighty  and  important  considerations, 
according  to  the  various  exigencies  of  times  and  occasions,  such 
changes  and  alterations  should  be  made  therein,  as  to  those,  that 
are  in  place  and  authority,  should  from  time  to  time  seem  either 
necessary  or  expedient:  and  whereas  the  book  of  canons  is  fit  to 
be  reviewed,  and  made  more  suitable  to  the  state  of  the  church; 
and  whereas  there  are  defects  and  abuses  in  the  ecclesiastical  courts 
aud  jurisdictions,  and  particularly  there  is  not  sufficient  provision 
made  for  the  removing  of  scandalous  ministers,  and  for  the  reform- 
ing of  manners  either  in  ministers  or  people  :  and  whereas  it  is 
most  fit,  that  there  should  be  a  strict  method  prescribed  for  the 
examination  of  such  persons  as  desire  to  be  admitted  into  holy  or- 
ders, both  as  to  their  learning  and  manners  : 

"  We,  therefore,  out  of  our  pious  and  princely  care  for  the  good 
order,  and  edification,  and  unity  of  the  church  of  England,  com- 
mitted to  our  charge  and  care,  and  for  the  reconciling,  as  much  as 
is  possible,  of  all  differences  among  our  good  subjects,  and  to  take 
away  all  occasions  of  the  like  for  the  future,  have  thought  fit  to 
authorize  and  empower  you,  &c.  and  any  nine  of  you,  whereof  three 
to  be  bishops,  to  meet  from  time  to  time,  as  often  as  shall  be  need- 
ful, and  to  prepare  such  alterations  of  the  liturgy  and  canons,  and 
such  proposals  for  the  reformation  of  ecclesiastical  courts,  and  to 
consider  such  other  matters,  as  in  your  judgments  may  most  con- 
duce to  the  ends  abovementioned." 

The  bishops  in  this  commission  were  Dr.  Thomas  Lamplugh, 
archbishop  of  York,  Dr.  Henry  Compton,  bishop  of  London  ;  Dr. 
Peter  Mew,  of  Winchester ;  Dr.  William  Lloyd,  of  St.  Asaph  ;  Dr. 
Thomas  Spratt,  of  Rochester ;  Dr.  Thomas  Smith,  of  Carlisle  ;  Dr. 
Jonathan  Trelawney,  of  Exeter  ;  Dr.  Gilbert  Burnet,  of  Salisbury; 
Dr.  Humphrey  Humphreys,  of  Bangor  ;  and  Dr.  Nicholas  Strat- 
ford, of  Chester.  The  twenty  divines  were,  Dr.  Edward  Stilling- 
fleet,  dean  of  St.  Paul's,  and  soon  after  bishop  of  Worcester  ;  Dr. 


cxx 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


Simon  Patrick,  dean  of  Peterborough,  and  soon  after  bishop  of 
Chichester  ;  Dr.  John  Tillotson,  dean  of  Canterbury,  and  soon  after 
of  St.  Paul's;  Dr.  Richard  Meggot,  dean  of  Winchester;  Dr.  John 
Sharp,  <lean  of  Norwich ;  Dr.  Richard  Kidder,  soon  after  made 
dean  of  Peterborough  ;  Dr.  Henry  Aldrich,  dean  of  Christ  Church, 
Oxford  ;  Dr.  William  Jane,  regius-professor  of  divinity  in  the  uni- 
versity of  Oxford;  Dr.  John  Hall,  Margaret-professor  of  divinity 
in  the  same  university ;  Dr.  Joseph  Beaumont,  regius-professor  of 
divinity  in  the  university  of  Cambridge  ;  Dr.  John  Montagu,  mas- 
ter of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge  ;  Dr.  John  Goodman,  archdeacon 
of  Middlesex  ;  Dr.  William  Beveridge,  archdeacon  of  Colchester  ; 
Dr.  John  Battely,  archdeacon  of  Canterbury  ;  Dr.  Charles  Alston, 
archdeacon  of  Essex  ;  Dr.  Thomas  Tenison,  archdeacon  of  Lon- 
don ;  Dr.  John  Scott,  prebendary  of  St.  Paul's;  Dr.  Edward 
Fowler,  prebendary  of  Gloucester  ;  Dr.  Robert  Grove,  prebendary 
of  St.  Paul's ;  and  Dr.  John  Williams,  prebendary  of  St.  Paul's. 

About  the  time  of  passing  this  commission,  Dean  Tillotson  drew 
up  the  following  paper,  of  which  there  is  a  copy  entered  in  short- 
hand into  his  common-place  book,  intitled,  **  Concessions,  which 
will  probably  be  made  by  the  church  of  England  for  the  union  of 
protestants,  which  I  sent  to  the  Earl  of  Portland  by  Dr.  Stillingfleet, 
Sept.  13,  1689. 

"  1.  That  the  ceremonies  enjoined  or  recommended  in  the  li- 
turgy, or  canons,  be  left  indifferent. 

"  2.  That  the  liturgy  be  carefully  reviewed,  and  such  alterations 
and  changes  therein  made,  as  may  supply  the  defects,  and  remove, 
as  much  as  is  possible,  all  ground  of  exception  to  any  part  of  it, 
by  leaving  out  the  apocryphal  lessons,  and  correcting  the  transla- 
tion of  the  Psalms,  used  in  the  public  service,  where  there  is  need 
of  it ;  and  in  many  other  particulars. 

"  3.  That  instead  of  all  former  declarations  and  subscriptions  to 
be  made  by  ministers,  it  shall  be  sufficient  for  them,  that  are  ad- 
mitted to  the  exercise  of  their  ministry  in  the  church  of  England, 
to  subscribe  one  general  declaration  and  promise  to  this  purpose, 
viz.  that  we  do  submit  to  the  doctrine,  discipline,  and  worship  of 
the  church  of  England,  as  it  shall  be  established  by  law,  and  pro- 
mise to  teach  and  practise  accordingly. 

"  4.  That  a  new  body  of  ecclesiastical  canons  be  made,  particu- 
larly with  a  regard  to  a  more  effectual  provision  for  the  reformation 
of  manners  both  in  ministers  and  people. 

«  5.  That  there  be  an  effectual  regulation  of  ecclesiastical  courts, 


LIFE    OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cxxi 


to  remedy  the  great  abuses  and  inconveniences,  which  by  degrees, 
and  length  of  time,  have  crept  into  them ;  and,  particularly,  that 
the  power  of  excommunication  be  taken  out  of  the  hands  of  lay-of- 
ficers, and  placed  in  the  bishop,  and  not  to  be  exercised  for  trivial 
matters,  but  upon  great  and  weighty  occasions. 

"  6.  That  for  the  future  those,  who  have  been  ordained  in  any 
of  the  foreign  reformed  churches,  be  not  required  to  be  reor- 
dained  here,  to  render  them  capable  of  preferment  in  this  church. 

"  7.  That  for  the  future  none  be  capable  of  any  ecclesiastical 
benefice  or  preferment  in  the  church  of  England,  that  shall  be  or- 
dained in  England,  otherwise  than  by  bishops.  And  that  those, 
w  ho  have  been  ordained  only  by  presbyters,  shall  not  be  compelled 
to  renounce  their  former  ordination.  But  because  many  have,  and  do 
still  doubt  of  the  validity  of  such  ordination,  where  episcopal  ordi- 
nation may  be  had,  and  is  by  law  required,  it  shall  be  sufficient  for 
such  persons  to  receive  ordination  from  a  bishop  in  this  or  the  like 
form  :  'If  thou  art  not  already  ordained,  I  ordain  thee/  &c.  as  in 
case  a  doubt  be  made  of  any  one's  baptism,  it  is  appointed  by  the 
liturgy,  that  he  be  baptized  in  this  form,  'If  thou  art  not  baptized, 
I  baptize  thee,' "  &c. 

This  last  proposal  of  the  Dean  with  respect  to  an  hypothetical 
ordination  of  those,  who  were  before  ordained  in  England  by  pres- 
byters, agreed  with  the  sentiments  of  one  of  the  most  learned  and 
judicious  prelates  of  the  beginning  of  that  century,  Dr.  John  Overal, 
bishop  of  Norwich,  with  regard  to  the  ordination  of  the  ministers 
of  the  foreign  reformed  church.  This  excellent  prelate,  whose  cor- 
respondence by  letters  w  ith  Grotius  is  published  in  that  useful  col- 
lection, iutitled,  Praestantium  eteruditorum  virorum  Epistolse  Ec- 
clesiasticse  et  Theological,  was  at  first  fellow  of  Trinity  College, 
in  Cambridge,  then  master  of  Catharine  Hall,  and  regius-professor 
of  divinity  in  that  university,  promoted  in  the  beginning  of  the  year 
to  the  deanery  of  St.  Paul's  by  Queen  Elizabeth,  at  the  re- 
commendation of  Sir  Fulk  Grevill,  afterwards  Lord  Brook  ;  and,  in 
April,  1614,  advanced  to  the  bishopric  of  Coventry  and  Litchfield, 
from  which  he  was  translated  in  1618  to  that  of  Norwich,  where 
he  died  the  12th  of  May,  the  year  following.  I  have  now  before 
me  a  long  letter,*  containing  many  curious  particulars  relating 
both  to  Antonio  de  Dominis,  archbishop  of  Spalato,  and  this 

*  Communicated  to  me  by  the  Honourable  Sir  Thomas  Burnet,  knt.  one  of  his 
Majest  y's  justices  of  the  common-pleas. 

VOL.   I.  O 


CXXli  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

Bishop,  written  by  Mr.  John  Cosin,  afterwards  bishop  of  Durham^ 
and  secretary  to  Bishop  Overal ;  of  whom  I  shall  mention  one  fact 
connected  with  the  point  abovementioned,  of  which  Mr.  Cosh* 
himself  was  witness.    Dr.  de  Laune,  who  translated  the  English 
liturgy  into  French,  being  presented  to  a  living,  and  coming  to  the 
Bishop,  then  at  Norwich,  with  his  presentation,  his  Lordship  asked 
him,  where  he  had  his  orders.  He  answered,  that  he  was  ordained 
by  the  presbytery  at  Leyden.    The  Bishop  upon  this  advised  him 
to  take  the  opinion  of  council,  whether  by  the  laws  of  England  he 
was  capable  of  a  benefice  without  being  ordained  by  a  bishop. 
The  Doctor  replied,  that  he  thought  his  Lordship  would  be  unwil- 
ling to  re-ordain  him,  if  his  council  should  say,  that  he  was  not 
otherwise  capable  of  the  living  by  law.    The  Bishop  rejoined, 
"  Re-ordination  we  must  not  admit,  no  more  than  a  re-baptization : 
but  in  case  you  find  it  doubtful,  whether  you  be  a  priest  capable 
to  receive  a  benefice  among  us,  or  no,  I  will  do  the  same  office  for 
you,  if  you  desire  it,  that  I  should  do  for  one,  who  doubts  of  his 
baptism,  when  all  things  belonging  essentially  unto  it  have  not 
been  duly  observed  in  the  administration  of  it,  according  to  the 
rule  in  the  book  of  Common  Prayer,  '  If  thou  beest  not  already,* 
&c.    Yet  for  mine  own  part,  if  you  will  adventure  the  orders  that 
you  have,  I  will  admit  your  presentation,  and  give  you  institution* 
into  the  living  howsoever.*'    But  the  title,  which  this  presentation 
had  from  the  patron,  proving  not  good,  there  were  no  farther  pro- 
ceedings in  it ;  yet  afterwards  Dr.  de  Laune  was  admitted  into 
another  benefice  without  any  new  ordination.    Mr.  Cosin  adds 
another  relation  to  the  same  purpose  concerning    Mr.  William 
Whittingham,  who  translated  the  119th  Psalm  into  metre,  the  ini- 
tial letters  of  his  name  being  still  set  before  it.    He  had  been  or- 
dained a  minister  at  Geneva,  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Mary  ;  and  in 
that  of  Queen  Elizabeth  having  the  deanery  of  Durham  conferred 
upon  him,*  was  questioned  by  Dr.  Sandys,  archbishop  of  Yorkr  as 
having  no  title  or  capacity  for  that  dignity,  because  he  was  not 
ordained  a  priest  by  a  bishop.    The  case  was  therefore  disputed 
and  traversed  in  divers  courts;  but  Mr.  Whittingham  had  judgment 
finally  in  his  favour,  it  being  declared,  that  ordination  beyond  the 
seas  was  equivalent  to  our  ordination  in  England  :  and  for  the  bet- 
ter confirmation  of  this  a  bill  was  preferred  in  parliament,  which 
passed  both  houses;  and  this  statute,  which  was  either  13  Eliz. 

*  July  19tb,  1562,  by  the  interest  of  tbe  Earl  of  Leicester.    The  DeaD  died  10th 
of  Jane,  1579. 


LIFE    OF   THE  AUTHOK, 


CXX111 


chap.  8.  or  8  Eliz.  chap.  13.  enacted,  that  whosoever  alleged  to 
have  been  ordained  a  minister  beyond  the  seas,  if  he  subscribed  to 
the  thirty-nine  articles  of  religion,  might  be  admitted  to  a  benefice 
in  the  church  of  England.  But  I  find  the  following  remark,  pro- 
bably of  Bishop  Burnet,  upon  this  last  story  in  his  Lordship's  copy  of 
the  letter ;  that  the  statute  pointed  at  was  13  Eliz.  chap.  12.  But  in 
which  there  is  in  fact  no  indication,  that  the  ground  of  it  was  to  jus- 
tify Mr.  Whittingham's  ordination  ;  but  most  probably  the  business 
was,  that  whereas  the  ministers  of  the  church  of  England  had  given 
security  of  themselves  at  their  ordination,  which  those,  who  had 
been  ordained  in  the  reigns  of  King  Henry  VIII.  or  Queen  Mary, 
or  in  the  Lutheran  churches,  had  not ;  the  latter  might  be  obliged  to 
do  the  like:  and  that  the  statute  had  only  some  such  aim,  is  evident 
by  the  determination  of  its  force  upon  so  sudden  a  date  as  the 
following  Christmas.  "I  have  looked/'  says  the  remarker,  "over 
such  reports,  as  I  could  get,  and  can  meet  with  no  such  thing  as 
this  Whittingham's  case,  and  therefore  guess  the  story  to  be  no 
more  than  tradition  and  hearsay.  In  the  story  there  is  this  misad- 
venture, that  the  statute  13  Eliz.  could  not  be  referred  to,  for  Sandys 
was  not  archbishop  of  York  until  the  18  Eliz.  Whittingham  might 
retain  his  deanery  by  virtue  of  his  letters  patent,  though  no  priest ; 
nothing  being  frequenter  than  for  dignities  and  prebends  to  be  held 
by  them,  who  were  no  priests,  a  long  while  after  the  13  Eliz.  even 
in  the  time  of  King  James;  and  before  that  statute  some  benefices 
with  cure  had  been  held,  as  I  have  heard.  The  statute  5  Edward  VI. 

1.  for  the  ordaining  of  priests  and  deacons,  as  well  as  consecrating  of 
bishops,  doth  impose  the  same  penalties  on  such,  as  use  other  form 
of  consecrating,  &c.  as  are  inflicted  on  such,  as  use  any  other  form  of 
common-prayer.  Those  penalties  are  somewhat  altered  and  made 
greater  by  the  statute  1  Eliz.  chap.  2.  That  statute  for  consecrating, 
&c.  5  Edw.  VI.  chap.  1.  is  confirmed  in  all  parts,  8  Eliz.  chap.  l. 
So  then  the  penalties  on  other  form  of  consecrating  must  be  fetched 
from  2  or  3  Edw.  VI.  chap.  5.  Edw.  VI.  chap.  1.  and  1  Eliz.  chap. 

2.  together  with  the  confirmation  of  8  Eliz.  1." 

But  to  return  to  the  proceedings  of  the  ecclesiastical  commis- 
sioners, they  opened  their  commission  at  the  Jerusalem  Chamber, 
on  the  10th  of  October,  1689;  but  some  named  in  it  either  did 
not  appear,  or  soon  deserted  their  brethren.  Among  these  were 
the  Bishops  of  Winchester  and  Rochester,  the  latter  of  whom  had 
set  in  an  ecclesiastical  commission  of  a  very  illegal  nature  in  the 

o  2 


cxxiv 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR* 


late  reign ;  Dr.  Aldrich,  and  Dr.  Jane.  The  last  of  these  was  son 
of  Joseph  Jane,  of  Leskard,  in  Cornwall,  Esq ;  member  for  that 
borough  in  the  long  parliament,  till  his  loyalty  forced  him  to  retire 
to  Oxford,  and  afterwards  abroad,  where  he  wrote  an  answer  to 
Milton's  ULiKovoKkaarriQ  under  the  title  of  Eikwv  a/cXac-roe,  or  the 
Image  Unbroken.  Dr.  Jane  was  educated  at  Westminster  School, 
from  whence  he  was  elected  in  1660  a  student  of  Christ  Church, 
Oxford,  of  which  he  was  afterwards  canon  in  1678,  and  dean  of 
Gloucester  ;  in  which  dignity  he  was  installed  on  the  6th  of  June, 
1685,  and  held  with  it  the  praecentorship  of  the  church  of  Exeter. 
He  was  the  great  promoter  of,  and  had  the  chief  hand  in,  drawing 
up  the  famous  judgment  and  decree  of  the  university  of  Oxford, 
passed  in  the  convocation  there  on  the  21st  of  July,  1683,  "against 
certain  pernicious  books  and  damnable  doctrines,  destructive  to 
the  sacred  persons  of  princes,  their  state  and  government,  and  of 
all  human  society which  was  presented  on  the  24th  of  that 
month  in  Latin  and  English  by  Dr.  Robert  Huntingdon,  afterwards 
bishop  of  Raphoe,  in  Ireland,  to  King  Charles  II.  in  the  presence 
of  the  Duke  of  York,  and  the  principal  persons  of  the  court,  who 
all  shewed  the  highest  satisfaction  in  it  ;*  though  this  decree  had 
afterwards  the  disgrace  of  being  burnt  by  the  common  executioner, 
by  order  of  the  House  of  Lords,  in  1710.  Notwithstanding  the 
principles  avowed  in  it,  Dr.  Jane  was  one  of  the  four  sent  by  that 
university  to  the  Prince  of  Orange,  then  at  Hungerford,  in  his 
march  to  London,  to  offer  his  Highness  their  plate,  which  the 
Prince  refused ;  but  the  Doctor  thought  his  own  merit  so  great, 
that  he  took  that  opportunity  of  asking  for  the  bishopric  of  Exeter, 
void  by  the  translation  of  Bishop  Lamplugh  to  the  archbishopric 
of  York.  But  not  succeeding  in  his  request,  that  bishopric  having 
been  before  promised  to  Dr.  Trelawney,  bishop  of  Bristol,  he  was 
so  far  disgusted,  that  he  was  ever  after  a  secret  enemy  of  King 
William  and  his  government,  though  he  had  appeared  himself  so 
early  in  the  Revolution.!  He  lived  some  years  after  Queen  Anne's 
accession  to  the  throne  without  being  advanced  higher  in  the 
church,  dying  on  the  6th  of  February,  170  f. 

The  rest  of  the  commissioners  applied  themselves  closely  to  the 
work  assigned  them  for  several  weeks.  They  had  before  them  all 
the  exceptions,  which  either  the  puritans  before  the  war,  or  the 
nonconformists  since  the  Restoration,  had  made  to  any  part  of  the 

*  Vita  Rob.  Huntingdon},  Scriptore  Tho.  Smith,  S.  T.  D.  p.  26^ 
t  Life  of  Dr.  Humphrey  Prideaux,  p.  55,  56. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CXXV 


church  service.  They  had  likewise  many  propositions  and  advices, 
which  had  been  offered  at  several  times  by  many  of  our  bishops 
and  divines,  upon  those  heads,  of  which  Bishop  Stillingfleet  had 
made  a  great  collection.  Matters  were  very  well  considered,  and  free- 
ly and  calmly  debated  ;  and  all  was  digested  into  an  entire  correct- 
ion of  every  thing,  that  seemed  liable  to  any  just  objection.*  They 
began  with  reviewing  the  Liturgy  ;  and  first  they  examined  the  ca- 
lendar, in  which,  in  the  room  of  apocryphal  lessons,  they  ordered 
certain  chapters  of  canonical  scripture  to  be  read,  that  were  more 
for  the  people's  edification.  The  Athanasian  creed  being  disliked 
by  many  persons,  on  account  of  the  damnatory  clause,  it  was  left 
to  the  minister's  choice  to  use,  or  change  it  for  the  apostle's  creed. 
New  collects  were  drawn  up  more  agreeable  to  the  epistles  and 
gospels  for  the  whole  course  of  the  year,  and  with  a  force  and 
beauty  of  expression  capable  of  affecting  and  raising  the  mind  in 
the  strongest  manner.  The  first  draught  of  them  was  composed 
by  Dr.  Patrick,  who  was  esteemed  to  have  a  peculiar  talent  for 
composing  prayers.  Dr.  Burnet  added  to  them  yet  farther  force 
and  spirit.  Dr.  Stillingfleet  then  examined  every  word  in  them 
with  the  exactest  judgment ;  and  Dr.  Tillotson  gave  them  the  last 
hand,  by  the  free  and  masterly  touches  of  his  natural  and  flowing 
eloquence.  Dr.  Kidder,  who  was  well  versed  in  the  oriental  lan- 
guages, made  a  new  version  of  the  Psalms  more  comformable  to  the 
original.  Dr.  Tennison  having  collected  the  words  and  expres- 
sions throughout  the  Liturgy,  which  had  been  excepted  against, 
proposed  others  in  their  room,  which  were  more  clear  and  plain, 
and  less  liable  to  objection.  Other  things  were  likewise  proposed, 
which  were  left  to  be  determined  by  the  convocation ;  as,  parti- 
cularly, that  the  cross  in  baptism  might  be  either  used  or  omitted 
at  the  choice  of  the  parents ;  and  that  a  nonconformist  minister 
going  over  to  the  church  should  not  be  ordained  according  to  the 
common  form,  but  rather  conditionally,  in  the  same  manner  as  in- 
fants are  baptized,  when  there  is  no  evidence  of  their  being  bap- 
tized before,  with  the  addition  of  the  episcopal  benediction,  as 
was  customary  in  the  ancient  church,  when  clergymen  were  admit- 
ted, who  had  been  ordained  by  heretics ;  of  which  manner  of  or- 
dination Dr.  Bramhall,  archbishop  of  Armagh,  had  given  a  pre- 
cedent, when  he  received  some  Scots  presbyters  into  the  church.f 

*  Burnel's  History  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  ii.  p.  3i.  and  Triennial  visitation  Charge, 
ann.  1704. 

t  That  primate  of  Ireland,  as  appears  from  his  Life,  written  by  John,  bishop  of 


cxxvi 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


This  abstract  of  th  ^proceedings  of  the  commissioners  is  said  to 
have  been  communicated  to  Dr.  Nichols*  by  Dr.  John  Williams,  after- 
wards bishop  of  Chichester,  who  had  drawn  up  an  account  of  them. 
And  the  original  of  the  alterations,  suggested  by  these  commis- 
sioners upon  their  review  of  the  liturgy,  was  in  the  hands  of  Dr. 
Tennison,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  was  always  cautious  of 
trusting  them  out  of  his  own  keeping,  alleging,  that  if  they  came 
to  be  public,  they  would  give  no  satisfaction  on  either  side,  but 
be  rather  a  handle  for  mutual  reproaches,  as  one  side  would  up-? 
braid  their  brethren  for  having  given  up  so  much  ;  while  the  other 
would  justify  their  nonconformity,  because  those  concessions  were 
too  little,  or  however  not  yet  passed  into  a  law.f  But  a  more  par- 
ticular account  of  the  proceedings  of  the  commissioners,  than  that 
published  by  Nichols,  is  inserted  here  from  Dr.  Calamy.J 

The  committee  being  met  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber,  a  dispute 
arose  about  the  authority  and  legality  of  the  court,  the  Bishop  of 
Rochester,  though  he  had  so  lately  acted  in  an  illegal  one,  being 
one  of  those  who  questioned  it.  The  grounds  of  this  scruple 
were  the  obligations  the  clergy  lay  under  by  act  of  parliament  of 
King  Henry  VIII.  not  to  enter  into  any  debates  about  making  any 
alterations  in  church  affairs  without  the  King's  special  and  imme- 
diate privacy,  and  direction  first  given  concerning  such  alterations. 
It  was  answered,  that  that  must  be  done  either  by  an  act  of  the 
King's  own  judgment,  or  by  a  private  cabal  (both  which  ways 
would  be  very  exceptionable)  or  else  by  his  Majesty's  commission 
to  a  certain  number  of  ecclesiastics  to  consult  about,  and  prepare 
what  was  necessary  to  be  altered,  as  it  was  in  the  present  case. 
For  moreover  the  commissioners  pretended  not  to  make  these  al- 
terations obligatory  by  virtue  of  a  law,  but  only  to  get  them  ready 
to  lay  before  the  convocation,  the  very  reports  being  not  so  much 
as  to  be  referred  to  the  privy  council,  lest  they  might  be  subject 


Limerick,  and  prefixed  to  his  Grace's  works,  printed  at  Dublin,  in  1677,  in  folio, 
inserted  these  words,  in  the  letters  of  orders,  which  lie  gave  to  Mr.  Edward  Parkinson: 

Non  annihilantes  prior  es  or  dines  (siquoshabuii)  nec  validitatem  eorundum  deter minantes, 
multo  minus  omnes  ordines  sacros  ecclesiarumforinsecarum  condemnantes,  quos  proprioju- 
dici  relinquimus,  sed  solummodo  supplentes  quicquid  prius  defuitper  Canones  Ecclesia 
AngUcanccrequisitum,  etprovidentes  pari  Ecclesia,  ut  Schismatis  tollatur  occasio,  etcon- 
scientiis  fidelium  satisfiat,  nec  ulli  dubitent  de  ejus  ordinatione,  c^iit  actus  suos  presbyle- 
riales  tanquaminvalidos  aversentur.    In  enjus  rei  testimonium,  &c. 

*  Apparat.  p.  95,  96.      t  Rennet's  Complete  History,  vol.  iii.  p.  591.  Note  d. 

J  Abridgment  of  the  Life  of  Mr.  R.  Baxter,  p.  452—455. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cxxvti 


to  be  canvassed  and  cooked  by  lay-hands.  However,  the  bishops 
©f  Winchester  and  Rochester,  Dr.  Jane  and  Dr.  Aldrich,  withdrew 
dissatisfied;  and  the  rest,  after  a  list  of  all  that  seemed  fit  to  be 
changed,  was  read  over,  proceeded  very  unanimously,  and  without 
any  heats,  in  determining,  as  follows  (each  article,  as  soon  as 
agreed  on,  being  signed  by  the  Bishop  of  London),  viz. 

That  the  chaunting  of  Divine  service  in  cathedral  churches 
shall  be  laid  aside,  that  the  whole  may  be  rendered  intelligible  to 
the  common  people. 

That  besides  the  Psalms,  being  read  in  their  course  as  before, 
some  proper  and  devout  ones  be  selected  for  Sundays. 

That  the  apocryphal  lessons,  and  those  of  the  Old  Testament, 
which  are  too  natural,  be  thrown  out,  and  others  appointed  in  their 
stead  by  a  new  calendar ;  which  is  already  fully  settled,  and  out 
of  which  are  omitted  all  the  legendary  saints'  days,  and  others 
not  directly  referred  to  in  the  service  book. 

That  not  to  send  the  vulgar  to  search  the  canons,  which  few  of 
them  ever  saw,  a  rubric  be  made,  setting  forth  the  usefulness  of  the 
cross  in  baptism,  not  as  an  essential  part  of  that  sacrament,  but 
only  a  fit  and  decent  ceremony.  However,  if  any  do,  after  all,  in 
conscience  scruple  it,  it  may  be  omitted  by  the  priest. 

That  likewise  if  any  refuse  to  receive  the  sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  supper  kneeling,  it  may  be  administered  to  them  in  their 
pews. 

That  a  rubric  be  made,  declaring  the  intention  of  the  Lent  fasts 
to  consist  only  in  extraordinary  acts  of  devotion,  not  in  distinction 
of  meats  :  and  another  to  state  the  meaning  of  Rogation  Sundays 
and  Ember  weeks  ;  and  appoint,  that  those  ordained  within  the 
Quatuor  Tempora,  do  exercise  strict  devotion. 

That  the  rubric,  which  obliged  ministers  to  read  or  hear  com- 
mon prayer  publicly  or  privately  every  day,  be  changed  to  an  ex- 
hortation to  the  people  to  frequent  those  prayers. 

That  the  absolution  in  morning  and  evening  prayer  may  be  read 
by  a  deacon,  the  word  priest  in  the  rubric  being  changed  into  mi- 
nuter, and  those  words,  "  and  remission,"  be  put  out,  as  not  very 
intelligible. 

That  the  Gloria  Patri  shall  not  be  repeated  at  the  end  of  every 
psalm,  but  of  all  appointed  for  morning  and  evening  prayer. 

That  those  words  in  the  Te  Deum,  "  thine  honourable,  true,  and 
only  Son,"  be  thus  turned,  "  thine  only  begotten  Son,"  honourable 
being  only  a  civil  term,  and  no  where  used  in  sacris. 


cxxviii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


The  Benedicite  shall  be  changed  into  the  128th  Psalm,  and  other 
psalms  likewise  appointed  for  the  Benedictusand  Nunc  dimittis. 

The  Versicles  after  the  Lord's  Prayer,  &c.  shall  be  read  kneel- 
ing, to  avoid  the  trouble  and  inconveniences  of  so  often  varying 
postures  in  the  worship.  And  after  those  words,  "  Give  peace  in 
our  time,  O  Lord,"  shall  follow  an  answer  promissory  of  somewhat 
on  the  people's  part,  of  keeping  God's  law,  or  the  like :  the  old 
response  being  grounded  on  the  predestinating  doctrine,  taken  in 
too  strict  an  acceptation. 

All  high  titles  or  appellations  of  the  king,  queen,  &c.  shall  be 
left  out  of  the  prayers,  such  as  most  illustrious,  religious,  mighty, 
&c.  and  only  the  word  sovereign  returned  for  the  king  and  queen. 

Those  words  in  the  prayer  for  the  king,  <c  Grant  that  he  may 
vanquish  and  overcome  all  his  enemies,"  is  of  too  large  an  ex- 
tent, if  the  king  engage  in  an  unjust  war,  shall  be  turned  thus, 
"  Prosper  all  his  righteous  undertakings  against  thy  enemies,"  or 
after  some  such  manner. 

Those  words  in  the  prayer  for  the  clergy,  "  Who  alone  workest 
great  marvels,"  as  subject  to  be  ill  interpreted  by  persons  vainly 
disposed,  shall  be  thus,  "  Who  alone  art  the  author  of  all  good 
gifts;"  and  these  words,  "the  healthful  Spirit  of  thy  grace,"  shall 
"  be  the  holy  Spirit  of  thy  grace,"  healthful,  being  an  obsolete 
word. 

The  prayer  which  begins,  (<  O  God,  whose  nature  and  proper- 
ty,'' shall  be  thrown  out,  as  full  of  strange  and  impertinent  ex- 
pressions, and  besides  not  in  the  original,  but  foisted  in  since  by 
another  hand.* 

The  Collects,  for  the  most  part  are  to  be  changed  for  those 
which  the  Bishop  of  Chichester  has  prepared,  being  a  review  of  the 
old  ones  with  enlargements,  to  render  them  more  sensible  and  af- 
fecting, and  what  expressions  are  needless  to  be  retrenched. 

*  Dr.  Nichols  in  his  Commentary  affirms,  that  this  prayer  was  first  brought  into  the 
Liturgy  in  the  first  of  King  James  I.  But  Mr.  Wheatley  asserts,  that  it  was  insert- 
ed in  the  Common  Prayer-book  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  It  was  at  first  placed  just  after 
the  prayer  In  tbe  Time  of  any  common  Plague  or  Sickness  (that  being  the  last  of  the 
Prayers  on  particular  Occasions);  but,  at  the  review  of  the  Common  Prayer  after  the 
Restoration,  the  two  prayers  for  the  Ember  weeks  were  inserted  just  after  that,  and 
the  prayer  in  question  immediately  followed  them.  The  printers  indeed  set  it  where 
it  now  usually  stands,  between  the  Prayer  for  all  Conditions  of  Men,  and  the  General 
Thanksgiving :  but  the  commissioners  obliged  them  to  print  a  new  leaf,  wherein  it 
should  stand  just  before  the  prayer  for  the  parliament.  Notwithstanding  which  the 
order  has  been  neglected  in  all  the  subsequent  editions. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CXX1X 


If  any  minister  refuse  the  surplice,  the  bishop,  if  the  people  de- 
sire it,  and  the  living  will  bear  it,  may  substitute  one  in  his  place, 
that  will  officiate  in  it ;  but  the  whole  thing  is  left  to  the  discretion 
of  the  bishops. 

If  auy  desire  to  have  godfathers  and  godmothers  omitted,  and 
their  children  presented  in  their  own  names  to  baptism,  it  may  be 
granted. 

About  the  Athanasian  Creed,  they  came  at  last  to  this  conclu- 
sion, that  lest  the  wholly  rejecting  it  should  by  unreasonable  per- 
sons be  imputed  to  them  as  Socinianisui,  a  rubric  shall  be  made, 
setting  forth,  or  declaring  the  curses  denounced  therein  not  to  be 
restrained  to  every  particular  article,  but  intended  against  those 
that  deny  the  substance  of  the  Christian  religion  in  general.* 

Whether  the  amendment  of  the  translation  of  the  reading  psalms 
(as  they  are  called)  made  by  the  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph  and  Dr.  Kid- 
der, or  that  in  the  Bible,  shall  be  inserted  in  the  Prayer  Book,  is 
wholly  left  to  the  convocation  to  consider  of  and  determine. 

Several  alterations  were  made  in  the  Litany,  Communion  Ser- 
vice, &c. 

Such  were  the  proceedings  of  the  commissioners,  which  had 
been  protested  against  by  their  brethren,  who  had  left  them  imme- 
diately after  their  first  meeting,  with  a  declaration,  that  they  were 
against  all  alterations  whatsoever.  They  thought,  that  too  much 
had  been  already  done  for  the  dissenters,  in  the  toleration  which 
was  granted  them,  and  would  do  nothing  to  make  them  still  easier. 
They  said  farther,  that  the  altering  of  the  customs  and  constitutions 
of  our  church,  to  gratify  a  peevish  and  obstinate  party,  was  like  to 
have  no  other  effect  on  them,  but  to  make  them  more  insolent ; 

*  This  article  is  not  very  consistent  with  Dr.  Nichols'  account  inserted  above : 
but  that  given  by  Dr.  Calamy  is  the  true  one  ;  for  Dr.  "Waterl and  in  the  postscript 
to  the  second  edition  of  his  Critical  History  of  the  Athanasian  Creed,  printed  at  Cam- 
bridge, in  1728,  has  given  us  the  following  copy  of  the  rubric  relating  to  that  creed, 
as  it  was  settled  and  finally  agreed  on  by  the  commissioners  in  1689,  communicated 
to  him  from  the  original  books, -then  in  the  possession  of  Dr.  Gibson,  bishop  of  Lon- 
don. 

"  Upon  these  feasts,  Christmas-day,  Easter-day,  Ascension-day,  Whitsunday,  Tri- 
nity Sunday,  and  upon  All  Saints,  shall  be  said  at  morning  prayer,  by  the  minister 
and  people  standing,  instead  of  the  creed,  commonly  called  the  Apostles'  Creed,  the 
confession  of  our  Christian  faith,  commonly  called  the  Creed  of  St.  Atbauasiut  :  the 
articles  of  which  ought  to  be  received  and  believed,  as  being  agreeable  to  the  Holy 
Scriptures  :  and  the  condemning  clauses  are  to  be  understood  as  relating  only  to 
those,  who  obstinately  deny  the  substance  of  the  Christian  faith* 


cxxx 


life  of  the  author. 


as  if  the  church,  by  offering  these  alterations,  seemed  to  confess, 
that  she  had  been  hitherto  in  the  wrong.  They  were  of  opinion, 
that  this  attempt  would  divide  the  church,  and  make  the  people 
lose  their  esteem  for  the  Liturgy,  if  it  appeared  that  it  wanted  cor- 
rection. They  excepted  also  to  the  manner  of  preparing  matters, 
by  a  special  commission,  as  limiting  the  convocation,  and  imposing 
upon  it ;  and  to  load  this  with  a  word  of  an  ill  sound,  they  called 
this  a  new  ecclesiastical  commission.  But  in  answer  to  all  this  it 
was  said,  that  if  by  a  few  corrections  and  explanations,  all  just  sa- 
tisfaction were  offered  to  the  chief  objections  of  the  dissenters, 
there  was  reason  to  hope,  that  this  would  bring  over  many  of  them, 
at  least  of  the  people,  if  not  of  the  teachers  among  them:  or,  if 
the  prejudices  of  education  wrought  too  strongly  upon  the  present 
age,  yet  if  some  more  sensible  objections  were  put  out  of  the  way, 
it  might  well  be  hoped,  that  it  would  have  a  great  effect  on  the  next 
generation.  If  these  condescensions  were  made  so,  as  to  own,  in 
the  way  of  offering  them,  that  the  nonconformists  had  been  in  the 
right,  that  might  turn  to  the  reproach  of  the  church :  but  such 
offers  being  made  only  in  regard  to  their  weakness,  the  reproach 
fell  on  them ;  as  the  honour  accrued  to  the  church,  who  shewed 
herself  a  true  mother  by  her  care  to  preserve  her  children.  That 
it  was  not  offered,  that  the  ordinary  posture  of  receiving  the  sacra- 
ment kneeling  should  be  changed ;  this  being  still  to  be  the  re- 
ceived and  favoured  posture ;  but  that  only  such,  as  declared  that 
they  could  not  overcome  their  scruples  in  that  matter,  were  to  be 
admitted  to  it  in  another  posture.  Ritual  matters  were  of  their 
own  nature  indifferent,  and  had  been  always  declared  to  be  so ; 
and  all  the  necessity  of  them  arose  only  from  the  authority  in 
church  and  state,  which  had  enacted  them.  It  would  therefore  be 
an  unreasonable  stiffness  to  deny  any  abatement  or  yielding  in  such 
matters,  in  order  to  the  healing  of  the  church's  wounds.  Great  al- 
terations had  been  made  in  such  things  in  all  ages  of  the  church. 
Even  the  church  of  Rome  was  still  making  some  alterations  in  her 
rituals.  And  changes  had  been  made  among  ourselves  often  since 
the  Reformation,  in  the  reigns  of  King  Edward,  Queen  Elizabeth, 
King  James  I.  and  King  Charles  II.  These  were  always  made 
upon  some  great  turn,  critical  times  being  the  most  proper  for  de- 
signs of  that  kind.  The  toleration  now  granted  seemed  to  render 
it  more  necessary  than  formerly,  to  make  the  terms  of  communion 
with  the  church  as  large  as  might  be,  in  order  to  draw  over  to  it 
the  greater  number  from  those,  who  might  now  leave  it  more  safely  ; 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CXXX1 


ami,  therefore,  the  more  care  was  to  be  used  for  the  gaining  them. 
And,  with  regard  to  the  manner  of  preparing  these  overtures,  the 
King's  supremacy  signified  little,  if  he  could  not  appoint  a  select 
number  to  consider  of  such  matters,  as  he  might  think  fit  to  lay 
before  the  convocation.  This  no  way  broke  in  upon  their  full  free- 
dom of  debate,  it  being  free  to  them  to  reject,  as  well  as  to  accept, 
of  the  propositions  that  should  be  offered  to  them.* 

But  while  this  important  affair  was  thus  argued,  the  party,  which 
was  now  at  work  for  the  abdicated  King,  took  hold  on  this  occa- 
sion to  inflame  men's  minds.  It  was  pretended,  that  the  church 
was  to  be  demolished,  and  presbytery  set  up  :  that  all  this  now  in 
debate  was  only  intended  to  divide  and  distract  the  church,  and 
to  render  it  by  that  means  both  weaker  and  more  ridiculous,  while 
it  departed  from  its  former  grounds,  in  offering  such  concessions. 
The  universities  took  fire  upon  this,  and  began  to  declare  against 
it,  and  against  all  who  promoted  it,  as  men  who  intended  to  under- 
mine the  church.  Severe  reflections  were  likewise  cast  on  the 
King,  as  being  in  an  interest  contrary  to  the  church  ;  for  the  church 
was  the  word  given  out  by  the  jacobite  party,  under  which  they 
thought  they  might  more  safely  shelter  themselves.  Great  can- 
vassings  were  every  where  in  the  election  of  members  of  the  con- 
vocation, a  tiling  not  known  in  former  times ;  so  that  it  was  soon 
very  visible,  that  the  temper  of  men  was  not  cool  or  calm  enough 
to  encourage  the  farther  prosecution  of  such  a  design.  + 

Those  who  were  friends  to  it  designed  Dr.  Tillotson,  dean  of 
St.  Paul's,  for  prolocutor  of  the  lower  house  ;  and  the  court  was 
solicitous  for  the  choice  of  him,  from  a  persuasion,  that  his  sin- 
gular moderation  and  prudence  in  that  chair  would  be  able  to  in- 
fluence that  house  to  concur  in  promoting  those  ends  for  which  the 
convocation  was  called.  He  was  accordingly  proposed  by  Dr. 
Sharp,  J  his  successor  in  the  deanery  of  Canterbury,  upon  the  meet- 
ing of  the  convocation,  on  Thursday,  November  21st,  1689  :  but 
it  was  carried  by  a  majority  of  two  to  one  for  Dr.  Jane,  the  choice 
of  whom  is  said  to  have  been  owing,  not  only  to  the  general  tem- 
per of  the  clergy,  but  likewise  to  the  intrigues  of  the  Earls  of  Cla- 
rendon and  Rochester,  who,  on  account  of  their  near  relation  to  the 
Queen,  whose  mother  was  their  sister,  expected,  when  the  govern- 
ment was  settled  on  King  William  and  her  Majesty,  to  have  had 

*  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  32.  t  Ibid.  p.  32,  33. 

t  Letter  to  me  from  the  Rev.  Dr.  Thomas  Sharp,  archdeacon  of  Northumberland 
dated  at  Durham,  November  7,  1751, 


CXXX11 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


some  of  the  higher  employments  under  it.  But,  being  disappointed, 
they,  from  resentment,  endeavoured  to  perplex  and  embarrass  it, 
and,  among  other  schemes  for  that  purpose,  set  themselves  to  de- 
feat whatever  was  intended  to  be  done  by  the  convocation,  and  ac- 
cordingly went  to  Oxford,  where  they  found  Dr.  Jane  prepared  for 
their  views,  by  his  own  disappointment  and  ambition,  as  well  as  by 
his  principles  ;  whom  having  engaged  to  stand  in  competition 
against  the  Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  they  supported  him  in  it  by  all  their 
interest.* 

But,  besides  these,  there  was  another  more  secret  cause  of  the 
opposition  to  the  Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  and  of  the  clamour  raised  on 
his  account,  both  before  and  in  the  convocation,  which  will  appear 
from  a  letter  of  his  to  be  produced  hereafter.  This  took  its  rise 
from  the  Bishop  of  London's  jealousy  of  the  Dean's  being  intended 
by  the  King  for  the  archbishopric  of  Canterbury,  which  himself 
had  once  before  been  disappointed  of,  when  Dr.  Sancroft  was  pro- 
moted to  it,  and  which  he  now  seemed  to  claim  as  due  to  his  con- 
duct before,  and  especially  at  the  Revolution,  as  well  as  to  his  rank 
and  family,  being  the  sixth  and  youngest  son  of  Spencer,  earl  of 
Northampton,  who  fell  in  an  engagement  at  Hopton  Heath,  in  Staf- 
fordshire, March  19,  164|,  fighting,  with  three  of  his  sons,  for  the 
royal  cause.  He  was  at  first  entered  at  Queen's  College,  in  Oxford, 
about  1649,  and  after  about  three  years'  stay  there,  travelled  into 
France,  Italy,  and  other  countries;  and  upon  his  return  was  after 
the  Restoration  made  a  cornet  in  the  royal  regiment  of  horse- 
guards,  under  the  command  of  Aubrey  Vere,  earl  of  Oxford.  Af- 
terwards entering  into  holy  orders,  when  he  was  about  thirty  years 
of  age,  he  was  in  1667  made  master  of  the  hospital  of  St.  Cross, 
near  Winchester,  in  May,  1669,  canon  of  Christ  Church  ;  and,  in 
October,  1674,  bishop  of  Oxford  ;  and,  in  December,  of  the  year 
following,  upon  the  death  of  Dr.  Humphrey  Henchman,  translated 
to  the  see  of  London,  in  which  he  died  on  the  7th  of  July,  1711,  in 
the  eighty-first  year  of  his  age.  He  was  an  humble,  modest,  ge- 
nerous, and  goodnatured  man,  but  weak,  wilful,  much  in  the  power 
of  others,  and  strangely  wedded  to  a  party.f  He  applied  himself 
more  to  his  function  than  bishops  had  commonly  done,  and  went 
about  his  diocese,  and  preached  and  confirmed  in  many  places ; 
but  his  preaching  was  without  much  vivacity  or  learning,  as  he 
had  not  passed  through  his  studies  with  the  exactness  that  was  pro- 

*  Life  of  Dr.  .Prkleaux,  dean  of  Norwich,  p.  54 — 56. 
t  Burnet,  vol.  i.  p.  392,  ami  vol.  ii.  p.  630. 


Lf fe  of  The  author.  cxxxiii 

per.  He  was  a  great  patron  of  the  converts  from  popery,  and  of 
those  protestants  who  had  been  obliged  to  leave  France  for  their 
religion.  His  chief  attachment,  during  the  reign  of  King  Charles 
II.  had  been  to  the  Lord  Treasurer  Danby ;  but  he  was  hated  by 
the  Duke  of  York,  whom  he  greatly  offended  by  his  frequent  com. 
plaints  to  the  King  of  the  insolence  of  the  papists,  and  especially 
of  Mr.  Coleman,  the  Duke's  secretary.*  He  was  one  of  those  emi- 
nent persons  in  the  following  reign,  who  met  at  the  Earl  of  Shrews- 
bury's house,  for  concerting  proper  advices  for  the  Prince  of 
Orange's  conduct,  and  drawing  up  the  declaration,  on  which  they 
advised  his  Highness  to  engage  ;t  and  he  joined  in  the  invitation 
of  that  Prince  by  the  persuasion  of  the  Earl  of  Danby.  +  His  op- 
position to  the  court,  after  the  Revolution,  in  concurrence  with  the 
tory  party,  began,  after  he  had  been  set  aside  in  the  disposal  of  the 
archbishopric  to  Dr.  Tillotson,  and  it  was  still  heightened  upon  the 
promotion  of  Dr.  Tennison  to  that  see ;  and,  in  the  reign  of  Queen 
Anne,  he  always  supported  those  measures,  which  were  most  agree 
able  to  her  Majesty's  own  inclination  and  principles. 

His  Lordship's  expectation  of  succeeding  Archbishop  Sancroft 
upon  the  derivation  of  the  latter,  and  his  "  open  falling  out,"  as 
Mr.  Wharton  expresses  it,§  with  the  Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  are  men- 
tioned by  that  writer,  who  adds,  that  the  Dean  laboured  to  exclude 
his  Lordship  from  the  archbishopric,  and  earnestly  pressed  the  King 
to  give  it  to  Bishop  Stillingfleet.  But  for  these  two  last  facts  I  have 
not  met  with  any  other  authority. 

But,  to  resume  the  history  of  the  convocation,  the  new  prolocu- 
tor being  presented  on  the  25th  of  November  to  the  Bishop  of  Lon- 
don, president  of  the  convocation,  whose  chaplain  he  had  been,  for 
his  Lordship's  approbation,  made,  according  to  custom,  a  speech 
in  Latin,  in  which  he  extolled  the  excellency  of  the  church  of  Eng- 
land, as  established  by  law,  above  all  Christian  communities,  inti- 
mating, that  it  wanted  no  amendment,  and  concluding  with  the  ap- 
plication of  this  sentence  by  way  of  triumph,  Nolumus  leges  An- 
gliee  mutari.  The  Bishop  in  his  answer  in  the  same  language  told 
the  clergy,  that  rt  they  ought  to  endeavour  a  temper  in  those  things 
that  are  not  essential  in  religion,  thereby  to  open  a  door  of  salvation 
to  a  multitude  of  straying  Christians :  that  it  must  needs  be  their 
duty  to  shew  the  same  indulgence  and  charity  to  the  dissenters  uu- 


*  Burnet,  vol.i.  p.  392.  t  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  712. 

$  MS.  Collections  above  cited. 


X  Ibid.  p.  794. 


cxxxiv 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


der  King  William,  which  some  of  the  bishops  and  clergy  had  pro- 
mised to  them  in  their  addresses  to  King  James." 

At  the  next  meeting  the  Bishop  acquainted  the  convocation,  that 
having  communicated  the  royal  commission,  by  which  they  were 
empowered  to  act,  to  an  eminent  civilian,  he  had  found  it  defective 
in  not  having  the  great  seal ;  for  which  reason  he  should  prorogue 
them  till  that  was  procured.  And,  on  the  4th  of  December,  that 
commission,  dated  November  30,  was  brought,  while  both  houses 
were  together  in  JTenry  VII/s  chapel,  by  the  earl  of  Nottingham, 
with  a  message  from  the  King,  representing,  that  his  Majesty  had 
summoned  this  convocation,  not  only  because  it  was  usual,  upon 
holding  a  parliament,  but  out  of  a  pious  zeal  to  do  every  thing  that 
might  tend  to  the  best  establishment  of  the  church  of  England, 
which  is  so  eminent  a  part  of  the  Reformation,  and  is  certainly  the 
best  suited  to  the  constitution  of  this  government,  and  therefore 
most  signally  deserved,  and  should  always  have  both  his  favour  and 
protection  :  and  that  he  doubted  not,  but  that  they  would  assist  him 
in  promoting  the  welfare  of  it,  so  that  no  prejudices,  which  some 
men  might  have  laboured  to  possess  them  with,  should  disappoint 
his  good  intentions,  or  deprive  the  church  of  any  benefit  from  their 
consultations.  That  he  therefore  expected,  that  the  things  that 
should  be  proposed  should  be  calmly  and  impartially  considered 
by  them :  and  he  assured  them,  that  he  would  offer  nothing  to 
them,  but  what  should  be  for  the  honour,  peace,  and  advantage 
both  of  the  protestant  religion  in  general,  and  particularly  of  the 
church  of  England. 

The  bishops  agreed  upon  an  address  to  his  Majesty  to  thank 
him  "  for  the  grace  and  goodness  expressed  in  his  message,  and  the 
zeal  shewn  in  it  for  the  protestant  religion  in  general,  and  the 
church  of  England  in  particular,  and  of  the  trust  and  confidence 
reposed  in  the  convocation  by  the  commission ;  which  marks  of  his 
Majesty's  care  and  favour  they  looked  upon  as  the  continuance  of 
the  great  deliverance,  which  Almighty  God  had  wrought  for  them 
by  his  means,  by  making  him  the  blessed  instrument  of  preserving 
them  from  falling  under  the  cruelty  of  popish  tyranny.  For  which, 
as  they  often  had  thanked  Almighty  God,  so  they  could  not  forget 
that  high  obligation  and  duty,  which  they  owed  to  his  Majesty; 
and  on  these  new  assurances  of  his  protection  and  favour  to  the 
church,  they  begged  leave  to  renew  the  assurance  of  their  constant 
fidelity  and  obedience  to  his  Majesty,  whom  they  prayed  God  to 
continue  long  and  happily  to  reign  over  them." 


LIFE   OF   THE   A UTHOB.  CXXXV 

The  lower  house  of  convocation,  who  were  determined  to  enter 
into  no  debates  with  relation  to  alterations,  would  not  consent  to 
this  address  ;  but  first  pleaded  for  the  privilege  of  presenting  a  se- 
parate one  of  their  own  drawing  up;  and  then  waving  that  preten- 
sion, applied  themselves  to  making  amendments  in  the  draughts 
sent  them  by  the  bishops,*  in  which  his  Majesty's  "  zeal  for  the  pro- 
testant  religion  in  general,  and  the  church  of  England  in  particular,'' 
was  acknowledged,  the  lower  house  thinking,  that  this  imported 
their  owning  common  union  with  the  foreign  protestants.f  The 
reason  which  they  assigned  for  refusing  their  concurrence  with 
the  bishops  in  their  form,  was,  that  ?  they  were  desirous  to  confine 
their  address  to  his  Majesty's  most  gracious  message,  and  to  those 
things  only  therein,  which  concerned  the  church  of  England. *'  This 
occasioned  a  conference  between  the  two  houses,  which  was  chiefiv 
managed  between  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  and  the  prolocutor;  and 
these  reasons  were  reported,  why  the  bishops  insisted  on  the  ex- 
press mention  of  the  protestant  religion :  1.  Because  it  is  the 
known  denomination  of  the  common  doctrine  of  the  western  part  of 
Christendom,  in  opposition  to  the  errors  and  corruptions  of  the 
church  of  Rome.  2.  Because  the  leaving  out  this  niav  have  ill 
consequences,  and  be  liable  to  strange  constructions,  both  at 
home  and  abroad,  among  protestants  as  well  as  papists.  3.  Be- 
cause it  agrees  with  the  general  reason  offered  by  the  clergv  for 
their  amendments,  since  this  was  expressly  mentioned  in  the  King's 
message;  and  in  this  the  church  of  England  being  so  much  con- 
cerned, their  lordships  thought  it  ought  to  stand  still  in  the  address. 
The  lower  house,  after  debating  these  reasons,  refused  to  consent 
to  them,  but  agreed  to  thank  his  Majesty  "for  his  pious  zeal  and 
care  for  the  honour,  peace,  advantage,  and  establishment  of  the 
church  of  England  ;"  and  then  to  add,  ,;  whereby  we  doubt  not  the 
interest  of  all  the  protestant  churches,  which  is  dear  to  us,  will,  un- 
der the  influence  of  your  Majesty's  government,  be  the  better  se- 
cured." The  upper  house  desiring  them  to  give  their  reason,  whv 
instead  of  the  protestant  religion  they  iuserted  protestant  churches 
it  was  given  in  these  words  :  "  We  being  the  representative  of  a 
formed  established  church,  do  not  think  fit  to  mention  the  word 
religion j  any  farther  than  it  is  the  religion  of  some  formed  estab- 
lished church."  Their  lordships  returned  the  amendment  with 
this  alteration  :  H  We  doubt  not,  the  interest  of  the  protestant  religi- 


•  K*nnet,ToI.  iii.  p.  593. 


*  Burnet,  toI.  ii.  p.  55. 


cxxxvi 


-LTFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


on  in  this  and  all  other  protestant  churches,"  &c.  The  lower  house, 
still  jealous  that  it  would  be  a  diminution  of  the  church  of  England 
to  join  it  with  foreign  protestant  churches,  would  have  the  words 
(this  and)  omitted;  and  at  last,  with  great  difficulty,  an  address 
was  agreed,  and  presented  to  the  King,  in  the  Banqueting-house,  at 
Whitehall,  on  Thursday,  the  12th  of  December ;  wherein  they  re- 
turned their  most  humble  acknowledgments  for  his  Majesty's  mes- 
sage, and  the  pious  zeal  and  care  which  he  was  pleased  to  express 
therein,  for  the  honour,  peace,  advantage,  and  establishment  of  the 
church  of  England  ;  whereby,  they  doubted  not,  the  interest  of  the 
protestant  religion  in  all  other  protestant  churches,  which  was  dear 
to  them,  would  be  the  better  secured  under  the  influence  of  his 
Majesty's  government  and  protection;  and  they  craved  leave  to 
assure  him,  that,  in  pursuance  of  that  trust  and  confidence  which 
he  reposed  in  them,  they  would  consider  w  hatsoever  should  be  of- 
fered to  them  from  his  Majesty,  without  prejudice,  and  with  all 
calmness  and  impartiality  ;  and  that  they  would  constantly  pay  the 
fidelity  and  allegiance,  which  they  had  all  sworn  to  him  and  the 
Queen,  whom  they  prayed  God  to  continue  long  and  happily  to 
reign  over  them.  The  King  well  understood,  why  this  address  omit- 
ted the  thanks  which  the  bishops  had  recommended  for  his  royal 
commission,  and  the  zeal  which  he  had  shewn  for  the  protestant 
religion  ;  and  why  there  was  no  expression  of  tenderness  to  the  dis- 
senters, and  but  a  cool  regard  to  the  protestant  churches.  How- 
ever, his  Majesty  returned  this  gracious  answer,  that  he  "  took  this 
address  very  kindly  from  the  convocation ;  and  that  they  might  de- 
pend upon  it,  that  he  would  do  all  he  had  promised,  and  all  he 
could  do,  for  the  service  of  the  church  of  England;  and  gave  them 
this  new  assurance,  that  he  would  improve  all  occasions  and  oppor- 
tunities for  its  service." 

The  majority  of  the  lower  house  had  a  reserved  kindness  for  the 
nonjuring  bishops  and  clergy  ;  and,  therefore,  one  of  the  members 
made  a  zealous  speech  in  behalf  of  the  bishops  under  suspen- 
sion, that  "  something  might  be  done  to  qualify  them  to  sit  in  con- 
vocation, yet  so  as  that  the  convocation  might  not  incur  any  danger 
thereby."  But  this  matter  being  of  too  delicate  a  nature,  was  left 
to  farther  consideration,  while  they  laboured  to  find  out  some  other 
business  to  divert  them  from  that,  for  which  they  were  called  to- 
gether. And,  therefore,  on  the  11th  of  December,  the  prolocutor 
attended  the  president  and  bishops,  and,  in  the  name  of  the  lower 
house,  represented  to  their  lordships,  «  that  there  were  several 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cxxxvii 


books  of  a  very  dangerous  consequence  to  the  Christian  religion 
and  the  church  of  England  ;  particularly,  Notes  upon  Athanasius's 
Creed,  and  Two  Letters  relating  to  the  present  Convocation,  newly 
come  abroad  ;"  and  desired  their  lordships'  advice,  "  in  what  way, 
and  how  far  safely,  without  incurring  the  penalty  of  the  statute  of 
25  Hen.  VIII.  the  convocation  might  proceed  in  the  preventing  the 
publishing  the  like  scandalous  books  for  the  future,  and  inflicting 
the  censures  of  the  church,  according  to  the  canons  provided  in 
that  behalf,  upon  the  authors  of  them."    Upon  which  the  Prolo- 
cutor, on  the  13th  of  that  month,  acquainted  the  house,  that  "  the 
President  had  declared  his  sense  of  the  ill  consquence  of  those 
books,  that  were  sent  up  from  that  house  to  their  Lordships ;  and 
that,  upon  inquiry,  he  could  not  receive  any  satisfaction,  how  far 
the  convocation  might  proceed  in  that  affair;  but  that  he  would, 
as  far  as  lay  in  him,  take  further  order  about  it."    The  same  day, 
the  bishops  having  proposed  to  appoint  a  committee  of  both  houses 
to  sit  during  the  recess,  the  lower  house,  after  some  debate,  re- 
solved in  the  negative :  after  which  the  convocation  was  prorogued 
to  the  24th  of  January  following,  then  prorogued  again,  and  at  last 
dissolved  with  the  parliament.*    For  as  there  was  at  that  time  but 
a  small  number  of  bishops  in  the  upper  house,  and  they  had  not 
their  metropolitan  with  them,  nor  strength  and  authority  to  set 
things  forward,  they  advised  the  King  to  suffer  the  session  to  be 
discontinued  :  and  thus  seeing  they  were  in  no  disposition  to  enter 
upon  business,  they  were  kept  from  doing  mischief  by  prorogations 
for  a  course  of  ten  years.  This  was  in  reality  a  favour  to  them  ;  for 
ever  since  the  year  1662  the  convocation  had  indeed  continued  to 
sit,  but  to  do  no  business  ;  so  that  they  were  kept  at  no  small  charge 
in  town,  to  do  nothing  but  only  to  meet  and  read  a  Latin  liturgy ; 
and,  consequently,  it  was  an  ease  to  be  freed  from  such  an  attend- 
ance to  no  purpose.    But  the  ill  reception  which  the  clergy  gave 
the  King's  message,  raised  a  great  clamour  against  them,  since  all 
the  promises  made  in  King  James  II/s  time  were  now  so  entirely 
forgot.f 

However,  there  is  observed  by  Bishop  Burnet  J  a  very  happy  di- 
rection of  the  providence  of  God  in  this  matter.  The  jacobite 
clergy,  who  were  then  under  suspension,  Mere  designing  to  make 
a  schism  in  the  church,  whenever  they  should  be  turned  out,  and 

*  Historical  Account  of  the  whole  Proceedings  of  the  Convocation,  printed  at  the 
end  of  Vox  Cleri:  London,  1690,  4to.;  and  Kennet,  p.  594,  595. 

t  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  33.  t  Ibid,  and  p.  34^ 

VOL.  I.  P 


cxxxvm 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


their  places  should  be  filled  up  by  others.  They  saw,  that  it  would 
not  be  easy  to  make  a  separation  upon  private  and  personal  ac- 
count, and  therefore  wished  to  be  furnished  with  more  specious 
pretences.  If,  therefore,  any  alterations  had  been  made  in  the 
rubric,  and  other  parts  of  the  Common  Prayer,  they  would  have 
pretended,  that  they  still  stuck  to  the  ancient  church  of  England,  in 
opposition  to  those  who  were  altering  it,  and  setting  up  new  models. 
But  though  they  hoped  and  wished  that  those  alterations  might  be 
made,  which  they  reckoned  would  have  been  of  great  advantage 
for  serving  their  ends,  yet  they  were  at  the  same  time  the  instru- 
ments of  raising  such  a  clamour  against  them,  as  prevented  their 
being  made ;  which,  if  they  had  been  carried  by  a  majority  in  the 
convocation,  would,  by  the  best  judgment  that  could  be  afterwards 
formed,  have  on  that  account  done  more  hurt  than  good. 

Such  important  points  as  were  the  subject  of  the  commission, 
and  intended  for  the  consideration  of  the  convocation,  occasioned 
the  publication  of  several  pamphlets  in  favour  of,  as  well  as  against, 
the  intended  comprehension.  Among  the  former  was  a  Discourse 
concerning  that  commission,  proving  it  to  be  agreeable  to  the  law 
of  the  land,  useful  to  the  convocation,  tending  to  the  well-being  of 
the  church,  and  seasonable  at  this  juncture,  written  by  Dr.  Thomas 
Tennison,  and  printed  at  London,  1689,  in  4to. ;  and  A  Letter  to  a 
Friend  relating  to  the  present  Convocation,  dated  November  27, 
1689,  and  sometimes  ascribed  to  Dr.  Tillotson,  though  the  real 
author  of  it  was  Dr.  Humphrey  Prideaux.*  On  the  other  side  was 
published,  Vox  Cleri ;  or,  the  Sense  of  the  Clergy  concerning  the 
making  of  Alterations  in  the  established  Liturgy :  with  some  Re- 
marks on  the  Discourse  concerning  the  Ecclesiastical  Commission, 
and  several  Letters  for  Alterations,  London,  1690,  in  4to.  This  was 
imputed  to  Mr.  Thomas  Long,  prebendary  of  Exeter  ;  and  was  op- 
posed by,  An  Answer  to  Vox  Cleri,  &c.  examining  the  reasons 
against  making  any  alterations  and  abatements  in  order  to  a  com- 
prehension, and  shewing  the  expediency  thereof;  said  to  be  written 
by  Dr.  William  Payne,  and  printed  at  London,  1690,  in  4to.  Vox 
Populi ;  or,  the  Sense  of  the  sober  Laymen  of  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land, concerning  Heads  proposed  in  his  Majesty's  Commission  to 
the  Convocation ;  printed  the  same  year,  and  in  the  same  form. 
Vox  Regis  et  Regni ;  or,  a  Protest  against  Vox  Cleri,  and  a  Per- 
suasive (thereby  occasioned)  to  make  such  Alterations  as  may  give 
ease  to  our  dissenting  Brethren :  London,  1690,  in  4to. ;  and  Two 

*  See  his  Life,  p.  58. 


I.  ITS.    OF    THE  AUTHOR. 


CXXXIX 


Letters,  and  a  Vindication  of  them,  concerning  Alterations  in  the 
Liturgy,  by  Mr.  Basset,  London,  1689,  in  4to.   The  answer  to  Vox 
Cleri  was  replied  to  in  a  just  censure  of  it;  and  Dr.  Henry  Mau- 
rice, chaplain  to  Archbishop  Sancroft,  published  Remarks  from 
the  Country  upon  the  Two  Letters  relating  to  the  Convocation  and 
Alterations.    The  Letter  to  a  Friend,  concerning  some  queries 
about  the  new  commission  for  making  alterations  in  the  Liturgy, 
Canons,  &c.  of  the  English,  published  in  October,  1689,  is  sup- 
posed to  be  the  performance  of  Dr.  Jane  himself  :*  and  this  sup- 
position is  the  more  probable,  as  the  author,  after  declaring  against 
any  alterations,  seems  to  point  his  reflections  directly  against  Dr. 
Tillotson  in  these  queries:  "  Whether  the  known  character  of 
some  leading  men  in  this  commission  be  not  reason  enough  to 
suspect  the  event  ?    Whether  men,  who  conformed  with  difficulty 
themselves,  or  upon  principles,  which  wise  men  foresaw  would  de- 
stroy the  church  in  time,  who  have  latitude  to  conform  to  a  church 
de  facto,  which  hath  power  on  its  side,  and  to  conceal  their  own 
inclinations  till  it  is  time  to  shew  them,  are  not  likely  to  do  the 
church  of  England  a  good  turn,  when  opportunity  serves,  and 
which  perhaps  they  imagine  now  they  have  V    Dr.  South  has  like- 
wise, in  several  passages  of  his  works,  spoke  with  his  usual  severity 
of  the  scheme.     He  begins  the  preface  to  his  Animadversions 
upon  Dr.  Sherlock's  Vindication  of  the  holy  and  ever-blessed 
Trinity,  printed  in  1693,  in  4to.  with  remarking,  (i  that  to  be  im- 
pugned from  without,  and  betrayed  from  within,  is  certainlv  the 
worst  condition,  that  either  church  or  state  can  fall  into ;  and  the 
best  of  churches,  the  church  of  England,  has  had  experience  of 
both.    It  had  been  to  be  wished,  and  (one  would  think)  might  very 
reasonably  have  been  expected,  that  when  Providence  had  took  the 
work  of  destroying  the  church  of  England  out  of  the  papists'  hands, 
some  would  have  been  contented  with  her  preferments,  without 
either  attempting  to  give  up  her  rites  and  liturgy,  or  deserting  her 
doctrine.    But  it  has  proved  otherwise."    He  is  still  more  full  and 
explicit  upon  this  topic  in  his  dedication  of  the  second  volume  of 
his  Sermons  to  the  university  of  Oxford,  dated  November  17tb, 
1693,  in  which  he  observes,  that  the  chief  design  of  some  of  them 
is  to  assert  the  rights  and  constitutions  of  our  excellently-reformed 
church,  ■  which  of  late,"  says  he,  "  we  so  often  hear  reproached 
(in  the  modish  dialect  of  the  present  times)  by  the  name  of  little 
things  ;  and  that,  in  order  to  their  being  laid  aside,  not  only  at 
•  Set  Wood.  Alh.  Oxon.  rol.  ii.  eol.  1049. 
P  2 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOE. 


Uttlet  but  superfluous.  But,  for  my  own  part,  I  can  account  nothing 
little  in  any  church,  which  has  the  stamp  of  undoubted  authority, 
and  the  practice  of  primitive  antiquity,  as  well  as  the  reason  and 
decency  of  the  thing  itself,  to  warrant  and  support  it.  Though,  if 
the  supposed  littleness  of  these  matters  should  be  a  sufficient  rea- 
son for  the  laying  them  aside,  I  fear  our  church  will  be  found  to 
have  more  little  men  to  spare  than  little  things."  He  then  declaims 
against  the  innovating  spirit,  which  had  been  striking  at  the  consti- 
tution of  our  church;  affirming,  that  "  innovations  about  religion 
are  certainly  the  most  efficacious,  as  well  as  the  most  plausible,  way 
of  compassing  a  total  abolition  of  it." 

On  the  other  side,  it  was  remarkable  that  Bishop  Patrick  should 
have  so  great  a  share  in  the  design  of  the  comprehension,  who,  in 
the  general  preface,  dated  November  1st,  1G83,  before  the  sixth 
edition  of  his  Friendly  Debate  between  a  Conformist  and  a  Non- 
conformist, had  declared  himself  irreconcileable  to  such  a  design. 
This  he  took  occasion  to  remark  in  answer  to  the  censure  passed 
upon  that  book  by  the  Lord  Chief- Justice  Hale,*  whom  he  owned 
to  be  as  eminent  for  candour  as  learning  and  piety.  His  Lordship 
had  expressed  a  great  dislike  of  the  Friendly  Debate,t  and  Dr. 
Parker's  Ecclesiastical  Policy,  %  as  tending  to  the  injury  of  religion 
itself,  that  he  wished  the  authors  would  openly  profess,  that  they 
wrote  for  themselves,  and  no  more  abusively  pretend  it  was  for  re- 
ligion. Dr.  Patrick  acknowledges,  in  his  general  preface,  that  "  he 
was  not  then,  nor  is  now,  for  that  project  of  comprehension,  with 
which  every  body  knows  Sir  Matthew  Hale  was  strongly  possessed. 
The  debate  came  in  the  way  of  that,  and  lay  cross  to  it.  But  as  for 
his  charge  of  the  author's  writing  for  himself,  I  can  demonstrate, 
that  as  things  then  stood,  it  was  impossible  (unless  we  will  suppose 
him  to  be  a  fool)  he  should  have  any  such  respect  to  secular  advan- 
tages, which  he  might  thereby  reap,  save  only  the  preserving  him- 
self by  preserving  the  government,  which  he  was  bound  to  do  as  a 
member  of  this  church  and  kingdom,  which  he  loves  unfeignedly, 
and  whose  present  constitution  he  will  always  endeavour  stedfastly 
to  uphold.  For  they  whom  he  opposed  had  too  much  power,  he 
knew  very  well,  at  that  time  to  obstruct  him  in  such  a  design;  and 
as  they  used  all  their  interest  to  depress  him,  so  they  had  such  an 
influence,  I  can  prove,  upon  some,  who  are  now  dead  and  gone, 

*  See  Mr.  Baxter's  second  Defence  of  Nonconformity,  p.  188.  London,  1681 . 
+  The  first  and  second  parts  of  it  were  published  in  1668;  and  the  third  iu  1670. 
X  Printed  at  London,  1669,  in  8vo. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cxh 


that  by  their  means  they  did  actually  keep  him  down,  a  loug  time, 
from  rising  at  all  in  the  world."  This  whole  preface  has  indeed 
strong  marks  of  chagrin  ;  and  the  time  of  writing  it  is  the  more  re- 
markable, being  soon  after  the  discovery  of  the  Rye-house  plot, 
which  he  styles  ualate  treasonable  conspiracy  against  his  Majesty's 
sacred  person  and  government."  Nor  is  it  improbable  that  his  at- 
tachment to  the  court,  and  connexions  with  Dr.  Samuel  Parker,  oc- 
casioned in  some  measure  that  resentment  which  he  expressed 
against  the  Dean  of  Canterbury,  on  account  of  his  sermon  on  Jo- 
shua xxiv.  15,  in  his  letters  to  that  ambitious  and  prostitute  divine, 
cited  above  from  Dr.  Hickes.  But  he  afterwards  became  more 
moderate;  and  his  zeal  and  labours  to  obviate  the  progress  of  po- 
pery during  the  reign  of  King  James  II.  concurred,  with  his  exten- 
sive learning  and  piety,  to  recommend  him  to  the  bishopric  of  Chi- 
chester, whence  he  was  translated  to  that  of  Ely,  in  1691,  where 
he  died  on  the  31st  of  May,  1707,  in  his  eighty-first  year,  being 
born  at  Gainsborough,  in  Lincolnshire,  on  the  8th  of  Septem- 
ber, 1626,  His  education  had  been  in  the  university  of  Cambridge, 
where  he  was  fellow  of  Queen's  College,  and  ordained  by  Dr.  Jo- 
seph Hall,  the  deprived  Bishop  of  Norwich.  He  was  at  first  vicar 
of  Battersea,  and  in  September,  166*2,  rector  of  St.  Paul's,  Covent 
Garden  ;  and  in  August,  1679,  advanced  to  the  deanery  of  Peter- 
borough, upon  the  decease  of  Dr.  Duport,  w  hose  Greek  and  Latin 
poems  were  in  the  last  age  much  admired,  though  now  little  read  ; 
the  former  being  a  cento  from  Homer,  and  the  latter  wanting  a  true 
classical  purity,  and  abounding  in  unnatural  conceits,  and  a  mere 
play  of  words. 

Dr.  Tillotson  had  been  in  strict  attendance  at  court,  in  his  office 
of  clerk  of  the  closet,  for  ten  weeks,  till  towards  the  beginning  of 
September,  1689,  when  he  obtained  leave  to  retire  for  some  days  to 
his  house  at  Edmonton,  w  hence  he  wrote  on  the  10th  of  that  mouth 
to  Lady  Russel,  giving  her  an  account  of  the  King's  having  given 
the  bishopric  of  Chichester  to  Dr.  Patrick,  and  the  deanery  of  Pe- 
terborough to  Dr.  Kidder.  The  rectory  of  St.  Paul's,  Covent 
Garden,  also  falling  to  his  Majesty's  disposal  by  the  promotion  of 
the  new  Bishop  of  Chichester,  Dean  Tillotson  informed  her  Lady- 
ship, that  he  believed  that  the  King  would  not  dispose  of  that 
living  but  to  one,  whom  the  Earl  of  Bedford,  the  patron  of  it, 
should  approve;  and  therefore  asked  her,  whether  his  Lordship 
and  -he  would  be  willing,  that  the  Earl  of  Nottingham  should  men- 
tion to  his  Majesty  on  that  occasion  Dr.  John  More.    This  divine 


cxlij 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


was,  after  his  advancement  to  the  episcopal  dignity,  one  of  the 
most  eminent  patrons  of  learning  and  learned  men  in  his  time ;  and 
his  name  will  be  carried  down  to  posterity,  not  only  by  his  ser- 
mons published  by  Dr.  Samuel  Clarke,  his  chaplain,  but  by  the 
curious  and  magnificent  library  collected  by  him,  and  purchased 
after  his  death  for  six  thousand  guineas  by  his  late  Majesty,  who 
presented  it  to  the  university  of  Cambridge.  He  was  born  at  Har- 
borough,  in  Leicestershire,  and  educated  at  Clare  Hall,  in  that  uni- 
versity, where  he  took  the  degree  of  bachelor  of  arts  in  1665,  of 
master  in  1669,  of  doctor  of  divinity  in  1681.  He  was  fellow  of 
that  college,  and  chaplain  to  the  Lord  Chancellor  Nottingham,  and 
quitting  the  rectory  of  Blaby,  in  Leicestershire,  was  presented  to 
that  of  St.  Austin,  in  London,  in  December,  1687  ;  and  in  October, 
1689,  was  removed  to  that  of  St.  Andrew's,  which  he  held  till  July, 
1691,  when  he  was  consecrated  Bishop  of  Norwich,  in  the  room 
of  Dr.  William  Lloyd,  deprived  for  not  taking  the  oaths ;  and  in 
July,  i707,  translated  to  the  see  of  Ely,  upon  the  death  of  Dr.  Pa- 
trick.   He  died  on  the  31st  July,  1714,  at  the  age  of  sixty-eight. 

In  the  same  letter  the  Dean  takes  notice  of  his  having  spoken  to 
the  King  the  Sunday  before  concerning  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson,  and 
that  his  Majesty  seemed  well  inclined  to  what  he  had  moved  for 
that  divine,  but  did  not  positively  determine  to  take  that  course. 
This  refers  to  some  request,  which  Lady  Russel  had  desired  the 
Dean  to  make  to  his  Majesty  in  favour  of  Mr.  Johnson,  for  whom 
she  had  great  zeal,  out  of  regard  both  to  the  memory  of  her  hus- 
band, whose  chaplain  he  had  been,  and  to  the  merit  of  his  writings 
and  sufferings.  This  remarkable  man  was  born  in  Staffordshire,  in 
1649,  educated  first  at  St.  Paul's  School,*  thence  removed  to  Tri- 
nity College,  in  Cambridge/}-  and  on  the  1st  of  March,  16-f-g,  pre- 
sented by  Mr.  Robert  Bidolph  to  the  rectory  of  Coringham,  in  the 
hundreds  of  Essex,  J  worth  eighty  pounds  a  year;  the  only  church 
preferment  which  he  ever  enjoyed.  But  the  air  of  that  place  not 
agreeing  with  his  health,  he  was  obliged  to  put  in  a  curate  to  sup- 
ply the  living,  and  came  to  London,  where  his  knowledge  of  poli- 
tics, and  the  constitution  and  history  of  his  country,  recommended 
him  to  the  acquaintance  of  the  principal  persons  engaged  in  an 
opposition  to  the  measures  and  designs  of  the  court,  and  particu- 
larly the  Earl  of  Essex  and  the  Lord  Russel,  the  latter  of  whom 
appointed  him  his  domestic  chaplain.    His  Julian,  the  Apostate, 

*  Some  Memorials  prefixed  to  his  Works.     t  Knight's  Life  of  Dean  CoIet,p.  411. 
X  Newcourt's  Repertoriam,  vol.  ii.  p.  94. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cxiiii 


published  in  1682,  was  intended  to  expose  the  doctrines  of  passive 
obedience  and  non-resistance,  which  were  carried  at  that  time  to 
an  extravagant  height  by  writers  even  of  his  own  order,  and  to  shew 
the  great  difference  betwixt  the  case  of  the  primitive  Christians,  who 
had  the  laws  against  them,  and  our's,  who  have  the  laws  on  our  side. 
This  provoked  the  court  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  was  prosecuted 
for  it  as  a  very  scandalous  and  seditious  libel,  and  sentenced  in  the 
King's  Bench,  on  the  11th  of  February,  168  j,  to  pay  500  marks  for  a 
fine  to  the  King,  to  find  sureties  for  his  good  behaviour  for  a  year, 
and  to  be  committed  to  the  prison  of  the  King's  Bench  till  this  be 
paid  and  done,  and  that  his  book  be  burnt  by  the  hands  of  the  com- 
mon hangman.    Being  incapable  to  discharge  his  fine,  he  conti- 
nued in  prison  in  extremely  necessitous  circumstances;  and  there 
drew  upon  himself  a  new  persecution,  in  the  reign  of  King  James 
II.  by  writing  and  printing,  in  1686,  An  humble  and  hearty  Ad- 
dress to  all  the  English  Protestants  in  the  present  Army.  The  sen- 
tence which  he  received  was  a  very  severe  one,  to  stand  in  the  pil- 
lory in  Westminster,  Charing  Cross,  and  the  Royal  Exchange;  to 
pay  a  fine  of  500  marks,  and  to  be  whipped  from  Newgate  to 
Tyburn.  Previously  to  his  suffering,  he  was  degraded  in  the  Chap- 
ter House  of  St.  Paul's,  on  the  22d  of  November,  1686,  by  Dr. 
Crew,  bishop  of  Durham,  Dr.  Sprat,  bishop  of  Rochester,  and 
Dr.  White,  bishop  of  Peterborough,  and  several  divines  of  the 
city ;  Dr.  Stillingfleet,  dean  of  St.  Paul's,  refusing  to  attend  on 
that  occasion.    He  bore  the  whipping,  on  the  1st  of  December  fol- 
lowing, with  great  fortitude.    The  Revolution  restored  him  to  his 
liberty,  and  the  judgment  given  against  him  in  1686  was  declared 
illegal  and  cruel,  and  his  degradation  null ;  and  the  House  of  Lords 
presented  two  addresses  to  King  William,  recommending  him  to 
preferment :  and  the  reason  why  he  never  received  any,  is  to  be  de- 
rived from  his  own  temper  and  conduct.    For  with  very  good  abi- 
lities, considerable  learning,  and  great  clearness,  strength,  and  vi- 
vacity of  sentiment  and  expression,  of  which  his  writings  are  a  suf- 
ficient evidence,  among  which  his  few  sermons  are  equal  in  their 
kind  to  his  other  performances  ;  and  with  a  firmness  of  mind  capa- 
ble of  supporting  the  severest  trials,  for  any  cause,  the  truth  or  im- 
portance of  which  he  was  convinced  of;  he  was  passionate,  impa- 
tient of  contradiction,  self-opinionated,  haughty,  and  apt  to  over- 
rate his  own  services,  and  undervalue  those  of  others,  whose  ad- 
vancement above  himself  was  an  insupportable  mortification  to  him. 
In  what  manner  he  treated  Bishop  Burnet,  against  whom  he  had  a 


Cxliv  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

peculiar  spleen,  appears  from  his  writings,  especially  his  Notes  on 
the  Phoenix  Edition  of  the  Pastoral  Letter.  Nor  was  he  much  more 
gentle  to  Dean  Tillotson,  especially  on  account  of  his  letter  to 
Lord  Russel :  but  the  Dean  bore  it  with  his  usual  temper,  and  still 
endeavoured  to  serve  him  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  and  in  so  se- 
cret a  manner,  that  Mr.  Johnson  should  not  discover  his  obliga- 
tions to  him,  it  being  not  uncommon  with  the  latter  to  return  the 
kindnesses  received  from  persons  whom  he  disliked  with  an  air  of 
the  utmost  contempt,  as  he  did  that  of  the  Dean,  when  he  sent 
him  a  present  of  thirty  pounds  during  his  confinement  in  the  King's 
Bench,  though  his  necessities  forced  him  to  accept  of  the  money. 
The  roughness  of  his  temper,  and  turbulency  of  his  genius,  ren- 
dered him  also  unfit  for  the  higher  stations  of  the  church,  of  which 
he  was  immoderately  ambitious ;  as  well  as  his  freedom  in  de- 
livering his  sentiments  with  relation  to  all  subjects  and  persons, 
without  management  or  decorum ;  a  liberty  which  he  often  exer- 
cised even  in  the  court  itself,  where  he  publicly  said,  that  upon  the 
principle  of  kings  being  accountable  only  to  God,  the  Rump  Par- 
liament had  done  right  to  send  King  Charles  I.  to  him.  As  he 
could  not  succeed  in  his  applications  for  a  bishopric  in  England, 
and  would  not  submit  to  any  inferior  preferment  in  the  church, 
having  refused  the  rich  deanery  of  Durham,  he  changed  his  former 
solicitations  into  one  for  a  pension  from  the  King ;  in  which  he 
was  at  last  gratified,  having  the  grant  of  300/.  a  year  for  his  own 
and  his  son's  life,  with  1000/.  in  money,  and  a  place  of  100/.  a  year 
for  his  son. 

The  King  had  now  fixed  upon  Dr.  Tillotson  for  the  successor 
to  the  suspended  Archbishop,  if  the  latter  should  incur,  as  he 
seemed  determined,  a  sentence  of  deprivation :  and  he  communi- 
cated this  intention  to  the  Doctor,  when  he  kissed  his  Majesty's 
hands  for  the  deanery  of  St.  Paul's.  But  this  fact  will  be  best  re- 
presented in  the  Dean's  own  words,  in  his  letter  to  Lady  Russel, 
which  I  shall  insert  here  at  length,  as  well  as  some  others,  since  a 
mere  abstract  would  be  an  injury  to  the  reader,  and  to  as  great  a 
master  of  the  epistolary,  as  all  other  kinds  of  writing.  And  it  is 
observable,  that  this  letter  is  an  unanswerable  confutation  of  a  re- 
port propagated  to  the  disadvantage  of  Bishop  Burnet,  that  he  had 
a  view  himself  to  the  archbishopric,  and  that  his  disappointment  in 
that  respect  was  the  ground  of  an  incurable  resentment  against  a 
Prince,  to  whom  he  had  been  so  much  obliged. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cxlv 


«  ♦honoured  madam,  London,  April  19, 1689. 

*'I  received  both  your  letters  ;  and  before  the  latter  came  to  my 
hands,  I  gave  your  Ladyship  some  kind  of  answer  to  the  first,  as 
the  time  would  let  me,  for  the  post  staid  for  it.  But,  having  now  a 
little  more  leisure  you  will,  I  hope,  give  me  leave  to  trouble  you 
with  a  longer  letter. 

"  I  was  not  at  Hampton  Court  last  Sunday,  being  almost  tired 
out  with  ten  weeks'  attendance,  so  that  I  have  had  no  opportunity 
to  try  further  in  the  business  I  wrote  of  in  my  last,  but  hope  to 
bring  it  to  some  issue  the  next  opportunity  I  can  get  to  speak 
with  the  King.  I  am  sorry  to  see  in  Mr.  Johnson  so  broad  a 
mixture  of  human  frailty  with  so  considerable  virtues ;  but  when 
I  look  into  myself,  I  must  think  it  pretty  well,  when  any  man's  infir- 
mities are  in  any  measure  overbalanced  by  his  better  qualities. 
This  good  man,  I  am  speaking  of,  has  at  some  times  not  used  me 
over-well ;  for  which  I  do  not  only  forgive  him,  when  I  consider 
for  whose  sake  he  did  it,  but  do  heartily  love  him. 

"  The  King,  besides  his  first  bounty  to  Mr.  Walker,  +  whose  mo- 
desty is  equal  to  his  merit,  hath  made  him  bishop  of  London-derry, 
one  of  the  best  bishoprics  in  Ireland  ;  that  so  he  may  receive  the 
reward  of  that  great  service  in  the  place  where  he  did  it.  It  is  in- 
credible how  much  every  body  is  pleased  with  what  the  King 
hath  done  in  this  matter,  and  it  is  no  small  joy  to  me  to  see,  that 
God  directs  him  to  do  so  wisely. 

"  I  will  now  give  your  Ladyship  a  short  account  of  his  Majes- 
ty's disposal  of  our  English  church  preferments,  which  I  think  he 
hath  done  as  well  as  could  be  expected  in  the  midst  of  the  power- 

*  From  a  copy  in  the  possession  of  the  right  Reverend  Dr.  Edmund  Gibson,  late 
lord  bishop  of  London. 

t  Mr.  George  Walker,  justly  famous  for  bis  defence  of  London-Derry,  in  Ireland, 
was  born  of  English  parents  in  the  county  of  Tyrone,  in  that  kingdom,  and  educated 
in  the  university  of  Glasgow,  in  Scotland.  He  was  afterwards  rector  of  Donogluuore, 
not  many  miles  from  the  city  of  London-Derry.  Upon  tbe  Revolution  be  raised  a  re- 
giment for  the  defence  of  the  Protestants ;  and,  upon  intelligence  of  King  James 
having  a  design  to  besiege  London-Derry,  retired  thither,  being  at  last  chosen  go- 
vernor of  it.  After  the  raising  of  that  siege  he  came  to  England,  where  he  was  most 
graciously  received  by  their  Majesties,  and,  on  the  19th  of  November,  1689,  receiv- 
ed the  thanks  of  the  House  of  Commons,  having  just  before  published  an  account  of 
that  siege.  He  was  created  doctor  of  divinity  by  the  university  of  Oxford,  on  the 
26th  of  February,  16§ fj,  in  bis  return  to  Ireland,  where  he  was  killed  in  the  begin- 
ning of  July,  1690,  at  the  passage  of  the  Boyne,  having  resolved  to  serve  that  cam- 
paign before  he  took  possession  of  his  bishopric. 


LIFE  Ol    THE  AUTHOR. 


ful  importunities  of  so  many  great  men,  in  whom  I  discern  too 
much  of  court  art  and  contrivance  for  the  preferment  of  their 
friends ;  yea,  even  in  my  good  Lord  Nottingham  more  than  I 
could  wish.  This  is  a  melancholy  consideration  to  one  in  my  sta- 
tion, in  which  I  do  not  see  how  it  is  possible  so  to  manage  a  man's 
self  between  civility  and  sincerity,  between  being  willing  to  give 
good  words  to  all,  and  able  to  do  good  to  very  few,  as  to  hold  out 
an  honest  man,  or  even  the  reputation  of  being  so,  a  year  to  an  end. 

4i  I  promised  a  short  account,  but  I  am  long  before  I  come  to  it. 

"  The  Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  bishop  of  Worcester ;  the  Dean  of  Pe- 
terborough, of  Chichester ;  an  humble  servant  of  your's,  dean  of 
St.  Paul's ;  the  Dean  of  Norwich  is  dean  of  Canterbury ;  and 
Dr.  Stanley,  clerk  of  his  Majesty's  closet,  is  residentiary  of  St. 
Paul's  ;  and  Dr.  Fairfax,  dean  of  Norwich.  The  warden  of  All 
Souls,*  in  Oxford,  is  prebendary  of  Canterbury ;  and  Mr.  Nixon 
hath  the  other  prebend  there,  void  by  the  death  of  Dr.  Jeffryes. 
These  two  last  merited  of  the  King  in  the  west,  Mr.  Finch  by  go- 
ing in  early  to  him,  and  Mr.  Nixon,  who  is  my  Lord  of  Bath's  chap- 
lain, by  carrying  messages  between  the  King  and  my  Lord  of  Bath, 
as  the  King  himself  told  me,  with  the  hazard  of  his  life.  St.  An- 
drews and  Covent  Garden  are  not  yet  disposed.  Dr.  Birch  (which 
I  had  almost  forgot)  is  prebendary  of  Westminster ;  and,  which 
grieves  me  much,  Mons.  Allix  put  by  at  present.  But  my  Lord 
Privy-Sealf  would  not  be  denied.  The  whole  is  as  well  as  could 
easily  be  in  the  present  circumstances. 

*'  But  now  begins  my  trouble.  After  I  had  kissed  the  King's 
hand  for  the  deanery  of  St.  Paul's,  I  gave  his  Majesty  my  mosthum- 

*  Mr.  Leopold  William  Finch,  fifth  son  of  Heneage,  earl  of  Winchelsea,  by  lady 
Mary,  second  daughter  of  William  Seymour,  Duke  of  Somerset.  He  was  born  at 
Constantinople,  while  his  father  was  ambassador  there,  educated  at  Christ  Church, 
in  Oxford,  and  elected  warden  of  All  Souls,  by  mandamus  of  King  James  II.  on  the 
21st  of  January,  168  f,  having  been  elected  fellow  of  that  college  from  Christ  Church, 
where  he  was  educated,  and  took  the  degree  of  batchelor  of  arts,  December  17,1681, 
as  he  did  that  of  master,  December,  1685.  How  opposite  his  principles  had  been 
to  those  of  the  Revolution,  in  which  he  so  early  joined,  may  be  judged  of  by  his  de- 
dication to  James,  Earl  of  Abington,  of  an  English  translation  of  Cornelius  Nepos,  by 
several  hands,  printed  at  Oxford,  in  1683;  in  which,  having  ridiculed  the  popish  plot 
by  the  name  of  Dr.  Titus's  Plot,  and  rejoiced,  that  it  comes  to  the  fanatics  turn  to 
bang,  he  complains  of  the  plague  of  republican  principles,  and  glories  in  the  gowns- 
mens  asserting  one  of  the  most  sacred  essentials  of  the  government,  the  lineal  succes- 
sion, which  could  neither  by  the  dispensation  of  the  Pope,  or  the  power  of  parliament, 
be  altered. 

t  The  Marquis  of  Halifax. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cxlvii 


ble  thanks,  and  told  him,  that  now  he  had  set  me  at  ease  for  the 
remainder  of  my  life.  He  replied,  *  no  such  matter,  I  assure  you  :* 
and  spoke  plainly  about  a  great  place,  which  I  dread  to  think  of ; 
and  said,  *  it  was  necessary  for  his  service,  and  he  must  charge  it 
upon  my  conscience  ?  Just  as  he  had  said  this,  he  was  called  to 
supper,  and  I  had  only  time  to  say,  that  when  his  Majesty  was  at 
leisure,  I  did  believe  I  could  satisfy  him,  that  it  would  be  most  for 
his  service,  that  I  should  continue  in  the  station,  in  which  he  had 
now  placed  me.  This  hath  brought  me  into  a  real  difficulty.  For 
on  the  one  hand  it  is  hard  to  decline  his  Majesty's  commands,  and 
much  harder  yet  to  stand  out  against  so  much  goodness  as  his 
Majesty  is  pleased  to  use  towards  me.  On  the  other,  I  can  nei- 
ther bring  my  inclination  nor  my  judgment  to  it.  This  I  owe  to 
the  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  one  of  the  worst  and  best  friends  I  know. 
Best  for  his  singular  good  opinion  of  me ;  and  the  worst,  for  di- 
recting the  King  to  this  method,  which  I  know  he  did  ;  as  if  his 
Lordship  and  I  had  concerted  the  matter  how  to  finish  this  foolish 
piece  of  dissimulation,  in  running  away  from  a  bishopric,  to  catch 
at  an  archbishopric.  This  fine  device  hath  thrown  me  so  far  into 
the  briars,  that  without  his  Majesty's  great  goodness,  I  shall  never 
get  off  without  a  scratched  face.  And  now  I  will  tell  your  Lady- 
ship the  bottom  of  my  heart.  I  have,  for  a  long  time,  I  thank  God 
for  it,  devoted  myself  to  the  public  service,  without  any  regard  for 
myself;  and  to  that  end  have  done  the  best  I  could,  in  the  best 
manner  I  was  able.  Of  late  God  hath  been  pleased,  by  very  se- 
vere ways,  but  in  great  goodness  to  me,  to  wean  me  perfectly  from 
the  love  of  this  world  ;  so  that  worldly  greatness  is  now  not  only 
undesirable,  but  distasteful  to  me.  And  I  do  verily  believe,  that 
I  shall  be  able  to  do  as  much  or  more  good  in  my  present  station, 
than  in  a  higher,  and  shall  not  have  one  jot  less  interest  or  influ- 
ence upon  any  others  to  any  good  purpose  :  for  the  people  natu- 
rally love  a  man,  that  will  take  great  pains  and  little  preferment. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  I  could  force  my  inclination  to  take  this 
great  place,  I  foresee  that  I  should  sink  under  it,  and  grow  melan- 
choly and  good  for  nothing,  and  after  a  little  while  die  as  a  fool  dies. 

"  But  this,  madam,  is  a  great  deal  too  much  upon  one  of  the 
worst  and  nicest  subjects  in  the  world — a  man's  self. 

"  As  I  was  finishing  this  long  letter,  which,  if  your  goodness  will 
forgive,  I  hope  never  to  have  occasion  to  try  it  so  far  again,  I  re- 
ceived your  letter,  and  shall  say  no  more  of  Dr.  More,  of  whose 
preaching  1  always  knew  your  Ladyship's  opinion.    The  person  I 


cxlviii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


mentioned  was  Mr.  Kidder,  on  whom  the  King  has  bestowed  the 
deanery  of  Peterborough,  and  therefore  cannot  have  it.  I  am  fully 
of  your  Ladyship's  opinion,  that  what  my  Lord  Bedford  does  in 
this  matter,  must  not  appear  to  be  done  by  him,  for  fear  of  bring- 
ing other  importunities  upon  the  King.  If  my  Lord  thinks  well 
of  Dr.  Horneck,  Dr.  More  would  then  certainly  have  St  Andrew's. 

I  thank  God  for  the  health  your  family  enjoys,  as  for  that  of  my 
own ;  and  equally  pray  for  the  continuance  of  it,  and  all  other 
blessings.  I  would  fain  find  room  to  tender  my  humble  service  to 
my  Lord  of  Bedford,  my  Lord  Russel,  and  two  of  the  best  young 
ladies  I  know.  I  am,  honoured  madam,  more  than  I  can  express, 
«'  Your  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

"John  Tillotson." 

Lady  Russel,  in  her  answer  to  this  letter,  desired  to  know  of  the 
Dean  the  characters  of  two  of  the  city  divines,  Mr.  Samuel  Free- 
man and  Mr  John  Williams ;  of  the  latter  of  whom  she  had  heard 
him  speak  in  very  advantageous  terms,  since  these  two  were  now 
the  only  persons,  who  lay  before  the  Earl  of  Bedford  for  his  consi- 
deration, in  order  to  be  recommended  to  the  King  for  the  living  of 
Covent  Garden ;  his  Lordship  not  being  inclined  to  Dr.  More, 
and  the  parish  in  a  high  degree  averse  to  Dr.  Horneck.  Her  La- 
dyship then  proceeds  to  the  Dean's  own  case.  "  Now  a  few  words," 
says  she,  "  to  your  own  concern,  that  bears  so  heavy  upon  your 
mind,  and  I  have  done.  I  know  not,  if  I  should  use  the  phrase, 
integrity  is  my  idol ;  but  I  am  sure  I  admire  and  love  it  hugely, 
wherever  I  meet  it.  I  do  pity  you,  Mr.  Dean,  and  think  you  have 
a  hard  game  upon  your  hands ;  which,  if  it  should  happen  you 
cannot  play  off  your  own  way,  you  can  do  better  than  a  man  less 
mortified  to  the  world  could  ;  because,  if  you  serve  the  interest  of 
religion  and  the  King's,  you  are  doing  what  you  have  dedicated 
yourself  to,  and  therefore  can  be  more  regardless  of  ignorant  and 
wicked  censures ;  for,  upon  my  word,  I  believe  you  will  incur  no 
other.  Your  character  is  above  it,  if  what  you  fear  should  come 
upon  you.  But  as  I  conceive  there  are  six  months  yet  to  deliberate 
upon  this  matter,  you  know  the  old  saying,  '  many  things  fall  out 
between  the  cup  and  the  lip/  And  pray  do  not  fill  your  head  with 
the  fears  of  a  trouble,  though  never  so  great,  that  is  at  a  distance, 
and  may  never  be :  for  if  you  think  too  much  of  a  matter  you 
dread,  it  will  certainly  disturb  your  quiet,  and  that  will  infallibly  in- 
jure  your  health ;  and  you  cannot  but  see,  sir,  that  would  be  of  a 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cxlix 


bad  consequence.  The  King  is  willing  to  hear  you ;  you  know 
your  own  heart  to  do  good ;  and  you  have  lived  some  time,  and 
have  had  experience.  You  say  well,  that  such  an  one  is  the  best 
and  worst  friend.  I  think  I  should  have  had  more  tenderness  to 
the  will  and  temper  of  my  friend.  And,  for  his  justification,  one 
may  say,  he  prefers  good  to  many,  before  gratifying  one  single  per- 
son; and  a  public  good  ought  to  carry  a  man  a  great  way.  But  I 
see  your  judgment  (if  your  inclination  does  not  bias  too  far)  is 
heartily  against  him  in  this  matter,  that  you  think  you  cannot  do 
so  much  good  then,  as  now.  We  must  see,  if  you  can  convince 
him  thereof ;  and,  when  he  is  master  of  that  notion,  then  let  him 
labour  to  make  your  way  out  of  those  briars  he  has  done  his  part 
to  bring  you  into  ;  though  something  else  would  have  done  it  with- 
out him,  I  believe,  if  I  am  not  mistaken  in  this,  no  more  than  I  am, 
that  this  letter  is  much  too  long." 

The  Dean's  reply*  to  this  letter  was  written  a  few  days  after. 

u  honoured  MADAM,  Edmonton,  Sept.  24,  1689. 

"  Just  now  I  received  your  Ladyship's  letter.  Since  my  last, 
and  not  before,  I  understand  the  great  averseness  of  the  parish  from 
Dr.  Horneck ;  so  that  if  my  Lord  of  Bedford  had  liked  him,  I 
could  not  have  thought  it  fit,  knowing  how  necessary  it  is  to  the 
good  effect  of  a  man's  ministry,  that  he  do  not  lie  under  any  great 
prejudice  with  the  people.  The  two,  whom  the  Bishop  of  Chiches- 
ter +  hath  named,  are,  I  think,  of  the  worthiest  of  the  city  ministers, 
since  Mr.  Kidder  declines  it,  for  the  reason  given  by  the  Bishop ; 
and,  if  he  did  not,  could  not  have  it,  not  because  of  any  inconsist- 
ency in  the  preferments,  but  because  the  King,  having  so  manv 
obligations  yet  to  answer,  cannot  at  the  same  time  give  two  such 
preferments  to  one  man.  For  the  two  persons  mentioned,  if  com- 
parison must  be  made  between  two  very  good  men,  I  will  tell  your 
Ladyship  my  free  thoughts  of  them. 

"  Mr.  Williams  is  really  one  of  the  best  men  I  know,  and  most 
unwearied  in  doing  good,  and  his  preaching  verv  weighty  and  judi- 
cious. The  other  is  a  truly  pious  man,  and  of  a  winning  conversa- 
tion. He  preaches  well,  and  hath  much  the  more  plausible  delivery, 
and,  I  think,  a  stronger  voice.  Both  of  them  (which  I  had  almost 
forgot)  have  been  steady  in  all  changes  of  times.  This  is  the  plain 
truth  ;  and  yet  I  must  not  conceal  one  particular  and  present  advan- 

*  From  a  copy  in  the  possession  of  a  late  Bishop  of  London.       f  Dr.  Patrick. 


cl 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


tage  on  Dr.  Freeman's  side.  On  Sunday  night  last  the  King  asked 
me  concerning  a  city-minister,  whose  name  he  had  forgot ;  hut  said 
he  had  a  very  kind  remembrance  of  him,  having  had  much  con- 
versation with  him,  when  his  Majesty  was  very  young  in  Holland, 
and  wondered  he  had  never  seen  him  since  he  came  into  England. 
I  could  not  imagine  who  he  should  be,  till  his  Majesty  told  me  he 
was  the  English  Ambassador's  chaplain  above  twenty  years  ago, 
meaning  Sir  William  Temple's.  Upon  that  I  knew  it  was  Dr.  Free- 
man. The  King  said,  that  was  his  name,  and  desired  me  to  find 
him  out,  and  tell  him,  that  he  had  not  forgot  him,  but  remembered 
with  pleasure  the  acquaintance  he  had  with  him  many  years  ago  ; 
and  had  charged  me,  when  there  was  an  opportunity,  to  put  him  in 
mind  of  him.  This  I  thought  both  great  goodness  in  the  King,  and 
modesty  in  Dr.  Freeman,  never  to  shew  himself  to  the  King  all  this 
while.  By  this  your  Ladyship  will  judge,  who  is  like  to  be  most 
acceptable  to  the  King,  whose  satisfaction  as  well  as  service  I  am 
obliged  to  regard,  especially  in  the  disposal  of  his  own  preferments, 
though  Mr.  Williams  be  much  more  my  friend. 

"  I  mentioned  Mr.  Johnson  again,  but  his  Majesty  put  on  other 
discourse;  and  my  Lord  Privy- Seal  told  me  yesterday  morning, 
that  the  King  thought  it  a  little  hard  to  give  pensions  out  of  his 
purse,  instead  of  church-preferments ;  and  tells  me,  Mr.  Johnson 
is  very  sharp  upon  me:  his  Lordship  called  it  railing;  but  it 
shall  not  move  me  in  the  least.  His  Lordship  asked  me,  whether 
it  would  not  be  well  to  move  the  King  to  give  him  a  good  bishop- 
ric in  Ireland,  there  being  several  void.  I  thought  it  very  well,  if 
it  would  be  acceptable.  His  Lordship  said,  that  was  all  one  :  the 
offer  would  stop  many  mouths  as  well  as  his ;  which  I  think  was 
well  considered. 

4<  I  will  say  no  more  of  myself,  but  only  thank  your  Ladyship  for 
your  good  advice,  which  I  have  always  a  great  disposition  to  follow, 
and  a  great  deal  of  reason,  being  assured  it  is  sincere  as  well  as 
wise.  The  King  hath  set  upon  me  again  with  greater  earnestness  of 
persuasion,  than  is  fit  for  one  that  may  command.  I  begged  as 
earnestly  to  be  considered  in  this  thing,  and  so  we  parted  upon 
good  terms.  I  hope  something  will  happen  to  hinder  it.  I  put  it 
out  of  my  mind  as  much  as  I  can,  and  leave  it  to  the  good  pro- 
vidence of  God  for  the  thing  to  find  its  own  issue.  To  that  I  com- 
mend you  and  your's,  and  am,  madam, 

"  Your's  by  all  possible  obligation, 

"  J.  Tillotson." 


LI  FH  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cli 


"  If  Mr.  Johnson  refuse  this  offer,  and  it  should  be  ray  hard  for- 
tune not  to  be  able  to  get  out  of  this  difficulty,  which  I  will,  if  it 
be  possible  to  do  it  without  provocation,  I  know  one,  that  will  do 
more  for  Mr.  Johnson  than  was  desired  of  the  King;  but  still  as 
from  the  King,  for  any  thing  that  he  shall  know.  But  I  hope  some 
much  better  way  will  be  found ;  and  that  there  will  be  neither  oc- 
casion nor  opportunity  for  this." 

The  Dean's  recommendation  in  this  letter  of  Dr.  Freeman  had 
its  full  weight  in  procuring  him  the  rectory  of  Covent  Garden,  to 
which  he  was  instituted  December  28,  1689,*  being  removed  thi- 
ther from  that  of  St.  Anne's,  Aldersgate,  to  which  he  had  been  pre- 
sented in  November,  1670,  by  Dr.  Henchman,  bishop  of  London. + 
He  had  been  also  vicar  of  his  native  town  of  Olney,  in  Buckingham- 
shire, and  was  preferred  to  the  deanery  of  Peterborough  about  Au- 
gust, 1691,  upon  the  advancement  of  Dr.  Kidder  to  the  bishopric 
of  Bath  and  Wells,  and  was  succeeded  in  that  deanery  at  his  death, 
which  happened  October  14th,  1707,  at  the  age  of  sixty-three,  by 
Dr.  White  Kennet,  afterwards  bishop  of  Peterborough.  J;  He  was 
a  man  of  great  pleasantry  in  conversation ;  but  his  performances 
in  the  pulpit  were  not  equally  admired ;  on  which  account  Dr. 
Garth  introduced  him  in  the  fourth  canto  of  his  Dispensary,  under 
the  epithet  of  mysterious,  and  described  him  as  preaching  his  parish 
into  a  lethargy. 

Mr.  Williams,  the  other  divine,  mentioned  by  the  Dean  as  a  friend 
highly  esteemed  by  him,  was  a  native  of  Northamptonshire,  and 
entered,  in  1651,  a  commoner  of  Magdalen  Hall,  in  the  uni- 
versity of  Oxford,  at  the  age  of  about  seventeen,  §  and  took  the  de- 
gree of  bachelor  of  arts,  December  14th,  1655,  ||  and  that  of  mas- 
ter, June  11th,  1658  ;1T  about  which  time  he  entered  into  holy  or- 
ders. He  was  presented  to  the  rectory  of  St  Mildred,  in  the  Poul- 
try, in  the  city  of  London,  in  September,  1673,**  and  to  the  pre- 
bend of  Rugmere,  in  the  cathedral  of  St.  Paul's,  in  September, 
1683.tt    After  the  Revolution  he  became  chaplain  to  King  Wil- 

•  Newcourt  Repertorium,  vol.  i.  p.  279.  t  Ibid.        %  Willis's  Survey. 

§  Wood.  Atben.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  1119,  1120.       ||  Fasl  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  108. 

%  Ibid.  col.  122.  **  Newcourt  Repertorium,  vol.  i.  p.  208.    Mr.  Wood. 

Athen.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  1120,  says,  tbat  be  had  been  before  this  minister  of  St.  Pe- 
ter's, Paul's  Wharf,  and  vicar  of  Wrotham,  iu  Kent.  But  we  find  by  Newcourt,  vol. 
i.  p.  528,  that  this  was  another  person  of  the  same  name,  who  died  not  long  before 
the  Revolution.  tt  Newcourt,  vol.  i.  p.  208. 


clii 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


liam  and  Queen  Mary,  and  was  preferred  to  a  prebend  of  Canter- 
bury, and  in  December,  1696,  advanced  to  the  bishopric  of  Chi- 
chester, in  which  he  died  in  1709.  He  was  a  considerable  writer 
in  the  controversies  with  the  papists  and  dissenters,  and  preached 
the  lectures  founded  by  Mr.  Boyle,  his  sermons  on  that  occasion 
being  published  in  1695,  in  4to.  under  the  title  of  The  Characters 
of  Divine  Revelation. 

The  grounds  of  the  great  averseness  in  the  parish  of  Covent 
Garden  to  Dr.  Anthony  Horneck,  are  not  easy  to  be  assigned  at 
this  distance  of  time.  But  their  dislike  to  him  was  the  more  extra- 
ordinary, considering  his  prodigious  popularity  on  account  of  his 
reputation  for  piety,  and  his  pathetic  sermons,  his  church  at  the 
Savoy  being  crowded  by  auditors  from  the  most  remote  parts  ; 
which  occasioned  Dean  Freeman  to  say,  that  Dr.  Horneck's  parish 
was  much  the  largest  in  town,  since  it  reached  from  Whitehall  to 
Whitechapel.    He  was  by  birth  a  German,  being  born  at  Bac- 
charach,  in  the  Lower  Palatinate,  in  1641,  and  was  educated  at 
Heidelbergh,  and  then  at  Leyden ;  and,  at  the  age  of  nineteen, 
coming  over  to  England,  was  entered  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford, 
December  24,  1663.  Two  years  after  he  became  tutor  to  the  Lord 
Torrington,  son  to  George,  duke  of  Albemarle,  who  gave  him  the 
living  of  Doulton,  in  Devonshire,  and  procured  him  a  prebend  in 
the  church  of  Exeter  from  Bishop  Sparrow.  In  1671  he  was  chosen 
preacher  at  the  Savoy,  upon  which  he  resigned  his  living  in  Devon- 
shire, being  irreconcilable  to  pluralities  and  non-residence.*  The 
noble  family  of  the  Russels  having  a  great  regard  for  him,  Admiral 
Russel,  afterwards  Earl  of  Orford,  recommended  him  to  the  Queen 
for  preferment ;  who,  by  the  advice  of  Dr.  Tillotson,  then  arch- 
bishop, promised  the  next  prebend  of  Westminster  that  should  fall; 
and  he  accordingly  was  presented  to  it  in  1693,  by  her  Majesty,  to 
whom  he  was  introduced  by  the  Archbishop,  being  now  restored  to 
his  Grace's  good  opinion,  from  the  prejudices  which  had  been 
raised  against  him.t    He  and  Dr.  Beveridge  had  the  chief  direc- 
tions of  the  religious  societies,  which  began  to  be  formed  in  the 
reign  of  King  James  II.    He  died  of  the  stone,  at  his  house  near 
Westminster  Abbey,  Jan.  31, 169f ,  in  the  fifty-sixth  year  of  his  age. 

Mr.  Nelson  being  at  Paris,  after  having  attended  his  lady  to  Aix, 
in  Provence,  for  the  recovery  of  her  health,  the  Dean  wrote  from 
Edmonton  a  letter  to  him  on  the  15th  of  October,  1689,  in  answer 


*  Life  of  Anthony  Horneck,  D.D.  by  Richard,  lord  hishop  of  Balh  and  Wells, 
p.  3—8.  Edit.  London,  1698.  t  Ibid.  p.  17—21. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cliii 


to  one  from  that  gentleman,  of  the  30th  of  July.  In  this  letter  he 
gives  an  account  of  the  disposal  of  the  church-preferments  in  the 
manner  mentioned  in  his  letter  to  Lady  Russel,  of  September  the 
19th,  with  this  addition,  that  Mr.  Kidder  and  Mr.  Freeman  had 
by  his  interest  been  created  doctors  of  divinity  at  Cambridge,  while 
the  Kins;  was  there  in  the  beginning  of  October ;  and  that  Dr. 
More  was  presented  to  the  rectory  of  St.  Andrew's,  Holborn,  and 
Dr.  Gilbert  Ironside  promoted  to  the  see  of  Bristol.  The  latter, 
who  was  the  son  of  a  bishop  of  Bristol  of  both  his  names,  had  been 
educated  in  YVadham  College,  in  Oxford,  while  Dr.  Wilkins,  whom 
he  then  highly  admired  for  his  great  abilities,  was  warden  of  it ; 
an  office  which  he  afterwards  filled  himself  upon  the  promotion  of 
Dr.  Blandford  to  the  bishopric  of  Oxford,  in  1665.  His  dislike  of 
the  proceedings  of  Bishop  Fell,  dean  of  Christ  Church,  which  he 
thought  somewhat  arbitrary,*  prevented  him  from  accepting  the 
orfice  of  vice  chancellor  of  the  university,  till  after  the  death  of 
that  prelate  iu  July,  160G;  but,  in  the  years  1687  and  1688,  he  un- 
dertook and  discharged  it  with  all  the  firmness  and  resolution  re- 
quisite, at  a  time  when  the  rights  of  the  university,  and  the  safety 
of  the  protestant  religion,  were  in  immediate  danger.  And  it  was 
by  his  address  and  management,  that  upon  the  earliest  notice  pos- 
sible of  the  death  of  James,  the  first  duke  of  Ormond,  at  Kiugstou 
Hall,  in  Dorsetshire,  on  the  21st  of  July,  1683,  in  the  evening,  the 
university  proceeded  to  the  election  of  his  grandson,  the  late  Duke 
of  Ormond,  for  their  chancellor,  on  the  23d,  in  the  morning;  by 
which  means  they  anticipated  the  King's  mandate  in  favour  of  the 
Lord  Chancellor  Jeffries, 

In  the  former  part  of  this  year,  1689,  the  Dean  and  his  friend, 
Dr.  Sharp,  dean  of  Canterbury,  were  involved  in  a  business,  which 
took  up  no  small  share  of  their  time.  It  was  a  trust,  in  which  they 
were  engaged  by  the  will  of  Robert  Aske,  Esq.  alderman  of  Lon- 
don, and  founder  of  the  magnificent  hospital  at  Hoxton,  near  that 
city,  for  maintaining  twenty  poor  men  of  the  company  of  Haber- 
dashers, of  which  he  was  a  member,  and  twenty  boys  with  a  pro- 
per education.  He,  dying,  and  leaving  considerable  effects,  had 
made  them  joint  executors  of  his  will,  and  the  Haberdashers'  Com- 
pany his  heirs  ;  and,  among  other  legacies,  had  left  each  of  the 
executors  200/.  and  400/.  to  twenty  such  poor  clergymen  as  they 
should  nominate.  The  executors  were  so  prudent,  as  to  let  the 
agents  of  the  Company,  whose  concern  in  this  matter  was  the 
*  Wood.  Allien.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  1184.    See  likewise  col.  1170. 

VOL.  I.  Q 


cliv 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


greatest,  have  the  custody  of  all  the  ready  money  and  bonds,  which 
were  found  belonging  to  the  deceased  ;  or,  at  least,  they  were  put 
into  some  common  hand  trusted  by  both  parties  till  the  will  was 
completely  executed :  nor  was  there  any  thing  transacted  relating 
to  this  trust  from  the  time  that  the  will  was  opened,  till  that  of  the 
surrendering  all  their  concerns  into  the  hands  of  the  Company,  but 
in  the  presence,  and  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  deputies 
of  the  Company,  particularly  Sir  Thomas  Vernon  and  Mr.  Mould, 
which  latter  kept  the  accounts  of  all  things  done  in  this  affair. 
This  caution  of  their's  proved  afterwards  of  great  importance  to 
them,  by  enabling  them  to  give  full  satisfaction  to  some,  who  had 
suspected,  upon  false  suggestions  made  to  them,  that  the  executors 
had  disposed  of  some  of  the  Alderman's  effects,  before  they  de- 
livered in  the  schedule  to  the  Company.  And  this  suspicion  being 
raised  at  a  time  when  they  were  both  metropolitans,  would  have 
been  something  more  than  a  blot  upon  their  private  characters, 
had  they  not  had  sufficient  evidences  to  recur  to,  of  their  great 
care  and  honesty  in  the  management  of  their  trust.* 

The  Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  among  other  subjects  of  his  sermons  be- 
fore their  Majesties  in  his  course,  took  one  upon  a  point  of  a  very 
delicate  nature,  before  the  Queen,  on  the  7th  of  March,  16-g-g.  It 
was  upon  Matthew  xxv.  46,  concerning  the  "  eternity  of  hell  tor- 
ments," which  he  soon  after  printed.  This  sermon  gave  occasion 
to  a  new  clamour  against  him,  as  if  he  had  absolutely  denied  the 
doctrine  itself ;  and  a  groundless  and  absurd  story  has  been  handed 
down  amongst  the  nonjuring  party,  that  it  was  written  by  way  of 
consolation  to  the  Queen,  then  under  the  horrors  of  despair  on  ac- 
count of  her  behaviour  to  her  father.  Dr.  Hickesf  discharges  all 
the  venom  of  his  pen  against  this  "  wretched  sermon,"  as  he  styles 
it,  calling  out  upon  the  convocation  to  censure  it,  representing  it 
as  a  matter  of  triumph  to  atheists,  deists,  and  Socinians ;  and  sug- 
gesting, that  the  reasoning  of  it  was  borrowed  from  a  manuscript 
discourse  upon  the  same  subject,  still  extant,  which  Dr.  Hickes 
owns  he  had  never  seen,  written  "  by  an  old  sceptic  of  Norwich." 
By  this  description  he  meant  Mr.  John  Whitefoot,  who,  while  rec- 
tor of  Hingham,  in  Norfolk,  preached  and  published  the  funeral 
sermon  upon  the  death  of  that  learned  and  venerable  prelate,  Dr. 

*  Extract  of  the  MS.  life  of  Dr.  John  Sharp,  archbishop  of  York,  by  his  son  Dr. 
Thomas  Sharp,  archdeacon  of  Northumberland,  communicated  by  him  lo  me  in  bis 
letter  of  November  7,  1751. 

t  Some  Discourses,  p.  44 — 47. 


•LIFE   OF  THE   AUTHOR.  cW 

Joseph  Hall,  bishop  of  Norwich,  on  the  8th  of  September,  1656,  in 
the  eighty-second  year  of  his  age,  and  was  afterwards  rector  of  St. 
Peter's,  of  Mancroft,  in  Norwich. 

This  sermon  of  the  Dean,  which  has  been  so  elaborately  defended 
by  Mons.  le  Clerc,  in  his  Bibliotheque  Choisie,*  in  1705,  induced 
Mr.  John  Kettlewell,  one  of  the  most  pious  and  moderate  of  the 
nonjurors,  who  had  been  formerly  fellow  of  Lincoln  College,  in  Ox- 
ford, and  was  vicar  of  Coleshill,  in  Warwickshire,  till  the  Revolu- 
tion, to  make  some  additions  to  his  Practical  Believer,  first  pub- 
lished in  1688,  upon  the  first  and  last  article  of  the  creed ;  the  one 
concerning  the  proportion  between  sin  and  punishment,  and  the 
other  with  relation  to  the  dispensing  power  in  God  as  to  punish- 
ments, t  Dr.  Whitby,  likewise,  in  the  second  volume  of  his  Para- 
phrase and  Commentary  on  the  New  Testament,  first  published  in 
1700,  and  reprinted  in  1706,  inserted  an  Appendix  to  the  first 
chapter  of  the  Second  Epistle  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians,  to 
shew,  that  the  endless  miseries  and  torments  of  the  wicked  are  well 
consistent  both  with  the  justice  and  the  goodness  of  God;  in 
which  he  endeavours  to  confute  some  of  the  Dean's  arguments  on 
that  subject,  whom  he  describes  by  the  epithets  of  a  "  great,  learn- 
ed, and  excellent  person."  And  the  main  reasonings  of  that  sermon 
were  directly  attacked  in  1706,  in  one  preached  before  the  univer- 
sity of  Oxford,  and  published  by  Mr.  (afterwards  Dr.)  William 
Lupton,  who,  after  having  been  fellow  of  the  same  college  with  Mr. 
Kettlewell,  and  curate  to  Bishop  Bull,  was  called  to  London,  to 
one  of  the  most  eminent  lectures  there,  at  St.  Dunstan's  in  the  West, 
then  chosen  preacher  at  Lincoln's  Inn,  and  at  last  presented  to  a 
prebend  of  Durham,  by  Bishop  Crew,  whom  he  has  highly  com- 
plimented in  a  sermon  on  Proverbs  iii.  16,  concerning  "  the  tem- 
poral advantages  of  religion,"  preached  before  his  Lordship  on  the 
fiftieth  anniversary  of  his  consecration,  by  applying  to  him  the  doc- 
trine of  his  text.  In  his  sermon  against  the  Archbishop's  discourse, 
he  describes  it  as  "  too  well  known,"  J  and  a  plain  instance,  that 
"  even  the  greatest  men  have  their  intervals  of  misapprehension 
and  mistake,"  though  he  owns  his  Grace's  "  extraordinary  personal 
accomplishments."  This  sermon  was  reprinted,  with  several  others 
of  Dr.  Lupton's,  after  his  death,  at  Tunbridge  Wells,  on  the  14th 
of  December,  1726,  and  will  enable  the  public  to  judge  of  them, 
separately  from  the  advantage  which  they  received  from  the  so- 

*  Tom.  vii.  art.  8.  p.  292,  et  seq.  t  Life  of  Mr.  Kettlewell,  p.  163. 

t  Dr.  Lupton's  Sermons,  p.  22. 

Q2 


Chi  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

lemnity  of  his  pronunciation  and  appearance,  how  far  they  deserved 
the  encomium  given  them  by  Mr.  Nelson,*  (who  seems  upon  this 
occasion  to  have  forgot  those  of  his  friend,  Dr.  Tillotson)  of  their 
being  "  a  fit  model  for  the  preachers  of  the  rising  generation."  Dr. 
Lupton  himself  was  less  persuaded  of  the  perfection  of  his  own  dis- 
courses ;  for,  I  am  well  informed,  that  he  desired,  in  his  last  ill- 
ness, that  they  might  not  be  published,  acknowledging  that  he  was 
not  that  great  man,  which  the  world  had  been  so  favourable  as 
to  mistake  him  to  be.  And,  indeed,  he  had  in  some  measure  un- 
deceived the  judicious  in  his  life-time,  by  his  sermons  at  Lady 
Mover's  Lecture  at  St.  Paul's,  which  were  thought  by  his  friends 
and  superiors  so  little  equal  to  the  subject,  and  his  own  character, 
that  he  was  dissuaded  from  the  publication  of  them. 

The  dispute  upon  this  important  question  was  revived  by  Mr. 
Whiston,  in  1740,  in  a  tract  reprinted  in  1752,  and  intitled,  "  The 
Eternity  of  Hell  Torments  inquired  into,  with  a  Refutation  of  the 
common  Opinion  concerning  them  from  Scripture  and  Reason :" 
the  main  position  of  which  he  had  laid  down  in  a  discourse  written 
about  September,  1707,  and  printed  in  his  Sermons  and  Essays, t 
in  1709.  Mr.  Winston's  tract  was  answered  by  Mr.  (afterwards  Dr.) 
Wm.  Dodwell,  rector  of  Shottesbrook,  in  Berkshire,  in  two  sermons 
preached  before  the  university  of  Oxford,  in  March,  1741,  and  print- 
ed there  in  8vo.  in  1743  ;  in  the  preface  to  which  he  affirms,  that  the 
article  of  the  eternity  of  future  punishment  "  is  so  fundamental  a 
part  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  so  intimately  united  with  its  most 
essential  doctrines,  and  is  in  itself  the  strongest  enforcement  of 
its  practical  duties,  that  it  is  scarce  possible  to  attack  it  in  a  more 
vital  branch,  or  more  to  lessen  the  influence  of  this  great  and  gra- 
cious scheme  for  the  reformation  of  mankind,  than  by  weakening 
the  sanctions  with  which  the  Divine  Lawgiver  has  supported  it." 

Episcopius,  the  most  justly  celebrated  writer  among  the  Arme- 
nians, his  Institutioues  Theologicse,  and  other  writings,  having  con- 
tributed very  much  to  the  forming  of  some  of  the  greatest  divines 
of  our  country  in  the  last  age,  and  in  particular  Archbishop  Tillot- 
son himself,  has,  in  his  answer  to  the  sixty-second  question,  De 
seternitate  poenarum  inferni,]:  treated  that  subject  in  the  same  man- 
ner with  his  Grace.  But  whoever  is  curious  to  see  it  thoroughly 
discussed,  may  consult  the  several  authors  cited  by  the  learned  Dr. 
Edmund  Law,  archdeacon  of  Carlisle,  in  his  notes  upon  his  trans- 

*  Life  of  Bishop  Bull,  p.  491.  t  P.  220,  221. 

t  P.  67.  Edit.  Amsterdam,  1650,  foL 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


clvii 


lation  of  Archbishop  King's  Latin  discourse,  "  concerning  the  ori- 
gin of  evil." 

Upon  the  meeting  of  the  new  parliament  on  the  20th  of  March, 
1(J  \,  their  Majesties  having  appointed  a  fast,  on  the  16th  of  April 
following,  to  implore  the  Divine  favour  and  blessing  on  their  forces 
and  preparations  by  sea  and  land,  and  for  the  preservation  of  the 
King's  person,  who  was  then  determined  to  hazard  it  in  Ireland 
against  King  James,  though  supported  by  a  body  of  French  troops, 
as  well  as  the  whole  strength  of  the  papists  in  that  kingdom,  the 
Dean  was  desired  by  the  House  of  Commons  to  preach  before 
them  on  that  occasion.  His  sermon  was  upon  Eccles.  ix.  11,  to 
shew,  that  "  success  is  not  always  answerable  to  the  probability  of 
second  causes."  And,  on  another  fast,  on  the  18th  of  June,  1G90, 
he  preached  before  the  lord  mayor  and  aldermen  of  London,  on 
Jerem.  vi.  8,  pointing  out  the  "  way  to  prevent  the  ruin  of  a  sinful 
people."  This  sermon  he  likewise  published,  with  a  dedication  to 
Sir  Thomas  Pi  Iking  ton,  then  lord  mayor,  in  which  he  expressed 
his  wishes,  that  it  might  have  the  good  effect  intended  by  him,  for 
the  reformation  of  manners,  and  reconciliation  of  the  unhappv  dif- 
ferences of  that  time  ;  the  latter  of  which  topics  he  insists  on  with 
great  force  and  pathos,  complaining,  that  the  unhappy  and  odious 
names  and  distinctions  of  parties,  which  had  been  laid  aside  during 
their  common  danger,  were  immediately  after  their  deliverance  by 
the  Revolution  revived  with  greater  heats  and  animosities,  if  possi- 
ble, than  before.  Nor  were  these  two  his  only  fast-sermons  during 
that  year;  for  he  preached  a  third  before  the  Queen,  at  Whitehall, 
on  the  16th  of  September,  1G90,  upon  Zech.  vii.  5,  "  how  to  keep 
a  truly  religious  fast."  In  this  discourse  he  takes  occasion  to  men- 
tion "  the  late  wonderful  deliverance  under  the  conduct  and  valour 
of  one  of  the  best  and  bravest  of  princes,''  whom  he  styles  '*  the 
great  benefactor,  not  only  to  these  nations,  but  even  to  all  Europe, 
in  asserting  aud  maintaining  their  liberties  against  the  insolent  pride 
and  unjust  encroachments  of  one  of  the  greatest  oppressors  the 
world  had  known  for  many  ages  ;"  to  whom  he  beautifully  applies 
the  description  of  the  leviathan  in  Job.  He  proposes  likewise  to 
the  whole  court  the  pattern  set  them  by  the  Queen,  "  of  a  decent 
and  unaffected  devotion,  of  a  most  serious  and  steady  attention 
without  wandering,  without  diversion,  and  without  drowsiness! 
Such  an  example,"  adds  he,  "  as  I  cannot  but  hope  will  in  a  short 
time  gain  upon  us  all,  and  by  a  more  gentle  aud  silent  reproof  win 
us  to  the  imitation  of  it." 


dviii  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR* 

The  see  of  Canterbury  becoming  vacant  by  the  deprivation  of 
Archbishop  Sancroft  on  the  1st  of  February,  16§-|,  the  King  conti- 
nued, for  several  months  after,  his  importunities  to  the  Dean  for  hi* 
acceptance  of  it ;  which  he  still  endeavoured  to  avoid.  In  this  situa- 
tion he  wrote  the  followingletter  to  Lady  Russel,  which  begius  with 
a  condolence  upon  the  loss  of  two  of  her  near  relations,  her  sister, 
the  Countess  of  Montague,  and  her  nephew,  Wriothesly  Baptist, 
earl  of  Gainsborough,  who  died  on  the  21st  of  September,  that 
year ;  the  former  of  whom  her  Ladyship,  in  a  letter  to  Bishop 
Burnet,  on  the  16th  of  October,  describes  as  "  so  amiable  a  crea- 
ture," that  she  deserved  "  to  be  remembered  by  all  those  who 
knew  her:"  and  the  latter  "  as  a  just,  sincere  man." 

"  *  honoured  madam,  "  Edmonton,  Oct.  9,  1690. 

«  Since  I  had  the  honour  of  your  letter,  I  was  tempted  to  have 
troubled  you  with  one  of  mine  upon  the  sad  occasion  of  your  late 
great  loss  of  two  so  near  relations,  and  so  near  together.  But  I 
considered,  why  should  I  pretend  to  be  able  either  to  instruct  or 
comfort  my  Lady  Russel,  who  hath  borne  things  much  more  grie- 
vous with  so  exemplary  a  meekness  and  submission  to  the  will  of 
God,  and  knows,  as  well  as  I  can  tell  her,  that  there  is  no  remedy 
in  these  cases  but  patience,  nor  any  comfort  but  in  the  hopes  of 
the  happy  meeting  of  our  deceased  friends  in  a  better  life,  in  which 
sorrow  and  tears  shall  have  no  more  place  to  all  eternity. 

"  And  now  I  crave  leave  to  impart  something  of  my  own  trouble 
to  your  Ladyship. 

«'  On  Sunday  last  the  King  commanded  me  to  wait  upon  him  the 
next  morning  at  Kensington.  I  did  so,  and  met  with  what  I  feared. 
His  Majesty  renewed  his  former  gracious  offer  in  so  pressing  a 
manner,  and  with  so  much  kindness,  that  I  hardly  knew  how  to 
resist  it.  I  made  the  best  acknowledgments  I  could  of  his  unde- 
served grace  and  favour  to  me,  and  begged  of  him  to  consider  all 
the  consequences  of  this  matter,  being  well  assured,  that  all  that 
storm,  which  was  raised  in  convocation  the  last  year  by  those 
who  will  be  the  church  of  England,  was  upon  my  account ;  and 

that  the  Bishop  of  L  was  at  the  bottom  of  it,  out  of  a  jealousy 

that  I  might  be  a  hindrance  to  him  in  attaining  what  he  desires, 
and  what,  I  call  God  to  witness,  I  would  not  have.  And  I  told 
his  Majesty,  that  I  was  still  afraid,  that  his  kindness  to  me  would 

*  From  a  eopy  in  the  possession  of  a  lale  bishop  of  London. 


LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  cllX 

be  greatly  to  his  prejudice,  especially  if  he  carried  it  so  tar,  as  he 
was  then  pleased  to  speak.  For  I  plainly  saw  they  could  not  hear 
it;  and  that  the  effects  of  envy  and  ill-will  towards  me  would 
terminate  upon  him.  To  which  he  replied,  that  if  the  thing  were 
once  done,  aud  they  saw  no  remedy,  they  would  give  over,  and 
think  of  making  the  best  of  it :  and  therefore  he  must  desire  me  to 
think  seriously  of  it ;  with  other  expressions  not  fit  for  me  to  re- 
peat. To  all  which  I  answered,  that,  in  obedience  to  his  Majesty's 
commands,  I  would  consider  of  it  again,  though  I  was  afraid  I  had 
already  thought  more  of  it  than  had  done  me  good,  and  must  break 
through  one  of  the  greatest  resolutions  of  my  life,  and  sacrifice  at 
once  all  the  ease  and  contentment  of  it ;  which  yet  I  would  force 
myself  to  do,  were  I  really  convinced,  that  I  was  in  any  measure 
capable  of  doing  his  Majesty  and  the  public  that  service,  which  he 
was  pleased  to  think  I  was.  He  smiled,  and  said,  1  you  talk  of 
trouble ;  I  believe  you  will  have  much  more  ease  in  it,  than  in  the 
condition  in  which  you  now  are.'  Thinking  not  fit  to  say  more, 
I  humbly  took  leave. 

"  And  now,  madam,  what  shall  I  do]  my  thoughts  were  never  at 
such  a  plunge.  I  know  not  how  to  bring  my  mind  to  it ;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  though  the  comparison  is  very  unequal,  when  I  remem- 
ber how  I  saw  the  King  affected  in  the  case  of  my  Lord  of  Shrews- 
bury, I  find  myself  in  great  strait,  and  would  not  for  all  the  world 
give  him  the  like  trouble.  I  pray  God  to  direct  me  to  that,  which 
he  sees  and  knows  to  be  best,  for  I  know  not  what  to  do.  I  hope 
I  shall  have  your  prayers,  and  would  be  glad  of  your  advice,  if  the 
King  would  spare  me  so  long.  I  pray  God  to  preserve  you  and 
your's. 

"  I  am,  honoured  madam,  &c. 

"  Jo.  Tillotson." 

To  this  letter  her  Ladyship  returned  an  answer,  a  few  days  after, 
in  these  terms  : 

"  The  time  seems  to  be  come,  that  you  must  put  anew  in  prac- 
tice that  submission  you  have  so  powerfully  both  tried  yourself, 
and  instructed  others  to.  I  see  no  place  to  escape  it.  You  must 
take  up  the  cross,  and  bear  it.  I  faithfully  believe  it  has  the  figure 
of  a  very  heavy  one  to  you,  though  not  from  the  cares  of  it.  The 
King  guesses  right ;  you  toil  more  now.  But  this  work  is  of  your 
own  choosing:  and  the  dignity  of  the  other  is  what  you  have  bent 


clx 


LIFE  OF  THE 


AUTHOR. 


your  mind  against,  and  the  strong  resolve  of  your  life  has  been  to 
avoid.   Had  this  even  proceeded  to  a  vow,  it  is,  I  think,  like  the 
virgins  of  old,  to  be  dissolved  by  the  father  of  your  country.  Again, 
though  contemplation,  and  a  few  friends  well  chosen,  would  be  your 
grateful  choice  ;  yet,  if  charity,  obedience,  and  necessity  call  you 
into  the  world,  and  where  enemies  encompass  round  about,  must 
not  you  accept  it  ?  and  each  of  these,  in  my  apprehension,  deter- 
mine you  so  to  do.    In  short,  it  will  be  a  noble  sacrifice  you  will 
make ;  and  I  am  confident  you  will  find,  as  a  reward,  kind  and 
tender  supports,  if  you  do  take  the  burden  upon  you.    There  is, 
as  it  were,  a  commanding  Providence  in  the  manner  of  it.  Perhaps 
I  do  as  sincerely  wish  your  thoughts  at  ease  as  any  friend  you 
have.    But  I  think  you  may  purchase  that  too  dear:  and  if  you 
should  come  to  think  so  too,  they  would  then  be  as  restless  as  be- 
fore.   Sir,  I  believe  you  would  be  as  much  a  common  good  as  you 
can.    Consider,  how  few  of  ability  and  integrity  this  age  produces. 
Pray  do  not  turn  this  matter  too  much  in  your  head.    When  one 
has  once  turned  it  every  way,  you  know  that  more  does  perplex  ; 
and  one  never  sees  the  better  for  it.     Be  not  stiff,  if  it  be  still 
urged  to  you.  Conform  to  the  Divine  will,  which  has  set  it  so  strong- 
ly into  the  other's  mind  ;  and  be  content  to  endure.    It  is  God 
calls  you  to  it.    I  believe  it  was  wisely  said,  that  when  there  is  no 
remedy,  they  will  give  over,  and  make  the  best  of  it.    And  so,  I 
hope,  no  ill  will  terminate  on  the  King,  and  they  will  lay  up  their 
arrows,  when  they  perceive  they  will  be  shot  in  vain  at  him  or 
you,  upon  whom  no  reflection,  that  I  can  think  of,  can  be  made, 
that  is  ingenuous ;  and  what  is  pure  malice,  you  are  above  being 
affected  with.    I  wish,  for  many  reasons,  my  prayers  were  more 
worthy  ;  but,  such  as  they  are,  I  offer  them  with  a  sincere  zeal  to 
the  throne  of  grace  for  you  in  this  strait,  that  you  may  be  led  out 
of  it,  as  shall  best  serve  the  great  end  and  design  of  God's  glory. ** 

This  letter  contributed  not  a  little  to  determine  him  at  last  to 
acquiesce  in  the  King's  pleasure,  if  his  Majesty  should  still  press 
him,  who  now  insisted  upon  a  peremptory  answer.  The  result  of 
this  affair  is  mentioned  at  large  in  his  letter  to  Lady  Russel.* 

"  honoured  madam,  "  October  25,  1090. 

"  I  am  obliged  to  your  Ladyship  beyond  all  expression,  for  taking 
my  case  so  seriously  into  your  consideration,  and  giving  me  your 


From  a  copy  in  »hort  hand,  in  his  common-place  bouk 


LIFE   OF    THE  AUTHOR. 


clxi 


mature  thoughts  upon  it.  Nothing  ever  came  more  seasonably  to 
me  than  vour  letter,  which  I  received  on  Wednesday  se'unight,  the 
verv  night  before  I  was  to  have  given  my  final  answer  to  the  King 
the  next  morning.  I  thank  you  for  it.  It  helped  very  much  to  settle 
and  determine  my  wavering  mind.  I  weighed  all  you  wrote,  both 
your  advice  and  your  arguments,  having  not  only  an  assurance  of 
your  true  friendship  and  good  will  for  me,  but  a  very  great  regard 
and  deference  for  your  judgment  and  opinion.  I  cannot  but  own  the 
weight  of  that  consideration,  which  you  are  pleased  to  urge  me 
withal;  I  mean  the  visible  marks  of  a  more  than  ordinary  provi- 
dence of  God  in  this  thing;  that  the  King,  who  likes  not  either  to 
importune,  or  to  be  denied,  should,  after  ao  obstinate  a  declining 
of  the  thing  on  my  part,  still  persist  to  press  it  upon  me  with  so 
much  kindness,  and  with  that  earnestness  of  persuasion,  which  it 
does  not  become  me  to  mention.  I  wish  I  could  think  the  King 
had  a  superior  direction  in  this,  as  I  verily  believe  he  hath  had  in 
some  things  of  much  greater  importance. 

"  The  next  morning  I  went  to  Kensington  full  of  fear,  but  yet 
determined  what  was  tit  for  me  to  do.  I  met  the  King  coming  out 
of  his  closet,  and  asking  if  his  coach  was  ready.  He  took  me  aside, 
and  I  told  him,  that  in  obedience  to  his  Majesty's  command  I  had 
considered  of  the  thing  as  well  as  I  could,  and  came  to  give  him  an 
answer.  I  perceived  his  Majesty  Avas  going  out,  and  therefore  de- 
sired him  to  appoint  me  another  time,  which  he  did  on  the  Satur- 
day morning  after. 

**  Then  I  came  again,  and  he  took  me  into  his  closet,  where  I 
told  him,  that  I  could  not  but  have  a  deep  sense  of  his  Majesty's 
great  grace  and  favour  to  me,  not  only  to  offer  me  the  best  thing 
lie  had  to  give,  but  to  press  it  earnestly  upon  me.  I  said  I 
would  not  presume  to  argue  the  matter  any  further,  but  I  hoped  he 
would  give  me  leave  to  be  still  his  humble  and  earnest  petitioner 
to  spare  me  in  that  thing.  He  answered,  he  would  do  so,  if  he 
could,  but  he  knew  not  what  to  do,  if  I  refused  it.  Upon  that 
I  told  him,  that  I  tendered  my  life  to  him,  and  did  humbly  devote 
(it)  to  be  disposed  of  as  he  thought  fit.  He  was  graciously  pleased 
to  say,  it  was  the  best  news  had  come  to  him  this  great  while.  I 
did  not  kneel  down  to  kiss  his  hand,  for  without  that  I  doubt  I  am 
too  sure  of  it ;  but  requested  of  him,  that  he  would  defer  the  de- 
claration of  it,  and  let  it  be  a  secret  for  some  time.  He  said  he 
thought  it  might  not  be  amiss  to  defer  it  till  the  parliament  was 
up.    1  begged  farther  of  him,  that  he  would  not  make  me  a  wedge 


clxii  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

to  drive  out  the  present  archbishop  :  that  some  time  before  I  was 
nominated,  his  Majesty  would  be  pleased  to  declare  in  council,  that 
since  his  lenity  had  not  had  any  better  effect,  he  would  wait  no 
more,  but  would  dispose  of  their  places.  This  I  told  him  I  humbly 
desired,  that  I  might  not  bethought  to  do  any  thing  harsh  or  which 
might  reflect  upon  me,  for  now  that  his  Majesty  had  thought  fit  to 
advance  me  to  this  station,  my  reputation  was  become  his  interest. 
He  said  he  was  sensible  of  it,  and  thought  it  reasonable  to  do  as 
I  desired. 

"  I  craved  leave  of  him  to  mention  one  thing  more,  which  injus- 
tice to  my  family,  especially  my  wife,  I  ought  to  do,  that  I  should 
be  more  than  undone  by  the  great  and  necessary  charge  of  coming 
into  this  place,  and  must  therefore  be  an  humble  petitioner  to  his 
Majesty,  that  if  it  should  please  God  to  take  me  out  of  the  world, 
that  I  must  unavoidably  leave  my  wife  a  beggar,  he  would  not  suf- 
fer her  to  be  so ;  and  that  he  would  graciously  be  pleased  to  consi- 
der, that  a  widow  of  an  archbishop  of  Canterbury  (which  would 
be  an  odd  figure  in  England)  could  not  decently  be  supported  by 
so  little,  as  would  have  contented  her  very  well,  if  I  had  died  a 
dean.  To  this  he  gave  a  very  gracious  answer,  *  I  promise  yo  u  to 
take  care  of  her.' 

"  Just  as  I  had  finished  the  last  sentence,  another  very  kind  let- 
ter from  your  Ladyship  was  brought  to  me,  wherein  I  find  your 
tender  concern  for  me,  which  I  can  never  sufficiently  acknowledge. 
But  you  say,  the  die  is  now  cast,  and  I  must  now  make  the  best  I 
can  of  what  I  lately  thought  was  the  worst  that  could  have  hap- 
pened to  me.  I  thank  God  I  am  more  cheerful  than  I  expected, 
and  comfort  myself  as  I  can  with  this  hope,  that  the  providence  of 
God,  to  which  I  have  submitted  my  own  will  in  this  matter,  will 
graciously  assist  me  to  discharge  in  some  measure  the  duty  he  hath 
called  me  to. 

"  I  did  not  acquaint  my  good  friend,  who  wrote  to  you,  with  all 
that  had  passed,  because  it  was  intended  to  be  a  secret,  which  I  am 
sure  is  safe  in  your  hands.  I  only  told  him,  that  his  Majesty  did 
not  intend  as  yet  to  dispose  of  this  place ;  but  when  he  did  it,  1 
w  as  afraid  it  would  be  hard  for  me  to  escape. 

"  The  King,  I  believe,  has  only  acquainted  the  Queen  with  it, 
who,  as  she  came  out  of  the  closet  on  Sunday  last,  commanded  me 
to  wait  upon  her  after  dinner,  which  I  did  ;  and  after  she  had  dis- 
coursed about  another  business  (which  was  to  desire  my  opinion  of 
a  treatise  sent  her  in  manuscript  out  of  Holland,  tending  to  the  re- 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


clxiii 


conciliation  of  our  differences  in  England)  she  told  me,  that  the 
King  had  with  great  joy  acquainted  her  with  a  secret  concerning 
me,  whereof  she  was  no  less  glad ;  using  many  gracious  expres- 
sions, and  confirming  his  Majesty's  promises  concerning  my  wife. 

"  But  I  am  sensible  this  is  an  intolerable  letter,  especially  con- 
cerning one's  self. 

"  I  had  almost  forgot  to  mention  Mr.  Vaughan's*  business.  As 
soon  as  he  brought  your  Ladyship's  letter  hither  to  me,  I  wrote 
immediately  to  Whitehall,  and  got  the  business  stopped.  The  Bi- 
shop of  St.  David's  had  written  up  for  some  minister  of  a  great 
town,  but  a  small  living  in  that  diocese,  that  it  might  be  bestowed 
on  him,  for  his  pains  in  that  great  town.  The  pretence  is  fair,  but 
if  the  minister  is  no  better  a  man  than  the  Bishop,  I  am  sure  he  is 
not  worthy  of  it. 

"  I  have  been  twice  to  wait  upon  my  Lord  Nottingham  about  it, 
but  missed  of  him.  When  I  have  inquired  farther  into  it,  if  the 
thing  be  fit  to  be  done,  I  will  do  my  best  for  Mr.  Vaughan.  And 
I  beg  of  your  Ladyship  to  make  no  difficulty  of  commanding  my 
poor  service  upon  any  occasion,  for  I  am  always  truly  glad  of  the 
opportunity. 

"  I  cannot  forbear  to  repeat  my  humble  thanks  for  your  great 
concernment  for  me  in  this  affair. 

"  That  God  would  multiply  his  best  blessings  upon  your  Lady- 
ship and  your  children,  and  make  them  great  blessings  and  com- 
forts to  you,  is  the  daily  prayer  of, 

"  Madam,  your  most  obliged  and  most  humble  servant, 

"  J.  T» 

The  Dean's  remark  to  his  Majesty,  that  the  a  widow  of  an  arch- 
bishop would  now  be  an  odd  figure  in  England/'  was  founded  upon 
this  fact,  that  only  two,  who  had  filled  the  see  of  Canterbury,  had 
been  married,  Cranmer  and  Parker.  The  former  was  indeed  twice 
married,  the  first  time  before  he  was  in  orders,  while  he  was  only 
fellow  of  Jesus  College,  in  Cambridge,  his  wife  dying  within  a  year 
in  childbed.f  He  married  his  second  wife  in  Germany,  while  he 
was  ambassador  there  in  1530.  She  was  niece  to  Osiander,  the 
famous  protestaut  pastor  of  Nuremberg ;  and  was  sent  for  by  him 
into  England  in  1534,  two  years  after  he  was  made  archbishop, 
where  he  kept  her  very  privately  till  1539;  when,  upon  the  six  ar- 

*  Probably  a  relation  of  Lady  Russel,  whose  first  husband  was  Lord  Vaughan, 
eldest  son  to  the  Earl  of  Carberv. 

t  Strype's  Memorials  of  Archbishop  Cranmer,  b.  i.  ch.  1,  p.  ?• 


clxiv 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


tides  being  put  in  execution,  she  was  obliged  to  return  to  her  re- 
lations in  Germany.*  In  the  time  of  King  Edward  VI.  when  the 
niairiage  of  the  clergy  was  allowed,  he  again  brought  her  forth,  and 
lived  openly  with  her,  and  had  children  by  her,  who  survived  him, 
as  she  likewise  did,  being  alive  towards  the  latter  end  of  Archbi- 
shop Parker's  time,  and  enjoying  for  her  subsistence  an  abbey  in 
Nottinghamshire,  which  Henry  VIII.  upon  the  motion  of  Dr.  Butts, 
his  physician,  without  Archbishop  Cranmer's  knowledge,  granted 
to  him  and  his  heirs. t  Archbishop  Parker  likewise  married  Mar- 
garet Harlesloue,  in  June,  1547,  in  the  forty-third  year  of  his  age,]; 
in  the  reign  of  Edward  VI.  but  she  died  before  him.  J 

The  reflection  of  the  Dean,  in  the  same  letter,  upon  Dr.  Thomas 
Watson,  bishop  of  St.  David's,  shews  what  ill  opinion  was  even 
at  that  time  entertained  of  that  prelate,  whose  enormities,  in  the 
article  of  simony,  afterwards  grew  so  public,  as  to  subject  him  to  a 
deprivation  of  his  see.  He  had  been  educated  in  St.  John's  Col- 
lege, in  Cambridge,  of  which  he  was  fellow  and  tutor  there,  the 
memory  of  his  avarice  and  arts  of  raising  money  still  continuing  in 
that  College.  His  advancement  to  the  bishopric  of  St.  David's  was 
in  the  reign  of  James  II.  in  April,  1637.  He  owed  it,  according 
to  Mr.  Wood, ||  to  the  recommendation  of  Henry  Jermyn,  created 
Lord  Dover,  in  May,  1685;  but  it  was  believed,  as  Bishop  Burnet 
informs  us,H  that  he  gave  money  for  it ;  and  that  historian  describes 
him  as  one  of  the  worst  men,  in  all  respects,  w  hom  he  ever  knew 
in  holy  orders,  passionate,  covetous,  and  false,  in  the  blackest  in- 
stances, without  any  one  virtue  or  good  quality  to  balance  his  many 
bad  ones.  The  obnoxiousness  of  his  character  exposed  him  to 
many  violent  insults  from  the  common  people,  upon  the  abdication 
of  King  James;**  to  whom  he  professed  for  some  time  so  much 
fidelity,  as  to  pretend  to  scruple  the  oaths  to  the  new  government. 
During  which  time,  on  the  28th  of  March,  1089,  meeting  with  Sir 
John  Reresby,  governor  of  York,  he  asked  that  gentleman,  whether 
he  thought  that  he  might  safely  take  those  oaths,  having  hitherto 
stood  out,  and  being  now  cited  to  appear  before  the  House  of 
Lords.  Sir  John's  answ  er  was,  that  it  was  fittest  for  himself  to  be 
advised  by  his  Lordship  in  such  a  case ;  and  that  certainly  his  own 
conscience  could  not  but  dictate  to  him  what  was  right.    But  Sir 

*  Slrype's  Memorials  of  Archbishop  Cranmer,  p.  11,  and  117,  418. 
f  Ibid.  p.  418.      |  Strype's  Life  of  Archbishop  Parker,  p.  23.      §  Ibid,  p.  Ml. 
||  Atb-.  Oxun.  vol.  ii.  col.  1170.     \  History  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  ii.  p.  2*3/^7. 
**  Wood,  ubi  $upra. 


life  of  the  Atmion.  clsv 

John  found  the  Bishop  already  resolved,  who  accordingly  wont  the 
next  day  and  complied,*  though  he  continued  still  attached  to  his 
old  master  King  James. t  He  was  deprived  in  1600  for  simony,  by 
Archbishop  Tennison,  whose  sentence  was  afterwards  confirmed  by 
a  court  of  delegates,  to  whom  the  deprived  bishop  had  appealed,; 
as  he  did  the  year  following  to  the  House  of  Lords,  where  the  affair 
wns  protracted,  and  his  bishopric  not  disposed  of  some  years, §  till 
the  end  of  April,  1705,  when  it  was  given  to  Dr.  George  Bull,|| 
whose  Defensio  Fidei  Nicense,  published  in  1685,  made  him  famous 
over  Europe,  and  whose  Judicium  Ecclesire  Catholicae,  printed  in 
1694,  aud  written  against  Episcopius,  in  defence  of  the  Anathema, 
as  his  former  book  had  been  of  the  Faith,  declared  at  the  first 
council  of  Nice,  procured  him,  in  1700,  the  thanks  of  the  general 
assembly  of  the  bishops  and  clergy  of  France. 

The  Queen  having  put  into  the  Dean's  hands  the  manuscript 
treatise  mentioned  in  his  letter  to  Lady  Russel  of  the  25th  of  Oc- 
tober, 1690,  to  have  been  transmitted  to  her  Majesty  from  Hol- 
land, he  considered  it  with  the  utmost  attention,  and  as  soon  as  his 
health  and  engagements  would  permit,  wrote  an  answer  to  the  let- 
ter which  the  author  of  it  had  sent  to  him.  The  author  was  the 
learned  Frederick  Spanheim,  professor  of  divinity  at  Leyden,  and 
brother  to  Baron  Ezekiel  Spanheim,  no  less  eminent  for  his  pro- 
found knowledge  in  polite  learning  and  antiquities,  than  for  his 
embassies  to  several  courts,  and  particularly  to  that  of  England. 
The  Professor's  treatise  may  be  seen  in  the  second  volume  of  his 
works  in  the  Leyden  edition,  in  1701,  in  folio,  under  the  title  of 
Judicium  expetitium  super  dissidio  Anglicano,  et  capitibus,  quse 
ad  Unionem  seu  Comprehensionem  faciunt.  The  Dean's  letter  to 
him  upon  the  subject  of  it  was  dated  the  6th  of  February,  169y  ; 
and  in  it  he  excuses  the  delay  of  his  answer  on  account  of  the  ill 
state  of  his  health,  which  obliged  him  to  retire  into  the  country, 
and,  though  better,  was  not  yet  fully  re-established.  He  observes, 
that  he  had  read  the  Professor's  discourse  upon  peace  and  union 
between  the  church  of  England  and  the  protectant  dissenters  with 
great  satisfaction,  on  account  of  the  excellent  judgment  and  learn- 
ing, singular  knowledge  of  the  discipline  and  rites  of  the  ancient 
church,  and,  what  was  superior  to  all,  the  truly  Christian  temper, 
vi  hich  appeared  through  the  whole.  That  there  were  perhaps  some 
few  things,  and  those  of  no  great  moment  (except  the  article  of  re- 
ordination),  in  which  it  would  be  a  little  difficult  to  find  a  tempera- 

*  Memoirs  of  Sir  John  lle-resbv,  bai  t.  p.  339.      t  Burnet,  p.  227.      $  Id.  Ibid. 
$  Ibid.  p.  250,  251,  aud  40o\  ||  Ibid. 


clxvi 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


ment,  by  which  the  contending  parties  might  be  brought  to  an 
agreement.  For  that  the  common  people  of  our  church,  as  well  as 
those  of  the  dissenting  congregations,  had  their  superstitions  and 
prejudices,  to  which  it  was  right  and  proper  to  have  some  regard 
in  the  concessions  to  be  made  by  our  church,  lest  the  former  being 
offended,  might  revolt  from  our's  to  that  of  Rome.  That  it  would 
be  tedious  to  enter  into  the  detail  now ;  but  that  there  would  be  a 
much  more  fit  place  for  discoursing  upon  it,  when  a  nearer  oppor- 
tunity should  offer.  "  Dr.  Stillingfleet,"  adds  he,  "  now  bishop  of 
Worcester,  mentioned  by  you  in  your  letter,  a  person,  of  whom  our 
church  deservedly  boasts,  is  still  in  the  same  opinion  with  us.  And 
there  are  very  many  others,  and  those  the  glories  and  ornaments  of 
our  church,  who  seem  to  have  strong  inclinations  to  peace  and  con- 
cord. I  do  not  presume  to  rank  myself  in  their  number,  being  not 
at  all  to  be  compared  with  such  great  and  excellent  men  ;  although 
you,  reverend  sir,  out  of  your  humanity  and  extreme  kindness  to 
me,  ascribe  too  much  to  my  judgment  in  these  controversies.  One 
thing,  in  my  opinion,  is  to  be  deeply  regretted,  that  there  are  many 
on  both  sides,  of  our  church,  as  well  as  among  the  dissenters,  who 
know  not  the  means  nor  way  of  peace  :  I  cannot  therefore  foresee 
what  will  at  last  be  the  issue  of  these  pacific  counsels.  As  affairs 
now  stand  in  England,  I  think  nothing  of  this  kind  should  be  at- 
tempted for  the  present;  but  that  we  ought  to  wait  till  the  times 
grow  more  disposed  to  peace  ;  a  period  which,  if  our  brave  King 
shall,  through  the  Divine  assistance,  meet  with  the  success  wished 
for  by  all  good  men,  I  presage  is  not  far  distant.  For  what  is  to 
be  despaired  of  under  the  auspices  of  such  religious  and  prudent 
prinees,  as  our  King  and  Queen  ]  For  this  reason,  if  you  will  at- 
tend to  my  opinion,  you  will  do  right  and  wisely  to  suspend  the 
publication  of  your  treatise  till  a  more  probable  hope  of  success 
shall  appear."  The  Dean  then  refers  him  to  the  Earl  of  Portland, 
as  a  sincere  friend  and  promoter  of  the  scheme  of  pacification,  who 
would  more  amply  explain  these  things,  and  the  whole  state  of  af- 
fairs in  England  :  and  concludes  with  desiring  his  excuse  for  the 
negligence  of  his  Latin  style,  which  it  was  not  agreeable  to  him  to 
return  to  the  use  of,  after  a  discontinuance  of  above  thirty  years, 
almost  his  whole  life  having  been  spent  in  preaching,  and  all  other 
branches  of  the  pastoral  duty.  But  this  excuse  was  unnecessary 
in  a  letter,  which  the  learned  reader  will  find  written  with  the  ut- 
most purity  and  elegance.* 

*  From  the  ojiginal  draught  in  his  own  hand  in  his  common-place  hook. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


clxvii 


•'•  Viro  admoduni  reverendo  Domino  Frederico  Spanhemio,  in  aca- 
demic Lugd.  Batav.  S.  Theol.    Professori  dignissimo. 

"Quod  Uteris  tuis,  vir  clarissirne,  sane  quam  humanissimis  non 
citius  rescripserim,  causa  fuit  adversa  valetudo  ;  cui  ut  mederer,  et 
animuni  recrearem  atque  rerieerem,  rus  ire  necesse  mihi  fait:  nunc 
autem,  gratia  Dei,  cocimodiore  quidem  utor  valetudine,  at  nondum 
etiam  bene  eonrirmata. 

"Traetatum  de  pace  et  unione  dissentientium  apud  nos  Protes- 
tantium  cum  ecclesia  Anglicana  tuum,  quern  mecum  serenissima 
Regina  conimunicavit,  avide  perlegi  et  summa  cum  delectatione. 
In  eo  judicium  acre  idemque  subactum,  eruditionem  eximian,  in 
antiquioris  ecclesia?  discipliua  ritibusque  peritiam  singularem,  et, 
quod  pra?cipuum  est,  mentem  et  animum  vere  Christianum,  ubique 
deprehendi.  Pauca  fortasse  sunt,  et  eadem  baud  ita  magui  mo. 
raenti  (articulum  de  sacris  ordinibus  iterandis  excipio)  in  quibus 
paulo  difricilius  erit  invenire  temperamentum,  cujus  ope  partes  inter 
se  litigantes  aliquando  concordare  possint.  Ecclesia?  euim  nostra? 
plebs,  non  secus  ac  dissentientium  ca?tuuin,  suas  etiam  habet  su- 
perstitioues  et  opiuiones  praejudicatas  ;  cujus  ut  ratio  habeatur  in 
rebus  ab  ecclesia  nostra  coucedendis  jus  et  a?quum  est,  ne  offensa 
dericiat  a  nobis  ad  ecclesiam  Romanam.  Lougum  adeo  foret  ea 
nunc  singillatim  persequi ;  multo  commodior  erit  de  his  disserendi 
locus,  cum  occasio  propior  advenerit. 

"  Stillingfletius  ille  noster,  nunc  ecclesia?  Vigorniensis  episcopus. 
cujus  in  tuis  ad  me  Uteris  mentiouem  facis,  de  quo  ecclesia  nostra 
merito  gloriatur,  is  etiam  nunc  in  eadem,  qua  nos,  sententia  perstat. 
Porro  sunt  alii  permulti,  et  hi  ecclesia?  nostra?  decora  et  ornamenta, 
in  quibus  magna  videtur  esse  animorum  inclinatio  ad  pacem  et 
concordiam.  In  horum  me  numerum  referre  mihi  non  assume, 
tantis  et  tarn  praeclaris  viris  neutiquam  comparandus ;  tametsi  tu, 
vir  reverende,  pro  humanitate  tua  et  summa  erga  me  benevolentia 
nimio  plus  tribuis  judicio  meo  de  his  controversiis.  Unum  ma^no- 
pere  dolendum  censeo,  multos  esse  ex  utraque  parte,  turn  ecclesia? 
nostra?,  turn  dissentientium,  qui  rationem  et  viam  pacis  non  norunt. 
Quern  igitur  exitum  ha?c  consilia  pacis  tandem  habitura  sint  divi- 
nare  nequeo.  Ut  nunc  est  in  Anglia,  nihil  hujusmodi  impra?sentia- 
ruin  tentandum  arbitror,  sed  expectandum  donee  tempora  magis 
pacata  fuerint ;  qua?,  si  fortissimo  Regi,  juvante  Deo,  omnia  pros- 
pere  et  ex  bonoruin  omnium  sententia  ceciderint.  non  procul  abesse 


dxviii  LIFE   OF    THE  AUTHOR. 

auguror.  Quid  enim  desperandum  sub  auspiciis  religiosissimorum 
et  prudentissimorum  principum  ;  Regis,  dice,  nostri  et  Reginae'? 
Qua  propter  si  me  audis,  vir  eximie,  recte  sapienterque  fcceris,  si 
tractatum  tuum  in  vulgus  edere  distuleris,  quoad  certior,  spes  se- 
cundi  successes  affulserit. 

Illustrissimus  Comes  Portlandius,  consilii  hujus  pacifici  ex  animo 
fautor  et  adjutor,  base  omnia  et  universum  rerum  nostrarum  siatum 
fusiiis  exponet;  cui  si  stadium  meum  et  obsequium  confirmare  vo- 
lueris,  gratissimum  mihi  feceris. 

"  Condonabis  mihi,  spero,  negligentiam  purioris  Latinitatis,  ad 
quaui  invitus  ad  mod  urn  redeo  post  triginta  plus  annorum  desuetu- 
dinem,  quoniani  in  concionibus  babe nd is,  et  in  omni  pastorali  mu- 
nere  obeundo  aetatem  pene  consumsi.  Veniam  igitur  pro  hac  re  a 
candore  tuo  petit,  is,  quern  ubique  cognosces, 
*c  Vir  elarissime, 
"  Reverentire  tua?  addictissimum  atque  omni 

"  Otiiciorum  genere  et  obsequio  devinetissimum, 
Feb.  G.  100^.  "Jo.  Ti LLOTSON.*' 

"  Amicum  tuum,  cui  literas  ad  me  dedisti,  non  vidi  ex  quo  mihi 
"  eas  reddidit.  Hominem  investigabo,  enm  ad  aulam  rediero, 
*  ac  libens  juvabo  qua  ratione  cunque  potero." 

A  few  days  after  this  letter  the  Dean  wrote  from  Edmonton 
another,  on  the  16th  of  that  month,  to  Mr.  Nelson,  then  at  Flo- 
rence, in  answer  to  two  lately  received  from  him.  In  thai  letter, 
after  having  mentioned  some  affair,  in  which  his  friendship  for  that 
gentleman  had  engaged  him  to  make  use  of  his  interest  with  the 
Kin«,  he  takes  notice  of  the  report  of  the  death  of  the  Pope,  Alex- 
ander VIII.  of  a  Venetian  family,  of  the  name  of  Ottoboni,  who 
had  sat  in  the  papal  chair  almost  a  year  and  a  half.  "  If  the  report 
be  true,"  says  he,  "  we  are  no  otherwise  concerned  in  the  loss  of 
him,  than  of  any  other  foreign  prince,  who  did  little  or  no  good 
whilst  he  lived.  We  could  spare  even  the  King  of  France,  if  God 
thought  fit  to  dispose  of  him  the  same  way."  He  observes,  like- 
wise, that  the  preparations  then  making,  both  by  sea  and  land,  were 
the  greatest  that  England  ever  saw,  and  in  the  greatest  forward- 
ness; and  that  Lord  Preston  had  "laid  open  all;  which/'  says  he, 
"  will  affect  a  great  many."  This  Lord,  who  was  son  of  Sir  George 
Graham,  of  Netherby,  in  Cumberland,  hart,  had  been  educated  at 
Christ  Church,  in  Oxford,  were  he  was  created  master  of  arts  on 


LIFE  OF  THE   AUTHOR.  clxlX 

the  27th  of  March,  1667.*    He  was  created  Viscount  Preston  in 
Scotland  by  King  Charles  II.  who  sent  him,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
year  1682,  envoy  extraordinary  to  the  court  of  France,  being  at- 
tended thither  by  Mr.  Wake,  afterwards  archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
as  chaplain  to  him.    While  his  Lordship  resided  at  Paris  he  pro- 
cured the  suppression  of  the  Abbot  Primi's  History  of  the  Dutch 
War,  printed  there  in  1682,  and  containing  an  account  of  the  se- 
cret treaty  between  France  and  England,  negociated  by  Henrietta, 
Duchess  of  Orleans,  with  her  brother  King  Charles,  at  Dover,  in 
May,  1669.+    Upon  his  return  from  thence,  in  the  beginning  of 
James  II. 's  reign,  he  was  received  into  a  high  degree  of  favour  and 
confidence  of  that  King,  by  whom  he  was  made  secretary  of  state 
upon  the  removal  of  the  Earl  of  Sunderland,  on  the  28th  of  Octo- 
ber, 1688,  and  designed  to  be  advanced  to  an  English  peerage,  with 
the  title  of  Viscount  Preston,  in  Amounderness,  in  Lancashire ;  but 
his  patent  was  not  passed  the  great  seal  before  the  abdication  of 
that  King.    Being  engaged  afterwards  in  a  plot  with  the  Earl  of 
Clarendon,  Dr.  Turner,  bishop  of  Ely,  and  others,  in  favour  of 
King  James,  he  was  seized  on  the  30th  of  December,  1690,  going 
to  France  with  Mr.  John  Ashton  and  Mr.  Elliot;  and,  on  the  17th 
of  January,  tried  at  the  Old  Bailey,  and  condemned  for  high-trea- 
son ;  but,  after  acting  a  very  weak  and  irresolute  part,  redeemed 
his  life  by  his  discoveries;  while  his  companion,  Mr.  Ashton,  sub- 
mitted to  death  with  great  firmness  and  decency.    His  Lordship 
was  a  man  of  excellent  parts  and  learning ;  and  gave  the  public,  in 
1695,  as  the  fruits  of  his  retirement,  a  translation  of  Boetius's  dis- 
course Of  the  Consolation  of  Philosophy,  illustrated  with  notes, 
and  a  life  of  the  author,  who  was  distinguished  by  being  one  of  the 
last,  who  made  any  figure  in  literature  or  genius  in  Italy,  then  sink- 
ing into  barbarism  through  the  irruption  of  the  northern  nations. 

In  the  same  letter  the  Dean  touches  upon  the  seduction  of  Lady 
Theophila  Nelson  and  her  daughter  from  the  protestant  religion, 
and  prays,  that  God  would  preserve  Mr.  Nelson  and  her  son,  Sir 
Berkley  Lucy,  in  the  truth ;  "  and  so,"  adds  he,  "  I  do  for  those, 
that  are  fallen  from  it,  that  God  would  grant  them  repentance  to 
the  acknowledgment  of  it.  I  pity  poor  Miss,  who  is  more  inno- 
cently seduced ;  but  my  Lady  much  more,  considering  the  degree 
of  her  understanding,  and  the  difference  of  the  two  religions/' 

About  this  time  the  Dean  was  solicitous  to  procure  by  his  in- 
terest at  court  some  reward  for  a  divine  of  great  merit  and  learning, 

*  Wood.  Fast.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  167.  t  Burnet,  vol.  i.  p.  301, 

VOL.  I.  R 


clxx 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


Mr.  John  Hartcliffe  *  B.  D.  and  fellow  of  King's  College,  in  Cam- 
bridge, who  had  just  published,  in  8vo.  at  London,  an  excellent 
system  of  Ethics,  under  the  title  of  A  Treatise  of  moral  and  intel- 
lectual Virtues ;  wherein  their  Nature  is  fully  explained,  and  their 
Usefulness  proved,  as  being  the  best  Rules  of  Life,  and  the  Causes 
of  their  Decay  are  inquired  into;  concluding  with  such  Argu- 
ments, as  tend  to  revive  the  Practice  of  them.    With  a  Preface, 
shewing  the  Vanity  and  Deceitfulness  of  Vice.    This  author,  in  his 
preface,  having  premised  a  remark,  that  the  world  has  ever  had  its 
vicissitudes  and  periods  of  virtue  and  wickedness,  and  that  all  na- 
tions have  advanced  themselves  to  their  power  and  grandeur  by 
sobriety,  wisdom,  and  a  tender  regard  of  religion ;  expresses  his 
hopes,  that  "  upon  the  late  wonderful  Revolution  the  English  na- 
tion might  recover  its  ancient  virtues,  that  had  been  too  long  under 
the  oppression  of  debauchery,  which  hath  been  an  evil  of  so  great 
malignity,  as  to  threaten  ruin  to  the  very  constitution  of  the  go- 
vernment.   Therefore,"  adds  he,  "  the  providence  of  God  hath 
sent  us  a  Prince  for  our  deliverer,  whose  piety  is  set  off  with  the 
whole  train  of  moral  virtues  ;  whose  temperance  is  so  great  and 
impregnable  amidst  all  those  allurements,  with  which  the  palaces 
of  kings  are  apt  to  meet  even  the  most  resolved  minds,  that  at  the 
same  time  he  doth  both  teach  and  upbraid  the  court."    Mr.  Hart- 
cliffe, who  was  born  about  the  year  1650,  at  Harding,  near  Henley, 
in  Oxfordshire,  had  been  educated  at  Eton  School ;  and  thence 
removed  to  be  a  servitor  in  Magdalen  College,  in  Oxford,  in  1666, 
and  the  year  following  was  scholar  of  Edmund  Hall,  where  he 
continued  a  year,  and  was  then  chosen  a  scholar  of  King's  College, 
Cambridge,  of  which  he  was  afterwards  fellow,  and  in  1681  master 
of  Merchant  Tailors'  School,  in  London,  After  the  Revolution  King 
William  appointed  him  by  mandamus  master  of  King's  College  ; 
the  fellows  of  which  opposing  the  admission  of  him,  his  Majesty 
left  them  to  their  free  choice ;  and  Mr.  Hartcliffe  Was,  by  the  re- 
commendation of  his  friend,  Dean  Tillotson,  preferred  to  the  ca- 
nonry  of  Windsor. 

The  King's  nomination  of  the  Dean  to  the  archbishopric  of 
Canterbury,  had  been  agreed  between  them  to  be  postponed  till 
after  the  breaking  up  of  the  session  of  parliament,  which  was  pro- 
rogued on  the  5th  of  January,  169^ ;  when  it  was  thought  pro- 
per to  defer  it  still  longer,  on  account  of  his  Majesty's  voyage  to 
Holland,  in  which  he  embarked  on  the  16th  of  that  month,  and  ar- 

*  MS.  teller  of  Lady  Russel  to  Dr.  Fil/.AVilliams,  Feb  169°. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR, 


rived  there,  after  a  very  dangerous  passage,  to  attend  the  congress 
at  the  Hague  of  all  the  confederate  princes  and  states  for  concert- 
ing measures,  in  order  to  preserve  the  liberties  of  Europe  against 
France.  Upon  the  conclusion  of  that  congress,  the  King  went  to 
the  army  near  Brussels  ;  and,  upon  the  surrender  of  Mons,  on  the 
1st  of  April,  to  Lewis  XIV.  who  had  attended  that  siege  in  person, 
his  Majesty  came  back  to  England,  arriving  at  Whitehall  on  the 
J  3th  of  that  month  ;  but  continued  there  but  a  short  time,  return- 
ing on  the  1st  of  May  to  the  campaign  in  Flanders. 

While  his  Majesty  staid  in  England,  he  was  resolved  to  fill  the 
vacant  sees,  from  which  he  had  been  hitherto  diverted  by  the 
Dean's  advice,  who  was  reproached  for  it  by  the  King  at  his  re- 
turn from  Flanders,  and  was  now  obliged  himself  to  consent  to  his 
Majesty's  nomination  of  him  to  the  archbishopric  in  council,  on 
the  23d  of  April,  1691.  Immediately  after  this  public  declaration 
he  went  to  the  deprived  Archbishop  still  at  Lambeth,  and  sent  in 
his  name  by  several  servants,  and  staid  a  long  time  for  an  answer, 
but  was  forced  to  return  without  receiving  any  ;  an  incivility,  which 
he  had  not  at  all  deserved  of  his  predecessor,  whose  reputation, 
integrity,  and  wisdom,  when  aspersed  by  others,  he  had  often  vin- 
dicated to  the  King.* 

The  conge  d'eslire  being  granted  on  the  1  st  of  May,  he  was 
elected  on  the  16th,  confirmed  on  the  28th,  and  having  retired  to 
his  house  on  Saturday,  the  30th,  which  he  spent  in  fasting  and 
prayer,  in  the  manner  represented  from  his  own  account  in  short- 
hand as  it  appears  in  his  works,  was  consecrated  the  day  follow- 
ing, being  Whitsunday,  in  the  church  of  St.  Mary-le-Bow,  by  Dr. 
Peter  Mew,  bishop  of  Winchester ;  Dr.  W'illiam  Lloyd,  bishop  of 
St.  Asaph;  Dr.  Gilbert  Burnet,  bishop  of  Sarum ;  Dr.  Edward 
Stillingfleet,  bishop  of  Worcester;  Dr.  Gilbert  Ironside,  bishop  of 
Bristol ;  and  Dr.  John  Hough,  bishop  of  Oxford,  in  the  presence 
of  Henry  Duke  of  Norfolk,  Thomas  Marquis  of  Carmarthen,  lord 
president  of  the  council,  William  Earl  of  Devonshire,  Charles  Earl 
of  Dorset,  Charles  Earl  of  Macclesfield,  Thomas  Earl  of  Falcon- 
berg,  Robert  Lord  Lucas,  and  divers  other  persons  of  rank,t  who 
attended  the  solemnity,  to  express  the  great  esteem  and  respect, 
which  they  had  for  his  Grace,  and  the  satisfaction  which  they  had 
in  his  promotion.  The  consecration  sermon  was  preached  on 
John  xxi.  17.  by  Mr.  Ralph  Barker,  afterwards  his  chaplain,  whom 

*  Mr,  Wharton's  MS.  collections.        t  Gazette,  p.  5686.  and  L«  Neve,  p.  22$, 

«  % 


clxxii 


LTFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


his  Grace  had  desired  to  perform  that  office,  with  an  absolute  re- 
striction, that  nothing  should  be  said  in  it  with  relation  to  himself; 
and  in  the  letter,  which  he  wrote  to  him  on  that  occasion,  on  the 
17th  of  April,  he  expressed  a  strong  sense  of  the  weight  of  what  he 
had  long  dreaded,  and  was  now  fallen  upon  him. 

Four  days  after  his  consecration,  June  4th,  he  was  sworn  of  the 
privy  council,  and  on  the  11th  of  July  had  a  restitution  of  the  tem- 
poralities of  his  see.  The  Queen  likewise  granted  him  all  the  pro- 
fits of  it  from  the  Michaelmas  preceding,  which  amounted  to  above 
2500/.  He  continued  to  live  at  the  deanery  of  St.  Paul's  till  the 
latter  end  of  the  year  1691,  and  in  the  mean  time  built  a  large 
apartment  at  Lambeth  house  for  his  wife,  repaired  the  whole,  al- 
tered the  windows  and  lights  of  the  Archbishop's  lodgings,  wains- 
coted many  rooms,  and  made  other  improvements  there.*  Which 
being  finished,  he  removed  thither,  as  appears  from  a  memorandum 
in  his  own  hand-writing,  on  the  26th  of  November,  1691. 

As  he  had  now  submitted,  after  a  long  and  unaffected  resistance, 
to  the  acceptance  of  this  great  station,  he  formed  at  the  same  time 
two  resolutions,  from  which  he  never  departed.  The  one  was,  that 
whenever  the  state  of  their  Majesties'  affairs  was  such,  that  he 
could  hope  to  be  dismissed  from  that  post,  he  would  become  a  most 
mportunate  suitor  to  be  delivered  from  it.  The  other  was,  that  if 
the  infirmities  of  age  should  so  far  overtake  him,  that  he  could  not 
go  through  the  fatigue  and  labour  of  it,  then  he  would  humbly  offer 
it  up  to  their  Majesties  ;  and  he  charged  some  of  his  most  particular 
friends  to  use  all  free  i  with  him,  if  they  should  observe  it,  be- 
fore it  was  perceived  by  himself.! 

His  promotion  was  attended  with  the  usual  compliments  of  con- 
gratulation, out  of  respect  either  to  himself  or  to  his  station ;  among 
which  he  received  a  Latin  letter  from  the  warden  and  fellows  of 
All  Souls'  College,  in  Oxford,  presented  to  him  by  Dr.  Thomas 
Millington,  afterwards  knighted  by  King  William,  to  whom  he  was 
physician,  and  Dr.  Adams,  on  the  5th  of  June,  1691.  To  which 
he  returned  an  answer,  dated  at  Edmonton,  in  which  he  returned 
his  acknowledgments  for  their  expression  of  good-will,  though  he 
could  not  accept  of  the  high  compliments,  with  which  they  had 
almost  oppressed  him ;  and  promised  for  himself,  that  he  would 


*  Mr.  Wharton's  MS.  collections. 
+  Burnet's  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  24, 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


clxxiii 


always  shew  himself  an  encourager  and  patron  of  good  learning, 
and  upon  all  occasions  a  zealous  friend  to  their  college.* 

"  Accepi  literas  vestras  humanissimas,  in  quibusbenevolentiaui 
perspicio  et  gratus  agnosco ;  laudes  vero  immensas,  quibus  me 
immeritd  cumulatis  et  pene  obruitis,  agnoscere  non  possum.  Hoc 
vobis  de  meipso  polliceri  ausim,  me  semper  fore  ingenuae  literatu- 
ra3  et  bonarum  artium  fautorem  et  praesidium.  Collegii  vestri  dig- 
nitatem et  privilegia,  quotiescunque  occasio  obvenerit,  pro  virili 
parte  defendam  et  protegam ;  vestrum  omnium  patrocinium  susci- 
pio,  vosque  libens  semper  juvabo  qua  ratione  cunque  potero.  Va- 
lete,  viri  clarissimi. 

*  Dabam  Edmonton,  1691." 

He  returned  likewise  the  following  answer  to  Lady  Coventry.t 

"  HONOURED  MADAM,  "  June  11,  1691. 

"  The  perpetual  hurry,  in  which  I  have  been  ever  since  I  re- 
ceived the  favour  of  your  Ladyship's  very  kind  letter,  would  not 
till  now  allow  me  time  to  make  an  ackn  ledgment  of  it,  as  I  ought 
to  have  done.  But  I  hope  your  goodness  will  excuse  w  hat  I 
could  not  help.  It  is  no  small  comfort  to  me,  madam,  to  have  the 
good  w  ishes  of  so  worthy  a  person,  whom  I  so  justly  esteem.  But 
after  all  I  cannot  but  be  sensible  of  the  burden  I  stand  under,  and 
which  I  was  so  very  unwilling  should  have  been  laid  upon  me. 
And  I  do  still  shrink  at  the  thoughts  of  it.  But  I  hope  that  God, 
whose  providence  hath  cast  it  upon  me,  will  support  me  under  it, 
who  depend  only  on  his  grace  and  help.  I  heartily  pray  for  your 
Ladyship's  life  and  health,  that  you  may  still  continue  to  do  more 
good,  and  to  increase  the  reward  of  well-doing,  which  is  laid  up 
for  you  in  a  better  world.  I  am,  madam,  with  great  respect, 
"  Your  Ladyship's  most  faithful  and  humble  servant, 

"Jo.  Cant/* 

The  primate  of  Ireland,  Dr.  Michael  Boyle,  who  died  in  1702,  at 
the  age  of  ninety-three,  after  filling  the  post  of  lord  chancellor  of 
that  kingdom,  as  well  as  the  highest  station  in  the  church  there, 
having  likewise  sent  two  letters  to  our  Archbishop,  he  wrote  the 
following  answer  :\ 

*  From  the  original  draught  in  his  MS.  volume  abovementioned. 
t  From  his  own  draught  in  short-hand. 
t  Ibid. 


elxxiv 


LIFE   Ql    THE  AUTHOR. 


"  MY  LORD,  *  June  11,  1691. 

"  Ever  since  I  received  your  Grace's  very  kind  and  welcome  let- 
ter, I  have  been  in  so  continual  a  hurry,  that  I  have  not  had  time 
to  acknowledge  the  favour  of  it,  as  I  ought  to  have  done.  But  I 
hope  your  Grace  will  excuse  what  I  could  not  well  help.  I  am, 
my  Lord,  as  I  have  great  reason,  very  sensible  how  unable  (I  am) 
to  sustain  the  weight  of  that  great  charge,  which  their  Majesties 
have  laid  upou  me,  not  only  without  my  desire,  but  very  much 
against  my  inclination.  But  I  hope  that  God,  who  has  called  me 
to  this  station,  and  upon  whose  grace  and  help  I  do  humbly  de- 
pend, will  be  pleased  to  assist  and  enable  me  in  some  measure  to  a 
faithful  discharge ;  and  I  hope  I  shall  have  the  benefit  of  your 
Grace's  prayers  to  this  purpose. 

"  As  to  your  former  letter,  dated  three  days  before,  concerning 
a  coadjutor  for  the  bishopric  of  Down,  I  never  heard  the  least  syl- 
lable of  it :  and,  if  any  such  were  designed,  I  would  oppose  it  to 
my  power,  as  an  example  of  very  ill  consequence.  I  think  it  much 
fitter  to  have  the  bishopric  made  void,  for  the  Bishop's  scandalous 
neglect  of  his  charge. 

"  If  there  be  any  thing,  wherein  I  may  be  useful  to  your  Grace, 
or  to  the  church,  over  which  you  preside,  I  shall  always  be  ready, 
upon  the  least  advice  or  intimation  from  your  Grace,  to  do  all  good 
offices  to  both. 

"  I  commit  your  Grace  to  God's  holy  protection  and  comfort, 
and  ever  remain, 

"  May  it  please  your  Grace, 
u  Your  Grace's  truly  affectionate  brother  and  most  faithful  servant* 

"  Jo.  Cant. 

"  P.  S.  Will  your  Grace  give  me  leave  to  trouble  you  with  a  ten- 
der of  my  humble  service  to  your  worthy  son,  my  Lord  Bless- 
ington  ?" 

The  Bishop  of  Down,  mentioned  in  this  letter,  was  Dr.  Thomas 
Hacket,  to  whom  the  Archbishop  had  been  near  thirty  years  be- 
fore curate  at  Cheshunt,  and  who  had  enjoyed  that  bishopric  ever 
since  the  year  1672,  but  with  so  little  regard  to  his  pastoral  office, 
that  he  had  spent  most  of  tliat  time  in  England;  on  which  account 
he  was  suspended  on  the  13th  of  March,  169|,  and,  on  the  21st  of 
the  same  month,  deprived  for  simony,  in  conferring  ecclesiastical 


LIFE   OF    THE  AUTHOR. 


chxv 


benefices,  and  other  grievous  enormities  committed  in  the  exercise 
of  his  jurisdiction.* 

The  congratulations  to  the  new  archbishop  were  soon  followed  by 
a  very  opposite  treatment  from  the  nonjuring  party,  the  greatest 
part  of  whom,  from  the  moment  of  his  acceptance  of  the  archbi. 
shopric,  pursued  him  with  an  unrelenting  rage,  which  lasted  during 
his  life,  and  was  by  no  means  appeased  after  his  death.  Before  he 
was  consecrated  to  the  see,  Mr.  Dodwell,  who  was  deprived  of  the 
Camdeuian  lecture  of  history  in  Oxford,  in  November,  1691,  wrote 
to  him  a  letter,  dated  the  12th  of  May,  to  dissuade  him  from  being 
"  the  aggressor/'  says  he,+  u  in  the  new-designed  schism,  in  erect- 
ing another  altar  against  the  hitherto-acknowledged  altar  of  your 
deprived  fathers  and  brethren.  If  their  places  be  not  vacant,  the 
new  consecration  must,  by  the  nature  of  the  spiritual  monarchy, 
be  null,  and  invalid,  and  schisinatical."  This  very  learned,  but 
equally  obscure  and  prejudiced  writer  affirms  likewise,  that  such  as 
were  coucerned  in  this  practice,  cut  themselves  off  from  the  com- 
munion, of  which  they  were  before  members;  as  did  all  others 
who  joined  with  them ;  which  he  endeavours  to  illustrate  by  in- 
stances in  the  first  ages  of  the  church,  and  particularly  that  of 
Athanasius ;  alleging,  that  those  who  would  be  bishops  in  the  room 
of  the  deprived,  must  seek  for  new  principles;  and  that  if  they 
should  pretend  lay-authority  as  sufficient,  they  would  overthrow 
the  being  of  a  church  as  a  society,  and  put  it  in  the  power  of  per- 
secuting princes  to  ruin  it. 

This  letter  of  Mr.  Dodwell  was  written  with  much  greater  mild- 
ness and  moderation,  than  another  which  was  sent  to  the  Arch- 
bishop's lady,  for  him,  and  a  copy  of  it  to  the  Countess  of  Derby, 
for  the  Queen,  and  published  in  print  soon  after.  It  called  upon 
him  to  reconcile  his  actings,  since  the  Revolution,  with  the  princi- 
ples either  of  natural  or  revealed  religion,  or  those  of  his  own  letter 
to  Lord  Russel,  which  was  reprinted  upon  this  occasion.  The  writer 
of  it  is  said  by  Dr.  Hickes, X  to  be  a  person  of  "  great  candour 
and  judgment,"  and  once  "  a  great  admirer"  of  the  Archbishop  ; 
though  he  was  afterwards  so  much  prejudiced  against  him,  that 
after  his  Grace's  death  he  declared  to  Dr.  Hickes,  that  he  thought 
him  an  M  atheist,  as  much  as  a  man  could  be,  though  the  gravest 

•  Sir  James  Ware's  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  213.  Edit.  Dublin,  fol. 
t  Appendix  to  the  Life  of  Mr.  John  Ketllewell,  p.  viii.  and  Life  of  Mr.  Htwy 
Dodwell,  by  Francis  Brokesbv,  B.D.  p.  220. 
X  Some  Discourses,  p.  40. 


cixxvi 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


certainly,"  said  he,  **  that  ever  was."  Dr.  Francis  Lee,  the  com- 
piler of  Mr.  Kettlewell's  Life,  from  the  collections  of  Dr.  Hickes 
and  Mr.  Nelson,  who  has  reprinted  this  letter  in  that  book,*  thinks 
it  to  have  been  written  by  one  of  Mr.  Kettlewell's  friends  ;  and  the 
late  editor  of  it,  in  a  collection  of  pamphlets  formed  chiefly  from 
those  of  Lord  Sommers,  has  prefixed  to  it  the  name  of  Charlewood 
Lawton,  Esq.  as  well  as  to  several  other  political  pieces  in  that  col- 
lection. But  whoever  the  writer  was,  he  has  intermixed  the  se- 
verest expostulations  with  the  Archbishop,  and  suggestions  against 
his  sincerity,  for  his  apostacy,  as  he  calls  it,  from  what  he  had 
formerly  preached  and  written,  with  frequent  compliments  to  his 
"  knowledge,  judgment,  largeness  of  spirit,  moderation,  and  many 
other  good  qualities,  that  have,"  says  he,  "  signalized  your  name, 
and  once  made  you  one  of  the  greatest  ornaments  of  the  Christian 
church,  one  of  the  greatest  exemplars  of  sound  morality,  and  all 
that  philosophers  call  virtue." 

But  this  and  other  libels  were  so  far  from  exasperating  his  Grace 
to  revenge  against  the  persons  concerned  in  dispersing  them,  that 
when  some  of  them  were  seized  on  that  account,  he  used  all  his  in- 
terest with  the  government  to  cover  them  from  punishment.  This 
may  be  seen  in  the  following  letter  to  Lady  Russel.t 

"  honoured  madam,  "  June  23,  1691. 

"  I  received  your  Ladyship's  letter,  together  with  that  to  Mr. 
Fox,  which  I  shall  return  to  him  on  Wednesday  morning,  when  I 
have  desired  Mr.  Kemp  to  send  him  to  me. 

"  I  intreat  you  to  give  my  very  humble  service  to  my  Lord  of 
Bedford,  and  to  let  his  Lordship  know  how  far  I  have  been  con- 
cerned in  this  affair.    I  had  notice  first  from  Mr.  Attorney-general 

and  Mr.  Solicitor,  and  then  from  my  Lord  ,  that  several 

persons,  upon  the  account  of  publishing  and  dispersing  several  li- 
bels against  me,  were  secured,  in  order  to  prosecution.  Upon 
which  I  went  to  wait  upon  them  severally,  and  earnestly  desired  of 
them,  that  nobody  might  be  punished  upon  my  account.  That  this 
was  not  the  first  time  I  had  experience  of  this  kind  of  malice,  which, 
how  unpleasant  soever  to  me,  I  thought  it  the  wisest  way  to  neglect, 
and  the  best  to  forgive,  it.  None  of  them  said  any  thing  to  me  of  „ 
my  Lord  Russel,  nor  did  it  ever  come  into  my  thought  to  hinder 
any  prosecution  upon  his  account,  whose  reputation,  I  can  truly 
say,  is  much  dearer  to  me  than  mine  own ;  and  1  was  much  more 
*  Page  233,  et  seq.  f  From  his  draught  in  short-hand. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


clxxvii 


troubled  at  the  barbarous  usage  done  to  his  memory,  and  especially 
since  they  have  aggravated  it  by  dispersing  more  copies  ;  and,  as  I 
find  by  the  letter  to  Mr.  Fox,  are  supported  in  their  insolence  by  a 
strong  combination,  I  cannot  but  think  it  very  fit  for  my  Lord  Bed- 
ford to  bring  them  to  condign  punishment. 

"  Twice  last  week  I  had  my  pen  in  my  hand  to  have  provoked 
you  to  a  letter,  and  that  I  might  once  in  my  life  have  been  before- 
hand with  you  in  this  way  of  kindness.  I  was  both  times  hindered 
by  the  breaking  in  of  company  upon  me.  The  errand  of  it  would 
have  been  to  have  told  you,  that  whether  it  be  from  stupidity,  or 
from  a  present  astonishment  at  the  danger  of  my  condition,  or  from 
some  other  cause,  I  find,  that  I  bear  the  burden  I  dreaded  so  much, 
a  good  deal  better  than  I  could  have  hoped.  David's  acknowledg- 
ment to  God  runs  in  my  mind,  **  Who  am  I,  O  Lord  God,  or 
what  is  my  house,  that  thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto;  and  hast 
regarded  me  according  to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  high  degree,  O 
Lord  God  V  I  hope  that  the  same  providence  of  God,  which  hath 
over-ruled  me  in  this  thing,  will  some  way  or  other  turn  it  to  good. 

"  The  Queen's  extraordinary  favour  to  me,  to  a  degree  much  be- 
yond my  expectation,  is  no  small  support  to  me  ;  and  I  flatter  my- 
self with  hopes,  that  my  friends  will  continue  their  kindness  to  me ; 
especially  that  the  best  friend  I  ever  had  will  not  be  the  less  so  to 
me,  now  that  I  need  friends  most. 

"  I  pray  to  God  continually  to  preserve  you  and  your's,  and  par- 
ticularly at  this  time,  to  give  my  Lady  Cavendish  a  happy  meeting 
with  her  Lord,  and  to  grant  them  both  a  long  and  happy  life  to- 
gether.   I  am,  madam, 

"  Your  most  faithful  and  humble  servant, 

"  Jo.  Cant." 

Soon  after  the  date  of  this  letter,  the  Archbishop  wrote  the  fol- 
lowing answer  +  to  two,  which  he  had  received  from  Mr.  Nelson; 
one  from  Florence,  dated  May  3,  1691 ;  the  other  from  Venice, 
of  May  25,  1691. 

"  Since  I  last  wrote  to  my  dear  friend,  I  have  received  from  him 
two  letters ;  one  from  Florence,  dated  May  3 ;  the  other,  froni.Ve- 
nice,  May  25,  1691. 

M  In  answer  to  the  first,  I  sent  Sir  B.  Lucy's  letter  to  my  Lady 
Berkley,  and  have  seen  my  Lord  since ;  but  he  said  nothing  to  it, 

*  i  Chron.  xvii.  16,  17.  t  From  his  draught  in  short-hand. 


clxxvhi 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


nor  did  I  expect  lie  would,  since  there  was  nothing  in  it,  but  what 
to  me  seemed  fit  and  reasonable. 

"  My  son*  hath  no  place  at  court,  nor  did  I  ever  mention  him 
to  the  King,  but  only  to  beg  leave  of  his  Majesty  for  him  to  attend 
upon  him  into  Holland,  where  he  met  with  great  civilities  both 
from  my  Lord  f  and  Lady  Dursley.  I  never  ask  any  thing  of  the 
King,  unless  upon  the  account  of  charity  for  persons  in  distress, 
and  whom  he  had  reason  to  consider ;  as  the  poor  French  and  Irish 
protestants  ;  or  for  some  poor  widows,  whose  husbands  have  died 
in  his  service,  and  for  whom  nobody  else  will  speak;  or  else  to  do 
some  good  office  for  a  friend,  which  costs  the  King  nothing ;  and 
this  but  very  rarelyi  And  indeed  1  have  no  need  to  ask  any  thing 
of  him,  who  hath  done  for  me  what  I  was  so  far  from  desiring,  that 
I  did  for  past  a  year  and  a  half  decline  it  with  all  my  might :  and 
yet  have  I  no  reason  to  doubt,  but  that  upon  the  least  intimation 
of  my  desire  he  would  willingly  give  ray  son  any  place  that  is  fit  for 
him.  But  as  well  as  I  love  my  son,  I  can  hardly  bring  myself  to 
ask  any  thing.  I  had  much  rather  the  King  would  prevent  me  ; 
or,  if  he  do  not,  I  believe  the  Queen  will.  And  I  should  not  be  a 
little  pleased  to  have  him  one  of  the  commissioners  of  the  customs, 
for  which  he  is  much  fitter  than  for  any  other  place  that  I  know. 
And  I  am  the  more  desirous  to  have  something  done  for  him,  not 
only  for  the  sake  of  my  grandchildren,  but  because  he  is  so  very 
kind  to  us,  and  considers  so  well  what  becomes  him  and  me,  that 
though  he  is  still  willing  to  live  with  me,  he  will  not  only  take  no 
place  from  me,  but  has  not  so  much  as  spoken  to  me  for  any  person 
whatsoever  ;  nor  will  he  ever  intermeddle  either  in  the  ordering  of 
my  family,  or  in  any  of  my  affairs  as  archbishop ;  so  that  the  

"  You  see  with  what  freedom  I  write  to  my  friend,  just  as  if  I 
were  talking  with  him. 

"  To  your  letter  of  May  25th,  I  know  not  what  to  say,  but  that 
love  is  blind,  and  yet  thinks  it  sees  that  in  a  friend,  which  the  friend 
cannot  find  in  himself.  I  consider,  likewise,  that  this  comes  from 
one,  who  hath  lived  a  great  while  in  a  climate  to  which  civility  is 
natural,  and  where  it  reigns  in  perfection. 

"  I  am  very  sensible,  that  I  come  into  a  difficult  place  in  a  very 
difficult  time ;  and  I  shrink  at  the  thought  of  the  burden  I  stand 
under.    And  yet  if  I  could  but  hope  to  be  able  to  do  any  consider- 

*  In-law,  James  Chadwicke,  Esq. 

t  Charles  Lord  Dursley,  who  was  called  tip  to  the  House  of  Peers  July  11,  1689, 
by  the  title  of  Baron  Berkley,  of  Berkley,  and  the  same  year  sent  envoy  extraordi- 
nary to  Holland. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


dixit 


able  good  to  this  miserably  distracted  and  divided  church  and  na- 
tion, I  should  esteem  it  a  full  recompense  for  all  the  trouble  I  fore- 
see I  must  undergo.  And,  without  this,  by  what  I  have  already 
found,  I  can  tell  you,  that  nothing  in  this  world  can  make  amends 
for  the  perpetual  hurry  and  uneasiness  I  have  been  in  for  these  six 
weeks  last  past. 

"  I  have  heretofore  had  plentiful  experience  of  the  persecution  of 
railing ;  which  is  by  no  means  pleasant,  but  is  very  tolerable  in 
comparison  of  the  persecution  of  flattery.  God  and  time  can  only 
tell  what  a  man  will  prove  in  auy  condition.  But  I  hope  I  cannot 
so  far  mistake  myself,  as  not  to  be  able  to  assure  you,  that  no  change 
of  fortune  can  alter  my  mind  towards  you.  The  station  in  which  I 
am  now  placed  is  much  more  likely  to  make  me  weary  of  my  life 
than  of  my  friends. 

u  Since  this  calamity  befel  me,  1  have  not  yet  had  time  to  deli- 
ver Sir  Berkley's  letter  to  his  sister,  which  I  intend  to  do  at  my  first 
leisure.  I  was  loth  to  visit  her  at  Mr.  Knox's;  and  it  is  less  fit 
now.  I  think  to  send  for  her  over  to  Mr.  Beale's,  and  there  to  talk 
with  her. 

"  My  wife  and  my  son  desire  to  have  their  very  humble  services 
presented  to  yourself  and  my  Lady,  to  whom,  and  Sir  B.  L.  I  in- 
treat  you  to  tender  mine. 

"  I  am  glad  that  we  are  like  to  see  you  sooner  than  you  thought. 
I  pray  God  to  preserve  you  all,  and  biing  you  safe  to  your  friends ; 
amongst  whom  I  hope  you  will  always  reckon, 

"  Dear  sir,  your  faithful  friend  and  servant, 

"  Jo.  Cant. 

M  P.  S.  You  may  think,  sir,  by  this  letter,  that  time  lies  upon  my 
hands  ;  but  it  is  you  that  lie  so  near  my  heart." 

The  Archbishop's  friendship  for  Dr.  Sharp,  his  successor  in  the 
deanery  of  Canterbury,  would  not  let  him  rest,  till  he  had  formed 
an  expedient  for  removing  the  King's  displeasure  conceived  against 
that  Dean  upon  this  occasion.  His  Majesty  had  been  pleased  to 
mention  Dr.  Sharp  as  a  proper  person  to  succeed  in  some  of  the 
bishoprics  vacated  by  the  deprivation  of  the  nonjuring  bishops. 
Two  or  three  were  accordingly  proposed  to  him.  Norwich  in  parti- 
cular was  pressed  by  Dr.  Tillotson,  as  the  place  which  he  thought 
would  be  most  acceptable.  But  Dr.  Sharp  absolutely  declined  to 
accept  of  any  of  them  ;  not  out  of  auy  scruple  of  conscience,  for  he 
could  not,  under  such  a  scruple,  have  either  made  a  return  to  the 


clxxx 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


conge  oVeslire  for  the  election  of  Dr.  Tillotson  to  Canterbury,  which 
he  did,  as  daen  thereof;  nor  could  he  have  suffered  himself  to  have 
been  consecrated  by  Dr.  Tillotson,  as  he  was  soon  after,  but  out 
of  a  particular  friendship  and  esteem  which  he  had  for  the  persons 
deprived.  This,  however,  displeased  the  King,  and  Dr.  Sharp 
seemed  to  be  no  longer  thought  of.  While  he  was  in  this  situation, 
Dr.  Tillotson  came  to  his  house  on  Friday,  the  24th  of  April,  1691, 
the  day  after  his  own  nomination  to  the  archbishopric,  and  told  him, 
that  since  he  had  so  obstinately  refused  taking  any  of  the  vacant 
bishoprics,  he  had  thought  of  a  method  to  bring  him  off  with  the 
King;  which  was,  that  he  should  promise  to  accept  the  archbi- 
shopric of  York,  when  it  fell,  as  Dr.  Tennison  should  take  Lincoln. 
He  told  him,  at  the  same  time,  how  all  the  vacant  bishoprics  were 
designed  to  be  disposed  of ;  observing,  that  he  had  thought  of  this 
scheme,  as  he  came  from  Whitehall  to  his  house  ;  and  directing 
him  to  go  and  acquaint  the  Earl  of  Nottingham  with  it;  and,  if  his 
Lordship  approved  of  it,  he  would  himself  propose  it  to  the  King 
on  the  Monday  following.  Accordingly,  on  that  day  he  acquainted 
his  Majesty  with  what  had  passed  between  Dr.  Sharp  and  himself, 
and  fixed  the  affair.  In  consequence  of  which,  on  the  next  coun- 
cil-day, in  the  middle  of  the  same  week,  the  King  declared  there 
who  should  fill  the  vacant  sees,  and  who  should  succeed  into  York 
and  Lincoln,  when  they  should  fall;  and  Archbishop  Lamplugh 
dying  on  the  5th  of  May,  Dr.  Sharp  was  consecrated  to  the  see  of 
York  on  the  5th  of  July  following.* 

Another  of  Archbishop  Tillotson's  friends,  whom  he  was  de- 
sirous to  promote,  was  Dr.  Thomas  Burnet,  author  of  the  Theory 
of  the  Earth,  who  had  been  his  pupil  at  Clare  Hall,  in  Cambridge. 
He  was  born  at  Croft,  in  Yorkshire,  and  his  first  education  was  at 
the  free  school  of  North  Alverton,  in  that  county,  under  Mr.  Tho- 
mas Smelt,  who  used  to  propose  him  as  an  example  to  the  rest  of 
his  scholars.t  Thence  he  was  removed  to  Cambridge,  where  he 
was  admitted  a  pensioner,  under  the  tuition  of  Mr.  Tillotson,  on 
the  26th  of  June,  1651 ;  but  removed  to  Christ's  College,  in  1654, 
upon  Dr.  Cudworth's  being  made  master  of  that  college,  and  in 
1657  became  fellow  of  it,  and  in  1661  senior  proctor  of  the  uni- 
versity. He  was  governor  to  Charles  Duke  of  Bolton,  and  to 
James  Earl  of  Ossory,  afterwards  Duke  of  Ormond,  and  grandson 
to  James  the  first  Duke  of  Ormond,  and  by  the  interest  of  that 

*  Letter  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Archdeacon  Sharp,  Nov.  7th,  1751. 
t  Life  of  Mr.  John  Kettlewell,  p.  13. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


clxxxi 


Duke  was  chosen  master  of  the  Charter  House,  in  1685,  though  he 
had  been  excepted  to  by  those  bishops,  who  v.  ere  of  the  number  of 
electors,  on  account  of  his  wearing  a  lay-habit ;  his  Grace  being 
satisfied,  that  he  had  the  more  esseutial  qualifications  of  manners 
and  conversation  in  all  respects  suitable  to  his  clerical  character. 
In  this  post  he  opposed  the  admission  of  Andrew  Popham,  a  Ro- 
man catholic,  as  a  pensioner  of  the  house,  though  enforced  by  a  let- 
ter from  King  James  II.  dated  December  26,  1686,  dispensing 
with  the  statutes  of  it ;  and  this  opposition  being  vigorously  sup- 
ported by  the  other  governors,  except  the  Lord  Chancellor  Jefferys, 
the  King  desisted  from  pursuing  the  affair.  After  the  Revolution, 
Dr.  Burnet,  whose  Telluris  Theoria  Sacra,  printed  at  London,  in 
1681,  in  4to,  had  raised  him  a  great  reputation  in  the  learned  world, 
was  in  a  situation  to  have  improved  his  interest  for  his  advance- 
ment, if  his  own  temper  would  have  suffered  him.  Nor  could  he 
have  failed  of  this,  when  he  was  brought  to  court  by  the  Arch, 
bishop,  succeeding  his  Grace  as  clerk  of  the  closet  to  King  William, 
whose  character  he  has  drawn  with  great  strength  and  elegance  in 
the  dedication  of  his  Archaeologiae  Philosophicce,  printed  at  Lon- 
dou.  1692,  in  4to.  if  the  offence  taken  from  his  manner  of  treat- 
ing the  story  of  the  fall,  and  his  imaginary  dialogue  between  Eve 
and  the  Serpent,  (which  he  afterwards  desired  a  Dutch  bookseller 
in  a  letter  of  his,  which  I  have  read,*  to  suppress  in  a  new  edition 
of  that  book  then  printing  in  Holland)  had  not  disabled  him  from 
any  other  preferments,  and  even  obliged  the  King  to  remove  him 
from  his  office  at  court.  He  died  at  the  Charter  House,  on  the  27th 
of  September,  1715,  at  a  very  advanced  age.  Besides  his  writings 
so  well  known  to,  and  so  justly  esteemed  by.  the  world,  he  was 
likewise  author  of  three  small  pieces  published  without  his  name, 
under  the  title  of  Remarks  upon  an  Essay  concerning  Human  Under- 
standing, in  a  Letter  addressed  to  the  Author,  London,  1697,  in 
4to.  Second  Remarks,  tic  being  a  Vindication  of  the  first  Remarks 
against  the  Answer  of  Mr.  Locke  at  the  End  of  his  Replv  to  the 
Lord  Bishop  of  Worcester,  printed  there  the  same  year ;  and  Third 
Remarks,  &c.  in  1699:  which  Remarks  were  answered  by  Mrs. 
Catharine  Trotter,  afterwards  Mrs.  Cockburn,  then  but  twenty- 
three  years  of  age,  in  her  Defence  of  Mr.  Locke's  Essay,  published 
at  London,  in  May,  1702. 

The  successorof  the  Archbishop  in  the  deanery  of  St.  Paul's  was 
Dr.  William  Sherlock,  who  owed  it  to  his  Grace's  recommendation 

•  It  was  shewn  me  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Bearcroft,  preacher  to  the  Charter  House. 


clxxxii 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


and  interest,  and  was  installed  in  it  on  the  15th  of  July,  1691.  Thii 
eminent  Divine,  whose  practical  writings  will  make  him  as  much 
known  to  posterity,  as  his  controversial  did  in  his  own  time, 
was  born  in  Southwark  about  the  year  1641,  and  educated  at 
Eton  School ;  thence  removed  to  Peter  House,  in  Cambridge,  where 
he  took  the  degree  of  bachelor  of  arts  in  1660,  and  master  in  1665, 
as  he  did  that  of  doctor  of  divinity  in  1680.    His  first  preferments 
in  London  was  that  of  the  rectory  of  St.  George,  Botolph  Lane,  to 
which  he  was  presented  August  3d,  1669,  as  he  was  to  the  prebend 
of  Pancras,  in  the  church  of  St,  Paul's,  November  3d,  1681.  Three 
years  after  he  was  made  master  of  the  Temple.  During  the  popish 
controversy,  in  the  reign  of  King  James  II.  he  was  one  of  the  most 
considerable  writers  on  the  protestant  side.  After  the  Revolution, 
he  for  some  time  refused  the  oaths  to  the  new  government,  which 
shewed  great  indulgence  to  him  on  that  occasion,  by  not  taking  the  for- 
feiture of  his  preferments.    But  at  last,  in  1690,  his  scruples  being 
entirely  removed  by  Bishop  Overal'sacts  and  canons  of  the  convoca- 
tion, begun  in  the  first  year  of  King  James  I.  he  took  the  oaths  to 
their  Majesties,  and  immediately  published  his  reasons  in  his  Case 
of  the  Allegiance  due  to  the  sovereign  Powers,  licensed  for  the 
press  the  17th  of  October  that  year;  which  drew  upon  him  the 
resentments  of  the  whole  jacobite  party,  vented  upon  all  occasions 
in  the  most  indecent  language.    Nor  was  he  treated  with  greater 
civility  by  Dr.  South,  who  had  himself  submitted  to  the  government 
than  by  Dr.  Hickes,  or  Mr.  Collier.    He  died  at  Hampstead,  near 
London,  on  the  19th  of  June,  1707,  in  the  67th  year  of  his  age, 
having  been  some  years  before  succeeded  in  the  mastership  of  the 
Temple  by  his  son,  the  Lord  Bishop  of  London. 

Soon  after  the  Archbishop's  promotion,  Lady  Russel  having,  on 
the  24th  of  July,  1691,  written  a  letter  to  the  Queen  in  favour  of 
Richard  Vaughan,  Esq.  knight  of  the  shire  for  the  county  of  Caer- 
marthen,  a  near  relation  of  her  first  husband,  the  Lord  Vaughan, 
that  he  might  succeed  Col.  Herbert,  as  auditor  of  Wales,  a  place 
worth  400/.  a-year,  she  requested  his  Grace  to  deliver  it  to  her 
Majesty.  This  he  accordingly  did,  though  he  wrote  to  her  Lady- 
ship on  the  25th,  before  he  had  presented  her  letter  to  the  Queen, 
that  he  apprehended  the  place  to  be  already  disposed  of;  which 
was  likewise  the  opinion  of  her  Majesty,  whose  answer  to  Lady 
Russel,  on  the  30th  of  that  month,  contains  some  passages,  on  ac- 
count of  which  I  have  mentioned  this  affair,  and  which  cannot  he 
omitted  in  justice  to  the  sentiments  of  a  princess  more  conspicuous 


LIFE   OF    THE  AUTHOR, 


clxxxiit 


for  her  personal  accomplishments  of  understanding  and  disposition* 
than  her  external  dignity.  "  You  are  very  much  in  the  right,"  says 
her  Majesty,  *'  to  believe,  I  have  cause  enough  to  think  this  life 
not  so  fine  a  thing,  as,  it  may  be,  others  do,  that  I  lead  at  present. 
Besides  the  pain  I  am  almost  continually  in  for  the  King,  it  is  so 
contrary  to  my  own  inclination,  that  it  can  be  neither  easy  nor 
pleasant.  But  I  see  one  is  not  ever  to  live  for  one's  self.  I  have  had 
many  years  of  ease  and  content,  and  was  not  so  sensible  of  my  own 
happiness,  as  I  ought,  till  I  lost  it.  But  I  must  be  content  with 
what  it  pleases  God,  and  this  year  have  great  reason  to  praise  him 
hitherto  for  the  successes  ill  Ireland  ;*  the  news  of  which  came  so 
quick  upon  one  another,  that  made  me  fear  we  had  some  ill  to  ex- 
pect from  other  places.  But  I  trust  in  God,  that  will  not  be, 
though  it  looks,  as  if  we  must  hope  for  little  good  either  from 
Flanders  or  sea.  The  King  continues,  God  be  praised,  very  well; 
and  though  I  tremble  at  the  thoughts  of  it,  yet  I  cannot  but  wish 
a  battle  well  over.  And  for  that  at  sea,  I  wish  it  as  heartily  as  Mr, 
Russelt  himself." 

Mr.  Nelson,  who  was  at  the  Hague  in  December  of  this  year, 
1691,  in  the  house  of  his  brother-in-law,  Lord  Dursley,  envoy  ex- 
traordinary to  the  States-general,  and  was  fixed  in  his  resolution 
not  to  acknowledge  the  government  of  the  King  and  Queen,  thought 
proper  now  to  consult  the  Archbishop  with  regard  to  the  practice 
of  those  nonjurors,  who  frequented  the  churches,  and  yet  professed, 
that  they  did  not  join  in  the  prayers  for  their  Majesties.  His  Grace's 
answer  to  Mr.  Nelson's  question  was  dated  December  15th,  1G91, 
in  these  words  :  "  As  to  the  case  you  put,  I  wonder  men  should  be 
divided  in  opinion  about  it.  I  think  it  plain,  that  no  man  can  join 
in  prayers,  in  which  there  is  any  petition,  which  he  is  verily  per- 
suaded is  sinful.  I  cannot  endure  a  trick  any  where,  much  less  in 
religion."  This  is  undoubtedly  the  letter  referred  to  in  the  Life  of 
Mr.  Kettlewell,J  whose  opinion  was  exactly  the  same. 

After  the  Archbishop  had  been  near  a  year  in  his  see,  he  found 
himself  confirmed  in  the  notions  which  he  had  before  entertained, 
that  the  circumstances  attending  a  great  post  make  grandeur  not 
near  so  eligible,  with  regard  to  the  possessor's  own  ease  and  happi- 
ness, as  persons  at  a  distance  from  it  are  apt  to  imagine.  To  this 
purpose  he  entered  his  own  reflections  in  short-hand  in  his  common- 

*  The  taking  of  Athlone,  by  General  Ginkle,  June  30th,  and  his  victory  over  St. 
Ruth  and  the  Irish,  July  12th. 

t  Afterwards  Earl  of  Qrford.  }  J*.  $5Jf  nnd  3£>7. 


clxxxnr 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


place  book,  under  the  title  of— tl  Some  scattered  thoughts  of  my 
own  upon  several  subjects  and  occasions,  begun  this  day,  March 
13,  169f,  to  be  transcribed."  His  remarks  concerning  a  public 
and  splendid  way  of  living,  compared  with  a  private  and  retired 
life,  deserve  to  be  inserted  here  at  length,  as  they  were  the  result 
of  the  real  experience  of  a  very  able  observer  of  human  life  in  all 
its  situations. 

"  One  would  be  apt  to  wonder,  that  Nehemiah  (chap.  v.  ver.  16, 
17,  18.)  should  reckon  a  huge  bill  of  fare,  and  a  vast  number  of  pro- 
miscuous guests  amongst  his  virtues  and  good  deeds,  for  which  he 
desires  God  to  remember  him.  But,  upon  better  consideration,  be- 
sides the  bounty>  and  sometimes  charity,  of  a  great  table  (provided 
there  be  nothing  of  vanity  or  ostentation  in  it),  there  may  be  exer- 
cised two  very  considerable  virtues ;  one  is  temperance,  and  the 
other  self-denial,  in  a  man's  being  contented,  for  the  sake  of  the 
public,  to  deny  himself  so  much,  as  to  sit  down  every  day  to  a  feast, 
and  to  eat  continually  in  a  crowd,  and  almost  never  to  be  alone, 
especially  when,  as  it  often  happens,  a  great  part  of  the  company, 
that  a  man  must  have,  is  the  company  that  a  man  would  not  have. 
I  doubt  it  will  prove  but  a  melancholy  business,  when  a  man  comes 
to  die,  to  have  made  a  great  noise  and  bustle  in  the  world,  and  to 
have  been  known  far  and  near,  but  all  this  while  to  have  been  hid 
and  concealed  from  himself.  It  is  a  very  odd  and  fantastical  sort 
of  life  for  a  man  to  be  continually  from  home,  and  most  of  all  a 
stranger  at  his  own  house. 

"  It  is  surely  an  uneasy  thing  to  sit  always  in  a  frame,  and  to  be 
perpetually  upon  a  man's  guard ;  not  to  be  able  to  speak  a  care- 
less word,  or  to  use  a  negligent  posture,  without  observation  and 
censure. 

"  Men  are  apt  to  think,  that  they,  who  are  in  highest  places, 
and  have  the  most  power,  have  most  liberty  to  say  and  do  what 
they  please.  But  it  is  quite  otherwise;  for  they  have  the  least  li- 
berty, because  they  are  most  observed.  It  is  not  mine  own  ob- 
servation; a  much  wiser  man  (I  mean  Tully)  says,  '  In  maxima 
quaque  fortund  minimum  Ucere:  They,  that  are  in  the  highest 
and  greatest  condition,  have  of  all  others  the  least  liberty. 

"  In  a  moderate  station  it  is  sufficient  for  a  man  to  be  indiffer- 
ently wise.  Such  a  man  has  the  privilege  to  commit  little  follies 
and  mistakes  without  having  any  great  notice  taken  of  them.  But 
he  that  lives  in  the  light,  i.  e.  in  the  view  of  all  men,  his  actions  are 
exposed  to  every  body's  observation  and  censure. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


C1XXXY 


rf  We  ought  to  be  glad,  when  those,  that  are  fit  for  government, 
and  called  to  it,  are  willing  to  take  the  burden  of  it  upon  them  ; 
yea,  and  to  be  very  thankful  to  them  too,  that  they  will  be  at  the 
pains,  and  can  have  the  patience,  to  govern,  and  to  live  publicly. 
Therefore  it  is  happy  for  the  world,  that  there  are  some,  who  are 
born  and  bred  up  to  it ;  and  that  custom  hath  made  it  easy,  or  at 
least  tolerable  to  them.  Else  who,  that  is  wise,  would  undertake 
it,  since  it  is  certainly  much  easier  of  the  two  to  obey  a  just  and 
wise  government  (I  had  almost  said  any  government)  than  to  govern 
justly  and  wisely.  Not  that  I  find  fault  with  those,  who  apply 
themselves  to  public  business  and  affairs.  They  do  well,  and  we 
are  beholden  to  them.  Some  by  their  education,  and  being  bred 
up  to  great  things,  and  to  be  able  to  bear  and  manage  great  busi- 
ness with  more  ease  than  others,  are  peculiarly  fitted  to  serve  God 
and  the  public  in  this  way  :  and  they,  that  do,  are  worthy  of 
double  honour. 

"  The  advantage,  which  men  have  by  a  more  devout,  and  retired, 
and  contemplative  life,  is,  that  they  are  not  distracted  about  many 
things ;  their  minds  and  affections  are  set  upon  one  thing ;  and 
the  whole  stream  and  force  of  their  affections  run  one  way.  All 
their  thoughts  and  endeavours  are  united  in  one  great  end  and  de- 
sign, which  makes  their  life  all  of  a  piece,  and  to  be  consistent 
with  itself  throughout. 

"  Nothing  but  necessity,  or  the  hope  of  doing  more  good  than 
a  man  is  capable  of  doing  in  a  private  station  (which  a  modest 
man  will  not  easily  presume  concerning  himself)  can  recompense 
the  trouble  and  uneasiness  of  a  more  public  and  busy  life. 

"  Besides  that  many  men,  if  they  understand  themselves  right, 
are  at  the  best  in  a  lower  and  more  private  condition,  and  make  a 
much  more  awkard  figure  in  a  higher  and  more  public  station ; 
when,  perhaps,  if  they  had  not  been  advanced,  every  one  would 
have  thought  them  fit  and  worthy  to  have  been  so. 

"And  thus  I  have  considered  and  compared  impartially  both 
these  conditions ;  and,  upon  the  whole  matter,  without  any  thing 
either  of  disparagement  or  discouragement  to  the  wise  and  great. 
And,  in  my  poor  judgment,  the  more  retired  and  private  condition 
is  the  better  aud  safer,  the  more  easy  and  innocent,  and  conse- 
quently the  more  desirable  of  the  two.* 

"  Those,  who  are  fitted  and  contented  to  serve  mankind  in  the 

A  man  would  be  glud  to  steal  some  more  parts  of  his  life  to  bimself  and  bis  owu 
use,  before  he  leave  the  world. 

VOL.  1.  S 


clxxxvi 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


management  and  government  of  public  affairs,  are  called  benefac- 
tors, and  if  they  govern  (well)  deserve  to  be  called  so,  and  to  be 
so  accounted,  for  denying  themselves  in  their  own  ease,  to  do 
good  to  many. 

"  Not  that  it  is  perfection  to  go  out  of  the  world,  and  to  be  per- 
fectly useless.  Our  Lord,  by  his  own  example,  has  taught  us, 
that  we  can  never  serve  God  better  than  when  doing  good  to  men  ; 
and  that  a  perpetual  retirement  from  the  world,  and  shunning  the 
conversation  of  men,  is  not  the  most  religious  life;  but  living 
amongst  men,  and  doing  good  to  them.  The  life  of  our  Saviour  is 
a  pattern  both  of  the  contemplative  and  active  life,  and  shews  us, 
how  to  mix  devotion  and  doing  good  to  the  greatest  advantage. 
He  would  neither  go  out  of  the  world,  nor  yet  immerse  himself  in 
the  cares  and  troubles,  in  the  pleasures  and  plentiful  enjoyments, 
much  less  in  the  pomp  and  splendour  of  it.  He  did  not  place  re- 
ligion (as  too  many  have  done  since)  in  a  total  retirement  from  the 
world,  and  shunning  the  conversation  of  men,  and  taking  care  to 
be  out  of  all  condition  and  capacity  of  doing  good  to  any  body. 
He  did  not  run  away  from  the  conversation  of  men,  nor  live  in  a 
wilderness,  nor  shut  himself  up  in  a  pen.  He  lived  in  the  world 
with  great  freedom,  and  with  great  innoceney,  hereby  teaching  us, 
that  charity  to  men  is  a  duty  no  less  necessary  than  devotion  to- 
wards God.  He  the  world  without  leaving  it.   We  read 

indeed,  that  he  was  carried  into  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  : 
but  we  no  where  read,  that  he  chose  to  live  in  a  wilderness  to  avoid 
temptation. 

M  The  capacity  and  opportunity  of  doing  greater  good  is  the  spe- 
cious pretence,  under  which  ambition  is  wont  to  cover  the  eager 
desire  of  power  and  greatness. 

4tIf  it  be  said  (which  is  the  most  spiteful  thing  that  can  be  said), 
that  some  ambition  is  necessary  to  vindicate  a  man  from  being  a 
fool ;  to  this  I  think  it  may  be  fairly  answered,  and  without  offence, 
that  there  may  perhaps  be  as  much  ambition  in  declining  greatness, 
as  in  courting  it :  only  it  is  of  a  more  unusual  kind,  and  the  ex- 
ample of  it  less  dangerous,  because  it  is  not  like  to  be  contagious." 

When  his  Grace  was  settled  in  the  archiepiscopal  see,  he  began 
to  form  several  designs  for  the  advantage  of  the  church  and  reli- 
gion in  general.  In  these  he  was  encouraged  by  the  readiness  of 
their  Majesties  to  promote  them  by  their  authority,*  and  especially 

*  Buruct's  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  25,  26. 


LIFE   OE  THE  AUTHOR. 


clxxxvii 


of  the  Queen,  who  was  incessantly  employed  in  possessing  her 
mind  with  the  best  schemes,  that  were  either  laid  before  her  by 
others,,  or  suggested  by  her  own  thoughts,  for  correcting  every 
thing,  which  was  amiss,  and  improving  every  thing,  that  wanted 
finishing.*  With  this  view,  the  Archbishop  joined  with  her  Ma- 
jesty in  engaging  Dr.  Burnet,  bishop  of  Salisbury,  to  draw  up  his 
excellent  Discourse  of  the  Pastoral  Care,  which  was  that  prelate's 
favourite  tract,!  as  an  attempt  to  prepare  the  scene  for  many  noble 
designs  for  the  perfecting  of  our  ecclesiastical  constitution. J  This 
Discourse  was  finished  before  the  end  of  March,  1692 ;  and  the 
Bishop  seems  to  have  had  some  intention  of  dedicating  it  to  his 
friend,  the  Archbishop;  who,  on  the  other  hand,  was  zealous  for 
its  being  published  under  the  Queen's  patronage ;  for  which  pur- 
pose he  wrote  the  following  letter  to  that  prelate. § 

"my  lord,  "Lambeth  House,  March  29,  1692. 

"  As  backward  as  I  am  in  writing  letters,  I  received  one  yester- 
day so  very  kind,  that  I  could  not  forbear  to  acknowledge  it  with 
the  first  opportunity.  I  do  heartily  congratulate  with  your  Lord- 
ship the  birth  of  your  two  daughters,  and  especially  the  safety  of 
the  good  mother,  after  so  long  and  heavy  a  burthen,  and  so  sore  a 
brunt.  I  pray  God  to  multiply  his  blessings  upon  you  more  and 
more. 

*  I  find  your  Lordship  hath  been  in  travail  too ;  and  I  doubt  not 
but  have  brought  forth  a  man-child.  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  him. 
I  wonder  you  can  have  any  dispute  where  to  dedicate  it :  not  that 
I  should  not  be  proud  of  it.  But  nobody  must  come  in  competition 
with  the  good  Queen,  who  so  well  deserves  all  the  respect,  that 
can  be  paid  her  by  all  mankind  ;  besides  that,  I  have  the  curiosity 
to  see  the  skill  of  your  pen  in  so  tender  a  point,  as  it  will  be  to  do 
her  Majesty  right  without  grating  upon  her  modesty. 

**  I  am  glad  of  the  happy  success  of  your  pains  in  catechising 
the  youth,  which  could  not  but  be  universally  acceptable ;  for  even 
bad  parents  wish  their  children  good. 

"  And  now  I  think  it  high  time  to  give  your  Lordship  my  most 
hearty  thanks  for  your  kindness  to  the  son  of  my  old  friend,  Mr. 

*  Id.  Preface  lo  the  3d  Edit,  of  his  Pastor.il  Care,  p.  xxxviii.  4th  Edit.  London. 

1736.  \ 
t  Conclusion  of  the  History  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  ii.  p.  637. 
X  Preface  to  Pastoral  Care,  nbi  supra,  and  Cli.  IX.  p.  223,  224. 
§>  Communicated  by  the  Honourable  Mr.  Justice  Burnet. 


clxXXVlii  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

Dereham,  and  am  glad  the  young  man  halh  approved  himself  to 
you.  Your  Lordship's  kind  thoughts  towards  the  father  are  yet 
much  greater :  but  many  things  must  happen  to  bring  that  about ; 
and  if  what  is  designed  succeed,  there  will  be  less  need,  and  there- 
fore I  would  have  no  hopes  given  him  of  it. 

"  My  wife  sends  her  humble  duty  to  your  Lordship,  and  joins 
her  service  with  mine  to  Mrs.  Burnet,  and  does  equally  congra- 
tulate with  me  her  safety  and  happiness.  God  keep  you,  and 
continue  you  long  for  the  service  of  his  church.  I  am  most  as- 
suredly, 

"  Your  Lordship's  most  affectionate  brother  and  friend, 

"  Jo.  Cant." 

The  Bishop  of  Salisbury  immediately  sent  the  manuscript  of  his 
Discourse  to  his  Grace,  who  returned  him  this  answer:* 

"MY  LORD,  "Lambeth  House,  April  12th,  1692. 

"  Since  you  are  pleased  to  be  so  positive,  I  will  take  upon  me 
too ;  and  will  write  how  and  by  whom  I  please,  and  am  resolved 
to  try,  whether  you  can  find  in  your  heart  to  give  over  writing  to 
me.  And  why,  I  pray,  was  not  Mr.  Fairfax  mentioned  among  my 
scribes  1 

"I  have  read  over  your  book  with  great  care,  and  except  that  I 
have  here  and  there  put  in  some  few  words,  which  I  saw  by  the 
sense  were  omitted,  I  saw  no  reason  to  make  any  alteration  in  the 
whole,  saving  the  putting  in  of  one  word,  and  the  changing  of 
another  ;  so  moderately  have  I  used  that  unlimited  power  you  en- 
trusted me  with.  The  work  is  as  perfect  in  its  kind,  as  I  hope  to 
see  any  thing.  I  cannot  but  take  notice  of  a  remarkable  prudence 
in  the  cast  of  the  whole,  that  you  do  not  grate  too  hard  and  too 
near  upon  the  present  state  of  things  amongst  us,  but  leave  what 
you  say  in  general  to  be  applied  to  ourselves,  if  we  please ;  which 
is  so  far  from  abating  the  force  of  it,  that  it  will,  I  believe,  render 
it  more  effectual.  It  will,  I  hope,  do  much  good  at  present,  and 
much  more  when  you  and  I  are  dead  and  gone.  I  pray  God  to 
reward  you  for  it. 

"  On  Friday  last  I  left  it  with  the  Queen,  to  whom  I  read  the 
conclusion,  which  she  will  by  no  means  allow ;  nor  any  thing  more 
than  a  bare  dedication.    She  says,  she  knows  you  can  use  no  mo. 

*  Communicated  by  the  Honourable  Mr,  Justice  Burnet. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


clxxxix 


deration  in  speaking  of  her.  So  resolute  and  unaffected  a  modesty 
I  never  saw. 

"Her  Majesty  hath  for  several  days  had  a  very  bad  cold.  It 
would  do  any  one  good  to  see  with  what  a  grace  and  cheerfulness 
she  plays  off  so  great  an  illness.  But  I  hope  the  worst  is  over,  and 
that  God  hath  designed  her  for  a  long  blessing  to  us. 

u  As  for  the  'office  of  the  fast/  you  will  not  censure  that  mat- 
ter, when  I  have  told  you,  that  I  took  care  to  have  it  printed  five 
weeks  before  ;  but  it  could  not  be  sent  abroad  till  the  first  fast-day 
was  settled.  This  her  Majesty  had  appointed  on  the  13th  of  April. 
But  when  the  proclamation  was  brought  to  the  council,  it  was  ob» 
jected,  that  the  13th  was  the  first  day  of  the  term,  then  the  20th 
was  proposed ;  but  that  was  thought  not  so  convenient,  because 
some  action  abroad  might  happen  sooner.  Then  it  was  brought 
back  to  the  8th.  I  told  the  Queen,  there  would  not  be  time  enough 
to  disperse  the  office.  She  said,  let  it  go  as  far  as  it  can  for  the 
first  fast;  it  will  come  time  enough  for  the  months  following. 

u  Yesterday  morning  I  obtained  a  meeting  here  of  eight  bishops, 
York,  London,  Worcester,  Ely,  Gloucester,  Chichester,  Norwich, 
Lincoln.  I  proposed  to  them  the  heads  of  a  circular  letter ;  upon 
which  we  discoursed  very  calmly,  and  without  the  least  clashing; 
and  in  conclusion  they  were  all  unanimously  agreed  to,  and  two  or 
three  heads  more  suggested,  which  were  likewise  consented  to,  none 
more  cheerfully  concurring  in  every  thing  than  my  Lord  Bishop  of 
London.  We  dined  together  with  great  kindness.  This  your 
Lordship  will  easily  believe  was  no  small  contentment  to  me.  But 
I  must  not  be  so  vain,  as  not  to  consider,  that  I  owe  all  this  to  the 
countenance  and  influence  of  her  Majesty.  Your  Lordship  may 
expect  a  more  particular  account  of  this  affair  when  it  comes  to 
more  ripeness*    In  the  mean  time,  and  ever,  I  am,  my  Lord, 

"  Your  Lordship's  most  affectionate  brother  and  servant, 

"Jo.  Cant." 

The  Pastoral  Care  being  now  ready  for  the  press,  received  the 
imprimatur  of  the  Archbishop  himself  on  the  5th  of  May,  1692, 
and  was  published  the  same  year. 

His  Grace's  acceptance  of  the  see  of  Canterbury,  and  his  at- 
tachment to  the  cause  of  the  Revolution,  excluded  him,  among 
others,  from  the  offer  of  pardon  in  King  James  II.'s  declaration. 
This  was  scut  over  to  England  about  April,  1692,  previous  to  his 
iutended  invasion  of  this  kingdom  with  a  considerable  army  of  Eng~ 


cxc 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


lish,  Scots,  Irish,  and  French ;  and  it  is  said  to  have  been  drawn 
up  by  Sir  James  Montgomery,  the  supposed  author  of  a  very  severe 
pamphlet  against  the  government,  intitled,  Britain's  just  Complaints, 
whose  zeal  for  the  Revolution,  by  the  disappointment  of  his  ambi- 
tion, in  not  being  gratified  with  the  post  of  secretary  of  state  for 
Scotland,  was  soon  changed  into  the  greatest  activity  for  the  re- 
storation of  the  abdicated  King,  till  his  firmness  to  the  protestant 
religion  exposed  him  to  such  ill  treatment  at  the  court  of  St.  Ger- 
mains,  that  he  was  obliged  to  abandon  it,  and  retire  to  Paris,  where 
he  died  in  extreme  melancholy  and  distress.  But  the  threats  of 
that  King  were  rendered  ineffectual,  and  his  design  entirely  defeated 
by  the  victory  of  Admiral  Russel  over  the  French  fleet,  on  the  19th 
of  May,  1692,  and  the  destruction  of  it  at  La  Ilogue.  But  there 
not  being  the  same  prospect  of  success  in  Flanders,  where  Lewis 
XIV.  in  person,  opened  the  trenches  before  Namur,  on  the  15th  of 
May ;  which  city  he  took  on  the  26th  of  May,  as  he  did  the  castle 
on  the  21st  of  June,  the  ill  situation  of  affairs  made  a  deep  impres- 
sion on  his  Grace,  who  improved  every  apprehension  of  public  dis- 
tress into  the  most  serious  resolutions  for  the  regulation  of  his  own 
conduct.  Accordingly  I  find  in  short-hand,  in  his  common-place 
book,  the  following  memoranda : 

u  June  7th,  1692.  That  last  night,  at  twelve,  being  in  great  per- 
plexity for  the  King  (now  in  great  danger,  if  there  be  an  engage- 
ment), I  lay  waking  from  that  time  till  five  in  the  morning,  and  did 
solemnly  make  these  following  resolutions,  which  I  earnestly  beg 
of  Almighty  God  the  grace  and  power  to  make  good,  and  did  like- 
wise resolve  to  read  them  over  every  morning. 

"  1.  Not  to  be  angry  with  any  body  upon  any  occasion,  because  all 
anger  is  foolish,  and  a  short  fit  of  madness;  betrays  us  to  great  in- 
decencies :  and  whereas  it  is  intended  to  hurt  others,  the  edge  of 
it  turns  upon  ourselves.  We  always  repent  of  it,  and  are  at  least 
more  angry  at  ourselves  than  by  being  angry  at  others. 

w  2.  Not  to  be  peevish  and  discontented.  This  argues  littleness 
and  infirmity  of  mind. 

"  3.  Not  to  trouble  the  Queen  any  more  with  my  troubles. 

"  4.  Whenever  I  see  any  error  or  infirmity  in  myself,  instead  of 
intending  to  mend  it,  to  resolve  upon  it  presently  and  effectually. 

"  5.  Not  to  disturb  the  Queen  on  the  Lord's  day ;  or,  if  I  speak 
with  her,  to  speak  only  on  matters  of  religion. 

"  6.  To  use  all  gentleness  towards  all  men,  in  meekness  instruct- 
ing those  that  oppose  themselves. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CXC1 


"  7.  Never  to  mention  any  thing  said  by  me  to  the  King  or 
Queen,  or  by  them  to  me  ;  but  to  thank  God  every  day  for  the 
great  blessing  of  the  King  and  Queen,  and  for  their  admirable 
example. 

"  8.  To  read  this  every  morning  before  I  go  to  prayer." 

The  same  month  his  Grace  was  consulted  by  his  friend,  the  Arch- 
bishop of  York,  how  to  proceed  with  a  dissenter  in  his  diocese, 
who,  claiming  the  privilege  of  the  act  of  Toleration,  had  set  up 
an  academy,  and  was  complained  of  to  him  by  the  clergy  of 
Craven  in  a  formal  petition,  that  this  academy  might  be  sup- 
pressed.* The  person  was  Mr.  Richard  Frankland,  born  in  1G30, 
at  Rathmill,  in  the  parish  of  Gigleswick,  in  Craven,  in  Yorkshire, 
and  educated  at  Christ's  College,  in  Cambridge,  where  he  took  the 
degree  of  master  of  arts,  and  was  afterwards  a  preacher  at  Haugh- 
ton-le-spring,  Lancaster,  and  Bishops-Aukland,  in  Durham  ;t  and 
when  the  Protector  Cromwell  had  erected  at  Durham  a  college  for 
academical  learning,  on  the  15th  of  May,  1657,  J  Mr.  Frankland 
was  fixed  upon  as  a  fit  man  to  be  a  tutor  there.  But  that  college 
being  demolished  at  the  Restoration,  and  the  act  of  Uniformity,  with 
which  he  refused  to  comply,  though  solicited  with  a  promise  of 
considerable  preferment  by  Bishop  Cosins,  of  Durham,  excluding 
him  from  his  living,  he  retired  to  Rathmill,  which  was  his  own 
estate,  where  he  set  up  a  private  academy,  and  had  in  the  course 
of  a  few  years  three  hundred  pupils.  Thence,  in  1674,  he  removed 
to  Natland,  near  Kendal,  in  Westmoreland  ;  and  thence,  on  ac- 
count of  the  Five  Mile  Act,  to  Dawsonfold,  and  other  places,  and 
at  last  returned  to  Kendal,  where  he  died  on  the  1st  of  October, 
1698,  having  met  with  much  opposition  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life, 
being  cited  into  the  bishop's  court,  and  excommunicated  for  non- 
appearance, but  absolved  by  order  of  King  William,  at  the  inter- 
cession of  the  Lord  Wharton,  Sir  Thomas  Rookby,  and  others.  He 
was  afterwards  sent  for  by  Archbishop  Sharp,  who  treated  him 
with  great  civility  ;  notwithstanding  which,  a  fresh  citation  was 
sent  from  the  ecclesiastical  court,  but  the  proceedings  upon  it  were 
stopped  by  a  prohibition.!  The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury's  answer 
to  his  brother  of  York  was  as  follows  :y 

*  Letter  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Archil, :acon  Sharp,  of  Nov.  7,  1751. 
t  Dr.  Calamy's  Account,  p.  284,  285. 

$  Peck's  Memoirs  of  Oliver  Cromwell,  Collect,  Numb.  xx.  p.  61,  et  seq. 
§  Dr.  Calamy's  Account,  p.  284 — 288. 

||  Communicated  to  mt  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Thomas  Sharp,  archdeacon  of  Northum- 
berland, 


cxcii 


LIFE  OF  THIi  AUTHOR. 


"  MY  lord,  "  Lambeth  House,  June  14,  1692. 

"  Yesterday  I  received  your  Grace's  letter  concerning  Mr, 
Frankland,  with  the  copy  of  an  address  to  your  Grace  against  him. 
Yourself  are  best  judge  what  is  fit  to  be  done  in  the  case,  because 
you  have  the  advantage  of  inquiring  into  all  the  circumstances  of  it. 
If  my  advice  can  signify  any  thing,  it  can  only  be  to  tell  your  Grace 
what  I  would  do  in  it,  as  the  case  appears  to  me  at  this  distance. 
I  would  send  for  him,  and  tell  him,  that  I  would  never  do  any  thing 
to  infringe  the  act  of  Toleration;  but  I  did  not  think  his  case  came 
within  it :  that  there  were  two  things  in  his  case,  which  would  hin- 
der me  from  granting  him  a  licence,  though  he  were  in  all  things 
conformable  to  the  church  of  England.  First,  his  setting  up  a 
school,  where  a  free-school  is  already  established ;  and  then  his 
instructing  of  young  men  in  so  public  a  manner  in  university  learn- 
ing, which  is  contrary  to  his  oath  to  do,  if  he  have  taken  a  degree 
in  either  of  our  universities,  and  I  doubt  contrary  to  the  bishop's 
oath  to  grant  a  licence  for  the  doing  of  it ;  so  that  your  Grace 
does  not  in  this  matter  consider  him  at  all  as  a  dissenter.  This  I 
only  offer  to  your  Grace  as  what  seems  to  me  the  fairest  and  softest 
way  of  ridding  your  hands  of  this  business. 

"  With  my  humble  service  to  Mrs.  Sharp,  and  my  hearty  prayers 
for  your  health  and  a  long  life  to  do  God  and  his  church  much  ser- 
vice, I  remain,  my  Lord, 

*'  Your  Grace's  very  affectionate  brother  and  servant, 

"  Jo.  Cant." 

The  next  month  his  Grace  was  named  by  the  Queen  herself  to 
stand  godfather,  with  her  Majesty  and  the  Earl  of  Bath,  to  the 
new-born  son  of  Charles  Marquis  of  Winchester,  afterwards  Duke 
of  Bolton,  by  his  Lady,  Frances,  daughter  of  William  Ramsden,  of 
Byrom,  in  the  county  of  York,  Esq.  This  honour  done  the  Archbi- 
shop by  her  Majesty  was  so  sensibly  felt  by  him,  that  he  could  not 
suppress  the  mention  of  it,  though  in  a  style  of  the  greatest  mo- 
desty and  delicacy,  to  Lady  Russel,  in  a  letter,  which  he  wrote  to 
her  upon  a  business  of  her  own,* 

"  HONOURED  MADAM,  "  Aug.  1 ,  1692. 

"  On  Sunday  morning  I  gave  your's  to  the  Queen,  telling  her, 
that  I  was  afraid  it  came  too  late.  She  said,  '  perhaps  not.'  Yes- 
terday meeting  the  Queen  at  a  christening,  she  gave  me  the  inclosed 

*  From  a  copy  in  the  possession  of  a  late  Bishop  of  Londou. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CXC111 


to  send  to  your  Ladyship.  And  if  I  could  but  obtain  of  your  severe 
judgment  to  wink  a  little  at  my  vanity,  I  would  tell  you  how  this 
happened.  My  Lady  Marchioness  of  Winchester  being  lately  de- 
livered of  a  son,  spake  to  the  Queen  to  stand  godmother;  and  the 
Queen  asking  whom  she  had  thought  of  for  godfathers,  she  said, 
only  the  Earl  of  Bath,  and  whom  else  her  Majesty  would  please  to 
name.  They  agreed  upon  me,  which  was  a  great  surprise  to  me ; 
but  I  doubt  not  a  gracious  contrivance  of  her  Majesty  to  let  the 
world  know,  that  I  have  her  countenance  and  support.  If  it  please 
God  to  preserve  my  good  master,  and  to  grant  him  success,  I  have 
nothing  more  to  wish  in  this  world,  but  that  God  would  grant  chil- 
dren to  this  excellent  Prince ;  and  that  I,  who  am  said  not  to  have 
been  baptized  myself,  may  have  the  honour  to  baptize  a  Prince  of 
Wales.  With  God,  to  whose  wisdom  and  goodness  we  must  sub- 
mit every  thing,  this  is  not  impossible.  To  his  protection  and  bless- 
ing I  commend  your  Ladyship  and  your  hopeful  children. 

"  Reading  over  what  I  have  written  puts  me  in  mind  of  one,  who, 
when  he  was  in  his  drink,  always  went  and  shewed  himself  to  his 
best  friends.    But  your  Ladyship  knows  how  to  forgive  a  little  folly 
to  one  so  entirely  devoted  to  your  service,  as  is,  honoured  Madam, 
*  Your  most  obliged  and  humble  servant, 

"  Jo.  Cant." 

In  the  latter  end  of  this  year,  1692,  the  History  of  the  Inquisi- 
tiou,  written  in  Latin  by  Philip  Limborch,  professor  of  divinity 
among  the  Arminians,  at  Amsterdam,  was  published  there  in  folio, 
with  a  dedication  to  the  Archbishop.  This  w  ork  was  undertaken 
by  the  author  upon  meeting  with  the  original  manuscript  of  the 
Sentences  pronounced  by  the  Inquisition  of  Thoulouse,  in  France, 
from  the  year  1307  to  1323;  and  it  is  an  excellent  performance, 
and  contains  an  account  of  the  rise,  progress,  and  proceedings  of 
that  formidable  court,  supported  by  indisputable  authorities.  When 
he  had  finished  it,  he  wrote  in  June,  1692,  to  Mr.  Locke,  who  was 
a  common  friend  to  the  Archbishop  and  himself,  to  request  his 
Grace's  leave  for  giving  it  to  the  world  under  the  sanction  of  his 
patronage.  Mr.  Locke  wrote  to  Mr.  Limborch  on  the  30th  of  that 
month,*  that  he  had  that  day  waited  upon  the  Archbishop,  who 
immediately  recollected  Mr.  Limborch's  name,  and  that  he  had  re- 
ceived from  him  a  present  of  that  divine's  book,  intitled,  De  veri- 

*  Familiar  Lelters  between  Mr.  Locke  and  several  of  bis  Friends,  p.  339.  Edit. 
London,  1708,  in  8vo. 


cxciv 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


tate  religionis  Christiana?  arnica  collatio  cum  erudito  Judaeo,  print- 
ed in  1687,  excusing  himself  for  not  having  returned  him  a  letter 
of  thanks  for  it,  because  his  ill  health,  the  weakness  of  his  eyes, 
and  other  intervening  engagements  of  business,  had  hitherto  pre- 
vented him  from  reading  the  whole  :  but  he  highly  commended  the 
work  and  its  author.  He  thought  that  the  History  of  the  Inquisi- 
tion would  be  very  seasonable  at  that  time,  and  read  over  the  con- 
tents of  the  chapters  with  great  pleasure  and  approbation ;  and, 
when  Mr.  Locke  mentioned  to  him  the  affair  of  the  dedication,  he 
answered  with  so  much  civility  of  words  and  countenance,  as  shewed 
that  it  was  not  displeasing  to  him.  Mr.  Locke  therefore  advised 
Mr.  Limborch  to  send  it  over,  concurring  with  him  in  opinion,  that 
the  Archbishop  should  read  it  before  it  was  sent  to  press  ;  and  pro- 
mising to  shew  it  to  his  Grace,  and  to  mark  any  thing  in  it  that 
ought  to  be  altered.  His  Grace  observed,  that  he  had  a  book  print- 
ed in  Portugal,  in  8vo.  concerning  an  auto  de  fe  there,  to  which 
were  prefixed  several  papal  bulls  and  other  instruments,  granting 
and  establishing  the  authority  of  the  holy  office ;  which  book  he 
had  not  yet  found,  though  he  had  looked  for  it,  his  library  not 
being  yet  in  order,  but  directed  it  to  be  searched  out  against  Mr. 
Locke's  next  visit,  to  be  sent  to  Mr.  Limborch.  Mr.  Locke,  in  his 
next  letter  of  the  23th  of  November,  1692,*  informs  Mr.  Limborch 
of  his  having  come  immediately  to  London  upon  the  arrival  of  the 
printed  copies  of  his  book,  and  waited  upon  the  Archbishop,  who 
declared  his  obligations  to  Mr.  Limborch  for  it,  and  his  great  sa- 
tisfaction in  reading  it,  as  he  had  already  done  the  greatest  part  of 
it,  notwithstanding  his  avocations  of  most  important  business  ;  and 
that  he  designed  to  write  to  Mr.  Limborch  a  letter  of  thanks  upon 
that  occasion.  Mr.  Locke,  in  another  letter  of  the  10th  of  Ja- 
nuarv,  109f,t  acquaints  Mr.  Limborch,  that  upon  his  coming  to 
town  three  days  before,  the  Archbishop  sent  for  him,  and  having 
premised  many  things  in  commendation  of  Professor  Limborch  and 
his  History,  said,  that  he  had  now  at  last  wrote  to  him,  having  been 
hitherto  prevented  by  a  multitude  of  business  ;  desiring  Mr.  Locke 
to  direct  and  transmit  his  letter,  together  with  a  volume  of  his  ser- 
mons lately  published. 

Mr.  Limborch's  dedication  to  his  Grace  is  formed  upon  topics, 
that  do  the  highest  honour  to  a  protestant  prelate,  and  are  applied 
to  him  with  great  force  and  propriety.    He  begins  it  with  remark - 

*  Familiar  Letters  between  Mr.  Locko  and  several  of  Lis  Frieuds,  p.  341.  Edit. 
Loudon,  170o,  in  8vo  t  Page  315. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cxcv 


ing,  that  upon  a  thorough  consideration  of  the  subject  of  the  book 
itself,  and  of  the  eminent  rank  held  by  ihe  Archbishop  with  the 
unanimous  applause  of  all  good  men,  and  to  the  common  advantage 
of  all  the  reformed  churches,  in  a  crisis  of  the  utmost  difficulty, 
the  inscription  of  such  a  work  was  due  to  his  Grace  above  all  men 
living.    That,  on  the  one  hand,  all  persons  who  wished  the  main- 
tenance of  the  gospel  purity  and  liberty,  had  the  highest  veneration 
for  his  Grace,  who  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  church  of  Eng- 
land, the  most  eminent  among  the  reformed,  and  who  was  on  that 
account  in  some  measure  the  defender  of  the  reformed  churches  in 
general ;  his  endeavours  being  faithfully  employed  in  the  promoting 
the  Christian  doctrine  and  faith,  by  means  directly  opposite  to  those 
of  the  papal  tyranny,  and  in  engaging  men  in  the  way  of  salvation. 
For  not  to  insist  upon  his  eloquence  in  the  pulpit,  of  which  he  was 
so  great  a  master,  genuine,  free  from  the  disguise  of  false  orna- 
ments, and  agreeable  to  the  Divine  oracles,  his  strength  and  acute- 
ness  of  judgment  in  controversy,  his  learning  adapted  to  use,  and 
not  to  ostentation,  and  his  other  excellent  qualifications,  which  had 
long  before  fixed  the  attention  and  hopes  of  all  good  meu  upon  him, 
and  now  adorned  the  high  office  which  he  filled  ;  his  Grace's  mild- 
ness of  temper,  so  peculiarly  becoming  a  pastor  of  the  church,  and 
so  much  wanted  in  that  age,  promised  the  greatest  advantage  to 
the  Reformation,  which  stiil  laboured  under  difficulties,  and  had 
been  lately  almost  oppressed.    For  so  distinguished  was  his  Grace 
for  integrity  of  life,  simplicity  of  manners,  candour,  universal  cha- 
rity and  benevolence,  and  prudence  founded  on  experience,  that 
Divine  Providence  seemed  to  have  chosen  him,  in  order  that,  under 
his  influence  and  conduct,  the  whole  body  of  the  reformed  churches, 
laying  aside  their  intestine  disputes,  might  unite  and  support  the 
liberty  of  the  gospel  and  the  Christian  religion  against  the  machi- 
nations and  shocking  cruelty  of  the  church  of  Rome.    That  his 
Grace,  who  was  an  example  to  all  men  of  a  true  evangelical  cha- 
rity, opposed  the  tyranny  of  the  see  of  Rome,  by  the  same  arts, 
sanctity  of  life  and  benignity  of  heart,  with  which  Christianity  an- 
ciently subdued  and  destroyed  pagan  idolatry,  impiety,  and  ty- 
ranny, and  by  which  it  will  always  triumph  over  its  enemies.  These 
were  the  reasons  which  prevented  Mr.  Limborch  from  offering  his 
work  to  auy  other  patron  than  his  Grace,  who,  he  was  persuaded, 
would  concur  with  him  in  opinion,  that  the  publication  of  it  wouM 
be  extremely  seasonable  in  the  present  situation  of  things,  when 
popery,  especially  in  England,  was  endeavouring  to  advance  itself, 


CXCV1 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


and  gain  the  sole  dominion ;  since  the  readers  of  that  book  would 
see  in  it,  as  in  a  glass,  the  lively  and  genuine  representation  of  it, 
and  by  that  means  not  suffer  themselves  to  be  deluded  with  a  fal- 
lacious one  ;  and  consequently  view  it  in  its  proper  light,  of  a  con- 
federacy of  cruel  and  sanguinary  men,  affecting,  and  where  they 
can,  usurping,  an  authority  over  the  consciences  of  others,  and  erect- 
ing a  kingdom  in  direct  opposition  to  that  of  Christ.  He  hoped, 
therefore,  that  all  protestants  would,  under  the  auspices  of  his 
Grace,  as  their  common  spiritual  father,  be  inspired  with  a  just  hor- 
ror of  the  papal  dominion,  and  obviate  its  progress  by  the  sincerity 
of  their  faith,  a  charity  truly  Christian,  and  a  thorough  purity  of 
manners :  and  that,  for  the  sake  of  preserving  the  Reformation, 
they  would  learn  to  detest  all  cruelty  against,  and  punishments  of 
those,  who  dissented  or  were  in  error,  if  they  were  otherwise  per- 
sons of  piety  ;  since  it  is  certain,  that  all  mankind  will  give  an  ac- 
count of  their  faith  before  the  tribunal  of  Christ,  their  supreme 
legislator  and  judge  ;  and  that  no  man  has  a  right  to  make  laws  for 
conscience,  and  prescribe  rules  of  belief,  which  would  be  in  reality 
assuming  the  seat  of  Christ.  Upon  these  principles  the  church 
would  at  last  flourish  under  his  Grace ;  and  enmity,  hatred,  and 
schisms,  by  which  it  had  been  hitherto  miserably  divided,  be  en- 
tirely abolished.  And  if  God,  in  punishment  for  our  sins,  should 
not  yet  restore  the  golden  age  of  the  primitive  church,  when  all  the 
believers  had  one  heart  and  one  mind,  men  would  at  least  learn 
not  to  domineer  over  the  consciences  of  their  brethren,  nor  to 
punish  any  person  for  a  simple  and  innocent  error  of  judgment, 
much  less  to  inflict  death  upon  him  for  the  ingenuous  profession  of 
his  faith,  of  which  he  is  ready  to  give  an  account  to  God  ;  but  to 
expose  errors  by  reason,  and  the  clear  testimony  of  Scripture,  and 
in  the  mean  time  to  wait  with  meekness  and  patience  for  the  repent- 
ance of  the  erring  person,  till  God  shall  enable  him  to  see  and  em- 
brace the  truth.  Mr.  Limborch  concludes  his  dedication  with  his 
wishes,  that  Providence  would  bless  his  Grace's  pious  labours  for 
the  peace  and  benefit  of  the  church,  and  grant  that  he  might  restore 
and  support  it  by  the  same  means,  to  which  it  owed  its  first  rise, 
progress,  and  establishment. 

His  Grace  had  likewise  a  great  regard  for  another  very  learned 
man  among  the  Arminians,  in  Holland,  to  whom  the  English  nation 
is  greatly  obliged  for  the  reputation,  which  our  best  writers  of  the 
last  and  present  century  have  acquired  in  foreign  countries.  This 
was  Mons.  Le  Clerc,  whose  translation  of,  and  paraphrase  and  com- 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


CXCV11 


mentary  upon,  Genesis,  published  in  1693,  gave  such  satisfaction 
to  the  Archbishop,  that  after  he  had  read  part  of  it,  he  testified  his 
approbation  of  it  by  a  letter  to  the  author,  and  afterwards  sent  him 
a  present  of  Bishop  Kidder's  Commentary  on  the  Five  Books  of 
Moses,  published  in  1694.*  But  that  prelate  having,  in  his  Dis- 
sertation concerning  the  author  of  the  Pentateuch,  passed  a  judg- 
ment upon  Mons.  Le  Clerc's  work,  which  the  latter  was  persuaded 
the  Archbishop  disapproved,  he  wrote  to  the  Bishop  on  the  5th  of 
November,  1694,  to  complain  of  his  Lordship's  charging  him  with 
ill  arts,  and  having  said  things  which  could  only  have  been  expected 
from  a  disciple  of  Hobbes,  or  a  deist.  Bishop  Kidder  returned  an 
answer  from  Wells,  on  the  9th  of  that  month,  promising  to  do  jus- 
tice to  his  character,  which  promise  he  repeated  soon  after  to  a 
friend  of  Mons.  Le  Clerc ;  who,  upon  his  Lordship's  dying  with- 
out publicly  retracting  the  censure  abovementioned,  printed  the 
letters  which  had  passed  between  them  on  that  subject.? 

The  success  at  sea,  in  the  summer  of  the  vear  169*2,  and  the  pre- 
servation of  his  Majesty's  person,  both  from  an  intended  assassi- 
nation by  the  Sieur  de  Grandval,  to  which,  according  to  his  own 
confession,  King  James  and  his  Queen,  as  well  as  the  French  court, 
were  privy,  and  in  the  unfortunate  battle  of  Steinkirk,  on  the  2 1th 
of  July,  against  Marshal  Luxemburgh,  occasioning  a  public  thanks- 
giving on  the  27th  of  October,  the  Archbishop  was  appointed  to 
preach  before  their  Majesties,  after  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  had 
excused  himself.  For  the  Queen  having  sent  that  Bishop  a  text, 
Exod.  iv.  13,  he  prepared  a  sermon  upon  it;  but  then  humblv  re- 
presented to  her  Majesty,  that  he  having  preached  the  two  thanks- 
giving sermons  in  the  two  preceding  years,  it  w  ould  look  as  if  none 
else  was  willing  to  perform  that  office,  if  it  should  be  still  laid  upon 
him.  The  Queen  saw  the  force  of  this  remark,  and  ordered  the 
Archbishop  to  preach  on  that  occasion ;  but  the  Bishop's  sermon, 
though  not  preached,,  was  afterwards  published  by  him  with  others 
in  1713.  That  of  his  Grace  w  as  on  Jerem.  ix.  23,  24,  in  w  hich  he 
describes  the  Revolution,  as  the  cause  of  true  religion  against  a 
false  and  idolatrous  w  orship,  and  of  the  liberties  of  mankind  against 
tyranny  and  oppression  ;  expressing  no  favourable  opinion  of  the 
sincerity  of  some  of  the  enemies  to  it.  "  As  bad  an  argument," 
says  he,  "  as  success  is  of  a  good  cause,  I  am  sorry  to  say  it,  but 
I  am  afraid  it  is  true,  it  is  like  in  the  conclusion  to  prove  the  best 
argument  of  all  others  to  convince  those,  who  have  so  loni;  pre- 

*  Billiutbeque  Choisie,  torn.  iv.  art.  \.  p.  S(J4.  f  Ibid.  p.  370.  «  «». 


cxcviii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


tended  conscience  against  submission  to  the  present  government. 
Mere  success,"  adds  he,  "  is  certainly  one  of  the  worst  arguments 
in  the  world  of  a  good  cause,  and  the  most  improper  to  satisfy 
conscience.  And  yet  we  find  by  experience,  that  in  the  issue  it  is 
the  most  successful  of  all  other  arguments,  and  does  in  a  very  odd 
but  effectual  way  satisfy  the  consciences  of  a  great  many  men  by 
shewing  them  their  interest."  This  passage  highly  enraged  Dr. 
Hickes,*  as  well  as  the  compliments  to  King  William,  in  which 
there  is  one  instance  of  false  eloquence  unusual  in  his  Grace's 
writings.  It  is  that,  where  taking  notice  of  Lewis  XIV/3  unprince- 
ly  manner  of  insulting  over  King  William,  when  he  believed  him  to 
have  been  slain  at  the  Boyne,  he  adds,  that  "  no  mortal  man  ever 
had  his  shoulder  so  kindly  kissed  by  a  cannon  bullet  f  an  expres- 
sion, which  gave  Dr.  South,  no  friend  to  him  or  his  memory,  the 
advantage  of  animadverting  upon  it  as  a  peculiar  strain  of  rhe- 
toric. + 

The  King  having  escaped  the  most  imminent  danger  in  the  bat- 
tle of  Landen,  in  July,  1G93,  against  Marshal  Luxemburgh,  in 
which  the  Earl  of  Portland  was  wounded,  the  Archbishop  took  the 
first  opportunity  of  writing  to  his  Lordship  the  following  letter  :| 

"  my  lord,  "  August  1,  1693. 

"  1  cannot  forbear  on  this  great  occasion  to  congratulate  the 
King's  safety  and  merciful  preservation  from  the  many  deaths,  to 
which  his  royal  person  was  so  eminently  exposed  in  the  late  bloody 
engagement.  I  thank  God  from  my  heart,  who  protected  him  in 
that  day  of  danger,  and  likewise  preserved  your  Lordship's  life, 
which  had  been  so  lately  restored.  I  hope  the  wound  your  Lord- 
ship received  is  not  dangerous,  and  that  it  may  be  healed  without 
losing  the  use  of  your  hand.  We  have  got  but  a  very  imperfect 
account  of  the  issue  of  the  whole  action,  and  what  has  happened 
since,  having  received  no  letters  of  a  later  date  than  the  morning 
after  the  light,  by  reason  of  contrary  winds. 

*'  I  did  not  intend  to  have  troubled  your  Lordship  about  so  small 
a  matter,  as  I  am  going  to  mention.  I  have  heard  it  from  so  many 
hands,  that  I  think  myself  obliged  to  rectify  the  mistake,  because 
though  the  thing  which  is  said  be  true,  I  doubt  the  occasion  of  it 
has  been  misrepresented  to  his  Majesty.  The  thing  was  thus : — the 

*  Some  Discourses,  p.  56.  58.    t  Dr.  South's  Sermons,  vol.  iii.  p.  570.  Edit.  1698. 
%  From  his  draught  in  short-hand. 


LIFE  OF   THE   AUTHOR.  CXcix 

Master  of  Stairs  shewed  me  a  draught  of  the  Scots'  bill  of  Com- 
prehension, telling  me  by  this  act  the  episcopal  ministers  were  re- 
quired to  own  thepresbyterian  government  as  the  only  government. 
I  asked  him,  if  no  other  words  were  added  to  qualify  that  clause  ; 
viz.  "  as  the  only  government  of  this  church,"  or  "  established  by 
law?"  He  said  no.  Then  I  asked,  if  the  bill  was  so  passed.  He 
said  it  was  so  passed  the  committee  of  the  House.  I  told  him,  I 
did  not  believe,  when  it  was  brought  into  the  House,  it  would  pass 
there  ;  but  I  was  sure  the  King  would  never  consent  to  have  that 
clause,  without  some  other  words  to  explain  it,  as  the  only  govern- 
ment of  this  church,  or  the  like  ;  and  then  the  bill  would  not  be  a 
bill  of  comprehension,  but  of  exclusion.  This  was  what  passed 
between  the  Master  of  Stairs  and  myself;  and,  if  he  has  represent- 
ed this  matter  any  otherwise  to  his  Majesty,  he  has  used  me  very 
ill.  I  intreat  your  Lordship  to  set  his  Majesty  right  in  this 
matter. 

"  I  pray  God  still  to  preserve  his  sacred  person,  and  make  him 
victorious.  I  shall  be  glad  to  hear  of  your  Lordship's  perfect  re- 
covery, who  am  with  the  truest  esteem  and  respect, 

"  My  Lord,  your  Lordship's  most  faithful  and  humble  servant, 

"  J.  C." 

This  letter,  as  well  as  his  Grace's  known  moderation  and  tender- 
ness in  matters  of  conscience,  will  be  a  sufficient  vindication  of 
him  from  a  memorandum  pretended  to  be  found  in  the  study  of  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Creech,  the  translator  and  editor  of  Lucretius,  at  the 
auction  of  his  books  in  Oxford.*  The  substance  of  it  was,  that 
'i  whatever  steps  were  taken,  and  all  that  was  done  for  the  abo- 
lishing episcopacy,  and  subversion  of  the  church  of  Scotland,  was 
done  by  the  contrivance,  advice,  and  approbation  of  Dr.  Tillot- 
son;"  the  writer  of  this  memorandum  adding,  "  This  I  had  from 
Johnson,  who  was  certain  of  it,  and  knew  the  whole  matter,  when 
I  was  down  in  the  north."  But  for  a  fuller  vindication  of  his 
Grace  from  this  charge,  it  will  be  necessary  to  trace  back  the  real 
causes  of  the  abolition  of  episcopacy  in  Scotland,  w  hich  were  en- 
tirely foreign  to  any  influence  or  interposition  of  the  Archbishop, 
if  he  had  been  inclined  to  it ;  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  he  appears 
to  have  endeavoured  the  mitigation  of  all  severe  impositions,  upon 
the  episcopal  clergy  in  that  kingdom.    And  in  fact  the  true  rea- 

*  Life  of  Archbishop  TUJotMB,  p.  3,  and  53. 


cc 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOIt. 


son  of  the  destruction  of  episcopacy  there  after  the  Revolution  is 
to  be  imputed  to  the  conduct  of  the  bishops  themselves,  both  pre- 
vious and  subsequent  to  it.  They  had  rendered  themselves  uni- 
versally obnoxious  as  the  immediate  creatures  of  the  court  of  King 
James,  and  had  written  to  him  a  letter  of  abhorrence  of  the  intend- 
ed expedition  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  dated  at  Edinburgh,  No- 
vember 3,  1688,  and  filled  with  the  strongest  assurances  of  pro- 
moting in  all  his  Majesty's  subjects  u  an  intrepid  and  stedfast  alle- 
giance" to  him,  "  as  an  essential  part  of  their  religion,  and  of  the 
glory,"  add  they,  "  of  our  holy  profession."  The  episcopal  party 
indeed  sent  up  Dr.  Scot,  dean  of  Glasgow,  in  February,  168f  to 
the  Prince  of  Orange,  who  assured  them  of  all  possible  favour,  if 
they  should  concur  with  the  new  settlement  of  Scotland.  But, 
being  possessed  by  the  earl  of  Dundee  with  the  opinion  of  a  resto- 
ration of  King  James,  they  adhered  so  strongly  to  his  interest,  that 
it  was  not  possible  for  King  William  to  preserve  episcopacy ;  all 
those,  who  declared  themselves  his  friends,  being  equally  zealous 
against  that  form  of  church  government ;  which  was  according- 
ly abolished  by  an  act  of  the  Scots'  parliament  on  the  22d  of 
July,  1689.* 

The  state  of  that  kingdom,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  169|, 
was  represented  to  the  King  in  a  paper  delivered  to  him  by  the 
Lord  Viscount  Tarbot,  w  ho  had  been  much  trusted  and  employed  in 
Scotland  by  King  Charles  II.  and  his  successor,  as  he  was  after- 
wards by  Queen  Anne,  who  made  him  Earl  of  Cromarty  and  se- 
cretary of  state.  This  paper  was  transcribed  by  the  Archbishop 
in  short  hand  in  his  common-place  book,  w  ith  a  remark  of  his  own 
at  the  end  of  it,  that  it,  u  seemed  to  contain  the  most  likely  propo- 
sal for  an  agreement  to  be  condescended  to  on  both  sides  (the 
episcopalians  and  presbyterians)  that  had  yet  been  offered." 

A  copy  of  the  Lord  Tarbot's  paper  given  in  by  him  to  the  King. 

"  January  1st,  1691. 
c<  Orkney,  Caithness,  Ross,  Murray,  Aberdeen,  Brechin,  Dun- 
keld,  and  the  greatest  part  of  Dumblain,  are  provinces, +  where 
the  ministers  are  good  men,  and  well-beloved  of  the  people,  and 
have  owned  their  Majesties' government,  are  ready  to  own  the  con- 

*  Kennet,  vol.  Hi.  p.  555.  572.  575.  and  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  23. 
t  Scotland  divided  into  two  parts,  one  north,  &c.  which  contain  together  thirty- 
five  provinces. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


eci 


fesaioo  of  faith  ;  and  many  of  them  have  already  addressed  upon 
the  King's  last  letter:  and  it  will  most  certainly  dissatisfy  all  those 
provinces,  if  their  ministers  be  not  assumed.  In  all  the  rest  of  the 
provinces,  in  the  south  and  west,  most  of  the  episcopal  clergy  are 
'already  deposed.  The  few,  that  are  left,  are  very  well  loved  by 
the  people.  The  presbyteries  of  Dunbar,  and  Haddington,  in 
Lothian  and  Dunfermline  in  Fife,  and  presbyteries  of  Sterling,  have 
excellent  ministers,  and  loved  by  their  people. — May  it  not  please 
all,  that  the  ministers  of  the  northern  provinces  be  assumed,  and  in 
the  south  only  those  few  of  the  aforesaid  four  presbyteries  (which 
in  all  will  not  amount  to  thirty  ministers)  and  no  more  be  assumed 
at  this  time  1 — That  a  commission  be  appointed  to  wait  on  the 
King's  commissioner  for  reviewing  all  processes  complained  of ; 
and  to  report  to  the  next  general  assembly,  whether  the  complaints 
be  from  ministers  or  parishes. — To  prohibit  all  commissions  of  the 
general  assembly,  as  dangerous,  and  not  consistent  with  the  forms 
of  presbytery. — To  hasten  the  close  of  the  assembly,  and  to  ap- 
point a  new  one  to  a  long  day  ;  with  a  clause,  unless  his  Majesty 
sees  fit  to  call  it  sooner,  pro  re  natd. — To  recommend  it  to  the 
commissioner  and  commission,  the  particular  and  notable  cases 
complained  of  to  their  Majesties.'' 

In  the  parliament  of  Scotland,  held  in  1G93  by  the  Duke  of  Ha- 
milton as  the  King's  commissioner,  the  bill  of  Comprehension,  men- 
tioned in  the  Archbishop's  letter  to  the  Earl  of  Portland,  was  first 
framed  in  the  manner  shewn  him  by  Sir  John  Dalrymple,  then  mas- 
ter, and  afterwards  Earl  of  Stairs,  who  had  been  made  secretary  of 
state  for  that  kingdom  in  1690,  but  was  removed  from  that  post 
in  1695  for  his  concern  in  the  massacre  at  Glencoe.  The  Archbi- 
shop, being  offended  with  the  rigour  of  this  test,  endeavoured  to 
soften  it ;  and  in  his  common-place  book  are  these  two  draughts  : 

The  test  of  the  ministers,  that  are  to  be  admitted  as  it  was 
Jirst  proposed. 

"  I  A.  B.  do  sincerely  declare  and  promise,  that  I  will  own 
and  submit  to  the  present  presbyterian  government  of  the  church, 
as  it  is  now  by  law  established  in  this  kingdom,  under  their 
Majesties,  King  William  and  Queen  Mary.  And  that  I  will  heart- 
ily concur  with,  and  under  it,  for  the  suppression  of  sin  and  wick* 

*  Since  the  year  1690  the  episcopalislt,  have  lost  all  their  places  and  preferments. 
VOL.  I,  T 


CCH  LIFE   OF   THE  ATTHOR. 

edness,  the  promoting  of  piety,  and  the  purging  of  the  church  of 
all  erroneous  and  scandalous  ministers.  And  that  I  do  also  assent 
and  consent  to  the  confession  of  faith,  and  to  the  larger  and  shorter 
catechisms,  now  confirmed  by  act  of  parliament,  as  the  standard 
of  the  protestant  religion  in  this  kingdom." 

This  test  may  be  molified  in  this  form,  if  it  be  thought  fit. 

"  I  A.  B.  do  sincerely  declare  and  promise,  that  I  will  submit 
to  the  presbyterian  government  of  the  church,  as  it  is  now  by  law 
established  in  this  kingdom,  under  their  Majesties,  King  William 
and  Queen  Mary,  by  presbyteries,  provincial  synods,  and  a  general 
assembly :  and  that  I  will,  as  becomes  a  minister  of  the  gospel, 
heartily  concur  with  the  said  government  for  the  suppressing  of 
sin  and  wickedness,  the  promoting  of  piety,  and  purging  the 
church  of  erroneous  and  scandalous  ministers.  And  I  do  fur- 
ther promise,  that  I  will  subscribe  the  confession  of  faith,  and 
the  larger  and  shorter  catechisms,  now  confirmed  by  act  of  par- 
liament, as  containing  the  doctrine  of  the  protestant  religion  pro- 
fessed in  this  kingdom." 

But  notwithstanding  the  unusual  terms  of  moderation,  to  which 
presbyterians  in  Scotland  were  brought,  with  regard  to  the  epis- 
copal clergy,  yet  the  latter  refused  both  them  and  the  oaths  to  the 
government.* 

Bishop  Wilkins's  excellent  treatise,  intitled  Ecclesiastes ;  or,  a 
Discourse  concerning  the  Gift  of  Preaching,  as  it  falls  under  the 
Rules  of  Art,  which  had  already  passed  through  six  editions  since 
the  first,  in  1646,  wanting  now  the  hand  of  a  careful  editor  for  a 
new  one,  the  Archbishop  requested  his  friend,  Dr.  John  Williams, 
afterwards  bishop  of  Chichester,  to  undertake  that  task  ;  which  he 
executed  with  great  industry  and  skill.  For,  as  he  informed  his 
Grace,  in  the  dedication  of  the  seventh  edition,  dated  April  1st, 
1693,  upon  engaging  in  it,  he  found,  that  besides  the  correction  of 
the  errors  of  the  press,  there  might  be  a  considerable  improvement 
made  of  the  work,  since,  after  the  course  of  so  many  years  from  its 
first  publication,  that  part  of  learning  had  much  increased ;  for 
which  reason  he  thought,  that  he  could  not  do  right  to  his  Grace, 
or  the  author,  or  the  design,  without  advising  with  others  of  greater 
ability  and  judgment  than  himself ;  by  whose  help,  and  especially 


*  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  121,  122. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cciii 


that  of  Dr.  Moor,  bishop  of  Norwich,  the  original  was  much  im- 
proved by  a  multitude  of  authors  of  celebrated  note  in  their  seve- 
ral ways. 

The  marriage  of  Lady  Russet's  second  daughter,  Catherine,  to 
John  Lord  Ross,  afterwards  Duke  of  Rutland,  on  the  17th  of  Au- 
gust, 1603,  gave  occasion  to  the  following  letter*  of  congratulation 
from  the  Archbishop  to  her  Ladyship. 

"madam,  ** Lambeth  House,  Aug.  26, 1693. 

<£  Though  nobody  rejoices  more  than  myself  in  the  happiness  of 
your  Ladyship  and  your  children,  yet  in  the  hurry,  in  which  you 
must  needs  have  been,  I  could  not  think  it  fit  to  give  you  the  dis- 
turbance so  much  as  of  a  letter,  which  otherwise  had  both  in  friend- 
ship and  good  manners  been  due  upon  this  great  occasion.  But 
now  that  busy  time  is  in  a  good  measure  over,  I  cannot  forbear, 
after  so  many,  as,  I  am  sure,  have  been  before  me,  to  congratulate 
with  your  Ladyship  this  happy  match  of  your  daughter ;  for  I  so 
heartily  pray  it  may  prove,  and  have  great  reason  to  believe  it  will, 
because  I  cannot  but  look  upon  it  as  part  of  the  comfort  and  re- 
ward of  your  patience  and  submission  to  the  will  of  God,  under 
the  sorest  and  most  heavy  affliction,  that  could  have  befallen  you ; 
and  when  God  sends  and  intends  a  blessing,  it  shall  have  no  sorrow 
or  evil  with  it, 

1 1  intreat  my  Lord  Ross  and  his  Lady  to  accept  of  my  humble 
service,  and  my  hearty  wishes  of  great  and  lasting  happiness. 

"  My  poor  wife  is  at  present  very  ill,  which  goes  very  near  me : 
and,  having  said  this,  I  know  we  shall  have  your  prayers.  I  intreat 
you  to  give  my  very  humble  service  to  my  Lord  of  Bedford,  my 
Lord  Russel,  and  to  my  Lord  Cavendish  and  his  Lady.  1  could 
upon  several  accounts  be  melancholy,  but  I  will  not  ^ipon  so  joyful 
an  occasion.  I  pray  God  to  preserve  and  bless  your  Ladyship 
and  all  the  good  family  at  Woburn,  and  to  make  us  all  concerned 
to  prepare  ourselves  with  the  greatest  care  for  a  better  life.  I  am 
with  all  true  respect  and  esteem,  Madam, 

"  Your  Ladyship's  most  faithful  and  most  humble  servant, 

"Jo.  Cant." 

His  Grace  wrote  likewise  to  her  Ladyship  another  letterf  in  Oc- 
tober following,  in  answer  to  one,  which  her  friendship  for  him 

*  From  a  copy  in  the  possession  of  a  late  Bishop  of  London,  t  Ibid, 

T  2 


cciv 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


and  concern  for  his  wife's  indisposition  had  drawn  from  her,  not- 
withstanding a  disorder  in  her  eyes,  which  had  long  troubled  her, 
and  threatened  a  total  failure  of  sight,  which  befel  her  in  the  latter 
years  of  her  life.  This  letter  of  his  shews,  that  his  own  integrity 
had  not  prevented  him  from  the  disagreeable  conviction  of  the 
great  want  of  sincerity  in  what  he  calls  "  the  upper  part  of  the 
world." 

"  Lambeth  House,  October  13,  1G93. 

"  I  have  forborn,  Madam,  hitherto,  even  to  acknowledge  the 
receipt  of  your  Ladyship's  letter,  and  your  kind  concernment  for 
mine  and  my  wife's  health,  because  I  saw  how  unmerciful  you  were 
to  your  eyes  in  your  last  letter  to  me,  so  that  I  should  certainly 
have  repented  the  provocation  I  gave  you  to  it  by  mine,  had  not 
so  great  and  good  an  occasion  made  it  necessary. 

f  I  had  intended  this  morning  to  have  sent  Mr.  Vernon  to  Wo- 
burn  to  have  inquired  of  your  Ladyship's  health,  having  but 
newly  heard,  that  since  your  return  from  Belvoir,  a  dangerous  fever 
had  seized  upon  you.  But  yesterday  morning  at  council  I  happily 
met  with  Mr.  Russel,  who  to  my  great  joy  told  me,  that  he  hoped 
that  danger  was  over ;  for  which  I  thank  God  with  all  my  heart, 
because  I  did  not  know  how  fatal  the  event  might  be  after  the  care 
and  hurry  you  had  been  in,  and  in  so  sickly  a  season. 

"  The  King's  return  is  now  only  hindered  by  contrary  winds ; 
I  pray  God  to  send  him  safe  to  us,  and  to  direct  him  what  to  do 
when  he  is  come.  I  was  never  so  much  at  my  wit's  end  concern- 
ing the  public.  God  can  only  bring  us  out  of  the  labyrinth  we  are 
in,  and  I  trust  he  will. 

•  '  My  wife  gives  her  most  humble  service  and  thanks  to  you  for 
your  concernment  for  her,  and  does  rejoice  equally  with  me  for 
the  good  news  of  your  recovery. 

"  Never  since  I  knew  the  world  had  I  so  much  reason  to  value 
my  friends.  In  the  condition  I  now  am,  I  can  have  no  new  ones, 
or,  if  I  could,  I  can  have  no  assurance  that  they  are  so.  I  could 
not  at  a  distance  believe,  that  the  upper  end  of  the  world  was  so 
hollow  as  I  find  it.  I  except  a  very  few,  of  whom  I  can  believe  no 
ill  till  I  plainly  see  it. 

'*  I  have  ever  earnestly  coveted  your  letters  ;  but  now  I  do  as 
earnestly  beg  of  you  to  spare  them  for  my  sake,  as  well  as  your 
own. 

"  With  my  very  humble  service  to  my  good  Lord  of  Bedford, 


LIFE   OF   THE    AUTHOR.  CCV 

and  to  all  year's,  and  my  hearty  prayers  to  God  for  you  all,  1  re- 
main, Madam, 

"  Your  Ladyship's  most  obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

"  Jo.  Cant." 

The  death  of  his  predecessor,  Archbishop  Sancroft,  on  the  24th 
of  November,  1693,  was  soon  followed  by  a  panegyric  upon  the 
deceased  Prelate,  intitled,  A  Letter  out  of  Suffolk  to  a  Friend  in 
London,*  intermixed  with  many  severe  reflections  upon  Arch- 
bishop Tillotson,  by  way  of  pretended  contrast  to  Sancroft.  It  is 
remarked  there,+  that  while  the  former  sat  in  the  chair,  there  was 
no  under-hand  trucking  with  Socinians,  or  others  out  of  the  com- 
munion of  the  church  of  England  ;  "  that  he  was  never  at  the  bot- 
tom of  any  project  to  give  up  the  Liturgy,  the  rights  and  ceremo- 
nies of  the  church  ;  for,  alas  !  quite  contrary  to  modern  policy,  he 
thought,  that  the  best  way  to  preserve  a  society  had  been  in  keep- 
ing stedfastly  to  all  the  terms  of  it.  .  .  .  He  had  not  that  latitude 
of  principle  to  sacrifice  the  church  out  of  secular  intrigues  and 
politics,  and  to  deliver  up  the  mounds  and  fences  of  it  to  a  party 
which  had  been  endeavouring  the  destruction  of  it  for  a  hundred 
years  and  more,  and  who  once  had  effectually  ruined  her.  When 
he  had  favour  at  court,  and  was  able  to  recommend  a  person  to 
the  highest  offices  in  the  church,  it  was  never  his  custom  to  lay 
aside,  or  postpone,  the  most  worthy  and  able  men,  and  firm  to  the 
constitution  of  the  church,  and  to  make  use  of  his  interest  to  ad- 
vance a  sort  of  men,  who  are  equally  principled  for  Geneva  as  for 
England,  or  for  any  constitution  besides  :  who  were  never  true  nor 
honest  to  the  church  in  their  inferior  charges,  and  who  are  far  bet- 
ter qualified  to  betray  than  to  support  her.  In  fine,  when  he  was 
possessed  of  the  revenues  belonging  to  his  church,  he  never  made 
it  his  business  to  destroy  and  plunder  it,  by  cutting  down  the  tim- 
ber upon  little  pretences,  and  then  putting  the  money  into  his  own 
pocket.  Upon  the  whole,  he  was  a  true  father ;  the  interests  of 
the  church  were  his  own  ;  and  he  spent  himself  in  preserving  her 
honour,  rites,  and  revenues :  whereas  it  hath  been  long  ago  ob- 
served, that  an  intruder  is  always  a  step-father,  who  spins  out  the 
bowels  of  the  church,  and  fattens  himself  with  her  blood ;  who 
having  no  legal  right  and  foundation,  is  for  compounding  with  re- 
ligion, and  bartering  the  securities  of  the  church  to  support  him- 


*  Printed  at  London  in  1694,  4to. 


t  P.  11. 


ccvi 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


self,  and  uphold  the  injustice  of  his  own  tenure.  And  this  ob- 
servation is  so  true,  that  it  hath  never  yet  failed  in  any  one  in- 
stance. He,  that  came  into  the  church  a  thief  and  a  robber,  hath 
always  continued  so  ;  and  from  the  beginning  of  the  church  to  this 
very  day,  there  hath  not  been  one  ecclesiastical  usurper ;  but  who, 
in  one  or  more  instances,  hath  pawned  something  of  religion  to  gain 
an  accession  to  his  party,  and  to  secure  and  strengthen  his  unrighte- 
ous possession."  The  writerof  this  Letter  afterwards  affirms,*  that 
the  deceased  Archbishop  had  left  behind  him  very  few,  who  in 
that  degenerate  age  were  likely  to  equal  his  virtues,  or  to  come  near 
them  by  many  degrees;  "and  none  less,"  says  he,  "than  him  who 
sits  in  his  chair,  and  some  others,  w  ho  fill  the  sees  of  our  deprived 
bishops."  And  he  adds,+  that  Archbishop  Sancroft  being  forced 
to  leave  Lambeth,  "  he  did  not  leave  his  virtues  behind  him  to  be 
possessed  by  the  next  comer,  (and  if  this  needs  to  be  proved,  we 
have  ocular  demonstration)  but  they  followed  his  person  in  all 
fortunes  and  places  ;  and  we  had  a  most  reverend  Archbishop  at 
Fresingfield,  when  there  was  none  at  Lambeth,  nor  nothing  like  it." 
Such  was  the  language  of  the  noujuring  party  concerning  the  two 
archbishops,  canonizing  the  one,  while  they  scrupled  no  topic  of 
invective  against  the  other,  though  with  so  little  ground  of  truth  or 
shadow  of  probability,  that  it  is  absolutely  unnecessary  to  make 
particular  remarks  upon  their  libels  against  him. 

In  the  few  moments  of  leisure,  which  his  elevated  station  left 
him,  he  revised  bis  sermons,  and  published  in  1693  four  of  them 
<c  concerning  the  divinity  and  incarnation  of  our  blessed  Saviour :" 
the  true  reason  of  which,  as  the  reader  is  informed  in  a  short  adver- 
tisement prefixed  to  them,  was  not  that,  which  is  commonly  al- 
leged for  printing  books,  the  importunity  of  friends,  but  the  im- 
portunate clamours  and  calumnies  of  others,  whom  he  heartily 
prayed  God  to  forgive,  and  to  give  them  better  minds. 

These  sermons  had  been  preached  in  1679  and  1680  at  his 
lecture  at  St.  Lawrence  Jewry,  and  the  publication  was  designed 
not  only  to  remove  the  imputation  raised  by  the  papists,  and 
adopted  by  a  party  opposite  to  him,  of  his  being  a  Sociuian,£ 
but  likewise  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  friend,  Mr.  Thomas  Firmin. 
This  public-spirited  and  charitable  man,  who  is  mentioned  by  the 
Archbishop  in  his  funeral  sermon  upon  Mr.  Gouge,  as  "  a  worthy 
and  useful  citizen,'*  was  a  native  of  Ipswich,  in  Suffolk,  where  he 


*  P.  20. 


i  P.  26. 


{  Burnet's  Reflections,  p.  105. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CCV11 


was  born  in  1632,  and,  having  served  an  apprenticeship  with  a 
master,  who  was  a  hearer  of  Mr.  John  Goodwin,  of  Coleman 
Street,  he  first  abandoned  the  principles  of  Calvin  for  those  of 
Arminius,  and  afterwards  adopted  those  of  the  Unitarians  from  his 
conversation  with  Mr.  John  Biddle,*  who  had  been  imprisoned  in 
December,  1645,  for  publishing  his  thoughts  upon  the  subject  of 
the  Trinity,  and  in  danger  of  suffering  death  for  them  in  1648, 
through  the  zeal  of  the  assembly  of  divines,  and  was  confined  se- 
veral years  in  the  island  of  Seilly.f    Mr.  Firmin's  zeal  for  his  in- 
structor was  so  great,  that  he  ventured,  while  he  was  only  an  ap- 
prentice, to  deliver  a  petition  for  his  release  out  of  Newgate  to 
Oliver  Cromwell,  who  gave  him  this  short  answer :  "  You  curl-pate 
boy  you,  do  you  think  I'll  shew  any  favour  to  a  man,  that  denies 
his  Saviour,  and  disturbs  the  government?"!  Mr.  Firmin  soon  be- 
came a  considerable  trader  in  London,  by  which  he  might  have 
acquired  a  very  large  fortune,  if  he  had  not  been  constantly  em- 
ployed in  all  conceivable  methods  of  serving  the  public,  which 
gained  him  an  universal  esteem,  and  particularly  with  the  most 
eminent  of  the  clergy,  though  his  peculiar  notions  were  well  known. 
And  his  charity  was  so  unconfined  and  impartial,  that  he  began  to 
exert  himself  in  collecting  money  for  the  deprived  nonjurors,  upon 
the  foot  of  a  scheme  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Kettlewell,  till  he  was  de- 
terred from  proceeding  in  it  by  some  of  his  great  friends,  who  told 
him,  that  this  scheme  was  illegal,  being  calculated  for  the  support 
of  the  enemies  of  the  government^    He  died  on  the  20th  of  De- 
cember, 1697,  in  the  66th  year  of  his  age,  being  attended  in  his  last 
illness  by  his  intimate  friend,  Dr.  Edward  Fowler,  who  had  been 
advanced  to  the  see  of  Gloucester,  in  July,  1691.j|    His  under- 
standing and  knowledge  were  very  remarkable,  but  he  was  entirely 
ignorant  of  the  learned  languages,  and  the  school  logic  and  philo- 
sophy.1T    His  hypothesis  with  respect  to  the  Trinity  was  that  of 
Arius,  though  he  was  commonly  styled  a  Socinian  ;  and  he  was  an 
industrious  propagator  of  the  books,  published  in  favour  of  his 
own  opinions  after  the  Revolution.** 

The  Archbishop  having  sent  him  one  of  the  first  copies  of  his 
Four  Sermons  from  the  press,  Mr.  Firmin,  not  being  convinced  by 

*  Life  of  Mr.  Thomas  Firmin,  p.  5 — 10. 

t  Wood.  Ath.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  304. 

t  Rennet's  Register  and  Chronicle,  p. 761. 

$  Life  of  Mr.  Kettlewell,  p.  420,  421.  ||  Life,  p.  82,  33. 

f  Ibid.  p.  15.  **  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  211,  212. 


ccviii 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


them,  caused  a  respectful  answer  to  be  drawn  up  and  published  in 
1694,  in  4to.  under  the  title  of  Considerations  on  the  Explications 
of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  ;  in  which  his  Grace  is  styled  "  the 
common  father  of  the  nation, "and  acknowledged  u  to  have  instruct- 
ed the  Socinians  themselves  with  the  air  and  language  of  a  father, 
not  of  an  adversary  or  judge     and  that  they  were  "  concerned  for 
their  own  reputation  to  reverence  his  person  and  admonitions,  be- 
cause it  is  agreed  among  all  good  men,  or  that  but  profess  to  be 
such,  that  he  is  respected  and  loved  by  all  but  those,  that  are  also 
known  to  hate  their  country  ;  and  hath  no  other  maligners,  but  the 
enemies  of  the  nation  itself.    A  copy  of  these  Considerations  was 
given  by  Mr.  Firmin  to  his  Grace,  who  having  read  them  over, 
only  said  to  him,  "  My  Lord  of  Sarum  shall  humble  your  writers." 
But  he  never  expressed  afterwards  the  least  coldness  to  that  gen- 
tleman on  account  of  that  answer,  to  which  he  had  before  declared 
upon  the  publication  of  his  Four  Sermons,  that  he  was  obliged  by 
the  calumnies  of  people  to  publish  them  ;  and  that  what  he  now 
printed  was  what  he  thought  at  the  time  of  preaching  them,  and 
continued  to  think ;  but  that  no  false  imputations  should  provoke 
him  to  give  ill  language  to  persons,  who  dissented  conscientiously 
and  for  weighty  reasons  ;  which  he  knew  well  to  be  the  case  of 
the  Socinians,  for  whose  learning  and  dexterity  he  should  always 
have  a  respect,  as  well  as  for  their  sincerity  and  exemplariness.* 
These  Considerations  did  not  long  continue  without  a  reply;  for 
Dr.  John  Williams,  afterwards  bishop  of  Chichester,  wrote  the 
same  year  a  Vindication  of  the  Archbishop's  Four  Sermons,  and  of 
the  bishop  of  Worcester's  Sermon  on  the  Mysteries  of  the  Christ- 
ian Faith.    The  imprimatur  to  it  is  dated  November  17, 1694,  the 
day  before  the  Archbishop  was  seized  with  his  last  illness  ;  but  it 
was  not  published  till  1695,  in  4to.  with  a  dedication  to  James 
Chadwick,  Esq.  his  Grace's  son  in  law  ;  in  which  Dr.  Williams  ob- 
serves, that  it  was  not  without  the  Archbishop's  direction  and  en- 
couragement, that  he  entered  upon  that  work ;  and  that  had  he 
lived  to  have  perused  the  whole,  as  he  did  a  part  of  it  a  few  days 
before  his  last  hours,  M  it  had  come  with  greater  advantage  into  the 
world,  as  having  passed  the  trial  of  that  exact  and  impartial  judg- 
ment, which  he  was  wont  to  exercise  in  matters  of  this  nature." 
To  this  piece  is  subjoined  a  letter  to  the  author  from  Dr.  Burnet, 

*  Life  of  Mr.  Thomas  Firmin,  late  citizen  of  London.    Written  by  one  of  liii 
most  intimate  Acquaintance,  p.  15—17.    Edit.  London,  1698. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


ccix 


bishop  of  Sarum,  dated  at  Westminster,  2d  of  Februar},  1694,  in 
which  he  speaks  with  great  contempt  and  severity  of  the  late 
pieces  published  in  England  in  defence  of  the  Unitarian  principles. 

But  how  little  soever  the  Archbishop  was  thought  by  the  Soci- 
niaus  themselves  a  friend  to  their  notions,  and  though  they  pub- 
lished a  confutation  of  his  Four  Sermons  against  them,  yet  these 
very  Sermons  were  urged  by  his  enemies  to  support  the  imputation 
of  Socinianism,  with  which  he  had  been  loaded.  For  in  1695  there 
was  published,  in  4to.  said  to  be  printed  at  Edinburgh,  a  piece  in- 
titled,  The  Charge  of  Socinianism  against  Dr.  Tillotson  considered 
in  Examination  of  some  Sermons  he  has  lately  published  on  purpose 
to  clear  himself  from  that  Imputation.  By  way  of  Dialogue  be- 
tween F.  a  Friend  of  Dr.  T's,  and  C.  a  catholic  Christian.  To 
which  is  added,  some  Reflections  upon  the  second  of  Dr.  Burnet's 
Four  Discourses,  concerning  the  Divinity  and  Death  of  Christ, 
printed  in  1694.  To  which  is  likewise  annexed,  a  Supplement  upon 
occasion  of  a  History  of  Religion  lately  published,  supposed  to  be 

wrote  by  Sir  R.  H  d.    Wherein  likewise  Charles  Blount's  great 

Diana  is  considered  ;  and  both  compared  with  Dr.  Tillotson's  Ser- 
mons. By  a  true  Son  of  the  Church.  The  whole  performance, 
which  the  writer  declares  in  his  preface  to  have  been  written  be- 
fore the  Archbishop's  death,  is  written  in  a  style  of  invective  and 
scurrility,  as  unsuitable  to  the  discussion  of  a  question  of  religion, 
as  the  character  of  the  person  against  whom  it  is  levelled.  It  as- 
serts,* that  his  Grace's  sermons  "  are  all  the  genuine  effects  of  Hob- 
bism,  which  loosens  the  notions  of  religion,  takes  from  it  all  that 
is  spiritual,  ridicules  whatever  is  called  supernatural;  it  reduces 
God  to  matter,  and  religion  to  nature.  In  this  school  Dr.  T.  has 
these  many  years  held  the  first  form,  and  nowr  diffuses  its  poison 
from  a  high  station  His  politics  are  Leviathan,  and  his  reli- 
gion is  latitudinarian,  which  is  none  ;  that  is,  nothing  that  is  posi- 
tive, but  against  every  thing  that  is  positive  in  other  religions  ; 
whereby  to  reduce  all  religions  to  an  uncertainty,  and  determina- 
ble only  by  the  civil  power.  ...  He  is  owned  by  the  atheistical  wits 
of  all  England  as  their  true  primate  and  apostle.  They  glory  and 
rejoice  in  him,  and  make  their  public  boasts  of  him.  He  leads 
them  not  only  the  length  of  Socinianism  (they  are  but  slender  beaux 
have  got  no  farther  than  that)  but  to  call  in  question  all  revelation, 
to  turn  Genesis,  &c.  into  a  mere  romance ;  to  ridicule  the  whole 


*  P.  13. 


ccx 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


as  Blount,  Gildon,  and  others  of  the  Doctor's  disciples  have  done 
in  print."  The  writer  proceeds  in  this  strain,  asserting,*  that  a 
thread  of  plain  and  downright  Hobbism  runs  through  all  the  Arch- 
bishop's works,  whose  principles  he  styles  diabolical,  and  that  he 
had  by  them  deeply  poisoned  the  nation.  Dr  Hickes  was  privy 
to  the  writing  of  this  piece,  for  he  recommendedf  it,  as  what  he 
hoped  would  see  the  light  before  the  publication  of  his  own  Dis- 
courses upon  Dr.  Burnet  and  Dr.  Tillotson. 

It  was  replied  to  in  A  Twofold  Vindication  of  the  late  Archbi- 
shop of  Canterbury,  and  of  the  Author  of  the  History  of  Religion, 
in  which  Dr.  Alexander  Monro,  an  eminent  nonjuring  divine,  for- 
merly principal  of  the  College  of  Edinburgh,  and  author  of  a  very 
good  volume  of  sermons,  printed  at  London,  in  1693,  and  of  a 
Letter  to  a  Gentleman  upon  occasion  of  some  new  Opinions  in 
Religion,  printed  in  1696,  in  4to.  being  considered  as  the  writer  of 
The  Charge  of  Socinianism  against  Dr.  Tillotson,  he  published  the 
same  year  1696,  A  Letter  to  the  Honourable  Sir  Robert  Howard, 
denying  his  having  had  any  concern  in  that  piece,  or  having  seen 
it  til!  after  it  was  printed  ;  to  which  purpose  he  had  published  an 
advertisement  in  January  that  year ;  and  he  affirms,}  that  the  real 
author  of  the  Charge  was  never  in  Scotland,  though  in  the  title 
page  it  is  pretended  to  have  been  printed  at  Edinburgh.  And  in- 
deed it  is  now  known  to  have  been  the  production  of  that  volumi- 
nous polemical  writer,  Mr.  Charles  Lesley,  a  man  of  some  learning 
and  wit,  but  accompanied  with  a  vein  of  scurrility,  that  must  ren- 
der his  writings  in  general  disgustful  to  the  present  age  and  poste- 
rity, however  applauded  in  his  own  time,  and  by  his  own  party. 
He  was  son  of  Dr.  John  Lesley,  bishop  of  Clogher,  and  in  1687 
was  made  chancellor  of  the  diocese  of  Connor,  in  Ireland,  the  year 
before  the  Revolution  ;  and  though  a  declared  enemy  to  it  afterwards, 
is  said  to  have  been  the  first,  who  began  the  war  in  Ireland  against 
James  II.  affirming  in  a  speech  solemnly  made,  that  he,  by  declar- 
ing himself  a  papist,  could  no  longer  be  king,  since  he  could  not 
be  the  defender  of  our  faith,  nor  the  head  of  our  church  ;  dignities 
so  inherent  in  the  crown,  that  he,  who  was  incapable  of  these  could 
not  hold  it :  and,  as  he  animated  the  people  with  this  speech,  so 
some  actions  followed  under  his  conduct,  in  which  several  men  were 
killed.H    He  died  in  Ireland,  in  March,  172|. 


*  P.  16. 


t  Some  Discourses,  p.  53,  54. 
||  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  538. 


t  P.  9. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


ccxi 


The  Archbishop's  concern  for  inculcating  the  principles  of  sted- 
fashiess  in  religion,  and  the  private  and  domestic  duties  of  it,  with 
the  advantages  of  early  piety,  and  a  right  education  of  children, 
engaged  his  Grace  to  publish  in  1694  six  sermons  upon  those  sub- 
jects, which  had  been  preached  by  him  in  the  church  of  St.  Law- 
rence Jewry.  In  the  preface  he  expresses  his  hope,  that  he  should 
for  the  remainder  of  his  life  be  released  from  "  that  irksome  and 
unpleasant  work  of  controversy  and  wrangling  about  religion,'' and 
his  resolution  of  turning  his  thoughts  to  something  more  agreeable 
to  his  temper,  and  of  a  more  direct  and  immediate  tendency  to  the 
promoting  of  true  religion,  to  the  happiness  of  human  society,  and 
the  reformation  of  the  world  ;  being  sensible  how  fast  the  inhrmi- 
ties  of  age  were  coming  upon  him.  "  I  know  very  well,''  adds  he, 
with  his  usual  modesty,  "  before  I  entered  upon  this  great  and 
weighty  charge,  my  own  manifold  defects,  and  how  unequal  my  best 
abilities  were  for  the  due  discharge  of  it ;  but  I  did  not  feel  t  his  so 
sensibly,  as  I  now  do  every  day  more  and  more.  And  therefore, 
that  I  might  make  some  small  amends  for  my  great  failings,  I  knew 
not  how  better  to  place  the  broken  hours  I  had  to  spare  from  al- 
most perpetual  business  of  one  kind  or  other,  than  in  the  pre- 
paring something  for  the  public  that  might  be  of  use  to  recover  the 
decayed  piety  and  virtue  of  the  present  age,  in  which  iniquity  doth 
so  much  abound,  and  the  love  of  God  and  religion  is  grown  so 
cold." 

The  last  sermon  which  his  Grace  preached  before  their  Majes- 
ties, was  on  the  25th  of  February,  J68f ,  at  Whitehall,  on  Titus  iii. 
2.  Against  Evil  Speaking,  which  was  not  published  till  the  year 
after  his  death,  together  with  that  On  a  heavenly  Conversation. 

The  death  of  Dr.  John  Conant,  rector  of  Exeter  College,  in  Ox- 
ford, prebendary  of  Worcester,  archdeacon  of  Norwich,  and  au- 
thor of  several  volumes  published  by  Bishop  Williams,  gave  the 
Archbishop,  in  1694,  an  opportunity  of  shewing  his  regard  for  that 
judicious  divine,  Mr.  John  Jeffery,  soon  after  doctor  of  divinity,  by 
presenting  him  to  that  archdeaconry,  which  was  his  Grace's  option 
on  Bishop  More's  promotion  to  that  see,  and  had  been  given  to  Dr. 
Conant,  in  June,  1076,  by  Bishop  Reynolds,  whose  daughter  the 
Doctor  had  married.  Mr.  Jeffery  was  born  at  Ipswich,  December 
20,  1647,  and  educated  at  Catherine  Hall,  in  Cambridge,  under  Dr. 
John  Echard,  the  celebrated  author  of  The  Grounds  and  Reasons 
of  the  Contempt  oithe  Clergy,  and  the  Dialogues  between  Philau- 
tus  and  Timothy,  the  pleasantry  of  which,  levelled  against  Mr. 


Gcxii 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


Hobbe's  opinions,  so  much  disconcerted  the  gravity  of  that  severe 
philosopher.  From  the  curacy  of  Dennington,  in  Suffolk,  which 
he  had  served  for  some  years,  he  was  chosen,  in  1678,  minister  of 
St.  Peter's,  of  Mancroft,  in  Norwich.  Here  he  contracted  a  friend- 
ship with  Sir  Edward  Atkyns,*  lord  chief  baron  of  the  Exchequer, 
who  then  spent  the  long  vacations  in  that  city.  By  this  gentleman 
he  was  carried  to  London,  and  introduced  there  to  the  acquaint- 
ance of  several  eminent  men,  and  particularly  the  Archbishop,  then 
preacher  at  Lincoln's  Inn,  who  often  engaged  Mr.  JefFery  to  preach 
for  him  there,  and  was  probably  the  means  of  making  him  known 
to  Dr.  Whichcot,  three  volumes  of  whose  sermons  were  afterwards 
published  by  Mr.  JefFery.  And  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  if  his 
Grace  had  lived  much  longer,  he  would  have  raised  the  Archdeacon 
to  a  more  conspicuous  station  in  the  church  ;t  whose  learning, 
piety,  and  thorough  knowledge  of  the  true  principles  of  Christ- 
ianity would  have  adorned  the  highest,  and  are  a  sufficient  recom- 
mendation of  his  writings,  collected  and  republished  in  a  manner 
that  does  justice  to  his  memory  and  the  public. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  same  year,  1694,  Mr.  John  Strype,  who 
had  before  distinguished  himself  as  the  editor  of  the  second  volume 
of  Dr.  John  Lightfoot's  Works,  having  now  finished  the  impression 
of  the  Life  of  Archbishop  Cranmer,  in  folio,  addressed  it  to  the 
Archbishop  in  a  modest  dedication,  in  which  he  takes  notice,  that 
his  Grace's  "  deserts  towards  this  church  and  the  Reformation,  had 
raised  him  to  sit  in  Archbishop's  Cranmer's  chair,  though  with  as 
much  reluctancy,"  says  he,  "  in  you,  as  was  in  him."  And  in  his 
preface,  dated  at  Low-Layton,  September  29,  1693,he  mentions  his 
obligations  to  his  Grace,  as  well  as  to  his  predecessor,  for  the  use 
of  the  manuscripts  in  the  library  at  Lambeth.  This  honest  and  in- 
dustrious writer  was  descended  of  a  German  family,  but  born  at 
London,  and  educated  at  Catherine  Hall,  in  Cambridge,  where  he 
took  the  degree  of  master  of  arts,  in  which  he  was  incorporated  at 
Oxford,  July  11,  1671.    He  was  at  first  rector  of  Theydon-Boys, 

*  Sir  Edward  Atkyns  had  been  long  a  most  intimate  friend  of  the  Archbishop,  as 
appears  from  a  passage  in  the  Life  of  Mr.  Isaac  Milles,  rector  of  Highcleer,  in  Hamp- 
shire, published  in  1721,  in  8vo.  by  his  son,  Dr.  Thomas  Milles,  bishop  of  Water- 
ford,  in  Ireland,  who  mentions,  p.  S3,  that  Mr.  Milles  being  introduced  by  Sir  Ed- 
ward to  Mr.  Tillotson,  at  Barley,  in  Hertfordshire,  discerned  in  him,  during  the  little 
conversation  which  he  then  had  with  him,  such  an  openness  and  clearness,  such  a  ci- 
vility and  obligingness  of  deportment,  as  he  never  found  in  any  other  man. 

t  Memoirs  of  the  Life  of  Dr.  Jeffery,  prefixed  to  A  complete  Collection  of  his  Ser- 
mons and  Tracts,  in  two  volumes,  London,  1751,  in  8vo. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


CCX1U 


in  Essex,  which  he  was  presented  to  in  July,  1G69,  and  resigned  in 
February  following,  for  the  vicarage  of  Low-Layton,  in  the  same 
county.  Besides  which,  he  had  a  considerable  sinecure  given  him 
by  Archbishop  Tennison,  and  was  lecturer  of  Hackney,  near  Lon- 
don, where  he  died  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Harris,  an  apothecary,  who 
married  his  grand-daughter,  on  the  13th  of  December,  1737,  at  an 
uncommon  age,  having  enjoyed  his  vicarage  near  sixty-eight  years. 
He  kept  an  exact  diary  of  his  own  life,  which  was  shewn  me  not 
long  before  his  death  by  Mr.  Harris  ;  and  seemed  to  contain  many 
curious  circumstances  relating  to  the  literary  history  of  his  times, 
as  he  was  engaged  in  a  frequent  correspondence,  especially  by  let- 
ters, with  Archbishop  Wake,  and  the  Bishops  Burnet,  Nicholson, 
and  Atterbury,  and  other  eminent  persons.  His  fidelity  and  indus- 
try will  always  give  a  value  to  his  numerous  writings,  however  des- 
titute of  the  graces  and  even  uniformity  of  style,  and  the  art  of  con- 
necting facts. 

The  Archbishop's  correspondence  with  Lady  Russel  had  been 
interrupted  on  her  part  for  many  months,  by  the  disorder  in  her 
eyes  increasing  to  such  a  degree,  that  she  was  obliged,  on  the  27th 
of  June,  1694,  to  submit  to  the  operation  of  couching.  Upon  this 
occasion  his  Grace  drew  up  a  prayer  two  days  after,  in  which*  he 
touched  upon  the  death  of  her  husband,  "whom  thy  holy  and  right- 
eous providence/'  says  he,  u  permitted,  under  a  colour  of  law  and 
justice,  to  be  unjustly  cut  off  from  the  land  of  the  living but  over 
these  latter  words,  after  the  first  writing,  he  drew  a  line,  as  intend- 
ing to  erase  them,  probably  from  a  reflection,  that  they  might  be 
too  strong,  or  less  suitable  to  a  prayer. 

The  day  before  the  composing  of  this  prayer,  he  wrote  a  letter 
to  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  upon  the  following  occasion.  Upon  the 
nomination  of  the  Bishop  to  that  see,  a  few  days  after  their  Majes- 
ties' advancement  to  the  throne,  he  met  with  some  difficulties  with 
respect  to  his  consecration.  For  when  his  election  was  returned 
and  confirmed,  the  precept  for  his  consecration  went  in  course  to 
Archbishop  Sancroft,  who  declared  that  he  would  not  obey  it.  Some 
of  the  bishops  tried  to  persuade  him,  but  in  vain.  The  Earl  of  Not- 
tingham likewise  tried,  but  succeeded  no  better.  The  party,  who 
were  enemies  to  the  Revolution,  had  got  it  among  them,  that  he  had 
promised  them  not  to  do  it.  But  as  the  time  came  on,  and  he  saw 
that  he  must  be  sued  in  a  prcemunire,  he  of  a  sudden  ordered  two 
commissions  to  be  drawn  ;  both  of  which  he  signed  and  sealed,  one 

*  Entered  in  short  hand  in  his  common-place  book. 


CCxiv  LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

directed  to  the  Archbishop  of  York,  and  all  the  bishops  of  Eng- 
land ;  the  other  to  all  the  bishops  of  the  province,  to  execute  his 
metropolitical  authority  during  pleasure.  The  latter  was  made  use 
of,  and  in  pursuance  of  it  Dr.  Burnet  was  consecrated  on  the  31st 
of  May,  1689 ;  so  that  this  was  as  much  Archbishop  Sancroft's 
own  act,  as  if  he  himself  had  consecrated  the  new  bishop,  and  he 
authorized  others  to  do  what  he  seemed  himself  to  think  unlawful. 
His  vicar-general  produced  this  commission,  and  was  present  at  the 
consecration,  and  all  the  fees  were  paid  to  his  officers.  But  the 
nonjuriug  party  complaining  of  this,  in  order  to  give  them  some  sa- 
tisfaction, the  Archbishop  sent  by  Mr.  Henry  Wharton  a  message 
(unless  the  latter  went  in  his  name  without  order)  to  Mr.  Tillot, 
the  register,  to  send  him  that  commission ;  which  being  accord- 
ingly sent,  it  was  withdrawn.  This  violation  of  a  public  register 
deprived  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  of  an  instrument  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  him,  since  the  canonicalness  of  his  consecration,  and 
his  legal  right  to  his  bishopric,  depended  upon  it.  Thus  it  conti- 
nued till  many  months  after  the  deprived  Archbishop's  death,  when 
notice  was  given  the  Bishop  of  it  by  one,  who  had  occasion  to 
know  it;  and  upon  inquiry  his  Lordship  found  it  true,  and  accord- 
ingly took  advice  upon  it ;  and  what  the  Archbishop's  was  is  evi- 
dent from  the  following  letter  to  the  Bishop:* 

"  my  lord,  "  Lambeth  House,  June  28,  1G94. 

"  Supposing  your  Lordship  by  this  time  to  be  returned  from 
your  visitation,  this,  I  hope,  will  find  you  at  Salisbury. 

"  I  have  heard  no  return  from  Suffolk  concerning  the  commis- 
sion that  was  withdrawn.  Dr.  Oxenden  tells  me,  the  proper  me- 
thod to  discover  the  truth  of  this  matter  will  be,  by  bill  in  Chan- 
cery, to  bring  Mr,  William  Sancroft,  the  late  Archbishop's  nephew, 
and  Mr.  Wharton,  and  Mr.  Tillot,  upon  their  oaths  to  discover 
their  knowledge  ;  and  if  the  commission  cannot  be  found,  then  to 
have  the  consecration  sufficiently  attested  and  registered.  To  ease 
the  charge,  1  think  it  fit  that  your  Lordship  take  in  the  Bishop  of 
Exeter,t  whose  translation  is  equally  concerned. 

u  I  have  read  a  great  part  of  Will.  Wot  ton's  book,  which  I  think 
to  be  very  extraordinary  both  for  the  learning  and  judgment  he 
hath  shewn  in  it,  and  for  the  manly  and  decent  style  and  manner 

*  Commnnicaled  by  the  Honourable  Mr.  Justice  Burnet. 

t  Sir  Jonathan  Tielawnv,  who  was  translated  from  the  bishopric  of  Bristol  to  that 
of  Hxeter,  April  12th,  1689. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CCXV 


of  writing,  hardly  to  be  paralleled  by  any  thing  that  hath  been  pro- 
duced in  this  age  by  one  of  his  years.  This,  I  believe,  will  not  be 
unwelcome  to  your  Lordship,  who  had  so  great  a  hand  in  forming 
this  great  young  man. 

u  Mr.  Geddes'  book  finds  a  general  acceptance  and  approba- 
tion. I  doubt  not  but  he  hath  more  of  the  same  kind,  with  which 
I  hope  he  will  favour  the  world  in  due  time. 

H  I  pray  God  to  give  you  health,  and  to  preserve  you  long  for 
the  use  and  benefit  of  his  church,  and  for  the  comfort  of,  my  Lord, 
"  Your  affectionate  friend  and  brother, 

"  Jo.  Cant. 

<c  I  leave  all  matters  of  news  to  a  friend  of  your's,  that  hath  bet- 
ter intelligence ;  only  I  cannot  forbear  to  tell  you,  that  my  Lady 
Itussel's  eye  was  couched  yesterday  morning  with  very  good  suc- 
cess.   God  be  praised  for  it." 

His  Grace's  opinion  in  this  letter  for  bringing  into  Chancery  the 
affair  of  the  commission,  which  had  been  withdrawn,  was  followed 
by  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  who  resolved  upon  having  all  persons 
concerned  in  it  examined  upon  oath,  and  proviug  the  tenor  of  the 
commission.  His  Lordship  giving  notice  of  his  resolution  to  Mr. 
Tillot,  the  register,  and  telling  him,  that  if  he  did  not  recover  the 
commission  between  that  time  and  Michaelmas  term,  he  would 
sue  him  in  Chancery,  the  consequence  was,  that  the  commission 
was  brought  back.* 

Mr.  Wotton's  book,  mentioned  in  the  Archbishop's  letter,  was 
the  first  edition  of  his  Reflections  upon  ancient  and  modern  Learn- 
ing, published  in  1694,  in  8vo.  and  dedicated  to  the  Earl  of  Not- 
tingham, whose  chaplain  he  was.  He  had  been  frnious  from  his 
childhood  for  a  knowledge  of  the  languages,  which  few  men  ever 
attained  to,  being  capable  at  five  years  of  age  of  reading  the  Latin, 
Greek,  and  Hebrew;  and  being  sent  to  Catherine  Hall,  in  Cam- 
bridge, in  the  beginning  of  April,  1676,  some  months  before  he 
was  ten  years  old,  took  the  degree  of  bachelor  of  arts  in  1679,  at 
twelve.  The  winter  following  he  was  invited  to  London  by  Dr. 
Burnet,  then  preacher  at  the  Rolls,  with  whom  he  continued  for 
some  time,  and  was  introduced  by  him  to  most  of  the  learned  men 
there.  Not  long  after  this  he  was  chosen  fellow  of  St.  John's  Col- 
lege, in  Cambridge,  and  in  1683  commenced  master  of  arts,  as  he 

*  Bishop  Burnet's  Reflections  upon  a  Pamphlet,  intitled,  Some  Discourses,  p.  22, 
23,  24  j  anil  Historv  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  ii.  p.  8. 


CXXV1 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


did  bachelor  of  divinity  in  1693.  He  was  presented,  in  1691,  by 
Dr.  Lloyd,  bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  to  the  sinecure  of  Llandrillo,  in 
Denbighshire,  vacant  by  the  death  of  Dr.  Henry  Maurice  ;  and,  in 
1693,  to  the  rectory  of  Middleton  Keynes,  in  Buckinghamshire,  by 
his  patron,  the  Earl  of  Nottinghamshire.  He  was  presented,  like- 
wise, in  1705,  to  a  prebend  of  Salisbury,  by  the  Bishop,  to  whom 
he  had  dedicated  his  History  of  Rome,  published  in  1701,  and  by 
whose  direction  it  had  been  written,  and  intended  for  his  Lordship's 
royal  pupil,  the  Duke  of  Gloucester.  In  1707,  he  was  honoured 
with  the  degree  of  doctor  of  divinity,  by  Archbishop  Tennison,  a 
title  which  he  had  merited  by  the  many  learned  writings  published 
by  him.  He  died  at  Buxted,  in  Sussex,  on  the  13th  of  February, 
1726,  at  the  age  of  sixty-one,  at  the  house  of  his  son-in-law,  Mr. 
William  Clarke,  canon  residentiary  of  Chichester. 

Mr.  Geddes'  first  volume  of  Miscellaneous  Tracts,  which,  as 
his  Grace  observes,  met  with  a  "  general  acceptance  and  approba- 
tion," deserved  it,  as  well  as  the  subsequent  volumes,  on  account 
of  the  many  valuable  pieces  which  they  contain,  and  which  his 
long  residence  abroad  enabled  him  to  give  the  public.  He  was 
born  in  Scotland,  and  educated  in  the  university  of  Edinburgh, 
where  he  took  the  degree  of  master  of  arts,  in  which  he  was  incor- 
porated at  Oxford,  on  the  11th  of  July,  1671.*  He  went  to  Lisbon, 
in  1678,  as  chaplain  to  the  English  factory;  the  exercise  of  which 
function  giving  offence  to  the  Inquisition,  he  was  sent  for  by 
that  court  in  1686,  and  forbid  to  continue  it.  The  merchants  re- 
senting this  violation  of  their  privilege,  wrote  immediately  on  the 
7th  of  September,  that  year,  to  the  Bishop  of  London,  represent- 
ing the  case,  and  their  own  right  to  a  chaplain ;  b-ut  before  their 
letter  reached  his  Lordship,  he  was  suspended  by  the  ecclesiastical 
commission.  They  were  deprived  therefore  of  all  exercise  of  their 
religion  till  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Scarborough,  the  English  envoy,  un- 
der whose  character  as  a  public  minister  they  were  obliged  to  shel- 
ter themselves.  Mr.  Geddes,  finding  things  in  this  situation,  thought 
proper  to  return  to  England  in  May,  1688,  where  he  took  the  de- 
gree of  doctor  of  laws  ;  and,  after  the  promotion  of  Dr.  Burnet  to 
the  bishopric  of  Salisbury,  was  made  by  him  chancellor  of  his 
church. 

The  good  of  the  church,  and  the  reformation  of  all  abuses  among 
the  clergy,  were  the  constant  objects  of  the  Archbishop's  thoughts ; 
and,  among  other  resolutions  and  projects  for  those  purposes, 

*  Wood.  Fasti  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  187. 


LIFE  OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


CCXVU 


which  he  intimated  to  Mr.  Wharton  in  a  private  conference  with 
him  on  the  12th  of  July,  1G92,  one  was,  for  obliging  the  clergy  to 
a  more  strict  observance  of  residence  on  their  cures.*  He  called 
likewise,  not  many  months  before  his  death,  an  assembly  of  the  bi- 
shops at  his  palace,  at  Lambeth,  where  they  agreed  upon  several 
important  regulations  ;  which  were  at  first  designed  to  be  enforced 
by  their  own  authority  ;  but,  upon  a  more  mature  consideration 
afterwards,  he  thought  it  better  that  they  should  appear  under  that 
of  their  Majesties,  in  the  form  of  royal  injunctions.  He  wrote 
therefore  the  following  letter  to  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  :f 

"  my  lord,  "  Lambeth  House,  Aug.  SI,  1094. 

"  Having  now  an  occasion  of  writing,  I  shall,  notwithstanding 
the  protestation  in  your  last  letter,  say  something  in  answer  to  it. 

"  My  Lord  Marquis  of  Normanby  having  made  Mr.  Wasely  his 
chaplain,  gent  Col.  Fitz-gerald  to  propose  him  for  a  bishopric  in 
Ireland,  wherewith  I  acquainted  her  Majesty,  who,  according  to 
her  true  judgment,  did  by  no  means  think  it  fit.  Their  Majesties 
have  made  Dr.  Foley  |  bishop  of  Down,  and  Dean  Pulleyn§  bishop 
of  Cloyne. 

"  I  have  had  many  thoughts  about  the  result  of  the  meeting  at 
Lambeth,  and  for  many  reasons  think  it  not  safe,  by  our  own  autho- 
rity or  agreement  amoug  ourselves,  to  endeavour  a  redress  of  abuses 
in  the  particulars  proposed  ;  nor  can  I  think  it  w  ill  be  effectual  to 
its  end.  And  therefore  I  have  pitched  upon  the  other  way  your 
Lordship  suggested  to  me,  by  a  letter  from  their  Majesties,  re- 
quiring me  and  the  Archbishop  of  York  to  communicate  their  Ma- 
jesties' pleasure  to  our  suffragan  bishops  by  way  of  injunctions 
from  their  Majesties.  To  this  end  I  have  taken  for  my  ground  the 
paper  your  Lordship  left  with  me,  making  as  well  as  I  could  some 
small  alterations  and  needful  additions,  of  which  I  have  sent  you  a 
copy,  as  also  a  brief  and  rude  draught  of  the  injunctions  ;  together 
with  a  copy  of  some  orders,  designed  by  my  predecessor,  concern- 

•  MS.  collections  of  Mr.  Wharton,  in  the  library  at  Lambeth, 
t  Communicated  by  the  Honourable  Mr.  Justice  Burnet. 

X  Dr.  Samuel  Foley,  born  at  Clonmel,  in  Tipperary,  25th  November,  1655,  fellow 
of  Trinity  College,  in  Dublin,  in  1677,  D.D.  in  1691,  and  consecrated  bishop  of 
Down,  in  September,  1694,  in  the  room  of  Dr.  Thomas  Hacket,  deprived.  He  died 
May  22,  1695. 

§  Dr.  Tobias  Pulleyn,  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  dean  of  Femes,  was  consecrated 
bishop  of  Cloyne,  November  12,  1694,  and  translated  to  Dromore,  in  May.  1695  , 
He  died  in  1713. 

VOL.    I,  U 


ccxviii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


ing  ordinations,  and  some"  observations  of  Bishop  Fell  thereupon, 
that  your  Lordship  may  mark  what  you  think  most  material  to  be 
taken  out  of  them.  And  if  your  Lordship  approve  of  the  method 
proposed,  I  intreat  you  to  give  me  your  free  thoughts  upon  every 
article  in  the  injunctions,  and  what  you  would  have  added  or  al- 
tered either  in  them  or  their  Majesties'  letter. 

c<  Your  Lordship  by  Bishop  Fell's  observations  will  perceive, 
that  he  doubted  whether  it  might  be  safe  to  meet  and  consult  about 
such  matters,  and  by  our  own  authority  to  make  any  orders  or 
agreement  besides  the  law  in  any  tittle,  though  never  so  fit.  But 
I  had  also  another  reason,  which  moved  me  herein,  that  their  Ma- 
jesties' concernment  for  religion  and  the  church  might  appear  to 
the  nation. 

"  I  do  not  use  to  write  so  long  a  letter,  and  therefore  hope  to  be 
the  easilier  pardoned.  My  humble  service  to  your  good  Lady,  and 
to  ray  worthy  friend,  Mr.  Secretary.  I  feel  his  absence,  being  al- 
most ready  to  be  starved  to  death  for  want  of  news.  My  two  boys,* 
I  thank  God,  are  got  safe  and  very  easily  over  the  small-pox.  I 
have  been  six  weeks  in  the  country  for  my  wife's  health,  and  am 
but  newly  returned.  I  pray  God  to  have  you  in  his  protection, 
and  send  us  a  happy  meeting.  I  am,  with  great  affection  and  re-  - 
spect,  "  My  Lord, 

"  Your  Lordship's  very  faithful  friend  and  brother, 

"  Jo.  Cant." 

He  wrote  another  letter  to  the  same  purpose,  a  few  days  after, 
to  Dr.  Stillingfleet,  bishop  of  Worcester,!  in  which  he  inclosed  a 
draught  of  their  Majesties'  letter,  and  of  the  injunctions  designed, 
intreating  the  Bishop  to  give  him  his  free  thoughts  upon  them,  and 
to  suggest  that  he  would  have  either  altered  or  added  in  either  of 
them.  He  observed  likewise  in  this,  as  well  as  the  preceding  let- 
ter, that  one  of  his  views  in  the  method  now  proposed  by  him  was, 
that  their  Majesties'  care  and  concernment  for  our  religion  might 
more  manifestly  appear  to  the  general  satisfaction  of  the  nation ; 
adding,  that  he  had  acquainted  the  Queen  with  the  scheme,  and 
shewn  her  the  draught  of  the  letter,  which,  she  was  pleased  to  say, 
she  thought  would  do  very  well. 

*  Kis  grandsons. 

t  Communicated  to  me  by  the  Right  Reverend  Isaac,  lord  bishop  of  Worcester, 
from  the  collection  of  Bishop  Stillingfleet's  papers,  in  the  possession  of  his  grandson, 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Edward  Stillingaeel,  rector  of  Hartlebury,  in  Worcestershire,  and  ca* 

non  of  Worcester, 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


ccxix 


A  few  days  after,  his  Grace  wrote  another  letter  upon  this  affair 
to  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  :  * 

"  MY  lord,  "Lambeth  House,  Sept.  10,  1694. 

<c  The  letter,  which  I  lately  received  from  your  Lordship,  I  have 
imparted  Jo  her  Majesty,  who  is  as  desirous  as  yourself  can  be  to 
have  this  matter  dispatched,  but  cannot  think  it  fit  to  put  forth 
any  thing  of  this  nature  without  first  advising  with  the  King,  and 
having  his  consent  and  concurrence  thereto,  especially  at  this  time, 
when  his  return  hither  within  a  little  while  may  so  probably  be  ex- 
pected. Hereupon  I  moved  it  might  be  sent  to  him  by  the  first 
opportunity;  but  her  Majesty  thougiit,  that  he  would  put  it  off  to 
his  coming;  or,  if  he  should  immediately  send  over  his  consent, 
yet  his  coming  being  probably  so  near,  it  might  be  liable  to  some 
odd  construction,  as  if  the  King  did  not  much  care  to  appear  in  if, 
and  therefore  it  was  purposely  contrived  to  be  done  in  his  absence. 
Your  Lordship  sees  how  her  Majesty's  great  wisdom  looks  on  every 
side  of  a  thing;  and  therefore  upon  the  whole  matter  the  business 
must  rest  till  the  King's  return  :  and  1  see  no  great  inconvenience 
in  it,  since,  according  to  the  method  now  pitched  upon,  the  reason 
of  delaying  to  the  King's  coming  will  be  visible  to  every  body. 

"  The  alteration  of  the  clause  of  encouragement  to  the  clergy  is, 
I  think,  much  for  the  better,  and,  which  is  more,  so  doth  the  Queen, 
who  also  approves  of  the  article  concerning  family-devotion. 

"  I  intreat  you  to  give  my  humble  service  to  your  good  Lady, 
and  to  Mr.  Secretary,  and  to  believe,  that  I  am,  my  Lord, 

"  Your  Lordship's  faithful  friend  and  most  affectionate  brother, 

"  Jo.  Cant." 

The  execution  of  this  important  business  of  the  royal  injunctions 
being  delayed  till  the  King's  return  on  the  9th  of  November,  a  to- 
tal stop  was  put  to  them  by  the  death  of  the  Archbishop  not  many 
daysafter,  and  that  of  the  Queen  the  month  following,  w  hose  en- 
deavours were  united  with  his  upon  all  such  occasions  ;  her  Majes- 
ty, to  whom  the  King  wholly  left  the  matters  of  the  church,  con- 
sulting chiefly  with  his  Grace,  whom  she  favoured  and  supported 
in  a  most  particular  manner.  And  she  saw  what  need  there  was  of 
it,  for  a  party  was  soon  formed  against  him,  who  set  themselves  to 
censure  every  thing  which  he  did.  And  it  was  a  melancholy  con- 
sideration, that  though  no  Archbishop  before  him  had  ever  applied 
*  Communicated  by  the  Honourable  Mr.  Justice  Buruet. 

u  2 


cexx 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


himself  so  entirely,  without  partiality  or  bias,  to  all  the  concerns  of 
the  church  and  religion,  and  the  Queen's  heart  was  set  on  promoting 
them,  yet  such  an  evil  spirit  should  seem  to  be  let  loose  upon  the 
clergy.  They  complained  of  every  thing  that  was  done,  if  it  was 
not  in  their  own  way;  and  the  Archbishop  bore  the  blame  of  all. 
And  as  he  did  not  enter  into  any  close  correspondence,  or  the  con- 
certing measures  with  the  ministry,  but  lived  much  abstracted  from 
them ;  they  likewise  endeavoured  to  depress  him  all  they  could. 
This  made  a  considerable  impression  upon  him,  and  he  grew  very 
uneasy  in  his  great  post.* 

The  malice  and  party-rage,  which  he  had  felt  the  effects  of  be- 
fore he  was  raised  to  the  archbishopric,  broke  out  with  full  force 
upon  his  advancement,  in  all  the  forms  of  insult.  One  instance  of 
which,  not  commonly  known,  deserves  to  be  mentioned  here.  Soon 
after  his  promotion,  while  a  gentleman  was  with  him,  who  came  to 
pay  his  compliments  upon  it,  a  packet  was  brought  in  sealed  and 
directed  to  his  Grace.  Upon  opening  of  which  there  appeared  a 
mask  inclosed,  but  nothing  written.  The  Archbishop  without  any 
signs  of  emotion  threw  it  carelessly  among  his  papers  on  the  table; 
and,  on  the  gentleman's  expressing  great  surprise  and  indignation 
at  the  affront,  his  Grace  only  smiled,  and  said,  that  this  was  a  gentle 
rebuke,  if  compared  with  some  others,  that  lay  there  in  black  and 
white — pointing  to  the  papers  on  the  tablet 

Nor  could  the  series  of  ill  treatment  which  he  received,  ever  pro. 
voke  him  to  a  temper  of  revenge ;  being  far  from  indulging  himself 
in  any  of  those  liberties  in  speaking  of  others,  which  were  to  so  im- 
measureable  a  degree  made  use  of  against  himself.^  And  upon  a 
bundle  of  libels  found  among  his  papers  after  his  death,  he  put  no 
other  inscription  than  this,  "  These  are  libels.  I  pray  God  forgive 
them;  I  do."§  The  calumnies  spread  against  him,  though  the  falsest 
which  malice  could  invent,  and  the  confidence  with  which  they 
were  averred,  joined  with  the  envy  that  accompanies  a  high  station, 
had  indeed  a  greater  operation,  than  could  have  bejen  imagined, 
considering  how  long  he  had  lived  on  so  public  a  scene,  and  how 

*  Burnet's  History  of  his  Own  Time,  vol.  ii.  p.  117,  118. 

t  Letter  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Archdeacon  Sharp,  of  November  7,  1751,  who  was  in- 
formed of  thisfactby  Dr.  Green,  vicar  of  St.  Martin's,  and  afterwards  bishop  of  Ely. 
X  Burnet's  Reflections,  p.  89,  90. 

§  Dean  Sherlock's  sermon  at  the  Temple,  December  30,  1694  .  This  sermon  was 
immediately  attacked  by  Mr.  Jeremy  Collier,  in  a  pamphlet,  in  4to.  intitled,  Remarks 
on  some  Sermons,  in  which  he  treats  the  character  and  memory  of  the  Archbishop 
with  great  bitterness  and  indecency. 


LIFE   OF   THE  ALTHOli. 


CCX\l 


well  he  was  known.  It  seemed  a  new  and  unusual  thing,  that  a  man 
who,  in  the  course  of  above  thirty  years,  had  done  so  much  good, 
and  so  many  services  to  so  many  persons,  without  ever  once  doing 
an  ill  office,  or  a  hard  thing  to  any  one,  and  who  had  a  sweetness 
and  gentleness  in  him,  that  seemed  rather  to  lean  to  an  excess, 
should  yet  meet  with  so  much  unkindness  and  injustice.  But  he 
bore  all  this  with  a  submission  to  the  will  of  God  ;  nor  had  it  any 
effect  on  him,  to  change  either  his  temper  or  maxims,  though  per- 
haps it  might  sink  too  much  into  him  with  relation  to  his  health. 
He  was  so  exactly  true  in  all  the  representations  of  things  or  per- 
sons, which  he  laid  before  their  Majesties,  that  he  neither  raised  the 
character  of  his  friends,  nor  sunk  that  of  those,  who  deserved  not 
so  well  of  him,  but  offered  every  thing  to  them  with  that  sincerity, 
which  so  well  became  him.  His  truth  and  candour  were  percepti- 
ble in  almost  every  thing  which  he  said  or  did  ;  his  looks  and  whole 
manner  seeming  to  take  away  all  suspicion  concerning  him.  For 
he  thought  nothing  in  this  world  was  worth  much  art  or  great  ma- 
nagement.* 

He  concurred  with  the  Queen  in  engaging  the  Bishop  of  Salis- 
bury to  undertake  his  "  Exposition  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  of 
the  Church  of  England,"  which  that  indefatigable  prelate  perform- 
ed in  less  than  the  compass  of  a  year,  and  then  sent  the  manuscript 
of  his  excellent  work,  which  was  not  published  till  1699,  to  the 
Archbishop,  who,  having  revised  and  altered  it  in  several  places, 
returned  it  with  his  judgment  upon  it  in  the  following  letter:  f 

"  my  lord,  "  Lambeth  House,  October  23d,  1694. 

"  I  have  with  great  pleasure  and  satisfaction  read  over  the  great 
volume  you  sent  me,  and  am  astonished  to  see  so  vast  a  work  be- 
gun and  finished  in  so  short  a  time.  In  the  article  of  the  Trinity 
you  have  said  all,  that  I  think  can  be  said  upon  so  obscure  and 
difficult  an  argument.  The  Socinians  have  just  now  published  an 
answer  to  us  all ;  but  I  have  not  had  a  sight  of  it.  The  negative  ar- 
ticles against  the  church  of  Rome  you  have  very  fully  explained, 
and  with  great  learning  and  judgment.  Concerning  these  you  will 
meet  with  no  opposition  among  ourselves.  The  greatest  danger 
was  to  be  apprehended  from  the  points  in  difference  between  the 
Calvinists  and  Remonstrants,  in  which  you  have  shewn  not  only 
great  skill  and  moderation,  but  great  prudence,  in  contenting  your- 

*  Burnet*  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  26,  27. 

T  Liieof'Bishop  Bin  net,  at  the  end  o!  the  2d  vol.  of  hisHisl.  of  his  Own  Time,  p.  Tljh 


CCXXli  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

self  to  represent  both  sides  impartially,  without  any  positive  de- 
claration of  your  own  judgment.  The  account  given  of  Athana- 
sius's  Creed  seems  to  me  no  wise  satisfactory.  I  wish  we  were  well 
rid  of  it.  I  pray  God  long  to  preserve  your  Lordship  to  do  more 
such  services  to  the  church.    I  am,  my  Lord, 

"  Your's  most  affectionately, 

"  Jo.  Cant." 

He  did  not  long  survive  the  writing  of  this  letter;  for,  on  Sunday, 
the  18th  of  November,  1694,  lie  was  seized  with  a  sudden  illness? 
while  he  was  at  the  chapel  in  Whitehall.  But,  though  his  counte- 
nance shewed  that  he  was  indisposed,  he  thought  it  not  decent  to 
interrupt  the  service.  The  fit  came  indeed  slowly  on,  but  it  seem- 
ed to  be  fatal,  and  soon  turned  to  a  dead  palsy.  The  oppression 
of  his  distemper  was  so  great,  that  it  became  very  uneasy  for  him 
to  speak  ;  but  it  appeared,  that  his.  understanding  was  still  clear, 
though  others  could  not  have  the  advantage  of  it.*  He  continued 
serene  and  calm,  and  in  broken  words  said,  that  he  thanked  God 
he  was  quiet  within,  and  had  nothing  then  to  do,  but  to  wait  the 
will  of  Heaven. f  He  was  attended  the  two  last  nights  of  his  ill- 
ness bv  his  friend,  Mr.  Nelson,  in  whose  arms  he  expired  on  the 
fifth  day  of  it,  Thursday,  November  22d,  at  five  in  the  afternoon,;*; 
in  the  sixty-fifth  year  of  his  age. 

The  sorrow  for  his  death  was  more  universal  than  was  ever 
known  for  a  subject ;  and,  when  his  funeral  was  appointed,  there 
was  a  numerous  train  of  coaches  filled  with  persons  of  rank  and 
condition,  who  came  voluntarily  to  assist  at  that  solemnity  from 
Lambeth  to  the  church  of  St.  Lawrence  Jewry,  where  his  body  was 
interred  on  the  30th  of  that  month,  and  a  monument  afterwards 
erected  to  his  memory,  with  the  following  inscription : 

P.  M. 

Revereudissimi  et  sanctissimi  Prsesulis 

JOHANNIS  TlLLOTSON, 

Archiepiscopi  Cantuariensis, 
Concionatoris  olim  hac  in  Ecclesiit 
Per  Annos  xxx  celeberrimi, 
Qui  obiit  x°  Kal.  Dec.  mdclxxxxiv. 
iEtatis  sues  lxiiii. 
Hoc  posuit  Elizabetha 
Conjuxillius  mrestissima. 

*  Burnet's  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  33.  t  Burnet,  History  of  his  Owu  Time- 

vol.  ii.  p.  134.  +  Mr.  Wharton's  MS.  collections. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CCXXlil 


His  funeral  sermon  was  preached  by  Dr.  Burnet,  bishop  of  Salis- 
bury, on  2  Tim.  iv.  7.  in  the  course  of  which  he  was  interrupted 
by  a  short  flow  of  sighs  and  tears,  which  forced  their  way,  as  was 
visible  to  the  audience ;  who  accompanied  it  with  a  general  groan.* 

This  sermon  being  soon  after  published  in  4to.  had  a  very  different 
effect  uponDr.Hickes,  and  gave  occasion  to  his  piece  so  often  cited 
above,  called  Some  Discourses,"  printed  the  year  following.  The 
acrimony  of  it,  which  is  scarce  to  be  matched  among  the  invectives 
of  any  age  or  language,  was  perhaps  owing  to  private  resentment, 
as  well  as  to  difference  of  opinion  and  party;  for  it  is  confessed 
by  the  Doctor's  friends,f  that  he  was  persuaded,  that  both  Dr.  Til- 
lotson  and  Dr.  Burnet  had  so  far  prejudiced  Savilie,  earl  of  Halifax 
against  him,  that  his  Lordship  was  the  only  one  of  the  commission- 
ers for  disposal  of  ecclesiastical  preferments,  who  refused  to  join 
in  the  recommendation  of  him  to  King  Charles  II.  for  the  deanery 
of  Worcester,  which  however  was  bestowed  upon  him  in  August, 
1683.  Bishop  Burnet  gave  a  strong  and  clear  answer  to  these  Dis- 
courses of  Dr.  Hickes,  in  1696,  in  his  Reflections  upon  them ;  to 
which  the  Doctor  published  no  reply,  though  Mr.  Hilkiah  Bedford, 
the  reputed  author,  and  real  editor  of  Hereditary  Right  asserted, 
in  his  preface  to  the  Doctor's  piece  J  in  defence  of  a  story,  which 
few  critics  now  would  undertake  to  maintain,  that  of  the  Thebaean 
Legion,  affirms,  that  he  wrote  one,  though  he  did  not  print  it,  as 
Mr.  Bedford  says,  ft  for  obvious  reasons."  But  it  is  not  probable, 
that  these  "  obvious  reasons"  would  have  restrained  so  bold  a  writer 
as  Dr.  Hickes,  who  seemed  in  general  to  use  his  pen  with  a  free- 
dom not  controlled  by  any  apprehensions  of  danger,  and  whose 
former  pamphlet  could  scarce  be  exceeded  in  that  point,  from  vin- 
dicating himself,  or  at  least  his  friends  from  justifying  his  memory, 
if  any  thing  satisfactory  could  have  been  returned  to  the  many 
charges  of  misrepresentation  and  falsehood  imputed  to  him  by  the 
Bishop  of  Salisbury. 

But  whatever  attempts  have  been  or  may  be  made  upon  the  me- 
mory of  Archbishop  Tillotson,  his  character  may  be  trusted  to  pos- 
terity upon  the  facts  related  of  him  from  indisputable  authority, 
and  the  testimony  of  his  own  writings,  both  private  and  public. 

His  life  was  indeed  not  only  free  from  blemishes,  but  exemplary 
in  all  the  parts  of  it.    In  his  domestic  relations,  friendships,  and 

*  Mr.  Oldmixon,  History  of  England,  p.  9 5.  who  was  present  at  that "solemnity, 
t  See  his  Life  in  the  General  Dictionary,  historical  and  critical,  vol.  vi. 
t  Written  in  1687,  and  printed  in  171 1,  in  8vo. 


ccxxiv 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


the  whole  commerce  of  business,  he  was  easy  and  humble,  frank 
and  open,  tenderhearted  and  bountiful,*  to  such  an  extent,  that 
while  he  was  in  a  private  station,  he  laid  aside  two  tenths  of  his  in- 
come for  charitable  uses.f  He  despised  wealth,  but  as  it  furnished 
him  for  charity,  in  which  he  was  judicious  as  well  as  liberal.  J  And 
though  he  had  enjoyed  considerable  preferments  many  years  before 
he  was  raised  to  the  archbishopric,  and  filled  that  post  above  three 
years  and  a  half,  yet  he  did  not  improve  his  fortune  from  his  two 
successive  deaneries,  or  from  that  see,  out  of  which  his  predecessor 
Sancroft  had  raised  an  estate.}  An  instance  of  his  moderation  in 
this  respect,  while  he  was  dean  of  St.  Paul's,  has  been  communi- 
cated to  me  by  his  worthy  successor  in  that  dignity,  Thomas,  lord 
bishop  of  Oxford.  The  only  lease,  which  he  executed  separately, 
as  dean  of  that  cathedral,  was  one  of  a  small  tenement  in  Creed 
Lane,  on  the  9th  of  February,  1G90.  And  though  two  others,  each 
of  a  few  acres  of  ground  near  London,  were  actually  drawn  and  en- 
tered in  the  register-book,  yet  he  left  them  unexecuted,  because  he 
was  soon  to  be  preferred  to  the  archbishopric. 

A  decent  but  grave  cheerfulness  made  his  conversation  as  lively 
and  agreeable,  as  it  was  useful  and  instructing.  He  was  ever  in 
good  humour,  always  the  same,  both  accessible  and  affable.  He 
heard  every  thing  patiently,  and  was  not  apt  either  to  mistake  or 
suspect;  his  own  great  candour  disposing  him  to  put  the  best  con- 
struction, and  to  judge  the  most  favourably,  of  all  persons  and 
things.  He  was  never  imperious  nor  assuming  ;  and  though  he  had 
a  superior  judgment  to  most  men,  yet  he  never  dictated  to  others. 
And  as  no  man  had  observed  human  nature  more  carefully,  or 
could  judge  better,  so  none  made  larger  allowances  for  the  frailties 
of  mankind,  than  he  did.|| 

The  vivacity  of  his  wit  is  evident  under  the  restraints  which  his 
discourses  from  the  pulpit  exaeted  from  him,  and  those  which  he 
imposed  upon  himself  in  his  few  controversial  writings ;  and  Sir 
Richard  Steele,  an  indisputable  judge  in  that  kind,  used  to  say,  that 
he  had  a  much  greater  share  of  it,  than  most  of  those,  w  hose  charac- 
ter w  as  denominated  from  it.  But  his  temper  and  principles  would 
not  suffer  him  to  exercise  it  in  satire,  or  even  in  self-defence;  so 
that  few  repartees  of  his  are  delivered  down.  Among  these  was 
one  in  return  to  Sir  John  Trevor,  who  was  made  master  of  the  Rolls 
by  King  James,  with  whom  he  was  in  high  favour,  and  expelled 
for  bribery  by  the  House  of  Commons,  while  he  was  speaker  of  it. 

*  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  28.       t  Le  Neve,  p.  234.         X  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  29. 
§  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  136.  ||  Fnneral  Sermon,  p.  20. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CCXXV 


This  gentleman,  who,  with  a  very  obnoxious  character,  affected 
very  high  principles  in  church  and  state,  passing  by  the  Archbi- 
shop in  the  House  of  Lords  soon  after  his  promotion,  said,  in  a  tone 
loud  enough  to  be  heard  by  his  Grace,  "  I  hate  a  fanatic  in  lawn 
sleeves ;"  to  which  the  Archbishop  answered  in  a  lower  voice, 
u  and  I  hate  a  knave  in  any  sleeves."  This  story  is  related  likewise, 
with  the  difference  of  some  circumstances,  that  Sir  John  Trevor's 
words  were  carried  to  his  Grace  by  Dr.  Manning,  then  chaplain  at 
the  Rolls,  upon  Sir  John's  bidding  him  deliver  them  to  the  Arch- 
bishop, whom  the  Doctor  was  going  to  visit,  though  without  any 
imagination,  that  the  Doctor  would  be  the  bearer  of  such  a  mes- 
sage ;  to  which  he  was  too  faithful,  and  even  brought  back  his 
Grace's  reply  to  the  Master  of  the  Rolls.  Another  instance  of  this 
talent  was  upon  occasion  of  Dr.  South's  Animadversions  on  Dr. 
Sherlock's  Vindication  of  the  Trinity,  in  1693.  Dr.  South  being 
desirous  to  know  the  Archbishop's  opinion  of  his  performance, 
wherein  he  had  occasionally  reflected  upon  him  for  his  "signal  and 
peculiar  encomium,"  as  he  calls  it,*  "of  the  reasoning  abilities"  of 
the  Socinians,  procured  a  friend  of  his  to  draw  it  from  his  Grace, 
who  gave  it  to  this  effect,  that  the  Doctor  "wrote  like  a  man,  but 
bit  like  a  dog."  This  being  reported  to  the  Doctor,  he  answered, 
**  that  he  had  rather  bite  like  a  dog,  than  fawn  like  one.''  To  which 
the  Archbishop  replied,  "  that  for  his  own  part,  he  should  choose 
to  be  a  spaniel  rather  than  a  cur."* 

He  lived  in  a  due  neglect  of  his  person,  and  contempt  of  pleasure, 
but  never  affected  pompous  severities. f 

In  his  function,  he  was  not  only  a  constant  preacher,  but  likewise 
diligent  in  all  the  other  parts  of  his  duty ;  for  though  he  had  no 
cure  of  souls,  yet  few  who  had  laboured  so  painfully  as  he  did, 
in  visiting  the  sick,  in  comforting  the  afflicted,  and  in  settling  such 
as  were  either  wavering  in  their  opinions,  or  troubled  in  mind.+ 

His  affability  and  candour,  as  well  as  abilities  in  his  profession, 
made  him  frequently  consulted  in  points  relating  both  to  practice 
and  opinion.  Among  his  letters  upon  these  occasions,  I  have  met 
with  the  following,  in  answer  to  two  questions  concerning  the  ali- 
enation of  tithes,  proposed  to  him  by  a  gentleman  of  Gloucester- 
shire : 

"  honoured  sir,  "  April  27,  1(589. 

M  To  the  two  questions  proposed  by  you  I  answer: 
"  To  the  first,  concerning  the  Jus  Divinum  of  the  particular 
*  P.  358.  t  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  29.  %  Ibid.  p.  28,  29. 


CCXXVl 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


way  of  maintenance  of  ministers  now  under  the  gospel  by  tithes, 
I  do  not  see  any  argument,  either  in  Bishop  Andrews*  or  Dr. 
Comber,  +  that  comes  up  to  the  proof  of  it.  That  whicli  is  called 
Bishop  Usher's  Body  of  Divinity, J  was  written  by  him  in  his 
younger  years,  and  unskilfully  compiled  by  some  other  hand. 

"  The  second  question  hath  no  necessary  dependence  upon  the 
first.  For  whether  tithes  be  jure  divino,  or  not,  yet,  supposing  an 
honourable  maintenance  in  general  of  the  ministers  of  the  gospel 
to  be  of  Divine  right,  which,  I  think,  is  allowed  by  all  that  own  a 
gospel  ministry,  the  alienating  of  any  maintenance  given  by  pri- 
vate persons,  or  settled  by  law  to  that  purpose,  except  in  case  of 
evident  necessity  for  the  preservation  of  the  public,  and  without 
compensation  made  for  it,  is  as  much  sacrilege,  as  the  alienation 
of  tithes,  supposing  that  they  were  of  Divine  right  and  appoint- 
ment. In  case  of  public  necessity,  even  the  vessels,  that  were  con- 
secrated to  the  use  of  the  temple,  were  alienated  by  good  kings, 
and,  for  any  thing  I  know  to  the  contrary,  without  sin.  I  do  not 
think  the  first  alienation  of  tithes  in  England  to  have  been  without 
great  fault;  but  since  the  thing  is  long  since  done,  and  they  are 
now  for  several  ages  passed  from  hand  to  hand,  those  who  were 
no  ways  accessary  to  the  first  injury,  may  as  lawfully  purchase  and 
hold  them  upon  a  valuable  consideration,  as  we,  who  now  possess 
England,  may  do  the  lands,  which  certainly  belonged  to  the  an- 
cient Britons,  or  those  which  are  held  by  the  unjust  title  of  the 
conqueror.  There  is  only  this  difference  in  the  case,  that  we  cer- 
tainly know  to  whom  tithes  did  originally  belong;  and  he  that  can 
spare  them  from  his  family,  shall  do  very  well  and  piously  to  re- 
store them  to  the  first  use :  he  that  cannot,  shall  do  very  well ; 
and  I  know  not  how  to  excuse  him,  if  he  be  able  to  secure  the 
main  end  for  which  they  were  first  given,  by  a  competent  mainte- 
nance, and  honourable,  if  the  circumstances  of  his  condition  will 
allow  it. 

"  I  am,  sir,  vour's, 

"  J.  TlLLOTSON." 

*  On  the  ten  commandments,  Comm.  4.  ch.  11.  Edit.  1650,  and  Theologica  deter- 
minatio  habita  in  publica  schola  Cantabrigiae  de  decimis,  printed  among  his  opuscula 
quacdam  posthumaat  London  in  1629,  in  4to.  p.  141 — 153. 

t  History  of  Tithes,  in  two  parts. 

t  It  was  published  withont  his  knowledge,  and  gave  him  great  concern  ;  and  he  com- 
plained of  it  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  John  Downham,  the  editor.  See  Dr.  Thomas  Smlfli's 
Life  of  Archbishop  Usher,  p.  123.  Yitse  qaorundam  eruditissimorum  et  illastriam 
Virorum,  Edit.  Loudou,  1707.  in  lto. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


CCXXVU 


His  love  for  the  real  philosophy  of  nature,  and  his  conviction, 
that  the  study  of  it  is  the  most  solid  support  of  religion,  induced 
him,  not  many  years  after  the  establishment  of  the  Royal  So- 
ciety, to  desire  to  be  admitted  into  that  assembly  of  the  greatest 
men  of  the  age  ;  into  which  he  was  accordingly  elected  on  the 
25th  of  January,  167^,*  having  been  proposed  on  the  18th  as  a  can- 
didate by  Dr.  Seth  Ward,  bishop  of  Salisbury  ;f  and  he  was  ad- 
mitted a  member  on  the  14th  of  March. | 

He  had  a  great  compass  in  learning.  What  he  knew,  he  had  so 
perfectly  digested,  that  he  was  truly  master  of  it.  But  the  large- 
ness of  his  genius,  and  the  correctness  of  his  judgment,  carried 
him  much  farther,  than  the  leisure,  that  he  had  enjoyed  for  study, 
seemed  to  enable  him  to  go ;  for  he  could  proceed  great  lengths 
upon  general  hints.§ 

He  always  endeavoured  to  maintain  the  Christian  doctrine  in  its 
original  purity.  Even  in  his  younger  years,  when  he  had  a  great 
liveliness  of  thought  and  extent  of  imagination,  he  avoided  the  dis- 
turbing the  peace  of  the  church  with  particular  opinions,  or  an  an- 
gry opposition  about  more  indifferent  or  doubtful  matters.  He 
lived  indeed  in  great  friendship  with  men  who  differed  from  him. 
He  thought,  that  the  surest  way  to  bring  them  off  from  their 
mistakes,  was  by  gaining  upon  their  hearts  and  affections.  And  in 
an  age  of  such  remarkable  dissoluteness,  as  that  in  which  he  lived, 
he  judged,  that  the  best  method  to  put  a  stop  to  the  growing  im- 
piety, was  first  to  establish  the  principles  of  natural  religion,  and 
from  that  to  advance  to  the  proof  of  Christianity  and  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, which  being  once  solidly  done  would  soon  settle  all  other 
things.  He  was  therefore  in  great  doubt,  whether  the  surest  means 
to  persuade  the  world  to  the  belief  of  the  sublime  truths,  that  are 
contained  in  the  Scriptures,  concerning  God,  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  concerning  the  person  of  Christ,  was  to 
enter  much  into  the  discussing  of  those  mysteries.  He  feared,  that 
an  indiscreet  insisting  and  descanting  upon  those  points  might  do 
more  hurt  than  good ;  and  thought,  that  the  maintaining  those 
doctrines,  as  they  are  proposed  in  the  Scriptures,  without  entering 
too  much  into  explanations  or  controversies,  would  be  the  most  ef- 
fectual way  to  preserve  the  reverence  that  was  due  to  them,  and 
to  fix  them  in  men's  belief.  But  when  he  was  desired  by  some, 
and  provoked  by  others,  and  saw  just  occasions  moving  him  to  it, 


■  Journal  Book  of  the  Royal  Society,  vol.  iv.  p.  227.  t  Ibid.  p.  225. 

t  Ibid.  p.  238.  $  Funeral  Sermon,  p.  S9, 


ccxxviii 


LIFE  01    THE  AUTHOR. 


he  asserted  those  great  mysteries  with  that  strength  and  clearness, 
which  was  his  peculiar  talent. 

He  thought,  that  the  less  men's  consciences  were  entangled,  and 
the  less  the  communion  of  the  church  was  clogged  with  disputable 
opinions  or  practices,  the  world  would  be  the  happier,  consciences 
the  freer,  and  the  church  the  quieter.  The  Scriptures  were  the 
rule  of  his  faith,  and  the  chief  subject  of  all  his  meditations.  He 
judged,  that  the  great  design  of  Christianity  was  the  reforming 
men's  natures,  and  governing  their  actions,  the  restraining  their  ap- 
petites and  passions,  the  softening  their  tempers,  and  sweetening 
their  humours,  and  the  raising  their  minds  above  the  interests  and 
follies  of  this  present  world  to  the  hope  and  pursuit  of  endless  bless- 
edness ;  and  he  considered  the  whole  Christian  doctrine  as  a  sys- 
tem of  principles  all  tending  to  this.  He  looked  on  men's  contend- 
ing about  lesser  matters,  or  about  subtleties  relating  to  those  that 
are  greater,  as  one  of  the  chief  practices  of  the  powers  of  darkuess 
to  defeat  the  true  ends,  for  which  the  Son  of  God  came  into  the 
world  ;  and  that  they  led  men  into  much  dry  and  angry  work,  who, 
while  they  were  hot  in  the  making  parties,  and  settling  opinions, 
became  so  much  the  slacker  in  those  great  duties,  which  were 
chiefly  designed  by  the  Christian  doctrine.* 

The  moderation  both  of  his  temper  and  principles  very  early  oc- 
casioned him,  as  well  as  Mr.  Chillingworth,  and  others  of  the  best 
and  greatest  men  of  their  times,  to  be  ranked  among  those  divines, 
who  were  stigmatized  with  the  name  of  Latitudinarians,  by  persons 
of  very  opposite  characters.  In  vindication  of  them  from  the  usual 
reproaches  annexed  to  that  title,  an  anonymous  author  had  pub- 
lished at  London  in  4to.  as  early  as  June  1662,  A  brief  Accouut 
of  the  new  Set  of  Latitude-men ;  together  with  some  Reflections 
upon  the  New  Philosophy.  By  S,  P.  of  Cambridge,  in  Answer  to 
a  Letter  from  his  Friend  at  Oxford.  And  he  was  seconded  by  the 
pious  and  rational  Mr.  Edward  Fowler,  then  rector  of  Northill,  in 
Bedfordshire,  and  afterwards  bishop  of  Gloucester,  in  his  first 
work  in  1670,t  intitled,  The  Principles  and  Practices  of  certain 
moderate  Divines  of  the  Church  of  England,  (greatly  misunder- 
stood) truly  represented  and  defended.  In  this  book  he  com- 
plains, J  that  this  term  of  reproach,  this  word,  as  he  calls  it,  "of 
a  foot  and  a  half  long,  Latitudinarian,"  was  frequently  thrown  out 
at  that  time  not  only  in  conversation,  but  from  the  pulpit,  and  that 

f  Ibid.  p.  ?9 — 32.       t  Printed  at  London,  in  8vo.  and  reprinted  there  ia  3  671, 

*  P.  9,  10, 


LIFE  OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


ccxxix 


"  it  accompanied  good  store  of  other  bombasts,  and  little  witti- 
cisms, in  seasoning  not  long  ago  the  stately  Oxonian  theatre."* 
Which  passage  evidently  refeis  to  the  speech  of  Dr.  South,  then 
orator  of  the  university  of  Oxford,  in  which  he  treated  not  only 
the  new  philosophy  and  the  Royal  Society,  but  likewise  modera- 
tion, comprehension,  and  other  topics  of  that  kind,  with  his  usual 
virulence  and  buffoonery,  so  justly  complained  of  by  Dr.  VVallis, 
in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Boyle,f  as  unsuitable  to  a  learned  body  ou  so 
solemn  an  occasion. 

His  gentleness  towards  the  dissenters  was  attended  with  the  con- 
sequence intended  by  him  of  reconciling  many  of  them  to  the  com- 
munion of  the  established  church,  and  almost  all  of  them  to  a  greater 
esteem  of  it,  than  they  had  before  entertained  of  it.  His  manner 
of  reasoning  with  them  on  the  subjects  in  dispute  will  appear  from 
the  following  letter,:):  written  to  a  lady,  whose  name  I  have  not 
been  able  to  discover. 

<c  HONOURED  MADAM,  "  Feb.  17tb,  1681. 

"  I  had  returned  an  answer  to  your  letter  sooner,  but  that  I  did 
not  know  how  to  direct  it,  till  I  met  with  Mr.  Lobb,  who  told  me 
your  lodgings. 

"For  answer  to  the  question,  in  which  your  Ladyship  desires  to 
be  resolved  ;  though  no  man  can  act  contrary  to  the  persuasion  of 
his  mind,  without  violence  to  his  conscience,  which  is  the  imme- 
diate guide  and  director  of  our  actions  ;  yet,  if  our  conscience  be 
misled,  either  by  a  heady  and  rash  zeal,  or  some  unreasonable  pre- 
judice, or  for  want  of  calm  and  impartial  consideration  of  the  rea- 
sons on  both  sides,  or  of  a  due  regard  in  doubtful  matters  to  the 
judgment  of  those  guides  whom  God  hath  set  over  us,  and  who 
are  likely  to  judge  better  of  these  things  than  we  can ;  or  from  a 
neglect  of  any  other  means  of  rightly  iuforming  our  consciences  ;  in 
all  these,  and  the  like  cases,  the  mistake  of  our  conscience  doth 
not  so  justify  our  actions,  but  that  the  party,  that  followed  his  con- 
science, may  be  very  culpable,  and  guilty  before  God  of  a  great 
sin.  St.  Paul  reckons  himself  among  the  greatest  of  sinuers,  for 
what  he  did  according  to  his  conscience,  and  the  firm  persuasion 
of  his  own  mind,  in  persecuting  the  church  of  God  ;  for,  he  tells 
us,  that  he  verily  thought,  he  ought  to  do  all  those  things,  which 

*  It  was  dedicated  in  the  beginning  of  July,  1669. 

t  Dated  at  Oxford,  July  17,  1669.    See  Boyle's  Works,  rol.  v.  p.  514. 

%  Communicated  to  me  by  the  reverend  and  learned  Dr.  Lvttelton,  dean  of  Exeter. 


ccxxx 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


he  did  against  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  I  do  not  parellel 
the  cases :  but  this  principle  holds  in  proportion  in  lesser  matters, 
that  one  may  be  faulty,  and  yet  act  according  to  his  conscience  ; 
which  ought  to  make  us  very  careful,  to  have  our  consciences 
rightly  informed  concerning  what  is  our  duty  or  our  sin. 

"  As  to  the  particular  case  concerning  the  gesture  of  receiving 
the  sacrament,  give  me  leave  to  use  that  necessary  freedom,  as  to 
tell  you,  that  I  do  not  think  your  conscience  is  truly  informed, 
either  concerning  the  nature  of  the  thing,  or  the  consequences  of 
it.  If  the  gesture  be  indifferent,  as  1  think  it  is,  and  as  it  was 
thought  to  be  by  the  whole  Christian  church,  for  aught  I  can  find, 
either  by  their  writings  or  practice,  for  many  ages,  which  is  a  very 
strong  presumption  of  the  indifferency  of  it ;  then  can  there  be  no 
well-grounded  persuasion  of  the  unlawfulness  of  any  gesture,  that 
is  in  use  in  the  church,  where  we  live  ;  especially  if  it  be  enjoined 
by  authority.  If  it  be  alleged,  that  the  gesture,  in  which  our  Savi- 
our celebrated  it,  is  necessary  to  be  followed  by  us ;  the  reason 
must  be,  either  because  we  are  punctually  to  observe  and  keep  to 
i  all  the  circumstances,  used  by  our  Saviour,  in  the  first  institution 

of  this  sacrament :  and  then  it  will  be  necessary,  for  aught  I  can 
see,  to  receive  it  in  the  very  gesture  used  by  our  Saviour,  after  sup- 
per, in  an  upper  room,  not  above  the  number  of  twelve  besides  him 
that  administers,  and  only  men,  and  not  women.  For  if  the  bare 
example  of  our  Saviour  make  it  necessary  to  us  to  do  the  like,  then 
every  circumstance  observed  by  him  will  become  equally  necessary 
to  us.  But  this,  I  think,  is  nobody's  opinion,  and  therefore  our 
Saviour's  bare  example  is  of  no  force  in  this  matter.  Or  else,  the 
reason  must  be,  because  the  gesture,  used  by  our  Saviour,  is  in  its 
own  nature  so  proper  and  suitable  to  the  sacrament,  as  may  seem 
to  make  it  necessary ;  and  this  is  that,  which,  I  think,  you  insist 
upon.  But  we  must  take  heed  of  concluding,  that  God  hath  com- 
manded or  forbidden  a  thing,  because  we  think  it  very  suitable  or 
unsuitable.  By  this  argument  indeed  the  papists  endeavour  to 
prove  an  infallible  judge  of  controversies,  and  a  great  many  other 
things ;  but  it  is  a  very  slippery  and  uncertain  argument.  And  to 
make  the  whole  action  of  the  sacrament,  with  all  the  circumstances 
of  it,  to  be  obligatory  to  us,  not  only  the  administration  of  the  sa- 
crament in  the  elements  of  bread  and  wine  must  be  expressly  com- 
manded, but  every  circumstance  likewise  must  be  expressly  en- 
joined. Otherwise,  the  argument  from  an  imaginable  suitableness 
will  be  of  no  manner  of  force ;  for  many  things  may  be  suitable 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


ccxxxi 


enough,  which  are  by  no  means  necessary.  Besides  that  I  cannot 
see,  but  that  this  way  of  arguing  is  rather  of  greater  force  as  to  the 
receiving  it  after  supper,  since  this  is  expressly  mentioned  by  St. 
Paul,  1  Cor.  xi.  where  he  professeth  to  declare  the  institution  just 
as  he  received  it,  but  says  not  a  word  of  the  gesture.  And,  Acts  xx. 
we  find,  that  the  disciples  met  together  in  the  evening  to  break 
bread,  and  in  an  upper  chamber;  so  that  it  seems  they  did  observe 
the  circumstances  both  of  time  and  place,  in  which  our  Saviour  ce- 
lebrated it.  And  the  circumstance  of  time  was  so  constantly  ob- 
served by  the  apostles,  as  to  give  this  sacrament  the  name  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  (1  Cor.  xi.  20.)  which  hath  ever  since  continued  in 
the  Christian  church,  though  the  time  hath  been  altered  from  even- 
ing to  morning.  And  now,  if  suitableness  or  unsuitableness  be 
such  a  mighty  argument,  it  seems  to  me  every  whit  as  unsuitable  to 
celebrate  a  supper  in  the  morning,  as  to  communicate  at  a  feast  in 
any  other  than  the  common  table  gesture. 

"  But  then  the  consequence  of  the  thing  is  much  worse  ;  because 
you  must  either,  during  this  erroneous  persuasion  (as  I  think)  of 
your  mind,  not  receive  the  sacrament  at  all,  which  is  to  neglect  a 
great  and  plain  institution  of  the  Christian  religion ;  or  you  must 
break  the  peace,  and  separate  from  the  communion  of  the  church, 
upon  such  a  reason,  as  will  produce  separation  without  end :  for  if 
every  little  doubt  and  scruple  be  ground  sufficient  to  warrant  a 
separation,  the  peace  and  unity  of  the  church  will  be  perpetually 
in  danger.  I  have  been  credibly  informed,  that  in  the  late  times 
there  was  an  anabaptist  church  in  London,  that  in  a  short  space 
subdivided  into  thirty  several  churches,  upon  different  opinions 
about  the  circumstances  of  administering  the  two  sacraments  ;  and 
every  party  so  stiffly  insisted  upon  that  circumstance,  which  they 
thought  necessary,  that  they  could  not  in  conscience  communicate 
with  one  another. 

And  now,  madam,  upon  the  whole  matter,  I  beseech  you  seri- 
ously to  consider  these  few  things.  1st,  That  one  may  sin  greatly 
in  following  the  persuasion  of  an  erring  conscience.  2dly,  That  it  is 
only  in  things  wherein  we  are  perfectly  at  liberty,  that  a  doubting 
conscience  binds  us  from  acting  contrary  to  it ;  which  is  the  case 
St.  Paul  was  speaking  of  in  the  text  you  cite :  "  he  that  doubteth 
is  damned,  if  he  eat."  But  where  there  is  any  obligation  to  the 
thing  (for  instance,  the  command  of  lawful  authority),  this  ought  to 
overrule  the  doubt:  for  in  this  case  it  is  not  enough  that  I  doubt 
whether  the  thing  commanded  be  lawful,  but  I  must  be  clearly  sa- 


I 


CCXXxii  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

tisfied  that  it  is  unlawful ;  otherwise  I  sin  in  disobeying  the  com- 
mands of  lawful  authority.    3dly,  That  it  is  not  every  doubt  or 
scruple  that  binds  the  conscience,  but  grounded  upon  such  reasons, 
as  to  prudent  and  considerate  persons  may  minister  great  and  just 
cause  of  doubt ;  for  a  scruple  and  fear,  that  hath  no  probable  reason 
to  justify  it  and  bear  it  out,  ought  to  be  rejected  ;  and,  upon  the 
advice  of  pious  and  prudent  persons,  one  may  safely  act  contrary  to 
such  a  doubting  and  scrupulous  conscience ;  especially  when  the 
ground  of  the  doubt  is  such,  as  by  the  generality  of  Christians  for 
many  ages  was  never  thought  to  be  of  any  weight.    4thly,  That  it 
falls  out  somewhat  unhappily,  that  the  doubts  and  scruples  of  well- 
minded  people  are  generally  on  the  wrong  side,  against  the  peace 
of  the  church  and  obedience  to  authority  ;  and  that  for  one  that 
doubts  whether  they  can  with  a  good  conscience  separate  from  the 
communion  of  a  church,  whose  terms  are  as  easy  as  of  any  Christ- 
ian church  in  the  world,  there  are  hundreds,  that  upon  so  many 
different  and  inconsistent  scruples  make  a  doubt,  whether  with  a 
good  conscience  they  can  continue  in  it.    It  is  worthy  our  serious 
consideration  whence  this  should  proceed,  when  it  is  so  very  plain, 
that  there  is  scarce  any  thing  more  strictly  charged  upon  Christ- 
ians than  to  endeavour  the  peace  and  unity  of  the  church.  5thly, 
That  if  you  be  not  undoubtedly  in  the  right  in  this  matter,  you  are 
certainly  guilty  of  a  great  sin  in  forsaking  the  communion  of  our 
church  upon  this  account.    And  lastly,  That  the  religion  which 
will  recommend  us  to  God  doth  not  consist  in  niceties  and  scruples  ; 
and  that  if  we  would  more  attend  to  the  great  end  and  design  of 
this  sacrament,  which  is  to  engage  us  to  be  really  good,  we  should 
neither  have  list  nor  leisure  to  contend  about  these  little  things  ; 
and,  but  that  I  believe  you  are  very  sincere  in  the  proposing  of  this 
doubt,  I  could  not  have  obtained  of  myself  to  spend  so  much  time 
about  a  matter,  which  I  think  to  be  of  so  little  moment.  And  I  am 
verily  persuaded,  that  our  blessed  Lord  did  for  this  very  reason 
make  so  few  positive  laws  in  the  Christian  religion,  hardly  any  be- 
sides the  two  sacraments,  and  did  also  leave  the  circumstances  of 
these  free  and  indifferent,  that  we  might  not  be  hindered  from  mind- 
ing the  weightier  duties  of  religion,  by  contending  about  circum- 
stances and  trifles  ;  but  in  all  things,  as  becomes  persons  of  hum- 
ble and  peaceable  spirits,  might  be  ready  to  comply  with  the  gene- 
ral usage  and  custom  of  the  church  in  which  we  live,  and  the  rules 
and  injunctions  of  those  who  have  authority  to  command  us  ; 
which  I  am  sure  is  a  greater  duty  than  many,  otherwise  very  good 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


ccxxxiii 


people,  seem  to  be  sensible  of.  I  heartily  pray  God  to  direct  and 
satisfy  you  in  this  doubt.    I  am,  madam, 

"  Your  most  faithful  friend  and  servant, 

"  J.  Tillotson." 

It  has  indeed  been  affirmed,  that  he  having  frankly  owned  in  a 
sermon,*  that  the  dissenters  had  some  plausible  objections  against 
the  Common  Prayer,  and  this  occasioning  Archbishop  Sancroft  to 
send  for  him  to  reprimand  him,  he  justified  his  assertion  ;  and, 
being  asked  what  parts  of  the  Common  Prayer  he  meant,  he  in- 
stanced in  the  burial-office ;  upon  which  his  Grace  owned  to  him, 
that  he  was  so  little  satisfied  himself  with  that  office,  that  for  that 
very  reason  he  had  never  taken  a  cure  of  souls.  Mr.  Hoadly,  in 
his  Defence  of  the  Reasonableness  of  Conformity,  justly  questioned 
the  truth  of  this  story;  and  there  is  undoubtedly  a  mistake  in  one 
important  circumstance  of  it;  for  it  appears  by  an  authentic  and 
original  certificate,  that  Archbishop  Sancroft  had  been  rector  of 
Houghton-in-the-Spring,  in  the  county  of  Durham,  to  which  he  was 
presented  on  the  7th  of  December,  1661,  upon  the  resignation  of 
Dr.  John  Barwick,  afterwards  dean  of  St.  Paul's,  and  resigned  it 
about  December,  1664, t  when  himself  was  installed  to  that  deanery. 

The  reasonableness  of  his  doctrines,  aud  that  goodness  and  ge- 
nerosity of  heart,  which  shone  through  all  his  writings,  as  well 
aa  every  part  of  his  conduct,  have  drawn  a  respect  towards  his  me- 
mory from  those,  who  were  the  least  affected  to  religion  in  gene- 
ral, or  Christianity  in  particular.  Mr.  Collins  has  introduced  him 
with  great  respect  into  the  most  exceptionable  of  his  own  works,! 
declaring,  that  all  English  free-thinkers  will  own  him  as  their  head, 
and  that  even  the  enemies  of  free-thinking  will  allow  him  to  be  a 
proper  in>tance  of  the  purpose  of  his  discourse  upon  it :  that  his 
Grace's  learning  and  good  sense  are  disputed  by  none :  and  that 
his  sermons  u  tend  to  the  promoting  of  true  religion  aud  virtue  (iu 
the  practice  whereof  the  peace  and  happiness  of  society  consist), 
and  free-thinking,  and  greatly  exceed  the  idea  which  he  used  to 
give  of  the  goodness  of  a  sermon,  by  frequently  repeating  the  words 
of  a  witty  man,  that  it  was  a  good  sermon  which  had  no  hurt  in  it. 

*  See  Dr.  Calainy's  Life  of  Mr.  Baxter,  p.  226,  2d  edit.  The  sermon  was  proba- 
bly that  preached  before  the  gentlemen  and  others  born  within  the  county  of  York, 
on  the  3d  of  December,  1678,  in  which  he  acknowledges  "  in  some  very  few  things 
the  plausible  exceptions  of  those  who  differ  from  us.'" 

t  Walker's  Sufferings  of  the  Clergy,  part  ii.  p.  144,  h.  marg. ;  and  Le  Neve,  p.  198. 

X  Discourse  of  Fiee-Thiuking,  p.  171.  Edit.  1713.  . 
VOL.  I.  X 


ccxxxiv 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


In  short,  that  his  works  are  formed  for  the  improvement  of  under- 
standing and  morality."  But  this  eloge  from  so  suspected  a  writer 
gave  occasion  to  one  of  the  ablest  of  his  answerers,*  among  other 
queries  proposed  to  the  authors  (for  he  supposes  more  than  one)  of 
the  Discourse  of  Free-Thinking,  to  ask,  whether  they  could  ever 
make  reparation  for  the  injury  done  to  the  memory  of  the  great 
and  good  Archbishop,  by  putting  him  into  the  same  list  with  Epi- 
curus and  Mr.  Hobbes,  against  both  whom  he  has  expressed  him- 
self with  so  particular  a  severity  in  some  parts  of  his  works,  and  by 
thus  doing  the  work  of  his  worst  and  bitterest  enemies.  Whether 
his  Grace's  example  had  not  better  been  imitated,  than  his  memory 
thus  blackened,  and  the  abuses  of  religion  charged  only  upon  the 
abusers,  and  not  upon  religion  itself.  Whether  his  zeal  against 
atheism  and  infidelity  might  not  have  been  mentioned,  as  well  as 
his  zeal  against  spiritual  tyranny  and  antichristian  cruelty.  Whe- 
ther the  injury  done  by  these  authors  to  his  great  name  was  not 
already  apparent,  when  a  conscientious  author  had  already  taken 
a  handle  from  them,  to  misrepresent  him  in  the  grossest  manner, 
contrary  to  the  whole  tenor  of  that  sermon,  in  which  he  speaks  of 
the  mischiefs  of  popish  zeal,  and  contrary  to  his  express  declara- 
tions concerning  the  Christian  religion,  which  he  in  the  same  ser- 
mon vindicates  from  the  least  shadow  of  guilt  upon  that  account. 
The  writer  of  the  queries  concludes  with  remarking,  that  as  it  was 
to  the  purpose  of  the  authors  of  the  Discourse  of  Free-Thinking, 
to  rank  this  good  man  in  such  company;  so  it  was  to  the  purpose  of 
his  popish  and  other  furious  enemies,  that  he,  who  could  not  enter 
into  their  blind  and  unchristian  measures,  should  pass  for  an  atheist 
and  an  infidel;  so  mutually  do  atheism  and  popery  assist  each  other! 

The  difference  between  his  principles  and  the  rigid  ones  of  Cal- 
vin, has  strongly  prejudiced  the  zealots  for  the  latter  against  his 
writings ;  and  their  prejudices  have  been  adopted  by  some  late 
pretenders  to  an  exalted  and  supernatural  piety.  Dr.  John  Ed- 
wards, the  declared  enemy  of  Mr.  Locke,  and  the  reviver  of  Cal- 
vinism in  the  church  of  England,  after  the  gradual  extinction  of  it 
there,  attacked  the  Archbishop's  works  in  his  Preacher,f  entirely 

*  Queries  recommended  to  the  authors  of  the  late  Discourse  of  Free-Thinking,  by 
a  Christian,  p.  22,  23.  Edit.  London,  1713.  This  excellent  piece,  published  at  first 
without  the  author's  name,  is  since  known  to  be  the  performance  of  the  Lord  Bishop 
of  Winchester. 

t  The  first  volume  of  which  was  published  in  1705,  the  second  in  1706,  and  the 
third  in  1709. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


ccxxxv 


omitting  them  in  his  catalogue  of  books,  which  he  recommends  to 
\oimg  students.     However,  he  acknowledges*  that  his  Grace 
"  gives  a  very  natural  description  of  the  moral  virtues,  and  com- 
mends and  sets  them  off  with  a  good  grace.    His  exhortations  to, 
aud  reasonings  about,  practical  duties,  are  very  persuasive  and  pe- 
netrating ;  for  he  performs  this  part  with  so  smooth  and  even  a 
style,  and  with  so  popular  an  air,  that  he  marvellously  insinuates 
into  the  minds  of  all  his  hearers  aud  readers."    But  his  reflections 
were  answered  by  Mr.  Robert  Lightfoot,  B.D.  and  rector  of  Odel, 
in  Bedfordshire,  in  his  Remarks  upon  some  Passages  in  Dr.  Ed- 
wards's Preacher,  printed  in  1709,  and  in  another  piece,  published 
t lie  year  following,  under  the  title  of  Dr.  Edwards's  Vindication 
considered.    Dr.  Hickest  has  indeed  ventured  to  hope,  that  his 
Grace's  pattern  of  preaching  u  would  neither  be  long  nor  much  fol- 
lowed ;"  and  reproaches*  him  with  having  read  but  few  of  the 
Fathers,  which  he  thinks  would  have  rendered  him  a  "  much  surer 
guide,  as  well  as  a  more  learned  and  sound  divine."    But  though 
some  few  may  differ  from  the  general  and  impartial  opinion  with 
regard  to  his  seutiments  iu  the  more  disputable  points,  yet  his  abi- 
lities as  a  writer  will  meet  with  little  contest  while  a  true  taste  sub- 
sists anions  us.    Mr.  Dryden  frequently  owned  with  pleasure,  that 
if  he  had  any  talent  for  English  prose,  which  must  be  allowed  to 
have  been  a  great  one,  it  was  owing  to  his  having  often  read  his 
Grace's  writings.§  And  Dr.  Swift,  whose  judgment  was  not  usually 
biassed  by  excess  of  civility,  vouchsafes  the  Archbishop  the  title 
of  excellent;  ||  an  epithet  given  him  likewise  by  Mr.  Dodwell,  when 
he  appealed  to  him  in  his  controversy  concerning  schism  with  Mr. 
Baxter.1T    Dr.  Henry  Felton  describes  him**  as  M  all  over  natural 
and  easy  in  the  most  unconstrained  and  freest  elegancy  of  words. 
His  course,  both  in  his  reasoning  and  his  style,  like  a  gentle  and 
even  current,  is  clear  and  deep,  and  calm  and  strong.    His  lan- 
guage is  so  pure,  no  water  can  be  more.    It  floweth  with  so  free, 
uninterrupted  a  stream,  that  it  never  stoppeth  the  reader  or  itself: 

*  Vol.  i.  p.  65.  t  Some  Discourses,  p.  51.  {  P.  64. 

$  Mr.  Congreve'5  Dedication  of  Mr.  Drjden's  Dramatic  Works  to  the  Dake  of 
Newcastle,  edit.  London,  1717. 

||  Letter  to  a  voung  gentleman  latc-lv  entered  into  holv  orders,  dated  Jannarv  9tb, 

1  Dodweli's  Defence  of  his  Book  of  Schism  against  Mr.  Baxter,  p.  5.  Edit.  1681, 

in  8vo. 

**  A  Dissertation  on  reading  the  Classics,  and  forming  a  jt  st  Stjle,  p.  181,  182. 

4th  Edit.  1750. 

x  2 


ccxxxvi 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


every  word  possesseth  its  proper  place.  We  meet  no  hard,  unusual, 
mean,  far-fetched,  or  over-strained  expression.  His  diction  is  not 
in  the  naked  terms  of  the  things  he  speaks  of,  but  rather  meta- 
phorical ;  yet  so  easily  are  his  metaphors  transferred,  that  you 
would  not  say  they  intrude  into  another's  place,  but  that  they  step 
into  their  own.''  Mr.  Addison  considered  his  writings  as  the  chief 
standard  of  our  language,  and  accordingly  marked  the  particular 
phrases  in  the  sermons  published  during  his  Grace's  life-time,  as> 
the  ground-work  of  an  English  dictionary,  projected  by  that  ele- 
gant writer,  when  he  was  out  of  all  public  employment,  after  the 
change  of  the  ministry  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne. 

However,  one  of  our  most  elegant  writers,  whose  version  of  Pliny 
has  shewn,  what  was  never  before  imagined  possible,  that  trans- 
lations may  equal  the  force  and  beauty  of  the  originals,  has,  in 
another  work  of  his,  mixed  the  highest  compliments  upon  the  Arch- 
bishop's sentiments  with  the  strongest  exceptions  to  his  style,  de- 
claring,* that  he  "  seems  to  have  no  sort  of  notion  of  rhetorical 
numbers  ;  and  that  no  man  had  ever  less  pretensions  to  genuine 
oratory :  that  one  cannot  but  regret,  that  he,  who  abounds  with 
such  noble  sentiments,  should  want  the  art  of  setting  them  off  with 
all  the  advantage  they  deserve ;  that  the  sublime  in  morals  should 
not  be  attended  with  a  suitable  elevation  of  language.    The  truth 
however  is,  his  words  are  frequently  ill  chosen,  and  almost  always 
11  placed.    His  periods  are  both  tedious  and  inharmonious,  as  his 
metaphors  are  generally  mean,  and  often  ridiculous. "    But  this  in- 
genious gentleman,  who  allows  that  there  is  '*  a  noble  simplicity" 
n  some  of  his  Grace's  sermons,  and  that  his  excellent  discourse  on 
Sincerity  "  deserves  to  be  mentioned  with  particular  applause,"  will 
perhaps  mitigate  his  censure  of  the  rest,  if  he  considers  the  state 
of  our  language  at  the  time  of  our  prelate's  first  appearance  as  a 
writer,  before  he  made  the  great  improvement  in  it :  the  few  ex- 
ceptionable expressions  to  be  found  in  his  works,  in  comparison 
of  what  are  observable  in  those  of  all  his  coteraporaries  :  the  vul- 
garity, which  some  of  them  have  contracted  since  his  use  of  them  : 
the  variety  of  his  subjects,  to  which  his  style  was  to  be  adapted, 
and  in  many  of  which  the  higher  form  of  oratory  would  have  been 
extremely  unsuitable,  particularly  those  of  the  argumentative  kind, 
or  upon  the  duties  of  common  life :  that  discourses  from  the  pul- 
pit being  chiefly  designed  to  be  pronounced,  regard  is  often  to  be 

*  Letters  on  several  Subjects,  by  the  late  Sir  Thomas  Fitzosborne,  bart.  Letter 
*xiv.  p.  109,  et  seq.  Edit.  1748. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR* 


CCXXXVll 


had  in  the  disposition  of  words  and  turn  of  sentences  to  the 
preacher's  voice  and  manner  of  speaking :  that  genuine  oratory,  to 
which  he  is  represented  as  a  stranger,  does  not  consist  merely,  or 
even  principally,  in  the  choice  of  well-sounding  words,  or  the  most 
harmonious  arrangement  of  them,  in  which  Archbishop  Tillotson 
is  by  no  means  defective;*  but  in  the  more  important  qualities, 
for  which  he  is  indisputably  eminent,  a  copiousness  of  invention 
©f  topics,  proper  for  conviction  and  persuasion,  urged  with  the 
greatest  strength  and  clearness  of  expression  :  that  the  merits  there- 
fore of  such  a  writer  are  not  to  be  measured  by  a  few  passages  se- 
lected out  of  whole  volumes  ;  especially  as  two-thirds  of  his  ser- 
mons, being  published  after  his  death,  want  that  perfection,  which 
his  last  hand  would  have  given  them.  And  with  regard  to  his  two 
funeral  sermons  upon  Mr.  Gouge  and  Dr.  Whichcot,  which  are 
affirmed  to  be  as  "  cold  and  languid  performances,  as  were  ever 
perhaps  produced  upon  such  an  animating  subject  not  to  insist 
upon  the  short  time  generally  allowed  for  the  preparation  of  dis- 
courses of  that  kind,  it  is  evident  that  the  former,  being  a  justifica- 
tion of  our  Saviour's  argument  in  proof  of  the  resurrection,  required 
reasoning  rather  than  oratory  ;  and  the  latter,  after  the  necessary 
explanation  of  the  sense  of  St.  Paul  in  the  text,  contains  some  very 
forcible  and  pathetic  consolations  against  the  fear  of  death ;  and 
the  accounts  of  his  two  friends  in  these  sermons  will  be  certainly 
acknowledged  not  defective  in  any  of  the  characters  of  a  just  pa- 
negyric. 

His  eminence  as  a  preacher  having  occasioned  a  gentleman  to 
ask  him,  by  what  means  he  had  obtained  it,  he  answered,  with  his 
natural  candour  and  modesty,  "  that  if  he  had  any  of  that  excel- 
lency, he  must  needs  own  all  of  it  to  be  entirely  owing  to  his  early 
study  of  the  Scriptures." +  And  he  seems,  in  qualifying  himself  for 
the  pulpit,  to  have  had  in  view  the  great  ends  of  preaching,  as  laid 
down  by  his  friend  and  father-in-law,  Bishop  Wilkins,f  informing 
or  persuading;  which,  as  that  excellent  writer  observed,  "  may  be 
most  effectually  done  by  such  rational  ways  of  explication  and  con- 

*  Mr.  Mason,  in  his  Essay  on  the  Power  and  Harmony  of  Prosaic  Numhers,  p.  49. 
Edit.  London,  1749,  in  8vo.  justly  affirms,  that  he  had  "  a  nice  ear,"  and  was  "  happy 
in  the  sweetness  of  his  numbers." 

t  Discourse  concerning  the  Certainty  of  a  future  and  immortal  State,  in  some  mo- 
ral, physiological,  aud  religious  Considerations.  By  a  Doctor  of  Physic,  p.  129.  Edit. 
London,  1706,  in  8vo.  The  author  was  Dr.  Walter  Harris,  fellow  pf  the  College  of 
Ph}  sicUns. 

;  Preface  to  liis  Ecclcsiastes. 


ccxxxvm 


LIFE   OF  TJIIi  AUTHOR. 


firmation,  as  are  most  fit  and  proper  to  satisfy  men's  judgments 
and  consciences.  And  this  will  in  all  times  be  accounted  good 
sense,  as  being  suitable  to  the  reason  of  mankind  ;  whereas  all  other 
ways  are,  at  the  best,  but  particular  fashions,  which,  though  at  one 
time  they  may  obtain,  yet  will  presently  vanish,  and  grow  into  dis- 
esleem."  That  prelate,  indeed,  in  the  opinion  of  the  author  of 
Advice  to  a  young  Clergyman,  in  a  letter  to  him,*  might  be  al- 
most said  to  have  taught  us  first  to  preach,  as  the  Archbishop  to 
have  brought  that  art  near  perfection,  "  had  there  been,"  adds  that 
writer,  "  as  much  life,  as  there  is  of  politeness,  and  generally  of 
cool,  clear,  close  reasoning,  and  convincing  arguments  in  his  ser- 
mons." 

The  death  of  the  Archbishop  was  lamented  by  Mr.  Locke  in  a 
letter  to  Professor  Limborch,+  not  only  as  a  considerable  loss  to 
himself  of  a  zealous  and  candid  inquirer  after  truth,  whom  he  con- 
sulted freely  upon  all  doubts  in  theological  subjects,  and  of  a  friend, 
whose  sincerity  he  had  experienced  for  many  years,  but  likewise  as 
a  very  important  one  to  the  English  nation,  and  the  whole  body 
of  the  reformed  churches.  And  it  affected  both  their  Majesties 
with  the  deepest  concern.  The  Queen  for  many  days  spoke  of 
him  in  the  tenderest  manner,  and  not  without  tears  ;J  as  his  own 
death  prevented  him  from  feeling  the  terrible  shock,  which,  if  he 
had  lived  about  five  weeks  longer,  he  must  have  received  from  that 
of  her  Majesty,  of  whose  virtues  and  accomplishments  he  had  the 
highest  admiration,  and  to  whom  the  King  himself  gave  this  testi- 
mony, that  he  could  never  see  any  thing  in  her  which  he  could  call 
a  fault. §  His  Majesty  likewise  never  mentioned  him  but  with  some 
testimony  of  his  singular  esteem  for  his  memory,  and  used  often  to 
declare  to  his  son-in-law,  Mr.  Chadwick,  that  "  he  was  the  best 
man  whom  he  ever  knew,  and  the  best  friend  whom  he  ever  had." 
And  this  seems  thoroughly  to  confute  a  common  traditional  story, 
that  his  Majesty  should  say,  that  he  was  disappointed  in  our  Arch- 
bishop and  his  successor,  Tennison,  in  opposite  respects,  having 
received  much  less  service  from  the  abilities  of  the  former  in  busi* 

*  P.  45,  46,  printed  at  London,  for  C.  Rivington,  but  without  any  mention  of  the 
year  or  name  of  the  author,  who  was  Mr.  Samuel  Wesley,  rector  of  Epworth,  in 
Lincolnshire,  and  addressed  this  letter  to  his  curate. 

t  Dated  at  London,  December  11,  1694.    Familiar  Letters,  p.  363. 

t  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p.  136. 

§  Preface  of  Dr.  Edward  Fowler,  bishop  of  Gloucester,  to  his  Discourse  of"  The 
great  diaingenaUy  and  unreasonableness  of  repining  at  afllicling  Providences,"  p.  22. 
Edit.  London,  16'Jo. 


LIFE  OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


ccxxxix 


ness,  (ban  from  the  latter,  of  whom  he  had  not  before  conceived  so 
high  an  expectation. 

The  King's  regard  for  the  Archbishop  extended  to  his  widow. 
For  his  Grace's  charity  and  generosity,  with  the  expense  of  coming 
into  the  see,  and  the  repairs  and  improvements  of  his  palace,  had 
so  exhausted  his  fortune,  that  if  his  first  fruits  had  not  been  for- 
given him  by  the  King,  his  debts  could  not  have  been  paid  ;  and  he 
left  nothing  to  his  family  but  the  copy  of  his  posthumous  sermons, 
which  was  afterwards  sold  for  2500  guineas.    His  Majesty  therefore 
granted  Mrs.  Tillotson,  on  the  2d  of  May,  1695,  an  annuity  of 
400/.  during  her  natural  life,  and  an  addition  to  it  on  the  18th  of 
August,  1698,  of  200/.  a-year  more;  both  which  were  continued 
till  her  death,  on  the  20th  of  January,  170J.    And  the  King  was 
so  solicitous  for  the  regular  payment  of  her  pension  without  any 
deduction,  that  he  always  called  for  the  money  quarterly,  and  sent 
it  to  her  himself.  The  augmentation  of  her  pension  appears  to  have 
been  owing  to  the  representation  made  by  the  Lord  Chancellor 
Sommers  to  his  Majesty,  of  the  distress  of  her  circumstances,  upon 
the  death  of  her  son-in-law,  Mr.  Chadwick.  His  Lordship  had  been 
particularly  informed  of  this  by  two  letters,  one  from  Dr.  Sherlock, 
dean  cf  St.  Paul's,  to  Dr.  Hobbs,  a  physician  and  intimate  friend 
of  his  Lordship ;  and  the  other  from  Mr.  Nelson  to  Lord  Som- 
mers himself.    These  letters  are  inserted  here  from  the  originals 
among  the  papers  of  that  great  lawyer  and  statesman. 

"  dear  hobbs,  "  Deanery,  Sept.  25,  1697. 

"  Th  at  kindness,  which  was  designed  to  Archbishop  Tillotson's 
nephew  for  maintaining  him  at  the  university,  and  was  then  refused, 
as  you  know,  is  now  become  necessary.  And  your  respect  for  the 
Archbishop's  memory,  which  was  your  motive  then,  I  hope  conti- 
nues still,  especially  considering  the  nephew  was  in  no  fault.  Mrs. 
Tillotson  has  such  a  regard  for  the  honour  of  my  Lord,  and  such  a 
kindness  for  his  relations  for  his  sake,  that  she  would  gladly  main- 
tain him  if  she  could  ;  but  she  is  reduced  herself  to  those  narrow 
circumstances  by  the  unexpected  death  of  Mr.  Chadwick,  and  that 
less  expected  condition  he  has  left  her  family  in,  that  she  is  utter- 
ly disabled.  She  came  to  me  before  I  went  to  Tunbridge  to  desire 
me  to  recommend  him  to  some  family  to  be  tutor  to  some  young 
gentleman,  where  he  might  support  himself ;  and  upon  that  occa- 
sion acquainted  me  with  her  condition,  that  Mr.  Chadwick  had 
•pent  all  his  estate,  but  what  was  settled  upon  his  wife  in  marriage, 


I 


ccxl 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


which  conies  to  her  eldest  son  :  that  the  youngest  son  and  daugh- 
ter had  not  one  farthing  to  maintain  them,  but  depended  wholly 
upon  her.  That  he  had  put  a  thousand  pounds  of  her  money  into 
the  Bank  in  his  own  name,  and  had  given  her  no  declaration  of 
trust,  though  she  had  often  desired  it  of  him,  which  by  this  means 
is  lost  to  her,  and  must  pay  his  debts.  That  his  estate  in  the  Fo- 
rest,* where  she  had  built  her  house,  and,  I  think,  is  copyhold,  was 
purchased  for  his  life  at  300/.  which  must  now  be  paid  again. 
That  upon  his  great  importunity  she  built  that  house  at  a  great  ex- 
pense, which  is  now  much  too  big  for  her.  I  was  extremely  con- 
cerned to  hear  this  sad  account,  and  promised  I  would  do  what  I 
could  to  maintain  her  nephew  in  the  university  :  for  to  take  him  so 
young  from  thence  would  be  his  ruin ;  and  for  this  reason  have  re- 
presented the  case  to  you,  presuming  upon  our  old  friendship,  but 
have  not  the  confidence  to  do  so  much  to  some  great  men  you 
know,  for  it  must  be  great  kindness  or  great  virtue,  that  recovers  a 
baulked  charity.  But  this  good  Lady's  condition  is  so  very  pitia- 
ble, that  I  wish  you  could  persuade  my  Lord  Chancellor  to  repre- 
sent it  to  his  Majesty,  who  I  am  persuaded,  after  all  his  generous 
goodness  to  her,  would  still  be  inclined  to  compassion  her  new  mis- 
fortunes.   I  arn,  dear  sir, 

"  Your  most  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

"  William  Sherlock." 

The  Archbishop's  nephew,  mentioned  in  this  letter,  Mr.  Robert 
Tillotson,  son  of  his  brother  Joshua,  was  educated  at  Clare  Hall,  of 
which  he  was  afterwards  fellow ;  and,  during  the  course  of  his 
education,  was  honoured  with  the  favour  of  Lord  Sommers,  out  of 
regard  to  his  uncle's  memory,  which  was  acknowledged  by  him  in 
a  Latin  letter  to  his  Lordship  still  extant.  Upon  entering  into  or- 
ders he  was  presented  to  the  sinecure  of  Elme,  of  considerable  va- 
lue, in  the  isle  of  Ely,  by  the  executors  of  the  Archbishop,  to  whose 
disposal  that  option  was  left. 

Mr.  Nelson's  letter  to  Lord  Sommers  was  as  follows  : 

"  MY  LORD, 

"  I  took  the  liberty  to  put  Mr.  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer 
in  mind  of  that  favourable  answer  your  Lordship  procured  from  the 


*  Valentines,  near  Wanslcad,in  Essex. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


ccxli 


King  in  reference  to  Mrs.  Tillotson's  affairs,  in  hopes  that  he  would 
lay  some  proposals  before  his  Majesty  for  his  royal  approbation, 
in  order  to  satisfy  the  necessity  of  Mrs.  Tillotson's  circumstances, 
and  that  they  might  be  dispatched  before  the  King's  departure ; 
since,  as  I  apprehend,  matters  of  this  nature  suffer  extremely  by 
delay,  and  meet  with  the  best  success,  when  the  sense  of  their  fit- 
ness makes  the  deepest  impression.  The  distance  I  live  from  town, 
and  the  aversion  I  have  to  be  troublesome  to  great  men,  makes  me 
ignorant  of  what  progress  Mr.  Chancellor  has  made,  though  I  must 
own  he  expressed  great  zeal  to  the  memory  of  the  Archbishop, 
and  professed  much  readiness  and  inclination  to  serve  Mrs.  Til. 
lotson. 

"  Your  Lordship's  generous  procedure  emboldens  me  to  solicit 
the  continuance  of  your  favour,  being  confident,  that  your  Lordship 
will  receive  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  from  seeing  that  finished, 
which  your  Lordship's  great  goodness  has  given  a  birth  to.  And  if 
Mr.  Montague  wants  any  incitement  besides  your  Lordship's  ex- 
ample, your  Lordship's  constant  owning  Mrs.  Tillotson's  cause  will 
be  an  argument  too  powerful  to  be  resisted.  I  have  all  the  respect 
imaginable  for  your  Lordship's  post  and  character,  but  I  must  pro- 
fess, it  is  the  experience  of  your  Lordship's  personal  merit,  which 
-creates  the  profoundest  respect  of,  my  Lord, 

"  Your  Lordship's  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

"  Nelson/' 

<(  Blackheath)  July,  1698." 

The  Archbishop  had  by  his  wife,  to  whom  he  was  married  at 
St.  Lawrence  Jewry,  by  her  father-in-law,  Dr.  Wilkins,  on  the  23d 
of  February,  166j,*  two  daughters,  Mary  and  Elizabeth,  who  both 
died  before  him  ;  the  former,  who  was  married  to  Mr.  Chad  wick, 
leaving  two  sons  and  a  daughter.  The  elder  was  educated  at  Ca- 
therine Hall,  in  Cambridge,  under  Mr.  Benjamin  Hoadly,  then  fel- 
low of  that  college,  afterwards  lord  bishop  of  Winchester;  and,  re- 
tiring to  his  paternal  estate,  in  Nottinghamshire,  of  about  three  hun- 
dred pounds  a-year,  died  there  young,  leaving  a  son,  Evelyn  Chad- 
wick,  Esq.  The  younger  son  was  a  Turkey  merchant,  and  died 
about  1735.  And  the  daughter  was  married  to  Mr.  Fowler,  a  con- 
siderable linen-draper,  in  London,  and  son  of  Dr.  Fowler,  bishop 
of  Gloucester. 


*  Iruin  ilic  register  of  St  Lawrence  Jewry. 


ccxlii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


His  posthumous  sermons  were  published  by  his  chaplain,  Dr. 
Ralph  Barker,  who  had  been  fellow  of  Caius  College,  in  Cambridge, 
and  preferred  by  his  Grace,  while  dean  of  St.  Paul's,  in  September, 
1690,  to  the  rectory  of  St.  Mary  Magdalen,  Old  Fish  Street,  in 
London,  which  he  resigned  in  May,  the  year  following,  for  some 
other  preferment.  The  Doctor  was  particularly  qualified  for  this 
office  of  editor,  having  been  instructed  by  his  patron  in  the  cha- 
racter, in  which  he  wrote  all  his  sermons.  The  first  volume  of 
these  sermons,  which  begins  with  one  on  John  i.  47.  the  last  preached 
by  his  Grace, atKingston,  July  29, 1694,  was  published  in  1695  with 
a  dedication  to  the  King  by  Mrs.  Tillotson  ;  and  the  14th  and  last 
volume  was  printed  in  1704.  Dr.  Samuel  Bradford,  then  rector  of 
St.  Mary-le-Bow,  and  afterwards  bishop  of  Carlisle,  in  April,  1718, 
and  of  Rochester,  and  dean  of  Westminster,  in  1723,  who  had  been 
honoured  with  the  friendship  and  patronage  of  his  Grace,  by  whom 
he  was  presented  to  the  rectory  abovementioned,  in  November, 
1693,  was  likewise  employed  in  revising  and  correcting  the  impres- 
sion of  these  sermons ;  besides  which  there  was  one,  which  was 
then  suppressed,  and  is  now  probably  lost.  In  that  sermon  the 
Archbishop  took  an  occasion  to  complain  of  the  usage,  which  he 
had  received  from  the  nonjuring  party,  and  to  expose  in  return  the 
inconsistency  of  their  own  conduct,  remarking  particularly,  that 
upon  a  just  comparison  of  their  principle  of  non-resistance  with 
their  actual  non-assistance  to  King  James  II.  they  had  little  reason 
to  boast  of  their  loyalty  to  him.  And  yet,  severe  as  this  discourse 
was  upon  that  party,  Mr.  Nelson,  who  was  attached  to  them,  was 
very  zealous  for  printing  it,  alleging,  that  they  deserved  such  a  re- 
buke for  their  unjust  treatment  of  so  good  a  man. 

His  sermons  against  the  doctrines  of  the  church  of  Rome  was 
attacked  after  his  death  in  a  book,  intitled,  A  true  and  modest  Ac- 
count of  the  chief  Points  in  Controversy  between  the  Roman  Ca- 
tholics and  the  Protestants  ;  the  writer  of  which,  N.  Colson,  pro- 
fesses, in  the  beginning  of  his  preface,  "  to  answer  the  most  ma- 
terial objections  in  Dr.  Tillotson's  Sermons,"  as  well  as  "  to  lay 
down  the  grounds,  on  which  the  popish  religion  is  founded.''  He 
allows  indeed  his  Grace  the  character  of  an  "  ingenious  person," 
though  as  he  insinuates,  without  any  solid  sense  or  argumentation, 
and  affirms  him  to  have  been  much  inferior  to  his  antagonist,  Mr. 
Serjeant,  whom  he  styles  "  a  great  wit,"  a  title,  which  he  much  less 
deserved,  than  the  other,  which  he  gives  him,  of"  an  indefatigable 
writer."  Mr.  Colon's  book  was  answered  by  a  divine,  who  had 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cdxiii 


been  honoured  with  his  Grace's  acquaintance,*  Lewis  Atterbury, 
L.  L.  D.  rector  of  Sheperton,  and  Hornsey,  in  Middlesex,  and  el- 
der brother  of  Francis,  lord  bishop  of  Rochester.  Dr.  Atterbu- 
ry's  answer  was  published  at  London,  in  1709,  in  8vo.  under  the 
title  of  A  Vindication  of  Archbishop  Tillotson's  Sermons  ;  being  an 
Answer  to  a  Popish  Book,  intitled,  A  true  and  modest  Account  of 
the  chief  Points  in  Controversy  between  the  Roman  Catholics  and 
the  Protestants,  &c.  Wherein  these  following  heads  are  consider- 
ed : — 1.  The  church  of  Rome  not  Catholic.  2.  The  supremacy. 
3.  The  infallibility  of  the  church.  4.  Transubstantiation.  5.  Com- 
munion in  one  kind.  G.  Prayers  in  an  unknown  tongue.  7.  The 
invocation  of  saints.  8.  Images.  9.  Purgatory.  10.  Indulgences. 
In  his  answer  to  Mr.  Colson's  preface  he  remarks, t  that  his 
Grace's  sermons,  "  besides  the  plainness  and  familiarity  of  the  ex- 
pression, and  the  other  beauties  of  style,  have  this  advantage  be- 
yond other  controversial  writings,  that  his  arguments  against  pope- 
ry being  intermixed  with  more  practical  truths,  are  read  with  plea- 
sure and  delight  by  such  persons,  who  would  never  endure  the  fa- 
tigue of  turning  over  and  considering  a  book  writ  closely,  and  con- 
sisting only  of  dry  argumentation."  He  owns,J  that  "  the  Arch- 
bishop sometimes  diverts  himself  and  his  reader  with  the  foppery 
and  impertinences  of  the  popish  authors,. their  unsound  reasonings, 
and  absurd  consequences  ;  but  never,"  adds  he,  "  at  the  expense 
of  good  manners  or  good  breeding.  He  every  where  mingles  his 
sharpest  reflections  on  the  cause  with  charity  to  the  person  ;  recon- 
ciles controversy  with  goodnature,  and  hath  shewn  himself  to  be 
not  only  a  skilful  divine,  and  an  able  disputant,  but  also  a  good 
man,  and  one  of  the  civilest  gentlemau-like  persons  in  the  world." 

Another  answer  to  the  true  and  modest  Account  was  published 
in  a  book  published  in  April,  1725,  at  London,  and  intitled,  A  Vin- 
dication of  the  Doctrines  of  the  Church  of  England  in  Opposition 
to  that  of  Rome,  as  far  as  the  Infallibility  of  the  Church  in  gene- 
ral, or  of  the  Church  of  Rome  in  particular,  the  Catholicism  of  the 
Roman  Church,  or  the  Supremacy  of  her  Popes,  and  the  Allegiance 
due  to  his  Majesty,  are  concerned  ;  in  which  the  Objections  of 
N.  C.  Papist,  against  Archbishop  Tillotson,  Dr.  Hammond,  and 
other  Protestant  Writers,  in  the  very  Popish  Words  and  Terms, 

*  See  Life  of  Lewis  Atterbury,  L.L.D.  by  Edward  Yardley,  B.  D.  archdeacon 
of  Cardigan,  prefixed  to  Dr.  Alterburj's  Sermons,  Edit.  London,  in  8vo. 
t  P.  4.  t  P-  3. 


ccxliv 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


are  particularly  considered  :  by  Philip  Gretton,  some  time  Fellow 
of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and  now  Rector  of  Springfield, 
Essex. 

Francis  Martin,  of  Galway,  in  Ireland,  doctor  of  divinity,  regius 
professor,  and  interpreter  of  the  Greek  language  in  the  university 
of  Louvain,  undertook  an  elaborate  confutation  of  the  Archbishop's 
sermon  on  1  Cor.  iii.  15.  concerning  the  Hazard  of  being  saved 
in  the  Church  of  Rome;  and  published  it  at  Louvain  in  1714, 
in  8vo.  under  the  title  of  "  Scutum  Fidei  contra  Haereses  hodi- 
ernas  :  seu  Tillotsonianae  Concionis,  sub  titulo  Strena  opportuna 
contra  Papismum,  Refutatio  :  Auctore  eximio  Domino  ac  Magistro 
nostro,  Francisco  Martino  Iberno-Galviensi,"  &c.  The  dedication 
to  the  Bishop  of  Bruges  is  dated  April  13,  1714.  In  the  preface 
the  author  declares  his  resolution  to  procure  a  translation  of  his 
book  into  French,  English,  and  Irish.  At  the  close  of  it  he  justi- 
fies his  having  every  where  treated  the  Archbishop,  or,  as  he  calls 
him,  Pseudo-Archiepiscopus,  with  harshness;  because  he  deserved 
it  on  account  of  his  frequent  and  bold  falsities  on  the  subject  of 
religion,  and  having  been  an  anabaptist,  and  the  first  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury  who  was  married  ;  and  because  it  was  well  known 
what  party  he  followed,  and  by  whom  he  was  promoted  to  that 
see.* 

Among  the  protestants  who  have  attacked  his  Grace's  writing?, 
one  of  the  most  forward  and  petulant  was  Dr.  South,  whose  learn- 
ing and  genius  were  accompanied  with  an  unrestrained  acrimony  of 
temper,  and  a  boundless  severity  of  language  mixed  with  the  low- 
est and  falsest,  as  well  as  truest  wit,  both  in  his  conversation  and 
writings,  against  those  who  differed  in  the  least  from  him,  especi- 
ally in  matters  which  he  imagined  or  represented  to  concern  the 
interests  of  the  established  church,  for  which,  after  the  Restora- 
tion, he  appeared  the  most  zealous  champion  on  all  occasions, 
though  before  that  event  he  had  insinuated  himself  into  the  good 
opinion  of  Dr.  John  Owen,  dean  of  Christ  Church,  where  he  was  edu- 
cated, and  of  the  independent  party,  whom  he  afterwards  abandon- 

*  Ne  minem  oftendat  quod  ubiq  ;  Tillotsonum  durius  exceperim.  Quia  iu  causa  re- 
ligionis  toties  et  tarn  splendide  mentitus,  ex  Apostoli  ad  Titum  raarrdato,  dure,  sicut 
commeruit,  increpandus  erat  ;  nec  mitiori  stylo  de  mendaciis  et  -imposturis  ejus 
loqui  me  oportebat.  Scapham  semper  licet  appellare  scapham.  Adde  quod  ipse 
(ut  heterodoxorum  fidedignorum  relatu  accepi)  Anabapti;>ta  fuerit,  etprimus  Cantua- 
riensem  Mitram  Uxori  conjunxerit,  cunctisq  ;  notum  sit,  quibus  partibtis  inter  he- 
terodoxus  studuerit,  et  a  quibus  fuerit  ad  earn  Dignitatem  promotus.  Angli  saltern 
mt  intelligent  p.  220. 


• 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


€Ctlv 


ed,  and  joined  with  the  presbyterians.*  These  circumstances  are 
related  of  him  by  Mr.  Wood,  who  has  drawn  his  character  in  a 
manner  not  at  all  favourable  to  his  memory,  and  has  the  more 
weight  from  his  own  conformity  to  the  Doctor's  professed  princi- 
ples both  in  church  and  state.  It  is  no  wonder  that  a  man  of  this 
divine's  disposition  should  conceive  an  early  aversion  to  one  of  so 
opposite  a  temper  and  conduct  as  Dr.  Tillotson ;  or  shew  it  in  his 
writings.  He  took  extreme  offence  in  particular  at  the  sermon  of 
the  latter,  preached  at  the  Yorkshire  feast,  in  December,  1678, 
and  animadverted  upon  it  several  years  after  in  one  of  his  own  on 
Galat.  ii.  5.  intitled,  "  False  Methods  of  governing  the  Church  of 
England  exploded  ;"  in  which,  alluding  to  a  passage  in  which  Dr. 
Tillotson  speaks  of  the  plausible  exceptions  of  those  who  differ 
from  us,  with  respect  to  some  very  few  things,  Dr.  South  expresses 
himself  thus :+  "  The  exceptions  being  thus  stripped  of  their  plausi- 
bility, and  force  too,  and  returned  upon  the  makers  of  them,  it  fol- 
lows, that  notwithstanding  all  the  loud  harangues  concerning  dif- 
fering in  lesser  things  (as  the  phrase  still  goes),  and  our  contend- 
ing about  shadows,  and  the  like,  made  by  some  amongst  us,  who 
would  fain  be  personally  popular  at  the  cost  of  the  public,  and 
build  themselves  a  reputatio^with  the  rabble  on  the  ruins  of  the 
ehiwch,  which  by  all  the  obligations  of  oaths  and  gratitude,  they 
are  bound  to  support,  as  I  am  sure  that  supports  them ;  it  follows, 
I  say,  that  for  the  governors  of  our  church  to  be  ready,  after  all 
this,  to  yield  up  the  received  constitutions  of  it,  whether  to  the  in- 
firmity or  importunity,  or  the  plausible  exceptions  (as  their  advo- 
cates are  pleased  to  term  them)  of  our  clamorous  dissenters,  is  so 
far  from  being  a  part  of  either  the  piety  or  prudence  of  those  go- 
vernors (as  the  same  advocates  intimate),  that  it  is  the  fear  of  many, 
both  pious  and  prudent  too,  that  in  the  end  it  is  like  to  prove  no 
other  than  the  letting  a  thief  into  the  house,  only  to  avoid  the  noise 
and  trouble  of  his  rapping  at  the  door."  He  then  +  argues  against 
the  scheme  of  a  comprehension,  and  points  out  the  certain  una- 
voidable effects  of  it ;  "  nor  indeed,"  adds  he,  "  could  any  other 
or  better  be  expected,  by  those  that  knew  that  the  surest  way  to 
ruin  the  church  would  be  to  get  into  the  preferments  of  it."  He 
afterwards  §  shews  his  disinclination  to  the  toleration,  which,  he 
says,  "  had  the  fortune  to  get  a  law  (or  something  like  a  law)  made 
in  its  behalf." 


•  Athen.Oxon.  vol.  ii.  col.  1042.  t  Dr.  Soutli's Sermons,  vol.  v.  p.  486.  Edit.  1737. 
t  Ibid.  p.  494.  $  Ibid.  p.  495. 


ccxlvi 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


Mrs.  Astell,  in  one  of  her  works,  which  do  honour  to  her  under- 
standing as  well  as  piety,  and  give  her  an  eminent  rank  among  the 
writers  of  her  sex,  has  made  some  remarks*  upon  the  Archbishop's 
doctrine  of  the  satisfaction  in  his  sermons  concerning  the  Divinity 
and  Incarnation  of  our  blessed  Saviour ;  though  she  treats  him 
with  the  highest  respect,  styling  him  a  great  author,  so  deservedly 
celebrated  for  his  good  sense  and  just  expression,  the  strength  and 
clearness  of  his  reasoning,  and  his  natural  and  unaffected  eloquence. 
And  Dr.  Waterlandf  commends  this  ingenious  lady,t  for  having 
animadverted  upon  his  Grace  both  modestly  and  judiciously. 

The  works  of  his  Grace  were  digested  by  Mr.  Lawrence  Echard, 
archdeacon  of  Stow,  into  a  volume  of  Maxims,  published  at  London, 
in  1719,  in  8vo.  who  in  his  preface  observes,  that  he  had  been  long 
of  opinion,  that  out  of  the  English  writers  many  apothegms,  wise 
sentences,  and  contracted  arguments,  as  beneficial  and  agreeable 
as  any  in  foreign  authors,  might  be  selected  to  excellent  good  pur- 
poses ;  and  that  u  more  particularly  in  Archbishop  Tillotson's 
works  may  be  found  a  number  of  passages,  not  inferior  to  Roche- 
foucault  and  La  Bruyere,  but  with  this  difference,  that  the  latter 
wrote  with  design,  and  the  Archbishop  occasionally,  as  his  subject 
led  him ;  so  that  their's  were  sometimes  more  finished,  but  his  more 
natural :  their's  had  sometimes  a  more  artful  turn,  which  the  French 
nation  have  studied  and  practised  almost  to  affectation;  his  had  a 
native  simplicity  and  grandeur  more  agreeable  to  the  English  taste. 
They  all  had  a  profound  insight  into  human  nature ;  but  the  French 
seemed  to  have  had  more  subtlety,  and  our  English  author  more 
solidity."  Upon  this  supposition  and  belief,  Mr.  Echard  undertook 
to  make  a  select  collection  of  various  passages  out  of  the  writings 
of  the  Archbishop  ;  methodizing  them  under  proper  heads  and 
subjects,  as  they  would  well  bear.  This  treatise  he  doubted  not 
would  prove  both  useful  and  entertaining  to  all,  who  have  a  true 
taste  for  polite  and  correct  writing;  and  that  those  who  had  read 
but  little  of  his  works,  when  they  came  to  see  the  justness  of  the 
thoughts,  the  happiness  of  the  expressions,  and  the  latent  wit,  that 
diffuses  itself  through  the  whole,  would  be  incited  to  read  him  at 
full  length,  and  to  consider  him  not  only  as  a  divine  and  moralist, 

*  The  Christian  Religion,  as  professed  by  a  Daughter  of  the  Church  of  England, 
p.  403 — 418.  Edit.  London,  1705,  in  8vo. 
t  Advice  to  a  young  Student,  p.  24.  3d  Edit. 

X  She  died  at  Chelsea,  in  May,  1731.  Monthly  Chronicle,  vol.  iv.  p.  95,  96 ;  and 
Memoirs  of  several  learned  Ladies  of  Great  Britain  :  by  George  Ballard,  p.  460. 
Edit.  Oxford,  1753,  in  4to. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


ccxlvii 


but  as  a  gentleman,  who  had  a  large  and  deep  insight  into  the  na- 
ture of  mankind. 

The  reputation  of  his  Grace's  writings  in  foreign  countries  was 
partly  owing  to  Mons.  Le  Clerc,  who,  in  his  Bibliotheque  Choisie,* 
for  the  year  1705,  gave  an  account  of  the  second  edition,  in  1699, 
in  folio,  of  those  published  in  his  Grace's  life-time.  He  declares 
there,  that  the  Archbishop's  merit  was  above  any  commendations 
which  he  could  give,  and  that  it  was  formed  from  the  union  of  an 
extraordinary  clearness  of  head,  a  great  penetration,  an  exquisite 
talent  of  reasoning,  a  profound  knowledge  of  true  divinity,  a  solid 
piety,  and  a  most  peculiar  perspicuity  and  unaffected  elegance  of 
"style,  with  every  other  quality,  that  could  be  desired  in  a  man  of 
his  order:  and,  to  crown  all  this,  these  excellent  qualities  were  too 
conspicuous  not  to  expose  him  to  envy  and  calumny,  which  scarce 
ever  attack  persons  of  the  common  or  those  whose  qualifica- 

tions are  not  eminent.  That  his  Grace  indeed  had  been  accused  of 
Socinianism,  an  imputation  generally  cast  upon  men,  who  have  rea- 
soned with  a  force  and  exactness  above  the  vulgar,  and  preferred 
the  expressions  of  Scripture  to  the  language  of  the  school-men. 
But  slanders  of  this  kind,  instead  of  blemishing  the  reputation  of 
men  of  the  Archbishop's  rank,  only  set  it  off  with  greater  advan- 
tage, like  shades  in  a  picture.  With  regard  to  his  sermons,  Mons. 
Le  Clerc  observes,  that  whereas  compositions  of  that  kind  are  com- 
monly mere  rhetorical  and  popular  declamations,  and  much  better 
to  be  heard  from  the  pulpit  than  read  in  print,  those  of  the  Arch- 
bishop are  for  the  most  part  exact  dissertations,  and  capable  of 
bearing  the  test  of  the  most  rigorous  examination  of  the  most  ac- 
curate reasoners. 

The  sermons  published  in  his  life-time  were  first  translated  into 
Low  Dutch,  and  then  a  French  version  of  them  was  begun  by  Mons. 
D'Albiac,  a  French  minister  in  Holland,  and  the  first  volume  of  it 
published  in  8vo.  at  Amsterdam,  in  1706.  Mons.  Bernard,  in  his 
Nouvelles  de  la  Republique  des  Lettres,t  gave  a  good  extract  of 
this  volume,  which  he  begins  with  remarking,  that  as  the  title  of 
sermons  is  no  great  recommendation  of  a  book,  since  many  persons 
expect  to  find  there  only  cold  declamations  on  subjects  common, 
and  treated  of  a  thousand  times  before  by  preachers  ;  it  would  not 
have  been  improper  to  have  intitled  this  w  ork  of  the  incomparable 
Archbishop,  "  Discourses  or  Dissertations  upon  the  most  import- 
ant Points  of  Religion.''    He  then  observes,  that  these  sermons 

*  Tom.  vii.  art.  8.  p.  239,  et  seq.        t  Mois  de  Decerobre,  1705,  art.  2.  p.  627. 


ccxlviii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


would  be  better  relished  by  men  of  learning  and  good  taste,  than 
by  those  who  are  destitute  of  both.  That  some  perhaps  might  be 
offended  with  the  simplicity  of  the  style,  and  treat  what  is  thus 
plain  and  natural  as  low.  But  that  this  simplicity  in  the  original 
was  no  inconsiderable  part  of  its  merit  among  the  EngHsh,  so  that 
many,  who  had  no  regard  for  religion,  read  these  sermons  merely 
for  the  beauty  of  the  language.  "  It  is  to  be  observed,"  continues 
Mons.  Bernard,  "  that  the  English  do  not  love  a  pompous  kind  of 
eloquence,  in  which  all  the  words  are  studied  and  placed  with  as 
much  care  as  a  statue  of  a  saint  in  his  niche.  They  are  apprehen- 
sive of  a  design  to  surprise  them,  when  they  are  approached  with 
so  much  preparation ;  and  they  are  jealous,  lest  this  elaborate  dress 
should  either  conceal  or  disguise  the  truth.  They  prefer  the  sim- 
ple beauty  of  nature  to  all  this  affected  rhetoric,  so  oppressed,  ra- 
ther than  adorned,  by  a  thousand  foreign  ornaments."  This  he 
thought  proper  to  premise,  as  he  was  assured  that  some  persons 
abroad  would  cry  out,  "Are  these  the  sermons  of  ArchbishopTillot- 
son,  which  have  been  so  highly  extolled?"  And  he  adds,  that  it  was 
affirmed,  that  his  Grace's  sermon  on  Prov.  xiv.  34.  had  been  made 
great  use  of  in  another  upon  that  text  by  a  learned  French  bishop, 
who  was  esteemed  one  of  the  best  preachers  that  ever  appeared  in 
France. 

The  second  volume  of  Mons.  D'Albiac's  version  was  published 
in  8vo.  But  the  task  of  translating  the  Archbishop's  works  into 
French  was  already  undertaken  by  a  much  abler  hand,  Mons.  Bar- 
beyrac,  so  justly  esteemed  for  his  own  writings,  and  his  excellent 
translations  of,  and  commentaries  upon,  Grotius  and  Puffendorf. 
The  first  volume  of  his  translation  of  his  Grace's  sermons  was  pub- 
lished at  Amsterdam,  in  1708.  To  this  he  prefixed  a  long  preface, 
to  shew,  that  the  Archbishop's  style  and  manner  of  preaching  are 
best  formed  for  doing  the  greatest  good.  He  has  added  likewise 
notes  and  citations  from  the  original  authors  referred  to  in  the  ser- 
mons. The  second  and  third  volumes  were  published  the  same 
year,  and  the  fourth  and  fifth  afterwards ;  and  Mons.  Barbeyrac 
revised  the  translations  of  the  sixth.  The  Archbishop's  Discourse 
against  Transubstantiation  was  likewise  published  in  French,  at 
London,  in  1685,  in  12mo.  and  a  new  version  of  it  by  Mons.  Bar- 
beyrac, in  1727,  in  12mo.  His  sermons  upon  Repentance  were 
translated  also  into  French  by  Mons.  Beausobre,  minister  of  the 
French  church  at  Berlin,  and  printed  at  Amsterdam,  in  1728,  in 
12mo.  Thirty  of  his  sermons  were  printed  likewise  in  High  Dutch 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


ecxlix 


at  Leipsic,  in  1(594,  in  4to.*  and  great  part  of  those  published  by 
himself  were  translated  into  that  language  by  John  Christian 
Frauendorf,  and  printed  there  in  1697.  f  Another  version  of  fif- 
teen of  his  sermons  was  printed  at  Dresden,  in  1728  and  1730,  in 
8vo.  with  a  preface  by  Bernard  Walthen  Marpenger  ;|  and  one  in 
Low  Dutch,  at  Rotterdam,  in  1712,  in  8vo.§ 

His  funeral  sermon  upon  his  friend  Dr.  John  Worthington, 
master  of  Jesus  College,  in  Cambridge,  and  preacher  at  St.  Bennet 
Fink,  in  London,  who  died  in  1671,  at  Hackney,  where  he  was 
chose  lecturer  the  year  before,  |J  was  never  printed  ;  but  an  extract 
of  it,  containing  the  character  of  the  Doctor,  is  inserted  in  the  pre- 
face to  that  learned  man's  Miscellanies,  published  at  London,  in 
1704,  in  8vo.  by  Dr.  Fowler,  bishop  of  Gloucester.  In  this  cha- 
racter of  Dr.  Worthington,  he  represents  him  in  the  most  amiable 
light,  as  a  perfect  example  of  unwearied  diligence  and  activity  in 
his  profession;,  and  for  the  general  service  of  mankind  ;  being  fur- 
nished with  a  great  stock  of  all  excellent  learning  proper  for  a  di- 
vine :  pious  and  grave,  without  moroseness  or  affectation,  as  re- 
markable for  humility  as  his  knowledge ;  zealous  in  his  friend- 
ships ;  charitable  beyond  the  proportion  of  his  estate ;  universally 
inoffensive,  kind,  and  obliging,  even  to  those,  who  differed  from 
him  ;  not  passionate  or  contentious  in  debates  or  controversies  of 
religion  ;  of  eminent  zeal  for  the  promotion  of  learning  and  piety  ; 
and  indefatigable  in  collecting,  reviewing,  and  publishing  the  works 
of  Mr.  Joseph  Mede,1T  "  which  he  did  with  so  much  care,  that  it 
would  be  hard  to  instance  either  in  our  own  nation,  or  perhaps  any 
where  else,  in  so  vast  a  work,  that  was  ever  published  with  more 
exactness ;  by  which  he  hath  raised  up  to  himself  a  monument 
likely  to  last,  as  long  as  learning  and  religion  shall  continue  in  the 
world."  Doctor  Worthington's  friendship  with  that  great  promoter 
of  all  useful  learning,  Mr.  Samuel  Hartlib,  was  cultivated  by  a  fre- 
quent correspondence  by  letters;  four-and-twenty  of  the  Doctor's 
being  published  at  the  end  of  his  Miscellanies,  and  several  others 
by  Bishop  Kennet,  in  his  Register  and  Chronicle.** 

The  Archbishop,  besides  his  own  discourse  against  Transub- 

*  J.  A.  Fabriciusde  verilate  religionis  Christiana1,  p.  282. 

t  Id.  Ibid.  p.  563.  J  Id.  Lux  Evangelii,  p.  186. 

§  Id.  de  verilate  rel.  Christian,  p.  564. 

|{  Preface  to  Dr.  Worlhington's  discourse  on  Christian  Love,  published  by  bis  son, 
Mr.  John  Worthington,  at  London,  in  1691.     f  Printed  at  London  1664,  in  folio. 

**  P.  867—871. 
VOL.  f.  Y 


ccl 


LtFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


stantiation,  was  likewise  editor  of  another  upon  the  same  subject, 
Entitled,  "  A  plain  Representation  of  Transubstantiation,  as  it  is  re- 
ceived in  the  Church  of  Rome,  with  the  sandy  Foundation  it  is 
built  upon,  and  the  Arguments,  which  do  clearly  avert  and  over- 
turn it,  written  by  Mr.  Henry  Pendlebury,  who  was  born  in  Lanca- 
shire, educated  at  Christ's  College,  in  Cambridge,  and  ejected  in 
1662  for  nonconformity  from  Holcomb  Chapel,  in  his  native  coun- 
ty, and  died  June  18,  1695,  at  the  age  of  seventy.* 

His  revisal  of  the  Harmony  of  the  Four  Evangelists,  by  Mr.  Sam- 
uel Cradock,  B.  D.  elder  brother  of  Dr.  Zachary  Cradock,  preacher 
of  Gray's  Inn  and  provost  of  Eton  College,  was  undoubtedly  of 
considerable  advantage  to  that  work,  printed  at  London  in  1668, 
in  fol.  as  his  care  had  preserved  it  from  the  flames  during  the  con- 
flagration of  that  city  in  September,  1666:  which  obligations  are 
mentioned  by  the  author  in  his  preface,  with  due  acknowledgments 
to  his  very  worthy  and  learned  friend. 

The  sanction  of  his  judgment  occasioned  the  publication  of  a 
very  valuable  discourse,  which  had  been  submitted  to  his  correc- 
tion by  the  author,  and  of  which  the  last  part  was  addressed  to 
him.  It  was  printed  at  London,  in  1682,  in  fol.  and  intitled,  "A 
View  of  the  Soul,  in  several  Tracts.  The  first  being  a  Discourse 
of  the  Nature  and  Faculties,  the  Effects  and  Operations,  the  Immor- 
tality and  Happiness  of  the  Soul  of  Man.  The  second  a  Cordial 
against  Sorrow,  or  a  Treatise  against  immoderate  Care  for  a  Man's 
own  Posterity,  and  Grief  for  the  Loss  of  Children.  The  third  con- 
sists of  several  Epistles  to  the  Rev.  John  Tillotson,  D.D.  and  Dean 
of  Canterbury,  tending  to  the  further  Illustration  of  the  former  Ar- 
guments concerning  the  Soul  of  Man,  and  the  Proof  of  a  particular 
Providence  over  it.  By  a  Person  of  Quality."  The  publisher  informs 
the  reader,  that  the  author  having  drawn  up  the  two  first  tracts, 
and  resolved  to  submit  them  to  the  judgment  of  some  other  per- 
son, applied  himself  for  that  purpose  to  the  Dean  of  Canterbury, 
a  person  well  known  to  the  world,  no  less  for  his  integrity  than  ac- 
curate judgment,  who  with  his  wonted  freedom  did  communicate 
his  thoughts  to  him  about  it,  and  encouraged  him  to  proceed  in  his 
design.  This  candour,  with  which  that  judicious  person  treated 
him,  did  at  once  both  increase  his  esteem  for  him,  and  induced  him 
to  think  over  his  arguments  again,  and  try  what  he  could  farther 
add  for  their  confirmation  and  improvement.    This  by  times  and 

*  Pr.  Calamy's  Acotmnt,  p.  400. 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


ccli 


in  several  ways  he  did  prosecute,  and  sent  his  thoughts  in  so  many 
familiar  epistles  to  the  Dean,  whom  he  had  now  made  his  friend. 
These  epistles  are  ten  in  number,  containing  219  pages ;  and  the 
first  opens  with  the  reason  of  the  author's  application  to  the  Dean, 
though  unknown,  "  not  only,"  says  he,  "  from  a  hearsay  of  your  clear 
judgment  and  courteous  disposition  to  all  men,  as  well  strangers 
as  familiars,  but  from  a  singular  opinion  I  had  of  you  myself,  that 
you  were  a  person  of  frank  and  open  discourse,  and  one,  who  would 
plainly  and  roundly  tell  me  of  my  faults  and  follies,  discover  your 
real  opinion  of  what  lay  before  you,  and  not  permit  and  suffer  me 
(a  mere  stranger)  for  want  of  admonition,  to  cherish  an  imperfect  or 
deformed  embryo,  and  such  as  might  casually  hereafter  be  born 
into  the  world  to  my  disgrace/' 

Not  long  after  he  was  advanced  to  the  Archbishopric,  he  had  in- 
tended to  hav  e  composed  in  Latin  a  system  of  natural  and  revealed 
religion  ;  but  the  business  of  that  important  post  was  probably  the 
cause  of  his  not  prosecuting  the  design.  The  plan,  dated  March 
1st,  169^,  is  still  extant  in  his  own  hand  ;  and,  as  the  smallest  re- 
mains of  so  great  a  master  deserve  to  be  preserved,  it  is  inserted  here. 

"  Summa  theologiae  Christianas  in  4  libros  distributa. 

"I.  De  religione  naturali  et  mentibus  humanis  inscia\ 
"  1.  De  Deo  liuuine  naturali  cognoscibili. 
"  2.  De  lege  naturae. 
"3.  De  providentia  divina. 
"4.  De  immortalitate  animorum. 
*'  5.  De  praemiis  et  poenis  post  mortem, 

"  II.  De  revelatione  divina* 
"  1.  De  variis  divinae  revelationis  generibus  et  gradibus. 
u  2.  De  revelatione  ad  Noachum  facta. 
w  3.  De  revelatione  ad  Abrahamum. 
"  4.  De  revelatione  per  Mosem  ad  Jud&os. 
"5.  De  revelatione  per  Christum  perfectissima  et  ultima. 
**  6.  Quare  non  prius  facta,  sed  tandiu  dilata. 

u  III.  De  religione  Christiana. 
"1.  De  Jesu  Domino  et  Salvatore  nostro,  et  religionis  Chi-ist- 
ianae  auctore. 

"  2.  De  materia  hujus  revelationis. 
"  3.  An  Christus  novas  leges  tulerit  ? 
"  4.  De  perfectione  hujus  religionis. 
u  5.  De  sacramentis  novi  foederis. 

y  2 


eelii  life  of  the  author. 

"  IV.  De  officio  hbminis  Christiani. 
"  1.  De  fide  hominis  Christiani  ad  salutem  necessaria. 
"  2.  De  poenitentia. 

"  3.  De  obedientia  Christiana  in  genere :  ejus  partes. 
"  4.  De  pietate  adversus  Deum. 
"  5.  De  temperantia  et  continents  sive  castitate. 
u  6.  De  virtutibus  sive  officiis  proximum  spectantibus. 
"  7.  De  charitate  omnium  aliarum  virtutum  fonte  et  vinculo. 
"  8.  De  obedientia  sincera  et  vere  evangelica. 
"  9.  De  praeparatione  ad  mortem. 
H  10.  De  supremo  judicio. 

"  11.  De  vitae  futurae  praemiis,  et  poenis  aeternis." 

There  are  extant  likewise  in  his  common-place  book  in  short- 
hand the  titles  of  a  course  of  sermons,  with  a  general  one  of  the 
Christian  Religion  vindicated  and  explained  in  several  Sermons  on 
the  chief  Articles  of  it  contained  in  the  Apostles'  Creed.  But  they 
are  most  probably  those,  which  he  drew  up  for  the  edition  of  Dr. 
Barrow's  sermons  on  that  Creed,  there  being  an  exact  correspond- 
ence between  them,  except  that  the  Achbishop's  title  of  the  thir- 
teenth sermon  is  Of  the  Truth  of  the  Christian  Religion  ;  whereas 
in  Dr.  Barrow's  works  it  is,  Of  the  Truth  and  Divinity  of  the  Christ- 
ian Religion ;  and  his  Grace's  MS.  list  contains  33  sermons,  but  in 
the  Doctor's  works  there  is  a  34th,  intitled,  f<  The  Divinity  of  the 
Holy  Ghost." 

The  Christian  religion  vindicated  and  explained  in  several  Sermons 
upon  the  chief  Articles  of  it  contained  in  the  Apostles'  Creed. 

I  believe,  &c. 

Sermon  I.  Of  the  evil  and  unreasonableness  of  infidelity.  Heb. 
iii.  12.  Take  heed,  &c.  Infidelity  is  the  cause  of  all  the  sin  and 
all  the  mischief,  &c. — Let  the  running  title  of  this  sermon  be, 
Of  Infidelity. 

I  believe,  &c. — Sermon  II.  Of  the  virtue  and  reasonableness  of 
faith.  2  Pet.  i.  1.  To  them  who  have  obtained,  &c. — Running 
title,  Of  Faith. 

I  believe,  &c. — Sermon  III.  Same  text,  2  Pet.  i.  1. — Running 
title  the  same. 

I  believe,  &c. — Sermon  IV.    Of  justifying  faith.    Rom.  v.  1. 
Therefore  being  justified,  &c. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


ecliii 


Sermon  V.    I  believe,  &c.    Text  the  same,  Rom.  v.  i.  Of  justifi- 
cation by  faith. 

Sermon  VI.  I  believe  in  God.  The  being  of  God  proved  from 
the  frame  of  the  world. — Jer.  li.  15.  He  hath  made  the  w  orld  by 
his  power,  &c. 

Sermon  VII.  The  being  of  God  proved  from  the  frame  of  human 
nature. — Gen.i.  27.  So  God  created  man,  &c. 

Sermon  VIII.  I  believe  in  God.  The  being  of  God  proved  from 
universal  consent. — Ps.  xix.  3,  4.  There  is  uo  speech  nor  lan- 
guage, &c. 

Sermon  IX.  I  believe  in  God.  The  being  of  God  proved  from 
supernatural  (facts)  effects. — John  v.  17.  But  Jesus  answered 
them,  My  Father,  &c. 

Sermon  X.  1  believe  in  God  the  Father.    Let  the  running  title  be, 

I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Eph.  iv.  6.  One  God  and  Father 

of  all. 

Sermon  XI.  The  Father  Almighty.  Running  title,  The  Father 
Almighty. — Rev.  xi.  17.  O  Lord  God  Almighty. 

Sermon  XII.    Running  title,  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth. — Acts 
iv.  24.    Lord,  thou  art  God,  &c. 

Sermon  XIII.  And  in  Jesus  Christ,  &c.  Of  the  truth  of  the 
Christian  religion. — Eph.  i.  13.  In  whom  ye  also  trusted,  &c. 

Sermon  XIV.  And  in  Jesus  Christ,  &c.  Of  the  impiety  and  im- 
posture of  Paganism  and  Mahometanism. — Text  the  same,  Eph. 
i.  13. 

Sermon  XV.    Of  the  imperfection  of  the  Jewish  religion. — Eph. 

i.  13. 

Sermon  XVI.  And  in  Jesus  Christ,  &c.  Of  the  excellency  of 
the  Christian  religion. — 1  Cor.  ii.  6.  We  speak  wisdom  amongst 
them  that  are  perfect,  &c. 

Sermon  XVII.    And  in  Jesus  Christ.    That  Jesus  is  the  true  Mes- 
siah.— Acts  ix.  22.  Proving  that  this  is  the  very  Christ. 

Sermon  XVIII.    The  same  title  and  text. 

Sermon  XIX.    The  same  title  and  text. 

Sermon  XX.    And  in  Jesus  Christ.    That  he  is  the  true  Messiah. 
John  v.  37.  And  the  Father  himself,  &c. 


ccliv  LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

Sermon  XXL    His  only  Son.    That  the  title — John  i.  14.  And 

we  beheld  his  glory,  &c. 
Sermon  XXII.    Our  Lord.    Running  title  the  same.— Eph.  iv.  5. 

One  Lord. 

Sermon  XXIII.  Who  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Run- 
ning title,  The  Incarnation  of  our  Lord.— Matt.  i.  20.  For  that 
which  is,  &c. 

Sermon  XXIV.  Conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  Virgin 
Mary.    Running  title  and  text  the  same  as  the  former. 

Sermon  XXV.  Suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate.  Running  title  the 
same.— Text,  1  Cor.  i.  23.  But  we  preach  Christ,  &c. 

Sermon  XXVI.   Was  crucified.  Title  the  same.— Text  as  before, 

1  Cor.  i.  23. 

Sermon  XXVII.    Dead  and  buried.     Title  the  same. — Text, 

1  Cor.  xv.  3.  For  I  delivered,  &c. 
Sermon  XXVIII.    He  descended  into  hell.    Title  the  same. — 

Text,  Acts  ii.  27-  Because  thou,  &c. 
Sermon  XXIX.    He  rose  again  from  the  dead.    Title  the  same. — 
Text  Acts  i.  3.  To  whom  also  he  shewed  himself  alive  after,  &c. 
Sermon  XXX.    Article.  The  third  day  he  rose  again.    Title  the 
same. — Text,  Luke  xxiv.  46,  And  he  said  unto  them,  Thus  it  is 
written,  &c. 

Sermon  XXXI.  He  ascended  into  heaven,  and  sitteth  on  the  right 
hand,  &c.  Title  the  same. — Text,  Mark  xvi.  19.  He  was  re- 
ceived  up  into  heaven,  Sec. 

Sermon  XXXII.  From  whence  he  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick 
and  the  dead.  Running  title,  The  Reasonableness  and  Equity 
of  a  future  Judgment. — Eccles.  iii.  17.  I  said  in  my  heart,  God 
shall  judge,  &c. 

Sermon  XXXIII.  From  whence  he  shall  come,  &c.  Running  title, 
The  Certainty  and  Circumstances  of  a  future  Judgment  from  Di- 
vine Revelation. — Acts  x.  42.  And  he  commanded  us  to  preach 
unto  the  people,  &c. 

He  had  likewise  formed,  just  before  his  advancement  to  the  arch- 
bishopric, a  design  of  a  new  book  of  Homilies,  which  he  communi- 
cated to  Bishop  Burnet  and  Bishop  Patrick  ;*  not  with  any  inten- 

*  See  Bishop  Burnet's  preface  to  his  Essay  towards  a  new  book  of  Homilies,  in 
seven  sermons,  prepared  at  the  desire  of  Archbishop  Tillotson,  and  some  other  bi- 
shop*, printed  with  his  Sermons  preached  on  several  Occasions,  London,  1715,  in  8vo. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cclv 


tion  to  lay  aside  the  book  of  Homilies  already  established,  but  to 
add  a  new  one  to  that,  which  we  have  had  now  near  two  hundred 
years.  He  thought  that  this  was  not  full  enough,  and  that  it  was, 
according  to  the  state  of  things  at  the  time  in  which  it  was  com- 
posed, fitted  chiefly  to  settle  people's  minds  right  with  relation  to 
the  Reformation,  and  in  opposition  to  popery ;  and  though  such  a 
w  ork  had  been  of  great  use  to  the  nation,  another  book  of  Homilies, 
which  should  contain  a  full  and  plain  account  both  of  the  doctrinal 
and  practical  parts  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  give  a  clear  ex- 
planation of  every  thing  relating  to  our  holy  faith,  or  to  the  con- 
duct of  our  lives,  was  necessary  chiefly  for  the  instruction  of  the 
clergy,  and  might  also  be  a  family  book  for  the  general  use  of  the 
nation. 

He  proposed,  that  it  should  consist  of  sixty-two  homilies,  two- 
and-fifty  for  all  the  Sundays  of  the  year,  and  ten  for  the  following 
holidays:  Christmas,  the  Circumcision,  Epiphany,  Christ's  Present- 
ment in  the  Temple,  the  Annunciation,  Ash  Wednesday,  Good  Fri- 
day, Monday  and  Tuesday  in  Easter  week,  the  Ascension,  and 
Monday  and  Tuesday  in  Whitsun  week. 

He  designed  that  the  book  should  begin  at  Advent,  in  this  order : 
The  first  should  give  a  view  of  the  Mosaical  dispensation  :  the 
second  was  to  explain  the  prophecies  concerning  the  Messias  during 
the  first  temple;  and  the  third  those  in  the  captivity  in  Daniel; 
and  the  others,  during  the  second  temple.  The  fourth  was  to  shew 
what  were  the  defects  in  that  dispensation,  and  what  was  necessary 
to  establish  a  better  covenant  upon  better  promises  ;  with  a  parti- 
cular view  of  the  nature  of  the  priesthood  under  this  better  dispen- 
sation, it  being  Ordination  Sunday. 

Then,  from  Christmas  to  Ash  Wednesday,  in  a  series  of  sermons, 
the  circumstances  of  the  doctrine,  the  parables,  and  the  miracles 
of  Christ,  were  to  be  copiously  opened,  with  these  particulars:  On 
the  Fea^t  of  the  Circumcision,  baptism  was  to  be  explained,  as  in- 
troduced instead  of  it.  On  Epiphany,  the  calling  of  the  gentiles, 
with  the  progress  that  the  Christian  religion  made,  and  the  destruc- 
tiou  of  Jerusalem,  with  the  persecutions  that  followed,  were  to  be 
unfolded.  On  the  Presentment  in  the  Temple,  the  compliance  with 
the  authorized  rituals  of  religion,  even  though  the  body  of  a  church 
was  much  corrupted,  both  with  false  doctrines  and  superstitious 
practices,  was  to  be  evinced,  but  with  the  necessary  limitations  of 
such  a  degree  of  corruption,  as  should  make  a  separation  from  the 
body  not  only  lawful,  but  necessary.  On  the  Feast  of  the  Annun- 


cchi  LIFfi  THE  AUTHOR. 

ciation,  the  hymns  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  of  Zacharias  and  Simeon, 
as  being  parts  of  the  daily  worship,  were  to  be  paraphrased  and 
explained.  On  Ash  Wednesday,  and  the  three  first  Sundays  in 
Lent,  the  whole  doctrine  of  repentance  was  to  be  fully  enlarged 
on;  restitution  and  the  reparation  of  injuries  were  to  be  much 
pressed;  then  the  guilt  of  sin,  with  the  just  punishments  due  for 
it,  both  in  this  life,  and  in  the  next,  were  to  be  set  forth,  to  pre- 
pare men  for  a  due  sense  of  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ.  On 
the  Sunday  before  Easter,  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
and  every  thing  relating  to  it,  were  to  be  rightly  stated.  On  Good 
Friday,  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ  were  to  be  fully  set  forth. 
On  Easter  Day,  the  resurrection  was  the  proper  subject,  and  both 
the  evidence,  and  effects  of  it,  were  to  be  enlarged  upon.  On  Mon- 
day and  Tuesday  in  that  week  the  doctrines  of  the  resurrection,  of 
the  judgment  to  come,  and  of  the  blessedness  of  the  saints  in 
heaven,  were  to  be  illustrated. 

In  the  six  Sundays  to  Whitsuntide,  the  doctrine  of  justification 
was  to  be  explained,  and  some  expressions  in  the  first  book  of  Ho- 
milies, that  seemed  to  carry  justification  by  faith  only  to  a  height 
that  wanted  some  mitigation,  were  to  be  well  examined  ;  and  all 
that  St.  Paul  had  written  on  that  head,  both  to  the  Romans  and 
the  Galations,  was  to  be  explained  and  reconciled  to  what  St. 
James  wrote  on  the  same  subject.  Next,  sanctification  was  to  be 
rightly  stated  ;  faith  and  hope  were  to  be  explained  ;  the  mission  of 
the  apostles,  and  of  their  successors,  the  bishops  and  pastors  of  the 
church,  with  their  authority,  and  its  limits,  were  to  be  asserted. 
Christ's  ascension,  and  his  kingdom,  as  the  Messias,  were  next  to 
be  proved  and  explained.  The  great  effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
on  Whitsunday  was  then  to  be  dwelt  on,  upon  which  the  authority 
of  the  New  Testament  is  to  be  proved,  in  opposition  to  tradition ; 
and  the  authenticalness  of  the  Scriptures,  as  they  are  now  in  our 
hands,  was  to  be  evinced.  For  the  Monday  and  Tuesday  in  Whit- 
sun  week,  the  necessity  of  inward  assistances  was  to  be  shewn,  and 
to  be  guarded  against  the  danger  of  enthusiasm.  On  Trinity  Sun- 
day, the  unity  of  God,  and  that  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 
were  one  God,  was  to  be  proved ;  with  an  exhortation  to  all  in  holy 
orders,  to  remember  their  vows,  and  to  live  and  labour  suitably  to 
their  profession. 

In  the  Sundays  after  Trinity,  the  sum  of  the  Ten  Commandment  s, 
and  every  one  of  the  ten,  with  the  duties  relating  to  it,  were  to  be  fully- 
opened:  in  particular,  humility,  meekness,  and  contentment,  and 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cclvii 


a  freedom  from  envy  and  covetousness.  After  this,  some  sermons 
were  to  be  added  concerning  prayer,  with  a  particular  enlargement 
on  all  the  parts  of  the  Lord's  Prayer.  And  the  year  was  to  end 
with  some  sermons,  enforcing  on  the  people  the  care  of  their  souls, 
and  their  duty  to  God,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  and  the  Governor 
of  the  world,  and  the  Saviour  of  all  who  believe. 

This  is  the  substance  of  that  scheme  which  the  Archbishop,  in 
a  long  conversation  with  Bishop  Burnet,  had  digested,  and  said  he 
would  communicate  to  others,  to  be  corrected  or  improved,  as  they 
should  advise.  In  order  to  this,  Bishop  Patrick  undertook  to  ex- 
amine carefully  the  Gospels  and  Epistles  for  the  w  hole  year,  to  see 
how  they  agreed  with  this  scheme,  and  to  select  such  other  por- 
tions of  the  Gospels  and  Epistles,  as  might  agree  better  with  all 
the  parts  of  it,  and  to  prepare  Collects  proper  for  them.  And 
from  some  discourse  with  his  Grace  afterwards,  Bishop  Burnet 
concluded,  that  he  had  made  a  good  progress  in  it. 

About  the  same  time,  their  Majesties  having  published  proclama- 
tions against  profane  swearing,  breach  of  sabbath,  lewdness,  and 
drunkenness,  the  Archbishop  desired  Bishop  Burnet  to  draw,  for 
an  essay,  homilies  on  those  subjects,  promising  to  take  a  large  share 
of  the  work  to  himself.  He  said,  that  Bishop  Patrick  was  willing 
to  do  the  same,  and  that  he  knew  several  persons,  who  had  consi- 
dered some  matters  relating  to  his  scheme  very  critically,  to  whom 
he  w  ould  assign  such  parts  of  it,  as  they  would  be  both  very  ready 
and  able  to  execute  well;  and  that  he  had  proposed  the  design  to 
Bishop  Lloyd,  who  approved  highly  of  it,  but  would  take  no  other 
share  in  it,  than  the  revising  the  several  compositions  that  were 
given  in  towards  the  finishing  the  work. 

When  Bishop  Burnet  had  drawn  up  the  five  Homilies,  which  the 
Archbishop  had  prescribed  to  him,  and  which  were  afterwards 
printed,  with  the  amendments  of  Bishop  Lloyd,  his  Grace  was 
so  pleased  with  them,  that  he  told  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  that 
his  Lordship  must  take  for  his  share  the  whole  Ten  Command- 
ments. 

But  soon  after  this  they  found  a  spirit  of  opposition  growing  so 
strong,  and  so  much  animated  and  supported,  that  it  was  to  no 
purpose  to  struggle  against  it  at  that  time.  For  which  reason  this, 
with  many  other  good  designs,  was  reserved  to  a  better  opportu- 
nity, and  no  further  progress  made  in  it. 

The  preface  to  the  letters  of  Sir  Everard  Digby,  one  of  the  con- 
spirators in  the  gunpowder  treason,  subjoined  to  a  new  edition  of 


cclviii 


LIFE   Of   THE  AUTHOR. 


the  history  of  it  by  Bishop  Barlow,  in  1679,  in  8vo.  was  evidently 
w  ritten  by  his  Grace,  not  only  from  the  style  and  manner  of  writing, 
but  as  being  likewise  subscribed  J.  T.  and  the  originals  of  those 
letters  having  been  mentioned  by  him  in  his  sermon  on  the  5th  of 
November,  the  year  preceding,  as  in  his  possession,  being  found 
about  September,  1675,  by  Sir  Rice  Rudd,  Bart,  and  William  Wo- 
gan,  of  Gray's  Inn,  Esq.  at  the  house  of  Charles  Cornwallrs,  Esq. 
executor  of  Sir  Kenelm  Digby,  son  and  heir  of  Sir  Everard,  tied 
up  in  two  silk  bags,  among  the  deeds,  evidences,  and  writings  of 
Sir  Kenelm.  They  were  licensed  for  publication  January  31, 1678-9, 
and  the  preface  gives  an  account  of  the  fidelity  of  their  publica- 
tion, with  several  remarks  upon  them ;  particularly,  that  Sir  Eve- 
rard appears  from  them  to  have  been  verily  persuaded  of  the  law- 
fulness of  the  design  in  which  he  had  been  engaged ;  and  that  he 
thought  it  also  lawful  to  deny  any  thing  upon  his  examination,  that 
was  to  the  disadvantage  of  his  religion,  or  might  bring  others  into 
danger,  without  any  regard  to  truth  ;  and  that  the  design  itself  was 
a  real  plot,  wherein  several  popish  priests  and  Jesuits,  and  other 
persons  of  quality  of  that  religion,  were  engaged  :  and,  not  only  so, 
but  that,  if  it  had  taken  effect,  an  association  of  foreign  princes  of 
the  same  religion,  by  a  solemn  oath,  like  that  of  the  holy  league  in 
France,  was  designed  to  have  assured  the  business  afterwards. 
<4  But  now,"  continues  the  preface,  "  to  come  threescore  years  after, 
and  to  think  to  baffle  all  the  records  and  histories  of  that  time  by 
a  bold  and  groundless  surmise,  that  all  this  was  a  contrivance  of 
Secretary  Cecil,  without  the  least  proof  or  evidence  produced  for 
it,  is  a  confidence  only  becoming  such  a  character  and  such  a  cause. 
To  conclude  this  matter,  though  the  priests  of  the  Romish  church 
are  able  to  impose  so  far  upon  the  easy  credulity  of  their  people, 
as  to  persuade  them  every  day  to  deny  their  senses,  and  to  believe 
contrary  to  what  they  plainly  see  ;  yet  have  they  no  reason  to  ex- 
pect the  same  civility  and  compliance  from  us,  whom  they  know  to 
have,  above  an  hundred  years  ago,  taken  up  an  obstinate  resolu- 
tion to  believe  our  own  senses,  against  the  confidence  and  pre- 
sumption of  any  church  in  the  world." 

The  short  time  during  which  the  Archbishop  filled  his  see,  pre- 
vented him  from  distinguishing,  as  he  intended,  several  learned 
men,  by  the  preferments  in  his  own  disposal,  or  his  interest  with 
the  crown.  Among  these  was  Dr.  Humphrey  Prideaux,  then  arch- 
deacon of  Suffolk,  prebendary  of  Norwich,  and  rector  of  Saham,  in 
Norfolk,  who,  in  a  letter  to  his  brother,  dated  in  that  city,  on  the 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cclix 


28th  of  December,  1694,*  lamented,  that  "  his  expectations  of 
farther  advancement  were  all  dead  with  the  Archbishop  nor  did 
he  receive  any  additional  preferment  till  June,  1702,  when  he  was 
promoted  to  the  deanery  of  Norwich,  upon  the  death  of  Dr.  Henry 
Fairfax,  descended  of  the  noble  family  of  that  name,  who  had  been 
expelled  from  his  fellowship  of  Magdalen  College,  in  Oxford,  on 
account  of  his  opposition  to  King  James  II. 's  mandate  for  admit- 
ting Mr.  Farmer  president  of  that  college. 

The  merits  of  Dr.  Humphrey  Hody  likewise  recommended  him 
to  his  Grace,  to  whom  he  was  appointed  domestic  chaplain  in  June, 
1694. t  He  was  born  January  1st,  1659,  at  Odcombe,  in  Somerset- 
shire, of  which  his  father  was  rector,  and  in  1676  sent  to  Wadham 
College,  in  Oxford,  of  which  he  was  chosen  fellow  ,  in  1684,  having 
taken  the  degree  of  master  of  arts  in  June,  1682,  as  he  did  in  Fe- 
bruary, 169§,  that  of  doctor  of  divinity.  His  first  performance 
was  written  while  he  was  only  bachelor  of  arts,  in  1680  and  1681, 
being  a  Latin  dissertation  against  Aristeas's  history  of  the  seventy 
interpreters,  printed  at  Oxford,  in  1685,  in  8vo.  This  produced 
an  answer  from  Isaac  Vossius,  canon  of  Windsor,  at  the  end  of  his 
Appendix  to  his  Observations  on  Pomponius  Mela,  printed  at  Lon- 
don, in  1686,  in  4to.  Dr.  Hody's  next  work  was  the  Prolegomena 
to  John  Malela's  Chronicle.  His  translation  into  English  of  an  an- 
cient Greek  manuscript  in  the  public  library  at  Oxford,  published 
at  London,  in  1691,  under  the  title  of  The  Unreasonableness  of  a 
Separation  from  the  new  Bishops,  engaged  him  in  a  controversy 
with  Mr.  Dodwell,  which  produced  several  pieces  on  both  sides 
on  that  subject.  He  had  been  chaplain  to  Dr.  Stiliingfleet,  bishop 
of  Worcester,  before  he  was  taken  into  the  family  of  Archbishop 
Tillotson,  whose  successor,  Tennison,  continued  him  in  the  same 
office,  and  gave  him  the  rectory  of  Charte,  near  Canterbury,  upon 
the  death  of  Mr.  Wharton,  on  the  5th  of  March,  169|;  which  Dr. 
Hody  immediately  exchanged  for  that  of  St.  Michael  Royal,  in 
London.  This  living  he  held  till  his  death  on  the  20th  of  January, 
1704,  together  with  the  Greek  professorship  at  Oxford,  to  which 
he  was  chosen  in  March,  169f,  and  the  archdeaconry  of  Oxford 
conferred  upon  him  in  1704.  He  had  prepared  for  the  press  a 
valuable  work,  formed  from  the  lectures  which  he  had  read  in  the 
course  of  his  professorship,  aud  containing  an  account  of  the  lives, 

*  In  the  possession  of  John  Loveda y,  of  Causham,  near  Reading,  Esq. 

+  Dissertatio  de  vita  et  sciiptis  Humphredi  Hodii,  autore  S.  Jebb,  M.  D.  p.  xxvu 
xxvii.  pra-fixa  libro  Hodii  de  Ciraecis  illustribus  linguae  Gnecae  literaruuique  huma- 
niorum  instauratoribus,  edit.  Londini,  1?  12. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


characters,  and  works  of  those  illustrious  Greeks,  who  introduced 
the  study  of  their  ancient  language  and  learning  into  Italy.  But 
it  continued  in  manuscript  above  thirty  years  after  his  death,  and 
was  published  at  London,  in  1742,  in  8vo.  by  Samuel  Jebb,  M.D. 
under  the  title  of  "  De  Grsecis  illustrious  linguse  Grzecae  literarum- 
que  hunianiorum  instauratoribus,  eorum  vitis,  scriptis,  et  elogiis, 
libri  duo,"  with  an  account  in  Latin  of  the  author's  life,  extracted 
chiefly  from  a  manuscript  one  written  by  himself  in  English. 

Another  of  the  Archbishop's  chaplains,  but  less  eminent  for  his 
writings,  which  consisted  only  of  a  few  sermons,  was  Dr.  George 
Royse,  born  at  Martock,  in  Somersetshire,  about  the  year  1655, 
and  admitted  a  semi-commoner  of  St.  Edmund's  Hall,  in  Oxford, 
in  the  beginning  of  April,  1671,*  where  he  took  the  degree  of  ba- 
chelor of  arts  March  1st,  1G7A,+  and  was  soon  after  elected  fel- 
low of  Oriel  College.  Upon  his  taking  the  degree  of  master,  May 
12th,  1678,^  he  entered  into  holy  orders,  and  became  chaplain, 
first  to  Richard  Lord  Wenman,  in  Oxfordshire,  then  to  George 
Earl  of  Berkley,  and  afterwards  to  King  William,  whom  he  attended 
in  that  capacity  to  Ireland,  in  June,  1690, §  having  been  created 
doctor  of  divinity,  at  Oxford,  on  the  22d  of  May  that  year.||  Af- 
ter his  return  from  Irelaud,  he  was  made  chaplain  to  Archbishop 
Tillotson,  who  gave  him  the  rectory  of  Newington,  in  Oxfordshire, 
vacant  by  the  death  of  Dr.  Henry  Maurice,  chaplain  to  his  prede- 
cessor; aud,  on  the  1st  of  December  following,  Dr.  Royse  was 
was  elected  provost  of  Oriel  College,  in  the  room  of  Dr.  Robert 
Say,  deceased.  1T  He  was  afterwards  advanced  to  the  deanery  of 
Bristol,  upon  the  death  of  Dr.  William  Levet,  being  installed  in  it 
on  the  10th  of  March,  169|,  and  died  in  April,  1708.** 

Among  others,  in  whose  favour  his  Grace  exercised  the  prero- 
gative annexed  to  the  archiepiscopal  see  of  conferring  degrees  in 
the  several  faculties,  was  Mr.  Robert  Hooke,  professor  of  geo- 
metry iu  Gresham  College,  to  whom  he  gave  that  of  doctor  of 
physic,  in  December,  1691;  +  +  who  well  deserved  such  a  distinc- 
tion, by  his  uncommon  industry  and  sagacity  in  the  study  of  na- 
tural philosophy,  and  the  fertility  of  his  invention  in  mechanics. 

His  long  acquaintance  with,  and  high  regard  for,  the  character 
and  writings  of  that  great  master  of  botany  and  natural  history 

*  Wood.  Ath.  Oxon.  vol.  ii.  p.  965.  t  Fasti,  vol.  ii.  col.  195.  t  Ibid.  col.  209. 
§  Athen.  ubi  supra.  |j  Fasti,  col.  235.  %  Atheii.  ubi  supra. 

**  Willis's  Survey,  vol.  i.  p.  787. 

it  Ward's  Lives  of  the  Professors  of  Gresham  College,  p.  188. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR, 


celxi 


in  general,  Mr.  John  Ray,  would  have  been  of  advantage  to  the 
fortune  of  the  latter,  which  was  very  slender,  after  his  Grace's  ad- 
vancement to  the  Archbishopric,  if  that  modest  and  pious  man 
would  have  accepted  of  preferment  in  the  church,  at  a  time  of  life, 
when  he  thought  himself  incapable  of  discharging  the  duties  of  it. 
Nor  did  he  omit  the  first  opportunity  of  returning  the  Archbishop 
a  public  mark  of  his  gratitude  and  esteem,  in  a  very  polite  dedication 
to  his  Grace,  of  his  three  physico-theological  discourses,  concern- 
ing the  Chaos,  the  Deluge,  and  the  Dissolution  of  the  World. 

His  Grace  was  likewise  instrumental  in  procuring  the  deanery 
of  Durham,  for  Dr.  Thomas  Comber,  with  whom  he  had  lived 
long  in  great  friendship,  and  for  whose  learning  and  piety  he  had 
an  high  esteem.  That  deanery  being  vacant  in  1691,  by  the  re- 
fusal of  Dr.  Dennis  Granville,  younger  brother  of  John,  the  first 
Earl  of  Bath,  to  take  the  oaths,  the  King  was  consulting  with  some 
of  the  leading  men  at  court,  to  whom  it  should  be  given.  The 
Marquis  of  Carmarthen,  afterwards  Duke  of  Leeds,  and  the  Arch- 
bishop, were  in  the  presence-chamber,  when  the  Earl  of  Falcon- 
berg,  who  had  been  reduced  from  a  wavering  state,  to  a  firm  ad- 
herence to  protestantism,  by  the  private  discourse  and  writings 
of  Dr.  Comber,  especially  his  advice  to  the  Roman  Catholics, 
proposed  that  divine  to  them,  as  a  proper  person  for  that  prefer- 
ment. Whereupon  the  Archbishop,  being  as  much  influenced  bv 
fais  regard  for  the  Doctor,  as  the  Marquis  was  connected  with 
him  by  family,  they  immediately  approved  of  Lord  Falconberg's 
proposal,  and  Dr.  Comber  being  recommended  to  his  Majesty, 
was  presented  to  the  deanery.*  The  year  following,  his  Grace 
requested  the  new  Dean,  to  write  an  answer  to  a  virulent  libel 
against  the  government,  called  Great  Britain's  Just  Complaint,  of 
which  Sir  James  Montgomery  was  supposed  to  be  the  author: 
and  the  Dean  having  finished  his  confutation  of  it,  sent  it  to  the 
Archbishop,  who  immediately  caused  it  to  be  printed,  though  with- 
out the  writer's  name.f  His  Grace  had  many  years  before  inter- 
posed to  moderate  the  differences  between  Dr.  Comber  and  Dr. 
Burnet,  on  account  of  the  History  of  the  Regale,  published  by 
the  latter,  in  1682,  to  which  the  former  having  written  an  answer, 
sent  it  to  Dr.  Lake,  bishop  of  Chichester,  who  committed  it  to  the 
press,  after  having  shewn  it  to  some  of  Dr.  Burnet's  friends  ;  which 

*  Extract  of  a  MS.  life  of  Dr.  Thomas  Comber,  some  time  dean  of  Durham,  writ- 
ten by  himself, 
t  Ibid. 


cclxii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


occasioning  much  altercation  both  in  words  and  writings,  Dr.  Til- 
lotson  used  all  his  interest  with  the  contending  parties  for  an 
accommodation.  And,  two  years  after,  when  Dr.  Comber  was 
preparing  for  the  press,  the  Second  Part  of  the  History  of  Tithes 
against  Mr.  Selden,  and  Dr.  Burnet's  book  abovementioned,  and 
a  treatise  ascribed  to  father  Paul,  Dr.  Burnett  being  then  in  dis- 
favour, with  the  court,  and  going  into  France,  their  common  friend 
Dr.  Tillotson,  requested  Dr.  Comber  to  omit  all  mention  of  that 
divine  in  his  work,  which  he  readily  consented  to  do.* 

Such  are  the  memorials  relating  to  the  incomparable  Archbishop 
Tillotson,  which  the  distance  of  above  half  a  century  from  his 
death  has  allowed  me  to  collect :  a  task  too  long  neglected  by 
others,  and  now  undertaken  by  me  from  a  just  apprehension,  that 
most  of  the  present  materials  for  a  life  of  him,  would  in  all  proba- 
bility have  been  lost  in  a  course  of  a  few  years  more.  I  can  only 
wish,  that  the  public  may  receive  the  same  satisfaction  from  the 
result  of  my  labour,  as  I  have  from  the  prosecution  of  this  attempt 
to  do  justice  to  the  memory  of  one  of  the  greatest  and  best  of 
men.  I  have  at  present  nothing  farther  to  add  upon  this  subject, 
except  what  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix:  and  I  shall  make 
some  amends  for  my  own  imperfections,  by  introducing  there  the 
judicious  observations  of  a  writer,t  whose  friendship  I  must  al- 
ways esteem  a  singular  advantage  to  myself,  as  his  works  are 
universally  allowed  to  be  to  the  joint  interests  of  learning  and  re- 
ligion. 

•  MS.  life  of  Dr.  Comber.  t  The  Rev.  Mr.  Jortin. 


APPENDIX 


NUMBER  L 

Some  Memorials  of  the  most  reverend  Dr.  John  Tillotson,  late 
Lord  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  :  written  upon  the  news  of  his  death 
bp  J.  B.*  M.  A.  for  his  own  private  satisfaction,  and  out  of  honow*  to 
his  Grace's  memory. 

I  have  reason  to  be  nearly  and  closely  concerned,  npon  the 
hearing  of  this  unexpected  news,  and  to  lament  it,  not  only  in  re- 
ference to  myself,  considering  my  quondam  relation  to  him,  as  his 
first  admitted  pupil,  about  the  latter  end  of  March,  165  J,  now  al- 
most forty-four  years  ago ;  but  also  upon  account  of  the  public 
loss  both  to  this  kingdom  and  church,  by  the  taking  away  of  so 
great  a  person,  the  chief  metropolitan  of  this  church,  and  privy- 
councellor  to  their  most  gracious  Majesties,  the  prime  ornament  of 
his  age,  the  love  and  admiration  of  all  good  men,  of  all  ranks  and 
qualities.  I  do  and  must  ever  acknowledge  with  thankfulness  to 
Almighty  God,  that  it  was  a  great  blessing,  and  a  merciful  disposal 
of  his  providence  to  me,  that  I  was  placed  under  the  tuition  of  so 
excellent  a  person,  as  he  was  then,  being  but  junior  bachelor,  and 
only  a  probationer  for  a  fellowship  in  Clare  Hall,  Cambridge.  There 
were  several  others  admitted  under  his  tuition  the  same  year,  and, 
among  the  rest,  the  worthy  Master  of  the  Charter  House,  Dr.  Bur- 
net. But  he  had  other  pupils  besides,  which  were  put  over  to  him 
by  Mr.  Clarkson,  fellow  of  the  said  college,  who  had  been  his  own 
tutor. 

He  was  at  those  years  a  very  good  scholar,  an  acute  logician  and 
philosopher,  a  quick  disputant,  of  a  solid  judgment,  and  no  way 
unqualified  for  the  trust  and  charge  incumbent  upon  him.  He 
spoke  Latin  exceedingly  well,  read  lectures  to  us,  that  were  admit- 
ted under  him,  out  of  Burgersdicius's  logic,  with  great  smartness  and 
judgment;  and  when  he  went  to  take  a  new  lecture,  he  examined 

*  John  Beardmore,  who  was  admitted  sixar  and  pupil  to  Dominus  Tillotson  on 
the  7th  of  April,  1631,  according  to  the  register  of  Clare  Hall,  in  Cambridge. 


cclsiv 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


us  about  the  former,  according  to  the  author,  and  his  own  explana- 
tions. When  we  went  to  prayers  in  his  chamber  a-nights,  he  put 
us  for  some  time  at  first  upon  construing  or  rendering  into  Latin  a 
chapter  in  the  Greek  Testament,  in  which  he  was  a  very  great 
critic  ;  and,  afterwards,  in  process  of  time,  he  used  to  put  some  or 
other  upon  giving  account  of  the  day's  reading;  after  which  ac- 
count given,  he  would  put  them  upon  defending  their  author  and 
his  sense  or  tenets.  This  was  ever  done  in  Latin  ;  for  I  know  not 
that  ever  he  spoke  a  word  of  English  to  us,  whilst  we  were  so  toge- 
ther, or  permitted  any  of  us  to  do  so.  He  sometimes  had  us  to  de- 
claim or  dispute  before  him  in  his  chamber  also  :  but  his  was  done 
in  the  afternoon  upon  such  days  as  he  appointed.  We  also  went 
to  him  to  prayers,  for  the  most  part  duly  on  Lord's  day  nights, 
when  he  examined  some  or  other  of  the  sermon  or  sermons  heard 
that  day ;  and  this  was  done  in  English,  for  that  was  the  only  day, 
when  he  spake  to  us,  or  we  gave  him  our  accounts,  in  English. 

His  prayers  were  (according  to  the  use  of  those  times)  of  that 
sort,  which  we  call  conceived  prayers,  in  which  he  had  a  very  great 
faculty  ;  but  always  performed  them  with  gravity  and  fervour;  as 
he  did,  also,  when  it  was  his  course  to  perform  prayer  in  the  chapel. 

In  the  week  days,  when  he  had  his  prayer,  as  we  were  going 
out  of  his  chamber,  he  usually  recalled  some  one  of  us,  and  then 
would  use  those  he  called  with  a  fair  freedom ;  discourse  them 
kindly,  encourage  to  studiousness,  seriousness,  and  diligence,  or 
tell  them  of  any  fault  he  either  observed  or  heard  of  in  them  ;  and 
those,  that  deserved  it,  he  would  reprove  very  sharply. 

Thus  he  was  a  very  good  tutor,  and  careful  of  his  pupils'  be- 
haviours and  manners ;  had  a  true  love  for  those  of  us,  that  he  saw 
deport  themselves  well,  and  was  respectful  to  them ;  but  very  se. 
vere  upon  those,  that  did  otherwise. 

As  for  my  other  observations  concerning  him,  whilst  I  was  re- 
lated to  him,  and  knew  him,  they  are  such  as  these  that  follow : 

He  was  very  religious  and  serious  ;  prayed  much  in  secret,  in  his 
bed-chamber:  he  used  his  voice  in  them,  but  so  as  none  could  per- 
ceive or  hear  the  same,  as  I  think,  except  myself,  who  kept  just 
over  him.  He  seemed  to  be  much  contrite  in  his  devotions ;  and 
he  doubtless  read  the  Scriptures  much,  it  appearing  by  his  sermons, 
that  he  was  very  ready  in  them. 

He  was  a  very  attentive  hearer  of  sermons,  of  which  in  that  time 
there  was  both  great  and  good  store,  he  generally  hearing  four  every 
Lord's  day,  besides  the  weekly  lecture  at  Trinity  Church,  on  Wed- 


LJLFB    OK  THE  AUTHOR. 


eel  xv 


uesclays,  which  was  preached  by  a  combination  of  the  worthiest 
aud  best  preachers  in  the  university  at  that  time,  all  of  them  fel- 
lows of  colleges. 

That  time  being  a  time  of  freedom,  the  most  prevailing  men  were 
generally  contra-remonstrants,  and  used  to  preach  much  upon 
those  subjects,  as  Dr.  Hill*  especially.  Mr.  Tillotson  heard  him 
constantly  on  Lord's  day  mornings  at  St.  Michael's  Church,  and  in 
the  afternoons  often  at  Trinity  :  but  it  did  not  appear  afterwards, 
that  he  imbibed  that  sort  of  theology,  but  rather  was  plainly  averse 
to  it.  There  were  divers  young  preachers  came  up  in  those  times 
who  were  of  a  freer  temper  and  genius  ;  such  as  were  Mr.  Samuel 
Jacorab,t  INI r.  Bright,  of  Emanuel  College, t  Mr.  Patrick,  bishop 
of  Ely,  and  others ;  who  went  not  that  way.  Mr.  Tillotson  seemed 
to  be  an  eclectic  man,  and  not  to  bind  himself  to  opinions. 

He  was  a  person  of  very  good  wit,  sharp,  and  acute,  pleasant  in 
conversation,  but  with  much  decorum  and  gravity  for  his  years. 

I  know  not,  that  he  was  of  those  called  hard  and  plodding  stu- 
dents, nor  affected  to  be  so.  He  did  not  note  or  pick  out  by  way 
of  common-place,  or  otherwise,  out  of  books  he  read,  but  only 
marked  them,  or  some  of  them,  that  he  meant  to  familiarize,  with  a 
black  pen.  He  read  Tullv  well ;  and  \  think  I  have  heard  say,  also, 
Twisse's  Vindiciee  Gratiae;  not  that  he  was  principled  with  the 
doctrine  of  it,  which  I  have  touched  before  ;  it  appears  he  was  not, 
but  because  of  the  acuteness  of  that  author  in  disputation. 

He  was  not  employed  much  in  exercise  either  in  public  or  in  the 
College,  but  rather  declined  it  all  he  could  ;  but  what  he  was  put 
upon,  he  performed  it  very  well. 

♦  Thomas  Hill,  D.  D.  educated  at  Emanuel  College,  in  the  university  of  Cam- 
bridge, and  incorporated  as  master  of  aits  m  that  of  Oxford,  on  the  9th  of  July,  1622. 
He  was  afterwards  rector  of  Ty  chmarsh,  in  Northamptonshire,  and  one  of  the  assem- 
bly of  divines,  and  at  last  master  of  Trinity  College,  in  Cambridge,  in  the  room  of  Dr. 
Tbomas  Comber,  ejected  by  the  authority  of  the  long  parliament,  before  whom  Dr. 
Hill  was  a  frequent  preacher.  He  died  in  1653, being  succeeded  by  Dr.  Arrowsmith, 
and  his  funeral  sermon  was  preached  by  Dr.  Anthony  Tuckney,  and  printed  in  1654, 
iu  8vo. 

♦  He  was  B.  D.  and  fellow  of  Queen's  College,  in  Cambridge,  and  afterward* 
chosen  minister  of  St.  Mary  Woolnolh,  in  Lombard  Street,  in  London,  where  he  died 
on  the  12lh  of  June,  1659,  in  the  30th  year  ofhis  age,  his  funeral  sermon  being  preached 
on  the  17th  of  that  month,  by  Simon  Patrick,  B.  D.  then  minister  of  Battersea,  in 
Sorry. 

♦  George  Bright,  afterwards  D.  D.  rector  of  Loughborough,  in  Leicestershire, 
chaplain  to  Mary,  Princess  of  Orange,  and  after  the  Revolution  dean  of  St.  Asapb. 
He  published  in  1625  six  sermons  preached  before  the  Queen  at  Whitehall,  and  wa* 
•ditor  of  the  fu  st  volume  of  Dr.  Lighlfoot'»  Worki,  printed  at  London,  1684,  in  folio. 

vol.  i.  z 


eclxvi 


LITE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


There  was  a  kind  of  fetid  in  the  College  betwixt  the  old  and  the 
new  fellows  ;  for  it  is  well  known  what  differences  in  opinion  and 
affection  the  civil  wars  created  in  the  nation,  which  differences  ex- 
tended to  the  universities,  and  the  particular  colleges  and  societies 
therein,  as  well  as  to  other  places.  The  old  fellows  that  then  re- 
mained in  the  College,  had  indeed  so  far  dispensed  with  their  judg- 
ments, as  to  have  either  taken  the  covenant,  and  after  that,  the  en- 
gagement, as  it  was  called,  or  otherwise  to  have  complied  so  far 
with  the  prevalent  powers  of  those  times,  as  to  have  kept  their  fel- 
lowships; but  yet  still  very  likely  in  their  inward  thoughts  and  in- 
clinations to  lean  to  the  ancient  government,  both  in  church  and 
state.  I  believe  Mr.  Tillotson,  then,  according  to  the  prejudices 
of  his  education,  might  be  something  biassed  the  other  way  (though 
not  very  hotly,  after  I  came  under  him),  and  so  was  one  of  those, 
who  lay  rather  under  the  disgust  of  the  senior  fellows  :  yet  he  kept 
himself  so  even  and  temperate  in  his  speeches  and  other  demean- 
our of  himself,  as  that  I  never  heard  or  observed  any  particular  re- 
flections upon  him  from  the  other  party ;  and  in  special  I  have  ob- 
served, that  Mr.  Jackson,  the  president  or  senior  of  the  fellows, 
since  Dr.  Jackson,  ever  gave  a  fair  respect  to  him. 

Though  he  was  probationer  to  a  fellowship  in  1651,  (which  I 
think  was  by  mandamus  from  the  higher  powers,)  yet  he  was  not 
actually  admitted  into  a  fellowship  of  some  considerable  time,  but 
lived  at  his  own  charge.  At  length  two  fellowships  being  declared 
void,  he  was  received  into  one  of  them,  and  one  Mr.  Newce  (who 
also  had  lived  as  probationer)  was  taken  into  the  other. 

I  have  heard  him  say,  the  society  dealt  not  fairly  with  him  about 
that  matter.  For  when,  after  the  Restoration  in  the  year  1660, 
those  fellows,  who  had  been  turned  out  upon  account  of  their  not 
taking  the  covenant,  came  to  be  re  admitted  into  their  fellowships, 
and,  among  the  rest,  the  famous  Dr.  Peter  Gunning ;  he  being  then 
a  man  of  interest  and  power,  would  needs  have  it,  that  the  fellow- 
ship, into  which  Mr.  Tillotson  had  been  admitted,  was  formerly 
his,  though  the  latter  told  me,  he  was  sure  it  was  not,  but  one  that 
was  fairly  and  legally  void  upon  a  fellow's  leaving  it  by  cession. 
But  the  beforesaid  Dr.  Gunning  having  some  personal  pique  against 
Mr.  Tillotson  (though  at  the  same  time  he  said  he  could  scarcely 
tell  wherein  he  had  disobliged  him),  yet,  I  say,  Dr.  Gunning  so 
wrought  with  the  society,  as  that  they  complied  with  his  pretences, 
and  so  put  Mr.  Tillotson  out  of  his  fellowship.  This,  I  have  heard 
him  say,  he  had  reason  to  take  ill  from  the  society,  as  not  having 


LI]  E   OI    THE   AUTHOR.  Cclxvii 

done  him  right,  but  dealing  unkindly  with  him,  who,  if  there  had 
been  nothing  else  in  it,  deserved  to  have  been  esteemed  a  bene- 
factor to  the  College  upon  such  accounts,  as  I  shall  touch  upon  by 
and  by.  As  for  Dr.  Gunning,  he  was  very  hot  and  earnest  to  put 
this  disrespect  upon  him ;  for  though  he  knew,  that  he  was  to  be 
chosen  master  of  Benuet  College  the  very  next  day,  upon  the  va- 
cancy by  the  death  of  Dr.  Love;  and  though  Mr.  Tillotson's  me- 
rits to  the  College  were  insisted  upon  and  pleaded  by  some  (at  least) 
of  the  society ;  yet  he  was  so  vehement  in  the  business,  as  to  say, 
•*  let  justice  be  done  first,  and  then,  if  they  were  minded  to  do 
Mr.  Tillotson  a  favour,  they  might  do  that  afterward." 

In  the  year  1655,  Mr.  Tillotson  was  appointed  to  keep  the  Phi- 
losophy Act,  at  the  public  commencement;  which  he  performed 
to  much  satisfaction,  yea  even  to  admiration. 

Soon  after,  he  went  to  London,  and  was  tutor  to  Prideaux's 
son  or  sons,  who  was  then  attorney-general  to  Oliver,  the  Protector, 
and  in  that  station  it  came  to  pass,  that  he  was  instrumental  in  pro- 
curing the  good  to  the  College  intimated  before.  For  by  the  At- 
torney's means,  he  obtained  a  thousand  pounds  to  be  paid  out  of 
the  Exchequer  to  the  College  for  wood  and  stone  prepared  for 
carrying  on  its  building,  but  seized  by  the  parliament-party  towards 
fortifying  the  castle  at  Cambridge  in  the  time  of  the  war.  Moreover, 
whilst  he  resided  in  London,  it  happened,  that  he  fell  into  acquaint- 
ance with  an  old  gentleman,  one  Mr.  Diggons,  who  had  formerly 
been  fellow-commoner  of  Clare  Hall,  a  very  humoursome  person, 
and  had  taken  disgust  against  some  of  his  own  relations.  With  him 
Mr.  Tillotson  wrought  so,  as  to  prevail  with  him  to  leave  300/.  per 
annum  to  the  College. 

The  College  had  been  then  very  low,  much  in  debt;  and  there- 
fore both  these  benefits  came  as  seasonably,  as  they  did  unexpect- 
edly. Moreover  he  told  me,  that  he  had  received  very  little  or  no 
profit  by  his  fellowship  all  the  time  he  was  possessed  of  it;  but  let 
all  go  to  the  benefit  of  the  College. 

During  his  abode  at  London,  in  this  private  state,  he  improved 
very  much;  among  other  ways,  by  hearing  the  best  of  sermons,  and 
conversing  with  very  worthy  persons,  as  particularly  Bishop  Brown- 
rig,  w  ho  was  then  preacher  at  the  Temple  ;  Dr.  Hacket,  afterwards 
bishop  of  Litchfield  ;  and  of  the  other  persuasion,  viz.  presbyterian, 
I  have  heard  him  profess  his  great  esteem  of  Dr.  Bates,  both  for 
his  learning  and  good  temper. 

He  did  not  appear  as  a  preacher  till  after  the  Restoration,  1660 

z  2 


celxviii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR, 


taking  orders  (as  he  hath  told  me)  from  the  old  Scottish  Bishop  of 
Galloway,*  who  at  that  time  had  great  recourse  made  to  him  on 
that  account.  King  Charles  II.  was  then  so  favourable  to  the 
presbyterian  party,  that  he  offered  bishoprics  to  some  of  that  per- 
suasion ;  as  to  old  Mr.  Calamy  for  one  ;  and  Mr.  Tillotson  told  me, 
in  the  year  1661,  that  the  good  old  man  deliberated  about  it  some 
considerable  time,  professing  to  see  the  great  inconvenience  of  the 
presbyterian  parity  of  ministers.  And  Mr.  Tillotson  said,  if  Mr. 
Calamy  had  accepted  of  the  bishopric  of  Litchfield,  which  was 
offered  him,  Dr.  Bates  had  been  dean,  and  Mr.  Miles  and  himself 
were  designed  for  two  of  the  canons.  But,  as  he  added  also,  though 
Mr.  Calamy  was  in  a  manner  induced  to  a  willingness  to  have  em- 
braced the  King's  offer,  yet,  Mrs.  Calamy  being  against  it,  over- 
ruled her  husband,  and  so  the  matter  went  off. 

Upon  the  first  beginning  of  his  preaching,  he  shewed  his  great 
learning,  reason,  judgment,  and  abilities.  Witness  his  sermon 
preached  at  the  morning  lecture  at  St.  Giles,  Cripplegate,  in  Sep- 
tember, 1661,  on  Matt.  vii.  12.  upon  which  subject  he  hatn 
treated  very  judiciously  and  comprehensively ;  though  I  heard 
him  say,  he  preached  that  sermon,  for  Dr.  Bates,  upon  but  little 
warning. 

He  soon  became  lecturer  at  St.  Lawrence  Jewry,  which  he  con- 
tinued till  his  advancement  to  the  see  of  Canterbury. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1663,  he  was  presented  to  the  par- 
sonage of  Ketton,  in  Suffolk,  by  Sir  Thomas  Barnardiston,  whose 
seat  is  there.  It  was  void  by  the  going  out  of  old  Mr.  Fairclough, 
upon  account  of  nonconformity  after  the  Bartholomew-act,  1662  ; 
but  he  staid  not  there  long,  as  being  chosen  preacher  at  Lincoln's 
Inn,  about  Michaelmas  after,  and  in  that  station  he  continued 

*  Dr.  Thomas  Sydserf,  the  only  Scots  bishop,  who  was  living  at  the  Restoration, 
when  he  came  up  to  London,  not  doubting  but  that  he  should  be  advanced  to  the 
primacy  of  Scotland,  though  he  failed  of  his  expectations,  having  given  offence  to 
the  English  bishops  by  his  promiscuous  ordinations,  when  he  first  came  to  England. 
For  when  the  act  of  Uniformity  required  all  men,  who  held  any  benefices  there,  to 
be  episcopally  ordained,  he  who,  by  observing  the  ill  effects  of  the  former  violence 
of  the  Scots  bishops,  was  become  very  moderate,  with  others  of  the  Scots  clergy 
who  gathered  about  him,  ordained  all  those  of  the  English  clergy,  who  came  to  him, 
without  demanding  either  oaths  or  subscriptions  of  them.  This  was  supposed  by  some 
to  be  done  by  him,  merely  for  a  subsistence  from  the  fees  for  the  letters  of  orders 
granted  by  him,  for  he  was  poor.  However,  he  was  translated  to  the  bishopric  of 
Orkney,  one  of  the  best  revenues  of  any  of  the  sees  in  Scotland,  in  which  he  lived 
little  more  than  a  year.  This  is  the  account  of  him  in  Bishop  Burnet,  vol.  ii.  p. 
132,  133.  who  in  another  place,  p.  26,  styles  him  a  very  learned  and  good  man. 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cclxix 


till  his  being  promoted  as  above.  And  how  much  he  esteemed 
that  honourable  Society,  he  hath  divers  ways  made  public  acknow- 
ledgment; and  there  was  no  kindness  lost  between  them  and  him  ; 
for  the  great  men  of  that  house  gave  a  very  great  deference  to  him, 
as  is  publicly  known. 

Alter  the  preferment  of  Dr.  Seth  Ward,  minister  of  St.  Lawrence 
Jewry,  to  a  bishopric,  Dr.  John  Wilkins  succeeded  him  there, 
where,  as  was  said,  Mr.  Tillotson  being  lecturer,  this,  as  I  suppose, 
gave  occasion  to  a  very  great  intimacy  and  friendship  betwixt  that 
learned  and  worthy  person  and  Mr.  Tillotson,  which  the  latter  va- 
lued not  a  little. 

Dr.  Wilkins  had  a  reputation,  and  that  most  deservedly,  of 
being  a  person  of  extraordinary  worth  and  learning.    Besides  his 
«kill  in  divinity,  he  was  accomplished  in  the  knowledge  of  the  best 
philosophy  of  all  sorts,  that  was  in  vogue  at  that  time;  not  that 
crabbed  disputatious  sort  of  it,  which  some  persons  have  attained 
to,  that  have  lived  long  in  the  uuiversity;  but  that  more  free,  ge- 
nerous, benign,  and  good-humoured  way  of  philosophizing,  that 
began  to  appear  openly  in  that  age,  though  it  had  many  op- 
posers  and  maligners.  Dr.  Wilkins  had  been  for  some  years  before 
the  happy  restoration  of  King  Charles  II.  the  great  encourager  of 
this  method  of  philosophizing  in  Oxford,  where  he  was  head  of 
Wadham  College  ;  and  had  begun  a  sort  of  society  for  the  com- 
municating of  experiments  in  natural  philosophy,  for  the  making  it 
useful  and  beneficial  to  mankind,  in  the  affairs  of  human  life ; 
and  when  he  w  as  made  master  of  Trinity  College,  in  Cambridge,  he 
set  up  a  like  society  there ;  and,  after  the  coming  in  of  King 
Charles  II.  was  the  chief  instrument  in  forming  that,  which  then 
came  to  be  called  the  Royal  Society :  which  contrivance,  how 
taking  it  was,  appeared  in  that  so  many  persons  of  noblest  rank 
and  highest  quality,  in  a  short  time,  entered  themselves  into  it,  and 
the  King  himself  vouchsafed  to  be  head  of  it.    What  a  value 
the  learned  and  ingenious  of  that  Society  had  for  Dr.  Wilkins,  ap- 
pears by  its  history  writ  by  Dr.  Sprat,  by  Mr.  Hook's  microscopi- 
cal experiments,  and  divers  others  of  them,  that  have  published 
their  books.    As  for  theology,  how  able  he  was,  appears  by  the 
two  little  books  he  put  forth,  about  the  Gift  of  Prayer  and  that  of 
Preaching,  the  little  tract  called  the  Beauty  of  Providence,  with 
some  sermons  before  the  King,  appointed  to  be  printed,  his  trea- 
tise about  Natural  Religion,  and  a  volume  of  sermons  printed  since 
his  death. 


cclxx 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


But  that  which  made  him  most  remarked  upon,  was  his  great  mo- 
deration in  the  points  agitated  betwixt  the  conformists  and  noncon- 
formists, about  liturgy,  ceremonies,  &c.  which  made  him  become 
the  object  of  odium  and  envy  to  a  great  party  in  our  church  ;  i.  e.  all 
the  bishops  and  churchmen,  that  were  very  high  and  zealous  for  the 
particular  establishments  in  those  points ;  insomuch,  that  he  was 
looked  upon  as  the  head  of  the  latitudinarians,  as  they  were  then 
styled  ;  i.  e.  persons  that  had  no  great  liking  for  the  Liturgy,  or  ce- 
remonies, or  indeed  the  government  of  this  church,  but  yet  had 
attained  to  such  a  largeness  and  freedom  of  judgment,  as  that  they 
could  conform,  though  without  any  warmth  or  affection  for  these 
things:  and  those  that  went  this  way,  were  looked  upon  as  the 
worst  and  most  dangerous  enemies  of  the  church  of  England. 

Nevertheless,  this  Dr.  Wilkins  had  so  well  acquitted  himself,  and 
had  such  considerable  friends,  as  that  he  came  to  be  made  bishop  of 
Chester,  about  the  year  16(59,  or  1670.  But  still  persisting  in  the 
same  moderation  and  temper,  he,  together  with  Lord  Chief  Justice 
Hale,  and  some  very  few  more,  became  the  promoter  of  a  bill  of 
Comprehension,  as  it  was  called,  viz.  to  take  in,  and  comprehend 
some,  at  least,  of  the  better  tempered  nonconformists,  in  a  capacity 
of  being  restored  to  the  public  service  of  the  church.  But  the  pro- 
ject had  too  many  opposers,  and  so  came  to  be  laid  aside  ;  and 
this  learned  and  moderate  bishop  lived  not  long  after  the  rejection 
of  it. 

I  am  sensible  this  is  a  digression  from  my  intended  history  of  Mr. 
Tillotson;  but  yet  it  may  be  useful  to  the  better  understanding 
some  passages  about  him.  For  Mr.  Tillotson,  by  the  advantage 
before  observed,  viz.  of  being  lecturer  of  that  church,  whereof  the 
Doctor  was  rector,  came  to  have  the  most  intimate  acquaintance  and 
conversation  with  him,  and  married  his  daughter-in-law. 

I  remember,  that  about  May,  1665,  being  at  Coventry,  I  went  to 
wait  upon  Bishop  Hacket,  as  he  was  returning  from  London  to  Litch- 
field; who  spoke  much  to  the  commendation  of  Mr.  Tillotson,  as  to 
his  learning  and  preaching,  and  particularly  praised  his  sermon,  then 
newly  printed,  called  The  Wisdom  of  being  Religious,  as  the  best 
thing  against  atheism,  that  ever  he  saw  in  the  compass  of  a  sermon. 
"  But,"  saith  he,  "  he  is  now  fallen  in  with  Dr.  Wilkins,  and  is  be- 
come a  presbyterian,  and  an  enemy  of  the  church  of  England ;"  or  to 
that  purpose  :  "  And,"  says  he,  '*  he  never  came  to  see  me  all  this 
time  I  have  been  at  London;  whereas  formerly  I  have  conversed 
with  him  with  great  familiarity."  I  did  by  letter  acquaint  him  with 


LI  IE  OF   THE   AUTHOR.  CclxXl 

the  importance  of  the  Bishop's  complaint  of  him,  who  returned  to 
me,  that  the  opinion,  which  I  myself  had  expressed  of  Dr.  Wilkins's 
worth,  was  true  and  just:  that  the  Bishop's  fears  of  himself  being 
become  a  presbyterian,  were  causeless  and  groundless ;  for  he  had 
long  before  fixed  his  principles  about  church-government,  and  was 
in  no  likelihood  of  altering  them  ;  and  that  it  was  by  reason  of  his 
much  business,  that  he  had  not  waited  on  his  Lordship  when  in 
town. 

He  was  an  eminent  encounterer  of  atheism  and  infidelity,  which 
begau  very  publicly  to  appear ;  and  the  first  specimen  he  gave  of 
his  ability  that  way,  in  public,  was  the  forementioned  sermon, 
preached  before  the  Lord  Mayor,  at  St.  Paul's,  in  the  year  166j, 
on  Job  xxviii.  28.  printed  with  this  title,  *  The  Wisdom  of  being 
Religious/' 

Then  he  set  himself  also  most  professedly  against  popery,  and 
all  the  main  limbs  of  it ;  and  his  sermons  were  most  clear  and 
distinct  upon  all  the  points  he  undertook,  and  struck  home. 

His  first  public  essay  and  appearance  against  popery,  was  his 
confutation  of  Mr.  J.  Serjeant's  book,  who  with  great  confidence 
and  assurance  thought  to  build  up  popery,  and  confute  protestancy, 
by  self-evident  principles.  But  Dr.  Tillotson,  did  so  maul  and 
unravel  him,  as  that,  though  Mr.  Serjeant  made  some  kind  of  faint 
attempts  against  him,  he  could  never  recover  himself  of  the  blows 
given  him  ;  only  whined  and  complained. 

Next,  that  noted  sermon  of  his,  preached  at  Whitehall,  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  year  1672,  about  the  difficulty  of  salvation  in  the 
Roman  Church,  on  1  Cor.  iii.  15.  which,  they  say,  so  nettled  the 
Duke  of  York,*  who  to  that  time  had  concealed  himself,  being  a 
papist  in  masquerade,  and  frequented  the  King's  chapel,  that  after- 
wards he  forsook  it,  and  never  more  appeared  there.  It  is  observ- 
able, that  this  was  about  that  time,  when  King  Charles  put  forth 
his  declaration  of  indulgence,  which  he  recalled  upon  the  parlia- 
ment's address  to  him  against  it  ;  and  soon  after,  in  the  same 
session  of  parliament,  or  the  next  after,  was  passed  the  first  Test- 
Act. 

Then  followed  the  discovery  of  the  popish  plot,  which  gave  oc- 
casion to  him  to  expose  the  principles  of  the  Roman  church,  as  to 
destroying  persons  upon  account  of  religion;  which  he  did  notably 

*  The  offence  which  this  sermon  gave,  is  said  to  have  occasioned  it  to  be  forbid 
to  be  printed  ;  but  a  noble  Lord  having  borrowed  a  copy  of  it  of  the  Dean,  it  was 
printed  privately  without  his  knowledge  in  1673. 


cclxxii  LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

in  that  sermon  lie  preached  before  the  House  of  Commons  on 
Luke  ix.  55,  56,  November  the  5th,  1678. 

His  concern  against  popery  was  exceeding  hearty  and  sincere  ; 
he  had  studied  and  thoroughly  considered  the  nature,  and  genius, 
and  tendency  of  it.  He  was  mighty  sensible  of  the  danger  this 
nation  was  in,  of  being  either  wheedled  or  forced  into  it.  I  believe 
the  apprehensions  hereof  kept  him  in  vehement  thoughts  and  agi- 
tations of  mind  for  many  years  ;  so  that  he  scarcely  ever  preached 
a  sermon  without  some  very  home-blow  against  it,  or  some  doctrine 
or  practice  of  that  church  ;  so  that  he  was  both  hated,  and  yet 
feared,  by  those  of  that  way. 

I  need  not  much  insist  upon  his  zeal  against  debauchery  and 
profaneness  ;  for  these  he  ever  sharply  reproved  and  exposed. 

It  should  appear,  that  he  had  many  good  friends  ;  and,  above  all 
the  rest,  King  Charles  II.  who,  as  I  have  heard,  much  esteemed 
him  for  his  preaching.  When  Dr.  Turner,  the  dean  of  Canterbury, 
died,  I  have  heard  that  three  very  great  persons  applied  to  the 
King  to  make  Tiim  dean  of  Canterbury.*  The  King  was  then  just 
going  for  Newmarket,  and  put  them  all  off  till  his  return.  Upon 
which,  when  he  came  to  hear  them  propose  the  person,  on  whose 
behalf  they  spoke,  it  appeared  that  they  all  concurred  in  Dr. 
Tillotson.  The  great  persons  that  besought  the  King,  were  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  that  then  was,  Dr.  Shelton,  the  Duke  of 
Buc  kingham,  and  the  Lord  Berkley  ;  which  when  the  King  under- 
stood, and  that  they  did  it  not  by  any  mutual  correspondence,  but 
each  one  out  of  their  own  particular  respect  to  the  Doctor,  he  was 
very  well  pleased,  and  so  preferred  him  very  readily.  So  also  he 
preferred  him  after  to  be  one  of  the  residentiaries  of  St.  Paul's,  at 
the  same  time  that  Dr.  Sancroft,  dean  of  St.  Paul's,  was  made 
archbishop,  and  Dr.  Stillingfleet  dean  in  his  stead. 

About  the  years  1680  and  81,  when,  after  the  discovery  of  the 
popish  J  lot,  things  began  to  be  turned  the  quite  contrary  way, 
and  great  heats  arose  between  the  tories  and  whigs,  the  Dean  of 
Canterbury  still  persisted  in  his  former  way  of  zeal  against  popery, 
and  moderation  towards  dissenters,  and  preserving  himself  as  un- 
concerned as  might  be  in  those  heats.    He  had  then  a  difficult 

*  It  appears  from  a  MS.  account  of  the  public  transactions,  in  the  possession  of 
the  Right  Honourable  the  Lord  Viscount  Weymouth,  that  the  King  was  gone  to  New- 
market on  the  3d  of  October,  1672,  five  days  before  the  death  of  Dr.  Turner  ;  upon 
which  Dr.  Tillotson  was  named  as  standing  fairest  to  succeed  him  in  the  deanery  ;  a* 
he  did  immediately  after  his  Majesty's  return  to  Whitehall,  on  the  19th  of  that  month. 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cclxxiii 


laik  of  it,  and  lay  under  suspicions  and  censures ;  partly  for  stick- 
ing close  to  Lord  Russel,  visiting  him  in  prison,  and  accompanying 
him  to  the  scaffold,  and  there  praying  with  and  for  him.  Dr. 
Burnet  was  fain  to  leave  the  kingdom  upon  that  and  some  such 
like  accounts,  and  betake  himself  to  travel,  not  returning  till  he 
came  in  with  the  Prince  of  Orange  in  1G88.  But  Sir  Roger  l'E3- 
t range,  however  it  came  to  pass,  became  the  Dean's  advocate,  vin- 
dicating him  in  his  Animadversions  upon  Lord  Russel's  paper. 

What  by  reason  of  the  heats  and  divisions  that  were  among 
people,  and  what  because  of  the  much  company  that  flocked  in 
to  him,  the  town  was  become  very  uneasy  to  him  ;  and  therefore 
he  bought  a  house  at  Edmonton,  w  hither  he  might  retire,  and  be  a 
little  more  private:  which  accordingly  he  did  for  the  most  part 
for  five  or  six  years,  viz.  the  last  part  of  King  Charles's  reign,  and 
the  short  reign  of  King  James  the  Second,  which  we  may  easily  un- 
derstand, were  become  very  adverse  and  opposite  to  him.  Yet  all 
that  time  he  continued  his  preaching  both  at  Lincoln's  Inn  and  at 
St.  Lawrence,  with  his  usual  freedom,  or  rather  with  greater  zeal 
and  fervency,  to  confirm  his  auditors  against  popery.  And,  blessed 
be  God,  as  many  adversaries  as  he  had,  and  those  great  ones  too, 
yet  God  was  with  him  ;  so  that  none  of  them  set  upon  him  to  hurt 
or  molest  him,  so  far  as  I  ever  heard. 

Upon  the  wonderful  deliverance  of  this  nation  from  popery  and 
arbitrary  power,  by  the  extraordinary  providence  of  God,  and, 
under  the  same,  by  the  matchless  expedition  of  the  Prince  of 
Orange,  anno  lo'88,  he  soon  shewed  his  affection,  and  delivered  his 
sense  of  it,  in  his  sermon  at  Lincoln's  Inn  upon  Ezra  ix.  13,  14. 
preached  on  the  thanksgiving  day  appointed  for  that  occasion  : 
upon  which  day  appointed  for  the  country,  I  myself  also  preached 
on  the  very  same  text.  In  that  sermon  he  said,  that  nothing  could 
obstruct  our  happy  settlement,  except  some  mistaken  principles 
concerning  allegiance,  with  other  remarkable  expressions. 

I  have  heard,  that  when  some  bishoprics  were  vacant,  and  he 
was  offered  one  by  King  William,  he  answ  ered,  that  had  he  been 
in  such  health  and  vigour,  as  to  be  able  to  manage  the  duties  of 
the  episcopal  function,  he  would  not  have  declined  the  orhce  ;  but 
he  found  decays  in  himself,  and  so  desired  to  be  excused. 

When  Dr.  Stillingfleet  was  made  bishop  of  Worcester,  he  was 
made  dean  of  St.  Paul's  :  which  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  in  his  fu- 
neral sermon  for  him,  intimates  was,  because  he  was  not  willing  to 
have  more  than  one  single  preferment;  and  that  his  holding  Two, 


cclxxir 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


viz.  the  deanery  of  Canterbury,  and  one  of  the  residentiary  prebends 
of  St.  Paul's,  was  rather  in  compliance  with  the  times,  and  because 
he  would  not  decline  what  was  so  frankly  offered  him  by  King 
Charles  II.  than  out  of  any  inclination  or  liking  of  his  own. 

Next,  upon  the  uonjurant  bishops  altogether  refusing  to- come 
into  the  government  of  their  Majesties,  he,  after  much  reluctancy, 
was  at  length  prevailed  with  by  the  King  and  Queen  to  accept  the 
archbishopric  of  Canterbury.  How  he  carried  himself  in  that  high 
station,  is  better  known  to  the  world  than  to  myself,  being  at  so 
great  a  distance,  and  having  had  no  correspondence  with  him. 
What  I  shall  add  further,  shall  only  be  something  concerning  his 
character;  which  yet  I  am  sensible  I  am  insufficient  to  give,  for  the 
reasons  now  mentioned,  were  there  no  other. 

He  was  a  person  of  unblemished  conversation,  not  to  be  charged 
with  any  either  intemperance  or  covetousness,  or  any  other  vice 
whatsoever,  which,  as  they  are  spots  even  in  a  layman's  life,  so 
thev  appear  much  more  foul  in  a  clergyman.  He  lived  well  upon 
the  incomes  of  his  preferments,  kept  a  good  table,  and  was  hospi- 
table and  charitable  ;  did  not  enrich  himself,  nor  lay  up  much 
money;  and  it  is  said,  that  his  advancement  to  the metropolitical 
see,  as  he  managed  matters,  did  not  increase,  but  much  diminish, 
his  estate.  For  he  enjoyed  it  not  full  four  years,  and  besides  the 
first  fruits,  which  are  high,  and  other  public  payments,  he  built  an 
apartment  for  his  lady,  paid  a  considerable  debt  of  Archbishop 
Sancroft's,  kept  a  very  splendid  and  plentiful  table,  was  bountiful 
and  charitable  in  relieving  the  poor,  besides  other  ways  of  draining 
his  purse.  He  was  not  a  man  that  valued  the  world,  or  laboured 
to  be  rich,  or  studied  his  temporal  interest;  but,  as  he  taught 
others,  so  he  lived  above  the  world,  and  the  advantages  of  it;  knew 
how  to  use  it,  so  as  not  to  abuse  it. 

He  was  one  of  a  very  sweet  nature,  friendly  and  obliging,  and 
readv  to  serve  his  friends  any  way  that  he  could  by  his  interest  and 
authority,  when  they  applied  to  him  ;  aud  this  he  did  freely  and 
generouslv,  without  any  oblique  designs  to  serve  himself. 

He  was  very  affable  and  conversible,  not  sour  or  sullen,  not 
proud  or  haughty,  not  addicted  to  any  thing  of  moroseness,  affected 
gravity,  or  to  keep  at  a  great  distance  from  those  that  were  much 
his  inferiors;  but  open  and  free,  gentle  and  easy,  pleasant  and 
amiable,  to  those  especially  that  he  was  acquainted  with,  or  that  he 
looked  upon  as  honest  and  good. 

His  common  and  familiar  discourse  was  witty  and  facetious,  but 


LIFE    OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cclx.w 


very  inoffensive:  not  at  all  biting  or  disobliging;  nothing  that  was 
vain  or  tritling,  nothing  calumniatory  or  reflecting  upon  others'  re- 
putation, absent  or  present,  passed  from  him  ;  and  even  as  to  those 
that  differed  from  him,  he  was  fair  and  candid  in  his  censures  of 
them. 

His  more  grave  discourses  were  very  weighty ;  he  spoke  apoph- 
thegms; was  very  serious  in  giving  good  counsels,  or  resolving 
doubts,  or  recommending  religion  and  virtue. 

He  was  wise  and  prudent  in  his  whole  deportment,  speaking  and 
acting  all  things  with  sreat  evenness  and  steadiness,  not  with  blus- 
tering  or  temerity,  or  so  as  to  give  just  offence  to  any.  He  under- 
stood human  nature  well,  and  how  ill  any  take  it  to  be  slighted  or 
dUrespected  ;  and  therefore  he  was  obliging  to  all,  disobliging  to 
none,  so  far  as  it  was  possible.  And  yet  this  his  wisdom  was  so  tem- 
pered with  uprightness  and  sincerity,  that  he  appeared  not  in  the 
least  to  be  crafty  or  designing.  He  was  greatly  esteemed  for  his 
integrity,  and  therefore  intrusted  by  divers  great  persons  in  the 
management  of  their  affairs  and  concernments  ;  made  their  exe- 
cutor or  trustee  for  the  governing  of  their  estates,  preserving  them 
to  their  children,  or  otherwise  to  such  purposes,  as  they  had  ap- 
pointed by  their  wills. 

As  he  was  eminent  in  these  and  the  like  homiletical  virtues,  so 
he  was  very  much  esteemed  for  them  by  persons  of  all  ranks,  es- 
pecially b>  those  of  higher  rank  and  quality.  He  had  a  mighty 
respect  paid  him  in  Loudon,  and  his  company  and  conversation 
were  very  much  desired  and  valued. 

In  reference  to  those  notorious  differences  anions  us  upon  ac- 
count of  conformity  and  nonconformity,  I  have  intimated  before 
how  moderate  he  was  :  his  moderation  was  known  unto  all  men  ; 
it  was  his  peculiar  virtue,  as  it  had  been  Bishop  Wilkius's  also 
He  was  naturally  disposed  to  it,  as  I  mav  sav,  having  had  as 
Bishop  Burnet  saith,  his  first  education  among  the  puritans,  even 
as  it  was  Bishop  Wilkins's  lot  also,  being  grandson  to  the  famous 
Mr.  Dod,  and  in  his  minority  instructed  by  him.  Our  Archbishop 
indeed  had  not  any  near  relation,  so  far  as  I  ever  heard,  of  the 
function  of  a  clergyman  that  was  of  that  persuasion ;  his  father 
being  a  layman,  a  clothier  of  good  repute,  living  at  Sowerbv  near 
Halifax,  and  reckoned  to  be  a  puritan,  as  they  were  called  in  the 
time  before  the  late  wars.  But,  as  I  have  partly  noted  before,  his 
son  got  out  of  the  prejudices  of  his  education,  when  but  a  very 
young  man  in  Cambridge,  divers  years  before  the  Restoration,  in 


eclxxvi 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


3  660,  or  any  prospect  of  it,  when  the  temptation,  as  to  hopes  of 
favour  and  preferment,  lay  the  quite  other  way;  and  so  conse- 
quently he  could  not  be  thought  to  have  changed  his  judgment  in 
that  respect,  upon  any  sway  or  motive  of  advancing  himself  in 
temporal  concernments:  no,  but  on  the  contrary,  upon  weighty 
reasons,  when  he  came  to  be  of  years  and  capacity  to  settle  his 
principles  in  religion,  and  to  make  it  a  matter  of  choice,  not  of 
education  only.  And  when  he  saw  cause  so  to  do,  he  did  not 
warp  too  much  to  the  other  extreme,  to  become  a  bigotted  zealot 
for  the  church  and  hierarchy,  as  many  have  done;  but,  like  a  wise 
and  good  man,  made  a  discrimination,  kept  to  what  was  good  in 
the  puritans,  their  pious  strictness,  their  renunciation  of  the  public 
vices  of  swearing,  drunkenness,  debauchery,  licentiousness  of 
manners,  &c.  only  relinquished  their  mistakes,  their  placing  too 
much  religion  in  little  distinctions  and  singularities,  and  their  odd 
aversions  to  the  church-government,  liturgy,  and  ceremonies. 

And  moreover  that,  which  I  mainly  drive  at,  he  did  not  so  espouse 
the  way  of  conformity,  as  to  take  up  such  a  hatred  and  abhorrence 
of  the  persons  of  the  puritans,  or  of  their  party,  as  to  cry  out  against 
them,  as  a  company  of  hypocrites,  factious  villains,  and  a  party  not 
to  be  suffered,  but  rather  to  be  doomed  to  rods  and  axes,  to  be 
pursued  with  the  severest  punishments,  as  one  did,  who  came  from 
that  party,  viz.  Dr.  Samuel  Parker  in  his  Ecclesiastical  Polity. 
But  our  Doctor  having  known  many  of  them  himself  to  have  been 
honest  and  sincere  in  the  main,  and  at  the  bottom,  though  misled, 
and  held  under  almost  invincible  prejudices,  he  had  a  tender  re- 
spect, and  a  great  compassion  for  them ;  and  therefore  thought 
they  were  rather  to  be  instructed  with  meekness,  and  reduced  by 
gentle  and  fair  methods  to  a  good  opinion  of  this  church,  and  the 
orders  and  constitutions  of  it,  than  to  be  continually  pelted  with 
sharp  reflections  from  the  pulpit,  or  rigorously  dealt  with  by  the 
execution  of  penal  laws.  And  therefore  I  remember  it  was  the 
counsel  he  gave  myself  in  the  year  1661,  not  to  be  sharp  upon  that 
party  in  sermons  or  other  discourses,  nor  to  cry  up  the  Liturgy  or 
ceremonies  ;  but  to  preach  true  Christianity,  and  to  take  heed  to 
govern  my  own  conversation  well :  "  for,"  said  he,  "  good  preach- 
ing and  good  living  will  gain  upon  people  :  if  a  man  join  these 
two,  they  will  at  length  come  to  like  his  religion  and  his  way,  and 
so  their  aversions  will  in  time  wear  off." 

As  to  himself,  he  did  most  eminently  practise  the  advice  which 
he  gave  me,  so  doubtless  he  was  the  most  successful  man  in  hi» 


LIFE   Of   THE  AUTHOR. 


c  ckxvii 


endeavours  this  way  of  all  others  in  this  whole  church  and  nation; 
at  least  beyond  any  one  man,  having  been  an  instrument  of  reduc- 
ing great  numbers  of  dissenters,  both  presbyterians,  independents, 
anabaptists,  into  the  church;  and  of  preserving  other  dissenters, 
especially  nonconforming  ministers,  whom  he  could  not  so  far  work 
upon  as  wholly  to  gain  them,  yet  from  being  troublesome  to  the 
church,  bringing  them  to  some  temper  and  moderation.  Yea,  I 
think  I  may  say  moreover  with  truth,  that  though  some  other 
worthy  and  excellent  persons  of  the  London  clergy  have  had  their 
share  in  this  commendation,  yet  he,  above  all  the  rest,  by  God's 
blessing,  hath  been  the  chief  and  prime  agent  to  preserve  the 
greatest  part  of  that  vast  body  of  the  citizens  of  London  from  run- 
ning into  extravagances  against  the  government  of  our  church, 
upon  divers  unhappy  emergencies  and  conjunctures,  that  have 
happened  in  the  space  of  thirty  years  last  past;  his  example  and 
excellent  preaching,  as  well  as  his  more  private  way  of  treating 
with  particular  persons,  haviug  been  so  influential  upon  them. 

Nor  hath  his  moderation  been  only  beneficial  to  this  church,  but 
hath  extended  likewise  to  the  reformed  churches  beyond  the  seas. 
For  such  hath  been  the  height  of  some  of  our  altitudinarian  divines, 
as  that  they  have  not  stuck  to  challenge  them  as  being  no  churches, 
for  want  of  episcopal  government;  as  particularly  that  learned 
person,  Mr.  Dodwell,  in  his  book  about  Schism,  and  his  other  book, 
One  Priesthood,  one  Altar.  About  which  I  remember,  that  hav- 
ing some  discourse  with  our  late  Archbishop  above  ten  years  ago, 
he  told  me,  that  Mr.  Dodwell  brought  his  book  to  himself  to 
peruse,  before  he  put  it  into  the  press,  and  desired  him  to  give 
him  his  judgment  of  it  :  that  he  freely  told  him  his  dislike  of  it  ; 
•and  that  though  it  was  writ  with  such  great  accuracy  and  close 
dependance  of  one  proposition  upon  another,  as  that  it  seemed  to 
be  little  less  than  demonstration,  "  so  that,"  saith  he,  "  1  can  hardly 
tell  you,  where  it  is  that  you  break  the  chain  ;  yet  I  am  sure, 
that  it  is  broken  somewhere  ;  for  such  and  such  particulars  are 
so  palpably  false,  that  I  wonder  you  do  not  feel  the  absurdity  of 
them ;  they  are  so  gross,  and  grate  so  much  upon  one's  inward 
sense."  And  I  remember,  also,  he  said,  that  Mr.  Dodwell  was  run 
into  one  extreme  as  much  as  Mr.  Baxter  (against  whom  Mr.  Dod- 
well's  books  were  wrote)  had  done  into  the  other;  adding,  more- 
over, that  they  were  much  alike  in  their  tempers  and  opinions  in 
one  respect,  though  they  were  most  wide  and  opposite  one  to  ano- 
ther in  their  tenets;  namely,  that  both  of  them  loved  to  abound  in 


Cclxxviii  LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

their  own  sense,  and  could  by  no  means  be  brought  off  their  ow  n 
apprehensions  and  thoughts,  but  would  have  them  to  be  the  rule 
and  standard  for  all  other  men's. 

Notwithstanding  this  his  charity  towards  dissenters,  he  was  far 
from  inclining  towards  any  of  their  peculiar  opinions  or  ways,  or  so 
much  as  encouraging  them  therein  :  any  one  that  reads  his  sermons 
with  understanding,  may  easily  discern  it.  He  is  sometimes  pretty 
tart  in  censuring  the  hypocrisy  of  some  of  that  party,  in  exposing 
their  peevishness  and  faction.  And  as  to  their  peculiar  tenets,  he 
sometimes  reproved  them,  and  at  other  times  rescued  and  cleared 
the  truth  from  their  mistakes.  So  that  no  sober  or  intelligent  per- 
son can  think,  that  he  was  partial  towards  them,  though  he  had  a 
great  zeal  to  remove  their  prejudices,  and  to  bring  them  into  the 
communion  of  this  church. 

I  know,  that  some  of  our  church  formerly  have  not  been  able  to 
endure  scarcely  so  much  as  the  word  moderation  in  reference  to 
the  constitutions  of  it :  particularly,  as  to  the  ceremonies,  have  con- 
demned both  name  and  thing,  and  have  looked  upon  all  persons 
that  have  gone  that  way  with  an  evil  and  jealous  eye,  as  the  be- 
trayers of  the  church,  as  those  that  destroy  its  power  ;  u  for,"  say 
they,  "  the  church's  power  lies  in  the  appointing  of  rites  and  cere- 
monies for  decency,  order,  and  solemnity  in  Divine  worship,  so 
as  none  of  the  said  ceremonies  be  evidently  contrary  to  scripture, 
or  in  themselves  superstitious,  or  tend  to  any  immorality  ;  and 
therefore  take  away  its  authority  in  such  appointments,  and  you 
destroy  the  church's  power,  and  undermine  its  government.*' 
Such  persons  have  censured  this  great  man  upon  this  account,  as 
no  friend  to  this  church,  because  he  declared  himself  freely  as 
willing  to  relax  in  some  things,  rather  than  break  the  peace  both  of 
church  and  state  by  a  too  stiff  adherence  to  them,  and  imposition 
of  them.  And  I  remember,  that  soon  after  he  had  preached  and 
printed  a  sermon  on  John  xiii.  34,  35,  to  his  countrymen,  the  na- 
tives of  Yorkshire,  at  their  feast,  in  the  year  1678,  in  which,  endea- 
vouring to  persuade  the  dissenters  to  come  into  the  union  of  this 
church  upon  this  account,  because  of  the  great  division  that  their 
standing  off  caused  in  the  bowels  of  it,  at  that  time  when  the 
papists  made  such  great  use  of  our  dissensions  towards  the  fur- 
thering of  their  design  to  destroy  the  church,  root  and  branch,  he 
said  to  this  purpose  :  "  I  am  persuaded,  that  the  governors  of  our 
church  are  persons  of  such  great  piety  and  prudence,  as  that  they 
could  be  content  to  yield  up  some  thing*  to  the  prejudices  and 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cclxxix 


weakness,  yea,  even  some  little  things  to  the  importunities  of 
those,  that  are  otherwise  minded,  for  peace-sake,  if  that  would 
do  the  business,"  <vc.  I  say,  I  remember  that  upon  this  pas- 
sage, a  doctor,  that  I  was  in  company  with,  expressed  himself  very 
much  dissatisfied  with  it ;  saying,  what  had  he  to  do,  being  but  a 
private  doctor,  to  undertake  this  without  the  consent  of  his  supe- 
riors ?  And  since  that  time,  in  the  convocation,  since  their  Ma- 
jesties Kiug  William  and  Queen  Mary's  accession  to  the  crown, 
the  same  accusation  has  been  renewed  against  him,  that  he  was 
the  head  of  that  party,  which  was  for  altering  the  Liturgy  in  com- 
pliance with  the  nonconformists,  to  make  way  for  their  coming 
into  our  communion.  And  so  they  looked  upon  his  moderation 
aforesaid,  rather  as  his  vice,  than  his  virtue  :  for  they  think  the 
very  establishment  of  the  church  upon  the  Reformation  was  mode- 
rate enough,  and  needs  to  make  no  further  abatement,  unless  it 
were  obliged  to  moderate  again  and  again,  and  so  till  the  whole 
constitution  be  destroyed  ;  for  to  be  sure  it  can  never  be  moderated 
so,  but  some  peevish  spirits  will  clamour  for  further  mitigations, 
till  they  have  brought  all  to  confusion.  Hence  this  areat  man  was 
looked  upon  rather  as  an  enemy  to  the  church,  than  fit  to  be  made 
a  pillar  of  it.  For  so  I  remember  I  have  heard  some  say,  when  it 
was  first  discoursed,  that  he  was  to  be  made  archbishop  of  Can- 
terbury, "actum  est  de  Ecclesia  Anglicaiia." 

But  notwithstanding  these  formidable  suggestions  against  him 
and  his  known  moderation  ;  yet,  as  on  the  one  side,  it  is  not  pro- 
bable, that  he  had  any  secret  design  against  this  church,  or  that  his 
temper  and  moderation  had  any  direct  tendency  towards  its  de- 
struction, or  was  of  ill  influence  that  way:  so  on  the  other  side, 
moderation  in  churchmen  and  church-governors  must  be  allowed 
to  be  a  great  virtue,  as  well  as  in  other  Christians.  This  might  be 
shewed  from  the  example  of  our  Saviour,  the  'Apy^i-oiurjv  and 
'ApYt-iGKo-rroc  of  it.  His  government  is  compared  to  the  meek 
and  gentle  conduct  of  a  shepherd,  which  imports  great  modera- 
tion :  his  kingdom  is  typified  in  the  peaceable  kingdom  of  Solomon, 
which  was  predicted  and  deciphered  Psal.  lxxii.  He  came  to  ease 
the  church  of  those  heavy  burdens  which  Moses  had  laid  upon  it; 
to  remove  the  ceremonial  law,  and  moderate  the  rigour  even  of  the 
moral  law  itself,  and  turn  it  into  the  royal  la^v  of  libertv.  He  pro- 
posed himself  as  a  pattern  of  great  gentleness  and  condescension  to 
ecclesiastical  governors,  Matt.  xx.  25,  26,  &c.  Now,  what  was 
this  buLjpraetising  nnd  teaching  moderation,  and  recommending  it 


cclxxx 


LTTE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


to  all  his  ministers  and  ambassadors?  And  this  pattern  of  bis  tcftf 
followed  by  his  apostles,  every  one  of  them  singly;  and  even  when 
they  were  met  in  council,  their  decrees  savoured  wholly  of  mode- 
ration, and  tended  to  preserve  peace  and  unity  in  the  church, 
u  It  seemed  good  unto  us,"  say  they,  "  being  assembled  together 
with  one  accord  :  it  seemed  good  to  the  Holy  Ghost  and  to  us, 
to  lay  upon  you  no  greater  burden  than  these  necessary  things," 
&c.  Acts  xv.  25.;  which  were  but  few,  and  necessary  for  the  peace 
of  the  church  at  that  time:  so  that  if  we  consider  these  great  and 
undoubted  patterns.it  appears,  that  moderation,  gentlenes>,  indul- 
gence, and  great  condescension,  are  very  considerable  virtues  in 
churchmen. 

Especially  if  we  add  the  pattern  of  St.  Paul,  next  to  that  of  our 
Saviour,  the  greatest ;  who  proposes  his  own  example  to  that  pur- 
pose ;  "  Even  as  I,"  says  he,  "please  all  men  in  all  things,  not 
seeking  mine  own  profit,  but  the  profit  of  many,  that  they  may 
be  saved,''  1  Cor.  x.  33;  and  again  at  large,  1  Cor.  ix.  19 — 22. 
And  especially  it  is  observable,  how  he  suffered  himself  to  be  per- 
suaded to  a  compliance  with  the  advice  of  St.  James,  bishop  of 
Jerusalem,  Acts  xxi.  to  purify  himself  after  the  Jewish  manner; 
and  how  great  a  zeal  he  had  for  his  countrymen,  the  Jews,  of  whom 
he  bare  record,  that  they  had  a  zeal  of  God,  though  not  according 
to  knowledge.  How  desirous  he  was  to  have  brought  them  within 
the  church  and  to  the  faith  of  Christ;  and  therefore  had  a  mighty 
tenderness  for  them.  And  can  it  be  a  fault  in  our  Archbishop,  if, 
having  been  bred  amongst  puritans,  as  his  adversaries  object,  and 
make  his  crime  ;  if  he,  I  say,  had  such  a  great  concern  for  those  of 
that  way,  as  having  known  doubtless  many  of  them,  that  he  believed 
were  honestly  and  uprightly  minded  at  the  bottom,  though  carried 
away  by  a  mistaken  zeal?  What  if  he  had  strained  a  little  with  the 
furthest  towards  gaining  them  into  the  church  ?  should  any  con- 
demn him  for  this  ?  Would  they  not  after  that  rate  censure  even 
St.  Paul  himself? 

I  could  easily  add  many  things  more  in  defence  of  this  great 
man's  moderation  ;  but  I  will  add  no  more  than  this,  that  I  believe 
his  successor,  the  now  most  worthy  Archbishop,  will  be  found  to 
walk  much  in  the  same  way,  and  to  tread  in  the  same  steps,  as  well 
as  other  excellent  bishops  and  worthy  presbyters  of  this  church, 
jwlw  yet  intend  not  trie  least  to  subvert  it,  or  to  weaken  ecclesi- 
astical authority. 

I  have  done  with  his  character;  and  shall  only  add  something 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cclxxxi 


further  concerning  his  preaching,  and  then  conclude  with  appli- 
cation to  myself,  which  was  my  principal  end  in  writing  these 
memoirs. 

He  was  deservedly  esteemed  one  of  the  best,  if  not  rather  ab- 
solutely the  very  best  preacher  of  this  age  ;  especially  considering 
how  frequent  and  constant  his  employment  was  that  way;  his 
sermons  being  full  of  good  sense,  judicious,  solid,  close,  and  very 
intelligible;  his  language  masculine,  but  not  bombast;  his  notions 
for  the  most  part  very  clear,  lying  even  to  the  understandings  of 
attentive  hearers.  Those  that  were  duly  qualified  heard  him  with 
delight ;  for  they  thought  they  knew  the  things  before,  and  yet 
they  were  not  obvious  to  common  invention.  Some  have  called 
him  a  rational  preacher,  as  indeed  he  was  in  the  best  sense.  He 
understood  human  nature,  and  natural  divinity,  and  true  morality 
very  well,  and  therefore  there  was  something  in  the  hearts  and 
consciences  of  men  not  debauched,  that  moved  them  to  give  as- 
sent and  consent  to  what  he  spoke,  as  being  agreeable  and  con- 
natural, as  1  may  say,  to  the  common  reason  and  faculties  of 
mankind,  to  that  votjog  ey-ypcnrrog,  that  law  of  God  written  and  en- 
graven upon  man's  heart:  and  there  is  no  teaching  like  that  of 
enabling  them  to  teach  themselves.  His  composures  were  no  jar- 
gon or- cant,  did  not  consist  of  phrases  or  forms  of  words  suited  to 
any  sect  or  party  of  men,  or  that  had  little  real  matter  in  them* 
It  was  one  thing  that  he  disliked  in  the  nonconformists,  that  they 
used  divers  distinctive  phrases  and  expressions,  that  seemed  to 
have  some  sublime  meaning,  when,  if  searched  to  the  bottom, 
they  were  scarce  sense,  or  however  might  be  better  expressed  in 
more  plain  and  intelligible  words ;  as  when  they  taught  men  to 
roll  upon  Christ,  and  act  faith*  and  the  like  ;  the  plain  sense  of 
which  is,  to  trust  in  him  and  believe  in  him. 

He  was  a  practical  preacher.  His  discourses  generally  aimed 
either  to  excite  in  men  an  awful  sense  of  God,  and  to  enkindle 
devotion  towards  him,  or  to  stir  up  to  a  holy,  religious,  and  vir- 
tuous conversation ;  which  certainly  is  the  great  end  of  Christian 
religion,  above  all  other  religions  that  are  or  ever  were  in  the 
world.  He  seldom  preached  controversies,  except  those  between 
us  and  the  church  of  Rome ;  which,  indeed,  he  did  purposely, 
when  he  saw  there  was  an  absolute  necessity  for  it,  by  reason  of 
the  danger  of  popery  getting  the  upper  hand  and  prevailing  either 

*  This  was  a  favourite  expression  of  many  of  the  old  puritans,  founded  probably 
on  the  marginal  translation  of  P»alm  xxii.  8.  and  xxxvii.  5. 
VOL.  I.  2  A 


cclxxxii 


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


by  fraud,  or  by  being  forcibly  thrust  upon  the  nation.  And  when 
he  did  treat  on  these  points,  he  did  it  to  purpose,  giving  the  Ro- 
mish tenets  each  of  them  a  killing  blow  before  he  left  them.  And 
as  for  practical  subjects,  I  believe  there  were  few  remarkable  texts 
of  Scripture,  either  of  the  Old  or  New  Testament,  or  however 
few  heads  of  practical  divinity,  but  he  handled  them  at  one  time 
or  other  in  the  course  of  his  preaching.  And  for  this  reason,  some 
would  call  him  a  moral  preacher,  as  a  diminution  to  him,  as  if  he 
preached  moral  virtue  rather  than  grace:  but  this  is  but  a  calumny 
upon  him.  He  did  not,  indeed,  treat  upon  the  inexplicable  and 
ineffable  operations  of  grace,  as  some  have  taken  upon  them  to 
do,  but  with  what  good  effect  I  cannot  tell.  They  might  have 
good  intentions,  I  do  not  deny:  but  the  effect  has  been  to  teach 
men  to  dispute,  rather  than  to  live ;  if  not  worse,  namely,  to  pos- 
sess men's  minds  with  a  kind  of  semi-enthusiasm,  and  putting  them 
upon  inquiry  after  marks  of  election  in  themselves,  which  when 
they  think  they  have  discovered,  they  have  grown  something  too 
proud  and  conceited  of  themselves,  and  despised  others  that  they 
thought  had  them  not,  and  have  too  much  neglected  the  duties  of 
a  good  life,  especially  of  love,  and  charity,  and  justice;  it  being 
observable,  that  such  have  been  generally  antinomians,  thinking 
themselves  freed  from  the  strict  obligation  to  moral  duties.  As 
for  this  our  great  preacher,  I  dare  say,  that  he  magnified  Divine 
grace,  and  taught  men  to  pray  and  labour  for,  and  make  use  of 
those  assistances  thereof,  which  God  offers  to  them,  and  will  be- 
stow upon  those  that  heartily  and  sincerely  do  so. 

But  then  also  he  knew  that  Christians  are  under  indispensable 
obligations  to  lead  good  lives  in  all  respects,  both  towards  God, 
men,  and  themselves.  Tc  which  purpose,  I  remember  a  notion 
he  told  me  now  above  thirty  years  ago,  viz.  that  Christianity,  as 
to  the  practical  part  of  it,  was  nothing  else  but  the  religion  of 
nature,  or  pure  morality,  save  only  praying  and  making  all  our 
addresses  to  God  in  the  name  and  through  the  mediation  of  our 
Saviour,  and  the  use  of  the  two  sacraments  of  Baptism  and  the 
Lord's  Supper;  and,  said  he,  u  want  of  understanding  and  prac- 
tising according  to  this  principle,  hath  broken  the  peace  of  Christ- 
endom, and  it  can  never  be  restored  till  this  principle  and  notion 
obtain  again."  And  if  this  notion  be  true,  as  I  believe  any  capa- 
ble and  considering  person,  that  weighs  the  precepts  of  the  gospel, 
will  think  it  is,  the  antinomians  must  both  unchristian  and  unman 
themselves,  while  they  look  upon  themselves  as  disobliged  from 


LIFE    OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cclxxxiii 


strict  morality.  So  that  one  may  see,  how  ill  requited  he  was  by 
the  nonconformists  for  all  his  kindness  and  moderation  towards 
them,  while  they  affixed  such  oblique  reflections  upon  him. 

But  how  generally  and  universally  his  preaching  was  esteemed, 
appeared  by  those  crowds  of  auditors  that  attended  it,  and  espe- 
cially of  the  clergy,  at  his  lectures  at  St.  Lawrence;  and  many  that 
heard  him  on  Sunday  at  Lincoln's  Inn,  went  joyfully  to  St.  Law- 
rence on  Tuesday,  hoping  they  might  hear  the  same  sermon  again. 
The  audience  generally  stood  or  sat,  with  the  greatest  attention, 
and  even  waited  upon  his  discourses,  hanging  upon  his  lips.  One 
should  hardly  see  a  wandering  eye  among  them  ;  and  when  his  ser- 
mons were  ended,  they  went  away  with  satisfied  minds,  and  glad 
hearts,  and  cheerful  countenances. 

In  his  expositions  of  scripture,  he  principally  followed  Grotius, 
of  whom  I  have  heard  him  say,  that  his  Annotations  upon  the  Four 
Evangelists  especially,  were  worth  their  weight  in  gold.  He  had 
a  great  dexterity  in  expounding  scripture  by  scripture ;  for,  like 
Apollos,  he  was  a  man  mighty  in  the  Scriptures.  The  Bible  was 
his  treasury,  from  whence  he  fetched  not  only  the  matter  and 
strength  of  his  sermons,  but  even  his  rhetoric  and  way  of  convin- 
cing and  persuading,  as  accounting  the  word  of  God  quick  and 
powerful,  sharper  than  a  two-edged  sword,  piercing  into  the  souls, 
searching  into  the  hearts,  and  criticising  upon  the  consciences 
and  most  inward  thoughts  of  men  :  and  yet  he  was  none  of  those 
that  criticised  upon  the  words  and  phrases  of  scripture,  or  studied 
to  force  any  far-fetched  interpretations  upon  them.  His  para- 
phrases or  sensing  any  passages  were  always  very  genuine,  and 
tending  to  render  them  intelligible. 

The  method  of  his  sermons  was  generally  apt  and  easy,  very 
well  fitted  both  to  the  understandings  and  memories  of  intelligent 
hearers;  and,  in  handling  the  several  heads,  his  endeavour  was  to 
make  all  things  clear,  to  bring  truth  into  open  light ;  and  his  ar- 
guments of  persuasion  were  strong  and  nervous,  and  tended  to 
gain  the  affections  by  the  understanding;  and  those  that  heard 
him  with  attention,  must  either  be  persuaded  to  become  good,  or 
else  they  must  do  violence  to  their  best  faculties,  and  notoriously 
act  contrary  to  their  own  reason.  So  that  if,  under  God,  his 
word  did  not  save  them,  yet  it  would  be  sure  to  judge  them,  and 
leave  them  without  excuse.  Thus,  as  St.  Paul,  he  did  in  his 
preaching  "  commend  himself  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the 
sight  of  God." 

2  a  2 


cclxxxiv 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOK. 


Such  a  wise,  such  an  able  workman,  did  this  great  preacher 
approve  himself  to  be,  and  one  that  needed  not  to  be  ashamed. 
And  I  am  persuaded,  that  by  God's  great  blessing  upon  his  la- 
bours, he  was  an  instrument  of  doing  as  much  good  in  his  station 
and  generation,  as  any  one  of  his  contemporaries  in  the  sacred 
function  whatsoever.  He  made  no  ostentation  of  his  learning, 
though  it  is  well  known  it  was  very  considerable.  He  did  not 
preach  Christ  or  his  gospel  out  of  envy.  He  did  not  expose  other 
men  or  parties  :  he  sought  not  glory  of  men,  but  devoted  himself 
entirely  to  glorify  and  serve  God  with  his  spirit,  in  the  gospel  of 
his  Son*  His  great  design  was  to  make  men  wisely  religious,  and 
every  way  virtuous  and  good ;  to  have  their  conversations  honest, 
and  to  keep  good  consciences  void  of  offence,  both  towards  God 
and  towards  men.  As,  indeed,  one  of  his  main  arguments  to  per- 
suade men  to  be  good,  was  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience, 
and  the  inward  peace  that  arises  from  it. 

Thus  I  have  endeavoured  to  offer  at  giving  a  character  of  his 
temper  and  life,  and  also  of  his  way  and  manner  of  preaching ; 
which  yet  I  know  how  very  short  and  defective  it  is.  I  myself 
could  have  added  a  great  deal  more,  very  much  from  my  own 
knowledge  and  observation,  though,  as  I  said  before,  I  have  so 
very  seldom  seen  or  conversed  with  him  since  I  was  under  his 
tuition,  that  I  am  not  one  of  the  most  competent  for  the  task ; 
but  I  hope  the  public  will  have  a  full  account  of  him  from  some 
worthy  hand  that  knew  him  intimately,  and  conversed  long  with 
him,  and  that  hath  been  capable  of  making  closer  observations, 
and  can  better  decipher  him  than  I:  and  if  such  a  thing  be  done, 
I  am  persuaded  it  would  be  a  very  worthy  work  ;  would  do  right 
to  his  memory,  and  propose  an  excellent  pattern  to  all  of  his  func- 
tion in  this  and  future  ages. 

I  do  not  believe  this  great  man  to  have  been  absolutely  perfect, 
or  wholly  devoid  of  all  faults  and  blemishes ;  nor  certainly  did  he 
ever  think  so  of  himself  ;  for  he  had  this  virtue  to  embellish  and 
grace  all  his  other  virtues  and  perfections,  namely,  to  be  very 
humble  in  his  whole  deportment.  He  had  nothing  of  pride  or 
fastidiousness,  no  not  so  much  as  in  his  spirit,  so  far  as  ever  ap- 
peared to  me  in  my  strictest  observation  of  him.  He  did  not 
boast  or  magnify  himself,  or  lift  up  himself  above  his  brethren. 
He  was  very  contrite  before  God ;  a  mourner  in  secret  for  his 
own  and  other's  sins.  He  was  meek  and  lowly  of  heart.  I  will 
but  say  only  this  one  thing  more  ;  that  upon  a  very  serious  review 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


cclxxxv 


upon  all  that  I  have  known  by  myself,  or  heard  from  others,  that 
were  worthy,  ingenuous,  and  credible  persons,  concerning  either 
his  temper,  or  conversation,  or  management  of  affairs,  or  any  way 
in  reference  to  his  function,  I  never  saw  or  heard  from  such  per- 
sons as  before,  of  any  false  step  he  made,  any  thing  that  argued 
him  insincere,  any  thing  that  was  scandalous,  or  of  ill  report;  but, 
on  the  contrary,  very  laudable  and  imitable.  What  secret  defects 
he  might  have,  was  known  to  God  aud  himself :  and  I  believe  he 
could  say  with  St.  Paul,  "  I  know  nothing  by  myself  (nothing  incon- 
sistent with  that  uprightness,  that  is  attainable  by  man  in  this  life, 
yet  am  I  not  hereby  justified.'' 

I  have  heard,  indeed,  that  this  great  man  hath  been  libelled  and 
rallied,  and,  I  think,  I  ouce  saw  at  London,  some  ten  years  ago  or 
upward,  some  sorry  insinuations  against  him  in  print  to  that  pur- 
pose;  most  of  which  were  false  in  my  own  knowledge.  But  this 
I  will  say  concerning  this  matter,  that  certainly  they,  who  either 
publicly  defamed  him.  or  more  secretly  slandered  him,  and  spoke 
evil  of  him,  or  detracted  from  his  worth,  either  they  never  knew 
him,  but  only  gratified  their  own  and  others  spite  and  malice  against 
him;  or  if  they  did  know  him,  they  only  betrayed  a  more  devilish 
nature,  and  persecuted  him  with  hatred,  because  he  was  so  good. 
But,  as  the  reverend  Dean  of  St.  Paul's  tells,  that  he  having  bun- 
dled up  all  the  libels  agaiust  him,  and  writ  upon  the  outside,  u  I 
pray  God  forgive  the  authors  of  them— I  do;  "  so  I  wish  the  same, 
and  grant  them  repentance,  that  they  may  be  forgiven. 

I  should  have  given  some  description  of  the  very  form  and  linea- 
ments of  his  body;  the  habitation,  where  his  sweet  and  good  mind 
dwelt  for  near  65  years.  His  countenance  was  fair  and  very  amia- 
ble ;  his  face  round,  his  eyes  vivid,  and  his  air  and  aspect  quick  and 
ingenuous  ;  all  which  were  the  index  of  his  excellent  soul  and  spirit. 
His  hair  brown  and  bushy;  he  was  moderately  tall;  very  slender 
and  sparing  in  his  youth  ;  his  constitution  but  tender  and  frail  to 
outward  appearance.  He  became  corpulent  and  fat,  when  grown 
in  age,  which  increased  more  and  more  as  long  as  he  lived  ;  but  yet 
was  neither  a  burden  to  himself,  nor  in  the  least  unseemly  to  others. 
The  vigour  of  his  mind,  and  perspicacity  of  his  understanding,  con- 
tinued to  his  last  seizure,  and  his  knowledge  and  remembrance  to 
his  death,  as  I  have  been  told  :  which  said  seizure  indeed  was  very 
sudden,  and  soou  proceeded  to  make  an  end  of  his  life  ;  though  I 
believe  it  was  no  surprise  to  himself,  being  habitually  prepared  for 
death ;  a  life,  which  had  been  so  beneficial  to  the  church,  and  to 


cclxxxvi 


/ 1 

LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


this  nation.  And  had  God  been  pleased  to  have  prolonged  it,  as 
also  that  of  our  late  gracious  Queen,  who  soon  followed  after  him, 
as  she  had  much  reverenced  and  valued  him,  we  might  have  ex- 
pected to  have  seen  and  experienced  greater  public  benefits  by  their 
conjunction  and  further  concurrence  for  the  establishing  of  the 
church,  and  reformation  of  the  lives  and  manners  both  of  the  clergy 
and  people,  and  of  procuring  a  greater  union  and  charity  among  us. 
However,  their  endeavours  would  not  have  been  wanting,  which, 
considering  their  high  wisdom  and  gracious  good  tempers,  joined 
with  their  authority,  one  might  have  been  almost  assured  would 
have  proved  successful.  But  God's  will  is  done,  and  we  must  all 
acquiesce  in  it  without  murmuring  or  gainsaying,  though  we  can- 
not but  closely  reflect  upon  and  lament  our  great  sins,  that  rendered 
the  nation  unworthy  of  the  longer  enjoyment  of  such  invaluable 
blessings.  Only  we  have  reason  to  hope  the  mercies  of  God  are 
not  come  utterly  to  an  end  towards  us,  in  that  he  hath  by  his  gra- 
cious Providence,  and  the  great  wisdom  of  our  King  and  the  late 
excellent  Queen,  raised  up  such  a  worthy  person  to  succeed  him  in 
the  primacy  ;  one  indeed  fit  to  follow  him,  as  having  much  of  the 
same  temper  3nd  spirit  in  him;  and  I  am  persuaded,  will  not  pull 
down  what  his  predecessor  had  in  his  heart  to  have  builded  up. 
And  so  likewise  praised  be  God,  who  hath  supported  and  comfort- 
ed the  heart  of  our  gracious  King,  under  that  almost  insupportable 
stroke  of  losing  his  consort,  the  joint  partner  of  his  throne,  and 
most  weighty  burthen  of  government.  And  may  the  hand  of  the 
Almighty  hold  him  fast,  and  his  arm  strengthen  him,  and  make  him 
as  a  polished  shaft  in  his  quiver,  and  grant  that  his  heart  may  not 
fail  nor  be  discouraged,  until,  under  God,  he  shall  have  planted 
righteousness  and  peace  in  the  earth,  in  these  and  other  nations  of 
Europe,  now  confederate  with  him. 

And  now  I  conclude  these  memoirs  of  this  great  and  most  worthy 
person,  with  a  short  application  to  myself.  He  was  always  an  ex- 
ample to  me  in  his  life,  though  my  weakness,  low  understanding, 
and  abilities,  did  not  make  me  capable  of  coming  near  such  a  pat- 
tern in  any  tolerable  measure  or  degree.  The  esteem,  the  honour, 
the  reverence,  and  love  I  had  for  him,  made  me  constantly  to  re- 
member him,  to  pray  for  him,  and  praise  God,  that  he  was  pleased 
to  dispose  me  under  such  a  worthy  tutor;  and  it  hath  been  matter 
of  sorrow  and  regret  to  me,  that  I  too  little  valued  such  a  blessing 
whilst  1  enjoyed  it ;  that  I  did  not  make  the  proficiency,  which  I 
might  have  done  under  his  tuition,  whilst  I  had  his  example  before 


LIFE    OF    THE  AUTHOR. 


cclxxxvii 


ray  eyes,  and  might  have  learnt  more  by  him  and  from  him.  But 
this  is  but  too  common  a  fault,  that  we  do  not  prize  nor  improve 
such  blessings,  as  we  ought,  whilst  they  are  present  with  us.  But 
for  many  years  I  may  truly  say,  that  I  have  most  affectionately  loved 
him,  and  have  thought  many  times,  that  I  could  hardly  live  if  he 
were  dead  ;  though  as  to  temporal  matters,  saving  his  good  word  or 
the  like,  I  never  received  any  favour  from  him.  I  confess  I  have 
sometimes  requested  him  to  remember  my  son,  which  he  was  pleas- 
ed to  say  he  would  in  due  time,  though  it  seems  he  lived  not  to 
have  opportunity  to  do  it.  But  I  pass  that,  and  do  not  at  all  think 
it  any  unkind  neglect  of  him  or  myself;  nor  doth  his  omission  in 
this  respect  in  any  degree  lessen  my  esteem  of  his  memory.  But 
I  say  truly  that,  which  hath  been  my  inward  sense,  that  I  after  a 
sort  lived  in  him  :  he  was,  under  God,  in  my  own  thoughts,  my 
crown  and  my  joy,  my  guard,  my  sweet  ornament ;  as  indeed  I 
cannot  think  I  am  so  wise,  or  so  well  fortified,  now  he  is  gone. 

But  since  he  is  gone,  and.  I  doubt  not,  to  be  exceeding  happy 
with  God  and  Christ ;  and  seeing  that  be  hath  left  such  a  precious 
memory  and  example  to  survive  him  now  he  is  dead,  I  ought  much 
more  to  remember  him,  and  propose  the  pattern  of  his  temper 
and  life  to  my  own  imitation,  as  that,  which  next  to  that  of  my  Sa- 
viour and  his  blessed  apostles,  I  hope  will  most  sensibly  affect  me. 
Let  me  labour  to  imitate  his  great  wisdom,  his  blameless  and  unspot- 
ted life:  his  humility,  his  meekness,  his  sweetness  of  temper,  his 
obligingness,  and  readiness  to  do  good  ;  his  excellent  preaching,  so 
far  as  I  am  able  ;  his  constancy  to  good  principles  ;  his  moderation 
and  candour;  his  looseness  from  the  love  of  the  world,  and  earthlv 
riches;  his  unwearied  diligence  in  preaching,  and  taat  from  such 
principles,  by  such  rules,  and  to  such  ends,  as  he  did. 

To  conclude,  though  I  have  but  a  short  time  to  live,  yet  God 
grant  me,  for  the  short  remainder  of  my  life,  that  he  of  his  mercv 
and  patience  shall  afford  me,  hereafter  to  make  some  improvement 
of  these  memorials,  which  1  have  now  set  down  concerning  him  ; 
that  so  I  may  attain  to  be  one,  though  the  very  meanest,  of  that 
numerous  and  blessed  company,  where  his  spirit  now  is.  through 
the  merits  of  my  dtarest  Lord  and  Saviour.  Amen. 


cclxxxviii 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


NUMBER  II. 

Miscellaneous  Remarks  on  the  Sermons  of  Archbishop  Tillot- 
son.  By  John  Jortin,  M.  A.  and  Rector  of  St.  Dunstan's 
in  the  East. 

Vol.  I.   Sermon  35.  Edit.  fol. 

This  sermon  hath  been  attacked  by  cavillers  at  home  and  abroad, 
and  defended  by  Le  Clerc  in  the  Bibliotheque  Choisie. 

Vol.  I.    Sermon  36. 

"  The  poet  feigns  of  Achilles,  that  by  some  charm  or  gift  of  the 
gods  he  was  invulnerable,  except  in  the  heel,  &c.  The  wise  poet 
instructing  us,"  &c. 

This  is  a  small  slip  in  our  excellent  author;  for  the  poet  car'  e£o^>)v 
is  Homer,  who  hath  said  nothing  concerning  this  fable  of  Achilles. 

Vol,  I.  Sermon  43,  &c. 

Tillotson  printed  these  sermons  On  the  Divinity  of  Christ,  to  vin- 
dicate himself  from  the  charge  of  Socinianism,  that  is,  from  an 
accusation  entirely  groundless.  I  have  been  told,  that  Crellius,  a 
Socinian,  and  a  descendant  from  the  more  celebrated  Crellius,  who 
used,  when  he  came  over  hither,  to  visit  the  Archbishop,  and  to  con- 
verse with  him,  justified  him  on  this  head,  and  declared,  that  Til- 
lotson had  often  disputed  with  him,  in  a  friendly  way,  upon  the 
subject  of  the  Trinity,  and  that  he  was  the  best  reasoner,  and  had 
the  most  to  say  for  himself,  of  any  adversary  he  had  ever  encountered . 

But  then  Tillotson  hath  made  some  concessions  concerning  the 
Socinians,  which  never  were,  and  never  will  be  forgiven  him,  and 
hath  broken  an  ancient  and  fundamental  rule  of  theological  contro- 
versy,— Allow  not  an  adversary  to  have  either  common  sense  or 
common  honesty. 

Here  is  the  obnoxious  passage  : 

"  And  yet  to  do  right  to  the  writers  on  that  side,  I  must  own 
that  generally  they  are  a  pattern  of  the  fair  way  of  disputing,  and 
of  debating  matters  of  religion  ;  without  heat  and  unseemly  reflec- 
tions upon  their  adversaries. — They  generally  argue  matters  with 
that  temper  and  gravity,  and  with  that  freedom  from  passion  and 
transport,  which  becomes  a  serious  and  weighty  argument :  and  for 
the  most  part  they  reason  closely  and  clearly,  with  extraordinary 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


cclxxxix 


guard  and  caution,  with  great  dexterity  and  decency,  and  yet  with 
smartness  and  subtilty  enough ;  with  a  very  gentle  heat  and  few 
hard  words :  virtues  to  be  praised,  wherever  they  are  found,  yea 
even  in  an  enemy,  and  very  worthy  our  imitation.  In  a  word,  they 
are  the  strongest  managers  of  a  weak  cause,  and  which  is  ill-found- 
ed at  the  bottom,  that  perhaps  ever  yet  meddled  with  controversy  ; 
insomuch  that  some  of  the  protestants,  aud  the  generality  of  the 
popish  writers,  and  even  of  the  Jesuits  themselves,  who  pretend  to 
all  the  reason  and  subtilty  in  the  world,  are  in  comparison  of  them 
but  mere  scolds  and  bunglers.  Upon  the  whole  matter,  they  have 
but  this  one  great  defect,  that  they  want  a  good  cause  aud  truth  on 
their  side ;  which,  if  they  had,  they  have  reason,  and  wit,  and  tem- 
per enough  to  defend  it." 

The  thought,  which  is  contained  in  the  last  sentence,  resembles 
that  of  Quintilian,  who  says  of  Seneca  :  "  Multa  probanda  in  ea, 
multa  etiam  admiranda  sunt ;  eligere  modo  curae  sit,  quod  utinam 
ipse  fecisset!  digna  enim  fuit  ilia  natura,  quae  meliora  vellet,  quse 
quod  voluit  effecit."  And  again,  "  Velles  eum  suo  ingenio  dixisse, 
alieno  judicio." 

Now,  by  way  of  contrast,  behold  the  character  of  the  same  per- 
sons, from  the  masterly  and  impartial  hand  of  South. 

"  The  Socinians  are  impious  blasphemers,  whose  infamous  pedi- 
gree runs  back  (from  wretch  to  wretch)  in  a  direct  line  to  the  devil 
himself;  and  who  are  fitter  to  be  crushed  by  the  civil  magistrate, 
as  destructive  to  government  and  society,  than  to  be  confuted  as 
merely  heretics  in  religion." 

Such  is  the  true  agonistic  style,  or  intolerant  spirit;  such  the 
courage  of  a  champion,  who  challenges  his  adversary,  and  then 
calls  upon  the  constable  to  come  and  help  him. 

 An  tibi  Mavors 

Ventosa  in  lingua,  pedibusque  fugacibus  istis 
Semper  erit  1 

Vol.  II.    Sermon  16. 

"  Josephus  flattered  Vespasian  so  far,  as  to  make  him  believe, 
that  he  was  the  man  (the  Messias) ;  and  thereupon  persuaded  him 
to  destroy  the  line  of  David,  out  of  which  the  tradition  was,  that  the 
Messias  should  spring,"  &c. 

Josephus  did  not  give  this  wicked  advice.  Our  prelate  perhaps 
had  iu  his  thoughts  what  Eusebius  relates  of  Domitian,  that  he  or- 


ccxc 


LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


dered  all  the  family  of  David  to  be  destroyed,  and  that  some  of  our 
Lord's  kinsmen  were  seized,  and  brought  before  him,  and  upon  ex- 
amination dismissed,  as  poor  and  inconsiderable  persons.  After- 
wards, in  the  time  of  Trajan,  some  heretics  laid  an  information 
against  Symeon  the  son  of  Cleopas,  as  being  of  the  family  of  David, 
and  also  a  Christian ;  and  for  this  Symeon  was  put  to  death,  when 
he  was  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  old.  But  these  very  accusers 
of  the  martyr  were  also  convicted  of  belonging  to  the  royal  tribe, 
diligent  search  being  made  at  that  time  for  such  persons. 

Eusebius  had  these  accounts  from  Hegesippus,  and  Hegesippus 
is  far  enough  from  infallibility.  So  the  stones  rest  upon  his  autho- 
rity, such  as  it  is.    Euseb.  E.  H.  III.  19,  20.  32. 

Vol.  II.    Sermon  70. 

"  We  must  be  serious  in  our  instructions — to  which  nothing  can 
be  more  contrary  than  to  trifle  with  the  word  of  God,  and  to  speak 
of  the  weightiest  matters  in  the  world,  the  great  and  everlasting 
concernments  of  the  soul  of  men,  in  so  slight  and  indecent  a  manner, 
as  is  not  only  beneath  the  gravity  of  the  pulpit,  but  even  of  a  well- 
regulated  stage.  Can  any  thing  be  more  unsuitable,  than  to  hear  a 
minister  of  God  from  this  solemn  place  to  break  jests  upon  sin,  and 
to  quibble  with  the  vices  of  the  age  ?  This  is  to  shoot  without  a 
bullet,  as  if  we  had  no  mind  to  do  execution,  but  only  to  make  men 
smile  at  the  mention  of  their  faults  :  this  is  so  nauseous  a  folly,  and 
of  so  pernicious  consequence  to  religion,  that  hardly  any  thing  too 
severe  can  be  said  of  it." 

This  was  undoubtedly  designed  as  a  censure  upon  South,  for 
saying,  that  M  there  is  no  fluxing  a  soul  out  of  its  immortality,"  and 
a  hundred  things  of  the  same  kind. 

Vol.  II.    Sermon  93. 

"  The  being  of  God  is  so  comfortable,  so  convenient,  so  neces- 
sary to  the  felicity  of  mankind,  that  (as  Tully  admirably  says) 
<  Dii  immortales  ad  usum  hominum  fabricati  pene  videantur;'  if 
God  were  not  a  necessary  being  of  himself,  he  might  almost  seem 
to  be  made  on  purpose  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  men." 

A  learned  person,  who  shall  not  be  named,  observed,  that  Tillot. 
son,  taking  the  verb  "fabricati"  in  a  passive  sense,  grossly  misun- 
derstood Cicero,  whose  words  are  these  :  "Sunt  autem  alii  philoso- 
phi,  et  hi  quidem  magni  atque  nobiles,  qui  Deorum  mente  atque 
ratione  omnem  mundum  administrari  atque  regi  censeant :  Deque 
verd  id  solum,  sed  etiam  ab  iisdem  vitse  hominum  consuli  et  provi- 


> 


LIFE  OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


CCXC1 


deri :  nam  et  fruges,  et  reliqua  quse  terra  pariat,  et  tempestates,  ac 
temporum  varietates,  coelique  mutationes,  quibus  omnia  qua?  terra 
gignat,  maturata  pubescant  a  Dis  immortalibus  tribui  humano  generi 
putant ;  multaque,  quae  dicentur  in  bis  libris,  colligunt ;  quae  talia 
sunt,  ut  ea  ipsa,  Di  immortales,  ad  usum  hominum  fabricati  pene 
videantur."     De  Nat.  Deor.  1.  2. 

It  is  certain,  tbat  these  words,  as  they  stand  in  Cicero,  will  not 
admit  the  sense,  which  Tillotson  gives  them  :  but  Tillotson,  in  all 
probability,  cited  by  memory,  and  without  consulting  the  context, 
and  put  that  meaning  upon  the  words,  which  seemed  the  most  rea- 
sonable and  elegant ;  and  perhaps  his  good  sense  led  him  here  to 
the  true  interpretation.  Boherius,  a  learned  French  critic,  under- 
stood this  passage  just  as  Tillotson  had  taken  it;  and,  to  accommo- 
date the  sentence  to  this  purpose,  he  proposed  a  slight  emendation, 
which  is  approved  by  Davies.  Clariss.  Boherius  legit^ — ut  et  ipsi 
Dii  immortales  ad  usum  hominum  fabricati  pene  videantur.  "Au- 
dax  sane  videtur  loquendi  ratio;  sed  sensus  facit,  ut  ei  conjecturse 
faveam."  Davies. 

In  favour  of  this  conjecture  and  interpretation,  it  may  be  observ- 
ed, that,  according  to  the  pagan  theology,  the  "Dii  immortales"  are 
the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the  planets,  and  the  earth,  who  furnish 
us  with  the  comforts  and  conveniences  of  life  ;  and  so  highly  bene- 
ficial are  they  to  mortal  men,  that,  although  they  be  gods,  yet 
they  seem  almost  to  have  been  made  for  the  use  of  man. 

If  you  ask,  by  whom  were  the  gods  made  ?  the  pagan  answer 
is,  by  Nature,  or  by  the  Supreme  God,  who  drew  them  out  of  chaos, 
and  who  is  called  by  Ovid,  "mundi  fabricator/' 

Hanc  Deus  et  melior  litem  Natura  diremit. 

And  then, 

Astra  tenent  cceleste  solum,  formseque  Deorum, 

Ovid,  Met.  i. 
Ilia  Deos  omnes,  longum  enumerare,  creavit, 

Says  Ovid,  Fast.  ix.  speaking  of  Venus. 

Cicero  advanced  somewhat  that  was  bold,  and  therefore  qualified 
it  with  a  "pene  videantur.'' 

Vol.  III.    Sermon  140. 

"  I  know  not  what  some  men  may  find  in  themselves  ;  but  I  must 
freely  acknowledge,  that  I  could  never  yet  attain  to  that  bold  and 


ccxcii 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


hardy  degree  of  faith,  as  to  believe  any  thing,  for  this  reason,  be- 
cause it  was  impossible.  So  that  I  am  very  far  from  being  of  his 
mind,  that  wanted,  not  only  more  difficulties,  but  even  impossibili- 
ties in  the  Christian  religion,  to  exercise  his  faith  upon." 

The  person  whom  Tillotson  had  in  view,  was  the  author  of 
Religio  Medici.  But  by  impossibilities,  Sir  Thomas  Brown,  as  well 
as  Tertullian,  meant  seeming  not  real  impossibilities  ;  and  what  he 
says  should  be  looked  upon  as  a  "  verbum  ardens,"  a  rhetorical  flou- 
rish, and  a  trial  of  skill  with  Tertullian,  in  which  however  he  had 
little  chance  to  come  off*  superior.  Both  of  them  were  lively  and 
ingenious,  but  the  African  had  a  warmer  complexion  than  the 
Briton. 

"  Methinks  there  be  not  impossibilities  enough  in  religion  for  an 
active  faith. — I  can  answer  all  the  objections  of  Satan  and  my  rebel- 
lious reason,  with  that  odd  resolution  I  learned  of  Tertullian, 
'Certum  est,  quia  impossible  est.' — I  am  thankful,  that  I  lived  not 
in  the  days  of  miracles,"  &c.    Rel.  Medici. 

Tillotson  judging,  that  the  papists  would  make  an  ill  use  of  this, 
and  such  passages  as  this,  in  protestant  writers,  was  willing  to  pass 
a  gentle  animadversion  upon  it. 

Sir  Kenelm  Digby,  a  Roman  catholic,  who  criticises  several 
things  in  the  Religio  Medici,  yet  gives  his  loud  approbation  to  these 
pious  sallies :  "I  am  extremely  pleased  with  him,  when  he  saith, 
there  are  not  impossibilities  enough  in  religion  for  an  active  faith," 
&c.  Extremely  pleased,  without  question,  and  full  of  hopes,  that 
this  young  author  might  at  last  unreason  himself  into  implicit  belief, 
and  go  over  to  a  church,  which  would  feed  his  hungry  faith  with  a 
sufficient  quantity  of  impossibilities. 

"  Tendimus  in  Latium  !" 

Amongst  many  things,  which  may  be  mentioned  in  favour  of 
Tillotson,  this  should  not  be  forgotten,  that  of  those,  who  have 
passed  their  judgments  upon  him,  there  never  was  a  son  of  absurdi- 
ty, who  did  not  dislike,  or  a  sensible  reader,  who  did  not  approve, 
his  writings.  If  a  person  were  to  offer  himself  a  candidate  for  ho- 
nest reputation,  what  could  he  wish  and  hope  more,  than  to  share 
Tillotson's  fate,  and  to  find  the  same  censurers  and  the  same  de- 
fenders? Yet  it  hath  been  said  of  this  great  and  good  man,  that 
his  spirits  were  in  some  degree  broken,  and  his  health  impaired,  by 
the  insults  and  calumnies  of  petulant  adversaries.    If  it  be  true,  it  is 


LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR. 


CCXC111 


a  melancholy  instance  of  human  infirmity,  and  a  proof,  that  a  little 
Stoicism  and  Socratism  is  a  desirable  possession.  To  forgive  ene- 
mies, though  difficult  to  many,  was  easy  to  him,  assisted  as  he  was 
by  goodnature  and  by  religion  :  but  to  despise  their  attacks,  was 
a  task  rather  too  hard  for  his  gentle  temper  and  sensibility  ;  so  that, 
in  this  respect,  and  under  these  disadvantages,  he  was  not  a  match 
for  men,  who  could  neither  blush  nor  feel. 

"  A  man's  good  name,  "  says  he,  <sisa  tender  thing,  and  a  wound 
there  sinks  deep  into  the  spirit  even  of  a  wise  and  good  man  :  and 
the  more  innocent  any  man  is  in  this  kind,  the  more  sensible  he  is 
of  this  hard  usage;  because  he  never  treats  others  so,  nor  is  he 
conscious  to  himself  that  he  hath  deserved  it."    Serm.  XLII. 

Every  thing,  they  say,  hath  two  handles.  When  Socrates  was 
under  sentence  of  death,  Xanlippe  took  on  bitterly,  and  refusing 
comfort,  cried,  "  O  my  husband !  what  grieves  me  most  is,  that 
these  wicked  judges  should  treat  an  innocent  man  thus,  and  con- 
demn thee  unjustly,  and  for  nothing  at  all.''  "Wife,''  said  he,  "why 
should  that  grieve  thee  ?  hadst  thou  rather  then  that  they  had  con- 
demned me  justly.'' 


PREFACE. 


I  shall  neither  trouble  the  Reader  nor  myself,  with  any  apo- 
logy for  the  publishing  of  these  Sermons :  for,  if  they  be  in  any 
measure  truly  serviceable  to  the  end  for  which  they  are  designed, 
to  establish  men  in  the  principles  of  religion,  and  to  recommend  to 
them  the  practice  of  it  with  any  considerable  advantage,  I  do  not 
see  what  apology  is  necessary ;  and,  if  they  be  not  so,  I  am  sure 
none  can  be  sufficient.  However,  if  there  need  any,  the  common 
heads  of  excuse  in  these  cases  are  very  well  known,  and  I  hope  I 
have  an  equal  right  to  them  with  other  men. 

I  shall  choose  rather  in  this  Preface  to  give  a  short  account  of 
the  following  discourses,  and  as  briefly  as  I  can  to  vindicate  a  sin- 
gle passage  in  the  first  of  them  from  the  exceptions  of  a  gentleman, 
who  hath  been  pleased  to  honour  it  so  far  as  to  write  a  whole 
book  against  it. 

The  design  of  these  discourses*  is  fourfold. 

First,  To  shew  the  unreasonableness  of  atheism,  and  of  scoffing 
at  religion  ;  which  I  am  sorry  is  so  necessary  to  be  done  in  this 
age.    This  I  have  endeavoured  in  the  two  first  of  these  discourses. 

Secondly,  To  recommend  religion  to  men  from  the  great  and  ma- 
nifold advantages  which  it  brings  both  to  public  society  and  to  par- 
ticular persons.    And  this  is  the  argument  of  the  third  and  fourth. 

Thirdly,  To  represent  the  excellency,  more  particularly,  of  the 
Christian  religion  ;  and  to  vindicate  the  practice  of  it,  from  the 
suspicion  of  those  grievous  troubles  and  difficulties  which  many 
imagine  it  to  be  attended  withal.  And  this  is  the  subject  of  the 
fifth  and  sixth. 

Fourthly,  To  persuade  men  to  the  practice  of  this  holy  religion, 
from  the  great  obligation  which  the  profession  of  Christianity  lays 

*  This  Preface  refers  to  the  eight  Sermons,  which  were  first  published  in  an  octavo 
volume  by  his  Grace. 


ecxcvi 


PREFACE. 


upon  men  to  that  purpose;  and,  more  particularly,  from  the  glori- 
ous rewards  of  another  life ;  which  is  the  design  of  the  two  next 
discourses. 

Having  given  this  short  account  of  the  following  discourses,  I 
crave  leave  of  the  reader  to  detain  him  a  little  longer,  whilst  I  vin- 
dicate a  passage  in  the  first  of  these  sermons,  from  the  assaults  of 
a  whole  book  purposely  writ  against  it.  The  title  of  the  book  is, 
Faith  vindicated  from  the  Possibility  of  Falsehood.  The  author, 
Mr.  J.  S.  the  famous  author  of  Sure  Footing.  He  hath  indeed  in 
this  last  book  of  his,  to  my  great  amazement,  quitted  that  glorious 
title.  Not  that  I  dare  assume  to  myself  to  have  put  him  out  of  con- 
ceit with  it,  by  having  convinced  him  of  the  fantasticalness  of  it : 
no;  I  despair  to  convince  that  man  of  any  thing,  who,  after  so  fair 
*  Letter  of  an  admonition,  does  still  persist  to  maintain,*  that 
Thanks,  p.  24,  &c.  f]rst  and  self-evident  principles  not  only  may,  but 
t  Ibid.  p.  11.  are  fit  to  be  demonstrated  ;  andt  that  those  ridi- 
culous identical  propositions,  that  faith  is  faith,  and  a  rule  is  a 
rule,  are  first  principles  in  this  controversy  of  the  rule  of  faith, 
without  which  nothing  can  be  solidly  concluded  either  about  rule 
or  faith.  But  there  was  another  reason  for  his  quitting  of  that  ti- 
tle, and  a  prudent  one  indeed  :  he  had  forsaken  the  defence  of  Sure 
Footing,  and  then  it  became  convenient  to  lay  aside  that  title,  for 
fear  of  putting  people  any  more  in  mind  of  that  book, 

I  expected,  indeed,  after  his  Letter  of  Thanks,  in  which 
i  P.  14.  hej  tells  us,  he  intended  to  throw  aside  the  rub- 
bish of  my  book,  that  in  his  answer  he  might  the  better  lay  open 
the  fabric  of  my  discourse,  and  have  nothing  there  to  do,  but  to 
speak  to  solid  points  ;  I  say,  after  this,  I  expected  a  full  answer  to 
the  solid  points  (as  he  is  pleased  to  call  them)  of  my  book  ;  and  that, 
(according  to  his  excellent  method  of  removing  the  rubbish,  in  or- 
der to  the  pulling  down  of  a  building)  the  fabric  of  my  book  would 
long  since  have  been  demolished  and  laid  even  with  the  ground. 
But,  especially,  when,  in  the  conclusion  of  that  most  civil  and  ob- 
liging Letter,  he  threatened  never  to  leave  following  on  his  blow, 
till  he  had  either  brought  Dr.  Still  and  me  to  lay  principles  that 
would  bear  the  test,  or  it  was  made  evident  to  all  the  world  that  we 
had  none  ;  I  began  (as  I  had  reason)  to  be  in  a  terrible  fear  of  him, 
and  to  look  upon  myself  as  a  dead  man.  And,  indeed,  who  can 
think  himself  so  considerable  as  not  to  dread  this  mighty  man  of 
demonstration,  this  prince  of  controvertists,  this  great  lord  and 
professor  of  first  principles  1    But  I  perceive  that  great  minds  are 


PREFACE. 


CCXCYii 


merciful,  and  do  sometimes  content  themselves  to  threaten  \vhen_ 
they  could  destroy. 

For,  instead  of  returning  a  full  answer  to  my  book,  he  (according 
to  their  new  mode  of  confuting  books)  manfully  falls  a  nibbling  at  one 
single  passage  in  it,  wherein  he  makes  me  to  say  (for  I  say  no  such 
thing)thattheruleof  Christian  faith,  andconsequentlyfaith 
itself,  is  possible  to  be  false.  Nay,  in  his*  Letter  of  Thanks,  *  P' 13* 
he  says  it  is  an  avowed  position,  in  that  place,  that  faith  is  possible 
to  be  false;  and,  to  give  the  more  countenance  to  this  calumny,  he 
chargeth  the  same  position  (in  equivalent  terms)  of  the  possible 
falsehood  of  faith,  and  that,  as  to  the  chiefest  and  most  funda- 
mental point,  the  tenet  of  a  Deity,  upon  the  forementioned  sermon. 
But  because  he  knew  in  his  conscience,  that  I  had  avowed  no 
such  position,  he  durst  not  cite  the  words  either  of  my  book  or 
sermon,  lest  the  reader  should  have  discovered  the  notorious  false* 
hood  and  groundlessness  of  this  calumny ;  nay,  he  durst  not  so 
much  as  refer  to  any  particular  place  in  my  sermon,  where  such  a 
passage  might  be  found.  And  yet  this  is  the  man  that  has  the  face 
to  charge  others  with  false  citations  ;  to  which  charge,  before  I 
have  done,  I  shall  say  something,  which  (what  effect  soever  it  may 
have  upon  him)  would  make  any  other  man  sufficiently  ashamed. 

But  yet  1  must  acknowledge,  that  in  this  position,  which  he  fast- 
ens upon  me,  he  honours  me  with  excellent  company,  my  Lord 
Faulkland,  Mr.  Chillingworth,  and  Dr.  Stillingfleet ;  persons  of  that 
admirable  strength  and  clearness  in  their  writings,  that  Mr.  S.  when 
he  reflects  upon  his  own  style  and  way  of  reasoning,  may  blush  to 
acknowledge  that  ever  he  has  read  them.  And,  as  to  this  position 
which  he  charges  them  withal,  I  do  not  know  (nor  have  the  least 
reason  upon  Mr.  S's  word  to  believe)  any  such  thing  is  maintained 
by  them. 

As  for  myself,  whom  I  am  now  only  concerned  to  vindicate,  I 
shall  set  dow  n  the  two  passages,  to  which  I  suppose  he  refers. 

In  my  sermon,  I  endeavour  (among  other  things)  to  shew  the 
unreasonableness  of  atheism  upon  this  account :  because  it  requit  es 
more  evidence  for  things  than  they  are  capable  of.  To  make  this 
good,  I  discourse  thus :  "  Aristotle  hath  long  since  observed,  how 
unreasonable  it  is  to  expect  the  same  kind  of  proof  for  every  tiling, 
w  hich  we  have  for  some  things.  Mathematical  things  being  of  an 
abstracted  nature,  are  only  capable  of  clear  demonstration.  But 
conclusions  in  natural  philosophy  are  to  be  proved  by  a  sufficient 
induction  of  experiments:  things  of  a  moral  nature  by  moral  argu- 

yol.  I.  2  b 


cexcviii 


PREFACE. 


ments,  and  matters  of  fact  by  credible  testimony.    And,  though 
none  of  these  be  strict^emonstration,  yet  have  we  an  undoubted 
assurance  of  them,  when  they  are  proved  by  the  best  arguments 
that  the  nature  and  quality  of  the  thing  will  bear.    None  can  de- 
monstrate to  me,  that  there  is  such  an  island  in  America  as  Ja- 
maica ;  yet,  upon  the  testimony  of  credible  persons,  and  authors 
who  have  written  of  it,  I  am  as  free  from  all  doubt  concerning  it, 
as  from  doubting  of  the  clearest  mathematical  demonstration.  So 
that  this  is  to  be  entertained  as  a  firm  principle,  by  all  those  who 
pretend  to  be  certain  of  any  thing  at  all,  that  when  any  thing  is 
proved  by  as  good  arguments  as  that  thing  is  capable  of,  and  we 
have  as  great  assurance  that  it  is,  as  we  could  possibly  have  sup- 
posing it  were,  we  ought  not  in  reason  to  make  any  doubt  of  the 
existence  of  that  thing.    Now  to  apply  this  to  the  present  case. 
The  being  of  a  God  is  not  mathematically  demonstrable,  nor  can 
it  be  expected  it  should,  because  only  mathematical  matters  ad- 
mit of  this  kind  of  evidence.    Nor  can  it  be  proved  immediately 
by  sense,  because  God  being  supposed  to  be  a  pure  spirit,  cannot 
be  the  object  of  any  corporeal  sense.    But  yet  we  have  as  great 
assurance  that  there  is  a  God,  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  to  be 
proved  is  capable  of,  and  as  we  could  in  reason  expect  to  have,  sup- 
posing that  he  were.'* 

Upon  this  passage  it  must  be  (if  any  thing  in  the  sermon)  that 
Mr.  S.  chargeth  this  position  (in  equivalent  terras)  of  the  possible 
falsehood  of  faith,  and  that,  as  to  the  chiefest  and  most  funda- 
mental point — the  tenet  of  a  Deity.    And  now  I  appeal  to  the 
reader's  eyes  and  judgment,  whether  the  sum  of  what  I  have  said 
be  not  this  :  That  though  the  existence  of  God  be  not  capable  of 
that  strict  kind  of  demonstration  which  mathematical  matters  are, 
yet  that  we  have  an  undoubted  assurance  of  it.    One  would  think 
that  no  man  could  be  so  ridiculous  as  from  hence  to  infer,  that  I 
believe  it  possible,  notwithstanding  this  assurance,  that  there 
should  be  no  God.    For  however  in  many  other  cases  an  undoubt- 
ed assurance  that  a  thing  is,  may  not  exclude  all  suspicion  of  a 
possibility  of  its  being  otherwise ;  yet  in  this  tenet  of  a  Deity  it 
most  certainly  does.    Because  whoever  is  assured  that  there  is  a 
God,  is  assured  there  is  a  Being,  whose  existence  is  and  always  was 
necessary,  and  consequently  is  assured,  that  it  is  impossible  he 
should  not  be,  and  involves  in  it  a  contradiction.    So  that  my  dis- 
course is  so  far  from  being  equivalent  to  the  position  he  mentions* 
that  it  is  a  perfect  contradiction  to  it.    And  he  might  with  as 


PREFACE. 


ccxeix 


much  truth  have  affirmed,  that  I  had  expressly  and  in  so  many 
words  said,  that  there  is  no  God. 

The  other  passage  is  in  my  book,  concerning  the  Rule  of  Faith. 
I  was  discoursing  that  no  man  can  shew  by  any  necessary  argument, 
that  it  is  naturally  impossible  that  all  the  relations  concerning 
America  should  be  false.  But  yet  (say  I)  I  suppose  that  notwith- 
standing this,  no  man  in  his  wits  is  now  possessed  with  so  incredi- 
ble a  folly,  as  to  doubt  whether  there  be  such  a  place.  The  case 
is  the  very  same  as  to  the  certainty  of  an  ancient  book,  and  of  the 
sense  of  plain  expressions :  we  have  no  demonstration  for  these 
things,  and  we  expect  none ;  because  we  know  the  things  are  not  ca- 
pable of  it.  We  are  not  infallibly  certain  that  any  book  is  so  an- 
cient as  it  pretends  to  be;  or  that  it  was  written  by  him  whose 
name  it  bears ;  or  that  this  is  the  sense  of  such  and  such  passages 
in  it :  it  is  possible  all  this  may  be  otherwise  ;  but  we  are  very  well 
assured  that  it  is  not,  nor  hath  any  prudent  man  any  just  cause  to 
make  the  least  doubt  of  it;  for  a  bare  possibility  that  a  thing  may 
be,  or  not  be,  is  no  just  cause  of  doubting  whether  a  thing  be  or 
not.  It  is  possible  all  the  people  in  France  may  die  this  night,  but 
I  hope  the  possibility  of  this  doth  not  incline  any  man  in  the  least 
to  think  it  will  be  so.  It  is  possible  that  the  sun  may  not  rise  to- 
morrow morning ;  yet,  for  all  this,  I  suppose  that  no  man  hath  the 
least  doubt  but  that  it  will. 

To  avoid  the  cavils  of  this  impertinent  man,  I  have  transcribed 
the  whole  page  to  which  he  refers.  And  now  where  is  this  avowed 
position  of  the  possible  falsehood  of  faith  ?  All  that  I  say  is  this, 
that  we  are  not  infallible  either  in  judging  of  the  antiquity  of  a 
book,  or  of  the  sense  of  it ;  by  which  I  mean  (as  any  man  of  sense 
and  ingenuity  would  easily  perceive  I  do)  that  we  cannot  demon- 
strate these  things  so,  as  to  shew,  that  the  contrary  necessarily  in- 
volves a  contradiction  ;  but  yet  that  we  may  have  a  firm  assurance 
concerning  these  matters,  so  as  not  to  make  theileast  doubt  of  them. 

And  is  this  to  avow  the  possible  falsehood  of  faith?  And  yet 
this  position  Mr.  S.  charges  upon  these  words  ;  how  justly  I  shall 
now  examine. 

Either  by  faith  Mr.  S.  means  the  doctriue  revealed  by  God,  and 
then  the  meaning  of  the  position  must  be,  that  what  God  says,  is 
possible  to  be  false;  which  is  so  absurd  a  position  as  can  hardly 
enter  into  any  man's  mind ;  and  yet  Mr.  S.  hath  the  modesty  all 
along  in  his  book  to  insinuate,  that  in  the  forecited  passage  I  say 
as  much  as  this  comes  to. 

2  B  2 


cce 


PREFACE. 


Or  else  Mr.  S.  means  by  faith,  the  assent  which  we  give  to  doc- 
trines as  revealed  by  God  ;  and  then  his  sense  of  infallibility  must 
be  either,  that  whoever  assents  to  any  thing  as  revealed  by  God, 
cannot  be  deceived,  upon  supposition  that  it  is  so  revealed  ;  or 
else  absolutely,  that  whoever  assents  to  any  thing  as  revealed  by 
God,  cannot  be  deceived.  Now,  although  I  do  not,  in  the  passage 
forecited,  speak  one  syllable  concerning  doctrines  revealed  by  God, 
yet  I  affirm  (and  so  will  any  man  else)  that  an  assent  to  any  doc- 
trine as  revealed  by  God,  if  it  be  revealed  by  him,  is  impossible  to 
be  false.  But  this  is  only  an  infallibility  upon  supposition,  which 
amounts  to  no  more  than  this,  that  if  a  thing  be  true,  it  is  impossi- 
ble to  be  false.  And  yet  the  principal  design  of  Mr.  S's  book  is  to 
prove  this,  which  I  believe  no  man  in  the  world  was  ever  so  sense- 
less as  to  deny.  But  if  he  mean  absolutely,  that  whoever  assents 
to  any  doctrine,  as  revealed  by  God,  cannot  be  deceived  ;  that  is, 
that  no  man  can  be  mistaken  about  matters  of  faith  (as  he  must 
mean,  if  he  pretend  to  have  any  adversary,  and  do  not  fight  only 
with  his  own  shadow) ;  this  I  confess  is  a  very  comfortable  asser- 
tion, but  I  am  much  afraid  it  is  not  true. 

Or  else,  lastly,  by  faith  he  understands  the  means  and  motives 
of  faith:  and  then  the  plain  state  of  the  controversy  between  us  is 
this — Whether  it  be  necessary  to  a  Christian  belief,  to  be  infallibly 
secured  of  the  means  whereby  the  Christian  doctrine  is  conveyed 
to  us,  and  of  the  firmness  of  the  motives  upon  w  hich  our  belief  of 
it  is  grounded.  This  indeed  is  something  to  the  purpose ;  for 
though  in  the  passage  before-cited,  I  say  not  one  word  concerning 
the  motives  of  our  belief  of  the  Christian  doctrine,  yet  my  dis- 
course there  was  intended  to  be  applied  to  the  means  whereby  the 
knowledge  of  this  doctrine  is  conveyed  to  us.  However,  I  am 
contented  to  join  issue  with  Mr.  S.  upon  both  these  points. 

1.  That  it  is  not  necessary  to  the  true  nature  of  faith,  that  the 
motives  upon  which  any  man  believes  the  Christian  doctrine  should 
be  absolutely  conclusive,  and  impossible  to  be  false.  That  it  is  ne- 
cessary, Mr.  S.  several  times  affirms  in  his  book;  but  how  unrea- 
sonably appears  from  certain  and  daily  experience.  Very  many 
Christians  (such  as  St.  Austin  speaks  of,  as  are  saved  not  by  the 
quickness  of  their  understandings,  but  the  simplicity  of  their  be- 
lief) do  believe  the  Christian  doctrine  upon  incompetent  grounds; 
and  their  belief  is  true,  though  the  argument  upon  which  they 
ground  it  be  not  (as  Mr.  S.  says)  absolutely  conclusive  of  the  thing: 
and  he  that  thus  believes  the  Christian  doctrine,  if  he  adhere  to  it, 


PREFACE. 


and  live  accordingly,  shall  undoubtedly  be  saved;  and  yet  I  hope 
Mr.  S.  will  not  say  that  any  man  shall  be  saved  without  true  faith. 
I  might  add,  that  in  this  assertion  Mr.  S.  is  plainly  contradicted  by 
those  of  his  own  church. 

For  they  generally  grant  that  general  councils,  though  they  be 
infallible  in  their  definitions  and  conclusions,  yet  are  not  always  so 
in  their  arguments  and  reasonings  about  them.  And  the  Guide  of 
controversies  expressly  says,  that  it  is  not  necessary  that  a  Di- 
vine faith  should  always  have  an  external  rationally  infallible  ground 
or  motive  thereto  (whether  church  authority,  or  any  other)  on  his 
part,  that  so  believes.  Here  is  a  man  of  their  own  church  avow- 
ing this  position,  that  faith  is  possible  to  be  false.  I  desire  Mr.  S. 
who  is  the  very  rule  of  controversy,  to  do  justice  upon  this  false 
Guide. 

I  must  acknowledge,  that  Mr.  S.  attempts  to  prove  this  assertion, 
and  that  by  a  very  pleasant  and  surprising  argument,  which  is  this : 
"The  profound  mysteries  of  faith  (he  tells  us*)  must  «  Faith  vind.  p.  90. 
needs  seem  to  some  (viz.  those  who  have  no  light  but 
their  pure  natural  reason,!  as  he  said  before)  impossi-  *  P"  89, 
ble  to  be  true  ;  which  therefore  nothing  but  a  motive  of  its  own  na- 
ture seemingly  impossible  to  be  false  can  conquer,  so  as  to  make 
them  conceit  them  really  true."  What  Mr.  S.  here  means  by  a  mo- 
tive of  its  own  nature  seeming  impossible  to  be  false,  I  cannot  di- 
vine, unless  he  means  a  real  seeming  impossibility.  But  be  that  as 
it  will,  does  Mr.  S.  in  good  earnest  believe,  that  a  motive  of  its  own 
nature  seeming  impossible  to  be  false,  is  sufficient  to  convince  any 
man,  that  has  and  uses  the  light  of  natural  reason,  of  the  truth  of  a 
thing  which  must  needs  seem  to  him  impossible  to  be  true'?  In  my 
opinion  these  two  seeming  impossibilities  are  so  equally  matched, 
that  it  must  needs  be  a  drawn  battle  between  them.  Suppose  the 
thing  to  be  believed  be  transubstantiation;  this  indeed  is  a  very 
profound  mystery,  and  is  (to  speak  in  Mr.  S's  phrase)  "  of  its  own 
nature  so  seemingly  impossible,"  that  I  know  no  argument  in  the 
world  strong  enough  to  cope  with  it.  And  I  challenge  Mr.  S.  to 
instance  in  any  motive  of  faith  w  hich  is,  both  to  our  understanding 
and  our  senses,  more  plainly  impossible  to  be  false  than  their  doc- 
trine of  transubstantiation  is  evidently  impossible  to  be  true.  And, 
if  he  cannot,  how  can  he  reasonably  expect  that  any  man  in  the 
world  should  believe  it? 

2.  That  it  is  not  necessary  to  the  true  nature  of  faith,  that  we 
should  be  infallibly  secured  of  the  means  whereby  the  Christian 


cccii 


PREFACE. 


doctrine  is  conveyed  to  us ;  particularly  of  the  antiquity  and  au- 
thority of  the  books  of  scripture,  and  that  the  expressions  in  it 
cannot  possibly  bear  any  other  sense :  and  these  are  the  very 
things  I  instance  in,  in  the  passage  so  often  mentioned.  And  to 
these  Mr.  S.  ought  to  have  spoken,  if  he  intended  to  have  confut- 
ed that  passage.  But  he  was  resolved  not  to  speak  distinctly, 
knowing  his  best  play  to  be  in  the  dark,  and  that  all  his  safety  lay 
in  the  confusion  and  obscurity  of  his  talk. 

Now  that  to  have  an  infallible  security  in  these  particulars  is 
not  necessary  to  the  true  nature  of  faith,  is  evident  upon  these  two 
accounts ;  because  faith  may  be  without  this  infallible  security, 
and  because  in  the  particulars  mentioned  it  is  impossible  to  be  had. 

1.  Because  faith  may  be  without  this  infallible  security.  He  that 
is  so  assured  of  the  antiquity  and  authority  of  the  books  of  scrip- 
ture, and  of  the  sense  of  those  texts  wherein  the  doctrines  of  Christ- 
ianity are  plainly  delivered,  as  to  see  no  just  cause  to  doubt 
thereof,  may  really  assent  to  those  doctrines,  though  we  have  no 
infallible  security ;  and  an  assent  so  grounded  I  affirm  to  have 
the  true  nature  of  faith :  for  what  degree  of  assent,  and  what 
security  of  the  means,  which  convey  to  us  the  knowledge  of 
Christianity,  are  necessary  to  the  true  nature  of  faith,  is  to  be  esti- 
mated from  the  end  of  faith,  which  is  the  salvation  of  men's  souls. 
And  whoever  is  so  assured  of  the  authority  and  sense  of  scripture, 
as  to  believe  the  doctrine  of  it,  and  to  live  accordingly,  shall  be 
saved.  And  surely  such  a  belief  as  will  save  a  man,  hath  the  true 
nature  of  faith,  though  it  be  not  infallible.  And  if  God  hath  suf- 
ficiently provided  for  the  salvation  of  men  of  all  capacities,  it  is  no 
such  reflection  upon  the  goodness  and  wisdom  of  Providence,  as 
Mr.  S.  imagines,  that  he  hath  not  taken  care  that  every  man's  faith 
should  arrive  to  the  degree  of  infallibility ;  nor  does  our  blessed 
Saviour,  for  not  having  made  this  provision,  "  deserve  to  be  es- 
. .  .  teemed  by  all  the  world  not  a  wise  lawgiver,  but  a 
CaatuarLn  is,  mere  ignoramus  and  impostor,"  as*  one  of  his  fellow 
p.  77.  controvertists  speaks  with  reverence. 

Besides,  this  assertion  that  infallibility  is  necessary  to  the  true 
nature  of  that  assent,  which  we  call  faith,  is  plainly  false  upon  ano- 
ther account  also  ;  because  faith  admits  of  degrees.  But  infalli- 
bility has  none.  The  scripture  speaks  of  a  weak  and  strong  faith, 
and  of  the  increase  of  faith ;  but  I  never  heard  of  a  weak  and 
strong  infallibility.  Infallibility  is  the  highest  perfection  of  the 
knowing  faculty,  and  consequently  the  firmest  degree  of  assent 


PREFACE. 


CCC-lll 


upon  the  firmest  grounds,  and  which  are  known  to  be  so.  But 
will  Mr.  S.  say,  that  the  highest  degree  of  assent  admits  of  de- 
grees, and  is  capable  of  increase  1  Infallibility  is  an  absolute  im- 
possibility of  being  deceived  :  now  I  desire  Mr.  S.  to  shew  me  the 
degrees  of  absolute  impossibility ;  and,  if  he  could  do  that,  and 
consequently  there  might  be  degrees  of  infallibility,  yet  I  cannot 
believe  that  Mr.  S.  would  think  fit  to  call  any  degrees  of  infallibi- 
lity a  weak  faith  or  assent. 

2.  Because  an  infallible  security,  in  the  particulars  mentioned, 
is  impossible  to  be  had  :  I  mean  in  an  ordinary  way,  and  without 
miracle  and  particular  revelation;  because  the  nature  of  the  thing 
is  incapable  of  it.  The  utmost  security  we  have  of  the  antiquity  of 
any  book  is  human  testimony,  and  all  human  testimony  is  fallible 
for  this  plain  reason — because  all  men  are  fallible.  And  though 
Mr.  S.  in  defence  of  his  beloved  tradition,  is  pleased  to  say  that 
human  testimony  in  some  cases  is  infallible,  yet  I  think  no  man 
before  him  was  ever  so  hardy  as  to  maintain  that  the  testimony  of 
fallible  men  is  infallible.  I  grant  it  to  be  in  many  cases  certain  ; 
that  is,  such  as  a  considerate  man  may  prudently  rely  and  proceed 
upon,  and  hath  no  just  cause  to  doubt  of;  and  such  as  none  but 
an  obstinate  man  or  a  fool  can  deny.  And  that  thus  the  learned 
men  of  his  own  church  define  certainty,  Mr.  S.  (if  he  would  but 
vouchsafe  to  read  such  books)  might  have  learned  from*  *  De  Joc 
Melchtor  Canus,  who  speaking  of  the  firmness  of  hu-  Tbeolog.  lib. 
man  testimony  in  some  cases,  (which  yet  he  did  not  be-  ^ominei 
lieve  to  be  infallible)  denies  it  thus  :  "  Those  things  are  ea  sunt,  quai 

certain  among  men,  which  cannot  be  denied  without  ^g3^  si?e 

i  f  .  „    „     .  .  >/r    r.   •      i         i  pervicacia,  et 

obstinacy  and  folly.     I  know  Mr.  S.  is  pleased  to  say,  stultitia,  non 

that  certainty  and  infallibility  are  all  one.  And  he  is  possunt. 
the  first  man  that  I  know  of  that  ever  said  it.  And  yet  perhaps 
somebody  may  have  been  before  him  in  it,  for  I  remember  Tully 
says,  "  That  there  is  nothing  so  foolish  but  some  philosopher  or  other 
has  said  it."  I  am  sure  Mr.  S's  own  philosopher,  Mr.  Wh.  con- 
tradicts him  in  this,  most  clearly,  in  his  preface  to  Rushworth's 
Dialogues;  where  explicating  the  term,  moral  certainty,  he  tells  us, 
that  **  some  understood  by  it  such  a  certainty  as  makes  the  cause 
always  work  the  same  effect,  though  it  take  not  away  the  absolute 
possibility  of  working  other  ways  ;"  and  this  presently  after  he  tells 
us,  "ought  absolutely  to  be  reckoned  in  the  degree  of  true  certainty, 
and  the  authors  considered  as  mistaken  in  undervaluing  it."  So 
that  according  to  Mr.  White  true  certainty  may  consist  with  a  po*« 


«ccir 


PREFACE. 


sibility  of  the  contrary,  and  consequently  Mr.  S.  is  mistaken  in 
thinking  certainty  and  infallibility  to  be  all  one.  Nay  I  do  not 
find  any  two  of  them  agreeing  among  themselves,  about  the  no- 
tions of  infallibility  and  certainty.  Mr.  Wh.  says,  that  what  some 
call  moral  certainty,  is  true  certainty,  though  it  do  not  take  away  a 
possibility  of  the  contrary.  Mr.  S.  asserts  the  direct  contrary.  That 
moral  certainty  is  not  only  probability,  because  it  does  not  take 
away  the  possibility  of  the  contrary.  The  Guide  in  controver- 
sies *  differs  from  them  both,  and  makes  moral, 

*  P  135 

certain,  and  infallible,  all  one.  I  desire  that  they 
would  agree  these  matters  among  themselves  before  they  quarrel 
vith  us  about  them. 

In  brief,  then,  though  moral  certainty  be  sometimes  taken  for  a 
high  degree  of  probability,  which  can  only  produce  a  doubtful  as- 
sent; yet  it  is  also  frequently  used  for  a  firm  and  undoubted  assent 
to  a  thing  upon  such  grounds  as  are  fit  fully  to  satisfy  a  prudent 
man :  and  in  this  sense  I  have  always  used  this  term.  But  now  in- 
fallibility is  an  absolute  security  of  the  understanding  from  all  pos- 
sibility of  mistake  in  what  it  believes ;  and  there  are  but  two  ways 
for  the  understanding  to  be  thus  secured  :  either  by  the  perfection 
of  its  own  nature,  or  by  supernatural  assistance.  But  no  human 
understanding  being  absolutely  secured  from  possibility  of  mistake 
by  the  perfection  of  its  own  nature,  (which  1  think  all  mankind, 
except  Mr.  S.  have  hitherto  granted)  it  follows,  that  no  man  can  be 
infallible  in  any  thing,  but  by  supernatural  assistance.  Nor  did  ever 
the  church  of  Rome  pretend  to  infallibility  upon  any  other  account, 
US  every  one  knows  that  hath  been  conversant  in  the  writings  of 

their  learned  men.  And  Mr.  Cressy,  in  his*  answer  to  Dr. 
*  P.  88  89.  . 

Pierce,  hath  not  the  face  to  contend  for  any  other  infalli- 
bility but  this,  that  "the  immutable  God  can  actually  preserve  a  mu- 
table creature  from  actual  mutation  but  I  can  by  no  means  agree 
with  him  in  what  immediately  follows,  concerning  the  omniscience 
of  a  creature;  that  God,  "  who  is  absolutely  omniscient,  can  teach  a 
rational  creature  all  truths  necessary  or  expedient  to  be  known  ; 
so  that  though  a  man  may  have  much  ignorance,  yet  he  may  be  in 
a  sort  omniscient  within  a  determinate  sphere."  Omniscient  within 
a  determinate  sphere,  is  an  infinite  within  a  finite  sphere;  and  is  not 
that  a  very  pretty  sort  of  knowing  all  things,  which  may  consist 
with  an  ignorance  of  many  things  ?  Of  all  the  controvertists  I  have 
met  with,  (except  Mr.  S.)  Mr.  Cressy  is  the  happiest  at  these  smart 
and  ingenious  kind  of  reasonings. 


PREFACE. 


CCCT 


As  to  the  other  particular  of  the  sense  of  books,  it  is  likewise 
plainly  impossible  that  anything  should  be  delivered  in  such  clear 
and  certain  words  as  are  absolutely  incapable  of  any  other  sense; 
aud  yet,  notwithstanding  this,  the  meaning  of  them  may  be  so 
plain,  as  that  any  unprejudiced  and  reasonable  man  may  certainly 
understand  them.  How  many  definitions  and  axioms,  Sec.  are 
there  in  Euclid,  in  the  sense  of  which  men  are  universally  agreed, 
and  think  themselves  undoubtedly  certain  of  it  ?  and  yet  the  words, 
in  which  they  are  expressed,  may  possibly  bear  another  sense. 
The  same  may  be  said  concerning  the  doctrines  and  precepts  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures;  and  one  great  reason  why  men  do  not  so  ge- 
nerally agree  in  the  sense  of  these  as  of  the  other,  is  because  the 
interests,  and  lusts,  and  passions  of  men  are  more  concerned  in 
the  one  than  the  other.  But  whatever  uncertainty  there  may  be 
in  the  sense  of  any  texts  of  scripture,  oral  tradition  is  so  far  from 
affording  us  any  help  in  this  case,  that  it  is  a  thousand  times  more 
uncertain  and  less  to  be  trusted  to ;  especially  if  we  may  take  that 
to  be  the  traditionary  sense  of  texts  of  scripture,  which  we  meet 
within  the  decretals  of  their  popes,  and  the  acts  of  some  of  their 
councils;  than  which  never  was  any  thing  in  the  whole  world  more 
absurd  and  ridiculous:  and  whence  may  we  expect  to  have  the 
infallible  traditional  sense  of  scripture,  if  not  from  the  heads  and 
representatives  of  their  church  1 

This  may  abundantly  suffice  for  the  vindication  of  that  passage 
which  Mr.  S.  makes  such  a  rude  clamour  about,  as  if  I  had  therein 
denied  the  truth  and  certainty  of  all  religion ;  but  durst  never 
trust  the  reader  with  a  view  of  those  words  of  mine  upon  which  he 
pretended  to  ground  his  calumny.  But  the  world  understands  well 
enough,  that  all  this  was  but  a  shift  of  Mr.  S's  for  the  satisfaction 
of  his  own  party,  and  a  pitiful  art  to  avoid  the  vindication  of  Sure 
Footing,  a  task  he  had  no  mind  to  undertake. 

And  yet  the  main  design  of  this  book,  which  he  calls  Faith  Vin- 
dicated, Sec.  is  to  prove  that  which  I  do  not  believe  any  man  living 
ever  denied,  viz.  That  what  is  true  is  not  possible  to  be  false  : 
which,  though  it  be  oue  of  the  plainest  truths  in  the  world,  yet  he 
proves  it  so  foolishly,  as  would  make  any  man  (if  it  were  not 
evident  of  itself)  to  doubt  of  it.  He  proves  it  from  logic  and  na- 
ure,  and  metaphysics,  and  ethics,  &c.  I  wonder  he  did  not  doit 
likewise  from  arithmetic,  and  geometry,  the  principles  whereof, 
he*  tells  us  are  concerned  in  demonstrating  thecer-  «  <;ure  fo  . 
tainty  of  oral  tradition.    He  might  also  have  pro-  p.  93.       '  c' 


CCCvi  PREFACE. 

ceeded  to  astrology,  and  palmistry,  and  chemistry,  and  have  shewn 
how  each  of  these  lend  their  assistance  to  the  evidencing  of  this 
truth.  For  that  could  not  have  been  more  ridiculous,  than 
*  Faith  Vindic.  his*  argument  from  the  nature  of  subject  and  predi- 
p.  6,  7,  &c.  cate,  and  copula  in  faith-propositions  :  because,  for- 
sooth, whoever  affirms  any  proposition  of  faith  to  be  true,  affirms 
it  impossible  to  be  false.  Very  true.  But  would  any  man  argue, 
that  what  is  true  is  impossible  to  be  false,  from  the  nature  of  sub- 
ject, predicate  and  copula?  for  be  the  proposition  true  or  false, 
these  are  of  the  same  nature  in  both,  that  is,  they  are  subject,  pre- 
dicate and  copula. 

But  that  the  reader  may  have  a  taste  of  his  clear  style  and  way  of 
reasoning,  I  shall  for  his  satisfaction  transcribe  Mr.  S's  whole  argu- 
ment from  the  nature  of  the  predicate.  His  words  are  these: 

P.  9.  12. 

"  Our  argument  from  the  copula,  is  particularly  strengthened 
from  the  nature  of  the  predicate  in  the  propositions  we  speak  of;  I 
mean  in  such  speeches  as  affirm  such  and  such  points  of  faith  to  be 
true.  For  true  means  existent  in  propositions  which  express  only 
the  an  est  of  a  thing,  as  most  points  of  faith  do  ;  which  speak  ab- 
stractedly, and  tell  not  wherein  the  nature  of  the  subject  it  speaks 
of  consists,  or  the  quid  est.  So  that  most  of  the  propositions 
Christians  are  bound  to  profess  are  fully  expressed  thus :  A  trinity 
is  existent,  &c.  and  the  like  may  be  said  of  those  points  which  be- 
long to  a  thing  or  action  past;  as  creation  was,  &c.  for  existent  is 
the  predicate  in  these  two,  only  affixed  to  another  difference  of 
time ;  and  it  is  equally  impossible  such  subjects  should  neither 
have  been,  nor  not  have  been,  or  have  been,  and  have  not  been  at 
once,  as  it  is  that  a  thing  should  neither  be  or  not  be  at  present,  or 
both  be  and  not  be  at  present.  Regarding  then  stedfastly  the  na- 
ture of  our  predicate  [existent]  we  shall  find  that  it  expresses  the  ut- 
most actuality  of  a  thing  ;  and  as  taken  in  the  posture  it  bears  in 
those  propositions,  that  actually  exercised,  that  is,  the  utmost  ac- 
tuality in  its  most  actual  state  ;  that  is,  as  absolutely  excluding  all 
manner  or  least  degree  of  potentiality,  and  consequently  all  possi- 
bility of  being  otherwise;  which  is  radically  destroyed  when  all  po- 
tentiality is  taken  away.  This  discourse  holding,  which  in  right 
to  truth  I  shall  not  fear  to  affirm  (unconcerned  in  the  drollery  of 
any  opposer)  to  be  more  than  mathematically  demonstrative,  it 
follows  inevitably,  that  whosoever  is  bound  to  profess  a  trinity,  in- 
carnation, &c.  is  or  was  existent,  is  also  bound  to  profess  that  it  is 


PREFACE. 


cccvii 


impossible  they  should  be  not  existent,  or,  which  is  all  one,  that  it 
is  impossible  these  points  of  faith  should  be  false. 

"  The  same  appears  out  of  the  nature  of  distinction  or  division 
applied  to  our  predicate  existent,  as  found  in  these  propositions  ; 
for  could  that  predicate  bear  a  pertinent  distinction  expressing  this 
and  the  other  respect,  or  thus  and  thus,  it  might  possibly  be  ac- 
cording to  one  of  these  respects,  or  thus  considered,  and  not  be 
according  to  another,  that  is  another  way  considered  :  but  this  eva- 
sion is  here  impossible;  for  either  those  distinguishing  notions 
must  be  more  potential  or  antecedent  to  the  notion  of  existent,  and 
then  they  neither  reach  existent,  nor  supervene  to  it  as  its  deter- 
minations or  actuations,  which  differences  ought  to  do;  nor  can 
any  notion  be  more  actual  or  determinative  in  the  line  of  substance 
or  being,  than  existent  is;  and,  so  fit  to  distinguish  it  in  that  line ; 
nor,  lastly,  can  any  determination  in  the  line  of  accidents  serve  the 
turn ;  for  those  suppose  existence  already  put,  and  so  the  whole 
truth  of  the  proposition  entire  and  complete  antecedently  to  them. 
It  is  impossible  therefore,  that  what  is  thus  affirmed  to  be  true, 
should  in  any  regard  be  affirmed  possible  to  be  false :  the  impossi- 
bility of  distinguishing  the  predicate  pertinently  excluding  here  all 
possibility  of  divers  respects. 

The  same  is  demonstrated  from  the  impossibility  of  distinguish- 
ing the  subjects  of  those  faith  propositions  ;  for  those  subjects  be- 
ing propositions  themselves,  and  accepted  for  truths,  as  is  suppos- 
ed, they  are  incapable  of  distinction,  as  shall  be  particularly  shewn 
hereafter.  Besides,  those  subjects  being  points  of  faith,  and  so 
standing  in  the  abstract,  that  is,  not  descending  to  subsuming  res- 
pects, even  in  that  regard  too  they  are  freed  from  all  pertinent 
distinguishableness. 

"  The  same  is  demonstrated  from  the  nature  of  truth,  which  con- 
sists in  an  indivisible  ;  whence  there  is  nothing  of  truth  had,  how 
great  soever  the  conceived  approaches  towards  it  may  be,  till  all 
may-not-bees,  or  potentiality  to  be  otherwise,  be  utterly  excluded 
by  the  actuality  of  is  or  existence  ;  which  put  or  discovered,  the 
light  of  truth  breaks  forth,  and  the  dim  twilights  of  may-not-bees 
vanish  and  disappear." 

I  have  here,  reader,  presented  thee  with  a  discourse  which  (if  we 
may  believe  Mr.  S.)  is  more  than  mathematically  demonstrative. 
A  rare  sight  indeed  !  And  is  not  this  a  pleasant  man,  and  of  <*ood 
assurance?  I  now  find  it  true,  which  he*  says  else-      *  letter  of 
\vhere,  that  principles  are  of  an  inflexible  genius,    Thanks,  p.  1. 


CCCV11I 


PREFACE. 


and  self-confident  too,  and  that  they  love  naturally  to  express  them- 
selves with  an  assuredness.  But  certainly  the  sacred  names  of  prin- 
ciples and  demonstration  were  never  so  profaned  by  any  man  be- 
fore. Might  not  any  one  write  a  book  of  such  jargon,  and  call  it 
demonstration?  And  would  it  not  equally  serve  to  prove  or  con- 
fute? If  he  intended  this  stuff  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  people,  he 
might  as  well  have  wrote  in  the  Coptic  or  Sclavonian  language  : 
yet  I  cannot  deny,  but  that  it  is  very  suitable  to  the  principles  of 
the  Roman  church ;  for  why  should  not  their  science  as  well  as 
their  service  be  in  an  unknown  tongue?  that  the  one  may  be  as  fit 
to  improve  their  knowledge,  as  the  other  is  to  raise  their  devotion. 
But  if  he  designed  this  for  the  learned,  nothing  could  be  more  im- 
proper ;  for  they  are  far  less  apt  to  admire  nonsense  than  the  com- 
mon people  :  and  I  desire  that  no  man  (how  learned  soever  he  may 
think  himself)  would  be  over-confident,  that  this  is  sense.  I  do 
verily  believe,  that  neither  Harphius  nor  Rusbrochius,  nor  the  pro- 
found mother  Juliana,  have  any  thing  in  their  writings  more  sense- 
less and  obscure  than  this  discourse  of  his,  which  he  affirms  to  be 
more  than  mathematically  demonstrative.  So  that  if  I  were  worthy 
to  advise  Mr.  S.  he  should  give  over  this  pretence  to  science ;  for, 
whatever  he  may  think,  his  talent  certainly  does  not  lie  that  way ; 
but  seems  to  be  as  well  made  for  a  mystical  divine,  as  any  man  I 
know.  And  methinks  his  superiors  should  be  sensible  of  this,  and 
employ  him  to  write  about  deiform  fund  of  the  soul,  the  super-es- 
sential life,  the  method  of  self-annihilation,  and  the  passive  unions 
of  nothing  with  nothing  :  these  are  profound  subjects,  and  he  hath 
a  style  peculiarly  fitted  for  them.  For  even  in  this  parcel  of  stuff', 
which  I  have  now  cited,  there  are  five  or  six  words,  such  as  may- 
not-bees,  potentiality,  actuality,  actuation,  determinative,  super- 
vene and  subsume,  which  (if  they  were  but  well  mingled  and  dis- 
creetly ordered,  and  brought  in  now  and  then  with  a  that  is,  to  ex- 
plain one  another)  would  half  set  up  a  man  in  that  way,  and  ena- 
ble him  to  write  as  mystical  a  discourse  as  a  man  could  wish.  But 
enough  of  this.  And  I  have  trespassed  not  a  little  upon  my  own 
disposition  in  saying  thus  much,  though  out  of  a  just  indignation 
at  confident  nonsense. 

It  is  time  now  to  draw  towards  a  conclusion  of  this  debate.  I 
shall  only  leave  with  the  reader  a  few  observations  concerning  this 
book  of  and  Mr.  S's,  his  doctrine  of  infallibility. 

First,  That  the  main  drift  of  his  book  being  to  prove  that  what  is 
true  is  impossible  to  be  false,  he  opposes  nobody  that  I  know  of  in 
this  matter. 


PREFACE. 


cccix 


Secondly,  That  in  asserting  infallibility  to  be  necessary  to  the 
true  nature  of  faith,  he  hath  the  generality  of  his  own  church  his 
professed  adversaries.  The  church  of  Rome  never  arrogated  to 
herself  any  other  infallibility  but  what  she  pretends  to  be  founded 
upon  Christ's  promise  to  secure  his  church  always  from  error  by 
a  supernatural  assistance,  which  is  widely  different  from  Mr.  S's  ra- 
tional infallibility  of  oral  tradition.  Mr.  S.  surely  cannot  be  igno- 
rant, that  the  divines  of  their  church  (till  Mr.  Rushworth  and  Mr. 
White  found  out  this  new  way)  did  generally  resolve  faith  into  the 
infallible  testimony  of  the  church,  and  the  infallibility  of  their 
church  into  our  Saviour's  promise;  and  the  evidence  of  the  true 
church  into  the  marks  of  the  church,  or  the  motives  of  credibility, 
which  motives  are  acknowledged  to  be  only  prudential,  and  not 
demonstrative.*  Bellarmine  says,  that  the  marks  *  l.  4.  de 
of  the  church  do  not  make  it  evidently  true,  which  Eccles. 
is  the  true  church,  but  only  "  evidently  credible ;  and  that  (says  he)  is 
said  to  be  evidently  credible  which  is  neither  seen  in  itself,  nor  in 
its  principles  ;  but  yet  hath  so  many  and  so  weighty  testimonies,  that 
every  wise  man  hath  reason  to  believe  it."  Becanus+  ^  Sum. torn.  2. 
to  the  same  purpose,  "That  the  motives  of  credibility  partic.  de  fide, 
are  only  the  foundation  of  a  prudent,  but  not  of  an  °" 
infallible  assent."  I  know  very  well  that  Mr.  Knott  and  some  others 
would  fain  persuade  us,  that  an  assent  in  some  sort  infallible  may 
be  built  upon  prudential  motives,  which  is  as  absurd  as  it  is  possi- 
ble ;  but  if  it  were  true,  yet  Mr.  S.  would  not  accept  of  this  sort 
of  infallibility ;  nothing  less  would  serve  him  than  demonstrative 
motives,  and  such  as  are  absolutely  conclusive  of  the  thing.  Sta- 
pleton  (as  Mr.  Cressy  tells  us)  expressly  says,  that  such  an  infalli- 
ble certitude  of  means  is  not  now  necessary  to  the  pastors  of  the 
church,  as  was  necessary  to  the  apostles,  who  were  the  first  found- 
ers of  the  church.  So  that,  according  to  these  authors,  there  may 
be  true  faith  where  neither  the  means  nor  the  motives  of  it  are  such 
as  to  raise  our  assent  to  the  degree  of  infallibility.  And  this  is  as 
much  to  the  full  as  any  protestant  (that  I  know  of)  ever  said.  Nay, 
even  his  friends  of  the  tradition,  Mr.  Rushworth,  Mr.  White,  and 
Mr.  Cressy,  are  guilty  of  the  same  damnable  and  fundamental  error, 
as  Mr.  S.  calls  it.t  For  they  grant  less  assurance  f  Lettertohis 
than  that  which  is  infallible,  to  be  sufficient  to  Answerer,  p.  5. 
Christian  faith,  and  that  we  are  justly  condemned  if  we  refuse  to 
believe  upon  such  evidence  as  does  ordinarily  satisfy  prudent  men 
in  human  affairs.    And  particularly,  Mr.  \Xh.  makes  a  question  whe- 


cccx 


PREFACE. 


ther  human  nature  be  capable  of  infallibility;  as  I  have  shewn  at 
large  by  clear  and  full  testimonies  out  of  each  of  these  authors  in 

„  „        „      the  answer  to  Sure  Footing.*  Of  which  testimonies 

*  P.  120  &c 

though  Mr.  S.  had  not  thought  fit  to  take  the  least 
notice  throughout  his  book  ;  yet  I  cannot  but  think  it  a  reasonable 
request,  to  desire  him  to  vindicate  the  divines  of  his  own  church 
(especially  those  of  his  own  way)  from  these  things,  before  he 
charge  us  any  farther  with  them. 

Thirdly,  That  Mr.  S.  by  this  principle,  that  infallibility  is  neces- 
sary to  the  true  nature  of  faith,  makes  every  true  believer  infalli- 
ble in  matters  of  faith  ;  which  is  such  a  paradox,  as  I  doubt  whe- 
ther ever  it  entered  into  any  other  man's  mind.  But  if  it  be  true, 
what  need  then  of  any  infallibility  in  pope  or  council?  And  if  this 
infallibility  be  grounded  upon  the  nature  of  oral  tradition,  what 
need  of  supernatural  assistance.  I  doubt  Mr.  S.  would  be  loth  to 
preach  this  doctrine  at  Rome.  I  have  often  heard,  that  there  is  an 
old  testy  gentleman  lives  there,  who  would  take  it  very  ill  that  any 
one  besides  himself  should  pretend  to  be  infallible. 

Fourthly,That  Mr.  S.  by  his  principles  does  plainly  exclude  from 
salvation  the  generality  of  his  own  church ;  that  is,  all  that  do  not 
believe  upon  his  grounds,  and  this  is  the  necessary  consequence  of 
his  reasoning  in  a  late  treatise,  intitled,  *  The  Method  to  arrive  at 
Satisfaction  in  Religion,"  the  principles  whereof  are  these  :  "That 
the  church  is  a  congregation  of  faithful ;  the  faithful  are  those  who 
have  true  faith  ;  that  till  it  be  known  which  is  the  true  faith,  it  can- 
not be  known  which  is  the  true  church;  that  which  is  the  true  faith 
can  only  be  known  by  the  true  rule  of  faith,  which  is  oral  tradition, 
and  that  the  infallibility  of  this  rule  is  evident  to  common  sense." 

And  from  these  principles  he  concludes,  *  "  that 
those  who  follow  not  this  rule,  and  so  are  out  of  this 
church,  can  have  no  true  faith  ;  and  that  though  many  of  the  points 
to  which  they  assent  are  true ;  yet  their  assent  is  not  faith  :  for  faith, 
(speaking  of  Christian  faith)  is  an  assent  which  cannot  possibly  be 
false."  So  that  the  foundation  of  this  method  is  the  self-evident  in- 
fallibility of  oral  tradition,  which  hath  been  sufficiently  considered 
in  the  answer  to  Sure  Footing,  which  yet  remains  unanswered. 
That  which  I  am  now  concerned  to  take  notice  of,  is  the  conse- 
quence of  this  method,  which  does  at  one  blow  excommunicate  and 
unchristian  the  far  greatest  part  of  his  own  church.  For  if  all  who 
do  not  follow  oral  tradition  as  their  only  rule  of  faith  are  out  of  the 
church,  and  can  have  no  true  faith,  then  all  who  follow  the  council 


PREFACE. 


cccxi 


of  Trent,  are  ipso  facto  no  Christians.  For  nothing  is  plainer,  than 
that  that  council  did  not  make  oral  tradition  the  sole  rule  of  their 
faith,  nor  rely  upon  it  as  such  ;  which  hath  been  proved  at  large 
in  the  Answer  to  Sure  Footing. 

But  why  is  Mr.  S.  so  zealous  in  this  master  of  infallibility  1  there 
is  a  plain  reason  for  it.  He  finds  that  confidence,  how  weakly  so- 
ever it  be  grounded,  hath  some  effect  upon  the  common  and  igno- 
rant people  ;  who  is  apt  to  think  there  is  something  more  than  or- 
dinary in  a  swaggering  man,  that  talks  of  nothing  but  principles 
and  demonstration.  And  so  we  see  it  in  some  other  professions. 
There  are  a  sort  of  people  very  well  known,  who  find  that  the 
most  effectual  way  to  cheat  the  people  is  always  to  pretend  to  in- 
fallible cures. 

I  have  now  done  with  this  infallibility.    But  I  must  not  forget 
this  Letter  of  Thanks.    I  shall  wholly  pass  by  the  passion  and  ill- 
language  of  it,  which  a  man  may  plainly  see  to  have  proceeded 
from  a  galled  and  uneasy  mind.    He  would  fain  put  on  some  plea- 
santness, but  was  not  able  to  conceal  his  vexation.    Nor  shall  I  in- 
sist upon  his  palpable  shuffling  about  the  explication  of  the  terms, 
rule  and  faith.    He  was  convinced  that  he  had  explained  them 
very  untowardly,  and  therefore  would  gladly  come  off  by  saying 
that  he  did  not  intend  explication,  but  only  to  pre- 
dicate or  affirm  something  of  them.    And  yet  the 
whole  design  of  the  first  page  of  Sure  Footing,  is  to  shew  the  ne- 
cessity of  beginning  with  the  meaning  of  those  words  which  ex. 
press  the  thing  under  debate.    And  this  method  he  tells  us  will 
apply  to  his  present  purpose,  and  will  examine  well  what  is  meant 
by  those  words  which  express  the  thing  he  was  to  discuss,  namely, 
the  rule  of  faith.    Now  if  we  examine  well  what  is  meant  by 
words,  be  not  to  go  about  to  explain  them,  I  must  confess  myself 
to  be  in  a  great  error.    Of  the  same  kind  is  his  apology  for  his  tes- 
timonies, as  if  they  weret  not  intended  against  the 
protestants;  whereas  his  book  was  writ  against  the      f  P' 105, 
protestants:  and  when  he  came  to  his  testimonies,  hej  declares  the 
design  of  them  to  be,  to  second  by  authority  what  x  Sure  Footing( 
he  had  before  established  by  reason.     So  that  if  126. 
the  rational  part  of  his  book  was  intended  against  the  protestants, 
and  the  testimonies  were  designed  to  second  it,  I  cannot  understand 
why  he  should  say  one  was  less  intended  against  them  than  the 
other.    But  it  seems  he  is  so  conscious  of  the  weakness  of  those 
testimonies,  that  he  does  not  think  them  fit  to  satisfy  any  but  those 
who  believe  him  already. 


cccxii 


PREFACE. 


As  to  his  charge  of  false  citations,  it  is  but  the  common  artifice 
of  the  Roman  controvertists  when  they  have  nothing  else  to  say. 
However,  that  the  world  may  see  how  little  he  is  to  be  trusted,  I 
shall  instance  in  two  or  three,  about  which  he  makes  the  loudest 
clamour,  and  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  judge  by  these,  of  his  since- 
rity in  the  rest. 

He  says,  I  notoriously  abuse  the  preface  to  Rushworth's  Dia- 
logues, in  citing  the  author  of  it  to  sav,  "  that*  such 
certainty  as  makes  the  cause  always  to  work  the  same 
effect,  though  it  take  not  away  the  absolute  possibility  of  working 
otherwise,  ought  absolutely  to  be  reckoned  in  the  degree  of  true  cer- 
tainty ;"  whereas  (says  Mr.  S.)  he  only  tells  us  there,  (p.  7.)  "that  by 
moral  certainty  some  understood  such  a  certainty  as  makes  the 
cause,"  &c.  To  vindicate  myself  in  this,  I  shall  only  set  the  au- 
thor's words  before  the  reader's  eyes.  They  are  these:  "This  term, 
moral  certainty,  every  one  explicated  not  alike ;  but  some  under- 
stood by  it  such  a  certainty  as  makes  the  cause  always  work  the 
same  effect,  though  it  take  not  away  the  absolute  possibility  of 
working  otherwise.  Others  call  that  a  moral  certainty  which  pro- 
ceeds from,  &c.  A  third  explication  of  this  word  is,  &c.  Of 
these  three  the  first  ought  absolutely  to  be  reckoned  in  the  degree 
of  true  certainty,  and  the  author's  considered  as  mistaken  in  un- 
dervaluing it."  Is  this  only  to  tell  us  that  by  moral  certainty  some 
understood,  &c.  Does  not  the  prefacer  also  expressly  affirm,  that 
what  these  some  understood  by  moral  certainty,  ought  absolutely 
to  be  reckoned  in  the  degree  of  true  certainty ;  which  is  the  very 
thing  I  cited  him  for. 

Another  heavy  charge  is,  that,  "  according  to  my  usual  sincerity," 
I  quote  Rushworth's  nephew  to  say,  that  a  few  good  words  are  to  be 
cast  in  concerning  scripture  (for  the  satisfaction  of  indifferent  men 
who  have  brought  up  this  verbal  and  apparent  respect  of  the 
Scriptures);  "  whereas  (says  Mr.  S.)  in  the  place  you  cite,  he  only  ex- 
presses, it  would  be  a  satisfaction  to  indifferent  men  to  see  the  po- 
sitions one  would  induce  them  to  embrace,  maintainable  by  scrip- 
ture." Does  he  only  say  so?  let  the  reader  judge.  The  words  in 
Mr.  Rushworth  are  these  :  "  Yet  this  I  must  tell  ye,  that  it  were  a 
great  satisfaction  for  indifferent  men,  that  have  been  brought  up 
in  this  verbal  and  apparent  respect  of  the  Scripture,  to  see  that  the 
positions  you  would  induce  them  unto,  can  be  and  are  maintained 
by  Scripture,  and  that  they  are  grounded  therein."  Certainly  one 
would  think  that  either  this  man  has  no  eyes  or  no  forehead. 

But  the  great  outcry  of  all  is,  that  I  abuse  his  first  demonstra- 


PREFACE. 


CCCX1U 


Hon  by  virtue  of  a  direct  falsification  both  of  his  words  and  sense, 
by  cogging  in  the  word  [all]  making  his  principle  run  thus  :  that  the 
greatest  hopes  and  fears  are  applied  to  the  minds  of  [all]  Christians. 
This  indeed  I  make  to  be  his  principle,  grounded  upon  his  words, 
which  I  had  cited  a  little  before ;  and  they  are  these,  J  st,  That 
Christian  doctrine  was  at  first  unanimously  settled  by  the  apostles 
in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful,  dispersed  in  great  multitudes  over  se- 
veral parts  of  the  world.  2dly,  That  this  doctrine  was  firmly  be- 
lieved by  all  those  faithful  to  be  the  way  to  heaven,  and  the  con- 
tradicting or  deserting  of  it  to  be  the  way  to  damnation  :  so  that 
the  greatest  hopes  and  fears  imaginable  were,  by  engaging  the  Di- 
vine authority,  strongly  applied  to  the  minds  of  the  first  believers, 
&c.  Now  if  these  first  believers,  to  whom  he  says  these  hopes  and 
fears  were  strongly  applied,  be  all  those  faithful  he  spoke  of  be- 
fore, which  were  dispersed  over  several  parts  of  the  world,  (as  the 
tenor  of  his  words  plainly  shews)  what  are  these  less  than  all  the 
Christians  of  that  age  1  And  he  himself  a  little  after  tells  us,  there 
is  the  same  reason  of  the  following  ages.  So  that  I  make  his  prin- 
ciple run  no  otherwise  than  he  himself  had  laid  it.  And  if  it  con- 
tradict what  he  says  elsewhere,  it  is  no  new  or  strange  thing.  I 
wonder  more  at  his  confidence  in  charging  such  falsifications  upon 
me  as  every  man's  eyes  will  presently  confute  him  in.  Methinks, 
though  a  man  had  all  science,  and  all  principles,  yet  it  might  not  be 
amiss  to  have  some  conscience. 

I  shall  only  speak  a  few  words  to  the  two  solid  points  (as  I  may 
call  them)  of  his  Letter,  and  I  have  done. 

I  had  charged  him  that  he  makes  traditious  certainty  a  first  and 
self  evident  principle,  and  yet  that  he  goes  about  to  demonstrate  it, 
which  I  said  was  impossible  to  be  done,  and  if  it  could  be  done  was 
needless.  To  avoid  this  inconvenience  which  he  found  himself 
sorely  pressed  withal,  he  distinguishes  between  speculative  and 
practical  self-evidence,  and  says,  that  things  which  are  practically 
self-evident  may  be  demonstrated,  but  those  that  are  speculatively 
so,  cannot.  But  he  must  not  think  to  shelter  himself  from  so  pal- 
pable an  absurdity  by  this  impertinent  distinction.  For  let  things 
be  evident  how  they  will,  speculatively  or  practically,  it  is  plain 
that  if  they  be  principles  evident  of  themselves,  they  need  nothing 
to  evidence  them  ;  and,  if  they  be  first  principles,  there  can  be  no- 
thing to  make  them  more  evident,  because  there  is  nothing  before 
them  to  demonstrate  them  by.  Now  if  Mr.  S.  had  in  truth  belier- 
ed  that  the  certainty  of  tradition  was  a  first  and  self-evident  prin- 

vol.  i.  2  c 


eccxiv  PREFACE. 

ciple,  he  should  by  all  means  have  let  alone,  for  it  was  in  a  very 
good  condition  to  shift  for  itself ;  but  his  blind  way  of  demonstra- 
tion is  enough  to  cast  a  mist  about  the  clearest  truth  in  the  world. 
But  perhaps  by  the  self-evident  certainty  of  tradition,  Mr.  S.  only 
means  that  it  is  evident  to  himself;  for  I  dare  say  it  is  so  to  no- 
body else.  And  if  that  be  his  meaning,  he  did  well  enough  to  en- 
deavour to  demonstrate  it :  it  was  no  more  than  needed. 

The  other  point  is  about  his  first  principles,  such  as  these  :  a  rule 
9  is  a  rule,  faith  is  faith,  &c.  which  he  says  *  must 

principle  all  that  can  be  solidly  concluded  either 
about  rule  or  faith.  Of  these  he  hath  mighty  store,  and  blessed 
himself  in  it,  as  the  rich  man  in  the  gospel  did  in  his  full  barns :  Soul, 
take  thine  ease,  thou  hast  principles  laid  up  for  many  years ;  and, 
out  of  an  excess  of  goodnature,  pities  my  case,  who  did  undertake 
to  write  a  discourse  about  the  ground  of  faith,  without  so  much  as 
one  principle  to  bless  myself  with.  But  the  mischief  is,  that  after 
all  this  stir  about  them  they  are  good  for  nothing,  and  of  the  very 
same  stamp  with  that  frivolous  one  Aristotle  speaks  of,  "  if  a  thing 
be,  it  is,"  which  he  rejects  as  a  vain  and  ridiculous 
Analy1t1Poster-  proposition.  Such  as  Mr.  S's  first  principles,  sur- 
feited of  too  much  truth  (as  an  ingenious  writer  of 
his  own  church  says  of  them)  and  ready  to  burst  with  self-evidence, 
and  yet  by  ten  thousand  of  them  a  man  shall  not  be  able  to  advance 
one  step  in  knowledge,  because  they  produce  no  conclusion  but 
themselves  ;  whereas  it  is  of  the  nature  of  principles  to  yield  a  con- 
clusion different  from  themselves.  And,  to  convince  Mr.  S.  fully 
of  the  foolery  of  these  principles,  I  will  try  what  can  be  done  with 
them,  either  in  a  categorical  or  hypothetical  syllogism  ;  e.  g.  a  rule 
is  a  rule,  tradition  is  a  rule ;  ergo,  tradition  is  a  rule.  Again,  If  a 
rule  be  a  Tule,  then  a  rule  is  a  rule  ;  but  a  rule  is  a  rule,  ergo.  How 
is  any  man  the  wiser  for  all  this  ?  But  it  may  be  Mr.  S.  can  make 
better  work  with  them,  and  manage  them  more  dexterously,  so  as 
to  principle  anything  that  can  be  solidly  concluded  in  any  contro- 
versy. 

And  now  I  hope  at  last  to  have  given  Mr.  S.  full  satisfaction ; 
since  he  has  brought  me  to  the  very  point  he  desired,  to  acknow- 
ledge that  I  have  no  principles.  And,  indeed,  if  there  be  no  other 
to  be  had  but  such  as  these,  I  do  declare  to  all  the  world,  that  I 
neither  have  any  principles,  nor  will  have  any. 


contents. 


SERMON  I. 


THE   WISDOM  OF  BEING  RELIGIOUS. 


And  unto  man  he  said,  Behold  !  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
that  is  ivisdom ;  and  to  depart  from  evil  is  under- 
standing. — Job  xxviii.  8. 

In  this  chapter  Job  discourseth  of  the  secrets  of 
nature,  and  the  unsearchable  perfections  of  the  works 
of  God  ;  and  the  result  of  his  discourse  is  this  :  That 
a  perfect  knowledge  of  nature  is  no  where  to  be 
found  but  in  the  Author  of  it;  no  less  wisdom  and 
understanding  than  that  which  made  the  world,  and 
contrived  this  vast  and  regular  frame  of  nature,  can 
thoroughly  understand  the  philosophy  of  it,  and 
comprehend  so  vast  a  design :  but  yet  there  is  a 
knowledge  which  is  very  proper  to  man,  and  lies 
level  to  human  understanding ;  and  that  is,  the  know- 
ledge of  our  Creator,  and  of  the  duty  we  owe  to 
him ;  the  wisdom  of  pleasing  God,  by  doing  what 
he  commands,  and  avoiding  what  he  forbids :  this 
knowledge  and  wisdom  may  be  attained  by  man, 
and  is  sufficient  to  make  him  happy.   "  And  unto 
man  he  said,  Behold  !  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is 
wisdom ;  and  to  depart  from  evil  is  understanding.'' 
These  words  consist  of  two  propositions,  which 
are  not  distinct  in  sense,  but  one  and  the  same  thins: 
variously  expressed  :  for  wisdom  and  understanding 
are  synonymous  words  here;  and,  though  sometimes 


318 


they  have  different  notions,  yet  in  the  poetical  books 
of  Scripture  they  are  most  frequently  used  as  words 
equivalent,  and  do  both  of  them  indifferently  signify 
either  a  speculative  knowledge  of  things,  or  a  prac- 
tical skill  about  them,  according  to  the  exigency  of 
the  matter  or  thing  spoken  of.  And  so,  likewise, 
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  departure  from  evil,  are 
phrases  of  a  very  near  sense  and  like  importance ; 
and,  therefore,  we  find  them  several  times  put  toge- 
ther in  Scripture :  "  Fear  the  Lord,  and  depart  from 
Prov.iii.  7.  evil :"  "  By  the  fear  of  the  Lord  men  de- 
xvi.  6.  parj-  from  evil."  So  that  they  differ  only 
as  cause  and  effect,  which  by  a  metonymy,  usual  in 
all  sorts  of  authors,  are  frequently  put  one  for 
another. 

Now,  to  "  fear  the  Lord,"  and  to  "  depart  from 
evil,"  are  phrases  which  the  Scripture  useth  in  a 
very  great  latitude,  to  express  to  us  the  sum  of  re- 
ligion, and  the  whole  of  our  duty.  And,  because 
the  large  usage  of  these  phrases  is  to  be  the  foun- 
dation of  my  following  discourse,  I  shall,  for  the 
farther  clearing  of  this  matter,  endeavour  to  shew 
these  two  things  : 

I.  That  it  is  very  usual  in  the  language  of  Scrip- 
ture to  express  the  ivhole  of  religion  by  these  and 
such  like  phrases. 

II.  The  particular  fitness  of  these  two  phrases  to 
describe  religion. 

I.  It  is  very  usual,  in  the  language  of  Scripture,  to 
express  the  ivhole  of  religion  by  some  eminent  prin- 
ciple or  part  of  religion. 

The  great  principles  of  religion  are  knowledge, 
faith,  remembrance,  love,  and  fear;  by  all  which  the 
Scripture  useth  to  express  the  whole  duty  of  man. 


319 

In  the  Old  Testament,  by  the  knowledge,  remem- 
brance, and  fear  of  God.   Religion  is  called,  "  The 
knowledge  of  the  holy."    And  wicked 
men  are  described  to  be  such  as  "  know  Ter  x  25 
not  God."    So,  likewise,  by  the  fear 
of  the  Lord,  frequently  in  this  book  of  Job,  and 
in  the  Psalms  and  Proverbs.    And,  "  Then  they 
that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one  to    -  ...  i6 
another."    And  the  fear  of  God  is  ex- 
pressly said  to  be  the  sum  of  religion:  kt  Fear  God 
and  keep  his  commandments,  for  this  is 

.  •  '  i       -  „        -a  ,  Eccl.  xii.  13. 

the  whole  of  man  :  and,  on  the  contrary, 

the  wicked  are  described  to  be  such  as  "  have  not 

the  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes."  And 

so,  likewise,  by  the  remembrance  of  God  :  ^sa|  XXXV1' 1 

T-k  ^  '11  n    Eccl.  Xll.  1. 

"  Remember  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of 
thy  youth  ;"  that  is,  enter  upon  a  religious  course 
betimes :  and,  on  the  contrary,  the  character  of  the 
wicked  is,  that  they  forget  God ;  "  The     ^  ^ 
wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all 
the  nations  that  forget  God."  In  the  New  Testament, 
religion  is  usually  expressed  by  faith  in  God  and 
Christ,  and  the  love  of  them.    Hence  it  is,  that  true 
Christians  are  so  frequently  called  believers,  and 
wicked  and  ungodly  men  unbelievers.    And  that 
good  men  are  described  to  be  such  as  love  God. 
"  All  things  shall  work  together  for  s:ood  „ 

°        _  _  »  ,         *  Rom.  viii.  28. 

to  them  that  love  God;  and  such  as  Eph.vi.24. 
"love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Now  the 
reason  why  these  are  put  for  the  ivhole  of  religion, 
is,  because  the  belief,  and  knowledge,  and  remem- 
brance, and  love,  and  fear  of  God,  are  such  pow- 
erful principles,  and  have  so  great  an  influence  upon 
men  to  make  them  religious,  that  where  any  one 


320 


of  these  really  is,  all  the  rest,  together  with  the  true 
and  genuine  effects  of  them,  are  supposed  to  be. 

And  so,  likewise,  the  sum  of  all  religion  is  often 
expressed  by  some  eminent  part  of  it ;  which  will 
explain  the  second  phrase  here  in  the  text — depart- 
ing from  evil.  The  worship  of  God  is  an  eminent 
part  of  religion  ;  and  prayer,  which  is  often  in  Scrip- 
ture expressed  by  seeking  God,  and  calling  upon 
his  name,  is  a  chief  part  of  religious  worship.  Hence 
religion  is  described  by  seeking  God ;  "  He  is  a 
H  b  .  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek 
Acts  ii.  21.     him:"  and  by  calling  upon  his  name; 

"  Whosoever  calleth  upon  the  name  of 
the  Lord  shall  be  saved :"  and  so,  by  coming  to 
God,  and  by  departing  from  evil.  In  this  fallen  state 
of  man,  religion  begins  with  repentance  and  conver- 
sion, the  two  opposite  terms  of  which  are,  God  and 
sin  :  hence  it  is  that  religion  is  described  sometimes 
,   .         by  cominsr  to  God  :  "  He  that  cometh  to 

Heb.  xi.  6.  J  ,     t  ,       ,      •     „  i 

God,  must  believe  that  he  is  ;  that  is,  no 
man  can  be  religious,  unless  he  believe  there  is  a 
God:  sometimes  by  departing  from  sin;  "  And  he 
that  departeth  from  evil  maketh  himself 
a  prey  ;"  that  is,  such  was  the  bad  state 
of  those  times  of  which  the  prophet  there  com- 
plains, that  no  man  could  be  religious  but  he  was 
in  danger  of  being  persecuted. 

II.  For  the  fitness  of  these  two  phrases  to  describe 
religion. 

1.  For  the  first,  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  The  fit- 
ness of  this  phrase  will  appear,  if  we  consider  how 
great  an  influence  the  fear  of  God  hath  upon  men  to 
make  them  religious.  Fear  is  a  passion  that  is  most 
deeply  rooted  in  our  natures,  and  flows  immediately 
from  that  principle  of  self-preservation,  which  God 


321 


hath  planted  in  every  man.  Every  one  desires  his 
own  preservation  and  happiness,  and  therefore  hath 
a  natural  dread  and  horror  of  every  thing  that  can 
destroy  his  being,  or  endanger  his  happiness.  And 
the  greatest  danger  is  from  the  greatest  power,  and 
that  is  Omnipotency.  So  that  the  fear  of  God  is  an 
inward  acknowledgment  of  a  holy  and  just  Being, 
which  is  armed  with  an  almighty  and  irresistible 
power;  God  having  hid,  in  every  man's  conscience, 
a  secret  awe  and  dread  of  his  infinite  power  and 
eternal  justice.  Now  fear  being  so  intimate  to  our 
natures,  it  is  the  strongest  bond  of  laws,  and  the 
great  security  of  our  duty. 

There  are  two  bridles  or  restraints  which  God 
hath  put  upon  human  nature — shame  and  fear. 
Shame  is  the  weaker,  and  hath  place  only  in  those 
in  whom  there  are  some  remainders  of  virtue.  Fear 
is  the  stronger,  and  works  upon  all  who  love  them- 
selves and  desire  their  own  preservation.  There- 
fore, in  this  degenerate  state  of  mankind,  fear  is 
that  passion  which  hath  the  greatest  power  over  us, 
and  by  which  God  and  his  laws  take  the  surest 
hold  of  us :  our  desire,  and  love,  and  hope,  are  not 
so  apt  to  be  wrought  upon  by  the  representation  of 
virtue,  and  the  promises  of  reward  and  happiness, 
as  our  fear  is  from  the  apprehensions  of  Divine  dis- 
pleasure.   For  though  we  have  lost,  in  a  great  mea- 
sure, the  love  and  relish  of  true  happiness,  yet  we 
still  retain  a  quick  sense  of  pain  and  misery  ;  so  that 
fear  relies  upon  a  natural  love  of  ourselves,  and  is 
complicated  with  a  necessary  desire  of  our  own  pre- 
servation.   And  therefore  religion  usually  makes  its 
first  entrance  into  us  by  this  passion ;  hence,  per- 
haps, it  is,  that  Solomon,  more  than  once,  calls 
the  fear  of  the  Lord  the  "  beginning  of  wisdom." 


322 


2.  As  for  the  second  phrase,  "  departing  from 
evil,"  the  fitness  of  it  to  express  the  whole  duty  of 
man  will  appear,  if  we  consider  the  necessary  con- 
nexion that  is  between  the  negative  and  the  positive 
part  of  our  duty.  He  that  is  careful  to  avoid  all  sin, 
will  sincerely  endeavour  to  perform  his  duty.  For 
the  soul  of  man  is  an  active  principle,  and  will  be 
employed  one  way  or  other,  it  will  be  doing  some- 
thing; if  a  man  abstain  from  evil,  he  will  do  good. 
Now,  there  being  such  a  straight  connexion  between 
these,  the  whole  of  our  duty  may  be  expressed  by 
either  of  them  ;  but  most  fitly  by  departing  from  evil, 
because  that  is  the  first  part  of  our  duty.  Religion 
begins  in  the  forsaking  of  sin  ; 

Virtus  est  vitium  fugere,  et  sapientia  prima 
Stultitia  caruisse  

Virtue  begins  in  the  forsaking  of  vice  ;  and  the  first 
part  of  wisdom  is  not  to  be  a  fool.  And,  there- 
fore, the  Scripture  which  mentions  these  parts  of 
our  duty,  doth  constantly  put  departing  from  evil 

ps.  xxxiv.  14.  first ;  "  Depart  from  evil,  and  do  good." 
&i"aXiUifi7,  "  Cease  to  do  evil— learn  to  do  well." 
&lv-7-  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and 

the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,  aud  let  him  re- 
turn unto  the  Lord."    We  are  first  to 

Eph.iv. 22,23,  "  put  off  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt 
according  to  deceitful  lusts,"  and  then  to 
"  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds,  and  to  put 

-  Pet  ui  ii    0D  tne  new  mai1'  &-c-        hini  "  eschew 
evil,  and  do  good."   To  all  which  I  may 
add  this  farther  consideration,  that  the  law  of  God, 
contained  in  the  ten  commandments,  consisting  most- 
ly of  prohibitions — (thou  shalt  not  do  such  or  such  a 


323 


thing) :  our  observance  of  it  is  most  fitly  expressed 
by  departing  from  evil,  which  yet  includes  obedi- 
ence likewise  to  the  positive  precepts  implied  in 
those  prohibitions. 

Having  thus  explained  the  words,  I  come  now  to 
consider  the  proposition  contained  in  them,  which 
is  this  : 

That  religion  is  the  best  knowledge  and  wisdom. 
This  I  shall  endeavour  to  make  good  these  three 
ways. 

1.  By  a  direct  proof  of  it. 

2.  By  shewing  on  the  contrary  the  folly  and  ig- 
norance of  irreligion  and  wickedness. 

3.  By  vindicating  religion  from  those  common 
imputations  which  seem  to  charge  it  with  ignorance 
or  imprudence. 

I  begin  with  the  direct  proof  of  this  :  and,  be- 
cause religion  comprehends  two  things,  the  know- 
ledge of  the  principles  of  it,  and  a  suitable  life  and 
practice  (the  first  of  which  being  speculative,  may 
more  properly  be  called  knowledge;  and  the  latter, 
because  it  is  practical,  may  be  called  wisdom,  or 
prudence)  ;  therefore,  I  shall  endeavour  distinctly 
to  prove  these  two  things  : 

1.  That  religion  is  the  best  knowledge. 

2.  That  it  is  the  truest  wisdom. 

1.  First,  That  it  is  the  best  knowledge. 
The  knowledge  of  religion  commends  itself  to  us 
upon  these  two  accounts. 

1.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  those  things  which  are 
in  themselves  most  excellent. 

2.  Of  those  things  which  are  most  useful  and  ne- 
cessary for  us  to  know. 

First,  It  is  the  best  knowledge,  because  it  is  the 


324 


knowledge  of  those  things  which  are  in  themselves 
most  excellent  and  desirable  to  be  known  ;  and 
those  are  God  and  our  duty.  God  is  the  sum  and 
comprehension  of  all  perfection.  It  is  delightful 
to  know  the  creatures,  because  there  are  particular 
excellences  scattered  and  dispersed  among  them, 
which  are  some  shadows  of  the  Divine  perfections  : 
but  in  God  all  perfections  in  their  highest  degree 
and  exaltation  meet  together,  and  are  united.  How 
much  more  delightful  then  must  it  needs  be  to  fix 
our  minds  upon  such  an  object,  in  which  there  is 
nothing  but  beauty  and  brightness — what  is  amia- 
ble and  what  is  excellent ;  what  will  ravish  our  af- 
fections and  raise  our  wonder — please  us,  and  asto- 
nish us  at  once  ?  And  that  the  finite  measure  and 
capacity  of  our  understandings  is  not  able  to  take 
in  and  comprehend  the  infinite  perfections  of  God  ; 
this,  indeed,  shews  the  excellency  of  the  object, 
but  doth  not  altogether  take  away  the  delightful- 
ness  of  the  knowledge.  For  as  it  is  pleasant  to  the 
eye  to  have  an  endless  prospect,  so  is  it  some  plea- 
sure to  a  finite  understanding  to  view  unlimited  ex- 
cellences, which  have  no  shore  or  bounds,  though 
it  cannot  comprehend  them.  There  is  a  pleasure 
in  admiration,  and  this  is  that  which  properly 
causeth  admiration,  when  we  discover  a  great  deal 
in  an  object  which  we  understand  to  be  excellent; 
and  yet  we  see  we  know  not  how  much  more  be- 
yond that,  which  our  understandings  cannot  fully 
reach  and  comprehend. 

And  as  the  knowledge  of  God  in  his  nature  and 
perfections  is  excellent  and  desirable,  so  likewise 
to  know  him  in  those  glorious  manifestations  of 
himself  in  the  works  of  creation  and  providence; 


323 


and,  above  all,  in  that  stupendous  work  of  the  re- 
demption of  the  world  by  Jesus  Christ ;  which  was 
such  a  mystery,  and  so  excellent  a  piece  of  know- 
ledge, that  the  angels  are  said  to  "  de-    x  Pet  j  12 
sire  to  pry  into  it.*' 

And  as  the  knowledge  of  God  is  excellent,  so 
likewise  of  our  dutv,  which  is  nothing  else  but  vir- 
tue  and  goodness  and  holiness,  which  are  the  image 
of  God,  a  conformity  to  the  nature  and  will  of 
God,  and  an  imitation  of  the  Divine  excellences 
and  perfections,  so  far  as  we  are  capable :  for  to 
know  our  duty  is  to  know  what  it  is  to  be  like  God 
in  goodness  and  piety,  and  patience,  aud  clemency; 
in  pardoning  injuries,  and  passing  by  provocations; 
in  justice  and  righteousness,  in  truth  and  faithful- 
ness ;  and  in  a  hatred  and  detestation  of  the  con- 
trary of  these  :  in  a  word,  it  is  to  know  what  is  the 
good  and  acceptable  will  of  God,  what  it  is  that  he 
loves  and  delights  in,  and  is  pleased  withal,  and 
would  have  us  to  do  in  order  to  our  perfection  and 
our  happiness.  It  is  deservedly  accounted  a  piece 
of  excellent  knowledge  to  know  the  laws  of  the 
land,  and  the  customs  of  the  country  we  live  in, 
and  the  will  of  the  prince  we  live  under  :  how 
much  more  to  know  the  statutes  of  heaven,  and  the 
laws  of  eternity;  those  immutable  and  eternal  rules 
of  justice  and  righteousness:  to  know  the  will  and 
pleasure  of  the  great  Monarch  and  universal  King  of 
the  world,  and  the  customs  of  that  country,  where 
we  must  live  for  ever  ?  This  made  David  to  admire 
the  law  of  God  at  that  strange  rate,  and  to  advauce 
the  knowledge  of  it  above  all  other  know-  «, 

°  PS.  C.VLX.  96. 

ledge  :   11  1  have  seen  an  end  of  all  per- 
fection, but  thy  commandment  is  exceeding  broad. 


526 


Secondly,  It  is  the  knowledge  of  those  things 
which  are  most  useful  and  necessary  for  us  to  know. 
The  goodness  of  every  thing  is  measured  by  its 
end  and  use,  and  that  is  the  best  thing  which  serves 
the  best  end  and  purpose ;  and  the  more  necessary 
any  thing  is  to  such  an  end,  the  better  it  is  :  so  that 
the  best  knowledge  is  that  which  is  of  greatest  use 
and  necessity  to  us,  in  order  to  our  great  end, 
which  is  eternal  happiness,  and  the  salvation  of  our 
souls.  Curious  speculations,  and  the  contempla- 
|  tion  of  things  that  are  impertinent  to  us,  and  do 
I  not  concern  us,  nor  serve  to  promote  our  happiness, 
are  but  a  more  specious  and  ingenious  sort  of  idle- 
ness, a  more  pardonable  and  creditable  kind  of  ig- 
norance. That  man,  that  doth  not  know  those 
things  which  are  of  use  and  necessity  for  him  to 
know,  is  but  an  ignorant  man,  whatever  he  may 
know  besides.  Now,  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of 
Christ,  and  of  our  duty,  is  of  the  greatest  useful- 
ness and  necessity  to  us,  in  order  to  our  happiness. 
It  is  of  absolute  necessity  that  we  should  know  God 
and  Christ,  in  order  to  our  being  happy  ; 
o  nxvn.  o.    t{  pji^jg  js  jjfe  e£ernai  (that  is,  the  only 

way  to  it)  to  know  thee,  the  only  true  God,  and 
him  whom  thou  hast  sent,  Jesus  Christ."  It  is  ne- 
cessary, also,  in  order  to  our  happiness,  to  know  our 
duty  ;  because  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  do  it,  and  it 
is  impossible  to  do  it  except  we  know  it. 

So  that  whatever  other  knowledge  a  man  may 
be  endued  withal,  he  is  but  an  ignorant  person,  who 
doth  not  know  God,  the  Author  of  his  being,  the 
preserver  and  protector  of  his  life,  his  sovereign, 
and  his  judge  ;  the  giver  of  every  good  and  perfect 
gift — his  surest  refuge  in  trouble,  his  best  friend  or 


327 


worst  enemy — the  present  support  of  his  life,  his 
hopes  in  death,  his  future  happiness,  and  his  por- 
tion for  ever  :  who  does  not  know  his  relation 
to  God,  the  duty  that  he  owes  him,  and  the  way 
to  please  him,  who  can  make  him  happy  or  miser- 
able for  ever  ;  who  doth  not  know  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  is  "  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life." 

If  a  man,  by  a  vast  and  imperious  mind,  and  a 
heart  large  as  the  sand  upon  the  sea-shore  (as  it  is 
said  of  Solomon),  could  command  all  the  know- 
ledge of  nature  and  art,  of  words  and  things — 
could  attain  to  a  mastery  in  all  languages,  and 
sound  the  depths  of  all  arts  and  sciences,  measure 
the  earth  and  the  heaven,  and  tell  the  stars,  and  de- 
clare their  order  and  motions — could  discourse  of 
the  interests  of  all  states,  the  intrigues  of  all 
courts,  the  reason  of  all  civil  laws  and  constitu- 
tions, and  give  an  account  of  the  history  of  all 
ages — could  speak  of  trees,  "  from  the  cedar-tree, 
that  is  in  Lebanon,  even  unto  the  hyssop  that 
springs  out  of  the  wall  ;  and  of  beasts,  also,  and 
of  fowls,  and  of  creeping  things,  aud  of  fishes" — 
and  yet  should,  in  the  mean  time,  be  destitute  of 
the  knowledge  of  God  and  Christ,  and  his  duty: 
all  this  would  be  but  an  impertinent  vanity,  and  a 
more  glittering  kind  of  ignorance;  and  such  a 
man  (like  the  philosopher,  who,  whilst  he  was  gaz- 
ing upon  the  stars,  fell  into  the  ditch)  would  but 
sapienter  descendere  in  infernum,  be  undone  with  all 
this  knowledge,  and  with  a  great  deal  of  wisdom 
go  down  to  hell. 

2.  Secondly,  That  to  be  religious  is  the  truest 
wisdom,  and  that  likewise  upon  two  accounts. 
1.  Because  it  is  to  be  wise  for  ourselves. 


328 


2.  It  is  to  be  wise  as  to  our  main  interest  and 
concernment. 

t.  It  is  to  be  wise  for  ourselves.  There  is  an  ex- 
pression, (Job  xx.  21.)  "  He  that  is  wise  is  profitable 
to  himself;"  and  (Prov.  ix.  12.)  "  If  thou  be  wise, 
thou  shalt  be  wise  for  thyself;"  intimating,  that  wis- 
dom regards  a  man's  own  interest  and  advantage, 
and  that  he  is  not  a  wise  man  that  doth  not  take 
care  of  himself  and  his  own  concernments,  accord- 
ing to  that  of  old  Ennius,  "  Nequicquam  sapere 
sapientem,  qui  sibi  ipsi  prodesse  non  quiret," — that 
man  hath  but  an  empty  title  of  wisdom,  and  is  not 
really  wise,  who  is  not  wise  for  himself.  As  self- 
preservation  is  the  first  principle  of  nature,  so  care 
of  ourselves  and  our  own  interest  is  the  first  part  of 
wisdom.  He  that  is  wise  in  the  affairs  and  concern- 
ments of  other  men,  but  careless  and  negligent  of 
his  own,  that  man  may  be  said  to  be  busy,  but  he  is 
not  wise:  he  is  employed,  indeed,  but  not  so  as  a 
wise  man  should  be :  now  this  is  the  wisdom  of  reli- 
gion, that  it  directs  a  man  to  a  care  of  his  own  proper 
interest  and  concernment. 

2.  It  is  to  be  wise  as  to  our  main  interest.  Our 
chief  end  and  highest  interest  is  happiness:  and  this 
is  happiness,  to  be  freed  from  all  (if  it  may)  however 
from  the  greatest  evils ;  and  to  enjoy  (if  it  may  be) 
all  good,  however  the  chiefest.  To  be  happy  is  not 
only  to  be  freed  from  the  pains  and  diseases  of  the 
body,  but  from  anxiety  and  vexation  of  spirit :  not 
only  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sense,  but  peace  of 
conscience,  and  tranquillity  of  mind.  To  be  happy, 
is  not  only  to  be  so  for  a  little  while,  but  as  long  as 
may  be  ;  and,  if  it  be  possible,  for  ever.  Now  reli- 
gion designs  our  greatest  and  longest  happiness  ;  it 


SERMONS, 


329 

aims  at  a  freedom  from  the  greatest  evils,  and  to 
bring  us  to  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the 
greatest  good.    For  religion  wisely  considers  that 
men  have  immortal  spirits,  which  as  they  are  spirits 
are  capable  of  a  pleasure  and  happiness  distinct 
from  that  of  our  bodies  and  our  senses:  and  because 
they  are  immortal,  are  capable  of  an  everlasting 
happiness.    Now  our  souls  being  the  best  part  of 
ourselves,  and  eternity  being  infinitely  the  most 
considerable  duration,  the  greatest  wisdom  is  to  se- 
cure the  interest  of  our  souls  and  of  eternity,  though 
it  be  with  loss  and  to  the  prejudice  of  our  temporal 
and  inferior  interests.   Therefore  religion  directs  us 
rather  to  secure  inward  peace  than  outward  ease,  to 
be  more  careful  to  avoid  everlasting  and  intolerable 
torment  than  short  and  "  light  afflictions  which  are  but 
for  a  moment ;"'  to  court  the  favour  of  God  more  than 
the  friendship  of  the  world,  and  not  so  much  to  "fear 
them  that  can  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no 
more  that  they  can  do,"  as  "  him,  who,  after  he  hath 
killed  can  destroy  both  body  and  soul  in  hell :"  in  a 
word,  our  main  interest  is  to  be  as  happy  as  we  can, 
and  as  long  as  is  possible  ;  and  if  we  be  cast  into 
such  circumstances,  that  we  must  be  either  in  part 
and  for  a  time,  or  else  wholly  and  always  miserable, 
the  best  wisdom  is  to  choose  the  greatest  and  most 
lasting  happiness,  but  the  least  and  shortest  misery. 
Upon  this  account  religion  prefers  those  pleasures, 
which  flow  from  the  presence  of  God  for  evermore, 
infinitely  before  the  transitory  pleasures  of  this  world, 
and  is  much  more  careful  to  avoid  eternal  misery 
than  present  sufferings.  This  is  the  wisdom  of  reli- 
gion, that  upon  consideration  of  the  whole,  and  cast- 
ing up  all  things  together,  it  does  advise  and  lead  us 
to  our  best  interest. 

VOL.  I.  2d 


330 


II.  The  second  way  of  confirmation  shall  be  by 
endeavouring  to  shew  the  ignorance  and  folly  of 
irreligion.  Now  all  that  are  irreligious  are  so  upon 
one  of  these  two  accounts :  either,  First,  Because 
they  do  not  believe  the  foundations  and  principles 
of  religion,  as  the  existence  of  God,  the  immortality 
of  the  soul,  and  future  rewards  :  or  else,  Secondly, 
Because  though  they  do  in  some  sort  believe  these 
things,  yet  they  live  contrary  to  this  their  belief; 
and  of  this  kind  are  the  far  greatest  part  of  wicked 
men.  The  first  sort  are  guilty  of  that  which  we  call 
speculative,  the  other  of  practical  atheism.  I  shall 
endeavour  to  shew  the  ignorance  and  folly  of  both 
these. 

First,  Speculative  atheism  is  unreasonable,  and 
that  upon  these  five  accounts.  1.  Because  it  gives 
no  tolerable  account  of  the  existence  of  the  world. 
2.  Nor  does  it  give  any  reasonable  account  of  the 
universal  consent  of  mankind  in  this  apprehension, 
that  there  is  a  God.  3.  It  requires  more  evidence 
for  things  than  they  are  capable  of.  4.  The  atheist 
pretends  to  know  that  which  no  man  can  know. 
5.  Atheism  contradicts  itself. 

I.  Because  it  gives  no  tolerable  account  of  the 
existence  of  the  world.  One  of  the  greatest  diffi- 
culties that  lies  in  the  atheist's  way  is,  upon  his  own 
supposition  that  there  is  no  God,  to  give  a  likely 
account  of  the  existence  of  the  world.  We  see  this 
vast  frame  of  the  world,  and  an  innumerable  mul- 
titude of  creatures  in  it,  all  which  we,  who  believe 
a  God,  attribute  to  him  as  the  author  of  them.  For 
a  Being,  supposed  of  infinite  goodness  and  wisdom 
and  power,  is  a  very  likely  cause  of  these  things. 
What  more  likely  to  make  this  vast  world,  to  stretch 


331 


forth  the  heavens,  and  lay  the  foundations  of  the 
earth,  and  to  form  these  and  all  things  in  them  of 
nothing,  than  infinite  power?  What  more  likely  to 
communicate  being,  and  so  many  degrees  of  happi- 
ness to  so  many  several  sorts  of  creatures,  than  infi- 
nite goodness  ?  What  more  likely  to  contrive  this 
admirable  frame  of  the  universe,  and  all  the  crea- 
tures in  it,  each  of  them  so  perfect  in  their  kind,  and 
all  of  them  so  fitted  to  each  other  and  to  the  whole, 
than  iufinite  counsel  and  wisdom  ?  This  seems  to 
be  no  unreasonable  account. 

But  let  us  see  now  what  account  the  atheist  gives 
of  these  things.  If  there  be  no  God,  there  are  but 
these  two  ways  imaginable  for  the  world  to  be. 
Either  it  must  be  said,  that  not  only  the  matter  but 
also  the  frame  of  this  world  is  eternal ;  and  that,  as 
to  the  main,  things  always  were  as  they  are,  without 
any  first  cause  of  their  being;  which  is  the  way  of 
the  Aristotelian  atheist  (those  I  mean,  who  pro- 
ceed upon  Aristotle's  supposition  of  the  eternity  of 
the  world,  but  yet  deny  it  to  be  from  God,  which  he 
expressly  asserts)  ;  or  else  the  matter  of  the  world, 
being  supposed  to  be  eternal  and  of  itself,  the  ori- 
ginal of  this  vast  and  beautiful  frame  must  be 
ascribed  merely  to  chance,  and  the  casual  concourse 
of  the  parts  of  matter  ;  which  is  the  way  of  the  Epi- 
curean atheist.  But  neither  of  these  ways  gives  a 
tolerable  account  of  the  existence  of  the  world. 

1.  I  shall  first  consider  the  hypothesis  of  those 
whom,  for  distinction  sake,  I  call  the  Aristotelian 
atheists,  which  is  this  :  That  not  only  the  matter  but 
also  the  frame  of  the  world  is  eternal ;  and  that,  as 
to  the  main,  it  was  always  as  it  is,  of  itself ;  and  that 
there  hath  been  from  all  eternity  a  succession  of  men 

2d2 


332 


and  other  creatures  without  any  first  cause  of  their 
being. 

It  seems  to  be  very  hard,  and  if  that  would  do  any 
good  might  be  just  matter  of  complaint,  that  we  are 
fallen  into  so  profane  and  sceptical  an  age,  which 
takes  a  pleasure  and  a  pride  in  unravelling  almost  all 
the  received  principles  both  of  religion  and  reason  : 
so  that  we  are  put  many  times  to  prove  those  things, 
which  can  hardly  be  made  plainer  than  they  are  of 
themselves.  And  such  almost  are  these  principles, 
that  God  is,  and  that  all  things  were  made  by  him  ; 
which  by  reason  of  the  bold  cavils  of  perverse  and 
unreasonable  men  we  are  now-a-days  put  to  defend. 

That  something  is  of  itself  is  evident,  because  we 
see  things  are.  And  the  things  that  we  see  must 
either  have  had  some  first  cause  of  their  being,  or 
have  been  always  and  of  themselves.  One  of  these 
two  is  unavoidable. 

So  that  the  controversy  between  us  and  this  sort 
of  atheists  comes  to  this  ;  which  is  the  more  credible 
opinion,  that  the  world  was  never  made  nor  had  a 
beginning  but  always  was  as  it  is,  and  that  there 
hath  been  from  all  eternity  a  succession  of  men  and 
other  creatures  without  any  first  cause  of  their 
being ;  or,  that  there  was  from  all  eternity  such  a 
being  as  we  conceive  God  to  be,  infinite  in  power, 
goodness,  and  wisdom,  which  made  us  and  all  other 
things  ?  The  first  of  these  opinions  I  shall  shew  to 
be  altogether  incredible,  and  the  latter  to  have  all 
the  credibility  and  evidence  of  which  a  thing  of  that 
nature  is  capable,  and  such  evidence  as  is  sufficient 
to  convince  any  impartial  and  considerate  man. 

Now  in  comparing  the  probabilities  of  things,  that 
we  may  know  on  which  side  the  advantage  lies, 


333 


these  two  considerations  are  of  great  moment — what 
the  arguments  are  on  each  side,  and  what  the  diffi- 
culties. For  if  there  be  fair  proofs  on  the  one  side, 
and  none  at  all  on  the  other,  and  if  the  most  pressing 
difficulties  be  on  that  side  on  which  there  are  no 
proofs,  this  is  sufficient  to  render  one  opinion  very 
credible,  and  the  other  altogether  incredible. 

These  two  things  therefore  I  shall  endeavour  to 
make  good,  in  the  matter  that  is  now  under  our  con- 
sideration. First,  That  there  are  fair  proofs  on  our 
side,  and  as  convincing  as  the  nature  of  the  thing 
is  capable  of ;  but  that  there  is  no  pretence  of  proof 
on  the  other.  And,  Secondly,  That  the  side  on  which 
there  is  no  proof  is  encumbered  with  the  greatest 
difficulties. 

First,  That  there  are  fair  proofs  on  our  side,  and 
as  convincing  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  is  capable 
of ;  but  that  there  is  no  pretence  of  proof  on  the  other. 

This  question,  whether  the  world  was  created  and 
had  a  beginning,  or  not?  is  a  question  concerning 
an  ancient  matter  of  fact,  which  can  only  be  decided 
these  two  ways — by  testimony  and  by  probabilities 
of  reason.  Testimony  is  the  principal  argument  in 
a  matter  of  this  nature,  and  if  fair  probabilities  of 
reason  concur  with  it,  this  argument  hath  all  the 
strength  it  can  have :  now  both  these  are  clearly  on 
the  affirmative  side  of  the  question,  viz.  that  the 
world  was  created,  and  had  a  beginning. 

1.  Testimony;  of  which  there  be  two  kinds — 
Divine  and  human. 

Divine  testimony,  as  such,  is  not  proper  to  be 
used  in  this  cause,  considering  the  occasion  of  the 
present  debate  :  for  that  would  be  to  beg  the  first 
and  main  question  now  in  controversy,  which  is, 


334 


whether  there  be  a  God  or  not?  which  a  testimony 
from  God  does  suppose,  and  therefore  ought  not  to 
be  brought  for  the  proof  of  it.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that 
those  effects  of  Divine  power,  I  mean  miracles,  which 
will  prove  a  Divine  testimony  to  an  infidel,  will  as 
well  prove  the  being  of  a  God  to  an  atheist;  but 
when  we  dispute  against  those  who  deny  a  God,  no 
testimony  ought  to  be  presumed  to  be  from  God, 
but  must  be  proved  to  be  so:  and  whatever  argu- 
ment proves  that,  will  also  prove  that  there  is  a  God. 

Human  testimonies  are  of  two  sorts — universal 
tradition  and  written  history.  Both  these  are  plainly 
and  beyond  dispute  on  our  side. 

First,  There  is  an  universal  tradition  concerning 
the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  that  it  was  made  by 
God.  And  for  the  evidence  of  this  we  have  the  con- 
curring tradition  of  the  most  ancient  nations — the 

•VideGrot.de  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians  ;*  and  of  the 
vent  chr.  Rehg.  lVQS^  barbarous — the  Indians;  who,  as 

tGeogr.  1.15.  Strabof  tells  us,  "  did  in  many  things 
agree  with  the  Grecians,  particularly  in  this,  that 
the  world  did  begin,  and  should  have  an  end,  and 
that  God,  the  maker  and  governor  of  it,  is  present 
in  all  parts  of  it."  And  Acosta  tells  us,  that  at 
the  first  discovery  of  America,  the  inhabitants  of 
Peru  did  worship  one  chief  God,  under  the  name 
or  title  of  the  Maker  of  the  Universe:  and  yet  these 
people  had  not  had  any  commerce  with  the  other 
known  parts  of  the  world,  for  God  knows  how 
many  ages. 

To  which  may  be  added,  that  the  most  ancient 
of  the  philosophers,  and  those  that  were  the  heads 
of  the  chief  sects  of  philosophy,  as  Thales,  Anaxa- 
goras,  and  Pythagoras,  did  likewise  consent  to 


335 


this   tradition.     Particularly  concerning'  Thales, 
TuIIy*  tells  us,  that  he  was  the  first  of   *DeNat.  Deo- 
all  the  philosophers  "  that  inquired  into  rum  l  *■ 
these  things,  and  he  said  that  water  was  the  be- 
ginning of  all  things,  and  that  God  was  that  mind 
(or  intelligent  pri  nciple)  which  fashioned  all  things  out 
of  water."    So  likewise  Strabo#  informs 
us,  that  the  Brachmans,  the  chief  sect  of 
philosophers  among  the  Indians,  agreed  with  the 
Grecians  in  this,  "  that  the  world  was  made  of  water." 
Which  agrees  exactly  with  Moses's  account  of  the 
creation,  viz.  44  that  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  up- 
on the  face  of  the  waters ;"  which  St.  Peter  ex- 
presses thus:  44  that  by  the  word  of  2Petiii5 
God,  the  heavens  and  the  earth  (for  so  the 
Hebrews  called  the  world)  were  of  old  i£  vSarog  <rw£- 
(TTwaa  constituted  or  made  of  water;"  not  44  standing 
out  of  the  water,"  as  our  translation  renders  it. 

Nay  Aristotle*  himself,  who  was  the    •  Metapu.  i.  i. 
great  assertor  of  the  eternity  of  the  world,        °* 3* 
gives  this  account  why  the  gods  were  anciently 
represented  by  the  heathens  as  swearing  by  the 
lake  Styx,  because  water  was  supposed  to  be  the 
principle  of  all  things.  And  this,  he  tells  us,  was  the 
most  ancient  opinion  concerning  the  original  of  the 
world  ;  and  that  the  very  oldest  writers  of  theology, 
and  those  who  lived  at  the  greatest  distance  from 
his  time,  were  of  this  mind.    And  in  the  book,  De 
Mundo,*  it  is  freely  acknowledged  to 
have  been  an  ancient  saying,  and  a  general 
tradition  among  all  men, 44  that  all  things  are  of  God, 
and  were  made  by  him."  I  will  concludethis  with  that 
full  testimony  of  Maximus  Tyrius*  to 
thispurpose :  "  However,"  says  he, 4<  men  * DuS€rtat  l 


336 

may  differ  in  other  things,  yet  they  all  agree  in  this  law 
or  principle,  that  there  is  one  God,  king  and  father 
of  all  things,  &c.  This  the  Greeks  say,  this  the 
Barbarians;  this  those  that  live  upon  the  continent, 
and  those  that  dwell  by  the  sea  ;  the  wise  and  the 
unwise." 

Secondly,  We  have  likewise  a  most  ancient  and 
credible  history  of  the  beginning  of  the  world  ;  I 
mean  the  history  of  Moses,  with  which  no  book  in 
the  world,  in  point  of  antiquity,  can  contend.  I 
shall  not  now  go  about  to  strengthen  my  argument,  by 
pleading  the  Divine  authority  of  this  book^;  for  which 
yet  I  could  offer  good  evidence,  if  that  were  proper 
to  the  matter  in  hand.  It  is  sufficient  to  my  present 
purpose,  that  Moses  have  the  ordinary  credit  of  an 
historian  given  him,  which  none  in  reason  can  deny 
him,  he  being  cited  by  the  most  ancient  of  the  heathen 
historians,  and  the  antiquity  of  his  writings  never 

•l.  i.  con-  questioned  by  any  of  them,  as  Josephus* 
tra  Appion.       assures  us. 

Now  this  history  of  Moses  gives  us  a  particular 
account  of  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  of  the 
creation  of  it  by  God.  Which  assertion  of  his  is 
agreeable  to  the  most  ancient  writers  among  the 
heathen,  whether  poets  or  historians.  And  several 
of  the  main  parts  of  Moses's  history,  as  concerning 
the  flood  and  the  first  fathers  of  the  several  nations 
of  the  world,  (of  which  he  gives  a  particular  account, 
Gen.  x.)  do  very  well  accord  with  the  most  ancient 
accounts  of  profane  history.  And  I  do  not  know 
whether  any  thing  ought  more  to  recommend  the 
writings  of  Moses  to  a  human  belief,  than  the  easy 
and  credible  account  w  hich  he  gives  of  the  original 
of  the  world,  and  of  the  first  peopling  of  it, 


/ 


337 

As  to  the  account  of  ancient  times,  both  the 
Egyptian  and  Chaldean  accounts,  which  are  pre- 
tended by  some  to  be  so  vastly  different  from  that  of 
the  Scriptures,  may  for  all  that  be,  near  the  matter, 
easily  reconciled  with  it;#  if  we  do  but  *videDr.sta- 
admit  what  Diodorus  Siculus  and  Plu-  ^f^ere 
tarch,  very  credible  persons  and  diligent  fully  made  out- 
searchers  into  ancient  books,  do  most  expressly  assure 
us,  viz.  that  both  those  nations  did  anciently  reckon 
months  for  years.  And  the  account  of  the  Chinese 
is  not  hard  to  be  reconciled  with  that  of  the  Sep- 
tuagint.  Now  in  so  nice  and  obscure  a  matter,  as 
the  account  of  ancient  times  is,  it  ought  to  satisfy 
any  fair  and  reasonable  inquirer,  if  they  can  be 
brought  any  whit  near  one  another. 

So  that  universal  tradition,  and  the  most  ancient 
history  in  the  world,  are  clearly  on  our  side.  And, 
if  they  be,  one  can  hardly  wish  a  more  convincing 
argument.  For  if  the  world,  and  consequently 
mankind,  had  a  beginning,  there  is  all  the  reason 
in  the  world  to  expect  these  two  things :  First,  That 
there  should  be  an  universal  tradition  concerning 
this  matter ;  because  it  was  the  most  memorable 
thing  that  could  be  transmitted  to  posterity.  And 
this  was  easy  to  be  done,  if  mankind  sprang  from 
one  common  root  and  original,  from  whence  this 
tradition  would  naturally  be  universally  diffused. 
Secondly,  It  may  with  the  same  reason  be  expected, 
that  so  remarkable  a  thing  should  be  recorded  in 
the  most  ancient  history.  Now  both  these  have 
accordingly  happened.  But  then,  on  the  other  hand, 
if  the  world  was  eternal,  and  had  no  beginning,  there 
could  be  no  real  ground  for  such  a  tradition  or 
history:  and,  if  such  a  tradition  were  at  anytime 
endeavoured  to  be  set  on  foot,  it  is  not  easy  to 


338 


imagine,  how  it  should  at  first  gain  entertainment, 
but  much  more  difficult  to  conceive,  how  ever  it 
should  come  to  be  universally  propagated.  For, 
upon  the  supposition  of  those,  who  hold  the  eternity 
of  the  world,  the  world  was  always  peopled  ;  and,  if 
so,  there  could  be  no  common  head  or  spring  from 
whence  such  a  tradition  would  naturally  derive  itself 
into  all  parts  of  the  world.  So  that,  unless  all  the 
world  was  some  time  of  one  language,  and  under 
one  government  (which  it  never  was  that  we  know 
of  since  it  was  peopled),  no  endeavour  and  industry 
could  make  such  a  tradition  common. 

If  it  be  said,  that  this  tradition  began  after  some 
universal  deluge,  out  of  which  possibly  but  one 
family  might  escape,  and  that  possibly  too  of  barba- 
rous people;  from  whom  any  fond  and  groundless 
conceit  might  spring,  and  afterwards  spread  itself,  as 
mankind  increased-— this  I  shall  have  occasion  to 
consider  in  a  more  proper  place.  In  the  mean  time 
I  have  shewn,  even  from  the  acknowledgment  of 
Aristotle  himself,  that  there  was  anciently  such  a 
tradition  concerning  the  beginning  of  the  world. 
Nay,  if  we  may  believe  him,  he  himself  was  the 
very  first  assertor  of  the  eternity  of  the  world. 

*  De  Cceio,     For  he#  says  expressly,  "  that  all  the  phi- 
i.  i.  c.  10.    losophers  that  were  before  him,  did  hold 
that  the  world  was  made."    Thus  much  for  the  first 
kind  of  proof  this  matter  is  capable  of,  namely,  tes- 
timony. 

2dly,  The  probabilities  of  reason  do  all  likewise 
favour  the  beginning  of  the  world  :  as, 

1.  The  w  ant  of  any  history  or  tradition  ancienter 
than  what  is  consistent  with  the  received  opinion  of 
the  time  of  the  world's  beginning  ;  nay,  the  most 
ancient  histories  were  written  long  after  that  time. 


339 


This  Lucretius,  the  famous  Epicurean,  urgeth  as  a 
strong  presumption  that  the  world  had  a  beginning. 

 Si  nulla  fait  genitalis  origo 

Terrarum  et  coeli,  semperquc  aiterna  Fuere: 
Cur  supra  bellum  Thebanum,  et  funera  Trojae, 
Noil  alias  alii  quuque  res  cecinere  poetae? 

i.e.  If  the  world  had  no  beginning,  how  is  it  that 
the  Greek  poets  (the  most  ancient  of  their  writers) 
mention  nothing  higher  than  the  Theban  war, 
and  the  destruction  of  Troy?  Were  there  from  all 
eternity  no  memorable  actions  done  till  about  that 
time?  or  had  mankind  no  way,  till  of  late,  to  record 
them  and  propagate  the  memory  of  them  to  poste- 
rity ?  It  is  much,  if  men  were  from  eternity,  that 
they  should  not  find  out  the  way  of  writing  in  all 
that  long  duration  which  had  passed  before  that  time. 
Sure  he  was  a  fortunate  man  indeed,  who,  after  men 
had  been  eternally  so  dull  as  not  to  find  it  out,  had 
the  luck  at  last  to  hit  upon  it. 

But,  it  may  be,  the  famous  actions  of  former  times 
were  always  recorded,  but  that  the  memorials  of 
them  have  been  several  times  lost  by  universal  de- 
luges, which  have  now  and  then  happened  and 
swept  all  away,  except  (it  may  be)  two  or  three 
persons,  that  have  escaped  and  begun  the  world 
again  upon  a  new  score.  This  is  the  only  refuge 
that  the  atheist  hath  to  fly  to,  when  he  is  pressed  with 
this  and  the  like  arguments.  But  he  cannot  possi- 
bly escape  this  way.  For  these  universal  inunda- 
tions must  either  be  natural  or  supernatural.  If 
they  be  supernatural  (as  any  man  that  considers 
well  the  frame  of  the  world,  and  how  hard  it  is  to 
give  a  natural  reason  of  them,  would  be  inclined  to 
think)  then  indeed  it  is  easy  to  conceive  how  a  few 
of  mankind,  and  no  more,  should  escape  :  because 


340 


this  will  depend  upon  the  pleasure  of  that  superior 
Being,  which  is  supposed  supernaturally  to  order 
these  things.  But  this  is  to  yield  what  we  have  all 
this  while  contended  for,  viz.  That  there  is  a  God. 
But  if  they  be  natural,  which  the  atheist  must  say, 
then  there  is  nothing  to  restrain  them  from  a  total 
destruction,  not  only  of  mankind,  but  of  all  the 
beasts  of  the  earth.  This  the  atheist  cannot  deny, 
not  only  to  be  very  possible,  but  exceeding  probable; 
because  he  grants  it  to  have  come  so  near  the  mat- 
ter, that  but  very  few  escaped,  and  no  doubt  with 
great  difficulty.  Now  it  is  the  greatest  wonder  in 
the  world,  that  a  thing  (according  to  their  own  sup- 
position) so  likely  to  happen,  should  never  have 
fallen  out  in  an  infinite  duration.  Will  any  man 
have  the  face  to  say  that  a  thing  is  likely,  which  did 
never  yet  happen  from  all  eternity  ?  One  would 
think  that,  not  only  whatever  is  probable,  but  what- 
ever can  possibly  happen,  should  be  brought  about 
in  that  space  :  so  that  if  mankind  had  been  from 
eternity,  it  had  in  all  probability,  I  had  almost  said, 
been  destroyed  from  all  eternity;  but,  I  may  confi- 
dently say,  long  since  ruined. 

2.  Another  probability  of  the  world's  beginning 
is,  the  account  which  we  have  of  the  original  of 
learning  and  the  most  useful  arts  in  several  parts 
of  the  world.  Now  if  the  world  had  been  eternal, 
these,  in  all  likelihood,  would  have  been  found  out, 
and  generally  spread  long  ago,  and  beyond  the  me- 
mory of  all  ages.  There  are  some  arts,  indeed,  that 
are  peculiarly  convenient  to  some  particular  na- 
tions ;  and  others,  that  are  only  serviceable  to  the 
humour  and  fashion  of  one  or  more  ages.  These 
are  not  likely  to  spread,  and  they  may  come  in  and 


341 


go  out,  and  return  again,  as  often  as  there  is  occasion. 
But  those  which  are  generally  useful  to  mankind,  in 
all  times  and  places,  if  they  were  once  found  out, 
(and  who  would  not  think  they  should  in  an  eternal 
duration?)  it  is  not  imaginable  but  that  they  should 
have  been  spread  innumerable  ages  since  :  nor  can 
any  man  give  a  good  reason  how  they  should  ever 
be  lost,  but  by  some  such  accident  as  an  universal 
deluge,  which  has  been  spoken  to  already.  But  now, 
on  the  contrary,  the  beginnings  of  learning  and  of 
the  most  useful  arts,  in  several  nations,  is  very  well 
known.  And,  I  add  farther,  that  wherever  learning 
and  civil  arts  have  come,  this  tradition  concerning 
the  beginning  of  the  world  hath  been  most  vigorous, 
and  asserted  with  the  greatest  clearness  and  con- 
fidence. 

3.  The  several  parts,  of  which  the  world  consists, 
being  (so  far  as  by  those  parts  of  it  which  we  know, 
we  can  possibly  judge  of  the  rest)  in  their  nature 
corruptible  ;  it  is  more  than  probable,  that  in  an  infi- 
nite duration  this  frame  of  things  would  long  since 
have  been  dissolved;  especially,  if  (as  the  atheist 
affirms)  there  be  no  superior  Being,  no  wise  and  in- 
telligent principle,  to  repair  and  regulate  it,  and  to 
prevent  those  innumerable  disorders  and  calami- 
tous accidents,  which  must  in  so  long  a  space  in 
all  probability  have  happened  to  it.  This  Lucre- 
tius* also  urges  as  a  convincing  proof  l.  * 
that  the  world  was  not  eternal. 

Quare  etiara  nativa  necesse  est  confiteare 
Haec  eadem ;  neque  enim,  mortali  corpore  quas  sunt, 
Ex  infinito  jam  tempore  adhuc  potuissent 
Immensi  validas  aevi  contemnere  vires. 

"  It  must  necessarily,"  says  he,  "  be  acknowledged, 


34c2 


that  the  world  had  a  beginning;  otherwise,  those 
things,  which  are  in  their  own  nature  corruptible,  had 
never  been  able,  from  all  eternity,  to  have  held  out 
against  those  forcible  and  violent  assaults,  which  in 
an  infinite  duration  must  have  happened."  Nay,  thus 
much  Aristotle  himself  every  where  grants,  that  if 
the  frame  of  the  world  be  liable  to  dissolution,  it 
must  of  necessity  be  acknowledged  to  have  had  a 
beginning. 

These  are  some  of  the  chief  probabilities  on  our 
side,  which,  being  taken  together,  and  in  their  united 
force,  have  a  great  deal  of  conviction  in  them  ; 
especially  if  this  be  added,  that  there  is  no  kind  of 
positive  proof  so  much  as  pretended  on  the  other 
side.  The  utmost  that  Aristotle  pretends  to  prove, 
is — that  the  world  proceeded  from  God  by  the  way 
of  a  natural  and  necessary  effect,  as  light  does  from 
the  sun  :  which,  if  it  be  true  (as  there  is  no  tole- 
rable ground  for  it),  the  world  indeed  would  be 
without  beginning,  but  not  of  itself.  And  thus  I 
have  done  with  the  first  consideration  I  propounded 
to  speak  to,  viz.  That  there  are  fair  proofs  on  our 
side,  and  as  convincing  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  is 
capable  of ;  but  that  there  is  no  pretence  of  proof 
on  the  other.    I  proceed,  therefore,  to  the 

Second  consideration  :  That  the  most  pressing 
difficulties  are  on  that  side  on  which  there  is  no 
proof. 

Those  who  deny  a  God,  and  hold  the  world  to 
have  been  eternal,  and  of  itself,  have  only  two  things 
to  object  against  us — the  difficulties  that  there  are 
in  the  notion  of  a  God,  and  in  making  the  world  of 
nothing.  To  the  first  I  answer,  that  we  attribute 
nothing  to  God  that  hath  any  repugnancy  or  contra- 


343 


diction  in  it.  Power,  wisdom,  goodness,  justice, 
and  truth,  have  no  repugnancy  in  them  to  our  rea- 
son ;  because  we  own  these  perfections  to  be  in  some 
degree  in  ourselves  ;  and,  therefore,  they  may  be  in 
the  highest  degree  that  is  possible  in  another.  The 
eternity  of  God,  and  his  immensity,  and  his  being  of 
himself,  how  difficult  soever  they  may  be  to  be  con- 
ceived, yet  these  perfections  must  be  granted  to  be 
somewhere  ;  and,  therefore,  they  may  as  well,  nay, 
much  better,  be  ascribed  to  God,  in  whom  we  sup- 
pose all  other  perfections  to  meet,  than  to  any  thing 
else.  And  as  for  God's  being  a  spirit,  whatever 
difficulty  there  may  be  in  conceiving  the  notion  of  a 
spirit,  yet  the  atheist  must  grant  the  thing,  that  there 
is  a  being  or  principal  really  distinct  from  matter; 
or  else  shew  how  mere  matter,  which  is  confessed 
by  themselves  to  be  void  of  sense  and  understand- 
ing, and  to  move  necessarily,  can  produce  any  thing 
that  has  sense,  understanding,  and  liberty.  As  to 
the  other  difficulty,  of  making  the  world  of  no- 
thing, I  shall  only  say  this :  that  though  it  signify 
an  inconceivable  excess  of  power,  yet  there  can  no 
contradiction  be  shewn  in  it :  and  it  is  every  whit 
as  easy  to  conceive  that  something  should  be  caused 
to  be  that  was  not  before,  as  that  any  thing  should 
be  of  itself ;  which  yet  must  be  granted  on  both 
sides  ;  and,  therefore,  this  difficulty  ought  not  to  be 
objected  by  either. 

But  then,  on  the  other  side,  there  are  these  two 
great  and  real  difficulties  :  First,  That  men  generally 
have  always  believed  the  contrary,  viz.  That  the 
world  had  a  beginning,  and  was  made  by  God  ; 
which  is  a  strong  evidence  that  this  account  of  the 
existence  of  the  world  is  more  natural,  and  of  a 


344 


more  easy  conception   to  human  understanding. 
And  indeed  it  is  very  natural  to  conceive,  that  every 
thing  which  is  imperfect  (as  the  world  and  all  the 
creatures  in  it  must  be  acknowledged  in  many  re- 
spects to  be)  had  some  cause  which  produced  it, 
such  as  it  is,  and  determined  the  bounds  and  limits 
of  its  perfection :  but  that  which  is  of  itself,  and 
without  a  cause,  may  be  any  thing,  and  have  any 
perfection  which  does  not  imply  a  contradiction. 
Secondly,  To  assert  mankind  to  have  been  of  itself, 
and  without  a  cause,  hath  this  invincible  objection 
against  it ;  that  we  plainly  see  every  man  to  be  from 
another.    So  that  mankind  is  asserted  to  have  no 
cause  of  its  being,  and  yet  every  particular  man 
must  be  acknowledged  to  have  a  father;  which  is 
every  whit  as  absurd,  in  an  infinite  succession  of 
men,  as  in  any  finite  number  of  generations.    It  is 
more  easy  indeed  to  conceive,  how  a  constant  and 
permanent  being,  suppose  matter,  should  always 
have  been  of  itself ;  and  then,  that  that  should  be 
the  foundation  of  infinite  successive  changes  and 
alterations:  but  an  infinite  succession  of  the  gene- 
rations of  men  without  any  permanent  foundation  is 
utterly  unimaginable.    If  it  be  said  that  the  earth 
was  always,  and  in  time  did  produce  men,  and  that 
they  ever  since  have  produced  one  another;  this  is 
to  run  into  one  great  absurdity  of  the  Epicurean 
way,  which  shall  be  considered  in  its  proper  place. 

And  thus  I  have  endeavoured,  as  plainly  and 
briefly  as  the  nature  of  the  argument  would  admit, 
to  prove,  that  the  account  which  the  Scripture  gives 
of  the  existence  of  the  world,  is  most  credible,  and 
agreeable  to  the  reason  of  mankind  ;  and  that  this 
first  account,  which  the  atheist  gives  of  it,  is  altoge- 


M5 


ther  incredible.  And  now  I  expect  after  all  this 
the  atheist  will  complain,  that  all  that  hath  been  said 
does  not  amount  to  a  strict  demonstration  of  the 
thing.  It  may  be  so.  And  if  the  atheist  would  un- 
dertake to  demonstrate  the  contrary,  there  might 
be  some  reason  for  this  complaint.  In  the  mean 
time,  I  desire  to  know,  whether,  when  both  sides  are 
agreed  that  the  world  is,  and  that  it  must  either  have 
its  original  from  God,  or  have  been  always  of  itself; 
and  if  it  have  been  made  evident,  that  on  one  side 
there  are  fair  proofs  both  from  testimony  and  reason, 
and  as  conv  incing  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  is  capa- 
ble of,  and  no  pretence  of  proof  on  the  other  ;  and 
that  the  difficulties  are  most  pressing  on  that  side 
which  is  destitute  of  proof ;  I  say,  if  this  have  been 
made  evident,  I  desire  to  know  whether  this  be  not 
upon  the  matter  as  satisfactory  to  a  wise  man  as  a 
demonstration  !  For  in  this  case  there  can  be  no 
doubt  on  which  side  the  clear  advantage  of  evidence 
lies,  and  consequently  which  way  a  prudent  man 
ought  to  determine  assent. 

I  come  now,  in  the  second  place,  to  consider 
the  other  account  which  another  sort  of  atheists, 
those  whom  I  call  the  Epicureans,  do  give  of  the 
existence  of  the  world  :  and  it  is  this.  They  sup- 
pose the  matter,  of  which  the  world  is  constituted, 
to  be  eternal  and  of  itself,  and  then  anin6nite  empty 
space  for  the  infinite  little  parts  of  this  matter  (which 
they  call  atoms)  to  move  and  play  in ;  and  that  these, 
being  always  in  motion,  did,  after  infinite  trials  and 
encounters,  without  any  counsel  or  design,  and 
without  the  disposal  and  contrivance  of  any  wise  and 
intelligent  Being,  at  last  by  a  lucky  casualty  entangle 
and  settle  themselves  in  this  beautiful  and  regular 

vol.  i.  2  E 


346 


frame  of  the  world  which  we  now  see  ;  and  that  the 
earth,  being  at  first  in  its  full  vigour  and  fruitfulness, 
did  then  bring  forth  men  and  all  other  sorts  of  living 
creatures  as  it  does  plants  now. 

This  is,  in  short,  the  Epicurean  account  of  the 
original  of  the  world,  which,  as  absurd  as  it  is, 
Lucretius#  hath  very  elegantly  expressed 

*  Lib.  5.       .  ,1 

in  these  verses  : 

Sed  quibus  ille  modis  conjectus  material 

Fundarit  coelum  ac  terrain,  politique  profunda, 

Solisque  et  lunae  cursus,  ex  ordine  ponam. 

Nam  certe  neque  consilio  primordia  rerum 

Ordine  se  quaeque,  atque  sagaci  mente  locarunt; 

Nec  quos  quaeque  darent  motus,  pepigere  profecto: 

Sed  quia  multa  modis  multis  primordia  rerum 

Ex  infinito  jam  tempore  percita  plagis, 

Ponderibusque  suis  consuerunt  concita  ferri, 

Omnimodisque  coire,  atque  omnia  pertentare, 

Quaecunque  inter  se  possent  congressa  creare : 

Propterea  fit,  uti  magnum  vulgata  per  aevum, 

Omnigenos  coetus  et  motus  experiundo. 

Tandem  ea  conveniant,  quae  ut  convenere,  repents 
Magnarum  rerum  fiunt  exordia  saspe, 
Terrai,  maris  et  coeli,  generisque  animantum. 

Thus  he,  like  a  good  poet,  but  a  very  bad  maker 
and  contriver  of  the  world.    For  I  appeal  to  any 
man  of  reason  whether  any  thing  can  be  more  unrea- 
sonable, than  obstinately  to  impute  an  effect  to 
chance  which  carries,  in  the  very  face  of  it,  all  the 
arguments  and  characters  of  a  wise  design  and  con- 
trivance?   Was  ever  any  considerable  work,  in 
which  there  was  required  a  great  variety  of  parts, 
and  a  regular  and  orderly  disposition  of  those  parts, 
done  by  chance?    Will  chance  fit  means  to  ends, 
and  that  in  ten  thousand  instances,  and  not  fail  in 
anyone?  How  often  might  a  man,  after  he  had  jum- 
bled a  set  of  letters  in  a  bag,  fling  them  out  upon 


"47 


the  ground  before  they  would  fall  into  an  exact  poem; 
yea,  or  so  much  as  make  a  good  discourse  in  prose  ? 
And  may  not  a  little  book  be  as  easily  made  by 
chance,  as  this  great  volume  of  the  world  ?  How 
long  might  a  man  be  in  sprinkling  colours  upon 
canvas  with  a  careless  hand,  before  they  would  hap- 
pen to  make  the  exact  picture  of  a  man?  And  is 
a  man  easier  made  by  chance  than  his  picture? 
How  long  might  twenty  thousand  blind  men,  which 
should  be  sent  out  from  the  several  remote  parts  of 
England,  wander  up  and  down  before  they  would 
all  meet  upon  Salisbury  plains,  and  fall  into  rank  and 
file  in  the  order  of  an  army?  And  yet  this  is  much 
more  easy  to  be  imagined,  than  how  the  innume- 
rable blind  parts  of  matter  should  rendezvous  them- 
selves into  a  world.  A  man  that  sees  Henry  VII. 's 
Chapel,  at  Westminster,  might  with  as  good  reason 
maintain  (yea  with  much  better,  considering  the 
vast  difference  betwixt  that  little  structure  and  the 
huge  fabric  of  the  world),  that  it  was  never  con- 
trived or  built  by  any  man,  but  that  the  stones  did 
by  chance  grow  into  those  curious  figures  into  which 
they  seem  to  have  been  cut  and  graven  ;  and  that 
upon  a  time  (as  tales  usually  begin)  the  materials  of 
that  building,  the  stone,  mortar,  timber,  iron,  lead 
and  glass,  happily  met  together,  and  very  fortunately 
ranged  themselves  into  that  delicate  order,  in  which 
we  see  them  now  so  closely  compacted,  that  it  must 
be  a  very  great  chance  that  parts  them  again.  What 
would  the  world  think  of  a  man  that  should  advance 
such  an  opinion  as  this,  and  write  a  book  for  it  ?  If 
they  would  do  him  right,  they  ought  to  look  upon 
him  as  mad  :  but  yet  with  a  little  more  reason  than 
any  man  can  have  to  say  that  the  world  was  made  by 

2  f.  2 


348 


chance;  or  that  the  first  men  grew  up  out  of  the 
earth  as  plants  do  now.  For  can  any  thing  be  more 
ridiculous  and  against  all  reason  than  to  ascribe  the 
productionof  men  to  the  first  fruitfulnessof  the  earth, 
without  so  much  as  one  instance  and  experiment  in 
any  age  or  history  to  countenance  so  monstrous  a 
supposition  ?  The  thing  is  at  first  sight  so  gross  and 
palpable,  that  no  discourse  about  it  can  make  it 
more  apparent.  And  yet  these  shameful  beggars  of 
principles,  who  give  this  precarious  account  of  the 
original  of  things,  assume  to  themselves  to  be  the 
men  of  reason,  the  great  wits  of  the  world,  the  only 
cautious  and  wary  persons  that  hate  to  be  imposed 
upon  ;  that  must  have  convincing  evidence  for  every 
thing,  and  can  admit  of  nothing  without  a  clear  de- 
monstration for  it. 

II.  Speculative  atheism  is  unreasonable,  because 
it  gives  no  reasonable  account  of  the  universal  con- 
sent of  mankind  in  this  apprehension,  that  there  is 
a  God.  That  men  do  generally  believe  a  God,  and 
have  done  in  all  ages,  the  present  experience  of  the 
world,  and  the  records  of  former  times,  do  abun- 
dantly testify.  Now  how  comes  this  persuasion  to 
have  gained  so  universal  a  possession  of  the  mind 
of  man,  and  to  have  found  such  general  entertain- 
ment in  all  nations,  even  those  that  are  most  bar- 
barous ?  If  there  be  no  such  thing  as  God  in  the 
world,  how  comes  it  to  pass  that  this  object  doth 
continually  encounter  our  understandings?  Whence 
is  it  that  we  are  so  perpetually  haunted  with  the 
apparition  of  a  Deity,  and  followed  with  it  wherever 
we  go?  If  it  be  not  natural  to  the  mind  of  man,  but 
proceeds  from  some  accidental  distemper  of  our  un- 
derstandings, how  comes  it  to  be  so  universal,  that 


349 

no  differences  of  age,  or  temper,  or  education,  can 
wear  it  out,  and  set  any  considerable  number  of  men 
free  from  it?  Into  what  can  we  resolve  this  strong 
inclination  of  mankind  to  this  error  and  mistake? 
How  come  all  nations  to  be  thus  seduced  ?  It  is 
altogether  unimaginable  but  that  the  reason  of  so 
universal  a  consent,  in  all  places  and  ages  of  the 
world,  and  among  all  differences  of  persons,  should 
be  one  and  constant :  but  no  one  and  constant  reason 
of  this  can  be  given,  but  from  the  nature  of  man's 
mind  and  understanding,  which  hath  this  notion  of 
a  Deity  born  with  it  and  stamped  upon  it:  or,  which 
is  all  one,  is  of  such  a  frame,  that  in  the  free  use  and 
exercise  of  itself  it  will  find  out  God:  and  what 
more  reasonable  than  to  think,  that  if  we  be  God's 
workmanship,  he  should  set  this  mark  of  himself 
upon  all  reasonable  creatures,  that  they  may  know 
to  whom  they  belong,  and  may  acknowledge  the 
Author  of  their  beings  ?  This  seems  to  be  a  credible 
and  satisfactory  account  of  so  universal  a  consent 
in  this  matter.  But  now  what  doth  the  atheist  re- 
solve this  into  ?  He  is  not  at  one  with  himself  what 
account  to  give  of  it  ;  nor  can  it  be  expected  he 
should.  For  he  that  will  overlook  the  true  reason  of  a 
thing,  which  usually  is  but  one,  may  easily  find  many 
false  ones,  error  being  infinite.  But  there  are  three 
which  he  principally  relies  upon — fear,  tradition, 
and  policy  of  state.  I  shall  briefly  consider  these. 

First,  He  would  make  us  believe  that  this  appre- 
hension of  a  God  doth  springfrom  an  infinite  jealousy 
in  the  mind  of  man,  and  an  endless  fear  of  the  worst 
that  may  happen ;  according  to  that  divine  saying  of 
the  poet,  which  he  can  never  sufficiently  admire, 

Primum  in  orbe  Deos  fecit  timor,  


350 


Fear  first  made  gods.    So  that  it  is  granted  on  both 
sides,  that  thefearofa  Deity  doth  universally  possess 
the  minds  of  men.    Now  the  question  is,  whether  it 
be  more  likely  that  the  existence  of  a  God  should 
be  the  cause  of  this  fear,  or  that  this  fear  should  be 
the  cause  why  men  imagine  there  is  a  God  ?  If  there 
be  a  God,  who  hath  impressed  this  image  of  himself 
upon  the  mind  of  man,  there  is  great  reason  why  all 
men  should  stand  in  awe  of  him  :  but  if  there  be  no 
God,  it  is  noteasv  to  conceive  how  fear  should  create 
an  universal  confidence  and  assurance  in  men  that 
there  is  one.    For,  whence  should  this  fear  come? 
It  must  be  either  from  without,  from  the  suggestion 
of  others,  who  first  tell  us  there  is  such  a  being,  and 
then  our  fear  believes  it ;  or  else  it  must  arise  from 
within,  from  the  nature  of  man,  which  is  apt  to  fancy 
dreadful  and  terrible  things.  If  from  the  suggestion 
of  others  who  tell  us  so,  the  question  returns,  who 
told  them  so  ?  and  will  never  be  satisfied  until  the 
first  author  of  this  report  be  found  out.  So  that  this 
account  of  fear  resolves  itself  into  tradition,  which 
shall  be  spoken  to  in  its  proper  place.    But  if  it  be 
said  that  this  fear  ariseth  from  within,  from  the  na- 
ture of  man,  which  is  apt  to  imagine  dreadful  things, 
this  likewise  is  liable  to  inexplicable  difficulties. 
For,  First — The  proper  object  of  fear  is  something 
that  is  dreadful  ;  that  is,  something  that  threatens 
men  with  harm  or  danger ;  and  that  in  God  must 
either  be  power  or  justice:  and  such  an  object  as 
this  fear  indeed  may  create;  but  goodness  and  mercy 
are  essential  to  the  notion  of  a  God  as  well  as  power 
and  justice  :  now  how  should  fear  put  men  upon 
fancying  a  Being  that  is  infinitely  good  and  merci- 
ful ?    No  man  hath  reason  to  be  afraid  of  such  a 


351 


Being,  as  such.  So  that  the  atheist  must  join  ano- 
ther cause  to  fear,  viz.  hope,  to  enable  men  to  create 
this  imagination  of  a  God.  And  what  would  the 
product  of  these  two  contrary  passions  be?  the 
imagination  of  a  Being  w  hich  w  e  should  fear,  would 
do  us  as  much  harm  as  we  could  hope  it  would  do 
us  good  ;  which  would  be  quid  pro  quo,  and  which 
our  reason  would  oblige  us  to  lay  aside  so  soon  as 
we  have  fancied  it,  because  it  would  signify  just 
nothing.  But,  Secondly — Suppose  fear  alone  could 
do  it ;  how  comes  the  mind  of  man  to  be  subject  to 
such  groundless  and  unreasonable  fears?  The  Aris- 
totelian atheist  will  say,  it  always  was  so  :  but  this 
is  to  affirm,  and  not  to  give  any  account  of  a  thing. 
The  Epicurean  atheist,  if  he  will  speak  consonantly 
to  himself,  must  say,  that  there  happened  in  the  ori- 
ginal constitution  of  the  first  men  such  a  contexture 
of  atoms  as  doth  naturally  dispose  men  to  these  pa- 
nic fears  ;  unless  he  will  say,  that  the  first  men, 
when  they  grew  out  of  the  earth,  and  afterwards  broke 
loose  from  their  root,  finding  themselves  weak  and 
naked  and  unarmed,  and  meeting  writh  several  fierce 
creatures,  stronger  than  themselves,  they  were  put 
into  such  a  fright  as  did  a  little  distemper  their  un- 
derstandings, and  let  loose  their  imaginations  to 
endless  suspicions  and  unbounded  jealousies,  which 
did  at  last  settle  in  the  conceit  of  an  invisible  Being, 
infinitely  powerful,  and  able  to  do  them  harm  ;  and, 
being  fully  possest  with  this  apprehension  (nothing 
being  more  ordinary  than  for  crazed  persons  to  be- 
lieve their  own  fancies)  they  became  religious;  and, 
afterwards,  when  mankind  began  to  be  propagated, 
in  the  way  of  generation,  then  religion  obliged  them 
to  instil  these  principles  into  their  children  in  their 


352 


tender  years,  that  so  they  might  make  the  greater 
impression  upon  them  ;  and  this  course  having  been 
continued  ever  since,  the  notion  of  a  God  hath  been 
kept  up  in  the  world.  This  is  very  suitable  to  Epi- 
curus's  hypothesis  of  the  original  of  men ;  but  if 
any  man  think  fit  to  say  thus,  I  cannot  think  it  fit  to 
confute  him.  Thirdly — Whether  men  were  from  all 
eternity  such  timorous  and  fanciful  creatures,  or 
happened  to  be  made  so  in  the  first  constitution  of 
things,  it  seems,  however,  that  this  fear  of  a  Deity 
hath  a  foundation  in  nature.  And,  if  it  be  natural, 
ought  we  not  rather  to  conclude,  that  there  is  some 
ground  and  reason  for  these  fears,  and  that  nature 
hath  not  planted  them  in  us  to  no  purpose,  than  that 
they  are  vain  and  groundless  ?  There  is  no  principle 
that  Aristotle  (the  great  asserter  of  the  eternity  of 
the  world)  doth  more  frequently  inculcate  than  this, 
that  nature  doth  nothing  in  vain  ;  and  the  atheist 
himself  is  forced  to  acknowledge  (and  so  every  man 
must  who  attentively  considers  the  frame  of  the 
world),  that  although  things  were  made  by  chance, 
yet  they  have  happened  as  well  as  if  the  greatest 
wisdom  had  the  ordering  and  contriving  of  them. 
And  surely  wisdom  would  never  have  planted  such 
a  vain  principle  as  the  fear  of  a  Deity  in  the  nature 
of  man,  if  there  had  not  been  a  God  in  the  world. 

Secondly,  If  fear  be  not  a  sufficient  account  of 
this  universal  consent,  the  atheist  thinks  it  may  very 
probably  be  resolved  into  universal  tradition.  But 
this  likewise  is  liable  to  great  exception.  For, 
whence  came  this  tradition?  it  must  begin  some 
time,  it  must  have  its  original  from  somebody ;  and 
it  were  very  well  worth  our  knowing  who  that  man 
was,  that  first  raised  this  spirit,  which  all  the  reason 


353 


of  mankind  could  never  conjure  down  since.  Where 
did  he  live,  and  when  ?  In  what  country,  and  in 
what  age  of  the  world  ?  What  was  his  name,  or  his 
son's  name,  that  we  may  know  him  ?  This  the  atheist 
can  give  no  punctual  account  of;  only  he  imagines 
it  not  improbable,  that  somebody  long  ago  (nobody 
knows  when)  beyond  the  memory  of  all  ages,  did  start 
such  a  notion  in  the  world,  and  that  it  hath  passed 
for  current  ever  since.  But  if  this  tradition  be  granted 
so  very  ancient  as  to  have  been  before  all  books,  and 
to  be  older  than  any  history,  it  may  for  any  thing  any 
body  can  tell  have  been  from  the  beginning;  and 
then  it  is  much  more  likely  to  be  a  notion,  which  was 
bred  in  the  mind  of  man,  and  born  with  him,  than  a 
tradition  transmitted  from  hand  to  hand  through  all 
generations ;  especially  if  we  consider  how  many 
rude  and  barbarous  nations  there  are  in  the  world, 
which  consent  in  the  opinion  of  a  God,  and  yet  have 
scarce  any  certain  tradition  of  any  thing  that  was 
done  among  them  but  two  or  three  ages  before. 

Thirdly,  But  if  neither  of  these  be  satisfactory, 
he  hath  one  way  more;  which  although  it  signify 
little  to  men  of  sober  and  severe  reason,  yet  it  very 
unhappily  hits  the  jealous  and  suspicious  humour 
of  the  generality  of  men,  who,  from  the  experience 
they  have  had  of  themselves  and  others,  are  very  apt 
to  suspect  that  every  body,  but  especially  their  supe- 
riors and  governors,  have  a  design  to  impose  upon 
them  for  their  own  ends.  In  short,  it  is  this  :  that 
this  noise  about  a  God  is  a  mere  state  engine  and  a 
politic  device,  invented  at  first  by  some  great  prince 
or  minister  of  state,  to  keep  people  in  awe  and  order. 
And,  if  so,  from  hence  (saith  the  atheist)  we  may 
easily  apprehend  how  from  such  an  original  it  might 


354 

be  generally  propagated  and  become  universally 
current,  having  the  stamp  of  public  authority  upon 
it.  Besides,  that  people  have  always  been  found 
easy  to  comply  with  the  inclinations  of  their  prince. 
And  from  hence  likewise  we  may  see  the  reason  why 
this  notion  hath  continued  so  long.  For,  being  found 
by  experience  to  be  so  excellent  an  instrument  of 
government,  we  may  be  sure  it  would  always  be 
cherished  and  kept  up. 

And  now  he  triumphs,  and  thinks  the  business  is 
very  clear :  thus  it  w  as,  some  time  or  other,  (most 
probably  towards  the  beginning  of  the  world,  if  it 
had  a  beginning,  when  all  mankind  was  under  one 
universal  monarch)  some  great  Nebuchadnezzar  set 
up  this  image  of  a  deity,  and  commanded  all  people 
and  nations  to  fall  down  and  worship  it :  and  this 
being  found  a  successful  device  to  awe  people  into 
obedience  to  government,  it  hath  been  continued  to 
this  day,  and  is  like  to  last  to  the  end  of  the  world. 
To  this  fine  conjecture  I  have  four  things  to  say  : 

1.  That  all  this  is  mere  conjecture  and  suppo- 
sition ;  he  cannot  bring  the  least  shadow  of  proof 
or  evidence  for  any  one  tittle  of  it. 

2.  This  supposition  grants  the  opinion  of  a  god 
to  conduce  very  much  to  the  support  of  government 
and  order  in  the  world  ;  and,  consequently,  to  be 
very  beneficial  to  mankind.  So  that  the  atheist 
cannot  but  acknowledge  that  it  is  great  pity  that  it 
should  not  be  true,  and  that  it  is  the  common  in- 
terest of  mankind,  if  there  were  but  probable  argu- 
ments for  it,  not  to  admit  of  any  slight  reason  against 
it;  and  to  punish  all  those  who  would  seduce  men 
to  atheism,  as  the  great  disturbers  of  the  world,  and 
pests  of  human  society. 


3$5 

3.  This  supposition  can  have  nothing  of  certainty 
in  it,  unless  this  be  true,  that  whoever  makes  a 
politic  advantage  of  other  men's  principles  ought  to 
be  presumed  to  contrive  those  principles  into  them. 
Whereas  it  is  much  more  common,  (because  more 
easy)  for  men  to  serve  their  own  ends  of  those  prin- 
ciples or  opinions,  which  they  do  not  put  into  men, 
but  find  there.  So  that  if  the  question  of  a  God 
were  to  be  decided  by  the  probability  of  this  con- 
jecture, (which  the  atheist  applauds  himself  most  in) 
it  would  be  concluded  in  the  affirmative.  It  being 
much  more  likely,  since  politicians  reap  the  advan- 
tages of  obedience,  and  a  more  ready  submission  to 
government  from  mens  believing  that  there  is  a 
God,  that  they  found  the  minds  of  men  prepossessed 
to  their  hands  with  the  notion  of  a  God,  than  that 
they  planted  it  there. 

4.  We  have  as  much  evidence  of  the  contrary  to 
this  supposition  as  such  a  thing  is  capable  of,  viz. 
that  it  was  not  an  arcanum  imperii,  a  secret  of  go- 
vernment, to  propagate  the  belief  of  a  God  among 
the  people,  when  the  governors  themselves  knew  it 
to  be  a  cheat.  For  we  find  in  the  histories  of  all 
ages,  of  which  we  have  any  records,  (and  of  other 
ages  we  cannot  possibly  judge)  that  princes  have 
not  been  more  secure  from  troubles  of  conscience 
and  the  fears  of  religion,  and  the  terrors  of  another 
world,  (nay,  many  of  them  more  subject  to  these) 
than  other  men,  as  I  could  give  many  instances,  and 
those  no  mean  ones.  What  made  Caligula  creep 
under  that  bed  when  it  thundered  ?  What  made 
Tiberius,  that  great  master  of  the  crafts  of  govern- 
ment, complain  so  much  of  the  grievous  stings  and 
lashes  he  felt  in  his  conscience  ?    What  made  Car- 


356 

dinal  Wolsey  (that  great  minister  of  state  in  our 
own  nation)  to  pour  forth  his  soul  in  those  sad 
words,  "  Had  I  been  as  diligent  to  please  my  God 
as  I  have  been  to  please  my  king,  he  would  not  have 
forsaken  me  now  in  my  grey  hairs?"  What  reason 
for  such  actions  and  speeches,  if  these  great  men  had 
known  that  religion  was  but  a  cheat?  But  if  they 
knew  nothing  of  this  secret,  I  think  we  may  safely 
conclude,  that  the  notion  of  a  God  did  not  come 
from  the  court,  that  it  was  not  the  invention  of  poli- 
ticians, and  a  juggle  of  state  to  cozen  the  people 
into  obedience. 

And  now  from  all  this  that  hath  been  said,  it 
seems  to  be  very  evident,  that  the  general  consent 
of  mankind  in  this  apprehension,  that  there  is  a 
God,  must  in  all  reason  be  ascribed  to  some  more 
certain  and  universal  cause  than  fear  or  tradition, 
or  state  policy,  viz.  to  this,  that  God  himself  hath 
wrought  this  image  of  himself  upon  the  mind  of 
man,  and  so  woven  it  into  the  very  frame  of  his 
being,  that  (like  Phidias  picture  in  Minerva's  shield) 
it  can  never  totally  be  defaced  without  the  ruin  of 
human  nature. 

I  know  but  one  objection  that  this  discourse  is 
liable  to,  which  is  this  ;  that  the  universal  consent 
of  mankind  in  the  apprehension  of  a  God  is  no  more 
an  argument  that  he  really  is,  than  the  general  agree- 
ment of  so  many  nations  for  so  many  ages  in  the 
worship  of  many  gods  is  an  argument  that  there 
are  many. 

To  this  I  answer,  1.  That  the  generality  of  the 
philosophers  and  wise  men  of  all  nations  and  ages 
did  dissent  from  the  multitude  in  these  things.  They 
believed  but  one  supreme  Deity,  which  with  respect 


to  the  various  benefits  men  received  from  him, 
had  several  titles  bestowed  upon  him.  And  although 
they  did  servilely  comply  with  the  people  in  wor- 
shipping God  by  sensible  images  and  represen- 
tations; yet  it  appears  by  their  writings,  that  they 
despised  this  way  of  worship  as  superstitious,  and 
unsuitable  to  the  nature  of  God.  So  that  Poly- 
theism and  idolatry  are  far  from  being  able  to 
pretend  to  universal  consent,  from  their  having  had 
the  vote  of  the  multitude  in  most  nations  for  several 
ages  together.  Because  the  opinion  of  the  vulgar, 
separated  from  the  consent  and  approbation  of  the 
wise,  signifies  no  more  than  a  great  many  ciphers 
would  do  without  figures. 

2.  The  gross  ignorance  and  mistakes  of  the  hea- 
then about  God  and  his  worship  are  a  good  argu- 
ment that  there  is  a  God  ;  because  they  shew  that 
men,  sunk  into  the  most  degenerate  condition,  into 
the  greatest  blindness  and  darkness  imaginable,  do 
yet  retain  some  sense  and  awe  of  a  Deity  ;  that 
religion  is  a  property  of  our  natures,  and  that  the 
notion  of  a  Deity  is  intimate  to  our  understandings, 
and  sticks  close  to  them,  seeing  men  will  rather 
have  any  God  than  none ;  and  rather  than  want  a 
Deity  they  will  worship  any  thing. 

3.  That  there  have  been  so  many  false  gods  de- 
vised, is  rather  an  argument  that  there  is  a  true  one 
than  that  there  is  none.  There  would  be  no  coun- 
terfeits but  for  the  sake  of  something  that  is  real. 
For  though  all  pretenders  seem  to  be  what  they 
really  are  not,  yet  they  pretend  to  be  something  that 
really  is:  for  to  counterfeit  is  to  put  on  the  likeness 
and  appearance  of  some  real  excellence.  There 
would  be  no  brass  money,  if  there  were  not  good 


358 


and  lawful  money.  Bristol  stones  would  not  pre- 
tend to  be  diamonds,  if  there  never  had  been  any 
diamonds.  Those  idols  in  Henry  the  Seventh's 
time,  (as  Sir  Francis  Bacon  calls  them)  Lambert 
Symnel  and  Perkin  Warbeck,  had  never  been  set 
up  if  there  had  not  once  been  a  real  Plantagenet 
and  Duke  of  York.  So  the  idols  of  the  heathen, 
though  they  be  set  up  in  affront  to  the  true  God, 
yet  they  rather  prove  that  there  is  one,  than  the 
contrary. 

III.  Speculative  atheism  is  absurd,  because  it 
requires  more  evidence  for  things  than  they  are 
capable  of.  Aristotle  hath  long  since  well  ob- 
served, how  unreasonable  it  is  to  expect  the  same 
kind  of  proof  and  evidence  for  every  thing,  which 
we  have  for  some  things.  Mathematical  things, 
being  of  an  abstracted  nature,  are  capable  of  the 
clearest  and  strictest  demonstration  :  but  conclu- 
sions in  natural  philosophy  are  capable  of  proof  by 
an  induction  of  experiments  ;  things  of  a  moral 
nature  by  moral  arguments  ;  and  matters  of  fact  by 
credible  testimony.  And  though  none  of  these  be 
capable  of  that  strict  kind  of  demonstration,  which 
mathematical  matters  are;  yet  have  we  an  undoubted 
assurance  of  them,  when  they  are  proved  by  the 
best  arguments  that  things  of  that  kind  will  bear. 
No  man  can  demonstrate  to  me,  (unless  we  will  call 
every  argument  that  is  fit  to  convince  a  wise  man  a 
demonstration)  that  there  is  such  an  island  in  Ame- 
rica as  Jamaica.  Yet  upon  the  testimony  of  cre- 
dible persons  who  have  seen  it,  and  authors  who 
have  written  of  it,  I  am  as  free  from  all  doubt  con- 
cerning it,  as  I  aui  from  doubting  of  the  clearest 
mathematical  demonstration.    So  that  this  is  to  be 


359 

entertained  as  a  firm  principle  by  all  those  who 
pretend  to  be  certain  of  any  thing  at  all — that  when 
any  thing,  in  any  of  these  kinds,  is  proved  by  as 
good  argument  as  a  thing  of  that  kind  is  capable  of, 
and  we  have  as  great  assurance  that  it  is,  as  we 
could  possibly  have  supposing  it  were,  we  ought 
not  in  reason  to  make  any  doubt  of  the  existence  of 
that  thing. 

Now  to  apply  this  to  the  present  case.  The  being 
of  a  God  is  not  mathematically  demonstrable,  nor 
can  it  be  expected  it  should,  because  only  mathe- 
matical matters  admit  of  this  kind  of  evidence.  Nor 
can  it  be  proved  immediately  by  sense,  because  God, 
being  supposed  to  be  a  pure  spirit,  cannot  be  the 
object  of  any  corporeal  sense.  But  yet  we  have 
as  great  assurance,  that  there  is  a  God  as  the  nature 
of  the  thing  to  be  proved  is  capable  of;  and  as  we 
could  in  reason  expect  to  have,  supposing  that 
he  were.  For  let  us  suppose  there  were  such  a 
being  as  an  infinite  spirit,  clothed  with  all  possible 
perfection ;  that  is,  as  good  and  w  ise  and  powerful, 
&c.  as  can  be  imagined  :  what  conceivable  w  ays  are 
there,  whereby  we  should  come  to  be  assured  that 
there  is  such  a  being?  but  either  by  an  internal  im- 
pression of  the  notion  of  a  God  upon  our  minds; 
or  else  by  such  external  and  visible  effects  as  our 
reason  tells  us  must  be  attributed  to  some  cause, 
and  which  we  cannot  without  great  violence  to  our 
understandings  attribute  to  any  other  cause  but 
such  a  being  as  we  conceive  God  to  be;  that  is,  one 
that  is  infinitely  good  and  wise  and  powerful?  Now 
we  have  this  double  assurance  that  there  is  a  God, 
and  greater  or  other  than  this  the  thing  is  not  capable 
of:  ifGod  shouldassume  a  body,  and  present  himself 


360 


before  our  eyes,  this  might  amaze  us,  but  could  not 
give  us  any  rational  assurance  that  there  is  an  infinite 
spirit.  If  he  should  work  a  miracle  ;  this  could  not 
in  reason  convince  an  atheist  more  than  the  argu- 
ments he  already  hath  for  it.  If  the  atheist  then 
were  to  ask  a  sign  in  the  heaven  above,  or  in  the 
earth  beneath,  what  could  he  desire  God  to  do  for 
his  conviction  more  than  he  hath  already  done? 
Could  he  desire  him  to  work  a  greater  miracle  than 
to  make  a  world  ?  Why,  if  God  should  carry  this 
perverse  man  out  of  the  limits  of  this  world,  and 
shew  him  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  springing 
out  of  nothing,  he  might  say  that  innumerable 
parts  of  matter  chanced  just  then  to  rally  together, 
and  to  form  themselves  into  this  new  world,  and 
that  God  did  not  make  it.  Thus  you  see  that  we 
have  all  the  rational  assurance  of  a  God  that  the 
thing  is  capable  of,  and  that  atheism  is  absurd  and 
unreasonable  in  requiring  more. 

IV.  The  atheist  is  unreasonable,  because  he  pre- 
tends to  know  that  which  no  man  can  know,  and  to 
be  certain  of  that  which  nobody  can  be  certain  of; 
that  is,  that  there  is  no  God,  and,  which  is  conse- 
quent upon  this,  (as  1  shall  shew  afterwards)  that 
it  is  not  possible  there  should  be  one.  And  the 
atheist  must  pretend  to  know  this  certainly.  For 
it  were  the  greatest  folly  in  the  world  for  a  man  to 
deny  and  despise  a  God,  if  he  be  not  certain  that 
he  is  not.  Now  whoever  pretends  to  be  certain  that 
there  is  no  God  hath  this  great  disadvantage — he  pre- 
tends to  be  certain  of  a  pure  negative.  But  of  ne- 
gatives we  have  far  the  least  certainty,  and  they  are 
usually  hardest,  aud  many  times  impossible  to  be 
proved.    Indeed,  such  negatives  as  only  deny  some 


361 


particular  mode  or  manner  of  a  thing's  existence, 
a  man  may  have  a  certainty  of  them  ;  because,  when 
we  see  things  to  be,  we  may  see  what  they  are,  and 
in  what  manner  they  do  or  do  not  exist.    For  in- 
stance, we  may  be  certain  that  man  is  not  a  creature 
that  hath  wings,  because  this  only  concerns  the 
manner  of  his  existence ;  and  we,  seeing  what  he  is, 
may  certainly  know  that  he  is  not  so  or  so  :  but 
pure  negatives,  that  is,  such  as  absolutely  deny  the 
existence  of  things,  or  the  possibility  of  their  exist- 
ence can  never  be  proved  ;  for,  after  all  that  can  be 
said  against  a  thing,  this  will  still  be  true,  that  many 
things  possibly  are  which  we  know  not  of,  and  that 
many  more  things  may  be  than  are  ;  and,  if  so,  after 
all  our  arguments  against  a  thing,  it  will  be  uncertain 
whether  it  be  or  not.    And  this  is  universally  true, 
unless  the  thing  denied  to  be  do  plainly  imply  a 
contradiction ;  from  which  I  have  already  shewn 
the  notion  of  a  God  to  be  free.    Now  the  atheist 
pretends  to  be  certain  of  a  pure  negative,  that  there 
is  no  such  being  as  God,  and  that  it  is  not  possible 
there  should  be  :  but  no  man  can  reasonably  pretend 
to  know  thus  much,  but  he  must  pretend  to  know 
all  things  that  are  or  can  be ;  which  if  any  man 
should  be  so  vain  as  to  pretend  to,  yet  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  nobody  would  be  so  weak  as  to  believe 
him. 

V.  Speculative  atheism  is  unreasonable,  because 
it  contradicts  itself.  There  is  this  great  contradiction 
in  the  denial  of  a  God  :  he  that  denies  a  God  says 
that  that  is  impossible,  which  yet  he  must  grant 
to  be  possible.  He  says,  it  is  impossible  that  there 
should  be  such  a  being  as  God,  in  saying  that  de 
facto  there  is  no  such  being.    For  eternity  being 

vol.  i.  2  F 


362 


essential  to  the  notion  of  a  God,  if  there  be  not  a 
God  already,  it  is  impossible  now  that  there  should 
be  one  ;  because  such  a  being,  as  is  supposed  to  be 
essentially  eternal  and  without  beginning,  cannot 
now  begin  to  be.  And  yet  he  must  grant  it  possible, 
that  there  should  be  such  a  being  as  hath  all  possible 
perfection  :  and  such  a  being  as  this  is  that  which 
we  call  God,  and  is  that  very  thing  which  the  atheist 
denies,  and  others  affirm  to  be.  For  he  that  denies 
a  God,  must  deny  such  a  being  as  all  the  world 
describe  God  to  be  ;  and  this  is  the  general  notion 
which  all  men  have  of  God,  that  he  is  a  being  as 
perfect  as  is  possible  ;  that  is,  endued  with  all  such 
perfections  as  do  not  imply  a  contradiction,  which 
none  of  those  perfections  which  we  attribute  to 
God  do,  as  I  have  already  proved. 

II.  Speculative  atheism,  as  it  is  unreasonable,  so 
is  it  a  most  imprudent  and  uncomfortable  opinion : 
and  that  upon  these  two  accounts.  First,  Because 
it  is  against  the  present  interest  and  happiness  of 
mankind.  Secondly,  Because  it  is  infinitely  hazard- 
ous and  unsafe  in  the  issue. 

i.  It  is  against  the  present  interest  and  happiness 
of  mankind.  If  atheism  were  the  general  opinion  of 
the  world,  it  would  be  infinitely  prejudicial  to  the 
peace  and  happiness  of  human  society,  and  would 
open  a  wide  door  to  all  manner  of  confusion  and 
disorder.  But  this  I  shall  not  now  insist  upon,  be- 
cause I  design  a  particular  discourse  of  that  by  itself. 

I  shall  at  present  content  myself  to  shew  how  un- 
comfortable an  opinion  this  would  be  to  particular 
persons :  for  nothing  can  be  more  evident,  than 
that  man  is  not  sufficient  of  himself  to  his  own  hap- 
piness.   He  is  liable  to  many  evils  and  miseries 


363 

which  he  can  neither  prevent  nor  redress.  He  is 
full  of  wants  which  he  cannot  supply,  and  com- 
passed about  with  infirmities  which  he  cannot  re- 
move, and  obnoxious  to  dangers  which  he  can  never 
sufficiently  provide  against.  Consider  man  without 
the  protection  and  conduct  of  a  superior  being,  and 
he  is  secure  of  nothing  that  he  enjoys  in  this  world, 
and  uncertain  of  every  thing  that  he  hopes  for.  He 
is  apt  to  grieve  for  what  he  cannot  help,  and  eagerly 
to  desire  what  he  is  never  likely  to  obtain.  "  Man 
walketh  in  a  vain  show,  and  disquieteth  himself  in 
vain."  He  courts  happiness  in  a  thousand  shapes, 
and  the  faster  he  pursues  it,  the  faster  it  flies  from 
him.  His  hopes  and  expectations  are  bigger  than 
his  enjoyments,  and  his  fears  and  jealousies  more 
troublesome  than  the  evils  themselves  which  he  is 
so  much  afraid  of.  He  is  liable  to  a  great  many  in- 
conveniences every  moment  of  his  life,  and  is  conti- 
nually insecure,  not  only  of  the  good  things  of  this 
life,  but  even  of  life  itself.  And,  besides  all  this, 
after  all  his  endeavours  to  the  contrary,  he  .finds 
himself  naturally  to  dread  a  superior  Being,  that  can 
defeat  all  his  designs,  and  disappoint  all  his  hopes, 
and  make  him  miserable  beyond  all  his  fears.  He 
has  oftentimes  secret  misgivings  concerning  another 
life  after  this,  and  fearful  apprehensions  of  an  invisible 
Judge  ;  and  thereupon  he  is  full  of  anxiety  concern- 
ing his  condition  in  another  world,  and  sometimes 
plunged  into  that  anguish  and  despair  that  he  grows 
weary  of  himself.  So  that  the  atheist  deprives  him- 
self of  all  the  comfort  that  the  apprehensions  of  a 
God  can  give  a  man,  and  yet  is  liable  to  all  the 
trouble  and  disquiet  of  those  apprehensions. 

I  do  not  say  that  these  inconveniences  do  happen 
2  f2 


364 


to  all ;  but  every  one  is  in  clanger  of  them.  For 
man's  nature  is  evidently  so  contrived  as  does  plainly 
discover  how  unable  he  is  to  make  himself  happy. 
So  that  he  must  necessarily  look  abroad  and  seek 
for  happiness  somewhere  else.  And  if  there  be  no 
superior  Being,  in  whose  care  of  him  he  may  repose 
his  confidence  and  quiet  his  mind ;  if  he  have  no 
comfortable  expectations  of  another  life  to  sustain 
him  under  the  evils  and  calamities  he  is  liable  to  in 
this  world,  he  is  certainly  of  all  creatures  the  most 
miserable.  There  are  none  of  us  but  may  happen 
to  fall  into  those  circumstances  of  danger,  or  want 
or  pain,  or  some  other  sort  of  calamity,  that  we  can 
have  no  hopes  of  relief  or  comfort  but  from  God 
alone:  none  in  all  the  world  to  flee  to  but  him. 
And  what  would  men  do  in  such  a  case  if  it  were 
not  for  God  ?  Human  nature  is  most  certainly  liable 
to  desperate  exigences,  and  he  is  not  happy  that  is 
not  provided  against  the  worst  that  may  happen.  It 
is  bad  to  be  reduced  to  such  a  condition  as  to  be 
destitute  of  all  comfort.  And  yet  men  are  many 
times  brought  to  that  extremity,  that  if  it  were  not 
for  God,  they  would  not  know  what  to  do  with 
themselves,  or  how  to  enjoy  themselves  for  one  hour, 
or  to  entertain  their  thoughts  with  any  comfortable 
considerations  under  their  present  anguish  and  suf- 
ferings. All  men  naturally  fly  to  God  in  extremity, 
and  the  most  atheistical  person  in  the  world,  when 
he  is  forsaken  of  all  hopes  of  any  other  relief,  is 
forced  to  acknowledge  him,  and  would  be  glad  to 
have  such  a  friend. 

Can  it  then  be  a  wise  and  reasonable  design  to 
endeavour  to  banish  the  belief  of  a  God  out  of  the 
world  ?    Not  to  say  how  impious  it  is  in  respect  of 


365 


God,  nothing  can  be  more  malicious  to  men,  and 
more  effectually  undermine  the  only  foundation  of 
our  happiness.  For  if  there  were  no  God  in  the 
world,  man  would  be  in  a  much  more  wretched  and 
disconsolate  condition,  than  the  creatures  below  him. 
For  they  are  only  sensible  of  present  pain,  and  when 
it  is  upon  them  they  bear  it  as  they  can.  But  they 
are  not  at  all  apprehensive  of  evils  at  a  distance, 
nor  tormented  with  the  fearful  prospect  of  what  may 
befal  them  hereafter;  nor  are  they  plunged  into 
despair  upon  the  consideration,  that  the  evils  they 
lie  under  are  like  to  continue,  and  are  incapable  of 
a  remedy.  And  as  they  have  no  apprehension  of 
these  things,  so  they  need  no  comfort  against  them. 
But  mankind  is  liable  to  all  the  same  evils  and  many 
others;  which  are  so  much  the  greater,  because 
they  are  aggravated  and  set  on  by  the  restless  work- 
ings of  our  minds,  and  exasperated  by  the  smart 
reflections  and  frettings  of  our  own  thoughts  :  and  if 
there  be  no  God,  we  are  wholly  without  comfort 
under  all  these,  and  without  any  other  remedy  than 
what  time  will  give.  For  if  the  providence  of  God 
be  taken  away,  what  security  have  we  against  those 
innumerable  dangers  and  mischiefs  to  which  human 
nature  is  continually  exposed?  What  consolation 
under  them,  when  we  are  reduced  to  that  condition 
that  no  creature  can  give  us  any  hopes  of  relief? 
But  if  we  believe  that  there  is  a  God  that  takes  care 
of  us,  and  we  be  careful  to  please  him,  this  cannot 
but  be  a  mighty  comfort  to  us,  both  under  the  pre- 
sent sense  of  affliction,  and  the  apprehension  of  evils 
at  a  distance.  For,  in  that  case,  we  are  secure  of 
one  of  these  three  things ;  either  that  God  by  his  pro- 
vidence will  prevent  the  evils  we  fear,  if  that  be 


366 


best  for  us:  or  that  he  will  support  us  under  them 
when  they  are  present,  and  add  to  our  strength  as 
he  increaseth  our  burden  :  or  that  he  will  make 
them  the  occasion  of  a  greater  good  to  us,  by  turning 
them  either  to  our  advantage  in  this  world,  or  the 
increase  of  our  happiness  in  the  next.  Now  every 
one  of  these  considerations  has  a  great  deal  of  com- 
fort in  it;  for  which,  if  there  were  no  God,  there 
could  be  no  ground.  Nay,  on  the  contrary,  the  most 
real  foundation  of  our  unhappiness  would  be  laid 
in  our  reason  ;  and  we  should  be  so  much  more  mi- 
serable than  the  beasts,  by  how  much  we  have  a 
quicker  apprehension  and  a  deeper  consideration  of 
things. 

So  that  if  a  man  had  arguments  sufficient  to  per- 
suade him  that  there  is  no  God  (as  there  is  infinite 
reason  to  the  contrary),  yet  the  belief  of  a  God  is  so 
necessary  to  the  comfort  and  happiness  of  our  lives, 
that  a  wise  man  could  not  but  be  heartily  troubled 
to  quit  so  pleasant  an  error,  and  to  part  with  a  de- 
lusion which  is  apt  to  yield  such  unspeakable  satis- 
faction to  the  mind  of  man.  Did  but  men  consider 
the  true  notion  of  God,  he  would  appear  to  be  so 
lovely  a  being,  and  so  full  of  goodness  and  of  all 
desirable  perfections,  that  even  those  very  persons, 
who  are  of  such  irregular  understandings,  as  not  to 
believe  that  there  is  a  God,  yet  could  not,  if  they 
understood  themselves,  refrain  from  wishing  with 
all  their  hearts,  that  there  were  one.  For  is  it  not 
really  desirable  to  every  man,  that  there  should  be 
such  a  being  in  the  world  as  takes  care  of  the  frame 
of  it,  that  it  do  not  run  into  confusion,  and  in  that 
disorder  ruin  mankind  ?  That  there  should  be  such 
a  Being  as  takes  particular  care  of  every  one  of  us 


367 


and  loves  us,  and  delights  to  do  us  good  ;  as  under- 
stands all  our  wants,  and  is  able  and  willing  to  re- 
lieve us  in  our  greatest  straights,  when  nothing  else 
can  ;  to  preserve  us  in  our  greatest  dangers,  to  assist 
us  against  our  worst  enemies,  and  to  comfort  us 
under  our  sharpest  sufferings,  when  all  other  things  ' 
set  themselves  against  us?  Is  it  not  every  man's 
interest,  that  there  should  be  such  a  Governor  of 
the  world  as  really  designs  our  happiness,  and  hath 
omitted  nothing  that  is  necessary  to  it;  as  would 
govern  us  for  our  advantage,  and  will  require  no- 
thing of  us  but  what  is  for  our  good,  and  yet  will 
infinitely  reward  us  for  the  doing  of  that  which  is 
best  for  ourselves  ?  that  will  punish  any  man  that 
should  go  about  to  injure  us,  or  to  deal  otherwise 
with  us  than  himself  in  the  like  case  would  be  dealt 
w  ithal  by  us  ?  In  a  word,  such  a  one  as  is  ready  to 
be  reconciled  to  us  when  we  have  offended  him, 
and  is  so  far  from  taking  little  advantages  against  us 
for  every  failing,  that  he  is  willing  to  pardon  our 
most  wilful  miscarriages,  upon  our  repentance  and 
amendment?  And  we  have  reason  to  believe  God 
to  be  such  a  being,  if  he  be  at  all. 

Why  then  should  any  man  be  troubled  that  there 
is  such  a  Being  as  this,  or  think  himself  concerned 
to  shut  him  out  of  the  world?  How  could  such  a 
Governor  as  this  be  wanting  in  the  world,  that  is  so 
great  a  comfort  and  security  to  mankind,  and  the 
confidence  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  ?  If  God  be 
such  a  being  as  I  have  described,  woe  to  the  world 
if  it  were  without  him.  This  would  be  a  thousand 
times  greater  loss  to  mankind,  and  of  more  dis- 
mal consequences,  and,  if  it  were  true,  ought  to 


368 


affect  us  with  more  grief  and  horror  than  the  extin- 
guishing of  the  sun. 

Let  but  all  things  be  well  considered,  and  I  am 
very  confident,  that  if  a  wise  and  considerate  man 
were  left  to  himself  and  his  own  choice,  to  wish  the 
greatest  good  to  himself  he  could  devise,  after  he 
had  searched  heaven  and  earth,  the  sum  of  all  his 
wishes  would  be  this,  that  there  were  just  such  a 
being  as  God  is:  nor  would  he  choose  any  other 
benefactor,  or  friend,  or  protector  for  himself,  or 
governor  for  the  whole  world,  than  infinite  power 
conducted  and  managed  by  infinite  wisdom,  and 
goodness  and  justice,  which  is  the  true  notion  of  a 
God. 

Nay,  so  necessary  is  God  to  the  happiness  of 
mankind,  that  though  there  were  no  God,  yet  the 
atheist  himself,  upon  second  thoughts,  would  judge 
it  convenient  that  the  generality  of  men  should  be- 
lieve that  there  is  one.  For  when  the  atheist  had 
attained  his  end,  and,  if  it  were  a  thing  possible, 
had  blotted  the  notion  of  a  God  out  of  the  minds  of 
men,  mankind  would  in  all  probability  grow  so 
melancholy  and  so  unruly  a  thing,  that  he  himself 
would  think  it  fit  in  policy  to  contribute  his  best 
endeavours  to  the  restoring  of  men  to  their  former 
belief.  Thus  hath  God  secured  the  belief  of  himself 
in  the  world,  against  all  attempts  to  the  contrary ; 
not  only  by  riveting  the  notion  of  himself  into  our 
natures,  but  likewise  by  making  the  belief  of  his 
being  necessary  to  the  peace  and  tranquillity  of  our 
minds,  and  to  the  quiet  and  happiness  of  human 
society. 

So  that,  if  we  consult  our  reason,  we  cannot  but 
believe  that  there  is  ;  if  our  interest,  we  cannot  but 


369 

heartily  wish  that  there  were  such  a  being  as  God 
in  the  world.  Every  thing  within  us  and  without 
us  gives  notice  of  him.  His  name  is  written  upon 
our  hearts  ;  and  in  every  creature  there  are  some 
prints  and  footsteps  of  him.  Every  moment  we  feel 
our  dependance  upon  him,  and  do  by  daily  expe- 
rience find  that  we  can  neither  be  happy  without 
him,  nor  think  ourselves  so. 

I  confess  it  is  not  a  wicked  man's  interest,  if  he 
resolve  to  continue  such,  that  there  should  be  a 
God  ;  but  then  it  is  not  men's  interest  to  be  wicked. 
It  is  for  the  general  good  of  human  society,  and 
consequently  of  particular  persons,  to  be  true  and 
just;  it  is  for  men's  health  to  be  temperate,  and  so 
I  could  instance  in  all  other  virtues :  but  this  is  the 
mystery  of  atheism,  men  are  wedded  to  their  lusts, 
and  resolved  upon  a  wicked  course ;  and  so  it  be- 
comes their  interest  to  wish  there  were  no  God, 
and  to  believe  so  if  they  can.  Whereas,  if  men  were 
minded  to  live  righteously  and  soberly  and  vir- 
tuously in  the  world,  to  believe  a  God  would  be 
no  hindrance  or  prejudice  to  any  such  design,  but 
very  much  for  the  advancement  and  furtherance  of 
it.  Men  that  are  good  and  virtuous  do  easily  be- 
lieve a  God ;  so  that  it  is  vehemently  to  be  sus- 
pected, that  nothing  but  the  strength  of  men's  lusts, 
and  the  power  of  vicious  inclinations,  do  sway  their 
minds,  and  set  a  bias  upon  their  understandings 
toward  atheism. 

2.  Atheism  is  imprudent,  because  it  is  unsafe  in 
the  issue.  The  atheist  contends  against  the  reli- 
gious man,  that  there  is  no  God  ;  but  upon  strange 
inequality  and  odds,  for  he  ventures  his  eternal 
interest;  whereas  the  religious  man  ventures  only 


370 

the  loss  of  his  lusts,  which  it  is  much  better  for  him 
to  be  without,  or  at  the  utmost  of  some  temporal 
convenience;  and  all  this  while  is  inwardly  more 
contented  and  happy,  and  usually  more  healthful, 
and  perhaps  meets  with  more  respect  and  faithfuller 
friends,  and  lives  in  a  more  secure  and  flourishing 
condition,  and  more  free  from  the  evils  and  punish- 
ments of  this  world,  than  the  atheistical  person  does; 
however,  it  is  not  much  that  he  ventures:  and,  after 
this  life,  if  there  be  no  God,  is  as  well ^as  he ;  but 
if  there  be  a  God,  is  infinitely  better,  even  as  much 
as  unspeakable  and  eternal  happiness  is  better  than 
extreme  and  endless  misery.  So  that,  if  the  argu- 
ments for  and  against  a  God  were  equal,  and  it  were 
an  even  question  whether  there  were  one  or  not, 
yet  the  hazard  and  danger  is  so  infinitely  unequal, 
that  in  point  of  prudence  and  interest  every  man 
were  obliged  to  incline  to  the  affirmative ;  and, 
whatever  doubts  he  might  have  about  it,  to  choose 
the  safest  side  of  the  question,  and  to  make  that  the 
principle  to  live  by.  For  he  that  acts  wisely,  and 
is  a  thoroughly  prudent  man,  willbe  provided  against 
all  events,  and  will  take  care  to  secure  the  main 
chance,  whatever  happens ;  but  the  atheist,  in 
case  things  should  fall  out  contrary  to  his  belief  and 
expectation,  hath  made  no  provision  for  this  case. 
If,  contrary  to  his  confidence,  it  should  prove  in  the 
issue  that  there  is  a  God,  the  man  is  lost  and  un- 
done for  ever.  If  the  atheist,  when  he  dies,  should 
find  that  his  soul  remains  after  his  body,  and  lias 
only  quitted  its  lodging,  how  will  this  man  be  amazed 
and  blanked,  when,  contrary  to  his  expectation, 
he  shall  find  himself  in  a  new  and  strange  place, 


371 


amidst  a  world  of  spirits,  entered  upon  an  everlast- 
ing and  unchangeable  state?    How  sadly  will  the 
man  be  disappointed  when  he  finds  all  things  other- 
wise than  he  had  stated  and  determined  them  in 
this  world.    When  he  comes  to  appear  before  that 
God,  whom  he  hath  denied,  and  against  whom  he 
hath  spoken  as  despiteful  things  as  he  could,  who 
can  imagine  the  pale  and  guilty  looks  of  this  man, 
and  how  he  will  shiver  and  tremble  for  the  fear  of 
the  Lord,  and  for  the  glory  of  his  majesty  ?  How 
will  he  be  surprised  with  terrors  on  every  side,  to 
find  himself  thus  unexpectedly  and  irrecoverably 
plunged  into  a  state  of  ruin  and  desperation  ?  And 
thus  things  may  happen  for  all  this  man's  confidence 
now.    For  our  belief  or  disbelief  of  a  thing  does  not 
alter  the  nature  of  the  thing.    We  cannot  fancy 
things  into  being,  or  make  them  vanish  into  nothing 
by  the  stubborn  confidence  of  our  imaginations. 
Things  are  as  sullen  as  we  are,  and  will  be  what 
they  are  whatever  we  think  of  them.    And  if  there 
be  a  God,  a  man  cannot  by  an  obstinate  disbelief 
of  him  make  him  cease  to  be,  any  more  than  a  man 
can  put  out  the  sun  by  winking. 

And  thus  I  have,  as  briefly  and  clearly  as  I  could, 
endeavoured  to  shew  the  ignorance  and  folly  of  spe- 
culative atheism,  in  denying  the  existence  of  God. 
And  now  it  will  be  less  needful  to  speak  of  the  other 
two  principles  of  religion — the  immortality  of  the 
soul  and  future  rewards.  For  no  man  can  have 
any  reasonable  scruple  about  these,  who  believes 
that  there  is  a  God.  Because  no  man  that  owns  the 
existence  of  an  infinite  spirit,  can  doubt  of  the  pos- 
sibility of  a  finite  spirit;  that  is,  such  a  thing  as  is 
immaterial,  and  does  not  contain  any  principle  of 


372 

corruption  in  itself:  and  there  is  no  man  that  be- 
lieves the  goodness  of  God,  but  must  be  inclined 
to  think  that  he  hath  made  some  things  for  as  long 
a  duration  as  they  are  capable  of.  Nor  can  any 
man,  that  acknowledged!  the  holy  and  just  provi- 
dence of  God,  and  that  he  loves  righteousness  and 
hates  iniquity,  and  that  he  is  a  magistrate  and  go- 
vernor of  the  world,  and  consequently  concerned  to 
countenance  the  obedience,  and  to  punish  the  viola- 
tion of  his  laws  ;  and  that  does  withal  consider  the 
promiscuous  dispensations  many  times  of  God's  pro- 
vidence in  this  world :  I  say,  no  man  that  acknow- 
ledges all  this,  can  think  it  unreasonable  to  con- 
clude, that,  after  this  life,  good  men  shall  be  re- 
warded and  sinners  punished.  I  have  done  with 
the  first  sort  of  irreligious  persons,  the  speculative 
atheist.    I  shall  speak  but  briefly  of  the  other. 

Secondly t  -fhe  practical  atheist,  who  is  wicked 
and  irre^jgious,  notwithstanding  he  does  in  some  sort 
believe  that  there  is  a  God  and  a  future  state  ;  he  is 
likewise  guilty  of  prodigious  folly.  The  principle 
of  the  speculative  atheist  argues  more  ignorance, 
but  the  practice  of  the  other  argues  greater  folly. 
Not  to  believe  a  God,  and  another  life,  for  which 
Ihere  is  so  much  evidence  of  reason,  is  great  igno- 
rance and  folly  ;  but  it  is  the  highest  madness  when 
a  man  does  believe  these  things,  to  live  as  if  he  did 
not  believe  them.  When  a  man  does  not  doubt  but 
that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  according  as  he  de- 
means himself  towards  him  he  will  make  him  happy 
or  miserable  for  ever,  yet  to  live  so  as  if  he  were 
certain  of  the  contrary  ;  and  as  no  man  in  reason 
can  live,  but  he  that  is  well  assured  that  there  is  no 
God.    It  was  a  shrewd  saying  of  the  old  monk, 


373 


that  two  kinds  of  prisons  would  serve  for  all  offend- 
ers in  the  world — an  inquisition  and  a  bedlam.  If 
any  man  should  deny  the  being  of  a  God  and  the 
immortality  of  the  soul,  such  a  one  should  be  put 
into  the  first  of  these,  the  inquisition,  as  being  a 
desperate  heretic  ;  but  if  any  man  should  profess 
to  believe  these  things,  and  yet  allow  himself  in  any 
known  wickedness,  such  a  one  should  be  put  into 
bedlam;  because  there  cannot  be  a  greater  folly 
and  madness  than  for  a  mau  in  matters  of  greatest 
moment  and  concernment,  to  act  against  his  best 
reason  and  understanding,  and  by  his  life  to  contra- 
dict his  belief.  Such  a  man  does  perish  with  his 
eye-  open,  and  knowingly  undoes  himself:  he  runs 
upon  the  greatest  dangers  which  he  clearly  sees  to 
be  before  him,  and  precipitates  himself  into  those 
evils  which  he  professes  to  believe  to  be  real  and 
intolerable;  and  wilfully  neglects  the  obtaining  of 
that  unspeakable  good  and  happiness  which  he  is 
persuaded  is  certain  and  attainable.  Thus  much 
for  the  second  way  of  confirmation. 

III.  The  third  way  of  confirmation  shall  be,  by 
endeavouring  to  vindicate  religion  from  those  com- 
mon imputations,  which  seem  to  charge  it  with  ig- 
norance or  imprudence.  And  they  are  chiefly 
these  three : 

1.  Credulity. 

*2.  Singularity. 

3.  Making  a  foolish  bargain. 

First,  Credulity.  Say  they,  the  foundation  of 
religion  is  the  belief  of  those  things  for  which  we 
have  no  sufficient  reason,  and  consequently,  of  which 
we  can  have  no  good  assurance  ;  as  the  belief  of  a 
God  and  of  a  future  state  after  this  life  ;  things  which 


374 

we  never  saw,  nor  did  experience,  nor  ever  spoke 
with  any  body  that  did.    Now  it  seems  to  argue  too 
great  a  forwardness  and  easiness  of  belief  to  assent 
to  any  thing  upon  insufficient  grounds. 
To  this  I  answer, 

1.  That  if  there  be  such  a  being  as  a  God,  and 
such  a  thing  as  a  future  state  after  this  life,  it  can- 
not (as  I  said  before)  in  reason  be  expected  that  we 
should  have  the  evidence  of  sense  for  such  things : 
for  he  that  believes  a  God,  believes  such  a  being  as 
hath  all  perfections,  among  which  this  is  one,  that 
he  is  a  spirit;  and  consequently,  that  he  is  invisible, 
and  cannot  be  seen.  He  likewise  that  believes 
another  life  after  this,  professeth  to  believe  a  state, 
of  which  in  this  life  we  have  no  trial  and  experi- 
ence. Besides,  if  this  were  a  good  objection,  that 
no  man  ever  saw  these  things,  it  strikes  at  the  athe- 
ist as  well  as  us.  For  no  man  ever  saw  the  world 
to  be  from  eternity ;  nor  Epicurus's  atoms,  of 
which  notwithstanding  he  believes  the  world  was 
made. 

2.  We  have  the  best  evidence  for  these  things 
which  they  are  capable  of  at  present,  supposing  they 
were. 

3.  Those  who  deny  these  principles,  must  be  much 
more  credulous,  that  is,  believe  things  upon  incom- 
parably less  evidence  of  reason.  The  atheist  looks 
upon  all  that  are  religious  as  a  company  of  credu- 
lous fools.  But  he,  for  his  part,  pretends  to  be 
wiser  than  to  believe  any  thing  for  company ;  he  can- 
not entertain  things  upon  those  slight  grounds  which 
move  other  men;  if  you  would  win  his  assent  to 
any  thing,  you  must  give  him  a  clear  demonstration 
for  it.    Now  there  is  no  way  to  deal  with  this  man 


375 


of  reason,  this  rigid  exacter  of  strict  demonstration 
for  things  which  are  not  capable  of  it,  but  by  shew- 
ing him  that  he  is  an  hundred  times  more  credulous, 
that  he  begs  more  principles,  takes  more  things  for 
granted  without  offering  to  prove  them,  and  assents 
to  more  strange  conclusions  upon  weaker  grounds 
than  those  whom  he  so  muchaccuseth  of  credulity. 

And,  to  evidence  this,  I  shall  briefly  give  you  an 
account  of  the  atheist's  creed,  and  present  you  with 
a  catalogue  of  the  fundamental  articles  of  his  faith. 
He  believes  that  there  is  no  God,  nor  possibly  can 
be,  and  consequently  that  the  wise  as  well  as  un- 
wise of  all  ages  have  been  mistaken,  except  himself 
and  a  few  more.  He  believes  that  either  all  the 
world  have  been  frighted  with  an  apparition  of  their 
own  fancy,  or  that  they  have  most  unnaturally  con- 
spired together  to  cozen  themselves;  or  that  this 
notion  of  a  God  is  a  trick  of  policy,  though  the 
greatest  princes  and  politicians  do  not  at  this  day 
know  so  much,  nor  have  done  time  out  of  mind. 
He  believes,  either  that  the  heavens  and  the  earth, 
and  all  things  in  them,  had  no  original  cause  of  their 
being,  or  else  that  they  were  made  by  chance,  and 
happened  he  knows  not  how  to  be  as  they  are  ;  and 
that  in  this  last  shuffling  of  matter,  all  things  have 
by  great  good  fortune  fallen  out  as  happily  and  as 
regularly  as  if  the  greatest  wisdom  had  contrived 
them,  but  yet  he  is  resolved  to  believe  that  there  was 
no  wisdom  in  the  contrivance  of  them.  He  believes, 
that  matter  of  itself  is  utterly  void  of  all  sense,  un- 
derstanding, and  liberty ;  but,  for  all  that,  he  is  of 
opinion,  that  the  parts  of  matter  may  now  and  then 
happen  to  be  so  conveniently  disposed,  as  to  have 
all  these  qualities,  and  most  dexterously  to  perform 


376 

all  those  line  and  free  operations  which  the  ignorant 
attribute  to  spirits. 

This  is  the  sum  of  his  belief.  And  it  is  a  won- 
der, that  there  should  be  found  any  person  pre- 
tending to  reason  or  wit  that  can  assent  to  such  a 
heap  of  absurdities,  which  are  so  gross  and  palpa- 
ble that  they  may  be  felt.  So  that  if  every  man  had 
his  due,  it  will  certainly  fall  to  the  atheist's  share  to 
be  the  most  credulous  person,  that  is,  to  believe 
things  upon  the  slightest  reasons.  For  he  does  not 
pretend  to  prove  any  thing  of  all  this,  only  he  finds 
himself,  he  knows  not  why,  inclined  to  believe  so, 
and  to  laugh  at  those  that  do  not: 

II.  The  second  imputation  \ssingularity;  the  af- 
fectation whereof  is  unbecoming  a  wise  man.  To 
this  charge  I  answer, 

1.  If  by  religion  be  meant  the  belief  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  religion,  that  there  is  a  God,  and  a  provi- 
dence, that  our  souls  are  immortal,  and  that  there 
are  rewards  to  be  expected  after  this  life ;  these  are 
so  far  from  being  singular  opinions,  that  they  are 
and  always  have  been  the  general  opinion  of  man- 
kind, even  of  the  most  barbarous  nations.  Inso- 
much, that  the  histories  of  ancient  times  do  hardly 
furnish  us  with  the  names  of  above  five  or  six  per- 
sons who  denied  a  God.  And  Lucretius  acknow- 
ledgeth  that  Epicurus  was  the  first  who  did  oppose 
those  great  foundations  of  religion,  the  providence 
of  God,  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  Primum 
Grains  homo,  &c.  meaning  Epicurus. 

2.  If  by  religion  be  meant  a  living  up  to  those 
principles,  that  is,  to  act  conformably  to  our  best 
reason  and  understanding,  and  to  live  as  it  does  be- 
come  those  who  do  believe  a  God  and  a  future  state ; 


377 

this  is  acknowledged,  even  by  those  who  live  other- 
wise, to  be  the  part  of  every  wise  man  ;  and  the  con- 
trary to  be  the  very  madness  of  folly,  and  height  of 
distraction ;  nothing  being  more  ordinary  than  for  men 
who  live  wickedly  to  acknowledge  that  they  ought 
to  do  otherwise. 

3.  Though  according  to  the  common  course  and 
practice  of  the  world  it  be  somewhat  singular  for 
men  truly  and  thoroughly  to  live  up  to  the  princi- 
ples of  their  religion,  yet  singularity  in  this  matter  is 
so  far  from  being  a  reflection  upon  any  man's  pru- 
dence, that  it  is  a  singular  commendation  of  it.  In 
two  cases  singularity  is  very  commendable. 

1.  When  there  is  a  necessity  of  it  in  order  to  a 
man's  greatest  interest  and  happiness.  I  think  it  to 
be  a  reasonable  account  for  any  man  to  give  why  he 
does  not  live  as  the  greatest  part  of  the  world  do, 
that  he  has  no  mind  to  die  as  they  do,  and  to  perish 
with  them  ;  he  is  not  disposed  to  be  a  fool,  and  to 
be  miserable  for  company  ;  he  has  no  inclination  to 
have  his  last  end  like  theirs  who  know  not  God,  and 
obey  not  the  gospel  of  his  Son,  and  shall  be  punish- 
ed with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power. 

2.  It  is  very  commendable  to  be  singular  in  any 
excellency,  and  I  have  shewn  that  religion  is  the 
greatest  excellency  :  to  be  singular  in  any  thing  that 
is  wise,  and  worthy,  and  excellent,  is  not  a  dispa- 
ragement, but  a  praise  :  every  man  would  choose  to 
be  thus  singular. 

III.  The  third  imputation  is,  that  religion  is  a 
foolish  bargain  ;  because,  they  who  are  religious  ha- 
zard the  parting  with  a  present  and  certain  happi- 

vol.  i.  2  G 


378 

ness,  for  that  which  is  future  and  uncertain.  To 
this  I  answer, 

J,  Let  it  be  granted,  that  the  assurance  which  we 
have  of  future  rewards  falls  short  of  the  evidence 
of  sense.  For  I  doubt  not,  but  that  saying  of  our 
Saviour,  "  Blessed  is  he  who  hath  believed,  and  not 
seen ;"  and  those  expressions  of  the  apostle,  "  we 
walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight,"  and  "  faith  is  the  evi- 
dence of  things  not  seen,"  are  intended  by  way  of 
abatement  and  diminution  to  the  evidence  of  faith, 
and  do  signify,  that  the  report  and  testimony  of 
others  is  not  so  great  evidence  as  that  of  our  own 
senses  ;  and  though  we  have  sufficient  assurance  of 
another  state,  yet  no  man  can  think  we  have  so  great 
evidence  as  if  we  ourselves  had  been  in  the  other 
world,  and  seen  how  all  things  are  there. 

2.  We  have  sufficient  assurance  of  these  things, 
and  such  as  may  beget  in  us  a  well-grounded  confi- 
dence, and  free  us  from  all  doubts  of  the  contrary, 
and  persuade  a  reasonable  man  to  venture  his  great- 
est interests  in  this  world  upon  the  security  that  he 
hath  of  another :  for, 

1.  We  have  as  much  assurance  of  these  things  as 
things  future  and  at  a  distance  are  capable  of,  and  he 
is  a  very  unreasonable  man  that  would  desire  more  : 
future  and  invisible  things  are  not  capable  of  the 
evidence  of  sense ;  but  we  have  the  greatest  rational 
evidence  for  them,  and  in  this  every  reasonable  man 
ought  to  rest  satisfied. 

2.  We  have  as  much  as  is  abundantly  sufficient 
to  justify  every  man's  discretion,  who,  for  the  great 
and  eternal  things  of  another  world,  hazards  or  parts 
with  the  poor  and  transitory  things  of  this  life.  And 


379 


for  the  clearing*  of  this  it  will  be  worth  our  consi- 
dering, that  the  greatest  affairs  of  this  world,  and  the 
most  important  concernments  of  this  life,  are  all 
conducted  only  by  moral  demonstrations.  Men 
every  day  venture  their  lives  and  estates  only  upon 
moral  assurance.  For  instance,  men  who  never 
were  at  the  East  or  West  Indies,  or  in  Turkey  or 
Spain,  yet  do  venture  their  whole  estate  in  traffic 
thither,  though  they  have  no  mathematical  demon- 
stration, but  only  moral  assurance,  that  there  are 
such  places.  Nay,  which  is  more,  men  every  day 
eat  and  drink,  though  I  think  no  man  can  demon- 
strate out  of  Euclid  or  Apollonius,  that  his  baker, 
brewer,  or  cook,  have  not  conveyed  poison  into  his 
meat  or  drink.  And  that  man,  that  would  be  so 
wise  and  cautious,  as  not  to  eat  or  drink  until  he 
could  demonstrate  this  to  himself,  I  know  no  other 
remedy  for  himT  but,  that  in  great  gravity  and  wis* 
dom,  he  must  die  for  fear  of  death.  And  for  any 
man  to  urge  that,  though  men  in  temporal  affairs 
proceed  upon  moral  assurance,  yet  there  is  greater 
assurance  required  to  make  men  seek  heaven  and 
avoid  hell,  seems  to  me  to  be  highly  unreasonable. 
For  such  an  assurance  of  things  as  will  make  men 
circumspect  and  careful  to  avoid  a  lesser  danger, 
ought  in  all  reason  to  awaken  men  much  more  to 
the  avoiding  of  a  greater  ;  such  an  assurance  as  will 
sharpen  men's  desires  and  quicken  their  endeavours 
for  the  obtaining  of  a  lesser  good,  ought  in  all  reason 
to  animate  men  more  powerfully,  and  to  inspire  them 
with  a  greater  vigour  and  industry  in  the  pursuit  of 
that  which  is  infinitely  greater.  For  why  the  same 
assurance  should  not  operate  as  well  in  a  great  dan- 
ger as  in  a  less,  in  a  great  good  as  in  a  small  and  in- 

2g  2 


380 


considerable  one,  I  can  see  no  reason  ;  unless  m  en 
will  say,  that  the  greatness  of  an  evil  danger  is  an 
encouragement  to  men  to  run  upon  it,  and  that  the 
greatness  of  any  good  and  happiness  ought  in  reason 
to  dishearten  men  from  the  pursuit  of  it. 

And  now  I  think  I  may  with  reason  intreat  such 
as  are  atheistically  inclined,  to  consider  these  things 
seriously  and  impartially ;  and  if  there  be  weight  in 
these  considerations,  which  I  have  offered  to  them 
to  sway  with  reasonable  men,  I  would  beg  of  such, 
that  they  would  not  suffer  themselves  to  be  biassed 
by  prejudice  or  passion,  or  the  interest  of  any  lust 
or  worldly  advantage,  to  a  contrary  persuasion. 

First,  I  would  intreat  them  seriously  and  dili- 
gently to  consider  these  things,  because  they  are  of 
so  great  moment  and  concernment  to  every  man.  If 
any  thing  in  the  world  deserve  our  serious  study  and 
consideration,  these  principles  of  religion  do.  For 
what  can  import  us  more  to  be  satisfied  in,  than  whe- 
ther there  be  a  God  or  not?  Whether  our  souls 
shall  perish  with  our  bodies,  or  be  immortal  and 
shall  continue  for  ever?  And,  if  so,  whether  in  that 
eternal  state,  which  remains  for  men  after  this  life, 
they  shall  not  be  happy  or  miserable  for  ever,  ac- 
cording as  they  have  demeaned  themselves  in  this 
world?  If  these  things  be  so,  they  are  of  infinite  con- 
sequence to  us  ;  and  therefore  it  highly  concerns  us 
to  inquire  diligently  about  them,  and  to  satisfy  our 
minds  concerning  them  one  way  or  other.  For  these 
are  not  matters  to  be  slightly  and  superficially 
thought  upon,  much  less  (as  the  way  of  atheistical 
men  is)  to  be  played  and  jested  withal.  There  is  no 
greater  argument  of  a  lightand  inconsiderate  person, 
than  profanely  to  scoff  at  religion.   It  is  a  sign  that 


381 


that  man  hath  no  regard  to  himself,  and  that  he  is  not 
touched  with  a  sense  of  his  own  interest,  who  loves 
to  be  jesting  with  edged  tools,  and  to  play  with 
life  and  death.  This  is  the  very  madman  that  Solo- 
mon speaks  of,  "  who  casteth  firebrands, 

_      ,  ,         .  ,  _     Prov.  xxvi.  18. 

arrows,  and  death,  and  saith,  Am  I 
not  in  sport  ?"  To  examine  severely  and  debate  se- 
riously the  principles  of  religion,  is  a  thing  worthy 
of  a  wise  man;  but  if  any  man  shall  turn  religion  into 
raillery,  and  think  to  confute  it  by  two  or  three  bold 
jests,  this  man  doth  not  render  religion,  but  himself, 
ridiculous,  in  the  opinion  of  all  considerate  men  ;  be- 
cause he  sports  with  his  own  life.  If  the  principles 
of  religion  were  doubtful  and  uncertain,  yet  they  con- 
cern us  so  nearly  that  we  ought  to  be  serious  in  the 
examination  of  them.  And  though  they  were  ne- 
ver so  clear  and  evident,  yet  they  may  be  made 
ridiculous  by  vain  and  frothy  men  ;  as  the  gravest 
and  wisest  person  in  the  world  may  be  abused  by 
being  put  into  a  fool's  coat,  and  the  most  noble  and 
excellent  poem  may  be  debased  and  made  vile  by 
being  turned  into  burlesque.  But  of  this  I  shall 
have  occasion  to  speak  more  largely  in  my  next  dis- 
course. 

So  that  it  concerns  every  man,  that  would  not 
trifle  away  his  soul,  and  fool  himself  into  irrecovera- 
ble misery,  with  the  greatest  seriousness  to  inquire 
into  these  matters,  whether  they  be  so  or  not,  and  pa- 
tiently to  consider  the  arguments  which  are  brought 
for  them.  For  many  have  miscarried  about  these 
things,  not  because  there  is  not  reason  and  evidence 
enough  for  them,  but  because  they  have  not  had  pa- 
tience enough  to  consider  them. 

Secondly,  Consider  these  things  impartially.  All 


382 


wicked  men  are  of  a  party  against  religion.  Some 
lust  or  interest  engageth  them  against  it.  Hence 
it  comes  to  pass  that  they  are  apt  to  slight  the  strong- 
est arguments  that  can  be  brought  for  it,  and  to  cry 
up  very  weak  ones  against  it.  Men  do  generally  and 
without  difficulty  assent  to  mathematical  truths,  be- 
cause it  is  nobody's  interest  to  deny  them  ;  but  men 
are  slow  to  believe  moral  and  Divine  truths,  because 
by  their  lusts  and  interest  they  are  prejudiced  against 
them.  And  therefore  you  may  observe,  that  the 
more  virtuously  any  man  lives,  and  the  less  he  is  en- 
slaved to  any  lust,  the  more  ready  he  is  to  entertain 
the  principles  of  religion. 

Therefore  when  you  are  examining  these  matters, 
do  nottakeinto  consideration  any  sensual  or  worldly 
interest,  but  deal  clearly  and  impartially  with  your- 
selves. Let  not  temporal  and  little  advantages  sway 
you  against  a  greater  and  more  durable  interest. 
Think  thus  with  yourselves,  that  you  have  not  the 
making  of  things  true  or  false,  but  that  the  truth  and 
existence  of  things  is  already  fixed  and  settled,  and 
that  the  principles  of  religion  are  already  either  de- 
terminately  true  or  false  before  you  think  of  them ; 
either  there  is  a  God,  or  there  is  not ;  either  your 
souls  are  immortal,  or  they  are  not :  one  of  these  is 
certain  and  necessary,  and  is  not  now  to  be  altered; 
the  truth  of  things  will  not  comply  with  our  con- 
ceits, and  bend  itself  to  our  interests.  Therefore  do 
not  think  what  you  would  have  to  be,  but  consider 
impartially  what  is,  and  (if  it  be)  will  be,  whether  you 
will  or  no.  Do  not  reason  thus:  I  would  fain  be 
wicked,  and  therefore  it  is  my  interest  that  there 
should  be  no  God,  nor  no  life  after  this ;  and  there- 
fore I  will  endeavour  to  prove  that  there  is  no  such 


383 


thing,  and  will  shew  all  the  favour  I  can  to  that  side 
of  the  question  ;  I  will  bend  my  understanding  and 
wit  to  strengthen  the  negative,  and  will  study  to 
make  it  as  true  as  I  can.  This  is  fond,  because  it 
is  the  way  to  cheat  thyself ;  and  that  we  may  do  as 
often  as  we  please,  but  the  nature  of  things  will  not 
be  imposed  upon.  If  then  thou  be  as  wise  as  thou 
oughtest  to  be,  thou  wilt  reason  thus  with  thyself: — 
my  highest  interest  is  not  to  be  deceived  about  these 
matters;  therefore,  setting  aside  all  other  considera- 
tions, I  will  endeavour  to  know  the  truth,  and  yield 
to  that. 

And  uow  it  is  time  to  draw  towards  a  conclusion 
of  this  long  discourse.  And  that  which  I  have  all 
this  while  been  endeavouring  to  convince  men  of,  and 
to  persuade  them  to,  is  no  other  but  what  God  him- 
self doth  particularly  recommend  to  us  as  proper  for 
human  consideration  :  "  Unto  man  he  said,  Behold 
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wisdom,  and  to  depart 
from  evil  is  understanding."  Whoever  pretends  to 
reason,  and  calls  himself  a  man,  is  obliged  to  ac- 
knowledge God,  and  to  demean  himself  religiously 
towards  him.  For  God  is  to  the  understanding  of 
man  as  the  light  of  the  sun  is  to  our  eyes — the  first 
and  the  plainest  and  the  most  glorious  object  of  it. 
He  fills  heaven  and  earth,  and  every  thing  in  them 
does  represent  him  to  us.  Which  way  soever  we 
turn  ourselves,  we  are  encountered  with  clear  evi- 
dences and  sensible  demonstrations  of  a  Deity  :  for 
(as  the  apostle  reasons)  "The  invisible  things  of  Him 
from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen, 
being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even 
his  eternal  power  and  godhead;  uq  T6  elvm  avrovg  ava- 
TroAoyriTovc,  so  that  they  are  without  excuse;"  iwi.  20. 


384 


that  is,  those  men  that  know  not  God  have  no  apo- 
logy to  make  for  themselves.  Or  if  men  do  know 
and  believe  that  there  is  such  a  being  as  God,  not  to 
consider  the  proper  consequences  of  such  a  prin- 
ciple, not  to  demean  ourselves  towards  him  as  be- 
comes our  relation  to  him  and  dependance  upon 
him,  and  the  duty  which  we  naturally  owe  him,  this 
is  great  stupidity  and  inconsiderateness. 

And  yet  he  that  considers  the  lives  and  actions  of 
the  greatest  part  of  men  would  verily  think,  that  they 
understood  nothing  of  all  this.  Therefore  the  Scrip- 
ture represents  wicked  men  as  without  understand- 
ing. "  It  is  a  nation  void  of  counsel,  neither  is  there 
D  t  .  ..  28  any  understanding  in  them  :"  and,  else- 
where, "  have  all  the  workers  of  iniquity 

psai.  xiv.  4.  n0  knowledge  ?"  Not  that  they  are  desti- 
tute of  the  natural  faculty  of  understanding,  but  they 
do  not  use  it  as  they  ought;  they  are  not  blind,  but 
they  wink,  they  detain  the  truth  of  God  in  un- 
righteousness, and  though  they  know  God,  yet  they 
do  not  glorify  him  as  God,  nor  suffer  the  appre- 
hensions of  him  to  have  a  due  influence  upon  their 
hearts  and  lives. 

Men  generally  stand  very  much  upon  the  credit 
and  reputation  of  their  understandings,  and  of  all 
things  in  the  world  hate  to  be  accounted  fools,  be- 
cause it  is  so  great  a  reproach.  The  best  way  to 
avoid  this  imputation,  and  to  bring  off  the  credit  of 
our  understandings,  is  to  be  truly  religious,  to  fear 
the  Lord,  and  to  depart  from  evil.  For  certainly 
there  is  no  such  imprudent  person  as  he  that  neglects 
God  and  his  soul,  and  is  careless  and  slothful  about 
his  everlasting  concernments ;  because  this  man 
acts  contrary  to  his  truest  reason  and  best  interest ; 


385 


he  neglects  his  own  safety,  and  is  active  to  procure 
his  own  ruin;  he  flies  from  happiness  and  runs  away 
from  it  as  fast  as  he  can,  but  pursues  misery,  and 
makes  haste  to  be  undone.  Hence  it  is  that  Solomon 
does  all  along  in  the  Proverbs  give  the  title  of  fool 
to  a  wicked  man,  as  if  it  were  his  proper  name  and 
the  fittest  character  of  him,  because  he  is  so  emi- 
nently such :  there  is  no  fool  to  the  sinner,  who  every 
moment  ventures  his  soul,  and  lays  his  everlasting 
interest  at  the  stake.  Every  time  a  man  provokes 
God  he  does  the  greatest  mischief  to  himself  that 
can  be  imagined.  A  madman  that  cuts  himself,  and 
tears  his  own  flesh,  and  dashes  his  head  against  the 
stones,  does  not  act  so  unreasonably  as  he,  because 
he  is  not  so  sensible  of  what  he  does.  "Wickedness 
is  a  kind  of  voluntary  phrensy  and  a  chosen  distrac- 
tion, and  every  sinner  does  wilder  and  more  extra- 
vagant things  than  any  man  can  do  that  is  crazed 
and  out  of  his  wits,  only  with  this  sad  difference, 
that  he  knows  better  what  he  does.  For  to  them 
who  believe  another  life  after  this,  an  eternal  state  of 
happiness  or  misery  in  another  world,  (which  is  but  a 
reasonable  postulatumor  demand  among  Christians) 
there  is  nothing  in  mathematics  more  demonstrable 
than  the  folly  of  w  icked  men  ;  for  it  is  not  a  clearer 
and  more  evident  principle,  that  the  whole  is  greater 
than  apart,  than  that  eternity,  and  the  concernments 
of  it,  are  to  be  preferred  before  time. 

I  will  therefore  put  the  matter  into  a  temporal 
case,  that  wicked  men  who  understand  anv  thine  of 
the  rules  and  principles  of  worldly  w  isdom  may  see 
the  imprudence  of  an  irreligious  and  sinful  course, 
and  be  convinced  that  this  their  way  is  their  folly, 
even  themselves  being  judges. 


386 


Is  that  man  wise,  as  to  his  body  and  his  health, 
who  only  clothes  his  hands,  but  leaves  his  whole 
body  naked  ?  who  provides  only  against  the  tooth- 
ache, and  neglects  whole  troops  of  mortal  diseases 
that  are  ready  to  rush  in  upon  him  ?  Just  thus  does 
he  who  takes  care  only  for  this  vile  body,  but  neglects 
his  precious  and  immortal  soul ;  who  is  very  soli- 
citous to  prevent  small  and  temporal  inconveniences, 
but  takes  no  care  to  escape  the  damnation  of  hell. 

Is  he  a  prudent  man,  as  to  his  temporal  estate, 
that  lays  designs  only  for  a  day,  without  any  pros- 
pect to,  or  provision  for,  the  remaining  part  of  his 
life?  even  so  does  he  that  provides  for  the  short  time 
of  his  life,  but  takes  no  care  for  all  eternity ;  which 
is  to  be  wise  for  a  moment,  but  a  fool  for  ever,  and 
to  act  as  untowardly  and  as  crossly  to  the  reason  of 
things  as  can  be  imagined — to  regard  time  as  if  it 
were  eternity,  and  to  neglect  eternity  as  if  it  were 
but  a  short  time. 

Do  we  count  him  a  wise  man,  who  is  wise  in  any 
thing  but  in  his  own  proper  profession  and  employ- 
ment, wise  for  every  body  but  himself?  who  is  in- 
genious to  contrive  his  own  misery  and  to  do  him- 
self a  mischief — but  is  dull  and  stupid  as  to  the  de- 
signing of  any  real  benefit  and  advantage  to  himself? 
Such  a  one  is  he,  who  is  ingenious  in  his  calling, 
but  a  bad  Christian  ;  for  Christianity  is  more  our 
proper  calling  and  profession  than  the  very  trades 
we  live  upon  :  and  such  is  every  sinner,  who  is  "  wise 
to  do  evil,  but  to  do  good  hath  no  understanding." 

Is  it  wisdom  in  any  man  to  neglect  and  disoblige 
Him,  who  is  his  best  friend,  and  can  be  his  sorest 
enemy  ?  or  with  one  weak  troop  to  go  out  to  meet 
him  that  comes  against  him  with  thousands  of  thou- 


387 


sands  ?  to  fly  a  small  danger  and  run  upon  a  greater  ? 
Thus  does  every  wicked  man  that  neglects  and  con- 
temns God,  who  can  save  or  destroy  him;  who 
strives  with  his  Maker  and  provoketh  the  Lord  to 
jealousy,  and  with  the  small  and  inconsiderable 
forces  of  a  man  takes  the  field  against  the  mighty 
God,  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  who  fears  them  that  can 
kill  the  body,  but  after  that  have  no  more  that  they 
can  do ;  but  fears  not  him,  who  after  he  hath  killed, 
can  destroy  both  body  and  soul  in  hell ;  and  thus 
does  he  who,  for  fear  of  any  thing  in  this  world,  ven- 
tures to  displease  God;  for,  in  sodoing,  herunsaway 
from  men,  and  falls  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God : 
he  flies  from  a  temporal  danger,  and  leaps  into  hell. 

Is  not  he  an  imprudent  man,  who,  in  matters  of 
greatest  moment  and  concernment,  neglects  oppor- 
tunities never  to  be  retrieved  ;  who,  standing  upon 
the  shore,  and  seeing  the  tide  making  haste  towards 
him  apace,  and  that  he  hath  but  a  few  minutes  to 
save  himself,  yet  will  lay  himself  to  sleep  there  till 
the  cruel  sea  rush  in  upon  him  and  overwhelm  him  ? 
And  is  he  any  better,  who  trifles  away  this  day  of 
God's  grace  and  patience,  and  foolishly  adjourns 
the  necessary  work  of  repentance  and  the  weighty 
business  of  religion  to  a  dying  hour? 

And,  to  put  an  end  to  these  questions,  is  he  wise, 
who  hopes  to  attain  the  end  without  the  means,  nay, 
by  means  that  are  quite  contrary  to  it  ?  such  is  every 
wicked  man,  who  hopes  to  be  blessed  hereafter  with- 
out being  holy  here,  and  to  be  happy,  that  is,  to  find 
a  pleasure  in  the  enjoyment  of  God,  and  in  the  com- 
pany of  holy  spirits,  by  rendering  himself  as  unsuit- 
able and  unlike  to  them  as  he  can. 

Wouldst  thou  then  be  truly  wise  ?  be  wise  for 


388 

thyself,  wise  for  thy  soul,  wise  for  eternity.  Resolve 
upon  a  religious  course  of  life.  "  Fear  God,  and 
depart  from  evil."  Look  beyond  things  present  and 
sensible,  unto  things  which  are  not  seen  and  are 
eternal ;  labour  to  secure  the  great  interests  of  an- 
other world,  and  refer  all  the  actions  of  this  short 
and  dying  life  to  that  state  which  will  shortly  begin, 
but  never  have  an  end  :  and  this  will  approve  itself 
to  be  wisdom  at  the  last,  whatever  the  world  judge 
of  it  now.  For  not  that  which  is  approved  of  men 
now,  but  what  shall  finally  be  approved  by  God,  is 
true  wisdom  :  that  which  is  esteemed  so  by  him, 
who  is  the  fountain  and  original  of  all  wisdom,  the 
first  rule  and  measure,  the  best  and  most  competent 
judge  of  it. 

I  deny  not  but  those  that  are  wicked  and  neglect 
religion  may  think  themselves  wise,  and  may  enjoy 
this  their  delusion  for  a  while :  but  there  is  a  time 
coming  when  the  most  profane  and  atheistical, 
who  now  account  it  a  piece  of  gallantry,  and  an  ar- 
gument of  a  great  spirit,  and  of  a  more  than  common 
wit  and  understanding,  to  slight  God  and  to  baffle 
religion,  and  to  level  all  the  discourses  of  another 
world  with  the  poetical  descriptions  of  the  fairy- 
land ;  I  say,  there  is  a  day  coming,  when  all  those 
witty  fools  shall  be  unhappily  undeceived,  and,  not 
being  able  to  enjoy  their  delusion  any  longer,  shall 
call  themselves  fools  for  ever. 

But  why  should  I  use  so  much  importunity  to 
persuade  men  to  that  which  is  so  excellent,  so  useful, 
and  so  necessary?  The  thing  itself  hath  allure- 
ments in  it  beyond  all  arguments  :  for  if  religion  be 
the  best  knowledge  and  wisdom,  I  cannot  offer  any 
thing  beyond  this  to  your  understandings  to  raise 


389 

your  esteem  of  it — I  can  present  nothing  beyond  this 
to  your  affections  to  excite  your  love  and  desire. 
All  that  can  be  done  is  to  set  the  thing  before  men, 
and  to  offer  it  to  their  choice  ;  and,  if  men's  natural 
desire  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  and  happiness,  will 
not  persuade  them  to  be  religious,  it  is  in  vain  to  use 
arguments ;  if  the  sight  of  these  beauties  will  not 
charm  men's  affections,  it  is  to  no  purpose  to  go  about 
to  compel  a  liking,  and  to  urge  and  push  forward  a 
match,  to  the  making  whereof  consent  is  necessary. 
Religion  is  matter  of  our  freest  choice,  and  if  men 
will  obstinately  and  wilfully  set  themselves  against  it 
there  is  no  remedy.  "  Pertinacise  nullum  remedium 
posuit  Deus,"  God  has  provided  no  remedy  for  the 
obstinacy  of  men  : — but  if  they  will  choose  to  be 
fools,  and  to  be  miserable,  he  will  leave  them  to  in- 
herit their  own  choice,  and  to  enjoy  the  portion  of 
sinners. 


390 


SERMON  II. 

THE  FOLLY  OF  SCOFFING  AT  RELIGION. 

Knowing  this  first ,  that  there  shall  come  in  the  last 
days  scoffers,  walking  after  their  own  lusts. — 
2  Pet.  iii.  3. 

Knowing  this  first.  In  the  verse  before,  the  apostle 
was  speaking  of  a  famous  prophecy,  before  the  ac- 
complishment of  which  this  sort  of  men  whom  he 
calls  scoffers  should  come.  "  That  ye  may  be  mind- 
ful of  the  words  which  were  spoken  before  by  the 
holy  prophets,  and  of  the  commandment  of  us  the 
apostles  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour;  knowing  this 
first,  that  there  shall  come  in  the  last  days  scof- 
fers," &c. 

The  prophecy  here  spoken  of  is  probably  that 
famous  prediction  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 
which  is  in  the  prophet  Daniel,  and  before  the  ful- 
filling whereof,   our  Saviour  expressly  tells  us, 

"  false  prophets  should  arise,  and  de- 
Mat,  xxiv.  11.        .  ., 

ceive  many. 

Now  the  scoffers  here  spoken  of  are  the  false 
teachers  whom  the  apostle  had  been  describing  all 
along  in  the  foregoing  chapter ;  "  there  were  false 
prophets  also  among  the  people,  even  as  there  shall 
be  false  teachers  among  you."  These,  he  tells  us, 
should  proceed  to  that  height  of  impiety  as  to  scoff 
at  the  principles  of  religion,  and  to  deride  the  ex- 


391 


pectation  of  a  future  judgment.  "  In  the  last  days 
shall  come  scoffers,  walking  after  their  own  lusts, 
and  saying,  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming?" 

In  speaking  to  these  words,  I  shall  do  these  three 
things. 

1.  Consider  the  nature  of  the  sin  here  mentioned, 
which  is  scoffing  at  religion. 

2.  The  character  of  the  persons  that  are  charged 
with  the  guilt  of  this  sin — they  are  said  to  walk  after 
their  own  lusts. 

3.  I  shall  represent  to  you  the  heinousness  and 
the  aggravations  of  this  vice. 

I.  First,  We  will  consider  the  nature  of  the  sin 
here  mentioned,  which  is  scoffing  at  religion.  "  There 
shall  come  scoffers."  These  it  seems  were  a  sort  of 
people  that  derided  our  Saviour's  prediction  of  his 
coming  to  judge  the  world.  So  the  apostle  tells  us 
in  the  next  words,  that  they  said,  "  Where  is  the 
promise  of  his  coming  ?"  2  Thes.  ii.  2. 

In  those  times  there  was  a  common  persua- 
sion among  Christians,  "  that  the  day  of  the  Lord 
was  at  hand,"  as  the  apostle  elsewhere  tells  us. 
Now  this,  it  is  probable,  these  scoffers  twitted  the 
Christians  withal :  and  because  Christ  did  not  come 
when  some  looked  for  him,  they  concluded  he  would 
not  come  at  all.  Upon  this  they  derided  the  Christ- 
ians as  enduring  persecution  in  a  vain  expectation 
of  that  which  was  never  likely  to  happen.  They 
saw  all  things  continue  as  they  were  from  the  be- 
ginning of  the  world,  notwithstanding  the  apprehen- 
sions of  Christians  concerningthe  approaching  end  of 
it ;  4<  For  since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  con- 
tinue as  they  were,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world." 
"  Since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,"  d<j>'     which  may  either 


392 

be  rendered  from  the  time,  or  else  (which  seems 
more  agreeable  to  the  atheistical  discourse  of  these 
men)  saving  or  except  that  the  fathers  are  fallen 
asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were.  Saving 
that  men  die,  and  one  generation  succeeds  another, 
they  saw  no  change  or  alteration.  They  looked 
upon  all  things  as  going  on  in  a  constant  course ; 
one  generation  of  men  passed  away,  and  another 
came  in  the  room  of  it,  but  the  world  remained  still 
as  it  was.  And  thus,  for  aught  they  knew,  things 
might  hold  on  for  ever.  So  that  the  principles  of 
these  men  seem  to  be  much  the  same  with  those  of 
the  Epicureans,  who  denied  the  providence  of  God 
and  the  immortality  of  men's  souls ;  and  conse- 
quently a  future  judgment,  which  should  sentence 
men  to  rewards  and  punishments  in  another  world. 
These  great  and  fundamental  principles  of  all  reli- 
gion they  derided  as  the  fancies  and  dreams  of  a 
company  of  melancholy  men,  who  were  weary  of  the 
world,  and  pleased  themselves  with  vain  conceits  of 
happiness  and  ease  in  another  life.  But  as  for  them, 
they  believed  none  of  these  things ;  and  therefore 
gave  all  manner  of  licence  and  indulgence  to  their 
lusts. 

But  this  belongs  to  the  second  thing  I  propounded 
to  speak  to,  namely, 

II.  The  character  which  is  here  given  of  these 
scoffers  ;  they  are  said  to  walk  after  their  own  lusts. 
And  no  wonder,  if,  when  they  denied  a  future  judg- 
ment, they  gave  up  themselves  to  all  manner  of  sen- 
suality. 

St.  Jude,  in  his  Epistle,  gives  much  the  same  cha- 
racter of  them  that  St.  Peter  here  does,  ver.  18,  19. 
"  There  shall  come  in  the  last  days  mockers,  walk- 


393 

ing  after  their  own  ungodly  lusts,  sensual,  not  having 
the  Spirit.''  So  that  we  see  what  kind  of  persons  they 
are  who  profanely  scoff  at  religion,  men  of  sensual 
spirits  and  of  licentious  lives.  For  this  character, 
which  the  apostle  here  gives  of  the  scoffers  of  that 
age,  was  not  an  accidental  thing  which  happened  to 
those  persons,  but  is  the  constant  character  of  them 
who  deride  religion,  and  flows  from  the  very  temper 
and  disposition  of  those  who  are  guilty  of  this  im- 
piety ;  it  is  both  the  usual  preparation  to  it,  and  the 
natural  consequence  of  it. 

To  deride  God  and  religion  is  the  highest  kind  of 
impiety.  And  men  do  not  usually  arrive  to  this 
degree  of  wickedness  at  first,  but  they  come  to  it  by 
several  steps,  The  Psalmist  very  elegantly  ex- 
pressed to  us  the  several  gradations  by  which  men 
at  last  come  to  this  horrid  degree  of  impiety : 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  that  walketh  not  Psalm  i.  1. 
in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly,  nor  standeth  in  the 
way  of  sinners,  nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful.*' 
Men  are  usually  first  corrupted  by  bad  counsel  and 
company,  which  is  called  "  walking  in  the  counsel  of 
the  ungodly;"  next  they  habituate  themselves  to  their 
vicious  practices,  which  is  standing  in  the  way  of 
sinners,  and  then  at  last  they  take  up  and  settle  in 
a  contempt  of  all  religion,  which  is  called  "  sitting 
in  the  seat  of  the  scornful." 

For  when  men  once  indulge  themselves  in  wicked 
courses,  the  vicious  inclinations  of  their  minds  sway 
their  understandings,  and  make  them  apt  to  dis- 
believe those  truths  which  contradict  their  lusts. 
Every  inordinate  lust  and  passion  is  a  false  bias 
upon  men's  understandings  which  naturally  draws 
toward  atheism  :  and  when  men's  judgments  are 
once  biassed  they  do  not  believe  according  to  the 

vol.  i.  2  H 


394 

evidence  of  things,  but  according  to  their  humour 
and  their  interest.  For  when  men  live  as  if  there 
were  no  God  it  becomes  expedient  for  them  that 
there  should  be  none :  and  then  they  endeavour  to 
persuade  themselves  so,  and  will  be  glad  to  find 
arguments  to  fortify  themselves  in  this  persuasion. 
Men  of  dissolute  lives  cry  down  religion,  because 
they  would  not  be  under  the  restraints  of  it ;  they 
are  loth  to  be  tied  up  by  the  strict  laws  and  rules  of 
it :  it  is  their  interest  more  than  any  reason  they  have 
against  it  which  makes  them  despise  it;  they  hate  it 
because  they  are  reproved  by  it.  So  our  Saviour 
John  in.  te^s  us>  tnat  "  men  l°ve  darkness  rather 
19>  20«  than  light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil ; 
for  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light,  neither 
cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds  should  be  re- 
proved." 

I  remember  it  is  the  saying  of  one,  who  hath  done 
more  by  his  writings  to  debauch  the  age  with  atheis- 
tical principles  than  any  man  that  lives  in  it,  u  that 
when  reason  is  against  a  man,  then  a  man  will  be 
against  reason."  I  am  sure  this  is  the  true  account 
of  such  men's  enmity  to  religion — religion  is  against 
them,  and  therefore  they  set  themselves  against  reli- 
gion. The  principles  of  religion  and  the  doctrines 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  terrible  enemies  to  wick- 
ed men;  they  are  continually  flying  in  their  faces, 
and  galling  their  consciences  :  and  this  is  that  which 
makes  them  kick  against  religion,  and  spurn  at  the 
doctrines  of  that  holy  book.  And  this  may  proba- 
bly be  one  reason  why  many  men,  who  are  observed 
to  be  sufficiently  dull  in  other  matters,  yet  can  talk 
profanely  and  speak  against  religion  with  some  kind 
of  salt  and  smartness,  because  religion  is  the  thing 
that  frets  them;  and  as  in  other  things  so  in  this, 


^395 


vexatio  dat  intellectum,  the  inward  trouble  and  vex- 
ation of  their  minds  gives  them  some  kind  of  wit 
and  sharpness  in  rallying  upon  religion.  Their  con- 
sciences are  galled  by  it,  and  this  makes  them  winch 
and  fling  as  if  they  had  some  mettle.  For  let  men 
pretend  what  they  will,  there  is  no  ease  and  comfort 
of  mind  to  be  had  from  atheistical  principles.  It 
is  found  by  experience,  that  none  are  more  appre- 
hensive of  danger  or  more  fearful  of  death  than  this 
sort  of  men  :  even  when  they  are  in  prosperity  they 
ever  and  anon  feel  many  inward  stings  and  lashes, 
but  when  any  great  affliction  or  calamity  overtakes 
them,  they  are  the  most  poor-spirited  creatures  in 
the  whole  world. 

The  sum  is ;  the  true  reason  why  any  man  is  an 
atheist  is  because  he  is  a  wicked  man.  Religion 
would  curb  him  in  his  lusts,  and  therefore  he  casts 
it  off  and  puts  all  the  scorn  upon  it  he  can.  Besides 
that,  men  think  it  some  kind  of  apology  for  their  vices 
that  they  do  not  act  contrary  to  any  principle  they 
profess:  their  practice  is  agreeable  to  what  they 
pretend  to  believe,  and  so  they  think  to  vindicate 
themselves  and  their  own  practices  by  laughing  at 
those  for  fools  who  believe  any  thing  to  the  con- 
trary. 

III.  The  third  thing  I  propounded  was,  to  repre- 
sent to  you  the  heinousness  and  the  aggravations  of 
this  vice.  And  to  make  this  out  we  will  make  these 
three  suppositions,  which  are  as  many  as  the  thing 
will  bear. 

1.  Suppose  there  were  no  God,  and  that  the  prin- 
ciples of  religion  were  false. 

•2.  Suppose  the  matter  were  doubtful,  and  the 
arguments  equal  on  both  sides. 

3.  Suppose  it  certain  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that 

2  B  2 


396 

the  principles  of  religion  are  true.  Put  the  case  how 
we  will,  I  shall  shew  that  the  humour  is  intolerable, 

1.  Suppose  there  were  no  God,  and  that  the  prin- 
ciples of  religion  were  false.  Not  that  there  is  any 
reason  for  such  a  supposition,  but  only  to  shew  the 
unreasonableness  of  this  humour;  put  the  case  that 
these  men  were  in  the  right,  in  denying  the  principles 
of  religion,  and  that  all  that  they  pretend  were  true  ; 
yet  so  long  as  the  generality  of  mankind  believes  the 
contrary,  it  is  certainly  a  great  rudeness,  or  incivility 
at  least,  to  deride  and  scoff  at  these  things.  Indeed, 
upon  this  supposition,  there  could  be  no  such  thing 
as  sin,  but  yet  it  would  be  a  great  offence  against  the 
laws  of  civil  conversation.  Suppose  then  the  atheist 
were  wiser  than  all  the  world,  and  that  he  did  upon 
good  grounds  know  that  all  mankind,  besides  him- 
self and  two  or  three  more,  were  mistaken  about  the 
matters  of  religion:  yet  if  he  were  either  so  wise,  or 
so  civil  as  he  should  be,  he  would  keep  all  this  to 
himself,  and  not  affront  other  men  about  these  things. 

I  remember  that  that  Jaw  which  God  gave  to  the 
people  of  Israel,  "Thou  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  the 
rulers  of  thy  people  ;"  is  rendered  by  Josephus  in  a 
very  different  sense  :  "  What  other  nations  account 
gods,  let  no  man  blaspheme."  And  this  is  not  so  dif- 
ferent from  the  Hebrew  as  at  first  sight  one  would 
imagine ;  for  the  same  Hebrew  word  signifies  both 
gods  and  rulers.  But  whether  this  be  the  mean- 
ing of  that  law  or  not,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  reason 
in  the  thing.  For  though  every  man  have  a  right  to 
dispute  against  a  false  religion,  and  to  urge  it  with 
all  its  absurd  and  ridiculous  consequences,  as  the 
ancient  fathers  did  in  their  disputes  with  the  hea- 
then: yet  it  is  a  barbarous  incivility  for  any  man 
scm  rilousl y  to  make  sport  with  that  which  others  ac- 


count  religion,  not  with  any  design  to  convince  their 
reason,  but  only  to  provoke  their  rage. 

But  now  the  atheist  can  pretend  no  obligation  of 
conscience  why   he  should  so   much  as  dispute 
against  the  principles  of  religion,  much  less  deride 
them.    He  that  pretends  to  any  religion  may  pre- 
tend conscience  for  opposing  a  contrary  religion  :  but 
he  that  denies  all  religion,  can  pretend  no  conscience 
for  any  thing.    A  man  may  be  obliged  indeed  in  rea- 
son and  common  humanity  to  free  his  neighbour  from 
a  hurtful  error;  but  supposing  there  were  no  God, 
this  notion  of  a  Deity  and  the  principles  of  religion 
have  taken  such  deep  root  in  the  mind  of  man,  that 
either  they  are  not  to  be  extinguished,  or  if  they  be, 
it  wouldbe  no  kindness  to  any  man  to  endeavour  it 
for  him,  because  it  is  not  to  be  done  but  with  so  much 
trouble  and  violence,  that  theremedv  would  be  worse 
than  the  disease. 

For  if  this  notion  of  a  Deity  be  founded  in  a  natu- 
ral fear,  it  is  in  vain  to  attempt  to  expel  it ;  for  what- 
ever violence  may  be  offered  to  nature  by  endeavour- 
ing to  reason  men  into  a  contrary  persuasion,  nature 
will  still  recoil,  and  at  last  return  to  itself,  and  then 
the  fear  will  be  augmented  from  the  apprehension 
of  the  dangerous  consequences  of  such  an  impiety. 
So  that  nothing  can  create  more  trouble  to  a  man 
than  to  endeavour  to  dispossess  him  of  this  conceit, 
because  nature  is  but  irritated  by  the  contest,  and 
the  man's  /ears  will  be  doubled  upon  him. 

But  if  we  suppose  this  apprehension  of  a  Deity  to 
have  no  foundation  in  nature,  but  to  have  had  its 
rise  from  tradition  which  hath  been  confirmed  in 
the  world  by  the  prejudice  of  education,  the  difficul- 
ty of  removing  it  will  almost  be  as  great  as  if  it  were 
natural,  that  which  men  take  i11  by  education  being 


398 

next  to  that  which  is  natural.    And  if  it  could  be 
extinguished,  yet  the  advantage  of  it  will  not  re- 
compense the  trouble  of  the  cure.    For,  except  the 
avoiding  of  persecution  for  religion,  there  is  no  ad- 
vantage that  the  principles  of  atheism,  if  they  could 
be  quietly  settled  in  a  man's  mind,  can  give  him. 
The  advantage  indeed  that  men  make  of  them  is  to 
give  themselves  the  liberty  to  do  what  they  please, 
to  be  more  sensual  and  more  unjust  than  other  men; 
that  is,  they  have  the  privilege  to  surfeit  themselves, 
and  to  be  sick  oftener  than  other  men,  and  to  make 
mankind  their  enemy  by  their  unjust  and  dishonest 
actions,  and  consequently  to  live  more  uneasily  in 
the  world  than  other  men. 

So  that  the  principles  of  religion,  the  belief  of  a 
God,  and  another  life,  by  obliging  men  to  be  vir- 
tuous do  really  promote  their  temporal  happiness. 
And  all  the  privilege  that  atheism  pretends  to  is  to 
let  men  loose  to  vice,  which  is  naturally  attended 
with  temporal  inconveniences.    And  if  this  be  true, 
then  the  atheist  cannot  pretend  this  reason  of  chari- 
ty to  mankind  (which  is  the  only  one  I  can  think  of) 
to  dispute  against  religion,  much  less  to  rally  upon 
it.    For  it  is  plain,  that  it  would  be  no  kindness  to 
any  man  to  be  undeceived  in  these  principles  of  reli- 
gion, supposing  they  were  false  ;  because  the  prin- 
ciples of  religion  are  so  far  from  hindering,  that  they 
promote  a  man's  happiness  even  in  this  world,  and 
as  to  the  other  world  there  can  be  no  inconvenience 
in  the  mistake ;  for  when  a  man  is  not,  it  will  be  no 
trouble  to  him  that  he  was  once  deceived  about  these 
matters. 

And  where  no  obligation  of  conscience  nor  of  rea- 
son can  be  pretended,  there  certainly  the  laws  of 
civility  ought  to  take  place.    Now  men  do  profess 


'399 

to  believe  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  the  commou 
principles  of  religion  are  true,  and  to  have  a  great 
veneration  for  these  things.  Can  there  then  be  a 
greater  insolence,  than  for  a  man  when  he  comes 
into  company  to  rally  and  fall  foul  upon  those  things 
for  which  he  knows  the  company  have  a  reverence  ? 
Can  one  man  offer  a  greater  affront  to  another,  than 
to  expose  to  scorn  him  whom  he  owns  and  declares 
to  be  his  best  friend,  the  patron  of  his  life,  and  the 
greatest  benefactor  he  hath  in  the  world  ?  And  doth 
not  every  man  that  owns  a  God  say  this  of  him  ? 

But  when  the  generality  of  mankind  are  of  the 
same  opinion  the  rudeness  is  still  the  greater.  So 
that  whoever  doth  openly  contemn  God  and  religion 
does  delinquere  in  majestaiem  populi  et  Jiumani  ge- 
neris, he  does  offend  against  the  majesty  of  the 
people,  and  that  reverence  which  is  due  to  the  com- 
mon apprehensions  of  mankind,  whether  they  be 
true  or  not ;  which  is  the  greatest  incivility  that  can 
be  imagined. 

This  is  the  first  consideration,  and  it  is  the  least 
that  I  have  to  urge  in  this  matter  ;  but  yet  I  have 
insisted  the  longer  upon  it,  because  it  is  such  a  one 
as  ought  especially  to  prevail  upon  those  who  I  am 
afraid  are  too  often  guilty  of  this  vice — I  mean  those 
who  are  of  better  breeding,  because  they  pretend  to 
unci  /stand  the  laws  of  behaviour  and  the  decencies 
of  conversation  better  than  other  men. 

2.  Supposing  it  were  doubtful  whether  there  be  a 
God  or  not,  and  whether  the  principles  of  religion 
were  true  or  not,  and  that  the  arguments  were 
equal  on  both  sides  ;  yet  it  would  be  a  great  folly 
to  deride  these  things.  And  here  I  suppose  as 
much  as  the  atheist  can,  with  any  other  colour  of 
reason,  pretend  to.    For  no  man  ever  yet  pretended 


400 


to  demonstrate  that  there  is  no  God,  nor  no  life  after 
this.  For  these  being  pure  negatives  are  capable  of 
no  proof,  unless  a  man  could  shew  them  to  be  plainly 
impossible.  The  utmost  that  is  pretended  is  that 
the  arguments  that  are  brought  for  these  things  are 
not  sufficient  to  convince.  But  if  they  were  only 
probable,  so  long  as  no  arguments  are  produced  to 
the  contrary,  that  cannot  in  reason  be  denied  to  be 
a  great  advantage. 

But  I  will  for  the  present  suppose  the  probabili- 
ties equal  on  both  sides.  And  upon  this  supposition 
I  doubt  not  to  make  it  appear  to  be  a  monstrous  folly 
to  deride  these  things.  Because,  though  the  argu- 
ments on  both  sides  were  equal,  yet  the  danger  and 
hazard  is  infinitely  unequal. 

If  it  prove  true  that  there  is  no  God,  the  religious 
man  may  be  as  happy  in  this  world  as  the  atheist ; 
nay,  the  principles  of  religion  and  virtue  do  in  their 
own  nature   tend  to  make  him  happier :  because 
they  give  satisfaction  to  his  mind,  and  his  conscience 
by  this  means  is  freed  from  many  fearful  goads  and 
twinges  which  the  atheist  feels.    Besides  that,  the 
practice  of  religion  and  virtue  doth  naturally  promote 
our  temporal  felicity.    It  is  more  for  a  man's  health, 
and  more  for  his  reputation,  and  more  for  his  advan- 
tage in  all  other  worldly  respects,  to  lead  a  virtuous 
than  a  vicious  course  of  life.    And  for  the  other 
world,  if  there  be  no  God,  the  case  of  the  religious 
man  and  the  atheist  will  be  alike,  because  they  will 
both  be  extinguished  by  death,  and  insensible  of  any 
farther  happiness  or  misery. 

But  then  if  the  contrary  opinion  should  prove  true, 
that  there  is  a  God  ;  and  that  the  souls  of  men  are 
transmitted  out  of  this  world  into  the  other,  there  to 
receive  the  just  reward  of  their  actions ;  then  it  is 


401 


plain  to  every  man,  at  first  sight,  that  the  case  of  the 
religions  man  and  the  atheist  must  be  vastly  dif- 
ferent ;  then  where  shall  the  wicked  and  the  ungodly 
appear?  And  what  think  we  shall  be  the  portion  of 
those  who  have  affronted  God,  and  derided  his  word, 
and  made  a  mock  of  every  thing  that  is  sacred  and 
religious  ?  What  can  they  expect  but  to  be  rejected 
by  him  whom  they  have  renounced,  and  to  feel  the 
terrible  effects  of  that  power  and  justice  which  they 
have  despised?  So  that  though  the  arguments  on 
both  sides  were  equal,  yet  the  danger  is  not  so.  On 
the  one  side  there  is  none  at  all,  but  it  is  infinite  on 
the  other.  And,  consequently,  it  must  be  a  mon- 
strous folly  for  any  man  to  make  a  mock  of  those 
things  which  he  knows  not  whether  they  be  or  not ; 
and,  if  they  be,  of  all  things  in  the  world  they  are  no 
jesting  matters. 

3.  Suppose  there  be  a  God,  and  that  the  princi- 
ples of  religion  are  true,  then  is  it  not  only  a  heinous 
impiety  but  a  perfect  madness  to  scoff  at  these  things. 
And  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  the  principles  of 
religion  are  true,  I  have  already  in  my  former  dis- 
course endeavoured  to  prove,  both  from  the  things 
which  are  made,  and  from  the  general  consent  of 
mankind  in  these  principles ;  of  which  universal 
consent  no  sufficient  reason  can  be  given  unless  they 
were  true.   And,  supposing  they  are  so,  it  is  not  only 
the  utmost  pitch  of  impiety,  but  the  highest  flight  of 
folly,  that  can  be  imagined,  to  deride  these  things. 
To  be  disobedient  to  the  commands  of  God  is  a 
great  contempt ;  but  to  deny  his  being,  and  to  make 
sport  with  his  word,  and  to  endeavour  to  render  it 
ridiculous,  by  turning  the  wise  and  weighty  sayings 
of  that  holy  book  into  raillery,  is  a  most  direct  affront 
to  the  God  that  is  above.    Thus  the  Psalmist  de- 


402 


scribes  these  atheistical  persons  as  levelling  their 
blasphemies  immediately  against  the  Majesty  of 
heaven.  "  They  set  their  mouth  against  the  heavens, 
and  their  tongue  walketh  through  the  earth  they 
do  mischief  among  men,  but  the  affront  is  immediate- 
ly to  God. 

Besides  that,  this  profane  spirit  is  an  argument  of 
a  most  incorrigible  temper.  The  wise  man  every 
where  speaks  of  the  scorner  as  one  of  the  worst  sort 
of  sinners  and  hardest  to  be  reclaimed,  because  he 
despiseth  instruction  and  mocks  at  all  the  means 
whereby  he  should  be  reformed. 

And  then,  is  it  not  a  most  black  and  horrid  ingra- 
titude thus  to  use  the  Author  of  our  beings  and  the 
patron  of  our  lives  ?  to  make  a  scorn  of  him  that 
made  us,  and  to  live  in  an  open  defiance  of  Him,  in 
whom  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  beings?  But 
this  is  not  all.  As  it  is  a  most  heinous  so  it  is  a 
most  dangerous  impiety,  to  despise  him  that  can  de- 
stroy us,  and  to  oppose  him  who  is  infinitely  more 
powerful  than  we  are.  "  Will  ye  (says  the  apostle) 
provoke  the  Lord  to  jealousy?  are  ye  stronger  than 
he?"  What  Gamaliel  said  to  the  Jews,  in  another 
case,  may  with  a  little  change  be  applied  to  this  sort 
of  men  :  if  there  be  a  God,  and  the  principles  of  reli- 
gion be  true,  "  ye  cannot  overthrow  them  ;  therefore 
refrain  from  speaking  against  these  things,  lest  you 
be  found  fighters  against  God." 

I  will  but  add  one  thing  more,  to  shew  the  folly  of 
this  profane  temper.  And  that  is  this  : — that  as  it  is 
the  greatest  of  all  other  sins,  so  there  is  in  truth  the 
least  temptation  to  it.  When  the  devil  tempts  men 
with  riches  or  honour  to  ruin  themselves,  he  offers 
them  some  kind  of  consideration :  but  the  profane 
person  serves  the  devil  for  nought,  and  sins  only 


403 


for  sin's  sake,  suffers  himself  to  be  tempted  to  the 
greatest  sins,  and  into  the  greatest  dangers,  for  no 
other  reward  but  the  slender  reputation  of  seeming 
to  say  that  wittily  which  no  wise  man  would  say. 
And  what  a  folly  is  this,  for  a  man  to  offend  his 
conscience  to  please  his  humour,  and  only  for  his 
jest  to  lose  two  of  the  best  friends  he  hath  in  the 
world — God  and  his  own  soul  ? 

I  have  done  with  the  three  things  I  propounded 
to  speak  to  upon  this  argument.  And  now  I  beg 
your  patience  to  apply  what  I  have  said  to  these 
three  purposes. 

1.  To  take  men  off  from  this  impious  and  danger- 
ous folly  of  profaneness,  which  by  some  is  miscalled 
wit. 

2.  To  caution  men  not  to  think  the  worse  of  reli- 
gion, because  some  are  so  bold  as  to  despise  and 
deride  it. 

3.  To  persuade  men  to  employ  that  reason  and 
wit  which  God  hath  given  them,  to  better  and  nobler 
purposes,  in  the  service  and  to  the  glory  of  that  God 
who  hath  bestowed  these  gifts  on  men. 

1.  To  take  men  off  from  this  impious  and  dan- 
gerous folly.  I  know  not  how  it  comes  to  pass,  that 
some  men  have  the  fortune  to  be  esteemed  wits  ouiy 
for  jesting  out  of  the  common  road,  and  for  making- 
bold  to  scoff  at  those  things,  which  the  greatest  part 
of  mankind  reverence.  As  if  a  man  should  be  ac- 
counted a  wit  for  reviling  those  in  authority,  which 
is  no  more  an  argument  of  any  man  s  wit  than  it  is  of 
his  discretion.  A  wise  man  would  not  speak  con- 
temptuously of  a  great  prince  though  he  were  out  of 
his  dominions,  because  he  remembers  that  kings  have 
long  hands,  and  that  their  power  and  influence  does 
many  times  reach  a  great  way  farther  than  their  di- 


404 


rect  authority.  But  "  God  is  a  great  king,  and  in  his 
hands  are  all  the  corners  of  the  earth  ;  we  can  go  no 
whither  from  his  Spirit,  nor  can  we  flee  from  his 
presence  wherever  we  are  his  eyes  see  us,  and 
his  right  hand  can  reach  us.  If  men  did  truly  con- 
sult the  interest,  either  of  their  safety  or  reputation, 
they  would  never  exercise  their  wit  in  dangerous 
matters.  Wit  is  a  very  commendable  quality,  but 
then  a  wise  man  should  always  have  the  keeping 
of  it.  It  is  a  sharp  weapon,  as  apt  for  mischief  as 
for  good  purposes,  if  it  be  not  well  managed.  The 
proper  use  of  it  is  to  season  conversation,  to  repre- 
sent w  hat  is  praiseworthy  to  the  greatest  advantage, 
and  to  expose  the  vices  and  follies  of  men,  such 
things  as  are  in  themselves  truly  ridiculous  :  but  if  it 
be  applied  to  the  abuse  of  the  gravest  and  most  se- 
rious matters  it  then  loses  its  commendation.  If 
any  man  think  he  abounds  in  this  quality,  and  hath 
wit  to  spare,  there  is  scope  enough  for  it  within  the 
bounds  of  religion  and  decency  ;  and  when  it  trans- 
gresseth  these  it  degenerates  into  insolence  and  im- 
piety. All  wit,  which  borders  upon  profaneness,  and 
makes  bold  with  those  things  to  which  the  greatest 
reverence  is  due,  deserves  to  be  branded  for  folly. 

And  if  we  would  preserve  ourselves  from  the  in- 
fection of  this  vice  we  must  take  heed  how  we  scoff 
at  religion,  under  any  form,  lest  insensibly  we  derive 
some  contempt  upon  religion  itself.  And  we  must 
likewise  take  heed  how  we  accustom  ourselves  to  a 
slight  and  irreverent  use  of  the  name  of  God,  and  of 
the  phrases  and  expressions  of  the  Holy  Bible,  which 
ought  not  to  be  applied  upon  every  light  occasion. 
Men  will  easily  slide  into  the  highest  degree  of  pro- 
faneness, who  are  not  careful  to  preserve  a  due  rere- 
rence  of  the  great  and  glorious  name  of  God,  and  an 


405 


awful  regard  to  the  Holy  Scriptures.  None  are  so 
nearly  disposed  to  scoffing  at  religion,  as  those  who 
have  accustomed  themselves  to  swear  upon  trifling 
occasions.  For  it  is  just  with  God  to  permit  those 
who  allow  themselves  in  one  degree  of  profaneness  to 
proceed  to  another,  till  at  last  they  come  to  that 
height  of  impiety  as  to  contemn  all  religion. 

2.  Let  no  man  think  the  worse  of  religion,  be- 
cause some  are  so  bold  as  to  despise  and  deride 
it.  For  it  is  no  disparagement  to  any  person  or  thing 
to  be  laughed  at,  but  to  deserve  to  be  so.  The  most 
grave  and  serious  matters  in  the  whole  world  are  li- 
able to  be  abused.  It  is  a  known  saying  of  Epicte- 
tns,  "  that  every  thing  hath  two  handles ;"  by  which 
he  means,  that  there  is  nothing  so  bad  but  a  man 
may  lay  hold  of  something  or  other  about  it  that 
will  afford  matter  of  excuse  and  extenuation,  nor 
nothing  so  excellent  but  a  man  may  fasten  upon 
something  or  other  belonging  to  it  whereby  to  tra- 
duce it.  A  sharp  wit  may  find  something  in  the 
wisest  men  whereby  to  expose  him  to  the  contempt 
of  injudicious  people.  The  gravest  book  that  ever 
was  written  may  be  made  ridiculous  by  applying 
the  sayings  of  it  to  a  foolish  purpose :  for  a  jest 
may  be  obtruded  upon  any  thing.  And  therefore 
no  man  ought  to  have  the  less  reverence  for  the  prin- 
ciples of  religion,  or  for  the  Holy  Scriptures,  because 
idle  and  profane  wits  can  break  jests  upon  them. 
Nothing  is  so  easy  as  to  take  particular  phrases  and 
expressions  out  of  the  best  book  in  the  world,  and  to 
abuse  them  by  forcing  an  odd  and  ridiculous  sense 
upon  them.  But  no  wise  man  will  think  agood  book 
foolish  for  this  reason,  but  the  man  that  abuses  it; 
nor  will  he  esteem  that,  to  which  every  thing  is  lia- 
ble, to  be  a  just  exception  against  any  thing.  At  this 


406 


rate  we  must  despise  all  things,  but  surely  the  bet- 
ter and  the  shorter  way  is  to  contemn  those  who 
would  bring  any  thingthat  is  worthy  into  contempt. 

3.  And  lastly,  to  persuade  men  to  employ  that 
reason  and  wit  which  God  hath  given  them  to  better 
and  nobler  purposes,  in  the  service  and  to  the  glory 
of  that  God  who  hath  bestowed  these  gifts  on  men, 
as  Aholiab  and  Bezaleel  did  their  mechanical  skill 
in  the  adorningand  beautifying  of  God's  tabernacle. 
For  this  is  the  perfection  of  every  thing,  to  attain  its 
true  and  proper  end  ;  and  the  end  of  all  those  gifts 
and  endowments,  which  God  hath  given  us,  is  to 
glorify  the  giver. 

Here  is  subject  enough  to  exercise  the  wit  of  men 
and  angels:  to  praise  that  infinite  goodness,  and  al- 
mighty power,  and  exquisite  wisdom  which  made 
us  and  all  things  ;  and  to  admire  what  we  can  ne- 
ver sufficiently  praise  ;  to  vindicate  the  wise  and 
just  providence  of  God,  in  the  government  of  the 
world  ;  and  to  endeavour  as  well  as  we  can,  upon 
an  imperfect  view  of  things,  to  make  out  the 
beauty  and  harmony  of  all  the  seeming  discords 
and  irregularities  of  the  Divine  administrations ;  to 
explain  the  oracles  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  to 
adore  that  great  mystery  of  Divine  love  (which  the 
angels,  better  and  nobler  creatures  than  we  are,  de- 
sire to  pry  into),  God's  sending  his  only  Son  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for 
them.  These  would  be  noble  exercises  indeed  for 
the  tongues  and  pens  of  the  greatest  wits  ;  and  sub- 
jects of  this  nature  are  the  best  trials  of  our  ability 
in  this  kind.  Satire  and  invective  are  the  easiest 
kind  of  wit.  Almost  any  degree  of  it  will  serve  to 
abuse  and  find  fault :  for  wit  is  a  keen  instrument, 
and  every  one  can  cut  and  gash  with  it ;  but  to  carve 


40? 


a  beautiful  image,  and  to  polish  it,  requires  great  art 
and  dexterity.  To  prai:e  any  thing  well  is  an  ar- 
gument of  much  more  wit  than  to  abuse.  A  little 
wit  and  a  great  deal  of  ill-nature  will  furnish  a  man 
for  satire,  but  the  greatest  instance  of  w  it  is  to  com- 
mend well.  And  perhaps  the  best  things  are  the 
hardest  to  be  duly  commended  :  for  though  there 
be  a  great  deal  of  matter  to  work  upon,  yet  there  is 
great  judgment  rec{uired  to  make  choice.  And 
where  the  subject  is  great  and  excellent  it  is  hard 
not  to  sink  below  the  dignity  of  it. 

This  I  say  on  purpose  to  recommend  to  men  a  no- 
bler exercise  for  their  wits,  and  if  it  be  possible  to 
put  them  out  of  conceit  with  that  scoffing  humour, 
which  is  so  easy  and  so  ill-natured,  and  is  not  only 
an  enemy  to  religion,  but  to  every  thing  else  that  is 
wise  and  worthy.  And  I  am  very  much  mistaken 
if  the  state,  as  well  as  the  church,  the  civil  govern- 
ment as  well  as  religion,  do  not  in  a  short  space  find 
the  intolerable  inconvenience  of  this  humour. 

But  I  confine  myself  to  the  consideration  of  reli- 
gion. And  it  is  sad,  indeed,  that  in  a  nation  profess- 
ing Christianity  so  horrid  an  impiety  should  dare 
to  appear.  But  the  Scripture  hath  foretold  us,  that 
this  sort  of  men  should  arise  in  the  gospel  age,  and 
they  did  appear  even  in  the  apostles'  days.  That 
which  is  more  sad  and  strange  is,  that  we  should 
persist  in  this  profai-eness,  notwithstanding  the  ter- 
rible judgments  of  God  which  have  been  abroad  in 
this  nation.  God  hath  of  late  years  manifested  him- 
self in  a  very  dreadful  manner,  as  if  it  were  on  pur- 
pose to  give  a  check  to  this  insolent  impiety.  And 
now  that  those  judgments  have  done  no  good  upon 
us  we  may  justly  fear  that  he  will  appear  once  for 
all.     And  it  is  time  for  him  to  shew  himself  when 


408 


his  very  being  is  called  in  question,  and  to  come  and 
judge  the  world  when  men  begin  to  doubt  whether 
Jie  made  it. 

The  Scripture  mentions  two  things  as  the  forerun- 
ners and  reasons  of  his  coming  to  judgment — infide- 
lity and  profane  scoffing  at  religion.     "  When  the 
Son  of  Man  comes,  shall  he  find  faith  on 
*vi  .  .   ^e  earth  ?"  And  St.  Jude  out  of  an  an- 
cient prophecy  of  Enoch  expressly  mentions  this  as 
one  reason  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  "to 
convince  ungodly  sinners  of  all  their 
hard  speeches  which  they  had  spoken  against  him." 

And  if  these  things  be  a  sign  and  reason  of  his 
coming,  I  wish  that  we  in  this  age  had  not  too  much 
cause  to  apprehend  the  Judge  to  be  at  the  door. 
This  impiety  did  forerun  the  destruction  of  Jerusa- 
lem, and  the  utter  ruin  of  the  Jewish  nation.  And 
if  it  hold  on  amongst  us,  may  not  we  have  reason  to 
fear,  that  either  "  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand,"  or 
that  some  very  dismal  calamity  greater  than  any  our 
eyes  have  yet  seen  does  hang  over  us?  But  I  would 
fain  hope  that  God  hath  mercy  still  for  us,  and  that 
men  will  pity  themselves,  "  and  repent,  and  give 
glory  to  God,"  and  "  know  in  this  their  day  the 
things  that  belong  to  their  peace."  Which  God  of 
his  infinite  mercy  grant  for  the  sake  of  Christ ;  to 
whom,  with  the  Father,  &c. 


\ 


409 


SERMON  III. 

THE  ADVANTAGES   OF  RELIGION  TO  SOCIETIES. 

Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation ;  but  sin  is  the  re- 
proach  of  any  people. — Prov.  xiv.  34. 

One  of  the  first  principles  that  is  planted  in  the  na- 
ture of  man,  and  which  lies  at  the  very  root  and 
foundation  of  his  being,  is  the  desire  of  his  own 
preservation  and  happiness.  Hence  is  it  that  every 
man  is  led  by  interest,  and  does  love  or  hate,  choose 
or  refuse  things,  according  as  he  apprehends  them 
to  conduce  to  this  end,  or  to  contradict  it.  And 
because  the  happiness  of  this  life  is  most  present  and 
sensible,  therefore  human  nature  (which  in  this  de- 
generate state  is  extremely  sunk  down  into  sense) 
is  most  powerfully  affected  with  sensible  and  tem- 
poral things.  And,  consequently,  there  cannot  be  a 
greater  prejudice  raised  against  any  thing  than  to 
have  it  represented  as  inconvenient  and  hurtful  to 
our  temporal  interests. 

Upon  this  account  it  is  that  religion  hath  extremely 
suffered  in  the  opinion  of  many,  as  if  it  were  opposite 
to  our  present  welfare,  and  did  rob  men  of  the  greatest 
advantages  and  conveniences  of  life.  So  that  he  that 
would  do  right  to  religion,  and  make  a  ready  way 
for  the  entertainment  of  it  among  men,  cannot  take 
a  more  effectual  course  than  by  reconciling  it  with 
the  happiness  of  mankind,  and  by  giving  satisfaction 
to  our  reason,  that  it  is  so  far  from  being  an  enemy, 
that  it  is  the  greatest  friend  to  our  temporal  inter- 

vol.  i.  2  I 


410 


ests  ;  and  that  it  doth  not  only  tend  to  make  every 
man  happy,  considered  singly  and  in  a  private  capa- 
city, but  is  excellently  fitted  for  the  benefit  of  human 
society. 

How  much  religion  tends  even  to  the  temporal 
advantage  of  private  persons  I  shall  not  now  consi- 
der, because  my  text  leads  me  to  discourse  of  the 
other ;  namely,  to  shew  how  advantageous  religion 
and  virtue  are  to  the  public  prosperity  of  a  nation, 
which  I  take  to  be  the  meaning  of  this  aphorism  of 
Solomon,  "  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation,"  &c. 

And  here  I  shall  not  restrain  righteousness  to  the 
particular  virtue  of  justice  (though  in  this  sense  also 
this  saying  is  most  true)  but  enlarge  it  according  to 
the  genius  and  strain  of  this  book  of  the  Proverbs, 
in  which  the  words  wisdom  and  righteousness  are 
commonly  used  very  comprehensively,  so  as  to  sig- 
nify all  religion  and  virtue.  And  that  this  word  is  so 
to  be  taken  in  the  text  may  appear  farther  from  the 
opposition  of  it  to  sin  or  vice  in  general ;  "  Righteous- 
ness exalteth  a  nation ;  but  sin  is  the  reproach  of  any 
people." 

You  see  then  what  will  be  the  subject  of  my  pre- 
sent discourse  ;  namely,  That  religion  and  virtue  are 
the  great  causes  of  public  happiness  and  prosperity. 

And  though  the  truth  of  this  hath  been  universal- 
ly acknowledged,  and  long  enough  experienced  in 
the  world,  yet  because  the  fashion  of  the  age  is  to 
call  every  thing  into  question,  it  will  be  requisite  to 
satisfy  men's  reason  about  it.  To  which  end  I  shall 
do  these  two  things  : 

I.  Endeavour  to  give  an  account  of  this  truth. 

II.  To  vindicate  it  from  the  pretences  and  insinua- 
tions of  atheistical  persons. 

I  shall  give  you  this  twofold  account  of  it. 


411 


1.  From  the  justice  of  the  Divine  providence. 

2.  From  the  natural  tendency  of  the  thing. 

1.  From  the  justice  of  the  Divine  providence 
Indeed,  as  to  particular  persons  the  providences  of 
God  are  many  times  promiscuously  administered  in 
this  world ;  so  that  no  man  can  certainly  conclude 
God's  love  or  hatred  to  any  person  by  any  thing  that 
befals  him  in  this  life.    But  God  does  not  deal  thus 
with  nations  :    because  public  bodies  and  commu- 
nities of  men,  as  such,  can  only  be  rewarded  and 
punished  in  this  world.    For,  in  the  next,  all  those 
public  societies  and  combinations,  wherein  men  are 
now  linked  together  underseveral  governments,  shall 
be  dissolved.    God  will  not  then  reward  or  punish 
nations,  as  nations  ;  but  every  man  shall  then  give  an 
account  of  himself  to  God,  and  receive  his  own  re- 
ward, and  bear  his  own  burden.  For,  although  God 
account  it  no  disparagement  to  his  justice  to  let 
particular  good  men  suffer  in  this  world,  and  pass 
through  many  tribulations  into  the  kingdom  of  God, 
because  there  is  another  day  a  coming  which  will  be 
a  more  proper  season  of  reward ;  yet  in  the  usual 
course  of  his  providence  he  recompenseth  religious 
and  virtuous  nations  with  temporal  blessings  and 
prosperity.    For  which  reason  St.  Austin  tells  us, 
that  the  mighty  success  and  long  prosperity  of  the 
Romans  was  a  reward  given  them  by  God,  for  their 
eminent  justice  and  temperance,  and  other  virtues. 
And,  on  the  other  hand,  God  many  times  suffers  the 
most  grievous  sins  of  particular  persons  to  go  un- 
punished in  this  world,  because  he  knows  that  his 
justice  will  have  another  and  better  opportunity  to 
meet  and  reckon  with  them.    But  the  general  and 
crying  sins  of  a  nation  cannot  hope  to  escape  public 
judgments,  unless  they  be  prevented  by  a  general 

2  I  2 


412 


repentance.  God  may  defer  his  judgments  for  a 
time,  and  give  a  people  a  longer  space  of  repentance ; 
he  may  stay  till  the  iniquities  of  a  nation  be  full;  but 
sooner  or  later  they  have  reason  to  expect  his  ven- 
geance. And  usually,  the  longer  punishment  is  de- 
layed it  is  the  heavier  when  it  comes. 

Now  all  this  is  very  reasonable,  because  this  world 
is  the  only  season  for  national  punishments.  And 
indeed  they  are  in  a  great  degree  necessary  for  the 
present  vindication  of  the  honour  and  majesty  of  the 
Divine  laws,  and  to  give  some  check  to  the  over- 
flowing of  wickedness.  Public  judgments  are  the 
banks  and  shores  upon  which  God  breaks  the  inso- 
lency  of  sinners,  and  stays  their  proud  waves.  And 
though  among  men  the  multitude  of  offenders  be 
many  times  a  cause  of  impunity,  because  of  the 
weakness  of  human  governments,  which  are  glad  to 
spare  where  they  are  not  strong  enough  to  punish, 
yet  in  the  government  of  God  things  are  quite  other- 
wise. No  combination  of  sinners  is  too  hard  for  him, 
and  the  greater  and  more  numerous  the  offenders 
are,  the  more  his  justice  is  concerned  to  vindicate 
the  affront.  However  God  may  pass  by  single  sin- 
ners in  this  world,  yet  when  a  nation  combines 
against  him,  "  when  hand  joins  in  hand  the  wicked 
shall  not  go  unpunished." 

This  the  Scripture  declares  to  be  the  settled  course 
of  God's  providence;  that  a  righteous  nation  shall 
be  happy ;  "  the  work  of  righteousness  shall  be 
peace ;  and  the  effects  of  righteousness,  quietness 
and  assurance  for  ever."  And,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  he  useth  to  shower  down  his  judgments  upon  a 
wicked  people  ;  "  he  turneth  a  fruitful  land  into 
barrenness  for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell 
therein." 


413 


And  the  experience  of  all  ages  hath  made  this 
good.  All  along  the  history  of  the  Old  Testament 
we  find  the  interchangeable  providences  of  God  to 
wards  the  people  of  Israel  always  suited  to  their 
manners.  They  were  constantly  prosperous  or  af- 
flicted, according  as  piety  and  virtue  flourished  or 
declined  amongst  them.  And  God  did  not  only 
exercise  this  providence  towards  his  own  people, 
but  he  dealt  thus  also  with  other  nations.  The 
Roman  empire,  whilst  the  virtue  of  that  people  re- 
mained firm,  was  strong  as  iron,  as  it  is  represent- 
ed iu  the  prophecy  of  Daniel :  but,  upon  the  dissolu- 
tion of  their  manners,  the  iron  began  to  be  mixed 
with  miry  clay,  and  the  feet,  upon  which  that  empire 
stood,  to  be  broken.  And  though  God  in  the  ad- 
ministration of  his  justice  be  not  tied  to  precedents 
and  we  cannot  argue  from  Scripture  examples  that 
the  providence  of  God  towards  other  nations  shall  in 
all  circumstances  be  conformable  to  his  dealings  with 
the  people  of  Israel ;  yet  thus  much  may  with  great 
probability  be  collected  from  them,  that  as  God 
always  blessed  that  people,  while  they  were  obedient 
to  him,  and  followed  them  with  his  judgments  when 
they  rebelled  against  him,  so  he  will  also  deal  with 
other  nations.  Because  the  reason  of  those  dispen- 
sations as  to  the  main  and  substance  of  them  seems 
to  be  perpetual,  and  founded  in  that  which  can  never 
change— the  justice  of  the  Divine  providence. 

2dly.  The  truth  of  this  farther  appears  from  the 
natural  tendency  of  the  thing.  For  religion  in  gene- 
ral, and  every  particular  virtue,  doth  in  its  own  na- 
ture conduce  to  the  public  interest. 

Religion,  wherever  it  is  truly  planted,  is  cer- 
tainly the  greatest  obligation  upon  conscience  to 
all  civil  offices  and  moral  duties.    Chastity,  and 


414 


temperance,  and  industry,  do  in  their  own  nature 
tend  to  health  and  plenty.  Truth  and  fidelity  in 
all  our  dealings  do  create  mutual  love,  and  good- 
will, and  confidence  among  men,  which  are  the 
great  bands  of  peace  :  and,  on  the  contrary,  wick- 
edness doth  in  its  own  nature  produce  many 
public  mischiefs.  For  as  sins  are  linked  together, 
and  draw  on  one  another,  so  almost  every  vice  hath 
some  temporal  inconvenience  annexed  to  it,  and  na- 
turally following  it.  Intemperance  and  lust  breed 
infirmities  and  diseases,  which  being  propagated 
spoil  the  strain  of  a  nation.  Idleness  and  luxury 
bring  forth  poverty  and  want;  and  this  tempts  men 
to  injustice,  and  that  causeth  enmity  and  animosi- 
ties, and  these  bring  on  strife  and  confusion  and 
every  evil  work.  This  philosophical  account  of 
public  troubles  and  confusions  St.  James  gives  us  : 
"  Whence  come  wars  and  fightings 
among  you  ?  Are  they  not  hence,  even 
from  your  lusts  that  war  in  your  members?" 

But  I  shall  shew  more  particularly,  that  religion 
and  virtue  do  naturally  tend  to  the  good  order  and 
more  easy  government  of  human  society,  because 
they  have  a  good  influence  both  upon  magistrates 
and  subjects. 

1.  Upon  magistrates.  Religion  teacheth  them  to 
rule  over  men  in  the  fear  of  God,  because  though 
they  be  gods  on  earth,  yet  they  are  subjects  of 
heaven,  and  accountable  to  Him,  who  is  higher  than 
the  highest  in  this  world.  Religion  in  a  magistrate 
strengthens  his  authority,  because  it  procures  vene- 
ration and  gains  a  reputation  to  it.  And  in  all  the 
affairs  of  this  world  so  much  reputation  is  really  so 
much  power.  We  see  that  piety  and  virtue,  where 
they  are  found  among  men  of  lower  degree,  will  com- 


James  iv.  1. 


415 


maud  some  reverence  and  respect :  but  in  persons 
of  eminent  place  and  diguity  they  are  seated  to  a 
great  advantage,  so  as  to  cast  a  lustre  upon  their 
very  place,  and  by  a  strong  reflection  to  double  the 
beams  of  majesty;  whereas  impiety  and  vice  do 
strangely  lessen  greatness,  and  do  secretly  and  un- 
avoidably derive  some  weakness  upon  authority  it- 
self. Of  this  the  Scripture  gives  us  a  remarkable  in- 
stance in  David.  For  among  other  things  which 
made  "  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  too  hard  for  him,"  this 
probably  was  none  of  the  least,  that  they  were  par- 
ticularly conscious  to  his  crimes. 

2.  Religion  hath  a  good  influence  upon  the  peo- 
ple;  to  make  them  obedient  to  government,  and 
peaceable  one  towards  another. 

1.  To  make  them  obedient  to  government  and  con- 
formable to  laws ;  and  that  not  only  for  wrath  and 
out  of  fear  of  the  magistrate's  power,  which  is  but  a 
weak  and  loose  principle  of  obedience,  and  will  cease 
whenever  men  can  rebel  with  safety,  and  to  advan- 
tage :  but  out  of  conscience,  which  is  a  firm  and  con- 
stant and  lasting  principle,  and  will  hold  a  man  fast 
when  all  other  obligations  will  break.  He  that  hath 
entertained  the  true  principles  of  Christianity  is  not 
to  be  tempted  from  his  obedience  and  subjection  by 
any  worldly  considerations,  because  he  believes  that 
whosoever  resisteth  authority  resisteth  the  ordinance 
of  God,  and  that  "they  who  resist  shall  receive  to 
themselves  damnation." 

2.  Religion  tends  to  make  men  peaceable  one  to- 
wards another.  For  it  endeavours  to  plant  all  those 
qualities  and  dispositions  in  men  which  tend  to 
peace  and  unity,  and  to  fill  men  with  a  spirit  of  uni- 
versal love  and  good-will.  It  endeavours  likewise 
to  secure  every  man's  interest  by  commanding  the 


416 


observation  of  that  great  rule  of  equity,  "  Whatsoever 
ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even 
so  to  them  f  by  enjoining  that  truth  and  fidelity  be 
inviolably  observed  in  all  our  words,  promises,  and 
contracts.  And,  in  order  hereunto,  it  requires  the 
extirpation  of  all  those  passions  and  vices  which  ren- 
der men  unsociable  and  troublesome  to  one  another; 
as  pride,  covetousness,  and  injustice,  hatred  and  re- 
venge and  cruelty  :  and  those  likewise  which  are  not 
so  commonly  reputed  vices,  as  self-conceit  and  pe- 
remptoriness  in  a  man's  own  opinions,  and  all  peevish- 
ness and  incompliance  of  humour  in  things  lawful 
and  indifferent. 

And  that  these  are  the  proper  effects  of  true  piety 
the  doctrine  of  our  Saviour  and  his  apostles  every 
where  teacheth  us.  Now  if  this  be  the  design  of  re- 
ligion to  bring  us  to  this  temper,  thus  to  heal  the  na- 
tures of  men,  and  to  sweeten  their  spirits,  to  correct 
their  passions,  and  to  mortify  all  those  lusts  which 
are  the  causes  of  enmity  and  division, — then  it  is  evi- 
dent, that  in  its  own  nature  it  tends  to  the  peace  and 
happiness  of  human  society  ;  and  that  if  men  would 
but  live  as  religion  requires  they  should  do,  the 
world  would  be  a  quiet  habitation,  a  most  lovely  and 
desirable  place  in  comparison  of  what  now  it  is.  And 
indeed  the  true  reason  why  the  societies  of  men  are 
so  full  of  tumult  and  disorder,  so  troublesome  and 
tempestuous,  is  because  there  is  so  little  of  true  re- 
ligion among  men  :  so  that  were  it  not  for  some  small 
remainders  of  piety  and  virtue,  which  are  yet  left 
scattered  among  mankind,  human  society  would 
in  a  short  space  disband  and  run  into  confusion,  the 
earth  would  grow  wild  and  become  a  great  forest 
and  mankind  would  become  beasts  of  prey  one  to 
wards  another.  And  if  this  discourse  hold  true,  sure 


417 

ly  then  one  would  think  that  virtue  should  find  itself 
a  seat  wherever  human  societies  are,  and  that  reli- 
gion should  be  owned  and  encouraged  in  the  world 
until  men  cease  to  be  governed  by  reason. 

II.  I  come  to  vindicate  this  truth  from  the  insinua- 
tions and  pretences  of  atheistical  persons.  I  shall 
mention  two. 

1.  That  government  may  subsist  well  enough  with- 
out the  belief  of  a  God  and  a  state  of  rewards  and 
punishments  after  this  life. 

2.  That  as  for  virtue  and  vice  they  are  arbitrary 
things. 

1.  That  government  may  subsist  well  enough 
without  the  belief  of  a  God  or  a  state  of  rewards  and 
punishments  after  this  life.  And  this  the  atheist 
does  and  must  assert,  otherwise  he  is  by  his  own 
confession  a  declared  enemy  to  government  and  un- 
fit to  live  in  human  society. 

For  answer  to  this,  I  will  not  deny  that  though  the 
generality  of  men  did  not  believe  any  superior  Being, 
nor  any  rewards  and  punishments  after  this  life,  yet 
notwithstanding  this  there  might  be  some  kind  of  go- 
vernment kept  up  in  the  world.  For  supposing  men 
to  have  reason,  the  necessities  of  human  nature  and 
the  mischiefs  of  confusion  would  probably  compel 
them  into  some  kind  of  order.  But  then  I  say  with- 
al, that  if  these  principles  were  banished  out  of  the 
world,  government  would  be  far  more  difficult  than 
now  it  is,  because  it  would  want  its  firmest  basis  and 
foundation;  there  would  be  infinitely  more  disorders 
in  the  world,  if  men  were  restrained  from  injustice 
and  violence  only  by  human  laws,  and  not  by  princi- 
ples of  conscience  and  the  dread  of  another  world. 
Therefore  magistrates  have  always  thought  them- 
selves concerned  to  cherish  religion,  and  to  maintain 


418 


in  the  minds  of  men  the  belief  of  a  God  and  another 
life.  Nay,  that  common  suggestion  of  atheistical  per- 
sons, that  religion  was  at  first  a  politic  device,  and  is 
still  kept  up  in  the  world  as  a  state-engine,  to  awe 
men  into  obedience,  is  a  clear  acknowledgment  of  the 
usefulness  of  it  to  the  ends  of  government,  and  does 
as  fully  contradict  that  pretence  of  theirs,  which  I 
am  now  confuting  as  any  thing  that  can  be  said. 

2.  That  virtue  and  vice  are  arbitrary  things,  found- 
ed only  in  the  imaginations  of  men,  and  in  the  con- 
stitutions and  customs  of  the  world,  but  not  in  the 
nature  of  the  things  themselves ;  and  that  that  is  vir- 
tue or  vice,  good  or  evil,  which  the  supreme  autho- 
rity of  a  nation  declares  to  be  so.  And  this  is  fre- 
quently and  confidently  asserted  by  the  ingenious 
author  of  a  very  bad  book, — I  mean  the  Leviathan. 

Now  the  proper  way  of  answering  any  thing  that  is 
confidently  asserted  is  to  shew  the  contrary ;  namely, 
That  there  are  some  things  that  have  a  natural  evil 
and  deformity  in  them,  as  perjury,  perfidiousness, 
unrighteousness,  and  ingratitude,  which  are  things 
not  only  condemned  by  the  positive  laws  and  con- 
stitutions of  particular  nations  and  governments,  but 
by  the  general  verdict  of  human  nature;  and  that 
the  virtues  contrary  to  these  have  a  natural  good- 
ness and  comeliness  in  them,  and  are  suitable  to  the 
common  principles  and  sentiments  of  humanity. 

And  this  will  most  evidently  appear  by  putting 
this  supposition.  Suppose  the  reverse  of  all  thatwhich 
we  now  call  virtue  were  solemnly  enacted,  and  the 
practice  of  fraud  and  rapine,  and  perjury,  and  false- 
ness to  a  man's  word,  and  all  manner  of  vice  and 
wickedness  were  established  by  a  law ;  I  ask  now, 
if  the  case  between  virtue  and  vice  were  thus  altered, 
would  that  which  we  now  call  vice,  in  process  of 


419 

time  gain  the  reputation  of  virtue,  and  that  which 
we  now  call  virtue  grow  odious  and  contemptible  to 
human  nature?  If  it  would  not,  then  is  there  some- 
thing in  the  nature  of  good  and  evil,  of  virtue  and  vice, 
which  does  not  depend  upon  the  pleasure  of  authori- 
ty, nor  is  subject  to  any  arbitrary  constitution.  But 
that  it  would  not  be  thus  I  am  very  certain,  because 
no  government  could  subsist  upon  these  terms.  For 
the  very  enjoining  of  fraud,  and  rapine,  and  perjury, 
and  breach  of  trust,  doth  apparently  destroy  the 
greatest  end  of  government,  which  is,  to  preserve  men 
in  their  rights  against  the  encroachments  of  fraud  and 
violence :  and  this  end  being  destroyed,  human  so- 
cieties would  presently  fly  in  pieces,  and  men  would 
necessarily  fall  into  a  state  of  war ;  which  plainly 
shews,  that  virtue  and  vice  are  not  arbitrary  things, 
but  that  there  is  a  natural  and  immutable  and  eter- 
nal reason  for  that  which  we  call  goodness  and  vir- 
tue, and  against  that  which  we  call  vice  and  wick- 
edness. 

Thus  I  have  endeavoured  to  evidence  and  vindi- 
cate this  truth.  I  shall  only  draw  an  inference  or 
two  from  this  discourse,  and  so  conclude. 

1.  If  this  discourse  be  true,  then  those  w  ho  are  in 
place  of  power  and  authority  are  peculiarly  con- 
cerned to  maintain  the  honour  of  religion. 

2.  It  concerns  every  one  to  live  in  the  practice 
of  it. 

1.  Magistrates  are  concerned  to  maintain  the  ho- 
nour of  religion,  which  doth  not  only  tend  to  every 
man's  future  happiness,  but  is  the  best  instrument  of 
civil  government  and  of  the  temporal  prosperity  of 
a  nation.  For  the  whole  design  of  it  is  to  procure  the 
private  and  public  happiness  of  mankind,  and  to  re- 
strain men  from  all  those  things  which  would  make 


420 


them  miserable  and  guilty  to  themselves,  unpeace. 
able  and  troublesome  to  the  world.  Religion  hath 
so  great  an  influence  upon  the  felicity  of  men  that  it 
ought  to  be  upheld,  and  the  veneration  of  it  main- 
tained, not  only  out  of  a  j  ust  dread  of  the  Divine  ven- 
geance in  another  world,  but  out  of  regard  to  the 
temporal  peace  and  prosperity  of  men.  It  will  re- 
quite all  the  kindness  and  honour  we  can  do  it,  by 
the  advantages  it  will  bring  to  civil  government,  and 
by  the  blessings  it  will  draw  down  upon  it.  God 
hath  promised,  that  those  that  honour  him  he  will  ho- 
nour ;  and  in  the  common  course  of  his  providence 
he  usually  makes  this  good,  so  that  the  civil  authori- 
ty ought  to  be  very  tender  of  the  honour  of  God  and 
religion,  if  for  no  other  reason,  yet  out  of  reason  of 
state. 

It  were  to  be  wished,  that  all  men  were  so  piously 
disposed,  that  religion  by  its  own  authority  and  the 
reasonable  force  of  it  might  be  sufficient  to  establish 
its  empire  in  the  minds  of  men :  but  the  corruptions  of 
men  will  always  make  a  strong  opposition  against  it. 
And  therefore,  at  the  first  planting  of  the  Christian  re- 
ligion in  the  world,  God  was  pleased  to  accompany 
it  with  a  miraculous  power  :  but,  after  it  was  plant- 
ed, this  extraordinary  power  ceased,  and  God  hath 
now  left  it  to  be  maintained  and  supported  by  more 
ordinary  and  human  ways,  by  the  countenance  of 
authority,  and  the  assistance  of  laws ;  which  were 
never  more  necessary  than  in  this  degenerate  age, 
which  is  prodigiously  sunk  into  atheism  and  pro- 
faneness,  and  is  running  headlong  into  a  humour  of 
scoffing  at  God  and  religion,  and  every  thing  that  is 
sacred.  For  some  ages  before  the  Reformation,  athe- 
ism was  confined  to  Italy,  and  had  its  chief  residence 
at  Rome.  All  the  mention  that  is  of  it  in  the  history 


421 


of  those  times  the  papists  themselves  give  us  in  the 
lives  of  their  own  popes  and  cardinals,  excepting 
two  or  three  small  philosophers  that  were  retainers 
to  that  court.  So  that  this  atheistical  humour 
among  Christians  was  the  spawn  of  the  gross  super- 
stitions and  corrupt  manners  of  the  Romish  church 
and  court  And,  indeed,  nothing  is  more  natural 
than  for  extremes  in  religion  to  beget  one  another, 
like  the  vibrations  of  a  pendulum,  which  the  more 
violently  you  swing  it  one  way,  the  farther  it  will  re- 
turn the  other.  But  in  the  last  age,  Atheism  travel- 
led over  the  Alps  and  infected  France,  and  now  of 
late  it  hath  crossed  the  seas  and  invaded  our  nation, 
and  hath  prevailed  to  amazement:  for  I  do  not 
think  that  there  are  any  people  in  the  world  that  are 
generally  more  indisposed  to  it  and  can  worse  brook 
it;  seriousness  and  zeal  in  religion  being  almost  the 
natural  temper  of  the  English ;  so  that  nothing  is  to 
me  matter  of  greater  wonder,  than  that  in  a  grave  and 
sober  nation,  profaneness  should  ever  come  to  gain 
so  much  ground,  and  the  best  and  wisest  religion  in 
the  world  to  be  made  the  scorn  of  fools.  For  besides 
the  profane  and  atheistical  discourses  about  God 
and  religion,  and  the  bold  and  senseless  abuses  of 
this  Sacred  Book,  the  great  instruments  of  our  sal- 
vation, which  are  so  frequent  in  the  public  places  of 
resort;  I  say,  besides  these  (I  speak  it  knowingly,)  a 
man  can  hardly  pass  the  streets  without  having  his 
ears  grated  and  pierced  with  such  horrid  and  blas- 
phemous oaths  and  curses,  as  are  enough,  if  we  were 
guilty  of  no  other  sin,  to  sink  a  nation.  And  this  not 
only  from  the  tribe  that  wear  liveries,  but  from  those 
that  go  before  them,  and  should  give  better  example. 
Is  it  not  then  high  time  that  the  laws  should  provide, 
by  the  most  prudentand  effectual  means,  to  curb  these 


422 


bold  and  insolent  defiers  of  Heaven,  who  take  a  pride 
in  being  monsters,  and  boast  themselves  in  the  fol- 
lies and  deformities  of  human  nature.  The  heathens 
would  never  suffer  their  gods  to  be  reviled,  which  yet 
were  no  gods  :  and  shall  it  among  the  professors  of 
the  true  religion  be  allowed  to  any  man  to  make  a 
mock  of  Him  that  made  heaven  and  earth,  and  to 
breathe  outblasphemies  against  Him  who  gives  us  life 
and  breath  and  all  things  ?  I  doubt  not  but  hypocrisy 
is  a  great  wickedness,  and  very  odious  to  God,  but  by 
no  means  of  so  pernicious  example  as  open  profane- 
ness.  Hypocrisy  is  a  more  modest  way  of  sinning,  it 
shews  some  reverence  to  religion,  and  does  so  far 
own  the  worth  and  excellency  of  it,  as  to  acknow- 
ledge that  it  deserves  to  be  counterfeited  ;  whereas 
profaneness  declares  openly  against  it,  and  endea- 
vours to  make  a  party  to  drive  it  out  of  the  world. 

2.  It  concerns  every  one  to  live  in  the  practice  of 
religion  and  virtue ;  because  the  public  happiness 
and  prosperity  depends  upon  it.  It  is  most  appa- 
rent, that  of  late  years  religion  is  very  sensibly  de- 
clined among  us.  The  manners  of  men  have  almost 
been  universally  corrupted  by  a  civil  war.  We 
should  therefore  all  jointly  endeavour  to  retrieve  the 
ancient  virtue  of  the  nation,  and  to  bring  into  fashion 
again  that  solid  and  substantial,  that  plain  and  un- 
affected piety  (free  from  the  extremes  both  of  su- 
perstition and  enthusiasm),  which  flourished  in  the 
age  of  our  immediate  forefathers :  which  did  not 
consist  in  idle  talk,  but  in  real  effects,  in  a  sincere 
love  of  God  and  of  our  neighbour,  in  a  pious  devo- 
tion and  reverence  towards  the  Divine  Majesty,  and 
in  the  virtuous  actions  of  a  good  life ;  in  the  denial 
of  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  and  "  in  living  so- 
berly and    righteously  and  godly  in  this  present 


423 


world/'  This  were  the  true  way  to  reconcile  God 
to  us,  to  stop  the  course  of  his  judgments,  and  to  bring 
down  the  blessings  of  Heaven  upon  us.  God  hath 
now  been  pleased  to  settle  us  again  in  peace,  both 
at  home  and  abroad,  and  he  hath  put  us  once  more 
into  the  hands  of  our  own  counsel.  Life  and  death, 
blessing  and  cursing,  prosperity  and  destruction,  are 
before  us.  We  may  choose  our  own  fortune  ;  and  if 
we  be  not  wanting  to  ourselves  we  may,  under  the  in- 
fluence of  God's  grace  and  assistance,  which  is  ne- 
ver wanting  to  our  sincere  endeavours,  become  a 
happy  and  a  prosperous  people. 

The  good  God  make  us  all  wise  to  know  aud  to 
do  the  things  that  belong  to  the  temporal  peace  and 
prosperity  of  the  nation,  and  to  the  eternal  happi- 
ness and  salvation  of  every  one  of  our  souls ;  which 
we  humbly  beg  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ ;  to 
whom,  &c. 


424 


SERMON  IV. 

THE    ADVANTAGE    OF    RELIGION    TO  PARTICULAR 
PERSONS. 

And  in  keeping  of  them  there  is  great  reward. 
Psalm  xix.  11. 

In  this  psalm  David  celebrates  the  glory  of  God 
from  the  consideration  of  the  greatness  of  his  works 
and  the  perfection  of  his  laws.  From  the  greatness 
of  his  works,  verse  1.  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory 
of  God,  and  the  firmament  sheweth  his  handy-work," 
&c.  From  the  perfection  of  his  laws,  ver.  7.  "  The  law 
of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul,"  &c.  And, 
among  many  other  excellences  of  the  Divine  laws, 
he  mentions  in  the  last  place  the  benefits  and  ad- 
vantages which  come  from  the  observance  of  them, 
verse  11,  "  and  in  keeping  of  them  there  is  great 
reward." 

I  have  already  shewn  how  much  religion  tends  to 
the  public  welfare  of  mankind  ;  to  the  support  of  go- 
vernment, and  to  the  peace  and  happiness  of  human 
societies.  My  work  at  this  time  shall  be  to  shew, 
that  religion  and  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God  do 
likewise  conduce  to  the  happiness  of  particular 
persons,  both  in  respect  of  this  world  and  the  other. 
For  though  there  be  but  little  express  mention  made 
in  the  Old  Testament,  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul 


425 


and  the  rewards  of  another  life,  yet  all  religion  does 
suppose  these  principles,  and  is  built  upon  them. 

I.  And  First,  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  how  reli- 
gion conduceth  to  the  happiness  of  this  life ;  and  that 
both  in  respect  of  the  inward  and  outward  man. 

First,  As  to  the  mind  ;  to  be  pious  and  religious 
brings  a  double  advantage  to  the  mind  of  man.  1.  It 
tends  to  the  improvement  of  our  understandings. 
2.  It  brings  peace  and  pleasure  to  our  minds. 

1 .  It  tends  to  the  improvement  of  our  understand- 
ings :  I  do  not  mean  only  that  it  instructs  us  in  the 
knowledge  of  Divine  and  spiritual  things,  and  makes 
us  to  understand  the  great  interest  of  our  souls  and 
the  concernments  of  eternity  better,  but  that  in  ge- 
neral it  does  raise  and  enlarge  the  minds  of  men,  and 
makes  them  more  capable  of  true  knowledge.  And 
in  this  sense  I  understand  the  following  texts : 
"  The  commandment  of  the  Lord  is  ^  .  .  0 

Psal.  xix.  8. 

pure,  enlightening  the  eyes."  "  The  fear        cxi.  10. 
of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom ;  a  good  un- 
derstanding have  all  they  that  keep  his  command- 
ments."  "  Thou  through  thy  command-  „  ,  . 

.  _  °   .      J  .         Psal.  cxix.  98. 

ments  hast  made  me  wiser  than  mine 
enemies,  (which  plainly  refers  to  political  prudence;) 
I  have  more  understanding  than  all  my  teachers,  for 
thy  testimonies  are  my  meditation."  "I   _~   _ ■  A 

J  J  .  Ver.99. 104. 

understand  more  than  the  ancients,  be-  iso. 
cause  1  keep  thy  precepts."    "  Through  thy  pre- 
cepts I  get  understanding."    "  The  entrance  of 
thy  word  giveth  light;  it  giveth  understanding  to  the 
simple." 

Now  religion  doth  improve  the  understandings  of 
men  by  subduing  their  lusts,  and  moderating  their 
passions.  The  lusts  and  passions  of  men  do  sully 
and  darken  their  minds,  even  by  a  natural  influence, 

vol.  i.  2  k 


426 


Intemperance,  sensuality,  and  fleshly  lusts,  do  de- 
base men's  minds,  and  clog  their  spirits,  make  them 
gross  and  foul,  listless  and  inactive ;  they  sink  us 
down  into  sense,  and  glue  us  to  these  low  and  infe- 
rior things  like  birdlime  ;  they  hamper  and  entan- 
gle our  souls,  and  hinder  their  flight  upwards ;  they 
indispose  and  unfit  our  minds  for  the  most  noble 
and  intellectual  considerations.  So  likewise  the 
exorbitant  passions  of  wrath  and  malice,  envy  and 
revenge,  do  darken  and  distort  the  understandings 
of  men,  do  tincture  the  mind  with  false  colours,  and 
fill  it  with  prejudice  and  undue  apprehensions  of 
things. 

There  is  no  man  that  is  intemperate,  or  lustful,  or 
passionate;  but  besides  the  guilt  he  contracts,  which 
is  continually  fretting  and  disquieting  his  mind,  be- 
sides the  inconveniences  he  brings  upon  himself,  as 
to  his  health,  he  does  likewise  stain  and  obscure  the 
brightness  of  his  soul  and  the  clearness  of  his  dis- 
cerning faculty.  Such  persons  have  not  that  free 
use  of  their  reason  that  they  might  have ;  their  un- 
derstandings are  not  bright  enough,  nor  their  spirits 
pure  and  fine  enough  for  the  exercise  of  the  high- 
est and  noblest  acts  of  reason.  What  clearness  is 
to  the  eye,  that  purity  is  to  our  mind  and  under- 
standing ;  and,  as  the  clearness  of  the  bodily  eye 
doth  dispose  it  for  a  quicker  sight  of  material  ob- 
jects, so  doth  the  purity  of  our  minds,  that  is,  free- 
dom from  lust  and  passion,  dispose  us  for  the 
clearest  and  most  perfect  acts  of  reason  and  under- 
standing. 

Now,  religion  doth  purify  our  minds,  and  refine 
our  spirits,  by  quenching  the  fire  of  lust,  and  sup- 
pressing the  fumes  and  vapours  of  it,  and  by  scatter- 
ing the  clouds  and  mists  of  passion.    And  the  more 


any  man's  soul  is  cleansed  from  the  filth  and  dregs 
of  sensual  lusts,  the  more  nimble  and  expedite  it  will 
be  iu  its  operations.  The  more  any  man  conquers 
his  passions,  the  more  calm  and  sedate  his  spirit  is, 
and  the  greater  equality  he  maintains  in  his  temper, 
his  apprehensions  of  things  will  be  the  more  clear 
and  unprejudiced,  and  his  judgment  more  firm  and 
steady.  And  this  is  the  meaning  of  that  saying  of 
Solomon,  *  He  that  is  slow  to  wrath,  is  of  great,  un- 
derstanding :  but  he  that  is  hasty  of  spirit  exalteth 
folly. 91  Ira  furor  brevis  est. — Anger  is  a  short  fit  of 
madness,  and  he  that  is  passionate  and  furious  de- 
prives himself  of  his  reason,  spoils  his  understand- 
ing, and  helps  to  make  himself  a  fool  :  whereas  he 
tiiat  conquers  his  passions,  and  keeps  them  under, 
doth  thereby  preserve  and  improve  his  understand- 
ing. Freedom  from  irregular  passions  doth  not  only 
signify  that  a  man  is  wise,  but  really  contributes  to 
the  making  of  him  such. 

•2.  Religion  tends  to  the  ease  and  pleasure,  the 
peace  and  tranquillity  of  our  minds:  wherein  hap- 
piness chiefly  consists,  and  which  all  the  wisdom  and 
philosophy  of  the  world  did  always  aim  at,  as  the 
utmost  felicity  of  this  life.    And  that  this  is  the  na- 
tural fruit  of  a  religious  and  virtuous  course  of  life, 
the   Scripture  declares  to   us  in  these  texts  : — 
"  Light  is  sown  for  the  righteous,  and  Pid.MB.iu 
gladnessfortheupright  in  heart."  "Great  adx.ifiS* 
peace  have  all  they  that  love  thy  law,  and  nothing 
shall  offend  them.*'  M  Her  ways  are  ways  prov.  a  17. 
of  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  Isa>  ™r 17> 
peace."  "  The  fruit  of  righteousness  is  peace,  and 
the  effect  of  righteosuness,  quietness   and  assu- 
rance for  ever  f  the  plain  sense  of  which  text  is, 
that  pleasure  and  peace  do  naturally  result  from  a 

2Ki 


428 


holy  and  good  life.  When  a  man  hath  once  engag- 
ed himself  in  a  religious  course,  and  is  habituated 
to  piety  and  holiness,  all  the  exercises  of  religion 
and  devotion,  all  acts  of  goodness  and  virtue,  are 
delightful  to  him.  To  honour  and  worship  God,  to 
pray  to  him  and  to  praise  him,  to  study  his  will,  to 
meditate  upon  him  and  to  love  him,  all  these  bring 
great  pleasure  and  peace  along  with  them.  What 
greater  contentment  and  satisfaction  can  there  be  to 
the  mind  of  man,  when  it  is  once  purified  and  refin- 
ed from  the  dregs  of  sensual  pleasures  and  delights, 
and  raised  to  its  true  height  and  pitch,  than  to  corn- 
template  and  admire  the  infinite  excellences  and 
perfections  of  God,  to  adore  his  greatness,  and  to  love 
his  goodness?  How  can  the  thoughts  of  God  be 
troublesome  to  any  one  who  lives  soberly,  and 
righteously,  and  godly  in  the  world  ?  No  man  that 
loves  goodness  and  righteousness,  hath  any  reason 
to  be  afraid  of  God,  or  to  be  disquieted  with  the 
thoughts  of  him.  There  is  nothing  in  God  that  is 
terrible  to  a  good  man ;  but  all  the  apprehensions, 
which  we  naturally  have  of  him,  speak  comfort  and 
promise  happiness  to  such  a  one.  The  considera- 
tion of  his  attributes,  is  so  far  from  being  a  trouble 
to  him,  that  it  is  his  recreation  and  delight.  It  is  for 
wicked  men  to  dread  God,  and  to  endeavour  to  ba- 
nish the  thoughts  of  him  out  of  their  minds  ;  but  a 
holy  and  virtuous  man  may  have  quiet  and  undis- 
turbed thoughts  even  of  the  justice  of  God,  because 
the  terror  of  it  doth  not  concern  him. 

Now  religion  doth  contribute  to  the  peace  and 
quiet  of  our  minds  these  two  ways.  First,  By  allay- 
ing those  passions,  which  are  apt  to  ruffle  and  dis- 
compose our  spirits.  Malice  and  hatred,  wrath  and 
revenge,  are  very  fretting  and  vexatious,  and  apt  to 


V 


429 

make  our  minds  sore  and  uneasy  ;  but  he  that  can 
moderate  these  affections,  will  find  a  strange  ease 
and  pleasure  in  his  own  spirit.    Secondly,  By  free- 
ing us  from  the  anxieties  of  guilt,  and  the  fears  of  Di- 
vine wrath  and  displeasure;  than  which  nothing  is 
more  stinging  and  tormenting,  and  renders  the  life  of 
man  more  miserable  and  unquiet.    And  what  a 
spring  of  peace  and  joy  must  it  needs  be,  to  appre- 
hend upon  good  grounds  that  God  is  reconciled  to 
us,  and  become  our  friend  ;  that  all  our  sins  are  per- 
fectly forgiven,  and  shall  never  more  be  remem- 
bered against    us!     What  inexpressible  comfort 
does  overflow  the  pious  and  devout  soul  from  the 
remembrance  of  a  holy  and  well-spent  life,  and  a 
conscience  of  its  own  innocency  and  integrity  !  And 
nothing  but  the  practice  of  religion  and  virtue  can 
give  this  ease  and  satisfaction  to  the  mind  of  man. 
For  there  is  a  certain  kind  of  temper  and  disposition, 
which  is  necessary  to  the  pleasure  and  quiet  of  our 
minds,  and  consequently  to  our  happiness  ;  and  that 
is  holiness  and  goodness,  which,  as  it  is  the  perfec- 
tion, so  it  is  likewise  the  happiness  of  the  Divine 
nature :  and,  on  the  contrary,  the  chief  part  of  the 
misery  of  wicked  men,  and  of  those  accursed  spi- 
rits, the  devils,  is  this — that  they  are  of  a  disposition 
contrary  to  God ;  they  are  envious  and  malicious  and 
cruel,  and  of  such  a  temper,  as  is  naturally  a  tor- 
ment and  disquiet  to  itself.    And  here  the  founda- 
tion of  hell  is  laid,  in  the  evil  disposition  of  men's 
minds  ;  and,  till  this  be  cured,  which  can  only  be 
done  by  religion,  it  is  as  impossible  for  a  man  to  be 
happy,  that  is  pleased  and  contented  within  himself, 
as  it  is  for  a  sick  man  to  be  at  ease.    Because  such  a 
man  hath  that  within  him,  which  torments  him,  and 
he  cannot  be  at  ease  till  that  be  removed.  The 


430 


Isa.  lvii.  20,  21. 


man's  spirit  is  out  of  order  and  oft*  the  hinges,  a  tid  till 
that  be  put  in  its  right  frame,  he  will  be  perpetually 
disquieted,  and  can  find  no  rest  within  himself.  The 
prophet  very  fitly  describes  to  us  the  unquiet  con- 
dition of  wicked  men  :  "  The  wicked  is  like  the 
troubled  sea  when  it  cannot  rest,  whose 
waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt ;  there  is 
no  peace  (saith  my  God)  to  the  wicked."  So  long 
as  sin  and  corruption  abound  in  our  hearts  they  will 
be  restlessly  working,  like  wine  which  will  be  in  a 
perpetual  motion  and  agitation,  till  it  have  purged 
itself  of  its  dregs  and  foulness. 

Secondly,  Religion  does  likewise  tend  to  the  hap- 
piness of  the  outward  man.  Now  the  blessings  of 
this  kind  are  such  as  either  respect  our  health  or  es- 
tate, or  reputation  or  relations  ;  and  in  respect  of  all 
these  religion  is  highly  advantageous  to  us. 

1.  As  to  our  health,  a  religious  and  virtuous  life 
doth  eminently  conduce  to  that,  and  to  long  life  as  a 
consequent  of  it.  And  in  this  sense  I  understand  these 
Prov  Hi  i  2   following  texts  :  "  My  son,  forget  not 
my  law,  but  let  thy  heart  keep  my  com- 
mandments ;  for  length  of  days  and  long  life  shall 
they  add  to  thee;"  and,  (ver.7  and  8.)"  Fear  the  Lord, 
and  depart  from  evil,  it  shall  be  health  to  thy  navel, 
and  marrow  to  thy  bones  ;"  and  (ver.  16.)  among  the 
temporal  advantages  of  wisdom  or  religion  this  is 
mentioned  as  the  first  and  principal :  "  Length  of  days 
is  in  her  right  hand  ;"  and,  (ver.  18.)  "  She  is  a  tree  of 
life  to  them  that  lay  hold  upon  her;"  and,  again, 
Prov.  viii.    "  Whoso  findeth  me,  findeth  life;  but  he 
35, 36.      t]iat  sinneth  against  me  wrongeth  his  own 
sour  (that  is,  is  injurious  to  his  own  life).  "All 
they  that  hate  me  love  death  :"  all  which  is  un- 
doubtedly true  in  a  spiritual  sense,  but  is  certainly 


431 


meant  by  Solomon  in  the  natural  sense.  And  these 
promises  of  the  blessings  of  health  and  long  life  to  good 
men  are  not  only  declaratory  of  the  good  pleasure  and 
intention  of  God  towards  them,  but  likewise  of  the 
natural  tendency  of  the  thing.  For  religion  doth 
oblige  men  to  the  practice  of  those  virtues  which  do 
in  their  own  nature  conduce  to  the  preservation  of 
our  health  and  the  lengthening  of  our  days  ;  such  as 
temperance  and  chastity,  and  the  moderation  of  our 
passions ;  and  the  contrary  vices  to  these  do  appa- 
rently tend  to  the  impairing  of  men's  health  and  the 
shortening  of  their  days.  How  many  have  wasted 
and  consumed  their  bodies  by  lust,  and  brought 
grievous  pains  and  mortal  diseases  upon  themselves. 
See  how  the  wise  man  describes  the  sad  conse- 
quences of  this  sin  :  "  He  goes  as  an  ox  pr0v.  vii. 
to  the  slaughter,  till  a  dart  strike  through  22» 23- 
his  liver;  as  a  bird  hasteneth  to  the  snare,  and  know- 
eth  not  that  it  is  for  his  life;"  and,  (ver.  25,  26,  27.) 
"  Let  not  thy  heart  decline  to  her  ways,  go  riot 
astray  in  her  paths ;  for  she  hath  cast  down  many 
wounded;  yea,  many  strong  men  have  been  slain 
by  her ;  her  house  is  the  way  to  hell,"  (that  isr  to  the 
grave)  "  going  down  to  the  chambers  of  death."  How 
many  have  been  ruined  by  intemperance  and  excess, 
and  most  unnaturally  have  perverted  those  blessings 
which  God  hath  given  for  the  support  of  nature  to 
the  overthrow  and  destruction  of  it?  How  often  hath 
men's  malice  and  envy  and  discontent  against  others 
terminated  in  a  cruel  revenge  upon  themselves?  How 
many,  by  the  wild  fury  and  extravagancy  of  their 
own  passions,  have  put  their  bodies  into  a  combus- 
tion, and  fired  their  spirits  ;  and,  by  stirring  up  their 
rage  and  choler  against  others,  have  armed  that 
fierce  humour  against  themselves. 


432 


2.  As  to  our  estates,  religion  is  a  mighty  advan- 
tage to  men  in  that  respect.  Not  only  in  regard  of 
God's  more  especial  providence  and  peculiar  bless- 
ing, which  usually  attends  good  men  in  their  under- 
takings, and  crowns  them  with  good  success,  but 
also  from  the  nature  of  the  thing.  And  this,  I  doubt 
not,  is  the  meaning  of  those  expressions  of  the  wise 
man  concerning  the  temporal  benefits  and  advan- 

Prov  Hi  i6  ta»es  °f  wisdom  or  religion  :  "  In  her  left 
viii.  2i.  hand  are  riches  and  honour."  "  They 
that  love  me  shall  inherit  substance,  and  I  will 
fill  their  treasures."  And  this  religion  principally 
does,  by  charging  men  with  truth  and  fidelity  and 
justice  in  their  dealings,  which  are  a  sure  way  of 
thriving,  and  will  hold  out  when  all  fraudulent  arts 
and  devices  will  fail.    And  this  also  Solomon  ob- 

Prov  x  9  serves  to  us :  "  He  that  walketh  uprightly 
walketh  surely ;  but  he  that  perverteth 
his  way  shall  be  known  :"  his  indirect  dealing  will 
be  discovered,  one  time  or  other,  and  then  he  loses 
his  reputation,  and  his  interest  sinks.  Falsehood 
and  deceit  only  serve  a  present  turn,  and  the  conse- 
quence of  them  is  pernicious  ;  but  truth  and  fidelity 

Prov  x  25  are  a  lastn,g  advantage :  "  The  right- 
xii.19.  eous  hath  an  everlasting  foundation." 
"  The  lip  of  truth  is  established  for  ever;  but  a 
lying  tongue  is  but  for  a  moment."  And  religion 
does  likewise  engage  men  to  diligence  and  indus- 
try in  their  callings,  and  how  much  this  con- 
duces to  the  advancement  of  men's  fortunes  daily 
experience  teaches,  and  the  wise  man  hath  told  us  : 

Prov.  x.  4.     "  The  diligent  hand  makes  rich  ;"  and, 
xxii.  29.  again,  "  Seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in 
business,  he  shall  stand  before  princes,  he  shall  not 
stand  before  mean  p  ersons." 


435 


And  where  men  by  reason  of  the  difficult  circum- 
stances of  their  condition  cannot  arrive  to  any  emi- 
nency  of  estate,  yet  religion  makes  a  compensation 
for  this,  by  teaching  men  to  be  contented  with  that 
moderate  and  competent  fortune  which  God  hath 
given  them.  For  the  shortest  way  to  be  rich  is  not 
by  enlarging  our  estates,  but  by  contracting  our  de- 
sires. What  Seneca  says  of  philosophy,  is  much 
more  true  of  religion,  u  Prsestatopes  sapientia,  quas- 
cuicunque  fecit  supervacuas  dedit it  makes  alt 
those  rich  to  whom  it  makes  riches  superfluous,  and 
they  are  so  to  those,  who  are  taught  by  religion  to 
be  contented  with  such  a  portion  of  them  as  God's 
providence  hath  thought  fit  to  allot  to  them. 

3.  As  to  our  reputation.  There  is  nothing  gives 
a  man  a  more  firm  and  established  reputation  among 
Wise  and  serious  persons  (whose  judgment  is  only 
valuable)  than  a  prudent  and  substantial  piety.  This 
doth  many  times  command  reverence  and  esteem 
from  the  worser  sort  of  men,  and  such  as  are  no  great 
friends  to  religion  :  and  sometimes  the  force  of  truth 
will  extort  an  acknowledgment  of  its  excellency, 
even  from  its  greatest  enemies.  I  know  very  well 
that  good  men  may,  and  often  do,  blemish  the  repu- 
tation of  their  piety,  by  overacting  some  things  in 
religion  ;  by  an  indiscreet  zeal  about  things  wherein 
religion  is  not  concerned,  by  an  ungrateful  austerity 
and  sourness,  w  hich  religion  doth  not  require ;  by 
little  affectations,  and  an  imprudent  ostentation  of 
devotion;  but  a  substantial  and  solid,  a  discreet  and 
unaffected  piety,  which  makes  no  great  noise  and 
shew,  but  expresses  itself  in  a  constant  and  serious 
devotion,  and  is  accompanied  with  the  fruits  of  good- 
ness and  kindness  and  righteousness  towards  men, 
will  not  only  give  a  man  a  credit  and  value  among 


434 


the  sober  and  the  virtuous,  but  even  among  the  vi- 
cious and  more  degenerate  sort  of  men.  Upon  this 
account  it  is  that  the  apostle  adviseth  Christians,  if 
they  would  recommend  themselves  to  the  esteem  of 
God  and  men,  earnestly  to  mind  the  weighty  and 
substantial  parts  of  religion  ;  "  Let  not  then  your 
good  be  evil  spoken  of;  for  the  kingdom  of  God  is 
not  meats  and  drinks,  but  righteousness  and  peace, 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  he  that  in  these 
things  serveth  Christ  is  acceptable  to  God,  and  ap- 
proved of  men." 

It  is  true  indeed  there  are  some  persons  of  so  pro- 
fligate a  temper,  and  of  such  an  inveterate  enmity  to 
all  goodness,  as  to  scorn  and  reproach  even  religion 
and  virtue  itself.  But  the  reproach  of  such  persons 
does  not  really  wound  a  man's  reputation.  For  why 
should  any  man  be  troubled  at  the  contumelies  of 
those  whose  judgment  deserves  not  to  be  valued, 
who  despise  goodness  and  good  men  out  of  malice 
and  ignorance?  If  these  reproaches  which  they  cast 
upon  them  were  the  censures  of  wise  and  sober  men, 
a  man's  reputation  might  be  concerned  in  them  ;  but 
they  are  the  rash  words  of  inconsiderate  and  injudi- 
cious men,  the  extravagant  speeches  of  those  who 
are  unexperienced  in  the  things  they  speak  against ; 
and  therefore  no  wise  man  will  be  troubled  at  them, 
or  think  either  religion  or  himself  disparaged  by 
them. 

4.  As  to  our  relations.  Religion  also  conduceth 
to  the  happiness  of  these,  as  it  derives  a  large  and 
extensive  blessing  upon  all  that  belongs  to  us ;  the 
goodness  of  God  being  so  diffusive  as  to  scatter  his 
blessings  "  round  about  the  habitations  of  the  just," 
and  "  to  shew  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that 
love  him  and  keep  his  commandments.  '  So  David 


435 


tells  us,  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  feareth     ,  .. 

lT        ,  liTi        i  i     •     i  •     Psal.  cxu.  t,  2,  3. 

the  Lord,  and  delighteth  greatly  in  his 
commandments.    His  seed  shall  be  mighty  upon 
earth:  the  generation  of  the  upright  shall  be  blessed. 
Wealth  and  riches  are  in  his  house,  and  his  righte- 
ousness endureth  for  ever."  So  Solomon:  ...  o? 
"  A  good  man  leaveth  an  inheritance  to 
his  children's  children;"  and  again,  "In  pr0v. xiv.26. 
the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong  confidence, 
and  his  children  shall  have  a  place  of  refuge."  But 
the  wicked  derives  a  curse  upon  all  that  is  re- 
lated to  him  ;  he  is  said  "  to  trouble  his  own 
house :"  and  again,  "  The  wicked  are  „ 

1  Prov.  xi.  29. 

overthrown,  and  are  not,  but  the  house         xii.  7. 
of  the  righteous  shall  stand." 

But,  setting  aside  the  consideration  of  God's 
providence,  religion  doth  likewise  in  its  own  na- 
ture tend  to  the  welfare  of  those  who  are  related 
to  us  ;  because  it  lays  the  strictest  obligations  upon 
men  to  take  care  of  their  families  and  relations,  and 
to  make  the  best  provision  both  for  their  comfortable 
subsistence  here  in  this  world,  and  their  salvation  in 
the  next.  And  those  who  neglect  these  duties,  the 
Scripture  is  so  far  from  esteeming  them  Christians, 
that  it  accounts  them  worse  than  heathens  and  in- 
fidels :  "  He  that  provideth  not  for  his 

.  „  "'    ,  ...  ,  1  Tim.  v.  8. 

own,  especially  those  of  his  own  house, 
is  worse  than  an  infidel,  and  hath  denied  the  faith." 
This  I  know  is  spoken  in  respect  of  temporal  provi- 
sion, but  it  holds  a  fortiori  as  to  the  care  of  their 
souls. 

Besides,  it  is  many  times  seen,  that  the  posterity 
of  holy  and  good  men,  especially  of  such  as  have 
evinced  their  piety  towards  God,  by  bounty  and 
charity  to  men,  have  met  with  unusual  kindness  and 


436 


respect  from  others;  and  have  by  a  strange  and  se- 
cret disposition  of  Divine  providence  been  unexpect- 
edly cared  and  provided  for;  and  that,  as  they  have 
all  the  reason  in  the  world  to  believe,  upon  the  ac- 
count and  for  the  sake  of  the  piety  and  charity  of 
their  parents.  This  David  tells  us  from  his  own 
ps  xxx  ii  25  particular  observation :    "  I  have  been 

young,  and  now  am  old,  yet  have  I  not 
seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging 
bread."  And  that  by  the  righteous  is  here  meant 
the  good  and  merciful  man,  appears  from  the  de- 
Ver  26      scription  of  him  in  the  next  words  :  "  He 

is  ever  merciful  and  lendeth,  and  his 
seed  is  blessed."  And,  on  the  contrary,  the  poste- 
rity of  the  wicked  do  many  times  inherit  the  fruits 
of  their  father's  sins  and  vices ;  and  that  not  only 
by  a  just  judgment  of  God,  but  from  the  natural 
course  and  consequence  of  things.  And,  in  this 
sense,  that  expression  in  Job  is  often  verified,  that 

job  xxi  19  ^*oc*  "  *ays  UP  tne  *m(lluty  °f  wicked 
men  for  their  children."  And  doth  not 
experience  testify,  that  the  intemperate  and  unjust 
do  many  times  transmit  their  bodily  infirmities  and 
diseases  to  their  children,  and  entail  a  secret  curse 
upon  their  estates,  which  does  insensibly  waste  and 
consume  it,  or  eat  out  the  heart  and  comfort  of  it? 
Thus  you  see  how  religion  in  all  respects  conduces 
to  the  happiness  of  this  life. 

II.  Religion  and  virtue  do  likewise  most  certainly 
and  directly  tend  to  the  eternal  happiness  and  salva- 
tion of  men  in  the  other  world.  And  this  is  incom- 
parably the  greatest  advantage  that  redounds  to  men 
by  being  religious,  in  comparison  of  which  all  tem- 
poral considerations  are  less  than  nothing  and  vanity. 
The  worldly  advantages  that  religion  brings  to  men 


43? 

in  this  present  life  are  a  sensible  recommendation  of 
religion  even  to  the  lowest  and  meanest  spirits  ;  but 
to  those  who  are  raised  above  sense,  and  aspire  after 
immortality,  who  believe  the  perpetual  duration  of 
their  souls  and  the  resurrection  of  their  bodies;  to 
those  who  are  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  incousi- 
derableness  of  this  short  dying  life,  aud  of  all  the 
concernments  of  it,  in  comparison  of  that  eternal 
state  which  remains  for  us  in  another  life ;  to  these, 
I  say,  the  consideration  of  a  future  happiness,  and  of 
those  unspeakable  and  everlasting  rewards,  which 
shall  then  be  given  to  holiness  and  virtue,  is  cer- 
tainly the  most  powerful  motive,  and  the  most  likely 
to  prevail  upon  them.  For  those  who  are  persuad- 
ed that  they  shall  coutinue  for  ever,  cannot  choose 
but  aspire  after  a  happiness  commensurate  to  their 
duration,  nor  can  any  thing,  that  is  conscious  to  it- 
self of  its  own  immortality,  be  satisfied  and  content- 
ed with  any  thing  less  than  the  hopes  of  an  endless 
felicity :  and  this  hope  religion  alone  gives  men, 
and  the  Christian  religion  only  can  settle  men  in  a 
firm  and  unshaken  assurance  of  it.  But  because  all 
men  who  have  entertained  any  religion  have  con- 
sented to  these  principles,  of  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  and  the  recompenses  of  another  world,  and 
have  always  promised  to  themselves  some  rewards 
of  piety  and  virtue  after  this  life  ;  and  because  I  did 
more  particularly  design  from  this  text  to  speak  of 
the  temporal  benefits  and  advantages  which  redound 
to  men  from  religion;  therefore  I  shall  content  myself 
to  shew  very  briefly,  how  a  religious  and  virtuous 
life  doth  conduce  to  our  future  happiness.  And 
that  upon  these  two  accounts ; — from  the  promise  of 
God,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  thing. 


438 

t  _   .  0       1.  From  the  promise  of  God.  "  God- 

l  Tim.  iv.  8,  r 

hness  (saith  the  apostle)  hath  the  pro- 
mise of  the  life  that  is  to  come."  God  hath  all  along 
in  the  Scripture  suspended  the  promise  of  eternal 
life  upon  this  condition.  He  hath  peremptorily  de- 
clared, that  without  obedience  and  holiness  of  life 
no  man  shall  ever  see  the  Lord.  And  this  very 
thing,  that  it  is  the  constitution  and  appointment  of 
God,  might  be  argument  enough  to  us  (if  there  were 
no  other)  to  convince  us  of  the  necessity  of  obeying 
the  laws  of  God  in  order  to  our  happiness,  and  to 
persuade  us  thereunto.  For  eternal  life  is  the  gift 
of  God,  and  he  may  do  what  he  will  with  his  own. 
He  is  master  of  his  own  favours,  and  may  dispense 
them  upon  what  terms  and  conditions  he  pleases. 
But  it  is  no  hard  condition  that  he  hath  imposed 
upon  us.  If  religion  brought  no  advantages  to  us 
in  this  world,  yet  the  happiness  of  heaven  is  so  great 
as  will  abundantly  recompense  all  our  pains  and  en- 
deavours; there  is  temptation  enough  in  the  reward 
to  engage  any  man  in  the  work.  Had  God  thought 
fit  to  have  imposed  the  most  grievous  and  difficult 
things  upon  us,  ought  we  not  to  have  submitted  to 
them,  and  to  have  undertaken  them  with  cheerfulness 
upon  such  great  and  glorious  encouragements?  As 
Naaman's  servants  said  to  them  in  another  case, 
"  Had  he  bid  thee  do  some  great  thing,  wouldest 
thou  not  have  done  it?"  So  if  God  had  said,  that 
without  poverty  and  actual  martyrdom,  "  no  man 
shall  see  the  Lord,"  would  not  any  man  that  be- 
lieves heaven  and  hell,  and  understands  what  these 
words  signify,  and  what  it  is  to  escape  extreme  and 
eternal  misery,  and  to  enjoy  unspeakable  and  end- 
less glory,  have  been  willing  to  accept  these  condi- 


439 

tions?  "  How  much  more,  when  he  hath  only  said, 
"  Wash,  and  be  clean?'"  and  "  Let  every  man  that 
hath  this  hope  in  him,  purify  himself  as  he  is  pure  :" 
but  God  hath  not  dealt  thus  with  us,  nor  is  the  im- 
posing of  this  condition  of  eternal  life  a  mere  arbi- 
trary constitution  ;  therefore  I  shall  endeavour  to 
shew, 

2dly.  That  a  religious  and  holy  life  doth,  from  the 
very  nature  and  reason  of  the  thing,  conduce  to  our 
future  happiness,  by  way  of  necessary  disposi- 
tion and  preparation  of  us  for  it.  We  cannot  be 
otherwise  happy,  but  by  our  conformity  to  God  : 
without  this  we  cannot  possibly  love  him,  nor  find 
any  pleasure  or  happiness  in  communion  with  him. 
For  we  cannot  love  a  nature  contrary  to  our  own, 
nor  delight  to  converse  with  it.  Therefore  religion, 
in  order  to  the  fitting  of  us  for  the  happiness  of  the 
next  life,  does  design  to  mortify  our  lusts  and  pas- 
sions, and  to  restrain  us  from  the  inordinate  love  of 
the  gross  and  sensual  delights  of  this  world ;  to  call 
off  our  minds  from  these  inferior  things,  and  to  raise 
them  to  higher  and  more  spiritual  objects,  that  we 
may  be  disposed  for  the  happiness  of  the  other 
world,  and  taught  to  relish  the  delights  of  it ; 
whereas,  should  we  set  our  hearts  only  upon  these 
things,  and  be  able  to  taste  no  pleasure  in  any  thing 
but  what  is  sensual  and  earthly,  we  must  needs  be 
extremely  miserable  when  we  come  into  the  other 
world ;  because  we  should  meet  with  nothing  to  en- 
tertain ourselves  withal,  no  employment  suitable  to 
our  disposition,  no  pleasure  that  would  agree  with 
our  depraved  appetites  and  vicious  inclinations.  All 
that  heaven  and  happiness  signifies  is  unsuitable  to 
a  wicked  man,  and  therefore  could  be  no  felicity  to 


440 


him.  But  this  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  more 
t  \id.  Serm.  vUi.  fully  to  in  a  subsequent  )' discourse. 

From  all  that  hath  been  said,  the  rea- 
sonableness of  religion  clearly  appears,  which  tends 
so  directly  to  the  happiness  of  men,  and  is  upon  all 
accounts  calculated  for  our  benefit.  Let  but  all 
things  be  truly  considered  and  cast  up,  and  it  will 
be  found,  that  there  is  no  advantage  to  any  man  from 
an  irreligious  and  vicious  course  of  life.  I  chal- 
lenge any  one  to  instance  in  any  real  benefit  that 
ever  came  to  him  this  way.  Let  the  sinner  declare 
what  he  hath  found  by  experience.  Hath  lewdness 
and  intemperance  been  more  for  his  health  than  if 
he  had  lived  chastely  and  soberly  ?  Hath  falsehood 
and  injustice  proved  at  the  long  run  more  for  the 
advancement  and  security  of  his  estate,  than  truth 
and  honesty  would  have  done?  Hath  any  vice  that 
he  hath  lived  in  made  him  more  true  friends,  and 
gained  him  a  better  reputation  in  the  world  than  the 
practice  of  holiness  and  virtue  would  have  done  ? 
Hath  he  found  that  peace  and  satisfaction  of  mind 
in  an  evil  course,  and  that  quiet  enjoyment  of  him- 
self, and  comfortable  assurance  of  God's  favour,  and 
good  hopes  of  his  future  condition,  which  a  religi- 
ous and  virtuous  life  would  have  given  him?  Nay, 
on  the  contrary,  have  not  some  of  his  vices  weakened 
his  body,  and  broken  his  health,  have  not  others 
dissipated  his  estate,  and  reduced  him  to  want? 
What  notorious  vice  is  there  that  doth  not  blemish 
a  man's  reputation,  and  make  him  either  hated  or 
despised,  and  that  not  only  by  the  wise  and  the  vir- 
tuous, but  even  by  the  generality  of  men?  But  was 
ever  any  wicked  man  free  from  the  stings  of  a  guilty 
conscience,  and  the  torment  of  a  restless  and  uneasy 
mind,  from  the  secret  dread  of  Divine  displeasure, 


441 


and  of  the  vengeance  of  another  world  ?  Let  the 
sinner  freely  speak  the  very  inward  sense  of  his  soul 
in  this  matter,  and  spare  not ;  and  I  doubt  not,  if  he 
will  deal  clearly  and  impartially,  but  that  he  will 
acknowledge  all  this  to  be  true,  and  is  able  to  con- 
firm it  from  his  own  sad  experience.  For  this  is 
the  natural  fruit  of  sin  and  the  present  revenge 
which  it  takes  upon  sinners,  besides  that  fearful  pu- 
nishment which  shall  be  inflicted  on  them  in  ano- 
ther life. 

What  reason  then  can  any  man  pretend  against 
religion,  when  it  is  so  apparently  for  the  benefit  not 
only  of  human  society,  but  of  every  particular  per- 
son, when  there  is  no  real  interest  of  this  world  but 
may  ordinarily  be  as  effectually  promoted  and  pur- 
sued to  as  great  advantage,  nay,  usually  to  far 
greater,  by  a  man  that  lives  soberly,  and  righteously,  ' 
and  godly  in  the  world,  than  by  any  one  that  leads 
the  contrary  course  of  life?  Let  no  man  then  say, 
with   those  profane  persons  whom   the  prophet 
speaks  of,  "  It  is  in  vain  to  serve  the  Lord,  ... 
and  what  profit  is  it  that  we  have  kept 
his  commandments  ?"  God  has  not  been  so  hard  a 
master  to  us  that  we  have  reason  thus  to  complain  of 
him.    He  hath  given  us  no  laws  but  what  are  for 
our  good  ;  nay,  so  gracious  hath  he  been  to  us  as  to 
link  together  our  duty  and  our  interest,  and  to  make 
those  very  things  the  instances  of  our  obedience, 
which  are  the  natural  means  and  causes  of  our  hap- 
piness.   The  devil  was  so  far  in  the  right,  when  he 
charged  Job  that  he  did  not  "  serve  God  for  nought/' 
It  is  he  himself  that  is  the  hard  master,  and  makes 
men  serve  him  for  nought,  who  rewards  his  drudges 
and  slaves  with  nothing  but  shame  and  sorrow  and 
misery.    But  God  requires  no  man's  service  upon 

vol.  i.  2  L 


442 


hard  and  unreasonable  terms.    The  greatest  part  of 
our  work  is  a  present  reward  to  itself,  and  for  what* 
ever  else  we  do  or  suffer  for  him,  he  offers  us  abun- 
dant consideration.    And  if  men  did  but  truly  and 
wisely  love  themselves,  they  would  upon  this  very 
ground,  if  there  were  no  other,  become  religious. 
For  when  all  is  done  there  is  no  man  can  serve  his 
own  interest  better,  than  by  serving  God.  Religion 
conduceth  both  to  our  present  and  future  happi- 
ness, and  when  the  gospel  chargeth  us  with  piety  to- 
wards God,  and  justice  and  charity  towards  men, 
and  temperance  and  chastity  in  reference  to  our- 
selves, the  true  interpretation  of  these  laws  is  this, 
God  requires  of  men,  in  order  to  their  eternal  happi- 
ness, that  they  should  do  those  things  which  tend  to 
their  temporal  welfare;  that  is,  in  plainer  words,  he 
promises  to  make  us  happy  for  ever,  upon  con- 
dition, that  we  will  but  do  that  which  is  best  for 
ourselves  in  this  world.    To  conclude,  religion  is 
founded  in  the  interest  of  men  rightly  apprehended. 
So  that  if  the  God  of  this  world,  and  the  lusts  of 
men,  did  not  blind  their  eyes,  so  as  to  render  them 
unfit  to  discern  their  true  interest,  it  would  be  im- 
possible, so  long  as  men  love  themselves,  and  desire 
their  own  happiness,  to  keep  them  from  being  reli- 
gious; for  they  could  not  but  conclude  that  to  be 
their  interest,  and  being  so  convinced  they  would 
resolve  to  pursue  it  and  stick  to  it. 


443 


SERMON  V. 

THE  EXCELLENCY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  RELIGION. 

Yea  doubtless,  and  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for 
the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus 
my  Lord. — Phil.  iii.  8. 

In  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  the  apostle  makes 
a  comparison  between  the  Jewish  and  the  Christ- 
ian religion,  and  shews  the  Christian  to  be  in  truth 
and  substance  what  the  Jewish  was  only  in  type 
and  shadow  (ver.  3.);  "We  are  the  circumcision, 
which  worship  God  in  the  Spirit/'  And  then  he 
enumerates  the  several  privileges  he  was  partaker  of 
by  virtue  of  his  being  born  in  the  Jewish  church  ; 
(ver.  4,  5,  6.)  "  Though  I  might  also  have  confidence 
in  the  flesh,  if  any  other  man  thinketh  that  he  hath 
whereof  he  might  trust  in  the  flesh,  I  more;  circum- 
cised the  eighth  day,  of  the  stock  of  Israel,"  &c. 
And  yet  he  tells  us,  he  was  contented  to  forego  all 
these  advantages  for  Christ  and  the  Christian  reli- 
gion ;  (ver.  7.)  "  But  what  things  were  gain  to  me 
those  I  accounted  loss  for  Christ."  And  not  only 
these,  but  if  there  were  any  thing  else  that  men  va- 
lue in  this  w  orld  he  was  willing  to  hazard  that  also 
upon  the  same  account;  (ver.  8.)  "Yea  doubtless,  and 
I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord." 

In  which  words  the  apostle  declares  the  high 
esteem  he  had  for  the  Christian  religion,  which  he 

2  l  2 


444 


calls  the  "  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord  f  the 
excellency  whereof  appeared  so  great  to  him,  that 
he  valued  nothing  in  comparison  of  the  advantages 
he  had  by  the  knowledge  of  it. 

My  design  at  this  time  from  this  text  is  to  repre- 
sent the  excellency  of  this  knowledge  of  the  Christ- 
ian religion  above  that  of  any  other  religion  or  in- 
stitution in  the  world.  And  here  I  shall  not  consi- 
der the  external  evidence  which  we  have  of  the 
truth  of  Christianity  and  of  the  divinity  of  its  doc- 
trine, in  which  respect  it  hath  incomparably  the  ad- 
vantage of  any  other  religion  :  but  only  the  internal 
excellency  of  the  doctrine  itself,  abstracting  from 
the  Divine  authority  of  it ;  and  that  in  these  four 
respects  : 

First,  As  it  does  more  clearly  reveal  to  us  the 
nature  of  God,  which  is  the  great  foundation  of  all 
religion. 

Secondly,  As  it  gives  us  a  more  certain  and  per- 
fect law  for  the  government  of  our  lives. 

Thirdly,  As  it  propounds  to  us  more  powerful 
arguments  to  persuade  men  to  the  obedience  of  this 
law. 

Fourthly,  As  it  furnishes  us  with  better  motives 
and  considerations  to  patience  and  contentedness 
under  the  evils  and  afflictions  of  this  life.  Now 
these  are  the  greatest  advantages  that  any  religion 
can  have: — To  give  men  right  apprehensions  of  God, 
a  perfect  rule  of  good  life,  and  efficacious  arguments 
to  persuade  men  to  be  good,  and  patiently  to  bear 
the  evils  and  sufferings  of  this  life.  And  these  shall 
be  the  heads  of  my  following  discourse. 

I.  The  Christian  religion  doth  more  clearly  re- 
Veal  to  us  the  nature  of  God,  than  any  religion  ever 
did.    And  to  have  right  apprehensions  of  God  is 


445 


the  great  foundation  of  all  religion  :  for  according 
as  men's  notions  of  God  are  such  will  their  religion 
be.    If  men  have  gross  and  false  conceptions  of 
God  their  religion  will  be  absurd  and  superstitious. 
If  men  fancy  God  to  be  an  ill-natured  being,  armed 
with  infinite  power,  one  that  delights  in  the  misery 
and  ruin  of  his  creatures,  and  is  ready  to  take  all 
advantages  against  them,  they  may  fear  him,  but 
they  will  hate  him  ;  and  they  will  be  apt  to  be  such 
towards  one  another  as  they  fancy  God  to  be  to- 
wards them  ;  for  all  religion  doth  naturally  incline 
men  to  imitate  him  whom  they  worship. 

Now  the  Christian  religion  gives  us  a  more  per- 
fect and  a  more  lovely  character  of  God  than  any 
religion  ever  did.    Jt  represents  him  to  us  as  a  pure 
spirit  (which  the  heathen  did  not  generally  believe), 
and  that  he  is  to  be  worshipped  in  such  a  manner  as 
is  most  suitable  to  his  spiritual  nature  (which  not 
only  the  heathens,  but  even  the  Jews  themselves, 
were  extremely  mistaken  about);  "  God  is  a  spirit 
(says  our  Saviour),  and  they  that  worship  him,  must 
worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."    It  is  true  in- 
deed God  himself  did  command  sacrifices  to  the 
Jews,  and  all  those  external  and  troublesome  ob- 
servances Qf  which  their  religion  did  consist:  but 
then  it  is  to  be  considered,  that  he  did  not  institute 
this  way  of  worship  because  it  was  most  suitable  to 
his  own  nature,  but  because  of  the  carnality  of 
their  hearts  and  the  proneness  of  that  people  to  idol- 
atry.   God  did  not  prescribe  these  things  because 
they  were  best,  but  because  the  temper  of  that  peo- 
ple would  then  admit  of  nothing  better.    And  this 
the  Scriptures  gives  us  several  intimations  of :  "  Thou 
desirest  not  sacrifice,  thou  delightest  not 

.  /v»    •         5,         •  i  •  i  i    Psalm  Ixi.  16.  . 

in  burnt-onenngs,     saith  JDavid:  and 


446 

elsewhere  more  expressly  to  this  purpose,  "  I  spake 

Jer  vii    22     "0t  Unt°  ^°UV  ^at^el*S  (SayS  ^od  DY  tne 

prophet  Jeremiah)  nor  commanded  I  hem, 
in  the  day  that  I  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt,  concerning  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices; 
but  this  thing  commanded  I  them,  saying,  Obey  my 
voice:"  a  sufficient  intimation  that  God  did  not 
primarily  intend  to  appoint  this  way  of  worship,  and 
to  impose  it  upon  them  as  that  which  was  most 
proper  and  agreeable  to  him,  but  that  he  condes- 
cended to    it  as  most  suitable  to  their  present 
state  and  inclination.    And  in  this  sense  also  some 
understand  what  God  says  to  the  same  people  by 
the  prophet  Ezekiel,  that  he  "  gave  them 
statutes  that  were  not  good. 
And  as  the  Christian  religion  gives  a  more  per- 
fect, so  a  more  amiable  and  lovely  character  of  the 
Divine  nature.    No  religion  that  ever  was  in  the 
world  does  so  fully  represent  the  goodness  of  God 
and  his  tender  love  to  mankind,  which  is  the  best 
and  most  powerful  argument  to  the  love  of  God. 
The  heathens  did  generally  dread  God,  and  looked 
upon  him  as  fierce  and  cruel  and  revengeful ;  and 
therefore  they  endeavoured  to  appease  him  by  the 
horrid  and  barbarous  sacrifices  of  men,  and  of  their 
own  children.     And  all  along  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment God  is  generally  represented  as  very  strict 
and  severe.    But  there  are  no  where  so  plain  and 
full  declarations  of  his  mercy  and  love  to  the  sons 
of  men  as  are  madein  the  gospel.  In  the  Old  Testa- 
ment God  is  usually  styled  "  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  the 
great  and  the  terrible  God  f  but  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment he  is  represented  to  us  by  milder  titles  :  "  the 
God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  the  Fa- 
ther of  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  consolations ;  the 


447 


God  of  all  patience;  the  God  of  love  and  peace 
nay,  he  is  said  to  be  love  itself,  and  to  dwell  in  love. 
And  this  difference  between  the  style  of  the  Old  and 
New  Testament  is  so  remarkable,  that  one  of  the 
greatest  sects  in  the  primitive  church  (I  mean  that 
of  the  gnostics)  did  upon  this  very  ground  found 
their  heresy  of  two  gods  ;  the  one  evil  and  fierce 
and  cruel,  whom  they  called  the  God  of  the  Old 
Testament;  the  other  good  and  kind  and  merciful, 
whom  they  called  the  God  of  the  New.  So  great 
a  difference  is  there  between  the  representations 
which  are  made  of  God  in  the  books  of  the  Jew  ish 
and  the  Christian  religion,  as  to  give  at  least  some 
colour  and  pretence  for  an  imagination  of  two 
gods. 

II.  Christian  religion  hath  given  us  a  more  certain 
and  perfect  law  for  the  government  of  our  lives. 
It  hath  made  our  duty  more  plain  and  certain,  in 
many  instances,  than  either  the  philosophy  of  the 
heathen,  or  the  precepts  of  Moses  had  done.  It 
commands  universal  love  and  kindness  and  good- 
will among  men,  a  readiness  to  forgive  our  greatest 
enemies,  "  to  do  good  to  them  that  hate  us,  to  bless 
them  that  curse  us,  and  to  pray  for  them  that  de^ 
spitefully  use  us  and  persecute  us  ;"  and  does  in- 
culcate these  precepts  more  vehemently,  and  forbid 
malice  and  hatred,  and  revenge  and  contention  more 
strictly  and  peremptorily,  than  any  religion  ever  did 
before:  as  will  appear  to  any  one  that  does  but 
attentively  read  our  Saviour's  sermon  upon  the 
Mount. 

And  as  Christianity  hath  given  us  a  more  certain* 
so  likewise  a  more  perfect  law  for  the  government  of 
our  lives.  All  the  precepts  of  it  are  reasonable  and 
wise,  requiring  such  duties  of  us  as  are  suitable  to 


448 


the  light  of  nature,  and  do  approve  themselves  to 
the  best  reason  of  mankind,  such  as  have  their  foun- 
dation in  the  nature  of  God,  and  are,  in  imitation  of 
the  Divine  excellences,  such  as  tend  to  the  perfec- 
tion of  human  nature,  and  to  raise  the  minds  of  men 
to  the  highest  pitch  of  goodness  and  virtue.  The 
laws  of  our  religion  are  such  as  are  generally  use- 
ful and  beneficial  to  the  world,  as  do  tend  to  the 
outward  peace  and  the  health,  to  the  inward  com- 
fort and  contentment,  and  to  the  universal  happiness 
of  mankind.  They  command  nothing  that  is  unne- 
cessary and  burdensome,  as  were  the  numerous 
rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Jewish  religion,  but  what 
is  reasonable,  and  useful,  and  substantial :  and 
they  omit  nothing  that  may  tend  to  the  glory  of  God, 
or  the  welfare  of  men,  nor  do  they  restrain  us  in 
any  thing  but  what  is  contrary  either  to  the  regular 
inclinations  of  nature,  or  to  our  reason  and  true  in- 
terest. They  forbid  us  nothing  but  what  is  base  and 
unworthy,  to  serve  our  humours  and  passions,  to 
reproach  our  understanding,  and  to  make  ourselves 
fools  and  beasts  :  in  a  word,  nothing  but  what  tends 
either  to  our  private  harm  and  prejudice,  or  to  pub- 
lic disorder  and  confusion. 

And  that  this  is  the  tenor  of  the  laws  of  the  gos- 
pel will  appear  to  any  one  from  our  Saviour's  ser- 
mons and  discourses :  particularly  that  upon  the 
Mount;  wherein  he  charges  his  disciples  and  follow- 
ers to  be  humble,  and  meek,  and  righteous,  and 
merciful,  and  pure,  and  peaceable,  and  patient 
under  sufferings  and  persecutions,  and  good  and 
kind  to  all,  even  to  those  that  are  evil  and  injurious 
to  us,  and  to  endeavour  to  excel  in  all  goodness  and 
virtue.  This  will  appear  likewise  from  the  writings 
of  the  holy  apostles  :  I  will  instance  but  in  some  few 


Tit.  ii.  II,  12. 


449 

passages  in  them.  St.  Paul  represents  to  us  the 
design  of  the  Christian  doctrine  in  a  very  few  words, 
but  of  admirable  sense  and  weight; 
"  The  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salva- 
tion hath  appeared  to  all  men,  teaching  us,  that  de- 
nying ungodliness  and  wwldly  lusts  we  should  live 
soberly,  and  righteously,  and  godly,  in  this  present 
world."  The  same  apostle  makes  this  the  main  and 
fundamental  condition  of  the  covenant  of  the  gos- 
pel on  our  part:  "  Let  every  one  that  g  Tm  ..  ^ 
names  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from 
iniquity/'  St.  James  describes  the  Christian  doctrine 
(which  he  calls  "  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above")  by 
these  characters  :  "  It  is  first  pure,  then 

1  James  m.  17. 

peaceable,  gentle,  and  easy  to  be  entreat- 
ed, full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  without  partiality, 
and  without  hypocrisy."  St.  Peter  calls  the  gos- 
pel "the  knowledge  of  him  that  hath  _  ;      ■  o 

r  &  .  Pet.  m.  1.  3, 4. 

called  us  to  glory  and  virtue  ;  whereby 
(saith  he)  are  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and  pre- 
cious promises,  thatby  these  you  might  be  partakers 
of  a  Divine  nature,  having  escaped  the  corrup- 
tion that  is  in  the  world  through  lust ; "  and,  upon 
this  consideration,  he  exhorts  them  "  to  Ar 
give  all  diligence  to  add  to  their  faith 
the  several  virtues  of  a  good  life,  without  which  he 
tells  them  "they  are  barren  and  unfruitful  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."    I  will  con- 
clude with  that  full  and  comprehensive  passage  of  St. 
Paul  to  the  Philippians :  "  Whatsoever  phn  u  g 
things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are 
honest  (ooa  a^va,  whatsoever  things  are  of  venera- 
ble esteem),  whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever 
things  are  pure   (or  chaste),  whatsoever  things  are 
lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report  if 


450 


there  be  any  virtue,  if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on 
these  things." 

But  the  perfection  and  the  reasonableness  of  the 
laws  of  Christianity  will  most  plainly  appear  by 
taking  a  brief  survey  of  them  :  and  they  may  all 
be  referred  to  these  two  general  heads.  They  are 
either  such  as  tend  to  the  perfection  of  human  na- 
ture, and  to  make  men  singly  and  personally  good, 
or  such  as  tend  to  the  peace  and  happiness  of  hu- 
man society. 

First,  Such  as  tend  to  the  perfection  of  human 
nature  and  to  make  men  good,  singly  and  person- 
ally considered  And  the  precepts  of  this  kind  may 
be  distributed  likewise  into  two  sorts,  such  as  enjoin 
piety  towards  God,  or  such  as  require  the  good  or- 
der and  government  of  ourselves  in  respect  of  the 
enjoyments  and  pleasures  of  this  life. 

1.  Such  as  enjoin  piety  towards  God.  All  the 
duties  of  Christian  religion  which  respect  God,  are 
no  other  but  what  natural  light  prompts  men  to,  ex- 
cepting the  two  sacraments  (which  are  of  great  use 
and  significancy  in  the  Christian  religion),  and  pray- 
ing to  God  in  the  name  and  by  the  mediation  of 
Jesus  Christ :  for  the  sum  of  natural  religion,  a$ 
it  refers  more  immediately  to  God,  is  this.  That  we 
should  inwardly  reverence  and  love  God,  and  that 
we  should  express  our  inward  reverence  and  love 
to  him  by  external  worship  and  adoration,  and  by 
our  readiness  to  receive  and  obey  all  the  revelations 
of  his  will ;  and  that  we  should  testify  our  depend- 
ance  upon  him,  and  our  confidence  of  his  goodness, 
by  constant  prayers  and  supplications  to  him,  for 
mercy  and  help  for  ourselves  and  others ;  and  that 
we  should  acknowledge  our  obligations  to  him  for 
the  many  favours  and  benefits  which  every  day  and 


4.51 


every  minute  we  receive  from  him,  by  continual 
praises  and  thanksgivings  ;  and  that,  on  the  contra- 
ry, we  should  not  entertain  any  unworthy  thoughts 
of  God,  nor  give  that  honour  and  reverence  which 
is  due  to  him,  to  any  other;  that  we  should  not 
worship  him  in  any  manner  that  is  either  unsuitable 
to  the  excellency  and  perfection  of  his  nature,  or 
contrary  to  his  revealed  will:  that  we  should  care- 
fully avoid  the  profane  and  irreverent  use  of  his 
name  by  cursing,  or  customary  swearing,  and  take 
heed  of  the  neglect  or  contempt  of  his  worship,  or 
any  thins  belonging"  to  it.  This  is  the  sum  of  the 
first  part  of  natural  religion,  and  these  are  the  ge- 
neral heads  of  those  duties  which  every  man's  rea- 
son tells  him  he  owes  to  God  :  and  these  are  the 
very  things  which  the  Christian  religion  does  ex- 
pressly require  of  us,  as  might  be  evidenced  from 
particular  texts  in  the  New  Testament.  So  that 
there  is  nothing  in  this  part  of  Christianity  but 
what  agrees  very  .well  with  the  reason  of  mankind. 

2.  Such  precepts  as  require  the  good  order  and 
government  of  ourselves  in  respect  of  the  pleasures 
and  enjoyments  of  this  life.  Christian  religion  com- 
mands whatsoever  things  are  pure  and  chaste,  all 
manner  of  sobriety  and  temperance  and  moderation 
in  reference  to  our  appetites  and  passions;  and  for- 
bids whatever  is  unnatural,  and  unreasonable,  and 
unhealthful  in  the  use  of  pleasures  and  of  any  of 
God's  creatures.  Hither  belong  all  those  texts 
which  require  of  us  that  we  should  u  not  walk  after 
the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit,5'  that  we  „ 

.  Rom.  viii.  1. 

should  "  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  fil-  2  cor.  vii.  i. 
thiness  of  flesh   and  spirit,"  that  we  iPet.i.13. 
should  "be  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation."  St. 
John  distributes  the  lusts  and  irregular  appetites  of 


452 

men  info  three  kinds  ;  voluptuousness,  covetousness, 
and  ambition,  answerable  to  the  three  sorts  of 
tempting  objects  that  are  in  the  world  ;  pleasures, 
riches,  and  honours.  "All  that  is  in  the  world,  the 
.  tu     ^  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes, 

1  John  ii.  16.  .  J  * 

and  the  pride  of  life,"  &c.  And  ChrisU 
ianity  doth  strictly  forbid  all  these.  "  Take  heed 
*  and  beware  of  covetousness  (says  our 

Luke  xn.  lo.  . 

Saviour,  and  he  adds  this  excellent  rea** 
son);  for  a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abun- 
dance of  the  things  which  he  possesseth."  It  for- 
bids pride  and  ambition  and  vain  glory,  and  com- 
mands humility  and  modesty  and  condescension  to 
Mat  xi  29  °thers  ;  uLearn  of  me  (says  our  Saviour), 
Rom.  xii.  i6.  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  spirit ;" 

a  jUhjcJ  not  high  things,  but  condescend 
to  them  that  are  of  low  degree;  "  "Let  nothing  be 
done  through  vainglory,  but  in  lowliness  of  mind 
let  each  esteem  other  better  than  themselves."  And 
in  reference  to  sensual  pleasures  it  forbids  all  irre- 
gularity and  excess,  and  strictly  enjoins  purity  and 
temperance;  cautioning   us  "to  take 

Luke  xxi.  36.  \  ° 

Rom.  xin.  13.  heed,  lest  we  be  overcharged  with  sur- 
i  Pet. n. ii.  fejiiug  au(j  drunkenness;"  charging  us 
to  "walk  decently  as  in  the  day,  not  in  rioting  and 
drunkenness,  not  in  chambering  and  wantonness  ;" 
to  "  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  which  war  against  the 
soul."  Now  all  these  precepts  do  not  only  tend  to 
beget  in  us  such  virtues  and  dispositions  as  are  rea- 
sonable and  suitable  to  our  nature,  and  every  way 
for  our  temporal  convenience,  and  advantage,  but 
such  as  do  likewise  exceedingly  dispose  us  to  piety 
and  religion,  by  purifying  our  souls  from  the  dross 
and  filth  of  sensual  delights.  For  covetousness  de- 
baseth  a  man's  spirit,  and  sinks  it  into  the  earth  ;  in- 


433 


temperance  and  lust  cloud  a  man's  understanding, 
and  indispose  it  for  the  contemplation  of  things 
spiritual  and  Divine.  Thus  you  see  how  the  pre- 
cepts of  Christianity  do  tend  to  the  perfection  of 
human  nature,  considering  men  singly  and  person- 
ally. 

Secondly,  The  other  sort  of  precepts  are  such  as 
tend  to  the  peace  and  happiness  of  human  society. 
And  the  reason  of  mankind  can  devise  nothing 
more  proper  to  this  end  than  the  laws  of  Christianity 
are.  For  they  command  all  those  virtues  which 
are  apt  to  sweeten  the  spirits  and  allay  the  passions 
and  animosities  of  men  one  towards  another.  They 
require  us  to  love  our  neighbour  (that  is,  every  man 
in  the  world,  even  our  greatest  enemies)  as  ourselves. 
And  for  this  end  among  others  was  the  sacrament 
of  the  Lord's  supper,  the  feast  of  love,  instituted  ; 
that  by  commemorating  the  love  of  our  dying  Savi- 
our, who  laid  down  his  life  for  his  enemies,  we  might 
be  put  in  mind  how  we  ought  to  love  one  another. 

And  by  this  lawof  lovingallmen,  even  ourenemies, 
Christian  religion  discovers  itself  not  only  to  be  the 
most  innocent  and  harmless,  but  the  most  generous 
and  best-natured  institution  that  ever  was  in  the 
world.  For  in  pursuance  of  this  general  precept  it 
commands  us,  "to  do  good  to  all  men;  if  it  be 
possible,  and  as  much  as  in  us  lies,  to  live  peaceably 
with  all  men;"  to  "be  kind  to  one  another,"  ready 
to  gratify  and  oblige  men;  to  be  "tender-hearted" 
and  compassionate  towards  those  that  are  in  want  or 
misery,  and  ready  to  supply  and  relieve  them  ;  to 
sympathize  with  one  another  in  our  joys  and  sor- 
rows, "  to  mourn  with  those  that  mourn,  and  to  re- 
joice with  them  that  rejoice;  to  bear  one  another's 
burdens,  and  to  forbear  one  another  in  love;"  to  be 
easily  reconciled  to  them  that  have  offended  us,  and 


454 


to  be  ready  to  if  forgive  from  our  hearts"  the  greatest 
injuries  that  can  be  done  to  us,  and  that  without 
bounds  and  limits,  "even  to  seventy  times  seven," 
as  our  Saviour  expresseth  it. 

The  laws  of  Christianity  do  likewise  secure  both 
the  private  interest  of  men  and  the  public  peace,  by 
confirming  and  enforcing  all  the  dictates  of  nature 
concerning  justice  and  equity,  and  our  doing  to 
others  as  we  would  have  them  to  do  to  us ;  and  by 
commanding  obedience  to  human  laws,  which  decide 
men's  rights  and  submission  to  government  under 
pain  of  damnation  ;  and  by  forbidding  whatever  is 
contrary  to  these,  violence  and  oppression,  defraud- 
ing and  over-reaching  one  another,  perfidiousness 
and  treachery,  breach  of  trusts,  oaths  or  promises, 
undutifulness  to  superiors,  sedition  and  rebellion 
against  magistracy  and  authority  :  and,  if  there  be 
any  thing  else  that  is  apt  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the 
world,  and  to  alienate  the  affections  of  men  from  one 
another,  as  sourness  of  disposition,  and  rudeness  of 
behaviour,  censoriousness  and  sinister  interpretation 
of  things,  all  cross  and  distasteful  humours,  and 
whatever  else  may  render  the  conversation  of  men 
grievous  and  uneasy  to  one  another:  all  these  are 
either  expressly,  or  by  clear  consequence  and  de- 
duction, forbidden  in  the  New  Testament. 

And  now  what  could  any  religion  do  more  to- 
wards the  reforming  of  the  dispositions  and  man- 
ners of  men  ?  What  laws  can  be  devised  more  pro- 
per and  effectual  to  advance  the  nature  of  man  to 
its  highest  perfection,  to  procure  the  tranquillity  of 
men's  minds,  and  the  peace  and  happiness  of  the 
world,  than  these  precepts  of  Christianity  are?  Se- 
veral of  which  (as  those  of  "loving  our  enemies,"  of 
"  not  revenging  injuries,  "of  "rendering  good  for  evil," 
&c.)  though  they  have  been  esteemed  reasonable 


455 


by  some  of  the  wisest  among  the  heathen,  yet  by 
reason  of  the  degeneracy  of  the  world,  and  of  the 
obscurity  and  uncertainty  of  human  reason,  they 
never  obtained  to  have  the  estimation  and  force  of 
natural  laws.  So  that  we  owe  to  Christianity  the 
discovery  of  the  most  certain  and  perfect  rule  of  life 
that  ever  the  w  orld  was  acquainted  withal. 

III.  Christian  religion  propounds  the  most  power* 
ful  arguments  to  persuade  men  to  the  obedience  of 
these  laws.    The  gospel  offers  such  considerations 
to  us,  as  are  fit  to  work  very  forcibly  upon  two  of 
the  most  swaying  and  governing  passions  in  the 
mind  of  man — our  hopes  and  our  fears.    To  encou- 
rage our  hopes  it  gives  us  the  highest  assurance  of 
the  greatest  and  most  lasting  happiness,  in  case  of 
obedience;  and  to  awaken  our  fear  it  threatens  sin- 
ners with  the  most  dreadful  and  durable  torments, 
in  case  of  disobedience.    "To  them  who  « 
by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing 
seek  for  glory  and  honour  and  immortality,"  it  pro- 
mised) eternal  life  :  but  unto  them  that  obey  not  the 
truth,  "  but  obey  unrighteousness/'  it  threatens  "in- 
dignation and  wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish."  And 
this  is  which  that  makes  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  so 
powerful  an  instrument  for  the  reforming  of  the  world, 
that  it  proposes  to  men  such  glorious  rewards  and 
such  terrible  punishments  as  no  religion  ever  did  ; 
and,  to  make  the  consideration  of  them  more  effec- 
tual, it  gives  us  far  greater  assurance  of  the  reality 
and  certainty  of  these  things  than  ever  the  world 
had  before.    This  account  the  apostle  gives  us  of 
the  success  and  efficacy  of  the  gospel  upon  the 
minds  of  men,  and  for  this  reason  he  calls  it  "  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation  ;"  because 
therein  "  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  Rora  1 16  t8 


456 


from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighte- 
ousness of  men."  Before  the  revelation  of  the  gos- 
pel the  wickedness  and  impenitency  of  the  heathen 
world  was  a  much  more  excusable  thing,  because 
they  were  in  a  great  measure  ignorant  of  the  rewards 
of  another  life,  and  had  generally  but  very  uncer- 
tain and  obscure  apprehensions  of  those  things 
which  urge  men  most  powerfully  to  forsake  their 
sins,  and  are  the  most  prevalent  arguments  to  a 
good  life.  So  St.  Paul  tells  the  Athenians,  the 
most  knowing  among  the  heathen,  "  The  times 
of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at,  but 

Acts  xvii.  30,31.  _  - 

now  commandeth  all  men  every  where 
to  repent;  because  he  hath  appointed  a  day  in  the 
which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by 
that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained,  whereof  he  hath 
given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raised 
him  from  the  dead."  The  resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ  from  the  dead,  hath  given  the  world  that  full 
assurance  of  another  life  after  this,  and  of  a  future 
judgment,  which  it  never  had  before ;  for  "  He  whom 
God  raised  from  the  dead,  did  declare  and  testi- 

fv,  that  it  was  he  who  was  ordained  of 

Acts  x.  42.  " 

God  to  be  the  judge  of  quick  and  dead." 
And  the  firm  belief  of  a  future  judgment,  which 
shall  "render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds," 
if  it  be  well  considered,  is  to  a  reasonable  nature 
the  most  forcible  motive  of  all  other  to  a  good  life  ; 
because  it  is  taken  from  the  consideration  of  the 
greatest  and  most  lasting  happiness  and  misery  that 
human  nature  is  capable  of.  So  that  the  laws  of 
Christianity  have  the  firmest  sanction  of  any  laws  in 
the  world  to  secure  the  obedience  and  observance  • 
of  them:  for  what  can  restrain  men  from  sin,  if 
the  terrors  of  the  Lord  and  the  evident  danger  of 


45? 


eternal  destruction  will  not?  What  encouragement 
can  be  given  to  goodness  beyond  the  hopes  of  hea- 
ven and  assurance  of  an  endless  felicity? 

IV.  The  Christian  religion  furnisheth  us  with  the 
best  motives  and  considerations  to  patience  and 
contentedness  under  the  evils  and  afflictions  of  this 
life.  This  was  one  great  design  of  philosophy,  to 
support  men  under  the  evils  and  calamities  which 
this  life  is  incident  to,  and  to  fortify  their  spirits 
against  sufferings.  And  to  this  end  the  wisest 
among  the  heathens  racked  their  wits  and  cast 
about  every  way,  they  advanced  all  sorts  of  princi- 
ples, and  managed  everylittle  argument  and  consider- 
ation to  the  utmost  advantage.  And  yet  after  all  these 
attempts  they  have  not  been  able  to  give  any  consi- 
derable comfort  and  ease  to  the  mind  of  man,  under 
any  of  the  great  evils  and  pressures  of  this  life.  "  The 
bed  is  shorter  than  that  a  man  can  stretch  himself  up- 
on it,  and  the  covering  narrower  than  that  a  man  can 
wrap  himself  in  it."  All  the  wise  sayings  and  advices 
which  philosophers  could  muster  up  to  this  purpose, 
have  proved  ineffectual  to  the  common  people  and 
the  generality  of  mankind,  and  have  helped  only  to 
support  some  few  stout  and  obstinate  minds,  which, 
without  the  assistance  of  philosophy,  would  have 
held  up  pretty  well  of  themselves. 

Some  of  the  philosophers  have  run  so  far  back 
for  arguments  of  comfort  against  pain  as  to  call  every 
thing  into  question,  and  to  doubt  whether  there  were 
any  such  thing  as  sense  or  pain.  And  yet  for  all 
that,  when  any  great  evil  has  been  upon  them,  they 
would  certainly  sigh  and  groan  as  pitifully  and  cry 
out  as  loud  as  other  men. 

Others  have  sought  to  ease  themselves  of  all  the 
evil  of  affliction  by  disputing  subtilly  against  it,  and 

vol.  i.  2  m 


458 


pertinaciously  maintaining,  that  afflictions  are  no 
real  evils,  but  only  in  opinion  and  imagination,  and 
therefore  a  wise  man  ought  not  to  be  troubled  at 
them.  But  he  must  be  a  very  wise  man  that  can 
forbear  being  troubled  at  things  that  are  very  trou- 
blesome. And  yet  thus  Posidonius  (as  Tully  tells 
us)  distinguished ;  he  could  not  deny  pain  to  be  very 
troublesome,  but  for  all  that  he  was  resolved  never 
to  acknowledge  it  to  be  an  evil.  But  sure  it  is  a 
very  slender  comfort  that  relies  upon  this  nice  dis- 
tinction, between  things  being  trouble  some  and  be- 
ing evils,  when  all  the  evil  of  affliction  lies  in  the 
trouble  it  creates  to  us.  But  when  the  best  that 
can  be  is  made  of  this  argument,  it  is  good  for  no- 
thing but  to  be  thrown  away  as  a  stupid  paradox 
and  against  the  common  sense  of  mankind. 

Others  have  endeavoured  to  delude  their  troubles 
by  a  graver  way  of  reasoning,  that  these  things  are 
fatal  and  necessary,  and  therefore  nobody  ought 
to  be  troubled  at  them,  it  being  in  vain  to  be  trou- 
bled at  that  which  we  cannot  help.  And  yet  per- 
haps it  might  as  reasonably  be  said,  on  the  other 
side,  that  this  very  consideration,  "  that  a  thing  can- 
not be  helped,"  is  one  of  the  justest  causes  of  trou- 
ble to  a  wise  man.  For  it  were  some  kind  of  com- 
fort if  these  evils  were  to  be  avoided,  because  then 
we  might  be  careful  to  prevent  them  another  time  ; 
but  if  they  be  necessary,  then  my  trouble  is  as  fatal 
as  the  calamity  that  occasions  it;  and  though  I 
know  it  in  vain  to  be  troubled  at  that  which  I  cannot 
help,  yet  I  cannot  choose  but  be  afflicted.  It  was 
a  smart  reply  that  Augustus  made  to  one  that  mi- 
nistered this  comfort  to  him  of  the  fatality  of  things, 
Hoc  ipsum  est  (says  he)  quod  me  malh  habet,  this  was 
so  "  far  from  giving  any  ease  to  his  mind  that  "  this 
was  the  very  thing  that  troubled  him." 


459 

Others  have  tried  to  divert  and  entertain  the  trou- 
bles of  other  men,  by  pretty  and  plausible  sayings, 
such  as  this:  "That  if  evils  are  long  they  are  but 
light;  if  sharp  but  short,"  and  an  hundred  such 
like.  Now  1  am  apt  to  imagine  that  it  is  but  a  very 
small  comfort  that  a  plain  and  ordinary  man,  lying 
under  a  sharp  fit  of  the  stone,  for  a  week  together,  re- 
ceives from  this  fine  sentence.  For  what  pleasure  so- 
ever men  that  are  at  ease  and  leisure  may  take  in 
being  the  authors  of  witty  sayings,  I  doubt  it  is  but 
poor  consolation,  that  a  man  under  great  and  sting- 
ing afflictions  finds  from  them. 

The  best  moral  argument  to  patience,  in  my  opi- 
nion, is  the  advantage  of  patience  itself.  To  bear 
evils  as  quietly  as  we  can  is  the  way  to  make  them 
lighter  and  easier.  But  to  toss  and  fling  and  to  be 
restless,  is  good  for  nothing  but  to  fret  and  enrage 
our  pain,  to  gall  our  sores,  and  to  make  the  burden 
that  is  upon  us  sit  more  uneasy.  But  this  is  pro- 
perly no  consideration  of  comfort,  but  an  art  of  ma- 
naging ourselves  under  afflictions  so  as  not  to  make 
them  more  grievous  than  indeed  they  are. 

But  now  the  arguments  which  Christianity  pro- 
pounds to  us  are  such  as  are  a  just  and  reasonable 
encouragement  to  men  to  bear  sufferings  patiently. 
Our  religion  sets  before  us  not  the  example  of 
a  stupid  stoic,  who  had  by  obstinate  principles 
hardened  himself  against  all  sense  of  pain,  beyond 
the  common  measures  of  humanity,  but  an  example 
that  lies  level  to  all  mankind,  of  a  man  like  our- 
selves, that  had  a  tender  sense  of  the  least  suffering, 
and  yet  patiently  endured  the  greatest;  of  "Jesus, 
the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith, 
who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  e  '  *' 
him,  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  and 

2  M  2 


460 


is  set  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of 
God." 

God  thought  it  expedient  that  the  first  Christians 
should  by  great  hardships  and  persecutions  be 
trained  up  for  glory,  and  to  animate  and  encourage 
them  hereto  the  "Captain  of  our  salvation  was  crown- 
ed by  sufferings."  Much  more  should  the  considera- 
tion of  this  pattern  arm  us  with  patience  against  the 
common  and  ordinary  calamities  of  this  life,  espe- 
cially if  we  consider  his  example  with  this  advan- 
tage, that  though  his  sufferings  were  wholly  unde- 
served, and  not  for  himself  but  for  us,  yet  he  bore 
them  patiently. 

But  the  main  consideration  of  all  is,  the  glory 
which  shall  follow  our  sufferings  as  the  reward  of 
them,  if  they  be  for  God  and  his  cause;  and  if 
upon  any  other  innocent  account,  as  a  reward  of  our 
^   patience.  "  Our  light  affliction,  which  is 

2  Cor.  iv.  17.    [  a  ' 

but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a 
far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory." 
Christian  religion  hath  secured  us  that  we  shall  be 
infinite  gainers  by  our  sufferings.  And  who  would 
not  be  content  to  suffer  upon  terms  of  such  ad- 
vantage; "  to  pass  through  many  tribulations  into 
the  kingdom  of  God,"  and  to  endure  a  short  af- 
fliction for  an  endless  happiness  ?  The  assurance 
of  a  future  blessedness  is  a  cordial  that  will  revive 
our  spirits  more  in  the  day  of  adversity,  than  all 
the  wise  sayings  and  considerations  of  philosophy. 

These  are  the  arguments  which  Christianity  pro- 
pounds to  us,  and  they  are  firm  and  sound  at  the 
bottom  ;  they  have  strength  and  substance  in  them, 
and  are  apt  to  work  upon  human  nature,  and  the 
most  ordinary  understanding  is  capable  of  the  force 
of  them.   In  the  strength  and  virtue  of  this  great 


461 


example,  and  in  contemplation  of  this  glorious  re- 
ward, with  what  resolution  and  cheerfulness,  with 
w  hat  courage  and  patience,  did  vast  numbers  of  all 
sorts  of  people  in  the  first  ages  of  Christianity,  not 
only  men  but  women,  not  only  those  of  greater  spi- 
rit and  more  generous  education,  but  those  of  the 
poorest  and  lowest  condition,  not  only  the  learned 
and  the  w  ise,  but  the  ignorant  and  illiterate,  en- 
counter all  the  rage  and  malice  of  the  w  orld,  and 
embrace  torments  and  death?  Had  the  precepts 
and  counsels  of  philosophy  ever  any  such  effect 
upon  the  minds  of  men?   I  will  conclude  this  with 
a  passage  in  the  life  of  Lipsius,  who  was  a  great 
studier  and  admirer   of  the  stoical  philosophy. 
When  he  lay  upon  his  death-bed,  and  one  of  his 
friends  who  came  to  visit  him  told  him  that  he  need- 
ed not  use  arguments  to  persuade  him  to  patience 
under  his  pains,  the  philosophy  w  hich  he  had  stu- 
died so  much    would  furnish   him  with  motives 
enough  to  that  purpose,  he  auswers  him  with  this 
ejaculation,  M  Domine   Jesu,  da  mihi  patientiam 
Christianam,'' — Lord  Jesus  give  me  Christian  pa- 
tience.   No  patience  like  that  which  the  consider- 
ations of  Christianity  are  apt  to  work  in  us. 

And  now  J  have  as  briefly  and  plainly  as  I  could 
endeavoured  to  represent  to  you  the  excellency  of 
the  Christian  religion,  both  in  respect  of  the  clear 
discoveries  which  it  makes  to  us  of  the  nature  of 
God,  which  is  the  great  foundation  of  all  religion, 
and  likewise  in  respect  of  the  perfection  of  its  laws 
and  the  power  of  its  arguments,  to  persuade  men 
both  to  obe>  and  suffer  the  will  of  God.  By  which 
you  may  see,  what  the  proper  tendency  and  design 
of  this  religion  is,  and  what  the  laws  and  precepts 
of  it  would  make  men  if  they  would  truly  observe 


462 


them  and  live  according  to  them,  substantially  re- 
ligious towards  God,  chaste  and  temperate,  patient 
and  contented  in  reference  to  themselves  and  the 
dispensations  of  God  s  providence  towards  them, 
just  and  honest,  kind  and  peaceable  and  good-na- 
tured towards  all  men.  In  a  word,  the  gospel  de- 
scribes God  to  us  in  all  respects  such  a  one  as  we 
would  wish  him  to  be,  gives  us  such  laws  as  every 
man  that  understands  himself  would  choose  to 
live  by,  propounds  such  arguments  to  persuade  to 
the  obedience  of  these  laws,  as  no  man  that  wisely 
loves  himself  and  hath  any  tenderness  for  his  own 
interest  and  happiness,  either  in  this  world  or  the 
other,  can  refuse  to  be  moved  withal. 

And  now  methinks  I  may  with  some  confidence 
challenge  any  religion  in  the  world  to  shew  such  a 
complete  body  and  collection  of  holy  and  reason- 
able laws  established  upon  such  promises  and 
threatenings  as  the  gospel  contains.  And  if  any 
man  can  produce  a  religion  that  can  reasonably  pre- 
tend to  an  equal  or  a  greater  confirmation  than 
the  gospel  hath,  a  religion,  the  precepts  and  pro- 
mises and  threatenings  whereof  are  calculated  to 
make  men  wiser  and  better,  more  temperate  and 
more  chaste,  more  meek  and  more  patient,  more 
kind  and  more  just,  than  the  laws  and  motives  of 
Christianity  are  apt  to  make  men  ;  if  any  man  can 
produce  such  a  religion,  lam  ready  to  be  of  it. 
Let  but  any  man  shew  me  any  book  in  the  world, 
the  doctrines  whereof  have  the  seal  of  such  mira- 
cles as  the  doctrine  of  the  Scripture  hath  ;  a  book 
which  contains  the  heads  of  our  duty  so  perfectly, 
and  without  the  mixture  of  any  thing  that  is  un- 
reasonable, or  vicious,  or  any  ways  unworthy  of 
God  ;  that  commands  us  every  thing  in  reason  ne- 


463 


cessary  to  be  done,  and  abridgeth  us  of  no  law- 
ful pleasure  without  offering  us  abundant  recom- 
pense for  our  present  self-denial:  a  book  the  rules 
whereof,  if  they  were  practised,  would  make  men 
more  pious  and  devout,  more  holy  and  sober,  more 
just  and  fair  in  their  dealings,  better  friends  and 
better  neighbours,  better  magistrates  and  better 
subjects,  and  better  in  all  relations,  and  which  does 
offer  to  the  understanding  of  men  more  powerful 
arguments  to  persuade  them  to  be  all  this  ;  let  any 
man,  I  say,  shew  me  such  a  book,  and  I  will  lay 
aside  the  Scripture  and  preach  out  of  that. 

And  do  we  not  all  profess  to  be  of  this  excellent  re- 
ligion, and  to  study  and  believe  this  holy  book  of 
the  Scriptures?  But,  alas  !  who  will  believe  that  we 
do  so,  that  shall  look  upon  the  actions  and  consider 
the  lives  of  the  greatest  part  of  Christians?  How 
grossly  and  openly  do  many  of  us  contradict  the 
plain  precepts  of  the  gospel,  by  our  ungodliness  and 
worldly  lust,  by  living  intemperately,  or  unjustly, 
or  profanely  in  this  present  world  ?  As  if  "  the  grace 
of  God,"  which  brings  salvation,  had  never  appeared 
to  us,  as  if  we  had  never  heard  of  heaven  or  hell,  or 
believed  not  one  word  that  the  Scripture  says  con- 
cerning them  ;  as  if  we  were  in  no  expectation  "  Of  the 
blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearance  of  the 
great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  whom 
"God  hath  appointed  to  judge  the  world  in  righte- 
ousness," and  who  will  bestow  mighty  rewards  up- 
on those  who  faithfully  serve  him,  but  will  come  "in 
flaming  fire  to  take  vengeance  on  them  that  know 
not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ." 

Let  us  not  then  deceive  ourselves  by  pretending 
to  this  "excellent  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  our 


464 


Lord,"  if  we  do  not  frame  our  lives  according  to  it. 
For  though  we  know  those  things  never  so  well, 
yet  we  are  not  happy  unless  we  do  them  :  nay,  we 
are  but  the  more  miserable  for  knowing  them  if 
we  do  them  not:  therefore  it  concerns  every  one 
of  us  to  consider  seriously  what  we  believe ;  and 
whether  our  belief  of  the  Christian  religion  have  its 
due  effect  upon  our  lives.  If  not,  all  the  precepts 
and  promises  and  threatenings  of  the  gospel  will 
rise  up  in  judgment  against  us,  and  the  articles  of 
our  faith  will  be  so  many  articles  of  accusation ; 
and  the  great  weight  of  our  charge  will  be  this,  that 
we  did  not  obey  that  gospel  which  we  professed  to 
believe,  that  we  made  confession  of  the  Christian 
faith,  but  lived  like  heathens.  Not  to  believe  the 
Christian  religion,  after  so  great  evidence  and  con- 
firmation as  God  hath  given  to  it,  is  very  unreason- 
able ;  but  to  believe  it  to  be  true,  and  yet  to  live  as 
if  it  were  false,  is  the  greatest  repugnancy  and  con- 
tradiction that  can  be.  He  that  does  not  believe 
Christianity,  either  hath,  or  thinks  he  hath  some 
reason  for  withholding  his  assent  from  it.  But  he 
that  believes  it,  and  yet  lives  contrary  to  it,  knows 
that  he  hath  no  reason  for  what  he  does,  and  is  con- 
vinced that  he  ought  to  do  otherwise :  and  he  is  a 
miserable  man  indeed  that  does  those  things,  for 
the  doing  of  w  hich  he  continually  stands  condemn- 
ed by  his  own  mind.  And  accordingly  God  will 
deal  more  severely  with  such  persons.  He  will 
pardon  a  thousand  defects  in  our  understandings, 
if  they  do  not  proceed  from  gross  carelessness  and 
neglect  of  ourselves  ;  but  the  faults  of  our  wills 
have  no  excuse  ;  because  we  knew  to  do  better,  and 
were  convinced  in  our  minds  that  we  ought  not  to 
have  done  so. 


465 


Dost  thou  believe,  that  "  the  wrath  of  God  is  re- 
vealed from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  un- 
righteousness of  men,"  and  dost  thou  still  allow  thy- 
self in  "  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts  ?"  Art  thou 
convinced  that  "  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see 
the  Lord,"  and  dost  thou  still  persist  in  a  wick- 
ed course?  Art  thou  fully  persuaded  that  "No 
whoremonger,  nor  adulterer,  nor  covetous,  nor  un- 
righteous person,  shall  have  any  inheritance  in  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  Christ,"  and  dost  thou  for 
all  that  continue  to  practise  these  vices?  What 
canst  thou  say,  man,  why  it  should  not  be  to  thee 
according  to  thy  faith  ?  If  it  so  fall  out  that  thou 
art  miserable  and  undone  for  ever,  thou  hast  no 
reason  to  be  surprised  as  if  some  unexpected  thing 
had  happened  to  thee.  It  is  but  with  thee  just  as 
thou  believedst  it  would  be  when  thou  didst  these 
things.  For  how  couldst  thou  expect  that  God 
should  accept  of  thy  good  belief  when  thou  didst 
so  notoriously  contradict  it  by  a  bad  life?  How 
couldst  thou  look  for  other  but  that  God  should 
condemn  thee  for  the  doing  of  those  things  for 
which  thine  own  conscience  did  condemn  thee  all 
the  while  thou  wast  doing  of  them?  When  we 
come  in  the  other  world  there  is  no  consideration 
that  will  sting  our  consciences  more  cruelly  than 
this,  that  we  did  wickedly  when  we  knew  to  have 
done  better,  and  chose  to  make  ourselves  miser- 
able when  we  understood  the  way  to  have  been 
happy.  To  conclude,  we  Christians  have  certainly 
the  best  and  the  holiest,  the  wisest  and  most  rea- 
sonable religion  in  the  world  ;  but  then  we  are  in 
the  worst  condition  of  all  mankind,  if  the  best  reli- 
gion in  the  world  do  not  make  us  good. 


466 


SERMON  VI. 

THE  PRECEPTS  OF  CHRISTIANITY  NOT  GRIEVOUS. 

And  his  commandments  are  not  grievous. — 
1  John  v.  3. 

One  of  the  great  prejudices  which  men  have  enter- 
tained against  the  Christian  religion  is  this — that  it 
lays  upon  men  "heavy  burdens  and  grievous  to  be 
born,"  that  the  laws  of  it  are  very  strict  and  severe, 
difficult  to  be  kept,  and  yet  dangerous  to  be 
broken ;  that  it  requires  us  to  govern  and  keep  un- 
der our  passions,  and  to  contradict  many  times  our 
strongest  inclinations  and  desires,  "  to  cut  off  our 
right  hand,"  and  "to  pluck  out  our  right  eye,"  to  "love 
our  enemies,"  to  "  bless  them  that  curse  us,"  to  "  do 
good  to  them  that  hate  us,"  and  to  "  pray  for  them 
that  despitefully  use  us  and  persecute  us;"  to  for- 
give the  greatest  injuries  that  are  done  to  us,  and  to 
make  reparation  for  the  least  that  we  do  to  others ; 
to  be  contented  with  our  condition,  patient  under 
sufferings,  and  ready  to  sacrifice  our  dearest  in- 
terest in  this  world,  and  even  our  very  lives,  in  the 
cause  of  God  and  religion:  all  these  seem  to  be 
hard  sayings  and  grievous  commandments. 

For  the  removal  of  this  prejudice  I  have  chosen 
these  words  of  the  apostle,  which  expressly  tells 
us  the  contrary,  that  "the  commandments  of  God 
are  not  grievous." 

And  though  this  be  a  great  truth  if  it  be  impar- 
tially considered,  yet  it  is  also  a  great  paradox  to 


467 

men  of  corrupt  minds  and  vicious  practices,  who 
are  prejudiced  against  religion  and  the  holy  laws  of 
God  by  their  interest  and  their  lusts.  This  seems 
a  strange  proposition  to  those  who  look  upon  reli- 
gion at  a  distance,  and  never  tried  the  experiment 
of  a  holy  life,  who  measure  the  laws  of  God  not  by 
the  intrinsical  goodness  and  equity  of  them,  but  by 
the  reluctancy  and  opposition  which  they  find  in 
their  own  hearts  against  them. 

Upon  this  account  it  will  be  requisite  to  take 
some  pains  to  satisfy  the  reason  of  men  concerning 
this  truth  ;  and,  if  it  be  possible,  to  make  it  so  evi- 
dent, that  those  who  are  unwilling  to  own  it,  may 
yet  be  ashamed  to  deny  it.  And  methinks  I  have 
this  peculiar  advantage  in  the  argument  I  have 
now  undertaken,  that  every  reasonable  man  cannot 
choose  but  wish  me  success  in  this  attempt,  because 
I  undertake  the  proof  of  that  w  hich  it  is  every  man's 
interest  that  it  should  be  true :  and  if  I  make  it 
out,  this  pretence  against  religion  will  not  only  be 
baffled,  but  we  shall  gain  a  new  and  forcible  argu- 
ment to  persuade  men  over  to  it. 

Now  the  easiness  or  difficulty  of  the  observation 
of  any  laws  or  commands  depends  chiefly  upon 
these  three  things. 

First.  Upon  the  natureof  the  laws  themselves,  and 
their  suitableness  or  unsuitableness  to  those  to  whom 
they  are  given. 

Secondly.  Upon  the  ability  or  weakness  of  those 
on  whom  these  laws  are  imposed  for  the  keeping  of 
them.  For  easiness  and  difficulty  are  relative  terms, 
and  refer  to  some  power,  and  a  thing  may  be  diffi- 
cult to  a  weak  man,  which  yet  may  be  easy  to  the 
same  person  when  assisted  with  a  greater  strength. 

Thirdly.  Upon  the  encouragement  that  is  given  to 


468 

the  observation  of  them.  For  the  proposal  of  great 
rewards  does  very  much  qualify  and  allay  the  diffi- 
culty of  any  undertaking. 

Now  if  I  can  make  these  things  evident;  1.  That 
the  laws  of  God  are  reasonable,  that  is,  suitable  to 
our  nature  and  advantageous  to  our  interest :  2. 
That  we  are  not  destitute  of  sufficient  power  and 
ability  for  the  performance  of  them  :  And,  3.  That 
we  have  the  greatest  encouragements  to  this  pur- 
pose :  then  have  we  all  imaginable  reason  to  assent 
to  the  truth  of  this  proposition,  that  the  "command- 
ments of  God  are  not  grievous." 

I.  The  laws  of  God  are  reasonable,  that  is,  suit- 
able to  our  nature  and  advantageous  to  our  interest. 
It  is  true  God  hath  a  sovereign  right  over  us  as  we 
are  his  creatures,  and  by  virtue  of  this  right  he  might 
without  injustice  have  imposed  difficult  tasks  upon 
us,  and  have  required  hard  things  at  our  hands. 
But  in  making  laws  for  us  he  hath  not  made  use  of 
this  right.    He  hath  commanded  us  nothing  in  the 
gospel  that  is  either  unsuitable  to  our  reason,  or 
prejudicial  to  our  interest ;  nay,  nothing  that  is  se- 
vere and  against  the  grain  of  our  nature,  but  when 
either  the  apparent  necessity  of  our  interest  does 
require  it,  or  any  extraordinary  reward  is  promised 
to  our  obedience.  "  He  sheweth  thee,  O  man,  what 
is  good;  and  what  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require 
of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to 
walk  humbly  w  ith  thy  God  ?"  This  is  the  sum  of  the 
natural   law,    that  we  should  behave  ourselves 
reverently   and    obediently  towards  the  Divine 
Majesty,  and  justly  and  charitably  towards  men  ; 
and  that,  in  order  to  the  fitting  of  us  for  the  better 
discharge  of  these  duties,  we  should  govern  our- 
selves hi  the  use  of  sensual  delights  with  temper- 


469 


ance  and  moderation.  And  if  we  go  over  the  laws 
of  Christianity,  we  shall  find  that,  excepting  a  very 
few  particulars,  they  enjoin  the  very  same  things  ; 
only  they  have  made  our  duty  more  clear  and  cer- 
tain. But  this  I  have  had  occasion  to  make  out 
largely  in  the  foregoing  discourse,  and  therefore  I 
shall  say  the  less  to  it  now. 

As  to  the  several  parts  of  God's  worship  and  ser- 
vice, prayer  and  thanksgiving,  hearing  and  reading 
the  word  of  God,  and  receiving  of  the  sacrament ; 
these  are  all  no  less  for  our  own  comfort  and  advan- 
tage than  for  the  honour  of  God  and  religion.  And 
there  is  nothing  of  difficulty  or  trouble  in  the  exter- 
nal performance  of  them,  but  what  hypocrisy  can 
make  tolerable  to  itself :  and  certainly  they  must 
be  not  only  much  more  easy,  but  even  delightful, 
when  they  are  directed  by  our  understandings, 
and  accompanied  with  our  hearts  and  affections. 

As  for  those  laws  of  religion  which  concern 
our  duty  to  ourselves,  as  temperance  and  chastity  ; 
or  to  others,  as  the  several  branches  of  justice  and 
charity,  comprehended  in  those  general  rules,  "  of 
loving  our  neighbour  as  ourselves/'  and  "  of  doing  to 
others  as  we  would  have  them  to  do  to  us  there  is 
nothing  in  all  these  laws  but  what  is  most  reasonable 
and  fit  to  be  done  by  us,  nothing  but  what  if  we 
were  to  consult  our  own  interest  and  happiness, 
and  did  rightly  understand  ourselves,  we  would 
choose  for  ourselves ;  nothing  but  what  is  easy  to 
be  understood,  and  as  easy  to  be  practised  by  an 
honest  and  willing  mind. 

Now  the  practice  of  all  these  is  suitable  to  our 
nature,  and  agreeable  to  the  frame  of  our  understand- 
ings ;  proper  to  our  condition  and  circumstances  in 
this  world,  and  preparatory  to  our  happiness  in  the 


4?0 

next.  And  no  man's  reason  did  ever  dictate  to  him 
the  contrary  of  any  of  these;  that  it  is  fit  for  a 
creature  not  to  love  God,  to  be  undutiful  to  his 
great  Sovereign,  and  ungrateful  to  his  best  benefac- 
tor; that  it  is  reasonable  for  a  man  to  debauch  him- 
self by  intemperance  and  brutish  sensuality;  to 
hate,  defraud,  and  oppress  other  men.  Our  very 
natural  reason,  if  we  will  but  listen  to  the  dictates 
of  it,  is  an  enemy  to  all  these  sins,  and  a  law 
against  all  these  vices. 

And  as  the  practice  of  all  piety  and  virtue  is  agree- 
able to  our  reason,  so  is  it  likewise  for  the  interest 
of  mankind;  both  of  private  persons  and  of  pub- 
lic societies,  as  I  have  already  shewn.  Some  vir- 
tues plainly  tend  to  the  preservation  of  our  health, 
others  to  the  improvement  and  security  of  our  es- 
tates, all  to  the  peace  and  quiet  of  our  minds  ;  and, 
which  is  somewhat  more  strange,  to  the  advance- 
ment of  our  esteem  and  reputation  ;  for,  though  the 
world  be  generally  bad,  and  men  are  apt  to  ap- 
prove nothing  so  much  as  what  they  do  themselves; 
yet,  I  know  not  how  it  comes  to  pass,  men  are  com- 
monly so  just  to  virtue  and  goodness,  as  to  praise 
it  in  others  even  when  they  do  not  practise  it  them- 
selves. 

And  as  for  those  precepts  of  Christianity,  which 
seem  to  be  most  harsh  and  difficult  at  first  appear- 
ance (as  repentance  and  restitution,  mortification 
of  our  lusts  and  passions,  humility,  patience  and 
contented ness  with  our  condition,  and  resignation 
of  ourselves  to  the  will  of  God  ;  forgiving  and  lov- 
ing our  enemies,  and  self-denial  for  the  cause  of 
God  and  religion,)  if  we  look  well  into  them,  and 
consider  thoroughly  the  nature  and  tendency  of 
them,  even  these  will  appear  to  be  both  reasonable 


471 


in  themselves,  and  upon  one  account  or  other  really 
for  our  advantage. 

What  more  reasonable  than  repentance,  than  that 
a  man  when  he  hath  done  amiss  and  contrary  to  his 
duty  should  be  heartily  sorrow  for  it,  and  resolve 
to  do  so  no  more  ?  And  how  grievous  soever  it  be, 
it  is  necessary,  being  the  only  way  to  pardon  and 
peace.  And  in  case  our  offence  against  God  hath 
been  complicated  with  injury  to  men,  it  is  but  rea- 
sonable we  should  make  restitution  as  far  as  we  are 
able,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  injury.  For 
without  this  our  repentance  is  not  real,  because  we 
have  not  done  what  we  can  to  undo  our  fault  as 
much  as  we  can,  or  at  least  to  hinder  the  injurious 
consequences  of  it  from  proceeding  any  farther? 
Nor  can  any  man  be  judged  to  be  truly  sorry  for  his 
sin  that  retains  the  profit  and  advantages  of  it  to 
himself.  Besides  that,  till  reparation  be  made  to 
the  utmost  of  our  power  we  can  have  no  peace,  in 
our  own  consciences,  nor  any  well-grounded  hopes 
of  forgiveness  from  God. 

Mortification  of  our  lusts  and  passions,  though, 
like  repentance,  it  has  something  in  it  that  is  trou- 
blesome, yet  nothing  that  is  unreasonable,  or  really 
to  our  prejudice.  If  we  give  way  to  our  passions, 
we  do  but  gratify  ourselves  for  the  present,  in  order 
to  our  future  disquiet ;  but  if  we  resist  and  conquer 
them,  we  lay  the  foundation  of  perpetual  peace 
and  tranquillity  in  our  minds.  ]f  we  govern  our- 
selves in  the  use  of  sensual  delight,  by  the  laws  of 
God  and  reason,  we  shall  find  ourselves  more  at 
ease  than  if  we  should  let  loose  the  reins  to  our 
appetites  and  lusts.  For  the  more  we  gratify  our 
lusts,  the  more  craving  they  will  be,  and  the  more 
impatient  of  denial.  Crescit  indulgens   sibi  dims 


472 

hydrops,  every  lust  is  a  kind  of  hydropic  distem- 
per, and  the  more  we  drink  the  more  we  shall 
thirst.  So  that  by  retrenching  our  inordinate  desires 
we  do  not  rob  ourselves  of  any  true  pleasure, 
but  only  prevent  the  pain  and  trouble  of  farther 
dissatisfaction. 

Humility,  though  it  may  seem  to  expose  a  man 
to  some  contempt,  yet  it  is  truly  the  readiest  way 
to  honour:  as,  on  the  contrary,  pride  is  a  most  im- 
proper and  absurd  means  for  the  accomplishing  of 
the  end  it  aims  at.  All  other  vices  do  in  some  mea- 
sure attain  their  end:  covetousness  does  usually 
raise  an  estate,  and  ambitious  endeavours  do  often 
advance  men  to  high  places;  but  pride  and  insolence 
and  contempt  of  others  do  infallibly  defeat  their 
own  design.  They  aim  at  respect  and  esteem,  but 
never  attain  it;  for  all  mankind  do  naturally  hate 
and  slight  a  proud  man. 

What  more  reasonable  than  patience  and  con- 
tentedness,  and  that  we  should  in  all  things  resign 
up  ourselves  to  the  will  of  God,  who  loves  us  as 
well  as  we  do  ourselves,  and  knows  what  is  good 
for  us  better  than  we  do  ourselves  ?  this  certainly 
is  the  best  way  to  prevent  anxiety  and  perplexity 
of  mind,  and  to  make  the  worst  condition  as  to- 
lerable as  it  can  be,  and  much  more  easy  than  it 
would  be  otherwise. 

As  for  that  peculiar  law  of  Christianity,  which 
forbids  revenge,  and  commands  us  to  forgive  inju- 
ries, and  to  love  our  enemies,  no  man  can  think  it 
grievous  who  considers  the  pleasure  and  sweetness 
of  love  and  the  glorious  victory  of  overcoming  evil 
with  good,  and  then  compares  these  with  the  rest- 
less torment  and  perpetual  tumults  of  a  malicious 
and  revengeful  spirit. 


473 

And,  lastly,  self-denial  for  the  cause  of  God  and 
religion;  this  is  neither  unreasonable  nor  to  our 
disadvantage.  If  we  consider  our  infinite  obliga- 
tions to  God,  we  have  no  reason  to  think  much 
to  sacrifice  to  him  our  dearest  interest  in  this 
world  ;  especially  if  we  consider  withal,  how  dis- 
proportionably  great  the  reward  of  our  sufferings 
shall  be  in  another  world.  Besides  that,  the  in- 
terest of  religion  is  of  so  great  concernment  to  the 
happiness  of  mankind,  that  every  man  is  bound, 
for  that  reason,  to  assert  the  truth  of  it  with  the 
hazard  of  any  thing  that  is  most  valuable  to  him 
in  this  world. 

II.  We  are  not  destitute  of  sufficient  power  and 
strength  for  the  performing  of  God's  commands. 
Had  God  given  us  laws,  but  no  power  to  keep 
them,  his  commandments  would  then  indeed  have 
been  grievous.  It  is  true,  we  have  contracted  a  great 
deal  of  weakness  aud  impotency  by  our  wilful  de- 
generacy from  goodness;  but  that  grace  which  the 
gospel  offers  to  us  for  our  assistance  is  sufficient  for 
us.  And  this  seems  to  be  the  particular  reason 
why  the  apostle  says  here  in  the  text,  that  his 
commandments  are  not  grievous,  because  he  offers 
us  an  assistance  proportionable  to  the  difficulty,  of 
his  commands,  and  the  necessity  of  our  condition  : 
for  it  follows  immediately  after  the  text,  "for' 
whosoever  is  born  of  God,  overcometh  the  world.' 
Therefore  the  commandments  of  God  are  not  grie- 
vous; because  every  child  of  God,  that  is,  every 
Christian,  is  endued  with  a  power,  whereby  he  is 
enabled  to  resist  and  conquer  the  temptations  of  the 
world.  The  same  apostle  elsewhere  encourages 
Christians  upon  the  same  consideration,  "  greater  is 
he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is  in  the  world." 

vol.  i.  2  N 


474 


Though  we  be  encompassed  with  many  and  potent 
enemies,  who  make  it  their  business  to  tempt  and 
to  deter  us  from  our  duty,  yet  our  case  is  not  hard, 
so  long  as  we  have  a  greater  strength  on  our  side  : 
and  this  the  apostle  tells  us  is  the  case  of  every 
':T  v  v.       Christian  :  "  greater  is  he  that  is  in  you, 

1  Joh.  iv.  4.  P    .  _     .  • 

than  he  that  is  in  the  world.     Are  there 
legions  of  devils,  who  are  continually  designing  and 
working  our  ruin  ?  there  are  also  myriads  of  good 
angels,  who  are  more  cheerful  and  officious  to  do  us 
good.  For,  I  doubt  not,  but  as  those,  who  are  bent 
to  do  wickedly,  will  never  want  tempters  to  urge 
them  on,  and  to  push  them  forward  in  an  evil  course ; 
so,  on  the  other  hand,  those  who  apply  themselves 
seriously  to  the  business  of  religion,  and  yield  them- 
selves tractable  to  good  motions,  will  find  the  good 
Spirit  of  God  more  ready  and  active  to  encourage 
them  than  the  devil  can  be  to  pull  them  back ;  un- 
less we  think,  that  God  hath  given  a  greater  power 
and  a  larger  commission  to  the  devil  to  do  men  mis- 
chief, than  to  his  holy  Spirit  and  his  holy  angels 
for  our  assistance  and  encouragement.    But  then 
we  are  to  understand  that  this  assistance  is  only  of- 
fered to  men,  and  not  forced  upon  them,  whether 
they  will  or  no.    For  if  we  beg  God's  grace,  but 
neglect  to  make  use  of  it ;  if  we  implore  his  assist- 
ance for  the  mortifying  of  our  lusts,  but  will  not 
contribute  our  own  endeavours,  God  will  withdraw 
his  grace  and  take  away  his  holy  Spirit  from  us. 
Nay,  if  after  we  have  begun  well  we  do  notoriously 
slacken  our  endeavours,  we  forfeit  the  Divine  assist- 
ance :  if  when,  by  God's  grace,  we  have  in  a  good 
measure  conquered  the  first  difficulties  of  religion, 
and  gained  some  habitual  strength  against  sin ;  if 
after  this  we  grow  careless  and  remiss,  and  neglect 


475 


our  guard,  and  lay  ourselves  open  to  temptations, 
God's  Spirit  will  not  always  strive  with  us;  not- 
withstanding all  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  and  the 
mighty  assistances  there  offered  to  us,  if  we  love 
any  lust,  and  will  with  Sampson  lay  our  head  in 
Delilah's  lap,  we  shall  be  insensibly  robbed  of  "  our 
strength,  and  become  like  other  men." 

III.  We  have  the  greatest  encouragement  to  the 
observance  of  God's  commands.  Two  things  make 
any  course  of  life  easy ;  present  pleasure,  and  the 
assurance  of  a  future  reward.  Religion  gives  part 
of  its  reward  in  hand,  the  present  comfort  and  satis- 
faction of  having  done  our  duty  ;  and,  for  the  rest, 
it  offers  us  the  best  security  that  Heaven  can  give. 
Now  these  two  must  needs  make  our  duty  very 
easy  ;  a  considerable  reward  in  hand,  and  not  only 
the  hopes  but  the  assurance  of  a  far  greater  recom- 
pense hereafter. 

I.  Present  peace  and  satisfaction  of  mind,  and 
inexpressible  joy  and  pleasure  flowing  from  the 
testimony  of  a  good  conscience.  This  is  present 
payment,  besides  that  it  is  the  earnest  of  a  future 
and  greater  happiness.  And  this  does  naturally 
spring  up  in  the  mind  of  a  good  man  ;  "  great  peace 
have  they  that  love  thy  law,  and  nothing  shall 
offend  them."  All  acts  of  piety  and  virtue  are 
not  only  delightful  for  the  present,  but  they  leave 
peace  and  contentment  behind  them ;  a  peace  that 
no  outward  violence  can  interrupt  or  take  from  us. 
The  pleasures  of  a  holy  life  have  moreover  this  pe 
culiar  advantage  of  worldly  joys,  that  we  shall  never 
be  weary  of  them;  we  cannot  be  cloyed  by  the  fre- 
quent repetition  of  these  pleasures,  nor  by  the  long 
enjoyment  of  them.  I  know  that  some  vices  pre- 
tend to  bring  great  pleasure  alone:  with  them,  and 

•2  n  2 


476 

that  the  delights  of  a  sensual  and  voluptuous  life 
make  a  glorious  show,  and  are  attended  with  much 
pomp  and  noise,  like  the  sports  of  children  and 
fools,  which  are  loud  and  clamorous ;  or,  as  Solo- 
mon elegantly  compares  them,  "  like  the  crackling 
of  thorns  under  a  pot,"  which  makes  a  little  noise 
and  a  sudden  blaze  that  is  presently  over.    But  the 
serious  and  the  manly  pleasures,  the  solid  and  sub- 
stantial joys,  are  only  to  be  found  in  the  ways  of 
religion  and  virtue.    The  most  sensual  man  that 
ever  was  in  the  world,  never  felt  his  heart  touched 
with  so  delicious  and  lasting  a  pleasure,  as  that  is 
which  springs  from  a  clear  conscience,  and  a  mind 
fully  satisfied  with  his  own  actions. 

2.  But  the  great  encouragement  of  all  is  the  as- 
surance of  a  future  reward,  the  firm  persuasion 
whereof  is  enough  to  raise  us  above  any  thing  in 
this  world,  and  to  animate  us  with  courage  and 
resolution  against  the  greatest  difficulties :  so  the 
apostle  reasons;    "His  commandments  are  not 
grievous ;  for   whatsoever  is  born  of  God  over- 
cometh  the  world,  and  this  is  the  victory  that  over- 
cometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  The  belief  of  a 
future  happiness  and  glory  was  that  which  made 
the  primitive  Christians  so  victorious  over  the  world, 
and  gave  them  the  courage  to  resist  all  the  pleasures 
and  terrors  of  sense.    It  cannot  be  denied,  but  that 
a  religious  course  of  life  is  liable  to  be  encumbered 
with  many  difficulties,  which  are  naturally  grievous 
to  flesh  and  blood.    But  a  Christian  is  able  to 
comfort  himself,  under  all  these,  with  the  thoughts 
of  his  end,  which  is  everlasting  life.    He  considers 
the  goodness  of  God,  which  he  believes  would  not 
deny  him  the  free  enjoyment  of  the  things  of  this 
world,  were  it  not  that  he  hath  such  joys  and  plea- 


477 


sures  in  store  for  him,  as  will  abundantly  recom- 
pense his  present  self-denial  and  sufferings. 

Let  us  now  put  both  these  together,  the  pleasures 
of  religion  and  the  rewards  of  it,  and  they  cannot 
but  appear  to  be  a  mighty  encouragement.  With 
what  pleasure  does  a  man  that  lives  a  holy  and  a  vir- 
tuous life  despise  the  pleasures  of  sin,  and  notwith- 
standing all  the  allurements  of  sense  persist  resolute- 
ly in  his  course  ?  And  how  is  such  a  man  confirmed 
in  his  purpose  and  animated  in  his  holy  resolution, 
when  he  finds  that  God  and  his  own  conscience  do 
applaud  his  choice;  when  all  along  in  the  course 
of  religion  and  a  virtuous  life,  in  his  conflicts  with 
sin,  and  resistance  of  temptations,  he  hath  for  his 
present  reward  the  two  great  pleasures  of  innocence 
and  of  victory,  and  for  his  future  encouragement 
the  joyful  hopes  of  a  crown  and  a  kingdom  ?  A 
recompense  so  great  as  is  sufficient  to  make  a  lame 
man  walk,  enough  to  make  any  one  willing  to  offer 
violence  to  his  strongest  passions  and  inclinations. 
A  man  would  be  content  to  strive  with  himself  and 
to  conflict  with  great  difficulties,  in  hopes  of  a 
mighty  reward.  What  poor  man  would  not  cheer- 
fully carry  a  great  burden  of  gold  and  silver,  that 
was  assured  to  have  the  greatest  share  of  it  for 
his  pains,  and  thereby  to  be  made  a  man  for  ever? 
Whatever  difficulties  religion  is  attended  withal, 
they  are  all  sweetened  and  made  easy  by  the  pro- 
posal of  a  great  and  eternal  reward. 

But  are  there  no  difficulties  then  in  religion  ?  Is 
every  thing  so  plain  and  easy  ]  Are  all  the  ways 
of  virtue  so  smooth  and  even,  as  we  have  here  repre- 
sented them?  Hath  not  our  Saviour  told  us,  that 
"  Strait  is  the  gate  and  narrow  is  the  ; 

i        i       i  i  •  p  i  i  i         Mat.  vii.  14. 

way  that  leads  to  life,  and  few  there  be 


478 


that  find  it  ?"  Does  not  the  apostle  say,  "  That 
Acts  xiv.  22.  through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter 
2Tim.iii.i2.  into  the  kingdom  of  God?"  And  that 
"  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer 
persecution?"  And  does  not  the  Scripture  every 
where  speak  of  striving,  and  wrestling,  and  run- 
ning, and  fighting;  of  labouring  and  watching,  and 
giving  all  diligence?  And  is  there  nothing  grievous 
in  all  this? 

This  is  a  very  material  objection ;  and  therefore 
I  shall  be  the  more  careful  to  give  a  satisfactory  an- 
swer to  it.  And  that  I  may  do  it  the  more  distinct- 
ly, be  pleased  to  consider  these  six  things.  1.  That 
the  sufferings  of  persecution  for  religion  is  an  ex- 
traordinary case,  which  did  chiefly  concern  the  first 
ages  of  Christianity.  2.  That  this  discourse  con- 
cerning the  easiness  of  God's  commands  does  all 
along  suppose  and  acknowledge  the  difficulties  of 
the  entrance  upon  a  religious  course.  3.  Nor  is 
there  any  reason  it  should  exclude  our  after-care 
and  diligence.  4.  All  the  difficulties  of  religion 
are  very  much  mitigated  and  allayed  by  hope  and 
by  Jove.  5.  There  is  incomparably  more  difficulty 
and  trouble  in  the  ways  of  sin  and  vice,  than  in  the 
ways  of  religion  and  virtue.  6.  If  we  do  but  put 
virtue  and  vice,  a  religious  and  a  wicked  course  of 
life  in  equal  circumstances  ;  if  we  will  but  suppose 
a  man  as  much  accustomed  and  inured  to  the  one 
as  he  has  been  to  the  other,  then  I  shall  not  doubt 
to  pronounce,  that  the  advantages  of  ease  and  plea- 
sure will  be  found  to  be  on  the  side  of  religion. 

I.  The  suffering  of  persecution  for  religion  is  an 
extraordinary  case,  and  did  chiefly  concern  the  first 
ages  of  Christianity.  And  therefore  the  general 
sayings  of  our  Saviour  and  his  apostles  concerning 


479 

the  persecuted  state  of  Christians  are  to  be  limited, 
as  doubtless  they  were  intended,  principally  to 
those  first  times,  and  by  no  means  to  be  equally  ex- 
tended to  all  ages  of  the  church.  At  first,  indeed, 
whoever  embraced  the  profession  of  Christianity  did 
thereby  expose  themselves  to  all  the  sufferings 
which  the  power  and  malice  of  the  world  could  af- 
flict them  withal :  But  since  "  The  kingdoms  of 
the  earth  became  the  kingdoms  of  the  Lord  and  of 
his  Christ,"  and  the  governors  of  the  world  began 
to  be  patrons  of  the  church,  it  is  so  far  from  being 
universally  true,  that  every  Christian  hath  suffered 
the  violence  of  persecution,  that  it  hath  been  a  rare 
case,  and  happened  only  in  some  few  ages,  and  to 
some  persons.  So  that  this  is  accidental  to  a  state 
of  religion,  and  therefore  ought  not  to  be  reckoned 
among  the  ordinary  difficulties  of  it.  And  when  it 
happens  God  gives  extraordinary  supports,  and  pro- 
mises mighty  rewards  to  make  it  tolerable. 

II.  This  discourse  concerning  the  easiness  of 
God's  commands  does  all  along  suppose  and  ac- 
knowledge the  difficulties  of  the  first  entrance  upon 
a  religious  course,  except  only  in  those  persons  who 
have  had  the  happiness  to  be  trained  up  to  religion, 
by  the  easy  and  insensible  degrees  of  a  pious  and 
virtuous  education.  These  indeed  are  freed  from 
a  great  deal  of  pains  and  difficulty,  which  others 
who  are  reclaimed  from  a  bad  course  of  life  must 
expect  to  undergo.  They  are  in  a  great  measure 
excused  from  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth,  from  the 
pains  of  a  sudden  and  violent  change,  from  the  ter- 
rors of  an  affrighted  mind,  and  from  the  deep  and 
piercing  sorrows  of  a  more  solemn  repentance. 
Whereas  those  who  have  lived  wickedly  before 


480 


must  look  to  meet  with  a  great  deal  more  trouble, 
because  they  are  put  upon  changing  the  whole 
course  of  their  life  at  once,  and  must  contend  with 
inveterate  habits,  and  offer  no  small  violence  to 
themselves  in  plucking  up  those  vices  which  have 
been  rooted  in  them  by  long  custom  and  continu- 
ance.   This  indeed  is  grievous  and  must  needs  be 
sensibly  painful,  like  the  "  plucking  out  of  a  right 
eye,  or  the  cutting  off  a  right  hand :"  for  in  this 
case  a  man  must  strive  against  the  very  bent  and  in- 
clination of  his  strongest  appetites,  against  the  tyran- 
ny of  custom,  and  the  mighty  power  of  a  second 
nature.    But  this  is  no  just  reflection  upon  reli- 
gion, because  this  does  not  proceed  from  the  nature 
of  God's  laws,  but  from  an  accidental  indisposition 
in  ourselves,  which  religion  is  apt  to  remove :  and 
if  we  will  but  allow  some  time  of  trouble  and  un- 
easiness for  the  cure,  when  that  is  once  wrought 
the  commands  of  God  will  be  more  easy  and  de- 
lightful to  us  than  ever  our  sins  and  lusts  were. 

III.  Nor  does  this  exclude  our  after-care  and  di- 
ligence. For  when  the  apostle  says  that  "  The 
commandments  of  God  are  not  grievous,"  he  does 
by  no  means  intend  to  insinuate,  that  they  are  cal- 
culated for  slothful  and  lazy  persons,  that  they  are 
so  easy  as  to  require  no  industry  and  endeavour  on 
our  part ;  he  only  aims  to  prevent  a  tacit  objection, 
which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  many  men's  hearts,  as  if 
religion  were  a  most  grievous  and  intolerable  bur- 
den, and  there  were  more  trouble  and  less  plea- 
sure in  it,  than  in  any  other  action  of  human  life. 
This  he  utterly  denies,  but  does  not  hereby  intend 
to  exclude  such  diligence  and  industry  as  men  use 
about  other  matters.  And  if  I  should  tell  you,  that 
the  business  of  religion  does  not  require  a  very  vi- 


481 


gorous  prosecution,  and  great  earnestness  of  endea- 
vour, I  should  speak  quite  beside  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures, which  so  frequently  command  seeking,  and 
striving,  and  labouring,  besides  many  other  such 
phrases,  that  import  diligence  and  earnestness.  And 
indeed  it  were  unfit  that  so  excellent  and  glorious 
a  reward  as  the  gospel  promises,  should  stoop  down 
like  fruit  upon  a  full-laden  bough,  to  be  plucked  by 
every  idle  and  wanton  hand  ;  that  heaven  should  be 
prostituted  to  the  lazy  desires  and  faint  wishes,  to 
the  cheap  and  ordinary  endeavours  of  slothful  man. 
God  will  not  so  much  disparage  eternal  life  and 
happiness,  as  to  bestow  it  upon  those  who  have 
conceived  so  low  an  opinion  of  it,  as  not  to  think  it 
worth  the  labouring  for.    And  surelv  this  is  suffici- 
ent  to  recommend  religion  to  any  considerate  man,  if 
the  advantages  of  it  be  much  greater  than  of  any 
worldly  design  that  we  can  propound  to  ourselves, 
and  the  difficulties  of  it  not  greater.    If  the  same 
seriousness  and  industry  of  endeavour,  which  men 
commonly  use  to  raise  a  fortune  and  advance  them- 
selves in  the  world,  will  serve  to  make  a  man  a  good 
man,  and  to  bring  him  to  heaven,  what  reason  hath  any 
man  to  complain  of  the  hard  terms  of  religion  ?  And 
I  think  I  may  truly  say,  that  usually  less  than  this 
does  it.    For  God  considers  our  condition  in  this 
world,  and  the  pressing  necessities  of  this  life,  that  we 
are  flesh  as  well  as  spirit,  and  that  we  have  great  need 
of  these  things,  and  therefore  he  allows  us  to  be  very 
sedulous  and  industrious  about  them.  However, 
this  I  am  sure  of,  that  if  men  would  be  as  serious  to 
save  their  immortal  souls  as  they  are  to  support  these 
dying  bodies;  if  they  would  but  provide  for  eternity 
with  the  same  solicitude  and  real  care  as  they  do  for 
this  life ;  if  they  would  but  seek  heaven  with  the 


482 


same  ardour  of  affection,  and  vigour  of  prosecution, 
as  they  seek  earthly  things  ;  if  they  would  but  love 
God  as  much  as  many  men  do  the  world,  and 
mind  godliness  as  much  as  men  usually  do  gain ;  if 
they  would  but  go  to  church  with  as  good  a  will  as 
men  ordinarily  do  to  their  markets  and  fairs,  and 
be  in  as  good  earnest  at  their  devotions  as  men  com- 
monly are  in  driving  a  bargain  ;  if  they  would  but 
endure  some  troubles  and  inconveniences  in  the 
ways  of  religion,  with  the  same  patience  and  con- 
stancy as  they  can  do  storms  and  foul  ways  and 
mischances,  when  they  are  travelling  about  their 
worldly  occasions;  if  they  would  but  avoid  bad 
company  as  men  used  to  do  cheaters,  and  reject  the 
temptations  of  the  devil  and  the  world,  as  they 
would  do  the  kind  words  and  insinuations  of  a  man 
whom  they  verily  believe  to  have  a  design  to  over- 
reach them:  I  am  confident  that  such  a  one  could 
not  fail  of  heaven,  and  would  be  much  surer  of  it  up- 
on these  terms,  than  any  man  that  doth  all  the  other 
things  could  be  of  getting  an  estate,  or  of  attaining 
any  thing  in  this  world. 

And  cannot  every  man  do  thus  much  ?  all  that  I 
have  said  signifies  no  more  but  that  men  should  use 
their  sincere  endeavours  ;  and  this  surely  every  man 
can  do.  For  to  use  our  sincere  endeavours  is  no- 
thing else  but  to  do  as  much  as  we  can,  and  it  is 
nonsense  for  any  man  to  deny  that  he  can  do  as 
much  as  he  can.  And  if  we  would  do  thus  much,  we 
are  sure  of  God's  grace  and  assistance,  which  is  ne- 
ver wanting  to  the  sincere  endeavours  of  men.  But 
men  expect  that  religion  should  cost  them  no  pains, 
that  happiness  should  drop  into  their  laps,  without 
any  design  and  endeavour  on  their  part,  and  that  af- 
>    ter  they  have  done  what  they  please  while  they  live, 


483 


God  should  snatch  them  up  to  heaven  when  they  die. 

But  though  "the  commandments  of  God  be  not 

grievous,"  yet  it  is  fit  to  Jet  men  know,  that  they  are 

not  thus  easy. 

IV.  All  the  difficulties  of  religion  are  very  much 
allayed  and  sweetened  by  hope  and  love.  By 
the  hopes  of  a  mighty  reward  so  great,  as  is 
enough  to  raise  us  above  ourselves,  and  to  make  us 
break  through  all  difficulties  and  discouragements  ; 
and  by  the  love  of  God,  who  hath  taken  all  imagin- 
able ways  to  endear  himself  to  us.  He  gave  us  our 
beings,  and  when  we  were  fallen  from  that  happi- 
ness, to  which  at  first  we  were  designed,  he  was 
pleased  to  restore  us  to  a  new  capacity  of  it,  by 
sending  his  only  Son  into  the  world  to  die  for  us. 
So  that  if  w  e  have  any  sense  of  kindness  we  cannot 
but  love  Him  who  hath  done  so  much  to  oblige  us; 
and,  if  we  love  him  entirely,  nothing  that  he  com- 
mands will  be  grievous  to  us  :  nay,  so  far  from  that, 
that  the  greatest  pleasure  we  are  capable  of  will  be 
to  please  him.  For  nothing  is  difficult  to  love.  It 
will  make  a  man  deny  himself  and  cross  his  own 
inclinations  to  pleasure  them  whom  he  loves.  It  is 
a  passion  of  a  strange  power  where  it  reigns,  and 
will  cause  a  man  to  submit  to  those  things  with  de- 
light, which  in  other  circumstances  would  seem 
grievous  to  him.  Jacob  served  for  "  Rachel  seven 
years,"  and  after  that  "  seven  years  more ;  and  they 
seemed  unto  him  but  a  few  days,  for  the  love  he  had 
to  her."  Did  but  the  love  of  God  rule  iu  our  hearts, 
and  had  we  as  real  an  affection  for  him,  as  some 
men  have  for  their  friends,  there  are  no  such  diffi- 
culties in  religion  but  what  love  would  conquer;  and 
the  severest  parts  of  it  would  become  easy,  when 
they  were  once  undertaken  by  a  willing  mind. 


484 


V.  There  is  incomparably  more  trouble  in  the 
ways  of  sin  and  vice,  than  in  those  of  religion  and 
virtue.  Every  notorious  sin  is  naturally  attended 
with  some  inconvenience  of  harm,  or  danger,  or  dis- 
grace, which  the  sinner  seldom  considers,  till  the 
sin  be  committed  ;  and  then  he  is  in  a  labyrinth,  and 
in  seeking  the  way  out  of  a  present  inconvenience, 
he  entangles  himself  in  more.  He  is  glad  to  make 
use  of  indirect  arts  and  laborious  crafts,  to  avoid  the 
consequence  of  his  faults;  and  many  times  is  fain  to 
cover  one  sin  with  another,  and  the  more  he  strives 
to  disentangle  himself  the  more  is  he  ' '  snared  in 
the  work  of  his  own  hands."  Into  what  perplexi- 
ties did  David's  sin  bring  him  ?  such  as  by  all  his 
power  and  arts  he  could  not  free  himself  from:  he 
was  glad  to  commit  a  greater  crime  to  avoid  the 
shame  of  a  less,  and  could  find  no  other  way  to  con- 
ceal his  adultery,  but  by  plunging  himself  into  the 
guilt  of  murder.  And  thus  it  is  proportionably  in 
all  other  vices.  The  ways  of  sin  are  "crooked 
paths,"  full  of  windings  and  turnings ;  but  "the  way 
of  holiness  and  virtue  is  a  highway,  and 

Isa.  xxxv.  8.  ,  to  J '  . 

lies  so  plain  before  us,  that  wayfaring 
men,  though  fools,  shall  noterr  therein."  There  needs 
no  skill  to  keep  a  man's  self  true  and  honest ;  if  we 
will  but  resolve  to  deal  justly,  and  to  "speak  the 
truth  to  our  neighbour,"  nothing  in  the  whole  world 
is  easier  :  for  there  is  nothing  of  artifice  and  reach  re- 
quired to  enable  a  man  to  speak  as  he  thinks,  and 
to  do  to  others  as  he  would  be  dealt  withal  himself. 

And  as  the  ways  of  sin  are  full  of  intricacy  and 
perplexities,  so  likewise  of  trouble  and  disquiet. 
There  is  no  man  that  wilfully  commits  any  sin  but 
his  conscience  smites  him  for  it,  and  his  guilty  mind 
is  frequently  galled  with  the  remembrance  of  it; 


485 


but  the  reflection  upon  honest  and  virtuous  actions 
hath  nothing  of  regret  and  disquiet  in  it.  No  man's 
conscience  ever  troubled  him  for  not  being  dishonest, 
no  man's  reason  ever  challenged  him  for  not  being 
drunk,  no  man  ever  broke  his  sleep,  or  was  haunted 
with  fears  of  Divine  vengeance  because  he  was  con- 
scious to  himself  that  he  had  lived  soberly,  and 
righteously  and  godly  in  the  world.  But  with  the 
ungodly  it  is  not  so.  There  is  no  man  that  is  know- 
ingly wicked  but  he  is  guilty  to  himself,  and  there 
is  no  man  that  carries  guilt  about  him  but  he  hath 
received  a  sting  into  his  soul  which  makes  him  rest- 
less, so  that  he  can  never  have  any  perfect  ease 
and  pleasure  in  his  mind. 

I  might  have  descended  to  particular  instances, 
and  have  shewn  how  much  more  troublesome  the 
practice  of  every  sin  and  vice  is  than  the  exercise  of 
the  contrary  grace  and  virtue;  but  that  would  be 
too  large  a  subject  to  be  brought  within  the  limits 
of  a  single  discourse. 

VI.  Let  virtue  and  vice,  a  religious  and  wicked 
course  of  life,  be  put  in  equal  circumstances,  do 
but  suppose  a  man  to  be  as  much  accustomed  and 
inured  to  the  one  as  he  has  been  to  the  other,  and 
then  I  doubt  not  but  the  advantages  of  ease  and 
pleasure  will  be  found  to  be  on  the  side  of  religion; 
and  if  we  do  not  put  the  case  thus  we  make  an  un- 
equal comparison.  For  there  is  no  man  but  when 
he  first  begins  a  wicked  course  feels  a  great  deal 
of  regret  in  his  mind,  the  terrors  of  his  conscience 
and  the  fears  of  damnation  are  very  troublesome  to 
him.  It  is  possible  that  by  degrees  a  man  may 
harden  his  conscience,  and  by  a  long  custom  of 
sinning  may  in  a  great  measure  wear  off  that  tender 
sense  of  good  and  evil,  which  make  sin  so  uneasy : 


486 


but  then  if  in  the  practice  of  a  holy  life  a  man  may 
by  the  same  degrees  arrive  to  far  greater  peace  and 
tranquillity  of  mind  than  ever  any  wicked  man 
found  in  a  sinful  course,  if  by  custom  virtue  will 
come  to  be  more  pleasant  than  ever  vice  was,  then 
the  advantage  is  plainly  on  the  side  of  religion.  And 
this  is  truly  the  case.  It  is  troublesome  at  first  for 
a  man  to  begin  any  new  course,  and  to  do  contrary 
to  what  he  hath  been  accustomed  to;  but  let  a 
man  but  habituate  himself  to  a  religious  and  virtu- 
ous life,  and  the  trouble  will  go  off  by  degrees,  and 
unspeakable  pleasure  succeed  in  the  room  of  it. 
It  is  an  excellent  rule  which  Pythagoras  gave  to  his 
scholars,  "  Optimum  vitce  genus  eligilo,  nam  consue- 
tudo  faciet  jucundissimum ;"  pitch  upon  the  best 
course  of  life,  resolve  always  to  do  that  which  is 
most  reasonable  and  virtuous,  and  custom  will  soon 
render  it  the  most  easy.  There  is  nothing  of  diffi- 
culty in  a  good  life  but  what  may  be  conquered  by 
custom  as  well  as  the  difficulties  of  any  other  course ; 
and,  when  a  man  is  once  used  to  it,  the  pleasure  of  it 
will  be  greater  than  of  any  other  course. 

Let  no  man  then  decline  or  forsake  religion  for 
the  pretended  difficulties  of  it,  and  lay  aside  all 
care  of  God's  commandments  upon  this  suggestion, 
that  they  are  impossible  to  be  kept :  for  you  see 
they  are  not  only  possible,  but  easy.  And  those 
who  upon  pretence  of  the  trouble  and  difficulties  of 
religion  abandon  themselves  to  a  wicked  course  of 
life  may  easily  be  convinced,  that  they  take  more 
pains  to  make  themselves  miserable  than  would 
serve  to  bring  them  to  happiness.  There  is  no  man 
that  is  a  servant  of  sin,  and  a  slave  to  any  base  lust, 
but  might  if  he  pleased  get  to  heaven  with  less  trou- 
ble than  he  goes  to  hell. 


487 

So  that  upon  consideration  of  the  whole  matter, 
there  is  no  reason  why  any  man  should  be  deterred 
from  a  holy  and  virtuous  life  for  fear  of  the  labour 
and  pains  of  it.  Because  every  one  that  is  wicked 
takes  more  pains  in  another  way,  and  is  more  indus- 
trious only  to  a  worse  purpose.  Now  he  that  can 
travel  in  deep  and  foul  ways  ought  not  to  say  that 
he  cannot  walk  in  fair.  He  that  ventures  to  run 
upon  a  precipice  when  every  step  he  takes  is  with 
danger  of  his  life  and  his  soul,  ought  not  to  pretend 
any  thing  against  the  plain  and  safe  paths  of  religion, 
which  will  entertain  us  with  pleasure  all  along 
in  the  way,  and  crown  us  with  happiness  at  the 
end. 


488 


SERMON  VII. 

OF  THE  OBLIGATION  OF  CHRISTIANS  TO  A 
HOLY  LIFE. 

Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart 
from  iniquity. — 2  Tim.  ii.  19. 

The  whole  verse  runs  thus  :  "  Nevertheless  thefoun- 
dation  of  God  standeth  sure,  having  this  seal — the 
Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his :  and,  let  every 
one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from 
iniquity." 

In  which  words  the  apostle  declares  to  us  the 
terms  of  the  covenant  between  God  and  man.  For 
the  word  Q^kXioq,  which  is  here  translated  founda- 
tion, according  to  the  usual  signification  of  it,  is 
likewise  (as  learned  men  have  observed)  sometimes 
used  for  an  instrument  of  contract,  whereby  two  par- 
ties do  oblige  themselves  mutually  to  each  other. 
And  this  notion  of  the  word  agrees  very  well  with 
what  follows  concerning  the  seal  affixed  to  it,  which 
is  very  suitable  to  a  covenant,  but  not  at  all  to  a 
foundation.  It  is  true  indeed,  as  the  learned  Grotius 
hath  observed,  there  used  anciently  to  be  inscrip- 
tions on  foundation-stones,  and  the  word  afaaylg 
which  we  render  seal  may  likewise  signify  an  in- 
scription;  and  then  the  sense  will  be  very  current 
thus  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure,"  hav- 
ing this  inscription.  But  it  is  to  be  considered, 
that  though  ^paytc  may  signify  an  inscription,  yet 


489 

it  is  only  an  inscription  upon  a  seal,  which  hath  no 
relation  to  a  foundation,  but  it  is  very  proper  to  a 
covenant  or  mutual  obligation.  And  accordingly 
the  seal  affixed  to  this  instrument,  or  covenant  be- 
tween God  and  man,  is  in  allusion  to  the  custom  of 
those  countries  said  to  have  an  inscription  on  both 
sides  agreeable  to  the  condition  of  the  persons  con- 
tracting. On  God's  part  there  is  this  impress  or 
inscription,  "  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his  ;" 
that  is,  God  will  own  and  reward  those  that  are 
faithful  to  him :  and,  on  our  part,  "let  every  one 
that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  ini- 
quity." 

"  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ 
that  is,  that  calls  himself  a  Christian.    For  to  name 
the  name  of  any  one,  or  to  have  his  name  called 
upon  us,  does,  according  to  the  use  of  this  phrase 
among  the  Hebrews,  signify  nothing  else  but  to  be 
denominated  from  him.    Thus  it  is  frequently  used 
in  the  Old  Testament,  and  sometimes  in  the  New, 
"  Do  they  not  blaspheme  that  worthy  T 
name,  by  the  which  ye  are  called  ?"  that  is 
the  name  or  title  of  Christians  ;  and  that  expression, 
"if  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of 
Christ,"  is  at  the  sixteenth  verse  varied, 
"  if  any  man  suffer  as  a  Christian."    So  that  to  name 
the  name  of  Christ  is  to  call  ourselves  Christians. 

"  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ 
depart  from  iniquity."  The  word  acWa  is  often  taken 
strictly  for  injustice  or  unrighteousness,  but  some- 
times used  more  largely  for  sin  and  wickedness  in  the 
general.  And  so  it  seems  to  be  used  here  in  the  text, 
because  there  is  no  reason  from  the  context  to  re- 
strain it  to  any  particular  kind  of  sin  or  vice,  and 
because  Christianity  lays  an  equal  obligation  upon 

vol,  i  42  o 


490 

men  to  abstain  from  all  sin.  f  Let  every  one  that 
nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity;" 
that  is,  every  Christian  obligeth  himself  by  his  pro- 
fession to  renounce  all  sin,  and  to  live  a  holy  life.  In 
speaking  to  this  argument  I  shall  do  these  two 
things : 

I.  Shew  what  obligation  the  profession  of  Christ- 
ianity lays  upon  men  to  live  holy  lives. 

II.  Endeavour  to  persuade  those  who  call  them- 
selves Christians  to  answer  this  obligation. 

I.  What  obligation  the  profession  of  Christianity 
lays  upon  men  to  live  holy  lives.  He  that  calls  him- 
self a  Christian  professeth  to  entertain  the  doctrine 
of  Christ,  to  live  in  the  imitation  of  his  holy  exam- 
ple, and  to  have  solemnly  engaged  himself  to  all 
this.  I  shall  speak  briefly  to  these,  and  then  come 
to  that  which  I  principally  intend,  to  persuade  men 
to  live  accordingly. 

1.  He  that  professeth  himself  a  Christian  pro- 
fesseth to  entertain  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  to 
believe  the  whole  gospel,  to  assent  to  all  the  arti- 
cles of  the  Christian  faith,  to  all  the  precepts  and 
promises  and  threatenings  of  the  gospel.  Now  the 
great  design,  the  proper  intention  of  this  doctrine, 
is,  to  take  men  off  from  sin,  and  to  direct  and  encou- 
rage them  to  a  holy  life.  It  teacheth  us  what  we  are 
to  believe  concerning  God  and  Christ,  not  with  any 
design  to  entertain  our  minds  with  the  bare  specula- 
tion of  those  truths,  but  to  better  our  lives.'  For 
every  article  of  our  faith  is  a  proper  argument 
against  sin,  and  a  powerful  motive  to  obedience. 
The  whole  history  of  Christ's  appearance  in  the 
world,  all  the  discourses  and  actions  of  his  life,  and 
the  sufferings  of  his  death,  do  all  tend  to  this  ;  the 
ultimate  issue  of  all  is  the  destroying  of  sin:  so  St. 


491 

John  tells  us,  "  for  this  purpose  was  the  1  John  in.  8. 
Son  of  God  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy  the 
works  of  the  devil."  But  this  is  most  express- 
ly and  fully  declared  to  us,  Tit.  ii.  12,  13,  14, 
"  The  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  hath 
appeared  to  all  men,  teaching  us  that  denying  ungod- 
liness and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly, 
and  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world: 
looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  ap- 
pearing of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ;  who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  re- 
deem us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself 
a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works. 

The  precepts  of  the  gospel  do  strictly  command 
holiness,  and  that  universal ;  the  purity  of  our 
of  souls  and  the  chastity  of  our  bodies ;  "  to 
cleanse   ourselves  from  all  filthiness     „  „ 

2  Cor.  vii.  1. 

flesh  and  spirit ;  to  abstain  from  all  kind     Thes.  v.  22, 
of  evil;  to  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation." 
They  require  of  us  to  endeavour  after  the  highest 
degrees  of  holiness  that  are  attainable  by  11s  in  this 
imperfect  state,  "  to  be  holy  as  he  that   t  Pet  .  u 
hath  called  us  is  holy  ;"  "  to  be  perfect  as  MaJ  V\Q°' 
our  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect." 

And  all  the  promises  of  the  gospel  are  so  many 
encouragements   to   obedience  and  a  holy  life : 
"  having  therefore  these  promises,  let  us    g  Cor  - 
cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of 
flesh  and  spirit,  and  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of 
God."  We  are  told  by  St.  Peter,  that  these  exceed- 
ing great  and  precious  promises  are  gi-  2  Pet  j  4 
ven  to  us,  that  by  these  "  we  might  be 
partakers  of  a  Divine  nature,  having  escaped  the 
pollution  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust ;"  and  that 
we  might "  give  all  diligence  to  add  to  our  faith  virtue, 

2  o2 


492 


and  to  virtue  knowledge,  and  to  knowledge  tem- 
perance and  patience,  and  brotherly  kindness  and 
charity." 

And  the  threatening^  of  the  gospel  are  so  many 
powerful  arguments  against  sin. 

Therefore  the  apostle  calls  the  gospel  "  the  power 
of  God  unto  salvation,"  because  therein  "the 
n  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven 

Rom.  i.  16.  18.  . 

against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteous- 
ness of  men."  So  that  if  we  call  ourselves  Christians 
we  profess  to  embrace  the  holy  doctrine  of  the 
Christian  religion,  which  is  perfectly  opposite  to  all 
impiety  and  wickedness  of  life.  We  profess  to  be 
governed  by  those  laws  which  do  strictly  enjoin 
holiness  and  virtue.  We  profess  to  be  persuaded, 
that  all  the  promises  and  threatenings  of  the  gospel 
are  true,  which  offer  such  great  and  glorious  re- 
wards to  obedience,  and  threaten  transgression  and 
disobedience  with  such  dreadful  punishments. 
And,  if  so,  we  are  obliged  both  by  our  reason  and 
our  interest  to  live  accordingly. 

2.  He  that  professeth  himself  a  Christian  pro- 
fesseth  to  live  in  the  imitation  of  Christ's  example, 
and  to  follow  his  steps,  "  who  did  no  sin,  neither  was 
guile  found  in  his  mouth."  The  Son  of  God  came 
into  the  world,  not  only  by  his  doctrine  to  instruct 
us  in  the  way  to  happiness,  and  by  his  death  to  make 
expiation  of  sin,  but  by  his  life  to  be  an  example 
to  us  of  holiness  and  virtue.  Therefore  in  Scrip- 
ture we  find  several  titles  given  him  which  import 
his  exemplariness.  as  of  a  Prince  and  a  Captain,  a 
Master  and  a  Guide.  Now  if  he  be  our  pattern,  we 
should  endeavour  to  be  like  him,  "to  have  the  same 
mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus ;  to  walk  in  love  as 
he  also  hath  loved  us,  and  given  himself  for  us." 


493 

We  should  aspire  after  the  highest  degree  of  holi- 
ness, make  it  our  constant  and  sincere  endeavour 
to  please  God,  and  do  his  will,  and  to  fulfil  all  right- 
eousness as  he  did.  Does  any  man  profess  him- 
self a  Christian,  and  yet  abandon  himself  to  intem- 
perance and  filthy  lusts?  is  this  like  our  Saviour? 
Are  we  cruel  and  unmerciful  ?  is  this  like  the  High- 
Priest  of  our  profession?  Are  we  proud  and  pas- 
sionate, malicious  and  revengeful  ?  is  this  to  be  like- 
minded  with  Christ,  who  was  meek  and  lowly  in 
spirit,  who  prayed  for  his  enemies,  and  offered  up 
his  blood  to  God  on  the  behalf  of  them  that  shed  it? 
If  we  call  ourselves  Christians  we  profess  to  have  the 
life  of  Christ  continually  before  us,  and  to  be  always 
correcting  and  reforming  our  lives  by  that  pattern. 

3.  He  that  calls  himself  a  Christian  hath  solemn- 
ly engaged  himself  to  renounce  all  sin  and  to  live  a 
holy  life.  By  baptism  we  have  solemnly  taken  upoti 
us  the  profession  of  Christianity,  and  engaged  our- 
selves to  renounce  the  devil  and  all  his  works,  and 
obediently  to  keep  God's  commandments.  An- 
ciently those  who  were  baptized  put  off  their  gar- 
ments, which  signified  the  putting  off  the  body  of 
sin :  and  were  immersed  and  buried  in  the  water, 
to  represent  their  death  to  sin ;  and  then  did  rise 
up  again  out  of  the  water,  to  signify  their  entrance 
upon  a  new  life.  And  to  these  customs  the  apo- 
stle alludes  when  he  says,  "  how  shall 
we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live  any  longer  Rom  vl-2~ 6 
therein?  Know  ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were 
baptized  into  Jesus  Christ  were  baptized  into  his 
death  ?  Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him  by  bap- 
tism into  death,  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up 
from  the  dead,  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so 
we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life;  for  if  we 


494 

have  been  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his 
death,  we  shall  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  his 
resurrection ;  knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is 
crucified  with  him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be 
destroyed,  that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin." 
So  that  by  baptism  we  profess  to  be  entered  into  a 
new  state,  and  to  be  endued  with  a  new  nature ; 
"  to  have  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds ;"  to 
have  quitted  "  our  former  conversation,  which  is  cor- 
rupt according  to  the  deceitful  lusts,"  and  to  be  "re- 
newed in  the  s  pirit  of  our  minds,"  and  to  have  "  put 
on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  right- 
eousness and  true  holiness."  And  therefore  bap- 
tism is  called  the  putting  on  of  Christ :  "  as  many 

Gal  iu  27    °^   y°u  as   nave  been  baptized  into 
Christ,  have  put  on  Christ."    Now  if 
we  profess  to  have  put  on  Christ  we  must  quit 
and  renounce  our  lusts,  because  these  are  inconsist- 
ent, as  appears  by  the  opposition  which  the  apo- 
-rj      ...  1/t   stle  makes  between  them  :  "  Put  ye  on 

Rom.  xui.  14.  m  J 

the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  make  not 
provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof." 

And  as  we  did  solemnly  covenant  with  God  to 
this  purpose  in  baptism,  so  we  do  solemnly  renew 
this  obligation  so  often  as  we  receive  the  blessed 
sacrament  of  Christ's  body  and  blood.  Therefore 
the  cup  in  the  sacrament  is  called  the  "  new  covenant 
in  his  blood  ;"  that  is,  this  represents  the  shedding 
of  Christ's  blood,  by  which  rite  the  covenant  be- 
tween God  and  man  is  ratified.  And  as  by  this 
God  doth  confirm  his  promises  to  us,  so  we  do 
oblige  ourselves  to  be  faithful  and  obedient  to  him ; 
"  and,  if  we  sin  wilfully  after  we  have  received  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth,"  that  is,  after  we  are  be- 
come Christians,  "we  account  the  blood  of  the  co- 


495 

venant  a  common  thing  ;"  that  is,  we  make  no- 
thing of  the  solemnest  rite  that  ever  was  used  in 
the  world  for  confirmation  of  any  covenant — the 
shedding  of  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God.  And 
that  this  was  always  understood  to  be  the  meaning 
of  this  holy  sacrament,  to  renew  our  covenant  with 
God,  and  solemnly  to  confirm  our  resolutions  of  a 
holy  life,  is  very  plain  from  that  account  which 
Pliny*  gives  us  of  the  worship  of  the 
Christians  in  a  letter  to  Trajan  the  empe-  ^."cpS 
ror;  in  which  he  tells  him,  "that  they 
assembled  early  in  the  morning,  before  day,  to 
sing  a  hymn  to  Christ,  as  God,"  and  then(saith  he) 
they  do  "  sacrament o  se  obstringere,  bind  themselves 
by  a  sacrament  or  oath  not  to  rob  or  steal,  or  com- 
mit adultery,  not  to  break  their  word  or  falsify  their 
trust;  and  after  they  have  eaten  together  they  depart 
home."  Which  is  plainly  an  account  of  the  Christ- 
ians celebrating  of  the  holy  sacrament,  which  it 
seems  was  then  looked  upon  as  an  oath,  whereby 
Christians  did  solemnly  covenant  and  engage  them- 
selves against  all  wickedness  and  vice. 

Thus  you  see  what  obligation  the  profession  of 
Christianity  lays  upon  us  to  holiness  of  life.  From 
all  which  it  is  evident,  that  the  gospel  requires  some- 
thing on  our  part.  For  the  covenant  between  God 
and  us  is  a  mutual  engagement ;  and,  as  there  are 
blessings  promised  on  his  part,  so  there  are  condi- 
tions to  be  performed  on  our's.  And  if  we  live 
wicked  and  unholy  lives,  if  we  neglect  our  duty 
towards  God,  we  have  no  title  at  all  to  the  blessings 
of  this  covenant.  The  contrary  doctrine  to  this 
hath  been  greedily  entertained  to  the  vast  prejudice 
of  Christianity,  as  if  in  this  new  covenant  of  the 
gospel  God  took  all  upon  himself,  and  required 


496 

nothing,  or  as  good  as  nothing  of  us ;  that  it  would 
be  a  disparagement  to  the  freedom  of  God's  grace 
to  think  he  expects  any  thing  from  us.  That  the 
gospel  is  all  promises,  and  our  part  is  only  to  be- 
lieve and  embrace  them,  that  is,  to  be  confident 
that  God  will  perform  them  if  we  can  but  think  so, 
though  we  do  nothing  else;  which  is  an  easy  condi- 
tion to  fools,  but  the  hardest  in  the  world  to  a  wise 
man,  who,  if  his  salvation  depended  upon  it,  could 
never  persuade  himself  to  believe  that  the  holy  God, 
without  any  respect  at  all  to  his  repentance  and 
amendment,  would  bestow  upon  him  forgiveness  of 
sins  and  eternal  life,  only  because  he  was  confident 
that  God  wouid  do  so.  As  if  any  man  could  think 
that  it  were  a  thing  so  highly  acceptable  to  God, 
that  men  should  believe  of  him,  that  he  loves  to  dis- 
pense his  grace  and  mercy  upon  the  most  unfit  and 
unreasonable  terms.  A  covenant  does  necessarily 
imply  a  mutual  obligation,  and  the  Scripture  plainly 
tells  us  what  are  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this 
covenant,  both  on  God's  part  and  ours,  namely — that 
he  will  be  our  God  and  we  shall  be  his  people.  But 
he  hath  no  where  said,  that  though  we  be  not  his 
people  yet  he  will  be  our  God.  The  seal  of  this 
covenant  hath  two  inscriptions  upon  it:  one  on 
God's  part,  that  he  will  "  know  them  that  are  his  ;" 
and  another,  on  our  part,  that  we  shall  "depart from 
iniquity."  But  if  we  will  not  submit  to  this  condi- 
tion, God  will  not  know  us,  but  will  bid  us  de- 
part from  him.  So  our  Saviour  tells  us:  "  I  will  say 
unto  them,  depart  from  me,  ye  workers 

Mat.  vii.  23.       n    .    .       .  '       r,  t  c 

of  iniquity,  1  know  you  not.  If  we 
deal  falsely  in  covenant  with  God,  and  break  loose 
from  all  our  engagements  to  him,  we  release  God 
from  all  the  promises  that  he  hath  made  to  us.  If 


497 

we  neglect  to  perform  those  conditions,  upon  which 
he  hath  suspended  the  performance  of  his  promises, 
we  discharge  the  obligation  on  God's  part,  and  he 
remains  faithful,  though  he  deny  us  that  happiness 
which  he  promised  under  those  conditions  which 
we  have  neglected. 

II.  I  come  now  to  the  second  thing  propound- 
ed, and  that  is,  to  persuade  those  who  profess  Christ- 
ianity to  answer  those  obligations  to  a  holy  life, 
which  their  religion  lays  upon  them.  We  all  call 
ourselves  Christians,  and  would  be  very  much  of- 
fended at  any  man  that  should  deny  us  this  title. 
But  let  us  not  cheat  ourselves  with  an  empty  and 
insignificant  name;  but  if  we  call  ourselves  Christ- 
ians, let  us  fill  up  this  great  title,  and  make  good 
our  profession  by  a  suitable  life  and  practice.  And 
to  persuade  us  hereto,  I  will  urge  these  three  con- 
siderations : 

1.  The  indecency  of  the  contrary. 

2.  The  great  scandal  of  it  to  our  blessed  Saviour 
and  his  holy  religion  :  and, 

3.  The  infinite  danger  of  it  to  our  own  souls. 

1.  Consider  how  unbecoming  it  is  for  a  man  to 
live  unsuitably  to  his  profession.  If  we  call  our- 
selves Christians  we  profess  to  entertain  the  doc- 
trine of  the  gospel,  to  be  taught  and  instructed  by 
the  best  Master,  to  be  the  disciples  of  the  highest 
and  most  perfect  institution  that  ever  was  in  the 
world,  to  have  embraced  a  religion  which  contains 
the  most  exact  rules  for  the  conduct  and  government 
of  our  lives,  which  lays  down  the  plainest  precepts, 
sets  before  us  the  best  patterns  and  examples  of  a 
holy  life,  and  offers  us  the  greatest  assistances  and 
encouragements  to  this  purpose.  We  profess  to  be 
furnished  with  the  best  arguments  to  excite  us  to 


498 

holiness  and  virtue,  to  be  awed  with  the  greatest 
fears,  and  animated  with  the  best  hopes  of  any  men 
in  the  world. 

Now  whoever  makes  such  a  profession  as  this, 
obligeth  himself  to  live  answerably,  to  do  nothing 
that  shall  grossly  contradict  it.  Nothing  is  more 
absurd  than  for  a  man  to  act  contrary  to  his  pro- 
fession, to  pretend  to  great  matters,  and  perform 
nothing  of  what  he  pretends  to.  Wise  men  will 
not  be  caught  with  pretences,  nor  be  imposed  upon 
with  empty  profession,  but  they  will  inquire  into 
our  lives  and  actions,  and  by  these  they  will  make 
a  judgment  of  us.  They  cannot  see  into  our  hearts, 
nor  pry  into  our  understandings,  to  discover  what  it 
is  that  we  inwardly  believe ;  they  cannot  discern  those 
secret  and  supernatural  principles  that  we  pretend 
to  be  acted  by :  but  this  they  can  do,  they  can  ex- 
amine our  actions,  and  behold  our  good  or  bad 
works,  and  try  whether  our  lives  be  indeed  answer- 
able to  our  profession,  and  do  really  excel  the  lives  of 
other  men,  who  do  not  pretend  to  such  great  things. 
There  are  a  great  many  sagacious  persons  who  will 
easily  find  us  out,  will  look  under  our  mask,  and 
see  through  all  our  fine  pretensions,  and  will  quick- 
ly discern  the  absurdity  of  telling  the  world  that  we 
believe  one  thing,  when  we  do  the  contrary. 

If  we  profess  to  believe  the  Christian  religion,  we 
expose  ourselves  to  the  scorn  and  contempt  of  every 
discerning  man,  if  we  do  not  live  up  to  it.  With 
what  face  can  any  man  continue  in  the  practice  of 
any  known  sin,  that  professeth  to  believe  the  holy 
doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  forbids  all  sin  under 
the  highest  and  severest  penalties.  If  we  did  but 
believe  the  history  of  the  gospel  as  we  do  any  or- 
dinary credible  story ;  and  did  we  but  regard  the 


499 

laws  of  Christianity  as  we  do  the  laws  of  the  land 
were  we  but  persuaded,  that  fraud  and  oppression, 
lying  and  perjury,  intemperance  and  uncleanness, 
covetousness  and  pride,  malice  and  revenge,  the 
neglect  of  God  and  religion,  will  bring  men  to  hell, 
as  certainly  as  treason  and  felony  will  bring  a  man 
under  the  sentence  of  the  law  ;  had  we  but  the  same 
awe  and  regard  for  the  threatenings  and  promises  of 
the  gospel,  that  we  have  for  the  frowns  and  smiles  of 
those  who  are  in  power  and  authority,  even  this  would 
be  effectual  to  keep  us  from  sin.  And  if  the  gos- 
pel have  not  this  effect  upon  us,  it  is  an  argument 
that  we  do  not  believe  it. 

It  is  to  no  purpose  to  go  about  to  persuade  men 
that  we  do  heartily  entertain  the  doctrine  of  Christ, 
that  doctrine  which  hath  all  the  characters  of  piety 
and  justice,  of  holiness  and  virtue  upon  it;  which 
obligeth  men  to  "  whatsoever  things  are  true,  what- 
soever things  are  honest,  whatsoever  things  are 
chaste,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  and  of  good 
report,"  if  we  have  no  regard  to  these  things  in  our 
lives.  He  that  would  know  what  a  man  believes, 
let  him  attend  rather  to  what  he  does  than  to  what 
he  talks.  He  that  leads  a  wicked  life,  makes  a 
more  credible  and  effectual  profession  of  infidelitv, 
than  he  who  in  words  only  denies  the  gospel.  It  is 
the  hardest  thing  in  the  world,  to  imagine  that  that 
man  believes  Christianity,  who,  by  ungodliness  and 
worldly  lusts,  does  deny  and  renounce  it.  If  we 
profess  ourselves  Christians,  it  may  justly  be  ex- 
pected from  us,  that  we  should  evidence  this  by  our 
actions,  that  we  should  live  at  another  rate  than  the 
heathens  did  ;  that  we,  who  worship  a  holy  and  just 
God,  should  not  allow  ourselves  the  liberty  to  sin, 
as  those  did  who  worshipped  such  gods  as  were 


500 


examples  of  sin  and  patrons  of  their  vices.  Thou, 
who  professeth  thyself  a  Christian,  mayst  not  walk 
in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  of  uncleanness,  as  those 
did  who  worshipped  a  lustful  Jupiter  and  a  wanton 
Venus.  Thou  mayst  not  be  intemperate  as  those 
were  who  worshipped  a  drunken  Bacchus.  Thou 
mayst  not  be  cruel  and  unmerciful  as  those  were 
who  worshipped  a  fierce  Saturn  :  nor  mayst  thou 
steal  as  those  did  who  worshipped  a  thievish  Mer- 
cury. Thou  must  remember,  that  thou  art  a  Christ- 
ian, and  when  thou  art  ready  to  debase  thyself  to 
any  vile  lust,  consider  what  title  thou  bearest,  by 
what  name  thou  art  called,  whose  disciple  thou  art; 
and  then  say  to  thyself,  shall  I  allow  myself  in  any 
impiety  or  wickedness  of  life,  who  pretend  to  be  in- 
structed by  that  grace  of  God,  which  teaches  men  to 
deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts?  shall  I  cherish 
any  sinful  passion,  who  pretend  to  have  mortified 
all  these,  and  to  have  "  put  off  the  old  man  with  his 
deeds?" 

It  is  not  being  gilded  over  with  the  external  pro- 
fession of  Christianity  that  will  avail  us  ;  our  religi- 
on must  be  a  vital  principle  inwardly  to  change  and 
transform  us.  What  the  apostle  says  concerning 
circumcision,  we  may  apply  to  them  that  are  bap- 
tized and  make  an  outward  profession  of  Christi- 
anity :  baptism  verily  profiteth  if  we  obey  the 
gospel :  but  if  we  walk  contrary  to  the 

Rom.  li.  25.    fe     r     '  .         •         -  , 

precepts  of  it,  our  baptism  is  no  bap- 
tism, and  our  Christianity  is  heathenism.  If  by 
our  lives  and  actions  we  do  contradict  that  religi- 
on which  we  profess,  we  do  by  this  very  thing  prove 
ourselves  to  be  counterfeits  and  hypocrites ;  and 
that  we  have  only  taken  up  our  religion  for  a  fa- 
shion, and  received  it  according  to  custom  ;  we  were 


501 

born  in  a  country  where  it  is  reverenced,  and  there- 
fore  we  are  of  it.  And  the  reason  why  we  are 
Christians  rather  than  Jews,  or  Turks,  or  heathens, 
is  because  Christian  religion  had  the  fortune  to 
come  first  in  our  way,  and  to  bespeak  us  at  our  en- 
trance into  the  world. 

Are  we  not  ashamed  to  take  up  a  profession  upon 
such  slight  grounds,  and  to  wear  about  us  such  an 
empty  title?  it  should  make  our  blood  to  rise  in  our 
faces,  to  consider  what  a  distance  there  is  between 
our  religion  and  our  lives.  I  remember  Tully  up- 
braids the  philosophers  very  smartly  for  living  un- 
suitably to  their  doctrines.  A  philosopher,  (saith 
he)  is  unpardonable  if  he  miscarry  in  his  life,  quod 
in  officio  cujus  magister  esse  vidt,  labitur ;  artemqae 
vitce  professus,  delinquitin  vita:  because  he  is  faulty 
in  that  wherein  he  pretends  to  be  a  master;  and, 
whilst  he  professeth  an  art  of  living  better  than 
other  men  he  miscarries  in  his  life.  With  how  much 
greater  reason  may  we  challenge  Christians  for  the 
miscarriages  of  their  lives,  which  are  so  directly 
contrary  to  their  profession?  It  may  justly  be  ex- 
pected, that  so  perfect  an  institution  as  the  gospel 
is,  which  the  Son  of  God  came  from  heaven  on  pur- 
pose to  propagate  in  the  world,  should  make  men 
more  strictly  holy  and  virtuous,  and  set  the  pro- 
fessors of  it  at  a  greater  distance  from  all  impurity 
and  vice,  than  ever  any  institution  in  the  world  did. 
If  any  man  profess  any  other  art  or  calling,  it  is  ex- 
pected that  he  should  be  skilled  in  it,  and  excel 
those  who  do  not  pretend  to  it.  It  is  the  greatest 
disparagement  to  a  physician  that  can  be,  to  say  of 
him,  that  he  is  in  other  respects  an  excellent  man, 
only  he  hath  no  great  skill  in  diseases,  and  the  me- 
thods of  cure — because  this  is  his  profession:  he 


502 


might  be  pardoned  for  other  defects,  but  the  proper 
skill  of  his  art  may  justly  be  expected  from  him. 
So  for  a  Christian ;  to  say  of  him,  the  worst  thing 
in  him  is  his  life  :  he  is  very  orthodox  in  his  opini- 
ons, but  he  is  an  ill-natured  man,  one  of  very  violent 
passions,  he  will  be  very  frequently  drunk,  he 
makes  no  conscience  of  his  dealings,  he  is  very  un- 
charitable to  all  that  differ  from  him  :  this  man  is 
faulty  in  his  profession,  he  is  defective  in  that  which 
should  be  his  excellency ;  he  may  have  orthodox 
opinion:  ;n  religion,  but  when  all  is  done  there  is 
no  such  error  and  heresy,  nothing  so  fundament- 
ally opposite  to  religion  as  a  wicked  life.  A  Christ- 
ian does  not  pretend  to  have  a  better  wit  or  a  more 
piercing  understanding  than  a  Turk  or  a  heathen  ; 
but  he  professeth  to  live  better  than  they,  to  be 
more  chaste  and  more  temperate,  more  just  and 
more  charitable,  more  meek  and  gentle,  more  lov- 
ing and  peaceable  than  other  men  :  if  he  fail  in  this, 
where  is  the  art  the  man  boasts  of?  to  what  purpose 
is  all  this  noise  and  stir  about  the  gospel  and  the 
holy  doctrine  of  Christ?  If  any  man  profess  him- 
self a  Christian,  and  do  not  live  better  than  others, 
he  is  a  mere  pretender  and  mountebank  in  religion, 
he  is  a  bungler  in  his  own  art,  and  unskilled  in  his 
proper  profession.  This  is  the  first — the  indecency 
of  the  thing. 

2.  Consider  how  great  a  scandal  this  must  needs 
be  to  our  blessed  Saviour  and  his  holy  religion.  The 
Christian  religion  hath  undergone  many  a  hard  cen- 
sure for  the  miscarriages  of  the  professors  of  it. 
The  impieties  and  vices  of  those,  who  call  them- 
selves Christians,  have  caused  many  sharp  reflec- 
tions upon  Christianity,  and  made  the  Son  of  God 
and  the  blessed  Saviour  of  the  world  to  wear  the 


503 


odious  names  of  deceiver  and  impostor.  If  a  man 
did  design  to  do  the  greatest  spite  to  religion,  he 
could  not  give  it  a  deeper  wound,  he  could  not  take 
a  more  effectual  course  to  disparage  it,  than  by  a 
lewd  and  debauched  life.  For  this  will  still  be  an 
objection  in  the  minds  of  those  who  are  strangers 
and  enemies  to  our  religion :  if  the  gospel  were  so 
excellent  an  institution  as  it  is  reported  to  be,  sure- 
ly we  should  see  better  effects  of  it  in  the  lives  of 
those  who  profess  it.  When  we  would  persuade  a 
heathen  to  our  religion,  and  tell  him  how  holy  a 
God  we  serve,  what  excellent  patterns  we  imitate, 
what  spiritual  and  Divine  precepts  of  holiness  and 
virtue  our  religion  does  contain ;  may  not  he  reply, 
Would  you  have  me  to  believe  you,  when  I  see  you 
do  not  believe  yourselves  ?  If  you  believed  your  re- 
ligion, you  would  live  according  to  it.  For  if  the 
gospel  were  every  word  of  it  false,  if  there  were 
neither  a  heaven  to  be  hoped  for,  nor  a  hell  to  be 
feared,  after  this  life,  how  could  many  Christians 
live  worse  than  they  do? 

As  we  would  not  proclaim  to  the  world  that  the 
gospel  is  an  unholy  and  vicious  institution,  let  us 
take  heed  that  we  bring  no  scandal  upon  it  by  our 
lives,  lest  the  enemies  of  our  religion  say  as  Salvian 
tells  us  they  did  in  his  time,  Si  Christus  sancta  do- 
cuisset  Christiani  sancte  vixissent — surely  if  Christ 
had  taught  so  holy  a  doctrine,  Christians  would  have 
lived  holier  lives.  Tully  tells  us,  that  one  of  the 
shrewdest  arguments  that  ever  was  brought  against 
philosophy  was  this :  Quosdam  perfectos  philoso- 
phos  turpiter  vivere  ;  that  some  great  philosophers 
led  very  filthy  lives.  Celsus  and  Porphyry,  Hiero- 
cles  and  Julian,  among  all  their  witty  invectives 
against  Christian  religion,  have  nothing  against  it 


504 


that  reflects  so  much  upon  it,  as  do  the  wicked  lives 
of  so  many  Christians.  The  greatest  enmity  to  re- 
ligion is,  to  profess  it  and  to  live  unanswerably  to  it. 

This  consideration  ought  greatly  to  affect  us.  I 
am  sure  the  apostle  speaks  of  it  with  great  passion 
phi  in  is    anc*   yehemency,  "  for  many  walk,  of 
whom  I  have  told  you  often,  and  now 
tell  you  even   weeping,   that  they  are  enemies 
of  the  cross  of  Christ,  whose  end  is  destruction, 
whose  God  is  their  belly,  whose  glory  is  in  their 
shame,  who  mind  earthly  things."  A  Jew  or  a  Turk 
is  not  so  great  an  enemy  to  Christianity  as  a  lewd 
and  vicious  Christian.  .  Therefore  let  me  beseech 
Christians,  as  they  tender  the  honour  of  their  Sa- 
viour and  the  credit  of  their  religion,  that  they 
would  conform  their  lives  to  the  holy  precepts  of 
Christianity.    And  if  there  be  any  who  are  resolved 
to  continue  in  a  vicious  course,  to  the  injury  and 
disparagement  of  Christianity,  I  could  almost  en- 
treat of  them  that  they  would  quit  their  profession 
and  renounce  their  baptism,  that  they  would  lay 
aside  their  title  of  Christians,  and  initiate  themselves 
in  heathenish  rites  and  superstitions,  or  be  circum- 
cised for  Jews  or  Turks:  for  it  were  really  better, 
upon  some  accounts,  that  such  men  should  aban- 
don their  profession,  than  keep  on  a  vizard  which 
serves  to  no  other  purpose  but  to  scare  others  from 
religion. 

3.  And,  lastly,  let  us  consider  the  danger  we 
expose  ourselves  to  by  not  living  answerably  to  our 
religion.  And  this,  I  hope,  may  prevail  upon  such 
as  are  not  moved  by  the  former  considerations. 
Hypocrites  are  instanced  in  Scripture,  as  a  sort  of 
sinners  that  shall  have  the  sharpest  torments  and  the 
fiercest  damnation.    When  our  Saviour  would  set 


505 


forth  the  great  severity  of  the  Lord  towards  the  evil 
servant  he  expresseth  it  thus  :  "  He  shall 

,  .  V.  .  .  .      Matt.  xxiv.  51. 

cut  him  asunder,  and  appoint  him  his 
portion  with  hypocrites."  So  that  the  punishment 
of  hypocrites  seems  to  be  made  the  measure  and 
standard  of  the  highest  puuishment.  Thou  pro- 
fesseth  to  believe  in  Christ,  and  to  hope  in  him  for 
salvation,  but  in  the  mean  time  thou  livest  a  wicked 
and  unholy  life;  thou  dost  not  believe,  but  presume 
on  him,  and  wilt  find  at  the  great  day  that  this  thy 
confidence  will  be  thy  confusion,  and  he  whom 
thou  hopest  will  be  thy  advocate  and  saviour,  will 
prove  thy  accuser  and  judge.  What  our  Saviour  says 
to  the  Jews,  "  there  is  one  that  accuseth  . 

1  _  .  .  John  v.  4o. 

you,  even  Moses,  in  whom  ye  trust, 
may  very  well  be  applied  to  false  Christians :  there 
is  one  that  accuseth  you,  and  will  condemn  you, 
even  Jesus,  in  whom  ye  trust. 

The  profession  of  Christianity  and  men's  having 
the  name  of  Christ  named  upon  them,  will  be  so  far 
from  securing  them  from  hell,  that  it  will  sink  them 
the  deeper  into  it.  Many  are  apt  to  pity  the  poor 
heathens,  who  never  heard  of  the  name  of  Christ, 
and  sadly  to  condole  their  case ;  but,  as  our  Saviour 
said  upon  another  occasion,  "  weep  not  for  them, 
weep  for  yourselves."  There  is  no  such  miserable 
person  in  the  world  as  a  degenerate  Christian,  be- 
cause he  falls  into  the  greatest  misery  from  the 
greatest  advantages  and  opportunities  of  being  hap- 
py. Dost  thou  lament  the  condition  of  Socrates, 
and  Cato,  and  Aristides,  and  doubt  what  shall  be- 
come of  them  at  the  last  day  of  judgment?  and 
canst  thou,  who  art  an  impious  and  profane  Christ- 
ian, think  that  thou  shalt  escape  the  damnation  of 
hell? 

VOL.  I.  2  P 


506 


Dost  thou  believe  that  the  moral  heathen  shall  be 
cast  out;  and  canst  thou,  who  hast  led  a  wicked  life, 
under  the  profession  of  Christianity,  have  the  impu- 
dence to  hope,  that  thou  shalt  sit  down  with  Abra- 
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  God? 
No :  those  sins  which  are  committed  by  Christians, 
under  the  enjoyment  of  the  gospel,  are  of  a  deeper 
dye  and  clothed  with  blacker  aggravations  than  the 
sins  of  heathens  are  capable  of.  A  pagan  may  live 
without  God  in  the  world,  and  be  unjust  towards 
men,  at  a  cheaper  rate  and  upon  easier  terms  than 
thou  who  art  a  Christian.  Better  had  it  been  thou 
hadst  never  known  one  syllable  of  the  gospel,  never 
heard  of  the  name  of  Christ,  than  that  having  taken 
it  upon  thee  thou  shouldst  not  depart  from  iniquity. 
Happy  had  it  been  for  thee,  that  thou  hadst  been 
born  a  Jew  or  a  Turk,  or  a  poor  Indian,  rather 
than  that  being  bred  among  Christians,  and  profess- 
ing thyself  of  that  number,  thou  shouldst  lead  a 
vicious  and  unholy  life. 

I  have  insisted  the  longer  upon  these  arguments, 
that  I  might,  if  possible,  awaken  men  to  a  serious 
consideration  of  their  lives,  and  persuade  them  to  a 
real  reformation  of  them ;  that  I  may  oblige  all 
those  who  call  themselves  Christians  to  live  up  to 
the  essential  and  fundamental  laws  of  our  religion  ; 
to  love  God,  and  to  love  our  neighbour;  to  do  to 
every  man  as  we  would  have  him  to  do  to  us ;  to 
mortify  our  lusts,  and  subdue  our  passions,  and 
sincerely  endeavour  to  grow  in  every  grace  and  vir- 
tue, and  to  abound  in  all  the  fruits  of  righteousness, 
which  are  by  Jesus  Christ  to  the  praise  and  glory  of 
God. 

This  indeed  would  become  our  profession  and  be 
honourable  to  our  religion,  and  would  remove  one 


507 

of  the  greatest  obstacles  to  the  progress  of  the  gos- 
pel. For  how  can  we  expect  that  the  doctrine  of 
God  our  Saviour  should  gain  any  considerable 
ground  in  the  world,  so  long  as  by  the  unworthy 
lives  of  so  many  Christians  it  is  represented  to  the 
world  at  so  great  disadvantage?  If  ever  we  would 
have  Christian  religion  effectually  recommended,  it 
must  be  by  the  holy  and  unblameable  lives  of  those 
who  make  profession  of  it.  Then  indeed  it  would 
look  with  so  amiable  a  countenance  as  to  invite 
many  to  it,  and  carry  so  much  majesty  and  autho- 
rity in  it  as  to  command  reverence  from  its  greatest 
enemies,  and  make  men  to  acknowledge  that  God 
is  in  us  of  a  truth,  and  to  glorify  our  Father  which 
is  in  heaven. 

The  good  God  grant,  that  as  we  have  taken  upon 
us  the  profession  of  Christianity,  so  we  may  be 
careful  so  to  live  that  we  may  adorn  the  doctrine 
of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things  ;  that  the  grace 
of  God  which  bringeth  salvation  may  teach  us  to 
deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live 
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present 
world  ;  looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the 
glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ :  to  whom  with  the  Father 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  &c. 


2p2 


508 


SERMON  VIII. 

OF  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  A  HEAVENLY  CONVERSATION. 

For  our  conversation  is  in  heaven. 
Phil.  iii.  20. 

For  the  understanding  of  which  words  we  need  to 
look  back  no  further  than  the  18th  verse  of  this 
chapter,  where  the  apostle,  with  great  vehemency 
and  passion,  speaks  of  some  among  the  Philippians, 
who  indeed  professed  Christianity,  but  yet  would 
do  any  thing  to  decline  suffering  for  that  profession  : 
"  There  are  many  that  walk,  of  whom  I  have  told 
you  often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping,  that  they 
are  enemies  to  the  cross  of  Christ."  They  cannot 
endure  to  suffer  with  him,  and  for  him  ;  they  are  so 
sensual  and  wedded  to  this  world,  that  they  will 
do  any  thing  to  avoid  persecution  :  so  he  describes 
them  in  the  next  verse,  "  whose  end  is  destruction, 
whose  god  is  their  belly,  whose  glory  is  in  their 
shame,  who  mind  earthly  things."  Now,  in  oppo- 
sition to  these  sensual  and  earthly-minded  men,  the 
apostle  gives  us  the  character  of  the  true  Christ- 
ians; they  are  such  as  mind  heaven  and  another 
world,  and  prefer  the  hopes  of  that  to  all  the  in- 
terests of  this  life.  "  Our  conversation  is  in  heaven." 

For  the  right  understanding  of  which  phrase  be 
pleased  to  observe,  that  it  is  an  allusion  to  a  city,  or 
corporation,  and  to  the  privileges  and  manners  of 


509 

those  who  are  free  of  it.    And  heaven  is  several 
times  in  Scripture  represented  to  us  under  this  no- 
tion of  a  city.    It  is  said  of  Abraham,  that  "  he 
looked  for  a  city  which  hath  founda- 
tions, whose  builder  and  maker  is  God."     e  xl* 
It  is  called  likewise  "the  city  of  the 
living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem." 
And  the  same  apostle  speaking  of  the  uncertain  con- 
dition of  Christians  in  this  world,  says  of  them,  that 
"  here  they  have  no  continuing  city,    Heb  xiii  u 
but  look  for  one  that  is  to  come." 

Now  to  this  city  the  apostle  alludes  here  in  the 
text,  when  he  says  "our  conversation  is  in  heaven." 
For  the  word  TroXtVfu^a,  which  is  rendered  conver- 
sation, may  either  signify  the  privilege  of  citizens, 
or  their  conversation  and  manners,  or  may  take  in 
both  these. 

In  the  first  sense  of  the  privilege  of  citizens,  we 
find  Tro\iTua,  a  word  of  near  affinity  with  this,  some- 
times used  ;  44  with  a  great  sum  (says  the  Acts  xxi}  ^ 
captain  to  Paul)  obtained  I  rrjv  iroXnruav 
tclvtw,  this  freedom."  According  to  this  sense,  rJ^Jv 
to  TroXn-tujua  may  very  well  be  rendered,  as  Tertullian 
often  does  in  this  text,  muiiicipatus  ywster,  our  citi- 
zenship is  in  heaven;  an  allusion  perhaps  (as  the 
learned  Dr.  Hammond  observes)  to  those  who 
though  they  were  not  born  in  Rome,  and  it  may 
be  lived  at  a  great  distance  from  it,  had  yet  jus 
civitatis  Romance,  the  privilege  of  Roman  citizens. 
In  like  manner  the  apostle  here  describes  the  con- 
dition of  Christians.  It  is  true,  we  are  born  here 
in  this  world  and  live  in  it,  but  we  belong  to  another 
corporation;  we  are  denizens  of  another  country, 
and  free  of  that  city  which  is  above. 

In  the  other  sense  of  the  conversation  of  citizens, 


510 


we  find  the  verb  iroXiTtvwOe  used  towards  the  begin- 
Phii  i  27     n*n£  °*  tn*s  Epistle,  "  let  your  conver- 
sation be  as  it  becometh  the  gospel  of 
Christ."    And  why  may  not  the  word  ttoXitev/lio  in 
the  text,  without  any  inconvenience,  include  both 
these?  As  if  the  apostle  had  said — there  are  some, 
that  mind  earthlythings,  and  are  so  addicted  to  them, 
that  rather  than  part  with  them,  they  will  forsake 
their  religion  ;  but  as  for  us,  we  consider  that  we 
are  citizens  of  heaven,  and  accordingly  we  converse 
and  demean  ourselves  in  this  world,  as  those  that 
are  free  of  another  city,  and  do  belong  to  it. 

So  that  to  have  "  our  conversation  in  heaven" 
does  imply  these  two  things: 

First,  The  serious  thoughts  and  considerations  of 
heaven. 

Secondly,  The  effect  which  those  thoughts  ought 
to  have  upon  our  lives. 

These  two  things  take  up  the  meaning  of  my  text, 
and  shall  be  the  subject  of  the  following  discourse. 

I.  The  serious  thoughts  and  considerations  of 
heaven  ;  that  is,  of  the  happy  and  glorious  state  of 
good  men  in  another  life.  And  concerning  this, 
there  are  two  things  principally  which  offer  them- 
selves to  our  consideration.  First,  The  happiness 
of  this  state.  Secondly,  The  way  and  means  where- 
by we  may  come  to  partake  of  this  happiness. 

First,  We  will  consider  the  happiness  of  this  state. 
But  what  and  how  great  this  happiness  is,  I  am  not 
able  to  represent  to  you.  These  things  are  yet  in 
a  great  measure  within  the  veil,  and  it  does  not  now 
fully  «  appear  what  we  shall  be."  The  Scriptures 
have  revealed  so  much  in  general,  concerning  the 
reality  and  unspeakable  felicities  of  this  state,  as 
may  satisfy  us  for  the  present,  and  serve  to  inflame 


511 


our  desires  after  it,  and  to  quicken  our  endeavours 
for  the  obtaining  of  it ;  as,  namel  y ,  that  it  is  incora  pa- 
rably  beyond  any  happiness  of  this  world  ;  that  it 
is  very  great;  and  that  it  is  eternal:  in  a  word, 
that  it  is  far  above  any  thing  that  we  can  now  con- 
ceive or  imagine. 

L  It  is  incomparably  beyond  any  happiness  in 
this  world.  It  is  free  from  all  those  sharp  and  bit- 
ter ingredients  which  do  abate  and  allay  the  felici- 
ties of  this  life.  All  the  enjoyments  of  this  world, 
are  mixed  and  uncertain  and  unsatisfying  :  nay,  so 
far  are  they  from  giving  us  satisfaction,  that  the  very 
sweetest  of  them  are  satiating  and  cloying. 

None  of  the  comforts  of  this  life  are  pure  and 
unmixed.  There  is  something  of  vanity  mingled  with 
all  our  earthly  enjoyments,  and  that  causeth  vex- 
ation of  spirit.    There  is  no  sensual  pleasure  but  is 
either  purchased  by  some  pain,  or  attended  with  it, 
or  ends  in  it.    A  great  estate  is  neither  to  be  got 
without  care,  nor  kept  without  fear,  nor  lost  without 
trouble.    Dignity  and  greatness  is  troublesome  al- 
most to  all  mankind,  it  is  commonly  uneasy  to  them 
that  have  it,  and  it  is  usually  hated  and  envied  by 
those  who  have  it  not.    Knowledge,  that  is  one  of 
the  best  and  sweetest  pleasures  of  human  life ;  and 
yet  if  we  may  believe  the  experience  of  one,  who 
had  as  great  a  share  of  it,  as  any  of  the  sons  of  men 
ever  had,  he  will  tell  us,  that  "  this  also  is  vexa- 
tion of  spirit;  for  in  much  wisdom  there 
is  much  grief,  and  he  that  increaseth  cces  l*  • 
knowledge  increaseth  sorrow." 

Thus  it  is  with  all  the  things  of  this  world,  the 
best  of  them  have  a  mixture  of  good  and  evil,  of  joy 
and  sorrow  in  them :  but  the  happiness  of  the  next 
life  is  free  from  all  allay  and  mixture.    In  the  des- 


512 


cription  of  the  new  Jerusalem,  it  is  said,  that  "there 
shall  be  no  more  curse,  and  there  shall 

Rev.  xxii.  3.  5 

be  no  night  there  ;"  nothing  to  embitter 
our  blessings,  or  obscure  our  glory.  Heaven  is  the 
proper  region  of  happiness,  there  only  are  pure  joys 
and  an  unmingled  felicity. 

But  the  enjoyments  of  this  world  as  they  are  mix- 
ed, so  they  are  uncertain.  So  wavering  and  incon- 
stant are  they,  that  we  can  have  no  security  of  them  : 
when  we  think  ourselves  to  have  the  fastest  hold  of 
them,  they  slip  out  of  our  hands,  we  know  not  how. 
For  this  reason,  Solomon  very  elegantly  calls  them, 
things  that  are  not :  "  why  wilt  thou  set  thine  eyes 
upon  that  which  is  not?  for  riches  certainly  make  to 
themselves  wings,  and  fly  like  an  eagle  towards  hea- 
ven." So  fugitive  are  they,  that  after  all  our  endea- 
vours to  secure  them,  they  may  break  loose  from  us, 
and  in  an  instant  vanish  out  of  our  sight.  "  Riches 
make  to  themselves  wings,  and  fly  like  an  eagle," 
intimating  to  us,  that  riches  are  often  accessary  to 
their  own  ruin.  Many  times  the  greatness  of  a 
man's  estate,  and  nothing  else,  hath  been  the  cause 
of  the  loss  of  it,  and  of  taking  away  the  life  of  the 
owner  thereof.  The  fairness  of  some  men's  fortune 
hath  been  a  temptation  to  those  who  have  been 
more  powerful  to  ravish  it  from  them  ;  thus  "  riches 
make  to  themselves  wings."  So  that  he  that  enjoys 
the  greatest  happiness  of  this  world,  does  still  want 
one  happiness  more,  to  secure  him  for  the  future, 
what  he  possesses  for  the  present.  But  the  happi- 
ness of  heaven  is  a  steady  and  constant  light,  fixed 
and  unchangeable  as  the  fountain  from  whence  it 
springs,  "the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no 
variableness  nor  shadow  of  turning." 

And  if  the  enjoyments  of  this  life  were  certain, 
yet  they  are  unsatisfying.    This  is  the  vanity  of 


513 


vanities,  that  every  thing  in  this  world  can  trouble 
us,  but  nothing  can  give  us  satisfaction.  I  know 
not  how  it  is  ;  but  either  we,  or  the  things  of  this 
world,  or  both,  are  so  fantastical,  that  we  can 
neither  be  well  with  these  things,  nor  well  without 
them.  If  we  be  hungry,  we  are  in  pain  ;  and  if  we 
eat  to  the  full,  we  are  uneasy.  If  we  be  poor  we 
think  ourselves  miserable;  and  when  we  come  to  be 
rich  we  commonly  really  are  so.  If  we  are  in  a  low 
condition,  we  fret  and  murmur;  and  if  we  chance 
to  get  up,  and  to  be  raised  to  greatness,  we  are  many 
times  farther  from  contentment  than  we  were  before. 
So  that  we  pursue  the  happiness  of  this  world  just 
as  little  children  chace  birds  ;  when  we  think  that 
we  are  come  very  near  it,  and  have  it  almost  in  our 
hands,  it  flies  farther  from  us  than  it  was  at  first. 

Nay,  so  far  are  the  enjoyments  of  this  world  from 
affording  us  satisfaction,  that  the  sweetest  of  them 
are  most  apt  to  satiate  and  cloy  us.  All  the  plea- 
sures of  this  world  are  so  contrived  as  to  yield  us 
very  little  happiness.  If  they  go  off  quickly,  they 
signify  nothing;  and,  if  they  staylong,  we  are  sick  of 
them.  After  a  full  draught  of  any  sensual  pleasure 
we  presently  loath  it,  and  hate  it  as  much  after  the 
enjoyment,  as  we  courted  it  and  longed  for  it  in  the 
expectation.  But  the  delights  of  the  other  world, 
as  they  will  give  us  full  satisfaction,  so  we  shall 
never  be  w  eary  of  them.  Every  repetition  of  them 
will  be  accompanied  with  a  new  pleasure  and  con- 
tentment. In  the  felicities  of  heaven  these  two 
things  shall  be  reconciled  which  never  met  together 
in  any  sensual  delight,  long  and  full  enjoyment,  and 
yet  a  fresh  and  perpetual  pleasure.  As  in  God's 
"  presence  there  is  fulness  of  joy,"  so  at  his  right 
hand  there  shall  be  pleasures  for  evermore. 


514 


2.  The  happiness  of  the  other  life  is  not  only  in- 
comparably beyond  any  happiness  of  this  world 
(that,  it  may  be,  is  no  great  commendation  of  it)  but 
it  is  very  great  in  itself.  The  happiness  of  heaven 
is  usually  in  Scripture  described  to  us  by  such 
pleasures  as  are  manly  and  excellent,  chaste  and 
intellectual,  infinitely  more  pure  and  refined  than 
those  of  sense ;  and  if  the  Scripture  at  any  time  de- 
scend to  the  metaphors  of  a  feast,  and  a  banquet, 
and  a  marriage,  it  is  plainly  by  way  of  accommo- 
dation to  our  weakness  and  condescension  to  our 
capacities. 

But  the  chief  ingredients  of  this  happiness,  so 
far  as  the  Scripture  hath  thought  fit  to  reveal  it  to 
us,  are  the  perfection  of  our  knowledge,  and  the 
height  of  our  love,  and  the  perpetual  society  and 
friendship  of  all  the  blessed  inhabitants  of  those 
glorious  mansions;  and  the  joyful  concurrence  of 
all  these  in  cheerful  expressions  of  gratitude,  in  the 
incessant  praises  and  admiration  of  the  fountain  and 
author  of  all  this  happiness.  And  what  can  be 
more  delightful,  than  to  have  our  understandings 
entertained  with  a  clear  sight  of  the  best  and  most 
perfect  Being,  with  the  knowledge  of  all  his  works, 
and  of  the  wise  designs  of  his  providence  here  in  the 
world?  than  to  live  in  the  reviving  presence  of  God, 
and  to  be  continually  attending  upon  him,  whose 
favour  is  life,  and  whose  glory  is  much  more  above 
that  of  any  of  the  princes  of  this  world,  than  the 
greatest  of  them  is  above  the  poorest  worm  ?  The 
queen  of  Sheba  thought  Solomon's  servants  happy 
in  having  the  opportunity,  by  standing  continually 
before  him,  to  hear  his  wisdom  ;  but,  in  the  other 
world,  it  shall  be  a  happiness  to  Solomon  himself, 


515 


and  to  the  wisest  and  greatest  persons  that  ever 
herein  this  world,  to  stand  before  this  great  King, 
to  admire  his  wisdom,  and  to  behold  his  glory. 
Not  that  I  imagine  the  happiness  of  heaven  to  con- 
sist in  a  perpetual  gazing  upon  God,  and  in  an  idle 
contemplation  of  the  glories  of  that  place.  For  as 
by  that  blessed  sight  we  shall  be  infinitely  trans- 
ported, so  the  Scripture  tells  us  we  shall  be  also 
transformed  into  the  image  of  the  Divine  perfections: 
"  we  shall  see  God,  and  we  shall  be  like  him:"  and 
what  greater  happiness  can  there  be  than  to  be  like 
the  happiest  and  most  perfect  Being  in  the  world  ? 
Besides,  who  can  tell  what  employment  God  may 
have  for  us  in  the  next  life  ?  We  need  not  doubt 
but  that  he,  who  is  happiness  itself,  and  hath  pro- 
mised to  make  us  happy,  can  easily  find  out  such 
employments  and  delights  for  us  in  the  other  world, 
as  will  be  proper  and  suitable  to  that  state. 

But  then,  besides  the  improvement  of  our  know- 
ledge, there  shall  be  the  most  delightful  exercise  of 
love.  When  we  come  to  heaven  we  shall  enter  into 
the  society  of  the  blessed  angels,  and  of  "  the  spirits 
of  just  men  made  perfect;"  that  is,  freed  from  all 
those  passions  and  infirmities  which  do  now  render 
the  conversation,  even  of  the  best  men,  sometimes 
troublesome  to  one  another.  We  shall  then  meet 
with  all  those  excellent  persons,  those  brave  minds, 
those  innocent  and  charitable  souls,  whom  we  have 
seen,  and  heard,  and  read  of  in  this  world.  There 
we  shall  meet  with  many  of  our  dear  relations  and 
intimate  friends,  and  perhaps  with  many  of  our 
enemies,  to  whom  we  shall  then  be  perfectly  recon- 
ciled, notwithstanding  all  the  warm  contests  and 
peevish  differences  which  we  had  with  them  in  this 
world,  even  about  matters  of  religion.    For  heaven 


516 


is  a  state  of  perfect  love  and  friendship  ;  there  will 
be  nothing  but  kindness  and  good-nature  there,  and 
all  the  prudent  arts  of  endearment  and  wise  ways  of 
rendering  conversation  mutually  pleasant  to  one 
another.  And  what  greater  happiness  can  be  ima- 
gined, than  to  converse  freely  with  so  many  excel- 
lent persons,  without  any  thing  of  folly  or  disguise, 
of  jealousy  or  design  upon  one  another?  for  then 
there  will  be  none  of  those  vices  and  passions,  of 
covetousness  and  ambition,  of  envy  and  hatred,  of 
wrath  and  peevishness,  which  do  now  so  much 
spoil  the  pleasure  and  disturb  the  quiet  of  mankind. 
All  quarrels  and, contentions,  schisms  and  divisions, 
will  then  be  effectually  hindered,  not  by  force,  but  by 
love,  not  by  compulsion,  but  by  that  charity  which 
never  fails  ;  and  all  those  controversies  in  religion, 
which  are  now  so  hotly  agitated,  will  then  be  final- 
ly determined,  not  as  we  endeavour  to  end  them 
now,  by  canons  and  decrees,  but  by  a  perfect  know- 
ledge and  convincing  light. 

And  when  this  blessed  society  is  met  together, 
and  thus  united  by  love,  they  shall  all  join  in  gra- 
titude to  their  great  patrons  and  benefactors,  "  to 
him  that  sits  upon  the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain,  to  God  even  our  Father,  and  to  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  loved  us,  and  washed  us 
from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood."  And  they  shall 
sing  everlasting  songs  of  praise  to  God  for  all  his 
works  of  wonder,  for  the  effects  of  that  infinite  good- 
ness, and  admirable  wisdom,  and  almighty  power, 
which  are  clearly  seen  in  the  creation  and  govern- 
ment of  the  world,  and  all  the  creatures  in  it ;  par- 
ticularly of  his  favours  to  mankind,  for  the  benefit 
of  their  beings,  for  the  comfort  of  their  lives,  and 
for  all  his  merciful  providences  towards  them  in 


517 

this  world:  but,  above  all,  for  the  redemption  of 
their  souls  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  for  the  free  for- 
giveness of  their  sins,  for  the  gracious  assistance  of 
his  holy  Spirit,  and  for  conducting  them  safely 
through  all  the  snares  and  dangers,  the  troubles  and 
temptations  of  this  world,  to  the  secure  possession 
of  that  glory  and  happiness,  which  then  they  shall 
be  partakers  of,  and  are  bound  to  praise  God  for 
to  all  eternity.  This,  this  shall  be  the  employment 
of  the  blessed  spirits  above,  and  these  are  the  chief 
ingredients  of  our  happiuess  which  the  Scripture 
mentions.  And  if  there  were  no  other,  as  there 
may  be  ten  thousand  more,  for  any  thing  that  I 
can  tell,  yet  generous  and  virtuous  minds  will  easily 
understand  how  great  a  pleasure  there  is  in  the  im- 
provement of  our  knowledge,  and  the  exercise  of 
love;  and  in  a  grateful  and  perpetual  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  greatest  benefits  that  creatures  are  ca- 
pable of  receiving. 

3.  This  happiness  shall  be  eternal.  And  though 
this  be  but  a  circumstance,  and  do  not  enter  into 
the  nature  of  our  happiness,  yet  it  is  so  material 
a  one,  that  all  the  felicities  which  heaven  affords 
would  be  imperfect  without  it.  It  would  strangely 
damp  and  allay  all  our  joys  to  think  that  they 
should  sometime  have  an  end.  And  the  greater 
our  happiness  were,  the  greater  trouble  it  would  be 
to  us  to  consider  that  it  must  have  a  period. 

It  would  make  a  man  sorrowful  indeed,  to  think 
of  leaving  such  vast  possessions.  Indeed,  if  the 
happiness  of  heaven  were  such  as  the  joys  of 
this  world  are,  it  were  fit  they  should  be  as  short; 
for,  after  a  little  enjoyment,  it  would  cloy  us,  and  we 
should  soon  grow  weary  of  it.  Being  so  excellent, 
it  would  scarce  be  a  happiness  if  it  w  ere  not  eternal. 


518 


It  would  embitter  the  pleasures  of  heaven,  as  great 
as  they  are,  to  seeau  end  of  them,  though  it  were  at 
never  so  great  a  distance ;  to  consider  all  this  vast 
treasure  of  happiness  would  one  day  be  exhausted, 
and  that  after  so  many  years  were  past,  we  should 
be  as  poor  and  miserable  again  as  we  were  once  in 
this  world.  God  hath  so  ordered  things,  that  the 
vain  and  empty  delights  of  this  world  should  be 
temporary  and  transient,  but  that  the  great  and 
substantial  pleasures  of  the  other  world  should  be 
as  lasting  as  they  are  excellent.  For  heaven  as  it 
is  an  exceeding,  so  it  is  "  an  eternal  weight  of  glo- 
ry." And  this  is  that  which  crowns  the  joys  of 
heaven,  and  banishes  all  fear  and  trouble  from  the 
minds  of  the  blessed.  And  thus  to  be  secured  in 
the  possession  of  our  happiness  is  an  unspeakable 
addition  to  it.  For  that  which  is  eternal,  as  it  shall 
never  terminate,  so  it  can  never  be  diminished  ;  for 
to  be  diminished  and  to  decay  is  to  draw  nearer  to 
an  end,  and  that  which  shall  never  have  an  end 
can  never  come  nearer  to  it. 

O  vast  eternity  !  how  dost  thou  swallow  up  our 
thoughts,  and  entertain  us  at  once  with  delight 
and  amazement?  This  is  the  very  top  and  highest 
pitch  of  our  happiness,  upon  which  we  may  stand 
secure,  and  look  dow  n  with  scorn  upon  all  things 
here  below  ;  and  how  small  and  inconsiderable  do 
they  appear  to  us,  compared  with  the  vast  and  end- 
less enjoyments  of  our  future  state?  But,  O  vain 
and  foolish  souls !  that  are  so  little  concerned  for 
eternity ;  that,  for  the  trifles  of  time,  and  the  plea- 
sures of  sin,  which  are  but  for  a  season,  can  find  in 
our  hearts^to  forfeit  au  everlasting  felicity.  Blessed 
God  !  why  hast  thou  prepared  such  a  happiness  for 
those  who  neither  consider  it,  nor  seek  after  it?  why 


319 

is  such  a  price  put  into  the  hands  of  fools,  who  have 
no  heart  to  make  use  of  it?  who  fondly  choose  to 
gratify  their  lust  rather  than  to  save  their  souls,  and 
sottishly  prefer  the  temporary  enjoyments  of  sin  be- 
fore a  blessed  immortality? 

4.  And  lastly,  This  happiness  is  far  above  any 
thing  that  we  can  now  conceive  or  imagine.  It  is 
so  great,  that  it  cannot  now  enter  into  the  heart  of 
man.  We  cannot,  from  the  experience  of  any  of 
those  pleasures  and  delights  which  we  have  been 
acquainted  withal  in  this  world,  frame  an  equal  idea 
and  conception  of  it.  So  that  when  we  come  to 
heaven,  we  shall  be  ready  to  say  of  it  as  the  queen 
of  Sheba  did  of  Solomon's  wisdom  and  prosperity, 
"  that  half  of  it  hath  not  been  told  us  ;"  that  the  fe- 
licities and  glories  of  that  state  do  far  exceed  all  the 
fame  which  we  have  heard  of  them  in  this  world. 
For  who  can  say  how  great  a  good  God  is?  and 
how  happy  he,  who  is  the  foundation  of  happiness, 
can  make  those  souls  that  love  him,  and  those  whom 
he  loves. 

In  this  imperfect  state  we  are  not  capable  of  a 
full  representation  of  those  glories.  We  cannot  now 
see  God  and  live.  A  full  description  of  heaven,  and 
of  the  pleasures  of  that  state,  would  let  in  joys 
upon  us  too  big  for  our  narrow  capacities,  and  too 
strong  for  weak  mortality  to  bear.  We  are  now 
but  children,  and  we  speak  as  children,  and  we 
understand  and  think  as  children  concerning  these 
things;  but  in  the  other  state  we  shall 

i  ii  1  Cor.  xiii. 

grow  up  to  be  men,  and  then  we  shall  9,10,11. 
put  away  these  childish  thoughts  ;  "  now  we  know 
but  in  part,  but  when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come, 
that  which  is  imperfect  shall  be  done  away :  now 
we  see  through  a  glass  darkly   (cv  aivtypari,  in  a 


520 


riddle),  but  then  we  shall  see  face  to  face ;  now  we 
know  in  part,  but  then  we  shall  know  even  as  also 
we  are  known,"  as  the  apostle  discourseth  excel- 
lently concerning  this  very  matter. 

No  sooner  shall  we  enter  upon  the  joys  of  the 
other  world,  but  our  minds  shall  be  raised  to  a 
strength  and  activity  as  much  above  that  of  the 
most  knowing  persons  in  this  world,  as  the  thoughts 
of  the  greatest  philosopher  and  wisest  man  upon 
earth  are  above  the  thoughts  of  a  child  or  a  fool. 
No  man's  mind  is  now  so  well  framed  to  understand 
any  thing  in  this  world,  as  our  understandings 
shall  then  be  fitted  for  the  knowledge  of  God  and 
of  the  things  that  belong  to  that  state.  In  the 
mean  time  let  us  bless  God,  that  he  hath  revealed  so 
much  of  this  happiness  to  us  as  is  necessary  to  ex- 
cite and  encourage  us  to  seek  after  it. 

The  second  thing  to  be  considered  concerning  our 
future  happiness,  is  the  way  and  means  whereby 
we  may  come  to  be  made  partakers  of  it.  And  that, 
in  short,  is  by  the  constant  and  sincere  endeavours 
of  a  holy  life,  in  and  through  the  mercies  of  God 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Christ  indeed  is  the  au- 
thor of  our  salvation,  but  obedience  is  the  condition 
of  it;  so  the  apostle  tells  us,  that  Christ  "is  the  au- 
thor of  eternal  salvation  to  them  that 
obey  him."  It  is  the "  grace  of  God"  in 
Tit.  n.  n,  12.         gospel  which  brings  or  offers  this 

salvation  to  us  ;  but  then  it  is  by  the  "  denying  of  un- 
godliness and  worldly  lusts,"  and  by  living  "sober- 
ly and  righteously  and  godly  in  this  present  world," 
that  we  are  to  "  wait  for  the  blessed  hope."  Our 
Saviour  promises  this  happiness  to  the  pure  in 
heart :  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall 
see  God     and  elsewhere  the  Scripture  doth  ex- 


521 


elude  all  others  from  any  share  or  portion  in  this 
blessedness :  so  the  apostle  assures  us,  that "  without 
holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."        Heb.  xii.  14 

And  holiness  is  not  only  a  condition  but  a  neces- 
sary qualification  for  the  happiness  of  the  next  life. 
This  is  the  force  of  St.  John's  reasoning :  "  we  shall 
be  like  him,  for  we  shall  see  him."  To  see  God  is 
to  be  happy ;  but,  unless  we  be  like  him,  we  cannot 
see  him.  The  sight  and  presence  of  God  himself 
would  be  no  happiness  to  that  man  who  is  not  like 
to  God  iu  the  temper  and  disposition  of  his  mind. 
And  from  hence  the  apostle  infers  in  the  next  verse, 
''every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  him- 
self even  as  he  is  pure."  So  that  if  we  live  wicked 
lives,  if  we  allow  ourselves  in  the  practice  of  any 
known  sin,  we  interrupt  our  hopes  of  heaven,  and 
render  ourselves  unfit  for  eternal  life.  By  this 
means  we  defeat  all  the  designs  of  God's  grace  and 
mercy  towards  us,  and  salvation  itself  cannot  save 
us,  if  we  make  ourselves  incapable  of  that  happi- 
ness which  God  offers.  Heaven  is  in  Scripture 
called  "  an  inheritance  among  them  that  are  sancti- 
fied," and  "the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light;"  so 
that  it  is  not  enough  that  this  inheritance  is  promised 
to  us,  but  we  must  be  qualified  and  prepared  for  it, 
and  "  be  made  meet  to  be  made  partakers  of  it." 

And  this  life  is  the  time  of  our  preparation  for 
our  future  state.  Our  souls  will  continue  for  ever 
what  we  make  them  in  this  world.  Such  a  temper 
and  disposition  of  mind  as  a  man  carries  with  him 
out  of  this  life,  he  shall  retain  in  the  next.  It  is 
true,  indeed,  heaven  perfects  those  holy  and  virtuous 
dispositions  which  are  begun  here ;  but  the  other 
world  alters  no  man  as  to  his  main  state ;  he  that 
is  filthy  will  be  filthy  still ;  and  he  that  is  unright- 

vol.  1.  2  Q 


522 


eous  will  be  unrighteous  still.  If  we  do  not  in  a 
good  degree  mortify  our  lusts  and  passions  here, 
death  will  not  kill  them  for  us,  but  we  shall  carry 
them  with  us  into  the  other  world.  And  if  God 
should  admit  us  so  qualified  into  the  place  of  hap- 
piness, yet  we  shall  bring  that  along  with  us  which 
would  infallibly  hinder  us  from  being  happy.  Our 
sensual  inclinations  and  desires  would  meet  with 
nothing  there  that  would  be  suitable  [to  them,  and 
we  should  be  perpetually  tormented  with  those  ap- 
petites which  we  brought  with  us  out  of  this  world, 
because  we  should  find  nothing  there  to  gratify  them 
withal.  For  as  the  apostle  says  in  another  sense, 
"  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meats  and  drinks,  but 
righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost."  The  happiness  of  heaven  consists  in  such 
things  as  a  wicked  man  hath  no  gust  and  relish  for. 
So  that,  if  a  covetous,  or  ambitious,  or  voluptuous 
man  were  in  heaven,  he  would  be  just  like  the  rich 
man  in  hell,  tormented  with  a  continual  thirst,  and 
burnt  up  in  the  flames  of  his  own  ardent  desires  ;  and 
would  not  be  able,  amidst  all  the  plenty  and  trea- 
sures of  that  place,  to  find  so  much  as  one  drop  of 
suitable  pleasure  and  delight  to  quench  and  allay 
that  heat.  So,  likewise,  our  fierce  and  unruly  pas- 
sions ;  if  we  should  carry  them  with  us  into  the 
other  world,  how  inconsistent  would  they  be  with 
happiness?  They  would  not  only  make  us  misera- 
ble ourselves,  but  be  a  trouble  to  all  those  with 
whom  we  should  converse.  If  a  man  of  an  envious 
and  malicious,  of  a  peevish  and  passionate  temper, 
were  admitted  into  the  mansions  of  the  blessed,  he 
would  not  only  be  unhappy  himself,  but  would  dis- 
turb the  quiet  of  others,  and  raise  storms  even  in 
those  calm  regions.    Vain  man !  that  dreamest  of 


52S 


being  happy  without  any  disposition  or  prepara- 
tion for  it.  To  be  happy,  is  to  enjoy  what  we  de- 
sire, and  to  Jive  with  those  whom  we  love.  But 
there  is  nothing  in  heaven  suitable  to  the  desires  and 
appetites  of  a  wicked  man. 

All  the  joys  of  that  place,  and  delights  of  that 
state  are  purely  spiritual,  and  are  only  to  be  relish- 
ed by  those  who  have  purified  themselves  as  God  is 
pure.  But  if  thou  be  carnal  and  sensual,  what  are 
these  things  to  thee?  What  happiness  would  it  be 
to  thee,  to  see  God,  and  to  have  him  always  in  thy 
view  who  was  never  in  all  thy  thoughts  ;  to  be  tied  to 
live  for  ever  in  his  company  who  is  of  a  quite  con- 
trary temper  and  disposition  to  thyself,  whose  pre- 
sence thou  dreadest,  and  whom  whilst  thou  wast  in 
this  world  thou  couldst  never  endure  to  think  upon  ? 
So  that  the  pleasures  of  heaven  itself  could  signify 
no  good  or  happiness  to  that  man  who  is  not  so  dis- 
posed as  to  take  pleasure  in  them.  Heaven  is  too 
pure  an  air  for  corrupt  souls  to  live  and  breathe  in, 
and  the  whole  employment  and  conversation  of  that 
place,  as  it  would  be  unsuitable,  so  would  it  also 
be  unacceptable  to  a  sensual  and  vicious  person. 

From  all  this  it  appears  how  necessary  it  is  for  us 
to  prepare  ourselves  for  this  blessed  state,  by  the 
constant  and  sincere  endeavours  of  a  holy  life,  by 
mortifying  every  lust  and  inordinate  passion  in  our 
souls.  For,  until  this  be  done,  we  are  not  meet  to 
be  made  partakers  of  the  felicities  of  the  other 
world.  And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  first  thing 
implied  in  this  phrase — of  having  our  conversation 
in  heaven  ;  viz.  the  serious  thoughts  and  considera- 
tion of  heaven  ;  or  the  happiness  of  that  state,  and 
of  the  way  and  means  whereby  that  happiness  is 
to  be  attained. 

2  q  2 


524 


II.  The  having  our  conversation  in  heaven  does 
imply  likewise  the  effect  which  these  considera- 
tions ought  to  have  upon  our  hearts  and  lives  :  as, 

1.  To  convince  us  of  the  vanity  of  this  world. 
God  hath  on  purpose  made  this  world  troublesome 
and  uneasy  to  us,  that  there  might  be  no  sufficient 
temptation  to  reasonable  and  considerate  men,  to 
take  them  off  from  the  care  and  thought  of  their 
future  happiness ;  that  God  and  heaven  might  have 
no  rival  here  below  ;  that  there  might  be  nothing  in 
this  world  that  might  pretend  to  our  affection  or 
court  us  with  any  advantage  in  comparison  of  ever- 
lasting life  and  glory. 

When  we  corne  to  die,  and  eternity  shall  present 
itself  to  our  serious  and  waking  thoughts,  then 
things  will  put  on  another  face,  and  those  things 
which  we  valued  so  much  in  this  life,  will  then  ap- 
pear to  be  nothing  worth ;  but  those  things  which 
we  neglected,  to  be  of  infinite  concernment  to 
us,  and  worthy  to  have  been  the  care  and  endea- 
vour of  our  whole  lives.  And  if  we  would  consider 
these  things  in  time,  while  the  opportunities  of  life 
and  health  are  before  us,  we  might  be  convinced  at 
a  cheaper  rate,  and  come  to  be  satisfied  of  the  vani- 
ty of  this  world  before  we  despaired  of  the  happi- 
ness of  the  other. 

2.  To  make  us  very  active  and  industrious  to  be 
as  good,  and  to  do  as  much  good  as  we  can  in  this 
life,  that  so  we  may  be  qualified  and  disposed  for 
the  happiness  of  the  next.  Men  are  usually  very 
industrious  for  the  things  of  this  life,  to  be  rich  and 
great  in  the  world  :  did  we  but  value  heaven  half 
as  much  as  it  deserves,  we  should  take  infinitely 
more  pains  for  that.  So  often  as  we  consider  the 
glories  that  are  above,  how  does  it  accuse  our  sloth, 


525 


and  condemn  our  folly,  that  we  are  less  concerned 
for  our  souls,  than  most  men  are  for  their  bodies, 
that  we  will  not  labour  half  so  much  for  an  eternal  in- 
heritance, as  men  ordinarily  do  for  these  corrupti- 
ble things  ? 

Let  us  remember  that  we  are  hastiug  apace  to  an- 
other world,  and  that  our  eternal  happiness  now  lies 
at  the  stake.  Aud  how  should  it  quicken  our  endea- 
vours, to  have  such  a  reward  set  before  us,  to  have 
crowns  and  sceptres  in  our  eyes?  would  we  but 
often  represent  to  our  minds,  the  glorious  things  of 
another  world,  what  fervours  should  we  feel  in 
our  hearts?  we  should  be  all  life  and  spirit,  and 
wing;  and  should  do  God's  will,  almost  with 
the  same  readiness  and  delight,  as  the  angels  do, 
who  continually  behold  the  face  of  their  Father. 
The  consideration  of  heaven,  and  the  firm  persua- 
sion of  our  future  happiness,  should  actuate  all  the 
powers  of  our  souls,  and  be  continually  inspiring 
us  with  a  new  vigour  in  the  ways  of  holiness  and 
virtue.  How  should  this  thought  swell  our  reso- 
lutions, and  confirm  our  purposes  of  obedience, 
that  if  we  have  our  "  fruit  unto  holiness,"  our  end 
will  be  everlasting  life  ? 

3.  To  mitigate  and  lighten  the  evils  and  afflictions 
of  this  life.  It  is  no  great  matter  how  rough  the 
way  be,  provided  we  be  sure  that  it  leads  to  happi- 
ness. The  incomparably  greater  good  of  the  next 
life  will,  to  a  wise  and  considerate  man,  weigh 
down  all  the  evils  of  this.  And  the  Scripture  tells 
us  that  there  is  no  comparison  between  them.  "The 
sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  Rom  ... 
worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory 
that  shall  be  revealed  in  us."  The  evils  in  this  life 
afflict  men  more  or  less,  according  as  the  soul  is 


526 


fortified  with  considerations  proper  to  support  us 
under  them.  When  we  consider  that  we  have  but 
a  little  while  to  be  here,  that  we  are  upon  our  jour- 
ney, travelling  towards  our  heavenly  country,  where 
we  shall  meet  with  all  the  delights  we  can  desire, 
it  ought  not  to  trouble  us  much  to  endure  storms 
and  foul  ways,  and  to  want  many  of  those  accom- 
modations we  might  expect  at  home.  This  is  the 
common  fate  of  travellers,,  and  we  must  take  things 
as  we  find  them,  and  not  look  to  have  every  thing 
just  to  our  mind.  These  difficulties  and  inconveni- 
ences will  shortly  be  over,  and  after  a  few  days  will 
be  quite  forgotten,  and  be  to  us  as  if  they  had  never 
been.  And  when  we  are  safely  landed  in  our  own 
country,  with  what  pleasure  shall  we  look  back  up- 
on those  rough  and  boisterous  seas  which  we  have 
escaped  ?  The  more  troubles  we  have  past  through, 
the  kinder  usage  we  shall  find  when  we  come  to 
our  Father's  house.  So  the  apostle  tells  us,  that 
"our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment, 
worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory."  When  we  come  to  heaven,  our 
happiness  shall  then  be  as  real  as  our  miseries  were 
here  upon  earth,  and  far  greater,  and  more  last- 
ing. And  what  great  matter  is  it,  though  we  suffer 
awhile  in  this  world,  provided  we  escape  the  end- 
less and  insufferable  torments  of  the  next;  though 
we  have  not  our  good  things  in  this  life,  if  infinitely 
greater  be  reserved  for  us,  and  we  shall  receive  them 
with  interest  in  the  other? 

Several  of  the  evils  and  calamities  of  this  life 
would  be  insufferable  indeed,  if  there  were  nothing 
better  to  be  hoped  for  hereafter.  If  this  were  true, 
Christians  would  not  only  be  of  all  men,  but  of  all 
creatures,  the  most  miserable.    But  our  religion  hath 


527 


abundantly  assured  us  to  the  contrary.  And  the 
assurance  of  this  was  that  which  made  the  primitive 
Christians  to  embrace  Sufferings  with  so  much 
cheerfulness,  "  to  glory  in  tribulation,  and  to  take 
joyfully  the  spoiling  of  their  goods,  knowing  that 
in  heaven  they  had  a  better  and  more  enduring  sub- 
stance." The  seven  brethren,  in  the  history  of  the 
Maccabees,  upon  this  persuasion,  would  not  accept 
deliverance,  "  that  they  might  obtain  a  better  resur- 
rection." The  storm  of  stones  which  was  poured 
upon  St.  Stephen,  was  no  more  to  him  than  a  com- 
mon shower,  when  "  he  saw  the  heavens  opened, 
and  Jesus  (in  whose  cause  he  suffered),  standing 
on  the  right  hand  of  God." 

4.  To  make  us  sincere  in  all  our  professions, 
words  and  actions.  Did  men  firmly  believe  the  re- 
wards of  another  world,  their  religion  would  not 
be  only  in  shew  and  pretence,  but  in  life  and  re- 
ality, no  man  would  put  on  a  form  of  godliness,  that 
were  destitute  of  the  power  of  it:  we  should  do  no- 
thing for  the  opinion  of  others,  but  all  with  regard 
to  God  and  our  own  consciences;  and  be  as  curi- 
ous of  our  thoughts  and  most  retired  actions,  as  if 
we  were  in  an  open  theatre,  and  in  the  presence  of 
the  greatest  assembly.  For  in  the  next  life,  men 
shall  not  be  rewarded  for  what  they  seemed  to  be, 
but  for  what  they  really  were  in  this  world.  There- 
fore whatever  we  think,  or  speak,  or  do,  we  should 
always  remember,  that  the  day  of  revelation  is  com- 
ing, when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  disclos- 
ed, when  all  disguises  shall  be  laid  aside,  and  every 
one's  mask  shall  be  taken  off,  and  all  our  actions 
and  designs  shall  be  brought  upon  the  public  stage, 
and  exposed  to  the  view  of  men  and  angels.  " There 
is  nothing  now  hidden,  which  shall  not  then  be 
revealed,  nor  secret  which  shall  not  be  made  known.*' 


528 


5.  To  arm  us  against  the  fears  of  death.  Death 
is  terrible  to  nature,  and  the  terror  of  it  is  infinite- 
ly increased  by  the  fearful  apprehensions  of  what 
may  follow  it.  But  the  comfortable  hopes  of  a 
blessed  immortality,  do  strangely  relieve  the  faint- 
ing spirits  of  dying  men,  and  are  able  to  reconcile 
us  to  death,  and  in  a  great  measure  to  take  away 
the  terror  of  it.  I  know  that  the  thoughts  of  death 
are  dismal,  even  to  good  men,  and  we  have  never 
more  need  of  comfort  and  encouragement,  than 
when  we  are  conflicting  with  this  last  enemy :  and 
there  is  no  such  comfortable  consideration  to  a  dy- 
ing man,  as  the  hopes  of  a  happy  eternity.  He 
that  looks  upon  death,  only  as  a  passage  to  glory, 
may  welcome  the  messengers  of  it  as  bringing  him 
the  best  and  most  joyful  news  that  ever  came  to  him 
in  his  whole  life ;  and  no  man  can  stay  behind  in 
this  world,  with  half  the  comfort  that  this  man 
leaves  it. 

And  now  I  have  done  with  the  two  things  implied 
in  this  phrase,  of  having  our  conversation  in  hea- 
ven ;  viz.  the  serious  thoughts  and  considerations 
of  heaven,  and  the  effect  of  these  thoughts  and  con- 
siderations upon  our  hearts  and  lives. 

I  crave  your  patience  but  a  little  longer,  until  I 
make  some  reflections  upon  what  hath  been  deli- 
vered, concerning  the  happiness  of  good  men  after 
this  life.  I  have  told  you,  that  it  is  incomparably 
beyond  any  happiness  in  this  world,  that  it  is  great 
in  itself,  and  eternal  in  its  duration,  and  far  above 
any  thing  that  we  can  now  conceive  or  imagine. 
And  now,  after  all  this,  I  am  very  sensible  how 
much  all  that  I  have  said  comes  short  of  the  great- 
ness and  dignity  of  the  thing.  So  that  I  could  al- 
most begin  again,  and  make  a  new  attempt  upon 
this  subject.    And,  indeed,  who  would  not  be  loth 


529 


to  be  taken  off  from  so  delightful  an  argument  ? 
Metbinks  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here,  and  to  let  our 
minds  dwell  upon  these  considerations.  We  are 
unworthy  of  heaven,  and  unfit  to  partake  of  so 
great  a  glory,  if  we  cannot  take  pleasure  in  the  con- 
templation of  those  things  now,  the  possession 
whereof  shall  be  our  happiness  for  ever. 

With  what  joy  then  should  we  think  of  those 
great  and  glorious  things  which  God  hath  prepared 
for  them  that  love  him,  of  "  that  inheritance  in- 
corruptible, undefiled,  which  fadeth  not  away,"  re- 
served for  us  in  the  heavens?  How  should  we 
welcome  the  thoughts  of  that  happy  hour,  when 
we  shall  make  our  escape  out  of  these  prisons, 
when  we  shall  pass  out  of  this  howling  wilderness 
into  the  promised  land  ;  when  we  shall  be  removed 
from  all  the  troubles  and  temptations  of  a  wicked 
and  ill-natured  world  ;  w  hen  we  shall  be  past  all 
storms,  and  secured  from  all  further  danger  of  ship- 
wreck, and  shall  be  safely  landed  in  the  regions  of 
bliss  and  immortality  ? 

O  blessed  time!  When  all  tears  shall  be  wiped 
from  our  eyes,  and  death  and  sorrow  shall  be  no 
more;  when  mortality  shall  be  swallowed  up  of 
life,  and  we  shall  enter  upon  the  possession  of  all 
that  happiness  and  glory,  which  God  hath  pro- 
mised, and  our  faith  hath  believed,  and  our  hopes 
have  raised  us  to  the  expectation  of;  when  we  shall 
be  eased  of  all  our  pains,  and  resolved  of  all  our 
doubts,  and  be  purged  from  all  our  sins,  and  be 
freed  from  all  our  fears,  and  be  happy  beyond  all 
our  hopes,  and  have  all  this  happiness  secured  to 
us  beyond  the  power  of  time  and  change  :  when  we 
shall  know  God  and  other  things  without  study, 
and,  love  him  and  one  another  without  measure, 


530 


and  serve,  and  praise  him  without  weariness,  and 
obey  his  will  without  the  least  reluctancy  ;  aud  shall 
still  be  more  and  more  delighted  in  the  knowing, 
and  loving,  and  praising,  and  obeying  of  God  to  all 
eternity. 

How  should  these  thoughts  affect  our  hearts,  and 
what  a  mighty  influence  ought  they  to  have  upon 
our  lives?  The  great  disadvantage  of  the  arguments 
fetched  from  another  world,  is  this — that  those 
things  are  at  a  great  distance  from  us,  and  not  sen- 
sible to  us;  and  therefore  are  not  apt  to  affect  us  so 
strongly,  and  to  work  so  powerfully  upon  us.  Now, 
to  make  amends  for  this  disadvantage,  we  should 
often  revive  these  considerations  upon  our  mind, 
and  inculcate  upon  ourselves  the  reality  and  cer- 
tainty of  these  things,  together  with  the  infinite 
weight  and  importance  of  them.  We  should  rea- 
son thus  with  ourselves:  if  good  men  shall  be  so 
unspeakably  happy,  and  consequently  wicked  men 
so  extremely  miserable,  in  another  world  ;  if  these 
things  be  true,  and  will  one  day  be  found  to  be  so, 
why  should  they  not  be  to  me  as  if  they  were  al- 
ready present  ?  Why  should  not  1  be  as  much  afraid 
to  commit  any  sin,  as  if  hell  were  naked  before  me, 
and  I  saw  the  astonishing  miseries  of  the  damned? 
and  why  should  I  not  be  as  careful  to  serve  God 
and  keep  his  commandments,  as  if  heaven  were 
open  to  my  view,  and  I  saw  Jesus  standing  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  with  crowns  of  glory  in  his  hand, 
ready  to  be  set  upon  the  heads  of  all  those  who  con- 
tinue faithful  to  him  ? 

The  lively  apprehensions  of  the  nearness  of  death 
and  eternity  are  apt  to  make  mens  thoughts  more 
quick  and  piercing,  and  according  as  we  think  our- 
selves prepared  for  our  future  state  to  transport  at> 


531 

with  joy,  or  to  amaze  us  with  horror.  For  the  soul 
that  is  fully  satisfied  of  his  future  bliss,  is  already 
entered  into  heaven,  has  begun  to  take  possession 
of  glory,  and  has  (as  it  were)  his  blessed  Saviour 
in  his  arms,  and  may  say  with  old  Simeon,  "Lord, 
now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  for 
mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation."  But  the  thoughts 
of  death  must  needs  be  very  terrible  to  that  man 
who  is  doubtful  or  despairing  of  his  future  condi- 
tion. It  would  daunt  the  stoutest  man  that  ever 
breathed,  to  look  upon  death  when  he  can  see  no- 
thing but  hell  beyond  it.  When  the  apparition  at 
Endor  told  Saul,  "  to  morrow,  thou  and  thy  sons 
shall  be  with  me,"  these  words  struck  him  to  the 
heart,  so  that  "befell  down  to  the  ground,  and 
there  was  no  more  strength  left  in  him."  It  is  as 
certain  that  we  shall  die,  as  if  an  express  messenger 
should  come  to  every  one  of  us  from  the  other 
world  and  tell  us  so.  Why  should  we  not  then  al- 
ways live  as  those  that  must  die,  and  as  those  that 
hope  to  be  happy  after  death  ?  To  have  these  ap- 
prehensions vigorous  and  lively  upon  our  minds, 
this  is  to  have  "  our  conversation  in  heaven,  from 
whence  also  we  look  for  a  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may 
be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,  according 
to  the  working  of  that  mighty  power,  whereby  he  is 
able  even  to  submit  all  things  to  himself." 

END  OF  VOL.  I. 


Printed  by  J.  F.  DOVE,  St.  John's  Square. 


Theological  Semm 


1  1012  01127  51 


30 


DATE  DUE 


GAYLORD 


PRINTED  JNU.SA 


