The Online Library of Liberty
A Project Of Liberty Fund, Inc.
Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of Shaftesbury,
Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times,
vol. 2 [1737]
The Online Library Of Liberty
This E-Book (PDF format) is published by Liberty Fund, Inc., a private,
non-profit, educational foundation established in 1960 to encourage study of the ideal
of a society of free and responsible individuals. 2010 was the 50th anniversary year of
the founding of Liberty Fund.
It is part of the Online Library of Liberty web sitehttp://oll.libertyfund.org, which
was established in 2004 in order to further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc.
To find out more about the author or title, to use the site's powerful search engine, to
see other titles in other formats (HTML, facsimile PDF), or to make use of the
hundreds of essays, educational aids, and study guides, please visit the OLL web site.
This title is also part of the Portable Library of Liberty DVD which contains over
1,000 books and quotes about liberty and power, and is available free of charge upon
request.
The cuneiform inscription that appears in the logo and serves as a design element in
all Liberty Fund books and web sites is the earliest-known written appearance of the
word “freedom” (amagi), or “liberty.” It is taken from a clay document written about
2300 B.C. in the Sumerian city-state of Lagash, in present day Iraq.
To find out more about Liberty Fund, Inc., or the Online Library of Liberty Project,
please contact the Director atoll@libertyfund.org.
LIBERTY FUND, INC.
8335 Allison Pointe Trail, Suite 300
Indianapolis, Indiana 46250-1684

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Edition Used:
Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times,ed. Douglas den Uyl
(Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2001). 3 vols. Vol. 2.
Author:Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of Shaftesbury
Foreword: Douglas Den Uyl
About This Title:
This new Liberty Fund edition of Characteristicks presents the complete 1732 text of
this classic work of philosophy and political theory. Also included are faithful
reproductions of the stirring engravings that Shaftesbury created to facilitate the
reader’s consideration of his meditations on the interrelationships among truth,
goodness, beauty, virtue, liberty, responsibility, society, and the state.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 2 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
About Liberty Fund:
Liberty Fund, Inc. is a private, educational foundation established to encourage the
study of the ideal of a society of free and responsible individuals.
Copyright Information:
The copyright to this edition, in both print and electronic forms, is held by Liberty
Fund, Inc.
Fair Use Statement:
This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc.
Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section above, this material may
be used freely for educational and academic purposes. It may not be used in any way
for profit.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 3 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Table Of Contents
An Inquiry Concerning Virture and Merit
The Moralists; a Philosophical Rhapsody
TREATISE IV
VIZ.
AN INQUIRY
CONCERNING
Virtue,or Merit.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 4 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Formerly Printed from an Imperfect Copy:
Now Corrected, and Publish’d intire.
The jest set aside, let us inquire
about serious matters.*Hor. Sat. I.
Printed first in the Year M.DC.XC.IX.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 5 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
[Back to Table of Contents]
AN INQUIRY, &C.
Book 1
PART I
SECTION I
Sect. 1.
RELIGION and VIRTUE appear in many respects so nearly
Occasion of this
related, that they are generally presum’d inseparable INQUIRY.
Companions. And so willing we are to[6] believe well of their
Union,that we hardly allow it just to speak, or even think of ’em apart. It may
however be question’d, whether the Practice of the World, in this respect, be
answerable to our Speculation. ’Tis certain that we sometimes meet with Instances
which seem to make against this general Supposition. We have known People, who
having the Appearance of great Zeal inReligion,have yet wanted even the common
Affections ofHumanity,and shewn themselves extremely degenerate and corrupt.
Others, again, who have paid little regard to Religion, and been consider’d as mere
Atheists,have yet been observ’d to practice the Rules ofMorality,and act in many
Cases with such good Meaning and Affection towards Mankind, as might seem to
force an Acknowledgment of their beingvirtuous.And, in general, we find mere
moral Principles of such weight, that in our dealings with Men, we are seldom
satisfy’d by the fullest Assurance given us of their Zeal in Religion, till we hear
something further of their Character. If we are told, a Man is religious; we still ask,
“What are his Morals?” But if we hear at first that he has honest moral Principles, and
is a Man of natural Justice and good Temper, we seldom think of the other Question,
“Whether he bereligiousanddevout?”[7]
This has given occasion to enquire, “WhatHonestyor Virtueis, consider’d by it-self;
and in what manner it is influenc’d by Religion: How farReligionnecessarily implies
Virtue;and whether it be a true Saying,That it is impossible for an Atheist to be
virtuous, or share any real degree of Honesty, orMerit.”
And here it cannot justly be wonder’d at, if theMethodof explaining Things shou’d
appear somewhat unusual; since theSubject-Matterhas been so little examin’d, and is
of so nice and dangerous Speculation. For so much is the religious part of Mankind
alarm’d by the Freedom of some late Pens; and so great a Jealousy is rais’d every-
where on this Account; that whatever an Author may suggest in favour ofReligion,he
will gain little Credit in the Cause, if he allows the least Advantage to any other
Principle. On the other side, the Men of Wit and Raillery, whose pleasantest
Entertainment is in the exposing the weak sides of Religion, are so desperately afraid
of being drawn into any serious Thoughts of it, that they look upon a Man as guilty of
foul Play, who assumes the air of aFree Writer,and at the same time preserves any
regard for the Principles of Natural Re[8]ligion. They are apt to give as little quarter
as they receive: And are resolv’d to think as ill of the Morals of their Antagonists, as
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 6 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
their Antagonists can possibly think of theirs. Neither of ’em, it seems, will allow the
least Advantage to the other. ’Tis as hard to persuade one sort, that there is any Virtue
in Religion, as the other, that there is any Virtue out of the Verge of their particular
Community. So that, between both, an Author must past his time ill, who dares plead
for ReligionandMoral Virtue,without lessening the force of either; but allowing to
each its proper Province, and due Rank, wou’d hinder their being made Enemys by
Detraction.
However it be: If we wou’d pretend to give the least new light, or explain any thing
effectually, within the intended Compass of thisInquiry;’tis necessary to take Things
pretty deep; and endeavour, by some short Scheme, to represent the Original of each
Opinion, whether natural or unnatural, relating to theDeity.And if we can happily get
clear of this thorny part of our Philosophy; the rest, ’tis hop’d, may prove more plain
and easy.[9]
SECTION II
Sect. 2.
IN the Whole of Things (or in the Universe) either all is
State of Opinions.
according to a good Order, and the most agreeable to a general
Interest:or there is that which is otherwise, and might possibly have been better
constituted, more wisely contriv’d, and with more advantage to the general Interest of
Beings, or of the Whole.
If every thing which exists be according to a good Order, andfor the best;then of
necessity there is no such thing as real ILL in the Universe, nothing ILL with respect
to the Whole.
Whatsoever, then,isso as that it cou’d not really havebeenbetter, or any waybetter
order’d, is perfectlygood.Whatsoever in the Order of the World can be call’d ILL,
must imply a possibility in the nature of the thing to have been better contriv’d, or
order’d. For if it cou’d not; it is perfect, and as it shou’d be.
Whatsoever isreallyILL, therefore, must be caus’d or produc’d, either byDesign,
(that is to say, with Knowledg and Intelligence) or, in defect of this, by Hazard, and
mereChance.[10]
If there be any thing ILL in the Universe fromDesign, then that which disposes all
things, is no one good designing Principle. For either theonedesigning Principle is it-
self corrupt; or there is someotherin being which operates contrarily, and is ILL.
If there be any ILL in the Universe from mereChance;then a designing Principle or
Mind, whether Good or Bad, cannot be the Cause ofallthings. And consequently, if
there be suppos’d a designing Principle, who is the Cause only of Good, but cannot
prevent the Ill which happens from Chance, or from a contrary ill Design; then there
can be suppos’d in reality no such thing as a superior good Design or Mind, other than
what is impotent and defective: For not to correct, or totally exclude that Ill of
Chance, or of a contrary ill Design, must proceed either fromImpotency,or Ill-Will.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 7 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Whatsoever is superior in any degree over the World, or rules in Nature with
Discernment and a Mind, is what, by universal Agreement, Men callGod. If there are
several such superior Minds, they are so manyGods: But if that single, or those
several Superiors are not[11] in their nature necessarily good, they rather take the
name ofDaemon.
To believe therefore that every thing is govern’d, order’d, or regulatedfor the best,by
a designing Principle, or Mind, necessarily good and permanent, is to be a perfect
Theist.
To believe nothing of a designing Principle or Mind, nor any Cause, Measure, or Rule
of Things, butChance;so that in Nature neither the Interest ofthe Whole,nor of any
Particulars,can be said to be in the least design’d, pursu’d, or aim’d at; is to be a
perfectAtheist.
To believe noonesupreme designing Principle or Mind, but rathertwo,three, or
more, (tho in their naturegood) is to be aPolytheist.
To believe the governing Mind, or Minds, not absolutely and necessarily good, nor
confin’d to what is best, but capable of acting according to mere Will or Fancy; is to
be aDaemonist.
There are few who think always consistently, or according to one certain Hypothesis,
upon any Subject so abstruse and intricate as theCause of all Things,andthe
OEconomy or Government of the Uni[12]verse.For ’tis evident in the Case of the
most devout People, even by their own Confession, that there are Times when their
Faith hardly can support ’em in the Belief of a supreme Wisdom; and that they are
often tempted to judg disadvantageously of a Providence, and just Administration in
the Whole.
That alone, therefore, is to be call’d a Man’s Opinion, which is of any other the most
habitual to him, and occurs upon most occasions. So that ’tis hard to pronounce
certainly of any Man, thathe is an Atheist;because unless his whole Thoughts are at
all Seasons, and on all Occasions, steddily bent against all Supposition or Imagination
of Design in Things,he is noperfectAtheist.In the same manner, if a Man’s Thoughts
are not at all times steddy and resolute against all Imagination ofChance, Fortune,or
ill Designin Things, he is noperfectTheist.But if anyone believes more of Chance
and Confusion than of Design; he is to be esteem’d moreanAtheistthana Theist,
from that which most predominates, or has the ascendent. And in case he believes
more of the Prevalency of an ill-designing Principle, than of a good one, he is rather a
Daemonist;and may be justly so call’d, from the Side to which the Balance of his
Judgment most inclines.[13]
All these sorts both ofDaemonism, Polytheism, Atheism,andTheism, may be*
mix’d. Religion excludes onlyperfect Atheism.PerfectDaemonists undoubtedly there
are in Religion; because we know whole Nations who worship aDevilor Fiend,to
whom they sacrifice and offer Prayers and Supplications, in reality on no other
account than because theyfearhim. And we know very well that, in some Religions,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 8 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
there are those who expresly give no other Idea ofGod, than[14] of a Being arbitrary,
violent, causing Ill, and ordaining to Misery; which in effect is the same as to
substitute aDaemon,or Devil,in his room.
Now since there are these several Opinions concerninga superior Power; and since
there may be found perhaps some Persons, who have no form’d Opinion at all upon
this Subject; either thro’Scepticism,Negligence of Thought, or Confusion of
Judgment: the Consideration is, how any of these Opinions, or this want of any certain
Opinion, may possibly consist withVirtueandMerit;or be compatible with anhonest
or moral Character.
PART II
SECTION I
Sect. 1.
WHEN we reflect on any ordinary Frame or Constitution either
A Constitution.
of Art or Nature; and consider how hard it is to give the least
account of a particularPart,without a[15] competent Knowledg ofthe Whole:
we need not wonder to find our-selves at a loss in many things
Whole and Parts.
relating to the Constitution and Frame ofNatureher-self. For to
what End in Nature many things, even whole Species of Creatures, refer; or to what
purpose they serve; will be hard for any-one justly to determine: But to what End the
many Proportions and various Shapes of Parts in many Creatures actually serve; we
are able, by the help of Study and Observation, to demonstrate, with great exactness.
We know that every Creature has a private Good and Interest of his own; which
Nature has compel’d him to seek, by all the Advantages afforded him, within the
compass of his Make. We know that there is in reality a right and a wrong State of
every Creature; and that his right-one is by Nature forwarded, and by himself
affectionately sought. There being therefore in every Creature a certainInterest or
Good;
there must be also a certainEnd,to which every thing in his
Interest orEndin
Constitution mustnaturallyrefer. To thisEnd,if any thing, Creatures.
either in his Appetites, Passions, or Affections, be not conducing,
but the contrary; we must of necessity own itillto him. And in this manner he isill,
with respect to himself;as he certainly is,with respect to others[16]of his kind,when
any such Appetites or Passions make him any-way injurious to them.
Now, if by the natural Constitution of any rational Creature, the
Interest of the
same Irregularitys of Appetite which make him illto Others, Species.
make him ill alsoto Him-self;and if the same Regularity of
Affections, which causes him to be good inonesense, causes him to be good also in
the other;
then is that Goodness by which he is thus useful to others, a real
Goodness.
Good and Advantage to himself. And thusVirtueandInterest
may be found at last to agree.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 9 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Of this we shall consider particularly in the latter part of ourInquiry.Our first Design
is, to see if we can clearly determine what that Quality is to which we give the Name
of Goodness, or Virtue.
Shou’d a Historian or Traveller describe to us a certain Creature
Private Good.
of a more solitary Disposition than ever was yet heard of; one
who had neither Mate nor Fellow of any kind; nothing of his own Likeness, towards
which he stood well-affected or inclin’d; nor any thing without, or beyond himself,
for which he had the least Passion or Concern: we might be apt to say perhaps,
without much hesitation, “That this was doubtless a very melancholy Creature, and
that in this[17] unsociable and sullen State he was like to have a very disconsolate
kind of Life.” But if we were assur’d, that notwithstanding all Appearances, the
Creature enjoy’d himself extremely, had a great relish of Life, and was in nothing
wanting to his own Good; we might acknowledg perhaps, “That the Creature was no
Monster, nor absurdly constitutedas to himself.”
But we shou’d hardly, after all, be induc’d to say of him, “That
Private SYSTEM.
he was a good Creature.” However, shou’d it be urg’d against
us, “That such as he was, the Creature was stillperfect in himself,and therefore to be
esteem’d good:For what had he to do with others?” In this sense, indeed, we might
be forc’d to acknowledg, “That he wasa good Creature;if he cou’d be understood to
be absolute and compleat in himself; without any real relation to any thing in the
Universe besides.” For shou’d there be any where in Naturea System,
of which this living Creature was to be consider’d asa Part;then
System of the Species.
cou’d he no-wise be allow’dgood; whilst he plainly appear’d to
be sucha Part,as made rather to the harm than good of that System orWholein
which he was included.
If therefore in the Structure of this or any other Animal, there be any thing[18] which
points beyond himself, and by which he is plainly discover’d to have relation to some
other Being or Nature besides his own; then will this Animal undoubtedly be
esteem’da Partof some other System. For instance, if an Animal has the Proportions
of a Male, it shews he has relation to a Female. And the respective Proportions both of
the Male and Female will be allow’d, doubtless, to have a joint-relation to another
Existence and Order of things beyond themselves. So that the Creatures are both of
’em to be consider’d as Parts ofanother System:which is that of a particular Race or
Species of living Creatures, who have some onecommon Nature, or are provided for,
by some oneOrder or Constitutionof things subsisting together, and co-operating
towards their Conservation, and Support.
In the same manner, if a whole Species of Animals contribute to
Animal System.
the Existence or Well-being of some other; then is that whole
Species, in general,a Partonly of some other System.
For instance; To the Existence of the Spider, that of the Fly is absolutely necessary.
The heedless Flight, weak Frame, and tender Body of this latter Insect, fit and
determine him as mucha Prey,as the rough Make, Watchfulness, and Cunning[19] of
the former, fit him for Rapine, and the ensnaring part. The Web and Wing are suted to
each other. And in the Structure of each of these Animals, there is as apparent and
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 10 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
perfect a relation to the other, as in our own Bodys there is a relation of Limbs and
Organs; or, as in the Branches or Leaves of a Tree, we see a relation of each to the
other, and all, in common, tooneRoot and Trunk.
In the same manner are Flies also necessary to the Existence of other Creatures, both
Fowls and Fish. And thus are other Species or Kinds subservient to one another; as
beingPartsof a certain System,and included in one and the sameOrder of Beings.
So that there is a System of all Animals; anAnimal-Order or OEconomy,according to
which the animal Affairs are regulated and dispos’d.
Now, if the whole System of Animals, together with that of
System of the Earth.
Vegetables, and all other things in this inferior World, be
properly comprehended inone Systemof a Globe or Earth: And if, again, thisGlobe
or Earthit-self appears to have a real Dependence on something still beyond; as, for
example, either on its Sun, the Galaxy, or its Fellow-Planets;
then is it in[20] reality aPartonly of some other System. And if
Planetary System.
it be allow’d, that there is in like manner aSystemof all Things,
and a Universal Nature;
there can be no particular Being or System which is not either
Universal System.
good or ill in thatgeneral oneof theUniverse:For if it be
insignificant and of no use, it is a Fault or Imperfection, and consequently ill in the
general System.
Therefore if any Being bewhollyandreallyIll,it must be ill with respect to the
Universal System; and then the System of the Universe is ill, or imperfect. But if the
Ill of one private System be the Good of others; if it makes still to the Good of the
general System, (as when one Creature lives by the Destruction of another; one thing
is generated from the Corruption of another; or one planetary System orVortexmay
swallow up another) then is the Ill of that private System no real Ill in it-self; any
more than the pain of breeding Teeth is ill, in a System or Body which is so
constituted, that without this occasion of Pain, it wou’d suffer worse, by being
defective.
So that we cannot say of any Being, that it iswhollyandabsolutely ill,
unless we can positively shew and ascertain, thatwhatwe callIll
Absolute ILL.
is no whereGood besides, in any other System, or with
re[21]spect to any other Order or OEconomy whatsoever.
But were there in the World any intire Species of Animals
Relative ILL.
destructive to every other, it may be justly call’d anillSpecies;
as being ill in theAnimal-System.And if in any Species of Animals (as inMen,for
example) one Man is of a nature pernicious to the rest, he is in this respect justly
styl’dan ill Man.
We do not however say of any-one, that he is anill Manbecause
Good and ill Man.
he has the Plague-Spots upon him, or because he has convulsive
Fits which make him strike and wound such as approach him. Nor do we say on the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 11 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
other side, that he isa good Man, when having his Hands ty’d up, he is hinder’d from
doing the Mischief he designs; or (which is in a manner the same) when he abstains
from executing his ill purpose, thro’ a fear of some impending Punishment, or thro’
the allurement of some exterior Reward.
So that in a sensible Creature, that which is not done thro’ any
Goodness thro’
Affection at all, makes neither Good nor Ill in the nature of that Affection.
Creature; who then only is suppos’dGood, when the Good or Ill
of the System to which he has relation, is the immediate Object of some Passion or
Affection moving him.[22]
Since it is therefore by Affection merely that a Creature is esteem’d good or ill,
naturalor unnatural;our business will be, to examine which are thegoodand
natural,and which theillandunnaturalAffections.
SECTION II
Sect. 2.
IN the first place then, it may be observ’d, that if there be an
Private or Self-
Affection towards any Subject consider’d as private Good, which Affection.
is*not really such, but imaginary; this Affection, as being
superfluous, and detracting from the Force of other requisite and good Affections, is
in it-self vitious and ill, even in respect of the private Interest or Happiness of the
Creature.
If there can possibly be suppos’d in a Creature such an Affection towards Self-Good,
as is actually, in its natural degree, conducing to his private Interest, and at the same
time inconsistent with the publick Good; this may indeed be call’d still a vitious
Affection: And on this Supposition a Creature *cannot really be good and natural in
respect of his Society or Publick, without being ill and unnatural toward himself. But
if the Affection be[23] then only injurious to the Society, when it is immoderate, and
not so when it is moderate, duly temper’d, and allay’d; then isthe immoderatedegree
of the Affection truly vitious, but notthe moderate.And thus, if there be found in any
Creature a more than ordinary Self-concernment, or Regard to private Good, which is
inconsistent with the Interest of the Species or Publick; this must in every respect be
esteem’d an ill and vitious Affection. And this is what we commonly call
†Selfishness,and disapprove so much, in whatever Creature we happen to discover it.
On the other side, if the Affection towards private or Self-good, howeverselfishit
may be esteem’d, is in reality not only consistent with publick Good, but in some
measure contributing to it; if it be such, perhaps, as for the good of the Species in
general, every Individual ought to share; ’tis so far from being ill, or blameable in any
sense, that it must be acknowledg’d absolutely necessary to constitute a Creature
Good. For if the want of such an Affection as that towards Self-preservation, be
injurious to the Species; a Creature is ill and unnatural as well thro’ this Defect, as
thro’ the want of any other natural Affection. And this no-one wou’d[24] doubt to
pronounce, if he saw a Man who minded not any Precipices which lay in his way, nor
made any distinction of Food, Diet, Clothing, or whatever else related to his Health
and Being. The same wou’d be aver’d of one who had a Disposition which render’d
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 12 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
him averse to any Commerce with Womankind, and of consequence unfitted him
thro’Illness of Temper(and not merely thro’a Defect of Constitution) for the
propagation of his Species or Kind.
Thus the Affection towards Self-good, may be a good Affection, or an ill-one. For if
this private Affection be too strong, (as when theexcessive Love of Lifeunfits a
Creature for any generous Act) then is it undoubtedly vitious; and if vitious, the
Creature who is mov’d by it, is vitiously mov’d, and can never be otherwise than
vitious in some degree, when mov’d by that Affection. Therefore if thro’ such an
earnest and passionateLove of Life,a Creature be accidentally induc’d to do Good, (as
he might be upon the same terms induc’d to doIll) he is no more a good Creature for
this Good he executes, than a Man is the more an honest or good Man either for
pleading a just Cause, or fighting in a good one, for the sake merely of his Fee or
Stipend.[25]
Whatsoever therefore is done which happens to be advantageous to the Species, thro’
an Affection merely towards Self-good, does not imply any more Goodness in the
Creature than as the Affection it-self is good. Let him, in any particular, act ever so
well; if at the bottom, it be that selfish Affection alone which moves him; he is in
himself still vitious. Nor can any Creature be consider’d otherwise, when the Passion
towards Self-good, tho ever so moderate, is his real Motive in the doing that, to which
a natural Affection for his Kind ought by right to have inclin’d him.
And indeed whatever exterior Helps or Succours an ill-dispos’d
Temper.
Creature may find, to push him on towards the performance of
any one good Action; there can no Goodness arise in him, till hisTemper be so far
chang’d, that in the issue he comes in earnest to be led by some immediate Affection,
directly,and notaccidentally,to Good, and against Ill.
For instance; if one of those Creatures suppos’d to be by Nature tame, gentle, and
favourable to Mankind, be, contrary to his natural Constitution, fierce and savage; we
instantly remark the Breach ofTemper, and own the Creature to be unnatural and
corrupt. If at any time after[26]wards, the same Creature, by good Fortune or right
Management, comes to lose his Fierceness, and is made tame, gentle, and treatable,
like other Creatures of his Kind; ’tis acknowledg’d that the Creature thus restor’d
becomes good and natural. Suppose, now, that the Creature has indeed a tame and
gentle Carriage; but that it proceeds only fromthe fear of his Keeper;which if set
aside, his predominant Passion instantly breaks out: then is his Gentleness not his real
Temper; but, his true and genuineNatureor natural Temperremaining just as it was,
the Creature is still asillas ever.
Nothing therefore being properly either Goodness or Illness in a Creature, except
what is fromnatural Temper; “A good Creature is such a one as by the natural
Temper or Bent of his Affections is carry’dprimarily and immediately,and not
secondarily and accidentally,to Good, and against Ill”: And anill Creatureis just the
contrary;viz.“One who is wanting in right Affections, of force enough to carry him
directlytowards Good, and bear him out against Ill; or who is carry’d by other
Affections directly to Ill, and against Good.”
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 13 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
When in general, all the Affections or Passions are suted to the publick Good, or[27]
good of the Species, as above-mention’d; then is thenatural Temperintirely good. If,
on the contrary, any requisite Passion be wanting; or if there be any one
supernumerary, or weak, or any-wise disserviceable, or contrary to that main End;
then is the natural Temper, and consequently the Creature himself, in some measure
corrupt andill.
THERE is no need of mentioning eitherEnvy, Malice, Frowardness,or other such
hateful Passions; to shew in what manner they are ill, and constitute anillCreature.
But it may be necessary perhaps to remark, that even as toKindnessandLoveof the
most natural sort, (such as that of any Creature for its Offspring) if it be immoderate
and beyond a certain degree, it is undoubtedly vitious. For thus over-greatTenderness
destroys the Effect of Love, and excessivePityrenders us uncapable of giving
succour. Hence the Excess of motherly Love is own’d to be avitious Fondness;over-
great Pity,Effeminacy and Weakness;over-great Concern for Self-preservation,
Meanness and Cowardice;too little,Rashness; and none at all, or that which is
contrary, (viz.a Passion leading to Self-destruction) amad anddesperate
Depravity.[28]
SECTION III
Sect. 3.
BUT to proceed from what is esteem’d mereGoodness, and lies within the reach and
capacity of allsensible Creatures,to that which is call’dVirtueor Merit,and is
allow’d toMan only.
In a Creature capable of forming general Notions of Things, not
Reflex Affection.
only the outward Beings which offer themselves to the Sense, are
the Objects of the Affection; but the veryActionsthemselves, and theAffectionsof
Pity, Kindness, Gratitude, and their Contrarys, being brought into the Mind by
Reflection, become Objects. So that, by means of this reflected Sense, there arises
another kind of Affection towards those very Affections themselves, which have been
already felt, and are now become the Subject of a new Liking or Dislike.
The Case is the same inmentalor moral Subjects, as in ordinaryBodys,or the
common Subjects ofSense.The Shapes, Motions, Colours, and Proportions of these
latter being presented to our Eye; there necessarily results a*Beauty or Deformity,
according to the different Measure, Ar[29]rangement and Disposition of their several
Parts. So inBehaviourandActions,when presented to our Understanding, there must
be found, of necessity, an apparent Difference, according to the Regularity or
Irregularity of the Subjects.
The Mind, which is Spectator or Auditor ofother Minds,cannot
Moral Beauty and
be without itsEyeandEar; so as to discern Proportion, Deformity.
distinguish Sound, and scan each Sentiment or Thought which
comes before it. It can let nothing escape its Censure. It feels the Soft and Harsh, the
Agreeable and Disagreeable, in the Affections; and finds aFoulandFair,a
Harmonious and aDissonant, as really and truly here, as in any musical Numbers, or
in the outward Forms or Representations of sensible Things. Nor can it*with-hold its
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 14 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
AdmirationandExtasy,itsAversionandScorn, any more in what relates to one than
to the other of these Subjects. So that to deny the common and natural Sense of a
SublimeandBeautifulin Things, will appear an†Affectation merely, to any-one who
considers duly of this Affair.
Now as in thesensiblekind of Objects, the Species or Images of Bodys, Colours, and
Sounds, are perpetually moving before[30] our Eyes, and acting on our Senses, even
when we sleep; so in themoral andintellectualkind, the Forms and Images of Things
are no less active and incumbent on the Mind, at all Seasons, and even when the real
Objects themselves are absent.
In these vagrant Characters or Pictures ofManners, which the Mind of necessity
figures to it-self, and carrys still about with it, the Heart cannot possibly remain
neutral; but constantly takes part one way or other. However false or corrupt it be
within it-self, it finds the difference, as to Beauty and Comeliness, between oneHeart
and another, oneTurn of Affection,oneBehaviour,oneSentimentand another; and
accordingly, in all disinterested Cases, must approve in some measure of what is
natural and honest, and disapprove what is dishonest and corrupt.
Thus the several Motions, Inclinations, Passions, Dispositions, and consequent
Carriage and Behaviour of Creatures in the various Parts of Life, being in several
Views or Perspectives represented to the Mind, which readily discerns the Good and
Ill towards the Species or Publick; there arises a new Trial or Exercise of the Heart:
which must either rightly and soundly affect what is just and right, and disaffect what
is contrary; or, corruptly[31] affect what is ill, and disaffect, what is worthy and good.
And in this Case alone it is we call any Creatureworthyor
Publick Good an
virtuous,when it can have the Notion of a publick Interest, and Object.
can attain the Speculation or Science of what is morally good or
ill, admirable or blameable, right or wrong. For tho we may vulgarly call an ill Horse
vitious,yet we never say of a good one, nor of any mere Beast, Idiot, or Changeling,
tho ever so good-natur’d, that he isworthyor virtuous.
So that if a Creature be generous, kind, constant, compassionate; yet if he cannot
reflect on what he himself does, or sees others do, so as to take notice of what is
worthyor honest;and make that Notice or Conception ofWorthandHonestyto be an
Object of his Affection; he has not the Character of beingvirtuous:
for thus, and no otherwise, he is capable of having aSense of
GOODNESS and
Right or Wrong;a Sentiment or Judgment of what is done, thro’ VIRTUE.
just, equal, and good Affection, or the contrary.
Whatsoever is done thro’ any unequal Affection, isiniquous,
Unequal Affection, or
wicked,andwrong. If the Affection be equal, found, and good, Iniquity.
and the Subject of the Affection such as may with advantage to
So[32]ciety be ever in the same manner prosecuted, or affected; this must necessarily
constitute what we callEquityandRightin any Action. For,Wrongis not such Action
as is barely the Cause of Harm, (since at this rate a dutiful Son aiming at an Enemy,
but by mistake or ill chance happening to kill his Father, wou’d doa Wrong) but
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 15 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
when any thing is done thro’ insufficient or unequal Affection, (as when a Son shews
no Concern for the Safety of a Father; or, where there is need of Succour, prefers an
indifferent Person to him) this is of the nature ofWrong.
Neither can any Weakness or Imperfection in the Senses be the occasion ofIniquityor
Wrong;
if the Object of the Mind it-self be not at any time absurdly
Impair’d Sense.
fram’d, nor any way improper, but sutable, just, and worthy of
the Opinion and Affection apply’d to it. For if we will suppose a Man, who being
sound and intire both in his Reason and Affection, has nevertheless so deprav’d a
Constitution or Frame of Body, that the natural Objects are, thro’ his Organs of Sense,
as thro’ ill Glasses, falsly convey’d and misrepresented; ’twill be soon observ’d, in
such a Person’s case, that since his Failure is not in his principal or leading Part; he
cannot in himself be esteem’diniquous,or unjust.[33]
’Tis otherwise in what relates toOpinion,Belief, or Speculation.
Corrupt Opinion.
For as the Extravagance of Judgment or Belief is such, that in
some Countrys even Monkeys, Cats, Crocodiles, and other vile or destructive
Animals, have been esteem’dholy,and worship’d even asDeitys;shou’d it appear to
any-one of the Religion or Belief of those Countrys, that to save such a Creature as a
Cat, preferably to a Parent, wasRight;and that other Men, who had not the same
religious Opinion, were to be treated as Enemys, till converted; this wou’d be
certainlyWrong, and wicked in the Believer: and every Action, grounded on this
Belief, wou’d be aniniquous,wicked, and vitious Action.
And thus whatsoever causes a Misconception or
Right and Wrong.
Misapprehension of the Worth or Value of any Object, so as to
diminish a due, or raise any undue, irregular, or unsocial Affection, must necessarily
be the occasion ofWrong. Thus he who affects or loves a Man for the sake of
something which is reputed honourable, but which is in reality vitious, is himself
vitious and ill. The beginnings of this Corruption may be noted in many Occurrences:
As when an ambitious Man, by the Fame of his high Attempts, a Conqueror or a
Pirate by his boasted Enterprizes, raises in another[34] Person an Esteem and
Admiration of that immoral and inhuman Character, which deserves Abhorrence: ’tis
then that the Hearer becomes corrupt, when he secretly approves the Ill he hears. But
on the other side, the Man who loves and esteems another, as believing him to have
that Virtue which he has not, but only counterfeits, is not on this account either vitious
or corrupt.
A Mistake thereforein Factbeing no Cause or Sign of ill Affection, can be no Cause
of Vice. But a Mistakeof Rightbeing the Cause of unequal Affection, must of
necessity be the Cause of vitious Action, in every intelligent or rational Being.
But as there are many Occasions where the matter ofRightmay even to the most
discerning part of Mankind appear difficult, and of doubtful Decision, ’tis not a slight
Mistake of this kind which can destroy the Character ofa virtuous or worthy Man.
But when, either thro’ Superstition or ill Custom, there come to be very gross
Mistakes in the assignment or application of the Affection; when the Mistakes are
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 16 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
either in their nature so gross, or so complicated and frequent, that a Creature cannot
well live in a natural State; nor with due Affections, compatible with human Society
and civil Life; then is the Character ofVirtueforfeited.[35]
And thus we find how far WorthandVirtuedepend on a knowledg ofRightand
Wrong,
and on a use of Reason, sufficient to secure a right application of
VICE in Opinion.
the Affections; that nothing horrid or unnatural, nothing
unexemplary, nothing destructive of that natural Affection by which the Species or
Society is upheld, may, on any account, or thro’ any Principle or Notion of Honour or
Religion, be at any time affected or prosecuted as a good and proper object of Esteem.
For such a Principle as this must be wholly vitious: and whatsoever is acted upon it,
can be no other than Vice and Immorality.
And thus if there be any thing which teaches Men either
Vitious Worship.
Treachery, Ingratitude, or Cruelty, by divine Warrant; or under
colour and pretence of any present or future Good to Mankind: if there be any thing
which teaches Men to*persecute their Friends thro’ Love; or to torment Captives of
War in sport; or to offer†human Sacrifice; or to torment, macerate, or mangle
themselves, in a religious Zeal, before their God; or to commit any sort of Barbarity,
or Brutality, as amiable or becoming: be it Custom which gives Applause, or Religion
which gives a Sanction; this is not, nor ever can beVirtue[36] of any kind, or in any
sense; but must remain still horrid Depravity,
notwithstanding any Fashion, Law, Custom, or Religion; which
Vitious Custom.
may be ill and vitiousit-self,but can never alter theeternal
Measures, and immutable independent Nature ofWorthandVirtue.
SECTION IV
Sect. 4.
UPON the whole. As to those Creatures which are only capable
Sensible and rational
of being mov’d bysensible Objects;they are accordinglygood Objects.
or vitious,as the sensible Affections stand with them. ’Tis
otherwise in Creatures capable of framingrational Objectsof moral Good. For in one
of this kind, shou’d thesensible Affectionsstand ever so much amiss; yet if they
prevail not, because of those otherrational Affectionsspoken of; ’tis evident, the
Temper still holds good in the main; and the Person is with justice esteem’d virtuous
by all Men.
More than this. If by Temper any one is passionate, angry,
Trial of Virtue.
fearful, amorous; yet resists these Passions, and notwithstanding
the force of their Impression, adheres toVirtue;we say commonly in this case,that
the Virtue is the greater:and we say well. Tho if that which restrains the Person, and
holds him to a virtuous-like Be[37]haviour, be no Affection towards Goodness or
Virtue it-self, but towards private Good merely, he is not in reality the more virtuous;
as has been shewn before. But this still is evident, that if voluntarily, and without
foreign Constraint, an angry Temper bears, or an amorous one refrains, so that neither
any cruel or immodest Action can be forc’d from such a Person, tho ever so strongly
tempted by his Constitution; we applaud his Virtue above what we shou’d naturally
do, if he were free of this Temptation, and these Propensitys. At the same time, there
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 17 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
is no body will say that a Propensity to Vice can be an Ingredient in Virtue, or any
way necessary to compleat a virtuous Character.
There seems therefore to be some kind of difficulty in the Case: but it amounts only to
this. If there be any part of the Temper in which ill Passions or Affections are seated,
whilst in another part the Affections towards moral Good are such as absolutely to
master those Attempts of their Antagonists; this is the greatestProofimaginable, that
a strong Principle of Virtue lies at the bottom, and has possess’d it-self of the natural
Temper. Whereas if there be no ill Passions stirring, a Person may be indeed more
cheaply virtuous;that is to say, he may conform himself to the known Rules of
Virtue,[38] without sharing so much of a virtuous Principle as another. Yet if that
other Person, who has the Principle of Virtue so strongly implanted, comes at last to
lose those contrary Impediments suppos’d in him, he certainly loses nothing in Virtue;
but on the contrary, losing only what is vitious in his Temper, is left more intire to
Virtue, and possesses it in a higher degree.
Thus isVirtueshar’d in different degrees by rational Creatures;
Degrees of Virtue.
such at least as are call’drational;but who come short of that
sound and well-establish’d Reason, which alone can constitute ajust Affection,a
uniform and steddyWillandResolution.And thus Vice and Virtue are found
variously mix’d, and alternately prevalent in the several Characters of Mankind. For it
seems evident from ourInquiry,that how ill soever the Temper or Passions may stand
with respect either to the sensible or the moral Objects; however passionate, furious,
lustful, or cruel any Creature may become; however vitious the Mind be, or whatever
ill Rules or Principles it goes by; yet if there be any Flexibleness or favourable
Inclination towards the least moral Object, the least appearance of moral Good (as if
there be any such thing asKindness, Gratitude, Bounty,or Compassion), there is still
something ofVirtue[39] left; and the Creature is not wholly vitious and unnatural.
Thus a Ruffian, who out of a sense of Fidelity and Honour of any kind, refuses to
discover his Associates; and rather than betray them, is content to endure Torments
and Death; has certainly some Principle of Virtue, however he may misapply it.
’Twas the same Case with that Malefactor, who rather than do the Office of
Executioner to his Companions, chose to keep ’em company in their Execution.
In short: As it seems hard to pronounce of any Man, “That he isabsolutely an
Atheist”; so it appears altogether as hard to pronounce of any Man, “That he is
absolutely corrupt or vitious”; there being few, even of the horridest Villains, who
have not something ofVirtuein this imperfect sense. Nothing is more just than a
known saying, “That it is as hard to find a Man wholly Ill, as wholly Good”: because
wherever there is any good Affection left, there is certainly someGoodness or Virtue
still in being.
And, having consider’d thus ofVirtue,What it is in it-self;we may now consider how
it standswith respect to the Opinions concerning aDeity,as above-mention’d.[40]
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 18 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
PART III
SECTION I
Sect. 1.
THE Nature ofVirtueconsisting (as has been explain’d)in a
Causes of VICE.
certain just Disposition, or proportionable Affection of a rational
Creature towards the moral Objects of Right and Wrong;nothing can possibly in
such a Creature exclude a Principle of Virtue, or render it ineffectual, except what,
1.Eithertakes away thenaturalandjustSense of Right and Wrong:
2.Or createsa wrong Sense of it:
3.Or causes the right Sense to be oppos’d, bycontraryAffections.
On the other side, nothing can assist, or advance the Principle of
Of VIRTUE.
Virtue, except whateitherin some manner nourishes and
promotes a Sense of Right and Wrong;or preserves it genuine and uncorrupt;or
causes it, when such, to be obey’d, by[41] subduing and subjecting the other
Affections to it.
We are to consider, therefore, how any of the above-mention’d Opinions on the
Subject of aDeity,may influence in these Cases, or produce either of thesethree
Effects.
I.
As To The First Case;The Taking Away The
Loss Of Moral
Natural Sense Of Right And Wrong. Sense.
IT will not surely be understood, that by this is meantthe taking away the Notion of
what isgoodor illin the Species, or Society.For of the Reality of such aGood andIll,
no rational Creature can possibly be insensible. Every one discerns and owns a
publick Interest, and is conscious of what affects his Fellowship or Community. When
we say therefore of a Creature, “That he has wholly lost the Sense of Right and
Wrong”; we suppose that being able to discern theGood andIllof his Species, he has
at the same time no Concern for either, nor any Sense of Excellency or Baseness in
any moral Action, relating to one or the other. So that except merely with respect to a
private and narrowly confin’d Self-good, ’tis suppos’d there is in such a Creature no
Likingor[42]Dislikeof Manners; no Admiration, or Love of any thing as morally
good; nor Hatred of any thing as morally ill, be it ever so unnatural or deform’d.
There is in reality no rational Creature whatsoever, who knows
Moral Sense.
not that when he voluntarily offends or does harm to any-one, he
cannot fail to create an Apprehension and Fear of like harm, and consequently a
Resentment and Animosity in every Creature who observes him. So that the Offender
must needs be conscious of being liable to such Treatment from every-one, as if he
had in some degree offended All.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 19 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Thus Offence and Injury are always known as punishable by every-one; and equal
Behaviour, which is therefore call’dMerit,as rewardable and well-deserving from
every-one. Of this even the wickedest Creature living must have aSense.So that if
there be any further meaning in thisSenseof Right and Wrong; if in reality there be
anySenseof this kind which an absolute wicked Creature has not; it must consist in a
real Antipathy or Aversion toInjusticeor Wrong, and in a real Affection or Love
towards EquityandRight,for its own sake, and on the account of its own natural
Beauty and Worth.[43]
’Tis impossible to suppose a mere sensible Creature originally so ill-constituted, and
unnatural, as that from the moment he comes to be try’d by sensible Objects, he
shou’d have no one good Passion towards his Kind, no foundation either of Pity,
Love, Kindness, or social Affection. ’Tis full as impossible to conceive, that a rational
Creature coming first to be try’d by rational Objects, and receiving into his Mind the
Images or Representations of Justice, Generosity, Gratitude, or other Virtue, shou’d
have noLikingof these, orDislikeof their contrarys; but be found absolutely
indifferent towards whatsoever is presented to him of this sort. A Soul, indeed, may as
well be withoutSense,as without Admiration in the Things of which it has any
knowledg. Coming therefore to a Capacity of seeing and admiring in this new way, it
must needs find a Beauty and a Deformity as well in Actions, Minds, and Tempers, as
in Figures, Sounds, or Colours. If there be norealAmiableness or Deformity in moral
Acts, there is at leastan imaginary oneof full force. Tho perhaps the Thing itself
shou’d not be allow’d in Nature, the Imagination or Fancy of it must be allow’d to be
from Nature alone. Nor can any thing besides Art and strong Endeavour, with long
Practice and Meditation, over[44]come such anatural Prevention,or *Prepossession
of the Mind, in favour of this moral Distinction.
Sense of Right and Wrong therefore being as natural to us as
How impair’d:
natural Affectionitself, and being a first Principle in our
Constitution and Make; there is no speculative Opinion, Persuasion or Belief, which is
capableimmediatelyordirectlyto exclude or destroy it. That which is of original and
pure Nature, nothing beside contrary Habit and Custom (a second Nature) is able to
displace. And this Affection beingan original oneof earliest rise in the Soul or
affectionate Part;
nothing beside contrary Affection, by frequent check and
By opposite Affection,
controul, can operate upon it, so as either to diminish it in part, or or Antipathy;
destroy it in the whole.
’Tis evident in what relates to the Frame and Order of ourBodys;that no particular
odd Mein or Gesture, which is either natural to us, and consequent to our Make, or
accidental and by Habit acquir’d, can possibly be overcome by our immediate
Disapprobation, or the contrary Bent of our Will, ever so strongly set against it. Such
a Change cannot be effected without extraordinary Means, and the intervention of Art
and Method, a strict Attention, and repeated Check. And[45] even thus, Nature, we
find, is hardly master’d; but lies sullen, and ready to revolt, on the first occasion.
Much more is thisthe Mind’sCase in respect of that natural Affection and
anticipating Fancy, which makes the sense of Right and Wrong. ’Tis impossible that
this can instantly, or without much Force and Violence,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 20 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
be effac’d, or struck out of the natural Temper, even by means of
Not by Opinion
the most extravagant Belief or Opinion in the World. merely.
NeitherTheism therefore, norAtheism,nor Daemonism, nor any religious or
irreligious Belief of any kind, being able to operate immediately or directly in this
Case, but indirectly, by the intervention of opposite or of favourable Affections
casually excited by any such Belief; we may consider of this Effect in our last Case,
where we come to examine the Agreement or Disagreement of other Affections with
this natural and moral one which relates to Right and Wrong.
SECTION II
Sect. 2.
II.
As To The Second Case, Viz.The Wrong Sense
Corruption Of
Or False Imagination Of Right And Wrong. Moral Sense.
THIS can proceed only from the Force of Custom and Education in opposition to[46]
Nature; as may be noted in those Countrys where, according to Custom or politick
Institution, certain Actions naturally foul and odious are repeatedly view’d with
Applause, and Honour ascrib’d to them. For thus ’tis possible that a Man, forcing
himself, may eat the Flesh of his Enemys, not only against his Stomach, but against
his Nature; and think it nevertheless both right and honourable; as supposing it to be
of considerable service to his Community, and capable of advancing the Name, and
spreading the Terror of his Nation.
But to speak of the Opinions relating to aDeity;and what effect
Causes of this
they may have in this place. As toAtheism,it does not seem that Corruption.
it can directly have any effect at all towards the setting up a false
Species of Right or Wrong. For notwithstanding a Man may thro’ Custom,
or by licentiousness of Practice, favour’d by Atheism, come in
Custom.
time to lose much of his naturalmoral Sense; yet it does not
seem that Atheism shou’dof it-selfbe the cause of any estimation or valuing of any
thing as fair, noble, and deserving, which was the contrary. It can never, for instance,
make it be thought that the being able to eat Man’s Flesh, or commit Bestiality,is
good and excellent in it-self.But this is certain, that by means ofcorrupt Religion,or
Superstition,
many things the[47] most horridly unnatural and inhuman, come
Superstition.
to be receiv’d as excellent, good, and laudablein themselves.
Nor is this a wonder. For where-ever any-thing, in its nature odious and abominable,
is by Religion advanc’d, as the suppos’d Will or Pleasure ofa supreme Deity;if in the
eye of the Believer it appears not indeed in any respect the less ill or odious on this
account; then mustthe Deityof necessity bear the blame, and be consider’d as a Being
naturally ill and odious, however courted, and sollicited, thro’ Mistrust and Fear. But
this is what Religion, in the main, forbids us to imagine. It everywhere prescribes
Esteem and Honour in company with Worship and Adoration. Whensoever therefore
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 21 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
it teaches the Love and Admiration of aDeity,who has any apparent Character ofIll;
it teaches at the same time a Love and Admiration ofthat Ill,and causes that to be
taken for good and amiable, which is in it-self horrid and detestable.
For instance: ifJupiterbe He who is ador’d and reverenc’d; and if his History
represents him amorously inclin’d, and permitting his Desires of this kind to wander
in the loosest manner; ’tis certain that his Worshipers, believing this History to be
literally and strictly true, must of[48] course be taught a greater Love of amorous and
wanton Acts. If there be a Religion which teaches the Adoration and Love of aGod,
whose Character it is to be captious, and of high resentment, subject to Wrath and
Anger, furious, revengeful; and revenging himself, when offended, on others than
those who gave the Offence: and if there be added to the Character of thisGod, a
fraudulent Disposition, encouraging Deceit and Treachery amongst Men; favourable
to a few, tho for slight causes, and cruel to the rest: ’tis evident that such a Religion as
this being strongly enforc’d, must of necessity raise even an Approbation and Respect
towards the Vices of this kind, and breed a sutable Disposition, a capricious, partial,
revengeful, and deceitful Temper. For evenIrregularitysandEnormitysof a heinous
kind must in many cases appear illustrious to one, who considers them in a Being
admir’d and contemplated with the highest Honour and Veneration.
This indeed must be allow’d; that if in theCultor Worship of such a Deity there be
nothing beyond common Form, nothing beside what proceeds from mere Example,
Custom, Constraint, or Fear; if there be, at the bottom, no real Heartiness, no Esteem
or Love imply’d; the Worshiper perhaps may not be much[49] misled as to his Notion
of Right and Wrong. If in following the Precepts of his suppos’dGod, or doing what
he esteems necessary towards the satisfying of such hisDeity,he is compel’d only by
Fear,and, contrary to his Inclination, performs an Act which he secretly detests as
barbarous and unnatural; then has he an Apprehension orSensestill of Right and
Wrong, and, according to what has been already observ’d, is sensible of Ill in the
Character of hisGod;however cautious he may be of pronouncing any thing on this
Subject, or so thinking of it, as to frame any formal or direct Opinion in the case. But
if by insensible degrees, as he proceeds in his religious Faith and devout Exercise, he
comes to be more and more reconcil’d to the Malignity, Arbitrariness, Pariality, or
Revengefulness of his believ’dDeity;his Reconciliation with these Qualitys
themselves will soon grow in proportion; and the most cruel, unjust, and barbarous
Acts, will, by the power of this Example, be often consider’d by him, not only as just
and lawful, but as divine, and worthy of imitation.
For whoever thinks there is aGod, and pretends formally to believe that he isjustand
good,must suppose that there is independently such a thing asJusticeandInjustice,
Truth andFalshood, Rightand[50]Wrong; according to which he pronounces that
God is just, righteous,andtrue.If the mereWill, Decree,or Law of God be said
absolutely to constituteRightandWrong, then are these latter words of no
significancy at all. For thus if each part of a Contradiction were affirm’d for Truth by
the supreme Power, they wou’d consequently becometrue.Thus if one Person were
decreed to suffer for another’s fault, the Sentence wou’d bejustandequitable.And
thus, in the same manner, if arbitrarily, and without reason, some Beings were
destin’d to endure perpetual Ill, and others as constantly to enjoy Good; this also
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 22 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
wou’d pass under the same Denomination. But to say of any thing that it isjustor
unjust,on such a foundation as this, is to say nothing, or to speak without a meaning.
And thus it appears, that where a real Devotion and hearty Worship is paid to a
supreme Being, who in his History or Character is represented otherwise than as
really and truly just and good; there must ensue a Loss of Rectitude, a Disturbance of
Thought, and a Corruption of Temper and Manners in the Believer. His Honesty will,
of necessity, be supplanted by his Zeal, whilst he is thus unnaturally influenc’d, and
render’d thus immorally devout.[51]
To this we need only add, that as theill Characterof aGod does
Influence of Religion.
injury to the Affections of Men, and disturbs and impairs the
natural Sense of Right and Wrong; so, on the other hand, nothing can more highly
contribute to the fixing of right Apprehensions, and a sound Judgment or Sense of
Right and Wrong, than to believe a God who is ever, and on all accounts, represented
such as to be actually a true Model and Example of the most exact Justice, and highest
Goodness and Worth. Such a View of divine Providence and Bounty, extended toAll,
and express’d in a constant good Affection towardsthe Whole,must of necessity
engage us, within our Compass and Sphere, to act by a like Principle and Affection.
And having once the Good of our Species or Publick in view, as our End or Aim, ’tis
impossible we shou’d be misguided by any means to a false Apprehension or Sense of
Right or Wrong.
As to this second Case therefore;Religion(according as the kind may prove) is
capable of doing great Good, or Harm; andAtheismnothing positive in either way.
For however it may be indirectly an occasion of Mens losing a good and sufficient
Sense of Right and Wrong; it will not,as Atheism merely,[52] be the occasion of
setting up a false Species of it; which only false Religion, or fantastical Opinion,
deriv’d commonly from Superstition and Credulity, is able to effect.
SECTION III
Sect. 3.
NOW As To The Last Case, The Opposition Made By Other
Affections To The Natural Sense Of Right And Wrong.
Opposition Of
’TIS evident, that a Creature having this sort ofSenseor good
The Affections.
Affectionin any degree, must necessarily act according to it; if it
happens not to be oppos’d, either by some settled sedate
Affection towards a conceiv’dprivate Good,or by some sudden, strong and forcible
Passion, as of Lust orAnger;which may not only subdue the Sense of Right and
Wrong, but the very Sense of private Good it-self; and overrule even the most familiar
and receiv’d Opinion of what is conducing to Self-interest.
But it is not our business in this place to examine the several Means or Methods by
which this Corruption is introduc’d or increas’d. We are to consider only how the
Opinions concerninga Deitycan influence one way or another.[53]
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 23 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
That it is possible for a Creature capable of using Reflection, to
Rise of Moral Sense.
have a Liking or Dislike of moral Actions, and consequently a
Sense of Right and Wrong, before such time as he may have any settled Notion ofa
God, is what will hardly be question’d: it being a thing not expected, or any-way
possible, that a Creature such asMan, arising from his Childhood, slowly and
gradually, to several degrees of Reason and Reflection, shou’d, at the very first, be
taken up with those Speculations, or more refin’d sort of Reflections, about the
Subject ofGod’s Existence.
Let us suppose a Creature, who wanting Reason, and being unable to reflect, has,
notwithstanding, many good Qualitys and Affections; as Love to his Kind, Courage,
Gratitude, or Pity. ’Tis certain that if you give to this Creature a reflecting Faculty, it
will at the same instant approve of Gratitude, Kindness, and Pity; be taken with any
shew or representation of the social Passion, and think nothing more amiable than
this, or more odious than the contrary. And this isto be capable ofVirtue,andto have
a Sense ofRightandWrong.[54]
Before the time, therefore, that a Creature can have any plain or positive Notion one
way or other, concerning the Subject ofa God, he may be suppos’d to have an
Apprehension or Sense ofRightandWrong, and be possess’d of VirtueandVicein
different degrees; as we know by Experience of those, who having liv’d in such
places, and in such a manner as never to have enter’d into any serious Thoughts of
Religion, are nevertheless very different among themselves, as to their Characters of
Honesty and Worth: some being naturallymodest, kind, friendly,and consequently
Lovers ofkindandfriendly Actions;othersproud, harsh, cruel, and consequently
inclin’d to admire rather the Acts ofViolenceand merePower.
Now, as to the Belief of aDeity,and how Men are influenc’d by
DEITY.
it; we may consider, in the first place, on what account Men yield
Obedience, and act in conformity to such a supreme Being. It must be eitherin the
way of hisPower, as presupposing some Disadvantage or Benefit to accrue from him:
or in the way of hisExcellencyandWorth,as thinking it the Perfection of Nature to
imitate and resemble him.[55]
If, as in the first Case, there be a Belief or Conception of aDeity,
who is consider’d only aspowerfulover his Creature, and
HopeandFear.
inforcing Obedience to hisabsolute Willby particular Rewards
and Punishments; and if on this account, thro’ hope merely ofReward,or fear of
Punishment,the Creature be incited to do the Good he hates, or restrain’d from doing
the Ill to which he is not otherwise in the least degree averse; there is in this Case (as
has been already shewn) no Virtue or Goodness whatsoever. The Creature,
notwithstanding his good Conduct, is intrinsecally of as little Worth, as if he acted in
his natural way, when under no dread or terror of any sort. There is no more of
Rectitude, Piety,or Sanctityin a Creature thus reform’d, than there isMeeknessor
Gentlenessin a Tiger strongly chain’d, orInnocenceandSobrietyin a Monkey under
the Discipline of the Whip. For however orderly and well those Animals, or Man
himself upon like terms, may be induc’d to act, whilst the Will is neither gain’d, nor
the Inclination wrought upon, butAwealone prevails and forces Obedience; the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 24 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Obedience isservile,and all which is done thro’ it, merelyservile.The greater degree
of such a Submission or Obedience, is only the greaterServility;whatever[56] may be
the Object. For whether such a Creature has a good Master,
or an ill one, he is neither more or less servile in his own nature.
Fear.
Be the Master or Superior ever so perfect, or excellent, yet the
greater Submission caus’d in this Case, thro’ this sole Principle or Motive, is only the
lower and more abject Servitude; and implies the greater Wretchedness and Meanness
in the Creature, who has those Passions of Self-love so predominant, and is in his
Temper so vitious and defective, as has been explain’d.
As to the second Case. If there be a Belief or Conception of a
HonourandLove.
Deity,who is consider’d asworthyandgood,and admir’d and
reverenc’d as such; being understood to have, besides mere Power and Knowledg, the
highest Excellence of Nature, such as renders him justly amiable to All: and if in the
manner this Sovereign and mighty Being is represented, or, as he is historically
describ’d, there appears in him a high and eminent regard to what is good and
excellent, a Concern for the good ofAll,and an Affection of Benevolence and Love
towards the Whole;
such an Example must undoubtedly serve (as above explain’d) to
Divine Example.
raise and increase the Affection towards Virtue, and help to
submit and subdue all other Affections to that alone.[57]
Nor is this Good effected byExamplemerely. For where the Theistical Belief is intire
and perfect, there must be a steddy Opinion of the Superintendency of a Supreme
Being, a Witness and Spectator of human Life, and conscious of whatsoever is felt or
acted in the Universe: So that in the perfectest Recess or deepest Solitude, there must
beOne still presum’d remaining with us; whose Presence singly must be of more
moment than that of the most august Assembly on Earth. In such a Presense,
’tis evident, that as theShame of guilty Actions must be the
Divine Presence.
greatest of any; so must theHonour be, of well-doing, even
under the unjust Censure of a World. And in this Case, ’tis very apparent how
conducing aperfect Theismmust be to Virtue, and how great Deficiency there is in
Atheism.
What theFearof future Punishment,andHopeof future Reward,
FearandHope.
added to this Belief, may further contribute towards Virtue, we
come now to consider more particularly. So much in the mean while may be gather’d
from what has been said above; That neither thisFearor Hope can possibly be of the
kind call’dgood Affections,such as are acknowledg’d the Springs and Sources of all
Actions trulygood.Nor can this Fear or[58] Hope, as above intimated, consist in
reality with Virtue, or Goodness; if it either stands asessentialto any moral
Performance, or asa considerable Motiveto any Act, of which some better Affection
ought,alone,to have beena sufficient Cause.
It may be consider’d withal; That, in this religious sort of
Self-love,
Discipline, the Principle ofSelf-love,
which is naturally so prevailing in us, being no-way moderated
How advanc’d.
or restrain’d, but rather improv’d and made stronger every day,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 25 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
by the exercise of the Passions in a Subject of more extended Self-interest; there may
be reason to apprehend lest the Temper of this kind shou’d extend it-self in general
thro’ all the Parts of Life. For if the Habit be such as to occasion, in every particular, a
stricter Attention to Self-good, and private Interest; it must insensibly diminish the
Affections towards publick Good, or the Interest of Society; and introduce a certain
Narrowness of Spirit, which (as some pretend) is peculiarly observable in the devout
Persons and Zealots of almost every religious Persuasion.
This, too, must be confess’d; That if it betrue Piety,to love
Its Effects in Religion.
Godfor his own sake;the over-sollicitous regard to private Good
expected from him, must of necessity prove a diminution of Pie[59]ty. For whilstGod
is belov’d only as the Cause of private Good, he is no otherwise belov’d than as any
other Instrument or Means of Pleasure by any vitious Creature. Now the more there is
of this violent Affection towardsprivate Good,the less room is there for the other sort
towards Goodness it-self,or any good and deserving Object, worthy of Love and
Admiration for its own sake; such asGod is universally acknowledg’d, or at least by
the generality of civiliz’d or refin’d Worshipers.
’Tis in this respect that the strong Desire andLove of Lifemay also prove an Obstacle
to Piety, as well as to Virtue and publick Love. For the stronger this Affection is in
any-one, the less will he be able to have trueResignation,or Submission to the Rule
and Order ofthe Deity.
And if that which he callsResignationdepends only on the
False Resignation.
expectation of infinite Retribution or Reward, he discovers no
more Worth or Virtue here, than in any other Bargain of Interest: The meaning of his
Resignation being only this, “That he resigns his present Life and Pleasures,
conditionally forThat,which he himself confesses to be beyond an Equivalent;
eternal living in a State of highest Pleasure and Enjoyment.”[60]
But notwithstanding the Injury which the Principle of Virtue may possibly suffer, by
the Increase of the selfish Passion, in the way we have been mentioning; ’tis certain,
on the other side,
that the Principle ofFear of future Punishment,andHope of
Belief of future Life;
future Reward,how mercenary or servile soever it may be
accounted, is yet, in many Circumstances,
a great Advantage, Security, and Support toVirtue.
How advantageous.
It has been already consider’d, that notwithstanding there may be implanted in the
Heart a real Sense of Right and Wrong,
a real good Affection towards the Species or Society; yet by the
Supporting.
violence of Rage, Lust, or any other counterworking Passion, this
good Affection may frequently be controul’d and overcome. Where therefore there is
nothing in the Mind capable to render such ill Passions the Objects of its Aversion,
and cause them earnestly to be oppos’d; ’tis apparent how much a good Temper in
time must suffer, and a Character by degrees change for the worse. But if Religion
interposing, creates a Belief that the illPassions of this kind, no less than their
consequentActions,are the Objects of a Deity’s Animadversion; ’tis certain, that such
a Belief must prove a seasonable Remedy[61] against Vice, and be in a particular
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 26 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
manner advantageous to Virtue. For a Belief of this kind must be suppos’d to tend
considerably towards the calming of the Mind, and disposing or fitting the Person to a
better Recollection of himself, and to a stricter Observance of that good and virtuous
Principle, which needs only his Attention, to engage him wholly in its Party and
Interest.
And as this Belief of a future Reward and Punishment is capable
Saving.
of supporting those who thro’ill Practiceare like to apostatize
from Virtue; so when byill Opinionand wrong Thought, the Mind it-self is bent
against the honest Course, and debauch’d even to an Esteem, and deliberate
Preference of a vitious one; the Belief of the kind mention’d may prove on this
occasion the only Relief and Safety.
A Person, for instance, who has much of Goodness and natural Rectitude in his
Temper, but withal, so much Softness, or Effeminacy, as unfits him to bear Poverty,
Crosses or Adversity; if by ill Fortune he meets with many Trials of this kind, it must
certainly give a Sourness and Distaste to his Temper, and make him exceedingly
averse to that which he may falsly presume the occasion[62] of such Calamity or Ill.
Now if his own Thoughts,
or the corrupt Insinuations of other Men, present it often to his
Belief of future Life;
Mind, “That hisHonestyis the occasion of this Calamity,andthat
if he were deliver’d from this Restraint ofVirtueandHonesty,he might be much
happier”: ’tis very obvious that his Esteem of these good Qualitys must in proportion
diminish every day, as the Temper grows uneasy, and quarrels with it-self. But if he
opposes to this Thought the Consideration, “That Honesty carrys with it, if nota
present,at leasta futureAdvantage, such as to compensate that Loss of private Good
which he regrets”; then may this injury to his good Temper and honest Principle be
prevented, and his Love or Affection towards Honesty and Virtue remain as it was
before.
In the same manner, where instead ofRegardor Love,there is
Improving.
ratheran Aversionto what is good and virtuous, (as, for instance,
whereLenityandForgivenessare despis’d, andRevengehighly thought of, and
belov’d) if there be this Consideration added, “ThatLenityis, by its Rewards, made
the cause of a greater Self-good and Enjoyment than what is found in Revenge”; that
very Affection ofLenityandMildnessmay come to be industriously nourish’d, and
the contrary Pas[63]sion depress’d. And thus Temperance, Modesty, Candour,
Benignity,and other good Affections, however despis’d at first, may come at last to
be valu’dfor their own Sakes,the contrary Species rejected, and the good and proper
Object belov’d and prosecuted, when the Reward or Punishment is not so much as
thought of.
Thus ina civilStateor Publick,we see that a virtuous
Rewards and
Administration, and an equal and just Distribution of Rewards Punishments,
and Punishments, is of the highest service; not only by
restraining the Vitious, and forcing them to act usefully to Society;
but by making Virtue to be apparently the Interest of every-one,
In the State.
so as to remove all Prejudices against it, create a fair reception
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 27 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
for it, and lead Men into that path which afterwards they cannot easily quit. For thus a
People rais’d from Barbarity or despotick Rule, civiliz’d by Laws, and made virtuous
by the long Course of a lawful and just Administration; if they chance to fall suddenly
under any Misgovernment of unjust and arbitrary Power, they will on this account be
the rather animated to exert a stronger Virtue, in opposition to such Violence and
Corruption. And even where, by long and continu’d Arts of a prevailing Tyranny,
such a People are at last totally oppress’d, the scatter’d Seeds of Virtue[64] will for a
long time remain alive, even to a second Generation; ere the utmost Force of
misapply’d Rewards and Punishments can bring them to the abject and compliant
State of long-accustom’d Slaves.
But tho a right Distribution of Justice in a Government be so essential a cause of
Virtue, we must observe in this Case, that it isExamplewhich chiefly influences
Mankind, and forms the Character and Disposition of a People. For a virtuous
Administration is in a manner necessarily accompany’d with Virtue in the Magistrate.
Otherwise it cou’d be of little effect, and of no long duration. But where it is sincere
and well establish’d, there Virtue and the Laws must necessarily be respected and
belov’d. So that as to Punishments and Rewards, their Efficacy is not so much from
the Fear or Expectation which they raise, as from a natural Esteem ofVirtue,and
Detestation ofVillany,which is awaken’d and excited by these publick Expressions of
the Approbation and Hatred of Mankind in each Case. For in the publick Executions
of the greatest Villains, we see generally that the Infamy and Odiousness of their
Crime, and the Shame of it before Mankind, contribute more to their Misery than all
besides; and that it is not the immediate Pain, or Death[65] it-self, which raises so
much Horror either in the Sufferers or Spectators, as that ignominious kind of Death
which is inflicted for publick Crimes, and Violations of Justice and Humanity.
And as the Case of Reward and Punishment stands thus in the
In the Family.
Publick, so, in the same manner, as toprivate Familys.For
Slaves and mercenary Servants, restrain’d and made orderly by Punishment, and the
Severity of their Master, are not on this account made good or honest. Yet the same
Master of the Family using proper Rewards and gentle Punishments towards his
Children, teaches them Goodness; and by this help instructs them in a Virtue, which
afterwards they practice upon other grounds, and without thinking of a Penalty or
Bribe. And this is what we calla Liberal Educationanda Liberal Service:the
contrary Service and Obedience, whether towards God or Man, beingilliberal,and
unworthy of any Honour or Commendation.
In the Case of Religion, however, it must be consider’d,
that if by theHope of Rewardbe understood the Love and Desire
In Religion.
of virtuous Enjoyment, or of the very Practice and Exercise of
Virtue in another Life; the Expectation or Hope of this kind is so far from being
derogatory to[66] Virtue, that it is an Evidence of our loving it the more sincerely and
for its own sake.Nor can this Principle be justly call’dselfish:for if the Love of
Virtue be not mere Self-Interest, the Love and Desire of Life for Virtue’s sake cannot
be esteem’d so. But if the Desire of Life be only thro’ the Violence of that natural
Aversion to Death; if it be thro’ the Love of something else than virtuous Affection,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 28 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
or thro’ the Unwillingness of parting with something else than what is purely of this
kind; then is it no longer any sign or token of real Virtue.
Thus a Person loving Life for Life’s sake, and Virtue not at all, may by the Promise or
Hope of Life, and Fear of Death, or other Evil, be induc’d to practice Virtue, and even
endeavourto be truly virtuous, by a Love of what he practices. Yet neither isthis very
Endeavourto be esteem’da Virtue:For tho he may intend to be virtuous, he is not
become so, for having only intended, or aim’d at it, thro’ love of the Reward. But as
soon as he is come to have any Affection towards what is morally good, and can like
or affect such Goodfor its own sake,as good and amiablein itself;then is he in some
degree good and virtuous, and not till then.[67]
Such are the Advantages or Disadvantages which accrue to
Security to Virtue.
Virtue from Reflection upon private Good or Interest. For tho the
Habit ofSelfishness,and the Multiplicity ofinterested Views,are of little
Improvement to realMeritor Virtue;yet there is a necessity for the preservation of
Virtue,that it shou’d be thought to have no quarrel withtrue Interest,andSelf-
enjoyment.
Whoever therefore, by any strong Persuasion or settled Judgment, thinks in the main,
That Virtue causes Happiness, and Vice Misery,carrys with him that Security and
Assistance to Virtue which is requir’d. Or tho he has no such Thought, nor can
believe Virtue his real Interest, either with respect to his own Nature and Constitution,
or the Circumstances of human Life; yet if he believes any supreme Powers concern’d
in thepresentAffairs of Mankind, andimmediatelyinterposing in behalf of the
Honest and Virtuous, against the Impious and Unjust; this will serve to preserve in
him, however, that just Esteem of Virtue, which might otherwise considerably
diminish. Or shou’d he still believe little of theimmediateInterposition of
Provindence in the Affairs ofthis present Life;yet if he believes a God dispensing
Rewards and Punishments to Vice and Virtue[68] ina future;he carrys with him still
the same Advantage and Security;
whilst his Belief is steddy, and no-wise wavering or doubtful.
Caution.
For it must be observ’d, that an Expectation and Dependency, so
miraculous and great as this, must naturally take off from other inferior Dependencys
and Encouragements. Where infinite Rewards are thus inforc’d, and the Imagination
strongly turn’d towards them, the other common and natural Motives to Goodness are
apt to be neglected, and lose much by Dis-use. Other Interests are hardly so much as
computed, whilst the Mind is thus transported in the pursuit of a high Advantage and
Self-Interest, so narrowly confin’d within our-selves. On this account, all other
Affections towards Friends, Relations, or Mankind, are often slightly regarded, as
beingworldly,and of little moment, in respect of the Interest ofour Soul.And so little
thought is there of any immediate Satisfaction arising from such good Offices of Life,
that it is customary with many devout People zealously to decry
Imprudent Zeal.
all temporal Advantages of Goodness, all natural Benefits of
Virtue; and magnifying the contrary Happiness of a vitious State, to declare, “That
except only for the sake of future Reward, and fear of future Punishment, they wou’d
divest themselves of all Goodness at once, and freely allow themselves to be[69] most
immoral and profligate.” From whence it appears, that in some respects there can be
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 29 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
nothing more*fatal to Virtue, than the weak and uncertain Belief of a future Reward
and Punishment. For the stress being laid wholly here, if this Foundation come to fail,
there is no further Prop or Security to Mens Morals. And thus Virtue is supplanted
and betray’d.
Now as to Atheism:tho it be plainly deficient and without
Atheism.
remedy, in the case ofill Judgment on the Happiness of Virtue;
yet it is not, indeed, of necessity the Cause of any suchill Judgment.For without an
absolute Assent to any Hypothesis ofTheism, the Advantages of Virtue may possibly
be seen and own’d, and a high Opinion of it establish’d in the Mind. However, it must
be confess’d, that the natural Tendency of Atheism is very different.
’Tis in a manner impossible, to have any great opinion of the Happiness of Virtue,
without conceiving high thoughts of the Satisfaction resulting from the generous
Admiration and Love of it: And nothing beside the Experience of such a Love is
likely to make this Satisfaction credited. The chief Ground and Support therefore of
this Opinion ofHappiness in Virtue,must arise from the powerful feeling of this
ge[70]nerous moral Affection, and the knowledg of its Power and Strength. But this is
certain, that it can be no great strengthning to the moral Affection, no great support to
the pure Love of Goodness and Virtue, to suppose there is neitherGoodness nor
Beautyin theWholeit-self; nor any Example, or Precedent of good Affection in any
superior Being. Such a Belief must tend rather to the weaning the Affections from any
thing amiable or self-worthy, and to the suppressing the very Habit and familiar
Custom of admiring natural Beautys, or whatever in the Order of things is according
to just Design, Harmony, and Proportion. For how little dispos’d must a Person be, to
love or admire any thing asorderlyin the Universe, who thinks the Universe it-self a
Pattern ofDisorder? How unapt to reverence or respect any particular subordinate
Beauty ofa Part;when eventhe Wholeit-self is thought to want Perfection, and to be
only a vast and infinite Deformity?
Nothing indeed can be more melancholy, than the Thought of living in a distracted
Universe, from whence many Ills may be suspected, and where there is nothing good
or lovely which presents it-self, nothing which can satisfy in Contemplation, or raise
any Passion besides that of Contempt, Hatred, or Dislike. Such an Opinion as this
may by degrees im[71]bitter the Temper, and not only make the Love of Virtue to be
less felt, but help to impair and ruin the very Principle of Virtue,viz. naturalandkind
Affection.
Upon the whole; whoever has a firm Belief of aGod, whom he
Theism.
does not merelycallgood, but of whom in reality hebelieves
nothing besidereal Good, nothing beside what is truly sutable to the exactest
Character of Benignity and Goodness; such a Person believing Rewards or
Retributions in another Life, must believe them annex’d to real Goodness and Merit,
real Villany and Baseness, and not to any accidental Qualitys or Circumstances; in
which respect they cannot properly be styl’dRewardsor Punishments,butcapricious
Distributions of Happiness or Unhappiness to Creatures.These are the only Terms,
on which the Belief of a World to come can happily influence the Believer. And on
these Terms, and by virtue of this Belief, Man perhaps may retain his Virtue and
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 30 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Integrity, even under the hardest Thoughts of human Nature; when either by any ill
Circumstance or untoward Doctrine, he is brought to that unfortunate Opinion of
Virtue’s being naturally an Enemy to Happiness in Life.
This, however, is an Opinion which cannot be suppos’d consistent with
sound[72]Theism. For whatever be decided as to a future Life, or the Rewards and
Punishments of hereafter; he who, as a soundTheist,believes a reigning Mind,
sovereign in Nature, and ruling all things with the highest perfection of Goodness, as
well as of Wisdom and Power, must necessarily believe Virtue to be naturally good
and advantageous. For what cou’d more strongly imply an unjust Ordinance, a Blot
and Imperfection in the general Constitution of Things, than to suppose Virtue the
natural Ill, and Vice the natural Good of any Creature?
And now last of all, there remains for us to consider a yet further
Atheism and Theism.
Advantage to Virtue, in theTheisticalBelief above the
Atheistical.The Proposition may at first sight appear over-refin’d, and of a sort which
is esteem’d too nicely philosophical. But after what has been already examin’d, the
Subject perhaps may be more easily explain’d.
There is no Creature, according to what has been already prov’d,
who must not of necessity beillin some degree, by having any
Effects of each.
Affection or Aversion in a stronger degree than is sutable to his
own private Good, or that of the System to which he is join’d. For in either Case the
Affection isilland vitious. Now if a ra[73]tional Creature has that Degree of
Aversion which is requisite to arm him against any particular Misfortune, and alarm
him against the Approach of any Calamity; this is regular and well. But if after the
Misfortune is happen’d, his Aversion continues still, and his Passion rather grows
upon him; whilst he rages at the Accident, and exclaims against his private Fortune or
Lot; this will be acknowledg’d both vitiousin present,andfor the future;as it affects
the Temper, and disturbs that easy Course of the Affections on which Virtue and
Goodness so much depend. On the other side, the patient enduring of the Calamity,
and the bearing up of the Mind under it, must be acknowledg’dimmediatelyvirtuous,
andpreservative of Virtue.Now,
according to the Hypothesis of those who exclude a general
Of Atheism.
Mind, it must be confess’d, there can nothing happen in the
Course of things to deserve either our Admiration, and Love, or our Anger, and
Abhorrence. However, as there can be no Satisfaction at the best in thinking upon
whatAtoms and Chanceproduce; so upon disasterous Occasions, and under the
Circumstances of a calamitous and hard Fortune, ’tis scarce possible to prevent a
natural kind of Abhorrence and Spleen, which will be entertain’d and kept alive by
the Imagination of so perverse an Order of Things.[74] But in another Hypothesis
(that of perfectTheism) it is understood,
“That whateverthe Order of the World produces, is in the main
Of Theism.
both just and good.” Therefore in the Course of Things in this
World, whatever Hardship of Events may seem to force from any rational Creature a
hard Censure of his private Condition orLot;he may by Reflection nevertheless,
come to have Patience, and to acquiesce in it. Nor is this all. He may go further still in
this Reconciliation; and from the same Principle may make theLotit-self an Object of
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 31 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
his good Affection; whilst he strives to maintain this generous Fealty, and stands so
well-dispos’d towards the Laws and Government of his higher Country.
Such an Affection must needs create the highest Constancy in any State of Sufferance,
and make us in the best manner support whatever Hardships are to be endur’d for
Virtue’s sake. And as this Affection must of necessity cause a greater Acquiescence
and Complacency with respect to ill Accidents, ill Men, and Injurys; so of course it
cannot fail of producing still a greater Equality, Gentleness, and Benignity in the
Temper. Consequently the Affection must be a truly good one, and a Creature the
more truly good and virtuous, by possessing it. For[75] whatsoever is the occasion or
means of more affectionately uniting a rational Creature to hisPartin Society, and
causes him to prosecute the publick Good, or Interest of his Species, with more Zeal
and Affection than ordinary; is undoubtedly the Cause of more than ordinary Virtue in
such a Person.
This too is certain; That the Admiration and Love of Order,
Contemplation.
Harmony and Proportion, in whatever kind, is naturally
improving to the Temper, advantageous to social Affection, and highly assistant to
Virtue;which is it-self no other than the Love of Order and Beauty in Society. In the
meanest Subjects of the World, the Appearance ofOrder gains upon the Mind, and
draws the Affection towards it. But ifthe Order of the World it-selfappears just and
beautiful; the Admiration and Esteem ofOrder must run higher, and the elegant
Passion or Love of Beauty, which is so advantageous to Virtue, must be the more
improv’d by its Exercise in so ample and magnificent a Subject.
For ’tis impossible that suchaDivine Ordershou’d be
Religious Affection.
contemplated without*Extasy and Rapture; since in the
common Subjects of Science, and the liberal Arts, whatever is according to just[76]
Harmony and Proportion, is so transporting to those who have any Knowledg or
Practice in the kind.
Now if the Subject and Ground of this divine Passion be not really just or adequate,
(the Hypothesis ofTheism being suppos’d false) the Passion still in it-self is so far
natural and good, as it proves an Advantage to Virtue and Goodness; according to
what has been above demonstrated. But if, on the other side, the Subject of this
Passion be really adequate and just, (the Hypothesis ofTheism being real, and not
imaginary) then is the Passion also just, and becomes absolutelydueandrequisitein
every rational Creature.
HENCE we may determine justly the Relation whichVirtuehas
Conclusion.
toPiety;thefirstbeing not compleat but in thelatter:Since
where the latter is wanting, there can neither be the same Benignity, Firmness, or
Constancy; the same good Composure of the Affections, or Uniformity of Mind.
And thus the Perfection and Height ofVirtuemust be owing tothe Belief of
aGod.[77]
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 32 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Book 2
PART I
SECTION I
Sect. 1.
WE have consider’dwhatVirtueis,and to whom the Character belongs. It remains to
inquire,
What Obligationthere istoVirtue;or what Reasonto embrace it.
Obligation to
VIRTUE.
We have found, that to deserve the name ofgoodor virtuous,a
Creature must have all his Inclinations and Affections, his Dispositions of Mind and
Temper, sutable, and agreeing with the Good of hisKind,or of thatSystemin which
he is included, and of which he constitutes aPart.To stand thus well affected, and to
have one’s Affectionsrightandintire,not only in respect of one’s self, but of Society
and the Publick: This isRectitude, Integrity,or Virtue.And to be wanting in any of
these, or to have their[78] Contrarys, isDepravity, Corruption,andVice.
It has been already shewn, that in the Passions and Affections of
Difficulty stated.
particular Creatures, there is a constant relation to the Interest of
a Species,or common Nature. This has been demonstrated in the case ofnatural
Affection,parental Kindness, Zeal for Posterity, Concern for the Propagation and
Nurture of the Young, Love of Fellowship and Company, Compassion, mutual
Succour, and the rest of this kind. Nor will any-one deny that this Affection of a
Creature towards the Good of the Species or common Nature, is asproper andnatural
to him, as it is to any Organ, Part or Member of an Animal-Body, or mere Vegetable,
to work in its known Course, and regular way of Growth. ’Tis not morenaturalfor
the Stomach to digest, the Lungs to breathe, the Glands to separate Juices, or other
Intrails to perform their several Offices; however they may by particular Impediments
be sometimes disorder’d, or obstructed in their Operations.
There being allow’d therefore in a Creature such Affections as these towardsthe
common Nature,
or System of the Kind,together with those other which regardthe
Union with a Kind or
private Nature,or Self-system;it will appear that in following the Species.
firstof these A[79]ffections, the Creature must on many
Occasions contradict and go againstthe latter.How else shou’d the Species be
preserv’d? Or what wou’d signify that implantednatural Affection,by which a
Creature thro’ so many Difficultys and Hazards preserves its Offspring, and supports
its Kind?
It may therefore be imagin’d, perhaps, that there is a plain and
Opposition from Self-
absolute Opposition between thesetwoHabits or Affections. It interest.
may be presum’d, that the pursuing the common Interest or
publick Good thro’ the Affections ofone kind,must be a hindrance to the Attainment
of private Good thro’ the Affections ofanother.For it being taken for granted, that
Hazards and Hardships, of whatever sort, are naturally theIllof the private State; and
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 33 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
it being certainly the Nature of those publick Affections to lead often to the greatest
Hardships and Hazards of every kind; ’tis presently infer’d, “That ’tis the Creature’s
Interest to be without any publick Affection whatsoever.”
This we know for certain; That all social Love, Friendship, Gratitude, or whatever
else is of this generous kind, does by its nature take place of the self-interesting
Passions, draws us out of our-selves, and makes us disregardful of our own
Convenience and Safety. So that[80] according to a known*way of reasoning on
Self-interest,that which is of a social kind in us, shou’d of right be abolish’d. Thus
Kindness of every sort, Indulgence, Tenderness, Compassion, and in short, all natural
Affection shou’d be industriously suppress’d, and, as mere Folly, and Weakness of
Nature, be resisted and overcome; that, by this means, there might be nothing
remaining in us, which was contrary to a directSelf-end;nothing which might stand
in opposition to a steddy and deliberate Pursuit of the most narrowly confin’dSelf-
interest.
According to this extraordinary Hypothesis, it must be taken for granted, “That in the
System of a Kind or Species, the Interest ofthe private Natureis directly opposite to
that ofthe common one;the Interest ofParticularsdirectly opposite to that ofthe
Publick in general.”—A strange Constitution! in which it must be confess’d there is
much Disorder and Untowardness; unlike to what we observe elsewhere in Nature. As
if in any vegetable or animal Body, thePartor Member cou’d be suppos’d in a good
and prosperous Stateas to it-self,when under a contrary Disposition, and in an
unnatural Growth or Habitas to itsWhole.[81]
Now that this is in reality quite otherwise, we shall endeavour to
Reconciliation.
demonstrate; so as to make appear, “That what Men represent as
an ill Order and Constitution in the Universe, by making moral Rectitude appearthe
Ill,and Depravitythe Goodor Advantage of a Creature, is in Nature just the contrary.
That to be well affected towards thePublick Interestandone’s own, is not only
consistent, but inseparable: and that moral Rectitude, orVirtue,must accordingly be
the Advantage, andVicethe Injury and Disadvantage of every Creature.”
SECTION II
Sect. 2.
THERE are few perhaps, who when they consider a Creature
Contradictory
void of natural Affection, and wholly destitute of a Notions.
communicative or social Principle, will suppose him, at the same
time, either tolerably happy in himself, or as he stands abroad, with respect to his
Fellow-Creatures or Kind. ’Tis generally thought, that such a Creature as this, feels
slender Joy in Life, and finds little Satisfaction in the mere sensual Pleasures which
remain with him, after the Loss of social Enjoyment, and whatever can be call’d
Humanityor Good-nature. We know that to such[82] a Creature as this, ’tis not only
incident,to be morose, rancorous and malignant;
but that,of necessity,a Mind or Temper thus destitute of
Dissolute or immoral
Mildness and Benignity, must turn to that which is contrary, and State.
be wrought by Passions of a different kind. Such a Heart as this
must be a continual Seat of perverse Inclinations and bitter Aversions, rais’d from a
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 34 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
constant ill Humour, Sourness, and Disquiet. The Consciousness of such a Nature, so
obnoxious to Mankind, and to all Beings which approach it, must overcloud the Mind
with dark Suspicion and Jealousy, alarm it with Fears and Horror, and raise in it a
continual Disturbance, even in the most seeming fair and secure State of Fortune, and
in the highest degree of outward Prosperity.
This, as to thecompleatimmoral State, is what, of their own
In whole.
accord, Men readily remark. Where there is thisabsolute
Degeneracy, thistotalApostacy from all Candour, Equity, Trust, Sociableness, or
Friendship; there are few who do not see and acknowledg the Misery which is
consequent. Seldom is the Case misconstru’d, whenat worst.The misfortune is, we
look not on this Depravity,
nor consider how it stands,in less degrees.The Calamity, we
In part.
think, does not of necessity hold proportion with the Injustice or
Iniquity. As if to beabsolutelyimmoral and[83] inhuman, were indeed the greatest
misfortune and misery; but that to be so, ina little degree,shou’d be no misery nor
harm at all! Which to allow, is just as reasonable as to own, that ’tis the greatest Ill of
a Body to be in the utmost manner distorted and maim’d; but that to lose the use only
of oneLimb, or to be impair’d in someone singleOrgan or Member, is no
Inconvenience or Ill worthy the least notice.
The Parts and Proportions ofthe Mind,their mutual Relation and
Inward Proportion.
Dependency, the Connexion and Frame of those Passions which
constitute the Soul or Temper, may easily be understood by any-one who thinks it
worth his while to study this inward Anatomy. ’Tis certain that the Order or
Symmetry of thisinward Partis, in it-self, no less real and exact, than that of the
Body.However, ’tis apparent that few of us endeavour to becomeAnatomistsof this
sort. Nor is any-one asham’d of the deepest Ignorance in such a Subject. For tho the
greatest Misery and Ill is generally own’d to be fromDisposition,andTemper; tho
’tis allow’d thatTemper may often change, and that it actually varys on many
occasions, much to our disadvantage; yet how this Matter is brought about, we inquire
not. We never trouble our-selves to consider thorowly by what means or methods our
inward Constitutioncomes at[84] any time to be impair’d or injur’d. TheSolutio
Continui,
which bodily Surgeons talk of, is never apply’d in this case, by
Continuity.
Surgeons of another sort. The Notion ofa WholeandPartsis not
apprehended in this Science. We know not what the effect is, of straining any
Affection, indulging any wrong Passion, or relaxing any proper and natural Habit, or
good Inclination. Nor can we conceive how a particular Action shou’d have such a
sudden Influence on the whole Mind, as to make the Person an immediate Sufferer.
We suppose rather that a Man may violate his Faith, commit any Wickedness
unfamiliar to him before, engage in any Vice or Villany, without the least prejudice to
himself,or any Miserynaturallyfollowing from the ill Action.
’Tis thus we hear it often said, “Such a Person has done ill indeed: But what is he the
worse for it?” Yet speaking of any Nature thorowly savage, curst, and inveterate, we
say truly, “Such a one is a plague and torment to himself”: And we allow, “That thro’
certainHumours, orPassions, and fromTemper merely, a Man may be compleately
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 35 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
miserable; let his outwardCircumstancesbe ever so fortunate.” These different
Judgments sufficiently demonstrate that we are not accustom’d to think with much
cohe[85]rency on these moral Subjects; and that our Notions, in this respect, are not a
little confus’d, and contradictory.
Now if the Fabrick of the Mind or Temper appear’d such to us as
Fabrick or System of
it really is; if we saw it impossible to remove hence any one the Affections.
good or orderly Affection, or introduce any ill or disorderly one,
without drawing on,in some degree,that dissolute State, whichat its heightis
confess’d to be so miserable: ’twou’d then undoubtedly be own’d, that since no ill,
immoral, or unjust Action cou’d be committed without either a new inroad and breach
on the Temper and Passions, or a farther advancing of that Execution already begun;
whoever did ill, or acted in prejudice of his Integrity, Good-nature, or Worth, wou’d
of necessity act with greater Cruelty towards himself, than he who scrupled not to
swallow what was poisonous, or who with his own hands shou’d voluntarily mangle
or wound his outward Form or Constitution, natural Limbs or Body.[86]
SECTION III
Sect. 3.
IT has been shewn before, that no Animal can be said properlyto
SYSTEM explain’d.
act,otherwise than thro’ Affections or Passions, such as are
proper to an Animal. For in convulsive Fits, where a Creature strikes either himself or
others, ’tis a simple Mechanism, an Engine, or Piece of Clock-work, which acts, and
not the Animal.
Whatsoever therefore is done or acted by any Animalas such, is
Spring of Actions.
done only thro’ some Affection or Passion, as of Fear, Love, or
Hatred moving him.
And as it is impossible that a weaker Affection shou’d overcome a stronger, so it is
impossible but that where the Affections or Passions are strongest in the main, and
form in general the most considerable Party, either by their Force or Number; thither
the Animal must incline: And according to thisBalancehe must be govern’d, and led
to Action.
The Affections or Passions which must influence and govern the
Affections, three
Animal, are either, kinds.
1.Thenatural Affections,which lead to the Good ofThe Publick.[87]
2.Or theSelf-affections,which lead only to the Good ofThe Private.
3.Or such as are neither of these; nor tending either to any Good ofthe
Publickor Private;but contrary-wise: and which may therefore be justly
styl’dunnatural Affections.
So that according as these Affections stand, a Creature must be virtuous or vitious,
good or ill.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 36 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Thelattersort of these Affections, ’tis evident, are wholly vitious. Thetwo former
may be vitious or virtuous, according to their degree.
It may seem strange, perhaps, to speak of natural Affections astoo strong,
or of Self-affections astoo weak.But to clear this Difficulty, we
Degrees of Affection.
must call to mind what has been already explain’d, “Thatnatural
Affectionmay, in particular Cases, be excessive, and in an unnatural degree”: As
when Pity is so overcoming as to destroy its own End, and prevent the Succour and
Relief requir’d; or as when Love to the Offspring proves such a Fondness as destroys
the Parent, and consequently the Offspring it-self. And notwithstanding it may seem
harsh[88] to call thatunnaturalandvitious,which is only an Extreme of some natural
and kind Affection; yet ’tis most certain, that where-ever any single good Affection of
this sort is over-great, it must be injurious to the rest, and detract in some measure
from their Force and natural Operation. For a Creature possess’d with such an
immoderate Degree of Passion, must of necessity allow too much to thatone,and too
little toothersof the same Character, and equally natural and useful as to their End.
And this must necessarily be the occasion of Partiality and Injustice, whilst onlyone
Dutyor natural Partis earnestly follow’d; andother Partsor Dutysneglected, which
shou’d accompany it, and perhaps take place and be prefer’d.
This may well be allow’d true in all other respects; since evenReligionit-self,
consider’d asa Passion,not of theselfishbutnoblerkind, may in some Characters be
strain’d beyond its natural Proportion, and be said also to bein too high a degree.For
as the End of Religion is to render us more perfect, and accomplish’d in all moral
Dutys and Performances; if by the height of devout Extasy and Contemplation we are
rather disabled in this respect, and render’d more unapt to the real Dutys and Offices
of civil Life; it may be said thatReligionindeed is thentoo strong[89] in us. For how,
possibly, can we call thisSuperstition,whilst the Object of the Devotion is
acknowledg’d just, and the Faith orthodox? ’Tis only the Excess of Zeal, which, in
this Case, is so transporting, as to render the devout Person more remiss in secular
Affairs, and less concern’d for the inferior and temporal Interests of Mankind.
Now as in particular Cases,publick Affection,on the one hand, may betoo high;so
private Affectionmay, on the other hand, betoo weak.For if a Creature be self-
neglectful, and insensible of Danger; or if he want such a degree of Passion in any
kind, as is useful to preserve, sustain, or defend himself; this must certainly be
esteem’d vitious, in regard of the Design and End of Nature. She her-self discovers
this in her known Method and stated Rule of Operation. ’Tis certain, that her
provisionary Care and Concern for the whole Animal, must at least be equal to her
Concern for a single Part or Member. Now to the several Parts she has given, we see
proper Affections, sutable to their Interest and Security; so that even without our
Consciousness, they act in their own Defense, and for their own Benefit and
Preservation. Thusan Eye,in its natural State, fails not to shut together, of its own
accord, unknowingly to us, by a[90] peculiar Caution and Timidity; which if it
wanted, however we might intend the Preservation of our Eye, we shou’d not in effect
be able to preserve it, by any Observation or Forecast of our own. To be wanting
therefore in those principal Affections, which respect the Good of the whole
Constitution, must be a Vice and Imperfection, as great surely in the principal part,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 37 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
(the Soul or Temper) as it is in any of those inferior and subordinate parts, to want the
self-preserving Affections which are proper to them.
And thus the Affections towards private Good become necessary and essential to
Goodness. For tho no Creature can be call’d good, or virtuous, merely for possessing
these Affections; yet since it is impossible that the publick Good, or Good of the
System, can be preserv’d without them; it follows that a Creature really wanting in
them, is in reality wanting in some degree to Goodness and natural Rectitude; and
may thus be esteem’d vitious and defective.
’Tis thus we say of a Creature, in a kind way of Reproof, that he istoo good;when his
Affection towards others is so warm and zealous, as to carry him even beyond his
Part;or when he really acts beyond it, not thro’ too warm a Passion[91] of that sort,
but thro’ an over-cool one of another, or thro’ want of some Self-passion to restrain
him within due Bounds.
It may be objected here, that the having the natural Affections too strong, (where the
Self-affections are over-much so) or the having the Self-affections defective or weak,
(where the natural Affections are also weak) may prove upon occasion the only Cause
of a Creature’s acting honestly and in moral proportion. For, thus, one who is to a
fault regardless of his Life, may with the smallest degree of natural Affection do all
which can be expected from the highest Pitch of social Love, or zealous Friendship.
And thus, on the other hand, a Creature excessively timorous may, by as exceeding a
degree of natural Affection, perform whatever the perfectest Courage is able to
inspire.
To this it is answer’d, That whenever we arraign any Passion astoo strong,or
complain of any astoo weak;we must speak with respect to a certain Constitution or
OEconomyof a particular Creature, or Species. For if a Passion, leading to any right
end, be only so much the more serviceable and effectual, for being strong; if we may
be assur’d that the strength of it will not be the occasion of any distur[92]bance
within, nor of any disproportion between it-self and other Affections; then
consequently the Passion, however strong, cannot be condemn’d as vitious. But if to
haveallthe Passions in equal proportion with it, be what the Constitution of the
Creature cannot bear; so that onlysome Passions are rais’d to this height, whilst
othersare not, nor can possibly be wrought up to the same proportion; then may those
strong Passions, tho of the better kind, be call’d excessive. For being in unequal
proportion to the others, and causing anill Balancein the Affection at large, they
must of course be the occasion of Inequality in the Conduct, and incline the Party to a
wrong moral Practice.
But to shew more particularly what is meant by theOEconomy of
OEconomy of the
the Passions,from Instances in the Species or*Kinds below us. Passions.
As for the Creatures who have no manner of Power or Means
given them by Nature for their defense against Violence, nor any-thing by which they
can make themselves formidable to such as injure or offend them; ’tis necessary they
shou’d have an extraordinary degree of Fear, but little or no Animosity, such as might
cause ’em to make resistance, or incline ’em to delay their Flight. For in this their
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 38 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Safety[93] lies, and to this the Passion of Fear is serviceable, by keeping the Senses
on the watch, and holding the Spirits in readiness to give the start.
And thus Timorousness, and an habitual strong Passion of Fear, may beaccording to
the OEconomyof a particular Creature, both with respect to himself, and to the rest of
his Species. On the other hand,Couragemay becontrary to his OEconomy,and
therefore vitious. Even in one and the same Species, this is by Nature differently
order’d, with respect to different Sexes, Ages, and Growths. The tamer Creatures of
the grazing kind, who live in Herds, are different from the wilder, who herd not, but
live in Pairs only, apart from Company, as is natural and sutable to their rapacious
Life. Yet is there found, even among the former inoffensive kind, aCourage
proportionable to their Make and Strength. At a time of danger, when the whole Herd
flies, theBullalone makes head against the Lion, or whatever other invading Beast of
Prey, and shews himself conscious of hisMake.Even the Female of this kind is
arm’d, we see, by Nature, in some degree, to resist Violence; so as not to fly a
common Danger. As for a Hind, or Doe, or any other inoffensive and mere
defenceless Creature; ’tis no way unnatural or vitious in them, when the Enemy
approaches, to[94] desert their Offspring, and fly for Safety. But for Creatures who
are able to make Resistance, and are by Nature arm’d offensively; be they of the
poorest Insect-kind, such as Bees or Wasps; ’tis natural to ’em to be rouz’d with Fury,
and at the hazard of their Lives, oppose any Enemy or Invader of their Species. For by
this known Passion in the Creature, the Species it-self is secur’d; when by Experience
’tis found that the Creature, tho unable to repel the Injury, yet voluntarily exposes his
Life for the Punishment of the Invader; and suffers not his Kind to be injur’d with
Impunity. And of all other Creatures,Man is in this Sense the most formidable: since
if he thinks it just and exemplary, he may possibly in his own, or in his Country’s
Cause, revenge an Injury on any-one living; and by throwing away his own Life (if he
be resolute to that degree) is almost certain Master of another’s, however strongly
guarded. Examples of this nature have often serv’d to restrain those in Power, from
using it to the utmost Extent, and urging their Inferiors to Extremity.
Upon the whole: It may be said properly to be the same with the
Measure. Tone.
Affections or Passions in an Animal-Constitution, as with the
Cords or Strings of a Musical Instrument. If these, tho in ever so just proportion one
to another, are strain’d be[95]yond a certain degree, ’tis more than the Instrument will
bear: The Lute or Lyre is abus’d, and its Effect lost. On the other hand, if while some
of the Strings are duly strain’d, others are not wound up to their due proportion; then
is the Instrument still in disorder, and its Part ill perform’d. The several Species of
Creatures are like different sorts of Instruments: And even in the same Species of
Creatures (as in the same sort of Instrument)oneis not intirely like theother,nor will
the same Strings fit each. The same degree of Strength which winds upone,and fits
the several Strings to a just Harmony and Concert, may inanotherburst both the
Strings and Instrument it-self. Thus Men who have the liveliest Sense, and are the
easiest affected with Pain or Pleasure, have need of the strongest Influence or Force of
other Affections, such as Tenderness, Love, Sociableness, Compassion, in order to
preservea rightBalancewithin,
and to maintain them in their Duty, and in the just performance
Balance.
of their Part: whilst others, who are of a cooler Blood, or lower
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 39 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Key, need not the same Allay or Counterpart; nor are made by Nature to feel those
tender and indearing Affections in so exquisite a degree.
It might be agreeable, one wou’d think, to inquire thus into the differentTunings[96]
of the Passions, the various Mixtures and Allays by which Men become so different
from one another.
For as the highest Improvements of Temper are made in human
TEMPER.
kind;
so the greatest Corruptions and Degeneracys are discoverable in
Best or worst inMan.
this Race. In the other Species of Creatures around us, there is
found generally an exact Proportionableness, Constancy and Regularity in all their
Passions and Affections; no failure in the care of the Offspring, or of the Society, to
which they are united; no Prostitution of themselves; no Intemperance, or Excess, in
any kind. The smaller Creatures, who live as it were in Citys (as Bees and Ants)
continue the same Train and Harmony of Life: Nor are they ever false to those
Affections, which move them to operate towards their Publick Good. Even those
Creatures of Prey, who live the farthest out of Society, maintain, we see, such a
Conduct towards one another, as is exactly sutable to the Good of their own Species.
Whilst Man, notwithstanding the Assistance of Religion, and the Direction of Laws, is
often found to live in less conformity with Nature; and, by means of Religion it-self,
is often render’d the more barbarous and inhuman. Marks are set on Men: Distinctions
form’d: Opinions decreed, under the severest Penaltys: Antipathys instill’d, and
Aversions rais’d in Men a[97]gainst the generality of their own Species. So that ’tis
hard to find in any Region a human Society which hashuman Laws. No wonder if in
such Societys ’tis so hard to find a Man who livesnaturally,and as a Man.
BUT having shewn what is meant by a Passion’s beingin too
State of the Argument.
high,or in too lowa degree; and that,“To have any natural
Affection too high, or any Self-affection too low,” tho it be often approv’d asVirtue,
is yet, strictly speaking, aViceandImperfection:we come now to the plainer and
more essential part ofVice,and which alone deserves to be consider’das such: that is
to say.
1.“Wheneitherthe publick Affections are weak or deficient.”
2.“Or the private and Self-affections too strong.”
3.“Or that such Affections arise as are neither of these, nor in any degree
tending to the Support either of the publick or private System.”
Otherwise thanthus,it is impossible any Creature can be such as we callillor vitious.
So that if once we[98] prove that it is really not the Creature’s Interest to be thus
vitiouslyaffected, but contrariwise; we shall then have prov’d, “That it is his Interest
to be whollyGood andVirtuous”: Since in a wholesom and sound State of his
Affections, such as we have describ’d, he cannot possibly be other than sound,good
andvirtuous,in his Action and Behaviour.
Our Business, therefore, will be, to prove;
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 40 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
I. “Thatto havethe Natural, Kindly,orGenerous Affectionsstrong and
powerful towards the Good of the Publick, is to have the chief Means and
Power of Self-enjoyment.” And, “That to want them, is certain Misery and
Ill.”
II. “Thatto havethe PrivateorSelf-affectionstoo strong, or beyond their degree
of Subordinacy to the kindly and natural, is also miserable.”
III.And, “That to havethe Unnatural Affections(viz.such as are neither
founded on the Interest of the Kind, orPublick;nor of theprivatePerson, or
Creature himself)is to be miserable in the highest degree.”[99]
PART II
SECTION I
Sect. 1.
TO begin therefore with this Proof, “That to have the Natural
FIRST Proof, from the
Affections(such as are founded in Love, Complacency, Good- natural Affections.
will, and in a Sympathy with the Kind or Species)is to have the
chief Means and Power of Self-enjoyment:AndThat to want them is certain Misery
and Ill.”
We may inquire, first, what those are, which we callPleasuresor Satisfactions;
from whence Happiness is generally computed. They are
Pleasures of the
(according to the common distinction) Satisfactions and BODY and MIND.
Pleasures eitherof the Body,or of the Mind.
Thatthe latter of these Satisfactionsare the greatest,is allow’d
The latter preferable.
by most People, and may be prov’d by this: That whenever the
Mind, having conceiv’d a high[100] Opinion of the Worth of any Action or
Behaviour, has receiv’d the strongest Impression of this sort, and is wrought up to the
highest pitch or degree of Passion towards the Subject; at such time it sets itself above
all bodily Pain as well as Pleasure, and can be no-way diverted from its purpose by
Flattery or Terror of any kind. Thus we seeIndians, Barbarians, Malefactors,and
even the most execrableVillains,for the sake of a particular Gang or Society, or thro’
some cherish’d Notion or Principle of Honour or Gallantry, Revenge, or Gratitude,
embrace any manner of Hardship, and defy Torments and Death. Whereas, on the
other hand, a Person being plac’d in all the happy Circumstances of outward
Enjoyment, surrounded with every thing which can allure or charm the Sense, and
being then actually in the very moment of such a pleasing Indulgence; yet no sooner
is there any thing amisswithin,no sooner has he conceiv’d anyinternal Ailor
Disorder, any thinginwardlyvexatious or distemper’d, than instantly his Enjoyment
ceases, the pleasure of Sense is at an end; and every means of that sort becomes
ineffectual, and is rejected as uneasy, and subject to give Distaste.
ThePleasures of the Mindbeing allow’d, therefore, superior, to
Inference.
those ofthe[101]Body;it follows, “That whatever can create in
any intelligent Being a constant flowing Series or Train of mental Enjoyments, or
Pleasures of the Mind, is more considerable to his Happiness, than that which can
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 41 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
create to him a like constant Course or Train of sensual Enjoyments, or Pleasures of
the Body.”
Now the mental Enjoyments are either actuallythe very natural
Mental Enjoyments,
Affections themselves in their immediate Operation:Or they whence.
wholly in a mannerproceed from them,and are no other than
their Effects.
If so; it follows, that the natural Affections duly establish’d in a rational Creature,
being the only means which can procure him a constant Series or Succession of the
mental Enjoyments, they are the only means which can procure him a certain and
solidHappiness.
NOW, in the first place, to explain, “How muchthe natural
Energy of natural
Affections are in themselves the highest Pleasures and Affections.
Enjoyments”: There shou’d methinks be little need of proving
this to any-one of human Kind, who has ever known the Condition of the Mind under
a lively Affection of Love, Gratitude, Bounty, Generosity, Pity, Succour, or whatever
else is of a so[102]cial or friendly sort. He who has ever so little Knowledg of human
Nature, is sensible what pleasure the Mind perceives when it is touch’d in this
generous way. The difference we find between Solitude and Company, between a
common Company and that of Friends; the reference of almost all our Pleasures to
mutual Converse, and the dependence they have on Society either present or
imagin’d; all these are sufficient Proofs in our behalf.
How much the social Pleasures are superior to any other, may be known by visible
Tokens and Effects. The very outward Features, the Marks and Signs which attend
this sort of Joy, are expressive of a more intense, clear, and undisturb’d Pleasure, than
those which attend the Satisfaction of Thirst, Hunger, and other ardent Appetites. But
more particularly still may this Superiority be known, from the actual Prevalence and
Ascendency of this sort of Affection over all besides. Where-ever it presents it-self
with any advantage, it silences and appeases every other Motion of Pleasure. No Joy,
merely of Sense, can be a Match for it. Whoever is Judg ofboththe Pleasures, will
ever give the preference tothe former.But to be able to judg of both, ’tis necessary to
have a Sense of each. The honest Man indeed can judg ofsensual Pleasure,and
knows its[103] utmost Force. For neither is his Taste, or Sense the duller; but, on the
contrary, the more intense and clear, on the account of his Temperance, and a
moderate Use of Appetite. But the immoral and profligate Man can by no means be
allow’d a good Judg ofsocial Pleasure,to which he is so mere a Stranger by his
Nature.
Nor is it any Objection here; That in many Natures the good Affection, tho really
present, is found to be of insufficient force. For where it is notin its natural degree,
’tis the same indeed as if itwere not,or hadnever been.The less there is of this good
Affection in any untoward Creature, the greater the wonder is, that it shou’dat any
timeprevail; as in the very worst of Creatures it sometimes will. And if it prevails but
for once,in anysingleInstance; it shews evidently, that if the Affection were
thorowly experienc’d or known, it wou’d prevailin all.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 42 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
ThustheCharmof kind Affection is superior to all other Pleasure: since it has the
power of drawing from every other Appetite or Inclination. And thus in the Case of
Love to the Offspring, and a thousand other Instances,the Charmis found to operate
so strongly on the Temper, as, in the midst of other Temptations, to render it
susceptible of this[104] Passion alone; which remains as theMaster-Pleasureand
Conqueror of the rest.
There is no-one who, by the least progress in Science or Learning, has come to know
barely the Principles ofMathematicks,but has found, that in the exercise of his Mind
on the Discoverys he there makes, tho merely of speculative Truths, he receives a
Pleasure and Delight superior to that of Sense. When we have thorowly search’d into
the nature of this contemplative Delight, we shall find it of a kind which relates not in
the least to any private Interest of the Creature, nor has for its Object any Self-good or
Advantage of the private System. The Admiration, Joy, or Love, turns wholly upon
what is exterior, and foreign to our-selves. And tho the reflected Joy or Pleasure,
which arises from the notice of this Pleasure once perceiv’d, may be interpreteda
Self-passion,or interested Regard:yet the original Satisfaction can be no other than
what results from the Love of Truth, Proportion, Order, and Symmetry, in the Things
without. If this be the Case, the Passion ought in reality to be rank’d withnatural
Affection.For having no Object within the compass of the private System; it must
either be esteem’d superfluous andunnatural,(as having no tendency towards the
Advantage or Good of[105] any thing in Nature) or it must be judg’d to be, what it
truly is,*“A natural Joy in the Contemplation of thoseNumbers, thatHarmony,
Proportion,andConcord,which supports the universal Nature, and is essential in the
Constitution and Form of every particular Species, or Order of Beings.”
But this speculative Pleasure, however considerable and valuable it may be, or
however superior to any Motion of mere Sense; must yet be far surpass’d byvirtuous
Motion,andthe Exercise of Benignity and Goodness;where, together with the most
delightful Affection of the Soul, there is join’d a pleasing Assent and Approbation of
the Mind to what is acted in this good Disposition and honest Bent. For where is there
on Earth a fairer Matter of Speculation, a goodlier View or Contemplation, than that
of a beautiful, proportion’d,andbecomingAction? Or what is there relating to us, of
which the Consciousness and Memory is more solidly and lastingly entertaining?
We may observe, that in the Passion of Love between the Sexes, where, together with
the Affection of avulgarsort, there is a mixture of thekind and friendly,the Sense or
Feeling of thislatteris[106] in reality superior to theformer; since often thro’ this
Affection, and for the sake of the Person belov’d, the greatest Hardships in the World
have been submitted to, and even Death it-self voluntarily imbrac’d, without any
expectedCompensation.For where shou’d the Ground of such an Expectation lie?
Nothere,inthis Worldsurely; for Death puts an end to all. Nor yethereafter,inany
other:for who has ever thought of providing a Heaven or future Recompence for the
suffering Virtue of Lovers?
We may observe, withal, in favour of the natural Affections, that it is not only when
Joy and Sprightliness are mix’d with them that they carry a real Enjoyment above that
of the sensual kind. The very Disturbances which belong to natural Affection, tho
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 43 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
they may be thought wholly contrary to Pleasure, yield still a Contentment and
Satisfaction greater than the Pleasures of indulg’d Sense. And where a Series or
continu’d Succession of the tender and kind Affections can be carry’d on, even thro’
Fears, Horrors, Sorrows, Griefs; the Emotion of the Soul is still agreeable. We
continue pleas’d even with this melancholy Aspect or Sense of Virtue. Her Beauty
supports it-self under a Cloud, and in the midst of surrounding Calamitys. For thus,
when by mere Illu[107]sion, as ina Tragedy, the Passions of this kind are skilfully
excited in us; we prefer the Entertainment to any other of equal duration. We find by
our-selves, that the moving our Passions in this mournful way, the engaging them in
behalf of Merit and Worth, and the exerting whatever we have of social Affection,
and human Sympathy, is of the highest Delight; and affords a greater Enjoyment in
the way ofThoughtandSentiment,than any thing besides can do in a way ofSense
andcommon Appetite.And after this manner it appears, “How muchthe mental
Enjoyments are actually the very natural Affections themselves.”
NOW, in the next place, to explain, “How theyproceed from
Effects of natural
them,as their naturalEffects”; we may consider first, That the Affection.
Effectsof Love or kind Affection, in a way of mental Pleasure,
are, “An Enjoyment of Good by Communication: A receiving it, as it were by
Reflection, or by way of Participation in the Good of others”: And “A pleasing
Consciousness of the actual Love, merited Esteem or Approbation of others.”
How considerable a part of Happiness arises from the former of theseEffects,will be
easily apprehended by one who is not[108] exceedingly ill natur’d. It will be
consider’d how many the Pleasures are, ofsharing Contentment and Delight with
others; of receiving it in Fellowship and Company; and gathering it, in a manner,
from the pleas’d and happy States of those around us, from accounts and relations of
such Happinesses, from the very Countenances, Gestures, Voices and Sounds, even of
Creatures foreign to our Kind, whose Signs of Joy and Contentment we can anyway
discern. So insinuating are these Pleasures of Sympathy, and so widely diffus’d thro’
our whole Lives, that there is hardly such a thing as Satisfaction or Contentment, of
which they make not an essential part.
As for that otherEffectof social Love, viz.the Consciousness of merited Kindness or
Esteem;’tis not difficult to perceive how much this avails in mental Pleasure, and
constitutes the chief Enjoyment and Happiness of those who are, in the narrowest
sense, voluptuous.How natural is it for the most selfish among us, to be continually
drawing some sort of Satisfaction from a Character, and pleasing our-selves in the
Fancy of deserv’d Admiration and Esteem? For tho it be mere Fancy, we endeavour
still to believe it Truth; and flatter our-selves, all we can, with the Thought ofMeritof
some kind, and the Persuasion[109] of our deserving well from some few at least,
with whom we happen to have a more intimate and familiar Commerce.
What Tyrant is there, what Robber, or open Violater of the Laws of Society, who has
not a Companion, or some particular Set, either of his own Kindred, or such as he
calls Friends; with whom he gladly shares his Good; in whose Welfare he delights;
and whose Joy and Satisfaction he makeshis own?What Person in the world is there,
who receives not some Impressions from the Flattery or Kindness of such as are
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 44 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
familiar with him? ’Tis to this soothing Hope and Expectation of Friendship, that
almost all our Actions have some reference. ’Tis this which goes thro’ our whole
Lives, and mixes it-self even with most of our Vices. Of this,Vanity, Ambition,and
Luxury, have a share; and many other Disorders of our Life partake. Even the
unchastestLoveborrows largely from this Source. So that were Pleasure to be
computed in the same way as other things commonly are; it might properly be said,
that out of these two Branches (viz.Community or Participation in the Pleasures of
others,andBelief of meriting well from others) wou’d arise more than nine Tenths of
whatever is enjoy’d in Life. And thus in the main Sum of Happiness, there is scarce a
single Article, but what[110] derives it-self from social Love, and depends
immediately on the natural and kind Affections.
Now such as Causes are, such must be theirEffects.And therefore asnatural
Affectionor social Loveis perfect, or imperfect; so must bethe Contentand
Happiness depending on it.
BUT lest any shou’d imagine with themselves that aninferior
Partial Affection
Degree of natural Affection, or animperfect partialRegard of examin’d.
this sort, can supply the place of anintire, sincere,andtruly
moral one; lest a small Tincture of social Inclination shou’d be thought sufficient to
answer the End of Pleasure in Society, and give us that Enjoyment ofParticipation
andCommunitywhich is so essential to our Happiness; we may consider first, That
Partial Affection,or social Lovein part,without regard to a compleat Society or
Whole,is in it-self an Inconsistency, and implies an absolute Contradiction. Whatever
Affection we have towards any thing besidesour-selves;if it be not of thenatural
sort towards the System, or Kind; it must be, of all other Affections, the most
dissociable,and destructive of the Enjoyments of Society: If it be really of the natural
sort, and apply’d only to someonePart of So[111]ciety, or of a Species, but not to the
Species or Societyit-self;there can be no more account given of it, than of the most
odd, capricious, or humoursom Passion which may arise. The Person, therefore, who
is conscious of this Affection, can be conscious of noMeritor Worthon the account
of it. Nor can the Persons on whom this capricious Affection has chanc’d to fall, be in
any manner secure of its Continuance or Force. As it has no Foundation or
Establishmentin Reason;so it must be easily removable, and subject to alteration,
without Reason.Now the Variableness of such sort of Passion, which depends solely
on Capriciousness and Humour, and undergoes the frequent Successions of alternate
Hatred and Love, Aversion and Inclination, must of necessity create continual
Disturbance and Disgust, give an allay to what is immediately enjoy’d in the way of
Friendship and Society, and in the end extinguish, in a manner, the very Inclination
towards Friendship and human Commerce. Whereas, on the other hand,Intire
Affection(from whenceIntegrityhas its name) as it is answerable to it-self,
proportionable, and rational; so it is irrefragable, solid, and durable. And as in the case
of Partiality,or vitious Friendship, which has no rule or order, every Reflection of the
Mind necessarily makes to its disadvantage, and lessens the Enjoyment;[112] so in the
case ofIntegrity,the Consciousness of just Behaviour towards Mankind in general,
casts a good reflection on each friendly Affection in particular,
Partial Affection.
and raises the Enjoyment of Friendship still the higher, in the
way of Communityor Participationabove-mention’d.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 45 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
And in the next place, aspartial Affectionis fitted only to a short and slender
Enjoyment of those Pleasures ofSympathyor Participation with others;so neither is
it able to derive any considerable Enjoyment from that other principal Branch of
human Happiness,viz. Consciousness of the actual or merited Esteem of others.From
whence shou’d thisEsteemarise? TheMerit,surely, must in it-self be mean, whilst
the Affection is so precarious and uncertain. What Trust can there be to a merecasual
Inclinationor capricious Liking?Who can depend on such a Friendship as is founded
on no moral Rule, but fantastically assign’d to some single Person, or smallPartof
Mankind, exclusive of Society, andthe Whole?
It may be consider’d, withal, as a thing impossible; that they who esteem or love by
any other Rule than that ofVirtue,shou’d place their Affection on such Subjects as
they can long esteem or love. ’Twill be hard for them, in the number of[113] their so
belov’d Friends, to find any, in whom they can heartily rejoice; or whose reciprocal
Love or Esteem they can sincerely prize and enjoy. Nor can those Pleasures be sound
or lasting, which are gather’d from a Self-flattery, and false Persuasion of the Esteem
and Love of others, who are incapable of any sound Esteem or Love. It appears
therefore how much the Men of narrow orpartialAffection must be Losers in this
sense, and of necessity fall short in this second principal part of mental Enjoyment.
Mean whileintire Affectionhas all the opposite advantages. It is
Intire Affection.
equal, constant, accountable to it-self, ever satisfactory, and
pleasing. It gains Applause and Love from thebest;and in all disinterested cases,
from the veryworst of Men. We may say of it, with justice, that it carrys with it a
Consciousness of merited Love and Approbation from all Society, from all intelligent
Creatures, and from whatever is original to all other Intelligence. And if there be in
Nature any suchOriginal;we may add, that the Satisfaction which attendsintire
Affection,is full and noble, in proportion to itsfinal Object,which contains all
Perfection; according to the Sense ofTheism above-noted. For this, as has been
shewn, is the result ofVirtue.And to have thisintire Affectionor Integrity[114] of
Mind, isto live according to Nature,and the Dictates and Rules ofsupreme Wisdom.
This is Morality, Justice, Piety, and natural Religion.
BUT lest this Argument shou’d appear perhaps tooscholasticallystated, and in Terms
and Phrases, which are not of familiar use; we may try whether possibly we can set it
yet in a plainer light.
Let any-one, then, consider well those Pleasures which he receives either in private
Retirement, Contemplation, Study, and Conversewith himself;or in Mirth, Jollity,
and Entertainment withothers; and he will find, That they are wholly founded inAn
easy Temper, free of Harshness,
Bitterness, or Distaste;and inA Mind or Reason well compos’d,
Mind and Temper.
quiet, easy within it-self, and such as can freely bear its own
Inspection and Review.Now such a Mind,and sucha Temper,which fit and qualify
for the Enjoyment of the Pleasures mention’d, must of necessity be owing to the
naturalandgood Affections.
TEMPER.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 46 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
As to what relates toTemper,it may be consider’d thus. There is no State of outward
Prosperity, or flowing Fortune, whereInclinationandDesire are always satisfy’d,
FancyandHumour pleas’d.[115] There are almost hourly some Impediments or
Crosses to the Appetite; some Accidents or otherfrom without;or somethingfrom
within,to check the licentious Course of the indulg’d Affections. They are not always
to be satisfy’d by mere Indulgence. And when a Life is guided byFancyonly, there is
sufficient ground of Contrariety and Disturbance. The very ordinary Lassitudes,
Uneasinesses, and Defects of Disposition in the soundest Body; the interrupted
Course of the Humours, or Spirits, in the healthiest People; and the accidental
Disorders common to every Constitution, are sufficient, we know, on many occasions,
to breed Uneasiness and Distaste. And this, in time, must grow into a Habit; where
there is nothing to oppose its progress, and hinder its prevailing on the Temper. Now
the only sound Opposite toIll Humour,isnaturalandkind Affection.For we may
observe, that when the Mind, upon reflection, resolves at any time to suppress this
Disturbance already risen in the Temper, and sets about this reforming Work with
heartiness, and in good earnest; it can no otherwise accomplish the Undertaking, than
by introducing into the affectionate Part some gentle Feeling of the social and friendly
kind; some enlivening Motion of Kindness, Fellowship, Complacency, or Love, to
allay and convert that contrary Motion of Impatience and Discontent.[116]
If it be said perhaps, that in the case before us,Religious Affectionor Devotionis a
sufficient and proper Remedy; we answer, That ’tis according as the Kind may
happily prove. For if it be of the pleasant and chearful sort, ’tis of the very kind of
natural Affectionit-self: if it be of the*dismal or fearful sort; if it brings along with it
any Affection opposite to Manhood, Generosity, Courage, or Free-thought; there will
be nothing gain’d by this Application; and theRemedywill, in the issue, be
undoubtedly foundworse than the Disease.The severest Reflections on ourDuty,and
the Consideration merely of what isby Authorityandunder Penaltysenjoin’d, will
not by any means serve to calm us on this occasion. The more dismal our Thoughts
are on such a Subject, the worse our Temper will be, and the readier to discover it-self
in Harshness, and Austerity. If, perhaps, by Compulsion, or thro’ any Necessity or
Fear incumbent, a different Carriage be at any time effected, or different Maxims
own’d; the Practice at the bottom will be still the same. Ifthe Countenancebe
compos’d;the Heart,however, will not be chang’d. The ill Passion may for the time
be with-held from breaking into Action; but will not be subdu’d, or in[117] the least
debilitated against the next occasion. So that in such a Breast as this, whatever
Devotionthere may be; ’tis likely there will in time be little ofan easy Spirit,or good
Temper remaining; and consequently few and slender Enjoyments ofa mental kind.
If it be objected, on the other hand, that tho in melancholy Circumstances ill Humour
may prevail, yet in a Course of outward Prosperity, and in the height of Fortune, there
can nothing probably occur which shou’d thus sourthe Temper,and give it such
disrelish as is suggested; we may consider, that the most humour’d and indulg’d State
is apt to receive the most disturbance from every Disappointment or smallest Ail. And
if Provocations are easiest rais’d, and the Passions of Anger, Offence, and Enmity, are
found the highest in the most indulg’d State of Will and Humour; there is still the
greater need of a Supply fromsocial Affection,to preservethe Temperfrom running
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 47 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
into Savageness and Inhumanity. And this, the Case of Tyrants, and most unlimited
Potentates, may sufficiently verify and demonstrate.
NOW as to the other part of our Consideration, which relates to a
MIND.
Mindor Reason well compos’d and easy within it-self;[118] upon
what account this Happiness may be thought owing tonatural Affection,
we may possibly resolve our-selves, after this manner. It will be
Reflection.
acknowledg’d that a Creature, such as Man, who from several
degrees of Reflection has risen to that Capacity which we call Reason and
Understanding; must in the very use of this his reasoning Faculty, be forc’d to receive
Reflections back into his Mind of what passes in it-self, as well as in the Affections,
or Will; in short, of whatsoever relates to his Character, Conduct, or Behaviour amidst
his Fellow-Creatures, and in Society. Or shou’d he be of himself unapt; there are
others ready to remind him, and refresh his Memory, in this way of Criticism. We
have all of us Remembrancers enow to help us in this Work. Nor are the greatest
Favourites of Fortune exempted from this Talk of Self-inspection. Even Flattery itself,
by making the View agreeable, renders us more attentive this way, and insnares us in
the Habit. The vainer any Person is, the more he has his Eye inwardly fix’d upon
himself; and is, after a certain manner, employ’d in this home-Survey. And when a
true Regard to our-selves cannot oblige us to this Inspection, a false Regard to others,
and a Fondness for Reputation raises a watchful Jealousy, and furnishes us
sufficiently with Acts of Reflection on our own Character and Conduct.[119]
In whatever manner we consider of this, we shall find still, that every reasoning or
reflecting Creature is, by his Nature, forc’d to endure theReviewof his own Mind,
and Actions; and to have Representations of himself, and his inward Affairs,
constantly passing before him, obvious to him, and revolving in his Mind. Now as
nothing can be more grievous than this is, to one who has thrown offnatural
Affection;so nothing can be more delightful to one who has preserv’d it with
sincerity.
There aretwoThings, which to a rational Creature must be
Conscience.
horridly offensive and grievous;viz.“To have the Reflection in
his Mind of anyunjustAction or Behaviour, which he knows to be naturallyodious
andill-deserving:Or, of any foolish Action or Behaviour, which he knows to be
prejudicial to his ownInterestor Happiness.”
The former of these is alone properly call’dConscience;whether
Moral Conscience.
in a moral, or religious Sense. For to have Awe and Terror of the
Deity, does not, of it-self, imply Conscience. No one is esteem’d the more
conscientious for the fear of evil Spirits, Conjurations, Enchantments, or whatever
may proceed from any unjust, capricious, or devilish Nature. Now to fear[120]God
any otherwise than as in consequence of some justly blameable and imputable Act, is
to feara devilishNature, nota divineone. Nor does the Fear of Hell, or a thousand
Terrors of theDeity,imply Conscience; unless where there is an Apprehension of
what iswrong, odious, morally deform’d,andill-deserving.And where this is the
Case, thereConsciencemust have effect, and Punishment of necessity be
apprehended; even tho it be not expresly threaten’d.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 48 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
And thus religious Consciencesupposes moral or natural Conscience.And tho the
former be understood to carry with it the Fear of divine Punishment; it has its force
however from the apprehended moral Deformity and Odiousness of any Act, with
respect purely to the Divine Presence, and the natural Veneration due to such a
suppos’d Being. For in such a Presence, the Shame of Villany or Vice must have its
force, independently on that farther Apprehension of the magisterial Capacity of such
a Being, and his Dispensation of particular Rewards or Punishments in a future State.
It has been already said, that no Creature can maliciously and intentionallydo ill,
without being sensible, at the same time, that hedeserves ill.And in this respect,
every sensible Creature may be said to have[121]Conscience.For with all Mankind,
and all intelligent Creatures, this must ever hold, “Thatwhatthey know they deserve
from every-one,thatthey necessarily must fear and expect from all.” And thus
Suspicions and ill Apprehensions must arise, with Terror both of Men and of
theDeity.But besides this, there must in every rational Creature, be yet farther
Conscience; viz.from Sense ofDeformity in what is thus ill-deserving and unnatural:
and froma consequent Shame or Regret of incurring what is odious, and moves
Aversion.
There scarcely is, or can be any Creature, whom Consciousness of Villany,as such
merely,does not at all offend; nor any thing opprobrious or heinously imputable,
move, or affect. If there be such a one; ’tis evident he must be absolutely indifferent
towards moral Good or Ill. If this indeed be his Case; ’twill be allow’d he can be no-
way capable of natural Affection: If not of that, then neither of any social Pleasure, or
mental Enjoyment, as shewn above; but on the contrary, he must be subject to all
manner of horrid, unnatural, and ill Affection. So that to wantConscience,or natural
Sense of the Odiousness of Crime and Injustice,is to be most of all miserable in Life:
but whereConscience,or Senseof this sort, remains; there, consequently, whatever is
committed[122] against it, must of necessity, by means of Reflection, as we have
shewn, be continually shameful, grievous and offensive.
A Man who in a Passion happens to kill his Companion, relents immediately on the
sight of what he has done. His Revenge is chang’d into Pity, and his Hatred turn’d
against himself. And this merely by the Power of the Object. On this account he
suffers Agonys; the Subject of this continually occurs to him; and of this he has a
constant ill Remembrance and displeasing Consciousness. If on the other side, we
suppose himnotto relent or suffer any real Concern or Shame; then, either he has no
Sense of the Deformity of the Crime and Injustice, no natural Affection, and
consequently no Happiness or Peace within: or if he has any Sense of moral Worth or
Goodness, it must be of a perplex’d, and contradictory kind. He must pursue an
inconsistent Notion,
idolize somefalse Speciesof Virtue; and affect as noble, gallant,
False Conscience.
or worthy, that which is irrational and absurd. And how
tormenting this must be to him, is easy to conceive. For never can sucha Phantomas
this be reduc’d to any certain Form. Never can thisProteusof Honour be held steddy,
to one Shape. The Pursuit of it can only be vexatious and distracting. There is nothing
beside real Virtue, as has been shewn,[123] which can possibly hold any proportion to
Esteem, Approbation, or good Conscience. And he who, being led by false Religion
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 49 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
or prevailing Custom, has learnt to esteem or admire any thing as Virtue which is not
really such; must either thro’ the Inconsistency of such an Esteem, and the perpetual
Immoralitys occasion’d by it, come at last to lose all Conscience, and so be miserable
in the worst way: or, if he retains any Conscience at all, it must be of a kind never
satisfactory, or able to bestow Content. For ’tis impossible that a cruel Enthusiast, or
Bigot,a Persecutor, a Murderer, aBravo,a Pirate, or any Villain of less degree, who
is false to the Society of Mankind in general, and contradicts natural Affection;
shou’d have any fix’d Principle at all, any real Standard or Measure by which he can
regulate his Esteem, or any solid Reason by which to form his Approbation ofany one
moral Act. And thus the more he sets upHonour, or advancesZeal;the worse he
renders his Nature, and the more detestable his Character. The more he engages in the
Love or Admiration of any Action or Practice, as great and glorious, which is in it-self
morally ill and vitious; the more Contradiction and Self-disapprobation he must incur.
For there being nothing more certain than this, “That no natural Affection can be
contradicted, nor any unnatural one advanc’d,[124] without a prejudice in some
degree to all natural Affection in general”: it must follow, “That inward Deformity
growing greater, by the Incouragement of unnatural Affection; there must be so much
the more Subject for dissatisfactory Reflection, the more any false Principle of
Honour, any false Religion, or Superstition prevails.”
So that whatever Notions of this kind are cherish’d; or whatever Character affected,
which is contrary to moral Equity, and leads to Inhumanity, thro’a false Conscience,
or wrong Sense of Honour,
serves only to bring a Man the more under the lash ofrealand
Causes Reproach
just Conscience,Shame, and Self-reproach. Nor can any one, fromtrue.
who, by any pretended Authority, commits one single
Immorality, be able to satisfy himself with any Reason, why he shou’d not at another
time be carry’d further, into all manner of Villany; such perhaps as he even abhors to
think of. And this is a Reproach which a Mind must of necessity make to it-self upon
the least Violation of natural Conscience; in doing what ismorally deform’d, and ill-
deserving;tho warranted by any Example or Precedent amongst Men, or by any
suppos’d Injunction or Command of higher Powers.[125]
Now as for that other part of Conscience,viz.the remembrance
Conscience, from
of what was at any time unreasonably and foolishly done, in Interest.
prejudice of one’s real Interest or Happiness:This
dissatisfactory Reflection must follow still and have effect, wheresoever there is a
Sense of moral Deformity, contracted by Crime, and Injustice. For even where there is
no Sense of moral Deformity, assuch merely;there must be still a Sense of the ill
Merit of it with respect to God and Man. Or tho there were a possibility of excluding
for ever all Thoughts or Suspicions of any superior Powers, yet considering that this
Insensibility towards moral Good or Ill implies a total Defect in natural Affection, and
that this Defect can by no Dissimulation be conceal’d; ’tis evident that a Man of this
unhappy Character must suffer a very sensible Loss in the Friendship, Trust, and
Confidence of other Men; and consequently must suffer in his Interest and outward
Happiness. Nor can the Sense of this Disadvantage fail to occur to him; when he sees,
with Regret, and Envy, the better and more grateful Terms of Friendship, and Esteem,
on which better People live with the rest of Mankind. Even therefore where natural
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 50 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Affection is wanting; ’tis certain still, that by Immorality, necessarily hap[126]pening
thro’ want of such Affection, there must be disturbance from Conscience of this sort,
viz.fromSense of what is committed imprudently, and contrary to real Interest and
Advantage.
From all this we may easily conclude, how much our Happiness
Conclusion drawn
depends onnatural and good Affection.For if the chief from the MENTAL
Happiness be from theMental Pleasures;and the chiefmental PLEASURES.
Pleasuresare such as we have describ’d, and are founded in
natural Affection;it follows, “Thatto have the natural Affections, is to have the chief
Means and Power of Self-enjoyment, the highest Possession and Happiness of Life.”
NOW as to thePleasures ofthe Body,and the Satisfactions
Pleasures of the
belonging tomereSense;’tis evident, they cannot possibly have SENSE, Dependent
their Effect, or afford any valuable Enjoyment, otherwise than by also on natural
the means ofsocial and natural Affection. Affection.
Tolive well,has no other meaning with some People, than toeatanddrink well.
And methinks ’tis an unwary Concession we make in favour of
Vulgar Epicurism.
these pretendedgood Livers,when we join with ’em, in
honouring their way of Life with the Title ofliving fast.As if they liv’d the
fastest[127] who took the greatest pains to enjoy least of Life: For if our Account of
Happiness be right; the greatest Enjoyments in Life are such as these Men pass over
in their haste,
and have scarce ever allow’d themselves the liberty of tasting.
Pleasures of the
Sense,
But as considerable a Part of Voluptuousness as is founded inthe
Palat;and as notable as the Science is, which depends on it; one may justly presume
that the Ostentation of Elegance,
and a certain Emulation and Study how to excel in this
Imagination, Fancy.
sumptuous Art of Living, goes very far in the raising such a high
Idea of it, as is observ’d among the Men of Pleasure. For were the Circumstances of a
Table and Company, Equipages, Services, and the rest of the Management withdrawn;
there wou’d be hardly left any Pleasure worth acceptance, even in the Opinion of the
most debauch’d themselves.
The very Notion ofa Debauch(which is a Sally into whatever
A Debauch.
can be imagin’d of Pleasure and Voluptuousness) carrys with it a
plain reference to Society, or Fellowship. It may be call’d aSurfeit,
or Excess of Eating and Drinking,but hardly aDebauchof that
Pleasures of the
kind, when the Excess is committed separately, out of all Sense.
Society, or Fellowship. And one who abuses him-self in this
way, is often call’d aSot,but[128] never aDebauchee.The Courtizans, and even the
commonest of Women,
who live by Prostitution, know very well how necessary it is, that
Women.
every-one whom they entertain with their Beauty, shou’d believe
there are Satisfactions reciprocal; and that Pleasures are no lessgiventhanreceiv’d.
And were this Imagination to be wholly taken away, there wou’d be hardly any of the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 51 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
grosser sort of Mankind, who wou’d not perceive their remaining Pleasure to be of
slender Estimation.
Who is there can well or long enjoy any thing, whenalone,and abstracted perfectly,
even in his very Mind and Thought, from every thing belonging to Society? Who
wou’d not, on such Terms as these, be presently cloy’d by any sensual Indulgence?
Who wou’d not soon grow uneasy with his Pleasure, however exquisite, till he had
found means to impart it, and make ittruly pleasantto him, by communicating, and
sharing it at least with someonesingle Person? Let Men imagine what they please; let
’em suppose themselves ever so selfish; or desire ever so much to follow the Dictates
of that narrow Principle, by which they wou’d bring Nature under restraint: Nature
will break out; and in Agonys, Disquiets, and a distemper’d State, demonstrate
evidently[129] the ill Consequence of such Violence, the Absurdity of such a Device,
and the Punishment which belongs to such a monstrous and horrid Endeavour.
Thus, therefore, not only thePleasures of the Mind,but even
Pleasures of the
those ofthe Body,depend on natural Affection: insomuch that Sense,
where this is wanting, they not only lose their Force, but are in a
manner converted into Uneasiness and Disgust. The Sensations which shou’d
naturally afford Contentment and Delight,
produce rather Discontent and Sourness, and breed a
Convertible into
Wearisomness and Restlessness in the Disposition. This we may Disgust;
perceive by the perpetual Inconstancy, and Love of Change,
so remarkable in those who have nothing communicative or
Variable:
friendly in their Pleasures.Good Fellowship,in its abus’d Sense,
seems indeed to have something more constant and determining. The Company
supports the Humour. ’Tis the same inLove.
A certain Tenderness and Generosity of Affection supports the
Insupportable.
Passion, which otherwise wou’d instantly be chang’d. The
perfectest Beauty cannot, of it-self, retain, or fix it. And that Love which has no other
Foundation, but relies on this exterior kind, is soon turn’d into Aversion. Satiety,
perpetual Disgust, and Feverishness of Desire, attend those who passio[130]nately
study Pleasure. They best enjoy it, who study to regulate their Passions. And by this
they will come to know how absolute an Incapacity there is in any thing sensual to
please, or give contentment, where it depends not on something friendly or social,
something conjoin’d, and in affinity withkindor natural Affection.
BUT ERE we conclude this Article ofsocialor natural
Balance of the
Affection,we may take a general View of it, and bring it, once Affections.
for all, into the Scale; to prove what kind of*Balanceit helps to
makewithin;and what the Consequence may be, of itsDeficiency,or light Weight.
There is no-one of ever so little Understanding in what belongs to a human
Constitution, who knows not that without Action, Motion, and Employment,the Body
languishes, and is oppress’d; its Nourishment turns to Disease; the Spirits, unimploy’d
abroad, help to consume the Parts within; and Nature, as it were, preys upon her-self.
In the same manner, the sensible and living Part,the Soulor Mind,wanting its proper
and natural[131] Exercise, is burden’d and diseas’d. Its Thoughts and Passions being
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 52 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
unnaturally with-held from their due Objects, turn against it-self, and create the
highest Impatience and Ill-humour.
In †Brutes,and other Creatures, which have not the Use of Reason and Reflection,
(at least not after the manner of Mankind) ’tis so order’d in
Instance in the animal
Nature, that by their daily Search after Food, and their Kinds.
Application either towards the Business of their Livelihood, or
the Affairs of their Species or Kind,
almost their whole time is taken up, and they fail not to find full
Balance of the
Imployment for their Passion, according to that degree of Affections.
Agitation to which they are fitted, and which their Constitution
requires. If any one of these Creatures be taken out of his natural laborious State, and
plac’d amidst such a Plenty as can profusely administer to all his Appetites and
Wants; it may be observ’d, that as his Circumstances grow thus luxuriant, his Temper
and Passions have the same growth. When he comes, at any time, to have the
Accommodations of Life at a cheaper and easier rate than was at first intended him by
Nature, he is made to pay dear for ’em in another way; by losing his natu[132]ral
good Disposition, and the Orderliness of his Kind or Species.
This needs not to be demonstrated by particular Instances. Whoever has the least
knowledg of natural History, or has been an Observer of the several Breeds of
Creatures, and their ways of Life, and Propagation, will easily understand this
Difference of Orderliness between thewildand thetameof the same Species. The
latter acquire new Habits; and deviate from their original Nature. They lose even the
common Instinct and ordinary Ingenuity of their Kind;
nor can they ever regain it, whilst they continue in this pamper’d
Animal Kinds.
State: but being turn’d to shift abroad, they resume the natural
Affection and Sagacity of their Species. They learn to unite in stricter Fellowship; and
grow more concern’d for their Offspring. They provide against the Seasons, and make
the most of every Advantage given by Nature for the Support and Maintenance of
their particular Species, against such as are foreign and hostile. And thus as they grow
busy and imploy’d, they grow regular and good. Their Petulancy and Vice forsakes
them, with their Idleness and Ease.
It happens withMankind,that whilst some are by necessity
Mankind.
confin’d to Labour,[133] others are provided with abundance of
all things, by the Pains and Labour of Inferiors. Now, if among the superior and easy
sort, there be not something of fit and proper Imployment rais’d in the room of what
is wanting in common Labour and Toil; if instead of an Application to any sort of
Work, such as has a good and honest End in Society, (as Letters, Sciences, Arts,
Husbandry, publick Affairs,
OEconomy, or the like) there be a thorow Neglect of all Duty or
Balance of the
Imployment; a settled Idleness, Supineness, and Inactivity; this Affections.
of necessity must occasion a most relax’d and dissolute State: It
must produce a total Disorder of the Passions, and break out in the strangest
Irregularitys imaginable.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 53 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
We see the enormous Growth of Luxury in capital Citys, such as have been long the
Seat of Empire. We see what Improvements are made in Vice of every kind, where
numbers of Men are maintain’d in lazy Opulence, and wanton Plenty. ’Tis otherwise
with those who are taken up in honest and due Imployment, and have been well inur’d
to it from their Youth. This we may observe in the hardy remote Provincials, the
Inhabitants of smaller Towns, and the industrious sort of common People; where ’tis
rare to meet with any Instances of those Irregularitys,[134] which are known in Courts
and Palaces; and in the rich Foundations of easy and pamper’d Priests.
Now if what we have advanc’d concerning aninward Constitutionbe real and just; if
it be true that Nature works by a just Order and Regulation as well in the Passions and
Affections, as in the Limbs and Organs which she forms; if it appears withal, that she
has so constituted thisinward Part,that nothing is so essential to it asExercise;and
no Exercise so essential as that ofsocialor natural Affection:it follows, that where
this is remov’d or weaken’d, theinward Partmust necessarily suffer and be impair’d.
Let Indolence, Indifference, or Insensibility, be study’d as an Art, or cultivated with
the utmost Care; the Passions thus restrain’d will force their Prison, and in one way or
other procure their Liberty, and find full Employment. They will be sure to create to
themselvesunusualandunnaturalExercise, where they are cut off from such as is
naturalandgood.And thus in the room of orderly and natural Affection, new and
unnatural must be rais’d, and allinward Order andOEconomydestroy’d.
OEconomy.
One must have a very imperfect Idea of the Order of Nature in
the Formation and Structure of Animals, to imagine that[135] so great aPrinciple,so
fundamental a Part as that ofnatural Affectionshou’d possibly be lost or impair’d,
without any inward Ruin or Subversion of the Temper and Frame of Mind.
Balance of the
Whoever is the least vers’d in this moral kind of Architecture,
Affections.
will find the inwardFabrickso adjusted, andthe wholeso nicely
built;
that the barely extending of a single Passion a little too far, or the
Fabrick.
continuance of it too long, is able to bring irrecoverable Ruin and
Misery. He will find this experienc’d in the ordinary Case of Phrenzy, and
Distraction; when the Mind, dwelling too long upononeSubject, (whether prosperous
or calamitous) sinks under the weight of it, and proves what the necessity is, of a due
Balance,and Counterpoise in the Affections. He will find, that in every different
Creature, and distinct Sex, there is a different and distinctOrder, Set, or Suitof
Passions; proportionable to the different Order of Life, the different Functions and
Capacitys assign’d to each. As the Operations and Effects are different, so are the
Springs and Causes in each System. The inside Work is fitted to the outward Action
and Performance. So that where Habits or Affections are dislodg’d, misplac’d, or
chang’d; where those belonging to one Species are intermix’d with those
be[136]longing to another, there must of necessity be Confusion and Disturbance
within.
All this we may observe easily, by comparing the more perfect
Monsters.
with the imperfect Natures, such as are imperfect from their
Birth, by having suffer’d Violencewithin,in their earliestForm, and inmostMatrix.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 54 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
We know how it is withMonsters, such as are compounded of different Kinds, or
different Sexes. Nor are they lessMonsters, who are mishapen or distorted in an
inward Part. The ordinary Animals appear unnatural and monstrous, when they lose
their proper Instincts, forsake their Kind, neglect their Offspring, and pervert those
Functions or Capacitys bestow’d by Nature. How wretched must it be, therefore, for
Man, of all other Creatures, to lose thatSense,andFeeling,which is proper to himas
aMan, and sutable to his Character, and Genius? How unfortunate must it be for a
Creature, whose dependence on Society is greater than any others, to lose thatnatural
Affectionby which he is prompted to the Good and Interest of his Species, and
Community? Such indeed is Man’s natural Share of thisAffection,thatHe, of all other
Creatures,
is plainly the least able to bear Solitude. Nor is any thing more
Balance of the
apparent, than that there is naturally in every Man[137] such a Affections.
degree of social Affection as inclines him to seek the Familiarity
and Friendship of his Fellows. ’Tis here that he lets loose a Passion, and gives reins to
a Desire, which can hardly by any struggle or inward violence be with-held; or if it be,
is sure to create a Sadness, Dejection, and Melancholy in the Mind. For whoever is
unsociable, and voluntarily shuns Society, or Commerce with the World, must of
necessity be morose and ill-natur’d. He, on the other side, who is with-held by force
or accident, finds in his Temper the ill Effects of this Restraint. The Inclination, when
suppress’d, breeds Discontent; and on the contrary, affords a healing and enlivening
Joy, when acting at its liberty, and with full scope: as we may see particularly, when
after a time of Solitude and long Absence, the Heart is open’d, the Mind disburden’d,
and the Secrets of the Breast unfolded to a Bosom-Friend.
This we see yet more remarkably instanc’d in Persons of the most elevated Stations;
even in Princes, Monarchs, and those who seem by their Condition to be above
ordinary human Commerce, and who affect a sort of distant Strangeness from the rest
of Mankind. But their Carriage is not the same towardsallMen. The wiser and better
sort, it’s true, are[138] often held at a distance; as unfit for their Intimacy, or secret
Trust. But to compensate this, there are others subtituted in their room, who, tho they
have the least Merit, and are perhaps the most vile and contemptible of Men, are
sufficient, however, to serve the purpose of an imaginary Friendship, and can become
Favouritesin form. These are the Subjects of Humanity inthe Great.For These we
see them often in concern and pain: in These they easily confide: to These they can
with pleasure communicate their Power and Greatness, be open, free, generous,
confiding, bountiful; as rejoicing in the Action it-self: having no Intention or Aim
beyond it; and their Interest, in respect of Policy, often standing a quite contrary way.
But where neither the Love of Mankind, nor the Passion for Favourites prevails, the
tyrannical Temper fails not to shew it-self in its proper colours, and to the life, with all
the Bitterness, Cruelty, and Mistrust, which belong to that solitary and gloomy State
of un-communicative and un-friendly Greatness. Nor needs there any particular Proof
from History, or present Time, to second this Remark.
THUS it may appear, how muchnatural Affectionis predomi[139]nant; how it is
inwardly join’d to us, and implanted in our Natures; how interwoven with our other
Passions; and how essential to that regular Motion and Course of our Affections, on
which our Happiness and Self-enjoyment so immediately depend.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 55 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
And thus we have demonstrated, That as,on one side,To have the natural and good
Affections, is to have the chief Means and Power of Self-enjoyment:So, on the other
side,to want them, is certain Misery, and Ill.
SECTION II
Sect. 2.
WE Are Now To Prove, That By Having The
SECOND
Self-passions Too Intense Or Strong, A Creature Proof; From
Becomes Miserable. The Self-
passions.
IN order to this, we must, according to Method, enumerate those
Home-affections which relate to the private Interest or separate OEconomy of the
Creature: such asLove of Life;—Resentment of Injury;—Pleasure, or Appetite
towards Nourishment, and the Means of Generation;—Interest, or Desireof those
Conveniences,by which we are wellprovided for,[140] andmaintain’d;—Emulation,
or Love of Praise and Honour;—Indolence,orLove of Ease and Rest.—These are the
Affections which relate to the private System, and constitute whatever we call
Interestednessor Self-love.
Now these Affections, if they are moderate, and within certain bounds, are neither
injurious to social Life, nor a hindrance to Virtue: but being in an extreme degree,
they becomeCowardice,—Revengefulness,—Luxury,—Avarice,—Vanityand
Ambition,—Sloth;—and, as such, are own’d vitious and ill, with respect to human
Society.
How they are ill also with respect to the private Person, and are
Self-passions.
to his own disadvantage as well as that of the Publick, we may
consider, as we severally examine them.
IF THERE were any of these Self-passions, which for the Good
Love of Life.
and Happiness of the Creature might be oppos’d toNatural
Affection,and allow’d to over-balance it;the Desire and Love of Lifewou’d have the
best Pretence. But it will be found perhaps, that there is no Passion which, by having
much allow’d to it, is the occasion of more Disorder and Misery.[141]
There is nothing more certain, or more universally agreed than this; “ThatLifemay
sometimes be even a Misfortune and Misery.” To inforce the continuance of it in
Creatures reduc’d to such Extremity, is esteem’d the greatest Cruelty. And tho
Religion forbids that anyone shou’d be his own Reliever; yet if by some fortunate
accident, Death offersof it-self,it is embrac’d as highly welcome. And on this
account the nearest Friends and Relations often rejoice at the Release of one intirely
belov’d; even tho he himself may have been so weak as earnestly to decline Death,
and endeavour the utmost Prolongment of his own un-eligible State.
SinceLife,therefore, may frequently prove a Misfortune and Misery; and since it
naturally becomes so, by being only prolong’d to the Infirmitys of old Age; since
there is nothing, withal, more common than to see Life over-valu’d, and purchas’d at
such a Cost as it can never justly be thought worth: it follows evidently, that the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 56 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Passion it-self (viz.the Love of Life,andAbhorrence or Dread of Death) if beyond a
certain degree, and over-balancing in the Temper of any Creature, must lead him
directly against his own Interest; make him, upon occasion, become the[142] greatest
Enemy to himself; and necessitate him to act as such.
But tho it were allow’d the Interest and Good of a Creature, by all Courses and Means
whatsoever, in any Circumstances, or at any rate, to preserveLife;yet wou’d it be
against his Interest still to have this Passion in a high degree. For it wou’d by this
means prove ineffectual, and no-way conducing to its End. Various Instances need not
be given.
For what is there better known, than that at all times an excessive
Self-passions.
Fearbetrays to danger, instead of saving from it? ’Tis
impossible for any-one to act sensibly, and with Presence of Mind, even in his own
Preservation and Defense, when he is strongly press’d by such a Passion. On all
extraordinary Emergences, ’tisCourage andResolutionsaves; whilstCowardicerobs
us of the means of Safety, and not only deprives us of our defensive Facultys, but
even runs us to the brink of Ruin, and makes us meet that Evil which of it-self wou’d
never have invaded us.
But were theConsequencesof this Passion less injurious than we have represented; it
must be allow’d still thatin it-selfit can be no other than miserable; if it be Misery to
feel Cowardice, and be haunted by those Specters and Horrors,[143] which are proper
to the Character of one who has a thorow Dread of Death. For ’tis not only when
Dangers happen, and Hazards are incurr’d, that this sort ofFearoppresses and
distracts. If it in the least prevails, it gives no quarter, so much as at the safest stillest
hour of Retreat and Quiet. Every Object suggests Thought enough to employ it. It
operates when it is least observ’d by others; and enters at all times into the pleasantest
parts of Life; so as to corrupt and poison all Enjoyment, and Content. One may safely
aver, that by reason of this Passion alone, many a Life, if inwardly and closely
view’d, wou’d be found to be thorowly miserable, tho attended with all other
Circumstances which in appearance render it happy. But when we add to this, the
Meannesses, and base Condescensions, occasion’d by such a passionate Concern for
living; when we consider how by means of it we are driven to Actions we can never
view without Dislike, and forc’d by degrees from our natural Conduct, into still
greater Crookednesses and Perplexity; there is no-one, surely, so disingenuous as not
to allow, thatLife,in this case, becomes a sorry Purchase, and is pass’d with little
Freedom or Satisfaction. For how can this be otherwise, whilst every thing which is
generous and worthy, even the chiefRelish, Hap[144]piness,andGood of Life, isfor
Life’s sakeabandon’d and renounc’d?
And thus it seems evident, “That to have this Affection ofDesireandLove of Life,
too intense, or beyond a moderate degree, is against the Interest
Love of Life.
of a Creature, and contrary to hisHappiness andGood.”
THERE is another Passion very different from that ofFear,and
Resentment.
which in a certain degree is equally preservative to us, and
conducing to our Safety. Asthatis serviceable, in prompting us to shun Danger; so is
this,in fortifying us against it, and enabling us to repel Injury, and resist Violence
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 57 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
when offer’d. ’Tis true, that according to strict Virtue, and a just Regulation of the
Affections in a wise and virtuous Man, such Efforts towards Action amount not to
what is justly styl’dPassionor Commotion.A Man of Courage may be cautious
without realFear.And a Man of Temper may resist or punish withoutAnger.But in
ordinary Characters there must necessarily be some Mixture of the real Passions
themselves; which however, in the main, are able to allay and temper one another.
And thus Anger in a manner becomes necessary. ’Tis by this Passion that one
Creature[145] offering Violence to another, is deter’d from the Execution; whilst he
observes how the Attempt affects his Fellow; and knows by the very Signs which
accompany this rising Motion, that if the Injury be carry’d further, it will not pass
easily, or with impunity. ’Tis this Passion withal, which, after Violence and Hostility
executed, rouzes a Creature in opposition, and, assists him in returning like Hostility
and Harm on the Invader. For thus, asRageandDespair increase, a Creature grows
still more terrible; and being urg’d to the greatest extremity, finds a degree of Strength
and Boldness unexperienc’d till then, and which had never risen, except thro’ the
height of Provocation. As to this Affection therefore, notwithstanding its immediate
Aim be indeedthe Illor Punishmentof another,yet it is plainly of the sort of those
which tend to the Advantage and Interest of the Self-system,the Animal himself;and
is withal in other respects contributing to the Good and Interest of the Species. But
there is hardly need we shou’d explain how mischievous and self-destructiveAnger
is, if it be what we commonly understand by that word: if it be such a Passion as is
rash, and violent in the Instant of Provocation; or such as imprints it-self deeply, and
causes a settledRevenge,and an eager vindicative Pursuit. No wonder indeed that so
much[146] is done in mereRevenge,and under the Weight of a deepResentment,
when the Relief and Satisfaction found in that Indulgence is no other than the
assuaging of the most torturous Pain, and the alleviating the most weighty and
pressing Sensation of Misery. The Pain of this sort being for a-while remov’d or
alleviated, by the accomplishment of the Desire, in the Ill of another, leaves indeed
behind it the perception of a delicious Ease, and an overflowing of soft and pleasing
Sensation. Yet is this, in truth, no better than theRackit-self. For whoever has
experienc’d racking Pains, can tell in what manner a sudden Cessation or Respite is
us’d to affect him. From hence are those untoward Delights of Perverseness,
Frowardness, and an envenom’d malignant Disposition, acting at its liberty. For this is
onlya perpetual assuaging ofAngerperpetually renew’d.In other Characters, the
Passionarises not so suddenly, or on slight Causes; but being once mov’d, is not so
easily quieted. The dormantFury,Revenge,being rais’d once, and wrought up to her
highest pitch, rests not till she attains her End; and, that attain’d, is easy, and reposes;
making our succeeding Relief and Ease so much the more enjoy’d, as our preceding
Anguish and incumbent Pain was of long duration, and bitter sense. Certainly if
amongLovers, and in the Language of[147] Gallantry, the Success of ardent Love is
call’d theassuaging of a Pain;this other Success may be far more justly term’d so.
However soft or flattering the former Pain may be esteem’d, this latter surely can be
no pleasing one:Nor can it be possibly esteem’d other than sound and thorow
Wretchedness, a grating and disgustful Feeling, without the least mixture of any thing
soft, gentle, or agreeable.
’Tis not very necessary to mention the ill effects of this Passion, in respect of our
Minds,or Bodys,our private Condition, orCircumstancesof Life. By these
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 58 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Particulars we may grow too tedious. These are of the moral sort of Subjects, join’d
commonly with Religion, and treated so rhetorically, and with such inforc’d repetition
in publick, as to be apt to raise the Satiety of Mankind. What has been said, may be
enough perhaps to make this evident, “That to be subject to such a Passion as we have
been mentioning, is, in reality, to be very unhappy”: And, “That the Habit it-self is a
Disease of the worst sort; from whichMiseryis inseparable.”
NOW AS to Luxury, and what the World callsPleasure:Were it
PLEASURE. Luxury.
true (as has been prov’d the contrary) that the most considerable
Enjoyments were those[148] merely ofthe Sense;and were it true, withal, that those
Enjoyments of the Sense lay in certain outward things, capable of yielding always a
due and certain Portion of Pleasure, according to their degree and quality; it wou’d
then follow, that the certain way to obtain Happiness, wou’d be to procure largely of
these Subjects, to which Happiness and Pleasure were thus infallibly annex’d. But
however fashionably we may apply the Notion ofgood Living,’twill hardly be found
that our inward Facultys are able to keep pace with these outward Supplies of a
luxuriant Fortune. And if the natural Disposition and Aptnessfrom withinbe not
concurring; ’twill be in vain that these Subjects are thus multiply’dfrom abroad, and
acquir’d with ever so great facility.
It may be observ’d in those, who by Excess have gain’d a constant Nauseating and
Distaste, that they have nevertheless as constant a Craving or Eagerness of Stomach.
But theAppetiteof this kind isfalseandunnatural;as is that of Thirst arising from a
Fever, or contracted by habitual Debauch. Now the Satisfactions of thenatural
Appetite,in a plain way, are infinitely beyond those Indulgences of the most refin’d
and elegantLuxury. This is often perceiv’d by the Luxurious them-selves. It has been
experienc’d in People[149] bred after the sumptuous way, and us’d never to wait, but
to prevent Appetite; that when by any new Turn of Life they came to fall into a more
natural Course, or for a while, as on a Journy, or a day of Sport, came accidentally to
experience the Sweet of a plain Diet, recommended by due Abstinence and Exercise;
they have with freedom own’d, that it was then they receiv’d the highest Satisfaction
and Delight whicha Tablecou’d possibly afford.
On the other side, it has been as often remark’d in Persons accustom’d to an active
Life, and healthful Exercise; that having once thorowly experienc’d this plainer and
more natural Diet, they have upon a following Change of Life regretted their Loss,
and undervalu’d the Pleasures receiv’d from all the Delicacys ofLuxury,in
comparison with those remember’d Satisfactions of a preceding State. ’Tis plain, that
by urging Nature, forcing the Appetite, and inciting Sense, the Keenness of the natural
Sensations is lost. And tho thro’ Vice or ill Habit the same Subjects of Appetite may,
every day, be sought with greater Ardour; they are enjoy’d with less Satisfaction. Tho
the Impatience of abstaining be greater; the Pleasure of Indulgence is really less. The
Pallsor Nauseatingswhich continually intervene, are of the worst and most
hate[150]ful kind of Sensation. Hardly is there any thing tasted which is wholly free
from this ill relish of a surfeited Sense and ruin’d Appetite. So that instead of a
constant and flowing Delight afforded in such a State of Life, the very State it-self is
in reality a Sickness and Infirmity, a Corruption of Pleasure, and destructive of every
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 59 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
natural and agreeable Sensation. So far is it from being true; “That in this licentious
Course we enjoyLifebest,or are likely tomake the mostof it.”
As to the Consequences of such an Indulgence; how fatal tothe Body,by Diseases of
many kinds, and tothe Mind,by Sottishness and Stupidity; this needs not any
explanation.
The Consequencesas to Interestare plain enough. Such a State of impotent and
unrestrain’d Desire, as it increases our Wants, so it must subject us to a greater
Dependence on others. Our private Circumstances, however plentiful or easy they
may be, can less easily content us. Ways and Means must be invented to procure what
may administer to such an imperiousLuxury, as forces us to sacrifice Honour to
Fortune, and runs us out into all irregularity and extravagance of Conduct. The Injurys
we do our-selves, by Excess and Unforbearance, are then surely[151] apparent, when
thro’ an Impotence of this sort, and an Impossibility of Restraint, we do what we our-
selves declare to be destructive to us. But these are Matters obvious of themselves.
And from less than what has been said, ’tis easy to conclude,
PLEASURE.
“ThatLuxury, Riot,andDebauch,are contrary to real Interest,
and to the true Enjoyment of Life.”
THERE is anotherLuxury superior to the kind we have been
Amours.
mentioning, and which in strictness can scarce be call’d aSelf-
passion, since the sole End of it is the Advantage and Promotion of the Species. But
whereas all other social Affections are join’d only witha mental Pleasure,and
founded in mere Kindness and Love; this has more added to it, and is join’d witha
Pleasure of Sense.Such Concern and Care has Nature shewn for the Support and
Maintenance of the several Species, that by a certainIndigenceand kind of Necessity
of their Natures, they are made to regard the Propagation of their Kind. Now whether
it be the Interest or Good of the Animal to feel thisIndigencebeyond a natural and
ordinary degree; is what we may consider.
Having already said so much concerningnaturalandunnatural Appetite,[152] there
needs less to be said on this occasion. If it be allow’d, that to all other Pleasures there
is a Measure of Appetite belonging, which cannot possibly be exceeded without
prejudice to the Creature, even in his very Capacity of enjoying Pleasure; it will
hardly be thought that there is no certain Limit or just Boundary of this other Appetite
of theAmorouskind.There are other sorts of ardent Sensations accidentally
experienc’d, which we find pleasant and acceptable whilst they are held within a
certain degree; but which, as they increase, grow oppressive and intolerable.Laughter
provok’d by Titillation, grows an excessive Pain; tho it retains still the same Features
of Delight and Pleasure. And tho in the case of that particular kind ofItchwhich
belongs to a Distemper nam’d from that effect, there are some who, far from disliking
the Sensation, find it highly acceptable and delightful; yet it will hardly be reputed
such among the more refin’d sort, even of those who make Pleasure their chief Study,
and highest Good.
Now if there be in every Sensation of mere Pleasure, a certain Pitch or Degree of
Ardour, which by being further advanc’d, comes the nearer to mere Rage and Fury;
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 60 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
if there be indeed a necessity of stoppingsomewhere, and
PLEASURE.
determining[153] onsome Boundary for the Passion; where can
we fix our Standard, or how regulate our-selves butwith regard to Nature,beyond
which there is no Measure or Rule of things? NowNaturemay be known from what
we see of the natural State of Creatures, and of Man himself, when unprejudic’d by
vitious Education.
Where happily any-one is bred to a natural Life, inur’d to honest Industry and
Sobriety, and un-accustom’d to any thing immoderate or intemperate; he is found to
have his Appetites and Inclinations of this sort at command. Nor are they on this
account less able to afford him the Pleasure or Enjoyment of each kind. On the
contrary; as they are more sound, healthy, and un-injur’d by Excess and Abuse, they
must afford him proportionate Satisfaction. So that were both these Sensations to be
experimentally compar’d; that ofa virtuous Coursewhich belong’d to one who liv’d
a natural and regular Life, and that ofa vitious Coursewhich belong’d to one who
was relax’d and dissolute; there is no question but Judgment wou’d be given in favour
of the former, without regard to Consequences, and only with respect to the very
Pleasure of Sense it-self.[154]
As to the Consequences of this Vice, with respect to the Health and Vigour ofthe
Body;there is no need to mention any thing. The Injury it doesthe Mind,tho less
notic’d, is yet greater. The Hinderance of all Improvement, the wretched Waste of
Time, the Effeminacy, Sloth, Supineness, the Disorder and Looseness of a thousand
Passions, thro’ such a relaxation and enervating of the Mind; are all of them Effects
sufficiently apparent, when reflected on.
What the Disadvantages are of this Intemperance, in respect of Interest, Society, and
the World; and what the Advantages are of a contrary Sobriety, and Self-command,
wou’d be to little purpose to mention. ’Tis well known there can be no Slavery greater
than what is consequent to the Dominion and Rule of such a Passion. Of all other, it is
the least manageable by Favour or Concession, and assumes the most from Privilege
and Indulgence. What it costs us inthe ModestyandIngenuityof our Natures, and in
the Faith and Honesty of our Characters, is as easily apprehended by anyone who will
reflect. And it will from hence appear, “That there is no Passion, which in its
Extravagance and Excess[155] more necessarily occasions Disorder and
Unhappiness.”
NOW AS to that Passion which is esteem’d peculiarly
INTEREST.
interesting;as having for its Aim the Possession of Wealth, and
what we call aSettlementor Fortunein the World: If the Regard towards this kind be
moderate, and in a reasonable degree; if it occasions no passionate Pursuit, nor raises
any ardent Desire or Appetite; there is nothing in this Case which is not compatible
with Virtue, and even sutable and beneficial to Society. The publick as well as private
System is advanc’d by the Industry, which this Affection excites. But if it grows at
length into a realPassion;the Injury and Mischief it does the Publick, is not greater
than that which it creates to the Person himself. Such a one is in reality a Self-
oppressor, and lies heavier on himself than he can ever do on Mankind.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 61 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
How far a covetingor avaritious Temperis miserable, needs not, surely, be explain’d.
Who knows not how small a Portion of worldly Matters is sufficient for a Man’s
single Use and Convenience; and how much his Occasions and Wants might be
contracted and reduc’d, if a just Frugality[156] were study’d, and Temperance and a
natural Life came once to be pursu’d with half that Application, Industry and Art,
which is bestow’d on Sumptuousness and Luxury? Now if Temperance be in reality
so advantageous, and the Practice as well as the Consequences of it so pleasing and
happy, as has been before express’d; there is little need, on the other side, to mention
any thing of the Miserys attending those covetous and eager Desires after things
which have no Bounds or Rule; as being out ofNature,beyond which there can be no
Limits to Desire. For where shall we once stop, when we are beyond this Boundary?
How shall we fix or ascertain a thing whollyunnaturalandunreasonable?Or what
Method, what Regulation shall we set to mere Imagination, or the Exorbitancy of
Fancy, in adding Expence to Expence, or Possession to Possession?
Interest.
Hence that known Restlessness ofcovetousand eager Minds, in
whatever State or Degree of Fortune they are plac’d; there being no thorow or real
Satisfaction, but a kind of Insatiableness belonging to this Condition. For ’tis
impossible there shou’d be anyreal Enjoyment,except in consequence ofnaturaland
just Appetite.Nor do we readily call that anEnjoymentof Wealth or of Honour, when
thro’[157] Covetousness or Ambition, the Desire is still forward, and can never rest
satisfy’d with its Gains. But against this Vice ofCovetousness,there is enough said
continually in the World; and in our common way of speaking, “A covetous,anda
miserable Temper, has, in reality, one and the same Signification.”
NOR IS there less said, abroad, as to the Ills of that other
Emulation.
aspiring Temper, which exceeds an honestEmulation,or Love of
Praise,and passes the Bounds even ofVanityandConceit.Such is that Passion which
breaks into an enormousPrideandAmbition.Now if we consider once the Ease,
Happiness, and Security which attend amodest Dispositionandquiet Mind,such as is
of easy Self-command, fitted to every Station in Society, and able to sute it-self with
any reasonable Circumstances whatever; ’twill, on the first view, present us with the
most agreeable and winning Character. Nor will it be found necessary, after this, to
call to mind the Excellence and Good ofModeration,or the Mischief and Self-injury
of immoderate Desires, and conceited fond Imaginations of personal Advantage, in
such things as Titles, Honours, Precedencys, Fame,Glory, or vulgar Astonishment,
Admiration,andApplause.[158]
This too is obvious, that as the Desires of this kind are rais’d, and become impetuous,
and out of our command; so the Aversions and Fears of the contrary part, grow
proportionably strong and violent, and the Temper accordingly suspicious, jealous,
captious, subject to Apprehensions from all Events, and uncapable of bearing the least
Repulse or ordinary Disappointment. And hence it may be concluded, “That all Rest
and Securityas to what is future,and all Peace, Contentedness and Easeas to what is
present,is forfeited by the aspiring Passions of this emulous kind; and by having the
Appetites towardsGlory andoutward Appearancethus transporting and beyond
command.”
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 62 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
THERE is a certain Temper plac’d often in opposition to those
Indolence.
eager and aspiring Aims of which we have been speaking. Not
that it really excludes either the Passion ofCovetousnessor Ambition;but because it
hinders their Effects, and keeps them from breaking into open Action. ’Tis this
Passion, which by soothing the Mind, and softning it into anexcessive Loveof Rest
andIndolence,renders high Attempts impracticable, and represents as insuperable
the[159] Difficultys of a painful and laborious Course towards Wealth and Honours.
Now tho an Inclination to Ease, and a Love of moderate Recess and Rest from Action,
be as natural and useful to us as the Inclination we have towards Sleep; yet an
excessive Love of Rest, and a contracted Aversion to Action and Imployment, must
be a Disease in the Mind equal to that of a Lethargy in the Body.
How necessary Action and Exercise are to the Body, may be judg’d by the difference
we find between those Constitutions which are accustom’d, and those which are
wholly strangers to it; and by the different Health and Complexion which Labour and
due Exercise create, in comparison with that Habit of Body we see consequent to an
indulg’d State of Indolence and Rest. Nor is the lazy Habit ruinous tothe Bodyonly.
The languishing Disease corrupts all the Enjoyments of a vigorous and healthy Sense,
and carrys its Infection intothe Mind;where it spreads a worse Contagion. For
however the Body may for a-while hold out, ’tis impossible that the Mind, in which
the Distemper is seated, can escape without an immediate Affliction and Disorder.
The Habit begets a Tediousness and Anxiety, which influences the whole Temper,
and converts the unnatural Rest[160] into an unhappy sort of Activity, ill Humour,
and Spleen: of which there has been enough said above, where we consider’d the
want of a dueBalancein the Affections.
’Tis certain, that as inthe Body,when no Labour or natural Exercise is us’d, the
Spirits which want their due Imployment, turn against the Constitution, and find work
for themselves in a destructive way; so ina Soul,or Mind,unexercis’d, and which
languishes for want of proper Action and Employment, the Thoughts and Affections
being obstructed in their due Course, and depriv’d of their natural Energy, raise
Disquiet, and foment a rancorous Eagerness and tormenting Irritation. The Temper
from hence becomes more impotent in Passion, more incapable of real Moderation;
and, like prepar’d Fuel, readily takes fire by the least Spark.
As to Interest,how far it is here concern’d; how wretched that State is, in which by
this Habit a Man is plac’d, towards all the Circumstances and Affairs of Life, when at
any time he is call’d to Action; how subjected he must be to all Inconveniences,
wanting to himself, and depriv’d of the Assistance of others; whilst being unfit for all
Offices and Dutys of[161] Society, he yet of any other Person most needs the help of
it, as being least able to assist or support himself; all this is obvious. And thus ’tis
evident, “That to have this over-biassing Inclination towardsRest,thisslothful, soft,
or effeminateTemper, averse to Labour and Imployment, is to have an unavoidable
Mischief,andattendent Plague.”
THUS have we consider’d theSelf-passions;and what the
Self-passions in
Consequence is of their rising beyond a moderate degree. These general.
Affections, as self-interesting as they are, can often, we see,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 63 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
become contrary to our real Interest. They betray us into most Misfortunes, and into
the greatest of Unhappinesses, that of a profligate and abject Character. As they grow
imperious and high, they are the occasion that a Creature in proportion becomes mean
and low. They are original to that which we callSelfishness,and give rise to that
sordid Disposition of which we have already spoken. It appears there can be nothing
so miserable in it-self, or so wretched in its Consequence, as to be thus impotent in
Temper, thus master’d by Passion, and by means of it, brought under the most servile
Subjection to the World.[162]
’Tis evident withal, that as thisSelfishnessincreases in us, so must a certainSubtlety,
andfeignednessof Carriage, which naturally accompanys it. And thus the Candour
and Ingenuity of our Natures, the Ease and Freedom of our Minds must be forfeited;
allTrust andConfidencein a manner lost; andSuspicions, Jealousys,andEnvys
multiply’d. Aseparate EndandInterestmust be every day more strongly form’d in
us;generous ViewsandMotiveslaid aside: And the more we are thus sensibly
disjoin’d every day from Society and our Fellows; the worse Opinion we shall have of
those uniting Passions, which bind us in strict Alliance and Amity with others. Upon
these Terms we must of course endeavour to silence and suppress our natural and
good Affections: since they are such as wou’d carry us to the good of Society, against
what we fondly conceive to be our private Good and Interest; as has been shewn.
Now if theseselfish Passions, besides what other Ill they are the occasion of, are
withal the certain means of losing us ournatural Affections;then (by what has been
prov’d before) ’tis evident, “That they must be the certain means of losing us the chief
Enjoyment of Life,[163] and raising in us those horrid andunnatural Passions,and
that Savageness of Temper, which makesthe greatest of Miserys,and the most
wretched State of Life”: as remains for us to explain.
SECTION III
Sect. 3.
THE Passions therefore, which, in the last place, we are to
THIRD Proof; from
examine, are those which lead neither toa publicknor a private the unnatural
Good; and are neither of any advantage to the Species in general, Affections.
or the Creature in particular. These, in opposition to thesocial
and natural,we call theunnatural Affections.
Of this kind is thatunnaturalandinhuman Delightin beholding
Inhumanity.
Torments, and in viewing Distress, Calamity, Blood, Massacre
and Destruction, with a peculiar Joy and Pleasure. This has been the reigning Passion
of many Tyrants, and barbarous Nations; and belongs, in some degree, to such
Tempers as have thrown off that Courteousness of Behaviour, which retains in us a
just Reverence of Mankind, and prevents the Growth of Harshness and Brutality. This
Passion enters not where Civility or affable Manners have the least place. Such is the
Nature of what we callgood Breeding,[164] that in the midst of many other
Corruptions, it admits not ofInhumanity,or savage Pleasure.To see the Sufferance
of an Enemy with cruel Delight, may proceed from the height of Anger, Revenge,
Fear, and other extended Self-passions: But to delight in the Torture and Pain of other
Creatures indifferently, Natives or Foreigners, of our own or of another Species,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 64 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Kindred or no Kindred, known or unknown; to feed, as it were, on Death, and be
entertain’d with dying Agonys; this has nothing in it accountable in the way of Self-
interest or private Good above-mention’d, but is wholly and absolutely unnatural, as it
is horrid and miserable.
There is another Affection nearly related to this, which isa gay
Petulancy.
andfrolicksome Delightin what is injurious to others; a sort of
wanton Mischievousness,and Pleasure in what is destructive; a Passion which,
instead of being restrain’d, is usually encourag’d in Children: so that ’tis indeed no
wonder if the Effects of it are very unfortunately felt in the World. For ’twill be hard,
perhaps, for any-one to give a reason why that Temper, which was us’d to delight in
Disorder and Ravage, when in a Nursery; shou’d not afterwards find delight in other
Disturbances, and be the occasion[165] of equal Mischief in Familys, amongst
Friends, and in the Publick it-self. But of this Passion there is not any foundation in
Nature; as has been explain’d.
Malice, Malignity,or Ill-Will,such as is grounded on no Self-
Malignity.
consideration, and where there is no Subject of Anger or
Jealousy, nor any thing to provoke or cause such a Desire of doing ill to another; this
also is of that kind of Passion.
Envytoo, when it is such as arises from the Prosperity or
Envy.
Happiness of another Creature no ways interfering with ours, is
of the same kind of Passion.
There is also among these, a sort ofHatred of Mankind and
Moroseness.
Society;a Passion which has been known perfectly reigning in
some Men,
and has had a peculiar Name given to it. A large share of this
MISANTHROPY.
belongs to those who have long indulg’d themselves in a habitual
Moroseness, or who by force of ill Nature, and ill Breeding, have contracted such a
Reverse of Affability, and civil Manners, that to see or meet a Stranger is offensive.
The very Aspect of Mankind is a disturbance to ’em, and they are sure always to hate
at first sight. The Distemper of this kind is sometimes found to be in a man[166]ner
National;but peculiar to the more savage Nations,
and a plainCharacteristickof unciviliz’d Manners, and
Inhospitality,
Barbarity. This is the immediate Opposite to that noble Barbarity.
Affection, which, in antient Language, was term’d*Hospitality,
viz.extensive Love of Mankind, and Relief of Strangers.
We may add likewise to the number of theunnatural Passions,
Superstition.
all those which are rais’d fromSuperstition,(as before-
mention’d) and from theCustoms of barbarous Countrys: All which are too horrid and
odious in themselves, to need any proof of their being miserable.
There might be other Passions nam’d, such asunnatural Lusts, in
Unnatural Lusts.
foreignKinds or Species, with other Perversions of the amorous
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 65 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Desire withinour own. But as to these Depravitys of Appetite, we need add nothing
here; after what has been already said, on the Subject of the morenaturalPassions.
Such as these are the only Affections or Passions we can strictly callunnatural, ill,
and of no tendency so much as to any separate or private Good. Others indeed there
are which have this tendency, but are so exorbitant and out of measure, so[167]
beyond the common Bent of any ordinarySelf-passion,and so utterly contrary and
abhorrent to allsocialandnatural Affection,that they are generally call’d, and may be
justly esteem’d,unnaturalandmonstrous.
Among these may be reckon’d such anenormous Prideor
Tyranny.
Ambition,such anArroganceandTyranny,as wou’d willingly
leave nothing eminent, nothing free, nothing prosperous in the World: such anAnger
as wou’d sacrifice every thing to it-self: such aRevengeas is never to be
extinguish’d, nor ever satisfy’d without the greatest Crueltys: such anInveteracyand
Rancouras seeks, as it were, occasion to exert it-self; and lays hold of the least
Subject, so as often to make the weight of its Malevolence fall even upon such as are
mere Objects of Pity and Compassion.
TreacheryandIngratitudeare in strictness mere negative Vices;
Treachery,
and, in themselves, no real Passions; having neither Aversion or Ingratitude.
Inclination belonging to them; but are deriv’d from the Defect,
Unsoundness, or Corruption of the Affections in general. But when these Vices
become remarkable in a Character, and arise in a manner from Inclination and Choice;
when they are so for[168]ward and active, as to appear of their own accord, without
any pressing occasion; ’tis apparent they borrow something of the mereunnatural
Passions, and are deriv’d fromMalice, Envy,andInveteracy;as explain’d above.
IT MAY be objected here, that these Passions,unnaturalas they
Unnatural Pleasure in
are, carry still a sort ofPleasurewith them; and that however general.
barbarous a Pleasure it be, yet still it is a Pleasure and
Satisfactionwhich is found in Pride, or Tyranny, Revenge, Malice, or Cruelty exerted.
Now if it be possible in Nature, that any-one can feel a barbarous or malicious Joy,
otherwise than in consequence of mere Anguish and Torment, then may we perhaps
allow this kind of Satisfaction to be call’dPleasureor Delight.But the Case is
evidently contrary. To love, and to be kind; to have social or natural Affection,
Complacency and Good-will, is to feel immediate Satisfaction and genuine Content.
’Tis in it-selforiginal Joy,depending on no preceding Pain or Uneasiness; and
producing nothing beside Satisfaction merely. On the other side, Animosity, Hatred
and Bitterness, isoriginal MiseryandTorment, producing no other Pleasure or
Satisfaction, than as the unnatural Desire is for the instant satisfy’d by
some[169]thing which appeases it. How strong soever this Pleasure, therefore, may
appear; it only the more implies the Misery of that State which produces it. For as the
cruellest bodily Pains do by intervals of Assuagement, produce (as has been shewn)
the highest bodily Pleasure; so the fiercest and most raging Torments of the Mind, do,
by certain Moments of Relief, afford the greatest of mental Enjoyments, to those who
know little of the truer kind.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 66 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
The Men of gentlest Dispositions, and best of Tempers, have at
Unnatural State.
some time or other been sufficiently acquainted with those
Disturbances, which, at ill hours, even small occasions are apt to raise. From these
slender Experiences of Harshness and Ill-humour, they fully know and will confess
the ill Moments which are pass’d, when the Temper is ever so little gall’d or fretted.
How must it fare, therefore, with those who hardly know any better hours in Life; and
who, for the greatest part of it, are agitated by a thorow active Spleen, a close and
settled Malignity, and Rancour? How lively must be the Sense of every thwarting and
controuling Accident? How great must be the Shocks of Disappointment, the Stings
of Affront, and the Agonys of a working Antipathy, against the multiply’d Objects of
Offence? Nor can it be wonder’d at, if to Persons[170] thus agitated and oppress’d, it
seems a high Delight to appease and allay for the while those furious and rough
Motions, by an Indulgence of their Passion in Mischief and Revenge.
Now as to the Consequences of thisunnatural State,in respect of Interest, and the
common Circumstances of Life; upon what Terms a Person who has in this manner
lost all which we callNature,can be suppos’d to stand, in respect of the Society of
Mankind; how he feels himself in it; what Sense he has of his own Disposition
towards others, and of the mutual Disposition of others towards himself; this is easily
conceiv’d.
What Injoyment or Rest is there for one, who is not conscious of the merited
Affection or Love, but, on the contrary, of the Ill-will and Hatred of every human
Soul? What ground must this afford for Horror and Despair? What foundation of Fear,
and continual Apprehension from Mankind, and from superior Powers? How thorow
and deep must be thatMelancholy,which being once mov’d, has nothing soft or
pleasing from the side of Friendship, to allay or divert it? Wherever such a Creature
turns himself; whichever way he casts his Eye; every thing around must appear
ghastly and horrid;[171] every thing hostile, and, as it were,bentagainst a private and
single Being, who is thus divided from every thing, and at defiance and war with the
rest of Nature.
’Tis thus, at last, thata Mindbecomesa Wilderness;where all is laid waste, every
thingfairandgoodlyremov’d, and nothing extant beside what is savage and
deform’d. Now if Banishment from one’s Country, Removal to a foreign Place, or any
thing which looks like Solitude or Desertion, be so heavy to endure; what must it be
to feel thisinward Banishment,this realEstrangementfrom human Commerce; and to
be after this manner in a Desart, and in the horridest of Solitudes, even when in the
midst of Society? What must it be to live in thisDisagreementwith every thing, this
IrreconcilablenessandOppositionto the Order and Government of the Universe?
HENCE it appears, That the greatest of Miserys accompanysthat Statewhich is
consequent to the Loss of natural Affection; and Thatto have those horrid, monstrous,
and unnatural Affections, is to be miserable in the highest Degree.[172]
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 67 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
CONCLUSION
THUS have we endeavour’d to prove what was propos’d in the beginning. And since
in the common and known Sense ofViceandIllness,no-one can be vitious or ill,
except either,
1.Bythe Deficiency or Weakness ofnatural Affections;Or,
2.by the Violence ofthe selfish;Or,
3.by such as are plainlyunnatural:
It must follow, that if each of these are pernicious and destructive to the Creature,
insomuch that his compleatest State of Misery is made from hence;To be wicked or
vitious, is to be miserable and unhappy.
And since every vitious Action must in proportion, more or less, help towards this
Mischief, andSelf-ill;it must follow,
Thatevery vitious action mustbe self-injurious and ill.
Conclusion.
On the other side;the HappinessandGood of Virtuehas been prov’d from the
contrary Effect of other Affections,[173] such as are according toNature,and the
OEconomy of the Species or Kind. We have cast up all those Particulars, from
whence (as by way of Addition and Subtraction) the mainSum or general Account of
Happiness, is either augmented or diminish’d. And if there be no Article
exceptionable in this Scheme ofMoral Arithmetick;the Subject treated may be said to
have an Evidence as great as that which is found in Numbers, or Mathematicks. For
let us carryScepticismever so far, let us doubt, if we can, of every thing about us; we
cannot doubt of what passeswithin our-selves.Our Passions and Affections are
known to us. Theyare certain, whatever theObjectsmay be, on which they are
employ’d. Nor is it of any concern to our Argument, how these exterior Objects stand;
whether they are Realitys, or mere Illusions; whether we wake or dream. Forill
Dreams will be equally disturbing. And a goodDream, if Life be nothing else, will be
easily and happily pass’d. In this Dream of Life, therefore, our Demonstrations have
the same force; ourBalanceandOEconomyhold good, and our Obligation toVirtue
is in every respect the same.
Upon the whole: There is not, I presume, the least degree of Certainty wanting in
what has been said concerning the Preferableness ofthe mental Pleasures to
the[174]sensual; and evenof the sensual, accompany’d with good Affection, and
under a temperate and right use,to those which areno ways restrain’d, nor supported
by any thing social or affectionate.
Nor is there less Evidence in what has been said, ofthe united Structure and Fabrick
of the Mind,and of those Passions which constitutethe Temper,or Soul; and on
which its Happiness or Misery so immediately depend. It has been shewn, That inthis
Constitution,the impairing of any one Part must instantly tend to the disorder and ruin
of other Parts, and of the Whole it-self; thro’ the necessaryConnexionandBalanceof
the Affections: That those very Passions thro’ which Men are vitious, are of
themselves a Torment and Disease; and that whatsoever is done which is knowingly
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 68 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
ill,must be ofill Consciousness;and in proportion, as the Act is ill, must impair and
corrupt social Enjoyment, and destroy boththe Capacity of kind Affection, and the
Consciousness of meriting any such.So that neither can weparticipatethus in Joy or
Happiness with others, or receive Satisfactionfrom the mutual Kindness or imagin’d
Love of others:on which, however, the greatest of all our Pleasures are founded.
If this be the Case of moral Delinquency; and if the State which is consequent[175] to
thisDefectionfrom Nature, be of all other the most horrid, oppressive, and miserable;
’twill appear, “That to yield or consent to any thing ill or immoral, is a Breach of
Interest, and leads to the greatest Ills”: and, “That on the other side,Every thing
which is an Improvement of Virtue, or an Establishment of right Affection and
Integrity, is an Advancement of Interest, and leads to the greatest and most solid
Happiness and Enjoyment.”
Thus the Wisdom of what rules, and isfirstandchiefin Nature,has made it to be
according to theprivate InterestandGood of every-one, to work towards thegeneral
Good; which if a Creature ceases to promote, he is actually so far wanting to himself,
and ceases to promote his own Happiness and Welfare. He is, on this account, directly
his own Enemy: Nor can he any otherwise be good or useful to himself, than as he
continues good to Society, and to thatWholeof which he is himselfa Part.So that
Virtue,which of all Excellencys and Beautys is the chief, and most amiable;that
which is the Prop and Ornament of human Affairs; which upholds Communitys,
maintains Union, Friendship, and Correspondence amongst Men;thatby which
Countrys, as well as private Familys, flourish and are happy;[176] and for want of
which, every-thing comely, conspicuous, great and worthy, must perish, and go to
ruin;that single Quality,thus beneficial to all Society, and to Mankindin general,is
found equally a Happiness and Good to each Creaturein particular;and isthatby
which alone Man can be happy, and without which he must be miserable.
And, thus, Virtueisthe Good,andVicethe Illof every-one.[177]
TREATISE V
VIZ.
THE MORALISTS,
A Philosophical Rhapsody.
BEING
A RECITAL
of certain Conversations on
NaturalandMoralSubjects.
To seek the truth amidst the groves of Academe.*
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 69 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Horat. Ep. 2. Lib. 2.
Publish’d in the Year M.DCC.IX.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 70 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
[Back to Table of Contents]
THE MORALISTS, &C.
PART I
PhiloclesToPalemon
SECTION I
Sect. 1.
WHAT Mortal, if he had never chanc’d to hear your Character,Palemon,cou’d
imagine that a Genius fitted for the greatest Affairs, and form’d amidst Courts and
Camps, shou’d have so violent a Turn towards Philosophy[182] and the Schools?
Who is there cou’d possibly believe that one of your Rank and Credit in the
fashionableWorld, shou’d be so thorowly conversant in thelearnedone, and deeply
interested in the Affairs of a People so disagreeable to the Generality of Mankind and
Humour of the Age?
I Believe truly, You are the only well-bred Man who wou’d have taken the Fancy to
talk Philosophy in such a Circle of good Company as we had round us yesterday,
when we were in your Coach together, inthe Park.How you cou’d reconcile the
Objects there, to such Subjects as these, was unaccountable. I cou’d only conclude,
that either you had an extravagant Passion for Philosophy, to quit so many Charms for
it; or that some of those tender Charms had an extravagant Effect, which sent you to
Philosophy for Relief.
In either Case I pity’d you; thinking it a milder Fate, to be, as I truly was, for my own
part,a more indifferent Lover.’Twas better, I told you, to admire Beauty and Wisdom
a little more moderately. ’Twas better, I maintain’d, to ingage so cautiously as to be
sure of coming off with a whole Heart, and a Fancy as strong as ever towards all the
pretty Entertainments and Diversions of the World. For these,[183] methought, were
things one wou’d not willingly part with, for a fine romantick Passion of one of those
Gentlemen whom they call’dVirtuoso’s.
The Name I took to belong in common to yourLover andPhilosopher.No matter
what the Object was; whether Poetry, Musick, Philosophy, orthe Fair.All who were
enamour’d any-way, were in the same Condition. You might perceive it, I told you,
by their Looks, their Admiration, their profound Thoughtfulness, their waking ever
and anon as out of a Dream, their talking still of one thing, and scarce minding what
they said on any other Subject.—Sad Indications!
But all this Warning serv’d not to deter you. For you,Palemon,are one of the
Adventurous, whom Danger rather animates than discourages. And now nothing less
will satisfy you than to have our Philosophical Adventures recorded. All must be laid
before you, and summ’d in one compleat Account; to remain, it seems, as a
Monument of that unseasonable Conversation, so opposite to the reigning Genius of
GallantryandPleasure.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 71 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
I MUST own, indeed, ’tis become fashionable in our Nation to talk Politicks[184] in
every Company, and mix the Discourses of State-affairs with those of Pleasure and
Entertainment. However,
’tis certain we approve of no such Freedom inPhilosophy.Nor
PHILOSOPHY.
do we look uponPoliticksto be of her Province, or in the least
related to her. So much have we Moderns degraded her, and stripp’d her of her chief
Rights.
You must allow me,Palemon,thus to bemoanPhilosophy;since you have forc’d me
to ingage with her at a time when her Credit runs so low. She is no longeractivein the
World; nor can hardly, with any advantage, be brought upon the publickStage.We
have immur’d her (poor Lady!) in Colleges and Cells; and have set her servilely to
such Works as those in the Mines. Empiricks, and pedantick Sophists are her chief
Pupils. TheSchool-syllogism,and theElixir,are the choicest of her Products. So far is
she from producing Statesmen, as of old, that hardly any Man of Note in the publick
cares to own the least Obligation to her. If some few maintain their Acquaintance, and
come now and then to her Recesses, ’tis as the Disciple of Qualitycameto his Lord
and Master; “secretly,andby night.”
But as low asPhilosophyis reduc’d; ifMorals be allow’d
Morals.
belonging to[185] her,Politicksmust undeniably be hers. For to
understand the Manners and Constitutions of Menin common, ’tis necessary to study
Manin particular,and know the Creature, as he is in himself, before we consider him
in Company, as he is interested in the State, or join’d to any City or Community.
Nothing is more familiar than to reason concerning Man in hisconfederateState and
nationalRelation; as he stands ingag’d to this or that Society, by Birth or
Naturalization: Yet to consider him as aCitizenor Commoner of the World,to trace
his Pedegree a step higher, and view his End and Constitution inNatureit-self, must
pass, it seems, for some intricate or over-refin’d Speculation.
It may be properly alledg’d perhaps, as a Reason for this general Shyness inmoral
Inquirys; that the People to whom it has principally belong’d to handle these Subjects,
have done it in such a manner as to put the better Sort out of countenance with the
Undertaking. The appropriating this Concern to mereScholasticks,has brought their
Fashion and Air into the very Subject. There are formalSet-places, where, we reckon,
there is enough said and taught on the Head of these graver Subjects. We can give no
quarter to any thing like it in good Company. The least mention of such matters gives
us a disgust,[186] and puts us out of humour.
If Learning comes a-cross us, we count itPedantry;if Morality,
Language.
’tisPreaching.
One must own this, however, as a real Disadvantage of our modern Conversations;
that by such a scrupulous Nicety they lose those masculine Helps of Learning and
sound Reason. Even theFair Sex,in whose favour we pretend to make this
Condescension, may with reason despise us for it, and laugh at us for aiming at their
peculiar Softness. ’Tis no Compliment to them, to affect their Manners, and be
effeminate.Our Sense, Language, and Style, as well as our Voice, and Person, shou’d
have something of that Male-Feature, and natural Roughness, by which our Sex is
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 72 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
distinguish’d. And whateverPolitenesswe may pretend to, ’tis more a Disfigurement
than any real Refinement of Discourse, to render it thus delicate.
No Work of Wit can be esteem’d perfect without that Strength
Style.
and Boldness of Hand, which gives it Body and Proportions. A
good Piece, the Painters say, must have goodMusclingas well asColouringand
Drapery. And surely no Writing or Discourse of any great moment, can seem other
than enervated, when neither strong Reason, nor Antiquity, nor the Records of Things,
nor the natural Histo[187]ry of Man, nor any-thing which can be call’dKnowledg,
dares accompany it; except perhaps in some ridiculous Habit, which may give it an
Air of Play and Dalliance.
THIS brings to my mind a Reason I have often sought for; why we Moderns, who
abound so much inTreatisesandEssays, are so sparing in the way of*Dialogue;
which heretofore was found the politest and best way of
DIALOGUE.
managing even the graver Subjects. The truth is; ’twou’d be an
abominable Falshood, and belying of the Age, to put so much good Sense together in
anyoneConversation, as might make it hold out steddily, and with plain coherence,
for an hour’s time, till anyoneSubject had been rationally examin’d.
To lay Colours, to draw, or describe, against the Appearance of Nature and Truth, is a
Liberty neither permitted the Painter nor the Poet. Much less canthe Philosopher
have such a Privilege; especiallyin his own Case.If he represents his Philosophy as
making any figure in Conversation; if he triumphs in the Debate, and gives his own
Wisdom the advan[188]tage over that of the World; he may be liable to sound
Raillery, and possibly be madea Fableof.
’Tis said ofthe Lion,that being in civil Conference withthe
A Fable.
Man, he wisely refus’d to yield the Superiority of Strength to
him; when instead of Fact, the Man produc’d only certain Figures and
Representations of human Victorys over the Lionkind. These Master-pieces of Art the
Beast discover’d to be wholly of human Forgery: and from these he had good right to
appeal. Indeed had he ever in his life been witness to any such Combats as the Man
represented to him in the way of Art; possibly the Example might have mov’d him.
But old Statues of aHercules,aTheseus,or other Beast-subduers, cou’d have little
power over him, whilst he neither saw nor felt any such living Antagonist capable to
dispute the Field with him.
We need not wonder, therefore, that the sort of moral Painting, by way ofDialogue,is
so much out of fashion; and that we see no more of these philosophical Portraitures
now-a-days. For where arethe Originals?Or what tho you,Palemon,or I, by chance,
have lighted on such a one; and pleas’d our-selves withthe Life?Can you imagine it
shou’d makea good Picture?[189]
YOU know too, that in thisAcademickPhilosophy I am to
Academists.
present you with, there is a certain way of Questioning and
Doubting, which no-way sutes the Genius of our Age. Men love to take party
instantly. They can’t bear being kept in suspence. The Examination torments ’em.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 73 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
They want to be rid of it, upon the easiest terms. ’Tis as if Men fansy’d themselves
drowning, whenever they dare trust to the Current of Reason. They seem hurrying
away, they know not whither; and are ready to catch at the first Twig. There they
chuse afterwards to hang, tho ever so insecurely, rather than trust their Strength to
bear ’em above Water. He who has got hold of anHypothesis,how slight soever, is
satisfy’d. He can presently answer every Objection, and, with a few Terms of Art,
give an account of every thing without trouble.
’Tis no wonder if in this Age the Philosophy of theAlchymists
Alchymists.
prevails so much: since it promises such Wonders, and requires
more the Labour of Hands than Brains. We have a strange Fancy to be Creators, a
violent Desire at least to know the Knack or Secret by which Nature does all. The rest
of our Philosophers only aim at that in Speculation, which our Alchymists aspire[190]
to in Practice. For with some of these it has been actually under deliberation how to
makeMan, by other Mediums than Nature has hitherto provided. Every Sect has a
Recipe.When you know it, you are Master of Nature: you solve all her
*Phaenomena:you see all her Designs, and can account for all her Operations. If
need were, you might, perchance too, be of her Laboratory, and work for her. At least
one wou’d imagine the Partizans of each modern Sect had this Conceit. They are all
Archimedes’s in their way, and canmakea World upon easier terms than he offer’d to
moveone.
In short; there are good Reasons for our being thus superficial,
Dogmatists.
and consequently thus dogmatical in Philosophy. We are too lazy
and effeminate, and withal a little too cowardly, to daredoubt.The decisive way best
becomes our Manners. It sutes as well with our Vices as with our Superstition.
Which-ever we are fond of, is secur’d by it. If in favour of Religion we have espous’d
an Hypothesis, on which our Faith, we think, depends; we are superstitiously careful
not to be loosen’d in it. If, by means of our ill Morals, we are broken with Religion;
’tis the same Case still: We are as much[191] afraid ofDoubting.We must be sure to
say, “It cannot be”; and “’tis Demonstrable:For otherwiseWho knows? And not to
know,is toyield!”—
Thus we will needsknowevery thing, and be at the pains of examining nothing. Of all
Philosophy, therefore, how absolutely the most disagreeable mustthatappear, which
goes upon no establish’d Hypothesis, nor presents us with any flattering Scheme, talks
only of Probabilitys, Suspence of Judgment, Inquiry, Search, and Caution not to be
impos’d on, or deceiv’d? This is thatAcademickDiscipline in which formerly*the
Youth were train’d:
when not only Horsemanship and Military Arts had their publick
Antients.
Places of Exercise; but Philosophy too had its Wrestlers in
repute. Reason and Wit had theirAcademy,and underwent this Trial; not in a formal
way, apart from the World; but openly, among the better sort, and as an Exercise of
the genteeler kind. This the greatest Men were not asham’d to practise, in the Intervals
of publick Affairs, in the highest Stations and Employments, and at the latest hour of
their Lives. Hence that way ofDialogue,and Patience of Debate and Reasoning, of
which we have scarce a Resemblance left in any of our Conversations, at this season
of the World.[192]
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 74 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
CONSIDER then, Palemon,whatour Pictureis like to prove: and how it will appear;
especially in the Light you have unluckily chosen to set it. For who wou’d thus have
confronted Philosophy with the Gaiety, Wit, and Humour of the Age?—If this,
however, can be for your Credit, I am content. The Project is your own. ’Tis you who
have match’dPhilosophythus unequally. Therefore leaving you to answer for the
Success, I begin this inauspicious Work, which my ill Stars and you have assign’d
me; and in which I hardly dare ask Succour ofthe Muses,as poetical as I am oblig’d
to shew my-self in this Enterprize.
SECTION II
Sect. 2.
“OWRETCHED State of Mankind!—Hapless Nature, thus to have err’d in thy chief
Workmanship!—Whence sprang this fatal Weakness? What Chance or Destiny shall
we accuse? Or shall we mind the Poets, when they sing thy Tragedy (Prometheus!)
who with thy stoln celestial Fire, mix’d with vile Clay, didst mock Heaven’s
Countenance, and in abusive Likeness of the Immortals[193] mad’st the compound
Man;that wretched Mortal,illto himself, and Cause ofIllto all.”—
What say you,Palemon,to thisRant,now upon second thoughts? Or have you forgot
’twas just in such a romantick Strain that you broke out againsthuman Kind,upon a
Day when every thing look’d pleasing, and theKindit-self (I thought) never appear’d
fairer, or made a better shew?
But ’twas not the whole Creation you thus quarrel’d with: Nor were you so out of
conceit withallBeauty. The Verdure of the Field, the distant Prospects, the gilded
Horizon, and purple Sky, form’d by a setting Sun, had Charms in abundance, and
were able to make impression on you. Here,Palemon,you allow’d me to admire as
much as I pleas’d; when, at the same instant, you wou’d not bear my talking to you of
those nearer Beautys of our own Kind, which I thought more natural for Men at our
Age to admire. Your Severity however cou’d not silence me upon this Subject. I
continu’d to plead the Cause ofthe Fair,and advance their Charms above all those
other Beautys of Nature. And when you took advantage from this Opposition, to shew
how little there was ofNature,and how much[194] of Artin what I admir’d, I made
the best Apology I cou’d; and fighting for Beauty, kept the Field as long as there was
oneFair-onepresent.
Considering how your Genius stood inclin’d to Poetry, I
Gallantry.
wonder’d most to find you on a sudden grown so out of conceit
with our modern Poets, andGalanteWriters; whom I quoted to you, as better
Authoritys than any Antient in behalf of the Fair Sex, and their Prerogative. But this
you treated slightly. You acknowledg’d it to be true indeed, what had been observ’d
by some late Wits, “ThatGallantrywas of a modern Growth.” And well it might be so,
you thought, without dishonour to the Antients; who understoodTruth andNaturetoo
well, to admit so ridiculous an Invention.
’Twas in vain, therefore, that I held up this Shield in my defense. I did my Cause no
service, when in behalf ofthe FairI pleaded all the fine things which are usually said,
in this romantick way, to their advantage. You attack’d the very Fortress ofGallantry,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 75 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
ridicul’dthe Point of Honour,with all those nice Sentiments and Ceremonials
belonging to it. You damn’d even our FavouriteNovels;those dear sweet natural
Pieces, writ most of ’em by the Fair Sex themselves. In short, this[195] whole Order
and Scheme of Wit you condemn’d absolutely, asfalse, monstrous, andGothick;
quite out of the way of Nature, and sprung from the mere Dregs ofChivalryor
Knight-Errantry;a thing which in it-self you prefer’d, as of a better Taste than that
which reigns at present in its stead. For at a time when this Mystery ofGallantry
carry’d along with it the Notion of doughty Knighthood; whenthe Fairwere made
Witnesses, and in a manner, Partys to Feats of Arms, enter’d into all the Points of War
and Combat, and were won by dint of Launce and manly Prowess; ’twas not
altogether absurd, you thought, on such a foundation as this, to pay ’em Homage and
Adoration, make ’em the Standard of Wit and Manners, and bring Mankind under
their Laws. But in a Country where noShe-Saintswere worship’d by any Authority
from Religion, ’twas as impertinent and sensless, as it was profane, to deify the Sex,
raise ’em to a Capacity above what Nature had allow’d, and treat ’em witha Respect,
which in the natural way of Love they themselves were the aptest to complain of.
Indeed as for theMoralPart, ’twas wonderful, you said, to observe the Licentiousness
which this foppish courtly Humour had establish’d in the World. What such a
flattering way of Address to all the[196] Sex in common cou’d mean, you knew not;
unless it were to render ’em whollycommon indeed, and make each Fair-one
apprehend that the Publick had a right to her; and that Beauty was too communicative
and divine a Thing, to be made a Property, and confin’d toOne at once.
MEAN while our Company began to leave us. TheBeau-monde,whom you had been
thus severely censuring, drew off apace: for it grew late. I took notice that the
approaching Objects of the Night were the more agreeable to you, for the Solitude
they introduc’d; and that the Moon and Planets which began now to appear, were in
reality the only proper Company for a Man in your Humour. For now you began to
talk with much Satisfaction of natural Things, and of all Orders of Beautys,Man only
excepted. Never did I hear a finer Description than you made of the Order of the
heavenly Luminarys, the Circles of the Planets, and their attendentSatellites.And
you, who wou’d allow nothing to those fair earthly Luminarys in the Circles which
just now we mov’d in; you,Palemon,who seem’d to overlook the Pride of that
Theater, began now to look out with Ravishment on this other, and triumph in the new
philosophical Scene of Worlds un[197]known. Here, when you had pretty well spent
the first Fire of your Imagination, I wou’d have got you to reason more calmly with
me upon that other Part of the Creation, your own Kind; to which, I told you, you
discover’d so much Aversion,
as wou’d make one believe you a compleatTimon,or Man-
Misanthropy.
hater.
“Can you then, OPhilocles,” (said you in a high strain, and with a moving air of
Passion) “Can you believe me of that Character? Or can you think it of me in earnest,
that beingMan, and conscious of my Nature, I shou’d have yet so little of Humanity,
as not to feel the Affections ofa Man? Or feeling what is natural towards my Kind,
that I shou’d hold their Interest light, and be indifferently affected with what affects or
seriously concerns them? Am I so ill a Lover ofmy Country?Or is it that you find me
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 76 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
indeed so illa Friend?For what are all Relations else? What are the Ties of private
Friendship, if that toMankindbe not obliging? Can there be yet a Bond in Nature, if
Thatbe none? OPhilocles!Believe me when I say I feel it one, and fully prove its
Power within me. Think not that I wou’d willingly break my Chain: Nor count me so
degenerate or unnatural, as whilst I hold this Form, and[198] wear a human Heart, I
shou’d throw off Love, Compassion, Kindness, and not befriendMankind.—But O
what Treacherys! what Disorders! And how corrupt is all!—Did you not observe e’en
now, when all this Space was fill’d with goodly Rows of Company, how peaceful all
appear’d.—What Charms there are in publick Companys! What Harmony in Courts
and Courtly Places! How pleas’d is every Face! How courteous and humane the
general Carriage and Behaviour!—What Creature capable of Reflection, if he thus
saw us Mankind, and saw no more, wou’d not believe our Eartha very Heaven?What
Foreigner (the Inhabitant, suppose, of some near Planet) when he had travel’d hither,
and survey’d this outward Face of things, wou’d think of what lay hid beneath the
Mask?—But let him stay a-while. Allow him leisure; till he has gain’d a nearer View,
and following our dissolv’d Assemblys to their particularRecesses,he has the power
of seeing ’em in this new Aspect.—Here he may behold those great Men of the
Ministry, who not an hour ago in publick appear’d such Friends, now plotting craftily
each other’s Ruin, with the Ruin of the State it-self, a Sacrifice to their Ambition.
Here he may see too those of a softer[199] kind, who knowing not Ambition, follow
onlyLove.Yet (Philocles) who wou’d think it?”—
At these words, you may remember, I discover’d the Lightness of my Temper, and
laugh’d aloud; which I cou’d hardly hope you wou’d have pardon’d, had I not freely
told you the true reason. ’Twas not for want of being affected with what you spoke. I
only imagin’d a more particular Cause had provok’d you, when having pass’d over
the Ambitious, you were coming full-charg’d against the People of a softer Passion.
At first, I look’d on you as deeplyin the Spleen:But now I concluded youin love,and
so unhappily engag’d as to have reason to complain of Infidelity. “This,” thought I,
“has mov’dPalemonthus. Hence thesad World! Here was thatCorruption,and those
Disorders he lamented!”
AFTER I had begg’d pardon for my rude Mirth, which had the
Cause ofIll.
good fortune however to make some change in your Humour; we
fell naturally into cool Reasoning about the Nature and Cause of ILL in general:
“Thro’ whatContingency,whatChance;by what fatalNecessity,whatWill,or what
Permissionit came upon the World; or being come[200] once, shou’d still subsist.”
This*Inquiry,which with slight Reasoners is easily got over, stuck hard, I found,
with one of your close Judgment and Penetration. And this insensibly led us into a
nice Criticism ofNature;whom you sharply arraign’d for many Absurditys you
thought her guilty of, in relation toMankind,and his peculiar State.
Fain wou’d I have persuaded you to think with more Equality ofNature,and to
proportion her Defects a little better. My Notion was, that the Grievance lay not
altogether inonepart, as you plac’d it; but thatevery thinghad its share of
Inconvenience. Pleasure and Pain, Beauty and Deformity, Good and Ill, seem’d to me
every-where interwoven; and one with another made, I thought, a pretty Mixture,
agreeable enough, in the main. ’Twas the same, I fansy’d, as in some of those rich
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 77 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Stuffs, where the Flowers and Ground were oddly put together, with such irregular
Work, and contrary Colours, as look’d illin the Pattern,but mighty natural and well
in the Piece.
But you were still upon Extremes. Nothing wou’d serve to excuse the Faults[201] or
Blemishes of this Part of the Creation,Mankind;even tho all besides were fair,
without a Blemish. The very Storms and Tempests had their Beauty in your account,
those alone excepted which arose in human Breasts. ’Twas only for this turbulent
Race of Mortals you offer’d to accuse Nature. And I now found why you had been so
transported with the Story ofPrometheus.You wanted such an Operator as this for
Mankind: And you were tempted to wish the Story cou’d have been confirm’d in
modern Divinity; that clearing the supreme Powers of any Concern or Hand in the ill
Workmanship, you might have the liberty of inveighing against it, without
Profaneness.
This however, I told you, was but a slight Evasion of the religious Poets among the
Antients. ’Twas easy to answer every Objection by aPrometheus:as, “Why had
Mankindoriginallyso much Folly and Perverseness? Why so much Pride, such
Ambition, and strange Appetites? Why so many Plagues, and Curses, entail’d on him
and his Posterity?”—Prometheuswas the Cause. The plastick Artist, with his unlucky
Hand, solv’d all. “ ’TwasHis Contrivance (they said) andHe was to answer for it.”
They reckon’d it a fair Game, if they cou’d gaina single[202]Remove,and put theevil
Causefarther off. If the People ask’d a Question, they told ’ema Tale,and sent ’em
away satisfy’d. None besides a few Philosophers wou’d be such Busy-bodys, they
thought, as to look beyond, or ask a second Question.
And in reality, continu’d I, ’tis not to be imagin’d how serviceablea Taleis, to amuse
others besides mere Children; and how much easier the Generality of Men are paid in
this Paper-coin, than in Sterling Reason. We ought not to laugh so readily at the
IndianPhilosophers, who to satisfy their People how this huge Frame of the World is
supported, tell ’em ’tis by an Elephant.—And the Elephant how?—A shreud
Question! but which by no means shou’d be answer’d. ’Tis here only that ourIndian
Philosophers are to blame. They shou’d be contented withthe Elephant,and go no
further. But they havea Tortoisein reverse; whose Back, they think, is broad enough.
So the Tortoise must bear the new Load: And thus the matter stands worse than
before.
The Heathen Story ofPrometheuswas, I told you, much the same with thisIndian
one: only the Heathen Mythologists were so wise as not to go beyondthe first
Remove.A singlePro[203]metheuswas enough to take the Weight fromJove. They
fairly madeJove a Stander-by. He resolv’d, it seems, to be Neuter; and see what
wou’d come of this notable Experiment; how the dangerous Man-moulder wou’d
proceed; and what wou’d be the Event of his Tampering.—Excellent Account, to
satisfy the HeathenVulgar!But how, think you, wou’d aPhilosopherdigest this?
“For the Gods” (he wou’d say presently) “either cou’d have hinder’dPrometheus’s
Creation, or they cou’d not. If they cou’d, they were answerable for the
Consequences; if they cou’d not, they were no longer Gods, being thus limited and
controul’d. And whetherPrometheuswere a Name forChance, Destiny,aplastick
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 78 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Nature,or anevil Daemon;whatever was design’d by it; ’twas still the same Breach
of Omnipotence.”
That such a hazardous Affair as this ofCreationshou’d have been undertaken by
those who had not perfect Foresight as well as Command, you own’d was neither
wise nor just. But you stood to Foresight. You allow’d theConsequencesto have been
understood by the creating Powers, when they undertook their Work: and you deny’d
that it wou’d have been better for them to have omitted it; tho they knew[204] what
wou’d be the Event. “ ’Twas better still that the Project shou’d be executed, whatever
might become of Mankind, or how hard soever such a Creation was like to fall on the
generality of this miserable Race. For ’twas impossible, you thought, that Heaven
shou’d have acted otherwise thanfor the best.So that even from this Misery andIllof
Man, there was undoubtedly someGood arising; something which over-balanc’d all,
and made full amends.”
THIS was a Confession I wonder’d indeed how I came to draw from you: And soon
afterwards I found you somewhat uneasy under it. For here I took up your own part
against you; and setting all those Villanys and Corruptions of human Kind in the same
light you had done just before, I put it upon you to tell, where possibly cou’d be the
Advantage or Good arising hence; or what Excellence or Beauty cou’d redound from
those tragical Pictures you your-self had drawn so well after the Life. Whether it must
not be a very strong philosophical Faith, which shou’d persuade one that those dismal
Parts you set to view were only the necessary Shades of a fine Piece, to be reckon’d
among the Beautys of the Crea[205]tion: Or whether possibly you might look upon
that Maxim as very fit for Heaven, which I was sure you did not approve at all in
Mankind; “To doIllthatGoodmight follow.”
This, I said, made me think of the manner of our modernPrometheus’s,the
Mountebanks,who perform’d such Wonders of many kinds, here on our earthly
Stages. They cou’d create Diseases, and make Mischief, in orderto heal,andto
restore. But shou’d we assign such a Practice as this to Heaven? Shou’d we dare to
make suchEmpiricksof the Gods, and sucha Patientof poor Nature? “Was this a
reason for Nature’s Sickliness? Or how else came she (poor Innocent!) to fall sick, or
run astray? Had she beenoriginallyhealthy, or created soundat first;she hadstill
continu’d so. ’Twas no credit to the Gods to leave her destitute, or with a Flaw which
wou’d cost dear the mending, and make them Sufferers for their own Work.”—
I was going to bringHomerto witness for the many Troubles ofJove, the Death of
Sarpedon,and the frequent Crosses Heaven met with, from the fatal Sisters. But this
Discourse, I saw, displeas’d you.
I had by this time plainly discover’d my Inclination to
Scepticism.
Scep[206]ticism.And here not onlyReligionwas objected to me,
but I was reproach’d too on the account of thatGallantrywhich I had some time
before defended. Both were join’d together in the Charge you made against me, when
you saw I adher’d to nothing: but was now as ready to declaim againstthe Fair,as I
had been before to plead their Cause, and defend the Moral of Lovers. This, you said,
was my constant way in all Debates: I was as well pleas’d with the Reason on one
side, as on the other: I never troubled my-self about the Success of the Argument, but
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 79 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
laugh’d still, whatever way it went; and even when I convinc’d others, never seem’d
as if I was convinc’d myself.
I own’d to you, Palemon,there was Truth enough in your Charge. For above all things
I lov’d Ease; and of all Philosophers those who reason’d most at their ease, and were
never angry or disturb’d; as those call’dScepticks,you own’d, never were. I look’d
upon this kind ofPhilosophyas the prettiest, agreeablest, roving Exercise of the Mind,
possible to be imagin’d. The other kind, I thought, was painful and laborious; “To
keep always in the Limits ofonePath; to drive alwaysat a Point;and hold precisely
to what Men, at a venture, call’d[207]the Truth:A Point,in all appearance, very
unfix’d, and hard to ascertain.” Besides, my way hurt no body. I was always the first
to comply on any occasion; and for Matters of Religion, was further from Profaneness
and erroneous Doctrine than any-one. I cou’d never have the Sufficiency to shock my
spiritual and learned Superiors. I was the furthest from leaning to my own
Understanding: nor was I one who exaltedReasonaboveFaith,or insisted much upon
what the dogmatical Men callDemonstration,and dare oppose to the sacred Mysterys
of Religion. And to shew you, continu’d I, how impossible it is for the Men of our
sort ever to err from the Catholick and Establish’d Faith, pray consider; That whereas
Others pretend to see with their own Eyes, what is properest and best for them in
Religion;We,for our parts, pretend not to see with any other than those of our
spiritual Guides. Neither do we presume to judg those Guides our-selves; but submit
to them, as they are appointed us by our just Superiors. In short, you who are
Rationalists,and walk by Reason in every thing, pretend to know all things, whilst
you believe little or nothing: We for our partsknownothing, andbelieveall.[208]
HERE I ended; and, in return, you only ask’d me coldly, “Whether with that fine
Scepticismof mine, I made no more distinction between Sincerity and Insincerityin
Actions,than I did between Truth and Falshood, Right and Wrong,in Arguments?”
I durst not ask what your Question drove at. I was afraid I saw it too plainly; and that
by this loose way of talking, which I had learnt in some fashionable Conversations of
the World, I had given you occasion to suspect me of the worst sort ofScepticism,
such as spar’d nothing; but overthrew all Principles,MoralandDivine.
Forgive me, said I, goodPalemon:you are offended, I see, and not without cause. But
what if I shou’d endeavour to compensate myScepticalMisbehaviour, by using a
known Sceptick Privilege,and asserting strenuously the Cause I have hitherto
oppos’d? Do not imagine that I dare aspire so high as to defend reveal’d Religion, or
the holy Mysterys of the Christian Faith. I am unworthy of such a Task, and shou’d
profane the Subject. ’Tis of merePhilosophyI speak: And my Fancy is only to try
what I can[209] muster up thence, to make head against the chief Arguments of
Atheism,and reestablish what I have offer’d to loosen in the System ofTheism.
Your Project, said you, bids fair to reconcile me to your
Deism.
Character, which I was beginning to mistrust. For as averse as I
am to the Cause ofTheism, or Name ofDeist,when taken in a sense exclusive of
Revelation; I consider still that, in strictness, the Root of all isTheism;and that to be
a settled Christian, it is necessary to be first of alla goodTheist.For Theism can only
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 80 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
be oppos’d to*Polytheism,or Atheism.Nor have I patience to hear the Name ofDeist
(the highest of all Names) decry’d, and set in opposition toChristianity.“As if our
Religion was a kind ofMagick,which depended not on the Belief of a single supreme
Being. Or as if the firm and rational Belief of such a Being, on philosophical Grounds,
was an improper Qualification for believing any thing further.” Excellent
Presumption, for those who naturally incline to the Disbelief of Revelation, or who
thro’ Vanity affect a Freedom of this kind!—
But let me hear, continu’d you, whether in good Earnest, and thorow Sinceri[210]ty,
you intend to advance any thing in favour of that Opinion which is fundamental to all
Religion; or whether you design only to divert your-self with the Subject, as you have
done hitherto? “Whatever your Thoughts are,Philocles,I am resolv’d to force ’em
from you. You can no longer plead the Unsutableness of the Time or Place to such
grave Subjects. The gaudy Scene is over with the Day. Our Company have long since
quitted the Field. And the solemn Majesty of such a Night as this, may justly sute
with the profoundest Meditation, or most serious Discourse.”
Thus,Palemon,you continu’d to urge me; till by necessity I was drawn into the
following Vein ofPhilosophical Enthusiasm.
SECTION III
Sect. 3.
YOU shall find then, said I (taking a grave Air) that it is possible for me to be serious;
and that ’tis probable I am growing so, for good and all. Your Over-seriousness a-
while since, at such an unseasonable time, may have driven me perhaps into a
contrary Extreme, by opposition to your melancholy Humour. But I have now a better
Idea of thatMelan[211]cholyyou discover’d; and notwithstanding the humorous Turn
you were pleas’d to give it, I am persuaded it has a different Foundation from any of
those fantastical Causes I then assign’d to it. “Love,
doubtless, is at the bottom; but a nobler Love than such as
LOVE.
common Beautys inspire.”—
Here, in my turn, I began to raise my Voice, and imitate the solemn way you had been
teaching me. “Knowingas you are,” continu’d I, “well-knowingand experienc’d in all
the Degrees and Orders of Beauty,
in all the mysterious Charms of the particular Forms; you rise to
Beauty.
what is more general; and with a larger Heart, and Mind more
comprehensive, you generously seek that which is highest in the kind. Not captivated
by the Lineaments of a fair Face, or the well-drawn Proportions of a human Body,
you viewthe Lifeit-self, and embrace ratherthe Mind,which adds the Lustre, and
renders chiefly amiable.
“Nor is the Enjoyment of such a single Beauty sufficient to
Society.
satisfy such an aspiring Soul. It seeks how to combine more
Beautys, and by what Coalition of these, to form a beautiful Society. It views
Communitys, Friendships, Re[212]lations, Dutys; and considers by what Harmony of
particular Minds the general Harmony is compos’d, andCommonwealestablish’d.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 81 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
“Nor satisfy’d even with publick Good inoneCommunity of Men, it frames it-self a
nobler Object,
and with enlarg’d Affection seeksthe Good of Mankind.It
Virtue.
dwells with Pleasure amidst that Reason, and those Orders on
which this fair Correspondence and goodly Interest is establish’d. Laws,
Constitutions, civil and religious Rites; whatever civilizes or polishes rude Mankind;
the Sciences and Arts, Philosophy, Morals, Virtue; the flourishing State of human
Affairs, and the Perfection of human Nature; these are its delightful Prospects, and
this the Charm of Beauty which attracts it.
“Still ardent in this Pursuit (such is its Love of Order and
Universe.
Perfection) it rests not here; nor satisfies it-self with the Beauty
of a Part; but extending further its communicative Bounty, seeks the Good of All, and
affects the Interest and Prosperity ofthe Whole.True to its native World and higher
Country, ’tis here it seeks Order and Perfection; wishing the best, and hoping still to
find a just and wise Administration.[213]
“And since all Hope of this were vain and idle, if nouniversal Mindpresided;
since without such a supreme Intelligence and providential Care,
GOD.
the distracted Universe must be condemn’d to suffer infinite
Calamitys; ’tis here the generous Mind labours to discover thathealing Causeby
which the Interest ofthe Wholeis securely establish’d, the Beauty of Things, and the
universal Order happily sustain’d.
“This,Palemon,is the Labour of your Soul: and This its
Illnatural and moral.
Melancholy;when unsuccessfully pursuing the supreme Beauty,
it meets with darkning Clouds which intercept its Sight. Monsters arise, not those
fromLybianDesarts, but from the Heart of Man more fertile; and with their horrid
Aspect cast an unseemly Reflection uponNature.She, helpless (as she is thought) and
working thus absurdly, is contemn’d, the Government of the World arraign’d, and
Deitymade void.
“Much is alledg’d in answer, to shew whyNatureerrs, and how she came thus
impotent and erring from an unerring Hand. But I deny she errs; and when she seems
most ignorant or[214] perverse in her Productions, I assert her even then as wise and
provident, as in her goodliest Works. For ’tis not then that Men complain of the
World’s Order, or abhor the Face of things, when they see various Interests mix’d and
interfering; Natures subordinate, of different kinds, oppos’d one to another, and in
their different Operations submitted, the higher to the lower. ’Tis on the contrary,
from this Order of inferior and superior Things, that we admire the*World’s Beauty,
founded thuson Contrarietys:whilst from such various and disagreeing Principles,a
universal Concordis establish’d.
“Thus in the several Orders of terrestrial Forms,a Resignationis requir’d, a Sacrifice
and mutual yielding of Natures one to another. The Vegetables by their Death sustain
the Animals: and Animal Bodys dissolv’d, enrich the Earth, and raise again the
vegetable World. The numerous Insects are reduc’d by the superior Kinds of Birds
and Beasts: and these again are check’d by Man; who in his turn submits to other
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 82 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Natures, and resigns his Form a Sacrifice in common to the rest of Things.[215] And
if in Natures so little exalted or pre-eminent above each other, the Sacrifice of
Interests can appear so just; how much more reasonably may all inferior Natures be
subjected tothe superior Natureof the World! That World,Palemon,which even now
transported you, when the Sun’s fainting Light gave way to these bright
Constellations, and left you this wide System to contemplate.
“Here are thoseLaws which ought not, nor can submit to any thing below. The central
Powers, which hold the lasting Orbs in their just Poize and Movement, must not be
controul’d to save a fleeting Form, and rescue from the Precipice a puny Animal,
whose brittle Frame, howe’er protected, must of it-self so soon dissolve. The ambient
Air, the inward Vapours, the impending Meteors, or whatever else is nutrimental or
preservative of this Earth, must operate in a natural Course: and other Constitutions
must submit to the good Habit and Constitution of the all-sustaining Globe.
“Let us not therefore wonder, if by Earthquakes, Storms, pestilential Blasts, nether or
upper Fires, or Floods, the animal Kinds are oft afflicted, and whole[216] Species
perhaps involv’d at once in common Ruin: But much less let us account it strange, if
either by outward Shock, or some interior Wound from hostile Matter, particular
Animals are deform’d even in their first Conception, when the Disease invades the
Seats of Generation, and seminal Parts are injur’d and obstructed in their accurate
Labours. ’Tis then alone that monstrous Shapes are seen: Nature still working as
before, and not perversly or erroneously; not faintly, or with feeble Endeavours; but
o’erpower’d bya superior Rival,and by another Nature’sjustlyconquering Force.
“Nor need we wonder, if the interior Form,the SoulandTemper, partakes of this
occasional Deformity, and sympathizes often with its close Partner. Who is there can
wonder either at the Sicknesses of Sense, or the Depravity of Minds inclos’d in such
frail Bodys, and dependent on such pervertible Organs?
“Here then is that Solution you require: and hence those seeming
Good.
Blemishes cast upon Nature. Nor is there ought in this beside
what is natural and good. ’TisGood which is predominant; and every corruptible and
mortal Nature by its Mortality and Corruption yields only to some better, and all
in[217] common to thatbest and highest Nature,which is incorruptible and
immortal.”
I SCARCE had ended these Words, ere you broke out in admiration; asking what had
befall’n me, that of a sudden I had thus chang’d my Character, and enter’d into
Thoughts, which must certainly, you suppos’d, have some Foundation in me, since I
cou’d express them with such seeming Affection as I had done.
O, said I, Palemon!that it had been my fortune to have met you the other day, just at
my Return out of the Country froma Friend,whose Conversation had in one day or
twomade such an Impression on me, that I shou’d have suted you to a Miracle. You
wou’d have thought indeed that I had been cur’d of myScepticismand Levity, so as
never to have rally’d more, at that wild rate, on any Subject, much less on these which
are so serious.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 83 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Truly, said you, I cou’d wish I had met you rather at that time, or that those good and
serious Impressions of your Friendhad without interruption lasted with you till this
moment.
Whatever they were, I told you,Palemon,I had not so lost ’em neither,[218] as not
easily, you saw, to revive ’em on occasion; were I not afraid. “Afraid!” said you. “For
whose sake, good Philocles,I intreat you? For mine or your own?” “For both,”
reply’d I. “For tho I was like to be perfectly cur’d of myScepticism;’twas by what I
thought worse,
downrightEnthusiasm.You never knew a more agreeable
Enthusiast.
Enthusiast!”
Were he my Friend, said you, I shou’d hardly treat him in so free a manner. Nor
shou’d I, perhaps, judg that to beEnthusiasmwhich you so freely term so. I have a
strong suspicion that you injure him. Nor can I be satisfy’d till I hear further of that
serious Conversation for which you tax him asEnthusiastick.
I must confess, said I, he had nothing of that savage Air of the vulgar enthusiastick
Kind. All was serene, soft, and harmonious. The manner of it was more after the
pleasing Transports of those antientPoetsyou are often charm’d with, than after the
fierce unsociable way of modernZealots;those starch’d gruff Gentlemen, who guard
Religion as Bullys do a Mistress, and give us the while a very indifferent Opinion of
their Lady’s Merit, and their own Wit, by adoring what they neither allow to be
inspected by others, nor care themselves to examine in a fair[219] light. But here I’ll
answer for it; there was nothing of Disguise or Paint. All was fair, open, and genuine,
as Nature herself. ’TwasNaturehe was in love with: ’TwasNaturehe sung. And if
any-one might be said to havea naturalMistress, my Friend certainly might, whose
Heart was thus ingag’d. ButLove,I found, was every-where the same. And tho the
Object here was very fine, and the Passion it created very noble; yetLiberty,I
thought, was finer than all: And I who never car’d to ingage in other Loves of the
least continuance, was the more afraid, I told you, of this which had such a power
with my poorFriend,as to make him appear the perfectestEnthusiastin the World,
Ill-humour only excepted. For this was singular in him, “That tho he had all of the
Enthusiast,he had nothing of theBigot.He heard every thing with Mildness and
Delight; and bore with me when I treated all his Thoughts as visionary; and when,
Sceptick-like, I unravel’d all his Systems.”
Here was thatCharacterandDescriptionwhich so highly pleas’d you, that you wou’d
hardly suffer me to come to a conclusion. ’Twas impossible, I found, to give you
satisfaction, without reciting the main of what pass’d in thosetwodays between my
Friendand me, in our Country-[220]Retirement. Again and again I bid you beware:
“You knew not the danger of thisphilosophical Passion;nor consider’d what you
might possibly draw upon your-self, and make me the Author of. I was far enough
engag’d already: and you were pushing me further, at your own hazard.”
All I cou’d say made not the least impression on you. But rather than proceed any
further this night, I engag’d, for your sake, to turnWriter,and draw up the Memoirs
of thosetwophilosophical Days; beginning with what had pass’d thislastDay
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 84 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
between our-selves; as I have accordingly done, you see, by way ofIntroductionto
my Story.
BY this time, being got late to Town, some hours after the latest of our Company, you
set me down at my own Lodging; and thus we bad Good-night.[221]
PART II
PhiloclesToPalemon
SECTION I
Sect. 1.
AFTER such a Day as Yesterday, I might well have thought it hard, when I awak’d
the next Morning, to find my-self under positive Engagements of proceeding in the
same philosophical way, without intermission, and upon harder terms than ever. For
’twas no longer the agreeable Part ofa Companionwhich I had now to bear. Your
Conversation,Palemon,which had hitherto supported me, was at an end. I was now
alone;confin’d to my Closet; oblig’d to meditate by my-self; and reduc’d to the hard
Circumstances ofan Author,andHistorian,in the most difficult Subject.
But here, methought, propitious Heaven, in some manner, assisted me. For ifDreams
were, asHomerteaches, sent[222] from the Throne ofJove;I might conclude I had a
favourable one, of thetruesort, towards theMorning-light;which, as I recollected
my-self, gave me a clear and perfect Idea of what I desir’d so earnestly to bring back
to my Memory.
I found my-self transported to a distant Country, which presented a pompousrural
Scene.It was a Mountain not far from the Sea, its Brow adorn’d with antient Wood,
and at its foot a River and well-inhabited Plain: beyond which the Sea appearing,
clos’d the Prospect.
No sooner had I consider’d the Place, than I discern’d it to be the very same where I
had talk’d withTheoclesthe second Day I was with him in the Country. I look’d
about to see if I cou’d find my Friend; and callingTheocles!I awak’d. But so
powerful was the Impression of my Dream, and so perfect the Idea rais’d in me, of the
Person, Words, and Manner of my Friend, that I cou’d now fansy myself
philosophically inspir’d, as thatRomanSageby hisAEgeria,and invited, on this
occasion, to try myHistoricalMuse. For justly might I hope for such Assistance in
behalf ofTheocles,who so lov’d the Muses,and was, I thought, no less belov’d by
them.[223]
TO RETURN therefore to thatoriginalrural Scene, and thatHeroickGenius, the
Companion and Guide of my first Thoughts in these profounder Subjects: I found him
the first Morning with his belov’dMantuanMuse, roving in the Fields; where, as I had
been inform’d at his House, he was gone out, after his usual way, to read. The
moment he saw me, his Book vanish’d, and he came with friendly haste to meet me.
After we had embrac’d, I discover’d my Curiosity to know what he was reading; and
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 85 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
ask’d, “if it were of a secret kind, to which I cou’d not be admitted.” On this he
shew’d me his Poet; and looking pleasantly, “Now tell me truly,” said he, “Philocles,
did you not expect some more mysterious Book than this?” I own’d I did, considering
his Character, which I took to be of so contemplative a kind. “And do you think,” said
he, “that without being contemplative, one can truly relish these diviner Poets?”
“Indeed,” said I, “I never thought there was any need of growing contemplative, or
retiring from the World, to readVirgilor Horace.”
You have nam’dtwo,said he, who can hardly be thought so very
Retirement.
like;tho[224] they were Friends, and equally good Poets. Yet
joining ’em, as you are pleas’d to do, I wou’d willingly learn from you, whether in
your opinion there be any Disposition so fitted for reading ’em, as that in which they
writ themselves. In this, I am sure, they both join’d heartily; to loveRetirement:when
for the sake of such a Life and Habit as you callcontemplative,they were willing to
sacrifice the highest Advantages, Pleasures, and Favour of a Court. But I will venture
to say more in favour ofRetirement:“That not only the best Authors, but the best
Company, require this seasoning.” Society it-self cannot be rightly enjoy’d without
some Abstinence and separate Thought. All grows insipid, dull, and tiresom, without
the help of some Intervals of Retirement. Say,Philocles,whether you your-self have
not often found it so? Do you think those Lovers understand the Interests of their
Loves, who by their good-will wou’d never be parted for a moment? Or wou’d they
be discreet Friends, think you, who wou’d chuse to live together on such Terms?
What Relish then must the World have (that common World of mix’d and
undistinguish’d Company) without a little Solitude; without stepping now and then
aside, out of theRoadandbeaten Trackof Life, that tedious Circle of Noise and
Show, which forces wea[225]ry’d Mankind to seek relief from every poor Diversion?
By your Rule, said I,Theocles,there shou’d be no such thing asHappiness or Good
in Life, since every Enjoyment wears out so soon; and growing painful, is diverted by
someotherthing; and that again by someother;and so on. I am sure, if Solitude
serves as a Remedy or Diversion to any thing in the World, there is nothing which
may not serve as Diversion to Solitude; which wants it more than any thing besides.
And thus there can be noGood which is regular or constant. Happiness is a thing out
of the way, and only to be found in wandring.
O Philocles,reply’d he,
I rejoice to find you in the pursuit ofHappiness andGood;
Happiness. Good.
however you may wander. Nay, tho you doubt whether there be
that Thing;yet if you reason, ’tis sufficient; there is hope still. But see how you have
unawares engag’d your-self! For if you have destroy’d allGood, because in all you
can think of, there is nothing will constantly hold so; then you have set it as a Maxim,
(and very justly in my Opinion) “ThatNothing can be good but what is constant.”
I own, said I, that all I know of worldly Satisfaction is inconstant. The[226] Things
which give it, are never at a stay: and theGood it-self, whatever it be, depends no less
on Humour than on Fortune. For that which Chance may often spare, Time will not.
Age, Change of Temper, other Thoughts, a different Passion, new Engagements, a
new Turn of Life, or Conversation, the least of these are fatal, and alone sufficient to
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 86 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
destroy Enjoyment. Thothe Objectbe the same,the Relishchanges, and the short-
liv’dGood expires. But I shou’d wonder much if you cou’d tell me any thing in Life,
which was not of as changeable a Nature, and subject to the same common Fate of
Satiety and Disgust.
I FIND then, reply’d he, that the current Notion ofGood is not
Pleasure.
sufficient to satisfy you. You can afford toscepticize,where no-
one else will so much as hesitate. For almost every-one philosophizes dogmatically on
this Head. All are positive in this, “That our realGood isPleasure.”
If they wou’d inform us “Which,” said I, “orWhat sort,” and ascertain once the very
Species and distinct Kind; such as must constantly remainthe same,andequally
eligibleat all times; I shou’d then perhaps be better satisfy’d. But whenWilland
Pleasureare synonymous; when every[227] thing which*pleases usis call’d
Pleasure,and we never chuse or prefer butas we please,’tis trifling to say, “Pleasure
is our Good.” For this has as little meaning as to say, “We chuse what we think
eligible”: and, “We are pleas’d with what delights or pleases us.” The Question is,
“Whether we arerightly pleas’d,and chuse as weshou’d do?” For as highlypleas’d
as Children are with Baubles, or with whatever affects their tender Senses; we cannot
in our hearts sincerely admire theirEnjoyment,or imagine ’em Possessors of any
extraordinaryGood. Yet are their Senses, we know, as keen and susceptible of
Pleasureas our own. The same Reflection is of force as to mere Animals, who in
respect of the Liveliness and Delicacy of Sensation, have many of ’em the advantage
of us. And as for some low and sordid Pleasuresof human Kind; shou’d they be ever
so lastingly enjoy’d, and in the highest credit with their Enjoyers; I shou’d never
afford ’em the name ofHappiness or Good.
Wou’d you then appeal, said he, from the immediate Feeling and Experience of one
who is pleas’d,and satisfy’d with what heenjoys?[228]
Most certainly I shou’d appeal, said I, (continuing the same Zeal whichTheocleshad
stirr’d in me, against those Dogmatizers onPleasure). For is there that sordid
Creature on earth, who does not prize his ownEnjoyment?Does not the frowardest,
the most rancorous distemper’d Creature do as much? Is not Malice and Cruelty of the
highest relish with some Natures? Is not a hoggish Life the height of some Mens
Wishes? You wou’d not ask me surely to enumerate the several Species of Sensations,
which Men of certain Tastes have adopted, and own’d for their chiefPleasureand
Delight. For with some Men even Diseases have been thought valuable and worth the
cherishing, merely for the Pleasure found in allaying the Ardor of an irritating
Sensation. And to these absurdEpicuresthose other are near a-kin, who by study’d
Provocatives raise unnatural Thirst and Appetite; and to make way for fresh
Repletion, prepareEmeticks,as the last Desert; the sooner to renew the Feast. ’Tis
said, I know, proverbially, “ThatTastes are different, and must not be disputed.” And
I remember some such Motto as this plac’d once on a Devise, which was found
sutable to the Notion. AFlywas represented feeding on a certain Lump. The Food,
however vile, was natural to the Animal. There was no Ab[229]surdity in the Case.
But shou’d you shew me a brutish or a barbarous Man thus taken up, and solac’d in
his Pleasure; shou’d you shew me a Sot in his solitary Debauch, or a Tyrant in the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 87 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
exercise of his Cruelty, with thisMottoover him, to forbid my Appeal; I shou’d
hardly be brought to think the better of hisEnjoyment:Nor can I possibly suppose
that a mere sordid Wretch, with a base abject Soul, and the best Fortune in the World,
was ever capable of anyreal Enjoyment.
By this Zeal, reply’dTheocles,which you have shewn in the refutinga wrong
Hypothesis, one wou’d imagine you had in reality some Notion ofa right;and began
to think that there might possibly be such a thing at last asGood.
That there is something nearer toGood, and more like it than another, I am free, said
I, to own. But whatrealGood is, I am still to seek, and must therefore wait till you can
better inform me. This I only know; “That either All Pleasure is Good, or only Some.”
If all,then every kind of Sensuality must be precious and desirable. Ifsome only, then
we are to seek,what kind;and discover, if we can,whatit is which distinguishes
between one Pleasure and another: and makesoneindifferent, sorry,
mean;[230]anothervaluable, and worthy. And by thisStamp,thisCharacter,if there
be any such, we must defineGood;and not byPleasureit-self; which may be very
great, and yet very contemptible. Nor can any-one truly judg the Value of any
immediate Sensation, otherwise than by judging first of the Situation of his own
Mind. For that which we esteem a Happiness inoneSituation of Mind, is otherwise
thought of inanother.Which Situation therefore is the justest, must be consider’d;
“How to gain thatPoint of Sight,whence probably we may best discern; and How to
place our-selves in that unbiass’d State, in which we are fittest to pronounce.”
O Philocles,reply’d he, if this be unfeignedly your Sentiment; if it be possible you
shou’d have the Fortitude to with-hold your*Assent in this Affair, and go in search
of what the meanest of Mankind think they alreadyknowso certainly: ’tis from a
nobler turn of thought than what you have observ’d in any of themodern Scepticks
you have convers’d with. For if I mistake not, there are hardly anywhere at this day a
sort of People more peremptory, or who deliberate less on the[231] choice ofGood.
They who pretend to such a Scrutiny of other Evidences, are the readiest to take the
Evidence of the greatestDeceiversin the World,their own Passions.Having gain’d,
as they think, a Liberty from some seeming Constraints of Religion, they suppose
they employ this Liberty to perfection, by following the first Motion of their Will, and
assenting to the first Dictate or Report of any prepossessing*Fancy,any foremost
Opinionor Conceitof Good. So that their Privilege is only that of being perpetually
amus’d; and their Liberty that of being impos’d on in their most important Choice. I
think one may say with assurance, “That the greatest of Fools is he who imposes on
himself, and in his greatest Concern thinks certainly heknowsthat which he has least
study’d, and of which he is most profoundlyignorant.” He who is ignorant, but
knows his Ignorance, is far wiser. And to do justice to these fashionable Men of Wit;
they are not all of ’em, indeed, so insensible as not to perceive something of their own
Blindness and Absurdity. For often when they seriously reflect on their past Pursuits
and Engagements, they freely own, “That for what remains ofLife,they know not
whether they shall be ofa-piece with them[232]selves;or whether their Fancy,
Humour, or Passion will not hereafter lead ’em to a quitedifferent ChoiceinPleasure,
and to a Disapprobation of all they ever enjoy’d before.”—Comfortable Reflection!
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 88 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
To bring the Satisfactions ofthe Mind,continu’d he, and the Enjoyments ofReason
andJudgmentunder the Denomination ofPleasure,is only a Collusion, and a plain
receding from the common Notion of the Word. They deal not fairly with us, who in
their philosophical Hour, admit that forPleasure,which at an ordinary time, and in
the common Practice of Life, is so little taken for such. The Mathematician who
labours at his Problem, the bookish Man who toils, the Artist who endures voluntarily
the greatest Hardships and Fatigues; none of these are said “To follow Pleasure.” Nor
will the Men of Pleasure by any means admit ’em to be of their number. The
Satisfactions which arepurely mental,and depend only on the Motion ofa Thought;
must in all likelihood be too refin’d for the Apprehensions of our modernEpicures,
who are so taken up with Pleasure ofa more substantialkind. They who are full of
the Idea of such asensible solidGood, can have but a slender Fancy for the mere
spiritualandintellectualsort. But ’tis this latter they set up and[233] magnify upon
occasion; to save the Ignominy which may redound to ’em from the former. This
done, the latter may take its chance: Its Use is presently at an end. For ’tis observable,
that when the Men of this sort have recommended the Enjoyments of the Mind under
the title ofPleasure;when they have thus dignify’d the Word, and included in it
whatever is mentally good or excellent, they can afterwards suffer it contentedly to
slide down again into its own genuine and vulgar Sense; whence they rais’d it only to
serve a turn. WhenPleasureis call’d in question, and attack’d, thenReasonand
Virtueare call’d in to her Aid, and made principal parts of her Constitution. A
complicated Form appears, and comprehends straight all which is generous, honest,
and beautiful in human Life. But when the Attack is over, and the Objection once
solv’d, the Specter vanishes:Pleasurereturns again to her former Shape: She may
e’en bePleasurestill, and have as little concern withdry sober Reason, as in the
nature of the thing, and according to common Understanding, she really has. For if
this rational sort of Enjoyment be admitted into the Notion ofGood, how is it possible
to admit withal that kind of Sensation, which in effect is rather opposite to this
Enjoyment? ’Tis certain that in respect of the Mind and its Enjoyments,[234] the
Eagerness and Irritation ofmere Pleasure,
is as disturbing as the Importunity and Vexation ofPain.If either
Pleasure and Pain.
throws the Mind off its biass, and deprives it of the Satisfaction it
takes in its natural Exercise and Employment; the Mind in this case must be Sufferer
as well by one as by the other. Ifneitherdoes this, there is no harm on either side.—
By the way, said I, interrupting him; As sincere as I am in questioning, “Whether
Pleasurebe reallyGood”; I am not such a Sceptick as to doubt “WhetherPainbe
reallyIll.”
Whatever isgrievous,reply’d he, can be no other thanIll.But that what is grievous to
one,is not so much as troublesom toanother;let Sportsmen, Soldiers, and others of
the hardy Kinds be witness. Nay, that what isPainto one, isPleasureto another, and
so alternately, we very well know: since Men vary in their Apprehension of these
Sensations, and on many occasions confound one with the other. Has not even Nature
her-self, in some respects, as it were blended ’em together, and (as a wise Man said
once) “join’d the Extremity of one so nicely to the other, that it absolutely runs into it,
and is undistinguishable?”[235]
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 89 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
IN FINE then, said I, ifPleasureandPainbe thus convertible and mix’d; if,
according to your Account, “That which is nowPleasure,by being strain’d a little too
far, runs intoPain,andPain,when carry’d far, creates againthe highest Pleasure,by
mere Cessation, and a kind of natural Succession; if some Pleasures tosome are Pains,
and some Pains toothersare Pleasures”: All this, if I mistake not, makes still for my
Opinion, and shows That there is nothing you can assign which can really stand as
Good.
For if Pleasurebe notGood, nothing is. And ifPainbeIll,(as I
Good.
must necessarily take for granted) we have a shreud Chance on
theillside indeed, but none at all on thebetter.So that we may fairly doubt, “Whether
Lifeit-selfbe not mere Misery”; sinceGainers by it we can never be:Losers we may
sufficiently, and are like to be, every hour of our Lives. Accordingly, what our
EnglishPoetess says of Good, shou’d be just and proper: “ ’Tis good not to be
born.”—And thus for any thing ofGood which can be expected in Life, we may e’en
“Beg pardon of Nature; and return her Present on her hands, without waiting for her
Call.”[236] For what shou’d hinder us? or What are we the better for living?
The Query, said he, is pertinent. But why such Dispatch, if the Case be doubtful?
This, surely, my goodPhilocles!is a plain Transgression of yourscepticalBounds.
We must be sufficientlydogmatical,to come to this Determination.
’Tis a deciding as well concerning Death as Life; “What possibly
Futurity.
may be hereafter, and Whatnot.” Now to be assur’d that we can
never be concern’d in any thinghereafter,we must understand perfectly what it is
which concerns or engages us in any thingpresent.We must trulyknow our-selves,
and in what thisSelfof ours consists. We must determine against
Self.
Pre-existence,and give a better reason for our having never been
concern’d in ought before our Birth, than merely, “Because weremember not, nor are
conscious.” For in many things we have been concern’d to purpose, of which we have
now no Memory or Consciousness remaining. And thus we may happen to be again
and again, to perpetuity, for any reason we can show to the contrary. All isRevolution
in us. We are no more the self-same Matter, or System of Matter, from one day to
another. What Succession there may behere[237]after,we know not; since evennow,
we live by Succession, and only perish and are renew’d. ’Tis in vain we flatter our-
selves with the assurance of our Interest’s ending with a certain Shape or Form. What
interested usat firstin it, we know not; any more than how we havesinceheld on,
and continuestillconcern’d in such an Assemblage of fleeting Particles.Where
besides, or inWhatelse we may have to do,
perchance, in time to come, we know as little; nor can tell how
Futurity.
Chanceor Providence,hereafter, may dispose of us. And if
Providencebe in the case, we have still more reason to consider how we undertake to
be our own Disposers. It must needs become aSceptickabove all Men to hesitate in
matters ofExchange.And tho he acknowledges no present Good or Enjoyment in
Life, he must be sure, however, of bettering his Condition, before he attempts to alter
it. But as yet,Philocles,even this Point remains undetermin’d between us:
“Whether in this present Life there be not such a thing as
Good.
realGood.”
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 90 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Be you therefore, said I, my Instructor, sagaciousTheocles!and inform me, “What
thatGood is, orWhere,which can afford Contentment and Satisfaction always alike,
without varia[238]tion or diminution.” For tho on some Occasions, and in some
Subjects, the Mind may possibly be so bent, and the Passion so wrought up, that for
the time no bodily Sufferance or Pain can alter it; yet this is what can seldom happen,
and is unlikely to last long: since without any Pain or Inconvenience, the Passion in a
little time does its own work, the Mind relaxes with its Bent, and the Temper weary’d
with Repetition finds no more Enjoyment, but runs to something new.
HEAR then! saidTheocles.For tho I pretend not to tell you at once the Nature of this
which I callGood;yet I am content to shew you something of it, inyour-self,which
you will acknowledg to be naturally more fix’d and constant, than any thing you have
hitherto thought on. Tell me, my Friend! if ever you were weary of doing good to
those you lov’d?
Say when you ever found it unpleasing to servea Friend?Or
Friendship.
whether when youfirstprov’d this generous Pleasure, you did
not feel it less than atthis present;after so long Experience? Believe me,Philocles,
this Pleasure is more debauching than any other. Never did any Soul do good, but it
came readier to do the same again, with more Enjoyment. Never was Love, or
Gratitude, or[239] Bounty practis’d but with increasing Joy, which made the Practiser
still more in love with the fair Act.
Answer me, Philocles,you who are such a Judg ofBeauty,and
Friendship private,
have so gooda Tasteof Pleasure; is there any thing you admire, publick.
so fair asFriendship?or any thing so charming asa generous
Action?What wou’d it be therefore, if all Life were in reality but one continu’d
Friendship, and cou’d be made one such intire Act? Here surely wou’d be thatfix’d
andconstantGood you sought. Or wou’d you look for any thing beyond?
Perhaps not, said I. But I can never, surely, go beyond this, to seek fora Chimera,if
thisGood of yours be not thorowly chimerical. For tho a Poet may possibly work up
such a single Action, so as to holda Playout; I can conceive but very faintly how this
high Strain of Friendship can be so manag’d as to filla Life.Nor can I imagine where
the Object lies of such a sublime heroick Passion.
Can any Friendship, said he, be so heroick, as that towards Mankind? Do you think
the Love of Friends in general, and of one’s Country, to be nothing? or that particular
Friendship can well subsist without such an enlarg’d Affection, and Sense of
Obligation to Society? Say, if possible, you are aFriend,but hateyour[240]Country.
Say, you are true to the Interest ofa Companion,but false to that ofSociety.Can you
believe your-self? Or will you lay the Name aside, and refuse to be call’dthe Friend,
since you renouncetheMan?
That there is something, said I, due toMankind,is what I think will not be disputed by
one who claims the Name ofFriend.Hardly indeed cou’d I allow the Name ofMan to
one who never cou’d call or be call’dFriend.But he who justly proves himselfa
Friend,isMan enough; nor is he wanting toSociety.A single Friendship may acquit
him. He has deserv’d a Friend, and isMan’s Friend;tho not in strictness, or according
to your high moral Sense,the Friend of Mankind.For to say truth, as to this sort of
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 91 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Friendship; it may by wiser Heads be esteem’d perhaps more than ordinarily manly,
and even heroick, as you assert it: But for my part, I see so very little Worth in
Mankind,and have so indifferent an Opinion ofthe Publick,that I can propose little
Satisfaction to my-self in lovingeither.
“Do you, then, takeBountyandGratitudeto be among the Acts
Gratitude.
of Friendship and Good-nature?” “Undoubtedly: for they are the
chief.” “Suppose then, that the oblig’d Person discovers in the[241] Obliger several
Failings; does this excludethe Gratitudeof the former?” “Not in the least.” “Or does
it makethe Exerciseof Gratitude less pleasing?” “I think rather the contrary. For
when depriv’d of other means of making a Return, I might rejoice still in that sure
way of shewing my Gratitude to my Benefactor, by bearing his Failings as a Friend.”
“And as toBounty:Tell me, I beseech you,
is it to those only who aredeservingthat we shou’d do good? Is
Bounty.
it only toa goodNeighbour, or Relation,a goodFather, Child, or
Brother? Or does Nature, Reason, and Humanity better teach us, to do good still to a
Father, becausea Father;and to a Child, becausea Child;and so to every Relation in
human Life?” “I think,” said I, “this last is rightest.”
O Philocles,reply’d he, consider then what it was you said, when you objected
against the Love ofMankindbecause of human Frailty; and seem’d to scorn the
Publick,because of its Misfortunes. See if this Sentiment be consistent with that
Humanity which elsewhere you own and practise. For where can Generosity exist, if
not here?
Where can we ever exert Friendship, if not in this chief Subject?
Love of Mankind.
To what shou’d we be true or grateful in the World, if not to
Mankind, and that Society to which we are so deep[242]ly indebted? What are the
Faults or Blemishes which can excuse such an Omission, or in a grateful Mind can
ever lessen the Satisfaction of making a grateful kind return?
Can you then out ofGood-breedingmerely, and from a Temper
Good-breeding.
natural to you, rejoice to shew Civility, Courteousness,
Obligingness, seek Objects of Compassion, and be pleas’d with every Occurrence
where you have power to do some service even to People unknown? Can you delight
in such Adventures abroad in foreign Countrys, or in the case of Strangers here at
home; to help, assist, relieve all who require it, in the most hospitable, kind, and
friendly manner? And canyour Country,or what is more,yourKind,require less
Kindness from you, or deserve less to be consider’d, than even one of these Chance-
Creatures?—OPhilocles!
how little do you know the Extent and Power ofGood-nature,
Good-nature.
and to what an heroick pitch a Soul may rise, which knows the
thorow Force of it; and distributing it rightly, frames in it-self an equal, just, and
universal Friendship!
JUST as he had ended these Words, a Servant came to us in the Field, to give notice
of some Company, who were come to dine with us, and waited our coming[243] in.
So we walk’d home-wards. I toldTheocles,going along, that I fear’d I shou’d never
make a goodFriendor Loverafter his way. As for a plain natural Love ofone single
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 92 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Person in either Sex, I cou’d compass it, I thought, well enough; but thiscomplex
universalsort was beyond my reach. I cou’d love the Individual, but not the Species.
This was too mysterious; too metaphysical an Object for me. In
Mystical Love.
short, I cou’d love nothing of which I had not some sensible
material Image.
“How!” reply’dTheocles,“can you never love except in this manner? when yet I
know that you admir’d and lov’d a Friend long ere you knew his Person. Or was
Palemon’s Character of no force, when it engag’d you in that long Correspondence
which preceded yourlatepersonal Acquaintance?” “The Fact,” said I, “I must, of
necessity, own to you. And now, methinks, I understand your Mystery, and perceive
how I must prepare for it: For in the same manner as when I first began to love
Palemon,I was forc’d to form a kind of material Object, and had always such a
certain Image of him, ready-drawn, in my Mind, whenever I thought of him; so I must
endeavour to order it in the Case before us: if possibly by your help I can raise
any[244] such Image, or Specter, as may represent this odd Being you wou’d have me
love.”
Methinks, said he, you might have the same Indulgence forNatureor Mankind,as for
the People of oldRome;whom, notwithstanding their Blemishes, I have known you in
love with, many ways; particularly under the Representation of a beautiful Youth
call’dtheGeniusof the People.
For I remember, that viewing once some Pieces of Antiquity,
Genius of a Country.
where the People were thus represented, you allow’d ’em to be
no disagreeable Object.
Indeed, reply’d I, were it possible for me to stamp upon my Mind such a Figure as
you speak of, whether it stood forMankindor Nature,
it might probably have its effect; and I might become perhapsa
Nature.
Lover after your way: But more especially, if you cou’d so order
it, as to make things reciprocal between us, and bring me to fansy of thisGenius, that
it cou’d be “sensible of my Love, and capable ofa Return.” For without this, I shou’d
make but an ill Lover, tho of the perfectest Beauty in the World.
’Tis enough, saidTheocles,I accept the Terms: And if you promiseto love,I will
endeavour to shew youthat[245]Beautywhich I countthe perfectest,andmost
deserving ofLove;and which will not fail ofa Return.—To-morrow, when the eastern
Sun (as Poets describe) with his first Beams adorns the Front of yonder Hill; there, if
you are content to wander with me in the Woods you see, we will pursue thoseLoves
of ours, by favour of the Silvan Nymphs: and invoking firstthe Genius of the Place,
we’ll try to obtain at least some faint and distant View ofthe sovereignGeniusand
first
Beauty.This if you can come once to contemplate, I will answer
Genius of the World.
for it, that all those forbidding Features and Deformitys, whether
of Natureor Mankind,will vanish in an instant, and leave you thatLover I cou’d
wish.—But now, enough!—Let us to ourCompany; and change this Conversation for
some other more sutable to ourFriendsandTable.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 93 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
SECTION II
Sect. 2.
YOU see here, Palemon,what a Foundation is laid for theEnthusiasms I told you of;
and which, in my Opinion (I told you too) were the more dangerous, because so very
odd, and out of the way. But Curiosity had seiz’d you, I perceiv’d, as it had done me
before. For after this first Conversation, I must own, I long’d[246] for nothing so
much as the next day, and the appointed Morning-walk in theWoods.
We had only a Friend or two at dinner with us; and for a good while we discours’d of
News and indifferent things, till I, who had my head still running upon those other
Subjects, gladly laid hold of something dropt by chance concerningFriendship;
and said, That for my own part, truly, tho I once thought I had
Friendship.
known Friendship, and really counted my-selfa good Friend
during my whole Life; yet I was now persuaded to believe my-self no better than a
Learner: sinceTheocleshad almost convinc’d me, “That to be aFriendto any onein
particular,’twas necessary to be firsta Friend to Mankind.” But how to qualify my-
self for such a Friendship, was, methought, no little difficulty.
Indeed, saidTheocles,you have given us a very indifferent Character of your-self, in
saying so. If you had spoken thus of the Friendship of anygreat Manat Court, or
perhaps ofa Courtit-self, and had complain’d, “How hard it was for you to succeed,
or make Interest with such as govern’d there”; we shou’d have concluded in your
behalf, that there were such Terms to be comply’d with, as were unworthy of you.
But[247] “To deserve well ofthe Publick,” and “To be justly styl’dthe Friend of
Mankind,”
requires no more than to begoodandvirtuous;Terms which for
Virtue.
one’s own sake one wou’d naturally covet.
How comes it then, said I, that even thesegood Terms
Motives.
themselves are so ill accepted, and hardly ever taken, if I may so
express it, except onfurther Terms? For Virtue,by it-self,is thought but an ill Bargain:
and I know few, even of the Religious and Devout, who take up with it any otherwise
than as Children do with Physick; where the Rod and Sweetmeat are the potent
Motives.
They are Children indeed, reply’dTheocles,and shou’d be treated so, who need any
Force or Persuasion to do what conduces to their Health and Good. But where, I
beseech you, are those forbidding Circumstances which shou’d makeVirtuego down
so hardly? Is it not, among other things, that you think your-self by this means
precluded the fine Tables and costly Eating of our modernEpicures;and that perhaps
you fear the being reduc’d to eat always as ill as now, upon a plain Dish or two, and
no more?
This, I protested, was injuriously suppos’d of me. For I wish’d never to eat[248]
otherwise than I now did, at his Table; which, by the way, had more resemblance (I
thought) ofEpicurus’s, than those which now-a-days preposterously pass’d under his
name. For if his Opinion might be taken, the highest Pleasures in the World were
owing toTemperance,andmoderate Use.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 94 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
If then the merest Studier ofPleasure,(answer’d Theocles) evenEpicurushimself,
made that favourable Report ofTemperance,
so different from his modern Disciples; if he cou’d boldly say,
Temperance.
“That with such Fare as a mean Garden afforded, he cou’d vie
even with the Gods for Happiness”; how shall we say of this part of Virtue, that it
needs betaken upon Terms? If the immediate Practice ofTemperancebe thus
harmless; are its Consequences injurious? Does it take from the Vigour of the Mind,
consume the Body, and render both the one and the other less apt to their proper
Exercises, “the Enjoyments of Reason or Sense, or the Employments and Offices of
civil Life?” Or is it that a Man’s Circumstances are the worse for it, as he stands
towards his Friends, or Mankind? Is a Gentleman in this sense to be pity’d, “AsOne
burdensom to himself, and others;One whom all Men will naturally shun, as an ill
Friend, and a Corrupter[249] of Society and Good Manners?”—Shall we consider our
Gentleman ina publick Trust,and see whether he is like to succeed best with this
restraining Quality; or whether he may be more rely’d on, and thought more
incorrupt, if his Appetites are high, and his Relish strong towards that which we call
Pleasure? Shall we consider him asa Soldier,in a Campain, or Siege; and advise with
our-selves how we might be best defended, if we had occasion for such a one’s
Service? “Which Officer wou’d make the best for the Soldiers; Which Soldier for the
Officers; or Which Army for their Country?”—What think you of our Gentleman, for
a Fellow-traveller?Wou’d he, as a temperate Man, be an ill Choice? Wou’d it indeed
be more eligible and delightful, “To have a Companion, who, in any shift or necessity,
wou’d prove the most ravenous, and eager to provide in the first place for himself,
and his own exquisite Sensations?”—I know not what to say whereBeautyis
concern’d. Perhaps theamorous Galants, and exquisiteRefinerson this sort of
Pleasure, may have so refin’d their Minds and Tempers, that, notwithstanding their
accustom’d Indulgence, they can, upon occasion, renounce their Enjoyment, rather
than violate Honour, Faith, or Justice.—And thus, at last, there will be little Virtue or
Worth[250] ascrib’d to this patient soberCharacter.“The dulltemperate Manis no
fitter to be trusted than the elegantluxuriousone. Innocence, Youth, and Fortune may
be as well committed to the Care of this latter Gentleman. He wou’d prove as goodan
Executor,as good a Trustee,as good a Guardian, as he wou’d a Friend.The Family
which entrusted him wou’d be secure; and no Dishonour, in any likelihood, wou’d
happen from the honestMan of Pleasure.”
THE Seriousness with whichTheoclesspoke this, made it the more pleasant; and set
our other Company upon saying a great many good things on the same Subject, in
commendation ofa temperate Life.So that our Dinner by this time being ended, and
the Wine, according to Custom, plac’d before us; I found still we were in no
likelihood of proceeding to a Debauch. Every-one drank only as he fansy’d, in no
Order or Proportion, and with no regard to circular Healths or Pledges: A Manner
which the sociable Men of another Scheme of Morals wou’d have censur’d no doubt,
as a heinous Irregularity, and Corruption ofGood Fellowship.[251]
I own, said I, I am far from thinkingTemperanceso disagreeable a Character. As for
this part of Virtue, I think there is no need of taking it on any otherTerms to
recommend it, than the mere Advantage of being sav’d from Intemperance, and from
the desire of things unnecessary.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 95 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
How! said Theocles,are you thus far advanc’d? And can you carry thisTemperance
so far as to Estates and Honours, by opposing it toAvariceandAmbition?—Nay, then
truly, you may be said to have fairly embark’d your-self in this Cause. You have
pass’d the Channel, and are more than half-seas over. There remains no further
Scruple in the case of Virtue, unless you will declare your-selfa Coward, or conclude
it a happiness to be born one. For if you can betemperatewithal towardsLife,and
think it not so great a business, whetheritbe of fewer or more Years; but satisfy’d
with what you have liv’d, can rise a thankful Guest from a full liberal Entertainment;
Is not this the Sum of all? the finishing Stroke and very Accomplishment ofVirtue?
In this Temper of Mind, what is there can hinder us from forming for our-selves as
heroicka Characteras we please? What is there eithergood, generous, or great,[252]
which does not naturally flow from such a modestTemperance?Let us once gain this
simple plain-look’dVirtue,and see whether the more shiningVirtueswill not follow.
See what thatCountry of the Mindwill produce, when by the wholesom Laws of this
Legislatress it has obtain’d itsLiberty!
You, Philocles,who are such an Admirer ofCivil Liberty,and
LIBERTY, Civil.
can represent it to your-self with a thousand several Graces and
Advantages; can you imagine no Grace or Beauty in that originalnative Liberty,
which sets us free from so many in-born Tyrannys, gives us the
Moral.
Privilege of our-selves, and makes usour own, and independent?
A sort of Property, which, methinks, is as material to us to the full, as that which
secures us our Lands, or Revenues.
I shou’d think, said he (carrying on his Humour) that one might draw the Picture of
thismoral Dame to as much advantage as that of herpoliticalSister; whom you
admire, as describ’d to us “in herAmazon-Dress, with a free manly Air becoming
her; her Guards theLaws, with their written Tables, like Bucklers, surrounding her;
Riches, Traffick, and Plenty, with theCornucopia,serving as her Attendents; and in
her Train theArtsandSciences,like Children, playing.”—The rest of the Piece[253]
is easy to imagine: “Her Triumph over Tyranny, and lawless Rule of Lust and
Passion.”—But what a Triumph wou’d her Sister’s be! What Monsters of savage
Passions wou’d there appear subdu’d! “There fierceAmbition, Lust, Uproar, Misrule,
with all theFiendswhich rage in human Breasts, wou’d be securely chain’d. And
when Fortuneher-self, the Queen of Flatterys, with that Prince of Terrors,Death,
were at the Chariot-wheels, as Captives; how natural wou’d it be to seeFortitude,
Magnanimity, Justice, Honour,and all that generous Band attend as the Companions
of our inmate LadyLiberty!She, like some new-born Goddess, wou’d grace her
Mother’s Chariot, and own her Birth from humbleTemperance,that nursing Mother
of the Virtues; who like the Parent of the Gods, old ReverendCybele,wou’d properly
appear drawn by rein’d Lions, patient of the Bit, and on her Head a Turret-like Attire:
the Image of defensive Power, and Strength of Mind.”
BY THIS PictureTheocles,I found, had given Entertainment to the Company; who
from this rough Draught of his fell to designing upon the same Subject, after the
antient manner; till[254]ProdicusandCebes,and all the Antients were exhausted.
Gentlemen, said I, the Descriptions you have been making, are,
VIRTUE.
no doubt, the finest in the world: But after all, when you have
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 96 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
madeVirtueas glorious and triumphant as you please, I will bring you an authentick
Picture of another kind, where we shall see this Triumphin reverse;“Virtueher-selfa
Captivein her turn; and by a proud Conqueror triumph’d over, degraded, spoil’d of all
her Honours, and defac’d; so as to retain hardly one single Feature of real Beauty.”—
I offer’d to go on further, but cou’d not, being so violently decry’d by my two Fellow-
guests; who protested they wou’d never be brought to own so detestable a Picture:
And one of ’em (a formal sort of Gentleman, somewhat advanc’d in Years) looking
earnestly upon me, said, in an angry Tone, “That he had hitherto, indeed, conceiv’d
some hopes of me; notwithstanding he observ’d myFreedom of Thought,and heard
me quoted for such a passionate Lover ofLiberty:But he was sorry to find that my
Principle of Liberty extended in fine to a Liberty from all Principles” (so he express’d
himself) “And none, he thought,[255] beside a Libertine in Principle wou’d approve
of such a Picture of Virtue, as onlyan Atheistcou’d have the impudence to make.”
Theoclesthe while sat silent; tho he saw I minded not my Antagonists, but kept my
Eye fix’d steddily on himself, expecting to hear what he wou’d say. At last, fetching a
deep Sigh, OPhilocles,said he, how well you are Master of that Cause you have
taken on you to defend! How well you know the way to gain advantage to the worst
of Causes, from the imprudent Management of those who defend the best!—I dare
not, for my own share, affirm to you, as my worthy Friends have done, “That ’tisthe
Atheistalone can lay this load onVirtue,and picture her thus
disgracefully.”—No—There are other over-officious and less suspected Hands, which
do her perhaps more injury, tho with a better colour.
ThatVirtueshou’d, with any shew of Reason, be madea Victim,(continu’d he,
turning himself to his Guests) must have appear’d strange to you, no doubt, to hear
asserted with such assurance as has been done byPhilocles.You cou’d conceive no
tolerable ground for such a Spectacle. In thisrevers’d Triumph you expected perhaps
to see some foreign Con[256]queror exalted; as eitherViceit-self, orPleasure, Wit,
spurious Philosophy,or somefalse Image of Truthor Nature.Little were you aware
that the cruel Enemy oppos’d to Virtue shou’d beReligionitself!
But you will call to mind, that even innocently, and without any
Religion and Virtue.
treacherous design,Virtueis often treated so, by those who
wou’d magnify to the utmost the Corruption of Man’s Heart; and in exposing, as they
pretend, the Falshood ofhuman Virtue,think to extolReligion.How many religious
Authors, how many sacred Orators turn all their edge this way, and strike atmoral
Virtueas a kind ofStep-dame,or RivaltoReligion!—*“Moralitymust not be nam’d;
Naturehas no pretence;Reasonis an Enemy;Common Justice,Folly; andVirtue,
Misery. Who wou’d not be vitious, had he his Choice? Who wou’d forbear, but
becausehe must? Or who wou’d value Virtue, but forhereafter?”
Truly, said the old Gentleman, interrupting him, if this be theTriumph of Religion,
’tis such as her greatest Enemy, I believe, wou’d scarce deny her: and I must still be
of opinion, withPhilocles’s leave, that it is no great sign of Tenderness forReligion,
to be so zealous in honouring her at the cost ofVirtue.[257]
Zeal
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 97 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Perhaps so, said I. Yet that there are many such Zealots in the World, you will
acknowledg. And that there is a certain Harmony between thisZealand what you call
Atheism,Theocles,you hear,
has allow’d.—But let us hear him out; if perhaps he will be so
Atheism.
free as to discover to us what he thinks of the generality of our
religious Writers, and their Method of encountring their common Enemy,the Atheist.
This is a Subject which possibly may need a better clearing. For ’tis notorious that the
chief Opposers of Atheism write upon contrary Principles to one another, so as in a
manner to confute themselves. Some of ’em hold zealously for Virtue, and are
Realistsin the Point. Others, one may say, are onlynominal Moralists,
by making Virtue nothing in it-self, a Creature of Will only, or a
MORALISTS,
mere Name of Fashion. ’Tis the same in natural Philosophy: Nominal, Real.
Some take one Hypothesis,
and some another. I shou’d be glad to discover once the true
Naturalists.
Foundation; and distinguish those who effectually refute their
other Antagonists as well as theAtheists,and rightly assert the joint-Cause of Virtue
and Religion.
HERE,Palemon,I had my Wish. For by degrees I engag’dTheoclesto[258] discover
himself fully upon these Subjects; which serv’d as a Prelude to those we were to
ingage in, the next Morning; for the approach of which, I so impatiently long’d. If his
Speculations prov’dof a rational kind,this previous Discourse, I knew, wou’d help
me to comprehend ’em; if onlypleasing Fancys,this wou’d help me however, to
please my-self the better with ’em.
Here then began his Criticism of Authors; which grew by degrees into a continu’d
Discourse. So that had this been at a University,Theoclesmight very well have pass’d
for some grave Divinity-Professor, or Teacher ofEthicks,reading an Afternoon
Lecture to his Pupils.
SECTION III
Sect. 3.
ITwou’d be undoubtedly, said he, a happyCausewhich cou’d
Divinity.
have the benefit of such Managers as shou’d never give their
Adversarys any handle of advantage against it. I cou’d wish that in theCauseof
Religionwe had reason to boast as much. But since ’tis not impossible to write ill
even in the best of Causes, I am inclin’d to think this great one ofReligionmay have
run at least an equal hazard with any other;
since they who write in defense of it, are apt generally to use
Divines.
so[259] much the less caution, as they are more exempt from the
fear of Censure or Criticism in their own Person. Their Adversary is well secur’d and
silenc’d to their hand. They may safely provoke him to a Field, where he cannot
appear openly, or as a profess’d Antagonist. His Weapons are private, and can often
reach theCausewithout offence to itsMaintainers;whilst no direct Attack robs them
of their imaginary Victory. They conquerfor themselves,and expect to be approv’d
still for theirZeal,howeverthe Causeit-self may have suffer’d in their hands.—
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 98 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Perhaps then, said I, (interrupting him) it may be true enough, what was said once by
a Person who seem’d zealous for Religion, “That nonewrit wellagainst the Atheists
beside theClerk,
who drew the Warrant for their Execution.”
Atheist.
If this were thetrue Writing,reply’d he, there wou’d be an end of all Dispute or
Reasoning in the Case. For where Force is necessary, Reason has nothing to do. But
on the other hand, if Reason be needful, Force in the mean while must be laid aside:
For there is no Enforcement of Reason, but by Reason. And therefore ifAtheistsare to
be reason’d with, at all; they are to be reason’d with, like other[260] Men; since
there’s no other way in nature to convince ’em.
This I own, said I, seems rational and just: But I’m afraid that most of the devout
People will be found ready to abandon thepatient,for the moreconciseMethod. And
tho Force without Reason may be thought somewhat hard, yet your other way of
Reason without Force, I am apt to think, wou’d meet with fewer Admirers.
But perhaps, reply’dTheocles,’tis a mere Sound which troubles us. The Word or
Name ofAtheistmay possibly occasion some disturbance, by being made to describe
two Characters so very different as His whoabsolutely denies,and His who only
doubts.Now he who doubts,may possibly lament his own Unhappiness, and wish to
be convinc’d. He whodenies,is daringly presumptuous, and sets up an Opinion
against the Interest of Mankind, and Being of Society. ’Tis easily seen thatoneof
these Persons may bear a due respect to the Magistrate and Laws, tho notthe other;
who being obnoxious to them,
is therefore punishable. But how the former is punishableby
Punishment.
Man, will be hard to say; unless the Magistrate had dominion
over Minds, as well as over Actions and Behaviour; and had power to[261] exercise
an Inquisition within the inmost Bosoms and secret Thoughts of Men.
I apprehend you, said I. And by your account, as there aretwosorts of People who are
call’d Atheists, so there aretwoways of writing against them, which may be fitly us’d
apart, but not so well jointly. You wou’d set aside mere Menaces, and separate the
Philosopher’sWork from theMagistrate’s; taking it for granted,
that the more discreet and sober part of Unbelievers, who come
Magistrate.
not under the dispatching Pen of the Magistrate, can be affected
only by the more deliberate and gentle one of Philosophy. Now the Language of the
Magistrate, I must confess, has little in common with that of Philosophy. Nothing can
be more unbecoming the magisterial Authority than a philosophical Style: and
nothing can be more unphilosophical than a magisterial one. A Mixture of these must
needs spoil both. And therefore, in the Cause before us, “If any one besides the
Magistrate can be said towrite well;’tisHe (according to your account) who writes as
becomes Philosophy, with Freedom of Debate, and Fairness towards his Adversary.”
“Allow it,” reply’d he. “For what can be more equitable?” “Nothing. But[262] willthe
Worldbe of the same Opinion? And may this Method of writing be justly practis’d in
it?” “Undoubtedly it may. And for a Proof, we have many Instances in Antiquity to
produce.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 99 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
The Freedom taken in this philosophical way was never esteem’d
Philosophy.
injurious to Religion, or prejudicial to the Vulgar: since we find
it to have been a Practice both in Writing and Converse among the great Men of a
virtuous and religious People; and that even those Magistrates who officiated at the
Altars, and were the Guardians of the publick Worship, were Sharers in these free
Debates.”
Forgive me,Theocles,said I, if I presume to say, that still this reaches not the Case
before us. We are to considerChristianTimes, such as are now present.
You know the common Fate of those who dare to appearfair
Jealousy of Authors.
Authors.What was that pious and learned Man’s Case, who
wrotethe Intellectual System of the Universe?I confess it was pleasant enough to
consider, that tho the whole World were no less satisfy’d with his Capacity and
Learning, than with his Sincerity in the Cause ofDeity;yet was he acus’d of giving
the upper hand to the Atheists, for having only stated their Reasons, and those of their
Adversarys, fairly together. And among other Writings of this kind, you may
remember how a cer[263]tainFairInquiry(as you call’d it) was receiv’d, and what
offence was taken at it.
I am sorry, saidTheocles,it prov’d so. But now indeed you have found a way which
may, perhaps, force me to discourse at large with you on this head; by entering the
Lists in defense of a Friend unjustly censur’d for this philosophical Liberty.
I confess’d toTheoclesand the Company, that this had really been my Aim: And that
for this reason alone I made my-self the Accuser of this Author; “Whom I here
actually charg’d, as I did all those othermoderate calmWriters, with no less than
Profaneness, for reasoning so unconcernedly and patiently, without the least shew of
Zeal or Passion, upon the Subject of a Deity, and a future State.”
And I, on the other side, reply’dTheocles,am rather for this patient way of
Reasoning; and will endeavour to clear my Friend of this Imputation, if you can have
patience enough to hear me out, in an Affair of such a compass.
We all answer’d for our-selves, and he began thus.[264]
OF THE many Writers ingag’d in the Defense of Religion, it
Authors.
seems to me that the greatest part are imploy’d, either in
supporting the Truth of the Christian Faith in general, or in refuting such particular
Doctrines as are esteem’d Innovations in the Christian Church. There are not, ’tis
thought, many Persons in the World who are loose in the very Grounds and Principles
of all Religion: And to such as these we find, indeed, there are not many Writers who
purposely apply themselves. They may think it a mean Labour, and scarce becoming
them, to argue sedately with such as are almost universally treated with Detestation
and Horror. But as we are requir’d by our Religion to have Charity for all Men, so we
cannot surely avoid having a real Concern for those whom we apprehend to be under
the worst of Errors, and whom we find by Experience to be with the greatest difficulty
reclaim’d. Neither ought they perhaps in prudence to be treated with so little regard,
whose Number, however small, is thought to be rather increasing; and this too among
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 100 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
the People of no despicable Rank. So that it may well deserve some Consideration,
“Whether in our Age and Country the same Remedys may serve, which have hitherto
been try’d; or[265] whether some other may not be prefer’d, as being sutable to Times
of less Strictness in Matters of Religion, and Places less subject to Authority.”
This might be enough to put an Author upon thinking of such a way of reasoning with
these deluded Persons, as in his Opinion might be more effectual for their Benefit,
than the repeatedExclamationsandInvectiveswith which most of the Arguments us’d
against them are commonly accompany’d. Nor was it so absurd to imagine that a
quite different Method might be attempted; by which a Writer might offer Reason to
these Men with so much more Favour and Advantage, as he appear’d un-
prepossess’d, and willing to examine every thing with the greatest Unconcern and
Indifference. For to such Persons as these, ’tis to be fear’d, ’twill always appear,
“That what was neverquestion’d,was neverprov’d: and That whatever Subject had
not, at some time or other, been examin’d with perfect Indifference, was neverrightly
examin’d,nor cou’drightly be believ’d.” And in a Treatise of this kind, offer’d as an
Essay or Inquiryonly, they wou’d be far from finding that Impartiality and
Indifference which is requisite: if instead of a Readiness to comply with whatever
Consequences such an Examination as this, and the[266] Course of Reasoning
brought forth, the Author shou’d shew a previous Inclination to the Consequences
only on one side, and an Abhorrence of any Conclusion on the other.
Others therefore, in different Circumstances, may perhaps have found it necessary,
and becoming theirCharacter,to shew all manner of Detestation both of the Persons
and Principles of these Men. Our Author, on the contrary, whose Character exceeds
not that of aLayman, endeavours to shew Civility and Favour, by keeping the fairest
Measures he possibly can with the Men of this sort; allowing ’em all he is able, and
arguing with a perfect Indifference, even on the Subject of aDeity.He offers to
conclude nothing positive himself, but leaves it to others to draw Conclusions from
his Principles: having this one chief Aim and Intention; “How, in the first place, to
reconcile these Persons tothe Principles of Virtue;That by this means, a Way might
be laid open toReligion;by removing those greatest, if not only Obstacles to it, which
arise from the Vices and Passions of Men.”
’Tis upon this account he endeavours chiefly to establishVirtue
Fundamental
on Principles, by which he is able to argue with those[267] who Principles.
are not as yet induc’d to own aGod, or Future State.If he cannot
do thus much, he reckons he does nothing. For how canSupreme Goodness be
intelligible to those who know not whatGoodness it-selfis? Or how can Virtue be
understood to deserve Reward, when as yet its Merit and Excellence is unknown? We
begin surely at the wrong end, when we wou’d proveMeritby Favour,andOrderby a
Deity.—This our Friend seeks to redress. For being, in respect ofVirtue,what you
lately call’da Realist;he endeavours to shew, “That it is really somethingin it-self,
and in the nature of Things: not arbitrary orfactitious,(if I may so speak) not
constituted from without, or dependent onCustom, Fancy,or Will;not even on the
Supreme Willit-self, which can no-way govern it: but beingnecessarily good,is
govern’d by it, and ever uniform with it.” And notwithstanding he has thus made
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 101 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Virtuehis chief Subject, and in some measure independent on Religion, yet I fansy he
may possibly appear at last as high aDivineas he is aMoralist.
I wou’d not willingly advance it as a Rule, “That those who
Theists,Nominal,
make onlya Name of Virtuemake no more ofDeity,and cannot Real.
without Affectation defend the Principles ofReligion”:[268] But
this I will venture to assert; “That whoever sincerely defendsVirtue,and is aRealist
inMorality,must of necessity, in a manner, by the same Scheme of Reasoning, prove
as verya RealistinDivinity.”
AllAffectation,but chiefly in Philosophy, I must own, I think unpardonable. And you,
Philocles,who can give no quarter to ill Reasoning, nor endure any unfound or
inconsistent Hypothesis; you will be so ingenuous, I dare say, as to reject our modern
Deism,and challenge those who assume a Name to which theirPhilosophycan never
in the least intitle ’em.
Commend me to honestEpicurus,who raises his Deitysaloft in the imaginary Spaces;
and setting ’em apart out of the Universe and Nature of Things, makes nothing of ’em
beyonda Word. This is ingenuous, and plain dealing: For this every one who
philosophizes may easily understand.
The same Ingenuity belongs to those Philosophers whom you,Philocles,seem
inclin’d to favour. Whena Sceptickquestions, “Whethera real Theologycan be
rais’d out ofPhilosophy alone,without the help ofRevelation”; he does no more than
pay a handsom Com[269]pliment to Authority and the receiv’d Religion. He can
impose on no-one who reasons deeply: since whoever does so, will easily conceive,
that at this rate Theology must have no Foundation at all. For Revelation it-self, we
know, is founded on the Acknowledgment of a divine Existence: And ’tis the
Province of Philosophy alone toprovewhat Revelation onlysupposes.
I look on it, therefore, as a most unfair way, for those who wou’d beBuilders,and
undertake thisprovingpart, to lay such a Foundation as is insufficient to bear the
Structure. Supplanting and Undermining may, in other Cases, befair War:But in
philosophical Disputes, ’tis not allowable to work under-ground, or as in Siegesby the
Sap.Nothing can be more unbecoming than to talk magisterially and in venerable
Terms of “AsupremeNature,aninfinite Being,anda Deity”; when all the whilea
Providenceis never meant, nor any thing likeOrder or the Government of a Mind
admitted. For whentheseare understood, andreal Divinityacknowledg’d; the Notion
is not dry, and barren; but such Consequences are necessarily drawn from it, as must
set us in Action, and find Employment for our strongest Affections. All theDutys of
Religionevidently follow hence;[270] and no exception remains against any of those
great Maxims whichRevelationhas establish’d.
Now whether our Friend be unfeignedly and sincerely of this latter sort ofreal
Theologists,you will learn best from the Consequences of hisHypothesis.You will
observe, whether instead of ending inmere Speculation,it leads toPractice:And you
will then surely be satisfy’d, when you see such a Structure rais’d, as with the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 102 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Generality of the World must pass at least forhigh Religion,and with some, in all
likelihood, for no less thanEnthusiasm.
For I appeal to you,Philocles,whether there be any thing inDivinitywhich you think
has more the Air ofEnthusiasmthan that Notion ofDivineLove,
such as separates from every thing worldly, sensual, or meanly-
Divine Love.
interested? ALovewhich issimple, pure,andunmix’d;which
has no other Object than merelythe Excellency of that Being it-self,nor admits of any
other Thought of Happiness, than inits single Fruition.Now I dare presume you will
take it as a substantial proof of my Friend’s being far enough from Irreligion, if it be
shewn that he has espous’d thisNotion,and thinks of making out thishigh Point of
Divinity,from Arguments familiar even to those who opposeReligion.[271]
According, therefore, to his Hypothesis, he wou’d in the first place, by way of
prevention, declare to you, That tho thedisinterested Love ofGod were the most
excellent Principle; yet he knew very well, that by the indiscreet Zeal of some devout
well-meaning People it had been stretch’d too far, perhaps even to Extravagance and
Enthusiasm; as formerly among theMysticksof the antient Church,
whom these of latter days have follow’d. On the other hand, that
Mysticks.
there were those who in opposition to this devout mystick way,
and as profess’d Enemys to what they callEnthusiasm,had so far exploded every
thing of this ecstatick kind, as in a manner to have given up Devotion; and in reality
had left so little of Zeal, Affection, or Warmth, in what they call theirRational
Religion,as to make them much suspected of their Sincerity inany.For tho it be
natural enough (he wou’d tell you) for a mere political Writer to ground his great
Argument for Religion on the necessity of such a Belief as thatof a future Reward
and Punishment;yet, if you will take his Opinion, ’tis a very ill Token of Sincerity in
Religion, and in the Christian Religion more especially, to reduce it to such a
Philosophy as will allow no room to that other Principle ofLove;but treats all of that
kind asEnthusiasm,[272] for so much as aiming at what is call’dDisinterestedness,or
teaching theLove of God or Virtuefor God or Virtue’s sake.
Here, then, we have two sorts of People (according to my Friend’s account) who in
these opposite Extremes exposeReligionto the Insults of its Adversarys. For as, on
one hand, ’twill be found difficult to defend the Notion of that high-rais’d Love,
espous’d with so much warmth by those devoutMysticks;so, on the other hand, ’twill
be found as hard a Task, upon the Principles of these cooler Men,
to guard Religion from the Imputation of Mercenariness, and a
RELIGION, liberal,
slavish Spirit. For how shall one deny, that to serve God by illiberal.
Compulsion, or for Interest merely, isservileandmercenary?Is
it not evident, that the onlytrueandliberalService paid either to that supreme Being,
or to any other Superior, isthat,“which proceeds from anEsteemor Loveof the
Person serv’d, a Senseof Duty or Gratitude, and a Love of the dutiful and grateful
Part, asgoodandamiable, in it-self?” And where is the Injury toReligion,from such
a Concession as this? Or what Detraction is it from the Belief of an After-Reward or
Punishment, to own “That the Service caus’d by it, is not equal to that which is
voluntaryandwith Inclination,but is rather disinge[273]nuous and of the slavish
kind?” Is it not still for the Good of Mankind and of the World, that Obedience to the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 103 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Rule of Right shou’d some way or other be paid; if notin the better way,yet at least
in this imperfect one?And is it not to be shewn, “That altho this Service ofFearbe
allow’d ever so low or base: yetReligionstill beinga Discipline,andProgress of the
Soul towards Perfection, the Motive of Reward and Punishment is primary and of the
highest moment with us;
till being capable of more sublime Instruction, we are led from
Rewards and
thisservileState, to the generous Service ofAffectionand Punishments.
Love?”
To this it is that in our Friend’s Opinion we ought all of us to aspire, so as to
endeavour “Thatthe Excellence of the Object,not theRewardor Punishment,shou’d
be our Motive: But that where thro’ the Corruption of our Nature, theformer of these
Motives is found insufficient to excite to Virtue, there thelattershou’d be brought in
aid,
and on no account be undervalu’d or neglected.”
Supplemental
Motives.
Now this being once establish’d, how canReligionbe any longer
subject to the Imputation ofMercenariness?But thus we know Religion is often
charg’d. “Godliness,” say they, “is great Gain:nor[274] isGod devoutly serv’dfor
nought.”—Is this therefore a Reproach? Is it confess’d there may bea betterService,
a more generous Love?—Enough, there needs no more. On this Foundation our
Friend presumes it easy to defendReligion,and even thatdevoutest Part,which is
esteem’d so great a Paradox of Faith. For if there be in Nature such a Service as that
of Affection and Love,
there remains then only to consider ofthe Object,whether there
Object of Love.
be really thatsupreme-One we suppose. For if there bedivine
Excellencein Things; if there be in Nature asupreme Mind or Deity;we have then an
Object consummate, and comprehensive of all which isgood or excellent.And this
Object, of all others, must of necessity be the most amiable, the most ingaging, and of
highest Satisfaction and Enjoyment. Now that there is such a principal Object as this
in the World, the World alone (if I may say so) by its wise and perfect Order must
evince. This Order, if indeed perfect, excludes allrealIll.And that it really does so, is
what our Author so earnestly maintains, by solving the best he can those untoward
Phaenomenaand ill Signs, taken from the Course of Providence in the seemingly
unequal Lot ofVirtuein this World.
’Tis true: tho the Appearances hold ever so strongly againstVirtue,and in fa[275]vour
of Vice,the Objection which arises hence against aDeitymay be easily remov’d, and
all set right again on the supposal of afuture State.This to a Christian,
or one already convinc’d of so great a Point, is sufficient to clear
Future State.
every dark Cloud of Providence. For he needs not be over-and-
above sollicitous as to the Fate ofVirtuein this World,who is secure ofHereafter.But
the case is otherwise as to the People we are here to encounter. They are at a loss for
Providence, and seek to find it in the World. The Aggravation of the appearing
Disorders in worldly Affairs, and the blackest Representation of Society and Human
Nature, will hardly help ’em to this View. ’Twill be difficult for ’em to read
Providence in such Characters. From so uncomely a Face of thingsbelow,they will
presume to think unfavourably of allabove.Bythe Effectsthey see, they will be
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 104 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
inclin’d to judgthe Cause;and by the Fate ofVirtueto determine ofa Providence.
But being once convinc’d of Order and a Providence as to thingspresent,
they may soon, perhaps, be satisfy’d even ofa future State.For if
Previous Proof.
Virtue be to it-self no small Reward, and Vice in a great measure
its own Punishment; we have a solid ground to go upon.
The plain Foundations of a distributive Justice, and due Order in
A Providence.
this World, may lead us to conceive a further Building.[276] We ORDER.
apprehend a larger Scheme, and easily resolve our-selves why
Things were not compleated in this State; but their Accomplishment reserv’d rather to
some further Period. For had the good and virtuous of Mankind been wholly
prosperous in this Life; had Goodness never met with Opposition, nor Merit ever lain
under a Cloud; where had been the Trial, Victory, or Crown ofVirtue?Where had the
Virtues had their Theater, or whence their Names? Where had beenTemperanceor
Self-denial?WherePatience, Meekness, Magnanimity?Whence have these their
being? WhatMerit,except from Hardship? WhatVirtuewithout a Conflict, and the
Encounter of such Enemys as arise both within, and from abroad?
But as many as are the Difficultys whichVirtuehas to encounter in this World, her
Force is yet superior. Expos’d as she is here, she is not however abandon’d or left
miserable. She has enough to raise her above Pity, tho not above our Wishes: and as
happy as we see her here, we have room for further Hopes in her behalf. Her present
Portion is sufficient to shew Providence already ingag’d on her side. And since there
is such Provision for herhere,such Happiness and such Advantages even in this Life;
how probable must it appear, that this provi[277]dential Care is extended yet further
toa succeeding Life,and perfectedhereafter?
This is what, in our Friend’s opinion, may be said in behalf of a future State, to those
who question Revelation. ’Tis this must render Revelation probable, and secure that
first step to it, the Belief of a Deity and Providence.
A Providence must be prov’d from what we see of Order in
Recapitulation.
things present. We must contend for Order; and in this part
chiefly, where Virtue is concern’d. All must not be refer’d toa Hereafter.For a
disorder’d State, in which all present Care of Things is given up, Vice uncontroul’d,
and Virtue neglected, represents a veryChaos, and reduces us to the belov’d Atoms,
Chance, and Confusion of the Atheists.
What therefore can be worse done in the Cause of aDeity,than to magnify Disorder,
and exaggerate (as some zealous People do) the Misfortunes of Virtue, so far as to
render it an unhappy Choice with respect to this World? They err widely, who
propose to turn Men to the Thoughts of abetterWorld,
by making ’em think so ill ofthis.For to declaim in this manner
Future State.
againstVirtueto those of a looser Faith, will make ’em the less
believea Deity,but not the morea future State.Nor can it be thought sincerely[278]
that any Man, by having the most elevated Opinion of Virtue, and of the Happiness it
creates,
was ever the less inclin’d to the Belief of a future State. On the
Favourers of the
contrary, it will ever be found, that as they who are Favourers of Opinion.
Vice are always the least willing to hear of a future Existence; so
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 105 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
they who are in love with Virtue, are the readiest to embrace that Opinion which
renders it so illustrious, and makes its Cause triumphant.
Thus it was, that among the Antients the great Motive which
Antients.
inclin’d so many of the wisest to the Belief of this Doctrine
unreveal’d to ’em, was purelythe Love of Virtuein the Persons of those great Men,
theFoundersandPreservers of Societys, theLegislators, Patriots, Deliverers,
Heroes, whose Virtues they were desirous shou’d live and be immortaliz’d. Nor is
there at this day any thing capable of making this Belief more engaging among the
Good and Virtuous thanthe Love of Friendship,
which creates in ’em a Desire not to be wholly separated by
Friendship.
Death, but that they may enjoy the same bless’d Society
hereafter. How is it possible, then, thatan Authorshou’d, for exaltingVirtuemerely,
be deem’d an Enemy to afuture State?How can our Friend be judg’d false to
Religion,for defending a Principle on which the very Notion ofGod andGoodness
de[279]pends? For this he says only, and this is the Sum of all: “That by building a
future State on the Ruins ofVirtue,
Religionin general, and the Cause ofa Deityis betray’d; and by
Conclusion.
making Rewards and Punishments the principal Motives to Duty,
the Christian Religion in particular is overthrown, and its greatest Principle, that of
Love,rejected and expos’d.”
Upon the whole then, we may justly as well as charitably conclude, that it is trulyour
Author’sDesign, in applying him-self with so much Fairness to the Men of looser
Principles, to lead ’em into such an Apprehension of the Constitution of Mankind and
of human Affairs, as might form in ’em a Notion ofOrder in Things, and draw hence
an Acknowledgment of that Wisdom, Goodness, and Beauty, which is supreme; that
being thus far become Proselytes, they might be prepar’d for thatdivine Lovewhich
our Religion wou’d teach ’em, when once they shou’d embrace its Precepts, and form
themselves to its sacred Character.
THUS, continu’d he, I have made my Friend’s Apology; which may have shewn him
to you perhaps a goodMoralist;and, I hope, no Enemy to Religion.[280] But if you
find still thatthe Divinehas not appear’d so much in his Character as I promis’d, I can
never think of satisfying you in any ordinary way of Conversation. Shou’d I offer to
go further, I might be ingag’d deeply in spiritual Affairs, and be forc’d to make some
new Model ofa Sermon upon his System of Divinity. However, I am in hopes, now
that in good earnest Matters are come well nigh toPreaching,you will acquit me for
what I have already perform’d.
SECTION IV
Sect. 4.
JUST as he had made an end of speaking came in some Visitants, who took us up the
remaining part of the Afternoon in other Discourses. But these being over, and our
Strangers gone, (all exceptthe old Gentleman,andhis Friend,who had din’d with us)
we began a-new withTheocles,by laying claim to his Sermon, and intreating him,
again and again, to let us hear him, at large, in histheologicalway.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 106 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
This he complain’d was persecuting him: As you have seen Company, said he, often
persecute a reputed Singer, not out of any fancy for the Musick, but to satisfy a
malicious sort of Curiosity, which ends commonly in Censure and Dislike.[281]
However it might be, we told him we were resolv’d to persist. And I assur’d our
Companions, that if they wou’d second me heartily in the manner I intended to press
him, we shou’d easily get the better.
In revenge then, said he, I will comply on this Condition; That since I am to sustain
the part ofthe DivineandPreacher,it shall be atPhilocles’s cost; who shall bear the
Part ofthe Infidel,and stand for the Personpreach’d to.
Truly, said the old Gentleman, thePartyou have propos’d for him is so natural and
sutable, that, I doubt not, he will be able to act it without the least Pain. I cou’d wish
rather, that you had spar’d your-self the trouble of putting him thus in mind of his
properCharacter.He wou’d have been apt enough of his own accord to interrupt your
Discourse by his perpetual Cavils. Therefore since we have now had Entertainment
enough by way ofDialogue,I desire theLaw of Sermonmay be strictly observ’d; and
“That there be noansweringto whatever isargu’d or advanc’d.”
I consented to all the Terms, and toldTheoclesI wou’d stand his Mark[282]
willingly: And besides, if I really were thatInfidelhe was to suppose me, I shou’d
count it no Unhappiness; since I was sure of being so thorowly convinc’d by him, if
he wou’d vouchsafe to undertake me.
Theoclesthen propos’d we shou’d walk out; theEveningbeing fine, and the free Air
suting better, as he thought, with such Discourses, than a Chamber.
ACCORDINGLY we took our Evening-Walk in the Fields, from whence the
laborious Hinds were now retiring. We fell naturally into the Praises ofa Country
Life;and discours’d a-while ofHusbandry, and the Nature of theSoil.Our Friends
began to admire some of thePlants,which grew here to great perfection. And it being
my fortune (as having acquir’d a little Insight into the nature ofSimples) to say
something they mightily approv’d upon this Subject,Theoclesimmediately turning
about to me; “O my ingenious Friend!” said he, “whose Reason, in other respects,
must be allow’d so clear and happy; How is it possible that with such Insight, and
accurate Judgment inthe Particularsof natural Beings and Operations, you shou’d no
better judg of the Structure of Thingsin general,and of the Order and Frame[283] of
Nature?Who better than your-self can shew the Structure of each Plant and Animal-
Body, declare the Office of everyPartandOrgan,
and tell the Uses, Ends, and Advantages to which they serve?
Organization.
How therefore, shou’d you prove so illa NaturalistinthisWhole,
and understand so little the Anatomy ofthe WorldandNature,as not to discern the
same Relation of Parts, the same Consistency and Uniformity inthe Universe!
“Some Men perhaps there are of so confus’d a Thought, and so irregularly form’d
within themselves,that ’tis no more than natural for them to find fault, and imagine a
thousand Inconsistences and Defects in thiswider Constitution.’Twas not, we may
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 107 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
presume, the absolute Aim or Interest of the Universal Nature, to render every
private-one infallible, and without defect. ’Twas not its Intention to leave us without
some Pattern of Imperfection; such as we perceive in Minds, like these, perplex’d
with froward Thought. But you, my Friend, are Master of a nobler Mind. You are
conscious of better Orderwithin,and can see Workmanship and Exactness in your-
self, and otherinnumerable Partsof the Creation. Can you answer it to your-self,
allowing thus much,[284] not to allow all? Can you induce yourself ever to believe or
think, that where there are Parts so variously united, and conspiring fitly within
themselves,
theWholeit-self shou’d have neither Union nor Coherence; and
WHOLE and Parts.
where inferior and private Natures are often found so perfect,the
Universal-oneshou’d want Perfection, and be esteem’d like whatsoever can be
thought of, most monstrous, rude, and imperfect?
“Strange! That there shou’d bein Naturethe Idea of an Order and Perfection, which
Natureher-self wants! That Beings which arise fromNatureshou’d be so perfect, as
to discover Imperfection in her Constitution; and be wise enough to correct that
Wisdom by which they were made!
“Nothing surely is more strongly imprinted on our Minds, or more closely interwoven
with our Souls, than the Idea or Sense ofOrder andProportion.
Hence all the Force ofNumbers, and those powerfulArts
Proportion.
founded on their Management and Use. What a difference there
is betweenHarmony andDiscord! CadencyandConvulsion!What a difference
between compos’d and orderly Motion, and that which is ungovern’d and accidental!
between the re[285]gular and uniform Pile of some noble Architect, and a Heap of
Sand or Stones! between an organiz’d Body, and a Mist or Cloud driven by the Wind!
“Now as this Difference is immediately perceiv’d by a plain internal Sensation, so
there is withal in Reason this account of it; That whatever Things haveOrder,
the same haveUnity of Design,and concurin one,are Parts
Union.
constituent ofoneWhole,or are, in themselves,intire Systems.
Such is aTree, with all its Branches; anAnimal,with all its Members; anEdifice,with
all its exterior and interior Ornaments. What else is even aTuneor Symphony,or any
excellent Piece of Musick, than a certainSystemof proportion’d Sounds?
“Now in this which we call theUniverse,whatever the
System.
Perfection may be of anyparticular Systems;or whateversingle
Partsmay have Proportion, Unity, or Form within themselves; yet if they are not
united all in general, in*OneSystem,but are, in[286] respect of one another, as the
driven Sands, or Clouds, or breaking Waves; then there being no Coherence inthe
Whole,there can be infer’d no Order, no Proportion, and consequently no Project or
Design. But if none of these Parts are independent, but all apparently united, then is
theWholea Systemcompleat, according to onesimple, consistent,anduniformDesign.
“Here then is our main Subject, insisted on: That neitherMan, nor any other Animal,
tho ever so compleat aSystemof Parts, as to allwithin,can be allow’d in the same
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 108 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
manner compleat, as to allwithout;but must be consider’d as having a further relation
abroad tothe System of his Kind.
So even this System of his Kind tothe Animal-System;this to the
Animal-System.
World (ourEarth;) and this again tothe bigger World,and tothe
Universe.[287]
“All things in this World areunited.
For as theBranchis united with theTree, so is the Tree as
System of the World.
immediately with theEarth, Air,andWater,which feed it. As
much as the fertileMouldis fitted to the Tree, as much as the strong and upright
Trunk of theOak or Elmis fitted to the twining Branches of theVineor Ivy;so much
are the veryLeaves,theSeeds,andFruitsof these Trees fitted to the variousAnimals:
These again to one another, and to theElementswhere they live, and to which they
are, as Appendices, in a manner fitted and join’d; as either byWingsfor the Air,Fins
for the Water,Feetfor the Earth, and by other correspondent inward Parts of a more
curious Frame and Texture. Thus in contemplating all on Earth, we must of necessity
viewAll in One,as holding to one common Stock. Thus too in the System of the
bigger World. See there the mutual Dependency of Things! the Relation of one to
another; of the Sun to this inhabited Earth, and of the Earth and other Planets to the
Sun! the Order, Union, and Coherence ofthe Whole!And know, my ingenious Friend,
that by this Survey you will be oblig’d to own theUniversal
Universal System.
System,and coherent Scheme of Things, to be establish’d
on[288] abundant Proof, capable of convincing any fair and just Contemplator of the
Works of Nature. For scarce wou’d any-one, till he had well survey’d this Universal
Scheme, believea Unionthus evidently demonstrable, by such numerous and
powerful Instances of mutual Correspondency and Relation, from the minutest Ranks
and Orders of Beings to the remotest Spheres.
“Now, in this mighty UNION, if there be such Relations of Parts
Appearance
one to another as are not easily discover’d; if on this account the ofIllnecessary.
End and Use of Things does not every-where appear, there is no
wonder; since ’tis no more indeed than what must happen of necessity: Nor cou’d
supreme Wisdom have otherwise order’d it. For in an Infinity of Things thus relative,
a Mind which sees notinfinitely,can see nothingfully:And since each Particular has
relation to all in general, it can know no perfect or true Relation of any Thing, in a
World not perfectly and fully known.
“The same may be consider’d in any dissected Animal, Plant, or
Solution.
Flower; where he who is no Anatomist, nor vers’d in natural
History, sees that the manyPartshave a relation tothe Whole;[289] for thus much
even a slight View affords: But he who like you, my Friend, is curious in the Works
of Nature, and has been let into a Knowledge of the animal and vegetable Worlds, he
alone can readily declare the just Relation of all these Parts to one another, and the
several Uses to which they serve.
“But if you wou’d willingly enter further into this Thought, and
Example.
consider how much we ought not only to be satisfy’d with this
our View of Things, but even to admire its Clearness; imagine only some Person
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 109 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
intirely a Stranger to Navigation, and ignorant of the Nature of the Sea or Waters,
how great his Astonishment wou’d be, when finding himself on board some Vessel,
anchoring at Sea, remote from all Land-prospect, whilst it was yet a Calm, he view’d
the ponderous Machine firm and motionless in the midst of the smooth Ocean, and
consider’d its Foundations beneath, together with its Cordage, Masts, and Sails above.
How easily wou’d he seethe Wholeone regular Structure, all things depending on one
another; the Uses of the Roomsbelow,the Lodgments, and Conveniences of Men and
Stores? But being ignorant of the Intent or Design of allabove,[290] wou’d he
pronounce the Masts and Cordage to be useless and cumbersom, and for this reason
condemn the Frame, and despisethe Architect?O my Friend! let us not thus betray
our Ignorance; but consider where we are, and in what a Universe. Think of the many
Parts of the vast Machine, in which we have so little Insight, and of which it is
impossible we shou’d know the Ends and Uses; when instead of seeing to the highest
Pendants,we see only somelower Deck,and are in this dark Case of Flesh, confin’d
even tothe Hold,and meanest Station of the Vessel.
“Now having recogniz’d this uniform consistent Fabrick, and own’d theUniversal
System,
we must of consequence acknowledg aUniversalMind;which no
Universal Mind.
ingenious Man can be tempted to disown, except thro’ the
Imagination of Disorder in the Universe, its Seat. For can it be suppos’d of any-one in
the World, that being in some Desart far from Men, and hearing there a perfect
Symphony of Musick, or seeing an exact Pile of regular Architecture arising gradually
from the Earth in all its Orders and Proportions, he shou’d be persuaded that at the
bottom there was noDesign accompanying this, no secret Spring ofThought,no
activeMind?[291] Wou’d he, because he saw no Hand, deny the Handy-Work, and
suppose that each of these compleat and perfect Systems were fram’d, and thus united
in just Symmetry, and conspiring Order, either by the accidental blowing of the
Winds, or rolling of the Sands?
“What is it then shou’d so disturb our Views ofNature,
as to destroy that Unity of Design and Order ofa Mind,which
Disturbance, whence.
otherwise wou’d be so apparent? All we can see either of the
Heavens or Earth, demonstrates Order and Perfection; so as to afford the noblest
Subjects of Contemplation to Minds, like yours, enrich’d with Sciences and Learning.
All is delightful, amiable, rejoicing, except with relation toMan only,
and his Circumstances, which seem unequal. Here the Calamity
Human Affairs.
and Ill arises; and hence the Ruin of this goodly Frame. All
perishes on this account; and the whole Order of the Universe, elsewhere so firm,
intire, and immoveable, is here o’erthrown, and lost by this one View; in which we
refer all things to our-selves:
submitting the Interest oftheWholeto the Good and Interest of
Selfishness.
so smalla Part.
“But how is it you complain of the unequal State of Man, and of the few[292]
Advantages allow’d him above the Beasts? What can a Creature claim, so little
differing from ’em, or whose Merit appears so little above ’em, except inWisdom and
Virtue,to which so few conform? Man may be virtuous; and by being so, is happy.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 110 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
His Merit is Reward. By Virtue he deserves; and in Virtue only can meet his
Happiness deserv’d. But if evenVirtueit-self be unprovided for,
andVicemore prosperous be the better Choice; if this, as you
Virtue and Vice.
suppose, be in the Nature of Things, then is all Order in reality
inverted, and supreme Wisdom lost: Imperfection and Irregularity being, after this
manner, undoubtedly too apparent in the moral World.
“Have you then, ere you pronounc’d this Sentence,
consider’d of the State ofVirtueandVicewith respect tothis Life
Their Power, Effect.
merely;so as to say, with assurance, When, and how far, in what
particulars, and how circumstantiated, the one or the other isGood or Ill?You who
are skill’d in other Fabricks and Compositions, both of Art and Nature, have you
consider’d of the Fabrick oftheMind,
the Constitution of the Soul, the Connexion and Frame of all its
A Mind.
Passions, and Affections; to know accordingly the Order and
Symmetry of the Part,[293] and how it either improves or suffers; what its Force is,
when naturally preserv’d in its found State;
and what becomes of it, when corrupted and abus’d? Till this
Improvement.
(my Friend!) be well examin’d and understood, how shall we
judg either of the Force ofVirtue,or Power of Vice?Or in what manner either of
these may work to our Happiness or Undoing?”
“Here therefore is thatInquirywe shou’d first make. But who is there can afford to
make it as he ought? If happily we are born of a good Nature; if a liberal Education
has form’d in us a generous Temper and Disposition,
well-regulated Appetites, and worthy Inclinations, ’tis well for
Temper.
us; and so indeed we esteem it. But who is there endeavours to
give these to himself, or to advance his Portion of Happiness in this kind? Who thinks
of improving, or so much as of preserving his Share, in a World where it must of
necessity run so great a hazard, and where we know an honest Nature is so easily
corrupted? All other things relating to us are preserv’d with Care, and have some Art
or OEconomy belonging to ’em; this which is nearest related to us, and on which our
Happiness depends, is alone committed to[294] Chance: AndTemper is the only thing
ungovern’d, whilst it governs all the rest.
“Thus we inquire concerning what is good and sutable to our
Appetites.
Appetites; but what Appetites are good and sutable to us, is no
part of our Examination. We inquire what is according toInterest, Policy, Fashion,
Vogue;but it seems wholly strange, and out of the way, to inquire what isaccording
toNature.The Balance ofEurope,of Trade, of Power, is strictly sought after; while
few have heard ofthe Balanceof their Passions,
or thought of holding these Scales even. Few are acquainted with
Balance.
this Province, or knowing in these Affairs. But were we more so,
as thisInquirywou’d make us, we shou’d then see Beauty and Decorum here, as well
as elsewhere in Nature; and the Order of the Moral World wou’d equal that of the
Natural. By this theBeauty ofVirtuewou’d appear; and hence, as has been shewn,
the SupremeandSovereignBeauty,the Original of all which is
Virtue. Deity.
Good or Amiable.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 111 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
“But lest I shou’d appear at last too like anEnthusiast,I chuse to express my Sense,
and conclude thisPhilosophical Sermon,in the words of one of those an[295]tient
Philologists,whom you are us’d to esteem.For Divinity it-self,says he, is surely
beauteous, and of all Beautys the brightest; tho not a beauteous Body, but that from
whence the Beauty of Bodys is deriv’d: Not a beauteous Plain, but that from whence
the Plain looks beautiful. The River’s Beauty, the Sea’s, the Heaven’s, and Heavenly
Constellations, all flow from hence, as from a Source Eternal and Incorruptible. As
Beings partake of this, they are fair, and flourishing, and happy: As they are lost to
this, they are deform’d, perish’d, and lost.”
WHEN Theocleshad thus spoken, he was formally complimented by ourTwo
Companions. I was going to add something in the same way: but he presently stop’d
me, by saying, he shou’d be scandaliz’d, if instead of commending him, I did not,
according to myCharacter,chuse rather to criticize some part or other of his long
Discourse.
If it must be so then, reply’d I; in the first place, give me leave to wonder that, instead
of the many Arguments commonly brought for proof ofa Deity,you make use only of
one single-one to build on. I expected to have heard from you, in custo[296]mary
form, of afirst Cause,afirst Being,and aBeginning of Motion:How clear theIdea
was of an immaterial Substance:And how plainly it appear’d,
that at some time or otherMatter must have been created.But as
Matter and Thought.
to all this, you are silent. As for what is said, of “A material
unthinking Substance being never able to have produc’d an immaterial thinking one”;
I readily grant it: but on the condition, that this great Maxim ofNothing being ever
made from Nothing,may hold as well on my side as my Adversary’s: And then, I
suppose, that whilst the World endures, he will be at a loss how to assign a Beginning
toMatter;or how to suggest a Possibility of annihilating it. The spiritual Men may, as
long as they please, represent to us, in the most eloquent manner, “ThatMatter
consider’d in a thousand different Shapes, join’d and disjoin’d, vary’d and modify’d
to Eternity, can never, of it-self, afford one single Thought, never occasion or give
rise to any thing like Sense or Knowledg.” Their Argument will hold good against a
Democritus,anEpicurus,or any of the elder or latterAtomists.But it will be turn’d on
them by an examiningAcademist:and when the two Substances are fairly set asunder,
and consider’d apart as different kinds; ’twill be as strong Sense, and as good
Argument, to say as[297] well of theimmaterial kind;“That do with it as you please,
modify it a thousand ways, purify it, exalt it, sublime it, torture it ever so much, or
rack it, as they say, with thinking, you will never be able to produce or force the
contrary Substance out of it.” The poor Dregs of sorryMattercan no more be made
out of the simple pure Substance of immaterialThought,than the high Spirits of
Thoughtor Reasoncan be extracted from the gross Substance of heavyMatter.So let
theDogmatists make of this Argument what they can.
But for your part, continu’d I, as you have stated the Question, ’tis not about what was
first,or foremost; but what isinstant,andnowin being. “For ifDeitybenowreally
extant; if by any good Token it appears that there isat this presenta universal Mind;
’twill easily be yielded thereeverwas one.”—This is your Argument.—You go (if I
may say so) uponFact,and wou’d prove that thingsactually arein such a state and
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 112 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
condition, which if they reallywere,there wou’d indeed be no dispute left. Your
UNION is your main Support. Yet how is it you prove this? What Demonstration
have you given? What have you so much as offer’d at, beyondbare Probability?So
far are you fromdemon[298]stratingany thing, that if this uniting Scheme be the
chief Argument for Deity, (as you tacitly allow) you seem rather to have
demonstrated, “That the Case it-self is incapable of Demonstration.” For, “How,” say
you, “can a narrow Mind seeAll Things?”—And yet if, in reality, It sees notAll,It
had as good seeNothing.The demonstrable part is still as far behind. For grant that
thisAll,which lies within our view or knowledg, is orderly and united, as you
suppose: this mightyAllis a mere Point still, a very Nothing compar’d to what
remains.
“ ’Tis only a separateBy-World,” we’ll say, “of which perhaps
Atheistical
there are, in the wide Waste, Millions besides, as horrid and Hypothesis.
deform’d, as this of ours is regular and proportion’d. In length of
time, amidst the infinite Hurry and Shock of Beings, thissingle odd World,by
accident, might have been struck out, and cast into some Form, (as among infinite
Chances,what is there which may not happen?) But for the rest ofMatter,’tis of a
different hue. OldFatherChaos(as the Poets call him) in these wild Spaces, reigns
absolute, and upholds his Realms of Darkness. He presses hard upon our Frontier; and
one day, belike, shall by a furious Inroad recover his lost Right, conquer his Rebel-
State, and re[299]unite us to primitiveDiscord andConfusion.”
This, said I,Theocles!(concluding my Discourse) is all I dare offer in opposition to
your Philosophy.I imagin’d, indeed, you might have given me more Scope: But you
have retrench’d your-self in narrower Bounds. So that to tell you truth, I look upon
your Theologyto be hardly so fair or open as that of our Divines in general. They are
strict, it’s true, as toNames; but allow a greater Latitude inThings. Hardly indeed can
they bear a home-Charge, a downright questioning ofDeity:But in return, they give
always fair play againstNature,
and allow her to be challeng’d for her Failings. She may freely
NATURE, arraign’d.
err, and we as freely censure.Deity,they think is not accountable
for her: Only she for her-self. But you are straiter, and more precise in this point. You
have unnecessarily broughtNatureinto the Controversy, and taken upon you to
defend her Honour so highly, that I know not whether it may be safe for me to
question her.
Let not this trouble you, reply’dTheocles:but be free to censureNature;whatever
may be the Consequence. ’Tis onlymy Hypothesiscan suffer. If I defenditill, my
Friends need not be scan[300]daliz’d. They are fortify’d, no doubt, with stronger
Arguments for a Deity, and can well employ thosemetaphysicalWeapons, of whose
Edge you seem so little apprehensive. I leave them to dispute this Ground with you,
whenever they think fit. For my own Arguments, if they can be suppos’d to make any
part of this Defense, they may be look’d upon only as distant Lines, or Outworks,
which may easily perhaps be won; but without any danger to the Body of the Place.
NOTWITHSTANDING, then, said I, that you are willing I shou’d attackNaturein
Form, I chuse to spare her in all other Subjects, exceptMan only. How comes it, I
intreat you,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 113 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
that in this noblest of Creatures, and worthiest her Care, she
NATURE in Man.
shou’d appear so very weak and impotent; whilst in mereBrutes,
and the irrational Species, she acts with so much Strength,
and exerts such hardy Vigour? Why is she spent so soon in
In Brutes.
feebleMan, who is found more subject to Diseases, and of fewer
years than many of thewild Creatures?They range secure; and proof against all the
Injurys of Seasons and Weather, want no help fromArt,but live in careless Ease,
discharg’d of Labour, and freed from the cumbersom Baggage of a necessitous
human[301] Life. In Infancy more helpful, vigorous in Age, with Senses quicker, and
more natural Sagacity, they pursue their Interests, Joys, Recreations, and cheaply
purchase both their Food and Maintenance; cloth’d and arm’d by Nature her-self, who
provides them both a Couch and Mansion. So has Nature order’d for the rest of
Creatures. Such is their Hardiness, Robustness, Vigour. Why not the same for
Man?—
And do you stop thus short, saidTheocles,in your Expostulation? Methinks ’twere as
easy to proceed, now you are in the way; and instead of laying claim to somefew
Advantages of other Creatures, you might as well stand forAll,and complain “That
Man, for his part,
shou’d be any thing less than a Consummation of all Advantages
Nature in Man.
and Privileges which Nature can afford.” Ask not merely, why
Man is naked, why unhoof’d, why slower-footed than the Beasts? Ask, “Why he has
notWingsalso for the Air,Finsfor the Water, and so on; that he might take
possession of eachElement, and reign inAll?”
Not so, said I, neither. This wou’d be to rate him high indeed! As if he were, by
Nature,Lordof All:which is more than I cou’d willingly allow.[302]
’Tis enough, reply’d he, that this is yielded. For if we allow once aSubordinationin
his Case; ifNatureher-self be not forMan, butMan for Nature;then mustMan, by
his good leave, submit tothe Elements ofNature,and notthe Elementsto him. Few of
these are at all fitted to him: and none perfectly. If he be left inAir,he falls headlong;
for Wings were not assign’d him. InWaterhe soon sinks. In Firehe consumes.
WithinEarthhe suffocates.—
As for what Dominion he may naturally have in other Elements, said I, my concern
truly is not very great in his behalf; since by Art he can even exceed the Advantages
Nature has given to other Creatures: But forthe Air,methinks it had been wonderfully
obliging in Nature to have allow’d him Wings.
And what wou’d he have gain’d by it, reply’dTheocles?For
Volatiles.
consider what an Alteration ofForm must have ensu’d. Observe
in one of those wing’d Creatures, whether the whole Structure be not made
subservient to this purpose, and all other Advantages sacrific’d to this single
Operation.
The Anatomy of the Creature shews it, in a manner, to beall
Anatomy.
Wing:its chief Bulk being compos’d of[303] two exorbitant
Muscles, which exhaust the Strength of all the other, and engross (if I may say so) the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 114 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
whole OEconomy of the Frame. ’Tis thus the aerial Racers are able to perform so
rapid and strong a Motion, beyond comparison with any other kind, and far exceeding
their little share of Strength elsewhere: these Parts of theirs being made in such
superior proportion, as in a mannerto starvetheir Companions. And in Man’s
Architecture, of so different an Order, were the flying Engines to be affix’d; must not
the other Members suffer, and the multiply’d Parts starve one another? What think
you of the Brain in this Partition?
Is it not like to provea Starveling?Or wou’d you have it be
The Brain.
maintain’d at the same high rate, and draw the chief
Nourishment to it-self, from all the rest?—
I understand you, said I,Theocles(interrupting him): The Brain certainly is a great
Starver,where it abounds; and the thinking People of the World, thePhilosophersand
Virtuoso’sespecially, must be contented, I find, with a moderate Share of bodily
Advantages, for the sake of what they callPartsandCapacityin another sense.
The Parts, it seems, of one kind agree ill in their OEconomy with
Parts.
the Parts of the other. But to make this even on both sides, let
us[304] turn the Tables; and the Case, I suppose, will stand the same with theMilo’s
of the Age, the Men of bodily Prowess and Dexterity. For not to mention a vulgar
sort, such as Wrestlers, Vaulters, Racers, Hunters;what shall we say of our fine-bred
Gentlemen, ourRiders, Fencers, Dancers, Tennis-players,and such like? ’Tis the
Body surely is theStarverhere: and if the Brain were such a terrible Devourer in the
other way; the Body and bodily Parts seem to have their Reprisals in this Rank of
Men.
If then, said he, the Case stands thus betweenMan andMan, how must it stand
betweenMan and aquite different Creature?If theBalancebe so nice,
that the least thing breaks it, even in Creatures of the same Frame
Balance.
and Order; of what fatal effect must it be to changethe Order it-
self, and make some essential Alteration in the Frame? Consider therefore how it is
we censureNaturein these and such-like Cases. “Why,” says one, “was I not made by
Nature strong asa Horse? Why not hardy and robust as thisBrute-Creature? or
nimble and active as that other?”—And yet when uncommon Strength, Agility, and
Feats of Body are subjoin’d, even in our own Species, see what befals! So that for a
Person thus in love with anAthletickMilo[305]neanConstitution, it were better, me-
thinks, and more modest in him, to change the Expostulation, and ask, “Why was I
not made in good earnesta veryBrute?” For that wou’d be more sutable.
I am apt indeed, said I, to think that the Excellence ofMan lies somewhat different
from that ofa Brute:and that such amongst us as are more trulyMen,shou’d
naturally aspire to manly Qualitys, and leave the Brute his own. But Nature, I see, has
done well to mortify us in this particular, by furnishing us with such slight Stuff, and
in such a tender Frame, as is indeed wonderfully commodious to support that Man-
Excellence ofThoughtandReason;but wretchedly scanty and ineffectual for other
Purposes. As if it were her very Design, “To hinder us from aspiring ridiculously to
what was misbecoming our Character.”
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 115 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
I see, saidTheocles,you are not one of those timorous Arguers, who tremble at every
Objection rais’d against their Opinion or Belief, and are so intent in upholding their
ownside of the Argument, that they are unable to make the least Concession onthe
other.Your Wit allows you to divert your-self with whatever oc[306]curs in the
Debate: And you can pleasantly improve even what your Antagonist brings as a
Support to his own Hypothesis. This indeed is a fairer sort of Practice than what is
common now-a-days. But ’tis no more than sutable to yourCharacter.And were I not
afraid of speaking with an Air of Compliment, in the midst of a philosophical Debate;
I shou’d tell you perhaps what I thought of the becoming manner of yourScepticism,
in opposition to a kind of Bigot-Scepticks;who forfeit their Right tothe philosophick
Character,and retain hardly so much as that of theGentlemanor Good
Companion.—But to our Argument.—
Such then, continu’d he, is the admirable Distribution ofNature,
Distribution.
her adapting and adjusting not only theStuffor Matterto the
ShapeandForm, and even the Shape it-self and Form to theCircumstance, Place,
Elementor Region;but also theAffections, Appetites, Sensations,mutually toeach
other,as well as to theMatter, Form, Action,and all besides: “All manag’dfor the
best,with perfect Frugality and justReserve:profuse to none, but bountiful to all:
never employing in one thing more than enough; but with exact OEconomy
retrenching the superfluous, and adding Force to what isprincipalin every thing.”
And[307] is notThoughtandReasonprincipalin Man? Wou’d he have noReservefor
these? no saving for this part of his Engine?
Or wou’d he have the same Stuff or Matter, the same Instruments
Principal Part.
or Organs serve alike for different purposes, and an Ounce be
equivalent to a Pound?—It cannot be. What wonders, then, can he expect from a few
Ounces of Blood in such a narrow Vessel, fitted for so small a District of Nature?
Will he not rather think highly of thatNature,which has thus manag’d his Portion for
him, to best advantage, with this happyReserve,(happy indeed for him, if he knows
and uses it!) by which he has so much a better Use of Organs than any other Creature?
by which he holds his Reason, isaMan,
and nota Beast?
Reason.
But*Beasts, said I, haveInstincts,
which Man has not.
Instinct.
True, said he, they have indeed Perceptions, Sensations, and†Pre-sensations,(if I
may use the Expression) which Man,
for his part, has not in any proportionable degree. Their Females,
Animals.
newly pregnant, and before they have bore Young, have a clear
Prospect orPre-sensationof their State[308] which is to follow; know what to
provide, and how, in what manner, and at what time. How many things do they pre-
ponderate? How many at once comprehend? The Seasons of the Year, the Country,
Climate, Place, Aspect, Situation, the Basis of their Building, the Materials,
Architecture; the Diet and Treatment of their Offspring; in short, the whole
OEconomy of their Nursery: and all this as perfectly at first, and when unexperienc’d,
as at any time of their Life afterwards. And “Why not this,” say you, “in Human
Kind?”
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 116 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Nay, rather on the contrary, I ask “Why this?Where was the
Human Kind.
Occasion or Use? Where the Necessity? Why this Sagacity for
Men?Have they not what is better, in another kind? Have they not Reason and
Discourse? Does not this instruct them? What need then of the other? Where wou’d
be the prudent Management at this rate? Where theReserve?”
TheYoung of most otherKinds,continu’d he, are instantly helpful to them-selves,
sensible, vigorous, known to shun Danger, and seek their Good: Ahuman Infantis of
all the most helpless, weak, infirm. And wherefore shou’d it not have been thus
order’d? Where is the loss in such a Species? Or what isMan the worse for this
Defect, amidst such large Sup[309]plies? Does not thisDefectengage him the more
strongly to Society,
and force him to own that he is purposely, and not by accident,
Society.
made rational andsociable;and can no otherwise increase or
subsist, than in thatsocialIntercourse and Community which is hisnatural State?Is
not both conjugal Affection, and natural Affection to Parents, Duty to Magistrates,
Love of a common City, Community, or Country, with the other Dutys and social
Parts of Life, deduc’d from hence, and founded in these veryWants?What can be
happier than such a Deficiency, as is the occasion of so much Good? What better than
a Want so abundantly made up, and answer’d by so many Enjoyments? Now if there
are still to be found among Mankind such as even in the midst of these Wants seem
not asham’d to affect a Right of Independency, and deny them-selves to be by Nature
sociable;where wou’d their Shame have been, had Nature otherwise supply’d these
Wants? What Duty or Obligation had been ever thought of? What Respect or
Reverence of Parents, Magistrates, their Country, or their Kind? Wou’d not their full
and self-sufficient State more strongly have determin’d them to throw offNature,and
deny theEndsandAuthorof their Creation?[310]
WHILSTTheoclesargu’d thus concerningNature,the old Gentleman, my Adversary,
express’d great Satisfaction in hearing me, as he thought, refuted, and my Opinions
expos’d. For he wou’d needs believe these to be strongly my Opinions, which I had
only started as Objections in the Discourse. He endeavour’d to reinforce the
Argument by many Particulars from the common Topicks of theSchool-menand
Civilians.He added withal, “That it was better for me to declare my Sentiments
openly; for he was sure I had strongly imbib’d that Principle,
that*the State of Naturewas a State of War.”
State of Nature.
“That it was noState of Government,or publick Rule,” reply’d I, “you your-self
allow.” “I do so.” “Was it thena State of Fellowship,or Society?” “No: For when
Men enter’d first into Society, they pass’d fromthe State of Natureinto that new one
which is founded uponCompact.” “And was that former Statea tolerableone?” “Had
it been absolutely intolerable, there had never been any such. Nor cou’d we properly
call thata State,which cou’d not stand or endure for the least time.” “If Man
therefore[311] cou’dendureto live without Society; and if it be true that heactually
liv’d so, when inthe State of Nature;how can it be said, That he isby Nature
sociable?”
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 117 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
The old Gentleman seem’d a little disturb’d at my Question. But having recover’d
himself, he said in answer, “ThatManindeed, from his ownnatural Inclination,
might not, perhaps, have been mov’d to associate; but rather from some particular
Circumstances.”
His Naturethen, said I, was not so very good, it seems; since having nonatural
Affection,or friendly Inclinationbelonging to him, he was forc’d into a social State,
against his will:And this, not from any necessity in respect of outward Things, (for
you have allow’d him a tolerable Subsistence) but in probability from such
Inconveniences as arose chiefly from himself, and his own malignant Temper and
Principles. And indeed ’twas no wonder if Creatures who werenaturallythus
unsociable, shou’d be as naturally mischievous and troublesom. Ifaccording to their
Nature,they cou’d live out of Society, with so little Affection for one another’s
Company, ’tis not likely that upon occasion they wou’d spare one another’s Persons.
If they were so sullen as not to meetfor Love,’tis more than probable[312] they
wou’d fightfor Interest.And thus from your own Reasoning it appears, “That the
State of Naturemust in all likelihood have been little different froma State ofWar.”
He was going to answer me with some sharpness, as by his Looks appear’d; when
Theoclesinterposing, desir’d, That as he had occasion’d this Dispute, he might be
allow’d to try if he cou’d end it, by setting the Question in a fairer Light. You see,
said he to the old Gentleman, what ArtificePhiloclesmade use of, when he engag’d
you to allow, that the State of Nature, and that of Society were perfectly distinct. But
let us question him now in his turn, and see whether he can demonstrate to us, “That
there can be naturally anyHuman Statewhich is notsocial.”
What is it then, said the old Gentleman, which we call theState of Nature?
Not that imperfect rude Condition of Mankind, saidTheocles,which some imagine;
but which, if it ever were in Nature, cou’d never have been of the least continuance,
or any-waytolerable,or sufficient for the Support of human Race. Such a Condition
cannot indeed so properly be call’da State.For what if[313] speaking of an Infant just
coming into the World, and in the moment of the Birth, I shou’d fansy to call thisa
State;wou’d it be proper?
Hardly so, I confess.
Just such a State,therefore, was that which we suppose ofMan, ere yet he enter’d into
Society,and became in trutha Human Creature. ’Twas therough Draught of Man,
theEssayor first Effortof Nature, a Speciesin the Birth,a Kind as yetunform’d; not
in itsnaturalState, but underViolence,and still restless, till it attain’d its natural
Perfection.
And thus, saidTheocles,(addressing still more particularly to the old Gentleman) the
Case must necessarily stand, even on the supposal “That there was ever such a
Condition orStateof Men, when as yet they were unassociated, unacquainted, and
consequently without any Language or Form of Art.” But “That it was theirnatural
State,to live thus separately,” can never without Absurdity be allow’d. For sooner
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 118 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
may you divest the Creature of any other Feeling or Affection, than that towards
Societyand hisLikeness.Allowing you, however, the Power of divesting him at
pleasure; allowing you to reduce even whole[314] Parts and Members of his present
Frame; wou’d you transform him thus, and call him stilla Man? Yet better might you
do this indeed, than you cou’d strip him of hisnatural Affections,separate him from
all hisKind,and inclosing him like some solitaryInsectin a Shell, declare him still
aMan. So might you call the human Egg, or Embrio,the Man.The Bug which breeds
the Butterfly is more properlya Fly,tho without Wings, than this imaginary Creature
isa Man. For tho his outward Shape werehuman, his Passions, Appetites, and Organs
must be wholly different. His whole inward Make must be revers’d, to fit him for
such a recluse OEconomy, and separate Subsistence.
To explain this a little further, continu’d he: Let us examine this pretendedState of
Nature;how and on what Foundation it must stand. “For eitherMan must have been
from Eternity, or not. If from Eternity, there cou’d be noprimitiveor original State,
noState of Nature,other than we see at present before our eyes. If not from Eternity,
he arose eitherall at once,(and consequently he was at the veryfirstas he isnow) or
by degrees,thro’ several Stages and Conditions, to that in which he is at length
settled, and has continu’d for so many Generations.”[315]
For instance, let us suppose he sprang, as the old Poets feign’d, froma big-belly’d
Oak: and then belike he might resemble more aMan-drakethan aMan. Let us
suppose him at first with little more of Life than is discover’d in that Plant which they
callthe Sensitive.But whenthe Mother-Oakhad been some time deliver’d, and the
false Birth by some odd Accident or Device was wrought into Form; the Members
were then fully display’d, and the Organs of Sense began to unfold themselves. “Here
sprang anEar: there peep’d anEye.Perhaps aTailtoo came in company. For what
SuperfluitysNature may have been charg’d with at first, is difficult to determine.
They dropt off, it seems, in time; and happily have left things, at last, in a good
posture, and (to a wonder!) justas they should be.”
This surely is the lowest View ofthe original Affairsof human Kind. For ifa
Providence,and notChance,gaveMan his being, our Argument for hissocial Nature
must surely be the stronger. But admitting his Rise to be, as we have describ’d, and as
a certain sort of Philosophers wou’d needs have it; Nature has then had no Intention at
all, no Meaning or Design in this whole Matter. So how[316] any thing can be call’d
naturalin the Case; how anyStatecan be call’da State of Nature,or according to
Nature,one more than another, I know not.
Let us go on however, and on their Hypothesis consider, WhichStatewe may best
callNature’s own.“She has by Accident, thro’ many Changes and Chances, rais’d a
Creature, which springing at first from rude Seeds ofMatter,proceeded till it became
what now it is; and arriv’d where for many Generations it has been at a stay.” In this
long Procession (for I allow it any length whatever) I ask, “Where was it that this
State of Naturecou’d begin?” The Creature must have endur’d many Changes: and
each Change, whilst he was thus growing up, was asnatural,one as another. So that
either there must be reckon’d a hundred different States of Nature; or if one, it can be
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 119 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
onlythatin which Nature wasperfect,and her Growthcompleat.Here where She
rested,and attain’d her End, here must be her State, or no-where.
Cou’d she thenrest,think you, in that desolate State before Society? Cou’d she
maintain and propagate the Species, such as it now is, without Fellowship or
Community? Shew it us in fact any[317]where, amongst any of our own Kind. For as
for Creatures which may much resemble us in outward Form, if they differ yet in the
least part of their Constitution, if their Inwards are of a different Texture, if their Skin
and Pores are otherwise form’d or harden’d; if they have other Excrescences of Body,
another Temper, other natural inseparable Habits or Affections, they are not trulyof
our Kind.If, on the other hand, their Constitution be as ours; their natural Parts or
inward Facultys as strong, and their bodily Frame as weak as ours; if they have
Memory, andSenses, andAffections,anda Use of Organs as ours: ’tis evident they
can no more by their good-will abstain fromSociety,than they can possibly preserve
themselves without it.
And here (my Friends!) we ought to remember what we discours’d a-while since, and
was advanc’d byPhilocleshimself, concerning the*Weakness of human Bodys, and
the necessitous State ofMan, in respect of all other Creatures; “His long and helpless
Infancy, his feeble and defenseless Make, by which he is more fitted to be a Prey
himself, than live by Prey on others.” Yet ’tis impossible for him to subsist like any of
those[318] grazing Kinds. He must have better Provision and choicer Food than the
raw Herbage; a better Couch and Covering than the bare Earth or open Sky. How
many Conveniences of other kinds does he stand in need of? What Union and strict
Society is requir’d between theSexes,to preserve and nurse their growingOffspring?
This kind ofSocietywill not, surely, be deny’d toMan, which to every Beast of Prey
is known proper, andnatural.And can we allowthissocial Part to Man, and go no
further? Is it possible he shou’dpair,and live in Love and Fellowship with his
PartnerandOffspring,and remain still wholly wild, and speechless, and without
those Arts of Storing, Building, and other OEconomy, as natural to him surely as to
theBeaver,or to theAnt,or Bee?Where, therefore, shou’d He break off from this
Society,if once begun? For that it began thus, as early as Generation, and grew into a
Houshold and OEconomy, is plain. Must not this have grown soon intoa Tribe?and
this Tribe intoa Nation?Or tho it remain’da Tribeonly; was not this stilla Society
for mutual Defense and common Interest? In short, if Generation benatural,if natural
Affection and the Care and Nurture of the Offspring benatural,Things standing as
they do with Man, and the Creature being of that Form and Constitu[319]tion he now
is; it follows, “ThatSocietymust be alsonatural to him”; And “That out of Society
and Community he neverdid,nor evercansubsist.”
To conclude, said he, (addressing still to the two Companions) I will venture to add a
word in behalf ofPhilocles:That since the Learned have such a fancy for this Notion,
and love to talk of this imaginaryState of Nature,I think ’tis even Charity to speak as
illof it as we possibly can. Let it bea State ofWar,Rapine,andInjustice.Since ’tis
unsocial, let it e’en be as uncomfortable and as frightful as ’tis possible. To speak well
of it, is to render it inviting, and tempt Men to turn Hermites. Let it, at least, be look’d
on as many degrees worse than the worst Government in being. The greater Dread we
have ofAnarchy,the betterCountry-menwe shall prove, and value more theLaws
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 120 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
andConstitutionunder which we live, and by which we are protected from the
outrageous Violences of such an unnatural State. In this I agree heartily with those
Transformers of Human Nature, who considering it abstractedly and apart from
Government or Society, represent it under monstrous Visages ofDragons,
Leviathans,and I know not what devouring Creatures. They wou’d have done well
however, to have express’d[320] themselves more properly in their great Maxim. For
to say in disparagement ofMan, “That he isto Man a Wolf,” appears somewhat
absurd, when one considers thatWolvesareto Wolvesvery kind and loving Creatures.
The Sexes strictlyjoinin the Care and Nurture of the Young; and thisUnionis
continu’d still between ’em. They houl to one another, to bring Company; whether to
hunt, or invade their Prey, or assemble on the discovery of a good Carcase. Even the
swinish Kinds want notcommon Affection,and run in Herds to the assistance of their
distress’d Fellows. The meaning therefore of this famous Sentence, if it has any
meaning at all, must be, “ThatMan is naturally to Man, as a Wolf is to a tamer
Creature”: as, for instance, toa Sheep.But this will be as little to the purpose as to
tell us, “That there aredifferentSpecies or Characters of Men; Thatallhave not this*
wolfish Nature, but Thatone halfat least arenaturallyinnocent and mild.” And thus
the Sentence comes to nothing. For without belyingNature,and contradicting what is
evident fromnatural History, Fact,and the plainCourse of Things, ’tis impossible to
assent to this ill-natur’d Proposition, when we have even done our best to make
tolerable sense of it.—But such is Man[321]kind! And evenhereHuman Natureshews
it-self, such as it is; not perfect, or absolutely successful, tho rightly tending,
and mov’d by proper and just Principles. ’Tishere,therefore,in
Sect. 5.
Philosophy,as in the commonConversationsof the World. As
fond as Men are ofCompany, and as little able to enjoy any Happiness out of it, they
are yet strangely addicted to the way ofSatir.And in the same manner, as amalicious
Censure craftily worded, and pronounc’d with Assurance, is apt to pass with Mankind
for shreud Wit;so a virulent Maximin bold Expressions, tho without any Justness of
Thought, is readily receiv’d fortruePhilosophy.
SECTION V
Sect. 5.
IN these Discourses the Evening ended; and Night advancing, we return’d home from
our Walk. At Supper, and afterwards for the rest of that Night,Theoclessaid little.
The Discourse was now manag’d chiefly by thetwoCompanions, who turn’d it upon
a new sort of Philosophy; such as you will excuse me (goodPalemon!) if I pass over
with more haste.
There was much said, and with great Learning, on the Nature of
Miracles. Prodigys.
SpiritsandApparitions;of which, the most astonishing[322]
Accounts were the most ravishing with our Friends: who endeavour’d to exceed one
another in this admirable way; and perform’d to a miracle in raising one another’s
Amazement. Nothing was so charming with them, as that which was disagreeing and
odd: nothing so soothing, as that which mov’d Horror. In short, whatever was
rational, plain, and easy, bore no relish; and nothing came amiss which was cross to
Nature, out of Sort and Order, and in no Proportion or Harmony with the rest of
Things.Monstrous Births, Prodigys, Inchantments, Elementary Wars,and
Convulsions,were our chief Entertainment. One wou’d have thought that in a kind of
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 121 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Rivalship betweenProvidenceandNature,thelatter Ladywas made to appear as
homely as possible; that her Deformitys might recommend and set off the Beautys of
the former.For to do our Friends Justice, I must own I thought their Intention to be
sincerelyreligious.But this was not a Face ofReligionI was like to be enamour’d
with. It was not from hence I fear’d being madeenthusiastick,or superstitious.If ever
I became so, I found it wou’d rather be afterTheocles’s manner. TheMonuments and
Church-yards were not such powerful Scenes with me, as theMountains,thePlains,
the solemnWoods andGroves; of whose Inhabitants I chose much rather to hear, than
of[323] the other. And I was readier to fansy Truth in those poetical Fictions which
Theoclesmade use of, than in any of his Friends ghastly Storys, so pompously set off,
after the usual way, in a lofty Tone of Authority, and with an assuming Air of Truth.
You may imagine,Palemon,that my*Scepticism,with which
Scepticism.
you so often reproach me, cou’d not well forsake me here: Nor
cou’d it fail to give disturbance to our Companions, especially to the grave
Gentleman, who had clash’d with me some time before. He bore with me a-while; till
having lost all patience, One must certainly, said he, be Master of no small share of
Assurance, to hold out against the common Opinion of the World, and deny things
which are known by the Report of the most considerable part of Mankind.
This, said I, is far from being my case. You have never yet heard me deny any thing;
tho I have question’d many. If I suspend my Judgment, ’tis because I have less
Sufficiency than others. There are People, I know, who have so great a regard to every
Fancy oftheir own,that they can believe their veryDreams. But[324] I who cou’d
never pay any such deference to mysleepingFancys, am apt sometimes to question
even mywakingThoughts, and examine, “Whether these are notDreams too”; since
Men have a Faculty of dreaming sometimes with their Eyes open. You will own, ’tis
no small pleasure with Mankind to make theirDreams pass for Realitys;and thatthe
Love of Truthis, in earnest, not half so prevalent as thisPassionfor Noveltyand
Surprize, join’d witha Desire of making Impression, andbeing admir’d.However, I
am so charitable still, as to think there is more of innocentDelusionthan voluntary
Imposture in the World:
and that they who have most impos’d on Mankind, have been
Imposture.
happy in a certain Faculty of imposing first upon themselves; by
which they have a kind of Salvo for their Consciences, and are so much the more
successful, as they can act their Part more naturally, andto the life.Nor is it to be
esteem’d a Riddle, that Mens Dreams shou’d sometimes have the good fortune of
passing with ’em for Truth; when we consider, that in some Cases, that which was
never so much asdreamt of, or related asTruth, comes afterwards to be believ’d by
one who has often told it.
So that the greatestImpostor in the World, reply’d he, at this rate may be allow’d
sincere.[325]
As to themainof his Imposture, said I, perhaps he may; notwithstanding some pious
Frauds made use of between whiles, in behalf of a Belief thought good and wholesom.
And so very natural do I take this to be, that in all Religions, except the true, I look
upon the greatest Zeal to be accompany’d with the strongest Inclination to deceive.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 122 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
For the Design and End beingthe Truth,’tis not customary to hesitate or be
scrupulous about the Choice of Means. Whether this be true or no, I appeal to the
Experience of the last Age: in which ’twill not be difficult to find very remarkable
Examples, whereImposture andZeal, BigotryandHypocrisyhave liv’d together, in
one and the sameCharacter.
Let this be as it will, reply’d he, I am sorry, upon the whole, to find you of such an
incredulousTemper.
’Tis just, said I, that you shou’d pity me as a Sufferer, for losing that Pleasure which I
see others enjoy. For what stronger Pleasure is there with Mankind, or what do they
earlier learn, or longer retain, thanthe Love of hearing and relatingthings strange and
incredible?
How wonderful a thing isthe Love of wondering,and of raising
Wonderment.
Wonder! ’Tis the Delight of Children to hear Tales they shiver at,
and[326] the Vice of Old Age to abound in strange Storys of Times past. We come
into the World wondering at every thing; and when our Wonder about common things
is over, we seek something new to wonder at. Our last Scene is to tell Wonders ofour
own,to all who will believe ’em. And amidst all this, ’tis well ifTruthcomes off, but
moderately tainted.
’Tis well, reply’d he, if with thismoderateFaithof yours, you can believe any
Miracleswhatever.
No matter, said I, how incredulous I am ofmodern Miracles,if I have a right Faith in
those offormer Times, by paying the deference due to sacred Writ. ’Tis here I am so
much warn’d againstCredulity,
and enjoin’d never to believe even the greatest Miracles which
Credulity.
may be wrought, in opposition to what has been already taught
me. And this Injunction I am so well fitted to comply with, that I can safely engage to
keep still in the sameFaith,and promisenever to believe amiss.
But is thisa Promise which can well be made?
If not, and that my Belief indeed does not absolutely depend upon my self, how am I
accountable for it? I may be justly[327] punish’d for Actions, in which my Will is
free: but with what justice can I be challeng’d for my Belief, if in this I am not at my
liberty? If Credulity and Incredulity are Defects only in the Judgment; and the best-
meaning Person in the world may err on either side, whilst a much worse Man, by
having better Parts, may judg far better of the Evidence of things: how can you punish
him who errs, unless you wou’d punish Weakness,and say, ’tis just for Men to suffer
for their Unhappiness, and not their Fault?
I am apt to think, said he, that very few of those who are punish’d for their
Incredulity,can be said to be Sufferers for theirWeakness.
Taking it for granted then, reply’d I, thatSimplicityandWeaknessis more the
Character ofthe Credulousthan ofthe Unbelieving;yet I see not, but that even this
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 123 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
way still we are as liable to suffer by ourWeakness,as in the contrary Case by an
over-refin’dWit.For if we cannot command our own Belief, how are we secure
against those false Prophets, and their deluding Miracles, of which we have such
Warning given us? How are we safe from Heresy and false Religion?Credulitybeing
that which delivers us up to all Impostures of this sort, and which[328] actually at this
day hold thePaganandMahometanWorld in Error and blind Superstition. Either
therefore there is no Punishment due to wrong Belief, because wecannotbelieve as
we will our-selves; or if wecan,why shou’d we not promisenever to believe amiss?
Now in respect of Miracles to come, the surest way never to believeamiss, is never to
believeat all.For being satisfy’d of the Truth of our Religion by past Miracles, so as
to need no other to confirm us; the Belief of new may often do us harm, but can never
do us good. Therefore as the truest Mark of a believing Christian is to seek after no
Sign or Miracle to come; so the safest Station in Christianity is his, who can be mov’d
by nothing of this kind, and is thus Miracle-proof. For if theMiraclebe on the side of
his Faith, ’tis superfluous, and he needs it not; if against his Faith, let it be as great as
possible, he will never regard it in the least, or believe it any other than Imposture, tho
coming from an Angel. So that with all thatIncredulityfor which you reproach me so
severely, I take my-self to be still the better and more Orthodox Christian. At least I
am more sure of continuing so than you, who with your Credulity may be impos’d
upon by such as are far short ofAngels.For having this preparatory Disposition, ’tis
odds you may come in time to believe Mi[329]racles in any of the differentSects,
who, we know, all pretend to them. I am persuaded therefore, that the best Maxim to
go by, is that common one, “ThatMiracles are ceas’d”: And I am ready to defend this
Opinion of mine to be the most probable in it-self, as well as most sutable to
Christianity.
THIS Question, upon further Debate, happen’d to divide ourtwoCompanions. For the
elderly Gentleman, my Antagonist, maintain’d, “That the giving up of Miracles for
the time present, wou’d be of great advantage to the Atheists.” The younger
Gentleman, his Companion, question’d, “Whether the allowing ’em might not be of as
great advantage to the Enthusiasts and Sectarys, against the National Church: This of
the two being the greatest Danger, he thought, both to Religion and the State.” He was
resolv’d, therefore, for the future to be as cautious in examining these modern
Miracles,as he had before been eager in seeking ’em. He told us very pleasantly what
an Adventurer he had been of that kind; and on how many Partys he had been
engag’d, with a sort of People who were always on the hot Scent of some new
ProdigyorApparition,some upstartRevelationor Prophecy.This, he thought,[330]
was trueFanaticism errant.
He had enough of this visionary Chace, and wou’d ramble no
Fanaticism.
more in blind Corners of the World, as he had been formerly
accustom’d, in ghostly Company of Spirit-hunters, Witch-finders, and Layers-out for
hellish Storys and diabolical Transactions. There was no need, he thought, of such
Intelligences fromHell,to prove the Power ofHeaven,and Being ofa God. And now
at last he begun to see the Ridicule of laying such a stress on these Matters: As ifa
Providencedepended on them, andReligionwere at stake, when any of these wild
Feats were question’d. He was sensible there were many good Christians who made
themselves strong Partisans in this Cause; tho he cou’d not avoid wondring at it, now
he began to consider, and look back.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 124 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
TheHeathens,he said, who wanted Scripture, might have recourse toMiracles:And
Providence perhaps had allow’d them theirOracles andProdigys,as an imperfect
kind ofRevelation.TheJews too, for their hard Heart, and harder Understanding, had
this allowance; when stubbornly they ask’d forSignsandWonders. ButChristians,for
their parts, had a far better and truerRevelation;they had their plainer Oracles, a more
rational Law, and clearer Scripture, carrying its own Force, and withal so[331] well
attested, as to admit of no dispute. And were I, continu’d he, to assign the exact time
when Miracles probably might first have ceas’d, I shou’d be tempted to fansy it was
when Sacred Writtook place, and was compleated.
This is Fancy indeed, (reply’d the grave Gentleman) and a very
Miracles, past,
dangerous one to that Scripture you pretend is of it-self so well present.
attested. The Attestation of Men dead and gone, in behalf of
Miracles past and at an end, can never surely be of equal force with Miracles present:
And of these, I maintain, there are never wanting a Number sufficient in the World to
warrant aDivine Existence.If there were no Miracles now-a-days, the World wou’d
be apt to think there never were any. The present must answer for the Credibility of
the past. This is “GOD witnessingfor himself”;
not “Men for GOD.” For who shall witness forMen,if in the
Human Testimony.
Case of Religion they have no Testimony from Heaven in their
behalf?
What it is may make the Report ofMencredible, (said the younger Gentleman) is
another Question. But for mereMiracles,it seems to me, they cannot be properly said
“To witness either forGOD or Men.” For who shall witness for theMiracles
themselves? And what[332] tho they are ever so certain? What Security have we, that
they are not acted byDaemons?What Proof that they are not wrought byMagick?In
short, “What Trust is there to any thing above, or below, if the Signs are only of
Power,and not ofGoodness?”
And are you so far improv’d then, reply’d the severe Companion, under your new
scepticalMaster, (pointing to me) that you can thus readily discard all Miracles, as
useless?—
The young Gentleman, I saw, was somewhat daunted with this rough Usage of his
Friend; who was going on still with his Invective. Nay then (said I, interposing) ’tis I
who am to answer for this young Gentleman, whom you make to be my Disciple. And
since his Modesty, I see, will not allow him to pursue what he has so handsomly
begun, I will endeavour it my-self, if he will give me leave.
The young Gentleman assented; and I went on, representing his fair Intention of
establishing in the first place a rational and just Foundation forour Faith;so as to
vindicate it from the Reproach of having no immediate Miracles to support it. He
wou’d have done this, I said, un[333]doubtedly, by shewing how good Proof we had
already for oursacred Oracles, from the Testimony ofthe Dead;whose Characters
and Lives might answer for them, as to the Truth of what they reported to us from
God. This, however, was by no means “Witnessing for GOD,” as the zealous
Gentleman had hastily express’d himself. For this was above the reach either of Men,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 125 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
or Miracles. Nor cou’d God witnessfor himself,or assert his Being any other way to
Men,
than “By revealing himself to theirReason,appealing to their
Divine Testimony.
Judgment,and submitting his Ways to theirCensure, andcool
Deliberation.” The Contemplation of the Universe, its Laws and Government, was, I
aver’d, the only means which cou’d establish thesound Beliefof aDeity.For what
tho innumerableMiraclesfrom every part assail’d the Sense, and gave the trembling
Soul no respite?
What tho the Sky shou’d suddenly open, and all kinds of
Miracles no proof of
Prodigys appear, Voices be heard, or Characters read? What Divinity.
wou’d this evince more than “That there werecertainPowers
cou’d do all this?” But “WhatPowers; WhetherOne, or more; WhetherSuperior,or
Subaltern; Mortal,or Immortal; Wise, or Foolish; Just,or Unjust; Good, or Bad”: this
wou’d still remain a Mystery; as wou’d the true Intention, the Infallibility or
Cer[334]tainty of whateverthesePowers asserted. Their Word cou’d not be taken in
their own case. They might silence Men indeed, but not convince them: since “Power
can never serve as Proof for*Goodness; andGoodness is the only Pledg ofTruth.”
ByGoodness alone,Trust is created. ByGoodnesssuperiorPowers may win Belief.
They must allow their Works to be examin’d, their Actions criticiz’d: And thus,thus
only, they may be confided in; “When by repeated Marks theirBenevolenceis prov’d,
and theirCharacterof SincerityandTruth establish’d.” To whom therefore the Laws
of this Universe and its Government appear just and uniform; to him they speak the
Government of oneJust-One; to him theyrevealand witness aGod:and laying in him
the Foundation of thisfirstFaith, they fit him fora†subsequent One.
He can then hearken toHistorical Revelation:and is then fitted,
Revelation.
and not till then, for the reception of anyMessage or miraculous
Noticefrom Above; where he knows beforehand all is just and true. But this, no
Power of Miracles, nor any Power besides hisReason,can make him know, or
apprehend.[335]
BUT now, continu’d I, since I have been thus long theDefendentonly; I am resolv’d
to take upoffensiveArms, and be Aggressor in my turn; providedTheoclesbe not
angry with me for borrowing Ground from his Hypothesis.
Whatever you borrow of his, reply’d my Antagonist, you are pretty sure of spoiling it:
And as it passes thro’ your hands, you had best beware lest you seem rather to reflect
onHim thanMe.
I’ll venture it, said I; whilst I maintain that most of those Maxims you build upon, are
fit only to betray your own Cause. For whilst you are labouring to unhinge Nature;
whilst you are searching Heaven and Earth for Prodigys,
and studying how tomiraculizeevery thing; you bring Confusion
Atheism from
on the World, you break its Uniformity, and destroy that Superstition.
admirable Simplicity of Order, from whence theOne infinite and
perfect Principle is known. Perpetual Strifes, Convulsions, Violences, Breach of
Laws, Variation and Unsteddiness of Order, shew either no Controul, or several
uncontroul’d and unsubordinate Powers in Nature. We have before our eyes either the
Chaos andAtomsof theAtheists,or theMagickand[336]Daemons of thePolytheists.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 126 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Yet is this tumultuous System of the Universe asserted with the highest Zeal by some
who wou’d maintain aDeity.This is that Face of Things, and these the Features by
which they representDivinity.Hither the Eyes of our more inquisitive and ingenuous
Youth are turn’d with care, lest they see any thing otherwise than in this perplex’d and
amazing View. As ifAtheismwere the most natural Inference which cou’d be drawn
from a regular and orderly State of Things! But after all this mangling and
disfigurement ofNature;if it happens, as oft it does, that the amaz’d Disciple coming
to himself, and searching leisurely intoNature’s Ways, finds more ofOrder,
Uniformity,andConstancyin Things than he suspected; he is of course driven into
Atheism:And this merely by the Impressions he receiv’d from that preposterous
System, which taught him to seek forDeityinConfusion,and to discoverProvidence
inan irregular disjointed World.
And when you, reply’d he, with your newly-espous’d System, have brought all things
to be asuniform, plain, regular,andsimple,as you cou’d wish; I suppose you will
send your Disciple to seek forDeityinMechanism;that is to say, in some exquisite
System ofself-govern’dMatter.[337] For what else is it you Naturalists make of the
World, than a mereMachine?
Nothing else, reply’d I, if to the Machine you allowa Mind.For in this case ’tis not a
Self-govern’d,but aGod-govern’d Machine.
And what are the Tokens, said he, which shou’d convince us? What Signs shou’d this
dumbMachinegive of its being thus govern’d?
The present, reply’d I, are sufficient. It cannot possibly give stronger Signs of Life
and steddy Thought. Compareour own Machineswith thisgreat-One;and see,
Whether by their Order, Management and Motions, they betoken either so perfect a
Life, or so consummate an Intelligence. Theoneis regular, steddy, permanent; the
otherare irregular, variable, inconstant. In one there are the Marks of Wisdom and
Determination; in the other, of Whimsy and Conceit: In one there appears Judgment;
in the other, Fancy only: In one, Will; in the other, Caprice: In one, Truth, Certainty,
Knowledg; in the other, Error, Folly, and Madness.—But to be convinc’d there is
something above, which thinks and acts, we want, it seems, thelatterof these Signs;
as supposing there can be no[338] Thought or Intelligence beside what is likeour
own.We sicken and grow weary with the orderly and regular Course of Things.
Periods, and stated Laws, and Revolutions just and proportionable, work not upon us,
nor win our Admiration. We must have Riddles, Prodigys, Matter for Surprize and
Horror! By Harmony, Order and Concord, we are madeAtheists:By Irregularity and
Discord, we are convinc’d ofDeity!“The World is mere Accident, if it proceeds in
Course; but an Effect of Wisdom, if it runs mad!”
THUS I took upon me the part of a soundTheist,whilst I endeavour’d to refute my
Antagonist, and shew that his Principles favour’dAtheism.The zealous Gentleman
took high Offence: And we continu’d debating warmly, till late at night. ButTheocles
was Moderator: And we retir’d at last to our Repose, all calm and friendly. However,
I was not a little rejoic’d to hear that our Companions were to go away early the next
Morning, and leaveTheoclesto me alone.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 127 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
For now (Palemon!) that Morning was approaching,
for which I so much long’d. What your Longing may prove,[339]
Sect. 1.
I may have reason to fear. You have had enough, one wou’d
think, to turn the edge of your Curiosity in this kind. Can it be imagin’d, that after the
Recital ofTwo such Days already past, you can with patience hear ofAnotheryet to
come, more Philosophical than either?—But you have made me promise; and now,
whate’er it cost, take it you must, as follows.[340]
PART III
PhiloclesToPalemon
SECTION I
Sect. 1.
IT was yet deep Night, as I imagin’d, when I wak’d with the noise of People up in the
House. I call’d to know the matter; and was told thatTheocleshad a little before
parted with his Friends; after which he went out to take his Morning-Walk, but wou’d
return, they thought, pretty soon: For so he had left word; and that no-body in the
mean time shou’d disturb my Rest.
This was Disturbance sufficient, when I heard it. I presently got up; and finding it
light enough to see the Hill, which was at a little distance from the House, I soon got
thither; and at the foot of it, overtookTheocles;to whom I complain’d of his
Unkindness. For I was not certainly, I told him, so effeminate and weaka Friend,as
to deserve that he shou’d[341] treat me likea Woman: Nor had I shown such an
Aversion to his Manners or Conversation, as to be thought fitter for the dull Luxury of
a soft Bed and Ease, than for Business, Recreation, or Study with an early Friend. He
had no other way therefore of making me amends, than by allowing me henceforward
to be a Party with him in hisserious Thoughts, as he saw I was resolv’d to be in his
Hours andExercisesof this sort.
“You have forgot then,” saidTheocles,“the Assignation you had yesterday with the
SilvanNymphs at this Place and Hour?” “No, truly,” said I: “For, as you see, I am
come punctually to the Place appointed. But I never expected you shou’d have come
hither without me.” “Nay then,” saidTheocles,“there’s hope you may in time become
a Lover with me: for you already begin to shewJealousy.How little did I think these
Nymphs cou’d raise that Passion in you?” “Truly,” said I, “for theNymphs you
mention, I know little of ’em as yet. My Jealousy and Love regardYou only. I was
afraid you had a mind to escape me. But now that I am again in possession of you, I
want noNymph to make me happy here; unless it were perhaps to join Forces against
you, in the manner your belov’d Poet makes theNymphAEgle[342] join with his two
Youths, in forcing the GodSilenusto sing to ’em.”
I dare trust your Gallantry, reply’dTheocles,that if you had such fair Company as
you speak of, you wou’d otherwise bestow your time than in an Adventure of
Philosophy.—But do you expect I shou’d imitate the Poet’s God you mention’d, and
sing “The Rise of Things from Atoms; the Birth of Order from Confusion; and the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 128 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Origin ofUnion, Harmony, andConcord,from the sole Powers ofChaos,and blind
Chance?” The Song indeed was fitted to theGod. For what cou’d better sute his jolly
Character, than such a drunken Creation; which he lov’d often to celebrate, by acting
it to the life? But even this Song was too harmonious for the Night’s Debauch. Well
has our Poet made it of the Morning, when the God was fresh: For hardly shou’d we
be brought ever to believe that such harmonious Numbers cou’d arise from a mere
Chaos of the Mind. But we must hear our Poet speaking in the Mouth of some soberer
Demi-God or Hero. He then presents us with a different Principle of Things, and in a
more proper Order of Precedency, givesThoughtthe upper hand. He makesMind
originally to have govern’dBody;notBodyMind:For this[343] had been aChaos
everlasting, and must have kept all things in aChaos-State to this day, and for ever,
had it ever been. But,
The activeMind,infus’d thro’ all the Space,
Unites and mingles with the mighty Mass:
Hence Men and Beasts.—
Here,Philocles,we shall find oursovereign Genius;if we can charm theGenius of
the Place (more chaste and sober than yourSilenus) to inspire us with a truer Song of
Nature, teach us some celestial Hymn, and make us feelDivinitypresent in these
solemn Places of Retreat.
Haste then, I conjure you, said I, goodTheocles,and stop not one moment for any
Ceremony or Rite. For well I see, methinks, that without any such Preparation, some
Divinityhas approach’d us, and already moves in you. We are come to the sacred
Groves of theHamadryads, which formerly were said to render Oracles. We are on
the most beautiful part of the Hill; and the Sun, now ready to rise, draws off the
Curtain of Night, and shews us the open Scene of Nature in the Plains below. Begin:
For now I know you are full of those Di[344]vine Thoughts which meet you ever in
thisSolitude.Give ’em but Voice and Accents: You may be still as muchaloneas you
are us’d, and take no more notice of me than if I were absent.
JUST as I had said this, he turn’d away his Eyes from me, musing a-while by himself:
and soon afterwards, stretching out his Hand, as pointing to the Objects round him, he
began.
“Ye Fields and Woods, my Refuge from the toilsome World of
Meditation.
Business, receive me in your quiet Sanctuarys, and favour my
Retreat and thoughtful Solitude.—Ye verdant Plains, how gladly I salute ye!—Hail all
ye blissful Mansions! Known Seats! Delightful Prospects! Majestick Beautys of this
Earth, and all ye Rural Powers and Graces!—Bless’d be ye chaste Abodes of happiest
Mortals, who here in peaceful Innocence enjoy a Life un-envy’d, tho Divine; whilst
with its bless’d Tranquillity it affords a happy Leisure and Retreat for Man; who,
made for Contemplation, and to search his own and other Natures, may here best
meditate the Cause of Things; and plac’d amidst the various Scenes of Nature, may
nearer view her Works.[345]
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 129 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
“O gloriousNature!supremely Fair, and sovereignly Good! All-loving and All-
lovely, All-divine! Whose Looks are so becoming, and of such infinite Grace; whose
Study brings such Wisdom, and whose Contemplation such Delight; whose every
single Work affords an ampler Scene, and is a nobler Spectacle than all which ever
Art presented!—O mightyNature!Wise Substitute ofProvidence!impower’d
Creatress! Or Thou impoweringDeity,supreme Creator! Thee I invoke, and Thee
alone adore. To thee this Solitude, this Place, these Rural Meditations are sacred;
whilst thus inspir’d with Harmony of Thought, tho unconfin’d by Words, and in loose
Numbers, I sing of Nature’s Order in created Beings, and celebrate the Beautys which
resolve in Thee, the Source and Principle of all Beauty and Perfection.
“Thy Being is boundless, unsearchable, impenetrable. In thy Immensity all Thought is
lost; Fancy gives o’er its Flight: and weary’d Imagination spends it-self in vain;
finding no Coast nor Limit of this Ocean, nor in the widest Tract thro’ which it soars,
one Point yet nearer the Circumference than the[346] first Center whence it
parted.—Thus having oft essay’d, thus sally’d forth into the wideExpanse,when I
return again withinmy-self,struck with the Sense of this so narrow Being, and of the
Fulness of that Immense-one; I dare no more behold the amazing Depths, nor sound
the Abyss of Deity.—
“Yet since by Thee (OSovereignMind!) I have been form’d such as I am, intelligent
and rational; since the peculiar Dignity of my Nature is to know and contemplate
Thee; permit that with due freedom I exert those Facultys with which thou hast
adorn’d me. Bear with my ventrous and bold Approach. And since nor vain Curiosity,
nor fond Conceit, nor Love of ought save Thee alone, inspires me with such Thoughts
as these, be thou my Assistant, and guide me in this Pursuit; whilst I venture thus to
tread the Labyrinth of wide Nature, and endeavour to trace thee in thy Works.”—
HERE he stop’d short, and starting, as out of a Dream; Now,Philocles,said he,
inform me, How have I appear’d to you in my Fit? Seem’d it a sensible kind of
Madness, like those Trans[347]ports which are permitted to ourPoets?or was it
downright Raving?
I only wish, said I, that you had been a little stronger in your Transport, to have
proceeded as you began, without ever minding me. For I was beginning to see
Wonders in thatNatureyou taught me, and was coming to know the Hand of your
divine Artificer.But if you stop here, I shall lose the Enjoyment of the pleasing
Vision. And already I begin to find a thousand Difficultys in fansying such a
Universal Geniusas you describe.
“Why,” said he, “is there any difficulty in fansying the Universe
Unity.
to beOne Intire Thing?Can one otherwise think of it, by what is
visible, than that All hangs together, asof a Piece?” “Grant it: And what follows?”
“Only this; that if it may indeed be said of the World, ‘That it is simplyOne,’ there
shou’d be something belonging to it which makes itOne.” “As how?” “No otherwise
than as you may observe in every thing. For to instance in what we see before us; I
know you look upon theTrees of this vast Wood to be different from one another:
And this tallOak, the noblest of the Company, as it is by it-self a different thing from
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 130 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
all its Fellows of the Wood, so with its own Wood of numerous spread[348]ing
Branches (which seemso many differentTrees) ’tis still, I suppose, one andtheself-
sameTree.Now shou’d you, as a mere Caviller, and not as a fairSceptick,tell me that
if a Figure of Wax, or any other Matter, were cast in the exact Shape and Colours of
this Tree, and temper’d, if possible, to the same kind of Substance, it might therefore
possibly bea real Treeof the same Kind or Species; I wou’d have done with you, and
reason no longer. But if you question’d me fairly, and desir’d I shou’d satisfy you
what I thought it was which made thisOneness or Sameness in the Tree or any other
Plant; or by what it differ’d from the waxen Figure, or from any such Figure
accidentally made, either in the Clouds, or on the Sand by the Sea-shore; I shou’d tell
you, that neither theWax,nor Sand, nor Cloudthus piec’d together by our Hand or
Fancy, had any real relation within themselves, or had any Nature by which they
corresponded any more in that near Situation of Parts, than if scatter’d ever so far
asunder. But this I shou’d affirm, ‘That wherever there was such aSympathizing of
Parts,as we saw here, in ourrealTree;Wherever there was such a plain Concurrence
in one common End,and to the Support, Nourishment, and Propagation of so faira
Form; we cou’d not be mistaken in saying there was a peculiar[349]Naturebelonging
to thisForm, and common to it with others of the same kind.’ By virtue of this, our
Tree is a realTree; lives, flourishes, and is stillOne and the same;even when by
Vegetation and change of Substance, not one Particle in it remainsthe same.”
At this rate indeed, said I, you have found a way to make very adorable Places of
theseSilvanHabitations. For besides the livingGenius of each Place, the Woods too,
which, by your account, are animated, have theirHamadryads, no doubt, and the
Springs and Rivulets theirNymphs in store belonging to ’em: And these too, by what I
can apprehend, of immaterial and immortal Substances.
We injure ’em then, reply’dTheocles,to say “they belong to these Trees”; and not
rather “theseTreesto them.” But as for theirImmortality,let them look to it
themselves. I only know, that boththeirsand all otherNaturesmust for their Duration
depend alone onthat Natureon which the World depends: And that everyGenius else
must be subordinate to thatOne goodGenius, whom I wou’d willingly persuade you
to thinkbelonging to this World,according to our present way of speaking.[350]
Leaving, therefore, these Trees, continu’d he, to personate themselves the best they
can,
let us examine this thing ofPersonalitybetween you and me; and
Personality.
consider how you,Philocles,areYou, and I’mMy-self.For that
there is a Sympathy of Parts in these Figures of ours,
other than in those ofMarbleform’d by aPhidiasor Praxiteles;
Self.
Sense, I believe, will teach us. And yet that our ownMarble,or
Stuff,(whate’er it be, of which we are compos’d) wears out in seven, or, at the
longest, in twice seven Years, the meanest Anatomist can tell us. Now where, I
beseech you, will that sameOne be found at last, supposing it to lie in theStuffit-self,
or any part of it? For when that is wholly spent, and not one Particle of it left, we are
Our-selves still as much as before.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 131 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
What you Philosophers are, reply’d I, may be hard perhaps to determine: But for the
rest of Mankind, I dare affirm, that few are so long themselves ashalfseven Years.
’Tis good fortune if a Man beone and the sameonly for a day or two: A Year makes
more Revolutions than can be number’d.
True, said he: But tho this may happen to a Man, and chiefly to one whose[351]
contrary Vices set him at odds so often with himself; yet when he comes to suffer, or
be punish’d for those Vices, he finds himself, if I mistake not, stillone and the same.
And you (Philocles!) who, tho you disown Philosophy, are yet so true a Proselyte to
Pyrrhonism; shou’d you at last, feeling the Power of theGenius I preach, be wrought
upon to own the divine Hypothesis,
and from this new Turn of Thought admit a total Change in all
Identity.
your Principles and Opinions; yet wou’d you be still the self-
samePhilocles:tho better yet, if you will take my Judgment, than the present-one, as
much as I love and value him. You see therefore, there is a strange Simplicity in this
You andMe, that in reality they shou’d be stillone and the same,when neitherone
Atom of Body,onePassion, nor oneThought remains the same. And for that poor
Endeavour of making out thisSameness or Identityof Being, from some self-same
Matter, or Particle of Matter,
suppos’d to remain with us when all besides is chang’d; this is by
Matter.
so much the more contemptible, as thatMatterit-self is not really
capable of such Simplicity. For I dare answer, you will allow thisYou andMeto be
each of us simply and individuallyOne, better than you can allow the same to any
thing of mere Matter; unless, quitting your Inclination forScep[352]ticism,you fall so
in love with the Notion of anAtom,as to find it full as intelligible and certain to you,
as thatYou areYour-self.
But whatever, continu’dTheocles,be suppos’d of uncompounded Matter,(a Thing, at
best, pretty difficult to conceive) yet being compounded,
and put together in a certain number of such Parts as unite and
Form.
conspire in these Frames of ours, and others like them; if it can
present us with so many innumerable Instances of particular Forms, who share this
simple Principle, by which they are reallyOne, live, act, and havea Natureor Genius
peculiar to themselves,
and provident for their own Welfare; how shall we at the same
A Genius.
time overlook this inthe Whole,and deny the Great and
General-One of the World? How can we be so unnatural as to disown divine Nature,
our common Parent, and refuse to recognizethe universaland
The Supreme One.
sovereignGenius?
Sovereigns, said I, require noNoticeto be taken of ’em, when they passincognito,nor
anyHomage where they appear notin due Form.We may even have reason to
presume they shou’d be displeas’d with us for being too officious, in endeavouring to
discover them, when they keep themselves either wholly invisible, or[353] in very
dark disguise. As for theNoticewe take of theseinvisible Powersin the common way
of our Religion, we have ourvisibleSovereigns to answer for us. Our lawful
Superiors teach us what we are toown,and toperform, in Worship. And we are
dutiful in complying with them, and following their Example. But in a philosophical
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 132 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
way, I find no warrant for our being such earnest Recognizers of a controverted Title.
However it be, you must allow one at least to understand the Controversy, and know
the Nature of thesePowersdescrib’d. May one not inquire, “WhatSubstancesthey
are of?
whethermaterialor immaterial?”
SubstanceMaterial,
Immaterial.
May one not, on the other hand, reply’dTheocles,inquire as
well, “WhatSubstance,or which of these twoSubstancesyou count your real and
properSelf.” Or wou’d you rather beno Substance,but chuse to call your-self aMode
or Accident?
Truly, said I, as accidental as my Life may be, or as that random Humour is, which
governs it; I know nothing, after all, sorealor substantialas My-self. Therefore if
there be that Thing you calla Substance,I take for granted I am one. But for any thing
further relating to this Question, you know my[354]SceptickPrinciples: I determine
neither way.
Allow me then, reply’d he (goodPhilocles!) the same Privilege ofScepticismin this
respect; since it concerns not the Affair before us, Which way we determine, or
Whether we come to any Determination at all in this point. For be the Difficulty ever
so great; it stands the same, you may perceive, againstyour own Being,as againstthat
which I am pretending to convince you of. You may raise what Objections you please
on either hand; and your Dilemma may be of notable force against the manner of such
a supreme Being’s Existence. But after you have done all, you will bring the same
Dilemma home to you, and be at a loss still aboutYour-self.
When you have argu’d ever so long upon these Metaphysical
Metaphysicks.
Points ofModeandSubstance,and have philosophically
concluded from the Difficultys of each Hypothesis, “That there cannot be in Nature
such aUniversal-Oneas This”; you must conclude,
from the same Reasons, “That there cannot be any such
A Mind.
particular Oneas Your-self.” But that there is actually such a
one asthis latter,your own Mind, ’tis hop’d, may satisfy you. And of thisMind’tis
enough to say, “That it is something whichactsupon a Body, and has[355] something
passiveunder it, and subject to it: That it has not onlyBodyor mere Matterfor its
Subject, but in some respect evenit-selftoo, and what proceeds from it: That it
superintends and manages its ownImaginations, Appearances, Fancys;correcting,
working, and modelling these, as it finds good; and adorning and accomplishing, the
best it can, this composite Order of Body and Understanding.” Such aMindand
governing Part, I know there is somewhere in the World. LetPyrrho, by the help of
such another, contradict me, if he pleases. We have our several Understandings and
Thoughts,
however we came by ’em. Each understands and thinks the best
Particular Minds.
he can for his own purpose: Hefor Himself;I for anotherSelf.
And who, I beseech you, fortheWhole?—No-one? Nothing at all?—The World,
perhaps,
you suppose to be mereBody:A Mass of modify’d Matter.The
Mind of the Whole.
Bodys of Menare part therefore of thisBody.The Imaginations,
Sensations, Apprehensions of Men are included in thisBody,and inherent in it,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 133 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
produc’d out of it, and resum’d again into it; thothe Body,it seems, never dreams of
it! TheWorldit-selfis never the wiser for all the Wit and Wisdom it breeds! It has no
Apprehension at all of what is doing; no Thought kept toit-self,for its own[356]
proper use, or purpose; not a single Imagination or Reflection, by which to discover or
be conscious of the manifold Imaginations and Inventions which it sets a-foot, and
deals abroad with such an open hand! The goodly Bulk so prolifick, kind, and
yielding for every-one else, has nothing left at last for its own share; having unhappily
lavish’d all away!—By what Chance I wou’d fain understand. “How? or by what
necessity?—Who gives the Law?—Who orders and distributes thus?” “Nature,” say
you.
“And what is Nature? IsitSense? Is ita Person? Has she Reason
Nature.
or Understanding?” “No.” “Who then understands for her, or is
interested or concern’d in her behalf?” “No-one; not a Soul: ButEvery one for
himself.”
Come on then. Let us hear further, Is not thisNaturestill aSelf?Or, tell me, I beseech
you, How are Youone?By whatToken?Or by virtue ofWhat?“By a Principle which
joins certain Parts, and which thinks and acts consonantly for the Use and Purpose of
those Parts.” “Say, therefore, What is your whole System a Part of? Or is it, indeed,
noPart,buta Whole, by it-self,absolute, independent, and unrelated to any thing
besides? If it be indeeda Part,and reallyrelated;to what else, I[357] beseech you,
than tothe Whole ofNature?Is there then sucha uniting PrincipleinNature?If so,
how are you then aSelf,andNaturenot so? How have you
Nature subject to a
something to understand and act for you, andNature,who gave Mind.
this Understanding, nothing at all to understand for her, advise
her, or help her out (poor Being!) on any occasion, whatever Necessity she may be in?
Has theWorldsuch ill fortunein the main?Are there so manyparticular
understanding active Principles every where? And is there Nothing, at last, which
thinks, acts, or understands forAll?Nothing which administers or looks afterAll?”
No (says one of a modern Hypothesis) for theWorldwas from
Contrary Belief.
Eternity, as you see it; and is no more than barely what you see:
“Matter modify’d; a Lump in motion, with here and there a Thought, or scatter’d
Portion of dissoluble Intelligence.”—No (says one of an antienter Hypothesis) for the
World was once without any Intelligence or Thought at all; “Mere Matter, Chaos,
and a Play of Atoms;tillThought,by chance, came into play,
Two sorts.
and made up a Harmony which was never design’d, or thought
of.”—Admirable Conceit!—Believe it who can.
For my own share (thank Providence) I have aMindin my[358]
Faith of Atheism.
possession, which serves, such as it is, to keep my Body and its
Affections, my Passions, Appetites, Imaginations, Fancys, and the rest, in tolerable
Harmony andOrder. Butthe Order of theUniverse,I am persuaded still, is much the
better of thetwo.LetEpicurus,if he please, think histhe better;and believing no
Genius or Wisdom above his own, inform us by what Chance ’twas dealt him, and
how Atomscame to be so wise.
In fine, continu’dTheocles(raising his Voice and Action) being thus, even by
Scepticismit-self, convinc’d the more still of my own Being, and of thisSelfof mine,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 134 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
“That ’tis areal Self,drawn out, and copy’d from another
Faith of Theism.
principal andoriginalSelf(theGreat-oneof the World)” I
endeavour to be reallyonewith it, and conformable to it, as far as I am able. I
consider, That as there isonegeneral Mass,oneBody of the Whole; so to this Body
there isan Order, to thisOrder aMind:That to thisgeneralMindeachparticular-one
must have relation; as being of like Substance, (as much as we can understand of
Substance) alike active upon Body, original to Motion and Order; alike simple,
uncompounded, individual; of like Energy, Effect, and Operation; and more like still,
if it co-operates with it to general Good, and strivesto will[359] according to the best
of Wills.So that it cannot surely but seem natural, “That theparticularMindshou’d
seek its Happiness in conformity with thegeneral-one,and endeavour to resemble it
in its highest Simplicity and Excellence.”
THEREFORE, Now, said I, good Theocles,be once again theEnthusiast;and let me
hear a-new that divine Song with which I was lately charm’d. I am already got over
my Qualm, and begin better than ever to fansy sucha Natureas you speak of;
insomuch that I find myself mightily in its Interest, and concern’d that all shou’d go
happily and well with it. Tho at the rate it often runs, I can scarce help being in some
pain on its account.
“Fear not, my Friend,” reply’d he. “For know that every
Energy of Nature.
particularNaturecertainly and constantly produces what is good
to it-self; unless somethingforeigndisturbs or hinders it, either by over-powering and
corrupting itwithin,or by Violencefrom without.ThusNaturein the Patient struggles
to the last, and strives to throw off the Distemper. Thus even in these Plants we see
round us, every[360]particularNaturethrives, and attains its Perfection, if nothing
fromwithoutobstructs it, nor any thingforeignhas already impair’d or wounded it:
And even in this case, it does its utmost still to redeem it-self. What are all
Weaknesses,
Distortions, Sicknesses, imperfect Births, and the seeming
Distempers.
Contradictions and Perversitys of Nature, other than of this sort?
And how ignorant must one be of all natural Causes and Operations, to think that any
of these Disorders happen by a Miscarriage of theparticular Nature,and not by the
Force of someforeign Naturewhich over-powers it? If therefore everyparticular
Naturebe thus constantly and unerringlytrueto it-self, and certain to produce only
what is good for it-self, and conducing to its own right State; shall not thegeneral-
one, TheNatureof the Whole,do full as much? ShallThatalone miscarry or fail? Or is
there any thingforeign,which shou’d at any time do violence upon it, or force it out
of its natural way? If not,
then all it produces is to its own advantage and good; theGood
General Good.
of Allin general: And what is for the good of all in general, is
JustandGood.” “ ’Tis so,” said I, “I confess.”
Then you ought to rest satisfy’d, reply’d he; and not only so, but be pleas’d[361] and
rejoice at what happens, knowingwhenceit comes, and towhat Perfectionit
contributes.
Resignation.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 135 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
BLESS me! said I,Theocles,into what a Superstition are you like to lead me! I
thought it heretofore the Mark of a superstitious Mind, to search for Providence in the
common Accidents of Life, and ascribe to the Divine Power those common Disasters
and Calamitys which Nature has entail’d on Mankind. But now, I find, I must place
all in general to one Account; and viewing things thro’ a kind of Magical Glass, I am
to see the worst ofIllstransform’d toGood, and admire equally whatever comes from
one and the same perfect Hand.—But no matter; I can surmount all. Go on,Theocles,
and let me advise you in my own behalf, that since you have rekindled me, you do not
by delaying give me time to cool again.
I wou’d have you know, reply’d he, I scorn to take the advantage of a warm Fit, and
be beholden to Temper or Imagination for gaining me your Assent. Therefore ere I go
yet a step farther, I am resolv’d to enter again into cool Reason with you; and ask, If
you admit for Proof what I advanc’d yesterday upon[362] that head, “Of aUniversal
UNION,
Coherence,or Sympathizingof Things?”
Principle of Order.
By Force of Probability, said I, you overcame me. Being convinc’d of a Consent and
Correspondence inallwe saw of Things, I consider’d it asunreasonablenot to allow
the samethro’out!
Unreasonable indeed! reply’d he. For in the infiniteResidue,were there no Principle
of Union; it wou’d seem next to impossible, that things within our Sphere shou’d be
consistent, and keep their Order.
“For what was infinite, wou’d be predominant.” “It seems so.”
Why universal.
Tell me then, said he, after thisUnionown’d, how you can refuse to allow the name
of Demonstration to the remaining Arguments, which establish the Government of a
perfect Mind.
Your Solutions, said I, of theill Appearancesare not perfect
Phaenomena ofIll.
enough to pass for Demonstration. And whatever seems vitious
or imperfect in the Creation, puts a stop to further Conclusions, till the thing be
solv’d.
“Did you not then,” said he, “agree with me, when I aver’d that theAppearances[363]
must of necessity stand as they are, and things seem altogether as imperfect, even on
the Concession of a perfect Supreme Mind existent?” “I did so.”
“And is not the same Reason good still? viz. ‘That in an infinity of Things, mutually
relative, a Mind which sees not infinitely, can see nothing fully;
and musttherefore frequently see that as imperfect, which in it-
Whence.
self is really perfect.’ ” “The Reason is still good.”
“Are theAppearances,then, any Objection to our Hypothesis?” “None, whilst they
remainAppearancesonly.”
Can you then prove them to be any more? For if you cannot, you prove nothing. And
that it lies on youto prove,you plainly see: since theAppearancesdo not only agree
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 136 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
with the Hypothesis, but are a necessary Consequence from it. To bid meprove,
therefore, in this case, is, in a manner, the same as to bid mebe infinite.For nothing
beside what isinfinitecan seeinfinite Connexions.”
The Presumption, I must confess, said I, by this reckoning, is wholly on your side. Yet
still this is onlyPresumption.[364]
“TakeDemonstrationthen,” said he, “if you can endure I shou’d
Demonstration.
reason thus abstractedly and drily. TheAppearancesof Ill,you
say, are not necessarily thatIllthey represent to you.” “I own it.”
“Therefore what they represent may possibly beGood.” “It may.”
“And therefore there may possibly be norealIllin things: but all may be perfectly
concurrent to one Interest; the Interest of that UniversalOne.” “It may be so.”
“Why, then, if it may be so, (be not surpriz’d) ‘It follows that it must be so’; on the
account of that greatUnit,and simpleSelf-principle,which you have granted in
theWhole.For whatever is possiblein the Whole,the Nature or Mind of theWhole
will put in execution forthe Whole’s Good:And if it be possible to excludeIll,it will
exclude it. Therefore since notwithstanding theAppearances,’tis possible thatIllmay
actually be excluded; count upon it, ‘That actually it is excluded.’ For nothing merely
passivecan oppose this universallyactivePrinciple. If any thing[365] active oppose
it, ’tisanother Principle.” “Allow it.”
Manichaeism.
’Tis impossible. For were there in NatureTwo or more
Principles, either they must agree, or not. If they agree not, all must be Confusion, till
one be predominant. If they agree, there must be some natural Reason for their
Agreement; and this natural Reason cannot be fromChance,but from some particular
Design, Contrivance,or Thought:which brings us up again toOne Principle, and
makes the othertwoto be subordinate. And thus when we have compar’d each of the
Three Opinions,viz.“Thatthereis no designing active Principle;
Thatthere is more than one”; or, “That finallythere is butOne”;
Conclusion.
we shall perceive, that the only consistent Opinion isthe last.
And sinceoneor otherof these Opinions must of necessity be true; what can we
determine, other than that thelastis, and must be so, demonstrably? if it be
Demonstration “That inThree Opinions,One of which must necessarily be true,Two
being plainly absurd, theThird must be the Truth.”
Enough, said I,Theocles.My Doubts are vanish’d.MaliceandChance(vain
Phantoms!) have yielded to thatall-prevalentWisdomwhich you[366] have
establish’d. You are Conqueror in the cool way ofReason,and may with Honour now
grow warm again, in yourpoetickVein. Return therefore, I intreat you, once more, to
thatPerfection of Being;and address your-self to it as before, on our Approaches to
these Silvan Scenes, where first it seem’d to inspire you. I shall now no longer be in
danger of imagining eitherMagickor Superstitionin the case; since you invoke no
otherPower than that singleOne, which seems so natural.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 137 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
THUS I continue then, saidTheocles,addressing my-self, as you wou’d have me, to
thatGuardian-DeityandInspirer, whom we are to imagine present here;
but nothereonly. For, “O mightyGenius! Sole-animating and
Meditation.
inspiring Power! Author and Subject of these Thoughts! Thy
Influence is universal: and in all Things, thou art inmost. From Thee depend their
secret Springs of Action. Thou mov’st them with an irresistible unweary’d Force, by
sacred and inviolableLaws, fram’d for the Good of each particular Being; as best may
sute with the Perfection, Life, and Vigour ofthe Whole.The vital Principle is widely
shar’d, and infinitely vary’d: dispers’d thro’out; no[367]where extinct. All lives; and
by Succession still revives. The temporary Beings quit their borrow’d Forms, and
yield their elementary Substance to New-Comers. Call’d, in their several turns, to
Life, they view the Light, and viewing pass; that others too may be Spectators of the
goodly Scene, and greater numbers still enjoy the Privilege ofNature.Munificent and
Great, she imparts her-self to most; and makes the Subjects of her Bounty infinite.
Nought stays her hastning Hand. No Time nor Substance is lost or un-improv’d. New
Forms arise: and when the old dissolve, the Matter whence they were compos’d is not
left useless, but wrought with equal Management and Art, even inCorruption,
Nature’s seeming Waste, and vile Abhorrence. The abject State appears merely asthe
Wayor Passage to some better. But cou’d we nearly view it, and with Indifference,
remote from the Antipathy of Sense; we then perhaps shou’d highest raise our
Admiration: convinc’d that eventhe Way it-selfwas equal to theEnd.Nor can we
judg less favourably of that consummate Art exhibited thro’ all the Works of Nature;
since our weak Eyes, help’d by mechanick Art, discover in these Works a hidden
Scene of Wonders; Worlds within Worlds,[368] of infinite Minuteness, tho as to Art
still equal to the greatest, and pregnant with more Wonders than the most discerning
Sense, join’d with the greatest Art, or the acutest Reason, can penetrate or unfold.
“But ’tis in vain for us to search the bulky Mass ofMatter:seeking to know its
Nature; how greatthe Wholeit-self, or even how small itsParts.
“If knowing only some of the Rules ofMotion,we seek to trace it further, ’tis in vain
we follow it into the Bodys it has reach’d. Our tardy Apprehensions fail us, and can
reach nothing beyond the Body it-self, thro’ which it is diffus’d. WonderfulBeing,(if
we may call it so) which Bodys never receive, except from others which lose it; nor
ever lose, unless by imparting it to others. Even without Change of Place it has its
Force: And Bodys big with Motion labour to move, yet stir not; whilst they express an
Energy beyond our Comprehension.
“In vain too we pursue thatPhantomTime,too small, and yet too mighty for our
Grasp; when shrinking to a narrow point, it scapes our Hold, or mocks our scanty
Thought by swelling[369] to Eternity, an Object unproportion’d to our Capacity, as is
thy Being, O thou AntientCause! older thanTime,yet young with fresh Eternity.
“In vain we try to fathom the Abyss ofSpace,the Seat of thy extensive Being; of
which no Place is empty, no Void which is not full.
“In vain we labour to understand that Principle ofSense andThought,which seeming
in us to depend so much onMotion,yet differs so much from it, and fromMatterit-
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 138 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
self, as not to suffer us to conceive how Thought can more result from this, than this
arise from Thought. ButThoughtwe own pre-eminent, and confess the reallest of
Beings; the only Existence of which we are made sure, by being conscious. All else
may be only Dream and Shadow. All which evenSensesuggests may be deceitful.
TheSenseit-selfremains still;Reasonsubsists; andThoughtmaintains itsEldershipof
Being. Thus are we in a manner conscious of thatoriginalandeternally
existentThought,whence we deriveour own. And thus the Assurance we have of the
Existence of Beings above our Sense, and ofThee,(the great Exemplar of thy Works)
comes from[370] Thee, theAll-True,and Perfect, who hast thus communicated thy-
self more immediately to us, so as in some mannerto inhabitwithin ourSouls;Thou
who artOriginalSoul,diffusive, vital in all, inspiritingthe Whole.
“All Nature’s Wonders serve to excite and perfect this Idea of theirAuthor.’Tis here
he suffers us to see, and even converse with him, in a manner sutable to our Frailty.
How glorious is it to contemplate him, in this noblest of his Works apparent to us, The
Systemof the bigger World!”—
HERE I must own, ’twas no small Comfort to me, to find that, as our Meditation
turn’d, we were likely to get clear of an entangling abstrusePhilosophy.I was in
hopes Theocles,as he proceeded, might stick closer toNature,since he was now
come upon the Borders of our World. And here I wou’d willingly have welcom’d
him, had I thought it safe at present to venture the least Interruption.
“Besides the neighbouring Planets,” (continu’d he, in his rapturous Strain) “what
Multitudes offix’dStarsdid we see sparkle, not an hour ago, in the clear Night, which
yet had hardly[371] yielded to the Day? How many others are discover’d by the help
of Art? Yet how many remain still, beyond the reach of our Discovery! Crouded as
they seem, their Distance from each other is as unmeasurable by Art, as is the
Distance between them and us. Whence we are naturally taught the Immensity of that
Being,who thro’ these immense Spaces has dispos’d such an Infinite of Bodys,
belonging each (as we may well presume) to Systems as compleat as our own World:
Since even the smallest Spark of this brightGalaxymay vie with this ourSun;which
shining now full out, gives us new Life, exalts our Spirits, and makes us feelDivinity
more present.
“ProdigiousOrb! Bright Source of vital Heat, and Spring of Day!—Soft Flame, yet
how intense, how active! How diffusive, and how vast a Substance; yet how collected
thus within it-self, and in a glowing Mass confin’d to the Center of thisplanetary
World!—MightyBeing! Brightest Image, and Representative ofthe Almighty!
Supreme of the corporeal World! Unperishing in Grace, and of undecaying Youth!
Fair, beautiful, and hardly mortal Creature! By what secret ways dost thou receive the
Sup[372]plies which maintain Thee still in such unweary’d Vigour, and un-exhausted
Glory; notwithstanding those eternally emitted Streams, and that continual Expence of
vital Treasures, which inlighten and invigorate the surrounding Winds?—
“Around him all thePlanets,with thisour Earth,single, or with Attendants,
continually move; seeking to receive the Blessing of his Light, and lively Warmth!
Towards him they seem to tend with prone descent, as to their Center; but happily
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 139 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
controul’d still by another Impulse, they keep their heavenly Order; and in just
Numbers, and exactest Measure, go the eternal Rounds.
“But, O thou who art theAuthorandModifierof these various Motions! Osovereign
andsole Mover,by whose high Art the rolling Spheres are govern’d, and these
stupendous Bodys of our World hold their unrelenting Courses! O wise OEconomist,
and powerful Chief, whom all the Elements and Powers of Nature serve! How hast
thou animated these moving Worlds? What Spirit or Soul infus’d? What Biass fix’d?
Or how encompass’d them in liquidAEther,driving them as with[373] the Breath of
living Winds, thy active and unweary’d Ministers in this intricate and mighty Work?
“Thus powerfully are theSystems held intire, and kept from fatal interfering. Thus is
our ponderousGlobedirected in its annual Course; daily revolving on its own Center:
whilst the obsequiousMoon with double Labour, monthly surrounding this our bigger
Orb, attends the Motion of her Sister-Planet, and pays in common her circular
Homage to theSun.
“Yet is thisMansion-Globe,thisMan-Container, of a much narrower compass even
than other its Fellow-Wanderers of our System. How narrow then must it appear,
compar’d with the capaciousSystemof its ownSun?And how narrow, or as nothing,
in respect of thoseinnumerable Systemsof other apparentSuns? Yet how immense a
Body it seems, compar’d with ours of human Form, a borrow’d Remnant of its
variable and oft-converted Surface? tho animated with a sublime Celestial Spirit, by
which we have Relation and Tendency toTheeour HeavenlySire,Center of Souls; to
whom these Spirits of ours by Nature tend, as earthly Bodys to their proper
Center.—[374]O did they tend as unerringly and constantly!—ButThou alone
composest the Disorders of the corporeal World, and from the restless and fighting
Elementsraisest that peaceful Concord, and conspiring Beauty of the ever-flourishing
Creation. Even so canst thou convert these jarring Motions of intelligent Beings, and
in due time and manner cause them to find their Rest; making them contribute to the
Good and Perfection oftheUniverse,thyall-goodandperfect Work.”—
HERE again he broke off, looking on me as if he expected I shou’d speak; which
when he found plainly I wou’d not, but continu’d still in a posture of musing Thought:
WhyPhilocles!(said he, with an Air of Wonder) What can this mean, that you shou’d
suffer me thus to run on, without the least Interruption? Have you at once given over
your scrupulous Philosophy, to let me range thus at pleasure thro’ these aerial Spaces
and imaginary Regions, where my capricious Fancy or easy Faith has led me? I wou’d
have you to consider better, and know, myPhilocles,that I had never trusted my-self
with you in thisVeinof Enthusiasm,had I not rely’d on you to govern it a little
better.[375]
I find then, said I, (rouzing my-self from my musing Posture) you expect I shou’d
serve you in the same capacity as that Musician, whom an antient Orator made use of
at his Elbow, to strike such moving Notes as rais’d him when he was perceiv’d to
sink; and calm’d him again, when his impetuous Spirit was transported in too high a
Strain.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 140 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
“You imagine right,” reply’dTheocles;“and therefore I am resolv’d not to go on, till
you have promis’d to pull me by the Sleeve when I grow extravagant.” “Be it so,”
said I; “you have my Promise.” “But how if instead of rising in my Transports, I
shou’d grow flat and tiresom: What Lyre or Instrument wou’d you imploy to raise
me?”
The Danger, I told him, cou’d hardly be suppos’d to lie on this hand. HisVeinwas a
plentiful one; and hisEnthusiasmin no likelihood of failing him. His Subject too, as
well as his Numbers, wou’d bear him out. And with the Advantage of the rural Scene
around us, his number’d Prose, I thought, supply’d the room of the best Pastoral
Song. For in the manner I was now wrought up, ’twas as agreeable to me to hear him,
in this kind ofPassion,invoke hisStars andElements,as[376] to hear one of those
amorousShepherds complaining to hisFlock,and making the Woods and Rocks
resound the Name ofHer whom he ador’d.—Begin therefore (continu’d I, still
pressing him) Begin a-new, and lead me boldly thro’ yourElements.Wherever there
is danger, be it on either hand, I promise to give you warning, when I perceive it.
LET us begin then, said he, with this ourElementof Earth,which yonder we see
cultivated with such Care by the early Swains now working in the Plain
below.—“Unhappy restlessMen,who first disdain’d these peaceful Labours, gentle
rural Tasks, perform’d with such Delight! WhatPrideor whatAmbitionbred this
Scorn? Hence all those fatal Evils of your Race! EnormousLuxury, despising homely
Fare, ranges thro’ Seas and Lands, rifles the Globe; and Men ingenious to their
Misery, work out for themselves the means of heavier Labour, anxious Cares, and
Sorrow: Not satisfy’d to turn and manure for their Use the wholesom and beneficial
Mould of this theirEarth,they dig yet deeper, and seeking out imaginary Wealth, they
search its very Entrails.[377]
“Here, led by Curiosity, we findMineralsof different Natures, which by their
Simplicity discover no less of the Divine Art, than the most compounded of Nature’s
Works. Some are found capable of surprizing Changes; others as durable, and hard to
be destroy’d or chang’d by Fire, or utmost Art. So various are the Subjects of our
Contemplation, that even the Study of these inglorious Parts of Nature, in the nether
World, is able it-self alone to yield large Matter and Employment for the busiest
Spirits of Men, who in the Labour of these Experiments can willingly consume their
Lives.—But the noisom poisonous Steams which theEarthbreathes from these dark
Caverns, where she conceals her Treasures, suffer not prying Mortals to live long in
this Search.
“How comfortable is it to those who come out hence alive, to breathe a purerAir! to
see the rejoicing Light ofDay! and tread the fertile Ground! How gladly they
contemplate the Surface of the Earth, their Habitation, heated and enliven’d by the
Sun,and temper’d by the freshAir of fanningBreezes!These exercise the resty
Plants, and scour the unactive Globe. And[378] when theSundraws hence thick
clouded Steams and Vapours, ’tis only to digest and exalt the unwholesom Particles,
and commit ’em to the sprightlyAir;which soon imparting its quick and vital Spirit,
renders ’em again with improvement to the Earth, in gentle Breathings, or in rich
Dews and fruitful Showers. The sameAir, moving about the mighty Mass, enters its
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 141 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Pores, impregnating the Whole: And both theSunandAir conspiring, so animate this
Mother-Earth,that tho ever breeding, her Vigour is as great, her Beauty as fresh, and
her Looks as charming, as if she newly came out of the forming Hands of her Creator.
“How beautiful is theWateramong the inferior Earthly Works! Heavy, liquid, and
transparent: without the springing Vigour and expansive Force ofAir;but not without
Activity. Stubborn and un-yielding, when compress’d; but placidly avoiding Force,
and bending every way with ready Fluency! Insinuating, it dissolves the lumpish
Earth, frees the intangled Bodys, procures their Intercourse, and summons to the Field
the keen terrestrial Particles; whole happy Strifes soon ending in strict Union, produce
the various Forms which we behold. How vast[379] are the Abysses of theSea,where
this soft Element is stor’d; and whence the Sun and Winds extracting, raise it into
Clouds! These soon converted into Rain, water the thirsty Ground, and supply a-fresh
the Springs and Rivers; the Comfort of the neighbouring Plains, and sweet
Refreshment of all Animals.
“But whither shall we trace the Sources oftheLight?or in what Ocean comprehend
the luminous Matter so wide diffus’d thro’ the immense Spaces which it fills? What
Seats shall we assign to that fierce Element ofFire,too active to be confin’d within
the Compass of theSun,and not excluded even the Bowels of the heavyEarth?The
Airit-self submits to it, and serves as its inferior Instrument. Even this ourSun,with
all thosenumerous Suns, the glittering Host of Heaven, seem to receive from hence
the vast Supplies which keep them ever in their splendid State. Theinvisible etherial
Substance,penetrating both liquid and solid Bodys, is diffus’d thro’out the Universe.
It cherishes the cold dull massyGlobe,and warms it to its Center. It forms the
Minerals; gives Life and Growth to Vegetables; kindles a soft, invisible, and vital
Flamein the Breasts of living[380] Creatures; frames, animates, and nurses all the
various Forms; sparing, as well as imploying for their Use, thosesulphurous and
combustibleMatters of which they are compos’d. Benign and gentle amidst all, it still
maintains this happy Peace and Concord, according to its stated and peculiar Laws.
But these once broken, the acquittedBeingtakes its Course unrul’d. It runs impetuous
thro’ the fatal Breach, and breaking into visible and fierceFlames,passes triumphant
o’er the yielding Forms, converting all into it-self, and dissolving now those Systems
which it-self before had form’d. ’Tis thus”—
HERETheoclesstopt on a sudden, when (as he imagin’d) I was putting my Hand out,
to lay hold on his Sleeve.
O Philocles,said he, ’tis well remember’d. I was growing too warm, I find; as well I
might indeed, in thishotElement. And here perhaps I might have talk’d yet more
mysteriously, had you been one who cou’d think otherwise than in the common way
of the soft Flames ofLove.You might, perhaps, have heard Wonders in this kind:
“How all things had their Beinghence,and how their[381] noblest End was to behere
wrapt up, consum’d and lost.”—But in these high Flights, I might possibly have gone
near to burn my Wings.
Indeed, said I, you might well expect the Fate ofIcarus,for your high-soaring. But
this, indeed, was not what I fear’d. For you were got above Danger; and, with that
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 142 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
devouring Element on your side, had master’d not only theSunhimself, but every
thing which stood in your way. I was afraid it might, in the issue, run to what they tell
us of a universal Conflagration;in which I knew not how it might go, possibly, with
our Genius.
I am glad, said he,Philocles!to find this grown such a Concern with you. But you
may rest secure here, if the Case you meant were thatperiodical Conflagrationtalk’d
of by somePhilosophers.For there theGenius wou’d of necessity beall in all:And
in those Intervals of Creation, when no Form, nor Species existed any-where out of
the Divine Mind,all then wasDeity:All was thatOne, collected thus within it-self,
and subsisting (as they imagin’d) rather in a more simple and perfect manner, than
when multiply’d in more ways; and becoming pro[382]ductive, it unfolded it-self in
the various Map ofNature,and thisfair visible World.
But for my part, said I, (interrupting him) who can much better seeDivinityunfolded,
than in thatinvolv’dandsolitaryState before Creation; I cou’d wish you wou’d go a
little further with me in the Map ofNature;especially if descending from your lofty
Flights, you wou’d be content to pitch upon this humble Spot ofEarth;where I cou’d
better accompany you, where’er you led me.
But you, reply’d he, who wou’d confine me to this heavyEarth,must yet allow me
the same Wings of Fancy. How else shall I fly with you, thro’ different Climates,
from Pole to Pole, and from the Frigid to the Torrid Zone?
O, said I, for this purpose I will allow you thePegasus of the Poets, or that wing’d
Griffinwhich anItalianPoet of the Moderns gave to one of his Heroes: Yet on this
Condition, that you take no such extravagant Flight, as his was, to theMoon; but keep
closely to this Orb ofEarth.
SINCE you will have it so, reply’dTheocles,let us try first on the darkest[383] and
most imperfect Parts of our Map, and see how you can endure the Prospect. “How
oblique and faintly looks the Sun on yonder Climates, far remov’d from him! How
tedious are theWintersthere! How deep the Horrors of the Night, and how
uncomfortable even the Light of Day! The freezing Winds employ their fiercest
Breath, yet are not spent with blowing. The Sea, which elsewhere is scarce confin’d
within its Limits, lies here immur’d in Walls of Chrystal. The Snow covers the Hills,
and almost fills the lowest Valleys. How wide and deep it lies, incumbent o’er the
Plains, hiding the sluggish Rivers, the Shrubs, and Trees, the Dens of Beasts, and
Mansions of distress’d and feeble Men!—See! where they lie confin’d, hardly secure
against the raging Cold, or the Attacks of the wild Beasts, now Masters of the wasted
Field, and forc’d by Hunger out of the naked Woods.—Yet not dishearten’d (such is
the Force of human Breasts) but thus provided for, by Art and Prudence, the kind
compensating Gifts of Heaven, Men and their Herds may wait for a Release. For at
length the Sun approaching, melts the Snow, sets longing Men at liberty, and affords
them Means and Time to make provision against the[384] next Return of Cold. It
breaks the icy Fetters of the Main; where vast Sea-Monsters pierce thro’ floating
Islands, with Arms which can withstand the Chrystal Rock: whilst others, who of
themselves seem great as Islands, are by their Bulk alone arm’d against all but Man;
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 143 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
whose Superiority over Creatures of such stupendous Size and Force, shou’d make
him mindful of his Privilege of Reason, and force him humbly to adore the great
Composer of these wondrous Frames, and Author of his own superior Wisdom.
“But leaving these dull Climates, so little favour’d by the Sun, for those happier
Regions, on which he looks more kindly, making perpetualSummer; How great an
Alteration do we find? His purerLightconfounds weak-sighted Mortals, pierc’d by
his scorchingBeams. Scarce can they tread the glowing Ground. The Air they breathe
cannot enough abate theFirewhich burns within their panting Breasts. Their Bodys
melt. O’ercome and fainting, they seek the Shade, and wait the cool Refreshments of
the Night. Yet oft thebounteousCreatorbestows other Refreshments. He casts a veil
of Cloudsbefore ’em, and raises gentleGales; favour’d by which, the Men and
Beasts[385] pursue their Labours; and Plants refresh’d by Dews and Showers, can
gladly bear the warmest Sun-beams.
“And here the varying Scene opens to new Wonders. We see a Country rich with
Gems, but richer with the fragrantSpicesit affords. How gravely move the largest of
Land-Creatures on the Banks of this fair River! How ponderous are their Arms, and
vast their Strength, with Courage, and a Sense superior to the other Beasts! Yet are
they tam’d, we see, by Mankind, and brought even to fight their Battels, rather as
Allies and Confederates, than as Slaves.—But let us turn our Eyes towards these
smaller, and more curious Objects; the numerous and devouringInsectson the Trees
in these wide Plains. How shining, strong, and lasting are the subtile Threds spun
from their artful Mouths! Who, besidethe All-wise,has taught ’em to compose the
beautiful soft Shells; in which recluse and bury’d, yet still alive, they undergo such a
surprizing Change; when not destroy’d by Men, who clothe and adorn themselves
with the Labours and Lives of these weak Creatures, and are proud of wearing such
inglorious Spoils? How sumptuously apparel’d, gay, and splendid, are all the
va[386]riousInsectswhich feed on the other Plants of this warm Region! How
beautifulthe Plantsthemselves in all their various Growths, from the triumphant
Palmdown to the humbleMoss!
“Now may we see thathappyCountry where preciousGums andBalsams flow from
Trees; and Nature yields her most delicious Fruits. How tame and tractable, how
patient of Labour and of Thirst, are those large Creatures; who lifting up their lofty
Heads, go led and loaden thro’ these dry and barren Places! Their Shape and Temper
show them fram’d by Nature to submit to Man, and fitted for his Service: who from
hence ought to be more sensible of his Wants, and of the Divine Bounty, thus
supplying them.
“But see! not far from us, thatfertilestof Lands, water’d and fed by a friendly
generous Stream, which, ere it enters the Sea, divides it-self into many Branches, to
dispense more equally the rich and nitrous Manure, it bestows so kindly and in due
time, on the adjacent Plains.—Fair Image of that fruitful and exuberant Nature, who
with a Flood of Bounty blesses all things, and, Parent-like, out of her many Breasts
sends the nutritious Draught[387] in various Streams to her rejoicing
Offspring!—Innumerable are the dubious Forms and unknown Species which drink
the slimy Current: whether they are such as leaving the scorch’d Desarts, satiate here
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 144 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
their ardent Thirst, and promiscuously engendring, beget a monstrous Race; or
whether, as it is said, by the Sun’s genial Heat, active on the fermenting Ooze, new
Forms are generated, and issue from the River’s fertile Bed.—See there the noted
Tyrant of the Flood, and Terror of its Borders! when suddenly displaying his horrid
Form, theamphibiousRavager invades the Land, quitting his watry Den, and from the
deep emerging, with hideous rush, sweeps o’er the tremblingPlain.The Natives from
afar behold with wonder the enormous Bulk, sprung from so small an Egg. With
Horror they relate the Monster’s Nature, cruel and deceitful: how he with dire
Hypocrisy, and false Tears, beguiles the Simple-hearted; and inspiring Tenderness
and kind Compassion, kills with pious Fraud.—Sad Emblem of that spiritual Plague,
direSuperstition!Native of this Soil; where first*Religion grew unsociable, and
among different Worshipers bred mutual Hatred, and Abhorrence of[388] each others
Temples. The Infection spreads: and Nations now profane one to another, war fiercer,
and in Religion’s Cause forget Humanity: whilst savageZeal,with meek and pious
Semblance, works dreadful Massacre; and for Heaven’s sake (horrid Pretence!) makes
desolate the Earth.—
“Here let us leave these Monsters (glad if we cou’d here confine ’em!) and detesting
the dire prolifick Soil, fly to the vastDesarts of these Parts. All ghastly and hideous as
they appear, they want not their peculiar Beautys. The Wildness pleases. We seem to
live alone with Nature. We view her in her inmost Recesses, and contemplate her with
more Delight in these original Wilds, than in the artificial Labyrinths and feign’d
Wildernesses of the Palace. The Objects of the Place, the scaly Serpents, the savage
Beasts, and poisonous Insects, how terrible soever, or how contrary to human Nature,
are beauteous in themselves, and fit to raise our Thoughts in Admiration of that
Divine Wisdom,so far superior to our short Views. Unable to declare the Use or
Service of all things in this Universe, we are yet assur’d of the Perfection ofall,and
of the Justice of thatOEconomy,to which all things are subservient, and[389] in
respect of which, Things seemingly deform’d are amiable; Disorder becomes regular;
Corruption wholesom; and Poisons (such as these we have seen) prove healing and
beneficial.
“But behold! thro’ a vast Tract of Sky before us, the mightyAtlasrears his lofty
Head, cover’d with Snow above the Clouds. Beneath theMountain’s foot, the rocky
Country rises into Hills, a proper Basis of the ponderous Mass above: where huge
embody’d Rocks lie pil’d on one another, and seem to prop the high Arch of
Heaven.—See! with what trembling Steps poor Mankind tread the narrow Brink of
the deep Precipices! From whence with giddy Horror they look down, mistrusting
even the Ground which bears ’em; whilst they hear the hollow Sound of Torrents
underneath, and see the Ruin of the impending Rock; with falling Trees which hang
with their Roots upwards, and seem to draw more Ruin after ’em. Here thoughtless
Men, seiz’d with the Newness of such Objects, become thoughtful, and willingly
contemplate the incessant Changes of this Earth’s Surface. They see, as in one instant,
the Revolutions of past Ages, the fleeting Forms of Things, and the Decay even of
this ourGlobe;whose[390] Youth and first Formation they consider, whilst the
apparent Spoil and irreparable Breaches of the wasted Mountain shew them the World
it-self only as a noble Ruin, and make them think of its approaching Period.—But
here mid-way theMountain,a spacious Border of thick Wood harbours our weary’d
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 145 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Travellers: who now are come among the ever-green and lofty Pines, the Firs, and
noble Cedars, whose towring Heads seem endless in the Sky; the rest of Trees
appearing only as Shrubs beside them. And here a different Horror seizes our
shelter’d Travellers, when they see the Day diminish’d by the deep Shapes of the vast
Wood; which closing thick above, spreads Darkness and eternal Night below. The
faint and gloomy Light looks horrid as the Shade it-self: and the profound Stillness of
these Places imposes Silence upon Men, struck with the hoarse Echoings of every
Sound within the spacious Caverns of the Wood. HereSpaceastonishes.Silenceit-
self seems pregnant; whilst an unknown Force works on the Mind, and dubious
Objects move the wakeful Sense. MysteriousVoicesare either heard or fansy’d: and
various Forms of Deityseem to present themselves, and appear more manifest in these
sacred Silvan[391] Scenes; such as of old gave rise to Temples, and favour’d the
Religion of the antient World. Even we our-selves, who in plain Characters may read
Divinityfrom so many bright Parts of Earth, chuse rather these obscurer Places, to
spell out that mysterious Being, which to our weak Eyes appears at best under a Veil
of Cloud.”—
HERE he paus’d a-while, and began to cast about his Eyes, which before seem’d
fix’d. He look’d more calmly, with an open Countenance and free Air; by which, and
other Tokens, I cou’d easily find we were come to an end of ourDescriptions;and
that whether I wou’d or no,Theocleswas now resolv’d to take his leave ofthe
Sublime:the Morning being spent, and the Forenoon by this time well advanc’d.
SECTION II
Sect. 2.
METHINKS, said he, Philocles!(changing to a familiar Voice) we had better leave
these unsociable Places, whither our Fancy has transported us, and return to our-
selves here again, in our more conversable Woods, and temperate Climates. Here no
fierce Heats nor Colds[392] annoy us, no Precipicesnor Cataractsamaze us. Nor
need we here be afraid of our own Voices; whilst we hear the Notes of such a chearful
Quire, and find theEchoesrather agreeable, and inviting us to talk.
I confess, said I, those foreignNymphs (if there were any belonging to those
miraculous Woods) were much too awful Beautys to please me. I found our familiar
Home-Nymphs a great deal more to my humour. Yet for all this, I cannot help being
concern’d for your breaking off just when we were got half the World over, and
wanted only to takeAmericain our way home. Indeed as forEurope,I cou’d excuse
your making any greatTour there, because of the little Variety it wou’d afford us.
Besides that it wou’d be hard to see it in any view, without meeting still thatpolitick
Face of Affairs, which wou’d too much disturb us in ourphilosophicalFlights. But
for theWesternTract, I cannot imagine why you shou’d neglect such noble Subjects
as are there; unless perhaps theGoldandSilver,to which I find you such a bitter
Enemy, frighted you from a Mother-Soil so full of it. If these Countrys had been as
bare of those Metals as oldSparta,we might have heard more perhaps of thePeru’s
andMexico’s than of all[393]Asia andAfrica.We might have hadCreatures, Plants,
Woods, Mountains, Rivers,beyond any of those we have pass’d. How sorry am I to
lose the nobleAmazon!How sorry—
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 146 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Here as I wou’d have proceeded, I saw so significant a Smile onTheocles’s Face, that
it stopt me, out of Curiosity, to ask him his Thought.
Nothing, said he; nothing butthis very Subjectit-self.—Go on.—I see you’ll finish it
for me. The Spirit of this sort ofProphecyhas seiz’d you. AndPhilocles,the cold
indifferentPhilocles,is become a Pursuer of the samemysteriousBeauty.
’Tis true, said I, (Theocles!) I own it. Your Genius, theGenius of the Place, and the
Great Geniushave at last prevail’d. I shall no longer resist the Passion growing in me
for Things of anaturalkind; where neitherArt,
nor theConceitor Capriceof Man has spoil’d theirgenuine
Natural Beautys.
Order, by breaking in upon thatprimitive State.Even the rude
Rocks,the mossyCaverns, the irregular unwroughtGrotto’s, and brokenFallsof
Waters, with all the horrid Graces of theWildernessit-self, as representingNature
more, will be the more engaging, and appear with a[394] Magnificence beyond the
formal Mockery of princely Gardens.—But tell me, I intreat you, how comes it, That,
excepting a fewPhilosophersof your sort,
the only People who are enamour’d in this way, and seek the
Passion of this kind.
Woods, theRivers,or Sea-shores, are your poor vulgarLovers?
Say not this, reply’d he, ofLoversonly. For is it not the same withPoets,and all those
otherStudentsinNature,and theArtswhich copy after her? In short, is not this the
real Case of all who areLovers either of theMuses or theGraces?
However, said I, all those who are deep in thisromantickway,
ENTHUSIASM.
are look’d upon, you know, as a People either plainly out of their
wits, or over-run withMelancholyand*Enthusiasm.We always endeavour to recall
’em from thesesolitaryPlaces. And I must own, that often when I have found my
Fancy run this way, I have check’d my-self; not knowing what it was possess’d me,
when I was passionately struck with Objects of this kind.[395]
No wonder, reply’d he, if we are at a loss, when we pursue theShadowfor the
Substance.
For if we may trust to what our Reasoning has taught us;
Shadows.
whatever in Nature is beautiful or charming, is only the faint
Shadow of thatFirst Beauty.
So that everyrealLovedepending onthe Mind,and being only
First Beauty.
the Contemplationof Beauty,either as it really isin it-self,or as it
appears imperfectly in the Objects which strike theSense;how can the rational Mind
resthere,or be satisfy’d with the absurdEnjoymentwhich reaches theSense alone?
From this time forward then, said I, I shall no more have reason to fear thoseBeautys
which strike a sort ofMelancholy,like the Places we have nam’d, or like these solemn
Groves. No more shall I avoid the moving Accents ofsoft Musick,or fly from the
enchanting Featuresof the fairesthuman Face.
“If you are already,” reply’d he, “such aProficientin thisnewLove,that you are sure
never to admire theRepresentative-Beauty,except for the sake of theOriginal;
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 147 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
nor aim at otherEnjoyment,than of therationalkind; you may
Original.
then be confident.” “I am so; and presume accordingly, to answer
for my-self. However I[396] shou’d not be ill satisfy’d, if you explain’d your-self a
little better as to this Mistake of mine you seem to fear.” “Wou’d it be any help to tell
you,
That the Absurdity lay in seekingthe Enjoymentelsewhere than
Enjoyment.
in theSubject lov’d?” “The Matter, I must confess, is still
mysterious.” “Imagine then, goodPhilocles,if being taken with the Beauty of the
Ocean which you see yonder at a distance, it shou’d come into your head, to seek how
to command it; and like some mighty Admiral, ride Master of the Sea; wou’d not the
Fancy be a little absurd?” “Absurd enough, in conscience. The next thing I shou’d do,
’tis likely, upon this Frenzy, wou’d be to hire some Bark, and go in Nuptial
Ceremony,Venetian-like, to wed theGulf,which I might call perhaps as properlymy
own.”
Let who will call it theirs, reply’dTheocles,you will ownthe Enjoymentof this kind
to be very different from that which shou’d naturally follow from the Contemplation
of the Ocean’sBeauty.The Bridegroom-Doge, who in his statelyBucentaurfloats on
the Bosom of hisThetis,has less Possession than the poorShepherd,who from a
hanging Rock, or Point of some high Promontory, stretch’d at his ease, forgets his
feeding Flocks, while he admiresher Beauty.—But to come nearer[397] home, and
make the Question still more familiar. Suppose (myPhilocles!) that, viewing such a
Tract of Country, as this deliciousValewe see beneath us, you shou’d forthe
Enjoymentof the Prospect, require thePropertyor Possession of the Land.
ThecovetousFancy, reply’d I, wou’d be as absurd altogether, as that otherambitious
one.
O Philocles!said he; May I bring this yet a little nearer? And will you follow me once
more? Suppose that being charm’d, as you seem to be, with theBeautyof theseTrees,
under whose shade we rest, you shou’d long for nothing so much as to taste some
deliciousFruitof theirs; and having obtain’d of Nature some certainRelishby which
theseAcorns or Berrys of the Wood became as palatable as theFigsor Peachesof the
Garden, you shou’d afterwards, as oft as you revisted theseGroves, seek hencethe
Enjoymentof them, by satiating your-self in these new Delights.
The Fancy of this kind, reply’d I, wou’d be sordidlyluxurious;and as absurd, in my
Opinion, as either of the former.[398]
Can you not then, on this occasion, said he, call to mind some otherForms of a fair
kind among us, where the Admiration of Beauty is apt to lead to as irregular a
Consequence?
I fear’d, said I, indeed, where this wou’d end, and was apprehensive you wou’d force
me at last to think of certain powerfulForms inhuman Kind, which draw after ’em a
Set of eagerDesires, Wishes, andHopes; no way sutable, I must confess, to your
rational and refin’d Contemplation ofBeauty.The Proportions of thisliving
Architecture,as wonderful as they are, inspire nothing of astudiousor contemplative
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 148 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
kind. The more they are view’d, the further they are from satisfying by mere View.
Let that which satisfies be ever so disproportionable an Effect, or ever so foreign to its
Cause; censure it as you please, you must allow however that it’snatural.So that you,
Theocles,for ought I see, are become theAccuserof Nature,by condemninga
natural Enjoyment.
Far be it from us both, said he, to condemna Joywhich is fromNature.But when we
spoke of the Enjoymentof these Woods and Prospects, we understood by it a far
different kind from that[399] of the inferior Creatures, who rifling in these places,
find here their choicestFood.Yet we too live by tastefulFood;and feel those other
Joys of Sensein common with them. But ’twas not here, myPhilocles!that we had
agreed to place ourGood; nor consequently ourEnjoyment.We who were rational,
and had Minds, methought, shou’d place it rather in thoseMinds;which were indeed
abus’d, and cheated of their realGood, when drawn to seek absurdly the Enjoyment
of it in the Objects ofSense,and not in those Objects they might properly calltheir
own:in which kind, as I remember, we comprehended all which was trulyFair,
Generous, or Good.
So thatBeauty,said I, andGood,
with you,Theocles,I perceive are still*one and the same.
Beauty and Good.
’TIS SO, said he. And thus are we return’d again to the Subject of our Yesterday’s
Morning-Conversation. Whether I have made good my Promise to you, in shewing†
the trueGood, I know not. But so, doubtless, I shou’d have done with good success,
had I been able in my poetick Extasys, or by any other Efforts, to have[400] led you
into some deep View ofNature,and theSovereignGenius. We then had prov’d the
Force of DivineBeauty;and form’d in our-selves anObjectcapable and worthy of
real Enjoyment.
O Theocles!said I, well do I remember now the Terms in which you engag’d me, that
Morning when you bespoke myLoveof thismysterious Beauty.You have indeed
made good your part of the Condition, and may now claim me fora Proselyte.If there
be any seeming Extravagance in the case, I must comfort myself the best I can, and
consider that all soundLoveandAdmirationis‡Enthusiasm:“The Transports of
Poets,the Sublime ofOrators, the Rapture ofMusicians,the high Strains of the
Virtuosi;all mereEnthusiasm!EvenLearningit-self, the Love ofArtsandCuriositys,
the Spirit ofTravellersandAdventurers; Gallantry, War, Heroism;All, all
Enthusiasm!”—’Tis enough: I am content to be thisnew Enthusiast,in a way
unknown to me before.
And I, reply’dTheocles,am content you shou’d call thisLoveof ours Enthusiasm:
allowing it the Privilege of its Fellow-Passions. For is there[401] a fair and plausible
Enthusiasm,a reasonableExtasyandTransport allow’d to other Subjects, such as
Architecture, Painting, Musick; and shall it be explodedhere?Are there Senses by
which all those other Graces and Perfections are perceiv’d? and none by which this
higher Perfection and Grace is comprehended? Is it so preposterous to bring that
Enthusiasmhither, and transfer it from thosesecondaryandscantyObjects, to this
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 149 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
originalandcomprehensive One?Observe how the Case stands in all those other
Subjects of Art or Science.
What difficulty to be in any degree knowing! How long ere a
Arts.
trueTasteis gain’d!
How many things shocking, how many offensive at first, which
A Judgment, Taste.
afterwards are known and acknowledg’d the highestBeautys!
For ’tis not instantly we acquire theSenseby which these Beautys are discoverable.
Labour andPainsare requir’d, andTimeto cultivate a natural Genius, ever so apt or
forward. But Who is there once thinks of cultivatingthisSoil,
or of improving any Sense or Faculty which Nature may have
Improvement.
given ofthiskind? And is it a wonder we shou’d be dull then, as
we are, confounded, and at a loss intheseAffairs, blind as tothishigher Scene,these
nobler Representations? Which way shou’d we come to understand better? which way
be knowing intheseBeautys? Is Study, Science, or[402] Learning necessary to
understand all Beautyselse?And for the SovereignBeauty,
is there no Skill or Science requir’d? In Painting there areShades
Chief Science.
andmasterly Strokes,which the Vulgar understand not, but find
fault with: in Architecture there isthe Rustick;in Musickthe Chromatickkind, and
skilful Mixture ofDissonancys. And is there nothing which answers to this, in
TheWhole?
I must confess, said I, I have hitherto been one of those Vulgar, who cou’d never
relishthe Shades, the Rustick,or the Dissonancysyou talk of. I have never dreamt of
such Master-piecesinNature.’Twas my way to censure freely on the first view. But I
perceive I am now oblig’d to go far in the pursuit ofBeauty;
which lies very absconded and deep: And if so, I am well assur’d
Beauty.
that myEnjoymentshitherto have been very shallow. I have
dwelt, it seems, all this while upon the Surface, and enjoy’d only a kind of slight
superficial Beautys; having never gone in search ofBeauty it-self,but of what I
fansy’dsuch. Like the rest of the unthinking World, I took for granted that what I
liked wasbeautiful;and what I rejoic’d in, was myGood. I never scrupled loving
what I fansy’d; and aiming only at the Enjoyment of what I lov’d, I never troubled
my-self with ex[403]amining whatthe Subjectswere, nor ever hesitated about their
Choice.
Begin then, said he, andchuse.See what theSubjectsare; and which you wou’d
prefer; which honour with your Admiration, Love and Esteem. For by these again you
will be honour’d in your turn. Such,Philocles,as is the Worth of these Companions,
such will your Worth be found. As there is Emptiness or Fulness here, so will there be
in your Enjoyment. See therefore whereFulnessis, and whereEmptiness.See in what
Subject residesthe chief Excellence:whereBeautyreigns: where ’tisintire, perfect,
absolute;wherebroken, imperfect, short.View these terrestrial Beautys, and
whatever has the appearance of Excellence, and is able to attract. See that which
either really is, or stands as in the room ofFair, Beautiful,andGood: “A Mass of
Metal; a Tract of Land; a Number of Slaves; a Pile of Stones; a human Body of
certain Lineaments and Proportions.” Is this the highest of the kind? IsBeauty
founded then inBodyonly; and not inAction, Life,orOperation?—
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 150 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Hold! hold! said I, goodTheocles!you take this in too high a Key, above my reach. If
you wou’d have me[404] accompany you, pray lower this Strain a little; and talk in a
more familiar way.
“THUS THEN,” said he, (smiling) “Whatever Passion you may have forother
Beautys;I know, good Philocles,you are no such Admirer ofWealthin any kind, as
to allow much Beauty to it; especially in a rude Heap or Mass. But in Medals, Coins,
Imbost-work, Statues, and well-fabricated Pieces, of whatever sort, you can discover
Beauty,and admire the Kind.” “True,” said I; “but not for theMetal’ssake.” “ ’Tis
not thenthe Metalor Matterwhich is beautiful with you.” “No.” “Butthe Art.”
“Certainly.” “The Artthen is theBeauty.” “Right.” “Andthe Artis that which
beautifies.” “The same.” “So that the Beautifying, not the Beautify’d, is the really
Beautiful.” “It seems so.” “For that which is beautify’d, is beautiful only by the
accession of something beautifying: and by the recess or withdrawing of the same, it
ceases to be beautiful.” “Be it.” “In respect of Bodys therefore,Beautycomes and
goes.” “So we see.” “Nor is the Body it-self any Cause either of its coming or
staying.” “None.” “So that there is no Principle of Beauty inBody.” “None at all.”
“For Body can no-way be the Cause of Beauty to it[405]self.” “No-way.” “Nor
govern nor regulate it-self.” “Nor yet this.” “Nor mean nor intend it-self.” “Nor this
neither.” “Must notthattherefore, which means and intends for it, regulates and
orders it, be the Principle of Beauty to it?” “Of necessity.” “And what must that be?”
“Mind,I suppose; for what can it be else?”
Here then, said he, is all I wou’d have explain’d to you before: “Thatthe Beautiful,
the Fair, the Comely,were never in theMatter,but in theArtandDesign; never in
Bodyit-self, but in theForm or forming Power.” Does not the beautifulForm confess
this, and speak the Beauty ofthe Design,whene’er it strikes you? What is it butthe
Design which strikes? What is it you admire butMind,or the Effect ofMind?’Tis
Mindalone which forms. All which is void ofMindis horrid: and Matter formless is
Deformity it-self.
Of allForms then, said I, Those (according to your Scheme) are the most amiable,
and in the first Order of Beauty, which have a power of making other Forms
themselves: From whence methinks they may be styl’dthe forming Forms.So far I
can easily concur with you, and gladly give the advantage tothe human[406]Form,
above those other Beautys of Man’s Formation. The Palaces, Equipages and Estates
shall never in my account be brought in competition with the originalliving Formsof
Flesh and Blood. And for the other, thedeadForms of Nature, the Metals and Stones,
however precious and dazling; I am resolv’d to resist their Splendour, and make
abject Things of ’em, even in their highest Pride, when they pretend to set off human
Beauty, and are officiously brought in aid ofthe Fair.
“Do you not see then,” reply’dTheocles,“that you have
Orders of Beauty.
establish’dThree Degrees or Orders of Beauty?” “As how?” First Order.
“Why first,the dead Forms,as you properly have call’d ’em,
which bear a Fashion, and are form’d, whether by Man, or Nature; but have no
forming Power, no Action, or Intelligence.” “Right.” “Next, and as thesecondkind,
the Forms which form;
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 151 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
that is, which have Intelligence, Action, and Operation.” “Right
Second Order.
still.” “Here therefore is double Beauty. For here is both the
Form (theEffectof Mind) andMindit-self: The first kind low and despicable in
respect of this other; from whence the dead Form receives its Lustre and Force of
Beauty. For what is a mereBody,tho a human one, and ever so exactly fashion’d, if
in[407]ward Form be wanting, and theMindbe monstrous or imperfect, as inan
Idiot,or Savage?” “This too I can apprehend,” said I; “but where is thethirdOrder?”
Have patience, reply’d he, and see first whether you have discover’d the whole Force
of thissecondBeauty. How else shou’d you understand the Force of Love, or have the
Power of Enjoyment? Tell me, I beseech you, when first you nam’d thesethe
Forming Forms, did you think of no other Productions of theirs besides thedead
Kinds,such as the Palaces, the Coins, the Brazen or the Marble Figures of Men? Or
did you think of something nearerLife?
I cou’d easily, said I, have added, that theseForms of ours had a Virtue of producing
other living Forms,like themselves. But this Virtue of theirs, I thought was from
another Form above them, and cou’d not properly be call’dtheirVirtue or Art; if in
reality there wasa superior Art,or somethingArtist-like,which guided their Hand,
and made Tools of them in this specious Work.
“Happily thought,” said he! “You have prevented a Censure which I hardly imagin’d
you cou’d escape. And here you[408] have unawares discover’d thatthirdOrder of
Beauty,
which forms not only such as we call mere Forms, but eventhe
Third Order.
Forms which form. For we our-selves are notable Architects in
Matter, and can shew lifeless Bodys brought into Form, and fashion’d by our own
hands: but that which fashions even Minds themselves, contains in it-self all the
Beautys fashion’d by those Minds; and is consequently the Principle, Source, and
Fountain of allBeauty.” “It seems so.”
“Therefore whatever Beauty appears in oursecondOrder of Forms, or whatever is
deriv’d or produc’d from thence, all this is eminently, principally, and originally in
thislastOrder of Supreme andSovereign Beauty.” “True.”
“Thus Architecture, Musick, and all which is of human Invention, resolves it-self into
thislastOrder.” “Right,” said I: “and thus all theEnthusiasms of other kinds resolve
themselves into ours. The fashionable Kinds borrow from us, and are nothing without
us: We have undoubtedly the Honour of beingOriginals.”[409]
“NOW therefore say again,” reply’dTheocles;“Whether are those Fabricks of
Architecture, Sculpture,and the rest of that sort, the greatest Beautys which Man
forms; or are there greater and better?” “None which I know,” reply’d I. “Think, think
again,” said he: “and setting aside those Productions which just now you excepted
against, as Master-piecesof another Hand;think What there are which more
immediately proceed from us, and may more truly be term’dour Issue.” “I am
barren,” said I, “for this time: you must be plainer yet, in helping me to conceive.”
“How can I help you?” reply’d he. “Wou’d you have me be conscious for you, of that
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 152 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
which is immediatelyyour own,and is solely in, and fromyour-self?” “You mean my
Sentiments,” said I. “Certainly,”
reply’d he: “and together with yourSentiments,your Resolutions,
Beauty moral.
Principles, Determinations, Actions;whatsoever is handsom and
noble in the kind; whatever flows from your goodUnderstanding, Sense, Knowledg
andWill;whatever is ingender’d in yourHeart, (good Philocles!) or derives it-self
from yourParent-Mind,
which, unlike to otherParents,is never spent or exhausted, but
Offspring.
gains Strength and Vigor by producing. SoYou, my Friend! Generation.
have[410] prov’d it, by many a Work: not suffering that fertile
Partto remain idle and unactive. Hence those good Parts, which from a natural
Genius you have rais’d by due Improvement. And here, as I cannot but admire the
pregnant Genius, andParent-Beauty; so am I satisfy’d of theOffspring,that it is and
will be ever beautiful.”
I took the Compliment, and wish’d (I told him) the Case were really as he imagin’d,
that I might justly merit his Esteem and Love. My Study therefore shou’d be to grow
beautiful,in his way ofBeauty;and from this time forward I wou’d do all I cou’d to
propagate that lovely Race of mental Children,
happily sprung from such a high Enjoyment, and from a Union
Source.
with what wasFairestandBest.But ’tis you,Theocles,
continu’d I, must help my labouring Mind, and be as it were the Midwife to those
Conceptions; which else, I fear, will prove abortive.
You do well, reply’d he, to give me the Midwife’s part only: For the Mind conceiving
of it-self,can only be, as you say,assisted in the Birth.
ItsPregnancyis from itsNature.Nor cou’d it ever have been
Pregnancy.
thusimpregnatedby any otherMind,than that which form’d it at
the beginning; and which, as we have already[411] prov’d, is Original to allmental,
as well asother Beauty.
Do you maintain then, said I, that thesementalChildren, the Notions and Principles,
of Fair, Just,andHonest, with the rest of theseIdeas, areinnate?
Innate Ideas.
“Anatomists,” said he, “tell us that the Eggs, which are
Principles in Body, areinnate;being form’d already in theFoetusbefore the Birth.
ButWhenit is, whetherbefore,or at,or afterthe Birth, or atWhattime after, that
either these, or other Principles, Organs of Sensation, or Sensations themselves, are
firstform’d in us, is a matter, doubtless, of curious Speculation, but of no great
Importance. The Question is, whether the Principles spoken of arefrom Art,or
Nature?If fromNaturepurely; ’tis no matter for the Time: nor wou’d I contend with
you, tho you shou’d denyLifeit-self to beinnate,as imagining it follow’d rather than
preceded the moment of Birth. But this I am certain of; thatLife,and theSensations
which accompany Life, come when they will, are frommere Nature,and nothing else.
Therefore if you dislike the wordInnate,let us change it, if you will, forInstinct;and
callInstinct,
that whichNatureteaches, exclusive ofArt, Culture,or
Instinct.
Discipline.” “Content,” said I.[412]
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 153 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
“Leaving then,” reply’d he, “those admirable Speculations to theVirtuosi,the
Anatomists,andSchool-Divines;we may safely aver, with all their Consents, that the
several Organs, particularly those of Generation,
are form’d byNature.Whether is there also from Nature, think
Generation.
you, anyInstinctfor the after-Use of them? Or whether must
LearningandExperienceimprint this Use?” “ ’Tis imprinted, said I, enough in
Conscience. The Impression, orInstinct,is so strong in the Case, that ’twou’d be
absurdity not to think itnatural,as well in our own Species, as in other Creatures:
amongst whom (as you have already taught me) not only the mere engendring of the
Young, but the various and almost infinite Means and Methods of providing for them,
are all foreknown. For thus much we may indeed discern in the preparatory Labours
and Arts of these wild Creatures; which demonstrate their anticipatingFancys,
Pre-conceptions,or Pre-sensations;if I may use a word you
Pre-conceptions.
taught me*yesterday.”
“I allow your Expression,” saidTheocles,“and will endeavour to show you that the
samePre-conceptions,of a higher degree, have place in human Kind.” “Do[413] so,”
said I, “I intreat you: For so far am I from finding in my-self these Pre-conceptions of
FairandBeautiful,in your sense, that methinks, till now of late, I have hardly known
of any thing like them in Nature.” “How then,” said he, “wou’d you have known that
outward FairandBeautifulof human Kind; if such an Object (a fair fleshly one) in all
its Beauty, hadfor the first timeappear’d to you, by your-self, this morning, in these
Groves? Or do you think perhaps you shou’d have been unmov’d, and have found no
difference betweenthis Formand anyother;if first you had not beeninstructed?”
I have hardly any Right, reply’d I, to plead this last Opinion, after what I have own’d
just before.
Well then, said he, that I may appear to take no advantage against you; I quit the
dazlingForm, which carrys such a Force ofcomplicated Beautys;and am contented
to consider separately each of thosesimpleBeautys, which taken all together, create
this wonderful effect. For you will allow, without doubt, that in respect ofBodys,
whatever is commonly said of the unexpressible, the unintelligible, theI-know-not-
whatof Beauty; there can lie no Mystery here, but what plainly[414] belongs either to
Figure, Colour, Motionor Sound.Omitting therefore thethreelatter,
and their dependent Charms; let us view the Charm in what is
Beauty of Body.
simplest of all,mere Figure.Nor need we go so high as
Sculpture, Architecture, or the Designs of those who from this Study of Beauty have
rais’d such delightful Arts. ’Tis enough if we consider the simplest of Figures; as
either a roundBall,aCube,or Dye.Why is even an Infant pleas’d with the first View
of these Proportions? Why is theSphereor Globe,theCylinderandObeliskprefer’d;
and the irregular Figures, in respect of these, rejected and despis’d?
I am ready, reply’d I, to own there is in certainFiguresa natural*Beauty, which the
Eye finds as soon as the Object is presented to it.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 154 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
Is there then, said he, a natural Beauty ofFigures?and is there
Beauty of Soul, As
not as natural a one ofActions?No sooner the Eye opens upon real, And necessarily
Figures,the Ear toSounds, than straightthe Beautifulresults, moving.
andGrace andHarmony are known and acknowledg’d. No
sooner areActionsview’d, no sooner thehuman Affectionsand[415]Passions
discern’d (and they are most of ’em as soon discern’d as felt) than straightan
inwardEyedistinguishes, and seesthe FairandShapely, the AmiableandAdmirable,
apart fromthe Deform’d, the Foul,
theOdious, or the Despicable.How is it possible therefore not to
Idea Natural.
own, “That as theseDistinctionshave their Foundationin
Nature,the Discernment it-self isnatural,and fromNaturealone?”
If this, I told him, were as he represented it; there cou’d never, I thought, be any
Disagreement among Men concerning Actions and Behaviour: as which wasBase,
whichWorthy;whichHandsom, and whichDeform’d. But now we found perpetual
Variance among Mankind; whose Differences were chiefly founded on this
Disagreement in Opinion; “The oneaffirming,the otherdenying,that this, or that, was
fitor decent.”
Even by this then, reply’d he, it appears there is Fitness and Decency in Actions;
sinceThe FitandDecentis in this Controversy ever pre-
TheFit,andDecent.
suppos’d: And whilst Men are at odds about the Subjects, the
Thing it-self is universally agreed. For neither is there Agreement in Judgments about
otherBeautys.’Tis controverted “Which is the finestPile,the loveliestShape,or
Face”: But without controversy,[416] ’tis allow’d “There is aBeautyof eachkind.”
This no-one goes about toteach:nor is itlearntby any; butconfess’dby All.
Allown theStandard, Rule,andMeasure: But in applying it to
Standard own’d.
Things, Disorder arises, Ignorance prevails, Interest and Passion
breed Disturbance. Nor can it otherwise happen in the Affairs of Life, whilst that
which interests and engages Men asGood, is thought different from that which they
admire and praise asHonest.—But with us,Philocles!’tis better settled; since for our
parts, we have already decreed, “That*BeautyandGood are still the same.”
I REMEMBER, said I, what you forc’d me to acknowledg more
Confirmation.
than once before. And now, goodTheocles!that I am become so
willing a Disciple, I want not so much tobe convinc’d,me-thinks, as to beconfirm’d
andstrengthen’d.And I hope this last Work may prove your easiest Task.
“Not unless you help in ityour-self,” reply’dTheocles:“For this is necessary, as well
as becoming. It had been indeed shameful for you to have yielded without making
good Resistance. To help one’s-[417]self to be convinc’d, isto prevent Reason,and
bespeak Error and Delusion. But upon fair Conviction, to give our heart up to the
evident side, and reinforce the Impression, this isto help Reasonheartily.And thus we
may be saidhonestly to persuade our-selves.” “Shew me then how I may best
persuade my-self.”
Have courage, said he,Philocles!(raising his Voice) Be not offended that I say,Have
Courage! ’TisCowardicealone betrays us. For whence canfalse Shamebe, except
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 155 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
fromCowardice?To be asham’d of what one is sure can never be shameful, must
needs be from the want of Resolution. We seek theRightandWrong in things; we
examine what isHonourable, whatShameful:and having at last determin’d, we dare
not stand to our own judgment, and are asham’d to own there is really aShamefuland
anHonourable. “Hear me” (says one who pretends to valuePhilocles,and be valu’d
by him) “There can be no such thing as realValuablenessor Worth; nothing in it-self
estimable or amiable, odious or shameful. All isOpinion:
’TisOpinionwhich makes Beauty, and unmakes it. The Graceful
Opinion, Fashion,
or Ungraceful in things, the Decorum and its Contrary, the
Amiable and Un-amiable, Vice, Virtue,
Honour, Shame, all this is founded[418] inOpiniononly.
Measure of Virtue
Opinionis theLaw andMeasure. Nor has Opinionany Rule and Vice.
besides mereChance;which varys it, asCustom varys: and
makes now this, now that, to be thought worthy, according to the Reign ofFashion,
and the ascendent Power ofEducation.”
“What shall we say to such a one? How represent to him his
Falshood of this.
Absurdity and Extravagance? Will he desist the sooner? Or shall
we ask what Shame,of one who acknowledges noShameful?” “Yet he derides, and
cries,Ridiculous!” “By what Right? what Title? For thus, if I werePhilocles,wou’d I
defend my-self: ‘Am I ridiculous? As how?Whatis ridiculous?Every-thing?or
Nothing?’ ” “Ridiculous indeed!” “But something then, something there is
Ridiculous:and the Notion, it seems, is right,
‘of aShamefulanda Ridiculous,in things.’ ”
Shame.
How then shall we apply the Notion? For this being wrong apply’d, cannot it-self but
be ridiculous. Or will he who criesShame,refuse to acknowledganyin his turn?
Does he not blush, nor seem discountenanc’d on any occasion? If he does, the Case is
very distinct from that of mere Grief or Fear. The Disorder he feels is from a Sense of
what is shameful and odious in it-self, not of what is hurtful or dangerous in its
Consequences.[419] For the greatest Danger in the world can never breed Shame: nor
can theOpinionof all the World compel us to it, whereour own Opinionis not a
Party. We may be afraid of appearing impudent, and may therefore feign a Modesty.
But we can never really blush for any thing beside what we think trulyShameful,and
what we shou’d still blush for, were we ever so secure as to our Interest, and out of
the reach of all Inconvenience, which cou’d happen to us from the thing we were
asham’d of.
Thus, continu’d he, shou’d I be able, by Anticipation, to defend my-self; and looking
narrowly into Mens Lives, and that which influenc’d ’em on all occasions, I shou’d
have Testimony enough to make me say within my-self, “Let who will be my
Adversary in this Opinion, I shall find him some way or other prepossess’d with that
of which he wou’d endeavour to dispossess me.”
Has he Gratitude or Resentment, Pride or Shame? Whichever
an Acknowledgment
way it be, he acknowledges a Sense ofJustandUnjust, Worthy ofmoralBeauty and
andMean.If he be Grateful, or expects Gratitude, I ask “Why? Deformity.
and on What account?” If he be angry, if he indulges Revenge, I
ask “How? and in what Case? Reveng’d ofWhat?of a Stone, or Madman?”
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 156 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
“Who is so mad?” “But[420] for What? For a Chance-hurt? an
Anger.
Accident against Thought, or Intention?”
“Who is so unjust?” Therefore there isJustandUnjust;and
Anger, an
belonging to ita natural Presumptionor Anticipation,on which Acknowledgment of
theResentmentorAnger is founded. For what else shou’d make JustandUnjust.
the wickedest of Mankind often prefer the Interest of their
Revenge to all other Interests, and even to Life it-self, except onlya Sense of Wrong,
natural to all Men, anda Desire to prosecute that Wrongat any rate? Not for their
own sakes, since they sacrifice their very Being to it; but out of hatred tothe imagin’d
Wrong, and from a certainLove ofJustice,which even inunjustMen is by this
Example shewn to be beyondthe Love ofLifeit-self.
Thus as toPride,I ask, “Whyproud? Whyconceited?and of
Pride,
What?Does any-one who has Pride, think meanly or
indifferently of himself?” “No: but honourably.” And how this, if there be no real
Honour or Dignitypresuppos’d? For Self-valuation supposesSelf-worth;
and in a Person conscious of real Worth, is either no Pride, or a
Pride, an
just and noble one.In the same manner, Self-contempt supposes a Acknowledgment of
Self-meannessor Defectiveness;and may be either a just WorthandBaseness.
Modesty, or unjust Humility. But this is cer[421]tain, that
whoever is proud, must be proud of something. And we know that Men of thorow
Pride will be proud even in the meanest Circumstances, and when there is no visible
Subject for them to be proud of. But they descrya Meritin themselves, which others
cannot: And ’tis thisMeritthey admire. No matter whether it be really in them, as
they imagine: It isa Worthstill,an Honour, or Meritwhich they admire, and wou’d
do, wherever they saw it, in any Subject besides. Forthenit is,thenonly, that they are
humbled, “When they see in a more eminent degree inothers,What they respect and
admire so muchin themselves.”—And thus as long as I find Men eitherangry or
revengeful, proudor asham’d, I am safe: For they conceivean Honourable and
Dishonourable,aFoulandFair,as well as I. No matterwherethey place it, orhow
they are mistaken in it: This hinders not my being satisfy’d “That the Thingis,and is
universallyacknowledg’d;That it is ofNature’s Impression, naturally conceiv’d,
and by noArtorCounter-Natureto be eradicated or destroy’d.”
Natural Impression.
AND NOW, what say you, Philocles,continu’d he, to this Defense I have been
making for you? ’Tis grounded, as you see, on the Supposition of[422] your being
deeply ingag’d in this philosophical Cause. But perhaps you have yet many
Difficultys to get over, ere you can so far take part withBeauty,as to make this to be
your Good.
Good.
“I have no difficulty so great,” said I, “as not to be easily
remov’d. My Inclinations lead me strongly this way: for I am ready enough to yield
there is no realGood besidethe Enjoyment of Beauty.” “And I am as ready,” reply’d
Theocles,“to yield There is no real Enjoyment of Beauty beside what isGood.”
“Excellent! But upon reflection, I fear I am little beholden to you for your
Concession.” “As how?” “Because shou’d I offer to contend for any Enjoyment of
Beauty out of your mental Way, you wou’d, I doubt, call such Enjoyment of mine
absurd; as you did once before.” “Undoubtedly I shou’d. For what is it shou’d enjoy,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 157 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
or be capable of Enjoyment, exceptMind?Or shall we say,Body
Mental Enjoyment.
enjoys?” “By the help ofSense,perhaps; not otherwise.” “Is
Beauty,then,the Object of Sense?Say how? Which way? For otherwise the help of
Senseis nothing in the Case: And ifBodybe of it-self incapable,
andSenseno help to it, to apprehend or enjoy Beauty, there
Body.
remains only theMindwhich is capable either to apprehend or to
enjoy.”[423]
“True,” said I; “but show me, then, WhyBeautymay not bethe Object of theSense?”
“Shew me first, I intreat you,Why, Where,or inWhatyou fansy
Sense.
it may be so?” “Is it notBeautywhich first excites the Sense, and
feeds it afterwards in the Passion we callLove?” “Say in the same manner, That it is
Beautyfirst excites the Sense, and feeds it afterwards in the Passion we call
Hunger.”—You will not say it. The Thought, I perceive, displeases you. As great as
the Pleasure is of good Eating, you disdain to apply the Notion ofBeautyto the good
Dishes which create it. You wou’d hardly have applauded the preposterous Fancy of
some luxuriousRomansof old, who cou’d relish a Fricassee the better for hearing it
was compos’d of Birds which wore a beautiful Feather, or had sung deliciously.
Instead of being incited by such a historical Account of Meats, you wou’d be apt, I
believe, to have less Appetite, the more you search’d their Origin, and descended into
theKitchin-Science, to learn the several Forms and Changes they had undergone, ere
they were serv’d at this elegant voluptuous Table. But tho theKitchin-Forms be ever
so disgraceful, you will allow that theMaterialsof the Kitchin, such, for instance, as
theGarden furnishes, are really fair and[424] beautiful in their kind. Nor will you
deny Beauty to the wildField,or to theseFlowerswhich grow around us, on this
verdant Couch. And yet, as lovely as are these Forms of Nature, the shiningGrass, or
silver’dMoss, the flowryThyme, wildRose,or Honey-suckle:’tis not theirBeauty
allures the neighbouring Herds, delights the brouzing Fawn, or Kid, and spreads the
Joy we see amidst the feeding Flocks: ’Tis not theForm rejoices; but that which is
beneath the Form: ’tisSavouriness attracts,Hunger impels; andThirst, better allay’d
by the clear Brook than the thick Puddle, makes thefairNymphto be prefer’d, whose
Form is otherwise slighted. For never can theForm be of real force where it is
uncontemplated, unjudg’d of, unexamin’d, and stands only as the accidental Note or
Token of what appeases provok’d Sense, and satisfies the brutish Part. Are you
persuaded of this, goodPhilocles?or rather than not give Brutes the advantage of
Enjoyment,will you allow them also a Mind and rational Part?—“Not so,” I told him.
If Brutestherefore, said he, be incapable of knowing and enjoying Beauty, as being
Brutes,and havingSense only (the brutish part) for their own share; it follows, “That
neither canManby[425] the sameSenseor brutish Part, conceive or enjoyBeauty:
But all theBeautyandGood he enjoys, is in a nobler way, and by the help of what is
noblest, hisMindandReason.”
Here lies hisDignityand highestInterest:Here hisCapacity
Reason.
toward Good and Happiness. His Abilityor Incompetency,his
Powerof Enjoyment, or hisImpotence,is founded in this alone. As this issound, fair,
noble, worthy;so are its Subjects, Acts and Employments. For as theriotousMind,
captive toSense,can never enter in competition, or contend for Beauty with the
virtuousMindof Reason’s Culture;
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 158 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
so neither can theObjectswhich allure the former, compare with
Comparison of
those which attract and charm the latter. And wheneachgratifies Objects,
it-self in the Enjoyment and Possession of its Object;
how evidently fairer are the Acts which join thelatter Pair,and
and Enjoyments.
givea Soulthe Enjoyment of what isgenerous andgood?This at
least,Philocles,you will surely allow, That when you place a Joy elsewhere than in
the Mind;the Enjoymentit-self will be no beautiful Subject, nor of any graceful or
agreeable Appearance. But when you think howFriendshipis enjoy’d, howHonour,
Gratitude, Candour, Benignity,and all internal Beauty; how all thesocialPleasures,
Societyit-self, and all which constitutes the Worth and Happi[426]ness of Mankind;
you will here surely allow Beauty in theAct,and think it worthy to be view’d, and
pass’d in review often by the glad Mind, happily conscious of the generous Part, and
of its own Advancement and Growth in Beauty.
THUS, Philocles,(continu’d he, after a short Pause) thus have I
Recapitulation.
presum’d to treat ofBeautybefore so great a Judg, and such a
skilful Admirer as your-self. For taking rise from Nature’s Beauty, which transported
me, I gladly ventur’d further in the Chase; and have accompany’d you in search of
Beauty, as it relates to us, and makes our highestGood, in its sincere and natural
Enjoyment. And if we have not idly spent our hours, nor rang’d in vain thro’ these
deserted Regions; it shou’d appear from our strict Search, that there is nothing so
divine asBeauty:which belonging not toBody,nor having any Principle or Existence
except inMindandReason,is alone discover’d and acquir’d by this diviner Part,
when it inspectsit-self,the only Object worthy of it-self. For whate’er is void of
Mind, isVoidandDarkness to theMind’sEye.This languishes and grows dim,
whene’er detain’d on foreign Subjects; but thrives and attains its natural Vigour,[427]
when employ’d in Contemplation of what is like it-self. ’Tis thus theimprovingMind,
slightly surveying other Objects, and passing over Bodys, and the common Forms,
(where only a Shadow of Beauty rests) ambitiously presses onward to itsSource,and
views the Originalof Form and Order in that which is intelligent. And thus,O
Philocles!may we improve and become Artists in the kind; learning “To knowOur-
selves,and whatThatis, which by improving, we may be sure to advance our Worth,
and real Self-Interest.” For neither is thisKnowledgacquir’d by Contemplation of
Bodys, or the outward Forms,
the View of Pageantrys, the Study of Estates and Honours: nor is
Knowledg of our-
He to be esteem’d that self-improving Artist, who makes a selves.
Fortune out of these; but he,He only, is thewiseandableMan,
who with a slight regard to these Things, applies himself to cultivate another Soil,
builds in a different Matter from that of Stone or Marble; and having righter Models
in his Eye,
becomes in truth theArchitectof his own LifeandFortune;by
Interest.
laying within himself the lasting and sure Foundations ofOrder,
Peace,
andConcord.—But now ’tis time to think of returning home.
Ability.
The Morning is far spent. Come! Let us away, and leave these
uncommon Sub[428]jects; till we retire again to these remote and unfrequented
Places.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 159 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
AT THESE words Theoclesmending his pace, and going down the Hill, left me at a
good distance; till he heard me calling earnestly after him. Having join’d him once
again, I begg’d he wou’d stay a little longer: or if he were resolv’d so soon to leave
both theWoods, and that Philosophy which he confin’d to ’em; that he wou’d let me
however part with ’em more gradually, and leave the best Impression on me he cou’d,
against my next Return. For as much convinc’d as I was, and as great a Convert to his
Doctrine, my Danger still, I own’d to him, was very great: and I foresaw that when
the Charm of these Places, and his Company was ceas’d, I shou’d be apt to relapse,
and weakly yield to that too powerful Charm,the World.Tell me, continu’d I, how is
it possible to hold out against it, and withstand the general Opinion of Mankind, who
have so different a Notion of that which we callGood? Say truth now,Theocles,can
any thing be more odd, or dissonant from the common Voice of the World, than what
we have determin’d in this matter?[429]
Whom shall we follow then? reply’d he. Whose Judgment or Opinion shall we take,
concerning What isGood, Whatcontrary?If All,or any partof Mankind are
consonant with themselves, and can agree in this; I am content to leavePhilosophy,
and follow them: If otherwise; Why shou’d we not adhere to what we have
chosen?—Let us then, in another View, consider how this Matter stands.
SECTION III
Sect. 3.
WE THEN walk’d gently homewards, it being almost Noon; and he continu’d his
Discourse.
One Man, said he, affects theHero; esteems it the highest
Manners of Men.
Advantage of Life, to have seen War, and been in Action in the
Field. Another laughs at this Humour; counts it all Extravagance and Folly; prizes his
own WitandPrudence;and wou’d take it for a Disgrace to be thought adventurous.
One Person is assiduous and indefatigable in advancing himself
Contrary Pursuits.
to the Character ofa Man of Business.Another on the contrary
thinks this impertinent; values not Fame, or a Character in the World: and by his
good[430]will wou’d always be ina Debauch,and never live out of theStewsor
Taverns; where he enjoys, as he thinks, his highest Good. One values Wealth, as a
means only to indulge hisPalat,andto eat finely.
Another loaths this, and affectsPopularity,anda Name. One
Mutual Censure.
admiresMusickandPaintings, Cabinet-Curiositys, and in-door
Ornaments: Another admiresGardens, Architecture,and the Pomp ofBuildings.
Another, who has no Gusto of either sort, believes all those they callVirtuosito be
half-distracted. One looks upon all Expence to be Madness; and thinks onlyWealthit-
self to be Good. Onegames; anotherdresses, and studysan Equipage;another is full
of Heraldry, Points of Honour,
a Family,anda Blood.One recommendsGallantryandIntrigue;
Disagreement with
another ordinaryGood-fellowship;anotherBuffoonery, Satir,and one another;
thecommon Wit;anotherSports, andthe Country;anothera
Court;anotherTravelling,and the sight offoreign Parts;anotherPoetry,and the
fashionable Learning.—All these go different ways.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 160 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
All censure one another, and are despicable in one another’s
And with themselves.
eyes. By fits too they are as despicable intheir own,and as often
out of conceit with themselves, as their Humour changes, and their Passion turns from
one thing to another.—What is it then I shou’d be concern’d for?[431] Whose
Censure do I fear? Or by whom, after all, shall I be guided?
If I ask, “AreRichesgood,when only heap’d up, and
Riches.
unimploy’d?” One answers, “They are.” The restdeny.“How is
it then they are to be imploy’d in order to be good?” Alldisagree.All tell me different
things. “Since thereforeRichesare not, of themselves,good,(as most of you declare);
And since there is no Agreement among youwhich waythey become good; why may
not I hold it for my Opinion, that they are neither goodin themselves,nor directlyany
Cause or Means of Good?”
If there be those who wholly despiseFame;And if among those who covet it,
he who desires it for one thing, despises it for another; he who
Fame and Honour.
seeks it with some Men, despises it with others: Why may not I
say, “That neither do I know how anyFamecan be call’da Good?”[432]
If of those who covetPleasure,
they who admire it inonekind, are superior to itin another;
Pleasure.
Why may not I say, “That neither do I knowwhichof these
Pleasures, or how Pleasureit-self, can be call’dGood?”
If among those who covetLifeever so earnestly, that Life which
Life.
to Oneis eligible and amiable, isto Anotherdespicable and vile;
Why may I not say, “That neither do I know howLifeit-self can,of it-self,be thought
a Good?”
In the mean time, This I know certainly; “That the necessary
Inslavement.
Consequence of esteeming these things highly, is to bea Slave,
and consequently miserable.”—But perhaps,Philocles,you are not yet enough
acquainted with this odd kind of Reasoning.
More, said I, than I believe you can easily imagine. I perceiv’d the goodly Lady, your
celebrated Beauty, was about to appear a-new:
and I easily knew again that fair Face ofLiberty,which I had
LIBERTY.
seen but once in the*Picture you drew yesterday of that Moral
Dame. I can assure you, I think of her as highly as possible: and find that without her
Help, to raise one above these seemingly essential Goods,
and make one more easy and indifferent towardsLife,and
Goods of Fortune.
towards a Fortune;’twill be the hardest thing in the world to
enjoyeither.Sollicitude, Cares,[433] and Anxiety, will be multiply’d: and in this
unhappy Dependency, ’tis necessary to make court, and be not a little servile. To
flatter the Great, to bear Insults, to stoop, and fawn, and abjectly resign one’s Sense
and Manhood; all this must courageously be endur’d, and carry’d off, with as free an
Air, and good Countenance as possible, by one who studys Greatness of this sort, who
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 161 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
knows the general way of Courts, and how to fix unsteddy Fortune. I need not
mention the Envyings, the Mistrusts, and Jealousys—
No truly, said he, interrupting me, neither need you. But finding you so sensible, as I
do, of this unhappy State, and of its inward Sores, (whatever may be its outward
Looks) How is it possible but you must find the Happiness of that other contrary
State? Can you not call to mind what we resolv’d concerningNature?Can any thing
be more desirable thanto followher? Or is it not by this Freedom from our Passions
and low Interests, that we are reconcil’d to the goodlyOrder of the Universe; that we
harmonize withNature;and live in Friendship both withGod and Man?
Let us compare, continu’d he,
the Advantages of each State, and set their[434]Goods one
Goods of the Mind.
against another: On one side, those which we found were
uncertainlyso; and depended both on Fortune, Age, Circumstances, and Humour: On
the other side, these which beingcertainthemselves,
are founded on the Contempt of those others so uncertain. Is
Comparison.
manlyLiberty, Generosity, Magnanimity,not aGood? May we
not esteem as Happiness, thatSelf-Enjoymentwhich arises from a Consistency of Life
and Manners, a Harmony of Affections, a Freedom from the Reproach of Shame or
Guilt, and a Consciousness of Worth and Merit with all Mankind, our Society,
Country, and Friends: all which is founded in Virtue only? AMindsubordinate to
Reason, aTemper humaniz’d, and fitted to all natural Affection; an Exercise of
Friendshipuninterrupted; a thorowCandor, Benignity,andGood Nature; with
constantSecurity, Tranquillity, Equanimity,(if I may use suchphilosophicalTerms)
are not these ever, and at all seasonsGood? Is it oftheseone can at any time nauseate
and grow weary? Are there any particular Ages, Seasons, Places, Circumstances,
which must accompanythese,to make ’em agreeable? Arethesevariable and
inconstant? Dothese,by being ardently belov’d, or sought, occasion any Disturbance
or Misery? Canthesebe at any time overvalu’d? Or,[435] to say more yet, can these
be ever taken from us, or can we ever be hinder’d in the Enjoyment of ’em, unless by
our-selves? How can we better praise the Goodness ofProvidence,than in this, “That
it has plac’d our Happiness and Good in thingsWecan bestow uponourselves?”
If this be so, said I, I see no reason we have to accuse Providence on any account. But
Men, I fear, will hardly be brought to this good Temper, while their Fancy is so
strong, as it naturally is, towards those other movableGoods. And in short, if we may
depend on what is said commonly, “AllGood is merely as we fansy it. ’TisConceit
which makes it. All isOpinionandFancyonly.”
OpinionAll.
Wherefore then, said he, do weactat any time? Whychuse,or
why preferone thing to another?—You will tell me, I suppose, ’tis because we fansy
it, or fansyGood in it.—Are we therefore to follow everypresentFancy, Opinion, or
Imagination of Good? If so, then we must follow that atonetime, which we decline at
another;approve atonetime, what we disapprove atanother;and be at perpetual
variance with our-selves. But if we are not to followallFancy or Opi[436]nion alike;
If it be allow’d, “That ofFancys,some aretrue,somefalse”; then we are toexamine
every Fancy; and there is someRuleor other, by which tojudg,anddetermine.’Twas
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 162 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
the Fancy of one Man to set fire to a beautiful Temple, in order to obtain immortal
Memory or Fame. ’Twas the Fancy of another Man to conquer the World, for the
same Reason, or what was very like it. If this were really the Man’sGood; Why do
we wonder at him? If the Fancy werewrong; say plainly in What it was so; or Why
the Subject was notGood to him, as he fansy’d?Either therefore, “Thatis every
Man’s Good which hefansys,and becausehe fansys it,and isnot contentwithout it”:
Or otherwise, “There isThatin which theNatureof Man issatisfy’d;and which alone
must behisGood.” If That in whichthe Nature of Man is satisfy’d,and canrest
contented,bealone hisGood;then he is a Fool who follows that with Earnestness,as
his Good, which a Man can be without, and yet besatisfy’dandcontented.In the
same manner is he a Fool who flies thatearnestlyas hisIll,which a Man mayendure,
and yet beeasyandcontented.Now a Man may possibly not have burnt a Temple, as
Erostratus,and yet may becontented.Or tho he may not have con[437]quer’d the
World, asAlexander,yet he may be easy andcontented:as he may still without any
of those Advantages ofPower, Riches,or Renown;if hisFancyhinders not. In short,
we shall find, “That without any one of those which are commonly call’dGoods, a
Man may becontented”: As, on the contrary, “He may possess them all, and still be
discontented,and not a jot the happier.” If so; it follows, “That Happiness is from
within,not fromwithout.” “A goodFancyis the Main.” And thus, you see, I agree with
you,
“That*Opinionis all in all.”—But what is this,Philocles,which
OpinionAll,in what
has seiz’d you? You seem of a sudden grown deeply thoughtful. sense.
“To tell you truth,” said I, “I was considering What wou’d become of me, if, after all,
I shou’d, by your means, turnPhilosopher.” “The Change, truly, wou’d be somewhat
extraordinary,” reply’dTheocles.“But be not concern’d. The Danger is not so great.
And Experience shews us every day, That for talking or writingPhilosophy,People
are not at all the nearer beingPhilosophers.”[438]
But, said I, the veryName is a kind of Reproach. The wordIdiotstood formerly as the
Opposite toPhilosopher:but now-a-days it means nothing more commonly than
thePhilosopherhim-self.
Yet, in effect, reply’d he, what else is it we all do in general, than
Philosophy.
philosophize?If Philosophybe, as we take it,the Study of
Happiness; must not everyone, in some manner or other, either skilfully or unskilfully
philosophize?Is not every Deliberation concerning our main Interest, every
Correction of our Taste, every Choice and Preference in Life to be reckon’dof this
kind?For “If Happiness be not allow’d to be fromSelf,and fromwithin;then Either
is it fromoutward Things alone, or fromSelfandoutward Things together.” If from
outward Things alone; shew it us, in fact, “That all Men are happy in proportion to
these; and that no one who possesses them is ever miserable by his own fault.”—But
this, it seems, hardly any-one will pretend to evince: All own the
contrary.—Therefore “If Happiness be partly fromSelf,partly fromoutward Things;
then Each must be consider’d, and a certain Value set on the Concerns[439] of an
inwardkind, and which depend onSelfalone.” If so: and that I consider “How, andin
Whatthese are to be prefer’d; When and on what occasion they are in season, or out
of season; When properly to take place, when to yield”: What’s this, after all, but to
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 163 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
philosophize?“Yet even this, still, is enough to put one out of the ordinary way of
thinking, and give one an unhappy turn for Business, and the World.” “Right! For this
also is to be consider’d, and well weigh’d.” And thereforeThis, still, isPhilosophy;
“To inquire Where, and in what respect one may be mosta Loser; Which are the
greatestGains, the most profitableExchanges”; since every thing in this World goes
by Exchange.Nothing is had for nothing.Favourrequires Courtship:Interestis made
by Sollicitation:Honours are acquir’d with Hazard;Richeswith Pains;Learningand
Accomplishmentsby Study and Application.Security, Rest, Indolenceare to be had at
other Prices. They may be thought, perhaps, to come easy. For “What Hardship is
there? Where is the Harm?” ’Tis only to abate ofFameandFortune.’Tis only to
wavethe Point of Honour,and share somewhat less ofInterest.If this be easy; all is
well. SomePatience,you see, is necessary in the case.Privacy[440] must be endur’d;
evenObscurityandContempt.—Such are the Conditions. And thus every-thing has its
Condition.PowerandPrefermentsare to be had at one rate;Pleasuresat another;
LibertyandHonesty at another. AgoodMindmust be paid for, as other things. “But
we had best beware lest, perhaps, we paytoo dearfor It. Let us be assur’d we have a
good Bargain.” Come on then.—Let us account.—“What is aMindworth? What
Allowancemay one handsomly make for it? Or What may one well afford it for?”—If
I part with It, or abate of It, ’tis notfor Nothing.Some value I must needs set uponmy
Liberty,some uponmy inward Character.Something there is in what we callWorth;
something inSincerity,anda soundHeart.Orderly Affections, generous Thoughts,and
a commandingReason,are fair Possessions, not slightly to be given up. I am to
consider first, “What may betheir Equivalent?Whether I shall find my Account in
letting theseinward Concernsrun as they please; or Whether I shall not be better
secur’d against Fortune by adjusting Mattersat home,rather than by making Interest
abroad, and acquiring first one great Friend, then another, to add still more and more
to myEstateor Qua[441]lity?” For Where am I to take up? Begin; and setthe
Bounds.Let me hear positively “How far I am to go, and Why no further?” What isa
moderate Fortune, a Competency,and those otherDegrees commonly talk’d of?
Where is myAngerto stop? or how High may I suffer it to rise? How far may I
engage inLove?How far give way toAmbition?How far to otherAppetites?Or am I
to let all loose? Arethe Passionsto take their swing; and no Application to be given
to ’em, but all tothe outward Thingsthey aim at? Or if any Application be requisite;
say plainly, “How much toone,and how much tothe other?” How far are the
Appetitesto be minded, and how faroutward Things? Give us the Measure and Rule.
See Whether this be not tophilosophize?and Whether willingly or unwillingly,
knowingly or unknowingly, directly or indirectly, Everyone does not as much?
“Where, then, isthe Difference?Which Manner isthe best?” Here lies the Question.
This is what I wou’d have you weigh and examine. “But the Examination,” say you,
“is troublesom; and I had better be without it.”Who tells you thus? “YourReason,
you say, whose Force, of necessity, you must yield to.” Tell me therefore, have you
fitly culti[442]vated thatReasonof your’s, polish’d it, bestow’d the necessary Pains
on it, and exercis’d it on this Subject? Or is it like to determine full as well when un-
exercis’d, as when thorowly exercis’d, or ever so expert? Consider, pray, in
Mathematicks;Whose is the betterReasonof the two, and fitter to be rely’d on? The
Practiser’s, or his who is unpractis’d? Whose in the way ofWar, of Policy,or Civil
Affairs?Whose inMerchandize, Law, Physick?—And inMoralityandLife,I ask still,
Whose? May he not, perhaps, be allow’d the best Judgof Living,who studysLife,and
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 164 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
endeavours to form it by someRule?Or is he indeed to be esteem’d most knowing in
the matter, whoslightlyexamines it, and whoaccidentallyandunknowingly
philosophizes?
Thus,Philocles(said he, concluding his Discourse) Thus isPhilosophyestablish’d.
For Every-one, of necessity, must reason concerning his own Happiness; “What his
Good is, and what hisIll.” The Question is only, “Who reasons best?” For even he
who rejects thisreasoningor deliberating Part,does it froma certain Reason,and
from a Persuasion “That this isbest.”[443]
BY this time we found our-selves insensibly got home. OurPhilosophyended, and we
return’d to the common Affairs of Life.
The End of the Second Volume.
[* ] Amoto quaeramus seria ludo.
[* ] As thus:
(1.) Theism with Daemonism: (2.) Daemonism with Polytheism: (3.) Theism with
Atheism: (4.) Daemonism with Atheism: (5.) Polytheism with Atheism: (6.) Theism
(as it stands in opposition to Daemonism, and denotes Goodness in the superiorDeity)
with Polytheism: (7.) The same Theism or Polytheism with Daemonism: (8.) Or with
Daemonism and Atheism.
(1.) As when the onechief Mind, or Sovereign Being, is (in the Believer’s sense)
divided between a good and an ill Nature, by being the Cause of Ill as well as Good:
Or otherwise, whenTwo distinct and contrary Principles subsist; one, the Author of
all Good, the other of all Ill.
(2.) As when there is notone,butseveralcorrupt Minds who govern; which Opinion
may be call’dPolydaemonism.
(3.) As when Chance is not excluded, but God and Chance divide.
(4.) As when an evil Daemon and Chance divide.
(5.) As when many Minds and Chance divide.
(6.) As when there are more principal Minds than one, but agreeing in Good, with one
and the same Will and Reason.
(7.) As when the same System of Deity or corresponding Deity subsists, together with
a contrary Principle, or with several contrary Principles or governing Minds.
(8.) As when the last Case is, together with Chance.
[* ]Infra, pag.79, &c. 163, 4, &c.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 165 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
[† ] VOL. I. pag.120.
[* ]Infra,pag. 414.
[* ]Infra,pag. 415, 418, 419, &c.
[† ] VOL. I. p.90, 91, 2, 3. VOL. III. p.32, &c.
[* ] VOL. I. p.18, 19, 20. VOL. III. p.115.
[† ] VOL. III. p.124.
[* ]Infra,pag. 412, 420, 421.
[* ] VOL. I. p.97, &c.
[* ]Infra,pag. 394, 400,&c.And VOL. III. p.30,&c.
[* ] VOL. I. p.90, &c. 116, 117, 118, 119, 120.
[* ]Infra,p. 131, 307, 8, 9, &c. And VOL. III. p.216, 217, &c.
[* ] VOL. III. p.30.
[* ] VOL. I. p.32, 33, &c. And VOL. III. p.115, 116, 124–128.
[* ]Supra, p. 92, 93, &c.
[† ]Supra, p. 92, 93. And Infra,p. 307, 8, 9, &c. And VOL. III. p.216, 17,&c.
[* ] VOL. III. p.153, 154. in the Notes.
[* ] Inter Silvas Academi quaerere Verum.
[* ] VOL. I. pag.193, 4, 5, 6, 7, &c. VOL. III.pag.290, &c.
[* ] See VOL. III. p.160.
[* ] VOL. I. pag.333, &c. and Notes.
[* ] Treatise IV. See the Beginning.
[* ] “ToPolytheism(Daemonism) or Atheism:” as above,pag.13.
[* ] See VOL. III. p.263, 264. what is cited in the Notes from the antient Author on
the World.
[* ] VOL. I. pag.308. VOL. III. pag.200.
[* ] VOL. I. pag.81.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 166 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
[* ] VOL. I. pag.320, &c.
[* ] VOL. III. pag.310.
[* ]Vid.Lockeof human Understanding,Book IV. Chap.6. §. II.
Ac mihi quidem Veteres illi majus quiddam animo complexi, multo plus etiam vidisse
videntur, quàm quantum nostrorum ingeniorum acies intueri potest: qui omnia haec,
quae supra & subter, unum esse, & una vi, atque una consensione naturae constricta
esse dixerunt. Nullum est enim genus rerum, quod aut avulsum à caeteris per seipsum
constare, aut quo caetera si careant, vim suam, atque aeternitatem conservare
possint.[Indeed, those old authors seem to me to have had greater power of
imagination, or even of vision, than is given to the penetration of our minds, when
they declared that everything above and below us is one and bound together by one
force and one harmony of Nature. For there is no kind of thing which can stand alone
if torn from the rest, or which, if withdrawn from the rest, would suffer them to keep
their functions and duration.] Cicero de Oratore, lib. 3.
Omne hoc quod vides, quo divina atque humana conclusa sunt, unum est: membra
sumus corporis magni. [All that you see, of which God and man form parts, is one;
we are the limbs of one great body.] Seneca, Epist. 95.
Societas nostra Lapidum fornicationi simillima est: quae casura, nisi invicem
obstarent, hoc ipso sustinetur.[Our fellowship is most like to the stones of an arch.
The arch would fall if it were not held up by the stones blocking each other.] Ibidem.
Estne Dei Sedes, nisi Terra, & Pontus, & AEther,
Et Coelum, & Virtus? Superos quid quaerimus ultra?
Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris.
[What house is there for the god save earth and sea and air and sky and virtue? Why
do we look for the gods outside ourselves? All that you see, all that you feel, is
Jupiter.] Lucan. lib. 9.
[* ]Supra, p. 92, 93,&c.and 131, 132. And VOL. III. p.216, 217, &c.
[† ]Infra,p. 413.
[* ] VOL. I. p.109, &c.
[* ]Pag.300.
[* ] VOL. I. pag.88, and 118.
[* ] VOL. III. pag.71, 2, 3, 4, 5, &c. And 241, 2, 3, 4. And 316, 17, &c.
[* ] VOL. I. p.94. And VOL. III. p.114.
[† ] VOL. I. p.298. And in this Volume,p.269.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 167 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812

Online Library of Liberty: Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, vol. 2
[* ] VOL. III. pag.59, 60, &c.
[* ] SeeLetter of Enthusiasm,towards the end. See also above,p.75. And VOL. III.
p.30, &c.
[* ]Supra, p. 238, &c.
[† ]Supra, p. 245.
[‡ ] VOL. I. p.53, 54.
[* ] Pag. 307.
[* ] Pag. 28.
[* ] Pag. 238, 245, 399.
[* ]Supra, p. 252. And VOL. III. p.201, 307, &c.
[* ] VOL. I. pag.307, 320, 324,&c.VOL. III. p.196, 199,&c.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 168 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/812