treatise of 
melm{ch 6 lt 

Contayniijg the c^ufes thereof, an^: 

reafons of the ftraunge it. worketh in oik 

minds andthe Phifickfcr^ r, ani‘. 

ffirituallconfilution forfuchashtue 
thereto adioyned afflicted 
, f.^.-knce. 

The inference bemxt it, andmelamholy^ with di-, 

Uerje philofiphicall dtfeourfes touchh’’ , and 

afeSiionsoffottle,fpiritandhody- -■cvartictt- 
lars whereof at e to be fe‘ h 
the book", 

ByT.BrightD of ; 

PhificF'* 



Imprinted at London by 
lohnVVmdeu 

1 j B 




TO THE RIGHT 

WORSHIPFVL M,PE 

TER OSBOVRNE.&c. 


F al otter pradife of 

alIa**correft«h the 

irifirmityes of the 
jnind.Fot the inftrutnent of teafcn, the brayne, 
- being either not of well tem^rS fubftance: or 
difbrdcred in his partes:aUclfercife of wifedome 
is hinderedrand where once ■^;jd^‘^t^anding lod¬ 
ged,wit,memory,& quicke cs>jbeit . kept refi- 
dencc,and thcexcellcncie;0^a%n. appeareth a- 
bone all other creatures "; ther? vnconfiderate 
iudgeraent.fimplicm^andfob'itfhncs make their 
ieat.andasitwerediipo.irefsing reafon, of her 
watch tower , fubiefteth the nature of man vnto 
the annoyance of infinite calamities, that force 
vpon PS in the courfe of this frailelifc , and ba- 
feth it far vnder the condition of bruit beaftes. 
The heart the ieate of aiFedion(and neither im¬ 
moderate in temper , norinfigure'or quantitic 
otherwife difpofed then is expedient for good 
aci:ion)thc feate of temperancie j of iuftice . of 
fortitude and liberalitie, dayly pradiie of phi-/ 
ficksfiiewethhowinuchit is difpofed and fra- 


THE EPISTLE. 

med to mcdiocritie ofafFeflion wherein vertue 
confifteth^ by fuch meanes as nature miniftreth, 
and the phifitian her great fteward according to 
her will, difpenfeth where neede reqnireth;tn fo 
much that what reafon bringcth io pafle by per- 
fwafion and counfell, that medicine and other, 
helpes of that kind feeme to worke by/inftinfl: 
ofnature. The dayly experience of phrenfies, 
madneffe.lunaiics,and melancholy cured by this 
hcauenly gift of God,make manifeA" demonftra- 
rio hereof.The notable fruit & fuccclTe of which 
art in that kind,hath caufed fome to iudge more 
bafelyofthefoule.then agreeth with pietie or 
nature,3nd haueaccomotedall manner affeiSlion 
thercofto be fuofcftto the phifitians hand, not 
confidering heccin any thing diiiinc', and aboue 
the ordinary e£n>nts.& naturall courfe of things: 
but haue efteem^l the vertues themfelues, yea 
reIigio.no ot^r t^'ng but as the body hath bin. 
tempered.and ot.-.he other fide,vice, prophane- 
ces,and negleftt3lMS|ligion and horiefty, tohauc 
bin nought buta t fair of humour.For cor- 
ledting the ludgeffieuc of fuch as fo greatly mif- 
lifce the matter.and partly for the. vfe of manye.. 
that may needc ioftrudfion and counfell > in the 
ftatepf melancholy, and affedlion of braine and 
hearc,and would haue both to fatisfie their ovm 
doubts,and to anfwerc the prophane obied^ions 
of others I haue taken this paines to confute the 
abfurde error 6fthe one,and to fatisfie the rea- 
fonable and modefi inquirie of the other that 
feeke to be enformed.I haue laid open how the 
body,and corjxarall things affedl the foule, and 
how the body is aSefkcd ofit againe : what the 
diffe- 


DEDICATORIE. 
diflercnce is betwixt naturall melancbolie , and 
that heau ie hand of God vpon the afflidled con- 
fcieace.tonnented with removfe of finncjSc fcare 
of his iudgementrwith a Chriftian refolution ac¬ 
cording to my skill for fuch as faint vnder that 
heauy burthe.And that 1 might to the vttermoft 
of my endenourfas other bufines would permit 
nie)comfort them in that eftate moft comfort- 
lefTe,! haue added mineaduifeot phificke helpc: 
what diet, what mcdicine,and what other reme¬ 
dy is meete for perfons, bpprefled with melan¬ 
choly feare.and that kind of heauines of heart'. I 
haue enterlaced my treatife befides with difputcs 
of Philofophie that the learned fort of them,and 
fuch as are of quickc conceit, and delighted in 
difcourle of reafon in Daturall thinges.may finde 
to pall’e thei r time with,and know the: groundcs 
and rcalbns of their pafsiocs,without which they 
might receaue more difeomfor ,& greater caufe 
of error.This I haug deliuered in a fimple phrafe 
without any cofl:,or port of words to a fuppofed 
friend Af-not ignorant of good letters,that the 
difeourfe might be more familiar then if it had 
carried other direftion it otherwife would' bee. 
Change the Ietter,and it is indifferent to whom 
foeuer ftandeth in need,or fhal make vfe thero£ 

I write it in our mother tongue that the benefic 
(how final foeuer it be)might be more c6mon, 
& as the praftife of alf ancient philofophers hath 
bin to write in their own laguage their precepts, 
whether concerning nature.or touching maners 
of life, to the end their country me might reape 
the benefit with more eafe,and lecke rather for 
found iudgemec of ynderftanding, the forvainc 
iij. often- 



THE EPISTLE 

ofteatatio of ftrange toungs: wttch is alfo fol¬ 
lowed m tranflationsrfo 1 tooke it metcft to im'? 
part thefe points of philofopIiie5& phifick in Ea- 
gliflijtp the end our people,might acquaint the- 
felues with fome part of this kind,rather the with 
other frjuolous difcourfes, neither profitable to 
vfe.aor deleftablc to the vertuous, & wel difpo- 
fed mind.This my flederendeuour I dedicate to 
your name right worihipfull M. Osbourne , to 
whom befides I am particularly beholding,your 
fauouring of vertuej& learning in certain of my 
acquaintance,hath moued me to giue this figni- 
ficatio how ready learning is to honor her fauo- 
rers:/he hath many daughters,& they be all knit 
in louctbetwixt the there is neither enuy nor ie- 
loufierwhere one is honored & receiueth enter- 
tainment,thereal^c 5 gratulate without detraftio? 
& eue as in a darl^ight one ftar breaking out of 
a thickcIoude,diiiuereth a far more cheereful & 
cofortablclight.thehifitlhone with many in a 
clere eueningrfo this vertue hath the more grace, 
& beauty in you.infomuch as almoft al fuch pla¬ 
nets haue a long time bene eclipfed,or quite fal- 
leout of their fpheres, to the great difeomfort of 
fuch as trauel in this kind of night works,& bufy 
tbefelues at the lamps & are careful to vphold the 
fociety of mankind by learning and inftradlion. 
There be a few that ihine with you,their honour 
grouded vpo vertue,flial ftad for eueirthe Mules 
haue their names in perpetual record; & I in their 
names performe this duty vnto you as I haue de¬ 
clared. Fare you wel.-frolitle S. Bartlemewes by 
Smitbfield the 23 .of May. i ? 8 . 

AlquerofyQur vertue^ T‘Etight. 



ro Hts 

lanchoHck friend M, 

Lthtfttgh dears M, your letter 
^uUofheaU'mes,and •vncomfor- 
tableflaintes^hath in fuch fort 
affeSied jmp , that (^as it faireth 
with a true hartedfriend ')your 
ajfUBien draweth me into the 
fellowfhip of your rnourneful e- 
fiateJFherehy 1 am hine to call for fuch fufpone,as 
reafon minifireth to wife mentand am compelled as it 
were to put bit into the mouth of mp ouer vehement 
affeSlioniandgtuecheeky asmuchoitny flren^hfer- 
Tteth vnto my paf donfotnevehat in this behalf e vnru- 
iy.Yet albeit our cafes are not ecjuail ^ in fo much as 
thegriefeis notfo fenfible to me as tjyourfelfe^whota 
it hath (I perceiue)entred to the qukkf, not onely of 
hodely fenfe.'but hath pafjed deeper^ and fretted the 
tender finewes of thefiule andfpiriteyet I fay for af- 
much as fucb is the gracious prouidence of our Gad, 
and the mat^fold graces of his hountifulL hand vnto 
men that fcarce appearetk any calamity fut if time he 
tak^n arid opporiunitk laide hold onjhelpe and releafe, 
doth as readily prefent itfelfe^tothe comfort of fuch as 
trauaile vnder the bttrthen,as affiefion is rea^ e to 
fbarge them: and confderinfon whom this kinds of 
troffe is faUentvpon a man exercifedin the fludie of 
fietie, and apraSlifer of the fame^and one not igno~ 
rant of the precepts ofphilofophie, whereby worldlye 
\neh,<^y fuch as are defihute of the tsnowkdge of God, 
flay themfelues in fuch cafes,which as it fetueth them 
*«/}. but 




hut (lender ly and h hut a readen flajfeyto heare vp fa 
heauy a bunhenfheingothermft 'U(>yde,eindvnfurni^ 
Jhed of the heauenly grace^ fo may fuch phUofophicaU 
and humaineprecepts, and confideration of naturall 
cdufes,andeuentes,Jlandhim inflead^ who rejieth not 
wholly thereon y hut leaneth vpon the tnaine pillar of 
Gods promifesjofmercy and grace y and waiieth with 
patience the appointed time of his releafe ^Thefe con- 
Jiderations to be fowen inyoUygiue me confolation and 
the rather inable me to comforteyou my deare friend, 
whofe foule 1 perceaue panteih with heat of that flamcy 
which mojl nighyoufay inyour feeling appfochethvn- 
to thofe tormentes deferibedwheretheworme diethnot 
andthe firegoeth not oMt,whereofalthough you feeme 
prefemlytofeek theanguiJhforatime,yet haue com~ 
fort and attend the happie ijfue, which douhtlejfe is. 
therayfing vp againeand more high aduauncement. 
into the ajfurance of Gods loueandfauour. Tor as of 
all mettadsgold is tsyed with mofi vehement heat, 'and 
abideth the oftenffi bamering of workgmen for the re-> 
fyningywhich beingoncefynedferuethfer the feate of 
the Diamend,andfor matter of precious vejfelsto the 
royallfurnitttre of the tables of potentates and princes:, 
fo now euen that heauenly refiner,holdeth you in this, 
hoteflame fora timcj tillbeing purified and cleared 
from that drqjffe of finne which cleaueth fqfafi , to our 
degenerate nature^you may makp hereafter a more 
glorious veffell , for hisferuice and honour of bis hea¬ 
uenly maiefiie.Your requefl is notonely. that tfhould 
nsinifler vntoyouywhat »y/lender skill either in diui* 
rutieorphifick^mayaffordybmthatl would at large 
declare vntoyou the nature of meldncholiejwhat cau- 
feth it,what effeSles it warkethy how curedyand farther 
to lay open , what foeutr may ferue for the knowledge 
thereof. 


ihtYeaf,mthfuch compam<»u-T>ffeare,fadHeffe, def^ 
peratiojteares.asfollotv that mommful traine^yea oft 
timesj-vnbridkdlau^neryifing not fro ary comfort of 
ihe hartjOrgladnesofJpiritybutfroKia difpeftion in 
fuchfort altered^ai hy error of conceit^ that gefimc: it 
in a coUterfet manor bejlowed vpo that difa^eingfaf 
fonjwhofi nature is rather to extinguijh it felfe with 
teares^the affwaged by the fweete breath of cheareful- 
nes,otherwife toreceiue refrefhingtThhyour requeji 
chargeth me with that,wherto if ny sk^l reacheth not, 
yet my good veil & prompt mind,both in refpeB of your 
eftate.TohoJegriefe I fitiy ^ defire to mitigate, & the 
complaimes ofdiuerfe others alfo epprejfed,driiwe me, 
that both th^ ^yoti> kyiowing the grouds ofthefe pa-, 
ffidsivehatpart nature hath m the tragedy, & what co- 
fcience offinne driueth y^ntoihove one muri(hethano- 
ther,how ech rifethyt^ ihefmeraltfifianesfioth ofpre~ 
ueming (fye cure ofech,the defperate difcoiiragemets, 
which rife of the body & mind thus affliSied may be at 
the leafi mitigated,^ fomeU^t^ue to the foule fil¬ 
ling in the darhjnidnight of ignorance,diflraEiedwith 
doubts e^penfiue thoughtes ofdi/pairetwherin I haue 
copioufly entreated ofthe/e pointes, that bothyoumight 
he the more coforted air fatisfied by pieny of difcourfe, 
& being a matter fivingyour humour^oumighthaue 
rvherwith topaffe the time with more cotenmet. Ther- 
fore atyourgriefe wilgiue leaue and refpit iherto.you 
may here kpow ^ leame that,whichyou defire to ftiow 
in this cafe,whereofif by God's hlefsingyo'kmay mak^ 
yfi to your comfort, 1 fhal toy in rty paints a^dyou a* 
gainfl other times of try al, by this experieceyhay haue 
caufeof more hope of releafe, & comfort in heauines, 
then through the terror ofthisjlrange affli&hn you 
prefent^feele. 


the contentes of 

the booke according to the 
Chapters,- 

H Owdiuerflythe word melan¬ 
choly is take. Cap.t,pag.i 
The caufes of nacurall me¬ 
lancholy, & of the excefife ther- 
of. Cap.2.pag.3. 

Whether good nourifhment breede 
melancholy by fault of the body tur¬ 
ning it into melancholy, and; whether 
fuch humour is found in nouriflimets, 
or rather is made of the.Cap. 3 ,pag.6,. 

Theaunfwereto obiedions made 
againft the breeding of melancho- 
licke humour out of nourilhment. 
Cap.4.pagp. 

A more particular and farther an- 
fwere to the former obiedions,Cap. y* 
pag.2i. 

The caufes of the increafe and ex- 
celfe of the melancholicke humour. 
Cap.5pag24, 

Of the melancholicke excrement 
Cap. 


Cap.7-pag-S”- , . , , . 

What burnt choller is,and the cau- 
fes thereof. Cap.8.pag.3i* 

How melancholie worketh feareful 
pafsions in the mind c Cap. 9 , pag .32. 

How the body afifedeth the foule. 
Cap.io,pag.37. „ , 

Obiedions againfte the manner 
how the body affedeth the foule,with 
anfwere thereunto.Cap. 11. pag.47* 

A farther anfwere to the former ob- 
iedions,and of the fimple facultie of 
the foule,and onelyorganicall of fpi- 
rit and body* Cap* 12.pag. 5 3* 

How trie foule by one fimple facul- 
tie performeth fo many and diuerfe a- 
aions* Cap.13.pag.d5. 

The particular anfweres to the ob- 
iedions made in the 11 .Chap. Cap* 
14.pag.70. _ 

Whether perturbations rife of hu- 
mour,or not with a diuifio of the per¬ 
turbations. Cap.15.pag.78* 

Whether perturbations which are 
not moued by outward occafions rife 
ofhumour,ornotiandhow. Cap.id. 
pag.87. 


How 


How melancliolie procureth feare,' 
fedneSjdifpaire , and fuch other pafsi- 
ons. Cap*i7,pag.5p. 

of thevnnaturall melancholic ri- 
fingby aduftion: howcit affedeth vs 
with diaerfe pafsi6s.Cap.i8 .pag. 107. 

How ficknes, and yeares feeme to 
alter the ttiindjand the caufe, and how 
the foule hath praftife of fenfes fepara- 
ted fro the body. Cap, 19.pag. 113. 

The accidentes which befall melan¬ 
cholic perfons. Cap.20.pag. 120. 

How melancholy altereth the qua¬ 
lities of the bodie* Cap.21 .pag.i 2 2. 

How melancholic altereth thofe a- 
dions which rife out of the braine* 
Cap. 22 .pag.i 2 5. 

How affeftions be altered. Cap, 
2‘3 .pag.i 28. 

. The caufes ofteares, and their falt- 
nes. Cap.24.pag.132. 

Why teares endure not ail the time 
of the caufe:and why in weeping com¬ 
monly the finger is put in the eie*Cap, 
2 5.pag. 144. 

Of the partes of weeping : why the 
countenance is call downe, the fore- 
hea<f 



head lowreth: the nofe droppeth, th^ 
lippe trembleth,&c. Cap. 2 6.pag. 149, 
The caufes of fobbing, and fighing; 
and how weeping eafeth the heart. 
Cap.27.pag.152. 

Howe melancholie caufeth both 
weeping,& laughing with the reafons 
how. Cap.28.pag.i57* 

The caufes of bluCbing, and bafti- 
fulnes, and why melancholie perfons 
are giuen therunto. Cap.29.pag. 161 ^ 
Ofthenaturall afbons altered by 
melancholie. Gap. 3 o.pag. 168. 

How melancholie altereth the na- 
turaU workes ofthe body : imce,and 
excrement. Cap.31.pag.1pl 

Of the affli( 5 tion of conference for 
finne. Cap.32,pag«i7p. 

W hether the afFli6ted corffcience be 
of melancholie. Cap. 3 3.pag. 18 2. 

The particular difference betwixt 
melancholie,and the afflided confei- 
ence in the fameperfon.Cap. 34.pag. 
187. 

The affliction of mind,to what per¬ 
fons it befalleth,and by what meanes 
Cap.35.pag ip3. 

A 



Aconfolationtothe aflPlified confci- 

cnee. Cap.35.pag.20t 

ThecureofmelanchoUe,and how 
melancholicke perfons are to order 
themfelues in adions of mind,fenfe,& 
motion, Cap.37»pag.2 35. 

How melancholicke perfons-are 
to order themfelues in their affedions. 
Cap.38 pag.2420 

How melancholicke perfiDns are to 
order themfelues in the reft of their 
diet,and what choice they are to make 
of ayre meate^and drinke,houfe, and 
apparelL Cap.3p pag^ayo* 

The cure by medicine meete for me# 
lancholicke perfons* Cap 4o,pag, 
251. 

The manner of ftrengthening me¬ 
lancholicke perfons after purging: 
with corredion of fomeof their acci¬ 
dents* Cap .41 .pag. 270, 


A 




A TREATISE 


OF MELAN- 


GHOLIE. 

CHAP. I. 

How diuerflie the word Melitncholie 
istal^n,a 

Efdrc I enter to de¬ 
fine tlie nature of 
mdacholic, & what 
it is . for the cleard 
vndcrftading of that 
wherin my purpofe 
is to inftrudl you, it 
fiial be necefiarie to 
lay forth diuets ma- 
ners of taking the 
name of melancholie.and whereto the name bc" 
ing one.is applied diuetflic.lt fignifieth in all, 
either a certaine fearefull difpofitionof the 
mind altered from reafbn, or clfe an humour of 
the body,comonly taken to be the only caufc of 
reafon by feare in fuch fOrt depraued, This hu¬ 
mour is of two fbrts:natarall,orvnnaturall,oa- 
turall is either the grofler part of the bloud or¬ 
dained for noarilhmcntjwhich cither by abun- 
A dance 




s A TREATISE, 

dance or immoderate hotcnefTc , pafsingmea* 
fure,rurcliargeth the bodic, and yeeldeth vp to 
ihc brainc certainc vapors, whereby the vnder-r 
Handing is obfcured.or clfeis an excrement or¬ 
dained to be auoyded out of the bodicjthrou^ 
fo manie alterations of naturall heatc, and va- 
rietie of cont:o£fion,hahing not a drop of non- 
rifhing iuyee remaining.whereby the bodie,ei¬ 
ther in power or fubftancet.may be relieued.This 
excrement, if it keepeth the bounds of his owne 
naturejbreedeth lsfTe perturbance either to bo¬ 
die or rainde: if it corrupt and degenerate far¬ 
ther froni it felfe and the qualitic of the bodie, 
then are all pafsions more vehement. & fo otit- 
lagioufly opprefle and trouble the quiet feate of 
the mind, that all organicall aftions thereof arc 
tnixed vvith melaricholie roadnclTc, and reafon 
tutnedto avainefcare , or playne defperation, 
theEfaine being altered in his complexion, and 
$s it were traofported into an inftrument of an 
other make then it ivas firft ordained; thefc two 
according to the diucrfitieoffetling, do ingeo- 
der diucrfitic of p3fsioas,& according thereunto 
do diuerfly vnderftanding, & do alter 

the afFcHion^efpeciaUye if by corruption of na¬ 
ture or euill euftome of manners the partye bee 
ouer pafsionate. The vnnamrall is an humout 
rifiog ofmelanchoJie before mentioned^of clfe* 
frorn bIpud or'choler,whollie chaunged into aa 
other nature by an vnkind.}y heatc , which tur- 
neth thefehumours, which before were .raun- 
ged vnder hatur^ gOuerument, and kept in or¬ 
der, into a qualitie .whollie repugnant, whofe 
ftbRance and vafor giueth fuck annoyance to 



XDF MELANCHOLiE. 5^ 
all the partes, that as it paflcth or is (catcd tna-^ 
lircr ii ftrange alterations in oor aftions, whether 
they be animal orvoIuntarie,or naturall not de¬ 
pending vpon our will > andthefe ate all which 
the name of mcladcholie doth fignifie: nov/ the 
definition and what it is. As the thinges be di- 
uerfe, fo it alfo folioweth the fuite , and is like- 
wife diuerfe either of the humour Or of the paf- 
fioa , and the humour being either a nutritiue 
iuyee or an excrement vnprofftablc thereunto, 
I define the humour no otherwife then that part 
of that bloud which naturally of the reft is moft 
giofle,and the excrement the fuperfluitie of the 
fame: which if it putrifieth, beftowethftill the 
name of a farre diuerfe thing both in temper Sc 
naturcjcallcd blackecholler . The melancholic 
pafsion is a doting of reafon through vayne 
ieare procured by fault of the melancholic hu- 
mour.Thos briefly & clearly do you vnderftand 
what the nature of mclancholie is , and where¬ 
to the name is vfually applycd; of which whea 
Ilhallhaucatthefulltoyput contentment en- 
treatcd,then will 1 fatisfie the other part of your 
demaund, and lay open the confeni and diffe¬ 
rence betwixt the confcience opprefled with 
fence of finne and this natural kindc before me - 
tioued, and minifter vnto you fuch heauenlye 
comfort and counfeli as my flend^r skill will af- 
foord,and fuch phificke helpe as your preient 
Qcede requireth. ; 

CHAP. II. 

The caufet ofmturall melanchoUe and 
oj the txceffe thereof. 

A.ij. Af 


4 ATREATISE 

all natural! humours rife of nourilhment, 
fo melancholie being a part of bloud, from 
thence it fpringeth alfo. Whatfoeuer we receauc 
into the bodie for fuftcntation of this fraile life, 
confifteth of diuerfitie of partes, being it felfc 
compounded,although to the outward viewc it 
fecraethto appeare vniforme: as bread, flelhc. 
fiffi, milke,wioe,beare&c.whichflicwe of vni- 
formitie being taken away by the naturall fur- 
nace,which preferueththe liucly heate of cue- 
lie Iiuing thing.that outward refemblance vani- 
iheth,and the d^iuerfitiemaaifefteth it fclfe ; as 
we fee gold or filusr, before it be proued with 
fire,app.earethno other then all alike; but af¬ 
terward is difeouered by the burning crucible 
to be much otherwife:fo farcth it with nourilh- 
ments.whofe diners partes are layd open by fo 
manifold cpncbftions,andcleanlings,andftrai- 
ninges,as are continually without intermifsion 
pradlized of nature in euerie tnans bodie : noc 
gold finer,more bufie at themine,or artificial! 
Chymift halfe fo induftrious in his laboratories 
as this naturall Chymift is in fuch preparations 
ofal nouriihmencrbe it meat.or drinke.of what 
fort foeuer.By this meancs the bloud which fce- 
roethin al parts like itfelfe.noeggcliker one to 
another,i$ preferued diftinfl: in all partes. Th?; 
pureft part which we call in comparifon and in 
refpefl: of the reft bloud,is temperate in quali- 
tie,and moderate in fubftance,exceeding all the ' 
other parts in quantitic,if the bodie be of equal 
tcnaper,madefornouriffimentofthe mofttem- , 
perate parts,and ingendringof ipirites.The fe- 
fiondisfieame,nexctobloudinquantitie, of a 
watc- 


OF MELANCKOLIE. jr 
watcrie nature^cold and moyft, apt to bee con- 
ucrted into the fubftanec of pure bloud if na¬ 
ture failc not in her workinge ordained for 
nourirtiment of moyfter partes. The thirde is 
melancholie» of fubftaunce grofle and earthie, 
cold and drie in regard of the other,in quantitie 
infcriour to Seume, fit nourifliment for foch 
partes as arc of like temper. The fourth cholcr, 
fieric,hote,and drieft ofqualitie,thinne in fub - 
fiance , leaft in quantitie,and ordained forfuch 
parts as require fiibtillernouriftirpent', and are 
tempered with greater portion of the fieric ele¬ 
ment. Thefc differences nature h ath fo diftin- 
guifhed, that althou gh in veine and place , they 
remaine linked together,yet in faculty,and ver- 
tue they are diuerfc the one from the other: 
which as they fit the varietie of parts, bloud the 
temperate,and the reftfuch partes ashaue like 
declining from temperate r fo by the maruelous 
working of nature, thefe varieties of humours 
are entertained by nourifhmentes inclining to 
like dilpofition: although no nourifliment can 
be vttcrly voide of all thefe partes,no not thole 
that arc counted moft to encline to anic one hu- 
naour,as bcefc,aDd venefon to melancholic: ho- 
nie,andbutter,tochGler:andfifii to fleume. 
Hereof rileth then this humour melancholic, c- 
uenfromnourifltraents,as all thehumours do, 
and although not of fuch excellent vfe : yet as 
neceffaric for the maintenance ol lyfc and fubv 
ftaunce of the bodie as anie other; neither doc 
thefe humoures fall into mans nature onely: 
but what foeuer liuing creature hath bloud 
can next be deftitutc of them as partes thereof, 
A.iii. more 



$ K TREATISE 

tnoreorleffeaccordinge to their diuerfccom- 
plexion.Thus then as man confifteth of partes 
requiri ng this dmerfitie oifoode, neceflaric it 
tvas, and fo ordained by God , fuch humours 
might anfwcre in like varietie : aod as humours 
arc diuerfe, lb likewife the matter whercofthey 
ihould be wrought could not be of one fort,and 
thereforealikinde of nature ordained fornou- 
Tilhmentjaffoordthis choyce, feme in greater 
fcarfiticjthis or that,to the imde no ftate of body 
fhouIdcomplaine.Hereyou may mooueaque- 
ilion not impertinent to the matter in hande, 
’whether fome bodies do not turne good nou- 
Tjfhmeot,& ofthe pureft fort into greater quan- 
titie of melancho!ie,then other fome,and whe¬ 
ther that of nourilhment which of it lelfc would 
ycelde ftore of the beft iuyee, by melancholickc 
■’Or rather cold and drie difpofition of the bod^ 
can fo be altered as to faile of that ftore, where¬ 
with by nature it is replenilhed, and in fteedc 
thereofyeeidc this grofle,thicke,cold,& earthie 
humour,whereof I nowe difeourfe. Agai ne whe-. 
ther thde humours are in fuch natures,as yeelde 
nourifhmenr and fo by reparation only after an 
Anaxagorun mariner appeare, or rather are 
made as a ftoole out of timber» bread of corns 
wineofgrape,&c. . 

GHAR. III. 

'Whether goedtitmripfjment hveedeih not Jlore cftiie* 
lancholiehy fault of the hodie'.n-hether it turneth 
not into mclancholie : and whether thefe htmourt 
are found in r. ouriPamenu^or rather are made out 
of them. 

The 



OF MELANCHOLIE 7 
"J’ H E S E queftionsarcnot voide ofprobabi- 
]itie o}3 both fidcs , which to the cnde the 
truth may lye the moreapparant,! will not ftick 
to declare vnto you.It (houlde feeme (as the ob- 
ieftion importcth)that which before hath bene 
attributed to the kind of nourilhtret Ihould ra¬ 
ther rife ofthe bodic nourilhed.cofidcring how 
it altereth,which itcmbraceth for nourilTiment, 
as confider the earth it felf.the mother and very 
niirfe of all corruptible thinges, how out of the 
lame royle,not halfe a foote betwixt the wholc- 
fome fruit and foasraigne medicinc.both fpring 
vp together with deadly poyfon: yea how in the 
felffame creature what ftrangc dmerfitie ofna- 
ture arifeth of the felfe fame nourilhroent: as in 
the Pafllmca marina^ whpfc fubftance and flefh is 
whole fome to ear,5£ yet the taile carrieth a moll 
deadly weapon.wherewith whatfbeuer is woun^ ' 
ded, perilheth without recouerie, not by an 3 'e 
foraine tinfture,but by the nourifhment altered 
in that pai: into luch a pernicious dilpofition. 
The lame is alfo found in the flies, CantharideSf 
whofc bodic exulcerateth all pans, but elpecial- 
iic the bladder,and is not inferiour to thechiefe 
poyfons^contrarilie the wings help wherein the 
bodic hurtedt which may be no Cmall reafonsof 
doubtc , whether the humors be found in hou- 
rilhmentSjOrrarberarcmadebya certeine dif- 
pofition of the bodic i as who \vould imagine, 
bloud could cuer be made ct yron , which not- 
wiihftandingjthe Ollridges alter in fuchfort, as 
by no heate of firc,it C3n be fooner molten then 
itisdigefted in the ftomach of that fethered 
foulefnowc nature digefteth nothing but to 
; A.iiii. make 



s A TREATISE 

make vfe of nourifhment thereof : e\Cc wbatfoc- 
ucr entreth into the body.pafleth asit commeth 
and hath no welcomming: but is refufed as itn- 
pertinent,nature beftov/ing no handling therof: 
more then a skilfoll painter to counterfeit the 
faihion offomeexcellcnt bcaiitie,would dip his 
penfill in the mirc,in fteed of perfeft colour.To 
thefe probabilities may be added,how fome na¬ 
tures chaunge into afarre diucrfe qualitie that 
which they haue receaued, then it flood by na¬ 
ture,as the family of Marfie in Italic,& Pfillie in 
Lybia:which were fo tepered,that they did with 
out hurt fiicke the poyfon of vipers,and without 
perill did vfually hunt themrand fo by neceffarie 
confequence to bee gathered, that they did re- 
ceaue nourifhment by them. What foeuer en¬ 
treth into the flomach, either is altered into fa- 
miliaritie of nature: or elle hauing an a£f uali 
power nothindered, altereth with repugnancie 
the nature which hath receaued it. If it altereth 
it whollie,thea deflroyethit ? ifinpartithen ca- 
rieth it on the one part nourifhing and alimen- 
tarie vertue, and on the other, a medicinable 
power: fo it Ihould feemc thefe Piillie,euen by 
vertue of nature made nourifhment of that, 
which to other is deadlie poyfon. Whereupon it 
may be gathered,that nourifhmets in fome bo¬ 
dies haue notfuch power, as I haue feid before: 
feeing they be made in certaine of poyfon. Thd 
fame maybe declared in duckes and hennes,. 
which feede vpon toads, notwithftanding their 
flefh we feed ofwith health,3nd flrength, to our 
bodies: Quailes likewifefeede of neefing pow¬ 
der feedes,and feldfarcs Ofhcmlocke, the one 
much 


OF MELANCHOLIE. ^ 
mucli approching nigh vnto, and the other fa¬ 
mous by the Athenian executions,for moft in¬ 
famous poyfon,al which notwithftanding , their 
flefli is not refuicd at the tables of the moft deli¬ 
cate and daintieft: hereby in apparance it fee- 
meth that it skilleth not much,what meat is re- 
ceaued in refpeft of fuftaining this or that com¬ 
plexion ; feeing that poyfon may bee made by 
vertue of concoftion familiar nounftiment: yea 
which is more auailable to vphold this matter, 
and ftraunge to cbnfider of: it hath bene known 
and it is recorded in credible hiftone.that iome 
haue ben^ brought vp from their youth and al- 
waies haue bene fuftained and fed with poyfon: 
which being fo. the nourifliments of the bodic 
not onelyreceaue preparation by naturall con- 
codfion,by which they become that indeedeSc 
efFefl, which before they were in power & pofti- 
bilitieibut feeme to be made out of what foeuet 
isreceaued, where it findeth a nature of foffi- 
cient ftrength to frame it; and not ( as it was 
wont to be faid)Mercurie is not made of euerie 
tree.fo nature maketh euerie thing of any thing; 
not by Anaxagoras art,for then Ihoulde breadc 
containe really, ccirporallye, and fubftancially 
flcfhjbloud and bone,but by a power and ver¬ 
tue whereof the matter hath no part, more then 
the gold for the framing of a iewell panaketh of 
the goldfmithes cunningj 

CHAP. IIII. 

T he anfvere io the former obteeftons, 

'J' HES E fiiewes and fcmblancc of truthes 
/ may 



to A TREATISE 

mayefeetne to ouerthrowe that wKJcIie .fiatli 
bene fet dovvne as the ground and matter of hu¬ 
mours,S: lay it rather in the nature of the thing, 
nourilhed,to transforme and afsirntiate what- 
(beacru hath receaued, though it bee of ncuer 
f9 ftraunge a quail tic : but as I haue fet dovync 
thefe obieftions , to the ende that trueth being, 
compared with vntruth may the better appearc 
by reafon ofcomparifon.fo marke for yourful- 
Jer fatis:r,ing in this point,howe yet nothing is 
hereby!: if, but fufficiendy-it maintainethit 
ielft . a; ’ by ftrength of reafon, the onely pillar 
ef htimaine truthes it is vpholden. It was decla- 
_red before how nourifhments as of all other hu. 
moursjfo of melancholic, they aflFoord the mat¬ 
ter , to the which nature applying her proper 
temperas an iRftrument, and pra€iizing that 
skill which fhe hath learned of God, worketh 
out both humours and fubftaunce forpreferua- 
tion and nourifliment of our bodies, nowe that 
ihe earth within finall diftance affoordeth nou- 
rifhment both to henbane & lettis,to hemlocke 
and the raallow.to poifon and wholfome herbs, 
that the fame flov/er nourifheth the fpider, ana 
yddeth honie to the bee.thatthe paflimea mari¬ 
na carieth the inftrument of death in hertayle, 
and wholfome foode in her fubftaunce, and all 
what hath bene before obiefted from Cantha- 
rides •* the Oftridges, Piillie and Marfi, neefing 
powder,hemlocke and toades, whereof whole- 
forae birds do aduenturc for nourifliment, and 
from that vitgine fed and fuftained with poyfon 
lent ynto Alexander to infefbhim with hircom- 
panie; al I fay that may out of thefe particulars 


OF MELANCHOLIE jf 

encounter the former truthes, being confidcrei 
and wayed.adde this thereunto ( taEing awaye 
nothing ) that to thedifpolition of the mattcr.it 
is alfo nece{rarie,an outward skill and Icience in 
the worker concurrc,whereby that matter mayc 
receauecQDuenient forme agreabic to the wor¬ 
kers intention.For as it isimpofsiblc to make a 
rope of fande, fo likewife hetipe maketh it not. 
without the art of the craftes man. who ioyning 
hi^ worke with conuenient ftufFc findeth the 
cnde of his labour: and as foroe woikemen ex¬ 
ceeds other in skill & diligence and of the fame 
matter, the worke either excelleth or wanteth 
according thereunto t in like manner the nou- 
tilhment being all one, as it falleth to a nature 
of good or bad temper, weake or ftrong.brin- 
geth forth nourifhment, and excrement accor¬ 
dingly. Touchingtheearth.it containeth in it 
inuifible feedcs of al things in a manerjtb which 
it ftoreth vp and importeth alfo food meete and 
conuenient; thefe feeds lye not diftindf in place 
but in nature,no more then the partes of bloud 
which before I inentioned, fo that although it 
were pofsible for hemlocke & the vine to grow 
in one bodie, and occupie one place,yet coulde 
not the proper nourifhment to either be auoy- 
ded; fuch harmonic and agreement is there be¬ 
twixt them in nature,and with fuch eainefl de- 
lirc doth the one affedi the other. This then is 
the caufe why life and death dwell fo nigh toge¬ 
ther , and yet ( as they ard of the vehementeft 
fortofaducrfarics ) without entercommunica- 
tionrEuen fo the bodie containeth partes linked 
Eotwithfianding in one conimuoitiej of diuerfc 
naturesj 



j» A TREATISE 

natures, wtichdrawe out of the mafle of nou- 
rifliment that which is mecte ech one for itfelf; 
which though it in apparance, & lhcw,feemeth 
vniforme.yet containeth it diuerfitie.as the fun- 
drie parts rcquirerwhich diuerfitie being diftjnft 
in nature, & confufed as it appeareth in one by 
the cloke & garment of an vniuerfal! forme: by 
natures Mechanicall operation (the very paternc 
of all arts,both liberall and feruile ) is difeouew 
led & brought into an aftual fubftaunce confi¬ 
ning ofhis "fingle & proper nature,which before 
had only a potentiall fubfificnce as members & 
parts haue in the whole. Which producing I vn- 
derftand not a difeoperie only,as by withdraw¬ 
ing a vaile,to Ihcw that which lay behind it,but 
a generation and coupling of matter with the 
forme: which forme it bringeth not with it,but 
rcceaueth it as it were an iniprefsion from the 
part So then,as eucry thing is not made of anyc 
thing in art ;neitherisfoodc miniftred for all 
things of euerie thing in nature, but requireth 
apt preparation of matter, by naturall vertue to 
be appropriate to, euerie part. Now if it be re- 
plied.-this anfwercjas it may fuffice againft that 
which is obiefted out of the earth, yet leaueth it 
doubt in thepafimaca^Carnhsindcs & Pfillie: by 
reafon the mat'^er of thefe thinges through na¬ 
tures working-groweth more particular,&isnof 
flored withfach varietie(as I may fo call them) 
of potentiall natures: whereby it might feeme 
the verie indiuiduali fubftance indificrentiy to 
fubieft it felfe either for nourifliment orpoifon: 
Icttheconfideration of the earth carrie vs yet 
farther to {he diffoluing of this knot alfo. True 
it is 



OF MELANCHOLIE. rj 

it Is.tliat the particular nourilhmcnt containctR 
not fo many futcs,as the earth the nourifber of 
all things dothryet it anfwereth in proportio to 
the part which it hath to (uftaine - So that the 
maflTe of blond being the vniuerfall foile.watcth 
not for the relief & entertainment of al the me - 
bers of the bodic,choi{e of fubftance according 
totheirvarietie.Hereofis the boncnouriihed.as 
hard as mettall :aod the braine as tender as-a 
poffet curdrthe kidneyes grofie and thicke: and 
the lights loofe and fubtile: the eyeas cleereas 
criftall: and the Ipleene as blacke and darke as 
inke.Now let vs apply this more particularly to 
Paftinaca,Cantharis,andthe reft of that forte. 
The Paftinaca,fubftance, and fifli, is nourilhsd 
with that whi ch in i t felfe is wholefome, the fiih 
being of the fame fubftance and difpofttiontbut 
fo that, t^t nouriihment hath in it an excre- 
mental fubftance,which being confidcred alone 
though it be not yet poyfon,hath in it a power, 
meeting with a former.to become of like hurt- 
full qualitietwhich we iee in excrements being 
permitted to putrifie and to degenerate of them 
felues, howe by corruption they become mofte 
daungerous: much more finding an a£tiue and 
liuely nature furniihed with power as it were to 
animate and waken thatwhich before lay dead 
in fuch matter: fo Paftinaca hath a weapon ge- 
nen by nature foked with moft deadly venome 
feparated yet from the fifli, and fticking on the. 
one fide on the middeft of thetaile , which is 
maintained with fiich a kinde of excrement, as 
being reiefhed of all the parts ,findeth there im- 
picfsioQ and cateitainmeiit.'ao; either that the 
fifhe 



14 A TREATISE ' 

filTi fcedc oFthat poyfon(for nothing feeJcth oF 
exctemcnt. appropriate to one part, or that 
wherewith that parte , while it is excrement is 
nourilhea^as veniraous, for then Ihould ftich 
as feede on that fifli bee in pcrill, but being vn- 
meete to nourifh or to haue place in the fiflie, is 
of temper, ( by the altering of that part ) apt to 
be conuerted into fo venenious a nature , which 
is planted in the fifties tayIe,not much vnhkc to 
the growing of Mifleto in a crab tree,whole na¬ 
tures do apparantly difFer,feeing the fame Mifle¬ 
to groweth alfo in the oke &on the hauthorne: 
neither can anie with reafon affirme j the Miflc 
is nouriftied with that which bclongeth to 
the crab: for then woulde it not prolpcr in the 
oke deftituteofhis proper iuyee, butboththc 
oke, the crab tree and the hauthorne,certayne 
of them,and in certaine places, hauing a flipet- 
fiuitie meete for that vfe.the feede of that Mifle¬ 
to being there & embracing that humour,rifeth‘ 
vp into fuch a diuerfe plant as We fee , which yet 
according to the diuerfitie of place, varieth in 
vertue, for that onely of the oke we vfe and ac- 
compt auailcable againft the falling ficknefle & 
efteeme the other of fmall value. Noweif it be 
demaundcdjwhy then groweth not the mifle on 
the earthjwhich hath more plenty offuch iuyee, 
and greater choycer it may bee thus anfwered: 
although the earth affoordech enrertainement 
for all things,yet it doth it diucifly,to fomc im- 
njediately,to other fomeby mcanes,as the earth 
miniftrediiuyccto the grafle and herb e ofthe 
common fieldc,it nourifticth mutton,& we feed 
ihereof, who ifwcfiiould attempt i;o be relee- 



OF MELANCHOLIE Tf 

Ucibythehcarbe, uwoaldycddvsbut tbinne 
fare. This iuyce of the earth is altered into acj; 
ocher nature in the herbc,that betbe intofleflicj 
andfleih ofthatkinde chaunged into thefub- 
ftaunce of our bodies which firft as it fprung vp 
from the carth,Io by it is it releued.So the tniflc 
draweth from the earth, bymeanes of the tree 
wherewith it ptofpereth,inducd now with other 
formej& made more familiar vnto it.by the pre¬ 
paration of the tree* And this I take to be the 
cauie why certaine thinges will not grow on the 
earth,, but in other natures; and why graffes 
yeld more pleafant fruit then camels, % reafbn 
the ftbekegiueth the crude and rawe noutifli- 
inentoftheeartha farther ripening, and euen 
as it were chewi ng i t viito the fion grafFed: fo to 
conclude this anfwere, the Paftiriaces yenome 
is miniftred by an excrement, which carieth ais 
aptnes to becouerted into poifonrand fuch poi- 
fon as that partis able therof to engender, nei¬ 
ther being fuch before in the Paftinaces nou- 
iiihment,nor in the fubftaunce of the fifli,nor as 
excrement, but after it is conuerted thereinto 
. by that barbed weapon,which the filh reuegeth 
within her taile. Whereby it is cuident, that not 
only of poifon,but of any humor bc{ide,the apc- 
nes of the mattcrCwhcreoffomcbegrofrcr, and 
feme pafle more aIterations)it is neceffary alfo 
there fliouldcconcurre in the place nourifhed, 
an altering vertue ; and as fuch afsimilation is 
neceflarie,in like manner an apt matter may not 
be to feeke,fit for fuch generation. Wherefore 
Melancholic is not made of eueric part of good 
iiourilhaa€Qt,btt( of fuch par^, as ha;h a token 



A TREATISE 

offellowflitp with the fame Melancholic : and! 
more or lelTe.as the bodie is more or lefle aptc, 
together with aptnefTe of the matter to make 
that conuerfion.Touching the Ofttidge which 
may feemc to turne yron into bloud and fb into 
flefh: wee are rather thus to efteemc, that al« 
though the Oil:ridgcnature doeth intend notj. 
rilhmenr by the yron, yet doth it no more non. 
rifli.then Rones doth chickins,& hennes which 
are diffolued in their mawCs Hov/ ihe(fayyou) 
& why doth it diffolue yroa f by a contrarie ver- 
tue which refpecteth all thinges alike j that arc 
Teceiuedrwhereby theftomach becomraeth the 
moft Catholicke parte in all the bodie, carying 
a more indifferent affeftion to what fbeuer is 
receiued then anie part befide,which in the firft 
concoftio regardeth not fo much it felf as other 
partes/or whofe fake it is ordayned, as it were, 
the Cooke not refpefting this or that forte of 
oouri/hmentpr foode, but applying it felf alike 
generally to all that hath nota refiftance in na¬ 
ture and a counterpower of poyfon, which al-, 
waies altereth and is not altered.Elfe coulde it 
not fb eafilie embrace both hote and cold/ower 
and fwecte,fatandlcanc,moyfl:and drie.ofall 
bougetts ( as a certaine Poet faith ) in that ref- 
peft the ftrangeftiby this vertue the Oftridges 
hauing a very thick and flefhie mawe, whereby 
itisfurnifhed withftoreofa naturallhcate dif- 
fblueth by a kinde of putrefattion , the yron, 
which if it yeeld anie nourifhment, the ftomacl? 
findeth benefite thereof in the bloud.wherwith 
it isnounflied.ifnone.itpafrethall into excre¬ 
ment and fo is voyded as vnprofitable, except it 
may 



OV MELANCHOXIE, tf 
ffiay t>c tbought more likely inteafon., that thd 
Oftridgcsenioyc fome parte of nourilhmentj 
thereby pafsing it into bloudjOr at the leaft that 
theftomach rcceiueth akindeof comfort and 
contcntrnentjwhich commonly it is taken to do 
by the noarifliment it containcth,as the Cooks 
appetite may be fatisfied for a time by rmelling 
of the roft,which if it faire fo with the ftomach 
there is then rcafonfufficicnt of fuch digeftion 
which the fowle worketh not by theexcefleof 
hcat.but by a certaine temper apt for the worke, 
for no heatc of fire in longe time is able to doc 
thatwhichtheOftridge mawe doctb fpeedelic 
by acertaine corruption of that which it dige- 
fteth; Carying as it were a kinde o£Aquafortis ia 
the mawe,rather then anie heate ofEma , if wee 
take it that the fowle hath feme parte in the bo- 
dic.whofe turne the common ofBcer , thefio- 
mach ierueth, agreeing to the nature of fome 
fubftance contained in the yron,& that conuey- 
ed into the bloud, and from thence drawen to 
that part.'wherof it is affeftedror it hath an Alc- 
mentarie vertue common to diuerfe partes.Bce- 
it fo,yet therefore no confequence of reafbn can 
inferreythat nature refpccteth not anie aptneffc 
of matter: for in a manner ai things of the earth 
hath fome thinge Alimentarie and pafturable 
for all lilting creatures,which may euidcntly ap- 
peare by comparing of nature. The earth which 
we plow and till and labour with hard and wea- 
lie hand is altogether mynerall.wbich is the ge- 
ccralleft nourilhment of alhnowc if one nature 
among fo manye millions bee found in yronto 
fijske forth that ?erj;u€,no m^racll feiJg all ere" 
U atHres 



i8 A THE ATI SE. 

atareswKicli require rcliefe of foodc j by cer* 
taine degrees and former operations , pertakc 
of thefarac: then feeing the Mincralls feedc the 
Vegetalls, and the Vegetalls the Animallsrlct 
the experience of the Oftridgefatisfie vs in this 
which reafon mifliketh nor, that cuen a nutri- 
tiuc iuicc for fome fort of Animall may be foud 
inyron,3ndyet/o,that(notwithftanding) not 
all thinges are of like aptnes for fuch vie,neither 
in generallis blond, nor in particular, as the 
more fpeciall food belonging to ech parte deri- 
ued from the bloud. And thus my friend M.tp 
paffc the tedious time with you, you hauemy 
©pinion to this obiedion. As for the ftrangc na¬ 
ture of that kindc of people or familie called 
Marffand P/lli.wc may thus reafonably conic- 
fture,that either they had a nature of ftronget 
temper,then the ordinary forte,by which it was 
able to maifler that poyfon and all other,or elfc 
by the cuftoraeof vfuall feeding on the flelh of 
afpes and vipers,which they did vlc,they grewe 
into fuch familiatitie with the poylbn,as thefer- 
pentes themfelocs, which nature had with fuch 
poifon fo armed.and this rather then that infa-' 
mous refuge of proprietie of fubftance,which is 
afinuch to fay,as we know not. This cuftome 
was alfo the only caufe why the yong maid nou- 
rilhed with poifon faired with it as with other 
viftuall; for of purpofc ihe was nounihedfroOl 
her infancie therwith,that flie might byfreque* 
ting theKinges companie deftroy him with in- 
fcaion,which poyfon being btit an accidentary 
thing,by cuftome is vanquilhed of a naturall 5£ 
c^capiall; ver|U6.Ihatpoy{bQi$btt( accidental! 



OF MELANCHOLlE. 
ani not cJrentialI.it appcarcth by that in diners 
kindes,it is not in al of the lame foice,nor alike 
in all partes'pffuchnatures,aswee count vene- 
mous,as the wings of Cantharides and the bo¬ 
dies fo contend in nature , that the one helpetk 
where the other hartnethichc weapon of Pafti- 
mca and the Sfli, the Scorpion and his ftingc, 
the vipers birte and vipers flelh, the bafe and 
foundation of Triacle,the fhrewmonfe and hei: 
iclfe differed and applyed to the wound: which 
ail argue the poyfon not to bee equallie mixe d, 
and therefore notxflentialhagaine in fome pla¬ 
ces Scorpions arc sfot hurtefull,in fome fpiders, 
in other fome afpidcs,the which if their nature 
did confift of poyfon, then could they not be o- 
therwifejneither receiue alteration by foile,nei- 
theristhisinanimallsonely,butaIfo in vege- 
talls,as in Perfeajin Heralockes, in Napellusu'a 
the Vgh tree which in other fome places carrie 
with them certaine and aifured peril!,and in o- 
ther fome arc vtterly harmclefle. Thiscuftome 
being begunne in infancie,madc a greater faiixi- 
liatitie betwixt the damfcls nature, & the poy¬ 
fon , which as in ciuill manners it is mote flexi- 
blcjin youth the in procefle of yearcs.fo the dif- 
pofition of nature fareth in like fort, which moft 
hartcly embraceth that wherewith it is firft ac- 
quaintcdjbutyou wil fay,how could it haue firft 
accefie and be entertained of nature, to whom© 
it is fo repugnant. Thus we arc to iudge in the 
cafe, that they which firft praftifed this ftraungc 
kinde of nourifhing,by litleand litlc aflaied na- 
ture,and now and then gaue harte thereunto by 
«oua;erpoyfoa preforuatiues, and (q at the lafte 
B.ii. being 



A TREATISE 


being encouraged, and farther ftrengthned, it f 
was able CO ouercome that part of the poyfon, ’' I 
which of it fclfe was deadhe and turne the other - ■ 

into familiar noarilhment. which by reafon of 
acquaintace through cuftome, her nature brake 
whichifithad bene alpoifon,then asithadbin 
wholly an vnfit matter,of nourifhmcnt/o could . 
ihee not without daunget hauc borne it one -| 
howre:whercby itis manifeftjthatwith natures, | 
arte an apt matter of producing of nourilhment . 1 
-muft needes meste for her maintenance. That 
whichCantharidesofFereth ofdoubc,maycbe ^ 
fufficiently refol ued by that which hath bin faid i 

of Paftinaca The quailes feeding of Hemlock,5{: S 

the other of neefing powder, moue more diffi- i 
cult-queftions/eingthey make the poyfonhole-' | 

fome nourilhment to thenafelues&ycelde their | 
. bodies.daintiedilhestoour tabIes,notwithftan- | 
ding their poyfoned foode; Whereby it Ihould | 
{esme,thatpoilbn it felf,wherc.a nature fitteth^l -A 
therewith may be matter of holcfpme nourilh- | 
ment. For the latisfyingof which obieftion.we ; | 
are to confidcr euerieparte of that we take for 3 
nourilhment,is not alimentall but parte excre- J 
ment,and that the greateft parte, as it appea- 
redi by lb many alterations , and purginges, i 
which the foode fuffereth, before it be receiued 4 
of the partes of the bodic for proper nourilh- ; 
ment:fo thereforeahefe birds are not fuftained 
with that which is poyfonfull in their foode,but 
alter it firft, and then pafle itinto fuperfluous 
excrement, their fnbftaunce being vtterly voyde 
of the lame,& fo becommeth vnto vs holelome: 
yerie'weli :,but how is their nature able to van-'. 

qiiilh 


OF MELANCHOLIE. ti 
quifttLatwbich ispoyfbnifeing itisnot rccei- 
ued of vs without prefcnt daungerrDiueife rea- 
Ibns therof may be allcadged,firft,it is not poi- 
fon vnto them, as weefeefome kindes of Aco¬ 
nites,to kill dogges,fome Leopardcs, and feme 
woIues,and notojffenfiucto other creaturesuhe, 
thatitmaybebyexesfsiueheateof the mawes 
offuch birdesjthe cold poyfon of Hemlocke re- 
ceiuethlufFicient alteration to keepeof the per- 
rill ofpoyfon. Whereto may alfo be ad4cd, the 
reafon of Galen, that becaufe thevaines & paf- 
fagesofthofe birdes areftraighte, the poyfon 
before it aflailcth thehart in the waye receiueth 
fufficient alteration, cfpecially Hemlock being 
fo cold poyfon,and therefore flow of paflage in 
refpeft ofit felfc, andfliuttihg vp,and ftraighte- 
ning of poorer, by whil^h it pafleth: fo jto con¬ 
clude this problcroe, we fee the fentence ftan- 
deth yet fure,that nourifhments are the matter 
of al humors,and by confequcnce of Melanclio- 
lie, and although natures wonderfull arte ap- 
pcareth in making f as it may feeme in appa- 
rancc)onecontrarieto another,yet doth it not 
fo in deede , but alwayes deflreth conu^nient 
matter to praftife her naturall arte vpon : and 
thus much to the obicftions,nov/to the quefli- 
ons themfclues. 

CHAP. V. 

Touchingthe queflioKS fropouniedinthe 
end of the fennd Chapter, 

'Y’ H V S much hath benefaid to the obiedfios, 
now let ys declare atlarge to your fuller fa- 
B.iii. tisfying 



tz A TR.EAtISE 

tisfyjngwhatliadge moft agreable to thetrutb 
in the queftionsrandfirft, whether fome bodies 
<!o not turne good nouriflimcnt,a nd of the pu- 
Tcft fort into greater quantitic of melancholic, 
then otherfome ? which queftion if wee confider 
partedit may more clcarely be decided , thatis, 
firft whether the fame Dourilhment bee not tur¬ 
ned into mote or lefle plcntie of melancholic in 
other bodies? then,whether by anie qualitie-of 
temper,good and pure nonrifiiment may yeeldc 
an humour roelancholicke fTo jhefe queftions 
firft I anlwereaffirmatiuely, yet not impairing 
of the former truth fet downc. For all kinde of 
nouriflimentas it in part altereth the bodies, fo 
is it againe of them more altered then it aTte- 
reth,whereby rnelancholicke petfons of the felfc 
iamenounftiraentframe vmo themfelues that 
which tothemfeluesis agreeable : elfecouldc 
there be no nourilhment without this altcringc 
vertue. Why then (fay you)it rifeth not of the 
nourifhment, which was not rnelancholicke,but 
of the nature nouriflied.Not fo,for no nourifti- 
ment is fo pure,that altogether it is void of me- 
iancholicke matter, for then couldeit not bee 
tiouriftimeonbut notwitKftanding it bath grea¬ 
ter plentie of good nourilhment then of groffe 
and melandiolicke,the fimilitude of nature re- 
fufeth the oDe,and embraceth the o thcr; where¬ 
upon riftth this difference in riorifftment, the 
victual being al one. The fecond part of the for¬ 
mer queftion.receaueth the fame anfwere with 
the firftjbecaufe no nourifhment is fo pure but 
iepartaketh httle or much, with fome part of 
ipelanchoIie.For I do not take it, that the parte 
maketh 



OF MELANCHOLIE 2j 
maketli the nourifttnent coclaDchoIicke, which 
caricthno dilpofition thereuntG;but lufieth af¬ 
ter that in the inaffe of viftualles, wherewith it 
hath greater familiaritic,which to a rnelancho- 
licke bodie is of an imporcr dirpoiition,refiiliDg 
that would ferue more fitlic for a better tempe¬ 
red complexionjcuen as we fee oft by experiece 
that the good complexion may bee rcplenifhed 
with melancholicke bloud: which appearcth by 
opening a vaine,and yet the parties bodie nou- 
tilhed, ( as the beautie of colour doth declare) 
with that which is pure> which melancholicke 
bloud rofe of euill choyce of dyet, rather then 
through faulte of complexion: now that part of 
nourilhmcnt, that is pure cannot be altered in 
fubftaunce into another, whereto it carrieth no 
proportion . by mixture it may bee defiled, and 
become impure,but neither can it be altered in¬ 
to that, where with it hath no comraunitie,more 
thengrofle,melancholicke, and eattbyenou- 
tifhment can by anie art of nature become aery, 
moderate and pure ;I meane the felfe fame part 
of nourifhmentrfot fo might ail things indeede 
rife of euerie thinge,which would turne the ex¬ 
cellent varietie of naturalL thingcE into vnitie. 
As for Anaxagoras imagination of breedingc 
thinges by reparation one!y,this kind of diueife 
matter, which we require in nonrifhment oucr- 
throweth itjneither are we to thinke generation 
of nourifhment to be no other but as arte wor- 
keth vppon her fubiefte, for there is no na¬ 
ture produced,diftinft in fubftance and cfTence, 
but an accidental! qualitie oncly produced by 
atf.And jhus left I be ouer tedious in this point, 
yots 



i4 A TREATISE 

you haue my anfwere to the quefi:ions & obie- 
^tions before made concerning the nature of 
nourifhing and preparation of humors,and hi- 
.thcrto that hath bene faid,re{pefteth onely me¬ 
lancholic , as it is an humour in the bodie aptc 
fornourifliment of certaine partes, more difpo- . 
fed to that , thcti to anic other portion of the 
bloud befides, nowe touching the caafeofin^ 
ersafe and cxcelTe of this humoar. 

CHAP. VI. 

of thecanfes of the increafe dndex~ 
eejfe ef meUncholick^humottr. 

J T was declared that the quantitic of melan¬ 
choly fhould be leaftin the iuft teperof bloud 
of all the other parts,fauing choler, which na- 
tura^l proportion and tare when it exceedeth, 
then is the bodie turned into a difpofirion rac- 
landiolicke by humour;al though the coplexion 
foratimehoIdecntirSjWhichlongcan not en¬ 
dure more then the nature of that damfcl which 
was nourifhed with poyfon, kept her ingenera¬ 
ted complexion : But nature acquainting it felfe 
by moments and degrees with fuch kinde of hu¬ 
mour, and hauing no choyce of better, isfaine 
' at length to embrace that , which otBerwife 
more gladly it would reieft.The caufes ,bf cx- 
cede of this humour are diuerfe.and all (except 
it be receaued from the parent ) fpring from- 
, fault of diet: and although chiefcly meates and 
> drinkes do ye'eld matter to this humour, yet be-. 
fldes the complexion inclining to fuch temper, 
'0jis mattcLis increafcd by persmbauo of mind,, 



OF MELANCHOLIfi. zf 

"by temper ofaire,andkin<lof habitation,, and 
that humour which otherwifc would yeeld a nu-. 
tritiueiuyce: of the beft fort,by this occafion is 
turned into thefe dregges of melancholic. Here 
fitftlwill declare vntoyou, fuch oourifhments 
as are apt to engender thofe humours, that in 
this prefent ftatc you nowe ftaod in , oppreffcd 
therewith, knowing which they are that mini- 
fter matter tothisgrofle iuyce, you for your 
more fpeedie rccoueiy may auoide the,and with 
choice of better, alter that which is amifle into 
a more cherefull qualitie. Nowe ail nourilh- 
roents that ofFende vs, cither doe it by their 
owne nature , or by fome accidentarie caufe be¬ 
falling vnto them, and likewife whacfocuer be- 
commeth vnto vs melancholicke. But that you 
may more ealily vnderftande from whence all 
Ibrt? of nourilhments are taken,I will fet downs 
vnto you in a fhort viewe,the kinds of them all, 
and in euerie kind note vnto you, that which of 
the owne nature is melancholic. You knows 
all nourijhmentes are cither meate or drinke r 
mcates are taken cither from vegetables or ani- 
malls; the vegetables either minifter vnto vs 
nouriihment themfelues , or their fruit only, & 
they are either of trees or herbs ,r of trees, the 
tend-r buds are eaten, which becaufc wee do li- 
llevfe tofeedof,Ipa&ou{ r farther mention. 
Ofherbes we either feede of the root , or fuck 
partes as rife thetefrom,and thofe rootes are ei¬ 
ther roundorlong, ofnehherfortdol remem¬ 
ber anie greatly to beecfchewed as melancho- 
licke,except rapesootcs & nauewes. Such partes 
as rife from the root,are vied while they be ten- 



A TREATISE 

d«r and young , or elfe /prung vp at the full, of 
thefc kinds ,co!eworts,beete,and cabages onely 
ingender a melancholickeiuycc. The ftuices of 
vegetables are either of trees or herbes* of fruits 
of trees,quincesrawe,tnedlets, feruiccs, dates, 
oiiues, chefnuts and acornesareallmelancho- 
lickfc: friiites of herbcs, arc either graine or of 
other fort, and thofe are either come or pulfe: 
of corne,fodden whcateisofa grofle and me- 
lancholicke nourilhment, and bread efpecially 
of the fine flower vnleauened: of this fort, arc 
bag puddings,or panpuddings made with floor, 
frittars, pancakes, fuch as wee call Banberie 
cakes .and thofe great ones confeftcd with but- 
ter, eggeSj&c.vfed at weddings,and howfocoer 
it be prepared,rye and bread made thereof, car- 
rieth with it plentie of melancholie. The pulfes 
are wholly to be efehewed, of fuch as are dilpo- 
led to melancholie: except white peafe: fruites 
ofherbes of other forte then graine are pureft 
from melanchohcke excefle. And thus of vege¬ 
tables you vnderftand, v/hich youhauein this 
inelancholicke relpeft to be auoyded.The food 
which wee take from the animals, is either from 
them felues , or from certayne wholcfomc 
cxcrementes. Such as ycelde themfelncs are ei¬ 
ther of the earth, or of the water : thole of 
the earth haue great diuerfltie of nourifhment 
in their feuerall partes,which are either fperma- 
ticall,and thofe of white colour; or fanguine.of 
colour redde and bloudie. The fparmaticall 
partes may well be difeharged of melancholicke 
iuycc.as rather enclining to fleume.Ofthe fan- 
guine parses, fomc are ^hebrawnie parts, which 



OFMELANCHOLIE. 17 
edtnpafle the bones , and are ordained for vo- 
luntariemotion, called mufclcs; or elfc are of 
the inward partcs,and arc of them felues defti- 
tute of motion. The mufcles which are fubieft 
to moft motion,as df the leggs.yeeld more me¬ 
lancholic, then partes which haue more reft. 
Of the inwardes , the milt is altogether roelan- 
cholicke,5c(bthckidneyes,the liuer, the heart, 
and with them , all the camels. Bloud is melan- 
eholicke,and whatfocuer dilh thereof is made. 
J^owc all nourilhments taken from the earth, 
ace either beafts , or foule. Ofbeafts, thefe arc 
of melancholick perfensto be efchewedrporke, 
except it be young.and a litle corned with ialt, 
beefcjrammc mutton, goate,bores flefh, & vc- 
nefon : neither is mutton of any forte greatly 
commended of Galen.Offoule,feme bee water 
foule,and feme land. The water foule arc not of 
mclancholicke perfons to be rafted , except the 
goofcwings. The land foule which are tnelan- 
cholickc are the{e:feldf3res,thtuft}es, fparowes, 
martins, turtles, ringdoucs,quailcs , piouers. 
peacockes&c.and thefe haue you to efeheweof 
nourilhments of the earth. Thoie of the water 
arefiftitS: either of the fait ware rand feator of 
the frefh watcr.Such as are of the fea, are cither 
of the monfters of the fea, orfuch as more pro¬ 
perly are to be called fifh.The mofters are ceals 
purpofeSjS: fuch likerwhich all breed vnwhole- 
fome & mclancholicke nourilhment.The fiib of 
the fea are either fhell fifh , or deftitote of fuch 
defence.Offhell fifh, fomc arc of harder Ihels. 
as oyftcrs.periwincks.mufcles.cockles . & fuch 
like: of which rank?, the oyfter carrkth with it 
,kaft 



i8 A TREATISE 

Icaft fufpition ofmdanchoUc.T}ie fofterfliel or 
cruftie are Cray fifli.the crabjthc lobfier, the pfi- 
ger,&fucli oftheriuersliketo tlicfe &c. which 
all neede not to bee excepted vnto y ou in or¬ 
der ofyour diet. Such fea fifti as carle no armor 
of fhelsjare either thofe.rhat haunt the rocksror 
other parts ofthefea.The.rocke fillies are moftc, 
apt of all maner lea fifli/or melancholickc per- 
fons : as the gilthead.the whiting, the fea perch 
, &c. Such as haunt other places,are either kee¬ 
pers of the depth, orapprochers nigh thcfaiid & 
iliore. Of fuch as keepe the depth ^^either they 
haunt the pooles : or other places of the depth. 
Of the pools fillies,! remember not any greatly 
to be auoyded in choyce of your dyetOf fuch as 
frequent other places of the depth, thefe are 
melancholickc: the dragon of the'fea, in forme 
like an ey1e:the cockoe.ling,aDy lalt filh, thorn-- 
bacfcc,and skate Of fach as approch the- Ihore,, 
i knew none greatly to be auoyded. Frelh wa¬ 
ter filh.and of the riuer : the lampray, and the 
tench, haue moft plentie of melancolie . And 
thefe are nouulhments taken from the partes of 
the animals-: now their workes arc either excre- 
ments,& fuperSuitie of theirhumors , or other 
kinds of workes,Ofthe firft fort.are milke from; 
the beaft,and egges from the foule: which the 
fpa wne of filh in a maner rcfc9ibleth:mi!ke,3nd 
what foeuer is made thereof, is to be efehewed 
of melancholic perfons : as cheefc, curdes,&c. 
thelpaunesj-asrocs ofhcaribges,3reto beeef- 
chued of you, as nourilhment of melancholic: ■ 
elfe I take none of that Ibrt.greatly to be feared/ 
iu that refped. Of other works of animals then , 
cxcrer 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 29 

excrements,y/e feed only of honi'e, wliicli tath 
no melancholy difpofitio atal.Ofdrinks,efchuc 
red wine.and what fbeucr liquor , bcare, alcj or 
cider,is not cleerc.and well nned;as alio if it bee 
tart.andfowcr. Hitherto haue you heardc of 
nouriHimcntes, which of their owne nature arc 
to be eichued, nowe of thofe that by fome ac¬ 
cident , and not of them iejues are melancho- 
licke, asifthey beetooolde, and verie leaner 
or be.Iong kept: or ouermuchfalted •• wkereby 
they become the dryer and harder, you are to 
refufethem. Likewife in the drefling of'thc 
nourilhment.it be oucrmuch baked, or rofted, 
it is to bee cfchued. To thefe belong fait fifii, 
beefe, and bacon, and rcdde hearringes, hard 
cheeie,and old. Ofdrinkes,newc wine, bcare, 
or ale: and on the contrarie part,ouer ftalc, and 
fower,aretobe efchuedrand of fauces, thofe 
that be"iharpe,as veriuyce, aliger, or b'eareger, 
vinegcr,are chicfely to be aupided of melancho, 
licke perfons.Thus do you vnderftand howe to 
vfe your choice in mcates,and diinkesrand what 
tofliuonc,as breeders of this thicke,blacke , and 
melancholicke humour. Befides thcfe, theaire 
thicke and groffe is fit to entertainethis humor: 
fo that fenny,marrilh, mifty, and lowe habita- 
tions,arc hurtful! topetfons dilpofedto melan- 
cholierlifcewife if it be dim and dark. Whcrfore 
the houfes.and habitations of that fort, are moft 
vnmeete for fuch perfons. Thefe hitherto arc 
all fuch outward things melancholickiwhatfoe- 
ucreIfebreedcthmeI£cholie,is adiforderly be- 
hauiour of our own parts,in fuch aifions as bc- 
longe to the gouernmcnt of our health. This 
beha 


JO A TREATISE 

bchatiiour, is either in aftions of motion :oria 
order and manner of reft.Our motion, is either 
of mind, or body, Of actions of the mind,oner 
vehement flrudies, and fadde pafsions, do alter 
good noanllimcntes into a rnelancholicke qua- 
liticjby wafting the pure ipirites,and the fubtil- 
left parte of the bloud.-and thereby leaning the 
reft grofte and thicke. In like forte do exercifes 
either wholly intermitted;,or turned into an ex- 
ceCTiue labour and wearying of thebodie: the 
one caufing the bloud to be thicke through fet- 
ling: and the other,by fpending the bodieouet* 
much,5:dryingitercefliuely. Such alfoasgiue 
themfelues to inordinate fleepe,thereby fuithet 
the encreafe of melancholicke humours. And 
thele are all the caufes, whereby the matter of 
that humour is fupplyed,and the bloud being of 
it felfc good, is altered into that iuice , whereof 
youcomplaine of abundance. tJowiftothefc, 
you adde a nature of it felfe difpoled thereto, & 
a fplene not able,either for feeblenes.or obftru- 
flion,to purge the bloud of fuperfluitie of that 
iuyee . then haue you all that may be faid of the 
caufes of this humour.keeping within the coixt- 
pafleofnouriihmeat, j 


CHAP. VIL 
OftneUmhoUcke exeremtnsr, 

’J’ H E melancholicke excrement is bredde of 
melancholic iuyee,drawen of thcmilte oiie 
oftheliuer, by a braunchof the porte vaync, 
wherewith being nouriflicd, it rciefteth the reft 


as mcerc excrementalljand voydetb parte, ii 


jhs 



OF MELANGHOLIE 31 
tlie moutli of die ftomach.to prouoke appetite, 
and hunger>and paffeth the other parte in fbnie 
perfons.by hemerodc vaynes into the fiege; le 
aboundeth there when it is hindered of fuch 
paffage as nature requircth.orelfe by fceblencs 
of the parte,it is not able,either to fuck the me¬ 
lancholic from the bIoud,or difeiarge it felf in¬ 
to thofe paflagcsjwhich nature hathahereto or- 
daincd.rhis member, ofthcwhole bodieisthe 
groiTeftsand cuilfauouredft so behold, blacke 
of colour,and euill fauorie of tafterand giucth a. 
manifeft experience of natures defire, alwayes 
tocouetthatjwhereto itismoft like.’andfo fa- 
icth the fplenc better with thofe muddy dreggs 
then itwould with purer and finer bloud, which 
if it fhould be offered to other paTts,thcy would 
abftaine:cxcept great want forced them to take 
anic part thercofo Thefe are tbecaufesof na- 
turali melancholic,both iuyee, and excrement ; 
It reraaincth next,to fliewe, what that humoui 
is, which rifeth of this,, oranyeclfe, corrupted^ 
called alio by the nanae of meiancholie. 

CHAP. vin. 

Whut harm Choler island f he caufis 
thereof, 

'J'H ATkinde of melanchoHe,which is called 
Mra bait , nfeth by excefsiue heate of fuch 
panes,whereit is engendredi or receaued wher- 
by the humour is fo aduft, as it becommeth of 
fuch an exa]cerating,and fretting quahtie, that 
it wafteth thofe partes, where it lightethtthis- 
moft commonly xyfcih of ihe meUnebolie cx- 
cremcm 



5 i ft TREATISE 

crcment before faid,an(l diuerfe times of the 0 i 
ther thicke parte of bloud,3s alfo of Cboler ,& 

: fait fleame: which take fuch heate» partly by di- 
ftemper ofthe bodie,and partly by putrefaftion 
that thcrebyiahuraor rifeth,breeding moft ter¬ 
rible accidentes to the minde , and ^ainefull to 
the bodie:which the mclaticholicke and grofic 
blond,doth rhorc forcibly procurerin that, that 
anieheate,thc grofler the fubftaunce isjwhcrein 
itisreceaued, the more fiercely it confumeth: 
wh^cupon the feacolc geueth more vehement 
hcate , then eharcole: and the cole then the 
flame: and a cauterie of hote yron , then a bur¬ 
ning firebrand. Otherwife choler being by na¬ 
ture of the hoteft tenaper, carieth with it, more 
quality of heat then the otherrbut by reafon the 
fubftance of the humor is more fubtle and rare, 
the lefle it appeatethtand as theheate of a flame 
in comparifon of the other, more fpeedily paf- 
feth.Hitherto haue I declared vnto you all the 
kinds of melancholy,and caufe's of ech of themt^ 
hereafter you fhall vnderftand, how they worke 
rhefc fearcfull effeftes in the mind,whereby the^ 
hart is made beanie, the fpirites dulled , the 
cheerfull countenance altered into mourning, 
and life itfelfc , which the nature of all thinges 
moft defireth,made tedious vnto perfons thu* 
afflided. 


CHAP. IX. 

Bowe meUncholit xoorkgth feare/idi 
fofsions imhemind. 


Befsrs 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 51 
13 Efore.I declare vnto you how this humour 
affli^teth the minde: firft it ihall be necciTar 
riefor you to vndcrftand, what the familiaritic 
is betwixt mind and bodie: how it afFedeth i^ 
andhowit isaflFe<£ledofitagaine. You knowc, 
God firft created all things fubieft to the coiufe 
oftimcs,andcorruptionof the earth, after that 
hce had diftinguilhed the confuled mafle of 
thinges, into the he3ucns,& thefourc elements. 
This earth he had endued with a fecunditye of 
infinite feeds ofall things; which hce cemaun- 
ded it,as a mother , to bring forth, and as it is 
moft agreable to their naturcjto entertaine with 
nouriflimet that which it had borne,& brought 
forth; whereby when he had all the furniture of 
this inferiour worldc,of thefecreatures,forac he 
fixed there ftill,aDd maintaineth the feedes , till 
the end ofal thinges,and that determinate time, 
which he hath ordained , for the emptying of 
thofe feedes of creatures, which he firft indued 
the earth-withall.Other fome, that is to fay,the 
animalsjhee drewc wholly from the earth at the 
beginning,and planted fecdc in them onely,and 
food from other creaturestas beafts,and man io 
refpeft of his bodie:thc differetice only thistthat 
likely it is,raaas body was made of purer mould 
as a moft precious tabernacle and temple,wher- 
in the image of god Ihould afterward be inlhri- 
ned: and being formed as it were by Gods pro¬ 
per hand.receaucd a greater dignitic of beautie, 
and proportion,and ftature ereft: thereby to be 
put in mind whither to direfl the religious fer- 
uicc of his Crearor . This tabernacle thus 
wrought,as the grofle parte yccldcd a mafic for 
C the 



54 A TREATISE. 

the proportioa to be framed of;(b had it by the 
RlefTing of God , before infpired , a fpirituall 
thing of greater excellencie, then the redde 
earth,which offered it felf to the eye only. This 
is that vvhich Philofophcrs call the fpirit: which 
Ipirit.fo prepareth.that worke to the feccauinge 
of the foule.tl'.at v/ith more agrcment.the foule, 
and body,haue growne into acquaintance : and 
is ordained of Gqd.as it were a true loue knot, 
to couple heatien ,& earth together .• yea a more 
diume nature,then the heauens.with a bafe clod 
of earth: which' btherwife woulde neuer hanc 
growen into focieti'c,: and hath fuch indifferent 
affedion vntoboth,tbat it is to both equally af- 
fe£led,and communicateth the body and cor- 
. poraU things with the mindc.and fpirituall, and 
■ intelligible thingsjafter a fort with the bodyifa- 
uing fometimes by vehemency of cithers aftio, 
they fteme to be diftraded , and the minde to 
negled the body : and the body and bodily a- 
dions common with other creatures , to refufe 
a s it were for a moment that commuDitie?whet- 
' by it comraeth to paffe,, that in yehement con-* 
templations.men iee not , that which is before 
'their eiesirieither heare,though noyfe beat the 
aire and found :nor feele, which at other time 
' ( fuch bent of the minde being remitted ) they 
&ould perccaue the fence of , with pleafure or 
paine.This (piri? isthechiefe inftruroent, and 
immediate, wherby the fotile beftoweth the ex- 
c reifes of her faciiltie in her body, that paffeth 
to and fro in a moment,nothing in fwiftnes and 
nimbienes being comparable thercuncorwhich 
when it is depraiied by anic occafion, cither t>- 



<5F ;M-EL ANC H.O tlB. 

from.thc;bo.die: ot byotlier meancs, tbea 
becometli it an mftr.iKtient vnhanfome for per¬ 
formance of rucha^i6s,3srcc|tijre. the vfc ther- 
ofrandfo the minde feemeth to be blame wor¬ 
thy : whcreinit is blameleflc: and faultie of cer- 
taiflc aftions irnputed thereuiito ; wherein the 
body and this Ipirite are rather to bee charged, 
thinges corpprall and earthly {the one, in fiib- 
ftaoce,andtheothcrinrel})eftof that mixture, 
wherewith the Lorde tempered the whole mafle 
in the beginning. And that you may hauc grea¬ 
ter aflutance in reafonofthis corporall inclina¬ 
tion of fpiritjcoofiderhow itis noiiri/hed: anJ 
with more euidece it fliall fo appeare vnto you. 
It is maintained by nouriihments,whcthcr they 
be of the vegctable.or animall k5nd:which crea¬ 
tures,afFoord not only their corporal] fubfiance, 
but a fpirituaU matter alfo ; Wliere wi th cuerye 
nourillimeot,moreor]efieis induednhis fpirite 
of theirs,is{^asfimiliiude of nature,more nighl y 
approcheth) altered more (pcedely, or with lar¬ 
ger trauell of nature. Of all things ofordinary: 
vfcrthc moft fpeedy alteration is of wine ; which 
in a moment repaired! oor fpirites, and reuiueth 
vs againcjbeing fpent with heauinefleror any o- 
therwife whatfocuer, ournaturall fpirites being 
diminifiiech which bread,and fle(h,doth in Ion - 
get timc.’being of flower paflage, and their fpi¬ 
rites not fo'fub tile,- oratleaft fettred as it were 
in a more groft bodyiand without this fpiritc, 
no creature could giue vs {uftentaxion. For it is 
a.knat,tQjDynebDth oiirfoHliSjiSc bodies tpge- 
therifi nothing of other natufe ean haue cor- 
poraiiconmnftion with vsjcxeepttheir fpirites 

C.ii. with 



AtRE^TISS 

with ours fitft growc into acquaintance: which 
is more fpeedily done a great deale,then the in- 
creafc of the firrac fubftaunce.-which you may c* 
uidently perceauc in that we arc ready to fainte, 
for want of food.- after a litie taken'into the fto- 
mach ofrefrefhing,before anie concoftion can 
be halfe reformed, the ftrength returneth, and 
the fpirite reuiucth, and fufficient contentment 
fecmeth to be geuen to nature '.which notwith* 
ftanding, tiot fully fo fatisfied, prcparcth farther 
the aliment of firmefubftauncc,& fpirits of pu-* 
rer fort,for the continuall fuppty of thofc inge - 
Derate,for fence and motion,life & nouriflimet. 
No we although thefe fpi rites rife from earthlie 
creatures, yet are they more excellent, then 
earth,or the earthy parts of thofc natures, from 
which they arc drawne, and rife from that di- 
uine influence of life,and arc not of them felues 
carthic : neither yet comparable in purenes and' 
excellencie,vnto that breath of life, wherewith 
the Lord made Adam a lining foulc.v/hich pro-- 
ceeded not from any creature, thathee had be« 
fore made,as the life of beafls and trees,but im¬ 
mediately from him felfe, reprefenting in lomc^ 
part>the character of his image. So then thefe 
three we hauein our nature to confider diftinft,' 
for the clearer vnderftanding of that I am to in- 
treate of: the bodie ofearth,the fpiritfrom vef*’ 
tucof that fpirit,which did as it were hatch that ■ 
great egge of Chaos : & the foule inipired front 
God,a nature cternall and diuine , not fettered 
with the bodie, ascertaine Philoiophers haue'' 
taken it:buthandfafted therwitb ,Ky that gol¬ 
den claipe ofthc;£pirite: whereby^ one(till the. 

pte 


OF MFLANCHOLIE. 37 
prcdeftinate time be expired,and the bodie be¬ 
come vnmecte for fo pure a fpoufe,) 4 oyetbar, 
and taketh liking of the other.Nowc as it is not 
pofsibletopaflcfromoncextrcme to an other, 
but by a meanc,& no meane istherc in the na¬ 
ture of man, but fpirit:by, this only the body af- 
fecleth the mind: and the body and fpirits affe- 
fled,partly by difordcr.and partly through out¬ 
ward occaHons, minifter difeontentment asit 
were to the minde; and in the ende breake th at 
bande of fcllowlhip, wherewith they 5 yeie both 
linked togcthcr.This afFedling o£,the'tninde , I 
vnderftand not to bee any etnpairing of the na¬ 
ture thereof,or decay e of any facultie therein,ot 
fiiortning of immortalitie,or any fuch infirmity 
inflifted vpon the fbule from the body^for it is 
farre exempt from all fuch alteration:) but fuch 
a|d)fpofition,and fuch difcon^entn.ent, as afalfe 
ftringedlute.giueth tothe mufitian:or a rough 
and euill fafliioned pen, to the cunning writer: 
which only obfcureth,the Ihew of either art, & 

- nothing diminifheth of that facolty,which with 
better inftrnmcnts.would fully content the eye 
with a faire hand,& fatisfie the eare with mofte 
pleafantand delcftable harmonie, Otherwife 
the foule receiueth noburt from the bodie , it 
being fpirituall,and voyde of all pafsionofeor- 
porall thinges.and the other grolIe,carthie,and 
fer ynable to annoy a nature of fuch excellency,, 

CHAP X, 

Hov the bodie dffeSteth thefoule . 

JN this forf then are you to conccaue me,ton- 
Cdii. chiag 


38 -' ■ - A treatISK 

ching tliqle aftioDS , whi'ch tHe boiie feemetS 

- to offer violence to the fo'ale ,-that no altera- 

- tion of fafeff ance.or nature', can rife there from, > 
ror anie felcmifii of naturall facultic, or decays 
of fuchtiaahtfes^as are cffchtiall vnto the (bule: 

' «)thefwSe,'thightit iathe eri4 perilh,& deftroy , 
that;iThTHortall.nacurei'which cannoE by anye 
tneanjcs dccaye , butby the fame power which 
createditl Butthusonelydb (as I rhay fo call 

- -th'crir)p¥irsfoijs fbreethe ioule.eue through the . 
'«aidldT{|j6_fe4ihftrurne^^^ of the bodie, they de- : 
praue the nibil excellent andmoftperfeft affi-* 
onsj whefeto the foule is bent in the whole or- ■ 
<!erofra^s-ri3tare,and by corruption of the 
SpiritesiwHich fhould be the facred barid of vni- | 

■ 'tie;eaiif^ch'tbiflike,as thefoule, without that' , 

‘ ' hie'diatroydrsdaineth the bodies longer ffilow- 

,<Iiip,andbetafccth it felfe, to that contemplati- 
t)h,whcretd-lt-isby nature inclined, and giueth 

■ jbuef the gfoffc and mechanicall aftions of the 
bodieiwhertaby order of creation.it was allot¬ 
ted in the eartoiy tabernacle, But you wil fay vO- 
to nie,ex-perience feemeth to declare a further 
pafsion pf the foule fromitbe bodierhen I men- , 

' tjdhrforwe fee what iffuesjbodelie thingesj and ; 
ihe bodie it felfe driue our niindes vntpras fome 

Icinde dPtftuficketo {jeaaineffe.otherfometo 

cheafefulnes.other fome tocornpafsion , other 
ibme to rage'; other to modeftiej and other to 
avantonnesdikcwifeofvifible thinges, certayne 
fturrevsto indigeation and difdaine.and other 
to coDtentednes,and good liking. In like manet 
certaine natures take inward,moue vs to mirth: ^ 
as wine,and other |b heaUines,fome to-rage,fa-^ 


OF MELANCHOLIE 
tie andfrenfie.and otHer fotneto dulnes Sc bea-i: 
uines of fpirite : as certayne poyfons fn both 
kinds do manifeft thefe pafsions veto vs, befides 
£ach as rife of ourh uniours bt^de in our owne 
bodies,which may be reafons, to one not welf 
aduifed.fo to miftake thefe efiefles of corporall 
thingcs.as though thefoule teceiued farther im- 
prcfeion,not onely in afFe£f ion, but aHb in vn^ 
derftanding , then I hauevnto you mentioned: 
for fatisfying of you, in which doubtes.you are 
diligently to confider,what I ilial declare, con¬ 
cerning the fcuerall aftions of bodie, foule and 
fpirite,and howc>eachone of tliefe performeth 
^eir aftiostwhich muftbe kept dilfinft,for bet* 
tervnderftanding of that I Aral hereafter in this 
difeo urfe lay open vnto you I And firft cpneeir 
ning the aftibus of the fouletyou remebef howe 
it was firft made by infpiratipn from God him- 
fejfe.a creature immormll,proceeding from the 
eternaljWith whom thefe isno mbrtaljtie., Th® 
endeofthis creation was, that being vnired to 
the bodily fubftance, rayfed and furnifiicd with 
corporall faculties from -the earth,commo vvi th 
other liuing creatures, there might rife a crea¬ 
ture of middle nature betwixt Angels,& beafts, 
to glorifiehis riafnejThis the foule dothjbyfwo 
kindes ofaflions ; the one kind,is fuch asitex- 
ercifeth, feperated from the bpdie , which are 
contemplations of God,in fuch meafurc as he is 
by naturall inftinff opened vnto it,with retieret 
recognifaunce of fuch blefsings, as by creation 
it is indacd with. Next vnto God,whatfoeuer 
within compaffe ofher conceite is immortal, 
without tedioufneSjOr prauell.and with fpiritual' 
f:.iii|. ioye 



4a A TREATISE 

idy incoparable.Thefe adios flie is bufied with 
in this life,fo long as /he inhabitcth her earthly 
tabernadcj neither in fuch perfe^ion, nor yet lo 
freely.as /he doth fcpcrated, and the knot loo- 
fed betwixt her and the body,being withdrawn, 
by aftioos exercifed with corporall inftrument,* ' 
of bafer fort. Thefc are the othef kmde which 
the foulc.by the creators law is fubieft vnto,for 
the continuaunce of the creatureand mainte¬ 
nance of the whole nature,with dueties thereto 
beIonging:animalI,vitall,naturall,and whatfoe- 
uermixed,requircthioyntlyall three: as this 
corporall prayfing of God for his goodnes, and 
prayingvnto hitnfornccefsities, relceuing our 
brothers want,and defending him from wrong, 
with etierie ones feaerall vocation, wherein his 
peculiar charge lyethjwhcther it be in peace, or 
in warre.at home,or abroad,with out country¬ 
men,or with ftraungerSjin our o wnc families,or 
with our neighbours, whether it be fuperiority 
of commandemet,or duty of obedience, which 
differ in degrec.as they be nigher, or farther of. 
the aftions peculiar to the foule, or communi¬ 
cate more Qt IcfTc with thcm.If you fay vnto me 
how commeth it to pa/Tcjthat the foule being of 
fb fiqgle, and diuine a nature , as the creation 
roanifeftly /heweth,intermedlcth with fo gro/Te 
a£l;ions,as arc common, not onely with bruite 
beafts,as fen/e, tnotion and appetite, but eucn 
alfo with natures of fatre inferiour condition;^ 
as pl3ntes,and mineralls , whereby it feemeth', 
that either the foule is not of fuch exccllency.as 
in tratk it is, or clfe that our nature confifteth 
9f^ree foufes, 50 which fcucxaU faculties, and ■ 
aftions 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 41 
aAions arealotted. By deeper confidcration of 
the nature of the foule.this obieft-io may be ca* 
fily aunfwered.Thc foule.as the fubftaunce-thcr* 
oHsmoft pure,and perfeft.and j&r ofremoued 
from corruptiojfo it is endued with faculties of 
- like qualitie.purejimmortall and anfwerable to 
fodiuine a fubie£t,& carieth wkh it, an inftinfl: 
fcicnce,gotten neither by precept, nor praftife, 
but naturally therewith furnifhed,whereby it is 
able,with one vniuerfall,and firaple facultic, to 
performe fo many varieties of actions,as the in* 
ftrumentjby which it performeth thcnijCarricth 
an apt inclination thereto; as the brayne being 
an inftrument of conceite , it therewith eoncei- 
uethuhe eye to fee,it fecthrthe care to heare , it 
hcarethrand fo the inftrument of ftnelling, and 
tafte,waoting nothing of their naturall difpofi- 
tion.the foule fmelleth with,& difeerneth taftes; 
which otherwife difpofed, it can not ftiewe that 
ingcncrateinftinft.by outward (enfes,the facul¬ 
ty yet notwithftanding remayning entire and 
vntouchedtifay thefacultie,and not faculties. 
For if we plant fo manye faculties in the foule, 
as there be outward and inward aftions perfor¬ 
med by vs,it certaincly could not be fimple.but 
seeds muft receiuc varietie of compofition-yW 
anfwere fo many faculties, as wee feeinfenfiblc 
creatures,which as they worke diuerfly, fo haqe 
they diuerfe varieties offtibftance, of which fort 
among many other is Aloc,Rhubarb,& diuetfc 
fimplesjthat with one parte of their fubftaunce, 
loo^/e, and open, and with the other ftoppe and 
ftaic,the fame alfo is fenfible in colevvortes and 
Cabages,andin ^hefubftaunceoflhell fifties: 

whpfe 



A TREATISE 

whole Jecoftion loofeth thg bodie, and proctj» 
reth {bhbleties; their fubftarice being of a quite 
contrary opcration:which rifcth of a diuerfete- 
peredfubftancc in one nature , compounded of 
fuch varicticjwhereof as the foule together vni- - 
forme,is voyde/o can it not pollcfle any variety 
olfacultic. This if it feeme ftraunge vnco you, 
confidering the diuerfc forts of adions, and the 
vnlikelines.ofperformanceoffo many, and fo- 
diuerfe,! will as I may in a rriatter.fo difficult, Sc 
aboue the reach of any fimilitude of vifiblccre- 
aturefexceptit fcIfc)oaly by comparifon, make 
tbeaffertion more plainc.Comparc the skill of 
paintingAvith the Ample and vniforme facultye 
of the foule: the facultie is Ample and one, and 
yet could Apelles therwith vfe both the groffc,& 
the fmall penfill.he coulddraw a line euident to 
the eye a far of^and fo fubtlc. that fcarfe might 
it be difcerned nigh at hand: he could applye 
himfelfc by his vniforme faculty, to al the parts 
of V^enus beautie: otherwife ihuft it of necefsity 
follow.thatfomanyinftrum'ents of painting as 
he vffdyfo many kinds of lines as he could draw, 
and fo many partes as he could counterfeit, the 
eye,the nofcjthe piouth,&c.fo many fundry fa¬ 
culties of painting had he, whichtoa man not 
deftitute of the facultieof reafon, muff needes 
leeme moft abford. The fame appeareth in the 
art of mufick, which being attained vnto, but 
oncfacultie.yetisitthe famc.inall the kindes 
of moodcsSt variety oftune.and time.-although 
the pradife be diuerfe.Euen fo the foule hath a 
fccultie one,fingle,and effentiall, notwithftan- 
diDgfo many and fundrypattes are performed. 



OF MELANCHOLiE. 41 

In the organicall bodies,as we dayly put in pra- 
ihferneithcr is it hereof to be gathered ,rhat the 
foule affbordeth no mo aaions,the there be in- 
ftrumentsifof both her proper aftions, require 
none, and the other common with the bodie, 
by diuerfe vfing and applying of the fame in- 
ftniment,are manifold & fundry, and the more 
-fundry,the more general! the inftrument is, and 
plyablc.to diuerfe vfesteuen £o , as the foule, in 
organicall a£i:ions,vfcth one and the felfefame 
inftrumentto chaungcable offices, likewife be¬ 
ing feperated froin the bodie, although the fa- 
culcie be one,it alfo esercifeth of her felfe,with¬ 
out inftrumentjfrom one faculty,diuets dueties. 
And thus haue you my opinio touching theafti- 
©ns of thefoule,eithcrconfidered,{epeiate , or 
conioyned with the body:& being ioyned iher- 
untOjfuch as it exercifeth of it felfe; or by thofe 
organicall mcanes as the body affordeth: it re- 
«iaineth,nextto entreate of the fpiri te, and oF 
the body,with their feuerall afiions.Of fuch or- 
ganes,as the foule vfeth for inftrumentall aiSti- 
onsjfome are of fubftance,& nature moft quick, 
rare,and fubtile.'other fome grofle,flow, & ear¬ 
thy .more or leffe.Thc fubtile inftrument.is the 
fpirite: which isthemoftvniuerfallinftrument 
of the foule.and cmbraceth atfu!,fo farre as bo¬ 
dily vfes require,al tlie vniuerfall faculty,where¬ 
with the foule is indued, andditectethit, and 
guideth it.vnto more particularinftruments.for 
more fpeciall and priuate vfes , as to the eye, to 
fee with, to the eare to heare, to the nofe to 
fmell.to the bowels.ftomack.and liner, to nou- 
eilh,?o|hehea^t,to mainfaine life: and to other 
‘ partes 



44 A TREATISE 

partcs,to tlie end of propagation: tKis is al! per¬ 
formed by the felfc fame,one,and Angle fpiritc. 
If you demaund whereof this fpirite is made, I 
take it to be an effednall,& pregnant fubftanee, 
bred in all things,at what time the fpirit of the 
Lord did as it were hatch,and breede out all li¬ 
ning thinges, out of the Chaos mentioned in 
Genefis, which Chaos, as it was matter of cor- 
porall, and palpable fubftaunce to all things: 
fo did it alfo minifter this liucly fpirit vnto the, 
diuerfe and feuerall, according to the diuerfitie 
of thofe feedes, which God indued it withall: to 
fome more pure, to otherfome more grofle, ac¬ 
cording to the exccllcncic of the creature, and 
dignitie of the vfcs,wherto it is to be emploied: 
from this power of God, fprange the (pirjte of 
man,as I take it.rayfed from the earth, together 
with the bodic, whereby it receiued fuch furni¬ 
ture,& preparation,as it becommeth a lodging, 
for fo n o ble a geft, except it maye feeme more 
likely.to beinfu{ed,andinfpired,into the bodic 
with that breath of life, which was the foulc of 
inan,at what time godhadfirft made his corps, 
of the mould of the earth, which I for certayne 
reafons here following am mooued to make 
doubt of Firft,although It be an excellent crea- 
ture.and farre exceedeth the groffe fubftahee of 
our bodie,yct is it bafer, then to bee attributed 
to fo diuine a bcginning.as fro god immediate-! 
ly.efpccially confidering it hath not only begin¬ 
ning,but periflieth alfo: to which condition,no 
thing that proccedeth from Godin fuch fpeciall 
manner, as the foule did, canbefubieft vnto. 
Againe, we fee {his fpiri{ maintained, and nou- 
rilhed 



OF MELANCHOLIE. 4f 

riffled by the vfe of earthly creatures, and is ci¬ 
ther plcntifull, or fcanteth, as it hath want, ot 
abundance of fuch corporall nourifliment.Now 
todrawe theoriginall pfspring of the fpirite of 
man from God,were in a manner to draw from 
him the ^iritc of al other things,wherwith that 
of man is relicued: which cannot be accomptcd 
to flowe from that breathing of God, both fee¬ 
ing the Scripture pronounceth it, as peculiar to 
thcfouleofmamandothcrwife, fliould they be 
not inferiour in that refpeft,to the foules of 
men, which by nature, are fct ynder his fectc,' 
and in al refpeftes are farre inferiour vnto him: 
that I mentio not, too nigh approching the ma- 
ieftieofGod: which without impairc thereof, 
admittethnotfonighjtheaccefleof the nature 
of inferiour crcatures,honoringmankind ther- 
with only of all his vifible workes.Thus then, as 
I take it.both the fpirite had his firft beginning, 
and is of fuch nature as I haue declared, and fer- 
nethfor thefe vfes,! know commonly there are 
accompte'd three fpirites;animall,vitall, andna- . 
turall : but thefe are indeed, rather diftinctions 
ofdiuerfe offices ofonc fpiritc,thcn'diuerfity of 
naturc.For as wel might they make as many as 
there be feucrall parts and offices in the bodyc, 
which were both faire,& fuperfluous. Next en- 
fueth the nature of the bodie, and his feucrall 
inftruments, with their vfes, which my purpofc 
is here fo far to touch, as it concerneth thevn- 
derftanding of that enfueth ofmy difeourfedea- 
uing the large handling thereof to that moft ex- 
excellcnt hyrnne of Galen. Touchingthc vfc of 
she parts:the bodie being of fubftance grofle;& 
earthy. 



A TREATISE,^ 

earthy, refctnbleththe matter whereof it was 
made: and isdiftinfi: into diuerfe members,and 
^iiierieparts.for fcuerall vfes required , pattcHc 
of nature,and partely of thehumainefocictieof 
life .'whereupon the braine is the chiefc inftru- 
ment of feofe.and motion,which it dryueth by 
the fpiritc before mentioned,into all the partes 
of the bodic,as alfo of thoughtes , and cogita> 
tions.perfourmed by common fenfe, and fan- 
tafie: and ftoring vpas itwerc , that whichit 
hath conceaued in the cheft of memorie: all 
which the braine it felfe with farther communi¬ 
cation eXercifethalone.The hart is the feate of 
life, and ofaffeftions, and perturbations , of 
louejor hate,hke,or diflifce, of fuch thinges as 
fall within cpmpafle of fenfe, either outward.ot 
inward, in effect, oi imagination onely.The li¬ 
ner the infirrument ofriouri fhment, & groweth: 
& is ferued of the ftomach by appetite of meats 
and drinkesjand of other parts, with luft of pro- 
pagation:5t as the hart,by arteries conueigheth 
life to a}i partes ofthebodie : fo theliuer, by 
vaines diftnbutcth her faculties to euerie mem¬ 
ber, therby the body eoioying nourifhment, & 
jncrcafc,ferued with naturall appetite, whereby 
ech part fatjsfieth it feife with that which there- 
to is rrioft agreable. Andthefcactions are bodi¬ 
ly performed of the foule , byempidying that 
excellent,and catholick inftrumcntpf fpirit, to 
the mechanical] workes of the groffe , andeai- 
thypartesofourbodies. Thus then the whole 
naturenf rnan, being compounded of two ex- 
tremities.rhefbuie, and the bodie; and of the 
.meanep.ffp.irites,; the foule teceiucthno other 
annoy- 



OF MELANCHOLIE 47 
annoyanceby thebodie , tbenthe craftes man 
by his inftrumentrwich no impeach,or impayre 
ofconning'.but an hinJcrance of cxercifing the 
excellent partes ofhis skill: cither vfhen the in’ 
ftrument is altogetker vnapt.and ferueth for no 
vfe : or in part only fit,whereby actions,and ef¬ 
fects are wrought,much inferiour to the faculty 
of the workenand as the jnftrument is of more 
parnctriarvfe^ fo is the foule the lefie impea- 
chcdrandasmoregeneralljfo yet ntore hin^e- 
red:both from varietie,and perfection of action; 
as the hart , more then the liuer { andthchuer, 
more then the braine: the ftomach more then 
the reft of the entrayles: and all publicke parts, 
more then priuate.* of which f®rt the fpirit being 
diiordered,either in temper,or leflened in qiia- 
titie.orentermixedwithftraungevapours, and 
fpirits.moft ofalUworkcth annoyance,' and dif- 
graceth the worke, and croffeth the foules ab- 
foluteintention:asfljallmore particularly ap- 
pearein the proceffe of my difeourfe : which 
that it may yceld vnto you full aunfwerc of fuch 
doubts,3s may arife vntoyou, and make que- 
ftion of the truth of this point: I will my felEe let 
downe fuch objections , as may encounter ths 
credit thereof,andaunfwcre them, Ihooe j to 
yourfatisfying. 


CHAP. Xl. 

OhieSfknsagatnfi zhefortifeY femence, touching the 
mann^ hew the fade is a^cefed of the hedie r with 
^^fwere'thcretq. ' ' ’ • 

The 



4 * A TREATISE 

H E obie£b'ons which feeme to enforce vp6 
the body farther power ouerthe foule, then 
to withftand the organicall aftions.arcfuch ,as 
are taken from the difpofitio of ourbodjes.both 
in health,and in ficknes. In health, we Ice howe 
the mind altcrcth in apparance, not oncly in 
a£lion,but alfo in facultierbothinthatfomefa- 
culties fpring vp, which before were not : and 
thole through ocoafions of chaunge of the body 
either more perfetfc, then otherwilc they haoe 
bene,or would be.This appeareth in age, and in 
diuerfe order ofdiet,and cuftomeof fenfuall & 
fenfible things. Firft touching age and yeares: 
wee fee in chiidehoodc, howe childifh the mind 
beareth it felfe.in facultie incomparable to that 
which afterward i tlheweth: as the vnderftan- 
ding dulhthe wit of blunter conceit; memorye 
flipperietand iudgement fearfe appeareth . Jhc 
body growing vp, and attaining at length the 
height of his incrcafe , al thefe giftes, more and 
more grow vp therewith: and (eucn as the bo- 
die)gei a maturitie, and ftrength, which is the 
perfe£lion in their kinde. Againe the bodi c paf- 
iing the point of his vigor and virilitie of age, 
turneth all the wits and fage counfelsjinto more 
then childilh doting: by which alterations and 
chaunges.in apparance the mind both fnffereth 
detriments and againe rcceiueth greater ability 
of facultic.Neithcr is this only brought to pafl'e 
through procelTe of yearsrbut alfo it may feeme 
that certaine faculties, which before were not. 
at a feafon of age, put fo rrh,and aduaunce them 
fclues, which before gaue no countenaunce of 
fhewe: and except we fhall make nature keepe 
idle 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 4i9 
idleIiolyday,in them were not at alhas the fa" 
culty ofpropagatioojofall naturall fortes , onc 
of the chiefeft: which if we lay it flept, as it were 
in the minde, or waited a day: it flioulde feemc 
very ridiculous,that nature fhould be furniflied 
fo many yeares with a facultie, which it ihouldc 
put in praftife fo long after: efpedally confde- 
ring how particular faculties attend onely vpon 
£ngleand particular vies , and haue no other 
cmploying.lfit were not before , then eyther 
Ihould the mind be imperfect at the firft, wan¬ 
ting fome part of the furniture, or elfe fhould it 
foeme to rile of the temper of the bodie: cither 
of which,attributc more vnto the bodie, then of 
right thereto belongethrand calleth in tjueftion 
the immortalitieofthe foulc; except you will 
faye, it is a facultie, whereof the foule hath no 
part,bcing common with brute beaftes: which 
earrieth withit thelc abfurdities.Firft, this fa¬ 
culty muft needs haue her feate, either in foule 
or bodie:ifit be not in foule,then in bodierif in 
bodie,then Ihould the inftrument poflelle the 
faculty,which is as one would attribute the' fa- 
cultie of the harmony to the harp, and the wri¬ 
ting t o the pen,and not to the feriuener: eftee- 
ming the skilfull harps,and skilfull pens, which 
arc dead inftrumets.and haue no beginning of 
motio in thefelucs.Now middle fubieft is there 
none,whereto this faculty Ihoulde fall , except 
we will vainly,and againft reafpnand philofo- 
phy admit mo foules then one in our bodies. A-^ 
gaine,to place anie facultie otherwife then of 
difpofition,and aptnes,in the bodyc , without 
|hcfoule,werc to difturb the vniformegouern- 
P SSent 



5 d AtREAtlSE 

ment,anJ that CEConomicall order,wlicreby our 
nature is ruled,in placing mo commanders then 
one. So we fee, ha wage , and couife of tymes 
afFeft the body,not only by alteration of facul¬ 
ty ,as it fliould feeme,but alfojby breeding new. 
Nowe the order of life, region, and dier, feeme 
to prelfe the matter further: and as it were, to 
turne the minde about, with eucry blaft of cor- 
porall chaunge. We may obfcrue the nature of 
mariners, occupied in the fea furges.who haue 
their maners not rnuche vnlike framed, tempe- 
ftuous and ftormye: likewife the Villager, who 
buficth him felfe about his plow,and cattell on- 
ly,hathhis wits of no higher conceit rtmtehers 
acquainted with flaughter, are accopted thereby 
to be ofa morccruell difpofition: and therforc 
amongft vs are difeharged from iuries of life & 
death: thefe experiences roaintainc the quarrel, 
againft the vnmoueable, and vnchaungcable fa- 
cultye of the (bule, whereof I haue before made 
mention. How region,and aire make demon- 
ftration of the fame,the comparifon of the gen- 
tle,aDd conftaunt ayre of Aiia,with the fharpe & 
vnftable of Europe.doth declare vnto vs:wheie- 
by the Afians are mid!^ and gentle, vnfitte for 
warre, andgiuen to fubieftion: the Europians, 
naturallye, rough, hardie, ftearne,tightmat- 
tiall impes,and harder to be fubdued, and raun- 
ged voder obedience: and of the fame region, 
fuch people as inhabite places barren, open,and 
dryc,3nd (ubicCfc to mutabilitye of weather, are 
more fierce,bolder,fliarpe,3na obftinatein opi- 
nion,then people of contrary habitation . Nei- 
iber l»th diet lefle part in this cafe of afFc^f ing 



QV MELANCHOLIE. ft 
iht fouie , then the reft: for we fee , howe the 
cheirefull fruit oft he vine tnaketh ^e hart me- 
rie.andgiueth (with moderation vfed) an edge 
cf wit.and quicknefleto thefpirites: and thofe 
tiourilhmetitcs that are moyft, groffe > and not 
firmely compacted, aggrauateth the vnderftan- 
dinge. ind maketh the conceit bIunt,aod dife- 
blcth iliuch the faculties of the minde: which a 
thinner, dryer, and more fubtile foode doth en* 
tertain.To thefe obieftions may be added,what 
alteration of minde,diuerfitie of complexion,^ 
exceffe of the fbure humours , choller, fleume, 
bloud.and melancholic do procure,not only to 
the aftcftions, as fanguine cherefulnefle, me~ 
lancholick fadnefle,fleume heauinefle.and cho - 
ler anger: but to the wits, and fuch faculties as 
apprOch nighcr to the foueraigne partes of out 
nature, the minde it felfe: as choier procureth 
talhncffc,and vnaduifediies, with mobilitye and 
tnftablenefle of purpcfe * melancholy cohttati-' 
ly.pertinacie, with aduifed deliberatio*. fanguine 
fimplicitic: and fleume flatte fooliftiiicne: and 
thefe are, fo farre as my memory feructh me, all 
thatis Wonted to beobiefted Fromthe ftateof 
Our bodyes,being in health, againfte the perpe- 
tuall,& iramOueable tranquillity of out minds, 
and immortall, vnchaungeable, and incorruptia 
blefaculdesthereof: which in the next Chap¬ 
ter,! will fetisfie with full aunfwere : now a fewe 
Wordes touching the perturbations, and altera¬ 
tions through flcknefle: and fo will I ende this 
Chapter, and in‘the next proceede to feuerall 
aunfwercs. I my felfe haue obferued in diuetfe 
timc^ not onely perturbation of minde to arife 
D.i). hf 



ya ATREATISE 

by ccrtainc direafes, whereby it fancicth, and 
feafonethdiforderlyrbutfomcfaculricscucn a- 
mended by the fame ( neither faculties of bafe 
aftiori)as for the eye.to fee clearer after an in* 
fiammation : and conuuliions to bee helped by 
aguestand in feuers, the hearing more quicke 
then before:and the fwclling mote fubtile: and 
in phrenticke perfons.the ftrength doubled vp6 
thcmrbutalfoeuen apprehenfion more perfea, 
and memorie amended,and deliuerance of talc 
more free:and eloquent without all compari- 
fontwhich are adtions of the greateft organicall 
pradifes of the mind : in inch forte that I hauc 
kno wne children languifliing of the fplene.ob- 
ftru£led,and altered in temper, talke with gra- 
uitic and wilcdome, furpafsing thofe tender 
yeares,and their judgement carrying a marue- 
lous imitation of the wifedome of the ancient, 
hauing after a forte, attained that by difeafe* 
which other hauc by courfc of yeares; wherup* 
on,I take it.the prouetbe arifeth: that they bee 
of fliort life, who arc of wit fb pregnant.bccaufe 
their bodies doc rcceanc by nature fo fpeedyc a 
ripenes, as thereby age is haftened, through 
acertainc temper of their bodies, eitherdn Ac 
whoIe,ot in fome animall part: which ripenefle , 
as in other creatures, it cafily yecldeih to rot- 
tennefTejfo in our nature,that fpcedy matmitie 
baftethto declination, and foonerdecayeth. If 
yon will delcend into the conhderation of the 
cffeftesofpoifbns in our natures,as of henbane, 
coriandcrjhcmlocke,night fhade,and fuch like,, 
they will giue greater cuidencevnto that which 
thefc obic^ions iropott:by which the mind fee- 
metk 



OF MELANCHOLIE. S3 
metli greatly to be be alteredjand quite put be- 
fide the rcafonablc vfe of her ingenerate facul¬ 
ties during the force of the poyfons : which be¬ 
ing maiftred, or at leaft rebated, by conucnicnc 
remedies , it recouereth thofe gifts, whereof it 
was in danger to fufFer wracke before .'and if it 
be true which Plato afFirmeth, that common 
wcalthes alter by chaunge of muficke,what lla- 
blenes lhali we account in the mind,which is in 
this fort fubieft to euery blaft of chaunge s“ Thus 
for your full fatisfying, I haue called to tninde 
fuch obieftions as do chiefiy gioe chcckc vnto 
that which I haue propounded touching the paf- 
fions which the body chargeth the foule^ with: 
now lhali you vnderftand me fblution, and clea¬ 
ring of thefedoubtes. 

CHAP. XII. 

The attpeere to the former obie&ions and of the (tm~ 
flefacultie of the foule and one^ organkalL o/fft^ 
rite,andhedie» 

'J’ Hefe doubtes before mentioned, I will an- 
Iwere in fuch order as they were in the for¬ 
mer chapter obiefted-beginning with thofe al¬ 
terations , which the loulc feemeth to fuftaine 
from the bodie,'while itenioyeth health , and 
good ftate of all his partes: of which forte age & 
yearcsfirftinferreagainftvs . For the generall 
anlwcrc whereof.as alfo for the reft, wee are to 
hold two pointes, as ¥rifallible,before mentio- 
nedithe one,is the fimple facultieof the mindet 
and the other,the organicall vfe only of the bo- 
dic andIprritc;which two groundes,before I en- 
D.iii. ter 



^4 A TREATISE 

ter,into the particular difciphering of the ofeic.^ 
Elions, I will firft eftablilh by reafon.and the ap¬ 
ply them to the particular folutio of that which 
hath becne obiefled. Firft,thc fimplicitie of the 
nature of the foule, more fimple then the hea- 
nens,argucth vnitie of faculty j feeing all fimplc 
thinges by nature reieft mixture and compofi- 
tioD,andwhatfoeuer tcndethlo pluralitie. For, 
whatfoeuer is more,is diuerfe,diuerfityc,fimplc 
thinges embrace not, neither doth diuerfityeof 
nature admitte fo nigh copulation , as to fettle 
themfclucs in the felfe fame fimple, & vniforme 
fubieft i which if they refufe to do,what fhal we 
iudge then of will, and appetite repognaunt to 
reafon: and will fometime at variance with ani- 
mall appetite? how can thefe fo contrarye facul¬ 
ties concurre in one fingle nature? That, fimplc 
thinges receauejieither contrarietie, nor diner- 
fity.the confideration of the whol fort of diflsn- 
tanie.and difagreeing things,wil make the mat¬ 
ter manifelf. All of that kinde are either fuche 
as we call 4iuerfe,or oppofite; diuerfe,whofe dif- 
^greement is moft gentle, haue notwithfiading 
fuch ftrife, that they meete notin the felfe fame 
fubieftatany tymeras beauty,and wifedome,ri¬ 
ches , and honeftye: which haue their diuerfe 
roomes in the fame generall nature, and do no! 
one farther encounter the other . The other, 
haue one fingle fubieiijif they be of accidentaiy 
natures, or qualities: and there one expelleth 
the otherienduringe no focietye: as vettue.vicej 
liberality,couetoufnefle,and prodigaliity.black, 
bIew,yellow,andgrecne.light,darknes,&C.AP^ 
ihefe are at perpetuall warre,and admit no troice 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 

^y,no not for a minute,& fo, becaufe they will 
oecdcs polTeffe the fame place,expel each other, 
and arc in Logick £earmed,Oppofites. Now the 
whatfocuer the foule fimplc,indiuiduall,& with- 
jOuC mixture or compofition giueth entertaine- 
ment of difagreeing natures , muft of neceffityc 
fall into one of thele :that is, to the oppofite or 
diuerfe. Ihc oj^ofitc require,their owne times, 
and will not aecorde in the fame fubie£f at once, 
except you will accompt relatiues of a milder 
difpofitioa,& more fociable then their fellowes 
which notwithftandinge by the diuerfe refpefit, 
are as farre difioyned as the reft . Now then,if 
we hoide that the minde hath diuerfe faculties, 
then of neceflitye muftc there bee in the fame 
mind diuerfitie of fubie£t:which if there be, then 
is the fiinplicity therof turned into multiplicity 
of fubftaunce,and compofition of nature; a dif- 
-pofition contrarye both to the manner of the 
beginning of the foule void of mixture, & that 
immorcall perpetuitye, wherewith it is indued. 
Peraduenture it may feeme ftrange, and repug- 
naunt to the nature of thinges diuerfe, to difle- 
tier them offubie<a:,feeing foftnes and whitnes, 
white and heat,andiuch likc,bceing diuerfe eii- 
ter into the fame fubie^: as rn fnoe.the one and 
the other in molten leade,or hote yron j which 
doubt, becaufe it ferueth for^roofe of this vni- 
ty of facultye.I will laye open, and make playne 
vnto you.Ofall things fubieft to corruption,the 
elements are moft firaple, which beeing diuerfly 
mixed,yeeld the varietye, we fee of all cbmpoud 
thinges voder heauen: thefe haue each of them, 
bat one quality:fire hote,ayer moift,earth diye, 

Diii).' and 



5<5 A treatise 

and water cold,if they Ihould haus twaine, then 
muft they needes eithercntercommunicate, or 
two qualities concutre with the firftc matter •• 
entcrcommunication is there none : for then 
Ihould they not be the elements of other thing* . 
feeing they fliould be elemets one of ech other: 
two qualities make fuperfluities in the mixed, 
which nature efehueth in all her worke: the fu- 
perfluitie would bejherein, that there ihould in 
the compound be found a dryncs of fire,and the 
like of earthra coldnes of the earth, and the like 
of waterrand fo in the heat of fire,& ayrc:which 
were more thenneede: feeing fuch qualities are 
fafficiently imparted to the compound by one. 
Now if the elementes which after a fort rcceiue 
coropofition ofagtofle matter and forme, doc 
admit no diucrfequalitie, muchlefle doth the 
mind of a more pure beginnmg,and fimple fub* 
ilance reieft the fime.But how then commeth 
it to paflc.that a cole is black and hard, & chalk 
harde and whitc,ia the fame parte throughout, 
if diuerfities fettle no nigher together ? yea very 
well notwithftanding.For compounded things, 
though they make one nature, yet arc they not 
by rcafon of compofitions in all parts alik^nci- 
ther are the elements fo cqnfufed in the mix¬ 
ture but m all partes they may be found diftinft 
by their qualities fimple or compound: which 
qualities although they be commonly attribu¬ 
ted to thewholc.yct properly and chiefely, be¬ 
long they to the elementes whereof the whole 
cofiftethrfo that in one nature, diuerfity of fub- 
is to be confidered.Example ihall make it 
plaincrtheheateofpepperrifethofthc fieric c- 

lement 


CF MELANCHOLIE. sf 
lementjthc drines and foliditye, offubftauncc 
which it hath of the earthie. In Rhubarb the 
purging vertue rifeth of the fubtle fubftanccjand 
the ftrengthningfacultieofthe groffe and car- 
thy.Chalk is white of the aiery moifture which 
it is endued withrand hath his hardnes of a ear¬ 
thie drines. The rofe her lednes of a certainc 
temper of Angle moiftneSjConcofted with heat: 
and her (haell.of an aiery moyftnes mixed with 
an earthy drines, attenuated with heate, and 
yertuc of the fiery element. So wee fee diuerfe 
thinges, which feeme to fall into one vniuerfall 
nature or fubieft, the matter being more nar¬ 
rowly vined.betake them to their owne fubieft, 
proper and peculiar vnto them felucs, and oncly 
by communicating their fubftauncc with the 
whole,endue it alfo with like qualities. But you 
will lay:if the Clementes hauebut 'onc qualitie 
Cwhichfirftwas affirmed to the maintenaunce 
of finglc facaltie)thcn is not the element of fire 
dry,nor of water moift,nor ofairewarme.True: 
neither are they of their owne natures fuch: but 
that which is in fire befide heate.is oriely an ab- 
fence of moiftncs.in the earth accompted cold, 
is anabfence oncly of heate: in the reft like wife, 
and not an ingeneratc qualitie : more then hea- 
uen may be faid to be moift,bccaufe it is not dry 
or hote.becaufe it is not cold: which indifferent¬ 
ly refufeth all fuch kindc of quality .Now an ab- 
fence of one quality , is not ftraightway an in¬ 
ferring of the otherrbut only in priuants, wherof 
the one is a meere abfence, and of that contra- 
ric onely, which naturally ftiould be prefent; as 
blindnes is not rightly faid of a ftone, though it 
fee 



A TREATISE 

fee not at any time. In the elemetary qualities,it 
is not fo; but they are all qualities importing a 
prefence : becaufe they adioyned po the firfte 
matter of thingcs , are the only formes ofele- 
mentesrnow ablencc forraeth nothing,and pti- 
tiantes are alwaies contrarie to forme and na» 
turetit appeareth then.that elements which are 
leflefimpie then the foules of men are endued 
but with one facultie,and that diuerfe things re¬ 
quire adiuerfe peculiar feat,which being taken 
vp in fuch natures as will abide mixture, feemc 
as though they were of the whole mixed, when 
as but after a fort only they are fo to bee accop- 
tcd.Thefe two pointes being fufBciently proued ^ 
cftabhfh euidently the fimple and vniforme fa¬ 
culties of thefoulc: For hereby it ismoftmani, 
feft that by reafon of the fimple nature thereof, 
jt cannot bcare any mixtare,or be fupport of di- 
tierie thiDgesmeither that diuerfe will fo neigh¬ 
bour it together, as to dwell in one indiuiduall 
fubieft-Then feing that they which ofal thedif- 
agreers Jeaft difagree, will not fo nighly be lin- 
kedtneithercanany dinerfitie offaciilticin the 
minde,in a nature fo fimple, and impartible be 
coupled together.whcre there is no difagremet 
of fubftance,nor diffent of mixture, but eucry 
parte like the whole,and ech like other. Againe 
thefe pluralities being eflentiall,can be but one: 
feing effence is not many , and nature alwaies 
farre vnlike the fvvord of Delphos, which ferued 
for diuerfe vfes.euer employeth oncto one, and 
not to many.-otherwife wat Ihould enforce her, 
which(fhe abounding with rufriciencie)refureth 
in all her actions. Morcouer being in eueiy part 


O F M E L A N C H O L lE. 

like itfelfe,andechpart likeothcr, no difsimi” 
liiuAe can arife by difti^ndlion of facultic . Acci¬ 
dental! if they be: thenis the minde in daunger 
of loofing alj faculty,which it cannot do feing ic 
i$ fubied; to no force, but of God hinifelfe that 
inadeit.Now wh;tt fogucr natural faculty in any 
thing fadethjit is by reafon the thing firft fadeth 
whidi enioycth that faculty.- elle wpuld they al- 
wayes continuetwherefore the minde being e- 
uerlafting.and exempt from chjaunge and cor- 
ruption,her facultie is alfo elTentiall^ and of like 
perpetuity: I neede not yecld,e reafon why con- 
trarie faculties, or fuch as we call defparates in 
logicke, can ha«e no rpome in a nature fo lim* 
pie as the foule is, both in refped .of the repug¬ 
nance within themfelues, and vnity of the fub- 
ied:feingfuchas are diu.crfeonly refufe that co¬ 
habitation and neighbputhood.Thus much Ihal 
faffice to pr o ue the limple facultie of the foule.; 
it followeth to prone the fpirit and body to bee 
wholly organicall: by prganicall 1 meane a dif- 
pofition & aptnes only,without any free worke 
or aftion.otherwife then at the minds corama- 
dcment:elfe fliould there be mo beginninges & 
caufesofadionthen one,in one nature: which 
popularity of adminiftratio,nature will none of, 
nor yet with any holygarcicall ormixt: but Cp - 
mandetb only by one louerainty:the reft being 
vaflalsarthebeckof the foueraigne comman- 
der.Thc kindes of inftruments are of two forts: 
the one deadinit felfe,anddeftitute of all moti- 
PD:as afaw before it be mo’ucd of the workman 
and a Ihip before it be ftirred with winde, and 
hoifed pf/^ile. the other fpr{c is liaely, and car- 


«9 A TREATISE 

rieth in itfelfcaptnes,& dtfpofitionof motion: 
as the hound to hunt with, and the hauke to 
fowle with,both caried with hope of pray ; the 
hand to moue at our pleafure, and to vfe any o- 
therkindofinftrumentortoolc. The fecond 
fort of thefe twaine.is alfo to be diftinguifiiedin 
twaine.whereof the one obtaincth power inn" 
felfc,and requireth dereftion onely.as the bcaft, 
and fowle aboue mentioned: and the other not 
only dcredion , but impulfion alfo from an in¬ 
ward vertue,aad forcible power: as the motion 
of the hand,and the varictie of the hand aftioni 
do moft euidentiy declare. Of theic three kinds 
of in ft rumen ts,I place the fpirif & bodye both 
to the mind,as they faw or axe in the workmans 
hand,or to the lute touched of the Mofitian(ac- 
eording to the fundry qualities & conditions of 
the inftrumentof thebodie)in the thirde fort, 
butfo,as thefpiritincomparifonof thebodye, 
farcth as the hand to the dead inftrumentes. Of 
the firft fort they arc not, becaufethey partake 
of liferof the fecond they may not be, becaufe 
of themfelues they haue no impulfion, as it 
appeareth euidentiy in animal] and voluntarie 
aflions, ( and although more obfeurely to be " 
{eene)infuchas becalled naturall.For the ipi- 
rit being either withdrawne from the outwarde 
parts by vehement pafsio ofgriefe,or ouer pro¬ 
digally feattered by ioy,or wafted by painc, the 
outward partes not only failc in their fenfe and 
motion,but eucn nqurifiimcnt & growth ther- 
by are hindered; and contrarily,though the fpi- 
rit be prefcot,cxccpt the part be alfo well difpo- 
fed,not only feeling is impaired,& fuch aflions 



OF MELANCHOLIE. €t 
as require (enfe and tnotion^but alfo concoftion 
andnouriftiment.Againe.the fpirit it felfwith¬ 
out impulfion ofmindelyeth idle in the bodie. 
This appeareth in animall actions more plainly* 
as the mind imploying vehemently the fpirit an 
other way,we neither fee that is fet before out 
eyes,nor heare.nor feclc that which otherwife 
with delight, or difplcafure, would vehemently 
afFcdl vs ln oaturall anions and parts, it is more 
obfcure:eith:r becaufe the fpirit cannot be alto* 
getherfo fcperatedby the order of nature,being 
rooted fo in the part, or becatife the verie pre- 
fence of the foule in an orgarijcal bodie,without 
further facultie or aU3on,carieth the life withal, 
and is not fubieft to arbittemcnt and wil:as the 
royal eftate of a Prince, moueth filence, reuc’> 
rencc, and cxpeftation , although there bee no 
charge, orcommaundementthcrofgiuen, nor 
fuch purpofe ofprefcncc: fo life lyeih rather in 
the eflcnee or fubftance of the fouIe,giuing it to 
a fit organed body, rather then by any fuch fa¬ 
cultie refident therein, except wccmaye tbinke 
that leffe portion of fpirite ferueth for life only, 
then forlife,lenfe and motion, & fo the partes, 
contented with the (mailer prouifion thcrof, are 
entertained with life,though fenfe and mouiog 
require more plcnty.But howfoeuer this be ob* 
feure in oaturall affions.the minde ttan^orting 
the (pints an other way by fodeine conccit.ftudy 
orpafsion.yetmoftccrtaine it is, if it holde on 
long,and relcafe not.the nburifhment will alfo 
faile,the increafe of the body diminifh, and the 
flower of bcautie fade.and finally death take his 
fatallhold; whickcommeth p paffejno^ onelyc 
by 



ATREATISE 

byeXpence of fpirit.but by leauing aeftitutc the 
parts,whereby declining to decay, they become 
at length vnmeete for the entertainement of fo 
noble an inhabitant as is the foule, offlrockc di- 
nine,of immortal! perpetuity, and exemptfroio 
all corruption. Then feeing neither body, nor 
fpirit ate admitted in the firft, or fccond forte of 
inftruments,they fall to the third kinde , which 
being liuely, or at the leaft apt for life, require 
dirc«ion , and alfo forcinc impulfion ; foreinc^ 
in refpeft of thcmfelues,defti,tute of facultie, o.* 
therwifethen difpofition;but inward and domc.- 
fticall \ in that it proceedeth from a naturall 
power, ( refident in thefe corporall members ) 
which we call the foule: no t working as ingens, 
by a force voyd of skil and cunning initfclfe,8: 
by a motion giuen by deuife of the Mechenift; 
butfarre otherwife indued with fcience, & pof- 
fcilcdofthemouertasif Archkas had bin him 
felfe within his flying doacs,& Vukanne Within , 
bis walking ftooles, and the mouing engine a» 
it were animated with the minde of the worker, 
therein excelling farre all induftrie ofart. For 
here the natural Apelles pamteth as well Within 
as without, and Phydias is no Icfle curious in 
polifliingthecstrailes, and partes withholdetf 
from the viewej then in garnifhing the outward 
app3rance,and flicw of bis frame 5 and which is 
yctmore,herethecraftesman entreth himfelfe 
into all the parts of the worke,and neuer would 
relinquifli the fame. Although we place the fpi* 
lit and body in the third kind of inftrumets, yet 
is there great oddes,betwix t thefo two. For the 
^iritanfwerethatfullall the organicallaftions 


OP MELANGHOLIE. .^5 
of the foule,& hath in it no diftHi<aien of mem- 
bcrS.-thebodieis ofmore particular vfes, com¬ 
pounded of fandry partes,/cch of them framed 
of peculiar duties,as the mind& fpirit emploieth 
ihem.The (piritis quicke,nimble, and of mar- 
uelous ccleritie of motion,the bodie. flow,dull, 
and giuen to reft of it felfe: the Ipirit the verie 
hand of the foule, the body & bodily members 
like flailes,fawes,or axes in the hand of him that 
vfeth them • For as we fee God hath geuen vs 
seafon for all particular faculties > and hand for 
all inftrumentSjOf pleafure , of neceflitie, of of. 
fencc,ofdefence,that thereby , although man 
be borne without couerihg,without teeth,with- 
outhoofe orhorne,onIy with tender nailes, and 
thofe neither in fafliion,nor temper fit for fights 
yet he clotheth him felfe,both againft the tem- 
peft warme.againft force of weapon with coate 
of fteele,and makethvnto him felfe weapons of 
warre,notuih,nohornc,nohoofe, nofnout of 
elephant in force comparable thereunto: fo the 
Ipirits of our bodies,and this hand of our fouls, 
Aough it be but one, yet handleth it all the in« 
ftruments of our bodie: and it being light,fub- 
tile,aod yeelding,yet forceth it the heauieft-and 
groffeft,& hardeft parts of our bodies, chewing 
with the teeth.and ftriking with the fift, & bea¬ 
ring downe with the thruft offtioulder,the refi- 
fiance of that which ftandeth firme , and contai¬ 
ning alone the force of all the members : feeth 
with the eye,heareth with the eares , vnderftan- 
deth organically with the braine, diftributeth 
life with the hart,andnouriftiment with the li- 
Mer^aud whaffoeuer o^er bodely aftion is pra- 
^fcd. 


^4 A TREATISE 

ftifcd.This hand is applyed to the grofle inftru- 
tticht.ahd the effed brought to paffcr yet not 
abrolutcly of it fclfjbut by itnpulfio of the mind 
which is placed the only agent>abfolute and fo- 
ueraigne not onely in refpeft of conamaundingj 
but alfo of faculty & execution.This place then 
bcareth thefpirits among the inftruments :and 
as the foule is one,and indued with one only fa- 
cultie , fo the fpirit is alfo one, and embraceth 
that one facultie,anddifttibuteth it among the 
corporal members,3S cuerie one according to 
his diuerfe temper or frame,or both ioyntly to* 
getheris meetethis way orthatway to be cm- 
ployed,yetfo that by degrees, and diuerfe dif- 
penfations,it is communicated from the prind- 
pall and chiefc partes with the reft. As fitft life 
and vitall fpirit,from the hart to the reft by arte* 
riesmourilhment 3 ndgrowth,from the liuer by 
vaines : fenfeand motion, from the braine by 
rcruesrnotcofufedly, and by eqnall portions 
adminiftredto al alike,but by fuch geometrical 
proportion as iuftice requireth,and is necefTarie 
for the office of euery part. Thus you fee what 
nature the fpirit is of,and to what vfe it ferueth 
in our nature,and of what fort of inftrument it 
is to be accompted.The corporall part and me- 
bers.becaufc their feruiccs be many are diftind: 
into d i uerfity of /hapes and tempers, to anfwcrc 
all turnes.whereof feme be more generall, and 
bcare as it were office o uer the reft, as the heart 
is moft generall, and extendeth it felfe to all the 
parts,with this prerogatiue aboue thi;liuer-that 
a part may liue for a timc,and not be nourifhed, 
nether yet ca any par{ be nourifhed without life. 



OT MELANCHOLIE* gf 
Thisrulcitcxercifcthby the miDiftciye of hi* 
arteries exteded in branches throughout the bo* 
dye.and fcattering the Ipirite of life throughout. 
Next the hart invfeand office towardes other 
members , the liuer obtaineth the fecond placet 
by whole vertue > through the operation of the 
{bule,and that fpirituallhand, nouriihment^and 
preparation of aliment is peifourmed in all the 
partcsjvpon whom attendeth the ftomach & the 
reft of the intralls vnder the midriffc. The thirde 
place is allotted to the braine,which by his fenfe 
and motion guideth, and direfteth the partes 
maintained with life and nouriihment: his fenfe 
is of two {brtcs.& fo his motion,both inward,8c 
outward.The inward fenfe,thinketh,imaginetb, 
and remem breth, and is praftifed with that pe* 
culiar temper and frame which the braine hath 

S :t, as alfo his interoall motion not mnehe 
e the panting of the hart.Thc outward fenfe 
and motion of finewes is deriued from it into al 
partes that require fenfe,or mouing. The other 
partes fubieft to thefe three principall and their 
minifters ferue their owne turnes onely,and are 
of priuate condition, except the ibule command 
a voluntarie or mixed aftion : astowalke, to 
go,&c.or to take breath, giuc paffage of ftoolc, 
or ?rine. 

CHAP. XIII. 

Hew the foule ly one (implefaculty perfometh 
fo many and ditters aSfiont. 

'Y’Hus haue you thefe partes, and organicall 
vfts diftinft; and if it fcemc yet difficult vo- 
£. t 9 



A TREATISS 

to you,to conceaue.how one fimple faculty can 
difchargc fuch multiplicity ofadions, way with 
fne alitle, by a coparifon of fimilitude,the truth 
of this point, & accordingly accept it. We fee it 
euident in automatical! inftruments.as clockes, 
watches, and larums,how one right and ftraight- 
motion, through the aptnes of the firft wheele, 
not only caufeth circular motion in the fame, 
bat in diuers others alforand not only fo.butdi- 
ftind in pace,and time of motion: fomc wheclci 
pafsing Iwifter then other feme,by diuers rafes: 
now to thefc deuifesjfome othcrinftrument ad¬ 
ded,as hammer and bell,not only another right 
motion fpringeth thereof, as the ftroke of the 
hammer,but found alfo oft repeated, & deliue- 
red at certaine times by equall paufes, and that 
either larum or hourcs according as the parts of 
the clockc are framed. To thefe if yet roorco- 
ucr a diredory had be addcd,this fimple, 

& right motion by weight or ftraincjlhall feme 
not only to be author of deliberate found, and 
to counterfet voice, but alfo to point with the 
finger as much as it hath declared by found.Be- 
fides thefe we fee yet a third motion with reci¬ 
procation in thc ballancc of the clock. So many 
adions diuerfe in kinde rife fro one fimple firft 
motion, by reafon of variety of ioynts in one 
engine. If to thefe you adde what wit ca deuife, 
you may find all the motion of- heauen with his 
planets counterfetted,ia a finall modil,with di- 
ftindion of time and feafon, as in the courfe of 
the heauenly bodies. And this appeareth in fuch 
fort as carie theirmotion within them felues.Iu 
water works I haue feenc a mill driuen wi th the 



OF melancholie; 6f 

winie, which hath both ferued for grift, aod a- 
uoiding of riuers of water out of drowned fens 
Sc marifties, which to an American ignorant of 
the deuife,would feme to be wrought by a liue- 
ly afts'o of euery part, and not by fuch a generall 
mouer as the wind is,which bloweih direct,and 
foloweth not by circular motion of the mill 
faile. No w if this be brought to palTc in artifi¬ 
cial! praftifes, & the variety of adlion infer not 
fo many faculties, but mecre difpofitions of the 
jnftrumcnts: let the fimilitude ferue to illuftrat 
thatvnto you,wherto thereafons before allead- 
ged, may with more force of proof induce you. 
If yet you be not fatisfied(for melancholick per- 
fons are for the moft part doubtful & leaft aflii- 
xed) and although yee acknov/ledge the truth 
hereof in organical aftios: yet in fuch as require 
no inftrBmentjiudge otherwife.that fcruple alfo 
by a fimilitude,! wil take away & make it plains 
vnto you, referring you for ftregth of reafon to 
that which hath beenraforefaid. Before,I Ihewed 
thevarietie of afilion, to fpring of ditierfitie of 
inftrument, now, where there is no inftrument, 
what diuerfitieffay you) can there be? and yet to 
giuc but one aciion to the foule.wcrc to depriue 
it of many goodly exercifcs, whereby it appre- 
hendeth the creator, thankfully acknowledgeth 
his goodnefle^ and direifteth itfelfe to his ho¬ 
nour, befidcs thofe fpirituall offices, which the 
foules departed out of this life,in louc pcrforme 
to each other, with that knowledge of etcrnall 
things? If you require reafon of proofe.the fim- 
plicitic of the foulc, and the nature of diucrfe 
things will make auafwererif of illuftration and 
E.ij, €om- 


gB A TREATISE 

comparifon of fimilitude: then conliderjliowe 
with one vicwe, a man beholdeth both top,and 
bottome of heighti and both codes of length at 
once,the fituation of the thing being conueniet 
thcrevnto: yet arc there neither diuerfe facul¬ 
ties, nordiuerfe inftrumentes: the Sunne both 
repeneth and withereth, and with an influence 
it bringeth forth ractalles, trees,herbcs,& what- 
fbeuer fpringeth from the earth, fomc thinges it 
fofteneth , and other fome it hardeneth: other 
Ibmc it maketh fweete, and other fome bittcrj 
an hammer driuethin,and driueth out,it loole- 
ncth and faftencth, it maketh Sc it marreth,not 
with diuerfity of faculty,kepingthe fame waight 
tempcr,andfaflnon it had before, but oncly di- 
uerflyc applycd, and vied vppon diuerfe matters: 
fo many vfes arife of oncinftramcnt-Morcoucr, 
if a man were dublc fronted ( as the Poets hauc 
fained lanus) & the inftruments difpofcd thcre- 
after,thc fame facaltye of fight woulde addrclTc 
it felfe to fee both before and behind at one in- 
ftaunt, which now it doth by turning. As thefe 
affions of fo fundry forts require no diuerfefa- 
cultye.but chaunge offubiefl, and altered ap¬ 
plication: fo the mind,in a6fion wonderful!,and 
next vnto the fupreamc maiefty of God, and by 
a peculier manet proceeding fronS him felfe, as 
the thinges are,fubieft ynto the apprchcnfion.St 
a6fion thereof: fo the fame facultic varieth not 
by naturc.but by vfe oncly, or diuerfity of thofe 
thinges whereto it applycth it felfe; as the fame 
faculty applycd to diflferring thihgcs,difcerneth, 
to thinges paft.reracmbrcth; tor thinges future, 
forefeeth: of prefenc thinges detennineth: and 


OFMELANCHOLIE. €9 
Ait which Ac eye doth by torning of the head, 
beholding betore.bchind, and on echefide,thae 
doth the mind freely at oace (not being hinde¬ 
red, notreftrained by corporal! inftrument)in 
iudging, remembring, forefeeing,according as 
the thinges prefent them feluesvnto theconfi- 
deration therof. For place mo then onc,& where 
will you ftay,and how will you number them'& 
why arc there not as well three fcore, as threei 
If you mcafure them by kindcs ofaftions, they 
are indefinite, and almoft infinite, and can not 
bcareanye certainetate in oar natures .'feeing 
fuch as arc voluntary, life vpon occafions, and 
nceclTityc vneertaine: and naturall are diuetfc 
in euerye feuerall part, and fo according to their 
number are multiplied,and of them fundrye ac¬ 
tions being performed,as to attrafl:,to concoft, 
to retaine,to erpell, to affimilate, agglutinate, 
&c.not generallye, but the peculiar and proper 
nourifhmcnt.the number woulde fill vp Erafto- 
fthenes fiue to count them all. Wherefore to c6- 
clude this argument, and to leaue you refolued 
in this pointjlet Ae facultye be one,and plurali- 
tic inapplicatio.vfe, & diuerfity of Aofc Ainges 
where about it was conuerfaunt: otherwife the 
mind Aalbc Aftrafkcd into parts,which is whol 
in euery parttand admit mixture, which is moll 
fimplc:and become fubieft of diuerfe qualities, 
whi A arc diftinft in naturc,and communicated 
by mixture of fubftances whereto they belong, 
& not confuled together in one, againft nature. 
Thus you hauc mine opinion touchinge Aefe 
Aree partes: of foule,of fpirite,and bodyc.with 
Aeir pecuficr ailions, and howe euerye one is 
£.iij. &ue° 



7 b A TREATISE 

feuerally brought to patle:which I thought ne- 
ceffary firft to make plaine, before I entrcd into 
particular auirfwer to the former obieftions, as 
the grounde of the folution, and rule whereto 
the particular aunfwercs are to be rquared. So 
then I take generally the foule to be affefted of 
the body and fpirit, as the inftrumcnt hindreih 
the worke of the artificer, which is not by alie- 
ling his skill, or diminilhing his cunnings but 
bydeprauing theaftion through vntowardnes 
of toole, and fault of inftrument. This in the 
Chapter following, I will particularly apply to 
the former obiedions, 

CHAP. XIIIT. 

Theparticular aunfwete to the obieEliom wait 
in the ii.Chapter, 

^ S for thofe faculties which age feemeth not 
only to alter,but alfo to breede, they are al¬ 
together organicall, and are not of this or that 
fort: or appeare not, becaufe, the faculty fuffe- 
reth violence or wanteth, but becaufe the in- 
ftruments as yet lacked fuchdifpofition, as the 
foule requireth, being altogether vnapt, or elfe 
although faulty in parte, yet employed as they 
may be: whereupon the adfions become Impei- 
feft. Asthe braine in a child new borne, ouer- 
charged with humidity caufeth diferetio of ien- 
fible obiedis for 40. dayes, as fayeth Hippocra¬ 
tes and Ariftotlc, to be fo dull, that they feele 
not,though they be rubbed,neither laugh they, 
though they be tickled, as afterward they doe _ 
both, and fake pkafore in yhe one, and as we be 
affeded 



OFMELANCHOLIE. 71 
affected after a mixt forte in the other: which 
obfeurity offenfe, ioyned with wancofexperi- 
cnce of fenfible things, and comparing of their 
cuents,wJth want of e-xercife, is the cheefe caufe 
of that'‘fi®plicity of children in affaires of this 
life, wherein prudence is moft conueriant. For 
better conceiuing of which point, you are to 
vnderftand, or call to minde, how the foule hath 
certaine principles of knowledge ingenerate, 
called Criteria of the Greekes, and certaine ta¬ 
ken from obfetuation of fenfible thinges, and 
from them framed, agreeably to thofe, groun¬ 
ded principles and ingenerate knowledge of the 
foule. Thefe Criteria difeerne betwixt good and 
badde, tructh and falfltobd, and are eucrfirme, 
and certayne in themfelues, and are abufed only 
by the imperfection of fuch inftrumentes, by 
which the diferetion and report of outward ob- 
ieftes do paffe. From this do fpring three feue- 
lall actions, wherby the whole courie of reafon 
is made perfeCt. Firft,that which the Greeks cal 
Sinterefis, the ground, vrhereupon the praCtifo 
of reafon confifteth, anlwering the propofition 
in a fillogifme: the conlcience applying, the af- 
fumptionrandofthem both,the third, a certain 
trueth concluded: thefe partes, the foule doth 
without inftrument of body, and neuer faileth 
therein, fo farre as the naturall principles leade, 
or outward obieCtes befincerely taken, & truly 
reported to the minds confideration. From the 
praClifes of thefe ingenerate 5 & infallible grouds 
rife all the knowledge of outwarde things, and 
humane fciences: and as a rule being but one 
ruleth equally gold, timber, and ftone, and the 
E. uij. ballancg 



71 A TREATISE 

ballancc pcafeth all kinde of waighty ttjngcs a- 
like/o thefe aplied to praftifes of life,& worldly 
bufincs, baue ingendred prudence, and circum* 
lpeiflion:in the conuerfation ofmen,3ndmanct 
of behauiour.the morall vertnes: in the perfec¬ 
tion of yoluntarye aftions, diucrle Artes and 
fciences, andaboucall . dirpofethit felfe to the 
wotfliipand adoration of Godwin fomc one fort 
or other:the right manner whereof dependinge 
vpon his exprefle Oracles, and operation of his 
fpirite aboue naturenhe want hcereof hath can- 
fed fo manye iites,& fundry fuperftitionsas are, 
& haue beene accompted religion in the world, 
the humaine fenfe being neither able to deliuet 
Ihifterics of fuch diuine quality vnto the mind, 
and thofe groundes and rules bccing fccbled, & 
crooked in that kinde, by the degenerate ftatc 
of our firft parentes. So then that wherein chil¬ 
dren feeme to fayle through age in reafon , is 
not that the faculty is vnripc,or to feeketbut bc- 
caufeihe exercife thereof through neceflitye of 
life,is imployed in fuch things, as fenfe not be¬ 
ing before acquainted with,maketh offer therof 
to the mindes iudgement confufed, and dcliuc- 
icth one thingfor an other.or the fame notfin- 
cerelye; fo thefaultis inorgadicall a£1:ion,and 
notiningcneratefacultye, which organe hath 
not yet, the full difpofition of all his partes , or 
mifeaketh for want of experience, that which it 
reporteth: accordingeto which the minde pro- 
nounceth, direftedby her ingenerate fcienceS 
which both are manifeft in tender yearcs: whofe 
braines are fofbken,and drowned with naturall 
rooifturc, that in them the animall infuuincnts 



OF MELANCHOLIE 7j 
areoaoft feeble,cfpcciallyc fucb as require vfc of 
tbcbrainc it fclfe the moifteft part of all the bo- 
dye,the other actions which ftande of a pafliue 
difpofitionCas outward fenfc)being little or no¬ 
thing thereby hindered. This appeareth plainely 
in thofe things which children do diftindly co- 
prehend, which their ingenerate fcience, eflen- 
tiall to the minde, doth clearelye.and perfedllyc 
eonceiue and iudge, as the auncient: as a childc 
knowing the heat of fire, will as readely iudge 
of the pcrill, as the wifeft Senatour, of the in¬ 
road of a bordcrer.or the politique Captaine,of 
the vnequall encouter with his cnimy, by place, 
occafion.of time,or what oportunityfbeuer, & 
hauing felt the heate thereof, will as prefentlye 
iudge the fentence falfe, affirraeth it coulde,as 
the fliarpeft witted Philofopher, the moft capti¬ 
ous argumet,& fubtileft Sorites of Stilpo.More 
ouer we daylye fee in children a Preludtum as it 
were,and draught of the graueft aftions, that in 
earneft do afterward fall out in our life,only the 
thing altered wherin the minde is occupied.For 
they will both counterfet the wife counfellcr, & 
the valiant eaptaine; the Maiefiy of a prince.and 
duety of homage and fubiedf ion,and giue figni. 
fication for the mofte part of that hope in their 
youth;as a modil,wherof age afterward maketh 
full proofe: which as it appeareth inall.fo mode 
notably in the worthy Cyrus,of whofc educati¬ 
on Zenophon writeth . .Now it alfo appeareth 
in children ( as their organicall partes are tem- 
pcred)more quickely.to apprehende.eucn thofe 
childilh matters wherewith they bufie thefclucs 
or they therewith more or lefle acquainted- 



^4 A TREATISE 

wbicKbotli concurred in Cyrus: his body being 
as it ihould feeme of excellent temper, & him- 
felfe, fonne of a King, at thofcdayes the great 
maifter of the worldras for his education,it was 

nothing elfe, but an acquainting of hisminde 
with thofe excellent partes of a prince,which af¬ 
terward being at full hability of inftrument, he 
put in praftife, as his goucrnmet required. Thjs 
called Plato a remembrance only,and calling t<y 
minde againe of thofe things, which the foulc, 
by being plunged in this gulfe of the body, had 
forgotten:which Ifo farre otherwife count of as 
neither do I hold that the foule had euer before 
any knowledge of thefe outwarde thinges, and 
fuch whereof the fcnfes be motions,neither be¬ 
ing feparated from this corporalWociety, lhall 
haue any knowledge, or remembrace of hereaf-, 
ter,at leaft in this maner, but only is conucrlant 
in thofe exercifes which require no bodely or¬ 
gan,til the refurreftioojwhe ioyned to the body 
ag3iDe,as after a fleepe,it recondcth with a fte/h 
memory what it hath done good or euill, with 
confcience excufing or accufing: becaufe they 
rife of ienfe, and fenfible obiefts, and haue no 
farther vfe then in humane focicty._, which fuch 
adiions do vphold: neither caricth it away more 
then it brought, as whereto nothing can be ad¬ 
ded. That then, which generally I aunfwered, 
touching organicall praftifes peculiar to bodie 
& fpirit, the fame do I apply particularly to the 
obieftion fro age, and fuch Hiferetion as it brin- 
geth with it, euen that all fuch aftions depend 
vpo inftrument, wherunto the fault whatfoeuer 
is to be aferibed, and no^ vnto any faculty of the 
naind. 



OF i^ELANCHOLIE yf 
mind, (wliichneuer fufFereth increafe nor de- 
creafejor zay other kind of alteration,) or elfc 
vntowantof experience, and excrcifeof thole 
things,which greater yeeres medle with:where- 
io the fenfes both external], and ipternall by vfe 
being perfeQ:, like as a true looking glafle re- 
prefenteth the countcnace to the eic>in al points 
as nature hath framed it, fo offer they the relati¬ 
on true & diftiofl: fro fenfible things:wherof the 
mind deliucreth refolution and fentencerwilleth 
good things.and refufeththe contrary, whatfoe- 
uer it feemeth to do otherwife, through the in- 
ordinat inftrumets'the feates ofvnruly appetite, 
and difbrderly afFe£fk)o, far different from that 
which the mind it felfe willeth entirely, free fro 
al perturbation.That which I hauc anfwered c6- 
cerning the animall adlions, fitteth alfo the ob- 
ieftion of propagation: for fuch parts haue not 
as yet their natural difpofitio thereunto; neither 
doth the animall parts make luch difcretion in 
male'& female, wherof that appetite arifeth, al¬ 
though the fight & countenance and perfbn of 
eche party be all one: neither is any faculty idle 
at any time, (the inftruments only of fenfe and 
motio take refrefhingby reft) elpecially fo ma¬ 
ny yeares: which muft needs enfoe, if it were a 
faculty diftinft, and not rather according to the 
apthes of inftruraent, a peculiar esercife onely. 
For nature employeth all to the vttermofl-, and 
giueth neuer oner, except it be more cheareful- 
lyand ftrongly to lay hand to the work againc, 
which to propagation ^needeth not, novfeha- 
uing bene thereof at all before. If you fay it ri- 
^thofaointernaiiconceite,take this withall, 
lhaf 



76 A TREATISE 

that the conceit is taken from an cxternall oh- 
left, together with a difpofed parte thereunto, 
which-fo foone as it is perfefted to the vfc, the 
minde being alwaics occupied, and in continu¬ 
al! motion,employeth that aifo whcrcunto na¬ 
turally it is bent-The obieftion rifing from cu- 
fiome of life in faylers,butchers,and ploughmS 
jcceiucth the fame anfwerc . For their inftru- 
inentes ofaftion through continuall praftife of 
fuch artes,makcth them in common fenfe, ima¬ 
gination,and aflFeftion, to deliuer thinges vnto 
the minde after an impure forte, alwaies fauou- 
ting of their ordinarie trade of life. This is that 
p'.itteth of butchers from juries, and iudgemets 
of life and death amongeft men: who although 
they know there is difference betwixt man and 
beaft,the caufe of the one and the yfe of theo- 
ther,the giltleffe prifoner,& the innocent lamb, 
yet they being accuftomed with {laughter, the 
difference IS not fo finccrely taken , and the af- 
feftion not indifferent in fuch a cafttand there¬ 
fore from fuch capitail caufes they are remoued. 
The mariner as the Europians are more rough, 
bold,hardie,inconftant,the the AEans, through 
inconftancieoftheaire, and tempeftioufoes of 
the regions: fo the inccrtaintic of the weather, 
and ftormiefeas with cuftome of daunger, ma- 
keththem more rough, bolig,andhaftye, then 
they which be of other trade of life, and their 
bufineife on 6rme land: cucry aftion in refpcftc 
and comparifbd of due conhderation , is either 
windc.tide.or tepeft,thcancher,failc,or fteirncr 
euericdifpleafureaftorme, andeuery content- 
meo(acalme:eueaasa man(ha( ha(h trauellcd 
all 



OF MELANCHOLIE 77 
all tbe day on hor/ebacke, or faylcd on tbe fea, 
though he be laid on his bed, yet keepeth an i- 
magination of trauel ftilbhis body fairing after 
a forte,as though it were on horfebacke, or yet 
embarked,iudgcth not fo rightly of reft.'by rea- 
fon of the former inured trauelhfo thcfe men 
through their kind of life , cither by falfe rcprc’- 
(entations offuch obicfts.or impcrfeft & mixed 
report,offerthinges to the mind.otheiwife then 
they arc indeed,and receiuc iudgement of thent 
thereafter: whereto their affeftions anfwering, 
they take thinges in farre other parte, then they 
lhould,ot the nature of thccaufc requireth.-now 
the region or habitation being as it were apa- 
tantvnto vs, miniftring breath and foodc, na 
tuaruell if our bodies be affe^cd thereafter’, and 
fo the aftiocs varieCas the childe of the parentes 
in one forte orother carieth the fcmblaunce) 
the facultic being all one,and keeping the fame 
ftatc,while the inftrumets ftandto fuch hazard, 
as outward thinges,eiihcr by region, diet, cu- 
ftome of life, or elfe whatlbcuer doth threaten 
and bring vpon vs. Moft of all hath region this 
fotce,not onely in that we feede as the foylcaf- 
fordcthjbutbecaulc the aire whereof the ipirits 
of our bodies are repaircd,bcfides that which xi» 
feth of the intcrnall fpiritc of aliment , is conti¬ 
nually drunke in vs, and pafleth into all the fe- 
cretes of our intrailcs,ftirreth out humotirs,and 
dinerfly affefteth all our organicall partesras the 
aircand foilc,drie,opcn,& barren , maketh the 
bodies firmc,hard, and compact,and the ipirites 
pure and fubtilc,wherby what aftio foeucr is to 
he performed of {hem,is more quicke, nimble, 
and 



A TREATISE 

and prompt,cfpecially if nouriflime t be propot- 
tionall, then of people of contrary habitation. 
.Of all the former obieftions.the humors of our 
bodies feemc moft to vrgc.and chalenge intereft 
in difpofing of the rainde, both in refpeftof 
thofe accidents, we fee perfons fall into ouer- 
charged with them, as alfo, hecaufe commonly 
the affeftions of the hart,as ioy, fadnes,delight, 
difplcafure, hope, feare, or whatfoeuer elfe of 
them is mixed among the perturbations, com¬ 
monly are all to them aferibed,which bccaufe it 
moft concerneth the chiefe drift of this dif- 
courfe of melancholy, I will more ftand vpon, 
and aftord it a more copious anfwere. 

CHAP. XV. 

whether the fermrbations rife of the 
humour or not, 

H E perturbations are taten commpnliettt 
rife of melancholy,choIer,hjotrd,or fleume. 
fb that men of haftie difpofition we call chole- 
rieke: ofiad,mclanchplickc: of heauie and dal 
flegmaticke: of merie and chearfull, fanguine: 
and not bnely the common opinion fo taketh it 
but thefe affetftions are accompted of the Phifi- 
tians for tokens of fuch complexions, andfiich 
humours raigning in the body. Let vs conlider 
therfore, whether the truth be as they hold it,& 
perturbations haue no other fountain the theie 
humours.What thefe humours are,wehaue fuf* 
ficicntly declared, and how they arc ingendred: 
the vfeof them is to nouriih the parts of the bo" 
die, and to repaire the 


contiauall eXpence there¬ 
of 



OF MELANCHOLIE 7# 

of tlirough trauels of this life, befides that, 
which the naturall heat continually confumeth. 
The perturbations thus tnoue vs, difturbe our 
coun{cls,& difijuiet our bodies on this fort.Firft 
occafion rifeth frora outward things,wherin v/e 
either take pleafure.or wherewith we are offen¬ 
ded : this obieff is caried to the internall fenfes 
from the outward, which if it be a matter fen- 
Xuall onely, the mindevfcth to impart it to the 
hart^ by the organicall interhali fenfes, which 
with ioy embraceth it, or with indignation,and 
miflike refufethit, ifof fuch points, asitfelfe 
liketh, without their helpe it giiieth knowledge 
thereof to the hart by the fpirits, which either 
embraceth the fame, impelled by the mindes 
willing, or reieftetli it with miflike and hatred, 
according to her nilling. But before I proceed 
further in this Chapter, it fhall be neceffarie to 
declare vnto you, ^1 the forts of perturbations, 
which being diftinguifhcd vato clafTes or pro¬ 
per farhilies, fhall deliuer great light vnto vs: 
both in laying open their natures.and alfo com¬ 
pared with the nature of the humours, make 
more cleare demonftratiou, what likelihoode 
they Carrie to be cffedfs of fuch caufcs as the hu¬ 
mours are. All perturbations arc either fimple, 
or Copounded of the fimple. Simple are fuch, as 
haue no mixture of any other perturbation: and 
thofe arc cither primitiuc. Sc firft, or deriuatiae 
and drawne from them. The primitiues hauc 
iike or diflike properties vnto the. Loue & hate 
are the firft kinds & primitiues of the reft: loue 
being a vehement liking, and hate a vehement 
^cftion of difliking: from thefe fpring all the 
detiua- 



«6 A TREATISE, 

dcriuatiues , which arifc either from loue, or 
hate,like,or diflike. From loue and liking of a 
prefcDt good,fpringeth ioy and reioycing.if it 
be to come,hope entettaineth the heart with cz* 
peffation,From dillike and hate: if the thing be 
euill as the other good, ('in deede or in appea¬ 
rance it skillcth not ) and prefent, rifcth heaui- 
nefle of hart,and difpofition of fadneflecif it bee 
a future euill,feare rileth fro the millike of hat^ 

& thefe I take to be al the fimplc perturbations. 
The compounds, are fuch as haue parte of the 
fimplc by mixture:and that either of the primi- 
tiue fimple.or the deriuatiuc:and of the primi- 
tiues with Ample ones only,or mixed with deri- 
uatiues. Such are mixed with primitiues dnely, 
are either mixed vncqually of loue and liking,or 
of raiflike & hate,or equally of the both.Of the 
-firft fort,& taking mo re part of liking,is the affc- - 
&ion which moueth ys to laugh,tbis we cal me* 
lines wherev/ith we with fomc diicontentment, 
take pleafurc at that,which is done or laid ridi- 
tuloufly:of which fort are deeds,or wotdes,vn- 
feemely Or vnmect,and yet moue no compafsid* 
as when a man fcaldcth his mouth with his'pot¬ 
tage or an hote 'pie, we arcdifcotcnted with the I 

hurt, yet ioye at thecuent vnexpefted of the I 
partie, and that we haue efcapcdit,frora whence 
eommeth laughter:which becau4 itexcccdcth 
the miflike of the thing that hurteth, burftetb j 
out into vehemcncy on that fide,and procuredi 
that mery gefture. If on the other fide the thing 
be fuch as the miflike exccedcth the ioy we haue ' 
of ourfreedome from that cuiH.then rileth pi tie 
and compafsion ; and thefe per^urbaiions take 



- OF WELANCHOLIE. 2i 
^eir beginnings of the primitiues vnecjually 
‘ mixedjwherebyoneofthem doth after a forte 
obfeure the other. The other are fuch as hauc 
equall mixture, and thole are enuie and icloiie. 
If the thing wc loue be fuch as we haue not part 
of, then (pringeth an hate or miflike of the par- 
tie who cnioycththatwe want and like of, and 
fo breedeth" enuy, agriefeforthc prolperity of 
another, or good fuccefle vvhatfoeuer, wherein 
we haue no part. If it be fuch benefit as we en¬ 
joy,and are gricued it Ihonld be coiiimuni cared 
with other, and wherein we refufc a parcener, 
that is called ieloufie; and is focne manifeft in 
fuch, as are amoroufly affefted, or of afpiiing 
natures: and thefe are compounded of the pri- 
mitiues alone, like or miflike, loue, or hate. 
Thofe which are mixed of prim itiues, or deriua- 
tiues, are of two fortes, according as the primi- 
tiuesithat is to fey mixed of loue or hate. Now 
Idue mixed with hope, breedeth ttufl: with lone 
aHd fearcdiftruft; Hateor miflike Compounded 
with hope,breedeth anger: whereby we arc dif- 
pleafed with that mifliketh Ys, and by hope of 
being fatisfied of that, that oflfered the diflike, 
are driuen to anger the afFcftion of rcuenge. If 
it be any thing wherein we hauc dilpleafed put 
ielues. with, it is'callcd fliamciif it becompoun- 
ded with fearcj it is called baflifulnelle, if the 
inifli% betaken;from another,the compofition 
is of hate and 3nger,& thereof lpringcth,malice. 
Thns haucyott the' perturbations compounded 
of primitiue pafsions with|hcir deriiiatiues. Of 
dcriuatiucs betwixt them felues aiife delpaire, 
and confident airBR«icc. Dcfpairc is coinpo““- 
■■■ \ ■■ 'F. ^ ded 



U ATREATISE 

dcd ofheauincffc, gricfe and feare, the other of 
joy and hope: thus haue you after my minde 
the perturbations raunged into their feuerall 
. claffes: to the cndc.the affinitie of caule and ef- 
feftC'f any be) betwixt them and the humours, 
may more eafily appeare, if none be, as in deed 
there is none, then the contrarie truth may with 
greater cuidence , approtie it felfe vnto your 
judgement. For loue or liking, hate or miflike, 
being but two primitiue pafsions, how may we 
with-reafpn referre them to the humours which 
are fourc : and if the perturbations ihould rife 
ofhumour. then Hiould they aunfwer ech other 
neither mo nor fewer; and as theoneiscom- 
.pound, primitiue and detiuatiue, fo ftould the 
humours be at the inftant of thofc pafsionsj 
which is impoisiblc: or if they be not at the in¬ 
ftant mixed, but before, the hart fliould not lye 
indifferet to all pafsions, and the mixture being 
once made, by what meanesfhould they be a- 
gaine vnmixed ? Againe.if they rife of humour, 
then fhould thofe parts wherein humours moft 
abound, be inftruments of pafsions, and fo the 
gall of anger,and the fplene of {adneflc,and not 
the hart, which is the ftatc of all thofe afFeft ios, 
which wccall perturbations: from which both 
ofthofe partes, are parted by themidriffe. But 
you will fay: thefeaftions rife of the temper of 
the heart, and that temper of the humour. No^ 
fo: for cither the afFeftions rife of the frame a-^ 
loneof the hart, or clfe at the leaft loyncd with 
the temper ; now the humours haue fofmall 
force in making temper, and framing the com¬ 
plexion, that them feiucs arc all therofframed, 
the 



OF MELANCHOLiE. gj 
thefpirks applying the temp>cr6f the organical 
parts to that bufinefle. Touching the frame of 
the hart, fuch as hauc bin moft couragrous haue 
itoffubftanec firrae, compaft, and of qualitie 
moderate, the poorcs neither ouerlarge norna- 
rOw; in which points the temper and comple¬ 
xion hath no vie: but the frame alone. Againcj 
thefe pafsions being wrought of the heart by a 
certaine enlarging of it fclfc,ifit be p!eafed,and 
ctofingjif it be contrarily affefted : which be a- 
ftions not of complcXio; but of frame & fhape, 
make fnfficicnt-probfe againft the complexion' 
in this part, which only beareth it fclfe affefted 
to that which it tbuchech, altering, if it be of 
viftualls into humours, and the humours into 
the iubftaoce of the body,which it indueth with 
the fame complexion.Againc,it fareth oft tithes 
that this or that hiimour abohndeth by.difor- 
dered diet, yet the complexion aH one, neither 
purgations ofhurnout alter completion,a fixed 
thing,ingenerate by natutCj& no tpuerthrowne 
but by fome venimous qualiti'c direSf p'ppofiS 
againft it, or long cuftome of bther difbrdefi 
whereby natuYe'Is fiipplanted in time, & growi-‘ 
ing in acquaintSce, with which firft it rhifliked; 
and is ouerifialched with a ebunterfet nature, 
gotten by vfe of that otherv/ife is VnnaturalU’ 
Thefe points might be more at'largclaid open, 
ifit wereneceflarie, or they did noewithdrawe 
fro the purpofe I hauc in hand, to reft more vp6' 
them.But how then cometh it to paflcjthat mc- 
kncholicke perfbns are more fad then other, & 
choleticke more angtie&c. if thefe humours^ 
bcarc no fway hcreis?For anfwet of which que- 
F. ij. ftiobs 



.84 atreatise 

llioD, you are to vnderftand that both ioye and 
•fadoelfearc of two forts, as alfo the rcftfprin- 
ging from them: the one is naturall rifing vpon 
an outward occafion, if the body be well tem¬ 
pered,and faultlcs in his inftrumets.and the ob- 
iedf made no greater nor Icile then it is in deed, 
and the hartjaanfwer proportionally thereunto:' 
the other is vnnaturall, and difordcred, rifing 
either of no outward occafion, but from inward 
delufion, or elfefuchas are (by fault of the re¬ 
port of the fenfes.or euil difpofition of the hart) 
otherwife taken then the obied^ requireth. In 
this feconde kinde, the humours feeme to haue 
greateft rule, which whether they haue fo, as 
caufes or not, & in what refpedt they entermed- 
dle,I will now make plaine vnto you.Of the fitft 
ibrtof perturbations naturalh and rifing vppon 
euident occafion I neede ftand lefie vpon, feeing 
as the hart is by outward cauies moued, fo is it 
neither more meded of this humour then of 
that, neither can there be anye fuch fudden fe- 
paratibn of humours wrought in the bodic, 
whereby through anger choler fiiould difi^ne 
himfelfe from his fellow humours, and pofielle 
lie hart: or melancholie in caules of griefe, fo- 
iowe,or feare,erpecially an humour of grofle & 
earthly partes, as it were the very lies of the reft 
of the bloudi Againc, it were very contrarie to 
leafon, to attribute an adion of lb necefiarie 
vie, as are the perturbations vnto that, which is 
no organeofour bodies, but oncly matter of 
food and nourilhment, of which fort are all the 
humours, keeping themfelues within cbmpafle 
of good temper. Moreouer, if through anger 
the 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 8f; 
tbebart be moued firft, then isit firfttroubled, 
and the perturbations wrought, before the hu¬ 
mour rcceaue impre6ion: if the humor admit 
firft the motion of the thing louely or hurtfull, 
and impart that to the heart, then fiiould it re- 
ceiue a degree of excellency aboue the hart m 
this rcfpefl:, being more attendat vp6 the fpirit. 
the chiefe fteward of this facultie, then the hart 
is, which next to the fpirit hath ereateft place in 
thebody.Butwhy then fayyou^aue the Philo- 
fophers defined anger a boyling of the bloud a- 
bout the hart'if it be according to that definiti¬ 
on, then the more cholericke a man is, fo much 
themore angty is he: becaufe the choleris firft 
apt to boile, as it were brimftone to the match, 
in refpeft of the othej humors. That definition 
of anger, is to be taken not by proper fpeech, 
but by a metoaymicall phrafe, wherby the caufc 
is attributed to the effeft.For firft the hart mo- 
oeth,kindled with anger, then the bloud rifeth, 
which being cholericke encrealeih the heatcs 
but addeth nothing to the pafsibn: nowe be¬ 
caufe we fenfibly feele an extraordinarie heate 
about our hearts when we be moued to angric 
pafsions, therefore they hauc defined anger by 
that effe£i:rwhich boyling, rifeth not of the qua- 
litie of the bloud, but by a ftrife of a contrarie 
motion in the heart at one time.the one being a 
coiitraSion of it lelfe,and a rctrait of the bloud 
andccrtainc fpirits not farre of: with miflike of 
that ofFendeth, as in fcare, which commandeth 
cuen from the extreme and vtmoft partsiwhcrc- 
by itgathereth great heate within, which brea¬ 
thing out againe with rcuengc,caufeth through 
F.iij. vehement 



8^ . :A, TREATISE j 

vehcmcHcy, & fudHenDefle of the motion, that* [ 
boyling of heat, procured of anger; efpecially, 
jfit be not deliucred by word and deed.wherby ■■ 
liberty is giue for the pafsion to breake foorth,. 
which reftrained in any fort, breedeth ah agony. 
of fuch ferueneyvas it may refemble the fcalding. 
ofaboiling chaldron notvnconered,oranhote' 
furnace clofcd vp in all vents. Moreouer if per- • 
turbatioii fhould becaufed ofhurnour,to whe-- 
ther ihould we attribute it J to the naturall hu-; 
mor, or to the excrement ? the excrement is far 
remoUed fro the hart,& is not fo ready to affeft 
it, a great diftace being betwixt their feucraU 
places, & in iaundes, the gall ouerflowing the 
body, & pafsing through the vaines,& ftaining. 
all parts, we fee the not fo affefted, more angry 
then at other times, or their bodies being clce- 
led from thetinftureof yellowmes. If it be the 
naturall humor, that is to fay, the fubtileft parte 
of the bloud,always cotained in the heart(whc- 
ther you vnderftad.that blond which is compre- 
bended in the two bofoms, or that wherewith 
the hart is fuftained & nourifhed in eucry part) 
why isnot.the the hart always afFcfted without 
intermifsion , with fuch paisions as the bloud 
enclincth vnto,feeing it is always prcfent,& ke- 
peth his difpofition alike i If you will haue it of 
neither, but of that which is contained in the 
great vain, rufhing with violence into the right 
fide of the hart, the quality of that bloud being 
of cooler,temp.er then that viihich the heart hath 
already embraced, fhould ferue to mitigate the 
mood, rather then to adde rno flicks to the fire. 
Tp conclude.|hispoint, leaft I fhould feemc to 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 87 
fight with a fhadow: if either humor, or excre¬ 
ment fhoufd haiic part in mouing affeftipns.no 
couriiell of philofophy, nor precept of wife men 
were comparable to calmc thefc raging pafsios, 
vnto the purging potions of Phifitians,& in this 
cafe the Elleborans of Anticera.the Colocinthis 
of Spainc.and the Rhubarb of Alexadria.abouc 
all the fchools of Djuinitie or Philofophy. The 
lefle I labour againft thcfehumors in the kinds 
ofnaturall perturbations, or fitch as rifevppon 
occafion, becaufe 1 think theerrour is foonere- 
moued, & requireth no long reafoning. T he o- 
ther fort which moue vs without caufe.or exter¬ 
nal! obicdf,either tofadnes,anger,fcare,or ioy,' 
becauie they feeme altogether to be cfFefts of 
humors, no other caufe being apparent whereto 
to afcribe them, I wilb more copioufly debate 
this point in the Chapter following. 

CHAP. XVI. 

Whether perimhationsytehich are not moued 
outward occaJioM rife of humours 
or mt fond how i 

vv E do fee by expeiience certaine perfons 
which enioy all the comforts of this life 
whatfocuer wealth can procure, and whatfoc- 
uerfriendlhipofrercth ofkindncs, and whatfo- 
cucrfecurity may alTure them: yet to bcoucr- 
whelmed with heauincsjand difmaidc with fuch 
feare.as they can neither receiuc conlblation, 
not hope of afifurance, notwithftanding there 
be neither matter of feare, or difcontentroent, 
oor yet caufe of daanger.but contratily of great 
F. iiij. conifortj 



S8 A TREATISE 

comfore, and gratulation. This pafsion bectng 
notmoucd by any aducrfity prefcntorimmi- - 
near, is attributed to melancholy the grofleft 
part of all the blood, cither while it is yet con¬ 
tained in the vaineszoraboundethin thefplene, 
(ordained to purge the blood of thatdrofle& 

. fetling of the humours) furcharged therewith 
for want of free vent, by reafon of obUruftioD, 
or any wayes elfethc paflage being let of clears 
auoydance.Thc rather it feemeth to be no lefle, 
becaufe purgation,opening of a vaine, diet, and 
other order of cure and medicine.as philick pre- 
fcribcth,haue been meancs of changing this dif- 
■pofition, and mitigation of thofe forowes,and 
quieting of fuch fcarcs, as melancholic perfons 
hauc fancied to themfelues, and haueasit fee¬ 
meth reftored both wit and courage. Hitherto 
wehaue been led by reafon of the obieftion 
from humors, which imported great power ia 
them ofafiefting the mind. It was anfwcrcd be¬ 
fore generally,whatfoeucr was done in the body 
of any part to be done organically, and that was 
applied (pecially to certainc obieftions before 
aunfwercd; it remaineth hecre.that the fame be 
applied alfo to our humours, which hauc no o- 
ther power to affea the mindi then to alter the 
ftatc of the inftrumetsrwhich next to the mind j 
& fbule it fclfe arc the oncly caufes of all direft 
afliion in the body. So heerc wc arc to confidcr, 
in what fort the humours moue thcle perturba¬ 
tions aboue mentioned: whether as cheefewm'" 
kersjihftrumcnts, or other kind of helpers; and 
fo how they may claime any intcreft in terrify- 
' ing.or foliciting the mind,this way or that way. 



OF MELANCHOLIE. tp 
»s the obicftios before mentioned would beare 
vs in hand. It hath been declared before hovr 
the mind is the foie mouer m the body, & bow 
the reft ol the parts fare as inftruments, and nai- 
nifters: whereby in oa total 1 al&dions theha^ 
mors arc fecluded from cheefe doers,and being 
no organicall partes feme for no inftruments. 
For whatfoeuer hath any conftant and firme 
adionin our bodies, theftate of health remay- 
ning firme, is done either by foule, or by the 
partes of the body: of which thehumoursare 
neither, and fo vtterly fecluded of nature from 
any peculiar adion to any vfe of the body. For 
that they arc faid to nourilh, it fignifieth only a 
pafsiue difpofition, by which through our nou:- 
rifiiing power, they recciuc the Charaderof 
our nature, and arc altered into the fubftance of 
the fame.they themlelucs giuing ouer their pri- 
uate adion,and fubmiuing to the naturaU cop- 
codiuc vertue, which deftroyeth all particulari¬ 
ties of nourifhment, and bringeth them to that 
vniformity which our nature requireth. Then 
while the body is in health, the humors beare 
no fway of priuate adion, but it being once al - 
tercd,and they cuil dilpolfed,and breaking from 
that regiment whetcunto they fhouldbcfub- 
icd, are fo farre off from fubiedion to the dif* 
pofition of our bodies, & ftrength of our parts, 
that they oppreffe them, and as it appeareth in 
fimptomaticall euentt in ficknes, defpife that 
gouernment,whereto by natures law they ftand 
bound.Thus then I hold humours to be occafi- 
ons ofdiforderly pcrturbations,eucn as they arc 
mcanes of deprauing the inftrumcat of pertur¬ 
bation. 



90 A TREATISE > . 

bation,& turning it otherwife.then nature tatli 
difpofed whofc goucrnmet when it hath fhakca 
off, it affefteth vs two maner of waics: the one' 
by thecorporall fubftance,whereby it anpoycth 
the corporal maffc of bodies, & complexion, & 
breaketh out into foares, empofthumes, or o- 
therfuch anoyances: the other by afpiritwhich 
itpoffefleth, either contrary altogether, ordi- 
uerfe at the Icaft from ouis, wherewith many 
wayes it difturbeth the orderly aftioos, and 
weakeneth the vigor of the fame: now both by 
fubCtance, and by ipiritc italtereth complexion 
where it preuailcth, and thereby giueth greateft 
ftroake to the organicall mcmbers.Thcn feeing 
all adlions are performed both by fpirite and 
co'rporall inftmment, and the'humours excee¬ 
ding the gone rnment of nature, and withdraw-- 
ing themfclues from fubieftion therof, affeft vs 
both waies, fpirite againft fpiritC) and corporall 
fubftace againft his like,we are to confider,how 
by thefe two meanes,our aftions fuffer through 
their difbrder,and where their operation taketh 
moft place in working fuchphantafticdl pertur¬ 
bations wherewith we are deluded. Of all parts 
of the body, in cch perturbation, two arc chiefly 
affeftcdifirft thebrayne, that both apprehen- 
deth the offenfiue or pleafant obieft, & indgeth 
ofthe fame in like fort, and communicateth it 
with the heart, which is the fccond partaffe- 
£fed: thefe being troubled carie with them all 
the reft of the partes into a fimpathy, they of all 
the reft being in refpeft of affeaion of moft 
importance. The humours then to workc thefe 
effeftes,which approch nigh (o naturall pertur¬ 
bations 



OF MELANCHOLIE. n- 
batioDs grounded vpon iuft occafion o£ necef- 
firie, alter either brame or hart: if the braine be 
altered, and the obieft not rightly apprehended 
then IS it deliuered otherwile then it ftandeth 
in nature, and fo the hart moued to a diforderly 
pafsion. Againe, though the braine be without 
fault,and report deliuered to the hart fincerely; 
yet that being diftempsred, or altered in com¬ 
plexion by fault of hum our, doth not aunfwere. 
in affeftion as the obieft rcquireth:but more or 
leflTcjas the diftemper mifleadeth: if both partes 
beouercharged of humour, the apprehenfion & 
afFecftion both are corrupted, and milfe of their 
right afiion, and !b all things miftaken, ingen- 
der that confufed fpinte, and thofe ftormes of 
outragious loue, hatred, hope or feare, where¬ 
with bodies fopafsionate are heereand there, 
tolled with difquiet.Now particularly the fpirit 
of.thc humour being fubtiler,thinner,and hoter 
then is meetc, raaketh the apprehenfion quic¬ 
ker then itlhould be, and the diferetion nKirc 
hafty, then is meete for the vprighc deliuery to 
the hart,what to embrace or to refufe; this cau- 
£:th. pronenes to anger, when we are offended 
wirhouf caufc, commonly called teaftines, and 
frowardnes. If the humour alfo with his fpirire 
poflefie the braync, then are thefe pafsions of 
longer continuance: humour being of a more, 
follid nature then the fpirite, and fo not eafily 
difperfed, which eaufeth fittesof fuch pafsions 
to be of longer continuance: and thus the hart 
may be abuled fro the braine •• not much vniikc. 
as it falkth ofte out in cpmuhication of {peach 
amongeft ys:a man of hafty difpofition,ready to 
: aunfwere, 


A TREATISE 

aunlwcre, and quick witted, will make reply to 
that which Ihould be faide, before the talc be 
halfe told,whereby he faileth in his replication, 
and aunfwereth from thepurpofe: which if he 
had been firft affured^wherto to reply,hc ilioald 
not haue miffed. This appeareth plainc in Cho- 
lericke perfons,or Cich as arc difpofcd to anger: 
fuchare offended where they haue no caufein 
truth, but by miftaking; and where they haue 
caufc the veheraency of the apprehenfion, and 
the fuddenes of the report from the braine vnto 
thefcaie of perturbation, inforceth double the 
pafsion: efpecialiy when the hate is as flexible, 
as the brayne is light: then raungeth it into all 
extremity. Thiscommeth to pafle, not by any 
power of anger in the Cholerick humour: but 
by reafon the inftrumets arc mifordered, either 
by vapour rifing from that humour, or the very 
fubftance of the fame. They ate diforderedio' 
this fort through ChoIcr.The naturall fpirit and 
eomplexi6 of thefc parts become fubtiler,thin¬ 
ner,and quicker,proner to adion, then of their 
natures they Ihould be, through the heat which 
rifeth of Choler, and his fpitit intermixed with 
ours:by this mobility of vapour, our fpiritfofa 
quieter and more ftabledifpofltion,) iseyther 
made more rare, then is expedient foi the vie of 
our bodies, or elfc ftriuing as it were to fubdue 
this baftatd fpirite and vnwelcome gheft, can 
not giue that attendance vpon his proper due- 
ty, which naturally it Ihould: and to the aftions 
thereupon rife depraued, and hauing wherewith 
it is encurabred within, admitteth the caufc of 
difpleafure more eafily which rifeth abroad:bc- 
ing 


OP MELANCHOLIE. 
log an additi6 to that which molefteth 2t home: 
and thefe natures for thcmoft parte arc trou¬ 
bled with a Cholerick humour, or fretting, like 
to Choler, about the mouth of the ftomach, 
which is of all the inwarde partes of quickeft 
fenfe and feeling. This caufeth them, cipecially 
fafting, before the humour be mitigated, and 
delayed with nourilhraent, to be moft prone to 
that angry pafsion. The teaftie waywardnes of 
ficke perfons, fiich as arc vexed with paine or 
fcauer.wherby the humors of the bo<fy become 
more fell maketh euident ptoofe he rcof.Wc ice 
howfmall matters put them out of patience, 
cuety thing of&ndeth: whereas in health the 
fame occafi^ons.would little, or nothing moue. 
The reafon is,becaufethey meafure all outward 
accidents, by that they finde of difeontentmenc 
withintnotthat the humor that difeontenteth is 
any inftrument of pafsion, or carieth with it fa¬ 
culty to be difpleafcd:but becadfe it difquieteth 
the body .and giucth difeontentment to nature, 
it is oecahon why dilpleafures are made great: 
and where there is no caule, nature troubled 
within, faireth as greatly di/plcafcd with that 
which outwardly fhould not difplealetthe griefc 
within,being added to an indifferet thing with- 
out,& drawing it into likefelowfhip ofdilplca- 
fure,euen but for that it pleafeth notrlike as in a 
troubled fea, a great veflel is more eafilyftirred 
with fmall ftreDgth,thcn in the calme hauen, or 
quiet ftreamc:fo ouripirites, and organicallin- 
ftturoents of pafsion, the parte toiled with ftor- 
my weather of internal! diicontentment, is with 
httle occafton difquictcd, yea wi^h thclbaking 



of a Tufii, that bath no fliow of calming thofe 
domcfticall ftormcs, that arife more trouble- 
fome and boiftcrous to our nature, then all the 
bluftenng windes in the Ocean fca.For whe out 
pafsion IS once vp by fuch occafion, the comtno 
fenfe is alCo caricd therewith, and diftiniiion of 
outward thinges hindered at the leaft-, if not ta- 
ken away,all things being wayed by that which 
nature findeth offence at withimeuen as thetaft 
altered in feauers by cholerick vapours, maketh 
fweetc thinges fceme bitter, and vnplcalaunt, 
which of themfelucs are moff deleftableto thc 
taft, and would greatly fttisfie the fame panic, 
the bitter rehfh through that taint ofcholla 
once take awaie. And in this fort in my opinion 
arifeth the diforderly, & vnruly pafiion of cbot* 
ler,bbth increafed, where fome occafion is offr- 
red, and procured by inward difpofition ofthe 
bodic and fpirit, when there is no pretence, or 
fhewe of caafc.This is feene as plainely in muth 
and ioye, which rifcth as'well vpon inwardhar- 
monieoffpirit,humour, anU complexion, asv- 
pon glad tidings, or externall benefite whereof 
wetake rerc^cing.A body of fanguinc corople- 
Tcion’(as conamoaly we cal it,although comple* 
xion be another thing, then condition of hu* 
mo.rs)^he fpirits being in their iuft temperin 
refpeO: of quality, and of fuch.plenty as nature 
requircthj not mixed or defiled by any ftiaonge 
fpirit or vapor, thchumours in quantity Sc qua'- 
litie rated in geometrical!, and iuft proportioir, 
the fubftancealfb of the body,and all the inenl- 
bers £b qualified by mixture of elements, as all 
confpirc together in due proportion, breedeih 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 

, an inaifferedcie to all pafsions.Now if bloud a- 
bourid,aDd kcepe his finccrity,and the body re - 
Cfcauc by it,and the fpints nfing from the lame, 
a comfort in the fcnfibk partes, without doubt 
, then,as anger without caufe cxternall,rofe vpon 
inward difplcafure.fo this fpirit, thefc humours, 

, &T:his tcmper.roay moue an inward ioy,where¬ 
of no external obie^ may be accompted as mft 
occafion. This is the caufe that maketh feme 
men prone to ioy, and laughter at fuch things, 

; as other men ate not drawne with into any paf- 
£od, and maketh them picke out, and feeke for 
caufes of laughter, not onely to moue others to 
the like,but to exprefle their mery pafeio,which 
rifetli by the iudgement of our fenfes imparted 
to the hart, not regarding whether the caufe be 
inward or outward, that moueth, which taketh 
comfort thereat,as though the obieft were ex¬ 
ternal!. This efpecialty commeth tb pafle if the 
bloud be fuch about the hart,as his purenclTe dc 
fineereneffc with fwcetuefle that carieth.mode-p 
ration of temper doth fo comfort, and mollifie 
it, that it eafily,& aptly enlargeth it felfithe fuch 
bloud or fuch vapor that hath this tickling qua- 
litie, caufeth a delight cqnceiued in the braine, 
and communicated with the hart, procureth a 
comfortable gratiilation.and inward ioy of that 
whereof nature taketh pleafurc. Foras wchaue 
fights, taftes, fmclles, noyfes, pleafant obieftes 
Without vs, and on the contrary part, as manie 
odious.and hatefull, which do force out fenfes: 
fo hauewe alfoailthefeintcrnall, pleafaunt or 
vnpleafaunt;& as we hauc of fenfual obiedls in¬ 
ternal!, fo in like manner pkafmc & difpleafurc 



$5 A TREATISE 

is communicated fro within of the brainc to tte 
heart, of fuch things as we are not able dircftlv 
to rcferre to this or that qualiticras we fee it fe. 
Tcth with tafts oftentimes: inch mixtures nay 
be in fauces, that foiriething may |»leafc vs vre 
cannot exprefle vvhat,rayfcd of the compofitio. 
This chiefly falleth to our bodies, when that 
which giueth this occaflon cariethforcc of gen¬ 
tle and light fpirits; as wine, and ftrongdrinke, 
and all aroraaticall fpiccs, which haue a power 
to comfort the braine, and hart, and affc^l all 
our bodie throughout with celeritie and quick- 
i)cflc,before their fpirits be fpent in the paffage: 
then the braine giueth merie report, & the hart 
glad for it fclfe, and all the fellow members,as 
it were,daunceth for ioy,and good liking,whiti 
it receaueth of iiich internail prouocations. The 
as we fee wine giue occaflon of mirth by his ex¬ 
cellent (pirit, wherewith dur /pirit is delighted, 
andgreatly increaicd,if it be drunk with roode- 
ratton,fo fuch as are ofmery di/pofitions,enioy 
anaturall wine in their bodies, cfpecially harts 
and braines, which cau/eth them to laugh at the 
wagging of a feather, and without iuft matter 
of laughter, without modeft regard of circutn- 
ftancc,to bcarethemfelucs light & ridiculous:& 
this my friend M. I take to be the caufe ofmcr- 
xiegreekes, who feeke rather to difeharge them 
fellies of the iocond afieftio, ftirred vp by their 
humour, then require true outward occaflon of 
fblace and recreation. Nowe as before Ihaue 
faid that choler procurcth anger, not as caufe, 
but as occaflon,fo likewi/c bloud thus tempered 
arid replenilhcd wi^h {heft aromaticall and me- 


OF MELANGHOLiE. si 
rie fpiritSjgiueth occafion only of this plcafant- 
oefTc, and is no caufc thereof,the heart making 
iuft claime to thefe affeSions as the only inftm- 
menc,& vnder the fouIe,chiefe author of thele 
vnroly companions : which inftrument is fo dif- 
poledjthat obeying the mind,and thoie naturall 
fules whereby all thinges arc eftecmcd.good or 
bad,true or fal(e,to be done or not to bee done, 
no otherwife then by a ciuil fubieftion ruled by 
counfel&no conftraint, it repugiieth oft times 
al the ftrong conciufions whatfocuerreafbn can 
make to the contrarie.Thus you ynderftad hovy 
a man may be angry and merie without e xter - 
nail obieft,or outward caufe: now let vs confi- 
dcr,howe fadnefle apd fcare, the ppintes which 
rooft belong to this difcourie, and your prefcnt 
ftatc,may alfo arife without occafion of outward 
terror either prefcntly molcfting , or fearing vs 
by likelihood,or pofsibilityj|f future dager» As 
the nature of choler is fubtill^ote,bitter , and 
of a fretting and biting quality ,both it felfe and 
the vapors that paffe from it, and blpudtcmpe- 
ntcjfwcete, and full ofcheercful and comforta¬ 
ble fpirits,3nfiverable to thofe we haue ingenc - 
rate,efpecially if they become aromatical, as I 
may terme them, and of a fragrant nature, by 
natural temper,or by meanes of diet: fo melan- 
tholie ofquality,gK)fle,dull,and of fewe com¬ 
fortable fpiritsiand plentifully repleniflied with 
filch as darken al the clearnefle of thofe fangui- 
neous,and ingrofle their fubtlenes,’ defile theit 
purenefle with the fogge of that flime, and feq- 
nie fubftaunce,and ftiut vp the hart as it were in 
a dungeon of obfeurity .caufeth many fcarefuU 
G fancies 


8 ATREATISE 

fancies, by abufing the brayne with vgly iUu, 
fions.& lockcth vp the gates of the hart, wheie-. 
out the fpihts fhould breake forth vpon iuft oc. 
cahqn, to the comfort of all the family of tlieii 
fellow membersrwhercby we arc in heauinefle, 
fit comfortlcfle.fcarcjdiftruft, doubt, difpaire, 
and lamentjwhen no caufc requircth it, but ra¬ 
ther a behauiqur befecmingc a heart vppoa 
iuft caufe, and found reafon moft comfortable, 
and chearcful.This doth melancholic work, not 
otherwife then the former humours,giuing ocr. 
cafton, and falfe matter of thefe paftions, and 
not by any difpoiition as of inftrument therun- 
to.OfallJthe other humours melancholic is ful- 
left of variety of pafsion,both [according to the. 
diuerfitieofplacc where it •fetlcth, as brayne,.. 
fplcnc,melaraicke vairies,heart,wombe,and fto* 
niach,as alfo through the diuerfekindes, as na¬ 
tural , vnnatoral: natural, either of the fplcne, 
orpfthc vaines,fa^yonly by exceffe of (}oan- 
titic, or thickcncfrcpf fubftance: Tonaturall by 
corruption, arid that either of bloud adoft, cho- 
Icr, or melancholic naturall ^byexcefsiuc di- 
ftemperofheate, turned in coroparifon of the 
naturall,into a lharpe lye by force of aduftion.^^ 
Thefe diuerfe forts hauing diuerfe matter, caofc 
mo ftraungc fymptomes of fancic and affeflion. 
to melancholickjc pcrfons.thcn their humour to 
fuch as are languinc,cholferickc, or flegmatickc-* 
which fleume of all.thc reft feructh Icaft to ftir 
yp any affeftion; but breeding rather a kinde of 
]ftupiditie,3nd an iropafsionate hart, theneafily 
moued to embrace or refufc, to forrow'orioy» 
anger or contentednelPfe : except ijbcc a falte; 

fleuffie 


OP MELANCHOLIE. 
5eurae,tlie approchcth it to the nature of cholcr 
4c in like fort therofriieth anger & frowardnes, 

CHAP. xvir. 

Hwmelanchotiefrocureth ,feart,f(idn£sjiffairt,ard 

fuch otherfafsions, 

2^0w let vs confider what pafsions they are 
that melanchohe driueth vs vnro , and the 
icafon how it doth lb diueifly diftra£t thofe that 
are opprefled therewith . The perturbations of 
melancholic are for the moft parte, faddc and 
fcarcfull, and fiich as rile of them : as diftruft, 
doubt.diffrdcnce,or dilpairc,fo,mctimcs furious, 
and fometimes merry in apparaunce, through a 
kindc of Sardonia.and falfc laughter, as the hu¬ 
mour is difpofed that procureth thele diuerfi- 
tics. Thofe which arc fad and penliue.rife of that 
melancholick humour, which is thcgrolTeft part 
of the bloud.whether it be iuyee or excrement, 
not pafling the naturall temper in heat whereof 
it partake th , and is called colde in comparifon. 
pncly. This for the moft part is fetled in the 
fplene, and with his vapours aonoyeth the heart 
and pafiing vp to the brainc, counterfefteth te- 
rible obieScs to the fantalie.and polluting both 
the fubftance,and Ipirites of the braine , caufeth 
it without external occafion,to forge monftrous 
fiftions,ahd terrible to the conceite, which the 
judgement taking as they are prelenred by the 
difbrdered inftrument. deliucr oucr.to thchartc, 
which hath no iudgement of diferetion in it Icifi 
bat giuing credite to the niiftakcn report of the 
braipe, bteaketh out into that inordinate pafsi- 
G.ij, on^ 



loo A TREATISE 

on, againft reafon.This commcth to paffc, bj; 
caufe the iiiftrumant of difcrction is dcprauci 
by thefe msUacholick fpiritcsiand a datkoes & 
cloadcs of melancholic vapours rifing from that 
piidle of the fplcne obfcurc the clearencs, which 
oar fpirites are indued with, and is rccjuiilteto 
the due dtlcretionsofoutward obieiftcs.Thisat 
the firft is riot fo extreamc,fleithcr doth itlhcwe 
foapparauntly, as inptocefleoftime , when 
. the fubftaunce of the braync hath plcntyful* 
Vlye drunke of that fplcnetickc fogge , wherehy 
i'jiis nature is become of the fame qualityc, and 
-'-^e pure and bright fpirits fo defiled, and eclip-- 
ft'fed, chat their indifforency alike to all fcnfible 
"T jihiDgeSjis now drawen to a partiality,and inclii 
/ nation,as by melancholy they are infpreed. Fot 
where that riaturall and internall light is darke¬ 
ned,their fanfiesatifevainc.falfe, and voide of 
groundteuenasin the esternall fcnfible darke^ 
hcs,a falfe illufion will appeare vnto our imagi¬ 
nation, which the light being broughtin is dif- 
eerned to be an abufe of fancier nowe' the inters 
nail darkcncffeafFefling more nigh oiir nature, 
then the outward, is canfe of greater fearcs, and 
more rrioleftethvs with terror, then that which 
taketh from vs the fight of fcnfible things: cfpi:* 
ciallyarifing not ofabfence of light only,butby 
a prefence of a fubftauncial obfeurity , which is 
poflefTed with an aftnall power of operation: 
this taking hold of the braine by procefTe of 
timegiuethit an habite ofdepraucd conccite; 
Wrbereby it fancicth not according to tructhrbot 
as the nature of that humour leadethit, altoge- 
Aergaftely and featefiil.This caufeth'not ooely 


OF MELANCHOLIE. loi 
ptaotaftlcal apparitions wronght by apprthen- 
fion only of common fenfe.but fantaiicjan othec 
parte of internal fcnfe compoundeth , and fotr 
geth difguiled (hapes, which gcue great terror 
vnto theheart,andcaufe it with the liucly fpirite 
to hide it felfe as wel as it can,by contraftion iri 
anpartcsjfromthofeconteifet goblins, which 
the braine difpofleiled of right difeerning, fay- 
neth vnto the heart. Neither only is common 
fenfe,and fantafie thus ouertaken with delufion, 
but memory a!fo receiueth a wounde therewith: 
which difableth it both to keepe in memoty.and 
to record thofc thinges, whereof it tooke fome 
cuftbdy before this pafsion,and after, therewith 
arc defaced. For a?the common fenfe and fan- 
lafye, which doc offer vnto the memory to lay 
vp,deliuer but fables in ftcad of true report, and 
thofe tragicall that difmay all the fenfible frame 
of our bodies, fo cither is the memorie wholly 
diftra£l by importunitie of thofe doubtes and 
feares, thatit neglcfteth the cuftodie ofother 
ftore or elfe it recordeth and apprehendeth on¬ 
ly fuch as by this importunity is thruft thcrupon 
nothing but darkencs,peril,doubt,frightes, and 
whatfocucr the harre of man moft doeth abhor. 
And thefe the fenfes do fo mclancholickcly dcli- 
uertoihe mindes confiderationf which iudgmg 
offuch thinges as bee offered, nothalhng far¬ 
ther to do in the deeper examination)that it ap- 
plyeth thofe certaine iegencrate pointes of rea - 
fon and wifedomc to a deccitfull cafe,though it 
be alwaiesin the general! , andif particularities 
bee deliuered vp a right, in them alfomoft cer- 
taine aud allured. For thofe tliinges which are 
G.iij. " fen- 



%0^ 


A TREATISE 
fcnflble, an J are as it were the coanterfettcs of 
outward creatures, the report of them is com* 
rnirted by Gods ordinaunceto the inftrumcnts 
of the braine futniflied with his fpinte,which if 
it bee, as the thinges are in nature , fo doth the 
minde iudge and dcitermine, no farther fubmit* 
ting it felfe to examine the credite of thefe fea* 
fes which (the inftrumentes being faultlefl'e.aod 
certainc other confiderations required neccfla* 
ry,agreeable vnto their integrity,)ncuer fade in 
their bufines , but are the very firft groundes of 
all this corporall aftion of life and wifedome, 
that the mind for the moft parte here outward¬ 
ly praftiicth.lf they be contrary,lb alfo doth the 
mind iudge,and purfucth or,/]iunneth, for thefe 
fcnfib'.c matters , repofing truft in the corporall 
minifters , whole mifreport, no more ought to 
diferedite the minde, or draw it into an acceffa- 
ry cry me of error, then the iudiciall fentence it 
to be blamed,which pronouneeth vpon the oth 
arid credite of a iurie impanelled of fuch as are 
reported men of honefty.crcd'.te, and diferction 
though their verdift bee not peraduentureac'' 
cording as the caufe committed to them doth 
require. Thememoriebeing thusfraightwith 

penis paftetand embracingonely through the 

btaynes diforderthat which is of difeornforte, 
caulcth the faritafie out of fuch recorvdes.to 
forge newc matters of ladnes and feare,whereof 
no occafion was at any time before, nor like W 
be giuenhereafter : to thefe fanfics ihe bart an* 
fwering with like mclancholickc affedibn .tut' 
neth all hope into feare, alTurance into difttuft 
gnddi(pairc,}opinto difcomforte t and as the 



OFMELANGHOLIE. 103 
melancholic nature, orbodieanie way corrupt’ 
iicfilcth the pure and holefome nourifhment, & 
conuerteth it into the fame kinds of impuritie; 
4 nd as the fire of all kinde of matter giueth in- 
creafe ofhcatc.whether itbe wood,ftone,mctaI, 
or liquor fo the body thus poflefled with the vn- 
chcarefun,& difcomfortable darknes of melan - 
cholic, obfeureth the Sunne and Moone, and 
all the comfortable planets of our natures, in 
luch fortjthat if they appears , they appeare all 
darke,and more then haife cclipfcd ofthis mift 
ofblackencs.rifingfrom thathidious lake : and 
in all thinges comfortable.either curjoufly pri- 
cth out, and fnatcheth atwhatfoeucr of miflikc 
may be drawne to the nouriihment of it felfc-'or 
elfe ncglefteth altogether that which is of other 
quality,then foode. and pafture of thole mon- 
ftcrs.whtch nature ncuer bred,nor perfeft fcnle 
conceiued, nor memprie vneorrupt would cucr 
allow entertainement, but are hatched out of 
this muddy humour,by an vnnaturall temper Sc 
baftard fpirite.to the difordcr of the whole regi¬ 
ment of humane nature.borh in judgement and 
affeffion.Thus the heart a while being acquain- 
tet, with nothing elle,but domeftical terror,fea- 
xeth eucry thing.and the braine limpatbetically 
partaking with the hartes fearc, maketh doubt, 
difl:ruftctli,& fulpefteth without caufc, alwaies 
ftanding iri awe of gricuaunce: wherwitb in time 
it becommeth lb tcndcr.that the leaft touch , as 
it were ones naile in an vlccr,giueth dilcourage- 
ment thereto , rubbing it vpon the gale cxulce- 
ratc with lorrow & fearcmcither only doubicth 
i; forrow vpon fmal occafio.but taketh it where 
G.iijj. none 



104 A TREATISE 

none is offered: euen as the cholcrick man fee. 
deth his pafsio with ridiculous caules of difplea. 
fiire.For firft(the generall being in a! natures a- 
ftions before the particular) the heart by the 
brainc folicitcd t94)afsi6>& vied to grief & feare 
taketh the accuftomed way of flight and auoy- 
dance,abhorring & fearing thofe thinges.which 
of themfelues ate mbft amiable and gratefulhat 
the firft not being aduifed,whereto to apply the 
pafsion: euen as one condemned to death with 
vndoubted cxpedation of execution, fearing e- 
uery knock at the prifon dore, hath horrour, 
though the meflenger of pardon with knock re¬ 
quire to be,admitted & let in,and cuery meflen- 
ger , where daunger is feared, though he come 
withcheareful countenance, gjiieth caufe ofdi- 
ftruft when there may be aflurance:euen fo, the 
heart ouercome v/ith inward, heauincs,and ska- 
red with inward feares,faireth as though what- ■ 
foeuer caufe bf affeftioD and perturbation were , 
minifter of prefentgriefe.orrheilcngcr of future ' 
daunger, by miffaking only, and withdrawcth j 
it felfe,and ihroudethit as {ecrete and. clofle,as 
nature will^fufFer , from that, which if cuftomc | 
had not bent it another way , vppon aduifement ; 
(now banifhed throughfwiftnes and vehemccy 
of pafsion)it would haue withioyful cheare em* 
braced. For eue as we fee in outward fefe .'the eie, 
or the eare long and vehemently affeSed with 
coulor,or found,or the nofe w!th ftrong feDt,rc- 
taine the very coulour.found.and fent in the m- 
ftfumentes, though the thing be remoued that 
yeeldedfuch qualities , fo the internall fenfes 
moleftcd confinually with this fearefull obieft 


OF MELANCHOLIE lof 
of internal darkcncs, efte^meih euerie diing of 
that nature: the true qualitie thereof being ob- 
fcurcjby that which hath taken poflefsion of the 
before. The brainc thus affedled, and the heart 
anfwering his pafsion thereafter, dnuethvs into 
thofeextremities of heauie mood, which aifaile 
and difpofleffc of tight vfcof reafon thofe who 
ate melancholicklic difpofedi much more if the 
heart be as melancholi^ly bent, as the brainc: 
then diuerfc times doeth it preuent the fancic 
with feare,and as a man tranfported withpafsio 
is vtterly bereft of aduilemet > caufeth the fenfes 
both outward.& inwarde prepofteroufly to con- 
ceiue, as the heart vaincly fcareth. This melan¬ 
choly as the partes are diucr{c,& aftions vary,fo 
doth it as it is ieated, or pafleth this or that way, 
breed diuerfitie of pafsion: 3 sin the hart a trem¬ 
bling. in the ftomach a greedy appetite : in the 
braincfalfc illufions , and in the other partes as 
theicarediipofed: to dcprauing their anions,it 
caufeth much variety of efFe£ls,which are nor in 
the nature ofthe humor,but as itdiftmbeth the 
afliue inftrumentes, no more then darknes cau¬ 
feth fomc to ftubIe,otherfom to go out of their 
way , & wander, & other fomc to bring to pafTe 
fuch purpofes, as light would bewray & hinder, 
al as they be difpofed Sc occupied which take the 
to their bufines in the dark, & not thiough anie 
fuch effeftual operation of darkenes, which is 
nought elfe but meere abfence of light Neither 
doth fo many ftraunge forts of accidents follow 
melancholy through dioerfiiy of pans only:but 
as thccuftomeoflife hath bin befote,& the fan- 
eje,& hart fome way vehemently occupied:there 
through 



ioS = ' A TRE AT IS g ' 

tills humoiir all the faculties aforenai 
nied, ate carried the fame way , as it were with 
the ftreame of a tide, driuen with a boyfteroui 
windej which caufeth that raclancholieke tneuy 
are not all of one nature pafsionate this wayrthe 
one taking his dolorous pafsion from his louc, 
another from his wealth; the other fto his plca» 
fures . whereof his melancholic bearetbhim in 
hand the prefent lofle, or imminent daunger of 
that wherein affeftion in former times had fo- 
reft footing; & on the other part, which before 
a man moft abhorred, that nowc the humor vr- 
geth with moft vehemcncie. Againeasitis mU 
xed with ocher homours.either keeping'medior 
crity.or abouding; fo hkewife breaketh it forth 
into fuch diuerfiries, & many times into plaine 
contrarieties ofconceit and perturbation. Thus 
you vnderftande, howe feares and forrowcsiilc, 
without caufe from naturall melancholic, whe¬ 
ther it bee iuyee, or excrement, not through 
chiefs a&on, as from workc of facultie, but by 
abufc of ieftrument through occafion. If the 
fplenfeticke cxcrementfurcharge the bodie, not 
being purged by hclpc of the fplene; then arc 
thefe perturbations farre more ootragious, and 
barde to be mitigated by counlell or perfwa- 
iion; and more do they enforce vs , the partes 
being altered with corporal! humour,then with 
fpiritual vapour : and fo are the pafsions lon^ 

f ;er in continuance , andmoreextreemein vcr 
emcncic. .For as the flame carricth not fuch 
fjfce of burning as the cole,neither contayncth 
the heate fb longej. euen fo the partes aflfer 
fted with the humom, which sarrieth both 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 107 
grofl^cfle of Cubftancc, witli contiouall fupr 
p!ie of that dimtnc vapour , Ictleth a more 
Jixcd paision of fcare and hcauinefle , then 
that which rifeih from the vapour oncly , part^ 
ly of the owne accordemore cafily vaniihing 
andpartly with greater facillitic wafted by na¬ 
tures ftrife and rcfiftance. No we it followcth to 
declare j howe the other vnnatutall melancholy 
anaoyeth with pafsions, & abufeth vs with cou- 
terfetcaufe of perturbation, whereof there is no 
ground in truth, but oncly a vaineand fantafti- 
call conceit. 

CHAP. XVIII. 

1 of the vnnttturaU meUtichoUe rifing by addupon^ 
hois it with diuersfafskns. 

Elides the former kindcs, there are fortes of 

vnnaturall melancholic: which I callfo ra¬ 
ther then the other, becaufc the other ofFendeih 
onlicin qualitie, orquantitie: theleare of ano¬ 
ther nature farredifagreeing from the other ,& 
by an vnproper fpeech called melancholy. They 
rife of thenaturall humors, or their excrements 
by excefliucdifteper of heate, burned as it were 
into alhes in comparifon ofhumonr , by which 
ahe humour of like nature being mixed.turncth 
it into a fhatpe lie: languine,cbolericke,or me- 
lancholickc,according to the humour thus bur- 
ned.which we call by name of melancholy .This 
fort raifeth the greatefl: tempeft of perturbatibs 
and moftof all deftroycth thebrainc with all hU 
faculties, and difpofition ofaftion,and maketh 
both it, Sc the hart cbeerc morevncorafoitably: 



io8 A TREATISE 

and if it rife of the natural rackncholy .beyond 
all likelihoode of truth,frame monftrous tetors 
of fcare and Keauinefle without caule. If it rife 
ofcholer, then rage playcth her parte, and furic 
ioyned with madnefle , putteth all out of 
framc^lf bloud miniftcr matter to this fire.eucry 
ferious thing for a time, is turned into aicft,& 
tragedies into comedies, and lamentadon into 
gigges and daunces : thus the pafsion whereof 
the humor miniftreth occafion^ by this vnkind- 
ly heate aduaunceth it felfc into greater extre> 
mities. For bccomming tnorcfubtile by heate* 
both in fabftance,& fpitit,it palfeth more deep¬ 
ly into all the parts of the inftrument it felfc, & 
is a conueyance alfo to the humour of the fame 
kinde: making a waie for natural! melancholy, 
wherewith it is mixed, into the vcric inward fe- 
crets of thole inftruments, whereof pafiions are 
aflFefted, cuen heart and brainc. Thus afFc^ied, 
you hauc men , when defperate furie is ioyned 
with feare,which fo terrifieth*. that to auoid the 
terrour, they attempt fomctimes to depriue the 
felues of lifeifo itkelbme it is vnto the through 
thefe tragicall conccits,although waighing and, 
confidering death by it felf without companion, 
and force of the pafsion, none morefcarc it the 
they. Thefe moft leckc to auoidc the focietic of 
men, andbetakethem towildcmelTcs .andde-* 
ferts.finding matter offearc in euery thing they 
beholdc j and beftat cafe, when alone they may 
digeft thefe fancies without new prouocations, 
which theie appreheodc in humane focietie. If 
choller hauc yeeldcd matter to this lharpe kind 
of melancholie, then rage, teuenge, and furic, 
poffelTc 


OF MELANCHOLIE 109 
polTeSe both heart and head, and the whole bo- 
die is carried with that ftormc; contrarie to per^ 
fuafion ofrcafon; which hath no farther power 
oner thefe affeftions, then by way of counfe! to 
giue other direftion (whereof the hart it fclfchs 
deilitute) and taking thefe difeomfortes of the 
creditc of the fenles, according thereto it appli- 
cthitfclfe, working,anddiipofingthe ingcnc- 
ratewifedome it is indued with, vnto thele parT 
ticulars, which the corporal inftrumentes cor¬ 
ruptly offer vnto it; which miniftreth doubt and 
queftioQ to fome not wel aduifed in this point, 
whether reafon it fclfe be not impared by thefe 
corporall alterations, and the imtnortall & ith- 
patible mind hereby fufFreth not violccc, which 
is farre otherwifc,if we duly way the matter.For 
the mad roan,of what kindc focuer he be of, as 
truly concludeth of that which fantafic niini'^ 
ftreth of conceit, as thewifeft: onely therein 
lieththeabufea^d defefte, that the organical 
partes which are ordained enibaf{adours,& no- 
tariesvnto the minde in thefe cafes, falfific the 
report, iiddeliuer corrupt recordcs. This is to 
be helped, as it (hall be declared more at large 
hereafter, by counfell onely fincerely miniftred, 
which is free from the corruptions of thofe offi¬ 
cers, and dcliuereth truth vnto the miade,whcr- 
by it putteth in pradiife contrarie to thefe im¬ 
portunate and furious follicitors. This furie is 
bred, becaufe choler thus aduft , getteth a grea¬ 
ter egemelTc of qualitie', and molefting the in- 
warde parts,and tpylingthe fpirits,ingendreth a 
greater- inwarde difquiet and difeontentment, 
Sien cruder choJci doth procure. The third fort 



UO A TREATISE 

is of meric melancholy, which rifeth ofthe{jlo<f 
ouer heated in fiichfort as I hauedeclared. Qf 
all the reft of humours,bloud is moft temperate 
and mild of difpofition.and comforteth the bo» 
die, as hath bccnc mentioned, whole fiibftance 
rcccauing that burning heat, wherebf rifeththe 
third kind of this vnnaturall melancholie, pro- 
cureth it to be ofa nature quickcand frcih, and 
indueth it with a fpirite of a nature fomewhat 
tnore itching,andas it were^of a tickling quali- 
tie then bloud it fclf For of it fclfe being (if it be 
pore and perfc<ft)nutrwecte, or milkefweete, by 
this licate becommeth firft fugar or hony fwceti 
which hath more force of affefting, and obtay- 
jieth a more fubtileand quicke fpirit:afterward 
by operation of heate, this {weetnefle is conuctr 
ted into a mild faltneffe.voyd offretting, which 
tickling and itching in thefe melancholikc bor 
dies, caufc them rather to be giuen to a ridicu¬ 
lous and ablurd mcriment, then a found ioye of 
hart, and comfortable gladneffc: which forceih 
them into laughter fomtimcs,that without cea* 
ling,to the tyring and wearying of their bodies, 
nopcrfwalion of reafbn is able to call them to 
more fobricty. We may fee in boyling of milkc; 
what fweetnefle is procured vnto it thereby { 5 C 
how hony much boy led,becommeth fait & bit¬ 
ter.- fuch is the force of heat in bloud,that it turt 
neth that milke fweet taft,into hpny fweet: and 
.that into a gentle & itching brackimnes, where¬ 
by the melancholickc bodies , being as it were 
tickledi render from their foolifh fantafic, and 
-falfe liking of the baft,many abfurd and ridicu- 
loas gefturcs and fpceches, and-( as farre altered 


OF MELA NC HO LIE. ti* 
Ais way,as the trielancholfck on the other 
fbatch at final occafions, or none at al ofttimcs; 
bfanfwcringthis fond humor in ootward light* 
nefle of gefturc & countenance. Thus you heare 
in what tort the humours fceme to afefte the 
inmd,eucty one fiogicd and keeping a part from 
his other fellowc humours : which, as they bee 
tempered with the other natural], or compoua* 
ded together with one or twaine of the like vn- 
naturall fortes of melancholie, make mabie di- 
ftinftions , and differences of melancholic paf- 
£bns: as tome more laddc,the other tome more 
meties tome quieter, &. other tome more prone 
to rage andfurie: andas the humours hauc their 
courfes, as for the ycare, bloud in the fpring j 
choller in fommer, melancholie in autumne, Sc 
fleume in winterrfor the houre according to So^ 
ranus Ephehus opinion,bloud from three of the 
docke in the morning, till nine of the fame day; 
choler from nine of the morning, til three at af 
teraooncjtoelancholicfro 3; at after noone tilt 
nine at night, and fleume from nine at night till 
the third of the morning. I fay if a mao obferue 
all thefe varieties , by mixture, and fcaton, with 
inclination of the partes, cuftomeof life, anti 
imbecillitie of fo.mepart, and proportioballie 
match the multitude of paifions with thefe oca 
caflons, he might haue the grouode of all thele 
troubleforae perturbations mad% plaine vnto 
him: why tome are contrarie affe^led tO other 
tome in their melancholicke fits, and are not all 
times alike, but iometimes fad , and fometimes 
txceffiue in mirth, no we rnore outr 3 giou 5 ,theo 
arangfoer timc> as feafoa of the yearc, & trine 



A TREATISE. ' 


of the daie approch, whet ci n thefe humors haiie 
more fpecial and pcrticiitar operation. But it 
were too long to deicende into (itch particulari¬ 
ties : itlhal Cuffice onclie to hauc declared how 
theie humors becomeoccafions of pafsions vn- 
co vs, and to hauenoted(uch a generalitieof 
rule, as any one may with calc thereby difeiphet 
the particulars. By that which hitherto hath bi.n 
ihewed, it appeareth thefe humors onely affeft 
the organ and corporal part, and nothing come 
nigh the minde and foule: which in the mcanc 
time of thefe ftormes andtempeftes of pafsion, 
thefe dclufions, feares, falfe terrours, and poeti- • 
call fidions of the braine, fitteth quiet and ftill, 
nothing altered in facultie, or any parte of that 
diuine and impatiblc difpofitio, which it obtai* 
neth by the exccllencie of creation: no mote 
then the Sunne is moued in the heauens, or re- 
ccaueth in it felfe an obfcuritie, when ftorroei 
arife, thunder, lightning, and cloudes ofdaik- 
nelTe, and boyfterous whirlewindes, feeme here 
belowetomire heauen and earth together, and " 
to make confufion in the courfe and frame of 
nature: And thus haue you the obieftions allea- 
ged againft that freedome of the foule from the 
inconucniences, aunfwercd I troft to your con-^ 
tentment.- Diuerfe accidentes followc theft bu- 
inqursj which are to be ?hewcd, both of fanciej 
fenfe, and afie( 9 ;ion, and alfo geftures & aQions 
of weeping, fighing,fobbing, laughing, Si fech 
like, with the reafons of cch one,and howe they 
be wrought by thefe pafsions t which I deferre 
in this place to difeuffe, being called onto pro* 
fecute the anfwere to the reft of the doubts pr<^ 
goundeo 


OF/MELANCK’OLiE. xij 
poan3cdbefore: which done fthat nothing , fo 
farre as my vnderftanding & mcmorie will help 
to the matter,may bee left obfeure vnto you in 
this cafe of nac!ancholie)I will hereafter profe- 
cute thofe alio, as I lhall hauc done the caufe* 
from whence they proceede. 

CHAP; XIX. 

H«w jtek^nes aniytaresfeemt to alter the mind: arid 
die cattfe : andhov the fouie'^ath fraBifeof fen^ 
fes^beingftf (Crated from the bodit, - i 

y^Lthough petfons fo difpofed with tnelani. 

cholie C as hath beene declared ) cnioy not 
perfeff eftate of health ,yet becaufe they com- 
■plainc no^t.neither are accounted ficke, neither 
lye for the matter,but feeme ( their fancies and 
iraine feares excepted ) to be otherwife health- 
full, I fo take them in this place though their 
■bodie be in that fort,as I hauc mentioned to be 
charged with dcfe9:,as vnfound and imperfeft. 
The laft of the obieftions is taken fro the con¬ 
dition of ficke perfons, who as in apparaunce 
dtfeemeth both receaue in their mindes altera¬ 
tion ofdefefl:,andincreafeoC faculties through 
thecorporall imbecillitieras though at certaine 
times the bodies health were tranl^rted to this 
eftablifhment of the mind^br the bodie at other 
times,& after an other fort weake, did commu¬ 
nicate that alfb vnto the foule.as'disburihening 
it felfc thereoh.To which obie£tion,the general 
anfvvcrc oforganical dilpofition of parts is here 
»ofe particularly to be appiycdiS: as in the for- 
H mM 


Ilf ATREATISE ’ 

nicrdoubtes/ointhisliudge a’lfuch aftion^ 
as the mind fcemeth to performc in that ftate of 
bodic,bcttcr or worfcjto beorganicall, pern* 
nentto fenfible things: & which as it pradtifeti 
not but in this life,nether hath fuch vfe of bein'* 
difioyned from this raaffe of earth whereto it is 
with fpirite coupled, fo in her faculties flic 
is not to be eftcemed fubieft to thefc alteraties, 
But you demaund a farther declaration of this 
point, whether ,dte tninde hath yfeoffenfeot 
not,after it diflodgeth from this earthly taber* 
nacle.To fatisfie you herein, if probabilitie of 
jeafon will ferue,! do not take it otherwifcithen 
that it i s all an eye, all an care, all nofe,raft,and 
£aewc,Without diftinaion, as thefe feacral in- 
ftruments which nowc it cmployeth make fliew 
of: For then were it not fimple in fubftance,but 
miift needs haue compounded fabftance, to an* 
fwete thefe particular fenfes, If you require ex¬ 
perience and example of this, becaufe it cannot 
DC had in foulcs departed ( bnt reafpn only rp' 
iioldcth the rule in refpeff of them ) let vs take 
that which dreames in iQccpc do miniftet for de¬ 
claration of this point, whi^ fleepe is a kinde of 
.lcparati6’ ofthe.fouic from the body for a time, 
at the Icaift a reft from outward fenfible aftions, 
whereby it inore freely applyeth it felfe to thpfe 
ditiine contertiplations .which is pnely learned 
-from the inftiaa ofprearioj&neuer apprehen- 
dedby any other infttuffion.In lleepe I fay, 
dreames in fomc fort make cuidcntvnto vs,hp«r 
the foulc without inftrument, lackcth pot the 
praftife of fenfes: i n which dreames we fee vr h® 
ourfoule,hcarc jtalkc > conferrc.and praftifc 


OF MEL A NC HO LIE. uf 

aftion fbeoer, as euidcntlywith affefiioii 
of ioyc orlbrrowe, as if the very obieftof thefc 
fcnfes wereieprcfentedyntovs brodc awake at 
ooone day. If you will fay it is nothing elfe, but 
the images of outwarde thinges, which hang in 
the common fenfeprefented to the fantafie, or 
offered of the memory.which inward fenfes are 
alwaies watchfull when the-outwarde take rcftc: 
liowthencommeth iccopa(Ie ,.thac we can not 
in like fort fancy being awake/If we fliuld ff riue 
to do it.eucry onelhouldfind it impoffible,as I 
takeitibecaurethefouleis in a lorte by that 
great law of necefsity (being chained with that 
golden chaine) in all partes linked to this body, 
which being awake, letteth thofe finccrc aftions 
whereabout it is bufied in fleepe : wherein 
cucry dreamcfcemeth to be a kindeofextal^r.oi 
traDace,& feparation of the foule from this bo> 
dilyfbeiety, in which it hath bene in oldc time 
inftrudlcd of God by reuelation, and myfteries 
offecretesreuealcdvnto it, as.thcn more fit tO' 
apprehende fuch diuinc oracles, then altogethet 
enioying awake the corporall fociety of thefe 
earthly members.But you will fay fuch dreames 
arc oft times butfancies.True; and many times 
they be'no fancies , whereof infinite examples 
may be brought, both (acred & prophane.Nowe 
when they be not,fufficiept profe arifeth to that 
I now difpute, that fbules haue fenfe of thinges 
withoutorganjcall fenfesiand when they bee but 
fancies, yet that which miniftreth the obieft, 
from fbmc diftemper of diet.or condition of the 
hody.good or bad, is fented with the minde on¬ 
ly, the outward fenfes being all in deepe fleepe, 
JJ,ij. - an3 


m6 a treatise 

and the inwarde hauing no power at alt to fte 
hearedmclljtaft or feelc,but only of difcerning 
that which the outwarde fcnfe deliuereth; for 
third there is none to whorne thefc aftions ate 
to be afcribed.Neither are thefe fcnfiblc aaions 
of the minde to be accompted falfc: bccaufc it 
fceth in drcames things paft as prcfent: for fo « 
doth alio future things fometitnes: which rather 
may argue,that botkpaft.and to come are both 
prefcnt vato the mind.offuch things as fall into 
the capacitie of her confideration. If anie man 
thinkeit much to aduince the mind fo high,let 
him remember from whom it proceeded,& the 
manerhoweit was created^and the moft excel¬ 
lent eftate thereof before the fall ,and no doubt 
itwillfafEcicntly anfwere that difficultie, and 
confirrae that which I haue faid. And thus much 
'for that interruption of my anfwere to the obic- 
^ion from fiekenes : whether the foulehath 
outward (enfe andnot organicalljor no.NoWto 
profecutc the auDfwerc: I fay all thofe which 
feeme to be faculties altered in ficfcnefles.bc on* 
lyorganicall difpofitions which the foulevfeth 
as fhe fiodeth chcm> As for the outward {eofes, 
the huraiditics.andraperflaitics ofthe earcs ,ia 
fomc ficknefle being dried vp, maketh hearing 
more quicke then in health : fo the pootes w 
fmelling may bee more open : and the eye by 
the fame rcafonreccaue quicker fight: and the 
lenfe of feeling more exadftor by realbn the fpi* 
rites are more fubtile, which thereby with grea* 
ter cafe floWe into all psrtes of the inftroment 
nowc emptied of fiipcrfluitie. Againe in phrea- 
fickeperfons, weefee through drines of the 
brainc 



OFMELANCHOLIE 117 
traine and finewcs, whatftrength they become 
of, that fewer men in health are fcarft able to 
hold them,though otherwife weake and feebicr 
Nowe the outward palTages of lenfes thus clea¬ 
red,and the fpirits more rare and fubtile.deliuer 
more exaftly to the inwarde the Ideas of fuch 
things as require to be admitted: which inward 
(enfes by like difpofition of the braine.morcex* 
aftly difeerne the outward quaiitie of thinges,&: 
deliucr more finccre reporte vnto the minde, 
whichfinding all fo cleare giueth fentence, pro- 
nounceth, and debateth more perfeftly, in re-^ 
fped of that diftin£fion and clearnelle it fiudeth 
inthofc pcrfbnall reprefentations of thinges, 
which maye feeme vnto fuck as eonfldet not 
duely whereof it rifeth. to bee an increafe of 
gift in the minde by fickneflfe , and not greater 
clearenefle of the obieft. This difpofition ofin- 
firument caufeth feme children to bee more 
pregnant then other fome, and in fickenefle 
many one to be of better aduifcmcnt then in 
health; and if you lift inferre it vppon the for» 
mer groundesr I will not deny this to be the 
eaufc why fome be idipttes and fooles, and 
other fome of quicke fpirit, and prompt witted. 
Kowe as the clearing of the poorcs, and fubti- 
liation of fpirits, is caufe of thefc more ready 
and diftinft aftions in fickencs then in health, 
and in youth aboue the tendernes of yeares: 
fo in health the poorcs rcpleniflied with their 
humours, andthefpiritesrccoueringtheir or- 
dinariegroflcncs, or mediocritie, theaftions 
become of the fame condition they were before: 
hot by.any alteration of facultic, but through 
H.iij. inftra- 


ii* A TREATISE 

inftrumcotdlucrfly difpofe<l,In like manner tke 
aged,farrc ftroken in yeares, failc in the execu¬ 
tion of externall adfions: though their myndes 
fiiould rather be wifer through experience , (if 
anye thing be learned by the praftife of thir 
life ) byexcremcntitioushumiditie.and rew- 
maticke fuperfiuities, which drowne the inftru* 
ment.and an internail dnneffe.wheiby all wayei 
tothatfmal renantoffpiric is flopped, through 
eontradbion and Ihrinking ofpootes, the veryd 
cundites ofthe Ipirite into al the corporal mem- 
bersrneither only dothey failein outward feufe 
and motion, but the internail alfo fufFer like 
imbecillity, whereupon their minde framingc 
conclufions yppon falfe groundes.fecmc to faile 
in that adfion alfo, not hauing better matter td 
work onJfyou fay vnto me: why is not this heh 
fed by that inorganicall fenfe of the miodc, and 
fo thefe inconueniences auoyded?you muft cop- 
fiderthe minde ncuer cxercifeth that, but being; 
withdrawen from the corporall focicty, & thefc 
imechanicall aftions,which in a maner in fleepc 
& extafle itis:tfaen it maketh choice of particU'; 
lars.asitliftethit{elfe;what,who,where . 
when: neither is it tycd to thefe outward mmir 
fters j or thofe Ideas which they take viewe ofi 
Morcouer we mufl remember that during this 
life ( fauing vpon certaine occafions extraordi* 
nary,) God hath ordained thefe adSions corpp* 
rahneithcr is it neceffary that wants of outward 
(enfes fhouid be fofupplicd.which (before finne 
tooke fuch hold of foulc & body)were not fub- 
icdl to thefe imbecillities , but pcrfe^ly and fin- 
merely deliucrcd (he condijion fenfible tbiflg* 


OFMELANCHOLIE. 1x9 
to tlie mindes codiidcration > which rcpoficg 
truft in them,according to the integryty where¬ 
in they firft flood, difehargeth her office of vn* 
derftaading,iudgiDg,& willing,as this way only 
itflndethcaule. And thus much touching the 
anfwcrc to the former obieftionsmotwithftan- 
ding whofe probabilities to the contraryi you 
may perccauc how the body only recciucth thefe 
alterations before mentioned , euen as inflru- 
mcncs of a corporall fubftance, and railed from 
the earth, fubiedt to earthly and elementary 
chauDges, without touch of foule.or difturbing 
ofthat immortal nature,which proceeded from 
the breath of God,and is of a more noble.race: 
neither are you lb to vnderftand irie,as though I 
acebmpted the foule in this prefent ftate cquall 
with the fitft creation; that wereerronious an4 
againft thchiftoiy of mans fal.and of that curlbj 
whichenfued through difobcdicncc , andcon- 
trarie to that experience, which euery one fin» 
deth of imhecillity in the moft excellent adfion* 
of the minde.and fuch as requirp no organ: but 
my difeourfc tendeth in this point to exempt it 
from corporal contagion onIy,whichit can hoc 
in any fort rcceaue,more then the beauens pol¬ 
lution from the carth^bcing a nature farre more 
different in comparifon then the heauens,/rom 
this inferiour worId,which isallottedto our vie 
ofhabiution.\ Hauing hitherto declared how 
perturbations rife'of humoars.ahhogb it be not 
greatly pertinent to the matter in hand, ofeoun- 
fell.in this pafsioayet bccaule my meaning is 
not only to fatisfic your requeft in that, but alfo 
Jtgiaeyott argumetofphilofophical di(eoyiife. 



' A TREATISE ' 
to occupie your felfe in this heauie time,wlicTc- 
inboth melancholiedothall it may to difcoa- 
iag€ you,and Sathan the oldc enimic takcth ad- 
uantagc to feruc his turne vpo your prefent ini» 
beciliity,! will add the reafon of fuch accidenies 
as fal vnto thele pafsions.in luch probability, as 
my hability will afFootd, both for mine bwne 
exercifcjand your contentment, whom in times' 
pafi T haue knowne to be delighted with ftudie 
ofphilofophie. 

CHAP. XX. 

Theweidentesrthtch befall melaticheliekf 
ferfinu 

all other ftatc of bodie, fb the melancho- 
licklhcweth it felfe,either in the qualitiesof 
the body,or in the dceds.Of the qualities which 
are firft taken fro the elemets, the melaeholickc 
without aduftioHjis cold and dryrof fuch as arc 
fecondjrifing from the firft,of colour black and 
fWartjOffuHftance inclining to hardnes, leane, 
and fpare offlcih: which caulethhollownes of 
eye, and rnchcarcfulnes of countenaunce, all 
thefemore orleffc.fomeor aheitheras the me- 
laeholy is ingenerate,or gotten by error of diet, 
hath continued longer,or ffiort time. Of deedes, 
and fuch as are adlions of the brainc, either of 
fenfe and motions.dull.both in outward fenfes, 
and conceite. Of memory reafonabic good.if 
fancies deface it notifirmc in opinion,and hard¬ 
ly remoued where it is refohiedrdoubtful before 
and long in delibcrationifijfpicious. painefull i« 
Jhidiciand ciTOimlpeft , giuen tofearefuH and 
terrible 


OF MELANCHOLIE i»t 

terrible dreame; in afFeftion fad, & fql of fcare 
Hardly moued to anger, but keeping it long, & 
rot eafie to be reconciled: enuious, and iclous, 
apt totake occafions in the worfe part, and our 
ofmeafure pafsionate, wherto it is moued. Fro 
thefe two difpofidons of braine and heart ari(c 
foUtarines,mourning,weping,& (if it be of fan- 
guine aduft)melanchoIic laughter.fighing.fob* 
bing, lamentation, countenance demifle, and 
hanging downe, blufhing and bafiiful, of pace 
flow,filcnt,negligcnt,refulIng the light and fre¬ 
quency of men, delighted more in folitarines Sc 
obfeurity.Thefe are aftios which lis in our pow* 
erstodoe.and are called animail. Of natural 
aftions, their appetite is greater than their con- 
toSion, digcftion flowe, and excretion not lb 
rcadie, pulfe rare, an J flowe. And thus faircth it 
with melancholy perfons in thofe decdcs which 
are aftions. Other deedes ate certaine workes, 
and effeftes of their naturall aftions: fuch are 
nutritine iuice, or excrement. Their nutritiue 
iuice asbloud, and the fecondary humours that 
rife there from, are thick and groflejtheir bloud 
blacke.and nothing frelh Their melancholidcc 
excrement very much, if the fplcne doe his part; 
if it fade, either by imbecillicie ofattradlion.or 
any hinderance ofobftm£fion , then is it more 
plentifull in the veynes, and greatcly altcreth 
the complexion:if it difeharge not it fclfe of the 
fnperfluitie of that it hath drawen fro the bloud, 
then fwellcth it, and groweth it into obftrufii- 
ons.caufeth fliortncs of breathiBg,cfpecially af¬ 
ter meatc , and an vnnaturall boylingofheate, 
with wyndiaes vnder the left fide, and plenty of 
iuimiditic 



A TREATISE 

humidity in the ftomach, which aboiindcthia 
fpitting by hindering the firft coocodion in the 
ftomach and noylomc vapours, caulitw palpita¬ 
tion of the heart. The excrement offtoole ii 
haTde,blackc,and ieeldome: vrine.pa!c,and verie 
lowcoloured, normuch in quantitie. Thcfe are 
the chiefeaccidentcs which fal vpon mclanchb- 
licke {ierfonsiof them I wil deliuer vnro you the 
particular caufes, fo farre as belongeth vnto the. 
charge of this melancholicke difeourfe. 

CHAP. XXL 

Hwe mlamhuUt altereth the ^mllitiuefthe 
bodie, 

H R bodies of melanchoUck perfons,if they 
be naturally giuen to that humor, or other- 
wyfe ithath preuailed in time vppon them, are 
colder, and drier then others, or if they be fucb 
by errOr of diet, the in times paft they thefelues 
haue benc:partlythrough contagion of that hu¬ 
mor, which with his cold altcreth the complex¬ 
ion,and partly by the nourilhment takenfrom 
the mafic of bloud: becaufeall thepartes are 
mainrayned.and rcleeued with cold and dry ali- 
ment.thd reft of the bloud being cooled by that 
gro fie, and earthie parte. Sometimes it faircth 
with them othcrwiic, to be iniemperately bote 
through obftrudion, which may gather heat in 
thefplenc.and foaccidentallybreedeanhoatc 
diftemper. Againe if the melancholic be of jthc 
aduft kinde, which pertaketh of heate, and be- 
commeth eger and fell.then arc they allb diftc- 
psri^ in hcatc,,or at the leaftnot mojefted with 



OF MELANCHOLIE. 123 
told, and hbwfoeucr itfaixcwith them in hoatc 
or cold, alwayes they keepc drie in fubftance of 
their bodics.both the naturall, and the adiift a- 
rsclancholy agreeing therewith. An humiditie 
they haae of Rewme.and fpitting from the fto- 
machjwhofc conco^ion is hindred.and natural 
heatc cooled (bmetimes by the fplenes difor- 
der,whichliethnigh thereunto , and may with 
tnoreplentie then need requireth of thatfoure 
iuice, which ferueth to ftirrevppeapetite, dull 
that heat of the ftomach wherewith the conco- 
ftion is made perfeft, and cxcreincntes become 
few; but this is a moiftnes cXcremerititious^and 
accidental! in that parte, and peraduentnre like 
inthebraine, byeohfent of the ftomach: the 
fubftanceofthe reft keeping drie thorough the 
nature of chcinourifliment, which in time ma- 
keth the coihplexion of like qualicie. They are 
not fo wel flefiit, nor in fuch good plight, as ci¬ 
ther they haue bin, or asfome other compleri- 
on:by reafbh all the natural aftions that flrould 
ferue that vfe, are become weaker, & as it were 
fmothered with this foote of melancholic : nei¬ 
ther is the melancholic blond colde and drie, a 
fitte matter to raife vp fan, or plenty of fltlhrfor 
to both thefe are requifite a moderation of cot 
plexion in the firft qualities, & a matter of mo¬ 
derate temper, which may entcrtainc both flefh 
and fatt. Thirdly the poores of the body beeing 
not fo free,for difttibutio of bloud.by reafon of 
their grofte nourifliment.and nature of the hu- 
mpr with which his coldnes and fowernes, ffor 
fech is the taftc of melancholic-) clofeth vp the 
pooresjor ftraightneththe paftages, & of it felfe 
jilfo 



Ii4 A treatise 

alfo flow of mooing, the bodie cannot be filled 
with that corpulency which falleth to other c6- 
plcxions. To the nouriflirocnt and good plight 
of the body, thefe three arc neceflarie: Coplcxi. 
on temperate, matter moderate, & paffageftce; 
which all falling contrary in melancholick per- 
fons.hindereth them of that good liking. & fuU 
CCS of body.which otherwife they might cnioy. 
For if the complexion be too hote then wafteth 
it, and therein rifeth the cholerick skrectnes: if 
it be too cold, then raileth it not fufficicncieof 
noonftiment of nieates, drinkes, & whatfoeuct 
we vfc for fflftcntatio of life:but leaueth it crude 
and maketh mo fuperfluitics. If it be dric, then 
drinketh it vp vnto tie folide partes, that which 
ihould baftc and line the body with, hauing not 
to fpare. If moift.thcn in ftead offirmc fubftace, 
the bodie is ouercharged with a counterfette 
fcindeoffatte, aind hydropical fogge,which bea- 
reih Ihewe of good babite>lf the matter be boat 
or dric,it foone vaoi(hcth,or hath not that ftore 
of nourifhing iuice, to yecld matter of flefli and 
fatte, befides the firmc nouriffimcnt. If moyft, 
then fwelleth it the bodie: and as water enlar' 
geth a fpongc, lo doth moift nourifliment foake 
into the bodie, and beareth it out, as faft fub- 
fiance doth naturally fill, railed from temperate 
nourilhmet Ifcold:then both hath it fraall por¬ 
tion of oaturall iuicc^and flow to be palTed from 
parte to part, it is not cafily rcceiucd into cue- 
ty member, whereof corpulencic doth rife. The 
paflages being cither narro we of themlelues, or 
hindered by ftopping,diftributi6 is likewife let¬ 
ted, yeri6,requifite to the maintenance of good 
liking^ 



OF MEL A NC HO LIE rtf 
Jikiflg^and moderate habirie of the body: which 
being ouerlarge giue cntcrraincrBent and place 
to groflcncs, whether it be fouodc, or in appa« 
tantc. No we thefe three failing out, cold»drie* 
thick and hard ofpaffagc, in tnclanchplick per- 
fons, procure that leane, and fpare bodie of the 
tnelancholicke: except it be by former cuifome 
of diet, or naturally otherwife, which the force 
of melancholy hath not yet lb fkrrc altered. Of 
this cojdnesanddrynes, rifeth hardnes where> 
of the flelh of meladcholy perfons is: except the 
melancholy nfe of fome difordcr of diet, or paf- 
Cons, and hath cot yet entredfofarrevpon the 
complexion, of colour they be black,according 
to.the humour v/hereof they aie nOurilhed, and 
theskinne alwa'ies receauingthe blacke vapors, 
which infcnfibly do pajflfe from the inward parts, 
taketh die and ftaine thereof: fauing that in the 
beginning it may come to palTe othcrwifc, the 
body whitc.and bloud blacke: nature for a time 
feruing her felfe of that which is pureft, and lea¬ 
ning the grofleft iri the vaines, till for want of 
better, in the end it be faine to take of the me- - 
laiicholicke . which befs^e it difdained: then al- 
tercth it the colour, and fairenefle is turned in¬ 
to roorphe, maketh eviidcnt the humour wbidi 
gaue the die. & hath obfeured the foimer beau- 
tie. A^id thus are the qualities of melancholie 
bodies altered by this grofle, eartbie and dark® 
humour. 

CHAP. XXII. 

MwjtmtlattcholyMtereihtkofeaS^imsTfhich 
rSfe 0H$ of tht brain 

Touching 



,isg A TREATISE 

/^OuchiDg a£lioas which rife from the hraiV 
mclaocholie caufcth dalneiTe of conceit* 
both by reafon the fubftaunceof the braincin 
iuch perfonnes is more groffe, and their (pirite 
not fo prompt and fubtileas is requifitfor ready 
vnderftandinge. Againe almoft all the fcnfcj 
ftanding in a kindc of paffiue nature,a fubllance 
cold'and drie, and by confequent hard, is notio I 

meetc thcretcr; which as it ieructh well to re- 
taine that which is once ingrauen, fo like ada¬ 
mant it kcepeth, in corapariibn of other tem¬ 
pers, that whi A once it hath reccaued: where¬ 
by as they are vnfit to commit redily to memo- 
tie , fo retaine they that is committed in futcr ^ 
cuftodie. Sometime it fallcth out, that melan- 
cholie men are founde verie wittie, and quickly 
difeerne: either becaufe the humour of melan- ^ 
choly with fome heate is fo made fubtile.that as | 

from the drieftwoode rifeih the cleareft flame^ 
and from the I yes of wine is diftilled a ftrong & 
burning aqua vitae,in like fort their fpirits.both 
from the drinefle of the matter, and ftraining of 
the grofle fubftance from which they pafle, re- 
.ceauing a pureneffc, are inftrumentes of fuch 
fharpnefle; which is the drielightthat Heracli¬ 
tus approued. To this, other rcafons may be ad¬ 
ded: as exercile of their wittes, wherein they be i 
indefatigable : which maketh them feeme'to 
haue that of a naturall readinefle, which cu- 
ftonie of «ercife , and vfe hath founde in theni. 
Moreouer, while their pafsions be not yet vche* 
met,whereby they might be ouercaried,mel3n- 
choliebrecdethaieloulleof doubt in that they 
take in deliberation, and caufeth them to be the 
• ■ more 


OF MELANCHOLIE. Ilf 
0iore cxaft & curious in pSiering tbe very mo- 
tnents of things; tothefe reafons may be aided, 
ihcvehemencie of their affedion oncerayfedt 
which carieth them, with all their faculties rher* 
tobelonging, into thcdcapth ofthat they take 
plcafure to intermeddle in.For though the me- 
laneholie man be not fo cafily affefted with any 
other pafsions, as with thofe of feare.ladneircjSc 
iclofie.yet being once throughly heat with a c6- 
trarie pafsion, retaineth the feruencye thereof 
farre longer time then anic other Complexion: 

, and more fcrucntly boyleth therewith, by rea- 
fbn his heart and fpiritchath more folliditie of 
fubftaunce to entertayne dcepelie the pafsion^ 
whichin amore rare and thinne foonervani- 
fhethaway. This greedineffe of defire in rhofe 
thinges which they afFcft, maketh them dili¬ 
gent and paincfull, warie and circumQjcft , and 
fb in afliions of braine and fenfenot inferiour to 
the beft tempers; as alfo it maketh them ftiffe 
in opinion. Their refolotion rifeth of long deli¬ 
beration, becaufe of doubt and diftruft: which 
- as it is not eafily bred, fo it is alfo harde to re- 
moue. Such petfons are doubtfull, fuJpitipus, 
and thereby long in deliberation, becaufc thofs 
domefticallfeares,orthat intcrnallcbfeuritie, 
eaufeth an opinion of daunger in outwarde af¬ 
faires , where there is no caufe of doubt: their 
dreamcsarefearefull: partly by rcafonof their 
fanciewaking, ismoft occupied about feares, 
and terrouTs , which retaineth the imprefsion 
in fleepe,and partly ouercharged througbt black 
and darke fumes of melancholie, rifieg vppe to 
the braine, whereof the fantafie forgeth obiefts, 
and 



tis A TREATISE, 

and difturbctli the deep of melancholy perfons. 
Thefe perfons arc alio rubiefte to that kinde of 
fuffocatiaio the night,which is called the marc, 
wherein, withfome horrible vifion in dreame 
they arc halfe ftrangled , and intercepted of 
fpccch , through they ftriueto call . Thishap- 
peneth through grofle raelancholick vapours in 
them which caufe horrible and feareful appa- ^ 
ritions.by reafon of the nature o*^that humour,^ 
andthefancie prone through cuftometo con- 
ceaue on the worfe parte , and ftoppeth their 
winde, by occupying the paflTages of fuch fpirits 
as rile from the braine, and flowe into the net- i 
r ues which ferae certaine mufclcs of refpiration; I 
it happeneth chiefly when they lye on iheir 
backc, and fotriewhat too low with their heade; 
becaufe both the midriffe ( a chiefc mufclcof | 
Tefpiration ) is more preifed with the bowelles, I 
which lie vnder it, the ftomach is not fo firmely 
doled, whereby vapours moreeafily haae vent, 
and the whole- bulke of the cheft in that pofi- 
tion of the bodie » lying more heauily vppoa 
them, requireth greater force of mouing facul* 
tic, whofe fpirit receaueth impediment of pafla- 
ges by thele thicke and melancholicke fumes: 
and thus are the aftions of brainc altered 
by melancholic. 

CHAP, xxiir. 

hlome fiffeSIions be alteretL , 

V C HI N G their affeftions of fcare and 
fadnefle, fufficicntly hath bene faide before; 
(auing whether is firft in place, and poflefleth 


OF MEL A NC HO LIE. n? 
firft the tnekncholicke Iiean.it tnay make fomc 
queftipn. la mine opinion, feare is the verie 
ground and rpotcof that forowe,which melan- 
chohck me arc throwne into.Fox^ continuance 
of feare, which is ofdaunger to conie, fo ouer- 
layeth the heart that it maketh it as nowpre- 
fent, which is only in expetT:ation,and although 
the daunger feared he.abfent, yet the affured- 
neflethercof in the opinion of a melancholicke 
braine as alwayes prefent, which ingendreth a 
forow alwayes accompanying their fearcs. They 
arc hardely moued to anger, except a biting 
and fretting choler be misted with their melan¬ 
choly,or the melancholy be of an aduft kiiid:by 
reafon they be ouerpafsionat another way, and 
haue their partes of groiler fenfe theneafily to 
be offended, and the heart not ready to be mo¬ 
ued, being of a colder & drier natureror fo afie- 
fted by the humor, which being once through¬ 
ly kindled with that pafsion,retayneth thcheatc 
longer, and is not eafily brought againe into 
the former temper. Enuious they are, becaufe 
of their Dwne falfe conceaued want, whereby 
their eftatc , feeming in theyr bwne fantafie 
muchworfe then it is, or then the condition of 
other men, maketh them defire that they ftc 
other to enioy, to better their eftate: this ma¬ 
keth them couetours of getting, though in cX- 
pence where their humour moucth them with 
liking, or avoydance of periIl,more then prodi¬ 
gall. leloufie pricketh them, becaufe they are 
not contented with any moderation, but thinks 
all too little for fiipply of their want: efpecially 
if it ftand in fuch matters as import great fup- 
1. plie 



,50 ATREATISE 

plic, or otherwifc they do earncftly afieft: and 
are in featc Icaft communication brecde whole 
diipoflefsiop, or make inequall partition.They 
intcrprctc , readily all to the vvorfe part, fufpiti- 
ous, ieaft it be a mattcrof farther fcarc, and not 
indifferently weighing the cafe, but poyfingii 
by their fantafticall fcarc, and doubt at home. 1 
Pafsionate they be out of meafure, whereto a 
vehement obieft and of long continuance vr-i 
geith them: this caufeth them to be amorous, 
both becaufe it is a pleafurc to loue, which tnit* 
tigateth their inward forow and timiditic, thin- 
neth their bloud, and dilateth the heart, and a I 
caufe to be bcloucd againe, which of all things 
liketh the melancholie perfons, being the grea- 
teft meanes of comfort vnto them: from which 
all offices of kindnefle, curtefie, and grace do • 
flowe: this affeflion lilbth not vnto them by ' 
proaneneflTe of nature, but by the force of that 
whiclr draweth them vrito the vehemcncie of 
pafsion, wherein they fo oft times exccede, that | 
it bereaueth them for a timc(ieloufie excepted) j 
of all other affedfion.lf the melancholic Be fan- I 
guine aduft, then may it fupply the want in the j 
obieft, and caufe an internail amorous difpofi- 
tion, with fuch dotage, that maketh nodifere- 
tion where the afleftion is beftowed; as he that 
is of a merrie nature will laugh at his conceit, 
and the angrie man: difpleafed with his ownc 
lhadowe. Thus fatte of the lirople aftions of 
brayne and heart, which are altered in roclan- 
cholickc perfons.and the maner how, with rea- 
fon of their altera tion: other aftions are in com- 
patifon of thefe mixed: as mourning, rifing of 
yaine 



OF MEtANCHOLlE. xjj 

faioefcare, orcountcrfct mi/crie, (bliunoelle, 
Icaft occafion of giicfe be miniftred by compa- 
nie and rcfbrt: llicnce, thorough rctraftion o£ 
(pints by their pafsion(cXccpt it be in tnournc* 
full plaints) to tnitigate the foro we, and 
nefleofthe inftruments, bolides the diforderlj^ 
fearc and heauinelTe which cannot either mini- 
fter, nor take occalion of familiar conference 
and communication, wholly tranfporting them - 
to the concofting of their forowfull humour i 
which breedeth in them (the pafiion more and 
more incrcafing) a negligence in their af&ires, 
and dilTolutenellc, where Ihould be diligence. 
Of pace, they arc for the moft part lloWe, except 
pcrill caufc them to haften , both by reafon o£ 
their members not fo nimble for motion, and 
the mind occupied with cogitation ahd ftudie 
ftaycth the pace: as we find our fclues'afFefled, 
when any matter of weight entreth into out 
meditation, Moreouer they are giuen to wee¬ 
ping fometimesfifthe melancholy be fanguine, 
they exceed in laughter) fighing, fobbing. la¬ 
mentation, countenance demiflei andlowringe^ 
balhfulneffe, and blulhing, thereafons whereof 
and manner how they arife, becaufe it requireth 
a larger difcourfe, I will referre them more par¬ 
ticularly to be difeufled in feuerall Chapters fol¬ 
lowing, with Philofophicall caufes, or proba- 
'bilities (at the leaft) how eueriebne ofthclc 
are wrought, that you be fully iuftruftedin 
that (peculation of melancholic, and the acci¬ 
dents which follow it, as you are (more then I 
wilh, or ftandeth with your prefent comfort) 
exercifed in the pradife. 

I.ij, CHAP^ 



A TREATISE 


t3* 

CHAP. XXIIir. 

The caafes of tearet, and thsif falmffe. 

Q p allthc aftions ofmelancliolie, orratkcr 

of heauinefle and fadnefle» none is fo tna- 
nifolde and diuerfe iii partes , as that of wee¬ 
ping. Fyrft of all it putteth finger in the eye, 
and Iheadeth tcares: then it bafeth the coun- 
tenaunce into the bofonie: thirdly it draweth 
the cheekes with a kinde of conuulfion on both 
fydes, and turneth the countenaunce into a 
relemblance ofgirning, and letteth thebrowes 
fall; vppon the: eye liddcs: it bleareth the eyes, 
and maketh the cheekes red: it cauleth the head 
to ake. the nofe to runne, and month toflauer, 
the lips to tremble: interrupteth the fpeeche, 
and fhaketh the whole cheft with fighes, and 
fobs: and fuch arc the companions of this fo- 
rowfullgefture of weeping: of which I willdc- 
liaer you the reafon one by one, firft beginning 
with teares; All r>bie£is, or-caufe of perturbati¬ 
on rifeth more or lelTc grieuous, or acceptable, 
as.it is taken: and although the caufe be great, 
if It be not apprehended, it tnoueth no pertur¬ 
bation at all. This caufeth fpme to forrowe, 
whereat another Teioyceth: and other fome to 
lament, which other fome beare out with coii* 
rage, or haue no fuch fenfe of: and to exceed in 
ioy or forow, (except reafon moderate thea& 
feftion) where other fome keepe mediocritie: 
by reafon of certaine degree of apprehenfion: 
yea though reafon faearc no part in the mode¬ 
ration. Moreouer feeing it is neceffarie , that 
both btainc andharf be dilp©fed in a kinde of 

.Sympa* 


OF MELANCHOLIE 135 

Svrop^thie, to fhevv foorth the affection, as they 
be diuerflie difpofed, fb may the caufe of per- 
turbatioo more or lefle moue and trouble. As 
if the braync be quicker of conccit,and of mote 
exaft diferetion then the heart is ready to yeeld 
his paftion, by reafon of a more comparand 
firme temper, then is it not aunfwerable to the 
apprehended hurt or daunger. If it be more 
dull, then by reafon the apprehenfion entreth 
not duly into the confideration.of theprefebt 
ftate, or imminent perill, the afFeAion aunfwe- 
leth not the caafe. Ifthc hart be more tender, 
then the braine ready: there is fearc and heaui- 
nefle oft times, either without caufe, ormorc 
vehement then caufe requireth: and thus it fa- 
reth in the reft of the perturbations, thefe three 
alwayes concurring in the affeSion: die out- 
warde mouer or caufe, the apprehenfion of the 
bratne, and the motion of the hart: according 
to the varietie and diuerfe difpofition of which 
three, the perturbations become diftinft in 
kinde, and diuerfe in degree. This is neceflaric 
foryoatoknow.forthe more plaine deliuerie 
of the caufes of the accidents before mentio¬ 
ned: and firft of teares, whofe pafsionisnotc- 
uerie kinde of griefe, nor any one kind alike 
taken, neither though the griefe be taken alike, 
and the caufe iuft' and true, yet doeth the partie 
not alwayes fheadc teares, thus affedled. Fiift 
therefore, for the manjfeftatton of this matter 
of teares we are to fearch what kind of thing it 
is thar moueth weeping,then how it isfto be re- 
cemed to worke this effeft, and thirdly of what 
difpofition they are when iuft occafion is mini- 
I. iij. ftrcdj 



134 A TREATISE 

ftred.andttic caufe be fo taken, that readily fig; , 
nifie their inward pafsion,by that dolorous out, 
ward gefture and aclion.Of fuch caufcs as draw 

vs into perturbation and pafiion,that only which 

moueth gricfc andforrow of hart caufcth tearcs. 
Such weeping as feemeth to proceede of ioyeis 
ofamizt caufe as lltall hereafter be declared, 
and maketh no exception to that vniuerfall caufe 
of teares procured by affiiftion, or greeuaunce; 
for elfe we fee ho man weepe but in forrowc: 
neither do any farrow , but vpon occafion or 
perfwafion of calamitie.or hurt,either prefentor 
to come t iauing thofe which are melancho' 
licke pafsionatc, who notwithftanding fancys 
vnto thcmfclues a counterfette occafion there¬ 
of without caufe.This I need not ftand vpon.be- 
Oaufe it is euident ofit felfe,& requireth no far¬ 
ther demonftration, the other two being of gre¬ 
ater difFiculty,& of more diligent confideratio. 
Touching the firft of tire two latter, how the a- 
ffeftion is moued for weeping,I take it necefia- 
ry ,the pafsion be not very extreame, nor of the 
iiigheft degree of forrow,ncithcr fo light &ge- 
tle that the obieft be contemned . For the firft; 
sfthe perturbation be too extreamc , and as it 
were rauifheth the cpnccitc, and aftonicth the 
heart, then teares being ordinary, andnaturall 
to a kinde of mediocrity of that pafsion,arc not 
affbordedtoan extraordinary affedion: euca 
dsaiqyfuddaine and rare takethawayc for the 
prefent,the fignification ofreioycing, and tur- 
neth the comforte which fhould bee receioed in* 
.|o an admiration,in ftcade of mirth and chcare; 
ioifi great extremity of fcare andheaui,ncs,ft>* 
row 


OFMELANCHOLIE. isf 

tow being coouerted into an aftdniflimeni, the 
fenfes rauifhed.and benummed therewith, the 
teates arc dryed vp or flayed, (being cfFeftes of 
ordinary and of naturall pafsion , )and others 
more ftraunger come in place, asvoydaunce of 
vria,& ordurc.For as cold in a kinde of degree, 
moucth fenfe , and the fame extreame benum- 
meth and taketh it quite awayrand as exceeding 
hrightnes blindeth , or at the leaft dazcleth the 
fight afwell as darkenes obfeureth the obieflifo 
an occafion of feare being beyond ordinary c6- 
palTeof naturall pafsion,feemeth to the heaTt,& 
vnderftanding of an other fort, then whereat to 
forrow,or tcares belong, and the tokens of ordi¬ 
nary afFedlion are due:v/hich flow not, by rea- 
fonfthrough that greatc perturbation ^nature is 
wholly vioIated,andkeepcth no courfe of accu- 
llomed order.-or becaufc fuch is the flight of na¬ 
ture,from that which Ihe fo abhorr^, that hi¬ 
ding her felfe iii her own cetcr.lhcjaraweth with 
her thofc humidities, which eafil^ follow with 
the fpirites and bloud,and arc not fepcrable for 
vfuaUcXcretion,befidestha5xdntrad:ion of her 
poores, whereby thocfHuxe of teares is hinde- 
rednhis in my opinion is the caufe: why extre¬ 
mity of terror or heauines refraiiieth teares, cf- 
pecially ifa fright hauc gone before: which is of 
greateft force to make this perturbation, and to 
Ihuc vp the poores of our bodies.This appearcth 
in fuch,asarefcarred:whofe haire feemeth to 
ftandvptight& ftiffe through that contraflion. 
So then the fame caufe ofpafsion in kind diffe- 
ring by degrees.bothdolorous & ful of calamity 
Bowc cauieth abundance of weeping, & gufheth 
Liiij. ' 



A TREATISE 

out into brookes of teares, and anon drietli ttg 
ail vp,througJidiftra£i;ion'of the mind, and ftu. 
piditie as it were of the heart, as though the 
, caufe of mourning were altogether remoued.lf 
you do require example in the fetfe fame perfon 
of weeping , and refiairiirig from teares in the i 
fame kind of obieft,yet difit-ridg in degree,that 
is moft finguler which is reported by Ariflotlc ; 
in the fecond -bobkeof his^ Rhetoricke, out of I 
Herodotus of - Amafis King of dEgypt. We are I 
' moued with edmpafsion only ^faith he) at the 1 
- afliRio ofluehfamiIi3rs,as are hot-very nighly 
knitre vntb vs,'either by aeqiiaihtance or affini- 

■ tie : and of the calamitie of otir -moft deere 
friends or allies, we haue not compafsion; but 

‘ we are affected with their hurte, as with out 
owne : wherefore it is reported of Amafis, that 

■ althoughhe did notweepe for his fpnne.whom ' 
he faw led to be put to death • yet at the calahii- 

' tie of his friend d%ilippus,he fhed tearesrfor that 
which in his friend was pitifulIj (hewed in his 
fonne horrible, and terriWe to beholdrhow ter- 
ror.chafeth away,& fwalloweth vp al copafsion. 
Which hiftorie of Amafis, maketh cleere all 

* doubt in this point, and confirrrieth that which 
v/e propound by the reafon of one of the moft 
graueft philofophers As this ouer vehemet fearc ! 
dneth vp thc(e fprings of teares^ 'or (hutteth vp i 
the paffages that no way isgiuen for them to 
diftill: Co the caufe being light, and nor greatly 
vrgingthe heart, nature vfeth notto makefuch 
ihew of forow: (o that at fmall matters or fo ta- ; 
ken,no man vfeth to weepe. Children (for want 
of vndejftanding) in a nianoer weepe at all oc- 

* * ■ ; cafions 


OF MELANCHOLIE 137 
eafions of offence alike: which time and age af¬ 
terward correfteth. Thus then m my opinion 
theaffcftion is to be difpofed for weeping.cuen 
in a meane, betwixt that light regard of peril or 
calamity wherwith no man is moued to teatcs, 
and that vehement extremitie, which ingen- 
dreth amaz^dnes and aftonifliment, wherewith 
nature either is benummed as it were, andda- 
Zeled with the extremitie of pafsion, and ne- 
glecleth her ordinariefigniScation offotow, in 
a Cafe fo farre extraordinarie : of clft fo farrc 
withdraweth her felfe into the center of the bo- 
die with herfpirite, blood, and humiditie, and 
clofeth vp her poores fo ftraightly, that neither 
matter of teares is readie, nor pafTagc free for 
them to diftill by. For the natnrall paflages, 
and fuch as depende not vpon voluntarie ope¬ 
ning or fhutting (as of thedDladder, and ftoole) 
fo farre only are open, as they bediftended and 
filled with blood,humour,& fpiritiwhich being 
withdrawcn as in adead body, they clofe toge¬ 
ther like an empty bag. But why the (fay you) 
do fomc make vrine for feareiand w'hy doth not 
nature withhold it,afwell as teares,berr,g a kind 
ofexcrcmetnol much vnlike? The reafonis rea¬ 
dier fuch retention as is performed by rnufcle & 
animal! facultie, defeending from the braine by 
fiaues, is of another fort, then thatwhich is ac- 
complifhed by aflriftion of poore f againe fuck 
excrementes as are already congregated into a 
place of recept,from whcncethey are to be voi¬ 
ded out of the body heereafter, are not of like 
condition with that which hathas yetnofepa- 
rationrFor the fitft point,the bladder,as al/o the 
■ - &nda- 



ijS A TREATISE 

fun<3amet,Ii3ue ecli of them a certain rouJ inuf,' 
cle, whiche hath power of opening and doling 
within it felf: which opening,way is giuen to the 
cxcrciBcntjthat of it feifeCfinding paffage) ifln» 
cth out of the bodie: or without opcning(andit 
bee a liquid excrement as vrincis) if the raufde 
Ihutt not clofe, or rctentiue feebled, it yoydeth 
alfo,though not fo plentifuly as being ful open. 
No w i n feares that cxcecde, the fpirites influent 
into that mafcle (as. all are fuch that pertaine to 
fence and motion) are called backe> asihaue 
before declared , to their proper fountaines, 
and fo it being left deftitate, receiueth akynde 
ofparaliticall dilpofition for the time, andfay- 
leth in his office, which is the caufe of fuchc va- 
uoluntary excretion. Now if you confidet & rc- 
msmberhewethe vrine pafleth fromthekide- 
neis by thofe long vefiels, you lhal well percciue 
there can be no refluxe backward, though it bee 
forcedjfor they difeed not direflly,opening the 
lelues as a touch hole into a gune, but Cophngs 
betwixt the fubftaunce of the bladder, with cer- 
tainc flender and thinne skinnes, whiche imme- 
diatly after the cntraunceof the humour clofe 
vp, in fuch fort, as the fuller the bladder is , the 
firmer is their faolde, as you may fee in the lea¬ 
ther clacke of a payre of bellowes: experience 
heereofis tnadc manifeft in a bladder, whiche 
being blowen rctaineth the airc and fuffereth 
not to vent, though it hauc entrances , fuchc 
as I haue fpoken for the vrine. This then is one 
hinderaunce why the vrine can not be retrafted 
the way being made vp by thofe skinnes, & the 
manner of the entraunce fuch of {hat excrement 
in?o 


OF MELANGHOLIE. 13 ? 
into tie bladder, why fuch flopping cannot bee 
in them, as failed out by clofing ot poores.thac 
happcncthto other partes through euacuation 
for thefe paflages arc neither ope , becaufe they 
be full: nor clofle, becaufe they be emptie, bur 
arc the one and the other,at our voluntary plea- 
furcstto this is the largenes of the paflages to be 
added,which hinder the clofe flnking of all iides 
together, with the pofirion of the body down¬ 
ward direftsand thus much for the difference of 
the retention and excretion, and how byreafon 
the partes containing the excrement no calling 
backe of humors can be, as in other parts which 
hauc fluxe and refluxe free. Touching the man¬ 
ner of excrcmct,this difference alfo is to be hol- 
d,en, that fuche humours as are not yet feperated 
for euacuation, follow the courfe offpirites,and 
ebbe and flow with them, being within the regi 
ment of nature,which the vrine contained in his 
naturall vrinall, and attending the opening of 
the paflage and deftitute of thofc aftiue Ipirites 
can not doe: and this I take to be the caufes.why 
in extreame paffions of feare, vrine may pafle a- 
gainfthis wiil,that notwithftanding can fhed no 
teares by the fame extremity. The thirde point 
remaineth, for the more cafie declaration of 
this doleful gefture.of what difpofltion of body 
they are of, who ate apt to teares. They arc al- 
moft altogether ofa moift, rare, and tender bo¬ 
dy, efpecially of brainc and heartc, whiche both 
being of that temper, carie the reft of the partes 
into like difpofltion: This is the canfe why chil* 
dren are more apt to weepe, then thole that arc 
of greater ycares, and women more then men. 

the 



140 A TREATISE 

tWonehauingby youth the bodymoift, rare 
& {oft,& the other by fex. Whereby teares both 
eafily flow, and are fupplied with plentiful mat¬ 
ter, if with rarenes of body and humidity, the 
braine aboue the refl: exceedc that way: and the 
eyes be great. Sc vaines & paflages there about 
largenhe wateth ther nothing to the foutain of 
teaies, euen vpon fmall occafionreontrarily they 
which haue their bodies drier by nature, and 
more compact,and the paflages & poores clofc, 
as men in comparifon of women and children: 
fuch hardly yeeld foorth that figneof forrowe 
though the occafion may require it. Thus you 
vnderftad what occafion moueth weeping, how 
taken,and what ftate of body they be of, that ea- 
fiiy water their cheekes, when {orrow and cala- 
mitie afflifteth. Nowletvs confider the matter 
of teares, what it is, and whence particularly, 
and properly they flow, and manner how.The 
matter is the cxcrcmentitious humiditie of the 
braine,not cotained in the vainesrfor eife would 
teares not be cicare, nor of a waterifli colour; 
but Tcfembling the colour of vrine, receiue a 
tinfture from the thinneft part of the blood, & 
fo appere yellovv.except the ftraining of the hu- 
mour might feeme loclarifie them, which can 
nqt fo be. For, ftraining, although it call away 
impuritic.it altercth not colourras ftraine claret 
wine as often as you will, it keepetk ftill the co¬ 
lour. Agaiue, the tinffurc of yellow, being of a 
cholerick whay in the blood which is moft thin, 
would nothing hinder the paflage ofthe tearc, 
Bortemaine behindc in the ftrainer. Then we 
may refolue rpon this pointy that teares rife of 


OF MELANCHOLIE 141 
tHc brains, thinncft and moft Hquidc excrcmenr, 
wbercof (being the moyftcft part of the whole 
bodie, and twifc fo rnuch in quantitic as the 
brainc ofaa oxe>it hath great plcntie, cuea 
tnore then any oAer part, both in icfpeft of his 
temper, andlargencfTe. This excrement is voy- 
ded ordinarily by the palace, the nofe, and the 
eyes, by ccrtainc paflages ordained for vaines, 
arteries, andfinues, frorq that carnell which is 
placed in the fadic of the bone called the wedge, 
which is dircft ouerthe palate of the mouth; 
this carnell is there placed, that the excrement 
might not rufh fuddenly into thefe partes, but 
gently dsftill into them. The moft ordinarie 
paflage of thinne humour is by the pallate and 
nofe: the pallate receaueth it dirc£lly,thc nofe 
from the eyes, leaft they fhouid be moleftcd by 
cbntinuall fluxe: into the eyes itfiowethby the 
paffageofthc fecond couple of nerucs, which 
ierue to moue the eye, not entering the fub- 
Ifanceofthera, bat palling onall fidcs, fioweth 
to the eyes, and from thence is receaued of the 
Sclltly carnell in the inner corner of the eye,and 
fo palleth into theoole,& voideth put,to purge 
thehead therebyrand this is the ordinary couifc 
of that humiditie, which voided from the braine 
into the nofe. Vpo occafion of gricfe,or trouble 
of fmoke or wind, this thinne liquor floweth 
from all partes,and is receaued of another fielh- 
}y carnell vnderthe vpper eyelid towards the 
cares, and from thence alfo watereth them, and 
tricklcth downe the cheekes. So then you per- 
ceaue the matter of tcares, & by what ftreames 
« voideth,and how it is conucighed : it remay- 
ncth 



US A TREATISE 

neth Uft ofal to lay open vnto you what cauftA 
the fluxe out of the eyes, feeing ordinarilic it 
fliould pafTe into the nofe, Or through the palat 
be voyded out at the tnouthc: and howe in wee* 
ping, nature difehargeth her felfc of this excre¬ 
ment. For clearing of which pointC) youmuftc I 

call to retnembraunce the kinde of paffion, 
wherewith nature is charged in matter of griefe 
or feare: which is an inforcement of flighte into 
her owneccnter,nothauing whither clfc to flys 
whereby fhee gatherfcth in one her fpirites , and 
bloud and calleth them in, partly withdrawing 
them from thatfeareful obic£t ,and partlye by : 
vnitiog of forces.inableth her fclf to make grea¬ 
ter refiftaunce againft that which annoicthtthefe 
fpiritsarefuch as paflefrom theprincipallparts j 
of the heart,brainc,andliuer,andgiue Iife,noai. 
rifhment, fenfe & motion to the reft of the me- 
bets ©four bodies. So the the brain being thus I 
Tcpienifhed with his flowingfpirits,is fuller the ! 

it was before, and of neceffitie warmer,hcatc ab \ 

wayes accompanying fpiritr with the fpirite, rc- 
floweth alfo the blood,andhnmours:andthat al 
may become fafe,nature maketh fuch contradii- 
on of the fubftaunce of thebraine, and partet 
therabout, that as one defirous to hold faft with 
his hand that which is apt to fiowe forth , lofeth 
by his hard har.diing and compreffion, which o- 
thenvife might retaine , fo it exprefleth that 
which by thinnefle is ready to voide,and forcing 
with fpirite , and prefling with contrafted fub- 
ftaunce, fignifieth by fliower oftearcs, what 
ftorme tofleth the afflidlcd harte, and ouercaft- 
c{h the chserefuli countenance. And this is the 
' manner 


OF MELA NC HO lie: 143 

niaCioet of the watering of the forowful checks. 
Sc vifage disfigured with lamentation,which be- 
jngbythis double meanes inforced, ifiue in 
more plentie, then the paflage into the npftrcU 
can readilie difeharge; the aboundance whereof 
drencheth the eyes, and ouerflowing the brims 
of thceyeliddcs, filleth the bolbme with teares. 
This caufeth the nofe to run,8: the mouth to fla- 
tier: cue the fudden breach of thefe watcrs,fafter 
fcekingvent, then agreeth with natures ordina- 
rieauoydance. They are fait of tafte, throughe 
that heateof the eyc,whichturoethcafilye that 
excrement into faltncfic, befides the mixture of 
the fait humidity which is alwayes about it. For 
the eye of any one being touched with the tong, 
giueth a manifeft relilhe offaltnefle: whichc ti- 
Icth of that moift excrement, altered into luche 
tafte by the eyes heate. That the eies bee excee-^ 
ding in heate, befides manifeft experience of 
touche, the plenty of fpirite which they ordina¬ 
rily ppflefle, the ftore of arteries and vaincs, the 
plenty of fat round about,the celeritie of moti¬ 
on do argue fufficicntlye the fame. Neither is 
that ordinary paflage of humidity fro the brain, 
whereby their heate may be tempered, left they 
become thereby fore, and withered, the leaft ar¬ 
gument of their hotc temper,which is not afFor- 
dedto anyc parte of the bodic.thcheatte onclye 
excepted. Laftlye the aptneffe to bee offended 
with heate . and rcadicofleDce taken thatwayc, 
fafficicntly decUreth whereto their nature ben- 


CHAP, 


*44 


A treatise: 


CHAP. XXV. 
one weefeth for iojf, and laughethfor 
griefe : n>fy teares andxeeepingindure not all the 
' time of the caufe : and the finger is put in the 

eye. ; / , ■ • -.u 

J N AeTormet chapter mentioa was made of 
weeping for ioy: heere you may demaund a 
reafon, why a ioyfoll pafsion.yecldeth foorth fo 
forowfoll an aftion ; nei ther do that weepe 

faine,asarnaa wileounterfet }aughtet:for teats 
cannot be counterfettei^,i».ecai}(e they rife not 
ofany a^ion or faculty vdfuhtaryj but naturall: 
& the weeping caufed of ioy is as harticj as that 
which rifethyppn conceit of forowe. We do fee 
in the works (^nature contrary effefts wrought 
by the fame caufe: fo the fame effe^t enfueth 
vpon contrary caufcs, through thediuerfe tna- 
ner of the working. You fee how the Sunne al- 
tereth the whirene Ae of a mans skin into black- 
nelTe, andhowit maketh elpA.white.itfofte- 
nethwaxe, and hardeneth clay. Againe we fee 
how the cold withereth the herbe, as doth the 
heate :and Caofeth the earth to be warme,that 
thd fountains fmoke againe.as doth the Sunne: 
andisasrequifite with vs in his fca:fon, for the 
ftrtilitie of the earth , as the reflexion of the 
Sunne beams. What maruell then, if contraries 
in pafsions bring forth like efPefts.as to weep Sc 
laugh,both for toy & foro w?Foras it is olt lepe 
that a man weepeth forloy, £b is not ftrange to 
fee one laugh for griefe, whereof examples are 
dayly: as if'a man takerhvp thatwhich is bur¬ 
ning hote, hauing thought it had been cold, he 


OF MELANCHOLIE. t4f 
Wil laugh atthc hurthtfcdcth: likewrift if one 
aflay tohadle another mans woud, the wouded 
wil declare the difc6tftmet with laughter: euea 
as a ma that is tickled,wil laugh though he uke 
ijo pleaiure in tickling,but rather miflike & dif- 
eoBtenttnet. With fuch kind of laughter did De¬ 
mocritus grieue at the Vanities of this lifcrwhich 
alio moued Hdrach'tus to weep. And (ometimet 
invrgentdiftrciTe,. the anguiih and vexation of 
mindyis declaredwith this kind of Sardohia laii- 
ghter,as if thehart toke pleafure.wherat it is gri- 
ucd.This iacrc3Te,& aredeth no logcr difeoursi 
the reafon is not fo euident, which I Will nowte 
make plaiUe vnto you.As you heard before hort- 
teare s in forrow do iffue out of the eies by com- 
pre{si6,& that internal fulnes of ipirites, & heat 
which forceth outthefe teares , fo ioy & gladneS 
being an enlargement of the hart,& braiDe,& al 
the internal parts,efpccia!ly of the fpirits, which 
do as it wereiifue out, to Welcome the ioyfull 
obiefit,partly through the enlargement of the 
pafl[ages,& partly through the accefle of fpirites 
to the outward parts,the moyfture before men¬ 
tioned is forced out of the eyes, & diftilleth into 
drops of tcaresiefpccially if eSmiferation & co- 
pafsio be mixed iherwithtfuch was lofcphs we- 
ping ouer hisbrethre,framed of iby of their pre- 
icnce & c6pa&ion of their eftate: & fo did lona- 
than weepe ouer Dauid , and Dauid ioying at 
lonathans kiDdnciTe , with commifleration of 
his teates,exceeded him in Weeping. This moft 
tomraonly fallcth out, whcii he whom we loue 
Bath elcapcd daunger , or wc thinke through o» 
8cr long abfencc , fbmcwha| vnprofpcrous 
K snigh^ 


ATREATISE 

might, or hath befallen him. Nbwe the cOnfii 
deration of the prefentfafety, mingled, with le- 
membrance of pcrill or want, tor the prefent, 
breaketh out into tcares, which are eafily to bs 
voyded.both through comprefsion, as hath bin 
before fiiewed, and by forcible exputhon. I fee 
youdcfirefarther,as well why griefc procuretb 
laughter,as ftrangc an cfFeif from the caufe, as 
tcares are froraioy & comfort. Before I lay this 
open ynto you,ye are to knowe what partes arc 
firft affefted with laughter,and how they drawe 
others into the lame fellowfhip ofaftion. The 
parts which, firft are affected in laughter,ate the 
hart and the midriffe.wherto the hart by his call 
andskinneir more ftraightly faftened then in 
beafts, the obie^f of laughter being a ridiculous i 

thing, mixed of pleafure and difpIcafureC elfe 
were it not ridiculous)caufeth the hart to mouc 
with great celerity his contrary motions of ope¬ 
ning,andlhutting, which being fo repugnaunt, 
caufe a maruelous agitation in the part, by this 
agitation, and ftraight coupling of the heart to I 
the midriffc, which draweth by ednfent other 
parts into like motion,the laughter is deliuered 
by interrupted expiration: byreafottthe mid- 
lifFe in his contraftion is not fuffered quietly to 
finifti it, but is by the harts trouble reftrained & 
iiowedinhisfall. Thus knowing the caufe of 
}aughter,and the inftrurtients of the gefture, I 
fliallmoreeafilymanifeft vntoyou, why a man 
may fometimes laugh for griefe and difeonrent- 
,ment,as well as weepe for ioy.Of all the mufclcs 
in the body.the midriffc is the moft noble, and 
of greateft vfe,whpfe aftion is in continual mo-. 

{ion/ 


ap melancholie; 147 

tion,andneuerceafeth,notfomuchas in fleepc 
('when all the reft take theis eafe ) for the necef. 
fitic of breathingrwith this tnnfcle do accord di- 
uerfe others j cfpecially thofe of the neither iaw 
andeheekes and lippes,taking thdroemCs from 
thefourth couple increafed by the fixt, which 
rifefrom the pith of the chine in the nccke. So 
then,the midriffebeing afFeftcd with'any kinde 
ofextraordinarie motion(as it is in griefe)eafily 
draweth thecheckes.and lippes into like moti6. 
But bow is the midriffe afefted in griefe ? Etiea 
much like as it is in laughter: that is to fay^hin- 
dred in his free falling by thecontraftion of the 
hart,which in griefe callcth in his fpitits, clofeth 
itfelfandfilleth the neighbour parts with more 
ftpre of blond then is ordinarie, which being fo 
replenifhcd,the thidrifFe is drawne call 

of the hart, and hath nothis owne libertie in his 
contraftion: by which meanes the expiration is 
deliuered by-fits,and not wholly j as in ordinarv 
breathing j the midriffe ( rcfembling in vie the 
leather of a paite of beilows)being ioyned roud 
about to the fides of the cheft: which aunfwe- 
icththctwoboordsofthe bellowes. This alio 
draweth the confent of the lippes and cheekesj 
the mufcles therof agreeing with the midriffe is 
their nerues,which make like contfaftiS to that 
in laughter, after a eoBoterfet manner in pains 
and ache that one prcfently fceleth or fcaretb* 
The other kinde,which is of griefe of minde , as 
that of Hanniball for the diftrefFe of CarthagPi 
and his prefent calami tic, is of a mixed .caufe ^ 
conapounded.of fomc ioy,which rifeth of confff 
dence of remedie or reuenge, which caufeth 3 

Mi), dil^ 


A TREATISE , 
dilatation of ioy.cntcrmcdlcd with contrafiloa 
ofgriefe:(oaraanthathath reccaucda difplea- 
hiTC of his enitnie, and aflured how he tiiay bee 
cuen with him, will laugh, though he haue in¬ 
dignation at the difpleafure, Tponhopc of re¬ 
quittance : whereof rifeth a ccrtaine ioye mixed 
with griefcjthat forceth out a Sardonian, bitter 
laughter Aort,and ouertakcn with more griefe, 
which with vapour and fpirit, through that dila¬ 
tation of the hart,iillech the cheekes, andean* 
feth their mufcles to be withdrawnc to their 
beads,ihew their teethiand faihion the counte¬ 
nance into that kind of grinning which is .appa- 
rant in laughter.Thus much by the way of laugh* 
ter.byoccafion of that weeping , which filletk 
vntofuchasvpon caufeof ioy breake out into 
teares.lf you dcfircto knowe rtiore of thismety 
gefture, I referre you to a treatife of laughter, 
written by Laurence loubcrt of Monntpelhcr, a 
Philofopher.and Phifitian,in my iudgmentnot 
inferiour to any of this age. The caufe why wee¬ 
ping endureth not all the time of the forow,but 
moft commonly at thefirft brunt only of griefe 
sears are Ihed,is partly by reafon tirac acquain- 
teth the hart with the ibrrowe, fo is the contra¬ 
ction lefle, thedaunger not being lb ftraunge.’ 
Againc.thatmoyfturc is partly emptied, which 
miniftreth matter vnto tearcs, & reafon in time 
dcalcth With the affeftion, which peraduenture 
moderateth the griefe , whereby it le0c vrgeth. 
The finger isvfuallyputinthe eye in weeping, 
by reafon the tcare falling into the eye with his 
faltncfle procurcth a kinde of itching about the 
carnell of (eares, which requiieth aydo of the 


OF MELANCHdLfE; 14^ 
Sngertobc exprcflcd at their firftfal: afterward 
the part acquainted with that qualitie > and one 
teare drawing on another,fuch ezprefsion is not 
foneceftarie. Beftdesthiscaufe of rubbing the 

wypiog,which ilfo moueth the finger to haft to 
the eye watered with tearcs : but this is after 3 
while, the otl^r before almoft any teare fall, 
as rfiough they were exprefled with rubbing. 
And thus much touching the caules of tearer, 
which beare the greateft part in weeping: nowe 
ye ffiaU xnderftand howe other partes of that 
gefiure arc performed, and by what mcanes. 


CHAP. XXVI. 

dfother partes of weeping :why the countenance h 
caji dovne^the forehead loureth , thenofe drap~ 
peth,the Uppe tremblethjihe cheeky cat dxasenet 
and the fpeech is interrupted, 

JN weeping the countenance is caft downc, by 
reaibn the fpirits are retraced , which are the 
authors(bytonicall motion) of ereftion: as a 
mafte corded on all fides ftandeth erefl:: which 
in {brow being withdrawn from the mufcl^cau- 
feth them to yceldc to the poyfc of the headrand 
fb bendeth itdowneward, wherto it is more en- 
dined then backeward: by reafon the rowels of 
the neckbone.with their fiiagges hinder that in- 
clin3tion.The forehead lewreth after a parali- 
ticall falhion,being deftiture of his fpirites, and 
all the former partes filled with that excremen- 
titieus moyfture «f teares before roentioneds 
K iij. which 



S5» A TREATISE 

wliicli is in tliat aboundance in perfons ittoiftof 
braine,tender and rare ofpoores , thatnot fin¬ 
ding fufFiciet way at the eies, it paffeth ihrough 
the nofe,as the other part by the palate into the 
mouth,and To fiilech ail full of teares and flauer. 
The lippe tretnbleth, becaufe the fpiritc which 
fhould vphold it in his right pofition^ is now in 
greateft meafure departed: fo that the waight 
of the lippe, ftriuing with the itnbecillity of the 
parte,eaufeth a trembling, which is betwixt e- 
yeftion,and plainc declination: as if a man bold 
a thing too heauie till he beginne to bee weary; 
though at the firft he hold it fteady.at the legth 
ftriuing aboue his power to beare it.maketh his 
hand to quake and tremble , the remnaunte of 
ftrength , ftriuing with the weight. The vpper 
lippe remaineth fteadie and ftill,becaufe it han- 
geth, and fequireth no proppe of ereftion: yet 
appeareth it fomewhat longer then before, be¬ 
ing fully ftretched out with the weight, and not 
borne vp,& reftrained by the fpirit.The checkes 
are drawne much like as in Iaughfer:not by any 
influence of the liuely fpirite, which in laughtei 
teplenifiieth the eountenaunce , and eaufeth the 
eyes to fparcle, and filling the mufcles of the 
-cbeekes with a fubtic vapour, eaufeth them to 
ftraine for the auoydaunce : as in ftreaking, the 
mufcles are contrafted to exclude a vaporous 
excrement: but the contraftion of the cheekes 
-in weeping feemeth to mc,aot to rife of any o- 
rhercaufe.then by an excrementitious vapour, 
which paffeth with the humiditie of teares,from 
the braineinto the cheekes, andforceth nature 
i9 msfee con;raaiqa {9 difcharge i^ lelfe of that 



OFMELANCHOLIE. ,ift 
vapounioynfed with the cofeat, which is bctwise 
the mufcles of the iawes and lipps with the mid- 
riffc •• whofc rcmifsi6,and flackcniog,being ha- 
ftened by the contraftion of the heart in gtiefe, 
contradeth alfo theforefaid lippes and cheekes, 
with which it confenteth by the fourth and fixte 
pairc of nerues.dcriaed into both partes , from 
the marow of the chine bone of the ne ck.There 
are alfb the caufes, of the whole deformitie of 
the face in weeping,which chiefcly contradeth 
the vifage in expiration,in which the heart hath 
more power ouer the mydrifFe being ilakened, 
then in infpiration, wherein by dilating of the 
cheft for vfe of breath it is extended. The fpeach 
is interrupted in weeping , bccaufe the cheft ia 
expiration doth not fall and finck,by gentle de¬ 
clination cquallyrbut hindred by that contradi- 
on of the heart, remittethhis extenfion , as it 
wercbyftroakesrasifaman would take a paire 
of bellowes,and not fuffer them being enlarged 
and full ofaire to fliut of themfclucs, but by an 
vricquall prefsing ofihehandes, caufethem to 
pufFe by fittes, and part the blowing into fundry 
blaftes,which at oncemightbeauoided. So the 
voyccrifingofiheayreexpired,as that is voy- 
ded,in like fort the voice is framed: which cau- 
feth thofc that weepe to fpeakc more indiftind- 
ly,and diuided fentences, then when they are 
free from that affedion.Morcouer fpeach doth 
require not onely the ycelding of the cheft 
through the poyfe,but ftandeth in neede alfo of 
theintercoftall miufcles.and thofe of the top of 
-the windpipe with the of the bely which through 
griefeor feate being now not fo repleniftsed 
K-iiii. wuh 



A TREATISE 

fplrhcs, the authors of morion of thofe 
jnufdesjcan not dcliucr the voice fmoth and v- 
suformc as before.morc then a childc is able fu- 
fiiciently to way downe by his {Ircngthof hand 
a fmithes bellow, that is forced by poyecs to fi. 
nifli that which ftr^gth ■would performe at once. 
Neither is the fpeech interrupted , and broken 
only by the diforrierly expiratio.but the infpiri-; 
rio being by fobs cutteth alfo the voice, & mar- 
jeth the diftinftpronutiation , the caufe where¬ 
of as alfo of iighing I wil deliuer vnto you in the 
next chapter. Thus yon haue (fobbing excep¬ 
ted ) the reafons of all the partes of weeping, fo 
farre as my coniedfurc by rcafon in matters fo 
hidden can gather:! will proceedc to the caufes 
of fighing and fbbing , and how they be procu- • 
red,and by what meanes.and fp finilh the whole 
giioornefull gefture of weeping. 

CHAP, xxvil. 

The caufis of fobbing and fighingandhstewK 
fingeafeth ihe hearti 

Efides the former a^^ions of forow.weping is 
for the moft part accompaniedfif it be vehe¬ 
ment) with fobbes and fighesibf which two.fob- 
brng is neuer without weeping,fighes are ordi- 
narie and common vpppn caules that fptec no 
tcares,aseuery-Qtlchathexpericncc.Fpr vndcr- 
ftanding pfthc caufes pf fobbes, itis occeflarie 
for you to call to mind that whi A hath bin faid 
of the vfc of the Diaphragma , or midrife, and 
the outward intcrcoftals , or outward mufcles 
fefy^ixtthe xibbes, sipd^hp maDDcr how. the 


OF MELANCHOLIg sjj 
leart is afFeftcd in griefe and forrowe. The 
dilating of Diaphiagtna is to enlarge the cLefty 
for taking breath. This is enelie required, if 
we be not naore the ordinarily vrged to breathe 
which if wee be, then doe the outwarde muf- 
eles of the ribbes dilate the cheft.alfo, and Ib 
encreafe the inlargnacnt.Nowc when matter of 
griefe inforceth teares, the Diaphragme, and 
the mufcles rccciue a wcakenes.by reafon of rc- 
tra£tion of fpirits, that they are faine for the di¬ 
latation of the cheft to maKe tno puls then one, 
as you heard before in the motion of contracti¬ 
on, fo that the breath is not drawen at one ftrai- 
niog of their cordes and fibers but by diuers ia,> 
fpiration; befides the heat of thole parts becing 
retracted , maketh themleflc plyablc vnto the 
force ofthc Mufcles! whereby the refpiration 
is with more difitcultie perfourmed, whiche 
requireth more vfe of dilatation, then beforc:by 
rcalbn the heat about the hearte it ielfe is nowe 
greater theri before the paffion, which bringeth 
therto a kinde of (ufbeation. That cooling of 
the heart which is fenfibly felt by fuddain euill 
ty dings,or milhappe vnlookcd for, or whatfo c- 
uernewcalamicie, rifeth through accefic of the 
blood and fpirits: which although they be hotc, 
yet wanting fomewhat of that hcatc which is 
feruet,and naturall to the heart, and of theheate 
of thofelpirits which arc refident there , for the 
time {eemeth to coole in comparilbn of the heat 
which the heart felt before: as a man would call 
hore water to that which boylcth moft feruent- 
ly:which although it be hotc.yct inferiour in de- 
.^ec tQ the heatc offemcn;ncs,i: mitigateth the 
fcaldiog 


i'u 'A TREATISE 

fcalding heate.and flaketh the boylingIn lihg 
manner at the firft rccourfeof thefe humours 
and raunging fpirites,although the heart feeme 
to receiue a chilling, yet anonc by eontradion, 
and plentie of fpirites which are apt to take heat 
it receiucth a greater neceflitye of breathing, 
which being not aunfwered through imbecilU* 
tie of the breathing parts,difehargeth the office 
of refpiration by fobbes , which ftiould be per- 
formed by one draught of breath. And thefe I 
take to be the caufes of fobbing.Sighing hathno 
othercaufe of mouing.then to coole and refreffi 
the heart,'with frefh breath, and pure ayre, 
which is the oouriffiment and foode of the vi- 
tallfpiritesjbelidesthecoolingwhichthe heart 
it fclfe receiucth thereby .The heart being con- 
traded as hath bene faid,deliuercthnotfo free¬ 
ly his footic and fmokie ercrementes, whereby 
the fpirites bccome'impure, and it bpyleth with 
more diftemper; which necefsity of frefh fpirite 
and cbole ayreenforceth a deeper enlargement 
ofthc cheft then is ordinarie.in which not only 
the midriffe playcth his parte» but outward in- 
tercoftals or middle mufclcsoftberibbesjbe- 
fides certaine of the flioulders , doetheir inde- 
•oour to this fo neceffaric an office , Moieouer it 
isvery probable that the tnidiiffc by acceffe of 
huthoui's and vapours to the partes thereabout 
is charged with vaperous fuperfluitie, which is 
byftrctchingitfelfe, as ill yawning, auoyded: 
when the mufcles are diftended by any vapour, 
of what fort foeuer it be of.being plentiful! and 
abound ant, itftirreth them to a contradicn, 
which caufeth akinde of prefsing, wheiby they 



OF MELANCHOLIE. ify 

iciiuer tlacmfelues of this excrement. This in 
yawning caufeth that gaping, & fpmetimes ac- 
eompaniedwithftreaking, whenwefinde our 
felues vnluftie , andvndilpofed to ftirre or excr- 
ciferwhich falling to the midriffe, may caufe a 
kinds of fighingjwhen a man hath no caufe: as 
hauing caufe,it hclpcth it foreward. For who fo-^ 
euet yawncth , ihall perceiue his cheft and mid- 
riffe dilated in fuch manner as in fighing,& fcele 
about the heart a kinde of refrclhing; euen as 
whenheiigheth.Totherecaafesmay bee added . 
theweight of the heart, which is by reafon of the 
accefle of humours about his vaynes and arte¬ 
ries to his contraftioD,increafed:wherebyitly- 
cth more heauily vpon the midriffe then before 
the burthen wherof it feckethto eafe it felfe of, 
by fuch ftreitching, which fomewhat lifteth vp 
the heart for the time, and fo the Diaphragma 
is rceofortedifo'thatthenccefsitic offrefh ayre, 
the cooling of the heart, the eafing of the bur ■> 
then therof vpo the midriffe,the auoiding of va^ 
porous excrements out of the midrifFe.fccme to 
, mecaufesfioal,&the midrifFes dilatatio, whole 
motion the whole cheft followeth the efficient 
caufe of fofaing & fighing. And thus much cocer- 
ning the two dolorous actions of fighing & fob* 
hing, whereto after I haue added how it eafeth 
the heart to weepe& fbbbe,Iwilcnd this chap- 
ter.By reafon of the withdrawing of the bloud 
^Tlpirites about the hart in feare.and foro w,it is 
necellary,that much vapour fhpuld arile, ftitred 
vp by the heat therof working vpo the moifturc 
thefe vapours befides the ordinarie excremeptes 
©f th? braine before msntioaedjmay y eeld ano ' 



is^ A'mEATlSE 

tberpartevQtoteires, beciag congele j in tKe 
braync j and vpper partes that arc thickc, coole 
JXiembraaoas.inclofed with the skul,aBd placed 
ouer the reft, as aftillitorye helmcouer the bo- 
dic.Now weeping by making auoydacc to fh ff g 
▼apours, doeth difchatgcthat fulncs wherewith 
it was before ftrayned and opprefled . Thefeva- 

E ours caufe that tednesia thecheeket.anda- 
out the cares of thofc that weepe, hcateth the 
face, and caufeth the head to akc, whereof the 
heart being ealed, receiueth a fanher enlarge* 
snent then at the beginning of the griefe, andfo 
enioycth that fnaall comfort which weeping af> 
foordeth. It may feeme probable that the lob¬ 
bing and fighingCdiffering onely in that fobbei 
are fighinges interrupted , and iighes Ibbbes at 
large) if they be not vehement and long by agi¬ 
tation of the ehefte expelling of the fmothered 
vapours, and drawing in of frelh aire » geue allb 
fome comfort: if they be vehement, then ihake 
they the hart and midriff too much^ and cauie 
a forcnelle about thofe partes, elpeciallye about 
the hart Ipoone, which is moll trauelled in fob-, 
bing, and whereto the midriffe is fa{lened.Thus 
much concerning thofe aftions whicbe are ani- 
mall.and ly in our powcr(fome abrolute!ye,and' 
Ibme after a fort) to do or not to do,altered by 
paffion of forrowc, and falling into melancholy 
petfons: it refteth to Ihcwc, howe melancholic 
procureth both laughing and weeping,and fo to 
proccede to thofe natural anions whicheare al* 
tred by this humour^ with the rcafon of fuch cf» 
rc<fts. 


CHAP, 


c F MEt ANCHOLIE x57 
CHAP, xxviii, 

Hw# Mtiancholie caufeih both wetplngtaH 
Unghing^andthereafenshowe' 

TTbath bene before declared b ow tnelancboly 
■^eaufeth fcare and forowe of hart, by falfe ima* 
gination, raifed tbroi^b fearcfull vapours rifing 
to the brainy and paffing by the batt, cuen be¬ 
fore the imaginatiott be moued, caufetb a cbc- 
traftion thereof: whicbeis tbe a^fioaof fear« 
accompanyingecb other, make fueb contradid 
as before natb bene faidc to bee caufc of tearcs t 
the matter bein^ partly fupplied by the ordina¬ 
ry excrements ot tbe braine,and partly through 
thofe vapours which arife from the bearre ouer- 
charged with concourfe of humours, which are 
retraced by tbefpirites: who vpon matter of 
difcontentmcnthaftc vnto the place of defence, 
andaflemble together,flyingthcirl&nicobicft 
andaddreffing them folues as it were to make 
tcfiftance. The partes about the ey<s being po¬ 
rous and rare the braine moyfte, and the partie 
apt to weepe, vpon this melancholy difpofitjon 
ijpringcththatiflueoftearesout t lmdancho- 
lickeeyes: andthcfclfuppoletol^ethecaufes, 
whymelancholickcpcrfons witb^atanyc out¬ 
ward occalion, fall into weeping 1M lamenta¬ 
tion. Why they laugh, and that ef ^ffiuelie,the 
caufe is ofmorc difficultie to fin<i j.SiJt, and the 
xealbn not fo manifeft, whereof as^^’-atn ledd by 
conieffure and probabilities , Ig’still deliuct 
. yoo mine opinien.yo« may remet her how the 

~ '1 roidriKS 



W A TREATISE 

midriflFc next vnto the heart is the chiefe caolc of 
laughter: fo that of ncceffitie one of thefetnuft 
be af&fted in that aftion. The hcarte is altvayes 
afFcfted ih true laughter, ahdnofalwaiesia a 
fained kind, which is only a fhaking of the cheft^ 
and retraftion of the lippes, without theliuelye 
and chearfuil eye, fraught with the ioyful fpiji{s 
whtche replcnilhc the merrie countenance; 
Thiskynde isthatwhiche melancholicke pet- 
fons without obieftc breakc out into.-except the 
melancholic rife ofaduftionof bloud, and be¬ 
come blackc chollcr, whiche affedeth alfo the 
lieart with a faigned conceit of merincirc, cuen 
as wine giueth it comforte, and ftirreth thefpi- 
rits to that liuelines & cheare, wherofeucry one 
bath experience. Nowe then for the better lay¬ 
ing open this mclancholick aftion.wc arc to di- 
ftinguifh of 1 aughter.-wherof there be two forts: 
the one is true and vnfaigned,riling from a com 
fort and reioycing of the heart i and the other a 
counterfet ^id falfe, wherein the hcarte recea* 
uethno con^ientmeo , but either it felfc; or the 
midriffe mc^ed difordcrly withfhakingbyany 
annoyance tV andmoueth alfo thecheftc, and 
tnufclcs of thb iawes and chcckcs by confent of 
nerucs , counterfetting a laughinge gc- 
fturc, wheryriti the hcarte raketh no pleafiire. 
The formerio.Bde may rife of inward e caufe i as 
well as outi^et'd: when the vapour of adult me¬ 
lancholic ilood, or rather when i: raketh 
thatheate.^efumeth the hcarte with a pure and 
cleare fnmtamt'hereatit is allured to ioye and 
<hcare; whs' he vapour and fame lifing of the 
mofte mild’s ffitid temperate humour, before 


OP MELAjJCHOLIE.* 
ttc’full adiiftion bceaccomplifhed, and mixed 
witli the other humours and fpirites, breedcth 
thftplcafantvaincs whiche ouertaketh roelan- 
choiikc pcrfons , whiehe peraducnturc other- 
wife not fo delayed, woulde turne theheartc to 
annoyance. This wayc mclancholie carrying a, 
winie and aromaticall fpirit. raifed by that heat, 
may procure an harty laughter, & not onely di^^ 
pole as wine dbeth, the fpirit thus raifed bceing 
more familiar the that of.wine,& fo compelling 
as it were the hart to break forth into that aftio 
ofTeibycingVThe falfe kindc of laughter which 
proceedeth firft from the midrifFe, mofte com¬ 
monly is affefted by melancholy,through a tic¬ 
kling vapor or fpirite,whtGh rifcth fro the lower 
partSjand ftirrcththe midrifFejas they which arc 
wouded in the cheft.and vpon dreffing are tber- 
about tbuched;do plainly perceaue to moue,and 
ftike,and rctraft it felfc, C v/bofe motion the 
chefte followeth^ and to force out a counterfet 
manner of laughter , whereof the heart hath no 
part: nor countenance,fauingthe girning of the 
mouthc, which is here but fmall, maketh anya 
pleafantlhew. This accident pertaineth chieflie 
to that melancholic whiche refteth about the 
fplcne, the mcfaraicke vaincs, and portyayne 
of the liucr: which breatheth an itching and tic- 
ling breathe, whereofthemidriffetakingc the 
fence, lhaketh and moueth.with indeuorto ihun 
the vDwelcome gheft , and to auoyde the touch 
thereof. Ko w that being once moucd,the other 
inftruments of laughter aurif were with like m@ 
tiOn.and all agree in this counterfet gefture, 
>voieh in appearance feemcih like the pleafant 
looks 



■\eo A treatise 

lookcofaliglit andtncrily difpofcd krt. This 
accident of laughter for the moftpart,is whe the 
melancholic paffion beginneth.or anonafic^e 
fore the blonde getteth a farther egernefle, aod 
thofe iolie fpirits be wafted; whiche aftcir they 
once be fpent, & the heate either otitragious or 
delayed or diftinguilhed byrnaptnes oFtnatter* 
tbs is the comedy turned into tragedy,plea(a&c< 
oes into fury,& in the end,mirth into mourniog 
much like as it fareth with fuch as intctHperatlie 
take in their cups,8c are oucr furfeted with wine 
or ftrong drink: thefe of them that are of nata« 
cold and dry ,8c of this melancholie complexion 
voyd of aduftion, at the iirft cupteceaue a mar^ 
uelous cheering about the hart,the drin^eand 
coldnefle of their inward parts being {c«ed and 
fteeped as it were.like dry leather in oyle.'if they 
proceed farther, the former modeftie anon altc* 
reth it felfe into the contraric extrcmitic of chat 
andezcefftnobabling, the fpiiit of the wine o- 
uerruling the fpirit of their naturall complexiSs 
yet a little more lipping, 8c this melancholy re- 
ceaueth liich heat, as rage and furie entreth pof- 
feffton of hart,and braine: and as hee had taken 
a d taught of Girces cup, he fareth in rcfpefte of 
roaners Sc behauiour,as though hee were turned 
into a wild beaft. In the end with farther carou- 
fesofercefle.thewina, for the while quite dif* 

poffelfing thy fpirits oftheir regimet ScofficeS 
quenching as it were the owne heat, & delaying 
Ae natural! heat of the bodye with immoderate 
quatity.the mirth & checre^the plcafant talk, the 
rage Sc furie giuc place,& in ftecd of that ioli«e 
foccedc^h filence, ftupidi|ic, ftcep 8c fojtilhnefllp 


ofmelancholie; tVt 

go iii melacholy, while that dric Sc fubtile fpin^ 
if fupplied with conueni^t matter, & is lightned 
in the mclahcholicke part.all is on the hoigh for 
a timc,which being confamed by heat^ the ftore 
thcrof being but fmal in rcfpe£lpf the grofle re- 
fidecc.the tyelancholick perfon bcc6meth after- 
ward fad,hcauy,& vncherful. Thus you perceiod 
(I think)fufFicieDtly how melancholick perfons 
fotnc laugh & forac wcepe^& in the fame mcla- 
cholicke.what caufeth mirth,& what teares. Be¬ 
fore I proccede to the natutall aftions chauni- 
ged and depraued by melancholy,! cannot pafle 
oueran adion which is verie vfiiall to melan- 
diolicke folke, and that is blufhiiig.with fhun-!> 
niog of the looke and cbuntenaunce 'of men, 
which the Grecians call Dyfopia, andbecaufe 
itrequirethalarger difeourfe then the eede of 
this Chapter will fuffer j I will treate of them itt 
thenext. 

GHAP., 

'the cau/isefblapjing and l>afhfutnefJe,andKhj/ we- 
lanchoUck^perfom are giuen thereunto. 

^ H E i&e&ioa that ihpueth bluChingc is 
. Ihame;, how fbcuer it rifeth , either vppoa 
falfe conceit, or deferUcdcaufc.Shamc is an afr 
feftion of griefc, mixed With anger againft out 
felues.rifirtg of the confeiefice of fomc knowne, 
or fuppofed to be knowne offcnce,either in dor 
ing t^tjwhich ought not to bee done, or omit-^ 
ting that which was requifite of vs to be done. 
This defetipiion Twill vnfo’d vnto you more at 
Jargeithat in fiiame cuerie one is gticued, expe- 
. i, sienes 


•jK , A TREATISE, 

tiencc makcthplaine , befides realqn leadet!» 
thereunto. Eucry pafsion of the heart is with 
ioycjOt with griefe, citherfinccre and fim- 
ple, or mixed, as in ridiculous occafions : in 
lhamethcrcisnoabfolote ioye nor comforte, 
therefore there muft needs be adifpleaiantnefle 
or elfe a mixt difpohtion of forrow and chcarc: 
this there is not,by reafon fhame cafteth downe 
the countenanccjfilleth the eye with forrow,and 
as much as may be withdraweth the liiielyc and ^ 
comfortable Cpiritc into the center of the bodie^ 
notvolikerntofearcandfadneflc . IrappearcA 
mixed with anger, by reafon eucrie one feeleth 
a kind of indignation within him fcife, and of- 
ferethas it were a vehement reuengc of him 
felfc for the ofFence.wee are angry with out 
lelues, becaufe the fault is oars, and from vs ri- 
feth the caufc of griefe, as in abfolutc anger the 
caufc is from other , and vpbn others wc leeke 
thereuenge. Where there is noe confcicnce* 
there can not be any fenfc of fault: for that it is 
wbichlaycthpuractionstothc rule, and con- 
eludeth them good or badiib although the fault 
becommitted in deede, andyetnoconfciencc 
made thercof.ii is taken for no oiFence, ncithet 
can giue caufe of this internal grief reuenge- 
mcrit. To thefe claufes I ad an offoace knownc, 
or fo fuppofed: for otherwife,though a man bee 
grieued and ibrie therefore : yet before itbe 
knowne to others is he not afliamed. This cau" 
ftth that‘men make no doubt of doing that in 
febet.which for ihame they would not do open* 
ly, yea in fuch thinges as of them felues are n*^ 
dilhoncft.'hordiialowablc. Morcouer,itriftth 
' ■ vp- 


ofmelancholie: isj 

fgodoiFence ,'committed in that thing which 
lly in our power (as we tookc it)to remedye,ot 
better to haue di (charged out fclues in doing 
oromitting.Thcrfore no man is alhamcd of an 
ague, orofthegoute, or to haue broken his 
Icgges, oraoie iiichoccafioa, as td haue bene 
ipoylcd,or tp diet&c,butonc!y intho(e thinges 
wherein we take our felucs to haue our partjand 
,to rife vpon our own default: fo are we both a,- 
ihamed of the adkiooand of all tokens thereof^ 
No we (being that all offence, is either in doing 
amifle > or neglefling that fhould be done,in ei- 
dier of both confifteth matter of fliame.The de* 
(criptionoffhame thus being declared , Ipro- 
esede to (hew how it forceth rednefle into tins 
cares andcheckes , and caufeth vs neither to 
beare other mens countcnaunces and lookes^ 
norwith courage and boldncfle to beare vp our 
ownc.Thegricfe that nature conceauethfrotn 
Our felues > is not fo ftraunge, as that which is 
forainc, and outward, but forte more familiar# 
aodthenee therefore in all partes raorc known 
Morcouerthe cauie is more tranfitoric and fa¬ 
ding , cfpecially, if the. offence be fmall and of 
ho greate note, Againe the griefe is not for any „ 
depriuatron of that, whereof the vfe is fo neceC- 
firy.as Ioffe of frendes.goodcs, peril! j pouer- 
tie do all import, nor of any fingular pleafure^ 
wherein nature Of will tookc their chiefc con- 
tcntmentThefctjualitiesoffhamc ioyned with 
anger., procureth that rednefle in the foce# 
’yrhichwecallblulliing. Thetindure of redde 
srifeth on this fortnhc heart difeontented with 
ihe opennefle of the offence, maketh a rctra"= 
aionj 



A TREATISB 

£tion of bloud.aad fpirit the firft, as ia fcafe 
andgriefe, and becaufe it feelcth no grcat« 
hart then of laughter, or rebuke of worde, ot 
fuch like touch, feeketh no farther cfcape, then 
a ftnall withdrawing of the fpirite and bloud by 
thefirftencraunceofthe perturbation : fo that 
the necefsity b cing no more vrgent j the bloud 
and fpirit breake forth againemore vehement¬ 
ly,and hil the partes about the face more then 
before, and cauleth the rednelle. This is helped 
forwarde with that anger, which is mixed with 
Ihime, which forceth in fome forte, thefc retra- 
£fced fpitites and bloud to reflowe with more 
ftrength,as we fee the bloud foone vpofa cho- 
Icricke perfoa-The palsionis not fo vehement 
to clofe vp the fpirits.and to retainc any longer 
time,for the caufe before alledgedrand although 
it were, yet would the anger, and inwarde re- 
nengement make way to the bloud and Ipiritesj - 
to giuc that lhamefaft colour. Thus you vnder- 
ftand what maner of perturbation caufeth blu** 
filing, what it is,andhow it breedeththeftaine; 
but you wil psraduenture fay^hy do not al that 
are afharaed blufb.and why fome more then o* 
<hcr fbme?This I fuppofc to becaufenn blufhing 
thefe pointes are to be Confidered for anfwere of 
^ this (jueftion: the qualitie of the blond and fpi» 
rit,thepafiage,& nature or fubftace of the face, 
which receiueth this reflux. If the blud be grolfe 
and thicke,and the paffages not fo free, then is 
the courle of bloud flow,& the coutenance little 
al tered. If the skin bcouer thtck.or ouer rare,the 
doth it not admit throgh the thicknes of the fp* 
rites, or at the Icaft maketh not that fhewe, nor 
letai- 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 

Ktaineth them through the rarcncfle and thin- 
ues.and by exfpiration make no apparaunce of 
rednesuhis is the caofe why many afhamed bee 
notfo ready to blu/h-Bcfides this difpofition of 
fpiritc, humour and fubftance of the face, the 
meafurc of the fhame more or leflcihelpethand 
hindereth bluflting.For Tome there are af&dled 
morcTehemently, and otherfomc moderately* 
& other fomc not a whittwho blulb not,bccaufe 
they are not at all afhamed.By that hath bio de¬ 
clared you may gather,why the yonger foitvand 
women eafily blufli: cuen through rarcnelfe of 
theirbody and Ipirites, ioyned with £mplicity* 
whichcaulethdoubtofof&nce : and this is the 
caufe why we commend blulhcrs, becaufe it de- 
elarethatender heart, and eafily moued wi?h 
remorle of that which is done amifle , & afeare 
to offend,* a care leaft itfliould commit oughc 
worthy of blame.Furthermore it flicwcth a co- 
icicncc quickc,'and tender. and anvprightfen-, 
tence of the minde, agreeable to this ingrauen 
ciaximcs of good and euilitand thus much fhall 
iufficeyoufdrblulhing.Asforthc ffxunning of 
mens countenances, and baflifulneflc. either in 
beholding or being beheld,it rifeth vpon a gilti- 
nes in coDCeite, or in effeft , in that we fcare is 
knowne to others wherein we haue offended,or 
ftand in doubt we fliall offcnd.This conceit cau- 
feth vs to hide our felues , and to withdraw our 
prefcnce from the fociety of me,whom we fearo 
doc view our faultes in beholding vs,and whet- 
ofour prefence ftirreth vp the rcmcmbraunce. 
Wherefore we being defirous to couer and hide 
ouf offence^ceke alfo to be hidden* couered, 
Liij. whn 



a treatise 

whohaue dcfcrucdthe blame: efpecially fro© 
foch of whomc we haue grcatcft rcnercnce, and 
of whole eftimation and cenfuie we ftande moft 
in awe of. Now becaufc the viewing of another 
canfeth the like from him againe.therfore doth 
she guilty minde abftainc there frozthat it pror 
uokc not the eye of another whomc he doth be- 
^old:e^cially if the other party looke vpo him 
againe > thenishe preiently’ outcountenaunced 
through the guiltie concsite ,3nd ielouiieofthe 
crime which he furped; to be reuciled.Moreouet 
thecountenaunce beeingas it were the graaeU 
charaacr ofthe mind.the guiltie perfon fcarcth 
fcaft that be read in his forehead.vAercof hee is 
guilty in his heartzwhich augmenteth the gtiefe, 
when he feeth himfelfc eyed more thenCby tur¬ 
ning afidc his own® countenance) when hec bc- 
h61dechitnot>Thus much touching the former 
bafhful adfions , whether they rife vpon caufe, 
«r opinion oncly.-it remaineth of diis chapter to 
fiiew.how mclancholickpcrfons arc much fub- 
seft to both, though they hauc coinmitted no-? 
thing deferaing rebuke, or worthy oflhame. 
That which bcfallcth youth, by their tender age 
in blulhing.the feme in a manner happeneth to 
melancholike perfons by their coraplexioni 
youthand children.if they come in place of re* 
uerend perfons will cafily blufh,not of any fault 
committed,but of reuerence to the parties: na» 
sureasitwcrefecretlyinrefpedl, coDdetnoiDg 
her imperfedions in that age, whereof the pre- 
fence of Both maketh a kinde of comparifon. 
Noreoucr the nature careFuIl of that which is 
a^decear, a?? aeguaioted with fuck 
■• ' . ' : ■ pres 



OF MELANCHOLIE. x6j 
fitcfencc,doubceth of error and vncomelincflc, 
anddiftruftingitfclfe.blufliethas if ofencetad 
tenc committsd.This is the caufe why the yong 
lake occafion fooner then the aged^and why re- 
Bcrcnd and vnacquainted prefence caufeth this 
pafsion.They which are of tno ycares.by reafon 
of experience and further knowledge, which 
bteedeth an a(rurauncc,more hardly blulh,, and 
familiarity and cuftome maketh greater bold- 
ncs.Eucnlbthe mclancholick perfon , through 
hisiotcrijall naiflike.and jcaufeof drlcouragc- 
ment, hath licle aiTurance or contentment in 
his adionswhatfoeucr:Whereby without caufe 
heeafily groweth into a conceite of feme abfur- 
dity committed where none isrthis caufeth him 
to blulh, and to exprefle by outward rednefle of 
colour the intemall pafsion: efpecially this be- 
fallethhim, if he carry any confcicncc of for¬ 
mer vice commiteduhen doth that ouercharge 
and let all out of ordcr.chicfely if it mingle the 
pafsion with fcarc, and the quality of the bload 
and Ipirite.largcncs ofpoorcs,and dil^lition of 
the skinne m the face aunfwerc thereunto . But 
how, will you fay, can the melancholic perfon 
haue his fpirite and blond fo difpofed , which I 
haue declared to be giolfc and thicke, and the 
pallagcs.of their bodies not free? Trueth it is 
that all mclancholickc perlbns are not fo dif- 
pofed to thin aftiS of blufliing, by reafon they 
are of bioud,fpirit,& bodie vnapt thcrvnto : but 
certain e only who haue melancholv not equal¬ 
ly difpofed.but rellcth vndcrthe ribbes,& a.noi^ 
cth chiefly with his vapour- , and who are fuch 
20? from their parents, but by fomc accident of 
diet 


jm A TREATISE 

diet or euil cnftomc,wliicli notwithftandi'n«5rv 
tairic as yet the fame difpofition of their Smc 
partes they had before.: or hauc fome othet hu- 
tnour of thinner fubftace,wherby their bloudis 
not fo dul of ebbingSf flowing:thefe I take to be 
themelancholickblufliers only, and thereft in 
all refpedtsfarreremoued there from : whofc 
fwartnes of the skinne with other impedin^ents 
both hindereth the recouife of the bloud:aod if 
they did blufh.oucrfhadoweth the colour. The 
fame cau(e which ftirreth bluihing in tnclan- 
cholicke men. forceth them to auoyde aflem- 
blies,and publieke theaters:and this is common 
to all melancholickcs, howfoeuer they he tem¬ 
pered in their bodiesreuen the opinion and fan¬ 
cy of fome dil^acefrom others,who are great¬ 
ly diipleafed with themlelues, and by their er* 
ronious conceit preuent the fentence of others 
vponfhemfelues,and condemne that vniuftly» 
whichduelyweyed, and without pafsion , hath 
no defert of blame,Thus much foi thefe adtions 
®f blolhing,and balhfulnes, 

CHAP. XX3E. 

of the tutlurallaSfiom altered hy ttttUnn 
cho^, 

J..| Itherto you haue bad declared the alterati¬ 
on of fuch adlions as lie in our power, & arc 
for the moft part arbitrarieiit followeth to Ihcvr 
yntp you the reft which are natural,& are not at 
our becke , but are performed by a certaine in- 
ftinft of nature wil we,nil we Thefe aftios are of 
sppcti?e;Qr 9f noariihmef; the adtios of appetite 


OF MELANCHOLIE 
ire oftneatc and drinkc,orof procreation.Tou- 
ching appetite of nicate , melancholie petfons 
taac it for the moft parte exceeding, and farre 
farpafeingtheirdigcfturc.The caufcwhy,it it 
through an aboundance of melancholie, which 
eafilypafleth from the fplene.the fincke of that 
humour,to the ftomach,whofe'(bwernes prouo- 
keth an appetite of nourifliment, to delay that 
iharpneffe which moleftcth the mouth thereof % 
& that you may with more facility conceiue this 
pointe,marke what I flial (ay of the Iplcne , the 
ftomach,and the'paCTage of that humour there- 
into.Thefplcnelyetifirndcr thclhortribbes on 
the left hde of the ftomach backward, and is or>. 
dained to purge the bloud of melacholick iuice, 
which it draweth vnto it fclf by meane of vaincs, 
and being fatisfied with fomc parte wherewith 
it is DOunOicd, the remnaunte fewer oftaftc, 
and as.a natarall fawce, it belcheth as it were 
into the ftomach, whofe (harpenes caufeth a 
kinde of griefe and gnawing therein, cfpecial- 
ly about the entrance,which is moftlcnfiblc, & 
foproooketh the appetite of noorilhmcnt ; by 
whofe fweete and familiar iuyce,the fiiarpnes or 
fowernes of the other is dulled and tempered,& 
fo the bytingeafed. Befides this fenle which the 
quallity of melancholy offerethtothe ftomach. 
itfaccording to the nature of ail thinges of that 
taftc ) bindeth and contrafireth the ftomach; 
which may alfo be an other caufe of the encreafe 
of that paice which inforceth to (ccka after nou- 
tifiiment. Thus then the ftomach being fnbieft 
vnto the fplencticke humour, as it exccedeth or 
ismorefQwre, fodo?h ^hi5 appep^c more in- 
creaf©.. 


170 A TREATISE 

crcafe. Nowe in perfons tnelancholifcc, the fa - 
perfluity of this humour is in great abouodance, 
which thereby the more forceth the appetite; 
and this I take to bee one eaufe of that greedy 
hunger,which is moreiofatiable in melancho* 
licke men then in others.To this may be added 
the deiire that nature hath to feeke and fupply, 
that thicke.grofle and dry humour.with new Sc 
freih nouriihment,and to temper the foggy ipi- 
litcs of chat humour, with more clearc.frefli and 
new: thefc wants of nature happily arc another 
eaufe of that greedy appetite of melanchoiicke 
peribus , Their conco^ion and digeftion is not 
aunfwerable to the appetite: through the cold- 
ncs of the ftomach, both by the melancholicke 
bloud, wherewith it is fedde, and mo re neighv 
bourhoodoftheiplene, which is a partincly- 
ning from mediocritieto coldnes in temperrthit 
hindereth the concoftion. The digeftion or di- 
ftribution faileth through difficultie of paffage,^ 
both by thicknes and flownes of the melanchp* 
lyiaycc.and narrownes of the way, efpeciaHy if 
the partie be by nature, and not through ocher 
occafion melanchoiicke. To this may be added 
the dulnes ofatttafliue power of the parts, cau' 
fed by coldnes and drincfle.and the ynfauorye 
Joyce,in enraparifon of the pure bloud, whereof 
nature is not pricked fo vehemently- with the 
defire, Thefc I take to be rcafons of the quicke 
appetite of melaticholickc perfons, and flow di- 
gefl:ion,and conco£lion, which partes of the for-* 
mcr diuifion belonging to nourifliraent.by or¬ 
der fliould afterward be handled: but bccaufe 
the compaxifoa with the appctife raiaiftred oc-r 


OF MELANCHOtlE 
eafibq.yoa fhall take them in this place, and noc 
lookefoithem hereafter.Whatfocuei other ira- 
becilUtyofnatnrall aftion about nourilhmcnt 
is depraued bymelaDcholy,the reafoo may bee 
drawne from that hath bin (hewed of the other* 
They are not fo defirous of drink,although me¬ 
lancholy be a dry humour, both becaufe their 
cpldnes ftakeneth the thirft and their fiomackes 
be moift by want, of digeftioD,which lendeth vp 
wateric vapours into the mouth, befidcs the af- 
cent of the humour it feife, which fatisficth the 
drought if any be, and preuenteth the defire of 
dfincke.Their ftomachis cold through melan¬ 
choly, which by the aboundance which floweth 
therein from the fplene is cooled, as alfo by the 
vicioetie of the famc,which lyeth clofe thereuh- 
to.The other appetite is of procreation, where¬ 
with or the moft parte melancholy perfons are 
iporc vehemently ftirred: the the caufc wherof T 
take to be double: the one from the afieftion of 
Ibuc,wherewith they are foone ouettaken: the 
other a windy difpoficion of their bodies, which 
procureth that defire . They arc allured to louc 
rhoreeafily, becaufe they more admire other 
then themfclues,and being caftdowne withco- 
ceite of their ownc imperreftion, extol! in their 
fancy that which hath any ftpall grace of loueli- 
pes in another. The other reafon I referre you 
to reade at large of in treatifes of pHilofophie, 
writte of the matter in other languages, the gra- 
nity and modefty pf our tongue not fitting with 
phrafe to deliuer fuch ptoblcmes. Thus much 
flial! fiiffice for the appetite depraued by me- 
iancholie; ether forrs of natural! a£UoDs befidcs 

"' ’ ■ ^ concofti- 


ir» A treatise 

eonco£IiOti and difttibution ( whidi luue betie 
1>efore fufficicntly to the purpofe in hande in- 
treated of) are the retention ouer faft, and afsi- 
mulation, or turning of the nourifiimcntinto 
ourfubftauncesimpeife^.The firft fault rifeth 
chiefiy of the drinede of the parts, which there¬ 
by retaine ante humiditie , the flownefleofthe 
humour which maketh no waye though nature 
expell, and if it bee an excrement that ihoulde 
pafle , the gro'flenefle wherewith ihc bath bene 
acquainted , cauieth the of^nce thereofleflTe to 
be felt, andlb naturebecommeth more iluttidi 
in cleaning the bodie of bis impurities. Againe 
the fenfe of fuch petfons is not veric quicke, 
neither cartieth the excrement anie prickinge 
of prouocation , which ihould put nature in re- 
tnembraunceofauoydaunce, except imroode* 
rate quantitie lerue that tume, whereof the 
drineife of mclancholicke natures is an irapedi- 
tncnt-Theafsimilationis faultie by rcafon of 
colde, thiscaufeth that morphewe, which ofte 
ftaineth melancbolicke bodies, and befpeck- 
leth their skinne here and there with blacke 
ftaines of this humour: & then the nouriihment 
infteede offupplying the perpetuall fluxeofour 
bodies, and auofwer'ing in like/ubft3nce,i$ (by 
fault of the parte of melanchoUcke difpodtion) 
depraued, and turned into like iuyee, where¬ 
with the parte is dyed into that blacke co¬ 
lour. The colour is blacke of the nature'of 
the humour,and difpodtion of the parte which 
by imbecillity is not able to alter it into white- 
neflcjto the fimilitude of it fclf. Hitherto I haue 
declared rn(o you wba( ai^iqns melancholy de - 
pia- 


OF MELA NC HO LIE 17$ 

bfifleth.wbether voluntary, or naturall, ofvo« 
lufltatie, whether of fenfe and motion,or of afE:« 
a:ionandpstturbation,of naturall whether a- 
^16 ofappetitC;Or belonging to the working of 
nourilhment s of appetite,whethw of viftuallcSj 
orofluftrtouchingdreflingand preparation of 
oourilhenent,whether it be co€Uon, digeftion, 
attra^ioui retention,afsimolation or e xpulfions 
it remaincth to deliuer vnto you, what workes 
are depraued by this humour,and howe it cor*> 
wpteA the perfedion of them. 

CHAP, xxxx; 

Hw mlatwhoUe akcteih naturaU mrj^s of the he* 
<iie,ittyceandextremM, 

J^L the works which rife of naturall anions in 
out bodies may be reduced to two forts: the 
one is naturall iuyce,apt for noarilhmet & buil-* 
ding vp die decay of our bodies through the bu- 
finefTs of this life and the intcfnall fire , which 
continually craueth fucllofviauall: the other 
is a fuperduity which riteth of the made of meats 
and drinkes/eparated from the pure and nutri- 
tiue.by the triall of our nararall heateras we fee 
the drode and impurity of metalles difcouered 
by the fire. This fuperfluitye nature expclleth 
out of the bodie, not being of that finceritie 
and familiar qualitie^, which nouridimcnt is in¬ 
dued with . Both theft are altered by this mc- 
lancholickcdifpolirion ,* whereof my difconrfe 
lunneth.The nourifhing iuycc(by malarichoIy> 
offuch nourilhmentcsas are pure and good re* 
^aue^hiropcrfeftiojijand becommeth groderi 
■ ” ihickets 



174 A TREATlSEi 

thicker, and. more crude then by the qualitie.ef 
thefubftancc itmightbc; the rather alfo, be^ ' 
caufe mclancholicke appetite isnetpropoitip- 
nail to their digeftion.butexccedeth.Thefecau* 

fes procure the nputiihing iuyee thieke . grofie, 
and crude , becaufe the heate of mclancholicke 
perfons is abated by this humour; which heat is 
the worker of (eparation, and raaketh fubtile& 
liqitide that v/hich of nature hath no contraris 
dilpofitipn. This houriihing ioyce is either pri- ^ 
mitiue, and the firft whereof the other take be* 
ginning and mattenorelie deriuatiue and rilfng 
fro the primitiue. The primitfue is that which is 
wrought in the ftomach, and is in colour whit?j 
Iiqttide,equaU, of a cremy fubftance: in this,as 
yet,no ieparatio is madeof place,but wholfome 
and vnwhoirome ,'cXcrcnlcnt and nourilhmcnt 
are milt together j onely thcre .they are as it 
werc diiTolucd and broken, and by our beats 
made more familiar vnto ys, and prepared foro* 
thcr partes morecafie handling.This is the groP 
Icr, for caufes before alleaged, and yecldcth, 
the excrement voyded by ftoolc, the thickeft; 
and grodeft of all the reft; which being inerea- 
fed in ihofc qualities by the mclancholicke dif- 
pofition, moiefteth them with coftiuenefTe, and 
hardncfTc of bellie. For through the. qualities 
before mentioned, it pafleth not lb eafilie the 
guts, which befides the foulds they hauc, left we 
ihould be oftener then were meet forced to the, 
ftpole, they haue plaites ouerthwart, as is to be 
iecac in the inwardcs of beaftes , which the drie 
excrement more hardly pafleth ouer. Again?, 
filch as are inclined to one cxcefle of humour. 


OF MELANCHOLIE 15-^ 

'ixt for prone t® another; cC* 

pecially ifithathaniecontrarie qualirierfo mc' 
tocholic.excccding through the cooling of the 
teinper, therewith lefle plcntic of chollcr is en- 
geddfed; which chollcr nature ferueth her felffe 
of for a naturall clyfter of the intrales and guts, 
both to fcoure them.and with bitternefleto ftit 
vp more readily the naturall excretion. Of this 
humour then melancholicke perfons pofiefling 
butfthaU portion, and the excrement of it fclfe 
groffc & dry,ftayeth longer in the paffage ,then 
nature without annoyance may well bearc: and 
this is the caufe why melancholicke perfons are 
for the moft part cncumbred with cofliuencfle, 
efpecially if they be Icane withall, ( as hardly are 
they othcrwirejand want that natural baftino of 
fat (which fome haue more then fufficient) ihca 
is this hardneiTe of ftoole inoch more increafod. 
The noutifliment thus dcliuercd of this excre- 
mefitdn the liucr is turned into bl6ud:& of whit 
by farther pfocelTe of heat is made red. Inpaf- 
fingof this triaUityecldethtwo^crethcnts,the 
one cholcrickc, and the other melancholicke, 
whileit retnaincth in theliucr, and beforeit be 
yetpaffed into the vaincs ; the cholcrickc is in 
iefle quantitic, except the mcates and driokes of 
them fclues doe miniftcr greater ftore of that 
matter, elfo their bodies are vnapt for gencrati6 
of that humourj the melancholic is in great a- 
boundance, by rcafon of the inclination of the 
complexion thereunto, & want of pure refining 
in the liuer; the aboundance wherofis fuCh.that 
it pafleth down froni the fplenc with groife and 
melancholic iuyee into the Hemerodes,and de- 
Jiuereth 


A TREATISE; 

liuercAofpieurifics, phrenfies, and 
(wherto the melancholidkes arc fabicd)ifth^ 
flowc be not too fparing.This aboundance, and 
thickncfle caufeth their fplcne to fwell,which is 
fayd therefore to procure laughter, bccaufe it 
draweth,aodruckeththe melancholickc excre¬ 
ment,and purgeth that humour which hath bene 
before declared to breed ip many fearful pafsios 
and bteedethftoppings,whereby it defilcth the 
whole fupply of the humors.The bloud now dib 
charged of the liuer,& polTeffed of the vains, yet 
leaucth another eXcrem^t more liquid & tbinne 
then the reft: this nature disburdeneth itfelfe of 
by the vertue of the reins,whofc office is to fuck 
out that thinne humour,aod to diftill it into the 
bladder,fr6 whence after a while nature rcmcm- 
bred therof.eithcr by quantity .heat, or lharpnes 
deliucreth it quite out of the bodie.This excre¬ 
ment is not plentifull in melanchoHcke perfons, 
but of colour white,by reafon of colde.and litle 
Rained for want of choJer,& thicke of fubftance 
according to the bloud,fr6 whence it is drawne. 
The bloud thus purified,and deliucred of fb ma¬ 
nic fuperfluous excrements, inthcende pafieth 
from the great,into the fmall vaines, and ftom 
the Imall into the priuate poorcs^of eucry mem¬ 
ber, and by diperfe degrees at the length recea- 
uctb the fimilitude of our nature, by the cople- 
xion of euery part, and is vnited in all refpe«eS 
vnto our natural fubftance.In this degree of na¬ 
tures worke, fundry fuperfluitics arife, paitlye 
common to all partes.and partly priuate to cer- 
teinc. The common isfwcat,whcrof melancho- 
beke perfons are Ipate, |hrough drinefie, 


OF MEL A NC HO lie; 
fweat requiring heate working vpon a moifture, 
whicli both faile in the melanchoIicks.For want 
of fufficient heate they are not much annoyed 
that way, neither doth the humors of their bo¬ 
dies grofle of fubftance deliuer rcadie matter 
thereunto.The other vhiuerfal fcinde is a kind of 
infenfible fteme, which breatheth cotinually fro 
our bodies,& appeareth on a mans fliirt,though 
he haue not fweat & foiled it.This melancholick 
men haue more foule, then the ether eftares of 
bodie , and deliuer more pientie , efpeciallie if 
their bodies be ch^fed.with exercife: for not ha- 
uing free paflage otherwife, for caufes before 
mentioned, it fetleth about the skinne raore a- 
boundantly, and vppon exercife which openeth 
the poores, & rarifieth the bodie,maketh plain e 
an outwardcfiiewe. The particular exetementSj 
efpecially woorth nothing, are that voyde from 
our head, ftomach , and cheft. From the heade, 
melancholie men haue abundaunce , by reafon 
of the ftomaches cruditie, whofe vapors it con- 
geleth, or gathereth into rhewrae, and diftillcth 
it into the mouth.From the ftomach,it rifeth by 
the graine of the throte , as you fee moifture rife 
fro the water pot by a clout in watering of mil¬ 
lions & cucumbers. The longes voide not much 
although through want of heate it gathereth of 
crude excreme tin thofe parts, thicker. with leffe 
fenfe of heat,then moderate. Thefc be the acci¬ 
dents which fall vnto melancholickc perfons, Sc 
thus procured: if any haue bene omitted, either 
they be fuch as are of no momet to be knowne, 
or the reafon of them is eafily rendred from that 
which hath of the reft bene fticwnc, neither was 
M my 



17 S A TREATISE 

my purpofe in prccifc manner to deliuer thefe 
pointes vnto you, as they are to be taught in a 
ichole of Philofophy.but only to giue youa taft 
ofthe for better vnderftanding of your prefent 
ftate, and difeharge of that daetie of friendfliip 
which your requeft layeth vpon me in this me- 
lancholiclte theme. This far I bane proceeded in 
my difeourfe philofophically,in laying the whol 
cafe of melancholic C To far as my skill in nature 
extedeth) before yoii.as thefirft part of your de- 
lire pretended : hereafter as the order of your 
requeft preferibeth, you Aral haue mine opinion 
of that afFe£tion which rifeth rpon horror, and 
confeience offinne.withfeare Si feeling of gods 
reuenging hand againft the fame, whether it be 
any part of melancholy or not, whether mclan- 
cholick perfons arc moft fubieft thcruiito.whac 
aduantage Satan taketh in this cafe by the frail- 
tie of the bod y, with fuch other doubts,as youc 
letter miniftred vnto mc,& in the end my couo- 
fel and comfort,and what direiftion elfe my phi- 
lick help wil afford.for reftoiing you to thefor- 
mer eftate ofyour body,fallen in decay through 
this humour, and to that tranquilitic of minde, 
and thofc comfortes of Gods grace , which be¬ 
fore this temptation aflayled you, you ioyed 
in, and was able tominiftcr comforte vntoo- 
thers afflifted with like difttcfte > and lb com¬ 
mit the fuccefle of this my labour to theblef- 
ling of God, and referre my louing indcuour to 
that friendly accepration, wherewith you are 
wont to value the flendet offices of,great good 
will vnto you. 


CHAP. 


ofmelancholie. xn 


CHAP. xxxTi. 

Of the affli£f(on of confcience for fnne. 

all kinds of tiiiferies that befall vnto man, 
none is fo miferablc as that which rifeth of 
the fenfe of Gods wrath, and reuenging hand a- 
gainft the guilcie foule of a linner. Other cala¬ 
mities afflid the body,and"one part only of oui* 
nature: this the foulc, which carrieth the whole 
into focietie of the fame miferic. Such as arc of 
the bodic, although they approch nigher the 
quickc then pouertic, or want of neceflariesfor 
maintenance of this life, yet they failc in degree 
ofmifeTy,& come (hort of that which thisfor- 
ceth vp6 thefoule. The other touch thofc partes 
where the foule commandeth,pouertic, naked- 
ncHc.ficknefle and other of th« kindc arc miti¬ 
gated with a mindcrefolutc in patience, or in¬ 
dued with wifedome to eafe thatgrieueth by 
fupply of remedie: this fezeth vpon the (cate of 
Wifedome it (elfe, and chargeth vpon all theex- 
ccllencie of vndcrftanding, and grindeth into 
powder all that ftandeth firme,and mcltcth like 
the dew before the Sunne whatfoeuer we reckcir 
ofas fupport of our defedtes, and fubdueth that 
whercwithall thinges elfe arc ofvs fubducd:the 
caufc,the guilt.the puniilimenc,the reuenge, the 
rainifters of the wrath, all concurring together 
in more forcible fort(& that againft the vhiuer- 
fall ftate of our nature, not for a timc,but for c- 
uer^ then in any other kinde of calamine what- 
foeucr. Here the caufc is not cither woud or fur- 
fetjfliipwrack or ipoile,infamie,or difgraccjbnr 
M i , ali 


i8o ATREATISE 

ail kindc of mifery ioined togither with a trou¬ 
bled fpirit,feeling the beginnings , & cxpefting 
with delperate feare the eternal confummatio of 
the indignati6,& fierce wrath of Gods vengeacc 
againft the violation of his holy comandemcts 
which although in thisiilc ittakethnocawaie 
the vfe of outwarde benefits, yet doth the inter¬ 
nal anguilh bereue vs of al delight of thc,& that 
pleafant relillt they are indued with to out com¬ 
forts: fo that manifolde, better were it the vfe of 
the were quite taken away, the for vs in fuch fort 
to enipy them. Neither is here the guiltines of 
breach of humane lawesCwhofe puniftimcnt ex- 
terideth no farther then this prcfcnt life, which 
euea of j t felf is ful of calamities not much infe- 
riour to the paine adioyned vnto the tranfgref- 
fion of ciuill lawes)but of the Law diuine,& the 
cenfure executed with the hand of God, whofc 
fierce wrath profecuteth the puniflimcnt eter¬ 
nally as his difpleafure is like to himfelfe, and 
followcthvs into ourgraucs.&receauethnofa- 
tisfa£lion with anie punifliment, either in re¬ 
garde of continuance or of extremitie. Such is 
the crime, and fuch is the guiltinefle which 
infer the reward fitting and fully anfwering the 
deferti which beinga leparation from Gods fa- 
uour the creator and biefler of all thinges, the 
fountaine of all peace and corrifort, what crea¬ 
ture the woorke of his. handes dare cheere vs 
with any confolation? or what affurance may we 
haue of cfcape if we would flee? the punifiiment 
as it hath no miferie to compare with, and the 
fence thereof not to be defcribed to the capaci¬ 
ty of any, but of fuch as haue felt the anguifiijas 


OFMELANCHOLIE. t8i 
your felfe at this prcfent, is rather to be fhewcd 
by negation of all happines,then by direft affir¬ 
mation of torinent.For as the happines rifing of 
Gods fauour, bcfides the enioying of all bodely 
and earthly blefsinges, fo farre forth as is expe¬ 
dient for vs,and tending to his glory,is aboue al 
conceite of mans heart, and report of tungc: fo 
the contrary eftatc exceedeth all vnderftanding 
oftheminde, and vtteraunce offpeach, and is 
fuch as it is aboue meafiire vchappy and moft 
miferable, inflifted by Gods reuehge, who is 
himlelf a confuming fire, and whofe wrath once 
kiodled,burnethto the bottome ofhcl.In other 
mifencs of execution,the miniftcr may vpon c6- 
pafsion & entreatic mitigate therigor: here Sa- 
than moued with the old ranchoj, and an enni- 
my vnreconcilable hath the charge,who is fo fat 
off from pitying our eftate, that to the enercafe 
of torment, where the Lordechafteneth with 
mercie , and limiteth fometimes this tormentor 
in cotnpaffc of our poffeffions and goads,he vr» 
geth sldnne for skinne , fireatch out thy hande, 
touch his bones and his flefli ? and if expreffe 
charge were not to the contrarie would not fa- 
tisfie himfelfe therewith, except life,yea not on¬ 
ly temporall, but that euerlafting, whereof we 
haue allured promifes of God,went alfoforpai- 
ment. But what doe I deferibe this vnto you 
whofe prefent experience exceedeth my dif- 
courfe? Although it be neceflary to be 1 aid open, 
for more cleare diftinguifliing thereof from the 
melancholy paffions aboue mentioned, and the 
qualitie ofthis roilerie thus being knowen, fuch 
as by Gods mercie are yet free, may acknow- 
M 3 ledge 



sSz A TREATISE 

ledge bis grace therein, pray for the continew- 
npceof that freedome , andpittie the eftatcof 
iuchas groncvndcr the burden of that heauic 
crofTc, wherein no reafon is able to minifter c5- 
folation.Dor the burthe wherof the Angels the- 
fclues hauc ability to fuftaine. Lcauing the dc- 
fcription of this affliftion I will fal to the deli¬ 
beration ; whether this kinde be of melancholic 
or not, and fo proceede to the doubtes, which 
the comparifon of them both together may mi- 
niftcrvntovs, 

CHAP, jcxsiir. 

fFhether theconfcknceof Jinne andtheafJUSiion 
thereof be melancho^ or nou 

gY that hath bene before declared it may cafi- 

ly appears the affliftion of foule through c6- 
fcicnce of finne is quite another thing then me- 
lacholy:butyet to the end it may lie moft clearc, 
I wil lay them together,ib fhal their diftinftna¬ 
tures thus compared be wray the error of feme, 
and the prpphanca of othcrfornc.who cither ac- 
compt the eaufe naturall,melancholy, or mad- 
nelTc,ot elfe hauing fome farther infight, with a 
Stoical prophancs of Athcifme, skoffeatthat 
kinde of affiidlion, againft which they thefelucs 
labour to fhut vp their hard hcartes, & with ob- 
flinacie of ftomach to bearc out that whereof 
they tremble with horror,and not hauing other 
refuge,pafie ouer the ftnfe with a defperate refo- 
lution-.which would awake,and doth not fade at 
times,to touch the quick of the fecurcft,& moft 

flinty halted galiantes of the world-Thcrforeto 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 183 
endjtbe one may be reformed in their iudg- 
0)CDt, and the other may thereby take occafion 
to reforme their maners, let them confidcr that 
this is a forrow and fearc vpon caufe t & that the 
greateft caafethat woiketh milery vnto ma: the 
other contrarily a meeie fancy & hath no grouil 
of true and juft obicft.but is only railed vp6 dis¬ 
order or humour in the fancy,and raflily deliuc- 
red to the heart, which vpon naturall credulitic 
faireth in pafsion, as if that were in deede wher- 
of the fancy giueth a falfc larume. In this the bo- 
die ftandeth oft times in firme ftate of health, 
perfcfl: in complexion.and perfedb in lhape,& al 
fymmetrfcof his parts, the humors in quantitie 
and quality not exceeding nor wanting their na¬ 
turall proportion. In the other,the coplexion is 
depraued, obftruclions hinder the free courfc of 
Spirits & humors.thc bloud is oucr groirc,thxck, 
& impure, & nature fodilbrdered , that diuerfc 
melancholicke perfons haue iudged thcmfelucs 
fome carthie pitchers, otherfome coekes, other 
fome to haue wanted their heades &c, as if they 
had bin tranfpoited by thccuillqualitieof the 
humor into ftraunge natures; here the fenles arc 
oft times perfeft both outward & inward, the i- 
magination found,the heart well compaft & re- 
folute,& this excepted,want no courage. In the 
other, the inward Icnfc & outward too fccbled, 
the fancy ouertaken with gaftly fumes of mela- 
choly, and the whole force of thelpirite clofcd 
vpin the dungeon of melancholy darknes,imar< 
gineth all darke , blacke and full of feare, theit 
heartes are cither ouertender and rare , & fo ca- 
fily admire {he pafsion,or ouer clofle of nature 
M 4 ferue 



184 A TREATISE 

ferue more cafily to imprifon.thc cheereful! fpj, 
rites the caufes of comforte ro the' reft of the 
bodie: whereby they are not in one refpeft only 
faint hearted, and full of difcourage: but eucric 
fmal occafion,yea though none be.^hey are dri- 
uen with tide of that humourtp fearc,eue in the 
middeftoffecurity.Hereit firft proceedethfro ' 
the mindes apprchenfion : there from the hu¬ 
mour, which deluding the organicallaftions, a- 
bufeth the rainde, and draweth it into erroni- 
ous iudgement, through falle tcftimony of the 
.outward report. Here no medicine, no purgati¬ 
on, no cordiall, no triacle or balme are able to 
aflure the affli^ed foule and trembling heart, 
now painting vnder the terrors of God: there in 
melancholy the vaine opened, ncefing pow¬ 
der or bearefootc miniftredjCordialls of pearle, 
Saphircs,and rubies, with fuch likcj recomfottc 
the heart throwne downe,& appaled with fanta- 
fticallfcare. In this afflidlion, the perill is not 
of bodie,and corporal! adlions, or decay of fer- 
uile.and temporall vfes, but of the whole nature 
foule and body cut off from the life of God, and 
from the fweec influence ofhis fauour,the foun- 
taine of all happines and eternall felicity. Final¬ 
ly if they be diligetly copared in caufe, in effeS, 
in qualitie , in whatfoeuer reipe^ theft vnreue- 
rent and prophane perfons lift to match them, 
they (hall appeare of diuerfe nature , neucr to be 
coupled in one felowlhippe, as more particu¬ 
larly fhalbc ffiewed hereafter. The caufe here is 
the ftucrity of Gods iudgment.fummoning the 
guiltie confcience: the fubie<ft is the finfullfoule 
apprehending the terror thereof, which is not 
momcn- 



OF MELANCHOLIE. i8f 
.nvotnentarieor for a feafon, but for euer and c- 
acnthc iffue of this affliftion is cternall puniih- 
ment j fatisfadoric to the iuftice of the dternall 
God, which is cndlcflc, and whofe feueritie ad- 
mitteth no mediation, neither that extended to 
-one ioynt, finue,or vaine, but to all.neither that 
of the body only,but of the foule. whofe nature, 
as it isimpatible of all other thingcs , and of all 
•other thinges in greateft peace, affurance and 
tranauillitie, fo onceihakenby theterroursof 
Gods wrath, and blafted with that whirlewinde 
-of his difplealure, falleth and with it driueth the 
whole frame of our nature into extreemc miie- 
rie and vtter confufion; fo farre they arc abufed 
who judge thcfe cafes as naturall, and fuehis 
the calamity of thofe whom the prophane ones 
-of this world propound vnto themfeluesas mat¬ 
ter of fcoSe and derifion,laboring by al meanes 
to bcDumme the fenfe of that fling, which linne 
euer carricth in the taylc, what pretence fo euer 
it iheweth of right, profit or pleafure, in face of 
outwarde appearance,to delude the fool&& fim- 
ple in his wayes,skilfull to do euilI,fottifii in the 
pathes of righteoufiies, andyttcrly ignorant of 
her rule, and wherin nature giueth fomefparke 
of light, more diftinftly to difeerne, euen there 
withcorruption of affeftion.like to ftubborne & 
vnbroaken horfejihaketh of rcafon.difpifeth her 
manage, and laycth the noble ryder inthc duft. 
In refpeft of you my dearc M. I knowe this dif- 
courfcHvere fuperfluous, who ftandeth in necdo 
of falue to the fore, andbeareth not’the Icaft 
touch of this gale , but becaufe my purpofe in 
this labour is not only to informe and to com¬ 
fort 



3 SS A TREATISE 

forteyou.butalfofor theinftruftion of other*' 
beare with this , and paffe it oucr,as not bcloo- 
giag vntoyou, but to the foolerofwhom Solo¬ 
mon fpeaketh, that followeth wickednes like an 
Oxc thatgocth to the flaughter, and as afoolc 
to the ftoekes for correftion ,and as a bird ha- 
fteth to the fnare, not knowing that he is in dafi- 
ger. Touching your particular eftate, that you 
may iudge thereof more fincerely , you arc to 
eftcctne of it, as mixed of the melancholick hu¬ 
mour and the terror of Godrwhicb as it is vpon 
the wicked an entrance into their cternali dc- 
flru£tion,fo vnto you it is,(as I fhal hereafter at 
large make proofe)a fatherly frowning only for 
a time, to correft that which in you is to be re¬ 
formed, and an admonition of farthcrcircuin- 
fpeftion in your waies and courfeof life heic- 
aftcr. For the firft pointe you may remember 
your fwolnefplene, with windnes and hardene* 
tmder the left ribbes,the facmcroydes not flow¬ 
ing according to their vfuali manner, the black- 
nes and grofTenes of that blood which bath bin 
taken from you vpon occafion.your dreames or- 
<iinaryly fearefull, your folitarinefle and excee- 
«liog fadnesjwith almoftall kindc of accidente* 
which accompany melancholic. For the other 
part wherec^ moil you complaine, the manner 
feadeth me to iudge thereof otherwift then na- 
turall, both becaufe fuch is indeede the fearc & 
terror of God fent vpon man.and noeffeft ofa- 
ny creature or caufc befides: as alfo becaufe the 
obiedl or mouing caufe is,in reafon and cleare 
vnderftanding.voydc of all abuft of fancy, fueh 
as ofnecefsity inforceth thefe lamentable eftefl;* 
which 


OF MELANCHOLIE 187 
whichyoutfoulefeeleth & defireth the relcafc 
©fjvpon you the croffefallcth more hcauily, in 
fo much as you arc vnderthe djfaduantagc of 
the mclaachoiickc complexionrwhofe opportu¬ 
nity Sithan embraceth to vrge all terror againft 
you to the fall,Bat remember that he.who hath 
redeerned vs,palled vnder thefc feares and hath 
fanftified them to hia redeemed, and according 
to his example,who was heard in that which he 
fcaredjwhcninthcdaycsof his flcflihe.did of¬ 
fer vp prayers and fupplycations with ftrog cry^ 
ing and tcares vnto him that was able to faue 
him from dcathrfo follow him in hope and pati¬ 
ence,who hath obtayncci the viftory not for him 
felfeonely, butforall fuch as in like temptation 
depend vpon him. To the end my labour mayc 
giue you a more perfect direction in this heauy 
cafe, what is naturall, and what is according to 
the good pleafiire of God in the other diftrefle 
ahoue nature,! will makeparticular diftinftioii 
of both in the Chapter folio wing,to yout clea¬ 
rer vnderftandiijg. 

CHAP, xxriiii. 

The particular difference betwixt melanchtlyy ^ the 
diffreffedconfeienceinthefameperfon. 

’^■y^Hatfoeuermoleftation rifeth direi^ly as 
a proper obieft of the mind .that in that 
refpeft is not melancholicke, but hath a farther 
groundtheafancic,and rifeth from confciencc, 
condemning the guylty foule of thofc ingra- 
uen lawes of nature , which no man is voyde of, 
be he ncucr fo barbarous. This is it.that hath 
can fed 


i88 A TREATISE 

caufed the prophan poets to hauc fained Hecate* 
Eumenides , and the infernall furies; which al¬ 
though they be but fained perlons, yet the mat> 
ter which is Ihewed vnder their maske, is fc- 
rious , true, and of wofull experience. This ta- 
keth nothing of the body.nor inter medleth with 
humour,but giucth a direft wounde with thofe 
firie dartes , which men fo afflifted make their 
mone of. Of this kindc Saul was poffeiTed, to 
whom the Lord fent an enill fpirite to encreafe 
the torment; and ludas the tray tor, whotooke 
the reuenge of betraying the innocent rppon 
him felfe with his ownc handes , fuche was 
the anguiih that Efau felt when he founde no 
repentance .after he had folde his birthright for 
a mefle of pottage; andfuch is the eftatc of 
all defiled confciences with hainous crimes; 
whofc harts are neucr free from the worifle, but 
with deadly bite thereof are driuen to defpaire. 
Thefe terrible obieftes which properly apper- 
taine vnto the minde, are fuch as oncly affed it 
with horror of Gods iuftice for breach of thofe 
lawes naturall, or writtenin his word, which by 
duetie of creation, we archolden to obey. For 
the minde as it is impatible of anic thing but of 
God onely that made it, fo ftandeth it in awe of 
none but of him, neither adroitteth it any other 
violence then from him, into whofc handes it is 
moft terrible and fearefull to fall. This caufeth 
fuch diftrefle vnto thofe that feele the torment 
hereof, that they would redeeme it gladly, if i? 
were pofsible with any other kind, yea with fuf' 
fering all other kind of mifcrie.This hath befal¬ 
len vnto the wifeft among men while the inte- 


OF MELANCHOLIE. i8? 
gritie of their vndciftanding hath ftood found' 

^ t^eth of a fodainc like lightning, and giueth 
no warning.Here the purity of the bloud, and 
thefioceritieandliuelines of thefpirits auayle 
nothingto mitigate the paine,but onely the ex- 
piatorie facrifice of the vnfpotted Lambe. On 
the contrarie part,when any conceite troubleth 
you that hath no lufficient grounde of reafon, 
but rifeth onely vpon the frame of your brayne, 
which is fubie^ ( as hath bene before ihewed> 
vnto the humour,that is right melancholicke, & 
fo to be accounted of you,Thefe are falfe points 
of reafon deceaued by the melancholie brayne , 
and difguiled icarres of the heart, without abi - 
litie to worke the pretenced annoyaunce : nei¬ 
ther do they approch the fubftaunce, and the 
fubftantiall and foueraigne aftions of the foule, 
as the other doth. The eftate happeneth by 
degrees, and getteth fttength in time,to the 
encumbraunce of all the inftrumentall aftions, 
and driue thebraine into afottiflines, and ob- 
feure the cleare light of reafon. Here the hu¬ 
mour purged , and the fpirite attenuate and re- 
freihed with remedie conuenient, the brayne 
ftrengthened,and the heart comforted with cor¬ 
dials, are meanes moft excellent ordayned of 
Godfor thisinfirmitie.Andto deliueryouin a 
word the difference, whatfoeuer is befides con- 
feience offinnein this cafe, it is melancholye: 
which confciencc terrified,is of liich nature, fo 
befet with infinite feares and diftruft,that it ea- 
% wafteth the pure fpirit.congeleih the liuelye 
hloud,and ftriketh our nature in foch fort, that 
it foone becommeth melancholicke, vile and 
bafe 



t$o A TREATISES 

bafe.and turnctb reafon into foolifiinefle , and 
difgraccth the beauty of the countcnanee, and 
transforraeth the ftouteft. Nabucadnezar in the 
world into a brut bcaft,fo cafiiy is the body fub- 
ieft to alteration ofmind,& foonc loofeth with 
anguilltanddeftrudlion thereof, all the fupport 
of his cxecllencic. Befides this in you, vainc 
feares,aodfa!fe eooceites of apparhioBs, imagi¬ 
nation of a voice founding in yourcareSjftight- 
full drcamesjdjfttuft of the confumption, and 
putrifying.of one part or other of your body ,8c 
the reft of this eruc,arecaufes of moleftatkm, 
which ate vyhelpcs of that tnelancholicke littc#, 
& arc bred of the Corrupted ftate of the body al¬ 
tered in fpirite.in blond, in fubftanccand com¬ 
plexion . by the aboundance of this fetling of 
the bloud which we call melancholy. This in- 
creafeth the terrourof the affliftedmindc,dou¬ 
bling thcfcare& difcouragcmcnt,& fhutteth vp 
the meancs of eonfolatio which is after another 
fort to be conucyed to the minde, then the way 
which the temptation taketh to breeddiftruft of 
Gods mere y.& pardon . For that hath finne the 
meaoes,which needeth no conueyaunce, but is 
bred with vs,8: entreth eucn into our conceptio: 
neither is the guiltincfle brought vnto vs by fo- 
reinc rcport.but the knowledge rifeth from the 
confcience of the offender; the meanesfl meane 
theoutwardc meanesofconfolationand curc^ 
muft needs pafTc by our fenfes to enter the mind 
whofe inftrument being altered by thchumor:& 
their fincerity ftained with the obfeure & darkc 
fpots ofmelancholy.receiuenot indifferctly the 
medicine ofcofoIatio.So itbotk miftaketh.that 


OF MELANCHOLIE rn 

wHicH jtapprelicndetli,and dcliucrctt it impcr- 
fcdly to the minds coniideratio. As theit trains 
are thus cuill difpofed , fo their harts in no bet¬ 
ter cafe,& acquainted with terror,&oucrtbrowo 
with that fcarefu! pafsio,hardly fet free the cher- 
full fpirits, fccbled with the corporallprifonof 
the body, & hardly yeeid to perfuafion of com¬ 
fort what foeucr it bringeth of affurance. This 
ciufeih the releafe of the affliftio to be long Sc 
hard,and not anfwerable to the fwiftnefTc of the 
procuring caufe,hauing fo many wayes to paffe, 
& encountring Co many lets before it meet with 
the fore.For as thecauferefpefleth not time nor 
place,no circumftance ofperfon,nor condition, 
jeeketh no opportunity of corporalimbccillity, 
but breaketh through all £uch confidcratioos, 
& beareth downe all refiftaunce;fo thecomforc 
requireth them ail 3greeablc,& mifeing anyone 
worketh febleefre(£ls,& flow.Herc the coforters 
perfon.his maner,thc time,& place , may hinder 
the confolatiothere the braine and hart,being as 
it were the gates Se entraunce vnto the fouic, as 
they be alFefted,ayd,or hinder the cocfolatiotfo 
that the confciece diftrefled falling into a mcla- 
choly ftate of body,therby rccciueth delay of rc- 
ftoring in refpcdl: of outwarde meancs, though 
the grace of God,& his mercy, his comfortable 
fpirit,& gracious fauor in like fwiftnes without 
mcanes may reftore the minde thus diftrefled: 
which lyeth equally ope to the kind of cure,cue 
as it lay to the wound.! hus I cocludc this point 
of difference,& marke betwixt melancholy and 
thefoules propcranguifii,whole only caufc pro- 
C€cde|[h from Gods vengeance & wrath appre¬ 
hended 



ija AJREATISE 

bended of tbe guilty foulerneither dotb mclan; 
choly alone,(though it may hinder the outwarj 
meanes of confolation.as it hath bin before fte- 
wed)any thing make me more fubieft vnto this 
kind of affliftio.Firft becaafe thebody worketb 
nothing vpon the foule altogether impatible of 
any other fauing of god alone.a.The torment is 
fuch as rifeth fro an efficient that requiieih noe 
difpofitio of means,god himfcIfij.The cofort is 
not procured by any corporal infl:ramets,fo nei¬ 
ther is the difcomfort procured or increafed that 
way,moreouer the caufe,thefubie£l:,thc proper 
efieds are o;her then corporal!. For although 
in that cafe the hart is heauy, deliuering a pafsio 
anfwerable to the fearcfal apprehenfion, yet the 
fenfe of thofe that are vnder this .croffe feelc an 
anguifh far beyond all affiidiion of naturall paf- 
fion coupled with that organicall feare and hea- 
uinefle of heart. The melaneholie difpofeth to 
feare,doubt,diftruft,& heauines, but all either 
without caufe , or where there is caufe aboueit 
inforceth the pafsion.Here both the moft vehe¬ 
ment caufe vrgeth.and alwaies carrieth a pafsion 
therwith abouc thejiarts afFedtion, euen the en¬ 
try of thofetormerits,which canot be conceaued 
at full,as our nature now ftadeth, nor deliuered 
by report.Kere in this pafsion, the caufe is not 
feare nor pafsionate griefe, but a tormentpro¬ 
curing thefe affedlions : and euen as the panifh- 
mcnt of bodily racking is not the pafsion of the 
hart,butcaufethitoneIy,fothe hart fareth vo¬ 
der this fore of the minde, which here properlye 
fretteth and ftrayacth the finners of the foule,. 
where from the heart takech his grjeuous -dif- 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 193 
eoaragement, and fainteth vndcr Gods luftice* 
Hitherto you haue dcfcribcd that which yoat 
foulc fcclcth, not to inftrudyou, but that othet 
may more truly iudge of the cafe,and the diftin- 
Aion betwixt melancholy and it^ may be more 
apparant. 

CHAP* XXXV. 

The affli&ion of mind to what perfont it 
hefaUeih,<tndlywhatmeAnet. 

^ Lthough no man is by nature freed fro this 
affli(9:ion, in fo much as all men are finners^ 
and being (Culpable of the breach of Gods laws, 
incurre the punifliment of condemnation: yet 
is the mclancholickc pcrfon more then any fub- 
ie& theruntoinotthat the humor hathfuch po¬ 
wer, which hath before bin declared to ftand fat 
a loofe of filch efieft, but by reafon the melan- 
cholick perfon is moft doubtfull,& ielous of his 
eftate^not only of this life, but alfo of the life to 
come: this maketh him fal into debate with him 
fi:lfe,& to be more then curious,who finding his 
aftions not fitting the oaturall,or written line of 
rigfateou&efle, & waring that archpiller of faith 
& afiurace in Chrifi: lefus our hope, partly tho¬ 
rough fearefindcth the horror, and partly Of it 
pleale God (b far to touch) fcelcth the verie an- 
guifii due vnto the finner, & in that moft mife- 
rable condition falleth into fiat difpaire. This 
Cometh to paflc.whe the curious melancholy ca- 
rieth the mind into the fenies of fuch mifteries 
as exceed humaine capacitie, and is defirous to 
know more the is reuealed in the word of truth: 
or being ignoratof that which is teucaled tho- 
,N. rough 



194 A TREATISE 

3 rough importuoateinquiric, ofa fuddcn fallesh 
into that.,gulfe ofGods fecret counfelles wliieii 
fwaHowccb vp all conceit of man or ingell: and 
meafurtog the^rueth of fuchr depth of mifteries 
-by thelhailovv modillofhis own wit, is caught 
& deupured of that which his prefumptupus cu- 
riofitie moued hioi to 'actemptto apprehendOf 
melancholy perfons^cfpccially fuch as are irtoft 
conternplatlBC,except they be well founded in 
the word of God, & remouenot one hairc ther- 
.ffoih in their fpcculations, are this wayes mofi: 

, cuettakenj & xeceatie the punifhment of ouer- 
bold atcept of thole holy things- which the Lord 

- bath Teferued- to Jiis owne counfell I while they 
iiegletf the declared truth, prop6otKicd;for rule • 
ofTife afidptaSife; in writtenwordes reuealed t 

: not remcrhbrihg dhe exhortatioa of Mbyfes to 

- the children of Iftaell I the fecrets are the Lords 
but the reuealed will,-appertaiiieth to vs,and onr 

I - childreh. And" this in mine opinion is one caufe 
-wherefore melancholickc perlbnnes arc mote 

- .prone to fill into this pitte, then fuch as are in 
' their organiciH members othefwife affefted. 

Now contempiatidns are more familia*. with 
melahcholkke perfons then with other, by rca- 
: iba they be nor fo apt for aftidn. Conlifting alfo 

- of a temper ftillahd Howe according: to the na- 
tureof the, melahcholie humour, which if it he 
attenuated with: heatc, deliuereth a dric, fabtile 
and pearcing fpirite. more conftant and liable 
then ante other humour, which is a great helpe 
to this contemplation. As the melancholicke is 
; moll: Tubieif td-the calamitic before mentio:- 

ned, and clpectallyqhe cdn^cmplattir^ fo of the 


OFMELANCHOLIE. 15 ? 

; inoft of all, flich whofe vocation confifteth in 
ftudieofhatd points of learning, and that phi- 
lofophicall ( efpccially of Nature ) haue caufe 
in this cafe to cariea lowiailc, and fometirac to 
ftrikejand lay at the anker of the Scriptures of 
God,leaft by tempcft of their prefumption.thcy 
be caried into that whirle pooler whereout they 
be in daunger (without the cfpeciall grace of 
Gods mercie ) neuer to deliucr them Iclucs. 
Such except they be well ballaccd with know¬ 
ledge of the Scriptures, and aflurance of Gods , 
• fpirite, are neuer able to abide the oiiglincfic 
of their linnets, when theyfhalllje oncevnfol- 
dcn, and the narrow point of repiobration and 
eleftion propounded vnto their melancholickc 
braines and hearts, and moll nhferable polluted 
foulcs: vnacquainted with Gods couenauntof 
mercie, and that carneft of his fauouf, the com¬ 
fortable fpirit of his grace.Of fuch as haue fome 
: knowledge in the word, and prailife of obedi¬ 
ence, the want of the true apprehending of gods 
reuealcd will touching eledlion and reprobati¬ 
on, and the right method of learning & concca- 
uing the doflrine, caufeth fome to ftdmble,and 
fall at this ftone^For as a fword take at the wreg 
end is readie to wound the hand of the taker,and 
•held by the handle is a fit weapon of defence, c- 
uen lb the doftrine of predeftination being pre- 
pofteroufly coriceiued.may through fault of the 
conceiuer procure hurt, whereas of itlelfeitis 
the moft ftrong rock of aflurance,in all llormes 
of teptations that can befall vnto body or foule. 
The one part of predeftination, is-Gods immu¬ 
table will, tbs eaufe and rule of all iuftice, and 
N. 1% vtteimoft 


195 ATREATISE 

TtteitnoftofallTealbn iahis wotkes :tlieotKtt 
part is the execution o£ that will, according to 
mercie or iuftice, fauing or condemniDg, with 
all the meanes thereto belonging: Chrift lefus 
inthofe ofwhomc the Lord'will Ihcwe mercie, 
and the iuft deferc oi a finner on whome hs is 
determined to fhewe the iuftice of his wrath. .. 
If this moil; comfortable do£frine,and thefiime 
ancher of our profefsion be not in all partes 
equally apprehended, we may not onely mifle 
-the bencfitc therof through our ownc fault, but 
reCciue wounde and daungeious hurte thereby. 
For if the coniideration be bent vpon Gods will 
and couhfel only, without rclpcft of the means, 
it is impofsible but the ftailtie of mans nature 
mud: needes be diftra^ed into diuerfe perilous 
and defpcrate feares, finding nothing in it felfe 
that may anfwere his iuftice, and withftand the 
fcarefuUfentenceof condemnation: if it ftay in 
the meanes of his iuftice only, and haue not eye 
vpbn his mercy in his fonne Chrift, then Irkc- 
wifearifeth an afliirance of eternall deftruftion 
to the confcience defiled, and the guilty foule 
deformed with iniquity: if the meanes of his. 
mercy be regarded without farther relpeift of 
his eternall decree and immouable iuftice, then 
is there allb no aflurance of his mercy vnto mi* 
fcrable man, who melteth bkefhowe, and yani- 
ftieth like a vapor before his iuftice,& doubting 
of the cotinuance of his faupur alwaies hangeth 
in fufpence. All thefe confiderations thus fcuc- 
rally falling into the melancholick perlbn.mbuc 
doubt and care, and either breed a refolutc def- 
peratnes, ora continual! diftruft, {oising hither 


OF MEL ANC HO LIE. m 
and tBither the foule not eftablifhcd by know-' 
Icdge'and faith in Gods etcrnall counfdl, & the 
moll wife,iufl: and mercifull meancs of his cxe- 
catio: which being perfe£lly knowne according 
to the word, and fealedvpintfae chriftian heart 
by the worke of Gods Qiiriteds lb farrc off from 
difcjuieting the Ipirit or breeding doubt,that the 
children of God in all temptations 6nd the im¬ 
mutability of Gods counlell,and the teftimony 
of his fauour in their confciences by his Ipirite, 
to fupporte them in all ftormes of temptation, 
and to be therqckc againft which no violence 
of Sathao> or his minilleis, or whatlbeuer their 
owne infirmitieoffereth ofdifcouragementcan 
preuaile. Belides thefe, fuch as read the word 
of God with pafsionate humour, fall into this 
inconuenience; elpccially if without guide and 
inftruflion they catie any prefumption of mind 
and are not modeil and warie in their collecti¬ 
ons,fuch being melancholitke may eafily fal in¬ 
to dillrull of Godsmercy, & perilh in defpaire. 
So that ignorance andinfidelitie,arethechiefe 
caules of this milerable eftatc: whereinto many 
haue fallen, elpecially fuch as haucncucr bene 
ableto bcrccomfotted,whichforthemoftpart 
are they who with neglcCl of Gods feareand 
hatdnes of heart, againft their confciencc and 
knowledge, haue with deaerate purpofe gathe¬ 
red ftrength in the waies of ftnne, and haue call 
off all remorlc, till the Lords vengeance in this 
fort ouertake them, or haue fallen into that fin 
whereof the Apoftlc fpeaketh of, that none 
Ihould pray for, and which our Sauiour callcth 
the finne againft the holy Ghoft. Other fome 
N. iij. there 



A TREATISE 

sherc be (oEwhtch number I kbowe you deate 
M.) thatfearing the Lord With lincerity of hart, 
baue bene notwithftanding this way diftrefled, 
the weight of their fiunes exceeding for a time 
the ftrength of their faith, whole cafcl take to 
be; thus farre, other then luch as I haue before 
mentioned: eucn as in ftormie tempeft the Ihip 
Icemcth at euery blaft & fourge of the Tea to be 
indaunger of wrack, and the yong alh bending 
to euery blaft bfwind, feenicth in peril of brea¬ 
king & rooting vp,whe both the fliip kepeth hit 
conftat courfe, ■& the treeyet hath his rooting: 
fo in you,& thole of your dilpofitio in this cafe, 
the tempeft, and ftorme of this temptation,ray- 
fed partly by your owne weakenesj and partely 
through Sathans tempeftious malice, caufeth 
your faith to bend,and feeme fecblei& yeelding 
to this force, while notwithftading you bebuilt 
on the rocke,& planted with the hand ofGod iir 
the Eden ofhis gracious eleftion, & remainc a 
plant foreuer in his paradife of eternall felici- 
tie-SuchCas you your felf)herin offend, that you 
meafure your lelues by your infirmities, which 
bath fo farre vfe in vs to breed a watchfull care 
ouer our own wayes, & not to difeourage vs: & 
confider that we are as the Lord efteemeth, 
who is more glorified in fhewing mcrcy,thcn in 
executing of his wrath: whole worddeclarcth 
vntb vs, that he loued vs being enemies, and 
found vs whe we were loft, and loathed not out 
poluiion,but for himfelfe only offered his mcr- 
cy:fp that we muft ftand in that reckning of oor 
felues which the Lord will haue vs to doe in his 
msrcicrelfe Ihal we be wrog iudges of the vvaies 


OF MELANCHOLIE - 
of tlie-Almiglity. Euen as one that hath not had 
experience of trauaile by fea.fearethcuety wea¬ 
ning of the fhip, & doubteth of pcrilhwhere tho 
natu re of the trauailer is fiich without hazard or 
dasinger; So you,& fiich as are in like cafe affli- 
died, imagine eucry puffe of this kindeif temp¬ 
tation to be nothing clfe but the gate of deftril- 
diion, when as notwithftanding it isthe veric 
courfe & way where through God doth lead bis 
deareli children : whofe counfels are not to be 
meafured by our infirmiti'S.nor by that we caft, 
forccaft, or doubt, but as he himfelfe hath pro- 
nouced of his own waies,& as many of his chil¬ 
dren hauc proued before vs.Hcre the raelanchb- 
lie taketh aduantage, and Sathan profecuteth a- 
maiae, with bending your afieftions to feafe, 
doubt, and diftruft, ftoppeth that, cobfolation - 
the mercie of God afFordeth,and which hischii- 
dreh arc rcadie to mioifter vnto you. And theie 
are mclanchoiickes of another fort, who not¬ 
withftanding they endeuourto fearc God,yeti 
not aduifed,through this bafe and vile humotir, 
recciuedifcouragcmet inthemfelues more then 
(through Gods mercie) they haue need, til fuch 
time as the comfort of his fpirit by'due meancs, 
and alteration of their body by cbnuenient re- 
medie of the godlic phyftcian rayfc tliem vp a-? 
gainc. Thefc are melancholiks moft difpofed, 
by rcafon of the eiiill temper of their bodies to 
this affliftion , not by power of the hurobr, 
which refteth in their bodieSj and toucheth riot 
the mind, but by rcafon they ate more curious 
and diftniftfull then other complexionswhich 
being ioyned with ignorance, or a prepoftetous 
N. liij. know- 



ioo A treatise 

knowledge caft them intotheie kbetintkes q£ 
fpiritualirotow,wbereoutverie hardly are they . 
at the length able to difpatch theinfelues with¬ 
out great mcrcie of God,and diligent and care- 
full applying of his meanes. But you may fay 
▼nto me. can a man by his owne power drawe 
on this kind of crolTe, which you haue before 
declared to be the hand of Godr yea verily, if 
. Gods only mercie be not his flay, euen as our 
firft parents voluntarily gaue their neckes, and 
in them all their pofterity vnder the yoke of Sa- 
than: and as the vengeance of Gods luftice al- 
waiesbutneth againft the wicked, SchisTword 
continually employed, which nothing ca quech 
but the water of his grace flowing fro the fides 
of his Sonne, and that fpiritual complet armour 
wherof S.Paul fpeaketh ofrfo fliould euen all of 
vs in this life tafte of the heate, & feelethe dint 
ofthatfword, if his mercy in his Sonne and for 
his Saintes caufe on the earth, he ftaied not the 
ieloufie of his wrath: His anger our finnes pull 
on,but his mercy is only for himfelfe.Thus yoo 
haue heard what manner affli£fion this of the 
mind and confcicnce of finne, not comforted 
by aflurance of pardon is, how it differeth from 
melancholy, how melancholickc perfons are 
moft fubiefl: therunto,and by what meanes this 
calamity i^procured, with the dinerlity of per- 
fons thus afflidfed ^ hereafter you ihall vndet- 
ftand (which is your chipfe defire) my counfcll 
and cure,both in that ftate ofminde wherin you 
ftand, and whereof the Lord graunt you fpccdic 
and comfortable releafe, and alfo in what your 
craled body furgained with melancholy and all 


201 . 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 
fiis vQcomfoxtablc accidents doA ofnaturall - 
ic pKifick help of medicine requirc.But fitft my - 
deare M.giue way to my words of comfort, and 
tortheoldfriendfhips fake, and fweete focietic 
we haue had in times paft, alwayes feafoned 
wiA heauenly meditations and fpirituall confe¬ 
rences, denie me not thatintereft which lhal be 
both comfortable vnto you,and ioyful to many 
ofyourfriendes, whole praiers arewiA fobbes 
powred out for your releafe: eipecially beware 
leaf); vnaduiledly you diihonor God in this kind 
offoxow, who is the God of peace and comfort. 

CHAP. XXX. 

jicofifolation vnto the afJiiSfed cotifii- 
ewe. 

Y (you fay) the wrath of God kin¬ 

dled againh your foule,and anguiih of con- r 
fdence moft intollcrable, and can findc (not- 
withftanding conciauall praiers and inceuaunt 
fupplication made vnto Ae Lord)Do releafe.and 
in your owne iudgement fl-and reprobatefrom 
Gods couenant, and voide of all hope of his in¬ 
heritance, expefting the confummation of your 
mifery and fcarefull (entence of eternall conde- 
natiori:! pray you(dearebrother)confider Gods 
mercies of old.and the former experience of his 
fauour, and thole holy teftimonies of ele^ioa 
which you haue in times paft made plentifully 
Aew of, and confider whcAer it be not raAer a 
tcraptation,thcn as you imagine,Gbds anger a-: 
gainft you. Of temptations there are diueric 
fortes,fome rifing fro Our owi« namresj other- 
fome 



201 AT^EATISE 

forae from without vs: fuch as are without our 
natures, either fpring froin our malitious ene- 
inie Sathan j or from fuch allurcmeDts, or ter¬ 
rors which the world tofleth vs wichalhluthefc 
Sathanis a worker, befides his ownc peculiar 
irianncr of tempting. His,temptations are either 
by corporal polTefeionjOr with more liberty and 
freedorne to the tetnpte4- Of ourowne natures 
{ptmg the temptations which nfc of the rootc 
of originali finne,without any forrainc iniUga- 
tion from the world, whatfoeuer is either a bait 
of plealurcjor fright of terror, which incrcafe 
the aftuall iinnes Ipripging from the originali 
roote, and lay as it wcre campaflTe, and powrcth 
on water, to that vngracious flock. Nowif this 
your, affliction be no other, but fome kinde of 
thefereptatios (which I ha,ue no doubt to make 
tnanifeft and plaine vnto you) then are 5 'ou to 
efleemeofyour cafe more comfortably the you 
do, and to attend with patience the iflhe^ which 
not pnely is not infallible to fignifie deiermi- 
Batly, of eleftion or reprobation, but in fuch as 
arc of like coDUerfation vnto you. and haue gi- 
uen cuident teflirapnies of a found faith groun¬ 
ded vp6 knowledge,as you haue done, biingeth 
forth the fruites of patience, experience, hope, 
inCTcalc of faith, and not onely in the end yecl- 
deth plenty of fpirituall ipy, and comforte vnto 
themfelues, but furniflicth alfo with power, and 
hability to confirme others, both by their owns 
, exathplc. and wprds of great confolation from 
their ownc experience. In all the former kindes 
«f temptations, there is hope, and examples arc 
fundry in ech kinde; of which the corporall in¬ 
habiting 



OF MEXANeHOLlE aoj 
labiting of Sathan is the grcateft, fullcft of tet- 
roar and difpaire: yet the hiftofy of the decides 
and layings of Ghrift. the wrytings of the E- 
uangelifts do teftifie of whole legions dirpoflef- 
fed of that liabi tatioD, by the power of Chrift 
ihercifolly extended vpon Inch poore and mife- 
table captiucs: which example s are writteh for 
our inllruftion againft like times of afBiAioh, 
that we giue not ouer hope. though millions of 
deuillslhould poirdTc vs within, and enuirone 
»swithout; but knowe his power is aboue all 
force of the encmic, and his mercie farre lii'r- 
niounting Sathans malice. But btfore I pro- 
ceede in this particular, I will make plaine de- 
monftration vnto you, that yOuhaueno Caufe 
in this forte to feare. nor haue any lhadoweof 
grounde whereOn you ihould relblue agaiiift 
yourlclfe vppon the poynt of reprobations but 
that thefe moleftations and terrOurs' , which 
you noweindure are temptations, rather for 
your farther good and profitc,' then grounded 
iefo!utions,ofluch lamentable ifliic; which ha- 
uingdeclarcdvDto you in the generalitie, I Will 
enter into the particular kindes, wherewith I 
iudge you are thus diftreffed. Firft l will endc- 
uour to looft the holdc your melancholic hath 
laied vppon the aflurahee ( as you take it) of 
reprobation , which hauing'firft perfOurmed, 
your iudgement may more'eafilie embrace the 
other parte, which is a tryall onely for a'time, 
andamecte temptation. Although Gods chil¬ 
dren euerie one hatie thdr faluation founded 
vppon his eternall decree of mercie towardcs 
them, publilhed by the preaching of the Gof- 
pell. 



ao4 A TRE’ATISE 

pel!, an j wrltteo, and fcaled in tbe heart of hit' 
cho&n, by the power of the .fpirit of adoptioo, 
which crieth Abba,father, and teftifieth in tnea' 
fare/ome more and (bme Icfle,according to the 
dirpcnfation of that grace: yet on the contrarie 
part, there is«o euident and vndoubted figne of 
reprobation in any, while they line: ('bccaufc 
there may be hope of repentance) bat onely that 
finne, which Chrift calleththe finne againft the 
hoIieGhoft,and for which the Apoftle forbids 
deth to pray: this the Diuines do expound to be 
an open and wilful! apoftahc from God, with 
malitious hate againft the profefsion of his 
knowen trueth. Next vnto this finne,is impeni- 
tencie: which can not be knowne, till death 
make Ihew thereof, and cut off time, of repen¬ 
tance. Of the firft of thefe, examples are veric 
rare,as lulianus theEmperour called apoftata: 
of theother,Cain,E{au,Saul,Iudas,and thepro- 
phane people of the worlde that knowe not 
Chrift, and fuchas knowe him onely in vaine 
profefsion outwardly, andfo continue, arc pat- 
ternes of the finne, and fiiall be examples of 
Gods vengeance. But firft touching that finne, 
wherefore no prayer is to be made, (becaufe it 
witnefieth,andfealeth vp reprobation to the of¬ 
fender in this life^ Iwill by comparing your 
courfc of life,and your prefcnt demeanour with 
that finne, manifeftly lay open your cafe to be 
farre other then reprobate. Before I enter here- 
into, you muft beware you make no mo finnes 
of that kind, then God him felfe hath pronoun¬ 
ced to be of that fort: for in thefe matters that 
concerne Gods religion, cuen the perfeftion of 
out 



OF MELANCHOLIE. *of 
our wiredomeis but folly,tnuch more our ficke 
braines, and meiancholicke vndeiftandiag , is 
f^ireto be remoued from handling fuchholie 
tfainges, whereof none can gcue rule, but he 
who knoweih the perfcft nature, (as I may fo 
fpeake) of God, which is knowen onely to him 
iclfcdo that beerejou muft reft in this cafe, and 
ftiioe to fee with no (harper eye, then (b farre 
as God hath reuealed, nor enter other courfe ia 
fcarch of fuch matters of his fecrcfic,then he 
hath himfelfc manifcfted:by whofe Oracles we 
are ioftru£):ed, that only one kinde of jSnne cut- 
teth of all hope of faluation in (iich as haue pro- 
feffcdChrift, and that only becaufcitis of fuch 
nature, that it clofethvp all remorie of repen- 
taunce: being the height of all iniquitie, e<]uall 
with that of the deuilles them (clues, who are 
(hut odt of Gods fauour for euer. If this then 
be the onely ftnne which brandeth the wicked 
Ibule to eternall condemnation, and you (dcare 
heart) haue not in anie fort thus offended, (as I 
haue no doubt to maki euideot proofc) whie 
do you vnkindlie torment your owne heart, and 
throwe your felfe into that pit of deftru^ion, 
from which the Lord hath redeemed you; and 
as though you were your owne and not his, a 
poifefsion of your own purchale to be beftowed 
asfancicleadethyou, and not Gods creation^ 
wrought by his fpirite of regeneration, otday- 
ned for his (eruice and gldrie. Now let vs entet 
into the conhderation, whether you haue fin¬ 
ned againft the holie Ghoft or not: which if 
you haue indeede done (as peraduenture your 
humour would leade you)whcre is (he renoun¬ 
cing 



aotf A TREATISE 

cing of Gods religion, which you hauc hitherto 
profeiTed and prefently do hartely embrace? 
Where is that malice, which profecuteth this 
tnifehiefe ? What perfecution hauc you in word 
or deede railed againft the truth ? What fword 
haue you euer drawne againft it, or what vo¬ 
lumes hauc you written againft found deftrinc, 
withpurpofedoppofition againft your own c6- 
fcience,neither that of frailtie, but of mcerc wil 
and obftin;Kic? If your humour be not able to 
allcadgc fuch tcftimonics. (as itcannot in deed, 
thefc things being matters of iudgement and 
witl,.3ndnot;off3ncie,and;confiftingofeuideni. 
cic to be knowen of others; and not of imagj- 
sacie conceit of a fearful! and diftruftfull heart) 
giue ouer I pray you thefe melancholicke piiur 
dices againft ypur fclfe, and prepare your hart to 
rcceaue comfort, which the word of promife 
miiiiftrethvnto you. For thatfinne except only, 
all other are within compafle of gracc,and haue 
no power, to fliut vs from Gods fauour. Beit 
that you hauc finned againft your conftienc^ 
yet certaine„cpndcmDation& caftingofi^doth 
not neceflarily entile thereupon , elfe fbould 
there be Oota perfon on whomc God Ihould, 
fiicwe mercie. For we all finne. in that manner, 
and the good we wpiild (our c5fciences bearing 
Witnefle of our duetie, and breach of that we are 
bpunde to do) we do not, but the finne which 
we would npt do in refpeft of regeneration,th« 
we commit thrpugh our frailtie,which groweth 
vp in ftrength, by increafes of God to perfee-- 
tion, and hath cuermore in it not to.difcour- 
rage vs, bu{ jp breede circumipeftipn, and-to 
remem- 


OF MELANCHOLIE try 

remcrnl>er vs where our peifei^ion and exccf- 
Icncic lieth, euen without vs, in that vnfpottcd 
lairibc Chnft lefus. For our willes arc cotnjp- 
tcdvDor oricly in that th^ are feduced by cor^- 
luptiudgementj Which is the Icafr part oi theyt 
want: but when contrarie to iudgcinent groun¬ 
ded cither vppbn nature, or the plaine wordie 
of tructh, we make choyce of that we know is 
naught , or prefette the greater reuill before 
the lefle. Otherwife -fhoutd our nature bbtairie 
iri this: life a greater perfeflion, then our firft 
parentes had in patadree, whpft freedome of 
will was perberted to that, which was againffi 
the knoweh coiritnaundenicbt of God t and 
giue any one faculty or pradtiie of the mind be 
perfeft, all muftneeds be of like purenelTc, fee¬ 
ing equallie they were corrupted,: and equallie 
rcceauc icftauration. This perfeflion we arc 
; to hope for, and attende the confiimmaiioa 
of the rodimentes of fighteoufeefle , which 
both io knowledge and vfc arc in part Blirid and 
impotent, and in hcauen are to receauc the 
abfolute perfeftion and beautie, fully agrecd)le 
-toGods good will and vprighttieflrc of his iu- 
ftice. If then you haue neither finited againft 
ihe hoiie Ghoft, which is plaine through ma ¬ 
nifold teftimonies of Vnfaigned faith, euen at 
this time beingfulloF fighes and groanes for 
your offences, carefull to eifehae what foeuer is 
repugnaunt to Gods wyli , releeuitige with 
tender affeftion of Chtiftian loue the neCef- 
fities of others , neither in the whole courfe 
ofyour life,hauing bene of notorious maikc of 
iniquitie, tnuch leffe a blafphcmsr of jhat holic 
-i : : “ namci: 




io8 A tREATlSE 

name, and a rcnouncer, with contumdic of the 
holie profefsion: aflure your fcife that your prc. 
- fent eftatc is no other, but a ftorme of tempta- 
lion, and no matkeof perdition) fronijwhich 
the Lorde, (after triafl of faith and patience) 
will deliuer you* and fcnde that caltnc peace 
and tranquillitie, which in times pafit you haue 
enioyed, and fhall by his grace againc recouer, 
to your cuerIafting, comfort. Of temptations 
fome touch our fayth , and other fome the 
fruites thereof. Our faith,, as whether we be- 
Iceucor not. The fruites: either of profe/sioH 
of the trueth, when perfecution or fcare,or fa- 
uour of men, flaken our zcale, and {mother the 
outward {hew of thofc glorious graces of faith, 
and of the {pirite.or in the fruites of obedience 
iiitable and kindly vnto our prbfelsion, as thofe 
which conceme perlbns, poflefsions, or name, 
wherein charitie towarde men is broken: all 
tfaefe temptations, though both affeftion do 
incline vnto them , (excepting incredulitie, 
which bringeth foorth impenitencie, and re¬ 
nunciation of the faith) and will bring them 
to effect, yet are they not of power to {eparater 
vs from the louc of God in Ghrill, whofc fa- 
crificeis all fufScient, and propitiatorie for all 
kindes of finne, (that onely before mentio¬ 
ned excepted.) You lay you beleeue not, and 
therefore drawe vppon you the paine due to 
the vnfaithfull: here beware deare brother, and 
waighwith circumfpeftion, and due confidera- 
tion of your ftatc in fb waightie a point as this 
isi and although you haue not at this time the 
fcnfe thereof in your imagination>which is now 
difgui- 


OF-MEL A NC HO LIE. 
difguifed and bictnifhed with melancholic con- 
ceites,and corporall alteration oftheinftrumene 
of the body .yet do you bclccue.and lhall here¬ 
after fcele the fweete comfort thereof, as you 
nowc aboundantly declare the fruites of fo ho.- 
ly a roote,patience,mcckenes , charity, prayer, 
oewnefle of life , and what focuer good venue 
Ipringeth in the children of God therefrom. 
For euen as in outwatdc fenfes we do fee fome- 
times and feelc, and heare'', when wee do not 
perceiue it, fo we may alfo haue faith , and not 
alwaies haue the fenfible perceauing thereof, 
elpecially our bodies ( as yours prefenriyisy 
being opprefled with melancholic > which al¬ 
waies vrgeth terror and diftruft: and deludeth 
vs with opinion,of want of that, v/hereof wee 
haue no lackeieuen as in another extremitie, o- 
thermen are oft carryed with an opinion and 
confidence of thoft thinges whereof they haue 
no part, And if it be fo with melancholickes, (as 
it is crediblie recorded in hiftorie') that fome 
haue coroplayned they haue bene headicffe, fo 
that ( as Aetius reporteth ) Phylotimus the 
Phifitian was faine to put a cap of lead, vpon a 
melancholickes heade, that be might by fee¬ 
ling the waight conceiue otherwife, and Arte- 
midorus the Gramarian did imagine hee wan¬ 
ted both a hand and a iegge . though he wanted 
neither,you are to lay afi<lc this fancie, and to 
weigh the prefence ofthe'eaufe by the effe£fes 
which are mofteuident tokens of faith in you, 
and not to reft vppon your deluded conceites, 
which if you yceld vnto,wil perfwadc you in the- 
ende. thatyou want both head and heart .alfo. 

O - ■' ■' after 


»To A TREATISE 

af ter it hath difpoffcfled you in part of the right 
vie of both : but you vvill fay vnto me , doc not 
men othcrwifc doubt of this point but vpo me- 
lancholie ? Yes verciy; and efpccially fuch as 
moft hunger and thirft after rightcouftcffe,and 
are poore in Ipirit.aod broken in heart: the reft 
of the world, (except fbmc vengeanee of God 
]aye holde vppon them , or fomc horrible faft 
gnaw their wounded confcience,) palsing their 
rime in a blinde fecuritie , carelellc of God, and 
empty of allfenfeand hopcofabetterlife , or 
feare of that cternall deftruftion» pafle their 
dayes , and finifti theircourfe, asthccalfc paf- 
feth to the fliambles not knowing their ende to 
be flaughter by the butchers knife. Such I fay 
as are moft carefull to walke before their God 
in righteoufnefle , as they doubt and fcarc in e* 
ueric adion.lcaft God bedifhonoured by their 
conuerfatio .fo are they ieloufe of their pretious 
faith, leaft it be not in fuch mcafure as they de- 
lire.prin truth be noneatalhwhetein they may 
eaflly be deceaued^ fitft in the difeerning .then 
in the roeafure and portion. Touching the dif¬ 
eerning thus may they be ouertaked: when the 
inward feeling thereof doth not anfwere their 
defire.and the aftions proceeding therefrom do 
not fatisfic iheir thirft of righteoufoefle.where- 
by reliefe may rife to the nourifhmentof faith,& 
the fatisfyingofthat holy appetiterthey are dif- 
couraged , and entangled r^rith fpirituall cares, 
from which a more aduifed confidcration agte- 
ableto Gods worde might eafilydeliuer thenii 
Touching the portion, their fault lyeth in this, 
that they mcafure the exceiicnej'e thereof and 


OFMELANCHOLIE* «fr 
tlic power, parfely by mearurc.and <juant{ty,an<( 
not by vertue, wbcicwith through Gods roer- 
. cifull grace it is indued to the faluation of all 
tbofe that haue it but in tneafure of a grains 
of niuflard feede: whichboth errours arc to be 
. corre^ed,by pondering of the cafe, not by that 
we indgCjbut by that God him felfe hath geuea 
rule of: both touching the lenfe offaithjthe fin- 
ccritic of the fruites.and incrcafe of tneafure: all 
being his giftcs and graces difpenfed vnto vs, 
according tO;his mercye and wifcdome.as is 
tnoft for hisglbric,and cxpedientifpr vs. For if 
We duely weigh from whence we are fallen , and 
howc deepe into this degenerate natuie where¬ 
in we are captiues of Sathati, andflaues of all 
iniquitie.weefliall reccaoe comfort of the, leaft 
iparke of faith , and maye praylc God, and rc- 
ceaue cornfQrt in the fmalleft v/Orke of obe¬ 
dience perfourmed in finccritic;, though not in 
perfeflion; and if we finde the increafes llbwc, 
and the vidlory harde in this our warfare: let 
vs conlidcr with whom We fight, and for what 
erownc: and howe both heauen and earth was 
mooued at our redemption •• and the fame 
power concurred thereto, as in pur firft crea¬ 
tion, And as the great and mightic oakes are 
flower in attaining their fulgrouth.then fhrubs 
andweedcs, whole enduring is,for many ages, 
when the other in fliortc time, wither and fade 
. awav.fo efteeme your entj-eafe ofheauenly gra¬ 
ces flow.but fuTC eucrlafting as immortality, 
that you may be as a beame ora piller in the te- 
plc of G®d for eUcr and euer.Ncither are we to 
accompt the nature of any thing according to 
O.ip out 



3 ii ATREATtsfi 

our fenfc ot td the (hewe it makcth, For tBcn 
fhould the rnoft fruitefolltree in winter be take 
for barren.and the luftie foylc drie.and vnfruit- 
ful while it is fliut vp with the hard trdft:butrea- 
fon(as in other dehberat!6s)td in this muftlcad 
vsCbcing guided by the word o£God)nghtIy to 
iudge of the preftnce,& life offaith in our fouls: 
which being the fliield ia this oiir fpiritual war¬ 
fare , endureth much battering & rhany bruntes 
■^aod receiueth the forefront of the encounter, 

& oft tiroes fairerh as if it were pearced through 
and worne ,n?nfit for battaileVy^'isfit in deede 
of nature i'nuinciblc ,'and repelicth whatfOeucr 
ingine the enimic inforceth agaihft vs, & ftart- 
deth firme rooted : what foeuer ftdrme Sathan 
raifeth for the dirplacingthereof.-Howe then are 
we to behauc dur felues in this temptationiwhe 
■ both the fenTc offaith is dulled^ih ys, and the 
fruites rninifter difcontentmentfybu teroeihbet 
the faying of the Apoftle, the graceis and metcie 
of God is without repentance , and Chrift lefus 
whomc he louetb,to theend hcloueth them: if 
then you htftie instiroes paft felt that gift of tiie 
{pirit(whiehyouhaae donc)Sihaue toyed ther- 
' in:be afluredit isa marke neuertd bee defaced, 
of your eleftion & firme ftading in Godsfauor. 
For what fnoued the Lord to beftow the grace 
but his own mercy;-& thathe beftoweth who cS 
take away,if He hitnfclf take it fro vs,for fonie de 
fert o f ours,did not he’fbrcfce t he fame long be* 
fore ? &'fo wrhy did he not withhold his mercy ? 
but as he knew vs when we were if rarigers from 
him,and loued vs, when we hated him, and had 
nothing which might prouofce his mercy,but 
our 


OFMELANCHOLIE. 115 
our mjfery;fo is liis goodnes continued vpon vs 
ftillfor hisovvneikke , .and not at all for our dc- 
feruing.-that all being fubieft to his condemna¬ 
tion, he might be glorified in the faluation of 
fpmc, f@r that righteoufnes fake which is in his 
fonnc,and that oblation of his offered vp, not 
for himfelfe but for others .-from whpfe righte- 
oufhes fo much is detrafted as we attribute vn- 
to our felues.or feeke to attainc vnto.in refpefte 
offatisfying Gods iufticcrandfo much impaired 
' of Gods mercy,as wee fhall reft vpon any vertue. 
or power in our fclues.wherby to auoide his ve- 
geanceofiuftice.' Our eleftions as itfirft nfetH 
from God , and is eftabliflied in his immutable 
counfell and decree,and lyeth in no power klfe 
I befide ; fo the hazard thereof is not committed 
to thcaduenture ofour fr3iletic,bi]ttihe cotinu- 
anccandftablenes in the lame decree hath the 
foimdati 6 For alas the woful iexperieocciofA- 
dams frailty in his beft eftate giucth fufficicnt 
teftimony,and more then fufficient: what hope 
there is of continuance of grace, if the aifurance 
©fourfaluacion Ihould depend vpon our keeper 
who without fupport of God arc like the winde 
I incooftant and as frailc as the tender hearbes, 
&wans all habilitie of withftanding the aflaults 
ofooreDimy.‘andcoDftant pcifeueranccin anye 
religious vertue.and workeofpictie.Then if the 
foundati on of our el eftion lye i n the counfell of 
God,and be founded vpon his decrectwho hath 
reuealed the one but the fpiritc of the Lord, and 
what is able to vndcrmincthe other where the 
Lord himlclfe hath laid the corner ftone; This 
affuranceintiraepaft the Spirite of God hath 
Oiij. confit- 


414 A TREATISE 

confirmed vnto yoo,& you Iiauc felt it witli plf' 
ty of hcauenly ioy.and coinfort:and if in the c6- 
fliftoftcmpration you cftccme theftrength ac¬ 
cording to that remaincth after the battaile, or 
that which you feele being fomewhat tyred in 
, the confliS; yoa may here giiie vantageto the 
enemy through difcouragement, andloofe the 
field as much as lieth in you,where there is hope 
of afifured viftprie. For,be it thatyou feele the 
hability wcake apd the enemy ftrong, and your 
owne corruptitih vpon the point to prcuaile, yet 
confider there is a ropte of this vertuc , whofe 
ffuite,and braunchesalthough thefe ftormyte- 
peftes may nippe and ffiake, yet the fappe ihall 
Bcucr be dried Vp iji the rpotc, neither can anyc 
cuil wind of Sathanfo blaft, that the immortall 
feed be at any time quit withered,yea though al 
his fiery dartes bee thereto with all might and 
mainc cipployed, but that the ftorme beeing 
tlone ouer by the fpiritc of grace,and the com¬ 
fortable funne ofconfolation firming vpon our 
gloumiehearteSjitwill buddc forth againcinto 
ibIofibme,fruit,and biaunch,a$ a moft beautiful 
tree in the paradicc of God. Let the comparifon 
ofbodciy fickncs.and the copfidcratipn of that 
kinde offrayltVjgiae comfort vnto you in your 
cafe although in an other kinde , yet in this ref- 

pc£f not ynhke.Wehauc experience how diuets 
times the difeafepreuailethouer the fickeper- 
fbns.thataftionsfailc and faculties feerhc quite 
, to be fpent,neither hand nor foote is able to do 
their duety,the eye is dimme, the hearing dull, 
the raft altered , and the tongue diftafteth all 
jAings cue of moft pleafant relifli ,and the weak 


OF MELANCHOLIE, ii? 
and feeble patient feemeth to attend the time 
of difTolution: when yet notwithftanding these 
rcmainctfa a fecrete power of nature,3nd a forci¬ 
ble (park of life that ouercometh all thefc infir- 
mitiei,and confometh them like drofl'c.and ten* 
dercth to the body a greater parity,& firmcnefle 
ofheaTththen before the ficknefle it did cnioy. 
Euen fo eifeeme of the fpirituall cafe^and confi- 
der that your foulc is lickc and not dead , and 
faith is availed but not oner come,and only hauc 
patience to attende thcfinifliing ofthis (ecrete 
workc which paffeth all conceite, and capacity 
of man,aad you ffiall fee thefe burning feaucrs> 
of temptations to bee flaked and cooled by the 
mercy and grace of Chrifte, and that fpajfce of 
faith which lycthnow hidde, and ouerwhelmed 
with heapes of temptation, and Icemeth to bee 
vtterly quenched to breake forth againe, and to 
confume thefe ffraunge caufes of the difeafe of 
the foule,and as nature after a perfeft crife dif- 
chargeth her felfe cither by fl:oole,vomite,fweat 
or blccding,orfuch like euacuations, to the re- 
couery of former . health , fo fliall you feele all 
thefc doubtcs.and fearcs, and terrors rernoued, 
and ftrength of faith reftored with fuch fupplye, 
as it fliall be able to mike cuident proofe what 
fcetete vettue laye hid and yet not idle in ail 
thisvncomfortable plight which otfercih yOu 
temptation of difpaire. Seing then that you ate 
yet but vnder the conflict : and not ouercomc. 
bane good cheate in thcfuccefle which as in 
Chrift it is viftorious , ourhead.fo arc we (his 
parts & members,)to looke for the fame crownc 
of glory,who both ouetcome inhim,& through 
0,iiij. him. 



4i6 a treatise 

him , in our felues fhall in the ende be pofTefled 
of the viftory.and receiue the crown of immor¬ 
tality As for that which your owne conceit cor¬ 
rupted by melancholy pcrfwadeth you^ wher- 
in Sathanis buCc,acdomittcth no opportunity: 
giuc no credite thercuntOjbut as it is,{b efteemc 
jtadelufion which time will diJcouerandlayo- 
pcn.as you your felfc fliall hereafter moft plaine- 
ly difcerne.Igrauntyou,the temptation it felfc 
thoughyour body were frc from thisinfirmitic, 
is of the greatcft kind,and fuch as doth not skir- 
mifli only lightly vpon ourfouls,but fctteth the 
inaine battaile againft our moft happy eftate, in 
Co much as it forced our Sauiour to cry,my God 
my God,why haft thou forfaken me. But what 
then? are we therforc to be difcouraged? no,no, 
here appearcth rather the aboundance of Gods 
grace,and the mightie fiipportc of his power, 
which eucn in the middeft of hel prcferueth his 
and fufFereth not fo much as their garments to 
take any fmell of the flame,but eue from thence 
is able to raife them to his celeftiall kingdomc, 
and^lace them with his fonne in the throne of 
glory. And ifyouduely eonfidef the price of our 
redemption how pretious it was,& how it could 
not be obtained, without fliedding ofthc moft' 
pretious heart bloud of the Sonne of God: you 
muftthinke the quarrel! to bee no other to the 
endcibut aoiattcr of bloud, of ftrife, offweate, 
of fearc, ofieioulie, and whatfoeuer afi&ftien 
goeth with affe^inga glorious tryumph in all 
the members of Chriftrboth inwardly.and out¬ 
wardly,in the fpifit and in the bodyias our head 
feimfelfe could findc no difpenfation,though be 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 117 
facd vnto his Father thcrfore with abouodancc 
of cearesrandthinke thatit is Gods bufinefle wc 
are in hand with, & that we are inabled of hint, 
mooned and carried by his fpirite, increafed 
with his increafes, not to be meafured with the 
eye offlefli.or carnall voderftandiog,but by the 
fame fpirite which worketh in vs:who as he hath 
bcgunnCjWil alfo make pcrfeft his workc to his 
Own glorietwhich lieth in taking pitie and com* 
paflion, more abonndantly then in {hewing ve- 
geance. By this which hitherto hath bene faid, it 
appeareth plainely that no finne hath yet pafled 
you. which can feclude you from hope of Valua¬ 
tion, and thereioreneceflarily itfolloweththat 
thecroffe you are now vndcris an attempt of 
Satan againftyou, to caft you into vtter diTpairc 
andifit were pofTible to vndoe that knot more 
furely knit then that of Gordius, which coupleth 
vs vnto our God, and wherewith wc are cfpou- 
fedvnto rcfus Chrift? euenour moft glorious 
faith which ouercommeth the worlde; & where 
againft not Sata, nor all his force, or ftratageme 
is able to preuaile.1 fay it is only a temptation of 
the enemie purpoied of him to your confufion: 
but from your louing God.and merciful father, 
a trial! of faith and patience, and the ptoofe of 
thofe vertues which before laiehidin fecrete: 
which he will haue now fhew thcmfelues in the 
combat, he himfelfc a beholder, ah incourager, 
a fuccour at neede, and preft with the crowne 
of triumph to giuc rewarde .and honour to the 
viftorie. Wherefore,on!y haue patience:be not 
difeouraged: ftandfure.&thcfecblencsofSa- 
thanfhali fooneappearc: and his weapons lhaii 
be 



^^2 ATREATISE 

be at broken in peeces, and God (through faith 
and patience, and comfort of the Scriptures by 
his fpirite) fiiall be glorified in the wcakenes of 
his poorc afflifted feruant; and you (hall againc 
(as Dauid was) be reftored to thofe woted loycs 
which you haue Ibmetimcs felt in the fwcetc 
’ mercies of the Lord.Now the ground of all tep- 
tation is'our o wne weakenefle , this is tried and 
proued by Sathan or the worldc, or both ioyned 
together as confidetaiions of our deftruftion. 
Befides this continual buddes of iniquity which 
doc rife from our originall corruption, Sathan 
fomctiracs playeth his part vpon out wcakenes 
alone, and fometimes by outward temptations, 
and fometimes laycth fiege round about vs, and 
befetteth al 1 the partes of our complete armour. 
We are weake in vnderftanding atKl in what (b- 
euer a£kion rifeth therefrom: eucn in wil & affe. 
£lion : Our vnderftanding is turned into blind- 
ncs of error ,Our will cmbraceth not only thole 
thinges which corruptiudgement direfteth vn- 
to,but euen where fomtime vnderftanding ftan- 
deth found, ther wil bedeth to afFc(f ion, & ne,- 
glefteth the light of reafori. Our affeftions are 
both rebellious to right iudgement and will: in 
that they rage where they (hould not,aDd where 
iuft caufe is giuen there they inordinately ex- 
ceed.Thus iadgement, wtl.and affedfion.hauing 
degenerated , vfe the bodcly members as wea¬ 
pons and inftrumentes of all impiette, and in 
iuftice: lb that if the grace of God did not for 
preferuation of humaine^ focietie, andefpcci- 
ally forhis Churches caufe reftrainc this ftregth 
of iniquity, the pilleis of the wpild wold (hatter 


OF MELANCHOLIE ai, 
io {under, and the vault of heaueawould fall, & 
all thinges would turnc againe to their former 
chaos, & be confumed with the terrible fire of 
Gods vengeaunce , and periflie in his hea- 
uie difpicalure. Our mifety being fuch,no mar- 
uaile though both Sathan and the world pre- 
uaile againft vs, except the Lordc ftretch foorth 
his hand.and vpholdvs. This our infirmity Sa- 
ihan doth fometimes afifaye without meanest 
andfometimes by outward occafions ofeuill, & 
forcible perfwafion of fipne,& rcbcilion againft 
God. Ho IV he doth it without means, the expe¬ 
rience is more lamentable and infallible , then 
the manner how eafie to finde out. In corporall 
pofiTcIfion it feemeth there needeth no meanest 
when Sathan poflefleth all partes of the houfe, 
and as maftcr commaundeih at his pleafute. 
But how without fuch acceffe he is able to tept, 
that is a matter of more difficult confideration: 
which, beezafe it maketh not a litle to the bet¬ 
ter laying open of your eftate> I will fomewhac 
ftandevpon referring you for the reft to the rc- 
folutions of thediuines who hauechiefe parte 
in this bufincs. For my owne part I do take it,&:\ 
am afluredyou find the experience, that Sathan 
after a perfonall manner vnto the foulc, though 
not in bodcly fhape to the eye, without meanes 
of outward things which (might mouc our wils 
or affeflions ) tempteth vs in the verie fecretc 
thoughtes of our hearts. For being a ipirite,and 
by creation moft cxccllcnt.it is not to be doub¬ 
ted but that he hath a fpirituall accefle vnto out 
ipiritcs,to trouble them,and to difordcr al their 
aiftions,as ws fee corporall creatures , with bo- 


iia A TREATISE 

dely and corporall force to annoy one an otlier; 
And as men haue fellowfliippc one with other 
by cprporall piefencc, and are delighted ordif- 
pleafed with the quallities of the minde accor¬ 
ding as they like, or diflike,vttered by fpeach & 
talkerfo is it raoft like that the fpirits haue their 
focietic matntaiDcd by a fpirituall conference, 
whereby their wils andpurpofes are entercotn- 
muniCated one to an other, without corporall 
found, whereof both the fpirits want the inftru- 
ment,and the voice nothing afredcth the mind. 
Dayly experience makcth this manifeft in fuch 
as are poifefled.hqw Sathan fo beareth the fway 
■in them that their Ipeache and phrafc altereth, 
and their difcourfc is farre other then before, & 
their whole nature at Sathans becke, and their 
vtterance of minde as he only fuggcftcth. In o- 
thers whome Sathan hath not layed fueh holde 
on, the fame no lefle is to be fcene: as when the 
falfe prophetes did deceauc Ahab: there came 
forth a fpirit which was fcnt to be a falfe & lying 
fpirite in the mouth of all his prophetes, which 
accordingly did make promis vnto him ofviSo 
xy, who notwithftading found a contrary cuent 
of ouerthtow,^ deftruftio. So entred Satan in¬ 
to ludas the traitor,& moued him to betray our 
Sauiour, not by a corporall poireflion; but by a 
fpirituall impullion whereby he worketh in the 
children of difobedience, and Peter in the fift of 
the Aftes faycth to Ananias: why hath Sathan, 
filled thine heart. & c: and againe in the fcconde 
to the Ephefians theApoftlecalieththeDiuell 
the prince that ruleth in the ayte, the fpirite that 
nowc worketh in the children of difobedience: 


OF MELANCHOLIE. itt 
by which it is plaine that the deuillhath-power 
where God permitteth him oucr the minds and 
iudgements, and wils* of the reprobate,and wic¬ 
ked: and may alfb in inch fort tempt the faithful 
feruauntes of God. For the Apoftle faith in the 
feme place, that the Ephefians (to whoroe hec 
wrote ) in times paft walked according to the 
courfe of this world,& after the conduiSof that 
fpiriteV Neither doe we ftandc thus fubie^f vn- 
to Sathaos annoyance through thefubtlcneflc 
ofhisnature.being afpirit,but through that log 
experience and praftifc of our mifcrie from age. 
to agCjwherby he fs able with e'afe to wprke our 
anoyance in all refpc^l:s.This giucth him know*- 
ledge of our minds more pcrfe£lly: who appre- 
hehdeih the fame by the leaft Ihew, and inclina-. 
tibn of our affedioti & wil.Not that hekhbweth 
oiir hearts, entirely and perfectly: which is prow 
per to God only the framer of the hart, but only 
through that triail and experience which not 
one onely particular man hath miniftred vntb 
him,but euen our whole race from Ada to this 
prefent: this giaket’ri hitii not to expeft any out¬ 
ward lignification of fpeach, or gefture, to Con- 
cciueour intents and piirpofes: but out of dor 
amiuer-fail corruption wbercof he hath contiriu- 
all proofe, he hath layed vp riiatter of argument 
to difeoner the vanity of our minds, and the fe- 
cret thbughtes of our heart: which' afterhehatli 
found,he fuggefteth (as he fccthbccafion wher- 
to wemiift incline)inftigati6 of finne & difbbe- 
dienee agaihft God, & his holy comandements. 
His teptations are properly fuch, as neither buf 
Batures feme to incline ynto, but in a generality 
to 


ail 


A treatise 

to all kinde of wickc(ines,nor the world doth ei» 
ther allure vs, orinforcevs: efpecially the chil¬ 
dren of god who are partakers of his ^iritfindc 
them moft ftraunge , and fuch as they abhorre 
the very Icaft conceitc of thena , & findc no part 
of their nature to incline vnto them, howfoeuer 
in othet-refpeftes they complaine offrailtic Of 
this kindc are certaine blafphemics fuggefted of 
the Deuill,and laying of violent handes ofthem 
ftlucs, or vpon others neither rooued therto by 
hate or malice: or any occafion of reuenge: of 
the fame fort is the difpaire and difttuft of gods 
‘tnercy.and grace, befides many other as taking 
awaie the feede of the worde out of the heart of 
the negligent hearerstthe fuggefting of errors & 
luch like without our natures fpeciali inclinati^ 
on that way,but rather contrarily affeflcd. And 
as he is afpirite, & an cfFcduall worker in other 
meanes: fo when he appheth his proper trauaile 
heattempteth the moft daungeroas aftaults, to 
our faluation; and entereth fo deep that (know¬ 
ing the iudgement is the fountaine of all ver- 
tuous a£lion)thcre he maketh trainejand after a 
fpirituall manner fccketh polTeflion thereof ;to 
the vtter difcouraging of all your aftibns that 
depend thereon : knowing that it once being at 
his dcuotion,the corporal gtoftc adlions & bo- 
dely vices, needeno^feat prouocation. Other 
temptations rife of our owne rebellious heartes 
vnto.the holy commandemeates of God; otfro 
the vyorJdly allurementes,which as baites entice 
ys fro the way of pbcdience:or elfe from terrors 
of life which ftar vs with threate of perill ,if we 
embraM the way ofpietie, and of hoiines: and 
fetteth 


OF MELANCHOLIE szj 
fcttetli Before vs a greater awe of men , then we 
haue of fearc,& Tcucrtncc of God. Now among 
jhefc temptations falleth your prefent eftatc 
efpecially Sathan employeth his force to your 
iudgementsand notagainftihe ftrength oi cat- 
nall iudgemeni only, but againft that which the 
Spirite of God hath taught and Icakd vnto you 
in your confcicnce: both fuggeftieg vnto you 
thoie blafphcmous ccnceites which your heart 
vtterly sbhorreth the Icaft thought and remem¬ 
brance of, & raifeth that doubt of Gods fauour 
which new diucifly diftrafteth you. Rcmembet 
1 pray you, howethe fpiriteof Godcallcthhim 
the tempter, the deceiucr of the world: and the 
accufer of the faithfull: the Dragon and old fer- 
pent,a lyer,and the father of lies: by which epc- 
thites, anddeferiptions, you mayconfider his 
power,his malice , and his craft to deceaue, sod 
to abuic you : neuer before acquainted with his 
praftifes as at this prefcnt'you haue experience 
of: and not take all that your mindc concci- 
ucth of any manner of impictic whattocucr ^ to 
be from youj but from Sathan: who as he hath 
power to tempt and to trie, to call before you 
tbe(c ftumbling blockes whereat be would haue 
you fall: fo hath he no power to fallen them vp6 
your mindc, and togiuethem fettcliog: your 
ownc confcicnce bearing you witnes how much 
repugnant they arc to your defires. The rather 
are you to accompt the as fi6 him, becaufe they 
be fuch.as arealtogethercotraiy to your former 
conuerfation, & whereto you haue felt your na¬ 
ture inclined before, & fuch as haue no inforce- 
ment nor inticctnenc from any creature, but fro 
him. 



^^4 A TREATISE 

him.Whereforc though fuch kindc oftlionolits 
do aflailc the hart. ihat(bcing guilty of fo 
£innc)your cofciece might be fo much the more 
defiled, and the difcouragetncnt the greater, yet 
aunfw'cre them againe by, the worde of God 
which is the fwordc of the fpirite : and wayte 
the happic ende of the confiiQ with patience: 
and accompt not thefc fmall venies of Sathan 
for deadly woundes^ which arc nothing elie but 
praftifes,& eXercifes of your fpirituall'couragej 
& circumipeftioh; & introductions to that vfe 
of the whole armour of God, where againft no 
force of the enemie fhal I prcuaile, though the 
attempt feeme to he full of peril!, and terrour. 
But you (ay you fccle fmall ftrength offaith^and 
no fupport of that hope which maketh not afha* 
med. Beware lead: you iudge vniuftlyof the 
wayes of God, and efteerac that for (mall which, 
is great, and vile, which in the fight of God » 
tnoft precious. For herein the enemie may take 
encouragement, to your great difaduauntage. 
You fecle not that tafte thereof you fometimes 
felt: and do you iudge therefore you are berea- 
ued vtterly therof? what; confider the foufe 
is nowe fickcj and difliafteth much wholefomc 
meate of confolation, and loathetfi many plea- 
faunt and fragrant cuppes of comforte, and 
counfel.and yet the indeuouts of Gods children 
in this behalfe, and the fweete waters of heane- 
ly comfort are not therfore of therafelucs bit¬ 
ter or vnfauory : fo you are not to meafurethe 
abfence of tins gr^ce by that you prefently, but 
by that in times paft (while the foule ftoodefree 
from this difeafe of teptation, & trial)you haue 


OF MELANCHOLIE. asf 
fcltofcomfort in the fpirite through an accep¬ 
table mtafure of faith according to the difpen- 
fation of Gods grace,and notaccording to our 
fency,hat as hefhal think mcete to be triiniftred 
into vs.Neithcr is the triall of faith onely to be 
taken accordihgas the fonlc fceleth it in it fdfe 
but alfo(and fometimes as in ftjch temptations 
as thefewljcreiiiyou nowe^raiiarlc onely ^by 
the cotirfe and trade of life which hath pafled 
before , ^nd thofefruites which are euident to 
the eye of others who can indge'more fincerelyi 
then the aflFIidfed whofc vhdcrttaildioges are' 
fomewhat altered through Sath^ns terrots.'^Eut 
againeyou fay the courfe ofMlfc paft, and your 
eftate prefent'hath nothing auniwered the hov 
linesofyourvocation, and' that linccritie the 
Lord reqaifeth fo that here alfb the comfortc 
faiIethyoa.What thenfare you therefore repro- 
bate?Nd,but it argueth wat offaith;Not fo,buC 
place for farther incrcafe of faith, and the fruites 
thcreofiThofe^hohie theLordehath chofen to 
be his woTfli'i^crs,ah:d hathTedeemcd,and ebn- 
fecratedh'oty tb hirnfclfe‘aird prepared good 
workes-for Aeth to walkc in f they be his plants 
and ingraf&doliue brannehesinhis fonhe who 
take not their fun perfeftidh-ttonceCbut accor¬ 
ding tothc^ture of a plant)T^uifeth daily wa¬ 
tering iStdreffingjwherby by degrees they attaia 
itfthecttdea ftii ftature in Chnft. So that you 
may not aeebthptyour felfc voyde of grace, bc- 
caufe you ate notperfe 61 ( for m this life both 
faith,and knowledge, and loue^rc al imperfect,, 
and ihall partly be fnrniihed,and partly reccauO 
^rfe^o chewhere,^bucyoaare godly & wife^* 


aig . A TREATISE - 

ly t.o C05jGiert^r?,?rete worke of • Gods fpirite^ 
and..gra.’fe yand take cpmiorte of the fmallcft 

and drop pf^this iieaueBly fuAeptatioa 

and attend yoijr.’un??.pf' pr^fed:gr9uth,,accor-. 
ding to tBergop'd, f li?afure pf God j;Yoa cannot, 
at: all tinses dpeie and follow witB5rpiin.^ncejt^ 
and natutald^paciuoAe yvorkef ofthis myftt’ 
T^inrpfe’tBinJmate.. aB to f|}4^rrie-wherp 
tp.WiBd.ufetKian'dwBereitlightpthfXpi^^k^ 
ryethat.arp.c^lled^areBornc againei^^^^^ as the 
tn^ea^^Bpur, bodies, ra, not per- 
c|,a'u2i^ptvs^Hpwe do in abe -birth, 

4hen loi§ iHyi|i^Yft%the heauenfj^jbirth,- and- 
4lntu3?irKgihfil^tip|riheipkipy^^ 
p.it£ont leanej, afl4%§uaii^t£variQti:,witli. his. 
hraruefoiis ,wprk.i.ng EOP£e^thca--js<: expedient at. 
Eisp!eaGirejyyhtp,apdjn^v/h3tmealuie;Ypr:.cnt' 
po^fpii-: dnpph leffe can% bp|y;puer?)}3rged' 
yii.th ojelanchoiy,&A|tpwn.^^p ^t-^rkpidpa-, 
o^qhrpetlre.cpgi^-^fe pft'is'day;ft3r> 

&'br.ighthp|^^ rlhcgeaiehidl Sppn^, pd a?-; 
feppadanrniwgyf^ a nraindyyhQfef^i^afp; 
6indere'iby,njdanesahereof^ yvk^r^y-if^peithei? 
conpeiuet'h’n.pr itt4scth hgeerp’K- vj»i^gb.tr. 
lye as ih.c cafe.^rpfipH'&th .andnekhpilpon-; 
ly affsded', bgt,bJ^n>dg^folded.hy'the;h^ 

^d b roogbe iDidr5fSjdarkppefl& 
tesd alfo ahd’beateni m'th, ,Satb^.:ycgi-„.aiis4d?Sj‘ 
whereby, being diftraftpd, it obtaipeth tkpr:r,ef'- 
pit, andkeleafe ,,-:of duejand iiift .ppofidsrdtiPn* 
hptve cap it dd'cerne. rightly ofttheic.'thjpges I 
"^berefo re your cafe bemg fuchye.elde’ i@pt fp 
jjyich tp the encmy,asrp,iti4ge ofypat felfeac.- ■ 
/! .. ■ - “a ■ ' cor-' 



OFMELANCHOLl£; tif 
tordiog to his feotence ,wEio is a lyerffom thd 
beginningj'and tMe father of ]yes, but according 
to thofe olde teftimonics which you haife feltra 
your ov/ne CODfciende.and batic giuen cpihfor- 
table Ihewe of to Others in the courfc ofyb'qt 
life heretofarc Gh,but ypufede not the tefti- 
inbhy ofGodsipirit^ which might aflfure you. 
Neither do any of Gods children’it all timei 
feele it.E^uidltoplained ofthe want herebfi loli 
complained lik'^Wife;& lo hauc diuerfe of Gods 
children in -41 times made ifipne hereof. Suffi-i 
cicht it is if at^nytime that aiTufaitfce be giueni 
arid' if'it bed -ffie wil of G^d ftif dtime to wifh* 
draw it,that’ybu may feeling ybuf;bwne frailtyy 
wiih moreeaTbeftdefire cdtb himfbr his Wbna^ 

fed gra'cedWho are you to interrupt the' Wa 5 fcs' 
of God,had to preuent his COunfelles ? and foe 
your comfortbe^aflufed that thefbfmer graceV 
you-haaereceaubdisdfthat-ii^ure'^ that it tie- 
uerdecayeihjbutremaineA'a^euct.lafting fed- 
of ithmortaKtiei'I'rocecdirigfrbnrrthe Father ibp 
c terrii tfy,irid with whom there is h b ’ chau ngca'^ 
blerifeflejnbrihadbwe'Wturnihg'whb doth, no^ 
thing to repeat him bfbufis only wjfe.AibiddS* 
fure.and iiath rib neede to cbfre® anye thing of' 
his o-Wrie wojfemanihip. Andff he withhold the 
comfbrt^fhfs’ipi’titcfrom youfbra ieafbn.itis' 
thatyou-afay With greater appetite- feeke after 
it.and hauibg;foBnd it,more ibyc therein, aoJ. 
praifS his mercy with thankfulrieiTe of hart,an 3' 
readinclFe of Ttterarice to found out the aboun*; 
dance of hisinetcy.If the Lord withhold it nor j - 
but thefraiiw wherein you ftarid-, diminiili tbe 
fenfe thereof^" or the teraptatibn preffe fo far 
P,ij. *'poa 


azS ATREATISE 

rpon you that you are not free to iudge aright, 
or the perill which the tcmputioij carriedi with 
it moueyou to diftruftiknowedt^ nothing be> 
fallcth you ftraunge herein mote ^eo to o^ct 
of Gods children before you , and that to wade 
through thefe yioleut ftreames, patience and 
conftancy is moft needfull,with a refoluie mind 
to abide the Lprds wil,who in the end wil come 
and wilnot tarry.This is the broken & contrite 
hart which the Lord will not dcipifc, this is the 
poorefpirit^on whom the Lorde ptonoonceth 
DieiTednes, and this is the a^li&ion whereof 
the fpirit of God is called the comfortertfo that 
f although before the Lord hath vouchiafedyou 
many graces,)yet w;ere you ncucr mecic to re-? 
ceaue diuerfc other which he will no we befto we 
vpon you,beforc this prefentrand fo lhallyou in 
the ende reccauc the cup pfialuiuionin ftced of 
the bottcll of vioeger and teares,and in ftced of 
the bread of afFjij6tion the heauenly Manna, and 
the bread of life fro the table of God St Chiift. 
Wherefore fufpeift thefe thoughtes to be of the 
enitny and qot of yout felfc.caft into your mind 
of hin3,3nd:not ipringing of ineredulitie: I am 
outofGodsiauour : I am reprobate from his 
Idngdomc., there remaineth no hope for me:I 
haue no faith. Forfucharc his temptations of 
old,& daily they be thc-points he la^rcth in a- 
gainft Gods <iildre,ifnot to wring &6 the their 
hope,at thclcaft to weary their dayes withhea- 
uinefle,and difeomfort. Keithcr cftccmc your 
fclf^prefenily by that you feele,but by that you 
haue felt, when nothing bath ouerfhadowed 
lhaj Iigh| of^0w^edge, fay^h ^ wd zea)e, but 


ofmelancholie; h? 

thefonbrighmesof thefc graces hath broken 
forth.Forwhyhauenot thefe doubts rifenvnto 
you before time > and where is nowe the an¬ 
cient aiTurance? They before time role DOt,bc- 
caufc the temptation was far ofF, and that allu- 
lancc although by tempeft of temptation, and 
by this fpiritualliforme it feeme to bend,and to 

§ iuebackc,yetisit inuinciblc, and recouereth 
lereby more ftrength then euer it had before. 
Is the foiildier worie appayed that fuftaineth 
die combat, and ftandeth in the face of his c- 
acmie,though the tenible thunder of fhot beat 
his earcs.and hj in perill of bitting, though he 
maintaine the hcatc of the battel! agaihft the 
force of his cnemie with perill ’ nbt a. whit: hec 
becommeth hereby more valiant: he Icarneth 
experience, his skill increafeth j and his cou- 
tage doubleth vppon him. SO in this fpirituall 
battaile you muftnot be difcoiiragedlikeamilk 
fbppe, or a ftefhe foldier vntrained or vnac~ 
quaioted with warfare: but fet the viftory be¬ 
fore your eyes, whidiis already attained and 
paicbafedforyou:.andfb much the more are 
you to endure withChriftian v3liance,in that 
here isnofoareofouerthrbwe : the battaile is 
broken ,,and the enemies fcattered, and oncly 
the captaine red uiretb to be followed of y on fo t 
whomc he hath obtained the crownc of vifto- 
rie, iftheftraglingtaylcofthe enemy annoye 
they may fliewe their malice aid hoftilitie bur 
their force is foyled, and take heart oncly, and 
•endure , and you fhall fee them vanquiflicd, 
and fobmit vnto that power of Chrift which in- 
ablethyou. Youmuft confider thatas in war- 
P.iij. fate 



iso :A TREATISE, 

fare the fcruice is not alwayes alike, neithtt 
keepeth the fouldier the fame degrcc,butis ad, 
naunced ofthegenerallashefeeth caufe: cuea 
fo if the Loidc-tiowc beftovve you. in a ftraunge 
pe.ece of fcrui.te in.his fpitiruall Avarre , and 
place you in the forefront, whom hee hath hi¬ 
therto tendered , as your condition required, 
you muft bee contented, and quite your felfe 
like a man, and knowe that the wifedomeof 
iheheauenly captaine is fuch, and his tender 
. affedtion fo great towarde his followers, that in 
.^the middeft ofperilL, notone haire of them 
fhali mifcarry whom he leadeth Then to con¬ 
clude this point,feeing your cafe is only a temp¬ 
tation,and no temptation is of it felfe f except 
that one ) a figne of reprobation : caft of thefc 
difcouragementcs,: and Icarnc bowe to behaue 
your felfe herein, that you may pafle through 
with credite ofyour vocation,and honourvnto 
God,& ioy & conafort to youi faithful frieds in 
the Lord lefus.You haiie read your felfe & may 
partly perceaue by my former difeourfe howe 
.melancholie perfwadethofmifery where there 
is no caufe,& foroe, haue imagined themfelucs 
* to haue wanted their heads , fome their armes, 
other fome haue thought themfelucs dead men, 
and other fome one member of their bodies as 
bigge as three: which as it perfwadeth in cor¬ 
poral things that which is not,fe> no lefle doth it 
.in fpirirual things efpecially,beihglike a. weapo 
.taken into Sathans hand,and vfed to alladuaun- 
tages of oar hurt and deftruftion . This maketh 
al more gricuous,5: is called of Serapio, the ve- 
ty feat&of the deuil being an apt inftrument fat 


OF'-MEIANCHOLIE. ^3^ 
him,both to weaken our bodies with, Sjto ter-2 
rify our minds with vaine,&-feHtaftica11 fearesj 
and to diftiirlie the'wh'ole tranquillity of our ria 
tore. Wherefore afcribe 1 pray you thefc'trou'ji 
blesof y'o'ormind to no othef.butto the frailty 
of your bodyrl raeane this excefl^'ofdiftfuft.and 
fcare,othcrwife the temptation tnoylie without 
it,and giuc'nO'Way to Sathans praaifc, in yeel- 
ding youir iudgment and afFe£tion to his fugge- 
ftion: biureflft-as againft aflcktiefiejand asna^ 
ture doth with her-^irit againft bo^ly difeaft^ 
fo take courage,and cal together the wifcdome, 
and knowlegc God hath giuca you , and nowc 
put it in vfe againft thisdubt!e-,and forcible ene¬ 
my. And through Gods blefsing by du e vfe of 
fuch hatura! mcanes as I ihall hereafter declare 
vnco you, both mind and body ihal agayne be 
reftored £0 the former integritie, and you hau6 
greater caufe then cuer to prayle God for his 
mercy,and goodnefle towardcs yon . Hitherto 
nothing hath befallen youvthatdiuerfe of Gods 
children haue not pafled through before you,Sc 
.although the battaile hath bene iharp & bloudy 
eueu as our Maifter hath fweat-dropps of bloud 
in the like combat, remember the vidlory is the 
more glorious j aud the conqueft fo much the 
more honourable & fure: as wc haUs experience 
in the perfon of lefus our Saui'our'whicli found 
iso ocher way to his kingdome^and hath left vn- 
tovs an example of like patience .conftaneic, & 
‘hope.and whatroeuervcrtue-eife is requifite to 
this^battaile of thcfpirite.and doth furmfli vs in 
. all partes with fpirit'u all armour. He gi rdeth vs 
with truth,and bucklcth on vs the b.reftplate o f 
P.iiij. righv 



aja. A TREATISE- 

rigliteoufnefreihe fhooweth our feet with the pre 
paration of the Gofpell of peace ; he deliucrcth 
into the left hand the Ihield of faith, wherby we 
may quenchrthe fiery dartes of the deuilhSt into 
the rightthe fword of the Q)irite , the worde of 

God, and coueteth our heads with the helmet 
of faluation.Ifwclhallcowardly caftour armor 
and weapon from vs,and betake vs to flight, bc- 
fides there is no place of fafetie jwce flialldilho* 
jjour our captaine, giue ouerout felucs'to the 
pleafuie and cruelly of our enemy > and finallye 
pe riflifor cucr. Wherefore try the ftrength of 
this armour, and the lharpneffe of this fworde. 

Sc now occafion is offered,match on with thofe 
ihoes of peace, which is the endc of warre, and 
whereof they are the pledge and affurance, hold 
out that ftiield of faith , and although it be bat¬ 
tered on all fides,yet forfake it not,for the tem¬ 
per is fuch as no fiery darte of the wicked can 
pierce itiandbcftowe that fword of Gods word, 
the wqrd ofconfolation,of ioy, of affurance,of 
fpirituall and heauenly wiledome, whereby the 
sudgement is petfeded.and the hart eftabliflicd, 
and the whole man of God made abfolute,For- 
fake not that breaftplate of the righteoufnes of 
Icfiis Chrift, and that fruit of our fandlificatioa 
whereby we arc in his Sonne acceptable vnto 
God;& with the helmet of faiuation coucryour 
hcad.that all the good meanes of God being to 
the full emplc^ed , you may feele the power of 
this heauenly furniture to your prefent encou- 
T3gemcnt^& hereafter to your euerlafting falua- 
tion.Let not your finnes difmay you, for Chrift 
eamc not'to faue the rigbieou j, he fupplyeth all 
our 


OF MELANCHOLIE; .135 
but wantes, and bath aboundatice to difcharge 
our debtes. In him is God wellpleafcd with vs» 
as himfelFe hath pronounced, fb that being dif- 
chargcdin hira.Iet vs giuc ouer ail fearc,& with 
holies approch vnto the throne of grace that 
we may rcceauc the mcrcie promifed vnto vs, 
for if we be righteous, then is Chriftyoiightcr 
ous, andfuderedforhimfelfe , and not for vs: 
but he was iuft & pure, a lambe without fpot or 
blcmifh flainefor the attonemct, that we might 
thereby Hue. broaken that we might be healed, 
and humbled for our aduauncemeut. Wherefore 
lay the burden vpon him, who hatbfaide, come 
vnto mee all yee that are heauie loden > and hee 
Ihali eafe your wearied fhoulders thereof, and 
giueycu refrefiiing.If there were no linne whef- 
on Ihould Gods mercie be Ihewcn? and whereto 
tcndcth the promifc of the Gofpcll? But you fay 
you arc a great finner : what then ? is not the 
mcrcie of God greater l is there any cndc of his 
corapaffion? Ifhnne do abound, who ihall fiint 
the grace of God, that it fliould not alfo ouer- 
flow-FDauid was a great linner, fo was both Pe¬ 
ter and Paulc:yet were they not refilled, but rc- 
ceaued mercie. And if the grace of God were fo 
great, that our finnes could not withholde his 
mcrcie when we were ftraungersfroro his coue- 
runt, aliens from the common wealth of Ifrael, 
and led with that fpint of erroar,and darknefle, 
like the nations that knewe not God, much 
- more being reconciled, ftandc we fiire, and vn- 
remoueableinhii fauour, though the cloudcs 
do fomtimes ouercaft the bright beames foerof 
9i oat Qwncimbecillitiecomprebendeth it not; 

Rcmcm- 



4 54 atreatise 

Remember tbe tryall of lob ; who would hau© 
taken him for other, then one forfaken of the 
tord? what were hjs thoughtsflet the daj^periflr 
wherin I was borne. Why died I not ih the^mh? 
wherefore is light giuen vnto him that is in mi- 
fcry, and life vnto them that hauehcauie hearts? 
And in an other placetoh that I were as in timea 
paftl when God preferueth me.whe his lightihi- 
ned vpon my head, &c.' Bu^ what was the tryall* 
God blefled the laft dayes of Job more thc the 
firft:eue fo,though the prefent affliftion be grie- 
Bous vnto you,& al hope faile in refpea of your 
feting , yet the Lorde when he hath proued yon 
and founde you pure and fincere in his beloued 
fonne.thelike iffue arc you alTured of with coin, 
-forte inthis life, and eternall faluatiooin the life 
to come. Thus leaning a more plentifiill confo- 
lation vnto your godly friendes who dayly fre¬ 
quent you .elpecially fnehas are preathers^of 
: the word and minifters of Gods grace,I proceed 
to inftruft you in that I iudge your body ftadeth 
in neede of,that howfoeuer hability faile in pef- 
fbrmace of the offices of friendfhips on my part 
towards you , my linceie affeftion and vnfaioed 
ioue vnto you may beat the leaft teftifiedby my 

indcuour: wherein if r be tedious partly,it is of 

forgetfulnes of thatconfideration, being ouct- 
caried with defire to benefite you,and partly bi- 
caufe in your cafe I alfo comprehend die eftatc, - 
of many one at this day in ?libe fort affeiaedaDd 
affliftei who if they rc'ceiue any meancs of co¬ 
forte by this my trauai}c,the§|maybe morefac- 
holding vnto my fried M. & pray for his releafr. 
Thus my good M. iyou faaue the icftimonie of 


OF WELANCHOLIE ajj- 
ihy good will in this part of counfell. I confeflfe 
I am not fo meet for it, as your cafe rcquireth: 
but fo hauc I difcharged that office whereto the 
duetie offrienlhip bindeth me. If my prefence 
may fupply the defeft,Twill not faileyon-whcr- 
in any part of mine ability may ferue your want: 

1 will nowe proceede to the cure of your bodice, 
whofe diforder increafethyonr heauinefle, and 
aoyneth hand with this kinde of temptation. 

. CHAP, xsxvii. 

The cure of melancholy , andhoxeerathtncholUk^ 
perfons are to order them fclues inaSliom of 
the minde,fenfe, and motion. . 

the ordinarie cure of all difeafes , Sc helpes 
of infirmities are to be begunne with remo-' 
uingof fuchcaufes as firft procured the infir- 
mitie { except they be remoued of themfelues, 
through their nature, neither ftable nor perma¬ 
nent) by luccefe ion of a contrarie caufe of the 
lamg kinde : euen fo the firft eatrie of reftoring 
the melancholicke braine and Heart, to a better 
ftateof conceite , &cheere, is the remouing of 
fuch caufes as firft difturbed iudgement, and af-. 
fe£l:ion,6r are thereto apE,with iiiducing of cau- 
ies of contrarie operation. The caufcs of all dif¬ 
eafes are dther breach of dyet, and feme er- 
rour comitted in the gouernment of our health; 
or fuch accidentes as befallvs in this life againft 
our wils; and vnlooked for. From the fame alfo 
do arife the wotkes of melancholie, whereof I 
intreate, and you defire to be releafed. Our diet 
coafifteth notonely f as it is commonly taken) 



A TREATISE 

in meate, and drinkc: but in whatfocuercrcrcii 
fes of mind or bodic: whether they be fiudies of 
the braioe, or a£R:£lions of the hart, or whether 
they be labours of the bodies, orexercifes only, 
Bcfidcs vnto diet, houfe , habitation, and appa¬ 
rel do beloDg.which are caufes of maintenance, 
or ouerthrowe of health,as they be affefted. To 
thefe alfo the order of reft, and fleepe is to bee 
added as a great meancs, taken in dne time, and 
in conuenient moderation, to preferue health, 
er to caufe ficknefle.if otherwilc it be taken im- 
moderatly , too fcant, or diforderly. Of the la¬ 
bours of the minde, ftudies haue great force to 
procure melancholic: if they be vehement, and 
of difficult matters, and high mifterics: & ther- 
fore chiefly they are to be auoyded, & the mind 
to be fet free from all fuch trauel,that the fpirits 
. which before were partly wafted, might be re* 
ftored: and partly employed vpon hard difeour- 
fcs,may be releafed,to the comfort of the heart, 
and thinning of the bloud.Befides, fuch a^ons 
approching nigh vnto, or being the veric inor- 
ganicall of the foule, caufe the minde to negle£b 
the bodie : whereby eafily it bccommcth af¬ 
terward vnapt for the aftion, and the humours 
skanted of the fweete influence thereof,and fpi- 
ritjfetlc into a melancholic thicknelle,and con- 
gele into that cold and drie humour,which ray- 
ftth thefe terroursand difeouragements. Wher- 
forc aboue al, abandon working of your braine 
by any ftudie,or conceit: andgiuc your mind to 
libertie of recreation, from fucb a£fions , that 
drawe too much of the fpirit, and therby wrong 
the corporal! mgbers of the bodic.For in main- 
tainance 


OF MELANCHOLIE. ^ 
tainaocc of health it is fpccially to be obferued, 
t hat the employing of parts either of mindet 
or bodie with Aeir fpirite , is to be carried with 
fuch indifference, and diferetion, that the force 
which ftiQuld be common to manic, be not la- 
uiihly fpent vpon any one. Nowe, ftudics, of ali 
affionsiboth becaufe it vfeth litle help of thclbo 
die,in comparifon of other; and becaiifcihe 
mindc chiefly laboureth y which draweth the 
whole bodie into fympadiie, whetby it is negle* 
ded as it were for a dme, a'bd the moft fubcilc 56 
pareftfpirits thereby are cbhfumed, is foie gi- 
uen ouct in the cure of this paffion; or if the af- 
feftibn cannot be tempered wholly thereffom,- 
then fuch matter of ftudic is to be made choylc. 
ofjas requircth no great contention, but with a- 
ccrtainemediocritie.may vnbend that.ffrelle of 
thetnibde, through that ouer vehement aiffion,- 
and withall carieacontentedncffetherctio, and 
ioy tothe affeaion.Nowe asall contention of 
the mind is to he intermitted,-fo eipccially that, 
whereto the tnclancholike peribn tooft hath 
, giuethfaim fcife beforethe paffion is ebieflie to 
be efehued , for the reebuerie of fornacr eftate, 
and reftoring the depraued conceit, and fcatc- 
fuU affe^^ionvFor therejif the affeftion of Kking 
go withall.both h3rt,andbrainedo oner prodi¬ 
gally,fpend their ipirites,& with them the fubti- 
left partes of the natural! iuyee, and humours of 
the bodie.If of mi{like,and the thing be by for¬ 
cible eonftraintlayde on, the diftra<ffiog of the 
mind,from the prompthes of the affeftion brec- 
deth fuch an agonic in oar nature, that thereon 
and of the 

- ' “ " " ■ tnoft 


438 . A XUEATISB 

tnoft raie and fubtiieJinmours of bar 
wbrich area.s it were tlie feat© of otjr naturall 
beatpiiiiie refinerof,all bnr humours , and the 
purifier^of our fpirites. ■ As that kind of ftudie, 
wherein the melanGholiekc hath Ipenthimfclfe 
is .tQcbc aaoy4ed V of intermitted, and. onc.df :a 
mildbf and iofter kindc to be inferredimplace 
:Xo niuchdcfle anie Araunge ftudie of 
dilicjiltie,, and mbeh tlaneli of the braine is ta 
be.^kcft in handc, as- a were to turne the minder 
iatd;aconttarie‘bennif:I»r herein thellraunge- 
ne(re,j be£des'diffic£iltiegi»eth caufeof trauaile- 
ahdtpile vntp our n^tntcTo that both thefeex-.; 
tfignjilijBS-are tb be efchu^d of you as moftdan-. 
gerods,-^nd hustfejlii^d the mind to.be'retired 
toiuch a tranquHlmeias the naturall heate aiid.. 
i^ritjs m^y.hauefteeieope to attende.vpponthe- 
corpg tal|a£lions of preparing the bloudi aadi 
thinning^f the^groflh imse into amoderatfub-, 
ftane§,a^i^ aeco rdi a g t o good d i fpo fit i onrof the 
bi^ie-iis ftodi^.IcOtBprehepde (.’althbUgh-they: 
beidrnetfe^ all aftions’bf interaall feHftSjwhich r 
are mjififters'aDdfernarit^iOfiludie, whdthejfic. 
bebf:jearning,or.ofmedit3tiohfandinueritioaj; 
whi^iater kindc,rfarreraoretbyleth-thc bodie,^ 
then ihpifarniet,' and jberfore.farther offisjt to, 
be remold. Of internal bftafes ,1 tafeephanta- j 
li,&t,Q.be||i&greate;ft-waftGfthefe/pirit%&m5di.. 
apt, tp. thicken the blondf,4f it be'cxceffitie .-Poj. 
that imka^eth the inueAtiuc action of theming; 
apd iiiaIo.vycr degree>(ifit be vehement& Gon- > 
ti.nuai} ymaketh greai yvall.of thofe tw.orinftrUr i 
menteSjXpirite,and Wateiip ihb melancholicke,. 

hodie. Fox as the a^igpdsxiHch is thefpir:it,anii» 


OF .MELANC HOLIE 

part thereof purer,{iibtiler.th inner, as tbe aflion 
IS of more excellencie, & farther remouedfrom 
eorpOTall praftife , anddraweth nigher to the 
clcercf 'and pure afbions of the mindc. If the 
mekocholicke be ouer much contemplatiuc^ 
it fliaUihea be meetefor him. to withdrawe his 
mind to corporal afirions of grofler fort: thatas 
thejitind by fpeculatioj after aiort difidyoethit 
felfefrotnthe bodierfo the bodely cxcrcifemay 
reuo!^it.^aine into,thefonnerfcllowfiiip,and 
exear^e of^odely action. Thcdutwardefcales 
becaafethey confift rather-in a kinde of paffionj 
theirivfc doth not greatly hinder the thiniiefie,' 
which we 'require againft melancholie , except 
theybeouet. trauelled with watchinge, which 
hathgreatforce to drinkevq) thefpirites & mok 
fture,. and fo to alter thehodilyftate into a:ttier«: 
lancbohe diipofition . tedious to mind & firaiyi 
In their adies it is.to bee obfcfued ,tbat.they bcl. 
not’inianic refpefi: irkefomoi; ofbdious. Forif 
they bee fuch'^ the heatt continually where the>- 
obieiSi is prefented, nowesgrowen tendeb thesi 
rou^theinterhali pafsiqh, fliethat the fljadoWi 
of euciae thing that cartieth the imalleft 
©fdifcohtcatmentn.andieclaimeilEhis ^irit^j 
about?him .filfe , leaae&'Jhe buiwaide part^, 
deftituteof doflitenientmcafiife^and by aboun— 
dadceabdi^ifilelfe-, CDrrapteth'.rhen:i in time,-! 
for".<waB‘t offoSicient refpiratiooiand breathing,. 
which-'no tefle ingendresh .melancholie ; then 
the former- difo^dets afore mentioned, and; as 
for the fea'refuU paffion j it’increafcth it direct-, 
lyi andkeepeth thatimmoderatefeare inV vre.;;.. 
^.ai&nfiblcobiccls.the vi^yfi, except they bo 
pleafauntj 



MO A TREATISE 

plca&unt, and proportinall, giucgjcateftdif;. 
contentment to the mclanchobke. If befide$ 
their horriblcneffc of fhapc, ( or withoot it> 
they rcprefcnt ante fignificant type of.tragical! 
calamitic, or mention that, wherewith the me- 
lancholicke apprehenfion faigneanic feaicfoll 
obie<Ji: much more inch fpcftacles are to bee 
ihunned of the melancholickes. And becaufe 
darkenelfe is as it were apatterne of death, it 
alibis as much as may beto be anoyded, and 
all checrcfull fightes , agreeable to vertaeand 
pictie,andto be embraced, and fought after, 
which as the other {bite, dole vp the fpirites, 
and giucth theheart ai&ultes of hoftilitie , may 
allure them out againe , 'and fet free the diftrcf- 
fed affe^ion, and :yKlde comfort to theama-> 
2«ihcart. Next tb.cifibk thinges .theaudibk 
obieS moll fnghteth the mclancholieke pcr- 
fon, efpecialy befides the ynplealantnes, ifitca* 
iieth alib fignifkation of terror: & here asplea- 
fant pi^ures, andliuely colours delight the me- 
laocnolicke eye« and in their mealure latisfie 
the heart, lb not onely cheere&il maficke in a 
genetalitie, but fnch ^that kindeas moft^ re- 
soyceth isi to be'lbtinded intthemelancholicke 
caresr of whidr Smde for themoft part is fach 
as carrieth an odde mcahire; and eafie to be 
difeerned j except the melandiolicbehaaeskill 
in mulicke , and reqnire a. deeper harmo. 
nie . That contrarilie, which isfolcmnc,;and 
ftill: as dumpes, and fanci^, and fettc inU- 
ficke, are hurtfoU in this cafe, and feme ra¬ 
ther for a difordered rage , and intemperate 
mirth, to leclaime within mediocritie, then to 
^ «Uuxe 


OF MEtANCHOLlE. 
iliure the Iptrites, to ftitre the hIoud,and to at¬ 
tenuate the humours, which is (if the harmony 
be wifely applyed) cffeftualHe wrought by nm- 
ficke. For that which rcafon worketh by a more 
euident way, that muficke as it were a magicall 
eharme bringeth to pafle in the mindes of mcn> 
which being forfene of wife law giuers in times 
paftjthey haue made choice of certaine kindcs 
thereof, and haue reiefted the other, as hurtfull 
to their common wealthes r which agreement 
betwixt concent of muficke,and affeSion of the 
mind, when Ariftoxenes perceaned, he thereby 
was moued to think.ihat the mind was aothing 
elfe but akind of harmobie. In the other fenfes 
' the obie£ts onely arc to be choyfed, fwcete in 
taftjpleafant in fmell, and foft to be felt, that all 
outward things may allure, and giue courage in 
deed.of that cowardly timiditie wrought by the 
humour.Motion doth much more,if it be vehe¬ 
ment, and drawe to the nature of labour, and 
withall continualLFot that drieth the bodic cx- 
cefsiuely. And although for the prefent it be 
hotter through fuch trauell t yet confuming the 
fpititc and moyfturc, which are matter of this 
heate : in the endc it dccayeth alfo , as fyre 
without fuell, and the lampc without oyle. 
As thele aftions ofbodie and mind being ouer- 
vehement, and cxcefsiue bereaue the humous 
of fpirite, and wafte the naturall heat,which be¬ 
ing fpent.whatfoeuer elfe is of the body is more 
grolTe and earthie, & becomnieth a lake of me¬ 
lancholic : euen fo if altogether thefe adtions 
ceafc, that neither the minde nor bodie beftowe 
themfelucs in good ftudics and exercifes, then 
OB 



• A TREATISE . | 

on the contrary part this worketh the fame that 1 

the other exceilc doth: and euca as water that 
ftandeth, and is not ftirr6d,corrupteth,and wax- 
cth grofle and thicke: and like as the laojpe that 
wanteth ay re goeth ou t, though plenty, of oyle 
beminiftted , euen fo without this ftirring of ' 
fpirites, humours, andbloud, all fettle into a 
grofle refidence of melancholie, and the whole 
mafl'e of bloud eafily dcgeneratcth ynto that ’ 
humour, and far,wantofexcrci{e,thenaturall 
iire being ilakencd.and the fpirit thcrby ingrof- 
fed, that which indued both with iuft mcafurc, 
and equalitie conuenient, was before a checre- 
fulliuyce comfortable to all the partes, and a 
I'weete deawe to the earthly fubftancev congea- 
leth into a groflenefle farre vnmeet for .that vie, 
.andofaquuecontraricdifpofitioD. - 

CHAP, xxxviii. 

melancholicke ferfans are to order thetnfelutt 
in their affections. 

^ S inftudies,exerci]£Softhcbraine;fcnfe,& 
voluntary motion, great moderation is to 
be kept of melancholy perfons: cuen fono lefle 
regard (if not more) is to be had of them in re- 
.ffrayning their afFe6iios,4nd guiding them with 
fuch wife conduit, as at no time, they breake 
forth into outrage, and lhake ofFthe gentle and 
light yoake which reafon.impofeth. Iwillnot 
now difpute whether vehement Itudy, ordifor- 
dsrly perturbations is more robe taken,heed of, 

. pasly take you . no lefle care in the one then in 


OF MELANCHOLIE. X43 
the other, except you fln.de your felfe tohauc 
fallen into excefTe, and CO haue furfetted more 
of this, then of that excefle: If you haue fo vne- 
qually exceeded, and the effed hath preuay led 
with yourthat kindjwherof you haue moft caufe 
to coroplaine, there refrainc, and employ thofe 
giftes ofwifedorae, and vertue wherein in times 
paft you haue bcene a patterne to others : and 
there keepe the ftraighteft handj where the lifts 
ofreafonare moft like to be broken through. 
You haue had declared how the excefsiue tra- 
uaile of animall aftions, or fuch as fpring from 
, the brainc, waft and fpend that fpirit which as it 
is in the world the only cheerer of all things, &: 
difpenfeth that life imparted of God to al other 
creatures, fo in mans nature.is the only comfort 
of theterreftriall members: which fpirite being 
confumed, or empaired, leaueth the maffy parts 
more heauie, grofle, and dull, and farther of re- 
moued from,all prompt, and laudable afliion of 
life : this effe£l: as it is wrought by that kinde of 
diforder, in like rnanner, a perturbation wheron 
rcafonfitteth not, and holdethnotthetaine.is 
of the fame aptnes to difturbe the goodly order, 
difpoled by iuft pioportio in our bodies:& put¬ 
ting the parts of that moft confonant, & pleafant 
harmony out of tune deliuer anote.to the great 
difeontentment of reafbn, and much againft the 
mindes will, which intendeth far other, then the 
corporall inftrument efredleth. If you wil call to 
xnindehiftories, you may remember how fome 
haue died of forrow,and otherfome of ioy, and 
feme with feare, fome with ieloufie, and other- 
foraewithloae haue bin bereaued of their wits 
Q^ij. euca 



144 ATREATISE , 

eucn tliofe moft exccllentin all theparts of rca- 
foDi aad found vnderftanding, and thereby haue 
made fuch perturbance of fpirit in their braincs 
that forcredite of wifedome, andinftcadc of ■ 
reputation; of difereite men they haue through 
thefe latter kindes of vnbridled affeftions, wor- 
thely caried the name of fooles, and men voide 
of all difcrcete confideration, in the whole race 
of their life following.Thiscommeth to palTe in 
fome by troubling of fpirite only which recjuire 
not alone due quantity,and temper, but a calme 
fetling,and tranquillitie.moued indifferently,as 
iuft matter of perturbation lhall giue occafion. 
In otherfome by lauifh wafte. and prodigall ex- 
pence of the fpirite in one paision, which dif- 
penfedwith judgement, would fuffice the exe¬ 
cution of many worthy aiSions befides. Hereto 
may ye furthermore adde, that as a member of 
thccorporall body ouer vehemently forced by 
ftrainingjis in perill of luxation, and fometimes 
thereby becometh altogether difioynted, & the 
parte loofeth thefreedome of flexible motion, 
euen fo the fpirite, ouerfotcible drained to one 
vehement pafsioa, carieth the di^ofition of the 
part therewith, and in giuingouer by too much 
yeelding to the violence of our pafsion, ftadeth 
as it were crooked that way, and with an ouer 
reach of the raigning perturbation, being paft 
recouery,,inclineth wholly whereto it was forci¬ 
bly driuen. Wherefore the perturbations are 
difereetely fo to be ruled as alwayes there do re-' 
maine fufficient power in reafons hand to rc- 
ftraine. Of thefe fome p^trturbations direftly Sc 
immcdiatly inereafe both pafsion and humour. 


OFMELANCHOLIE. *45 
of which forte are faddeneffe, and feare. Other 
fomc pafsing meafure, not fo much of thefelues 
procure either, as they do feeble the melancho- 
licke bodies,as anger,and ioy.both by excefsiue 
efFufionof fpirits, and fuddaine alteration from 
the hearts contraftion to fuche dilatation as 
thofe affe£f ions proGure.In ioy if it breake forth 
into imnioderat laughter: then doth it more 
feeble the melancholicks, and breath out there 
fpirites and leaue a painc in their fides and belr 
lies which partes are greatly trauailed in laugh¬ 
ter. For although it ftould feemc mecte in lef- 
peft ofthe thinning of the humor by flowing 
offpirit,and blood injro the outward parts from 
the inward center, and alteraticrn of the pafsion 
by the contraric 3iRci:ion,yet the fecblenefle of 
their bodies, and skant of ^irites their humors 
being vnapt for plentiful fupply,refpe£t not that 
confideration, but require fuch anexpulfionof 
one affeftion by the other, that the body it felfe • 
notwithftanding fuftaine no detrement; other- 
wife the combate would be fo fore, that nature 
not being able to beare the force of ech pafsion, 
would be diffolued by violence of that conten¬ 
tion. So that as al matter of feare is to be aban- 
donned, exccfiiue ioy is alfo to be efohewed as 
a great feebler ofmelancholickperfons,chiefly 
if they be women, or of tender and rare habite. 
If the melancholic rife of any perturbation, that 
efpccialiyis to he altered, & brought intoa me¬ 
diocrity whereof the pafsion take firft begin¬ 
ning. Among them feare, and heauines are of 
moft force, and as they are procured according 
to the vehemency of the caufe, fothekindc of 
QJiJ. heaui- 



14 ^ A TREATISE 

hcauines and feare more or lefle cncountereth 
rcafon,& frighteth the melancholicke heart.We 
both fearc, & are fad for the Ioffe of thofe things 
which with delight and pleafure intimepallwc 
enioyed, and are tormented with defpaire, and 
griefe when (in thofe thinges which we defir^) 
there is no hope to lay hold on. Among the fup- 
drie fortes of fubiefts to thefe pafsions, feme 
areofnecefsitie, and Ibme of pleafure. Such as 
are of necefiity either refpedf the naturall main¬ 
tenance of our bodies and iiues,or honeft repu¬ 
tation amongft men. The naturall maintenance 
of life is of fuch force in this cafe that it moueth 
beyonde meafure euen the wifeft and moft fet- 
led, and adraitteth no moderation. Ifitbeim- 
becilliiie of body and voide of paine it is borne 
more tolerablc.Rcputation,me ofvcrtuous.and 
couragtous difpolition tender as their hues: 
vvherby they are in a manner in like cafe & fom- 
times more alleged with hazard thereof,then if 
life were in daunger. The reafbh is becaufe cre¬ 
dit & eftimation toueheth the whole perfon of 
the man, and not either tiiindc or body only, Sc 
hath the leaft meanes(being once loft)to be re- 
ccuered againe. and befidesthe difgrace iti this 
life,man (being immorlallin (bule) ftandeth in 
awe of the perpetuall note of infamy which may 
remaine after his death. This pafsion is moft 
hardlie borne of the ambitious and proud man 
inrefpefl: ofthat opinion he entertainethofhis 
owne wortliines:& next ynto him it letleth deep, 
in the minde enlarged with the veitue called 
magoanimitie, in refpeft his honor aunfweretli 
nothismerites. The obieftes which are plea- 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 247 
fantjif they be naturalhand not belonging to a- 
ny onepart jbut vnto the whole nature, ot which 
fort is that loue which vpholdcth the propaga¬ 
tion of kindc,and is the only glnc to couple the 
joynts of this great frame of the world toge¬ 
ther : Heere reafon is often times foyled by the 
pafsion>andCcaried captiue)fubtnitteth v/here it 
fhouldhatie preeminece,& rulejf it be of other 
things which nature hathnqtfov/eddedtoge-' 
therithc lofle is borne with more tollcration, 8 c 
where there is peril of want in the, delpaire tou- 
cheth more lightly. In refpefb of their owne na¬ 
ture Inch IS the c6dition of the things we defire 
in this world. But becaufe the diuerfe qualities 
of men taketh them fometiraes otherwifcither- 
fore that pafsion & thofe occafions moft vrge as 
the partie is therwitbmoft pafsionate: fome one 
way, fome an other, as nature bendeth, or edu¬ 
cation hath framed. In thefe cafes of griefe and 
hcauincs fitft of all inftrufifcion out of the ferip- 
tures of God is to be miniftred, and embraced^ 
which offering the afluraunce of farre better 
thinges, then the price of all worldlie treafures, 
may fwallowvp whatfbeuer calamitie this vale 
of miferie prefleth vppon vs: next, preceptes of 
moral! yertue and patience, with examples of 
conftancie,,and moderation in like cafes ought 
to moue, and confideration of that vneertaintie 
of pleafure in this vvorld, which is only conftant 
in inconftancie, and as theheauenstnemfelues 
ftandnot ftill, and the nature of things receaue 
continuall cofuming like a ftreame thatpadeth: 
cuenib our ftateis fubieft vnto like mutabiiity, 
and with no other condition is our life deliue^ 
Q^iiij. red 



a4S A TREATISE 

led vnto vs of nature,through that originall dif- 
obcdicnce, nor is to be otherwifc accepted of 
wife men. In this cafe I referrc the melancholick 
to the bookes of the Scriptures,and roorail pre¬ 
cepts of Philofophers, to the godly inftruftions 
of the diuines, and comfort of their friends. If 
loue not aunfwered againe with like kindnefle, 
procure this pafsion, either amendes is that way 
to be made, or the melancholick is to be per- . 
fwaded the fubie^ of that he liketh is not fo 
louely, and all mention, & fignification of that 
kinde is not once to be called into minde, but 
whatfoeuer iuftly may be all eadged to the par¬ 
ties difgrace is to be obicftcd vnto the amorous 
melan Aolick, and other delights brought in in 
fteed,and more highly commended, which all I 
leaue to the prudency of thofe that attend vpon 
this kind of cure. And if no other perfwafion wii 
leruea vehement pafsion, of another fort is to 
be kindled, that may withdraw that vaine and 
foolifh {broweinto fome other extremity, as of 
anger,or fome feare miniftrcd by another occa- 
fion, then that which firft was authour of this 
fadnes. For although they both breed a diflike, 
yet that proeeedeth of other caufc, rebateth the 
force of it which gaue firft occafion, and as one 
pinne isdriuen out with another, fi? the later 
may expcll the former; but this is to be vied in 
regard of the conceit, and alFeftion. If the body 
therby be altered, and the bloud thickened^into 
melancholie,then all kind of greeuanceds to be 
ftiunned, and onely picafaunt, and delcftablc 
things to be admitted. Thus much for the me- 

fanchplicke afreftion,how it is to be moderated 


- OF MELANCHOLIE. i 4 p 
,iad guided: other kinds ofaflionSjofhody.are 
not any caufes of this palsion, except in fuch as 
were wont by periods to be purged of certaync 
rnelancholick blpudiwhich (if it failc and mini- 
fter caufe, or increafe of this humour,) is to be 
diminifhed by opening a vaine, that may moft 
conueniently fupply that want of nature, and 
disburthen it of the fuperfluitie, as caufe fhall 
require, and force, & ftrength will permit. Eaie 
and reft although it be alone of fmall power to 
ingender, yet may it be an helping caufe to the 
pafiioB.Si inaeafe of this humour, fo that heeie 
in mediocritie is to be kept, and exercife of one 
fort or other ncucr to be omitted, as the chicfc 
temper of the fpirits with the humors,& quick- 
neffe ofcorporall actions. Forasfleeperefem- 
bleth death, and reft of the members is their 
kind of flecpe, & doth that in particulars which 
flcepedoth in the whole, fo (if it exceede)as 
ech referable other in nature, in efieft they will 
not be much vnlikc : but as the one cooleth the 
bodie, and eprrupteth the bloud, and extingui- 
iheth naturall heate, whofe extinftion is death 
it felfe, euen fb the other in a degree hinder the 
prefeiit exprefeing of that Hucly vigour, which 
they poflefle, and difableth them afterwarde to 
make proofe of the facultie, wherewithlE^ are 
indued. And thus haue you in thefe a. Chapters 
whatgouernmentmelancholicke perfons arc to 
obferue in their aftions, and deeds that cocernc 
maintenance of health: in the next, I will lay 
openvnto you of the outward meanes of fu- 
ftentation of life what choifc is to be made, and 
with what difcretion fiichreliefe is tobcvfed. 

CHAP. 



A TREATISE 


SfO 

CHAP. XXXIX. 

Uoro mdamholkk^perfons are to order themfetuet 
in the reft of their diet, and what choife they are 
to mah^of ajre,Tneate, and drinks, houfe,and 
appared. 

He reft of diet, con^ fteth 10 the right vfe of 
outward fuftcntation of life, which is cither 
taken inward^or is outwardly vfed only.The in¬ 
ward and fiich as is to be receaued into pur bo¬ 
dies, is either aire.or fuften^ce. The ayre meet 
for melancholicke folke, ought to be thinnei 
pure and fubtile, open, and patent to all winds : 
in refped of their teper, efpecially to the South, 
and Southeaft .except fomc other imbecilhtic of 
their bodies dilTuadc therefrom,and in the con- 
trarie part, mamlh,miftie,and foggicayreis to 
beefcnued as an iricreafe of both humour, and 
pafsion. Suftenaunce is either raeate or drinfce. 
Their meates ought not onely to be chofen fuch 
as of their ownc nature do ingcnder a pure and 
tWnnc iuycc, but if the nature of the nourifh- 
ment be otherwife, the preparation ought to 
giue ita correftion of that fault, and gencrallic 
they fhould be liquide, & in forme; ofbrothes, 
that both by the raoyft qualitie thereof the dri- 
nelFe of the humour, and their bodies might be 
rcfourmed,and that the pafl’age and concodion 
might alfo be more eafie, and Ipeedy in all their 
partes. Nouriflimentcs of their owne nature a- 
mong meats, wholfomc & meet for melancho- 
lickc folke, and of vegetable things,are parfncp, 
earret^ and skcrret roots. And fallctherbsi let- 
tice,malIowcSi3nd endiue mixed with a guantb* 
tie 


OF MELANCHOLIE ayt 
tic of rocket,and taragon, are not to be refuftd, 
no more is aretcb, forell and par0anewith the 
late rwaine aboue mentioned, or with perfley, 
charueH and fcnell, with little vineger, plenty of 
oyle and fuger. Of forts of bread, cheat bread, 
is meeteft for them, and if they be charged with 
ftore of blond, and the vaines full, fomcoates, 
barlcy.or millet flower mingled with the wheat- 
meele, fliall abate the aboundant nourifiiment 
of the wheat. Of fruites, fuch as are moyft, (oft, 
and Iweeteare meeteft for them, as thefwcetc 
damfing, cherrie, figges, grapes, and abricots: 
neither are newe walnuts, and greene almonds 
fanrtfull in this cafe. Capers waflied from the 
fait and vineger, and eaten with fuger and oyle, 
are raeeter for them then oliucs.Offlelh,tho 
young is fitteft for their diet, and the younger 
the better, in refpe£t of their cold and drie bo¬ 
dies, and grofle humours, which require plen¬ 
tiful! moyftening and, warming, which is flip- 
plyed by the tender age of thofc things whereo 
we feede: being fuller of vitall heate, and natu- 
rail moyfturc, then the older of the fame kind. 
Neither is it requifitc that they be young onely, 
but alfo well liking , and of the fame kind the 
tame, and domefticallismeeteforcorreftioa 
of their melancbolicke ftate, then the wilde. A- 
gainc of flefh, thefoule is to be preferred for 
their vfe before the beaft, and that foule rather 
which vfeth much the feete, and lefle the wing. 
Of foule thefe are of cfpecial l choyce for melan- 
cholicke perfons, the partridge, the godwft, the 
yong pigeon, the pulletj theieafant,& theyong 
tutky, among thefe the goofe wing hath his 



afi A TREATISE 

place, not to be refufed if the tnelancholidcg 
bauc appetite thereto. And generally of foulc 
theoaruedis better, then the other. Ofbeaftes 
the gelded haue prefermet aboiie their felowei 
of that kindramong them pigge is meet for me- 
lancholy, farced with fage and fuch like art of 
cookery,to dry vp part of his fupeifluous humi. 
ditie: veale,efpecially of a cowe calfc.yong we¬ 
ther mutton, kidde, and rabbet arc of the beft 
kind of diet among the beafts for melancholick 
perfons. Of the parts of flefli: the brawnes and 
mufcles are the beft, and next to them the tong 
is of fecond choycc. Of liuers, the pigges liuet 
among beafts is the beft,& the ftones of cocke- 
lells yeeld commendable nourifhment.Offlelh 
theie aboue mentioned are moft agreeable with 
the diet cure of nielancholie, & fuch parts of the 
as I haue declared.; the other either breeding 
agrofTe or flimicnouriflimenthard ofdigefti- 
on and flowe of paflage. Generally fiih is notfo 
wholefome as flefh for this vfe, becaufe they be 
not fo well ftored with naturall heateand moy- 
ftnre, except the imbecillitie of. the melancho¬ 
lick ftomach be fuch as wil not bcare the flregth 
of fleih, then is the fiih to be boyled with wine, 
and to be eaten out of fbme wholefome broth,; 
or with good ftore of fweet butter, and fauored 
with pepper. If the partie defire fifh, thefe fol¬ 
lowing are principal among them. And fiift ge¬ 
nerally fuch as arc of a middle bignefle, not too 
fat,nor Ieane,whitc,and brittle of fub fiance,and 
haunt the fwifteft and pureft waters, arc moft 
commendable: for fuch breed fubtilcft nourifh- 
ment, and leaft fraight with excrements. Of fait 
water 



- OF MELANCHOLIE. 

water fifh that beare fhells,the oyfter is only for 
this diet, of thofc that are defended with a cruft, 
theflirimp, and crayfifh go before the reft. Gf 
other kind of fcafim, fuch as haunt the rockes . 
are excellent food for melancholicke perfons, 
correfted and vied as I haue before Ihewed: a» 
the gilthcad, the whiting, the fea pcarch &c. Of 
other fort the mullet, the lucie, the haddocke, 
the foie, place, but, gurnard and rotchet are to 
be admitted into this diet. Offrelh water fifti, 
thofe of the riucr are to be preferred: & the reft 
fcarfe to be touched, except they receaue corre- 
ftion from thekitchin. Of riaer fifli thefeare of 
the wholefomeft kind: pearch,pike,gougeon,8c 
trout. Thus of the fubftance of creatures you 
haue what 1 iudge meeteft for you in this cafe. 
Gfthe other fort, nothing is to be refufed but 
cowmilkc,all other forts carrying a thinner, and 
more liquid fubftance, and importing no perill 
ofobftruSion, nor windineflerefpecially taken 
with fuger and a litle ralt,& two or three houres 
before any other fuftenance. As cowmilkeis 
thegroffeft and thickeftTo mares milke (except 
that of camels) is the thinneft , next of afle, 
goats milke is moft moderate, and ewes milke 
thicker then it. Of the partes of milke, whay 
drunke with fuger is wholefome for melancho- 
lickc folkc, neither is frefli & new butter to be 
refufed, chcefe made altogether of cowe milke 
is vnwholfome,mixed with goats,or afies milk, 
maketh itnot Co apt to breed obftruftions.Eggs 
are good,and wholefome fuftssnance for melan- 
cholickc bodies, rofted rather then fod or pot- 
ched, and reare dreffed fomewha; the yelk dic¬ 
ker 



454 A TREATISE 

ker then to be fupped. Of eggcs,hens,fe3faunts; 
and turkies lay the wholefomeft egges. and arc 
only for the melancholickes dilh. Thus much 
concerning the meates fit for their diet. Their 
drefsing ought to be fuch as may maintainc 
their naturall iuyee as much as may be,with re- 
xnpuing of all rawnefle. Their fawces would be 
the iuyee of an orange or lymon, well tjualified 
with fuger and fweet butter,cfpecially if vineger 
or venuyee be part in fauce, more in vineger, & 
lefle in veriuycc. Their drinke would be of bar- 
lie mault brued with rain water,or fpring water 
which is much drawn of,next to thefe riuer wa¬ 
ter may take the third place of commendation. 
It would be of a midie fl:reDgth,& not tooftale: 
beere rather the ale, becaufe the hops do great¬ 
ly rcfpedl: their liuer and fplene, and fcoureththe 
ftomach, and maketh purer.and readier way for 
diftribution of their noutilhment. It lhal be vc- 
rie good for them to drinke at meales a draught 
of wine of good ftrength ; claret rather then 
white, and of any kind well refined, and full of 
wine. If they drinke their wine with fugef.it gi- 
ueth greater cheering to them, maketh it to 
paffe more eafily, and mitigateth their mclan- 
cholicke fowrenefle. Drinke betwixt meales,ot 
after meateis to be auoyded, except great caufe 
vrge. Hitherto their fuftcnance, of what kind it 
ought to be of,and among fuch variety of food, 
and Co many good blefsingcs of God that way, 
what ioyce is to be made: as for their order of 
eating, and drinking, and meafureofboth,as 
liquid meates anTbrothes are moft conuenient 
for them, ib I take it, they may drinke largely, 
(except 



O F- M EL A N C H o LIE ajf 

Xrtcept fome accident of the ftom ach difluade,) 
By rcafon their digcftion is flowe, my aduife is, 
-theyiCate little, and often: little, becaufe theyt 
ftrength beareth not much,nor fuch mediocrity 
as other men: often, becaufe their fpirites are 
fcwe.and ncede repayring : bcfidcs the colde, 
fower, and fetling humpur of melanchplie is m 
be refrclhed as^much as may be, with frelh and 
pure nourifhment,and to be tempered, and mi¬ 
tigated with that fwect and gentle mixturc.The 
outward maintenance of life, and fuftentatioa 
ofourfraiic bodies inhoufeor habitati6, 
&appatell, wiich both muft ckrie thefe proper- 
- ties to be cleane and nete, and in ail relpefts as 
much as may be fatisfying the mind of the me- 
lancholicke. For although mcates and dnnkcs, 
.and ay re, either ynwholefome, orvnpkafaunti 
.bcare great fway in difpofing the humour, yec 
becaufe they haue not fuch power to affcft: the 
mindc and fenfes as thefe other haue, in refpc^ 
^.f the pafsion, and melanchplike affeftion.they 
worke not fo prefent annoyaunce. The houfe 
except it be cheerefull and lightfome, trimme 
.and neate, feemeth vnto the melancholickc a 
prifbn or dungeon, rather then a place of aflii- 
red repofe and reft . And the apparell except 
it be light, cleane, fitte,and well fittingjmaketh 
' fheweofdeformitieto the melancholickc, and 
being cuer in his eye, isa reprefentation ofhis 
prefent calamitie, verie tedious vnto him, or if 
it be not fp in his conceit, being now farre al¬ 
tered; yet agreeing with the humour, it may be ■ 
meanes of incrcafe thereof and augmenting the 
£kacie , The fituation of his hoiiCe ,.or at the 



2 ?^ A treatise 

Icaft of his chamber, and place where he is moff 
conucrfant, woulde bee fuch as might let ia 
fuch kinde of ayrc as I haue before declared, and 
fcatcd neither too lowe in anie bottome, nor v- 
pon hill too high, except the mclaDcholic bc 
out of meafure, (adde and fuilen, then an high, 
loftic,and troubled ayre.and fuch featcofhoufc 
will not be atnilTe. If the melancholicke beof 
abilitic, the honfe would not want ornament of 
pifture, of gay and frelh colours, in fuch matter 
as lhall be moft pleafant, and delightful!, and of 
all ornaments of honfe, and home,a pleafaunt 
gardinand hortyeard: with a liuelie fpring, is 
aboue all domefticall delight, and mceteft for 
the raelancholie heart and braine. His apparel! 
would be decent and comely, and as the purfe 
will giuc leaue fomewhat for the time fumpti- 
ous, as alfo the whole houfhold fiirniture be¬ 
longing vnto him. Of colour, light, orchauQ- 
geablc, except the place, and grauity of the me¬ 
lancholic perfon refufeth colours, and hccre no 
kinde of ieemely ornament would be omitted 
which might entice thefenfesto delight, and 
allure the inclofed fpirits to folace themfelues 
the outward parts of their bodies: heere brou- 
ches,chaines,and rings, may haue good vfe with 
fuch like ornament of iewell as agreeth with the 
habilitie and calling of the raelancholicke: and 
thole DOE only curious, and pretious by arte,but 
efpecially garniflied with precious ftones that 
are faid to haue vertue againft vainc fcares and 
bafenefle of courage. Of which fort are theft 
following: the Carbuncle for vertue the chiefc 
offtones: The Calcedony of power to put away 
fcare 


O F ME L A N C H O LIE. 
fcarcaDdhcauinesofhcart,acIcarcrof the fpi- 
xite»,and chafer awaye of fantafticall melancho¬ 
ly vifions,. The tnby auailcable agaynflfearfull 
dreames . The lacint a great checrer of the 
heart,and procurer of fauour. The Tarcoyfc, a 
comforter of the Spirites, The Chryfophars of 
like vcrtue.The Corneole a mitigater of anger 
and meetefor melancholickes of the furious' 
forte. Stones of bafer forte and yet of lingnlar 
vertue, are the Chalydony, or fwallowe ftonc, 
found in the mawes of young fwalIowcs,againft 
madnes:and the Aleftorian or Cockes ftone, of 
a watery colour,found in the mawt of a Cocke, 
or Capon after he be nine yeares oldc, abouc 
all commended for geuing ftrength and cou¬ 
rage, andwherewithCas itisteportcd)the fa-’ 
mous Milo Crotonien alway ftoode inuincible. 
Thus haue you the whole order of the melacho - 
lie diet. I do not remember any thing particu¬ 
lar,and-peculiar vnto them neceflary,morc then 
hath beene hitherto declared , wherefore in the- 
next chapter I will alfo laye open what phifickc 
helpe is rcquiiite in this cafe,and fo recommend 
the fuccefle and fruitc of my labour to the blef- 
fing of God vppon you , andfuch as are parta¬ 
kers of like affliftion.As for the furious melan- 
choly.I leaue it to be cured as difeafeand fick- 
ncs,and will not meddle therewith in this place, 
being impertinent to my purpofe. which refpe* 
fteth onelyyour cftate,and foch like condition 
ofoihers. 


R 


CHAP. - 



258 , 


ATREATISE 


CHAP. XL. 

The curt hj/msdfcine^'meetefor melancholie 

; perfons» 

^Eforelcnicr totreate oftlie care by medi¬ 
cine one word of admonition touching the 
vfe of the medicines and meanes fhall bee iirft 
liecefTary both for your fake,& others who may 
hereafter haue vfe of this my counfclhmy mea- • 
ning is not to make you a phifition, or to giue 
warrant by this my labour to anyrafl)ly.& with¬ 
out dire6lion of the learned phifition,to aduen* 
ture praftife vppon this aduiie, as the common 
forte is to venterous to attempt what they read 
of medicine deliuered in their vulgar toung, but 
that feing the manifold good means which god 
in his great prouidence, and mercy hath ordai¬ 
ned for thereliefe,you may take courage in the' 
confideration of his goodnes herein, & receiue 
rrefrelhi ng by the view of his aide though it be a 
farreoff.which the difcreetc application of the 
wife phi fitian (who is made of godfor the health 
of men) fhall bring nigh vnto you, and ioyning 
with this ftrength of melancholic, chafe it farre 
from you,and render vnto you the former good 
difpofition of your body ,and defired tranquili- 
tie of your minde.For medicine is like a toole & 
inftrument of the fharpeft edge, which not wife¬ 
ly guided,nor handled with thatcunning which 
thereto appertaineth , may bring prefent psrill' 
in fteade of health,and where it fhould be a fuc- 
eour,and maintenance of life.for want of arte, 
may worke acontraric efreft, daungerous, and 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 
deadly . To the right applying of medicine,be- 
fidcs the" particular confiderations belonging 
properly to the arte of phificke wherein exer- 
CifemaKcth the phifitian prompt and expert, 
iharpe of iudgcment,and circufpeft in the cure, 
you your felfe know what furniture of philofo- 
phie is nccclfary,euen the whole courfc of artes, 
and knowledge of nature,but onely to prepare, 
and togiue hability>ofconceiuing,and learning 
the rules of preferuing and reftoring the health 
of mans body,which we call phificke: fo that as 
Galen faith in a booke of that title, a phifitian 
ought to be a philofopher, the beft philofopher 
maketh the beft phifitian,neithcr oufht any to - 
be admitted to touch fo holy thinges,,that hath 
not pafled the whole difeiplirie of liberal! fcicn- 
ces,and wafhedhim felfe pure and cleanc in the 
waters of wiledome,and vnderftanding. The a- 
bufe at this day is great,and commo,defrauding 
the Ample forte in their fubftance and hurting 
oftheirbodies vnder the pretence of experiece. 
offecretes and hid mifteties of remedies, which 
thefe masked thccues,& murthcrers allcdge foe 
color of their lewdncs.ThatCas I am perfwaded) 
there are not lb many honeft and painefull men 
ofany one trade in the landt , as diere be lewde 
coufoning varlettcs, that to auoide the traoaile 
of honeft labour, feede vpon the fimplicitie of 
the people, and make the pretence of phificke 
thecloake of their idlencs. Othetfome there 
bceofacuriofitie not knowing what they doe 
bolde to attempt out of an englilh booke the 

pra£fileofanyreceitc,and wilnotfticketo en¬ 
counter the ludgemcnt of the wifeft and befir 
K..ij. praftio 



4^0 ATREATISE 

praftifed phifitiaa. Thefe are vnthankefulljand 

prcfumptcous. Vntliankc&ll in that they ac¬ 
knowledge not from whome they hauc rccea-, 
-ued thefc wholcfome meanesrprefumpteous, in 
hazarding the health of an other, and aduentu- 
ring their owne credit vpon the receite of a me¬ 
dicine with perill of life where it is beftowed, 
which ofit felf is but an inftrument onely, and. 
worketh good or huttc, as it is applied and gui- 
ded:to the application whereof the long ftudies 
the knowledge of fo many partes ofphilofophie 
and learning,the peregrinations , and conferen¬ 
ces of learned men make proofe, and giuc fuffi-. 
cient teftiraony both what is requifite, and how 
farre of they be from modefty and honefty that 
being vnfurnilhedaltogcthei, of cuery parte of 
thefc ncceffarie hclpes, dare attempt the apply- 
cation of medicine whole nature they know noc 
& of what diljjofition the body or part is wher- 
to it is to be applyed,they are vtterlyignoraunr.: 
But one will fay they do Ibmetimes good; they 
do lb,but oftentimes hurte,and morfrhurtc’thea 
prelently appeareth, and with that good they in 
one refpeft d®e,in diuerfe belides they leatJethc. 
body crafed , and make it afterward fubieft to 
greater infirmitic: their cure becing imperfefl:, 
accidental!,vneertaine, void of rule and rcafon. 
wherefore although you hauc for your parte pa- 
fled your courfe in philofophie & goodleaming 
and are not altogether ignorant of the precepts 
of philitians whereby this warning mightlecmc 
lelTe to appertaine vnro you.yct cofidcringyour i 
prefcot infirrnity,and vpon what graincs & |,mP- - 
mcnts,and points of time thispta&fc ftandeth: 

Icoun* 



OFMELANCHOLIE. zSi 
■ I cotmlell you & al other except the direftion of 
diet that hath bin before declared,& vfe of thofe 
familiar things with euery one daily puts in pra- 
without the aduife of the phifitianjCwhofe 
prefent eye may bAold euery necefsity,)you ut¬ 
terly abftaine, and take my labour herein as a 
pointing of the finger to that which I judge 
meet for y ou being in a place far diftat,& where 
nccefsity may cotnpell you to vfe whatmeanes 
of counfel you ca gct:& not fuch as you 'would: 
andirpon the view of thefe manifold meanes of 
• bodely health: confider howe much more the 
Lords prquidence is ready at al need,to comfort 
our IbuleSjin fo much as the one is far more ex¬ 
cellent then the other. Thushauing giuen this 
warning I proccede to deliner the natural helps 
andordinarieremeadies wedoe vie in this cafe 
wherein your bodely health now ftandeth. He- 
therto you vndcrftand what outward caufe arc 
to beremoued, and what to bee brought in 
ftead of them,contrary in operation , and bree¬ 
ders of a better tempered humour. The next 
confidcrationCaccording to the method of cu- 
ring)is to be had of fuch inward caufe as refteth 
in the bodic,and hath bene the effefl: of the out - 
wardannoyancerthat is here the melancholicke 
humour.and complexion of the body now de¬ 
generated thereby. The humour requireth e- 
nacuation,and emptying; and becaule your bo¬ 
dy is not only melancholicke vnder the ribbes 
but the v/hole mafle of your bloud is chaunged 
thcrewithritlhall bec firft necclTarie to open a 
vainerthat both thereby you rnay be disburthc- 
ned in parte of that heauy Ioade,and nature ha- 
R.ijj. uing 



-i^z A TREATISE 

uing IefleoftIiatkin(ie to dcale withall, may ai. 
Scr the remnant into a more milde and plcafant 
iuicerthinne it in fubftance, and temper it with 
natural! heate'and moifture in qualitie. Before 
any vaine be opened a clifter is firft to be rccea- 
ued that may clenfe the entrailes and diminilh 
fome part of the humour featedin thofe partes, 
it would be made of marfhmallo wes, holihocks, 
pellerory of the wall,mercury, beetes, aietch, 
violet ieaues,pQlipQdy,borrage,bpglofl'e,cham- 
inomilc.hoppes.djll, and melilote.annifc feeds, 
and fennell, dccofted in ale or beeie: and the 
decoftion being made, an ounce of Conteftio 
hamech with adrarame of Hicra pichra added 
thereto. Hony wherein roferoarie flowers 
haue bene fteeped, and oyle of dill of each an 
ownceand a balfc,this or fuch like according to 
the diferetion of the learned phifitia. The mor^ 
pingfollowingjthe vaincs are to be emptied the 
pecelTity of the pafsio compared with the force 
and ftrength which moderateth aU kinde of e- 
nacuatio.though the difeafe require large emp^ 
tyingAnd becaufemelanchoIy blood is thicke 
andgrofle,& thcrforc eafily floweth not though 
the vaine be openedptfliall helpe the bleeding 
to exercife your bodye a while before with fuch 
' moderation that be equally warmed, and the 
fpirite,3nd bloud ftirred vp.The Orifice wQulde 
be fomewhat large that no lett be to the i(rue,& 
thegroffenes of the bloud may haue the free 
paflage: yet fo that it be no larger then is reqai- 
lice for wafting offpirits.wherof melacholy per- 
fons haue no ftorc to fpare.In the body the mid- 
dls vaine of the left arms is fitteft to be opened, 
which 


OFMELANCHOLIE. 
VifMch,relpc£lcth, both hcad.Iiaer, and fplene: 
that betwixt the little finger and the next is o£ 
fmall vfe.Infuch ashaue the adduft melancho¬ 
ly fcated in their brains,the head vaine is more 
direct for ieaulfion,and thofc about the head it 
felfe forcuacuating and dcriaiog.The tokens of 
fearing there onely,are with altered fancie and 
imagination j the bodie elfe carying no melm- 
choheke fignes,no fower belching after meate, 
nor hcate with windinelle, which all rife of the 
melancholie humour flopping mefaraieke 
vaines, and fo procuring that vnnaturall & fuf- 
focating heate.whifch many melancholicke per- 
fons complaine of.The quantity which I would 
hauc you fparedetit beno lefTe then nine or tea 
ownccs, except the prefent aftion of opening 
minifter other confideration.Now becaufe you 
hau^had in rimes paft the benefite of bleeding 
hemorhods , which now a long time are flopped 
at fuch feafons as they were wont to open , qr 
now when they giue any figne offuineffe, fwel - 
ling or paine, they would alfo be opened by ap¬ 
plying a redde onion to the place,'or annoyn- 
ting it with th iuyee of garlicke , or with bulks 
gall.or rubbingic with a fig leafe, or with horf- 
leeches well purged > and prepared, and fo ap- 
plyed the cafieft. way; by opening the inwarde 
vaines of the ancle,& fuch like remedies as may 
prouoke thebloud his vfuall way, and bring na¬ 
ture in minde of her wonted difeharge of that 
humourjwhich being flopped breedeth ( as Hi¬ 
pocrates faith, and experience maketh proofed 
rrenfies , melancholies ,pleurifies,hard milts, 8c 
dropfies: and conftarily opened,& Sowing mo- 
R.iiij. dcratly 



a4 A treatise 

dcrately.dcliuereth from thctn all.If this mclan - 
choly fallcth vrito maidens, women, and thcit 
ordinary courfe faile them > thevaines of the 
hammes or ancles are to be cut, and drinkes of 
opening rootcs,fcnell,perfly,butchers broomCj 
madder,andfoch likejwithgermander, goolds, 
herbcgrace,mugwort3ndncpareto bee much 
vfed.with fittinges and bathinges in mallowes, 
cammomileandncp, pcBiroyall, baylcaues, 
fethcrfcw,(and fnch like, which hauc vertue in 
that cafe) decoftedin water, wherein lb much 
Honie hath bene ;ditfolued,as will giue it a taft 
of fweetnes.if greater force be required then a 
idramme of the troches of myrre in the former 
decodlio arc mofl forcible,the opening of vaine 
before mentioned would be procured at the ac- 
cuftomed time,at the full mone in the elder fort 
and the chaunge in the yonger. The thicker the 
bloudisjthe more the melancholick may fpare, 
and the thinner i the leffe . Thus much I iudge 
necedarie for one kind ofeuacuation. which al¬ 
though it letteth out good bloud withall (as in 
all bleeding ) yet here lyeth the benefit,that na¬ 
ture is partly disburthened, and fb more eafilyc 
oouerneth the reftjand by vertue of her naturall 
heate, andfpitite,corre£leth with fmafler helps 
that which therein is farther to be reformed, the 
fpiritesbauefreelibertie*, and great fcope i^ 
giuentothehartesdilating.the adlion peculiar 
to achecrcfulldifpofition. The other kind ofe^ 
tiacation is by purging: which leaucth the bloud 
. entrie, only itcleanfeth the body of that grcflb 
■end thicKc fettehnge , and is more peculiarj 
and diredily lingieth put the melancholy from 



OF MELANCHOLIE. stf,- 
t^e other humours: and bccaufc this humour is 
thicke, and hardly moueth, and the paiTages, Sc 
veines of the bodie clofer then whereby u may 
eafilypaffe, ( according to Hipocrates rule) 
both bodie and humour are to receauc a prepa¬ 
ration,and the parts of the body to be loofened, 
and Enlarged, & the humor made more flowing 
and thinne,both which may be brought to pafle 
with one meanes at once: by choice of fuch na¬ 
tures as haue vertue of attenuating, opening, & 
cleaoflng: and becaufe the cure is not onely in¬ 
tended againftthe melancholicke humour, and 
that complexion of bodie, but alfo againft the 
&ncie, and afleftion, which wee call in phifickc 
fymptomes , alwayes choice would ,be made of 
fuch as earrie with them proprietic to Ifrcngthe 
the altered braine, and to chcerc the comfort- 
Icflehart; or if that cannot be found in one fim- 
ple.it is to be fupplied by mixturc.Their teinper 
would be moderate in heat, except the natUrall, 
tenaper of thebody, time of yearc, fcX&c. (and 
fuch like eonfiderations > perfwadc on cythcr 
fide ally declination. The fimplcs meete for this 
preparation of body,& humour are thefe which 
followc: borragej buglofle, endiue, fumitorie, 
hops.betony.the forts of maide haire , ceterach, 
harts tong,polypody, doddar of thime, agrimo 
ny.cich peafe, aflt barks, caper barks, tamarisk, 
to which would be added opening roots, fenell, 
perfley, fmallagc, butchers broome yafparagusj 
and fuch like. Of thele fimples decodfions Ihold 
be made, and mixed with ^rops of like vertue, 
as witb lyrope of borrage, of apples, fimplc, or 
compound, as that of King Sabor, lyrope of fu- 


A TREAT IS®: ; : 

Hjitoricjfyropeof violets,of ceterach, fyrope of 
epithymus or doddar of tbiir.e : all openers of 
fplcnc and liner,clcanfers of the blond,and great 
preparers to the purging both of bodie,and hn^ 
mour: the vie of them would be mudi, & often 
falling that they may hane their ful force*More-j 
ouer to this vfe a kind of beare, brued with the 
fimples before mentioned,and lonie fmall rclilh 
of clones and cynamoa giuen vnto it: & fo vfed 
as prdinaric drinke would be very wholfomc fot 
melancholick perfons:and now and then if the 
ftomach be raw & rheumatiek,a draught of hip- 
pocras, or fome aromaticall wine giueth great 
comfort,increafeth the fpirits, and makeih the 
bloudthinne - Buthereheedc muft be giuen 
that it be not too ftrong offpice ,leaft through 
too much heate , by euaporating -the thinpe 
part, the reft of the bloud remaine more thicke* 
and harder to be purged. Belides tbefe inwarde 
preparations, and opening and thinning po¬ 
tions , the liuer, and the fplenc, and the partes 
vndcr the ribbes w buld be fuppled with conue 
nient fomentations and oyntmentes, to foften 
to ppcn,and toloofe thofe partes where the pur¬ 
ging medtein hath tnoft to dotthis may be done 
with fomentations made ofmallowes.chammo- 
rDilc,mclilot,figges.linefeede,fethcrfcw, rewe, 
and rofc leaues,red and damaske, and the parte 
being a while iupplcd therwith,fome molifying 
and warming ointmet is to be rubbed & chafed 
in gently,with a foft hand: as that which is cal¬ 
led comonly refumptiuu.the ointment of brio- 
ny, the ointment offwines bread called cycla¬ 
men^ vpon which if need bs^ piaifter of like ef- 


OF MELANCHOLIE. 
fcft fliay Haue very good vfe, as diachylu mag- 
num.thc emplaiftcr of mclilotc for the fplene: 
ccroneum, diamelilotum of Androraachus &c. 
to thcfe prcparati6s,& difpofiogs of body ,& hu-' 
mor to the purging If it feme good vnto the phi 
fitias,& for variety,baths would be vfed of mol- 
JifyingSe moderatly warming Irmples.as ofnial 
lowes,tnarih mallowes.holihock.chammomile, 
mclilot,peniroyal,lioefecd,rofes,&c. In which 
decodlio lakcwarme.thc body is to be kept half 
an houre at a time C or as prelent occalion ihall 
■direa)faft!ng,and in the while the partes vndcr 
the lhort ribs fuppled & eXercifed with a fofte 
hand,anointed with oile of capersjpile of bitter 
3lomonds, & afew drops of petroleum mixed 
therwith. After the body hath bin thus prepared 
& thchamour Ibmewhat more loole,'& eafie to 
purgation is next to be attcpted:by ftoolc 
rather then by vomitxxcept the party bee verie 
apt thereunto,& the melancholy be chiefly Ica- 
ted therabout.The fimplcs proper to purge me¬ 
lancholy arc theft followisg: Sena, polypodic, 
blacke hellebore,and white.the azure ftonc.and 
more gentle then it, the Armenian ftone, all 
which diligently prepared and corredled, Sc mi 
niftred in quality meet for the patients ftregth 
enter combat with this humor, Sc with fuch force 
chafeth it outof the bodie.thatit followeth it e * 
lien into the ftoolc.Thc compounds are dialcna 
conftdiio hamech: hicralogadion; pils offumi- 
tory,IndaJ, of the azurc/and Armenian ftone, in 
which the fimplgs before mentioned receaue 
their corretiioD,& due preferuation, farre more 
ftfe to be vfed then the Ample alone, ail which 
purgers 



»68 A TREATISE 

purgcrs arc to be rcceiucd&mingled witbCoitic 
raoyfting deco£tion,as of barley, with borragc, 
bugloflcjviolet leaues,&fyrop of violetcrsjbor-. 
rage.buglofle &c,if they be cleftuaries.or pow- 
ders,and if they be pils,a thin brothidrunke im» 
tnediatly after them, that both the liquid fub> 
ftaoce may giuc a fpcedie conueyance, and the 
dry humour fooked with that forme of medi¬ 
cine, may more gently yeelde, and giue place to 
the purge.Whc the medicine is fdtnow to haue 
paiTed the llomach which is perceaued that it 
yeeldcth no mcdicinable taft to the mouth , by 
belching or breath, then fomc broth may be ta¬ 
ken, made of fiich kinde of fielh and herbes as 
haue bene before mentioned, & fo(till the wor¬ 
king ccafe ) the whole aftion of the medicine to- 
be endured. Thus much for purging byftoolc: 
if vomit be thought more necefl'arie. ( as I iudge 
it verie neceflarie in yoii) whatfoeuer ctnptieth 
the ftomach by prouoking nature that way(cx- 
cept the matter be verie hard to mooue,& deepe 
fettled ) ihall fufFife for that fort of euacuation. 
Vomit is very neceflarye when the ftomach is 
irioift and waterie, and maketh (hew thereof by 
much fpitting, when the patient is trobled with 
foure belching, and when the meate is percea- 
ned (in mouing of thebodie) to be loofe, and 
ioggeinthe ftomach: then I fay all other cir- 
cumftances concurring together i vomit is to be 
vied: firft of the gentle fort: of which kinde arc 
radifli rootes, and fcedcs, pompeon root, nettle 
icedc.aftrabacka root or leafe &c. if the caufe Sc 
ftrength of the mclancholicke require a greater 
force of medicine. Stibium, & white hellebore 
arc 


OF MELANCHOLIE. ad? 

gre finguUr inthis cafe: which both would bee 
miniftrcd in fat broth:the fubftance of Stibium, 
and the infiifion ofneefing powder or white hel- 
ieborus: being in fubftance moft daungerous. 
Ihis Jtind of hellebore more helpeth the fancy; 
and correfteththebraine, and the other more 
dealeth with the humor, and both difcrctly vfed 
performe a moft wholfome euacuation. If the 
tnelancholicke doe labour much in vomiting, 
minifter drinfee or thin broth, fo ftiall the vomit 
be with more eafc difeharged. All perturbation 
of the bodic being ended, and the medicine ha- 
uing wrought the defired effeft,thc face is to be 
reffefhed with fome mixture ofrofewater, and 
vinegcr, and rofe water is to be fmellcd rntOjtho 
mouth to be waftied and Ibme conferuc of red 
rofes, with a quarter fb much of quince prefer- 
ued, & one drop of oylc of clones, or cynamon, 
would be receaued to fticengthen the ftomach a-^ 
gaine,to fettle it quiet, andif any qualitic of the 
medicine remaine to corre^ and alter it, what 
foeuer thereby the ftomach ihould fecle of dif- 
contcntment.This emptying of ftooIe& vomit, 
is fo often to be repeated, & by fuch diftanceof 
timci as neede requircth: the ftrength of the me- 
lancholicke wil bcare,and the humor admitteth 
of preparation: cfpeci41y the fpring & fallcraue 
this emptying at large. 

CHAP. xlr. 

Themanmrof firengthningwdancholick^ptTfint 
after purging: vith correction of fome of their 
accidsntes. 

Betwixt 



270 A TREATISE 

gEtwixtthcfpaces of purging rcgardcis aK 
wayestobee had of ftrcngthening the fto- 
mach,Iiucr,and fplcnc,with fomc ointmeat and 
fomentatio outwardly,ofa moderate afttiaiuc 
vertue, and fome inward medicine compoun¬ 
ded of fuchfimplcs as are accompted familiarj 
and fimpathetical! to thole partesvas ofinwarde 
thinges, to the ftomach,rniDtes,bctony worme> 
woodjfuger iofes.maftick, gaIaga,mace,clouesj 
■ cinnamon,amber ginger.&c.of which, potions, 
powders,and eleftuaries would be made, and v- 
fed for the ftomach.Of the fame matter fomen¬ 
tations would alfo be made, c^ccially ofCam- 
momill, ro{es,wormewood,and agrimony. Of 
compoundes conferee of wormewood, of fage 
flowers,of Ennla campana, of mintes arc fingu- 
Icr comforters of the ftomach and bowels: the 
fame vertac haue greene walecnts preferued, 
erabilifce myrobolans.and greene gingerrioze- 
ges of Aromaricum rofatum.Dianifi.The ointc* 
mentes are to be made of red rofes, corrall,ra'a - 
fticke,mintes,clouesrcinnamon, gumme, aloes, 
with oyle of v/orracwood.mafticke,quinces,&c. 
and hete the cmplaiftcr of a cruft of bread, dcf. 
cribed of montagnana greatly ftrengthencth 
the ftomake.as alfo the ftomach platfter oi mef- 
ue . For the liucr thefe are meyteft ftrcagthc- 
nersrliuerwodrte,maiden heate,agrimoDy, fu¬ 
mitory hoppes, alparagus, wormwood, hore- 
hound, germander, faunders, yuorie rofes , ray- 
finges, iuDCus odoratus , Calamus aromaticus. 
&c, of which ftulFe potions, powders, eleflua- 
ries are to be rcceiued inward lie, and fomenta¬ 
tions,oylcs,ointment and plaifters Co be apply- 


OP MELANCHOLIE. tjx 

*4 outwardly. Of compoundes confcrae of fu¬ 
mitory conicruc of wormewoodc, conftrucof 
maiden heare, Dialacca, Diacurcuma, Diaco- 
ftuni, open obftruftions, and leauea ftrcngthe- 
ning vertue in the part: ofthc fplene, hoppes, 
dodder, cetcrach, heath,caperbarkcs , tama- 
liske, acorusjgumme lacca centaurie be pecu¬ 
liar comforters. OFinward compounde ; diaco- 
fthufii: diacalamentum, diacapparis, confcrue 
of cetcrach; Of outward meanes^dyle of capers, 
oyleriffpike, and oyle of lillies compounded 
with maftich, clones,cinnamon, ra£frone,coftus, 
and Galamus aromaticus are openers and com¬ 
forters of thefplcnerandofoyntmentes, mar- 
tiatum magnum: of plaifters, Diaphenicon,&c. 
Thefe wholeiomc medicines after the purges 
haue fatisfied the phificians intention, would be 
vfed and much applied both in refpeft of the 
parties difpofition through the mclancholickc 
humor,and alfo by reafon thefe doc fuftaine the 
greateft force of purgations, and preparations 
afore faid- and whofe natures arecafijydifloi- 
ued, and alwaies require a ftrengthening fimple 
raixtwith thcreftt though they be of contrary 
operation . In tbe meane v/hilc of this prepara¬ 
tion, andpurging: both in refpeil of the fancy, 
of the brayne, and afFe£ljon of the hearte, 
and the complexion of both,put out of frame by 
the humour, thefe two are chiefely to be refpe- 
£ted, with cordialls, and medicines appropriate- 
Cordiall fimples arc thefe:faorfage,bogloffe,the 
iuice of pi pins and permaines, balme, Carduus 
benediftus.fcabionsjbafil feede.vnicorns home, 
beazer ftone; y^orie,p^aIle,^aphyre;hiacint,co- 
- rail. 



A TREATISE 

rail, amber , limon, and citron pile, cynnamon 
clones, wine, fufFran, angellica, rnarygooldes 
with a puraber of like nature , the great prouU 
dcnce of God being fuch that this noble part of 
the heart hath moe hclpcs and comfortes pe¬ 
culiar thereunto, then any part of our. body be, 

fides. The compoundes vfuallareahcfe:coD- 

feruc of borrage, & bugloffe flowers, of orange 
flowers,oFgylliflowers, and carnations, <liama- 
gariton caiidil, the eleftuary of precious ftoncs, 
Tetificans Galeni mithridate dianthos,&c. Of 
thedecodipnof which hearbes afore mentio¬ 
ned, epithemes may be made, and quilts of the 
powder of them, be fprincklcd with malmfey& 
vineger. Which forme of ontwarde medicine 
made of fimples agreeable to the ftomach is 
good thereto alfo to be applycd: whole mouth 
doth greatly agree with the heart, andeafily 
driueth into paffion. As the hearts affedion is to 
be correded, by amending thcinftrumetrfp the 
braines conceite requireth no lefle regarde; for 
which thefe medicines following arc yeelded to 
our cofort: fage,bctony,{weet mariorume.rbfe- 
mary,chamomil,mirtle,rue,peony,lpite, ftorax, 
henoync clones,rauske, amber greece.Of com- 
ppunds: conferuc of rofemary flowers,of acorns 
of betony, of ftechas, fagc,peony,and primerofc 
DambrajDiamofehum dulce,and amarum.Ncir 
tberis the braine and hart only cheered,& com¬ 
forted by the inwarde rcceiuing of thcle fimples 
onely, but whafocuer of them is of pleafant and 
fragrant fmell, that agreeth with cth, & giucth 
recreation and increafe to the fpirits ofboth.So 
shat fweetc fmcls are both in rcfpedc.of heart 


OF MELANCHOLIE S 73 
and braine moft comfortable to tbe njelancbo- 
licks.Thus the melancholick body,dieted, pre¬ 
pared, purged,& ftrcgthencdjwhat is there 'more 
to be done of naturall meanes:one]y this: After 
all this courfe taken, and diligently obferued fo 
long as it fhall feerae expedient & neceflary to 
the learned phifitia for the health of this melan¬ 
cholick patient,Camorigwhomel accompt you 
the fubiedl: of this my coufell) nature muft haue 
a time and refpit giuen,to tty her own ftrength, 
according to the counfell of Ruphus, and not to 
be tiered with medicine,the diet notwiihftading 
being kept’diligently which hath bin preferibed 
and all kinde of honeft exercife, and recreation 
praSdfed & procured.Ifthe melacholy beaduft, 
(which it is not in you) then breedeth it a kinde 
offury,and’madnes,and requireth a cooling: & 
perticular confideration: whereof ( becaufe it i* 
very rare in refpeft of the other kinde,and ente- 
reth into the rancke of euident difeafe) I minde 
not here to difeourfe being only willing thus fat 
to fatisfie your defire,wherin your cafe (& fucb 
as are in like coditio with you,)rcquire it.lf any 
accidentes befall you through this infirmity, of 
hardnes of body you may yfc the differ before 
mentioned without the purging medicines,with 
three ownces of oyIe,and as much of honie: or 
you may take an handfull of mallowcs , holy- 
hock,violet leaues,beete,andfetherfew, annife 
feedes.orfennell feedes halfe an ounce beaten 
■with an handfull of courfe wbeate branne tied in 
a linne cloth & boiled in thinne whay:to a pinte 
of which being ffrained, adde oyle, and honie. 
wilhhajfe a ^oonefiili offal|;:and receaue it for 
S acliftet 


'm ■ a.treatise 

adifterror drinkcfaftinga fpoonefull or twain® 
of fwOete fallct oyle in a draught of whaye i 
create a quarter of an ownce of confeiuc of da- 
maske rpfes.withxxx.graines of the pureft faltc 
peter, anddrinke it : andcfpeciallye let ybut 
broathcs alwaycs haue Ibme foluble hearbcs, 
that may giue you that bencfite , as niallgwes, 
violettes , metcurie, aretch , beetes and Tuch 
like, if your flcepe.fayle you throughvehc- 
mentie ofcogit3tion,and feare: let your handes 
and feete be waflied with the deco&ion of dill, 
chamincmile , lettice, poppie mallowes, and 
willowe leaues: and annointe them with'oyle 
- efpoppiefeedesmade by exprefsibn; or take 
a dramnie of Mithrid3te,fiue graines of Opium, 
ttreeof faffrpD.withafpooirefullof malmefey, 
and a grainc or two of Camphire : put all into a 
limon pill emptied of the iuyee ,andrmell to it 
often about your ordinary hpure of fleep:which 
meanes if they bring not the delired effebf.fwal- 
Jew twentie graines of the pilles of Cyncgloffc,, 
or take halfeadrarnmeofPhilomumgojDgto 
bedjforoiher fomp other wholefome opiats me¬ 
dicine well correbled. If your body bee much 
troubled with winde ( as if is for the moft part a 

companion of this kinde of melancholic: ) 

tnuft vfe a fomentation to your flomachbelly 
and partes about the fiiort ribbes with oile and 
malmeiey wherein rue,fennel,cumminc.and an- 
, nife feedps,and hearbes haue bepc boylpd , and 
inwardly you are to take failing Deathon pip- 
trion,diaciminu,or diagalanga the quantitie of 
anutmeggeatatimeiand now and then ccre- 
^Ipath cfgummes^ with oyle,ofmjnts,aBd,rue, 

■ w.9m 


OF MEL ANC HO LIE 
worne vpon thofe partes, fliall be of great force 
to waft the winde,to warme them , and to giue 
them ftrength.Thus my friend M.haue you, ray 
whole counfcll, whatliudgcmectcfor youin 
this cafe , my philolbphicair diftourfes to pafle 
your time with, who hath alwaies delighted in 
phiiofbphic : mycoDfolatibn in refpedl of that 
Chriftian duely which 1 owe you, wherein jf I 
haue fo bufied my felfc, that my care that waye 
hath exceeded my power.Sc habilitie, fo efteerne- 
it,and fo meafure that discharge. My phi ficke,: 
curctof diet, of preparation of your body.ofeua- 
cu3tion,of ftrengtheningjof correfting,and cut¬ 
ting ofcertainetroublefome accidents that fall 
to this humour.it is not fo copious,and abfolute' 
as peraduenture may fitte your eftate, and leaue 
no queftionof doubt, but (if I miftake not 
the cafe very much ) for fubftaunce and gropnde 
of the cure you fhall not fleede to make faither 
inquirie. Although I remember your trauaile in 
philofophie.and ftiidie of philick,to which both 
"you haue ha^ a naturall difpolition, and take 
pleafurein reading our writinges of precept and 
rule take aduife pf fomc learned, and vertuous 
phifitian about you,and aduenture nor vpon a- 
ny part of euacaarion without his direftion: O- 
therwifeyouhatiethisasa touchftone to proue 
the skill of fuch lewde people as at this daye are 
impudentlyc bolde with the hurte of others , to 
deceiueboafting,& lying.and couctingthe po- 
uertie of their vnderftandingj with gorgeous 
wordes.and rich.pompe of phrafeiothetwife be¬ 
ing as emptye of knowledge as they bee quire 
yoidc of ail verfae & honefty.I fay let it be a rule 
S.i|, . 



-Z 76 a treatise 

to fquarc & trie them by: and if fuch knowledg e 
(whereof here you may haue the taft ) be nece- 
flary in an infirmitie of no perill of life ^though 
it make it tedious, and irkcfome ) what aduife- 
naent and care is to be had whpme to call for^ & 
what phifitian to make choice of in dileafes 
full of daunger.lharp.and fwift, and whole cure 
( if art be nbtin aU poises perfourmed ) is not 
withoot leaning fuch fear, that no rebating, no 
deterfiue medicine is able to pare & wipe away 
thebiemilh: ootancycforejbuta mayme, and: 
fixed imbeciilitie in ftornach.in braine, in hart^ 
or liaer,nor that by natures error,or by an ordi- 
narie breach of diet which are more gentle, but 
through anioutward violence and forces againft 
which na.iureh^^hp skill tolielpcit felfe, not 
power to te;^.AsIgiueyou this warning to bc- 
ware.fo whofocuef lhal reape any fruit of my la¬ 
bour taken in Hand for your fake , let them alfo 
take this admonitio from mc,rather then to at¬ 
tend with their own hurt,& expence,the inftru- 
ftion and dilciplinc which experience bringeth. 
Thus my good M with this caucat, I commend 
the blefsing&fucceflcofmy labour to the Al- 
.jmighty.who reftorc you if it be his wil found in 
. body,chearefullinniind.andaffurcd 
; in faith ofhis fweete mercic 
, r 'A andfauour. 


