L E T Lo E RS- 


— Written TO and FOR 
PARTICULAR FRIENDS, 
On the moſt 

IMroRTANT OccasIoNs. 
| Directing not only the Requiſite | 


STYLE aud FORMS 


To be Obſerved in WRITING 


Familiar Letters; 
But How to. 


THINK and AcT Juſtly and Prudeutiy, 
IN THE 


COMMON CONCERNS 


HUMAN LIFE, 


CONTATITNTING 
One Hundred and Seventy-three LeTTERs, 
None of which were ever before Publiſhed. 
— ——————=z= 
LOND O N: 


Printed for C. Rivixcrox, in Sr. Paus Church- yards 
+ OsB0RN, in Pater nale, Row; ; and J. LI AE, at Bath; 


M. DCC. xII. ee 


2 * = V * A 8 44 5 I * „ „ init dn 
- 7 WIN — * Fr - 
ett * W * e with Ss * a 4 1 
8 . l — » 7 a”. 0 n "YR C 
FLY n 


— 


——ů ů ů — — 
ä?ͤyZ2j2m2— —ù.—ę .9— —s, — — 


* 


2 2 © ä * — — * 47 a N * * 4 or as * 4% —— * "IS * 25 2 En wh . 
” * * * — 1 4 0 4 * R * 4 n - 
' "I; IF» OE, a VE PPE PE; To Ing 8 
- £4 * Ls 2 * 
3 


* 


liſh'd at the Solicitation of par- 
ticular Friends, who are of Opi- 
nion, that they will anſwer (eve- 
ral good Ends, as they may not only direct 
the Forms requiſite to be obſerved on the 
moſt important Occaſions; but, what is 
more to the Purpoſe, by the Rules and 
Inſtructions contained in them, contri- 
bute to mend the Heart, and improve the 
Underſtanding. 

NATURE, PROPRIETY of CHARACTER, 
PLAIN SENSE, and GENERAL USE, have 
been the chicf Objects of the Author's 
Attention in the penning of theſe Letters; 
and as he cvery-where aimed to writc 
to the Judgment, rather than to the 
Imagination, he would chuſe, that they 
mould generally be found more 4 ful 
chan 


2 


T N N UE. 


than diverting: Tho, where the Subjects 
require Strokes of Humour, and innocent 


ſeaillery, it will be ſeen, perhaps, that. 
the Method he has taken, was the 


Effect of Choice, and not merely of 
Neceſſity. 

The Writer is no Friend to long Pre- 
faces; but it may be neceſſary, however, 
to ſay, what he has aimed at in this Per- 
formance ; and to leave his Merit in the 
Execution of it, to proper Judges. 


He has endeavour'd then, in general, 


throughout the great Variety of his Sub- 


jects, to inculcate the Principles of Virtue 


and Benevolence; to deſcribe properly, 
and recommend ſfrongly, the SOCIAL and 
RELATIVE DUTIES; and to place them 
in ſuch practical Lights, that the Letters 
may ſerve for Rules to THINK and ACT 
by, as well as Forms to WRITE after. 
Particularly, he has endeavourcd to 
point out the Duty of a Servant, not a 
Slave; the Duty of a Maſter, not a Y- 
rant; that of the Parent, not as a Perſon 
moroſe and ſour, and hard to be pleaſed; 
but mild, indulgent, kind, and ſuch an 


one as would rather govern by Perſuaſion 
than Force, 


He 


4 
” 
x 
. 
2 
11 
Y 
A 
1 
a3 
2 
r. 
* ; 
. 
"If; 


U 


PREFACE 


He has endeavour'd to direct the young 


Man in the Choice of his Friends and 


Companions; to excite him to D/. 


gence; to diſcourage Extravagance, 


Sottifhneſs, and Vice of all Kinds. 

He has aimed to ſet forth, in a Variety 
of Caſes, to hot Sexes, the Inconve- 
niencies attending amſuitable Marriages ; 
to expoſe the Folly of a /:tigious Spirit ; 
to conſole the Unhappy; to comfort the 
Atourner : And many of theſe by Argu- 
ments, tho' e and familiar, yet new 
and uncommon. Ft 

With regard to the Letters of Court- 


ſtip, the Author has aimed to point out 


fach Methods of Addreſs, to a young 
Man, as may ſtand the Teſt of the Parents 
Judgment, as well as the Daughter's 
Opinion; and, at the ſame time, that they 
ſhould not want the proper Warmth of 
Expreſſion, which Complaiſance, and Paſ- 
ſion for the beloved Object, inſpire, (and is 
ſo much expected in Addreſſes of this Na- 
ture) they ſhould have their Foundation 
laid in common Senſe, and a manly Sin- 
cerity; and, in a Word, be ſuch as a 


prudent Woman need not bluth to receive, 


nor a diſcreet Man be aſhamed to look 
A 3 back 


ee 


* VO, —— 2 — — 
ware 


PRE FACE. 
back upon, when the doubt ful Couriſtip is 


changed! into the matrimonial Certainty. 
. ith this View he has alſo attempted 


to expoſe the empty {lou iſtes, and nco- 


herent Rhapſodies, by which ſhallow 
Heads, and dejiening {{carts, endeavour 
to exalt their Miſtreſſes into Goddeſſes, i in 
hopes of having, it in their Power to ſink 
them into the Characters of the 929/? Cre- 
autous and 60/1 of their Sex. 

Orphans, and Ladics of independent 
Fortunes. he has particularly endeayour'd 
to guard againſt the inſidious Arts of their 


Ht arfering and ſeliiſʒ Dependents, and the 


{a ndeſ/ti IC Addreſſes of For: lune- Hunters, 
thoſe Beaſts of Prey, as they may well be 
called, who ſpread their Snares for the 
innocent and thoughtleſs Heart. 

Theſe, among other no leſs material 
Objects, have been the Author's principal 
Aim : How well he has ſucceeded, mult, 
as has been hinted, be left to the Judg- 
ment of the candid Reader. 


N 


2 Ke. 


* 

4 
1 

; 
% 
4 
; 

[7 

b 
4 

= 
4 
— 
2 
2 
7 
wY 
» F 
+ 
I : 
f 
* 


5 


17% 7 * 1 
/ 4/4 J 


AURA 

N — \ k CE 5 4 U 

7 v7 

i . DK. 4 
8 N» 


1 4 
— 


e 
ede 


1 M = 


CONTENTS 


FHR 


LE ITI ERC. 


I. O a Father, again putting a Youth of but mo- 
derate Parts to a Profeſſion that requires more 


extenſive Abilities. Page 1 

II. From an Uncle to a Nephew, on his keeping bad Com- 
pany, bad Hours, &c. in his Apprenticeſhip. 5 
III. From a Widow-Mother, in Anſwer to her Sons 
complaining of Hardſhips in his Apprenticeſhip. 9 
IV. From an Uncle to the Youth, on the ſame Occa- 
fron. 11 
V. From an Apprentice to an Uncle, about a Fraud com- 
mitted by his Fellow- Apprentice. 12 
VI. The Uncle's Anfaver. ibi t. 
VII. Adcice from a Father to a young Beginner, bit 
Company to chuſe, and how to behave in it. 13 
VIII. General Rules for agreeable Converſation in « 
young Man. From a Father to à Sen. 16 
IX. An elder to a younger Brother, who is in Los e wich 
a young Lady of great Gaiety, &c. ll 


A 4 X. An 


CONTENT S. 


X. Ar elder to an extravagant younger Brother. Page 20 


XI. To a young Man too ſoon keeping a Horſe. 21 
XII. Againſi a ſudden Intimacy, or Friendſbip, with one 
of a ſport Acquaintance. - 25 
XIII. 4 young Man in Bufine/s, to a Father, defiring 
Leuwe to addreſs his Daughter. 26 
XIV. To the Daughter, (on the Father”s Allonvance) ap- 
prifing her of his intended Vifit. 27 
From a young Lady to her Father, acquaintirng him 
with a Propoſal of Marriage made to her. 28 
XVI. The Tale, s Anfaver, on a Suppoſition that he 
appromes not of the young Man's Addreſſes. 2y 
IT The Father's 4nfever, on a Suppofition that be does 
t diſapprove of them. 30 


XVIII. The young Gentleman to the Father, apprifing 
him of his Afﬀection for his Daughter. 31 
XIX. From the Couſin to the "as and Mother in Com- 
 mendation of the young Gentleman. 32 
XX. From the W in Anjfaver to the young Gen- 

tleman. 


33 
XXI. From the young Gentleman to his Miſtreſs, en her 


Arrival at her Father's. 35 
XXII. From a Brother to his Sifter in the Country, up- 
braiding her for being negligent in Mi ating. 36 
XXIII. In Anfever to the preceding. 37 
XXIV. From the Daughter to her Mother, in Excuſe for 
her Negled. 38 
XXV. From a Son-in-law to his Wife's Father, ac- 
guainting him with his Wife's Illneſs. . ibid. 
XXVI. From a Country Chapman beginning Trade, to 
a City Dealer, offering his Correſpondence. 39 
XXVII. In Anſwer to the foregoing. 40 


XXVIII. From a Maid. ſervant in Town, acquainting 
' ber Father and Mother in the Country, with a Pro- 
poſal of Marriage, and aſking their Conſents. ibid. 

XXIX. From the Parents, in Anſaber ta the preceding. 


42 
XXX. 


b 
2 
« * enn 
K . 6 4 ? 15 ; 
: ' — 5 e Y : » þ _—_ 
D ' ; F k CIPO * 12 8 1 
28 2 N 


Marriage. Page 41 
XXXI. Recommending a /; . ior Man- ſervant. 42 
XXXII. Recommending a Met-nus ſe. 43 
XXXIII. Recommending a Cook-maid. ibrd. 
XXXIV. Recommending a Chamber-maid. 44. 
XXXV. Recommending a Nurſery-maid. ibid. 
XXXVI. A Father to a Son, to diſſuade him from the 

"ice of Drinking to Exceſs. © © 45 
XXXVII. The /ame Subject purſued. 47 
XXXVIII. From an Apprentice to his Majter, begging 

Forgiveneſs for a great Miſdemeanour. 40 
XXXIX. The Maſter's Anſwer. 90 
XL. From au Apprentice to bis Friends, in Proije of his 

after and Family. 5 7 
XLI. frother from an Apprentice, aubere the Majter is 

too remiſs in his own Affairs. 52 
XLII. To a Country Correſpondent, moge/tly requeſting 4 

Balance of Accounts between them. 53 
XLIII. In Anfever to the preceding. ibid. 
XLIV. A more preſiing and angry Letter from a City 

Dealer on the ſame Account, © 5 
XLV. Is Anfeer to the preceding. 3 
XLVI. To a young Trader generally in a Hurry in Buſi- 

neſs, ad: ing Method as well as Diligence. 56 


Player. 60 
XLIX. To a Brother too captious to bear himſelf the 
Ridicule Be practiſes upon others. 6r 
L. To a Friend, on his 2 ery from a dangerous II- 
neſs. 63 
LI. On the fame Occaſion, | ibid. 


CUN I NIS. 
XXX. From the ſame, acguai ting ber Pargits with Ser 


XLVII. From à Son reduced by his own Extravagance, 


requeſting his Father's Advice, on his Intention to turn 
Player. 


59 
XLVIII The Father's Av fuer, ſetting forth the Incon- 
veniencies and A attending the Profeſſion of a 


LU. 1 — to the preceding. 64 


CONTENTS. 


LIII. To 4 young Lady, adviſing her not to change her 


Guardians, nor to encourage any clandeſtine Ad- 


dreſs. Page 64 


LIV. From a Mother to a Daughter, jealous of her 


Huſband. 67 
LV. The Subject continued. 69 
LVI. From a tender Father to an ungracious Son. 71 
LVII. The Son's dutiful An fever. 74 
LVIII. To a Friend, on Occaſion of his not anſwering 


his Letters. 76 
LIX. In Anfwer to the preceding. ibid. 
LX. From a Father 1s a Son, on his Negligence in his 

Afﬀazrs, 77 
LXI. The Sens grateful Anfaver. 78 


LXII. A young Woman in Town to her Sifter in the 
Country, recounting her narrow Eſcape from a Snare 
laid for her on her firſt Arrical, by a wicked Pro- 
cureſs. 79 

LXIII. To a Daughter in a Country Town, auh en- 
courages the Addreſs of a Subaltern [A Caſe too fre- 
quent in Country Towns.) 


4 
LIV. Of Expeſiulations from a grave Friend to a young 


Man, on his flighting and irreverent Behaviour to his 
Father. 86 
LXV. Againſt tos great a Love of Singing and * 
2 
1457 I. From a Daughter to her Father, pleading F 
her Sifter, who had married without his Conſent. 93 
LXVII. The Father's Anfaver. 94 
LXVIII. To a Brother, againſt making his Wife and 
Children the conflaut Subject of Praiſe in Conver- 
ſation. 95 
LXIX. From a Father to a Daughter, in Diſlike of her 
Iutention to marry at too early an Age. 


; 97 
LXX. From a Father to a Daughter againſt a frothy, 


French Lower. 99 
LXXI. A modeſt Lover, deſiring an Aunt's Favour to her 
Niece. 100 


LXXII. 


1 
1 2 


CONTIENT S. 
LXXII. The Aunt's Anfwer, ſuppoſing the Gentleman 


deſerves Encouragement. Page 101 
LXXIII. The Anſever, ſuppefing the Gentleman is not 
approved. 102 
LXXIV. From a reſpectſul Lower to his Miſtreſs. ibid. 
LXXV. The An fever. 103 
LXXVI. A humourous E piſtle of neighbourly Occurrences 
and News, to a Bottle-Companion abroad. 104 
LXXVII. From a Nephew to his Aunt, on his flow Pro- 
greſi in a Courtſhip Mair. 108 
LXXVIII. The Aunt's Anſwer, encouraging him to per- 
[evwere. ITO 
LXXIX. A Gentleman to a Lady, profeffing an Averſion 
to the tedious Forms of Courtſhip. 111 
LXXX. The Lady's Anſwer, encouraging a farther De- 
claratizn. 112 
LXXXI. The Gentleman's Reply, more explicitly avoau- 
ing his Paſſion. 113 
LXXXII. The Lady's Anfever to his Reply, putting the 
Matter on à ſudden Que. 114 
LXXXIII. A facetious young Lady to her Aunt, ridi- 
culing her ſerious Lover. ibid, 
LXXXIV. Her Aunt's Anſwer, reprehending her ludi- 
crous Turn of Mind. 117 
LXXXV. Fam à Gentleman to his Miſtreſs, reſenting 
her ſuppoſed Coguetry. 119 
LXXXVI. The Lady's angry Anſwer. 120 
LXXXVII. The Gentleman's ſubmiſſive Reply. 121 
LXXXVIII. The Lady's forgiving Return. 122 
LXXXIX. Ridiculing à romantic Rhapſody in Court/hip. 
12 
XC. Againſt a young Lady's affecting manly Airs ; and alk 
cenſuring the madern Riding-habits. 124 


ACI. 4 Father to a Daughter, relating to three Perſons 
of different Characters propoſed to him, each for 
her Huſband ; with his Recemmendation of ore in 
Years, 128 


XCII, 


— —— ——— — 
—— — 


— — — 


—— . " 
—— — 
— > . 


— -- 


— — — W-- - A 
— — . 


— —— — —2— — —— — — — — — — ——EwçV— 


| 


„ CONTENTS. 
XCII. Her Anſwer, ditifully expoſiulating on the Caſe. 


Page 129 
XCIII. Hi, Reply, urgently enforcing, but not compelling, 
her Compliance with his Defire. 23 


XCIV. Toa rich Widow Lady with Children, diſſuading 
her from marrying a Widower of meaner Degree, who 
has Children alſo. 133 

Juſtructions to young Orphan Ladies, as well us others, 
how to judge of Propoſals of Marriage made to them 
«cithout their Guardians or Friends Conſent, by their 
Alilaners, Mantua-maters, and other Go-betwweens. 136 


XCV. From the yeung Lady, to the clandeſtine Propoſer of 


the Match. 141 
XCVI. Ta a young Fellow who makes Love in a romantic 
manner. By the Hand of a Friend. 142 


XCVII. Another leſs affronting on the ſame Occaſion. 143 
XCVIII. A4notber fiillleſa ſevere, but not encouraging. ibid. 
XCIX. To rebuke an irregular Addreſs, when it is not 


thought proper wholly to diſcourage it. 144 
C. Another for a Lady referring to a Guardian, or choſen 
Friend. ibid. 
CI. A4ther to the fame Purpoſe. 145 
CII. From a Town-Tenant to his Landlord, excuſing De- 
lay of Payment. ibid. 
CIII. From a Country Tenant to the ſame Purpoſe. 146 
CIV. The Landlord's Anfaver. ibid. 
CV. 4 threatening Letter from a Steward on Delay of 
Payment, 147 
CVI. The poor Tenant's moving Anfaver. ibid. 


CVII. The Stesvard's Reply, giæing more Time. 148 
CVIII. The poor Man's thankful Letter in Return. 149. 
CIX. An Oer of Affiſtance to a Friend, who has received 

great Loſſes by a Perſon's Failure. | 150 
CX. The Friend's Anſwer, accepting the kind Offer. ibid. 
CXI. The Friend's Anſever, ſuppoſing he has no Occaſion 


for the Offer. 15 1 
CXII. Of Conſolatien to a Friend in Priſon for Debt. ibid. 
CXIII. In Anfwer to the preceding. 153 


N 5 
CXXI. To a Friend, on a Breach of Promiſe in not return- 


* CXXV. A Gentleman to . Lady, whe humourouſly reſents 


R CXXXI. From a young Maiden, abandon'd by her Lower 
N CXXXII. From à Gentleman to his Miftreſs, wvho ſeeing 


_ —_—_— — 


— ” 


COUNLIEN. TS 
CXIV. To a Perſon of Note, in Acknowledgment of great 


Benefits received. 


Page} 154 

CXV. Another for Fawours of not ſo bigh, yet à generous 
ature. 155 
CXVI. An Excuſe to a Perſon avho wants to berrow 
Money. ibid. 
CXVII. On the ſame Subject. x 156 
CXVIII. Another on the ſame. | ibid. 
CXIX. To a Friend, in Compliance with his Regueſt to 
borrow @ Sum of Money. ibid. 


CXX. Another on the ſame Occaſion, limiting the Pay- 


ment to à certain Tine. 157 


ing Money lent in his Exigence. ibid. 
CXXII. To a Friend, who had promiſed to lend a Sum of 
Money, to anſwer a critical Exigence, and drove it off 

to the laſt. 158 
CXXIII. The An/aver, excuſing the Pain he had given 
his Friend by his Remiſſneſs. 159 
CXXIV. To one who, upon a very ſhort Acquaintance, and 


evithout any wvi/ble Merit, but Aſſurance, wants to 
borrow a Sum of Money 3 460 


bis Miſtreſs's Fondneſs of a Monkey, and Tndifference 


to himſelf. 161 
 CXXVI. A Sailor to his betrothed Miftreſe. 162 
(XXVII. Her Anſwer. - 164 
 CXXVIIL. 4 Sea-Oficer to his Wife. 165 
CCXXIX. 4 Wife to her Huſband at Sea. 166 


' CXXX. To a Father, on his Neg ledi of his Childrens 


Education. 168 


for the ſake of a greater Fortune. I71 


no Hopes of Succeſs, reſpectfully withdraws his Suit.173 


CXXXIII. From a Lady to à Gentleman, ache had ob- 


tained all ber Friends Conſent, urging bim to decline 
bis Suit to her. | 


174 
Cxxxlv. 


CONTENTS. 
CXXXIV. The Gentleman's Anſwer to the Lady's un- 


common Requeſ?. Page 176 
CXXXV. The Lady's Reply, in caſe of a Prepoſſeſſion.177 
CXXXVI. The Lady's Reply in caſe of no Prepoſſeſſion, 

or that ſhe chuſes not to awvory it. 178 
CXXXVII. A Lady toa Gentleman of ſuperior Fortune, 

who, after a long Addreſs in an honourable way, pro- 

poſes to live avith her as a Gallant. 179 
CXXXVIII. 4 Father to a Daughter in Service, on 

hearing of her Maſter's attempting her Virtue. 181 
CXXXIX. The Daughter's Anfaver. 182 
CXL. To a Gentleman of Fortune, «vho has Children, 

diſſuading him from a Second Marriage with à Lady 


much younger than himſelf. ibid. 
CXLI. The fame Subject purſued. 185 
CXLII. Againſt a Second Marriage, where there art 
Children on both Sides. _ 188 


CXLIII. Againſt a ſecond Marriage, where there are 
Children on one Side, and a Likelihood of more. 193 
CXLIV. Adviſing a Friend againſt going to Law. 197 
CXLV. To a young Lady, cautioning her againſt keeping 
Company with a Gentleman of bad Character. 200 
CXLVI. From a Mother to her high-ſpirited Daughter, 
avho lives on uneaſy Terms with her Huſband. 201 
CXLVII. A Lady to her Friend, a young Widow Lady, 
evho, having bury'd a polite and excellent Huſband, in- 
clines to marry a leſs deſerving Gentleman, and of un- 
equal Fortune. 20 
CXLVIII. From a Gentleman, ftrenuouſly expaſtulating 
avith an old rich Widow, about to marry a very young 
gay Gentleman. 20 
CXLIX. From à young Lady in Town to her Aunt in 
the Country. 1. Deſcribing the Tower, Monument, 
St. Paul's, &c. 212 
CL. 2. Deſcribing other remarkable Places in and about 
London and Weſtminſter, which are generally ſhewn 
to Strangers. | 214 


CLI. 


o 


6 


| CLXIV. 4. Friin the ſame: Deſcribing ber fluttering 


CLXVII. From a Gentleman to his Lady, wwhoſe Over- 


| CONTENTS. 
CI. 3. Deſcribing Chelſea Hoſpital, and Kenſington 


Palace. Page 217 
CLII. 4. Deſcribing Greenwich Park, and the Paſſage 
to it by Water. 218 
CLIII. 5. Deſcribing Bethlehem Hoſpital. 220 


CLIV. 6. Diver ſions of Vaux-hall deſcribed. 222 
CLV. 7. An Account of Weſtminſter-Abbey. 225 
CLVI. 8. Accountof Weſtminſter-Abbey continued. 228 
\*CLVIL. 9g. O a Concert or Mufical Entertainment. 232 


CLVIII. 10. Or the Diverſions of the Play-houſe. 234 


* CLIX. 11. The Play, and the low Scenes of Harle- 


quinery after it, deſcribed and expoſed. 236 


| CLX. From a Country Gentleman in Town, to his Bro- 


ther in the Country, deſcribing a publick Execution in 
London. 239 


Fe Letters which paſſed between an Aunt and her Niece, 


in relation to her Conduct in the Addreſſes made her 
by two Gentlemen; one a gay fluttering military Coxcomb, 


the other a Man of Senſe and Honour. 242 
CLXI. 1. From the Aunt to the Niece, deſiring her 
Niece's own Opinion of the two Lowers, ibid, 


CLXII. 2. The Niece's Anſwer : Deſcribing the Be- 


hawviour of the ſenſible Lover. 243 
CLXIII. 3. Continuing the Deſcription of the Beha- 


viour of the ſame Gentleman; which occaſions a Lowe- 
quarrel. 245 


Pretender. 248 


CLXV. 5. From the Aunt, containing ſolid Advice and 


Cautions on this Occaſion. ; 250 


5 
- CLXVI. From @ Lady to her falſe Lower, who after 


having braved all his Friends Expoſtulations, at laſt 


is perſuaded to abandon her for another of larger 
Fortune. 212 


niceneſs in her Houſe, and uneaſy Temper with her Ser- 
vants, make their Lives uncomfortable. 255 


CLXVIII. From a Gentleman ache in à ſmall Fortune 


experiences the Slights of his Friends; but being ſud- 
| denſy 


G ON. TENNIS. 


| denly reputed to be rich, is oppreſſed with the fawning 
Careſſes and Adulation of thoſe who bad before neg- 
lefted him: | Page 258 
CLXIX. From one addi to anat her, on the raſh Mar- 
. rtage of a beloved Daughter of one of them, to æ 
profligate young Fellow. . 262 
CLXX. The afflicted Father, in Anſwer to the PR 


Ig. 294 
CLXXI. To a Father on the Loſs of his Son, aubo died 
under Age. 205 
CLXXII. To a Father, on the Loſs of a hopeful 25 
who died at Man's Eſtate. 
CLXXIII. To a Widxw, on the Death of her Hu 
bang. 279 


Familiar 


Familiar LETTERS 
4 On the moſt 


IMeoRTANT Occas1oNS 
I N 


COMMON LIFE. 


$. 


_ 
1 oh. 4 * by PR ox va. (14 a EE 


LET TEN I, 
To a Father, againſt. puiting a Youth of but 
moderate Parts to a Profeſſion that requires 
more extenſive Abilities., 


Dear Sir, 


p_— 


Pax} 0 U pay me a Compliment, tho' a 
very obliging one, when in the laſt 
A AJ | Letter you favoured me with, you 
AS; l deſire my Advice, with reſpect to 
l the Diſpoſition of your Son Yam 
=== whom you are inclin'd to bring up 
to the Bar. If, in complying with your Requeſt, 
I ſhould ſay any thing you may not intirely 

2 approve, you will not have ſo much room to 


B tame 


lar 


—— ———— Ü ————¶ů— ů — — 


2 Familiar LETTERS on the 


blame me, as your own wrong Choice of a 
Counſellor. 

I need not now tell you, I have a good Opi- 
nion of Vill; and think him a modeſt, grave, 
ſober, Youth : But, for this very Reaſon, I 
hardly think him qualihed for the Profeſkon you 
would chuſe for him; for, I doubt, he has neither 
Talents for the Law, nor ever will have the 
Preſence of Mind neceſſary to make a Figure at 
the Bar. In any ſmooth, eaſy Buſineſs, he will 
probably ſuccecd, and be a uſctul Member of the 
Commonwealth, And as he is not your eldeſt 
Son, I ſhould, were it to me, put him to a 
Merchant ; or, as we live in an Ifland, and Trade 
and Navigation are both our Riches and our Glory, 
I ſhould not even ſcruple to put a ſecond Son to a 
creditable wholeſale Dealer, rather than fail ; it he 
himſelf is not averſe to ſuch a Calling. For 1 
know not (you'll excuſe me, I'm ſure) whether 
Hill's Genius is equal to that of an univerſal 
Merchant : For, the various Springs of Com- 
merce, the Seaſons for chuſing proper Comme— 


_ dities, and numberleſs Incidents that make a 


neceflary Return of Gain precarious, are {ull Im- 
ploy ment for the ſtrongeſt Judgment; as a Man, 
by one ill-choſen Venture, often loſes more than 
he gains by ſeveral ſucceſsful ones. 

But this Opinion of Will, ſhould you think it 
Juſt, will be no Obſtacle to his ſucceeding in the 
World in ſome creditable eaſy Buſineſs, Tho' I 
think him unequal to the Part you ſeem inclinable 
to allot him ; yet he is no Fool : And Experience 
teaches us, that, in ſome forts of Buſineſs, ample 
Advantage, may be made by very moderate Ja- 
lents, with much Reputation, Theſe are princi- 
pally ſuch Employments as merely conſiſt in Buy- 
ng with Prudence, and in Selling at a Market- 

| profit: 


moſt Important Occaſions. 2 


| 1 profit: Hence we ſee ſeveral Wholeſale Dealers 


bf 

} 

1 

5 

Þ 

b 
| 


gain large Fortunes with Eaſe and Credit, and 
without any other Secret than the plain Practice 
of Buying at the beſt Hand, paying for their 
Goods punctually, and vending them always for 
what they are, In Dealings of this Kind, the 
Fatigues are few, and clear well-kept Books 
are ſufficient to ſhew, at any time, a Man's Loſs 
or Gain ; for which, generally ſpeaking, leſs than 
One Forenoon in a Week is ſufficient : And yet, 
by a conſtant Attention, in this caſy manner, as 
g:9d a Character, and, very often, more Money 
is to be gained than in Profeſſions that require an 
extraordinary Genius, a perpetual Attention, and 
a cloſe and intenſe Study; which very ſeldom ſuc- 
ceeds neither: For ſee you not of Hundreds of 
Lawyers, how very few of them make a Figure, 
or get genteel Bread? And how many, for want 
of Courage to appear at the Bar (who yet have 
good Parts and Knowledge in the Laws) are 
forced to confine themſelves to Chamber- practice, 
in which it is a long time before they grow noted 
enough to make a tolerable Livelihood. 

As to what you hint, of placing him in the 


5 Phyſick Tribe; I like this no better than the other. 


Conſider only this one Thing, how long it is be- 
fore he will be capable of entering into Buſineſs, 
or Reputation, as a Phyſician, if he ever does it at 
all: For who chuſes to truſt his Health to a raw and 
unexperienced young Man? The Law requires a 


: ſprightly Impudence, if I may fo ſay, the Phyſick 


Line a ſolemn one, in the Perſon who would make a 
Figure in either. And do you think, tho' Lill is 
grave enough of Conſcience, that he ever can come 
up to that important Deportment, that unbluſhing 
Parade, which is the very Eflence of an Engliſh 
nyſician? So he may, in either of the Pro- 

B 2 feſſions, 


— 8 —ñä—äm—äõ ——ů N 3 —— — Moe — 


4 Familiar LETTERS on the 
ſeſſions, live over all his Days, and be quite un- 


* known; for, as Practice in both Faculties is the 


beſt "Teacher, and Theory a moſt uncertain Guide, 


he may live to be Forty or Fifty Years of Age, 


and not come into any Buſineſs that ſhall improve 
himſelf, or benefit his Conſulters. 

W hercas in the Way I propoſe, no ſooner is he 
come of Age, and fit to be truſted with the 
Management of any Affairs at all, but his Seven 
Years will be expired ; and if he has not been 
wanting to himſelf in it (and if he be, he would 
have been much more ſo in an abſtruſer Bufineſs) 
he will be enabled, with the Fortune you can 
beſtow upon him, to enter upon the Stage of the 
World with great Advantage, and become directly, 
a neceſſary and an uſeful Member of the Commu- 
nity. And, my good Friend, when you and I 
recollect, that moſt of the noble Families in the 
Kingdom, as well as the genteel ones, had the 
Foundations of their Grandeur laid in Trade, I 
expect not, in ſuch a Country as ours eſpecially, 


that any Objection to my Advice will be form'd, 


either by you or your good Lady, on this Score, 
if you have not more ſignificant Reafons proceed- 
ing from the Boy's Turn of Mind and Inclination ; 
which, I think, ſhould always be conſulted on 
theſe Occaſions, For, tho' I hope it never will 
be ſo in your Cafe, yet nothing has been more 
common, than that of Two Sons, the Eldeſt 
brought up to the Eſtate, the other to Trade, in 
the Revolution of Twenty or Thirty Years, the 
latter, thro* the Extravagance of the former, has 
made himſelf Eldeſt, as I may fay ; for, by ſaving 
while the other has been ſpending, he has found 
Means to keep the Eſtate in the Family, tho* it 
has been transferr'd upon the youngeſt, and, as it 
has then proved, the w¾orthieſt Branch. 


This 


moſt Important Occaſions, 5 


This, ,F think, deſerves your Conſideration 3 
and by viewing Will in the ſame Light I do; that 
of a well-inclined Lad, of moderate Pafhons, 
great natural Modeſty, and no ſoaring Genius ; 1 
belicve you will think it beſt to diſpoſe of him in 
ſuch manner as may require no greater Lalents 
than he is poſſeſſed of, and may, in due Lime, make 
him appear in the Face of the World fully quali- 
fied for what he undertakes. I am, Sir, 


Your very humble Servant, 


— 


. 


From an UNCLE lo a Nevitiw, on bis keep- 
ing bad Company, bad l, &c, in bis 
Apprenticeſhip, 


Dear Nephew, 


I AM very much concerned to hear that you are 

of late fallen into bad Cormpiny ; that you 
keep bad Hours, and give great Uncatineſs to your 
Maſter, and break the Rules of his Family : "That 
when he expoſtuJates with you on this Gerne 
you return pert and bold Anſwers; and, inſtead of 


promiſing or endeavouring to amend, repeat the 
3 Offence ; and have enter'd into Clubs and Societies 
of young Fellows, who ſet at naught all good 


Example, and make ſuch Perſons who would do 


their Duty, the Subject of their Ridicule, as Per- 


ſons of narrow Minds, and who want the Courage 


to do as they do, | | 
Let me, on this Occaſion, expoſtulate with 


1 you, and ſet before you the Evil of the Way you 


gare in. 


B 3 In 


, bs " 2 — . 1 
7 8 „* — | ** — —äã 2 —— —wEö— — — — — — — — Ho — nr ne 2 _— — . — eq ͥ — — . — 200 © 


6 Familiar LETTERS on the 


In the firſt Place: What can you mean by 
breaking the Rules of a Family you had bound your 
ſelf by Contract to obſerve? Do you think it is 

| honeſt, to break thro' Engagements into which 
1 you have ſo ſolemnly entered; and which are no 
| Jeſs the Rules of the Corporation you are to be 
. one Day free of, than thoſe of a private Family? 
— deven Years, ſeveral of which are elapſed, are 
not ſo long a Term, but that you may ſee it 
determined before you are over-fit to be truſted with 
vour own Conduct: "Twenty-one or Twenty-two 
Years of Age, is full early for a young Man to be 
his own Maiter, whatever you may think ; and you 
may ſurely ſtay till hen, at leaſt, to chuſe your 
own Hours, and your own Company ; and, I fear, 
as you go on, if you do not mend your Ways, 
vour Diſcretion will not then do Credit to your 
Choice. Remember, yo have no Time you can 
call your own, during the Continuance of your 
Contract; and muſt you abuſe your Maſter in a 
double Senſe ; rob him of his Time, eſpecially if 
any of it be Hours of Buſineſs ; rob him of his 
Reſt ; break the Peace of his Family, and give a 
bad Example to others? And all for what? Why 
to riot in the Company of a Set of Perſons, who 
[ contemn, as they teach you to do, all Order 
17 and Diſcipline; who, in all Likelihood, will lead 
you into into Gaming, Drinking, Swearing, and 
even more dangerous Vices, to the unhinging of 
your Mind from your Buſineſs, which muſt be 
your future Support. 
Conſider, I exhort you, in time, to what theſe 
Courſes may lead you. Conſider the Affliction 
you will give to all your Friends, by your Con- 
tinuance in them, Lay together the Subſtance oj 
the Converſation that paſles in-a whole Evening 
with your frothy Companions, after you are 2 
| ron 


» 
"tl 
Os 
O 
* 
* 
3 
4 
LAG | 
4 
* 


0 88 
ann „„ 


ſure and Credit. 


moſt Important Occaſions. * 


from them, and reflect what ſolid Truth, what 
uſeful Leſſon, worthy of being inculcated in your 
future Life, that whole Evening has afforded you; 
and conſider, whether it is worth breaking thro” 
all Rule and Order for ? W hether your pre- 
ſent Conduct is ſuch as you would allow in a Ser- 
vant of your own ? Whether you are ſo capable 
to purſue your Buſineſs with that Ardor and De- 
light next Morning, as if you had not drank, or 
kept bad Hours over Night? If not, whether 
your Maſter has not a double Loſs and Damage 
from your miſ-ſpent Evenings ? Whether the taking 
of ſmall Liberties, as you may think them, leads 
ou not on to greater; for, let me tell you, you 
will not find it in your Power to ſtop when you 
will : And then, whether any Reſtraint at all 


vill not in time be irkſome to you? 


I have gone thro” the like Servitude with Plea- 
I found myſelf my own Maſter 


| full ſoon for my Diſcretion : What you think 


of your ſelf I know not; but I wiſh you may do as 


well for your own Intereſt, and Reputation too, as 


I have done for mine: And I'll aflure you, I 


? ſhould not have thought it either creditable or 
* honeſt to do as you do. I could have ſtood the 
Laugh of an Hundred ſuch vain Companions as 
you chuſe, for being too narrow-minded to break 
: thro” all moral Obligations to my Maſter, in order 
to ſhew the Bravery of a bad Heart, and what an 


, abandon'd Mind dared to perpetrate. 


A bad Be- 


ginning ſeldom makes a good Ending, and if you 
was aſſured that you could ſtop when you came for 


your ſelf, which is very improbable, how will you 


anſwer it to Equity and good Conſcience, that 
vou will not do fo for your Maſter? There is, 
let me tell you, more true Bravery of Mind in for- 


bearing to do an Injury, 


than in giving Offence. 
B 4 Lou 


L Familiar LETTERS u the: 


You are now at an Age, when you ſhould 
ſtudy to mpreve not divert your Faculties, You 
thould now lay in a Fund of Knowledge, that in 
time, when ripened by Experience, may make 
pow a worthy Member of the Commonwealth, 

o you think you have nothing to learn, either 
as to your Buſineſs, or as to the forming of yaur 
Mind! Would it not be much better to chuſe the 
hlent, the ſober Converſation of Books, than ot 
ſuch Companions as never read or think? An 
Author never commits any but his beit Thoughts 
to Paper; but what can you expect from the 
laughing noiſy Company you keep, but frothy 
irate, indigeſted Notions, and Thoughts ſo unwor- 
thy of being remember'd, that it is the greatet: 
k indneſs to torget them. 

Let me intreat you then, my dear Kinſman, 
fer uf Family's ſake, for your own ſake, before 
it be too late, to reflect as you ought upon the Courſe 
you are enter'd into. By applying yourſelf to Books, 
inſtead of ſuch vain Company, you will be quali- 
fied in time for the beſt of Company, and to be 
reſpected by all Ranks of Men. This will keep 
you out of unncceffary Expences, will employ all 
your leiſure Time, will exclude a world of 
Temptations, and open and inlarge your Notions 
of Men and Things, and, finally, ſet you above 
that wretched Company which now you ſeem ſo 
much delighted with. And one Thing let me 
recominend to you, That you keep a Liit of the 
young Men of your Standing within the Com- 
pais of your Knowledge, and for the next Seven 
Years obſerve what Fate will attend them: dee, 
if thoſe who follow net the Courſe you are fo 
lately enter'd into, will not appear in a very dit- 
| ferent Light from thoſe who de; and from the 
Induſtry and Proſperity of the one, and the 

| Decay 


2 


moſt Important Occaſions, 9 


Decay or Failure of the other, (if their vain Ways 
do not blaſt them before, or as ſoon as they begin 
the World) you'll find abundant Reaſon every 
Day to juſtify the Truth of the Obſervations I 
have thrown together. As nothing but my Af- 
fection for you could poſhbly influence me to theſe 
Expoſtulations, I hope for a proper Effect from 
them, if 59 would be thought well of by, or ex- 
pet any Favour from, 


Your loving Uncle, 


Your Maſter will, at my Requeſt, ſend me 
word of the Succeſs of my Remonſtrances. 


— 


LETTER III. 


A Widow- Mother's Letter, in Anfwer to her 
Son's complaining of Hardſhips in his Ap- 
prenticeſhip, 


Dear Billy, 
1 AM very ſorry to hear of the Difference between 
* 


our Maſter and you. I was always afraid you 
would expect the ſame Indulzences you had met 
with at home; and as you know, that in many 


' Inſtances, I have endeavoured to make any ſcem- 


ing Hardſhip as eaſy to you as I could, if this 
cauſes you to be harder to be ſatisficd, it would be 
a great Trouble to me. Your Uncle tells me, I 
am afraid with too much Truth, that the Indul- 
gences you have received from me, have made your 
preſent Station more difagreeable than it would 
otherwiſe have been. What I have always done 
for you was intended for your Good, and nothing 


1 could ſo deeply afflict me as to fee my I enderneſs 
4 B 


5 have 


10 Familiar LETTERS o the 


have a contrary Effect: Therefore, dear Child, to 

my conſtant Care for your Welfare, do not add 

the Sorrow of ſeeing it the Cauſe of your behaving 

worſe than if it had not been beſtow*d upon you ; 
1 for as, before we put you to your Maſter, we had 
| an extraordinary Character of him, from all his 
Neighbours, and thoſe who dealt with him; and as 
Mr. Feſeph, who is now out of his Time, gives 
him the beſt of Characters, and declares your 
Miſtreſs to be a Woman of great Prudence and 
good Conduct; I know not how to think they 
would uſe you ill in any reſpe&t. But con- 
ſider, my Dear, you muſt not, in any Woman 
beſide myſelf, expect to find a fond, and perhaps 
partial Mother; for, the little Failings which 
J could not ſee in you, will appear very plain to 
other Perſons, My Love for you would make me 
wiſh you always with me; but as that is what 
your future Welfare will no way permit; and as 
you muſt certainly be a Gainer by the Situation 
you are now in, let a Deſire to promote my 
Happineſs, as well as your own, make every 
ſzeming Difficulty light; which, I hope, will 
appear much lighter for being what I intreat you 
to diſpenſe with; who am, 


0 Your ever loving Mother. 


J have deſir'd your Uncle to interpoſe in this 
| Matter, and he writes to you on this Occa- 
1 ſion ; and has promiſed to ſee Juſtice done 
4 


you, in caſe your Complaints be reaſon- 
1 | able. 


| LET. 


moſt Im fortan Occaſions. 11 


EI. 


An Uncle's Letter to the Youth, on the ſame 


. Occaſion, 
Couſin William, 
AM forry you ſhould have any Miſunderſtand- 
ing with your Maſter : I have a good Opinion 
of him, and am unwilling to entertain a bad one 
of you, It is ſo much a Maſter's Intereſt to uſe 
his Apprentices well, that I am inclinable to think 


that when they are badly treated, it is oftener the 
Effect of Provocation than Choice. Wherefore, 


before I give myſelf the Trouble of interpoſing in 


your Behalf, I defire you will ſtrictly inquire of your- 
ſelf, whether you have not, by ſome Miſconduct or 
other, provoked that Alteration in your Maſter's Be- 
haviour of which you ſo much complain. If, after 
having diligently complied with this Requeſt, you 
aſſure me that you are not ſenſible of having given 
Cauſe of Diſguſt on your Side, Iwill readily uſe my 


beſt Endeavours to reconcile yeu to your Maſter, or 


procure you another. Rut if you find yourſelf blame- 
ble, it will be better for you to remove, by your own 
Amendment, the Occaſion of your Millers Diſ- 
pleaſure, than to have me, or any other Friend, offer 
to plead your Excuſe, where you know it would 
be unjuſt to defend you. If this ſhould be your 
Caſe, all your Friends together could promiſe your 
better Behaviour, indeed ; but as the Performance - 
muſt even then be your own, it will add much 
more to your Character to paſs thro* your Whole 
Term without any Interpoſition between you, 
Weigh well what I have here ſaid ; and remember, 
that your future Welfare depends greatly on your 
preſent Behaviour, I am, 

Your Loving Kir ſinan. 
B 6 I. E T | 


12 Familiar LETTERS O the 


LE 43:8 KM -V.* 


An Apprentice to an Uncle, about a Fraud 


committed by his Fellow- Apprentice to their 
Maſter. 


Dear Uncle, 


1 AM under greater Uneaſineſs than I am able to 

expreſs : My Fellow-*prentice, for whom I had 
a great Regard, and from whom I have received 
many Civilities, has involved me in the deepeſt 
Affliction. I am unwilling to tell you, and yet I 
muſt not conceal it, that he has forfeited the 
Confidence repoſed in him by a Breach of Truſt, 
to which he ungenerouſly gain'd my Conſent, by 
a Pretence I did not in the leaſt ſuſpet.. What 
muſt I do? My Maſter is defrauded : If I diſcover 
the Injury, I am ſure to ruin a young Man I wou'd 
fain think poſſeſſed of ſome Merit; if I conceal 
the Injuſtice, I muſt at preſent ſhare the Guilt, 
and hereafter be Partaker in the Puniſhment. 4 
am in the greateſt Agony of Mind, and beg your 
urſtant Advice, as you value the Peace of 


Your dutiſul, tho“ unfortunate Nephew. 


L BI 1I-B-K--: v4, 
The Uncle's Anſwer. 


Dear Nephew, 
Y OUR Letter, which I juſt now received, 


gives me great Uneaſineſs: And as any Delay 
in the Diſcovery may be attended with Confe- 
quences which will probably be dangerous to your 


felf, and diſagreeable to all who belong to you; 
_ Chargj 


ved, | 
Delay | 
»nfe- | 
our. 


« F » Wl — 2 > He 4 
. » 7 * 
3 r 


moſt Important Occaſions, 13 


charge you, if you value your own Happineſs, and 
my Peace, to acquaint your Maſter inſtantly with 
the Injuſtice that has been done bim; which is 
the only Means of vindicating your own Innocence, 
and prevent your being looked upon as an Accom- 
plice in a Fact, to which I with you may not be 
found to have been too far conſenting. As to the 
unhappy young Man who has been guilty of fo 
fatal an Indiſcretion, I wiſh, if the known Cle- 
mency and Good-nature of your Maſter may par- 
don this Offence, he may let his Forgiveneſs teach 
him the Ingratitude and Inhumanity af injuring a 
Man, who is not only the proper Curtin of his 
Youth, but whoſe Goodneſs deſerves the beſt Be- 
haviour, tho' he be generous enough to excuſe the 
worſt, Let not a Minute paſs after you receive this, 
before you reveal the Matter to your Maſter : For, 
I am in Hopes that your Application to me, and 
your following my Advice, will greatly plead in your 
Behalf ] will very ſpeedily call on your Maſter, and 


am, as far as an honeſt Regard for you can make 
me, 


Your Loving Uncle. 


— 


EBIT II. 


Advice from a Father to a young Beginner, 
what Company to chuſe, and how to behave 
in it, | 
Dear Robin, 


S you are now entering into the World, and 
will probably have conſiderable Dealings in 
our Buſineſs, the frequent Occaſions you will 
ve for Advice from others, will make you de- 


ſirous 


14 Familiar LETT ERS 0n the 


ſirous of ſingling out among your moſt intimate 
Acquaintance, one or two, whom you would view 
in the Light of Friends. 

In the Choice of theſe, your utmoſt Care and 
Caution will be neceſſary: for, by a Miſtake 
here, you can ſcarcely conceive the fatal Effects 
ou may hereafter experience: Wherefore, it will 
be proper for you to make a Judgment of thoſe 
who are fit to be your Adviſers, by the Conduct 
they have obſerved in their ewn Affairs, and the 
Reputation they bear in the World. For he who 
has by his own Indiſcretions undone himſelf, is 
much fitter to be ſet up as a Land-mark for a pru- 
dent Mariner to ſhun his Courſes, than an Example 
to follow. 

Old Age is generally flow and heavy, Youth 
h-ad{trong and precipitate ; but there are old Men 
who are full of Vivacity, and young Men reple- 
niſh'd with Diſcretion ; which makes me rather 
point out the Conduct than the Age of the Perſons 
with whom you ſhould chuſe to aſſociate; tho' 
after all, it is a never-failing good Sign to me of 
Prudence and Virtue in a young Man, when his 
Seniors chuſe his Company, and he delights in 
theirs. 

Let your Endeavour therefore be, at all Adven- 
tures, to conſort yourſelf with Men of Sobriety, 
good Senſe and Virtue; for the Proverb is an un- 
erring one, that 72 A Man is known by the Com- 
pany he keeps. If ſuch Men you can ſingle out, 
while you improve by their Converſation, you will 
benefit by their Advice; and be ſure remember one 
thing, that tho' you muſt be frank and unreſerved 
in delivering your Sentiments, when Occaſions 
offer, yet that you be much readier to hear than 
ſpeak; for to this Purpoſe it has been ſignificantly 
obſerved, that Nature has given a Man two Ears, 


and 


moſt Im portant Occaſions, 135 
and but one Tongue. Lay in therefore by Obſer- 


vation, and a modeſt Silence, ſuch a Store of Ideas, 
that you may at their Time of Life, make no 
worſe Figure than they do ; and endeavour to bene- 
fit yourſelf rather by other Peoples Ills than your 
own. How muſt thoſe young Men expoſe them- 
ſelves to the Contempt and Ridicule of their Seniors, 
who having ſeen little or nothing of the World, 
are continually ſhutting out by pen Mouths and 
cloſed Ears, all Poſſibility of Inſtruction, and 
.naking vain the inch] End of Converſation, 
which is Improvement. A ſilent young Man 
makes generally a wiſe old one, and never fails of 
being reſpected by the beſt and moſt prudent Men. 
When therefore you come among Strangers, hear 
every one ſpeak before you deliver your own Sen- 
timents; by this means you will judge of the 
Merit and Capacities of your Company, and avoid 
expoſing yourſelf, as I have known many do, b 
ſhooting out haſty and inconſiderate Bolts, Which 
they would have been glad to recal, when perhaps 
a filent Genius in Company has burſt out upon 
them with ſuch Obſervations, as have ſtruck Con- 
fciouſneſs and Shame in the forward Speaker, if he 
has not been quite inſenſible of inward Reproach. 
I have thrown together, as they occurr'd, a few 
Thoughts, which may ſuffice for the preſent to 
ſhew my Care and Concern for your Welfare, I 
hope you will conftantly from time to time, com- 
municate to me whatever you ſhall think worthy 
of my Notice, or in which my Advice may be of 
Uſe to you. For 1 have no Pleaſure in this Life 
equal to that which the Happineſs of my Children 
ives me. And of this you may be aſſured; for 
am, and ever mult be, | 


Nur affewnate Father. 
L E T- 


— — — —Q2— 


16 Familiar LETTERS 04 the 


LE 4 4 BM; 


General Rules for agreeable Converſation in a 
young Man, From a Father io a Son, 


Dear William, 
S I had not an Opportunity of ſaying ſo much 


to you as I wiſhed when you were laſt here; 
I ſend this to inform you of ſome things in your 
general Converſation, which I think would b. 
proper for you to obſerve, and amend ; particularly 


your exceſſive Itch for Talking, which diſcovers itſel{ 


alike on all Occaſions. I have always flatter'd my- 
ſelf that you do not want Senſe, and am willing to 
hope I nave not been deceived : But the dangerous 
Self-ſufficiency of moſt young Men, ſeems violently 
to have ſeized you, which, I hope, a little Re- 
flection will remove. 

The Art of rendering yourſelf agreeable in Con- 
verſation is worth your ſerious Study : * Tis an Ad- 
vantage few can bozit, tho* ſought after by all; 
and nothing is ſo conſtant an Enemy to Succeſs in 
thoſe who would excel in this Art, as the harbour- 
ing an Opinion of their own Proficiency, before 
they have attained to any tolerable Degree of 
Knowledge in what they imagine themſelves poſ- 
ſeſſed of, Converſation, where it is rightly ma- 
naged, muſt be ſo conducted, as to let each Mem- 
ber of the Company have a Share in the Pleaſure 
and Applauſe it affords : If you are Six in Number, 
after you have told a Story, or made any Remark 
which gives a general Satisfaction; you muſt con- 
fider it the Right of another to call your Attention 
in his Turn ; and, unleſs particularly requeſted, it 


| betrays a great Weakneſs to follow yourſelf, No 


doubt but you love to be admired: And have not 
others 


8 
2 
i 
* 
* 
+ 
* 
> 


mojt Important Occaſions. 14 


ethers the ſame Paſſion? You believe your Wit 
more brilliant than theirs? Are you ſure that th 

are not of the ſame Opinion as to their own ? If a 
Man ſpeaks little, you muſt not from thence con- 
clude him willing to give up every Claim to con- 
rerſible Merit: Perhaps he cannot ſing: But to be 
ſure he is as deſirous of having his peculiar Humour, 
or his dry 7oke applauded, as you are to be intreat- 
ed another Song. If he is no Mathematician, per- 
haps he is verſed in religious Diſputation ; if he 
deſpiſes Plays, he may admire Hiſtory; tho' he 
uuderſtands not Geography, he may yet know how 
to deſcribe the Humours of Mankind: And tho” 
he pretends not to Politicks, he may have a Turn 
for ſome more uſeful Science. When theſe are 
conſidered, if his Modeſty is great, you cannot ob- 
lige him more than by throwing an Opportunity 
in his way to diſplay his Capacity on the Subject 
he believes himſelf moſt able to handle with Ad- 


vantage: For, in order to ſupport a thorough 


good Humour, a Man muſt be pleaſed with Him- 
ſelf as well as with others. hen this is pro- 


perly taken Care of, Converſation ſeldom fails to 


prove entertaining : And to the Neglect of this, 
are owing many of the yawning Hours ſpent in 
Companies compoſed of Men not incapable of be- 
having agreeably. 


The Manner of telling a Story, is alſo worth 


| your Notice : You have known the Pleaſure of 


1earing a long one well told: Mr. Trotter has an 


* admirable Talent in this way: But then you muſt 


: obſerve, that half the Pleaſure he gives, ariſes from 
his happily avoiding any of the lilly Digreſſions, 
Which are the great Cauſe of a Story's ſeemin 

| tedious : You never hear him mingle his Relation 
with, I remember very well it was the ſame Day 
that *Squire Trumbul's Son came of Age.---1 bought 


my 


1-4 


— nix % „„ — — —— 


18 Familiar LETTERS on the 


my bay Nag the very Day before, at ſuch a Fair, 
being a Friday that Year ;----or, I can ſcarce think 
of it without Laughing; But, however, as I was 
faying :--- And a hundred more ſuch Dead-weights 
to Attention, Nor does he ever praiſe a Story be- 
fore he relates it ; a fatal Rock to many a good 
Relation : For when any Story wants a preparatory 
Recommendation, it ought not to be told; and 
even when the Relation is poſſible, the Generality 
of Auditors are apt to perſuade themſelves, 


The Mountain labours, and a Mouſe is born. 


Theſe are looſe and general Hints; but by a due 
Improvement of them, you will find yourſelf very 
ſenſibly grow more and more agreeable where-ever 
you converſe, An Eaſe and becoming Freedom 
you already have, and by the Addition of Diſcre- 
tion in your Uſe of them, and Complaiſance to 
others, you will probably ſucceed in the Detire ſo 
predominant in you, of being admired by Men 
of Senſe and Judgment. Which will be no ſmall 
Pleaſure to 


Your affectionate Father, 


—— — — W _ ＋ 
— — ——— — . * 


EIER 


An elder to a younger Brother, who is in Love 
with @ young Lady of great Gaiety, &c. 


Dear Brother, 
I AM more concerned for your Welfare tha 


4 you imagine. You are younger than myſelt 

My Duty, in ſome Degree, requires my Care fo 

your Good, and particularly in a Point that ma! 
| b 


moſt Important Occaſions. 19 


be ſo material to your whole Life, as is that of 
Love. 

Beauty has as great a Force upon my Senſes, as 
it can have upon yours. I am near Thirty Years 
of Age; you are not more than Twenty. Your 
Paſſions are ſtrong ; mine, Brother, are far from 
ſubſiding : I admire, I love, with as much Force 
of Nature as you can do. My Reaſon ought to 
be ſtronger, and *tis well if my Paſſion is not ſo 
likewiſe, Miſs Rooke is amiable on many Ac- 
counts; her Features are regular, her Wit ſprightly, 
ber Deportment genteel ; and Voice, — I had al- 
moſt ſaid, raviſhing. Her Dreſs is eaſy and un- 
affected ; and her Manner of Converſation, has 
a Freedom that captivates more Hearts, than 
yours: Yet, I greatly fear, with all theſe Endow- 
ments, ſhe will not make the Wife you ought to 
with for. Her airy Flights, and gay Behaviour, 
are pleaſing, as a Partner in Converſation, but 
will they be equally agreeable ina Partner for Life ? 
What now charms you, charms alſo others: You 
are now content with thinking yourſelf one among 
many that admire her, and are admitted to ſhare 
the Brilliancy of her Converſation ; but will a Share 
of her Wit and Humour, her Freedom and Gaiety, 
pleaſe hereafter as a Wife? And tho? ſhe is delight- 
ful in Company, are you ſatisfied ſhe will be 
as agreeable when alone with you; or when ſhe 
has not an Opportunity of ſhewing- away in a 
Company that perhaps you may not approve ? She 
now ſees nobody but whom ſhe chuſes to ſee: If 
| ſhe ſhould be a Wife, it is more than probable ſhe 
may diſlike Reſtraints : and can you approve of 
ruſe Converſation in one you defire to your- 

elf 
Think not, Brother, that I have any intereſted 
Motive for this Advice. I aſſure you I have * 
am 


20 Familiar LETTERS on the 


I am not your Rival: I deſire not the Lady you 
ſeem too fond of. All I mean (for I fay nothing at 
preſent, with regard to your own Youth, which 
ought not, however, to be wholly forgotten, as very 
tew prudent Matches are made by young Gentle- 
men at your Age) is, to caution you againft 
thinking of a Gentlewoman who may, and I am 
willing to believe v0, be a ſuitable Companion tc 
a Gentleman whoſe Station and Choice leads hin 
into much Company, and gay Life; but to Mer 
whoſe Circumitances, if not their Inclinations 
require a more retired way of Life, it is obviou- 
a Woman, whoſe Talents lie principally i 
Converſation, can never, for that Reaſon only 
juſtify a young Gentleman for chuſing her for 
Wife. 

I hope this will come time enough to put yo! 
upon guarding againſt the Inconveniencies tha 
threaten the Indulgence of your preſent Paſſion 
Shut not your Ears to Reaſon ; forget not your 
ſelf ; and be ſure to remember, that the Pleaſur 
of an Hour or Two, and of Twenty, Thirty, © 
Forty Years, or a whole Life, muſt ariſe fro: 
very different Sources. I am, 


Dear Brother, 
Your moſt affettionate, &c. 


— 


— 


LETTER” X. 


An elder to an extravagant younger Brotber 


Dear Jonx, | = 
V O U may be certain that your Misfortunes : 
to me a moſt melancholy Subject: You 2 


my only Brother: I own it: And your M 
| fortur 


ns, 1“ 


ther. 


nes ar? 
"ou are 
ir Mis 


fortunc: 


moſt Important Occaſions. 21 


fortunes affect me next to my own : But there is 
this Difference in what I feel for you, and for my- 
ſelf: I am ſure, every Misfortune I have met 
with, has been occaſioned by unavoidable Acci- 
dents. This Conſideration has ſupported me under 
the many Afflictions I have myſelf endured : But 
for thoſe I have ſhared with you, I cannot boaſt 


the ſame Alleviation, While our Father lived, he 


was your conſtant and unwearied Support, even 
after your Patrimony was ſquander'd away. While 
our Mother remained, ſhe was every Week aſſiſt- 


ing your Neceſſities, but what might more pro- 


perly be called your Levity and Extravagance. 
She is now, by the Divine Will, taken from 
us both; her Jointure, as well as the Eſtate 
my Father independently left, has devolved upon 
me. Of this both Nature and Providence re— 
quire I ſhould make the beſt Uſe : And to ſerve 


you, I readily confeſs, is my greateſt Care. But, 
my dear Brother, how is this to be done? The 


generous and bountiful Aſſiſtance of our Parents, 


procured you no ſubſtantial Good. What then 


am I to do to ſcreen you from Want and Miſery ? 
'—— That you are not already happy, is not owing 
to the Backwardneſs of your Friends to ſerve you; 
but, allow me to ſpeak plainly, to your own In- 
diſcretion. Your own Fortune maintained you 
not for three Years: Were J able to give you as 
much more, what Reaſon have you given me to 
ſuppoſe you will be a better Quconomiſt than 
you have been? My whole Eſtate, let me tel! 
you, Brother, at your Rate of Expence, would 
ſcarcely maintain you for SevenYears : And, think 
Dou as you will, | muſt believe it my Duty to 
leave enough to ſupport my Off-ſpring, with pru- 
dent Conduct, to the End of Time. If I fend 
'ou, as you deſire, Fifty Guineas, What good wit 
that 


* 


22 Familiar LETTERS 07: the 


that Sum procure you? It will but ſerve to lengthen 
our Credit, and make you run deeper into Debt. 
I have aſſiſted you before; and has not this always 
been the Caſe ? And have not People given you 
Credit, becauſe they think I wil! ſupport you ? 
"Tis Time then, my dear Brother, to hold wy 
Hand. But yet, be aſſured, that wizen I am co: 
vinced you have thoroughly abandon'd your prete::. 
Courſes, you ſhall find in me, 


A truly affefttionats Erotle 


J 


LN LC ET — 


68-4 LS K: RFK 
To a young Man too ſoon keeping a Horſe. 


Dear T om, 


1 Always take great Pleaſure in hearing of your 

Welfare, and of every thing that makes for 
our Satisfaction and Comfort: But give me 
E to ſay, That I am ſorry to hear you have 
ſo early begun to keep a Horſe, eſpecially as your 
Buſineſs is altogether in your Shop, and you have 
no End to ſerve in riding out; and are, beſides, 


S 
Parcs and healthy,, and fo cannot require it, as 


2 — — — 


have him at hand on a Sunday Morning, if the 
Day proves fair, and you have nothing to keep 
you in Town ? 

You muſt conſider, that tho* here, in the 
Country, many common Tradeſmen keep Horſes, 
the Expence is but ſmall to them, and tte 


Diſtance of one Cuſtomer from another, in 2 


manner obliges them to it. But this can be no 


Plea for you: And if you do not want a Horte 


xerciſe, And is it worth while, think you, to | 
keep a Horſe the whole Week, that you may! 


for! 


2 


Men of eftabliſhed Fortunes; and when you are 
as old as the younge/? of them, and can as well 


afford it, I would be far from diſſuading you from 
keeping a Horſe. But at preſent, you may de- 
pend upon it, you rather incur their Contempt, 
than gain their Eſteem, by offering to appear 
their Equal, when they and you well know, in 
what relates to Expences, you ought not to be 
ſo, nor have you had a Time for it. The lower 


Fart of the World may, perhaps, ſhew you more 
Reſpect for thoſe Marks of Subſtance ; but ſhould 


a Time come (and who is exempt from Misfor- 
tunes?) when they muſt know they were the 
Effects of unthinking Levity ; how deſpicable 
muſt you then appear in their Eyes ? And, let me 


tell you, that the Eſteem of Perſons of Credit 
and Underſtanding, muſt be gained by very dif- 


ferent Means, from Shew or Equipage ; for with 


Þ| theſe, Modeſty, Prudence, and good Senſe only, 


U 


Will ever prevail. 


Beſides, 


moſt Important Occaſions. 23 


for Exerciſe, you can only alledge the worſt Rea- 
” ſon in the World for your maintaining one; that 
your Neighbours all round you do the fame : 
For, look who they are, and what their Motives, 
and you'll ſoon ſee the Difference, and that their 
Example will not juſtify you. Mr. Thompſon, 
for Inſtance, who lives next Door to you, is 
near Sixty Years of Age, of a pretty groſs Con- 
ſtitution, and capable of no other Exerciſe ; and 
' moreover he had acquired, by Length of Time, 
Hand Induſtry, an ample Fortune, before he gave 
himſelf this Diverſion. Mr. Fenkins has an 
Eſtate fallen to him, that ſets him above the Want 
of Trade; and his continuing in it, is rather an 
- Amuſement than an Employment. Mr. Fachſon, 


Mr. Wet, Mr. Trozier, and Mr. Kent, are all 


— 
— — — — 


——ö4äů4äñ—ũ ——— ͤ ͤ4äi4l¹ʒũꝛ kN 
A - - — * 
% 


2 4 Familiar LETTERS on the 


Beſides, the Expence of the Horſe is not th: 


leaſt thing to be conſidered : It will in time, very 
robably, lead you into a more dangerous one, 


that of beſtowing too much of your Time in the] 
Uſe of it. It will unhinge your Mind, as I may! 


ſay, from Buſineſs, and give your Servants Oppor- 
tunity to be remiſs in your Abſence. And as 
you are a young Man, it is fit that you ſhould Jay 
up, by your Induſtry, againſt a more advance! 


Age, when the Exerciſe a Horſe affords, will ſeem 
not only more ſuitable, but perhaps abſolutely ne- 
ceſſary to your Health; whereas now, it ny 


rather paſs for Wantonneſs and Affectation. 


You are not without a tolerable Share of Rca. 


ſon ; let me prevail with you to uſe it: Sell you 
Horſe, and fear not being laugh'd at on that Ac. 
count; for it will be a Credit to you more Way: 
than one, to ſay, That your Buſineſs would not 
allow you Time to uſe it. And it would argue 


beſides, great Perverſeneſs, to continue in an EH 
ror, for no other Reaſon than to ſupport a wrong 


Judgment at firſt ſetting out: And your reducing 
an unneceſſary Expence in good time, will more 


than recover any good Opinion you may have def 


by running into it. 


Your prudent Uſe of this Advice, will, as |: . 
muſt tend to your Good, be a great Satisfaction . 


to 
Your tenderly affeftioiiate Fats 


* 
{ 


* 


r „ 


K 


— 0 — — — —äp — — — 


moſt Important Occaſions. 25 


LETTER XI. 


Againſt a ſudden Intimacy, or Friendſhip, wish 
j bone of a ſhort Acquaintance. 


* Coufn Tom, 
: I AM juſt ſetting out for Vindſor, and have not 


time to ſay ſo much as I would on the Occa- 
ſion upon which I now write to you. I hear that 
Mr. Douglas and you have lately contracted ſuch 
an Intimacy, that you are hardly ever aſunder ; 
and as I know his Morals are not the beſt, nor 
his Circumſtances the moſt happy, I fear he will, 
if he has not already done it, let you ſee, that he 
better knows what he does in ſeeking your Ac- 
quaintance, than you do in cultivating His. 
* I am far from deſiring to abridge you in any 
neceſſary or innocent Liberty, or to preſcribe too 
much to your Choice of a Friend: Nor am 1. 
L re BARS your being complaiſant to Strangers; for this 
þ © Gentleman's Acquaintance is not yet a Month old 
12 you; but you muſt not think every Man 
whoſe Converſation is agreeable, fit to be imme 
diately treated as a Friend: Of all Sorts, haſtily- 
contracted Friendſhips promiſe the leaſt Duration 
or Satisfaction; as they moſt commonly ariſe 
from Deſign on one Side, and Weakneſs on thæ 
bother. True Friendſhip muſt be the Effect of long 
ind mutual Eſteem and Knowledge: It ought to 
have for its Cement, an Equality of Years, a 
Similitude of Manners, and, pretty much, a Parit 
in Circumſtance and Degree. But, gcnerally 
7 ſpeaking, an Openneſs to a Stranger carries with 
it ſtrong Marks of Indiſcretion, and not ſeldom 
ends in Repentance, 
C For 


26 Familiar LET T ERS on the 


For theſe Reaſons, I would be glad you would 
be upon your Guard, and proceed cautiouſly in 
this new Alliance. Mr. Douglas has Vivacity and 
Humour enough to pleaſe any Man of a light 
Turn; but were I to give my Judgment of him, 
I ſhould pronounce him fitter for the Tea-table, 
than the Cabinet, He is ſmart, but very ſuper- 
ficial ; and treats all ſerious Subjects with a Con- 
tempt too natural to bad Minds; and I know more 

oung Men than one, of whoſe good Opinion he 
Lis taken Advantage, and has made them wiſer, 
though at their own Expence, than he found 
them. 

The Caution J here give you, is the pure Effect 
of my Experience in Life, ſome Knowledge of 
* new Aſſociate, and my Affection for you. 


he Uſe you make of it will determine, whether 


you merit this Concern from 
Your afſfectionate Kinſman. 


* 


— 


LETTER XIII. 


A young Man in Buſineſs, io a Father, defiring 
| Leave to addreſs his Daughter. 


S 1 R, 
1 HOPE the Juſtneſs of my Intentions will 

excuſe the Freedom of theſe few Lines, where- 
by J am to acquaint you of the great Affection 
and Eſteem I have for your Daughter. I would 
not, Sir, offer at any indirect Addrefs, that ſhould 
| have the leaſt Appearance of Inconſiſtency with 
her Duty to you, and my honourable Views to 
her ; chufing, by your Influence, if I may ap- 


prove myſelf to you worthy of that Henour, to 
com- 


3 a tn. ad. 
x 1 
* £> W . "x 
2 - * — 3 g 


moſt Important Occaſions. 27 


3 commend myſelf to her Es You are 
not inſenſible, Sir, by the Cr 


edit J have hitherto 
reſerved in the World, of my Ability, by God's 
Blefüing, to make her happy: And this the rather 
imboldens me to requeſt the Favour of an Even- 
ing's Converſation with you, at your firſt Con- 
venience, when I will more fully explain myſelf, 
as I earneſtly hope, to your Satisfaction, and take 
my Encouragement or Diſcouragement from your 
own Mouth. I am, Sir, mean time, with great 


* Reſpect, 


Your moſt obedient humble Servant. 


LETTER XIV. 


To the Daughter (on the Father's Allowaxce) 
appriſing her of his intended Viſit. 


Mapam, 


HAVE ventured to make known to your 
honoured Father, the great Deſire I have 
to be thought worthy of a Relation to him by 
your Means. And, as he has not diſcouraged 


me in the Hopes I have entertained, that I may 
2 poſſibly be not unacceptable to him, and to all 
your worthy Family, I propoſe to do myſelf 
the Honour of a Viſit to you next Monday. 
3 Tho” he has been ſo good as to promiſe to intro- 
duce me, and I make no doubt has acquainted you 
with it; I give you, nevertheleſs, the Trouble of 
2 theſe Lines, that I might not appear wanting in an 
2 outward Demonſtration of that *nviolable R 
with which J am, dear Madam, 


eſpect, 


Your moſt devoted humble & rt. 
C 2 LE T- 


28 Familiar LETTERS on the 


LET-I ER XV. 


From a young Lady to her Father, acquainting 
him with a Propoſal of Marriage made 10 
Her. 


Honoured Sir, . Nottingham, April 4. 


THINE it my Duty to acquaint you, that a 
Gentleman of this Town, by Name Derham, 
and by Buſineſs a Linen-draper, has made ſome 
Overtures to my Couſin Morgan, in the way of 
Courtſhip to me. My Couſin has brought him 
once or twice into my Company, which he could 
not well decline doing, becauſe he has Dealings 
with him ; and has an high Opinion of him, and 
his Circumſtances, He has been ſet up "Three 
Years, and has very good Buſineſs, and lives in 
Credit and Faſhion. He is about Twenty- ſeven 
Years old, and a likely Man enough : He ſeems 
not to want Senſe or Manners ; and is come of a 
good Family. He has broke his Mind to me, and 
boaſts how well he can maintain me: But, I aſſure 
you, Sir, I have given him no Encouragement ; 
and told him, that I had no Thoughts of changing 
my Condition, yet awhile; and ſhould never think 
of it but in Obedience to my Parents ; and I de- 
ſired him to talk no more on that Subject to me. 
Vet he reſolves to perſevere, and pretends extra- 
ordinary Affection and Eſteem. I would not, Sir, 
by any means, omit to acquaint you with the Be- 
ginnings of an Affair, that would be want of Duty 
in me to conceal from you, and ſhew a Guilt and 
Diſobedience unworthy of the kind Indulgence and 
Affection you have always ſhewn to, Sir, 


Your meſt dutiful Daughter. 
5 | My þ 


— — — 


, Kea be . x 
o * 2 - 
2 4 2 - FRF . _ > -. 4 9 W 
#4 a4 F e $7 2 „ i 


2 n 
1 


My humble Duty to my honour'd Mother, 
ve to my Brother and Siſter ; and Reſpects 

to all Friends. Couſin Morgan, and his Wife 
and Siſter deſire their kind Reſpects. I can- 


not ſpeak enough of their Civility to me. 


LETTER XVI. 


The Tather's Anſwer, on a Suppoſition that he 
approves not of the young Man's Addreſſes. 


WW 


Dear Pally, Northampton, Apr. 10. 
1 HAVE received your Letter dated the 4th 


Inftant, wherein you acquaint me of the Pro- 
poſals made to you, thro* your Couſin Morgan's 


Recommendation, by one Mr. Derham. I hope, 


as you aſſure me, that you have given no Encou- 
ragement to him: For I by no means approve of 
him for your Huſband. I have inquired of one 
of his Townſmen, who knows him and his Cir- 
cumſtances very well; and I am neither pleaſed 
with them, nor with his Character; and wonder 
my Couſin would ſo inconſiderately recommend 
him to you. Indeed, I doubt not Mr. Morgan's good 
Intentions; but J inſiſt upon it, that you think 
nothing of the Matter, if you would oblige 


Your indulgent Father, 


Your Mother gives her Blefling to you, and 
joins with me in the above Advice. Your 
Brother and Siſter, and all Friends, fend their 
Love and Reſpects to you. 


moſt Important Occaſions. 29 


9 — — - 2 — def 
” - —0oOD LR * 


30 Familiar LETTERS o the 


LETTER XVI. 
The Father's Anſwer, on a Suppoſition that hz 


does not diſapprove of the young Man's Ad- 
dreſſes. 


My dear Daughter, Northampt. Apr. 10. 


1 N Anſwer to yours of the 4th Inſtant, relating 

to the Addreſſes of Mr. Derham, I would have 
you neither wholly encourage nor diſcourage his 
Suit; for if, on Inquiry into his Character and 
Circumſtances, I ſhall find that they are anſwer- 
able to your Couſin's good Opinion of them, and 
his own Aſſurances, I know not but his Suit 
may be worthy of Attention. But, my Dear, 
conſider, that Men are deceitful, and always put 
the beſt Side outwards; and it may pofſhbly, on 
the ſtrict Inquiry, which the Nature and Impor- 
tance of the Caſe demands, come out far other- 
wiſe than it at preſent appears. Let me adviſe you 
therefore, to act in this Matter with great Pru- | 
dence, and that you make not yourſelf too cheap ; 
for Men are apt to flight what is too eaſily obtain- 
ed. Your Couſin will give him Hope enough, 
while you don't abſolutely deny him ; and in the 


mean time, he may be told, that you are not at 


your own Diſpoſal ; but intirely reſolved to abide 
by my Determination and Direction, in an Affair“ 
of this great Importance: And this will put him! 
upon applying to me, who, you need not doubt, 
will in this Caſe, as in all others, ſtudy your Good; 
as becomes b | 

Nour indulgent Father. 


Your Mother gives her Bleſſing to you, and 
joins with me in the above Advice. Your 
Brother and Sifter, and all Friends, ſend their 


Love and Reſpects to you. f 
̃ Pe i LET. 


moſt Important Occaſions, 27 


LETTER XVIII. 


The young Gentleman's Letter to the Father, 
appriſing him of his Affection for bis Daugi- 
ter. 


Sir, Northampton, April 12. 


* I TAKE the Liberty, tho” perſonally unknown 
1 to you, to declare the Front Value and Affection 

| ? { have for your worthy Daughter, whom I have 
had the Honour to ſec at my good Friend Mr. 
Morgan's. I ſhould think myſelf intirely un- 
worthy of her Favour, and of your Approbation, 

if I could have a Thought of influencing her Re- 

\ ſolution but in Obedience to your Pleaſure ; as] 

* ſhould, on ſuch a Suppoſition, offer an Injury like- 

| wiſe to that Prudence in her/e/f, which I flatter 
myſelf, is not the leaſt of her amiable Perfections. 
If I might have the Honour of your Countenance, 

| Sir, on this Occaſion, I would open myſelf and 
- Circumſtances to you, in that frank and honeſt 
manner which ſhould convince you of the Sincerity 
of my Affection for your Daughter, and at the 
: fame time of the Honourableneſs of my Intentions, 
In the mean time, I will in general fay, That I 
3 have been ſet up in my Buſineſs in the Linen- 
drapery way, upwards of Three Years; that I 
baue a very good Trade for the Time: That I had 
1000 J. to begin with, which I have improved to 
1500 J. as I am ready to make appear to your Satiſ- 
faction : That I am deſcended of a creditable Fa- 
mily; have done nothing to ſtain my Character; 
and that my Trade is ſtill further improveable, as 
1 ſhall, I hope, inlarge my Bottom. This, Sir, 
Il | thought but honeſt and 2 to acquaint you with, 
| 4 tha 


nne AS. IE. 25; ett 


r ao 


32 Familiar LETTERS on the 


that you might know ſomething of a Perſon, who 
ſucs to you for your Countenance, and that of 
your good Lady, in an Affair that J hope may 
prove one Day the greateſt Happineſs of my Life; 
us it ut be, if I can be bleſſed with that, an! 
your dear Daughter's Approbation. In Hope of 
which, and the Favour of a Line, I take the Li- 
berty to ſubſcribe myſelf, Good Sir, 


Your moſt obedient humble Servant, 


LETTER N. 


From the Couſin to the Father and Mother, 
in Commendation of the young Gentleman, 


Dear Couſins, Northampton, Apr. 12. 


T GIVE you both Thanks for ſo long continu- 
ing with us the Pleaſure of Couſin Polly's Com- 
pany. She has intirely captivated a worthy Friend 
of mine, Mr. Derham, a Linen-draper of this 
Town. And JI would have acquainted you with 
it myſelf, but that I knew and adviſed Couſin 
Polly to write to you about it; for I would not for 
the world any thing of this ſort ſhould be carried 
on unknown to you, at my Houſe, eſpecially. 
Mr. Derham has Gown me his Letter to you; and 
I believe every Tittle of it to be true; and really: 
if you and my Couſin approve it, as alſo Couſin 
Polly, I don't know where ſhe can do better, I 
am ſure I ſhould think fo, if I had a Daughter 
he could love, | 
Thus much I thought myſelf obliged to fay-; and 
with my kind Love to your other Self, and all my 
Couſins, as alſo my ife's, and Siſter's, I remain 


Your affectionate Couſin. 
LE T- 


moſt Important Occaſions, 33 


LETTER. XY. 


From the Father, in Anſwer to the young Gen- 
tleman. 


Sir, Nottingham, April 16. 


1 AVE received yours of the 12th, and am 
obliged to you for the good Opinion you expreſs 
of my Daughter. But I think ſhe is yet full young 
to alter her Condition, and imbark in the Cares of 
a Family, I cannot but ſay, that the Account you 
give of yourſelf, and your Application to me, ra- 
ther than firſt to try to engage the Affections of 
my Daughter, carry a very honourable Appearance, 
and ſuch as muſt be to the Advantage of your Cha- 
racter. As to your Beginning, Sir, that is not to 
be fo much looked upon, as the Inprovement; 
and I doubt not, that you can make good Proof 
of what you aſſert on this Occaſion. But ftill I 
| muſt needs ſay, that IT think, and fo does her Mo- 
ther, that it is too early to incumber her with the 
Cares of the World; and as I am ſure ſhe will do 
nothing in ſo important an Affair without our Ad- 
| vice, ſo I would not, for the world, in a Caſe fo 
nearly concerning her, and her future Welfare, con- 
ſtrain her in the leaſt. Tintend ſhortly to ſend for her 
: | | home; for ſhe has been longer abſent from us, than we 
intended; and then I ſhall conſult her Inclinations; 
and you will excuſe me to ſay, for the is my 
| Daughter, and a very good Child, tho? I ſay it, 
4 þ that I ſhall then determine myſelf by that, and by 
1 what ſhall appear to offer moſt for her Good. In 
tze mean time, Sir, I thank you for the Civility 
; and commendable Openneſs of yours ; and am, 


] | Your humble Servant. 
C5 The 


34 Familiar LETTERS on the 


The Father in this Letter referring pretty much 
to the Daughter's Choice, the young Gentle- 
man cannot but conſtrue it as an Encourage- 
ment to him, to proſecute his Addreſſes to 
her ; in which he doubles his Diligence, (on 
the Hint, that ſhe will ſoon return to Not- 
tinzham) in order to gain a Footing in her 

ood Will; and ſhe, finding her Father and 
Mother not averſe to the Affair, ventures to 
| give him ſome room to think his Addreſſes not 

vi indifferent to her ; but ſtill altogether on Con- 

\Ff dition of her Parents Conſent and Approba- 

tion, By the Time then, that ſhe is recalled 
home, (nothing difagreeable having appeared 
. in the young Gentleman's Behaviour, and his 
| general Character being conſiſtent with his 

Ii Pretenſions) there may be ſuppoſed ſome De- 

if reeof Familiarity and Confidence to have paſs'd 

tween them; and ſhe gives him Hope, that 
ſhe will receive a Letter from him, tho” ſhe 
| will not promiſe an Anſwer ; intirely refer- 

[ih ring to her Duty to her Parents, and their 

good Pleaſure. He attends her on her Jour- 

ney a good Part of the way, as far as ſhe will 
permit ; and when her Coufin, his Friend, | 

"A informs him of her ſafe Arrival at Nottingham, | 

| he ſends the following Letter. | 
| 
| 


- © — * — - - _— 
? A4q. as OO. a 


LE T- 


moſt Important Occaſions, 35 


LETTER III. 


From the young Gentleman to his Miſtreſ on 
ber Arrival at her Father's. 


Dear Madam, May 25. 


I HAVE underſtood with great Pleaſure your 
ſafe Arrival at your Father's Houſe ; of which 
I take the Liberty to congratulate your good Parents, 
as well as your dear Self. I will not, Madam, fill 
chis Letter with the Regret I had to part with you, 
becauſe I have no Reaſon nor Merit, at preſent, to 
expect that you ſhould be concerned for me on 
this Score, Vet, Madam, I am not without Hope, 
from the Sincerity of my Affection for you, and the 

| Honeſty of my Intentions, to deſerve in time, 
» thoſe Regards which I cannot at preſent flatter my- 
ſelf with. As your good Father, in his kind Let- 
ter to me, aſſured me, that he ſhould conſult your 
: Inclinations, and determine by them, and by what 

: ſhould offer moſt for your Good; how happy 

* ſhould I be, if I could find my humble Suit not quite 
indifferent to your dear Self, and not rejected 
by Him! If what I have already opened to him 
as to my Circumſtances, be not unacceptable, I 
ſhould humbly hope for Leave to pay you and him 
A2 a Viſitat Nottingham ; or if this be too great a 
Flavour, till he has made further Enquiry, that he 
would be pleaſed to give himſelf that Trouble, and 
put it in my Power, as ſoon as poſſible, to con- 
vince him of the Truth of my Allegations, upon 
Which I deſire to ſtand or fall in my Hopes of your 
Favour and his. For I think, far different from 
many in the World, that a Deception in an Affair 

; | of this weighty Nature, ſhould be leſs forgiven than 
in any other. Since then, deareſt Madam, I build 

1 C 6 my 


8 aching — aa 
— Pr — ‚——ͤ — OP 
* a . 


36 Familiar LET T ERS on the 


my Hopes more on the Truth of my Aﬀection for 
you, and the Honour of my Intentions, than any 


Other Merit, or Pretenſions, I hope you will con- 


deſcend, if not to become an Advocate for me, 
which would be too great a Preſumption to expect, 
yet to let your good Parents know, that you have 
no Averſion to the Perſon or Addreſs of, deareſt 
Madam, 
4 Yeur for ever-obliged, and 
aſfectionate humble Servant, 


My beſt Reſpects grand your good Father ar 
other, and whole Family. 


As this puts the Matter into ſuch a Train, as 
may render more Writing unneceſſary; the 
next Steps to be taken, being the Inquiry in- 
to the Truth of the young Man's Aſſertions, 
and a Confirmation of his Character; and 
then the Propoſals on the Father's Part of 
what he will give with his Daughter; all 
which may be done beſt by word of Mouth, 
or Interpoſition of Friends; ſo we ſhall have 
no Occaſion to purſue this Inſtance of Court- 
ſhip further. 


8 _— * _ IS —_—— — 


LETTER XXIL 


From a Brother to his Siſter in the Country, up- 
' braiding ber for being negligent in Writing. 


Ay dear Siſter, 
T WRITE to you to acquaint you how un- 
kindly we all take it here, that you do not 


write oftener to us, in relation to your Health, 


Diverſions, and Employment in the Country. 
8 | | You 


moſt Important Occaſions. 37 


You cannot be inſenſible how much you are beloved 
by us all ; judge then if you do right to omit giving 


us the only Satisfaction Abſence affords to true 


Friends, which is often to hear from one another. 
My Mother is highly diſobliged with you, and ſays 
you are a very idle Girl; my Aunt is of the ſame 
Opinion ; and I would fain, like a loving Brother, 
excuſe you, if I could. Pray, for the future, take 
Care to deſerve a better Character, and by writing 
ſoon, and often, put it in my Power to ſay what a 
good Siſter I have: For you ſhall always find me 


Your moſt asfectionate Brother. 


Due Reſpects of every one here to my Aunt, 
and all Friends in the Country. 


LETTER XXIII. 
In Anfwer to the preceding. 


Dear Brother, 


5 Me ST wag and too juſtly, do you up- 
| braid me. 


own my Fault, and never will 


be guilty of the like again, I write to beg my 
Mother's Pardon, and that ſhe will procure for 
me that of my good Aunt, on Promiſe of Amend- 
ment. Continue, my dear Brother, to be an Ad- 
vocate for me in all my unintended Imperfections, 
and I will never err voluntarily for the future: 
That ſo I may be as worthy as poſſible of your 
Find Conſtructions, and ſhew myſelf, what I truly 
am, and ever will be, 


Your moſt aſfectionate and obliged Sifter, 


LET- 


38 Familiar LETTERS on the 


LETTER XXIV. 


From the Daughter io ber Mother, in Excuſe 
for her Neglect. 
Honoured Madam, 


AM aſhamed I ſtaid to be reminded of my Duty 
by my Brother's kind Letter, I will offer no Ex- 
cuſe for myſelf, for not writing oftener, tho” I have 
been ſtrangely taken up by the Kindneſs and Fa- 
vour of your good Friends here, particularly my 
Aunt Vindus: For well do I know, that my Duty 
to my honoured Mother, ought to take place of all 
other Conſiderations. All I beg therefore is, that 
you will be ſo good to forgive me, on Promiſe of 
Amendment, and to procure Forgiveneſs alſo of 
my Aunt Talbot, and all Friends. Believe me, 
Madam, when I fay, that no Diverſions here or 
elſewhere ſhall make me forget the Duty I owe to 
ſo good a Mother, and ſuch kind Relations ; and 
that I ſhall ever be 
Your gratefully dutiful Daughter, 
My Aunt and Couſins deſire their kind Love 
to you, and due Reſpects to all Friends. 
Brother John has great Reputation with 
every one for his kind Letter to me. | 


_—_—. 


LETTER NV. 
From a Son-in- Law io his Wife's Fatber, ac- | 
_ quainting bim with his Wife's Illneſs. 
Honoured Sir, 


1 AM ſorry to acquaint you with the Indiſpo- ? 
ſition of your dear Daughter. She was taken | 


_ — 


ill laſt Monday of a Fever, and bas all the Aſſiſt- 


ance 


. 


* 
1 


moſt Important Occaſions. 39 


ance that we can procure in theſe Parts. I hope 


' ſhe is not in Danger. However, I thought it my 


Duty to let you know it in time, that you may 


| fatisfy yourſelf, that no Care is wanting; and that 


you may fayour us with a perſonal Viſit ; which 


will be a great Conſolation to her, who craves, 
mean time, your Bleſſing and Prayers; and alſo to, 


Sir, 


Your dutiful Son, 


This may ſerve, mutatis mutandis, in the like 
Circumſtance for a Daughter to her Huſ- 
band's Father, or Mother, and in ſeveral 
other intimate Relations, 


- 


* 
1 "OM _ 3 * 1 


LETTER XXVL 


From a Country Chapman beginning Trade, to 


2 
— 
I 
* 
0 


;3 
| 


% 
5 


£ 
2 
" 


| 
; 
| 


of 
: 


a City Dealer, offering his Correſpondence. 
SI X, Mancheſter, Oct. 20. 


"F- HE Time of my Apprenticefhip, with Mr. 


Dobbins of this Town, being expired, I am 
juſt going to begin for myſelf in Cheſter field, havin 
taken a Shop there for that Purpoſe. And as 


know the Satisfaction you always | mhe to my 


Mafter in your Dealings, I make an Offer to you of 


my Correſpondence, in Expectation that you will 


uſe me as well as you have done him, in whatever 
I may write to you for. And this I the rather ex- 
pect, as you cannot difoblige Mr, Dobbins by it, be- 


| cauſe of the Diſtance I ſhall be from him; and I 


: 


FS 


hall endeavour to give you equal Content with 
regard to my Payments, Sc. Your ſpeedy Anſwer, 
whether or no you are diſpoſed to accept of my 
Your humble Servant. | 


Offer, will oblige, 


— e 


— — — 


——— — 3 — 


r 


— — 3 TS. 
- — Co. AY. DAS. +. — —— 
— — * . _—_—_ _ 


40 Familiar LETTERS on the 


7 LETTER XXVII. 
In Anſwer to the foregoing. 


S 1 R, 
1 HAVE received yours of Octeber 20. and 


very chearfully accept the Favour you offer me, 
J will take Care to ſerve you in the beſt manner 
I am able, and on the ſame foot with Mr, Dobbins ; 
not doubting you will make as punctual Returns 
as he does ; which intitles him to a more favour- 
able Uſage, than could otherwiſe be afforded, I 
wiſh you Succeſs with all my Heart, and am 


Your obliged Servant. 


LETTER XXVIII. 


From a Maid-ſervant in Town, acquainting her 
Father and Mother inthe Country, with a Pro- 


poſal of Marriage, and aſking their Conſents, 


Honoured Father and Mother, 


1 Think it my Duty to acquaint you, that I am 
addreſſed to for a Change of Condition, by 
one Mr, Fohn Tanner, who is a Glazier, and 
lives in the Neighbourhood by us. He is a young 
Man of a ſober Character, and has been ſet up 
about two Years, has good Buſineſs for his Time, Þ 
and is well beloved and ſpoken of by every one. 
My Friends here think well of it, particularly 
my Maſter and Miſtreſs ; and, he fays, he doubts 
not, by God's Bleſſing on his 128 to main- 
tain a Family very prettily: And I have fairly 
told him, how little he has to expect with * 
ut 


——— — ——_——— 


moſt Important Occaſions, 41 


But T would not conclude on any thing, how- 
ever, till I had acquainted you with his Propoſals, 
and aſked your Bleſſings and Conſents, For I am, 
and ever will be, ; 


Your dutiſul Daughter, 


LET TEN K. 
From the Parents, in Anſwer to the preceding. 


Dear Nanny, 


WE have received your dutiful Letter. We can 
only pray to Gad to direct and bleſs you in all 
; your Engagements. Our Diſtance from you, 
muſt make us leave every thing to your own Diſ- 
cretion ; and as you are ſo well ſatisfied in Mr. 
Tanner's Character, as well as all Friends, and 
your Maſter and Miſtreſs, we give our Bleflings 
and Conſents with all our Hearts: We are only 
ſorry we can do no more for you. But let us know 
When it is done, and we will do ſome little 
Matters, as far as we' are able, towards Houſe- 
keeping. Our Reſpects to Mr. Tanner, Every 
body joins with us in Wiſhes for your Happineſs ; | 
and may God bleſs you, is all that can be ſaid, by 4 


p Your truly loving Father and Mather, 
id 4 | 

«| LBTTER. XXX... 

P From the ſame, acquainting her Parents with 
_ 4 ' 


„ . her Marriage. 
ly kt Honoured Father and Mother, 
n- 1 Write to acquaint you, that laſt Thurſday I | 
: was married to Mr. Tanner, and am to go . 
1c, home to him in a Fortnight. My Maſter and 


zut ; _ Miſtreſs 


I 22 —uĩ—n88—8 . TICS. rr rere. 


42 Familiar LRT T ERS on the 


Miſtreſs have been very kind, and have made me 
a Preſent towards Houſekeeping of Three Guineas, 
J had faved Twenty Pounds in Service, and that is 
all. I told him the naked Truth of every thing. 
And indeed did not intend to marry ſo ſoon ; but 
when I had your Letter, and ſhew'd it him, he 
would not let me reſt till it was done. Pray don't 
ſtraiten your ſelves out of Love to me. He joins 
with me in ſaying ſo, and bids me preſent his 
Duty to you, and tell you, that he fears not to 
maintain me very well. I have no Reaſon to 
doubt of being very happy. And your Prayers for 
a Blefling on both our Induſtry, will, I hope, be a 
Means to make us more ſo. We are, and ever 


ſhall be, with Reſpects to all Friends, 
Your moſt dutiful Son and Daughter, 


— — * 


LETTER XXXI. 
Recommending a Superior Man- Servant. 


l | 
Wh HE Bearer of this is Mr. John Andrews, 


140% whom I mentioned to you laſt time I ſaw 
10 you; and for whoſe Integrity and Ability to ſerve 

0 you in the Way you talked of, I dare be anſwer- 
able. I take the greater Pleaſure in this Recom- 
th mendation, as I doubt not it will be of Service to 
. you both. And am, Sir, 


Your maſt obedient Servant. 


— — — - 


— — —_—— —— — N ——— 
2 - * —— — — oy . — * — & a 
. — 5 as ca — - — — —— 


— — — ——— — 


— — FEY 
AP — * 


1 
1 LE T- 
T;108 
21% 


— 


moſt Important Occaſions, 43 


LETTER XXXII. 
Recommending a Wet-Nurſe. 


MADAM. 


1 TH Bearer is Mrs. Newman, whom I recom- 
nz mended to you as a Nurſe for Maſter. You 
will be pleaſed with her neat Appearance and 
= wholeſome Countenance. She lives juſt above 
Want, in a pleaſant airy Place, and has a very 
- © honeſt diligent Huſband, with whom ſhe lives very 
| # happily, and the Man is exceedingly fond of Chil- 
dren, very fober, and good-humour'd ; and they 
have every thing very pretty about them, You 
will find ſuch Anſwers to the Queſtions that ſhall 
be put to her, as will pleaſe you in every reſpect 
that you mentioned to me; and the Woman will 
| not tell an Untruth, or impoſe upon you. In a word, 
I know not a more proper Perſon, and am glad I have 
this Opportunity to oblige you in ſo deſerved a Re- 
commendation: For I am, dear Madam, 


Your maſt faithful Servant. | 


n l ah 


0 


1 

e LETTER XXXIII. 

— Recommending a Cook-maid, 

0 | 
Mapa, 

. you defired me to inquire for a Maid, who was f 
I qualified to ſerve you as a Cook. The Bearer ö 


lived three Vears in her laſt Place, and went away 
to her Friends in the Country, on a Fit of Illneſs, 
of which ſhe is now perfectly recovered, As ſhe had N 
5 given 


= ee ee eee i ee ee ES = 


44 Familiar LETTERS on the 


given no Hopes of Return, they had provided them- 
ſelves when ſhe offered her Service again. The 
give her a very good Character, as well for Honeſty 
and Sobriety, as for her orderly Behaviour, and 
obliging Temper, as alſo for her good Performance 
of what ſhe undertakes, I therefore thought you 
could not wiſh for a properer Perſon ; and fhal! 
be glad it proves ſo. For IJ am, Madam, 


Your moſt obedient Servant, 


LETTER XXIV. 


Recommending a Chamber-maid. 


} 


Map, 


TI E Bearer, Jane Adams, is well recommended 

to me as a diligent, faithful Body, who un- 
derſtands her Needle well; is very neat, and 
houſewifely ; and, as you defired, no Goſſip or 
Make-bate, and has had a tolerable Education, 
being deſcended from good Friends. I make no 
doubt of her anſwering this Character. Of which 
J will fatisfy you farther, when I have the Honour 
to ſee you, Till when I remain 


Your msft obedient humble Servant. 


1 a — 


—_—— 


LETTER XXXV. 


| Recommending a Nurſery-maid. 


Mapanm, 


THE Bearer, Sarah Williams, is a houſewitcly | 
1 genteel Body, who has been uſed to attend 
Children, and has a great Tenderneſs for 2 

c 


— — ee ene tonne 
— — — äʒw—— — — — ns — — 


? moſt Important Occaſions. 45 


| She is very careful and watchful over them in all 
their little pretty ways, and is a very proper Per- 
ſon to encourage their good Inclinations, or mild] 
to check their little Perverſeneſſes, ſo far as you 
2 ſhall permit her to do the one or the other. She is 
come of good Friends, who have had Misfortunes 
is very honeſt, and will, I dare fay, pleaſe you 
much, if you are not provided; which, I hope, 
| you are not, for both your ſakes ; for I love the 
+ Girl, and am, with great Reſpect, Madam, 


4 Your obliged humble Servant. 


— 


LETTER I. 


A Father to a Son, to diſſuade him from ths 
Vice of Drinking to Exceſs. 
2 


My dear Son, 


IT is with a Grief proportioned to my Love, 
which is extreme, that I underſtand you have 
of late neglected your Studies, and given yourſelf 
up to the odious Vice of Drinking: What ſhall 
I fay, what ſhall I do, to engage you to quit this 
pernicious Practice, before it becomes ſuch.a Habit, 
that it will be impoſſible, or at leaſt very difficult, 
4 . you to caſt it off? Let me require, let me in- 
treat you, to give a ſuitable Attention to what I 
have to ſay on this Head, which I ſhall offer rather 
is a warm Friend, than an angry Father; and as 
1 addreſs myſelf to your Reaſon, I will leave it to 
Fourſelf to judge of the Truth of the Obſervations 
have to make to you. 


IJ 


os » 
2? 


- 


In the firſt place, with reſpe&t to Health, the 
1d reateſt Jewel of this Life, it is the moſt deſtructive 
7 4 all Vices: Ajtoma's, Vertigoes, Palfies, Abo- 
| 


plexes, 


46 Familiar LRT TE RS on the 


plexies, Gouts, Colicks, Fevers, Dropfies, Con- 
ſumptions, Stone, and Hypochondriack Diſeaſes, are 
naturally introduced by e::ceflive Drinking. 

All the reſt of the Vices together, are not ſo 
often puniſhed with ſudden Death as this one : 
What fatal Accidents, what Quarrels, what 
Breaches between Friend and Friend, are owing 
to it ? 

Then, in the ſecond Place; How does it de- 
face Reaſon, deſtroy all the tender Impulſes of 
Nature, make a wiſe Man a Fool, and ſubject 
Perſons of the brighteſt Parts to the Contempt of 
the weakeſt, and even, in time, extinguiſh thoſe 
ſhining Qualities, which conſtitute the Difference 
between a Man of Senſe and a Blockhead ? For, 
as a certain very eminent Author well obſerves, 1 
Fools having generally ſtronger Nerves, and leſs Þ} 
volatile Spirits, than Men of fine Underſtandings, f 
that which will rouſe the one, will make the othe 1 
either ſtupid or frantick; and tho” it ſometimes, wh: ' 
the Fit continues, ſtrengthens the Imagination, 
5 it always depreſſes the Judgment; and after the 

it is over, both thoſe Faculties languiſh together, 
till, in time, it quenches the Imagination, impairs 
the Memory, and drowns the Judgment. 

Moſt other Vices are compatible, as the ſame 
Author obferves, with ſeveral Virtues; but Drun- Þ 
kenneſs runs counter to all the Duties of Life. A F 
great Drinker can hardly be either a good Huſband, 6 
a good Father, a good Son, a good Brother, or 2 
good Friend: It lays him open to the worſt Com 0 
pany, and this Company frequently ſubjects him A 
to lewd Women, Gaming, Quarrels, Riots, and 
often Murders. All other Vices, even the greateſt 
of Vices, as Ambition, Unchaſtity, Bigotry, . 
Avarice, Hypocriſy, deteſt this unnatural and worſe , 
than beaſtly Vice; for the Beaſts themſelves, Þ* 


even 


F moſt Important Occaſions. 47 


even the uncleaneſt of them, know nothing of it, 
much leſs practiſe it. 
þ Other Vices indeed make Men worſe, ſays this 
judicious Author; but this alters Men from them- 
/clver, to that degree, that they differ not more 
from their preſent Companions, than from their 
»mer Selves. A Habitude of it will make the 
prudent inconſiderate, the Ambitious indolent, 
the Active idle, and the Induſtrious flothful ; fo 
that their Affairs are ruin'd for want of Applica- 
tion, or by being intruſted in the Hands of thoſe, 
ho turn them wholly to their own Advantage, 
and, in the End, to the Ruin of thoſe who employ 
them. , 

I have written a long Letter already: Yet have I 
ſtill mere to ſay, which, that I may not tire you, 1 
will leave to another Letter ; which the next Poſt 
mall bring you. And J am, mean time, in hopes 

this will not loſe its proper Effect, 


, 


Your moft indulgent Father, 


LETTER XXVII. 
The ſame Subject purſued, 


My dear Son, 
| BY my former you will ſee, that hard Drinking 
is a Vice, that breaks a Man's Reſt, impairs the 
Underſtanding, extinguiſhes the Memory, inflames 
the Paſſions, debauches the Will, lays the Founda- 
tion of the worſt and moſt dangerous n in- 
om a Perſon from purſuing his Studies, and 
Jom applying to the Duties of his Calling, be it 
Phat it will; begets Contempt from the World ; 
= d even if a Man's Circumſtances were above 
Feling the Expence, which can hardly be, alters 
1 38 


48 Familiar LETTERS on the 


and changes the Practiſer of it from himſelf ; and | 
if he is not above feeling it, often reduces him 0 f 


Want and Beggary : And if he has a Family, hiz 
Children, who by then Father's Induſtry and 


Sobriety might have made a creditable Figure in . 


Life, are left to the Mercy of the World, become 
the Outcaſts of the Earth; poſſibly Foot-ſoldier, 
Livery-ſervants, Shoe-cleaners, Link-boys, and, 
perhaps, Pickpockets, Highwaymen, or Foot 
pads; and inſtcaJ of a comfortable Livelihood, an: 


a Station above Contempt, are intitled only i Þ* 


Shame, Miſery, and the Gallows. 


And do you judge, my Son, how a Man can 


anſwer this Conduct to God, to his Parents and 
other Relations, to his Wife, to his Children, to 


himſelf, and perſiſt in a barbarous and an unnatural Þ - 
Vice, which makes himſelf not only miſerable ani Þ 
contemptible, but tranſmits the Miſchief to his Þ* 


unhappy and innocent Children, if he has any. 
Add to all this, That it is a Vice a Man cannot 
eaſily maſter and ſubdue ; or which, like ſome 
others, may be cured by Ape ; but it is a Vice 
that feeds and nouriſhes itſelf by Practice, and 
grows upon a Man as he lives longer in the World, 
till at laſt, if it cuts him not off in the Flower 
of his Days, his Body expeQts and requires Liquor: 
And ſo, tho” a Man, when he enters upon it, 


: 
| 


may be ſingle, yet if he ever ſhould marry, it 
may he attended with all the frightful and de-! 


plorable Conſequences I have mentioned, and ruin 


beſides an innocent and perhaps prudent Woman, þ 


rendering her, without her own Fault, the joint 
unhappy Cauſe of adding to the Number of the 
miſerable and . 


hildren, with which the! 


* 
5 
* 


* 
x 
"x 


World too much abounds, and which is owing, to Þ 
nothing ſo much as this deteſtable Sin in thc 


Con- 


Parents. 


the World; and in 


moſt Important Occaſions, 49 


Conſider all theſe things, my dear Son, and be- 


fore it be too late, get the better of a Vice, that 


you will find difficult to ſubdue, when it is grown 
to a Head, and whic' will otherwiſe creep upon 
you every Day more and more, till it ſhuts up your 
Life in Miſery as to pre and Contempt as to 
ead of giving Cauſe even to 

our neareſt and beſt Friends to remember you with 
leaſure, will make it a Kindneſs in them to 


forget they ever had in the World, if a Parent, 


ſucha Son; if a Tutor, ſuch a Pupil ; if a Brother 


Wife, ſuch a Huſband ; if a Child, ſuch a Father; 
and if a Friend, ſuch a wretched one, that cannot 


1 
or Siter, ſuch an unhappy near Relation; if a 
| 


be thought of without Pity and Regret, for having 


[7 ſhortened his Days, and ruin'd his Affairs, by fo 


4 * * . 

* pernicious a Habit. 
B 

1 


"4 
e 


. . 


1 


* _ 
n 


What a Joy, on the contrary, will that nobleſt 
of Conqueſts, over you , yield to all thoſe dear 
Relations! And, in particular, what Pleaſure will 

you give to the aged Heart, and declining Days, 
of, my dear Child, | 


Your indulgent and maſt affeftionate Father ! 


* 
I 


—— 
A 6E — 


| ELETLERXXXYHUL 
From an Apprentice to his Maſter, begging Fore 
giveneſs for a great Miſdemeanor. 


Good Sir, 
AM ſo aſham'd of myſelf for the laſt Occaſion 


{ have given you to be angry with me, after 

my repeated Promiſes of Amendment, that I have 
not the Courage to ſneak to you. I therefore take 
this Method of -begging vou to forgive What is 
| ) paſt ; 


80 Familiar LETTERS 0# the 


paſt ; and let this Letter teſtify againſt me, if ever 
I wilfully or knowingly offend again for the future, 
You have Children of your own. They may 
poſſibly offend ; tho' I hope they never will as ! 
have done, Yet, Sir, would you not wiſh they 
might meet with Pardon if they ſhould, rather 
than Reprobation ? My Making or my Ruin, 
I am ſenſible, lies in your Breaſt. If you will not 
forgive me, ſad will be the Conſequence to me, I 
doubt. If you do, you may ſave a Soul, as wel! 


as a Body from Miſery ; and I hope, Sir, you 


will weigh this with your uſual Goodneſs and Con- 
ſideration. What is paſt I cannot help; but for 
what is to come, I do promiſe, if God gives me 
Health and Power, that my Actions ſhall teſtiſ) 
for me how much I am, good Sir, 


Your repentant and obliged Servant, 


LETTER XIII. 
The Maſter's Anſwer, 


John, 


OUR Letter has affected me ſo much, that! 
am willing once more to paſs overall you hae 
done. ourely I may at laſt depend on theſe your Þ 


ſolemn Aſſurances, and, as I hope, deep Contrition. 


If not, be it as you ſay, and let your Letter teſtify Þ * 


againſt you for your ingrateful Baſeneſs; and for 


me, in my Readineſs (which however ſhall be] | 
the laſt time) to forgive one that has been ſo much Þ 


uſed to promiſe, and ſo little to perform. But! 


hope for better, becauſe I yet wiſh you well; be- 


ing, as you uſe me, 
Yours, or otherwiſ: 


1 

4 

it 

1 
. 


LE I. I 


1 


moſt Important Occaſions. 31 


N 


From an Apprentice to his Friends, in Praiſe of 
his Maſter and Family, 


Honoured Sir, 


| Ion it will be a great Satisfaction to you and 


my dear Mother, to hear that I go on very 


| happily in my Buſineſs ; and my Maſter ſeeing my 


Diligence, puts me forward, and encourages me in 
ſuch a manner, that I have great Delight in it, 
and hope I ſhall anſwer in time your good Wiſhes 
and Expectations, and the Indulgence which you 
have always ſhewn me, There is ſuch good Order 
in the Family, as well on my Miſtreſs's Part as 


my Maſter's, that every Servant, as well as I, 


knows their Duty, and does it with Pleaſure, So 
much Evenneſs, Sedateneſs, and Regularity, is 


| obſerved in all they injoin and expect, that it is 
| impoſſible but it ſhould be fo, My Mafter is an 


honeſt worthy Man; every body ſpeaks well of him. 
My Miſtreſs is a chearful ſweet-temper'd Woman, 


and rather heals Breaches than widens them, And 


the Children, after ſuch Examples, behave to us 
all, like one's own Brothers and Siſters. Who can 


but love ſuch a Family? T wiſh, when it ſhall 
> pleaſe God to put me in ſuch a Station, that T 
may carry myſelf juſt as my Maſter does; and if I 


ſhould ever marry, have juit ſuch a Wife as m 
Miſtreſs : And then, by God's Blefling, I ſhall 


be as happy as they are; and as you, Sir, and my 
dear Mother, have always been. If any thing can 
make me ſtill happier than I am, or continue to 
my preſent Felicity, it will be the Continuance 


D 2 | of 


CU :» % — %% ĩ˙˖—„(— K „%7&ãúu“ 


52 Familiar LETTERS on the 


of yours, and my good Mother's Prayers, for, 
honour'd Sir and Madam, | 


Your ever dutiful Son. 


* 


LE-L-1 EN II. 


Another from an Apprentice, where the Maſter 
is too remiſs in his own Affairs, 


Henoured Sir and Madam, 


Y vv deſire to know how I go on in my Buſi- 


neſs. I muſt needs fay, Very well in the 
main; for my Maſter leaves every thing, in a 
manner, to me. I wiſh he did not, for his own 
ſake. For tho? I hope he will never ſuffer on the 
Account of any wiltul Remiſſneſs or Negligence, 
much leſs want of Fidelity, in me, yet his Affairs 
do not go on ſo well as if he was more in them, 


and leſs at the Tavern. But it becomes not me 


to reflect upon my Maſter, eſpecially as what I 
may write or ſay on this Head, will rather expoſe 
his Failings, than do him Service ; for as it muſ: 
be his Equals that ſhould reprove him, ſo all a 
Servant can obſerve to others will do more Harm 
than Good to him. One Thing is at preſent in 
my own Power; and that is, to double my Dili 
gence, that his Family ſuffer as little as poſſible 
by his Remiſineſs: And another, I hope, by 
God's Grace, wil! be; and that is, to avoid in my- 
ſelf, when my Time comes, thoſe Failings which 
1 ſee ſo blameable in him. And as this will be 
benefiting properly by the Example (for that Bee 
muſt be worſe than a Drone, that cannot drow 
Honey from a bitter as well as a ſweet Flower) 
4 it will give you the Pleaſure of knowing t 

| you! 


moſt Important Occaſions. 53 


your good Inſtructions are not thrown away upon 
me; and that I am, and ever will be, 


Dur dutiful Son. 


LEZ I ER ALL 


To a Country Correſpondent, modeſtly requeſting 
a Balance of Accounts between them, 


SIX. 


I Find myſelf conſtrained by a preſent Exigence, 
to beg you to balance the Account between us. 
Tho' Matters have run into ſome Length, yet 
would I not have apply'd to you, had I known 
ſo well how to anſwer my preſſing Occaſions an 
other way. If it ſuits you not to pay the Whole, 
I beg, Sir, you will remit me as much towards it 
as you can, without Prejudice to your other Aft- 


fairs, and it will extremely oblige 


Your moft humble Servant 


LETTEX XIII. 
In Anſwer to the preceding. 


. 


1 I AM very glad I have it in my Power to ſend 


| you now directly, One hundred Pounds, on 
Account between us, which I do by our Carrier, 
who will pay you in Specie. I will ſoon remit 
you the Balance of your whole Demand, and am 
only ſorry, that I gave Occaſion for this Applica- 
tion for what is ſo juſtly your Due. When I ſend 
you the reſt, which will be in a few Days, it I 


D 3 | am 


54 Familiar LETTERS on the 


am not greatly diſappointed, I will accompany ir 
with an Order, which will begin a new Debt; but 
which I hope to be more punctual in diſcharging, 
than I have been in the laſt, I am, very ſincerely, 


Dur Friend and Servant. 


LETTER WIV. 


A more preſſing and angry Letter from a Cit) 
Dea er on the ſame Account, 


Ar. Barret, 


A M forry your ill Uſage conſtrains me to write 

to you in the moſt prefling manner. Can you 
think it is poſſible to carry on Buſineſs after the 
manner you act by me? You know what Promiſcs 
you have made me, and how from time to time 
you have broke them. And can I depend upon 
any new ones you make? If you uſe ethers as you 
do me, how can you think of carrying on Buſineſs? 
If you do rot, what muſt I think of a Man who 
deals worſe with me, than he does with any body 
elſe ?---It you think you may treſpaſs more upon 
me, then you can on others, this is a very bad Com- 
liment to my Prudence, or your own Gratitude, 
For ſurely good Uſage ſnould be intitled to good 
Uſage. I know how to allow for Diſappointments 
as well as any Man; but can a Man be diſappoint- 
ed for ever? Trade is fo dependent a thing, you 
know, that it cannot be carried on without mu- 
tual Punctuality. Does not the Merchant expect 
it from me, for thofe very Goods I ſend you ? And 
can I make a Return to him, without receiving it 
from you ? What End can it anſwer to give you 
Two Years Credit, and then be at an Uncertainty, 


for Goods which J ſell at a ſmall Profit, and have 


not 


As b3—ͤä¹»ͤ»¹ es „ 4 


moſt Important Occaſions. 55 


; not Six Months Credit for myſelf? Indeed, Sir, 
this will never do. I muſt be more punctual 
> uſed by you, or elſe muſt deal as little punctually 


with others; and what then muſt be the Conſe- 


quence ?---In ſhort, Sir, I expect a handſome Pay- 


' ment by the next Return, and Security for the 
' Remainder ; and ſhall be very loth to take an 
' harſh Methods to procure this Juſtice to myſelf, 


my Family, and my own Creditors, For I am, 
if it be not your own Fault, 


Your faithful Friend and Servant. 


LETTER XLV. 


In Anſwer io the preceding. 
SIX, 


1 MUST acknowledge I have not uſed you well, 


and can give no better Anſwer to your juſt Ex- 


ä poſtulations, than to ſend you the incloſed Draught 


for 50 J. which you will be pleaſed to carry to 


my Credit; and to aſſure you of more punctual 
Treatment for the future. Vour Letter is no bad 


Leſſon to me; I have conn'd it often, and hope I 
| ſhall improve by it. I am ready to give you my 
| Bond for the Remainder, which I will keep paying 


every Month ſomething till 'tis all diſcharged ; and 


What T write to you for, in the Interim, ſhall be 


paid for on Receipt of the Goods. This, I hope, 


W 3 
r 


Sir, will ſatisfy you for the preſent. If I could do 
better, I would ; but ſhall be ſtreighten'd to do 
this: But I think, in Return for your Patience, I 
cannot do leſs, to convince you, that I am now, 
at laſt, in Earneſt, I beg you'll continue to me 
the ſame good Uſage and Service I have met with 
from you hitherto, And that you'll believe me to 
be, unſeignedly, | | 
Dur odliged humble Servant. 


D 4, LET. 


— — 4 — 


56 Familiar LETTERS o the 


LEER Nil. 


To a young Trader generally in a Hurry in 
Buſineſs, adviſing Method as well as Di- 
gence. | 


Dear Nephew, 
T H E Affection I have always borne you, 28 


well for your own ſake, as for your late Fa- 
ther's and Mother's, makes me give you the Trouble 


of theſe Lines, which 1 hope you will receive as 


kindly as I intend them. 

I have lately call'd upon you ſeveral times, and have 
as often found you in an extraordinary Hurry ; 
which I well know cannot be ſometimes avoided ; 
but, methinks, need not be always the Caſe, if 


your Time were diſpoſed in regular and proper Pro- 


ortions to your Buſineſs, I have frequently had 
Reaſon to believe, that more than half the Flutter 
which appears among Traders in general, is rather 
the Effect of their Indelence, than their Induſtry ; 
however willing they are to have it thought other- 
wiſe ; and I will give you one Tnſtance in Confir- 

mation of this Opinion, in a Ncighbour of mine, 
This Gentleman carried on for ſome Ycars a 
rofitable Buſineſs ; but indulging himſelf every 
5 in a Tavern Society or Club, which the 
Promotion of Buſineſs (as is uſually the Caſe) gave 
the firſt Pretence for, he looked upon thoſe En- 
gagements as the natural Conſequence of the Ap- 
roach of Night; and drove on his Buſineſs in the 
Day with Precipitation, that he might get thither 
with the earlieſt. He ſeldom kept very late Hours, 
tho' he never came home ſoon, The Night being 
gone, and his Bottle empty'd, the Morning was 
always wanted to diſpel the Fumes of the =” 
Q=- 


———— —— OOO OS 


moſt Important Occaſions, 57 


Whoever therefore came to him before Nine, was 
defired to call again; and when he roſe, ſo many 
Matters waited for him, as directly threw him into 
a Flutter ; ſo that from his Riting till Dinner- 
time, he ſeem'd in one continued Ferment, A 
long Dinner-time he always allowed himſelf, in 
order to recover the Fatigues he had undergone 
and all his Table-talk was, How heavy his Buſi- 
neſs lay upon him ! And what Pains he took in it! 
The hearty Meal, and the Time he indulged him- 
ſelf at Table, begot an Inappetency for any more 
Bufineſs ſor that ſhort Afternoon ; fo all that could 
be deferr'd, was put off to the next Morning; and 
loag'd-for Evening approaching, he flics to his uſual 
Solace : Empties his Bottte by Eleven: Comes 
home: Gets to Bed; and is inviſible till next 
Morning at Nine; and then riſing, enters upon 
his uſual Hurry and Confuſion. 

Thus did his Life ſeem to thoſe who faw him in 
his Buſineſs, one conſtant Scene of Fatigue, tho? 
he ſcarce ever apply'd to it Four regular Hours in 
any dne Day. Whereas had he riſen only at Seven 
in the Morning, he would have got all his Buſi- 
nefs under by Noon; and thoſe Two Hours, from 
Seven to Nine, being before many People go abroad, 
he would have met with no Interruption in his 
Affairs; but might have improved his Servants by 
his own Example, directed them in the Buſineſs of 
the Day, have inſpected his Books, written to his 
Dealers, and put every thing in ſo regular a Train, 

| for the reſt of the Day, that whatever had cccurr'd 


| afterwards, would rather have ſerved to divert than 


fatigue him. 

And what, to cut my Story ſhort, was the Up- 
! ſhot of the Matter? Why, meeting with ſome 
; 111 and Loſſes, (as all Traders muſt 
expect, and ought to provide for) and his Cuſtom- 
1 e 1 


— "A 
OC. nu ie III ies —ᷣ—ᷣ- — - 


— — 


58 Familiar T.tTTERS on 1he 


ers not ſeeing him in his Shop ſo much as the 
expected, and when there, always in a diſobliging 
petulant Hurry ; and moreover, Miſtakes frequent- 
ly happening through the Flurry into which he 
put himſelf and every one about him; by theſe 
means his Buſineſs dwindled away inſenſibly, and 
not being able to go out of his uſual Courſe, 
which helped to impair both his Capacity and Ar- 
dor to Buſineſs, his Creditors began to look about 
them, and he was compelled to enter into the 
State of his Affairs; and then had the Mortifica- 
tion to find the Balance of 2000/7. againſt him. 

I his was a ſhocking Caſe to himſelf ; but more 
to his Family ; for his Wife had lived, and his 


Children had been educated, in ſuch a manner, as 


induced them to hope their Fortunes would be 
ſufficient to place them in a State of Independence. 
In ſhort, being obliged to quit a Buſineſs, he had 
managed with fo little Prudence, his Friends got 
him upon a charitable Foundation, which afforded 
him bare Subſiſtence for himſelf, His Children 
were diſperſed ſome one way and ſome another, 
into low Scenes of Life, and his Wife went home 
to her Friends, to be ſnubb'd and reffected on by 
her own Family, for Faults not her own. 
This Example will afford ſeveral good Hints, to 
a young Tradeſman, which are too obvious to need 
expatiating upon, And as I dare fay, your Pru- 
dence will keep you from the like Fault, you will 
never have Reaſon to reproach yourſelf on this 
Score. But yet, as I always found you in a Hurry, 
when I called upon you, I could not but give you 
this Hint, for fear you ſhould not rightly propor- 
tion your Time to your Buſineſs, and leſt you 
ſhould ſuſpend to the next Hour, what you could 
and ought to do in the preſent, and ſo did not 
keep your Buſineſs properly under. Method 1s 
every 


—— — —— — 


moat Important Occaſions. 39 
every thing in Buſineſs, next to Diligence. And 
you will by . into a regular one, always be 
calm and unruffled, and have time to beſtow in. 
your Shop with your Cuſtomers; the Female ones 
eſpecially; who always love to make a great many 
Words in their Bargainings, and expect to be hu- 
mour'd and perfuaded : And how can any Man 
find Time for this, if he prefers the Tavern to his 
Shop, and his Bed to his Buſineſs? I know you will 
take in good Part what I have written, becauſe you 
are ſenſible how much I am 


Your truly affefionate, &c. 


* 


LETTER WLVII. 


From a Son reduced by his own Eutravagance, 
requeſting his Father*s Advice, on his Inten- 
tion to turn Player, 


Honoured Sir, 


A FTER the many Occaſions I have given for 
| your Diſpleaſure, permit me to aſk your Advice 
in an Affair which may render my whole Life com- 
fortable or miſerable. Y ou know, Sir, to what a low 
Ebb my Fofly and Extravaganee have reduced me: 
Your generous Indulgence has made you ſtretch your 
Power, to my Shame I ſpeak it, even beyond the 
Bounds which Wiſdom, and a neceſſary Regartl 
to the reſt of your Family would permit ; there- 
fore, I cannot hope for further Aſſiſtance from you. 
Something, however, I muſt reſolve upon to gain a 
Maintenance: And an Accident fell out Yeſterday, 
| Which offers me, at leaſt, prefent Bread. 

| Mr. Rich, Maſter of one of the "Theatres, hap- 
; pened to dine at my Uncle's when I was there: 
After Dinner, the Subject of Diſcourſe was, the 
| Ts D 6 Art 


— 


* - -— 4 ʒ— 
— Ae. — * 
— 


2 — — — ——— —— yo — 
N — _— 


60 Familiar LETTERS on the 


Art of a Comedian : On which my Uncle tock 
Occaſion to mention the little Flights in that way 
with which I have divertcd myſelf in my gayer 
Moments; and partly compelled me to give an 
Inftance of my Abilities. Mr. Rich was pleaſed to 
declare his Approbation of my Manner and Voice; 
and on being told my Circumſtances, offer'd, at 
once to take me into his Company with an Allow 
ance ſufficient for preſent Subſiſtence, and addi- 
tional Encour:gement, as I ſhould be found to 
deſerve it. Half a Benefit he promiſed me the firſt 
Seaſon; which, by my (otherwiſe too) numerous 
Acquaintaince might, I believe, be turned to pretty 
good Account, I am not fond of this Life; but 
ſee no other Means of ſupporting myſelf like a 
Gentleman. Your ſpeedy Anſwer, will be ever 
gratefully acknowledged by, honoured Sir, 


Your dutiful, tho“ unhappy Son, 


EE TIER XLVBNL. 


The Father's Anfever, ſeiting forth the Incou- 
veniencies and Diſgrace attending the Pro- 


eon of a Player. 
Dear Gilbert, 
SHOULD be glad to have you in any Situa- 


tion, which would aftord you a comfortable and 
reputable Subſiſtence : But cannot think the Life 
of a Stage-player proper for that End. You mult 
conſider, that tho* in the gay Trappings of that 
Employment a Man may reprefent a Gentleman, 
yet none can be farther from that Character it a 
perpetual Dependence be the worſt Kind of ver- 
vility. In the firit Place, the Company you will 
be in a manner obliged to keep, will be ſuch as will 


tend little to the Improvement of your Mind, or 


Amend- 


— 


— © 2 . 1 


moſt Important Occaſions. 6r 
Amendment of your Morals : To the Maſter of 


the Company you lift in, you muſt be obſequious 


to a Degree of Slavery, Not one of an Audience 
that is able to 5%, but you muſt fear; and each 
ſingle Perſon you come to know perſonally, you 
muſt oblige on every Occaſion that offers, to en- 
gage their Intereſt at your Benefit. A Thought 
the moſt ſhocking to a free and generous Mind 
And if to this you add the little Profit that will 
attend making a low Figure on the Stage, and, 
beſides: the Qualifications neceſſary, the incredi- 
ble Fatigue attending the Support of a- good 
Figure upon it; you will eaſily fee, that more 
Credit, more Satisfaction, more Eafe, and more 
Profit, may be got in many other Stations, with- 
out the mortifying Knowledge of being deem'd a 
Vagrant by the Laws of your Country. I hope 
this will be enough to diſſuade you from farther 
Thoughts of the Stage: And, in any other Em- 
ployment, you may, yet, expect ſome ſmall Aſſiſt- 
ance from 


Your loving Father. 


nä 


EELT 1EK ALEC 


To a Brother too captious io bear himſelf the 
Ridicule be practiſes upon others, 


Dear Jack, 


AM glad to find you improve both in Thought 
and Speech. You know I am no Witch at either: 
But ſo as we have ſome Wit in our Family, no 
matter who is at the Trouble of carrying it for 
what he'll get by it. I ſuppoſe you thought to 
give no ſmall Pleaſure to the Company laſt Night 
y your facetious Flings at all around you, not 
EXCepting 


„ 


— — 


— —ů — ; 


62 Familiar LETTERS on the 


excepting the Parſon himſelf : But ſhould you not 
have conſidered, that every one in the Room had 
a Right to return the Freedom you took, in the 
beſt manner he was able? Was it therefore well in 
you to reſent ſo warmly as you did, a fmart Re- 
mark. made by Mr. Criſpe, on a palpable Blunder 
of your own, when you had taken ſo much Liber- 
ty with him, as well as every body elſe, juit before! 

ndeed, Brother, you muſt either lay aſide Ridiculc, 
or learn to bear it better; and in the preſent Caſo 
you ſhould have remember'd, that, in the manner 
you began with that Gentleman, it was not pofii- 
ble for him to ſay any thing it would have been 
your Credit to reſent. A Retort on theſe Occa- 
ſions muſt be excuſed, tho' fraught with Reſent- 
ment; for a Man is not always in a Humour to 
be jeſted with, and it is the Duty of him who be- 
gins, to take what follows, Your failing in this 


. known Rule; whatever yu may think, has made 


you appear in ſo mean a Light to the whole Com- 
pany, that all your Acuteneſs will not in haſte 
atone for it. 

If I judge rightly, nothing is more delicate than 
Ridicule : Where it is conducted with Prudence 
and Humour, it is ſure to pleaſe even the Man 
who is the Subject of it, if he is not of a moroſe 
Temper: But when, inſtead of that, perſonal Fail- 
ings, or private Indiſcretions, are expoſed for the 
Entertainment of a Company, tho' you may think 
to raiſe a Laugh by it in the UnrefleQting, it will 
bring upon you the Cenſure of the Conſiderate. It 
is our Duty to conſult what we can bear ourſelves, 
as well as what we can inffict on others. For m 
own Part, I know I cannot bear what is called a 
cloſe Rub, as many Men can, and for that Reaſon 
I never jeſt with any body, unleſs by way of Re- 
priſal, and that I ſhorten all I can, leſt my Tem- 
per ſhould not hold out. No 


— — 


—ñͤ 4b — 


moſt Important Occaſions, 63 
No doubt but you have more Humour than I; 
* but if you do not blend in it a Quantity of Temper 
* ſufficient to carry it off, you will be no Gainer b 
the Qualification. The Philoſopher ſays, That to 
Bear and Forbear, are the higheſt Points of Wiſ- 
dom: If fo, where is his Wiſdom, who will nei- 
ther do the one or the other? You may not like 
the Freedom I have here taken; but I reſpect you 
too well to paſs over your Foibles without fome 
+ Obſervation ; being 
B Your truly aſfectionate Brother. 


LAT TBN 1. 


To a Friend on his Recovery from a dangerous 
lllneſs. 


Dear Sir, 


G IVE me Leave to mingle my Joy with that 
of all your Friends and Relations, in the Re- 
covery of your Health, and to join with them to 
bleſs God for continuing to your numerous Well 
wiſhers the Benefit of your uſeful and valua- 
ble Life. May God Almighty long preſerve you 
in Health, and profper all your Undertakings, for 
the Good of your worthy Family, and the Pleaſure 
of all your Friends and Acquaintance, is the hearty 
Prayer of, Sir, 

Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, 


LETTER-LL 


ix. On the ſame Occaſion. 
. Good Sir, | 
1 HAVE received with great Delight, the good 
| * News of your Recovery from the dangerous III- 
neſs with which it pleaſed God to afflict you. 1 
moſt 


64 Familiar LETTERS on the 


moſt heartily congratulate you and your good Lady 
and Family upon it; and make it my Prayer, 
TT hat your late Indiſpoſition may be ſucceeded hy 
ſuch a Renewal of Health and Strength both of 
Body and Mind, as may make your Life equally 
happy to yourſelf, as it muſt be to all who have 
the Pleaſure to know you. I could not hciy 
giving you this Trouble, to teſtify the Joy that 
affected my Heart on the Occaſion; and to afture 
ou, that I am, with the greateſt A ſtection and 
Reſpect, Sir, Your faithful humble Servant, 


LE21.6 K-EM, 
In Anfwer to the preceding, 
Dear Sir, | 


GIVE vou many Thanks for your kind Con- 

gratulations. My Return of Health will be 
the greater Pleaſure to me, if I can contribute in 
any meaſure to the Happineſs of my many goed 
Friends ; and, particularly, to that of you and 
yours; for I aſſure you, Sir, that no body can be 
more than I am, Your obliged humble Servant. 


—— 


EETIENX LEE 
To a young Lady, adviſing ber not to change 


her Guardians, nor to cucourage any Cant 


deſtine Addreſs. 


Dear Miſs, 
1 E Friendſhip which long ſubſiſted between 


your prudent Mother and me, has always made 
me attend to your Welfare with more than a com- 
mon 


— — — 
— ———— V— 2 


moſt Important Occaſions. 65 


mon Concern : And I could not conceal my Sur- 
prize at hearing, that you intend to remove the 
| Guardianſhip of yourſelf and Fortune, from the 
Gentlemen to whom your tender Parents commit- 

ted the Direction of both. I am afraid, my Dear, 
your Diflatisfa&tion ariſes more from ſudden Diſ- 
taſte, than from mature Reflection. Mr. Jenes 
and Mr. Pitt were long the intimate Friends and 
Companions of your Father; for more than I hirty 
| Years, he had experienc'd their Candor and Wif- 
dom; and it was their Fitneſs for the Truſt, that 
1duced him to leave you to their Care; and will 
u reflect upon his Judgment? 

They are not leſs wiſe now, than when he 
made his Will; and if they happen to differ from 
our Judgment in any thing of Moment, what 
oom have you to ſuppoſe yourſelf better able to 
judge of the Conſequences of what you deſire, 
than they. I do not undervalue your good Senſe, 
and yet I muſt tell you, that (the Difference of 
Years conſider'd, and their Knowledge of the 
| World, which yet you can know little of) it would 
he ſtrange if they did not know better than you, 
what was proper for you; and their Honeſty was 

never yet diſputed. Upon theſe Conſiderations, 
| who is moſt probably to blame, ſhould you happen 
to diſagree? From ſuch Men, you will never meet 
more Reſtraints than is neceflary for your Happi- 
| neſs and Intereſt ; for nothing that can injure you 
in any reſpect, can add to heir Advantage or Re- 
| putation, I have known ſeveral young Ladies of 
your Age impatient of the leaſt Controul, and 
| think hardly of every little Contradiction; but 
| when, by any unadviſed Step, they have releaſed 
| themſelves, as they call it, from the Care of their 
try'd Friends, how often have they had Caufe to 
| repent their Raſhneſs? How ſeldom do you hear 
N | thoſe 


6) . — on—gre no 3 gy 
* 2 — ve - — + 2 - 


— ——— — — 


66 Familiar LETTERS on the 


thoſe Ladies, who have ſubjected themſelves to 
what ſome reckon the greateſt Reſtraints while 
young, repent the Effects of them when grown up? 

To mention the ſingle Article about which, 
generally, theſe Differences ariſe, that of Marriage: 
What good Fruits can a Lady hope, from the inſidious 
Progreis of a clandeſtine Addreſs? A Man who 
can be worth a Lady's Acceptance, will never 
be aſhamed or afraid to appear openly. If he de- 
ſerves to ſucceed, or is conſcious that he does, 
what need of concealing his Deſigns from her 
Friends? Muſt it not be with a View to get he 
in his Power, and by ſecuring a Place in her At- 
ſections, make her Weakneſs give Strength to % 
Preſumption, and forward thoſe Pretenſions that 
he knew would otherwiſe be rejected with Scorn ? 

Let me tell you, my dear Miſs, that you neither 
want Senſe nor Beauty ; and no young Gentleman 
can be aſhamed of being #nown to love you. Con- 
fider this well, and deſpiſe the Man who ſeeks the 
Aid of back Doors, bribed Servants, and Garden- 
walls, to get Acceſs to your Perſon. If he had 
not a meaner Opinion of your Underſtanding than 
he ought, he would not hope for Succeſs from ſuch 
poor Methods, Let him ſee then, how much he 
is miſtaken, if he thinks you the giddy Girl his 
clandeſtine Conduct ſeems to call you. In time 
adviſe with your try'd Friends. "Truſt no Servant 
with Secrets you would not have known to your 
Equals or Guardians; and be fure ever to ſhun 2 
ſervile Confidant, who generally makes her Mr. 
ket of her Miſtreſs, and ſells her to the higheit 
Bidder, 

T hope, dear Miſs, you will ſeriouſly reflect upon 
all I have ſaid, and excuſe the well-meant Zeal of 


Your ſincere Friend, 


LET- 


— -_ 
OO — — ——ä—ä—j — — — — — — — — 


, moſt Important Occaſions. 67 


BETTEN. 


From a Mother to ber Daughter, jealous of 
her Huſband, 


Dear Bet, 


AM ſorry to find you are grown jealous of your 

Huſband. Tis a moſt uneaſy Paſſion, and will 
be fatal, not only to your preſent Quiet, but to 
our future Happineſs, and probably to that of 
ur Family, if you indulge it. 

You either have, or have not Cauſe for it. If 
you have Cauſe, look into yourſelf and your own 
Conduct, to fee if you have not by any Change of 
Temper, or Difagreeableneſs of Behaviour; alie- 
nated your Huſband's Affections; and if ſo, ſet 
about amending both, in order to recover them: 
for once he loved you, and you was ſatisfy'd he 

did, above all your Sex, or you would not have 
had him, If it be owing to his inconſtant "Temper, 

| that is indeed unhappy ; but then, ſo long as you 
are clear of Blame, you have nothing to reproach 
| yourſelf with: And as the Creatures wicked Men 
follove, emit nothing to oblige them, you muſt 
try to avoid ſuch uneaſy and diſturbing Reſent- 
ments, as will make you more and more diſtaſteful 
to him. Shew him, that no guilty Wretch's pre- 
| tended Love can be equal to your real one: Shew 
him, that ſuch Creatures ſhall not out-do you in 
an obliging Behavicur, and Sweetneſs 0 Viper ; 
and that, let him fly off from his Duty, if he will, 
you will perſevere in yours, This Conduct will, 
if not immediately, in time, flaſh Conviction in his 
Face: He will ſee what a Goodneſs he injures, 
and will be ſeftened by your Softneſs. But if you 
make his Home uneaſy to him, he will fly on 
Huf 


— — ' 


with him, inflame his 


68 Familiar LETTERS on# the | 


that and you And to whom will he fly, but, moſt 
probably, to one who will allow his Pleas, and 
aggravate every thing _ you; who will ſide 

| aſſions, and thereby ſecure 
him to herſelf? And would you contribute to ſuch 
a Wretch's Power over him, and furniſh Oppor— 
tunities for her to triumph over you ? For while 
you exaſperate his Paſſions, and harden his Mind 
againſt you, ſhe will, by wicked Blandiſhments, 
ſhew him how obliging be can be, and fo a 
Courſe of Life, that he would follow privately. 
and by ſtealth, as it were, he will more open'y 
purſue 3 he will grow ſhameleſsin it; and, ſo com- 
mon is the Vice, more's the Pity ! will find thoſe 
who will extenuate it for their own ſakes, and 
throw the Blame on the Violence of your Temper, 
and jay, you drive him into theſe Exceſſes. Thus 
much I write, ſuppoſing you have Reaſon to 
be jealous, I will write yet another Letter on this 


important Subject. I hope they will have the 
Weight intended them, by 


Your ever indulgent Mother, 


LETTER LY. 
The ſame Subject continued. 


Dear Bet, 


WHAT I wrote in my former, was on a Suppo- 
ſition that you had too much Reaſon to be 
uneaſy at your Huſband's Conduct, 

I will now purſue the Subject, and put the Cat 
that you have no Proof that he is guilty, but your 
Surmizes, or, perhaps, the buſy hiſperings of oth- 
cious Mate- debates. In this Caſe, take care, my 
Betſey, that you don't, by the Violence, of * Paſ- 

5 10125, 


moſt Important Occaſions. 69 


| ſions, precipitate him on the Courſe you dread, and 
that you alienate not, by unjuſt Suſpicions, hs 


> Aﬀections from you; for then perhaps he will be 


| ready indeed to place them ſomewhere elſe, where 

you may not ſo eafily draw him off ; for he will, 

may be, think, as to you (if he be devoid of ſupe- 
rior Conſiderations) that he may as well deſerve 
| your Suſpicions, as be tiezed with them without 
deſerving them. 

I know it is a moſt ſhocking thing to a ſober 
young Woman, to think herſelf obliged to fare 
thoſe Affections which ought to be all her own, 
with a vile Proſtitute, beſides the Danger, which 
| is not ſmall, of being intirely circumvented in her 
| Huſband's Love, and perhaps have only his In- 
. if not Contempt, inſtead of it. But, m 

ear, at the worſt, comfort yourſelf that you are 

not the guilty Perſon, for one Day he will, per- 


| haps, fatally find his Error. And confider, be- 
ſides, my Betſey, that your Caſe, from an unfaith- 


ful Huſband, is not near ſo bad as his would be 
from an unfaithful Lie: For, Child, he cannot 


make the Progeny of a Ba/tard Race ſucceed to 
his and your Eſtate or Chattels, in Injury of your 


| lawful Children, If any ſuch he ſhould have, the 
Law of the Land brands them: Whereas a naught 


y 
ie often makes the Children of anther Man, 


| Heirs of her Huſband's Eftate and Fortune, in In- 
jury of his own Children or Family. So, tho? the 


Crime may be equal in other Reſpects, yet this 
makes the Injury of the Woman to the Man, 
| greater than his can be to Her. 

| Theſe Thoughts I have thrown together, as they 
occurred in two Letters, that I might not tire you 
with a Length, that, yet, the important Subject re- 
| Quired, Let me briefly ſum up the Contents. 


If 


70 Familiar LETTERS on the 


If he be guilty, try by Softneſs and kind Expo- 
ſtulations to reclaim him, before the Vice be rooted 
in him. If it be ſo rooted, as that he cannot be 
drawn off, you know not what God may do for 
you, if you truſt in Him, and take not upon your- 
{eii, by giving up your Mind to Violence, to he 

our own Avenger. Ai Bed, a tender Conduct 
in you, a ſore Diſaſter, (and who that lives, is not 
liable to ſuch ?) may give him to ſee the Error 
his Ways, and ſhew him the Foulneſs of his Crime 
which your good Uſage will aggravate, upon 
ſober Reflection, with the no weak Addition o 
Ingratitude to ſo good a Wife. The Mretch he has 
choſen for a Partner in his Guilt, may, by her 
ſordid Ways, awake him, by her libidinous .De- 
portment, /atiate him, by her detected Commerce 
with sthers (for ſuch Creatures, having once given 
themſelves up to Vice, know no Bounds) make 
him abhor her : And then he will ſee the Differ- 
ence between ſuch a one, and a chaſte Wife, whoſe 
Intereſts are bound up in his own, and will admire 
ou more than ever he did; and yow'll have the. 

leaſure, beſides, in all Probability, of ſaving a Soul 
that ſtands in ſo near a Relation to your own. 

But if your Uneaſineſs be owing to private Tal:- 
bearers and buſy Intermeddlers ; take care, my Dear, 

ou are not made a Property of by ſuch miſchievous 
| 8 Take care that you make not your own 
preſent Peace, and your future Good, and that of 
your Family, and of him your injur'd Huſband, 
the Sacrifices to ſuch pernicious Buſy-bodies, 

Conſider, my Dear, all I have ſaid, and God 
bleſs you with a Conduct and Diſcretion ſuitable 
to the Occaſion before you, and, at the worſt, give 
you Comfort and Patience in your own Innocence, 

or ſuch is this tranſitory Life, that all the III or 
Good we receive, will be ſoon over with us, and 
then 


4 


moſt Important Occaſions, 71 


then the P. Aſbment of the former, and the Reward 

of the latter, will make all Scores even, and what 
bis paſt appear as nothing, Mean time I can but 
pray for you: As, my dear Child, becomes 


Yeur ever affeftionate Mother, 


i 
_— Jn hc 


LETTER LYL 


| From a tender Father to an ungracious Son, 


8 — 


— 


Sen John, 


[JAM under no ſmall! Concern, that your con- 
1 tinued ill Courſes give me Occaſion to write 
this Letter to you. I was in hopes, that your 
ſolemn Promiſes of Amendment might have been 
better depended on; but I fee, to my great Mor- 
tifcation, that all I have done for you, and all I 
have ſaid to you, is thrown. away, What can I 
Hay more than I have ſaid? Yet, once more am I 
deſirous to try what the Force of a Letter will do 
with one who has not ſuffer'd mere Words to have 
any Effect upon him. Perhaps this remaining with 
you, if you will now and then ſeriouſly peruſe it, 
may, in ſome happy Moment, give ”_=_ Reflection, 
and by God's Grace, bring on your Repentance and 
Amendment. 
Conſider then, I beſeech you, in time, the Evil 
of your Ways. Make my Cafe your cwn; and 
think, if you were to be Father of ſuch a Son, how 
his Actions would grieve and afflict you. But if 
Imy Comfort has no Weight with you, conſider, 
my Son, how your preſent Courſes muſt impair, 
in time, a good Conſtitution, deſtroy your Health, 
and, moſt probably, ſhorten your Life. Conſider 
that your Reputation is wounded, I hope, not 5 
| _ tally, 


hd RY oo - NW 


yy . 0, SD SO. cas 


72 Familiar LETT ERS on the 


tally, 2s yet. That you will be ranke; among thy 
Profligate and Outcaſts of the World; that ng 
virtuous Man will keep you Company; that eve 
one who has a Regard for his own Credit will {un 
you; and that you will be given up to the Socicty 
of the bt and moſt abandon'd of Men, when 
ou might be improved by the Examples of the By, 
hat no Family which values their own Honour, 
and the Welfare of their Child, will ſuffer your 
Addreſſes to a Daughter worthy of being ſought 
after for a Wife, ſhould you incline to marry ; and 
that the worſt of that Sex muſt probably, in that 
Caſe, fall to your Lot, which will make you 
miſerable in this Morld, when you might be happy, 
Then, as to another World beyond this tranſitory 
one, my Heart trembles for what moſt probably 
will be the Conſequence to your poor Soul : For 
the human Mind is ſeldom at a ftay ; if you do 
not grow better, you will moſt undoubtedly grow 
worſe, and you may run into thoſe Sins and Eyils, 
that you cw perhaps think yourſelf incapable of; 
as already you are arrived at a Height of Folly and 
Wickedneſs, that once you would have thought 
vou could not have been guilty of. Don't, my 
dear Son, let your poor Mother and me have the 
Mortification to think, that we have been the un- 
happy Means of giving Life to a Child of Perdition, 
inſtead of a Child of Glory; that ear beloved Son 
with all the Pains we have taken to inſti] good 
Principles into his Mind, in hopes he would one 
day prove a Credit and Comfort to his Family, 
ſhould, inſtead of anſwering our longing. Wiſhes, 
when at Age, take ſuch contrary Courſes, as wil 
make us join to wiſh he had never been born. 
Conſider, my dear Son, we don't want any thing 
of you but your own Good, We lived before you 


were born, You have been a great Expence to 
to 


— c — * 


— — 


moſt Important Occaſions, 73 


to bring you up to theſe Years, You cannot now 
live without ug, but we can without you, We 
hope God will continue your Life to be ſtill a fur- 
ther Expence to us. For all we live for, is our Chil- 
drens Good. Let then the Diſintereſtedneſs of our 
Plea move you. Be but good to your/e!f, that is 
all we require of you. Let us but have Reaſon to 
hope, that when we are dead and gone, you will 
ſupport our Name with Credit, and be no Burden 
to your poor Siſters, nor Diſgrace to our Memories. 
Shew us that you are of a generous, not of a ſordid 
Nature ; and will probably ſet yourſelf above fu- 
ture Misfortunes by reclaiming in time, and then 
we ſhall be happy. As God has done his Part by 
ou, and given you Talents that every one cannot 
boaſt, let me beg you to conſider only, how much 
more noble it is to be in ſuch a Situation as ſhall 
enable you to confer Benefits, than ſuch an one as 
ſhall lay you under the poor Neceſſity to receive 
them from others, and, perhaps, where they ought 
to be leaſt expected. t 

I have written a long Letter. The Subject is 
next my Heart, and will excuſe it. God give a 
Bleſſing to it! God give you to ſee the Error of 
your Ways before it be too late, and before you 
7 ſuch a Habit as you cannot alter if you would. 
et your poor Mother and Siſters look upon you 
with Pleaſure, rather than Aoprebenſion, in, caſe 
God Almighty ſhould take me away from them : 
Jet them think of you as a Protector in my ſtead, 
rather than as an ingrateful Spoiler among them; 
and you will then give Comfort to my Life, as long 
as God ſhall ſpare it, and alleviate, inſtead of aggra- 
vate, the Pangs of my dying Hour, ,when God 

ſhall ſend it, 
1 dear Son, I conjure you, by all our 
paſt Tenderneſs and Affection for you, by our 
E HFopes, 


72 Familiar LETTERS on the 


tally, as yet. That you will be rank«;' among the 
Profligate and Outcaſts of the World; that ng 
virtuous Man will keep you Company; that cvuy 
one who has a Regard for his own Credit will {un 
you; and that you will be given up to the Society 
of the tot and met abandon'd of Men, when 
ou might be improved by the Examples of the 5%, 
*hat no Family which values their own Honour, 
and the Welfare of their Child, will ſuffer your 
Addreſſes to a Daughter worthy of being fought 
after for a Wife, ſhould you incline to marry ; and 
that the worſt of that Sex muſt probably, in that 
Caſe, fall to your Lot, which will make you 
miſerable in this World, when you might be happy, 
Then, as to another World beyond this tranſitory 
one, my Heart trembles for what moſt probably 
will be the Conſequence to your poor Soul : For 
the human Mind is ſeldom at @ flay; if you do 
not grow better, you will moſt undoubtedly grow 
worſe, and you may run into thoſe Sins and Evil, 
that you cw perhaps think yourſelf incapable of; 
as already you are arrived at a Height of Folly and 
Wickedneſs, that once you would have thought 
vou could not have been guilty of. Don't, my 
dear Son, let your poor Mother and me have the 
Mortification to think, that we have been the un- 
happy Means of giving Life to a Child of Perdition, 
inſtead of a Child of Glory; that our beloved Son 
with all the Pains we have taken to inſti good 
Principles into his Mind, in hopes he would one 
day prove a Credit and Comfort to his Family, 
ſhould, inſtead of anſwering our longing Wiſhes, 
when at Age, take ſuch contrary Courſes, as wil 
make us join to wiſh he had never been born. 
Conſider, my dear Son, we don't want any thin! 
of you but your own Good, We lived before you 


were born, You have been a great Expence to 
to 


. 4 * — 


— Ü N ˙⁵ÜX— —“ 


moſt Important Occaſions, 73 
to bring you up to theſe Years. You cannot now 


live without as, but we can without you. We 
hope God will continue your Life to be itil] a fur- 


| ther Expence to us. For all we live for, is our Chil- 


drens Good. Let then the Diſintereſtedneſs of our 
Plea move you. Be but good to your/e!f, that is 


all we require of you. Let us but have Reaſon to 


hope, that when we are dead and gonr, you will 
ſupport our Name with Credit, and be no Burden 
to your poor Siſters, nor Diſgrace to our Memorics. 
Shew us that you are of a generous, not of a ſordid 


Nature; and will probably ſet yourſelf above fu- 
ture Misfortunes by reclaiming in time, and then 
we ſhall be happy. As God has done his Part by 


Ju, and given you Talents that every one cannot 


aſt, let me beg you to conſider only, how much 
more noble it is to be in ſuch a Situation as ſhall 
enable you to confer Benefits, than ſuch an one as 


{ ſhall Jay you under the poor Neceſſity to receive 


| them from others, and, perhaps, where they ought 
| to be leaſt expected. 


I have written a long Letter. The Subject is 
next my Heart, and will excuſe it. God give a 
Bleſſing to it! God give you to ſee the Error of 
your Ways before it be too late, and before you 
7 ſuch a Habit as you cannot alter if you would. 
et your poor Mother and Siſters look upon you 
with Pleaſure, rather than Apprehenſion, in caſe 
God Almighty ſhould take me away from them : 
Het them think of you as a Protector in my ſtead, 
rather than as an ingrateful Spoiler among them; 
and you will then give Comfort to my Life, as long 
as God ſhall ſpare it, and alleviate, inſtead of aggra- 
vate, the Pangs of my dying Hour, ,when God 
ſhall ſend it, 
* dear Son, I conjure you, by all our 
paſt Tenderneſs and Affection for you, by our 
| Opes, 


—— — — _- ä —u——¹4é1 


Succeſs; and that you will not let us intreat in 


ternal Affection neceſſary. I am reſolved inſtantly 


adhere to my preſent good Reſolutions, I have 1» 


74 Familiar LER TT ERS on the 


Hopes, and our Fears, from Infancy to Manhood, 
to think of all theſe Things; reflect upon the 
Tranſitorineſs of worldly Enjoyments, even when 
better choſen than yours are. Judge of the Plea- 
ſures you expect in your preſent Courſe, by the 
Vanity of the pat; of your next Aſſignations, 
by the aching Head, and undelighted Heart, which 
followed the 4; and you will find, that no Satiſ- 
faction, which is not grounded on Virtue and So— 
briety, can be durable, or worthy of a rational 
Creature, 

Your good Mother, who joins her Tears ſo 
often with mine, to deplore the ſad Proſpect your 
ill Courſes give us, joins alſo her Prayers to mine, 
that this my lat Effort may be attended with 


vain, Amen, Amen, ſays 
Your indulgent and affiitted Father, 


LET TER--EVI 
The Son's dutiful Anſwer, 


Honoured Sir, 


AM greatly affected with the tender and 
moving Goodneſs expreſſed in your indulgent 
Letter. I am exceedingly ſorry, that all your 
good Advice before has been ſo caſt away upon 
me, as to render this further Inſtance of your pa- 


to ſet about a Reformation, and to conform my- 
ſelf intirely to your good Pleaſure for the future ; 
and I beg, Sir, the Continuance of yours, and my 
good Mother's Prayers to God, to enable me to 


often promiſed, and ſo often broken my Word, 
(rat lier 


— ll ˙ͤ— —  - 


— — — — = 


moſt Important Occaſions. 75 


| {rather indeed thro' the Strength of my Paſſions, 
than a Deſign of Non- performance) that I think, 
I ought now to give you fome Proof that I am in 
* earneſt ; and what better can I give, than to aſſure 
| you, that I will henceforth break myſelf from 
the frothy Companions I uſed to take too much 
Delight in, and whoſe lewd Banteis and Tempta- 
tions have ſo frequently ſet aſide my good Pur- 
poſes? You, Sir, for the future, ſhall recommend 
| the Company proper for me to keep ; and I beg 
you will chalk out for me the Paths in which you 
would have me tread, and, as much as poſible, I 
will walk in them; and when I have convinced 
| you of the Sincerity of my Reformation, I hope, 
| bir you and my Swear Mother, will reſtore 
me to your good Opinions, which it ſhall be my 
| conſtant Study to deſerve, I have already broke 
with George Negus, who attempted to laugh me 
out of my good Reſolutions. And I beg Leave to 
wait upon you for ſuch a Space of Time as you 
| ſhall think proper, in order to break myſelf from 
| the reſt of my profligate Companions, and that I 
| may have the Benefit of your Advice and Dire- 
| tion for my future Conduct, God continue lon 
(for the Benefit of us all) your Life and Health, 
and make me happy in contributing as much to 
| your future Comforts, as I have, by my paſt 
Exceſſes, to your Trouble of Mind, is, and ſhall! 
| always be, the Prayer of, Honoured Sir, 


Your truly penitent and dutiful Son. 


55 


— — — ————— 


76 Familiar LR TT ERS on the 


LETTER LVIII. 


To a Friend, on Occaſion of his not anſwering 
his Letters, 


Dear Sir, 
T is ſo long ſince I had the Favour of a Line 


8 from you, that I am under great Apprehenſions 
j in relation to your Health and Welfare, I beg you, 
# Sir, to renew to me the Pleaſure you uſed to give 


by me in your Correſpondence ; for I have written 
Fi three Letters to you before this, to which I have 
| had no Anſwer, and am not conſcious of having 
15 any way diſobliged you. If I have, I will moſt 
| willingly aſk your Pardon ; for nobody can be more 
15 than I am, 


Yeur affetionate and faithful Friend and Servant, 


5 EET TE 
ly. | In Anſwer to the preceding. 


Dear Sir, 


W d eds have not, cannot diſoblige me; but I 
have greatly diſobliged myſelf, in my own 

faulty Remiſſneſs. I cannot account for it. as! 
| ought. To ſay I had Buſineſs one time, Company 
ts another, was diſtant from home a third, will be 
| but poor Excuſes, for not anſwering one of your 
kind Letters in four long Months. I therefore in- 

genuouſly take Shame to myſelf, and promiſe 
future Amendment. And that nothing ſhall ever, 
while I am able to hold a Pen, make me guilty o 


the like Neglect to a Friend I love fo well, and 


have 


ͤ—V 4w..— ́ꝶ—4äů q — — — — — 


moſt Important Occaſiaus. 77 


have ſo much Reaſon ſo to do. Forgive me then, 
my good, my kind, my generous Friend; and be- 
lieve me ever, 


Hur highly obliged humble Servant. 


th. 


— 1 4 
1 


LET TEN E 


From a Father io a Son, on his Negligence it 
his Affairs, 


Dear Jemmy, 


OU cannot imagine what a Concern your Care- 
leſſneſs and indifferent Management of your 


Affairs give me. Remiſſneſs is inexcuſable in all 
* Men, but in none fo much as in a Man of Buſineſs, 
the Soul of which is Induſtry, Diligence, and 
Punctuality. 


Let me beg of you to ſhake off the idle Habits 
you have contracted; quit unprofitable Company, 


and unſeaſonable Recreations, and apply to your 
Compting-houſe with Diligence. It may not be 
yet too late to retrieve your Affairs. Inſpect there- 


fore your Gains, and caſt up what Proportion they 


bear to your Expences; and then ſee which of the 


latter you can, and which you cannot contract. 


Conſider, that when once a Man ſuffers himſelf 
to go backward in the World, it muſt be an un- 
common Spirit of Induſtry that retrieves him, and 
puts him forward again. 


Reflect, I beſeech you, before it be too late, 


| upon the Inconveniencies which an impoveriſh'd 
Trader is put to, for the Remainder of his Life ; 
which, too, may happen to be the prime Part of it; 


the Indignities he is likely to ſuffer from thoſe 


whoſe Money he has unthinkingly ſquander'd; the 
E 


3 Con- 


78 Familiar LET T ERS on the 


Contempt he will meet with from all, not except- 
ing the idle Companions of his Folly; the Injuſtice 
he does his Family, in depriving his Children, not 
only of the Power of raiſing themſelves, but of 
living tolerably; and how, on the contrary, from 
being born to a creditable Expectation, he ſinks 
them into the loweſt Claſs of Mankind, and ex- 
oſes them to the moſt dangerous Temptations. 
hat has not ſuch a Father to anſwer for! and 
all this for the ſake of indulging himſelf in an idle, 
a careleſs, a thoughtleſs Habit, that cannot afford 
the leaſt Satisfaction, beyond the preſent Hour, if 
in that; and which muſt be attended with decp 
Remorſe, when he comes to reflect. Think ſeri- 
oufly of theſe Things, and in time reſolve on ſuch 
a Courſe as may bring Credit to yorrelf, Juſtice to 
all you deal with, Pe:ce and Pleaſure to your own 
Mind, Comfort to your Family; and which will 
give at the ſame time the higheſt Satisfaction to 


Your careful and loving Father, 


LETTER LXI. 
The Son's grateful Anſwer. 


Honoured Sir, 

Return you my ſincere Thanks for your ſea— 

ſonable ſees? and Advice. I have indeed too 
much indulged myſelf in an idle careleſs Habit, 
and had already begun to feel the evil Conſequences 
of it, when k your Letter, in the Infults 
of a Creditor or two from whom I expected kinder 
Treatment. But indeed they wanted but their 
own, fo I could only blame myſelf, who had 
brought their rough Uſage upon me. Your Let- 


ter came ſo ſeaſonably upon this, that I hope it will 
| not 


moſt Important Occafions. 190 
not want the deſired Effect; and as I thank God 


it is not yet too late, I am reſolved to take another 
Courſe with myſelf and my Affairs, that I may avoid 
the ill Conſequences you fo judiciouſly forewarn me 
of, and give to my Family and Friends the Plea- 
ſure they ſo well deſerve at my Hands ; and particu- 
larly that Satisfaction to ſo good a Father, which. 


is owing to him, by 
His moſt dutiful Son. 


—— — — 


4 
= 
LE » — —— 


LET TEK: LI. 


A young Woman in Town to her Siſter in the 
Country, recounting her narrow Eſcape from 


a Snare laid for her on ber firſt Arrival, by 
a wicked Procureſs. 


Dear Sifter,. 


W E have often, by our good Mother, been 
warned againſt the Dangers that would too 
probably attend us on coming to Londen ; tho' I 
muſt own, her Admonitions had not always the 
Weight I am now convinced they deſerved. 

I have had a Deliverance from ſuch a Snare, as I 
never could have believed would have been laid for 
a Perſon free from all Thought of Ill, or been fo 
near ſucceeding upon one ſo ſtrongly on her Guard 
as I imagined myſelf: And thus, my dear Siſter, 
the Matter happened : 

Returning, on Tueſday, from ſeeing my Couſin 
Atkins, in Cheapfide, I was over-taken by an elderly 
Gentlewoman of a ſober and creditable Appearance, 
who walked by my Side ſome little time before 
ſhe ſpoke to me; and then gueſſing, (by my aſking 
the Name of the Street) that I was a Stranger to 

E 4 "the 


80 Familiar LRT TERS on the 
the Town, ſhe very er began a Diſcourſe 


with me, and after ſome other Talk, and Queſtions 
about my Country, and the like, deſired to know 
if I did not come to Town with a Deſign of going 
into ſome genteel Place? J told her, If I could meet 
with a Place to my Mind, to wait upon a ſingle 


Lady, I ſhould be very willing to embrace it. She 


ſaid, I look'd like a creditable, ſober and modeſt 
Body, and at that very time ſhe knew one of 
the beſt Gentlewomen that ever lived, who was in 


great Want of a Maid to attend upon her own 
Perſon, and that if ſhe liked me, and I her, it 


would be a lucky Incident for us both, 


I expreſſed myſelf thankfully, and ſhe was ſo 
very much in my Intereſt, as to intreat me to go 
inſtantly to the Lady, leſt ſhe ſhould be provided, 
and acquaint her I was recommended by Mrs. Jones, 
not doubting, as ſhe ſaid, but, on Inquiry, my 
Character would anſwer my Appearance, 

As that you know was partly my View in com- 
ing to Town, I thought this a or: Incident, and 
determined not to loſe the Opportunity; and ſo, 
according to the Direction ſhe gave me, I went to 
inquire for Mrs, C----- in 7---n's Court, Flect- 


ſtreet. The Fa - 3:9 gat look'd genteel, and 


I ſoon found the Houſe. I aſked for Mrs. C----- ; 
ſhe came to me, dreſs'd in a ſplendid Manner ; I 
told her what I came about ; ſhe immediately de- 
fired me to walk into the Parlour, which was ele- 
gantly furniſhed ; and after aſking me ſeveral Que- 
ſtions, with my Anſwers to which ſhe ſeem'd very 
well pleaſed, a Servant ſoon brought in a Bowl of 
warm Liquor, which ſhe called Negus, conſiſting of 
Wine, Water, Orange, &c. which, ſhe ſaid, was tor 
a Friend or two ſhe expected preſently ; but as I was 
warm with walking, ſhe would have me drink ſome 
of it, telling me it was a pleaſant innocent Liquor, 
| 0 


moſt Important Occaſions, 81 


and ſhe always uſed her waiting Maids, as ſhe did 
herſelf, I thought this was very kind and con- 
deſcending, and being warm and thirſty, and ſhe 
encouraging me, I took a pretty free Draught of 
it, and thought it very pleaſant, as it really was. 
She made me fit down by her, ſaying, Pride was 
not her Talent, and that ſhe ſhould always indulge 
me in like manner, if I behaved well, when ſhe 
had not Company : and then lightly aſked what I 
could do, and the Wages I required? With my 
Anſwers ſhe ſeemed well fatished, and granted the 
Wages I afked, without any Offer of Abatement. 

And then I roſe up, in order to take my Leave, 
telling her I would, any Day ſhe pleaſed, of the 
enſuing Week, bring my Cloaths, and wait upon 
her. 

. She faid, that her own Maid being gone away, 
ſhe was in the utmoſt Want of another, and would 
take it kindly, if I would ſtay with her till next 
Day, becauſe ſhe was to have ſome Ladies to paſs 
the Evening with her. I faid this would be prett 
inconvenient to me, but as ſhe was ſo ſituated, 
would oblige her, after I had been with my Aunt, 
and acquainted her with it. To this ſhe reply'd, 
that there was no manner of Occaſion for that, be- 
cauſe ſhe could ſend the Cook for what I wanted, 
who could, at the ſame time, tell my Aunt how 
Matters ſtood, 

I thought this looked a little odd ; but ſhe did it 
with ſo much Civility, and ſeemed fo pleafed with 
her new Maid, that I ſcarcely knew how to with- 
ſtand her: But the Apprehenſion I had of my 
Aunt's Anger for not aſking her Advice, in what 
ſo nearly concerned me, made me inſiſt upon going, 
though I could perceive Diſpleaſure in her Coun- 
tenance when ſhe ſaw me reſoly'd, 


E 5 She 


$2 Familiar LE TTERS on the 


She then ply'd me very cloſe with the Liquor, 
which ſhe again ſaid was innocent and weak; but 
I believe it was far otherwiſe ; for my Head began 


to turn round, and my Stomach felt a little dif- 


ordered. I intreated the Favour of her to permit 
me to go, on a firm Promiſe of returning imme- 
diately ; but then, my new Miſtreſs began to raiſe 
her Voice a little, aſſuring me I ſhould on no Ac- 
count, ſtir out of her Houſe. She left the Room, 
in a ſort of a Pet, but ſaid ſhe would ſend the Cook 


to take my Directions to my Aunt; and I heard 


her take the Key out of the outward Door. 

This alarmed me very much; and, in the In- 
ſtant of my Surprize, a young Gentlewoman en— 
tered the Parlour, dreſs'd in white Sattin, and every 
way genteel ; ſhg fat down in a Chair next me, 
looked earneſtly at me a while, and ſeemed going 
to ſpeak ſeveral times, but did not. At length 


ſhe roſe from her Chair, bolted the Parlour-door, 


and, breaking into a Flood of Tears, expreſs'd her- 
ſelf as follows: | 

„Dear young Woman, I cannot tell you the 
% Pain J feel on your Account; and from an In- 
« clination to ſerve you, I run a Hazard of in- 
„ yolving myſelf in greater Miſery than J have yet 
experienced, if that can be. But my Heart is yet 
©« too honeſt to draw others, as I am deſir'd to do, 
1% into a Snare which I have fallen into myſclf, You 
« are now in as notorious a Brothel, as is in Len- 
« don: And if you eſcape not in a few Hours, you 
« are inevitably undone, I was once as innocent 
as you now feem to be. No Apprehenſion you 
can be under for your Virtue, but I felt as much: 
« My Name was as unſpotted, and my Heart as 
„ unvers'd in Ill, when I firſt entered theſe guilty 
«© Dcors, whither I was ſent on an Errand, much 
like what I underſtand has brought you hither. 1 

| „% was 


12 ä . Ot 


. moſt Important Occaſions, 83 


« was by Force detained the whole Night, as you 
e are deſigned to be, was robbed of my Virtue ; 
„ and knowing I ſhould hardly be forgiven by my 
„Friends for ſtaying out without their Know- 


« ledge; and in the Morning being at a Loſs, all in 


% Confuſion as I was, what to do, before I could 
&« reſolve on any thing, I was obliged to repeat my 
“ Guilt, and had hardly Time afforded me to re- 
te flect on its fatal Conſequences, My Liberty I 
e intreated to no Purpoſe, and my Grief ſerved for 
ce the cruel Sport of all around me, In ſhort, I 
te have been now ſo long confined, that I am 
c aſhamed to appear among my Friends and Ac- 
e quaintance. In this dreadful Situation, I have 
e been perplexed with the hateful Importunities of 
different Men every Day; and tho' I long re- 
e ſiſted to my utmoſt, yet downright Force never 
“failed to overcome. hus in a ſhameful Round 
of Guilt and Horror, have I lingered out Ten 
„Months; ſubje& to more Miſeries than Tongue 
can expreſs. The ſame ſad Lot is intended you, 
nor will it be eaſy to ſhun it: However, as I can- 
© not well be more miſcrable than I am, I will aſſiſt 
«© you what I can; and not, as the wretched Pro- 
* cureſs hopes, contribute to make you as unhappy 

as myſelf. 1 
You may gueſs at the Terror that ſeized my 
Heart, on this ſad Story, and my own Danger; 
I trembled in every Joint, nor was I able to ſpeak 
for ſome time; at laſt, in the beft Manner I could, 
I thanked my unhappy new Friend, and begg'd ſhe 
would kindly give me the Aſſiſtance ſhe offered: 
which ſhe did; for the firſt Gentleman that came 
to the Door, ſhe ſtept up herſ-lf for the Key to let 
him in, which the wretched Procureſs gave her, 
and I took that Opportunity, as ſhe directed, to 
run out of the Houle, ne. that in ſo much Hurry 
6 and 


_ . WV 
-> 
— 
—— — — — 
* - — 
L! . 


— — 


— — 


Family? 


84 Familiar LETTERS on be 
and Confuſion, as to leave my Hood, Fan, and 
Gloves behind me. 

I told my Aunt every Circumftance of my 
Danger and —— and received a ſevere Repri- 
mand for my following fo inconſiderately, in ſo 
wicked a Town as this, the Direction of an intire 
Stranger. 

I am ſure, Siſter, you rejoice with me for my 
Deliverance. And this Accident may ferve to 
teach us to be upon our Guard for the future, as 
well againſt the viler Part of our own Sex, as that 
of the other. I am, dear Siſter, 


Your truly affectionate Siſter, 


N. B. This ſhocking Story is taken from the Mouth of 
the young Woman herſelf, who ſo narrowly eſcaped 
the Snare of the vile Procureſs ; and is Fact in every 

_ Circumſtance. 


LE-T:T ER. LXUL 


To a Daughter in a Country Town, who en- 
courages the Addreſs of a Suballern [A Caſe 
too frequent in Country Places]. 


Dear Betſy, 


1 HAVE been under the deepeſt Affliction ever 
ſince I heard of your encouraging the Addreſſes 


of a Soldier, whether Serjeant or Corporal, I know 


not; who happens to quarter next Door to your 
Uncle. | 

What, my dear Child, can you propofe by ſuch 
a Match? Is his Pay ſufficient to maintain himſelf? 
If it be, will it be ſufficient for the Support of a 


Conſider, 


—— ENT —ää̃— 


* __— we a 


moſt Important Occaſions. 8 


Conſider, there will be no Opportunity for you to 
increaſe his poor Income, but by ſuch Means as 
will be very grating for you to ſubmit to! Will 

our Hands be capable of enduring the Fatigues of 
a Waſh-tub, for your Maintenance? Or, will 
following a Camp ſuit your Inclinations ? Think 
well of the certain Miſery that muſt attend your 
making ſuch a Choice, 

Look round at the Wives of all his Fellow-ſol- 
diers, and mark their Appearance at their Homes, 
and in Publick, Is their abject Condition to be 
coveted? Do you ſee any ng SO in Poverty 
and Rags? And, as to the Man' for whom you 
muſt -endure all this, he may poſſibly indeed be 
poſſeſſed of Honeſty, and a Delire to do his beſt 
for you, at leaſt you may think ſo; but is it proba- 
ble he will? For if he be wiſe and induſtrious, how 
came he to prefer a Life ſo mean and contempt- 


ible? If he was bred to any Trade, why did he 


| deſert it? 


Be cautious of ruſhing yourſelf into Ruin, and 
as I am not able to maintain you and a young Fa- 
mily, do not throw yourſelf upon the uncertain 
Charity of well-d:ſpoſed People; who are already 
vaſtly encumbered by the Miſerable. I hope you 
will not thus raſhly increaſe the unhappy Number 
of ſuch; but will give due Attention to what TI 
have ſaid ; for I can have no View, but that of diſ- 
charging the Duty of 


Your loving Father, 


LE T- 


86 Familiar LETTERS on the 


LETTER LXIV. 


Of Expoſtulation from a grave Friend to q 
young Man, on his ſlighling and irrevercut 
Behaviour to his Father, 


Dear Sir, 
1 TAK E the Freedom of a brief Expoſtulation 


with you on your Behaviour to your Father; 
and I hope you will receive it from me, with the 
ſame Good-will, that I mean it. 

His Indulgence to you formerly, certainly claims 
better Returns on your Part, altho' it ſhould be 
allow'd, as you fondly imagine, that his Affection 
to you is alienated. There may be ſomething of 
Petulancy in him, which you ought to bear with; 
for one time or other you may be convinced by Ex- 
perience, that Age itfelf has its inſuperable AMi- 
Ctions, . that require the Allowance of every one ; 
and more particularly of ſuch who hope to live a 
long Life themſelves, and ſtill more particularly of 
a Son, whoſe high Paſſions, require, perhaps, at 
leaſt as much Allowance, He may be petulant ; 
but are you not fiery and impetuous? And I Would 
fain know, whether you ought to bear with %, 
or he with you © 
_ *Tis a very groundleſs Surmiſe to think his Af- 
fections are alienated from you. A Father 7 
love his Son. He cannot help it. And is it cre— 
dible even to yourſelf, on cool Reflexion, that the 
ſame good Man who was wont to be delighted with 

our childiſn Vanities and Foibles, (for we have all 
had them more or Jeſs) and even indulged and per- 
haps cheriſhed thoſe youthiul Forwardneſles, that 
might be called the Seeds of thoſe Paſſions, which 
h | "NOW 


moſt Important Occaftons, 87 


now, being ſprung up, give him ſo much Difturb- 
ance, and make you ſo impatient of Contradiction : 
Can you, I ſay, believe that this ſame good Man, 
without Reaſon, without Provocation, can change 
that Love into Hate? 
You are grown to Man's Eſtate, and tho” far 
from the ungracious Sons, that we have ſeen in the 
World, yet ought not to be ſo partial to eee 
as to 2 you are wholly faultleſs. Examine 
our own Conduct then, and altho' you ſhould not 
be able to charge your Intention with any Blame, 
yet you mult leave your Behaviour to be judg'd by 
others; and *twill perhaps be given againſt you, 
that ſome Slight, ſome Negligence, ſome Inatten- 
tion, if not worſe, too cutting for a Father's Cares 
and Fondneſs to ſupport, has eſcaped you. Then 
conſider, Sir, what a grievous thing it muſt be to 
him to reflect, that this Behaviour of yours, may 
be but the gradual Conſequence of his former In- 
dulgence to you, and that he 1s deſervedly puniſh- 
ed, for not rooting up in your childiſh Days thoſe 
Weeds which now ſpread to his Uncaſineſs. But 
let me tell you, Sir, that it ought to be a more ſad 
Reflection to a conſiderate young Gentleman, that 
he is to be the Inſtrument to puniſh his fond Fa- 
ther's faulty Indulgence to himſelf, | 
I have been a diligent Obſerver of the Diſpenſa- 
tions of Providence in this reſpect, and have always 
ſeen the Sin of Undutifulneſs to Parents puniſhed 
in Kind, more than any one Sin, T have ſeen the 
Sen of the undutiful Son, revenging the Cauſe of 
his Grandfather ; and at the ſame time, intail'd a 
Curſe upon his Son, if he has not been taken off 
childleſs, who, in his Turn, has retorted the un- 
gracious Behaviour; and thus a Curſe has been in- 
taiPd by Deſcent upon the Family, from one Ge- 
neration to another, : 
Yowll 


88 Familiar LETTERS on the 


You'll fay, that your Behaviour to your Father 
is not, you hope, of ſuch an atrocious Nature, ag 
to be attended with ſuch terrible Conſequences ; 
and perhaps will add, that you do not wiſh: for a 
better Behaviour from your Son, than you ſhew to 
your Father. But if this be not Partiality to your- 
ſelf, pray conſider, that while your Father takes 
2 preſent Conduct in ſo ill Part, and you uſe ſo 

ittle Circumſpection to avoid giving him Diſguſt, 

and have ſo little Complaiſance, as not to ſet him 
right; the thing is full as tormenting to him from 
the Appearance, as if it were real; nay, tis real 
to him, if he believes ſo. 

He thinks, and let me tell you, Sir, he thinks 
juſtly, that he ought to expect as much Deference 
to his Will and Pleaſure now, as he has heretofore 
ſhewn you Indulgence, even in thoſe things that 
now perhaps you are ſo unkind to ſuffer to turn 
ſevereſt upon him. I would not recriminate : But 
it was with very little Reverence, and indeed with 
an Air as cenſurable as the Fords, that you told 
bim, in my Hearing, that he knew not what he 
would have : That he expected you to be more ac- 
countable at this Age, than when you were a 
Child, &c. Why, dear Sir, does your being 7 
Age, leſſen the Duty you owe to your Father? Are 
not his Cares for you allowably doubled, and ought 
he not now to expect from your good Senſe, and 
more mature Underſtanding (improved, as it is to 
be hoped, by the Education he has, at a great Ex- 
pence, given you) greater Proofs of Duty, rather 
than 7 He may forget, perhaps what he was 
at your Age, as you irreverently told him; but how 
much more laudable would it be, for you, at yours, 
to enter into what you would naturally expect from 
your Son, were you in the Place, and at the Age, of 
your Father, A generous Mind wall do its Duty, 
tho 


moſt Important Occaſions, 89 


tho? it were not to meet with ſuitable Rewards or 
Returns; for even ſhould your Father not do 95 
by you, you are not abſolved of yours to him; much 
leſs then, ought the natural, the conſequential, In- 
firmities of Age, to diſſolve the Duty of a Son to 
an indulgent Parent, | 
Be convinced, my dear Sir, of your wrong Con- 
duct, and don't think it beneath the high Spirit of 
a brave young Gentleman, to ſubmit to the Will 
of his Father, By your Dutifulneſs and Circum- 
ſpection you may, in all Probability, add to the 
Number as well as the Comfort of Vi Days to whom 
you owe your Being. But whar a Woe does that 
'$ oung Man bring upon himſelf who robs his aged 
8 in both reſpects ! It behoves all Children to 
e reflect upon this timely, and with Awe. 
it On how many Occaſions has he heretofore re- 
n joiced to me, on, even, the ſmalleſt Openings and 
it Dawnings of your Mind and Genius! How has he 
h dwelt on your Praiſes on even bee Beauties, 
Id which have appeared ſuch to his fond and partial 
e Tenderneſs only! How has he extenuated your 
c- Wl failings, connived at your Faults, and extolled and 
3 W brought forward into ſtrong Light, even the re- 
if WW moteſt Appearance of Virtue in you. Such was 
re always, and ſuch, notwithſtanding the Intermixtures 
ht of Age and Infirmity, and even of your continued 
1d % ts and W ee, always will be, the Inſtances 
to of his paternal Affection for you. And J will ven- 
ture to ſay, that even this very Petulance, as you 
think it, is a Demonſtration of his Regard for you, 
however difagreeable it may be to you, ſince he 
loves you too well to be inſenſible to thoſe Parts of 
your Dare which he thinks are owing to 
= 5 or Negligence. | 2 
I have exceeded the Bounds I intended when I 
began, and would rather leave to your natural good 


Senſe, 


/// ðͤ OT ON 


2 
w__ 


90 Familiar LET TERS on the 


Senſe, and cooler Reflection, what I have army 
urged, than tire you too much, with what might 


till farther be added on this Occaſion, But the 


Affection and Friendſhip I have for all your Fa- 
mily, and the long Intimacy I have had with your 
good Father (who, however, knows nothing of 
my writing) and the evil Conſequences that may 
follow a wider Breach between you, will anſwer 
for my Intention, and, I hope, for my Freedom, 
which I'Il take upon me to ſay, I expect from your 
Candor and Education, being 


Your fincere Friend to ſerve you, 


— — 


LE IE K--LXY. 
Again} too great a Love of Singing and 
Muſick, 
Dear Couſin, 
1 AM ſure you have the good Senſe to take kindly 
what I am going to mention to R in which! 
can have no poſſible View but your Benefit. When 
ou were laſt with me at Hertford, you much ob- 
liged us all, with the Inſtances you gave us of your 
Skill in Muſick, and your good Voice. But as you 
are ſo young a Man, and ſeem to be ſo very much 
pleaſed yourſelf with theſe Acquirements, I muſt 
enter a Caution or two on this Score, becauſe of 
the Conſequences that may follow from too much 
Delight in theſe Amuſements, which, while they 
are purſued as Amuſements only, may be ſafe and 
innocent ; but when they take up too much of a 
Man's Time, may be not a little pernicious. 
In the firſt place, my dear Couſin, theſe Plea- 
ſares of Sound, may take you off from the more 
deſirable ones of Senſe, and make your Delights 


ſtop 


— — — 


moſt Important Occaſions. gt 
ſtop at the Ear, which ſhould go deeper, and be 


placed in the Under/tanding. For whenever a chear- 
ful Singer is in Company, adieu to all Converſa- 
tion of an improving or intellectual Nature. 

In the ſecond place, it may expoſe you to Com- 


pany, and that not the be/? and mo? eligible neither; 


and by which your Buſineſs and your other more 
uſeful Studies, may be greatly if not wholly neglect- 
ed, and very poſſibly your Health itſelf much im- 
paired, 

In the third place, it may tend, for ſo it natu- 
rally does, to enervate the Mind, and make you 


» haunt muſical Societies, Operas and Concerts; and 


what Glory is it to a Gentleman if he were even 
a fine Performer, that he can ſtrike a String, touch 
a Key, or ſing a Song with the Grace and Com- 
3 of a hired Muſician? | 
Fourthly, Muſick, to arrive at any tolerable Pro- 
ficiency in it, takes up much Time, and requires ſo 
much Application, as leaves but little Room, and, 
what is worſe, when delighted in, little Iaclination 
for other Improvements: And as Life is a bort 
Stage, where longeſt, ſurely the moſt precious Mo- 
ments. of it, ought to be better imploy'd, than in 
ſo light and airy an Amuſement. The Time of 
Vuth will be ſoon over, and that is the Time of 
laying the Foundation of more ſolid Studies, The 
Mind, as well as the Body, will become ſtiff by 
Years, and unſuſceptible of thoſe Improvements, 
that cannot be attained, but in particular Periods of 
it: And, once an airy Delight engages the Faculties, 
a Habit is formed ; and nothing but great Struggle, 
and abſolute Neceſſity, if that will do it, can ſhake 
it off. One Part of Life is for Improvement, that 
s Yoxth ; another Part is for turning that Improve- 
ment to ſolid Benefits to one's Self, one's Family, or 
Acquaintance ; that is the middle Part ; —_— 
| . Art. 


what I truly am, 


92 Familiar LETTERS on the 


Part carries a Retroſpe& to a future Eftate : And 
ſhall we loſe the Time of Improvement, which can 
never come again; forfeit alt the Benefits of it, in! 
our M:ddle-life, and embitter our future Praoſpe, * a 
as well mundane as eternal, with Reflections on our! 
paſt Neglect of Opportunities that never can be! 
recalled? And all for what? Why, only to be! 
deemed for eight or ten empty Ye ears of Life, a g 
Companion, as the Phraſe is :--- Tho?, perhaps, a1, 
bad Huſband, a bad Father, a bad Friend, and, of ; 
courſe, a bad Man p 

Some there are, who divide Life into four Stages 
or Opportunities. He, they ſay, who is not hand- 
ſome by Twenty, ſtrong by Thirty, wiſe by Forty, © 
rich by Fifty, will never be either handſome, ſtrong, 
wiſe, or rich, And this, generally ſpeaking, is a 
good and improving Obſervation z which ſhould 
teach us, as we go along, to make a __ Ole of 
thoſe Periods of Life, which may be proper Entrances 
for us into a ſtill more important one than that 
behind it. | 

I have but lightly touched on theſe weighty 
Points, becauſe I know you have good Senſe enough 
to improve as much from Hints, as others can from 
tedious Lectures. And when J have repeated, that 
I am far from diſſuading you from theſe Amuſe- 
ments while they are reſtrained to due Bounds, and 
are.regarded as Amuſements only ; I know you will 
think me, what I always defire to be thought, and 


> > 


Tx $$. es * 


N 
— PA 


br ed ty ays 2 


Nur aſfectionate Uncle, 
and ſincere Friend. 


— 


LE T- 


8 


moſt Important Occaſions, 93 


. 
| 


| 2 WW. WO 4 jt 
| From a Daughter io her Father, pleading for 
her Siſter, who bad married without his 


Conſent. 


Honoured Sir, 
| T HE kind Indulgence you have always ſhewn 


to your Children, makes me preſume to be- 
come an Advocate for my Siſter, tho' not for her 
| Fault. She is very ſenſible of that, and ſorry ſhe 
das offended you; but has great hopes, that Mr. 
= Robinſon will prove ſuch a careful and loving Huſ- 
band to her, as mo77 atone for his paſt Wildneſs, 
and engage your Forgiveneſs. For all your Chil- 
* dren are ſenſible of your paternal Kindneſs, and 
that you wiſh their Good more for their ſakes, 
than your own, 
This makes it the more wicked to offend fo 
good a Father: But, dear Sir, be pleaſed to con- 
ſider, that it now cannot be helped, and that ſhe 
may be made by your Diſpleaſure very miſerable in 
her own Choice; and as his Faults are owing to the 
Inconſideration of Youth, or otherwiſe it would 
not have been a very diſcreditable Match, had it 
had your Approbation; I could humbly hope, for 
my poor Siſter's ſake, that you will be pleaſed rather 
to encourage his preſent good Reſolutions, by your 
kind Favour, than make him deſpair of a Recon- 
| ciliation, and ſo perhaps treat her with a Negligence, 
which hitherto ſhe is not apprehenſive of. F or he 
is really very fond of her, and I hope will continue 
ſo. 1 is ſne dejected for her Fault to you, and 
wiſhes, yet dreads, to have your Leave to throw 
herſelf at your Feet, to beg your Forgiveneſs and 
1 Bleſſing, 


4 


* 
VE 


CT .. K 


D 
7 


J 
f 


: 
| 
[| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
[| 


- —_ 


94 Familiar L:TTx Rs o the 


Bleſſing, which would make the poor dear Offen- 
der quite happy. | 

Pardon, Sir, my interpoſing in her Favour, in 
which my Huſband alſo joins. She is my Siſter, Þ? 
She is your Daughter; tho? ſhe has not done {Þ7"" 
worthily as I wiſh, to become that Character. Be 
pleaſed, Sir, to forgive her, however; and alt 
forgive me, pleading for her. Who am, 


„ 
ö 
.- 


Your ever-dutiful Daughter, 


LETTER LXVII. oo 
The Father's Anſwer, 2 


My dear Nanny, 


OU muſt believe that your Siſter's unadviſcd 
1 Marriage, which ſhe muſt know would b 
diſagreeable to me, gives me no ſmall Concern; 
and yet I will aſſure you that it ariſes more fron 
my Affection for her, than any other Conſidera- 
tion. In her Education I took all the Pains an 
Care my Circumſtances would admit, and often 
flattered myſelf with the Hope that the happy 
Fruits of it would be made appear in her prudent 
Conduct. What ſhe has now done is not vicious, but 
indiſcreet ; for, you muſt remember, that I hav 
often declared in her Hearing, that the wild After 
tion of a Rake making a good Huſband, was th: 
moſt dangerous Opinion a young Woman coul 
imbibe. 
I will not, however, in Pity to her, point ov 
the many Ills I am afraid will attend her Raſt 
neſs, becauſe it is done, and cannot be helped; bu 


wiſh ſhe may be happier than I ever ſaw a Wa 


man who leap'd ſo fatal a Precipice. is 
Her Huſband has this Morning been with mic 


for her Fortune; and it was with much 17 pe 
| | J tol 


moſt Important Occaſſons. 95 


I told him, That as all ſhe could hope for was wholly 
at my Diſpoſal, I ſhould diſburſe it in ſuch a man- 
Iner as I thought would moſt contribute to her Ad- 
vantage; and that, as he was a Stranger to me, I 
fe chuſe to know he deſerved it, before he had 


the Power over what I intended to do for her, He 
bit his Lip, and, with a baſty Step, was my humble 
dervant. Ei | 
Tell the raſh Girl, that I would not have her to be 
afflicted at this Behaviour in me; for I know it 
will contribute to her Advantage one way or other: 
If be married her for her own ſake, ſhe will find 
no Alteration of Behaviour from this Diſappoint- 
ment: But if he married only for her Money, ſhe 
willſoon be glad to find it in my Poſſeſſion, rather 
than his. 

$ Your Interpoſition in her Behalf is very {/erly : 
And you ſee I have not the Reſentment ſhe might 
Expect, But would to God ſhe had acted with your 


Prudence] For her own ſake I wiſh it. I am 
Your loving Father, 


DB T1E KR LEY 

Yo a Brother, againſt making his Wife and 
Children the conſtant Subject of his Praiſe and 
Converſation, 


Dear Brother, 


HE Love I have always had for you, and an 
Unwillingneſs I find in myſelf to ſay any thing 
at may put you to Confuſion, has made me take 
is Method of acquainting you with a ſmall In- 
"Wicretion I have often obſerved in you, and which 


Ii perceive gradually to gain Ground as your Family 
\\Mcreaſes, n . 5 What 


j 


J 


96 Familiar LRT ERS on the 


What I mean, is an immoderate Inclination to 
make your Spouſe, and your Children, the Sub- 
je& of Diſcourſe where-ever you are. Imagine 
not that any Pique or Diſlike draws this from 
me: My Silter, I think, is poſſeſſed of as mam ge 
valuable Qualities as moſt of her Sex; ; and al 

our Children are very promiſing. No wonder then, 
that this. View makes a very deep Impreſſion upon 4 
ſo tender a Heart as yours; and the Fondneſs of: 
Huſband, and of a Father, is what muſt make you F. 
eſteemed by all who conſider the many Advan- . . 
tages ariſing from thence to Poſterity. But a Milli 
full of Affection for what is ſo dear to himſelf; 
ſtands in need of the utmoſt Care, to keep what con- 
cerns only himſe ſo from employing too much the 
Attention of others: What affects you molt ſenſi. 
bly upon this Subject, is, even by your Friend; 
heard rather with an Ear of Cenſure 2 fron e, : 
And what the tender Bias of a Father ſwells inf 
your Conception to the moſt witty Repartee, h F 
an Ear deſtitute of that Bias, ſounds neither witty 
nor uncommon z and you cannot mortify many 
Men more, than by dragging out an unwilling 4. 
very pretty indeed, Sir: A charming Boy ! or, "Sud i 
| 2 bejig Was far above his Years, truly. Which 

kind of yawning Applauſe, is ſometimes, by yea 
Attention being ſtrongly fixed to your Story, mil 
taken for Approbation, and you thereupon launci 
out farther upon the ſame Subject, when youll 
Hearers are ſcarce able to conceal their InattentionM 
Beſides, don't you conſider, that another Man nl 
have as great Fondneſs for his, as you have {if 
yours; and while your Children are the wittieſt, ti 
deautifulleſt, the hopefulleſt in England, do yu 
not tacitly reflect upon every other Man's Childr 
in the Company ? 


8 2, 


Lo 


* 
— 


— — — —— — — —  -—— —  —  — —_ — 


— ” —ä—ä — 


— —— — — —— 


moſt Im portant Occaſions. 97 


To me, I grant you full Liberty to ſay whatever 
ou pleaſe; nay, ſeveral little Tricks you tell of 
atty and Tommy are agreeable enough to me, and 


\ 
ä ä 


Wome I think even entertaining; but to others, have 


& cloſe Guard upon yourſelf, leſt when you try to 
et your Children admired, you ſhould get your- 
H deſpiſed. Let you and me, as Father and Uncle, 
Weep all their little Whimfies to ourſelves ; for as 
Wtrangers ſhare not in the Affection and Expence at- 
ending them, why ſhould they partake in the Eu- 
Fertainment they afford? 

T hope my conſtant Behaviour has convinced you 
f my ſincere Regard for your Intereſt and Repu- 
ration: What I have ſaid, I mean for vour Benefit: 
nd you know me too well, to chiuk otherveide 


our tenderly affeFionate Brother. 


* — — —— — - — — ——— — . — ů GO 


LETTER NIX. 


rom a Father to a Daughter, in Diſliłe of her 
Intentions to marry at 100 eariy an Age. 


— 


Dear Sally, 2 
Eg) WAS greatly ſurpriſed at the Letter you ſent 


* 


Su 


# 


me laſt Week, I was willing to believe I faw 


% 


Win you, for your Years, fo mvch of your late dear 
g Mother's Temper, Prudence, and virtuous Ditpo- 


Wition, that I refuſed, ſeveral advantageous Offers 
Wot changing my own Condition, purely for your 
ſake: And will you now convince me fo early, 
that IJ have no Return to expect from you, but 
that the Moment a young Fellow throws himſelf 
In your way, you have nothing ele to do, but to 
ee me Notice to provide : Fortune for you? for 
1 that 


. 


à Bias in your Favour. 


never uſed violent Meaſures to you on any Occaſio 


— — —— — —————— —— — — 
2 — — ” - « * — 


Familiar LETTERS on the 


98 
that you intend to be of no further Uſe and Sg. 
vice to me. This, in plain Engliþ, is the Meanin 
of your Notification. For I ſuppoſe your you 
Man does not intend to marry you, without ; 4 
Fortune. And can you then think, that a Father ha 
nothing to do, but to confer Benefits on his Chi 
dren, without being intitled to expect any Reiun 
from them ? 
To be ſure, I had propoſed, at a proper Time, to 1 
find a Huſband for you; but I thought I had y«ſ 
three or four Years to come. For, confider, Sa, 
ou are not fully Sixteen Years of Age: And x 
Wife, believe me, ought to have ſome better Qua- 
lifications, than an agreeable Perſon to preſerve i 
Hiſband's E tee, tho? it often is enough to νν % 


a@ Lover's Notice. tl 
Have you Experience enough, think you, dis 
creetly to conduct the Affairs of a Family ? IM* 


thought you as yet not quite capable to manage »:|i 
Houſe ; and I am ſure, my Judgment always too: 


' Beſides, let me tell you, I have great Exceptions 4 
to the Perſon, and think him by no means ti 
Man I would chuſe for your Huſband, For which, þ 


if it be not too late, I will give good Reaſons. | 5 
On the whole, you muſt expect, if you marr & 


without my Conſent, to live without my Ai? 
Think it not hard: Your Diſappointment can 
be greater than mine, if you will proceed. I he. 


and ſhall not on this. But yet I earneſtly hope you 
will not hurry yourſelf to Deſtruction, and me 
perhaps to the Grave, by an Action which a lich; 
Conſideration may fo eaſily prevent. I am ; 
Your affiifted Father 7 „ 

L EI 


„ 


moſt Important Occaſions, 99 


LE 1-1 EK LAX. 


| on; a Father to a Danuplter againſt a frothy, 
French Lover. 


Dcar Polly, 
; I CANNOT ſay I look upon Mr. La Turriere 


in the ſame favourable Light that you ſeem to 
do, His frothy Behaviour may divert well enough 
gas an Acquaintance; but is ver unanſiverable, | 
think, to the Character of a Huſband, eſpecially an 
Engliſb Huſband, which I take to bea graver Cha- 
racter than a French one. There is a Difference in 
Fbeſe gay Gentlemen, while they /r:ve te pleaſe, and 
when they expect to be obliged, In all Men this is 
too apparent: But in thoſe of a light Turn it is 
more viſible than in others. If after Marriage his 
preſent Temper ſhould continue, when you are a 
careful Mother, he wall look more like a Son than 
Huſband: If entering into the World ſhould 
. ange his Diſpoſition, expect no Medium ; he will 
be the moſt inſipid Mortal you can imagine; if his 
Ppirits ſhould be depreſſed by the Accidents of Life, 
he is ſuch a Stranger to RefleRion, (the beſt Coun- 
ſellor of the Wiſe) that from thence he will be un- 
ble to draw Relief. And Adverſity to ſuch Men 
5 the more intolerable, as their Deportment is 
uited only to the Smiles of Success. 
He dances well; writes very indifferently: Is an 
artiſt at Cards; but cannot cat Accormts :* Under- 
ſtands all the Laws of C hance 3 but not one of the 
and: Has ſhewn great Skill in the Improvement 
f his Perſon; vet none at all, that I hear, of his 
Fate And tho' he makes a good Figure in Com- 


1 


T 2 x Parny, 


3100 Familiar LETTERS on the 


pany, has never yet ſtudied the Art of living at Tome: 
He /ings well ; but knows nothing of Bufineſs : He 
has long acted the Part of a Lover; but may not 
find the ſame Variety and Entertainment in acting 
the FHluſband : Is very gallant ; but may not be over 
affoetionate + And is fo tender of h:mſelf, that he 
will have little Time to indulge any bedy elfe.---- 
Theſe, Child, are my Sentiments of him; you 
arc not wholly ignorant of the World: I deſire to 
guide, not to force, your Inclinations ; and hope your 
calm Reaſon will baniſh all farther Thoughts of this 
Gentleman, who, however you may like him for 
a Partner at a Ball, ſeems not ſo well qualified for 
a Journey through the various Trials, from which 
no Station can exempt the married State. I am 


Nur affeftionate Father, 


LETTEN LAXqE 


A modeſt Lover deſiring an Aunt's Favour 1 
her Niece. 


Good Madam, 


I HAVE feveral times, that I have been happy 

in the Company of ary beloved Niece, thought 
to have ſpoken m ind, and to declare to he 
the true Value and Affection I have for her. But 
Juſt as J have been about to ſpeak, my Fears haue 
vanquiſh'd my Hopes, and I have been obliged tw 
ſuſpend my Purpoſe. I have thrown out ſeveril 
Hints, that I thought would have led the way to 
fuller diſcloſing of the Secret that is too big {v 
my Breaſt, and yet, when I am near her, is too in- 
portant for Utterance. Will you be fo good, Mir 
dam, to break way for me, if I am not wholly di 


. 


approved 


* 


2 
j 
t 
| 
7 
1 
| 


moſt Important Occaſions. 101 


approved of by you; and prepare her dear Mind 
” for a Declaration that I muſt make, and yet know 
not how to begin ?---- My Fortune and Expecta- 
| tions make me hope, that I may not on thoſe 
Accounts be deemed unworthy : And could I, by 


= 4 


1 other Bar, I ſhould be enabled to build on fo de- 

ſirable a Foundation, and to let your Niece know, 
how much my Happineſs depends upon her Favour, 

” Excuſe, dear Madam, I beſeech you, this Trouble, 
and this preſumptuous Requeit, from 


„ 


Veur mijft obliged and obedient Servant, 


LET ERNI. 
The Aunt's Anſtoer, ſuppoſing the Gentleman 
| ger des Encouragement, 
$1 R, 


| I CANNOT ſay J have any Diſlike, as to my 


own part, to your Propoſal, or your Manner of 


making it, whatever my Nicce may have : becauſe” 


Diffdence is generally the Companion of Merit, 

and a Token of Reſpect : She is a Perſon of Pru- 
dence, and all her Friends are ſo throughly con- 
vinced of it, that her Choice will have the Weight 
it deſerves with us all: So I cannot fay, what will 
be the Event of your Declaration to her. Yet, ſo 
far as I may take upon myſelf to do, I will not 
| leny your Let 3 but on her Return to me to- 
norrow will break the Ice as you deſire, not doubt- 
ing your Honour, and the Gates of your Pro- 
of the Advances you make. TI believe ſhe has had 
the Prudence to keep her Heart intirely diſengaged, 


' - 
L 1 


* 


becauſe ſhe would 3 have told me: And 
| | 3 15 


FI 
„ 


half a Line from your Hand, hope, that there is 


feſſions; and TI ſhall tell her moreover what I think. 


wb, —— 


1 


—— — 


— 


102 Familiar LETTERS on the 


xs not ſo mean- ſpirited, as to be able to return 
Tyranny and Inſult for true Value, when {he i: 
properly convinced of it. Whoever has the Happi- 
neſs (permit me, tho* her Relation, to call it 0 
to meet with her Favour, will find this her Chara- 
cter, and that it is not owing to the fond Partia- 
lity of, Sir, Your Friend and Servant. 


LETTER IXXIII. 


The Anſwer, ſuppoſing the Gentleman is ui 
approved. 

X, 

HAV E intimeted your Requeſt to my Niece, 

who thinks herſelf obliged to your good Opinion 
of her: But begs that you will give over al 
T7 houhts of apply ying to her on this Subject. She 
fays ſhe can by no means encourage your Adrets, 
It is better therefore to know this at firſt, becauſe 
it will fave her and yourſelf farther Trouble. | 
am, Sir, Yeur humble Servant. 


e . nd RN © AH Wa) ana! ww wo ay „% 


— — 


LETTER LXXIV. 


From a reſpecsſul Lover to his Miſtreſs, 
Dear Madam, 


HAVE long ſtruggled with the moſt honovr- 
able and reſpectful Paſſion that ever filled the 
Heart of Man. I have often try'd to reveal it per- 
ſonally; as often in this way; but never till now 


could prevail upon my Fears and Doubts. But! 


can no longer ſtruggle with a Secret that has given 
me ſo much Torture to keep, and yet hitherto 


more, when I have endeavoured to reveal it. 1 


never entertain the Hop de to ſee you, without Rap- 
| ture; 


moſt Important Occaſions. 103 


ture; but when J have that Pleaſure, inſtead of be- 
ing animated as I ought, I am utterly confounded, 
What can this be owing to, but a Diflidence in 
myſelf, and an exalted Opinion of your Worthi- 
nels? And is not this one ſtrong Loken of ardent 
Love! Yet if it be, how various is the tormenting 
Paſſion in its Operations] Since ſome it inſpires 
with Courage, while others it deprives of all ne- 
ceſſary Confidence, I can only aſſure you, Madam, 
that the Heart of Man never conceived a ſtronger 

© or lincerer Paſſion than mine for you. If my Re— 
verence for you is my Crime, am ſure it has 
been my ſufficient Puniſhment, I need not ſay my 
Deligꝑns and Motives are honourable : Who dare ap- 
proach ſo much virtuous Excellence, with a Suppo- 

| fition that ſuch an Aſſurance is neceſſary? What my 
Fortune is, 1s well known, and I am rcady to 

| ſtand the Teſt of the ſtricteſt Inquiry, Condeſcend, 
Madam, to embolden my reſpectful Paſſion, by 
ne fayourable Line; that if what I here profeſs, 
hope further to have an Opportunity to aſſure 
Alf, be found to be unqueſtionable Truth, then 
my humble Addreſs will not quite be unaccept- 


able to you; and thus you will for ever oblige, 
dear Madam, | 


Your paſſionate Admirer, and devoted Servant. 


LET T-E-R IAV. 
The Anſwer, 


z 


IX. 
} T* Modeſty be the greateſt Glory of our Sex, 


| = ſurely it cannot be blame- worthy in yours. For 
my own part, I muſt think it the moſt amiable 
Quality either Man or Woman can poſſeſs. Nor can 
there be, in my Opinion, a true Reſpect, where 
F 4 there 


" 
—— . — — 


= 


104 Familiar LETTERS en 1he 


there is not a Diffidence of one's own Merit, and 
an high Opinion of the Perſon's we eſteem. 

To ſay more, on this Occaſion, would little be- 
come me. To ſay lefs, would look as if 1 knew 
not how to pay that Regard to modeſt Merit, 
which modeſt Merit only deſerves. 

You, vir, beſt know your own Heart; and if 
vou are ſincere and generous, will receive as you 
ought, this Franknefs from 

Your humble Servant, 


— 


L.E-T-T-E-K-:LALY SL. 


A bumorous Epiſtle of neighbourly Occurrences 


and News, to a Bottle-Companion abroad, 
Dear Bob, 


AM glad to hear you're in the Land of the 

Living Kill. You expect from me an Account 
of what has happen'd among your old Acquaint- 
ance ſince you have been abroad. I will gire 
it you, and, bating thet two or three Years al- 
ways make vaſt Alterations, in mature Life, you 
would be ſurpris'd at the Havock and Changes 
that ſmall Space of Time has made in the Circle 
of our Acquaintance, To begin then with my- 
ſelf : I have had the Misfortune to Joſe my Son 
Fo; and my Daughter Jud) is marry'd, and has 
brought me e Fo, Fack Kid of the Foun- 


tain, where we kept our Club, has loſt his Wiſe, 


who was a ſpecial Bar-keeyer, got his Maid Pr il 
with Child-----you remember the Slut, by her 
mincing Airs---marry*d her, and is broke: But 
not till he had, with his horrid Stum, poiſon'd 
half the Society, We began to complain of his 


Wine, you know, before you left us; and I told 


him he thould let us have Neat, who drank our 
Gallons, 


moſt Important Occaſions, 105 
| Gallons, if he was honeſt to himſelf; and, if he 


| was to regard Conſcience as well as Interet, muſt 
do leſs Harm by diſpenſing his Rats-bane to thoſe 
who drank Pints, than to thoſe honeſt Fellows 
* who ſwallow'd Gallons, and, in ſo handſome a Doſe 
| of the one, mult take a too large Quantity of the 
other: But the Dog was incorrigible ; for he went 
on brewing and poiſoning, till he kilPd his beſt 
Cuſtomers, and then what could he expect ? 
what follow'd ; for, truly, Bob, we began 
to 4 Oo like rotten Sheep. As thus: The Dance 
was begun by that ſeaſon'd Sinner Tim. Brackley, 
the Half-pint Man, who was always ſotting by 
himſelf, with his Tets in the Morning, his or- 
| reftives after Dinner, and Digeſters at Night, and 
at laſt tipt off of one of the Kitchen-benches in 
an Apoplexy. is true he was not of our Club; 
| tho" we might have taken Warning by his Fall, as 
the Saying is; but were above it. So the Rot got 
among us; and firſt, honeſt laughing Zack Adams 
kick'd up of a Fever. Tom Dandy fell. into a 
Jaundice and Dropſy, and when his Doctors ſaid 
he was mending, ſlipt thro' their Fingers, in ſpite 
| of their Art and Aflurance. Rage Harman, the 
| Punſter, then tipt off the Perch, after very little 
Warning: And was follow'd ina Week by 4rthur 
© Sykes, Ralph Atkyns bid us Good-bye in a few 
Months after him, And Ben. Tomliuis, who, vou 
ö member, would never go home ſober, tumbled 
down Stairs, and broke his Collar-bone. His Sur- 
eon took him firſt, a Feder next, then his Doctor; 
| | and then, as it were of courfe, Death: A natural 
Round enough, you'll ſay, Bob, His Widow made 
a handfome Burial for poor Ben.; ; took on grievouſly, 
ö and in Five Weeks married her Journeyman. 
Jemmy Hawkins was à long time ailing, yet would 
aot cave off; ſo he dy d, as one may ſay, of a mare 
5 natural 


_—  —— — - 


106 Familiar LETTERS en the 
natural Death. Ralph Rawlins fell ſick, after a 


large Doſe; and had fo narrow an Eſcape, that he 
was ſrighten'd into a Regimen; and now drinks 
Aſſes Milk of another Complexion than that which 
gave him his Malady; and between Phy/ic& and 
the Hyp, ſerves for a Mementa Mors to others, and 
neither lives nor dies himtelf, While honeſt Capt. 
Tinker, who was deep gone in a Conſumption, i; 
in very little better Caſe : And if any thing faves 
him, and me, and the reſt of our once numerous 
Society, it will be the Bankruptcy of our worthy 
Landlord ; for that has quite broke us up. 

So much for the Club, Bob. Now to the Neigb- 
bourheod about us, that you and I knew next bcit, 

Jerry Fenkyns, the prim Mercer, has had a Sta- 
tute taken out againſt him, and 5 s. in the Pound 
is all the Reſult of his pragmatical Þluttering, 
Dan, Pcccci the Draper has had an Eſtate left him, 
and quitted Buſineſs: While Sam. Simpſon the 
Grocer has loſt one in Law, and gone mad upon 
it. See, Bob, the Ups and Downs of this tranſitory 
State]! Harry Barl:w the Turkey Merchant has 
left off to his Nephew, and now pines for want of 


Employment. Jaſbua Milliams the Cheeſemonger, 


a ſtrange projecting Fellow, you know ! is carried 
out of his Shop into a Sponging-houſe by His cn 
Maggots, Fohn Jenes the Organiſt is married to 
Sykes's Daughter Peggy, who proves an arrant 
Shrew, and has broke about his Head his beſt Cy. 
mona Fiddle, in the Sight of half a dozen Neigh- 
bours. The Wife of Fob Fohnſon, our Sword- 
cutler, has clop'd from hin:. You know they al- 
ways liv'd like Dog and Cat. Paul Lane's Daugi- 
ter Poll has had a Baſtard by *Squire Wilſon“ 
Coachman ; and the *Squire's own Daughter Mik 
Nelly has run away with her Father's Poſtilion. 
Dick Fenkyns, that vile Rake and Beau, is turn 


Duater; 


moſt Imtoriant Occaſions. 107 


| Dunker ; and that ſtill greater Libertine, Peter 
| Mottram, /Methodift : While old Satan, to make 
up his Loſs in theſe two, has ſubdued Hill Migley, 
and Tom Allen, who you know uſed to be very 
hopeful young Fellows, and are now Rakes of the 
Town. Tony Williams J had like to have forgot. 
He has cheated all our Expectations, having eſcaped 
the Gallows, and dy'd a natural Death, after 
hundred Rogueries, every one of which deferved 
Hanging. 

Parſon Matthews goes on preaching and living, 
excellently, and has ſtill as many Admirers as 
Hearers, but no Preferment : While old clumſy 
E Parſon Dromedary is made a Dean, and has Hopes, 
by his Siſter's means, who is a Favourite of a certain 
great Man, to be a Biſhop, 
| As to News of a public Nature, the Papers, 
which no doubt you fee, in the monthly Colle- 
| Hons at leaſt, will inform you beſt of that. By 
them however you'll find very little Judgment to 
be form'd cf our Affairs or our Miniſters, as to 
the one being, or the other doing, right or wrong. 
For while ſome are made as black as Devils on one 
| dide, they are made as white as Angels on the other. 
| They never did one good thing, ſays the Enzmy. 
They never did ane bad one, ſays the Friend. For 
my own part, I think, conſidering the undoubted 
Truth of the Maxim Humanum eft errare, and how 
much caſter it is to find a Fault than to mend one, 
the Gentlemen in the Adminiſtration will be well 
| off, if the Publick will middle the Mutter between 
the tw Extremes, Mean time one Side goes 
| on, accuſing without Mercy; the other, acquitting 
without Shame, Tis the Bufineſs of one Set of 
| Papers to beſpatter and throw Dirt; and of the 
other to follow after them, with a Scrubbing-brufh 
and a Diſh-clout And 8 7 all-— the one bedaubs- 

6 ſo 


108 Familiar LETTERS 0n the 


ſo plentifully, and the other wipes off fo flovenly, 
that, let me be hang'd, Beb, if I'd appear on 
*Change with the Coat on my Back that a cer- 
tain great Man {talks about in, without Con- 
cern, when theſe Dewters and Scewerers have done 
their a0 and their beſt upon it. But *tis a great 
Matter to be 2% d to ſuch a Coat. And a great 
Happineſs, I'll warrant, your Nameſake thinks 
it, that with all this Rubbing and Scrubbing, it docs 
not appear threadbare yet, after twenty Y cars Wear, 
and a hundred People trying to pick Holes in it. 

But I have done with my News and my Poli- 
ticks, in which I was ever but a Dabbler; and 
having written a terrible long Letter, and given 
you, as it were, the World in Miniature, think it 
time to cloſe it; which I fall do with wiſhing, 
that now our poiſoning Landlord K:i4d is broke 
and gone, you were among us your old Friends now- 
and-then, to enliven us with your chearful Pipe, 
as you uſed to do in the Days of Yore, when we 
were all alive and merry. And with this hearty 
Wiſh, I conclude myſelf, dear Boh, 


Your old Bottle- Companian, and humble Seruant, 


LETTER LXXVI. 


| From a Nephew to his Aunt, en his flow Pro- 


greſs in a Courtſhip Mair. 


Dear Aunt, 


1 HAVE made my Addreſſes, in the beſt man- 
ner I can, to Miſs Dawley, but have not the 
leaſt Room to boaſt of my Succeſs : The Account 
you gave me of her good Senſe, and many uncom— 
mon Qualifications, will not permit me to e 
er 


=> 


2 2 


— 


„ 


— 


- 


— et wad . 


moſt Important Occaſions, 109 
her Conduct; and the good Opinion I have long 


| cntertained of myſelf, makes me very ſlow in 
blaming my Own. I would have obey'd your 
Orders to write to you ſooner, but knew not 
what to ſay ; and by waiting till I began to fear 
you would think me neglizent, I am in no better 
Condition. I firſt declared my Regard for her in 
a manner I thought moſt ſuitable for that Purpoſe. 
She very encouragingly made me no Anſwer; and 
when I ſpoke again upon the Subject, ſhe aſx'd how 
you did, and was glad to hear you were well. Be- 
ing put out of my Play, I talk'd of indifferent 
| Things a good while, and at laſt fell again upon the 
| Reaſon of my attending her. She order'd the Cloth 
to be laid, and complaiſantly hoped I would ſtay Sup- 
per. I had no mere Opportunity for that time. 
| Two Days after, I repeated my Viſit. She receiy- 
| ed me at- firſt politely ; but when I began to reſume 
the Subject I came upon, ſhe rung for the Maid, 
and bad her put on the Tea-kettle. About fix 
| Viſits paſſed before I could obtain one Word to my 
| Buſineſs : And the firſt Thing ſhe anſwer'd upon 
| that Head was, That Length of Time was neceſ- 
| fary to the making of an Acquaintance that muſt 
not be either bluſhed at, or repented of: This ſhe - 
| ſpoke with ſuch an Air of Gravity, as put what I 
would have reply'd, quite out of my Head, Yet 
next Viſit I began again. I told her how happy I 
| ſhould think myſelf, if I could be encouraged to 
hope for the ſmalleſt Share of her Favour, But 
ſhe made me ſuch an odd Anſwer, as plainly 
demonſtrated to me, that I had more of her Con- 
tempt than Approbation. This made me as earneſt 
as ſhe, to wave the Subject; and ſo we went on 
| upon the Weather, for a whole Week before; and 
when we had done that, we talk'd Politicks: And 
Admiral Vernon, and Lord Cathcart's Expedition, 


and 


| 


110 Familiar LETTERS 044 the 


and the like Stuff, took Place. So that, in ſhort, 
after 'I'wo Months Study how to accompliſh the 
Happineſs you pointed out for me, I find my ſelf 
1 not one ſingle Step advanced; for when I ſee her 
Vi now, we both talk with ſceming Satisfaction, on 
1 any Subject where Love has no Part: but when 
1 that is introduced, all her eaſy Eloquence ſinks 
1 into Reſerve. 

| il I v-ould not determine to give up my Addreſs, he- 
10 fore I had pour farther Advice: In hopes of which 

| 


I am, 


Honoured Madam, your dutiful Nephew, 


IETER LAXYUOL 
The Aunt's Anſwer, encouraging bim 10 
Perſevere. 


Nepheto Robert, 


F 1 Thought you had been better acquainted with 

the Art of Love, than to be fo eaſily out ©: 
Heart. That ſuch a Lady as Miſs Dawley has not 
forbid your Viſits, let me tell you, is Encourage- 
ment as much as you ought to expect. She is © 
Lady of fine Senſe, and has had the Advantage ct 
as fine an Education; and you muſt not expect a 
Lady of her Prudence and Merit, will be won by 
| general Compliments ; or that her Affection will be 
moved by the Notion of a ſudden and precipitate Fa- 
ſion. Her Judgment muſt be firſt touch'd ; for ihe 
views Marriage as a ſerious Thing: By it her Mo- 
ther was made happy, and her Siſter undone, I in- 
Join the Cent:nuation of your Addreſſes; for a more 
| deſerving Lady than. Miſs, does not live. And be 
It | ſure, at leaſt, to be more ambitious of appearing a 
Man of Senſe, than a Lover, When the latter 
accepted on account of the former, the Lady 


docs 


— — 


moſt Important Occaſions. 111 


does Credit to her Choice. You young Fellows. 
have ſuch Notions of a Nine-days Courtſhip, that 
© if it were indulged by all Women, none would, 
in a ſhort time, be thought obliging, who did not 
make Modeſty ſubmit to Paſſion, and Diſcretion 
to Compliment. I deſire to hear from you again 
a Month hence; and am, in the mean time, 


Tour affeftiwnate Aunt, 


* a 


LEITER UAE. 


Gentleman to a Lady, profeſſing an Averſion 
to the tedious Forms of Courtſhip, 


Dear Madam, 


Remember that one of the Ancients, in de- 
ſcribing a Youth in Love, ſays he has neither 
Wiſdom enough to ſpeak, nor to hold his Tongue. 
If this be a juſt Deſcription, the Sincerity of my 
| Paſſion will admit of no Difpute : And whenever, 
in your Company, I behave like a Fool, forget 
not that you are anſwerable for my Incapacity. 
Having made bold to declare thus much, I mutt 
| preſume to ſay, that a favourable Reception of 
this will, I am certain, make me more worthy 
your Notice; but your Diſdain would be what J 
believe myſelf incapable ever to ſurmount. To 
try by idle Fallacies, and airy Compliments, to pre- 
rail on your Judgment, is a Folly for any Man to 
attempt who knows you. No, Madam, your 
good Senſe and Endowments have raiſed you far 
above the Neceſſity of practiſing the mean Artifices 
which prevail upon the leſs deſerving of your Sex: 
You are not to be fo lightly deceived ; and if you 
were, give me leave to fay, I ſhould not think you 


deſerving 


112 Familiar LETTERS on the 


deſerving of the Trouble that would attend fach 
an Attempt. 

This, I muſt own, is no faſhionable Letter from 
one who, I am ſure, loves up to the greateſt Hero cf 
Romance: But as I would hope that the Hapyinc{ 
I ſue for, ſhould be laſting, it is certainly mo# 
eligible to take no Step to procure it but what 


will bear Reflection; for I ſhould be happy to fe 


you mine, when we have both out-lived the Faſte 
for every thing that has not Virtue and Reaſon ta 


ſupport it. I am, Madam, notwithſtanding this 
unpoliſh'd Addreſs, 


Your moſt reſpeciful Admirer, and obedient Servant. 


ER LI LER LEEY-- 


The Lady's Anſwer, encouraging a farther 
Declaration, 


S 7. R, 


AM very little in Love with the faſhionab!* 

Methods of Courtſhip : Sincerity with me i: 
preferable to Compliments ; yet I fee no Reaſon 
why common Decency ſhould be difcardei. 
There is ſomething ſo odd in your Style, that 
when I know whether you are in Jeſt or Earneſt | 
ſhall be leſs at a loſs to anſwer you. Mean time, 
as there is abundant Room for riſing, rather than 
ſinking, in your Complaiſance, you may poſi! 
have choſen wifely to begin firſt at the low! 
End. If this be the Caſe, I know not what 
ſucceeding Addrefles may produce: But I tell you 
fairly, that your preſent make no great Impreſhon, 
yet perhaps as much as you intended, on 


Hur humble Serv 
LET. 


moſt Important Occaſions. 113 


LETTER LXXXI. 


; The Gentleman's Reply, more explicitly avow®- 
ing his Paſſion, 


Deareſt Madam, 


OW TI have the Hope of being not more 

deſpiſed for my acknowledg'd Affection, I 
declare to you, with all the Sincerity of a Man of 
Honour, that I have long had a molt ſincere Paſſion 
ſor you; but I have ſeen Gentlemen led ſuch 
| Dances, when they have given up their Affections 
| to the lovely 'T'yrants of their Hearts, and could 
not help themſelves, that I had no Courage to 
begin an Addreſs in the uſual Forms, even to you, 
of whoſe good Senſe and Generoſity I had never- 
theleſs a great Opinion. You have favoured me 
with a few Lines, which I moſt humbly thank you 
for. And I do aſſure you, Madam, if you will 
be pleaſed to encourage my humble Suit, you 
ſhall have ſo juſt an Account of my Circumſtances 
and Pretenſions, as I hope will intitle me to your 
Favour in the honourable Light, in which I profeſs 
, myſelf, dear Madam, 


Your moſt obliged and faithful Admirer. 


Be ſo good as to favour me with one Line 
more, to encourage my perſonal Attendance, 
if not diſagrecable, 


LE T- 


—— — —ñ 


114 Familiar LETTERS 07 the 


LETTER LAXXIL 


The Lady's Anſwer to his Reply, pulling 162 
Matter on a ſudden Iſſue, 


SIX, 


S we are both fo well inclincd to avoid un- 
neceſſary Trouble, as well as unneceſſary 
Compliments, I think proper to acquaint you, 
That Mr. Fohnſon, of Pallmall, has the Manage- 
ment of all my Affairs; and is a Man of ſuch Pro- 
bity and Honour, that I do nothing in any Mattes 
without him. I have no Diſlike to your Perſen; 
and if you approve of what Mr. Zohnj;n ca: 
acquaint you with, in relation to me, and I ap 
prove cf his Report in your Favour, I ſhall be 
far from thewing any Gentleman, that I have either 
an inſolent or a ſordid Spirit, cipecially to ſuch 
as do me the Honour of their goud Opinion, 
J am, Sir, 


4 — — - 


Your bumble? Servant, 


* — 
* 


LETTER ILIXXXIII. 


A facetions young Lady to ber Aunt, ridiculing 
ber ſerions Lover. 


Dear Aunt, | 
| much obliged to you for the Kindneſ 


you intended me, in recommending Mr. Lea«- 
beater to me for a Huſband : But I muſt be ſo ire: 
as to tell you, he is a Man no way ſuited to my 
Inclination. I deſpiſe, *tis true, the idle Rants ot 
Romance ; but am inclinable to think there may 


be'an Extreme on the other Side of the . 
0 


e ũ nh r w. w:m1n +. vo ̃ — V ot; oo _axwv& at ud oe oe 


— 


Se A ty „ „„ ng wo SÞaHi” acc 


mw — My 


fy 


moſt Important Occaſions. 115 


The firſt time the hone/t Man came to ſec me, 
in the way you was pleaſed to put into his Head, 
| was one Sunday aſter Sermon time: He began 
with telling me, what I found at my Fingers- 
ends; that it was very cold, and politely blow'd 
upon his, I immediately perceived, that his Paſ- 
fon for me could not keep him warm ; and in 
Complaiſance to your Recommendation, con- 
ducted him to the Fire- ſide. After he had pret- 
ty well rubbed Heat into his Hands, he ſtood 
up with his Back to the Fire, and with his Hand 
| behind him, held up his Coat, that he might be 
warm all over; and looking about him, aſked with 
the Tranquillity of a Man a Twelve-month mar- 
ried, and juſt come off a Journey, How all Friends 
did in the Country? I ſaid, I hoped, very well; 
| but would be glad to warm my Fingers, Cry 
Mercy, Madam! ---- And then he ſhuMled a 
little further from the Fire, and after two or three 
Hems, and a long Pauſe---- 
I have heard, ſaid he, a moſt excellent Sermon 
juſt now : Dr. Thomas is a fine Man truly: Did 
you ever hear him, Madam? No, Sir, I gene- 
rally go to my own Pariſh-Church, That's 
right, Madam, to be ſure : What was your Sub- 
ject to-day? The Phariſee and the Publican, Sir. 
A very good one truly; Dr. Thomas would have 
made foe Work upon that Subject. His Text to- 
day was, {Evil Communications corrupt good Man- 
ers, A good Subject, Sir; I doubt not the Doctor 
made a fine Diſcourſe upon it. O, ay, Madam, he 
can't make a bad one upon any Subject. I rung 
for the Tea-kettle 3 for, thought I, we ſhall have 
all the Heads of the Sermon immediately. 
At Tea he gave me an Account of all the religious 
Societies, unaſk'd ; and how many Boys they had 
put out Prentice, and Girls they had . ta 
| | <nit 


— — — — — 
— — — — — — 
— — — — — Os 


116 Familiar LETTERS on the 


knit and fing Pfalms. To all which I gave 2 Mo 
Nod of Approbation, and was juſt able to fav, (for V 
began to be horribly in the Vapours) It was ü 
very excellent Charity. O, ay, Madam, faid he 
again, (for that's his Word, I find) a very excellent 
one truly; it is ſnatching ſo many Brands out 6 
the Fire. You are a Contributor, Sir, I dub: 
not. O, ay, Madam, to be ſure; every good Mar 7 
would contribute to ſuch a worthy Charity, to be! 
ture. No doubt, Sir, a Bleſling attends upon al 
who promote fo worthy a Deſign. O, ay, Madam, 
no doubt, as you ſay, Jam ſure I have found it ; 
bleiied be God! And then he twang'd his Noe, 
and lifted up his Eyes, as if in an Ejaculation, 

O, my good Aunt, what a Man is here for a 
Huſband ! At laſt came the happy Moment of 
his taking Leave; for I would not aſk him to ſtay 
Supper: and moreover, he talk'd of going to a 
Lecture at St. Helen's; and then (tho' I. hid 
had an Opportunity of ſaying little more than 
Yes, and No, all the Time; for he took the 
5 Vapours he had put me into, for Devotion and 
dl Gravity at leaſt, I believe) he preſs'd my Hand, 
V look'd frightfully kind, and gave me to underſtand, 
as a Mark of his Favour, that if, upon further? 
Converſation, and Inquiry into my Character, he | / 
ſhould happen to like me as well as te did from my 
Behaviour and Perſon ; why, truly, I need not! 
fear, in time, being blefled with him for my 
Huſband |! 

This, my good Aunt, may be a mighty fate 
way of travelling toward the Lind of Matrimony, 
as far as I know; but I cannot help wiſhing 
for a little more Entertainment on our Jeu 
ney, I am willing to believe Mr, Leaabeater 
1 an honeſt Man, but am, at the ſame time, afraid 
Ill his religious Turn of 'Cemper, however in itſel 
if com- 


harmed 


— 


pes tn ht — of = — — — 


* 
1 
i 


- moſt Important Occaſions. 117 


commendable, would better ſuit with a Woman 


who centres all Deſert in a ſolemn Appearance, 
than with, dear Aunt, 


Your greatly obliged Kinſwoman, 


LETTER LXXXIV. 


ler Aunt*s Anſwer, reprebending her ludicrous 


Turn of Mind. 


Couſin Jenny, 
1 ſorry you think Mr. Leadbeater ſo unſuit- 


able a Lover. He is a ſerious, ſober, good 


Man; and ſurely when Seriouſneſs and Sobriety 
make a neceſſary Part of the Duty of a good 


þ Huſband, a good Father, and good Maſter of a 


Family; thoſe Characters ſhould not be the Sub- 


jects of Ridicule, in Perſons of our Sex eſpecially, 
ho would reap the greateſt Advantage from them. 
But he talks of the Neather when he firſt ſees 
you, it ſeems 3 and would you have him direct! 


F 
fall upon the Subject of Live, the Moment he 
| beheld you ? 


He viſited you juſt after Sermon, on a Sunday : 


And was it ſo unſuitable for him to let you ſee, 


that the Duty of the Day had made proper Im- 
preſſions upon him? 


His Turn for promoting the Religious Societies 
which you ſpeak fo ſlightly of, deſerves more Re- 
gard from every good Perſon ; for that ſame Turn 
d a kind of Security to a Woman, that he who 
had a benevolent and religious Heart, could not 
make a bad dan, or a bad Huſband, To put cut 
poor Boys to Prentice, to teach Girls to ſing 
Pſalms, would be with very few a Subject for 
Ridicule ; for he that was ſo willing to provide for 


the 


' faid, without a thorough Knowledge of your Cha- 


118 Familiar LETTERS o the 


the Children of others, would take ſtill greater Care 
of his etun. 

He gave you to underſtand, that if he liked you 
Character on Inquiry, as well as your Peron 
and Behaviour, he ſhould think himtelf very happy 
in ſuch a Wife; for that, I dare ſay, was more like 
his Language, than that you put in his Mouth; 
And, let me tell you, it would have been a much 
{ſtranger Speech, had ſo cautious and ſerious a Mn 


racter, that at the firſt Sight he was over Heal 
and Ears in Love with you, 

I think, allowing for the ridiculous Turn your 
airy Wit gives to this his firſt Viſit, that, by your 
own Account, he acted like a prudent, a ſeri, 
and a worthy Man, as he is, and as one that 
thought flaſhy Compliments beneath him, in {v 
ſerious an Affair as this. 1 

I think, Couſin Jenny, this is not only a mighty 


ſafe Way, as you call it, of travelling toward the We: 


Land of Matrimony, but to the Land of Happine/s, Wi 
with reſpect as well to the next World as this. And BW 
it is to be hoped, that the better Entertainment you BW 
ſo much wiſh for, on your Fourney, may not cad 
ou too much out of your Way, and divert your 
Mind from the principal View which you ouglit 
to have to your Fourney's End. 

In ſhort, I could rather have wiſh'd, that you 
could bring your Mind nearer to h:s Standard, than 
that he ſhould bring down his to your Level. Ani WW 
you'd have found more Satisfaction in it than you WF 
imagine, could you have brought yourſelf to 2 if 
little more of that ſolemn Appearance, which you Wi 
treat ſo lightly, and which, I think, in þ/», 1 WW 
much more than mere Appearance. 1 

Upon the whole, Couſin Ferry, I am forr; i 
that a Woman of Virtue and Morals, as you ate, 


ſhout! 


* 


mmoft Important Occaſions. 119 


ould treat ſo ludicrouſly a ſerious and pious Frame 
df Mind, in an Age, wherein good Examples are 
P rare, and ſo much wanted; tho' at the ſame 
time I am far from offering to preſcribe to you in 
© arduous an Affair as a Huſband ; and with you 
: nd Mr. Leadbeater too, ſince you are ſo differently 
Jifpoſed, matched more ſuitably to each other's 
lind, than you are likely to be together: For I am 


Your truly affeftiinate Aunt, 


— 


LETTER LEAAXY. 


From a Gentleman to his Miſtreſs, reſenting 
her ſuppoſed Ceoquetry, 

MA DAM, 

PEAUTY has Charms which are not caſily 


reſiſted ; but it is, I preſume, in the Power 
pf the fineſt Woman breathing, to counter-balance 
l her Charms by a Conduct unworthy of them. 
Whis Manner of ſpeaking, Madam, is what I am 
ppprehenſive you have not been enough uſed to: 

he Advantages you polleſs, independently of any 
Act of your own, cannot be any Warrant for a 
Behaviour repugnant to Honour, and ſtrict good 
Manners, I ventured to addreſs myſelf to you, 
Madam, upon Motives truly honourable, and beſt 
to be defended ; but ſuffer me to ſay, that I never 
propoſed to glory in adding one to the Number of 
your publick Admirers, or to be ſo tame, as to 
Jubject myſelf to any Uſage, And if this be your 
Intention, and this only, I ſhall {till admire you; 
put muſt Jeave the flattering of your Vanity to 
PBentlemen who have more Leiſure, and leſs Since- 
Iity, than, Madam, 


Your maſt ebedient Servant, 
LE T- 


from the 


120 Familiar LET T ERS on the 


LETTER LXXXVL 
The Lady's angry Anſwer, 
SIR, 


Y the Letter I juſt now received from you, 
fanſy you have been a little too baity, as well 
at too free, in your Conjectures about my Con- 
duct. I hope it is ſuch, and will be always fach, 
as ſhall juſtify me to Perſons of Honour of my own 
Sex, as well as yours. You have ſurely, Cir, ; 
Right to act as you pleaſe; and (at preſent, how: 
ever) ſo have I. How long I ſhould have thi 
Liberty, were I at your Mercy, this Letter of 
yours gives me a molt deſirable and ſeaſonable 
ntimation, | 
For Goodneſs ſake, Sir, let me do as J think 
proper: I fee, you will. I ſent not for you, ner 
aſked you to be one of the Number you mention, 
And, if you think fit to withdraw your Name 
Lift, can I help it, if I would ever 6 
fain ? But could you not do this without reſolving 
to affront me, and to reflect on my Conduct? |! 
am unworthy of your Addreſs, grant it 
Then you can forbear it. Perhaps I like to ſee the 
young Fellows dying for me ; but fince .they can 
do it without impairing their Health, don't be fe 
very angry at me. In ſhort, Sir, you are your 
own Maſter ; and, Heaven be thank'd, I am, at 


preſent, my own Miſtreſs; and your well- man. 


ner'd Letter will make me refolve to be ſo longer 
than perhaps I had otherwiſe reſolved. You ſee 
my Follies in my Conduct. Thank you, Sir, fot 
letting me know you do, I ſee your Sex in you! 


Letter, Thank you, Sir, ſor that too. So being 
thus 


moft Important Occaſions. 121 
thus much obliged to you, in a double reſpect, 


can I do otherwiſe than ſubſcribe myſelf, 


Your thankful Servant ? 


LETTER LXXXVII. 
The Gentleman's ſubmiſſive Reply, 


Dear Madam, 


BEG ten thouſand Pardons for my raſh Letter 
to you, I wiſh'd, too late, I could have re- 
call'd it. And when I had the Favour of yours, 
was under double Concern. But indeed, Madam, 
you treated me, I thought, too lightly ; and Con- 
tempt is intolerable where a Mind is fo ſincerel 
devoted, I never ſaw a Lady I could love before 
I faw you. I never ſhall ſee another I wiſh to be 
mine; and as I muſt love you whether I will or 
no, I hope you'll forgive my foolifh Petulance. 
lam ſure it was inſpired by Motives, that, how- 
ever culpable in their Effects, are intitled to your 
Forgiveneſs, as to the Cauſe, I cannot meanly 
ſue, tho? to you. Don't let me undergo too heavy 
a Penance for my Raſhneſs. You can mould me to 
any Form you pleaſe. But, dear Lady, let not m 
honeſt Heart ſuffer the more Torture, Lent it is 6 
devotedly at your Service. Once again, I aſk a thou- 
land Pardons.- What can I ſay more? -I own I am 
haſty ; but *tis moſt when I think myſelf lighted, 
or uſed contemptuouſly, by thoſe I love. Such 
Tempers, Madam, are not the worſt, let me tell 
you. And tho? I may be too ready to offend, yet 
am I always as ready to repent. And, dear, good 
Madam, le me be receiv'd to Favour this once, 
and I will be more cautious for the future, For 
| I am, 


122 Familiar LETTERS on the 


I am, and ever muſt be, whether you'll allow i; 
or not, 


Your moſt devoted Admirer, and humble Servant. 


LETTER LXXXVIII. 
The Lady's forgiving Return, 


IN. 


1 Cannot help anſwering your Letter, becauſe 

you ſeem ſenſible of your Fault. If you 
Temper is ſo captious, your Guard againft it ſhould 
be the ſtronger, It is no very comfortable View, 
let me tell you, that one ſees a Perſon who wants 
to recommend himſelf to one's Friendſhip, ſo ready 
to take Fire, What has a Woman to do in com- 
mon Diſcretion, but to avoid, while ſhe can, a 
Proſpect ſo unpleaſing? For if ſhe knows ſhe can- 
not bear diſreputable Imputations, as indeed ſhe 
ought not, and that the 8 is not able to 
contain himſelf whenever he is pleaſed to be 
moved, from giving them; why this, truly, affords 
a moſt comfortable Appearance of a happy Life 
However, Sir, I cannot bear Malice for a firſt 
Fault, tho' yet it looks like a Temper, even in a 
Friend, that one, would rather fear than love. 
But if it be never repeated, at leaſt till I give ſuch 
Reaſons for it, that neither Charity, nor a profetled 
Efteem, can excuſe, I ſhall hope, that what has 
happen'd may rather be of good than bad Uſe to us 
both. But indeed I muſt ſay, that if you cannot 
avoid ſuch diſagreeable Inſtances of your Senſibility, 
it will be Juſtice to both, now we are both free, to 


think no more of 5 
Your humble Servant, 


ET: 


moſt Important Occaſions, 123 


LETTER LXXXIX. 
Ridiculing a romantick Rhapſody in Courtſhip. 


SIX, 


MN deſires me to acquaint you, that ſhe 
| received your celeſtial Epiſtle laſt Night, as 


we were all ſitting down to Supper ; and ſhe leaves 


it to me to anſwer it, according to the Effects it 
has produced, You muſt know then, that as ſoon 
| as ſhe had read it, there appear'd a more marvellous 
Metamorphoſis in her Deportment, than any we 
read of in Ovid, She put on high Airs, and talk'd 


in a lofty Strain to Us, as well as to the Maids ; 


nor knew ſhe how to behave all the reſt - of the 
Evening. ---- You had ſo thoroughly proved her 
ſuperior to all the Deities of the Antients, that ſhe 
could not help fanſying the homely Viands that 
ſtood before her, a Banquet of Paradiſe; and when 
ſhe put to her Lips ſome of our common Table- 
drink, it became immediately, in her Fancy, 
Nectar and Ambreſia ; and ſhe affected to fip, 
rather than drink. When, by your generous Aid, 


ſhe had thus raiſed herſelf far above Mortality, ſhe 


began to deſpiſe our Company, and thought her 
Grandmother and me too highly favoured by he- 
Preſence ; and ſpoke to us in ſuch a Tone, as 
made us honeſt Mortals amaz'd at her ſudden 
Elevation, | 

In ſhort, Sir, as ſhe has placed ſuch a thorough 
Confidence in you, as to believe whatever you arc 
pleaſed to tell her, ſhe begs you will never ſo far 
mortify her towering Ambition, as to treat her like 
any thing earthly. | 
If then you would make yourſelf worthy of her 


G 2 {oOriptean 


Favour, you muſt, in order te ſupport the De- 


124 Familiar LE TT ERS on the 


ſcription you have given of her, at leaſt dart 
through the Clouds, or riſe with the Morning- 
Goddeſs, and attend, in her airy Chariot, at her 
Chamber-window, where, you fay, all the Graces 
wait; ſo that you will not bo diſpleaſed with your 
Company. | 

Ind ſhe is under a Concern, which you muſt 
ſupply, for what Kind of Birds you will find to 
draw her Chariot; for Doves and Peacocks ſhe 
would ſcorn to borrow of Venus and Juno, whom 
you make ſo much her Inferiors, 

Here ſhe put on a Royal Air: We will con- 
clude Our own Letter Ourſelf, ſaid ſhe ſo, taking 
Pen in Hand, ſhe writes as underneath. 

Don't let me, when the Car is quite in Readi- 
neſs, be rudely diſturbed : But tell Mercury, I 
would have him tap ſoftly at my Window, I will 


riſe in all my Glory, whip into my ſtarry Calaſh, 


and ruſh through the Regions of Light, till, de- 
ſpiſing Mortality, we ſhall form ſome new Con- 
ſtellation, which ſome happy Aſtrologer may, per- 
haps, in Honour of us both, ſtyle the Tawinklers 
of Moor fields. When I have choſen my new Name, 

will deign to write it; till when, I can only ſtyle 


myſelf, moſt obliging Sir, ; 
Your Celeftial, &c. 


LETTER XC. 
Againſt a young Lady's affecting manly Airs; 
and alſo cenſuring the modern Riding-habils, 


Dear Betſey, 
HE Improvement that is viſible in your Per- 
ſon, ſince your going to Bury, gives me much 
Pleaſure ; and the dawning of fine Senſe, and ' 
: S0 


moſt Important Occaſions, 125 


good Judgment, that diſcovers itſelf in your Con- 
verſation, makes me hope to ſee every Perfection 
of my Siſter, your late excellent Mother, revived 


in you, 

Let one thing the Duty of a tender Uncle 
obliges me to blame in you; and that is, a certain 
Affectation that of late obtains in your Behaviour, 

of imitating the Manners of the other Sex, and 
appearing more maſculine than either the amiable 
Softneſs of your Perſon or Sex can juſtify. 
I have been particularly offended, let me tell 
| you, my Dear, at your new Riding-habit; which 
is made fo extravagantly in the Mode, that one 
cannot eaſily diſtinguiſh your Sex by it. For you 
neither look like a mode/t Girl in it, nor an agree- 
able Boy. | 
| Some Conformity to the Faſhion is allowable. 
But a cock'd Hat, a lac'd Jacket, a Fop's Peruke, 
what ſtrange Metamorphoſes do they make! And 
then the Air aſſumed with them, ſo pert, and fo 
| inſipid, at the ſame time, makes, upon the whole, 
| ſuch a Boy-girl Figure, that I know of nothing 
that would become either the Air, or the Dreſs, 
but a young Italian Singer. For ſuch an one, 
| being neither Man nor //aman, would poſſibly 
be beſt diſtinguiſhed by this Hermaphrodite Ap- 
pearance. | 
In ſhort, I would have you remember, my Dear, 
that as ſure as any thing intrepid, free, and in a pru- 
dent Degree bold, becomes a Man; fo whatever is 
| ſoft, tender, and modeſt, renders your Sex amiable. 
In this one Inſtance we do not prefer our own 
| Likeneſs ; and the leſs you reſemble us, the more 
| you are ſure to charm : For a maſculine I/aman is 
a Character as little creditable as becoming. 
Lam no Enemy to a proper Preſence of Mind 
in Company; but would never have you appear 


G 3 bold , 


126 Familiar LETTERS on the 


bold, talkative, or aſſured, Modeſty in the outwar 
Behaviour, is a ftrong Prepoſſeſſion in a Lady, 
' Favour ; and, without it, all your Perfections wil! 
be of little Service, either as to Reputation ot 
Preferment. You want not Senſe : and, I hope, 


will take kindly theſe well-intended Hints from 
| Your aſfectionate Uncle 


CT 


LETTER XCI. 


Letter of a Father to a Daughter, relating 1 
Three Perſons of different Characters u- 
poſed to him, each for her Huſband, Iii 
his Recommendation of one in Years, 


Dear Polly 831 


1 HAVE three ſeveral Propoſals made me on 
your Account; and they are fo particularly 
circumftanced, that I cannot approve of one of 
them. £ 
The firſt is by Mr. Aldridge, for his Son John, 
| who, you know, is very weak in his Intellects, and 
1 ſo apt to be miſled, that he wants a Guardian tor 
i him in a Vie, and ſo does you the Reputation to 
ll think you a proper Perſon for that Office. But! 
q think, the worſt Weakneſs in the World in 2 
1 Huſband is, that of Iutellect; and I ſhould ſuffer 
„ much to have you linked to a Man who has no 
Head, and is, for that Reaſon, highly unworthy 
1 to be yours. A fooliſh Wife is much more tolera- 
I | ble, becauſe ſhe can be kept up; but a fooliſh Huj- 
| l band will do what he pleaſes, and go where he 
I pleaſes ; and tho? he knew nothing elſe, will think 
he knows too much to be controuled by his Wife; 


and will have this Leſſon taught him by Rakes 2 
Liber 


mot Important Occaſions. 127 


Libertines, when he is capable of u other. So I 
did not think it neceſſary ſo much as to conſult 
you about him. 


{ * The ſecond is from Mr. Gough, for his Son 


Richard, who has run thro* ſuch a Courſe of 


Libertiniſm, that he has hardly his Fellow, and 


has neither a ſound Head, nor a ſound Body ; and 
» ſo far from being reclaim'd, that his Father 
propoſes a Wife, as the /a/? Hope, for him; and 
yet knows not whether he will accept of one, if 
one can be found that would venture upon him, 


So ] could not think of ſuffering my ern, + ra to 


ſtand either to the Courteſy, or lie at the Mercy, 
of ſo profiigate a Rake: tho”, it ſeems, he vouch- 


| ſafes to like you better, as his Father ſays, than 


any one he ever ſaw ; which was the Reaſon of 
the old Man's Application to me. 

The third was from Mr. Tomkins, whoſe Nephew 
is as bad a Set, as the other is a Rake; but who 
promiſes to reform, if his Uncle can procure my 
Conſent and yours, But as you had refuſed his 
Overtures when made to yourſelf, without con- 
ſulting me, and for the very Reaſons I ſhould have 


rejected him, I would not trouble you about him 


but gave a total Denial to the Requeſt of his Uncle, 
who deſired that the Matter might be brought on 
again, by my Authority and Interpoſition. 
So, my good Girl has had hard Fortune, as one 
may ſay, in the Offers of three Perſons, that it 
is impoſſible ſhe ſhould chuſe out of: One ſo very 
a Fool, a ſecond ſo profligate a Rake, and the third 
ſo vile a Sot, that there could be no Thought of 
a of the Three. 
zut I have a 3 Affair to mention to you, 
againſt which there can lie but one Objection; 
and that is, ſome Diſparity in Years, This is my 
good Friend Mr, Rowe ; as honeſt a Man as ever 
684 lived; 


128 Familiar LETTERS on the 


liv'd ; a Man of Prudence; a Man of good For. 
tune, and eaſy Circumſtance ; Maſter of a gentee| 
Houſe and Buſineſs ; well reſpected by all the 
World, and moſt by thoſe who know him 5%; a 
good-natur'd Man, humane, compaſſionate, and, 
tho* frugal, not a Niggard. 

Now, my dear Daughter, What think you of 
Mr. Rowe ? ---- He has an high Opinion of your 
Prudence and Diſcretion ; but wiſhes himſelf, that 
yu were either Ten Years older, or he Ten Year 
younger.----Yet he thinks, if you can get over 
that Point, he could make you one of the fondeſt 
of Huſbands, and that there is not any thing but 
he could and would oblige you in. 

I too, my Dear, wiſh there was a nearer Agree- 
ment in Tears; yet, conſidering the Hazardsa young 
Woman runs, as the World goes, from Rate: 


'Sots, and Fools, of every Degree; conſidering that 


in this Matter, there is but one only thing to be 
wiſth'd for; and that all the grand Deſirables of 
Life will be ſo well ſupply'd; conſidering too 
that he is a fightly, a neat, a perſonable Man, and 
has good Health, good Spirits, and good Humour, 
and is not yet got quite at the Top of the Hi! e 
Life, Conſidering all theſe Things, I ſay, I think 
that ane Conſideration might be given up for the 
many other more material ones, which would be ſo 
well ſupply'd in this Match. 

Say, my dear Daughter, ſay freely, what you 
think. You'll much oblige me, if you can get 
this Matter over. But if you cannot, (and be ſo 
happy as I wiſh you)---why then--- I don't know 
what to ſay ---- But I muſt--- TI think---acquieſce. 
But yet, L could once more wiſh---But I will ſay 
no more till I have your Anſwer, but that I am 


Your mot indulgent Father, 
LE T- 


| 
| 
; 


moſt Important Occaſions, 129 


LETTER XCIL 
Her Anſwer, dutifully expoſtulating on the 


aſe. 


Honoured Sir, 


| I AM ſenſible of the Obligations which both Na- 


ture and Gratitude lay me under to obey your 
Commands; and am willing to do ſo at all Events, 
if what I have to offer be not thought ſufficient to 


| excuſe my Compliance, 


Mr. Rowe is, I believe, poſſeſſed of all the 
Merit you aſcribe to him. But be not diſpleaſed, 
dear Sir, when I ſay, that he ſeems not ſo proper 
an Huſband for me, as for a Woman of more 
Years and Experience, 

His advanced Years, give me leave to ſay, will 
be far from being agrecable to me ; and will not 
my Youth, or at leaſt the Zfe#s of it, in ſame 
Particulars, be diſtaſteful to him? Will not that 
innocent Levity, which is almoſt inſeparable from 
my Time of Life, appear to him in a more de- 
ſpiſable Light, than perhaps it deſerves? For, 
dir, is not a Likeneſs of Years attended with a 
Likeneſs of Manners, a Likeneſs of Humours, an 
Agreement in Diverſions and Pleaſures, and Think- 
ing too? And can ſuch Likenefles, fuch Agree— 
ments, be naturally expected, where the Years 
on one Side double the Number of the other? Be- 
fides, Sir, is not this DefeCt, if I may fo call it, a 
Defe& that will be far from mending by Time ? 

Your great Goodneſs, and the Tenderneſs I 
have always experienc'd from you, have embolden'd 
me to ſpeak thus freely upon a Concern that is of 
the higheſt Importance to my future Welfare, 

3 5 Which 


130 Familiar LET TERS on the 


which I know you have in View from more ſolid 
Motives than I am capable of entertaining. And 


jf you ſtill inſiſt upon my Obedience, I will only 


take the Liberty to obſerve, that if I do marry 
Mr. Rowe, it will be intirely the Effect of my 
Duty to the beſt of Fathers, and not of an AMfection 
for a Gentleman that I reſpect in every other Light 
but that you propoſe him in. And dear, good Sir, 
conſider then, what Miſunderſtandings and evil 
Conſequences may poſſibly arife from hence, and 
xender unhappy the future Life of 


Your moſt dutiful' Daughter, 


I am greatly obliged to you, Sir, that you 
refuſed, without conſulting me, the three 
ſtrange Overtures you mention. 


LETTER XCIII. 


His. Reply, urgently inſorcing, but not compell- 
ing, her Compliance with his Deſire. 


Dear Polly, 
1 AM far from taking amiſs what you have writ- 
1 ten, in Anſwer to my Recommendation of my 
werthy Friend Mr. Rowe ; and J am ſure, if I was to 
ſhew him your Letter, he would never permit you 
to be urged more on this Head. But, my Dear, 
I own my Wiſhes and my Heart are engaged in hi, 
ſhall I fay, or in your own F. avour? And I would hope, 


that notwithſtanding all you have written, your 


good Senſe, and that Diſcretion for which you have 
been hitherto ſo deſervedly noted, may, on ma- 
ture Reflection, enable you to overcome the Ob- 


jection that would be inſuperable to lighter and 


airier Minds of your Sex. 
Such 


moſt Important Occaſions, 131 


uch is the Profligateneſs of the Generality of 

oung Fellows of the preſent Age, that I own I look 
into the World with Affrightment, at the Riſques 
which a virtuous young Woman has to encounter 
with on a Change of Condition, which makes 
me dwell upon the Point with the greater Earneſt- 
neſs, And you know, my Dear, I can have no 
Motive but your Good. 

Then, Child, conſider the Reputation this 
Match, to all who know Mr. Rowe's Worth, 
will bring to your Prudence, and even to your 
Sex. For it is as much Credit to a young Lady to 
marry a worthy Man, older than berſelf as it is 
Diſcredit for an old Woman to marry a young Man, 
Does my Polly take my Meaning ? The Caſe is 
plain, Beſides, no-body thinks Ten or Twelve 
Years Difference in a Man's Age any thing out of 
the way. So, my Dear, it is not Twenty Years 
Odds; it is only Ten at moſt. | | 

Then, again, he is a good-natur'd Man ; there's 
a great deal in that, you know. 

To be ſure, my Dear, it is my good Opinion of 
your Prudence, that makes me endeavour to per- 
ſuade you to this. And I could be glad, methinks, 
to find, that I have not too high a Notion of your 
Diſcretion, in the Preference Tam willing to give 
it to that of all the young Ladies I know, 

But if I am miſtaken, I mean, if you cannot 

get over this one Difficulty, I ſhall be apt to think, 
ſo ſurmountable does it ſeem to me, that you have 
ſeen ſomebody you like, and are prepoſſeſs'd. 
Yet I cannot believe that neither, becauſe you 
know I have fo tender a Regard for your own- 
N that you would have made me acquainted. 
with it. . 

Yet, after all, far be it from me to compel your 
Inclinations ! But if you ſhould be ſo happy as to 

(3 6 _ think. 


— he - 
=Y 
_—_ 
" — 
K 00 „. 


132 Familiar Lx TTERS on the 


think with me, that the many valuable Qualitics 
Mr. Rowe is poſſeſſed of, are ſcarcely to be hoped 
for in a younger Man, as the World now goes, 
you would make me very happy; and I am per- 
ſuaded you will never repent your Choice. 

One thing more let me urge, my Dear ; for 
you ſee how my Heart's upon it. How many 
very virtuous young Maidens have married, for the 
fake of Riches only, a Man much older, much 
more diſagreeable, waſpiſh, humourſome, diſeaſed, 
decrepit, and yet have lived Years without Re- 
proach, and made themſelves not unhappy ! And 
will not my dear Daughter do as much to obige 
her Father, (and where Health, Good-nature, 
Wiſdom, Diſcretion, and great Circumitances 
meet to enforce the Argument) as others would 
do, where not one of theſe Advantages are in the 
Caſe, except the ſingle Article of Riches? Only 
then, my Dear, let Mr. Rowe attend you, two 
or three times, before you abſolutely ſet yourſclf 
againſt him. And, 8 hope your Affections are 
intirely diſengaged, you will ſoon ſee whether his 
Converſation or Propoſals will not incline you in 
his Favour, conſidering all things; that is to ſay, 
conſidering the one thing AGAINST him, and the 
many FOR him, And if it cannot be, I will 


intirely acquieſce, being ever ſtudious of your 


Happineſs, as becomes 
Yaur indulgent Father, 


LET: 


moſt Important Occaſions. 133 


LETTER XCIV. 


To a rich Widow Lady with Children, diſ- 
ſuading her from marrying a Widower of 
meaner Degree, who has Children alſo. 


Dear Madam, 


£2 is with ſome ReluQtance, and great Reſpect, 

that I prevail on myſelf to give you this Trouble, 
The frequent Viſits Mr. Clark/on makes you, and 
the Airs that Gentleman gives himſelf, have given 
Birth to a Report, that a Treaty of Marriage be- 
tween you is on foot; and that, in all Probability, 
it will be ſoon brought to Effect. 

To be ſure, Mr. Clarkſon is not to be blam'd, to 
endeavour to procure for his Wife a Lady of your 
Prudence, good Character, and Fortune; but whe- 

| ther you will be able to avoid the Cenſure of the 
World, if you chuſe him for a Huſband, is another 
Point, which greatly concerns — to conſider of, 
. and affects me, and all who with you well. 
His Fortune, Madam, is not equal to yours, 
, W ſuppoling it to be better than the World reports. it: 
e W He has Children: So have you. What Inconvenien- 
cies may not ariſe from hence? Eſpecially, as he is 
not thought to be one of the beſt and ſmootheſt- 
temper'd Men in the World.---His Character is 
not equal in any reſpect, to of ar leaſt, (for I 
would not detrat from any Man's Merit) to 
that of your late good Spouſe, my dear Friend 
who would have been much grieved, if he had had 
but the leaſt Apprehenlion, that the Man he would 
not have accompany'd with, ſhould ſucceed him 
in his Bed. | | 
Far be it from me, dear Madam, if you are ſo 
diſpoſed, as to wiſh to hinder you from a Change 


of . 


5 


ꝙ— — — 


124 Familiar Lx TTERS on the 


of Condition with a ſuitable Perſon ! But as your 
late Spouſe left hs and your Children ſo much in 
your Power, methinks you ſhould take eſpecial 
Care, how and to whom you communicate any Part 
of that Power, and thereby givea Right to controul 
not only them, but yourfelf, Muſt he not be par- 
tial to his oͤο Children? And will he not expect, 
that your Complaiſance to him ſhould make 52 
ſo too; or, at leaſt, be his Childrens Behaviour 
what it will, that it ſhall induce you to put them 
upon a Par with your own? His Daughters will 
be Spies upon your Conduct, and, be you ever {6 
kind to them, will always ſuſpect your Partiality 
to your own, and treat you as their Mother-in-law; 
and their Father will believe all they ſhall ſuggeſt, 
for that very Reaſon, and becauſe he will juage, 
tho” perhaps not al/ow for, that you ought to pre- 
fer your own to his: And this will be the Source of 
erpetual Uneaſineſſes between you. Conſider, dear 
Medium, whether your late affectionate Spouſe de- 
ſerved from you, that His Children and your own 
ſhould be put upon ſuch Difficulties, in Favour of 

thoſe of any other Perſon whatever. 
No doubt but you may make your own Condi- 
tions with Mr. Clari/on. He will be glad to call you 
and your Fortune his, upon any Terms: But con- 
ſider, Madam, how difficult it may be, whatever 
Articles you make, for a good Wife, who has been 
accuſtom'd to think her Intereſt the ſame with that 
of her Huſband, to refuſe to his Importunities, and 
perhaps to his Conveniency, if not Neceſſities, thoſe 
Communications of Fortune which you may re- 
ſerve in your own Power, when they will make 
him eaſier in Circumſtance, and more complaiſant 
in Temper: And how hard it will be to deny a 
Man any thing, to whom you have given your Per- 
ſen, and to whom you have vowed Duty * Obe- 
che,. 


moſt Important Occaſions, 135 


diener. But if you ſhould have the Reſolution to 

refuſe him, what he may not be backward to aſt, 
do you think yourſelf ſo well able to bear that [n- 

difference, if not worſe, which ſuch a Refuſal may 
* eccaſion? And would you chuſe to have Advantage 

taken of your fendereſt Hours, either to induce yoo 
| to acquiefce with Importunities, which, comply'd 
| with, may hurt your Children; or, to have thoſe 
tender Moments daſh'd with Suſpicions of Se/fi/h- 
| neſs and Defign; for Prudence will oblige you 
to be on your Guard, that even the highe/t As 
of Kindneſs, and the ftronge/t Profeſſins of Aﬀe- 
im, may not be preparative Arts to obtain from 
you Conceſſions you ought not to make. And how 
will the pure Joys which flow from an unſaſpected 
Union of Minds and Intereſts, the Want whereof 
will make any Matrimony unhappy, be found in 
a State thus circumſtantiated ? | 

If, Madam, you are bent upon a Change of Con- 
dition, your Friends would wiſh firſt, that you will 
be pleaſed abſolutely to aſcertain the Fortunes of 
your Children, according to the Deign and N11 
of their dear Father, as far as may legally be done, 
either by chuſing Truſtees for them, or by ſuch other 
way as ſhall put it out of a zew Huſband's Power to 
hurt them: And when he ſhall know this 7s dene, 
you will have a better Teſtimony of his Affection, 
as he will know what zs, and what ic not yours, 
and can hope for no more, becauſe it is not in your 
Power to give more. But how much more is it to 
be wiſhed, for your own ſake, as well as your Chil- 
drens, that if you do change, it may be with a 
[Perſon who has 1 Children? And then what other 
Children may be the Reſults of your new Marriage, 
a they will be your own as well as his, and fo be more 
oeoperhh intitled to your Care and your Kindneſs, 
dan any Man's Children by another 1/ife can be. 


x By 


—— 


136 Familiar LETTERS on the 


By this means, Madam, moſt of the Uneaſineſſes 
we every Day ſee in Families, where are two Sorte 
of Children, will be prevented ; or perhaps your 
preſent Children will be grown up, and out of the 
way, before the other can znterfere eſſentially with 
them; or if not, they will be naturalized, as one may 


. fay, to each other; and having the ſame Mother, 


who has an 2qual Intereſt in them all, will expe 
and allow for an equal Exertion of Tenderneſs and 
Favour to all. | 

I will trouble you with no more at preſent on this 
Head; and am confident, that when you confider 
maturely what I have written, and the reſpectſul 
Manner in which I have ventur'd to give my Opi- 
nion, and my own Diſintereſtedneſs beſides, and 
that I might ſtill have urged other powerful Motives, 
which I forbear in Honour to you, you will hare 
the Goodneſs to excuſe the Liberty 1 have taken, 
which is ſo ſuitable to the Laws of Friendſbip, by 
which I am bound to be, dear Madam, 


Your zealous Well-wiſher, and humble Servant, 


4a — 


os 


Inſtructions to young Orphan Ladies, as well as 
others, how to judge of Propoſals of Marriage 
made to them without their Guardians or 
Friends Conſent, by their Milaners, Mantua- 
makers, or other Go-betweens, 


YOUNG Orphan Lady, of an independent 
Fortune, receivable at Age, or Day of Marr- 

age, will hardly fail of ſeveral Attempts to engage 
her Aﬀections. And the following general Rules 
and Inſtructions will be of Uſe to her on theſe Oc- 
caſions: : 
| U 


moſt Important Occaſions, 137 


In the firſt place, ſhe ought to miſtruſt all thoſe 
who ſhall ſeek to ſet her againſt her Guardian, or 
thoſe Relations to whom her Fortune or Perſon is 
intruſted: And, next, to be apprehenſive of all 
ſuch as privately want to be introduced to her, 
and who avoid treating with her Gnardian firſt 
for his Conſent. For ſhe may be aſſur'd, that if 
a young Man has Propoſals to make, which he him- 
ſelf thinks would be accepted by a Perſon of Years 
and Experience, he will apply in a regular way to 
her Friends ; but if he has not, he will hope to 
engage the young Lady's Aﬀections by the means 
of her Milaner, her Sins whe or her Ser- 
vant, and ſo by Bribes and Promiſes endeavour to 


make his way to her Favour, in order to take Ad- 


vantage of her Youth and Inexperience : For this 
is the conſtant Method of Fortune-hunters, to which 
many a worthy young Lady of good Senſe and good 
Fortune has owed her utter Ruin, 

The following are generally the Methods taken 
by this Set of Deſigners : . 

Theſe induſtrious Go- betweens, who hope to 
make a Market of a young Lady's Affections, 
generally by Letter, or Word of Mouth, if 
oy have Opportunity, ſet forth to the young 

ady : 

That there is a certain young Gentleman of 
“great Merit, of a handſome Perſon, and fine Ex- 
« peftations, or proſperous Buſineſs, who is fallen 
„deeply in Love with her. And very probably, 
the young Lady, having no bad Opinion of her- 
* ſelf, and loving to be admired, believes it very 


« ealily. 

hy That he has ſeen her at Church, or the Opera, 
* the Play, the Aſſembly, &c. and is impatient to 
* make known his Paſhon to her. 


6 That 


— — n i — 2 * ow — — * = 


138 Familiar LETTERS en the 


«« That he is unwilling to apply to her Guardian, 

till he 4:ows how his Addreſs will be received by 
cc . 
„That, beſides, it may very probably be the 
& Cafe, that her Guardian may form Obſtacles, 
* which may not be reaſonable on her Part to give 
<< into, 

„That, if he has Daughters of his own, he 
& would perhaps rather ſee them marry'd fr /?. 

«© 'T hat he may not care to part with her Fortune, 
© and the Reputation and Convenience the Manage— 
& ment of it may give him. 

„That he may deſign to marry her, when he 


„ thinks proper, to ſome Perſon agrecable to his 


* own Intereſt or Inclinations, without conſulting 
chers as he ought. | 

4 That, therefore, it would be beſt, that her 
Guardian ſhould know nothing of the Matter, 
<< till ſhe ſaw. whether ſhe could approve the Gen- 
© tleman or not. 

That even then ſhe might encourage his Ad- 
<& dreſs, or d:ſcco:intenance it as ſhe p!rafo, 

„That for her the Propoſer's part, fhe h:1 19 
& Inter in the world, one way or other; and 29 
& /72w, but to ſerve the young . and to ob- 
lige a young Gentleman ſo well qualify'd to 
& make her happy. And ſuch-like plauſible Afu- 
rances; ending, perhaps, „with deſiring to bring 
& on an Interview, or, if that will not be admitted, 
ce that ſhe will receive a Letter from him.“ 

This kind of Introduction ought always to be 
ſuſpeted by a prudent young Lady. She ovg!:t 
with [/armth and Reſentment to diſcourage the . 
cions Propoſer. She ought to acquaint her, 

„That ſhe is refolved never to give way to 2 
& Propofal of this Importance, without the Conſent 


and Apprebation of her Guardian or Friends. 
1 | „“ That 


mo Important Occaſions, 139 
&« That her good Father or Mother, who had + 


« ſcen the World, and had many Years Experience. 


« of her Guardian's Honour and Qualifications for 


«ſuch a Truſt, knew what they did, when they 


« put her under his Care. 
“ That he had always ſhewn an h9ne/t and gene- 


* rous Regard for her Welfare. 


„That ſhe took it very unkindly of the Pro- 
*« poſer, to offer to inſpire her with Doubts of his 
Conduct, when ſhe had none herſelf, nor Reaſan 
for any. 

That it was Time enough when he gave her 
% Reaſon, to be apprehenſive of his ſiniſter Deſigns, 
or of his preferring his own Intereſt to hers. 

„That it was a very ftrange Attempt to make 
« her miſtruſt a Friend, a Relation, a Gentleman, 
* who was choſen for this Truſt by her dear Pa- 
« rents, on many Years Experience of his Honour 
and Probity, and of whofe Goodneſs to her, for 
«* ſo long tizze paſt, ſhe herſelf had many Proofs : 
« And this in Favour of a Perſon who had a v/7- 
« ble Intereft to induce him to this Application 
« whoſe Per/on ſhe hardly new, if at all; whoſe 
„ Profeſſions ſhe could not judge of; who began by 
« ſuch mean, ſuch groundleſs, ſuch unworthy In- 
e ſinuations : Who might, or might not, be the Per- 
* ſon he pretended; and who wanted to induce 
her to prefer himſelf, on no Acquaintance at all, 
to a Gentleman ſhe had ſo many Years known 3 
* and whoſe Honour, good Character, Reputation, 
and 1 were all engaged to her as ſo 
2 N ledges for his honourable Behaviour to 

er, 

That ſhe the Propoſer, and the young Gen- 
* tleman too, mult have a very indifferent Opinion 
* of her Gratitude, her Prudence, her Diſcretion, to 
make ſuch an Attempt upon her. 

That 


140 Familiar LET T ERS on the 


That if he could approve himſelf to a Man 
% Years and Experience, who was not to be im- 
«© poſed upon by blind Paſſion, in the Light he 
& wanted to appear in to her, why fhould he not 
apply to him 125 

That ſurely it was a very ungenerous as well 2; 
« ſuſpicious Method of Proceeding, that he could 
find no other way to give her an Opinion of Vu 
& /elf,, but by endeavouring to depreciate the Cha- 
« racter of a Gentleman, who, by this Method, 
<« plainly appeared to his own Apprehenſion to ſtand 
© in the way of his Proceedings; and that ty 
% before he had try'd him; and which ſhewed, 
„ that he himſelf had not hope of ſucceeding, but 
* by Arts of Deluſion, Flattery, and a clandeſtine 
„ Addreſs, and had nothing but her own {nadver- 


© tence and Inexperience to build upon. 


That, therefore, it behoved her, had ſhe 0 other 
<< Reaſon, to reject with Reſentment and Diſdain 
a Conduct fo affrontive to her Under/tanding, as 


well as ſelfiſh and ungenerous in the Propoſer. 


That, therefore, ſhe would not countenance 
any Interview with a Perſon capable of acting in 
„ ſuch a manner, nor receive any Letter from 
6 him. 

&« And laſtly, that ſhe deſires never to hear of 


< this Matter again, from her the Propo/er, it 


& ſhe would have her retain for her that good Opi- 
& nion, which ſhe had hitherto had. 
This prudent Reaſoning and Conduct will make 


the Intervener quit her Deſign upon the young 


Lady, if ſhe is not wholly abandoned of all Senie 
of Shame, and corrupted by high Bribes and Pro- 
miſes ; and in this Caſe, the young Lady will judge 
how unfit ſuch a Perſon is either for her Confident 
or Acquaintance, Nor will the Lady loſe an humbie 


Servant worthy of being retain'd or encouraged; Fa 
| K 


moſt Important Occaſions. I41 


if he be the Perſon he pretends, he will directly ap- 
ply to her Guardian, and have a high Opinion of 
% Prudence and Diſcretion ; and if ſhe hears no 
t more of him, ſhe may conclude, he could net 
make good his Pretenſions to a Perſon of Diſcern- 
ment, and will have Oceaſion to rejoice in eſcaping 
his deſigning Arts with ſo little Trouble to herſelf. 

If a Lady has had actually a Letter delivered her 
from ſuch a Pretender, and that by means of a Perſon 
who has any Share in her Conhdence, and wants a 
Form of a Letter to ſend to the Recommender to 
diſcourage the Proceeding ; the following, which 
has been ſent with good Effect, on a like Occaſion, 
may be proper. 


ES TFER-AGY. 
Mrs. Pratt, 


INCLOSE theLetter you put into my Hands, 
and hope it will be the laſt I ſhall ever receive 
from you or any body elſe on the like Occaſion, I 
am intirely ſatisfied in the Caze and Kindneſs of m 
Guardian, and ſhall encourage no Propoſal of this 
tort, but what comes recommended to me by His 
Approbation. He knows the World. I do not; 
ind that which is not fit for him to know, is not fit 
por me to receive; and I am ſorry either you or the 
Writer looks upon me in ſo weak a Light, as to 
magine I would wiſh to take myſelf out of the 
Hands of ſo experienced a Friend, to throw myſelf 
Into thoſe of a Stranger. Yet I would not, as this 
s the firſt Attempt of the kind from you, and 
hat it may rather be the Effect of Inconſideration, 
than Delign, ſhew it my Guardian; becauſe he 
vould not perhaps impute it to fo favourable a Mo- 
We tue in you, as J am willing to do, being 

* Your Friend and Servant. 


- It 


142 Familiar LETTERS 01 the 


If there be no Go-between, but that a young 
Fellow takes upon himſelf to ſend Letters to teize 
a young Lady to encourage his Addreſs, by his ro- 
mantick Profeſſions of his Affection and Regard for 
her, and attributing ſuch Perfections to her, as no 
one Woman ever had; and if ſhe is deſirous, but 
knows not how, to get rid of his troubleſome Im- 
portunity; and that even a contemptuous Silence, 
which it is prudent for a young Lady to ſhew on 
ſuch an Occaſion, has no Effect upon him; nor 
yet that he will deſiſt, tho” ſhe returns his Lettc.; 
unopen' d, or in a blank Cover, after ſhe happens to 
have read them, then let the Lady get ſome Fricnd 
to write to him, looking upon him as beneath her 
own Notice; for even a Denial, if given in Nritin; 
under her ewn Hand, will encourage ſome pre- 
ſumptuous Men; or at leaſt they may make ſome 
Uſe of it to the Lady's Diſadvantage, and ought 
not to have it to boaſt, that they have received a 
Letter from her, tho' ever ſo much to their own 
Diſcredit, if it were ſhewn. And the following 
may be the Form : 


LETTER XCVI. 


SIR, i= 
Y O U have thought fit to write to Miſs Ku 


twice or thrice in a very troubleſome manncr 
She cannot poſbly ſo far forget what belongs to 
Herſelf and Character, as to anſwer you any oth 
way than by the Contempt of Silence. Yet ſinc 
ſhe cannot, it ſeems, be free from your Impert: 
nence, ſhe wiſhes you may be told, "That you mul 
have as mean an Opinion of her Judgment, as all 
who read your Epiſtles, muſt have of-yowurs, if yo! 
can expect Succeſs from ſuch inconſiſtent Rhip: 
ſodies. I vil 


1 
I 
C 


moſt Important Otcaſions, 142 


[ will from myſelf venture to give you one Piece 
Advice; That the next Perſon you pretend to 
{dreſs with your bright Compoſitions, you don't 
n them forget one Ingredient, which 1s common 
nſe ; tho* you ſhould be forced to borrow it. I am 


Yours, unknown, 


Or, if this be thought too affronting, the fol- 
wing: 


LETTER XClI. 
SIR, 


OU are defired to ſend no more of your ela- 

borate Epiſtles to Miſs Xnollys. You are quite 
ftaken in the Lady. She knows Her ſelf, and b 
our Letter ſhe knows you, ſo well, that ſhe dc 
back, that you may find ſome other Perſon to 
nd it to, whoſe Sentiments and Underſtanding are 
tter proportion'd to your own, I am, Sir, Cc. 


If the Letters of the young Fellow deſerve leſs 
verity, and are ſuch as have not their Founda- 
on in Romance and Bombaſt ; but yet the Lady 
inks not proper to encourage his Addreſs, this 
orm may ſerve: 


LETTER XCVIIL 
FE RW 


AM deſir'd to acquaint you, that Miſs Kn/lys 
thinks herſelf obliged to every one who has a 
bod Opinion of her; but begs, that you will not 
ve yourſelf, or her, the Trouble of any more 
eters, For Things are ſo circumſtanced, * 

| 1 e 


ſulted, in all her Affairs of Moment. Whatere 


gage her Attention. I am, Sir, 


144 Familiar LETTERS on the 


ſhe has neither Inclination nor Power to encourage 
your Addreſs, I am, Sir, 


Your humble Servant, unknown, 


If the Lady has a mind to rebuke the Attempt 
of a clandeſtine Addreſs to her, and yet thinks the 
Propoſal not abſolutely unworthy of Attention, did 
it come regularly to her, by means of her Father, 
Mother, B &c. this Form may be ob- 
ſerved: 


LETTER XCIX. 


11 


MIss Knollys deſires you ſhould be informed, 

which ſhe preſumes you did not know, T hat 
ſhe can never think herſelf at her own Diſpoſal, 
while ſhe has ſo near and ſo good a Friend to ad- 
viſe with as Mr. Archer, whoſe Wiſdom ſhe muc 
prefers to her own, as his Experience in the World 
and Kindneſs to her, make him deſerve to be con 


ſhall appear fit to him, will have great Weight wit 
her; and there is but that one poſſible way to en 


Yours, &c, 


Or, if the Lady has not a Guardian, or Father 
or Mother, but ſome Friend in whom ſhe uc 
confide, the following may be a proper Form: 


LETTER C. 


SIR, 


1 T may not be amiſs to acquaint you, that Mil 
Knollhs is ſo happy as to have a Friend of Ex 
perience and Probity,. without whoſe 1 
- under 


moſt Important Occaſions. 145 


undertakes nothing of Conſequence, It is Mr. 
Salter, of Grace-church-ftreet. And ſhe will not care 
to admit of any Propoſal of Moment to her that 
has not paſſed his Approbation. This, ſhe hopes, 


will fave her and yourſelf the Trouble of any fur- 
ther Applications. I am 


| Your humble Servant, 
Or this: 


L841 4 KR U. 
SIX, | 
MN. Salter, of Grace church-ftreet, being a Gen- 
tleman that Miſs Kns/lys conſults in all her 
Affairs, ſhe refers to him all Propoſals that are or 
may be of Importance to her, and deſires to receive 


no more Letters or Meſſages from you, by any 
other Hand, I am 


Nur bumble Servant, uninown. 


YR. tm. an. 4 


LETTER CI. 
From a Town-Tenant to his Landlord, excuſing 
Delay of Payment. 


Honoured Sir, 


AM under a great Concern, that I cannot at pre- 
ſent anſwer your juſt Expectations. I have ſuſtain- 
ed ſuch heavy Lofles, and met with ſuch great Diſ- 
appointments of late, that I muſt intrude another 
Quarter on your Goodneſs. Then, whatever Shifts 


Jam put to, you ſhall hear to more Satisfaction 
Mi than at preſent, from, Sir, | 


Your meſt obliged humble Servant. 
| i "BK LE Fe 


—— 
—_ 


146 Familiar LETTERS on the 


LETTER CIIL 
| From a Country Tenam to the ſame Pur pa. 


Honoured Sir, 


H E Seaſon has been ſo bad, and TI have had 

ſuch unhappy Accidents to encounter with in 
a ſick Family, Loſs of Cattle, c. that I am ob- 
liged to treſpaſs upon your Patience a Month or two 
longer. The W heat-harveſt, I hope, will furniſh 
me the Means to anſwer your juſt Expectations 
which will be a great Contentment to 


Your honeſt Tenant, and humble Servany, 
LETTER CIV. 
The Landlord's Anſwer, 


Ar. Jacobs, 


1 HAVE yours: I hope you'll be as good as your 
Word at the Expiration of the Time you har: 
mentioned. I am unwilling to diſtreſs any hone} 
Man ; and I hope, that I ſhall not meet with the 
worſe Uſage for my Forbearance, For Ln 
abuſed, even in generous 'Tempers, provokes Re- 
turns, that ſome People would call /evere ; bu 
ſhould not be deemed ſuch, if 7 Iam 


Fours, &c. 


—— —— — —— 


moſt Important Occaſions. 147 


LETTER CV. 


A threatenins Letter from a Steward on Delay 
of Payment. 
Mr. Atkins, 


HAVE mentioned your Caſe to Sir John, as 
you requeſted, He is exccedingly provoked at 
your Uſage, and ſwears bloodily he'll ſeize, and 
throw you into Gaol, if he has not 20/7. at leaſt 
paid him by Quarter-day, which is now at hand ; 
ſo you know what you have to truſt to; and 1 
would have you avoid the Conſequences at any 
rate; for he is reſolved vtherwiſe to do as he ſays, 
Of this I aſſure you, who am 


Yours, &c. | 


LET TE KR-CYL. 
The poor Tenant”s moving Anſwer. 


our Good Mr. Taverner, 


ave 1 AM at my Wits end almoſt on what you write. 
But if I am to be ruined, with my nume- 
te rous Family, and a poor induftrious, but ailing 
Wife, how can I help it? For I cannot poſſibly 
Ke. niſe 207. any manner of way by the Time you 
ba mention. I hope Sir ohn won't be ſo hard- 
hearted. For if God Almighty, our common Land- 
Kc. lord, ſhould be equally hard upon us, what would 
become of us all? Forgive my Boldneſs to talk of 

God Almighty to his Honour, in this free manner. 
I would do it, if it was tobe done; but you know, 
dir, what a Seaſon we have had. And an honeſter 
| Tenant his Honour will never have, that I am ſure 
Ie But if Money won't riſe, what can I de? 
H 2 Should 


— — — > <——— — — 


148 Familiar LETTERS on the 


Should I ſell my Team, and my Utenſils for Labour, 
there is an End of.a//, I ſhall have no Means left 
me then wherewith to pay his Honour, or any 
body elſe. If his Honour will not be moved, but 
will ſeize, pray, good Mr, Taverner, prevail on 
him not to throw me into Gaol, for a Priſon pays 
no Debts ; but let my poor Wife and Six ſmall 


Children lie in the Barn, till I can pet a little 


Day-labour ; for that muſt be all I can have to 
truſt to, if his Honour ſeizes. I hear my Man 
Milliam that was, has juſt taken a Farm; may be, 
he wHl employ his poor ruin'd Maſter, if I am not 
priſon d. Butif I be, way then the Pariſh mul 
do. ſomething for my poor Children, tho* I hope! 
they would never trouble it. Lay theſe things be- 
fore his Honour, good Sir, and forgive this Trouble 
from 


His Honour's honeſt, tho“ unfortunate Tenant, 


LETTER CVII. 
The Steward's Reply, giving more Time. 


Ar. Atkins, 


| HAVE laid your Letter and your Caſe before 
Sir Fohn : He is moved with it, and fays he 
will have Patience another Quarter, to ſee what 
you'll do. Conſider, Man, however, that Gen- 
tlemen live at a great Expence, are obliged to keep 
up their Port, and if their Tenants fail them, why 
then they muſt fail their Tradeſmen, and ſuffer in 
their Credit, You have good Crops of all Kind 
on the Ground; and ſurely may by next Parte! 


- raiſe 40 or 50. tho? 2 could not raiſe 20 l. ina 


Fortnight, This Sir John will expect at leaſt, | 


Call 


o* — , 


moſt Important Occaſions. 149 


can tell you. And you may comply with it from 
the Produce of ſo good a Farm, ſurcly, I am | 


| Tours, &. 


LETTER CVIII. 
The poor Man's thankful Letter in Return, 


NOD bleſs his Honour, and God bleſs you, Mr, 

F Taverncr, that's all I can ſay. We will now 
ſet our Hands to the Plough, as the Saying is, with 
chearful Hearts, and try what can be done, I am 
ſure, I, and my Wife and Children too, tho' three 
of them can but liſp their Prayers, ſhall Morning, 
Noon and Night, pray to God for his Honour's 
Health and Proſperity, as well as for you and yours 
and to enable me to be juſt to his Expectations. I'm 
ſure it would be the Pride of my Heart to pay every 
body, his Honour eſpecially. I have not run be- 
| hind-hand for want of Induſtry ; that all my Neigh- 
bours know ; but Loſſes and Sickneſs I could. not: 
help; and — could live more frugal and ſparing. 
than both my Wife and I. Indeed we have hardly 
| allowed ourſelves Cloaths to our Backs, nor for our 
Children neither, tight, and clean, and wholſome as 
they may appear to thoſe who fee them: And we 
| will continue to live ſo low as may only keep us in 
| Heart to do our Labour, until we are got before— 
hand ; which God grant. But all this, I told you 
before, Mr. Taverner; and ſo will ſay no more, but 
Iwill do all I can, and God give a Blefling to my 


| Labours, as I mean honeſtly. So no more, but 
that I am, Sir, 


Fur ever-obliged Servant. 


C 3 LET. 


150 Famitiar LETTERS 0n the 


LETTER CIX. 


An Offer of Aſſiſtance io a Friend who Vet 
received great Loſſes by a Perſon's Failure. 


Dear Sir, | 


1 AM exceedingly concerned at the great Lo 
which you have lately ſuſtained, by the Failurcof 
Mr. Tranter. TI hope you behave under it like the 
Man of Prudence you have always ſhewn your- 
felf, and as one who knows how liable all Men orc 


to Misfortunes, I think it incumbent on this Oc- 


cafion, not to conſole you by Words only; but in 
the Spirit, and with the Chearfulneſs, of a mot 
fincere Friend, to offer my Service to anſwer any 

reſent Demand, ſo far as 200 J. goes, which you 
ſhall have the Uſe of freely for a Twelve-month, 
or more, if your Affairs require it; and will even 
ſtrain a Point rather than not oblige you, if more 
be neceſſary to your preſent Situation, You'll do 
me great Pleaſure in accepting this Offer, as frech 
as it is #indly meant, by, dear Sir, 


Tour's moſt faithfully, 
LETTER: CE 
The Friend's Anſwer, accepting the kind Offer, 


My dear Friend, 
H OW ſhall I find Words to expreſs the grateful 


Senſe I have of your Goodneſs? This is an 
Inſtance of true Friendſhip indeed! I accept molt 
thankfully of ſome Part of your generous Offer, 
and will give you my Bond, payable in a Year, 
for 1904, which is at preſent all I have ran 

or; 


ey 2 . . x 


reg Free 4a « 


— — r ee COS 


moſt Important Occaſions. 151 


for; and if I did not know I could then, if not be- 
fore, anſwer your Goodneſs as it deſerves, I would 
not accept of the Favour. This Loſs is very heavy 
| and affecting to me, as you may fuppoſe ; yet your 
zenerous Friendſhip is no ſmall Comfort to me in 
it. For ſo good a Friend is capable of making any 
Calamity light. I am, dear Sir, 


Your mot faithful and obliged humble Servant, 


LETTER CAI. 
| The Friend's Anſwer, ſuppoſing he has up 


Occa/ion, 
Dear Sir, 


| A THOUSAND Thanks to you for your 
| +2 gencrous Offer, and kind Advice. I have been 

not a little affected at the unexpected Failure of a 
| Man all the World thought as good as the Bank. 

| But, at preſent, I have no Occaſion for your friendly 
Aſſiſtance. If I ſhould, I know no one in the 
| World I would ſooner chuſe to be obliged to; for 
| Iam, dear, kind Sir, 


Your me:ft obliged humble Servant. 


| EETFEER UI. 
| Of Conſolation to @ Friend in Priſon for Delt. 
| Dear Sir, 


AM exceedingly concerned to hear, that the Se- 
| * verity of your Creditors has laid you under Con- 
finement. But there is one Comfort reſults from it, 
that the utmoſt Stretch of their Revenge cannot 
carry them farther; and that when a Man is got to 
the undermoſt Part of Fortune's Wheel, he may. 
| H 4 riſe, 


—— 
2 


1 
N 
1 


152 Familiar LET T ERS 01 the 


riſe, but cannot fink lower. You now know tho 
worſt, and have nothing to do, but to ſupport your 
Misfortune with that true Magnanimity which be- 
comes a noble Mind, Long, very long, have you 
been labouring under great Difficulties, and ſo have 
been enured to Misfertunes ; and you have /oo4e/ 
orward with ſuch Anxiety and Pain to the Hard 
Lot that has now befallen you, that *tis impoſſible the 
bearing of it can be equal to the Apprehenſions you 
had of it. You fer all around you too many un- 
happy Objects reduced to the fame Diſtreſs, and 
you ſee them either extricating themſelves from 
thoſe Difficultres, (as I hope you ſoon will) or learn- 


Ing to bear them with a true Chriſtian Reſignation, 


For well does the wiſe Man obſerve, that the Race i: 
not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, nor Riches 
ta Man of Underftanding. And it will yield you ſome 


Conſolation when you reflect, that zh:s Life is but 


a State of Probation, and he that meets with Miſ- 
fortunes here, may, by a pxoper Uſe of them, and by 
God's Grace, be intitled to a bleſſed Hope; when 
a proſperous State may make a Nan forgetful of 
his Duty, and fo reap no other Good but what he 
finds in this ranſitory Life. Remember, my Friend, 
that the School of Affliction is the School of Miſdon; 
and ſo behave under this fying Calamity, as to ſay 
with the Royal Prophet, It is good for me, that! 
was affiitted. 
I think myſelf, however, not-a little unhappy, 
that my Circumſtances will not permit me to afſiſt 
ou on this grievous Occaſion, in the way a Friend 
would chuſe to do, if he was able; but if by my 
perſonal Attendance on any of your Creditors or 
Friends, I can do you Pleaſure or Service, I beg 
you to command me. For, in whatever 1s in my 


poor Power, I am, and ſhall ever be, 


Your faithful Friend and Servant. 
LE T- 


oils. Gay ay a — —G_—CM wy  n<uﬀc_=ﬀ—ru — nn 


moſt Important Occaſions, 153 


LETTER CXII.. 
In Anſwer to the preceding. 


Dear Sir, 


I NOW experience fully the Truth of the honeſt 

1 Engliſh Phraſe, That a Friend in Need, is a 
Friend in Deed; You have filled me with fuch un- 

| fpeakable Comfort to find that I am not abandoned 
by alli my old eg J e that, in a great meaſure, 

your ſeaſonable Kindneſs will enable me to purſue 

the Advice you give me. 

It is too ave to look back now on the Steps that 

| have brought me to this abject Condition. No 

doubt, were I to live my Life over again, I could 

do much better for myſelf than I have done, .and - 
| ſhould hardly run into ſome of the Failings that 

have help'd to bring ſuch heavy Misfortunes upon 

me. But my Comfort is, I ever had an h:nef In 
| tention, and never was a Sat or a Spendthrift, But 

yet, who knows, if I had avoided /ome Miſtakes, that 

J might not have fallen into as bad awother way? 

So I muſt acquietce in the Diſpenſation, and pray 

to God, in his own good Time, to deliver me 

| from it. 

What is moſt grievous to me in this Matter, 1s 

my poor Mie and Children, who have deſerved a 

| happier Fate; had it been in my Power to have 

| done better for them, than now I am ever likcly 

to do, 

As to your kind Offer, my dear Friend, I wilt 
beg to ſee you as often as may not be detrimental. 
| to your own Affairs. I care not how ſeldom I ſee 
my dear Wife: Neither her Heart nor ine can 
| bear the Grief that oppreſſes us when we think of 
| eur happier Days and Proſpects, and ſce them all 
| R's concluged 


— <——_ —<— — 


f 
| 
| 
ö 


ca 


| 


134 Familiar LE TT ERS on the 


concluded within theſe Bars, and Bolts, and Lat- 
tices; ſo that we fink one another ſtill lower 
every doleful Viſit the dear good Woman make: 
me. But your Viſits, my Friend, will be of 
ſingular Uſe and Comfort to me, (as your Pre- 
ſence and kind Advice will be to her, as often as 
you can) to fave us both the Mortification of ſeeing 
one another ſo often as my Affairs will otherwiſe 
require her to come to this diſmal Place; for 1 
cannot open my Mind to any body but you and 
her, I will alfo get you to go to Mr. Maddox, my 
principal Creditor, and one or two more ; I will 
tell you about what; and only fear I ſhall be too 
troubleſome to you. But you are fo kind as to 
offer your Service in this way, and J am reduced to 
the ſad Neceſſity of puſhing myſelf upon you, with- 
out the leaſt Hope of ever having it in my Power to 
ſhew you, as I wiſh to do, how much I am 


: Your grateful, tho“ unhappy Servant. 


r 1 — 


LETTER CXIV. 


To a Perſon of Note, in Acknowledgment 
great Benefits received, 


Honoured Sir, 
ERMIT me to approach you with the thank- 
ful Acknowledgments of a grateful Heart, on 
the Favour and Benefit your Goodneſs has con- 
ferred upon me. It ſhall be the Buſineſs of my 
whole Life, to the utmoſt of my Power, to de- 
ſerve it; and my whole Family, which you have 
made happy by your Bounty, will every Day Join 
with me in Prayers to God, to bleſs you wit! 
the Continuance of your valuable Health, vg 
LIIe, 


Fr WM. 


L mi as 4 _2& * 


n 
— ũ 7˙—³Ü u ͤ = 2 — - > * = AT - an. — W * 


moſt Important Occaſions, 155 


Life, and all worldly Honour; for fo it will become 
us to do, for the unmerited Favours conferr'd upon, 
honoured Sir, . 


Your met dutiful Servant. 


LETTER CXV. 


Another for Favours of not fo high, yet of 4 
generous Nature, 


Mriby Sir, 
I SHOULD appear ungrateſul, if I did not add: 
this further Trouble to thoſe I have already given- 
vou, of acknowledging your Goodneſs to me, in- 
this laſt Inſtance of it. May God Almighty return 
to you, Sir, one hundred-fold, the Benefit you: 
have conferr*d upon me, and give me Opportunity 
by my future Services, to ſhew my grateful Heart, 
and how much I am, worthy Sir,. 


Your for-ever obliged and dutiful Servant. 


U 


— | 


LETTER cui. 1 


An Excuſe io a Perſon who wants to borrow- \ 
Money. 
SIX, 


AM very ſorry, that your Requeſt comes to me 
* at a time when I am fo preſs'd by my o.] n- 
Affairs, that I cannot with any Conveniency com- 
ply with it, I hope, Sir, you will therefore excuſe 


- 
— 


Your moſt humble Strvant.. 


H 6 LE T- 


* * _ 


” — - — os. - — 1 * — 88S —— — — — 


—_—— <— = 


156 Familiar LETTERS on the 


LETTER CXVII. 


On the ſame Subject. 
SIX, 
1 HAVE, on an urgent Occaſion, been obliged to 
borrow a Sum of Money myſelf within ten Days 
paſt : Hence you'll judge of. my Want of Capacit 
rather than Taclination to comply with your Re- 


queſt. For I am 
Fur fincere Friend. 


LETTER CXVIII. 
On the ſame Subject. 

12 

T is with no little Pain, that Jam obliged t 
lay open to you, on occaſion of the Loan you 
requeſt of me, my own Inability. I ſhall make 
very hard Shiſt to aniwer ſome neceſſary Demands, 
which mult becomply*'d with by a certain Time; and 


ſo can only ſay, I am ſorry J have it not in ny 
Power to ſhew you how ſincerely I am 


Your moft humble & ervant, 


LETTER. CXIX. 
To a Friend in Compliance with his Requeſt i 
borrow a Sum of Money. 
SIN, i 


* OV have highly obliged me in the Requeſt you 
make me. I moſt e comply with it, 
and incloſe a Note for the requeſted Sum, payabi: 


4 


on Sight; and am nota little glad it is in my Powe 


to ſhew you how much I am 
| Hur faithful Friend and Servant. 


LET: 


— — N 
—— — a. 


moſt Important Occaſions. 157 


LETTER CXX. 


| Another on the ſame Occaſion, limiting the Re- 
| payment lo à certain Time. 


S1 R, 


HE Intimation you give me, that the Sum of 
| + 50 Pounds will be of great Uſe to you, and 
that you ſhall be able to repay it in Four Months, 
makes me reſolve to put myſelf to ſome Difficul 
to oblige you. Accordingly I incloſe a Bank Note 
to that Amount. But I muſt, in the Name of Friend- 
| ſhip, beg of you to return it me vnuſed, if you think 
you cannot keep your Word in the Repayment ; 
for my accommodating you with this Sum, is rather, 
at preſent, a greater Jeſtimony of my Inclination 


| than Ability to ſerve you: For Jam. 
| Your affectionate Friend and Servant. 


EET TER_CXXL: 


7 a Friend, on a Breath of Promiſe in noi 
returning Money lent in his Exigence, 


SIR, 


H E N-you apply'd to me, in your Streights, 
for Aſſiſtance, and made ſuch ſtrong Promiſes 
of returning in Four Months what I advanced ; 
little did I think, you would give me the irkſome 
Occaſion, either of reminding you of your Promiſe, 


' 


or of acquainting you with the Streights in which 


my Friendſhip for you has involv'd myſelf. I have 
always endeavour'd to manage my Affairs with ſo 


much Prudence, as to keep within myſelf the Power 


of 


< III on AU SY > ow > grit wo CIOS, = my 


* 
j 
: 


158 Familiar LE TT ERS bn the 


of anſwering Demands upon me, without troubling 
my Friends ; and I told you, I muſt expect you 
would keep your Word exactly to the Four Months, 
or elſe I ſhould be diſtreſs'd, as bad as you were 
when you apply'd to me. Six Months paſſed, 
and you took no manner of Notice of the Mzt- 
ter, when I was forced to remind you of it, 
Having been put to it, as I told you I ſhould. You 
took a Fortnight longer, under {til} ſtronger Pro- 
miſes of Performance. And Three Weeks are now 
expired, and your fecond Promiſes are ftill :x 
much to be performed as your fit. Is this kind, 
is this friendly, is it grateful, Sir, let me aſk you? 
And ought I to be made to ſuffer in my Credit, wo 
was ſo ready to ſave yours ?- When, too, mine 
had been in no Danger, had I not put out of my own 
Power what actually was then in it? I will only 
ſay, That if any Conſideration remains with you 
for one ſo truly your Friend, let me immediately 
be paid, and take from me the cruel Neceflity of 
reproaching you for Ingratitude, and myſelf tor 
Folly : Who am, Sir, 
Tour unkindly uſed, &c, 


LETTER CXXII. 


To a Friend, who had promiſed to lend a Sum cf 


Money, to anſwer a critical Exigence, and 
drove it off to the laſt, | 


Dear Sir, 


OU were ſo kind as to tell me, a Fortnigit 
ago, that you would lend me One hundred 
Pounds on my nd. to anſwer a Demand that 
my Credit would be otherwiſe a Sufferer by. And 
you were pleaſed to ſay, you would have me look n 
further, 


G * — — A 


moſt Important Occaſions, 159 


further, and that I ſhould certainly have it in time, 1 
] have looked no further, Sir; and the Day of Pay- | 
ment approaching, you cannot imagine how my if 
Mind has ſuffered by being not ab/olutely ſure of | 
having the Money to anſwer the Demand. I hope, 

| Sir, nothing has happen'd to make you alter your 

Mind; for, at this ſhort Notice, I ſhall not know _. ' 

to whom to apply to raiſe it, In the utmoſt Pertur- 
| bation of Mind, for fear of the worſt, my Credit 
being wholly at Stake, I beg your Anſwer, which 
I hope will be to the Satisfaction of, Sir, 


Your obliged humble Servant, 


LETTER CXXIII. 


| The Anſwer, excuſing the Pain he had given his | 
Friend by his Remiſſneſs. | 


Dear Sir, 
WILL attend you this Afternoon with the 
1 Money, which I had always great Pleaſure in 
the Thought of ſupplying you with ; and I am moſt 
heartily vexed with myſelf, for giving you the Pain 
and Uneaſineſs that muſt have attended a Mind ſo 
punctual as yours, and in a Caſe fo critically cir- | 
cumſtanced. But J hope you'll forgive me, tho' I 
can hardly forgive myſelf. I am, Sir, as well on 
| this, as on any other Occaſion in my Power, 


Your ſincere Friend and Servant, 


LET- 


— 


160 Familiar LRT T ERS on the 


; | LETTER CXXIV. 


| To one who, upon a very ſhort Acquaintance, and 
doit bout any viſible Merit but Aſſurance, want; 
t to borrow. a Sum of Money. 


„IX, 
| * OU did me the Favour of inquiring for me two 


or three times while I was out of Town. And 
among my Letters I find one from you, defiring the 


Loan of 50 Guineas. You muſt certainly have 

miſtaken yourſelf or me very much, to think we 
. were enough known to each other for ſuch a Tran. 

action. I was twice in your Company; I was de- 

lighted with your Converſation : You ſeemed as 

much plcaſed with mine: And if we both acted 
| with Honour, the Obligation is mutual, and there 
i can be no room to ſuppoſe me your Debtor, |] 
Have no churliſh nor avaritious Heart, I will ven— 
ture to ſay; but there muſt be Bounds to every 
thing; and Diſcretion is as neceſſary in conferring 
as in receiving a Kindneſs, Toa Friend, my help- 
ing Hand ought to be lent, when his Neceſflitics 
require it: You cannot think our Intimacy enough 
to commence that Relation; and ſhould I anſwer the 
Demands of every neto Acquaintance, I ſhould ſoon 
want Power to oblige my od Friends, and even to 
ſerve myſelf. Surely, Sir, a Gentleman of your Merit 
cannot be ſo little beloved, as to be forced to ſeek 
to a new Acquaintance, and to have no better Friend 
than one of Ye/terday. I will not do you the In- 
jury to ſuppoſe, that you have not many, vie 
have the be/? Reaſons from long Knowledge, 0 
oblige you: And, by your Application to e, 
cannot think Baſbfulneſs ſhould ſtand in your w: 7 


20 


0 
— N — Eœàmãecn —— 


— — — 
— — — — 


moſt Important Occaſions. 161 


to them. Be this as it may, it does not at all ſuit 
my Conveniency to comply with your Requeſt; 
and ſo I muſt beg you to excaſe | 

- Veurs, &c. 


8 p — 


E 


| A Gentleman to a Lady who humourouſly reſents 
bis Miſtreſs's Fondneſs of a Monkey, and In- 
difference to him es,. 


| Madam, 


MUST be under the lefs Regret, for the Con- 
' tempt with which you receive my Addrefles, 
when your Favour is wholly engroſſed by ſo wretch- 
ed.a Rival: For ought a rational Man to wonder 
he is received with Neglect and Slight by a Lady 
who can be taken up with the Admiration of a chat- 
tering Monkey? But pray be ſo good as to permit 
me to reaſon the Matter a little with you. I would 
aſk you then, By what extraordinary Endowment 
this happy Creature has found Means to engroſs 
out Favour ? Extravagance is never commendable : 
ut while I am dying beneath your Frowns, how 
can you be profuſe in your Careſſes to ſo mean a 
Competitor ? Condeſcend to view us in the ſame 
Light: What valuable Qualification is Mr, Pug 
endowed with, which I am deſtitute of? What can 
he do, which I cannot perform, tho' with leſs Agi- 
lity, to full as good Purpoſe? Is it a Recommenda- 
tion in him that he wears no Breeches? For my 
part, I will moſt willingly ſurrender mine at your 
Feet. Be impartial for once: Place us together 
before you : View our Faces, our Airs, our Shapes, 
and our Language, If he be handſomer than 1, 
| | | which, , 


acute he may be, I can aſſure you I reckon 1 


— 
mg air „ 


— — 1 — - _ 


162 Familiar LETTERS 0 the 


which, on a ſtrict Scrutiny, I hope will not be al- 
lowed him neither, pray try our Wits: However 


no Fool; if I was, I ſhould leſs reſent the Pre- 
terence you give againſt me. I will ſing or dance 
with him for his Ears: Turn him loofe to me, 1 
will fight him, if that be neceſſary to obtain your 
Favour ; or do any thing in the World to ſhew you 
how much TI am, and ſhall ever be, if you'll per- 


mit it, 
Your very humble Admirer. 


_—_ 
* 


LETTER CXXVI. 
A Sailor to his betrothed Miſtreſs. 


Ay dear Peggy, Barbadoes, Oct. q. 
1 F you think of me half ſo often as J do of you, 


it will be every Hour ; for you are never out of 
my Thoughts, and, when I am aſleep, I conſtantly 
dream of my dear Peggy. I wear my Half- bit of 
Gold always at my heart, ty'd to a blue Ribbon 
round my Neck ; for True Blue, my deareſt Love, 
is the Colour of Colours to me. Where, my Deareſt, 
do you put yours © I hope you are careful of it; for 
it would be a bad Omen to loſe it. 

J hope you hold in the fame Mind ſtill, my 
dearcſt Dear ; for God will never bleſs you, if you 
break the Vows you have made to me. As to your 
ever faithful Milliam, I would ſooner have my 
Heart torn from my Breaſt, than it Thould harbour 
a Wiſh for any other Woman beſides my Pegz;, 


0 3 Love! you are the Joy of my Life 


My oughts are all of you ; you are with me in all 
Ide; and my Hope and my #7/þ is only to be s. 
God ſend it may be fo! Du 


dec «=. ww £. «a «a a «a 


al ad os fad. ed: tran Ec. 


Pl BY 4 fond bend we a 


Q — — — ay — > 


— = 
— —— — — —— — = — ———— — — ———— —— 


— — ——  gort oernneon—e— — — 


moſt Im portant Occaſions, 163 


Our Captain talks of ſailing ſoon for England; 
and then, and then — my deareſt Peggy /---O how 
I rcjoice, how my Heart beats with Delight, that 
makes me I cannot tell hto, when TI think of ar- 
riving in England, and joining Hands with my 
Peggy, as we have Hearts before, I hope! I am 
ſure I ſpeak for one. 

John Arthur, in the good Ship Elizabeth, Capt. 
| JVinterton, which is returning to England, (as I 
hope we ſhall ſoon) promiſes to deliver this into 
rour own dear Hand ; and he will bring you too, 
Six Bottles of Citron-water as a Token of my Love. 
It is fit for the fineſt Ladies Taſte, it is ſo good ; 
and it is what, they ſay, Ladies drink, when they 
can get it. 

John ſays, he will have one ſweet Kiſs of my 
deareſt Peggy, for his Care and Pains. So let him, 
my beſt Love; for I am not of a jealous Temper. 
| have a better Opinion of my Deareft, than ſo.--- 
But, Oh! that I was in his Place - -One Kiſs 
ſhould not ſerve my Turn, tho? I hope it may his /--- 
Yet, if he takes two, I'll forgive him; one for me, 
and one for himſelf, For I love John dearly ; and 
ſo you may well think. Well, what ſhall I fay 
more 9----Or rather what ſhall I fay next? For I 
have an hundred things crouding in upon me, when 
I write to my Deareſt ; and, alas! one has fo few _ 
Opportunities !---But yet I muſt leave off ; for I 
have written to the Bottom of my Paper. Love 
then to all Friends ; and Duty to both our Mothers, 
concludes me 


Yeur faithful Lever till Death. 


LE T- 


_—_ — — 


164 Familiar LETTERS on the 


LETTER CXXVIL 
Her Anſwer. 


my 


Dear William, 


F OR fo I may call you now we are ſure: and (9 

my Mother fays. This is to let you know, 
that nothing ſhall prevail upon me to alter my Pro- 
miſe made to you, when we parted : With hcavy 
Hearts enough, that's true. And yet I had a little 
Inkling given me, that Mr. Alford's Son the C:- 
penter would be glad to make Love to me: But, do 
you think I would ſuffer it? No, indeed! For [ 
doubt not your Leyalty to me, and do you think [ 
will not be as /oyal to you !---"T'o be ſure I will, 
Theſe Sailors run ſuch jad Chances, ſaid one that 
you and I both know. They may return, and they 
may not, Well, I will truſt in God for that, who 
has returned ſafe to his Friends, their dear Bilh, 
ſo many a time, and often. They will have a 
Miſtreſs. in every Land they come to, ſaid they. All 
are not ſuch naughty Men, ſaid I, and PII truſt 
Billy Oliver all the World over. For why cannot 
Hen be as faithful as Nomen, tro'? And for me, | 
am ſure no Love ſhall ever touch my Heart but 


Yours, 


God ſend us a happy Meeting! Let who will ſpeak 
againſt Sailors; they are the Glory and the Safe- 
guard of the Land. And what would have become 
of Old England long ago but for them? I am ſure 
the lazy good-for-nothing Land-lubbers would never 
have protected us from our cruel Foes, So Sailors 
are and ever ſhall be eſteemed by me; and, of all 
Sailors, my dear Billy Oliver, Believe this Truth 
from | 


Your faithful, &c. 


- * 9 


—— 


moſt Important Occaſions. 163 


P. S. I had this Letter writ in Readineſs to 
ſend you, as I had Opportunity. And the 
Captain's Lady undertakes to fend it with 


| her's. That is very kind and condeſcending. 
Is it not ? | 


LETTER CXXVIII. 
A Sea-Officer to his Wife. 


Port- Mahon, October 3r, 
Aly dear Life, 
J TAKE the Opportunity afforded me by Captain 
Copythorne, who is returning to England, to 
let you know that I am in perfect Health at pre- 
ſent, God be praiſed ; tho? I have, with many of 
the Crew, been down of the Bloady- Flux, occa- 
oned by being a little too free with the new 
Vines and Fruit of theſe Countries ; and yet I 
thought I was very moderate in both. Our Captain 
continues very civil and kind, and places his prin- 
cipal Confidence in me; and I endeavour fo to be- 
have on the Occaſion, as to avoid incurring the 
Envy of every one; and indeed, have the good 
Fortune to be generally reſpected. | 
Captain Copythorne is ſo kind as to carry to you 
a Token of my Affection; which is a ſmall 
Parcel of Cyprus Wine, that I believe will be 
agreeable to your beſt Friend Mrs. Simpſon, to 
whom therefore you may preſent half, and keep 
the other for your own Uſe, The Captain has 
alſo Fifty Dollars to preſent you with, from me, 
only paying out of them the Duty for the Mine; 
for it is but % that it ſhould be ſo, if he cannot 
meet with Favour in ſo ſmall a Pareel ; for what 


the Law of the Land, which protects us all, gives 


to the King, is as much bis Due, (however other 
| People 


222 


— — — 2 


166 Familiar L.ETTERS on the 


People act) as any Part of my private Property, 
which is ſecured to me by the ſame Law, is mine: 
And I am convine””, that if eyery one acted up to 
this juſt Principle, there need. not be io many 
Taxes as there are; and the fair Trader, and all 
honeſt Men, would be the better for it. 

I hope, my dear Fackey and Nancy continue 
in good Health, and dutiful, and come on in their 
Schooling ; for that will ſtand them in ſtead, per- 
haps, when the poor Matters we are enabled to do 
for them, may not be worth truſting to. 

I long to ſte my dear Betty, God give us 2 
happy Meeting, if it be his bleſſed Will. But, ! 
believe, it will hardly be till we have humbled the 

oud Fack Spamiard: Which God alſo grant. 
For that Nation has been very vile and baſe to u 
honeſt Engliſpmen. This concludes me at preſent 


| Your ever-laving Huſband, 
Love and Service to all Friends. 


LETTER CXXIX. 
AIWife to ber Huſband at Sea. 


My Dear, | 
Think it a long Time ſince I have had the Com- 
fort and Satisfaction of hearing of your Wel- 
fare, Often and often do I reflect on the Unhap- 
pineſs of us poor Women, who are marry'd to Sea- 
faring Men. Every Wind that blows, every 
Pirate we hear of, and now, in Time of War, 
every Hour of our Lives, the Dread of Enemies, 
alarms us. God's Providenee-is our Reliance, and 
ſo it ought ; for nothing elſe can ſuſtain us thro' 
our different Apprehenſions every Day we, live. 
But to be ſure the Unhappineſs is Rill pour > 
uc 
4 


— 


22 Fe = wr — 2 . — — 


— — 


moſt Important Occaſions. 167 


ſuch as love one another, as we always did. I hope, 
when it ſhall pleaſe God to return you fafe to my 
Wiſhes, that vou will take no. more of theſe very 
long Voyages, if you can help it. The Trips to 
Holland or France are ſo pretty, that they rather 
add to than diminiſh one's Comforts: But, Oh, 
thcſe long, long Voyages! Yet, in Time of War, 
People cannot do as they will, And I muſt be 
contented ; and the more, when I ſee that the fine 
Ladies of Captains, Commodores, and Admirals, 
are no better off than your poor 7 erny 

We have had the Misfortune to loſe Uncle 
Tames ſince you went: He was a Landman, out 
of the Dangers you run; yet, as I hope, God has 
preſerved you, while he is dead and gone. So we 
ſee there is nothing to be ſaid for it, when our 
Time is come. They talk of my Aunt's marrying 
gain, and ſhe has a Courtier comes to her, be- 
auſe ſhe is aforehand in the World, and yet Uncle 
James has not yet been dead three Months. Fie 
upon her, I ſay, tho' ſhe is my Aunt ! for ſhe had 
a good Huſband of him. As to you and I, my 
Dear, I hope God will ſpare us to one another ; 
for you are my Firſt Love, and ſhall be my Laf2. 
Couſin Barns had the Misfortune to break his Leg, 
but is in a good way. Jenny Adams is to be 
arry'd next Week to John Laſcells, This is 
the News among our Acquaintance; for I am 
ue it is none, to tell you, that I am 


Your faithful and loving Wife, 


131 


— — — — — 


168 Familiar LETTERS on the 


LETTER CXXX. 


To a Father, on his Neglect of his Children 
= £ducation, 


Dear Sin, 


1 AM under a Concern to ſee ſuch a Remiſſneſ 
as every body takes notice of, in the Educatio, 
of your Children. They are brought up, tis true, 
to little Offices in your Buſineſs, which keep then 
active, and may make them in ſome degree of jr; 
ſent, tho” poor Uſe to you; but, I am ſorry to fay, 
of none to themſelves, with regard to their futur 
Proſpects, which is what a worthy Parent alway 
has in View, : 

There is a proper Time for every thing; anc 

| Children are not early initiated into their D 
i and thoſe Parts of Learning which are proper i 
I their particular Years, they muſt neceſlarily |; 
diſcouraged, and ſet behind every one of thei 
Schoolfellows, tho* much, younger than themſelves; 
and you know not, Sir, what a laudable Emulatig 
you by this means deſtroy, than which nothing 
of greater Force to Children, to induce them t 
attend to their Bock; nor what a Diſgrace you 
involve them in with reſpect to Children amor; 
Children, for the Biggeſt and Eldeſt to be fo mic 
out-done by the Leaſt and Youngeſt. 

Nor is the Conſequence of this Defect cont. 
to the School-age, as I may call it; for as tit 
grow up, they will be look'd upon in an equal 
diſcouraging and diſadvantageous Light, by all wl 
converſe with them: Which muſt of courſe thro 
them into the Company of the Dregs of Mat 
kind; for how will they be able to. converſe d 
correſpond with thoſe whoſe Acquaintance it 

mo 


moſt Important Occaſions, 169 


moſt worth their while to cultivate? And indeed 
they will probably be ſo conſcious of their Unfit- 
neſs to bear a Part in worthy Converſation, that, 
to keep themſelves in Countenance, they will, of 
their own Accord, ſhun the better Company, and 
aſſociate with the wert: And what may be the 
Conſequence of this, a wiſe Man, and a good 
Father, would tremble to think of, eſpecially when 
he has to reflect upon himſelf as the Cauſe of it, 
let it be what it will, 
Then, Sir, it is to be conſider'd, that without 
a tolerable Education, they can be only fit for 
mean and ſordid Employments. Hear what the 
Wiſe Man ſays to this very Purpoſe : “ How can 
« he get Wiſdom, that holdeth the Plough, and 
« that gloricth in the Goad, that driveth Oxen, 
&« and is occupied in their Labours, and whoſe Talk 
« is of Bullocks ? He giveth his Mind to make 
& Furrows, and is diligent to give the Kine Fodder, 
« So every Carpenter and Mortmaſter that labour- 
eth Night and Day----'The Sith alſo fitting 
« by the Anvil, and conſidering the Iron-work, 
« the Vapour of the Fire waſteth his Fleſh----' 
„The Neiſe of the Hammer and the Anvil is ever 
« in his Ears----- So doth the Potter ſitting at his 
« Work, and turning the Wheel about with his 
« Feet----He faſhioneth the Clay with his Arm, 
„% and boweth down his Strength before his Feet.“ 
Theſe, as he obſerves, are uſeful in their Way; 
but their Minds being wholly engroſſed by their 
Labours, „they ſhall not be ſought for in publick 
Council, nor fit high in the Congregation----= 
they cannot declare 7u/tice and Judgment, and 
« they ſhall not be found where Parables are 
« ſpoken.” That is, they ſhall be confined to the 
Drudgery of their own ſervile Station, and will be 
intitled neither to Honour no Reſpect, as they 3 
| Ve 


_ =» ts = 22 
TI 1 »„— ͤnͥ ñũ 


— — = p 
IS — 


170 Familiar LETTERS 0n the 


have been, had they had an Education to qualify 
them for more reſpectable Buſineſſes. And you 
will conſider, Sir, in a cloſer Light, as to us 
who live in the preſent Age, and in this great City, 
that there is hardly a creditable or profitable Em- 
ployment in London, where a tolerable Knowledge 
of Accounts, and Penmanſhip, in particular, is not 
required, Conſider alſo what Opportunities they 
may loſe by this Neglect of their Education, in 
caſe they ſhould fail in the Buſineſs they are put to, 
of getting comfortable and genteel Bread in ſome 
Merchant's Compting-houſe, or in ſome one of the 
ſeveral Offices about this great Metropolis ; as 
Bouok-keepers, Clerks, Accomptants, &c. 

And with regard more immediately to yeur/e!f, 
how can you expect, when they know you could 
do better for them, but that their Beliavicur to 
vo will be of a Piece with the reſt ? for if they 
are not poliſh'd by Learning, but are left to a kind 
of Iuſtinet rather, is it to be expected, that they 
ſhould behave to you, and their Mother, with that 


Senſe of their Obligations which Learning incul- 


cates? Nor indeed will they have thoſe Obligations 
to you, which other Children have to therr Parents, 
who take care to give them Opportunities of Im- 
provement, which are deny'd to yours. Conſider, 
dear Sir, what a contemptible Character, even 
among the ſordid Vulgar, that of an illiterate 
Felloto is; and what Reſpect, on the contrary, : 
Man of Letters is treated with, by his Equals, 
well as [nrferiors : And when you lay all theſe plu 
Reaſons and Obſervations together, I make 10 
doubt but you will endeayour to retrieve ji 
Time, and be adviſed in this material Point (which 
can have no Intereſt in) by 


Your ſincere Friend and Servant 
IDS Y; 


. ——— O ô—— ———_ 


FE ˙ꝛ Q oh EE rei —. ͤͤ—ò W — 


mdſt Important Occaſions, 171 


LETTER CXXXI. 


From a young Maiden, abandon'd by her Lover 
for the ſake of a greater Fortune, 


Mr. John, 


IST take up my Pen and write, tho” perhaps 
you will only ſcoff at me for ſo doing; but 
when I have ſaid what I have to ſay, then I ſhall 
have eaſed my Mind, and will endeavour to forget 
you for ever. I have had ſo many Cautions given 
me againſt the falſe Hearts of Men, and was ſo 
often told how they will vow and forſwear them- 
ſelves, that I ought to have been on my Guard, 
that's true: And indeed, ſo I was a great while: 
You know it well. But you courted me ſo long, 
vowed ſo earneſtly, and ſeem'd ſo much in Love 
with me, that it was firſt Pity in me, that made 
me liſten to you; and, Oh ! this za/ty Pity, how 
ſoon did it bring----But I won't ſay Love neither. 
| thought, if all the young Men in the World 
beſides proved falſe, yet it was impoſſible you 
ſhould, Ah ! poor filly Creature that I was, to 
think, tho' every body flatter'd me with being 
lightly enough, I could hold a Heart fo ſordidly 
bent on Intereſt, as I always ſaw yours to be; but 
that, thought I, tho? *tis a Meanneſs I don't like, 
yet will it be a Security of his making a frugal. 
Huſband in an Age fo fruitful of Spendthrifts. 

{ But at length it has proved, that you can prefer 
, WW folly Bambridge, and leave par me, only becauſe 
dhe has a greater Portion than I have. 
I fay nothing againſt Polly, I wiſh her well. 

Indeed Ido. And I wiſh yen no Harm neither. 
hut as you knew Polly _ why could you not 
lave made to yourſelf a Merit with her, without 


I 2 going 


172 Familiar LETTERS o the 


going ſo far with me? What need you have ſo 
often begg'd and pray'd, ſigh'd and vow'd, (never 
leaving me, Day nor Night) till you had got me 
fooliſhly to believe and pity you? And fo, after your 
Courtſhip to me was made a Town-talk, then you 
could leave me to be laugh'd at by every one I 
lighted for you ! Was this juſt, was this well done, 
think you ? EEE 

Here I cannot go out of Doors but I have ſome 

one or other ſimpering and ſneering at me; and J 
have had two Willoꝛu-garlands ſent me; ſo I have-- 
But what poor Stuff, in ſome of my own Sex too, 
is this, to laugh at and deride me for your Baſe- 
neſs? I can call my Heart to witneſs to my 
| Virtue in Thought, in Word, and in Deed ; and 
1 muſt I be ridicul'd for a falſe one, who gives him- 
| ſelf Airs at my Expence, and at the Expence of 
5 his own Truth and Honour? Indeed you cannot 
5 ſay the leaſt Ill of me, that's my Comfort. I 
U defy the World to ſay any thing to blaſt my Cha- 
li racter: Why then ſhould I ſuffer in the 7/5r 1's 
i Eye, for your Baſeneſs ?---- 

I ſeek not to move you to return to the Fidelity 
ou have vow'd; for by this Time, mayhap, 
ou'd be as baſe to Polly as you have been to me, 

if you did; and I wiſh her no H/low-garlands, 
I'll aſſure you. But yet, let me deſire you to ſpeak 
of me with Decency : That is no more than ! 
deſerve, well you know. Don't, to brave-thro' 
the Perfidy you have been guilty of, mention me 
with ſuch Fleers, as, I hear, you have done to ſeve- 
ral ; and pray call me noneof your poor dear Girls! 
And, I hope ſhe won't take it to Heart, poor Thing! 
----with that Inſolence that fo little becomes you, 
and J have ſo little deſerved. I thought to have 
appeal'd to your Conſcience, on what has paſſed 


between us, when I began, I thought to have 
| put 


mm — tt t OA  « 


_— —— — 
— — — — — — —Emœ—ꝓͤ. —A—4é—ͤ 222 


moſt Important Occaſions, 173 


put the Matter home to you ! But I have run out 
into this Length, and now don't think it worth 
while to write much more: For what is Conſcience 
to a Man who could vow as you have done, and 
act as you have done? 
Go then, Mr. John, naughty Man as you are! 
I will try to forget you for ever. Rejoice in the 
Smiles of your Pol y Bambridge, and glad your 
Heart with the Poſſeſſion of an Hundred or I'wo 
| of Pounds more than I have; and fee what you'll 
be the richer or —_— a feww Years hence. wiſh 
no Harm to you. Your Conſcience will be a greater 
| Trouble to you than I wiſh it to be, if you are 
capable of reflef7ing. And for your ſake, I will 
henceforth ſet myſelf up to be an Adviſer to all my 
dex, never to give Ear to a Man, unleſs they can be 
ſure, that his Intereſt will be a Security for his pre- 
tended Affection to them. I am, tho' greatly in- 
jured and deceived, naughty Mr. John, 


Your Well -ww1/her, Pi 


— 


LETTER CXXXII. 


I From à Gentleman to his Miſtreſs, who ſeeing no 
Hopes of Succeſs, reſpecifully withdraws his 
| Suit. 


MapAu, | 
[ MAKE no doubt but this will be the welcomeſt 


Letter that you ever received from me; for it 
comes to aſſure you, that it is the laſt Trouble 
| you will ever have from me, Nor ſhould I have 
| fo long with-held from you this Satisfaction, had 
not the Hope your Brother gave me, that in time I 

might meet with a happier Face, made me willing 

, | | 3 to 


| 174 Familiar LETTERS on the 


to try every way to obtain your Favour. But 
fee, all the Hopes given me by his kind Con- 
tideration for me, and thoſe that my own Pre. 
ſumption had made me entertain, are all in vain: 
| And I will therefore rid you of ſo troubleſome an 
Importuner, having nothing to offer now but my 
i ardent Wiſhes for your Happineſs ; and theſe, 
| N Iwill purſue you with to my Life's lateſt 

ate. 7 

May you, whenever you ſhall change your Con- 
dition, meet with a Heart as paſſionately, and 2s 
lincerely devoted to you as mine] And may you 
be happy for many, very many Years, in the Man 
you can honour with your Love! For, give me 
leave to fay, Madam, that in this, my End wil 
be in part anſwer'd, becauſe it was moſt fin- 
cerely your Happineſs I had in View, as well a 
my own, when I preſumptuouſly hoped, by contri- 
buting to the one, to ſecure the other, I am, 
Madam, with the higheſt Veneration, 


Yeur neſt obedient humble Servant, 


— 
— cw K 
— ad 


| LETTER CxxxXIII. 


From a Lady to a Gentleman, who had obtain 
all ber Friends Conſent, urging him to declilt 
His Suit to Her. 


S 1 R, 


| WY have often importuned me to return Mark 
tk of that Conſideration for you, which you profeb 
for me. As my Parents, to whom I owe all Duty, 
bl encourage your Addreſs, I wiſh I could. I an 
hardly treated by them, becauſe I cannot, What 


ſhall I do? Let me apply to you, Sir, for my 
Relich, 


moſt Important Occaſions. 173 


Relief, who have much good Senſe, and, I hope, 
Generoſity. Yes, Sir, let me b-ſpeak your Hu- 
manity to me, and Fuſtice to yourſeli, in this Point; 
and that ſhall be all T will aſk in my Favour. I 
own you deſerve a much better Wife than I ſhall 
ever make ; but yet, as Love is not in one's own 
Power, if I have the Misfortune to know I can- 


| not love you, will not 7u/tice to yourſelf, if not 


Pity to me, oblige you to abandon your. preſent 


| Purpoſe ? 


But as to myſelf, Sir, . Why ſhould you-make a 
poor Creature unhappy in the Diſpleaſure of all her 
Friends. at preſent, and ſtill more unhappy, it, to 
avoid that, ſhe gives up her Perſon, where ſhe can- 
not beſtow her Heart? If you love me, as you 


| profeſs, let me aſk you, Sir, Is it for my jake, or 


is it for your 92wn?----If for mine, how can it be, 
when I muſt be miſerable, if I am forced to marry 
where I cannot love ?---- If for your own, reflect, 
dir, on the Selfiſhneſs of your Love, and judge it 
it deſerves from me the Return you wiſh, 

How ſadly does this Love already operate! Y 
love me ſo well, that you make me miſerable i:; 


the Anger of my deareſt Friends! - Your Lo. 
has already made them think me undutiful, and 
| inſtead of the Fondneſs and Endearment I uſed 6 


be treated with by them, I meet with nothing bu 
Chidings, Frowns, Slights, and Diſpleaſure. 

And what is this Love of yours to do for me 
hereafter ?---Why hereafter, Sir, it will be turned 
to Hatred, or Indifference at leaſt: For then, tho? 
I cannot give you my Heart, I ſhall have given you 


a Title to it, and 2 will have a lawful Claim to 


its Allegiance. ay it not then, nay ought it not 
to be treated on the Foot of a Rebel, and expect 
Puniſhment as ſuch, inſtead of Tenderneſs? Even- 
were I to be treated with Mercy, with Goodneſs, 
I 4 with 


„44 „ — — ä—ↄBœgr᷑ↄᷓ— — — — — 


176 Familiar LETTERS on the 
with Kindneſs by you, and could not deſerve or 


return it, what a Wretch would your Love make 
me] How would it involve me in the crying Sin 
of [ngratitude ! How-would it deſtroy my Repu- 
tation in the J/orld's Eye, that the het of Huſbands 
had the worf? of Wives !---- The #:mdeft of Men, 
the wnkinde/t of Women |---- | 
Ceaſe then, I beſeech you, this hopeleſs, this 
cruel Purſuit |------ Make ſome worthier Perſon 
happy with your Addreſſes, that can be happy in 
them !----By this means, you will reſtore me (if 
you decline as of your own Motion) to the Con- 


dition you found me in, the Love of my Parents, 


and the Eſteem of my Friends. If you really 
Jove me, this may be a hard Taſk ; but it will be 
a moſt generous one ----And there is ſome Reaſon 
to expect it; for who, that truly loves, wiſhes to 
make the Object of his Love miſerable ? This 
muſt I be, if you perſiſt in your Addreſs ;- and I 
ſhall know by your Conduct on Occaſion of this 
uncommon Requeſt, how to conſider it, and in 
what Light to place you, either as the moſt ge- 
nerous or the moſt ungenerous of Men, Mean time 
I am, Sir, moſt heartily, tho' I cannot be what 
you would have me, 


Your Well-wiſher, and humble Servant, 


LETTER CXXXIV. 


The Gentleman*s Anſwer to the Lady's uncom - 
mon Requeſt, 


Dear Madam, 


1 AM exceedingly concerned, that I cannot be 


as acceptable to you, as I have the good For- 


tune to find myſelf to your honoured Parents. If, 
| Mada my 


moſt Important Occaſions, 197 


Madam, I had Reaſon to think it was owing to 

our Prepoſſeſſion in ſome happier Man's Favour, 
I ſhould utterly deſpair of it, and ſhould really 
think it would be unjuſt to myſelf, and ungenerous 
to yo, to continue my Addreſs, As therefore you 
have, by your Appeal to me, in ſo uncommon a way, 
endeavour'd to make me a Party againſt myſelf, 
and I have thewn ſo much Regard to you, as to 
be willing to oblige you, as far as I can, may I not: 
hope the Favour of you to declare generouſly, whe- 
ther I owe my Unhappineſs to ſuch a Prepoſſeſſion, 
and whether your Heart is given to ſome other? 
----If this be the Caſe, you ſhall find all you wiſh 
on my Part; and I ſhall take a Pride to plead 
againſt myſelf, let me ſuffer ever ſo much by it, 
to your Father and Mother: But if not, and you 

have taken any other Diſguſts to my Perſon or Be- 
haviour, that there may be Hope my utmoſt Aﬀec- 
tion and Aſſiduity, or a contrary Conduct, may, 
in time, get the better of, let me implore you to 
permit me {till to continue my zealous Reſpects to 
you; for this I will fay, that there is not a Man 
in the World who can addreſs you with a ſincerer 
and more ardent Flame, than, dear Madam, 


Yaur dſfectionate Admirer, and humble Servant... 


LETTER CDA. 
The Lady's Reply, in caſe of a Prepoſſeſion. 


I 
F Thank you for your kind Aſſurance, that you 


will befriend me in the manner I wiſh ; and I 
think I owe it to your Generoſity to declare, that 
there is a Perſon in the World, that, might I bs 
leſt to my own Choice, I ſhould prefer to all other 


15 Men. 


478 Familiar LETTERS en the 


Men. To this, Sir, it is owing, tliat your Addreſi 
cannot meet with the Return it might otherwiſe 
deſerve from me. Yet are Things ſo circumſtanc'd, 
that while my Friends prefer you, and know nothing 
of the other, I ſhould find it very difficult to obtain 
their Conſents. But or enerous Diſcontinu- 
ance, without giving them the true Reaſon for it, 
will lay an Obligation greater than I can ex- 
preſs, on _ . 
Your maſt humble Servant. 


LETTER CXXXVI. 


The Lady's Reply in caſe of no Prepoſſeſſion, or 
that ſhe chuſes not to avow it. 


S IR, | 
AM forry to ſay, that my Diſapprobation of 
your Addreſs is inſuperable -- yet cannot 1 
but think myſelf beholden to you for the Generoſity 
of your Anſwer to my earneſt Requeſt, I mult 
beg you, Sir, to give over your Application ; but 
How can I ſay, while I cannot help being of this 
Mind, that it is or is not owing to Prepoſſeſſion ; 
when you declare, that, in the one Inſtance, (and 
that is very generous too) you 221! oblige me; but 
in the other you will not? If I cannot return 
Love for Love, be the Motive what it will, pray, 
Sir, for your own ſake, as well as mine, diſcontinue 
your Addreſs - In caſe of Prepoſſeſſion, you ſay 
you can, and you will oblige me: Let my Un- 
worthineſs, Sir, have the ſame Effect upon you, 
as if that Prepoſſeſſion were to be avow'd. This 
will inſpire me with a Gratitude that will always 
make me 


Nur moſt obliged Servant, 
5 LET. 


maſt Important Occaſions. 179 


LETTER CXXXVII. 


A Lady to a Gentleman of ſuperior Fortune, 
who, after a long Addreſs in an honourable 
way, propoſes to live with her as a Gallant, . 


SIX, 


n many unaccountable Heſitations, and 
concealed Meanings, that your Mind ſeem'd 
of late big with, but hardly knew how to expreſs, 
you have, at laſt, ſpoken out all your Mind; 
and I know what I am to truſt to ! I have that 
Diſdain of your Propoſal that an honeſt Mind 
ought to have. But I wiſh, for my own ſake, . 
(and I will ſay, for yours too, becauſe your Honour 
is concerned in it ſo deeply) that I had had, at my 
firſt Acquaintance with you, ſuch an Inſtance 
of your Plain-dealing, or rather Baſeneſs Then 
I ſhould have had no Regret in letting you 
know how much I ſcorn'd the Propoſer, and the 
Propoſal : Tho' I hope, as it is, a little Time 
and Reflection will make me, for the ſake of the 
latter, abhor the former. 

However, Sir, I muſt ſay, you are very cruel 
+ to uſe me thus, after you had, by all the alluring 
\ MW Profeſions of an honourable . Love, inſpired me 
„Vith a grateful Return, and brought me to the 
- 

/ 


Freedom of owning it----Nor yet will I be an 
Hypocrite, or deny my honeſt Paſſion ; for that 
would be to leſſen your Guilt, God is my Wit- 
„ness, I loved you beyond all your Sex; yet I loved 
you virtuorſly ; I loved you becauſe I thought you 
virtuous, And now, tho' it may take ſome Time, 
and too much Regret, to get over, yet do I hope, 
Four Behaviour will enable me to conquer my fond 
1. Ys. i | | ol 
3-6 Un- 


180 Familiar LET T ERS on the 


Ungenerous Man ! to take Advantage of your 
ſuperior Fortune to inſult me thus, when you had 
gain'd my Aﬀections ! What, tho” I am not bleſſed 
with a worldly Circumſtance equal to what you 
might expect in a Vie, can you think my Mind 
ſo baſe as. to ſubmit to be yours on unworthy 
Terms? Go, unworthy Man, and make your 
Court to Miſs Reynolds, as you feem to threaten. 
She hasa Fortune equal to your own, and may you 
be happy together ! I ſhould have been ſo, had [ 
never known you. I never deceived you : You 
knew my ſcanty Fortune, and yet pretended to 
prefer me to all my Sex. 

On me you might have laid the higheſt Obli- 
gation, by raiſing me to a Condition I was humble 
enough to think above me; and I ſhould have 
been, on that account, all Gratitude, all Duty, 
all Acknowledgment. On Miſs Reynolds you will 
confer none ; her Fortune will quit Scores with 

ours, and you muſt both, in your Union, be 

trangers to the inexpreſſible Pleaſure of receiving 

or conferring of Benefits : But this is a Pleaſure 
which none but generous Minds can taſte; That 
yours is not ſo, witneſs your deteſted Propoſal, 
after fuch ſolemn Profeſſions of faithful and ho- 
nourable Love. And I have one Conſolation, 
tho' a Conſolation I did not wiſh for, that I am 
under no Obligation, but the contrary, to ſuch a 
Man. And am as much your Superior, as the 
Perſon who would do no Wrong, is to one that 
will do nothing elſe. Send me, however, my Let- 
ters, that I may be aſſured my fond Credulity 
will not be the Subject of freſh Inſult, and that 
perhaps to the Perſon that ſhall be what you made 
me expect I ſhould be. Iwill ſend you all yours, 
the laſt only excepted. Which, as it may aſſiſt 
me to conquer my fond Folly for you, I hope 8 
N . OW 


moſt Important Occaſions; 181 


allow me to keep, tho' it is the Abhorr'd of my 
Soul- May you be happier than you have made 
me I- is the laſt Prayer you will have from 


Yeur too credulous Fell-wiſher. 


— — — —— 


LETTER CXXXVIII. 


A Father to a Daughter in Service, on bearing 
of her Maſter*s attempling ber Virtus. 


My dear Daughter, 


Underſtand with great Grief of Heart, that 

your Maſter has made ſome Attempts on your 
Virtue, and yet that you ſtay with him, God 
rant that you have not already yielded to his baſe 
— For when once a Perſon has ſo far for- 
gotten what belongs to himſelf, or his Character, 
as to make ſuch an Attempt, the very Continuance 
with him, and in his Power, and under the ſame 
Roof, is an Encouragement to him to proſecute his 
Deſigns. And if he carries it better, and more 
civil, at preſent, it is only the more — to 
undo you when he attacks you next. Conſider, 
my dear Child, your Reputation is all you have 
to truſt to, And if you have not already, which 
God forbid ! yielded to him, leave it not to the 
Hazard of another Temptation ; but come away 
directly (as you ought to have done on your own 
Motion) at the Command of 


Your grieved and indulgent Father 


182 Familiar LETTERS on the 


LETTER CXXXX. 
The Daughters Anſwer. 


Honoured Father, 


Received your Letter Yeſterday, and am fot 

I ſftay'd a Moment in my Maſter's Houſe after 
his vile Attempt. But he was ſo full of his Pro- 
Miſes, of never 2 the like again, that 1 
hoped I might believe him; nor have I yet ſeen 
any thing to the contrary : .But am ſo much con- 
vinced, that IJ ought to have done as you fay, 
that I have this Day left the Houſe ; and hope to 


” 


be with you ſoon after you will have received this 


Letter. I am 
Your dutiful Daughter, 


— 


LETTER CXL. 


To a Gentleman of Fortune, who has Children, 
diſſuading bim from @ Second Marriage with 
a Lady much younger than himſelf, 


Wirthy Sir, | | 
b are pleaſed to inform me of your Thoughts 


in relation to a Change of your Condition, 
and to command me to give you freely my Opinion 
of the Conveniencies and Inconveniencies, that 
may follow from the Inequality of Vears between 


you, and the young Lady you think of making 
your ſecond Wife, Indeed, I am ſo much con- 


cerned for your Happineſs, that had J heard of ſuch 


your Intention, and had not your Commands to 
be free on this Head, I think I ſhould have run 


| the 


moſt Important Occaſions. 183 


the Riſque of being thought impertinent and offi- 
cious, rather than not have expoſtulated with you 
on this Occaſion. My Objections, Sir, are not ſo 
much to the Gaiety o the Lady, as to her Youth, 
and the Children you have already by your late 
excellent Lady: And when you remember, that 
Miſs Fanny, your eldeſt Daughter, is near as old 
as the Lady you think to make her Mother, I 
beg, Sir, you will conſider how your Reputation, 
| as to Prudence, will ſuffer in the Eye of the World 
| without you, as well as the Look it will have to 
your Children and Domeſticꝶs. | 
Nature, 1 , and every Branch 
of human Prudence, plead ſtrongly againſt the 
Union of lively Youth with maturer Years. Her 
Temper may be very agreeable : So indeed is 
yours - But may they be ſo to each other, when 
they meet together in ſo cloſe an Union? You are 
yet bleſt with a good State of Health; but can you 
expect, that it will be always fo ?--Or rather, will 
not every Year take from your Conſtitution, what 
it will add to hers, for ſeveral Years to come ? 
Your Years make you ſerious and ſolemn, and you 
are paſt a Reliſb for thoſe Pleaſures and Amuſe- 
ments, which are but ſuitable to hers, and which 
at the ſame Age you yourſelf delighted in. Can 
you recall Time paſt ? Will it become you to re- 
ſume the Part which Fudgment has made you quit? 
How aukwardly, if you attempt it, will you do 
this! What Cenſure will this ſubje&t you to? 
How will it embolden the gay young Fellows to 
make Attempts, that may, notwithſtanding the 
{ moſt unexceptionable Conduct in the Lady, give 
you great Uneaſineſs ? | 
It you cannot join in the innocent Gaieties which 
you have long diſuſed, it would be, in ſome meaſure, 
cruel, to deprive a young Lady of her Share of them, 
5 at 


Fou your. 


184 Familiar LET T ERS on the 


at an Age that will naturally make her expe and 
require them: And yet will not even innocent 
Liberties be Matter of Reproach to her, and Un- 
eaſineſs to you, if ſhe takes them without you ? 
And would you chuſe to bear her Company, and 
indulge a young-old Taſte, for gay Scenes long 
contemn'd, and fo appear in a Light, to all that 
beheld E together, either as her Father, or her 
jealous Keeper, and make it look to the World as if 
2 doubted her Virtue out of your own 
Preſence? Suppoſe the Scene at a gallant Comedy, 
that ſprightly free Joke which will make her ſmile, 
will make you frown ; and fo on in every other 
Scene of Life and Amuſement between you, For 
a Defe# or Inequality of whatever Kind, when- 
ever a Man is conſcious of it, let him carry it off as 
he may, will always be preſent with him, and, like 
another Conſcience, ſtare him in the Face. 

Your Fortune, tis true, is ſo conſiderable, that 
you may amply provide for 4 your Children, and 
| yet make it worth a young Lady's while, who 

would ſtudy her Intereſt, preferably to any other 
Conſideration, to oblige you : But, Sir, let me 
afk you, Can you, who lived ſo happily with your 
late dear Lady, and had ſuch conſtant Proots of 
her inviolable Affection to your Perſon, content 
ourſelf with a counterfeit Paſſion, a mere „i 
Affection in a /Z7ife And can you think, that ſo 
young a Lady can love you, like hs who grew on in 
Life, in Hope, in Deſires with you; and who, 
from a reciprocal Youth paſſed agreeably together, 
grew equally mature, and had both but one View 
between you; to wit, a young Family growing 
up, the common Offspring of your mutual Aﬀe- 
 Qtions ; and who were the Binding, and, fo long 2s 
her Life laſted, the indiſſoluble Cement of your 
Loves and your Intereſts If ſhe can, ſhe wml be 
25 | a Con- 


e 


mot Important Occaſions, 1855 


2 Contradiction to all Experience, and you will be 
happy againſt all reaſonable Expectation -- If ſhe 
cannot, will you be content with a /elfiſh, an in- 
tereſted Crvility, inſtead of true Love; and which 
cannot poſſibly ſo much as look lite Love, but by 
the Diſſimulation and Hypocriſy of your Boſom 
«we 2———— 

hen 1 look back on what T have written, I 
begin to be afraid of your Diſpleaſure on a double 
Account; for the Nature, and for the Length of 
this Epiſtle, tho* you have commanded me to ſpeak 
my Mind. Yet having ſeveral other material 
Points to touch upon, and relying upon your Ex- 
cuſe for my good Intentions, (for what View can 
I have in the Liberty I take, but your Happineſs ?) 
I will beg Leave to purſue the Subject in another 
Letter; and to conclude this, tho* a little ab- 
ruptly, with the Aſſurance, that (as you 7 
nobody ſhall fee what I write but yourſelf; an 
that I am, Sir, 


Your affefttianate humble Servant, 


LETTER CXLI. 
The ſame Subject purſued, 
SIR, 


] WILL now take the Liberty to continue my 


Subject, and my humble Expoſtulations upon 
it: And I will ſuppofe two Caſes very, if not 


| equally probable; to wit, that you may, or 
may not, have Children by your new Lady; and 


to judge in both Caſes, how the Happineſs of 
your remaining Life may be affected by either. In 


| the firſt place, if you ſhould have Children by her, 


(to ſay nothing of the Miſunderſtandings and Jea- 
louſies 


8 — o - * — - 
* — * 
— — nd — s 


_— — a 
—— ——— on woe 
— 2 —ͤ— boned 


Y 2 
- — EE -— qa" - þ 
. x" — _— — 


— — 
— — 2 — 
—— A, 
— —-— K 


— —— 
LEO > | ws 
Oy n—__ ——_— — — 


- © r 
— err 


2 
— 2 22 
— ——— — — Mal” 


— —— — = - 


8 —— 


- A 
nan 3 3 I 
4 * „ 
: 88 — „ 53 - 4 <a Fe 
RR a Om 


——ů — — 
„„ 1 — * — — 


—— — —ꝛ —— — —p— — 


* 
1 | 
| 
1 
' i 
i } | 


— — — — — — 2 —— — 


186 Familiar LETTERS on the 


louſies this may create between your Lady, and 
your preſent Children, which may greatly afte& 
your own Happineſs) are you ſo well able to ſup- 
port, at theſe Years, with Credit and Satisfaction, 
that Character which ſo peculiarly befits a young 
Huſband to a young Wife? And will it not natu- 
rally ſtrike you, that your own Children by at 
time will make a better Figure in ſuch a Circum- 
ſtance than yourſelf? Will you be fo well able to 
go thro* the ſame Troubles, the Jame Anxieties, 
the ſame Hopes, Fears, and Affections, both to 
the pregnant Mother, and afterwards to the Infant 
Progeny, that you have ſo happily got over ? And 
will not what was then called /audable Love, be 
now deemed Dotage and Uxorionuſneſs? 
Providence ſeems to have deſign'd the youthful 
Portion of a Man's Life, for mutual Endearments, 
and Propagation of his Family; the maturer Part, 
for Education, Counſel or Advice. And will you, 
Sir, invert the Deſign of it? Will you call back 
the Days of Senſe, into the Years of Intellect; 
watch over the Baby in the Cradle, when you 
ſhould form the Mind of the grown Perſon? 


How unequal will you be to this Pazt, to what 


ou once were ?---As you will not have the ſame 
Dilpolitione-adcut you, you eannot have the ſam- 
Joy at a pleaſing Incident; but will have poſſibly 
a ſuperadded Weight of Sorrow on any ſad Event, 
as Years will have added to your Reflettion, as Eæpe- 
rience will have contracted your Hope, and as you will 

have ſeen the Vanity of all worldly Expectations. 
Then, my dear Sir, conſider, if you ſhould 
even get · over this reſumed Province happily, and 
have no material Uneaſineſs from the Lady, on the 
Account I have intimated to you: Is it not too 
robable, that you may not live to ſee this young 
ce brought up? And if you ſhould, what Ani- 
155 moſities, 


— — — 
— — — 


moſt Important Occaſions, 187 


moſities, what Uneaſineſſes may not enſue, from 
the different Intereſts into which your Family will 
| be divided? And it may, moreover, be poſſible for 
you to have Grandchildren older than ſome of 
your own by your new Lady. 

But if we ſuppoſe, that the Occaſion for this may 
not happen; will the Matter be mended by it ?---- 
All young Ladies expect and wiſh for Children, 
when they marry. If ſhe ſhould not have any, 
ſhe will hardly be induced to think it Her Fault; 
but the Difference of Years will tell her, and all 
the World will join in it, where to lay the Blame, 
deſerved or not. She will, for want of ſo neceſſary 
an Employment, look abroad for Amuſements and 
Dixverſions, which, however innocent in her firſt 
Intentions, may not always end fo; and if they 
do, will be very unſuitable to your Diſpoſition and 
Liking. Childbed matronizes the y/1dieſt Spirits, 
and brings them to Reflection ſooner than any 
other Event. Its Conſequences fill up the Time, 
and introduce different Scenes of Pleaſure and 
Amuſement in the Mind of a Lady. It draws her 
Attention to more ſerious Affairs, it domeſticates 
her, as I may ſay, and makes her aſſociate with 
graver Perſons, and ſuch as are in the ſame Scenes 
of Life. But where this is not, ſhe continues her 
youthful and giddy Acquaintance, c/a/ſes herſelf _ 
as to her Company and Diverſions, as if in the ſingle 
dtate ſtill, and looks for Amuſements out of her- 
felf, and out of your Houſe: And you will be 
obliged to connive at a good deal more than you. 
otherwiſe would, becauſe the Difference of Years 
will give as much Conſciouſneſs to you, as it will 
Preſumption to her ; and if there be any Grievance 
between you, ſhe'll think, after all you can do, it 
is of her Side, Nor will Time and Years mend the 
Matter ; but, contrarily, make it worſe and morſe. 

1 nen 


9%%»%≅ꝛau ! !: TT ee——_ — 


188 Familiar Lx TTERS on the 


Then another Inconvenience may ariſe : The 
Lady, if ſhe has no Children by you, to prevent 
lying at the Mercy of yours, as ſhe will call it, 
will be making a ſeparate Intereſt to herſelf : She 
will grow upon your Indulgence and Fondneſs; 
ſhe will cajole, ſhe will reproach, ſhe will tieze you 
into Acts of Bounty and Profuſion to her. She 
will endeavour to build up a Fortune out of yours, 
to the de; cone of your Family, And all this for 
what End ?----Only to make her a rich Widow, 
and to give her Opportunity to triumph, in Con- 
junction perhaps with ſome young Rake or 1 0 
gate, over your Ajhes, and to make Compariſons 
grievous to Reflection, at the Expence of your For- 
tune and Memory, in the zew Man's Favour, 

Forgive me, dear Sir, theſe free Hints. My 
full Mind, which is thus ready to overflow thro! 
the Zeal I have for your Honour and Welfare, ſug- 
geſts many more to me, which your cool Reflection 
will not want. And I have been already fo prolix, 
that I will only farther ſay, that I am, and ſhall 


ever be, 
Your faithful and moſt affeFionate 
| : Friend and Servant, 


Ml — — — 


1 — — ——————— — —C td 


LETTER CXLIL 


Againſt a Second Marriage, wwbere there att 
| Children on both Sides, 


Dear Sir, 
You aſk my Opinion as to the Thoughts you 
have entertained of making your Addreſſes to 

the Widow Lockyer, Do you really afk it with an 
Intent to take it ? Or, like the Generality of the 
World, only in hopes that my Judgment falling in 


with 


— — — — — — — — — — — 2 * — * 5 


——— — — — 


mot Important Occaſions. 189 


with your own, may be a kind of Juſtification or 
Excuſe for what hor intend to do, and are, per- 
haps, already reſolved upon? If ſo, what do you 
Jo, but lay a Snare for me, which may put an End 
co our Friendſhip ? For Men leaſt of all bear Con- 
troul or Contradiction in Points of this Nature, 
when their Hearts are actually determined; and 
then Indifference begins, and Diſguſt ends the beſt- 
cemented Friendſhips. 

To ſay the Truth, I never was a Friend to 
Second Marriages, where there are Children on one 
ide, and a Likelihood of more ; but, eſpecially, 
where there are Children on th. I have nothing 
to ſay, as to the Perſon or Character of the 
Lady, You, whom it moſt concerns, are well 
ſatisfy'd of both, or you would not have gone ſo 
far, as to aſk a Friend's Advice on this Occaſion : 


— But ſince you do put it to me, I will throw a few 
K Reaſons together, which have always had Weight 
40 ith me on theſe Occaſions; and I hope, you'll 


ot think the worſe of your Friend, if he happen 
0 differ a little from your own Judgment. 

It muſt be confeſs'd, in the Caſe you put, That 
he Circumſtances on both Sides, are pretty equal. 
hat there is no great Diſparity in Years. That 
Ine has Three Children, and you have Four ; a 
ound Family, however, when they come toge- 
her | That ſhe is very fond of her Children, and 
ou, at preſent, of yours. That you ate not an 
l-temper'd Man, and ſhe is a good-temper'd Wo- 
an; and was a loving Wife to her late Spouſe, as 
you were an affectionate Huſband to yours. Well, 
o far is very well, and, you'll think perhaps, very 

romifing of a happy Union; and poſſibly you may 

an think right; at jeaſt you have much better Grounds 

or it, than many that do marry upon much worſe 
and more unequal Proſpects, 5 

| But 


1 


190 Familiar LETTERS on the 


But conſider, Sir, what Security have you, that 
Perſons who have been always good-temper'd, 
when they have nothing to thwart or try their 
Temper, will be till ſo, when they have ſome- 
thing that will ?----Here, at the very Threſhold 
of this Adventure, is a Cauſe of great Trial; a 
Trial which neither of you had before, and con- 
ſequently, which neither of you know how you 
ſhall behave in: She loves her Children. So ſhe 
ought. You love yours. It is right ſo to do, 
But ſee you not, before I ſpeak, that this laudable 
ſeparate Love of either, =_ become matter of 
great Uneaſineſs to both? You cannot, either of 
you, poſhbly expect more than common Civility, 
and outſide Kindneſs, from the other, ſbe to yours, 
you to hers, And it will be happy enough if this 
aſk do not ſufficiently try the Diſcretion of both. 

It is impoſſible, my Friend, but you muſt have 
very different Views on each other-- A pretty Pro- 
ſpect to ſet out with in a matrimonial Adventure 
Her Praiſes of her own Children will be very ſin- 
cere and laviſh, Her Praiſes of yours, if ſhe ever 
praiſes, will be very ſuſpicious and ſparing. And 
perhaps you muſt be as diſcreet as poſſible, in the 
Praiſes of your own, The very Cloaths each wear, 
the Victuals they eat, nay, the very Looks of either 
Parent, as they ſhall appear kind to their own, or 
reſerved to the other's, will afford room for in- 
ward Heart-burnings, if not outward Janglings. 
I have ſeen many Inſtances of theſe Kinds. 

Their different Capacities ; one ſhall take their 
Learning, another not--- Their different Tempers; 
ane ſhall be mild, another inſulting: one ſmooth, 
another rough ---- Their different Ages; which 
will make one dictate, while the other will not 
be preſcribed to ---- Will all afford Cauſe of Dit- 
ference ; and when they come to an Age fit for 

ſetung 


moſt Important Occaſions. 191 


ſetting them out in the World ; if Bages to Ap- 
prentice; You put Jacſtey to a better rade than 
Tommy, and give more Money with him ! And yet 
one Trade or Maſter may apparently deſerve or 
require it; the other, not. If Girls, in Matri- 
mony 3 Why ſhould Betſey be married before 
Thomaſine ?--=Let the Eldeſt go firſt ! Tho' perhaps 
the one has an humble Servant, the other none 
Ay, I ſee poor Themaſine muſt be contented 
with any body, or any thing, while Betſey muſt be a 
Lady ? --- Theſe are all ſtill freſh Cauſes of Dif- 
ference and Uneaſineſs to you both, 

Then will ſhe actually, or you will ſuſpect it, 
(and that is as bad to your Peace) be conſtantly 
progging, as the Women call it, for her Children, 
in order to make a private Purſe for them, on any 
Occaſion that may happen, or in caſe ſhe ſhall 
outlive you. 

And if there be a third Race of Children from 
this Marriage, worſe and worſe ſtill. Then the 
two former Sets, if they never joined together 
before, now will make a common Cauſe, in this 
ingle. Point, againſt the new Race; and mult not 
this double your own and your Wife's Comforts, 
think 2 ?---- Then muſt you be glad to leſſen 
your Family at home, that you may leſſen the 
Number of ſo many Spies and Enemies to your 
Repoſe. The Boys muſt be hurry'd out to the 
irt Thing that offers for them, whether ſuitable 
or unſuitable to their Genius or Capacity; and the; 
generally thrive accordingly : The Girls to the firſt 
Man that will take them, whether he can provide 
for them or not, as he ought; and after a while. 
they may come back to you, tho” fitted out with a 
great Expence, quite deſtitute and undone, with a 
larther Increaſe to your Family; the too frequent 
Conſequences of precipitate Marriages. And thon 

5 | WI 


192 Familiar LET TERS dn the 


will a new Scene commence; for all the unprovided- 
for, will join againſt the poor unhappy one. 

This, you'll ſay, is looking a great way forward, 
It is fo, And x 6H may never happen. Poſſibly 
it never may, as to the laſt Caſe 3 but as it too 
often has happen'd, and daily does happen, a wiſe 
Man will think a little about it, while it is in 
his Power to prevent it all. 2 

I have touch'd but upon a few of the Conſe- 
quences that may too probably follow from a 
new Engagement. Yet, I believe, theſe, if you 
are not abſolutely determin'd, will make you 
chink alittle; if you are, why then, all the Rea- 
ſons that can be urged will ſignify nothing. And 
in this Caſe, you ſhould not have laid a Snare 
for me to diſoblige a Perſon who is to ſtep in be- 
tween your Friendſhip and mine, and who will 
look upon me, if ſhe knows my Mind, (as very 
probably ſhe will; for I hardly ever knew a Secret 
of this kind kept) as her Enemy, and ſo create a 
Coolneſs and Indifference between us, which you 
cannot help if you would. For if ever it be ſo, 
and your Lady receives me, in a way that I have 
not been uſed 'to in your Houſe, I ſhall be very 
ſhy of viſiting either you or her. 
If you require it, and it will have oy Effect 
upon you, I can enter ſtill farther into this Subject; 
but I fanſy I have ſaid enough, and perhaps more 
than you'll thank me for. Bus be that as it will, 
I have anſwer'd your Requeſt ; and ſhewn you, 
(peradventure, at the Expence of my Diſcretion) 
that I am, in all Things, 


Your fincere Friend and Well-wiſber. 


3 L E- 


5: 


'2S >> A 


my — 
— 


2 — 


ent Important Occaſions, 193 


LETTER CXLIII. 


Againſt a ſecond Marriage, where there are Chil- 
dren on one Side, and a Likelihood of more, 


Dear Sir, 


OU are inclined, you tell me, to give your 
Children a Mother, inſtead of the good one 
they have loſt; or rather, in plain Engliſb, you 
ſhould have faid, yourſelf a Wife, to ſupply your 
tun Loſs : And you aſk my Opinion on the Sub- 
ject, without naming the Perſon, only intimating, 
that ſhe is a maiden Lady, no more than Seven 
| Years younger than yourſelf, and has a pretty 
middling Fortune. | 

I am glad you have not named the Lady; for 
now I ſhall ſtand clear of any Imputation of per- 
ſonal Prejudice, let me ſay what I will. I will 
therefore freely tell you my Mind, that I am al- 
ways againſt fecond Marriages, where there are 
Children on one or both Sides, and likely to be 
more : Unleſs there are ſuch worldly Reaſons as 
make it abſolutely prudent for a Perſon to niarry to 
eſtabliſh his Circumſtances. This is not your Cate : 
For you are very eaſy in the World ; and beſides, 
the Ladies of this Age are ſo brought up, that 4 
Man muſt not look for very extraordinary Aſſiſt- 
2rces in a Wife, with relation to her own Chil- 
cren, much leſs the Children of anther Woman, 
Well, but this Lady is highly prudent, good- ha- 
mour'd, an excellent QfEconomiſt, and what not? 
And ſo they are all, my Friend; or at leaſt, we 
are os to perſuade ourſelves ſo, before they are 
marry'd, 

But we'll ſuppoſe her all you fay, and all yo 
wink; yet ſhe will * I preſume, be Gre 


194 Familiar LETTERS on the 


of the Paſſions common to human Nature. Cas. 
you expect, that tho? you give your Children a Mlo- 
ther, you give them an own Mother ? She may 
have Prudence enough to do what e will think 
her Duty by them, but muſt ſhe not be her own 
Judge, of what that is ?--- And are you ſure, that 
what ſhe calls ſo, nay, and, for Peace-ſake, what 
you will be willing to call fo too, will be called fo 
by your Children, as they grow up, and even b 
the reſt of the World? But Children, you'll fay, 
may be unreaſonable and undutiful--- U 

Sir-- we'll ſuppoſe it ſo; but will this make you 
Happy, let them have Reaſon, or not, for their 
Surmiſes? And as ſhe cannot plead Nature for 
the Regulator of her Conduct towards them, but 
common Civility, and Prudence only, at the very 
beſt ; will there not be two to one on the Childrens 
Side, that they may be right? But whoever may 
be right or wrong, if you are made unhappy by it, 
that's the eſſential Point to you, who by this ſecond 
Marriage have been the Cauſe of it all. 

This is moſt certain, her Views muſt be quite 
contrary to thoſe of your Children Tis true, theirs 
will of Conſequence be likewiſe contrary to hers, 
and yet both may be very reaſonable too, according 
to the Character of each. And is not this a pretty 
Situation for you, do you think? For which Side 
eau you, muſt you take? The Children, as they 
grow up, Will” be jealous of ill Offices from lier 
with you. She will interpret thoſe things which 3 
natural Mother would think nothing of, as ſtudiad 
Slights; and will not their conſtant Bickerings 
make you uneaſy in your own Family, where Un- 
ealineſs is the leaſt tolerable, as it is the Place to 
which a Man ſhould retire for Comfort, when the 
World gives him Cauſe of Diſpleaſure ? 


And 


ery well, 


— — & — 2 QLD) CY % FD ADL - 


— 


— 
— 


«„ — „ — — — d © rw u —— — — 2 


moſt Important Occaſions. 193 


And what, pray, may this probably end in? 
Why, for Quietneſs-ſake, you will poſſibly be ob- 
liged to ſeparate them, The Mother-in-law, 
ſhould foe be in Fault, you canzot part with. The 
Children then muſt turn out, of courſe, You muſt 
ſtudy, after reconciling and patching up a hundred 
Breaches, to make ſome other Proviſion for them. 
And thus, perhaps, they are precipitated into a 
wide World, and expoſed to a thouſand dangerous 
Temptations ; and how can you forgive yourſelf, 
if they ſhould by this means become a Prey to the 
deſigning Attempts, the Boys, of vicious Nomen; 
the Girls, of profiigate Men? And how would it 
have grieved the Heart of their indulgent Mother, 
could ſhe have foreſeen, that her beloved Spouſe, 
inſtead of ſupplying the Loſs of a Mother to them, 
ſhould take from them his own immediate Pro- 
tection, and that perhaps at a Time of Life, when 
it was molt neceſſary for their future Good? 

This may very probably be more or leſs the Calc, 
if there be no other Difficulties, than what may 
ariſe between your Children and their Mother-in- 
law. But if, as s moſt likely, you ſhould have 
Children by this your ſecond Wife, the Caſe max 
be {till worſe. She will then look upon yours by 
your firſt, not only with a more ee but 
probably with a jealous Eye. She will be continu- 
ally carking and laying up for her own, and grudge 
every thing you bh out upon the gathers. And 
when they are both grown up to any Bignels, what 
Claſhings and Jarrings may not enſue between the 
Offspring of the ſame Father, and two different 
Mothers? How will you be obliged to give a Pre- 
terence to the Children of the latter Wite, againſt 
thoſe of the farmer; becauſe the Mother of the one 
Set is preſent and pri, and perhaps clamorous, 


1 


196 Familiar L'ETTERS 0x the 
in their Favour- that of the other, ab/ent, ſilent, 
dead, forgotten ! 

If Love hides a Multitude of Faults, as no doubt 
it does, and [ndifference, or, perhaps, as it may be, 
Hatred, is quick-ſighted to every little Slip, how 
will hers be all Angels! Yours--- the worſt ſhe can 
.call them !---Yet how can you help this? You are 
married to the Temper, as well as to the Yeoman ; and 
Oppoſition, tis likely, will but make matters worſe ; 
for what the Sex cannot carry by Reaſon or Argu- 
ment, they will by Obſtinacy and Teizing. 

Then in the Matter of making Proviſion reſpe- 
Ctively for their future Good, how will your Soli- 
citudes for the one be conſtantly leſſened ; for the 
other perpetually importun'd? Nor muſt your own 
Judgment, in either Caſe, be ſo much the Rule 
of your Conduct, as the fond Partiality of your 
ſecond Wife for hers. And it is far from being 
impoſſible, that ſhe may uſe your firſt Children 
eorſe than ſhe would do mere Strangers, for no 
other Reaſon, but becauſe they have a better Title 
to your Regard, and ſtand more in the way of her 
Intereſt and Views. 

Theſe, my good Friend, are ſome of the Reaſons 
I have to alledge againſt ſecond Marriages, where 
there are Children on one Side, and a Probability 
of having a ſecond Race. As I hinted, there may 
be Reaſons, where a Perſon's Circumſtances ſtand 
in need of the Aſſiſtance that may be procur'd by 
this means, to overbalance many of the Inconve- 
niencies J have hinted at. The leſſer Evil in this 
Caſe is to be choſen, and the Party muſt make 
the beſt of the reſt. But this is not your Cale: 
And ſo I refer the Whole to your mature Con- 
ſideration, and am, Sir, 
YR Sincerely yours, 


LE T- 


8 
1 
P 
5 
8 
V 
b 
þ 
* 
V 
ſt 
h 
8 


moſt Important Occaſion... 197 


LETTER CMIIV. 
Adviſing a Friend againſt going to Law, 


Dear Sir, 


1 A M ſorry to hear, that the Difference between 
you and Mr. Archer is at laſt likely to be brought 
to a Law- ſuit. I wiſh you'd take it into your ſeri- 
ous Conſideration before you begin, becauſe it will 
hardly be in your Power to end it, when you pleaſe. . 
For you immediately put.the Matterout of your own 
Hands, into the Hands of thoſe whoſe Intereſt it is 
to protract the Suit from Ferm to Term, and who 
will as abſolutely preſcribe to you in it, as your 
Phyſician in a dangerous IIlneſs. | 
The Law, my good Friend, I look upon, more 
than any one thing, as the proper Puniſhment or 
an over-haſty and perverſe Spirit, as it is a Puniſh- 
ment that follows an Act of a Man's own feekuip 
and chuſing, You will not conſent perhaps nv 
to ſubmit the Matter in Diſpute to Reference; but 
let me tell you, that after you have expended large 
Sums of Money, and ſquandered away a deal of 
Time in Attendance on your Lawyers, and Pre- 
parations for Hearings, one Term after another, 
you will probably be of another Mind, and be glad 
Seven Years hence to leave it to that Arbitration 
which now you refuſe. He is happy who is wite 
by other Mens Misfortunes, ſays the common 
Adage : And why, when you have heard from all 
your Acquaintance, who have try'd the Experiment, 
what a grievous Thing the Law is, will you, notwith- 
ſtanding, pay for that Wiſdom, which you may 
have at the Colt of others? | 
The Repreſentation that was once hung up as a 
Sign in the Rolls Liberty, on one Side, of a Man 
| K. 3 all 


198 Familiar LETTERS on the 


all in Rags wringing his Hands, with a Label im- 
porting, That he had laſt his Suit; and on the other, 
a Man that had not a Ragleft, but ſtark naked, 
eapering and triumphing, That he had carry'd his 
Cauſe *, was a fine Emblem of going to Law, and 
the infatuating Madneſs of a litigious Spirit, 

How excellent to this Purpoſe is the Advice 
of our Bleſſed SAv1oUR, rather than ſeek this 
Redreſs againſt any who would even take one's 
Coat, to give him his Cloak atfo? For, beſides the 
Chriſtian Doctrine inculcated by this Precept, it 
will be found, as the Law is managed, and the Un- 
certainty that attends it, even in the be/?-grounded 
Litigations, that ſuch a pacifick Spirit may be 
deemed the only way to preſerve the reſt of one's 
Garments, and to prevent being ſtript to the Skin, 

Moreover, what wife Man would ruſh upon a 
Proceeding, where the principal Men of the Pro- 
feſſion (tho' the Oath they take, if Serj--nts, ob- 
liges them not to fign a ſham Plea, nor plead in a 
Cauſe againſt their own Opinion) are not aſhamed, 
under the ſpecious, but ſcandalous Notion, of do- 
ing the be/t they can for their Client, to undertake, 
for the ſake of a paltry Fee, to whiten over the 
blackeſt Cauſe, and to defeat the jaſteſt? Where 
your Property may depend altogether upon the 
[mpudence of an eloquent Pleader aſſerting any 


ring, a perjured Evidence ſwearing whatever will 


do tor his Suborner's Purpoſe? Where the Tricks 
and Miſtakes of Practiſers, and want of trifling 
Forms, may Nonſuit you? Where Deaths of Per- 
ſons made Parties to the Suit, may cauſe all to 
begin again? What wiſe Man, I ſay, would ſub- 


* *Tis ſaid, That Sir John Ty ——, Maſter of the 
Rolls, cauſed this Sign to be taken down, on the Cla- 
mour it ogcalion'd among the Lawyers, 


ject 


* 


moſt Important Occaſions, 199 


ject himſelf to theſe Vexations and common In- 
cidents in the Law, if he could any way avoid 
itz together with the intolerable Expences and 
Attendances conſequent on a Law-ſuit ? Beſides, 
the Fears, the Cares, the Anxieties, that revolve 
with every Term, and engroſs alla Man's Thoughts? 
Where legal Proofs mult be given to the plaineſt 
Facts; that a living Man is living, and identi- 
cally himſelf; and that a dead Man is dead, and 
buried by Certificate; where Evidence muſt bg 
brought at a great Expence to Hands and Seals 
affixed to Deeds and Receipts, that never were be- 
fore queſtion'd; till a Cauſe ſhall be ſplit into 
ſeveral Under-ones ;, theſe try'd Term by Term ; 
and Y ears elapſe before the main Point comes to be 
argued, tho' originally there was but one fnolcy 


%- 


Point, as you apprehended, in the Queſtion. A 
to the Law-part only, obſerve the Proceſs : Pirſt, 
comes the Declaration; 2dly, a Plea ; 2dly, De- 
murrer to the Plea; 4thly, a Joinder in 9 ; 
5thly, a Rejoinder; 6thly, a Sur-rejoinder ; which 
ſometimes is concluſive, ſometimes to begin al! 
over again, Then may ſucceed Tryals upon tik 
Lato Part, and Fryals upon the Equity Part, 
oftentimes new Tryals, or Rehearings ; and thete 
followed by Writs of Error. 

Then you may be plung'd into the bottomlc!: 
Gulf of Chancery, where you begin with Bills are 
Anſwers, Containing Hundreds of Shects at exor- 
bitant Prices, 15 Lines in a Sheet, and 6 Words 
in a Line, (and a Stamp to every Sheet) barefacedly ſo 
contrived to pick your Pocket: Then follow all the 
Train of Examinations, Interrogatories, Exceptions, 
Bills amended, References for Scandal and Imperti- 
nence, new Allegations, new Interrogatories, new 
Exceptions, on Pretence of inſufficient Anſwers, 
Replies, Rejoinders, Sur-rejoinders, Butters, Rebut- 


: K 4 ters,, 


Jaux-hall, Cuper's-gardens, Mary le-bon, &c. 


200 Familiar LITT ERS e - 


ters, and Sur-rebutters; till, at laſt, when you have 


dunced thro? this bleſſed Round of Preparation, the 
Tryal before the Maſter of the Rolls comes next ; 
Appeals follow from his Honour to the Chancellor ; 
then from the Chancellor to the Houſe of Lords; 
and fometimes the Parties are ſent down from 
thence for a new Tryal in the Courts below----- 
Good Heavens! What wife Man, permit me to 
repeat, would enter himſelf into this confounding 
Circle of the Lau! 

I hope, dear Sir, you will think of this Matter 
molt deliberately, before you proceed in your preſent 
angry Purpoſe; and if you ſhall think proper to 
take my Advice, and avoid a Law-ſuit, J am fure 
vou will have Reaſon to thank me for it, and for 


the Zeal wherewith I am 


Your ſincere Friend and Servant, 


— —— 


—— — — „* — ** 


LETTER CXLV. 


Fo a young Lady, cautioning ber againſt keep- 
ing Company with 4 Gentleman of a bad 
Charaftler, 


Dear Coufm, 
HE great Reſpect IT have, and always had 


for you, obliges me to take this Freedom, to 
let you know, that the Neighbourhood begins to 
talk pretty freely of you and Mr, Lory. You have 
been ſeen with him at the Play, and after that, at 
the R---- Tavern, a Houſe of no good Repute, I 


— — — 


aſſure you; where you have ſtaid with him till 


near Twelve o' Clock at Night: You have like- 
wiſe been with him at Vipont's at Hampſtead, at 


I am 


_—_— - 7 


FA „ £©& x4 XX „„ Fes tw dd 24+ ov VQ4 + 


hl a 2_Y&&  -X i _ NVÞ mv 


— * — — RT 


moſt Important Occaſions. 201 
J am ſorry for theſe Things, becauſe he has none 
of the beſt of Characters; having, as Iam well in- 
form'd, already ruin'd Two, if not Three, worthy 
Tradeſmens Daughters: And it is but too probable, 
that he has no honourable Deſign upon you: For, 
whatever he may promiſe you, I am credibly aſſur'd, 
that he is actually engaged with Miſs Knapper, 
whom you know very well: Indeed, it is ſaid, he 
has 200 J. per Ann. but if it be ſo, he is very much 
involved in the World ; and, at the Rate he lives, 
had he three times that Eſtate, would never be out 
of Debt; for he is downright extravagant, a Man 
of no Conduct, a perfect Rattle, whoſe Words are 
not to be rely'd on in any reſpect ; and makes a 
common Boaſt of the Favours he has received from 
our Sex, whoſe faulty Fondneſs is the conſtant 
Subject of his Ridicule, 
For all theſe Reaſons, I beg of you, dear Couſin, 
to avoid his Company; for tho' I am confident 
you will preſerve your Virtue, yet, my Dear, 
think what you will, you may receive an incurable 
Wound in your Reputation. I hope you'll excuſe 
this Liberty, which no other Motive but Zeal tor 
your Credit and Welfare has occaſioned. And be- 
lieve me to be Dur faithful Friend, 
as well as affettionate Couſin, 


; 


* * K * 


LETTER CXLVI. 


From a Mother to her high-ſpirited Daughter, 
20 lives on uneaſy Terms with her Husband, 


* 


Dear Nanny, 


1AM ſorry with all my Heart, to hear of the 
frequent Miſunderſtandings between your Huſ- 
band and you, I hoped much better things from 

| = your 


2 


* 2 


ww. 
adhd 


„. 
— 7 


1 
1 
. 
: * 
0 
4 
F 
: 


202 Familiar LETTERVS on the 
your Prudence. From my Prudence, you'll ſay 
perhaps! as if I thought all the Fault was yours: 
But, my Dear, I don't think ſo, I can't think fo; 
and yet I 2 #4 Fault with your want of Pru- 
dence too: For Prudence will oblige a good Wife 
to bear a little Contradiction from her Huſband, 
tho” not always juſt, perhaps, as well as to avoid 
wiving Offence. - Suppoſe he is peeviſh, petulant, un- 
eaſy in his Temper, and on flight or no Occaſions, 
as yoy may think; muſt you be peeviſh and petu- 
fant, becauſe h is ſo? How do you know what 
things may have happened to him abroad, in the 
way of his Buſtneſs, to make him ſo ?---Or, if it 
be only Humour, why muſt you be as bad as he 
that you find Fault with? Is an ill Temper in a 
Huſband, fo taking a thing, that the Wife, who 
finds it intolerable to her, muſt nevertheleſs imi- 
tate or aſſume it? 

The Reaſon why you will not allow him to be 
oftener in the Right, and why you condemn as 


cauſeleſs his: Petulance and Waſpiſhneſs, muſt pro- 


ceed in a great meaſure from a ſlender Opinion, if 
not Contempt, of his Judgment. If you think him 
a Man of Senſe, tis impoffible but you ſhould allow, 
that there may be ſome Cauſe, tho? you don't im- 
mediately penetrate it, why he ſhould be diſturbed ; 
and it would be kind in you to ſuppoſe the beſt ; 
as, that his Tenderneſs for you will not let him 
communicate it to you, rather than to imagine 
he is always in the wrong, and always angry witb- 


cut Reaſon, But were it actually to be ſo, are 


vou commiſſioned to puniſh him with Provocations 


* 
and Reſentments as wrong, and even more unbe- 


coming in a Wife? If you love him as you ought, 
you vill extenuate his Failings, and draw into an 
advantageous Light thoſe Actions which may be 
interpreted in his Favour. 5 RE 
ut 


„ „„ ed od eo een RT, —_ 


— -—— — — — —— ee EY IEEE. 


moſt Important Occaſions; 202 


But if, as I heard you once” ſay, you will give 
him as good as he brings ; that you will not bear his 
unaccountable Humours, and ſuch-like vulgar and 
provoking Expreſſions; it muſt come to this Point: 
Either you or he muſt give way; one of your Tem- 
por muſt be ſubdued, and over-aw'd by the other. 

f it be His Caſe, tir'd out by your reſolute and 
ſturdy Behaviour, to ſuccumb, do you think this 
will either be a Credit to him or to you 5 What an 
abject (henpeck*d, the Vulgar call it) Wretch will 
he be deem'd ? What a 3 you ? He'll be 
the Jeſt of his Companions, and you be thought to 
excel--in what? Ina Quality the moſt infamous to 
a Woman, next to that of an Adultereſs. 

But this I aver, that Meekneſs, Condeſcenſion, 
Forbearance, are ſo far from being deſpiſable Qua- 
lities in our Sex, that they are the Glory of it. And 
what is Meetnefs, my Dive, if you are not to be 
try'd by Provocations? What is Condeſcen/ion, it 
vou mult always have your own way ? What i, 
Forbearanse, if you are to return Injury for Injury, 
with the hoſtile Spirit of a fierce Enemy, rather 
than to act with the ſweet Complacency of a tender 

Wife, who has vow'd Obedience and Duty? 
But, Obedience and Duty, you'll ſay, in Re- 
turn for 2% Nature and ill Uſage ! Yes, my Dear, 
even were it to be ſo, you eught. For, do you . 
think you are never to condeſcend, or give up your 
own Humour to your Huſband ? A pretty. Sort of 
Obedience that, which ſhall be only ſhewn.where 
vou are not thwarted, but never where you are“ 
Would not this be Obedience to your own head- 
ſtrong Paſſions, and not to him? So long as yav 
can have your way in every thing, you will be. a 
Mirror of Condeſcenſion; but when once you come 
to be contradicted, why then you are at Liberty 19 
contradict again. If he is out of the way in his 
K 6 Humour, 


5 
5 


— — Cn 


4 
7 
4 
4. 
. 


204 Familiar LE TT ERS on the 
Humour, you will never be in the way in yours. 
If he gives you one unkind Word, he ſhall have 
ru in Return; for you will give him as good as be 
brings. If he is paſſionate, you will be ſo too. You 
will return provoking Anſwers for reflecting Words; 
and ſo make your Houſe a conſtant Scene of Con- 
fuſion, and your Life uncomfortable, And for 
what? Why to ſhew how bravely you can return 
Injury for Injury; how nobly you can contend for 
Victory over your Huſband ; and how you can 
make him deſpiſed in his Family, as well by Chil- 
dren as Servants, and yourſelt diſcredited by the 
poor Victory, ſuppoſe you were to win it by 
breaking his Spirit. 

Is this, my Dear, the Part of a tender Mie to 
a Huſband? Nay, is it the Part of a Chri/t:an to a 
Chriſtian, where there is not the matrimonial Ob- 
ligation? For are we not commanded to return 
Good for Evil, and to pray for them that deſpight- 
filly uſe us? And is not the Wife's Conver/a- 
tion to be coupled with Fear; and do we not vow 
Reverence to a Huſband as our Head? How can 
all this be, if you are to return Evil for Evil; to 


make yourſelf your own Judge, and Jury, and Ex- 
ecutioner too, by acquitting yourſelf, condemning 


him, ſentencing him, and puniſhing him with all 
the Severity of licentious Speech, provoking Snap- 
piſhneſs, or the ſtill more affecting Deportment of 
ſullen contemptuous Silence. Let me, on the Whole, 
beſeech you, for my ſake, who would be loth to be 
thought to have ſet you any bad Example ; for your 
Family's fake, for your Reputation's ſake, as well 
as his, to reſolve on a different Conduct. Make the 
good Rule yours, of never being out of Humour 
when he is fo. Firſt ſoften him by good Temper ; 
then, when ſoften'd, expoſtulate mildly on the Un- 
reaſonableneſs of his Anger, If you convince him 

| | thus, 


— 
— — _ 2 — OS * * —— — — ——— - 


thus, he will take care of the like Error, or his 
preſent Confeſſion will ſtrengthen your mild Argu- 
ments againſt him in any thing elſe for the 1 
He will ſee you adviſe him for his Good. He will 
have a greater Opinion of your Prudence, and be 
more doubtful of his own. He will ſee you contend 
not for Victory, or Contradiion-ſake ; but for 
his own ſake. And depend upon it, you will both 
reap the happy Fruits of it in the Comfort of your 
Lives; .in the Love of your own Children ; in the 
Reverence of your Servants (who will otherwiſe be 
liſted in each Contender's Quarrel, and be inſolent 
Judges of the Conduct of both); in the Reſpect of 
' your Neighbours and Friends; and in the Pleaſure 
you will give to your Relations, who will viſit and 
be viſited by you both, with that Delight which no- 
body knows how to eſtimate ſo much, as, my dear 
Nanny, 


Dur ever affeftionate Mother. 


_— 


LETTER CXLVII. 


Lady to her Friend, a young Widow Lady, 
who, having bury'd a polite and excellent 
Husband, inclines to marry a leſs deſerving 
Gentleman, and of unequal Fortune. 


Dear Madam, 
ERE I to lay it down for a Maxim, that 


Maids often mend their Circumſtances by 
Marriage, W/idows very rarely, I believe I might 
be juſtify'd by every one's Experience. To what 
can the Truth of this Obſervation be owing ? Is it 
to be ſuppoſed, that Widows have ſtronger Paſtrions 
than Maids? Shall the proud lordly Sex have it to 
boaſt, that they are ſuch eſtimable Creatures, that 


when 


moſt Important Otcaſions. econ 


206 Familiar LETTERS on the 


when once one of them has had the Fortune to he 
choſen by a Lady, and has been taken from her by 
Death, ſhe cannot live without taking another, 
end finds herſelf obliged to accept of the next. that 
offers, thro* all Diſadvantages, and every Degree of 
Inequality ? Surely this cannot be the'Caſe ! Surely 
a prudent, a modeſt Lady will not ſay this in /+ 
many Words Much leſs then-ought:ſhe to con- 
feſs it by her Actions, which are much ſtronger than 
Il ords. For I believe no Woman who ever en- 
ter'd the Pale of Matrimony with ſprightly Hopes 
about her, found the Poſſeſſion (Sex only conſider'd ) 
equal to her Expectations. The Maid may hope, 
may fanſy much, in the Commerce between the 
Sexes, from her meditating on . the heighten'd 
Scenes, which pernicious Novels, and idle Ro- 
mances, the Poiſon of Female Minds, abound with. 
But the Widow nous *tis all Free-maſonry, all 
empty Hope, flaſhy, fooliſh, unworthy, unperma- 
nent, and, but for the Law of Nature, deſpicable.-- 
Whence is it then, that the wihing, expecting 
Maid ſhould be more prudent than the #nowing, 
experienced Widow ? Should be better Proof, with 
raiſed Imaginations, againſt Courtſhip or Perſua- 
$on, than one who well knows the tranſitory Va- 
nity and Unſatisfactorineſs of the End to which 
that Courtſhip or Perſuaſion tends ? 

If it be ſaid, That this Point is not ſo much 
the Caſe, as the ſettled Life of Matrimony, which 
has been once ſo ſatisfactorily experienced; let th! 
Circumſtances of a Lady who abounds in every 
thing, anſwer this poor, but common Excuſe ; and 
let the Choice ſhe makes of the Perſon and Fortune 
of her fecond Husband (which is generally, as J 
have obſerved above, in both Caſes, far ſhort of her 


former Choice) acquit or convict her, as her Con- 
duct ſhall deſerve. 1 


% Toe oo Sn no ro of  zT we." 


moſt Important Occaſions. 207 


Af a young Widow indeed advantages her/elf, 
and worſts not her Children, (if ſhe has any) in 
her ſecond Adventure, let her proceed: She is juſti- 
fied to worldly Prudence. But this, as I have ſaid, 
is ſo ſeldom the Caſe, even with Widow Ladies of 
Modeſty, and Diſcretion in other reſpects, that I 
muſt own I have been often puzzled and confound- 
ed how to account for the Motives of ſuch an one, 
reputably ; eſpecially when ſhe appears to me and 
all the World, neither to have done Honour to the 
Memory of her late Spouſe, to her Family, to her- 
ſelf, nor, as ſometimes, has been the Caſe, paid 
any regard to common Decency. How, I ſay, 
ſhall this be accounted for, in a. Lady of Prudence 
and Virtue? Is it, that, as one Extreme is ſaid to 
border on another, extreme Foy treads on the Heels 
of extreme Sorrow? It cannot be; for as, on one 
hand, I am ſure there can be no extreme Foy in the 
matrimonial Commerce; ſo, I fear, where a Wo- 
man can ſoon forget her departed Spouſe, ſhe can- 
not be ſenſible of extreme Grief for his Loſs. And 
if ſhe will take upon her this latter Part of the Cha- 
rater, and own the firſt was thus indifferent to 
her, ſhe ſhall have my Conſent to do any thing ſhe 
has a mind to do, and I will exempt her willingly 
from the Obſervation of every other Rule of Pru- 
dence and Decency. 

But in a Caſe the dire& Reverſe of this, how 
ſnall we account for ſuch a Behaviour? How in 
particular, if the charming, the blooming Miſs 
Bendiſh, who was ſo coy a Maiden, and with ſo 
much Difficulty won by the late amiable and con- 
verſible Mr. Brogtes, with a Fortune ſuperior to 
ker own, ſhould, within a few Months after his 
Deceaſe, when bleſt with an Affluence left her by his 
Ceneroſity and Affection for her, be won by Mr, 
PFawnes, 


W 


hos Familiar LETTERS o the 


Fownes, a Man leſs accompliſh'd as to Knowledge, 
leſs amiable in his Perſon, leſs polite in his Con- 
verſation, and of a Fortune ſo much beneath 
what was even her maiden one, that her Friends 
then would never have thought him worthy of her ? 
-- How, I fay, ſhall we account for this, if it ſhould 
be ſo? Is there a ſecret Sympathy in Tempers and 
Diſpoſitions, that attracts each its Like by Motives 
imperceptible and unaccountable? It cannot be in 2516 
Caſe ſurely, For can the polite Mrs. Brookes be 
leſs polite for _—_— been marry'd to one of the 
beſt-bred and beſt-behav'd Gentlemen in England? 
And can ſhe ſo ſoon get over Forms as a Vidoꝛo, 
for ſuch a Suitor as Mr. Fownes, which as a Maid 
were fo long before they could be diſpenſed with 
in Favour of ſuch a Lover as Mr. Brookes ?-- Is her 
ſoft and delicate Mind, as we all think it, after a!/, 
more on a Level with that of the one Gentleman 
than that of the other far more excellent one? Has 
ſhe, will the Licentious aſk, ſtronger Incentives to 
a married State, as a Widow, than ſhe had as a 
Maid ?---It cannot be !---W hat then ſhall we ſay 
to all this ?---For after all, two Years won not 
Miſs Bendiſb, to a Gentleman of exalted Worth; 
and two Months ſeem to have made a great Pro- 
reſs with Mrs. Brookes /-- And that in Favour of a 
zentleman, whom we all think unworthy of her 
at all. | . 
My dear Boſom- friend, my School - fellow, my 


Companion, as well in the maiden as in tlie matri- 


monial, tho', I bleſs God, not in the vidual State, 


reſolve me theſe Queſtions ; anſwer to me for this 
Conduct; account to me for theſe ſeeming unac- 
countable Motives, and thereby juſtify yourſelf to 


your Reputation, to the Memory of the dear De- 


| parted, to your own Sex, to the other Sex, (fo at- 
: | tente 


— — -— —— 


— — — — —-¼ 2 —8 = 


moſt Important Octafons, 20g 


tentive as they both are to your Conduct in this 
Particular) and, laſtly, which will for ever oblige 
me, to 

Your affectionate and 


Faithful Friend and Servant. 


— N "— — : 


LETTER CXLVIII. 


From a Gentleman, ſtrenuouſly expoſtulating 
with an old rich Widow, about to marry a 
very young gay Gentieman, 


Madam, 


I AM very ſorry to hear of the Encouragement 
you give to the Viſits of young Mr. Barnes, 
becauſe of the great Difference in Years between 
ou. I cannot help giving you the Trouble of this 
3 tho? I am told, (and much affected 
I am with the News, if it be true) that the Matter 
between you is ſo far gone, that all I can ſay may 
too probably prove ineffectual. | 
Our Sex, Madam, in all your late Huſband's 
Time, has received an Advantage and a Credit 
from your Conduct in the marry'd State; and now, 
I wiſh it may not receive as great a Diſparagement, 
ſince the prudent Mrs. Bates thinks fit to coun- 
tenance the Addreſſes of one who was born after 
ſhe was marry'd, and a Mother, and who can poſſi- 
bly have no other Inducement than your Fortune, 
I believe, Madam, you never knew one happy 
Marriage of this ſort in all your Life : And you 
will reflect, that you will not be intitled to Pity, 
nor the young Man to Cenſure, if he ſhould prove 
the worſt and moſt profligate of Huſbands to you, 
For every one will cenſure you, and . _ 
thou 


210 Familiar LETTERS Sn the 


ſhould he even treat you with perſonal Abuſe and 
Barbarity. | 
Beſides, it is well known, that Mr. Barnes is a 
young Man of no very promiſing Inclmations. 
ome young Gentlemen are as grave and diſcreet at 
'Twenty-fve, as others at Thirty-five : But he has all 
the Vanity, the Gaiety, the Aﬀectation, of any one 
"at his Time of Life : And can you expect, that he 
will treat you well, that was never noted for treat- 
ing his on Mother very dutifully, who, by the way, 
is younger than yourſelf? Advanced Y cars are the co1:- 
ſtant Subject of Ridicule with ſuch wild young Fel- 
lows, to their Shame be it ſpoken ! and what can.you 
expect, when the very Motives by which you al 
be ſuppoſed to be acted in ſuch a Match, will in- 
volve you in the deepeſt Cenſure, will make you 
the Contempt of Perſons of all Ages, and both 
Sexes, and expoſe you to the low Buffoonery even 
of the Man you have choſen, who, inſtead of being 
your Protector, as a Huſband ought to be, will 
probably be the Perſon who will lead the Feſt that 
all will join in upon you, in order to excuſe his 
. own ſordid Choice? 
bi You owe it, Madam, give me Leave to ſay, to 
1 the Memory of your late worthy Huſband ; you owe 
j it to 2 Sex; you owe it to yourſelf, and your 
4 em%n Intereſt, and future Good; nay, to Decencyv, 
I will venture to add, to proceed no further in this 
| Affzir. It ſeems to me, to be next to a Degree of 
Inceſt for a Woman all hoary and grey-gooſed over 
JF by Time, or who will be ſoon ſo, to expoſe her- 
4 ſelf to the Embraces of a young Fellow, who is not 
ſo old as her firſt Son would have been, had he 
lived. Forgive me, Madam; but I cannot help 
this Plain-dealing -on the Occaſion. If you pro- 
ceed in giving Encouragement to the Boy's Ad- 
dreſs, I expect not, nor can I deſire, to be forgiven, 
OL 


- 


moſt Important Occaſions. 21 


or to ſtand upon common Terms with you: If 
etherwiſe, I am ready to aſk your Pardon; but I 
cannot with Patience think, that Mrs. Bates, who 
has paſſed thro? every Station h:therto with ſo much 
Applauſe, as well that of the pru lent Hide, and 
exemplary Matron, as the affectionate Mie, ſhould 
b ſo great a Wound to our Sex as ſhe will do, if 
e makes ſuch a Boy as Mr. Barnes the Succeſſor 
to her late worthy Huſband, and the Maſter of 
her Perſonand Fortune : By which Act ſhe will vow 
Obedience to one who was in a Cradle, when ſhe 
had Children of her own who were riling from it; 
and who would undoubtedly deſpiſe her in this 
Light, were it not for her Wealth; all of which, 
that he can get at, by Force, or fair Means, (if he 
acts by you as others generally have done in the 
ſame Circumſtances) will be ſquander'd away upon 
rival Objects more ſuitable to his Youth, while 
you will be the Laughing-ſtock and Scorn of ſuch 
as will revel in your Spoils, and triumph over you 
by the Help of your own Fortune. Mean time you 
will be ſo far from engaging the Pity of your Sex, 
that the more conſiderate of them, will ſhun and 
contemn you, as one who has brought a Diſgrace 
upon it: The Men will deſpiſe and flout you, 
and you will have nothing to do but to hide in a 
contemn'd Obſcurity that grey- green Head, which 
has ſo inconſiderately involved you in ſo much Di- 
ſtreſs, and to turn Penitent for it, and pray for an 
End to a miſerable Life; which, come when it will, 
will give Cauſe of Joy and Triumph to your young 
Huſband, and very little Sorrow to any other Perſon. 
But I hope ſtill for better things; and I hope for 
Pardon for this Freedom; for fain would Ibe thought 
by Mrs. Bates, | FTE 

Her affectionate and faithful Friend, 
.and humble Servant. 


—— — 


212 Familiar LITT ERS en the 


The following Eleven Epiſtles may ſerve a; 
Models for Letters to write by, on the like 
Occaſion ; likewiſe to give a brief Deſcription 
of London and Weſtminſter, 0 ſuch as 
have not ſeen thoſe Cities; and to point out 10 
thoſe who never were in Town before, what. 
is moſt worthy of Notice in it. 


LETTER CXLIX. 


From a young Lady in Town to her Aunt in the 
Country, 


I. Deſcribing the Tower, Monument, St, 
Paul's, Ce. 


Honoured Madam, 


Y OU will have me write you down Accounts of 


what I ſee remarkable in and about London, to 
keep me, as you ſay, out of Idleneſs, and to enter- 
tain my good Friends in my Abſence, I will obey, 
tho? your good Opinion of me, I am ſenſible, will be 
no ſmall Diſadvantage to me; for I ſhall convince 
you more effectually than ever of my Defects, and 
want of that Ability to entertain my abſent 
Friends, which their Partiality had made them 
expect from me. 

To begin then, my Aunt and Couſins carricd 
me, in the firſt Place, to ſee the Tower of London, 
which we have heard ſo much Talk of in the 
Country ; and which no one that viſits this great 
Town, omits ſeeing. *'T'is fituated by the Thames 
Side, ſurrounded with an old Wall, about a Mile 
in Compaſs, with a broad deep Ditch, which has 
generally more Mud in it than Water. All Found 

19 the 


1 „ 


traordinary Occaſions are fired; as on more com- 
mon ones, they fire only Rows of others, which 
are fixed in the Ground, on the Wharf by the 
Thames. At the Entrance on the Right-hand, we 
ſaw the Collection of wild Beaſts kept there, as 
Lions, Panthers, Tygers, &c. alſo Eagles, Vul- 
furs, Wee | 

We were then carried to the Mint, where we 
faw the manner of coining Money, and ftriking 
Medals, &c. From thence we went to the Jewel- 
houſe, and were ſhewn the Crown, and the other 
Regalia ; which gave me no ſmall Pleaſure, as I 
had never ſeen theſe things before, and heard fo 
much Talk of them. ; 


The Horſe-Armory is a fine Sight; for here they 


ſhew Fifteen of our Exgliſb Monarchs on Horſe- 
back, all in rich Armour, attended with Guards : 
But I think this Sight not comparable to the ſmall 
Armory ; for here Pikes, Muſkets, Swords, Hal- 
berds, and Piſtols, (enow, as they told us, for three- 
ſcore thouſand Men) are all placed in ſuch beauti- 
ful Order, and ſuch various F igures, repreſenting 
the Sun, Star and Garter, Half-moons, and ſuch- 


like, that T was greatly delighted with the Sight, 


all the Arms being bright and ſhining. 
We ſaw the Train of Artillery, in what they 


call the Grand Storehouſe ; filled with Cannon and 


Mortars, all very fine, a Diving-bell, and other 
Curioſities ; and I thought, upon the whole, that 
this great Magazine of Curioſities and Stores, was 
the moſt worthy of the Notice of a Stranger to 
London, of any thing I had been ſhewn. | 

From hence they carried me to the Monument, 
built in Remembrance of the Fire of London, a 
very curious Pillar, from the Gallery of which we 


a Survey of the- whole City, But as it ſtands 


low, 


moſt Important Occaſions. 213 


the outward Wall are Guns planted, which on ex- 


3 a 
> » Gaw — c = - — — — 


214 Fumiiar LETTERS on the © 


low, I cannot fay, but I liked the Proſpect from f 


St. Paul's Cupola much better, when I was car- 
ried up thither, which was Yeſterday ; for that be- 
ing the higheſt Situation in the City, and more in 
the Centre of London and Weſtminſter, commands 
a finer View over both Cities, Hampſtead and High- 
gate Hills, Surrey, the River, &c. The Cathe- 
dral is a moſt noble Building, and I admired it not 
a little, for its Choir, Chapels, Dome, Whiſper- 
ing-place, Vaults below, and other Curioſities too 
tedious to mention. | 
This, Madam, may ſerve for one Letter, and 


to ſhew you how much I am deſirous, by my Obe- 


dicnce to your Commands, to approve myſelt 
Yeur dutiful Niece, 


LEI TER CL 


From the ſame. 


II. Deſcribing other remarkable Places in and 
about London and Weſtminſter, which ar: 
generally ſhewn to Strangers, 


Floneured Madam, 


HAVE ſeen the Cuſtom-houſe, a Place of 
Hurry and Buſineſs, with a crouded and incon- 
venient Key, compared to that of Briſtol. St. 
Themas's and Guy's Hoſpitals, Southwark, all mo! 
noble Charities ; St. Bartholomew's, a ſtill nobler ; 
but which, by its additional Buildings, ſeems to 
be in a way to ſwallow up its own Revenues, by 
pulling down their 'Tenants Houſes, which con- 
tributed Means to ſupport the Charity. Smithfield 
alſo, a ſpacious Market for live Cattle, &c. as, I 
{ſhould have faid, I had Leaden-hall ns a 
5 ro- 


wel 


buy 
= 


2322 a -M 


n3 as ©, =y 


= a PA tas eb «> © woe 


—— — — 


— — — — . — — 


moſt Important Occaſions, 215 


Prodigy of its Kind, and the Admiration of Fo- 
reigners. Sadler*s-wells, at I/lington, I have been 
at, and ſeen there the Diverſions of Rope-dancing, 
Volting, Singing, Muſick, Sc. which I * 
well enough for once. 1ſrmgton-wells, or the New 
Tunbridge, I have been at; the Walks and Rooms 
neat enough, and good Decorum obſerv'd in both. 

The Blue-coat Hoſpital J have alſo ſeen, another 
noble Charity ; and the pretty Sight of the Chil- 
dren at Church, and at Supper of Sunday Night, 
which much pleaſed me. The Charter-houſe too, 
another noble Charity. A 

Alſo the Guildhall of London, a handſome Build- 
ing, adorn'd with Pictures, and with the Trophies 
of the Duke of /farlborough's Victory over the 
French; and the prepoſterous wooden Figures of 
the two famous Giants. The Royal Exchange 
likewiſe, a very fine Edifice; but they ſay the 
dtatues of the Kings and Queens there, are ill done, 
except that of Charles II. in the Middle of the 
Area, and one or two more. 

1 have alſo been carried to W:min/ter-hall, and 

the two Houſes where the Lords and Commons 
meet, "They are by no means anſwerable to what 
I expected, tho' the Houſe of Commons is the 
neateſt, and very convenient for hearing and ſce- 
ing too. We/tminſ/ter-hall, like Guildhall, is adorn— 
ed with more of the Duke of Marlborough's Tro- 
phies, and it has Shops on each Side for Milaners, 
Bookſellers, and ſuch-like Trades. Here the Coro- 
nation-Feaſt is kept; and here are held, as you know, 
the Courts of Chancery, King's-bench, Common 
Pleas, and up Stairs the Court and Offices of the 
Exchequer. | 


The Abbey we are to ſee another time, being 


obliged to dine at Veſiminſter with a Friend of my 1 
Couſin's. 


Somer ſet- | 


4216 Familiar LETT ERS on the 


Somer ſet- heuſe, in the Strand, I have ſeen, n. A 
for its pleaſant Garden fronting the River; and is 
is indeed a fine Palace itſelf, deſigned for the Re- 
ſidence of the Queens Dowager of England, when 
we have ſuch a Perſonage. Marlborough Houſe in the 
Park, is finely furniſhed and adorned with Pictures 
of the Duke's Battles. St. Fames's Houſe is a 
poor Palace for a King of England; but it ſeems 
convenient on the Inſide. Buckingham Houſe ſtands 
better than that, for commanding the beautiful 
Park and Canal. The Treaſury, a fine new Build- 
ing. White-hall, whoſe Glory is the Banquetting- 
houſe, juſtly admir'd for its Architecture by Ing 
22 and Inſide Painting by Rubens. It is a noble 

ituation for a Palace, which, were it to be built 
like this, would be the moſt magnificent in the 
World. 

We took Coach another time, and were carried 
thro? the principal Squares and new Buildings about 
London and Weſtminſter, which are highly worth 
feeing ; ſuch as Lincoln's-Ien Square, Lincoln's-Inn 
Fields, St. Fames's Square, Soho Square, Hanover 
Square, Cavendiſb Square, and Groſvenor Square, 
with the Multitude of ſtately Buildings, and noble 
Streets contiguous to the latter; a Sight worthy of 
Admiration. 

This, Madam, may ſerve for a ſecond Letter, 
and another Inſtance, tho? a poor one, of that Obe- 
dience which will always bind me to be 


Your dutiful Niece, 


L.E T- 


— 


oft Important Occaſions. 217 


LETTER Oh. 
From the ſame, 


III. Deſcribing Chelſea Hoſpital, and Kenſing- 
ton Palace. 
Honoured Madam, 


J HAVE been carried by my obliging Couſins to 
Chelſea College, about a Mile from St. Fames's. 
Park, and to Kenſington Palace about two Miles 
Weſt from London. 

The College, you know, was founded by King 
Charles II. and finiſhed by the late King William, 
for the Reception of ſuperannuated Officers and 
Soldiers. It is ſituated on the Banks of the Thames, 
its Gardens extending quite down to the River. It 
is a neat and ſtately Building; the Front looking 
to the Thames, has a fine Hall on one Side, and a 
neat Chapel on the other, with a noble Pavilion, 
as they call it, between them. The two Sides are 
four Storics high, and have two Wards in each Story, 
containing thirty-ſix neat Bed-rooms each, for ſo 
many Soldiers. Each Corner of this main Building 
is adorned with a fine Pavilion, being the Gover- 
nor's Lodging and Council-chamber ; Lodgings 
for Officers, &c. In the Middle of the Square is a 
Braſs Statue of King Charles II. on a Marble Pe- 
deſtal. ; | 

There are beſides, four other large and uniform 
Wings; one is the Infirmary for the Sick, a ſecond 
for maimed Officers, a third for Officers of the 
College, the fourth for Servants. The Whole is a 
neat, convenient and airy Building, well worth a 
Stranger's View. 

Kenſingtan Palace is a very pretty Summer Retire- 
ment tor the Court: It is adorn'd with fine Pictures, 

L | rich 


218 Familiar LETTERS on the 


rich Hangings, and other Ornaments, But the Gar- 
dens, which have been much augmented of late ears, 
are delightful, and we diverted ourſelves in walk- 
ing round them, which gave me great Pleaſure; 
and I could not but with, that you, Madam, were 
with me, becauſe. you love walking, and would 
have been much pleaſed with theſe charming Gar- 
dens, which abound with fine Walks, Sc. A noble 
Piece of Water, called the Serpentine River, but 
for what Reaſon I know not, (it being a ſtrait, and 
not winding Piece) preſents itſelf to View; and 
there is lately a new Road made thro' Hyde-park to 
Kenſington, 4 the late Q. Caroline, to keep tlie 
Gardens clear from Duſt in the Summer, and 
make them more private from Horſes, Paſſengers, 
Coaches, c.; for the old Road, in one Part, ran 
almoſt cloſe to the Wall. A Row of Lamps from 
one End to the other of this Road, is placed on 
each Side of it, when the Court is there, which is 
a Beauty as well as Convenience. | 

Will this, Madam, ſerve for a third Letter on 
the Subject you have preſcribed to 


Your ever-dutiful Niece? 


LETTER CLI. 
From the ſame. 


IV. Deſcribing Greenwich Park, and 10 


Paſſage to it by Water. 


Honoured Madam, 
AST Tueſday, being Eaſter 1 e; I went 
1 


with my Uncle, Aunt and Coufins, down the 


River, on what they call a Party of Pleaſure ; but 


with Deſign principally to ſee Greenwich Park and 
Hoſpital, is 


viour: A Croud of ee ſome with, 
| 2 


moſt Important Occafions, 219 


We took Water at the Tower, which I de- 
ſcribed in my firſt Letter: I was pretty much afraid 
of Danger from Anchors, Cables, and ſuch-like, 
as we paſſed by the great Numbers of Ships, that 
lay in our Way at firſt ſetting out, But afterwards 
the River looked very pleafant, and the Number of 
Boats all rowing with the T'ide, made the River 
look very agreeably. 

After ſailing not many Miles, we come with- 
in Sight of the Dock-yard at Deprford, where 
ſeveral large Ships upon the Stocks afforded a fine 
Proſpect; as the naval Strength of England is 
both its Glory and its Defence. 

Next to Deptford, I was greatly pleaſed with 
the Proſpect of the Royal Hoſpital at Greenwich, 
for Seamen grown old in the Service of their Coun- 
try, When we landed, we went into this fine 
Building; and in the Inſide, every thing, in, my 
Judgment, was perfectly agreeable to the Magni- 
ficence of the Outſide; allowing the one to be deſign- 
ed to do Honour to the Nation, the other to ſupport 


a a Number of neceſſi tous People, who ought to be 


the publick Care. The great Hall, and the Paint- 


ings in it, are admirable ; but I know not whether 


they would not better ſuit a Palace, than an Hoſpital; 


and indeed this may be ſaid of the whole Building, 
From thence we went into the Park; where I 
beheld divers odd Scenes of Holiday-folks, Here 
appeared a rakiſh young Fellow, with two or 
three Women who look'd like Servant-maids ; 
the Hero delighted, the Nymphs ſmiling round 
him-— There a careful-looking Father with his 
Children on each Side; Trains of admiring Lovers, 
ready-pair'd, followed one another in thronging 
Crouds at the Gate; a Sea-Officer, with a Lad 
not over-burdened with Modeſty in her Beha- 


{ome 


220 Familiar LETT ERS 04: the 


ſome without their Laſſes: Half a dozen Beaux 
ogling all they met: And ſeveral ſecmingly diſcon- 
ſolate Virgins walking alone. The Concourſe of 
middling Objects preſſed chiefly toward a high Hi!l 
in the Middle of the Park; where, as they arrived, 
their Buſineſs was to take hold of Hands, and run 
down as faſt as poſſible, amidſt the Huzza's of a 
Multitude of People, who earneſtly expected to ſee 
the Women fall, in hopes that their Cloaths would 
not lie ſo conveniently, when they were down, as 
might be wiſhed. | 

This, Madam, is a Diverſion you would not 
expect ſo near the polite City of London ; but I 
aſſure you, ſuch a Levity poſſeſſed almoſt every 
body aſſembled on this Occaſion, as made the Park, 
though molt beautiful in itſelf, no way entertain- 
ing to 

Your moſt dutiful Niece, 


LETIER CLUE 
From the ſame. 


V. Deſcribing Bethlehem Hoſpital, 


Honoured Madam, 
bn tell me, in your laſt, that my Deſcrip- 


tions and Obſervations are very ſuperficial, and 
that both my Uncle and yourſelf expect from 
me much better Accounts, than I have yet given 
you; for I muſt deliver my Opinion, it ſeems, on 
what I ſee, as well as tell you what I have been 


ſhewn. Tis well J left my bettermoſt Subjects 


to the laſt ; ſuch, I mean, as will beſt bear Refle- 
ction; and I muſt try what I can do, to regain that 
Reputation which your Indulgence, rather than 


my Merit, had formed for me in your Kind 


Thoughts 


„ 89 — 9 A 3 2 


q 
5 


moſt Important Occaſions, 221 


Thoughts---Yet, I doubt, I ſhan't pleaſe you, 
after all, But *tis my Duty to try for it, and it 
will be yours, I had almoſt ſaid, to forgive Imper- 
fections which I ſhould have concealed, but for 
your undeſerved good Opinions of me, which draw 
them into Light, 

I have this Aſternoon been with my Couſins, to 
gratify the odd Curioſity moſt People have to fee 
Bethlehem, or Bedlam Hoſpital. 

A more affecting Scene my Eyes never beheld ; 
and ſurely, Madam, any one inclined to be proud 
of human Nature, and to value themſelves above 
others, cannot go to a Place that will more effe- 
Qtually convince them of their Folly : For there 
we ſee Man deſtitute of every Mark of Reaſon and 
Wiſdom, and levelled to the Brute Creation, if not 
beneath it; and all the Remains of good Senſe or 
Education, ſerve only to make the unhappy Perſon 
appear more deplorable | 

I had the Shock of ſeeing the late polite and in- 
—— Mr. in one of theſe woful Chambers: 
We had heard, you know, of his being ſomewhat 
diſordered ; but I did not expect to find him here: 
No fooner did I put my Face to the Grate, but 
heleap'd from his Bed, and called me, with fright- 
ful Fervency, to come into his Room. The Sur— 
prize affected me pretty much; and my Confuſion 
being obſerved by a Croud of Strangers, I heard it 
preſently whiſper'd, That I was his Sweetheart, 
and the Cauſe of his Misfortune. My Couſin af- 
ſured me ſuch Fancies were frequent upon theſe 
Occaſions: But this Accident drew ſo many Eyes 
upon me, as obliged me ſoon to quit the Place. 

I was much at a Loſs to account for the Beha- 
viour of the Generality of People, who were 
looking at theſe melancholy Objects. Inſtead of 
the Concern I think unavoidable at ſuch a Sight, a 


L 3 | | ſort 


222 Familiar LETTERS on the 


fort of Mirth appeared on their Countenances ; and 
the diſtemper'd Fancies of the miſerable Patients 
moſt unaccountably provoked Mirth, and loud 
Laughter, in the unthinking Auditors; and the 
many hideous Roarings, and wild Motions of others, 
ſeemed equally entertaining to them. Nay, fo 
ſhamefully inhuman were ſome, among whom (1 
am ſorry to ſay it I) were ſeveral of my own Sex, 
as to endeavour to provoke the Patients into Rage, 
to make them Sport, 

I have been told, this dreadful Place is often uſed 
for the Reſort of lewd Perſons to meet and make 
Aſſignments: But that I cannot credit; fince the 
Heart muſt be abandon'd indeed, that could be 
vicious amidit ſo many Examples of Miſery, and 
of ſuch Miſery, as, being wholly involuntary, may 
overtake the moſt ſecure, 

I am no great Admirer of publick Charities, as 
they are too often managed ; but if we confider the 
Impoſibility of poor Peoples bearing this Misfor- 
tune, or providing ſuitably for the Diſtempered at 
their own Beings, no Praiſe can ſurely be too 
great for the Founders and Supporters of an Ho- 
fpital, which none can viſit, without receiving the 
moſt melancholy Proof of its beingneedful. I am, 
with Reſpects where due, honoured Madam, 


Yeur weft dutiful Niece, 


LETTER etw. 
From the ſame, 


VI. Diverſions of Vaux-hall deſcribed, 


Honoured Madam, 
1 WEN T on Monday laſt to Vaux-hall Gardens; 
whither every body muſt go, or appear a ſort of 


Monſter in polite Company. For the n 
0 


moſt Important Occaſions. 223 


of Waterage, as well as of Converſation, we were 
a pretty large Company, and the Evening proved: 
ſerene and clear, | 
The Paſſage from Somerſet Stairs, where we 
took Water, was pleaſant enough ; the Thames at 
High-water being a moſt beautiful River, eſpeci- 
ally above Neſtminſter, where the green Banks, and 
the open Country, afford a very agreeable Proſpect, 
The Place we landed at was crouded with Boats, 
and from the Water-ſide to the Gardens, we walk- 
| ed through a double Line of gaping Watermen, 
Footmen, old Beggar-women and Children. As 
| ſoon as we entered the Walks, I was pleaſed with 
a ſort of Stage, or Scaffold, raiſed at the Entrance, 
for the Servants of the Company to fit out of their 
Maſters way, and yet within Call of the Waiters, 
The Muſick-gallery and Organ look perfectly 
polite, and their being raiſed one Story from the 
Ground, has a good Effect upon the Muſick. The 
Walks are well enough, but environ'd with paltry 
wooden Boards, where I expected at leaſt a good 
Brick-wall. One Part of the Whole is thrown 
into Walks only ; the other is on the Sides filled 
with Seats or Arbours, with painted Backs; on 
each of which is reprefented ſome Scene of our 
moſt common Plays, or the youthful Repreſenta- 
tion of the Infant Games, &c. I happened to have 
at my Back honeſt Hob, come dripping wet out of 
the Well; and the young Fellows, under Colour of 
| ſhewing their Taſte in obſerving the Beauties of 
the Piece, were ſo perpetually ſtaring in our Faces, 
that Couſin Bet and I had little Pleaſure in our 
; Supper. Perhaps you will wonder at our Supping 
in ſo open a Place; but, I aſſure you, Madam, no 
Lady is too tender for fo faſhionable a Repaſt. My 
| Uncle treated us very chearfully; but I could 
not help grudging the Expence he was at; 
| L-4 | for 


* 


224 Familiar LITTERS on the 


for when the Reckoning was paid, it amounted to 

no Jeſs than Len Shillings a Head; which I think 

| too dear, as the Entrance-money muſt be ſuffici- 

'F ent to defray the Houſe and Muſick, But as the 

5 Whole is devoted to Pleaſure, the Expence ſeems 

rather to create Satisfaction, than Diſtaſte, as it 

gives an Opportunity to gallant People to oblige 

thoſe they love, or pretend to love, in order, moſt 

of them, to pay themſelves again with large In- 
tereſt. 

The Figure of Mr. Handel, a great Maſter os 
Muſick, ftands on one Side the Gardens, and looks 
pretty enough : The Muſick plays from Five to 

en, about three Tunes (J believe I ſhould have 
ſaid Pieces) in an Hour. They are all reported to be 
the beſt Performers who aſſiſt here: but my rough 
| Ears cannot diſtinguiſh, 
| About Ten o' Clock, many People think of 
| Home: But the Votarics of Cupid, L am told, 
| about that Time, viſtt the remoteſt Walks, and ſigh 
out the foft Paſſion in Accents that may poſſibly 
1 be improved by the melting Sweetneſs of the Mu- 
„ ſick -I would not have you from hence conclude 
9 | any Rudeneſs can be offered ; for at the Termina- 
tion of every Walk, through the whole Garden is 
placed a Man to protect the Company from all 
manner of Inſult. But when the Place grows thin 
of Company, the Lovers have a better Chance to 
eſcape being laugh'd at, en the Appearance of any 
amorous Symptom. 

Soon after Ten, we returned to our Boat ; and 
; I found the Paſſage extremely cold, notwithſtand- 
; ing a Covering over us: I muſt own, I wiſh'd to 
be at home, long before I reached it ; for I was 
taken with ſuch a Shivering, as did not leave me 
tor two Days. 


— II» a5 8 a 


* — — "x. — — 
ä—mUm— — —— r ͥ evi p — 2 2 — — — > 4 
— 2 — : Y . 4 8 
— - — < -<- - —_— o . 4 


_ 


Thus, 


moſt Important Occaſions, 223 


Thus, Madam, have I been at Vaux-hall, with 
the Crowd of Faſhion-hunters, But if nobody 
had a greater Inclination than JI have to go thither 
again, that Amuſement would ſoon be given up- 
For I fee more and more, that, do what I will, 
Nature never deſigned me to be polite ; ; and I can 
{incerely declare, that I take more Satisfaction in 
an Evening-walk with you up the Heft- grove, 
where I am fo often benefited by your good In- 
ſtructions, than in the inchanting Shades of the ſo- 
much celebrated Faux-hall, I am, honoured 
Madam, N 


1our meft aut iful Niece, 


E. 


From the ſame, 


VII. An Account of Wellminſter- Abbey, 


Honoure Madam, 


HAVE this Afternoon been at VHeſiminſter- 

Abbey, and not a little pleaſed with what I have 
ſeen there. If there can be Majeſty in the Grave, 
here we ſce it: And ſuch was the ſolemn Effect 
the ſacred Repoſitory had upon me, that I never 
found an awful Reverence equal to what I felt on 
that Occaſion. Whatever be the Intention of 
erecting theſe coſtly Monuments, they ſeem to me 
very capable of being made an excellent Sermon to 
ſucceeding Generations; for here the moſt ſumptuous 
Piles ſerve only to ſhew, that every one of us mult ſub- 
mit to the ſame Fate, that has overtaken thoſe whom 
Empire itſelf could not ſave. And how humble 
ought the Perſcn to be, who ſurveys the Royal 
Ruins of Mortality, preſerved (as if ina vain Defiance 


5 of 


226 Familiar LITT ERS 01 the 


of Time) to ſhew nothing more than the Cer- 
tianty of our Diſſolution |! 

'Theſe, Madam, were my general Sentiments 
on this Occaſion ; but as I know you expect more 
particular Deſcriptions from me, I wilt tell you 
what moſt ſtruck my Notice among the many 
remarkable Curioſities to be here met with. 

Among the Royal Monuments, thoſe of antient 
Date pleaſed me beſt ; becauſe they look agreeable 
to what I read of the plain Royalty of our former 
Sovereigns. I lamented the Loſs of Henry the 
Fifth's Head, which being Silver, as they ſay, was 
ſtolen during the Civil War, I much wonder it 
has never yet been ſupply'd from ſome” of his 
Buſto's. He wanted not a Head, to ſpeak in the 
metaphorical Style, while living ; and France can 
teſtify, that his Heart deſerved all things of Engii/h 
Men: For he was the Terror of the one, and 
the Glory of the other. 

Henry the Seventh's Chapel, in every Part of it, 

is ſurpriſingly magnificent and beautiful ; and, as 
10 far as I can judge of ſuch Things, far ſurpaſſes all 
1 I have ſeen, either of antient or modern Date. 
Þ In this Chapel is the Chair in which our Kings 
| for many Ages have been crown'd, *Tis very 
plain, and looks as if it were not worth more than 
the Forfeit paid for ſitting in it. 

The Body of Queen Catharine, Conſort to 
Henry the Fifth, was ſhewn us in an open Coffin; 
and what remains of Skin, looks like black diſ- 
coloured Parchment. She is ſaid to have been very 
beautiful ; and, ſurely, to view her now, 1s 2 
moſt effectual Antidote againſt the Vanity riſing 
from that dangerous Accompliſhment. 

Two Embaſſadors Coffins are kept here, ſaid to 
be detained for want of having their Debts diſ- 
charged, This, indeed, does little Credit to the 
i Crown 


K 
* ͤ— —— — — & 2 —— 


© 2 ES 


Wi „ iy 


. ——— 


y 


— 


— hs — * 4 * 
— 3 — —————— 
> — = 2 
n et A 
. 


—_— 5 : OY = 
—— alt we Sb ——— ¶ co OI — 


— 


moſt Important Occaſions, 227 


Crown they ſerved ; but I can ſcarce think it the 
Diſhonour deſign'd them, to be repoſited among 
the Remains of our Kings; tho' indeed ſeveral of 
them have their Debts unpaid too, as I am told. 

Several Effizies are preſerved in Wax; particu- 
larly thoſe of King Milliam, and his excellent Queen 
Mary; as alſo, very lately, the truly Royal Queen 
Anne. To be ſure, this is no bad Way, for a few 
Years, to preſerve their Likeneſs ; but I know not 
whether ſuch gay Repreſentations ſuit the Solemnity 
of a Sepulchre. And yet ſome that ſtand here, ſeem 
not to have deſerved that Diſtinction, if it be 
deemed one, in Favour of their Memories. Ge- 
neral Monꝭ, if I were to judge, would be one of 
thoſe ; for his conſtant Train of Hypocriſy for a 
long time, ſeem'd a Contradiction to the Apoſto- 
lical Precept, Not to do Evil, that Good may come 
of it. A Ducheſs of Richmond, who walked at King 
Charles the Second's Coronation, never was re- 
markable for any thing, as I can hear, but that. 

A very coſtly Effigy of the late Duke of 
Buckinghamſhire is in this Place, who was ſomewhat 
remarkable in his Lime, but chiefly for doing what 
pleaſed himſelf, whether any body elſe was pleaſed 
or better'd by it, or not. And, what is odd 
enough, the preſent Ducheſs ſtands by him. Her 
Son too, the laſt Duke, who died juſt before he 
came of Age, is diſtinguiſhed with an Oſtentation 
ſuperior to all the reſt; tho' all I can learn of him 
is, that he was a hopeful young Nobleman, and 
the Darling of his Mother, 

General Mont, whom I mentioned before, in a 
Habit mourning the Power of Time, ſtands in a 
Poſture ſo very fierce, as to ſeem rather intended 
to. ſcare Children, than for any other Purpoſe. 

I had almoſt forgot his Royal Maſter, King 
Charles the Second, 8 5 ſtands in his Garten 

6 Rob 255 


228 Familiar LETTERS 04 be 


Robes, and has long been admired by all Comers, 
it ſeems, for reſtoring Monarchy ; for I can re- 
member no worthy Actions in his Hiſtory, nor 
were we told any more, by the Perſon who ex- 
poſed his Image to cur View. 

Many Reaſons make it neceſſary for the Wills 
of deceaſed Perſons to be literally obſerved, tho” 
ſome Inſtances of this kind do little Honour to the 
Deceaſed ; as a Monument erected to the Conſort 
of a noble Lord, for whom a Vacancy being left en 
his Tomb, as for his ſecond Wife, ſhe, becauſe ſhe 
«ould not take the Right-hand of his firſt Lady, left 
ſtrict Order to be bury'd where her Bones now lie, 
and thereby has tranſmitted her Pride and Folly to 
ſucceeding Ages. 

1 Near this 'Tomb, 1s the Figure of a Lady bleed- 

10 ing to Death by pricking her Finger: She was 

q Maid of Honour to Queen Elizabeth, and, I 

think, of the Rafe! Family. It ſeems ſhe got 

her fatal Wound at her Needle; end ſuch has been 

1. the Care of the Ladies who have ſucceeded her, 

that not one has fallen under the like Misfortune 
ever ſince. 

If Ithall not quite tire you, I will proceed with 


this Subject in my ncxt-—-And am, mean time, 
honoured Madam, 


Your meſt dutiful Niece» 


LET-T-EÞ CLYVI 
From the ſame, 
VIII. Account of Weſtminſter- Abbey continucd, 


Honoured Madam, 


1 NOW trouble you with an Account of what 
moſt {truck my Attention in the outward Ay les 


of Wftminſter- Ablcy. At 


———_ EL 


moſt Important Occaſions, 229 


At entering the North-gate, a Monument of pro- 
digious Size, and great Expence, ſtood on my Left- 
hand: It is that of 7% Holles late Duke of New- 
caſtle, and all that is left him, out of upwards of 
50000 J. a Year, as they tell me he had accumu- 
lated, and the two Heirs not much the richer for 
their Shares of it neither. I hope, as we ſay in cur 
Country Phraſe, it was hone/tly got. 

Next to this is one conſecrated to the Memory 
of the Duke that preceded him, the laſt of his 
Name of the Cavendiſb Family, as the other was 
of the Holles ; with the celebrated Lady, his 
Ducheſs Margaret, a great Writer, and a great 
Chymiſt, (you know we have her Olio) both 
lying Side by Side, on a Lomb made great by their 
Names, and diſtinguiſhed by their Adventures; 
but as to outward Grandeur, wholly eclipſed by 
the former. Behind theſe is a large Room, or 
little Chapel, ſeparated from the publick Piaces, in 
which are repolited the Halles Family. One of 
theſe Gentlemen has at his Feet the Repreſentation 
of a wild Boar, in Token of his having killed one 
of thoſe Animals, when he was on a Croiſade. 
Another has a large black Patch over his Right- 
eye, having loſt an Eye on the like Expedition, 

Not far from hence, a fine Monument {tands, 
to the Memory of Dr. Chamberlen, a Man-mid- 
wife, of no great Fame when living, but who 
happened to have the Eſteem of the preſent Duchets 
of Buckingham, who erected this to his Memory. 

A magnificent Monument ſtands near this, of a 
Lady, whoſe Name is Carteret ; and ſome Re- 
ports _ an odd Cauſe for her Death; v:z. 
the late French King's ſaying, A Lady one of lus 


Nobles compared to her, was the handſomeſ! of the 
TW9, | | 


A 


230 Familiar LETTERS on the 


A fine Monument of Lord Courcey ſtands near 
this; on which, we are told, One of his Anceſtors 
had a Privilege granted, of wearing his Hat before 
the King---Hereare ſeveral Monuments of Gentle- 
men who fell in the late Wars; Col. Bringffeld, in 
particular, who had his Head ſhot off by a Cannon 
Ball, as he was mounting the Duke of Marlborough, 
who had a Horſe ſhot under him. Thoſe of others 
who were famous for different Talents ; as m 
Favourite Purcel, and Dr. Crofts, for Muſick, 
decorate the North Iſle ; at the Head of which 
ſtands Sir G-dfrey Kneller, Painter to his late Majeſty; 
but witha Copy of Verſes on it, that, Judges fay, are 
not very extraordinary, and yet Mr. Pope's Name 
is affixed to them. j a Corner, that anſwers to 
it, on the South- ſide of the Weſt-gate, ſtands a 
curious Reſemblance of James Craggs, Eſq; Secre- 
tary of State in 1720. erected by a certain Ducheſs, 
for what Reaſon is not ſaid, Mr. Pope has been 
laviſh of his Praiſes, much more being engraved 
on this Gentleman's Monument of his Virtue, Cc. 
than I ever heard any-where elſe, But they ſay 
he was a companionable Man, as ſome call it, 
and eaſy of Acceſs----A {mall Diſtance from this, 
is a Monument erected by another Ducheſs, Siſter 
of the former, to the Memory of Mr. Congreve, 
from the great Eſteem ſhe bore him. So here are 
three Monuments erected to three Favourites, by 
three Ducheſſes. What a generous Sex is ours, 
who carry their Eſteem for the Merit of thoſe they 
favour, beyond the Grave]! On the ſame Side of 
the Church is a very ſlight Monument of the great 
Earl Godolphin, who was Ld. High Treaſurer, during 
the proſperous Part of Queen Anne's Reign; and 
the mean Appearance- this.makes, when compared 
with thoſe of Mr. Craggs, Mr. Congreve, Dr. 
Chamberlen, &c, makes a Spectator ſenſible, that 


a Judg- 


— 


moſt Important Occaſions, 2231 


a Judgment of the Deceaſed's Merits muſt not be 
formed from their Monuments; nor, as is to be 
hoped, the Gratitude and Affection of their De- 
ſcendents either. Sir Claudeſiy Shovel has great 
Honour done him, his Monument being erected at 
the Expence of his Royal Miſtreſs. But I thought 
he was a rough hene/? Tar ; yet his Effigies makes 
him a great Beau, with a fine flowing full-bottom'd 
Periwig; ſuch a one, but much finer, and more in 
Buckle, than that we have ſeen our Lawyer Mr. 
Kettl:by wear at our Aſſizes. 6 

Mr. Thynne's Murder is prettily repreſented on his 
Tomb----But before I ſtep into what is call'd the 
Poets Row, I muſt return to the Door of the Choir; 
on the North-ſide of which is placed a noble 
Monument of the great Sir //aac Newton, which 
I humbly apprehend to be needleſs; for has he not 
built for himſelf a much finer Monument, and a 
much more durable one, than Marble? And will 
it not out-laſt this we ſee here, and the Abbey 
which contains it ? He lies in a contemplative 
Poſture, leaning on the Volumes that have made 
his Name immortal. Oppoſite to him, at the 
South Entrance of the fame Door, is a very grand 
Pile, to the Memory of the late Earl Stanhope, a 
brave Soldier, tho? unfortunate in one Battle; an 
a Man of great Probity, | P 

On one Side of the Poets are Dr. Sauth and 
Dr. Buyby ; the one an humorous and witty Di- 
vine, the other as remarkable a School- maſter, be- 
ing famous for his Diſcipline and Severity, Geoffry 
Chaucer has reach'd us: Spencer is near him; 
Philips not far from Spencer. Ben. Fohnſon is 
written on a poor Buſt: and Butler (put up by a 
Printer, to make his own Name famous) bears 
kim Company. I would fain not name Matt. 
Prior; but his Monument is ſo beautiful and large, 


and 


— 


232 Familiar LETTERS on the 


and his Buſto ſo admirable, being a Preſent to 
the Poet by the French King Lewis XIV. that J 
muſt not paſs it over; tho', poor Man! it ſerves 
only to proclaim his Vanity, being erected at his 
own Deſire and Expence : A fad Inſtance of Pride 
beyond the Grave! Behind him ſtands Mr. Gay, 
in a Place conſecrated to Mortality, declaring LI 
is a Feſt, &c. Dryden has only his Name on his 
Buſt, Milton has lately been put up by a Gentle- 
man, who, after the Printer's Example above- 
mentioned, has a Mind to engraft his own Fame 
on the other's Stock ; but, in this, out-does Mr. 
Barber : For, after dedicating Six ſingle Letters to 
the Poct's Name, HILTON, he beſtows many 
Words upon his own ; not being content to name 
the little Honours he, the Erector, now enjoys, but 
the leſſer ones which he poitelied in the former 
Reign; and from this Example, the Architect 
(who, no doubt, was paid for his Labour) has Seven 
Words to his Fame, declaring, That Ryſbrack 
was the Statuary who cut it, Here's fine engratt- 
ing Work for you | However, Milton's Memory is 
a Tree that will do Honour to the weakeſt Schon 
that ſhall ſpreut from it, or even to a Dung- hill, 
were ſuch a thing to lie at its Root, But of our 
Poets I'll add no more; for Shakeſpeare is not 
among them, I am, Madam, | 

| Teur meft obedient Niece, 


LETTER WU. 
From the ſame. 


IX. On a Concert or Muſical Entertainment. 


Honour oi adam, 
WET i 1% Night to ſee, or rather to hear, a 
ne. Untertunmentof Muſick : And muſt con- 
feſs, - much diſappointed of the Pleaſure I 
_ promiſed 


dat 


* 


2 


. 4 K rn 


„ g * 
25＋6—V— a—L[L—[ ) — 


% 


moſt Important Occaſions. 233 


promiſed myſelf, I can't ſay but I liked two or 
three of the Songs well enough ; and the Muſick, 
that was playing all the while, I did not diſap- 
rove. But pray, Madam, can you tell me, (for 
have already aſked twenty, not one of whom 
will anſwer me) What is the Reaſon of having 
every Word ſpoken, ſqueaked to ---- I cannot 
ſay a Tune, but to ſuch a Hum as makes me 
quite ſick? If it be the Muſick that is valuable, 
why muſt the Words torture it? And if the Werds 
be fought after, wherefore ſhould they be broken 
to Pieces by Notes that drown the Sound, and quite 
loſe their Senſe? What I mean is, I believe, 
called, Speaking in Recitative ; - but whence was 
this Mode of Speech taken? In what Country 
is it natural? And if it be natural no-where, of 
what is it an Imitation? What are the Marks of 
its Excellencies ? and how ſhall we judge of its 
Merit? Whence can ariſe any Pleaſure from hear- 
ing it? And ſhall we find Cauſe for excuſing the 
Time loſt in ſuch an unnatural Amuſement ? For 
myſelf, I muſt own *twas far from delighting me ; 
for as it was neither ſinging nor ſpeaking, I could 
not tell what to make of it; for it was more like to 
make me cry than laugh, I was fo provoked, when 
the T wang of the Harpſichord robbed me of the 
Word the whole preceding Line depended-upon !--- 
I muſt confeſs myſelf for downright Speaking or 
Singing: I hate Mongrels. Unleſs my Judgment 
be convinced by ſuch Reaſons as I can't, for my 
Life, hit upon at preſent, Yet, after all, I begin 


to think, I am betraying my Ignorance all this | 


time; and:ſo I'll conclude myſelf, Madam, 


Tour moſt dutiful Niece. 


LE T- 


2 — — 
* aL 4 -. 
- w_ 


” — 2 - — = = = 
„ — wt a a, >, > * . 
N : 4 A Lan 1 > hy _— ————_ _ 
- 
28 ——— — , _ = = * — 
TY? ” : | — 
2 1 — _ _ as _ 45 * [| IS 


i AX 


og : 
mas . * — 


| 
| 
h 


234 Familiar LETTERS on the 


LETTER CLVIII. 
From the ſame. 
X. On the Diverſions of the Play-houſe. 


Honoured Madam, 


NON I have, by your Indulgence, tarry'd in 

Town till the Approach of Winter, you 
will expect that I ſhould give you a little Account 
of the Diverſions of the Stage. To begin then: 
My Couſin William and his two Siſters conducted 
me laſt Night to the Playhouſe, and we took 
Places in the Pit. 

You may believe I was agreeably ſurpriſed at the 
Magnificence of the Stage, and its elegant Orna- 
ments; and I was mightily pleaſed to ſee ſuch a 
prodigious Number of People ſeated with Eaſe, and 
conveniently placed to hear the natural Pitch of a 
common Voice. I did not expect to find the Mu- 
ſick ſo near the Audience; but believe that the 
moſt proper Situation to convey the Sound over the 
whole Theatre. | 

The Play I ſaw was a Comedy, in which the 
Parts acted by Women had ſeveral. Speeches that 
I thought not quite conſiſtent with the Modeſty 
of the Sex. And the Freedom of their Voice and 
Geſtures, the*, perhaps, ſuitable enough to the 
Characters they repreſented, were not fo pleaſing 
to a Mind bent upon innocent Amuſement, (if 
not wholly upon Inſtruction) as Speeches that put 
us not to the Expenceof a Bluſh, What Hardſhip 
muſt it be to the Minds of theſe Women, to 
enter firſt upon this Employment ? How muſt 
their Virtue (and ſure no Woman is without 
Virtue at her Entrance into the World) be ſhock'd 


to offer themſelves for the Entertainment of Six 
hundred 


ee * OD 


ſent, affords a ſort o 
under ſuch ſeeming Obligations as cannot be 


„„ „ i ̃Äwm a Mono. tied. re 


moſt Important Occaſions, 235 


hundred Men, and to utter Words which con- 
vey Ideas too groſs for a modeſt Ear, and ſuch as 
would be difficult to hear in private Company 
without Confuſion! How hard then muſt the 
Utterance of them be to a numerous and gay 
Aſſembly ! And yet, I am aſſured, ſeveral Women 
who get their Bread upon the Stage, are ſtrictly 
virtuous, If ſuch there are, how great muſt be 
their Merit, when compared with that of the wicked 
ones of our Sex, who are liable to none of their 
certain and numerous "Temptations? But yet, 
where it can be avoided, why ſhould Women ex- 
poſe themſelves to certain Dangers, if there is a 
Poſſibility of obtaining a tolerable Subſiſtence with- 
out it? And thoſe who can live by Performance 
upon the Stage, certainly require Qualifications more 
than ſufficient to fubſiſt in ſafer and leſs dependent 


Stations. 


The Behaviour of the Men, I did not ſo muck 


wonder at; for a becoming Aſſurance in them is 


rather pleaſing than diſobliging: Nor did I per- 
ceive, that ſo many Expreſſions, which are oftener 
miſcalled arch, than more truly named obſcene, 
were put into the Mouths of the Men as of the 


Women; tho? the Reaſon the Poets have for this 
I cannot gueſs. 


The Conduct of the Company I thought, to 
the higheſt Degree, commendable: The utmoſt 
Decency was obſerved, and I ſaw nothing diſagree- 
able to the ſtricteſt Politeneſs or good Manners ; 
the Awe given by ſo great an Audience of Per=- 
ſons of Taſte, being too much to admit any thing 
but what is decent and obliging : Not that I think 


it adviſeable for Women to go alone to the Play- 


houſe ; for the Copy, ſo faſhionable at pre- 
Occaſion for laying them 


returned 


— 9 K«4«« ———ů w ů ů—ð˙—t¹, — — 


236 Familiar LET TERS an the 


returned, and ought therefore not to be ae- 
cepted. 


Theſe, dear Madam, are the rough Thoughts, 
on this Occaſion, of 


Your dutiful Niece, 


LETTER CLIX 
From the ſame. 


XI, The Play, and the low Scenes of Harle- 
quinery after it, deſcribed and expoſed, 


Honoured Madam, 


His. as I told you in my laſt, ſeen a Comedy, 
I was next carried by my Couſin William, and 
his kind Siſters, to a Tragedy ; which was that of 
Hamlet And J was greatly moved with the Play, 
and pleaſed with the Action. But the low Scenes 
of Harleguinery that were exhibited afterwards, 
filled me with high Diſguſt, inſomuch that I could, 
for their ſake, have wiſhed I had not ſeen the 
other. I will give you an Account of this diſmal 
Piece of farcical dumb Shew. | 

We were, then, preſented with the moſt ex- 
traordinary Gentleman I ever beheld, who, 
with the uglieſt Face, and moſt apiſh Behaviour 1 
ever ſaw, had the moſt amazing Succeſs in his 
Amours, with. Ladies whoſe Appearance deſerved 
a more amiable Gallant, 

My Coufin Milliani told me the Name of this 
Hero was MR. HARLEQUIN ; but as you know 
Billy has no great Capacity, you will be the leſs 
ſurpriſed to hear he anſwered not one Queftion I 
aſked him to my Satisfaction. 


Whom 


hi 


—— — 


— — — — 


moſt Important Occaſions. 237 


Whom does that Character repreſent, Couſin ? 

Harlequin. 

Pray, of what Nation is the Gentleman? 

rance. 

What is his Buſineſs on the Stage? 

To be admired by every Woman 205 ſets Eyes on 
him. 

Why ſeem they ſo fond of him ? 

Becauſe he is ee 

Why is his Face black ? 

' Harlequin's was never of any ether Colour. 

Who is the Lady with whom he appears to be 
in the ſtricteſt Engagement? 

Colombine. 

Who is ſhe? 

Colombine. 

Whence came ſhe, pray, Couſin? 

From France. 

Is ſhe married, or fingle ? 


Moſtly married 3 ; and at Harlequin's Service in 
1 115 . Hum: Teeth, 


Breet Colombine is to be at his Beck on every 
Occaſion. 


For what Reaſon ? 

Becauſe they never appear without one another, 
Is this Nature ? 

It is Faſhion, and that's as good. 


Why don't theſe worthy Perſons favour us with 
Aa Song? 


They never 2 
How muſt I underſtand them? 


By the Motion [of their Heads, Hands and Heels, 
Have they no TI ongues ? 


They muſt not uſe them. 
Why does he wear a wooden Sword? 


Tis 


— — — —— — 


238 Familiar Lx TEX » 


*Trs his Symbol, to which whatever obtru#ts his 
Fiſhes, aſe give way, 
Why ? 


That he may come at Colombine againſt all Fr 
Ob/truftion ? | 

Why mult they needs be together? 

That the People may laugh, 

Wherefore ſhould we laugh? 

Becauſe they are together. 

Why does MR. HARLEqQuindelight ſo much in 
jumping? | 

To pleaſe his Miſtreſs. 

Why does ſhe admire him for that ? 


Becauſe he can reach her over other Mens 
Shoulders, 


Is that Wit? 

Ie laugh at it. 

So you may; but it is more like to ſet me 2 
crying. 

 Waw're a Country Laſs, Couſin. 

You, Couſin, are a Town Gentleman. 

By this, Madam, you may gueſs at my Enter- 
- Jainment;, We had juſt ſeen Hamlet, as I have 
faid : My Heart was full of Ophelia's Diſtreſs, and 
the Prince's Fate had ſhook my Soul : In this 
State of Mind, to fit two Hours to ſee Peoplc 
run after one another as if they were bewitched, 
only to cuekold a poor ſimple-looking Huſband, 
put me ſo much out of Patience, that I ſhall not 
bear the Sight of the Stage for ſome time. And 
indeed, having now run thro' the Diverſions of the 


Town, I begin to be deſirous of caſting myſelf at 
your Feet, as becomes 


ec 
! 
0 
. 
1 
4 


Dur dutiful Niece, 


LET. 


moſt Important Occaſions. 239 


LETTER CLX. 


From a Country Gentleman in Town, to his 
Brother in the Country, deſcribing a publick 
Execution in London, 


Dear Brotber, 
1 HAVE this Day been ſatisfying a Curioſity I 
believe natural to moſt People, by ſeeing an 
Execution at Tyburn : The Sight has had an extra- 
ordinary Effect upon me, which is more owing to 
the unexpected. Oddneſs of the Scene, than the 
affecting Concern which is unavoidable in a think- 
ing Perſon, at a Spectacle ſo awful, and ſo intereſt- 
ing, to all who conſider themſelves of the ſame 
Species with the unhappy Sufferer. | 
That I might the better view the Priſoners, and 
| eſcape the Preſſure of the Mob, which is prodi- 


pious, nay, almoſt incredible, if we conſider the 


requency of theſe Executions in London, which 
is once a Mane; I mounted my Horſe, and ac- 
| companied the melancholy Cavalcade from News- 
gate to the fatal Tree. The Criminals were Five 
in Number, I was much diſappointed at the Un- 
concern and Careleſneſs that appeared in the Faces 
of Three of the unhappy Wretches : The Coun- 
tenances of the other I'wo were ſpread with that 
Horror and Deſpair which is not to be wonder'd at 
in Men whoſe Period of Life is ſo near, with the 
terrible Aggravation of its being haſten'd by 
their own voluntary Indiſcretion and Miſdeeds. 
The Exhortation ſpoken by the Bell-man, from 
the Wall of St. Sepulchre's Church-yard, is well 


intended; but the Noiſe of the Officers, and the 


Mob, 


4 


4 
h 


240 Familiar LETTERS on the 


Mob, was fo great, and the filly Curioſity of People 
climbing into the Cart to take leave of the Crimi- 
nals, made ſuch a confuſed Noiſe, that I could 
not hear the Words of the Exhortation when 
ſpoken ; tho” they are as follow: 


« All good People, pray heartily to Gop for 
<< theſe poor Sinners, who now are going to their 
„ Deaths ; for whom this great Bell doth toll. 
„Lou that are condemn'd to die, repent with 

& lamentable Tears. Aſk Mercy of the Lord for 
& the Salvation of your own Souls, thro* the 
« Merits, Death, and Paſſion of Jeſus Chriſt, 
c who now fits at the Right-hand of God, to 
„ make Interceſſion for as many of you as peni- 
© tently return unto him. 

& Lord have Mercy upon you 1 Chrift have 
&« Mercy upon you ! **---- Which laſt Words the 
Bell-man repeats three times, 


All the way up Holborn the Croud was ſo great, 
as at every twenty or thirty Yards, to obſtruct the 
Paſſage 3 and Wine, notwithſtanding a late good 
Order againſt that Practice, was brought the Male- 
factors, who drank greedily of it, which I thought 
did not ſuit well with their deplorable Circum- 
{tances : After this, the Three thoughtleſs young 
Men, who at fir/t ſeemed not enough concerned, 
grew molt ſhamefully daring and wanton ; be- 
having themſelves in a manner that would have 
been ridiculous in Men in any Circumſtance what- 
ever: They ſwore, laugh'd, and talk'd obſcenely, 
and wiſh'd their wicked Companions good Luck, 
with as much Aſſurance as if their Employment 
had been the moſt lawful, | | 

At the Place of Execution, the Scene grew {til 
more ſhocking ; and the Clergyman who attended 


Was 


1 as Pay a >_ a 


moſt Important Occaſions, 241 


was more the Subject of Ridicule, than of their 
ſerious Attention. The Pfſalm was ſung amidſt 
the Curſes and Quarrelling of Hundreds of the moſt 
abandon'd and profligate of Mankind : Upon whom 
(ſo ſtupid are they to any Senſe of Decency) all 
the Preparation of the unhappy Wretches ſeems 
to ſerve only for Subject of a barbarous kind of 
Mirth, altogether inconſiſtent with Humanity. 
And as ſoon as the poor Creatures were half dead, 


I was much ſurpriſed, before ſuch a Number of 


Peace-Officers, to ſee the Populace fall to halling 
and pulling the Carcaſſes with ſo much Earneſt- 
neſs as to occaſton ſeveral warm Rencounters, and 
broken Heads. Theſe, I was told, were the 
Friends of the Perſons executed, or ſuch as, for 
the ſake of Tumult, choſe to appear fo, and ſome 
Perſons ſent by private Surgeons to obtain Bodies 
for Diſſection. The Conteſts between theſe were 
fierce and bloody, and frightful to look at: So that F 
made the beſt of my way out of the Crowd, and, 
with ſome Difficulty, rode back among a large 
Number of People, who had been upon the ſame 
Errand with myſelf. "The Face of every one ſpoke 
a kind of Mirth, as if the Spectacle they had be- 
held had afforded Pleaſure initead of Pain, which 
I am wholly unable to account for. 

In other Nations, common Criminal Exec tions 


are ſaid to be little attended by any beſide the 


neceſſary Officers, and the mournful Friends; but 
here, all was Hurry and Confuſion, Racket and 


Noiſe, Praying and Oaths, Swearing and Singing 


Pſalms: I am unwilling to impute this Difference 
in our own to the Practice of other Nations, to 
the Cruelty of our Natures; to which, Foreigners, 
however, to our Diſhonour, aſcribe it. In moſt 
Inſtances, let them ſay what they will, we are hu- 
mane beyond what . Nations can boaſt; but 

in 


242 Familiar LETTERS o the 


in this, the Behaviour of my Countrymen is paſt 
my accounting for; every Street and Lane J paſſed 
through, bearing rather the Face of a Holiday, 
than of that Sorrow which I expected to fee, for 
the untimely Deaths of five Members of the 
Community. 

One of the Bodies was carried to the Lodging 
of his Wife, who not being in the way to receive 
it, they immediately hawked it about to every 
Surgeon they could think of; and when none 
would buy it, they rubb'd Tar all over it, and leſt 
it in a Field hardly cover'd with Earth, 

This is the beſt Deſcription I can give you of a 
Scene that was no way entertaining to me, and 
which I ſhall not again take fo much Pains to ſee. 
Jam, dear Brother, 


| Yours affetionately, 


— 


Advice of an Aunt to à Niece, in relation to her 
Condutt in the Addreſſes made her by Two 
Gentlemen; one a gay, fluttering Military 
Coxcomb, the other a Man of Senſe and 
Honour. In Five Letters. 


LETTER CIT! 


I. The Aunt to the Niece, deſiring her own 
Opinion of her Two Lovers, 


t Dear Lydia, 
| I AM given to underſtand, that you have twa 


new Admirers, of very different Tempers and 
Profeſſions ; the one Capt. Tomkins of the Guards; 


ford 


- — — — — —¼ OO — 


the other Mr, Rufpferd, As I know Mr. Ruſb- 


moſt Important Occaſions. 243 


ford to be a ſenſible, ſedate, worthy Gentleman ; 
I am a little uneaſy, leſt he ſhould be diſcouraged 
for the other. And yet, as I know not the Merits 
or Qualifications of the Captain, I would not 
cenſure you, or condemn him, right or wrong. 
This makes me defire your Sentiments of both, and 
that you'll acquaint me to which you molt incline. 
T have a very high Opinion of your Prudence, and 
can have no View in this Requeſt, but your Good. 
Only, I muſt afſure you, that I have ſuch an 
Eſteem for Mr. Ruſbford's Character, that the 
other Gentleman ought to be ſomething more ex- 
traordinary than is to be generally met with in 
his Profeſſion, to be preferr'd to him. I hope you'll 
think ſo too; but be this as it will, the frank De- 
claration of your Mind will be very obliging to 


Your truly affettioate Aunt, 


LETTEIXN CEXIL 


II. The Niece's Anſwer : Deſcribing the Beba- 
viour of the ſenſible Lover. 


Honoured Aunt, 
1 HAVE, on ſo many Occaſions, as well of this, 


as other kinds, been obliged to your kind Con- 
cern for me, that I ſhould be very ingrateful, if L 
conceal'd from you the leaſt Byaſs of my Mind on 
ſo important an Occaſion. I think truly with you, 
that Mr. Ruſbford is a very valuable Gentleman; 
hy he 1s over-nice ſometimes as to the Company 
1 ſee; and would take upon him a little too much, 
f I did not keep him ata Diſtance; and particularly 
8s ſo uneaſy about the Captain, that he wants me to 
forbear ſeeing him on any Occaſion. Now, I 
think, this is a little too preſcribing, for the Time 
g M3 of 


—— — — —_ > - — — 


244 Familiar LETTERS on the 


of our Acquaintance, and the ſmall Progreſs 1 
have hitherto permitted to the Intimacy between 
us, For what is this but ſurrendering to him upon 
his own Terms ? and that, too, before I am ſum- 
moned in Form? Nothing but a betrothed Lover, or 
a Huſband, has ſurely a Right to expect this Ob- 
ſervance ; and if I were to oblige him, it is abſo- 
lutely putting myſelf in his Power, before he con- 
vinces me how he will uſe it. O my dear Aunt, 
theſe Men, I ſee, even the worthieſt of them, 
are incroaching Creatures ! --- And a Woman that 
would not be defpis'd, muſt not make her WAll too 
cheap an Offering to that of her Admirer. Then, 
my dear Aunt, I know not how it was with you 
formerly ; but there is a Pleaſure in being admired, 
that affects one very ſenſibly; and I know not 
whether even Mr. Ruſhford would ſay half the 
fine Things he does, if he had not N. e 
that ſays N Son And ] think it a kind of 
Robbery that a Woman commits upon her Plea- 
ſures, if ſhe too ſcon confines herſelf to one. For 
ſhe can be but once courted ; unleſs ſuch an Event 
happens, that ſhe muſt have a very bad Heart, that 
can wiſh for it. And why ſhould a Woman ab- 
ſolutely bind herſelf to the Terms of For Better 
or For Worſe, before ſhe goes to Church ?---I hope, 
when the Ceremony has paſled, I ſhall make a 
very good Wife : But why ſhould I buckle to 
Honour and Obey, when it is all the Time I ſhall 
have to be honoured and obeyed myſelf ?---Indeed, 
Aunt, I think, there is a great deal in this. And 
Mr. Ruſhford gives himſelf wonderful grave Airs 
already: As I'll give you an Inſtance----But here 
the Captain is come, and I will give you an Ac- 
count of it in my next. For I will lay before you 
faithfully all my Proceedings with both Gentle- 


men, and their Behaviour; and you will be en- 
abled 


moſt Important Occaſions. 245 


abled to judge from my Account, which I pre- 
fer, were I not to declare myſelf as plainly as Il am 
ſure IT ought to do, in every Particular demanded 
of me by ſo good an Aunt. I am, Madam, 


Yeur truly dutiful and aſfectionate Kinſwoman, 


LETTER CLXIII. 
From the ſame, 


III. Containing the Deſcription of the Behaviour 
of the ſame Gentleman; which occaſions a 
Love-quarre!, 


Honoured Aunt, 
HOPE, the Suſpenſe I gave you by my abrupt 


breaking off in my laſt, will be My I 
was going to give you an Inſtance of Mr. Ruſbford's 
pore Airs. He comes lait Thurſday with great 

ormality, and calls himſelf my humble Servant 
and I faw he was pleaſed to be diſpleaſed at ſome- 
thing, and ſo look'd as grave as he, only bowing 
my Head, and following my Work ; for I was 
hemming a Handkerchief. You are very buſy, 
Madam Ves, Sir ---- Perhaps I break in upon. 
you=----Not much, Sir----1 am ſorry if I do at all, 
Madam You ſee I am purſuing my Work, as 
I was before you came. I do, Madam !---very 
gravely, ſaid he--- But I have known it otherwi/e, 
when Somebody elſe has been here----Very likely, 
Sir !---But then I did as I pleaſed---ſo I do now--- 
and who ſhall controul me ?----/ beg pardon, 
Madam ; but *tis my Value for you----That makes 
you troubleſome, ſaid I, interrupting him.----- 
J am ſorry fer it, Madam !-—-Your humble Ser- 
_ vant.---- Y ours, vir,---90 away he went.--- Well, 
thought I, if thou art to be loſt for this, and nuiſt 
| M 3 put 


F = : * . —— — 8 rr 
—— — — — — . 2 * — = — E > : E — 8 


246 Familiar LET ERS on the 
put me into bodily Fear, every time thou hat a 


ind to be grave, Adieu to thee | 
In the Evening he comes again---- Ars. Betty, 
1s your Lady diſingaged Could I be admitted to 
fay one Mord to her? I believe ſo, Sir. Madam, 
Mr. Ruſhford begs to be admitted to ſay one Word 
to you. He was at the Door, and heard me, as! 
know. Do you introduce him, ſaid J, (with as 
much Form as he) to my Preſence. He enter'd. 1 
roſe up, with my Hands before me ſee you are 
angry with me, Madam.----I am ſorry for it, Sir, 
faid I. Sorry for your Anger, I hope, Madam ?--- 
I ſhould be ſorry, Sir, faid I, if any body ſhould 
ſee me angry for nothing.----1 am ſorry, Madam, 
that you 1 as nothing one that has jo much Value for 
you, Mr. Ruſhford, ſaid I, we have ſo many 
Sorry's between us, that I ſhould be pleas'd with a 
few Glad's !---]JFhy, ſaid he, with this tiff, ſet Air, 
do you delight to vex thus an Heart that you can make 
ſorry or glad at your Pleaſure? - Why am I, Sir, 
to be treated capriciouſly, and to have my Con- 
duct upbraided, when you think proper to be out of 
Humour ?---- T out of Humour, Madam 1 
thought ſo ---Was it in high good Humour that 
you inſulted, me with that Somebody elſe? I own, 
Madam, I cannot bear to ſee you fo gay, ſo pleaſed, 
and lively, when that painted Butterfly is here; and 
fo grave, jo laconick, ſo reſerv'd, when I pay my 
Reſpects to you, Priythee, pr'ythee, Mr. Ruſbford, 
none of theſe preſcribing Airs ! ---- What Right 
have I given you to ufe me thus ?---- Madam, I 
hoped my Addreſs was not quite unwelcome.--- W hat- 
ever your Addreſs is, your Preſcriptions are.--- [ 
cannot, where I ſo much love, bear ſuch a Difference 
as I always ſee in your Temper, when that Flutterer ts 
here, to what J experience--T he Difference perhaps 
may be in the Men, not in the Woman, As how, 
Madam? 


moſt Important Occaſions. 247 


Madam ? As how ! Why, ſaid I, he makes me 
laugh, and if I was to give way to't, your grave 
Airs would make me cry |---Thank you, Madam, 
faid he What's Sport to yon, is Death to me !--- 
And ſo he ſigh'd, and took a Turn or two about 
the Room---L was ſtanding all this time. 

He came, and took my Hand, and look'd fo 
filly upon me, I half pity'd him: I hope, Madam, 
I don't keep you ſtanding !---Y es, you do, Sir I 
T bes, Madam, you'll not torture me with this con- 
temptuous Formality 1---] think I am the moſt com- 
plaiſant Creature breathing !--To ME, Madam, do 
you mean 1--- Yes, Sir---You always mean ſomething 
in your Paradoxes, Madam: May I aſt your Mean- 
ing noi? When I laſt ſat and purſued my Work, 
you were diſpleaſed. I now itand, and have nothing 
to do but to be entertain'd in ſuch an agreeable 
manner as you ſhall think propereſt for me 
yet you are not pleaſed. 

Madam, ſaid he, you put me quite beſide my Pur- 
poſes . I thought you would have it fo, [would 
ſooner die than be ſo troubleſome to you, as I now 
have Nea ſon to think myſelf If you have Reaſon 
to think fo, I hope you are Maſter of your own 
Actions, ſaid I Do you forbid me your Pre- 
fence for ever, Madam ?] do, if you aſk it, Sir. 
(Was not this, Madam, daring me to anſwer even 
worſe? )---I aſe it, Madam Heaven is my Witneſs, 
it would be the heavieſt thing that could befal me--- 
You would not thus brave it from me, if you 
thought ſo, ſaid I, quite nettled. | 

In this manner we went on, till we had vex'd 
one another to ſome Purpoſe ; and then he was ſo 
good as to give me Leave to fit down, and I was fo: 
gracious as to permit him to fit by me; and ws 
parted with no Diſpleaſure on either Side. Thus 
much for Mr. Rufford, . his grave Airs, My 


4 ; next 


248 Familiar LE TT ERS on the 


next ſhall let you into the Qualifications of his 
Competitor. Till when, I am, honoured Madam, 


Your dutiful Kinſfwoman, 


LETTER CEXIV. 


IV. From the ſame : Deſcribing her fluttering 
Pretender. | 


Heonaured Madam, 


NOW give you ſome Account of the Captain. 
He is a handſome Perfon of a Man, of a good 
Family: Heir to a good Eſtate : Dreſſes well, ſings 
well, dances well---So much for his good Qualities, 
As for his others; he is inſufferably vain ; talkative; 
is always laughing, eſpecially at what he ſays him- 
ſelf; and, ſometimes, at the Conceit of what he is 
going to ſay, before he ſpeaks : He has ſuch an un- 
daunted Aſſurance, that there is no ſuch thing as 
utting him out of Countenance. One Inftance 
In give you---He is always admiring himſelf in 
the Glaſs; inſomuch that while he is in the 
Room, I cannot peep into one without ſtaring him 
in- the Face ; and one Day rallying him on this, I 
aſk*d him how the Glaſſes were fixed in a Camp? 
He reply'd, without Heſitation, O Madam! the 
Care our Generals take to pitch our Tents by the 
Banks of ſome tranſparent Stream, ſerves very well 
for that Purpoſe. And then he laugh'd moſt egre- 
giouſly for five or fix Minutes together, 

You may believe, Madam, from what I have 
faid, that I give no great Encouragement to his 
Viſits, Yet is there no ſuch thing as getting rid of 
him; for by all his Conduct, Iplainly ſee, he has 
ſwallow'd the ridiculous Opinion, that the mene 

averſe 


mo/? Important Occaſions. 249 


averſe a Woman appears to a Man's Addreſſes, the 
more Ground he has to expect Succeſs ; and he ſeems 
ſo aſſured of winning me, that I begin to be appre- 
henſive, every time he puts his Hand in his Pocket, 
that he will pull out a Licence and a Ring---If I 
admit him into m Company, I know not how to 
get rid of him, If I cauſe myſelf to be deny'd, 
he plants himſelf directly againſt my Window, 
that the whole Neighbourhood may know his 
Buſineſs : Thus, with or without my Conſent, he 
will be either thought my reigning Admirer, or he 
will, Don Quixote like, have me for-his Dulcinea, 
in ſpite of my Teeth. 

He has three or four times he d away before 
Mr. Rvfbford, and, as I cannot forbear heartily 
laughing at the Airs he gives himſelf, tho? for very 
different Reaſons from thoſe by which hzs riſible 
Muſcles are moved, he thinks me pleaſed with 
bim; and, what is more vexatious, Mr. Rufsford 
thinks ſo too, and grows ſerious and ſullen, as I 
inſtanc'd in my former. 

Now, Madam, what can I do ? I heartily de- 
ſpiſe my Soldier; I greatly regard Mr, Rufpford's 
good Senſe, good Breeding, and other good Qua- 
lities : But to forbid this Fop, is what IT am ſure 
will have noWeight with him; for I have as good 
as done it ſeveral times, and he tells me, he will 
viſit me whether I will or not, as long as I am 
unmarried : And to do it profeſſedly in Complai- 
ſance to Mr. Ruſhford, unleſs. Matters had gone 
further between us, is putting myſelf abſolutely in 
his Power, and declaring myſelf His, before he aſks 
me the Queſtion. So, may I not laugh on a 
little at the one, and teize the other's cauſeleſs 
Jealouſy, do you think, till I bring Mr. Ruy/ford 
to ſpeak out ſo explicitly, that a Woman of ſome 
Nicenels, as I pretend to be, may be in no Danger 

N M 5 of 


250 Familiar LETTERS ou the 


of miſtaking him? Beſides, I think Mr. Ryhford 
a little too capricious, and ſhould be glad to break 
him of it, leſt, if it ever ſhould be our Lot to 
come together, that "Temper ſhould improve 
upon him; and be more troubleſome from an 
Huſband, than it is from an hable Servant. I 
ſhould be glad my Conduct might merit the Appro- 
bation of ſo good a Judge : but if it do not, I will 
endeavour to conform myſelf to your Advice : For 
I am, and ever will be, honoured Madam, 


Your moſt dutiful Niece. 


LETTER MWA. 


V. From the Aunt, containing ſolid Advice 
and Caution on this Occaſion. 


Dear Lydia, 
On laſt Letter pleaſed me much better than 


your two former: For your firſt held me in 
great Suſpenſe; 2 ſecond gave me Concern for 
your rigorous Treatment of poor Mr. Ruſbford, 
who, *tis plain, loves you much ; but your third 
confirms me in the Opinion I always entertain'd of 
your Prudence, in preferring a Man of Senſe to a 
Coxcomb. 
I muſt tell you, that nothing could give me 
N Pleafure, than to ſee you Mr. Rufhford's 
ride. His Fortune is good, his Perſon manly and 
agrecable, and his Behaviour polite, But in my 
Opinion, you have need of all your Prudence and 
Caution, to avoid giving him a laſting Diſguſt ; 
for I would have you always remember, my Dear, 
that nothing can give ſuch Diſlike to a Man of 
Wiſdom and Diſcernment, as to make him imagine 
a Fool is preferr'd to him. 


If 


moſt Important Occaſions, 251 
If Mr. Ryfferd did not love you, he would not 


be jealous of ſuch a Fop as you deſcribe ; and it is 
enough to keep his Paſſions awake, when he ſees you 
ſo grave and fo ſevere, as I may ſay, to him, and 
ſo facctious and chearful with the other. For 
many a Woman of Senſe, in other reſpects, has 
been caught by ſome of thoſe ridiculous Airs that 
ſuch empty Laughers give themſelves ; and if you 
ſhould carry your Jeſt too ſar, it might make him 
deſpiſe a Levity, as he would be apt to conſtrue it, 
which he would think unworthy of his Addreſſes. 
I know it is but too natural to our Sex to love to 
be admired ; but this Humour, when not properly 
bounded and guarded, has many times colt us dear, 
even the Happineſs of all our Lives. Don't be 
afraid of obliging Mr. Ryfford, in a Point fo 
material to his Tranquillity, and your own Repu- 
tation, as the forbidding the Viſits of your Man of 
Scarlet For, as you intend not to encourage him, 
and he has ſo undaunted an Aſſurance, founded on 
ſo much Folly, I think, if you had no other hum- 
ble Servant, it would not be reputable to receive 
this; much leſs when you have one of ſo different a 
Caſt, that Licht and Darkneſs are not more op- 
polite : And a Perſon muſt have a very indifferent 
Regard to a Man of Merit, who would not give 
up ſuch a one to his Requeſt; for the very Thought 
of a Competition with ſuch a Rival, in fo tender 
and nice a Point, muſt be diſguſting, to a Man 
of Senſe, > 
And beſides, you know not, my Dear, but 
Mr. Ry/ford may be deterr'd from a formal putting 
the Queſtion to you, by the Apprehenſion that 
vou ſce his Rival with too much Approbation: 
or can a Man of his Senſe think of giving him- 
ſelf up abſolutely to a Perſon who ſeems to waver 
in her Judgment, which to prefer of two ſuch 


M 6 Com- 


| 
| 
| 


252 Famiſttar LETTERS en the 


Competitors? Muſt not the Mind that can heſitate 
one Moment on ſuch a Deciſion, appear unworthy 
of the Character of his Wife? 

And then, as to teizing him for his Jealouſy, 
and breaking him of it F I doubt this 
ſavours a little too much of the ungenerous Tem- 
pers of ſome of our Sex, who love to tyrannize, 
when they can, Prudence in a Lady is the beſt 
Cure of Jealouſy in a Gentleman; and is the 
Method you propoſe of laughing on with the 
Captain, and teizing a worth Man, who un- 
doubtedly loves you, a Mark of that Prudence? 
Indeed, I fear, if you go on thus, you will either 
loſe Mr. Ruyfferd, or will be obliged to keep him 
at the Expence of a Submiſſion (after you have 
provok'd him) proportionable to the Inſult he will 
receive; and this, my dear Kinſwoman, will be 
but little agreeable to the Pride of our Sex, and a 
particular Mortiftcation to your cw. 

One Rule let me give you: That the more 
obliging you are in the Time of your Power, the 
more it will move a generous Mind to indulge 
you, in his; and the Time you may reckon yours, 
may not be Three Months in Proportion to Thirty 
Years of his; or the whole Life. And pray, m 
Dear, remember, that young Ladies aſſume a Ta 
they are very little qualify'd for, when they ſet up 
to break Tempers, and manage Huſbands, before they 
are married. | 

Your Prudence will ſuggeſt to you a very pro- 
per Conduct, I am ſure, to ſecure a worthy 
Huſband, without my writing a Word more. 
Eſpecially as I know it will teach you to overcome 
the little low. Pleaſure, which ſome of our Sex 
take, at yourYears, in being admired and flattered, 
and to conquer the little teizing Pride of perplex- 
ing and torturing the Heart of a worthy Ad- 

: mirer, 


moſt Important Occaſions. 253 


mirer, when we think we have it in our Power. 
And fo, hoping ſoon to hear, that you have ba- 
niſh'd the Captain, and are in the way to change 
the Name of Fenton for that of Ruſhford, I remain, 
my dear Niece, 

. Your affectionate Aunt, 


LETTER CLXVI. 


From a Lady to her falſe Lover, who afler 
having brav'd all bis Friends Expoſtula- 


tions, at laſt is perſuad:d to abandon her for 
another of larger Fortune, 


SIR, 


P15 a poor, a very poor Pretence that you 
make, after what has pafled between us, that 


you muſt, in Compliance with the Commands of 
our Friends, break off Acquaintance with me! 
How often have I adviſed you to this formerly! 
How often have you vow'd the Impoſſibility of 
your doing it ? How have you, in purſuance of 
this Avowal, brav'd your Friends, and defy'd 
their Reſentments, in ſuch a manner, that gave 
them no Hope of ſucceeding with you ! tho? Þ 
always blam'd your diſobliging way of doing it, 
in regard to them, as your Relations, But juſt 
as you had brought them to. expect you would not 
be prevail'd upon, and they had fo far acquieſced in 
„our Choice, that I had received and returned 
Viſits from the Principals of your Family, for you 
poorly to plead their Menaces, is ſuch a Jeſt, as is 
not to be received without Contempt and In- 
dignation, 


Well 


2 


284 Familiar LETTERS on the 


Well, I can gueſs at your Motives !---tho* you 
are too mean-ſpirited to acknowledge them, and 
that they are too mean fo be acknowledged. Miſs 
Hlolles can explain them all, by the Help of a larger 
Fortune than I have ! I have heard of your Unclc's 
Propoſal, and your Viſit there,---Go on, Sir, and 
welcome! I have Spirit enough to deſpiſe the Man 
that could deceive me. -- But could you not, for 
your own ſake act this perfidious Part in a moro 
manly and more worthy manner? Could you not 
find a better Reaſon than one you had always re- 
jected, when it was more your Duty to obſerve it? 
But muſt you, when your Jus to me had made 
it your Duty to diſpenſe with it, then ſhew your 
Levity in adhering to it? Yet why do I expoſtulate 
with a Perſon fo little deſerving Expoſtulation ? 
You may think me angry, becauſe of my Diſ- 
appointment. *Tis true, it 75 a Diſappointment, 
and I had a better Opinion of you than this Con- 
duct ſhews you deſerved ; or Things ſhould never 
have proceeded ſo far as they did. But *tis a Diſ- 
appointment, I hope, (tho* no Thanks to any 
Part of your Conduct, but your Meanneſs) I ſhall 
ſoon get over. And tho? I wiſh you no Harm, 
let us ſee, if, Seven Years hence, you will be fo 
many hundred Pounds the richer, as makes the 
Difference to you, between Miſs Helles and Her 
you have treated ſo unworthily, And if that will 
make you happier, I truly wiſh you may be fo! 
For I am not your Enemy, tho* you deſerve not 


that I ſhould ſtyle myſelf 


Your Friend, 


LE T- 


rer — 


— — 2822 


moſt Important Occaſions. $33 - 


LETTER CLXVII. 


From a Gentleman to his Lady, whoſe Over- 
niceneß in her Houſe, and uneaſy Temper 
with her Servants, make their Lives un- 
comfortable, 


My Dear, 


YOUR kind Concern for my Abſence is very 
obliging. Tis true, I have already out- ſtay'd 
my Intention by a Week ; and I find the Place I am 
in ſo very erigaging, and Mr. Terry and his Siſter ſo 
agrecable, that, but to come to you, I could wil- 
lingly ſtay a Month longer with them. In ſhort, 
my Dear, Mr. Terry lives juſt as I would wiſh to 
live; and his Siſter, who is his Houſe-keeper, is 
juſt what I would wiſh you to be, in many Parti- 
culars ; tho' no one, in my Opinion, can equal 
you in others, | 
You muſt know then, that Mr. Terry and I 
are quite happy in one another ; and when he has 
no Viſitors, are indulg'd in a very pretty Parlour, 
which neither Pail nor Mop is permitted to enter 
for two or three Days together. And when we 
have Company, the Dining-room is at our Service, 
and the kind Lady lets us ſmoak there without 
remarking upon the beaſtly Fumes that we give the 
Furniture. Not only ſo, but if, by a ſudden Turn 
of the Pipe, any one of us chances to beſtrew the 
Floor with burnt Tobacco, we are not broken in 
upon either by Maid or Broom. And yet no 
Room can be cleaner than we find that, when we 
return to it froma Walk in the Gardens, 
And indeed, I muſt acquaint you, that I never 
ſaw a Lady more prudently nice than Mrs, Tray: | 
er 


— 


| 

| 
| 
} 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


256 Familiar LETTERS on the 


Her Perſon, Furniture, and Houſe, are even Pat- 
terns of Neatneſs and good Qfconomy. I never 
any-where ſaw the one or the other out-done, 
Yet how can this be, I marvel |---For I have ſeen 
her paſs over the Mark of a dirty Shoe-heel, upon 
a Floor as white as a Curd, and never once rank 
the Aggreſſor among the worſt of Slovens. Nay, 
more than that, I have ſeen her Brother drop a few 
Crums of Bread and Butter under his Feet, with- 
out ſo much as one corrective Frown ? Is not this 
ſtrange, my Dear ? Have Batchelors, from a Siſter, 
more Privileges, than a marry'd Man from his Wife? 
More than this, (it is true, upon my Honour! 
incredible as it may ſeem to you) t'other Day he 
bappen'd to ſpill a Glaſs of Claret upon a fine 
Damaſk Table- cloth, and broke the Glaſs; yet 
met with no other Reproof than an agreeable 
Laugh at his Aukwardneſs, and, It ꝛbas bell it was 
he that did it, who might do as he pleaſed with his 
own Oh, what a happy Man, thought J, is this 
good old Batchelor ! | | 
But, my Dear, prepare for more ſtrange Things 
ſtil] : Velerdef, at Dinner, he was cutting up a 
good fat Gooſe, and, by an unfortunate Splaſh, 
moſt grievouſly beſpatter*d a rich Gown his Siſter 
had on. My Heart ached upon this ; for, truly, I 
thought, for a Moment, I was at home, But good 
Mrs. Terry convinced me of the contrary. Oh, 
Brother, ſaid ſhe, with a Smile, what a Slip was 


that !---But, Misfortunes will happen !--- And out 


{he pulled her Pocket Hankerchief, to wipe her 
Gown. TI am forry for it, Siſter, ſaid he. It can't 
be help'd, return'd ſhe, with a Smile; but J had a 

ood Mind to put you to fome Expence for this. 
This was all ſhe ſaid, and ſhe kept her Seat, and 
eat her Dinner in perfect good Temper ; nay, and 
look*d as eaſy and as pleaſant as ſhe ſpoke. DIR 

mu 


4 


„ 


„ % + eo ———ů ——- — — 
—ů — 


— — — m oo — 


moſt Important Occaſions, 257 


I muſt ſtill further obſerve, that, tho? all Things 
here are conducted with the greateſt Decorum, and 
every Servant in the Houſe knows their Duty, and 
does it diſtinguiſhingly well, yet I have never heard 
one high or angry Word paſs between Mrs. Terry 
and the Maids, Is not this ſurpriſing, my Dear ? 
W hat can it be owing to? I thought, for my Share, 

ſo much have I been uſed to a contrary Manage- 

ment, that no Servant could do their Duty, unleſs 
the Miſtreſs of the Family put herſelf out of Hu- 
mour with all the Houſe. Either ſhe is more 
fortunate than you, in lighting of good Servants 
or, perhaps, as Perſecution makes © hiſmaticks-in 
the Church, ſo finding Faults creates them in a 
Family. There may be ſomething in this, my 
Dear ; for I have ſeen your Maid Fane blunder, out 
of Fear; and blunder a ſecond time, to find ſhe 
bad blunder'd; and a third, becauſe ſhe was put 
quite out, and could not help it.----'Then how 
has my poor Deary been diſcompoſed' ! How have 
her charming Features been even diſtorted with 
Paſſion ! not a Bit of the Lily in her Face; for the 
crimſon Roſe had ſwallowed it all up; and an Eye 
darting Flames of Indignation and Woe mixed 
together | And then, breaking Silence, Nobody 
ever had ſuch 'Torments of Servants as I have! 
Alas! poor Deary ! How hard is thy Hap | 
How much happier this good Family! For, ſe- 
cure of an Excuſe, rather than Blame, if a ſmall 
Fault ſhould be committed, in comes each Ser- 
vant, as their Duty requires, all ſerene, pleaſed, 
chearful, as their Miſtreſs, Their Eye is fixed 
upon her Eye, with a becoming Confidence of 
pleaſing ; and a Nod, or a Beck, does more with 
them, than an hundred Words, 

How can I, my Dear, think of leaving ſuch a 
delightful Houſe and Family as this ?--- Yet I long 

7 to 


258 Familiar LETTERS en the 


| 
| | 
1 
| | 
| 

AF 
| | 
| | 
{ | 


to ſee my beloved Spouſe; and I will ſet out on 
Monday next for that Purpoſe, with as great Delight 
as ever I knew, fince I had the Happineſs to call 
you mine, But pray, my dear Love, let what I 
have ſaid, without the leaſt Deſign to offend or 
concern you, a little impreſs you, however. Let 
me have the Satisfaction, for both our ſakes; of 
{ſeeing you get over ſome of thoſe Foibles, that 
make us as effectually unhappy, at times, as if we 


had ſubſtantial Evils to encounter with. In ſhort, 


my Dear, let us think the Houſe made for our 
Uſe, and not we for that. And let us ſhew our 
Servants, that while we would have them 1% 


faulty than they are, we will, ourſelves, try to be 
more perfect than we have hitherto been; and not, 


while we condemn their Failings, be guilty of 
much greater. 

Juſtice, Prudence, Eaſe, Pleafure, Intereſt, Re- 
putation, all require this of us: And could I hope 
what I have written will be attended to, as Lwiſh 
and mean it, you cannot conceive the Delight that 
will double upon me on my Return. to my 
Deareſt ; for it is my Pride, that I can ſtyle my- 
ſelf Yours ever, maſt affeftionately.. 


LETTER CLXVIII. 


From à Gentleman who in a ſmall Fortune ex- 
periences the Slights of his Friends; but being 
Juddenly reputed to be rich, is oppreſſed with 
the fawning Careſſes and Adulation of thoſe 
who had before neglected him. 


Dear Sir, 
1 MUST, for once, poſtpone every thing I woul: 


ſay to you, in order to make room for an Ac- 
count you little expect. What 


— —_ - 


— aug us eo — 


moſt Important Occaſions, 259 
What will you ſay, when I tell you, that a 


current Report of my being immenſely rich is the 
greateſt Misfortune J at preſent labour under? Nor 
do I find it fo ſupportable as you may be apt to 
imagine. The Occaſion was owing to the frequent 
Slights I had received from the Gentlewoman with 
whom I lodge, and from others of my Friends, 
who, believing that I lived up to my ſcanty Fortune, 
as in Truth Ido, (tho' I take care to be beholden to 
nobody, and pay ready Money for every thing) 
could not treat me negligently enough. I com- 
plain'd of this to that arch Wag Tony Richards, 
who told me, he would change every one's Be- 
haviour to me in a few Days. And he has done it 
effectually: For what does he do, but, as a kind 
of Secret, acquaints my Landlady, that beſide my 
poor little Eſtate (which you know to be my All) 
he had lately diſcovered, that I had Twenty thou- 
ſand PoundsStockin one of our great Companies! 

Such. was the Force of his whimſical Deluſion, 
that, the very next Morning, I had a clean Towel 
hung over my Water-bottle, tho* I never before 
had more than one a Week during the Twenty 
Years I have lodged here. | 

About a Week after this, my Couſin Tom, who, 
for the two Years he has been in the Temple, has 
let me ſee him but three times, came, in a moſt 
complaiſant manner, plainer dreſſed than ever I 
had before ſeen him ; and begg'd, if the Length of 
the Evening was in any Degree burdenſome, I 
would permit him to wait upon me with ſuch 
Pieces of Wit, Humour, or Entertainment, as 
the Town affe; the reading of which under 
my Ear, he was ſure, would be a great Advantage 
to him; and aſſured me, that, for a Beginning, he 
had preſumed to bring the laſt new Tragedy in his 
Pocket: I thank'd my young Spark. Upon which 


"WP 


260 Familiar LET T ERS en the 


he is ſo much in earneſt in his Obſervances, 

that three Nights in a Week he thus entertains 
me : Which will at leaſt be of fo much Service, 
as to keep him out of more expenſive Company. 
And you cannot think what Pains the Rogue takes 
to read with the Cadence he knovys I admire, and 
ſits till his Teeth chatter before he offers to look 
towards the Fire. 

What you will ſtill more wonder at, Sir John 
Fi:ohhim called upon me before Chriſtmas ; and tho? 
J have not had a Viſit from him theſe Five Years, 
was fo obliging, as to run away with me in his Cha- 
riot into Hertfordſbire, to keep the Holidays in his 
Family; where his Lady treated me with the 
utmoſl RefpeR, and her Puaghters paid me their 
Morning Devoirs, with the ſame Deference as if 
I had been their Grand Papa. No Dinner was 
concluded upon, without conſulting my Palate 5 
and the young Gentlemen, his Sons, are as ambi- 
tious of my hearing their Exercifes, as if their 
Fortunes depended upon my Approbation. 

Sir 5 me with every Improvement 
he had made in his Eſtate, and aſſured me, that 
his ſecond Son Mill. my Nameſake, has a Genius 
ſingularly turned for managing Country Buſineſs, 
had he not had the Misfortune of having a Brother 
born before him ; and gave me ſeveral Reaſons to 
believe, that a fine Eſtate, which lay in the Neigh- 
bourhood, and was then to be fold, would be a 
great Pennyworth. I took the Hint; but faid, I 
had no Inclination to purchaſe : He ſhook his Head 
at my Thouſands, and told me, that, in his Opi- 
nion, a Land Eſtate was preferable to the beſt 
Stock in the Kingdom. 5 | 

When I came to Town the 4th of Fanuary, I 
was no ſooner out of Sir John's Chariot, but my 


Landlady, in Perſon, informed me, that — 1 
"a 


— 4 — 
— 


moſt Important Occaſions. 261 
had been abſent, I had ſo many Preſents ſent me, 
that ſhe had been in an hundred Fears for their 
ſpoiling : I aſked her the Particulars, and found Five 
Turkeys, Three Chines, Three Hampers of Ma- 
deira for the Gout, Two Collars of Brawn, Geeſe, 
Chickens, Hares, and Wild-fowl, to a large 
Amount. | 

At Night I was welcom'd to Town by all my 
od Acquaintance, and about Twenty almoſt new 
ones: 1 was a little tired with my Journey; and 
had a ſlight Cold beſides ; which being obſerved, 
one was running for a Phyſician, another for a 
Surgeon, to bleed me : One thought an Emetick 
not improper : Another recommended a gentle 
Sweat, or compoſing Draught; and, amidſt the 
general Officiouſneſs, I could hear it whiſper'd, 
that if my Will was not made, Delays might 
2 dangerous: And, in the Morning, Rye 

eflengers after my Welfare arrived before Day. 

Thus, Sir, you ſee my Peace is gone, my 
Tongue is of no Uſe ; for no one believes me, when 
I declare my real Circumſtances : And, under the 
Happineſs of a very ſmall Fortune, I ſuffer all the 
Afflictions attending a Man immoderately rich; 
and if you keep not your uſual Behaviour, I ſhall 
not know myſelf, nor any Man elſe; ſince all my 
Companions are become Flatterers, and all around 
me are ſo obſequious, that it is impoſſible for me 
to know when I do right or wrong. I am, dear 
Sir, tho' thus Whimſically ſituated, 


Your real Friend. 


LE T- 


262 Familiar LE TT ERS o the 


LETTER CLXIX. 


From one Brother to another, on the raſh Mar- 
riage of a beloved Daughter of one of them, 
to a profligate young Fellow, 


Ay dear Brother. 


1 AM exceedingly concerned for the raſh Step 

- your Daughter Themaſin has made: I know how 
it muſt affect you, and I am myſelf not a little 
troubled at it. But we ſee how unht we are to 
chuſe for ourſelves! And, oh! how often are we 
puniſhed by the Enjoyment of our own Wiſhes !--- 
You ſay, you would rather have follow'd her Corpſe 
to the „Ten than that ſhe ſhould have thus thrown 
herſelf away on a Rake, a Prodigal, a Sot, and a 
Fool, as I, as well as you, know to be the Cha- 
rater of the Perſon ſhe has choſen, I would not 
afflict you, my Gr Brother, inſtead of pouring 
Balm on the Wounds of your Mind, But you 
will remember, that it is ſcarce two Years ago, 
when you were no leſs anxiouſly diſturbed on Occa- 
ſion of the violent Fever, which then endangered 
her Life. What Vows did you not put up for her 


Recovery! What Tumults of Grief then agitated 


your afflifted Mind! And how do you know, that 
then ſhe was only reſtor'd at your inceſſant and im- 
portunate Prayers; but that otherwiſe, God Al- 
mighty, knowing what was beſt for you both, 
would have taken her away from this heavy Evil! 
This ſhould teach us Rebanition to the Divine 
Will, and that we are moſt unft to chuſe for our- 
ſelves: And even this Affliction, heavy as it is, may 
be ſent, in order to wean you from a Delight that 
you had too much ſet your Heart upon, 


Mean 


dd AY. „ bug od + = 


1 r 


moſt Important Occaſions, 203 


Mean time, you muſt not, by too violent a Re- 
ſentment and Reprobation of her, which I find 
you-are reſolv'd upon, add to the Miſeries ſhe has 
choſen. The poor Creature, will, I fear, too ſoon 
find her Puniſhment-in her Choice ; and already, I 
underſtand, ſhe is driven to great Diſtreſs, You 
know ſhe has ſtrong Paſſions, and your too great 
Severity may precipitate. her on her everlaſtin 
Ruin, when ſhe becomes thoroughly ſenſible of the 
Condition ſhe has brought herſelf to, from as hap 
Proſpects as any young Lady could promiſe her- 
ſelf. 

Let this prevail upon you to allow her Neceſſa- 
ries; for, oh! ' tis a ſad thing for meagre Want to 
ſtare in the Face a young Creature uſed to the 
fulleſt Plenty ! eſpecially when *tis aggravated by 
the Reflection, that it is all owing to her own 
Raſhneſs. And as it may not ſuit with your Liking, 
to appear yourſelf to allow her any thing, at leaſt 
till you ſee what Uſe will be made of your Fa- 
vours, I will undertake, as from myſelf, and on 
my own Head, to furniſh, if you pleaſe, what 
is immediately neceſſary; and from time to time 
give you a faithful Account of the Diſpoſition in 
which ſhe receives it, and how her wretched De- 
luder is affected by it. | | 

This is a Taſk I ſhould not be fond of, but to 
prevent worſe Conſequences ; and I muſt intreat 
you, Brother, to weigh ſeriouſly the Matter; and as 
you abound, let not the unhappy Wretch, who, 
after all, is your Daughter, want thoſe Neceſſaries 
of Life, which all your Servants have in ſuch 
Plenty, 

I could not bear to be a Witneſs of the great 
Griefs, which muſt tear aſunder your Heart, ftrug- 
gling between paternal Affection, and juſt Indig- 
nation; which makes me chuſe to write to you; 


and 


264 Familiar LETTERS 07: the 


and ſhall wait your Reſolution on this Subject. 1 
am, dear Brother, 


Yours. moſt affeftionately, 


LETTER CLXX. 
The afflicted Father, in Anſwer to the preceding. 


Dear Brother, 


V OU are very kind in your Intention, yet very 
affecting in your juſt Reproofs of my miſ- 
placed Fondneſs for a Creature ſo unworthy. Re- 
ſignation to the Divine Will, a noble, a needful 
Leſlon ! is the Doctrine you raiſe from it. God 
give it me, as I ought to have it. Time and His 
Grace, I hope, will effect it. But at preſent---- 
Oh ! Brother ! you know not how I ſet my Heart 
on this Wretch. That was my Crime, you'll ſay : 
And *tis but juſt it ſhould be my Puniſpment. Do 
you, as you pleaſe, in what you propoſe, I deſire 
not the ingrateful Creature ſhould want, yet let 
her too be pinch'd: Nothing elſe will make her 
ſenſible of her great Offence----But don't let her 
be precipitated on any worſe Fate, if a worſe can 
be poſſible, as it may with regard to another Life. 
Yet let not her Seducer be the better for the Aſ- 
ſiſtance. He ſhall never riot in my Subſtance, Let 
me know what you have done three Months hence ; 
that I may retrench, or add to what you ſhall ad- 
vance, as I ſhall ſee her Behaviour, I fay in three 
Months, for another Reaſon : becauſe 5 by 
that time, I hope, get more Strength of Mind and 
Patience, than at preſent poſſeſſes the Heart of 


Your ever-aſfectianate Brother, 


ET: 


k— — 


— — ES er Oe 


moſt I, mport ant Occafions, 26 ; 


LETTER CLXXI. 


To a Father on the Loſs of his Son, who died 
under Age. 


My gear Friend, 


Yor R Lot, I confeſs, is hard, exceeding hard, 
to loſe ſo promiſing and ſo hopeful a Child as 
that dear Boy was, who ſo much engroſſed the Af- 
fections of yourſelf and Spouſe: and a ſuitable 
Grief on fo trying an Occaſion ought to be indulged. 
But yet not ſo, as if you were bereft of all Com- 
fort, and inſenſible to thoſe other great Mercies, 
which God has beſtowed upon you. This, my 
dear Friend, would be a ſinful Rejection of thoſe 
Bleſſings which remain to you, as if, like froward 
Children, you would have zething, becauſe you 
could not have every thing you wiſh'd. 

Look upon all the great Families of the Earth, 
upon all your Neighbours round you; and ſee if 
they have not almoſt every one ſhed. Tears on this 
very Occaſion, and then judge of the Unreaſon- 
ableneſs of t90 great a Grief, and what Pretenſion 

ou have to be exempted from thoſe Accidents, to 
which Royalty itſelf is hable. I will not, to alleviate 
you Grief, remind you of a Topick, which is 

owever no leſs important than too frequently the 
Caſe, that he might not altbays have been ſo hope- 
ful; but might, as he grew up, many wars have ad- 
miniſtered Bitterneſs to you. But I think it ſur- 
paſſes all other Comforts, even thoſe-you hoped r 
from him, that he is taken away at an Age, at 
which God's Mercy renders his eternal Happineſs 
unqueſtionably certain; and you and your mourn— 
ing Spouſe have the Pleaſure to reſſect, that ye 
have been the hippy Means of adding one to the 
Number of the Bleſt above; and that he is gone be- 
tore you, but a little while, to that Place, where 


N all 


x —— TL 


— —  — —— 


266 Familiar LET T EES on the 
all Tears ſhall be wiped away, and whither, thro” 
the ſame infinite Mercy, you will in time follow 
him, and enjoy him for ever, 

Lou have this Comfort, that he dy'd a natural 
Death ; that the Wark was God Almighty's, who 
gave him to you, and has but taten back what he 
lent you: That you ſaw every thing done for his 
Recovery, that could be done ; and that it pleaſed 
God not to grant him to your Prayers; and why 
ſhould you repine at the Diſhenſeiion, when you 
know the Diſpenſer 7 Let it therefore be your 
Duty, on this trying Occaſion, to ſhew an intire 
Acquieſcence to the Divine Will; ſuch an Ae- 
qureſcence as may be exemplary to your good Spouſe, 
whoſe weaker Sex and Mind want all the Conſo- 
lation your ftronger Reaſon can give her. And at 
the ſame time, it behoves you to ſhew a thankful 
Spirit for the Mercies yet continued to you, (Mer- 
cies that 'Thou'ands have not to rejoice in!) leſt God 
Almighty ſhould, as a Puniſhment, deprive you of 
thoſe you have itil] left. R 

I beg you will take in good Part theſe few Lines, 
which my Affection for you has drawn from my 
Pen; and that you'll believe me to be, dear Sir, 


Nur truly ſympathizing Friend, 
and humble Servant. 


LETTER CEXXIL 


To a Father on the Loſs of a hopeful Son, who 
died at Man's Eſtate, 


IX. 
1 AM truly ſorry for your Loſs. So hopeful a 


Son juſt arrived at Man's Eitate, and who was 
ſo great a Comfort and Aſſiſtance to you, to be 


ſnatched 


moſt Important Occaſions, | 26 ” 


ſnatched away, is what muſt adminiſter to you 
the greateſt Grief of any thing that could poſſibly 
befal you. 

But, alas] yours is no new Caſe, The greateſt Fa- 
milies have been thus afflicted, and with the Aggra- 
vation to ſome of them, that perhaps they have been 
deprived of their Heirs, and have not a Lon left to 
continue their Name and Honour. The late 
Queen Anne, when Princeſs of Denmark, loſt her 
beloved Duke of Glouceſter, not only her Hopes, but 
the Hopes of the Nation ; and the Crown, to which 
he ſcem'd not only horn, but faſbianed, was obliged 
to be ſettled, on that Occaſion, upon a diſtant 
Branch of the Royal Line. 

The great Duke of MARLBOROUGH, who 
by his Merit, and his Victories, had raiſed a 
princely Eſtate, as well as Titles, had but one Son, 
the Marquis of Blandford, on whom he. and his 
Ducheſs built all their Hopes, for the perpetuating 
of thoſe new Honours in their Family; and he was 
ſnatched away by Death, when he was at the Uni- 
verſity, training up to become the Dignitics, to 
which he was intitled. 

Still more recent was the unhappy Fate of a 
Lady of the firſt Quality in England, Her Lord 
had a Son lent to his advanced Years. This Son 
was the laſt of that noble Family, and on his Life 
depended all his Father's and his Mother's Hopes ; 
and on his living till of Age, a valuable Part of the | 
Eſtate itſelf, which otherwiſe was to fall to an ille- 
gitimate Offspring. What Care was not uſed to 


preſerve the noble Youth ! An eminent Phyſician. 


was taken into the Family, , to be made a conſtant, 
Watchman, as it were, over his Health and Exer 

ciſes. The young Nobleman himſelf was hopeful, 
dutiful, and as diſtinguiſhed in the Graces of his 
Mind, as by his Birth. He travelled; his indul- 
gent Mother travelled with him: He madea Cam- 


N 2 paign 


r 
— — 


1 
— 


268 Familiar LETTERS en the . 


paign under his Uncle, the greateſt General then 
ſurviving in an Age of Generals. He again travelled 
to reſtore and confirm his Health, and all the noble 
Mother's Hopes and Views were employ'd on the 
finding for her beloved Son, on his Return, a Wife 
fuitable to his Quality, and who might be a Means 
to preſerve one of the firſt Families in the King- 
dom, from utter Extinction. a 
What was the Event of all her Cares, her Hopes, 
her Vows, her Proſpects ?-- Why, juſt as the young 
Nobleman' had (within a few Months) arrived at 
Age, and could have made thoſe Family Settle- 
ments, which were moſt deſirable ſhould be made, 
and the Want of which involved his noble Mother 
in perplexing Law-ſuits, which, too, turn'd againſt 
her ; it pleaſed God to deprive her of him, and 
he died in a foreign Land, far diſtant from his 
fond Mother; who, (ſtill more grievous, if true!) 
tor Reaſons of State, as was ſaud, had been deny'd 
to accompany and attend him; and ſo ended all 
her Hopes of above twenty Y ears ſtanding, and in 
kim his Family likewiſe. 
A ſtill more recent Calamity to a great Family, 
J might mention; in the Death of two hopeful 
Children, the only Sons of their Father, and the: 
only Heirs Male of one of the firſt Families in the 
Kingdom, both ſnatch'd away, in the Space of a 
tew Hours of one another, from healthy Conſti- 
tutions, and no Ailments previous to the ſudden 
ene that carry d them off, which was only believed 
to be a fore Throat, In vaia were the Conſulta- 
tions of the moſt eminent Phyſicians and Surgeons, 
who gave Attendance all Night, minutely to 
watch every Change of the. Diitemper ; in vain 
2 the Aſſurance of the Skiltul. to the fond: 
Parents, that there was no Danger. Death mocked 
all their Hopes; and when the firſt dy'd, in vain: 
was he opened, aa order to find out, if 8 the 
-aule 


2— ä —— ů oo 


moſt Important Occaſions. 269 


Cauſe of the fatal Malady, in order to adminiſter, 
with greater Hopes of Succeſs, Remedies againſt it, 
to preſerve the other. That other hopeful Youth 
followed his Brother, and their Fate deeply wounded 
the Hearts of half a dozen noble Families, whoſe 
intimate Relationſhip gave them a very near Intereſt 
in the awful Event. 

Like Inſtances of the Loſs of hopeful Sons, and 
of the only Male Heirs, might be produced in 
other Families of prime Diſtinction in the Liſt of 
the Britiſb Nobility; but I need not enumerate 
more to a Mind conſiderate as yours, which will 
refle that Death is a common Lot, from which no 
Rank or Degree is exempted. And I hope theſe 
Reflections, and ſuch as you will be able to add to 
thera, by your own Reaſon and Piety, will ſerve 
to rebuke the Overflowings of your Grief, and con- 
fine it to the natural Channels, into which both 
God and Nature will indulge it to flow. 

I mention not to your enlighten'd Mind, you 
ſee, the Motives, that, nevertheleſs, might be in- 
fiſted on with great Propriety, on ſo grievous an 
Occafion ; ſuch as, The Uiucermingy of Life: 
The Gratitude you ought to ſhew for having had 
your Son {5 long continu'd to you, as he was: The 
great Probability of his being happy in God's Mer- 
cies, by reaſon of his Hopefulneis and Duty: The 
#arly Releaſe he has met with from the Troubles 
and Chances of a changeable and tranſitory Life : 
His Eſcape from the Danger of the Temptations 
which his Virtue might have been tried with, had 
he lived to maturer Y ears : That this your Depriva- 
tion is God's Work: That he dy'd not in a diſtant 
Land, and by an untimely Death : But that you 
had the Satisfaction of knowing that every thing 
was done for him that could be done: That his 
Morals were ſtill untainted, and. he was not cut 
off in the Purſuit of ſome capital Sin, as has 2 

| otten 


2 
- 7 _—_————— _ 
IS. —— _ * —— Rn . 

_ — —— 


210 Familiar LETTERS on the 


often been the Caſe with bold and daring Spirits in 
the Heat of their youthful Paſſions : And that he 
eſcap'd the Snares uſually laid for young Men by 
idle Companions, and vicious Women, which too 
often entangle and catch the unthinking Mind. 
Theſe will be all ſuggeſted to you from your own 
better Reaſon ; and to that ſecondarily, as to a due 
Reſignation to the Divine Will primarily, let me 
refer you, on this trying Occaſion: Who am, with 
a ſympathizing Affection, dear Sir, 


Your ſincere Friend, and humble Servant, 


LETTER CLEXXUT... 
To a * Widow on the Death of her Husband, 
Good Madam, | 


LLOW me the Liberty of condoling with 

you on the truly great and heavy Loſs you have 
ſuſtain'd of an excellent Huſband. All we, who had 
the Pleiſure of his Friendſhip, mourn with you, the 
irretrievable Misfortune to ws as well as to you, 
But as there is no recalling it, and as it is God's 
doing, we muſt not repine at the Diſpenſation, 
but acquieſce in it. And yet to ſay, that neither 
you nor we ought to grieve for it, would be abſurd 
and unnatural. Sinful Grief, however, we are 
commanded to Hun: And we ought to bleſs God, 
that he was graciouſly pleaſed to continue him with 
us /o long, inſtead of mourning too heavily, that we 
had not longer the Pleaſure of his agrecable Con- 
verſation. We were not born together, and ſome 
of us muſt have gone ſirſt; and | live ſometimes 


2 


r 


* With ſmall Variations, the ſame Arguments may 
be uſed to a Husband on the Death of his Wife, and 
on other melancholy Occaſions of tie like Nature, 


| been 
4 


moſt Important Occaſions. 271 
been ready to think, (beſides the Life of Glory, 
that, thro? God's Mercies, awaits the Good) that 
he is far happier, than thoſe he leaves behind him, 
in this Point, That he is ſaved from the Regret 
(which fills the wounded Hearts of his ſurviving 
Friends) of ſeeing them go before him, as they have 
ſeen him go before them. Had he not dy'd now, a 
few Years would have determin'd his uſeful Life ; 
for the longeſt Life is but a Span; and then the 
Matter, had he gone before us, would have been 
as It is nu. 

We may make our own Lives miſerable in be- 
wailing his Loſs ; but we cannot do iim good, nor 
(were he to know it) Pleaſure. You, in particu- 
lar, Madam, who are now called upon to be both 
Father and Mother to the dear Pledges of your 
mutual Affection, ought to take double Care, 
how you ſuffer immoderate Grief to incapacitate 

ou from this new, and more arduous and neceſſary 
Taft. For by this means, you would not only do 
yourſelf Hurt, but double the Loſs which his dear 
Children have already ſuſtain'd in that of their 
Father. And would you, Madam, make them 
motherleſs as well as fatherleſs? God forbid ! 
Conſider, tho? this is a heavy Caſe, yet it is a com- 
mon Caſe. And we muſt not repine, that God 
Almighty thought him ripe for Heaven, and put 
an End to his probatory State. 

With melancholy Pleaſure have I often, on 
the Loſs of Friends, contemplated the excellent 
Advice of the Son of Sirach, who tells us how we 
ought to z29urn on theſe Occaſions, and how we 
ought to govern our Mourning ; and reminds us 
molt excellently, that while we are grieving for 
our departed Friends, our cwn Lives pals away, and 
we are not, Youw'll permit me to tranſcribe his 


own excellent Words, as moſt ſuitable to the Sub- 
ject before us, 


cc My 


1 
1 
ö 
+ 
fi 
U 


572 Familiar LerTens, Ge. 


the Dead, and begin to lament z and then cover 


his Body according to the Cuſtom, and neglect 
c not his B 

«© Moan, and uſe Lamentation as he is worthy---- 
and then comfort thyſelf for thy Heavineſs ; for 


© of Heavineſs cometh Death; and the Heavineſs 


c of the Heart breaketh Strength. In Affliction 
« alſo Sorrow remaineth ; and the Life of the Poor 
© ſor Miſerable, or of thoſe who make themſelves 
«« {o by Mourning]is the Cur ſe of the Heart. Take 
„ ftherefore] no Heavinefs to Heart: Drive it 
% away; and remember [hy wn] laſt End. For- 
ce cet it not; for there is no turning again: Thou 
cc ſalt not do him Good, but hurt thyſelf, Re- 
< member My Judgment [ſaith the wiſe Man, 
e ſpeaking as if in the Perſon of our late dear Friend] 
& for THINE al ſo ſhall be ſo. Yeſterday for ME, 


and To-day for THREE. When the Dead is 


« at Reſt, let his Remembrance reſt ; and be com- 
forted for him, when his Spirit is departed from 
6mm," 

To add any thing to this excellent Advice, 


would be, in ſome meaſure, to depreciate it, I will 


therefore conclude with my Prayers, that God will 
enable you to bear as you t, and as all your 
Friends wifh and expect from you, this truly heavy: 
Diſpenſation, and that moſt particularly for the 
ſake of your dear Children by him; and with aſſure- 
ing you of my Service, to the utmoſt of my Ability: 
For I am, Madam, as well for theirs and your own 
fake, as for his Memory's ſake, 


Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, 


MUSES 


