DIARY AND LETTERS

MADAME D'A RELAY.

VOL.  rv.

DIARY

AND

LETTERS

/  f

AND

OF

MADAME D'A RELAY,

AUTHOE OF  "EVELINA,"  "CECILIA,"  Ac.

EDITED BY HER NIECE.

"  TUB SPIRIT WALKS OF EVERY DAY DECEASED." — YOUNC.

31  $tto lEtrttton.
IN SEVEN VOLUMES.

VOL.  IV.  L3

1788-89.          1 3

L

LONDON:

PUBLISHED FOR HENRY COLBURN,

BT HIS SUCCESSORS,  HURST AND BLACKETT,

GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1854.

3316

.4

DIARY AND LETTERS

OK

MADAME D'ARBLAY.

PART I.

1788.

The New Year— Character of Mrs.  Delany— Graciousness of the
Queen — Sir George and Lady Frances Howard — The Infant
Princess Amelia — Leave-taking — Mrs.  Piozzi — Her publication
of Dr.  Johnson's Letters — The Drawing-room at St.  James's —
Family Meeting — Mrs.  Ord— A New Year's Gift — Return to
"Windsor — The Bishop of Worcester — Mrs.  Delany's Memoirs
of Herself—Colonel Welbred— Mrs.  Schwellenberg and her
pet Frogs— Jacob Bryant — Anecdotes— The Two Highway
men — Lords Baltimore and Portsmouth — The Old Mysteries —
Origin of Dramatic Entertainments— Dr.  Johnson's Letters to
Mrs.  Thrale  —  Recollections and Regrets  —  Mr.  and Mrs.
Locke — Old Affections and Associations — A Misunderstanding
— Explanations and Vindications — A Real Friend — One Fault
— M.  de Saussure — A long Discussion — An Evening with
Mrs.  Delany — A Discussion on Life and Death — How to be
Happy— Sympathy and Antipathy — Lord Chesterfield — Plea
sant Table-talk — A Damper — A Visit from the King — Mrs.  Sid-
dons and Mrs.  Jordan — Visit from an Old Friend— The Queen's
Bitthday — Lady Holdernesse — Newspaper Squibs — An Even
ing Party at Mrs.  Cholmley's— Lord and Lady Mulgrave —
An Evening at Mrs.  Ord's — Mrs.  Garrick — The Streatham
Correspondence — Sir Joshua Reynolds — Bishop Porteus — Mrs.
Montagu — Mrs.  Boacawen — Mrs.  Carter— Mrs.  Chapone —
Horace Walpole — Letter of Mr.  Twining to Miss Burney.

Queen's Lodge.  Windsor.

TUESDAY,  JANUARY IST. — I BEGAN the new year,
as I ended the old one,  by seizing the first moment it
presented to my own disposal,  for rlying to Mrs.  Delany,
and begging her annual benediction.  She bestowed it
with the sweetest affection,  andl spent,  as usual,  all the
VOL.  iv.  B

2 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

time with her I had to spare.  It seems always so short;
yet we now meet almost regularly twice a-day.  Yet
where there is a perfect confidence,  there is so much
to communicate,  and so much to discuss,  and compare
opinions about,  that the shortest ahsence supplies food
for the longest meeting.  And,  indeed,  without any ma
terials of events,  an intercourse the most smooth and un
interrupted with a mind so full,  an imagination so fertile,
and a memory so richly stored as Mrs.  Delany's,  would
still seem brief,  if broken only by that which will break
all things.

I carried the Queen,  in the morning,  a key,  I had
at her command drawn up,  of Swift's l(  History of John
Bull."  I found that work so filled,  not only with politics
(into which 1 have never entered),  but with vulgarisms the
most offensive,  that I frankly told her Majesty how far
I felt myself from recommending it to her own perusal,
or that of the Princess Royal.  Her sweetness and gra-
ciousness draw out from me,  almost at full length,  every
thing I think upon such subjects as she starts ;  and this
little illness of Mrs.  Schwellenberg has procured me
much time with her.

In passing the eating-parlour,  as I returned to my
room,  I saw Sir George Howard and Lady Frances.  I
went to them,  and was just beginning a common chat,
when suddenly the Queen appeared :  she was cloaked,
and soon after went into her carriage;  and I found she
made a new year's visit to my dear Mrs.  Delany,
whom she told  "  she had come to her without telling any
body" — "even Miss Burney" — as she would not let any
fuss or preparation be made for her visit.

My dear Mrs.  Delany,  to my great satisfaction,  seized
this fair opportunity to speak to her Majesty of your
F.  B.,  and to express the grateful sense I felt of her
goodness and condescension towards me.  I was most
happy to have this said from lips so venerable and so
respected,  as I have longed,  lately,  to make known to
her Majesty the zealous and gratified sentiments she

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  3

has inspired.  Her graciousness indeed,  of late,  has aug
mented into the most perfect,  the most flattering kind
ness  ;  and very glad I was,  yet not,  I own,  surprised,  to
hear that she looked very much pleased with Mrs.  De-
lany's speech.

In the evening,  by long appointment,  I was to receive
Mr.  Fisher and his bride.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  of her
own accord,  desired me to have them in my room,  and
said she would herself make tea for the Equerries in the

eating-parlour.     Mrs.  Delany and Miss P came to

meet them.  Mrs.  Fisher seems good-natured,  cheerful,
and obliging,  neither well nor ill in her appearance,  and,
I fancy,  not strongly marked in any way.  But she
adores Mr.  Fisher,  and has brought him a large fortune.

The Princess Amelia was brought by Mrs.  Cheveley,
to fetch Mrs.  Delany to the Queen.  Mrs.  Fisher was
much delighted in seeing her Royal Highness,  who,  when
in a grave humour,  does the honours of her rank with a
seriousness extremely entertaining.  She commands the
company to sit down,  holds out her little fat hand to
be kissed,  and makes a distant courtesy,  with an air of
complacency and encouragement that might suit any
Princess of five times her age.

Late in the evening I had a leave-taking visit from
General Bude,  who brought back Mrs.  Delany,  and then
came in himself for half an hour.  He returns no more
to Windsor,  unless for a short occasional hunt,  till after
the King's birth-day.  I am sorry to lose him  :  he is always
pleasant,  good-humoured,  and well bred.

Later still,  Colonel Goldsworthy also called on the
same errand.  His waiting finished with the year,  and
his successor,  Colonel Welbred,  will accompany the
King's suite in our next return from London.

He opened with great warmth,  and manifest discon
tent,  upon his disappointment in being consigned to the
tea-room next door,  when such a party were in my
room.

1 had much discourse,  while the rest were engaged,

u2

4 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

with Mr.  Fisher,  about my ever-valued,  ever-regretted
Mrs.  Thrale.  Can I call her by another name,  loving
that name so long,  so well,  for her and her sake  ?  He
gave me concern by information that she is now publish
ing,  not only the Letters of Dr.  Johnson,  but her own.
How strange  !

WEDNESDAY,  JANUARY 2ND. — We came to town for
the next day's Drawing-room.  In the evening my dear
father lent me his carriage to go to Titchfield-street.  I
called first in St.  Martin's-street.  My dear father was
delightfully well and gay ;  and Sarah employed in paint
ing me a trimming for the Queen's birth-day.

Mrs.  Maling,  and a pretty little daughter,  accompanied
me to Titchfield-street,  where I found the good and dear
Mr.  Burney infinitely better than I had ventured to hope
I could see him  ;  but our sweet Esther looks so thin — so
pale — I could almost cry when my eyes fix upon her.
Yet she,  too,  is better,  and poor Marianne is recovering.
I think her a lovely girl,  both in mind and person,  and
wish I could see more of her.

How delightfully they played  !  how great a regale such
music and such performance to my now almost antiquated
ears  !  For though I hear now often,  at Windsor,  some
pieces that give me great pleasure,  'tis a pleasure so in
ferior to what they can give,  that it bears not any com
parison.

Charles,  also,  came in to tea,  and I appointed him for
the next day at St.  James's.  It was altogether a truly
comfortable and interesting evening to me.

THURSDAY,  JANUARY SRD. — This was a great Draw
ing-room,  as the New Year's day was kept upon it,  the
Ode performed,  and the compliments of the season paid.

My kind Mrs.  Ord,  by appointment,  came to me early
at St.  James's,  and stayed till three o'clock.  We had much
to say to each other.  I proffered her an evening against
my next return to town,  and begged her to let me meet a
party of my old friends at her house.  It is high time I
should see them again,  after this long separation ;  and now

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBIAY.  5

that my mind is easy,  and I am quite resigned to my fate
and situation,  I feel an anxiety not to be forgotten by
those who have been kind to me,  and a yet stronger one
to show them I have set no forgetting example.  I rather
wish to make this first re-entrance at the house of Mrs.
Ord than at any other,  because I am proud to show every
body the just first place she holds with me,  among all that
set;  next,  indeed,  to my most bosom friends do I prize
her,  and because I am sure she will make a selection that
will give me pleasure.

Mr.  Smelt,  the only person who,  to both,  would have
been a welcome interrupter,  came from the Drawing-
room,  to make me a little visit.

We had scarce arranged ourselves when a real intruder

broke in,  that disconcerted us all — Mr.  S ;  but he is

never disconcerted himself,  for he never perceives what
mischief he enacts.  He came to beg my consolation
upon a misfortune he had met the day before.  He was
the Queen's Equerry in waiting,  as usual,  and came to the
palace to attend her Majesty to the play  ;  but he stole up
stairs,  into our eating-parlour,  and stayed chattering there
till he was too late,  and the Queen was gone,  and all the
suite,  and his own royal coach among the rest !  So he had
to walk across the park in the rain,  to get into a chair.
Yet he entreated me not to tell Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  for
he said she would be more severe upon him than anybody.
The Queen,  he saw by her looks,  had pardoned him,  but
with Mrs.  Schwellenberg he could have no chance of
quarter.

He went not away till Mr.  Smelt kindly drew him off,
by proposing that they should return to the drawing-room
together.

Mrs.  Ord was soon obliged to follow,  but not till she
had distressed me,  in the only way she can pain me,  by
inveigling,  rather than forcing upon me,  a beautiful but
very expensive new year's gift :  as to her child,  she says,  she
does it,  and I feel her so truly maternal I dare not strug
gle with her.  "  And why should you  ?"  I hear my Fredy

6 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

whisper.  My dearest Fredy,  for the same motive that
urges the struggle with yourself — a wish of preventing such
costly tokens of regard from being repeated,  since I can
not be easy to see the best economists I know turn pro
digals only for me.

In the evening came my dearest father,  who gave up
the opera to spend it with me  ;  and brought all his let
ters and papers,  and was excellently in spirits,  and made
!HS  !r»!)  happj.  I have never seen him better — gayer —
sweeter.  He showed me a letter of my Susan's,  and
another of Charlotte's,  siiti one from J ames,  all exhila
rating to me,  and all shown with glee and pleasure.  Mr-
Smelt joined us for one half hour,  and was very charming.

FRIDAY,  JANUARY 4TH. — We returned to Windsor
at noon;  Mrs.  Sclrwellenberg,  Miss Planta,  Mr.  de Luc,
and myself.

In the morning,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg presented me,
from the Queen,  with a new year's gift.  It is plate,  and
very elegant.  The Queen,  1 rind,  makes presents to her
whole household every year:  more or less,  according to
some standard of their claims which she sets up,  very
properly,  in her own mind.

I have been drinking tea with my dear Mrs.  Delany,  and
most socially.  I found her very well.  Mrs.  Schwellen
berg sent for Madlle.  Montmollin,  and I knew she would
have also Colonel Welbred,  who is just come into waiting,,
and therefore I have built upon this as a fair opportunity
of taking a little time to myself.  Accordingly,  here at
this moment I am writing to my beloved correspondents,
instead of playing at piquet.  Till all my licence,  so
lately bestowed,  is withdrawn,  I will continue to use it,
and to dedicate the best part of it thus.

And now good night.  I have not thus written to the
very moment for a longer time than I can now recollect.

But let me not fail to tell you 1 had the real honour,
in the morning,  of a little visit from the Bishop of Wor
cester.  He is better,  but still unwell ;  and still I regret
his indisposition and its consequence,  in keeping him

1788]  OP MADAME D'ARBLAY.  7

this Christmas from his customary annual visit to
Windsor.

JANUARY STH. — This evening I determined upon still
another effort for  "  separation of forces ;"  though I re
gretted missing Colonel VVelbred,  and should have sought,
not shunned,  his society,  in any other situation.  But here,
to meet and to have society are two things.  I begged

my dear Mrs.  Delany and Miss P to come to my

apartment at a little after six o'clock,  and to give im
mediate orders that I should be called downstairs to
them.  This they did,  and I made my courtesy instantly,
and without preface.  Nothing was said,  and all seemed
promising.

Time thus,  once more,  in our disposal,  we resumed,  as
we have done now every evening since the late new ar
rangement when we have met,  the Memoirs.  Nothing
can be more interesting,  more candid,  more expressive of
the sweet and clear mind of their almost incomparable
writer, — not quite,  my Susan  ! — my Fredy  !

I had just ordered tea,  but alas!  in the midst of this
regale,  a message intrudes,  of invitation to the next room.

Reluctantly we broke up our party,  myself the most
mortified,  who saw in this invite that  "  the next room"
grew sick of the separation,  and found it would not
answer  ;  nor did I at all enjoy the prospect of appearing
before Colonel Welbred in the constrained and uncom
fortable situation in which I am there placed.  He had
seen me so once,  and I am sure the contrast,  from being
Prime Ministress,  had not failed to strike him.

However,  there was no choice :  in we went,  and my
regret was a little slackened by the great politeness,  al
most cordiality,  with which the Colonel expressed him
self upon our re-meeting.

A new scene now opened.  Mutual salutations and com
pliments over,  I seated myself next Miss P ,  with full

purpose of total stillness for the rest of the evening ;  but
Colonel Welbred,  evidently not conjecturing that inten
tion,  drew a chair next mine,  and began instantly an ani-

8 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

mated discourse,  wholly and solely,  when not positively
called off,  addressed to me.

I saw,  very undoubtedly,  that he was entirely a stranger
to the cabals and rules and timidities of the apartment :
having first met me when mistress of it,  he knew not into
what a cipher I sunk when only a guest in it ;  at least he
suspected not that such a sinking was voluntary and sys
tematic  :  for though he had witnessed the change,  in the
last evening he spent here in June,  he had concluded either
that I might be ill,  or imagined I had only declined con
versing with him,  in his two or three little openings,  be
cause the room was full,  and he sat at a distance from me.

This I draw from his behaviour this evening,  for he
spoke to me with such an open gaiety of manner,  that I
•was sure he had entered into none of the cautions that
bad intimidated the rest,  and he appropriated himself to
me with such an unreserved distinction,  that I am certain
he is wholly unaware how totally I disuse myself from
playing a conspicuous part in that presence.

His gentleness,  however,  his perfect good breeding,
and a delicacy of manner I have rarely seen equalled,
made it utterly impossible to decline his conversation  :  I
entered into it,  therefore,  quietly and unaffectedly ;  con
soling myself internally,  that if it proved painful elsewhere,
it might abridge invitations which brought me into such
circumstances.

The astonishment created was apparent.  No Equerry
hitherto had ever attacked me in this presence,  and least
of all was it expected I should be singled out by a man
universally reckoned the most reserved and the shyest of
the whole set;  but those are just the characters to whom
something quiet and unobtrusive is most welcome.

Various attempts were made to draw him to another
quarter  ;  but they were only followed by an immediate
and civil reply,  and the discourse instantly returned to its
first channel.

The subject was a tour in Wales,  which he has lately
made,  and of which he gave an account full of information

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  9

and ingenuity.  But though it was a narration fitted for all
hearers,  I believe he was willing to spare himself the con
tinual trouble of interruption and explanation from con
stant misunderstanding,  and therefore,  in a lowered voice,
it was designedly bestowed on one who had no other de
sire than to keep it alive by brief comments and simple
inquiries.

At length,  however,  the Colonel and myself were both
suddenly drawn off from our Welsh expedition by a de
scription,  given by Mrs.  Schwellenberg to Mrs.  Delany,
of her frogs !  The Colonel,  I believe,  had not heard of
them before.  His surprise,  when he found they were kept
in glasses,  for fondlings and favourites,  was irresistible to

Miss P ,  who with great difficulty forbore laughing

out ;  and for myself,  when he began to ask me,  aside,  a
few questions upon the subject,  I was forced to make a
little silencing bow,  and to look another way.

A commendation ensued,  almost ecstatic,  of their most
recreative and dulcet croaking,  and of their ladder,  their
table,  and their amiable ways of snapping live flies.  My
neighbour,  if I am not much mistaken,  was then as much
disposed to look another way as myself.

Mrs.  Delany now asked if they caught at a fly as the
chameleons do?

"  What will become of the poets,"  cried Colonel Wei-
bred,  "if the chameleons catch flies?"  And then he
asked me if I remembered Churchill's line upon the cha
meleon,  in the  '  Prophecy of Famine.'

No,  I told him,  I had never read it ;  and begged him
to repeat it.

.  He was some time recollecting it ;  and then,  in a very
low voice,  he quoted it,  and added to it several couplets :
but I could hardly hear them,  so fearful was he of turn-
big spouter to the company at large.

At the close of the evening,  when left alone with Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  she could not disguise her surprise at the
behaviour of Colonel Welbred,  but asked me very signi
ficantly if I had known him long  ?  for he had said some-
tiling about  "  a year."

10 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

"  He only said,  ma'am,"  cried I,  "  by way of civility,

1 1 have not seen you this twelvemonth  ;'  but,  in fact,  a
twelvemonth ago I had never seen him at all.     I only
made acquaintance with him about February last,  during
his waiting."

SUNDAY,  JANUARY GTH. — Things are now,  indeed,
much mended :  I gain abundantly more time,  and that
recruits me,  and my present plan of operations unlocks
me from that enclosure of stagnation which,  in my former
plan,  seemed necessary to my well-doing.  I really thank
Colonel Welbred very much,  as I think this coming forth
will reconcile my absences far more than all my studious
holding backs  :  I mean in company,  for when tete-a-tete
I have always been as communicative as I could urge
myself to be.

TUESDAY,  JANUARY STH. — This evening,  according
to my present plan of freedom,  as Mrs.  Delany came not
to the Lodge,  I went myself to Mrs.  Delany,  and left
the tea-table to its original state.  I had the courage to
make my visit from seven to ten o'clock.

I met Mr.  Bryant,  who came,  by appointment,  to give
me that pleasure.  He was in very high spirits,  full of
anecdote and amusement.  He has as much good-hu
moured chit-chat and entertaining gossiping as if he had
given no time to the classics and his studies,  instead of
having nearly devoted his life to them.  One or two of
his little anecdotes I will try to recollect.

lo the year thirty-three of this century,  and in his own
memory,  there was a cause brought before a 'Judge,
between two highwaymen,  who had quarrelled about the
division of their booty ;  and these men had the effrontery
to bring their dispute to trial.  "  In the petition of the
plaintiff,"  said Mr.  Bryant,  "  he asserted that he had been
extremely misused by the defendant :  that they had car
ried on a very advantageous trade together upon Black-
heath,  Hounslow Heath,  Bagshot Heath,  and other
places  ;  that their business chiefly consisted in watches,
wearing apparel,  and trinkets of all sorts,  as well as large
concerns between them in cash  ;  that they had agreed to

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  11

an equitable partition of all profits,  and that this agree
ment had been violated.  So impudent a thing,  the judge
said,  was never before brought out in a court,  and so he
refused to pass sentence in favour of either of them,  and
dismissed them from the court."

Then he told us a great number of comic slip-slops,  of
the first Lord Baltimore,  who made a constant misuse of
one word for another:  for instance,  "I have been,"  says
he,  "  upon a little excoriation to see a ship lanced  ;  and
there is not a finer going vessel upon the face of God's
yearth  :  you've no idiom how well it sailed."

Having given us this elegant specimen of the language
of one lord,  he proceeded to give us one equally forcible
of the understanding of another : — The late Lord Ply
mouth,  meeting in a country town with a puppet-show,
was induced to see it ;  and,  from the high entertainment
he received through Punch,  he determined to buy him,
and accordingly asked his price,  and paid it,  and carried
the puppet to his country-house,  that he might be diverted
with him at any odd hour!  Mr.  Bryant protests he
met the same troop just as the purchase had been made,
and went himself to the puppet-show,  which was exhi
bited senza Punch !

Next he spoke upon the Mysteries,  or origin of our
theatrical entertainments,  and repeated the plan and
conduct of several of these strange compositions,  in par
ticular one he remembered which was called  '  Noah's
Ark,'  and in which that patriarch and his sons,  just pre
vious to the Deluge,  made it all their delight to speed
themselves into the ark without Mrs.  Noah,  whom they
wished to escape;  but she surprised them just as they
had embarked,  and made so prodigious a racket against
the door that,  after a long and violent contention,  she
forced them to open it,  and gained admission,  having first
contented them by being kept out till she was thoroughly
wet to the skin.

These most eccentric and unaccountable dramas filled
up the chief of our conversation  :  and whether to consider

12 DIARY AND LETTERS        [PART I.

them most with laughter,  as ludicrous,  or with horror,  as
blasphemous,  remains a doubt I cannot well solve.

WEDNESDAY,  JANUARY 9TH. — To-day Mrs.  Schwel
lenberg did me a real favour,  and with real good nature ;
for she sent me the letters of my poor lost friends,  Dr.
Johnson and Mrs.  Thrale,  which she knew me to be almost
pining to procure.  The book belongs to the Bishop of
Carlisle,  who lent it to Mr.  Turbulent,  from whom it
was again lent to the Queen,  and so passed on to Mrs.
Schwellenberg.  It is still unpublished.

With what a sadness have I been reading!  what scenes
has it revived ! — what regrets renewed  !  These letters
have not been more improperly published in the whole,
than they are injudiciously displayed in their several parts.
She has given all — every word — and thinks that,  perhaps,
a justice to Dr.  Johnson,  which,  in fact,  is the greatest
injury to his memory.

The few she has selected of her own do her,  indeed,
much credit :  she has discarded all that were trivial and
merely local,  and given only such as contain something
instructive,  amusing,  or ingenious.

About four of the letters,  however,  of my ever-revered
Dr.  Johnson are truly worthy bis exalted powers  :  one
is upon Death,  in considering its approach as we are
surrounded,  or not,  by mourners;  another,  upon the
sudden and premature loss of poor Mrs.  Thrale's darling
and only son.

Our name once occurs:  how I started at its sight! —
Tis to mention the party that planned the first visit to our
house  :  Miss Owen,  Mr.  Seward,  Mrs.  and Miss Thrale,
and Dr.  Johnson.  How well shall we ever,  my Susan,
remember that morning  !

I have had so many attacks upon her subject,  that at
last I fairly begged quarter,  and frankly owned to Mrs.
Schwellenberg that I could not endure to speak any
more upon the matter,  endeavouring,  at the same time,
to explain to her my long and intimate connexion with
the family.  Yet nothing I could say put a stop to  «  How

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  13

can you defend her in this? — how can you justify her in
that?"  &c.,  &c. — Alas!  that I cannot defend her is pre
cisely the reason I can so ill bear to speak of her.

How differently and how sweetly has the Queen con
ducted herself upon this occasion  !  Eager to see the
letters,  she began reading them with the utmost avidity :
a natural curiosity arose to be informed of several names
and several particulars,  which she knew I could satisfy ;
yet,  when she perceived how tender a string she touched,
she soon suppressed her inquiries,  or only made them with
so much gentleness towards the parties mentioned,  that I
could not be distressed in my answers ;  and even in a
short time I found her questions made in so favourable
a disposition,  that I began secretly to rejoice in them,  as
the means by which I reaped opportunity of clearing
several points that had been darkened by calumny,  and
of softening others that had been viewed wholly through
false lights.

To lessen disapprobation of a person once so precious
to me,  in the opinion of another so respectable both in
rank and virtue,  was to me a most soothing task ;  and
my success was so obvious,  from the lenity of all remarks,
and the forbearance of all hard constructions,  that I felt
myself inexpressibly obliged ;  since her own strict exer
cise of every duty inclines and authorises a general
expectation,  even to a degree of severity,  of strictness
in others.

This morning,  in a manner the most gratifying,  she
proposed Mr.  Locke's coming to Windsor,  to give her
a lesson of colouring the impressions,  next Easter.  I
think and trust that time will suit.  But I said I was
sure my dearest Mrs.  Locke would come with him when
ever the journey took place,  both in care of him and in
indulgence to me : — "  To be sure !"  she said very sweetly,
and in a tone of having taken it for granted.  She also
mentioned her intention of lodging them in her own
canon's house,  where Madame de la File resides in
the summer.  But she bid me say nothing of all this at

14 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

present.      Probably something hangs upon it as yet
undecided.

This is Mrs.  Delany's last week at Windsor.  On
Saturday she goes to town for the winter ;  so do we our
selves on Tuesday.  She could not come out this even
ing,  and I determined to drink tea with her.  I stayed,
however,  with Mrs.  Schwellenberg till just before her
own tea-time,  because she was alone,  and was very
civil.

I found my dear Mrs.  Delany sweeter,  more alive,
and kinder than ever.  This evening I finished read
ing her memoirs.  The almost incessant dangers to
which she was exposed in all the early part of her life,
and the purity of prudence with which she always extri
cated herself from them,  have more than ever raised my
admiration and increased my tenderness.  What a cha
racter is Mrs.  Delany's  ! — how noble throughout ! — how
great upon great occasions ! — how sweet,  how touching,
how interesting upon all !  Oh,  what should I do without
her here  ?  That question will occur,  but no answer can
I make to it.  Heaven be praised,  however,  she is well,
uncommonly well,  and looks as if she would live to be
one hundred years old with ease.

THURSDAY,  JANUARY  !()TH. — When we were sum
moned to the tea-room I met Miss de Luc coming
out.  I asked if she did not stay tea?  "  How can I,"
cried she,  in a voice of distress,  "  when already,  as there is
company here without me,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg has asked
me what 1 came for?"

I was quite shocked for her,  and could only shrug in
dismay and let her pass.  When there is no one else she
is courted to stay  !

Mr.  and Mrs.  Fisher came soon after ;  and the Prin
cesses Augusta and Amelia fetched away Mrs.  Delany.

Soon after Colonel Welbred came,  ushering in Mr.
Fairly and his young son,  who is at Eton school.  I
had seen Mr.  F.  but once since his great and heavy loss,
though now near half a year had elapsed.  So great a

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  15

personal alteration in a few months I have seldom seen  :
thin,  haggard,  worn with care,  and grief,  and watching
— his hair turned grey — white,  rather,  and some of his
front teeth vanished.  He seemed to have suffered,
through his feelings,  the depredations suffered by others
through age and time.

His demeanour,  upon this trying occasion,  filled me
with as much admiration as his countenance did with
compassion :  calm,  composed,  and gentle,  he seemed
bent on appearing not only resigned,  but cheerful.  I
might even have supposed him verging on being happy,
had not the havoc of grief on his face,  and the tone of
deep melancholy in his voice,  assured me his solitude was
all sacred to his sorrows.

Mr.  Fisher was very sad himself,  grieving at the death
of Dr.  Harley,  Dean of Windsor and Bishop of Here
ford.  He began,  however,  talking to me of these letters  ;
and,  with him,  I could speak of them,  and of their pub
lisher,  without reserve :  but the moment they were named,
Mrs.  Schwellenberg uttered such hard and harsh things,
that I could not keep my seat;  and the less,  because,
knowing my strong friendship there in former days,  I
was sure it was meant I should be hurt.  I attempted
not to speak,  well aware all defence is irritation,  where an
attack is made from ill-nature,  not justice.

The gentle Mr.  Fisher,  sorry for the cause and the
effect of this assault,  tried vainly to turn it aside :  what
began with censure soon proceeded to invective  ;  and at
last,  being really sick from crowding recollections of past
scenes,  where the person now thus vilified had been dear
and precious to my very heart,  I was forced,  abruptly,
to walk out of the room.

It was indifferent to me whether or not my retreat was
noticed.  I have never sought to disguise the warm friend
ship that once subsisted between Mrs.  Thrale and myself,
for I always hoped that,  where it was known,  reproach
might be spared to a name I can never hear without a
secret pang,  even when simply mentioned.  Oh,  then,  how

]6 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

severe a one is added,  when its sound is accompanied by
the hardest aspersions !

I returned when I could,  and the subject was over.

When all were gone Mrs.  Schwellenberg said,  "I have
told it Mr.  Fisher that he drove you out from the room,
and he says he won't not do it no more."

She told me next — that in the second volume I also
was mentioned.  Where she may have heard this I
cannot gather,  but it has given me a sickness at heart
inexpressible.  It is not that I expect severity:  for at
the time of that correspondence — at ail times,  indeed,
previous to the marriage with Piozzi — if Mrs.  Thrale
loved not F.VB.,  where shall we find faith in words,  or
give credit to actions?  But her present resentment,
however unjustly incurred,  of my constant disapprobation
of her conduct,  may prompt some note,  or other mark,
to point out her change of sentiments — but let me try to
avoid such painful expectations ;  at least,  not to dwell
upon them.

O,  little does she know how tenderly at this moment I
could run again into her arms,  so often opened to receive
me with a cordiality I believed inalienable.  And it was
sincere then,  I am satisfied :  pride,  resentment of disap
probation,  and consciousness of unjustifiable proceed
ings — these have now changed her;  but if we met,  and
she saw and believed my faithful regard,  how would she
again feel all her own return  !

Well,  what a dream am I making  !

FRIDAY,  JANUARY HTH. — Upon this ever-interesting
subject,  I had to-day a very sweet scene with the Queen.
While Mrs.  Schwellenberg and myself were both in OUF
usual attendance at noon,  her Majesty inquired of Mrs.
Schwellenberg if she had yet read any of the letters?

"  No,"  she answered,  "  I have them not to read."
I then said she had been so obliging as to lend them
to me,   to whom they were undoubtedly of far greater
personal value.

"That is true,"  said the Queen;  "for I think there

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  17

is but little in them that can be of much consequence or
value to the public at large."

"Your Majesty,  you will hurt Miss Burney if you
speak about that ;  poor Miss Burney will be quite hurt
by that."

The Queen looked much surprised,  and I hastily ex
claimed,

"  O,  no !  —  not with the gentleness her Majesty
names it."

Mrs.  Schwellenberg then spoke in German;  and,  I
fancy,  by the names she mentioned,  recounted how Mr.
Turbulent and Mr. Fisher had  "driven me out of the room.'*

The Queen seemed extremely astonished,  and I was
truly vexed at this total misunderstanding ;  and that the
goodness she has exerted upon this occasion should
seem so little to have succeeded.  But I could not
explain,  lest it should seem to reproach what was
meant as kindness in Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who had not
yet discovered that it was not the subject,  but her own
manner of treating it,  that was so painful to me.  My
silence,  however,  was mortifying to myself;  and I could
not but regret that Mis.  Delany had not found an oppor
tunity of clearing up the affair.

However,  the instant Mrs.  Schwellenberg left the
room,  and we remained alone,  the Queen,  approaching
me in the softest manner,  and looking earnestly in my
face,  said,  "  You could not be offended,  surely,  at what
I said."

"  O no,  ma'am,"  cried I,  deeply indeed penetrated by
such unexpected condescension,  "  I have been longing to
make a speech to your Majesty upon this matter;  and
it was but yesterday that I entreated Mrs.  Delany to
make it for me,  and to express to your Majesty the very
deep sense I feel of the lenity with which this subject
has been treated in my hearing."

"  Indeed,"  cried she,  with eyes strongly expressive of
the complacency with which she heard me,  "  I have
always spoke as little as possible upon this affair.  I

VOL.   IV.  C

18 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

remember but twice that I have named it :  once I said
to the Bishop of Carlisle that I thought most of these
letters had better have been spared the printing  ;  and
once to Mr.  Langton,  at the Drawing-room,  I said,
4 Your friend Dr.  Johnson,  sir,  has had many friends
busy to publish his books,  and his memoirs,  and his
meditations,  and his thoughts;  but I think he wanted
one friend more.'  '  What for  ?  ma'am,'  cried he ;  '  A
friend to suppress them,'  I answered.  And,  indeed,  this
is all I ever said about the business."

The sweetness of a vindication such as this,  and the
fulness of my heart upon a subject so near it,  brought
the tears into my eyes,  and"  I could hardly gain firmness
for what 1 felt it necessary to say:  but,  as well as I could,
I thanked her in the most grateful terms for the whole
tenor of lenity she had deigned to show.  I told her,  very
frankly,  that my great regard and intimate connexion
both with Mrs.  Thrale and Dr.  Johnson could never be
obliterated from my mind,  and made all that was said of
them constantly affect me.  "  And indeed,  ma'am,"  I
added,  "  the harsh things I continually hear have rendered
the subject extremely painful to me  ;  but not with your
Majesty  !  Mrs.  Schwellenberg has wholly misconceived
me :  for,  quite on the contrary,  it is rather a relief
to me to speak of it where it is treated with patience ;
and,  indeed,  I must venture to say I cannot but regard
the great gentleness with which your Majesty has uni
formly touched upon it as an indulgence to myself/'

She did not disclaim my acknowledgment,  and here
we stopped.  She went afterwards to Mrs.  Delany,  where
she talked the matter over,  and sweetly said she  "  would
upon no account say anything to shock me."  Indeed I
am sure she would not.  The dear and partial Mrs.
Delany broke out into kindest praises,  but ended them
with saying,  "One fault,  however,  Miss Burney has,
though I think but one."

"  And what is that?"  cried the Queen,  no doubt sur
prised at the singular number!

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  19

"  She wants so much drawing out,  ma'am."
"Yes,  but she's very well worth it,"  was the gracious
answer,  which 1 have not been willing to deny myself the
pleasure of letting my equally blind partialists hear,  as
well as Mrs.  Delany.

Before dinner to-day,  I had two tete-a-tetes,  both with
gentlemen.  The first was with Mr.  de Luc,  who came to
bring me a little pamphlet he had just printed in answer
to an attack of Mr.  de Saussure upon some of his philoso
phical experiments.  He explained and talked the whole
affair over to me  ;  and not long after he was gone,  came
Mr.  Turbulent,  who desired me,  when I had finished Dr.
Johnson's Letters,  to send them directed to his wife,  as he
should not be in Windsor.  I congratulated him on her
amendment,  and desired my compliments to that purpose :
he thanked me,  and went his way.

The evening I spent wholly with Mrs.  Delany,  who
was to go to town the next day.  But when,  the next
morning,  I called to see her set off,  and take her kind
blessing,  I found her in much anxiety:  her niece had
been ill in the night,  and she had sent for Dr.  Lind  ;  and
it was agreed their journey should be put off to the next
day.

How did I languish to spend with them that day !  but
I was obliged to come home to dinner;  Miss Planta and
Madlle.  Montmollin being engaged to me.

I was amply recompensed for this little forbearance in
spending an evening the most to my natural taste of any I
have spent officially under the royal roof.  How high Co
lonel  \V elbred stands with me you know  ;  Mr.  Fairly,  with
equal gentleness,  good breeding,  and delicacy,  adds a far
more general turn for conversation,  and seemed not only
ready,  but pleased,  to open upon subjects of such serious
import as were suited to his state of mind,  and could not

c2

20 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

but be edifying,  from a man of such high moral character,
to all who heard him.

Life and Death were the deep themes to which he led;
and the little space between them,  and the little value of
that space,  were the suhject of his comments.  The un-
happiness of man,  at least after the ardour of his first
youth,  and the general worthlessness of the world,  seemed
so deeply impressed on his mind,  that no reflection ap
peared to be consolatory to it,  save the necessary short
ness of our mortal career.

Respect to his own private misfortunes made me listen
in silence to a doctrine I am,  else,  ever ready to try to
combat:  for I cannot,  myself,  conceive this world so
necessarily at variance with happiness,  nor suppose our
beneficent Creator averse to our enjoying it,  even on
earth,  where we seek it in innocence.

Colonel Welbred scarcely exerted himself any better,
and,  I do not doubt,  he gave way from the same motive :
for he seemed to feel every consideration that the most
respectful compassion can inspire,  for the situation as
well as sentiments of Mr.  Fairly.

When he talked,  however,  of the ardour of youth,  I
could not refrain naming Mrs.  Delany,  and mentioning
that she had still every susceptibility for happiness ;  and
that I always thought with pleasure,  from such an instance
of the durability of human powers,  that there was no time,
no age,  in which misery seemed tied to our existence,  or
in which,  except for circumstances,  it might not,  pretty
equally,  be happy.

"  Indeed,"  answered he,  u there is no time — I know of
none — in which life is well worth having.  The prospect
before us is never such as to make it worth preserving,
except from religious motives.*'

I felt shocked and sorry.  1 wished him at Norbury  ;
and ventured — hardly,  though,  speaking to be heard — to
acknowledge that I thought differently,  and believed hap
piness dependent upon no season of life,  though its mode
must be adapted to all its changes.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  21

"  But do you think,"  cried he,  in a tone of extreme
dejection,  "  that those who before forty have never tasted
it,  may ever expect it after?"

Has he never tasted happiness,  who so deeply drinks
of sorrow?  He surprised me,  and filled me,  indeed,  with
equal wonder and pity.  At a loss how to make an an
swer sufficiently general,  I made none at all,  but referred
to Colonel Welbred :  perhaps he felt the same difficulty,
for he said nothing ;  and Mr.  Fairly then gathered an
answer for himself,  by saying,  "  Yes,  it may,  indeed,  be
attainable in the only actual as well as only right way to
seek it, — that of doing good !  "

"  If,"  cried Colonel Welbred,  afterwards,  "  I lived
always in London,  I should be as tired of life as you
are :  I always sicken of it there,  if detained beyond a
certain time."

They then joined in a general censure of dissipated
life,  and a general distaste of dissipated characters,  which
seemed,  however,  to comprise almost all their acquaint
ance  ;  and this presently occasioned Mr.  Fairly to say,
"  It is,  however,  but fair for you and me to own,  Wel
bred,  that if people in general are bad,  we live chiefly
amongst those who are the worst."

Whether he meant any particular set to which they
belong,  or whether his reflection went against people in
high life,  such as constitute their own relations and con
nexions in general,  I cannot say,  as he did not explain
himself.  But I again wished him safe in Norbury Park,
and looking from thence at a loved and pure abode,  at
the bottom as well as at the top of that sweet hill !

This,  however,  was no time for indulging myself in
talking upon that subject,  or painting scenes of felicity.
Mr.  Fairly,  besides the attention due to him from all,
in consideration of his late loss,  merited from me peculiar
deference,  in return for a mark I received of his disposi
tion to think favourably of me from our first acquaint
ance  :  for not more was I surprised than pleased at his
opening frankly upon the character of my coadjutrix,  and
telling me at once,  that when first he saw me here,  just

22 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

before the Oxford expedition,  he had sincerely felt for
and pitied me.

This must have resulted wholly from his own sense of
the nature of things,  as nothing,  I am certain,  escaped
me that betrayed my unhappiness at that period.  I did
not,  however,  venture to enlarge upon the subject,  and he
instantly dropped it when he found me reserved  ;  though
he laughed a little himself,  on recollecting the dialogue
upon the newspapers,  and said he had seen my inward
laugh,  though,  at that time,  he observed me too much in
awe of Mrs.  Schwellenberg not to disguise it.

I fancy,  by his 'saying cf at that time,"  he conceives me
now a person at large,  and draws this conclusion from
seing me converse so much with Colonel Welbred in pre
sence of La Presidente.  He does not know how new a
business that is,  nor that it is wholly owing to the Colo
nel's innocence of my general retirement,  not to any fresh
adopted measures of my own courage.  But I soon found
him one whose observation was all alive to whatever
passed ;  and,  with those keen remarkers,  where their
shrewdness is unallied to ill-nature,  there is a zest in con
versing that gives a spirit to every subject.

In talking over the adventures of the hunt,  Colonel
Welbred gave an account of Lord Chesterfield,  that
reminded me so strongly of an expression concerning
him in a letter I had just received from Miss Baker,  that I
offered to show them the paragraph.  They joined to de
sire I would produce it,  and I ran into my own room for
it ;  but I found it so mixed with remarks I could not
possibly show,  that I determined first to prepare it for
their inspection by a few obliterations,  and I returned
and apologized that I had put it by to read to Mrs.  De-
lany,  but would produce it some other time.

Colonel Welbred acquiesced,  with a smiling bow;  but
Mr.  Fairly put into his smile so strong a suspicion of the
truth,  that I had withdrawn it purposely,  that though he
said never a word,  I was forced to answer his look by
assuring him I would really produce it another day.

He laughed to see me understand him,  but readily

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  23

accepted the promise;  and Colonel Welbred very deli
cately said,

"  Then if you allow of our waiting upon you another
evening,  you may perhaps bring it  ?"

"  Oh,  every evening while I stay,  I hope  !  "  cried Mr.
Fairly,  with a quickness so flattering,  that it obtained
my immediate affirmative  :  little as I had meant,  in the
beginning,  to make any such engagement.  But when I
found,  at last,  conversation here such as I should have
coveted anywhere,  I thought it would be folly unpardon
able to avoid it,  merely because it was in an apartment
where I had never met with it before.

When they left me to go to the music-room,  I hastened
to my dearest Mrs.  Delany,  and stayed to the last mo
ment.  I found Miss P recovered,  and ready for her

journey the next morning.  I recounted my evening's ad
ventures,  and my sweet counsellor approved my new pro
mise,  and strongly advised me to make the best through
out of an official circumstance that could not,  without
infinite difficulty,  be wholly avoided.  She gave me a very
kind message for Mr.  Fairly,  inviting him to visit her in
town,  in remembrance of his mother,  with whom she was
well acquainted.

SUNDAY,  13TH. — I went to breakfast with my beloved
old friend,  and found her lovely niece quite well,  and
Dr.  Lind with them,  who,  seeing my good spirits to find
all well,  joined to my extreme haste not to be too late for
church,  said I was  •'  in a very fidget of joy."

They were all prepared for departure ;  and that,  I am
sure,  was no joy to me,  though we were now so soon to
go to town ourselves for the winter.

I ran all the way,  past King,  Colonels,  and regiment,
to church,  and just entered before the Queen.

At tea-time I went at once,  and stationed myself in the
room,  with a book to pass the time till the arrival of my
company;  for Mr.  Fairly's open request,  and my own
acquiescence,  fixed me to my office during his stay,  and
determined me to take no further steps for eluding it.

24 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

He came,  and brought his little son,  with Colonel Wei-
bred and General Harcourt,  and all of them before eight
o'clock,  I fear from still misunderstanding the affair of
yesterday.  The t\vo Colonels seated themselves next me,
on each side,  and little Mr.  Fairly sat on his father's
chair.  He seems a sweet boy :  open,  innocent,  and sen
sible  ;  and his father almost lives in him.

The evening was not so unexceptionable as that of
yesterday,  for the cold General Harcourt was a damp to
it.  I had,  however,  a good deal of separate conver
sation with Mr.  Fairly,  while Colonel Welbred talked
with the General.  He asked me if I had found my
letter,  assuring me that both himself and Colonel Wel
bred had been much disappointed by missing it.  I
instantly produced it.  The expression for which I had
shown it,  concerning my Lord Chesterfield — "  What pity
it is his spirits run away with his brains !" — amused him
much,  and led to a good deal of character-stricture
in a more general way.  We also talked over the old
newspaper story at full length ;  and I acquainted him of
some laughable particulars which had followed his de
parture.  He held them almost in too much contempt to
laugh,  but very gently and compassionately turned the
discourse into an expression of concern at my situation,
in being tied to such a person.  He had felt,  he said,
quite sorry for me,  and the more as he was told that she
now made a point of always appearing,  though in the
latter times of Mrs.  Haggerdorn he informed me she
had seldom shown herself.

This is an obligation de plus I

Just as tea was over the King came into the room :  he
stayed chatting and in high spirits some time,  and when
he went,  called General Harcourt to follow.  The other
two stood suspended a moment,  whether to go also,
according to the usual custom,  or to seize the apparent
privilege of having no summons,  to stay.  But the sus
pense was decided by Colonel Welbred,  who,  smiling a
little at his own act,  softly stepped to the door,  shut it>

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  25

and then returned to his seat,  with the look of a man who
said to himself,  "  Come,  'tis as well to stay and be com
fortable  !"

Mr.  Fairly seems ever ready at an invitation of that
sort,  and sat down immediately ;  and then they entered
into conversation,  with so much good sense,  good
breeding,  good morality,  and good fellowship,  that far
from wishing myself released,  I was happy in their relin
quishing both the usual waiting-room,  and their own
Equerry-apartment,  and preferring to remain in the tea
room.

There is something in Colonel Welbred so elegant,  so
equal,  and so pleasing,  it is impossible not to see him
with approbation,  and to speak of him with praise.  But
1 found in Mr.  Fairly a much greater depth of under
standing  ;  and all his sentiments seem formed upon the
most perfect basis of religious morality.

During the evening,  in talking over plays and players,
we all three united warmly in panegyric of Mrs.  Siddons  ;
but when Mrs.  Jordan was named,  Mr.  Fairly and my
self were left to make the best of her.  Observing the
silence of Colonel Welbred,  we called upon him to
explain it.

"  I have seen her,"  he answered,  quietly,  "  but in one
part."

"  Whatever it was, "  cried Mr.  Fairly,  "it must have
been well done."

"  Yes,"  answered the Colonel,  "  and so well that it
seemed to be her real character ;  and I disliked her for
that very reason,  for it was a character that,  off the stage
or on,  is equally distasteful to me — a hoyden."

I had had a little of this feeling myself when I saw her
in the  "  Romp,"  where she gave me,  in the early part,
a real disgust;  but afterwards she displayed such un
common humour that it brought me to pardon her as
sumed vulgarity,  in favour of a representation of nature,
which,  in its particular class,  seemed to me quite perfect.

At length,  but not till near ten o'clock,  Mr.  Fairly

26 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

said  "  Now,  Miss Burney,  I fear we are trespassing upon
your time?"

Colonel Welbred,  with a look of alarm,  instantly arose,
repeating a similar question.  I said they did me honour;
but thinking it really time to break up,  I added nothing
more,  and they left me,  pleased with them both,  and
satisfied how little the official room had to do with my
general distaste to my evenings there,  since these two
evenings had appeared as short as if spent in the fairest
regions of liberty.

MONDAY,  HTH. — This morning my dear Miss Cam
bridge spent with me.  Mrs.  Hemming came to visit a
relation at Windsor,  and she kindly took the opportunity
to spend the same time with me.  Her society was doubly
welcome to me,  as it was my first morning for missing
my revered old friend.

Again I stationed myself,  with work and books,  ready
for my cavaliers in the evening.  Mr.  Fairly's posi
tive request has taken off a world of indecision.  I was
not,  however,  quite so well pleased with my office when I
saw General Grenville and Mr.  Fisher enlarge the party.
Mr.  Fisher,  indeed,  is never unwelcome;  but General
Grenville is as cold as General Harcourt,  and wears an
air of proud shyness extremely ill calculated to bring for
ward those who are backward.  He is,  besides,  a valetu
dinary,  and restless and ennuyt to a most comfortless
excess.

"Will you give me leave,"  cried Colonel Welbred,  "  to
begin your circle  ?"  and drew a chair next mine,  while
Mr.  Fairly took my other side,  quite as a thing of
course  ;  and indeed I conversed with him almost solely,
all the evening,  leaving the other two gentlemen to do
their best for General Grenville,  whom I could by no
means attempt.

Colonel Welbred extremely admired my beautiful Nor-
bury work-box,  and he did me the honour to suspect the
impressions of being my own.  For a moment 1 felt sorry
to undeceive him,  but it was only for a moment :  the

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  27

happiness of saying by whom was the joint work suc
ceeded,  and was far greater than I think I could have felt
even from a more selfish consciousness.

When tea was over,  poor General Grenville,  who had
been some time stretching and yawning,  called out
"  Come,  Fairly,  come ! — let's go to the King.1*

"  I shall have quite standing enough to satisfy me,"
answered Mr.  Fairly,  "  if I go half an hour later !"

"  No,  no — but it's time  ! — come  !"

"  You may go if you please,"  answered he,  bowing his
full permission  ;  "  the King will want to talk with you
about the Duke of York :  but Welbred and I may stand
still and hear !  To be sure,  a great inducement to quit
Miss Burney's tea-table !"

He could not help laughing,  but was forced for some
time to desist;  and then attacking Colonel Welbred,  de
clared it was absolutely necessary they should now show
themselves.

Colonel Welbred,  getting his hat,  with a leave-taking
bow to me,  said  "  I am afraid it is ;"  and they went
together,  but Mr.  Fairly steadily stayed out his half-hour
longer.  Mr.  Fisher had brought him a very curious
Latin poem,  upon London and its environs,  and they read
it together,  explaining and translating to me as they went
on,  though not without many professions of suspicion that
I should understand it without that trouble.  Not a
syllable,  Heaven knows  !

I could keep no journal the rest of this week for ex«-
treme hurry.  We went to town Tuesday the 15th,  and
spent every moment till the 18th in preparations for the
Queen's birth-day.

The following day was indeed almost equally fatiguing,
for the whole morning was divided between attendance,
and receiving visits from the Queen's ladies,  of inquiry
after her Majesty.  Among them came Lady Holdernesse,
whose early kindness to my dear father in the beginning

28 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

of his life made her sight interesting to me  ;  and she talked
to me of him with great pleasure and politeness.

I spent one evening at my dearest Mrs.  Delany's,  with

Lady Bute and Mrs.  Ord  ;  and Miss P showed me

a newspaper paragraph which had been lent her for that
purpose by Colonel Goldsworthy.  He is a collector of
these diurnal squibs.  Lo,  and behold it !

"  Miss Burney,  we are told,  is directing her thoughts
to the composition of a novel,  of which a married woman
is the heroine.  As her aim is always moral,  this produc
tion will no doubt prove extremely useful ;  for though the
fair sex do not appear to want instruction with regard to
their conduct in a single state,  it is to be regretted that
too many of them are deficient in that affection and good
ness which constitute the chief part of conjugal duty."

There,  ye fair married dames  !  what say ye to this?  Do
you think me qualified for this office,  or will you say
"  Go and first make trial yourself?"

I seized the paper,  and bid her say that as it was the
first I had heard of the design,  I must beg to keep it,  as
a memorandum for its execution.

My kind Mrs.  Ord now settled Thursday se'nnight for
an assembly at her house of my old friends,  purposely to
indulge me with once again seeing them in a body.

I spent also an evening at Mrs.  Cholmley's,  to meet
the amiable Lady Mulgrave,  who is just as unaffectedly
sweet and modest as when Miss Cholmley,  and so very
kindly disposed,  that,  allowing for my little time,  she dis
pensed with my waiting upon her at her own house,  and
voluntarily offered to meet me at Mrs.  Cholmley's by any
appointment I could ever have leisure to make ;  "  For
then,"  she said,  "  we may all be happy together."

At present Lord Mulgrave is perhaps the most felici
tous of men ;  but I fear that cannot last.  The dispropor
tion is so great,  in person as well as in years,  that when
she grows out of her present almost infantine reliance on
his kindness for her happiness,  I fear she will sigh for an
equality out of her reach  :  for their mental endowments

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  29

are as dissimilar as their personal ;  there is nothing be
tween them to create sympathy :  on his side is all the
admiration  ;  on hers all the novelty and pleasure of re
ceiving it.  How precarious a foundation for permanent
welfare !

At the usual tea-time I sent Columb,  to see if anybody
was come upstairs.  He brought me word the eating-
parlour was empty.  I determined to go thither at once,
with my work,  &c.,  that there might be no pretence to
fetch me when the party assembled ;  but upon opening
the door I saw Mr.  Turbulent there,  and alone !

1 entered with readiness into discourse with him,  and
showed a disposition to placid good-will,  for with so
irritable a spirit resentment has much less chance to do
good than an appearance of not supposing it deserved.

Our conversation was of the utmost gravity.  He told
me he was not happy,  though he owned he had every
thing to make him so;  but he was firmly persuaded that
happiness in this world was a real stranger.

I combated this misanthropy in general terms  ;  but he
assured me that such was his unconquerable opinion
of human life.

How differently did I feel when I heard an almost
similar sentiment from Mr.  Fairly!  In him I imputed
it to unhappiness of circumstances,  and was tilled with
compassion for his fate :  in this person I impute it to
something blameable within,  and I tried by all the argu
ments I could devise to give him better notions.  For
him,  however,  1 soon felt pity,  though not of the
same composition :  for he frankly said he was not good
enough to be happy  —  that he thought human frailty
incompatible with happiness,  and happiness with human
frailty ;  and that he had no wish so strong as to turn
monk  !

I asked him if he thought a life of uselessness and of
goodness the same thing  ?

"  I need not be useless,"  he said  ;  <s I might assist by
my counsels.  I might be good in a monastery — in the

30 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

world I cannot!     I am not master of my feelings:   I am
run away with by passions too potent for control !"

This was a most unwelcome species of confidence,  but
I affected to treat it as mere talk,  and answered it only
by slightly telling him he spoke from the gloom of the
moment.

«  No,"  he answered,  (t I have tried in vain to conquer
them.  I have made vows — resolutions — all in vain  !  I
cannot keep them !"

"  Is not weakness,"  cried I,  "  sometimes fancied,
merely to save the pain and trouble of exerting for
titude?"

"  No,  it is with me inevitable.  I am not formed for
success in self-conquest.  I resolve — I repent — but I fall !
I blame — I reproach — I even hate myself — I do every
thing,  in short,  yet cannot save myself !"

My dear friends,  how I shuddered to hear such a con
fession  !

"  Yet do not,"  he continued,  seeing me shrink,  "  think
worse of me than I deserve  :  nothing of injustice,  of ill-
nature,  of malignancy — I have nothing of these to re
proach myself with."

<f I believe you,"  I cried,  "and surely,  therefore,  a

general circumspection,  an immediate watchfulness "

"  No,  no,  no  ! — 'twould be all to no purpose."

"  ?Tis that hopelessness which is most your enemy.    If

you would but exert your better reason "

"  No,  ma'am,  no ! — 'tis a fruitless struggle.  I know
myself too well — I can do nothing so right as to retire —
to turn monk — hermit."

"I have no respect,"  cried I,  "  for these selfish seclu
sions.  I can never suppose we were created in the midst
of society,  in order to run away to a useless solitude.  I
have not a doubt but you may do well,  if you will do
well."

"  You think so,  because "  He stopped,  and hesi
tated  ;  and then,  in a tone of rising pride,  added,  "  Yes,
surely you — you,  ma'am — yes — I have a right,  ma'am,

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  31

to expect vou should think of me better than I do of
myself?"

What he meant I know not to this moment ;  but I did
not choose to ask,  and therefore made no answer.

Some time after he suddenly exclaimed,  "  Have you —
tell me — have you,  ma'am,  never done what you repent?"

"  O yes  ! — at times."

"  You have  ?"  he criedx,  eagerly.

"  O yes,  alas  ! — yet not,  I think,  very often — for it is
not very often I have done anything?"

"  And what is it has saved you  ?"

I really did not know well what to answer him  ;  I could
say nothing that would not sound like parade,  or implied
superiority.  I suppose he was afraid himself of the
latter ;  for,  finding me silent,  he was pleased to answer
for me.

"Prejudice,  education,  accident! — those have saved
you!"

"  Perhaps so,"  cried I.  "  And one thing more,  I
acknowledge myself obliged to,  on various occasions —
Fear.  I run no risks that I see — I run — but it is always
away from all danger that I perceive."

"  You do not,  however,  call that virtue,  ma'am — you
do not call that the rule of right?"

"No — I dare not — I must be content that it is cer
tainly not the rule of wrong."

He began then an harangue upon the universality of
depravity and frailty that I heard with much displeasure;
for,  it seems to me,  those most encourage such general
ideas of general worthlessness who most wish to found
upon them partial excuses for their own.  But in the
midst of his railing entered Colonels Welbred and Gwynn.

JANUARY 31 ST. — And now I must finish my account
of this month by my own assembly at my dear Mrs.  Ord's.
I passed through the friendly hands of MissOrd to the
most cordial ones of Mrs.  Garrick,  who frankly embraced
me,  saying,  "  Do I see you,  once more,  before I tie,  my
tear little spark?  for your father is my flame,  all my
life,  and you are a little spark of that flame  !"

32 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

She added how much she had wished to visit me at the
Queen's house,  when she found I no longer came about
the world ;  but that she was too  "  tiscreet?  and I did not
dare say  "  Do come  !"  unauthorised.

Then came Mr.  Pepys,  and I do not know what my
dear Fredy would have said to his raptures at the meet
ing.  She would have asked him,  perhaps,  if it would
make a good paragraph  !

He spoke to me instantly of the  *  Streatham Letters.'
He is in agony as to his own fate,  but said there could be
no doubt of my faring well.  Not,  I assured him,  to my
own content,  if named at all.

We were interrupted by Sir Joshua Reynolds.  I was
quite glad to see him  ;  and we began chatting with all our
old spirit,  and he quite raved against my present life of
confinement,  and the invisibility it had occasioned,  &c.  &c.

The approach of Mrs.  Porteus stopped this.  She is
always most obliging and courteous,  and she came to
inquire whether,  now she saw I really was not wholly
immured,  there was any chance of a more intimate culti
vation of an acquaintance long begun,  but stopped in its
first progress.  I could only make a general answer of
acknowledgment to her kindness.

Her Bishop,  whom I had not seen since his prefer
ment from Chester to London,  joined us,  and most good-
naturedly entered into a discourse upon my health.

I was next called to Mrs.  Montagu,  who was behind
with no one in kind speeches,  and who insisted upon
making me a visit at the Queen's house,  and would take
no denial to my fixing my own time,  whenever I was at
leisure,  and sending her word  ;  and she promised to put
off any and every engagement for that purpose.

I could make no other return to such civility,  but to
desire to postpone it till my dear Mr.  and Mrs.  Locke
came to town,  and could meet her.

Mrs.  Boscawen was my next little tete-a-tete,  but I had
only begun it when Mr.  Cambridge came to my side.

"I can't get a word!"  cried he,  with a most forlorn
look,  "  and yet I came on purpose I"

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  33

I thanked him,  and felt such a real pleasure in his sight,
from old and never-varying regard,  that I began to listen
to him with my usual satisfaction.

He related to me a long history of Lavant,  where the
new-married Mrs.  Charles Cambridge is now very un
well;  and then he told me many good things of his dear
and deserving daughter;  and I showed him her muff,
which she had worked me,  in embroidery,  and we were
proceeding a little in the old way,  when I saw Mrs.  Pepys
leaning forward to hear us ;  and then Lady Rothes,  who
also seemed all attention to Mr.  Cambridge and his con
versation.

The sweet Lady Mulgrave came for only a few words,
not to take me,  she said,  from older claimants ;  the good
and wise Mrs.  Carter expressed herself with equal kind
ness and goodness on our once more meeting ;  Miss
P ,  looking beautiful as a little angel,  only once ad
vanced to shake hands,  and say,  "  /can see you another
time,  so I won't be unreasonable now."

Mr.  Smelt,  who came from Kew for this party,  made
me the same speech,  and no more ;  and I had time for
nothing beyond a  "how do do"  with Mr.  Langton,  his
Lady Rothes,  Mr.  Batt,  Mr.  Cholmley,  Lord Mulgrave,
Sir Lucas Pepys,  and Lady Herries.

Then up came Mrs.  Chapone,  and,  after most cordially
shaking hands with me,  "  But I hope,"  she cried,  "you
are not always to appear only as a Comet,  to be stared at,
and then vanish  ?  If you are,  let me beg at least to be
brushed by your tail,  and not hear you have disappeared
before my telescope is ready for looking at you !"

When at last I was able to sit down,  after a short con
ference with every one,  it was next to Mr.  Walpole,  who
had secured me a place by his side  ;  and with him was my
longest conversation,  for he was in high spirits,  polite,
ingenious,  entertaining,  quaint,  and original.

But all was so short! — so short! — I was forced to re
turn home so soon !  'Twas,  however,  a very great regale
to me,  and the sight of so much kindness,  preserved so

VOL.  IV.  D

34 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

entire after so long an absence,  warmed my whole heart
with pleasure and satisfaction.

Mv dearest father brought me home.

Mr.  Twining to Miss Barney.

DEAR MlSS B U R N E Y ,  Colchester,  January 20, 1788.

1 have no right,  poor sinner as I am,  to come into your
presence with the least simper upon my face.  I will not
attempt to joke myself out of the scrape.  That would
be as preposterous as if Mr.  Hastings should make his
defence before the House of Lords by cutting two or
three capers or jumping over the bar.  And yet now what
is all this but simpering? — Bless me! — I,  too,  who
pique myself upon having an uncommon power of com
manding my muscles,  and putting on the face of a man
going to be hanged,  while the shoulders of my inward
man are jolting up and down in the convulsions of a
horse-laugh. — What can I do with myself? — and what is
still more impudent,  I not only cannot look perfectly
grave myself,  but cannot imagine you to look otherwise
than pleasant upon me.  But I know it is not so — I
know it is not so — I know you frown — at least you do in
theory;  in practice,  I believe you would find it rather —
What am I about  ? — I must e'en back out of your pre
sence-chamber,  and come in again.

Dear Miss B.

I am,  really and truly,  perfectly ashamed of my abo
minable silence.  You cannot be more angry with me
than I really am,  and have long been,  with myself.  I
can only say this,  that not a single fortnight of this long
silence was intended.  Your letter — I am saying what only
serves to blacken my crime,  but it is the truth — your
letter gratified and delighted me;  and I should have
turned upon my heel in a pet,  to any living soul who had
only hinted a possibility of my not thanking you for it
within a month after I received it.  But alas!  to my

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  35

frailty,  and singular talent of procrastination,  nothing is
impossible.  As time stole on,  sin,  and of course the ne
cessity of apology first,  then the difficulty of apology,  and
last of all,  the impossibility of apology — 'tis so frightful
that I stop there,  unable to make anything of this in the
way of a grammatical sentence.  ["  Muscles,  do your
office!  " — they are relaxing again!]  Well,  but I spied
a little bit of a paw in one page of my last letter from
Chelsea College,  that gave me comfort.

So far I have tried what a little forced pleasantry will
do for me, — with a great deal of real penitence and hu
miliation wrapped up in it.  I take occasion to modulate
into another subject,  that may be favourable to me,  as it
will  (I hope)  put your mind into a posture of congratu
lation  ;  with which it can no more hold its posture of
resentment than I can now hold two livings without a
dispensation :  for,  you must know,  my old Cambridge
acquaintance,  the Bishop of London,  has just given me
the living of St.  Mary's,  in Colchester.  Its value is no
great matter;  about 90/.  a-year,  I believe  :  but from its
situation and other circumstances,  it has always been
more desirable to me than greater things elsewhere ;  and
so pray be as glad as you possibly can.  But admire me
too :  I actually asked for this dab of preferment.  It is
the first piece of pushery I ever was guilty off;  and it
has answered so well,  that all my old sneaking principles
of modesty and delicacy,  &c.  are overturned de fond en
comble  ;  and I believe if I were to begin the world again,
I should run at every thing that came in my way,  like a
mad bull.  (Is not that your  \vay at Court  ?)  Above all
things,  I repent of having been all my life so entete — (I
put myself in mind of Captain Aresby, — did you ever
read  '  Cecil ' — hush  !)  with the foolish notion of being
contented.  Not but the thing is well enough too,  in itself;
but the worst of it is,  the world is so contented with one's
being contented.  I have never thought so well of this
virtue in myself,  since I read an excellent thing,  and
I verily believe a very true thing,  that Sir W.  D'Avenant

D2

36 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

says about it:  viz.  "  Contentedness,  when examined,
doth mean something of laziness as well as moderation."
So you see how I am likely to improve,  if I live long
enough ! — But now let me move your pity,  and try to
steal into your forgiveness that way.  Consider what a
gauntlet I have to run  ! — Archbishop,  Bishop,  and their
examining Chaplain,  more frightful than themselves —
Dispensation,  Institution,  Solicitor's fees,  Secretary's
fees,  &c.  Sec. — What will become of me ! — Imagine me
shut up in a Chaplain's apartment at Lambeth,  and forced
to write my thoughts in Latin upon two theological
questions,  whether I have any thoughts upon them or
not !  Pray don't you think,  as I always did,  that the Ex
aminee, upon these occasions,  has a natural right — aright
of which he ought no more to be deprived than of the
right of self-defence when he is corporeally attacked — to
examine the Examiner in his turn?  Well,  I must en
dure it with what patience I may.  I can write  "  about
it,  Goddess,  and about it ;  "  and words will go for mean
ing,  all the world over.  I believe I am but a scurvy
TheoLOG ; — but that you need not mention at Court.

I have another claim upon your commiseration ;  nay,
many claims  ; — but the loss of four teeth — the four front
contiguous teeth of my upper set, — /  do not mention.  (I
like that sort of rhetorical lie.)  I have not wherewithal to
make an F,  or a V,  if you would give the world for them
— but that I say nothing of.  I have got this preferment
just in time to whistle sermons to a polite congregation.
This is a trifle.  But this Press-work I  (Were you ever in
the — hush!)  Here am I printing,  perhaps in a ruinous
manner,  a great fat quarto,  which not above a dozen per
sons will buy,  and not half the dozen read.  And really
now it is,  I verily believe,  owing, principally at least,  to the
hurry I have been in all the summer,  to get this business
off my hands,  or at least off my head,  that I have behaved
thus shabbily to you,  and,  indeed,  to many others of my
best and most valued friends and correspondents.  Dr.
Johnson,  you know,  said that  "  illness makes a man a

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  37

scoundrel."  I have not,  thank God,  had this excuse to
plead ;  but I fancy the being in the press has some effect
of the same kind.  Well,  I hope it will be a purgatory
to me,  and that I shall come out a new man.

I shall be in town soon,  and shall inquire at Newton
House whether I may be permitted to throw myself at
your feet.  I have thought of you often and often  :  indeed
Conscience took care of that ! — I have had my punish
ment.  I wonder whether you will ever write to me
again !  Will you vouchsafe,  un beau jour,  to try me
once more  ? — You see I keep to my new principles.
Mrs.  T.  begs her best compliments.  It is time to release
you.  Pardon all this foolery,  and believe me,  most truly
and sincerely yours,

T.  T.

38 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

PART II.

1788.

Mrs.  Siddons in Portia— The Humorist— The Death of Abel-
Return to Windsor— Visit from the King— His Taste in Dress
—Return to St.  James's— The Duke of York— Elopement of
Lady Augusta Campbell— The Duchess of Ancaster's Masked
Ball — An Evening at Home— Mr.  Twining — The Princess
Elizabeth— The Trial of Warren Hastings— Westminster Hall
—Description of it on the Occasion of the Trial— Edmund Burke
— Fox — Sheridan — Wyndham — Procession of the Princes of
the Blood and Peers — The Prisoner — Ceremonies of the Ar
raignment—Speech of Lord Chancellor Thurlow to the Prisoner
— Reply of Warren Hastings— Opening of the Trial— The
Mischiefs of Political Party— Lady Claremont— Mr.  Crutchley
— Recollections of Streatham — Mr.  Wyndham — His Admi
ration of Dr.  Johnson — His Reflections on the Spectacle—
Character and Bearing of the Chancellor— His Bias in Favour
of Hastings — The two Archbishops — Wyndham's Opinion of
Hastings— Remonstrance and Reply — William Pitt — Major
Scott— Mr.  Francis— Public Character of Hastings—The
Charges against Hastings — His Private Habits and Character
— His Personal Appearance — His mild and humble Demeanour
in Private Life— Character and Manners of Wyndham — Mr.
Wyndham again — His Reflections on the Proceedings —
Burke's wonderful Powers of Eloquence — Sir Elijah Impey —
His threatened Impeachment — His Character — Close of the
First Day's Proceedings^-Conference on it with the Queen —
Second Day at Hastings's Trial— Speech of Burke against
Hastings— Character of his Eloquence— Mr.  Crutchley— Gene
ral Caillot — Eloquence of Fox — Lord Walsingham — Sir Lucas
Pepys— General Prejudice against Hastings.

FKIDAY,  FEBRUARY IST. — To-day I had a summons
in the morning to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who was very ill;
so ill as to fill me with compassion.  She was extremely
low-spirited,  and spoke to me with quite unwonted kind
ness of manner,  and desired me to accept a sedan-chair,
which had been Mrs.  Haggerdorn's,  and now devolved
to her,  saying,  I might as well have it while she lived as
when she was dead,  which would soon happen.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  39

I thanked her,  and wished her,  I am sure very sin
cerely,  better.  Nor do I doubt her again recovering,  as
I have frequently seen her much worse.  True,  she
must die at last,  but who must not?  My Fredy,  my
Susan,  Mr.  Locke,  Mrs.  Delany,  all the world's fairest
ornaments must go the same way.  Ah  !  the survivor of
all such — not the departed — will be worthy of pity.

At night,  by the Queen's gracious orders,  I went to
the play with Miss Goldsworthy,  Madlle.  Montmollin,
and,  by the same gracious permission,  at the request of
Miss Goldsworthy,  Mrs.  Gwynn.  I was very glad to see
her in a place where I could so much better converse
with her than where I had last met her.  She looked as
beautiful as the first day I saw her,  and was all gen
tleness and softness.  Colonels Gwynn and Goldsworthy
were our beaus.

The play was  "The Merchant of Venice.''  Mrs.
Siddons played  '  Portia;'  and charmingly,  though not,  I
think,  with so perfect an entrance into the character as I
have observed in her performance of some other parts.

The farce was a farce indeed, — "The Humorist:"  a
thing without plot,  character,  sentiment,  or invention ;
yet,  by means of ludicrous mistakes and absurd dialogues,
so irresistibly comic,  for one representation,  that we all
laughed till we were almost ashamed of ourselves.

SATURDAY,  FEBRUARY 2ND. — The Queen this morn
ing lent me  "  The Death of Abel,"  which she was much,
astonished to hear me say I had never read.  After we
arrived at Windsor she kept me with her in close conver
sation upon various subjects till her dinner was called.
More and more she keeps me in her presence,  rarely
dismissing me,  when we are alone,  except by the neces
sity of her avocations and engagements ;  and the sweet
ness and openness of her discourse engage me to the
warmest gratitude and most faithful attachment.  Were I
at liberty to give instances for illustration,  my journal
could have room for nothing else.

Miss Planta dined with me,  and I begged her cha
ritable assistance in the evening.  She came,  and Coloael

40 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IL

Welbred sent me his compliments,  and begged to know
if he might come,  with Colonel Goldsworthy,  to tea.
Yes — sa?i<?  doute — and they came early.

"  I don't ask,"  cried Colonel Welbred,  almost as he
entered the room,  "how Miss Burney was entertained at
the play last night."

"  You saw it then  ?"   cried I.

"  Yes,  perfectly;  but have you brought Pompey down
with you  ?"

"  What Pompey  ?"

"  The Humorist's Pompey.  That part,  I saw,  was
your favourite."

I owned the charge,  but asked how he had discovered
it.  Instead of answering me,  he picked out another part
which had particularly amused me — then another and
another that had struck me — then every part almost,
through the five acts,  with which I had most been pleased
in the play.

I was quite amazed at his seeing thus distinctly,  and
with such discernment,  across the house.  "  Nor can I
conceive,"  cried I,  "  what sort of eyesight you must
have  ;  for whenever I looked myself opposite,  you ap
peared to me leaning on your hand,  and scarce looking
even at the stage with any care or strong attention."

"  But I saw,"  cried he,  smiling ;  "  and,  indeed,  I take
great delight in watching for thoughts and opinions at
particular passages during a play  :  'tis at least half my
amusement.  I think that then I can read into people's
own dispositions and characters."

On my word,  thinks I,  if I had been aware of being
watched thus,  and with such a view,  I should less have
liked my vis-a-vis situation.  I confessed myself,  how
ever,  to have just the same propensity to drawing my
conclusions,  and honestly regretted that I had not the
same ability,  from the shortness of my sight.

We then ran over almost the whole,  both of the play
and farce,  comparing notes,  and re-diverting ourselves
with all we had seen.

This re-performance of our dramas was interrupted by

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  41

the appearance of his Majesty,  \vho,  however,  also talked
them over,  and commented upon them very judiciously.
The King's judgment upon these subjects seems to me
almost always good,  because constantly his own,  natural
and unbiassed,  and resulting from common sense,  un
adulterated by rules.

The King always makes himself much diversion with
Colonel Goldsworthy,  whose dryness of humour,  and
pretended servility of submission,  extremely entertain him.
He now attacked him upon the enormous height of his
collar,  which,  through some mistake of his tailor,  ex
ceeded even the extremity of fashion.  And while the
King,  who was examining and pulling it about,  had his
back to us,  Colonel Welbred had the malice to whisper
me,  "  Miss Burney,  I do assure you  'tis nothing to what
it was ;  he has had two inches cut off since morning !"

Fortunately,  as Colonel Welbred stood next me,  this
xras not heard ;  for the King would not easily have for
gotten it.  He soon after went away,  but gave no sum
mons to his gentlemen.

And now Colonel Welbred gave me another proof of
his extraordinary powers of seeing.  You now know,  my
dear friends,  that in the King's presence everybody
retreats back as far as they can go,  to leave him the
room to himself.  In doing this,  through the disposition
of the chairs,  I was placed so much behind Colonel Wei-
bred as to conclude myself wholly out of his sight;  but
the moment the King retired,  he said,  as we all dropped
on our seats,  "  Everybody is tired — Miss Burney the
most — for she has stood the stillest.  Miss Planta has
leant on her chair,  Colonel Goldsworthy against the wall,
myself occasionally on the screen,  but Miss Burney has
stood perfectly still — I perceived that without looking."

'Tis,  indeed,  to us slanders,  an amazing addition to
fatigue to keep still.

VVe returned to town next day.

In the morning I had had a very disagreeable,  though
merely foolish,  embarrassment.  Detained,  by the calling

42 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

in of a poor woman about a subscription,  from dressing
myself,  I was forced to run to the Queen,  at her sum
mons,  without any cap.  She smiled,  but said nothing.
Indeed,  she is all indulgence in those points of externals,
which rather augments than diminishes my desire of
showing apparent as well as my feeling of internal
respect :  but just as I had assisted her with her peignoir,
Lady Efh'ngham was admitted ;  and the moment she sat
down,  and the hair-dresser began his office,  a page an
nounced the Duke of York,  who instantly followed his
name.

I would have given the world to have run away,  but
the common door of entrance and exit was locked,  unfor
tunately,  on account of the coldness of the day  ;  and
there was none to pass,  but that by which his Royal
Highness entered,  and was standing.  I was forced,  there
fore,  to remain,  and wait for dismission.

Yet I was pleased,  too,  by the sight of his affectionate
manner to his Royal Mother.  He flew to take and kiss
her hand,  but she gave him her cheek;  and then he
began a conversation with her,  so open and so gay,  that
he seemed talking to his most intimate associate.

His subject was Lady Augusta Campbell's elopement
from the masquerade.  The Duchess of Ancaster had
received masks at her house on Monday,  and sent
tickets to all the Queen's household.  I,  amongst the
rest,  had one ;  but it was impossible I could be spared at
such an hour,  though the Queen told me that she had
thought of my going,  but could not manage it,  as Mrs.
Sclnvellenberg was so ill.  Miss Planta went,  and I had
the entire equipment of her.  I started the project of
dressing her at Mrs.  Delany's,  in all the most antique and
old-fashioned things we could borrow;  and this was put
very happily in execution,  for she was,  I have heard,  one
of the best and most grotesque figures in the room.

I really believe the most gracious Queen forbore dis
missing me,  merely because she thought it would add to
my embarrassment to pass by the Duke ;  for when he

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  43

moved to another part of the room,  she said in the most
condescending manner,  "  Now,  Miss Burney,  I will let
you go and dress yourself too."

SUNDAY,  FEBRUARY lOxn. — This first Sunday in
Lent I drank tea in St.  Martin's-street.  The six Sun
days in Lent are all that we ever pass in town,  for the
whole year through.

I had the infinite pleasure to meet here Mr.  Twining.
He is in town for a few days,  and he had intended
coming to see me,  just with the same kind ease he would
have intended it in St.  Martin's-street.  Not the smallest
idea had he conceived of my situation,  but concluded,
and very naturally,  that,  wherever I was myself,  there
might be my friends.  Were that the case,  my situation
now,  with respect to itself,  could have nothing left to
wish.  But when was there such a situation as that?
There being no door to enter but across the great court,
and no stairs to ascend but those used on all common
occasions by the Royal Family themselves,  makes all
visits here,  except by appointment,  or from publicly re
ceived and allowed friends,  absolutely impracticable.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Bogle,  also,  were of this party,  and my
dear father came from his Chaos to join it.  The evening
was all too short ;  yet Mr.  Twining broke from scores of
relations to come,  and was forced to return to them
before even my time of absconding.  I followed him out
to the door,  just as we used jointly to do,  and thought so
of old times and of my Susan,  when we were accus
tomed to go like supporters on each side,  and never lose
a quarter of an instant that we could spend with him.
Can I use these words and not recall to my Susan him
whom my whole mind fills with from this last sentence  ? —
our most beloved Mr.  Crisp  ! — who arrived in our hearts
the first,  and took place of all !  Ah,  my dearest Susan,
what a blank is to me the reflection that he is no more !
Even to this moment I can scarce forbear,  at times,  con
sidering how I shall relate to him my affairs,  and what
will be his opinion when he hears them !  Yet the re-

44 DIARY AND LETTERS  [13ART II.

membrance grows less bitter ;  for now,  as you find,  I can
bear to name it.  Till very,  very lately,  I was always
forced to fly from the subject wholly;  so poignant,  so
overwhelming I found it.

MONDAY,  FEBRUARY HTH. — In the afternoon,  while
Mr.  Turbulent,  Miss Planta,  and myself were at coffee,
the Princess Elizabeth came for the former.  He was very
unwilling to go,  and most ridiculously exclaimed,  "Why
should 1 go,  ma'am  ? — Why should your Royal Highness
go?  why should you not come and sit clown here comfort
ably and rationally,  and enter into conversation with us  ?'*

Who else could have ventured at such a speech,  and
not have given the highest offence?  But he is so pri
vileged a favourite with all the Royal Family,  that he
utters all his flights to them almost as easily as to un
royal ists.

"I can't,  sir,"  answered she,  very good-humouredly,
"or I give you my word I should like it very much  ;  but
as I cannot stay here with you,  you must be content to
come with me."  And away they went together.

The next day we returned to town,  that the Queen
might be ready for the great State Trial on the 13th.

FEBRUARY 13TH. — To what an interesting transaction
does this day open !  a day,  indeed,  of strong emotion to
me,  though all upon matters foreign to any immediate
concern of my own — if anything may be called foreign
that deeply interests us,  merely because it is not per
sonal.

The Trial,  so long impending,  of Mr.  Hastings,  opened
to-day.  The Queen yesterday asked me if I wished to
be present at the beginning,  or had rather take another
day.  I was greatly obliged by her condescension,  and
preferred the opening.  I thought it would give me a
general view of the Court,  and the manner of proceeding,
and that I might read hereafter the speeches and evi
dence.

She then told me she had six tickets from Sir Peter
Burrell,  the Grand Chamberlain,  for every day ;  that three

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  45

were for his box,  and three for his gallery.  She asked
me who I would go with,  and promised me a box-ticket
not only for myself,  but my companion.  Nor was this
consideration all she showed me ;  for she added,  that as
I might naturally wish for my Father,  she would have me
send him my other ticket.

I thanked her very gratefully,  and after dinner went to
St.  Martin's-street ;  but all there was embarrassing  :  my
father could not go ;  he was averse to be present at the
trial,  and he was a little lame from a fall.  In the end I
sent an express to Hammersmith,  to desire Charles to
come to me the next morning by eight o'clock.

I was very sorry not to have my father,  as he had been
named by the Queen  ;  but I was glad to have Charles.

I told her Majesty at night the step I had ventured to
take,  and she was perfectly content with it.  "  But I
must trouble you,"  she said,  "  with Miss Gomme,  who
lias no other way to go."

This morning the Queen dispensed with all attendance
from me after her first dressing,  that I might haste away.
Mrs.  Schwellenberg was fortunately well enough to take
the whole duty,  and the sweet Queen not only hurried
me off,  but sent me some cakes from her own breakfast-
table,  that I might carry them in my pocket,  lest I should
have no time for eating before I went.

Charles was not in time,  but we all did well in the
end.  We got to Westminster Hall between nine and ten
o'clock  ;  and,  as I know my dear Susan,  like myself,  was
never at any trial,  I will give some account of the place
and arrangements ;  and whether the description be new
to her or old,  my partial Fredy will not blame it.

The Grand Chamberlain's box is in the centre of the
upper end of the Hall  :  there we sat,  Miss Gomme and
myself,  immediately behind the chair placed for Sir Peter
Burrell.  To the left,  on the same level,  were the green
benches for the House of Commons,  which occupied a
third of the upper end of the Hall,  and the whole of the
left side :  to the right of us,  on the same level,  was the
Grand Chamberlain's gallery.

46 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

The left side of the Hall,  opposite to the green benches
for the Commons,  was appropriated to the Peeresses and
Peers'  daughters.

The bottom of the Hall contained the Royal Family's
Box and the Lord High Steward's,  above which was a
large gallery appointed for receiving company with Peers'
tickets.

A gallery also was run along the left side of the Hall,
above the green benches,  which is called the Duke of
Newcastle's Box,  the centre of which was railed off into
a separate apartment for the reception of the Queen and
four eldest Princesses,  who were then incog.,  not choosing
to appear in state,  and in their own Box.

Along the right side of the Hall ran another gallery,
over the seats of the Princesses,  and this was divided into
boxes for various people — the Lord Chamberlain,  (not
the Great Chamberlain,)  the Surveyor,  Architect,  &c.

So much for all the raised buildings ;  now for the
disposition of the Hall itself,  or ground.

In the middle was placed a large table,  and at the head
of it the seat for the Chancellor,  and round it seats for the
Judges,  the Masters in Chancery,  the Clerks,  and all who
belonged to the Law ;  the upper end,  and the right side
of the room,  was allotted to the Peers in their robes ;  the
left side to the Bishops and Archbishops.

Immediately below the Great Chamberlain's Box was
the place allotted for the Prisoner.  On his right side was
a box for his own Counsel,  on his left the Box for the
Managers,  or Committee,  for the Prosecution ;  and these
three most important of all the divisions in the Hall were
all directly adjoining to where I was seated.

Almost the moment I entered I was spoken to by a
lady I did not recollect,  but found afterwards to be Lady
Claremont ;  and this proved very agreeable,  for she took
Sir Peter's place,  and said she would occupy it till he
claimed it;  and then,  when just before me,  she named
to me all the order of the buildings,  and all the com-
pany,  pointing out every distinguished person,  and most
obligingly desiring me to ask her any questions I wanted

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  47

to have solved,  as she knew,  she said,  "  all those creatures
that filled the green benches,  looking so little like gentle
men,  and so much like hair-dressers."  These were the
Commons.  In truth,  she did the honours of the Hall to
me with as much good nature and good breeding as if I
had been a foreigner of distinction,  to whom she had
dedicated her time and attention.  My acquaintance with
her had been made formerly at Mrs.  Vesey's.

The business did not begin till near twelve o'clock.
The opening to the whole then took place,  by the entrance
of the Managers of the Prosecution;  all the company
were already long in their boxes or galleries.

I shuddered,  and drew involuntarily back,  when,  as the
doors were flung open,  I saw Mr.  Burke,  as Head of the
Committee,  make his solemn entry.  He held a scroll in
his hand,  and walked alone,  his brow knit with corroding
care and deep labouring thought, — a brow how different
to that which had proved so alluring to my warmest
admiration when first I met him !  so highly as he had been
my favourite,  so captivating as I had found his manners
and conversation in our first acquaintance,  and so much
as I had owed to his zeal and kindness to me and my
affairs in its progress  !  How did I grieve to behold him
now the cruel Prosecutor  (such to me he appeared)  of au
injured and innocent man  !

Mr.  Fox followed next,  Mr.  Sheridan,  Mr.  Wyndham,
Messrs.  Ansti uther,  Grey,  Adam,  Michael Angelo Taylor,
Pelham,  Colonel North,  Mr.  Frederick Montagu,  Sir
Gilbert Elliot,  General Burgoyne,  Dudley Long,  &c.
They were all named over to me by Lady Claremont,  or
I should not have recollected even those of my acquaint
ance,  from the shortness of my sight.

When the Committee Box was filled the House of
Commons at large took their seats on their green benches,
which stretched,  as I have said,  along the whole left side
of the Hall,  and,  taking in a third of the upper end,  joined
to the Great Chamberlain's Box,  from which nothing sepa
rated them but a partition of about two feet in height.

48 DIARY AND LETTERS       [PART II.

Then began the procession,  the Clerks entering first,
then the Lawyers according to their rank,  and the Peers,
Bishops,  and Officers,  all in their coronation robes ;  con
cluding with the Princes of the Blood, — Prince William,
son to the Duke of Gloucester,  coming first,  then the
Dukes of Cumberland,  Gloucester,  and York,  then the
Prince of Wales ;  and the whole ending by the Chancellor,
with his train borne.

They then all took their seats.

A Serjeant-at-Arms arose,  and commanded silence in
the Court,  on pain of imprisonment.

Then some other officer,  in a loud voice,  called out,  as
well as 1 can recollect,  words to this purpose: — "  Warren
Hastings,  Esquire,  come forth  !  Answer to the charges
brought against you  ;  save your bail,  or forfeit your recog
nizance!"

Indeed I trembled at these words,  and hardly could
keep my place when I found Mr.  Hastings was being
brought to the bar.  He came forth from some place
immediately under the Great Chamberlain's Box,  and was
preceded by Sir Francis Molyneux,  Gentleman-Usher of
the Black Rod ;  and at each side of him walked his bail,
Messrs.  Sulivan and Stunner.

The moment he came in sight,  which was not for full
ten minutes after his awful summons,  he made a low bow
to the Chancellor and Court facing him.  I saw not his
face,  as he was directly under me.  He moved on slowly,
and,  I think,  supported between his two Bails,  to the
opening of his own Box ;  there,  lower still,  he bowed
again  ;  and then,  advancing to the bar,  he leant his hands
upon it,  and dropped on his knees  ;  but a voice in the same
moment proclaiming he had leave to rise,  he stood up
almost instantaneously,  and a third time profoundly bowed
to the Court.

What an awful moment this for such a man  ! — a man
fallen from such height of power to a situation so humi
liating — from the almost unlimited command of so large
a part of the Eastern World to be cast at the feet of his

1788]  OP MADAME D'ARBLAY.  49

enemies,  of the great Tribunal of his Country,  and of the
Nation at large,  assembled thus in a body to try and to
judge him !  Could even his Prosecutors at that moment
look on — and not shudder at least,  if they did not blush  ?

The Crier,  I think it was,  made,  in a loud and hollow
voice,  a public proclamation,  *'  That Warren Hastings,
Esquire,  late Governor-General of Bengal,  was now ou
his trial for high crimes and misdemeanors,  with which
he was charged by the Commons of Great Britain  ;  and
that all persons whatsoever who had aught to allege
against him were now to stand forth."

A general silence followed,  and the Chancellor,  Lord
Thurlow,  now made his speech.  I will give it you to the
best of my power from memory;  the newspapers have
printed it far less accurately than I have retained it,
though 1 am by no means exact or secure.

"  Warren Hastings,  you are now brought into this
Court to answer to the charges brought against you by
the Knights,  Esquires,  Burgesses,  and Commons ot Great
Britain — charges now standing only as allegations,  by them
to be legally proved,  or by you to be disproved.  Bring
forth your answers and defence,  with that seriousness,
respect,  and truth,  due to accusers so respectable.  Time
has been allowed you for preparation,  proportioned to the
intricacies in which the transactions are involved,  and to
the remote distances whence your documents may have
been searched and required.  You will still be allowed
Bail,  for the better forwarding your defence,  and whatever
you can require will still be yours,  of time,  witnesses,  and
all things else you may hold necessary.  This is not
granted you as any indulgence :  it is entirely your due :  it
is the privilege which every British subject has a right to
claim,  and which is due to every one who is brought
before this high Tribunal."

This speech,  uttered in a calm,  equal,  solemn manner,
and in a voice mellow and penetrating,  with eyes keen and
black,  yet softened into some degree of tenderness while

VOL.  IV.  E

50 DIARY AND LETTERS       [PART II.

fastened full upon the prisoner — this speech,  its occasion,
its portent,  and its object,  had an effect upon every hearer
of producing the most respectful attention,  and,  out of
the Committee Box at least,  the strongest emotions in the
cause of Mr.  Hastings.

Again Mr.  Hastings made the lowest reverence to
the Court,  and,  leaning over the bar,  answered,  with much
agitation,  through evident efforts to suppress it,  "My
Lords — Impressed  —  deeply impressed  —  I come before
your Lordships,  equally confident in my own integrity,
and in the justice of the Court before which I am to
clear it.1'

"Impressed"  and  "deeply impressed,"  too,  was my
mind,  by this short yet comprehensive speech,  and all
my best wishes for his clearance and redress rose warmer
than ever in my heart.

A general silence again ensued,  and then one of the
Lawyers opened the cause.  He began by reading from an
immense roll of parchment the general charges against
Mr.  Hastings,  but he read in so monotonous a chant
that nothing more could I hear or understand than now
and then the name of Warren Hastings.

During this reading,  to which I vainly lent all my atten
tion,  Mr.  Hastings,  finding it,  I presume,  equally impos
sible to hear a word,  began to cast his eyes around the
House,  and having taken a survey of all in front and at
the sides,  he turned about and looked up;  pale looked
his face — pale,  ill,  and altered.  1 was much affected by
the sight of that dreadful harass which was written on his
countenance.  Had I looked at him without restraint,  it
could not have been without tears.  I felt shocked,  too,
shocked and ashamed,  to be seen by him in that place.
I had wished to be present from an earnest interest in
the business,  joined to a firm confidence in his powers of
•defence ;  but his eyes were not those I wished to meet in
Westminster Hall.  I called upon Miss Gomme and
Charles to assist me in looking another way,  and in con-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  51

versing with me as I turned aside ;  and I kept as much
aloof as possible till he had taken his survey,  and placed
himself again in front.

From this time,  however,  he frequently looked round,
and I was soon without a doubt that he must see me.
Not very desirable to me,  therefore,  was a civility I next
received from one of the managers, — one,  too,  placed in
the front of the Committee,  and in a line with the prisoner  :
it was Mr.  Frederick Montagu,  who recognised and bowed
to me.  He is a most intimate friend of Mrs.  Delany,
and a man of excellence in all parts of his character
save politics,  and there he is always against the Adminis
tration  !  Why will any man of principle join any party?
Why not be open to all,  yet belong to none  ?

Mr.  Frederick Montagu looked so gloomy and un
comfortable that,  but for the assistance of Lady Ciare-
mont,  I should not have recollected him.  At Mrs.
Delany's he had seemed all gaiety and good humour.
Lady Claremont herself remarked to me  "that Mr.  Mon
tagu looked as if engaged in a business he did not
approve."  If so,  doubly is he censurable for adherence
to opposition.

I hope Mr.  Hastings did not see us  ;  but in a few
minutes more,  while this reading was still continued,  I
perceived Sir Joshua Reynolds in the midst of the Com
mittee.  He,  at the same moment,  saw me also,  and not
only bowed,  but smiled and nodded with his usual good-
humour and intimacy,  making at the same time a sign to
his ear,  by which I understood he had no trumpet;
whether he had forgotten or lost it I know not.

1 would rather have answered all this dumb show any
where else,  as my last ambition was that of being noticed
from such a Box.  I again entreated aid in turning away;
•but Miss Gomme,  who is a friend of Sir Gilbert Elliot,
one of the Managers,  and an ill-wisher,  for his sake,  to
the opposite cause,  would only laugh,  and ask why I
should not be owned by them.

52 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

1 did not,  however,  like it,  but had no choice from my
near situation  ;  and in a few seconds I had again a bow,
and a profound one,  and again very ridiculously I was
obliged to inquire of Lady Claremont who my own
acquaintance might be.  Mr.  Richard Burke,  senior,  she
answered.  He is a brother of the Great — Great in
defiance of all drawbacks — Edmund Burke.

Another lawyer now arose,  and read so exactly in the
same manner,  that it was utterly impossible to discover
even whether it was a charge or an answer.

Such reading as this,  you may well suppose,  set every
body pretty much at their ease ;  and but for the interest
I took in looking from time to time at Mr.  Hastings,
and watching his countenance,  I might as well have been
away.  He seemed composed after the first half-hour,
and calm  ;  but he looked with a species of indignant con
tempt towards his accusers,  that could not,  I think,
have been worn had his defence been doubtful.  Many
there are who fear for him  ;  for me,  I own myself wholly
confident in his acquittal.

Soon after,  a voice just by my side,  from the green
benches,  said,  "  Will Miss Burney allow me to renew my
acquaintance with her?1'  I turned about and saw Mr.
Crutchley.

All Streatham rose to my mind at sight of him.  I have
never beheld him since the Streatham society was abo
lished.  We entered instantly upon the subject of that
family,  a subject ever to me the most interesting.  He
also had never seen poor Mrs.  Thrale since her return to
England  ;  but he joined with me very earnestly in agree
ing that,  since so unhappy a step was now past recall,  it
became the duty,  however painful a one,  of the daughters,
to support,  not cast oft'  and contemn,  one who was now as
much their mother as when she still bore their own name.

"  But how,"  cried he,  "  do you stand the fiery trial of
this Streatham book that is coming upon us  ?"

I acknowledged myself very uneasy about it,  and he

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAV.  53

assured me all who had ever been at Streatham were in
fright and consternation.

We talked all these matters over more at length,  till I
was called away by an  "  How d'ye do,  Miss Burney?"
from the Committee Box !  And then I saw young Mr.
Burke,  who had jumped up on the nearest form to speak
to me.

Pleasant enough  !  I checked my vexation as well as I
was able,  since the least shyness on my part to those with
whom formerly I had been social must instantly have
been attributed to Court influence  ;  and therefore,  since
1 could not avoid the notice,  I did what I could to talk
with him as heretofore.  He is besides so amiable a
young man that I could not be sorry to see him again,
though I regretted it should be just in that place,  and at
this time.

While we talked together,  Mr.  Crutchley went back
to his more distant seat,  and the moment I was able to
withdraw from young Mr.  Burke,  Charles,  who sat behind
me,  leant down and told me a gentleman had just desired
to be presented to me.

"Who?"  quoth I.

"  Mr.  Wyndham,"  he answered.

I really thought he was laughing,  and answered accord
ingly  ;  but he assured me he was in earnest,  and that Mr.
Wyndham had begged him to make the proposition.

What could I do  ?  There was no refusing ;  yet a planned
meeting with another of the Committee,  and one deep in
the prosecution,  and from whom one of the hardest
charges has come — could any thing be less pleasant as I
was then situated  ?

The Great Chamberlain's Box is the only part of the
Hall that has any communication with either the Com
mittee Box or the House of Commons,  and it is also the
very nearest to the Prisoner.  Mr.  Wyndham I had seen
twice before — both times at Miss Monckton's  ;  and any
where else I should have been much gratified by his
desire of a third meeting,  as he is one of the most agree-

54 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

able,  spirited,  well-bred,  and brilliant conversers I have
ever spoken with.  He is a neighbour,  too,  now,  of
Charlotte's.  He is member for Norwich,  and a man of
family and fortune,  with a very pleasing though not hand
some face,  a very elegant figure,  and an air of fashion and
vivacity.

The conversations I had had with him at Miss Monck-
ton's had been,  wholly by his own means,  extremely
spirited and entertaining.  I was sorry to see him make
one of a set that appeared so inveterate against a man I
believe so injuriously treated;  and my concern was
founded upon the good thoughts I had conceived of him,
not merely from his social talents,  which are yet very un
common,  but from a reason dearer to my remembrance.
He loved Dr.  Johnson, — and Dr.  Johnson returned his
affection.  Their political principles and connexions were
opposite,  but Mr.  Wyndham respected his venerable
friend too highly to discuss any points that could offend
him  ;  and showed for him so true a regard,  that,  during
all his late illnesses,  for the latter part of his life,  his car
riage and himself were alike at his service,  to air,  visit,  or
go out,  whenever he was disposed to accept them.

Nor was this all;  one tender proof he gave of warm
and generous regard,  that I can never forget,  and that
rose instantly to my mind when I heard his name,  and
gave him a welcome in my eyes when they met his face  :
it is this:  Dr.  Johnson,  in his last visit to Lichfield,  was
taken ill,  and waited to recover strength for travelling
back to town in his usual vehicle,  a stage-coach  ;— as
soon as this reached the ears of Mr.  Wyndham,  he set off
for Lichfield in his own carriage,  to offer to bring him
back to town in it,  and at his own time.

For a young man of fashion,  such a trait towards an
old,  however dignified philosopher,  must surely be a
mark indisputable of an elevated mind and character;  and
still the more strongly it marked a noble way of thinking,
as it was done in favour of a person in open opposition
to all his own party,  and declared prejudices.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  55

Charles soon told me he was at my elbow.  He had
taken the place Mr.  Crutchley had just left.  The abord
was,  on my part,  very awkward,  from the distress I felt
lest Mr.  Hastings should look up,  and from a conviction
that I must not name that gentleman,  of whom alone J
could then think,  to a person in a committee against him.

He,  however,  was easy,  having no embarrassing thoughts,
since the conference was of his own seeking.  'Twas so
long since I had seen him,  that I almost wonder he
remembered me.

After the first compliments he looked around him,  and
exclaimed  "  What an assembly is this  !  How striking a
spectacle!  I had not seen half its splendour down there.
You have it here to great advantage  ;  you lose some of
the Lords,  but you gain all the Ladies.  You have a very
good place here."

"Yes;  and I may safely say I make a very impartial
use of it :  for since here I have sat,  I have never disco
vered to which side I have been listening  !"

He laughed,  but told me they were then running
through the charges.

"And is it essential,"  cried I,  "that they should so run
them through that nobody can understand them  ?  Is
that a form of law?"

He agreed to the absurdity ;  and then,  looking still at
the spectacle,  which indeed is the most splendid I ever
saw,  arrested his eyes upon the Chancellor.  "  He looks
very well from hence,"  cried he;  "  and how well he ac
quits himself on these solemn occasions !  With what
dignity,  what loftiness,  what high propriety,  he comports
himself!"

This praise to the Chancellor,  who is a known friend
of Mr.  Hastings,  though I believe he would be the last
to favour him unjustly now he is on trial,  was a pleasant
sound to my ear,  and confirmed my original idea of the
liberal disposition of my new associate.

I joined heartily in the commendation,  and warmly
praised his speech.  "Even a degree of pompousness,"
cried I,  "  in such a Court as this,  seems a propriety."

56 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

"  Yes,"  said he ;  "  but his speech had one word that
might as well have been let alone  ;  '  mere allegations '  he
called the charges ;  the word  '  mere/  at least,  might have
been spared,  especially as it is already strongly sus
pected on which side he leans  !"

I protested,  and with truth,  I had not heard the word
in his speech;  but he still affirmed it.  "  Surely,"  I said,
"  he was as fair and impartial as possible  :  he called the
accusers  '  so respectable  !' "

"  Yes,  but  '  mere — mere  '  was no word for this occa
sion  :  and it could not be unguarded,  for he would never
come to speak in such a Court as this,  without some little
thinking beforehand.  However,,  he is a fine fellow, — a
very fine fellow!  and though,  in his private life,  guilty of
so many inaccuracies,  in his public capacity I really
hold him to be unexceptionable."

This fairness,  from an oppositionist professed,  brought
me at once to easy terms with him.

I begged him to inform me for what reason,  at the end
of the Chancellor's speech,  there had been a cry of
"Hear!  hear!  hear him !"  which had led me to expect
another speech,  when I found no other seemed intended.

He laughed very much,  and confessed that,  as a parlia
ment man,  he was so used to that absurdity,  that he had
ceased to regard it ;  for that it was merely a mark of ap
probation to a speech already spoken ;  "  And,  in fact,
they only,"  cried he,  "  say Hear,  when there is nothing
more to be heard !"

Then,  still looking at the scene before him,  he suddenly
laughed,  and said,  "  I must not,  to Miss Burney,  make
this remark,  but — it is observable that in the Kings
Box sit the Hawkesbury family,  while,  next to the
Speaker,  who is here as a sort of Representative of the
King,  sits Major Scot!"

I knew his inference,  of Court influence in favour of
Mri Hastings,  but I thought it best to let it pass quietly.
I knew,  else,  I should only be supposed under the same
influence myself.

Looking still on,  he next noticed the two Archbishops.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  57

"  And sec,"  cried he,  "the Archbishop of York,  Mark-
ham, — see how he affects to read the articles of impeach
ment,  as if he was still open to either side !  My good
Lord Archbishop  !  your Grace might,  with perfect safety,
spare your eyes,  for your mind has been made up upon
this subject before ever it was investigated.  He holds
Hastings to be the greatest man in the world — for Hast
ings promoted the interest of his son in the East Indies 1"
Somewhat sarcastic,  this;  but I had as little time as
power for answering,  since now,  and suddenly,  his eye
dropped down upon poor Mr.  Hastings :  the expression
of his face instantly lost the gaiety and ease with which
it had addressed me ;  he stopped short in his remarks ;
he fixed his eyes steadfastly on this new,  and but too inte
resting object,  and after viewing him some time in a sort
of earnest silence,  he suddenly exclaimed,  as if speaking
to himself,  and from an impulse irresistible — "What a
sight is that !  to see that man,  that small portion of
human clay,  that poor feeble machine of earth,  enclosed
now in that little space,  brought to that Bar,  a prisoner
in a spot six foot square — and to reflect on his late
power !  Nations at his command !  Princes prostrate at

his feet ! — What a change  !  how must he feel it ! "

He stopped,  and I said not a word.  I was glad to see
him thus impressed ;  I hoped it might soften his enmity.
I found,  by his manner,  that he had never,  from the com
mittee box,  looked at him.

He broke forth again,  after a pause of some length, —
"  Wonderful indeed  !  almost past credibility,  is such a
reverse !  He that,  so lately,  had the Eastern World
nearly at his beck ;  he,  under whose tyrant power princes
and potentates sunk and trembled ;  he,  whose authority

was without the reach of responsibility  ! "

Again he stopped,  seeming struck,  almost beyond the
power of speech,  with meditative commiseration;  but
then,  suddenly rousing himself,  as if recollecting;  his
"almost blunted purpose/'  he passionately exclaimed,
"O could those — the thousands,  the millions,  who have

58 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

groaned and languished under the iron rod of his oppres
sions — could they but — whatever region they inhabit — be
permitted one dawn of light to look into this Hall,  and
see him there  !  There — where he now stands — it might
prove,  perhaps,  some recompense for their sufferings !"

I can hardly tell you,  my dearest Susan,  how shocked
I felt at these words  !  words so hard,  and following sen
sations so much more pitying and philosophic  !  I cannot
believe Mr.  Hastings guilty ;  I feel in myself a strong
internal evidence of his innocence,  drawn from all I have
seen of him  ;  I can only regard the prosecution as a party
affair;  but yet,  since his adversaries now openly stake
their names,  fame,  and character against him,  I did not
think it decent to intrude such an opinion.  I could only
be sorry,  and silent.

Still he looked at him,  earnest in rumination,  and as if
unable to turn away his eyes  ;  and presently he again
exclaimed,  "  How wonderful an instance of the instability
of mortal power is presented in that object !  From pos
sessions so extensive,  from a despotism so uncontrolled,
to see him now there,  in that small circumference  !  In the
history of human nature how memorable will be the
records of this day  !  a day that brings to the great tribunal
of the nation a man whose power,  so short a time since,
was of equal magnitude with his crimes !"

Good Heaven  !  thought I,  and do you really believe all
this?  Can Mr.  Hastings appear to you such a monster?
and are you not merely swayed by party  ?  I could not
hear him without shuddering,  nor see him thus in earnest
without alarm.  I thought myself no longer bound to
silence,  since I saw,  by the continuance as well as by the
freedom of his exclamations,  he conceived me of the same
sentiments with himself;  and therefore I hardily resolved
to make known to him that mistake,  which,  indeed,  was a
liberty that seemed no longer impertinent,  but a mere act
of justice and honesty,

His very expressive pause,  his eyes still steadfastly
fixed on Mr.  Hastings,  gave me ample opportunity for

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  59

speaking ;  though I had some little difficulty how to get
out what T wished to say.  However,  in the midst of his
reverie,  I broke forth,  but not without great hesitation,
and,  very humbly,  I said,  "  Could you pardon me,  Mr.
Wyndham,  if I should forget,  for a moment,  that you are
a Committee man,  and speak to you frankly?"

He looked surprised,  but laughed at the question,  and
very eagerly called out  "  O yes,  yes,  pray speak out,  I beg
it!"

"Well,  then,  may I venture to say to you,  that I believe
it utterly impossible for any one,  not particularly engaged
on the contrary side,  ever to enter a court of justice,  and
not instantly,  and involuntarily,  wish well to the pri

soner

His surprise subsided by this general speech,  which I
had not courage to put in a more pointed way,  and he
very readily answered,  "  'Tis natural,  certainly,  and what
must almost unavoidably be the first impulse  ;  yet,  where
justice "

I stopped him ;  I saw I was not comprehended,  and
thought else he might say something to stop me.

"  May I,"  I said,  "  go yet a little farther  ?"

"  Yes,"  cried he,  with a very civil smile,  "  and I feel an
assent beforehand."

"  Supposing then,  that even you,  if that may be sup
posed,  could be divested of all knowledge of the particu
lars of this affair,  and in the same state of general igno
rance that I confess myself to be,  and could then,  like
me,  have seen Mr.  Hastings make his entrance into this
Court,  and looked at him when he was brought to that
bar;  not even you,  Mr.  Wyndham,  could then have
reflected on such a vicissitude for him,  on all he has left
and all he has lost,  and not have given him,  like me,  all
your best wishes the moment you beheld him."

The promised assent came not,  though he was too civil
to contradict me ;  but still I saw he understood me only
in a general sense.  I feared going farther:  a weak advo
cate is apt to be a mischievous one ;  and,  as I knew no-

60 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

thing,  it was not to a professed enemy I could talk of
what I only believed.

Recovering,  now,  from the strong emotion with which
the sight of Mr.  Hastings had filled him,  he looked again
around the Court,  and pointed out several of the principal
characters present,  with arch and striking remarks upon
each of them,  all uttered with high spirit,  but none with
ill-nature.

"  Pitt,"  cried he,  "is not here! — a noble stroke that for
the annals of his administration  !  A trial is brought on by
the whole House of Commons in a body,  and he is absent
at the very opening  !  However,"  added he,  with a very
meaning laugh,  "  I'm glad of it,  for  'tis to his eternal dis
grace  !"

Mercy  !  thought I,  what a friend to kindness is party!

"  Do you see Scot?"  cried he.

"No,  I never saw him ;  pray show him me."

"  There he is,  in green ;  just now by the Speaker,  now
moved by the Committee ;  in two minutes more he will
be somewhere else,  skipping backwards and forwards;
what a grasshopper it is !"

"  I cannot look at him,"  cried I,  "  without recollecting
a very extraordinary letter from him,  that I read last sum
mer in the newspaper,  where he answers some attack that
he says has been made upon him,  because the term is
used of  '  a very insignificant fellow ;'  and he printed two
or three letters in the Public Advertiser,  in following days,
to prove,  with great care and pains,  that he knew it was
all meant as an abuse of himself,  from those words  !"

"And what,"  cried he,  laughing,  "do you say to that
notion now you see him  ?"

"That no one,"  cried I,  examining him with my glass,
"can possibly dispute his claim  !"

What pity that Mr.  Hastings should have trusted his
cause to so frivolous an agent !  I believe,  and indeed it is
the general belief,  both of foes and friends,  that to his
officious and injudicious zeal the present prosecution is
wholly owing.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  61

Next,  Mr.  Wyndham pointed out Mr.  Francis to me.
'Tis a singular circumstance,  that the friend who most
loves and the enemy who most hates Mr.  Hastings
should bear the same name  !*  Mr.  Wyndham,  with all
the bias of party,  gave me then the highest character of
this Mr.  Francis,  whom he called one of the most ill-used
of men.  Want of documents how to answer forced me
to be silent,  oppositely as I thought.  But it was a very
unpleasant situation to me,  as I saw that Mr.  Wyndham
still conceived me to have no other interest than a com
mon,  and probably to his mind,  a weak compassion for
the prisoner  —  that prisoner who,  frequently looking
around,  saw me,  I am certain,  and saw with whom I  \vas>
engaged !

The subject of Mr.  Francis again drew him back to
Mr.  Hastings,  but with more severity of mind.  "  A
prouder heart,"  cried he,  "an ambition more profound,
were never,  I suppose,  lodged in any mortal mould than
in that man  !  With what a port he entered  !  did you ob
serve him  ?  his air !  I saw not his face,  but his air !  his
port !"

"  Surely there,"  cried I,  "he could not be to blame  !
He comes upon his defence ;  ought he to look as if he
gave himself up  ?"

"Why,  no;  'tis true he must look what vindication to
himself he can;  we must not blame him there."

Encouraged by this little concession,  I resolved to ven
ture farther,  and once more said  "May I again,  Mr.
Wyndham,  forget that you are a Committee-man,  and
say something not lit for a Committee-man to hear  ?"

"Oyes!"  cried he,  laughing very much,  and looking
extremely curious.

"  i must fairly,  then,  own myself utterly ignorant upon
this subject,  and — and — may I go on?"

*  Mr.  Hastings's enemy was Mr.,  afterwards Sir Philip Francis,
by some persons supposed to have been the author of  "  Junius's
Letters."  The friend of Mr.  Hastings here alluded to was
Clement Francis,  Esq.,  of Aylsham in Norfolk,  who married
Charlotte,  fourth daughter of Dr.  Burney.

62   .          DIARY AND LETTERS        [PART II.

"  I beg you will !"

"Well,  then, — and originally prepossessed in favour of
the object !"

He quite started,  and with a look of surprise from
which all pleasure was separated,  exclaimed — "Indeed!'*

"Yes!"  cried I,  "  'tis really true,  and really out,
now !"

"  For Mr.  Hastings,  prepossessed  !"  he repeated,  in a
tone that seemed to say — do you not mean Mr.  Burke?

"  Yes,"  I said,  "  for Mr.  Hastings  !  But I should not,
to you,  have presumed to own it just at this time, — so
little as I am able to do honour to my prepossession by
any materials to defend it, — but that you have given me
courage,  by appearing so free from all malignity in the
business.  'Tis,  therefore,  your own fault !"

"But can you speak seriously,"  cried he,  "when you
say you know nothing of this business  ?"

"  Very seriously :  I never entered into it at all ;  it was
always too intricate to tempt me."

"  But,  surely you must have read the charges  ?"

"No;  thev are so long,  I had never the courage to
begin."

The conscious look with which he heard this,  brought
— all too late — -to my remembrance,  that one of them was
drawn up,  and delivered in the House,  by himself!  I
was really very sorry to have been so unfortunate ;  but I
had no way to call back the words,  so was quiet,  perforce.

"Come,  then,"  cried he,  emphatically,  "to hear Burke!
come and listen to him,  and you will be mistress of the
whole !  Hear Burke,  and read the charges of the Be
gums,  and then you will form your judgment without
difficulty."

I would rather  (thought I)  hear him upon any other
subject :  but I made no answer;  I only said,  "  Certainly,
I can gain nothing by what is going forward to-day.  I
meant to come to the opening now,  but it seems rather
like the shutting up!"

He was not to be put off.  "  You will come,  however,
to hear Burke?  To hear truth,  reason,  justice,  elo-

1788}  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  63

quence!  You will then see,  in other colours,  'That
Man !'  There is more cruelty,  more oppression,  more
tyranny,  in that little machine,  with an arrogance,  a self-
confidence,  unexampled,  unheard of."

"  Indeed,  sir !"  cried I ;  "  that does not appear,  to those
who know him ;  and — I — know him a little."

"  Do you  ?"  cried he,  earnestly ;  "  personally,  do you
know him  ?"

"  Yes ;  and from that knowledge arose this prepos
session I have confessed."

"  Indeed  !  what you have seen of him have you then so
much approved  ?"

"  Yes,  very much !  I must own the truth f*

"  But you have not seen much of him?"

"  No,  not lately.  My first knowledge of him was
almost immediately upon his coming from India :  I had
heard nothing of all these accusations  ;  I had never been
in the way of hearing them,  and knew not even that
there were any to be heard.  I saw him,  therefore,  quite
without prejudice,  for or against him  ;  and indeed,  I
must own,  he soon gave me a strong interest in his
favour."

The surprise with which he heard me must have silenced
me on the subject,  had it not been accompanied with an
attention so earnest as to encourage me still to proceed.
It is evident to me that this Committee live so much shut
up with one another,  that they conclude all the world of
the same opinions with themselves,  and universally ima
gine that the tyrant they think themselves pursuing is a
monster in every part of his life,  and held in contempt
and abhorrence by all mankind.  Could I then be sorry,
seeing this,  to contribute my small mite towards clearing,
at least,  so very wide a mistake?  On the contrary,  when
I saw he listened,  I was most eager to give him all I
could to hear.

"  I found him,"  I continued,  "  so mild,  so gentle,  so
extremely pleasing in his manners "

"  Gentle  !"  cried he,  with quickness.

64 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

"  Yes,  indeed  ;  gentle,  even to humility."
«'  Humility  ?  Mr.  Hastings and humility  !"
"  Indeed it is true ;    he is perfectly diffident in the
whole of his manner,  when engaged in conversation ;  and
so much struck was I,  at that very time,  by seeing him
so simple,  so unassuming,  when just returned from a
government that had accustomed him to a power superior
to our monarchs here,  that it produced an effect upon
my mind in his favour which nothing can erase I"

"  O yes,  yes  !"  cried he,  with great energy,  fc you will
give it up  !  you must lose it,  must give it up !  it will be
plucked away,  rooted wholly out of your mind 1"
"  Indeed,  sir,"  cried I,  steadily,  "  I believe not!"
*4You believe not?"  repeated he,  with added anima
tion  ;  "  then there will be the more glory in making you
a convert !"

If  "conversion"  is the word,  thought I,  I would rather
make than be made.

"But,  Mr.  Wyndham,"  cried I,  "all my amazement
now is at your condescension in speaking to me upon this
business at all,  when I have confessed to you my total
ignorance of the subject,  and my original prepossession in
favour of the object.  Why do you not ask rne when I was
at the play?  and how I liked the last opera?"

He laughed ;  and we talked on a little while in that
strain,  till again,  suddenly fixing his eyes on poor Mr.
Hastings,  his gaiety once more vanished,  and he gravely
and severely examined his countenance.  "  'Tis surely,"
cried he,  "  an unpleasant one."  He does not know,  I
suppose,  'tis reckoned like his own !

"  How should he,"  cried I,  "  look otherwise than un
pleasant here  ?"

"True,"  cried he;  "yet still,  I think,  his features,  his
look,  his whole expression,  unfavourable to him.  I never
saw him but once before;  that was at the bar of the
House of Commons  ;  and there,  as Burke admirably said,
he looked,  when first he glanced an eye against him,  like
a hungry tiger,  ready to howl for his prey  !"

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  65

"Well,"  cried I,  "I am sure he does not look fierce
now!  Contemptuous,  a little,  I think he does look!'*

I was sorry 1 used this word  ;  yet its truth forced it to
escape me.  He did not like it ;  he repeated it ;  he could
not but be sure the contempt could only be levelled at his
prosecutors.  I feared discussion,  and flew oft'  as fast as 1
could,  to softer ground.  "  It was not,"  cried I,  "  with
that countenance he gave me my prepossession !  Very
differently,  indeed,  he looked then  !"

"  And can he ever look pleasant  ?  can that face ever
obtain an expression that is pleasing?"

"  Yes,  indeed and in truth,  and very pleasant !  It was
in the country I first saw him,  and without any restraint
on his part ;  I saw him,  therefore,  perfectly natural and
easy.  And no one,  let me say,  could so have seen him
without being pleased with him ;  his quietness and sere
nity,  joined to his intelligence and information "

"  His information  ? — In what way  ?"

"  In such a way as suited his hearer :  not upon com
mittee business ! — of all that I knew nothing.  The only
conversation in which I could mix was upon India,  con
sidered simply as a country in which he had travelled ;
and his communications upon the people,  the customs,
habits,  cities,  and whatever I could name,  were so in
structive as well as entertaining,  that I think I never re
collect gaining more intelligence,  or more pleasantly con
veyed,  from any conversation in which I ever have been
engaged."

To this he listened with an attention that but for the
secret zeal which warmed me must have silenced and
shamed me.  I am satisfied this committee have con
cluded Mr.  Hastings a mere man of blood,  with slaughter
and avarice for his sole ideas !  The surprise with which
he heard this just testimony to his social abilities was only
silent from good-breeding,  but his eyes expressed what
his tongue withheld ;  something that satisfied me he con
cluded I had undesignedly been duped by him.

I answered this silence by saying  "  There was no object

VOL.  IV.  F

66 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

for hypocrisy,  for it was quite in retirement I met with
him :  it was not lately ;  it is near two years since I have
seen him ;  he had therefore no point to gain with me,  nor
was there any public character,  nor any person whatever,
that could induce him to act a part;  yet was he all I have
said — informing,  communicative,  instructive,  and at the
same time gentle and highly pleasing."

He seemed now overpowered into something like be
lieving me,  and,  in a voice of concession,  said,  "  Certainly,
from a man who has been in so great a station — from any
man that has been an object of expectation — there is
nothing so winning as gentleness of manners."

I cannot say how even this little speech encouraged
me  :  I went on with fresh vigour.  (( Indeed,"  I cried,  "  I
was myself so entirely surprised by that mildness,  that I
remember carrying my admiration of it even to his dress,
which was a very plain green coat ;  and I asked the friend
at whose house we met,  when I saw his uniform sim
plicity,  whether the Governor-General of Bengal had not
had that coat made up before he went to the East,  and
upon putting it on again when he returned,  had not lost
all memory of the splendour of the time and the scenes
that had passed in the intermediate space."

"Well,"  said he,  very civilly,  "  I begin the less to
wonder,  now,  that you have adhered to his side ;
but "

"To see him,  then,"  cried I,  stopping his but, — "to
see him brought to that Bar!  and kneeling at it! — .
indeed,  Mr.  Wyndham,  I must own to you,  I could
hardly keep my seat — hardly forbear rising and running
out of the Hall."

"  Why,  there,"  cried he,  « I agree with you  !  'Tis cer
tainly a humiliation not to be wished or defended  :  it is,
indeed,  a mere ceremony,  a mere formality;  but it is a
mortifying one,  and so obsolete,  so unlike the practices
of the times,  so repugnant from a gentleman to a gentle
man,  that I myself looked another way  :  it hurt me,  and I
wished it dispensed with."

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  67

"  O,  Mr.  Wyndham,"  cried I,  surprised and pleased,
"  and can you be so liberal  ?"

"  Yes,"  cried he,  laughing ;  "  but  'tis only to take
you in!"

Afterwards he asked what his coat was,  whether blue
or purple ;  and said,  "  Is it not customary for a prisoner
to come in black  ?"

"  Whether or not,"  quoth I,  "  I am heartily glad he
has not done it ;  why should he seem so dismal,  so shut
out from hope  ?"

"  Why,  I believe he is in the right !  I think he has
judged that not ill."

"  O,  don't be so candid,"  cried I,  "  I beg you not"
tf Yes,  yes,  I must;  and you know the reason  !"  cried
he,    gaily ;   but presently exclaimed,  "  One unpleasant
thing belonging to being a manager is that I must now
go and show myself in the committee."

And then he very civilly bowed,  and went down to his
box,  leaving me much persuaded that I had never yet
been engaged in a conversation so curious,  from its cir
cumstances,  in my life.  The warm well-wisher myself of
the prisoner,  though formerly the warmest admirer of his
accuser,  engaged,  even at his trial,  and in his presence,  iu
so open a discussion with one of his principal prose
cutors  ;  and the Queen herself in full view,  unavoidably
beholding me in close and eager conference with an
avowed member of opposition  !

These circumstances made me at first enter into dis
course with Mr.  Wyndham with the utmost reluctance;
but though I wished to shun him,  I could not,  when
once attacked,  decline to converse with him.  It would
but injure the cause of Mr.  Hastings to seem to fear
hearing the voice of his accusers ;  and it could but be
attributed to undue court-influence had I avoided any
intercourse with an acquaintance so long ago established
as a member of the opposition.

Long since,  indeed,  when I considered with myself the
accidents by which I might occasionally be thrown in the

F2

68 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

way of the Court adversaries,  I formed this resolution : —
To let them see no difference whatsoever in my behaviour,
but to conduct myself uniformly amongst them,  just
as I had done formerly when I resided in St.  Martin's-
street.

I have the satisfaction to be now confirmed in this re
solve,  by having stated my situation with respect to this
very conference to Mr.  Smelt.  Indeed,  when once I had
begun with Mr.  Wyndham,  and forced the barriers to our
conference which rendered its opening distressing to me,
I found myself impelled to proceed,  not only by the
vivacity with which he drew me on,  and the unalterable
good-humour and good-breeding with which he encou
raged me to open to him ;  but by a pleasure past expres
sion which I experienced,  in the opportunity it gave me
to speak favourably of a man so oppressed,  to one of his
oppressors.  I soon saw Mr.  Wyndham harboured no
personal rancour :  he was a stranger to the very person of
Mr.  Hastings,  and wholly ignorant of his character in
private and social life.  I was happy in those points to
be permitted to give him some intelligence,  and I saw by
the surprise with which he listened that he had imagined
Mr.  Hastings as mean in his parts,  and as disagreeable in
his manners,  as he believes him to be cruel in his nature
and worthless in his principles.

How to account for the currency of these notions is
past all conjecture  ;  but the whole truth must soon appear.
Meanwhile,  I see in Mr.  Wyndham a man of a high and
generous spirit,  who considers himself as a friend of the
public in bringing to justice and to punishment a public
enemy.

In the midst of the opening of a trial such as this,  so
important to the country as well as to the individual who
is tried,  what will you say to a man — a member of the
House of Commons — who kept exclaiming almost per
petually,  just at my side,  "  What a bore  !— -  when will it be
over? — Must one come any more? — I had a great mind
not to have come at all—Who's that?— Lady Hawkes-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  69

bury and the Copes? — Yes. — A pretty girl,  Kitty. — Well,
when will they have done? — I wish they'd call the ques
tion — I should vote it a bore at once !"

Just such exclamations as these were repeated,  without
intermission,  till the gentleman departed :  and who should
it be that spoke with so much legislative wisdom but Mr.
W !

In about two or three hours — this reading still lasting
— Mr.  Crutchley came to me again.  He,  too,  was so
wearied,  that he was departing ;  but he stayed some time
to talk over our constant topic — my poor Mrs.  Thrale.
How little does she suspect the interest I unceasingly
take in her — the avidity with which I seize every oppor
tunity to gather the smallest intelligence concerning her  !

One little trait of Mr.  Crutchley,  so characteristic of
that queerness which distinguishes him,  I must mention.
He said he questioned whether he should come any more  :
I told him I had imagined the attendance of every mem
ber to be indispensable.  "  No,"  cried he,  "  ten to one if
another day they are able to make a house 1"

"  The Lords,  however,  I suppose,  must corne  ?"

"  Not unless they like it."

"  But I hear if they do not attend they have no tickets."

"Why,  then,  Miss Primrose and Miss Cowslip must
stay away too !"

I had the pleasure to find him entirely for Mr.  Has
tings,  and to hear he had constantly voted on his side
through every stage of the business.  He is a very inde
pendent man,  and a man of real good character,  and,
with all his oddity,  of real understanding.  We compared
notes very amicably upon this subject,  and both agreed
that those who looked for every flaw in the conduct of a
man in so high and hazardous a station,  ought first to have
\veighed his merits and his difficulties.

A far more interesting conference,  however,  was now
awaiting me.  Towards the close of the day Mr.  Wynd-
ham very unexpectedly came again from the Committee-
Box,  and seated himself by my side.  I was glad to see

70 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

by this second visit that my frankness had not offended
him.  He began,  too,  in so open and social a manner,
that I was satisfied he forgave it.

"  I have been/'  cried he,  "  very busy since I left you —
writing — reading — making documents."

I saw he was much agitated ;  the gaiety which seems
natural to him was flown,  and had left in its place the
most evident and unquiet emotion.  I looked a little sur
prised,  and rallying himself,  in a few moments he inquired
if I wished for any refreshment,  and proposed fetching
me some.  But,  well as I liked him for a conspirator,  I
could not break bread with him  !

I thought now all was over of communication between
us,  but I was mistaken.  He spoke for a minute or two
upon the crowd — early hour of coming — hasty breakfast
ing,  and such general nothings;  and then,  as if involun
tarily,  he returned to the sole subject on his mind.  "  Our
plan,"  cried he,  "  is all changing  :  we have all been busy
- — we are coming into a new method.  I have been
making preparations — I did not intend speaking for a
considerable time — not till after the circuit — but now,  I
may be called upon,  I know not how soon."

Then he stopped — ruminating — and I let him ruminate
without interruption for some minutes,  when he broke
forth into these reflections  :  "  How strange,  how infatu
ated a frailty has man with respect to the future  !  Be
our views,  our designs,  our anticipations what they may,
wo are never prepared for it  ! — it always takes us by sur
prise — always comes before we look for it !"

He stopped ;  but I waited his explanation without
speaking,  and,  after pausing thoughtfully some time,  he
went on : —

"This day — for which we have all been waiting so
anxiously,  so earnestly — the day for which we have fought,
for which we have struggled — a day,  indeed,  of national
glory,  in bringing to this great tribunal a delinquent from
so high an office — this day,  so much wished,  has seemed
to me,  to the last moment,  so distant,  that now — now that

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAV.  7J.

it is actually arrived,  it takes me as if I had never thought
of it before — it comes upon me all unexpected,  and finds
me unready !"

Still I said nothing,  for I did not fully comprehend
him,  till he added,  "  I will not be so affected as to say to
you that I have made no preparation — that I have not
thought a little upon what I have to do ;  yet now that
the moment is actually come

.Again he broke off;  but a generous sentiment was
bursting from him,  and would not be withheld.

"  It has brought me,"  he resumed,  "  a feeling of which
I am not yet quite the master !  What I have said hitherto,
when I have spoken in the house,  has been urged and
stimulated by the idea of pleading for the injured and the
absent,  and that gave me spirit.  Nor do I tell you  (with
a half-conscious smile)  that the ardour of the prosecution
went for nothing — a prosecution in favour of oppressed
millions  !  But now,  when I am to speak here,  the thought
of that man,  close to my side — culprit as he is — that man
on whom all the odium is to fall — gives me,  I own,  a
sensation that almost disqualifies me beforehand  !"

Ah,  Mr.  Wyndham  !  thought I,  with feelings so gene
rous even where enmity is so strong,  how came you ever
engaged in so cruel,  so unjust a cause  ?

I could almost suppose he saw me think this,  though
I uttered never a word  ;  but it may be that a new set of
reflections were pouring in upon him irresistibly,  for he
presently went on  : —

"  'Twas amazing to myself how I got into this business  !
I thought it at first inextricable,  but once begun — the
glow of a public cause — a cause to support, — to revive,
to redress helpless multitudes  !"

«  O,  Mr.  Wyndham  !"  cried I,  «  you chill me  !"

"But surely,"  cried he,  "you cannot be an earnest
advocate in such a cause  ?"

"I am so unwilling,"  cried I,  "  to think so ill of it!"

"  But is it possible Mr.  Burke's representations should
have so little effect upon you  ?"

72 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

"  I am the friend of Mr.  Burke,"  cried I,  eagerly,  «  all
the time !  Mr.  Burke has no greater admirer ! — and that
is precisely what disturbs me most in this business!"

"  Well,"  cried he,  in a tone extremely good-humoured
and soft,  "  I am then really sorry for you ! — to be pulled
two ways is of all things the most painful.''

'*  Indeed it is :  and,  in this very question,  I wish so
well one way,  and have long thought so highly the other,
that I scarce know,  at times,  what even to wish."

"  That doubt is,  of all states the worst:  it will soon,
however,  be over ;  you must be all one way the moment
you have heard Burke."

"  I am not quite so sure of that!"  cried I,  boldly.

"  No?"  cried he,  looking amazed at me.

"  No,  indeed !  But if it seems strange to you that I
should own this,  you must impute it all to the want of
that malignity which I cannot see in you !"

The odd civility of this speech,  which wras a literal
truth,  again brought back his gaiety,  and he made some
general comments upon the company and the place.

"  What an assembly  !"  he cried  ;  "  how brilliant,  how
striking !  When I look around and think of speaking
here — rank,  nobility,  talents,  beauty. — Well,  however,  'tis
worth,  and nobly worth,  all our pains and all our powers."

"  Now again,  Mr.  Wyndham,"  cried I,  "  I am going
to beg that you will forget that you are a Committee-man
while I say something more to you."

"  Surely  ! — I beg you will speak  !"

"  Well,  supposing you out of the question,  I cannot,  as
I sit here,  look down upon those two Boxes,  and not think
it a little unfair — at least very hard — for Mr.  Hastings to
see on one side only feed hirelings,  and men little expe
rienced and scarce at all known,  and on the other almost
all the talents of the nation!  Can that be fair?"

"  O yes,"  cried he,  "  have no apprehensions from that !
A lawyer,  with his quirks and his quibbles,  and his
cross questions and examinations,  will overset and master
the ablest orator,  unpractised in their ways."

1788]  OP MADAME D'ARBLAY.  73

I hoped there was some truth in this,  and therefore
accepted the consolation.

"  That this day was ever brought about,"  continued he.
"  must ever remain a noble memorial of courage and per
severance in the Commons.  Every possible obstacle has
been thrown in our way — every art of Government has
been at work to impede us — nothing has been left untried
to obstruct us — every check and clog of power and
influence."

"  Not by him,"  cried I,  looking at poor Mr.  Hastings ;
"  he has raised no impediments — he has been wholly
careless."

"  Come,"  cried he with energy,  "  and hear Burke  ! —
Come but and hear him! — 'tis an eloquence irresistible 1
— a torrent that sweeps all before it with the force of a
\vhirlwind  !  It will cure you,  indeed,  of your prepos
session,  but it will give you truth and right in its place.
What discoveries has he not made!  —  what gulfs has
he not dived into  !  Come and hear him,  and your con
flict will end !"

I could hardly stand this,  and,  to turn it off,  asked him
if Mr.  Hastings was to make his own defence  ?

"  No,"  he answered,  "  he will only speak by counsel.
But do not regret that,  for his own sake,  as he is not used
to public speaking,  and has some impediment in his
speech besides.  He writes wonderfully — there he shines
— and with a facility quite astonishing.  Have you ever
happened to see any of his writings  ?"

"  No:  only one short account,  which he calls Memoirs
relative to some India transactions,  and that struck me to
be extremely unequal — in some places strong and finely
expressed,  in others obscure and scarce intelligible."

"  That is just the case — that ambiguity runs through
him in everything.  Burke has found an admirable word
for it in the Persian tongue,  for which we have no trans
lation,  but it means an intricacy involved so deep as to
be nearly unfathomable — an artificial entanglement.'1

Then he spoke the original word,  but I do not presume
to write Persian.

74 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

I took this occasion to mention to him his friend Dr.
Johnson,  in observing how little lenity he ever had to
more words than matter.  He looked with a respectful
attention when I named that honoured name,  that gratified
my own respect for it.  He then said he must be gone,
and show himself again in the committee.

I inquired how it was all to end — whether this reading
was to continue incessantly,  or any speaking was to
follow it?

"I have not inquired how that is/'  he answered,  "but
I believe you will now soon be released."

"  And will the Chancellor speak to adjourn  ?"

"  I cannot tell what the form may be,  or how we are
to be dissolved.  I think myself there is nothing more
difficult than how to tell people they may go about their
business.  I remember.,  when I was in the militia,  it
was just what I thought the most awkward,  when I had
done with my men.  Use gives one the habit;  and I
found,  afterwards,  there was a regular mode for it :  but,  at
first,  I found it very embarrassing how to get rid of them."

Nothing excites frankness like frankness  ;  and I an
swered him in return with a case of my own.  "When
first I came to my present residence I was perpetually,"
I said,  f<  upon the point of making a blunder with the
Queen  ;  for when,  after she had honoured me with any
conversation,  she used to say,  *  Now I won't keep you —
now I will detain you no longer/  I was always ready
to answer,  «  Ma'am,  I am in no haste  ! — ma'am,  I don't
wish to go !'  for I was not,  at first,  aware that it was only
her mode of dismissing people from her presence."

Again he was going :  but glancing his eyes once more
down upon Mr.  Hastings,  he almost sighed — he fetched,
at least,  a deep breath,  while he exclaimed with strong
emotion,  "What a place for a man to stand in to hear
what he has to hear! — 'tis almost too much  !"

What pity,  my Susan and my Fredy,  that a man who
could feel such impulsive right in the midst of party rage,
should bow down to any party,  and not abide by such
impulse  !

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  75

It would not be easy to tell you how touching at such
a time was the smallest concession from an avowed oppo
nent,  and I could not help exclaiming again,  "  O,
Mr.  Wyndham,  you must not be so liberal !"

"  O !''  cried he,  smiling,  and recovering himself,  "  'tis
all the deeper malice,  only to draw you in !"

Still,  however,  he did not go:  he kept gazing upon
Mr.  Hastings till he seemed almost fascinated to the
spot;  and presently after,  growing more and more open
in his discourse,  he began to talk to me of Sir Elijah
Impey.  I presume my dearest friends,  little as they hear
of politics and state business,  must yet know that the
House of Commons is threatening Sir Elijah with an im
peachment,  to succeed that of Mr.  Hastings,  and all upon
East India transactions of the same date.

When he had given me his sentiments upon this sub
ject,  which I had heard with that sort of quietness that
results from total ignorance of the matter,  joined to total
ignorance of the person concerned,  he drew a short com
parison,  which nearly,  from him,  and at such a moment,
drew the tears from my eyes — nearly do I say  ? — indeed
more than that !

"  Sir Elijah,"  cried he,  "  knows how to go to work,
and by getting the lawyers to side with him professionally,
has set about his defence in the most artful manner.  He
is not only wicked,  but a very pitiful fellow.  Let him
but escape fine or imprisonment,  and he will pocket all
indignity,  and hold himself happy in getting off :  but
Hastings  (again looking steadfastly at him) — Hastings
has feeling — 'tis a proud feeling,  an ambitious feeling —
but feeling he has  !  Hastings — come to him what may
— fine,  imprisonment,  whatsoever is inflicted — all will be
nothing.  The moment of his punishment — I think it,
upon my honour ! — was the moment that brought him to
that Bar !"

When he said ft I think it,  upon my honour,"  he laid
his hand on his breast,  as if he implied  "  I acquit him
henceforward."

76 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

Poor Mr.  Hastings  !  One generous enemy he has at
least,  who pursues him with public hate,  but without
personal malignity !  yet,  sure I feel he can deserve
neither!

I did not spare to express my sense of this liberality
from a foe ;  for,  indeed,  the situation I was in,  and the
sight of Mr.  Hastings,  made it very affecting to me.  He
\vas affected too,  himself;  but presently,  rising,  he said
\vith great quickness,  "  1 must shake all this off;  I must
have done with it — dismiss it — forget that he is there.'*

"  O,  no,"  cried I,  earnestly,  "  do not forget it !"

"  Yes,  yes  ;  I must."

"No,  remember it rather,"  cried I;  "I could almost
(putting up my hands as if praying)  do thus  ;  and then,
Jike poor Mr.  Hastings just now to the house,  drop;
down on my knees to you,  to call out t Remember it."

"Yes,  yes,"  cried he,  precipitately,  "how else shall I
go on  ?  I must forget that He is there,  and that you are
here."

And then he hurried down to his Committee.

Was it not a most singular scene  ?

I had afterwards to relate great part of this to the
Queen herself.  She saw me engaged in such close dis
course,  and with such apparent interest on both sides,
with Mr.  Wyndham,  that I knew she must else form
conjectures innumerable.  So candid,  so liberal is the
mind of the Queen,  that she not only heard me with
the most favourable attention towards Mr.  Wyndham,
but was herself touched even to tears by the relation.

You,  my beloved friends,  absent from the scene of
action,  and only generally interested in it,  can form no
idea of the warmth you would feel upon the subject,  were
you here,  and in the midst of it.

We stayed but a short time after this last conference  ;
for nothing more was attempted than reading on the
charges and answers,  in the same useless manner.
******

The interest of this trial was so much upon my mind,

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  77

that I have not kept even a memorandum of what
passed from the 13th of February to the day when I
went again to Westminster Hall ;  nor,  except renewing
the Friday Oratorios with Mrs.  Ord,  do I recollect one
circumstance.

The second time that the Queen,  who saw my wishes,
indulged me with one of her tickets,  and a permission of
absence for the Trial,  was to hear Mr.  Burke,  for whom
my curiosity and my interest stood the highest.

One ticket,  however,  would not do ;  I could not go
alone,  and the Queen had bestowed all her other tickets
before she discovered that this was a day in my particular
wishes.  She entered into my perplexity with a sweetness
the most gracious  ;  and when 1 knew not how to obviate
it,  commanded me to write to the Duchess of Ancaster,
and beg permission to be put under the wing of her
Grace,  or any of her friends that were going to the Hall.

The Duchess,  unluckily,  did not go,  from indispo
sition,  nor any of her family ;  but she sent me a very
obliging letter,  and another ticket from Sir Peter Burrell,
to use for a companion.

I fixed upon James,  who,  I knew,  wished to hear Mr.
Burke for once,  and we went together very comfortably,
and spent near three hours in a more social conversation,
after we were seated in the Chamberlain's Box,  than  \ve
had enjoyed since I quitted my home.

When the Managers,  who,  as before,  made the first
procession,  by entering their Box below us,  were all ar
ranged,  one from among them,  whom I knew not,  came
up into the seats of the House of Commons by our side,
and said,  "  Captain Burney,  I am very glad to see you."

"  How do you do,  sir  ?"  answered James ;  "  here I am,
come to see the fine show."

Upon this the attacker turned short upon his heel,  and
abruptly walked away,  descending into the Box,  which he
did not quit any more.

I inquired who he was ;  General Burgoyne,  James told
me.  "  A Manager !"  cried I,  "  and one of the chargers  !

78 DIARY AND LETTERS        [PART IL

and you treat the business of the Hall with such con
tempt to his face  !"

James laughed heartily at his own uncourtly address,
but would not repent,  though he acknowledged he saw
the offence his slight and slighting speech had given.

Fearful lest he should proceed in the same style with
my friend Mr.  Wyndham,  I kept as aloof as possible,  to
avoid his notice,  entreating James at the same time to
have the complaisance to be silent upon this subject,
should he discover me and approach.  My own senti
ments were as opposite to those of the Managers as his,
and I had not scrupled to avow honestly my dissent ;  but
I well knew Mr.  Wyndham might bear,  and even respect,
from a female,  the same openness of opposition that
might be highly offensive to him from a man.  But I
could obtain no positive promise ;  he would only com
promise with my request,  and agree not to speak unless
applied to first.  This,  however,  contented me ;  as Mr.
Wyndham was too far embarked in his undertaking to
solicit any opinion upon it from accidentally meeting any
common acquaintance.

From young Burke and his uncle Richard I had
bows from the Committee Box.  Mr.  Wyndham either
saw me not,  or was too much engaged in business to
ascend.

At length the Peers'  procession closed,  the Prisoner
was brought in,  and Mr.  Burke began his speech.  It
\vas the second day of his harangue ;  the first I had not
been able to attend.

All I had heard of his eloquence,  and all I had con
ceived of his great abilities,  was more than answered by
his performance.  Nervous,  clear,  and striking was almost
all that he uttered  :  the main business,,  indeed,  of his
coming forth was frequently neglected,  and not seldom
wholly lost;  but his excursions were so fanciful,  so enter
taining,  and so ingenious,  that no miscellaneous hearer,
like myself,  could blame them.  It is true he was un
equal,  but his inequality produced an effect which,  in so

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  79

long a speech,  was perhaps preferable to greater con
sistency,  since,  though it lost attention in its falling off,  it
recovered it with additional energy by some ascent un
expected and wonderful.  When he narrated,  he was easy,
flowing,  and natural ;  when he declaimed,  energetic,
warm,  and brilliant.  The sentiments he interspersed
were as nobly conceived as they were highly coloured  ;
his satire had a poignancy of wit that made it as enter
taining as it was penetrating;  his allusions and quo
tations,  as far as they were English and within my reach,
were apt and ingenious ;  and the wild and sudden flights
of his fancy,  bursting forth from his creative imagination
in language fluent,  forcible,  and varied,  had a charm
for my ear and my attention wholly new and perfectly
irresistible.

Were talents such as these exercised in the service of
truth,  unbiassed by party and prejudice,  how could we
sufficiently applaud their exalted possessor  ?  But though
frequently he made me tremble by his strong and horrible
representations,  his own violence recovered me,  by stig
matizing his assertions with personal ill-will and designing
illibt rality.  Yet,  at times I confess,  with all that 1 felt,
wished,  and thought concerning Mr.  Hastings,  the whirl
wind of his eloquence nearly drew me into its vortex.
I give no particulars of the speech,  because they will all
be printed.

The observations and whispers of our keen as well as
honest James,  during the whole,  were highly characteristic
and entertaining.  "When will he come to the point?" —
*'  These are mere words !" — "  This is all sheer detrac
tion  !" — "  All this is nothing to the purpose  !"  Sec.,  &c.

"  Well,  ma'am,  what say you to all this  ?  how have you
been entertained  ?"  cried a voice at my side ;  and I saw
Mr.  Crutchley,  who came round to speak to me.

"Entertained?"  cried I,  '' indeed,  not at all;  it is
quite too serious and too horrible for entertainment :  you
ask after my amusement as if I were at an opera or a
comedy."

"A comedy?"    repeated he,  contemptuously,  "no,  a

60 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

farce ;  'tis not high enough for a comedy.  To hear a
man rant such stuff.  But you should have been here the
first day he spoke ;  this is milk and honey to that.  He
said then,  '  His heart was as black — as — black !'  and
called him the Captain-general of iniquity."

"Hush!  hush!"  cried I,  for he spoke very loud;
"  that young man you see down there,  who is looking up,
is his son!"

"  I know it/'  cried he,  "and what do I care?"

How I knew Mr.  Crutchley again,  by his ready talent
of defiance,  and disposition to contempt!  We agreed,
however,  precisely in our serious opinions,  though we
differed in various modifications of them ;  and so we ever
did,  if I may say so,  when I add that I never knew him,
in any essential point,  vary from the strictest honour in
every notion he ever uttered.  He is,  indeed,  a singular
character;  good,  upright,  generous,  yet rough,  unpo
lished,  whimsical,  and fastidious;  believing all women at
his service for the sake of his estates,  and disbelieving any
would accept him for any other reason.  He wrongs both
them and himself by this conclusion.

I was very glad to meet with him again  ;  I have always
had an esteem for his worth,  and he had spent so much
time with me in a place I once so much loved,  that it
was soothing and pleasant to me to talk that and its inha
bitants over with him.

I was called aside from him by James,  to Samuel
Rose,  who was in the back of the Chamberlain's Box,
and so much formed and settled since I saw him,  that I
did not know him.

During this recollection scene Mr.  Crutchley retired,
and Mr.  Wyndham quitted his den,  and approached me,
with a smile of good-humour and satisfaction that made
me instantly exclaim,  «  No exultation,  Mr.  Wyndham,
no questions  ;  don't ask me what I think of the speech  ;
I can bear no triumph just now."

•'  No,  indeed,"  cried he very civilly,  "  I will not,  I pro
mise you,  and you may depend upon me."

He then spoke to James,  regretting with much polite-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  81

ness that he had seen so little of him when he was his
neighbour in Norfolk,  and attributing it to the load of
India business he had carried into the country to study.
I believe I have mentioned that Felbrig,  Mr.  Wyndham's
seat,  is within a few miles of my brother-in-law,  Mr.
Francis's house at Aylsham.

After this,  however,  ere we knew where we were,  we
began commenting upon the speech.  It was impossible
to refuse applause to its able delivery and skilful elo
quence;  I,  too,  who so long had been amongst the
warmest personal admirers of Mr.  Burke,  could least of
all withhold from him the mite of common justice.  In
talking over the speech,  therefore,  while I kept clear of
its purpose,  I gave to its execution the amplest praise ;
and I secretly grieved that I held back more blame than
1 had commendation to bestow.

He had the good breeding to accept it just as I
offered it,  without claiming more,  or endeavouring to
entangle me in my approbation.  He even checked him
self,  voluntarily,  when he was asking me some question of
my conversion,  by stopping short,  and saying,  "  But,  no,
it is not fair to press you ;  I must not do that."

"  You cannot,"  cried 1,  "  press me too much,  with
respect to my admiration of the ability of the speaker;
I never more wished to have written short-hand.  I must
content myself,  however,  that I have at least a long
memory."

He regretted very much that I had missed the rirst
opening of the speech,  and gave me some account of it,
adding,  I might judge what I had lost then by what I had
heard now.

I frankly confessed that the two stories which Mr.
Burke had narrated had nearly overpowered me;  they
were pictures of cruelty so terrible.

"But General Caillot,"  cried he,  smiling,  "the hero
of one of them,  you would be tempted to like :  he is as
mild,  as meek,  as gentle in his manners "

I saw he was going to say  "  As your Mr.  Hastings  ;*'

VOL.  IV.  G

82 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

but I interrupted him hastily,  calling out,  "  Hush  !  hush !
Mr.  Wyndham !  would you wish me in future to take to
nothing hut lions?"

He laughed,  but gave up the comparison,  and only
pointed out to me his Mr.  Francis,  with a very warm
eloge on his deserts,  and an animated reprobation of the
ill-usage he had met with in his own country;  finishing
with an exclamation against the  "  unwilling gratitude
of base mankind'''

"  How admirably,"  he continued,  "  did Burke intro
duce that quotation from Horace  !  I must not presume
to translate Latin to you,  but "

I assured him of his mistake,  and he proceeded in his
explanation.  It was apropos to the report that the
Begums themselves had thanked Mr.  Hastings for his
services to them ;  but they were thanks,  he said,  such
as these :  "  You have taken from us everything — light,
food,  and raiment — leave us,  however;  go,  and we yet
will thank you."

I told him it reminded me of a speech in the  '  Old
Woman's Magazine,'  where a poor gentleman,  during
the time that the women all wore immense hoops,  was
beat about so unmercifully in the streets,  that he ex
claimed,  "  Pray,  ladies,  let me but make interest to walk
in the kennel."

We then went into various other particulars of the
speech,  till Mr.  Wyndham observed that Mr.  Hastings
was looking up,  and,  after examining him some time,
said he did not like his countenance.

I could have told him that he is generally reckoned
extremely like himself;  but after such an observation I
would not venture,  and only said,  "  Indeed,  he is cruelly
altered :  it was not so he looked when I conceived for
him that prepossession I have owned to you."

"  Altered,  is he  ?"  cried he,  biting his lips and looking
somewhat shocked.

"Yes,  and who can wonder?  Indeed,  it is quite
affecting to see him sit there to hear such things."

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  83

"  I did not see him,"  cried he eagerly ;  "  I did not
think it right to look at him during the speech,  nor from
the Committee-Box ;  and,  therefore,  I constantly kept my
eyes another way."

I had a great inclination to beg he would recommend
a little of the same decency to some of his colleagues,
among whom are three or four that even stand on the
benches to examine him,  during the severest strictures,
with opera-glasses.

Looking at him again now,  myself,  I could not see his
pale face and haggard eye without fresh concern,  nor
forbear to exclaim,  "  Indeed,  Mr.  Wyndham,  this is a
dreadful business  !"

He seemed a little struck with this exclamation ;  and,
lest it should offend him,  I hastened to add,  in apology,
"  You look so little like a bloody-minded prosecutor,
that I forget I ought not to say these things to you."

"Oh!"  cried he,  laughing,  "we are only prosecutors
there — (pointing to the Committee-Box),  we are at play
up here."

But afterwards,  with more seriousness,  he spoke of my
conversion as of a thing indispensable ;  and,  to soften its
difficulty,  he added,  "To give up a favourable opinion is
certainly always painful ;  but here — if admiration is so
pleasant to you — you need not part with it;  you have
but to make a transfer,5'  pointing to Mr.  Burke.

"  I have no occasion for such a transfer,"  said I,  "  to
admire Mr.  Burke,  for he has long had my warmest
admiration ;  I was even,  originally,  almost bewitched bv
him."

"I know it,"  cried he,  with great quickness;  but
whether his knowledge arose from what had dropped
from myself,  or what he had heard from others,  he did
not explain.

"  But the prepossession there,"  he continued,  looking
at Mr.  Hastings,  "cannot be so hard to root out;  it
cannot be of long standing.  Pluck it out;  pluck it out
at once."

G 2

84 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

"Will you,  can you pardon me,"  cried I,  "if I venture
to say that I — who am not of that Committee — must
•wait,  ere 1 change,  to hear what may come from the
other side  ?"

These were rather bold words ;  but he politely as
sented,  though with a conscious sort of smile,  that seemed
to say,  "  You will not,  then,  take our words  ?"

Here we dropped the discussion.

I wished much to know when he was himself to speak,
and made sundry inquiries relative to the progress of the
several harangues,  but all without being comprehended,
till at length I cried,  "  In short,  Mr.  Wyndham,  I want
to know when everybody speaks."

He started,  and cried with precipitancy,  "Do you
mean me?"

"Yes."

"  No,  I hope not ;  I hope you have no wants about my
miserable speaking?"

I only laughed,  and we talked for some time of other
things  ;  and then,  suddenly,  he burst forth with,  "  But
you have really made me a little uneasy by what you
dropped just now."

"  And what was that  ?"

"  Something like an intention of hearing me."

"O,  if that depended wholly on myself,  I should cer
tainly do it."

"  No,  I hope not !  I would not have you here on any
account.  If you have formed any expectations,  it will
give me great concern."

"  Pray don't be uneasy about that ;  for whatever expect
ations I may have formed,  I had much rather have them
disappointed."

"Ho,  ho! — you come,  then,"  cried he,  pointedly,  "to
hear me,  by way of soft ground to rest upon,  after the
hard course you will have been run with these higher-
spirited speakers  ?"

As I could not agree to this,  it led to a discourse upon
public speaking,  in which he told me that,  "in his little

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  85

essays"  in the House of Commons,  the very sound of his
own voice almost stopped and confounded him ;  and the
first moment he heard nothing else,  he felt quite lost,  quite
gone !  He was remiss,  he owned,  to himself,  in not prac
tising it more,  especially now,  where an harangue of such
importance was impending ;  but added that he generally
lost the opportunity before he acquired the resolution.

"O,"  cried I,  "  you will do very well, — I am afraid !  "

He could not but laugh ;  yet continued to regret that
everything now was so hastened on,  he should not be at
all prepared for the enterprise.

"  Perhaps,"  cried I,  "  that may be all the better — the
worse,  I mean  ! — for my wishes  !  When there is anything
to come out,  I fancy it is commonly with a happier effect
from the spur of surprise and hurry than from time and
study."

"That may be true in general,  and I believe it is,  when
there is anything to come ! — Here,  however,  something of
previous thought is absolutely necessary :  mere facts will
not do,  where an audience is so mixed and miscellaneous  ;
some other ingredients are indispensably requisite,  in
order to seize and secure attention."

"  They will all come !  and the more,  perhaps,  for a
Httle agitation,  and surely with greater power and effect :
for where there is sufficient study for all the rules to be
strictly observed,  I should think there must be an air of
something so practised,  so artificial,  as rather to harden
than affect the hearts of the hearers.  When the facts are
once stated,  I cannot but suppose they must have much
more force where followed only by unstudied arguments,
and by comments rising at the moment,  than by any la
boured preparations ;  and have far more chance of mak
ing a deep impression,  because more natural and more
original."

He allowed there might be truth in this,  but seemed too
diffident of his powers to trust them to the impulse of the
moment in such an assembly.  However,  he talked over
the point very openly,  and told me he believed Irony the
ablest weapon of oratory.

86 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

He desired me not to fail to come and hear Fox.  My
chances,  I told him,  were very uncertain,  and Friday was
the earliest of them.  "He speaks on Thursday,"  cried
he,  "  and indeed you should hear him."

"  Thursday is my worst chance of all,"  I answered,
"  for it is the court-day."

"And is there no dispensation?"  cried he;  and then,
recollecting himself,  and looking very archly at Mr.  Fox,
who was just below us,  he added,  "  No, — true — not for
him ! "

"  Not for any body  !"  cried I ;  {( on a court-day my at
tendance is as necessary,  and I am dressed out as fine,
and almost as stiff,  as those heralds are here."

I then told him what were my Windsor days,   and
begged he would not seize one of them to speak himself.
"  By no means,"  cried he,  quite seriously,   "  would I
have you here ! — stay away,  and only let me hope for
your good wishes."

"  I shall be quite sincere,"  cried I,  laughing,  "  and own
to you that stay away I shall not,  if I can possibly come ;
but as to my good wishes,  I have not,  in this case,  one to
give you !"

He heard this with a start that was almost a jump.
"  What !"  he exclaimed,  "  would you lay me under your
judgment without your mercy? — Why this is heavier
than any penal statute  !"

He spoke this with an energy that jnade Mr.  Fox look
up,  to see to whom he addressed his speech :  but before
I could answer it,  poor James,  tired of keeping his pro
mised circumspection,  advanced his head to join the con
versation  ;  and so much was I alarmed lest he should
burst forth into some unguarded expression of his vehe
ment hatred to the cause,  which could not but have
irritated its prosecutors,  that the moment I perceived his
motion and intention,  I abruptly took my leave of Mr.
Wyndham,  and surprised poor James into a necessity of
following me.

Indeed I was now most eager to depart,  from a cir
cumstance that made me feel infinitely awkward.  Mr.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  87

Burke himself was just come forward,  to speak to
a lady a little below me ;  Mr.  Wyndham had instantly
turned towards me,  with a look of congratulation that
seemed rejoicing for me,  that the orator of the day,  and of
the cause,  was approaching;  but I retreated involuntarily
back,  and shirked meeting his eyes.  He perceived in an
instant the mistake he was making,  and went on with his
discourse as if Mr.  Burke was out of the Hall.  In a
minute,  however,  Mr.  Burke himself saw me,  and he
bowed with the most marked civility of manner;  my
courtesy was the most ungrateful,  distant,  and cold ;
I could not do otherwise ;  so hurt I felt to see him the
head of such a cause,  so impossible I found it to utter
one word of admiration for a performance whose no
bleness was so disgraced by its tenour,  and so conscious
was I the whole time that at such a moment to say nothing
must seem almost an affront,  that I hardly knew which
way to look,  or what to do with myself.  How happy and
how proud would any distinction from such a man have
made me,  had he been engaged in a pursuit of which I
could have thought as highly as I think of the abilities
with which he has conducted it  !

In coming downstairs I met Lord Walsingham and
Sir Lucas Pepys.  "  Well,  Miss Burney,"  cried the first,
"what say you to a Governor-General of India now  ?'*

"  Only this,"  cried I,  "  that I do not dwell much upon
any question till I have heard its answer !"

Sir Lucas then attacked me too.  All the world against
poor Mr.  Hastings,  though without yet knowing what
his materials may be for clearing away these aspersions I

88 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

PART III.

1788.

Hastings's Trial — The Queen and Hannah More — Westminster
Hall— Cabal and Dispute— Mr.  Wyndham— Burke's Great
Speech — Fox's Great Speech— Character of his Style — Liber
ality of Wyndham— Mrs.  Crewe — Conversation with Burke —
Commentary on Burke's Speech — Its vague Declamation and
personal Malice — Fox's Speech — Its factitious Character — Its
Vehemence— Wyndham's Opinion of Pitt's Public Speaking —
Moliere's Old Woman — Senatorial Licence — Wyndham's Admi
ration of Johnson — Reminiscences of Streatham — Lost Time —
Sheridan— Conversation with him — Return to Windsor — Sir
Joseph Banks— His Shyness— Mrs.  Gwynn — Bunbury the
Caricaturist — Death of Mrs.  Delany— Her last Hours— Her
Piety and Resignation — Grief at her Loss— Generosity of the
Queen — Mrs.  Delany's Will — Visits of Condolence — Mrs.  Ord
— Miss Cambridge — Death of Mr.  Lightfoot — Jacob Bryant —
Mr.  Turbulent— Mr.  Wyndham and Evelina — Michael Angelo
Taylor— Dr.  Johnson and Boswell — The Probationary Odes —
Wyndham and Hastings— Reflections on the Trial— Attack
and Reply— Personalities of Pitt as a Speaker — Personal
Resemblance between Wyndham and Warren Hastings — The
Handel Commemoration — Lord and Lady Mulgrave — Dr.  Mon-
sey— The Paston Letters— Visit toEgham Races — Mr.Crutchiey
— Mr.  Turbulent— Madame Krumpholtz — Mr.  Murphy.

VERY concise will be my accounts till I come again to
the trial,  to relate my third time of being at Westminster
Hall.

The Queen most graciously,  in the mean while,  made
me a present of all the charges and answers as they had
been printed for the Lords at the opening,  when certainly
my hearing had not made them very familiar to me.

I have read them with great eagerness,  and cannot but
feel added curiosity and earnestness for the proofs which
alone can balance accounts between assertions so bold
and contradictions so positive.  When you read them,
my dearest friends,  whatever parts you pass over lightly,
do not fail to read entirely the conclusion of the defence.

1788]  OF MADAME D'AllBLAY.  89

You will find it extremely touching,  yet manly,  un
daunted,  and high-minded,  drawn up with equal con
sciousness of superior abilities,  unrequited services,  and
injured honour.

The Queen also proposed to me that I should go to
the new opera with my father and my little sister Sarah,
who stands mighty well here,  from her very pretty per
formance in painting me a birth-day trimming.

The Queen lent me,  too,  the new book of Miss More's,
which was just published,  "  The Influence on Society of
the Manners of the Great."  Have you read it?  The
design is very laudable,  and speaks a mind earnest to
promote religion and its duties ;  but it sometimes points
out imperfections almost unavoidable,  with amendments
almost impracticable.

Her Majesty at this time was a little indisposed,  and
we missed going to Windsor for a fortnight,  during which
I received visits of inquiry from divers of her ladies —
Mrs.  Brudenell,  Bed-chamber Woman  ;  Miss Brudenell,
her daughter,  and a Maid of Honour elect,  would but
one of that class please to marry or die;  Mrs.  Tracy,
Miss Ariana Egerton,  Mrs.  Herbert,  all likewise Bed
chamber Women  (Mrs.  Fielding and her daughters are
still in Paris)  ;  Miss Tryon and Miss Beauclerk,  Maids of
Honour,  neither of them in a fair way to oblige Miss
Brudenell,  being nothing approaching to death,  though
far advanced from marriage;  and various others;  with
good Lady Effingham continually.

Miss Brudenell's only present hope is said to be in
Miss Fuzilier,  who is reported,  with what foundation I
know not,  to be likely to become Mrs.  Fairly.  She is
pretty,  learned,  and accomplished  ;  yet,  from the very
little I have seen of her,  I should not think she had heart
enough to satisfy Mr.  Fairly,  in whose character the
leading trait is the most acute sensibility.  However,  I
have heard he has disclaimed all such intention,  with high
indignation at the report,  as equally injurious to the deli
cacy both of Miss Fuzilier and himself,  so recently after
his loss.

90 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PAKT III.

And now for my third Westminster Hall,  which,  by
the Queen's own indulgent order,  was with dear Charlotte
and Sarah.

It was also to hear Mr.  Fox,  and I was very glad to
let Mr.  Wyndham see a  "  dispensation"  was attainable,
though the cause was accidental,  since the Queen's cold
prevented the drawing-room.

We went early,  yet did not get very good places.  The
Managers at this time were all in great wrath at a decision
made the night before by the Lords,  upon a dispute be
tween them and the Counsel for Mr.  Hastings,  which
turned entirely in favour of the latter.  When they
entered their Committee-Box,  led on as usual by Mr.
Burke,  they all appeared in the extremes!  and most angry
emotion.

When they had caballed together some time,  Mr.
Wyndham came up among the Commons,  to bow to some
ladies of his acquaintance,  and then to speak to me  ;  but
he was so agitated and so disconcerted,  he could name
nothing but their recent provocation from the Lords.  He
seemed quite enraged,  and broke forth with a vehemence
I should not much have liked to have excited.  They
had experienced,  he said,  in the late decision,  the most
injurious treatment that could be offered them  :  the
Lords had resolved upon saving Mr.  Hastings,  and the
Chancellor had taken him under the grossest protection.
"  In short,"  said he,  "  the whole business is taken out of
our hands,  and they have all determined to save him."

"  Have they indeed  ?  "  cried I,  with involuntary eager
ness.

"  Yes,"  answered he,  perceiving how little I was
shocked for him,  "  it is now all going your way."

I could not pretend to be sorry,  and only inquired if
Mr.  Fox was to speak.

"  I know not,"  cried he,  hastily,  "  what is to be done.,
who will speak,  or what will be resolved.  Fox is in a
rage !  Oh,  a rage !"

"  But yet I hope he will speak.  I have never heard
him."

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  91

•'  No?  not the other day?"

"  No ;  I was then at Windsor.'1

"  Oh yes,  I remember you told me you were going.
You have lost every thing by it !  To-day will be nothing,
he is all rage !  On Tuesday he was great indeed.  You
should have heard him then.  And Burke,  you should
have heard the conclusion of Burke's speech;  'twas the
noblest ever uttered by man  !"

"So I have been told."

"  To-day you will hear nothing — know nothing, — there
will be no opportunity ;  Fox is all fury."

I told him he almost frightened me ;  for he spoke in a
tremor himself that was really unpleasant.

"Oh  !"  cried he,  looking at me half reproachfully,  half
good humouredly,  "  Fox's fury is with the Lords — not
there !''  pointing to Mr.  Hastings.

I saw by this he entered into my feelings in the midst
of his irritability,  and that gave me courage to cry out,
"  I am glad of that at least !"

"  O yes!  yes  !"  cried he,  a little impetuously,  "all our
complaints,  our indignities,  our difficulties — all those are
but balm to you.''

And he shook his head and his hand at me tremulously
and reproachfully,  rising at the same time to be gone.

"  Oh,  Mr.  Wyndham,"  cried I,  half laughing,  yet half
afraid,  " ( soften a little of that flint,'  as Mr.  Sterling says,
I beseech you."

A smile forced its way to his features whether he would
or not;  but he very earnestly said,  "  And do you still,  and
can you after what you have heard,  retain any esteem for
Mr.  Hastings  ?"

"  Why — a — little !"  answered I,  hesitatingly.

«  What,  still !  after what you have heard  !"

"Won't you allow me any?"  cried I.

'<  If it is half what it was — "

«  Not half !— Oh yes,  allow me half!"

"  What,  half!  after all you have heard  !"

And again shaking his head and his hand as if quite

92 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

scandalized for me,  he hurried back to his den,  and I saw
no more of him.

Mr.  Fox spoke five hours,  and with a violence that did
not make me forget what I had heard of his being in such
a fury;  but 1 shall never give any account of these
speeches,  as they will all be printed.  I shall only say a
word of the speakers as far as relates to my own feelings
about them,  and that briefly will be to say that I adhere
to Mr.  Burke,  whose oratorical powers appeared to me
far more gentleman-like,  scholar-like,  and fraught with
true genius than those of Mr.  Fox.  It may be I am pre
judiced by old kindnesses of Mr.  Burke,  and it may be
that the countenance of Mr.  Fox may have turned me
against him,  for it struck me to have a boldness in it quite
hard and callous.  However,  it is little matter how much
my judgment in this point may err.  With you,  my dear
friends,  I have nothing further to do than simply to give
it ;  and even should it be wrong,  it will not very essentially
injure you in your politics.

*  #  5^  *  #

I have very little to say till again I beg you to accom
pany me to Westminster Hall.

I must mention,  however,  that in a visit from Mrs.
Ariana Egerton she told me that she was very intimate
with Mr.  Wyndham,  and would herself acquaint me,  by
a note,  of the day upon which he meant to speak.  This
I desired very much,  as I now more wish to hear him
than any of the set.

She told me,  too,  such kind speeches made of me by
Mr.  Burke,  whom she often meets at Bulstrode,  at the
Duke of Portland's,  that they went to my heart with fresh
dismay,  in reflecting on the violent and unjust part he
now seems acting.

Again,  on the fourth time of my attendance at West
minster Hall,  honest James was my esquire.

We were so late from divers accidents that we did not
enter till the same moment with the prisoner.  In de
scending the steps I heard my name exclaimed with sur-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  93

prise,  and looking before me,  I saw myself recognised by
Mrs.  Crewe.  "  Miss Burney,"  she cried,  "  who could
have thought of seeing you here !"

Very obligingly she made me join her immediately,
which,  as I was with no lady,  was a very desirable cir
cumstance;  and though her political principles are well
known,  and,  of course,  lead her to side with the enemies
of Mr.  Hastings,  she had the good sense to conclude me
on the other side,  and the delicacy never once to distress
me by any discussion of the prosecution.

I was much disappointed to find nothing intended for
this day's trial but hearing evidence ;  no speaker was pre
paring ;  all the attention was devoted to the witnesses.

Mr.  Adam,  Mr.  Dudley Long,  and others that I know
not,  came from the Committee to chat with Mrs.  Crewe  ;
but soon after one came not so unknown to me — Mr.
Burke  ;  and Mrs.  Crewe,  seeing him ascend,  named him
to me,  but was herself a little surprised to see it was
his purpose to name himself,  for he immediately made up
to me,  and with an air of such frank kindness that,  could
I have forgot his errand in that Hall,  would have made
me receive him as formerly,  when I was almost fascinated
with him.

But far other were my sensations.  I trembled as he
approached me,  with conscious change of sentiments,  and
with a dread of his pressing from me a disapprobation he
might resent,  but which I knew not how to disguise.

"  Near-sighted as I am,"  cried he,  "  I knew you imme
diately.  I knew you from our box the moment I looked
up  ;  yet how long it is,  except for an instant here,  since
I have seen you  !"

"Yes,"  I hesitatingly answered, te I — live in a monas
tery now."

He said nothing to this.  He felt,  perhaps,  it was
meant to express my inaccessibility.

I inquired after Mrs.  Burke.  He recounted to me
the particulars of his sudden seizure when he spoke last,
from the cramp in his stomach,  owing to a draught of

94 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

cold water which he drank in the midst of the heat of his
oration.

I could not even wear a semblance of being sorry for
him on this occasion;  and my cold answers made him
soon bend down to speak with Mrs.  Crewe.

I was seated in the next row to her,  just above.

Mr.  Wyndham was now talking with her.  My whole
curiosity and desire being to hear him,  which had induced
me to make a point of coming this time,  I was eager to
know if my chance was wholly gone.  "  You are aware,"
I cried,  when he spoke to me,  "  what brings me here this

morning !"

"  No ;''  he protested he knew not.

Mrs.  Crewe,  again a little surprised,  I believe,  at this
second opposition acquaintance,  began questioning how
often I had attended this trial.

Mr.  Wyndham,  with much warmth of regret,  told her
very seldom,  and that I had lost Mr.  Burke on his best day.

I then turned to speak to Mr.  Burke,  that I might not
seem listening,  for they interspersed various civilities upon
my peculiar right to have heard all the great speeches,
but Mr.  Burke was in so profound a reverie he did not
hear me.

I wished Mr.  Wyndham had not either,  for he called
upon him aloud,  "  Mr.  Burke,  Miss Burney speaks to
you !"

He gave me his immediate attention with an air so full
of respect that it quite shamed me.

"  Indeed,"  I cried,  "  I had never meant to speak to
Mr.  Burke again after hearing him in Westminster Hall.
I had meant to keep at least that geographical timidity."

I alluded to an expression in his great speech of  "geo
graphical morality"  which had struck me very much.  He
laughed heartily,  instantly comprehending me,  and assured
me it was an idea that had occurred to him on the
moment he had uttered it,  wholly without study.

A little general talk followed;  and then,  one of the
Lords rising to question some of the evidence,  he said he

1788]  OP MADAME D'ARBLAY.  95

must return to his Committee and business, — very flatter
ingly saying,  in quitting his post,  "  This is the first time
I have played truant from the Manager's Box."

However I might be obliged to him,  which sincerely I
felt,  I was yet glad to have him go.  My total ill will to
all he was about made his conversation merely a pain to
me.

I did not feel the same with regard to Mr.  Wyndham.
He is not the prosecutor,  and seems endowed with so
much liberality and candour that it not only encourages
me to speak to him what I think,  but leads me to believe
he will one day or other reflect upon joining a party so
violent as a stain to the independence of his character.

Almost instantly he came forward to the place Mr.
Burke had vacated.

"  Are you approaching,"  I cried,  "  to hear my upbraid-
ings  ?"

"Why — I don't know,"  cried he,  looking half alarmed.

"  Oh  !  I give you warning,  if you come you must ex
pect them  ;  so my invitation is almost as pleasant as the
man's in  *  Measure for Measure,'  who calls to Master
Bamardine,  *  Won't you come down to be hanged T  "

"  But how,"  cried he,  "  have I incurred your upbraid-
ings  ?"

"  By bringing me here,"  I answered,  "  only to dis
appoint me."

*'  Did 1 bring you here  ?"

"  Yes,  by telling me you were to speak to-day."

He protested he could never have made such an asser
tion.  I explained myself,  reminding him he had told me
he was certainly to speak before the recess ;  and that
therefore,  when I was informed this was to be the last
day of trial till after the recess,  I concluded I should
be right,  but found myself so utterly wrong as to hear
nothing but such evidence as I could not even understand,
because it was so uninteresting I could not even listen
to it.

"  How strangely,"  he exclaimed,  <e are we all moulded,

96 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

that nothing ever in this mortal life,,  however pleasant in
itself,  and however desirable from its circumstances,  can
come to us without alloy — not even flattery  !  for here,  at
this moment,  all the high gratification I should feel,  and
1 am well disposed to feel it thoroughly in supposing you
could think it worth your while to come hither in order to
hear me,  is kept down and subdued by the consciousness
how much 1 must disappoint you."

"  Not at all,"  cried I ;  "  the worse you speak,  the
better for my side of the question."

He laughed,  but confessed the agitation of his spirits
was so great in the thought of that speech,  whenever he
was to make it,  that it haunted him in fiery dreams in
his sleep.

"  Sleep  !"  cried I ;  "  do you ever sleep  ?"

He stared a little,  but I added with pretended dryness,
"  Do any of you that live down there in that prosecutor's
den ever sleep in your beds  ?  I should have imagined
that,  had you even attempted it,  the anticipating ghost of
Mr.  Hastings would have appeared to you in the dead of
the night,  and have drawn your curtains,  and glared
ghastly in your eyes.  I do heartily wish Mr.  Tickell
\vould send you that  '  Anticipation'  at once  !"

This idea furnished us with sundry images,  till,  looking
down upon Mr.  Hastings,  with an air a little moved,  he
said,  "  1 am afraid the most insulting thing we do by him
is coming up hither to show ourselves so easy and dis
engaged,  and to enter into conversation with the ladies.'*

"  But I hope,"  cried I,  alarmed,  "he does not see
that."

"  \\  hy your caps,"  cried he,  ft are much in your favour
for concealment;  they are excellent screens to all but the
lirst row !"

I saw him,  however,  again look at the poor,  and,  I
sincerely believe,  much-injured prisoner,  and as I saw
also he still bore with my open opposition,  I could not
but again seize a favourable moment for being more
serious with him.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  97

"  Ah,  Mr.  Wvndham,"  I cried,  "  I have not forgot what
dropped from you on the first day of this trial."

He looked a little surprised.  "You,"  I continued,
"  probably have no remembrance of it,  for you have been
living ever since down there ;  but I was more touched
with what you said then,  than with all I have since heard
from all the others,  and probably than with all I shall
hear even from you again when you mount the rostrum."

"  You conclude,"  cried he,  looking very sharp,  "  I shall
then be better steeled against that fatal candour?"

"  In fact,"  cried I,  "  Mr.  Wyndham,  I do really believe
your steeling to be factitious,  notwithstanding you took
pains to assure me your candour was but the deeper
malice ;  and yet I will own,  when once I have heard your
speech,  I have little expectation of ever having the honour
of conversing with you again."

"  And why?"  cried he,  starting back;  "what am I to
say that you denounce such a forfeit beforehand  ?"

I could not explain ;  I left him to imagine ;  for,  should
he prove as violent and as personal as the rest,  1 had no
objection to his previously understanding I could have no
future pleasure in discoursing with him.

"  I think,  however,"  I continued,  with a laugh,  "  that
since I have settled this future taciturnity,  I have a fair
right in the mean while to say whatever comes upper
most."

He agreed to this with great approvance.

"  Moliere,  you know,  in order to obtain a natural opinion
of his plays,  applied to an old woman;  you,  upon the
same principle,  to obtain a natural opinion of political
matters,  should apply to an ignorant one; — for you will
never,  I am sure,  gain it down there"

He smiled,  whether he would or not,  but protested
this was the severest stricture upon his Committee that
had ever jet been uttered.

I told him as it was the last time he was likely to hear
unbiassed sentiments upon this subject,  it was right they
should be spoken very intelligibly.

VOL.  iv.  H

98 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

"And permit me,"  I said,  "  to begin with what strikes
me the most.  Were Mr.  Hastings really the culprit he
is represented,  he would never stand there."

"  Certainly,"  cried he,  with a candour he could not
suppress,  "  there seems something favourable in that ;  it
has a good look;  but assure yourself he never expected to
see this day."

"  But would he,  if guilty,  have waited its chance  ?
Was not all the world before him  ?  Could he not have
chosen any other place of residence  ?"

"  Yes; — but the shame,  the disgrace of a flight?"

•'*  What is it all to the shame and disgrace of convicted
guilt?"

He made no answer.

"  And now,"  I continued,  "  shall I tell you,  just in the
same simple style,  how I have been struck with the
speakers and speeches I have yet heard  ?"

He eagerly begged me to go on.

"  The whole of this public speaking is quite new to me.
I was never in the House of Commons.  It is all a new
creation to me."

"And what a creation it is 1"  he exclaimed  ;  "how
noble,  how elevating  !  and — what an inhabitant for it !"

I received his compliment with great courtesy,  as an
encouragement for rne to proceed.

I then began upon Mr.  Burke ;  but I must give you a
very brief summary of my speech,  as it could only be
intelligible at full length from your having heard his.  I
told him that his opening had struck me with the highest
admiration of his powers,  from the eloquence,  the imagin
ation,  the fire,  the diversity of expression,  and the ready
flow of language,  with which he seemed gifted,  in a most
superior manner,  for any and every purpose to which
rhetoric could lead.  "  And when he came to his two
narratives,"  I continued,  "  when he related the particulars
of those dreadful murders,  he interested,  he engaged,  he
at last overpowered me;  I felt my cause lost.  I could
hardly keep on my seat.  My eyes dreaded a single glance

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  99

towards a man so accused as Mr.  Hastings ;  I wanted to
sink on the floor,  that they might be saved so painful a
sight.  I had no hope he could clear himself;  not ano
ther wish in his favour remained.  But when from this
narration Mr.  Burke proceeded to his own comments
and declamation — when the charges of rapacity,  cruelty,
tyranny were general,  and made with all the violence of
personal detestation,  and continued and aggravated without
any further fact or illustration;  then there appeared more
of study than of truth,  more of invective than of justice ;
and,  in short,  so little of proof to so much of passion,  that
in a very short time 1 began to lift up my head,  my seat
was no longer uneasy,  my eyes were indifferent which
way they looked,  or what object caught them ;  and
before I was myself aware of the declension of Mr.
Burke's powers over my feelings,  I found myself a mere
spectator in a public place,  and looking all around it,
with my opera-glass in my hand!"

His eyes sought the ground on hearing this,  and with
no other comment than a rather uncomfortable shrug of
the shoulders,  he expressively and concisely said—*'  I
comprehend you perfectly  !"

This was a hearing too favourable to stop me  ;  and Mr.
Hastings constantly before me was an animation to my
spirits which nothing less could have given me,  to a
manager of such a Committee !

I next,  therefore,  began upon Mr.  Fox  ;  and I ran
through the general matter of his speech,  with such
observations as had occurred to me in hearing it.  "  His
violence,"  I said,  "  had that sort of monotony that seemed
to result from its being factitious,  and I felt less pardon
for that than for any extravagance in Mr.  Burke,  whose
excesses seemed at least to be unaffected,  and,  if they
spoke against his judgment,  spared his probity.  Mr.
Fox appeared to have no such excuse  ;  he looked all good
humour and negligent ease the instant before he began a
speech of uninterrupted passion and vehemence,  and he
wore the same careless and disengaged air the very instant

H 2

100 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

he had finished.  A display of talents in which the in
ward man took so little share could have no powers of
persuasion to those who saw them in that light;  and
therefore,  however their brilliancy might be admired,
they were useless to their cause,  for they left the mind of
the hearer in the same state that they found it."

After a short vindication of his friends,  he said,  "You
have never heard Pitt?  You would like him beyond any
other competitor."

And then he made his panegyric in very strong terms,
allowing him to be equal,  ready,  splendid,  wonderful ! —
he was in constant astonishment himself at his powers
and success ; — his youth and inexperience never seemed
against him  :  though he mounted to his present height after
and in opposition to such a vortex of splendid abilities,
yet,  alone and unsupported,  he coped with them all !
And then,,  with conscious generosity,  he finished a most
noble eloge with these words  :  "  Take — you may take —
the testimony of an enemy — a very confirmed enemy of
Mr.  Pitt's  !  ""

Not very confirmed,  I hope !  A man so liberal can har
bour no enmity of that dreadful malignancy that sets mi-
tigation at defiance for ever.

He then asked me if I had heard Mr.  Grey?

"No,"  I answered;  u\  can come but seldom,  and
therefore I reserved myself for to-day."

"You really fill me with compunction!"  he cried.
"  But if,  indeed,  I have drawn you into so cruel a waste
of your time,  the only compensation I can make you wiH
be carefully to keep from you the day when I shall really
speak."

"  No,"  I answered,  "  I must hear you ;  for that is aH
I now wait for to make up my final opinion."

"  And does it all rest with me? — <  Dreadful responsibi
lity  !' —  as Mr.  Hastings powerfully enough expresses
himself in his narrative."

"And can you allow an expression of Mr.  Hastings's
to be powerful  ? — That is not like Mr.  Fox,  who,  in ac-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  101

knowledging some one small thing to be right,  in his
speech,  checked himself for the acknowledgment by
hastily saying  'Though I am no great admirer of the
genius and abilities of the gentleman at the bar;' — as if
he had pronounced a sentence in a parenthesis,  between
hooks, — so rapidly he flew oft'  to what he could positively
censure."

"And hooks they were indeed  !"  he cried.

"  Do not inform against me,?'  I continued,  "and I will
give you a little more of Moliere's old woman."

He gave me his parole,  and looked very curious.

"Well then, — amongst the things most striking to an
unbiassed spectator was that action of the Orator that led
him to look full at the prisoner upon every hard part of
the charge.  There was no courage in it,  since the ac
cused is so situated he must make no answer ;  and,  not
being courage,  to Moliere's old woman it could only
seem cruelty  /"

He quite gave tip this point without a defence,  except
telling me it was from the habit of the House of Commons,
as Fox,  who chiefly had done this,  was a most good-hu
moured man,  and by nothing but habit would have been
betrayed into such an error.

"  And another thing,"  I cried,  "  which strikes those
ignorant of senatorial licence,  is this, — that those perpe
tual repetitions,  from all the speakers,  of inveighing
against the power,  the rapacity,  the tyranny,  the despotism
of the Gentleman at the Bar,  being uttered now,  when we
see him without any power,  without even liberty — confined
to that spot,  and the only person in this large assembly
who may not leave it when he will ; — when we see such a
contrast to all we hear,  we think the simplest relation
would be sufficient for all purposes of justice,  as all that
goes beyond plain narrative,  instead of sharpening indig
nation,  only calls to mind the greatness of the fall,  and
raises involuntary commiseration !  "

"  And you wish,'*  he cried,  "  to hear me  ?  How you
add to my difficulties  ! — for now,  instead of thinking of

102 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

Lords,  Commons,  Bishops,  and Judges before me,  and of
the delinquent and his counsel at my side,  I shall have
every thought and faculty swallowed up in thinking of
who is behind me !  "

This civil speech put an end to Moliere's old woman
and her comments ;  and not to have him wonder at her
unnecessarily,  I said  "Now,  then,  Mr.  Wyndham,  shall
I tell you fairly what it is that induced me to say all this
to you? — Dr.  Johnson  ! — what I have heard from him of
Mr.  Wyndham has been the cause of all this hazardous
openness."

"'Twas a noble cause,"  cried he,  well pleased,  "and
noble has been its effect !  I loved him,  indeed,  sincerely.
He has left a chasm in my heart — a chasm in the world  !
There was in him what I never saw before,  what I never
shall find again  !  I lament every moment as lost,  that
J might have spent in his society,  and yet gave to any
other."

How it delighted me to hear this just praise,  thus
warmly uttered  ! — I could speak from this moment upon
no other subject.  I told him how much it gratified me  ;
and we agreed in comparing notes upon the very few op
portunities his real remaining friends could now meet with
of a similar indulgence,  since so little was his intrinsic
worth understood,  while so deeply all his foibles had been
felt,  that in general it was merely a matter of pain to
hear him even named.

How did we then emulate each other in calling to mind
all his excellences!

"His abilities,"  cried Mr.  Wyndham,  "were gigantic,
and always at hand ;  no matter for the subject,  he had
information ready for everything.  He was fertile, — he
was universal !  "

My praise of him was of a still more solid kind, — his
principles,  his piety,  his kind heart under all its rough
coating:  but I need not repeat what I said, — my dear
friends know every word.

I reminded him of the airings,  in which he gave his

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  103

time with his carriage for the benefit of Dr.  Johnson's
health.  "  What an advantage  !"  he cried,  "was all that
to myself!  I had not merely an admiration,  but a ten
derness for him, — the more 1 knew him,  the stronger it
became.  We never disagreed ;  even in politics,  I found it
rather words than things in which we differed."

"And if you could so love him,"  cried I,  " knowing
him only in a general way,  what would you have felt for
him had you known him at Streatham  ?  "

1 then gave him a little history of his manners and way
of life there, — his good humour,  his sport,  his kindness,
his sociability,  and all the many excellent qualities that,
in the world at large,  were by so many means obscured.

He was extremely interested in all I told him,  and re-
grettingly said he had only known him in his worst days,
when his health was upon its decline,  and infirmities were
crowding fast upon him.

"  Had he lived longer,"  he cried,  "  I am satisfied I
should have taken to him almost wholly.  I should have
taken him to my heart!  have looked up to him,  applied to
him,  advised with him in all the most essential occur
rences of my life !  I am sure,  too, — though it is a proud
assertion, — he would have liked me,  also,  better,  had we
mingled more.  I felt a mixed fondness and reverence
growing so strong upon me,  that I am satisfied the closest
union would have followed his longer life."

I then mentioned how kindly he had taken his visit to
him at Lichfield during a severe illness.  "  And he left
you,"  I said,  "a book?"

"Yes,"  he answered,  "and he gave me one,  also,  just
before he died.  '  You will look into this sometimes,'  he
said,  '  and not refuse to remember whence you had it.' "

And then he added he had heard him speak of me, —
and with so much kindness,  that I was forced not to press
a recapitulation :  yet now I wish I had heard it.

Just before we broke up,  "  There is nothing,''  he cried,
with energy,  "  for which I look back upon myself with
severer discipline than the time I have thrown away in

1C4 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

other pursuits,  that might else have been devoted to that
wonderful man  !  "

He then said he must be gone,, — he  \vas one in a Com
mittee of the House,  and could keep away no longer.
"  Yet I go,"  he cried,  "to the driest work  ! — to the wool
business !  "

"What wool business?"

''Wool and worsted!  "  repeated he,  with disgust,  fs the
Bill now in debate.  And to leave such an assembly,  such
society as this,  for wool and worsted  !  for — for — "  he hesi
tated and laughed,  and then,  in a whisper,  added,  "for
Mr.  Simkins and Mr.  Hobson  ! "

I drew back, — but he leant forwarder,  over the little
partition that divides the Chamberlain's Box from the
House of Commons,  and,  with a very arch earnestness,
exclaimed,  "Nay,  nay  ! — let me have this little retaliation !
"'tis very little,  indeed,  for what I owe  !"

I stopped him,  however,  by answering only to his wool
and worsted lamentation :  "  Who,"  cried I,  <(  shall pity
the toils and labours of the poorer class of mankind,  when
a den such as that  (pointing to the Managers'  Box)  can
find such volunteers?"

He laughed and shook his head,  and took his leave.

And certainly,  thought I to myself,  to earn daily bread
may be less fatiguing than to earn daily abuse.

I then again joined in with Mrs.  Crewe,  who,  mean
time,  had had managers without end to converse with
her.

But,  very soon after,  Mr.  Burke mounted to the House
of Commons again,  and took the place left by Mr.  Wynd-
ham.

I inquired very much after Mrs.  Burke,  and we talked
of the spectacle,  and its line effect ;  and I ventured to
mention,  allusively,  some of the digressive parts of
the great speech in which I had heard him :  but I saw
him anxious for speaking more to the point,  and as I
could not talk to him — the leading prosecutor — with that
frankness of opposing sentiments which I used to Mr.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  105

Wyndham,  I was anxious only to avoid talking at all;
and so brief was my speech,  and so long my silences,  that,
of course,  he was soon wearied into a retreat.  Had he
not acted such a part,  with what pleasure should I have
exerted myself to lengthen his stay !

Yet he went not in wrath :  for,  before the close,  he
came yet a third time,  to say  "  I do not pity you for hav
ing to sit there so long,  for,  with you,  sitting can now be
no punishment."

"  No,"  cried I,  "  I may take rest now for a twelvemonth
back."

His son also came to speak to me ;  but,  not long after,
Mrs.  Crewe called upon me to say,  "  Miss Burney,  Mr.
Sheridan begs me to introduce him to you,  for he thinks
you have forgot him."

I did not feel very comfortable in this ;  the part he acts
would take from me all desire for his notice,  even were
his talents as singular as they are celebrated.  Cold,  there
fore,  was my reception of his salutations,  though as civil
as I could make it.  He talked a little over our former
meeting at Mrs.  Cholmondeley's,  and he reminded me of
what he had there urged and persuaded with all his might,
namely,  that I would write a comedy ;  and he now re
proached me for my total disregard of his counsel and
opinion.

I made little or no answer,  for I am always put out by
such sort of discourse,  especially when entered upon with
such abruptness.

Recollecting,  then,  that  '  Cecilia  '  had been published
since that time,  he began a very florid flourish,  saying he
was in my debt greatly,  not only for reproaches about what
I had neglected,  but for fine speeches about what I had
performed.  I hastily interrupted him with a fair retort,
exclaiming — "O  !  if fine speeches may now be made,  I
ought to begin first — but know not where I should end T
I then asked after Mrs.  Sheridan,  and he soon after left me.

Mrs.  Crewe was very obligingly solicitous our renewed
acquaintance should not drop here;  she asked me to

106 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

name any day for dining with her,  or to send to her at any
time when I could arrange a visit :  but I was obliged to
decline it,  on the general score of wanting time.

In the conclusion of the day's business there was much
speaking,  and I heard Mr.  Fox,  Mr.  Burke,  and several
others;  but the whole turned extremely in favour of the
gentleman at the bar,  to the great consternation of the
accusers,  whose own witnesses gave testimony,  most un
expectedly,  on the side of Mr.  Hastings.

We came away very late ;  my^  dear James quite de
lighted with this happy catastrophe.

MARCH. — I have only memorandums of this month,
as my dearest Fredy's being in town makes the chief part
of its occurrences already known.  What I have noted,
take.

In our first journey to Windsor this month Mrs.
Schwellenberg was still unable to go,  and the party was
Miss Planta,  Colonel Welbred,  Mr.  Fairly,  Sir Joseph
Banks,  and Mr.  Turbulent.

Sir Joseph was so exceedingly shy that we made no
sort of acquaintance at all.  If instead of going round
the world he had only fallen from the moon,  he could not
appear less versed in the usual modes of a tea-drinking
party.  But what,  you will say,  has a tea-drinking party to
do with a botanist,  a man of science,  a president of the
Royal Society?

I left him,  however,  to the charge of Mr.  Turbulent,
the two Colonels becoming,  as usual,  my joint sup
porters.  And Mr.  Turbulent,  in revenge,  ceased not
one moment to watch Colonel Welbred,  nor permitted
him to say a word,  or to hear an answer,  without some
most provoking grimace.  Fortunately,  upon this sub
ject he cannot confuse me ;  I have not a sentiment about
Colonel Welbred,  for or against,  that shrinks from ex
amination.

To-night,  however,  my conversation was almost wholly
with him.  I would not talk with Mr.  Turbulent;  t

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  107

could not talk with Sir Joseph Banks ;  and Mr.  Fairly
did not talk with me :  he had his little son with him  ;  he
was grave and thoughtful,  and seemed awake to no other
pleasure than discoursing with that sweet boy.

I believe I have forgotten to mention that Mrs.  Gwynn
had called upon me one morning,  in London,  and left me
a remarkably fine impression of Mr.  Bunbury's  *  Propa
gation of a Lie/  which I had mentioned when she was at
Windsor,  with regret at having never seen it.  This I had
produced here a month ago,  to show to our tea-party,  and
just as it was in the hands of Colonel Welbred,  his
Majesty entered the room ;  and,  after looking at it a
little while,  with much entertainment,  he took it away to
show it to the Queen and Princesses.  I thought it lost;
for Colonel Welbred said he concluded it would be
thrown amidst the general hoard of curiosities,  which,
when once seen,  are commonly ever after forgotten,  yet
which no one has courage to name and to claim.

This evening,  however,  the Colonel was successful,  and
recovered me my print.  It is so extremely humorous
that I was very glad to receive it,  and in return I fetched
rriy last sketches,  which Mr.  William Locke had most
kindly done for me when here last autumn,  and indulged
Colonel Welbred with looking at them,  charging him at
the same time to guard them from a similar accident.  I
meant to show them myself to my royal mistress,  who is
all care,  caution,  and delicacy,  to restore to the right
owner whatever she receives with a perfect knowledge

who the right owner is.

*  *  #  *  *

MONDAY,  MARCH 10TH — Was our next Windsor ex
cursion.

*****

The rest of this month will be comprised in a few
lines.  The visit to Windsor at Easter,  of my sweet and
loved friends,  has been related in the best manner to my
Susannah by themselves.

All I saw of my dear Charlotte during the same

108 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

period,  while in town,  we have mentioned in more imme
diate communications.

My most loved,  most revered Mrs.  Delany I saw by
every opportunity ;  and I received from her,  at Easter,  a
letter written in her own hand,  full of all the spirit,
affection,  fancy,  and elegance with which she could have
written at twenty-five.  Dear,  precious,  invaluable lines!
how shall I preserve and love them to my latest hour!

The second volume of the Letters of my reverenced
Dr.  Johnson was now lent me by her Majesty;  I found
in them very frequent mention of our name,  but nothing
to alarm in the reading it.

APRIL. — I have scarce a memorandum of this fatal
month,  in which I was bereft of the most revered of
friends,  and,  perhaps,  the most perfect of women.  The
two excellent persons to whom I write this will be the
first to subscribe to her worth  :  nearest to it themselves,
they are least conscious of the resemblance — but how
consolatory to me is it to see and to feel it !

I am yet scarce able to settle whether to glide silently
and resignedly — as far as I can — past all this melancholy
deprivation,  or whether to go back once more to the ever-
remembered,  ever-sacred scene that closed the earthly
pilgrimage of my venerable,  my sainted friend.

My beloved Susan and Fredy,  I believe,  know it all, —
I had so recently parted with that sweet Fredy,  and my
Susan was waiting for me as I quitted the dying angel,
just on the almost very moment of her beatitude.  What
a support to me was she in that awful,  heart-piercing
minute  ! — what a consolation  ! — what a blessing on the
following mourning day !

I believe I heard the last words she uttered  ;  I cannot
learn that she spoke after my reluctant departure.  She
finished with that cheerful resignation,  that lively hope,
which always broke forth when this last — awful — but,  to
her,  most happy change seemed approaching.

Poor Miss P and myself were kneeling by her

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  109

bedside.  She had just given me her soft hand;  without
power to see either of us,  she felt and knew us.  O,
never can I cease to cherish the remembrance of the
sweet,  benign,  holy voice with which she pronounced
a blessing upon us both  !  We kissed her ;  and,  with a
smile all beaming — I thought it so — of heaven,  she
seemed then to have taken leave of all earthly soli
citudes.  Yet then,  even then,  short as was her time on
earth,  the same soft human sensibility tilled her for poor
human objects.  She would not bid us farewell — would
not tell us she should speak with us no more — she only
said,  as she turned gently away from us,  "  And now —
I'll go to sleep  .'" — But,  O,  in what a voice she said it !  I
felt what the sleep would be;  so did poor Miss P .

Poor,  sweet,  unfortunate girl !  what deluges of tears
did she shed over me !  I promised her in that solemn
moment my eternal regard,  and she accepted this,  my
lirst protestation of any kind made to her,  as some solace
to her sufferings.  Sacred shall I hold it ! — sacred to my
last hour.  I believe,  indeed,  that angelic being had no
other wish equally fervent.

How full of days and full of honours was her exit !  I
should blush at the affliction of my heart in losing her,
could I ever believe excellence was given us here to love
and to revere,  yet gladly to relinquish.  No,  I cannot
think it:  the deprivation may be a chastisement,  but not
a joy.  We may submit to it with patience;  but we
cannot have felt it with warmth where we lose it without
pain.  Outrageously to murmur,  or sullenly to refuse
consolation — there,  indeed,  we are rebels against the dis
pensations of Providence — and rebels yet more weak
than wicked;  for what and whom is it we resist?  what
and who are we for such resistance  ?

She bid me — how often did she bid me — not grieve
to lose her !  Yet she said,  in my absence,  she knew
I must,  and sweetly regretted how much I must miss
her.  I teach myself to think of her felicity ;  and I never
dwell upon that without faithfully feeling I would

1 10 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

not desire her return.  But,  in every other channel in
which my thoughts and feelings turn,  I miss her with so
sad a void !  She was all that I dearly loved that remained
within my reach ;  she was become the bosom repository
of all the livelong day's transactions,  reflections,  feel
ings,  and wishes.  Her own exalted mind was all ex
panded when we met.  I do not think she concealed
from me the most secret thought of her heart ;  and while
every word that fell from her spoke wisdom,,  piety,  and
instruction,  her manner had an endearment,  her spirits
a native gaiety,  and her smile,  to those she loved,  a ten
derness so animated,  —  O,  why do I go on entering
into these details  ?  Believe me,  my dear friends,  now—
now that the bitterness of the first blow is over,  and that
the dreary chasm becomes more familiar to me,  I think
and trust I would not call her back.

What a message she left me !  did you hear it  ?  She
told Mrs.  Astley to say to me,  when she was gone,  how
much comfort I must always feel in reflecting how much
her latter days had been soothed by me.

Blessed spirit !  sweet,  fair,  and beneficent on earth  ! —
O,  gently mayest thou now be at rest in that last home —
to which fearfully I look forward,  yet not hopeless;
never that — and sometimes with fullest,  fairest,  sublimest
expectations!  If to her it be given to plead for those she
left,  I shall not be forgotten in her prayer.  Rest to her
sweet soul !  rest and everlasting peace to her gentle
spirit 1 My dearest friends,  I know not why I write all
this ;  but I can hardly turn myself away and write anything
else.  You must not read a word of it to Mr.  Locke.

I will now compile the heads of this sad month,  and
then end it with a conference long since promised with
Mr.  Wyndham,  which may enliven it to my feeling friends
and to my own pen.

I saw my poor lovely Miss P twice in every day,

when in town,  till after the last holy rites had been per
formed.  I had no peace away from her;  I thought my
self fulfilling a wish of that sweet departed saint,  in con-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  Ill

signing all the time I had at my own disposal to solacing
and advising with her beloved niece,  who received this
little offering with a sweetness that once again twined her

round my heart.

*****

I was much blamed here,  universally,  for my conduct
at this time,  in keeping alive all my sorrow,  by going so
continually to that scene of distress.  They knew not
it was my only balm  ! — all for which I could willingly
exert myself,  and all that rested with me of power to pay
the devotion of my heart to the revered manes of her who

was gone.

*****

My poor Miss P came to Windsor to settle her

affairs here,  and again I spent with her every moment in
my power,  though,  indeed,  I could not enter that house
with a very steady foot;  but we could join our tears,  and
try to join promises and exhortations to submission.

Poor Mrs.  Astley,  the worthy humble friend,  rather
than servant,  of the most excellent departed,  was the
person whom,  next to the niece,  I most pitied.  She was
every way to be lamented :  unfit for any other service,  yet
unprovided for in this,  by the utter and most regretted
inability of her much attached mistress,  who frequently
told me that leaving poor Astley unsettled hung heavy
on her mind.

My dearest friends know the success I had in venturing
to represent her worth and situation to my Royal Mistress.
In the moment when she came to my room to announce
His Majesty's gracious intention to pension Mrs.  Astley
here as housekeeper to the same house,  I really could
scarce withhold myself from falling prostrate at her feet :
I never felt such a burst of gratitude but where I had no
ceremonials to repress it.

Joseph,  too,  the faithful footman,  I was most anxious
to secure in some good service ;  and I related my wishes
for him to General Gary,  who procured for him a place
with his daughter,  Lady Amherst.

112 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

I forget if I have ever read you the sweet words that
accompanied to me the kind legacies left me by my
honoured friend — I believe not.

They were ordered to be sent me with the portrait of
Sacharissa,  and two medallions of their Majesties :  they
were originally written to accompany the legacy to the
Bishop of Worcester,  Dr.  Hurd,  as you may perceive by
the style,  but it was desired they might also be copied : —

"  I take this liberty,  that my much esteemed and re
spected friend may sometimes recollect a person who
\vas so sensible of the honour of  ^  friendship,  and
who delighted so much in her conversation and
works."

Need I — O,  I am sure I need not — say with what
tender,  grateful,  sorrowing joy I received these sweet
pledges of her invaluable regard  !

To these,  by another codicil,  was added the choice of
one of her mosaic flowers.  And,  verbally,  on the night
but one before she died,  she desired I might have her
fine quarto edition of Shakspere,  sweetly saying she had
never received so much pleasure from him in any other
way as through my reading.

What a heart overflowing with kindness,  goodness,
and benevolence was hers  ! — ever insensible to the noblest
things she did ;  ever alive to the most trivial she received  !
She always appeared to me an angel before her time —
O,  may she now be a guardian,  a guiding,  and a pitying
one!

All that voluntarily drew me from the lovely young
sufferer at this time was my poor Mrs.  Ord,  who just now
lost her youngest son,  a very promising youth,  who died
in the East Indies.

This occasioned a division in my melancholy visits  :  I
went to them both all that I was able,  comforting to the

best of my power my poor Miss P ,   and receiving

myself the most edifying lessons by witnessing the self-
given comfort assumed by Mrs.  Ord.     She bore this

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  113

stroke with a fortitude so truly religious,  that I can never
admire nor recollect it sufficiently.  All her maternal
feelings in this world were sunk in the superior maternal
feelings of hoping her son happy,  and beyond the reach of
sublunary temptation to merited misery.  She has a truly
elevated mind — disinterested,  sincere,  pious,  and firm.
She admitted only Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt and myself,  and
•we passed several evenings all together,  in moralizing
sorrow.

My dear and kind Charlotte was in town all this
month,  and came to me with sweet and genuine affection
every moment I could receive her,  which was every mo
ment that my attendance and these two houses of mourn
ing did not engage me.

My friendly,  anxious,  and kind Miss Cambridge came
to town also,  to spend with me a consolatory morning,
and I was truly grateful,  and could not but revive the
sooner for it.  My beloved father came to me all he
could — my dear Esther — all that I could covet to see on
this sad event came.

The whole household,  indeed,  took a pitying interest
in the great loss they knew me to sustain.  I had mes
sages,  and inquiries,  and visits from all.

But how sad was my re-entrance,  and every re-entrance
into Windsor! — bereft,  irremediably,  of all that could
soften to me the total separation it causes between me
and all my original and dearest friends.

It was,  however,  a very fortunate circumstance that for
the two or three first comings Mr.  Fairly happened to be
of the King's party.  Inured himself to sorrow,  his soul
was easily turned to pity ;  and far from censuring the
affliction,  or contemning the misfortunes,  which were in
ferior to his own,  his kind and feeling nature led him to
110 sensation but of compassion,  which softened every
feature of his face,  and took place of all the hard traces
of personal suffering which most severely had marked it.
The tone of his voice was all in sympathy with this gentle
ness  ;  and there was not an attention in his power to show

VOL.  iv.  I

114 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

me that he did not exert with the most benevolent and even
flattering alacrity  ;  interesting himself about my diet,  my
health,  my exercise ;  proposing walks to me,  and exhort
ing me to take them,  and even intimating he should
see that I did,  were not his time all occupied by royal

attendance.

*****

Poor Miss Baker lost her favourite nephew,  George
Drake,  at the same time ;  and I went to spend one after
noon with her and her poor mother at the Salt-office,  as
Miss Cambridge thought it might a little revive them.
There cannot be two more excellent people.  I had never
been able to manage a visit to them before,  since I
quitted home.  We were now all in unison — all in sad
ness and seriousness,  and fitted for being together.

The death of the worthy and ingenious Mr.  Lightfoot
happened also in this month,  and just before that so
deeply felt.  It was very sudden  ;  but I think he was a
man so inwardly good and religious he was never un
prepared.

Colonel Welbred's waiting was over with March  :  it
would have been greatly to my regret had I been less
unhappy.  Colonel Manners succeeded  ;  and with all his
levity and spirits,  showed a kind concern for me on this
occasion that marked great good-nature and good-will.

Poor Mr.  Bryant came once to dine with me,  very sin
cerely joining in the lamentation of the month.

Mr.  Turbulent during this period was so thrown from
all his flights by my gravity and sadness,  that he spent but
little time with me,  and seemed  "  therewith content ;''  yet
he is a man of real good-nature,  and ready and willing to
take any trouble and labour,  and run any hazard,  and risk
any expense,  to serve or to oblige.  But gravity is too
much for him  —  he cannot support its weight — he had
rather quarrel and be quarrelled with  !

The part of this month in which my Susanna was in
town I kept no journal at all.  And I have now nothing
to add but to copy those memorandums I made of the

1788]  OF MADAME D'A RELAY.  115

Trial on the day I went to Westminster Hall with my
two friends,  previously to the deep calamity on which
I have dwelt.  They told me they could not hear what
Mr.  Wyndham said ;  and there is a spirit in his discourse
more worth their hearing than any other thing I have now
to write.

You may remember his coming straight from the
managers,  in their first procession to their box,  and be
ginning at once a most animated attack — scarcely waiting
first to say How do ! — before he exclaimed  "  I have a
great quarrel with you ! — I am come now purposely to
quarrel with you ! — you have done me mischief irre
parable — you have ruined me  !"

"  Have I  ?"

"  Yes  :  and not only with what passed here,  even setting
that aside,  though there was mischief enough here ;  but
you have quite undone me since  !"

I begged him to let me understand how.

"  I will,"  he cried.  "  When the Trial broke up for the
recess I went into the country,  purposing to give my
whole time to study and business  ;  but,  most unfortu
nately,  I had just sent for a new set of  *  Evelina;'  and in
tending only to look at it,  I was so cruelly caught that I
could not let it out of my hands,  and have been living
with nothing but the Branghtons ever since  !"

I could not but laugh,  though on this subject  'tis
always awkwardly.

"There was no parting with it,"  he continued;  "I
could not shake it off from me a moment! — see,  then,
every way,  what mischief you have done me  !"

He ran on to this purpose much longer,  with great
rapidity,  and then,  suddenly stopping,  again said,  "But
I have yet another quarrel with you,  and one you must
answer.  How comes it that the moment you have
attached us to the hero and the heroine — the instant you
have made us cling to them so that there is no getting
disengaged — twined,  twisted,  twirled them round our very
heart-strings — how is it that then you make them undergo

i2

116 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

such persecutions?  There is really no enduring their
distresses,  their suspenses,  their perplexities.  Why are
vou so cruel to all around — to them and their readers?"

I longed to say — Do you object to a persecution  ? — but
I know he spells it prosecution.

I could make no answer :  I never can.  Talking over
one's own writings seems to me always ludicrous,  because
it cannot be impartially,  either by author or commen
tator  ;  one feeling,  the other fearing,  too much for strict
truth and unaffected candour.

When we found the subject quite hopeless as to dis
cussion,  he changed it,  and said  "I have lately seen some
friends of yours,  and I assure you I gave you an excellent
character to them  :  I told them you were firm,  fixed,  and
impenetrable to all conviction !"

An excellent character,  indeed !  He meant to Mr.
Francis and Charlotte.

Then he talked a little of the business of the day ;  and
he told me that Mr.  Anstruther was to speak.

"  I was sure of it,"  I cried,  (<  by his manner when he
entered the Managers'  Box.  I shall know when you are
to speak,  Mr.  Wyndham,  before I hear you."

He shrugged his shoulders a little uncomfortably.

I asked him to name to me the various managers.  He
did  ;  adding,  "  Do you not like to sit here,  where you
can look down upon the several combatants before the
battle?"

When he named Mr.  Michael Angelo Taylor,  I par
ticularly desired he might be pointed out to me,  telling
him I had long wished to see him,  from the companion
given to him in one of the Probationary Odes,  where they
have coupled him with my dear father,  most imperti
nently and unwarrantably.

"  That,  indeed,"  he cried,  "  is a licentiousness in the
press quite intolerable ! — to attack and involve private
characters in their public lampoons!  To Dr.  Burney
they could have no right;  but Mr.  Michael Angelo Taylor
is fair game enough,  and likes that or any other way

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  117

whatever of obtaining notice.  You know what Johnson
said to Boswell of preserving fame  ?"

"  No."

"  There were but two ways/'  he told him,  "  of pre
serving;  one was by sugar,  the other by salt.  '  Now,'  says
he,  '  as the sweet way,  Bozzy,  you are but little likely to
attain,  I would have you plunge into vinegar,  and get
fairly pickled at once/  And such has been the plan of
Mr.  Michael Angelo Taylor.  With the sweet he had,
indeed,  little chance,  so he soused into the other,  head
over ears."

We then united forces in repeating passages from
various of the Probationary Odes,  and talking over vari
ous of the managers,  till Mr.  Anstruther was preparing
to speak,  and Mr.  Wyndham went to his cell.

I am sure you will remember that Mr.  Burke came
also,  and the panic with which I saw him,  doubled by my
tear lest he should see that panic.

When the speech was over,  and evidence was filling up
the day's business,  Mr.  Wyndham returned.

Some time after,  but I have forgotten how,  we were
agreeing in thinking suspense,  and all obscurity in expec
tation or in opinion,  amongst the things most trying to
bear in this mortal life,  especially where they lead to
some evil construction.  (c But then,"  cried he,  "  on the
other hand,  there is nothing so pleasant as clearing away
a disagreeable prejudice ;  nothing so exhilarating as the
dispersion of a black mist,  and seeing all that had been
black and gloomy turn out bright and fair."

"  That,  sir,"  cried I,  "  is precisely what I expect from
thence,"  pointing to the prisoner.

What a look he gave me !  yet he laughed irresistibly.

"  However,"  I continued,  "  I have been putting my
expectations from your speech to a kind of test."

"  And how,  for Heaven's sake  ?"

"  Why,  I have been reading — running over,  rather — a
set of speeches,  in which almost the whole House made a
part,  upon the India Bill  ;  and in looking those over I

1J8 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

saw not one that had not in it something positively and
pointedly personal,  except Mr.  Wyndham's."

" O,  that was a mete accident !"

"  But it was just the accident I expected from Mr.
Wyndham.  I do not mean that there was invective in all
the others,  for in some there was panegyric — plenty  !  but
that panegyric was always so directed as to convey more
of severe censure to one party than of real praise to the
other.  Yours was all to the business,  and thence I infer
you will deal just so by Mr.  Hastings."

"  I believe,"  cried he,  looking at me very sharp,  "you
only want to praise me down.  You know what it is to
skate a man down  ?"

"  No,  indeed."

u Why,  to skate a man down is a very favourite diver
sion among a certain race of wags.  It is only to praise,
and extol,  and stimulate him to double and treble exer
tion and effort,  till,  in order to show his desert of such
panegyric,  the poor dupe makes so many turnings and
windings,  and describes circle after circle with such
hazardous dexterity,  that,  at last,  down he drops in the
midst of his flourishes,  to his own eternal disgrace,  and
their entire content."

I gave myself no vindication from this charge but a
laugh  ;  and we returned to discuss speeches and speakers,
arid I expressed again my extreme repugnance against all
personality in these public harangues,  except in simply
stating facts.

"What say you,  then,"  cried he,  "  to Pitt?"  He then
repeated a warm and animated praise of his powers and
his eloquence,  but finished with this censure  :  "  He takes
not,"  cried he,  "the grand path suited to his post as
Prime Minister,  for he is personal beyond all men;
pointed,  sarcastic,  cutting ;  and it is in him peculiarly
unbecoming.  The Minister should be always concili
ating  ;  the attack,  the probe,  the invective,  belong to the
assailant."

Then lie instanced Lord North,  and said much more

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  119

on these political matters and maxims than I can possibly
write,  or could at the time do more than hear ;  for,  as I
told him,  I not only am no politician,  but have no am
bition to become one,  thinking it by no means a female
business.

When he went to the Managers'  Box,  Mr.  Burke again
took his place,  but he held it a very short time,  though he
was in high good humour and civility.  The involuntary
coldness that results from internal disapprobation must,
I am sure,  have been seen,  so thoroughly was it felt.  I
can only talk on this matter with Mr.  Wyndham,  who,
knowing my opposite principles,  expects to hear them,
and gives them the fairest play by his good humour,
candour,  and politeness.  But there is not one other
manager with whom I could venture such openness.

That Mr.  Wyndham takes it all in good part is cer
tainly amongst the things he makes plainest,  for again,
after Mr.  Burke's return to the Den,  he came back.

"  I am happy,"  cried I,  "  to iind you have not betrayed
me."

"  Oh,  no ;  I would not for the world."

"  Oh,  I am quite satisfied you have kept my counsel ;
for Mr.  Burke has been with me twice,  and speaking
with a good humour I could not else have expected from
him.  He comes to tell me that he never pities me for
sitting here,  whatever is going forward,  as the sitting
must be rest;  and,  indeed,  it seems as if my coming
hither was as much to rest my frame as to exercise my
mind."

"  That's a very good idea,  but I do not like to realize
it;  1 do not like to think of you and fatigue together.
Is it so?  Do you really want rest?"

"  O,  no  !"

"O,  I am well aware yours is not a mind to turn
complainer ;  but yet I fear,  and not for your rest only,
but your time.  How is that ;  have you it,  as you ought,
at your own disposal  ?"

"Why,  not quite,"1 cried I,  laughing.  Good Heaven I
what a question,  in a situation like mine  !

120 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

"  Well,  that is a thing I cannot bear to think of —
that you should want time  !"

''But the Queen,"  cried I,  "is so kind/'

"That may be,"  interrupted he,  "and I am very glad
of it :  but still,  time — and to you !"

"Yet,  after all,  in the whole,  I have a good deal,
though always uncertain ;  for,  if sometimes I have not
two minutes when I expect two hours,  at other times 1
have two hours where I expected only two minutes."

"All that is nothing,  if you have them not with cer
tainty.  Two hours are of no more value than two
minutes,  if you have them not at undoubted command."

Again I answered,  "  The Queen is so kind ;"  deter
mined to sound that sentence well and audibly into Re
publican ears.

"Well,  well,"  cried he,  "that may be some compen
sation to you ;  but to us,  to all others,  what compensation
is there for depriving you of time  ?"

t(  Mrs.  Locke,  here,5'  cried I,  "  always wishes time coulcJ
be bought,  because there are so many who have more
than they know what to do with,  that those who have
less might be supplied very reasonably."

"  'Tis an exceeding good idea,"  cried he;  "and I am
sure,  if it could be purchased,  it ought to be given to yon
by act of parliament,  as a public donation and tribute."

There was a tine flourish  !

A little after,  while we were observing Mr.  Hastings-,
Mr.  Wyndham exclaimed,  "  He's looking up;  I believe
lie is looking for you.'

I turned hastily away,  fairly saying,  "I hope not."

II Yes,  he is  ;    he seems as if he wanted to bow to
you."

I shrank back.

"  No,  he looks off;  he thinks you in too bad com
pany  !"

"Ah,  Mr.  Wyndham,"  cried I,  "you should not be
so hard-hearted towards him,  whoever else may;  and I
could tell you,  and I will tell you if you please,  a very
forcible reason."

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  121

He assented.

"  You must know,  then,  that people there are in this
world who scruple not to assert that there is a very strong
personal resemblance between Mr.  Wyndham and Mr.
Hastings ;  nay,  in the profile,  I see it myself at this
moment ;  and therefore ought not you to be a little softer
than the rest,  if merely in sympathy  ?"

He laughed very heartily  ;  and owned he had heard of
the resemblance before.

"  I could take him extremely well,"  I cried,  "  for your
uncle."

if he looks like my elder brother,  I aspire
he is more like your uncle ;  he has just that

"  No,  no
at no more.'

"  No,  no

air ;  he seems just of that time of life.     Can you then be
so unnatural as to prosecute him with this eagerness  ?"

And then,  once again,  I ventured to give him a little
touch of Moliere's old woman,  lest he should forget that
good and honest dame  ;  and I told him there was one
thing she particularly objected to in all the speeches that
had yet been made,  and hoped his speech would be
exempt from.

He inquired what that was.

"  Why,  she says she does not like to hear every orator
compliment another;  every fresh speaker say,  he leaves
to the superior ability of his successor the prosecution of
the business."

"  O,  no,"  cried he very readily,  "  I detest all that sort
of adulation.  I hold it in the utmost contempt."

"  And,  indeed,  it will be time to avoid it when your
turn comes,  for I have heard it in no less than four
speeches already."

And then he offered his assistance about servants and
carriages,  and we all came away,  our different routes ;
but my Fredy and Susan must remember my meeting
with Mr.  Hastings in coming out,  and his calling after
me,  and saying^  with a very comic sort of politeness,  "  I
must come here to have the pleasure of seeing Miss
Burney,  for I see her nowhere else."

122 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

What a strange incident would have been formed had
this rencontre happened thus if I had accepted Mr.
Wyndham's offered services !  I am most glad I had
not ;  I should have felt myself a conspirator,  to have been
so met by Mr.  Hastings.

I have nothing more to say of this month.  Alas  !  that
I had not had half as much.

MAY. — On the 17th of this month Miss P bade

her sad and reluctant adieu to London.  The Commemo
ration Handelian was held at the Pantheon the evening
before,  and my Royal Mistress most graciously gave me a
ticket for her to accompany me thither.  My dear father
carried us.  It was a most melancholy evening to us
both.

I gave what time I could command from Miss P 's

departure to my excellent and maternal Mrs.  Ord,  who
supported herself with uuabating fortitude and resigna
tion.  But a new calamity affected her much,  and affected
me greatly also,  though neither she nor I were more
than distant spectators in comparison with the nearer
mourners :  the amiable and lovely Lady Mulgrave gave a
child to her lord,  and died,  in her first dawn of youthful
beauty and sweetness,  and exactly a year after she became
his wife.  'Twas,  indeed,  a tremendous blow.  It was
all our wonder that Lord Mulgrave kept his senses,  as he
had not been famed for patience or piety ;  but I believe
he was benignly inspired with both,  from his deep admi
ration of their excellence in his lovely wife.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Cholmley were in the deepest distress,
and my dear Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt sympathized in their
sorrow with the most feeling tenderness.  Mr.  Smelt,
indeed,  was the prop and support of them all.  His firm
reliance on Providence,  his strong and cheerful sense that
all is directed for the best,  give to him a force and reso
lution that no misfortune can shake,  and that enable him
wonderfully to sustain and assist all of feebler depend
ence or weaker minds.

Once I saw my dear Esther,  and I gave her two pretty

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  123

boys two tickets for the trial.  They were given me by
the Queen,  with permission to dispose of them as 1
pleased if I did not wish to use them.  My wish for
using them was all over,  save when they could procure
me a morning with one of my sisters ;  for the great
delight taken by my ever-animated Mrs.  Delany in the
accounts I brought her of those days had given a zest to
them,  which now,  being over,  made them 110 longer desir
able except for that other purpose.

I made two or three afternoon visits to Chelsea.  In
one of them I met old Dr.  Monsey,  who desired to know
if I was the Queen's Miss Burney  ?  Yes,  thought I,

very decidedly !

*  *  *  *

I must mention a laughable enough circumstance.
Her Majesty inquired of me if I had ever met with
Lady Hawke  ?  Oh yes,  I cried,  and Lady Say and
Sele too.  "  She has just desired permission to send
me a novel of her own writing,"  answered her Majesty.

"  I hope,"  cried I,  "'tis not tbe Mausoleum of Julia !"

But yes,  it proved no less  !  and this she has now pub
lished and sends about.  You must remember Lady Say
and Sele's quotation from it.  Her Majesty was so
gracious as to lend it me,  for I had some curiosity to
read it.  It is all of a piece — all love,  love,  love,  unmixed
and unadulterated with any more worldly materials.

I read also the second volume of the  *  Paston Letters,'
and found their character the same as in the iirst,  and
therefore read them with curiosity and entertainment.

The greater part of the month was spent,  alas !  at
Windsor,  with what a dreary vacuity of heart and of
pleasure I need not say.  The only period of it in which
my spirits could be commanded to revive was during two
of the excursions in which Mr.  Fairly was of the party  ;
and the sight of him — calm,  mild,  nay cheerful,  under
such superior sorrows — struck me with that sort of edifying
ail miration that led me,  perforce,  to the best exertion in
my power for the conquest of my deep depression.  If

124 DIARY AND LETTERS      [PART III.

I did this from conscience in private,  from a sense of
obligation to him in public I reiterated my efforts,,  as I
received from him all the condoling softness and attention
he could possibly have bestowed upon me had my afflic
tion been equal or even greater than his own.

A terrible period being put to the life of General
Carpenter,  who,  in a fit,  I doubt not,  of sudden lunacy,
destroyed himself,  Colonel Goldsworthy became senior
Equerry,  and Major Garth was chosen to supply the
vacancy.  He came to Windsor on a visit,  and to recon
noitre the field of action.  He stayed a few days.  He is
sensible and intelligent.  He has travelled much,  and
converses on the places he has seen very satisfactorily.
Colonel Wei bred seems gloomy enough now.  I believe
he wants courage to brave the world,  more than inclina
tion to stand the chance for himself.  How people are
always living for others,  or rather not living at all,  lest
others should think they live unwisely  !

*****  *

On one of the Egham race days the Queen sent Miss
Planta and me on the course,  in one of the royal coaches,
with Lord Templeton and Mr.  Charles Fairly for our
beaus.  Lady Templeton was then at the Lodge,  and I
had the honour of two or three conferences with her
during her stay.

On the course we were espied by Mr.  Crutchley,  who
instantly devoted himself to my service for the morning —
taking care of our places,  naming jockeys,  horses,  bets,
plates,  &c.  Sec.,  and talking between times of Streat-
ham and all the Streathamites,  of Mrs.  Piozzi,  all the
Miss Thrales,  Mr.  Seward,  Mr.  Selwin,  Harry Cotton,
Sophy Streatfield,  Miss Owen,  Sir Philip Clerk,  Mr.
Murphy,  &c.  &c.

We were both,  I believe,  very glad of this discourse.
He pointed to me where his house stood,  in a tine park,
within sight of the race-ground,  and proposed introducing
me to his sister,  who was his housekeeper,  and asking
me if,  through her invitation,  I would come to Sunning

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  125

Hill Park.  I assured him I lived so completely in a
monastery that I could make no new acquaintance.  He
then said he expected soon Susan and Sophy Thrale on
a visit to his sister,  and he presumed I would not refuse
coming to see them.  I truly answered I should rejoice
to do it if in my power,  but that most probably I must
content myself with meeting them on the Terrace.  He
promised to bring them there with his sister,  though he
had given up that walk these live years.

It will give me indeed great pleasure to see them again.

My two young beaus stayed dinner with us,  and I after
wards strolled upon the lawn with them till tea-time.  I
could not go on the Terrace,  nor persuade them to go
by themselves.  We backed as the royal party returned
home ;  and when they had all entered the house,  Colonel
Welbred,  who had stood aloof,  quitted the train to join
our little society.  "  Miss Burney,"  he cried,  "  I think I
know which horse you betted upon  !  Cordelia  !"

"  For the name's sake you think it !"  I cried;  and he
began some questions and comments upon the races,
when suddenly the window of the tea-room opened,  and
the voice of Mr.  Turbulent,  with a most sarcastic tone,
called out,  "I hope Miss Burney and Colonel Welbred
are well !"

We could neither of us keep a profound gravity,  though
really he deserved it from us both.  I turned from the
Colonel,  and said I was coming directly to the tea-room.

Colonel Welbred would have detained me to finish our
race discourse,  for he had shut the window when he had
made his speech,  but I said it was time to go in.  "Oh
no,"  cried he,  laughing a little,  "  Mr.  Turbulent only
wants his own tea,  and he does not deserve it for this !"

In,  however,  I went,  and Colonel Manners took the
famous chair the instant I was seated.  We all began
race talk,  but Mr.  Turbulent,  approaching very signifi
cantly,  said,  "Do you want a chair on the other side,
ma'arn?  Shall I tell the — Colonel — to bring one  ?"

"  No,  indeed !"  cried I,  half seriously,  lest he should
do it.

126 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

He went away,  but presently returning,  and looking
towards Colonel Manners,  he exclaimed,  "  How easily a
chair may be sat upon,  yet not filled  !"

He went on to the same purpose,  but I made tea,  and
refused to answer him,  till at last he said,  "  Do,  ma'am,
accept my proposal !  the Colonel will like it extremely ;
you may take my word for it."

I then gravely begged him to be quiet,  and he went
his way  ;  but Colonel Welbred,  not knowing what had
passed,  came to that same other side,  and renewed his
conversation,  saying,  "I have recollected another horse
Miss Burney may have betted upon,  '  Rosina!'"  and this
led on to the race-ground  ;  and thence he proceeded to
Madame Krumpholtz the harp-player,  who was soon to
have a concert,  at which he wished me to hear her.

In the midst of all this Mr.  Turbulent hastily ad
vanced with a chair,  saying,  "  Colonel Welbred,  I cannot
bear to see you standing so long."

I found it impossible not to laugh under my hat,  though
I really wished to bid him stand in a corner for a naughty
boy.  The Colonel,  I suppose,  laughed too,  whether he
would or not,  for I heard no answer.  However,  he took
the chair,  and finding me wholly unembarrassed by this
polissonncrie,  though not wholly unprovoked by it,  he re
newed his discourse,  and kept his seat till the party,  very
late,  broke up ;  but Colonel Manners,  who knew not what
to make of all this,  exclaimed,  "Why,  I see,  ma'am,  you
cannot keep Mr.  Turbulent in much order."

My two young beaus stayed as late as they could.
Lord Templeton seems perfectly open and well disposed,
and little Mr.  Fairly has a countenance and manner that
promise the fair inheritance of all his father's virtues.

JUNE. — Another Streatham acquaintance,  Mr.  Murphy,
made much effort at this time for a meeting,  through
Charles,  with whom he is lately become very intimate.
So much passed about the matter,  that I was almost com
pelled to agree that he should know when I was able to
go to St.  Martin's-street.  He is an extremely agreeable

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  127

and entertaining man,  but of so light a character in
morals that I do not wish his separate acquaintance ;
though,  when I met with him at Streatham,  as associates
of the same friends,  I could not but receive much advan
tage from his notice — amusement rather I should perhaps
say,  though there was enough for the higher word,  im
provement,  in all but a serious way.  However,  where,  in
that serious way,  I have no good opinion,  I wish not to
cultivate,  but rather to avoid,  even characters in other
respects the most captivating.  It is not from fearing
contagion — they would none of them attack me  :  it is
simply from an internal drawback to all pleasure in their
society,  while I am considering their talents at best as
useless.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg came to Windsor with us after the
Birth-day,  for the rest of the summer.

Mr.  Turbulent took a formal leave of me at the same
time,  as his wife now came to settle at Windsor,  and he
ceased to belong to our party.  He only comes to the
Princesses at stated hours,  and then returns to his own
home.  He gave me many serious thanks for the time
passed with me,  spoke in flourishing terms of its contrast
to former times,  and vowed no compensation could ever
be made him for the hours he had thrown away by com
pulsion on  "The Oyster."  His behaviour altogether
was very well — here and there a little eccentric,  but,  in
the main,  merely good-humoured and high-spirited.

I am persuaded there is no manner of truth in the
report relative to Mr.  Fairly and Miss Fuzilier,  for he led
me into a long conversation with him one evening when
the party was large,  and all were otherwise engaged,  upon
subjects of this nature,  in the course of which he asked
me if I thought any second attachment could either be as
strong or as happy as a first.

I was extremely surprised by the question,  and quite
unprepared how to answer it,  as I knew not with what
feelings or intentions I might war by any unwary opinions.
I did little,  therefore,  but evade and listen,  though he

128 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

kept up the discourse in a very animated manner,  till the
party all broke up.

Had I spoken without any consideration but what was
general and genuine,  I should have told him that my
idea was simply this,  that where a first blessing was with
drawn by Providence,  not lost by misconduct,  it seemed
to me most consonant to reason,  nature,  and mortal life,
to accept what could come second,  in this as in all other
deprivations.  Is it not a species of submission to the
Divine will to make ourselves as happy as we can in
what is left us to obtain,  where bereft of what we had
sought?  My own conflict for content in a life totally
adverse to my own inclinations,  is all built on this prin
ciple,  and when it succeeds,  to this owes its success.

I presumed not,  however,  to talk in this way to Mr.
Fairly,  for 1 am wholly ignorant in what manner or to
what degree his first attachment may have riveted his
affections;  but by the whole of what passed it seemed to
me very evident that he was not merely entirely without
any engagement,  but entirely at this time without any
plan or scheme of forming any  ;  and probably he never
mav.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  129

PART IV.

1788.

Illness of the Kins: — Journey to Cheltenham— Cheltenham Diary-
Breakfast at Nuneham Court— Henley-on-Thames— Oxford —
Cheltenham— Fauconberg Hall — Lady Plymouth — Visit from
the King— Colonel Gwynn— Court Attendance — Lord Courtown
—The Royal Family in Public— The Walks at Cheltenham-
Arrangements at Fauconberg Hall  —  Royal Munificence  —
— The Cheltenham Waters — Falconer's  'Shipwreck'  —  The
Cheltenham Meadows — Rencontres with Old Acquaintance  —
Mr.  Seward— Mrs.  Piozzi and Baretti — Their literary Quar
rel— Lady D'Oyley— Miss Palmer— Visit to Lord Bathurst's
at Cirencester— Mr.  Raikes,  the Founder of the Sunday Schools
— Gloucester Cathedral— Tomb of Edward the Second— The
Lions of Gloucester — The Jail — Treatment of the Prisoners —
London and Country Mobs — Dr.  Halifax,  Bishop of Glou
cester— Dr.  Tucker,  Dean of Gloucester— The Vanity of
Human Life — Courts and a Court Life discussed— Akenside
— Baretti's Strictures on Mrs.  Thrale — Anecdote of Baretti —
Italian Revenge— A Visit to Lord Coventry's— Discussion on
*  Cecilia'— Attendance on the Queen — The Cheltenham Theatre
— Mrs.  Jordan in  '  The Country Girl'— The Royal Family at
Gloucester Cathedral — Lord Salisbury— Lady Harcourt— The
King and Queen on the Walks— Character of Pitt— Family
Papers— The Olimpiade— Mrs.  Jordan's Sir Harry Wildair —
Burning of private Papers.

JULY> — Early in this month the King's indisposition
occasioned the plan of his going to Cheltenham,  to try the
effect of the waters drank upon the spot.  It was settled
that the party should be the smallest that was possible,  as
his Majesty was to inhabit the house of Lord Fauconberg,
vacated for that purpose,  which was very small.  He
resolved upon only taking his Equerry in waiting and
pages,  &c.  Lord Courtown,  his treasurer of the house
hold,  was already at Cheltenham,  and therefore at hand
to attend.  The Queen agreed to carry her Lady of the
Bedchamber in waiting,  with Miss Planta and F.  B.,
and none others but wardrobe-women for herself and the
Princesses.

Mr.  Fairly was here almost all the month previously to

VOL.  IV.  K

130 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

our departure.  At first it was concluded he,  and Colonel
Gwynn,  the Equerry in waiting,  were to belong wholly to
the same table with Miss Planta and me,  and Mr.  Fairly
threatened repeatedly how well we should all know one
another,  and how well he would study and know us all
au fond.

But before we set out the plan was all changed,  for
the King determined to throw aside all state,  and make
the two gentlemen dine at his own table.  "  We shall
have,  therefore,"  said Mr.  Fairly,  with a very civil regret,
"no tea-meetings at Cheltenham."

This,  however,  was an opening to me of time and
leisure such as I had never yet enjoyed.

As to all else I shall beg leave to skip,  and bring you,
my dear friends,  to another part of the country.

CHELTENHAM, SUNDAY,  JULY 13TH. — Now,  my dearest
friends,  I open an account which promises at least all the
charms of novelty,  and which,  if it fulfils its promise,
will make this month rather an episode than a continua
tion of my prosaic performance.

So now for yesterday,  Saturday,  July 12.

We were all up at five o'clock ;  and the noise and con
fusion reigning through the house,  and resounding all
around it,  from the quantities of people stirring,  boxes
nailing,  horses neighing,  and dogs barking,  was tremen
dous.

I must now tell you the party  : —

Their Majesties ;  the Princesses Royal,  Augusta,  and
Elizabeth ;  Lady Weymouth,  Mr.  Fairly,  Colonel Gwynn,
Miss Planta,  and a person you have sometimes met.
Pages for King,  Queen,  and Princesses,  Wardrobe-
women for ditto,  and footmen for all.

A smaller party for a royal excursion cannot well be
imagined.  How we shall all manage Heaven knows.
Miss Planta and myself are allowed no maid  ;  the house
would not hold one.

The Royal party set off first,  to stop and breakfast at
Lord Harcourt's at Nuneham.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  131

You will easily believe Miss Planta and myself were
not much discomfited in having orders to proceed straight
forward.  You know we have been at Nuneham  !

Mrs.  Sandys,  the Queen's wardrobe-woman,  and Miss
Macentomb,  the Princesses';  accompanied us.

At Henley-on-Thames,  at an inn beautifully situated,
we stopped to breakfast,  and at Oxford to take a sort of
half dinner.

The crowd gathered together upon the road,  waiting
for the King and Queen to pass,  was immense,  and
almost unbroken from Oxford to Cheltenham.  Every
town and village within twenty miles seemed to have
been deserted,  to supply all the pathways with groups of
anxious spectators.  Yet,  though so numerous,  so quiet
were they,  and so new to the practices of a hackneyed
mob,  that their curiosity never induced them to venture
within some yards of the Royal carriage,  and their satis
faction never broke forth into tumult and acclamation.

In truth,  I believe they never were aware of the
moment in which their eagerness met its gratification.
Their Majesties travelled wholly without guards or state  ;
and I am convinced,  from the time we advanced beyond
Oxford,  they were taken only for their own attendants.

When we came to Burford,  where we stopped for
horses,  how I wished to have seen Mrs.  Gast,  my dear
Mr.  Crisp's sister !  I knew she resided there,  but had no
power to visit her.  1 inquired after her of the inn-keeper,
and sent her my most affectionate remembrances.

All the towns through which we passed were filled with
people,  as closely fastened one to another as they appear
in the pit of the playhouse.  Every town seemed all
face ;  and all the way upon the road we rarely proceeded
five miles without encountering a band of most horrid
fiddlers,  scraping  "God save the King"  with all their
might,  out of tune,  out of time,  and all in the rain ;  for,
most unfortunately,  there were continual showers falling
all the day.

This was really a subject for serious regret,  such num-

K2

132 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

bers of men,  women,  and children being severely suffer
ers  ;  yet standing it all through with such patient loyalty,
that I am persuaded not even a hail or thunder storm
would have dispersed them.

The country,  for the most part,  that we traversed,  was
extremely pretty ;  and,  as we advanced nearer to our place
of destination,  it became quite beautiful.

When we arrived at Cheltenham,  which is almost all one
street,  extremely long,  clean,  and well paved,  we had to
turn out of the public way about a quarter of a mile,  to
proceed to Fauconberg Hall,  which my Lord Fauconberg
has lent for the King's use during his stay at this place.

It is,  indeed,  situated on a most sweet spot,  surrounded
with lofty hills beautifully variegated,  and bounded,  for
the principal object,  with the hills of Malvern;  which,
here barren,  and there cultivated,  here all chalk,  and there
all verdure,  reminded me of Box-hill,  and gave me an im
mediate sensation of reflected as well as of visual plea
sure,  from giving to my new habitation some resemblance
of Norbury Park.

When we had mounted the gradual ascent on which the
house stands,  the crowd all around it was as one head  !  We
stopped within twenty yards of the door,  uncertain how to
proceed.  All the Royals were at the windows;  and to
pass this multitude, — to xvade through it,  rather, — was a
most disagreeable operation.  However,  we had no choice:
we therefore got out,  and,  leaving the wardrobe-women
to find their way to the back-door,  Miss Planta and I
glided on to the front one,  where we saw the two gentle
men,  and where,  as soon as we got up the steps,  we en
countered the King.  He inquired most graciously con
cerning our journey ;  and Lady Weymouth came down
stairs to summon me to the Queen,  vrho was in exceilent
spirits,  and said she would show me her room.

"  This,  ma'am  !"  cried I,  as I entered it — "is this liltle
room for your Majesty  ?"

"  O stay,"  cried she,  laughing,  "  till you see your own
before you call it little  !"

1768]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  133

Soon after,  she sent me upstairs for that purpose ;  and
then,  to be sure,  I began to think less diminutively of that
I had just quitted.  Mine,  with one window,  had just
space to crowd in a bed,  a chest of drawers,  and three
small chairs.

The prospect,  however,  from the window is extremely
pretty,  and all is new and clean.  So I doubt not being
very comfortable,  as I am senza Cerbera, — though having
no maid is a real evil to one so little her own mistress as
myself.  I little wanted the fagging of my own clothes
and dressing,  to add to my daily fatigues.

I began a little unpacking,  and was called to dinner.
Columb,  happily,  is allowed me,  and he will be very use
ful,  I am sure.  Miss Planta alone dined with me,  and we
are to be companions constant at all meals,  and iete-h-
tete,  during this sejour.  She is friendly and well dis
posed,  and I am perfectly content ;  and the more,  as I
know she will not take up my leisure unnecessarily,  for
she finds sauntering in the open air very serviceable to her
health,  and she has determined to make that her chief oc
cupation.  Here,  therefore,  whenever I am not in attend
ance or at meals,  I expect the singular comfort of having
my time wholly unmolested,  and at my own disposal.

A little parlour,  which formerly had belonged to Lord
Fauconberg's housekeeper,  is now called mine,  and here
Miss Planta and myself are to breakfast and dine.  But
for tea we formed a new plan :  as Mr.  Fairly had himself
told me he understood there would be no tea-table at
Cheltenham,  I determined to stand upon no ceremony
with Colonel Gwynn,  but fairly and at once take and ap
propriate my afternoons to my own inclinations.  To
prevent,  therefore,  any surprise or alteration,  \ve settled
to have our tea upstairs.

But then a difficulty arose as to where?  We had each
equally small bed-rooms,  and no dressing-room  ;  but,  at
length,  we fixed on the passage,  near a window looking
over Malvern hills and much beautiful country.

This being arranged,   we went mutually on with

134 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

our unpackings,  till we were both too thirsty to work
longer.  Having no maid to send,  and no bell to ring for
rny man,  I then made out my way downstairs,  to give
Columb directions for our tea-equipage.

After two or three mistakes,  of peering into royal
rooms,  I at length got safe to my little parlour,  but still
was at a loss where to find Columb  ;  and while parading in
and out,  in hopes of meeting with some assistant,  I heard
my name inquired for from the front door.  I looked out,
and saw Mrs.  Tracy,  senior Bedchamber-woman to the
Queen.

She is at Cheltenham for her health,  and came to pay
her duty in inquiries,  and so forth.

I conducted her to my little store-room,  for such it
looks,  from its cupboards and short checked window cur
tains  ;  and we chatted upon the place and the expedition,
till Columb came to tell me that Mr.  Fairly desired to
speak with me.

I waited upon him immediately,  in the passage leading
to the kitchen stairs,  for that was my salle d 'audience.

He was with Lord Courtown ;  they apologised for dis
turbing me,  but Mr.  Fairly said he came to solicit leave
that they might join my tea-table for this night only,  as
they would give orders to be supplied in their own apart
ments the next day,  and not intrude upon me any more,
nor break into my time and retirement.

This is literally the first instance I have met,  for now
two whole years,  of being understood as to my own re
tiring inclinations ;  and it is singular I should first meet
with it from the only person who makes them waver.

I begged them to come in,  and ordered tea.  They are
well acquainted with Mrs.  Tracy,  and I was very glad
she happened to stay.

Poor Miss Planta,  meanwhile,  I was forced to leave in
the lurch ;  for I could not propose the bed-room passage
to my present company,  and she was undressed and un
packing.

Very soon the King,    searching for his gentlemen,

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  135

found out my room,  and entered.  He admired it pro
digiously,  and inquired concerning all our accommoda
tions.  He then gave Mr.  Fairly a commission to answer
an address,  or petition,  or some such thing,  to the Master
of the Ceremonies,  and,  after half an hour's chat,  retired.

Colonel Gwynn found us out also,  but was eager to
find out more company,  and soon left us to go and look
over the books at the rooms,  for the list of the company
here.

After tea Mrs.  Tracy went,  and the King sent for
Lord Courtown.

Mr.  Fairly was going too,  and I was preparing to re
turn upstairs to my toils;  but he presently changed his
design,  and asked leave to stay a little longer,  if I was at
leisure.

At leisure I certainly was not ;  but I was most content
to work double tides for the pleasure of his company,
especially where given thus voluntarily,  and not accepted
officially.  What creatures are we all for liberty and
freedom !  Rebels partout !

44 Soon as the life-blood warms the heart,
The love of liberty awakes  !"

Ah,  my dear friends !  I wrote that with a sigh that
might have pierced through royal walls  !

From this circumstance we entered into discourse with
no little spirit.  I felt flattered,  and he knew he had given
me de quoi  ;  so we were both in mighty good humour.

Our sociability,  however,  had very soon au interrup
tion.  The King re-entered ;  he started back at sight
of oui'  diminished party,  and exclaimed,  with,  a sort of
arch surprise,  "What!  only you two?"

Mr.  Fairly laughed a little,  and I — smiled ditto  !  But
I had rather his Majesty had made such a comment on
any other of his establishment,  if make it he must ;  since
1 am sure Mr.  Fairly 'a aversion to that species of raillery
is equal to my own.

The King gave some fresh orders about the letter,

136 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV,

and instantly went away.  As soon as he was gone,  Mr,
Fairly, — perhaps to show himself superior to that little
sally, — asked me whether he might write his letter in my
room  ?

"O yes!"  cried I,  with all the alacrity of the same
superiority.

He then went in search of a page,  for pen and ink,
and told me,  on returning,  that the King had just given
orders for writing implements for himself and Colonel
Gwynn to be placed in the dining-parlour,  of w)ii«Bt
they were,  henceforth,  to have the use as soon as the-
dinner-party had separated  ;  and after to-night,  therefore,,
he should intrude himself upon me no more.

I had half a mind to say I was very sorry for it T I
assure you I felt so.

He pretended to require my assistance in his letter,
and consulted and read over all that he writ.  So I
gave my opinion as he went on,  though I think it really
possible he might have done without me !

Away then he went with it,  to dispatch it by a royal
footman  ;  and I thought him gone,  and was again going
myself,  when he returned, — surprising me not a little by
saying,  as he held the door in his hand,  "  Will there
be any — impropriety — in my staying here a little longer?1'

I must have said no,  if I had thought yes  ;  but it
would not have been so plump and ready a no !  and I
should not,  with quite so courteous a grace,  have added
that his stay could do me nothing but honour.

On,  therefore,  we sat,  discoursing on various subjects,
till the twilight made him rise to take leave.  He was in
much better spirits than I have yet seen him,  and I know
not when I have spent an hour more socially to my taste.
Highly cultivated by books,  and uncommonly fertile in
stores of internal resource,  he left me nothing to wish,  for
the time I spent with him,  but that  "  the Fates,  the
Sisters Three,  and suchlike branches of learning,"
would interfere against the mode of future separation
planned for the remainder of our expedition.  Need I

17S8]  OP MADAME D'ARBLAY.  137

more strongly than this mark the very rare pleasure I
received from his conversation  ?

Not a little did poor Miss Planta marvel what had be
come of me ;  and scarce less was her marvel when she
had heard my adventures.  She had told me how gladly
the gentlemen would seize this opportunity of a new situ
ation,  to disengage themselves from the joint tea-table,
and we had mutually agreed to use all means possible for
seconding this partition ;  but I had been too well satisfied
this night,  to make any further efforts about the matter,
and I therefore inwardly resolved to let the future take
care of itself — certain it could not be inimical to me,
since either it must give me Mr.  Fairly in a party,  or time
for my own disposal in solitude.

This pleasant beginning has given a spirit to all my
expectations and my fatigues in this place ;  and though
it cost me near two hours from my downy pillow to
recover lost time,  I stole them without repining,  and arose
— dead asleep  ! — this morning,  without a murmur.

And now for to-day  :

SUNDAY,  JULY 13TH. — I was obliged to rise before six
o'clock,  that i might play the part of dresser to myself,
before I played it to the Queen ;  so that did not much
recruit the fatigues of yesterday's rising and journey !

Not a little was I surprised to be told,  this morning-,
by her Majesty,  that the gentlemen were to breakfast
with Miss Planta and me,  every morning,  by the King's
orders.

When I left the Queen,  I found them already in my
little parlour.  Mr.  Fairly came to the door to meet me,
and hand me into the room,  telling me of the new
arrangement of the King,  with an air of very civil satis
faction.  Colonel Gwynn appeared precisely as I believe
he felt, — perfectly indifferent to the matter.

Miss Planta joined us,  and Columb was hurried to get
ready,  lest the King should summon his esquires before
they had broken their fast.

Mr.  Fairly undertook to settle our seats,  and all the

138 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

etiquette of the tea-table;  and I was very well con
tent,  for when he had placed me where he conceived I
should be most commodiously situated,  he fixed upon the
place next me for himself,  and desired we might all keep
to our posts.

It was next agreed,  that whoever carne first to the
room should order and make the tea ;  for I must often
be detained by my waiting,  and the King is so rapid in
his meals,  that whoever attends him must be rapid also,
or follow fasting.  Mr.  Fairly said he should already
have hastened Columb,  had he not apprehended it might
be too great a liberty ;  for they had waited near half an
hour,  and expected a call every half minute.  I set him
perfectly at his ease upon this subject,  assuring him I
should be very little at mine if he had ever the same
scruple again.

He had been in waiting,  he said,  himself,  ever since a
quarter after five o'clock in the morning,  at which time he
showed himself under the King's window,  and walked
before the house till six  !  I was beginning to express my
compassion for this harass,  but he interrupted me with
shrewdly saying,  "O,  this will save future fatigue,  for it
will establish me such a character for early rising and
punctuality,  that I may now do as I will :  'tis amazing
what privileges a man obtains for taking liberties,  when
once his character is established for taking none !"

Neither Miss Planta nor myself could attempt going
to church,  we had both so much actual business to do for
ourselves,  in unpacking,  and fitting up our rooms,  &c.
The rest of the day was all fagging,  till the evening,
and then — who should enter my little parlour,  after all
the speechifying of  "only one night,"  made yesterday,
but Mr.  Fairly,  Colonel Gwynn,  and Lord Courtown!

Whether this,  again,  is by the King's command,  or iui
consequence of the morning arrangement,  I know not :
but not a word more has dropped of  "  no evening tea-
table  ;"  so,  whether we are to unite,  or to separate,  in
future,  I know not,  and,  which is far more extraordi-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  139

nary,  I care not.      Nobody but you could imagine what a
compliment that is,  from me  !

I had made Miss Planta promise,  in case such a thing
should happen,  to come down ;  and she was very ready,
and we had a very cheerful evening.

Great difficulties,  however,  arose about our tea-equip
age.  So few things are brought,  or at least are yet arrived,
that Colurnb is forced to be summoned every other mo
ment,  and I have no bell,  and dare not,  for this short
time,  beg for one,  as my man herds with the King's
men ;  besides,  I have no disposition to make a fuss here,
where every body takes up with every thing that they get.

In lamenting,  however,  the incessant trouble I was
obliged to give the gentlemen,  of running after Columb,
I told Mr.  Fairly my obligation,  at Windsor,  to Colonel
Welbred,  for my bell there.

"  O yes !"  cried he,  laughing,  "  I am not surprised  ;
Colonel Welbred is quite the man for a  (  belle  !' '

"Yes,"  cried I,  "that he is,  indeed,  and for a  'beau  '
too."

"  O ho !  you think him so,  do you  ?"  quoth he  :  to
which my prompt assent followed.

*  *  *  *  *

The Royal Family had all been upon the walks.  I
have agreed with myself not to go thither till they have
gone through the news-mongers'  drawing up of them and
their troop.  I had rather avoid all mention ;  and after a
few days,  I may walk there as if not belonging to them,
as I am not of place or rank to follow in their train.

But let me give you,  now,  an account of the house and
accommodations.

On the ground-floor there is one large and very plea
sant room,  which is made the  (lining-parlour.  The
King and Royal Family also breakfast in it,  by them
selves,  except the Lady-in-waiting,  Lady Weymouth.
They sup there also,  iu the same manner.  The gentle
men only dine with them,  I find.  They are to breakfast
with us,  to drink tea where they will,  and to sup —
vfhere they can;  and I rather fancy,  from what I have

140 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

yet seen,  it will be commonly with good Duke Hum
phrey.

A small,  but very neat dressing-room for his Majesty
is on the other side the hall,  and my little parlour is the
third and only other room on the ground-floor  :  so you
will not think our Monarch,  his Consort and offspring,
take up too much of the land called their own  !

Over this eating-parlour,  on the first floor,  is the
Queen's drawing-room,  in which she is also obliged to
dress and to undress  ! — for she has no toilette apart
ment  !  Who,  after that,  can repine at any inconvenience
here for the household  ?

Here,  after breakfast,  she sits,  with her daughters and
her lady,  and Lady Courtown,  who,  with her Lord,  is
lodged in the town of Cheltenham.  And here they drink
tea,  and live till supper-time.

Over the King's dressing-room is his bed-room,  and
over my store-room is the bed-room of the Princess-
Royal.

And here ends the first floor.

The second is divided and sub-divided into bed
rooms,  which are thus occupied: — Princess Augusta and
Princess Elizabeth sleep in two beds,  in the largest room.
Lady Weymouth occupies that next in size.  Miss
Planta and myself have two little rooms,  built over the
King's bed-room;  and Mrs.  Sandys and Miss Mac-
entomb,  and Lady Weymouth's maid^  have the rest.

This is the whole house !

Not a man but the King sleeps in it !

A house is taken in the town for Mr.  Fairly and
Colonel Gwynn,  and there lodge several of the servants,
and among them Columb.  The pages sleep in out
houses.  Even the house-maids lodge in the town,  a
quarter of a mile or more from the house  !

Lord Courtown,  as Comptroller of the Household,  acts
here for the King,  in distributing his royal bounty to the
Wells,  Rooms,  Library,  and elsewhere.  He has sent
around very magnificently.

We are surrounded by pleasant meadows,  in which I

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  HI

mean to walk a great deal.  They are so quiet and so
safe,  I can go quite alone ;  and when I have not a tirst-
rate companion,  my second best is — none at all !  But I

expect,  very soon,   my poor Miss P ,  and I shall

have her with me almost constantly.

MONDAY,  JULY 14m. — This morning I was again up
at five o'clock,  Miss Planta having asked me to accom
pany her to the Wells.  The Queen herself went this
morning,  at six o'clock,  with his Majesty.  It is distant
about a quarter of a mile from Lord Faucon berg's.

I tasted the water,  for once;  I shall spare myself any
such future regale,  for it is not prescribed to me,  and I
think it very unpleasant.

This place and air seem very healthy ;  but the very
early hours,  and no maid !  I almost doubt how this
will do.  The fatigue is very great indeed.

We were too soon for company,  except the Royals.
We met them all,  and were spoken to most graciously by
every one.

We all came back to breakfast much at the same time,
and it was very cheerful.

I spent all the rest of the day in hard fagging,  at work,
and business,  and attendance;  but the evening amply
recompensed it all.  Lord Courtown,  Mr.  Fairly,
Colonel Gwynn,  and Miss Planta,  came to tea.  My
Lord and Colonel Gwynn retired after it,  to go to the
rooms  ;  Mr.  Fairly said he would wait to make his bow
to his Majesty,  and see if there were any commands for
him.

And then we had another very long conversation,  and
if I did not write in so much haste,  my dear friends
would like to read it.

Our subject to-night — his subject,  rather — was,  the
necessity of participation,  to every species of happiness.
"His"  subject,  you may easily believe;  for to him
should I never have dared touch on one so near and so
tender to him.  Fredy,  however,  could join with him
more feelingly  —  though he kept perfectly clear of all

142 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

that was personal,  to which I would not have led for a
thousand worlds.  He seems born with the tenderest
social affections ;  and,  though religiously resigned to his
loss — which,  I have been told,  the hopeless sufferings of

Lady rendered,  at last,  even a release to be desired

— he thinks life itself,  single and unshared,  a mere melan
choly burthen,  and the wish to have done with it ap
pears the only wish he indulges.

I could not perceive this  \vithout the deepest commi
seration,  but I did what was possible to conceal it ;  as it
is much more easy,  both to the hearer and the speaker,
to lead the discourse to matters more lively,  under an
appearance of being ignorant of the state of a sad heart,
than with a betrayed consciousness.

We talked of books,  and not a little I astonished him
by the discovery I was fain to make,  of the number of
authors I have never yet read.  Particularly he instanced
Akenside,  and quoted from him some passages I have
heard selected by Mr.  Locke.

I told him,  fairly,  that though in general my little
reading was the effect of little opportunity,  not of choice,
yet here,  in respect to works of imagination and senti
ment,  to poetry and to favourite authors,  rny inclination
had had some share in my tardiness,  as one of the first
gratifications of my life was such reading with those who
had an equal pleasure in it;  and as,  though now deprived
of it,  I had tasted that indulgence so highly,  with a
certain sister,  in all my early life,  that I know not how to
fix its relinquishment,  by going on without her.

"True!"  answered he,  mournfully,  "there is no inte
rest where there is no sympathy !"

Then we talked of the country,  of landscapes,
of walking,  and then,  again,  came back the favourite
proposition, — participation!  That,  he said,  could make
an interest in anything, — everything ;  and O,  how did I
agree with him !  There is sympathy enough,  Heaven
knows,  in our opinions on this subject !

But not in what followed.     I am neither good nor

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  143

yet miserable enough to join with him in what he added,
— that life,  taken all in all,  was of so little worth and
value,  it could afford its thinking possessor but one
steady wish, — that its duration might be short!

Alas !  thought I,  that a man so good should be so un-

hapwp;

then came back again to books,  and he asked us
if we had read a little poem called the  'Shipwreck?'
Neither of us had even heard of it.  He said it was some
what too long,  and somewhat too technical,  but that it
contained many beautiful passages.  He had it with him,
he said,  and proposed sending Columb for it,  to his
house,  if we should like to read it.  We thanked him,
and off marched Columb.  It is in a very small duode
cimo volume,  and he said he would leave it with me.

Soon after,  Miss Planta said she would stroll round
the house for a little exercise.

When she was gone,  he took up the book,  and said,
"  Shall I read some passages to you  ?"  I most gladly
assented,  and got my work, — of which I have no small
store,  believe me  ! — morning caps,  robins,  cScc.  &c.,  all
to prepare from day to day ;  which,  with my three con
stant and long attendances,  and other official company
ceremonies,  is no small matter.

The passages he selected were really beautiful :  they
were chiefly from an episode,  of Palemon and Anna,
excessively delicate,  yet tender in the extreme,  and most
touchingly melancholy.

One line he came to,  that he read with an emotion
extremely affecting — 'tis a sweet line —

"  He felt the chastity of silent woe."

He stopped upon it,  and sighed so deeply that his sad
ness quite infected me.

Then he read various characters of the Ship's Com
pany,  which are given with much energy and discrimina
tion.  I could not but admire every passage he chose,
and I was sensible each of them owed much obligation
to his reading,  which was full of feeling and effect.

144 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

How unwillingly did I interrupt him,  to go upstairs
and wait my night's summons !  But the Queen has no
bell for me,  except to my bed-room.

He hastily took the hint,  and rose to go.

'•"  Shall I leave the poem,"  he cried,  "  or take it with
me,  in case there should be any leisure to go on with it
to-morrow?"

"  Which you please,"  cried I,  a little stupidly,  for I did
not,  at the moment,  comprehend his meaning;  which,
however,  he immediately explained by answering,  "  Let
me take it,  then  ; — let me make a little interest in it to
myself,  by reading it with you."

And then he put it in his pocket,  and went to his
home in the town,  and up stairs went I to my little cell,
not a little internally simpering,  to see a trait so like what
so often I have done myself, — carrying off a favourite
book,  when I have begun it with my Susanna,  that we
might finish it together,  without leaving her the tempta
tion to peep beforehand.

TUESDAY,  JULY 15TH. — -This morning,  at breakfast,
the gentlemen brought in presents which they had
received from the Queen.  All the Royals go to the
walks and the rooms as private company,  with only
Laxly Wey mouth and Lady Courtown,  Mr.  Fairly and
Colonel Gwynn  ;  and they now amuse themselves with
looking over the toys brought thither,  and making pur
chases.

Mr.  Fairly's gift was a little inkstand ;  such a one as
my dear friends may have seen of mine,  from the same
royal hand.  He said he should give it to his little
daughter;  but would beg leave,  now,  that it might
remain in my parlour,  for occasional use  ;  and he asked
me to get it fitted up for him.  "  You,"  he said,  <f who
have so many friends in this house — as I am sure you
must have,  if you are at all known to them — can easily
manage it for me."

You may think I would not lose such a compliment
by declining the little commission,  and I made Columb
carry it to one of the pages for materials.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  145

Colonel Gwynn had a very pretty little box,  and he
destined it for his beautiful wife.

My Lord Courtown never comes to breakfast :  he has
apartments in the town,  or a house of his own.
*  *  *  *  # .

While the Royals were upon the walks,  Miss Planta
and I strolled in the meadows,  and who should I meet
there but Mr.  Seward !  This was a great pleasure to me.
I had never seen him since the first day of my coming
to St.  James's,  when he handed me into my father's
coach,  in my sacque and long ruffles.  You may think
how much we had to talk over.  He had a gentleman
with him,  fortunately,  who was acquainted with Miss
Planta's brother,  so that we formed two parties with
out difficulty.  All my aim was to inquire about Mrs.
Piozzi,  —  I must,  at last,  call her by her now real
name  ! — and of her we conversed incessantly.  He told
me Mr.  Baretti's late attack upon her,  which I heard
with great concern.  It seems he has broken off'  all
intercourse with her,  and not from his own desire,  but by
her evident wish to drop him.  This is very surprising;
but many others of her former friends,  once highest in
her favour,  make the same complaint.

We strolled so long,  talking over this ever-interesting
subject,  that the Royals were returned before us,  and AVC
found Mr.  Fairly waiting tea in my parlour.  The rest
soon joined.

Mr.  Seward had expected to be invited  ;  but it is im
possible for me to invite any body while at Cheltenham,
us there is neither exit nor entrance but by passing the
King's rooms,  and as I have no place but this little
common parlour in which I can sit,  except my own room.

Neither could I see Mr.  Seward anywhere else,  as my
dear friends will easily imagine,  when they recollect all
that has passed,  on the subject of my visitors,  with her
Majesty and with Mr.  Smelt.  He told me he had
strolled in those meadows every day,  to watch if I were
of the party.

VOL.  iv.  L

146 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

Mr.  Fairly again out-stayed them all.  Lord Courtown
generally is summoned to the royal party after tea,  and
Colonel Gwynn goes to the town in quest of acquaint
ance and amusement.  Mr.  Fairly has not spirit for
such researches ;  I question,  indeed,  if he ever had taste
for them.

V/hen Miss Planta went off for her exercise,  he again
proposed a little reading,  which again I thankfully
accepted.  He took out the little poem,  and read on the
mournful tale of Anna,  with a sensibility that gave pathos
to every word.

How unexpected an indulgence — a luxury,  I may say,
to me,  are these evenings now becoming !  While I listen
to such reading,  and such a reader,  all my work goes on
with an alacrity that renders it all pleasure to me.  I
have had no regale like this for many and many a
grievous long evening  !  never since I left Norbury Park,
— never since my dear Fredy there read Madame de
Sevigne.  And how little could I expect,  in a royal resi
dence,  a relief of this sort!  Indeed,  I much question if
there is one other person,  in the whole establishment,
that,  in an equal degree,  could afford it.

Miss Planta,  though extremely friendly,  is almost
wholly absorbed in the cares of her royal duties,  and the
solicitude of her ill-health:  she takes little interest in
anything else,  whether for conversation or action.  We
do together perfectly well,  for she is good,  and sensible,
and prudent,  and ready for any kind office  :  but the
powers of giving pleasure are not widely bestowed:  we
have no right to repine that they are wanting where the
character that misses them has intrinsic worth ;  but,  also,
we have no remedy against weariness,  where that worth is
united with nothing attractive.

I was forced again,  before ten o'clock,  to interrupt his
interesting narrative,  that I might go to my room.

He now said he would leave me the book to look over
and finish at my leisure,  upon one condition,  which he
begged me to observe :  this was,  that I would read with

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  147

a pen or pencil in my hand,  and mark the passages that
pleased me most as 1 went on.  I readily promised this.

He then gave it me,  but desired I would keep it to
myself,  frankly acknowledging that he did not wish to
have it seen by any other,  at least not as belonging:  to
him.  There was nothing,  he said,  of which he had less
ambition than a character for bookism and pedantry,
and he knew if it was spread that he was guilty of carry
ing a book from one house to another,  it would be a cir
cumstance sufficient for branding him with these epithets.

I could not possibly help laughing a little at this
caution,  but again gave him my ready promise.

WEDNESDAY,  JULY IGrn. — This morning we had the
usual breakfast,  and just as it was over I received a note
from Miss Palmer,  saying she was uncertain whether or
not I was at Cheltenham,  by not meeting me on the
walks or at the play,  but wrote to mention that she was
with Lady D'Oyley,  and hoped,  if I was one of the royal
suite,  my friends might have some chance to see me
here,  though wholly denied it in town.

I sent for answer that I would call upon her;  and as
no objection was made by her Majesty,  I went to Sir
John D'Oyley's as soon as the royal party rode out.

I found Miss Palmer quite thoroughly enraged.  We
had never met since I left the paternal home,  though I
am always much indebted to her warm zeal.

Sir John and Lady D'Oyley are a mighty gentle pair.
Miss Palmer could make them no better present than a
little of her vivacity.

Miss Elizabeth Johnson,  her cousin,  is of their party :
she is pretty,  soft,  and pleasing ;  but,  unhappily,  as deaf
as her uncle,  Sir Joshua ;  which,  in a young female,  is a
real misfortune.

To quiet Miss Palmer as much as I was able,  I agreed
to-night that I would join her on the walks.  Accord
ingly,  at the usual time I set out with Miss Planta,  whom
I was to introduce to the D'Oyleys.

Just as we set out we perceived the King and his

148 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

three gentlemen,  for Lord Courtown is a constant at
tendant every evening.  We were backing on as well
as we could,  but his Majesty perceived us,  and called
to ask whither we were going.

We met Mr.  Sevvard,  who joined us.
There is nothing to describe in the walks :  they are
straight,  clay,  and sided by common trees,  without any
rich foliage,  or one beautiful opening.  The meadows,
and all the country around,  are far preferable ;  yet here
everybody meets.  All the D'Oyley party came,  and
Miss Planta slipped away.

The King and Queen walked in the same state as on
the terrace at Windsor,  followed by the three Princesses
and their attendants.  Everybody stopped and stood up
as they passed,  or as they stopped themselves to speak
to any of the company.

In one of these stoppings,  Lord Courtown backed a
little from the suite to talk with us,  and he said he saw
what benefit I reaped from the waters  !  I told him I
supposed I might be the better for the excursion,
according to the definition of a water-drinking person
by Mr.  Walpole,  who says people go to those places
well,  and then return cured  !

Mr.  Fairly afterwards also joined us a little while,
and Miss Palmer said she longed to know him more,
there was something si fine in his countenance.

They invited me much to go home with them to tea,
but I was engaged.  We left the walks soon after the
Royal Family,  and they carried me near the house in Sir
John D'Oyley's coach.

I walked,  however,  quietly in by myself;  and in my
little parlour I found Mr.  Fairly.  The others were gone
oft'  to the play without tea,  and the moment it was over
Miss Planta hurried to her own stroll.

This whole evening I spent tete-a-tete with Mr.  Fairly.
There is something singular in the perfect trust he seems
to have iu my discretion,  for he speaks to me when we
are alone with a frankness unequalled;  and something

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  149

very flattering in the apparent relief he seems to find in de
dicating what time he has to dispose of to my little parlour.

In the long conference of this evening I found him
gifted with the justest way of thinking and the most
classical taste.  I speak that word only as I may pre
sume to judge it by English literature.

SATURDAY,  JULY I§TH. — The breakfast missed its
best regale :  Mr.  Fairly was ill,  and conrined to his room
all day.

The royal party went to Lord Bathurst's,  at Ciren-
cester,  and the Queen commanded Miss Planta and me
to take an airing to Gloucester,  and amuse ourselves as
well as we could.

Miss Planta had a previous slight acquaintance with
Mr.  Raikes  ;  and to his house,  therefore,  we drove.

Mr.  Raikes was the original founder of the Sunday-
schools — an institution so admirable,  so fraught,  I hope,
with future good and mercy to generations yet unborn,
that I saw almost with reverence the man who had first
suggested it.

He lives at Gloucester with his wife and a large
family.  They all received us with open arms.  I was
quite amazed,  but soon found some of the pages had
been with them already,  and announced our design ;  and
as we followed the pages,  perhaps they concluded we
also were messengers,  or av ant- courier es,  of what else
might be expected.

Mr.  Raikes is not a man that,  without a previous dis
position towards approbation,  I should greatly have ad
mired.  He is somewhat too flourishing,  somewhat too
forward,  somewhat too voluble  ;  but he is worthy,  bene
volent,  good-natured,  and good-hearted,  and therefore
the overflowing of successful spirits and delighted vanity
must meet with some allowance.

His wife is a quiet and unpretending woman  :  his
daughters common sort of country misses.  They seem
to live with great hospitality,  plenty,  and good cheer.
They gave us a grand breakfast,  and then did the honours

150 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

of their city to us with great patriotism.  They carried
us to their fine old cathedral,  where we saw the tomb
of poor Edward the Second,  and many more ancient.
Several of the Saxon princes were buried in the original
cathedral,  and their monuments are preserved.  Various
of the ancient nobility,  whose names and families were
extinct from the wars of the Roses,  have here left their
worldly honours and deposited their last remains.  It
was all interesting to see,  though I will not detail it,
for any Gloucester Guide would beat me hollow at that
work.

Next they carried us to the Jail,  to show in how small
a space,  I suppose,  human beings can live,  as well as
die or be dead.  This jail is admirably constructed for its
proper purposes — confinement and punishment.  Every
culprit is to have a separate cell ;  every cell is clean,
neat,  and small,  looking towards a wide expanse of
country,  and,  far more fitted to his speculation,  a wide
expanse of the heavens.  Air,  cleanliness,  and health
seem all considered,  but no other indulgence.  A total
seclusion of all commerce from accident,  and an absolute
impossibility of all intercourse amongst themselves,  must
needs render the captivity secure from all temptation
to further guilt,  and all stimulus to hardihood in past
crimes,  and makes the solitude become so desperate that
it not only seems to leave no opening for any comfort
save in repentance,  but to make that almost unavoidable.

The Jail is of white stone,  and yet unfinished.  The
debtors also are considered,  as they ought to be,  with far
more favour than the other offenders,  and,  of course,
perfectly guarded from all intercourse with them.

After this they carried us to the Infirmary,  where I
was yet more pleased,  for the sick and the destitute
awaken an interest far less painful than the wicked and
contemned.

Cleanliness again here shone with even a lustre of
benevolence  :  every poor patient was visibly benefited
by it,  and the whole building rendered so pleasant and

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  151

salutary,  that there was not one apartment to which
there could be any objection to entering;  yet all were
occupied,  though not one was crowded.  The tenderness,
too,  with which every poor sufferer seemed treated,  the
ease of their accommodations,  the order running through
the whole,  the quiet,  yet close attendance of the nurses
— all these were observations not to be made without
the most sensible pleasure,  even in the midst of the sad
commiseration excited by their occasion.

We went entirely over the house,  and then over the
City,  which has little else to catch notice.  The Pin
manufactory we did not see,  as they discouraged us by
an account of its dirt.

Mr.  llaikes is a very principal man in all these bene
volent institutions ;  and while I poured forth my satis
faction in them very copiously and warmly,  he hinted a
question whether I could name them to the Queen.
"  Beyond doubt,"  I answered  ;  "  for these were precisely
the things which most interested her Majesty's humanity."
The joy with which he heard this was nothing short of
rapture.

The King and Queen intend going to Gloucester
soon.

We returned home to a late dinner.

SUNDAY,  JULY 20TH. — -Colonel Gwynn again brought
but a bad account of his companion,  who was now under
the care of the Cheltenham apothecary,  Mr.  Clerke.

I had appointed in the evening to go on the walks
with Miss Palmer.  I scarce ever passed so prodigious
a crowd as was assembled before the house when I went
out.  The people of the whole county seemed gathered
together to see their Majesties  ;  and so quiet,  so decent,
so silent,  that it was only by the eye they could be dis
covered,  though so immense a multitude.  How unlike
a London mob !

The King,  kindly to gratify their zealous and respectful
curiosity,  came to his window,  and seeing me go out,  he
called me to speak to him,  and give an account of my
intentions.

152 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

The people,  observing this graciousness,  made way for
me on every side,  so that I passed through them with as
much facility as if the meadows had been empty.

The D'Oyleys and Miss Johnson and Miss Palmer
made the walking party,  and Mr.  Seward joined us.

Mr.  Raikes and all his family were come from Glou
cester to see the Royal Family on the walks,  which were
very much crowded,  but with the same respectful mul
titude,  who never came forward,  but gazed and admired
•at the most humble distance.

Mr.  Raikes introduced me to the Bishop of Gloucester,
Dr.  Halifax,  and afterwards,  much more to my satisfac
tion,  to the Dean of Gloucester,  Dr.  Tucker,  the famous
author of  '  Cui bono.'  I was very glad to see him  :  he
•is past eighty,  and has a most shrewd and keen old
face.

I went afterwards to tea with the D'Oyleys and Miss
Palmer,  and Mr.  Seward again accompanied us.  Miss
Palmer brought me home in Sir John's carriage,  making
it drive as near as possible to the house.

But just before we quitted the walks I was run after
by a quick female step  : — "  Miss Burney,  don't you know
me? — have you forgot Spotty?" — and I saw Miss Ogle.
She told me she had longed to come and see me,  but did
not know if she might.  She is here with her mother
and two younger sisters.  I promised to wait on them.
Mrs.  Ogle was daughter to the late Bishop of Winchester,
who was a preceptor of the King's :  I knew,  therefore,  I
might promise with approbation.

MONDAY,  JULY 2 1 ST. — I was very much disappointed
this morning to see Colonel Gwynn come again alone to
breakfast,  and to hear from him that his poor colleague
was still confined.

The royal party all went at ten o'clock to Tewkesbury.

About noon,  while I was writing a folio letter to my
dear father,  of our proceedings,  Mr.  Alberts,  the Queen's
page,  came into my little parlour,  and said  "If you are
at leisure,  ma'am,  Mr.  Fairly begs leave to ask you how
you do."

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  153

I was all amazement,  for I had concluded his con
finement irremediable for the present.

I was quite happy to receive him  ;  he looked very ill.
and his face is still violently swelled.  He had a hand
kerchief held to it,  arid was muffled up in a great coat ;
and indeed he seemed unfit enough for coming out.

He apologized for interrupting me.  I assured him I
should have ample time for my letter.  "  What a letter !"
cried he,  looking at its size ;  "  it is just such a one as I
should like to receive,  and not "

"Read,"  cried I.

"  No,  no  ! — and not answer  !"

He then sat down,  and I saw by his manner he came
with design to make a sociable visit to me.  He was
serious almost to sadness,  but with a gentleness that
could not but raise in whomsoever he had addressed
an implicit sympathy.

He led almost immediately to those subjects on which
he loves to dwell  —  Death and Immortality,  and the
assured misery of all stations and all seasons in this vain
and restless world.

I ventured not to contradict him with my happier sen
timents,  lest I should awaken some fresh pain.  I heard
him,  therefore,  in quiet and meditative silence,  or made
but such general answers as could hazard no allusions.
Yet,  should I ever see him in better spirits,  I shall not
scruple to discuss,  in such a way as I can,  this point,  and
to vindicate as well as I am able my opposite opinion.

He told me he had heard a fifth week was to be now
added to this excursion,  and he confessed a most anxious
solicitude to be gone before that time.  He dropped
something,  unexplained,  yet very striking,  of a peculiar
wish to be away ere some approaching period.

I felt his meaning,  though I had no key to it ;  I felt
that he coveted to spend in quiet the anniversary of the
day on which he lost his lady.

You may believe I could say nothing to it;  the idea
was too tender for discussion  ;  nor can I divine whether

154 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

or not he wishes to open more on this subject,  or is better
pleased by my constant silence to his own allusions.  I
know not,,  indeed,  whether he thinks I even understand
them.

We then talked over Cheltenham and our way of life,
and then ran into discourse upon Courts and Court life
in general.  I frankly said I liked them not,  and that,  if
I had the direction of any young person's destination,,  I
would never risk them into such a mode of living ;  for,
though vices might be as well avoided there as anywhere,
and in this Court particularly,  there were mischiefs of a
smaller kind,  extremely pernicious to all nobleness of
character,  to which this Court,  with all its really bright
examples,  was as liable as any other, — the mischiefs of
jealousy,  narrowness,  and selfishness.

He did not see,  he said,  when there wa$  a place
of settled income and appropriated business,  why it might
not be filled both with integrity and content in a Court
as well as elsewhere.  Ambition,  the desire of rising,
those,  he said,  were the motives to that envy which set
such litile passions in motion.  One situation,  however,
there was,  he said,  which he looked upon as truly
dangerous,  and as almost certain to pervert the fairest
disposition ;  it was one in which he would not place
any person for whom he had the smallest regard,  as he
looked upon it to be the greatest hazard a character
could run.  This was,  being Maid of Honour.

TUESDAY,  JULY 22ND. — To-day,  at noon,  I had a
surprise with which I was very much pleased.  His
Majesty opened the door of my little parlour,  called
out,  "  Corne,  come in ;"  and was followed by Major
Price.

He was just arrived from his little farm in Hereford
shire,  and will stay here some days.  It is particularly
fortunate just now,  when another gentleman was really
required to assist in attendance upon the Royal party.

Mr.  Seward,  with a good-humoured note,  sent me the
Magazine with Baretti's strictures on Mrs.  Thrale.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  155

Good heaven,  how abusive !  It can hardly hurt her —
it is so palpably meant to do it.  I could not have
suspected him,  with all his violence,  of a bitterness of
invective so cruel,  so ferocious  !

I well remember his saying to me,  when first I saw him
after the discovery of '  Evelina/  "  I see what is it you can
do,  you little witch — it is,  that you can hang us all up for
laughing-stocks  ;  but hear me this one thing — don't med
dle with me.  I see what they are,  your powers ;  but
remember,  when you provoke an Italian you run a
dagger into your own breast !"

I half shuddered at the fearful caution from him,
because the dagger was a word of unfortunate recollec
tion  :  but,  good heaven !  it could only be a half shudder
when the caution was against an offence I could sooner
die than commit,  and which,  I may truly say,  if personal
attack was what he meant,  never even in sport entered
my mind,  and was ever,  in earnest,  a thing I have held
in the deepest abhorrence.

I must do,  however,  the justice to his candour to add,
that upon a nearer acquaintance with me,  which imme
diately followed,  he never repeated his admonition  ;  and
when  *  Cecilia'  came out,  and he hastened to me with
every species of extravagant encomium,  he never hinted
at any similar idea,  and it seemed evident he concluded
me,  by that time,  incapable of meriting such a sus
picion;  though,  to judge by his own conduct,  a proceed
ing of this sort may to him appear in a very different light.
He thinks,  at least,  a spirit of revenge may authorize any
attack,  any insult.  How unhappy and how strange!  to
join to so much real good nature as this man possesses
when pleased,  a disposition so savagely vindictive when
offended.

******

THURSDAY,  JULY 24xH. — "  Pray,  Miss Burney,"  cried
Colonel Gwynn,  "do you think Mr.  Fairly will ever
marry again?"

"I think it very doubtful,"  I answered,  "but I hope
he will,  for,  whether he is happy or not in marrying,  I

156 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

am sure lie will be wretched in singleness;  the whole
turn of his mind is so social and domestic.  He is by no
means formed for going always abroad for the relief of
society;  he requires it more at hand."

"  And what do you think of Miss Fuzilier?"

"That he is wholly disengaged with her and with
everybody."

"Well,  I think it will be,  for I know they correspond;
and what should he correspond with her for else  ?"

"Because,  I suppose,  he has done it long before
this could be suggested as the motive.  And,  indeed,  the
very quickness of the report makes me discredit it;  'tis so
utterly impossible for a man whose feelings are so deli
cate to have taken any steps towards a second connexion
at so early a period."

"  Why,  I know he's very romantic;  but I should like
to know your opinion."

"I have given it you,"  cried I,  "very exactly."

Not long after,  when all the party was broke up from
my little parlour,  though not yet set out for Gloucester,
who should again surprise me by entering but Mr.
Fairly  !

I was quite rejoiced by his sight.  He was better,
though not well.  His face is almost reduced to its
natural size.  He had a letter for her Majesty from
Lord Aylesbury,  and had determined to venture bring
ing:  it himself.

He said he would carry it in to the Queen,  and then
return to my parlour,  if I would give him some break
fast.  You may suppose I answered  "  No!"  But,  after
wards,  fearing he might be detained and fatigued,  he
asked me to present it for him,  and only say he was
waiting in my room for commands.

I was forced to say  "  Yes,"  though I had rather
not.

Her Majesty was much surprised to hear he was again
out so unexpectedly,  and asked if he thought of going
to Gloucester?

"  No,"  I said,  « I believed he was not equal to that."

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  157

She bid me tell him she would see him before she
went.

He was summoned to her Majesty,  in the dining-
parlour.  But when they were all set out on the Glou
cester expedition,  he returned to my little parlour,  and
stayed with me a considerable time.

Grave he came back — grave quite to solemnity,  and
almost wholly immersed in deep and sad reflections.
He spoke little,  and that little with a voice so melan
choly,  yet so gentle,  that it filled me with commi
seration.

At length,  after much silence and many pauses,  which
I never attempted to interrupt or to dissipate,  continuing
my work as if not heeding him,  he led himself — dis
tantly,  yet intelligibly — to open upon the immediate
state of his mind.

I now found that the King's staying on at Cheltenham
a fifth week was scarcely supportable to him ;  that the
16th of next month was the mournful anniversary of his
loss,  and that he had planned to dedicate it in some
peculiar manner to her memory,  with his four children.
Nothing of this was positively said  ;  for

"  He feels the chastity of silent woe  !"

But all of it was indubitably comprised in the various
short but pointed sentences which fell from him.

"  To a certain extent,"  he said,  "  we can all go,  and
support and sustain ourselves with firmness ;  but beyond
it we falter.  And where once the mind is made up to
wait to a certain period for its relief — or,  perhaps,  I
should say indulgence — it can bear anything during that
time of probation without sinking,  and without repining;
but that denied or disappointed,  it can bear nothing.
Take from it that promised staff — that purposed term
of ease — and all is over."

I was so much'  affected for him I could scarce forbear
offering to represent his situation to her Majesty;  but
when I considered that he had access to her at his plea-

158 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

sure,  from his so much higher office,  I feared it might
seem unseasonable and officious,  and therefore I was
deterred.

He told me he had already,  however,  gone so far as to
beg leave to decline being present at the ball,  which was
to be given on the 19th,  at Windsor.  And,  afterwards,
with a heartfelt sigh,  he found,  he said,  that we were to
travel on the 16th.

Well might he sigh  !  What a day for him to go through
such fatigue,  such public parade,  such requisite and un
avoidable exertion  !

"  And to dine,"  he added,  "at Nuneham,  all the
party,  at Lord HarcourtV."  and to this,  with a yet
deeper sigh,  he acknowledged himself wholly unequal.

He then walked about the room in total silence for
some minutes ;  after which,  repeating that he could not
go through with it,  he uttered almost to himself,  "  Her
Majesty must know what the 16th is to me."  And then,
almost immediately,  he wished me good morning,  and
went away ;  leaving me so much touched by the mourn
ful state of his excellent mind,  and so gratefully im
pressed by the kind confidence he seemed to feel that he
spoke to a safe and a sympathising well-wisher,  that I
could not,  for the whole day through,  turn my thoughts
to any other subject.

I would I could tell whether it is his wish I should
openly enter into his affairs and situation,  with that frank
and avowed friendship to which all his conduct seems
to lead,  and which my high opinion of his character
disposes me to meet half way ;  or whether he is better
satisfied,  and more relieved,  by thus breaking out occa
sionally and incidentally into such communication only
as arises from time to time,  from the impulse of the
moment,  with no other stimulus than a general dispo
sition to think well of the person who hears him.

This is just the point on which I would wish to
consult my two beloved friends.  I sometimes fear,  by
my continued silence and backwardness,  to seem insen-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  159

sible — at least insipid;  and yet I prefer even that to
the risk of coining forward,  without a greater certainty
it might prove to him some consolation.  O,  no,  I
cannot give him that ;  some relief would be sufficient
for me.  No two casuists in the world,  perhaps,  would
judge so properly in a point of such minute delicacy  ;
but I am so cruelly in arrears in all accounts,  that I shall
never know your opinions till all occasion for them is
past,  except the constant pleasure to myself of hearing
them,  and comparing notes.

I must be guided,  meanwhile,  as I can,  by what strikes
at the moment.

FRIDAY,  JULY 25TH. — Again,  to a very late breakfast
came Mr.  Fairly.  He was much better,  and less me
lancholy.  He said he should be well enough to join
the royal party to-morrow,  who were to dine and spend
the whole day at Lord Coventry's*  at Coombe.

I had,  afterwards,  a letter from Mrs.  Hawkins,  written
in the name of all the  'Burnean System'  in these parts,
to inquire if I could not join their party,  if I accompanied,
the royal group to the Worcester music meeting.  I have
great hope I shall be able to arrange this.

Miss Planta came to my room upstairs,  to inquire
how long Mr.  Fairly had stayed,  and I was quite happy
to appease her astonishment that he should come without
sending in to the King,  by assuring her he was only
nursing for the next day,  when he meant to attend the
Coombe party.

I thought it so absolutely right to mention his visit to
the Queen,  lest,  hearing of it from the Princesses through
Miss Planta,  she should wonder yet more,  that I put
aside the disagreeable feel of exciting that wonder my
self,  and told her he had drank tea here,  when I attended
her at night.

She seemed much more surprised than pleased,  till I
added that he was preparing and hardening himself for
the Coombe expedition the next day,  and then she was
quite satisfied.

SATURDAY,  JULY 26TH. — The Royal party were to be

160 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

out the whole day,  and I had her Majesty's permission to

go to the play at night with Miss P and her friends,

and to introduce Miss Planta to them for the same pur
pose.

The breakfast was at seven o'clock  ;  we were all up at
half after five.  How sorry was I to see Colonel Gwynn
enter alone,  and to hear that Mr.  Fairly was again
ill!

Soon after the King came into the room and said,
"  So,  no Mr.  Fairly again  ?"

"  No.  sir  ;  he  's very bad this morning."

"  What 's the matter  ?     His face  ?"

"No,  sir;  he has got the gout.  These waters,  he
thinks,  have brought it on."

"  What,  in his foot  ?"

"  Yes,  sir ;  he is quite lame  ;  his foot is swelled pro
digiously."

"  So he  's quite knocked up  !     Can't he come out?  "

"  No,  sir  ;  he  's obliged to order a gouty shoe and stay
at home and nurse."

The King declared the Cheltenham waters were admir
able friends to the constitution,  by bringing disorders out
of the habit.  Mr.  Fairly,  he said,  had not been well
some time,  and a smart fit of the gout might set him all
to rights again.

Alas,  thought I,  a smart fit of the gout in a lonely
lodging at a water-drinking place  !

They all presently set off;  and so fatigued was my
poor little frame,  I was glad to go and lie down  ;  but I
never can sleep when 1 try for it in the daytime;  the
moment I cease all employment,  my thoughts take such
an ascendence over my morphetic faculty,  that the attempt
always ends in a deep and most wakeful meditation.

About twelve o'clock I was reading in my private loan
book,  when,  hearing the step of Miss Planta on the stairs,
I put it back in my work-box,  and was just taking thence
some other employment,  when her voice struck my ear
almost in a scream — "  Is it possible  ?  Mr.  Fairly !"

My own with difficulty refrained echoing it when I

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  161

heard his voice answer her ;  and in a few minutes they
parted,  and he rapped at the door and entered my little
parlour.

He came in hobbling,  leaning on a stick,  and with a
large cloth shoe over one of his feet,  which was double
the size of the other.

Columb now soon came in to inquire what time I
should dine,  but a ghost could not have made him stare
more than Mr.  Fairly,  whose confinement with the gout
had been spread all over the house by Colonel Gwynn.

I ordered an early dinner on account of the play.

"  Will you invite me,"  cried Mr.  Fairly,  laughing,  "to
dine with you  ?"

"Oh yes!"  I cried,  "with the greatest pleasure;"  and
he said he would go to his home and dress,  and return to

my hour.

*  #  *  *  *

As he was at leisure,  I had bespoke the Queen's hair
dresser,  on account of the play;  but Miss Planta came
to inform me that she could not be of that party,  as she
had received a letter from Lady Charlotte Finch,  con
cerning Princess Mary,  that she must stay to deliver
herself.

I told her she would have a beau at dinner.  "  Well,"
she exclaimed,  "'tis the oddest thing in the world he
should come so when the King and Queen are away  !
I am sure,  if I was you,  I would not mention it."

"  O yes,  I shall,"  cried I ;  "  I receive no visitors in
private;  and I am sure if I did,  Mr.  Fairly is the last
who would condescend to make one of them."

Such was my proud,  but true speech,  for him and for
myself.

At dinner we all three met;  Mr.  Fairly in much better
spirits than I have yet seen him at Cheltenham.  He at
tacks Miss Planta upon all her little prejudices,  and rallies
her into a defence of them,  in a manner so sportive  'tis
impossible to hurt her,  yet so nearly sarcastic that she is
frequently perplexed whether to take it in good or ill part.

VOL.  IV.  M

162 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

But his intentions are so decidedly averse to giving pain,
that even when she is most alarmed at finding the laugh
raised against her,  some suddenly good-humoured or
obliging turn sets all to rights,  and secures any sting from
remaining,  even where the bee has been most menacing to
fix itself.

I believe Mr.  Fairly to possess from nature high ani
mal spirits,  though now curbed by misfortune;  and a fine
vein of satire,  though constantly kept in order by genuine
benevolence.  He is still,  in mixed company,  gay,  shrewd,
and arch;  foremost in badinage,  and readiest for what
ever may promote general entertainment.  But in chosen
society his spirits do not rise above cheerfulness ;  he de
lights in moral discourse,  on grave and instructive sub
jects,  and though always ready to be led to the politics
or business of the day,  in which he is constantly well
versed and informing,  I never observe him to lead but to
themes of religion,  literature,  or moral life.

When dinner and a very sociable dessert were over,  we
proposed going to the King's dining-parlour,  while the
servants removed the things,  &c.,  against tea.  But the
weather was so very fine we were tempted by the open
door to go out into the air.  Miss Planta said she would
take a walk ;  Mr.  Fairly could not,  but all without was so
beautiful he would not go into the parlour,  and rather
risked the fatigue of standing,  as he leant against the
porch,  to losing the lovely prospect or sweet air.

And here,  for near two hours,  on the steps of Fau-
conberg Hall,  we remained  ;  and they were two hours of
such pure serenity,  without and within,  as I think,  ex
cept in Norbury Park,  with its loved inhabitants and my
Susan,  I scarce ever remember to have spent.  Higher
gaiety and greater happiness many and many periods of
my life have at different times afforded me ;  but a tran
quillity more perfect has only,  I think,  been lent to me in
Norbury Park,  where,  added to all else that could soothe
and attract,  every affection of my heart could be expanded
and indulged.

1788]  OP MADAME D'ARBLAY.  163

But what have I to do with a comparison no longer
cherished but by memory  !

The time I have mentioned being passed,  Miss Planta
returned from her walk,  and we adjourned to the little
parlour,  where I made tea,  and then I equipped myself
for the play.

The sweet Miss P received me with her usual

kind joy,  and introduced me to her friends,  who are Mr.
Delabere,  the master of the house,  and chief magistrate
of Cheltenham,  and his family.

We all proceeded to the play-house,  which is a very
pretty little theatre.  Mrs.  Jordan played the  "Country
Girl,"  most admirably ;  but the play is so disagreeable in
its whole plot and tendency,  that all the merit of her per
formance was insufficient to ward off disgust.  My prin
cipal end,  however,  was wholly answered,  in spending
the evening with my poor M .

Lady Harcourt is come to take the place of Lady
Weymouth,  whose waiting is over ;  and Lord Harcourt
will lodge in the town of Cheltenham.  We have no
room here for double accommodations.

I have had two or three little visits,  in my little par
lour,  from Lady Weymouth.  She is a sensible,  plain,
unaffected woman,  but hard and unpleasant in her man
ners,  and so inferior to her charming mother,  the late
Duchess of Portland,  who was all courtesy and grace
and dignity in her demeanour,  without a shadow of pride
or self-importance,  that I cannot see her without surprise
as well as disappointment

SUNDAY,  JULY 27xH. — This morning in my first
attendance I seized a moment to tell her Majesty of
yesterday's dinner.  "  So I hear!"  she cried  ;  and I was
sorry any one had anticipated my information,,  nor can I
imagine who it might be.

"  But pray,  ma'am,"  very gravely,  "  how did it happen  ?
I understood Mr.  Fairly was confined by the gout."

M 2

164 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

"  He grew better,  ma'am,  and hoped by exercise to
prevent a serious fit."

She said no more,  but did not seem pleased.  The
fatigues of a Court attendance are so little compre
hended,  that persons known to be able to quit their room
and their bed are instantly concluded to be qualified for
all the duties of their office.

We were again very early,  as their Majesties meant
to go to the cathedral at Gloucester,  where the Bishop
of Gloucester,  Dr.  Halifax,  was to preach to them.  But
I was particularly glad,  before our breakfast was over,
to see Mr.  Fairly enter my little parlour.  He was
still in his gouty shoe,  and assisted by a stick,  but he
had not suffered from his yesterday's exertion.  He
was,  however,  quite unfit for any attendance;  but as
Lord Salisbury was here,  and joined the suite,  he was
the less wanted.

Before the things were removed a page opened the
door,  and all the Royal Family — King,  Queen,  and three
Princesses — came into the room to see Mr.  Fairly and
inquire how he did.

I hardly know with which of the five he is most in
favour,  or by which most respected,  and they all ex
pressed their concern for this second attack,  in the
kindest terms.

The King,  however,  who has a flow of spirits at this
time quite unequalled,  would fain have turned the whole
into ridicule,  and have persuaded him he was only
fanciful.

"Fanciful,  sir?"  he repeated,  a little displeased ;  and
the good King perceiving it,  graciously and good-
humouredly drew back his words,  by saying  "Why I
should wonder indeed if you were to be that !"

When they all decamped I prepared for church.  I

had appointed to go with Miss P ,  and to meet her

on the road.

Mr.  Fairly said,  if I would give him leave,  he would
stay and write letters in my little parlour.  I supplied

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  165

him with materials,  and emptied my Queen's writing,
box for a desk,  as we possess nothing here but a low
dining-table.  So away went journals,  letters,  memoran
dums,  &c.  &c.,  into the red portfolio given me by my
dear father.

As soon as I presented him with this,  not at all aware
of the goods and chattels removed for the occasion,  he
said it was so very comfortable he should now write all
his letters here,  for at his lodgings he had such a miser
able low table he had been forced to prop it up by brick
bats  !  He writes very much,  and his first pleasure seems
receiving and answering his letters.  Here it may well
have such precedence.

We went on to the church,  which is large and com
modious enough.  Mr.  Boulby,  father of Lady Cour-

town,  received us into his daughter's pew.

*****

Mr.  Fairly sealed and made up his dispatches,  and
then said he would stroll a little out to put his foot in
motion.  "  And what,"  he asked,  "  shall you do  ?"

I had a great mind to say,  Why,  stroll with you ;  for
that,  I think,  was the meaning of his question  ;  but I
feared it might prevent my being dressed against the
return of the Queen,  and I do not think she would have
thought it an adequate excuse !

The Royals came home to an exceeding late dinner.
The gouty shoe being readily admitted,  Mr.  Fairly re
sumed his seat at the King's table.

On the walks we met Miss Palmer,  Miss Ogle,  &c.,
and a multitude of new comers — starers rather — but all
perfectly well-behaved and quiet.  The King and Queen

stopped to speak to Mrs.  Granville and Miss P

very graciously.

MONDAY,  JULY 28TH. — Miss Ogle acquainted me
that this was the last day of her remaining at Chelten
ham,  and I promised to drink tea with her in the after
noon  ;  and the Queen honoured me with a commission
to bring Mrs.  Ogle on the walks,  as his Majesty wished
again to see her.

166 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

Mr.  Fairly very slowly amending,  came again late
to breakfast,  but was not well enough to ride out with
the Royal party.  He remained some time with me when
they were gone,  but almost entirely silent,  leaving me to
pursue my work,  of which,  I assure you,  I have plenty,
while he pursued his reflections.  Melancholy ones they
seemed,  and sad the mind whence they flowed.

It became quite painful to me to refrain from pro
posing to assist him,  in all that now could alleviate his
suffering,  which was,  obtaining him leave of absence
previous to our general departure  ;  but the fear of offici-
ousness forced me to be quiet.

I recollected some letters I had been shown formerly
by Mr.  Astle,  a collector,  antiquary,  &c.,  through the
means of Mrs.  Thrale,  in which a part of Mr.  Fairly's
family were much concerned.  They were copies,  and
all addressed to Sir Charles Hanbury Williams.  Some
were from the Duke of Newcastle,  when in the late
King's ministry;  others from Lord Essex and Lord
Holland;  but the chief of the collection were from
Lord .

"  Could you allow,"  I cried,  "to be asked anything
by halves,  where previously told that you must make no
inquiries after the whole  ?"

"  Yes,"  cried he,  a little smiling,  "'tis what I wish."

I then asked him what relation to himself that Lord
— —  might be,  and gave him a little account of the
letters,  but told him I could not inform him who was
their possessor,  nor how I came to see them,  as I was
intrusted secretly.

It was possible,  he said,  it might be his eldest brother,
who was many years older than himself;  or,  perhaps,
his grandfather,  the late Lord.  His own father died
before he came to the title.

I related to him a character given,  jn these let
ters,  of the late Mr.  Pitt,  which,  1 remember,  finished
with these words,  after much of praise and much of
censure — "He is inflexible,  impracticable,  invincible!"

This led to a little talk of his family,    in which he

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  167

named his mother with the most filial reverence.  He
told me she had left him her executor,  and that then all
the letters and papers of his father and grandfather were
in his possession ;  but as he conceived they might turn
to some possible mischief,  by falling into incautious or
evil hands,  he had burned them all,  and now forgot even

what they were.

*****

I found Mrs.  Ogle and her daughters all civility and
good humour.  Poor Mrs.  Ogle has lately  (by what
means I do not know)  wholly lost her eye-sight ;  but
she is perfectly resigned to this calamity,  and from mo
tives just such as suit a Bishop's daughter.  When I told
her who desired her to be on the walks,  she was ex
tremely gratified.  Spotty is a complete rebel,  according
to the principles of her republican father,  and protested
it would only be a folly and fuss to go,  for their notice !
The younger sisters are bred rebels too  ;  but the thought
of guiding their mother,  when such royal distinction was
intended her,  flattered and fluctuated them.  There was
another lady with them,  who told me that Dr.  Warton,  of
Winchester,  had desired her to make acquaintance with
me ;  but I have forgotten her name,  and have no time to
refresh my memory with it.

To the walks we went,  the good and pious Mrs.  Ogle
between her two young daughters,  and Spotty and I
together.  Spotty begged me to go to the ball with her,
but I had neither licence nor inclination.

The Queen immediately espied Mrs.  Ogle,  by seeing
me,  as I heard her say to the King ;  and they approached
the spot where we stood,  in the most gracious manner.
The King spoke with such kindness to Mrs.  Ogle,  and
with such great regard of her late father,  that the good
lady was most deeply affected with pleasure.  I believe
they stayed half an hour with her,  talking over old scenes
and circumstances.  Spotty kept pulling me all the time,
to decamp;  but I kept  "invincible," — not quite like
Mr.  Pitt,  yet  "invincible."  At last the King spoke to

168 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

her:  this confused her so much,  between the pleasure
of the notice,  and the shame of feeling that pleasure,  that
she knew not what she either did or said,  answered every
thing wrong,  and got out of the line,  and stood with her
back to the Queen,  and turned about she knew not why,
and behaved like one who had lost her wits.

When they left us,  Mrs.  Ogle expressed her grateful
sense of the honour done her,  almost with tears ;  the two
young ones said,  they had never conceived the King and
Queen could be such sweet people;  and poor Spotty was
so affected and so constrained in denying them praise,
and persisting that she thought it  "all a bore,"  that I
saw the republican heart was gone,  though the tongue
held its ground.

A second time,  after a few more turns,  the same gra
cious party approached,  with fresh recollections and
fresh questions concerning interesting family matters.
This was more than could be withstood ;  Mrs.  Ogle
was almost overpowered by their condescension ;  the
young ones protested they should never bear to hear any
thing but praise of them all their lives to come ;  and poor
Spotty was quite dumb  !  She could not,  for shame,  join the
chorus of praise,  and to resist it she had no longer any
power.

We did not,  however,  stop here ;  for still a third time
they advanced,  and another conference ensued,  in which
Mrs.  Ogle's sons were inquired for,  and their way of life,
and designs and characters.

This ended and completed the whole ;  Mrs.  Ogle no
longer restrained the tears of pleasure from flowing  ;  her
little daughters declared,  aloud,  the King and Queen
were the^two most sweet persons in the whole world,  and
they would say so as long as they lived;  and poor
Spotty,  colouring and conscious,  said — "But I hope I
did not behave so bad this time as the first  ?"

Nay,  so wholly was she conquered,  that,  losing her
stubbornness more and more by reflection,  she would not
let me take leave till she obliged me to promise I would

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  169

either call the next morning,  before their departure,  or
write her a little note,  to say if they found out or men
tioned her ungraciousness.

I was too well pleased in the convert to refuse her this
satisfaction ;  and so full was her mind of her new loyalty,
that when she found me steady in declining to go with
her to the ball,  she gave it up herself,  and said she would
go home with her mother and sisters,  to talk matters
over.

I was very much pleased,  indeed,  with this whole
business.

TUESDAY,  JULY 29TH. — Our breakfast this morning was
again in the original style.  Mr.  Fairly came at the usual
hour,  eight o'clock,  with Colonel Gwynn,  and afterwards
attended his Majesty on horseback.  His gout has ended
without a serious n't;  though I am sorry to find he seems
to think his general health would more have benefited

by its quitting him less abruptly.

*  *  *  *  *  *

WEDNESDAY,  JULY 30TH. — In the afternoon I went

again to the play,  with Miss P and the Delaberes

and Granvilles.  It was  "  Sir Harry Wildair,"  and Mrs.
Jordan performed it extremely well,  but very little to my
satisfaction.  It is a very disagreeable play,  and wholly
abounding in all that can do violence to innocence and
morality ;  but it gave me an evening with that sweet
young friend,  and we neither of us cared much for the
stage,  while both had so much to communicate and to
hear,  of nearer interest.

It was for the benefit of Mrs.  Jordan ;  and all our
household had taken tickets,  at the request of Mrs.  Mil-
banke,  a lady here who patronizes all the players.

THURSDAY,  JULY 3 1 ST. — Mr.  Fairly joined Miss
Planta and me at tea.  "And here,"  cried he,  "  after all
the toils and bustle of the day,  here we meet,  to finish
with our quiet dish of tea the last,  and not,  to me,  least
pleasant part of the day's business."

We talked much upon letter-writing,  perfectly agree-

170 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

ing in holding it the first of all enjoyments,,  in the
absence of those first in our affections.  He has many
correspondents,  for he has many friends,  and loves to
keep up a constant intercourse with them.  'Tis a rule
with him to destroy his letters almost as soon as they
are answered.  Here^  certainly,  we agreed not so per
fectly.

"  You do not,"  cried he,  " burn your letters?''

I was too fairly detected for evasion,  but I assured
him I kept none dishonourably — none that I was bid to
destroy.

He then said he thought it a bad and dangerous cus
tom to keep them.

"But what fortitude,"  cried I,  "  does it not require to
burn them,  when they are written by those we wish to
write them !"

"And what,"  cried he,  "is to become of yours,  if any
thing happens  ?  Think but how they will be seized ;
everybody will try to get some of them ;  what an outcry
there will be !  Have you seen Miss Burney's letters  ?
Have you got any  ?  I have a bit !  and I have another  !
and I !  and I !  will be the cry all round."

No,  no ;  I assured him I was not quite so inconsiderate
of consequences.  All my papers would fall into the
hands of one of the most honourable characters in the
world,  though a pretty near relation of mine, — a certain
sister,  in whose discretion and delicacy I had a reliance
the most perfect ;  and I was sure,  I said,  I might depend
upon the Queen that they should be safely transmitted
to her;  I could not,  therefore,  conceive there could be
either danger or crime,  so situated,  in retaining them.

He did not,  however,  quite acquit me :  his sincerity is
proof against everything but the fullest conviction ;  and
he told me it was commonly a mere visionary notion,  that
of reading over letters in future times ;  those times
brought their own letters and avocations,  and all such
hoards were as generally useless as they were frequently
hazardous.

1788]  OF MADAME D»ARBLAY.  171

O,  could he see my hoards,  what a conflagration
would he make for me !  However,  he has really,  by his
reasoning,  wrought upon me a resolution to take a
general review of my manuscript possessions,  and to
make a few gentle flames,  though not to set fire to the
whole.

Miss Planta said the Duke of York was expected the
next day.  This led to much discourse on the Princes,
in which Mr.  Fairly,  with his usual but most uncommon
openness,  protested there was something in the violence
of their animal spirits that would make him accept no
post and no pay to live with them.  Their very voices,
he said,  had a loudness and force that wore him.

Immediately after he made a little attack — a gentle
one,  indeed — upon me,  for the contrary extreme,  of
hardly speaking,  among strangers at least,  so as to be
heard.  "And why,"  cried he,  "do you speak so low?
I used formerly not to catch above a word in a sentence
from you."

This is a fault it is high time to conquer ;  but — but,
whenever embarrassment comes voice goes!  and what
can I do?  Amend,  however,  I will,  as fast as I can.
How would Mr.  Cambridge have delighted in hearing
this mentioned to me !  he has so often murmured upon
the subject.

In talking on about the Princes,  he asked me how I
managed with them.

Not at all,  I said,  for since I had resided under the
Royal roof they were rarely there,  and I had merely
seen them two or three times.

He congratulated me that I had not been in the family
in earlier days,  when they all lived together;  and Miss
Planta enumerated various of their riots,  and the dis
tresses and difficulties they caused in the household.

I was very glad,  I said,  to be out of the way,  though
I did not doubt but I might have kept clear of them had
I been even then a resident.

"  O no,  no,"  cried Mr.  Fairly ;  "  they would have come

172 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV

to you,  I promise you ;  and what could you have done
— what would have become of you  ? — with Prince Wil
liam in particular?  Do you not think,  Miss Planta,  the
Prince of Wales and Prince William would have been
quite enough for Miss Burney  ?  Why she would have
been quite subdued  !"

I assured him I had not a fear but I might always
have avoided them.

"Impossible!  They would have come to your tea
room.'1

"1 would have given up tea."

"  Then they would have followed you — called for you
— sent for you — the Prince of Wales would have called
about him,  '  Here !  where's Miss Burney  ?'  "

"  O,  no,  no,  no !"  cried 1 5  "I would have kept
v holly out of the way,  and then they would never have
thought about me."

"  O,  ho !"  cried he,  laughing,  "  never think of seeing
Miss Burney  !  Prince William,  too  !  what say you to
that,  Miss Planta?"

She agreed there was no probability of such escape.

I was only the more glad to have arrived in later
times.

Here a page came to call Mr.  Fairly to backgammon
with his Majesty.

And here ends July,  1788.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  173

PART V.

1788.

Fondness of George III.  for the Duke of York— Mr.  Bunbury,  the
Caricaturist — Plays and Players — Mrs.  Jordan — Royal Family
at a Country Theatre— Royal Visit to the Bishop of Wor
cester— Churchill— Hastings'  Trial— Excursion to Worcester —
Bishop Kurd— The Bishop's Palace— Worcester Music Meet
ing —  Dr.  Langhorne— Mr.  Mason —  Mrs.  Montagu— Horace
Walpole— The Bishop of Worcester— Loyal Addresses— Music
Meeting — Return to Cheltenham— The Princess Elizabeth —
Conversation with the Queen— The Cheltenham Theatre— Lord
Mountmorris— The Princess Daschkau— Return to Windsor —
An Old Acquaintance — Court routine— Dr.  Shepherd— M.  de
Lalande,  the Astronomer— Dr.  Maskelyne— Royal Birthday —
The Prince of Wales at Windsor— Return to Kew— West
minster Election— Graciousness of the Queen to her Attendants
— D'Alembert's Eloges.

FRIDAY,  AUGUST IST. — This was a very busy day;  the
Duke of York was expected,  and his fond father had caused
a portable wooden house to be moved from the further
end of Cheltenham Town up to join to Fauconberg Hall.
The task had employed twenty or thirty men almost
ever since our arrival,  and so laborious,  slow,  difficult,
and all but impracticable had it proved,  that it was barely
accomplished before it was wanted.  There was no room,
however,  in the King's actual dwelling,  and he could not
endure not to accommodate his son immediately next
himself.

His joy upon his arrival was such joy as I have only
seen here when he arrived first from Germany ;  I do not
mean it was equally violent,  or,  alas  !  equally unmixed,
but yet it was next and nearest to that which had been
most perfect.

Mr.  Bunbury attended his Royal Highness.  We had
all dispersed from breakfast,  but the King came in,  and
desired me to make him some.  Mr.  Fairly had brought

174 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

him to my little parlour,  and,  having called Columb,  and
assisted in arranging a new breakfast,  he left us,  glad,
I suppose,  of a morning to himself,  for his Majesty was
wholly engrossed by the Duke.

We talked over his usual theme — plays and players — •
and he languished to go to the theatre arid see Mrs.
Jordan.  Nor did he languish in vain  :  his Royal Master,
the Duke,  imbibed his wishes,  and conveyed them to
the King ;  and no sooner were they known than an
order was hastily sent to the play-house,  to prepare a
royal box.

The Queen was so gracious as to order Miss Planta
and myself to have the same entertainment.  We went
into a box near the stage,  which is always appropriated
for Mr.  Delabere,  as chief magistrate,  whenever he
chooses to make use of it.

Very vexatiously,  however^  my message arrived so

late,  that my dear Miss P •  and her aunt,  &c.,  were

out.  Mr.  Delabere and the sweet little Anne Dewes
accompanied us to their box.

The delight of the people that their King and Queen
should visit this country theatre was the most disinte
rested I ever witnessed ;  for though they had not even
a glance of their Royal countenances,  they shouted,
huzzaed,  and clapped,  for many minutes.  The managers
had prepared the front boxes for their reception,  and
therefore the galleries were over them.  They made a
very full and respectable appearance in this village
theatre.  The King,  Queen,  Duke of York,  and three
Princesses,  were all accommodated with front seats ;
Lord Harcourt stood behind the King,  Lady Harcourt
and Mr.  Fairly behind the Queen;  Lord and Lady
Courtown and Lady Pembroke behind the Princesses;
and,  at the back,  Colonel Gwynn and Mr.  Bunbury  ;  Mr.
Boulby and Lady Mary were also in the back group.

I was somewhat taken up in observing a lady who sat
opposite to me,  Miss W .  My Susanna will remem
ber that extraordinary young lady at Bath,  whose con-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  175

duct and conversation I have either written or repeated
to her.

I could not see her again without being much struck
by another recollection,  of more recent and vexatious
date.  Mrs.  Thrale,  in one of the letters she has pub
lished,  and which was written just after I had communi
cated to her my singular rencontre with this lady,  says to
Dr.  Johnson,  "  Burney has picked up an infidel,  and
recommended to her to read  'Rasselas.' "

This has a strange sound,  but when its circumstances

are known,  its strangeness ceases ;  it meant Miss W ,

and I greatly fear,  from the date and the book,  she can
not but know the 6(  infidel  "  and herself are one.  I was
truly concerned in reading it,  and I now felt almost
ashamed as well as concerned in facing her,  though her
infidelity,  at that time,  was of her own public avowal.
Mr.  Bunbury is particularly intimate with her,  and
admires her beyond all women.

The Duke of York,  so long expected,  declared he
could stay but one night ;  he was forced to be in town on
Sunday,  by military business;  but he would travel all
Saturday night,  that he might defer his setting off till
the day was over.

"  I wonder,"  cried Mr.  Fairly very gravely,  "  how
these Princes,  who are thus forced to steal even their
travelling from their sleep,  find time to say their
prayers !"

You may imagine,  nobody stopped to make out how
that might be managed.

Notwithstanding,  however,  this violent fatigue,  the
Duke agreed to attend their Majesties on the Saturday
to Hartlebury,  beyond Worcester,  whither they had gra
ciously engaged themselves to the Bishop of Worcester,
Dr.  Kurd.

When they were gone,  Miss Planta and myself,  by the
Queen's direction,  went in a chaise to see Tewkesbury.
We were carried to several very beautiful points of view,
all terminating with the noble hills of Malvern ;  and

176 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

we visited the cathedral,  which is very ancient,  and con
tains many of the unhappy warriors in the battles of the
Two Roses; — Lord Warwick,  the Duke of Clarence,
&c.  The pews of this cathedral seem the most unsafe,
strange,  and irregular that were ever constructed  ;  they
are mounted up,  story after story,  without any order,  now
large,  now small,  now projecting out wide,  now almost
indented in back,  nearly to the very roof of the building.
They look as if,  ready made,  they had been thrown up,
and stuck wherever they could,  entirely by chance.

We returned home just in time to be hastily dressed
before the Royals came back.  I was a little,  however,
distressed on being told,  as I descended to dinner,  that
Mr.  Richard Burney was in my parlour.  The strict dis
cipline observed here,  in receiving no visits,  made this a
very awkward circumstance,  for I as much feared hurting
him by such a hint,  as concurring in an impropriety by
detaining him.  Miss Planta suffers not a soul to
approach her to this house  ;  and Lady Harcourt has
herself told me she thinks it would be wrong to receive
even her sisters,  Miss Vernons,  so much all-together is
now the house and household  !

My difficulty was still increased,  when,  upon entering
the parlour,  I found him in boots,  a riding dress,  and
hair wholly without curl or dressing.  Innocently,  and
very naturally,  he had called upon me in his travelling
garb,  never suspecting that in visiting me he was at all in
danger of seeing or being seen by any one else.  Had
that indeed been the case,  I should have been very glad
to see him ;  but I knew,  now,  his appearance must prove
every way to his disadvantage,  and I felt an added
anxiety to acquaint him with my situation.

Miss Planta looked all amazement;  but he was him
self all ease and sprightly unconsciousness.

We were obliged to sit down to dinner;  he had dined.
I was quite in a panic the whole time,  lest any of the
Royals should come in before I could speak ;  but,  after
he had partaken of our dessert,  as much en badinage as I

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  177

could,  I asked him if he felt stout enough to meet the
King?  and then explained to him,  as concisely as I had
power,  that I had here no room whatsoever at my own
disposal,  in such a manner as to enable my having the
happiness to receive any of my private friends ;  even

Miss P ,  though known to all the Royal Family,  I

could never venture to invite,  except when they were
abroad  :  such being,  at present,  the universal practice and
forbearance of all the attendants in this tour.

He heard me with much surprise,  and much laughter
at his own elegant equipment for such encounters as those
to which he now found himself liable ;  but he imme
diately proposed decamping,  and I could not object.

Yet,  to soften this disagreeable explanation,  I kept him
a few minutes longer,  settling concerning our further
meeting at the concerts at Worcester,  and,  in this little
interval,  we were startled by a rap at my door.

He laughed,  and started back ;  and I,  alarmed,  also
retreated.  Miss Planta opened the door,  and called out
— "TisMr.  Fairly."

I saw him in amaze at sight of a gentleman  ;  and he
was himself immediately retiring,  concluding,  I suppose,
that nothing less than business very urgent could have
induced me to break through rules so rigidly observed by
himself and all others.  I would not,  however,  let him
go ;  but as I continued talking with Richard about the
music meeting and my cousins,  he walked up to the win
dow with Miss Planta.

I now kept Richard as long as I well could,  to help off
his own embarrassment at this interruption ;  at length
he went.

Hearing now the barking of the dogs,  I knew the
Royals must be going forth to their promenade ;  but I
found Mr.  Fairly either did not hear or did not heed
them ;  for,  upon my having asked some question about
Hartlebury,  he said,  "If you'll give me leave,  I'll sit
down and tell you the whole of the expedition."

He then gave a most interesting narration of the

VOL.  IV.  N

178 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

excursion of their Majesties,  and of their delighted
reception by the county of Worcester.  So immense arid
so respectful a crowd Mr.  Fairly declared he had
never seen,  and confessed he had been extremely affected
by their loyal joy,  though now accustomed to such
scenes.  Their extreme good behaviour had induced
him,  occasionally,  to hang a little back from the Royal
group,  in order to satisfy the curiosity he heard them
expressing,  of knowing who was who;  and he declared
he never saw people so obliged as they all showed them
selves,  that one of the  "  uniforms"  would come among
them,  to point out one princess from another,  and tell
the names of the whole party.

While I expected him every moment to recollect him
self,  and hasten to the walks,  he quietly said,  "They are
all gone but me.  I shall venture,  to-night,  to shirk; —
though the King will soon miss me.  But what will
follow  ?  He will say — *  Fairly is tired  !  How shabby !'
Well !  let him say so  ;  I am tired  !"

Miss Planta went off,  soon after,  to her walk.

He then began reading  *  The Pleasures of the Imagi
nation,'  and I took some work,  for which I was much in
haste,  and my imagination was amply gratified.

How sweet a poem,  in parts,  it is !  I rejoiced never
to have read it sooner,  unless,  indeed,  1 had read it with
my Susan or Fredy.  But anything highly beautiful I
have almost an aversion to reading alone.

He only looked out for favourite passages,  as he has
the poem almost by heart,  and he read them with a feel
ing and energy that showed his whole soul penetrated
with their force and merit.

After the first hour,  however,  he grew uneasy;  he
asked me when I expected the King and Queen from
their walk,  and whether they were likely to come into my
room?

"All,"  I said,  "was uncertain."

"  Can nobody,"  he cried,  "  let you know when they
are coming  ?"

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  179

"  Nobody,"  I answered,  "  would know till they were
actually arrived."

"  But,"  cried he,  "  can you not bid somebody watch  ?"

'Twas rather an awkward commission,  but I felt it
would be an awkwardness still less pleasant to me to
decline it,  and therefore I called Columb,  and desired he
would let me know when the Queen returned.

He was then easier,  and laughed a little,  while he ex
plained himself,  "  Should they come in and find me
reading here before I could put away my book,  they
would say we were two blue stockings !"

I am always ready enough to enter into any caution to
save that pedantic charge,  and therefore we were per
fectly agreed.  And perhaps he was a little the more
anxious not to be surprised to-night,  lest his being too
tired for walking should be imputed to his literary pre
ference of reading to a blue.

At tea Miss Planta again joined us,  and instantly
behind him went the book.  He was very right ;  for
nobody would have thought it more odd — or more blue.

During this repast they returned home,  but all went
straight upstairs,  the Duke wholly occupying the King ;
and Mr.  Bunbury went to the play.  When Miss Planta,
therefore,  took her evening stroll,  '  Akenside'  again came
forth,  and with more security.

"  There is one ode here,"  he cried,  "  that I wish to
read to you,  and now I think I can."

I told him I did not in general like Akenside's odes,
at least what I had chanced to read,  for I thought they
were too inflated,  and filled with  "  liberty cant."  tf But
this,  however,"  cried he,  "  I must read to you,  it is so
pretty,  though it is upon love  !"

'Tis addressed to Olympia :  I dare say my dearest
Fredy recollects it.  It is,  indeed,  most feelingly written  ;
but we had only got through the first stanza when the
door suddenly opened,  and enter Mr.  Bunbury.

After all the precautions taken,  to have him thus
appear at the very worst moment !  Vexed as I was,  I

N2

180 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

could really have laughed  ;  but Mr.  Fairly was ill dis
posed to take it so merrily.  He started,  threw the book
forcibly behind him,  and instantly took up his hat,  as if
decamping.

I really believe he was afraid Mr.  Bunbury would
caricature us  !  "  The sentimental readers !"  or what
would he have called us?

Luckily this confusion passed unnoticed.  Mr.  Bun-
bury had run away from the play to see after the horses,
&c.  for his Duke,  and was fearful of coming too late.

Plays and players now took up all the discourse,  with
Miss W ,  till the Duke was ready to go.

They then left me together,  Mr.  Fairly smiling drolly
enough in departing,  and looking at  ( Akenside'  with a
very arch shrug,  as who should say  "  What a scrape you
had nearly drawn me into,  Mr.  Akenside  !"

SUNDAY,  AUGUST SRD.  —  This morning I was so
violently oppressed by a cold,  which turns out to be the
influenza,  it was with the utmost difficulty I could dress
myself.  I did indeed now want some assistant most
\vofully.

The Princess Royal has already been some days dis
turbed with this influenza.  When the Queen perceived
it in me she told his Majesty,  who came into the room
just as she was going to breakfast.  Without making
any answer,  he himself went immediately to call Mr.
Clerk,  the apothecary,  who was then with the Princess
Royal.

"  Now,  Mr.  Clerk,"  cried he,  "  here's another patient
for you."

Mr.  Clerk,  a modest,  sensible man,  concluded,  by the
King himself having called him,  that it was the Queen
he had now to attend,  and he stood bowing profoundly
before her ;  but soon observing she did not notice him,
he turned in some confusion to the Princess Augusta,
who was now in the group.

"  No,  no  !  it's not me,  Mr.  Clerk,  thank God 1"  cried
the gay Princess Augusta.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  181

Still more confused,  the poor man advanced to Prin
cess Elizabeth.

"  No,  no  ;  it's not her  !"  cried the King.

I had held back,  having scarce power to open my
eyes,  from a vehement head-ache,  and not,  indeed,  wish
ing to go through my examination till there were fewer
witnesses.  But his Majesty now drew me out:  "  Here,
Mr.  Clerk,"  he cried,  "  this is your new patient 1"

He then came bowing up to me,  the King standing
close by,  and the rest pretty near.

"You — you are not well,  ma'am?"  he cried in the
greatest embarrassment.

"  No,  sir,  not quite,"  I answered in ditto.

"  O,  Mr.  Clerk will cure you  !"  cried the King.

" Are — are you feverish,  ma'am?"

"  Yes,  sir,  a little."

"  I — I will send you a saline draught,  ma'am."

"  If you please."

And then he bowed and decamped.

Did you ever hear a more perfectly satisfactory ex
amination  ?  The poor modest man was overpowered
by such Royal listeners and spectators,  and I could not
possibly relieve him,  for I was little better myself.

I went down to breakfast,  but was so exceedingly
oppressed I could not hold up my head  ;  and as soon as
I could escape I went to my own room,  and laid down
till my noon attendance,  which I performed with so much
difficulty I was obliged to return to the same indulgence

the moment I was at liberty.

*  *  *  #  *

Down at last I went,  slow and wrapped up.  I found
Mr.  Fairly alone in the parlour,  reading letters with
such intentness that he did not raise his head,  and with
an air of the deepest dejection.

I remained wholly unnoticed a considerable time ;  but
at last he looked up,  and with some surprise,  but a voice
of extreme sadness,  he said  "Is that Miss Burney?  j
thought it had been Miss Planta."

]82 DIARY AND LETTERS        [PART V".

I begged him to read on,  and not mind me  ;  and I
called for tea.

When we had done tea,  "  See,  ma'am,"  he cried,  "  I
have brought you Carr;  and here is a sermon upon the
text I mean,  when I preach,  to choose : — '  Keep inno-
cency,  and take heed to the thing that is right;  for that
will bring a man peace at the last.'  "

Sincerely I commended his choice;  and we had a
most solemn discussion of happiness,  not such as coin
cides with gaiety here,  but hope of salvation hereafter.
His mind has so religious a propensity,  that it seems to
me,  whenever he leaves it to its natural bent,  to incline
immediately and instinctively to subjects of that holy
nature.

Humility,  he said,  in conclusion,  humility was all in
all for tranquillity of mind  ;  with that,  little was expected
and much was borne,  and the smallest good was a call
for gratitude and content.

How could this man be a soldier  ?  Might one not
think he was bred in the cloisters  ?

"  Well,"  cried he,  again taking up the volume of Carr,
"  I will just sit and read this sermon,  and then quietly go
home."

He did so,  feelingly,  forcibly,  solemnly ;  it is an ex
cellent sermon  ;  yet so read — he so sad,  and myself so ill
— it was almost too much for me,  and I had some diffi
culty to behave with proper propriety.

To him subjects of this sort,  ill or well,  bring nothing,  I
believe,  but strength as well as comfort.  The voice of
dejection with which he began changed to one of firm
ness ere he had read three pages.

Something he saw of unusual sinking,  notwithstanding
what I hid  ;  and,  with a very kind concern,  when he had
finished the sermon,  he said,  "  Is there anything upon
your spirits  ?"

"  No,"  I assured him,  "but I was not well;  and mind
and body seemed to go together sometimes,  when they
did not."

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  183

"  But they do go together,"  cried he,  "  and will."

However,  he took no further notice :  he is like me,
for myself,  in that — that whatever he thinks only bodily
is little worth attention  ;  and I did not care to risk ex
plaining to his strong and virtuous mind the many fears
and mixed sensations of mine,  when brought to a close
disquisition of awaiting eternity.

I never,  but with Mrs.  Delany and Dr.  Johnson,  have
entered so fully and so frequently upon this awful sub
ject as with Mr.  Fairly.  My dear and most revered
Mrs.  Delany dwelt upon it continually,  with joy,  and
pure,  yet humble hope.  My ever-honoured Dr.  Johnson
recurred to it perpetually,  with a veneration compounded
of diffidence and terror,  and an incessant,  yet unavailing
plan,  of amending all errors,  and rising into perfection.
Mr.  Fairly leans upon it as the staff of his strength — the
trust,  the hope,  the rest of his soul — too big for satisfac
tion in aught this world has given,  or can reserve for]him.

He did not,  however,  "go quietly home"  when he had
finished the sermon  ;  on the contrary,  he revived in his
spirits,  and animated in his discourse,  and stayed on.

In speaking of the King he suddenly recollected some
very fine lines of Churchill,  made on his accession to the
throne.  I wish I could transcribe them,  they are so
applicable to that good King,  from that moment of pro
mise to the present of performance.  But I know not in
what part of Churchill's works they may be found.

Finding me unacquainted with his poems he then re
peated several passages,  all admirably chosen  ;  but among
them his memory called forth some that were written

upon Lord H ,  which were of the bitterest severity I

ever heard  : — whether deserved or not,  Heaven knows  ;
but Mr.  Fairly said he would repeat them,  for the merit
of the composition.  There was no examining his opinion
of their veracity,  and he made no comments ;  but this

Lord H ,  was the famous man so often in the House

of Commons accused of expending,  or retaining,  unac
counted millions  !

Having run through all he could immediately recollect,

184 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

he said,  with a very droll smile,  tc Come,  now I'll finish
our ode,"  and went to my drawer for  '  Akenside.'

His fears of surprise,  however,  again came upon him
so strongly while reading it,  that he flung away the book
in the utmost commotion at every sound,  lest any one
was entering,  always saying in excuse,  "  We must not be
called two blue stockings  ;"  and,  "  They are so glad to

laugh  ;  the world is so always on the watch for ridicule.'*
******

I know not by what means,  but after this we talked
over Mr.  Hastings'  trial.  I find he is very much ac
quainted with Mr.  Wyndham,  and I surprised him not a
little,  I saw,  by what I told him of part of my confer
ences with that gentleman.

This matter having led us from our serious subjects,
he took up e Akenside'  once more,  and read to me the
first book throughout.  What a very,  very charming
poem is the  '  Pleasures of the Imagination  !'  He stayed
to the last moment,  and left me all the better for the time
he thus rescued from feverish lassitude and suffering.

TUESDAY,  AUGUST STH. — This morning at breakfast I
was much vexed to hear Mr.  Fairly,  during the whole
repast,  speaking with that unguarded openness which
requires the most perfect understanding of his character,
before one who heard all with a literal acceptation,  and
concluded him next to a rebel,  though he is,  perhaps,
one of the most zealously devoted of rational subjects.
But neither his zeal nor his devotion blind him  ;  nor do
I think they ever could to any object under heaven, — so
clear seems his perception of good and ill,  so unbiassed
his mind by either partiality or prejudice.

He sat with us some minutes,  giving an account of the
route we were to take,  and what was worth our looking
for,  and various other useful,  though local matters.  We
were to travel in the evening on account of the heat ;  we
should pass through much beautiful scenery,  and there
were some parts for which he bid us look,  in which he

desired us  "  not to let a blade of grass pass unnoticed."
*  *  *  *  *  *

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  185

Miss Planta and I followed,  as usual,  in the last royal
coach,  the two wardrobe-women joining us.

The journey to Worcester was very pleasant,  and the
country through which we passed extremely luxuriant
and pretty.  We did not go in by the Barborne road ;
but all the road,  and all avenues leading to it,  were
lined with people,  and when we arrived at the city we
could see nothing but faces;  they lined the windows
from top to bottom,  and the pavement from end to
end.

We drove all through the city to come to the palace of
Bishop Hurd,  at which we were to reside.  Upon stop
ping there,  the King had an huzza that seemed to vibrate
through the whole town ;  the Princess Royal's carriage
had a second,  and the Equerries a third  ;  the mob then,
as ours drew on in succession,  seemed to deliberate whe
ther or not we also should have a cheer  :  but one of them
soon decided the matter by calling out,  '*  These are the
Maids of Honour!"  and immediately they gave us an
huzza that made us quite ashamed,  considering its
vicinity.

Mr.  Fairly and Colonel Goldsworthy having performed
the royal attendance,  waited to hand us out of the car
riage  ;  and then the former said he believed he should
not be wanted,  and would go and make a visit in the
town.  I should have much liked walking off also,  and
going to my cousins at Barborne Lodge ;  but I was no
free agent,  and obliged to wait for commands.

The Bishop received the Royal Family and all the
suite;  but lodged himself out of the house,  the better to
accommodate them.

The house is old and large ;  part of it looks to the
Severn  ;  but the celebrated  "  Fair Sabrina"  was so thick
and muddy,  that at this time her vicinity added but little
to the beauty of the situation.

The utmost care and attention was paid by the good
Bishop to the convenience and comfort of his royal
guests,  and all their people.  Our party in this mansion

186 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

consists of all the Royals,  Lady Harcourt,  Miss Planta,
and myself,  with pages,  &c.  Lady Pembroke,  Lord
and Lady Courtown,  Mr.  Fairly,  Colonels Goldsworthy
and Gwynn,  are all lodged in the town.  Lord Coventry,
as Recorder of Worcester,  is here to receive the King,
and Lord Oxford is come as Lord in Waiting.

My bed-room is pleasant,  with a view of the distant
country and the Severn beneath it;  but it is through
that of the Princess Royal;  which is an inconvenience
her Royal Highness submits to with a grace that would
make me ashamed to call it one to myself.  The parlour
for our eating is large and dark,  and old-fashioned.  I
made tea in it to-night for Lord Courtown and the two
Colonels,  and Miss Planta,  and was so much the better
for my journey,  that I felt the influenza nearly con
quered.

WEDNESDAY,  AUGUST GTH. — I had the pleasure to
arrange going to the music meeting with my own family.
Notes were immediately interchanged from and to Bar-
borne Lodge,  and the Queen was very well pleased that
I should have this opportunity of joining my friends.
Mr.  and Mrs.  Hawkins and Betsy called for me at the
Bishop's.

I was heartily glad to see Betsy and Mrs.  Hawkins ;  I
introduced Miss Planta to them,  who was of our party.
We sat in what are called the Stewards'  places,  imme
diately under their Majesties.  The performance was very
long,  and tolerably tedious,  consisting of Handel's gravest
pieces and fullest choruses,  and concluding with a ser
mon concerning the institution of the charity,  preached
by Dr.  Langhorne.  I was,  however,  so glad to be with
my cousins,  that the morning was very comfortable and
pleasant to me.  Richard and James joined us occa
sionally  ;  the rest of the family are at Shrewsbury.

It was over very late,  and we then went about the
church,  to see King John's tomb,  &c.  They were very
earnest with me to go to Barborne  ;  but it was impossible.
I promised,  however,  to accompany them to the concert

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  187

at night,  and be of their party to all the morning meet
ings at the cathedral.

My parlour at the Bishop's afforded me a good deal of
entertainment,  from observing the prodigious concourse
of people from all the tops of houses,  and looking over
the walls to watch his Majesty's entrance into the court
yard.  Poor Lord Courtown,  on account of his star,  was
continually taken for the King,  and received so many
huzzas and shouts,  that he hardly dared show himself
except when in attendance.

I was looking at the window after dinner when his
Lordship was forced to come out with the other gen
tlemen,  to wait for the King,  whom they were all going
to attend to the china and other manufactories.  Mr.
Fairly saw me,  and instantly came np to the window,  to
inquire how I did,  and what was become of my influ
enza  ?  The rest followed,  and among them Lord Oxford,
and they all stayed,  chatting upon Worcester,  &c.,  till
his Majesty appeared.  The Queen then came also to
peep in and see how I was accommodated.  The perfect
good humour and graciousness of all the Royal Family in
these excursions there is no describing.  The Princess
Royal regularly,  during this Worcester visit,  parted the
orgeat given her for her own influenza,  and with her
own fair hands placed half of it by my bedside,  where I
always found it at night.  Could anything be more
sweetly condescending?

My cousins called in the evening,  and we accom
panied them to the concert,  where 1 was much more
pleased than in the morning,  but obliged to come away
at the end of the first act,  as it was already ten o'clock;
so late did they begin the performance.

When we came home I found my parlour filled with
the gentlemen  ;  the crowd had pressed so hard upon the
Royal Family in their walk to the manufactories,  that
they had been obliged to order carriages and return
home.  It was merely eagerness to see them,  for all was
perfectly civil and loyal.

188 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

THURSDAY,  AUGUST 7TH. — This afternoon I could
have contrived to go to Barborne Lodge,  as all the party
attended their Majesties in an expedition to see sights,
but my cousins themselves were at the concert,  and I
would not keep them away.

Poor Lady Harcourt had now the influenza with great
severity,  and was confined to the house,  and till the even
ing,  to her room,  which was immediately within my
parlour.  When she found all were out except myself,  (for
even Miss Planta was gone off shopping and walking,)
she sent to propose spending the evening with me.  I
could not but accept the honour,  and she came,  muffled
up in cloaks and night-caps,  and stayed with me,
tete-a-tete,  three hours — that is,  till I was summoned to
the Queen.

We talked over Mr.  Mason,  Mrs.  Montagu,  and Mr.
WTaIpole,  all of whom she happened to know had ad
mitted me of their acquaintance.  She was very courteous
indeed,  but the native stiffness of her character and de
portment never wears away,  and its effect upon me was,
1 am afraid,  sympathetic.  How long may a tete-a-tete
seem,  and how short !  Time never goes so quick or so
slow as in such duettos.

I had several little conferences with the Bishop of
Worcester in the course of the day,  which were extremely
pleasant to me.  He made me sundry little visits,  while
in waiting at different times for their Majesties.

FRIDAY,  AUGUST STH. — The Recorder of Worcester,
Lord Coventry,  and the Mayor and Aldermen,  &c.,
arrived early this morning to conduct the King to the
Town Hall,  which he had settled to see.  His Majesty
came to the Queen while I was with her,  to desire her to
look at the procession from the window.  She graciously
bid me look also;  and the King proposed bringing in
Mr.  Fairly,  who had,  I believe,  some business with her.
He came to my window to look on  ;  and when the pro
cession was passed I left the room and went down to a
cold breakfast,  Miss Planta having had hers ;  for we were

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  189

here in more confusion as to meals,  times,  dressings,  and

meetings,  than anywhere.

******

My cousins came at the usual time,  and we all went
again to the cathedral.  Mara sung very finely,  but she
is not a favourite singer of my heart's ;  I had not,  there
fore,  any very exquisite delight,  for I am sure there was
no other chance for it.

In the evening the Royal Family determined to gratify
the Worcester City by appearing at the concert.  We
were all to attend it also,  and obliged to make up caps,
forsooth,  on the occasion,  there having yet been none
that required any dress without a hat.

Of course I went with my cousins.  Miss Planta
joined a lady of her acquaintance,  Mrs.  Fountain.

The box for the Royals was prepared upstairs,  and
made very handsome ;  but there was no sort of resting-
place considered for their attendants,  who were forced to
stand perpendicular the whole time.

Mrs.  Hawkins,  Betsy,  and myself,  had places imme
diately behind the royal box.  The King,  Queen,  and
Princesses had very handsome large chairs ;  their poor
standing attendants were Lady Harcourt,  Lord Oxford,
Mr.  Fairly,  and the two Colonels to fill up;  for in form
and order the Equerries are never admitted into the
Royal box,  but in the country this etiquette is cast
aside.  Lord Oxford is in waiting as Lord of the Bed
chamber.

I was so near them as occasionally to speak with them
all,  and even to receive from Colonel Goldsworthy one
of the royal books of the words of the concert.

Poor Lady Harcourt was so weakened by her influ
enza that she was ready to drop,  and after the first act
was forced to entreat permission to resign her place to
Lady Pembroke,  who was in the gallery,  and,  being ano
ther Lady of the Bedchamber,  was equally proper for it.

The concert was very Handelian,  though not exclu
sively.

190 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

SATURDAY,  AUGUST 9TH. — Her Majesty this morning
a little surprised me by gravely asking me what were Mr.
Fairly's designs with regard to his going away  ?  I
could not tell her I did not know what I was really
acquainted with ;  yet I feared it might seem odd to her
that I should be better informed than herself,  and it was
truly unpleasant to me to relate anything he had told me
without his leave.  Her question,  therefore,  gave me
a painful sensation;  but it was spoken with an air so
strongly denoting a belief that I had power to answer it,
that I felt no choice in making a plain reply.  Simply,
then,  "  I understand,  ma'am,"  1 said,  "  that he means to
go to-morrow morning early."

" Will he stay on to-night,  then,  at Worcester?"

"N — o,  ma'am,  i believe not."

"  I thought he meant to leave us to-day  ?     He said so."

"  He — intended it,  ma'am, — he would else not have
said it."

tf I know I understood so,  though he has not spoke to
me of his designs this great while.'3

I saw an air bordering upon displeasure as this was
said  ;  and how sorry I felt ! — and how ashamed of being
concluded the person better informed  !  Yet,  as he had
really related to me his plan,  and I knew it to be what
he had thought most respectful to herself,  I concluded it
best,  thus catechised,  to speak it all,  and therefore,  after
some hesitation uninterrupted by her,  I said,  i(  I believe,
ma'am,  Mr.  Fairly had intended fully to begin his jour
ney to-day,  but,  as your Majesty is to go to the play to
night,  he thinks it his duty to defer setting out till to
morrow,  that he may have the honour to attend your
Majesty as usual."

This,  which was the exact truth,  evidently pleased her.

Here the inquiry dropped ;  but I was very uneasy to
relate it to Mr.  Fairly,  that the sacrifice I knew he meant
to make of another day might not lose all its grace by
wanting to be properly revealed.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  191

Our journey back to Cheltenham was much more
quiet than it had been to Worcester,  for the royal party
took another route to see Malvern Hills,  and we went
straight forward.

Miss Planta having now caught the influenza,  suffered
very much all the way,  and I persuaded her immediately
to lie down when we got to Fauconberg Hall.  She
could not come down to dinner,  which I had alone.
The Princess Elizabeth came to me after it,  with her
Majesty's permission that I might go to the play with
my usual party ;  but I declined it,  that I might make
some tea for poor Miss Planta,  as she had no maid,  nor
any creature to help her.  The Princess told me they
were all going tirst upon the walks,  to promener till the
play time.

I sat down to make my solitary tea,  and had just sent
up a basin to Miss Planta,  when,  to my equal surprise
and pleasure,  Mr.  Fairly entered the room.  "  I come
now,"  he said,  "  to take my leave."

They were all,  he added,  gone to the walks,  whither
he must in a few minutes follow them,  and thence attend
to the play,  and the next morning,  by five o'clock,  be
ready for his postchaise.

Seeing me,  however,  already making tea,  with his
usual and invariable sociability he said he would ven
ture to stay and partake,  though he was only come,  he
gravely repeated,  to take his leave.

"  And I must not say,"  cried I,  "  that I am sorry you
are going,  because I know so well you wish to be gone
that it makes me wish it for you myself."

"  No,"  answered he,  "  you must not be sorry ;  when
our friends are going to any joy we must think of them,
and be glad to part with them."

Readily entering into the same tone,  with similar
plainness of truth I answered,  "  No,  I will not be sorry
you go,  though miss you at Cheltenham I certainly
must."

"  Yes,"  was his unreserved assent,  t{  you will miss me

192 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

here,  because I have spent my evenings with you ;  but
you will not long remain at Cheltenham."

Oime I thought I,  you little think how much worse will
be the quitting it.  He owned that the bustle and fatigue
of this life were too much both for his health and his
spirits.

I told him I wished it might be a gratification to him,
in his toils,  to hear how the Queen always spoke of
him ;  with what evident and constant complacency and
distinction.  "  And you may credit her sincerity/'  I
added,  "  since it is to so little a person as me she does
this,  and when no one else is present."

He was not insensible to this,  though he passed it over
without much answer.  He showed me a letter from
his second son,  very affectionate and natural.  I con
gratulated him,  most sincerely,  on his approaching
happiness in collecting them all together.  "  Yes,"  he
answered,  "  my group will increase,  like a snow-ball,  as
I roll along,  and they will soon all four be as happy as
four little things know how to be."

This drew him on into some reflections upon affection
and upon happiness.  t(  There is no happiness,"  he
said,  "  without participation ;  no participation without
affection,  There is,  indeed,  in affection a charm that
leaves all things behind it,  and renders even every cala
mity that does not interfere with it inconsequential;  and
there is no difficulty,  no toil,  no labour,  no exertion,  that
will not be endured where there is a view of reaping it."

My concurrence was too perfect to require many
words.

"And affection there sometimes is,"  he continued,
"even in this weak world,  so pure,  so free from alloy,  that
one is tempted to wonder,  without deeply considering,
why it should not be permanent,  and why it should be
vain."

Here I did not quite comprehend his conclusion  ;  but
it was a sort of subject I could not probe,  for various
reasons.  Besides,  he was altogether rather obscure.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  193

He ruminated some time,  and then told me of a ser
mon he had heard preached some months ago,  sensibly
demonstrating the total vanity and insufficiency,  even for
this world,  of all our best affections,  and proving their
fallibility from our most infirm humanity.

My concurrence did not here continue  :  I cannot hold
this doctrine to be right,  and I am most sure it is not
desirable.  Our best affections,  I must and do believe,
were given us for the best purposes,  for every stimulation
to good,  and every solace in evil.

But this was not a time for argument.  I said nothing,
while he,  melancholy and moralizing,  continued in this
style as long as he could venture to stay.

He then rose and took his hat,  saying,  "  Well,  so
much for the day  ;  what may come to-morrow I know
not;  but,  be it what it may,  I stand prepared."

I hoped,  I told him,  that his little snowball would be
all he could wish it,  and I was heartily glad he would so
soon collect it.

"  We will say,"  cried he,  "  nothing of any regrets,"
and bowed,  and was hastening off.

The  "we,"  however,  had an openness and simplicity
that drew from me an equally open and simple reply.
"  No,"  I cried,  "  but I will say — for that you will have
pleasure in hearing — that you have lightened my time
here in a manner that no one else could have done,  of
this party."

To be sure this was rather a circumscribed compli
ment,  those he left considered  ;  but it was strict and
exact truth,  and therefore like his own dealing.

He said not a word of answer,  but bowed,  and went
away,  leaving me firmly impressed with a belief that
I shall find in him a true,  an honourable,  and even an
affectionate friend,  for life.

Soon after I went up to poor Miss Planta,  and sat
with her great part of the evening ;  and the rest was
passed in a visit from Lady Harcourt,  who had not been
well enough for the play.

VOL.  IV.  O

194 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

SUNDAY,  AUG.  !()TH. — Major Price was of the break
fast party this morning,  to my great contentment.  I
heartily wish he was asain in the King's household,  he is
so truly attached to liis Majesty,  and he so earnestly
himself wishes for a restoration,  not to the Equerryship,
which is too laborious an office,  but to any attendance
upon the King's person of less fatigue.

He opened to me very much upon his situation and
wishes.  He has settled himself in a small farm near the
house of his eldest brother,  but I could see too plainly
he has not found there the contentment that satisfies
him.  He sighs for society  ;  he owns books are insuf
ficient for everything,  and his evenings begin already to
grow wearisome.  He does not wish it to be talked of
publicly,  but he is solicitous to return to the King,  in any
place attached to his person,  of but rnild duty.  Not
only the King,  he said,  he loved,  but all his society,  and
the way of life in general ;  and he had no tie whatsoever
to Herefordshire that would make him hesitate a
moment in quitting it,  if any other place could be made
adequate to his fortune.  His income was quite too
small for any absence from his home of more than a few
weeks,  in its present plight;  and therefore it could alone
be by some post under government that he must flatter
himself with ever returning to the scenes he had left.

How rarely does a plan of retirement answer the
expectations upon which it is raised  !  He fears having
this suspected,  and therefore keeps the matter to him
self;  but I believe he so much opened it to me,  in the
ho{)e I might have an opportunity to make it known
where it might be efficacious  ;  for he told me,  at the same
time,  he apprehended his Majesty had a notion his fond
ness for Herefordshire,  not his inability to continue
Equerry,  had occasioned his resignation.

I shall certainly make it my business to hint this to
the Queen.  So faithful and attached a servant ought
not to be thrown aside,  and,  after nine years service,  left
unrewarded,  and seem considered as if superannuated.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  195

When I came from her Majesty,  just before she went
down to dinner,  I was met by a servant who delivered me
a letter,  which he told me was just come by express.  I
took it in some alarm,  fearing that ill news alone could
bring it by such haste,  but,  before I could open it,  he
said,  "  'Tis from Mr.  Fairly,  ma'am."

I hastened to read,  and will now copy it : —

"  Miss Burney,  Falconberg Hall.

«  Northleach,  Aug.  10th,  1788.

"  Her Majesty may possibly not have heard that Mr.
Edmund Waller died on Thursday night.  He was
Master of St.  Catherine's,  which is in her Majesty's gift.
It may be useful to her to have this early intelligence of
this circumstance,,  and you will have the goodness to
mention it to her.  Mr.  W.  was at a house upon his
own estate within a mile and a-half of this place.  Very
truly and sincerely yours,

"  S.  FAIRLY."

How to communicate this news,  however,  was a real
distress to me.  I know her Majesty is rather scrupulous
that all messages immediately to herself should be con
veyed by the highest channels,  and I feared she would
think this ought to have been sent through her Lady
then in waiting,  Lady Harcourt.  Mr.  Fairly,  too,  how
ever superior to such small matters for himself,  is most
punctiliously attentive to them for her.  I could attribute
this only to haste.  But my difficulty was not alone to
have received the intelligence — the conclusion of the note
I was sure would surprise her.  The rest,  as a message
to herself,  being without any beginning,  would not strike
her ;  but the words  "  very truly and sincerely yours,"  come
out with such an abrupt plainness,  and to her,  who
knows not with what intimacy of intercourse we have
lived together so much during this last month,  I felt
quite ashamed to show them.

While wavering how to manage,  a fortunate circum-

o 2

196 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

stance seemed to come in to my relief;  the Princess
Elizabeth ran up hastily to her room,  which is just oppo
site to mine,  before she followed the Queen down to
dinner ;  I flew after her,  and told her I had just heard of
the death of Mr.  Waller,  the master of St:  Catherine's,
and I begged her to communicate it to her Majesty.

She undertook it,  with her usual readiness to oblige,
and I was quite delighted to have been so speedy without
producing my note,  which I determined now not even to
mention unless called upon,  and even then not to pro
duce;  for now,  as I should not have the first telling,  it
might easily be evaded by not having it in my pocket.

The moment,  however,  that the dinner was over,  Prin
cess Elizabeth came to summon me to the Queen.  This
was very unexpected,  as I thought I should not see her
till night ;  but I locked up my note and followed.

She was only with the Princesses.  I found the place
was of importance,  by the interest she took about it.
She asked me several questions relative to Mr.  Waller.
I answered her all I could collect from my note,  for
further never did I hear;  but the moment I was obliged
to stop she said,  "  Pray have you known him long  ?"

"  I never knew him at all,  ma'am."

"No?  Why,  then,  how came you to receive the
news about his death  ?"

Was not this agreeable?  I was forced to say,  "I
heard of it only from Mr.  Fairly,  ma'am."

Nothing could exceed the surprise with which she now
lifted up her eyes to look at me.  "  From Mr.  Fairly  ? —
Why did he not tell it me  ?"

O,  worse and worse  !  I was now compelled to answer,
"  He did not know it when he was here,  ma'am ;  he heard
it at Northleach,  and,  thinking it might be of use to your
Majesty to have the account immediately,  he sent it over
express."

A dead silence so uncomfortable ensued,  that I thought
it best presently to go on further,  though unasked.

"  Mr.  Fairly,  ma'am,  wrote the news to me,  on such

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  197

small paper,  and in such haste,  that it is hardly fit to be
shown to your Majesty  ;  but I have the note upstairs."

No answer;  again all silent;  and then Princess
Augusta said,  "  Mamma,  Miss Burney says she has the
note upstairs."

"  If your Majesty pleases to see it" —

She looked up again,  much more pleasantly,  and said,
"I shall be glad to see it,"  with a little bow.

Out I went for it,  half regretting I had not burned it,
to make the producing it impossible.

When I brought it to her,  she received it with the most
gracious smile,  and immediately read it aloud,  with great
complacency,  till she came to the end ;  and then,  with a
lowered and somewhat altered tone,  the  "  very truly and
sincerely yours,"  which she seemed to look at for a mo
ment with some doubt if it were not a mistake,  but in
returning it she bowed again,  and simply said,  "I am very
much obliged to Mr.  Fairly."

You will be sure how much I was pleased during this
last week to hear that the place of the Master of St.
Catherine's was given by her Majesty to Mr.  Fairly.  It
is reckoned the best in her gift,  as a sinecure.  What is
the income I know not :  reports differ from 400/.  to
$00?.  per annum.

The night before we left Cheltenham we all went to

the play.  Miss P and myself had far rather have

passed the evening together;  but it was concluded we
should be pleased to go to the theatre,  and declining in
tended kindness is always an ungrateful task.

I was introduced in the box,  by his desire,  to Lord
Mountmorris,  who sat behind me,  chatting all the night
with the freedom of a long acquaintance.  He is clever
and agreeable,  but not very reserved or diffident.

One thing surprised me from him very much.  When
all was over he offered to hand me out,  but as I had a
chair bespoke,  without a servant,  Columb being already
set out for Windsor,  I wished to decline troubling him,
that I might keep back to the last moment with Miss

198 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

P .  He would not,  however,  be excused,  taking the

hand I did not hold out,  and when I said I must have
my chair called first,  "  O,"  he cried,  <(  I know your
chair  !"  and then,  with a most audible voice,  he pro
nounced  "  Here,  number twenty-four !"  and instantly a
chair appeared,  which I knew to be right.

How he had got at this number is odd enough.
Perhaps,  indeed,  he had tried to bespeak it for himself,
and so might hear how it was engaged.  He has
declared a violent resolution for making this acquaint
ance some time  ;  and he certainly determined the oppor
tunity should not be thrown away.  Yet he is not an
ill-bred,  though a bold man  ;  on the contrary,  he is
really polite for a character of that sort.

Lord Mountmorris told me some very curious anec
dotes of Mrs.  Vesey and her coterie in former days,
particularly of the Russian Princess Daschkoff,  who,  he
assured me,  was meant by O'Keeffe for the Princess
Rusty Fusty,  in the  '  Agreeable Surprise  !'

SATURDAY,  AUGUST 16TH. — We left Cheltenham
early this morning.  Major Price breakfasted with us,
and was so melancholy at the King's departure he could
hardly speak a word.  All Cheltenham was drawn out
into the High-street,  the gentles on one side and the
commons on the other,  and a band,  and  '  God save the
King,'  playing and singing.

My dear Miss P ,  with all her friends,  was there

for a last look,  and a sorrowful one we interchanged ;  Mr.
Seward also,  whom again I am not likely to meet for
another two years at least.

The journey was quite without accident or adventure.

And thus ends the Cheltenham episode.  May I not
justly call it so,  different as it is to all the mode of life
I have hitherto lived here,  or alas !  am in a way to live
henceforward  ?

Melancholy  —  most melancholy  —  was the return to
Windsor ;  destitute of all that could solace,  compose,  or
delight ;  replete with whatever could fatigue,  harass,  and

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  :  199

depress  !  Ease,  leisure,  elegant society,  and interesting
communication,  were now to give place to arrogant man
ners,  contentious disputation,  and arbitrary ignorance !
Oh,  Heaven  !  my dearest friends,  what scales could have
held and have weighed the heart of your F.  B.  as she
drove past the door of her revered,  lost comforter,  to
enter the apartment inhabited by such qualities !

But before I quit this journey let me tell one very
pleasant anecdote.  When we stopped to change horses
at Burford I alighted and went into the inn,  to meet
Mrs.  Gast,  to whom I had sent by Mrs.  Frodsham a
request to be there as we passed through the town.

I rejoiced indeed to see again the sister of our first
and wisest friend.  My Susanna,  who knows her too
enthusiastic character,  will easily suppose my recep
tion.  I was folded in her arms,  and bathed in her tears
all my little stay,  and my own,  from reflected tenderness
for her ever-honoured,  loved,  and lamented brother,
would not be kept quite back  ;  'twas a species of sorrow
ful joy — painful,  yet pleasing — that seemed like a fresh
tribute to his memory and my affection,  and made the
meeting excite an emotion that occupied my mind and
reflections almost all the rest of my journey.

She inquired most kindly after my dear father and my
Susanna,  and separately and with interest of all the rest
of the family ;  but her surprise to see me now,  by this
most unexpected journey,  when she had concluded me
inevitably shut up from her sight for the remainder of her
life,  joined to the natural warmth of her disposition,
seemed almost to suffocate her.  I was very sorry to
leave her,  but ray time was unavoidably short and
hurried.  I inquired after Chesington,  and heard very
good accounts.

WINDSOR,  SUNDAY,  AUGUST I/TH. — This day,  after
our arrival,  began precisely the same as every day pre
ceding our journey.  The  '  Sleeping Beauty in the
Wood '  could not awake more completely to the same

200 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

scene  ;  yet I neither have been asleep,  nor am quite a
beauty  !  O  !  I wish I were as near to the latter as the
former at this minute  !

We had all the set assembled to congratulate his
^Majesty on his return — Generals and Colonels without
end.  I was very glad while the large party lasted,  its
diminution into a solitary pair ending in worse than
piquet — a tete-a-tete ! — and such a one,  too  !  after being
so spoiled !

MONDAY,  AUGUST 18TH. — Well,  now I have a new
personage to introduce to you,,  and no small one ;  ask
else the stars,  moon,  and planets !  While I was sur
rounded with bandboxes,  and unpacking,  Dr.  Shepherd
was announced.  Eager to make his compliments on the
safe return,  he forced a passage through the back avenues
and stairs,  for he told me he did not like being seen
coming to me at the front door,  as it might create some
jealousies amongst the other Canons  !  A very com
mendable circumspection  !  but whether for my sake or
his own he did not particularize.

M.  de Lalande,  he said,  the famous astronomer,  was
just arrived in England,  and now at Windsor,  and he
had expressed a desire to be introduced to me.

Well,  while he was talking this over,  and I was won
dering and evading,  entered Mr.  Turbulent.  What a
surprise at sight of the reverend Canon  !  The reverend
Canon,  also,  was interrupted and confused,  fearing,  pos
sibly,  the high honour he did me might now transpire
amongst his brethren,  notwithstanding his generous efforts
to spare them its knowledge.

Mr.  Turbulent,  who looked big with heroics,  was quite
provoked to see he had no chance of giving them vent.
They each outstayed the patience of the other,  and at
last both went off together.

Some hours after,  however,  while I was dressing,  the
Canon returned.  I could not admit him,  and bid Goter
tell him at the door I was not visible.  Pie desired he

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAV.  201

might wait till I was ready,  as he had business of im
portance.  I would not let him into the next room,  but
said he might stay in the eating-parlour.

When I was dressed I sent Goter to bring him in.
She came back,  grinning and colouring :  she had not
found him,  she said,  but only Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who
was there alone,  and had called her in to know what
she wanted.  She answered she came to see for a gen
tleman.

"  There's no gentleman,"  she cried,  "  to come into my
parlour !  it is not permit.  When he comes I will have it
locked up,"

O,  ho,  my poor careful Canon  !  thought I.  However,
soon after a tap again at my door introduced him.  He
said he had been waiting below in the passage,  as he saw
Madame Schwellenberg in the parlour,  and did not care
to have her know him ;  but his business was to settle
bringing M.  de Lalande to see me in the evening.

I told him I was much honoured,  and so forth,  but
that I received no evening company,  as I was officially
engaged.

He had made the appointment,  he said,  and could not
break it without affronting him  ;  besides,  he gave me to
understand it would be an honour to me for ever to be
visited by so great an astronomer.

I agreed as to that,  and was forced,  moreover,  to agree
to all the rest,  no resource remaining.

I mentioned to her Majesty the state of the case.  She
thought the Canon very officious,  and disapproved the
arrangement,  but saw it was unavoidable.

But when the dinner came I was asked by the pre-
sidente,  "  What for send you gentlemen to my parlour  ?"

"  I was dressing,  ma'am,  and could not possibly receive
company in mine,  and thought the other empty."

"  Empty or full is the same  !  I won't have it.  1 will
lock up the room when it is done so.  No,  no,  I won't
have no gentlemen here  ;  it is not permit,  perticklere
when they won't not speak to me  !"

202 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

I then heard that ft a large man,  what you call/'  had
entered that sacred domain,  and seeing there a lady,  had
quitted it  "  bob short  !"

I immediately explained all that had passed,  for I had
no other way to save myself from an imputation of
favouring the visits and indiscretion of this most gallant
Canon.

"  Veil,  when he comes so often he might like you.
.For what won't you not marry him  ?"

This was coming to the point,  and so seriously,  I found
myself obliged to be serious in answer,  to avoid miscon
struction,  and to assure her,  that were he Archbishop of
Canterbury,  and actually at my feet,  I would not become
Archbishopess.

"  Veil,  you been right when you don't not like him  ;
I don't not like the men neither  :  not one from them  !'*

So this settled us very amicably till tea-time,  and in
the midst of that,  with a room full of people,  I was called
out by Westerhaults to Dr.  Shepherd  !

Mrs.  Schwellenberg herself actually te-hed at this,
and I could not possibly help laughing myself,  but I
hurried into the next room,  where I found him with his
friend,  M.  de Lalande.  What a reception awaited me  !
how unexpected a one from a famed and great astro
nomer  !  M.  de Lalande advanced to meet me — I will
not be quite positive it was on tiptoe,  but certainly with
a mixture of jerk and strut that could not be quite flat-
footed.  He kissed his hand with the air of a petit-
maitre,  and then broke forth into such an harangue of
Eloges,  so solemn with regard to its own weight and im-
poitance,  and so fade with respect to the little personage
addressed,  that I could not help thinking it lucky for the
planets,  stars,  and sun,  they were not bound to hear his
comments,  though obliged to undergo his calculations.

On my part sundry profound reverences,  with now
and then an  "  O,  monsieur /"  or  " cest trop tfhonneur"
acquitted me so well,  that the first harangue being
finished,  on the score of general and grand reputation,

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  203

Eloge the second began,  on the excellency with which
"  cette ce'lebre demoiselle'  spoke French  !

This may surprise yon,  my dear friends ;  but you must
consider M.  de Lalande is a great discoverer.

Well,  but had you seen Dr.  Shepherd  !  he looked lost
in sleek delight and wonder,  that a person to whom he
had introduced M.  de Lalande should be an object for
such fine speeches.

This gentleman's figure,  meanwhile,  corresponds no
better with his discourse than his scientific profession,
for he is an ugly little wrinkled old man,  with a fine
showy waistcoat,  rich lace ruffles,  and the grimaces of a
dentist.  I believe he chose to display that a Frenchman
of science could be also a man of gallantry.

I was seated between them,  but the good doctor made
no greater interruption to the florid professor than I did
myself:  he only grinned applause,  with placid,  but in
effable satisfaction.

Nothing therefore intervening,  Eloge the third followed,
after a pause no longer than might be necessary for due
admiration of Eloge the second.  This had for sujet the
fair female sex ;  how the ladies were now all improved ;
how they could write,  and read,  and spell ;  how a man
now-a-days might talk with them and be understood,  and
how delightful it was to see such pretty creatures turned
rational !

And all this,  of course,  interspersed with particular
observations and most pointed applications ;  nor was
there in the whole string of compliments which made up
the three bouquets,  one single one amongst them that
might have disgraced any petit inaitre to utter,  or any
petite maitresse to hear.

The third being ended,  a rather longer pause ensued.
I believe he was dry,  but I offered him no tea.  I would
not voluntarily be accessory to detaining such great per
sonages from higher avocations.  I wished him next to
go and study the stars  :  from the moon he seemed so
lately arrived there was little occasion for another journey.

204 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

I flatter myself he was of the same opinion,  for the
fourth eloge was all upon his unhappiness in tearing
himself away from so much merit,  and ended in as many
bows as had accompanied his entrance.

I suppose,  in going,  he said,  with a shrug,  to the
canon,  "  M.  le Docteur,  cest bien genant,  mais il faut
dire des jolies choses aux dames I"

He was going the next day to see Dr.  Maskelyne's
observatory.  Well !  I have had him first in mine !

I was obliged on my return to the tea-room to undergo
much dull raillery from my fair companion,  and much of
wonder that te since the Canon had soch good prefer
ment"  I did not  "marry him at once,"  for he  "would not
come so often if he did not want it."

TUESDAY,  AUGUST 18iH. — The Duke of York's birth
day was kept this day,  instead of Saturday,  that Sunday
morning might not interfere with the ball.

The Prince of AVales arrived early,  while I was yet
with the Queen.  He kissed her hand,  and she sent for
the Princesses.  Only Princess Elizabeth and Princess
Sophia were dressed.  Her Majesty went into the next
room with Mrs.  Sandys,  to have her shoes put on,  with
which she always finishes.  The Prince and Princesses
then chatted away most fluently.  Princess Elizabeth
frequently addressed me with great sweetness;  but the
Prince only with curious eyes.  Do not,  however,  un
derstand that his looks were either haughty or imper
tinent;  far from it;  they were curious,  however,  in the
extreme.

The rest of the day was almost all devoted to dressing
and attendance,  except a dinner,  an afternoon,  a tea,
and an evening tete-a-tete  !

I had a most restless and feverish night,  attempting to
lie down at twelve o'clock and rising at four.  The Queen
came home from the Castle,  where the ball and supper
were given,  about five  ;  and at six I again laid down till

near eight.

*****

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  205

We returned to Kew ;  and in the evening I received
my good Mr.  Cambridge,  who was all kindness and cor
diality.  I was truly happy in his company,  and gave
him the history of our journey very fully.  His excellent
daughter was at Lavarit,  with both her brothers.

We proceeded to Windsor without Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg,  who was unwell,  and went to town for advice.

Poor Madame La Fite was my first visitor,  and I made
her as welcome as possible,  to console her a little for
the accident that happened to her poor son,  at a place
where she might reasonably expect nothing but good —
dear Norbury.

For the remainder of this month we had General
Bude,  Colonel Manners,  and Mr.  Bunbury,  on visits
most of the time,  to aid the Equerry in Waiting,  Colonel
Goldsworthy.

Colonel Manners made me laugh as if I had been at
a farce,  by his history of the late Westminster election,
in which Lord John Townshend conquered Lord Hood.
Colonel Manners is a most eager and active partisan on
the side of the Government,  but so indiscreet,  that he
almost regularly gets his head broke at every contested
election  ;  and he relates it as a thing of course.

I inquired if he pursued his musical studies,  so hap
pily begun with Colonel Welbred  ?  *6 Why,"  answered
he,  "  not much,  because of the election  ;  but the thing
is,  to get an ear :  however,  I think I have got one,
because I know a tune when I hear it,  if it's one that
I've heard before a good many times ;  so I think that's a
proof.  But I can never get asked to a concert,  and that
keeps me a little behind."

"Perhaps,"  cried J,  "your friends conclude you have
music enough in your three months'  waiting to satisfy
you for all the year?"

"  O,  ma'am,  as to that,  I  'd just as lief hear so many
pots and pans rattled together;  one noise is just as well
as another to me."

I asked hiin whether his electioneering with so much

206 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

activity did not make his mother,  Lady Robert,  a little
uneasy  ? — N.B.  She is a Methodist.

"  O,  it does her a great deal of good,"  cried he ;  "  for I
could never get her to meddle before ;  but when I'd had
my head broke,  it provoked her so,  she went about her
self canvassing among the good people,  and she got us
twenty votes."

"  So then,"  cried Colonel Goldsworthy,  "  there are
twenty good people in the world?  That's your calcu
lation,  is it?"

Mr.  Fisher,  who just then came in,  and knew nothing
of what had passed,  starting the election,  said to Colonel
Manners,  "  So,  sir,  you have been beat,  I hear!"

He meant only his party ;  but his person having
shared the same fate,  occasioned a violent shout among
the rest at this innocent speech,  and its innocent answer ;
for Colonel Manners,  looking only a little surprised,
simply said,  "  Yes,  I was beat,  a little/'

"A little,  sir?"  exclaimed Mr.  Fisher,  "no,  a great
deal ;  you were shamefully beat — thrashed thoroughly."

In the midst of a violent second shout,  Colonel Man
ners only said,  "Well,  I always hated all that party,  and
now I hate them worse than ever."

"Ay,  that I'll be bound for you,"  cried Colonel
Goldsworthy.

"Yes,  for having been so drubbed by them,"  cried
Mr.  Fisher.

As I now,  through all his good humour,  saw Colonel
Manners colour a little,  I said in a low voice to Mr.
Fisher,  "  Pray is it in innocence,  or in malice,  that you
use these terms  ?"

I saw his innocence by his surprise,  and I whispered
him the literal state of all he said ;  he was quite shocked,
and coloured in his turn,  apologising instantly to Colonel
Manners,  and protesting he had never heard of his
personal ill usage,  but only meant the defeat of his

party.

******

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  207

Everybody was full of Mr.  Fairly 's appointment,  and
spoke of it with pleasure.  General Bude had seen him
in town,  where he had remained some days,  to take the
oaths,  I believe,  necessary for his place.  General Bude
has long been intimate with him,  and spoke of his cha
racter exactly as it has appeared to me;  and Colonel
Goldsvvorthy,  who was at Westminster with him,  de
clared he believed a better man did not exist.  "This,  in
particular,"  cried General Bude,  "  I must say of Fairly :
whatever he thinks right he pursues straightforward;
and I believe there is not a sacrifice upon earth that
he would not make,  rather than turn a moment out of
the path that he had an opinion it was his duty to
keep in."

They talked a good deal of his late lady ;  none of
them knew her but very slightly,  as she was remarkably
reserved.  <f More than reserved,"  cried General Bude,
"she was quite cold.  Yet she loved London and public
life,  and Fairly never had any taste for them  ;  in that
they were very mal assortie^  but in all other things very
happy."

"  Yes,'  cried Colonel Goldsworthy,  <*  and how shall
we give praise enough to a man that would be happy
himself,  and make his wife so too,  for all that difference
of opinion  ?  for it was all his management,  and good
address,  and good temper.  I hardly know such another
man."

General Bude then related many circumstances of his
most exemplary conduct during the illness of his poor
suffering wife,  and after her loss;  everybody,  indeed,
upon the occasion of this new appointment,  has broke
forth to do justice to his deserving it.  Mrs.  Ariana
Egerton,  who came twice to drink tea with me on my
being scnza Cerbera,  told me that her brother-in-law,
Colonel Masters,  who had served with him at Gibraltar,
protested there was not an officer in the army of a
nobler and higher character,  both professional and per
sonal.

208 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

^

She asked me a thousand questions of what I thought
about Miss Fuzilier  ?  She dislikes her so very much,  she
cannot bear to think of her becoming Mrs.  Fairly.  She
has met with some marks of contempt from her in their
official meetings at St.  James's,  that cannot be par
doned.  Miss Fuzilier,  indeed,  seemed to me formerly,
when I used to meet her in company,  to have an uncer
tainty of disposition that made her like two persons  ;
now haughty,  silent,  and supercilious — and then gentle,
composed,  and interesting.  She is,  however,  very little

liked,  the worst being always what most spreads abroad.
*  *  *  *  *

The Queen was all graciousness,  unmixed,  to me,
during this recess of La Compagne;  whenever she did
not attend the early prayers she almost regularly gave to
me their time,  coming to my room,  and there staying till
the King returned.  She lent me books,  talked them
over,  and opened upon a thousand confidential topics ;
and the excellence of her understanding and acuteness
of her observation never fail to make all discourse with
her lively and informing.

I saw all I could see of my poor Mrs.  Astley,  who is
settled,  by way of keeping the house,  in the loved man
sion of the most venerable and perfect of human beings — •
human now no longer — but perfect,  I trust,  with a per
fection above our comprehension  !  Nothing,  however,
is yet arranged as to her pension,  &c.,  which grieves
and distresses me beyond measure.

Lady Courtovvn has had a new place not merely
given,  but created for her.  She was so useful and plea
sant to the Queen at Cheltenham,  that she has been
appointed Lady in Waiting in the Country;  by which
means she will now regularly attend her Majesty in all
country excursions,  and during all residences at Windsor
and Kew.  I am very glad of it,  for she is constantly
cheerful and obliging,  and seems invariably in good
humour and good spirits.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  209

I have been reading a volume of D'Alembert's
4 Eloges,'  with very great pleasure ;  the accounts of
Massillon,  Boileau,  Fenelon,  De la Motte,  and many
others,  were highly interesting to me,  though I cannot
but think of what Mr.  Fairly said when he borrowed
this volume at Cheltenham,  in the mere desperation of
having no other reading.  "  I do not like,"  he said,
"these  'Eloges;'  they contain what one modest man
never could say to another — nor of another."  How
ever,  I fancy he had read some other author's  '  Eloges,'
for these are by no means so adulatory :  far otherwise ;
indeed,  they are full of criticism,  and,  I think,  candid
strictures.

VOL.  IV.

210 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

PART VI.

1788.

Baron Trenck — His Adventures and Character — Drawing-room
at St.  James's — Return to Kew — Royal Birthday — Toil and
Toilette — A Dinner Party — A Family Meeting — St.  James's
and Windsor — Dr.  Herschel — Dr.  Hunter — Illness of the King
— Sir George Baker  —  The King grows worse  —  Alarm and
Agitation— Return to Windsor — Conference with the King
during his illness — Mental Character of his Disorder — Affect
ing Scene with the King in the Queen's Apartments — A
Melancholy Birthday — Grief of the Queen — The King grows
worse — Confirmed Insanity of the King — Newspaper Reports
— Confusion and Dismay of the Household — Arrival of the
Prince of Wales — The Palace closed against all Visitors —
Paroxysm of the King at Dinner — Conduct of the Queen — The
King's Account of his Own Case — Piety of the Queen — Lady
Carmarthen  —  Arrival of Dr.  Warren — The Kins*  refuses to
admit Him— The Princesses — Perplexity of the Queen — Con
duct of the Prince of Wales— The Queen's kindness and con
sideration for her Attendants — Details of the new Mode of
Life at Windsor,  consequent on the King's Illness — All En
trance to the Palace interdicted by the Prince — The Duke
of York — The King:  grows worse — The Prince assumes the
Government of the Palace.

SEPTEMBER IST. — Peace to the manes of the poor
slaughtered partridges !

I finished this morning the e Memoirs of the Baron
Trenck/  which have given me a great deal of enter
tainment  ;  I mean in the first volume,,  the second con
taining not more matter than might fill four pages.  But
the singular hardiness,  gallantry,  ferocity,  and ingenuity
of this copy of the knights of ancient times,  who has
happened to be born since his proper epoch,  have won
derfully drawn me on,  and I could not rest without
finishing his adventures.  They are reported to be chiefly
of his own invention ;  but I really find an air of self-
belief in his relations,  that inclines me to think he has
but narrated what he had persuaded himself was true.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  211

His ill-usage is soch as to raise the utmost indignation in
every reader;  and if it really affected his memory and
imagination,  and became thence the parent of some few
embellishments and episodes,  I can neither wonder nor
feel the interest of his narrative diminished.

Mrs.  Ariana Egerton and her mother drank tea with
me.  I like them on these occasions,  when 1 want lady
assistants in doing tea honours.

SEPTEMBER 2ND. — To-day I went to Kew,  with the
usual three,  Mr.  Turbulent,  Mr.  de Luc,  and Miss
Planta.

Mr.  Turbulent was in high rage that I was utterly
invisible since my return from Cheltenham ;  he pro
tested he had called seven times at my door without
gaining admission,  and never was able to get in but
when  "  Dr.  Shepherd had led the way."

He next began a mysterious attack upon the pro
ceedings of Cheltenham.  He had heard,  he said,
strange stories of flirtations there.  I could not doubt
what he meant,  but I would not seem to understand
him :  first,  because I know not from whom he has been
picking up this food for his busy spirit,  since no one
there appeared collecting it for him  ;  and secondly,  be
cause I would not degrade an acquaintance which I
must hope will prove as permanent as it is honourable,
by conceiving the word flirtation to be possibly con
nected with it.

By every opportunity,  in the course of the day,  he
renewed this obscure raillery ;  but I never would second
it,  either by question or retort,  and therefore it cannot
but die away unmeaningly as it was born.  Some effect,
however,  it seems to have had upon him,  who has with
drawn all his own heroics,  while endeavouring to develop
what I have received elsewhere.

SEPTEMBER 4TH. — To-day there was a drawing-room,
and I had the blessing of my dearest father while it
lasted;  but not solus — he was accompanied by my

p2

212 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

mother;  and my dear Esther and her little innocent
Sophy spent part of the time with us.  I am to be god
mother to the two little ones,  Esther's and James's.
Heaven bless them  !

We returned to Kew to a late dinner;  and,  indeed,  I
had one of the severest evenings I ever passed,  where
my heart took no share in unkindness and injustice.  I
was wearied in the extreme,  as I always arn on these
drawing-room days,  which begin with full hair-dressing
at six o'clock in the morning,  and hardly ever allow any
breakfast time,  and certainly only standing,  except while
frizzing,  till the drawing-room commences;  and then
two journeys in that decked condition — and then another
dressing,  with three dressing attendances — and a dinner
at near seven o'clock.

Yet,  not having power to be very amusing after all
this,  I was sternly asked by Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  "For
what I did not talk?"  I answered simply,  "Because I
was tired."

"  You tired  ! — what have you done  ?  when I used to
do so much more — you tired  !  what have you to do but
to be happy? — have you the laces to buy?  have you the-
wardrobe to part?  have you — you tired?  Veil,  what
will become next,  when you have every happiness  ! —
you might not be tired.  No,  I can't bear it."

This,  and so much more than it would be possible to
write,  awoke me pretty completely,  though before I was
scarce able to keep my eyelids a moment open  ;  but so
sick I turned,  that indeed it was neither patience nor
effort that enabled me to hear her ;  I had literally hardly
strength,  mental or bodily,  to have answered her.  Every
happiness mine! — O gracious heaven!  thought I,  and is
this the companion of my leisure — the associate of my
life !  Ah,  my dear friends,  I will not now go on — I turn
sick again.

I kept on no more journal till my most loved friends
arrived,  the 10th of this month,  and departed,  the 16th.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  213

O,  they will here see,  by those last few words,  ho\v sea
sonable was their sweet visit ;  how necessary to cheer

the mournful murmurings of such a livelong life.
******

Mr.  Turbulent is very quiet,  and begins,  therefore,  to
grow such an addition to the party — such a life to it,
indeed — as his abilities and intelligence must always
render him when his flights do not interfere.  One little
fit of the old style was just beginning,  upon my remain
ing alone in the parlour at Kew;  but on my rising to go
to my room upstairs — for I am not at Kew,  as at
Windsor,  forced to keep in the same accessible apart
ment — he protested he would be perfectly lamb-like if I
would stay.

"  With all my heart,"  I answered,  "on that condition  ;
for I had great pleasure in thinking you grown quite
tame and good."

"  So I am,"  cried he,  "  and so you shall find me."

He was as good as his word,  and I sat still all the
evening,  working.  His talk was all general,  and full of
observation and entertainment.  Something,  however,
has occurred,  but what I know not,  to determine him on
keeping a strict guard over himself.  I rejoice,  be it what
it may.  He gave me some hints to this purpose,  but I
could not comprehend them,  and did not choose to ask,
or let him know I thought any caution or guard neces
sary  ;  for now,  indeed,  I flatter myseif,  not only our
scenes of violence and rhodomontading are over,  but that
his volatile temper will soon lead him to forget they ever
passed.  He may then prove a truly pleasant acquaint
ance to me,  and a most able relief to the mental mono
tony of our internal society.

SEPTEMBER 22ND. — This day was all dressing again,
to commemorate the Coronation.  I hate the parade
and trouble of these days,  but must surely bear it,  for a
memorial of the period that gave us such a King — so
good he is,  so benevolent,  so disinterested,  so amiable.

All are in preparation for Princess Royal,  whose birth-

214 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

clay concludes this month;  that is,  keeping it one day,
and resting from it another.

SEPTEMBER 27TH. — Mrs.  Schwellenberg not being
\vell enough to come down to tea,  I invited Madame
de la Fite,  as I knew there would be a larger party to
be ready for Monday's birth- day.  And,  accordingly,
added to Colonel Goldsworthy,  who has now his three
months'  waiting,  were General Bude,  Mr.  Blomberg,  and
Colonel Welbred.

It quite lightened me to see this last,  and he was more
lively and animated than usual.  He took his old seat,
Mr.  Turbulent not being present,  and gave me a full
history how he had passed his summer;  which,  as usual,
was in following up beautiful prospects,  and bringing
home their principal points.

He had been also,  he said,  to Cheltenham,  since our
departure :  6(  And there I was very happy to see how
beautiful a view you had from your room upstairs."

I laughed heartily,  and asked  "  How he should know
my room?"

"  I know both your rooms,"  he cried.

"  It would be hard to say which was least worth your
knowing,"  cried I,  "  for one was a garret,  the other a
store-room."

"  Yes,  I was sorry for your parlour,  but above-stairs
the view might compensate for the smallness of the
apartment."

He told me the house was now shown to all tra
vellers,  with the names of every inhabitant during the
Royal visit.

SEPTEMBER 29TH. — The birth-day of our lovely eldest
Princess.  It happens to be also the birth-day of Miss
Goldsworthy ;  and her Majesty,  in a sportive humour,
bid me,  as soon as she was dressed,  go and bring down
the two  "  Michaelmas geese."  I told the message to
the Princess Augusta,  who repeated it in its proper
words.  I atteoded them to the Queen's dressing-room,
and there had the pleasure to see the cadeaux presen-

1788]  OP MADAME D'ARBLAY.  215

tations.  The birth-days in this house are made ex
tremely interesting at the moment,  by the reciprocations
of presents and congratulations in this affectionate family.
Were they but attended with less of toil  (I hate to add
ette,  for I am sure it is not little toil),  I should like them
amazingly.

At noon I received a note from Mrs.  Majendie,  beg
ging a hint how to come dressed,  as Mrs.  Schwellenberg
had invited her to dinner.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg being too much indisposed to come
downstairs,  I could not but marvel at her not acquainting
me she had invited company to the table of which,  per
force,  1 must be deputy-receiver.  However,  the marvel
rested not here  ;  for when dinner was called,  and I opened
my door to be ready to follow Mrs.  Majendie,  as she
descended from making her compliments upstairs to
Mrs.  Schwellenberg — not Mrs.  Majendie alone had I to
follow — Mr.  and Mrs.  Majendie,  Miss Goldsworthy,
Madame La Fite,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Fisher,  Miss Mawr,
Mr.  Turbulent,  and Mdlle.  Montmollin.

I disguised my surprise at this great group as well as
I could,  lest to them it should prove as awkward as to
me  ;  and I passed them,  to take my seat,  with all the
ease I could assume.  But I think it was a tolerable
stroke of power,  to invite such a party to a table at which
another must preside,  without the slightest hint of her
purpose.

The dinner,  however,  was cheerful and lively  :  they
were all intimate with one another,  and none pretended
to be saddened at the absence.

SEPTEMBER 30TH. — This month concluded with a
very singular confidence.  I had a private visit from Miss
Mawr  :  she came to borrow a book to while away some
of the time she spent in waiting till Mrs.  Schwellenberg
could receive her,  who always summoned her some time
before she was ready.  But she besought me not to men
tion she had called ;  "  For,  to tell you the truth,"  she

216 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VL

said,  "  I should never be forgiven if it was known I
called for a moment !"

I could not doubt the truth of this,  though its plainness
surprised me  ;  but she said,  relying on my honour,  she
must tell me something more,  that had struck her with
such an indignation for me she could not conceal it.
The day before,  when all her company was assembled
upstairs,  before dinner,  she publicly asked Miss Golds-
worthy to do the honours of her table,  as she was not
well enough to do them herself!

"I was quite glad,"  she added,  "that you knew
nothing of it,  and so passed on so innocently to your
proper place;  and I'm sure they were all glad,  for every
body stared.  But I must beg you never so much as to
say I ever called upon you,  for she can't bear it !  she's so
jealous.  And now I must go  ;  for if she should hear me
here she'll never forgive it,  and she's always listening
what voices she can hear in your room."

She then confessed she often thought me strangely
used in many ways,  and slighted,  and contradicted,  and
dealt with very rudely,  but it was all from jealousy,  and
so must be passed over.  Yet she owned,  for herself,  it
was a life not to be endured ;  that the greatest penance
she ever suffered was making these visits,  which,  also,
she never consented to till she had refused as often as
she dared.

Something there is,  I know not what,  of unhappy obli
gation to her,  that compels this intercourse;  but she
assured me,  were it of a sort to last,  she should break it,
to live on bread and water in preference  !  and she pitied
me,  with a good-nature that quite made me friends with
her,  for so sad a lot as falling into such hands.

To live upon bread and water — ah  !  were that my
only difficulty !

I am glad,  however,  I did not know this intended
affront ;  it would highly have embarrassed me how to act,
and I was embarrassed enough without it.  Two years-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  217

ago I should have rejoiced at any proposition that took
from me the presidency of the table ;  but now,  after two
years keeping it,  whenever its first claimant was absent,
it would have been a disgrace in the eyes of the whole
house to have had it thus suddenly taken away;  and
such was its palpable meaning.

After we all came downstairs,  except Miss Mawr,
she inquired whether Miss Goldsworthy had sat at the
head of the table.  Miss Mawr was afraid to answer,
and she asked Westerhaults,  who said No ;  and she ex
pressed great anger and displeasure that her commands
were thus disregarded at her own table  !

She felt,  however,  too strongly,  that she here attempted
an exertion of caprice and power beyond her right,  to
venture at speaking of it to me ;  she knew it was a trial
of tyranny as unauthorized as it was unprovoked,  and
that it could not stand the test of resistance even from
the person whom she thinks an object for her to trample
upon.  She has become,  however,  both colder and
fiercer ever since :  I cannot now even meet her eyes—
they are almost terrifying.

Nothing upon earth having passed between us,  nor the
most remote subject of offence having occurred,  I have
only one thing on which to rest my conjectures,  for the
cause of this newly-awakened evil spirit,  and this is from
the gentlemen.  They had all of late been so wearied
that they could not submit even for a quarter of an hour
to her society :  they had swallowed a dish of tea and
quitted the room all in five minutes,  and Colonel Golds-
worthy in particular,  when without any companion in
his waiting,  had actually always fallen asleep,  even during
that short interval,  or at least shut his eyes,  to save him
self the toil of speaking.

This she brooked very ill,  but I was esteemed inno
cent,  and therefore made,  occasionally,  the confidant of
her complaints.  But lately,  that she has been ill,  and
kept upstairs every night,  she has always desired me to
come to her as soon as tea was over,  which,  she observed,

218 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

"  need not keep me five minutes."  On the contrary,
however,  the tea is now at least an hour,  and often more.

I have been constantly received with reproaches for
not coming sooner,  and compelled to declare I had not
been sooner at liberty.  This has occasioned a deep and
visible resentment,  all against them,  yet vented upon me,
not in acknowledged displeasure — pride there interfered
— but in constant ill-humour,  ill-breeding,  and ill-will.

At length,  however,  she has broken out into one in
quiry,  which,  if favourably answered,  might have appeased
all ;  but truth was too strongly in the way.  A few
evenings after her confinement she very gravely said,
"  Colonel Goldsworthy always sleeps with me !  sleeps
he with you the same  ?"

In the midst of all my irksome discomfort,  it was with
difficulty I could keep my countenance at this question,
which I was forced to negative.

The next evening she repeated it.  "  Veil,  sleeps he
yet with you — Colonel Goldsworthy  ?"

"  Not yet,  ma'am,"  I hesitatingly answered.

"  O  !  ver veil !  he will sleep with nobody but me  !  O,
I von't come down."

And a little after she added,  "  I believe he vill marry
you!"

et I believe not,  ma?am,"  I answered.

And then,  very gravely,  she proposed him to me,  say
ing he only wanted a little encouragement,  for he was
always declaring he wished for a wife,  and yet wanted
no fortune — "  so for what won't you not have him  ?"

I assured her we were both perfectly well satisfied
apart,  and equally free from any thoughts of each other.

"  Then for what,"  she cried,  "  won't you have Dr.
Shepherd  ?"

She is now in the utmost haste to dispose of me  !  and
then she added she had been told that Dr.  Shepherd
would marry me  !

She is an amazing woman  !  Alas,  I might have told
her I knew too well what it was to be tied to a companion

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  219

ill-assorted and unbeloved,  where I could not help myself,
to make any such experiment as a volunteer!

If she asks me any more about Colonel Goldsworthy
and his sleeping,  1 think I will answer I am too near
sighted to be sure if he is awake or not !

I have given the Colonel a hint,  however, — that he may
keep awake in future.

Perhaps a part of this increased ill-will may arise from
my having been of the Cheltenham party,  where she
could not go,  from want of room for her four servants.
And however little I may have to do with these regula
tions,  I am quite the most convenient person to receive
the ill fruits of her disappointments.

Well,  the month is passed however,  and here ends its
recital.

OCTOBER 2ND. — What a sweet noon had I this day —
my beloved father,  my tender Susanna,  my little darling
Fanny  ! — How should I love the drawing-room days,
with all their toil,  had they more frequently such cheers.
Dearest,  dearest Susanna  !  O,  how my heart duelt upon
the little sight all the rest of the softened day  !  And I
had leisure for repose to the poor mind,  since I returned
to Kew senza Cerbera.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  very ill indeed,  took leave of the
Queen at St.  James's,  to set off for Weymouth,  in com
pany with Mrs.  Hastings.  I was really very sorry for
her;  she was truly in a situation of suffering,  from bodily
pain,  the most pitiable.  I thought,  as I looked at her,
that if the ill-humours I so often experience could relieve
her,  I would consent to bear them unrepining,  in pre
ference to seeing or knowing her so ill.  But it is just the
contrary  ;  spleen and ill-temper only aggravate disease,
and while they involve others in temporary participation
of their misery,  twine it around themselves in bandages
almost stationary.  She was civil,  too,  poor woman.  I
suppose when absent she could not well tell why she had
ever been otherwise.

OCTOBER SRD. — We returned to Windsor at noon.

220 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

Mrs.  de Luc sent me a most pressing invitation to tea,
and to hear a little music.  Two young ladies,  Misses
S ,  were to perform at her house in a little concert.

I am always happy to see this excellent woman,  and I
could make myself much comfort from her kindness,
which is of the very warmest sort ;  but she also fears to
show it,  lest it involve Mr.  de Luc in ill-consequences.
She therefore only comes to me by stealth,  making all
her public visits abovestairs,  and then gliding softly down,
as carefully,  though not quite so terrified,  as Miss Mawr.

The Misses S I had seen formerly at Brighthelm-

stone,  and their mother,  who came to remind me of
having there met her.

Dr.  Herschel was there,  and accompanied them very
sweetly on the violin  :  his new-married wife was with
him,  and his sister.  His wife seems good-natured  :  she
was rich too  !  and astronomers are as able as other men
to discern that gold can glitter as well as stars.

Dr.  Hunter was also there,  who has lately written a
Biographical Commentary on the Bible,  but I had no
conversation with him.

This little visit was not quite so well understood as I
had expected,  so I shall take the same step no more — •
that's all  !

OCTOBER GTH. — General Grenville is now stationed
here,  his own regiment being quartered at Windsor.  I
begin to find I shall like him better;  his extreme ennui
and shy indolence do him injustice :  there seems worth
and good-humour,  and even a disposition to sport,  veiled
under this listless mist.

*  *  #  *  *

OCTOBER QTH. — I go on now pretty well ;  and I am so
much acquainted with my party,  that when no strangers
are added,  I begin to mind nothing but the first entree
of my male visitants.  My Royal mistress is all sweetness
to me  ;  Miss Planta is most kind and friendly  ;  General
Bude is ever the same,  and ever what I do not wish to
alter ;  Colonel Goldsvvorthy seems coming round to good-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  221

humour ;  and even General Grenville begins to grow
sociable.  He has quitted the corner into which he used
to cast his long figure,  merely to yawn and lounge;  and
though yawn and lounge he does still,  and must,  I
believe,  to the end of the chapter,  he yet does it in
society,  and mixes between it loud sudden laughter at
what is occasionally said,  and even here and there a
question relative to what is going forward.  Nay — yester
day he even seated himself at the tea-table,  and amused
himself by playing with my work-box,  and making sundry
inquiries about its contents.

So now,  I believe,  I am entered into good-fellowship
with them all.  I have also a good deal of leisure,  and
it is quiet and uncontrolled.  So,  altogether,  things never
have been smoother,  though serenity cannot well have
less of interest in it.  Serenity,  however,  it is,  and grate
fully I welcome it.

OCTOBER lOxn. — This evening,  most unwittingly,  I
put my new neighbour's good-humour somewhat to the
test.  He asked me whether I had walked out in the
morning?  Yes,  I answered,  1 always walked.  "  And in
the Little Park?"  cried he.  Yes,  I said,  and to Old
Windsor,  and round the park wall,  and along the banks
of the Thames,  and almost to Beaumont Lodge,  and in
the avenue of the Great Park,  and in short,  in all the
vicinage of Windsor.  "But in the Little Park?"  he
cried.

Still I did not understand him,  but plainly answered,
u Yes,  this morning  ;  and indeed many mornings."

"  But did you see nothing — remark nothing there T

"  No,  not that I recollect,  except some soldiers
drilling."

You never heard sucli a laugh as now broke forth
from all — for,  alas for my poor eyes,  there had been in
the Little Park General Grenville's whole regiment,  wilh
all his officers,  and himself at their head  !

Fortunately it is reckoned one of the finest in the

222 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

King's service :  this I mentioned,  adding that else I could
never again appear before him.

He affected to be vehemently affronted,  but hardly
knew how,  even in joke,  to appear so  ;  and all the rest
helped the matter on,  by saying they should know now
how to distinguish his regiment,  which henceforth must
always be called  "the drill."

The truth is,  as soon as I perceived a few red-coats I
had turned another way,  to avoid being marched at,  and
therefore their number and splendour had all been thrown
away upon me.

SUNDAY,  I^TH. — At the cathedral this morning the
good Madlle.  Montmollin told me she had just got
thirteen Swiss friends who were come to Windsor to see
her,  and they all would like to see me.  I made my ex
cuse pretty honestly,  but she urged me to do it with a
simplicity very amusing,  crying,  •"  O,  if you won't know
my friends,  you don't love me  !  my dear Miss Burney  !
and that is very a little ingrate,  for I love you so moch  !
'pon m'honneur,  my dear Miss Burney!"

Still I assured her I could not encounter so many
strangers.  "  Well,  look then,  now,  and they will see you
a littel !"  I told her I could not distinguish them across
the cathedral.

"  O,"  she said,  tl you have such short eyes  !"

I have made Madame la Fite very happy by inviting
her for next Friday evening to tea,  to meet Mr.  Fairly.
He is the only person of the establishment that she thinks
has any merit beyond the chace ;  and she can never forget
his having said of her,  just before we went to Chelten
ham,  "Why,  what have you done to Madame la Fite?
she used to be so prim  !  and now she is foremost in con
versation."  She is charmed to have a change remarked
that she is always addressing to me as a compliment,  and
she says,  in return,  que ce M.  Fairly a le meme gout,
punque she never remembered him so full of discourse.

TUESDAY,    HTH. — -This evening I had again one

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  223

of my old newspaper vexations.  I observed my beaux
communicating something one from the other,  but softly,
just as they were retiring to the concert-room Colonel
Goldsvvorthy marched up to my tea-table,  and hastily
saying  "  There,  ma'am,"  he put a newspaper on the
table,  and hurried out of the room with the greatest
speed.

I read this paragraph  : — "The literary silence of Miss
Burney at present is much to be regretted.  No novelist
of the present time has a title to such public commen
dation as that lady;  her characters are drawn with ori
ginality of design and strength of colouring,  and her
morality is of the purest and most elevated sort."

You will say,  perhaps,  Why be vexed?  Why,  my
dearest friends,  because every mention alarms me  ;  I
know not what may follow ;  and the original repugnance
to being known returns with every panic.  Indeed the
more and the longer I look around me,  the greater
appears the danger of all public notice !  Panegyric is
as near to envy as abuse is to disgrace.

******

FRIDAY,  OCTOBER 17TH. — Our return to Windsor
is postponed till to-morrow.  The King is not well;
he has not been quite well some time,  yet nothing I
hope alarming,  though there is an uncertainty as to his
complaint not very satisfactory ;  so precious,  too,  is his
health.

Miss Cambridge spent the whole morning with me,  in
kindness and confidence.  My true value for her makes
me always tenderly rejoice to see her.

I passed much of the day with the sweet Queen,  who is
now reading Hunter's  '  Lectures'  *  with me.  They are
very good,  though not very striking.

SATURDAY,  OCT.  18TH. — The King was this morning
better.  My royal mistress told me Sir George Baker
was to settle whether we returned to Windsor to-day or
to-morrow.

*  Vide page 220.

224 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

SUNDAY,  OCT.  19TH. — The Windsor journey is again
postponed,  and the King is but very indifferent Heaven
preserve him  !  there is something unspeakably alarming
in his smallest indisposition.

I am very much with the Queen,  who,  I see,  is very
uneasy,  but she talks not of it.  She reads Hunter's
'  Discourses/  and talks chiefly upon them.

I showed her to-day an excellent and very original
letter I have received from good Mr.  Hutton;  but he
concludes it,  ft I am,  dear miss,  your affectionate humble
servant."

"  Affectionate ?"    she repeated,  "I did not know he

was so tender."

******

We are to stay here some time longer,  and so unpre
pared were we for more than a day or two,  that our dis
tresses are prodigious,  even for clothes to wear ;  and as
to books,  there are not three amongst us ;  and for com
pany,  only Mr.  de Luc and MissPlanta;  and so,  in mere
desperation for employment,  I have just begun a tragedy.
We are now in so spiritless a situation that my mind
would bend to nothing less sad,  even in fiction.  But I
am very glad something of this kind has occurred to me  ;
it may while away the tediousness of this unsettled,  unoc
cupied,  unpleasant period.

MONDAY,  OCT.  20TH. — The King was taken very ill in
the night,  and we have all been cruelly frightened;  but
it went off,  and,  thank Heaven  !  he is now better.

I had all my morning devoted to receiving inquiring
visits.  Lady Effingham,  Sir George Howard,  Lady
Frances Howard,  all came from Stoke to obtain news of
the King  ;  his least illness spreads in a moment.  Lady
Frances Douglas came also.  She is wife of the Archi
bald Douglas who caused the famous Hamilton trial in
the House of Peers,  for his claim to the Douglas name.
She is fat,  and clunch,  and heavy,  and ugly;  otherwise,
they say,  agreeable enough.

Mr.  Turbulent has been sent for,  and he enlivens the

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  225

scene somewhat.  He is now all he should be,  and so
altered  !  scarce a flight left.  He has opened his mind
to me very much with regard to his affairs,  &c.,  and this
is a species of confidence I encourage to the utmost:  it
has that style of friendliness that interests with propriety,
and it gives safe yet animating matter for tete-a-tetes,
and those are unavoidable at times,  situated as we now
are.

TUESDAY,  OCT.  21sT. — The good and excellent King
is again better,  and we expect to remove to Windsor in
a day or two.

THURSDAY,  OCT.  23RD. — The King continues to
mend,  thank God !  Saturday we hope to return to
Windsor.  Had not this composition lit seized me,
societyless,  and bookless,  and viewless as I am,  I know
not how I could have whiled away my being ;  but my
tragedy goes on,  and fills up all vacancies.

SATURDAY,  OCT.  25TH. — Yesterday was so much
the same,  I have not marked it ;  not so to-day.  The
King was so much better that our Windsor journey
at length took place,  with permission of Sir George
Baker,  the only physician his Majesty will admit.  Miss
Cambridge was with me to the last moment.

I have been hanging up a darling remembrance of
my revered,  incomparable Mrs.  Delany.  Her Sacha-
rissa is now over my chimney.  I could not at first
bear it,  but now I look at it,  and call her back to my
eye's mind perpetually.  This,  like the tragedy I have
set about,  suits the turn of things in this habitation.

I had a sort of conference with his Majesty,  or rather
I was the object to whom he spoke,  with a manner so
uncommon,  that a high fever alone could account for it;
a rapidity,  a hoarseness of voice,  a volubility,  an earnest
ness — a vehemence,  rather — it startled me inexpressibly ;
yet with a graciousness exceeding even all I ever met
with before — it was almost kindness  !

Heaven — Heaven preserve him !  The Queen grows
more and more uneasy.  She alarms me sometimes for

VOL.  IV.  Q

226 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

herself,  at other times she has a sedateness that wonders
me still more.

I commune now with my dearest friends every morn
ing,  upon the affairs of the preceding day.  Alas  !  how
little can I commune with them in any other way !

SUNDAY,  OCT.  26TH. — The King was prevailed upon
not to go to chapel this morning.  I met him in the
passage from the Queen's room ;  he stopped me,  and
conversed upon his health near half-an-hour,  still with
that extreme quickness of speech and manner that
belongs to fever;  and he hardly sleeps,  he tells me,  one
minute all night;  indeed,  if he recovers not his rest,  a
most delirious fever seems to threaten him.  He is all
agitation,  all emotion,  yet all benevolence and good
ness,  even to a degree that makes it touching to hear
him speak.  He assures everybody of his health  ;  he
seems only fearful to give uneasiness to others,  yet cer
tainly he is better than last night.  Nobody speaks of
his illness,  nor what they think of it.

The Bishop of Peterborough is made Dean of Dur
ham,  and I am glad,  for old acquaintance sake.

OCT.  29TH. — The dear and good King again gains
ground,  and the Queen becomes easier.

To-day Miss Planta told me she heard Mr.  Fairly was

confined at Sir R F 's,  and therefore she would

now lay any wager he was to marry Miss F .

In the evening I inquired what news of him of General
Bude :  he told me he was still confined at a friend's
house,  but avoided naming where — probably from sug
gesting that,  however little truth there may yet have been
in the report,  more may belong to it from this particular
intercourse.

SATURDAY,  Nov.  IST. — Our King does not advance
in amendment ;  he grows so weak that he walks like a
gouty man,  yet has such spirits that he has talked away
his voice,  and is so hoarse it is painful to hear him.
The Queen is evidently in great uneasiness.  God send
him better !

1768]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAV.  227

She read to me to-day a lecture of Hunter's.  I have
named that work,  I believe :  it is a Biographical Com
mentary on the Old Testament,  extremely well done
with respect to orthodox principles and moral inferences,
and in pleasing and alluring language;  a book worth
much commendation,  but of no genius;  there is nothing
original in the statement of facts,  or in the reflections
they produce.  I would not recommend it to Mr.  Locke,
but I read it without murmuring at loss of time myself,
and I would heartily recommend it to my Fnedy,  for her
own little congregation,  as it is all good,  and there
would not be all obvious.

During the reading this morning,  twice,  at pathetic
passages,  my poor Queen shed tears.  u How nervous I
am  !"  she cried  ;  "  I am quite a fool !  Don't you think so  ?''

"  No,  ma'am !"  was all I dared answer.

She revived,  however,  finished the lecture,  and went
upstairs and played upon tlie Princess Augusta's harpsi
chord.

The King was hunting.  Her anxiety for his return
was greater than ever.  The moment he arrived he sent
a page to desire to have coffee and take his bark in the
Queen's dressing-room.  She said she would pour it out
herself,  and sent to inquire how he drank it.

The King is very sensible of the great change there is
in himself,  and of her disturbance at it.  It seems,  but
Heaven avert it !  a threat of a total breaking up of the
constitution.  This,  too,  seems his own idea.  I was
present at his first seeing Lady Effingham on his return
to Windsor this last time.  "  My dear Effy,"  he cried,
"you see me,  all at once,  an old man."

I was so much affected by this exclamation,  that I
wished to run out of the room.  Yet I could not but
recover when Lady EfBngham,  in her well-nreaniug but
literal way,  composedly answered,  "We must all grow
old,  sir ;  I am sure I do."

He then produced a walking- stick which he had just

228 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

ordered.  "  He could not,"  he said,  "  get on without it ;
his strength seemed diminishing hourly."

He took the bark,  he said;  "But the Queen,"  he
cried,  "is my physician,  and no man need have a better;
she is my Friend,  and no man can have a better."

How the Queen commanded herself I cannot conceive;
but there was something so touching in this speech,
from his hoarse voice and altered countenance,  that it
overset me very much.

Nor can I ever forget him in what passed this night.
When I came to the Queen's dressing-room he was still
with her.  He constantly conducts her to it before he retires
to his own.  He was begging her not to speak to him
when he got to his room,  that he might fall asleep,  as he
felt great want of that refreshment.  He repeated this
desire,  I believe,  at least a hundred times,  though,  far
enough from needing it,  the poor Queen never uttered
one syllable!  He then applied to me,  saying he was
really very well,  except in that one particular,  that he
could not sleep.

The kindness and benevolence of his manner all this
time was most penetrating :  he seemed to have no anxiety
but to set the Queen at rest,  and no wish but to quiet and
give pleasure to all around him.  To me he never yet
spoke with such excess of benignity  :  he appeared even
solicitous to satisfy me that he should do well,  and to
spare all alarm  ;  but there was a hurry in his manner and
voice that indicated sleep to be indeed wanted.  Nor
could I,  all night,  forbear foreseeing  <f He sleeps now,
or to-morrow he will be surely delirious  !"

SUNDAY,  NOVEMBER 2ND. — The King was better,  and
prevailed upon to give up going to the early prayers.
The Queen and Princesses went.  After they were gone,
and I was following towards my room,  the King called
after me,  and he kept me in discourse a full half hour ;
nearly all the time they were away.

It was all to the same purport ;  that he was well,  but

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  229

wanted more rest;  yet he said he had slept the last night
like a child.  But his manner,  still,  was so touchingly
kind,  so softly gracious,  that it doubled my concern to
see him so far from well.

I invited Miss Ariana Egerton this evening,  to assist
me with my officers;  General Sir William Fawcett being
added to Generals Grenville and Bade,  and Colonel
Goldsworthy.  We all do mighty well,  and General
Grenville is now the most social amongst them  !  Having
once thrown aside his disposition to be loup-cjarou,  he
seems to enjoy the change himself,  and very pleasantly
makes it enjoyed by us all.  He comes regularly to my
tea-table,  though tea he holds bad for his nerves,  and
never drinks ;  he examines whatever I am about,  and
amuses himself with questions and comments,  extremely
dry and ridiculous.  Yesterday,  in a fit of nonchalance,
he took my Fiedy's work-box,  which is my repository
for all public stores,  and fairly untied the lid and opened
it;  and then began taking up its contents,  one by one.  and
looking into its several compartments,  not aware,  I believe,
of what he was doing,  till Colonel Goldsworthy exclaimed
"  Pray who gave you leave to do that? — upon my
word — very familiar!"

He laughed very heartily,  but shut it up  ;  taking,  the
next minute,  a threaded needle from my work,  and be
ginning to sew his own fingers.

"  Look you there,  now!"  cried the Colonel,  "O poor
gentleman,  far gone indeed! — he is sewing his o\\n fin
gers  !"

"  Tis only a little galanterie"  cried he,  "  to have
something to carry about me of Miss Burney V

"And you'll take care,"  cried General Bude,  •*  Miss
Burney shall have something to remember you by,  with
out a memorandum,  for you have put all her work into
confusion."

He is now waiting for the King to review his regiment,
the Welsh Fusileers,  which I so unfortunately took for a

230 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

few soldiers drilling !  But the King has not yet been
well enough to fix a day.

MONDAY,  NOVEMBER SRD. — The birth-day of the
Princess Sophia.  I had received the beautiful birth-day
offering yesterday from my Fredy,  and this morning I
carried it to the Lower Lodge,  where it was very prettily
welcomed.

I have exerted myself to do the honours a little in the
establishment on Saturday next the 8th,  for the Princess
Augusta's birth-day.  I have invited Miss Gomme and
Mdlle.  Montmollin to dinner,  and poor Madame la Fite,
who is also to stay the evening.  For me,  this is being
very grand  ;  but the truth is,  I find it wholly expected
amongst the household on the elder birth-days.

However,  we are all here in a most uneasy state.  The
King is better and worse so frequently,  and changes so,
daily,  backwards and forwards,  that everything is to be
apprehended,  if his nerves are not some way quieted.  I
dreadfully fear he is on the eve of some severe fever.
The Queen is almost overpowered with some secret terror.
I am affected beyond all expression in her presence,  to
see what struggles she makes to support serenity.  To
day she gave up the conflict when I was alone with her,
and burst into a violent fit of tears.  It was very,  very
terrible to see  !  How did I wish her a Susan or a Fredy !
To unburthen her loaded mind would be to relieve it from
all but inevitable affliction.  O,  may Heaven in its mercy
never,  never drive me to that solitary anguish more! — I
have tried what it would do ;  I speak from bitter recol
lection of past melancholy experience.

Sometimes she walks up and down the room without
uttering a word,  but shaking her head frequently,  arid in
evident distress and irresolution.  She is often closeted
with Miss Goldsworthy,  of whom,  I believe,  she makes
inquiry how her brother has found the King,  from time
to time.

The Princes both came to Kew,  in several visits to the

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  231

King.  The Duke of York has also been here,  and his
fond father could hardly bear the pleasure of thinking
him anxious for his health.  "  So good,"  he says,  '•  is
Frederick  !'*

To-night,  indeed,  at tea-time,  I felt a great shock,  in
hearing,  from General Bude,  that Dr.  Heberden had been
called in.  It is true more assistance seemed much want
ing,  yet the King's rooted aversion to physicians makes
any new-comer tremendous.  They said,  too,  it was

merely for counsel,  not that his Majesty was worse.

*  *  *  *    '          *

Ah,  my dearest friends  !  I have no more fair running
journal:  I kept not now even a memorandum for some
time,  but I made them by recollection afterwards,  and
very fully,  for not a circumstance could escape a memory
that seems now to retain nothing but present events.

I will copy the sad period,  however,  for my Susan and
Fredy will wish to know how it passed;  and,  though
the very prospect of the task involuntarily dejects me,  u
thousand things are connected with it that must make all
that can follow unintelligible without it.

TUESDAY,  NOVEMBER 4TH — Passed much the same
as the days preceding it ;  the Queen in deep distress,  the
King in a state almost incomprehensible,  and all the
house uneasy and alarmed.  The drawing-room was
again put off,  and a steady residence seemed fixed at
Windsor.

WEDNESDAY,  NOVEMBER STH. — O dreadful day!
My very heart has so sickened in looking over my me
morandums,  that I was forced to go to other employ
ments.  I will not,  however,  omit its narration.  'Tis too
interesting ever to escape my own memory,  and my dear
friends have never yet had the beginning of the thread
which led to all the terrible scenes of which they have
variously heard.

I found my poor Royal Mistress,  in the morning,  sad
and sadder still ;  something horrible seemed impending,
and I saw her whole resource was in religion.  We had

232 DIARY AND LETTERS'  [PART VI.

talked lately much upon solemn subjects,  and she ap
peared already preparing herself to be resigned for what
ever might happen.

I was still wholly unsuspicious of the greatness of the
cause she had for dread.  Illness,  a breaking up of the
constitution,  the payment of sudden infirmity and pre
mature old age for the waste of unguarded health and
strength, — these seemed to me the threats awaiting her ;
and great and grievous enough,  yet how short of the fact!

I had given up my walks some days ;  I was too uneasy
to quit the house while the Queen remained at home,
and she now never left it.  Even Lady Effingham,  |the
last two days,  could not obtain admission  ;  she could
only hear from a page how the Royal Family went on.

At neon the King went out in his chaise,  with the
Princess Royal,  for an airing.  I looked from my window
to see him  ;  he was all smiling benignity,  but gave so many
orders to the postilions,  and got in and out of the car
riage twice,  with such agitation,  that again my fear of
a great fever hanging over him grew more and more
powerful.  Alas !  how little did I imagine I should see
him no more for so long — so black a period  !

When I went to my poor Queen,  still worse and
worse I found her spirits.  She had been greatly offended
by some anecdote in a newspaper — the  *  Morning
Herald  '  —  relative to the King's indisposition.  She
declared the printer should be called to account.  She
bid me burn the paper,  and ruminated upon who could
be employed to represent to the editor that he must
answer at his peril any further such treasonable para
graphs.  I named to her Mr.  Fairly,  her own servant,
and one so peculiarly fitted for any office requiring
honour and discretion.  "  Is he here,  then  ?"  she cried.
"  No,"  I answered,  but he was expected in a few days.

I saw her concurrence with this proposal.  The Prin
cess-Royal soon returned.  She came in cheerfully,  and
gave,  in German,  a history of the airing,  and one that
seemed comforting.  .

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  233

Soon after,  suddenly arrived the Prince of Wales.  He
came into the room.  He had just quitted Brighthelm-
stone.  Something passing within seemed to render this
meeting awfully distant on both sides.  She asked if he
should not return to Brighthelmstone  ?  He answered
yes,  the next day.  He desired to speak with her;  they
retired together.

I had but just reached my own room,  deeply musing
on the state of things,  when a chaise stopped at the rails ;
and I saw Mr.  Fairly and his son Charles alight,  and
enter the house.  He walked lamely,  and seemed not yet
recovered from his late attack.

Though most happy to see him at this alarming time,
"when I knew he could be most useful,  as there is no one
to whom the Queen opens so confidentially upon her
affairs,  I had yet a fresh start to see,  by his anticipated
arrival,  though still lame,  that he must have been sent
for,  and hurried hither.

Only Miss Planta dined with me.  We were both
nearly silent :  I was shocked at I scarcely knew what,
and she seemed to know too much for speech.  She
stayed with me till six o'clock,  but nothing passed,  be
yond general solicitude that the King might get better.

To keep my promise with Madame la File,  I made
Columb go and watch her coining to Princess Elizabeth,
and invite her for tea.

Meanwhile,  a stillness the most uncommon reigned
over the whole house.  Nobody stirred ;  not a voice was
heard;  not a step,  not a motion.  I could do nothing
but watch,  without knowing for what :  there seemed a
strangeness in the house most extraordinary.

At seven o'clock Columb came to tell me that the
music was all forbid,  and the musicians ordered away !

This was the last step to be expected,  so fond as his
Majesty is of his Concert,  and I thought it might have
rather soothed him :  I could not understand the prohi
bition  ;  all seemed stranger and stranger.

At eight o'clock Madame la Fite came.      She had

234 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

just left the Princess Elizabeth,  and left her very misera
ble,  but knew not why.  The Queen,  too,  she said,  was
ill.  She was herself in the dark,  or thought it necessary
so to seem.

Very late came General Bude.  He looked extremely
uncomfortable.  I could have made inquiries of him with
ease,  as to the order about the Court;  but he loves not
to open before poor Madame la File.

Later still came Colonel Goldsworthy :  his countenance
all gloom,  and his voice scarce articulating no or yes.
General Grenville was gone to town.

General Bude asked me if I had seen Mr.  Fairly;
and last of all,  at length he also entered.

How grave he looked  !  how shut up in himself !  A silent
bow was his only salutation  ;  how changed I thought it, —
and how fearful a meeting,  so long expected as a solace !

Scarce a word was spoken,  except by poor Madame la
File,  who made some few attempts to renew her acquaint
ance with her favourite,  but they were vain.  He was all
absorbed in distant gravity.

Colonel Goldsworthy was called away :  I heard his
voice whispering some time in the passage,  but he did
not return.

Various small speeches now dropped,    by which I
found the house was all in disturbance,  and the King in.
some strange way worse,  and the Queen taken ill !

Poor Madame la Fite,  disappointed of a long-promised
pleasant evening,  and much disturbed by the general
face of things,  when she had drank her tea,  rose to go.
I could not oppose,  and Mr.  Fairly hastened to help her
on with her cloak,  and to open the door.

A little less guardedly now,  the two gentlemen spoke
of the state of the house,  but in terms so alarming,  I had
not courage to demand an explanation;  I dreadfully
awaited to catch their meaning,  gradually,  as I could,
unasked.

At length,  General Bude*  said he would go and see if
any one was in the music-room.  Mr.  Fairly said he

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  235

thought he had better not accompany him,  for as he had
not jet been seen,  his appearance might excite fresh
emotion.  The General agreed,  and went.

We were now alone.  But I could not speak  :  neither
did Mr.  Fairly ;  I worked — I had begun a hassock for
my Fredy.  A long and serious pause made me almost
turn sick with anxious wonder and fear,  and an inward
trembling totally disabled me from asking the actual
situation of things  ;  if I had not had my work,  to employ
my eyes and hands,  I must have left the room to quiet
myself.

I fancy he penetrated into all this,  though,  at first,  he
had concluded me informed of everything  ;  but he now,
finding me silent,  began an inquiry whedier 1 was yet
acquainted how bad all was become,  and how ill the
King?

I really had no utterance for very alarm,  but my look
was probably sufficient ;  he kindly saved me any questions,
and related to me the whole of the mysterious horror?

0 my dear friends,  what a history  !      The King,  at
dinner,   had broken forth into positive delirium,  which
long had been menacing all who saw him most closely;
and the Queen was so overpowered as to fall into violent
hysterics.     AH the Princesses were in misery,  and the
Prince of Wales had burst into tears.     No one knew
what was to follow — no one could conjecture the event.

He spoke of the poor Queen,  in terms of the most
tender compassion ;  he pitied her,  he said,  from the bot
tom of his soul ;  and all her sweet daughters,  the lovely
Princesses — there was no knowing to what we might
look forward for them all !

1 was an almost silent listener ;  but,  having expressed
himself very warmly for all the principal sufferers,  he
kindly,  and with interest,  examined me.     "  How,"  he
cried,  "are you?  Are you strong?  are you stout?  can
you go through such scenes as these?  you do not look
much fitted for them."

'•  I shall do very well,"  I cried,  "for,  at a time such as

236 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

this,  I shall surely forget myself utterly.  The Queen
will be all to me.  I shall hardly,  I think,  feel myself at
liberty to be unhappy  !"

He was not yet well himself;  he had had an attack of
gout upon the road.  He had quitted his sister,  and,  in a
visit in the journey back,  he was seized.  He had the
advantage,  there,  of very good medical help.  He got on
to town as soon as it was possible,  and meant there
to have nursed himself well by Saturday,  had not the
ill accounts from Windsor hastened him hither at once.

He stayed with me all the evening,  during which we
heard no voice,  no sound !  all was deadly still !  At ten
o'clock I said,  "  I must go to my own room,  to be in
waiting."  He determined upon remaining downstairs,
in the Equerries'  apartment,  there to wait some intelli
gence.  We parted in mutual expectation of dreadful
tidings.  In separating,  he took my hand,  and earnestly
recommended me to keep myself stout and firm.

If this beginning of the night was affecting,  what did it
not grow afterwards  !  Two long hours I waited — alone,
in silence,  in ignorance,  in dread  !  I thought they would
never be over ;  at twelve o'clock I seemed to have spent
two whole days in waiting.  I then opened my door,  to
listen,  in the passage,  if anything seemed stirring.  Not a
sound could I hear.  My apartment seemed wholly sepa
rated from life and motion.  Whoever was in the house
kept at the other end,  and not even a servant crossed the
stairs or passage by my rooms.

I would fain have crept on myself,  anywhere in the
world,  for some inquiry,  or to see but a face,  and hear a
voice,  but I did not dare risk losing a sudden summons.

I re-entered my room and there passed another endless
hour,  in conjectures too horrible to relate.

A little alter one,  I heard a step — my door opened —
and a page said I must come to the Queen.

I could hardly get along — hardly force myself into the
room  ;  dizzy I felt,  almost to falling.  But,  the first
shock passed,  I became more collected.  Useful,  indeed,

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  237

proved the previous lesson of the evening :  it had stilled,
if not fortified my mind,  which had else,  in a scene such
as this,  been all tumult and emotion.

My poor Royal mistress  !  never can I forget her coun
tenance — pale,  ghastly pale she looked ;  she was seated
to be undressed,  and attended by Lady Elizabeth Walde-
grave and Miss Goldsworthy;  her whole frame was dis
ordered,  yet she was still and quiet.

These two ladies assisted me to undress her,  or rather
I assisted them,  for they were firmer,  from being longer
present ;  my shaking hands and blinded eyes could scarce
be of any use.

I gave her some camphor julep,  which had been
ordered her by Sir George Baker.  "  How cold I am  !"
she cried,  and put her hand on mine  ;  marble it felt!  and
went to my heart's core  !

The King,  at the instance of Sir George Baker,  had
consented to sleep in the next apartment,  as the Queen
was ill.  For himself,  he would listen to nothing.  Ac
cordingly,  a bed was put up for him,  by his own order,  in
the Queen's second dressing-room,  immediately adjoining
to the bed-room.  He would not be further removed.
Miss Goldsworthy was to sit up with her,  by the King's
direction.

I would fain have remained in the little dressing-room,
on the other side the bed-room,  but she would not per
mit it.  She ordered Sandys,  her wardrobe-woman,  in
the place of Mrs.  Thielky,  to sit up there.  Lady Eli
zabeth also pressed to stay ;  but we were desired to go
to our own rooms.

How reluctantly did I come away !  how hardly to my
self leave her !  Yet I went to bed,  determined to pre
serve my strength to the utmost of my ability,  for the
service of my unhappy mistress.  I could not,  however,
sleep.  I do not suppose an eye was closed in the house
all night.

THURSDAY,  NOVEMBER GTH. — I rose at six,  dressed
in haste by candle-light,  and unable to wait for my sum-

238 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

mons in a suspense so awful,  I stole along the passage iu
the dark,  a thick fog intercepting all faint light,  to see if
I could meet with Sandys,  or any one,  to tell me how the
night had passed.

When I came to the little dressing-room,  I stopped,
irresolute what to do.  I heard men's voices ;  I was
seized with the most cruel alarm at such a sound in her
Majesty's dressing-room.  I waited some time,  and then
the door opened,  and I saw Colonel Goldsworthy and
Mr.  Batterscomb.  I was relieved from my first appre
hension,  yet shocked enough to see them there at this
early hour.  They had both sat up there all night,  as
well as Sandys.  Every page,  both of the King and
Queen,  had also sat up,  dispersed in the passages and
ante-rooms !  and O what horror in every face I met!

I waited here,  amongst them,  till Sandys was ordered
by the Queen to carry her a pair of gloves.  I could not
resist the opportunity to venture myself before her.  I
glided into the room,  but stopped at the door:  she was
in bed,  sitting up;  Miss Goldsworthy was on a stool by
her side !

I feared approaching without permission,  yet could not
prevail with myself to retreat.  She was looking down,
and did not see me.  Miss Goldsworthy,  turning round,
said,  "  'Tis Miss Burney,  ma'am."

She leaned her head forward,  and in a most soft man
ner,  said,  "Miss Burney, how are you  ?"

Deeply affected,  I hastened up to her,  but,  in trying
to speak,  burst into an irresistible torrent of tears.

My dearest friends,  I do it at this moment again,  and
can hardly write for them;  yet I wish you to know all
this piercing history right.

She looked like death — colourless and wan;  but na
ture is infectious ;  the tears gushed from her own eyes,
and a perfect agony of weeping ensued,  which,  once be
gun,  she could not stop ;  she did not,  indeed,  try ;  for
when it subsided,  and she wiped her eyes,  she said,  "  I
thank you,  Miss Burney — you have made me cry — it is a

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  239

great relief to me — I had not been able to cry before,  all
this night long."

O what a scene followed  !  what a scene was related  !
The King,  in the middle of the night,  had insisted upon
seeing if his Queen was not removed from the house ;
and he had come into her room,  with a candle in his
hand,  opened the bed-curtains,  and satisfied himself she
was there,  and Miss Goldsworthy by her side.  This
observance of his directions had much soothed him ;  but
he stayed a full half hour,  and the depth of terror during
that time no words can paint.  The fear of such another
entrance was now so strongly upon the nerves of the poor
Queen,  that she could hardly support herself.

The King — the Royal sufferer — was still in the next
room,  attended by Sir George Baker and Dr.  Hebertlen,
and his pages,  with Colonel Goldsworthy occasionally,
and as he called for him.  He kept talking unceasingly  ;
his voice was so lost in hoarseness and weakness,  it was
rendered almost inarticulate  ;  but its tone was still all
benevolence — all kindness — all touching graciousness.

It was thought advisable the Queen should not rise,
lest the King should be offended that she did not go to
him ;  at present he was content,  because he conceived
her to be nursing for her illness.

But what a situation for her !  She would not let me
leave her now ;  she made me remain in the room,  and
ordered me to sit down.  I was too trembling to refuse.
Lady Elizabeth soon joined us.  We all three stayed with
her  ;  she frequently bid me listen,  to hear what the King
was saying or doing.  I did,  and carried the best accounts
I could manage,  without deviating from truth,  except by
some omissions.  Nothing could be so afflicting as this
task ;  even now,  it brings fresh to my ear his poor ex
hausted voice.  "I am nervous,"  he cried  ;  "  I am not ill,
but I am nervous  :  if you would know what is the matter
with me,  I am nervous.  But I love you both very well ;
if you would tell me truth :  I love Dr.  Heberden best,

240 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

for he has not told me a lie  :  Sir George has told me a
lie — a white lie,  he says,  but I hate a white lie  !  If you
•vvill tell me a lie,  let it be a black lie !"

This was what he kept saying almost constantly,  mixed
in with other matter,  but always returning,  and in a
voice that truly will never cease vibrating in my recol
lection.

The Queen permitted me to make her breakfast and
attend her,  and was so affectingly kind and gentle in her
distress,  that I felt a tenderness of sorrow for her that
almost devoted my whole mind to her alone !

Miss Goldsworthy was a fixture at her side;  I,  there
fore,  provided her breakfast also.

Lady Elizabeth was sent out on inquiries of Colonel
Goldsworthy,  and Mr.  Batterscomb,  and the pages,  every
ten minutes  ;  white I,  at the same intervals,  was ordered
to listen to what passed in the room,  and give warning
if anything seemed to threaten another entrance.

The behaviour of Lady Elizabeth was a pattern of
propriety for her situation.  She was quiet,  gentle,  serene,
full of respect and attention,  and kind concern.

She got some breakfast,  standing,  in the little dressing-
room,  while waiting for an answer to one of her messages  ;
she wished me to do the same,  but I could not eat.  She
afterwards told the Queen I had had nothing,  and I was
then ordered to go and make reparation in my room.

The Queen bid me bring the Prayer-Book and read
the morning service to her.  I could hardly do it,  the
poor voice from the next room was so perpetually in my
ears.

You may suppose a thousand things to be said and to
pass that I never would write  ;  all I have put down was
known to other witnesses.

When I came to my room,  about twelve o'clock,  for
some breakfast,  I found a letter from Lady Carmarthen.
It was an answer to my congratulation upon her mar
riage,  and written with honest happiness and delight.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  241

She frankly calls herself the luckiest of all God's crea
tures  ;  and this,  if not elegant,  is sincere,  and I hope will
be permanently her opinion.

While swallowing my breakfast,  standing and in haste,
and the door ajar,  I heard Mr.  Fairly's voice,  saying,
"Is Miss Burney there?  is she alone?"  and then he sent
in Columb,  to inquire if he might come and ask me
how I did.

I received him with as much gladness as I could then
feel,  but it was a melancholy reception.  I consulted
with him upon many points in which I wanted counsel :
he is quick and deep at once in expedients where any
thing is to be done,  and simple and clear in explaining
himself where he thinks it is best to do nothing.  Miss
Goldsworthy herself had once stolen out to consult with
him.  He became,  indeed,  for all who belonged to the
Queen,  from this moment the oracle.

Dr.  Warren had been sent for express,  in the middle
of the night,  at the desire of Sir George Baker,  because
he had been taken ill himself,  and felt unequal to the
whole toil.

I returned speedily to the room of woe.  The arrival
of the physicians was there grievously awaited,  for Dr.
Heberden and Sir George would now decide upon no
thing till Dr.  Warren came.  The poor Queen wanted
something very positive to pass,  relative to her keeping
away,  which seemed thought essential at this time,
though the courage to assert it was wanting in every
body.

The Princesses sent to ask leave to come to their
mother.  She burst into tears,  and declared she could
neither see them,  nor pray,  while in this dreadful situa
tion,  expecting every moment to be broken in upon,
and quite uncertain in what manner,  yet determined not
to desert her apartment,  except by express direction
from the physicians.  Who could tell to what height the
delirium might rise  ?  There was no constraint,  no power :

VOL.  IV.  R

242 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

all feared the worst,  yet none dared take any measures
for security.

The Princes also sent word they were at her Majesty's
command,  but she shrunk still more from this interview  :
it filled her with a thousand dreadful sensations,  too ob
vious to be wholly hid.

At length news was brought that Dr.  Warren was
arrived.  I never felt so rejoiced ;  I could have run out
to welcome him with rapture.

With what cruel impatience did we then wait to hear
his sentence  !  An impatience how fruitless  !  It ended
in information that he had not seen the King,  who re
fused him admittance.

This was terrible.  But the King was never so des
potic  ;  no one dared oppose him.  He would not listen
to a word,  though,  when unopposed,  he was still all gen
tleness and benignity to every one around him.

Dr.  Warren was then planted where he could hear his
voice,  and all that passed,  and receive intelligence con
cerning his pulse,  &c.,  from Sir George Baker.

We now expected every moment Dr.  Warren would
bring her Majesty his opinion ;  but he neither came nor
sent.  She waited in dread incessant.  She sent for Sir
George — he would not speak alone  :  she sent for Mr.
Hawkins,  the household surgeon  ;  but all referred to Dr.
Warren.

Lady Elizabeth and Miss Goldsworthy earnestly
pressed her to remove to a more distant apartment,
where she might not hear the unceasing voice of the
unhappy King ;  but she would only rise and go to the
little dressing-room,  there to wait in her night-clothes
Dr.  Warren's determination what step she should take.

At length Lady Elizabeth learnt among the pages
that Dr.  Warren had quitted his post of watching.

The poor Queen now,  in a torrent of tears,  prepared
herself for seeing him.

He came not.

1788]  OP MADAME D'ARBLAY.  243

All astonished and impatient,  Lady Elizabeth was
sent out on inquiries.

She returned,  and said Dr.  Warren was gone.

"  Run  !  stop him !"  was the Queen's next order.
"  Let him but let me know what I am to do."

Poor,  poor Queen  !  how I wept to hear those words  !

Abashed and distressed,  poor Lady Elizabeth returned.
She had seen Colonel Goldsworthy,  and heard Dr.
Warren,  with the other two physicians,  had left the
house too far to be recalled  ;  they were gone over to the
Castle,  to the Prince of Wales.

I think a deeper blow I have never witnessed.  Al
ready to become but second,  even for the King!  The
tears were now wiped ;  indignation arose,  with pain,
the severest pain,  of every species.

In about a quarter of an hour Colonel Goldsworthy
sent in to beg an audience.  It was granted,  a long cloak
only being thrown over the Queen.

He now brought the opinion of all the physicians in
consultation,  "That her Majesty would remove to a more
distant apartment,  since the King would undoubtedly be
worse from the agitation of seeing her,  and there could
be no possibility to prevent it while she remained so near."

She instantly agreed,  but with what bitter anguish  !
Lady Elizabeth,  Miss Goldsworthy,  and myself attended
her;  she went to an apartment in the same row,  but to
which there was no entrance except by its own door.  It
consisted of only two rooms,  a bed-chamber and n
dressing-room.  They are appropriated to the lady-in-
waiting,  when she is here.

At the entrance into this new habitation the poor
wretched Queen once more gave way to a perfect agony
of grief and affliction ;  while the words  "  What will be
come of me!  What will become of me  !"  uttered with
the most piercing lamentation,  struck deep and hard into
all our hearts.  Never can I forget their desponding
sound  ;  they implied such complicated apprehensions.

Instantly now the Princesses were sent for.      The

244 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

three elder hastened down.  O,  what a meeting  !  They
all,  from a habit that is become a second nature,  strug
gling to repress all outward grief,  though the Queen her
self,  wholly overcome,  wept even aloud.

They all went into the bedroom,  and the Queen made
a slight dressing,  but only wore a close gauze cap,  and
her long dressing gown,  which is a dimity chemise.

I was then sent back to the little dressing-room,  for
something that was left;  as I opened the door,  I almost
ran against a gentleman close to it in the passage.

"  Is the Queen here  ?"  he cried,  and I then saw the
Prince of Wales.

"  Yes,"  I answered,  shuddering at this new scene for
her;  "should I tell her Majesty your Royal Highness is
here  ?"

This I said lest he should surprise her.  But he did
not intend that  :  he was profoundly respectful,  and con
sented to wait at the door while I went in,  but called me
back,  as I turned away,  to add,  "  You will be so good to
say I am come by her orders."

She wept a deluge of tears when I delivered my com
mission,  but instantly admitted him.

I then retreated.  The other two ladies went to Lady
Elizabeth's room,  which is next the Queen's new apart
ments.

In the passage I was again stopped  ;  it was by Mr.
Fairly.  I would have hurried on,  scarce able to speak,
but he desired to know how the Queen did.  "  Very
bad"  was all I could say,  and on I hastened to my own
room,  which,  the next minute,  I would as eagerly have
hastened to quit,  from its distance from all that was going
forward ;  but now once the Prince had entered the
Queen's rooms,  I could go thither no more unsummoned.

Miserable,  lonely,  and filled with dreadful conjectures,
I remained here till a very late dinner brought Miss
Planta to the dining-parlour,  where I joined her.

After a short and dismal meal we immediately parted :
she to wait in the apartments of the Princesses above-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  245

stairs,  in case of being wanted ;  I to my own solitary
parlour.

The Prince of Wales and Duke of York stayed here
all the day,  and were so often in and out of the Queen's
rooms that no one could enter them but by order.  The
same etiquette is observed when the Princes are with
the Queen as when the King is there — no interruption
whatever is made.  I now,  therefore,  lost my only con
solation at this calamitous time,  that of attending my
poor Royal Mistress.

Alone wholly,  without seeing a human being,  or gather
ing any,  the smallest intelligence of what was going for
wards,  I remained till tea-time.

Impatient then for information,  I planted myself in
the eating-parlour  ;  but no one came.  Every minute
seemed an hour.  I grew as anxious for the tea society
as heretofore I had been anxious to escape it ;  but so late
it grew,  and so hopeless,  that Columb came to propose
bringing the water.

No;  for I could swallow nothing voluntarily.

In a few minutes he came again,  and with the compli
ments of Mr.  Fairly,  who desired him to tell me he would
wait upon me to tea whenever I pleased.

A little surprised at this single message,  but most truly
rejoiced,  I returned my compliments,  with an assurance
that all time was the same to me.

He came directly,  arid indeed his very sight,  at this
season of still horror and silent suspense,  was a repose to
my poor aching eyes.

"  You will see,"  he said,  "  nobody else.  The physi
cians being now here,  Colonel Goldsworthy thought it
right to order tea for the whole party in the music-room,
which we have now agreed to make the general waiting-
room for us all.  It is near the King,  and we ought
always to be at hand."

Our tea was very sad.  He gave me no hope of a
short seizure ;  he saw it,  in perspective,  as long as it was
dreadful :  perhaps even worse than long,  he thought it —
but that he said not.  He related to me the whole of the

246 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

day's transactions,  but my most dear and most honourable
friends will be the first to forgive me when I promise
that I shall commit nothing to paper on this terrible
event that is told me in confidence.

He did not stay long ;  he did not think it right to leave
his waiting friends for any time,  nor could I wish it,
valued as I know he is by them all,  and much as they
need his able counsel.

He left me plunged in a deep gloom,  yet he was not
gloomy himself;  he sees evils as things of course,  and
bears them,  therefore,  as things expected.  But he was
tenderly touched for the poor Queen and the Princesses,

Not till one in the morning did I see another face,  and
then I attended my poor unhappy Queen.  She was now
fixed in her new apartments,  bed-room and dressing-
room,  and stirred not a step but from one to the other.
Fortunately all are upon the ground-floor,,  both for King
and Queen  ;  so are the two Lady Waldegraves'  and mine  ;
the Princesses and Miss Planta,  as usual,  are upstairs,
and the gentlemen lodge above them.

Miss Goldsworthy had now a bed put up in the Queen's
new bed-room.  She had by no means health to go on
sitting up,  and it had been the poor King's own direction
that she should remain with the Queen.  It was settled
that Mrs,  Sandys and Miss Maceriton should alternately
sit up in the dressing-room.

The Queen would not permit me to take that office,
though most gladly I would have taken any that would
have kept me about her.  But she does not think my
strength sufficient.  She allowed me however to stay
with her till she was in bed,  which I had never done till
now ;  I never,  indeed,  had even seen her in her bed-room
till the day before.  She has always had die kindness
and delicacy to dismiss me from her dressing-room as
soon as I have assisted her with her night-clothes ;  the
wardrobe-woman then was summoned,  and I regularly
made my courtesy.  It was a satisfaction to me,  however,
now to leave her the last,  and to come to her the first.

Her present dressing-room is also her dining-room,  her

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  247

drawing-room,  her sitting-room ;  she has nothing else but
her bed-room  !

I left her with my fervent prayers for better times,  and
saw her nearer to composure than I had believed pos
sible in such a calamity.  She called to her aid her
religion,  and without it what,  indeed,  must have become
of her?  It was near two in the morning when I quitted
her.

In passing through the dressing-room to come away,  I
found Miss Goldsworthy in some distress how to execute
a commission of the Queen's :  it was to her brother,  who
was to sit up in a room adjoining to the King's  ;  and she
was undressed,  and knew not how to go to him,  as the
Princes were to and fro everywhere.  I offered to call
him to her;  she thankfully accepted the proposal.  I
cared not,  just then,  whom I encountered,  so I could
make myself of any use.

When I gently opened the door of the apartment to
which I was directed,  I found it was quite filled with gen
tlemen and attendants,  arranged round it on chairs and
sofas,  in dead silence.

It was a dreadful start with which I retreated  ;  for any
thing more alarming and shocking conild not be con
ceived  :  the poor King within another door,  unconscious
a-ny one was near him,  and thus watched,  by dread neces
sity,  at such an hour of the night !  I pronounced the
words  "Colonel Goldsworthy,"  however,  before I drew
back,  though I could not distinguish one gentleman from
another,  except the two Princes,  by their stars.

I waited in the next room;  but instead of Colonel
Goldsworthy,  my call was answered by Mr.  Fairly.  I ac
quainted him with my errand.  He told me he had himself
insisted that Colonel Goldsworthy should go to bed,  as he
had sat up all the preceding night,  and he had undertaken
to supply his place.

I went back to Miss Goldsworthy with this account.
She begged me to entreat Mr.  Fairly would come to her,
as she must now make the commission devolve on him,

248 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

and could less than ever appear herself,  as they were
all assembled in such a party.

Mr.  Fairly most considerately had remained in this
quiet room,  to see if anything more might be wanted,
which spared me the distress of again intruding into the
public room.

I begged him to follow,  and we were proceeding to
the dressing-room,  when I was stopped by a gentleman,
who said,  "Does the Queen want anybody?"

It was the Prince of Wales.  "Not the Queen,  sir,"
I answered,  "  but Miss Goldsworthy,  has desired to see
Mr.  Fairly."

He let me pass,  but stopped Mr.  Fairly;  and,  as he
seemed inclined to detain him some time,  I only told
Miss Goldsworthy what had retarded him,  and made off
to my own room,  and soon after two o'clock,  I believe,  I
was in bed.

FRIDAY,  NOVEMBER 7TH. — I was now arrived at a
sort of settled regularity of life more melancholy than
can possibly be described.  I rose at six,  dressed,  and
hastened to the Queen's apartments,  uncalled,  and there
waited in silence and in the dark till I heard her move or
speak with Miss Goldsworthy,  and then presented myself
to the sad bedside of the unhappy Queen.  She sent
Miss Goldsworthy early every morning,  to make inquiry
what sort of night his Majesty had passed;  and in the
middle of the night she commonly also sent for news
by the wardrobe-woman,  or Miss Macenton,  whichever
sat up.

She dismissed Miss Goldsworthy,  on my arrival,  to
dress herself.  Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave accommodated
her with her own room for that purpose.

I had then a long conference with this most patient
sufferer;  and equal forbearance and quietness during a
period of suspensive unhappiness never have I seen,
never could 1 have imagined.

At noon now I never saw her,  which I greatly regretted  ;
but she kept on her dressing-gown all day,  and the Princes

J788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  249

were continually about the passages,  so that no one un-
summoned dared approach the Queen's apartments.

It was only therefore at night and morning I could see
her;  but my heart was with her the livelong day.  And
how long,  good Heaven  !  how long that day became  !
Endless I used to think it,  for nothing could I do — to
wait and to watch — starting at every sound,  yet revived
by every noise.

While I was yet with my poor Royal sufferer this
morning the Prince of Wales came hastily into the room.
He apologised for his intrusion,  and then gave a very
energetic history of the preceding night.  It had been
indeed most affectingly dreadful!  The King had risen
in the middle of the night,  and would take no denial to
walking into the next room.  There he saw the large
congress I have mentioned  :  amazed and in consternation,
he demanded what they did there?  Much followed that
I have heard since,  particularly the warmest elo«;e on his
dear son Frederick,  his favourite,  his friend.  "  Yes,"  he
cried,  "  Frederick is my friend  !" — and this son was then
present amongst the rest,  but not seen  !

Sir George Baker was there,  and was privately ex
horted by the gentlemen to lead the King back to his
room  ;  but he had not courage :  he attempted only to
speak,  and the King penned him in a corner,  told him he
was a mere old woman — that he wondered he had ever
followed his advice,  for he knew nothing of his complaint,
which was only nervous  !

The Prince of Wales,  by signs and whispers,  would
have urged others to have drawn him away,  but no one
dared approach him,  and he remained there a consider
able time, "  Nor do I know when he would have been got
back,"  continued the Prince,  "if at last Mr.  Fairly had
not undertaken him.  I am extremely obliged to Mr.
Fairly indeed.  He came boldly up to him,  and took him
by the arm,  and begged him to go to bed,  and then drew
him along,  and said he must go.  Then he said he would
not,  and cried  '  Who are you  ?'  '  I am Mr.  Fairly,  sir,'

250 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

he answered,  'and your Majesty has been very good to
me often,  and now I am going to be very good to you,
for you must come to bed,  sir :  it is necessary to your
life.'  And then he was so surprised,  that he let himself
be drawn along just like a child;  and so they got him to
bed.  I believe else he would have stayed all night !"

Mr.  Fairly has had some melancholy experience in a
case of this sort,  with a very near connexion of his own.
How fortunate he was present !

*****

At noon I had the most sad pleasure of receiving Mr.
and Mrs.  Smelt.  They had heard in York of the illness
of the King,  aod had travelled post to Windsor.  Poor
worthy,  excellent couple  ! — ill and infirm,  what did they
not suffer from an attack like this — so wonderfully unex
pected upon a patron so adored  !

They wished the Queen to be acquainted with their
arrival,  yet would not let me risk meeting the Princes in
carrying the news.  Mr.  Smelt I saw languished to see
his King :  he was persuaded he might now repay a part
of former benefits,  and he wished to be made his page
during his illness,  that he might watch and attend him
hourly.

The good Mrs.  Smelt was even anxious to part with
him for this purpose  ;  and I had not a doubt,  myself,  he
would perform it better than anybody,  his personal ten
derness for the King being aided by so intimate a know
ledge of his character and sentiments.

They determined to wait till the last,  in hopes some
accident would occasion my being summoned.

Poor Mr.  de Luc soon joined us  :  he has forgot all
his own complaints ;  his very heart and soul are consigned
to the King,  and have room for nought beside.

Mr.  Smelt,  seeing Dr.  Warren pass my window,  has
tened out to confer with him  ;  and,  just after,  a rap at my
door produced Mr.  Fairly.

I never gave him a better welcome.  I had heard,  I
told him,  what he had done,  and if he could instigate

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  251

others to such methods I should call him our nation's
guardian.

He had a long story,  he said,  for me;  but from slight-
ness of acquaintance with Mrs.  Smelt,  he forbore at
present to enter into particulars,  and only — Cheltenham
fashion — asked me to lend him pen and ink to write a
note.  We left him to that,  and pursued our discourse.

I had had a message in the morning by Mr.  Gorton,
the clerk of the kitchen,  to tell me the Prince of Wales
wished our dining-parlour to be appropriated to the
physicians,  both for their dinner and their consultations.
I was therefore obliged to order dinner for Miss Planta
and myself in my own sitting-parlour,  which was now
immaterial,  as the Equerries did not come to tea,  but
continued altogether in the music-room.

Mr.  Fairly had,  I believe,  forgot this new regulation,
for the moment he had written his note he hastened away,
saying  "  In the evening I shall come to tea,  of course."

I stopped him then to explain the loss of the tea-room,
but added,  if he found any time,  I should be most happy
to receive him in my own.

As I had no summons I contrived to speak to Mr.
Alberts,  the Queen's page,  and begged him to acquaint
her Majesty Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt were here.

He did ;  but no message followed,  and therefore at
three o'clock,  with bleeding hearts,  they left this miser
able house.

In the evening,  of course,  came Mr.  Fairly,  but it was
only to let me know it would be of course no longer.
He then rang the bell for my tea-urn,  finding I had
waited,  though he declined drinking tea with me  ;  but he
sat down,  and staged half an hour,  telling me the long
story he had promised,  which was a full detail of the
terrible preceding night.  The transactions of the day
also he related to me,  and the designs for the future.
How alarming were they all !  yet many particulars,  he
said,  he omitted,  merely because they were yet more
affecting,  and could be dwelt upou to no purpose.

252 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

SATURDAY,  NOVEMBER STH. — :This was,  if possible,
the saddest day yet passed  :  it was the birthday of Princess
Augusta,  and Mrs.  Siddons had been invited to read a
play,  and a large party of company to form the audience.
What a contrast from such an intention was the event!

When I went,  before seven o'clock in the morning,  to
my most unhappy Royal Mistress,  the Princes were both
in the room.  I retreated to the next apartment till they
had finished their conference.  The Prince of Wales
upon -these occasions has always been extremely well-
bred and condescending in his manner,  which,  in a situ
ation such as mine,  is no immaterial circumstance.

The poor Queen then spoke to me of the birthday
present she had designed for her most amiable daughter.
She hesitated a little whether or not to produce it,  but at
length meekly said  "  Yes,  go to Miss Planta and bring it.
Do you think there can be any harm in giving it now?"

"O,  no  !"  I said,  happy to encourage whatever was a
little less gloomy,  and upstairs I flew.  I was met by all
the poor Princesses and the Duke of York,  who inquired
if he might go again to the Queen.  I begged leave first
to execute my commission.  I did ;  but so engrossed was
iny mind with the whole of this living tragedy,  that I so
little noticed what it was I carried as to be now unable
to recollect it.  I gave it,  however,  to the Queen,  who
then sent for the Princesses,  and carried her gift to her
daughter,  weeping,  who received it with a silent courtesy,
kissing and wetting with her gentle tears the hand of
her afflicted mother.

During my mournful breakfast poor Mr.  Smelt arrived
from Kew,  where he had now settled himself.  Mr.
de Luc also joined us,  and they could neither prevail
upon themselves to go away all the morning.

Mr.  Smelt had some thoughts of taking up his abode
in Windsor till the state of things should be more deci
sive.  The accounts of the preceding night had been
most cruel,  and to quit the spot was scarce supportable
to him.  Yet he feared the Princes might disapprove his

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  253

stay,  and he well knew his influence and welcome at
court was all confined to the sick-room:  thence,  there
could now issue no mandate.

Yet I encouraged him to stay ;  so did Mr.  de Luc  ;
and while he was still wavering he saw Dr.  Warren in
the court-yard,  and again hastened to speak with him.
Before he returned the Prince of Wales went out and
met him  ;  and you may imagine how much I was pleased
to observe from the window that he took him by the arm,
and walked up and down with him.

When he came to us he said the Prince had told him
he had better stay,  that he might see the Queen.  He
determined,  therefore,  to send off an express to Mrs.
Smelt,  and go and secure an apartment at the inn.

This was very soothing to me,  who so much needed
just such consolation as he could bestow  ;  and I begged
he would come back to dinner,  and spend the whole day
in my room,  during his stay.

What,  however,  was my concern and amaze,  when,
soon after,  hastily returning,  he desired to speak to me
alone,  and,  as Mr.  de Luc moved oft',  told me he was
going back immediately to Kew !  He spoke with a
tremor that alarmed me.  I entreated to know why such
a change  ?  He then informed me that the porter,  Mr.
Humphreys,  had refused him re-entrance,  and sent him his
great coat !  He had resented this impertinence,  and was
told it was by the express order of the Prince  !  In utter
astonishment he then only desired admittance for one
moment to my room,  and having acquainted me with
this circumstance,  he hurried off,  in a state of distress and
indignation that left me penetrated with both.

He made Mr.  de Luc promise to write to him,  as he
knew I had received injunctions to send no accounts from
the house ;  but lie said he would come no more.

And,  after such an unmerited — a wanton affront,  who
could ask him  ?  I can make no comments.

From this time,  as the poor King grew worse,  general
hope seemed universally to abate ;  and the Prince of

254 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

Wales now took the government of the house into his
own hands.  Nothing was done but by his orders,  and he
was applied to in every difficulty.  The Queen interfered
not in anything ;  she lived entirely in her two new rooms,
and spent the whole day in patient sorrow and retirement

with her daughters.

******

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  255

PART VII.

1788.

Total Seclusion of the Royal Family  —  Dr.  Warren  —  Public
Prayers for the King's Recovery— The Archbishop of Canter
bury — The Kin?  grows worse — The Bishop of Worcester —
The Prince of Wales at Windsor— Hopes of Recovery— Sir
Lucas Pepys  — The Duke of York— The King's Conduct
during his Illness— Bad Accounts oi'  the King— His Desire to
see his Children — His Conduct to his Equerries — The Queen
—  New Regulations respecting the King's Treatment — The
King's dread of being removed to Kew — Total Seclusion —
Dr.  Stillingfleet called in—Excitement of the People respect
ing the King's Illness— Threatening Letters to the Physicians
•—Sir George Baker stopped by the Mob — The Queen and the
Chancellor— The Physicians before the Privy Council — Con
duct of Pitt — The King's dread of Removal — Preparations for
leaving Windsor — The Queen's Departure for Kew  —  The
Princesses — Removal of the King to Kew — Prospect of a
Regency.

THE next news that reached me,  through Mr.  de Luc,
was,  that the Prince had sent his commands to the
porter,  to admit only four persons into the house on any
pretence whatever :  these were Mr.  Majenclie,  Mr.  Tur
bulent,  General Harcourt,  and Mr.  de Luc himself;
and these were ordered to repair immediately to the
Equerry-room below stairs,  while no one whatsoever was
to be allowed to go to any other apartment.

From this time comrrienced a total banishment from
all intercourse out of the house,  and an unremitting con
finement within its walls.

Poor Mr.  de Luc,  however,  could not forego coming
to my room.  He determined to risk that,  since he was
upon the list of those who might enter the house.

I was glad,  because he is a truly good man,  and our
sentiments upon this whole melancholy business were
the same.  But otherwise,  the weariness of a great
length of visit daily from a person so slow and metho-

256 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

dical in discourse,  so explanatory of everything and of
nothing,  at this agitating period,  was truly painful to
endure.  He has often talked to me till ray poor bur-
thened head has seemed lost to all understanding.

I had now,  all tea-meetings being over,  no means of
gaining any particulars of what was passing,  which added
so much to the horror of the situation,  that by the
evening I was almost petrified.  Imagine,  then,  alike
my surprise and satisfaction at a visit from Mr.  Fairly.
He had never come to me so unexpectedly.  I eagerly
begged an account of what was going on,  and,  with his
usual readiness and accuracy,  he gave it me in full
detail.  And nothing could be more tragic than all the
particulars ;  every species of evil seemed now hanging
over this unhappy family.

He had had his son with him in his room upstairs ;
"  And I had a good mind,"  he said,  "  to have brought
him to visit,  you."

I assured him he would have been a very welcome
guest ;  and when he added that he could no longer have
him at the Equerry table to dinner,  as the Prince of Wales
now presided there,  I invited him for the next day to
mine.

He not only instantly accepted the proposal,  but cried,
with great vivacity,  u I wish — you would invite me too."

I thought he wras laughing,  but said,  "  Certainly,  if
such a thing might be allowed ;"  and then,  to my almost
speechless surprise,  he declared,  if I would give him
permission,  he would dine with me next day.

He then proceeded to say that the hurry,  and fatigue,
and violent animal spirits of the other table quite over
powered him,  and a respite of such a quiet sort would be
of essential service to him.  Yet he paused a little after
wards,  upon the propriety of leaving the Prince of Wales's
table,  and said  "He would first consult with General
Bude,  and hear his opinion."

SUNDAY,  NOVEMBER QTH. — No one went to church;
not a creature now quits the house  :  but I believe devo-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  257

tion never less required the aid and influence of public
worship.  For me,  I know,  I spent almost my whole
time between prayer and watching.  Even my melan
choly resource,  my tragedy,  was now thrown aside ;
misery so actual,  living,  and present,  was knit too closely
around me to allow my depressed imagination to fancy
any woe beyond what my heart felt.

In coming early from the Queen's apartment this
morning I was addressed by a gentleman who inquired
how I did,  by my name  ;  but my bewilderment made him
obliged to tell his own before I could recollect him.  It
was Dr.  Warren.

I eagerly expressed my hopes and satisfaction in his
attendance upon the poor King,  but he would not enter
upon that subject.  I suppose he feared,  from my zeal,
some indiscreet questions concerning his opinion of the
case;  for he passed by all I could start,  to answer only
with speeches relative to myself — of his disappointment
in never meeting me,  though residing under the same
roof;  his surprise in not dining with me when told he
was to dine in my room,  and the strangeness of never
seeing me when so frequently he heard my name.

I could not bring myself to ask him to my apartment,
when I saw,  by his whole manner,  he held it imprudent
to speak with me about the only subject on which I
wished to talk — the King  ;  and just then seeing the Duke
of York advancing,  I hastily retreated.

While I was dressing,  Mr.  Fairly rapped at my door.
I sent out Goter,  who brought me his compliments,  and,
if it would not be inconvenient to me,  he and his son
would have the pleasure of dining with me.

I answered,  I should be very glad of their company,
as would Miss Planta.

Miss Goldsworthy had now arranged herself with the
Lady Waldegraves.

Our dinner was as pleasant as a dinner at such a season
could be.  Mr.  Fairly holds cheerfulness as a duty in the
midst of every affliction that can admit it ;  and,  therefore,

VOL.  IV.  s

258 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

whenever his animal spirits have a tendency to rise,  he
encourages and sustains them.  So fond,  too,  is he of his
son,  that his very sight is a cordial to him  ;  and that
mild,  feeling,  amiable boy quite idolizes his father,
looking up to him,  hanging on his arm,  and watching
his eye to smile and be smiled upon,  with a fondness like
that of an infant to its maternal nurse.

Repeatedly Mr.  Fairly exclaimed,  t(  What a relief is
this,  to dine thus quietly !"

What a relief should I,  too,  have found it,  but for a
little circumstance,,  which I will soon relate.

We were still at table,  with the dessert,  when Colunib
entered and announced the sudden return from Wey-
mouth of Mrs.  Schwellenberg.

Up we all started  ;  Miss Planta flew out to receive
her,  and state the situation of the house  ;  Mr.  Fairly,  ex
pecting,  I believe,  she was coming into my room,  hastily
made his exit without a word  ;  his son eagerly scampered
after him,  and I followed Miss Planta upstairs.

My reception,  however,  was such as to make me deem
it most proper to again return to my room.

What an addition this to the gloom of all !  and to
begin at once with harshness and rudeness  !  I could
hardly tell how to bear it.

MONDAY,  NOVEMBER  !()TH. — This was a most dismal
day.  The dear and most suffering King was extremely
ill,  the Queen very wretched,  poor Mrs.  Schwellenberg
all spasm and horror,  Miss Planta all restlessness,  the
house all mystery,  and my only informant and comforter
distanced.

Not a word,  the whole day through,  did I hear of what
was passing or intending.  Our dinner was worse than
an almost famished fasting  ;  we parted after it,  and met
no more.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who never drinks tea
herself,  hearing the general party was given up,  and never
surmising there had ever been any particular one,  neither
desired me to come to her,  nor proposed returning to me.
She took possession of the poor Queen's former dressing-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  259

room,  and between that and the adjoining apartments she
spent all the day,  except during dinner.

This  \vas my only little satisfaction,  that my solitude
had not the evening's interruption I expected.  Alas  !  I
now found even its dreariness acceptable,  in preference to
such a companion as must have dispelled it.  But what
a day  !  how endless every hour  !

TUESDAY,  NOVEMBER HTH. — This day passed like
the preceding;  I only saw her Majesty in the morning,
and not another human being from that hour till Mrs.
Schwellenberg and Miss Planta came to dinner.  Nor
could I then gather any information of the present state
of things,  as Mrs.  Schwellenberg announced that nothing
must be talked of.

To give any idea of the dismal horror of passing so
many hours in utter ignorance,  where every interest of
the mind was sighing for intelligence,  would not be easy  :
the experiment alone could give it its full force;  and from
that,  Heaven ever guard my loved readers !

WEDNESDAY,  NOVEMBER 12™. — To-day a little
brightened upon us;  some change appeared in the loved
Royal sufferer,  and though it was not actually for the
better in itself,  yet any change was pronounced to be
salutary,  as,  for some days past,  there had been a mono
tonous continuation of the same bad symptoms,  that had
doubly depressed us all.

My spirits rose immediately;  indeed,  I thank God,  I
never desponded,  though many times I stood nearly alone
in my hopes.

In the passage,  in the morning,  I encountered Colonel
Gwynn.  I had but just time to inform him I yet thought
all would do well,  ere the Princes appeared.  All the
Equerries are now here except Major Garth,  who is ill ;
and they have all ample employment in watching and
waiting.  From time to time they have all interviews ;  but
it is only because the poor King will not be denied see
ing them :  it is not thought right.  But I must enter into

s 2

260 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

nothing of this sort — it is all too closely connected with
private domestic concerns for paper.

After dinner,  my chief guest,  la Presidents,  told me,
"  If my room was not so warm,  she would stay a littel
with me."  I felt this would be rather too superlative an
obligation  ;  and therefore I simply answered that  "I was
too chilly to sit in a cold room;"  and I confess I took no
pains to temper it according to this hint.

Finding there was now no danger of disagreeable inter
views,  Mr.  Fairly renewed his visits as usual.  He came
early this evening,  and narrated the state of things  ;  and
then,  with a laugh,  he inquired what I had done with my
head companion,  and how I got rid of her?

I fairly told him rny malice about the temperature.
He could not help laughing,  though he instantly re
monstrated against an expedient that might prove preju
dicial to my health.  ee You had better not,"  he cried,
"try any experiments of this sort:  if you hurt your
nerves,  it may prove a permanent evil ;  this other can
only be temporary."

He took up the  '  Task '  again  ;  but he opened,  by ill
luck,  upon nothing striking or good;  and soon,  with dis
taste,  flung the book down,  and committed himself
wholly to conversation.

He told me he wished much he had been able to con
sult with me on the preceding morning,  when he had the
Queen's orders to write,  in her Majesty's name,  to the
Archbishop of Canterbury,  to issue out public prayers
for the poor King,  for all the churches.

I assured him I fancied it might do very well without
my aid.  There was to be a privy council summoned,
in consequence of the letter,  to settle the mode of com
pliance.

How right a step in my ever-right Royal Mistress is
this!  If you hear less of her now,  my dearest friends,
and of the internal transactions,  it is only because I now
rarely saw her but alone,  and all that passed,  therefore,

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  261

was in promised confidence.  And,  for the rest,  the
whole of my information concerning the Princes,  and
the plans and the proceedings of the house,  was told me
in perfect reliance on my secrecy and honour.

I know this is saying enough to the most honourable
of all confidants and friends to whom I am writing.  All
that passes with regard to myself is laid completely
before them.

THURSDAY,  NOVEMBER 13xH. — This was the fairest
day we have passed since the first seizure of the most
beloved of monarchs.  He was considerably better.  O
what a ray of joy lightened us,  and how mildly did my
poor Queen receive it !

FRIDAY,  HTH. — Still all was greatly amended,  and
better spirits reigned throughout the house.

Mr.  Fairly — I can write of no one else,  for no one
else did I see — called early,  to tell me he had received
an answer relative to the prayer for his Majesty's reco
very,  in consequence of which he had the Queen's com
mands for going to town the next day,  to see the Arch
bishop.

This was an employment so suited to the religious
cast of his character,  that I rejoiced to see it fall into
his hands.

He came again in the evening,  and said he had now
got the prayer.  He did not entirely approve it,  nor
think it sufficiently warm and animated.  I petitioned
to hear it,  and he readily complied,  and read it with
great reverence,  but very unaffectedly and quietly.  1
was very,  very much touched by it ;  yet not,  I own,
quite so much as once before by another,  which was
read to me by Mr.  Cambridge,  and composed by his son,
for the sufferings of his excellent daughter Catherine.
It was at once so devout,  yet so concise — so fervent,  yet
so simple,  and the many tender relations concerned
in it — father,  brother,  sister — so powerfully affected me,
that I had no command over the feelings then excited,
even though Mr.  Cambridge almost reproved ine for

262 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

want of fortitude ;  but there was something so tender in
a prayer of a brother for a sister.

Here,  however,  I was under better control ;  for though
my whole heart was filled with the calamitous state of
this unhappy monarch,  and with deepest affliction for all
his family,  I yet knew so well my reader was one to
severely censure all failure in calmness and firmness,
that I struggled,  and not ineffectually,  to hear him with a
steadiness like his own.  But,  fortunately for the relief
of this force,  he left the room for a few minutes to see if
he was wanted,  and I made use of his absence to give a
little vent to those tears which I had painfully restrained
in his presence.

When he returned we had one of the best  (on his
part)  conversations in which I have ever been engaged,
upon the highest and most solemn of all subjects,  prayers
and supplications to heaven.  He asked my opinion
with earnestness,  and gave his own with unbounded
openness.

SATURDAY,  NOVEMBER 15TH. — This morning my poor
royal mistress herself presented me with one of the
prayers for the King.  I shall always keep it ;  how — how
fervently did I use it !

Whilst I was at breakfast Mr.  Fairly once more called
before he set off for town ;  and he brought me also a
copy of the prayer.  He had received a large packet of
them from the Archbishop,  Dr.  Moore,  to distribute in
the house.

The whole day the King continued amended.

SIWDAY,  NOVEMBER 16'rn. — This morning I ven
tured out to church.  I did not like to appear abroad,
but yet I had a most irresistible earnestness to join the
public congregation in the prayer for the King.  Indeed
nothing could be more deeply moving :  the very sound
of the cathedral service,  performed in his own chapel,
overset me at once ;  and every prayer in the service in
which he was mentioned brought torrents of tears from
all the suppliants that joined in them.  I could scarcely

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  263

keep my place,  scarce command my voice from audible
sobs.  To come to the House of prayer from such
a house of woe  !  I ran away when the service was over,
to avoid inquiries.  Mrs.  Kennedy ran after me,  with
swollen eyes ;  I could not refuse her a hasty answer,
but I ran the faster after it,  to avoid any more.

The King was worse.  His night had been very bad;
all the fair promise of amendment was shaken;  he had
now some symptoms even dangerous to his life.  O
good Heaven,  what a day did this prove !  I saw not
a human face,  save at dinner ;  and then,  what faces !
gloom and despair in all,  and silence to every species
of intelligence.

The good Bishop of Worcester came,  but he could
only see the Queen  ;  overwhelmed with grief for the
situation of his unhappy King and patron,  he could
bear no interview he had power to shun.

Mr.  Smelt came to Windsor,  and,  by means of cer
tain management,  dined here,  but hastened to Kew
immediately afterwards.  In how many ways had I rea
son to repine at his most ungrateful treatment !

So full of horror was my mind that I could not even
read ;  books of devotion excepted,  I found it impos
sible even to try to read,  for I had not courage to take
anything in hand.  At the cathedral a sort of hymn had
occurred to me,  and that I wrote down on my return ;
and that alone could divide my attention with listening
for footsteps at the door.  No footsteps,  however,  ap
proached  :  my only friend and intelligencer gone,  not
another in the house could even dream of the profound
ignorance in which,  during his absence,  I was kept.
My morning attendance upon the Queen,  indeed,  was
informing,  as far as it was tete-a-tete,  but after that I
saw her no more till night,  and then never alone.

It was melancholy to see the crowds of former wel
come visitors who were now denied access.  The Prince
reiterated his former orders ;  and I perceived from my
window those who had ventured to the door returning

264 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

back in deluges of tears.  Amongst them to-day I per
ceived poor Lady Effingham,  the Duchess of Ancaster,
and Mr.  Bryant;  the last sent me in,  afterwards,  a
mournful little letter,  to which he desired no answer.
Indeed I was not at liberty to write a word.

WEDNESDAY,  NOVEMBER 19xH. — The account of the
dear King this morning was rather better.

Sir Lucas Pepys was now called in,  and added to Dr.
Warren,  Dr.  Heberden,  and Sir George Baker.  I
earnestly wished to see him,  and I found my poor Royal
Mistress was secretly anxious to know his opinion.  I
sent to beg to speak with him,  as soon as the consulta
tion was over;  determined,  however,  to make that re
quest no more if he was as shy of giving information
as Dr.  Warren.

Poor Mr.  de Luc was with me when he came ;  but
it was necessary I should see Sir Lucas alone,  that I
might have a better claim upon his discretion  :  never
theless I feared he would have left me,  without the
smallest intelligence,  before I was able to make my
worthy,  but most slow companion comprehend the
necessity of his absence.

The moment we were alone,  Sir Lucas opened upon
the subject in the most comfortable manner.  He as
sured me there was nothing desponding in the case,
and that his Royal Patient would certainly recover,
though not immediately.

Whilst I was in the midst of the almost speechless
joy with which I heard this said,  and ready to kiss the
very feet of Sir Lucas for words of such delight,  a rap
at my door made me open it to Mr.  Fairly,  who en
tered,  saying,  "  I must come to ask you how you do,
though I have no good news to bring you ;  but "

He then,  with the utmost amaze,  perceived Sir Lu
cas.  In so very many visits he had constantly found
me alone,  that I really believe he had hardly thought
it possible he should see me in any other way.

They then talked over the poor King's situation,  and

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  265

Sir Lucas was very open and comforting.  How many
sad meetings have I had with him heretofore ;  first in
the alarming attacks of poor Mr.  Thrale,  and next in
the agonizing fluctuations of his unhappy widow  !

Ah,  my dearest friends,  whom shall we pity so much
as those who neglect to habituate those imperious as
saulters of all virtue and all self-denial,  The Passions,
to the control of Patience?  For that,  I begin to
think,  is more properly their Superior than Reason,
which,  in many cases,  finds it hard not to join with
them.

Sir Lucas wished to speak with me alone,  as he had
something he wanted,  through me,  to communicate to
the Queen  ;  but as he saw Mr.  Fairly not disposed to
retire first,  by his manner of saying  "  Sir Lucas,  you
will find all the breakfast ready below stairs,"  he made
his bow,  and said he would see me again.

Mr.  Fairly then informed me he was quite uneasy
at the recluse life led by the Queen and the Princesses,
and that he was anxious to prevail with them to take
a little air,  which must be absolutely necessary to their
health.  He was projecting a scheme for this purpose,
which required the assistance of the Duke of York,
and he left me,  to confer upon it with his Royal High
ness,  promising to return and tell its success.

Sir Lucas soon came back,  and then gave me such
unequivocal assurances of the King's recovery,  that
the moment he left me I flew to demand a private
audience of the Queen,  that I might relate such
delightful prognostics.

The Duke of York was with her.  I waited in the
passage,  where I met Lady Charlotte Finch,  and tried
what I could to instil into her mind the hopes I enter
tained  :  this,  however,  was not possible ;  a general
despondency prevailed throughout the house,  and Lady
Charlotte was infected by it very deeply.

Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave then passed,  and made

266 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

me go and wait in her room with her sister till the
Duke left the Queen.  Nothing can deserve more
commendation than the steady good conduct and pro
priety of Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave,  who seems more
uniformly to do precisely what is right,  and neither
more nor less,,  than almost any character I have met.

At length I gained admission and gave my account,
which was most meekly received by the most patient
of sorrowers.

At night came Mr.  Fairly again ;  but,  before he
entered into any narrations he asked,  <e Do you expect
Sir Lucas?"

"No,"  I said,  "he had been already."

"  I saw him rise early from table,"  he added,  "and
I thought he was coming to you."

He has taken no fancy to poor Sir Lucas,  and would
rather,  apparently,  avoid meeting him.  However,  it is
to me so essential a comfort to hear his opinions,  that
I have earnestly entreated to see him by every oppor
tunity.

The equerries now had their own table as usual,  to
which the physicians were regularly invited,  down
stairs,  and our eating-parlour was restored.  The
Princes established a table of their own at the Castle,
to which they gave daily invitations to such as they
chose,  from time to time,  to select from the Lodge.

The noise of so large a party just under the apart
ment of the Queen occasioned this new regulation,
which took place by her Majesty's own direction.

THURSDAY,  NOVEMBER 20TH. — Poor Miss Golds-
worthy was now quite ill,  and forced to retire and
nurse.  No wonder,  for she had suffered the worst sort
of fatigue,  that of fearing to sleep,  from the apprehen
sion the Queen might speak,  and want her ;  for,  though
the Queen was all graciousness and consideration,  the
situation could not admit of ease and repose.

Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave now took her place of

1788]  OP MADAME D'ARBLAY.  267

in the Queen's room,  but the office of going
for early intelligence how his Majesty had passed the
night devolved upon me.

Exactly at seven o'clock I now went to the Queen's
apartment ;  Lady Elizabeth then rose and went to her
own room to dress,  and I received the Queen's com
mands for my inquiries.

I could not,  however,  go myself into the room where
they assembled,  which Miss Goldsworthy,  who always
applied to her brother,  had very properly done  :  I sent
in a message to beg to speak with General Bude,  or
whoever could bring an account.

Mr.  Charles Hawkins came;  he had sat up.  O,
how terrible a narrative did he drily give of the
night! — short,  abrupt,  peremptorily bad,  and indu
bitably hopeless !

I did not dare alter,  but I greatly softened this
relation,  in giving it to my poor Queen.  I had been,
indeed,  too much shocked by the hard way in which 1
had been told it,  to deliver it in the same manner ;
neither dicl I,  in my own heart,  despair.

I saw Sir Lucas afterwards,  who encouraged all my
more sanguine opinions.  He told me many new regu
lations had been made.  His Majesty was to be kept
as quiet as possible,  and see only physicians,  except
for a short and stated period in every day,  during
which he might summon such among his gentlemen as
he pleased.

Mr.  Fairly came also early,  and wrote and read letters
of great consequence relative to the situation of affairs  ;
and he told me he was then to go to the King,  who had
refused his assent to the new plan,  and insisted upon
seeing him when he came in from his ride,  which,  to
keep mm a little longer quiet,  they had made him be
lieve he was then taking.  The gentlemen had agreed
{0 be within call alternately,  and he meant to have
his own turn always in the forenoon,  that his evenings
might have some chance for quiet.

268 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

The rest of the day was comfortless  ;  my coadjutrix
was now grown so fretful and affronting that,,  though
we only met at dinner,  it was hard to support her most
unprovoked harshness.

At night,  while I was just sealing a short note to my
dear Miss Cambridge,,  who had an anxiety like that of
my own Susan and Fredy lest I should suffer from my
present fatigues,  I heard the softest tap at my door,
which,  before I could either put down my letter or
speak,  was suddenly but most gently opened.

I turned about and saw a figure wrapt up in a great
coat,  with boots and a hat on,  who cautiously entered,
and instantly closed the door.

I stared,  and looked very hard,  but the face was
much hid by the muffling of the high collar to the
great coat.  I wondered,  and could not conceive who it
could be.  The figure then took off his hat and bowed,
but he did not advance,  and the light was away from
him.  I courtsied,  and wondered more,  and then a sur
prised voice exclaimed,  "Don't you know me?1'  and I
found it was Mr.  Fairly.

"  I cannot,"  he said,  "  stop now,  but I will come
again;  however,  you know it,  perhaps,  already?"

"  Know what  ?"

"  Why — the — news."

"What news?"

"Why — that the King is much better,  and — "

"Yes,  Sir Lucas said so,  but I have seen nobody
since  "

"  No  ?     And have you heard nothing more  ?"

"  Nothing at all;  I cannot guess what you mean."

"What,  then,  have not you heard — how much the
King has talked  ?  And — and,  have not you heard the
charge."

"  No  ;  I have heard not a word of any charge."

"  Why,  then,  I'll tell you."

A long preamble,  uttered very rapidly,  of  "  how
much the King had been talking,"  seemed less neces-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  269

sary to introduce his intelligence than to give him
time to arrange it ;  and I was so much struck with
this,  that I could not even listen to him,  from impa
tience to have him proceed.

Suddenly,  however,  breaking off,  evidently from
not knowing how to go on,  he exclaimed,  "  Well,  I
shall tell it you all by and by ;  you come in for your
share !"

Almost breathless now with amaze,  I could hardly
cry,  "  Do I  ?"

"Yes,  I'll tell you,"  cried he;  but again he stopped,
and,  hesitatingly said,  "  You — you won't be angry  ?"

"  No,"  I answered,  still more amazed,  and even
almost terrified,  at what I had now to expect.

"  Well,  then,"  cried he,  instantly resuming his first gay
and rapid manner,  "  the King has been calling them
all to order for staying so long away from him.  '  All
the equerries and gentlemen here,'  he said,  '  lost their
whole time at the table,  by drinking so much wine and
sitting so long over their bottle,  which constantly made
them all so slow in returning to their waiting,  that
when he wanted them in the afternoon they were never
ready ;  and — and — and Mr.  Fairly,'  says he,  'is as bad
as any of them  ;  not that he stays so long at table,  or
is so fond of wine,  but yet he's just as late as the rest ;
for he's so fond of the company of learned ladies,  that
he gets to the tea-table with Miss Burney,  and there
he stays and spends his whole time.' "

He spoke all this like the velocity of lightning  ;  but,
had it been with the most prosing slowness,  I had
surely never interrupted him,  so vexed I was,  so sur
prised,  so completely disconcerted.

Finding me silent,  he began again,  and as rapidly
as ever  ;  "  I know exactly,"  he cried,  "  what it all
means — what the King has in his head — exactly what
has given rise to the idea — 'tis Miss Fuzilier."

Now,  indeed,  I stared afresh,  little expecting to hear
her named by him.  He went on in too much hurry

270 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

for me to recollect his precise words,  but he spoke of
her very highly,  and mentioned her learning,  her
education,  and her acquirements,  with great praise,
yet with that sort of general commendation that dis
claims all peculiar interest ;  and then,  with some de
gree of displeasure mixed in his voice,  he mentioned
the report that had been spread concerning them,  and
its having reached the ears of the King before his ill
ness.  He then lightly added something I could not
completely hear,  of its utter falsehood,  in a way that
seemed to hold even a disavowal too important for it,
and then concluded with saying,  "  And this in the pre
sent confused state of his mind is altogether,  I know,
what he means by the learned ladies."

When he had done he looked earnestly for my an
swer,  but finding I made none,  he said,  with some con
cern,  "You won't think any more of it?"

"  No,"  I answered,  rather faintly.

In a lighter manner then,  as if to treat the whole
as too light for a thought,  he said,  as he was leaving
the room to change his dress,  "  Well,  since I have now
got the character of being so fond of such company,  I
shall certainly" — he stopped short,  evidently at a loss
how to go on ;  but quickly after,  with a laugh,  lie
hastily added,  "come and drink tea with you very
often ;"  and then,  with another laugh,  which he had
all to himself,  he hurried away.

He left me,  however,  enough to think upon ;  and the
predominant thought was an immediate doubt whether
or not,  since his visits had reached the King,  his Ma
jesty's observation upon them ought to stop their
continuance  ?

Upon the whole,  however,  when I summed up all,  I
found not cause sufficient for any change of system.
No raillery had passed upon me  ;  and,  for him,  he had
stoutly evinced a determined contempt of it.  Nothing
of flirtation had been mentioned for either ;  I had
merely been called a learned lady,  and he had merely

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  271

been accused of liking such company.  I had no
other social comfort left me but Mr.  Fairly,  and I had
discomforts past all description or suggestion.  Should
I drive him from me,  what would pay me,  and how
had he deserved it  ?  and which way could it be worth
while?  His friendship offered me a solace without
hazard;  it was held out to me when all else was
denied me ;  banished from every friend,  confined
almost to a state of captivity,  harrowed to the very soul
with surrounding afflictions,  and without a glimpse of
light as to when or how all might terminate,  it seemed
to me,  in this situation,  that Providence had benignly
sent in my way a character of so much worth and ex
cellence,  to soften the rigour of my condition,  by kind
sympathy and most honourable confidence.

This idea was sufficient ;  and I thence determined
to follow as he led,  in disdaining any further notice,  or
even remembrance,  if possible,  of this learned accu
sation.

FRIDAY,  Nov.  2 1 ST. — All went better and better to
day,  and I received from the King's room a more
cheering account to carry to my poor Queen.  We
had now hopes of a speedy restoration  :  the King
held long conferences with all his gentlemen,  and,
though far from composed,  was so frequently rational
as to make any resistance to his will nearly impossible.
Innumerable difficulties attended this state,  but the
general promise it gave of a complete recovery recom
pensed them all.

Sir Lucas Pepys came to me in the morning,  and
acquainted me with the rising hopes of amendment.
But he disapproved the admission of so many gentle
men,  and would have limited the licence to only the
Equerry in waiting,  Colonel Goldsworthy,  and Mr.
Fairly,  who was now principal throughout the house,  in
universal trust for his superior judgment.

The King,  Sir Lucas said,  now talked of everybody
and everything he could recollect or suggest.

272 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

So I have heard,  thought I.

And,  presently after,  he added,  "  No one escapes ;
you will have your turn."

Frightened lest he knew I had had it,  I eagerly ex
claimed,  "  O,  no  ;  I hope not."

"  And why  ?"  cried he,  good-humouredly  ;  "  what
need you care?  He can say no harm of you."

I ventured then to ask if yet I had been named  ?

He believed not yet.

This doubled my curiosity to know to whom the
"learned ladies"  had been mentioned,  and whether to
Mr.  Fairly himself,  or to some one who related it ;  I
think the latter,  but there is no way to inquire.

Very early in the evening I heard a rap at my
door.  I was in my inner room,  and called out  "  Who's
there  ?"  The door opened and Mr.  Fairly appeared.

He had been so long in attendance this morning
with our poor sick monarch,  that he was too much
fatigued to join the dinner-party.  He had stood five
hours running,  besides the concomitant circumstances
of attention.  He had instantly laid down when he
procured his dismission,  and had only risen to eat
some cold chicken before he came to my room.  Dur
ing that repast he had again been demanded,  but he
charged the gentlemen to make his excuse,  as he could
go through nothing further.

I hope the King did not conclude him again with
the learned.

This was the most serene,  and even cheerful evening
I had passed since the poor King's first seizure.

SATURDAY,  NOVEMBER 22ND. — When I went for my
morning inquiries,  Colonel Manners came out to me.
He could give me no precise account,  as the sitters-up
had not yet left the, King,  but he feared the night had
been bad.  We mutually bewailed the mournful state
of the house.  He is a very good creature at heart,
though as unformed as if he had just left Eton or West
minster.  But he loves his Master with a true and

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  273

faithful heart,  and is almost as ready to die as to live
for him,  if any service of that risk was proposed to
him.

While the Queen's hair was dressing,  though only
for a close cap,  I was sent again.  Colonel Manners
came out to me,  and begged I would enter the music-
room,  as Mr.  Keate,  the surgeon,  had now just left the
King,  and was waiting to give me an account before he
laid down.

I found him in his night-cap :  he took me up to a
window,  and gave me but a dismal history :  the night
had been very unfavourable,  and the late amendment
very transient.

1 heard nothing further till the evening,  when my
constant companion came to me.  All,  he said,  was bad  :
he had been summoned and detained nearly all the
morning,  and had then rode to St.  Leonard's to get a
little rest,  as he would not return till after dinner.

He had but just begun his tea when his name was
called aloud in the passage :  up he started,  seized his
hat,  and with a hasty bow,  decamped.

I fancy it was one of the Princes  ;  and the more,  as
he did not come back.

SUNDAY,  NOVEMBER 23 RD. — A sad day this !  I was
sent as usual for the night account,  which I had given
to me by Mr.  Fairly,  and a very dismal one indeed.
Yet I never,  upon this point,  yield implicitly to his
opinion,  as I see him frequently of the despairing side,
and as for myself,  I thank God,  my hopes never wholly
fail.  A certain faith in his final recovery has uniformly
supported my spirits from the beginning.

I ventured once more to the cathedral,  to join in the
public prayer.  There I was seen by poor Madame la
Fite,  who lamented her banishment from the house,  in
bitter complaints.  I could but tell her it was universal.
"But,  my chere Madame,"  cried she,  "do you see
moch ce Mr.  si digne,  ce Mr.  Fairly?"

"  Yes/'  I answered,  "  when he had any spare time."

VOL.  iv.  T

274 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

And promised,  in happier days,  she also should see
him  ;  to her great content.

Dr.  Duval preached a sermon,  from Job,  very ap
plicable and very well,  all exhorting to trust in God,
however hopeless in man.

Sir Lucas came to me on my return,  and was still
very comfortable.  How much I owe him for his cheer
at such a season  !  There now remained no other on
the side of hope ;  all were dispirited,  and the King
undoubtedly worse.

In the evening,  a small tap at my door,  with  "  Here
I am again,"  ushered in Mr.  Fairly.  He seemed
much hurried and disturbed,  and innately uncom
fortable;  and very soon he entered into a detail of
the situation of affairs that saddened me in the ex
treme.  The poor King was very ill indeed,  and so
little aware of his own condition,  that he would submit
to no rule,  and chose to have company with him from
morning till night,  sending out for the gentlemen one
after another without intermission,  and chiefly for Mr.
Fairly,  who,  conscious it was hurtful to his Majesty,  and
nearly worn out himself,  had now no chance of respite
or escape but by leaving the house and riding out.

Seeing me much depressed,  he began to cheer him
self;  and,  asking for my book,  declared we must dwell
on the sad subject no longer.  "  Let us do,"  he cried,
"all we can;  and that done,  turn to other objects,
and not suffer ourselves to sink."

My book was  '  Ogden.'  I begged him to let me
choose him a sermon,  and gave him the second,  on Be
lief.  It is one of the most spirited and pointedly to the
matter I have ever read.  But his mind was too much
preoccupied to enter into its merits ;  he read on ra
pidly,  though in general he is a very slow reader,  and
evidently sought to lead my thoughts into a new chan
nel,  without the power of diverting his own.

He then hurried off to execute some business for
her Majesty.

1788]  OP MADAME D'ARBLAY.  275

About ten o'clock,  however,  he came back,  accom
panied by Lady Charlotte Finch,  and each of them
begging a million of pardons,  but telling me they had a
commission to execute for the Queen,  and no place not
crowded with Princes,  physicians,  or pages,  in which
they could utter a word undisturbed.

1 rejoiced to make my apartment of any use at such
a period,  and hastened into my bed-room,  though they
would have me remain still.  But I had no claim upon
the confidence of Lady Charlotte ;  and I was sure,  if I
stayed,  Mr.  Fairly would forget I had none also upon
his.  I took,  therefore,  a book and a candle,  and left
them.

When they had finished their consultation Lady
Charlotte came for me,  and Mr.  Fairly went away.
We then talked over affairs in general,  but without
any comfort.  She is no hopcr;  she sees nothing
before us but despair and horror.  I believe myself,
indeed,  the only regular hoper of any one resident in
the house.  Mr.  Fairly himself now evidently leans to
the darker side,  though he avoids saying so.

MONDAY,  NOVEMHKK 24rH. — Very bad again was
the night's account,  which I received at seven o'clock
this morning from Mr.  Dundas.  I returned with it to
my poor royal mistress,  who heard it with her usual
patience.

While I was still with her,  Lady Elizabeth came
with a request from Mr.  Fairly,  for an audience before
her Majesty's breakfast.  As soon as she was ready she

ordered me to tell Lady Elizabeth to bring him.

******

Soon after,  with a hasty rap,  came Mr.  Fairly.  He
brought his writing to my table,  where I was trying to
take off impressions of plants.  I saw he meant to read
me his letter;  but before he had finished it Lady
Charlotte Finch came in search of him.  It was not for
the Queen,  but herself ;  she wished to speak and con-

T2

276 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

suit with him upon the King's seeing his children,
which was now his vehement demand.

He was writing for one of the King's messengers,
and could not stop till he had done.  Poor Lady
Charlotte,  overcome with tenderness and compassion,
wept the whole time he was at his pen ;  and when he
had put it down,  earnestly remonstrated on the cruelty
of the present regulations,  which debarred his Majesty
the sight of the Princesses.

I joined with her,  though more firmly,  believe me ;
my tears I suppress for my solitude.  I have enough
of that to give them vent,  and,  with all my sup
pression,  my poor aching eyes can frequently scarce
see one object from another.

When Mr.  Fairly left off writing he entered very
deeply into argument with Lady Charlotte.  He was
averse to her request ;  he explained the absolute ne
cessity of strong measures,  and of the denial of dan
gerous indulgences,  while the poor King was in this
wretched state.  The disease,  he said,  was augmented
by every agitation,  and the discipline of forced quiet
was necessary till he was capable of some reflection.
At present he spoke everything that occurred to him,
and in a manner so wild,  unreasonable,  and dangerous,
with regard to future constructions,  that there could
be no kindness so great to him as to suffer him only
to see those who were his requisite attendants.

He then enumerated many instances very forcibly,
in which he showed how much more properly his Ma
jesty might have been treated,  by greater strength of
steadiness in his management.  He told various facts
which neither of us had heard  ;  and,  at last,  in speak
ing of the most recent occurrences,  he fell into a nar
rative relating to himself.

The King,  he said,  had almost continually demanded
him of late,  and with the most extreme agitation ;  he
had been as much with him as it was possible for his

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  277

health to bear.  "  Five hours,"  continued he,  "  I spent
with him on Friday,  and four on Saturday,  and three
and a-half yesterday  ;  yet the moment I went to him
last night,  he accused me of never coming near him.
He said I gave him up entirely ;  that I was always
going out,  always dining out,  always going to Mrs.
Harcourt's — riding to St.  Leonard's  ;  but he knew
why — 'twas to meet Miss Fuzilier."

Lady Charlotte stared,  surprised,  I saw,  at his
naming that lady,  and in a voice and manner so
entirely disclaiming the King's imputation.  I had
heard him before,  and my surprise,  therefore,  was
over.

"  Then,"  continued he,  "  he raved about my little
boy,  whom he said I loved better than him  ;  and — and —
so he went on in that sort of way for a considerable
time,  quite enraged."

Poor Lady Charlotte was answered,  and,  looking
extremely sorry,  went away.

He then readme his messenger's letter.  'Twas upon
a very delicate affair,  relative to the Prince of Wales,  in
whose service,  he told me,  he first began his court pre
ferment.

When he had made up his packet he returned to
the subject of the King's rage,  with still greater open
ness.  He had attacked him,  he said,  more violently
than ever about Miss Fuzilier;  which,  certainly,  as
there had been such a report,  was very unpleasant.
"  And when I seriously assured him,"  he added,  "  that
there was nothing in it,  he said  '  I had made him the

happiest of men.'  "

******

I found the Queen at night very much disturbed,
and all I could learn assured me how complicate were
her reasons for disturbance  ;  though I heard no parti
culars,  as I did not see Mr.  Fairly again at night.

TUESDAY,  NOVEMBER 25in. — My morning account

278 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

was from General Bude,  and a very despairing one.
He has not a ray of hope for better days.

My poor Queen was so much pleased with a sort of
hymn for the King,  which she had been reading in the
newspapers,  that I scrupled not to tell her of one in
manuscript,  which,  of course,  she desired to read;
but I stipulated for its return,  though I could not pos
sibly stay in the room while she looked at it.  I would
copy it here for my dear readers,  who will exclaim and
declaim against me that I do not ;  but,  in truth,  at this
moment in which I am writing,  I know not where to
find it.

When the Queen had finished her short dressing,
and a long conference,  she sent me for Lady Charlotte
Finch.  I found her in the music-room with Colonel
Welbred,  whom I had not before met.  He looked very
sallow and ill;  these night-watches,  and this close
attendance,  disagree with them all.  Lady Charlotte
went,  but Colonel Welbred stopped me for a little
conversation.  We condoled upon the state of things  :
I found him wholly destitute of all hope,  and per
suaded the malady was a seizure for life.

How happy for me that I am made of more sanguine
materials  !  I could not think as they think,  and be
able to wade through the labours of my office.

In the evening Mr.  Fairly came,  entering with a
most gently civil exclamation of  "  How long it is since
I have seen you  !"

I could not answer,  it was only one evening missed ;
for,  in truth,  a day at this time seems literally a week,
and a very slow one too.  He had been to town,  sud
denly sent by the Queen last night,  and had returned
only at noon.

He gave me a full account of all that was passing
and projecting  ;  and awfully critical everything seemed.
"  He should now soon,"  he said,  "quit the tragic scene,
and go to relax and recruit,  with his children,  in the

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  279

country.  He regarded his services here as nearly over,
since an entirely new regulation was planning,  in which
the poor King was no longer to be allowed the sight
of any of his gentlemen.  His continual long conver
sations with them were judged utterly improper,  and
he was only to be attended by the medical people and
his pages."

He then gave into my hands the office of hinting
to the Queen his intention,  if he could be dispensed
with by her Majesty,  to go into the country on the
12th of next month  (December),  with his boy Charles,
who then left Eton for the Christmas holidays.

I knew this would be unwelcome intelligence ;  but I
wished to forward his departure,  and would not refuse
the commission.

When this was settled he said he would go and
take a circuit,  and see how matters stood ;  and then,
if he could get away after showing himself,  return — if
I would give him leave to drink his tea with me.

He had not been gone ten minutes before Lady
Charlotte came in search of him.  She had been
told,  she said,  that he was with me.  I laughed,  but
could not forbear asking if I passed for his keeper,
since whenever he was missing I was always called to
account for him.  Again,  however,  he came and drank
his tea,  and stayed an hour,  in most confidential dis
course.

When the new regulation is established,  only one
gentleman is to remain — which will be the Equerry in
waiting.  This is now Colonel Goldsworthy.  The
rest will disperse.

WEDNESDAY,  26TH. — My seven o'clock account this
morning was given me by Mr.  Fairly ;  and a very
gloomy one.  He made me come into the waiting-
room to hear it by the fire,  for it was  .very cold,  and
he was there alone ;  and,  indeed,  he had as many
questions to ask as to answer,  for he thought me
unwell myself:  but I got on,  nervous and feverish

280 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

now and then,  but never,  thank heaven,  confined;  and
at this time,  nothing short of that would,  by any other
whom I now see,  be perceived.

The new plan of operations being settled,  my poor
Queen was again very calm.  She gave me back my
verses with very gracious thanks,  but desired a copy.
I shall trust to the times and their fulness for her
forgetting this request.

******

Mr.  Fairly returned and gave me his usual nar
rative.  I found we were all speedily to remove to
Kew.  This was to be kept profoundly secret till
almost the moment of departure.  The King will never
consent to quit Windsor ;  and to allure him away by
some stratagem occupies all the physicians,  who have
proposed and enforced this measure.  Mr.  Fairly is
averse to it:  the King's repugnance he thinks insur
mountable,  and that it ought not to be opposed.  But
the Princes take part with the physicians.

He left me to ride out,  but more cordial and with
greater simplicity of kindness than ever,  he smilingly
said in going,  "  Well,  good bye,  and God bless you."

"  Amen,"  quoth I,  after he had shut the door.

In the afternoon I had a short visit from Sir Lucas,
who still sustained the language of hope.

THURSDAY,  27xn. — This morning and whole day-
were dreadful !  My early account was given me by
Mr.  Charles Hawkins,  and with such determined deci
sion of incurability,  that I left him quite in horror.

All that I dared,  I softened to my poor Queen,  who
was now harassed to death with state affairs,  and im
pending storms of state dissensions.  I would have
given the world to have spent the whole day by her
side,  and poured in what balm of hope I could,  since it
appeared but too visibly she scarce received a ray from
any other.

Universal despondence now pervaded the whole
house.  Sir Lucas,  indeed,  sustained his original good

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  281

opinion,  but he was nearly overpowered by standing
alone,  and was forced to let the stream take its course
with but little opposition.

Even poor Mr.  de Luc was silenced ;  Miss Planta
easily yields to fear;  and Mrs.  Schwellenberg — who
thinks it treason to say the King is ever at all indis
posed — not being able to say all was quite well,  forbade
a single word being uttered upon the subject !

The dinners,  therefore,  became a time of extremest
pain  —  all was ignorance,  mystery,  and trembling
expectation of evil.

In the evening,  thank Heaven  !  came again my sole
relief,  Mr.  Fairly.  He brought his son,  and they
entered with such serene aspects,  that I soon shook off
a little of my gloom  ;  and I heard there was no new
cause,  for though all was bad,  nothing was worse.

We talked over everything ;  and that,  always opens
the mind,  and softens the bitterness of sorrow.

The prospect before us,  with respect to Kew,  is
indeed terrible.  There is to be a total seclusion from
all but those within the walls,  and those are to be con
tracted to merely necessary attendants.  Mr.  Fairly
disapproved the scheme,  though a gainer by it of
leisure and liberty.  Only the Equerry in waiting is to
have a room in the house ;  the rest of the gentlemen
are to take their leave.  He meant,  therefore,  himself,
to go into the country with all speed.

FRIDAY,  28TH. — How woful — how bitter a day,  in
every part,  was this !

My early account was from the King's page,  Mr.
Stillingfleet,  and the night had been extremely bad.

I dared not sink the truth to my poor Queen,  though
I mixed in it whatever I could devise of cheer and
hope;  and she bore it with the most wonderful calm
ness,  and kept me with her a full half hour after
breakfast was called,  talking over  '  Hunter's Lectures,'
and other religious books,  with some other more con
fidential matters.

282 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

Dr.  Addington was now called in  :  a very old physi
cian,  but peculiarly experienced in disorders such as
afflicted our poor King,  though not professedly a prac
titioner in them.

Sir Lucas made me a visit,  and informed me of all
the medical proceedings ;  and told me,  in confidence,
we were to go to Kew to-morrow,  though the Queen
herself had not yet concurred in the measure  ;  but the
physicians joined to desire it,  and they were supported
by the Princes.  The difficulty how to get the King
away from his favourite abode was all that rested.  If
they even attempted force,  they had not a doubt but
his smallest resistance would call up the whole country
to his fancied rescue !  Yet how,  at such a time,  pre
vail by persuasion  ?

He moved me even to tears,  by telling me that none
of their own lives would be safe if the King did not
recover,  so prodigiously high ran the tide of affection
and loyalty.  All the physicians received threatening
letters daily,  to answer for the safety of their monarch
with their lives  !  Sir George Baker had already been
stopped in his carriage by the mob,  to give an account
of the King ;  and when he said it was a bad one,  they
had furiously exclaimed  "The more shame for you!"

After he left me,  a privy council was held at the
Castle,  with the Prince of Wales ;  the Chancellor,  Mr.
Pitt,  and all the officers of state were summoned,  to
sign a permission for the King's removal.  The poor
Queen gave an audience to the Chancellor — it was
necessary to sanctify their proceedings.  The Princess
Royal and Lady Courtown attended her.  It was a
tragedy the most dismal !

The Queen's knowledge of the King's aversion to
-,Kew made her consent to this measure with the ex-
tremest reluctance ;  yet it was not to be opposed :  it
was stated as much the best for him,  on account of the
garden :  as here there is none but what is public to
spectators from the terrace,  or tops of houses.  I

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  283

believe they were perfectly right,  though the removal
was so tremendous.

The physicians were summoned to the Privy Coun
cil,  to give their opinions,  upon oath,  that this step
was necessary.

Inexpressible was the alarm of every one,  lest the
King,  if he recovered,  should bear a lasting resent
ment against the authors and promoters of this journey.
To give it,  therefore,  every possible sanction,  it was
decreed that he should be seen,  both by the Chancellor
and Mr.  Pitt.

The Chancellor went into his presence with a tremor
such as,  before,  he had been only accustomed to inspire ;
and when he came out,  he was so extremely affected
by the state in which he saw his Royal Master and
Patron that the tears ran down his cheeks,  and his
feet had difficulty to support him.

Mr.  Pitt was more composed,  but expressed his
grief with so much respect and attachment,  that it
added new weight to tne universal admiration with
which he is here beheld.

All these circumstances,  with various others,  of
equal sadness,  which 1 must not relate,  came to my
knowledge through Sir Lucas,  Mr.  de Luc,  and my
noon attendance upon her Majesty,  who was compelleo.
to dress for her audience of the Chancellor.  And,
altogether,  with the horror of the next day's removal,
and the gloom of the ensuing Kew residence,  I was so
powerfully depressed,  that when Mr.  Fairly came in
the evening,  not all my earnestness to support my
firmness could re-animate me,  and I gave him a most
solemn reception,  and made the tea directly,  and almost
in silence.

He endeavoured,  at first,  to revive me by enlivening
discourse,  but finding that fail,  he had recourse to
more serious means.  He began his former favourite
topic — the miseries of life — the inherent miseries,  he
thinks them,  to which we are so universally born and

284 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

bred,  that it was as much consonant with our reason to
expect as with our duty to support them.

I heard him with that respect his subject and his
character alike merited ;  but I could not answer — my
heart was sunk — my spirits were all exhausted :  I
knew not what to expect next,  nor how I might be
enabled to wade through the dreadful winter.

He proceeded,  however,  with one of the best dis
courses I ever heard upon religious fortitude and
cheerful resignation  ;  and his own high practice of
those virtues in all his personal misfortunes rendered
their recommendation not merely proper,,  but affecting
from him.

Once,  attempting a little smile,  he said,  fflf you
might choose what frame of mind to be in for a con
stancy — a gay and lively one,  full of buoyant hope and
vivacity,  or one wholly serious and solemn — which
would you take  ?"

I knew which frame he thought best — the serious  ;
but I know which I prefer — the buoyant :  however,  I
could not argue,  and simply said,  "  You must not
question me to-night,  Mr.  Fairly,  for to-night I feel
afraid of you!''

"  I think,"  cried he,  "  that when the nature of our
small earthly happiness is considered,  and the danger
we are in,  while it lasts,  of forgetting what most we
ought to reflect upon — I think,  upon the whole,  that a
melancholy humour,  such as you and I are in just
now,  is to be preferred.  Gaiety has such an aptitude
to run into levity,  that it can little be relied upon with
any security."

I could have said much upon this subject at another
time,  but here I had no force.  I could only forbear
to concur.  In this point,  indeed,  I am wholly dissen
tient.  I am very sorry he harbours opinions so
gloomy.  They are not consonant to my ideas of that
true religion of which I believe him so pure a disciple.

He had not,  I saw,  one ray of hope to offer me of

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  285

better times,  yet he recommended me to cheer myself;
but not by more sanguine expectations — simply and
solely by religion.  To submit,  he said,  to pray and to
submit,  were all we had to do.

He inquired how long I should remain in my par
lour?  I told him,  till summoned to her Majesty — now,
commonly,  at twelve o'clock.  I saw he purposed call
ing again.  But in going,  he said,  with a smile,  he
would give me a text for a sermon,  "  Expect little,  be
humble,  and pray."  This,  he said,  was his own text
in the adversities of fortune,  and he recommended to
me to make a sermon upon it,  which he assured me
would be very useful.

I agreed to the excellence of the text ;  but as to
making a sermon,  Heaven knows how much more I
was a subject for being taught than for teaching !

The voice of the Prince of Wales,  in the passage,
carried him away.  They remained together,  in deep
conference,  all the rest of the evening,  consulting upon
measures for facilitating the King's removal,  and ob
taining his consent.

I went very late to the Queen,  and found her in
deep sorrow;  but nothing confidential passed:  I found
her not alone,  nor alone did 1 leave her.  But I knew
what was passing in her mind — the removing the
King ! — its difficulty and danger at present,  and the
dread of his permanent indignation hereafter.

SATURDAY,  NOVEMBER 29xH. — Shall I ever forget
the varied emotions of this dreadful day  !

I rose with the heaviest of hearts,  and found my
poor royal Mistress in the deepest dejection  :  she told
me now of our intended expedition to Kew.  Lady
Elizabeth hastened away to dress,  and I was alone
with her for some time.

Her mind,  she said,  quite misgave her about Kew  :
the King's dislike was terrible to think of,  and she
could not foresee in what it might end.  She would

286 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

have resisted the measure herself,  but that she had
determined not to have upon her own mind any oppo
sition to the opinion of the physicians.

The account of the night was still more and more
discouraging :  it was related to me by one of the
pages,  Mr.  Brawan ;  and though a little I softened or
omitted particulars,,  I yet most sorrowfully conveyed it
to the Queen.

Terrible was the morning  ! — uninterruptedly terrible  !
all spent in hasty packing up,  preparing for we knew
not what,  nor for how long,  nor with what circum
stances.,  nor scarcely with what view  !  We seemed pre
paring for captivity,  without having committed any
offence  ;  and for banishment,  without the least conjec
ture when we might be recalled from it.

The poor Queen was to get off in private :  the plan
settled,  between the Princes and the physicians,  was
that her Majesty and the Princesses should go away
quietly,  and then that the King should be told that
they were gone,  which was the sole method they could
devise to prevail with him to follow.  He was then
to be allured by a promise of seeing them at Kew ;
and,  as they knew he would doubt their assertion,  he
was to go through the rooms and examine the house
himself.

I believe it was about ten o'clock when her Majesty
departed :  drowned in tears,  she glided along the pas
sage,  and got softly into her carriage,  with two weeping
Princesses,  and Lady Courtown,  who was to be her
Lady-in-waiting during this dreadful residence.

Then followed the third Princess,  with Lady Char
lotte Finch.  They went off without any state or
parade,  and a more melancholy scene cannot be ima
gined.  There was not a dry eye in the house.  The
footmen,  the house-maids,  the porter,  the sentinels — all
cried even bitterly as they looked on.

The three younger Princesses were to wait till the

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  287

event was known.  Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave and
Miss Goldsworthy had their Royal Highnesses in
charge.

It was settled the King was to be attended by three
of his gentlemen,  in the carriage,  and to be followed
by the physicians,  and preceded by his pages.  But all
were to depart on his arrival at Kew,  except his own
Equerry-in-waiting.

It was not very pleasant to these gentlemen to
attend his Majesty at such a time,  and upon such a
plan,  so adverse to his inclination,  without any power
of assistance :  however,  they would rather have died
than refused,  and it was certain the King would no
other way travel but by compulsion,  which no human
being dared even mention.

Miss Planta and I were to go as soon as the pack
ages could be ready,  with some of the Queen's things.
Mrs.  Schwellenberg was to remain behind,  for one
day,  in order to make arrangements about the jewels.

Mr.  de Luc called to take leave of us,  in extreme
wretchedness.  He,  Mr.  Turbulent,  and Madame la
Fite,  were left at large.

In what a confusion was the house  !  Princes,  Equer
ries,  Physicians,  Pages — all conferring,  whispering,
plotting,  and caballing,  how to induce the King to
set off!

At length we found an opportunity to glide through
the passage to the coach ;  Miss Planta and myself,
with her maid and Goter.  But the heaviness of heart
with which we began this journey,  and the dreadful
prognostics of the duration of misery to which it led
us — who can tell  ?

We were almost wholly silent all the way.

When we arrived at Kew,  we found the suspense
with which the King was awaited truly terrible.  Her
Majesty had determined to return to Windsor at
night,  if he came not.  We were all to forbear unpack
ing in the mean while.

288 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

The house was all now regulated by express order
of the Prince of Wales,  who rode over first,  and
arranged all the apartments,  and writ,  with chalk,
the names of the destined inhabitants on each door.

My own room he had given to Lady Courtown ;  and
for me,  he had fixed on one immediately adjoining to
Mrs.  Schwellenberg's ;  a very pleasant room,  and
looking into the garden,  but by everybody avoided,
because the partition is so thin of the next apartment,
that not a word can be spoken in either that is not
heard in both.

While I was surveying this new habitation,  the
Princess Royal came into it,  and,  with a cheered coun
tenance,  told me that the Queen had just received
intelligence that the King was rather better,  and would
come directly,  and therefore I was commissioned to
issue orders to Columb to keep out of sight,  and to
see that none of the servants were in the way when the
King passed.

Eagerly,  and enlivened,  downstairs I hastened,  to
speak to Columb.  I flew to the parlour,  to ring the
bell for him,  as in my new room I had no bell for either
man or maid ;  but judge my surprise,  when,  upon
opening the door,  and almost rushing in,  I perceived a
Windsor uniform  !  I was retreating with equal haste,
when the figure before me started,  in so theatric an
attitude of astonishment,  that it forced me to look
again.  The arms were then wide opened,  while the
figure fell back,  in tragic paces.

Much at a loss,  and unable to distinguish the face,
I was again retiring,  when the figure advanced,  but in
such measured steps as might have suited a march
upon a stage.

I now suspected it was Mr.  Fairly ;  yet so unlikely I
thought it,  I could not believe it without speech.
"  Surely,"  I cried,  "  it is not — it is not — "  I stopped,
afraid to make a mistake.

With arms yet more sublimed,  he only advanced,  in

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  289

silence and dumb heroics.  I no\v ventured to look
more steadily at the face,  and then to exclaim — "  Is it
Mr.  Fairly T'

The laugh now betrayed him:  he could hardly
believe I had really not known him.  I explained that
my very little expectation of seeing him at Kew had
assisted my near-sightedness to perplex me.

But I was glad to see him so sportive,  which I found
was owing to the good spirits of bringing good news ;
he had mounted his horse as soon as he had heard the
King had consented to the journey,  and he had gal
loped to Kew,  to acquaint her Majesty with the wel
come tidings.

I rang,  and gave my orders to Columb ;  and he then
begged me not to hurry away,  and to give him leave to
wait,  in this parlour,  the King's arrival.  He then
explained to me the whole of the intended proceedings
and arrangements,  with details innumerable and most
interesting.

Miss Planta then appeared.  A more general con
versation now took place,  though in its course Mr.
Fairly had the malice to give me a start I little
expected from him.  We were  'talking of our poor
King,  and wondering at the delay of his arrival,
when Mr.  Fairly said,  "The King now,  Miss Planta,
mentions everybody and everything that he knows or
has heard mentioned in his whole life.  Pray does he
know any of your secrets  ?  he'll surely tell them if he
does  !"

"  So I hear,"  cried she;  "  but I'm sure he can't tell
anything of me !  But I wonder what he says of
everybody?"

"  Why,  everything !"  cried he.  "  Have you not
heard of yourself?"

t(  Dear,  no !     Dear me,  Mr.  Fairly  !"

"  And,  dear,  Miss Planta!  why should not you have
your share  ?  Have you not heard he spares nobody  ?"

VOL.  iv.  u

290 DIARY AND LETTERS      [PART VII.

"  Yes,  I have ;  but I can't think what he says of
them  !"

Fearful of anything more,  I arose and looked at the
window,  to see if any sign of approach appeared,  but
he dropped the subject without coming any nearer,
and Miss Planta dropped it too.

I believe he wished to discover if she had heard of
his  "learned ladies 1"

Dinner went on,  and still no King.  We now began
to grow very anxious,  when Miss Planta exclaimed
that she thought she heard a carriage.  We all listened.
"  I hope  !"  I cried.  "  I see you do  !"  cried he  ;  "  you
have a very face of hope at this moment!" — and it
was not disappointed.  The sound came nearer,  and
presently a carriage drove into the front court.  I
could see nothing,  it was so dark;  but I presently
heard the much-respected voice of the dear unhappy
King,  speaking rapidly to the porter,  as he alighted
from the coach.  Mr.  Fairly flew instantly upstairs,  to
acquaint the Queen with the welcome tidings.

The poor King had been prevailed upon to quit
Windsor with the utmost difficulty  :  he was accom
panied by General Harcourt,  his aide-de-camp,  and
Colonels Goldsworthy and Welbred — no one else !
He had passed all the rest with apparent composure,
to come to his carriage,  for they lined the passage,
eager to see him once more  !  and almost all Windsor
was collected round the rails,  &c.  to witness the mourn
ful spectacle of his departure,  which left them in the
deepest despondence,  with scarce a ray of hope ever
to see him again.

The bribery,  however,  which brought,  was denied
him ! — he was by no means to see the Queen  !

When I went to her at night she was all gracious-
ness,  and kept me till very late.  I had not seen her
alone so long,  except for a few minutes in the morning,
that I had a thousand things I wished to say to her.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  291

You may be sure they were all,  as far as they went,
consolatory.

Princess Augusta had a small tent-bed put up in
the Queen's bed-chamber  :  I called her Royal High
ness when the Queen dismissed me.  She undressed
in an adjoining apartment.

I must now tell you how the house is disposed.  The
whole of the ground-floor that looks towards the gar
den is appropriated to the King,  though he is not
indulged with its range.  In the side wing is a room
for the physicians,  destined to their consultations ;
adjoining to that is the Equerry's dining-room.  Mrs.
Schwellenberg's parlours,  which are in the front of
the house,  one for dining,  the other for coffee and
tea,  are still allowed us.  The other front rooms below
are for the pages to dine,  and the rest of the more
detached buildings are for the servants of various
sorts.

All the rooms immediately over those which are
actually occupied by the King are locked up;  her
Majesty relinquishes them,  that he may never be
tantalized by footsteps overhead.  She has retained
only the bed-room,  the drawing-room,  which joins to
it,  and the gallery,  in which she eats.  Beyond this
gallery are the apartments of the three elder Prin
cesses,  in one of which rooms Miss Planta sleeps.
There is nothing-  more on the first floor.

On the second a very large room for Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg,  and a very pleasant one for myself,  are over
the Queen's rooms.  Farther on are three bed-rooms,
one for the surgeon or apothecary in waiting,  the next
for the Equerry,  and the third,  lately mine,  for the
Queen's lady  —  all written thus with chalk by the
Prince.

The inhabitants at present are Mr.  Charles Haw
kins,  Colonel Goldsworthy,  and Lady Courtown.

Then follows a very long dark passage,  with little
bedrooms on each side for the maids,  viz.  the two

u2

292 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

Misses Macenton,  wardrobe-women to the Princesses,
their own maid,  Lady Courtown's,  Miss Planta's,  Mrs.
Schwellenberg's two maids,  Mrs.  Level and Arline,
and Mr.  Chamberlayne,  one of the pages.  These
look like so many little cells of a convent.

Mrs.  Sandys has a room nearer the Queen's,  and
Goter has one nearer to mine.

At the end of this passage there is a larger room,
formerly appropriated to Mr.  de Luc,  but now chalked
"  The Physicians'."

One Physician,  one Equerry,  and one Surgeon or
Apothecary,  are regularly to sleep in the house.

This is the general arrangement.

The Prince very properly has also ordered that one
of his Majesty's Grooms of the Bedchamber should be
in constant waiting;  he is to reside in the Prince's
house,  over the way,  which is also fitting up for some
others.  This gentleman is to receive all inquiries about
the King's health.  The same regulation had taken
place at Windsor,  in the Castle,  where the gentlemen
waited in turn.  Though,  as the physicians send their
account to St.  James's,  this is now become an almost
useless ceremony,  for everybody goes thither to read
the bulletin.

The three young Princesses are to be in a house
belonging to the King on Kew Green,  commonly called
Princess Elizabeth's,  as her Royal Highness has long
inhabited it in her illness.  There will lodge Miss
Goldsworthy,  Madlle.  Montmollin,  and Miss Gomm.
Lady Charlotte Finch is to be at the Prince of Wales's.

I could not sleep all night — I thought I heard the
poor King.  He was under the same range of apart
ments,  though far distant,  but his indignant dis
appointment haunted me.  The Queen,  too,  was very
angry at having promises made in her name which
could not be kept.  What a day altogether was this !

SUNDAY,  NOVEMBER SOra. — Here,  in all its dread
colours,  dark as its darkest prognostics,  began the

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  293

campaign.  I went to my poor Queen at seven o'clock :
the Princess Augusta arose and went away to dress,
and I received her Majesty's commands to go down
for inquiries.  She had herself passed a wretched night,
and already lamented leaving Windsor.

1 waited very long in the cold dark passages below,
before I could find any one of whom to ask intelligence.
The parlours were without fires,  and washing.  I gave
directions afterwards to have a fire in one of them by
seven o'clock every morning.

At length I procured the speech of one of the pages,
and heard that the night had been the most violently
bad of any yet passed  ! — and no wonder  !

I hardly knew how to creep upstairs,  frozen both
within and without,  to tell such news  ;  but it was not
received as if unexpected,  and I omitted whatever was
not essential to be known.

Afterwards arrived Mis.  Schwellenberg,  so oppressed
between her spasms and the house's horrors,  that the
oppression she inflicted ought perhaps to be pardoned.
It was,  however,  difficult enough to bear !  Harshness,
tyranny,  dissension,  and even insult,  seemed per
sonified.  I cut short details upon this subject — they
would but make you sick.

I longed to see Sir Lucas Pepys,  and hear if any
comfort might yet be gathered from his opinion.  I
went downstairs to wait in the parlour,  and watch his
entrance or exit ;  but I saw Colonel Goldsworthy in it,
doing the honours to the Howards and some others,
who had come with earnest inquiries.  He could not
take them to the Equerry-room,  as it was through
that of the physicians.

I believe they were none of them strangers to me.
but I had not spirits to encounter such a party,  and
hastily ran back.

My dear Miss Cambridge sent to me immediately.
I saw she had a secret hope she might come and sit
with me now and then in this confinement.  It would

294 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII

have been my greatest possible solace in this dreary
abode :  but I hastened to acquaint her of the absolute
seclusion,  and even to beg she would not send her
servant to the house ;  for 1 found it was much desired
to keep off all who might carry away any intelligence.

We could write,  however,  by Mr.  Dundas the
apothecary,  who was now in alternate waiting with
Mr.  Battiscombe,  Mr.  Charles Hawkins,  and Mr.
Keate.

She is ever most reasonable,  and never thence
forward hinted upon the subject.  But she wrote con
tinually long letters,  and filled with news and anec
dotes of much interest,  relating to anything she could
gather of out-house proceedings,  which now became
very important — the length of the malady threatening
a REGENCY! — a word which I have not yet been able
to articulate.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,  though so near,  came not !
The Master of the house was not its owner ! — they
presumed not to enter its doors !

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  295

PART VIII.

1788.

Kew Diary for December— Alarming Accounts— Interviews with
the Queen— Her Grief and Resignation— The Prince of Wales-
Mrs.  Harcourt— News from Home— Personal Kindness of the
Queen— Moir's Sermons— Dr.  Willis and his Son called in —
His first Interview with the Kins: — Gives strong Hopes of
Recovery — Cross-examination —The Regency Question  —
Marked Improvement of the King under Dr.  Willis's Treat
ment—Its Effect on the Regency Hill— Dr.  Willis's Plans
obstructed— He contemplates resigning his Charge — Con
clusion of the Year.

KEW,  MONDAY,  DECEMBER IST. — Mournful was the
opening-  of the month  !  My account of the night from
Gezewell,  the page,  was very alarming,  and my poor
Royal Mistress began to sink more than I had ever yet
seen.  No wonder  ;  the length of the malady so uncer
tain,  the steps which seemed now requisite so shocking :
for new advice,  and such as suited only disorders that
physicians in general relinquish,  was now proposed,
and compliance or refusal were almost equally tre
mendous.

I had half-an-hour with her alone before she sum
moned the wardrobe-woman,  and after poor Princess
Augusta retired to another room to dress.  Again,  too,
at noon,  she sent for me before her other attendants,
and much of melancholy confidence ensued.

In sadness I returned from her,  and,  moping and un
occupied,  I was walking up and down my room,  when
Columb came to say Mr.  Fairly desired to know if I
could see him.

Certainly,  I said,  I would come to him in the par
lour.

He was not at all well,  nor did he seem at all com
fortable.  He had undertaken,  by his own desire,  to

296 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

purchase small carpets for the Princesses,  for the house
is in a state of cold and discomfort past all imagination.
It has never been a winter residence,  and there was
nothing prepared for its becoming one.  He could not,,
he told me,  look at the rooms of their Royal High
nesses without shuddering for them ;  and he longed,
he said,  to cover all the naked,  cold boards,  to render
them more habitable.  He had obtained permission to
execute this as a commission  :  for so miserable is the
house at present that no general orders to the proper
people are either given or thought about ;  and every
one is so absorbed in the general calamity,  that they
would individually sooner perish than offer up com
plaint or petition.  I should never end were I to ex
plain the reasons there are for both.

Mr.  Fairly's confidential favour with all the Royal
Family enables him to let the benevolence of his cha
racter come forth in a thousand little acts and pro
posals at this cruel period,  which,  from any other,
would be regarded as a liberty or impropriety.

What he must next,  he said,  effect,  was supplying
them with sand-bags for windows and doors,  which
he intended to bring and to place himself.  The wind
which blew in upon those lovely Princesses,  he declared,
was enough to destroy them.

When he had informed me of these kind offices,  he
began an inquiry into how I was lodged.  Well
enough,  I said ;  but he would not accept so general
an answer.  He insisted upon knowing what was my
furniture,  and in particular if I had any carpet ;  and
when I owned I had none,  he smiled,  and said he would
bring six,  though his commission only extended to
three.

We talked over our Royal Mistress,  and all the
scenes of distress,  passed,  passing,  and expected.  How
sad,  sad a discourse  !  He meant to see her Majesty
before he left Kew,  but he had been begged to see
Colonels Goldsworthy and Welbred first,  who had

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  297

some inquiry to make,  which they had no means to do
but by Mr.  Fairly.  Colonel Welbred has had a room
appointed him here,  as well as the Equerry in waiting.
Neither of them were just then visible.

He did not at all like the parlour,  which,  indeed,  is
wretchedly cold and miserable :  he wished to bring it
a carpet,  and new fit it up with warm winter accom
modations.  He reminded me of my dearest Fredy,
when she brought me a decanter of barley-water and
a bright tin saucepan,  under her hoop.  I could not
tell him that history in detail,  but I rewarded his good
nature by hinting at the resemblance it bore,  in its
active zeal,  to my sweet Mrs.  Locke.

This day was far less rigid than the preceding one,
as my coadjutrix began to recover a little more good
humour,  and as I was called down in the evening to Sir
Lucas Pepys,  who still supports hope for the end,  and
again to Mr.  Dundas,  who gave me a good account of
my dear Miss Cambridge,  whom he attends,  and who
had made him promise her that he would actually see
me,  in order to satisfy her I was really living and
looking well.  She had suspected I was ill,  and her
kind heart had taken an alarm which my own letters
could not remove.

TUESDAY,  DECEMBER 2ND. — This morning I was
blessed with a better account of my poor King,  which
I received from Mr.  Dundas,  than I have had for six
days past.  With what eager joy did I fly with it to
my Queen  !  and I obtained her leave for carrying it on
to the Princesses,  who otherwise might not have known
it till the general breakfast,  at nine o'clock.

I took this fair opportunity to propose stepping out
to call upon Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,  as they would not
come to the house,  and I had received a most melting
note from both,  expressive of their deep unhappiness.
I produced it :  it drew tears from the poor Queen —
easily now drawn  !  and she assented to my proposition.
I hastened therefore to them,  and met the kindest

298 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

but most melancholy reception :  yet I cheered them
with my better news,,  and would have stayed all my
short morning to enjoy their valuable society,  but that
Mrs.  Harcourt entered,  which,  as it stopped our confi
dential openness,  enabled me to depart.  Yet she
made herself a welcome,  for she brought me a dear
.alive from my sisters.  It had arrived after our depar
ture from Windsor,  and she had called at the Queen's
Lodge to see the little Princesses.

I had also a short interview in the parlour with Sir
Lucas,  but a comfortable one.

The Queen afterwards presented me with a very
pretty little new carpet ;  only a bed-side slip,  but very
warm.  She knew not how much I was acquainted with
its history,  but I found she had settled for them all
six.  She gave another to Mrs.  Schwellenherg.

WEDNESDAY,  DECEMBER ORD. — Worse again to-day
was the poor King  :  the little fair gleam,  how soon did
it pass away  !

1 was beginning to grow ill myself,  from the added
fatigue of disturbance in the night,  unavoidably occa
sioned by my neighbourhood to an invalid who sum
moned her maids at all hours  ;  and my Royal Mistress,
who knew this to have been the case with my predeces
sor,  Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  spoke to me about it herself;
and,  fearing I might suffer essentially,  she graciously
issued orders for a removal to take place.

In consequence of this there were obliged to be two
or three other changes.  The physician in waiting was
removed,  and his room made over to me ;  while that
which I had at first occupied was deemed impracticable
for a sleeping-room to any one.

My new apartment is at the end of the long dark
passage I have mentioned,  with bed-room cells on each
side it.  It is a very comfortable room,  carpeted all
over,  with one window looking to the front of the house
and two into a court-yard.  It is the most distant from
the Queen,  but in all other respects is very desirable.

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  299

I have made it as neat as I could,  and its furniture is
far better than that of my own natural apartment,
which my Fredy thought so succinct !

I must now relate briefly a new piece of cruelty.  I
happened to mention to la premiere president.?  my
waiting for a page to bring the morning accounts.

"And where do you wait?"

"  In the parlour,  ma'am."

"  In my parlour  ?  Oh,  ver well !  I will see to
that !"

"  There is no other place,  ma'am,  but the cold pas
sages,  which,  at that time in the morning,  are com
monly wet as well as dark."

"  O,  ver well !  When everybody goes to my room I
might keep an inn — what you call hotel."

All good humour now again vanished;  and this
morning,  when I made my seven o'clock inquiry,  I
found the parlour doors both locked !

I returned so shivering to my Queen,  that she de
manded the cause,  which I simply related ;  foreseeing
inevitable destruction from continuing to run such a
hazard.  She instantly protested there should be a new
arrangement.

THURSDAY,  DECEMBER 4TH. — No opportunity offered
yesterday for my better security,  and therefore I was
again exposed this morning to the cold dark damp of
the miserable passage.  The account was tolerable,
but a threat of sore-throat accelerated the reform.

It was now settled that the dining-parlour should be
made over for the officers of state who came upon
business to the house,  and who hitherto had waited
in the hall ;  and the room which was next to Mrs.
Schwellenberg's,  and which had first been mine,  was
now made our salle a manger.

By this means,  the parlour being taken away for
other people,  and by command relinquished,  I ob
tained once again the freedom of entering it,  to gather

300 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

my account for her Majesty.  But the excess of ill-will
awakened by my obtaining this little privilege,  which
was actually necessary to my very life,  was so great,
that more of personal offence and harshness could not
have been shown to the most guilty of culprits.

One of the pages acquainted me his Majesty was
not worse,  and the night had been as usual.  As usual,
too,  was my day ;  sad and solitary all the morning —
not solitary,  but worse during dinner and coffee.

Just after it,  however,  came the good and sweet Mr.
Smelt.  The Prince of Wales sent for him,  and conde
scended to apologise for the Windsor transaction,  and
to order he might regain admission.

How this was brought about I am not clear :  I only
know it is agreed by all parties that the Prince has
the faculty of making his peace,  where he wishes it,
with the most captivating grace in the world.

It was softening to these rigid days to see Mr.
Smelt again,  even in ungenial company.  But it was
only softening to my sight :  I was bowed down once
more from all strength of effort,  and only sat silent and
rejoiced he was there.

Between seven and eight o'clock I stole away.  I
was of no use,  and Mr.  Smelt being with Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg,  I could no way be missed ;  and I wished
to keep up the custom lately begun at Windsor,  of
rescuing a part,  at least,  of my evenings for myself.
Hitherto,  however,  as I could not leave her alone,  I
had not left her at all.

Mr.  Fairly told me this evening that Dr.  Willis,
a physician of Lincoln,  of peculiar skill and practice
in intellectual maladies,  had been sent for by express.
The poor Queen had most painfully concurred in a
measure which seemed to fix the nature of the King's
attack in the face of the world  ;  but the necessity and
strong advice had prevailed over her repugnance.

SATURDAY,  DECEMBER GTH. — The accounts now of

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  301

the poor King vary but slightly;  neither the better
nor the worse are long enough either for permanent
joy,  or,  thank God  !  alarm.

The Queen told me afterwards that Mr.  Fairly had
been recommending Moir's Sermons to her  ;  and she
desired me to ask him for a full direction where they
were to be had.  I readily undertook the little com
mission,  much pleased to see by it her approbation of
our conferences.  For well do I know,  had she disap
proved them,  even slightly,  the last thing in the world
she would have done would have been authorising
them by a message from one to the other.

As he had told me he should go to town to-day,  I
was upon the point of sending Columb to him with a
message concerning Moir,  when,  fortunately,  he came
to me,  to borrow pen and ink for a few memorandums.

Notwithstanding much haste,  he could not,  he said,
go till he had acquainted me with the opening of Dr.
Willis with his Royal Patient.  I told him there was
nothing I more anxiously wished to hear.

He then gave me the full narration,  interesting,
curious,  extraordinary;  full of promise and hope.  He
is extremely pleased both with the doctor and his son,
Dr.  John.  He says they are fine,  lively,  natural,
independent characters.  I quite long to see them.
But my accounts are always now from the pages or the
apothecaries,  Mr.  Battiscomb and Mr.  Dundas.

This little history gave me a spirit that supported
me through the day ;  and at night,  though I had no
society,  I retired to a little quiet reading.  Good Mr.
Smelt comes regularly every evening,  and takes my
place at the card-table.

SUNDAY,  DECEMBER 7TH. — Very bad was this morn
ing's account,  and very mournful all the day,  except
one half-hour,  at my breakfast,  in which I had the
most pleasant surprise of a visit from Mr.  Smelt.  Mrs.
Schwellenberg was not visible,  and therefore he ven
tured to come on to my room,  and beg some news.  I

302 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI II.

promised he should always have it if he would always
come,  which he assured me would be most useful to
the peace of his mind.  He would not take any
breakfast,  as Mrs.  Smelt was anxiously waiting his
return.

Sir Lucas now comes every third day,  and I then
regularly have a conference with him in Dr.  Willis's
parlour,  as it is now called,  which has always been
empty.

Lady Charlotte Finch read prayers to the Queen
and Princesses,  and Lady Courtown,  and the rest for
themselves.  Mr.  Fairly wishes her Majesty would
summon a chaplain,  and let the house join in congre
gation.  I think he is right,  as far as the house ex
tends to those who are still admitted into her Majesty's
presence.

MONDAY,  DECEMBER STH.  —  The accounts began
mending considerably,  and hope broke in upon all.

TUESDAY,  DECEMBER 9TH. — All gets now into a
better channel,  and the dear Royal Invalid gives every
symptom of amendment.  God be praised  !

Mr.  Smelt now calls every morning at breakfast-time,
and I have the infinite comfort of his reviving society
for a regular half-hour ;  and this is as unknown to la
Presidents as the visits of my other consoler :  she
would be quite outrageous to hear of either.

Mr.  Smelt could not stay this evening,  and therefore,
as soon as I had made my tea,  I returned to Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  as she was alone,  and more civil,  and
requested it.

WEDNESDAY,  DECEMBER K)TH.— Still amending,  in
all but my evenings ;  which again,  except one hour
under pretence of drinking tea,  are falling into their
old train.

THURSDAY,  DECEMBER HTH. — To-day we have had
the fairest hopes ;  the King took his first walk in Kew
garden !  There have been impediments to this trial
hitherto,  that have been thought insurmountable,

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  303

though,  in fact,  they were most frivolous.  The walk
seemed to do him good,  and  \ve are all in better spirits
about him than for this many and many a long day
past.

FRIDAY,  DECEMBER 12rn. — This day passed in much
the same manner.  Late in the evening,  after Mr.
Smelt was gone,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg began talking about
Mr.  Fairly,  and giving free vent to all her strong in
nate aversion to him.  She went back to the old history
of the  "  newseepaper,"  and gave to his naming it every
unheard of motive of spite,  disloyalty,  and calumny! —
three qualities which I believe equally and utterly
unknown to him.  He was also,  she said,  "very onfeel-
ing,  for she had heard him laugh prodigious with the
Lady Waldegraves,  perticleer with Lady Carlisle,  what
you call Lady Elizabeth her sister ;  and this in the
King's illness."  And,  in fine,  she could not bear him.

Such gross injustice I could not hear quietly.  I be
gan a warm defence,  protesting I knew no one whose
heart was more feelingly devoted to the Royal Family,
except,  perhaps,  Mr.  Smelt ;  and that as to his laugh
ing,  it must have been at something of passing and ac
cidental amusement,  since he was grave even to melan
choly,  except when he exerted his spirits for the relief
or entertainment of others.

Equally amazed and provoked,  she disdainfully asked
me what I knew of him  ?

I made no answer.  I was not quite prepared for the
interrogatory,  and feared she might next inquire when
and where I had seen him.

My silence was regarded as self- conviction of error,
and she added,  "  I know you can't not know him ;  I
know he had never seen you two year and half ago ;
when you came here he had not heard your name."

"  Two years and a half,"  I answered coolly,  "  I did
not regard as a short time for forming a judgment of
any one's character."

"  When you don't not see them  ?    You have never

304 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

seen him,  I am sure,  but once,  or what you call
twice."

I did not dare let this pass,  it was so very wide from
the truth ;  but calmly said I had seen him much of-
tener than once or twice.

"  And where  ?  when have you seen him  ?"

"  Many times ;  and at Cheltenham constantly ;  but
never to observe in him anything but honour and
goodness."

"  O ver well !  you don't not know him like me ;  you
can't not know him ;  he is not from your acquaintance
— I know that ver well !"

She presently went on by herself.  "  You could not
know such a person — he told me the same himself:  he
told me he had not never seen you when you first came.
You might see him at Cheltenham,  that is true ;  but
nothing others,  I am sure.  At Windsor there was no
tea,  not wonce,  so you can't not have seen him,  only at
Cheltenham."

I hardly knew whether to laugh or be frightened at
this width of error ;  nor,  indeed,  whether it was not all
some artifice to draw me out,  from pique,  into some
recital :  at all events I thought it best to say nothing,
for she was too affronting to deserve to be set right.

She went on to the same purpose some time,  more
than insinuating that a person such as Mr.  Fairly could
never let himself down to be acquainted with me ;  till,
finding me too much offended to think her assertions
worth answering,  she started,  at last,  another subject.
I then forced myself to talk much as usual.  But how
did I rejoice when the clock struck ten — how wish it
had been twelve !

SATURDAY,  DECEMBER 13TH.  —  Accounts are now
very tolerable,  and the sentiments of Sir Lucas Pepys
upon the prospects before us are most encouraging;
and I have the happiness to convey them to my Royal
mistress upon every visit he makes here.  But I have
never yet seen Dr.  Willis.  I never go down stairs

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  305

but at seven o'clock in the morning,  to speak to the
page or apothecary who has sat up with the King.

I had been seized this morning with a bad cold,  and
therefore I left Mrs.  Schwellenberg in the evening,
before my usual hour,  eight o'clock,  to get my tea.
Mr.  Smelt was with her.  I had been,  however,  but a
short time in my room when Mr.  Fairly came.  He is
still here,  detained,  I suppose,  by business of her
JVIajesty.  I made tea,  and he made talk,  till,  some
time after tea was over,  we heard a rap at the door.

"  Who's there  ?"  I called out,  concluding it some
one for Mr.  Fairly.

There was no answer,  but another rap.

"  Come in !"  cried Mr.  Fairly,  hastily ;  and then
apologising,  he begged pardon,  and asked if he might
say so.

Still no answer,  and still another rap.

I then went to the door and opened it.  Who should
be there but Mr.  Smelt !

He was prevailed upon to sit down and enter into
conversation,  but I did not much assist ;  I left them
to entertain each other,  and worked almost silently.

They did very well,  however,  though not very natu
rally,  for both seemed under some constraint.  But
the general great subject — the King — supplied them
with copious materials for discussion  ;  and indeed they
are so well fitted for conversing together,  that I should
have been quite regaled by their meeting and their
discourse,  had not the opening of the interview been
so disagreeable.

But afterwards,  when Mr.  Smelt asked some ques
tion concerning the physicians,  which Mr.  Fairly either
could not or did not choose to answer,  he took the
opportunity to say,  "  This,  sir,  is a point which I do
not inquire about ;  on the contrary,  I am glad to get
a little out of the way."

They came next to the Parliament,  and that opened
a most ample field for conjecture and discussion ;  till

VOL.  iv.  x

306 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

at last,  Mr.  Fairly,  turning to me for the first time
since the entrance of Mr.  Smelt,  said,  "  This is not
quite fair,  Miss Burney,  to work on so hard,  and take
no part in the conversation."

"  I only seem to take no part,"  cried I,  (i but I take,
in fact,  a very essential one — that of hearer  !"

He pressed the matter no farther ;  and they talked
on till Mr.  Smelt rose to go.  Mr.  Fairly instantly
rising at the same time,  said he should now return to
the Equerry-room,  and see what was doing there.

SUNDAY,  DECEMBER HTH. — The day passed much
as usual,  with no sensible change in the King.

MONDAY,  DECEMBER 15TH. — This whole day was
passed in great internal agitation throughout the
house,  as the great and important business of the
.Regency was to be discussed to-morrow in Parliament.
All is now too painful and intricate for writing a word.
I begin to confine my memorandums almost wholly to
my own personal proceedings.

TUESDAY,  DECEMBER 16iH.  —  Whatsoever might
pass in the House on this momentous subject,  it sat
so late that no news could arrive.  Sweeter and
better news,  however,  was immediately at hand than
any the whole senate could transmit ;  the account
from the pages was truly cheering.  With what joy did
I hasten with it to the Queen,  who immediately ordered
me to be its welcome messenger to the three Prin
cesses.  And when Mr.  Smelt came to my breakfast,
with what rapture did he receive it!  seizing and
kissing my hand,  while his eyes ran over,  and joy
seemed quite to bewitch him.  He flew away in a very
few minutes,  to share his happiness with his faithful
partner.

After breakfast I had a long conference in the par
lour with Sir Lucas Pepys,  who justly gloried in the
advancement of his original prediction  ;  but there had
been much dissension amongst the physicians con
cerning the bulletin to go to St.  James's,  no two agree-

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  307

ing in the degree of better to be announced to the
world.

Dr.  Willis came in while we were conversing,  but
instantly retreated,  to leave us undisturbed.  He looks
a very fine old man.  I wish to be introduced to him.
Mr.  Smelt and Mr.  Fairly are both quite enchanted
with all the family  ;  for another son now,  a clergyman,
Mr.  Thomas Willis,  has joined their forces.

WEDNESDAY,  DECEMBER I/TH. — My account this
morning was most afflictive once more  :  it.  was given
by Mr.  Hawkins,  and was cruelly subversive of all our
rising hopes.  I carried it to the Queen in trembling ;
but she bore it most mildly.  What resignation is hers!

Miss Planta tells me the Queen has given her com
mands that no one shall bring her any account of the
night but me.  She has been teased,  I fancy,  with
erroneous relations,  or unnecessarily wounded with
cruel particulars.  Be this as it may,  I can hardly,
when my narration is bad,  get out the words to tell it;
and I come upon the worst parts,  if of a nature to be
indispensably told,  with as much difficulty as if I had
been author of them.  But her patience in hearing
and bearing them is truly edifying.

Mr.  Hawkins to-day,  after a recital of some par
ticulars extremely shocking,  said,  "  But you need not
tell that to the Queen."

•'  I could not,  sir/'  was my true,  though dry answer.
Yet I never omit anything essential to be known.
Detail is rarely of that character.

MONDAY,  DECEMBER  "22ND. — With what joy did I
carry,  this morning,  an exceeding good account of
the King to my Royal Mistress !  It was trebly wel
come,  as much might depend upon it in the resolutions
of the House concerning the Regency,  which was of
to-day's discussion.

Mr.  Fairly took leave,  for a week,  he said,  wishing
me my health,  while I expressed my own wishes for
his good journey.

308 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

But,  in looking forward to a friendship the most
permanent,  I saw the eligibility of rendering it the
most open.  I therefore went back to Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg ;  and the moment I received a reproach for stay
ing so long,  I calmly answered,  "  Mr.  Fairly had made
me a visit,  to take leave before he went into the
country."

Amazement was perhaps never more indignant.
Mr.  Fairly to take leave of me  !  while not once he
even called upon her !  This offence swallowed up all
other comments upon the communication.

I seemed not to understand it ;  but we had a ter
rible two hours and a-half.  Yet to such,  now,  I may
look forward without any mixture,  any alleviation,  for
evening after evening in this sad abode.

[N.B.  My own separate adventures for this month,
and year,  concluded upon this day.  I shall com
prise the rest in a page or two.]

At the same time that I lost my acknowledged
friend,  I also lost Mr.  Smelt,  who was so much
alarmed by an illness of his excellent wife,  that he
quitted her in no part of the day except the morning,
when he came,  he said,  for  "his daily support,"  to my
little apartment.  He came,  he declared,  for food,  just as
instinctively as my birds  ;  for I have formed a small
receptacle for those sweet little creatures,  which I
provide with food,  that allures them in this hard wea
ther to visit me in troops.  And they are so tame,  by
finding themselves always supplied and never dis
turbed,  that I am not a moment wholly deserted by
them till sunset.

Mrs.  Smelt,  however,  thank Heaven,  was much reco
vered before the year was ended.

Another fortunate,  though far less important inci
dent also happened :  Mrs.  Schwellenberg took a very
great fancy to Madlle.  Montmollin,  and invited her
to play at cards almost every evening;  and this ena
bled me to lengthen my absence till ten o'clock,  when

1788]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  309

I took the place of Madlle.  Montmollin,  who re
turned to the house in which she lives,  with the
younger Princesses,  called Princess Elizabeth's House.
The King went on now better,  now worse,  in a most
fearful manner  ;  but Sir Lucas Pepys never lost si<jht
of hope,  and the management of Dr.  Willis and nis
two sons was most wonderfully acute and successful.
Yet so much were they perplexed and tormented by
the interruptions given to their plans and methods,
that they were frequently almost tempted to resign
the undertaking from anger and confusion.

310 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

PART IX.

1789.

Diary continued  —  Improvement in the King's health-T^Dr.
Willis and his Sons  —  Relapse of the King  —  Letter from Miss
Burney to Mrs.  Francis  —  Proceedings in Parliament on the
state of the King  —  Learning in Women—  The Opposition and
the Regency  —  Conversation with the Queen  —  A sad Birthday
—  The King insists on seeing the Queen and Princesses—  Im
provement in the King's health  —  Character of the Willises  —
Conversation with the Queen  —  Further improvement in the
King's health  —  Address to the Queen.  VlA>

KEW PALACE,  THURSDAY,  JANUARY IST.  —  The year
opened with an account the most promising of our
beloved King.  I saw Dr.  Willis,  and he told me the
night had been very tranquil  ;  and he sent for his son,
Dr.  John Willis,  to give me a history of the morning.
Dr.  John's narration was in many parts very affecting  :
the dear and excellent King had been praying for his
own restoration  !  Both the doctors told me that such
strong symptoms of true piety had scarce ever been
discernible through so dreadful a malady.

How I hastened to my Queen!  —  and with what
alacrity I besought permission to run next to the
Princesses  !  It was so sweet,  so soothing,  to open a
new year with the solace of anticipated good  !

O how did I,  afterwards,  delight Mr.  Smelt!  He
came,  as usual,  at my breakfast,  but he could hardly
get away.  Joy in the beginning of a year that suc
ceeds a year of sorrow is so truly buoyant that the
heart seems to jump with every breath.  When,  how
ever,  he recollected that each instant of his present
enjoyment was an instant lost to his valuable partner
he hastened to that his best participation.

At noon he came back again,  and brought Mr.
de LiiCj who had permission to enter the walls,  with a

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  311

new year's good wishes.  I told the two Dr.  Willises
that they had given to the whole nation a new year's
gift.

FRIDAY,  2ND. — All still amends in the great,  great
point.  Were I to speak of smaller matters,  I could not
use so fair a phrase.  Let the King,  however,  recover ;
and then,  between the partial and the general joy,  I
shall revive.

SATURDAY,  3RD. — I have the great pleasure,  now,  of
a change in my morning's historiographers;  I have
made acquaintance with Dr.  Willis and his son,  and
they have desired me to summon one of them constantly
for my information.

I am extremely struck with both these physicians.

Dr.  Willis is a man of ten thousand;  open,  honest,

dauntless,   light-hearted,  innocent,   and high-minded:

i I see him impressed with the most animated reverence

and affection for his royal patient;  but it is wholly for

<   Jiis character,-— not a whit for his rank.

ojjjj  -piv John,  his eldest son,  is extremely handsome,  and

^  inherits,,  in a milder degree,  all the qualities of his

fjj&irher;;  but living more in the general world,  and

having his fame and fortune still to settle,  he has not

.v. ,y$t  (ac,quired the same courage,  nor is he,  by nature,

quife so sanguine in his opinions.     The manners of

bqth  /are extremely pleasing,  and they both proceed

completely their own way,  not merely unacquainted

with court etiquette,  but wholly,  and most artlessly,

unambitious to form any such acquaintance.

FRIDAY,  QTH. — I might write enough,  were I to enter
upon the adventures of to-day ;  but as they all con
sisted in almost unheard-of indignities,  from a person
who cannot fabricate a provocation in the world beyond
that of declining to spend with her every moment not
spent in legal attendance, — why I will not give the
sickening relation :  I will only confess,  the treatment
these last two days has been of so insulting a nature,
that I should have thought meanly,  not meekly,  of

312 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

myself,  for consenting to return to her table or her
room,  had I not considered the apparent selfishness
there would seem in any open rupture at a time of such
material distress.  I bear it,  therefore,  and will bear it
while this misery lasts ;  but I think that must change,
or I must change,  if I bear it longer.

So completely overset had I been with secret rumi
nations of what there was to recompense endurance of
such usage,  that when Mr.  Smelt came in,  after coffee,
he kindly inquired if I was taken ill,  and what had
made me so pale and thin all at once.

I saw her struck — with shame,  and,  I really believe,
a little remorse;  for she grew more civil directly,
offered me some of her supper,  and asked why I did
not sometimes go out.

When I wenf away,  however,  for my tea,  I thought
my least resentment might authorize my returning no
more ;  but at nine o'clock she sent me a message,  with
her compliments,  and she was quite alone,  if I would be
so good to come :  so there was no help for going.  A
little concession from a proud mind is a great pain;
and it therefore appeases accordingly.

I proposed piquet:  I had not yet regained voice
enough for talking.  It was gladly accepted.

I can give no other interpretation to the insulting
mode of present behaviour,  except the incapacity of
bearing with patience the gloomy confinement inflicted
on all the house ;  which renders a temper,  naturally
irascible,  fierce and furious even to savageness.

How often do I not wish I might but be allowed to
see my good Miss Cambridge !  She is so near — so
eager to come — so kindly affectionate ;  what alightener,
and how innocent a one,  would it not be,  to this
burthening period !

SATURDAY,  K)TH. — The King is again not so well;
and new evidences are called for in the house,  relative to
his state.  My poor Royal Mistress now droops.  I
grieve — grieve to see her ! — but her own name and

17S9]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  313

conduct called in question ! — who can wonder she is
shocked and shaken  ?  Was there not enough before,
firmly as she supported it  ?

But it is evident,  my dear friends,  throughout the
world,  misfortune is better endured than insult ;  even
though the one be permanent,  and the other transient.

During my hour's respite of this evening,  while I was
reading  "  Hunter's Lectures," — which were lent me by
the Queen,  and must be read ere returned, —  a rap at
my door made me suppose Mr.  Smelt had followed me,
as Mrs.  Schwellenberg had talked of going to the
Queen.  "Who's there?"  I called out;  but the voice
that answered was Mr.  Fairly's,  who,  in slowly opening
it,  mildly said,  "  May a friend come in,  and ask Miss
Burney how she docs  ?  "

When he had made me shake hands with him across
my table,  he hastened to peep at my book.  He is just
like Dr.  Johnson in that particular;  he cannot rest till
he reads the title,  when once he has seen a binding.

He had been sent for express,  by her Majesty.  In
these perilous times,  I wonder not she could dispense
with his services no longer;  wise,  good,  undaunted,
vigorous — who has she like him  ?

He gave me a little history of his tour and his time.
He had just been keeping the birth-day of his eldest
nephew n the mere quiet society of their own family,
the melancholy of the times prohibiting any further
celebration.

You may imagine subjects were not wanting for con
versation  :  all I knew,  and all I was ignorant of from
his absence,  was now fully discussed.  He read mo
various passages from many interesting letters,  and
renewed his confidential communications with the same
trusting openness as before his journey.

But he told me his present plan was to live entirely
in town during the rest of the winter,  and only to come
hither by particular calls from her Majesty.  When he
was here,  he said,  the whole day,  so many of its hours

314 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

were passed in a manner wholly useless to others,  as well
as comfortless to himself,  from the bustle,  fatigue,  cabal,
and restraint of the house,  that he wished to settle
himself upon a new plan.  He had mentioned this
already to Lady Charlotte Finch,,  and he now made it
known to me,  that each of us,  if opportunity should
offer,  might speak of it to her Majesty.

I told him I should be happy to be of the least use
to him,  and especially for a release I could so well
understand his coveting;  but I advised him,  mean
while,  to rather seek an opportunity of mentioning it
for himself,  by a public and positive request.

He then said he wished he had a room here,  in the
Lodge,  that when he did stay he might be more com
fortable.  He was miserably off,  he added,  at the
Prince of Wales's,  as his room was but half furnished.
He had many friends in town with whom he could
associate cheerfully and pleasantly,  particularly Lady
Harriet Ackland,.who seems his first favourite.

I did not go to Mrs.  Schwellenberg  :  it was late.-  I
expected questions and reproaches :  my mind was too
full to encounter them.  I knew she could but telUthe
Queen of my absence,  and her surmises  ;  and I had no
desire,  no intention,  to keep either secret from her
Majesty.  I resolved to speak myself,  as usual,  of my
visitor ;  and if by her any objections were made,  to in
timate them at once to Mr.  Fairly himself,  without
scruple or reserve.  My mind is every way too little
happy to run the smallest risk of the disapprobation
of my Royal Mistress.

I had some difficulty to seize a moment for my
communication :  the Queen did not appear surprised,
though rather thoughtful.  She asked some general
questions concerning him,  and then spoke of other
things.

SUNDAY,  HTH. — This morning Dr.  John gave me
but a bad account of the poor King.  His amendment
is not progressive ;  it fails,  and goes back,  and dis-

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  315

appoints most grievously ;  yet it would be nothing
were the case and its circumstances less discussed,  and
were expectation more reasonable.

Miss Eurney to Mrs.  Francis,  Aylsham,  Norfolk.

Kew Palace,  January 11,  1789.
MY VERY DEAR CHARLOTTE,

NOTHING but the extreme disturbance of my late
and present life could make me possibly deserve your

Eardon for not immediately answering your sweet
itter,  though I am sure I should obtain it from your
ever ready kindness had I a much less powerful plea.

The painful and gloomy time that all have passed
here you will have known by every public channel ;
and all private ones have been closed,  except for
merely public purposes.  But how shall I thank you,
and your excellent partner,  for so kind a proposition  :
I have not been unfeeling,  though silent ;  and indeed
such a mark of your aflcction,  little as I wanted any
mark to convince me of its warmth,  has been amongst
the things the most soothing to my mind in this truly
calamitous period.

Nevertheless,  were my own share in it ten times
more saddening than it is,  and were that possible,  I
could not elude it.  What am I,  in such circumstances f
and how could I set about thinking of myself when
such sufferers surround me?  We are all creatures of
comparison and of habit ;  every comparison here sinks
me and my distress into nothing  ;  and the force of
habit is such that I now pass whole weeks in this glcom
better than,  ere thus initiated,  I could have passed a
single day.

I am satisfied that not even the 20,000/.  prize in
the lottery could,  at this time,  draw me from this
melancholy scene.  My wishes,  therefore,  were never
more limited,  for no turn of fortune could make a
change in my situation.  To leave my Royal and suffer-

316 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

ing Mistress at such a time would he truly barbarous,
since,  however little comfort or use she may find in me
when present,  she would feel it a great additional
wretchedness to be now attended by a stranger.

Heaven be praised,  however,  all hope is before us of
the most favourable conclusion to this tragedy;  and
when the catastrophe is happy,  my dear Charlotte
knows the intermediate distresses may be supported
with patience.

An example of patience is before us here,  such as
indeed I have never seen till now,  and scarcely thought
in existence.  Such an influence naturally spreads
itself all around,  and no one dreams of repining or
murmuring,  while all are stimulated by one common
pity and admiration for the chief sufferer.

Do not be uneasy for me,  my kind Charlotte  ;  I keep
very well,  and take infinite care of myself,  since here
to be ill and useless would be truly terrible.

We see no one — not a soul but of the household,
and of those only such as are in attendance.

Poor Mr.  Hastings !  I think very often what he
must feel and fear at this alarming and critical time.
Heaven send his most upright master may be restored
before his arduous trial recommences.

From your ever truly most affectionate and faithful

F.  B.

MONDAY,  12TH. — A melancholy day  :  news bad both
at home and abroad.  At home the dear unhappy
King still worse — abroad new examinations voted of
the physicians  !  Good Heaven !  what an insult does
this seem from parliamentary power,  to investigate
and bring forth to the world every circumstance of
such a malady as is ever held sacred to secrecy in the
most private families  !  How indignant we all feel
here no words can say.

TUESDAY,  JANUARY 13xH. — The two younger Willises,
Dr.  John and Mr.  Thomas,  came upstairs in the after
noon,  to make a visit to Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  I took

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  .317

the opportunity to decamp to my own room,  where I
found Mr.  Fairly in waiting.

In the course of conversation that followed,  Mrs.
Carter was named :  Mr.  Smelt is seriously of opinion
her ode is the best in our language.  1 spoke of her
very highly,  for indeed I reverence her.

Learning in women was then our theme :  I rather
wished to hear than to declaim upon this subject,  yet
I never seek to disguise that I think it has no recom
mendation of sufficient value to compensate its evil ex
citement of envy and satire.

lie spoke with very uncommon liberality on the
female powers and intellects,  and protested he had never,
in his commerce with the world,  been able to discern
any other inferiority in their parts than what resulted
from their pursuits  ; — and yet,  with all this,  he doubted
much whether he had ever seen any woman who might
riot have been rather better without than with the
learned languages,  one only excepted.

He was some time silent,  and I could not but sup
pose he meant his correspondent.  Miss Fuzilier;  but,
with a very tender sigh,  he said,  "  And she was my
mother, — who neglected nothing else,  while she culti
vated Latin,  and who knew it very well,  and would
have known it very superiorly,  but that her brother
disliked her studying,  and one day burnt all her
books !"

This anecdote led to one in return,  from myself.  I
told him briefly the history of Dr.  Johnson's most kind
condescension," in desiring to make me his pupil,  and
beginning to give me regular lessons of the Latin
language,  and I proceeded to the speedy conclusion —
my great apprehension,  conviction rather,  that what I
learnt of so great a man could never be private,  and
that he himself would contemn concealment,  if any
progress should be made ;  which to me was sufficient
motive for relinquishing the scheme,  and declining the

318 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

honour,  highly as I valued it,  of obtaining such a
master. — "  And this,"  I added,  "  though difficult to be
done without offending,  was yet the better effected,
as my father himself likes and approves all accomplish
ments for women better than the dead languages."

He made afterwards many inquiries concerning my
own present mode of going on.

"  What a situation,"  he once cried,  "  it is,  to live
pent up thus,  day after day,  in this forlorn apart
ment  ! — confinement ! — attendance  ! —  seclusion ! — un
certain,  for months to come,  how long it may last."

I could not command philosophy adequate for treat
ing this subject as I felt upon it ;  I therefore had re
course to a letter I had just received from my affectionate
Charlotte,  telling me she seriously feared I should be
quite killed by living such a life,  and supplicating me
most earnestly to give it up,  and to let Mr.  Francis
apply to my father to obtain his permission for me to
resign,  and then to propose to me a constant residence
in their house,  to be only broken in upon by my going
to my father himself,  and to another,  to whom she
would always yield — my Susanna.

'Tis a most sweetly kind intention,  and urged
with the most innocent artlessness of its impractica
bility.

He inquired her name and abode,  &c.,  but most
promptly agreed her scheme,  though truly sisterly,
was out of all question.

He then inquired if I knew any thing,  of late,  of Mr.
Wyndham,  concerning whom he has heretofore heard
me very lavish of praise,  and with whom he is well ac
quainted.  "  No,"  I answered,  "  I had done with the
whole set at present :  their present behaviour relating
to the King and the Regency demolished,  with me,  all
pleasure in their talents."  {  \( £$\  \  n CJ  ^)

"And I,"  cried he,  "go now no more to a house
where I used to meet him :  I keep out of the way of all

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  319

oppositionists.  Tis now a cause of humanity,  not of
party,  and I will not herd with those who think other
wise."

I showed him a little paragraph I had received in a

letter from Miss C ,  in which she says that  "  Lady

Willoughby de Broke had mentioned her concern that
such a man as Mr.  Wyndham should submit to party
trammels :"  for,  continues her Ladyship,  "  so singularly
pleasing is he,  that it is quite a treat to hear him speak
a common sentence."

Some time after,  he examined a little book -shelf in
my room.  Mr.  Smelt had lent me Pope's works.  I
gave him a volume,  and he read the epitaph —

"  Go,  fair example of untainted youth,
Of modest wisdom,  and pacific truth,"  &c.

He would not,  however,  allow to Pope's panegyric
the weight I thought it deserved  ;  he said  "  There was
nothing in it that formed a great character — nothing
beyond the common line of duty,  though it might sur
pass the common line of practice/'

"  Surely,"  cried I,  "  it is no common and no small
praise to say of a man,

"  He knew no wish but what the world might hear."

"That,"  cried he,  c<  is saying nothing,  because it is
asserting more than any man living can say of another.
I think all praise absolutely nugatory that cannot be
proved to be just.  What man shall pretend,  in sober
truth,  to say that he knows another man who has not a
wish to conceal  ?  Even if it were true,"  he added,  "  the
praise rises not into greatness of character ;  for where
there is nothing to conceal,  there is nothing to struggle
with,  and such a character is only good,  as he is short
or tall,  because he is made so.  Is not that a nobler
character who has wishes he suppresses,  and desires he
combats and conquers  ?"

He then looked over the rest of Pope's works,  prais
ing,  commenting,  and inquiring my opinion,  as he

320 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

came from one to another,  till he opened the epistle of
Eloisa,  and then,,  suddenly shutting up the volume,  he
laughed,  and said,  "  Mind,  I don't ask you how you
like that ! — T only know myself  'tis but too beautiful,
and that is its greatest fault."

He then took the  '  Essay on Man/  and read various
charming passages till the clock struck ten.

WEDNESDAY,  14TH. — I must now mention a rather
singular conversation.  I had no opportunity last
night to name,  as usual,  my visitor ;  but I have done it
so often,  so constantly indeed,  that I was not uneasy
in the omission.

But this morning,  while her hair was dressing,  my
royal mistress suddenly said,  "  Did you see any body
yesterday  ?"

I could not but be sure of her meaning,  and though
vexed to be anticipated in my avowal,  which had but
waited the departure of the wardrobe-woman,  Sandys,
I instantly answered,  "  Yes,  ma'am ;  Mr.  Smelt in the
morning,  and Mr.  Fairly in the evening."

"  O  !  Mr.  Fairly was here,  then  ?"

I was now doubly sorry she should know this only
from me  !  He had mentioned being just come from
town,  but I had concluded Lady Charlotte Finch,  as
usual,  knew of his arrival,  and had made it known to
her Majesty.

A little while after, — "  Did he go away from you
early  ?"  she said.

"  No,  ma'am,"  I immediately answered,  "not early;
lie drank tea with me,  as he generally does,  I believe,
when he is here for the night."

"  Perhaps,"  cried she after a pause,  "  the gentlemen
below do not drink tea."

"I cannot tell,  ma'am,  I never heard him say ;  I only
know he asked me if I would give him some,  and I told
him yes,  with great pleasure."

Never did I feel so happy in unblushing conscious
ness of internal liberty as in this little catechism !

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  321

However,  I soon found I had mistaken the motive
of the catechism  :  it was not on account of Mr.  Fairly
and his visit — it was all for Mrs.  Schwellenbcrg and
her no visits ;  for she soon dropped something of
"poor Mrs.  Schwellenbcrg"  and her miserable state,
that opened her whole meaning.

Here,  indeed,  I was not,  am not so ready.  Treated
with such truly unprovoked indignity as at present,  I
can suffer no interference to make me relinquish my
evening retreat,  which is very rarely for more than
one poor hour,  except when I leave her engaged with
Mr.  Smelt or Mdlle.  Montmollin.  And I almost con
stantly return at last,  and stay till we go to the Queen,
which is hardly ever till past 12 o'clock,  and which
always seems not till 3 in the morning.

It is palpable she has lodged some complaint against
my absences.  The discovery made me not only silent,
but comfortless.  I cannot endure to retaliate  ;  I am
bent against making any serious charge to discredit an
old servant,  who,  with all her faults,  has an attachment
for her mistress that merits her protection.  And this,
too,  is the last time to take for either attack or defence.
It would be distressing  ;  it would be unfeeling.  I know
myself now peculiarly useful:  many things pass that I
am bound not to write  ;  and it might seem taking a
mean advantage of the present circumstances to offer
any defensive appeal just now.

SUNDAY,  18TH. — The public birthday of my poor
royal mistress.  How sadly did she pass it;  and how
was I filled with sorrow for her reflections upon this
its first anniversary for these last twenty-eight years
in which the King and the nation have not united in
its celebration !  All now was passed over in silence
and obscurity;  all observance of the day was pro
hibited,  both abroad and at home.

The poor King,  whose attention to times and dates
is unremittingly exact,  knew the day,  and insisted

VOL.  iv.  Y

322 DIARY AND LETTERS       [PART IX.

upon seeing the Queen and three of the Princesses ;
but — it was not a good day.

KEW,  MONDAY,  19TH. — This morning the news was
very cheering,  and I have begun now a great friend
ship with Dr.  Willis and Dr.  John.  They are most
delightful people  ;  all originality,  openness,  and good
ness.

When I saw,  afterwards,  Sir Lucas Pepys,  he told
me lie plainly saw I was on the verge of an illness
myself,  and recommended air and exercise as essen
tially requisite to save me from this menace.  I obeyed
his injunctions the moment I could name them to the
Queen,  for my health is now amongst my first duties,
as far as it may depend upon my own care.

I took,  therefore,  a safe opportunity,  and strolled a
little while in Richmond Gardens.

WEDNESDAY,  21srr.- — I had nothing at all to write
yesterday.  My dearest readers will soon,  perhaps,
wish I had nothing to write of to-day.

This evening my tea rap was unusually early,  and
Mrs.  Schwellenberg asked me to stay,  and play at
cards with her till Mdlle.  Montmollin arrived.  I
make a point of never refusing her when she is civil  :
down therefore I sat,  and stayed to play out a game,
and till Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt both entered.

I then came to my room  ;  and there,  in my own cor
ner,  sat poor Mr.  Fairly,  looking a little forlorn,  and
telling me he had been there near an hour.  I made
every apology that could mark in the strongest manner
how little I thought his patience worth such exertion.

He took up a volume of  '  Metastasio,'  and asked,
gravely,  if I would object to tell him which of his
dramas I most approved  ?

I told him I had already praised the  '  Olimpiade'  to
him at Cheltenham,  and he had given it no quarter.

That,  he said,  was only relative to the false heroism
of the principal character ;  "  and my knowledge of

1/S9J OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  323

Italian,1'  he added,  <$'is so trifling,  that my opinion is
immaterial:  the beauties of the language,  which,  in
Metastasio,  I understand to be the chief merit,  are
wholly thrown away upon me ;  or,  at least,  very in
completely enjoyed."

"  But the sentiments,"  cried I,  '•'  are equal,  I believe,
to the language."

"  Those,  also,  lose great part of their energy by so
incompetent an acquaintance with the force of their
words."

"The characters,  too,"  I cried,  "in all his best
operas,  arc strikingly noble."

"In  .    .    .    .    which  ?"  he cried.

"  O,"  quoth I,  laughing,  "  I must read them over
again before I name them,  in remembrance of the
Olimpiade  !"

What a look again he gave me  ! — it implied an idea
that I was the most distrustful person breathing!
But he did not say so ;  and I was not bound to answer
to his countenance !

He then added,  that he did not merely desire to
have Mctastasio's best operas recommended,  but also
— to read them with — somebody who knew the lan
guage better than himself.

I did not choose to accept this as pointed,  for cer
tainly I know it too little to read it with any person
whatsoever — except Al fieri or Raretli I

He next took from his pocket-book two little papers
which I had begged from him  ;  they were two charac
ters of our beloved King,  in verse ;  one drawn by
Churchill,

"  Stript of her gaudy plumes,  and vain disguise,"  &c.

The other from Cowper  : —

"  O bright occasion of dispensing good,"  &c.

These extracts he has deemed very fitting to be
read and re-read at this afflictive time,  to keep up
the loyal zeal of the poor King's friends.  He had told

Y 2

324 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

me of them some time ago.  I had then petitioned for
a copy of each,  printed as they were for the news
papers  :  he told me he did not choose to be known as
their publisher,  and I perfectly agreed with him that
all good was best done that was done most quietly.

Finding I entered into nothing,  he took up a fan
which lay on my table,  and began playing off various
imitative airs with it,  exclaiming,  "  How thoroughly
useless a toy !"

"  No/'  I said ;  "  on the contrary,  taken as an orna
ment,  it was the most useful ornament of any belong
ing to full dress  ;  occupying the hands,  giving the
eyes something to look at,  and taking away stiffness
and formality from the figure and deportment."

"  Men have no fans,"  cried he,  "  and how do they
do?"

"  Worse,"  quoth I,  plmnply.

He laughed quite out,  saying,  "That's ingenuous
however  ;    and,  indeed,  I must confess they arc re
duced,  from time to time,  to shift their hands from one
pocket to another."

"  Not to speak of lounging about in their chairs
from one side to another."

"But the real use of a fan,"  cried he,  "if there is
any,  is it not — to hide a particular blush that ought
not to appear?"

"  O,  no;  it would rather make it the sooner no
ticed."

"  Not at all ;  it may be done under pretence of
absence — rubbing the check,  or nose — putting it up
accidentally to the eye — in a thousand ways."

He went through all these evolutions comically
enough;  and then,  putting aside his toy,  came back to
graver matters.

SUNDAY,  25Tfi. — The two last days were wholly
eventless;  but this morning I had so fair an account
of our beloved monarch,  that I drew up a bulletin
myself;  not,  indeed,  for St.  James's,  but where it was

17S9]  OF MADAME D'ARDLAV.  325

certain of a flourishing reception.  Mr.  Smelt was
going to town,  and could not call ;  he sent me a note
of inquiry,  which arrived while I was still listening to
Dr.  John Willis,  in our late little parlour,  and hearing1
every interesting particular of the night and early
morning.  I answered Mr.  Smelt's note thus  : —

"  Kew Palace,  Sunday murning,  January 25,  17SH.

"  His Majesty lias passed a very good night,  and is
perfectly composed and collected this morning.
"  (Signed)  JOHN WILLIS.

(Witnessed)     FKANCKS BL-RNEY."

The young doctor gave me his name very wil
lingly;  and with this bulletin Mr.  Smelt went and
gladdened the hearts of every good subject of his
acquaintance in town.

These Willises are most incomparable people.
They take a pleasure,  that brightens every particle of
their countenances,  in communicating what is good,
and they soften all that is bad with the most sedulous
kindness.

In running this morning,  at seven o'clock,  along my
dark passage,  I nearly fell over a pail,  carelessly left in
the way by a housemaid,  and broke my shin very pain
fully.  Unable,  therefore,  to walk,  yet so strongly en
joined to take the air.  I could not escape accompanying
Mrs.  Schwellenberg in a little tour round Brentford,
which,  that we might sec a little of the world,  was the
postillion's drive.  But the ill humour of my com
panion during this rural ride was of so affronting a
cast,  that I wished myself a thousand times hopping
with my broken shin over the worst ploughed land in
England,  rather than so to be seated in a royal
vehicle.

*  *  *  *  «

I have not mentioned a singular present which has
been sent me from Germany this month:  it is an
almanac,  in German,  containing for its recreative part

326 DIARY AND LETTERS       [?A RT IX.

an abridgment of  '  Cecilia/  in that language ;  and
every month opens with a cut from some part of her
history.  It is sent me by M.  Henouvre,  a gentleman
in some office in the King's establishment at Hanover.
I wish I could read it — but I have only written it !

MONDAY,  2f>TH. — In the evening Mr.  Fairly came to
tea.  He was grave,  and my reception did not make
him gayer.

General discourse took place till Mrs.  Dickenson
happened to be named.  He knew her very well as
Miss Hamilton.  Her conjugal conduct,  in displaying
her superior power over her husband,  was our particu
lar theme,  till in the midst of it he exclaimed,  "  How
well you will be trained in by Mrs.  Schwellenberg — if
you come to trial !"

Ah  !  thought I,  the more I suffer through her,  the
less and less do I feel disposed to run any new and
more lasting risk.  But 1 said not this,  I only pro
tested I was much less her humble servant than might
be supposed.

"  How can that be,"  cried he,  "when you never con
test any one point with her  ?"

Not,  I said,  in positive wrangling,  which could never
answer its horrible pain  ;  but still I refused undue
obedience when exacted with indignity,  and always
hastened to retire when offended and affronted.

He took up Mrs.  Smith's  'JEmmeline,'  which is just
lent me by the Queen  ;  but he found it not piquant,
and putting it down,  begged me to choose him a
Rambler.

I had a good deal of difficulty in my decision,  as he
had already seen almost all I could particularly wish to
recommend  ;  and,  when he saw me turn over leaf
after leaf with some hesitation,  he began a serious
reproach to me of inflexible reserve.  And then away
he went.

I hastened immediately to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and
found all in a tumult.  She had been,  she said,  alone

17S9]  0?  MADAME D'ARBLAY.  327

all the evening,  and was going to have sent for me,  but
found I had my company.  She sent for Mile.  Mont-
mollin — but she had a cold;  for Miss Gomme,  but she
could not come because of the snow ;  for Miss Planta
— but she was ill with a fever,  '•  what you call head
ache  :"  she had then  "sent to Princess lloyal,  who had
been to her,  and pitied her vor moch,  for Princess
Royal was really sensible."

And all this was communicated with a look of accu
sation,  and a tone of menace,  that might have suited
an attack upon some hardened felon.

And this complaint of the absence of two hours to
one treated when present as if too highly honoured in
being suffered in the same apartment !

I never yet found this more hard to bear — to be de
nied the common forms of common civility when I
stayed,  yet to have the whole house apprised of my
retreat,  as an act of barbarity  !

I made no sort of apology ;  nor any other answer
than that Lhad had the honour of Mr.  Fairly 's com
pany to tea,  which was always a pleasure to me.

I believe something like consciousness whispered her
here,  that it might really be possible his society was as
pleasant as I had found hers,  for she then dropped
her lamentation,  and said she thanked God she wanted
nobody,  not one  ;  she could always amuse herself,  and
was glad enough to be alone.

Were it but true  !

I offered cards ;  she refused,  because it was too late,
though we yet remained together near two hours.

If this a little disordered me,  you will not think
what followed was matter of composure.  While the
Queen's hair was rolling up,  by the wardrobe-woman,
at night,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg happened to leave the
room,  and almost instantly her Majesty,  in a rather
abrupt manner,  said,  "  Is Mr.  Fairly here to-night?"

"Yes,  ma'am.'*

"  When did he come back  ?"

328 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

I could not recollect.

"  I did not know he was here  !"

This thunderstruck me  ;  that he should come again,
or stay,  at.  least,  without apprising-  his Royal Mistress,
startled me inwardly,  and distressed me outwardly.

"  I knew,  indeed/'  she then added,  "he was here in
the morning,  but I understood he went away after
wards."

The idea of connivance how struck me with a real
disdain,  that brought back my courage and recollection
in full force,  and I answered,  "  I remember,  ma'am,  he
told me he had rode over to Richmond Park at noon,
and returned here to dinner with Colonel Welbrcd,
and in the evening he drank tea with me,  and said he
should sup with General Harcourt."

All this,  spoken with an openness that rather invited
than shunned further investigation,  seemed to give an
immediate satisfaction  ;  the tone of voice changed to its
usual complacency,  and she inquired various things
concerning the Stuart family,  and then spoke upon
more common toyncs.

I concluded it now all over ;  but soon after Mrs.
Sandys went away,  and then,  very unexpectedly,  the
Queen renewed the subject.  "The reason,"  she said,
"  that I asked about Mr.  Fairly was that the Schwel-
lenbcrg sent to ask Miss Planta to come to her,
because Mr.  Fairly was — no,  not with her — he never
goes to her."

She stopped;  but I was wholly silent.  I felt in
stantly with how little propriety I could undertake
cither to defend or to excuse Mr.  Fairly,  whom I de
termined to consider as a visitor,  over whom,  having no
particular influence,  I could be charged with no par
ticular responsibility.

After waiting a few minutes, — "  With you,"  she
said,  "  Mr.  Fairly was;  and the Schwellenberg was
alone."

My spirits quite panted at this moment to make a

1780]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  329

full confession of the usage I had endured from the
person thus compassionated  ;  but I had so frequently
resolved,  in moments of cool deliberation,  not even to
risk doing mischief to a favourite old servant,  however
personally provoked,  that I withstood the impulse;
but the inward conilict silenced me from saying any
thing else.

1 believe she was surprised ;  but she added,  after a
long pause,  "  I believe — he comes to you every evening
when here  ?  "

"  I do not know,  ma'am,  always,  when he is here or
away  ;  but I am always very glad to sec him,  for indeed
his visits make all the little variety that "

I hastily stopped,  lest she should think me discon
tented with this strict confinement during this dreadful
season  ;  and that 1 can never be,  when it is not accom
panied by tyranny and injustice.

She immediately took up the word,  but without the
slightest displeasure.  "  Why here there might be
more variety than anywhere,  from the nearness to
town,  except for —

"  The present situation of things,"  I eagerly inter
rupted her to say,  and went on  : — •"•  Indeed,  ma'am,  I
have scarce a wish to break into the present arrange
ment,  by seeing anybody while the house is in this
state  ;  nor have I,  from last October,  seen one human
being that does not live here,  except Mr.  Smelt,  Mr.
Fairly,  and Sir Lucas Pepys ;  and they all come upon
their own calls,  and not for me."

"  The only objection,"  she gently answered,  "  to
seeing anybody,  is that every one who comes carries
some sort of information away with them."

I assured her 1 was perfectly content to wait for
better times.

Here the matter dropped  ;  she appeared satisfied
with what I said,  and became soft and serene as before
the little attack.

TUESDAY,  2/"TH.— The intelligence this morning was

330 DIARY AND LETTERS       [PART IX.

not very pleasant.  I had a conference afterwards with
Sir Lucas Pepys,  who keeps up undiminished hope.
We held our council in the physicians'  room,  which
chanced to be empty  ;  but before it broke up Colonel
Welbred entered.  It was a pleasure to me to see him,
though somewhat an embarrassment to hear him im
mediately lament that we never met,  and add that
he knew not in what manner to procure himself that
pleasure.

I joined in the lamentation,  and its cause,  which con
fined us all to our cells.  Sir Lucas declared my con
finement menaced my health,  and charged me to walk
out,  and take air and exercise very sedulously,  if I
would avoid an illness.

Colonel Welbred instantly offered me a key of
Richmond Gardens,  which opened into them by a
nearer door than what was used in common.

I accepted his kindness,  and took an hour's walk, —
for the first time since last October ;  ten minutes in
Kew Gardens are all I have spent without doors since
the middle of that month.

KEW LODGE,  WEDNESDAY,  28xH. — The excellent Dr.
Willis gave me a most reviving account of our beloved
King this morning,  and with a glee so genuine,  that I
think even the opposition must have sympathised in
it.  Afterwards the same pleasant tidings were con
firmed by his son,.  Dr.  John,  who is a truly amiable
and lively character,  with admirable good sense and
no pretensions.  Mr.  Smelt,  all delight,  came to me at
noon,  with the debates of the Commons on the Regency.

THURSDAY,  29TH. — Still good news from the two
good doctors.  All else bad, — Cerbera dreadful! —
more rough and harsh than I have words to tell.  She
has done,  palpably,  what was possible to procure a
censure from the Magnolia  ;  but the Magnolia cannot
enjoin an injustice — though she may wish me more
subservient.  But I will not enter upon these matters
here.

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  331

FRIDAY,  30TH. — To-day my poor Royal Mistress
received the address of the Lords and Commons,  of
condolence,  £c.,  upon his Majesty's illness.  What a
painful,  but necessary ceremony  !  It was most pro
perly presented by but few members,  and those almost
all chosen from the household  :  a great propriety.

Not.  long1 after came Mr.  Fairly,  looking harassed.
"  May I,"  he cried,  «'  come in  ? — and — for an hour  ?
Can you allow me entrance and room for that time  ?"

Much surprised,  for already it was three o'clock,  I
assented :  he then told me he had something to copy
for her Majesty,  which was of the highest importance,
and said he could find no quiet room in the house but
mine for such a business.

I gave him every accommodation in my power.

When he had written a few lines,  he asked if I was
very busy,  or could help him  ?  Most readily I offered
my services ;  and then I read to him the original,
sentence by sentence,  to facilitate his copying;  receiv
ing his assurances of my  "  great assistance"  every two
lines.

In the midst of this occupation,  a tap at my door
made me precipitately put down the paper to receive
— Lady Charlotte*  Finch  !

"Can you,"  she cried,  "have the goodness to tell
me any thing of Mr.  Fairly?"

The screen had hidden him  ;  but,  gently, — though
I believe ill enough pleased, — he called out himself,
"Here is Mr.  Fairly."

She flew up to him,  crying,  "  O,  Mr.  Fairly,  what a
search has there been for you,  by the Queen's orders  !
She has wanted you extremely,  and no one knew
where to find you.  They have been to the waiting-
room,  to the equerries',  all over the garden,  to the
Prince's house,  in your own room,  and could find you
nowhere,,  and at last they thought you were gone
back to town."

He calmly answered,  while he still wrote on,  he was

332 DIARY AND LETTERS      [PART IX.

sorry they had had so much trouble,  for he had only
been executing her Majesty's commands.

She then hesitated a little,  almost to stammering,  in
adding,  "  ?o — at last — I said — that perhaps — you
might be here  !"

He now raised his head from the paper,  and bowing
it towards me,  "Yes,"  he cried,  '-'Miss Burney is so
good as to give me leave,  and there is no other room
in the house in which I can be at rest."

"So I told her Majesty,"  answered Lady Charlotte,
"though she said she was sure you could not be here;
but I said there was really no room of quiet here for
any business,  and so then I came to see."

"Miss Burney,"  he rejoined,  "has the goodness
also to help me — she has taken the trouble to read as
I go on,  which forwards me very much."

Lady Charlotte stared,  and I felt sorry at this con
fession of a confidence she could not but think too
much,  and I believe he half repented it,  for he added,
"  This,  however,  you need not perhaps mention,  though
I know where I trust 1"

He proceeded again with his writing,  and she then
recollected her errand.  She told him that what he
was copying was to be carried to town by Lord Aylcs-
bnry,  but that the Queen desired to see it first.

She then returned to her Majesty.

She soon,  however,  returned again.  She brought the
Queen's seal,  and leave that he might make up the
packet,  and give it to Lord Aylesbury,  without show
ing it first to her Majesty,  who was just gone to dinner.

With her customary good-humour and good-breed
ing,  she then chatted with me some time,  and again
departed.

We then went to work with all our might,  reading
and copying.  The original was extremely curious — I
am sorry I must make it equally secret.

/  OF MADAME D'AKBLAY.  333

PART X.

1789.

Extraordinary scene between the King and Miss Rurney in
Kew Gardens— Miss Burney relates her adventure to the
Queen— Continued improvement of the King— The Regeney
Bill— Distress of the Queen— Conference with the Queen-
Two lunatics in the Royal Palace— Progress of the Regency
Bill — Further improvement of the King — The Kegencv Bil'l
postponed— Devotion of the Royal Family to the Kiiiir—  Inter
view between the King and the Lord Chancellor— The Kini;
and Queen walk out together — New arrangements at the
Palace— Mr.  Wyndham— Critical state of the Times— The
Regency Bill abandoned — Interview of Mis's Burney with
the King — Conclusion.

KEW PALACK,  MONDAY,  FrunrAUY 2.\n. — What
an adventure had I this morning  !  one that lias occa
sioned me the severest personal terror 1 ever experi
enced in my life.

Sir Lucas Pcpys still persisting that exercise and
air were absolutely necessary to save me from illness,
I have continued my walks,  varying my gardens from
Richmond to Kew,  according to the accounts I re
ceived of the movements of the King.  For this I had
her Majesty's permission,  on the representation of Sir
Lucas.

This morning,  when I received my intelligence of
the King from Dr.  John Willis,  I begged to know
where I might walk in safety  ?  "  In Kew Gardens,"
he said,  "  as the King would be in Richmond."

"Should any unfortunate circumstance,"  I cried,  "at
any time,  occasion my being seen by his Majesty,  do
not mention my name,  but let me run off without call
or notice."

This he promised.  Every body,  indeed,  is ordered
to keep out of sight.

Taking,  therefore,  the time I had mcst at command,

334 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

I strolled into the gardens.  I had proceeded,  in my
quick way,  nearly half the round,  when I suddenly per
ceived,  through some trees,  two or three figures.
Relying on the instructions of Dr.  John,  I concluded
them to be workmen and gardeners ;  yet tried to look
sharp,  and in so doing,  as they were less shaded,  I
thought I saw the person of his Majesty  !

Alarmed past all possible expression,  I waited not to
know more,  but turning back,  ran off with all my might.
But what was my terror to hear myself pursued  ! — to
hear the voice of the King himself loudly and hoarsely
calling after me,  (c Miss Burney  !  Miss Burney  !"

I protest I was ready to die.  I knew not in what
state he might be at the time  ;  I only knew the orders
to keep out of his way were universal ;  that the Queen
would highly disapprove any unauthorised meeting,
and that the very action of my running away might
deeply,  in his present irritable state,  offend him.
Nevertheless,  on I ran,  too terrified to stop,  and in
search of some short passage,  for the garden is full of
little labyrinths,  by which I might escape.

The steps still pursued me,  and still the poor hoarse
and altered voice rang in my ears  : — more and more
footsteps resounded frightfully behind me, — the at
tendants all running,  to catch their eager master,  and
the voices of the two Doctor Willises loudly exhorting
him not to heat himself so unmercifully.

Heavens,  how I ran  !  I do not think I should have
felt the hot lava from Vesuvius — at least not the hot
cinders — had I so run during its eruption.  My feet
were not sensible that they even touched the ground.

Soon after,  I heard other voices,  shriller,  though less
nervous,  call out  "  Stop  !  stop  !  stop  !"

I could by no means consent :  I knew not what was
purposed,  but I recollected fully my agreement with
Dr.  John that very morning,  that I should decamp if
surprised,  and not be named.

My own fears and repugnance,  also,  after a flight

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  335

and disobedience like this,  were doubled in the thought
of not escaping;  I knew not to what 1 might be ex
posed,  should the malady be then high,  and take the
turn of resentment.  Still,  therefore,  on I flew ;  and
such was my speed,  so almost incredible to relate or
recollect,  that I fairly believe no one of the whole party
could have overtaken me,  if these words,  from one of
the attendants,  had not reached me,  ••'  Doctor Willis
begs you to stop  !"

"  I cannot!  I cannot!"  I answered,  still flying on,
when he Ciillcd out  ••  You must,  ma'am  ;  it hurts the
King to run."

Then,  indeed,  I stopped — in a state of fear really
amounting to agonv.  1 turned round,  I saw the two
Doctors had got the King between them,  and
three attendants of Dr.  Willis's were hovering about.
They ail slackened their pace,  as they saw me stand
still ;  but such was the excess of my alarm,  that I was
wholly insensible to the effects of a race which,  at any
other time,  would have required an hour's recruit.

As they approached,  some little presence of mind
happily came to my command :  it occurred to me that,
to appease the wrath of my flight,  I must now show
some confidence :  I therefore faced them as undaunt
edly as I was able,  only charging the nearest of the
attendants to stand by my side.

When they were within a few yards of me,  the King
called out  "Why did you run away  ?"

Shocked at a question impossible to answer,  yet a
little assured by the mild tone of his voice,  I instantly
forced myself forward,  to meet him,  though the inter
nal sensation which satisfied me this was a step the
most proper,  to appease his suspicions and displeasure,
was so violently combated by the tremor of my nerves,
that I fairly think I may reckon it the greatest effort
of personal courage I have ever made.

The effort answered :  I looked up,  and met all his
wonted benignity of countenance,  though something

336 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

still of wildncss in his eyes.  Think,  however,  of my
surprise,  to feel him put both his hands round my two
shoulders,  and then kiss my check!

I wonder I did not really sink,  so exquisite was my
affright when I saw him spread out his arms!  In
voluntarily,  I concluded he meant to crush me :  but
the Willises,  who have never seen him till this fatal
illness,  not knowing-  how very extraordinary an action
this was from him,  simply smiled and looked pleased,
supposing,  perhaps,  it was his customary saluta
tion  !

I believe,  however,  it was but the joy of a heart un
bridled,  now,  by the forms and proprieties of established
custom and sober reason.  To see any of his house
hold thus by accident,  seemed such a near approach to
liberty and recovery,  that who can wonder it should
serve rather to elate than lessen what yet remains of
his disorder  !

He now spoke in such terms of his pleasure in seeing1
me,  that I soon lost the whole of my terror  ;  astonish
ment to find him so nearly well,  and gratification to see
him so pleased,  removed every uneasy feeling,  and the
joy that succeeded,  in my conviction of his recovery,
made me ready to throw myself at his feet to ex
press it.

What a conversation followed !  When he saw me
fearless,  he grew more and more alive,  and made me
walk close by his side,  away from the attendants,  and
even the Willises themselves,  who,  to indulge him,
retreated.  I own myself not completely composed,  but
alarm I could entertain no more.

Every thing that came uppermost in his mind he
mentioned;  he seemed to have just such remains of
his ilightiness as heated his imagination without
deranging his reason,  and robbed him of all control
over his speech,  though nearly in his perfect state of
mind as to his opinions.

What did he not say ! — He opened his whole heart

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  337

to me, — expounded all his sentiments,  and acquainted
me with all his intentions.

The heads of his discourse I must give you briefly,
as I am sure you will be highly curious to hear thorn,
and as no accident can render of much consequence
what a man says in such a state of physical intoxica
tion.

He assured me he was quite well — as well as he had
ever been in his life ;  and then inquired how I did,  and
how I went on  ?  and whether 1 was more comfort
able?

If these questions,  in their implication,  surprised me,
imagine how that surprise must increase when ho
proceeded to explain them  !  He asked after the coad-
jutrix,  laughing,  and saying  ''Never mind her! — don't
be oppressed — I am your friend !  don't let her cast
you down  ! — I know you have a hard time of it — but
don't mind her  !"

Almost thunderstruck with astonishment,  I merely
curtsied to his kind  "  I am your friend,"  and said
nothing.

Then presently he added,  "  Stick to your father —
stick to your own family — let them be your objects."

How readily I assented  !

Again he repeated all I have just written,  nearly in
the same words,  but ended it more seriously  :  he sud
denly stopped,  and held me to stop too,  and putting
his hand on his breast,  in the most solemn manner,  lie
gravely and slowly said,  "  I will protect you!— I pro
mise you that — and therefore depend upon me !"

I thanked him ;  and the Willises,  thinking him rather
too elevated,  came to propose my walking on.  "  Xo,
no,  no !"  he cried,  a hundred times in a breath ;  and
their good humour prevailed,  and they let him again
walk on with his new companion.

He then gave me a history of his pages,  animating
almost into a rage,  as he related his subjects of dis
pleasure with them,  particularly with Mr.  Ernst,  who

VOL.  iv.  z

338 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

he told me had been brought up by himself.  I hope
his ideas upon these men are the result of the mistakes
of his malady.

Then he asked me some questions that very greatly
distressed me,  relating to information given him in his
illness,  from various motives,  but which he suspected
to be false,  and which I knew he had reason to suspect  :
yet was it most dangerous to set any thing right.,  as I
was not aware what might be the views of their having
been stated wrong.  I was as discreet as I knew how
to be,  and I hope-  I did no mischief;  but this was the
worst part of the dialogue.

He next talked to me a great deal of my dear
father,  and made a thousand inquiries concerning his
'  History of Music.'  This brought him to his favourite
theme,  Handel ;  and he told me innumerable anecdotes
of him,  and particularly that celebrated tale of Han
del's saying of himself,  when a boy,  "  While that boy
lives,  my music will never want a protector.1'  And this,
he said,  I might relate to my father.

Then he ran over most of his oratorios.,  attempting
to sing the subjects of several airs and choruses,  but
so dreadfully hoarse that the sound was terrible.

Dr.  Willis,  quite alarmed at this exertion,  feared he
would do himself harm,  and again proposed a separa
tion.  "  No  !  no  !  no  !"  he exclaimed,,  "  not yet ;  I have
something I must just mention first."

Dr.  Willis,  delighted to comply,  even when uneasy
at compliance,  again gave way.

The good King then greatly affected me.  He began
upon my revered old friend,  Mrs.  Delany;  and he
spoke of her with such warmth — such kindness  !  "  She
was my friend  !"  he cried,  "  and I loved her as a friend !
I have made a memorandum when I lost her — I will
show it you."

He pulled out a pocket-book,  and rummaged some
time,  but to no purpose.

The tears stood in his eyes — he wiped them,  and

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  339

Dr.  Willis again became very anxious.  "  Come,  sir,"
he cried,  "  now do you come in and let the lady go on
her walk, — come,  now you have talked a long while, —
so we'll go in, — if you/ Majesty pleases."

"  No,  no !"  he cried,  *'  I want to ask her a few ques-  \
tions  ; — I have lived so long out of the world,  I know  ?,
nothing  !"

This touched me to the heart.  We walked on toge
ther,  and he inquired after various persons,  particularly
Mrs.  Boscawcn,  because she was Mrs.  Dclany's friend!
Then,  for the same reason,  after Mr.  Frederick Mon
tagu,  of whom he kindly said,  "  I know he has a great
regard for me,  for all he joined the opposition."  Lord
Grey de Wilton,  Sir Watkin Wynn,  the Duke of Beau
fort,  and various others,  followed.

He then told me he was very much dissatisfied with
several of his state officers,  and meant to form an entire
new establishment.  He took a paper out of his pocket-
book,  and showed me his new list.

This was the wildest thing that passed  ;  and Dr.
John Willis now seriously urged our separating ;  but
he would not consent ;  he had only three more words
to say,  he declared,  and again he conquered.

He now spoke of my father,  with still more kindness,
and told me he ought to have had the post of Master
of the Band,  and not that little poor musician Parsons,
who was not tit for it :  "  But Lord Salisbury,"  he cried,
"  used your father very ill in that business,  and so he
did me  !  However,  I have dashed out his name,  and I
shall put your father's in, — as soon as I get loose
again  !"

This again — how affecting was this !

"  And what,"  cried he,  "  has your father got,  at last?
nothing but that poor thing at Chelsea  ?  O fie  !  fie !
fie !  But never mind  !  1 will take care of him !  I
will do it myself!"

Then presently he added,  "  As to Lord Salisbury,
he is out already,  as this memorandum will show you,

z2

340 DIARY AND LETTERS  [?AUT X.

and so are many more.  I shall be much better served  ;
and when once I get away,  I shall rule with a rod of
iron  !"

This was very unlike himself,  and startled the two
good doctors,  who could not bear to cross him,  and
were exulting at my seeing his great amendment,  but
yet grew quite uneasy at his earnestness and volu
bility.

Finding we now must part,  he stopped to take leave,
and renewed again his charges about the coadjutrix.
"  Never mind her  !"  he cried,  "  depend upon me  !  I
will be your friend as long as I live  ! — I here pledge
myself to be your friend 1"  And then he saluted me
again just as at the meeting,  and suffered me to go on.

What a scene  !  how variously was I affected by it 1
but,  upon the whole,  how inexpressibly thankful to sec
him so nearly himself — so little removed from recovery  !

I went very soon after to the Queen,  to whom I was
most eager to avow the meeting,  and how little I could
help it.  Her astonishment,  and her earnestness to
hear every particular,  were very great.  I told her
almost all.  Some few things relating to the distress
ing questions I could not repeat ;  nor many things
said of Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  which would much,  and
very needlessly,  have hurt her.

This interview,  and the circumstances belonging to
it,  excited general curiosity,  and all the house watched
for opportunities to beg a relation of it.  How delighted
was I to tell them all my happy prognostics !

But the first to hasten to hear of it was Mr.  Smelt ;
eager and enchanted was the countenance and atten
tion of that truly loyal and most affectionate adherent
to his old master.  Yet he saw me so extremely shaken
by the various exertions of the morning,  that I could
with difficulty persuade him they would not make me
ill:  never,  I assured him,  where the result was well,
did any agitation essentially hurt me.  He wished me
to see Lady Harcourt and the General,  and to make

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  341

them a brief relation of this extraordinary rencounter:
but for that I had not effort enough left

I did what I could,  however,  to gratify the curiosity
of Colonel Wclbrcd,  which I never saw equally excited.
I was passing him on the stairs,  and he followed me,
to say he had heard what had happened — I imagine
from the Willises.  I told him,  with the highest satisfac
tion,  the general effect produced upon my mind by the
accident,  that the King seemed so nearly himself that
patience itself could have but little longer trial.

He wanted to hear more particulars :  I fancy the
Willises had vaguely related some  :  "  Did he not,"  he
cried,  "  promise to — do something for you  ? — take care
of you?"  I only laughed,  and answered,  "O yes!  if
you want any thing,  apply to me  ; — now is my time  !"

TUESDAY,  3RD. — I had the great happiness to be
assured this morning,  by both the Dr.  Willises,  that
his Majesty was by no means the worse for our long
conference.  Those good men are inexpressibly happy
themselves in the delightful conviction given me,  and
by me spread about,  of the near recovery of their royal
patient.

While I was dressing came Mr.  Fairly :  I could not
admit him,  but he said he would try again in the
evening.  I heard by the tone of his voice a peculiar
eagerness,  and doubted not lie was apprized of my
adventure.

He came early,  before I could leave my fair com
panion,  and sent on Gotcr.  I found him reading a
new pamphlet of Home Tooke:  "  How long,"  he cried,
"  it is since I have been here  !  "

I was not flippantly disposed,  or I would have said
I had thought the time he spent away always short,  by
his avowed eagerness to decamp.

He made so many inquiries of how I had gone on
and what I had done since I saw him,  that I was soon
satisfied he was not uninformed of yesterday's trans
action.  I told him so;  he could not deny it,  but
wished to hear the whole from myself.

342 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

I most readily complied.  He listened with the most
eager,  nay,  anxious attention,  scarce breathing :  he
repeatedly exclaimed,  when I had finished,  "  How I
wish I had been there ! — how I should have liked to
have seen you !  "

I assured him he would not wish that,  if he knew the
terror I had suffered.  He was quite elated with the
charges against Cerberic tyranny,  and expressed
himself gratified by the promises of favour and pro
tection.

FRIDAY,  GTH. — These last three days have been spent
very unpleasantly indeed :  all goes hardly and diffi
cultly with my poor royal mistress.

Yet his Majesty is now,  thank Heaven,  so much
better,  that he generally sees bis gentlemen in some
part of the evening;  and Mr.  Fairly,  having no par
ticular taste for being kept in waiting whole hours for
this satisfaction of a few minutes,  yet finding himself,
if in the house,  indispensably required to attend with
the rest,  has changed his Kew visits from nights to
mornings.

He brought me the  "  Regency Bill !  " — I shuddered
to hear it named.  It was just printed,  and he read it
to me,  with comments and explanations,  which took up
all our time,  and in a manner,  at present,  the most
deeply interesting in which it could be occupied.

Tis indeed a dread event ! — and how it may ter
minate who can say  ?  My poor Royal Mistress is much
disturbed.  Her daughters behave like angels;  thep
seem content to reside in this gloomy solitude for ever,
if it prove of comfort to their mother,  or mark their

duteous affection for their father.

*****

MONDAY,  OTH. — I now walk on the road-side,  along
the park-wall,  every fair morning,  as I shall venture
no more into cither of the gardens.  In returning
this morning,  I was overtaken by Mr.  Fairly,  who
rode up to me,  and,  dismounting,  gave his horse to his
groom,  to walk on witli me.

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARDLAY.  343

About two hours after I was,  however,  surprised by
a visit from him in my own room.  He came,  he said,
only to ask me a second time how I did,  as he should
be here now less and less,  the Kind's amendment ren
dering his services of smaller and smaller importance.

He brought me a new political parody of Pope's
Eloisa to Abelard,  from Mr.  Eden to Lord Hawkes-
bury.  It is a most daring1,  though very clever imita
tion.  It introduces many of the present household.
Mrs.  Schwellenberg is now in eternal abuse from all
these scribblers ;  Lady Harcourt,  and many others,  less
notorious to their attacks,  are here brought forward,
How infinitely licentious  !

TUESDAY,  lOm. — The amendment of the King is
progressive,  and without any reasonable fear,  though
not without some few drawbacks.  The Willis family
were surely sent by Heaven to restore peace,  and
health,  and prosperity to this miserable house!

Lady Charlotte Finch called upon me two days ago,
almost purposely,  to inquire concerning the report of
my young friend's marriage ;  and she made me pro
mise to acquaint her when I received any further ncxvs  :
at noon,  therefore,  I went to her apartment at the
Prince of Walcs's,  with this information.  Mr.  Fairly,
I knew,  was with the equerries in our lodge.

Lady Charlotte had the lJuchess of Beaufort and all
the Fieldings with her,  and therefore I only left a
message,  by no means feeling spirits i'or encountering
any stranger.

At noon,  when I attended her Majesty,  she inquired
if I had walked  ?— Yes. — Where  ? — In Richmond Gar
dens. — And nowhere else  ? — No.

She looked thoughtful, — and presently I recollected
my intended visit to Lady Charlotte,  and mentioned it.
She cleared up,  and said,  "O! — you went to Lady
Charlotte  ?"

"  Yes,  ma'am,"  I answered,  thinking her very ab
sent, — which I thought with sorrow,  as that is so small

344 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

a part of her character,  that I know not I ever saw any
symptom of it before.  Nor,  in fact,  as I found after
wards,  did I see it now.  It was soon explained.  Miss
Gommc,  Madlle.  Montmollin,  and Miss Planta,  all
dined with Mrs.  Sclnvcllenberg to-day.  The moment
I joined them,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg called out, — "  Pray,
Miss Berner,  for what visit you the gentlemen?  "

-Me?"

'•'  Yes,  you, — and for what,  I say?  '*

Amazed,  I declared I did not know what she meant.

*'  O  ! ''  cried she,  scoffingly,  ''that won't not do! — •
we all saw you, — Princess Royal the same  ! — so don't
not say that !"

I stared, — and Miss Gommc hurst out in laughter,
and then Mrs.  Schwellenberg added. — "  For what go
you over to the Prince of Wales his house  ? — nobody
lives there but the gentlemen, — nobody others.''

I laughed too,  now,  and told her the fact.

"  O,"  cried she,  "Lady Charlotte! — ver true.  I
had forgot Lady Charlotte" !  v

"  O,  very well,  ma'am,"  cried I, — "  so only the gen
tlemen were remembered ! '"

I then found this had been related to the Queen  ;
and Madlle.  Montmollin said she supposed the visit
had been to General Gordon  ! — He is the groom now
in waiting.

"  In good time!"  as Mrs.  Piozzi says; — I know
not even his face!  But I laughed,  without further
affirmation.

Miss Gomme told me she had not been so much
diverted since the poor King's illness as by hearing
this attack upon my character.

Then followed an open raillery from Madlle.  Mont
mollin of Mr.  Fairly's visits ;  but I stood it very well,
assuring her I should never seek to get rid of my two
prison-visitors,  Mr.  Smelt and Mr.  Fairly,  till I could
replace them by better,  or go abroad for others !

FRIDAY,  13m. — This morning there was a great

1 789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  345

alarm in the house,  by the appearance of two madmen.
1 heard it from Columb,  Mr.  Smelt was so engaged in
consultation about them,  that he did not even come up
stairs  ;  and I remained in the most anxious uncertainty
till noon,  when my ever ready and kind informant,  Mr.
Fairly,  found his way to me.

"  I am come."  he cried,  "  only for a moment,  to ac
quaint you with the state of things below."  He then
repeated all the particulars :  but as the adventure was
local,  I shall not write more of it than that one of these
men,  after a long examination by all the gentlemen,
was dismissed,  and the other sent to the oflice of Lord
Sydney,  Secretary of State.

Nothing so strange as the eternal rage of these un
happy lunatics to pursue the Royal Family  !

He then gave me the particulars of the progress of
the Regency Bill,  which direful topic lasted while he
stayed.  O how dreadful will be the day when that
unhappy bill takes place  !  I cannot approve the plan
of it; — the King is too well to make such a step right.
It will break his spirits,  if not his heart,  when he hears
and understands such a deposition.

SATURDAY,  HTH. — The King is infinitely better.  O
that there were patience in the land  !  and this Regency
Bill postponed  !

Two of the Princesses regularly,  and in turn,  attend
their royal mother in her evening visits to the King.
Some of those who stay behind now and then spend
the time in Mrs.  Schwcllenberg's room.  They all long
for their turn of going to the King,  and count the
hours till it returns.  Their dutiful affection is truly
beautiful to behold.

This evening the Princesses Elizabeth and Mary
came into Mrs.  Schwellenberg's room while I was yet
there.  They sang songs in two parts all the evening,
and very prettily in point of voice.  Their good
humour,  however,  and inherent condescension and
sweetness of manners,  would make a much worse per
formance pleasing.

346 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

FEBRUARY Ifrrn. — All well,  and the King is pre
paring for an interview with the Chancellor  !  Dr.
Willis now confides in me all his schemes and
notions  :  we are growing the best of friends  ;  and his
son Dr.  John is nearly as trusty.  Excellent people  !
how I love and honour them all !

I had a visit at noon from Mr.  Fairly.  He hastened
to tell me the joyful news that the King and Queen
were just gone out,  to walk in Richmond Gardens,  arm
in arm  ! — what a delight to all the house  !

"  But I have got,"  cried he,  "  a pamphlet for you,
well worth your perusal :  'tis a letter from a member
of Parliament to a country gentleman,  and contains
the characters of all the opposition  ;  and here is your
friend Mr.  Burke,  done to the life  !"

He insisted upon reading that passage himself : — •
'tis skilfully written,  but with extreme severity  ;  though
it allows to him original integrity,  which is what I have
never been induced to relinquish for him,  and never
can disbelieve.

I told him I was now soon expecting in town my
dearest friends the Lockes.

"  Do you  ?"  he cried ;  and then,  after a thoughtful
pause,  he said,  "  I — 'must give up the thought of know
ing them — till you go to Norbury Park,  and I make
you a visit there."

A sad shake of my head was all my answer, — but
he did not see it,  nor move his eyes towards me  ;  and
presently he added,  "  That is your hope  ! — to go there,
and to Mickleham  !  We must all have something to
which we look forward — something to hope — is it not
so  ? — and is not this your hope  ?"

Still I made no answer but a poor sigh  !

He grew graver,  and said,  "  To meet here — till you
look forward to meet — hereafter."

"O,"  cried I,  "could I but be sure to meet them
hereafter ! — to go where they go ! — I think I should
be quite content here!"

"  Why,  no,"  cried he,  smiling,  "  not quite : — some-

17S9]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  347

thing — some little thing — would yet be wanting for
the mean time !"

"  Well — yes, — I am afraid that is true  ! — the en
attendant would always want some relief."

He begged me,  when I had read the pamphlet,  if
he should not return to claim it,  which was uncertain,
to give it to Mr.  Smelt.

However,  in the evening I carried these characters
to Mrs.  Schwelleubcrg,  and,  to while away the time,

read them to her.

*  »  *  »  *

When I came to tea,  I found Mr.  Fairly waiting in
my room.  He had left Kcw for Richmond Park,  but
only dined there.

We had much discussion of state business.  The King
is so much himself,  that he is soon to be informed of-
the general situation of the kingdom.  O what an in
formation  ! — how we all tremble in looking forward to
it!  Mr.  Fairly thinks Mr.  Smelt the fittest man for
this office :  Mr.  Smelt thinks the same of Mr.  Fairly  :
both have told me this.

Then again Mr.  Locke came into play.  I told him
I believed him a man without blemish.

He repeated my words with emphatic surprise.
"At least,"  I cried,  "there is no fault in him I have
ever seen, — nor yet that,  amongst his acquaintance,  I
have ever heard mentioned."

"  What a character !"  he exclaimed  ;  and again,  for
getting the long delay he had proposed in the morning,
he declared he must know him.  He asked me various
particulars of his way of life ;  I sketched it all out
with that delight which such a subject communicates
to all my ideas,  and he is now perfectly well informed
of the whole system of Norbury Park.

He began soon to look at his watch,  complaining
very much of the new ceremony imposed,  of this at
tendance of handing the Queen,  which,  he said,  broke
into his whole evening.  Yet he does as little as pos-

348 DIARY AND LETTERS  [

sible.  "The rest of them,"  he said,  "think it neces
sary to wait in an adjoining apartment during the
whole interview,  to be ready to show themselves when
it is over  !'*

He now sat with his watcli in his hand,  dreading to
pass his time,  hut determined not to anticipate its
occupation,  till half-past nine o'clock,  when he drew
on his white gloves,  ready for action.  But then,  stop
ping short,  lie desired me to guess whom,  amongst
my acquaintance,  he had met in London this last time
of his going thither.  I could not guess whom he
meant — but I saw it was no common person,  by his
manner.  He then continued — (s A tall,  thin,  meagre,
sallow,  black-eyed,  penetrating,  keen-looking figure."

I could still not guess, — and lie named Mr.  Wynd-
ham.

st Mr.  "Wyndham  !"  I exclaimed,  "  no,  indeed, — you
do not describe him fairly, — -he merits better colour
ing."

He accuses me of being very partial to him  :  however,
I am angry enough with him just now,  though firmly
persuaded still,  that whatever has fallen from him,
that is wrong and unfeeling,  on the subject of the llc-
gency,  has been the effect of his enthusiastic friendship
for Mr.  Burke  :  for lie has never risen,  on this cruel
business,  but in support of that most misguided of
vehement and wild orators.  This I have observed in
the debates,  and felt that Mr.  Burke was not more
run away with by violence of temper,  and passion,  than
Mr.  Wyndham by excess of friendship and admiration.

Mr.  Fairly has,  1 fancy,  been very intimate with
him,  for he told me he observed he was passing him
in Queen Anne Street,  and stopped his horse,  to call
out,  "  O ho,  Wyndham  !  so 1 see you will not know
me with this servant 1"

He was on business of the Queen's,  and had one of
the royal grooms with him.

Mr.  Wyndham laughed,  and said he was very glad

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  349

to see who it was,  for,  on looking at the Royal servant,
he h.id just been going to make his lowest bow.

"  O,  I thank you  !"  returned Mr.  Fairly,  "  you took
me,  then,  for the Duke of Cumberland."

We talked about him a good while  :  my high admi
ration of his talents,  his style of conversation,  and the
mingled animation and delicacy of his manners,  I en
larged upon without scruple;  adding,  that I should
not feel it so strongly,  but from a fixed belief,  founded
on reason and information,  that his internal character
was amongst the noblest ever formed.

FEBRUARY 17Tii. — The times are now most interest
ing and critical.  Dr.  Willis confided to me this morn
ing that to-day the King is to sec the Chancellor.
How important will be the result of his appearance! —
the whole national fate depends upon it !

Mr.  Smelt has had his first interview also  ;— it was

all smooth  ;  but,  to himself,  deeply affecting.

*  #  *  *  *

I am very sorry to say I am satisfied a certain Ccrbcra
has lamented my tea-elopements to the Princess Royal.
There is an evident change,  and coldness of a high
sort,  in that lately so condescending Princess.  I am
quite grieved at this.  But I will not pay a mean court,
for which I should despise myself,  in order lo con
ciliate a person whom I have never justly offended,  but
by running away from her when affronted myself.  I
will rather risk every consequence.  Time,  I think,  must
stand my friend.

WEDNESDAY,  ISiH. — I had this morning the highest
gratification,  the purest feeling of delight,  I have been
regaled with for many months :  I saw,  from the road,
the King and Queen,  accompanied by Dr.  Willis,
walking in Richmond Gardens,  near the farm,  arm in
arm f — It was a pleasure that quite melted me,  after a
separation so bitter,  scenes so distressful — to witness
such harmony and security!  Heaven bless and pre
serve them !  was all I could incessantly say while I
kept in their sight.

350 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

I was in the carriage with Mrs.  Schwellenberg at the
time.  They saw us also,  as I heard afterwards from
the Queen.

In the evening Mrs.  Arlinc,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg's
maid.,  came into Mrs.  Schwellenberg's room,  after
coffee,  and said to me,  "  If you please,  ma'am,  somebody
wants you."

I concluded this somebody my shoemaker,  or the
like ;  but in my room I saw Mr.  Fairly.

He was in high spirits.  He had seen his Majesty;
Dr.  Willis had carried him in.  He was received with
open arms,  and embraced :  he found nothing now re
maining of the disorder,  but too much hurry of
spirits.

When he had related the particulars of the interview,
he suddenly exclaimed,  "  How amazingly well you have
borne all this  !"

I made some short answers,  and would have taken
refuge in some other topic  :  but he seemed bent upon
pursuing his own,  and started various questions and
surmises,,  to draw me on.  In vain,  however :  I gave
but general,  or evasive answers  ;  and I suddenly put
before him Young's Works,  which 1 had borrowed of
Mr.  Smelt.

Young,  he said,  was an author not to read on regu
larly,  but to dip into,  and reflect upon,  in times of soli
tude and sadness.  Nevertheless,  he opened and read.

What a nobleness of expression,  when noble,  has this
poet!  what exquisite feeling!  what forcible ideas! — I
forgot,  while I listened,  all my own little troubles and
disturbances.

THURSDAY,  19TH. — This is my dear young friend's
bridal day  !  1 have written to her.  Heaven send her
happy !

Dr.  Willis this morning lent me a crambo song,  on
his own name,  which he has received by the penny
post.  I shall copy and show it you.  It is sportive
enough,  and loyal.

This was a sweet,  and will prove a most mem or a-

1789]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  351

ble day :   the Regency was put off,  in the House of
Lords,  by a motion from the Chancellor !

Huzza !  huzza !

And this evening,  for the first time,  the King came
upstairs,  to drink tea with the Queen and Princesses
in the drawing-room !

My heart was so full of joy and thankfulness,  I could
hardly breathe  !  Heaven— Heaven be praised  !

What a different house is this house become  ! — sad
ness and terror,  that wholly occupied it so lately,  are
now flown away,  or rather are now driven out ;  and
though anxiety still forcibly prevails,  'tis in so small a
proportion to joy and thankfulness,  that it is borne as
if scarce an ill !

MONDAY,  23iiD. — This morning opened wofully to
me,  though gaily to the house ;  for as my news of his
Majesty was perfectly comfortable,  I ventured,  in direct
words,  to ask leave to receive my dear friends Mr.  and
Mrs.  Locke,  who were now in town  : — in understood
sentences,  and open looks,  I had already failed again
and again.

My answer was — "  I have no particular objection,
only you'll keep them to your room."

Heavens! — did they ever,  unsummoncd,  quit it?  or
have they any wish to enlarge their range of visit  ?

I was silent,  and then heard a history of some im
prudence in Lady Effingham,  who had received some of
her friends.

My resolution,  upon this,  I need not mention  :  I
preferred the most lengthened absence to such a per
mission.  But I felt it acutely  !  and I hoped,  at least,
that,  by taking no steps,  something more favourable
might soon pass.

The King I have seen again— in the Queen's
dressing-room.  On opening the door,  there he stood  !
He smiled at my start,  and saying he had waited on

352 DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.  [?ART X.

purpose to sec me,  added,  "I am quite well now, — I
was nearly so when I saw you before — but I could over
take you better now  !  "  And then he left the room.

I was quite melted with joy and thankfulness at this
so entire restoration.

End of February,  1789.     Dieu merci!

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

TO THE

FOURTH VOLUME.

BAKER,  SIR GEORGK,  was born in Devonshire in 1722,  and edu
cated at Eton and Cambridge.  He commenced practice at
Stamford in 1756;  removed to London shortly afterwards,  and
was appointed Physician in Ordinary to the King,  and Phy
sician to the Queen.  In 1766 he was created a baronet,  and
in 1797 was elected President of the College of Physicians.
He was an elegant classical scholar,  but his literary pro
ductions were exclusively of a professional character.  He
died in 1809.

BANKS,  SIR JOSEPH,  was born in 1743,  and was son of William
Banks,  Esq.,  of Reverby Abbey,  Lincolnshire.  He was edu
cated at Eton and Oxford.  In 1 7f>5 he made a voyage
to Newfoundland and Labrador,  and in 1 768 embarked with
Cook and Solander on the first voyage round the world, — on
each occasion in pursuit of his favourite study of Natural
History.  In 1778 he was created a baronet,  and elected Pre
sident of the Royal Society.  Sir Joseph Banks's published
writings consisted entirely of Papers in the Transactions of
learned societies,  with the sinsjle exception of a tract connected
with agriculture.  He died in 1820.

CARMARTHEN,  LADY.  This lady was Catherine,  daughter of
Thomas Anguish,  Esq.  In October,  1788,  she became the
second wife of Francis Godolphin,  Marquis of Carmarthen/who
succeeded to his father's title of Duke of Leeds,  in March*, 1789.

DASCHKAW,  PRINCESS,  was born at St.  Petersburg in 1744.  She
appears to have been one of the most extraordinary women
that ever lived,  both for strength of character,  force of talents,
and extent of acquirements.  The part she acted in the re
volution of 1762  (when she was only nineteen years of age),
which caused the dethronement and assassination of Peter III.,
and seated the  "Great"  Catherine on the throne of Russia,
was so conspicuous and remarkable as to justify the assertion
that she was in fact the leader of that movement,  which in
some sort changed the face of European politics.  In 1732 the
Princess was called upon by the Empress to take the sole
direction of the  "  Academy of Arts and Sciences"  of St.  Peters
burg,  and she filled this office  (so singular a one for a woman
and a Princess)  with credit and honour to herself,  and ureat
advantage to the institution,  for several years.  She had pre
viously travelled through the principal states of Europe,  visited
their courts,  and held intercourse with their most celebrated
men in all departments of art and letters.  She died at
Moscow,  in 1810.

VOL.  iv.  2 A

354 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

The autobiography of this extraordinary woman,  as trans
lated from the original MS.  and edited by her friend Mrs.  W.
Bradford,  at whose instance the work was written,  and to whom
the MS.  was given,  is however the only record of the writer's
singular career.

FALCONER,  WILLIAM,  was born in 1730,  at Edinburgh,  where
his father was a barber.  He went to sea in the merchant
service,  and had attained the situation of second mate,  when
he was cast away.  This circumstance,  and the events con
nected with it,  were the groundwork of his poem of the
"  Shipwreck,"  which was published in 1762.  He wrote several
other poems,  none of which have attained any permanent repu
tation.  In 1769 he sailed for Bengal in the  'Aurora'  frigate,
which vessel touched at the Cape in December of the same
year,  but was never afterwards heard of.

FRANCIS,  SIR PHILIP,  was born in 1740,  and was the son of Dr.
Francis,  the well-known translator of Horace.  He was brought
up at St.  Paul's School,  and early obtained a clerkship in the
Secretary of State's Office.  Afterwards he was attached to the
Embassy to Portugal,  and on his return obtained a clerkship in
the War Office.  Up to this period he was little known out of
his own family circle.  Suddenly,  however,  in 1772,  he was ap
pointed a Member of the Bengal Council,  with a salary little short
of ten thousand a year.  Some persons have endeavoured to
account for this extraordinary piece of good fortune by sup
posing that he was,  and was known to be,  the writer of the
famous  "  Letters of Junius."  Certain it is that after his ap
pointment to India Junius was heard of no more.  On his re
turn from India,  Mr.  Francis was chosen  (in 1781)  member
of Parliament for the borough of Yarmouth,  in the Isle of
Wight,  and joined the Whig opposition.  Among other mat
ters in which he distinguished himself in Parliament was the
Impeachment of Warren Hastings,  with whom,  when in India,
he had a personal quarrel and fought a duel,  in which he,
Francis,  (not Hastings,  as erroneously stated by some of his
biographers,)  was dangerously wounded.  He received the Or
der of the Bath,  and died in 1818.

GARRICK,  EVA MARIA,  wife of David Garrick,  was born at
Vienna in 1725.  She was a dancer on the stage of her native
city,  and came to London in 1744,  when she was immediately
taken under the especial care and protection of the Countess
of Burlington;  and on her subsequent marriage with David
Garrick,  the Earl of Burlington gave her a marriage portion of
6000/.  She died in 1822.

HALIFAX,  DR.  SAMUEL,  was born at Mansfield,  Derbyshire,  in
1733.  He was the son of an apothecary of Chesterfield,  and
was educated at Cambridge,  where he distinguished himself,
and became a Fellow of Trinity Hall.  He graduated as LL.D.,

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.  355

and afterwards obtained the professorships successively of
Arabic and of Civil Law.  In 1781 he was raised to the see of
Gloucester,  and was subsequently translated to St.  Asaph.
He published many sermons,  an  "  Analysis of Butler's Ana
logy,"  and a work on the  "Civil Code of the Romans."  He
died in J 790.

HUNTER,  DR.  HENRY,  was born in 1741,  at Culross,  in Perth
shire,  and educated at the University of Edinburgh.  He early
distinguished himself for his scholarship,  and in 1766 was
ordained Minister of South Leith.  Tn 1771 he became Pastor
of the Scottish Presbyterian Church at London Wall.  Among
his many original and translated productions the chief are,  the
"Sacred Biography,"  in seven volumes,  and a splendid illus
trated translation of  "  Lavater's Physiognomy."  He died at
Bristol Hot-wells in 1802.

LALA.NDE,  M.  DE,  a French astronomer of great genius and
celebrity.  He was born in 1732.  His own inclinations,  very
early displayed,  would have led him to scientific pursuits ex
clusively  ;  but his friends directed his studies to the law,  and
he was admitted an advocate at a very early age.  Before he
had attained his twenty-first year,  however,  his proficiency in
scientific studies,  and particularly in astronomy,  was evinced
by his appointment as Astronomer in the Academy of Sciences
in Paris.  He died in 1807.

LANGHORNE,  JOHN,  was the son of a clergyman,  and was
born in Westmoreland in 1735.  He had not a collegiate edu
cation,  hut for several years filled the office of private tutor.
He subsequently took orders in the church.  The first literary
effort by which he became known was an Eastern tale,  entitled
44 Solyman and Alcmena."  He subsequently wrote several
original works ;  but the production by which he is now chiefly
remembered is a translation of  "  Plutarch's Lives,"  which he
executed,  in conjunction with his brother,  a clergyman at Folk-
stone,  in Kent.  He died at London in 1799.

MASKELYNE,  DR.  NEVIL,  was born in London in 1732,  and edu
cated at Westminster School,  and Catherine Hall,  Cambridge.
He was eminent as a mathematician,  and his studies were
ultimately devoted almost exclusively to astronomy.  He was
employed by the Government on many occasions connected
with that science,  both abroad and at home,  and was ultimately
(on the death of Mr.  Bliss)  appointed Astronomer Royal.  He
was the author of several extremely valuable works connected
with nautical science,  and of many papers in the Philosophical
Transactions.  He died in 1811.

RAIKES,  ROBERT,  was born at Gloucester in 1735.  His father
was a printer in that city,  and proprietor of the  "  Glou
cester Journal."  Mr.  Raikes is only known as being the
originator,  conjointly with the Rev.  Mr.  Stocks,  of those ex-

356 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

cellent institutions,  the Sunday Schools,  which led the way to
the general spread of education among the poor.  He died
in 1811.

SAUSSURE,  HORACE BENEDICT DE,  was born at Geneva in 1740.
He was the son of a member of the Council of Two Hundred,
and imbibed his taste for Natural History from his father.  He
became a Professor of Philosophy at the early ase of twenty-
two.  Previously to this period,  however,  he had commenced
those researches and explorations in the Alps,  and especially
among the Glaciers,  for which he afterwards became famous,
and which formed the subject of his great work,  entitled
"  Voyages dans les Alpes."  In 1788 he succeeded in reaching
the summit of Mont Blanc,  which at that period was regarded
as a most extraordinary achievement.  When Geneva was
united to the French Republic,  M.  de Saussure was chosen a
Deputy of the National Assembly.  He died in 1799.

TUCKER,  JOSIAH,  was born in 1711,  and educated at Oxford,  for
the church.  He is chiefly known as a political and contro
versial writer.  In 1755 he obtained the degree of D.D.,  and
was made a Prebendary of Bristol ;  and Dean of Gloucester
in 1758.  He wrote a vast number of tracts on various sub
jects,  and also a volume of sermons.  He died in 1 799.

WARREN,  DR.  RICHARD,  was born about 1732,  and attained great
eminence in his profession.  He was a Fellow of the Royal
and Antiquarian Societies,  and WHS Phvsician in Ordinary to
George III.  and the Prince of Wales.  He died in 1797.

WILLIS,  DR.  FRANCIS,  was a native of Lincolnshire,  and re
ceived a classical education at Brazenose College,  Oxford,
where he obtained a fellowship.  In 1740 he entered into Holy
Orders,  and was appointed to a college living ;  but shortly
afterwards he devoted himself to the medical profession,  and
that department of it chiefly which was connected with dis
eases of the mind,  without however abandoning the church.
He established a private asylum for lunatics at Greatford,  in
his native county;  and his success there led to his being in
trusted with the entire management of the case of his Majesty
George III.  Besides the two sons referred to in the Diary —
Dr.  John Willis and the Rev.  Thomas Willis— Dr.  Willis had
a third son,  Dr.  George Darling Willis,  who was appointed
one of the Royal Physicians in Ordinary in 1811.  Dr.  Francis
Willis died in 1807.

I

END OF VOL.  IV.

London :  Printed by WILLIAM CLOWES and SONS,  Stamford Street.

BINDING LIST QCT 151946

PR Arblay,    Frances    (Burney)   d1

3316 Diary and letters

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY
